— 6 —

About the whole plant world according to their morphological
beats The whole hangs far more than you think
vegetation together with the phenomena that occur in
shine and cold, dry or rain etc. condition that
we call welter or climate, about which the 4th lecture
acts. Decay and the processes of respiration all read
Plant and animal matter by the oxygen of the At-
Mosphere is reduced in carbonic acid, ammonia and
water spreading in the atmosphere. This
Substances take possession of the plant and form them under
constant increase in the oxygen in the atmosphere
carbon-rich and hydrogen-rich constituents, Slarke,
Gum, sugar and fat types, as well as nitrogenous
components: protein, fiber and cheese. The human being
both as animals take nitrogen from the plant world
echoing bodies: the protein, the fiber, the cheese and
Glue, which Liebig prefers to call foodstuffs
will ; also nitrogen-free, namely gum, sugar, starch,
referred to as respiratory agents, and types of fat. Thus the plants are the sources from which dic
Animals, as well as man, takes the substances which
form the organic parts of the body, they are
Plants again, which also supply the inorganic substances,
that are present in the animal body. The plants take
these substances from the soil and it must therefore be
farmers strive to keep the substances in the soil
to replace. Schleiden then discusses the milky juice
of the plants and their different occurrences, it resembles
haft of cow's milk in Gymneura laetiferum, hardens on the
Air at Siphonia elastica, generated. boiled down, the terrible
Farstengift, Upas Radja, from Strychnos Fieuté Lesch., his
smallest part freeze the tigers in the same moment
and stare dying. In the further course of the writing, the remarkable
ed external forms of cacti, their occurrence on bare
Oden rocks or steppes, their internal structure examined, and
the last prophecies give us an outline of the plant-
geography, the history and aesthetics of the plant world. A living language and suitable images accompany this
Scientific in these auditions, and so do that
Book for an equally entertaining and interesting
den as an instructive lecture. AH. a

oh . Overview of genres and arias in
the psyllod family,

by

Teachers at & higher Birgerschule in Aachen,

The genus Psylla was first identified by Geoffroy *)
placed, which described some species quite clearly. With
Psylla soon became the genus Livia Latr. compiled
and both raised to a family of their own in more recent times. Réaumur and de Geer made observations about the life
benwise, Linnaeus and Fabricius made several ways
known and named them after the plants on which they grew
are dependent for their food, mostly without diagnosis
to attach. Also they warped under the name of Chermes
a lot of strangeness together, which later on was eliminated
that had to be. Gmelin, Scopoli and closet fag-
ten to the Linnean others, now difficult to unravel
species added. For a long time now these creatures became
neglected by entomologists until Zet-
terstedt again some new species in its fauna lapponica
made known, and Hartig in the year 1841 in the magazine
far entomology of Germar, 3. Bd, not only several new ones
Arlen described, but also with the addition of a new one
genus (Aleurodes) to the two known family ver-
more. As easy as the confinement of the family seemed,
and how conveniently the species subordinate themselves to the genus
left, but ruled neither here nor in others
Points, between the named writers any one
agreement, least of all with regard to organizational
sation, For what the subsidiary eyes, the sucking beak, the
Concerning genillae and the formation of wings, the
there are numerous and much remains in this
to correct the moment abrig. But pass over all this

  

ée des insectes, qui se trouvent aux environments de
. lp 482489. 5

=

a

i
|
i

 

 

 
  
     
   
      
    

     
 

 

material, welc! bids. The same appears in Verh
knew not insignificant and with liberal
meeting of such entomologists, the shell still unused
own, are easily propagated handsomely. succeeded all Ar
in black

 

     

 

     
 

 

 
   
  

stands
the success! Naturally
"Don't work ven di
be made, and i
in short Ue
far

  
 
 

      
  
 
   
  
   
     

 

at-
other rhei-
y Are
It

 

—- 67 —

Before proceeding to the description of the species, mag

ner & surz the family character, not like him Bur-

eister has stated in his manual selir verfehit,
but as it is the result of my observations. head with two network and three subsidiary eyes,
the latter far separated from each other; Feelers 8—10-
limbed, the last limb with two fine bor-
star rear breast with two mushroom-like denticles;
the winglets with a strong marginal vein, the pro~
derfligel either leathery or membranous. The genders I have accepted and re-established
ments, with the exclusion of Aleurodes, which has a special
whose family needs form will be very easy from the following
scheme recognized

net sucking|a. The Head |f, The Un-'a, The Fli-|* Front Wings

round, fiber die) front ia terrandader gel without leathery, ronz-

       

two cones) with awei stigma, lich, impenetrable
Aesia, see. Livilla Curt. Ropffach si

 

+ front wing
hayy, dx
tig, Aryiaina m1)

 

 

 

a stigma. Psyila Geof. | 2. The Tai

ok. itself)

ht about the

     

i

i

 

 

 

 

    
  
   
  
     
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
   

—- 69 — pa

|
B
|

  
 

, with not entirely black bands with a red rear edge. “The front
Hind wing hail are leathery. opaque, with sharpening- Pt
in the veins. The 2nd fork cell is the i among all Arlen

 
        
   
      
  
     
  
 
  

 

 

    
  
       
 
  

T : most of the whole family here with the shortest stalk, because the stalk is |
the flag is | scarcely +/- as long as the Qte tine. The hind wings are yg if
Hail must be used greatly abbreviated, smoky gray in colour, with a very strong. q
; thickened anterior margin. ie
These, because of the leathery forewings under the * i

h Psyloids almost abnormal species, I have very hiu-

a but it is caught fig on high mountain meadows with the creator—

which differed not only in the gen: there was no ulex there, but spartium and ge-
nista, therefore this little animal does not appear exclusively 4

. to occur on Ulex. mr y Heyden only caught 2 specimens
allen plare near Falkenstein im Taunus, he knocked them off the trees, :
but he also adds that he saw no ulex there
have taken in f
from the previous ones their em aT ;
t, in addition, the errors also have a j H. ARYTAINA m
. because of the shortness of the individual links. : are Sparti i

d, entom. star vol p. 375.

both here
urt from Hm. Arradata. Schullig yellow, head and thorax with indistinct markings
tion, the abdomen with brown bands and red hinds
terraming (the fiblers were broken off! ), legs yellow,
Thighs brownish, tibia tips and tarsi black. brown. The frontal cones are very long and narrow, somewhat ab-
standing; the winglets water-white, the inferior marginal vein *) with
their division with a queer lying mop, which however
does not reach the border of the flag, also brown at the tip
likewise the radius, but the latter very broadly browned:
the hem pulls against the Fl t :
almost reaches the cubitus,
the Qte, however, only from your Bie
from this bend

 

; down the middle of the hedgehog and
All tines are broadly browned,
towards the inner edge;

a brown streak up
A dreader z strips to that
points where the cubitus forks,

From this from e

 

type I received a Q 2

t¥
- by collar, without specifying the location
fluff. ili. PSYLLA Geoffr. 1. p.s. AlniL. are the Fi
from the root f
brownish,

1 Q became Baden-Baden by Mr. von Heyden ge~
catch, this species appears to be somewhat larger and stronger
tiger than Ps. Alni. gel clear as glass, only the hem of the inner edge
up to the first fork cell, is weak

    

3. p.s. Buxi L

Greenish-yellowish, the thorax with reddish spots;
the abdomen grins, at the Q with a dirty yellow leather tube. Fubler yellow, from the Aten limb brownish at the tip,
the last two quite brown. The slirn cones are grin
or pale yellow, broad, faintly acuminate, somewhat longer than
at Alni, and very hairy. wings yellow, with yellow veins,
The second prong sharply bent upwards,

Found on Buxus sempervirens near Aachen and at
Frankfurt (v. Heyden), I also received them from England
Mr. walker 4d. ps,
Gran, on the back of the chest with reddish spots that
he from the 3rd segment brown at the tip, both of them
well, so is the tip of the sucker
ib or grin, bl the claws brownish;
water-white, with kréfligen, somewhat réthlichen

 

 

f
last quite bra

 

 
  
 

    
 
      
 
 

    

and was from Mr. stonework
found near Bergheim, wabrend Hr. Kaltenbach and I
only larvae were found here near Aachen. scum album. p.s. Ulmi L

mixed that

enbach with
from England

 

 

 
 
  
   
  
  
    
   
  
   
 
   

- 2—

6 hp Crataegicola. p.s. viridis Hart? Grin, kum something yellow mixed in, Fabler yellowish,

of the Gte and Tle limb at the top coft very undeullich)
and the last two quite brown. frontal cone rather long,
broad and gradually bluntly tapered from the base. At
only the claws are brownish on the legs. Elagel water white
with light yellow veins, -
Very common near Aachen on Crataegus oxyacantha
England I received it from Mr. Walker under the N

Amen
Crataegi. 7. p.s. Salicicola. Grin with Beimischu:

Sten limbs on clearly at the

last limbs quite brown. of yellow , the filers are yom

itze ringed, the two
frontal cone rather long,
tip blunt to rounded,
The fl are special. tenen, tender veins, and
as before the minding of the first

  
 

 

  
  
  
   
   
   
  

 

 

 

  

 

  

 

a type only 2¢ and

 

    

either all brown

    
 

 
 

something
little veins,

 

 
  
  

   

 

on,
she Mr. Walker under the name Ps,

 
  

 

 

9s

Dunkeigrin, on the B
less clear,
limbs of Fi

   

 
 
  

Deadly yellow Fi

 

  

> Year mane pts

- B

strong, somewhat yellowish veins
shorter than in Mali,

Both sexes on Carpinus betulus near Aachen
captive. The first fork cell is

 

i0. p.s. dubia. Grin, tending to yellowish; the breastbone without
conspicuous spots, the filers yellowish, the last two
Limbs brown, the frontal cones from the base to the scapula
noticeably narrowed and projecting; only on the legs
the foot clans brownish, the wings water-white, the first
Fork cell very long. from Ps. Alni due to smaller size, much longer forehead
cone, a shorter sheath at the 9, and unlirble flame-
from Crataegicola by larger, larger, more smoldering ones
n cone and the length of the dead fork cell distinguished,

After both sexes from me at Aachen with
imprisoned by the Creator, so whereabouts are still unknown. 11. p.s. Fraxinicola. p.s. modesta v. H in purple
Grin, somewhat yellowish, the antennae from the 3rd joint
and the last two links
d somewhat short, broad and after

 

   

 
 
  

 

 
  
 

raspy
the

 
 

pa aS

se eammacate

 

The flags:

 

  
  

en in Holland on Hippophaé rhamnoides
now communicated to me for investigation. 13. p.s. viridula,
with yellowish anil

 

gr
Members of the Fab! at the top
ke

   

the last two
ge of the preceding ones
the forehead=
and
you

    
  
  
  
    
 
 
  
   

limbs off at the
awake brown tinged, last 2 segments

 

any one
and water-bright,

» Yom ten
last
the

far

— 5 —

protruding. Chest back with more or less prominent
dashes. Wings faintly yellowish with yellow veins. Several Q from the Aachen area. 17 Ps, melanoneura. Réthlich yellow, back of chest with pale markings, der
Abdomen on the chin with brown bandages, that
belly pale. The feelers are from the 3rd to the 6th segment
on the scapula, the others almost entirely brown, frontal cone long
and sharply narrowed towards the apex. wing aquatic
pale, the veins at the base pale, from the mille of the winglet
from deep brown, also the inner edge up to the vicinity of the first
Fork cell is pale brown and even the stigma is on
1 copy this colour,

1 go from the Aachen area, cin 2nd from Mr. Walker received from England,

 

 

4S p.s. spartiophila. head and thorax yellow, sometimes sozar ziegelrath; the
Breast ribs with more or we
drawing

ger clearly protruding
en, the abdomen with brown bandages on the
Abdominal cords of the Q usually only stand out as spots. From the
From the limbs down the palers are almost completely brown up to the scapula. The vocal cones are very short in this species
(still more sparse as in Ps, Aln
of the sucker and d

 

 

  

     

    
 

suitable

     

the truncheon, mushrooms
last Fussgl are also fails

       

the
the limb

  

   
  
     
  
 

  

Syringa vulga:
found. 20 p.s. costato punctata. pale yellow, the doe with darker markings,
the abdomen with brown spots on the middle of the rings;

 

Ro

 

filer segments from the stent at the tip very clearly
lightly and definitely brown ringed, the last 2 completely brown,

i i broad and gradual at the base
yellowish with yellow veins, the
to the top with a grater of brownish

   
 
  
 
 
  

 

  

 

a

colored: the Qte fork cell

 

In this way I caught 2 sticks, 1 and 1Q
in the Aachen area; Mr. y. Heyden sent 2 Q from
Emscin,

23 p.s. Pruni Scope. head and thorax somewhat dirty dark red, the hind
Upper breast paler, the middle breast brown, the abdomen open
Back and belly with wide brown bands and lively
vermilion edges; the wings are dark brown with
pale base. o7 and Q are colored to match. I caught
this beautiful, above all excellent species on Prunus spi-
nesa near Aachen, as well as Mr. Kaltenbach, and it is

ifelt Scopoli's Pruni; Mr. v. Heyden caught 1 Ex. on
sylvestris (certainly only verilogen!) near Frankfurt, a
gene and a 3rd again near Frankfurt,
ne specification of the forage plant. 24 p.s. Pyri Le
yellow, head and thorax with broad brown
spots and stripes, the abdomen with broad brown
Bands and red posterior margins: the frontal cones ma

 

 

 

   

    

Dirty red

 

vinegar long,

broad base bluntly acuminate, and the feelers of the 4th

 

Limbs almost entirely brown. On the legs are the shanks

  
 
 
  

 

kel and tarsi

   

aun; the wing veins dark brown, the
but yellowish at the tip of the stigma. n brown, not very sharply defined=

lichen stains, the inner edge also has one

anterior marginal vein ind
Between the veins II
stepping, mostly lan:

 

 

   

 

  

dunly colored brown spot

    

   
   
 

 
 
 
  

 

wn

r collection
+ slams from binge and

pear trees s.

 

r have

   

 

     

 

inc

be, little

      

 

 

no

— m3 --- 79 —

 

gate the pear tree dwellers the largest
and look at her. I caught 11 Q and turned 1 A near Aachen
Boppard in garden on dwarf pear trees. near Frankfurt
(zen completely brown; the forehead cones very much the same does not appear to occur, just as little in

   

 

 

    

   
 
    
   

  

 

       
  
 
   
   
   
   
  
 
   
  
 
 

 

   

sharpened from a wide base, { England. On the legs, the thighs are brownish at the base. ‘ °. . : +
The wings are yellowish with yellow veins and a brown - OS. p.s. Salicetis . a spot in front of the © gabel cell on the inner edge. ; Head and thorax lighter or darker red, with brown
t near Aachen. 2 others 9 | stripes, the abdomen with brown bands and vermilion
of sods | schiekie Mr. v. Hev the one under the red border. The Fabler limbs yellowish, the Ate and the
name Ps. similis, sic were caught on Pyrus communis following brownish ringed at the tip, the 2 last
been. oot © all brown; the legs are slimy yellow, tinged with brownish
thighs. The forehead cone long, somewhat sluggishly pointed. 26 Ps, apiophila. Wings fairly water-white with brownish-red stigma
veins fairly and similarly colored in colour,
ib This species is very common near Aachen, Mr. v. Heyden
Hi sent several on Salix a caught 2 but only
zi i this 1 7 which has been found on Crataegus oxyacantha
Species and there was still a, I had this species before I knew the forage plant,
ki pitz, but only sent to the under the name aemulta. more water-bright and the brown 5th .
; a 29. p.s. ferruginea. at

and sharper, oo, :ae

Head and thorax more or less red, with brown
stripes , the abdomen with brown bands and vermilion
red cattle, the thighs of the legs are brownish
hienen with the Q sometimes too, but biased like them
tarsi tarsi red. yellow limbs
fe 2 last
wide base:

   

both at
umen in the garden, Mr. plain of sods
Fobnortes. Yon Mr. itze brundlich ringed,

  

g long, ouch d stick something out

 

  
 
 

 

I have a kind
hter, but not often caught
I E probably but in
ie forage plant

 

 

2

 

oa

— 7 — —- 8 —-

32 p.s. Heydeni. rinzten brau- The largest of all species known to me; head and thorax
and vermillion yellowish, with dark red spots and stripes, the posterior
the false limbs are yellow, from Sten Jeib with brown bands and pale margins. The Fibers
Limbs banded brown at the tip: this brown colour. are long and strikingly fine, the limbs from the 4th onwards
However, practice increases, not only the 10th and 10th, the tip has a brown ring, the last 3 are completely brown. the
d fe limb becomes completely brown. The | Slim cone very short (like Alni! ), from a very wide
ha. The frontal cones are | sis very slump? mushroomed. and far away. The legs
pointed, but yellow because it is soggy; the fly! water-white with brown veins,
dark brown veins, the anterior marginal vein inde: the stigma and the base of the

‘Own stains on the inside | Inferior marginal vein (before ih: I) greenish yellow. ,t sent Mr. v. Heyden
hiccup in, one of the
Ha Alni time. But there already is one
is, I gave her the name of the

   
   

brown bandages

 

   

 
 
 
 
  
   
   
  
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
     
 
  
 
 
  
    
 

 

 

  
   
   

   

 

Aachen. Yon
easily through
rch the lack of brown ones
yrisuga and Saliceti
ken on the inner edge. &

y 33. p.s. alpine. Dirty horny, head and thorax with brown spots
and stripes, the abdomen with brown bands, the feelers
from the tip of the 4th segment brown on the legs
the thighs at the base, but the hindmost almost whole

 

   

 

are long, from a very broad base quite
because

  

bt bag
53

4
5

quite

 
  

 

pus
narrow

  

pretty much

     

and

nn

 

 

— 3 —

TRIOZA. m.
1. Tr. urticae. Chermes Urticae L.

head and thorax dirty yellow, with more or
ger brown stripes, Hi with brown ones
Binding, last on the belly ropes not continuous (9!) at 7 meh The forehead cones
brown with me the fihler brown,
the 2nd and | in the middle,
the rails after the brown, to the
behind i elvish. crystal clear Y.g.

 

  
 
 
  
     
   
    
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
   
 

 

 

Yellowish grin, only you
tip of sucker,
brown i liked

 

‘bt

   
 
  
  
   

at the Sp
most legs

 

 

j
j
+

— 3 —

somewhat yellowish; the radius approaches the tip of the wing
as with eupoda. 2 2 from Aachen, all colored in the same way. 5. Tr. remote. Belly yellow with reddish spots and stripes
something shimmering white. ; the feelers from the 4th segment,
the tip of the sucking beak, as well as the tip of the feet
of the claw part brown; the forehead cones are merely at the
extreme tip, branch imperceptible, brownish. You Fligel
completely clear; the radius far away from the wing tip,
even more like eupoda. 1 g and 1 Q from the Aachen area. 6. Tr. crassinervis. with brownish spots and bands
s 2nd and third, and sometimes also
r or less yellow; the forehead cones,
head on the underside and the tip of the sucker
black-brown, the former often with a pale base, the abdominal

  
 
 
  

   

segments are brown, with pale posterior margin, on abdomen
d these bands at the Q very wide and interrupted,
the same thereby appearing white-yellow. The Wings
t stronger than in Urticae,

    
 
 

and the veins white

From the Aachen area. n spots and stripes,
f the rick something

 

— 4 —

& Tr. albiventris,
head, thoracic and abdominal
Ticking, the fibers from the 4th link. the thighs up
the outside and the medial tibiae together with feet brown. The belly is snow-white or slightly greenish with velvety
black anal phalanx, el rather narrow and
tipped, the radius of the tip fairly approximated,
1# from the Aachen area,

 

  

Rethiic! 9 drops pallipes
Musty yellow, the breast with réthlic
the hindquarters
edges, belly and
pages in

  
    
 
   
   
  

 

 

 

   

  

the buggers are the
(the others
Zapien and the Spitz
gel a little yellowish,
strongly approached,

ig in the N
in Silesia. free~

> with brown ones

Am

 

at the rear=
3rd term applies

 

     
    
 

 

the legs ¥
brown,
Slimke
at

— 3 —
is yellowish). The wings are fairly water-clear, the Ra-
dius fairly close to the Flageispitze. 2 f from the Frankfurt area (v. Heyden!). 12. Tr. sanguinosa. Light brick red in color with brownish stripes
of the thorax and brown bandages on the abdomen, on the
The first 3 segments of the antennae are white-yellow, the frontal cones
deep black-brown, the legs dirty yellow, on the front
the thighs are somewhat brownish on the outside. the
lagel are fairly water-clear, the tip radius somewhat
approached. 1 ge he from Aachen,

 

13. Tr. hematodes. colored red, with very faint brown
hen stripes on the chest, the abdominal rings
ugly brown. The main link of the brown flags is awesome
usually very sct

prevail! awake brownish colored; a little darker

 

 

Letay Tar:

 

d brownish ; the flagel
the radius far in front of the fly
in the. and by Fi

heat

 

 
 
 
 
   

 

and again
brownish

 

  

&
oa
£
5
@

   

2

&

=
saa
53

  
   

ammunition off
Silesia before. Chern;
Predominately dark

el cinnabar red ,
everyone

s a 0 the thorax towards
oraun marked, abdominal rings dark-
brown, the anus reddish, the ventral side sometimes red
light instead of brown. On the brown feelers the 3rd, dte and
te segment white-yellow; the forehead cones are somewhat dirty
Color occurs on the upper side

on

   

 

   
 
  
   
     
     

pf is b roth, the tip
h The legs réthlich-
» Hey thighs on the outside die
Strongly yellowish, the wheel
on
sylv
he fabler and flagel easily

 
  
  
  
 
    

traces of g

 

  
 
 
 

The reddish-yellow markings appear on the @
Head and thorax very distinct. i gf i have near aachen and 1 q at
Boppard caught, I also received them from Schlesjen,

18 Tr. acutipennis Zett. Brown in colour, on the sides and back
rathlich's chest, of's abdomen with brown bandages,
which have a yellowish rear edge on the ventral side
the @ is the belly side of the color of the back breast... An
the brown blemishes, the 3rd segment is quite lengthened
and white-yellow, the frontal cones dirty, almost reddish brown,

 

the throat pin somewhat lighter colored; the tip of the suction

 

beaks also
melty yellow mi
and that first

black hraun. The legs appear
brotherly: thighs, the rearmost
e phalanx ibid slightly into the white-yellow
hed. The flagels are water-white, somewhat elongated and
mushroomed, the radius quite far in front of the tip of the wing
minding
I found 1 y and 1 g near Aachen. 19 Tr. Galileo. Black-brown, the Ste Fithler limb, the splints and
b, the hindbr

the r

 

 
  

st elwas réthlich yellow, the

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   

and
High near Bérgel

 

20 Tr. velutina. With

  

the same

the back
The 3rd link is white

elf,

 

same coloring, the radius is

y
and at its base the Cu

  

 

— ss —

  

Boppard on W. ei Aachen and Frankfurt comes
he not via Ireland discovered her Mr. Minden Mr. Oberforster W

     

day, and at

 

husband. 21 Tr. abieticola. Mellow yellow, the back of the chest except for the
Prothorax is brown due to merging stripes which
abdomen has brownish birds; the errors are yellow, the
last two segments brown; the vocal cones short, fairly
strongly 2u pointed: the pointed & 2nd fork
i nde, just before be. at least all Ar

 

    
 

 

 

  
          
  

 

Tr. mouth. four breast;

radius

     
  
      
 
  

 

2 ae

 

brown. ctw:

 

  
 

r Ste close in front of

within the

 

 

lying comes: the 2nd fork cell is
very small here. England and Silesia. I owe a Q copy of this excellent one
Kind of the calculated English enlomologist, whose name
she is intended to lead her from now on, later I received a
awhile Slick by Mr. dr Scholz from Silesia, which
found them on Prunus spinosa. relation to the first,

V.APHALARA. HM. 1, aph. flavipennis. Brownish yellow, on head and thorax with brownish not
prominent spots, or faint red lines
fen, the feelers are yellow, from the 4th segment onwards in the
steer brownish ringed, the last two links whole
tip is yellow, the suction beak on the
tip brown: legs yellow, only the claws brownish; the
Abdomen has brown bands (with pale posterior margin! ), the
but very receding on the ventral side. The wings are
colored yellow, dark egg at the tip

I have this type after both sexes in very
large numbers near Aachen and Boppard on damp meadows
fenced they do not occur, from
England sh e Mr. Walker, from Ireland Mr. Haliday and
from Minden Mr. Above ter Wissmann. in Ireland, in

 

3. aph. polygoni. Head and thorax above lively reddish with delicate white
stripe, the latter below as well as the rear
jeib brown; the feelers colored as in exilis and also the
Legs : thighs have only a faint brownish tinge
Approach. The wings are somewhat yellowish toward the tip
but darker, and characteristic of this species are 3 brown ones

 

 

 

 

 
 

orderrande, just where the companies
the other am
the other,

  

randader the b
posterior edge, the former in front of the first prong
where this prong in the rear edge n

After generations of me at Aachen and
Boppard on Polygonum; also with Fri:

 
  
 
  

   

finds. nd, from

may surprise, there
given. what not

  
 

4. aph. nervous. Grin, am and w f

yellow streaks or spots

and thorax with dirt. no are green and
4 last links

  
 

 

      

    

aph. innoxia. t grinem hind

 

  

  

7. Aph.subpunctata. Yellowish, the filars yellow, the last 2 segments brown,
the individual limbs are proportionately longer, as in
of the previous kind. The foot claws brownish. the
Fligel almost water-white, the tines and the radius are at
its union with the edge a brownish point,
also when the inferior marginal vein joins the anterior
edge, such is noticeable. From the region of Aachen both sexes,

VI. RHINOCOLA. m.
1, Rh. acer
Chermes Aceris Platanoidis L.Fn. Suec. 1014 — Fabr. sp. into the. 2. p, 392. n. 16. mant. into the. 2nd p. 318. n. 16. Grin, later clay yellow, the last fable link and the
foot claws pale brownish; the fiddleheads are yellow, the first
Fork cell not much wider than the 2nd,
After both sexes very often at Aachen
Acer campestris,

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

   

2 Rh. Ericae. p.s. Ericae Curt. Grin or dirty yellow, the thorax sometimes a little
reddish, the last antennal segment and the foot claws also
slightly brownish; the two Gabezellers proportionately
Rzer and pap at Aceris, the little animal itself
also just halk

 

  

 

 

 

     

  
   
 

 

 

and they here near Aachen,
right like Walker, she sent
d Haliday ous Iriand under the above name,

FH. LIVIA Letr. forehead cone
in front in 2

 

  
  
  
 
    
 
 
    
    
   
  
   
  
  
    
   
   

— 92 — — 93 —

  
 
 
  
    
  

 

EUPHYLLURA m.
Pale Slinky, head without frontal cone, wings without
Stigma, 2nd forked cell with a very short stalk; the unpaired
The accessory eye is far from the front edge of the head. stigma, i.e

like
The two fork cells

  

a

is closed. far

 

y widespread (Aachen, Frankfurt, Ltine-
bt on rushes. burg and Silesia); Ie

1. Euph. Oleae. Psylla Oleae B. d. fonsc. Mr. Boyer de Fonscolombe informed me of this manner
several copies, some of which are still in good condition,
but to have bleached and lost their natural coloring
rails. The best baltenen showed heads and
Thorax réthlich yellow, the abdomen was more grin yellow, the
Sheath of Q grin with brown spur. The fitbler limbs
often without Stira cones, which were brownish from the 3rd onwards at the extreme tip
2nd fork ringed, the last completely brown. The flagellation had on
at least the front edge: Fh the 6 specimens compared by me the peculiarity,

that the inferior marginal vein before joining the anterior margin itself
» connects, is split into a multitude of branches, all of which in
reduce the front edge. *) At the mouth of the first prong
t a round deep brown point. The el are yellowish
‘@rbt and unre, ig aun spotted or diced,

 

 

 

40

 

     

 

  

   

     

   

 

through the
a lei

  

nh. Phillyreae. This 4th

, i

 
 
  

same
front iris and 4

 
     
  
 
  

 
    
 

F new Gaitung,

      

 

in brown,

 
   

    
   

right + those of Le-

   
 

and were

 

 
 
 

onbaums. — 4 —
SPANIONEURA m.

 

     

 

filer 10-

right into the

 
  
   
    
   
  
  

Span. Fonscolombii. Grénlich or rathi with pale legs, the fih-
ate,
lich, with three deep brown
toned warts lying hard on the edge of the june
In relation to 2ur Linge the fidgel are narrow,
ius i at the front

  

very fine, the stem not longer than d
doctor brown

 

     

flagel ge

   

   

end. excellent course,

olombe 1 gt and | Q from

 

   

   

also on other mushrooms
Location is i so
h from
captive

t.

Psylla subgranulata. Trioza maura. session

— 5 —

Second addendum. When I wrote the first follow-up to the previous one
work on the Psyllodes I did not think was forthcoming
to be in a position to add something new to it
Figen 2u kénuen. By a happy coincidence
but in the space of eight days I received three new ones
Consignments of psyllium, one from Ireland by
Haliday, the second from Mr. Chief Forester Wissmann
from the Harz Mountains and from the Minden area, and cine third
by Gravenhorst from the Breslauer Museum, Der lelz~
Another mission were also the provisions of the Hemiptera
Silesia's well-deserved Dr. Scholz attached. The

the discovery was less
interesting species, I hereby give way to the public
With regard to the species already described
i to add the new footers which
of the individual species is not unimportant
ft. for the Ve:
seem

mind. mom
m.irl. B

elanoneura

 
  

 

 

k
{i
'

i
i

 

 

   

describedcn

1. Aphalar Artemisiae. - Grin, head and rump with yellow markings ;
Ghler short, dirty yellow; the legs are also great
mixed in The fly! are densely mottled with brown,
have at the base of the inner edge

 

 

hey

     
 
  
  
 
  

 

 

the
gen places at the
have,

 

 

19

closer, like that

     
  
 

you from

inden, brown
e either cord-like

 

to marry

Jer rows
ig together

  

also occasionally irregular

 

2Aphalara Sonchi. Coloration same as flavipennis, on which there are feelers

last only on

  
 

 

   

education

 

someone

 

 

—- 97 —

the first prong; the second fork cell is slightly smaller
as in aph. exilis. Received one from Ireland by Haliday, he caught the same
on Ulex. 4. Psylla argyrostigma,

Red-brown, with black-brown markings ; the feelers
melty yellow, the individual links from the third down from the
Tip brown-ringed, the 7th entirely brown; the back
body rings are brown with red posterior edge; the legs yellow,
the thighs almost to the tip and the last phalanx
brown, the winglets water-white, the stigma shiny silver, am
Inner edge in front of the first fork cell a brown smudge, the
extends almost to the base, between the stalks of the
both fork cells cin second, longer but wider,
the hind wings also have a small brown streak on them
inner rim. .

I received three 2 from the Breslauer Museum through the
ability of Mr. Prof. Dr. Gravenhorst. case
5. Psylla Alaterni. Reddish yellow, with stripes on the chest ribs, the
hindquarters with brown spots, abdomen greenish-
yellow with pale brownish bands, which have a broad pale
have trailing edge; Pale and legs yellow, former from third
Limbs with brown ringlets at the tip, the last two
Ib, slightly darker at the tip,

 

 

 

  
  
 

  

i pale yellow spots; vehicle
yellow, the first from the third segment onwards at the
it is ringed with brown, the last two segments are completely brown
the wings as clear as water, the
towards the tip of the wing
hey pulling Veins differs this

   
 
 

     

more or less

   

 

Through the coloring

Verh am Ver Jaks. v. 7

 

 

i
i

 

kind of almost of
first sight. Both sexes from Ireland by Haliday (S specimen) obtain. prevailing grin g

 

Be on the

 

7. Psylla occulta,

Reddish yellow, the breast ribs with something darker. colored welts, the ridges of the abdomen with bruises
binding, the belly grins; the fabier and legs yellow, former
from the third joint onwards ringed brown at the tip; the two
the last limbs entirely brown frontal cone long, broader
is sharply pointed and widely projecting. wing aquatic
healthy, the veins at the base yellow, after the mushroom of the fli-
turn reddish and somewhat darker. Received two g and three g from Irtand of Haliday,

8th. Trioza flavipennis,

Dirty red-brown, the abdomen black-brown, the
posterior margins of the individual segments are darker; the
the feelers and legs
first and the b

 

 

 

  

     
   

 

re have that

the third on
base of thighs
Wings are dark-
rade as with

 

the last limbs
the apex brown, the latter d
and the last foot gli alike; you
yellow: somewhat rounded at the tip
). A
from Harz,

    
   

     

 

   

I received from Mr. Oberforster Wi

9. Trioza vitripenni
the breast bones with

    
 

ini; darker
ei first members of the fibers, the crura
n hind legs

 

 
  
   
    

 

m

the

 

something g

A # from around Ash:

the coloring, especially of the legs. of which a
Frontal cones are much longer and
in those two arias. the bass

 

~ 9 —

The funnel moth, Rhynchites Betu-
lae gyl. Some observations on the way of life

of the same,
by
stolwerck,
Teacher at the higher city school in Uerdingen. The numerous members of the natural history association
one becomes the most meritorious and treasured work
About the life and development history of the Rüisselki—
fers (Rhynchites Betulae) be known, with which Hr. dr Debey,
from Aachen, in the beginning of 1846, the entomological
public delighted. Two years have passed since then
within which the inquiring gaze of the constitution

 

      

sers may have presented some new things that some in
partially reported views set out in his work
others wohi supplement dirfle, and whose mili healing us as

Addendum to the continuation of his work in Aussichi
is. Now if we dare with some. so much us
known to occur new observations here, so mégen
us to justify this step of the author's own
Words at hand, what, so comprehensive and thorough
also his treatise i. nevertheless in several places
There are hints for further research, and especially on the Shiu
Says he doesn't prove it would
own and more detailed investigations of others
i da Unyoil:

 

 

 

 

   

     

 

    

   

stigt, the opposite country our special

 

 

f