YAY
't
z aa iy AE
. x
t toN 24
K ous 5S >
M4 aS ay
J, x i a
if A rf Ye
'Py

Cornell University

LIBRARY OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF ENTOMOLOGY

Mew Work State College of Agriculture

SLINGERLAND COLLECTION

En.1l09.7. snail [04

Cornell University Liberal
SB 931.N83 a

Tiny

"
|

| |
9 72 015

924 0

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE LITTLE ENEMIES

THE

AGRICULTURE

OR

TREATISE
those harmful or annoying in field, garden and house
Kerfe, other arthropods, worms and snails,

with special reference to their natural enemies
and those applicable to them

PROTECTIVE MEANS. WITH WOODCUTS BY ALLGAIER & SIEGLE
ACCORDING TO DRAWINGS BY SCHNORR & FEDERER (,
ISSUED
vox

PROFESSOR Dr. H. NORDLINGER,

STUTTGART AND AUGSBURG. 1G COTTA*SCHER PUBLISHING. 1855,
\

 

Book printing of the J, G. Cotta'sche book handling in Stuttgart and Augsburg

 

SR. GRAND DUCHY

THE WERRN

MARGRAF WILLIAM

FROM BATHING
IN HONOR AND GRATITUDE

ORWIDMET"

from the writer. kid line. There are several for agricultural use
certain entomological works. The richest among them is; Low, Natural History
of all insects harmful to agriculture: an industrious one
Compilat, but the farmer all the less recommended
Jen, as the whole, but especially the specified
soften means against the individual cores, by the author without
all kvitik are treated, and therefore, who after
often wanted to waste resources and money uselessly
would. Bouché's natural history of the physical and useful
garden insects is very good, but on the one hand for land
wirth not comprehensive enough and yet on the other hand also
containing forest insects. Kollar's natural history of the harmful insects in
zug ant Landwirihschatt and Forsicultnr is comprehensive and
worked diligently, alone in the kintheihing lacked. As
should therein, in order to give an example, which felderver-

 

 

 

 

 

be found when cr alone and
ter the forest-damaging insects lini? Zonker's natural history of harmful animals, on the other hand, is
Iu plan quite well laid out, but too learned and guided,
and therefore almost inaccessible to the non-entomologist. Of the
Blick strays bein opening the book mustit through the
learned stematiku and through too much synonymic
ends pages. Such a thing is all the more regrettable,
as the general part, which is the key to the whole
should be, by no means sufficient, nm the Laicn also mr

 

 

  

 

very eel

 

 

vi

necessary with the necessary when searching
inological knowledge to equip. Also the cup
are not for the adornment of the work; the book will
- probably by someone who has been taught, but not by the layman
Advantage used. Quite a number of works, some of which have already been mentioned
individual groups of agricultural insects, 2 B. the
Obstbaumkerfe by Schnidberger, the Rebeninsckten cte.,
have appeared scattered, or so dear and difficult to
get that they for the farmer thats not shlich
bribe I have some of this kind, despite all
rigors could not procure, even the numerous
Works of the many, which without any calling are thoughtless
Have copied others, be thought here in leniency. The main drawback of almost all work is that
lack of illustrations, without which, in my opinion,
the material would always have to remain unloadable, by which
but it also makes the author's task incredibly difficult. It required several years of teaching at the Au-
stult Hohenheim, where I also do agricultural work
entomology hatic to make me thier almost end-
loose work zn sign. Most of the time I have the
Execute calculations according to nature under my guidance
to let. Only in relation to the tendrils did I often
use excellent Hitbner copper, which by original
I could not hope for original drawings to pass 2u. In my opinion, an agricultural crime should
do not invite from the point of view of pure scientific
Eutomologic to be edited from. All very fine sub-
divorces must be omitted, especially those
which exceed the use of the loupe, Tmerhalb
this limit, however, the farmer must also
comprehension of sharp entomological indicators.
the. The mere observation of the way of life of Kerfen
is by no means sufficient. Are a lot of 5
meritorious work from farmers about harmful ones

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

vu

  

Insckt purely useless because of the long descriptions
contain the non-essentials and the main characteristics
passed over

That I, by the way, in the general entomological Ai
Demands on the farmer don't go far, should
it was already apparent that I included the general part
ebwa 30 pages together. These form the
necessary key to understanding the whole book. Apart from this distribution of some entomological-diagnostic
schen knowledge among the Landwirtschafthen my book has the
Task, the sense for observation of Kerfen za weeks uid
develop mi. For who wants to conquer an enemy with success?
hope that his customs, his habits, his
necessities of life, his weapons not ker

 

   

   

   

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

t? The reader who sees
does not let the time grow too long, w

 

nn only a few
following sects closely in their way of life will differ from
of the unacceptable unsustainability of those among farmers
widespread belief that insects are made from stagnant juices
there are chins, grindlich Tiberzeagen and much more ciu-
ere learn that the propagation of insects is merely
as happens in all higher animals. authorize
Yes, even the latest research to assume that
the mode of origin of inanimate matter even in the
lowest beings, where no other explanatory
wise had not exist, rather also the latter in whole
similarly, albeit more mysteriously, to continue
plant, like dice kerfe, So who the entomological
Vorschen doesn't at least go so far that he takes over
Procreation of non-bribery of a generatio aequivoce wins,
put the book aside as unenjoyable for him. The
but aspiring readers who read columns 30 to 60
followed, I promise that he will be in the field and in the garden
besides the knowledge of his enemies, also those thiti-
should get to know friends. Ey will help me a lot
Fight against prejudice, useful means against one's enemies
seize and condemn innumerable ones praised as effective. vu

 

The friends who advise me in my work,
especially also through larger literary aids
have stitz, the Mr. Ratzeburg zn Neustadt-Eberswalde,
y. Roser, Herring, v. Martens, C. Hoffmann zu Stuttgart,
Brothers Villa in Milan, Hartig in Braunsehweig, Herrich-
Seliiffer zu Regensburg, I say my sincere thanks. According to the custom which the glossators regard-
observed in the use of parentheses in the text
have, are those of my own accord, in the text
Other interwoven, glosses in square brackets. By using a smaller text,
in my opinion, less important and doubtful more
into the scientific background. I kept the nomenclature very simple,
Limnean, at your risk, by entomologists from Fach
to be blamed for it. Do not hide Zenker's book
want to be up to date with science,
so would the eutomological part, where the ailment at
FithIbarsten will certainly find even more recognition. To avoid the consequences of our unfortunate
schen mass confusion I, as usual, on
metric system indicated on page X. Mark the crosses that are used frequently in the book
Length and width of the Ke: The space saving necessitated
them sometimes lying down, sometimes standing up; to possible
To prevent errors, the head
catch indicated by an arrowhead. movable
7\- ‘parts, such as fillers, bristles, etc. were except
measurement left. The transverse line denotes the
Width at the widest point of the kerf, regardless of this
in the thoracic or abdominal region s The length of the crack
kéifer is at natural, wilmlich crooked abwiiris court
a - measured in the dead position of the ruffle. the kind
HS how to hide the dimensions of the moths

are connected by the adjoining wooden selnite

 

   

 

 

 

  

 

   

 

  

   

  

 

 

denied. 1X

The sign of Mars where it is needed, o, be-
draws the male kerf, that of Venus, ¢, the female
licence,

The general reasons why I betw
the kerfe preferred the woodcut to your copper or stone,
I'm not allowed to put the man from the field together first. Part of the reason for me was the concern that colored plates might
ten the eye of the entomologically only to be formed
we draw too much attention to the colors. The main thing,
shape and drawing, is more sharply defined in the woodcut
presses. But here is a description of the same for understanding
to make a note. Mere shifting namely or dark
Color of a kerf is created by strokes of equal thickness,
while Linicu is connected to an insect by double lines
Freten are, for example, the Rebensehneider, §. 92, a
black but all over smooth kifer, the Rossskiifer, $. 93,
on the other hand, black with a smooth breast piece and lined pigeonholes
cover. .

Finally, a comment on how
I order the literary aids available to me
useful, . So far I have the information for a number of years
If someone else had the opportunity to check it, I got it on time
done. Where I haven't been in this position, I only have
the perceptions of recognized observers ole distrust
used. In the many cases where I have had second, not alone
calculate! was, information from credible Mauner only
To deny general gritudes, I have repeated
observations recommended. But in this case I was
also somewhat constrained to appear rambling
on me by, in order to give the reader the
go to the earlier works to spare details and pro-
schlige others discussed, which I neither quite right,
see high totally discardable. Anyway, the crowd was
of the available materials so large that testing of all
Information given by others is beyond the powers of a person

 

 

 

 

have to. For the observation of many rarely occurring lisek-
ten is not enough for a human life, and also
Apart from this, the sighting of the whole can be
the material is observed by a larger number of observers
farmers happen. For the latter a fixed stopping point,
to work out a kind of prodromus 2 on an equal footing
to offer the later work was solely my
Intention. I recognize the imperfection of my work myself
preferably. However, a longer Zégeru would help
not served, rather only various observations
postponed, which will allow future
eliminate levthum 2u, throw unnecessary ballast overboard 21,
and finally to fill in essential gaps. Kirehheim below Teck, January 1855. Nordlinger. Beneficial literature :

Annals and Magazine of natural history, inchding zoology, botany and
geology. London: R. and J.E. 'Taylor, Vol. 1, second series 18485
volume Il, second series 1848; volume IV, second series 1849; volume V, second
series 1850; volume V1, second series 1850. Borkhausen, M. B., Natural history, the enrop. Butterflies, Volumes I—V,
1788—1794, Frankfurt, with Varrentrapp and Wenner. Bonehe, P. Fri., natural history, the harmful and useful garden insects
th and the most proven means for eradicating the former. -ber-
lin, Nicolai'sche bookshop. Burmeister, H., Handbook of Entomology. 2nd volume. Special
eutomology. Rhynchota and Gymnognatha. Berlin 1839, at
Friedr. Enslin, Volume 2. Special Entomol. Gymuognatha. Berlin 1838 and 1839,

Clark, B., Essay on the bots of horses and other animals, London. Printed for the author, and sold at No, 17, Giltspur Street, 1815. Degeer, K., Essays on the History of Insects. To the Franz. translated by J. A. E, Gize, Nuremberg, 1776-1783. Erath, Dr., Griindl, Notice of Knowledge and Destruction of the Sehiid-
common insects in agriculture, Rottweil a. N. Setzer'see
Bookstore, 1847. Ericson, Dr. W.F., Naturgesch. of the insects of Dentsehlaud. First

 

department. Coleoptera. third volume. Berlin, Nicolei'sche Bueh-
handling, 1848.

ichson, dr W. B., in the archive fir Naturgesch. VIL, year 1. Tape,
under the heading: Zar systemat, Knowledge of insect larvae,

 

Forster, A., Overview of the genera and species in the family of

 

Psylloden, in the negotiations of the natur
sian Rhineland. 1848 8th.

St. Vereius the Prussian

 

xu

Freyer, U. B., the most beautiful semblances of Germany, Augsburg. Karl Kollmanu'se bookstore, 1839.

tireve, A., Abridged natural history. the schiidl. Insect species besides the
best preserved means 2u of their extermination. Osnabrück, 1810. crown'. sche bookstore. Grognier, L. F. Outline of Veterinary Zoology. Edited_ was ver-
completed by Dr. C.F.H, Weiss. Stuttgart, 1845. publisher of
Steinkopf'schen bookshop. Gurlt, Dr, and Dr, Hertwig, Magazine for the entire 'Thierheil-
Customer, fourth year. Berlin, 1838. Hartig, Dr. Theodor, The family of sawflies and wasps. Berlin, 1837, Hande and Spener bookshop. hunt by Hirsehwald. autumn, j None W., (and Jablonsky) natural system of all known domestic and

hen Insektew, Berlin, by J. Pauli. 1785-1806. Hering, E., The Kriizmiten der 'Thiere, (Acta Acad. Caesar. leop. Carol. nat. volume XVUL YP. 1)

Herman, J Fr., Mémoire aptérologique. Strasbourg. whoops
bf G. Levrault, 1804,

Kirby and Spence, Introduction to Entomology, Ans dem Eugl. Translated into German. 4 Bue. Stutigart. J. G, Cotta'see Bueh-
action, 1823—1833,

Kollar, Vincenz, Naturgesch, der sehadli
agriculture and forestry. Vienna, 1837. anf cost of
k, k. Agricultural Society. The book forms a ‘part of the
Connections of the k, k. Agricultural Society. in Vienna:
No episode. Fifth Volume. Vienna, 1837. In the publishing house of the company
settled. Korte, F., The line, Zng or migratory locust, Berlin, at Aug.
Ricker, 1828. Lenehs, J.C., Voll
attachment

 

outside

   

 

en insects in relation to aut

 

 

nature lovers the Aekersehuecke, in addition to one

 

wthalleud a representation of the means of destroying all

 

schid], animals. Nuremberg, 1820. Publisher of the Comtoir of the general. action newspaper. 1

Liw, Dr, Carl Anton, Naturgesch. uné, Carolus a, Systema naturac, eurante Guicliu. Here the farmer's shadow
Iusects. Maunhcim, published by Frieder. gitz xt

Mayer, J.F., The Mayenkiifer as Worm and Bird. Sehwabach, near
Gottlicb Mizler, 1786. b

Meigen, J. W., Description of European Diptereal Insects. Aachen, by F. W. Forstmann. 1818-1838, 7 vols. Meyer, F.A. A., Non-profit natural history of poisonous insects. First part. Berlin, 1792, by H. A. Rottmann. Moll, v., Treatise on the Harmfulness of Insects. Salzburg
at J.J. Mayers sel. heiress bookstore. 1783. Mulsant, M.E., Histoire naturelle des coléoptéres de France. lamellar
cornes Paris. Maison, libraire. 1842 natural history of the three kingdoms. 10th volume. Zoology by Voigt. Stuttgart,
1838, Schweizerbart'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung; and f1ter volume. Stuttgart, 1840. Nenning, Dr., On a highly beneficial to grapevines, excellent
insect native to Reichenan Island. Constance, 1840, Bei
Carl Glucker. Useful Instruction Regarding Means of Reducing and Tilting
tion of the sehidl. animals. Leipzig, in all bookshops, 1795,

Oken, general natural history for all hours. Stutigart, Hoffmannian
Bookstore, 1835. ‘Animal realm: 2nd volume, 2nd and 3rd sections. Panzer, G, W. F., Deutschlandlends Insect fauna or entomol, Taschen-
book for the year 1795. Nuremberg. Felscker bookstore. Panzer, Germany's insect fan. At Pustet in Regensburg. Pezold, C. P., Means of reducing harmful caterpillars,
for gardeners and farmers. Coburg, at R, A.W. Ahl, 179%. From the Rebenstichern, four prize publications of the chnrpfilzische academy
of Sciences, Mannheim, 1767. Réaumur, de, Mémoires pour servir & Vhistoire des inseetes. Paris,

Imprimerie Royale, 1734-1742. 6 inde. - R. (Roser) Remarks on the enworm and sourworm
the grapes. 1835
amusements, 4 vols. 17461764. Schmidberger, J., Contributions to fruit tree cultivation and natural history

 

 

Rosel, A.J., Insect

of insects harmful to fruit trees. Linz, at ©. haslinger 4 yeast. 1827-1836. The same short practical instruction in the cultivation of fruit trees

 

xIV

in Garientépfen or the so-called. fruit orangery marriage. Linz, near
C.Haslinger, 1828. The same easy-to-understand instruction on the upbringing of the dwarf biinme. Linz, by C. Haslinger. 1821 The same easy-to-understand instruction on the upbringing of fruit trees. ~ Linz, with C. Haslinger. 1824 Schwab, Dr. R. C., The Oestracids of Horses, Cattle, and Sheep,
marriage. pressed at M. Péssenbacher. 1840 Siebold, Handbook of Physiology. vol. I. S. G41 & f. Parasites. Vogelbacher, J. B., Instructions for useful beekeeping. Freiburg
in Breisgau, 1854. Waguer bookshop. Werner, J., Way to exterminate vermin without poison ete. Breslau, Grasse's Erben and Barth. Histoire naturelle des insectes. Aptéres IJJ., par Mr. Walckenacr. Aceres
Phrynéides etc., by Mr. Paul Gervais, Paris. Libr. encyclop. en
Roret. 1844 Westwood, J. 0. Esq. British moths and their transformations, in two
volumes. London, William Smith, 113 Fleet Street. Zenker, J.C., Natural History of Noxious Animals. Leipzig in tree
giirtner's bookshop. 1836, . table of contents. Division of animals into vertebrates and invertebrates, 5. 1. Kintheilung of invertebrates, 8. 2. Radiating animals — mollusks or snails and mussels: garden snails,
Ilelix hoviensis; Naked shoes: Limax ater, hyalinus, red Schneeke,
rufis. S. 25 Grane Ackerschuecke, agrestis, S, 3. — Worms with me
white blood: Bandiiiermer; strapworm, ligula; bubbler
Quese; intake manifold, $8.13; Cone Worm, Double Hole, Liver Fluke, Pint
hole; hookworms ; roundworms: acetic acid, Vibrio aceti; wassev
thread, Gordins aquatics; roundworms, bilaria; whipworm, 8. 4
Aphrodisiac, palisade worms; roundworms; worms with
red blood: leeches; Earthworms, Lumbricns terrestris, 8. 15,
— arthropods; cancerous: cancer; water flea; woodlouse, onis
cus asellus, 8. 17; spider-like, Aranea: horseback spinue, 8. 18; Hillside-
spine Jumping Spimie; field spiny; scorpion, scorpio; bookscorpion,
Obisium caneroides, p. 19; Ticks, Ixodes, p. 20; Mites, Acarus, S.
21; sheep mite, ovis, p. 23; Pilanzenspime, telarius, 5. 27; Thousand-
fiisse: Scolopendra, $. 29; Kerfe or insects: definition, 8. 30;
‘Parts of head, chest, abdomen, p. 31; imperfect ‘states of
Kerfe, 8, 33; generation, p. 36; inner organization and senses, 8. 37;
Instinct, p. 38; basic living conditions, 8. 39; way of life, 8. 41;
Identification of a Kerfeverwiistang, 8. 42; Means against kerfe, viz
drill culture, 8, 45: catch, cleanliness, 5. 46; Fragrances , mecha
Sacher conclusion, p. 47; Pork herds, “Application of Tehneu
monen, wood ants, shaking on towels, p. 49; Hop off with
a hammock, sticky substances, snares, glimmers of sweets,
brushing with lime, p. 50; fire, heat, hot water, stench,
Scents with pepper etc. w., 8. 51; incense pan, sulphur,
suffocate, 8. 52; with chlorine, with phosphorus (werren bellows), 8. 53; With
Kssigdimst, cherry laurel; sprinkling, dousing with thrane, soapy water
ser, long, wood vinegar, sulfuric acid; Ei en or drinking with Ocl,
spirit of wine, 8. 54; with wormwood, coloquinta, quassin, cobalt, az-
lime water, mercury or liius ointment, arsenic , mercury sublimate. Brush with brown lime, burnt potta mare, 8. 55; burnt

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AVI

gypsum, lime dust, gypsum dust; Tobacco, rhombus, Pieler, Kuobauch, Hant,
Henbane, Asand, Persian Tusektenpulver, Gumini arabieum, Alor. wood

 

8th. 56,

Chin healing of the kerfe, 8. 56 I, beetle order, 8. 61 1) Fivefold tomcat : —

A,

Laufkifer, Carabus: Feuerstehler, auratus, $. 61; eoriaceus;
hortensia granules; morbidity; cupreus, aeueus; eurynotus;
communis, — Cieindela eampestris. — Carabus eephalotes, 8. 62:”
Grain weevil, Carabus gibbus, 8. 63 Short-winged Staphylinus: olens, 8. 65; maxillosus; mu-
runs; eaesarens; erythropterus; stereorarius, 8, 66. Schwimmkiifer, Dytieus: latissinus; marginalis, 8.66; —
Kolbeu water weevil, Hydrophilus piecus, 8. 67 Click beetles: Springhifers, Elater: Seed clicks,
segetis, 8. 68; darker, obscurus, 8. 69; lettuce speed kiifer
taor; iniusecolored, imurinus, 8. 70; Prackikiifer, Buprest
(Agrilus? ); candens. Soft dee kifer: Luminescent, Lampyris noetiluca, 8. %
— Schneider, Cantharis: fusing; mstiea; dispar; obseura; melanur
= wart beetle, Malachius: acneus; bipustulains; — raspberry kifer,
Dasytes niger, 8. 72 Immenkifer, Clerus: Beewolf, apiarius,
~ Corynetes violaceus. Nolzbohrer, Teredili: Nammbohrkifer, Plilinus peetinieornis,
8.75; — Nagekiifer, Anobium: Werkhola Nagekiifer, striatum. 8th. 76; Despite head, pertinax, p. 77; Brodborer, paniceum, 8. 78 Bohrkifer, Ptinus: Gemeiner, fur, p. 79; crenate; 'scotia,
8th. 80; imperial, imperialis. club-eared: death-diggers, Neerophorus: vespillo; mortuo-
rum (Manskiifer, Dermestes marinus); — Aashifer, Silpha:
mata, 8. 81; quadripunetata; black 82; - Shine:
i 8 845 Ips 4 pu
2 Speekkiifer, lardarins, p. 86;
fereheu, fumatus, 5. 89; tomato
— Blithenkifer, Authrenus: hivtus; ge
8th. 90; Kabinetifer, iuseorum; pimpinellaes

   

 

 

   

  

3

 

5 alvears. rius, 8. Beche ¢: Rebenschmeider, Lethrus cephalodes, $. 92 Squirrel-horned: Mist Scarabacus: stereorarius; typhoid;
blue kifer, meloloutha; Maikiiter, vulgaris, 8, 93; hippoeasiaui

 

 

p. 104; fullo; solstitialis; ruficornis; horticola, $. 105; fruticola;
agricola; July; freshii; — Crtonia aurata, 8. 106; + Kin settlers,
Trichius evemita; hemipterus; — Nashorakiifer, Geotrupes nasicor-
nis; — Balkenschriter, Lucanus: parcllelopipedus, 8. 107 2) Disparate beetles:

Mehikiifer, Tenebrio: molitor, 8. 107; Kiichenkiifer, ewlinaris; opatroi-

of; — Todtenkiifer, Blaps: mortisagn, p. 109; - Pyrochroa coccinea;

- spiny weevil, Mordclla acneta; — Plasterkiifer, Lytta: vesieato-

ria. None 110; — blue May pine, Meloé: proscarabacus; black bee
nenlaus, p. 112. 3) Four-limbed beetles:

A. Riissekiifer: seed kifer, Bruchus: pea kifer, pisi,S. 114;
arable crops, granarins, p. 116; rufinanus; sertatus. —
Brushweed, Anthribus: scabrosus. — fathead weevil, Apoderus:
coryli, 8. 17,—Riisselstecher, Rlynchites: Birkenstecher , betula;
Vine cutter, betuleti, 8. 117; Apple piercer, Bacchus, 8. 134; at-
rate aequatus, p. 135; Pilaumenstecher, cupreus, 8. 136; Branch-
detour,, conicus, 8. 189; — Spitzmieschen, Apion: Obstspitz-
miiuschen pomonae Wickenspitzmans craceac 8. 142; yellowish-
keliges, flavofemoratum; red clover shrews, aprieans; yellow-
liquid, flavipes; vermillion, miniatum; red grainworm,
framentarium, p. 143; — Magdalis: pilaumus weissel beetle, pruni,
p. 144; cerasi; barbicornis, 8. 145; violacea, 8. 146; — curcu
hello; Dickleissler, Cucorhinus: gemiuatus; Dicklebrissler up
Hazelnut, coryli, p. 146; Grauriissler, Sitona: lined, lineata;

Dickmaulriissler, Otiorhynchus: Liebstéckelviissler, ligustieiy
8th. 147; furrowed, suleatus; brown-footed, picipes; Marqnardtii ;
smoke Jaevigatus, p. 148; — Griinriissler: usomus ovulum:
phyllobins: pyri; arborators Silver-headed ruffler, argentatus, 8. 149;
maculicornis; dwarf, parvulus; brown, oblongus, p. 150; po
lydrosus: soft green viissler, mollis; apple green, splendidus;
goldsidner, scriceus; grancr, mali, p. 151; — Blatinager, Phy
tonomus: Kndirig leaf rodents, polygoni, Roeselii, $.152, and nigri-
rostris; — Getreideraissler, Calandra: Gemeiner, granaria, p. 153;
Reisskiifer, oryzae, p. 163; — Flowering Oyster Anthonomus :
Apple blossom stinger, pomornm, 8. 164; Stone fruit stinging
draparum ; pedicularius, 8. 170; iucurvns; rubi;-— nut riddle-
kiifer, Balaninus: nasal snout kiifer, nucum , 8. 171; credence ;
venous cherry stone weevil, cerasorum; — Manstooth Ripper,
Baris: «des Repses, chloris, 8. 174; — Hidden Riissler, Ceuto-
rhynchus: several species (alauda, ​​napi, assimilis, etc.), 8. 176-178; — Orchester segetis, p. 179. Nobrdlinger, the little enemies. and

 

 

 

     

 

 

 

   
    

 

 

  

 

 

XVal

 

8th. molt eaters, nylophages: Hork beetles, Bostricwus: unequal
cher, dispar, 5. 180; Saxescnii; Datebarkkiifer, daetyliperda ;
hairy, villosus, p. 184; Buehenbarkkiifer, bicolor; — bast
kiifer, Hylesinus: Kleewnrzelktifer, trifolii; poligraphns, 8. 185;
fic, — Phlocotribus oleae; — Pruning bark weeper, Kecoptogaster :
large, pruni, 8. 186; smaller, rugulosus, 8. 187; — Keru wood
Beetles, Platypus: common, cylindrus. — Colydium elongatum,
p. 188. C. Malmkifer: Kapuciner, Apate: capucina, 8. 188; grain capu
ziner, frumentarin, 8. 190; — Splinthdifer, Lyctus: geriuuter, ea
nalienlatus, 8. 189; frumentarins, 8. 190; — Brodkiifer, Trogo-
sila: meiuer, earaboides, $191; bluer, cocrulene, 8, 192; —
Flat beetle, Cucujus: burnt yellow, ferrngincus; pusillus. D. Buckkifer, Capricornia: actual, Cerambyx, 8. 193: run
zcliger, Cerdo; — Saperda: grituleiteriger, scalaris; Haselbiick
chen, linearis, p. 19; Getreidebdckcheu, gracilis, p. 195; at-

 

    

 

 

 

 

browned, pracusta; — Callidina: Balkeubockkifer, bajulus,
8th. 196 — Pogonocherus: hispidus; rhagium inquisitor; Clyus
arietis. E. Blattkifer, Chrysomela: Saatblattkiifer, eerealis, p. 197;
6 pumetata; — Lema; lily piper, merdigera; 12 punctured
asparagus weevil, 12 punctata; yellow-spotted, asparagi; cereal
chen, cyanella; red-necked, melanopa, p. 198: — Luperus ru-
fipes; — flea killer, Haltica, 8. 199: Kohlerdtloh, oleracea,
hemorum, 8. 203; lepidii; napi; hyoseyami; brassiene; coneima;
— Falthifer, Cryptocephatus: Weinstockliifer, vitis, $. 204,

4) Three-legged beetle :
Marienkiiferces, Coccinella: 7 punctate, 7 punctata, 8.206; impune
tata; double-pointed, bipunetata. IL butterfly order, 8. 207 Butterflies, Papilio:
Cherry Butterfly, polychloros, p. 240; Tree White, crataegi, p. 212;
large cabbage white, brassicae, $. 247; small cabbage white, rapae,
5, 221; Carrot white, napi, 8.223; German C, ¢ album; mallow
moth, malvarum; Swallowtail, machaon, p. 224; sailfold
podalirins; Pileum moth, primi, 8. 225; Peppered moth, betulac; rocket
moth, Daplidice, 8, 226,

Swarmer, Sphinx:

Abendpfanenange, ocellata, p. 227; Lime moth, tiliae; rain
willow wormer, ligustri, $. 228; Weinschwiirmer, elpenor; greater

 

  

 

  

Weinsschwiirmer, Celerio, $. 229; poreellus; Pigeon sweat toes, stel-
latarum, p. 230; death's head, atropos; Olednderschwarmer, no
Sesia eulieiformis; tipulacformis. — Syntomis phegea, p. 231. — Aty-
chia statices. Spinnor, Bombyx:

Ring moth, neustria, $. 233; moonbird, bucephala; four point spin
ner, quadra; Goldafter, chrysorrhoea, 8. 238; garden pear moth, auri-
fina, 8, 246; unequal, dispar, p. 248; Liilehspinner, morio; pear
crackhead; Redtail, pudibunda, 8. 252; clover flower spider, fascelina,
8,254; Apricot Spinner, antiqua, 8, 255; Pea moth, gonostigma,
8,257; blackberry moth, rnbi; Alberus spinner, populi, $. 258; gastric
thorn moth, erataegi; Cherry Nest Spinuer, lanestris, 8, 259; Copper-
glucke, quereifolin, p. 261; plum moth, pruni; willow borer, eos:
sns, 8,262; horse chestnut moth, aeseuli, 8,265 ; silk butterfly, mori,
$8. 266; hop root moth, 8. 267; Bluukopf, eocruleocephala, 8. 268,

  

 

 

Owls, Noctu: . Ampferenle, rumicis, 8.271; Apicotine newle, tridens; Selehenenle, psi. 272; Lilchenle, popnlaris, 8. 273; housemother, pronnba, p. 276;
chieule, chi; Ginsefussele, chenopodii; Mangoldeule, meticulosa; hereditary
senenle, pisi, p. 277; Lettuce leaves, Inetueae; early pear owl, satellite ;
Reporting eule, atriplicis, p. 278; Gemiiseenle, oleracea, 279; Kolilenle,
brassiene, $. 280; winter seedle, segetum, 8. 282; corn duck, crassa;
Waldstrohcule, aquilina, p. 288; parsley owl, dysodca; garden bi
cule, manda; cherry duckling, flavieineta; Almond newt, unstable; pyra-
lina, 8. 289; trapezoidal element; trapezina; Holm Owl, petriticata;
Steinklecewle, suase; Capsules, eapsineola, p. 200; white-yellow bule,
ochroleuea; Grascule, graminis, p. 202; Wlohkrautenle, pers
8,204; flame thigel, pyramidea; hawthorn owl, oxyacanthue; plum
gencule, paranympha, 8. 295; wood birncule, eulta; maura upsiloncule,
gamma, p. 296; typhae; Cossns arundinis, p. 300. Tensioner, geometries:

    

 

   

 

   
    

   

   

 

  

Pilanmen stretcher, pruna:
bud moth, rhomboidaria; Alniari
fro, pomonaria, $, 304; Vistula spam, bajar
sericearin, p. 306; elder spamner, sambuearia; hawthorn moth,
erataegata; cherry moth, hirtaria, p. 307; psitta-
cata; Biruspamer, pilosaria, p. 308; honeysuckle moth, elinguaria; Times-
Yenspanner, cervinaria; Zwelschgenspanner, prunata, p. 309; greater
Frostspamer, defoliaria, S, 310; horseradish moth, fluetnata; clypeata,
8th. 312; Frilling moth, vernaria; Lesser winter moth, brumata,
8.3135 horeatu; Apple spamner, rectangulata, 8.
grossulariata, S, 329; Currant moth, wavaria, S.

     

302; ptinsich
S, 303; fruit chip

   

    

     

ivaslind

 

 

     

   

 

     

 

Small moths, Microlepidoptera:

A. Ziinsler, Pyralis: Meerettigziinsler, forficalis, $. 331; parialis,
8, 332; nettle worm, urticalis; Schmalzziinsler, pinguinalis,
S, 333; Riibsöpfeifer, p. 334; Hopfenziinsler, rostralis, 8. 335;
Birnziinsler, palliolalis; Mehlziinsler, farinalis, $. 336; suatziins
ler, frumental; Hirseziinsler, silacealis, 8. 337; Roggenziinsler,
secalis, 8. 338 B. Wickler, Tortrix: codling moth, pomonana, p. 339; earthly
Plumworm, nigricana, p. 346; chestnut rampant; dateworm,
8th. 347; gray bud moth, variegana, 8. 348; red buds
caterpillar, ocellana, 8, 349; Pilum moth, pruniana, $. 351; era
taegana; ameriana, p. 352; heparana; xylosteana; laevigana;
ribeaua; Birnwickler, Holmiana, 8, 353; cerasana; sorbiana; Where-
berana, S, 354; arena; Tranbenwickler, uvana, p. 355; Wine-
winder, reliquana, 8. 359; Pyralis vitana; Springwickler, ‘Tor-
trix Pilleriaua, p. 360; golden yellow rose moth, Bergmanniana,
S, 361; garden rose moth, Forskacleana; ochroleucana; aquana ;
oporana, 8. 362 C. Moths or cockroaches, Tinea: Wax cockroach, cerella, p. 364;
colonella; alvearia; Cockroach, pellionclla, 8, 369; clothes cockroach,
sarcitella; Feather cockroach, crinella, 8. 371; tapezella,
p. 372; white-shouldered cockroach, lacteella; Kornmotia, Grauella,
8th. 373; cerealelln, 8. 379; Dried cockroach, elutella, p. 381; sex
spider moth, cognatella, S, 383; padelling evonymella; asperella;
persicella; caesiella, p. 385; prunella; grossnlariella; more
cockroach daucella 8 386; xylostella; porrectella; npilobia moth,
epilobiella; spinach moth, Roesella, p. 389; Cockroach Rhododendron
phagella; Minirriinpehen (Clerkella), syringella; ghost, aluminum
cit: rhodoiaetyla, 8. 390,

 

 

 

 

 

IL. wasp order, 5. 391 1) sawflies:

A. Halmwaspen, Cephus : Grain stem wasp, pygmaeus, 8, 394,

B. spider sawflies, Lyda: sociable pear sawfly,
pyri, 8. 395; Stone fruit wasp, drnpacearum, 8, 398,

   

C, Siigewasps, Tenthredo: Mylotoma: rosarum, 8. 401; pa-
gana, — Cladius diffor Aihalia vosve, 8, 402, — Selan-
dria bipmetaia; Clad pipes. — Nematus veutricosns, 8. 403 ;
appendiculatns. — Emphytus cinctus; rnfocinetus; grossulariae,
$8. 404, — Tenthredo flava, — Selandria morio. — Allantus ri

 

  

 

   

XXI

— Plum wasp, Selandria fulvicornis, $. 405; brunnea;
brevis, — reppsii wasp, Athalia spinarum, S, 408. — Allantus
aethiops, p. 410; tricinetus, — Tenthredo pruni and others,

p. 412. 2) Actual wasps, Vespa: mean, vulgaris, p. 313; common;
germanica, 3. 420; rufa; gallica; hornet, erabro; bees, apis;
Hurmeln, Bombus, 8. 421 3) Ants, Formica, p. 422: Braunrote, p. 429; pitch black, fuli-
ginosa; yellow; red, rubra; p. 430. Cynips or Gall Wasps, p. 430. 4) Niitaliche Woespen: digger or spider wasps, sphex, 8. 431. —

Wasps, Ichnueumon, §. 432. IV locust order, 8. 436. A. Grasshoppers, Acridium: migratory locust, migratorium, p. 437;
cristatum; italicum; red snaring locust, stridulum; blueness,
coerulescens; chirping locust, Locusta viridissima; verruei-
before, 8. 448. B, crickets, Acheta: Heiinehen, domestica, p. 448; field cricket, campe-
stris, 8. 450 C. Mole cricket, Gryllotalpa: vulgaris, p. 451. D. Cockroaches, Blatta: common cockroach, orientalis, 8. 459; ka
kerlak, americana; German cockroach, germanica, 8. 460 HK. Earwitmer, Forfeula: common, auricularia, 8. 461; smaller,
minor, 8, 464,

Bladder feet, thrips: haemorrhoidalis; grain bubble foot. cerea
lium; obscura, 8. 465; physapus. V. Order of bugs and aphids, 5. 466 1) Wanzon, p. 467. A. Broad bugs, Cimex: Kolil bug, oleraceus; adorned, ora
red-legged, rufipes; Berry bug, bacearum, 5. 468; June:
perinus; white, bicolor; black-striped, unigrolinentus ;
margin bug, marginatus; searabacoides; field bug, griseus; Bed-
bug, lectularius, S, 469; domesticus, p. 473.

 

do;

 

 
 

B. Schmalwanze, Redueius: Kothwanze, personatus; annul 5
Lygacus: green lard bug, nassatus, p. 474. ‘2) Chirping, Cienda: Rosencicade, rosne; foamhead, spumaria; sangui-
nolenia; interrapia. — Weinziirner, Teltigonia haematodes, p. 4755
Water bugs, Notonecta: glauca, p. £76. XX

 

3) Saugor, Psylla: large pear sucker, pyrisuga, p. 477; apple warbler,
Mali, 8. 481; ziegelrother, eraiaegi? 8, 483; ‘Trioza, 8. 484; psylla
pruni; peach leaf suckers, persicae; buxi; ficus. +) Blattduse, Aphis, p. 485; roseublattliiuse, rosae; dirhoda; tetrarhoda ;
trirhoda; rosarum sonchi; ulmaviac, 8. 495; Oat aphid, avenacs
hieracii; inctucae; currant blattians, ribis; avellanae; cherry leaf
from, cerasi; cerasina; Cabbage leaf aphid, brassicae, S, 496; caprene; private Sichblattlans, persicae, $. 497; dock aphid, 8. 499; great apple
Diattlaus, Mali, 8. 500; réthliche apple aphid, sorbi, p. 508; padis
Phlaumenblatilaus, pruni, 8. 510; carnation aphid, dianthi; lerberidis ;
Hopfenblattious, humuli, 8. 511; pruninas prunaria; vibuenis corylis
Younglandicola, 8. 512; juglandis; vitis; seealis, 8. 513,

5) scale insects, Coccus, p. 513: Rebschildlaus, vitis; peach tortoiseshell,
persicac, 8. 515; apple scale, mali; orange scale insect, hesperi-
dum; bromelines; cestri, 8. 516; coffee claus, adouidum; Oleander-
sehildtiger, Apidiotus uerii; Rosenschildtviiger, rosac; cchinocacti; lor
beerschildiriiger, lauri, 8, 517. VI. fly order, 8. 518 1) Miickon or gnats:
A. Thoracic hooks, Culex: common, pipicns, 8. 521; shark snake,
nemorosus, S, 524,
B. Bartmiekchen, Ceratopogon: puticari
C. Gall midges, Cecidomyia: ¢ Birugall midges, nigra, 8. 5255
Grane Birngallniic cola, 8, 527; Wheat Destroyer, destruc-
tor (wheat mosquito), tritici, pp. 530 and 531; grain grinder,
Tipula cerealis, $. 532. D. Sorrow Miickchen, Seiara: Birmmiiekchen, pyri, 8. 583; size
Birmnieke, pyri major, 8. 534; paradoxical pear wasp,
536; Winter-
> leptis; —

  

  
  

 

     

   

Erdschnake, Tipula: Kohischuake, oleracea,
crane fly, Triehocera hicmalis; — snipe lily
robbery. asylus; — Mordiliegen, Laphria; — hawk silies,
Dioetria, 8. 537. 2) Bugger:
A. Kriebehmiieken, Simutia: ornata, 8, 539; reptans; 2
rin; Gollubatzer Micke, maculata, 8. 540; sericea;
544; marginata; elegans auricoma; latipes'y nigra,
B. hairy mosquitoes, Bibio: garden hairy mosquito, hovtilanus, 8. 545.

   

sila s vite
ineata, 8. XXL

 

3) Short-bodied double-headed flies, actual flies, musca:

A. Common flies: Stick fly, domestica, 8. 546; corvina; Aasiliege,
cadaverina; blane Fleischiliege, vomitoria, 8. 551; mean gold
fly, Caesar. Grane Hleischiliege: Sarcophaga carnaria, 8. 554,

Sceliflies, Tachina, 8. 555. Cypher flies, Ocyptera: cabbage flies, brassicaria,

bean flies, Anthomyia: thunderfly, meteorica; ruddy lily,

couformis, 8, 556; Onion Lily, ceparam, p. 559; cabbage,

brassicae, $. 560; lettuce, lactuearam; radish bed, ra-

dicum, 8. 561. F. Piophila: Casetliege, Musca casei, p. 562,

G. Scheekflies, Ortalis: Kirschentliege, ccrasi, 8. 563. H, Spitz flies, Psila: Mobreniliege, Psila rosae. 1. Green-eyed flies, Chlorops, 8. 565: Fritiliege, frit; Rye-
fig, lineata, S, 566,

K, Olive Tliege, Dacus oleae. L, Vinegar lye, Drosophila funebris, 8, 567. M. stable flies, Stomozys: common, calcitraus, 8, 568; stimulants, p. 569. Boor

 

4) Brakes:
light, tabanus: horse fly, bovinus; albipes; autumnalis, 8. 5715 Bromius; fulvus. B. Uniichte: rainfly, Haematopoda plavialis; Blind brake, Chry
sops covcatiens. 5) Hoverflies, Syrphus, p. 572,
6) Bumblebee or bee thrushes:
A, thigh flies, Merodon: Nareissenschenkeliliege, nareissi; total
tele Blumentliege, equestris, p. 574. B. Mud flies, Eristalis, 8. 575. C. Biesflies oter Dasselmiicken, Oestrus: Rinderbiestliege, bovis, 8. 576; Schafbiesiliege, ovis, 8, 579; Horse stomach beast, Gastrus
equi, p. 581; rectal beast, haemorrhoidalis, 8,583; Twelve-
fingergut bisiliege, salutaris ; Nascubies fly, uasalis, p. 584. 7) Bug Flies, Hippobosea:
horse lansiliege, eyuina; Sheep lansil, ovina, p. 585. VII. Virgin Order, p. 586. A. Holzliiuse, Psocus: Bitcherlaus, pulsatorius; howling louse, dome
sticus, p. 588. B.
c

Termites, Termes: yellow-footed, flavipes; lucifugum; flavicole. aphid lions, Hemerobius; scorpion fly,
norpa communis, 8. 589; Camel neck lily, Raphidin, p. 590. vii Ohnfliler regulation, 8. 590 flea, 8 590; Lituse, p. 592; Springtails, Podura:
plumbea; nivalis; Alba. Bristletail, Lepisma:
‘Zuckergast, saccharina, 8. 596 The great majority of farmers, even many of the
most educated, throw under the indefinite expressions
» Witmer, Maden and the like. not only all insects together
but also change a lot with it
small animals, those greatly affected by ban and way of life
are essentially strange. It is therefore probably fair
appear finished, white, che for the treatment of the Kerfe
or insects, the distinguishing features
of those little creatures which the layman
possibly confused with the kerfes kiunte. It is
this is all the more necessary and appropriate as under the
except for small animals standing in the circle of the kerfe
which are marked by great harm,
some by being useful

The large series of animate beings can be known
lich bring with ease in several large groups, md
away is understood by

 

   

 

vertebrates

 

the Sangethiere, Végel, Reptilion and Vische. It fits
with them to the left of the Riekens a vou kuécherner mass
uneven Rackemnarkssinle md an articulated skeleton;
their almost identical parts are pilen sym-
with files. hawe'
ch and they usually have four extremes
Nérdlinger, who have no enemies '

   

   

 

missing them

 

Opposite these vertebrae

invertebrates ,

which are divided into the following subdivisions:

1) Radiant animals (zoophytes), because of the simplicity of their
burrow standing on the lowest level of animate creatures. Thr nervous system very poorly developed, locomotor
zenge unyollkonmien, body from symmetrical to cine or
several axes, composed of ordered parts. sense organs
completely missing. Polyps, infusoria or extremely small, to tans
thie occurring in stagnant or foul water

2) The mollusks, or snails and mussels, be
a much less concentrivies nervous system, the spinal cord
and the articulated bony framework is absent. You have one
easily accessible Uihiillang and white blood. your
senses are very mperfect; they often fail to see and hear. Everyone knows the difference between housed
Schuecken and naked snails. The former are tity
the Landwirtschafth because of the usually small number, iu
which they arose, as well as because most of their food
n arable crops, pretty much without importance. At most, cinmal eats the garden shoots, Helix hoard-
sis Mill., the foliage of the vines. It is different with
the naked snails, whose entanglements éfiers quite un-
are comfortable. Several nackic snail arias are filed as harmful
start Thus, according to De la Bretomuidre dflers it would be necessary that
Tree snakes in front of Limax ater L. and hyalinus Scop. 2 secure,
Leizterer grew after Scopoli spoiler of the bean sprouts. Also, in very wet years, some hardly ever grow
a observing Arteu noticeably harmful. The big red
Naked Schuecke, Liman rufus L., eg. which you can choose
nor wn watery swimming, at the gelatinds
(Bast) side listed Banmriude, to plantain mid the like. sin
chen,
Ze

 

  
  

  

   

   

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

  

   

 

 

Eating flakes is, as a rule, harmful; If you
but very multiplied, as in the summer of 1853, it appears
in droves in German kitchens the D and grazes

 

 

 

cut off and destroy the beans, cabbage and potato plants
she almost always, but the rule comes because of her
Sel
plain

  

h only considering the garden

 

Mainly

generally known and known gray acres

     

hnecke, Lin. agrestis L. side- _
stabbing figure
he overpowers us

  

Description of the animal, only be remarked here that its
colour, namely the réthlich gray of the back and the white
gray of the belly (the sole), depending on the genus of the foot
ters something changes, the very special peculiarity
Snail is, as everyone knows, its complete
dependence on moisture. Wen the place where they sic
located, warn and dry

 

   

   

 

i, so she rolls herself, so good she
came and goes together, but goes when the dry
heit persists, due to dehydration to Grande. Oh damp
Orien came to endure them without nourishment for months. She marks her way with a
tvockuen glittering chicim. You need the same all the more
more plentifully, the drier the ground on which they stand b
away. On moist soil she comes two or three times as much
longingly away than on dry land, and, she will go on my way
surprised by the great dryness of the soil and the air, so
she has to mow a halt and until the return of heavy traffic
stinde, i.e. rain or ‘Than, remain lying. But depends
So hes with your physical. vert together. Kine very gui ernélrte and therefore mucous ntseht niim-
lich with a lot of gy

 

    

 

 

 

   

its lightness over very dry conditions
stand and with gris
NY

 

   

perseverance, as a
te empty of juice. The ack ¢ is in all seasons, but in sel
different quantity available; in spring there is in the

 

 

she

   

  

 

Usually few, in autumn many, if not exceptionally
many. The Ackerselmeeke likes to look for their food on built
ten fields; it eats grass, leaves, buds, young shoots. The way she eats is
through the eaten boh
nerblatt erased. tender
Vegetables with mild
Siifts she prefers to hard ones,
especially if these
equally salty, bitter,
bend, are sharp. Younger
clover, very young grain,
especially wheat and rye
gene (not barley), cabbage,
Ritben-, lettuce-blitter, itber-
chief gems are theirs
favorite foods. (Auel Schwaumne and Lichen, after Leuchs
even mosses, eat them.) “Also fresh grain and all
farinaceous body (bran ete), field and tree fruit, with
Exception of the acidic, e.g. B. the apple; this rather only
cry they've gone soft. She especially loves strawberries
ren and pumpkin bites. After Lenchs, she also reaches for
other food Potatoes (probably in hemp)
on the field; also different roots. (Self
She saw paper and dead tendons of her own kind
consume leuehs.) The field slug's particular place of residence is
Meadows, clover patches, hedgerows and bushes, woodland cattle,
especially very shady ones; so all Orie, where they except the necessary
agile food aueh ily main clement, moisture and
Find Seliutz before Austrockumug. Especially ling
Bache you meet them in large numbers and from hicr ans
they most cunningly the neighboring gardens. On fields as such, the Schuecken are mn like that
sellener, the drier the triad; so welcome them up

 

  

 

 

 

   

  

  

 

  

clay-rich soils occur in large quantities, they are on the
sandy ones less often, because these are usually drier. Before the warm daylight hours, they hide where they can
find no other hiding places, like to lie under hollow. Stones, clods of earth, blitter, in Manerritzen ete. Also in
hide the earth where they enter it
themselves with increasing drought. Leuchs insured
that one on fields, whereupon oneself withrend the spring
Snails stopped, but they dried up completely in summer
be, the Schneeken on cinen half to a foot and
still deeper into the earth. At hervschender
damp, mild weather can be found even during the day
crawling about the places of their feeding. Also dry
Cold is very detrimental to them and kills them if they
of being lined up in their winter camp; upon entering soleher
Witterang they crawl away at first only superficially and
come back when milder weather returns
Provided, but go deeper into the moss when it gets colder or
in the ground, to Leuchs bis.sechzchu inch, to Schi
his three feet deep. If you bring them out of the state of torpor,
in which they then find themselves, in a warm room, like this
they live again in a few minutes, as well as this in
This is the case outdoors later when spring weather sets in. They are usually stuck in such a way that they can also
drying are protected. But it happens that they
owing to the returning heat or rough winds
dry up. On the other hand, they kinuen at thaw when dev
Snow on the ground has melted, under the snow gone-
crawl and eat seeds, Leuchs also states that
Snails under stones or covered by moss while
all water may be frozen or frosted, do not solidify,
and as it were a thin layer of heat around itself

The sinews are Awitter. You stay for several hours
which united at mating; this takes place on the floor,
or un branches ete, stati. The couple fills in the summer
'

 

 

 

 

 

 

Oh

     
      

    

 

  

    

 

 

 

 

 

*, according to the statements in the Juui and Angust. [July not?] 6

 

From August, as long as the weather permits,
the laying of the eggs lasts until well into the autumn. Yes even
Those who were surprised by the winter sleep lay after Lenchs
Snails still have their children in the early spring. The eggs are usually burrowed into small feuchie
and depressions in the earth, in the moss, on the roots
and the lower half-rotted splinters of grass and others
Pllanzeu, under fallen Banmbkitter and the like. checked,
The children lie in six or even thirty, roe-
nice to each other. They are all transparent and bright
soft and elastic, and you can see a kind of crystalline
approach the lens. They hold, without suffering, not nor
a cold of 4 degrees with zero ons, Soudern can also
on the stove, like clinging to the earth from the sun, like that
be dried up so that nothing more can be said of them
sees with naked eyes; repeats this up to eight times,
and yet they swell again when it is ignited and
men out, even if the snails in the eggs sehou
were somewhat educated. The number of children that a Schuecke
lays, changes a lot according to their state of crniéhrang and

 
 

   

 

the abundance of food, but in any case it is very large
and takes care of many hamsters. So observed Lenchs

     

outdoors a snail, which in five days aut a square
foot, partly in heaps, partly scattered, had laid 222 children. The time of the subsistence of the children depends only on
the weather. If this is cold, they remain undisturbed,
but if it is warm, they creep in three or four weeks
ans, (in the middle of a furnace in ten days). in November
clutches do not develop until May of the following year. In November, Schirach found a countless number of younger people
Selnecken, and therefore believes that the earlier laid Kier
connect before winter. The wisicn younger Selmecken finds
man tibrigeus uach Lenchs in April and May, where if that
Weather is warm and regulative, the Kier get along. The young snails, a line, stretched four
until flint lines long, have cine Dic! © vou a half to

 

a line, at first they like to nestle in theirs
slimy camp. Only lights are enough in this one
state the moldy sifts [2] and small plants, dic
to be found in the earth. They grow very schooly with good fat, and are
after a week already twice and three times as big. To
Their main growth is completed in 6-8 weeks. To
.Leuchs took one almost fully grown worm, two
Fed days with good feed, almost wm's triple
weight too. When the reproductive capacity of an Ind:

 

 

 

 

daums cintritt, does not seem to have been determined yet. The life span of the snail is longer than mau
previously believed; for she does not die in the first winter, but
can last for several years. But Leuchs thinks that
them by the great number of their enemies and the fortunes of the
to which she is easily subject, seldom overwhelms her life
bring awei Yahweh. A large part is dying, he says, after
of birth, and few surviving the first four months. But if that were not the case, then the whole earth would be there too
Schueeken be covered. After Leuchs you will be thrown through darker slopes
Change of Wirme and Kiélte killed. than with you
he describes occurring diseases

1) Diarrhea, vou allzaw:
young grain growing in the shade and

 

 

 

 

 

erigen’ foodstuffs, 2 B.

cause of emaciation. 2) putrid disease, cintreend where a lot of snow crusts
are together in one place and ifmen in a clean place
Consequence

 

water broken; cine contagious disease in dere

eu, you keepers see! becomes and in kav

   

   
 

    

they stop 2u fi
Time passes into fiiulniss. 3) Black fire, i. H. blackening of the gauzen
Kérpers, finally Vertrockuen; either also a consequence
from Eysehlaflang with bad weather and food,

 

  

or consequence of drought td lack of food. 4)

 

éiusesucht, which with bad food mid

 

8th

uncleanliness of the place of residence; the lilies [Mil-
ben?] are very small, white and always keep on top of it
bodies of the snails. She's getting leaner and thinner
and usually dies. The Natural Circumstances Encouraging Reproduction
of snails are, as we have seen above, moist
warm weather. Spring is therefore usually 2 for them
cold, the summer too dry and too warm, why them
Mainly only the dew rich, leach, tickle niece of
autumn's comfort. After mild winters they appear
but also already in the spring in the field, and
in this case their young ones come out earlier, and meets
If they were already in large numbers in the field in August,
hence their immense multiplication and the terrible ones
ravaged by them in 1768
to 1771, 1816 to 1817, 1851, 1853. The natural circumstances, on the other hand,
hdwig bring death are, as we have seen above,
Lack of moisture or wedges. Also physical
these are usually fatal to them; denu they have too
cine great reproductive power, as long as they are young and g
are sound, and again generate heads or schwanz when
if it is cut away, then films in the open air are still
injuries, especially skin irritation caused by thorns,
usually fatal. You lose a lot of mucus in the process,
crawl no further and therefore die from sounen-
shine and desiccation,

Your real enemies are the many Thie
you them nélwen. Here pigs, manlwiute, ducks, the at
Schueckeukost a tasty meat and lots of fat
chickens of all kinds, pigeons, crows, jackdaws,
Ulstern, Staare, Kibitve. [I want to leave it undecided,
whether it would be weekly and possibly, by holding one
or other of these beasts in greater numbers in the field,
to counteract the proliferation of snails, nud

 

 

   

  

 

 

  

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

I

 

the

 

   

 

refer in this regard to the handover of the
building materials in general. I have the same thing regarding
the more numerous smaller enemies of the tendons, 2. B. the
Lantkefer to say. Recommended as a means of protection against snails
Leuch rightly sowing the grain as early as possible,
by preferably the very young, soft one, the ilnen
and they no longer haunt older ones, just like them
at cabbage ete. all already more woody, hard-fibrous parts
avoid, Only too knowing, soft plant parts are to them,
as noted above, neither agreeable nor pertinent. That
not only their gluttony, but also their slime
eaten mushrooms and even the subsequent seed
detrimental, it was claimed, but based on experience
denied towards vou Leuchs, rather the question of whether the
Consequences of snail damage can heal, only
derived from the fact that the snails also do that
Have crushed the heart of the little plants, or zitun this again
exorcise Kudspchen remained behind. Also draining, clearing and improving the
soil, removing the stones, narrow and high furrows,
insofar as they eliminate superfluous moisture, are the
Snails unfavorable. Lench particularly recommends dressing the seed;
he affirms that he has made experiments and grain in
Lime water with a bit of onion and peppermint
swells, and siiculates, and observes that the shoots
not those of the due Plinth toes
frasseu, on the other hand, those that spring from unpickled. Of course, the question still remains whether, if one everything
grain, so that it is preferable not to
swollen grain yortinden, therefore no pickled of
If they are attacked, usefulness is there
of pickling ansser doubts. Leuchs recommends as
Stain a number of water-soluble substances, and
must equal vi > bitter and very harsh plant cakes. Especially lime water with Selpeter, table salt, onion satt or
manure manure; he himself considers the latter to be effective on its own. cinema
Second good spot would be Mistjanche according to his insurance
boiled with human or sheep excrement and at the end Knob-
lanch, onions and asa foetida. Third, two
Tliinde full of garlic bulbs, a handful of fresh rue,
half a landful of peppermints with eight Maas of water
cooked; temporarily mixed in some Asa foetida. Fourth, one
half a ton Misijauclhe, a Scheffe! Ashes of wood, three bitches
quicklime, half a pledge of saltpeter or a quarter
pound of alum, cin quarter pound of table salt anf awdlf Berliner
shelf of grain. I have to
validity of these prescriptions only the confirmation by the
give experience. The tilling of the fields, especially in dry weather
termng and at the time when the Kier are in the ground, lichens
by yourself. Likewise the reworking of fenchter places in
Banum Schools. Useless grass margins and bushes as brood nests
and hiding places of the Selmecken must wet in the Nithe
country to be removed. As a means of deterrence, Leuchs believes that
where vou bits and banks of a stream the snails in
view large amount, pits with sloping and
use kiémi well without grass preserved side walls,
just as rock-preserved soil, at least one leads cr
Bri at a general snail

 

   
 

 

 

 
   

 

    

 

     

attached, the zn consequence
nwiistimg all fields that have not been devastated,
a broad country road and beyond one

   

which rear
Shorten the graves that have just been thrown

Surrounding beds with a hand-wide St
ngelisch lime with flax saw oil, to keep the from
the neighborhood. with snails crawling over it, will says
the same, ineffective in very bad weather. environment
of fruit trees with a half of 1Y,—2 feet
Jen mid am Stamm 1-L", Fnss high heap fine ec

 

 

fen

  

  

 

 

  

— —

 

so it is very safe to use sand that dries out easily
Bitumen protection. 'Theer or Thranringe oline sogenaunte
stalks destroy the bark; so that applies here
on the occasion of the frost spanuer it over the tar belt Ge-
said. The stolen woolen belt may be better, protected
against wetness by a stroli ring placed over it. That
Create narrow beds or rows of strong-smelling
Plants, such as onion and hant, are threatened as protection
fields seems to me to be of dubious effectiveness. Particularly protective for data is the same
idle spreading in furrows of cabbage leaves, orchards
clinit
ten pumpkin bites, which the snails see above all
put, anthalien and i

 

   

ng

 

pieces, even elder branches, but especially ze

 

 

ht tidtet in large masses or
shall be picked up by driven-in euten, Lin Alten-
Burgische, assures Leuchs, draw only 2 of this one
Guard every year gourd bites in abundance,

means of extermination. collecting the snails,

 

 

 

And killing them is, of course, costly and laborious. It
but one wonders whether it is possible under certain circumstances, if nian
the business by applying hollow bricks, small boards, etc.,
under which the snails nestle when the wit-
ternng together, but not economically justified
appears, On the keeping or favoring of domestic and wild
Vogelu ete., for which the snails a much desired
Make food, I don't think much. At most kénute it see
the question is whether in wet years, where the sinews
without crawling away, en masse in the fields
are tretlen, especially if they e.g. still by Kiir
stiteke etc. attracted w

 

 

is
den, not small flocks of ducks in
short time for the extraction and destruction of the tendons
could be molted. If you want to give the young seed cinmal, then has

 

 

 

as a means of destruction one has the choice between heavy over-
roll, clods of earth, when the earth is frozen
and tendons are crushed; leg

 

he goes over it

   

 

12

Don't roll. In this case, a well-performed
plaited Dornegge, woe thy snails greatth \
wounds and kills, be successful. Of even greater things
is in any case a deep mess. Harvesting of barley chaff, hemp and flat saws,
Siigspinen'u. the like are the snails in dry weather
by sticking and wounding very detrimental and
often bad; but when the weather is very wet they come
over it unharmed. Moreover, the mean is in the large
not applicable. The same is true of the various chemical ones
Means, which of course can kill the snails quickly,
and indeed wn so faster, the more stir the water
pull, the more drying they act on the snails,
and the less well fed, the less phlegm these latter have
are. As the most important means including and partially
half to be recommended, because one hitulig with their spreading
linked to other purposes are named: wgelisch-
The lime that's strewn on the fields knows it's not raining
and does not thaw badly, longer time fatally for the
touching snow remains. Wet lime does not harm them
more; Ash is less powerful than lime. Less v
sam and of equal use as other dry earth,
is burned plaster. Kalkwasser should also be used for the majority
the snails can be deadly and damage the weight. Long would be very effective, but too expensive on a large scale. Soap-
Boiling lye, although less powerful, is in garden with advantages

 

 

 

  

 

    

      

 

  

 

 

partially use

Dung manure, ham, absiide of sha and spiced
adhere to plants, especially nut leaves, wedges, rhombus,
Tobacco keep the taste buds from those who pour it on
Mushrooms off, ti
indirectly, onions do not have to be boiled, but 7
be applied. Even less practical if, apart from the Selne

   

 

 

 
 
 

but without the addition of salts 1

 

 

very uncomfortable, there is smoke. Gifleendlich are too dangerous.,

13

 

(Compare especially J, C. Leuchs, complete natural
history of field slugs with instructions ete, niun-
mountain 1820, ext. i.e. Comp. i.e. general trade newspaper.) 3) The actual warmers (earthworms, earthworms,
Tapeworms, nematodes, leeches, etc.) remain worms,
as long as they live, and also stand down on a selu
stage of development They are usually very stretched,
6fters extraordinarily long. Most of the time we see them from a
formed a very large number of rings, although ofiers
flat. Other wiumers that belong here are very dull
shaped; their nervous system little developed, and all of them too
Sinuses and organs little localized. Although a digestive
hose, but no breathing tools. “Different
colored, sometimes red blood. Strong reproduction by
an individual cut in two parts, si
easy to train for vei special individuals. hermaphrodite
gender; but nevertheless the multiplication frequently these very days
vithselhatt. A head sometimes clearly developed, sometimes hardly. recognize me. Breast and abdomen not separated. None
limbs. The Witmer lead a very ‘different life’

 

 

 

 

 

wise, and their meaning is therefore not kw
to summarize. The worms with white blood break up into; bandwitr
mer, Taenia, distinguished by plates, ribbon-shaped, ge-
articulated or injoined body, not hollow inside, live
in the guts of animals; in particular they are with the
Peddling has already been mentioned and described, carp
and trout, even water and land birds get through
A genus of this order, the beltworm, Ligua,
heliistigt. The bladderworms, Cysticercus,
short neck in front, very common in domestic animals. The quese, Cocnwrus cerebralis L., is also found here
found in the brains of sheep with rotting disease. The songworms, Trematoda, flat or three-round,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

you hiinfi

 

4

 

unstructured. Suction pits in various places. Ott ohh
Slime inside. coneworm” and double hole (liver
leeches) and fin hole. Also in domestic

The Hackworms, Acanthocephala, Prickly Head,
body tubular, water-filled; in the pig. The roundworms. Swivel, elastic. tubing
ger gut you mouth through the whole body. Hey
the vinegar lilies, Vibrio aceti Ge, with a smooth mouth,
tem tail, scarcely a line long, which one in greater
Amount in bad vinegar, sour Brithen like an eel
sees swimming. They are ignored and without after-
partly swallowed by thousands. 4

Also the water thread, Gordius aquatieus L.
long and as thick as a fine gut string, musty yellowish,
bordered dark at the ends, swimming in puddles, Gré-
on 'the mud-
is

 

 

   

 

    

    

tighten-

 

 

 

ben, sometimes also ponds, especially
my grand. Sometimes also in the drinking water:
but, although directed by the common man, safe for
the one who accidentally got the water in his stomach
has come. . The gunz equal thick, long, twisted, white

 

yellow threadworms, Filaria, come as intestinal animals
in front, partly in ranches, e.g. those of the golden age, their death
bring them about in the last days of the Eutwiekling. sic
then crawl out and you will find them next to the caterpillar
curled up in a big bang. Oken fits near Werner and closet except one in
Caterpillars the space between then and body [skin?} quite
suckling species, Filaria erucarum, as well as others found in
Kiters and hay foxes occur, and from these themselves
sometimes should drill out, I found aneh cine in the ge-
my ear w

Other filariae live in the body cavities in
graze grisserer, insbesoudere also the Hausthicre. There also the yorn hair-like ones, thickened behind
Whipworms, Trichocephalus, as well as the randen, yoru

 

 

  

  

  

 

nm. 15

dieken, behind pimple-shaped verdtimuten awl twine,
oxyuris; look at the front and rear thinned Rolls
Spiral-tailed Spiroptera of Méunchens. Further the palisade he, Strongylus, with both-
scits pointed body, creformed or angular mouth
with a wreath of white lace. Finally the spool
worm, Ascaris, spheroidal, thin with three at both ends
Knétehen un's Mant; in humans and animals. The worms with red blood know how to roll
body falling together zo
aichen and expand, Sic
are of interest to Laudwirth
nig; in which they do not live
towers of beasts, but thy
most in the sea. only the blood
leeches in the sweet water of parts
chen and swamps. Against it
the earthworms, Lumbr
down in the soil. The mean after
Chamisso over all parts of the world
widespread rainflag, Lunbricus terrestris L., is
Apparently long and fleshy red, has in the middle
a thickening girdle with four rows of fine bristles. lives in the earth and also feeds on it, provided that
like all dam earth, it contains organic substances. je
the richer she is, the more she appeals to him. Therefore sees
you can also visit him in Stee, where he finds more mold and
drag under spread manure. In the crops he becomes duvet
Attacking young plants, Krani set
he concerns for a while and their flowers
Hole pulls, sel kistig and physical. Also look at him
the gardener as a very unnerved guest in den Blumer
tap here it produces acid. The rainworms slip out of the ground
and glide around on the wet ground, mm zn
hn

   

   

 

   

 

    

     

 

 

 

sy

 

   

 

     
      

 

     
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

nation. On clayey and even sandy paths one sees

 

16

in the morning still easy, which go in all directions
crossing tracks of the nachis previously crawled around
rainfly. The earthworms push large ones all year round
Hiiufeeren earthen filth from their lights, so that often a
appears all the way overwhelmed by it. Five the winter
Dig deep, 3-4 feet depending on the cold
Floor. The spring weather then lures them out again
the surface. A multitude of mammals, birds and reptiles
they feed on worms. That one was after a
meu rain or even spit at night with a lantern
carefully looking for a lot of rainstorms in Giirten
is known. They drive them out of their lights
Fischer by pouring a decoction of gritnen over it
or roasted walnut flakes. The same application
allow according to Leuchs hemp flakes and grime nut shells. Also hitting the flowerpots with the hand,
push a pole into the freshly prepared ground and
trembling of the latter drives them out; oh Leuc
especially the young worms. Even through shabby Méhren,
Laid in the footpaths of a garden in the evening, they should be like that
very suggestive that one the following morning
should find a lot of rainstorms, which due to overeating
sens have become unable to crawl away (Leuchs). Also
be it possible, by digging in waves of tender
to expel rice wood from the beetles. Finally lure her
short-rotted manure strewn between young plants,
so that they left the young plants spared
(Leneh's). I mer happens
known from bitter, ethereal and empyreumatic substances. But the details belong to veterinary medicine. 4) The so-called arthropods are made of a few
Number of links, rings formed, each of which
imassen the replay of the previous is
Ritckenmark felt. They are symmetrical and after two

   

    

 

 

3 before

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Extermination of many Kingeweidey

 

          

 

 

Cut-wrapped sides. Your jacket consists of a solid
Mass that also serves as a point of attachment for the muscles. Lin
Generally numerous extremities; blood white. The crustacean arthropods do throw theirs
hard armor every year; but such is not an actual one
Transformation. Peculiar very composed oral
setup. Whitish blood. finf or
respiration through gills (crabs, as-
selu). Here go the ordinary ones
Crayfish, Cancer fluviatilis Deg., in Fliissen
and Bachen, the crabs and crabs iin
seas; the meanness or the water flea,
Gammarus fluviatilis M. Kdw., in source
len and groiben, who sometimes in's
Trin he comes, generally, however
without reason, considered dangerous
fir the one who mmanfinerksam him with the
drank water into it; finally the
Woodlice, Oniseus, which the common man goes by the name
Woodlouse, Manercsel, keunt. The commonest ruffle, Oniscus asellus L., gran und
yellowish piebald, rather broad and ansser
Standing up curling up is uncommon
often in basements, garden areas,
hénsern, under boards, bees and brambles. three
Main food can be in fanlenden Pil
stand, but she should lean on the cabbage
also on all kinds of fallen fruit,
in the trowels, in fences
Trellis fruit in the gardens many
is special

  

  

 

   

 

indicate he-
in the ladles,
m garden like

 

 

drive yourself
len thun, — ins-
hated by the gardeners by Ze orang
reluctantly germinating plants, e.g. of the peumia, through that
Eat up 7 he blothen parts and the bhitter, which the
touch the wall she shall also gnaw on the bark
be harmful to other plants. The Gartners recommend above all as a preliminary step
Nirdlinger, ie little enemies 2

 

     

 

 

  

18

Prompt covering of those in 'Tépfen' etc. germinating, dem
Cellar donkey subjected to plants, with glass plates,

As a catch, it is advisable to put rotten fruit in the cellar
lay. They accumulate on it, and can be killed instantly
will; likewise those who are under intentionally
laid planks or bricks, or in cast-iron stones
gels, small pumpkin bites and the like. collect. sand, ash,
Russ, Siigespiine, which one also recommends to me-
mechanically because they struggle to lose
in damp places largely their effectiveness. Car-
theer painted on strips of wood, wn with it the threatened
objects should not lose its effect
missing, the other suggested middle) I think fir
useless or ineffective. The basement donkeys are from
Poultry gladly eaten. The spider-like arthropods (arachnids)
are characterized by a head and chest that merge into a stick
have grown together. They have smooth, often numerous
Eyes. No transformation. Breathing through pulmonary sac
or tracheae. Four pairs of actual legs. Before the same
but a pair of arms or scissors ete. to touch, to grasp
or pubs. The big family in the:
common spiders, Aranea, We must have the same, insofar as they
living only on insect predation, call it useful. the
Spiders are of the most varied size and form. At
best known, their radiating networks in Hansern and
Spaining the garden is the cross spike,
Aranea diadema L. You can see them too
Right everywhere because of the Kifer, with
they flies, wasps, in short all flies
insects. Only in living room
her black filth annoyed her and came
not be tolerated. Likewise, care must be taken
tiindeu out-

 

   

  

  

  

 

or group form the actual

 

  

   

that they do not catch yarn on and in bee

strains. 19
The same is true of the black house spider,
franea domestica L. in the nooks and crannies
rural buildings, especially in haystacks, wooden stables
etc. their flat and end in a tube at the back-
puts on the yarns, and from this turn on her Ranb
rushes out. Finally, there are a lot of spiders, especially
the smaller ones, who weave no webs at all, but
- roaming everywhere catch their prey in a leap. such as B. the jumping spider, Salticus scenicus L., shorter than one
Bow tie, black with white slashes, which one nuf
trees and walls and all kinds of insects,
Psylla and the like catch sight. Finally to the striking ones
also belong to the field spiders, which at beautiful Witten-
ng as in autumn the fields so with thread
jen that they glisten sciden-like in the sun, Ar. obtextrix Bechst. The Seorpione have a broadly fused with the chest
its abdomen; instead of the button stem of the
Spin a pair of large scissors. The dense
Scorpions are very flat and have a long
gen tail with a poisonous spike at the tip. They are found just south of the Alps, in
Upper Italy, southern France, Tyrol,
Spain. One knows several species whose
recommendation does not belong here. Here amr the
Remark that they are usually under se. europacus 1
Stones, between tree bark, in all houses, wall:
scratch, on ledges under the boards, even sometimes in
Hold rooms under papers, although her sting is swelling
and pains, but usually from
flies etc. live whom they kill with the sting. Among the foolish scorpions (without a tail) belongs the
Bicher or paper scorpion, Obisiwn caneroides L., der
uur is small, amd everywhere, although not often, between
papers, in old beers, herbaria, cracks in
ken, under tree bark ete. is found, and special

 

 

   

 

fiberzi

 

 

 

 

 

20

 

mites, wood lilies and the like. follows, therefore by no means
deserves to be followed. The ticks, Ixodes, have one init two valves.
seen crack. They live in forests and bushes, sit
at the summit of cincs Halmes or twigs and hang themselves, the
Forelegs stretched out in wait for those who pass by
Domestic and wild animals, immediately suck on their skin
tight, and swell from the blood they draw from them,
immensely. The individual species still shine
with regard to the diagnosis and the occurrence, since sic mcist
live on several animals to admit doubt; because yourself
Walckenir often gives the description of several authors. The dog tick, Ixodes ricinus L. Grisse ein kleiné

hemp seed, oval; when full as big as

Ye cine bean, globose and violet-black; Legs
and appendages brown. Kine of deu special

ders on dogs, preferably hunting dogs,

living species, but also to Kithe cte., even to the
goes to people, and digs into their skin so hard with the rift
pierces that you usually tear them apart when you take them away
know. A drop of Ocl dabbed on her makes, after several-
fold assurances that they fall away, I wanted it

  

 

  

  

 

not always succeed, by the way, perhaps because the tick shy away
au was deeply drilled. Other tick species described by several are
the sheep tick, ox tick, Ixodes reduvius Deg., hhich-
at least eight million long, flat, with a round black one in front
Sign. legs black. Body yellowish pale red. male
not larger than a corn seed, usually on the female
i.e. Should be particularly useful on swampy meadows and ,
ichafe wid dogs

 

walking around
stay in the pipe, and there au cattle,
come. Under the name Ochsenzecke Ixodes is also mentioned
reticulatus Latr, divided, and described as follows
ben: Ash-grey above, spotted and striped brown-red, belly
edge with stripes, 'Tas ciforr full sucked wolil

 

 

 

        

21

 

5-6 lines long, originally imt Moose Jebend and vou
from there clinging to oxen, deer and sheep. «t+ This is probably the kind I see on blades of grass in deciduous

groves until November. Finally, the pigeon tick, Lvodes marginatus F. (co-
tumbae Herm.) described as 4 million Long Tick by bluish
flesh-red, bordered, by blood vessel branches
ansgezeichuetey: abdomen, with something not visible from above
Head. On tanben, especially young ones. .

As a remedy against similar species, where the same in
larger amounts of increasing importance is excluded
common oil rubbing in turpentine or anise oil
recommended. The mites, Acarus, are extremely small, but also
of extraordinary distribution and number, your body,
its usual small size, easy on the four pairs

  

new recognizable as the cincr species of spider, is usually strongly marked
wolbi, sometimes pear-shaped, sometimes square and oddly shaped
bristles etc. verzicrt. Color mostly very pale and

    

   

  

sight. Ks here is not the place that was silent
‘ien, too little
to deal with their microscopic description, rather
let us limit ourselves to the species under Antitführung
Briefly state your place of residence, first those
inanimate substances :

Acarus domesticus Deg. (Siro L.) is the mite of what
the surface of the cheese swarms and the flour coats it
walks She is somewhat gréssetn from ciner, 4th longior Gere,
(aut hollind. Kiise) accompany

A, lactis F., aut der Obertlic

cL prunorum Her., ant alten gedér
pouring out like bloated znc! ive wrage their
first generation in different mat

  

    

   

e old frame. Jen Zwetsel

 

 

noon

 

 

he.

   

. pussularun Her, on Zibeben, Veigen and dier

 

err A, agiles Her. of dates, figs, plums

 

 

22

 

e species, perhaps also a part of the previous ones,
are found on raisins, stale bread, flour,
on this the pictured one; finally on

, the chief of the Hele,

The mites found on diseased potatoes destroy
fall into two types according to herring, the first of which is the
Superficial, Acarus fecwlarum Guér., the audere im Imern,
-l.feculae Ray. (Host. natural Annual Hette. 1846 1.) In old books, damp papers, herbaria and
Museums should not over-
hitting mite, the scissor tick, Acarus eruditus Schr
find that imitates the beer glue and paste. It is part of the development of mites next to you
certain age of the substance that eliminates them
a stuffy wet environment. That's why you can use yours
Education easily evoke, if one z. B. very easily
fried flour in a tightly closed tin can, or

 

 

 

 

 

Keeping raisins in a snuffbox for a long time. Yes, even on animal bodies, e.g. stuffed birds and
dead Tusekten, they come easily. You're only allowed
the latter dry in larger quantities in a glass drier
keep, and a few weeks later you will be at the
Iusects next to a disgusting smell a lot of small
ner mites, no doubt Acarus destructor Schrk., the moder-
mite, d. H. find the same, woe the insects in streny
closed accumulations turned to dust. It is still strange how soon after or how with that
ode some animals appear. So e.g.
on larvae and cardboard, which in summer, perhaps,
ebwas too dry, kept, fairly large half-
clear fiefdoms that separate from it completely
from which mites arise, I regret this perception
folyt to have to see if these balls

 

 

 

 

not closer vei
are an original formation, or perhaps of a previous
as junee

 

previous generation of mites are descended, - s¢

Mites, or Kier, 21 guarded. a

n except the mite of

23

Coming to living bodies
human scabies, A. scabied Deg., many mite species than
cause or contributory cause of skin diseases, you plant
they often pass from one animal to another. horse mite, Acarus equi Nitssch; Beef mite, Acarus bovis
Her. ; Cat mange mite, Acarus cati Nitssch; dog mite:
‘Pigeon feather mite, A. bifidus Nitasch; Vogelinib, A. avium
dug (gallinae deg.) in Hithner and Taubenschlégen. In canine ear ulcers, A. cynotis Her. ; on hat
of the horse, the ray canker mite, A. hippodos Her. The sheep mite deserves special attention or
Bark sheep mite, Acarus ovis Nitssch. She finds herself
by Prof. Hering under the title: Easy to understand instruction
about the shepherds for skippers and landowners, 2nd prob. edition,
Stuttgart and Tubingen, publisher of the J. G. Cotta'sechen Buch-
action 1843, settled. She is very small and
seems to be staring at a black cloth just like a very small
ner white dot arises on the skin of the sheep (main
obviously on Riteken and tail base) in a row long lasting
tending rainy weather:

 

 

means dam mite mange and> triigt
known with great ease of cinem Sehaf
to the other, from one herd to another itber, md wiire
it only indirectly through stables, hurdles and the like. The Fringe
is usually not life-threatening for the sheep,
simply because they have no rest, they fall from the flesh
and can finally emaciate. But the greatest damage grows
because their wool, which they also have permanently
and pluck, decreases significantly in quality and quantity. Rough sheep can, if you the infected
Vellen wants to see the necessary attention, without everyone
disadvantage to be slaughtered; it is advisable to
when the herds are very small or the beasts are fat,
or it lands nmr wm some suspicious sticks. Selling a whole large rough herd out of land

 

 

 

this is in addition to the fitr other resulting
fair, usually with the greatest loss for the owner

 

24

  

linked; on the other hand, the healing as s
and not expensively portrayed. Didn't you get overwhelmed by the presence
the true edge, smd owns on the Daner the cure hiu-
dwindling, secluded, willow or fallow fodder for the sick
Herd and ciuen stables, etc., where one in bad weather
bring the same mother canoe, so you get two old ones
Auber, which are large enough, with a sheep in it quite under-
to come diving. Into another vessel one rides
Long look at the following Watz:

cher, nehwer

 

4 pounds of white lime with the necessary amount of water
then
dd Potash added and both mixed to a paste, in
which you can now look for amd
6 pounds of smelly deer horal and
3 pind ships' army removed; becomes the resulting thick mass
now with constant stirring
200 pounds (about 50 Maas) of manure strained through an old cloth
shoveled, and finally
Poured 800 phind (about 200 maas) of water. 250 Maas broth for 500 sheared sheep,

right

  

 

alas

 

It is essential that this length is
given way, not in any order
cinander schitts. If the sheep have been shorn before bathing, then so
the edge plates are easier to find and canoe them while
of bathing still moistened; but the wool is still aut
the sheep, you need more broth, just this one
t is longer in the wool and therefore has a longer lasting effect
the skin, which they come into contact with everywhere
must, Man dips the sheep into the in the
make tubs of broth so that it is everywhere:
is moistened, amit Ausnale of the head and the viisse. Two strong miners hold antissen cs, up and down a few times
drain, then put in the other empty tub, where the
Brithe expires; in this hold e miner,
press the wet wool 1 that the brithe right on

 

 

   

    

 

 

 

 

there two others

    

 

 

the hant cindringt pour from the expired glasses unit
a port on those parts of the body where maybe
the long one didn't really want to get through, sodanu
lift the sheep out and let it walk. Each stitek of the specified
stuck flock to be treated, whether one
plates noticed or not. “The lye has the properties
shaft, the itch mites on the skin in a nutshell
time to kill; but since at the same time others are penetrating your skin
are digging, which lay Kier, which after fourteen at the most
slip out days, so the kintanchen must the whole
herd to be repeated twice more, namely on the eighth
ten and fimtzelmien day, all the same way in new
prepared broth. A free remote location is chosen for this business
place and bright day so that the sheep can dry off soon
don't rain wash the Brithe too soon. The roughest
Sheep now you dip first. Withr the three to four weeks which this cure
to pay close attention, what sheep still
show inclination, sic These are

 

 

 

  
   

au scratch or too rub
to catch out immediately and at the itchy spot with the
to dab lye. "

Should the Thieve be watered frequently during the cure or
the bath must have been made naeliliissig, so it is
néthig, the same instead of three times, four or more times 20
repeat, with between seven and eight days' interval. When finally the cure has been carried out according to the
the animals must be about eight days after the bath
cinzeln ant's most accurate to be searched, whether not yet
find something suspicious, namely mites that live, and
if this is not the case, the herd after dew
existing Geseiz still three weeks, from the last
refuses to stay. Wiltrend der
one for the fact that the stable or
will agree, che man the same

 

    

 

Bath on, as before off

 

treatment of the herd

 

sc
the Pférehhütte ues. ways

 

 

26

 

used again for the healed herd. You drive it
Dung out of the stable, sweep the racks, hoe the winds. away. wid let her tiinchen; wash the hurdles with water:
or put them in a stream for a few days. The wool initially turns a strong brown due to the brow,
but this soon disappears, like the rumor of the same
self. It has been noticed that after this treatment the wool
action noticeably strong jerks. The dabbing of the individual spots of mange in animals
or even the bathing of individuals from the marginal herd
does not lead the whole herd to the goal, which is this
to be released as soon as possible. Only when great cold is in the way of bathing,
one could, so that the disease does not get too much out of hand
take the most attacked animals with the above lye
pluck until milder weather general kin diving

 

 

 

 

 

 

allowed Also, in such a case, one can use the rough
slaughter the first animals one after the other in order to keep the rest of the
Expose Austeekung less, meanwhile are also already
in the middle of winter not only ragged sheep 'overhang', sou-
devn even pregnant ewes and Siiuglimmer with best
Achievement healed by immersion. Since the mange of the sheep more common in autumn and winter
as happens in the mild season, so will Heilang
seldom prevented for lack of pasture and fodder
and the flock must to the greatest advantage of the owners
slaughtered or sold far beyond value except laud
will. Certainly in many such cases tir dic could be done
sick herd a separate grazing area was found
chen, even if several herds on the same mark
hibernate. Tsar bites and itches the sea sheep too when they many
Zeeken (p. 20) or Schafliuse (see below) to have. you know
but don't confuse the Zeeken with mites, because they die
have the size and shape of a medium-sized spider; alone
from the skin areas eaten by Zeekeu you have Achu-

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

27

 

ality with those which have produced the mites. The only difference is that 1) the mites on a
such spot absent, and 2) that, if, one ticks

 

euferut, the eaten spot completely vou in a few days
itself heals, which is not the case with mite mange, since
it always increases when left to its own devices. Many kifers, especially dung diggers, grave diggers and the like. are from a large mite, the pine mite, Acarus coleo-
‘pleratorum L., cunning. One notices in summer on young seedlings that
appear to be quite healthy, have only slightly sprouted,
thus perhaps suffering from some lack of moisture,
white mites. She digs her rift into the stalks
and cause tremendous damage to the plants. [Be-
watch out for small pine conifers, which become grande as a result
went.] Finally Garter and Blumenlikbhaber know quite well
the so-called plant spider, Acarus telurius L., Trombidium

  

 

 

telarium Herm., which was in the greenhouses, especially
men Treibhiiu:

 

“rn, manure and tan beds, at the top of the plant

 

zen, especially on the underside of the leaves, extremely fine
webs. She's za hundreds in these webs-

chen in Be

 

wwegung: sang the juice to the blitteru and will
with their large number very disadvantageous to the plants. she
squirm and drop the bliss. Willing her in the
‘Busters every year
mii

   

 

in several generations

ig occur, they should also in very warm summers

 

 

multiply immensely in the open air, according to Bouché in particular
others to Bohuen and the like. A species occurring in Héusern, Trombidiwn, | million long, in shape reminiscent of an Aicisen lion, pale with
black edge, long front legs, which, like the
that here and there are black, I dare to examine
dry specimens no scientific name
to settle. At Hohenheim from cracks in the wall of a room
my thousands hey

     

coming. 28

The means against mites must with their large numbers
and the variety of objects that inhabit them,
of course also be very different. bal

According to Bouché, the mushroom spike (mite) is already suffering
by frequent sprinkling with cold water
brought strong tobacco smell tidte so zi Mecha-
niche cleaning of the plants is difficult, but successful. Especially recommended is the pilanzen in July and August
put in the open, under proper custody of the
Individual warm house plants against excessive cold, and
of the whole plant against excessive heat from the sun. Mr Lucas
on the other hand, it is recommended to give shade and a steady one
humid, depending on the plant warm or cold temperature. Because according to him the plant spider sequence is
here heat. Whether with braided Bolnen the Rei ale
from all bark, as the spiders' lair during
of winter, fir the beans in the next year of great
Can be useful, stands there. Foodstuffs thrown at the mites: Kise, flour,
Fruits and the like must, above all, be as short as possible

 

 

  

 

 

 

of P

 

possibly in musty fenced rooms and ventilation windows

  

be kept, just by looking at them from time to time
Time briefly in the sun and air, you kt the
development and reproduction of the mites to some extent
gene, for example in stuffed birds and Iusects,
which have already been attacked by mites, this often helps
keep loud. By the way, the distance is also
Destruction of the ten mites not difficult. short baking
> kills them; also beaks of s with salt
water. At mere washing often helps when the mites
are scary. Pfefler, even Anis mud Fenehel [?] should be detrimental to them. Moreover, ribbing
recommended with havana substances such as camphor;
but dirtie direct application you Terpeutinél, Wernmth,
Cologuinte and the like far more we

 

 

   

       
 
 

   

   

     

uur iin

   

 

 

  

have ung. Oh, lightest

29

 

zen are objects that facilitate the application
ter or strong poisons tolerated. The same which in-
deter sects are also useful for mites. the
mites on humans and animals in general,
under observation of appropriate cleanliness, either mechanical
physically removed, or killed by poisons, or by artificial ones
Middle] destroys the skin layer that gives them a place to stay
serves, and after their Kutfernmmg sic also die out
uitiss The rest belongs in veterinary medicine. The centipedes have stretched bodies, their mouth
parts are set up for gnawing. Stand on your head -Fihl-
herner. breathing through tracheae. Nonetheless you
substantially different from the insects and easy to intercept
separate by at least twelve pairs of legs, most of them
lack of wings and a full-time metamorphosis. The Bandasselu or hundred
fiisse, Scolopendra. The commonest brown, S. forfieata L.,
1 inch long, flat, brown, 15 pairs of feet, extremely bright, dic
found under tree bark; and the luminous, S. elec-
trica L., 1.5 inches long, narrow, yellow, with 54 pairs of fitssen,
which one emits in the evening, a phosphorescent light
bend, finds on paths and damp earth. Collar fils here
when putting up a fight also still the 2 inch long. 21 pair-footed rust-yellow, under stones, leaves, manure, in
ten hiulige S. hortensis Leach. on, finally the centipedes
with a round body and a great many legs, Julus. the
commonest species, about 1 inch long, quite granular, Julus
terrestris L., hides under stones, bark, moss, etc.,
Gives off a strong odor typical of 1 living
indeed of vegetables, but, although they are usually considered
is listed as harmful, but probably without meaning. In any case, Julus guitulatus F. is more harmful, a small one

 

thread-thin, but pale each
with a row of blood-red, light
bleeding spotted species,
which one hitutig and zahveieh on

 

30

 

fallen fruit and in the soil in a quantity fleshy
roots and seeds 2. B., Méhren, on germinating diseased
Beans, pumpkin seeds and the like. especially in wet years
finds. They eat their way under the roots 1nd
make disgusting caves there, because of which one often
have to throw away some of the little ones. A matching:
Finding a remedy against them would be difficult. The kerfe or insects, the chief object
stood our treatment, we recognize in the full
condition preliminary at the separation of the body in head,
Trunk, abdomen, always three pairs of legs; at the head
FahIhdrner; mostly wings; Breathing through the tracheae. The metamorphosis or
Metamorphosis. Never plural appears first as
Ki, later as maggot, larva or ranpe, then as pupa
and finally only as perfect, just described as
nice kerf. We give a brief description of the classification of insects
Treatise of their construction and their royal secrets. Any insect, be it born as a ki or
born alive, grows significantly and stretches
several times his haunt, which had become too tight for him; but it is
the last day is over, that's how you want it
no more. So e.g. B. a fly a little smaller or
be taller than any other, just like not all of them
grown people are the same size, but a room
fly e.g. B. is therefore never za a sea meiss fly. Consequently
even a perfect insect does not usually branch
more 1 food; some butterflies, including us
must be allowed to lead the Scidese butterfly, have
even parts of the mouth that are no longer used for eating

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

      

are set up. at

Perfect kerf. a
head

of the moth. ‘les Sandlinfers. the bee,

b

Ee. Pa, A

  

The head of the perfect insect bears 2 two
Pages cin a few large, long, so-called zisam-
said Angen, A. You have, with the magnifying glass,
a strangely built, with a lot of Héeker
hant. Doeh is found in some insects-
families, e.g. B. the bees, incidentally several smooth or
Secondary eyes on the forehead (the bee's head, a). Between the eyes stand the so-called. Fihlhérner, Fh,
distinguished by hst mamnigtache form, and there-
hence of the greatest importance for the distinction; you
are articulated thread-like in sandpipers, in bees
hostage-shaped, somewhat club-shaped in the moth. The structure of the mouth parts conforms to the species
of the food consumed by the insect. at
we distinguish an upper lip from the gnawing kerf, then
those in the Sandliuter that are solidly built, in the case of the bee somewhat
seahorse-shaped pincers, next to the frenes
the jaws stand against you when sand-skiing*,
ready for the 2wik

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

     

 

hen to be processed by the tongs

 

 

Food determined and with appendages, so-called
Feeding tips and lip feelers, which ones together
are included under b. tongue not visible. With the bees, hornets, wasps ete. (see head of the bee
Woe to their Muudtheile both for scraping wad Beis
sen than use for sucking, the cress tongs are still
present in the ordinary form; the kinu
load, cic cic. but are stretched long and serve
due to this form, the riisselfémmig standing in the middle
Tongue, Z, for support and wrapping. In the merely singing insects, moths or butterflies
terlingen, flying ete. finally almost all mouths
parts pulled together to form an actual rift (sec
head of the moth). Behind its appendages comes into shape
after yorn weighted hairy horns, sucked, Schuur
repent, up. The chest or the

ve” hull of the kerf
breaks down into
it

 

breast piece, central
breast piece samint
tag, background

x” : chest piece. The middle and
back brisket
each wear a pair

Fligel, dic by the difference in their ban from gv
its value for the classification. Really are common
the two hindwings of completely different mass, of another
construction, of different grisse or linge and differently
igur or with fine eyesight

 

 

 

tastes like the May kiifer in the
pen covered, as well as the front wings (moths) and the like. Yes, in one group the hind wings are quite atrophied
(Flying), with one other there is hardly one of the two pairs
Trace present (Ohutliigler). °

Front, center and back brisket each piece

  

 

    

 

33,

Pair of yokes (shee May beetle, figure), on which w
Gentiles have the leg, a, the splint, b,
and those from a certain Zalil (here five)
Foot gliding composed of foot sole. The abdomen of the Kerfe is skiny on its
upper side covered by the fliiget. He passes
usually made up of nine rings. On every ring
can one use the above and below," i.e. H. Rtieken
and distinguish components; the upper one is coming soon
soft, the lower one hard, (Kifer), soon kicks like
in butterflies the circumscribed case cin. Octers
ind the first abdomen songs so narrow that the abdomen
body stalked appears. Warmth still deserve the various with many
appendages of the abdomen, such as thread,
Bristles, Doleh knives, Clasps, Hooks, Pipes, Forks. However, they are behind in connection with the most
at the end of the abdomen ang: chien sex organs, have
Incidentally, also often for purposes of defense and the like. The indicated parts of the perfect fisect are
not always in the same size and shape with the incomplete
to prove the conditions that have arisen. For example, the caterpillar
later as a butterfly a spiral, thread-like,
hollow sangrit bowl bekimmi, is with powerful chewing implements
She still misses the fihlhérner of the butterfly. She does not have the developed characteristics. Th whole
Body from head on is wnemfirmig, but like that of
perfect insects formed from wolf rings. Only at; only when
the three will follow the transformation upside down-
the rings to the front, middle and back breast piece. The at
the caterpillars attached to these first three rings hook-
shaped three pairs of legs form see to the three pairs of
uen des Schinetierlings ans, the many warts forutigen, white
chen legs of the further posterior rings of the
Ranpe, on the other hand, disappear in the context,
and the rings themselves thus drawn against the forebody

Nérdlinger, the little enemies, 3. AW niter

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

    

      

 

» dless

       

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

34

 

gusaumien, that nan, you can't tell by the number
guided, in the abdomen of the butterfly hardly deu worm-
shaped body of the caterpillar. If the caterpillar loses one of the six in an accident
front legs, the butterfly lacks the corresponding one
Fnss, withrend the loss of a warty leg, if
the caterpillar doesn't perish, but the butterfly does
with its six legs. Here are the
different corms of imperfect kerfe. Actual caterpillars
wrap us into butterflies,
have a hard-shelled head
three pairs of clan feet, four

 

  

Pair of wart-shaped banefeet
and a pair of followers. nanniten caterpillars is instead of four
Pair of bench feet, just a pair of
handeu, a; also a few Eu-
caterpillars skin two pairs of belly
fiisse. Be’ en very small, e.g. as a minirer inside the blitter
living riiupchen the number melts
the building feet even more together. no actual
Caterpillar has more than eight pairs of Bene. “The ramps are ge-
livable seems to have died. What mely than has eight pairs of legs, deh. ¢
Breast feet, five to seven pairs of belly feet and one pair
Nachschieber, there is no butterfly wd is therefore called

i after- or false caterpillar. she has also
Mgrs usually have a strong backwards
EEE beguiled, wryly wrinkled

Body. Only one genus has after caterpillars apart from the six
Slave feet have no further legs and only a pair at the back
lateral appendages. (Save spider sawflies, Lyda.) Also
the after ramps are usually characterized by beautiful or
colorful coloring of their skin. } Pair

 

 

 

 

grubs or long-footed larvae, short
foot larvae, unifoot larvae and maggots
in the majority, but not all, one white,
soft skin, and thereby approach im
in appearance somewhat like the worms;
that's why the common man calls them
often warmer. The grubs, E, have horny heads and
three pairs of strongly developed legs; the
Short leg larvae, K, horny head in
short legs; the shank larvae, O,
gy, horny head, but no pure. LD The maggots, M, have no legs,
age och usually hornavtigen
Sy head, though often horny
CO” mouthparts. The other form of the body, curled
or straight, has no influence on this designation. The names of the ranch, after-
caterpillar n. s. w., are of the utmost importance, so often
one sees it when examining a visual insect in the
imperfect znsiand to thou hath. .

The knowledge of the various
forms of the doll. Either it is of a general nature

 

  

     

 

    
 

 

M

 

  

Heights that are only due to a few
lines the outlines
borrow slumbering _ future ones
Kerfes recognize asst, masked
pupae, in; or does the skin wrap every powerful body
partly special; damu the doll pretty much already represents that
future insect in its main forms, usually

rarely cardboard, g; or grazes the insect when it dies

maggot time durelilived, s
because this shrinks cige

 

Jes underneath ver-

   

 

don't shed your skin,

 

me together; but in

, her interior is transformed
aa Penge in front of you, so that later it's full: %

(come insect from the dried up” maggots
skin breaks out, (. 36,

After listing the previous - terms, can
of metamorphosis or transformation
be. Most insects are born as eggs. Doeh the case is not at all uncommon that lively
young are born, the caterpillar crawls out of the egg,
Larva or maggot, which eats at all times except the
times when they shed the ‘skin that has become too tight’
roams and that of resting. She then becomes a puppet,
which is more or less unnecessary, usually only the
abdomen can move and never eats. Finally the perfect insect appears. That's the process
at the kerfs with transformation. However, several insect families have no relatives
ing. They come unless they are born alive
are, from the children as nymphs, i. H. with a pretty
perfect shape; they grow and heed themselves, more-
mals, eat like the larvae or caterpillars almost constantly,
finally get Fligel, whose Antiinge closed earlier

 

were noticed, and thus have hues, but
no false transformation; such as the young locust
or bug. Both have, apart from the wings, so
much the same form as the adult grasshopper
or bug. Finally there are kerfes that don't skin cinmal, yet
less so have a transformation. Lice. J

The whole development time of a kerf is called
Generation. Needs an insect from ki state until it full-
come fully grown, more than a year, so one speaks
from one and a half year old, two, three, four year old
generation, whereas cin-fold generation is cine
called one-year-olds. Very three hours but another one and a half
multiple (three genrations in two years), double, triple and
several generations ago,

The sex of the Kerfe is usually only
tomic: way to discover in the imperfect states
cken. At the perfect Ke

 

 

it is mostly through different

37
size, shape, appendages, etc. recognizable. But often too
is here to make sure about gender
sleep, it is absolutely necessary that the abdomen be dismantled
tears. Finally, let's briefly look at the internal organization
of insects are touched. BS

The nervous system of the kerfe consists in cinem
Nerve cord with numerous swellings, of which
the nerves for the social organs go off. the nerve
strand, however, does not correspond to the spinal cord of the higher ones
animals, but the abdominal nervous system. The bloodstream of insects can be best seen in the nackia
caterpillars ete. to be observed. Here you can see the blood
through a tube lying under the skin of the back, which
constantly contracting from back to front,
be fooled. Breathing is usually through the inexhaustible
set, alternating contraction and contraction
of the abdomen, den, along both sides of the abdomen,
sting for cannulas (tracheae) leading small airy :
through these, the air is pumped in and out. In the-
sects take in a lot of oxygen when they breathe
the air, but can nevertheless longer time,
without dying, without air. .

If even a single insect shows no noticeable blood
warm, then proves the increased temperature in the
hives that the vitality of the kernels of heat
development is accompanied. In the Gauz they are against Kiilte
very persistent, Lier freezes and freezes itself
not under O. Larya, on the other hand, can freeze so

  

 

      

 

  

uanz become hard, and if you cut them up or

 

breaks, crunches, and yet it slowly starts to hit again
hh and come alive

 

the same applies to the dolls. Insects also thrive in the hot springs. The tactile sensation lies with the insects

lich in the fahthérnem, the feeding spi

 

 

eu and the Ky

  

 

38

soles the taste without doubt at the bottom of the tongue. The sense of smell is extremely finely developed; that's how you smell them
The females also often roam at great distances
by noise, development of light lure the two
worse sith on. One believes in the conception of the sounds
you feeler; to see into the distance, like uian an-
takes, the big ones, near the side eyes, where such
available. There is no vocal organ; the lute
by flapping wings, rubbing wings against each other,
the parts of the thorax among themselves, the abdomen
on the wing-coverts, in the Death's Head Butterfly
Rossi, by drawing in air through the tongue and the like. spawned. -

The instinct of insects, like that of other animals, is
planted by nature in the interest of dev conservation and
Propagation of individuals and species, By Wah! of what nature calls thou, her sins derive,
hence the blunders that e.g. Bliegen commit, ind i
lay their hearts on flowers instead of on rotten meat
smell rotten meat. The great security with which all individuals under
the same inconveniences, yes often despite many reasons for not being able to
doing the same proves that the instinct of the insects wedev
invention of the individual, nor the result of his experience,
but is inherited. How else should the Harmonic
in the admirable construction of a beehive. Nevertheless, one would err if one wanted the insects
with regard to their actions and doings for pure machines
th; because nature leaves every individual next to his:
Instinct noel for its, albeit small, dispatch, a
gene leeway; such as B. Fléhe allow a kind of Dressuv ete. On the precise knowledge of instinct and self

 

 

   

   

 

    

   

  

 

 

the way of life of insects based on this is mainly based
obviously the means that man can take to
sh of the damage md. the infestation by Tusekten 20
woo. 39

It is known that the kerfe like the grésseru thicre
depend on external living conditions. There are
these chiefly the presence of the passeuden
Food of the insect and cin appealing to the insect
Climate; the former plays the leading role. we want sic
Learn about some herbivorous insects. - However
are e.g. B. American lumberjacks often with foreign
wooden, which usually occurs only in southern Europe
arriving rice-kickers with shipments of grain in prodigious quantities
came to Germany without breeding there
zen, although corresponding types of wood and grain gemyg
were present; probably because the German climate
lands was not suitable for reproduction. A multitude of harmful insects of certain, especially
But more regions would still be far beyond the borders of theirs
outside of the fatherland, they find the ones from them different
food plant instructed by nature more widespread. So
it behaves without a doubt with the grape motie and the
Figbark Kiifer. The layman is, however, with his judgment

 

 

 

 

hiiutig finished all too soon and makes deception; because even
the number of those Kerfe is very large, woe not only
aul' one, but are dependent on different plants
and through the transition from one plant to another
mislead. If we e.g. B. in an area where
vines have been planted for the first time, the vine
sticher, in a newly planted chestnut forest, the platy
pus cylindrus occur, we assume all too easily,
these insects have settled in with the new crop
different, and yet this assumption would be a very forced one;
eng the vine cutter lives, except on the vine, in the forest
on many types of wood, Platypus at least in the oak,
and from there they come, like a multitude of other in-
sects on our crops. On the other hand, the common Korukifer likes us with the Ge-
grain species to the Orient have been listed, and in
in the same way many domestically cunning fellows, which it everywhere

 

 

 

 

 

 

40

in the settlements of man also their dwellings
hit. - Some things come to us on the Zag, eg. the
migratory locust. But have more accurate observations
taught that many of those observed apparently flown it up
Seluvmer not immigrated, but, favored by favored
extra warm somuer, created on the spot; then
not just the climate of a country in general, but
also the nature of several following each other, yes even one
i n summer the reproduction of insects can vou
be the greatest euiuss. Just remember the dependent
bility of beekeeping by the nature of the vintage. Of the
Landmann goes even further and brings eg. in which
Saying: 'May year, good year' the harvest with the
copious appearance of Maykiifer in connection. Like
now also with the Maikiifer with its long life
then the influence of a recent year gauge in relation to aut
the larval state largely recedes into the background,
one may further admit that strong May pine swarms still
no summer weather favorable for field and fruit crops
testify, that may be true in the saying,
» the May kiifers persisting at the end of April and May
s, in other words this season the
my init brings itself, the vegetation and blothe rapidly
precedes, and prospect, though not con one
there is a plentiful harvest. An insect plants itself in
for a short time through several generations, so dic
gusty weather of a summer an extraordinary
result in an increase. Often a particularly sensitive
condition, such as the shedding of the caterpillars, into non-venomous
wilting; then large masses can be destroyed. What is very interesting in this statement is that: was it,
usually the development period of the larvae of the same
sentence is quite sharply defined by nature, ananeh-
sometimes, however, noticeable lengthening or shortening
yor come, the markings vou usually also un so

 

 

 

 

   

    

   

 

 

that white

 

   
 

seevy
7c v

     

 

 

 

 

 

   

   

AL

become more frequent, the greater the masses of insects that occur
and the more they lack food as a result. Of particular interest is the occurrence of the in-
sects in different media depending on where they are in
ki, larval, pupal or the perfect state
Find. Many Kerfe, the nine-tenths of their lifetime,
ie. spent their entire youth as larvae in water
have, live in the trained state merely in the air and
only return to the water to lay their eggs there. Others remain in the water their entire lives. still
others live as larvae hidden in the earth, inside
of plants, animals, etc., but the perfect states
in the open air. But others bring in their Versteek
also the time of their perfection and the like. Mauche
harmful insects are inevitable in animals
or tied to plants from whose sap they live. Kura, there is a great deal in this relationship
Varying, such a variety according to the
ments and types that the Lé
liver

   

 

ic who has never dealt with the
way the core was busy, every moment
'Trngsehliisson is exposed by being often in the air
seeks, and in the great realm of flying ships
find mi believes what is in the water or out of the water
m_ ship or search in the earth, what's the last thing,
escaped from it, from the warming rays of the sun
please

   

  

 

 

 

To get acquainted with the way of life of an Iusekt
therefore belongs to the answer of a large Reilie vou
Ask what we consider most essential in ourselves
want to bring out the form observed throughout the book. What are the characteristics of the male, the
females? When, where, in what quantity can you find it full
coming insect? Is it very posable or tril
%n what time, how does mating take place? 42

Where and how does the woman lay the eggs
ub, or does it give birth to lively young? Will it die soon after? Which stages of development from Ki onwards, which
welcome, what kind of food, what sensitivity
we notice on the larva or caterpillar ete.? what shape
and color does she have? Are their ejections ete. for ile
characteristic of being? :

Is she firmly attached to a food plant? When and where does the transformation into a doll take place? Does the larva or caterpillar make a web? What does the cardboard look like? Is she mobile, apparently
and dead, sensitive or insensitive? How, where and when will appear from the doll or
Nymph “the perfect insect? The farmer does very well, his sense of observation
to kill already fr wn the way of life of the harmful cores. There are persons who are quite incapable from lack of exercise
are to observe others who even have the talent to do so
almost comes off. For such I want to give some hints. Sickly, stunted growth, especially
trees standing at the edge of large pieces of goods
above all, to attract the attention of the farmer
and iho drillworms and the like. in the wood or dev bark ver-
mute Bark covered with drill dust, small holes
His tribe will often confirm his suspicions. Often
he becomes bare branches or webs and on the way
notice mischief. He points to a caterpillar
owing. On the field plants, preferably those that have been eaten away
Bitterness and flowering, yellowing, early ripening of the fruit, etc. their enemies. In the preparations, filth, criminal waste,
grains spun out, and if it cin internally

  

cupping tusekt is, hollow grains floating overhead

in the water give him suspicion and certainty. 43

From where and how* we find the insect and further
from its natural history, which is usually already known. whether the jusekt is seriously harmful, whether it is the growths or
Fruits, Vorréthe, goods ete. destroyed, or only the wax
the actions of the pilances, the value of the goods
presses without making them unusable; whether it is also the
Mithe and costs rewarded, woehe any means of extermination
would cause, or whether we should nature alone
let work. It is namely indubitable that often cold or very
what weather alone is capable of a straight
breeding and therefore sensitive insect 2u
destroy,

Besides, there are a multitude of animals from all classes,
which always, or at certain times, only exist
feed on insects. Who doesn't already have the glowing
Shells seen in the castings of foxes? and
don't know how much the hedgehog and the bat like insects
wolf down? In May one finds the stomach of the owls of May-
keifer fulfilled; also the night and day swallows are
mischievous in hunting insects. She smacks underneath
olme Wahl Gone everything that passed through her throat. In the stomach of a swallow swarming around a hilt
in May mornings one chews ruffles, flakes of earth, small ones
Dung kifer, Cieads, but also Staphylins, Hymenoptera,
but find, , with everyone
the contents of her stomach change, and every month offers
them other sources of food. Int June they often eat theirs
Boys exclusively with small butterfly resembling
A lot applies to deu tits, grits and a crowd
other insectivorous bird whose protection against
raw and thoughtless persecution not enough to heart
can be laid. a. H. insect re

 

hour of the day

 

 

   

 

 
  

word do not speak; the
hen torn:

We want that for the sparrows

unbarnhe pu or Ge-

   

way they bauunl

n, makes them hateful to the farmer. Doeli

grain outhiil

 

 

Inc

must also not be left unsaid how eagerly they May, June
and many other beetles and cherry trees in
Befrcien near the villages of caterpillars. The woodpecker needs special protection. He eats one
amount of wood kéter and woodworms and is therefore useful
that he chopped off sick trees and branches
verrith. Where he once started punching holes or
To read off the bark, there can be a sign of damage to the tree
no longer be an issue. :

The useful ones feeding on harmful insects
Tusekt families we will give in general outlines at the
make appropriate places nainhaft. Also we refer
with regard to visceral insects (parasites, ichnenmo-
nen), on the order of the wasps. In many cases man has to lend a hand himself
to defend himself against his enemies, and he can do it too, because
as a rule, the harmful insects appear far away
not all in the same year. Not even all tree ramparts
show up at the same time by adding bad weather to a
certain time of the past year one species in its development
development or interfere with reproduction, thus fitrs com-
next year can almost destroy, while another of
various development goes out harmless and firs
puts off plenty of roasts next year.

. Unlaaghar would cs but a blunder, fir every year,
in which one notices venous insects, its destructive
to use measures. There are 2. B. Years in which
the expected fruit harvest is so plentiful, i
Bainume could hardly bear what to wear
these cases one or more, not in all zn greater
Declaring war on the number of existing insects would be
unwise and unwise. At most value skin the destructive
We have laid down measures in years, which probably
not to the most fertile gehéven and in welehen ee when
not too large a quantity of harmful grime with us
threatened with the ruin of the whole harvest. nope

 

 

45

Means against insects. We have substantially 2u under-
separate preventive and destructive means. The healthier the field plants, the fewer they are
usually exposed to the attacks of the Kerfe. It is this
with a reason why drill culture where it's executable
is, has priority over the usual field cultivation. With her, growth is much faster, see,
the plants bloomed more evenly and selmeller, the
So sects have less time, about the plant or the
Blithe to become master. Everything the powerful development
the plants promotes is thus usually in relation to
the damage threatened by the kerfs. We find an exception to this in the leaf lenses (see Fig
there). ’

Most wood insects attack cracked wood
over than healthy. Manele can therefore be
allow the wood in the bark to be easily attracted and they bore
themselves or their children then usually on the wetter at
side lying on the floor. Is such a wooden drum with
Occupied by insects, you can easily tell by that
Drilling dust, which the same work out or on passages and
Larvae found under bark or in wood. Man
must then cut off and burn the bark, the wood
split and soon use Deun wide for heating
you have to wait until the larvae are fully grown
would, then all could be involved in the processing of the wood
loren going to the transformation come nud auders-
where wreak havoc. But in the case that you
versiiumic, at the appropriate time the destruction of the kerfe and
To undertake larvae at all, one would have to see for oneself
Heeke brought up by enemies and the means were more au
feared as evil itself. To those wood cores that attack only wood,
that is still fairly viable to remove or attached to
stéren, 2 B. Bostr. dispar, of course I don't want any other means
a commandment stand, as severe wounding of worthless ones

   

 

46

 

Stémmehen, be it on stem or root. This will
cin cringe which certainly attracted the kief
and its destruction 2. B. in nurseries, where he often dies
the rarest types of fruit, made possible. Freshly felled, completely healthy wood is often not
immediately attacked by’ insects, because the fresh vitality
is also a kind of deterrent for the Kerfe. Through
a gas-inducing substance that passes under the bark
is brought to the prospective decomposition of the tree sap
transport and attract the insect more easily, nud suggests itself
should be repeated. be tried. By the way, I have cine
Sample of the species failed. Must, which is often the case, because of cultural or
Bauvernderung Biume be cut down, and has one
for carrying out this business in the spring a game
yon a few weeks, so you can the Biumen for the time being
cut off some strong roots or make strong notches around the
Trunk around deep into the sapwood. Such Fangbiéume become
attract numerous broods, and if filled soon after,
debarked and the bark burned, allowing the brood to be destroyed. A lot of wares and supplies suffer from mot-
only if they are untouched
longer time in the magazines, especially in dull-
wet magazines. Only that applies to the wool
the drier it lies, the harder it is on moths
shit is. 'The mere again in use nelunen, Rat-
tinkering, dashing back and forth often works as much or alone what
it is also more superfluous and expensive to use
credited funds. And how cleanliness on the body
protects him from certain vermin, he is also able to do so
Urgent surveillance down to the furthest corners and R
get the Vorreithe of each kind before a large number sch
anticipated and unexpected discoveries of the
to preserve insects. Regarding the spe-
Incidentally, compliance with this provision must be based on the individual

 

   

 

 

 

sects themselves are referenced. N.T

One turns vou to protect against child wrestling
moths and the like odoriferous substances*, which
should be reflected In general, however, must be noticed
will,. that the mere smell of these substances is the main thing
according to is not at all deadly to insects, even some
like the camphor, they don't seem to mind at all. Yet its use is so common and a cheap one
effect so generally accepted that we hardly ever think of it
dare dare deny. In fact, it is rightly explained
that the volatile oils are due to moths, etc
difficult breathing are necessary, furthermore that the chamber
pher, as well as turpentine, as a weak preservative
slight, constant decomposition of the organic ones
Substances and thus the development of the smelling substances
reduce, woe to the cores the nearness of the
reveal desired objects. In the main, however,
my opinion, the strong-smelling remedies work
by covering up the smell of the goods, and protect
the same not as soon as the vermin enter the path
found m. This is best seen on insects
collections. Are the moths caught in them?
pushed, so help the biggest ones placed in the boxes
doses of camphor nothing, the less; than many of the
disturbing larvae have the habit of making themselves so inside
to keep their food that they are very good on the outside

 

 

are protected and only whom they want to transform,
can be noticed. Some Anthrenus larvae i
Months in a bottle with camphor sticks and
dead insects locked up, did not go to
Reasons. One of the best antidotes to destruction is meehani-
shear conclusion against the Kerfe. That the container is air-
being dense is by no means necessary, yes under certain circumstances
detrimental because it is suffocating the object itself

® Camph

   

Cajeputal, Spikél, Talgliel

 

48

au result came. The Kerfe pamper their Kier or
settle into the object itself, which is their successor
intended to serve only as food. Are sic by cine enveloping
fine canvas e.g. B, held off, so seek it out
after a crease to penetrate. Do you not find this
so they go on or live away so that one them
later found dead nearby. (Furs over summer
in canvas.) However, it is evident that the careful
wrapping with canvas, binding in fine linen beading,
Sealed in precisely fitted wooden containers and the like. can only be effective when no Brat in
is included in the items. In this case,
blocking completely wrong, ie. protective: for the insect effects. We eliminate the harmful or
cunning thugs must then successfully declare war,
if we observe their way of life very closely. Also
only in this case are we able to, with certainty
judge how far we relate our to warfare
turned costs with benefit fir present or future
spend or have spent. Twice in three fiilleu
is missing here, and either a success from the
wende ciues means derived when the damage is done
the Tusekt after the natural course of things vou
itself would have had to stop, or will an agent take effect
while not the means, but the
Circumstances under which it has been applied have helped
ben etc. me In any case, therefore,
and benefits to be expected prior to the use of a
tels well considered, this wu so conscientiously, if
the remedy is not an acknowledged trial. How many mitiel
have not been carried over from book to book without criticism
den, and thus almost undeservedly have a certain authority
reached, I crimner only at Low, who often turns twenty
chic den means indicates. So the reader will not forgive me
tibeln if I don't believe in this regard
mv was trusting

 

 

  

   

  

 

     
   

Ag

Fs is natural that in dev extermination of the in-
sects have to look for strangers as long as possible
to claim. Bigger larvae in the soil e.g. B. we can through a-
driven crying, especially after that
Field been overthrown, read together and eat. Hiners are also in the garden to pick up smaller larvae
to use. Leuelis even assures that there Ki-
bitze, whose feathers had been torn out, to
reading of tendons and caterpillars can be learned. The experiments made in forest management
uatirlichen enemies of the kerfe, the parasitic kerfe or
To bring up Iehneumonen in greater quantity, in order to
to keep the proliferation of the sexual disease in check,
were in vain. The same can even, without just deu Ver-
au repeat, you ii similar ventures in the
agriculture to be claimed; the suggestion 7. B, big
to bring wood ants to granaries where rift-
beetle live, is cin highly trusted; because the woodame-
s would very soon find all of them on this foreign soil
Lose energy, lose your way, and under no circumstances can you
the Liirvelen staying in the grain farms ant
search. Moreover, the alleged stone of death is certain
Between the big carpenter ant and the grain kiter none
greater than that between all ants and other jin-
sects ruling. Moreover, the largest carpenter ant would
F. herculeana L. because they are difficult to crowd out of their burrows
to get out in thick, hollow trees wire, dic
“Most unsuitable type for the stated purpose. Unfortunately we can only refer to ourselves in many cases:
count themselves, and must therefore seek, our task
attack as quickly and effortlessly as possible,

Wherever we can, we will end the Kinzel war
avoid, and z. Bénmen, shrubs, as well as some
higher field weight

   

 

 

   

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Are the harmful insects mutant?
shake spread towels, or into a spread one

NGrdlingey, My Enemies,'

 

50

 

Knock and smash umbrella. Ni is about to
observe that usually the first injury
the unprepared insects swoop down, and that thus
the initial shaking or tapping must be strong,
otherwise the kerf seeks itself more and more firmly with its claws
cling,

For taller plants standing in rows, 2. Baker-
bohuen, even with widely seeded smaller ones, like Haunt,
Lein ete., can be in a few minutes with
Help of a Creator or Hammen (im
Generally like the Butterfly Ham-

 

 

\ men, me in grésscrem scale, with oval
\ | Wire and dinner canvas made)

catch an infinite number of Erdilehe, and in that
\-/ Crush the end of the sack. Regarding the actual flea trapping machine, sure
flea. Some insects can be attracted by sticky substances
zeu (cooked linen, little bird, syrup, tar etc.) catch, which one strokes on chopsticks, whereupon dic {lie
the insects want to settle down (flies), or
formed around the trunk of trees, on which they climb
have to crawl (frost moth). The Werre fills in Fangtépfe, which we on its lower
dig earthly passage, and saves us so cin long
look out)

wasps, ants, etc. can be made with sweets
lure and drown in narrow-necked glasses. In many areas it is customary to
snatch the wintering caterpillars and kier at once
au destroy the trunk of the Obsthiéume over the winter
to brush with lime. You can use some
not deny this custom, but cs wonders whether d
utility equals mihe; most fruit tree
insects lay eggs on branches wd buds, hence
Mainly these would have to be coated, but w

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

   

allau cumbersome, perhaps because of the building's respiration
harmed and has not yet been attempted. (But that
the liming of stems with tar rings as very expedient
appears niissig, is at . Frost spawners detected
will.) 7

Fire. Who would not have noticed that the
Gingerbreads and flies like to fly towards the light and
easily get burned here. Yet the fire delivers none
significant destructive; because it's mainly them
men fluttering about after the women, which
lie on the light, while the former far calmer theirs
Brui ship to you. Heat. Natural history objects seized by moths
can often only be caused by heat in a
Save Dérvstnbe. However, since one usually
no ve heat than about 40° R. must apply
the dérrei long afterwards; but hicbei lose 2. B. Bilge
and feathers in luster and vividness of colour. Also
it is advisable to keep the objects, especially insects and plants,
as soon as they come to the Dirrkammer, on a pair of stands
to put in a damp place so that they can get some again
can absorb moisture and lose their brittleness
ren. Also in grain, horse beans and the like. hidden
Larvae or kiifers can also be killed by the heat of the oven or
be killed by throwing in he s water. The stench of wild crabs is supposed to drive Kerfe away, 2. B.
Cornworms from grain chanters on which the crabs are stuck
will. I don't believe it, but without the understanding
makes zi have. ranching with suffocating or respiration
detrimental substances are depending on the Un
Success; but we have given some more detailed explanations. As a rule, cleaning does not cause the kerfe
getddiet, except in close quarters, and in this case speak-
we suffocate; it can also be used in the main
sache mur zim current operations, Heral

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

inden of good

 

 

 

the

 

caterpillars etc. be applied. In this sense
the so-called Riéiuch he r-
pan on. This is in the manner of a scale with three
small chains hung from the top of a pole
arbitrarily from below the caterpillar companies on the
Trees can be approached 7 so that the pan
stun the caterpillars, fall down, sometimes
sometimes tédte. As incense substances are rightly
Sulfur recommended (with some sulpeter mixed in, the
promotes the vigorous combustion of the sulphur), in
to a lesser degree pitch, straw with some horn spituen or ditr-
rem Dinger mixed. The recommended smoking in rooms against
I consider zen just as cunning as insufficient. Because sheer
Smoke destroys the wound, and stuns more than it kills
the Stiure developed from burnt Schwetel likes to bleach
moist, colored substances, and kills, if not that
Room is completely hermetically sealed, zwn at least the
Not eggs, so would have to be repeatedly applied
will. The latter can be smoked by the smoker with pepper
the expulsion of the Motien from clothes, the flies et
be said apart from the circumstantiality and frivolity
of the means. I have just as little faith in the expulsion of
Snails, caterpillars, grasshoppers by fire on the
fields. If these do not have a very local effect, so itsste
in any case, they are mainly opened in the evenings, because closed
this time of day the smoke likes to spread and
which pulls down the valley. Smothering of kerfes, especially larvae, who die
haunted objects (grain, goods) hermetically
can be included is not enough to recommend. You bring z. B. attacked grain in a large,
tightly lockable cauldrons or in large wine
fiisser, burns one or some pieces of sulfur in it

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

53

and eat while shutting up the corn some
hours of suffocating sulfuric air,
the larvae perish. By the way, attempts
first decide whether a shorter
because the grain in the sulphurized barrels is enough,
and if it is necessary, the corn afterwards, so that it
lose the smell of sulfur, spread in the air,
or to douse with some lime-containing water, with it
that the sulphurous acid scratching the palate is eliminated,
and afterwards to dry again carefully, Ansserdem kéunte
hydrogen sulphide gas for the same purpose and after
previous application of some chlorine gas to the peculiar ones
If you like, remove the eggs and make them harmless;
or else would try sulfur liether, the effect of which
in the locked room of the insect collection
know quite well. It is in this respect the human
There is still a wide field of activity and inventiveness
open. After all, as an addendum to these proposals
be recommended that the attacked object
After killing the insects, only grow dry and in
don't pile up too densely, sell or grind soon
leave, but especially use the flour soon; because the
animal remains contained in it soon become
rank. For the destruction of scolopenders, spiders, flees, etc.,
which accumulate in large numbers on long sea voyages in the ship
rooms, recommends Voigt (Heidelberg. Nature-
estimated Zoology IV p. 199) chloric acid vapors as very
effective. To suffocate Werren, generally from underground
animals living in tunnels, is known to be a bellows
in use, which has a flared mouth,
wherein sulfur is ignited and the suffocating gas
can be wrapped around when squeezing the bellows
to be driven into gear, what to, so that
Thier desio certain suffocate, closed the aisle. Also

 

 

 

 

54

a bit of phosphorus, ignited in the Gai

lost, works the same. Also used to smother moths in clothes

Vinegar vapor recommended, whether to the advantage, I don't know

came. .

car

 

laid and

 

   

I don't think much of the also praised Au-
twisting of twigs of grape cherry and kirseh
‘laurels; they do, however, come in very small numbers
hydrocyanic acid. From the circumstances, however, that a lot
Insects without a suture for days and in the buds
of the two trees dwell, the ineffectiveness of the
Appear by means of sufficient. To the. Splashing or dousing vo

 

 

caterpillars
which are to be killed is diluted with water
Thrane or soapy water rightly recommended; lye should
otherwise have the same effect. Also be verdimnicr
wood vinegar or sulfuric acid. The limit of
usability of these liquids in caterpillar nests, terrestrial
plead, not on the trunk or branches, but on the grii
ing parts of the growth, should again be more precise
may be tested. Manure manure only works if it is repeated
fetch. For rubbing or drinking the objects, which
on or what organic animals feed on, it is called that
Oil, which is effective for caterpillars and a lot of other kernels
lich is fatal in that it appears to them that At
ren clogged. ferucr is known for its excellent
Common application ztuu Kin Jhren vou people
and animals, if an insect accidentally crept into them
Has; on the other hand, I saw very much Fléhe drizzled with oil
suffer little as a result. Unfortunately, the majority of Kalle allowed
Don't use the oil because of its inherent properties
characteristic Alcohol kills insects if they stay in it for a long time
gene; But embrocations have too ephemeral an effect. Far more successful migen ste aronnitische, sharp or

 

 

 

 

Linangseffian

 
 

  

    

 

 

 

 

  

bitter organic substances, such as wormwood, coloquiuts,
Quassive and the like be. ‘Letateres acts on I
there) as a formal poison. You can use this Ki
Addition of a small quantity of light mineral git
tes, such as cobalt or the like, of course even more effective
do. The Liiuse on young Kilbern one kills, according to Leuchs,
by caustic lime water, with which the animals are washed. However, the most common remedy in such cases is
the well-known mercury ointment (louse ointment, unguentum mereu-
riale), a mechanical mixture of mercury and fat. However, they should only be used with caution (although in humans
and animals). It also works in low quantities
litdit reliable. The most excellent, but also the most dangerous means of
Rubbing and protecting inanimate objects remains Av-
senic (white arsenic, arsenic acid). The same will
neither used as (arsenic) soap, as with internal
Checking the Thirbeilge; in unlocked rooms
however, he likes to practice and is therefore dangerous, Um
To kill the lures, the arsenic with their food
mixed and in angles, shutters and under Schrinuke
laid, where it is neither eaten by children nor by domestic animals.
can be enough. Achuliches one can tell from another very corrosive
say poison, the mercury sublimate, which
This before arsenic by easier solubility in water
excellent. For sprinkling the kerfe both as*the of them
bellied objects (mushrooms, etc.) are recommended:
burnt lime and calcined potash in powder, which
Leuchs used with all due care against snails and
also against earth fleas etc. recommends. I'm out of shape
also explain whether they are just as effective against other animals
cken, and what their (perhaps
sldrende) effect on vegetation. are like against Si

 

56

 

Leuchs also says of the powdered plaster of paris,
that he used to stump infested bodies against me
Kerfe was effective, and of the same with a dry
Food (Meh! e.g. b) injured, in the stomach heated and for her
tédtlieh_ become. This much is certain, that lime and plaster dust are tender
eere, like aphids, become perishable, but in the
Rule not strictly enough to their most important stay
Places to be scattered and germinate after every rain
have to be refreshed. Perhaps besides the costly
bility to make the same reproach to the sulfur flowers. 7

I have even less confidence in the effectiveness
grasp the affinity of aromatic or uarkotic plant substances,
which are sprinkled in powder form; because I believe that they
drive out kerfe present in the rarest cases, if
they are also not to be despised in part as a means of preparatory work
are. In this context one uses tobacco, rue, pepper,
Garlic, Hemp, Bilsenkrant, Asand. Yes, I don't admit
understand how the currently much-praised [odorless]
Persian insect powder that you can get from pharmacies
stop, should have more effect on insects than e.g. B. hay
flower. A number of other recommended fabrics, such as Ktigelehen
from Gwnmi arabic, Stiteke Ahornholz u. etc., pass
I without further explanation, because I believe that ilnen
no effect can reasonably be attributed. From the foregoing it can be seen that we ourselves
many of the effective remedies are by no means sufficient in the
Are clear, tind that the practicing agriculturist cin
can earn great merit, had conscience, prejudiced
free and proper knowledge of the pursued insect
to make slipping attempts. Division of the Kerfe. The subsequent healing of the skin has no claim
based on the latest state of knowledge. Nevertheless, it may be applied to a restricted
Subject, like agriculture, correspond more than dice
modern trend, the whole Kerfen world in a continuous
cudless series smaller touching each other tansendfiltig under each other-
of groups and genera. It was also said on this occasion that instead
of the innumerable names of subgenera, woe the
disgusting laypersons, even some serious entomologists,
far as not to cause confusion, the parents
Limné'schen, Fabricius see ete. references needed
were, and according to Ratzeburg's suggestion, the author of the Spe-
ciesname was allegirt. The Kerfe or Insekteu have in their youth how

“above and here discussed, either complete or in-
complete, or no transformation at all. they crumble
hereafter, as well as after the perfect state, into the following
Orders:

 

   

 

 

I. Debauchery: I. Perfect Kerf:

Complete, with larval chewing organs. ‘Vorderflit-
and (mostly sculpted) puppies: hard covers. Behind'

little by little gel: across below together-

a beaten. peas
Beetles (Coleoptera). Volistindig, with caterpillars — Spiral proboscis,

and wanted dolls. Scaly Birds. aay? Moths (Lepidoptera). Complete, with caterpillars
or larvae with or oline addition
nen, or maggots, Geinciselte
dolls. Mo LP PC

incomplete (there. H. you

The young look the same as the old
but doesn't have a college yet

oe

 

Unyollstiindig. chewing tools and suction
tear. The four wings through-
visible, with Schsch more economical,
often no nerve tangles at all
tion. Wasps (Hymenopter
chewing tools. Front'lii-
gel: parchment-like. Behind-
fliigel: in the peace of the Linge
still ¢in fiichers together
beaten up. N
Grasshoppers (Orthoptera). suction nozzle. front wing :
hiiuig almost wing-like,
as in the Kiifers, 6fters
but also delicate. Meadows and Blatilius (Hemiptera). completely. doll in de
crrigid larvae (see
above). < p

San Grain. Just two flii-
gel. Flying (diping). 59

Changeable, insofar as chewing tools. front ili! know Netzfliiglér pupae not transparent like hindwings. eat more, so formal . Very fine net-like refused
dolls are. Annoy. Great of the four wings

not very different

 

 

Maidens (Ni curopteren. Ie

Whole: larvae and pups - without wings:
pen. a) Sucker (parasitic
ED fiche). ORR. No metamorphosis. b) sucker. — freeloader
ae (Liiuse), <GRe

 

No metamorphosis. c) Kaner. On the abdomen with
long, straight (lepisma)
. or jump fids (Podura). ae 7 Se Se

Ohntliigler (Aptera). So how do we determine the name of a kerf? Do we have the name of an agriculturist, as
harmful already known insect, so ask
above all whether it is in the perfect state
finds. or not. One recognizes this almost: always the
presence or absence of wings. dl the
Fligel present, so is the finding in our book
present no 2u great difficulty. Which we will
due to the parts of the mouth and the nature of the wings mostly so-
immediately referred to the relevant Ordmmg. It is different
with the imperfect states. Blinded in

 
 
   

 

60

this cin kerf from the series of those wit uuvolllkou-
mener transformation, e.g. grasshoppers, bedbugs, which
in youth to the perfect form nothing more felut
than the Fligel, so one will also here with regard to the order
uung kawn err kémen. But if it is incomplete
common beetles, wasps, moths, flies, which in their juvenile
siud so completely different than in old age, so we compare
the imperfect animal with the in column L of the Kinthei-
given figures. We direct our main
augeuutk to the presence or absence of the
head, to the dasciu or non-existence and especially
also on the number of legs. Usually we will
then with determination the order of the jusckts
put kenuen. But sometimes you come between them
Larvae and maggots of the order of beetles and wasps
and sometimes similar to that of flies
in front; This is what a look at the first column of our teaches us
Ordinance, So in this case we're going to order
to be sure, to flip through two orders in search
to have,

In order to remedy and ciuen this evil as far as possible
to give you further clues to look for,
is the table in which the Kerfe according to their host plants
are arranged, have been compiled. She refers us
usually on a small number of kerfes, wi whose
Names it is kau, also once the Orduug
or the two orders, iu which the cores possibly
heard, are determined-

The special description and way of life at last
be the keystone to recognizing the insect. 61

\. beetle order. partly useful. partly sexual,

The perfect insect is easy to find by number
bring the phalanges into Unierordnungen. Does one read ném-
the heaves on the last phalanx except for
tion, so the kifers disintegrate into

A) _Five-limbed, with five limbs at each foot-
sole,

 

 

Laufkiifer, Carabus. With whole, i. H. up to back
flagel coverings reaching to the body and thread-like fihlers
(whose limbs do not thicken towards the tip),
Strongly built tongs. On the Unterscite, at the place
where the limb is joined, usually a strongly de-
wrapped thigh strap. Legs evidently too rapid
run formed. Let anyone touch them out of their mouths
or abdomen a stinking juice flow. The larvae naked but with strong shields, rather
well developed legs,
warmly black and harsh life- Sea
dig like to bite around. the commonest species is the Carabus auratus L
lente, by its golden-green shine
lich, against a multitude of kiifers, caterpillars,
Earthworm field and garden police

does he eat the gray
alive Kirper den
softer abdomen away. Land fire stoker

   

   

 

 

   

 

62

A school-like way of life leads the still greater, but less holy
black Carabus coriaceus L.; also other relatives, approximately from the
Size of the auratus, like Carabus hortensis L. (back duukel with coppery
edge and three longitudinal rows of metallic burrows on the wing covers). Carabus granulatus £. Ricken copper-red or green, black or
red legs; Wing-coverts with three longitudinal rows of raised, longitudinal lights
Points between two and three raised longitudinal ridges,

Carabus morbillosus Pz. Same as the previous scbv, but larger,
sets copper red, chest piece fin ratio wider and finial rows
and lasts stronger. This species is extraordinary in ciuzclnen years
meant, otherwise individually. — Kerner ran a lot of smaller ones on all paths.
who like to see species flying in the sun:

Carabus cupreus F. (Kig.) and Carabus aeneus F., both 14 million. long and
the back copper-red or grim ; cupreus but
shiny anit dentlichen longitudinal lines on the
Wing Pads and Black Legs and Fill
Jen; aeneus matter, with red, haired
ns and feelers and scarcely visible longitudinal lines on the ceilings; so-

   
  

 

  

   

then Cardbus curynotus Kug. —!— wid communis F, —|— related,

Both, the former dull, the latter strongly copper-colored on the back
zend; scarcely twice as inug as wide,

The larvae of the ground runners are also common in the open field
find, but keep more in secret, even in the ground ant,
yet they have the same robbery ways as the pincers. Janfen
this very first: beliend. Closely related to German runners, but with longer legs and feeding
pliers msgezcichuet, are the sand runners, Cicindela (siche head 8. 31). They are very common, also geographically very common and drift
from March on in warm sunshine on sandy fields and aut
Saudwegen_heram. Cicindela campestris L. (ie I'm still on the Pie du midi
Bagnéres found in the Pyrenees), flies fast _| when approaching
of that; but is at the stable blue shine under the wing covers
still in the butfernnng kuntleihe; Riteken gran with small, yellow |
Points, larvae: in dilulic places, ritualistic in hiding. But now we also have a running kiifer that we want to mention
should have a different way of life and importance from the previous ones,

It is claimed that the approximately 23 million long, black, with smooth
Breastpiece and wing deflections provided, between chest and abdomen
Carabus cephatotes F. oder
its larva, also from the row of loud-kiffers, devastated the
grain (Nicol. Col. p.12.). Ratzeb. Believe this, and rightly so
little of the larva than of the kifer. That leglerem nothing to burden

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

     

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

63

au will be, I conclude from this that I ibn anf the
Sondduinen found by the sea in its Erdhihihihihihihi, where aneh its larw
if only had a very small selection from the available mushrooms. on the other hand, the proximity of the tide would possibly have many animal ones
marine ejections could deliver. Just this occurrence on sand dunes,
where so few insects live, I would stick with Hartig's observation
moniren, who saw mehvere Cephalotesein - cadavers buried. -In any case
So there seems to be more than doubt that the insect is harmful to grain. The Grain Lantk:

 

fer, Carabus (Zabrus) gibbus Bon. Up to 14 million long (after Andem still
longer), 6.3 million wide. Black Matt-
turn on the underside including feet
; Benstsehild and
wing covers strongly arched. The former with a longitudinal furrow
punctured across in the middle and behind. The very detailed one in Germar's Magaz. 1. p.1 and T.LF. 1-5 delivered messages za result
the kifer appears at the end of June to June, initially completely white,
black after a few hours. In Austria, in the
near Halle and Kisleben he is said to have lived in a few years
immense crowds about to come, to themselves of the day:
keep under clods and stones, but at night at the
Halmen climb up and the Kérner out of the Achren
eat, Even in prison he shall be thrown out
Aechren consume peacefully, but in the event of a shortage
attack same. The kifer should probably have the kier in clumps
lay. The resulting larvae, which are left
taking years

   

   

   

 

     
 

 
    

0

 

 

 

    

ns:

   

to their full but

firen outyegrowing something itber cinen inch ling, plat,
sehmal init head and twelve rings. head flat with me
strong pincers and two four-pronged bristle-tipped ones
Féhlem, two eyes and covered with emzemen dimen hair
puts. First section quite square and larger than
the rest, bram above, white below. The following two
Sections wider than long, brown above, white below, with

v

 

 

  

 

   

  

 

64

a brown calloused point on each side at the site
of the air hole. The further sections are of equal length among themselves,
but decreasing in width backwards, yellowish white,
set with bristles on the sides; above with a wide
brown spot rounded on the*sides, which extends outwards
shows an indented point. All those brown spots
meet lengthwise and are thicker
mass than the body. In the margins of the sections. one
Double rows of similar brown elongated warts. auto
the bottom in the middle of each section a similar one,
brown, narrow, calloused transverse ileek, and behind the—
same on each section four of the same in a transverse
line lying burned points, which last but on the
Unier side of penultimate section missing. The anal section
small, almost entirely brown; the anus protrudes and over the-
same is an elevation with two tripartite,
hairy, wispy, pointed horns, along the back of the
A transparent mitic line runs through all the larvae
sections. In some years these larvae are said to
Fields swarm, but only in the evening and at night,
where they come out ays six inches deep Erdléchern themselves
eat into the stalk and yerzelu the pith down

 

 

 

   

 

 

2
so that all the winter seed of viclen morning withers,
and even twice if you looked again. Ln
Autumn should do most of the eye damage. you seem
to foresee the wheat; also like to go to the rye
and the barley other field fruit, such as Wiekeu or
Potatoes, don't attack them. lin Friihjaly start the
Devastations anew because the larvae in the earth
winter. The pupae can be found one at a time in June
tubes 6 inches deep and even some at a depth of
2 shoe; they lie there curled up in an eager,
glitched cavity, are yellowish white, with black cn
Eyes and private limbs, soft and sensitive. 65

 

 

Early June pupation of the larva, late June and ant
Jnli the beetles start

It cannot be denied that the foregoing Lebeu-
wise in contradiction to that usual in long-running runners
stands. Anch are probably easily confused with others
larvae imaginable. You might have the friend with him
mistaken enemy; it would not be the first time (see
also Cantharis). But one is in the winblick anf the up to the
EKinzee takes precedence over information in Germar's Magazine
hand not entitled to express doubts. some more
for further details see Germar at the attached location

B. Kurzflitgler, Staphylinus. Actually borrows from hers
short, like truncated wing-coverts, It is highly
steus a confusion with a few boekkiifers, Maiwiir-
mers and the catchy tune mi; » but have a lot
Kingere coolers, four foot joints and, a few, something
Muygespilzie, who also just such short blankets. The Deeks
of the Maiwunn are even more pointed towards the back,
footglider

 

 

cry,

 
   

 

 
 

   

   

 

 

 

 

and fit. But the catchy tune makes a difference
itself by its scissors at the end of its tail, apart from the
difference, of the phalanges,

The beetles of this family show cine of those of the vocal
keifer pathetic way of life. You meet them on fields and
Because, in winter under stones ete., very much alive their
robbery suspected; they hit this when approaching:
Tail end high and smell peculiar, several
little ones probably also live on things, they are very hiiu-
fig an Dungiiitten. They often catch your eye. Thre larvae, which are closely related to the running kifer, live
also in hiding and from the robbery of other hisects, or
of carrion or you found vegetable substances, especially
also swimming, but Ratzeburg has the prospect
that here the Ranbe bewolniger small swimming pools

 

   

   

 

   

 

   

 

 

  

Insects follow. The commonest larger Avions are the sch
urosse Staphylinus olens: F. '

Nivdlinger, the little ones. 5

 

66

' Staphylinus maxillosus L., black. with a gray back

i' [> ~~ part and grain band fiber d
Staphylinus muvinus L., almost entirely yellowish
silver white row dots on the bottom:
several very related black species init bramen

 

  

elcken. ‘an checked, with
ite of the womb
len,

 

  

 

   

 

finally
Blankets on legs, namely:
Stopphylinus cacsorens Cedl., with goklen neck
Jenk amd black screen marriage,

Staphylinus erythropterns L., firm as large, with golden neck
articulated around the screen. een open een mercarring OL, with neck joint amd Sebild-

without gold. In addition, a lot of ke
Selir different forms,
©. Schwimmifer, Platte, ghatte, elliptis
hairy, hind legs cingerichicien for swimming. chen with' broadened fore-tuss-gliders, females
with furrowed covers, larvae peculiarly like,
beginning and descending with ease in the water. The lengths
jaws to seize and suck their prey,

The largest species, Dylicus latissimus L., 40 million. long, 24 million wide,
beriseh, not only by dead fish and
but should also eat into the skin of living dears
ener than

 

ere, black and variegated species

    

  

 

far with
mii ninti,

     

     

    

 

lich cidee! debt selir
the like itself

   

 

 

However, it is a lot
der sinnie, dyticns mar-
ginalis L. Selgenein in
Ponds, rivers and puddles. Swims like the previous ser
quickly and comes from /
at the time on the surface of the
water to separate air
poop His N:
in all arias insects which
live in the water or hine
cinfallen, also in fish fry;
especially the carrion
anzichen : bling. ‘Dries up the lake
out, so fli ter; but only in the evening? — at least
one further and it at
yu vu serve, nim again iu

 
 
 
 
 

  

 

 

ang. ordered

   

   

   

other swimmers fly in the sun
them the blinding of the water as a lei
her element 20 coming. The Kiifer's Strength. himself to the carrion. especially dead
Fischen, 2020: ie give cin easy means, at least de
Kifer anaulure md to fish away with a close-meshed Hanien, wrong
its devastations should indeed be of importance. After Zenker
(Germar's Mag. HL$. 418) had swimmers, with the drinking water
entered the human stomach. already worrying coincidences
causes

Related to the previous ones in its way of life, but with bulbous,
short fillers and holds twice as long diimien feeding tips
here at Egg

the flask water kiifor,
Hydrophilus piceus Lin,
Children of the grissten dent-
see kifer; black,
strongly arched at the top,
vend, below brinnlieh,
short, felty, with a strong,
Roast skewer and wheels. bristles Lobes on the front feet of the minnuchen. Found in all
Leparticularly secure conscience, selwinmt with some effort, particularly
when he wants to go under; cont. like all swimmlifers, the athnumg
because of time zn time to the surface of the water: prepared as assured
becomes, his eggs a kind of little ship,' in which they are on the water
swim. The Kiifer should Wa
eat deeper lights into the body, hence the F

  

chen, d

     

 

  

   

y

   

    

   

 

 

  
  

ren, yourself
cliichen very

usckten and small fish marriage y

  

 

to be healthy. The larvae, which are about 2.5 inches long, should really look delicate,
if very irritable, other Iusects, Schucken, themselves
he accrue, crawl out of the water to replenish. 1 water
hey mn

 

  
 

 

and el
Little F

By vigorously stirring the water on the shore viselion d
Pilanzen it is not selw the Kiifer in number to the Obert
bring and ship 21,

 

   

D. Fast-kister beetles, with rather elongate
tem, sometimes at the same time a bit plaitem Kirper. head pretty
ran in his chest, hearty horns. 1) jumping kifer, Mater (
awi see the legs cinen deuil
protruding, in a corresponding channel. matching

 

  

pin code). ‘Carry on the chest

 

 

shen rapid apparatus, d. bra. come here
tip of the breast, with which the Kiiler laid on the back
up and back on the Bene kau. 68

Larvae wormlike, elongated, almost entire
slender, of hard substance. Three pairs of short legs; head
broad-knit above and below; a small kndspitze nnd the
After (penultimate ring) héulig as a small paragraph znm Nach-
ive serving; yellow, Under the name Drathwurm
now

The seed speed hunter, Hlater segetis Gyll

SB ‘0 F). Verhilinisomissig thick and

strongly arched; radiator and legs brown-

— = —_yellow;_ underside thanksgiving brown; head and

breast black-brown; the yellow-brown covers finely dotted-

streaked with four lighter lingstripes; the whole body with
covered with short, yellowish rows. The pine tree is found throughout the summer on various
those plants too, especially on meadow umbrella flowers
here and there on the cornstalks
Rw The larva, generally described above-
-—~—. ben nnd under the name of the Drathworm
known, especially in Frohjahy and autumn
Worzels of different growths gnaw. In fact: fell
the damage done by the Drathworm in 1845
at Grand-Jonan in Bretague with the wheat,
into the month of April. Among the cereals they
as far as wheat is concerned, then also haber, rye and
u; the leaves of the same (at least this applies
vou ante) turn yellow as a result of the benageus and the
Halm dies. According to news from Sweden, cine
A tiny larva can destroy twenty halves and one often
find four to eight sticks on a square yard. they held
in the grain fields preferably in dry places
len, on the back of the Beetle, and contented themselves during
the fallow with the grass as Unkr. To
Westwood and some of my observations
is the larva
man, but also that of stubble, carrots

 

  

 

    

 

 

 

    

 
   

 

 

 

no growing

   

other not just roots of cereal species
and Gri

Toffelu, Méhreu, lettuce, types of cabbage, even herbaceous and holly

   

 

69

“garden plants,
lettuce plant. This information probably refutes the doubts in fact
Bouchés, which is supposed to be the real food of the
Larvae do not exist in healthy roots, but more
in vegetable matter, amd dice attacks of insect
only occur when the same, in oversized
Lots of people who were forced to live parts of the
tackle plants. But let us be careful of erroneous

   

ie also bored into the stalk of the

 

    

to keep normal; because while inan 2 B. many jumping beetle-
larvae only found in soft wood, I already have them
which seen the fresh vegetable juices on
ce into a freshly germinating acorn

   

sen, cine e.g., wel
drilled a hole. After Bierkander, who fed wireworms
often take five years to develop. ver
pupation in July; the doll was Y, inches long, white with
black eyes, above the eyes with two small brown ones
horns and with two tips on the tail; that
Occurrence of the kifer ficl in August. About the devastation lying in the cornfields
Reports to Sweden, Germany, even the western one
France ahead, and the help of the harvest should already be there
to have gone to zn reasons. Because the vigel likes to eat the Drathwnrm, so em-
one obliges the reworking of the attacked field, where
through which birds can get hold of; that during the fallow
time, by Kutferut keeping all weeds the Drathwiinner
supposed to die of hunger seems doubtful. The dnuclear tendon kitter, Elater obscurus [. (variabilis F.). To the
very similar to the previous ones in size and shape; however chest and blankets still
vbwas more arched, upper and lower side somewhat darker, and the chest piece
as well as densely striped wing-coverts with similar awns. fine,
Karzen deer covered. I met the kifer in May, also at the beginning of July on F
According to Kirby, the larva lives on all kinds of rootlets d

 

 

 
  
 

 

idern and ways. r garden plants. sr recommends
to attract the larvae will take 2 tidten. and often wreaks quite noticeable havoc. i

 

wrraben of potatoes

 

 

70

The salad school cat, Blater sputator F., cin the previous very vahe
standing insect, is called by Kollar because of its destruction: h
succulent lettuce plants. Welehe especially in the spring and summer of vou
of the larva are to be made to wither. the
Larye eat, he says, the root of the salaiplanye down to the knots,
from which the Bkitler develop, as a result of which the fungus naturally
die off, Kiifer from the pupa after v A Herr Scheffer
In Médling, Ofters lost four parts of his lettuce mushrooms. The best thing is to approach the larva with the withered plant or
to see and do in their surroundings. The tawny jumping kifer, Elater murinus L., wide nud
quite plain; brisket a little lumpy at the back; the
whole kerf with graven and brown squamous hairs seekig

2| covers; abdomen red under the wing-coverts; one sees such
from afar at the Kiife, who likes to fly in the sunshine

According to Mr. Heyer's report fithrie cin Kuustgirtner in Liineburg
bitter complaint about the fact that this summer everywhere in field and
Cutter lying around in the forest and then very easily encountered flowers 20
on a rose bed vocal bud stalks close below the flower
bud gnawed and last wilted; that he further
cut off the bark of the pirops. The larva should also survive
The potatoes attracted the attention of the local horticultural association
have attracted. Of the fact that in Giirten the lettuce and cieho
plants near the surface of the soil convinced himself
Mr. Heyer by appearance. We take this news from Ratzeburg's forest insects, where iib
It is not specified how one can be certain about this
ensure that the larvae mentioned above really belong to the murdius and
not so well related to a related jumper,

Westwood has described the larva of murinus as a short md tlacher
ben, than other Elater larvae, (Kriehsou.) come on

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

  

 

 

xx
gene

 

 

   

 

3 in particular
ing you

There are several other relatives
dere is also the larva, which according to the Versicl
u Hohenheim the Ruakelriben

  

  

harms, a wireworm
2) Prachtkifer, Buprestis, Without clear schooling

ing; Color usually metallic: grin, blan or copper

red dn the bark of pear trees one does not step too far

zeluc Libel which no doubt cine Buprestis

(Agrilus) has taken its exit, the hole is in sight

 

 

    

   

 

it

 

connection with a ziekzvektOrmig back and forth, mianeh-

sometimes even at the same time receding gear vischen splint md

Bas An Baiumen, whose bark has been scraped off,

one often notices that earlier such things as-

who came in from both sides with young wood- (3
I, like all his

wallt are. The beetle lays its eggs safely
turned, in cracks or sebuppen of the bark, namely in
initially strong, strong bime as well, uls in all, less
vital. Maybe he'll just go younger voice then
when in June or July they are temporarily affected by large
suffer from heat and are almost dehydrated, or if they are in cinem
have suffered in previous years (save Borkenkéifer). The larva is known to me: long, flat, oline legs. quite smooth, and because it belongs to the subgenus Agrilus,
with double end point. However, have the perfect insect
I still can't find it despite all my attention. It's probably the same whose awe you get between
Bark and wood in Crataegus and maybe in Rowan
finds. One may add the insect to the series of destructive ones
means should be found. Also the honorable Bupre-
stis candens green or binugreen with broad glithendred face
ten blankets, green, black-and-white nath and 2
en on the breastplate, larva with stomp 3
lives. often between bark and sapwood crinkled cherry trees. Thick flat cardboard cavities just below the outermost layer of bark. Beetles in early summer. E. Weichdeeke
gen, multipartite feelh
probably useful. put; extermination:

   

   
  

 
   
 

 

ven St

  

 

     

afer; usually with filamentous
ner and soft wing deck:

      

 

The Lenehtwarm, Seheinwarm, Johmniskiiter, Lampyris noctituca L.
Females almost as well as that living on small snails
Larva, long and flattened, oline wings and coverts, from a —|—
Repeatedly formed by wide screens, with its strong, all-
kamuton loan hein at the end of the lower leily
nehien with long ‘ny unr with a small F
Summer, evenings, especially in damp, damp weather. nike ; ine

         

 

striking. that nvat single Seheiuwiitmer manchurl in the middle of winter
thinks Dic Schueider, Cantharis. Zicwilich plate md long beetles with diin-
new, sharply pointed radiator; float on a bunch of flowers
around as predatory insects, which seize even_ olme need ihves like
and request. Their La are also flat and Jang, with a velvety
File dense and so coated that uur the anterior hilite of the head
remains free; three pairs of not very long legs, These larvae are found in the
winter over night Sieinen nud in the earth; they crawl at fast a-
emerging, mild weather often in large quantities and on the
Selmee hermn; hence their name Schucewuirmer; they also live on
other Iusekten, In the spring they transform into a
Hleisclrothe larva (fusca ohue doubt), which one in April already with
thank eyes finds; in May the kifer. Common black-bodied species are Can-
tharis fusca L, legs and covers gran black,
Head around the red Brnsischild at the front edge
black,

Cautharis rustica case. As well. nav the selwarze Brusisebildfleek in
the middle of the thigh red . Cautharis dispar F., with entirely red thoracic shield and red
I grandchildren

Cantharis obscura F., all greyish-black, on both sides
of the breastplate reddish yellow,

Cantharis melanura F., yellow red, with pointed eyes
“© of the ceilings black; fiss mean,

In 1845, 2 Hohenlcim grain was in the ground by cin
Insect destroyed, only afterwards was the information given to me on this occasion
collected larvae of ciner Cantharis as Missethiterin ciugehiinigte. Certainly
but she had no part in the destruction: accustomed. Warzenkiiter, Malachius. Metallic gritue, fairly wide kifers,
which, if you press them a little, turn red or yellow on the side of the neck
push out blisters; (ammelu often: anf Bluuen hernm, wale
presumably criminal, their larvae, which the clergy are very similar to,
if weih, ohue horny mark sign. but with a horn fork on
end of the tail, is not infrequently found under various tree ridges,
% B. of apple tree. Here they live roughly in the manner of the clergy
Jarvae partly from larvae, partly from their scrapings. en
exactly mubn,
l= Maluchius aeweus L., grin amit duukelrotheu Deekeu. ~4= Malachins bipustulatus £., grin with red-yellow cover tips,

“The Raspberry Kiifer, Dasytes niger Le Scluual with some iim

  

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

   

 

 

 
   

    

    

 

  
  

 

     

 

 

   

 

 

    

 

73

Pronotum, metallic black. Bebart, the kifer is on mimbeerbldthen
in multitude, its 2" long larva with horny head and six legs,
on the back with a dark line and yellow spots, on the tail
avei tips, like to squeak in a ring, is supposed to
consume boden inter der berry. With this, of course, I don't really want to agree that I have a dasytes
niger, the kifer, once found with the bark of an apple tree fob
mild 2). F. lumenkifer, Bee kifer, Clerus. Against the
tip thickened fibers; chest narrowed towards the back
sign; Cover pretty test; partly useful, partly harmful. The Bieneuwolt, Clerus apiarius I, beautiful steel
blue, hairy kifer with red, blue
bind > blue blankets at the end. Man
The perfect insect wins in large amounts of PR
in May, also spiter (Joli 1854) on different
which Blathen, especially the Spierstauden, makes here
is useful in that he can use other tools, e.g. B. the fur
kéifer u. the like, consumed He holds the beetles with his front
on the bones and the manle, and leave nothing fibrous but the hard ones
Cover; in addition, cr also lives on the honey juice of the flowers. It is assured that he has his Kier in the Bieuensticke
both common bees and related genera,
%. B, the mason bee, lay. I once had a larva that
I biclt for that of apiarius, crawling against a wall
found she was 1 flesh red with strong jaws, six
i tip
as

 

   

 

   

   
    

   

 

     

 

 

      

homigen bites and in av
and last half s

   

leaking tail bug,
the bee larvae; she went to me
storage to reason. Since fal
I thought in vain for myself and many beekeepers
a same larva; nobody kav > and me
concluded from this the
adventurer, every year in winter
1853-54 I find again cine Clerns-

    

gross

    

oh years longer

   

te them jedoc! as well as from other, aut wii
hanging with the Wael

   

   

lurve in one of my beehives,

  

fen on the inner edge of the basket in grim -
waste of the bees: she is only 8.5 million, lay, already

 

4

flesh red ; the flat head dark in front, skin burnt yellow, like
also the Ritckenschild, on which two dark ones towards the back
tips drawn siud; Legs light yellowish, like them
slightly woolly, fairly long hairs; the two brothers
terminal tips brown; very 'triige; slowly growing; eats
yom waste dev bees and hides under him; you
fell in the summer of 1854, but is now int autumn
greater than six months ago; that's why I can hardly
believe that they are soust by bee larvae and after
Léw even of honey and wax nither; both touched her
not on. Just as little do I believe that she is a parchment
nice web made; dean related species lie
as a pupa freely in a cavity. [confused with de
cockroach.] On the other hand, according to the analogy, it seems correct that
that pupation before winter or at the latest in the first
Friihjahy successes, and the development of the insect a more-
years is. It would ow w
uenkiifers eu gep! plichlt to avoid the damage caused by him
embroider best
In this regard, it is noted that the larvae are more closely related
Depending on the circumstances, we didn't stay in one place for long
to stay. The presence of the larva is said to be evident
rubbish falling on the backing board [??}. Also the bees should then not be as busy as
voluntary. Lin Nothfall was recommended, the bees through
Raneh to expel the larvae nud possible way
to be able to get hold of their figment, or even the
to bring swarms into a single hive. [All this only
you of the wax have transferred to the beekeeper.] Kifer similar to the previous one, Clerus alvearius F.. something

One should be grissier, even hairier, with a red wing tip
Fithren by iy thulliche way of life in bee-sticks, After émmur
but it occurs only in mason bee nests (Xylocopa muraria); also
is in fact very doubtful about the correctness of the previous statement. The small one with four-jointed feet and strong antennae

 

 

   

   

 

   

 

that the way of life of the
i and would be completed. Man em-

   

, the bees-

 

  

udig you below zt verjtingen, but it is in

 

 

 

 

   

 

usually found in carrion and on flowers, % B. very hiwig ant
Dlithen apple trees, cleres also found in gardens and houses
Russian-like, dark blue Corynetes violaceus F. is said to be in spring
sometimes come across the Speek in the houses

however, be rare. Any means against him as with Speekkiiter. G. Wood borers, Veredili. The higher belongings siimt-
lich not over six million, long. head under breast shield
hidden. The cine genus

1) comb borer beetle, Plilinus; very squishy, ​​at Minn-
little strongly curved feelers, those of the female init |
towards Sigziihuen. . S

Ptilinus pectinicornis L., bolt often in crowds
new houses from the Kichen, maple,
Buehen- and Nussbawmholz out and
flies to the windows, (He was here

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

usually already in the forest or on the —
Ziumerplatz got into the wood.) But he would

Ratzeburg can also be met in Hausgerithen, especially
But he becomes more cunning by drilling through the tree
support alders, aspen, willows and the like. Larva as in the following genus ution
appears to be a two year old. Because one out of the wall
ahornencn insect box, which already existed in Miérz 1850
fer was bored with me a female Plilinus Ende
May 1851 suddenly out. He had to
put the gong of the box in the maple wood as a larva,
for somewhere there was a trace of Kingang in the attacked
to shave boards. ,

It really can be difficult, an easy-to-use tool
to designate against the insect, immediate debarking dev
Rods after felling, especially after filling im
Sonuner will not be without use, The insect shall aneh
Destroy all libraries, right through the gang's paper

 

        

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

boring. 2 nail biter, Anobium. Less wavy and with thread-

ussersicu G

    

icder ver

 

shaped fullers, on these the

Gert, otherwise like

 

the previous genus. Mostly in the wood, that

 

76

not only the larva, but also often the kiifer in long
Bolted in gear, likes to pretend to be dead. Larvae always curved in an arch, with a pale head,
many transverse ridges, which the bark beetle knows
with short hairs, but with three pairs distinct, tibri
gen's little legs. Doll lying in a hollow. The workholazuage beetle, Anobium
striatum olive, strongly deviating in the grisse
corresponding, rather cylindrical. Light brown with

- covered with fine yellow hares. breastplate
very buckling. The meanest, from spring to August in Hiiusern
occurring species, boring out of the wood. A
Destroy the geriithe on the various softer lanb-
wood, walnut, cherry, birch, alder, and, in German
Churches, wooden statues, etc. Also outdoors, e.g.
in sick apple wood, one hits him, besides he pierces
the agricultural tools and even small hand tools,

    

 

 

 

 

 
   

 

 

 

like planes, mammersticle and the like, In June I saw

him 6fiers to the Ziumergerithon in the Begattuug. It

 

so this seems to be the main time of the kiifer,
se» The larva has a light head, brown mouth, three
pair of light legs; in general it is the des
Bohrkiifers, Ptinus, similar, but facing forward
thicker, (apatedhulicher), abdomen more hollow, posterior
leith thinner and more often one sees the brown-red
graze still through. The presence of the insect in wood is usually only
dam notices when already perfect beetles turn out-
left wunten Fluglécher. 's vou drill out-
hey

 

 

 

drilled and the soger
Fillt out of these flights, be
the white kiifers, whether from gnawing larvae
reudes, fine wood flour, which the later generations
of the insect verrith. As a means of protection against
nd and work, Tutti

 

 

 

Above all, Jusekt is
SS Ant:

 

   

piohlen soon Buty

 

put and dry storage of the wood, from welheur
Devices are to be worked. One stabbed in the bark
Wood will always be attacked sooner than one in the
treated in the manner indicated above. image columns,
work etc. Objects of value can yor her
Position a few times with a Qnecksilver sublimate or
solution containing arsenic,

The recommended coating with resolution of green
vitriol in water or white spirit, mixture of alot in the
Polishing of furniture, finally a stain you nutshell absnd
and Alam should be checked by Nenem. tea active
ness as a deterrent

 

  

 

     

 

m without a new exhibition of
Try not to be disputed. That
be helpless to get the La
Destroy, lies on flat hands. Commodities such as tools are not allowed
Jange to be put out of use, at least not line
quite a while in muffled rhymes. once did that
Insect laid its eggs on the wood and the larva itself
developed, further use no longer protects. means of destruction, except in the destruction of the
Boring tools themselves are therefore separate
anawvenden because you can't use the wood d

  

but she is quite wired

 

    

ven in their Ginggen zn

 

 

 

 

ren came without
that it shrinks and tears. For smaller stitch corners
however, this is Dorr

The defiant head, Todtennhr, Anobium pertinae L.
Literally black, with a raised forked line on the |
Ricken of the Brusise picture amd a yellow Fle |
every corner of the same. Pulls when touching the
Filler cin, close your legs like the previous one,
Lowers head and neck and stays with great neck strength
bility in this position when he is needed in the slightest. One mainly considers Anobiun pertinaa as the
Kiifor, who in the holark of rooms a tick, who ciner
Clock dhulich, brought forth, and hence the name 'Todten-
got ubr. » usable without damage. 78

if-
dd. Also
hiler-
lick

rarer than the ve

   

Theh (and him always 1
same he mostly as the more frequent referred to wi
I never mentioned it in German under striatum
handicrafts. Its occurrence at cincr tamencn |
don't let me suppose that he maybe destroyer old tan-
new boards. Of course I caught him another time
my tinner in the middle of a lot of Celtis
wood-crooked Lyctus canaliculatus. .

The Brodbolier, Anobium panicewn L. Verhiiliniss-

slightly wide, also with dots aut
TZ the ceilings. Réthlich brown, fiber and ther
_ covered with rather sarkish yellow hairs. Kiifer and larva live in vegetable objects,
stale bread, rusks; also in a box on the cardboard, where
he followed the paste, or individual wafers. In iiller
Inside he is a real plague for botanists, whom
he often completely corrects their herbaria. (The frass
instead of the Ptlauzen is used here not as in Ptinus for L.
glued to the sheet of paper, but mostly the sheet
with threads.) He is said to be the main destroyer in the root
ahead of the materialists and pharmacists. man vi
also ensures that he breaks the leather binding in libraries
store. But whether he also goes into wood olme need or not
only in dried plant stems and the like, stands there,
since confusion with relatives is possible. in old
Brod is often said to stick larva au larva. Collar shiic from that into that
Yahveszeit meets, larva and nymple and Kiéiter, d
several generations in the year statitinden, This acceptance
but it should still be possible to prove it, because the ver-
wandien seem a much longer Kutwieklingsdaner ai

 

  
    

 

 

 

   

 

     

 

   

 

   

 

Kiiterehen to all

   

     

     

    

 

have. mu
use of the objects, mixing of the
the paste with lead sugar, sublimate or arsenic. Alum,
Aloe and turpentine go far

 

1 recommends against ihu rightly cleanliness mud

  

a. at

 

 

Jlerbarien provides, embedding the insect-free packages in
Canvas embroidery services indicated. I. Bohrkiter, Plinus. Kithler uniform tadentoe
without thickened end segments. head more or less miter
hidden in the breastplate, eyes protruding
Larvae which the Anobium dusserst dulich, (white hor-
Niger head with burning mouth parts.) The common borer, plural for L. Boekkaterahu-
lich, The Méiunchen (Fig.) schmiiler,

 

 

yellow burn; the female eats a lot

 

 

stocky, heavily arched, dark
bramn iit somewhat mixed white- mM
lichen Haarbinder, Uligellos. I love little insects that summer 1nd

Winters as kiifers on privies, platforms and in tins
finds. In order to be alive, it is not content with sele
heat. I saw it in the winter mornings at just three degrees
to the (enchien canvas of my ditlerential thermome-
ters and Jebhatt warm up, so at a time,

 

 

 
 

in which other Kerte have froze. By day the i
very sluggish, active at night in temptations
bare objects, even if they were only dead flies. The kerf, it seems, lays his brat closed
into the fawe wood of hollow churches, but dearer is him
in addition, the bark on dry but dull lying old ones
Wooden or wooden stalks, after a few years of the car:
he should protect himself z. B. in the fibrous bast of:
Canadian poplar, young pine and many woods
other Biume, in Popinamburstengelu, even in the an dev
Lichens sticking to the bark, also in the roots
the pharmacist and especially in the very old dumpy
ireide is cr héulig m find, nud if he's already longer

    

   

 

 

 

and in several generations darian hanst what is often the
Full isl, very easy to get to the test inside
other cemented cores and oval cavities made of solid
Kilt in which the metamorphosis of the insect takes place,

 

80 Incidentally, the larva is also standing, vou the Rundkérui-
live on castings of the corn moth caterpillar. Hue's own
Excesses are very fine, splinter-like and also betray
if its origin: very light. Most dangerous, however, is the keeper for fur goods,
Jusect and Stem Lungs of Stuffed Animals. Self. in
aging libraries exchange ¢

‘Despite their kicinen legs, the larvae are
not for walking on a flat surface cin-
directed, therefore also more than probable,
that they are still quite young through cracks of crate
little ones should sleep, ohue already there as an egg
to have been filed. Jin Aftersummer sticks the
Ptinus larvae of vegetable or animal origin, at their
Eat leftover scrapings into small tomes, in
which she transforms. Dry in the sums
Plants she sticks one side of the bin to the paper. The transformation time of the kerf does not seem to be very
to be true, at the beginning of July I found pupating
spider larvae. In what age group in December
In my herbarium there were larvae, I dare
not to decide. Generation at least one die
Multiplication does not seem to be going on as rapidly as 2
in Anobium paniceum L.

All remedies are effective against the Bolrkéfer
‘The nail-biter are indicated. It is particularly easy
that of catching and destroying the kifer, Uni cin Zimmer
you can free him, uur fenchte canvas, or
still better moistened stalks of mushrooms repeated the night
put fiber in the room and those who sit next to it in the morning
Tap off and kill kiifers. even i
pretty good. The Plinus ercuatus B. filet, which is only half red in size and much more spherical
ciue of the previous one's abntiche way of life. Ptinus scotias FP. is well built. Brown gliinzeud, Schr ku-

gelatinous completely smooth on the body, wing-coverts grown together; With

hnarigen Fiiblero and Biissen. Should iu Th zen aueh sometimes

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 winter succeeds

 

  

 

 

aun)

   

 

81

to reside in altom Hen. [eh, on the other hand, always find the stoner in
zal] in the manners of an alien barracks. The imperial borer Pinus émperialis F, Gran, on the Riteken
burned, breastplate with a fairly strong Hecker. On the wing +

_ cover two angular grane fleeken, which together form an Avi 1
form a double eagle sign. The Kiifer is not rare from the beginning of May when it develops
ain Holze, Husern ete In the summer of 1850, the kifer only started creeping up on me
fear off; I found him myself at the end of September in the Coon as
Doll and as a Kifer ready to crawl. ‘You can also meet the larvae all over the Jalir fiber, not just, as it seems,
in all kinds of plum wood, but mainly in the rind of different ones
strong Binme, 2. B. the walnut. Likewise in Gingen, which is half in the
bark and sapwood, in tree stumps of birch, willow, aka
zi. Destroyer against the certainly never very harmful insect like
at Plinus fur. L Club-hérnige Kifer (but make sure Silpha), with in
usually short, at the end a thick one, across the axis
leafy, button-bearing feelers. Very different
Way of life, partly useful. partly harmful core. The following can be stated as being of little use:

The Deathgrippers, Necrophorus. The commonest types are sehwara
with yellow bands on the Beekens

Necrophorus vespillo L. (league) has yellow filler club and crooked tendons
of the hind legs, the somewhat smaller mortuorum F. black
Club and straight rails, they smell far away: <—
ferming dead animals such as moles, mice, etc. etc., \
fly at them with a loud hum and dig into the ground, 10
therein to create their brood, they particularly suit the farmer. often
around the eyes, so they got a gill spot here. With the
death-grippers usually in the company of mouse-kiifers,
mestes murinus L,, white below, black above, with Gran durehe
works. \

1) The carrion beetles. pha. With Fitter so Jang than that
Brisket and only slightly thickened towards the tip. The species st
way of life too

   

 

 

  

   
  

   

seem quite different
their. en one meets at the carcass, so-
probably larvae as kiifers, e.g. in the company of dead
over the silpha sinuata F.; the others uithren themselves vou
Every pit, finally the approach of larvae seems

nora

    

   

 

Ker, the little enemies. 6

 

and beetles of a few others to be thoroughly examined first-
Merely bribing the species in Vegetabilicn you are
thus partly useful, partly harmful. According to the collar, the Silpha quadripunctata L. (black with yellow
bordered Benstschild and four black spots on the yellow ones
— ia Deeken) as larvae in the nests of the processional
ranpen, In fact I too found ign June 1845 when I
me quite erimere, both dolls and still very weak kifer under
the moss of a church forest. where procession nests have been present
liked, The kifer can be found on Binmen from April onwards and knocks
ilm often in crowds of blossoming apple bitumen, where he quite well, how
mm claimed to prey on other small insects chew

The black carrion skiifer, Silpha atrata L. As before

numerous relatives all black, with
see strongly curved edge of the Fligel
cover, three ling-ribs on each wing-

cover, wrinkled punctured in between. The meanest kind. Hibernates under stones or moss, at the foot of, Biu-
men and even not infrequently on the same, in cracks under
the bark, or even in the ground. Come in April
out of his hiding place. All summer long
But especially at the end of May the beetle is growing in all fields
around. He cunning when

 

 

  

 

wu ihu up, not uur qus yours
oozing juice, soudern also from the mouth
a grin apparently from freshly eaten vegetables
resulting. In addition, it has long been known that he
ath of carrion lives. He should put his kier an inch deep in the
lay the earth, the children round, be white, wud naeli fourteen
days when larvae emerge. The larvae, like me in the second Milfie
Mai's observed, are soft and white below the breast,
else! all black, the twelve shields from which they
stand, partly on the body
margin lobed, uelinen from head
at at breadth towards the rear
close, but narrow down
again very against the anus. ilinter body a si

 

  

 

  

 

83

Fihler consisting of three long ghederm. Next to them
six little bugs. Six fairly short spiny ones, an
the crab's cringing legs. The tubular anus
dieneud as a follower, - the larva must be in large quantities
be present on the fields is very much alive and
likes to try to get away from her when you approach her, man
nd in every weather. All day
eating, she grows extraordinarily quickly and reaches:

   

   

e also ui

 

itber
in

 

four times their original ones in the last few days
Size. She hides several times and so suddenly that she
before hatching not even, as usual, knuckle
celt. Immediately after hatching, the larva appears
white with brown pines, but an hour later is sic
look black again like before,

In captivity she perished several times. That's why I wanted to know more about her way of life
rid of others, she shall hide herself at night,
but by day their food, nidulich todiem flesh after-
walk. should be served with bread soaked in cinnamon, snails, etc. be able to be ernilyt, molt four times, finally fairly
deep in the earth into a white, strangely
criminal doll transformu, whose head iamter the
Neck shield back wii

 

 

 

 

  

    

horses
s is bent, at the side of each ring
n lyes fox red Hnar has, like four on the front
edge of the pronotum. She is said to be very lively nude
thrash about at the Berihrang, after ten days,
At the beginning of September, the Kiifer appear. teh
‘must remark that in the year 1851 on 1. August one
just crawled out kifer still with crib-like wings
found. We see several geuverations a year
cni stand, which is also the case with Gefr
The larva grows
Interesting bit
interpret this
there

 

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

sweetness and the rapid
becomes liirlich. ig zi life story and
s insect is supplied by observing,
the larva in the Runkelribbenfelder, iirigeus also
here usually underground, hidden authilt, however

  

 

  

   

 

84

when they come out, by eating the gang boys
Large destructions reported. 2) The Shine Kidula, Kicine Kifer. fillers with

tripartite flat mace. Body broad and flat. larvae little known, with before; ktem hor-
small head, small legs. and one as a follower before
kicking igen anus and two-handed last posterior
life ring. They live under construction

feludem juice on bitumen or in manure. Nitidula bipustulata L. Matisehwars, Ricken more or less
Beiue rustfar Each Fiiieldeeke in the middle with a
in a red spot. ;

Not found on dead animals in the field, but should
occur at the same time on flowers and in fatty goods, ham (dic
larva also in the puffball). I doubt that he is here often. Vali a cool place for storage, cleanliness and time
Consumption of the F « at salted but careful evenly
"Treatment" will certainly help against the hangover. In an emergency, a tightly woven wrap or a sack can be used
perform safe services while store-rooms bear fruit over water:
are, since the Kiifer ieeight flies

' > The repsy luster, Nitidula aenca FP. Pretty square. Metallic green shiny. = legs reddish brown. Annotation. The same

Examples anit: economical Puuktirang and Be-
dula

 

    

cae
>

  

 

   

uden, also to austrian

 

    

  

  
 

 

    
 
 

      

   

 

nit, this occurring

     

 

blue green
hair on the back and the back of the legs
viridescens I, This distinction, however, appears
to have value by having cenea and viridescens in
y mixture amit cinander occur. Since the perfect kert already in the first year of Prith
on a lot of flowers, plum flowers, composites and
the like appears, it is anzamelunen that at least
aptly, as kifer hibernates. but in large quantities,
often in the hundreds on Kiner Pilanze, cr gathers furiously
flowering Reps and similar cruciferous plants. As soon as the flowers dim, he's there and eats
into these, and the standard fiends Qvehl them too

    

incl

   

   
     

       

 

   

 

85

Blunenblitter itself) to consume. Such ausyetressene
Flowers do not open and dry up, As long as they
Blithe then, he is there and flies from an iltern
Blossom zn a jimmern, from the early blooming fields
the spit flowering jiber. By autumn he will be one of the
common flower insects, but do not want to succumb to them
great number that it could become as harmful as im
springling. Recently he is said to have destroyed entire fields
to have. The kiifer is very lively in warm weather,
lanft and flies fast and smoothly, if you put it on the
hand, though he draws his legs a moment,
runs or flies away quickly, you see
the kifer sel often in the Begaltang. Unfortunately, however
the Keuntuisse, however, still blessed his continued fear

The larva is said to be after the eggs in the rep wartula
live and you eat so well in the fall that the reps
pilanzen die off (supplement to the Berlinische Nachrichten
of state affairs and matters of law, v. 20 July 1839, no. £67),
but which is very unlikely and probably due to
nlit or even with
larvae or other larvae that have not yet been examined in detail
connected dirtie. According to others, she eats the young
pods ans what seems incredible again and from ci
Confused with a Rhynchaenus or the Rhynchaenus
or ciner Aweilliiglermade herrtthren kouut
Remark on the way of life of the

 

 
  

    

   

 

 

 

 

 

   

   

 

Tung with the Reps Riddleknife be

 

 

 

   

 

You general

 

itidula larvae let us assume that the vou aenea still

ar not recognized, the larva not at all on or in the reps:

   

 

hen insect

  

live, rather just the kifer as a frequent bli
occur on it. the Ze

circulation certain

 

trong of the insect has allyemeinen at its

its difficulty. One assures it

  

        

disappear 6flers aut' i

   

ven night frost. [2 certainly mur bis
kelirk |. Good and quickly dismissed
The kifer doesn't damage Plauen as easily as that
it becomes understandable that the reps with Drilikultur less

 

the warm wipe

 

 

 

86

 

suffers than with wide-wine seed. water
Substances will be of little value. Only experience has to decide whether it is possible
and indeed worthwhile tapping the kiifer or
skimming and destroying, wn so more than after
Above multiple confusions with other Ker-
have taken place. Ips 4 pustulata £. 4—G6 Mill, long, cantilever, elongated, fla-
Pretty, generally lustrous, black pine tree with four red spots
on the wing covers, which is hunfig, as well as its larva under the
Bark of diseased cherry trees fiudet. The rather flat larva, their all-
common form reminiscent of the clergy, flat, with flat, peeh-
yellow head and naked hild. three pairs of short legs. on the twelfth
Ring is one of two blunt or rather intertwined branches
captivating fork. Body extremely jeler-like. without meaning,

3) Cuticles, Dermestes. Eagerly in front and behind
blunt kifers, strongly arched at the top, with short fillers
this i round (not flat) tripartite fithler club. I'm bare. The spotted kifer, Dermestes lardarius L. Pine light brown c

width, across the root of the wing
SSD vs: running bandage, followed by three
black dots stand. The Kiifer already develops at the end of September
Doll and also crawls when it's warm autumn
tempted, still in the houses umber. Usually though
he postpones his activity to the coming spring. Then, and indeed already in the first days of April, see
to run him over in number in and at housery, er
searches 2u_ since
it smoked or not. You can find it on the bacon,
Bladders from 'Thicren, stuffed bows, especially from
Vogelu with young feathers still covered with blood; also in fur
waren, every biche

iit smelling

 

   

   

 

  
 

    

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 

    

 

food dry meat of every kind,

 

bound together with collections of insects
ten. Is-now however not to
Kiifer himself the attached objects,
ht you are, eats and thus

 

should he desolate
lie that de
Mn

 

   

   

especially if they still

    

 

87

destroyed. or spoiled, the one brought on by the larva
directional damage far more significant. Already trith iu: summer
uimullich the larva laid as Ki around May has cine
funnel grisse. It's almost twice as long as that
Kiifer, sirated, tapered backwards, head and hindquarters
brown; underside white; everywhere iit bramnen long Hi
niger head, three pairs of short legs, aut dem

 

 

       

ren busy, hey
last ring two horn hooks and one on the anus as after-
pusher serving diligence This uncommonly voracious
Larva scrape at Kiirschnern wad tanners on trowels and Ma
th, especially if the latter are bold, e.g. B. the sea
skins, all hair w In like manner we find thy
larval appendages of animals. uh

 

 

Here they should even, in
large number available,
mad if you don't
stirt, flesh grew cartilage =

eat up to the bones. You beware dfiers and
leave behind a very corpse, crooked, brown
ringed, hiniea provided with the two hooks, in front
aut of the doe open bellows showing the presence of the larva
borrows verrith. In August to September the larva
thicker, shorter, hairless, She looks deep between the
hair e.g. B. a fur, so that the front part of Iusekis
is cleared out, and so there is a connection. the
The doll only looks out of the face with the wide front part
larval skin burst out. She is white, by the way, on II
body with burning cattle and stirs
rump. At the end of September, the kifer ripens
hant towards the back so that aman glanben |
come straight from the la

 

 

 

  

 

   

ho with that
ie puppeu-
jnnte, he
even emerge. With the
Hind part seeping in the larval and pupal skin, ve
he stays for a long time. We recommend against the spotting! tion of the opposite

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ifer that is too close
inde dry well before Alem,
attacked areas, e.g. 8. am speek to rub slark with salt,

 

 

 

88

Bacon and scallions but wrapped tightly in dry chicken
pack. Wormwood should be of little use. Since the kifer is quite large, a good deal can be
seliluss already have a great effect, with natural-historical pre-
ready that shouldn't eing
— Poisoning, withrend camphor, turpentine, spic
and similar certainly of little use. Der Pelzkiiter, Kirschner, Dermestes pellio L.
Almost all black with a white dot
ant each wing cover. The Kiifer spends the winter in Hanser. Thieves-
gating and breeding is in May. At that time you will find him
you owe a lot of leaves. The stoner causes great destruction
ments in fur
Animals are not properly provided with protective studs. Woolen clothes and tanned skins are also very important to him.
a way of life, however, exist

 

 

 

 

 

can be lost
'1, alo

    

  

     

   

 

   

aguzinen and many muscen we expelled;

 

thrown Regarding ant
I still know vicle [rrthiimer. Decisively wrong is e.g. B. that
L to arrive, boxes and
pierce the wooden box. I even doubt that
the weeper as such overbuilds in the destruction of large ones
take sympathy. I always found him on flowers, especially
umbel-shaped, often in hundreds on the same spiraeus
is very harmless on the windows of older houses in which
probably the larva had found enough food. doubted
he his Kier between the columns
Rather, he becomes like other insects

 

he, un to Pelawaar

 

      

   

 

 

 

also seems that
foot pads leg
lay his Kier directly on cleats who are able to
young larvae zn emiihven. The larvae. nnge easily recognizable, are towards the front

thickest, have three pairs

iyo short legs, large bristly

head, as well as the whole core

   

 

per is covered with burnt yellow Borsieu, and cinen behind
long, yellow-brown, loose hair pin. The larva rolls
likes to bang his head against his chest and walk backwards. sic

 

89
is supposed to go through only four breedings and probably
transform in August, the larva preferably has one
to ascribe the devastation, To the gnawed furs
the hair falls out in clumps, where the larva lives,
one finds the larvae that grow on the objects

 

   

lying and easily blown away. Geucration cin-year-old. The doll touches the larval skin
not from, and thus the beetle seems nmeditelbar from the
larva to arise:

Since the larva is very mobile, it easily crawls away
and comes out of his crooked corner again, so must
one carefully protects the objects protected from their attacks
monitor. Cleanliness, frequent brushing, use of the
Fur goods, hanging out in the sun or in an always-in
Use Thire guarding, protect against the beetle that
kénute put his arms on it, she knows calmly in ciner
lie corner. Certainly there is no brood in them yet, so
protects ancl) chin bandages in glued little packets, or unwiekel
with linen bags. Stuffed birds become unique
and all with the well-known Arscnik ropes. is

    

 

 

 

 

  

 

the insect already in Pelawaaren u. etc., they must
aired, 'Meissig

 

truncated, or where this
in a drying room, a bra

not to
t- or Baekolen etc. to be brought. The heat here is allowed to be about 45° R.
not overpower if the colors of the objects are different
should not suffer want. In addition, suffocation is recommended
of the larvae through
objects whose colors can become harmful. wwefeldampt, which, however, especially in humid

> As a kifer, the insect can easily be found in large numbers

 

destroys as there are crowds on Spirien-
bleed (col. chamaedryfolia) in the gardens. here
I banged off Kinmal forty Kiers in my catch screen. Daw the yerwandie close in shape, but a little small
grinning, with reddish-yellow legs and black eyesc
Muifkiiferchen, Dermestes fumatus [.. wit its also black-eyed
but otherwise rust-yellow variety, D. tonentosus F
especially in May, due to blackberry, raspberry, spiracen, tranbencherry

   

   

Here. bee

 

that's in the summer

 

  

 

90

and other Blithe hits and I'm already big holes
eat in raspberry flower buds, as the authors saw it as a destroyer
of raspberries and blackberries should not be mentioned in houses
rare and devastating fur goods in England. I don't know
right what to think of this statement. Are the ‘very
larvae which are most common, which the raspberries under-
hollow, really from this animal marriage, it would probably not be for furs
to fear; also the kifer, who otherwise lives with the Authrenes, may
seldom go from flowers to fur because of feeding. Dermestes domesticus L. (Bostrichus domesticus Aut.) just pierced
Wood in the forest, ie in the Hiseru, therefore also belongs here, but
only 2 the Forstiusekten. 4) Flower weevil, Anthrenus. small, short, squat,
Ruudliche, but somewhat flat on the back with small
Squirrel covered pineapples. Her head tilted back
pulled, filler short. pronotum dure a rag that
Covering shields, thin legs. If you touch her, like this
pull back all extremities in joints,

Short, flat-topped larvae with a small, densely hairy
tem head, three pairs of short feet; all the rings of the Kirper
with leather-like, band-shaped back rail. Admittedly
all with spiky hair, but this one is longer
towards the back, mostly with a real broom, by the way
to form On the other hand, three on each side of the abdominal cude
crooked hairbrushes. development wo! one year, though
ana deu all winter itber larvae on Biihuen and others. to del. Orient finds. Platat when mated to the pupa in May to June
the skin of the larva along its whole length on the ri

      

 

 

 

  

 

  

 

 

en,

   

and the doll gets stuck there, just like afterwards
some time the kifer. These mainly from flowering juices
live. But recently I found an Authrenus hirtus L., cine

 

gnawing doll skin which was hanging on a raspberry leaf. The common leaf weevil, Anthrenus serophulariae BP. Gray below, black above, gray and red spotted, Konnst
en, especially fruit trees

1, wk

 

from April onwards frequently on a lot

 

bltithen, roses cite. in front. Frequently also in the houses
he by destroying fur, clothing, animal

 

ok
ke be very crafty in kind, and even leather and
should tackle dried plants. The human larva in front of which collectors of natural history
must be careful, is usually found on the

Boden vou Kannnern, where she finds todic flies, and you
Where from you sic

 

     

gladly also in the room. she has
1 black hair,
of the following kind in the form dhulich. The cabinet maker, Anthrenus museorum L.

Eight-limbed antennae with two-limbed club AD
Unien gran, above dark brown with three indistinct

pale, garish yellow bands on the ceilings. Kbentalls but even more frequently on the plum tree
blooming and especially meadow umbrella blooming. -Way of life
as in the previous one; only more dangerous, whatever
the name somewhat signifies

The larva with red-brown, rather short and thin
hair. Your verwii sticks are

 

long, iibe

 

t however of those

   

  

   

 

 

    

terrible. At Degeer ain gnawed. e
they even healings in horn, 7
However, the statement appears. of the same author that she ate herself through wooden boxes. Lid deer eat to dead insects and the like. to er-
enough, civeilelhatt. You can find them all year round and especially

   

   

 

Winter. In May or early June she changes into
cine ciférmige, rear cone ge; slightly flat, yellowish,
few days, in June, in that
our generation. 3

 

n

 

brew

   

imgige doll, after

 

Kiiferchen. Usually a

Degeer has beobi
monen is haunted. Erichsou distinguishes between the smaller ones
Species with five-membered feelers and narrowed, club-shaped terminal
member, 1.7—3 million long, Mau finds them in mixed misery with the previous one
and just as often on the flowers. In the way of life they are certain
not different. Also Anthrenus Pimpineltae F, (dark above with broad,
white band in front over the wings, especially on parapets) and

 

 

fet that the larva also from Ichnen-

 

 

igen Cine further no

      

 

 

also inr

 

92

 

rare
gel cover, al

(above dark yellow with three whitish wavy lines over the plt
Kiifer in abundance on spirae) are said to be found in the herbaria
the pens, but in a far more subordinate degree than the previous one. Middle
against the flowering kifer as in the bacon and fur kifer. 9 K. As muggy kid we have hi
“Sees the Rebenschucider, Lethrus cephalotes F., aufautih-
ren, in which the little Félhornk6lbcheu from in cinander
inserted cups. He reminds through his worm
and color at the same time to the deer kief and the dung kief,
to the latter especially the female,
Only the miinmchen is wearing the bottom
each of the crooked, internally
_” strong jaws notched a large one
crooked tooth directed towards nnaten. eastern Europe, in
e.g. B. at Olen, and at home in Russia. his residential
id particularly dry, sudsy areas, and he helps
enem crap and mm the roots endure-
a in the style of crickets le-
uehen should hénlig am Kingang
1 minute cifersiieh-
let the kitter

 

     

 

 

   

    
 

 

   

 
    

 

yarn,
place 5
I here in troe
the vegetables in pairs
bend, in Léchern aut. the Héhle sit and le
get term Hiindel. erichson bi
during the year Gr
It is also a fact that in the vineyards he
bite the jimigen bosoms or kuospen sensitive scha-
Also will ve repeated the
ris into his cave in the ground. an advantage of his own earnings or
» If it happens, it won't happen
ere news from the area

rn

 

   

   

    
 

 

  

nt miif ande

    

 
  
  

   
 
  

al

   

     

 

    

iweave. von Ofen I owe the skillfulness of one of my f
Zuhirer, Horr Meyer. The Tusekt, he says, will come, oh-
which it spent the winter in the earth, in the Frahjahe
with the first rays of the sun on the vine
succumbs. The whole Weingarien is then covered with very
Help lights from the size of a shotgun ball soon tind
reels soon left going into the ground. Into these lights

 

 

   

     

 

93,

flattened the beetles with uncommon swiftness
they notice a noise. It is, ohue the vine

ness to whom

 

mm damage, hard to dig after them, the boy
Kiifer [probably meaning the larva] eats like that
old. You can in the morning at nine and eleven o'clock, after-
out of the ground at three o'clock in the afternoon, crawling quickly to the
up the vines and cut off the grapes. In the rain-
don't let the weather show you. After frequent rain
weather, the insect may have disappeared without a trace. Means of extermination and pre-construction can only from still
closer acquaintance with the vine cutter's habit
emerge. L. Blaitterhérnige Finfglicderer. antennae flaky
as in Maikiif y

_ At this point we must not fail to mention the very numerous arias of dung cows, Scarabacus, which we like everywhere in the mountains
in the plane, zn 'thousands in all arias thi dxkremente, yes
some small species even in rotten plant remains, 2. B. Cabbage stalks tin
the. They are of very different colors, usually black, brown
or red, smooth, not infrequently have ridges on the head or chest
sign. the commonest, of horse dung, is the big one, in the evening at
good knowledge from Fribling to November
Rossskiifer, Scarabacus stercorarius L. (Fig.) The dung diggers dig under the
Put dung in the ground, put dung in it
and also lay off their brood, Tespecially the one in| father
Scarabacus fairly common in some areas
typhocus L. fills in steppe regions through its
perforator made freely_in the earth. he —
creates in the sheep manure. The Agricultural Bee
asked, eat them
create a part de:

The Maikifer, grub, Melolontha culgaris B., han-
neton, ver blanc, bede
exercise. At most the Vavicetiit should
with a brown or red breastplate
be on stage, it's hard to believe
» accidentally, but as a consequence
circumstances arise. The Miamchen des Maikéifers and s

     

 

 

   

 

  

 

dear ex

 

 

  

   
  

 

   

 

 

  

 

ung of the dung kief is not fixed yet
of the thing, otherscits

   

nen ‘The

   

same in the ground. no description

 

   
    

cht re jusscrer

‘here

  

lich that they 1

   

 

4

  

Relatives is characterized by much larger Fihlh
in front of the woman. The Maikiifer seems to be distributed almost all over Enropa
mm be He is known to come at the end of April, May, and? ever
depending on the circumstances also at the beginning of June, sometimes even as late as
in July for provision, in the mountains the flight takes place naturally
a little more flat than in the milder plains, because
ng there not so early, maybe also because
above all the average annual weather that is rougher
Insect, which takes a number of years to develop
needs, is less favorable. So the Maikéfertlug stopped in
1847 in Hohenheim, the usual time
on the other hand in the Seeburger Thal (above Urach) and to Crails-
home, d. H. at a mountain height where the apple trees in the
Blossom at most twelve days later, in July. energy

 

 

   

        

 

 

 

The flights are also delayed because of that
Kii released in May
leave again
in autumn May kiifer fly in large numbers, and explained
this results from the hasty development of the insckis, that
only in the spring of the following year did hétie come into existence
inen should. — So the pineapples usually appear in ‘May. They swarm, especially on long evenings,
probably also at hot midday, then

 

him because of inclement weather

 

  
  

echen, Man assures that sometimes too

 

 

 

 

About less haphazard

and more about the Biénme on which they are Nahrang
search. The colder the weather, the fewer they are
gan flight inclined; in the heat they fly after one
Little ones preparing to fly away with their wings. — One
Hi

 

nptet, the Maikiifer is not in the sand, anf' big

 

 

 

to fly distances; The Maikiiferjahye are thus always
local. All

limited, and v. B. those on Bodensce and di

  

    

ngs are the flies behind through mountain ridges

 

on the other hand
of the Alb often do not mix. Demoeh pull the May
Kiifer very often preferably a certain area m. So
A few years ago they threw themselves on a part of the
Stutigart vineyards. Also known:

 

   

fe one is zn Lyon im

95
Year 1841 about the fact that the kifer flew over dic Sadne and themselves
moved en masse to the vineyards around Maeou. At any one time you meet a lot of kids in the area
genus, although they are the same primarily in warmer climates
weather conditions. Then they can only do it with difficulty
to separate from each other. The maykiifer is extremely gluttonous and goes the
most diverse growths; except many forest bees,
among which even lark, apple, and especially plum
genbiume, on which often not a leaf is spared. remain;
the same is true of the vine, the tame chestnut, the
walnut and rosewood. The leather blade d
he doesn't attack trees at all. Ratzeburg assures
to have that the Ké

 

 

 

    

 

   

s pear
heard
fer in an area without Biéiume den
Reps ate completely bare. I too saw il when
not even in devastating quantities that consume Repsbliithe. Where the kifer has eaten, it leaves its dark
grimacing, often disgustingly wet feces. Soon after the
genus, the females are looking for a place to deposit the
kid a loose, dry soil is what they prefer here
sten, For this reason, people often overhear in areas
Lime or marl soils exceptionally it over Maikiiter wise. Sandbéden will probably do the same. Precisely because these soils are at the same time the driest,
The plants damaged in the root system attack each other

 

 

 

 

 

   
 

damage
becomes all the greater in its consequences. The Maikii
prefers to nest its brood in an open ground, e.g
vegetable jars, than in one sown with grass; rather how
one betrays, in completely bare ones than in ones covered with moss
or covered with foliage; nevertheless one finds him
possibly in all of these places. Whether the given circumstances are sufficient - explain
ren when he inget for winter seeds
we put it another way, because Ratzebt
den Frass under analog ver

less to recover, mid the maykiifer served

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

is lich, let

 

has a mean-

 

 

‘ilinissen, namely under

 

96

 

the closest bite of blueberries and blueberries
found. .
The female digs, one assures, a four to eight
inch deep hole, about awélf to thirty kier in it
to lay climp marriages, and repeats this act
other places. Ratzebnrg doubts that the Kier up to ant
be laid a foot deep. On the whole, the Kifer
lay about forty children. After four to six weeks
see the Lirvehen or grubs from the eggs. In the first year they are very small, up to nine lines
long and keep sociable together, In the twentieth year
should they smash each other, 1d goes into third
it apart in all directions, and
». The latter hangs
your

 

 

any lower or higher
by the way, shrug off the weather,
she great drought md Kile the soil
avoid superficial. is unlikely
in be

  

   

 

since a certain rule hi

 

that after the days:
watch. One betrays one thing¢
fasting long in the earth, on the other hand their main food
consists of mold and animal dung parts, wid sic
only go to Pllanzenworzeli in the absence of the latter. But there is usually some huns cut in the ground,
which can serve them for food, and it is thus of
an actual fast here probably kau the speech. Further
don't seem to be the main
natural food of the angel can be considered to con-
because why would he then eat more than his thumb
Roots of fiefs that stand in a forest grass place,
where there is no lack of mold, and secondly the thin
Concerning judgment, the analogy would give us
opposite view, since the Maikiifer the Mistkii-
fi
true But these live from vegetable food in the
Inside of hollow trees, or in tan, The Said

 

8, the larvae can months

  

   

 

 

  

n is certainly less close than the Trichius ind Geo-

97

muolge you had so anamehine

 

that the Eugerling
May you live in a vegetal-munosal earth,
however, and especially in old age, very much
gladly vou plant roots uiilye. That the thicric things
promotes its growth in the soil is probable; it
however, it remains to be investigated whether the effect of
the same is an indirect or direct one. The tracks of the grub feeding on roots are
usually not very difficult to recognize, even if you look at the
larva can no longer be found in the area. she eats
usually at the root up to the rootstock, so
that one does not find the root branches in the ground while
the mouse usually only in one place, be it over, sci it
Eat the mushrooms under the ground, Of course come
on very grassy, ​​you mise all through chosen

 

   

 

  

 

 

   

 

ground fill before, where also the weaker roots appear

 

have been tugged, Ratveburg assures that in any case

 

the Engerlingtrass differed from the damage caused by Méinse

will

 

ime that the zithne of the fugue: fibers au

 

 

leave the eaten parts hanging. I want that
not denying it, but I have already observed

respect, whose destruction I decide to the Engerling 2u-

 

rub, but on which as little as with lousy food
As the only pass-
now in such cases the par-
wise hedges of mouse-tooth marks in places where mu quite
little was said. How strong the pull of the
are small, it follows that they are already tree
stitizen are said to have eaten away with the pubic warts, and
that

   

anyway

 

scue fasc

 

 

of Kemnizei

 

 

they, if you hold your finger towards them, sensitive
pub, your favorite food is lettuce, cabbage, beets,
Beans, Hant', Flax, Cereals, Strawberry Root u. General
chy they léchern the potatoes through that
ideal field
that the cutter has the

is known, as s

 

 

she nibbled onions

 

+ that often whole Plitze in Ge
so basically beti

 

grain remains in dev hand. The grassy ground becomes light because of them
Nérdhinger, the Little Enemies, 7

 

98,

 

selien completely entertained and by the Sonvenhi
burns. ;

The larva appears every year ci
mow and go deeper on this occasion see
cine Héhlug to put on, and after four to six weeks
again with new voracity against the surface
come. At the end of the fourth summer she goes 2 bis
34 feet deep to 'pupate'. The relatives
to the doll is to take place in mid-August wd September. *
Anything is not uncommonly found at Stirzen, der Aecker
in late autumn the freshly developed Kifer, Ratzeburg
observed them also at the beginning of August and part of this one
early transformation from that sometimes still in the fall
Kifer appear. According to others, one finds
growing larvae even in October. From the soon to
the rickety soon appear cardboard lying on its head
after four to eight weeks a pale, weak ki
usually stays there until spring. From February
on he works see in the Hoh
only seels up to eight inches below the upper part, HKindividual
are expected to come out in winter. the tightest
Soil, even that of a trodden footpath, prevents ilu
not to dig through. He then leaves a hole
that one believes to have been hit with a stick. Near Ratzeburg, the Maikéfer would have a four-year-old
Generation, woe to the episode observed in sickness
Founded in May 1805, 1809, 1813, 1817. Other,
bes ni and Swiss take one for the rule
three siblings as
Exceptions, which they keep from lack of food

». Kollar speaks of fini'
hsjithriger. —-
ring of the hall

ve’ Hiiu tung durelan-

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

     

   

 

in March, they say, he is

   

 

   

    

    
 
 

fray

 

 

ration and look at you

   

of the larval period

 

yes at Spitlingen from se

     

wiire sely za witn-

 

The more distant car
See, Extraordinary circumstances are of course more likely
Reason that four years, among other things, a strong Maiké
fer year few Maykiifer

 

to shine, and against dureh

 

 

99

 

ing conditions chi subordinate Klug the
heard. Above-
hye full, half, third

best
gin a nencu episode of Maikiifer
this one has when addressing the J
to distinguish partial syllables. Preventative' against the may beetle. Umm the May
Prefer pine eating, one recommends on a small scale, Biiume
dusted with lime dust, because the pine tree determined
not easy to do. It is clear, by the way, that every rain
makes Nevem's operation necessary. » Number of remedies proposed
wn the kiif n laying its eggs on the fields
a prevent proves the inadequacy of the individual. On light soil one should avoid marl, street dirt, pond
and

   

  

 

   

 

the big

 

  

         

 

apply mud, which is spread evenly
when the fishing season is over
but the initial amounts are pretty high, wm the
to really hold off Maikiifer. That gypsum helps Niehis is
understandable. Crushed coal ip sufficient quantity aul
to drive, mn a mixture fil the earth vorzimelunen
(Kriiniiz), méchie héulig agriculturally not za right. be ready and kosepiclig. One becomes about the same
of the burning substances we say: their effect
is admittedly partly favorable to the vegetation. This
but probably only when they started against you
Maikdfer be ineffective zn. If poured over with liquid manure
of sure success, what is also achieved, so
this will probably be the best way. winter seeds should
as noted above, not laying the eggs. U.N-

 

   

  

 

 

 

 

and therefore means of protection here tiber

 

vorfe! be casual. dav

nutrient substances essential for the food of the May kief

* For the sake of oddness, it should be noted here that
that in 1479 the grubs in a corporate monitorio's
ecclesiastical law were cited towards Lansumne, although this thon a de-
fensor from Freiburg, but she herself after the exact deduction
both parties and mature consideration quite seriously under the spell
that, $. Mich, Stetiler's Selweizer Chronicle p. 278 n.

 
      

 

 

 

100

 

should contribute, especially in the vineyards vou
excessive stable fertilization discouraged watering
Flight time is of course an excellent tool. spellbound
school three to yier inches high foliage and needles anfzn-
piling up is without certain effect. In need one has
to plant the threatened little trees, with all cultivars
species, row sowing or planting is more dangerous than kinze
planting, because the grub with ease in the ranks
from one plant to another. Intermediate rows of
Strawberries and lettuce can of course serve as drains,
but only want to be practical in Girten. Means of extermination, The vitality of the Mailkiifer
is awfully big, not just like the beetle, but also
the larv strong frost cannot zn the ki
tédten, In the year 1834 the red turf was so
burns so that they can be detached with the greatest ease
could fen. Underneath, however, the larvae were safe:
Long chicks, by the way, are said to kill larvae and popps. when you lie wet. Soticl is quite certain that sic so
well as their vermin, the larvae of Trichius, oline 2
eren kénucn,

 

   

   

 

   

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

   

Gronde to go, in the harsh winter
that they are easily broken. It was believed to destroy floods
the grubs dwelling in the fiberiluted laude. the

80 ge

   

  

   

 

Erfalwangen in Germany as well as on the banks of the
Sadne have taught the opposite. Za is amazed
also not in fact, because e.g. B. Borkenk
to be blinded under the bark of flown wood, w

  

ferlarvae, dic
Jen

 

 

through weeks of slacking of the wood on the Wa
not killed. The M:fer shines through Iehneumouen
not to suffer, on the other hand we as cine:
most enemies to call the mole, whose
common food in insects, especially in grubs. ki

   

It must be borne in mind that the man throw, where there is any
go, be favoured. {hn tolerable meadows
which, of course, is a disgusting task for the farmer,

101

 

Because, one also admits that by pushing the man-
litter ciue kind of natural rejuvenation of the meadow
will work, 'then come when the grass is high, the
molehills are no longer thrown apart,
and when they mow in the frithe they are bedewed
plumes through the earth rationally purified. have against
gardeners like the Maulwnef very much, and it is

 

 

 

ir cin such known who, in order to meet the Engerlings
have an effect, for each one of them:

 

rien Mauser throw six Krenzer
he paid to put the same in his Bolmenliud. the
Experience now has to decide whether a grant of
Mole in one place, e.g. in Giirten, allowed

 

ig is

 

i.e. H. the distance from the meadows is not possible
too. Lots of muikiifers are eaten by bats

 

zebet. You can get them impaled by Wiirger at Dorue. t her at her evening
fly. Crows, jackdaws, starlings and sparrows fu
up the kifers, the first two peck out the larvae
the meadows. One finds large heaps of dtler on towers
from Maykifer leftovers, woe from the meals of those there
resident owls, jackdaws and the like. herrithren, Also falcons
should adjust ihucn (Bouché). Among the beetles are
the great runners as the main enemies
to highlight. How little but all you to the destruction of nature
further applied means are able, thoroughly
to remedy this, prove the following May
beetle years. However, the enemies of the Muikéifer receive it
the equilibrium under the usual conditions. However, if one wanted in the event of an extraordinary increase in

The Nachischwalbe versehlin

 

 

 

 
   

 

Maykitfers expect help from them, so put this one in

 

Preceded and corresponding propagation of the same

 

ahead. If you want to be rid of the Maikiiter, stay put
nothing fibrig as itself with its riveting
to deal with. One objects, albeit at all

   

 

102

Destroyed the Maikiifer in the fields and in the garden, like that. str6-
meu yes always from the deciduous forests a lot of Maikiifer
out, and the work thus becomes embroidery. Then he-
Ratzeburg repeats that the Maikeifers are in the woods
preferably and the Réiudern together, where you
could get hold of the same corpse. Don't be
in the hour, he also says, to destroy all Maikefer, but
then - which would be easy - uur the H
this is already a great benefit, because the Maikifer brood is thriving
Yes, mostly certainly, and the Vertilynng of the Eugerlings is intimate
samer and more expensive. I don't allow myself 20 decisions
den, in how far really vine destroyed the may
is practicable: in fact it can be derived from the previous one
derive experience as much as nothing, further means iat
that when a Maikefer gene creation comes under the effect of
giustiger Unistiude fillt, destroying nature itself Bruteu
kan, whose progenitors have destroyed zn with effort,
we regret it. Kine large amount May bugs, which on
Chestnut avenues and the like seek their pasture are absolute
not to me. I gladly admit that the annihilation
be of use to half the Maykifers among those under circumstances
can and must; but the fact is not disputed
can be made that ¢ iii
generation through nature
generation can raise that thus the Muikiifer if
even a woman lays only 40 Kier, but the Fi
intrinsically to multiply very quickly. So we have no means, the vast majority
if he destroys it, then our work will not
be accompanied by the desired success, roughly how
in www

 

   

 

 
    

fte, so wire

   

         
     

          

 

    

 

    

  

       

  

 

wedge

 
   

 

   

'the

   

when we at cincm Brande deal with it
the main ones sléren, oline the last ones
wiping out traces of fire. As for the fulfillment of the work of Samimelus
As for Kiiler himself, von Wi
as long as the tussect still hangs rigid on the trees,

the embers

   

 

 

  

happiness, same morning,

 

103

and can be easily herahstitezeu, vorzumelinen. As long as the niece is cold, the kifers should be more
hold on to the lower branches. Because their vitality so
is big, de
caught in a large cloth and put in a bucket: ver-
have been preserved, neither drowned nor buried, but
reqnetting. Where they start

 

one sic who they are in a nunterhalten

 

mnss between boards

 

fall on the ground, one can content oneself, they cinzelu a
step, In the nature of the circumstances, it must
be executed in the accord, so that fitr cin certain init
Maykiifer fallen amount ee tax is paid. The celebration-
Of course, the position of the latter remains relative. Children thrive when properly instructed and supervised
be, gnt zn the business. Far more difficult than destroying the maykiifers
is that of the grubs. It is recommended that the field whereonf
they sit down, cover themselves generously with Dimger 21, which
chem dic larvae like to catch up. One should then in the
Turn the cold to freeze the larvae. lye,

 

disintegrate
roar

 

  

    

 

 

 

 

Kalkwasser etc. spread to the deadweed of the larvae,
is not unsafe for mr, but even for the vegetation
dubious. If one notices the fading of the grain in the field,
the hack

 

Iight, then the digging will be unseamed or
Don't bother collecting the eng too
They read the scriptures after the Piluge. Are the faces
small, one can bring in wine that has this
works properly, they are assured that they will
Eating many grubs Nichis a pity. Only one should ihhen

 
 

    

linge necessary. at the same time arrange other food, give to drink,
set 20. That's all
The grub was not completely destroyed by herds of pigs
is ritualistic, prove information about forests in which
Pig farming is commonplace, and therefore nambafier de-
damage occurs. On the man-excavated Kelde
a rapidly maturing fruit is sown or planted. and they not for long the heat dic

   

 

 

 

104

Mau has observed that the Eugerlinge
like natural or artificial soil heights, Manlwurt-
géngen and the like hiss, and it occurred to me
come, by excavation of such burrows of the same
au gather and kill. Whether ten to awolf such
caves would suffice for the morning is uncertain
ast zit doubt

Under the turf of the meadows gather dic
Larvae often in such numbers that one can get ten to avolt
count to the square foot in this case
lift off the turf, and after crushing the larvae
stért has, if he's not completely burnt, back
start. In the midday sun, the exposed u
larvae can be killed within an hour. Also kicks
and Brachiicker hide a lot of grubs. only is
here unfortunately cine pursuit not so easy with any ei
combine cult work. Grub damage is usually as soon as you notice it
already tidal. — They often linger a long time in Grande
of the plants withered by gnawing, presumably
of_remaining pages:

The May kiifers as well as their larvae come alive
lich serve as gules pig feed. Also the jellyfish
st she very much. They also provide a good animation
lic requirement. Moreover, one wants to go through strong things
cooking the Maikéfer Wagenschlmiere. Many of the Spriiclwériers who knelt at the Maikifer
r, as largely due to prejudices or

 

  

 

 

     

 

   

 

 

 

 

because of Eli. cant

 

     

     

   

pf, pass w'

 

trembling. The horse chestnut cockchafer, Melolontha hippoca
instant FP. Aihulich to the common Maikiifer adusserst, however
Re smaller, hairier; the anus handle not a bit crooked,

 

 

    

 

udder standing vertically downwards, kit
thickening again to a cup at the tip. Should have the same yeographic distribution as the

he, against

 

   

mean. rarely expensive in southern Germany, but in

105

 

southern even more common than the latter after Ericlison
he is sometimes together with the common man, sometimes he helps
other flight years cin, bakl he occurs in other locations
ul. Hardly any of the common
ven to distinguish. ‘

-In a confusing way

     

 

 

are still making nambaft zit,
which is very related to the Maikiifer, but larger, with s
covered with white marbled or speckled ceilings:

Julikifer, Melolontha Fullo L, up to 37 million. Jang, so much bigger
than the common May kief, brown and mottled with white, tendrils
of Mamnehens extraordinarily large. Also widespread, but
nu locally frequent. As a larva, particularly on the roots of the large sand
griisey in the dense regions of Denmark and France, naeh a
individual indications even on the grain and the potatoes. As a beetle in the Jnli, eats both Lanb and Nadetholawaldbéiume kab
Now even the fruit trees shouldn't miss

The fallow or June weevil, Melolontha (Rhizoteogus) solstitialis L.
Slubby light yellow, bristly. Also extremely widespread_ and ge-, |
my in the plain as in the mountains, the kifer flies especially
in Joni and July; in 1850 in Ti
of the evening nm Gebische umd on how
his aimless confusion of unsheres, De fri fraat atrcngn een
poplar trees and in young pine shelters; that the Kiifer cause
of the Mniterkorn by clinging to it is a privilege
Fable. The wives are often very cold and broken off, firstly because
the mammoths put a lot of pressure on them when mating, then such are
perhaps also individuals who are already mating for the sake of laying beer
dug into the ground but left it again. the
Larvae are said to thrive especially in fallow cores. The Melolontha ruficornis F. The previous very alu
light but duukter; at Pahlern, Halsehild, ceiling
cattle

   
         

     

   
  
  
 

 

rol still at the beginning of Augnst ~{|-—
ar often molests dureh

    
    
 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

diraly brown, breast even more shaggy. din Mai and Joni as Kiifer often mean, especially:
geus swimming. After the Kinen in Gehélzen, after
on meadows, others follow on sandy ones, leans
Pliitzen,

 

 

en

 

The larva is said to have been the cereal by the Benageu
become holy of power

individually

 

The Gavtenlaubk:

   

« Melolontha terticola 1. Kopt, Be mn Sehitd-

 

 

106

chen gleaming grin, blankets brown, quarreled a bit, Un
Sk terside and legs black, the Kiifer is particularly in
'individual years from the beginning of June to the end of July

often in gardens, on low trees 1 hedges and hazel bushes,
He gnaws the leaves on it, on apple trees, but especially the late
Blossoming Pyrus corouaria, to the annoyance of the tree grower, he eats,
according to Schmidberger even young apples. Birnbliiticr are zn leathery. In the gardens he replaces leaves and flowers on roses
masses that the latter often cannot even start fruiting, Ie
as a rule he leaves the ribs of the bitters. Bouché and others found the grub-like larva on the roots
various perennials, cauliflower and head cabbage, even in
Vopten an deu roots of Trollins, Sarifraga and drgl. They ate these
up to the stem. After Erichsou, the kifer becomes citvig vou
Asilus-Avten pursued. Shedding the kifers, transplanting the squishy potted plants. The grain leaf weeper, Meloloutha fruticola F. (segetis Herbst) Grisse,
Form and colors almost the same as the previous ones, but the shield on the head is towards the front
weir proboscis; shaggy hairy; wings yellow-brown. When married
behind the vertebrae a black-brown spot. The especially in sandi; areas of Prenssens, also in Austria
in recent years selir frequent kifer keeps at the grain, before: h
the Roggeniheen and eats here to Ratzeburg! the dust collectors,
and others the young Korner,

The larva found Bouché in the soil in half-rotted manure. With
he also raised her on this one. 'ifer not difficult, with the Creator. , Melolontha' agricola F, tin middle Dentsebland

and France. A little taller and wider than the previous one,
oe nit a more or less distinct brown-black
Cross on the blankets, Kiley's supposed to hiiutig sometimes

and: occur on the grass as early as April and May. its larva
the roots of the same, . Older Schvifisteller also still filed as Weinblattve
lontha Julii Fo and Friselit BF, on, however, since Eri steren names
‘ogen hat und mumehy mnterschéidet M. vitis F., M. solida Ky.
oblonga Er. and Krischit F. (last 17 million, long and 8.5 million wide). en completely new observations, derives_ from the proper diagnosis,
sel desired. .

Of no agricultural importance are: The gold collector, Cetouia
auvata L., which we, as breeders, have in such large quantities on lilacs or on
Licking nerve wounds find a larva is a maykiifer grub
aluish. but has shorter legs

 

      

 

    

       

  

   

 

 

 

 

  

   

 

   

 

  

  

 

 

iister Melo

  
 

 

son eI

     
   

 

   

  

     

      

 

 

107,

Often found in large numbers under the dead bark wud in the teulen
Wood from nuts and other trees, hence also in the praise of the
houses, finally and most recently hilly in the great forest anthills,
mmitien among the ants. In any case, generation of several years

Herr Plieninger found out that the larvae of Ce-
fonia were gnawing on living plant roots. At least this is from aurata
unwelcome,

The solitary, Trichius eremita L. 33 Mill. long, 17.7 million wider,
dark brown-black, peculiar, not very pleasant
Kiifer, which also resembles the English larva, except in woodland trees. like bees, willows, etc., lives in hollow apple bites,

Trichius hemipterus L. Black and gran, speckled, larva ofters
Fence pieces and, according to Résel, in the roots of diseased plums 5
biiume. Also, the kifer is said to be often present in large quantities
occurring swellings of fruit and willow trees. Finally, mention may be made here of

Rhino kiifers, Geotrupes uasicornis L. 23 and up to 41 mill. long and
a little more than half as wide. Brawn, the minute with ciem strong
Horn, the female with only a heckere on her forehead; often in quantity
in the Hichenlohe of ‘Tveibhauser and tanneries; finally the less
leafy than sighorny . Balkenschroters, Lucanus parallelopipedus L., a
Not dissimilar to small deer-knife females, nber =) {|
platinum and all black. In the summer as a kifer not I
rare The perennial grub in fanlen Béumen. eg, B, in the wood of brittle walnut trees. 2) Dissimilar beetles, «(l. h. init fiinl limbs on
-the two front pairs of benes, four on the third pair. 4

 

 

    

 

 

   

‘eeeeing

 

  

 

 

 

 

    

    
 

   

The Mehtkiiter, Mealworm, Tenebrio molitor L. Der
complete kerf appears in Jul

 

rr
welived co eae
had, in the hands of bucks, Malleru,

Mehihindlern, eh gladly in newly built residential areas; hello
he had no doubt in the Sprea under the planks
béden developed, even in Taubenh:

   

Meng places where he as Lary

 

but he is very behind
Ker comes alive especially in the evening, and that's why she finds herself

 

After the morning tugging on the room bids, That fertilized

 

108

Female puts his Kier in corners, chests, on memory
from where flour, mehistanb or lying very quiet and dull
Crops or advances of Ptlauzenstotien are revealed. So I found his brood already in thin Jerusalem artichoke stalks. If one claims that he also comes under Eichenr
and in rotten willow wood, this is well founded
Confusion of his larye with those of all yours
Jumping Kiiferla: (Page 68.) They have shiny, yellow larva with brownish-yellow
Fugen has a domed head, three pairs of four
PRE o¢<hrize short heins, two at the top of the black
horny fine tips, below two warty nac'ber. three
Food consists of flour, mehistan, bran, bread, cloth
cut if such accidentally stung her bid. Iu the
in an emergency their dying
own jaw pierced
s heirdest bread, also gnaws away from an empty little one
chiel za euwich if she notices a crack, cine
A lot of wood chips gone. Her feces are eye-watering. the larva
slides slowly from the Siclle, you should four Thiutungen
th make, the empty hiuite stick easily in the flour to-
rick, though the larvae themselves lost themselves from it
have or have been removed siud. To grow needs
at least they have several Mongte. For the sake of pupification, they say, gnaw them
Lave a cradle in the wall of the helpful Mehibehiilter. But I also saw dolls lying in the bran, of course
in a thurn pot. After a few weeks, the
we pupa to the kiifer, the cinige taye long yellow
remains, and down dark brown firbi. Kir the development period from Ki au to zam Kifer
is assumed cin year

  

 
    

 

   
    

 

 

  

 

   

 

 

eu

    

 

    

    

      

   

 

 

  

 

 

 

This period should ibrigeus by rich
and mild weather at half a Jule
will be able to. To protect oneself from the destruction of the child,

ce food

 

ekfethet

 

 

109

is rightly recommended, Mchikésten and del. so with fine
Drath ete. to ensure that no kifer enter and
scine spawn can deposit. It never arises by itself
Flour, not even in the feuchien, although the latter certainly does
particularly attractive for taking off his children. There are further
Sealing and cleanliness in the flour containers and their
Surroundings recommended, smell of turpentiu and camphor
(see general, Thl) have no great effect. In order to
other insect in its various states 20

 

   

 

     

stéren, we have various means. Leave the larvae
like B

 

ern history, by sieving you dem
eu you keep, ground-
nice knockout! hen, if they are permissible
of good action against the kids which otters in cracks
put. (The worms have usually in cities to
Hold the nightingale initialization quite a high value.) Also from the poultry are eaten. To the
Light wedges include application of Arabic Guimini,

separate flour. — Vacancies

 

 

en and Ausbe

  
  

 

      

    

rust, maple wood etc.

The kitchen weed, Tenebrio (Uloma) culinaris F., smaller than the previous one. rust-red, filigree caps striped notched, front tendons dented. should in
fantem wood and children, but also in grain hemp and even in food
chambers to store meat products, bacon n, drgl. occurrence. Another, very similar to the previous one, pitch-brown,
smooth kifer, Uloma opatroides D., is found in quite abundance int
the strange grain which was in the last years of theurwngg from 1
Egypt ind America moved to Wittrttemberg. After Hru Villa he is
in Egypt. Sinia, Spain and Silesia to Hans. Der Totenkiiler, Schatteukiifer, Blaps mortisaga 1. Completely black,
or pitch brown. Unlimited, with waxed, strongly deviated at the back
shaky and in a point approaching cliigeldeek. coming |
from April to autumn as Ktifer Iniufig, yes often even larger
amount in the apartments and stables, but uur in}
damp, dark and serene, especially in the opposite direction, in silence
under hay flowers, boards u. drgl., in the cellar of the barrel storage. Its closeness consists of decomposed vegetable waste
and you don't know his other way of life very well. yet it is decidedly unreal that its larvae in wood and Mébehi
live. That its appearance of Abergkiubischen as portent of a

 

 

 

 

   

     
  
 

 

 

  

 
 

       

 

 

   

 

110

'Deathstalls considered_ some climb through the jaugeed. shock
white passage of the insect or by the black color. The animal is because of the smell it touches. spread. inappropriate
genchm. not physically. Also the larva of a kiifer, black below, with a high red back,
} of Pyrochroa coccinea L., is not found under the bark
| fragile trees, e.g. the walnut tree. She is inch long, lind-
| worm-like, narrow and flattened, smooth. wit three pairs wide posed

 

 

 

 

 

iirts

legs, yellow, rather transparent. Rear cin pair incl
curved Hickeehne, without meaning. The spiny cowhide, Mordetla aculeata L. Gi
ending in a long, downwardly directed tip. hopping,
Is common throughout the summer in flowers and should be on young plants
harm kiunen, this task seems to me very compelling. The six-
According to Schilling, some kiifer larvae are found in abundance in September
in the pith of the common mugwort. the pavement

  

 

 

 

fer, the kantharide, Spanish
Fly, Lytta vesicatovia L. Schiner
his kiifer with black antennae,
AS bent head, slender thighs
very soft blankets that cover the hindquarters of the female
Don't leave it completely, cover it completely with the male. — T
Minnchen is also a bit small
The beetle would only be confused with Cerambys moschatus L.,
the false spanish fly, in Boekkifer of similar grimer color,
but the latter by its long horns, flat bodies, thorns on both sides
Brusisehild and four-jointed soles very easily from Lyla
is different. He comes alive, his larva in pollarded willows, Mau recognizes
him already on several steps at his pleasant, cigenthly
gladly Because of this latter, the sehwibi-
schen Landlente like in thre tobacco jars, they call him spanise
Mosquito. The pilaster! Yours sincerely, probe

    

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

        

      

southern Europe:

 

vr is not mur i
nm also over all of Germany, Sele:
the, Russia, Sibiri spread, find after Ratzeburg
the Kéifer almost every year. Indeed remember
I me, ihu in western France also more:
years behind cinander gese
rumored to have gotten in the Stuttgart area though

 

 
   

 
 

  

 
    

1 or at least on

 

      

hh, damn fibrizeus in large M

does he come more period

ii

in front. The plants on which he shows himself in the gardens,
are Spanish lilac, various types of honeysuckle,
willow, self ant Hollmder, roses, trumpet banm, maple
and Pappelu has sometimes noticed him in Ratzeburg. Auely
anf Lerchenbiéumen and Ahorn maw him to Losehge

   

 

 

find, finally in Calabria after Ginelin on Asperula ar
ox filled

   

rensis. most frequently
he marriage, on this is also his life
been observed most badly. The pine flies at the warmest time of day to appear
usually in large quantity on cinmal. First she gnaws
Company the jimgera Blitter off, finally also the élem
shepherds, When there are too many, the trees become so bare
eaten, leaving only petioles and ribs on them
stay. Even the youngest impulses are supposed to grieve
have verzelirt what is doubted by others. The beetles spread a vicious
gene intrinsic Gernch, which of some with the
Miinse, compared by others to that of carrion
is. Even the plentiful rubbish with which those of the
twigs damaged by live insects
this pleasure

The begathimg of the insect takes place with great vigor
activity instead, males and females
from one

I under all weight:

 

    

team

   

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

en hang like dogs
turned away, hourly, yes according to Ratzeburg's
secure themselves to cinander for days, and eat during
this time greedy The intoxicated female —becomes
attaches itself to the earth, usually burrows into firmer ground
a hole LO-14 lines deep. When this is finished, then crawl
it with the anus vo lays 40-50 Kier, cricebt
damm up, cover a hole with earth, f
again, but lives only a few days. The kids are
almost smoldering yellow, lanky, very white, after 3-4 weeks
the lilies crawl out of it, which are black in
yellow in the middle and with fihler, strong quills, three
pair of legs and two long tail bristles,

 

 

 

 

  
   

 

 

142

   

They scatter over the earth. what they live on
does not seem to have been decided yet. You already have the
thing set up that they ven and as parasites on Eli
bee-like pods feed. However, this is done by
Ratzeburg doubts. Safe down here. Low ecntlehut somewhere the message that she hanpt-
surely all four Yahweh will appear in large numbers, theirs
Generation thus appears to be four years old. The plaster kiters have the Kigenschait on the skin
blisters, and this can become more frequent as a result
touching done. The Kiifer are therefore offi inell, and it
is pretty cheap in pharmacies, high price, 4-8 gro-
see per pound in Norddentschland, paid. Collecting
Jolmt is therefore quite good. It is operated at the appropriate
most early in the morning, because at that time the insect is less
is lively. You carefully stretched the total 1 kifer-
sam to dry, and must she, shall otherwise a 'part of her
aft not lost, deliver soon. numbers

   

 

  

K

The biane Maikiifer (laiwnem, Meloé proscarabacus L.), autallend
due to its size (up to 40 million Jang wd 13m wide), straightness,
~ protective fillers, only short ones, the long abdomen only for small ones
Partly forfeited elytra, the softness of the whole body, his
ran Dlaue color and the juice that cr from all joints when touched
let go, is also used in medicine.
Jing, where in all pits hugged, gathered, Ni-
heres see Meyer p. 12. the so-called black bee louse, Kine already Réanmur (4. bah,
11, mem. 8, 490) and Degeer (Ba. 1V, 8. 240) wohibekaunte and them
Later reproduced so-called "black bee louse" according to the form
gebive here after the claws, she is — Jang, in the form of a
Kid lizard or a small Staphytinus The head pretty much
semicircular. Kiiluer with a thick base link and another lot
thinner with bristles, The three parts of the breast are about the same size, round
wearing legs. On these the sole ans
m Gilied consisting of three parts, the two outer parts woven
ne back marriages, the nine limbs of the abdomen flat, at the end-
Hint white short side
bsring at the bottom with shorter ones
Extremely fine, at the same time dense pankti

 

   

 

   

    

 

 

 

   

 

 

   
  

 

per big at

 

 

 

   

weather
articulate two bristles, as long as d
horsten, Ansserdem every hind
corsten The top of the larva

 

ib and

     

       

   

 

therefore of dull faith. body
square gray brown

black. Thigh brown. bristles
Chicks and claws, feelers and mouth parts, including the
dumb! pointed, dirty yellow. — In April and May in abundance
in the spring flowers, Ficaria vorna ete., often in dozens anf ci
Blithe nud vou these aux vou the bees visiting them in the basket
worn, but probably not on purpose, but accidentally on her fur
hanging. Todte finds mon za this time in quantity in the basket, anf the
Descent board amd in front of the wing hole, you feed the bees in the
Frithling with honey, that's how you see cinzelne selwarze Léinse this after-
sichen and sitting outside with legs spread apart, eating honey, Spiiter
in April and May I no longer sali them in the basket, so I look at them
as of quite nutergeorducter importance, but I have to note that
Réaumur mid Degeer the larye also on a fly and especially on
found their wing root sitting and therefore for cine at Luselten
Schmare 1 Degeer for that one of Melo# proscarabucus,
halicn, What defines me. to turn them on here is other than Degeer's
Meimung Erichson's remarks in the archive f, Naturg., VIL year, 1, vol. according to which the last phalanx of the young larvae vou Lytta and
Melo# consists of one limb with three clans, but I have to
found that after the observation with the magnifying glass on dead specimens
Wanch aonchmen can see only the three clans and none at all
r present. zeayde Kiiferlar

 

 

  

   

3) Four-limbed beetles. A. Ritsel kifer familial; head to snout

liingerl, which carries the Kanwerkzenge at its end, Die

Fithler are soon simply against the top

diekt, but this is rare, soon keulentér

and kinked or nicked, in which case one

distinguishes the shaft S and the hostage G. Those in all parts of the Gewii

   

 

   

fig =p

 

thse Tebenden Larveu
short, few times never felt warm, whitish, yellowish,

 

usually quite tough fleshy, arched, crooked,
* The small, bluish, also four-membered Corynetes violaceus F.

is above pax because of his other relatives. limbed up. 1, their enemies, 8

under the fiint

 

   

 

 

114

The horig, hind yellow or brown head with a fork-
line. All legless species belonging here. chiselled
Puppeu, on which one can clearly see the rift. Haulig with hooks, thorns, bristles n, etc. to head,
shield, knee joints. Two mostly long dew spines. The way of life of the riddle pickers is mostly very strange
due to the artistic drive with which they usually drink their beer and
give birth or take care of the brood, Precisely with these
When they are sedentary, they really need their long snout. The kipper usually feeds on the green parts
of the plant, its pith or bark or rootu the larva
to serve. That's why I suspect e.g. B. also the larva of
Curculio fuscomaculatus lives at the root of Heracleum
sphondylium, dena I saw the Kiifer in Angus 1854 aut
the mushroom eats the large seeds of the same,
The same may be true of Lepyrus colon
peeps away from the pasture, because it eats its litter. a) Probe not kinked. 1) Dic Sumenkiifer, Bruchus. Very globular with short
em, perpendicular devi

 

n,

 

cleared rift. feeler all

  

and
thigh. Small dorm on the hind rails. The peaweed, Bruchus pisi L. The lowest

four fihler limbs, likewise the schinen- and
Soles of forelegs red. Ouch
superfluous place behind the wing covers

white black spots. Vleckchen the whole
aiem dull gran, washed out. The kifer will find it at the time of the blossoms, probably
even a little earlier on the pea plants. Nah
Some also anf Patt or Pferdebolmen, Viera Kuba, This
However, the statement may be confused with the following
Art based, the female puts his Kier individually in the
You can still see the trace later. (si
other reasons already of the analogy

Higly thickening, helpful-limbed. Thickened, toothed hin-

 

   

    

zen top

 

 

 

rbset

 

Beginnings of the ne

Fig,, ¢.) It's on

 

 

15

 

because very improbable that he hit the pods
kri

  

sche to lay fier, as has already been asserted. Until autumn. the larvae appear in the as usual
gradually growing peas reaches its perfect size. mi, because in winter we'll find the doll of the
Insckts in the peas. The cavity in the pea, wherein
the development is going on, still leaves a large
sen part, in the copies lying before me probably dic
ilalfte, the pea mass ig. Something to correct:
on the task that nothing but the hill filled with unvath
the pea remains. Also, the inuen
héhlien peas in water do not start at the top, as from ilimen
is claimed. So the question arises whether the larva is not much-
easy, che sic in a pea to help the pupation
png make your cavity, already send others
has destroyed peas and whether these
are mainly meant. Tue
Otherwise, however, peas would appear in relation to the Grésse
of the insect even small. Remediable before pupation
the larva thus rounds off its héhinng, and extends the-
the same to the outside that you can already see the pea from the outside
recognizes that there is a doll in it. She shows mochle
one says, an eye in which there is still a round one, © og
semi-transparent skin covering the insect: this for
Insect that has become a kid eats its way through the against the Frihjalur
closing skin to look for pea fields. drilling room in the last

   

   

 

 

It appears in the transition to kifer
NEN save many dolls go to ground. — I
sparkling wine already has a great harvest of peas 7

 

stirs, and should

 

devs in Amevike have been listening heavily. The proposed treatment of the sirened seed
guts can't possibly see in front of it. On the other hand, you will
by strong thing and happy choice of seed cit
finish blooming more quickly, which is good for the mother-kiifer
not trained, over a large number of flowers Mr. za knows

the. Should inau already before or at the time of flowering a large one
/

 

 

116

 

Zalil Kiifer wat find the peas would be particularly hot
drill culture skimming the same with a Tammen,
depending on the circumstances, maybe tapping into one of the following:
held small screen useful. That you attacked an egg
has not crawled out, d
to be cleaned on top of floating con-
nen, it is claimed; with me the attacked crabs sank
sen i water; but new attempts will be made. The bohu pine, Bruchus granarius L. Dem
Closely related to the previous ones, somewhat more convex. Except the four
In the innermost limbs of the foal the entire front legs are also red. Small stains on the separating spot. The spots on
the middle of the breastplate hind wall smaller but greater. Likewise the red-burned, small spot behind the sign. The Scheekige anf the whole Ricken sparsauter but mav-
kirter. Lives in a similar way on horse bohuen. here
I met the dam very often before flowering
in the summit and axis of the Pilanze, but drives: cr itself
Mau the same time here and there in other blooms, e.g. those
of the plum tree, md noeh in June ant meadow umbrella
t himself at quieter Bertihruny

 

 

resent if the kifer still

   

throw in water wid but-

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

bleed around., He li
fall off easily. By the dead horsebolms I own,
stands the cavity brought about by the larvae
always perpendicular to the fiche, in which
Lay the two Bohuenlappen sn cinander. Sometimes there were avei cores in the same bole. In Uebri
same as the previous one. Bruchus rufimanus Shh, don't pist very much, but from him. distinguished by the thighs of the forelegs also being red. Related also to Bruchus sertatus I. with fin vothen Kilbler limbs
and front and middle legs all red, both of which were the same
Information about their way of life very desirable,

The int. also belongs here because of its usefulness
badly the brushweed, Anthribus, which partly in rotten wood, partly
live as parasites in shield lenses, their bodily form and their feelers

ante

   

 

117

   

crimert: back to the seed collectors, Bruchns. Ur rift is-mostly ontal-
lend phit,

scabrosns B. is sehwar: 1 cissteten, red,
in between black and gran dotted striped wing coverts, after t
Autumn with blossoming plants, I found them as larvae in the pepper
grain-sized saps of the cherry tree, the kifer developed
In the middle of July a number of days lingered in the shieldlan:
and consume their insides completely, maybe that he also in the same
large cocens of the horse chestnut lives, because autumn on this one
tree. The Diekkoptkiifer. Apoderus coryli L. Head very strong backwards,
Horse-like donkey muirt, snout straight, whole, short, body thick and
Ireit. Cover and pronotum shiny red, everything else was shaky
sometimes also the thighs red,

Hinfig on Hasem, Buehen, Mainbuchen, Alders, where he is in frithen
Years early May, soust only from mid-January to Lécher in the Blitter
frist amd this cut through from one side down to the middle rib,
make a roll out of it, at the top of which you put a couple of yellow balls
finds 20 strongly curved yellow larvae with a garnet-brown head
The rolls stay fresh for a long time, in July and August they are
Larvae grow up and soon the young beetle comes up to make new ones
rolls to manufacture; which only later came to development in the summer
Menen larvae fall with the leaf rolls to the ground id should first
pupate next Friihjahy [2}. In September 1849 amd October
In 1854 I found what should be regarded as an exception to the previous
imperfect, unripe kifers on hazels and birches. Where really the insect should become harmful through blighted ones,

the easy to start collecting and destroying the rolls
pickle, the same applies to the small, lmmen, blackened birch
stecher, Rhynehites Betulae L.. the otters also stand on haschins
leaves, which he cut in half, 2a small ones. (justified
rolls. unit of the lings

 

   

  

 

 

 

 

 

    

   

 

     

    

  

 

 

 

    

w

   

  

   

 

 

   

2) The Riisselstecher, Rhynchites, Riissel
to de

ylindviseh,
ate tip broader, cilfglicdrige filler ole knees
with a three-pronged club, in a longitudinal furrow as a rattle
standing. head not cinched behind,

The vine cutter, Rhynchites betuleti F. This in-
sec( has because of its ¢

    

 

increased eligibility the general,
e but the Iiteresse di

 

 

ius particular winegrowers aa various
ade taken into account. Longing

Time (but one held the apple cutter for the destroyer of the

     

 

those times in high ¢

 

118

 

Reben, wad itself ciner of the first Lusektenklas tors
was trapped in this Irethum. Canoe sogur the Heidel
Berger natural history from the lack of own observations
Don't deviate from Latreille's irrihum, because she thinks
cee kine are noméglich wrong. This essential
limited belief in the accuracy of observations
dever and the convenience of new these observations on:

 

  

 

 

zulischen, prompted the priest Braner to write a written
maker, who already in the last century about the vine
Stecher wrote to speak of the fiuster times,
eh, dflers without right

to understand which of the former is actually mine

     

wherever children absel the others

 

 

being. *

    

Others, like the Ver
Prizes awarded by the Academy of Sciences
partly chewed the vine well, but
apply to them but so schy dic knowledge of the general
Wieklungsganges at the Insckt, the partially ve
turned little pap-
pelvitsselkiifer for the young betweti hicl and to his
way of life
fen. the one before
al were available, used the one in the Oken-

¢ the four you the chnrpfitl-

   

 

 

 

     

species, 2 B. the branch detour, a

   

 

   

des Betuleti evgéuzten, d. H. make incorrect

 

respectful Ratzeburg, to whom these writings do not

  

in original
excerpt made available from it by natural history, which
had already eliminated. He
obviously the generation of
in the mentioned

 

 

Roughly on the above essays s

referred to these authors

     

 

Tusek

 

, ohue za alnen, da

there are so many contradictions in this regard

are that one believes neither the one nor the other

  

can give. Thus errors are inherited in succession
this ungliic

 

cligen Kinseitenk

 
 
 

{ vicler ectomologists who
I'm not interested in the way insects live
the Kinsciti
smallest ally

 

siren, and
Farmers, which without the
ne Keuntuiss of Kerfe, ole ever watch
to have lost, don't believe that their even to
empirical direction ire Siune irre fitlven kone. 119

The vine picker

 

t olme Behuarung, stahlblaa, me-
metallic grin, or goldgrim, or gringol-
the. The difference in colors
grimdet- no special species at all
or special history, since blane,

  
   

 

grime or gold-colored kifers without sub- —

parted with each other, After Ratzeburg, Panzer and
Others wore the woman on each side of the breast
forward pointing tip. According to Linnaeus, she finds herself at
Mannchen, I too found at ei
least

    

 

 

ven in copulation or
s beetles in mock mating embraced the thoracic
peak at the one sitting above, i.e. the presumptive one
Male. Hellwig found thorn-bearing males, but also

     

 

spineless males and females in mating. Also
vine
sure, bet

 

Pastor Walther, whose observations about

 

ner

 

stecher communicated below: are, ve
Series of more than 300 investigations always changes the Donn
have found zn in the male. Who has among these
Universities are right? — or did not observe nature here
Rule? At the relatives Rh. This applies to Bacchus and populi
thorn-bearing fir the female sex. against the direc-
activity of this assumption sprii

 

 

 

in the pre-

 

ne but one of me

Péirchen of populi found years ago, of which the Miimn

 

chen carries the thorns. In any case, new observations would

 

attention to the matter desirable. Most recently and in greatest activity fi
the Kéter in May and June. He appears fibrous
cinmal in autumn in noticeable numbers. In the forest it inhabits beech, aspen, Canadian paprika
peln, linden and several willow species. Also the very
damage to the multiple sheet wound rolls on Else-
no doubt stem from him. Bechstein has him
also found on alders, birches, hazels. h often ant pear
bium. Anch Schmidberger wants to be damaged by him

et, man
us yet

     

   

 

be

 

 

I also find ihu always ziemli

 

Virnbiinme have seen, Furthermore, he wicket on quince-

 

120

 

bitumen. Walther says he has it in the pipeline,
Half grown, found hiiwig on his apple trees. Apparently he has the branch detour for the vines here
held a star, he never appeared to me on apple trees,
neither the kifer nor his blister packs. In the T! also seem to be the short, spit. erselicinenden mul sper
pricking tufts of leaves of the apple trees far
to ciguen less for his work than that of the Birubéiume. For once he may find himself on it, today
r certainly never. A little later, when the vines begin to sprout,
he also makes himself felt in the vineyards, and
awar often in desirable quantities. Ks is likely that:
these flocks of cops before the forest and fruit trees
wohut, sodaun but have left, for whom still consecration
Follow the shooting and splintering of the vine. Least
Wise in June and July

  

   

 

   

   

 

  
  

 

iS

 

 

      

   

 

you meet the kifer in it similar

 

also in the forest no longer easily stare at the already
Blistering of the beech, but more on the water shoots
the aspen, pastures n.dergl. On them he finds even softer ones
Food rolls into fire more easily like kehide leaves. The food of the kid consists of soft, herbaceous
reits namhatt ge-

 

    

 

 

term parts of vou ili bewolmten, bi

made Gowieh:

   

   

5 still full

 

sn young
Tricbe on elwa finger stalls halfway under the tip,
hangs his head half withered. I
n shoot. 0 that the upper ‘Th
watched him himself 5. June 1850 on a sole:
The leaves were severely scraped. (The Psylla, pyrisuya mud
whose numerous yellow eggs on the half-wilted lap
got the cut as a result of the Betuleti
rails. ) Should he de
the withered ili vicll

 

 

   

   

are probably ble

hell abselmeiden, just umn ven

 

 

hit more pleasant bhitters to eat ? Kine Beni

 

ng von Vorster: the insect gnawed in the

 

fangeuschatten the ciwas withered Bhitler rather than the fully

 

121

 

ften, also dentet here, Anch Sehinidberger
knows this being eaten through and falling of the womb. But we also justified Annaline that sometimes
sometimes with keenest Witlerung cin lap, whose bitterness he
wickeu therefore wanted to cut it off, which grew out of it
s he for his Brni business wubranch

  

 

 

 

nid stretched, so there
became cash. He does similar things, many cin-voiced
According to him, in the vineyards, by going to his
nourishes the eye that is just driving, and the young sick
© avoided. In one day he shouldn't
nn two, three and even more [2] shitlings pierce,

      

term Rebschos

  

 

but they cut off most of the time where they are on the
Stick sprouted, This Annagen [Querdurelmagen?} until anfs Mark fer anéh still at the 'Tran-
instead of beating and draw the withering from the scho:
dl Tranben after itself, It kéune, becomes belianpiet,
nntraghar for a whole year
Plarrer brewery in Alsace

 

 

find something fun

 

   

       
 

   

Jiger Kifer a vine! do

 

Therefore, worai
sam made, the French Ansdrnek Coupe-bourgeons, dev
Italian tagliadisso. Second, the kiter usually scrapes the Blatier
on its upper side in smack strips so that nar
nor the transparent epidermis of the mtern side of the leaf
n stays. The scraping itself happens in such a way that:
the kitten with the riddle
bend in a straight line
wiirts strides, and thus cinen
long strips of leafy green
bleeds. On these strips (Mig. one recognizes hiinig the Anfent
keeps the nearby hidden
new insect. Brenchel, the after
he Angahe vine cutter lin-

 
       

   

 

ste

 

   
 
  
 
  
 
 

  

 

 

vere had time in prison

veliittert at, says that that

 

122

Scraping the buns between the ribs crst begin when
the kifer no longer have tender shots at hand,

Simultaneously with these devastations or a little later
the pines also seriously think about their reproduction. From May to July you can see them in pairs
on the kitters, often three or more together. Brenchel claims to have observed the couple being so strict
Monogamy holds that no male to the other female
chen go, and they still close after the first brood
stay

The way the beetle stores its eggs is remarkable

 

 

 

 

     

   

 

worthy and interesting to look at with genuine eyes. Through
mere collusion by means of trunks and legs brings
he stood the cigar-like leaf wraps or cones,
in which the Kier are to be placed. The Blitterwraps
on fruit trees
{fig.) will always
from a larger or
smaller number of
ter made; on the
Quince tree anit
a big one, I want
row leaves
maybe- a few
yondensmall, smooth
He branches pear bliss
up to achiteen and
maybe even more. I used to meet him
nitrate Gfters just with the wicket of Banmblitt-
employed, without observing the whole sale 2 at the time
archive But I love the ones in my collection
sticking roles to following procedure of the insect at
the production of the tree leaf wraps. Should a Bkitterbiisehel
be wobbled, the kifer d
Stressing out the marrow on the busis of the womb this don

 

   

Beetle

 

 

    
    

h Drilling 1

 

123

to pay off the tax allowance. Allows such the construction of
Lap au scinem tuterste parts not well, or is
the purpose has not been fully achieved as a result
each cinzelue stalk of the blitter to be wrapped holds one
hurtful | Hiulig when a tuft of leaves is too small
, this is drilled at the bottom. and some bliss
you pulled the first bud, this leaf
but the stalks are durelis. Dice's juice needs to be tapped
happen, so that the blotches will wither md h after
can be wrapped at the discretion of the kitter. The wrapping
apparently gradually, in that the Ké does the work and
breaks, puts Kier in the role, again one or more
Bkitter completes, Kier lays again and so on. the blisters,
the kifer also likes to lay those of the biume, it seems
but not always with the smooth side out, It
the question now is how do they get over each other
did Bkitier roll the necessary halt? They say the beetle
stick diesel} to cinander, since dic Blatter with the rein-

 
    

   

   
     

   

   

     

 

 

 

 

 

that are particularly test anf cinander, I sneben eme here
Discover some kind of glue, but in vain. (Anch wraps
the ver

 

‘audée Betwlae aul birches without glue.) To the earlier
Auschannng I can only state that the Kifer
 Effort of the legs the Bkitter tiber cinander

 
   
   

5! shit and gently presses with the ruffle. Need more details

 

teach new observations, - also you have egg-laying

 

I uie anit angeschen, but the kifer certainly seduces in
the following way. Does the blade have a normal thickness
softened, the kifer drills through the not quite hard ones
Blitter a hole, put the egg in it and push it with the
Riissel inside to a suitable place. Ward like that
very soft eggs laid before rolling, so they would have to
necessarily suffer hardship at work. This a posteriori recording finds its place
hey observer
just now

   

 

Confirmation of the noble Sehinid mountains:

 

 

ting in collars harmful insects, which nu

 

 

communicated through the Gite of Professor Ratzching

 

been. It licenses here: he also lays while he is working
his kidney stings 1: tulle through, puts his egg in front
the opening and pushes it in with the rifling; in progress
zen 4—6 kids

You sticky substances with which si
is no trace to beme they lie all fi
em also almost obvious who
ue role aut elt. The kids remember :
core, are tibwhitish and have a sharp measurement
millimeters of ling. If the weather favors his work,
and are located in the vicinity of the roll and winding

  

      

 

   

 

fall
important:

  
  

 

 

     

  

 

bare bhitter, so the kifer can actually do it

 

serial nd or after the incubation one sees the
Gllers look around ci in the warm sunshine
el hernmjagen. At this time the Kiifer
he likes to look at the floor when he does
otherwise in cooler weather less shy and easy
foot on the hand. Still in June, yes even Autungs
In July I saw the Kiifer in the forest next to a freshly made one
Bkitteriuten,

On the mountain maple leaves, which are similar to the white leaf
irt cr in another way. In the Bavarian mountains saw
I wrap him this au end of July in the way that he put on

 

 
  

  

    

t falls

  

   

 

  

   

     

    

     

all kitters observed by amir at a short distance
from the end of the petiole 4, the petiole in an arc through
gnawed, and the drooping to wrap rollie. the
In this case, the role does not remain on the last
tenth fifth on est. Blitterwiekeln is of unequal importance
of the insect on the vine. Ks was already the

  

  

 
    

he

 

more well known, like that of Brauer ans Plautus,
Cato and Plininus quoted passages and the Iusekt
attached name Convoleulus prove. Hs is also in the
'ln, to the
ren. Unfortunately

 

 

That not sewer, that tusekt, we 1S ci

  

vines

 

1, especially on Espalierrebeu in G

125

However, I have the one that was offered to me a few years ago

 

opportunity, here his way of life géian za heob-
regard. In the following you should
different

 

 

01

 

t numerous details
put together the credible
puts, become; Information believed to be cin
térmal error seems to be the reason zx liegon, I have in
the Ora

 

 

mine

 

 

denied,

On the freshly advanced shoots of vines one finds
the kittens now individually, now one or two together,
soon a large number is said to be gathering together. The actual incubation business begins as soon as the blitter
Grésse cines Dreibitizuers have achieved. In this case
the beetle makes a roll of several blitters by
he starts to roll with the youngest tender ones. it's coming
&fters also before that young shoots are still in the role
get involved. If the weather is good, the development
winding of the shoots of the vine sel raseh in front of you, the vines:

  

      

 

 

     

stecher can then no longer put a few kitters together-
wrap, but must wrap itself with one of the mmiuchr g
moved closer together, but also by greater
en Blitter begrudge, The Sati cutting history
in various ways, as will be said below

 

18-

     

so gr

 

word:

      

is, by puncturing the sticles and ribs. In we-
After a few hours the leaf will wither and begin to
to roll a little, The Kiifer guides this rolling
sheets
work
commonly with cinander. That just the Minmehen outside,
the woman is busy inside the leaf, ken for dew
wahirscheiulic
sheet put down. The doubt I have in this regard
hege, has already been said above, the leaf resists
after one side, the kitter looks for it on the other 2u
turn, yes he changes even the Orda

 

and continues through Gegencinanderzichen de
with the foreti

 

female marriages and minor marriages

 

 

be, the amimuot, the kids will remember that

 

 

1 pine cone
ott 8-4 times; as a rule, however, the hk ", so that

 

 

 

126

the rain runs off easily, the smooth side of the wine
leaves outward zn kebren. He shall, in order to cross the blitter
to attach to each other, here and there the beak in the roll
prick, and the wool of the rough blade side diureh the kh
look for an opening. Probably Berulit
this statement, by the way, as already mentioned above, on irr
heavenly view of the species of Kierlegeus. That the
Kifer, to wen the roll, or to lay eggs, in which-
the same rise, is in the tightness, with which the Blitler
lying on top of each other, unthinkable. To make a roll
According to various sources, it takes several hours
after another 5-6 days, as is the case in the nature of things
lies, since the Kiifer has a role that is already finished
when the weather is favourable, I'm sure it's often moved
multiply by several leaves. After Rozier, from his Cours compl. d'Agriculture®
T. XIU, P. 27, Ratzeburg wil Oken, the procedure of
give Kafers in a slightly different translation,
the process is as follows:

The kifer choose, it is said, for his work the
largest bliticr, prick the petiole and repeat, so-
soon the leaf after a few days due to lack
The discharge begins to wilt and become limp, the operation
on each of the five ribs of the leaflets, by he must the rib of
puncture the small innermost lobe; then he rolls it
Fold together in a spiral, then go the rib of the
second lobe, and roll it in the opposite direction
Direction; with the drift and y
Proceed so that at the Eude avei lobes from the right
en after the

 

 

 

   

  
   

    

 

 

 

  

 

  
  

 

that rag will ebeuso

 

to the left, and avei from the link

 

 

ten rolled. The finfie rag is finally becoming one
used to deck the four remaining Oken in
Translation does not leave the leaf veins alone
days, but immediately after the stalk has been gnawed,
wolf down. — So much for Rozier's text. In Oken's translation
the remark is included that the leaf lobes are yon

his

     

 

after ¢

 

own

 

~ 127

 

self [?] should roll, alternating to the right
or left soon on the upper one as a result of the nerve being stabbed
side of the Blatis, soon on the mnteren. I can
note in the passages quoted by Oken from Rozier's
Cours compl. d'Agricultre not at all. During the work of rolling, which, according to Rozier 5—6
lasts days, the female lays her eggs, After the ones
three children germinate, no more and no less, in a whole
zes vine leaf, according to others much more. After Vorster would
the female only ciwa ci

  

 

si put Kier anf cinmal, dam
Rest 9-10 hours, and then back to an old [2]
or put in a neve roll,

Sometimes just let the female scine beer on the inner side of the leaf
to append and to invent, others invent, as already noted, to the same thing
Get an attaching, sticky moisture, or leave it in some sort
put down from the bag, or finally even overspomiated! Also finds. the assertion that the Kiifer with its beak, a hole vou
then drill through all the kitter to anf ei every ki so that they
appear as if pierced with pins, so that the future worm
have enough air, or with it rain and than from outside the better
penetrate, this seems to mean the holes again 21
be, through which the Kiers are pushed in after the roll has been made. According to Breuchel, the kifer should also keep its roast rolls in captivity
make, 'To all' these remarks I add that the ver-
rolls dried very much in relation to the sheet used
seemed severely crumpled,

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

In Joli and Angust one notices that one can do more

* When in the Rheingau viticulture in 1765. 8th. 8, 329 it is said that
Insect spits itself into the vine leaves after devastating the shoots
cin, and further: it rolls itself together, transforms itself and lays it
Kier in

 

 

, 80 such rests on a weak mind, more unfortunate
Combination and confusion with the way of life of completely different insects,
and refers to nothing else than mour wound brood rolls. According to Brenchel, the male would
rock and bring to safety with the greatest diligence! In twenty-four
hours two couples had already finished two taps with him; the female
Little ones stayed in the cones, to artificially stick their beers in them, nud
in two days at the back: cones, actually on the leaf stalk, out again-
get. Also, the fer would always be in three to four weeks
Roll up the zapten again and put fresh chicks in it! ! 8th "
Kaler; also agree with this remark Ratzeburgs wid
Other information matched. During this time, however, the Eut-
winding of the roast. After multiple insurance marriages
the larvae, depending on the pegs, on the warm sun
or hang in the shade, although they may have fallen on the ground,
always 8-12 days before The little lovebirds have them
general kigeushatien of the larvae to Sehmid
'n horizontal strokes over the back and
hen. From the various information about
vehen in the dried up Bitier

B

   

    

 

      

 

    

berger, with sehwar

 

a right head
the development of the 1
wrap! it's not even clear if it's for them
1 stay

  

he is when the wraps hung on the stick

   
  

thus at most be enticed by rain and dew, or
lie on the wet Evde. The liirvehs gnaw inward
yern the wraps Little Ginggehen, and nelunen to Grésse
my after L4 days to three weeks they would come out
stress the cone and go into the ground; no
but it is to be believed that they will then already have their perfect
have reached their Grésse. Kher acceptable is Vorsiers
Statement that the larvae mature in five weeks; hardly
but usually again, d: they don't go through a molt,
The larva should make a pea-sized hole in the ground
finished, in which she would remain unchanged for three weeks, wm herself
dam a pupate for a short time
The Kate created from the dolls

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

stayed in de:
earth until a penetrating rain germinated, whereupon they hew
crawl out of the Bodeu by the dozen. Brewer wants the Kéifer in
of this kind at the beginning of August to the beginning of September

 

‘T6pten have received, in which he partly j in the Wiirine, the
in the Kithle the insect. ¢

The whole processing from the egg to the beetle
imamend with others anf 60 days

 

 

so it's pretty fiber
calculated. * Davs the larva under the naineu of the white worm on the blossom
of the Weustock
the caterpillar of the trefoil moth. ichaden caused, based on gross confusion with

 

129

As already indicated above, one meets the young gene
vation of Kétern in autumn (September, every now and then too
October), Gflers can be seen mating; that
but she still leaf wraps fe
not insure ans cigener Beobachiimg, even if there
and the kifer is stated there again beaten
to (a few steps anf Banmen and Stréiuchern), after which
Production he'll go to Grande before winter. the ans
the young arising from the aveit brood would be the peepers for
deliver next May. The information that Rebenstecherkifer in winter under
tree barks have been found, different ver-
changes to the grind. Generation. Already in the previous one has
notice how fluctuating the information about the
development time of the Kiifer lanten. Above all, it should be noted that
even if the kid does not eat all the eggs in one day
the roll lays, although this little difference in wax
thim of the larvae living together in a roll: be-
founds, the possible differentness of the Eutwickhingzeit
of the perfect Kiifer, however, much greater is explained from this
lich that one from the beginning of May to the end of Jini, yes even
sometimes freshly made Bhitterbags can be found at the beginning of July. The annals of various writers is that the
development of the beetles after a quarter of a year at the latest
hiefiiy also speaks apart from the above statement by Braner, who
wants to have brought up the child in fear, in fact that
disappearance of the kiifer in July and the reappearance of the
suspected second generation in [erbst. As
should now, however, if one assumes that it appears cine Zweile
Generation iui year, the same but no longer finished rolls,
the appearance of numerous kifers in Frihjakr explained
will? Apparently either by overwintering the
Kiifers and spring reappearance—indeed
secures Breuchel, twenty full-grown, laterally living
Prickly pear found with the dung at the end of February
wed

 

noah ii

      
 

gene, d. H. wide, km I

 

  

 

 

  

 

   

 

 

    

 

    

 

 

Nérdlinger, 1 enemies, ”

  

 

130,

 

have, although it will of course be noted that
this isolated whale capture by an observer,
to which so many [rrthiiner are to be assigned, probably still further
further confirmation is required - or because many,
perhaps the majority of the kiifers with theirs until autumn
development will not be finished, rather until the next
need Spring (this probably the W; ‘ahyscheintichste); dean
that the autumn kifer lay Hicr on the falling leaves
should, as one claim goes > the larvae into the ground
creep and the pupae overwinter, oil is supportive
Observed not to be accepted. Sehmidberger, on the other hand, takes a simple
ration an and aneh Rozier says, 'Luckily enough appears
in a year only one generation, for only once occurs
one rolled blitter. * This one-year generation explains
but not the autumn weeds, so you fill in under them
Assuming again the necessity of a white

 

      

 

 

   

teron Annalime, namely the one that the kids don't often
from spring to spring of next year ihve development
development feaniligen, but a year and a half, namely from
may need until the fall of the next year; suits

but in the way, as Ratzeburg also notes, that then

the appearance of the kiifer
often

     

1 autumn not so regular and
should be, and secondly, that if the beetle is true
usually in awolf months, in a single year
but in this time it was not finished, there was a lot of
It would be more likely that he would have his final one in June and July

 

Transfiguration reach 2 see when just in August
and september,

Finally there is even a two-year-old generation
suppose, for which I know of no particular reason, it
Would you like Waiter's comment that he had larvae?
a quarter of a year with thin leaves wrapped up in a tangle
and at the end of this time they are still larvae.
have sent. damage. In the year {756 the Rebenstecher

 

   

131

to Roth in Baden have been so common that
one day fourteen Simri (2!) read together and
nevertheless %/, to %, who have lost grape harvest. In the year
In 1750 the vines were bare near Landan at the end of June
as on Christmas nights when the wood was so emaciated that
lost all prospect of a yield the following year
ing; only ¥, the harvest stopped. The same is also in
Hard hit in 1788. Not only that
the stabbing and gnawing of the young shoots reason zn
to the mischief, is elucidated by several remarks. rozier
2. B. says: -For laying time in June, set up the largest
Damage to', and Braner: .All evil is due to care,
which the kiifers carry their brat. * [last
teres certainly too one-sided again.} I be dem vineyards with dry soil
assumed that vineyards in the Rhemgau are suffering from it
with glue base often several years behind cinander; in the
He doesn't get away from Sandbiden so easily because he's in
do not build safe housing for the winter
koune. [2] On heavily dimmed ground, the beetle should be more
au be feared than on unconditional. This
anf cinem lush surroundings, maybe based on
that the vines sprout earlier on conditioned soil, and
therefore the beetle of the neighbor switch at a time cinladen,
where they find little food elsewhere, or because
that sic ry selowammmigere, il when stabbing
form inner shoots. The vine cutter should prefer sickly plants to
attack sinde. In terms of grape varieties, Breuchel does
the comment: «one finds that these vermin have a
knowing how to distinguish between rough and tender; because crack
linge and ‘Traminer, for example
have lighter leaves than other sticks, so they hold each other ¢

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

preference;

 

  

ca

 

 

will however

 

   

  

      

  

 

lurte, but especially the latter

 

on the Rolanders, Alben, Gutedel and Kieinstallstcken
anf, amter where the difference is very small, because
the gy

   

sste damage right at the start at the time of sprout

 

132
happens. * Braner also says it seems ilne od
To be pleasant to those vine varieties, because ikre B and

       

Shoot not so big and strong. 'Maybe, says
the same, weighs the way in which the vines are
draws oneself and under oneself, also many things 21 the grés-
greater or lesser damage from the vine cutter. where you
Vines planted 1nd to be tacked to the way that
the young shoots, which remain standing for the coming year
should enjoy more open air and sun than the others
Branches that are cut off again, so do they
the wood just does not do so much damage, they hang themselves
I think of you under the branches that have more shade and
not grow so fast; you will perish on such people
rob before sic cial came to the blossom, but that
Wood is not a1 regret because it olmedem where there is no
Bears grapes when the next year is cut off. Where to grow the vines in the Fla
both the good and the bad wood are the same

 

 

 

     

 

che or level draws that

 

i sun and
have air, or also where one bends down the vines strongly,
that the front wood jerks rker than
more is moved by the wind, di remains
rather on the foremost and most useful branches, and
as it cuts off these, it causes for the following year
a big damage. *

sales. If in the Frith year rough winds or
If he can hold back the growth of the vines, he can
vine-cutters great damage than; with a lot of rainy weather
but the wet doesn't prevent him avar from work, but
because just as in shady places the foliage is not right
If she wants to wither, she will do badly; as well
is it where too strong wind world. Comes after
If the drought persists, then come Wuirmlem
spoil, the larvae should also survive the winter kill
have to die more often,

In water with a lot of lead sugar, the larvae counteract
remain alive for six hours, several minutes also in water

 
 
 

behind: and

     

b,
s vermin

   

 

 

 

133

 

init corrosive mercury, which they
ausniumnt, not killed. The deadliest substance is wine
steindl; in common Ocl the warm crumbles, recovers
but again in damp earth. At Vorbanungstnitteln one recommends
Seed you F
also. — Bestr

 

 

'nicely
if between the vines, so that the caretaker
Ien the young shoots with a bitter taste
For a long time we don't have to schr miihsani, but also, especially since
since it had to happen before the appearance of the kid, wn-
effective and insufficient, other substances are not
not without danger for the vegetation. Even that recommended
Lene Shedding the Kiifer by hitting it with a stick
through the castings to the vines, to the
Of course, throwing kiifers down cannot bring much success
to have. The only effective means are: first, the
tings of the lightly on the blisters
blue heels; secondly, the
slide it into a tach laid out underneath, a small
an umbrella, etc. On warm days it is harder
get hold of them, because they are then already ant
Werlen some distance to earth, bet kithlen is the
Harvest plentifully, in wet weather you don't meet them very much
gahirich on the sticks. The collected kifer must

   

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

heavy, metal

 

, coppery or green Ki

 

  

 

 
 

 

to be thrown into a swatter, in the throat of which one
‘Funnel has set. M
buzz and 2

       

ny also recommends di

 

to

 

burn when they start di
mine, sobuld man
can get hold of. Against the Kiiter on fruit

will; it would be better if she 2a

 

 

of their
buimnen, where he is by far rarer and infinitely fewer
want to drive, seems
to go too far, and advises zn' part of confusion

 

ger is harmful, also war

t the branch detour. If you are still busy
Banning and digging up the vines

 

 

we at different years

re understood,

  

I recommend doing this in the transformation
Tr
that this

 

 

1, it should be noted
little kicking

kt to destroy

   

     

Destruction in any case only ctwa ¢

 

-_e

134

can, which thereby very tie? come and lie down
therefore not able to wrap around me. The purple apple piercer, Rhynchites bacchus L.
Size of the vine cutter. Crimson with
NEM gold shimmer, soft but m
very hairy. The one love
C = sallow the female, with a counter
= front-facing tip on the side of
Breastpieces honed. One has recently heard of that
R. Bacchus L. vine similar, hitherto unnoticed under
deuiselbcu names running type Rh. auratus Scope. different
the learned. This latter has a short and thick one,
up to the hialfie golden-purple colored ruffle. at
the eighth Bacchus the thinner, longer snout is dark-
died black. turns out to be very early in the year, because already in
the first Miirziageu one finds tomcats who
have left quarters. It's pretty common these days
the bloom on the Aptelbiumen. I have him on vines
neither did Schmidberger. Here is always
betwleti The pothead will probably catch soon after the bloom
cast off to its brood, On the 1st May 185 I kicked him out
a Biru branch, in the midst of damage, that certainly
he himself committed hatic, The aw
supreme had at the grande
ing hole and ii

 

 

 

   

 

 

  

 

  

  

 

is

  

 

 

 

» sprout below the

     

 

n round through the marrow inside
black glitter down-
hngen, The Blittershot at the summit showed a yleiches
hole, but still was in the damp, cold weather
fresh. Were further down a cluster of flowerheads
i the sticl of Bliitheukuospen at the union with
pierced the keleh punch. Audere Kuospeu deeper unien
aun stem hicng: down. the kitter
only has to die for nutrition or to pass the time
Lécher have eaten, deun in the short the boys
Yriebe couldn't think of helping
Kier in it nutteeu, and yet dirt

  
 
  
 

  

    
    

 
 

  
   

nm uur still at a Zasi

 

 

yin years. Where

 

135

the apples and probably also the pears ugly fail
Depose Kier, with shots for nelimen. Usually
he frys namely in young apples and starts with that
Sclunidberger only at Johanni. The process of brood peeling would be as follows: the female bores
in the course of a quarter of an hour a hole in an apple and widens it-
same with a spacious chamber for the egg to be laid. It spins
nm, lay the whitish egg and drill it into the
Apple, a little over a line deep, Finally, ex partially closes the entrance
with the snout, partly with the abdomen, in which there is a sticky matter
then separate and move the abdomen back and forth to remove the gauze
as it were gliding, for this work it takes a whole hour, only
cit fails to rest. Sometimes same in the
he of the previous one, often on the same apple, it looks for cin nenes bi-
bring. Ex chooses a smooth side of the same at a short distance
from the chalice, sometimes four kiers are attached to an apple
represent, Is the weather giiustig. then after a few days a
whitish stinging with a black head that extends deeper into the apple
you will usually advance to the core building. Vou lays out there
after the surface of the apple it takes a walk around the rubbish
to get up (2) or thereby get air x, After three to four
In weeks it is fully grown; according to Schmidberger, the ranch of the pear moth
no doubt quite similar at first glance, but less flesh-colored,
almost the same size, by the way. [But surely it is easy to under-
see silk because it has no legs. We can go on the ban
and must be wrinkled, like most Riissellcifer larvae.J

Ks leaves the apple to cling to the earth and into
to see the following Friilyjaby as a kifer, To destroy him, niuss
according to Schmidberger, the kifer was caught and the pierced ones
Get rid of apples, also in the morning see the orchards, under
whose splinters the kifer fibernachtel, That Bacchus not on vines before-
comes is already mentioned in the case of the vine cutter. Since the dete R. Bacchus is the more hivut of the two relatives, the following applies
what has been said above, without a doubt, by him primarily, R. auratus

approx. as anch Ratzeburg assumes, probably in general the same Lebeus
lead wisely. but it would be of interest to his
get to know customs,

The red-headed Blithstaber, MRhynch. acquatus L. Inder form
very different from the previous
as Kopt and Br
third of the whole

   

; about his

 

  

 

 

 

     

   

      

 

    

 

 

 

 

    

 

   

 

 

 

     

‘see you in

 

 

 

 

Ht. but the rift in Miéunemarriage so long

 

 taken together, in the wife of avei |
pe az bronze-coloured, with the exception of the
cls and the red Fligeldeeken. fingers black Riis

   

 

136

The cat is hiiwig. even very often in a few years. Man
finds him late April to early June. often in the company of eupreus,
on plum trees, apple trees, rowanberries, even on Aronia Bo. tryapium wd Cratacgus punctata in the pleasure buds, one sees him sche
in pairs on the branches, in cooler weather he sits
somewhere on the wood of a twig or on the edge of a leaf stalk
with spread knees and the rift, one might say cheekily,
stretching out in the air, Ankh ev bows down like his relatives
suddenly descended with a sense of relief. His way of life is not yet
known here. But in any case he belongs to the harmful ones, I saw
ilm with it at the end of April, in which hardly protruded from the buds
to pierce numerous holes in the fallen flower buds with his rift,
Probably to get rid of it, a lot of flowers went up
because xu reason. But how does he propagate his sex? ge know how his relatives In ceive ingenious ways. Maybe through
Stabbing off flowers in which he has laid eggs? The plant borer, Rhynchites cupreus Lt
Corridor burned red-copper, cracks! shorter than the previous one. Upper parts strongly ranh, somewhat hairy. .

May and June are very windy and open in pairs
Awetschgen, Kirschon, Arlsbeer (Pyrus torminalis), especially
also rowanberries. I also found him twice in

   

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

yenber anf den Biénmen. — He accompanies the rowanberry until
in the high mountains; but not exclusively, because still
in the Alpenrdschen region in the Bavarian Tyrol
tir freshly cut off in June, on the bark skin |
undercut branches of the mebilberry tree below, the cin
Ki of L millimeters long, which one except
cupreus at most the one found on whitebeam trees
Attribute to vine cutter kéunte. But I have. the latter
nowhere has it been customary
Brat to use, we may

      

   

tends to twigs with his
probably with Grind vorkiuliz
our cuprews as authors of the cut off Meblbauu-

ge consider how we also do not doubt it

 

 

 

my

   

1,
'Leave the many cut branches on the voxel becr
vou dew

 

same hervilir. As soon as you approach him, he throws himself down. Schinidberger describes the way in which the motherkifer
behaves during brood laying. Have the pilaumen the gris

 

 

 

ciuer almond reached, so he cuts, why cr an hour
needs, the plant stalk half done, nan looks at the
Pilamme a suitable place to store his ki,
drills a hole through the epidermis into you with the rift
green mass of pilanme, not deep, even sometimes only moter
the upper hand, nnd extends it to ciner fir the bi more than
sufficiently large chamber, After this mngefihr one
fifteen minutes is gone, he slides his abdomen
into the entrance of the chamber, logs his hi, pushes it along
completely down the snout sticks the epidermis, which he
looked after carefully while working. and now goes back to the half-eaten spot
of the stick. He's eating them all the way through now, or at least like that
far that it only sticks slightly, so in these:
Fall the pilaume about that falls to the ground, tsar
he branches when, as in summer, the pilaf stalks are already
are stirrer, often around 3 hours. Ks is therefore understandable
that the mother animal in a day only three, at most four
Kier interrupts When sometimes two Kier in
are sunk in a plant, this comes after Sehmid-
berger ohue Zweilel therefore that cin second female ans

  

   

 

  

 

    

    

  

medicines

   

 

 

 

accidentally left his hi there. Should be after a few days
already the widow crawling out of the ki. But is hicbei za
notice that i kier in cherries, i think too
from pilaumen borer, it has perhaps been known for several
earlier days, with chr warm weatherrang ee week
remained undeveloped for a long time. Also says Schmidberg

     

   

 

that sometimes Kier also in the third and fourth week

be found inanimate
Warm fet

 

1, if that is the necessary one
© Spiitlinge, because meanwhile dic
lazy, like to go to reason. At the regular
course of things

     

; that but sole
Pilanme

 

 

i the whole present in the pilanmen
SSC

 

  

th consumed in 5 to 6 weeks; the w

 

food supplies
Larvae with a black head bury themselves in you
Earth and come in the égrant following Frahjahe as Kier
to appear. , y S .
So November weepers would be cursed. 138

Beginning of May, ie at the time when the pilaumen are still closed
were small, Schmidberger one day noticed a few mil
Cutting off young plum shoots
Pilate borer. Kr believes that they are just faking this out
have done need. They are at work like the branch-
detour (ith. conicus) seduced, and kept the womb
you cut off two sides. This deviation from
the rule seems very strange though. But missing
mis itber the habits of both the plum borer
of the branch detour and some relatives another
amount of details. So I found, as noted above,
at the end of May 1850 lying under a cherry tree, a
quantity
schenstiels apparently gone:

   

   

 

   

  

fresh and at different points of the church

 

  

hnitiene cherries, from the Grisse
1 dark brown spot

 

of a strong cherry pit, each with one

   

and below a spacious chamber, with a fat-gliding
ing, muattweiße egg, exactly from the length of one
millimeters (so like that of the Betuleti). Because I don't like it
did not succeed in attracting all attention, except for a plum
to shake other riddle pickers from the branches,
so I have to presume prekinfig, the torn ones
Cherries come from the plant borer and he lays
his Kier in cherries, as long as the plums require the
have not yet reached their full size. But since I him
also individually in May on young forminalis leaves
next to long and dimen, probably deviated from the branch
cut sch
I mean he probably just gnaws the young leaf without touching it
to deduce Britten. According to Sehmidberger, some plants become Biame
of all fruits by the plum borers, and
he therefore recommends shaking the boom from the middle
June to late Jali. On our above remark
the time of the Vorkoume:
one would in this Ze

 

 

 

    

sen fund, wonders what he's doing here

 

  

ng vou

the Kiifer also anf Kirsehl

     

une! the sales price will also start in June
and at Kirschbiinmen divefen include the month of May,

139

The Awei Detour, Rhynch. conicus Ill, (ulliariae L.)
stature quite like cuprevs, anch and that
still not hairy, but the whole Kiifer,
with Ausualine of black feelers, splints,
soles, shiu steel blue,

The fer comes in abundance in Friithling, as soon as the
first blossoms and leaf buds of the fruit trees unfold. One finds
ilm then in the garden on all different kinds and varieties of the
same, on pilaf, cherry, apricot, pear trees, even the gnarled
wild pear mud after Richter on Pyr. salicifolia. Also on that
medlar and chokeberry, as well as on several wallbiums: service tree, bird
beer, bird cherry, hawthorn; at least the many seem to me
cut branches hanging from these forest trees, the smallness of the
eggs locked in them, and the ditane because of the wombs. just
to be able to lose the conicus. Individual checkerberry shoots were several times
stabbed. At first he bores his rift into the flower and
Blattsticle, nm to feed on the sap or soft flesh mul
one often sees them even in mating. begins soon after
the breeding work. Namely, as soon as the shank once reached a few inches in length
have enough, he puts his eggs in the tip of a sole and sheds
a bit from here, so that the larva in the withered peak
nourished and developed. Schinidberger has the Avt wud
way described as the kerf

 

here goes za works, it was
st himself the description of this
contribute little to the procedure. Of the
Above all, Kiifer is looking for a place
soft lap agreeable to him. Send you a kiss too
Ee long, then il does not prevent such,

cine work to start when
norwen

 

 

 

 

 

 

ssteusder outermost part
quite herbaceous
t. The Kiifer describes himself

   
 

same still vr

 

 

he

 

attached to the tribe

 

ton side of the womb by one
Riis:

cut from Ritsselbreite, dit

stitch or a transverse
Job

    
 

140

(q) where they bite through the soft womb afterwards, stab
wants, Here he bores against the tip at a short distance from it
vin hole to the core. That he did this in Sehmidberger's observation
htung straight on the side facing away from the Siam and the
head directed towards unien, accomplished, seems inir cher
to be conspicuous as a constant rule. That to record one
Ice specific hole is now widened sufficiently. The female
Kifer then sits down the king aisle of the chamber and lays a
in and brings it completely into the right one with the riddle
Location. All this work takes about an hour. Without
zt back to earlier position, mm den
Instinct to cut off, but initially his work is more

 

   

     

 

 

  

   

   

he ever returns to rest

 

cin refusal because he bets on one side of the tri
be

 

take the ripple and drive across to the other and like-
aurick, On this A.

  
   

cuts. he to aut a certain
depth cin. Then the actual parting begins, that
the kiifer continues uncrmiidet for so long, either until the

 

 

viecb is completely pierced, in which case one thinks
should he sci cut off with scissors, or until he,
attached only with its innermost part, itself strong
inclines or hangs down. During work he walks more
times towards the top; that so hes gegebe to the 'Tried
fall completely through the heaviness of his body,
as Schmidberger thinks, does not seem credible. Then
A single rip stitch further measured more success for him
have than the small burden of his little body. This work
then often 1-L¥, hours. Kr rests on it for a few minutes
on a leaf, scrapes about close to its food
niiutchen of the same, but so little that you
can notice the spot where the same thing happened. After about
Before recovery he goes back to work and
brings to the hanging shoot
is present, another Ki in a wide hole in di

 

     

 

 

 

  
   

 

   

 

cinstitnd

 

 

> whom space enough

 

 

 

Near the first under, he will know through the evening
book, then cr shall be in all Mahe on the following day
e Wi. Not every lap

 

daily work and puts the between

   

14

often only: the third or fourth, it seems to him for his purposes
tangible. In a short drive probably only one
Ki, in longer or stronger two, sometimes three. Tn the
I regularly counted three hawthorn shoots. If it
no matter how hard-working, the female only produces two
hey a day, and mostly it's a series of
days prevented from work by rainy weather or wind. The main breeding season is May and Jimi. On the
Apple tree, however, it only begins in June, i. bra. if the
tails are no longer so short and woolly. From the beginning
From July onwards there are usually fewer freshly cut ones
Shoots, how about assuming that August shoots
cut, and according to Richter himself still in September
pricked branches found w

The Lirvehen crawls out of the after just eight days

      

 

 

 

  

 

    

Ki It is white, with a black-brown head, and after
14 days already st especially the Mark
of the drive. After four weeks it has its formation
reaches and goes out into the earth; it should be here
dig a few inches deep. In the first spring the Riis-
self-kids trained. The beetle particularly likes to infest the grafts because of their softness
Reiser, judges are cut off in individual years %» of the same:
often only one thing, but in many cases two and some
even all three eyes. Schmidberger also states that in the tree nursery in a
certain year, almost no graft would remain whole if he did not
would have hunted the insect very much. After the same is a dry one
May and June of the procreation of the insect must be favourable, for it humps very much
then the eyeball together and the egg is squeezed. The same
achicht if the stabbed lap lying on bare ground from
is parched by the sun. The best way to collect insects is to tap them off
an official umbrella. Selnnidberger recommends that anyway
Collecting and destroying the shoots inhabited by the larvae. According to the same, the previous one would be very related
such great deviations in their way of life are also determined by the fact that
she lays her egg in the pith of the blatsticle. She pricks 2u this guard
reehta and left in the petiole, to which she entrusted her egg

   

 

moderately large;

    

   

 

 

 

now Lally

   

   

 

that. 142

Leaf withers and falls off, He never had this little variety a lap
absclinciden, being only once the great branch-cutter
lay a leaf stalk,

I, too, have the little flowers of this little pine in pear leaf
stalked beginning Jnli found: on the back side of the leaf, there where the
Stem attached to leaf. I don't know anything more about it. Appendix 21 Rhynchites. In mid-June 1854 I found Hohenheim on a
and the same strong pear tree spurred young shoots on the branches,
We are quite large, like those of the Rh. cupreus corresponding Kier eut-
held, but which was not deprived of the Safi by partial cutting off. Much went around the young Trib hernm in the spiral many to the core
pricked points. The question is num, whence the previous gri
Aten's this way of housing the brood? You Spitzmuschen, Apion. through his straight-
look at the snout of a shrew, manehma) something
writhing, kinfold filers as in Rhynchites, not standing in a pit. Bulbous wing-coverts, body very strongly rounded. all little,
shape or black or metallic color are very similar

  

 

  

 

 

 

        
 

in
Kiiferchen. The apion species no doubt shove their kidneys into lichs that they carry with them
their snout beforehand in the very young pods or in the stalks of them
Wohoopi lance have bolted. The larvae are therefore harmful to health
partly in eating up the seeds, partly in that of the pith of the stalk,
muscheu, Ap. pomonae F, more acutely pointed

Proboscis, sky blue above, black below. Of the

Kiifer is very early especially in April and May

- the freshly planted Buehenblittern, Auel anf the
Flowers of the ‘Ivanbenkirs and the young shoots

+ *™ the fruit bitumen I always notice him in the spring
Quantity. According to Bonehé, at this time of year it destroys their flowers and
young shoots, especially those of the plants. Even in late summer, Au-
gust to October, you can find large numbers of fruit and other
Biiumen, following the honey-thane of the aphid. eradication by
knock off

The Vetch Spicy, Ap. craccae Grm, (viciae Deg.). larger than the previous species, awl-shaped snout, black, vacant
Fiilder red at the root. Miummare much smaller, with all brown-red
feelers. According to Degeer, the female lays her eggs at the time of the blithes
the very young Wiekenschote. The resulting Liirvehen are
white with yellow head and brown jaws, curled up. — sic
eat up the seed in the pod and transform in the blink of an eye
Friihjaby to Kiifer. 143

 

The era-colored Spitzminschen, Apion aencum Gru, Filler der Riis
scl base nearer, ore colors, underside black, Minnehen on the »
Upper side slightly blue, smaller, wings simply striped. stoner already *
At the beginning of April in quantity anf mallows and after Bonché also lavateren, egg
Initially tears and pierces leaves and leaf and flower stems,
right away you can see him mating very often, soon after he lays his
Kier in the stems and petioles and until autumn, maybe even
Even earlier, the young Kiifer are ready and eat up, That
thus the kiifer, with its large number, brings disadvantages to the mallows
cinlenchtend, Bouché even says that one brings because of his wives
in a few years not a flower of it,

The yellow-shanked Spitzmuschen, A, flaro-femoratun Grm. Kithler
attached near the proboscis of the proboscis, black, finely grained hairs. Thighs red in the middle. Wing coverts bluish. Should the seeds of the
Senklee's, Trif. pratense, eat,

The red clover shrew, Apion apricans Gyll. Kithler in the
Sitting in the middle of the chisel, body black, smooth. fiibler base and +
all thighs and front tibiae red, snout a little: curved,
Found from May onwards in the greatest quantity on the red meadow clover. It should eat its seeds and thereby spoil whole clover bugs,
From the time of the Blithe, easily eaten in large quantities by one
skim off Bammen. The yellow-footed shrew, A, flavipes Grm. filer in the middle
of the snout, black, somewhat shiny, the feelers black, on the
base red. All thighs and tibiae red. found at the moment
the blossoms in abundance on the white clover (Trifol. repens.) and will as
Destroyer of the same pictured. Easy to slip off like the previous ones. The zimoberroihe shrew, A, miuiatom sec. feeler at the
Standing in the middle of the chin, lively, almost bloody, with black
Eyes. tert on the 1st blossom and on the like |
Places, Destroyed after Bouché in Friihjaly often all the Garter's Blitter
ampfers by lacing them completely. Bouché, who wrote it as Ap. frw
mentarium Ib. auitihrt, but very likely our miniatum means,
It is compulsory to shake off the kiifer and tuck into it. The so-called red cornworm, Ap. frumentariun Gyll, 4 Dem
Similar to the previous ones, but smaller and pale red. being
Riissel_curved, the wing-coverts somewhat rougher,
The rows of notched points are somewhat wider than those
uwi see lying bridges. Used since Linnaeus of
Described by many as a feared grain destroyer. But this statement by Linné was rightly given by a
Herbst and others in doubt. Iliger and Germar are the ones
View that Linné olne doubts whole young, not yet obscure

  

 

    

 

 

 

   

say

         

    

   

    

 

 

   

 

 

 

  

 

 

     

    

   

 

 

     

 
     

  

 

Via

dead black cornworms as Attelabus (Apion) frumentarius besebriated
have. Except that of Erath gowi
Indication that the Kiafer's kiafs go partly with the grain into the granary
dragged, partly produced in the same later [21]. is since
As far as I know, no one has reported that the Kifer
but in the grain of s well, that he may be found in the grass 2n,
Thus, it can be assumed that even if the way of life of the insckts still
is not exactly known, but the same is probably not true in cereals
occurs, even if it occurs in this one. at least it is rare
is to deserve great attention

   

hrang gescheptten

   
 

   

   

 

 

cekom! b) Length of the first antennal segment at least one-third
of all the buggers, but not yet an actual one
Shaft. ce

Magdalis. Loud stoners under 7 mill, Linge. Ripple soon
Hardly longer, soon several times longer than the head. Larvae similar to those of the other ruffles, with a horny end
head and legless. life under the bark. The plum weevil, Magdalis pruni L. All black with. voth-
gefbén Fithlern, The kifer is pretty mean. He finds himself over
May, June and, as far as I can remember, I think, too

later in the year on apple. Plum, apricot, quince trees. I have also found it singly on cherry blossoms, 'Serves as food
ibm the grin of the bhitter, which he sees from the top or bottom of the
Bitter scrape off. It usually mates on the underside
der Bhitter stati, The Iusekt is not schen and elwas trig, Mebrere
Writers probably draw from the same source
News that the larva of the chick was cake-like and slippery
and wake up from the young sprouts of plums and apricots,
This statement certainly stems from an erroneous confusion with the
Allantus larvae, M. pruni larvae do not live on the leaves,
but in woody parts just under the bark. essentially agree with other weevil larvae, which are larval sizes
crooked. The harmfulness of the kiifer on the ground of my own observations
tion seems low to me. By shaking off the Kiifor who
mostly on the leaves, as said above, the insect would not
difficult to destroy because, as far as I know, it is usually only
occur. Same kind where not a tinsserst relative I ke at
idnngstrait find am able than that ai
Feeler hostage darker, brighter than the common prnni. I found in
great number in diseased rose-sticks, Here he had between bark and wood
his with dark brown flour! fulfilled Gingen created, cradle 2n two
Third deepened into the sapwood, development of the kifer in mid-May 1852. The same man mated in captivity, apparently the same man
I'm looking this year, May 1854, gnawing on the pear tree's splinters. Another very related Magdalis, also all black,
but something grissier, with red-brown fihler, on this one linge-
ve Kenle, and can get a little longer ruffle, hold on to the hawthorn,
even the American species like Cratacgisgrus galli and the like, especially
ders but anf Qnittenbuinmen and the medlar (Mespitus germanica) ant. She also scrapes off leaf green streaks on 'even leaves, both
on the top or bottom of the sheet. You can't hit your brnt
rare in number below the smooth bark of medlar and quince. Dan-
I found twigs as thick as most of them. This pine tree too
wiht the nearness of branches, knots to put down the kids
and the like. The larval veins are preferentially lodged in the bark
and grasp a little in the cotter pin. Where they run, she has
Bark a reddish-brown color and is somewhat crimson, from the
Cradle, which the splint formerly only gently touches 4, the young one
Kiifer in the invi through a hole made as if by Buprestis. This
Léeher can be found on almost every middle medlar tree, and they serve zr
easy access to things. generation probably nor cinjilrig. Magdalis Cevasi F. is 4 million. long, wide, with Kinge-
vem, diinnerem . curved snout , shorter, narrower
cher hairy black fiddler; the tooth on the
thighs, woven Linnaeus speaks, is very weak. hn the rest even duller black than the previous one, Ab- =
Education based on an example given by Herm Ratzeburg

Should be used as a kiifer and larva on cherry, plum, pilana. yes even apple trees are met, in Sweden in 1750 dureh
Destruction of the blitter have been aimed at, at this insse he
souders striking Fleeken zurtiek. Herbst designates the larva as
Minirerin of the cherry and pear tree bliss. AN die tir me came
credible,

Very similar species to the latter, but with a short snout,
I brought up much smaller and older hairy, gnarly black feelers
apple lists,

The larva of Magdalis barbicorn also lives in these
long. even broader and flatter, chev
with their shorts, not very dieht beh

    

 

   

  

 

  

 

   

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

grm This ~
Is matt black, even the fithlre
rien kenle,

 

 

 

Ndrdlinger, the hey enemies, 10

   

 

146,

By the darkness that still exists about Magdatis' way of life: pruni
as well as over the riisselkiifer rules. who live on the cherry trees,
could also the more distant Magdalis species occurring on Obsthiiumen
not to be walked along in complete silence,

As a formal inaccuracy or confusion with a
related species, I must consider the statement that Magdalis violacea L.,
distinguished from the previous ones by their dark blue elytra and
mostly more important large ones, also the young shoots of the hawthorn and the
Grapevine spoils, and its larva occurs in the marrow of the same. Never
I saw him nowhere else than on pines and spruces; in these, je-
but lives under the bark and only in fragile young trees. Yes
known also its larva. If the above information is not a
change with the likewise blue vine weevil 7m? c) Fiibler conspicuously kinked, in the form of a flagella (curculio),
in fact
#) Proboscis short, ie, shorter in most, only slightly in some
longer than the head. .

1) The fat eaters, Cneorhinus. with very short
zem, platium at the top, thick rift, where a very significant:
almost downwards with a ribbing furrow. wing
loose, very arched and stout. Cureulio (Cneorh.) geminatus F. —|— long. The black one
Basic color of the body due to densely packed brown scaly
or bristles covered. broad, somewhat globular, white
sparsely bristly covers with grany lines. The flat riddle
with a barely noticeable gutter. Except in the forest, the Kiifer is already very harmful
in the vineyards, where he nursed the young vine buds
pen eaten. The news of his devastation
preferably come from Silesia. A lesser relative, the fat-belly eater on hazels, Cureulio

(Cneorh.) coryli Gyll., is also quite spherical and of a
Tits covered with grey-brown scales, somewhat piebald
with half-black seam (Curenlio coryli F), In abundance in spring and
again in autumn on hazel and birch etc. streches. He gnaws buds
pen and the bark of young shoots. Transformation probably in the earth. Will 6fters through his

Lots of fun, but less in the garden than in the woods, tapping and
riveted. 147

2) The Grauriissler, Sifoua. have very short riddles with mter that
Eye curved proboscisfuere and are all about 6 million, long. xnarrow kifer, tiber and fiber with metallic yellowish, awns or
covered with brown shackles and thus of crimson,
see. The lined Grauriissler, Curcutio (Sit.) lincatus
1. ++ We want several under this name
understand very related species and varieties. Which
simmillich on a dark background of granen eyes
pen are covered and their brisket of ling
after three lighter stripes of scales have passed through, which also
continue over the elytra, albeit weaker,

The kiifers appear with the first spring year, not only run quickly,
but still fly from one field to another in the sunshine, man
it occurs in very large numbers on pod plants such as field beans,
Lathyrus, peas, also clover and the like. They eat the leaves
marginally when they have barely emerged from the seed coats or are still
are young, so that they ass astray. The resulting one
Gchaden seems to be often not unimportant. The beetle is difficult to collect individually because it likes to kiss
falling to the ground like dead and is not here because of the color of the earth
I'd love to see you. With. but he can do hamming especially in fields
can be siphoned off very easily in large quantities with row culum,

More information about these kifers is yet to come; but seems
so much certain that melirere the Sitona species Eude August from the pupae
crawl, since at this time one everywhere a lot of uncorrupted specimens
plare finds, while dic appearing in the Frithjahy very worn, thus
are without a doubt older and have overwintered,

3) The Dickmantriissler, Otiorhynchus, With a short ver-
thick rift, The short rift pit against the eye into one
hollow flattening. Body rather strongly arched, but sometimes the
Back flat, medium to fairly small. Der Liebstiickelritssler, Curcutio (Otiorh.) ligustied 1. Riiss slightly longer than the head, black, dirty
grey, also whitish scaled pine, brisket with
black round knots, heavily arched

I often find the Kiifer in May very often on the slopes wid on paths,
often with fresh, green juice in the man}, which may have come from mean wie-
descendants. However, the kifer should not be used as a kifer [2] and larva
only in umbels and whose roots become harmful. but also caused great damage, especially in Rosenmark, 16
even portrays him as genius on the still undeveloped Banmbliths,
especially the peach tree. 148

The turreted thick mautriissster, Curculio (Otiorh.) sulcatus M10 Mill. long, with a black, almost knotted, curled neck, furrowed,
in the furrows punctures, also with dirty burns, small ones
hairy patches, The larva becomes 9 million long, is footless, almost elliptical, slightly behind
narrowed, crooked, yellowish-white and red-haired, with almost half-
royal, yellow, retractable head. She lives the fall and winter
hinduych to the Wurzcin of the primroses and suxi questions which they up
eats away at the trunk and kills. In the spring of 1832 at Bouché they were very mean and corrupt
above mentioned plants mainly in pots. After Westwood he is
also harmful to the vine. Remove shriveled mushrooms and kill them by the roots
located larvae it is recommended

+ The burned thick-maul viissler, Curcutio (Otiorh.) picipes hb 1 A bit flat at the top. Densely brown and yellowish scaly. breastpiece
| heavily kibbled. furrowed ceilings. On the back between the
Finchen strong grains on all sides from Schiippehen. According to Kirby and Spence in ban schools for slips fatal. According to Faldermann in the Bulletin scientifique de Académie Impériale des
Sciences, de St. Pétersbonrg. January 1837 is cin dem picipes see related
and more similar, but of more significant size and length, the core
Russel, longer, slightly milled at the base and rear, weakly
ran and in the gullies beautiful with spots and yellow and brown
Schiippchon frosted blankets, marked giant kifer, €. (Otiorh.) March
quardtit Fald., in the imperial peach forages 7 ‘Tsarskoie Selo
in innumerable quantities by gnawing off the bark of the young shoots sehiidl-
become lich. The gnawed branches died. The stoner lived mainly
evident at night and therefore had to be followed in the light. True-
apparently the beers had come in with the earth that had come out
been brought and the insckt had settled in the mild temperatuy of the
‘Forkhanses developed. Finally, Ratzcburg adds: Curcutio (Otiorh.) rancus F
t quite globular, with properly made pronotum, colorful throughout

his dense, awned and scorched stags. Of the buds
damaging the fruit trees and wine. Finally damaged Curculio (Otiorh.) lacvigatus F., 6 3mill. long, whole
shiny black. according to Richter the Pllaumenbinme in a dlnich way. like the branch cutter. ie

 

4) The grin tears form a fairly natural one
tnd Grappa vou, which catches the eye because of its colour
3 million to 10 million Longing. Your body is more towards the front

 

149

 

eye spittoon than among the Granrdssler, the great Mebrzah wnt
Whole body covered with fine, grainy scales that
Giving beetles a gorgeous look, with age
the grin not rarely too golden yellow or noeh hiul
skyblank. You can find the Griinriissler on many forest, even
Coniferous trees, without therefore on the fruit trees and
expected to be less common. You meet them preferentially
wise in May and June. They belong because of the number
in which they appear and the young kitters, yes even from
gnaw breaking kuospen, partly to the selir sehitd-
common insects. The commonest types are

a) with strongly arched, ciferous abdomen, un-
tligell, with bluish-green eyes, fihler in furrow-|
like pit and thigh without thorns. Curculio (Euso- |
mus) ovulum Til, especially on plum trees,

b) Body rather slender, antennae in a dimple
standing. —Phyllobius,

curculio (phyll.) Pyri B., the grimacing one among the mean ones: the whole one
Bodies with green or greenish, granary, coppery, warm me t

 

 

  

 

 

 

lic, but usually not very lively glistening, Bfters even
covered with rather dull, hairy webbing; Legs reddish brown
with distinct thorns. Very common on alders and other forests
Name and Ratzebnrgs remark that the kifer in Loudo
magazine Oet. 1837 p. 465 as very harmful, assume that
possibly also on fruit trees at home. Cureulio (Phyll.) arborator Hb, shinal, shin metallicgrim be- ]
nststiick quite royal. one with green thorns

    

    

 
 

scaly and at the same time brownish hairy. al, brown-yellow 1

  

blankets alike
thighs. In mountains hinfig, usually on nutmeg and rowanberry, their
He eats leaves, but probably also éflers on orchards,

The silver-grey tortoiseshell, Cureulio (Phyll.) ar-
gentatus L. Burning grin, also golden green. sometimes bluish scaled. Pretty strong
light bristles. Thighs_ spined, splints and
Barrel soles yellowish. Acusserst frequently on Ohst~
sky and mountain. 150

The very similar Cureulio (Phyll.) maculicornis Grm.,
weak lorstig. with more bluish scales, black legs
with pitch-brown sole and black sheep tip and filler club. Seems to be common in North Dentsehland only mv. The dwarf grunt, Curewlio (Phyll.) parrulus Gyll. more
f-stocky, covered with pale green tufts of hair, not bristly: red gel

Fithler and legs, these without Doruen, also very common aut
fruit bitumen . The Brown Green Tear, Cucurlio (Phyll.) oblongus L
Without gray scales. Fairly heavily haired with grey. fih
ler and the faintly spined legs red. wing covers

brown, sometimes black. The Kiifer appears in some years in more dreadful

Quantity. He starts his by rubbing the trees

 

Devastation on the Obstbiumen, above all the

 

nibbles at buds and when they grow very slowly
1 ruins. Particularly

 

wrap, to the big ‘The
this damage becomes sensitive in the Bawn schools
the grafts. Later he sits down in the unfolded
Buds and consumes either just the soft of the bliss
or all but the prime rib and stalk. Especially aut'
dwarf and trellis trees, Schmidberger lost his
heal sensitive. Hardly, he says, are in their years
1831, 1834 and 1835 the young peach and trellis trees
could be saved from ilm. [was in May and June 1851
the kifer very ze end in the Banmschule in Hohenheim. Here, too, as in Schmidberger's garden, he undertook things
the different types of fruit no Unterse

Towards the end of June there are fewer kifers to be seen. Above
the cocooning history of the beetle the details are very
trackable. Teh found him several times on filter rolls of pap-
pelu, and believed antiing! muche maybe roles like
Rhynchites. However, this is based on error. Of the
Kéfer stands on such castors as aneh on cast off
chenen drooping branches of other trunk kites, without
Only a quarter, because the withered Bhitt zn his pasture
says more than the fresh, pastoral ones, Schntidberger says,

 

 

  

 

 

low certainly

     

 

 

 

15d

the female lay her eggs in the soil where the larva
from the warts of your meadow plants feed and
tiberwintere, 1m in the next spring as a kifer for
seem to come. How far one goes in destroying the insect, welehes
in warm midday weather, you are welcome to avoid the reenactment
whether tapping is sufficient is to be determined first; at
it should be of use to the freshly budded trees
but the valuable slips an eylindrishe, above ge-
closed paper bag za deeken to see if the
Don't focus on the sun-drenched
visited wild ricers. Of course, this is probably because of that
the possible damage caused by putting it on
the unfolding of the graft buds happen. e) Body rather slim. Fihler in a down
crooked risselfury standing. Polydrosus. The Soft Griinriissler, Curculio (Polydr.) mollis Grm. Pretty much
narrow. Just reach the fithler to the rear end of the breastbone. |
Metallic golden green of scale-like hares covering the entire kifer
cover. Light-coloured cap, soft wing-coverts, reddish-yellow, keenly
thorny legs. After insuring one of my accomplices in a lot of Blatter
grazing in a lilac in the gardens. Otherwise in abundance on Nadethdlzern,

The apple-green Granriissler, Curculio (Polydr.) splendidus Hetlw. (seriecus Gyll.) Shin dull light grin scaled. cover hairless, dent-
lightly striped pnnktirt. The thin fillers and legs yellow, latter
somewhat green-scaled on the very faintly spined thighs. very
common on all fruit trees. The golden silk Gvitnriissler, Curculio (Polydr.) sericeus Hb. (fla
vipes Gyll.) Greengolden scaled. Filler very diiun amd like the |
thornless legs yellow. The Gray Green Ripper, Curculio (Polydr.) mali F. Bbwas matt. ) Coppery becomes metallic gray from scale-like heads, winged |
cover somewhat striped, noticeably tapered behind, with strong, not
covered rows of dots. Always in April and May very common to Waldbiumeu, especially the
Kuche, which often loses a large part of the young foliage because of it. At the same time often very hilly on fruit trees, especially apple trees,
see also here through the gnawing of bkittera and flowers. After He-
getsehweiler (Denksehy. i.e. c probably. 1833, 1, 8, 73) would

  

 

 

  

 

 

 

 
 
  

 

   

 

the tomcat almost as much in the live as in the perfect state
damage than the Frost Moth [?} The woman lays according to his instructions
the eggs in a small indentation made with a riddle
Flower buds, the stalks and also the leaf stalks, probably just one
or two, probably in the case of a nut. where they lie next [2], while
during the day they move from leaf to leaf, but with great haste. The footless larva, which hatches after eight days, works its way into
the bud inside and gnaws the ovary; like it's the caterpillar
crust moths, so that although the blossom sometimes still develops,
but the fruit withers, and this is not only the case with apples
pears. but also at Zweteehgen, The larva bolted a gear
down to the fruit stalk, and then falls to the ground with it, in
which she probably pupates and hibernates in early August
disappear the kifers, you can bring them up by sudden hitting
subdue ete, This pricking of flowers by the present
Insect appears all the more strange. ats you other, your Kier in green
Plant parts boring related to rivulets, with longer rifts
are worn out

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A) Nissel approximately in front of the line of the chest piece, often downwards. but at most vertical, not curled inward against the chest

 

) The Blatinager, Phytonomus. proboscis scarcely bent, obliquely
standing, the wings quite far over the rear noticeably
lacing breast piece protruding,

The kudtrig leaf rodent, Cureulio (Phyt.) polygoni f. Briunliegegran,
on the breastpiece with three off-white lines
no. Cover gran with burns and three

on broken black lines. The colors on that

Breastplate from Sehiippchen, on the Deeken vou

diet deer. After Bouché it is

the footless, rithlich-wise larva of this kiifer. He hollows out carnations and thereby turns them into the V

 

  

 

 

 

 

   

woe to the 'frie! withers. As a means of extermination fi
times to avoid and the
After Oken wire the Clove Destroyer: Phyt. Roeselite lut.? or phyt. nigtirostris F.; the former, among which Risel's Image, Vol, IIL, 'Tab. LXVI, D
be understood, is in size and all a polygani with brown
Cover completely similar, It should therefore the name Curculio Roeselii Oken mur
designate a variety of polygoxé, The development from a sehin
yellow, red and grin colored caterpillar with seven pairs of banana bites
But ant has to conclude that there is a grave confusion, let me
so I'm less interested in Nitheve than I'm supposed to be,

   

 

atlas insect he recommends adding the shoots

  

crush Lary,

 

     

  

    

 

   

   

   

     

mindy! 153

that the puppet represented by Rosel's character C almost doubles that
uvossen Kiifer D deliver. Curcutio (Phyt.) nigrirostris F. on the other hand is pretty flat, with dred ge
Longitudinal lines on the chest piece, and the blankets are all green, with
Perception of a few small lines towards the back, anxiety at first
I found this and its worn variety, ‘variabilis F..
Untall creeping at the foot of a bundle, partly still very soft and
fresh So these were the jams of the specimens. the one int Kriihling
finds. 6) The Grain Roughers, Calandra. Riis
as long as the Brusischild, almost gau
at the wart

   

st not gan
straight forward,
somewhat thickened. body uniformly lingual,
flat at the top. Breast piece as long as the wing tufts, hence
of peculiar form and of a mole or a
Were crying. wing fades,
unfit to fly, inside of
legs boron
The common grain ripper,
black (or better brown) Kornkit
far Kornwuri, Curculio(Cal.) granariusL. 4.0 million long, 1.3 million wide. Duukelbraun, ats juuger Kii-
fer light brown, specimens of this color see inen fbr
gens schou in mating. The booty by lying
lichen, ticle points slit or trickled. his
len so hard they crack loudly when you hit the beetle

     

 

 

ooh

   

 

crushes. . In the Sameu none of the ones that grow wild in Germany
The grainworm finds plenty of grass species to euthanize
in a larva. Furthermore, it is very likely
that he never sent his brood to Korner or Ach
lays. eh therefore do not think olme Gr

wieklong

 

    

fen that the Kornwurm not originally deniseh, but
only with the culture of the grain species from the Orie
and is coming. gel
8th
The kifer usually spends the winter in buildings
in cracks, or between double biden (in
straw or in dei

 

Spren), or in the soil of Scheneru-

 

154

 

go to bed Vou these lupfwinkels go in the Frahjebr
its spread and multiplication on the reservoirs. With the returning spring warmth he leaves his
Hiding, even if the severest winter cold
is not able to kill, warmth is his life-
element. In order to be alert, he should need 10-12° R
have and can even endure 50° heat, these temperatures
but only for a short time, especially the probable
much more sensitive larva. It is when there is a need for warmth
to attribute, d the Kiifer geru au the midday side
of fruit stores' and Biickerhiiusern. the allegation
tion that he brought the light to the same thing, himself
immediately to hide again in grain heaps or crevices
search, seems ungrimed. At least you can see the beetle
who never flies but always walks, very howled
walk out into the sun from cellars and dark rooms. Here e.g. 3. sitting on the winds of the houses, one notices
the Ki; often of mating; the female hay the Méann
carrying little things on the back,

The intoxicated female certainly lays her eggs in a hail
Look at the grain still lying in Garbeu. Here is
the occasion the gimstigest, especially when the grain
niht gi could mature or be taken away wet
had to. If the mother kief lays his ki in heaps of fruit,
this should happen a few inches deep, probably not because of it
warmth alone, but at the same time because of the internal
stern of the heaps noticeably duller state of the
Freight. A
a crooked incision and raises the skin of the a little

 

    

   

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

eblich he makes his purpose with the Ri

  

KKorns, according to my observations, on the other hand, he lays it
small (rib-transparent Fi in one marked with the crack cl
hobbled, sufficiently gerdium Kaun

   

at the weehen

 

selate

 
 

germ tip of the grain, or also at the opposite

     

hairy side: probably also in the column of the same and ¢
ters deep into the mehi-substance. Tn the next door

155

formed Full found the dureh cineuSebnitt
exposed Kierkammer E nale under the be-
covering hant. With spelled, the K
break the egg through the handle with the rifling
bring to the cor. Corn, Wheat, Spelled, |
Rye, both all and outer fruit, are
wanted him to his brood right away. read
he now according to the information in cin wheat
grain me an egg, it's conceivable that
in the larger corn 6fters also two lar-
ven could occur in a grain. At the corn, Tibri-
gens also with wheat ete., one wonders, at welehen
Score the” mother beetle prefers to lay the eggs. Tn hemps, which are heavily populated by the grain kifer, is
increased the heat so much that you could live it with your hand
feels. However, the assumption that this heat is too
brittimg the necessary here is certainly included. The larva should be out of the ki after ten to twelve days
crawl. That they tame the opening at the grain with a cinem
Smearing mucus is certainly false. Do you find that?
Boluloeh clogged, so is the
nothing else than

 

  

 

 

 

toptender mass determined
the filth of the larva. Anyway lies
the larva, which has become somewhat py ', is definitely inside
of the grain. She has
clear, brown on the mouth
Head is white, short, almost
globular, very lively in shape
changeud, so that they often three-
ig view; although it is somewhat padded on the chest, it has
but no legs at all. She lies solidly rammed in the grain
and springs forth when the grain that it inhabits is in
the middle major
Korn, [The previous contradictory descriptions

 

  
   

 

 

cuts. Your filth stays completely inside

visible of the foreskin of legs, filling out
Unraths and decf. perhaps: on confusion with Ptinus Sur
wud tinea qranella based.] 156

The larva does not leave the Koru it inhabits;
Notwithstanding this, the question arises whether a larva that might
in a small grain of rye does not contain sufficient
tion has found up to its development, not in cin
other grain to get across. that they simply
go out and cintressen kune into another grain,
like the white cormworm (cine Ranpe), is possible
for the larvae of the pineapple are, as a rule, tame to walk
already much too excited. By the way, the larva should be long
There are no hungry. Your food is the flour at home
ner of the grain. She can finally hollow out the same thing
that in the end nothing remains but the bran. Despite the
many mischiefs that start from her in the Kertits,
don't get the attacked grain any unpleasant
men Gernch. Also, the grains will not be like the

Corn moth caterpillar contaminated by fiids. CSSD When the larva is fully grown, it pupates

herself in the grain of grain inhabited by her. How long as a doll (Fig.) still dwell in it is nowhere
specified, but that the entire development period
from the egg to the perfect pine that comes from the grain
crawls out, is about forty days. Appear in July
the boys, d. H. actually the first young generation
of the insect. That these appear much more numerous than the old ones
Kiifer in the spring is welcome, but the winter
cooped up kiifers only got close to the
find eides together to ér- in the same number
see, while the boys don't get together first
to need,

According to the information, the young generation lays
ten days Kier again and from these ends develops
Septembers the second Bent, and this second Brut wire
richer in alil than the first. In fact put me on
in the first days of August 1851, also took place
r early September £848 in dense masses

 

   

 

 

 

 

still

 

 

 

I the

   

on the corn sacks of a Rheinschitl. You just need to
have just developed. In warmer Europe, such
even more than two generations may be possible. It can be said that the beetle has five social life-
wise. Not just because you can find large masses of them in
a small pile of grain appear, but because
the kifers, if you don't disturb them after their development,
like to stay together and eat peacefully next to cinander,
If one observes the individual beetle, one becomes it frequently
his proboscis in the germinal tips of the I

 

drill or
with the same for a long time in the column while threshing
rbeaten grain from the floury interior to feel comfortable
lich earn schen. Are the beetles mehvere, so will the
Column quickly emptied of flour and so widened that more
more kifers could crawl in. They do it often
only approach again when the grain is down to the hard Hise
is hollowed out. So also the damage inflicted by the peeper
it is hard to feel. The kifer runs pretty much day and night
alive nearer, very often the females in mating
with the mien sitting on her back, which
as a caress the beak on the breastplate of the female
chens hin wad her whetzt. It is indeed claimed that the increase of the Inseki goes
Very cool:

   

 

  

 

wind in front of you and a spring woman can
lay 150 children in the first brood and in the second (i.e. in one
year) itber 6000 offspring. These numbers prove it
but only the ability to reproduce, not at all that
the infection, even if the circumstances favor it,
multiply so rapidly. Finally, noeh is related
to add to the reproduction of the insect that
the female after brooding in the spring of this
does not churn but eggs all summer long
lays, every day cines [2]. This would be interesting since the
Majority) of the insects, by the way preferably such, dic
put many Kier on cimmal, soon after the beer set de-
kriiftct stand, but if the thing is correct, then it follows,

 

 

158

 

that with us, too, there are not just two main periods of the ‘I
activity of the mother weepers, namely Frahling and Juli,
but that the whole summer to keep brood-laying
and you can meet larvae all year round
got to. It is said that where the black Koruworm sees
nested, the white, i. H. the corn moth caterpillar, ver
vanishing. No coincidence is due to this observation
are based on the rule, in any case the assertion
the kiifer eats the corn moth caterpillar. Above all, cine belongs to the preparatory means
a week-long arrangement of the fruelit granaries. you from stone
It is not necessary to build a new one, because if it broods
Kiifer likes to work in wood, so he would have to get into the planks
béden and intermediate winds opportunity, and this one will
you probably can't avoid it. By the way
the kiifer lays his eggs in cracks of wood just as little as on them
stone manners; furthermore stone walls entertain more
musty air, which is particularly pleasant for the insect. This greater humidity prevailing in stone rooms
keit dirfie the advantage of greater coolness, which, however, dic
vitality of the insect somewhat diminished, tber
The airy location is advantageous above all because
cannot fly at all and therefore the grain closes

 

 

 

      

 

 

 

      

 

lay. the cafe:
Far less easy to find on foot, and there is another one in the
Proximity, scents far less. There are houses and héfe in which the ancestral
Presence of the grain collector in angled buildings
is a true calamite. So in the Baden Aekerbau
sehule Hoehburg before the takeover by the current one
Director, Mr. Reinhardt. This one had the courage to
about to report that formerly the pitchers to the grain weevil
were so established that millions of kifers were already there in the Ernie era
were in the barns, and the porters
here in winter

     

 

 

  

   

 

 

hey, your wife
so often 7

 

to miss the harvest,
Disadvantage, Um

 

her GI

 

Ee

159

 

I var to secure the Korukeifer for the future
there the whole scouring floor 2 riddled with cats! foot deeply gouged out, all cracks in the wall scratched out, friscl
bribed and fresh with Kalkmileh berttincht, wodureh
in connection with the subsequent necessary cleanliness
the most complete liberation of memory from the Kornkii
achieved, was. The more cin unfavorably located storage for 1
and Lutt is made accessible, the better

Herr Reinhardt helps so much with airing and cleaning
hold that several weeks before the harvest to get the
Schcuern to live, puts his straw néthigenfulls in the open. Projecting windows are not only not effective against the grain worm
necessary but even harmful. Because cinmal will
he rarely come in the window, then will
also thy brooded in pierced grain and for
development, beetles got through the windows outside
prevented from crawling, which is surely clin so important. The above-mentioned
stroke all fangs and cracks in which the kiifer is
could hide, also cin lime coating, which already dic
Easier to notice the presence of the black insect

The wooden floors, before you put grain on them, with
Boiling in hot water doesn't help at all, because the eggs
of the kiifer, which one wants to devour on this occasion,
never laid on the ground, but on the grain itself
the. Careful turning away serves the same purpose. pouring about the absnds of various bitter,
but odorless plants and from vitriollésung is whole
awkward,

Also from sprinkling the floor with scents,
like turpentine, decoction of tobacco, tamen tips, wax
holderiisten, from rubbing the ground with Chenopodium
vlvaria, one promises oneself far too much by im
In general, no insects, but only the ex-
dimming of his food, here that of grain, more

 

    

 

cht

 

 

 

 

St.

   

 

    

 

   

 

160

 

or cover less. For this reason the cat likes
however, grain stored in horse-bags, as they say
assured, do not tackle. But who wants his daughter here?
store grain? nnd who, after what before
has been said to believe that the mere stable
that the insect be expelled from the grain in Siande? Exactly the same as we said of the fragrances
have, applies to the Tamnenreis, with which one recommended
in alternating layers the fruit on the store 2
layer through. Use of resin to the same guard
is of course completely ineffective. The use of free
be in sand, because in small spaces between and around
heaped up the grain, he mechanically makes the approach
creeping of the kiifer; but whether the circumstance of the means
not the benefit that one expects from it,
overweighs, stands there ;

It was also recommended to use the cold at the time dev
reproduction of the insect. But how is this to be done? The main and most effective means of prevention
will always be: speedy threshing of the grain,
especially if the sheaves are just a little ripe or moist
had to be brought. Fert éfleres snuggling,
but especially throwing in Frihling amd July, when dew
two main propagation periods. spread the
need a shovel with fragrant substances than down
it superfluous. Royal cleanliness on the fruit floors. Very old items, even in small quantities, should never be
kelen lying Geircide tolerated: be. Anch to proposed extermination wad
propellants we are nm s0 richer, each nnaweek-
the plural of the same deserves to be named more idly. 4) In Reirelf the larva (of the worm) is: seen above
remarks that she is gui kept in her grain, her soimit
tossing the grain back and forth doesn't work

 

   

 

 

 

 

2.

 

  

 

   

 

the can. Just as little, on the same grind, can

161

 

taule crayfish, which one in the Kor
spread flax knots, hops ete. through her gernch the
Brat, it has been claimed, drive out, rather must
be taken against them more actively zn works. loading
if you notice the larvae, you will, even if they already are
partly in white still soft;

stuck on. mnherge-

 

 

 

 

 

-ups were changed,
best do, the grain as quickly as possible to one
To sell Bicker or to have it ground by Olme Verzny. Certainly the evhaliene flour by the addition of the
Larvae do not lose much in quality. Just let it be
bring to consumption as soon as possible, denu
just this admixture of animal matter will not last long
Allow storage, but slightly evoke leadership. Shelled grains are said to float in the water on top of
men and therefore a special version of the guien and the sloe
Make ten cores possible by throwing them in water. This
is, as long as the insect is in the kernels, hardly believable. but new investigation worthwhile. But afterwards it has
no special value, which the separation kinfe a-
can be done more often by throwing

 

  

 

 

 

 

Grain cannot be sold, so there is a safe one, if
also something nmst

  

ideal means to destroy the larvae,
in that it is in a smaller portion in an oven
dry. 3

It would also be possible without a doubt, the attacked fruit
in kisser zn fitllen, to burn with sulfur and the in
Grain contained larvae through cinige time. daning
to suffocate closed Halien, Sulfur vapor shall
but impart an unpleasant odor to the fruit. (Ether wid brandy can also serve, work
over in just cin to two days.) You can do it with sulphur
the process “in a stone rake probably itself
in large

 

 

  

 

 

in fitness

   

2) Is it about the destruction of dolls or

Beetles, it is to be noted that the attacked

Grain itself is therefore less more useful, probably
Nérdlinger, the small enemies u

 

 

162

but any spread of the evil must be prevented
can. The beetle is very vital; even with calcium carbonate
tiinchi, he worked his way out again with Mr. Reinhardt,
without going there for a reason. Like small piles of grain, the big ones were made
take in fleeing beetles and have them killed immediately
should, is not quite clear to me; unbelievable but seems
that the insect hides in heaps of rite seeds. Of the
faintly intoxicating smell of green hemp and tobacco leaves
finally can't possibly be more effective than that of Ter-
pentin, the inadequacy of which has long been recognized. On the other hand, Herr Reinhardt found that dry rags,
large numbers of beetles when migrating
tion, were very convenient for collecting them,
and he thus finds a similar use of sheep
skins, which a long time ago against the kifer
recommended, cif appropriate ; [although not
the smell of the sheepskins is what appeals to the beetle
should be]. Also dipped in water and then wrung out
Cloths, thrown over heaps of grain, are said to keep the beetles
attract. But at the same time they should serve to
the heaps that remained behind their abode only
to make it more comfortable. Confining Chickens or Attracting Insects-
feeding birds may, however, to reduce
crawling beetles contribute, but also the contamination
by caged birds is not without all meaning
tion, because this has started decomposition of the grain
is significantly promoted. .

From Sainmcln large wood ants, to them in the
Magazine let the crawling beetles sniff 2u is
nothing to expect; the ants would only leave each other
feel and do the business assigned to them completely
draw. no

163

He who behaves cautiously with grain becomes rare
come in the case, to the extermination measures against

8) having to take refuge with the cooper. Kime
but the case before. so w: in my opinion the purpose
Most idle when the Kiifer is already at the grain kernels
crawled out but is still in the hemp, sift him through
and troughs of the grain to tremen, itn into the Fener
mm throw or stomp and fitter the tithner 2n. That these should die if they eat too much,
is just a reason not to give them too much anf once. because that the grain worm would kill their goiter (stomach?) through-
gnaw, is a’ snickering claim. The fruit wire
to give immediately to the meal, use the flour, zn and,
when practicable, it is certainly good to store in the summer
leave it empty for a few weeks and
sen, so that the scattered kifer get lost completely. The Rice Beetle, Rice Warm, Curculio (Cal.) oryzae L.
differs from the previous one in form and color.
Lich, but cin little smaller, the Russel noticeably dinner. The breasts are densely covered with round dots, the covers with them
ribs and dense rows of dots. Also the legs
heavily punctured, hence the dull appearance of the whole kifer. Finally, another crucial feature is the front
and quite far back on each cover a red spot. Is known to be a very ardent lover of the ans
Ovient coming Reisses, but also in the eastern
Europe as a home Kert, dean the Villa brothers fib
in their vows of the Lombard kifer anf. In the year 1847 he can also live in enormous numbers
to us in Wuirttemberg in the probably Egyptian
th originating grain stocks. Fr found himself then
no difference in corn as in wheat. Thieves-
worried, he wants to foriplance with us, seems un-
to have been founded, since then rd from him
nowhere more the speech, probably he veriviliche nser
little winter

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

      

 

   

 

(64

7) Cut at least Mamal as long as the chest shield, if you like
gently lowered forward. 7) The Blitheustecher, Anthonomus. dinner riddle,
which the kifer, frightened, lays against his chest, 1, bis
2 times as long as the chest piece. Body facing forward
cone-shaped tapering (pear-firm). All thighs clear
gedorut. The apple blossom weevil, Curculio (Anthon.) pomo-

rum L., is in the area of ​​Kirehhein
= from the sudden reddening of the von
” of its larvae, the blooms of the
a, called ~burner*. His trunk is like that
long as head and brisket taken together. Before the-
thighs the thickest, the whole body under the magnifying glass
viewed, with a short, somewhat irregular coat
covered. The whole beetle is brown-red, the scutes are white. One runs crookedly over the last third of the Vliigeldeeken
bright red bandage with a dark border, which
speaking bandage of the other blanket one against the front
6 forms an open angle. The Kiifi pert until Sweden and Russia
distributed up land, lives mainly on apple trees,
in individual years, e.g. 1848, where apple blossoms
seeming to be missing something, we often bored into pear blossoms. He treats high voices like low potbiums. his win
He takes a longer stay on leaves, stones, but especially
under bark scales and in bark crevices, even in the
Bastgiingen of the apple pruner,; if only far enough
are to rescue him. Selimidberger states that the Kéifer
always climb the tree to Puss in the spring, but this is
not really, because he himself admits that he had some stoners
seemed to have flown over from neighboring bitumen,
I also saw the kifer in the first days of April
fly around cheerfully in the warm sunshine, also flies
the closely related Curculio druparum on Tranbenkirsehe
gladly and easily, finally I saw a pomorum at the end of June

 

 

 

   

6 how to versi

 

 

 

 

 

165

 

lie down even in the evening. If you come near him, you startle
he suddenly descends to the ground and remains there
Time with stretched out, beaten up Kuicen
and riddle lowered against the chest. The beetles mate in the first Frithling on the
branches and buds. Just three days after the first
Appear egg-laying shall begin, So soon or when
as soon as the apple buds start to stir, you can do it
Females eager to work. In the selection of the buds
be it, says Schmidberger, very choice

I just didn't find this, especially not for so long
number of stirring bees was still small. On this
he often pierces almost all the buds, but without his kidneys
to squander; because one meets later in a bliss
only one egg at a time, even if nearly all the flowers in Gfter are one
Bud Kier included. The kitfer drills while frying
at the still almost completely closed Kuospe aul's Gerathe-

 

 

 

 

   

 
 

 

 

 

often many holes in a bud until it succeeds
with the rattle through the flower petals, or flower and

 

Calyx of a flower bud through its stem fides
to hen, Mau sees the traces of this kiu drilling
as in our figure (8.167) the Eutwick
Inng the bud, often in the autumn on the small holes
the first bliss of the branch. He puts his name on it
the hole laid ki amidst the dusty tides, where to
find it when you open it. It's 0.6 million. long, 0.4 mill. thick,
front grew ciférmig at the back, white as the eggs
their pebble kifer and zieiich soft. 'Meets. the beak accidentally in the fruit
knots of the young blossom, it dries up beforehand
écher
also appear to be the purpose of feeding the kid
to have. Housing a gravel does not require Schmid-
berger ¥, hours. Does the sprouting of the buds
pen very slowly, so the beetle can handle most of it

 

 

   

 

 

  

 

flowering and falling, Many of the numerous Bohy

 

Blossoms become masters, but the bud development goes

 

166

very quickly, so the leaves come over quickly
past the time when only the kifer his Kier
accommodated with success. He puts them in one too late
blossom so that the larvae no longer
development can destroy the fertilization organs,
the blot folds, the larva just lies down and
goes to Grande. This is one of the reasons. waram the kerf with the apple tree
far ahead of the pear tree. In fact, the pear blossoms outgrow
of the larva too quickly, so I found in the spring of 1852 at the time of flowering
here pear blossoms with young flowers, they searched for the petals
ywas brown, but open and the dust fides were still present themselves
to hide under these, but had to perish of necessity afterwards
only if they are laid very early as an egg in the pear blossom,
this remains closed and the brood does not fail, the Kiifer
undesired opening of the punctured. By the way, there should be flowers
also sometimes come up with the apple tree, the other reason is that
the pear tree itberhunpt much fri igt and the kerf therefore
none so long bratzcit furnished as the apple tree. Free in spring
same as 1854, in early April cin part of the pear trees in
the development of the buds was so advanced, while the apple
I didn't move yet, he scorned the just opening bulbs
are not budding at all, as if the second layer of bud shoots
(which are half white, half brown, and much softer than the outermost
cover of buds), he drilled a lot of Kier into the flowers, The
fi was also here exposed under the stamen, After the bud has spread further
had unfolded, flowed out of the pierced flower heads a quite
large eckel sweet, clear drop of honey approaching. Glistened in the sun
many a pear tree from such as vou dewdrops, ergi the:
Drops into the inside of the blossom, but this shouldn't be possible
the larvae beginning to eat the egg begin to blossom
maybe of it. I found the leaf buds drilled into, however
always without a Fi

If there is harsh or rainy weather during the breeding season
terang, the kiifer hides away in large numbers
under the flakes of bark on apple ete. Béiumen
sit ete. You can often find him here. The lirvehen creep after a week, under very
favorable conditions according to Schmidberger already in five
th and sixth day, on the egg. They'll make up soon

    

   

 

   

'look

 

 

    

 

 
   

     

     

   
 

 

 

Oooo, eee, it!" rrrrr—_.———. a
167 :

to the fertilizing organs of the blood, but eat what
I watched otters, even the ovary out. As a result
this destruction, mostly however already because of impossible
been fertilized, the blossoms degenerate, and the
Bleeding buds dry up before they can open. So
form as branes against which, as one understands,
assures very injurious sun to egg and larva
protective roof, and the
Landmann then believes
the flowers seem from the
sun or cold
bruiunt and speaks
from the burner or the
besen dew of the fruit trees. Just the brown flowers:
blitter the unopened
Blathen (the dark in
of the figure) trust the
presence of the insect
at a great distance, too
can still be recognized 6fters
on the flowers the spot
through which the egg ci

 

    
 
  
  
  
  
 
  

has been pushed. nope
half a month
already the stage of the larva
finished. This is adult
sen rather long and slender,
Slightly tapered in front and behind. head small, black. Behind
the same a narrow dark arc of two small ones
composed of neck shields. She's not so wu-
stig like most other Ritsselkiifer larvae. skin thin,
so that one can see through them the partly red-brown ones
king willow sees. On the back crest-like double
heekerchen. Pale hair sparsely behind the head. otherwise smooth. 168 After mid-May you can already find many in the blossoms
cardboards. They are wriggly, pale yellow with
ea, dark eyes, stay cardboard about one
Week Jang and will be Eude May or in
s weeks
rocked
brown floral blanket out a round hole: tL, like us
See p. 167 on the top flower. That the stoner
well, as Stephens states, in the blossoms of the hawthorn
me, is unknown to me and improbable. Much more you can see the young kifers in June and still
not uncommon on the fruit trees at the beginning of July. They get lost
here by scraping or piercing young apple chillies. I noticed this even on Pyrus salicifolia. Against eng
they ground less and less often by enemies and enemies
il vhl decreaseu. But are still-
there is enough available to brat in the next spring
nit, success zn operate. The harmfulness of the apple blossom weevil is usually
lightly heathereitzt. In blithe-rich Jal one often believes
the entire yield of the apple tree will be lost,
'and yet sufficiently strong buds remain
the tree. The fact that this is so is also out of the

   

 

the first days Janis, so ebwa tint see you

    

vou Bian, to the Kiifer, who through the ve:

 

 

 

  

   

 

 

 

 

_ velmmung that in the year 1853. despite the collab
freffens the masses of tension ranches and Blathenstecher
the apple tree you all trees in the freight to s
stood. Without the Blithenstecher would have in many
years the trees succumb under their burden. Vou meaning
tion is its kiniluss in leafless years or

hh on the sterile

Here come

fockens in Sufi, as the Baner says,

“tight and miserable developments:

the bloith that the Kia rubbed scines

Bread shops cimiiumt, can. and sometimes none at all

 

non

 

 

on Baungittern in close location, finally

 

bare ground frockener Allimanden and Ej
often because of
er because of the

      
 

 

    

rr long time to be

blithe of it,

169

The insect is therefore initially attracted to most
relieved by a cold spring weather, interrupted
from some warm midday stands. After the brat calls
the arising and growing larvae most one
Persistent cold and wet weather because the vegetation
tation is slow while the young larva, in their bloom
hidden, has little to suffer from. Often one finds
the red flower-coverts of the larvae or pupae
in greatest number of bird, perhaps the sparrow or
Kinks, violently torn to pieces, but the larvae or pupae
ve Whether the legion bugs that one éfters to the
same time meets the apple trees, same lar-
ven because of cinstellen, or rather because of the apple sucker
(Psylla) wad the leaf lens or the caterpillars, I leave there-
placed. In contrast, the Blithens'
Dorch Tehnenmonenna

 

 

 

 

 

detect often
len, which one instead of her next to the
stripped larvae of the Apple Piercer in the Blithen-
hile finds and easily recognizes because of the lack of a head. An anti-insect remedy to be recommended is yor
Again, a selection of late and fast-growing tree species
with well closed buds. None has in
the Kirchheimer Geg: more through the
Distillers suffered as a frithe species with a long time ago
the leaf of a clapping bud. Schmidberger, from the
t proceeding, the kifer preferentially mount the trunk
au barrel, also recommend against the tar belt. Has
it has already been used for the Frostspamner,
so they only had him in Fh for a little longer
ling friselh zn received. The chirping of the bitwune to aul the brooding kifers
Throwing down 'cloths spread out underneath came only from er-
be followed when cool weather, the Kiifer from the back
fly on the spell. Moreover, it would have to be significant
be repeated, so that one wonders whether the ans
nde Mithe their replacement in correspondingly higher
find. H-

 

 

 
 

 

170

Freshly advised the pruning and dangling of inflamed
lichen trees, which in fact, insofar as it is strong and
promotes rapid turning out where it is economically feasible,
to be recommended. Liming of the trunk and the like. Drugs that are not at all part of the insect's way of life
grab are actually quite worthless. Collecting the egg-laying beetle that is found in these
business should not be shy at all, and crushing a
zener Blithen, both recommended by Schmidberger
only possible on a small scale on low trees, the latter even
almost of no value, unless it happens quite generally. | The drupe cutter, Cureulio (auth.) druparum 1. Yellow Red

covered with attached yellow hairs. Above the flags two
jagged yellow bands. Up to now, the kifer has always been a nuisance to me on bird cherries (Prunus
padus) occurred, here in very large quantities for the first time at the Blithezci
and then again in mid-summer as a young generation, Its short and
thick, yellowish-white larvae curled up in the last one
Kern, has a transparent head with a brown muzzle, only legs
breast-like elevations. The larva consumes the core completely, water hin-
remission of little filth. They are most commonly found in the spit
ripening cherries and at the end of the top of the bunches, mid-July
is she grown up According to the older editions, the beetle will be very hungry in a few years
on the sour cherries and gnawed a loeh up into the shells here
the nucleus enclosed in the stone, wn to lay egg here. the
The wound heals, but a deep scar remains, the fruit
grow as fat as she pleases, The larva transforms itself before it does
the core is completely eaten out and kisses back no rubbish. Whether the infamous Kirsehénverderber this “says Ratzeburg
Forstins. 1, p. 152. I could scarcely believe it, given that
Ratzeburg vou Sitsskirschen (Prunus avium) sprit, de
the kiifer, which occurs so frequently with us on Prunus padus, anch
Found once on Siiss or Sanerkir, none at all
hollowed-out cherry stones (see also Magdalis cerasi, Rhynchites enpreus,
which also spoils cherries, and Curentio cerasorum.) Cusentio (Anth.) pedicularius L., very similar in shape to the pomornm

and coloring but somewhat smaller and more reddish-brown, dorsal lines
1 of the brisket, shields and very large wing bands white. To
T Loudon. gard. Like. Found by Curtis on flowering apple trees
and to Westwood devthat which Salisbury his Kier in apple

 

 

    

 

 

     
    

n cit

   

 
 
   

n never have I

      

 

 

   

7am

 

Dlithenkuospen lay lst. Without a doubt, Zenker is leading him as well
Herbst's authority as a frequent destroyer of apple and pear buds
bang on. I therefore have no hesitation in assuming that too
the one described by Kollar, harmful insects, p. 257, uncommonly from po-
morum hardly distinguishable Curculio (Anth.) Piri coll. our pedicularius
may be. After the collar, it lays its brood in whole flowers, even in flower hay
and leaf buds at the same time, the buds become as if from frost
brown. The further statements of the author are pretty much from the life
wisely derived from the apple blossom pineapple,

Still smaller than the above-named, and in the heights of grape-
developing quite in the manner of pomorwn, Cureutio (Anth.) incurvus Gir. But there can hardly be any question of harmfulness, because the
Kafer comes at least to Hohenheim only very sporadically and only in the
forest aut the bird cherries, 7

The Hinbeerstecher, Curculio (Anth.) rubi hb Vou the great des
previous. Black, softly haired, with white cap and
faintly thorny legs, Very mean on blackberries, raspberries, of
Reportedly also on strawberries and pilafs and even rosebuds
(Degeer), seems to me just as unimportant as the previous one, Am Brutge-
I have often seen the female twice, namely the raspberry blossom
lasted, i.e. mainly in May and June, He stabs into the
closed flower bud a fine, if need be with naked eyes
visible hole. Through this will then, and without a doubt mi
dem Riise], the Ki pushed deep into the bud to the dust fiends. (I had to tell m1 about the significant size of the off-white Ki's i
relation to this small hole and the Jusekt itself is wonderful.) on this
stings the little pine in order to prevent the bud from further development
deni cracks) cine small wounds (black dot) in the bud stalks. Either the whole bud withers withered as a result, or remains sic
in this state hanging on the stick, so that in the latter case
Jnni frequently hits the larva in its scrapings. She has a yellowish head
with brown mouthparts, is then often white and reddened by
ning, softly hairy, very mobile, similar to that of the apple blossom tree. 8) The nut cracker, Balaninus. Hibsche, mark-
buds with very long filiform, pilose very
strongly curved proboscis. Dinne, long fibers. hill
cover each other almost forming an equilateral triangle. Pretty long legs. The Hazelnut Riissler, Curculio
(Balan) nucum L, proboscis fairly strong a
crooked, very long and thin; filer
towards the top of short, thick,

  

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

    

 

 

 

  
     

 

172

kuraby ern existing. Big sign, that
Whole bodies of brownish gray or yellowish herons
overcast, seen here and there. At the end of May to July the perfect insect drives itself
around on Haselu and Kiellen. After Ratzeburg look mau
sometimes gnawing at hazel buds, as it is well over-
fed on the green leaves of the hazelnut cloth. Of the
Kifer should also once a deep hole in cine Frith-
have eaten bime. By the way, the kifer is very shy
and suddenly drops down when approaching. Résel states that the kid is mainly afraid
roam the hazel stands and be on ihuen, breeding
get ship. However, I believe with Ratzeburg as the time
des Kierlegeus at the end of June and July;
first because the larva otherwise hardly has the necessary time to germinate
winding have dirfte, in order to, like Résel himself,
gives to have grown tall in September, secondly because
however, in fear the nuts were already beginning to
drill too hard to be thirdus but because i'm at 21. July
1848 on the Hohentwiel ruins the beetle brooding
Tegen surprised myself in the milder part of Wittenberg
so dic brut ctwas earlier than there must be. The kitten has-
ten the ruffle the whole length after iu the zicuilich
steeken hard half-grown hazelnut, so that I sic
calmly take away from the nits kounte, cinem of the same
but the rift broke off and half back in the nut
blicb, from this we can probably further conclude that that
Don't get stuck on the shell, as Résel says,
but deep into the nut, to the kernel itself. A brown tip marriage marked after the nut
the ripple track. After a fortnight, according to Résel,
the egg out. The core then obne doubts next to the
evolving larva, otherwise you probably mitsste
Most of them soon died out from lack of food
walk. I just want Résel's Worle: 'K
in until the core has reached the reasonable size

 

  

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

   

replace with the following: 'Nimant the larva known as Ki
is often placed on a core that is still very small, too rapid
Development, * and drive off with Résel: she doesn't get it that way
enough food and dies, sometimes leaving you in
senen Haselutissen Unrath finds and the dead larva. *

This larva has a brown hard head with a forked line

and two bright spots, is like most

Teardrop larvae strongly bulging, without distinct 2
}
i.e

  

 

legs and, as far as I can remember,
white, according to Résel light ocher yellow, as well as the
Puppet. Is the larva at its perfect size?
in September ¢ ht, it is usually half the |
gaped. But the nut usually fills earlier than the non-
attacked. Now the larva eats its way through a hole
out, which is scarcely larger than the head behind which
inside but the thick body still winds itself through. she
then penetrates into the ground, to Ratzeburg up to 1 or
1Y, feet deep. When observing Résel, this changed
Larvae in the soil in their cauldron as late as June
the following year to the yellow doll. This one is on that
extraordinarily strongly curved snout, the many long
hairy spiny humps and the crooked long ones removed
standing Afterdoruen kuntlich. Only in August kréche
the young Kiifer from his doll's hill and would stay
eight days underground, Naeh Hartig's observations
the kiifer would appear in the autumn of the second or spring
of the third year, outdoors and in favorable years, however
heavier in the fall. A part of the
preserved larvae was even as late as November of the second
Year transformed into pine trees. These counts therefore only in
spring of the third year come out of the ground,
Ratzeburg also cites a single observation, at
which a kifer (venosus) has already completely transformed into the nut
was found. Hardly believable is that by Bouché,
information borrowed from others, the Hasehuuss
riissler also in the almond kernels at home,

   

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

174

Occurring on the same tree species (hazelnut and riche).
the same way of life two related species: Curculio (Balan.) glossy
dium Marsh, which is very similar to the previous one, still has a ruffle
dinner and krimmer than the previous one, and as long or almost as long
than the Koper: with longer and dinner feeler links, which only am
Bear somewhat stiffer bristles at the end, further

Curculio Balan.) renosus Germ., which of all three is the shortest and
has the straightest snout and a tiny little label. Since the larvae often over half the hazelnut kernel
turn into filth, so that this one perishes
must go, and since often cin third of all wet tapped
should be, the insect in Giirten is not without importance,
albeit of course the gathering of the egg-laying beetles in the
June and July difficult and at best by tapping in
an umbrella or similar. is to be carried out. The cherry pit shredder, Curculio (Balan.) cerasorum F.
Often confused with villosus, similar to the hazelnut ripper,
but only '/,s0 big, +—:, with extraordinarily long, gliin-
tawny rift. The whole Kiifer brown with here and there
with a yellowish sheen. Deeken dotted striped, through ver-
ragged yellowish spots and transverse bands as usual
also legs brown. After autumn the larva in cherry pits. Here on land
never found by me, although I say from friends
heard that they have already found larvae in sweet cherry stones

had. On the other hand I found in Tyrol in a Siiss
Q vivsien a larva, which I well get here

aiehen mnss, since Cureulio druparwm has never been to me
sweet cherry stones has occurred. J Nose clearly bent against the chest or even more dense
fitting. As long as or longer than the chest stick. 9) The Mousetooth Rattles, Baris. Lingly, quite
flat kifer. Russel severely crooked, already a little inward
turned against the chest. Like a mouse tooth from the inside
because of the outside. Mcis metallic sheen. Manstooth Ripper of Repses, Cureulio (Baris)

 

175
chloris F. underside, Russel, antennae and
legs black. Upper side dark steel blue
or greenish. Except the ceilings all l
Beetles, even their legs punctured. to the =

Very fine bursting on legs, only visible with a sharp magnifying glass
chen. Covers with nine fine, sharp longitudinal lines and (at
not quite sharp magnification) smooth spaces in between. With sharp magnification one notices on every intermediate
space one, here and there probably also double row very much
fine pinkie. I give all these marks because
I gave the Kiifer the name chloris F. on Ratzeburg's
I have enclosed the illustration of chloris in
Panz, fama germ. 18, 8. but brown fibers, granen Russel
and indicates legs and broader body, also figure
and text the fine rows of dots on the covers
go, so I have to wink, 20 no further information
thiimern cause to become. The Kiifer can be found in different seasons. I imagine him already in his cradle, at the end of August
1849, in the stubble of a Repsfeld met 2u. Nevertheless, in the first spring there were still a lot of living
the kifer in the stubble I collected and home
had kept and in April I found the live insect
singly in the open air in places where it comes only by chance
could be. "Yet meets nan, as far as I could observe,
the perfect Insckt not together in large quantity. The way of life of the Repsrisselkifers is not to me
exactly known; but from some observations
at least in general, conclude that the Kiifer already
at the time of the Repsbliithe, if not before, on the
Rep must be. He drills dam no doubt by means of his
nes riissels his Kiers on the armpits of the branches of the Rep-
ses into the marrow, and this is where the young white larva then lives
with tawny head; she hollows out limbs and main stems! out, has, it almost seems, a kind of air vent on several
lower parts of the stalk, and increases as it cracks

 

176

more and more towards the roots. The made Wee
signifies them by healing and returning from filth. Her transformation is finally near. She then prepares herself
just below the bark of the rape stem, in the root or
near which a bed, the so-called cradle, dress them with
many wood fibers as with charpie from nnd transforms
still in the middle of summer in the blue kifer. Some Kiifers
may then still crawl on; but the majority triss
will probably only approach next Friday to get
mating and creating new broods. The harmfulness of
Insect is not insignificant. Every year you see one
part, in years like L851 a considerable part of the
Repses become ripe as a result of the stalk being hollowed out, and
partly already fall out when the other plants of the
maturity are just near. This Repskiifer finds himself without
Doubts also about other related plants. ver
change with the shiner has demonstrably already been good
found instead. Destruction by burning the Reps-
stubble. 10) The Hidden Tears, Coutorhynchus
short, fairly flat at the top, slightly wavy at the bottom
with a twisted, thin riddle. This one is longer. than the chest and always lies well between the legs

"hidden. There are a large number of species of this genus
towards agriculture
on cruciferous plants like Reps, Sent and de
With the present state of knowledge of their way of life
and with the striking resemblance among them
I, however, before authentic determinations are commanded me
see, species name not given yet. I know four
ten on the reps.

 

 

 

   

 

   

   

   

 

   
 

 

 

1) Black on top, gray underneath,
with white shoulder corner. No whitish
line liutt over the middle of the head and
through the rim of the breastplate. This
Cover

 

 

 

on each scite with one

177

quarreled, finely scaly grained, at the end with
clear quirks occupied. buttocks
with a thorn marriage,

On Reps, after the blithe nnd up to
ripening time in quantity. You can see him in Jani
on the young pods platawise the Grine
scrape, also his ruffle into the pods
drill. He lays his hands on the very young one
Reps and Rubsen near the earth or
nnunter her Obertkicl

 

 

e, because here arise
before winter pea-sized root and stem
gel swelling (Fig. ), which the plant needs
easily cause damage. They run over you
even more in winter. in the spring sodam,
mur sheet, bolirt itself
the larynx from swelling; mauch lead-
but also live well in it and pupate
instead of in the ground here at the end of May or early
beetles out of the ground at the beginning of June
work. I also find the Kiifer on turnips and
Mustard. But I do not know whether he also here in the
roots lives. Proper coverage of seeds after sowing
may be the best remedy against the insect. At least
I find roots of the reps half looking out of the ground

 

 

  

 

   

e of Reps and Rirbse

   

 

 

 

 

aim meisien attacked
2)

 

» Smaller ones, completely black-grey:

  

+ aged. with strong 4

    

   

conical, coagulated, physically provided with a hook
Brusistiiek and thornless shackles, wing covers not the body

 
   

nz covering, barely or not rough at the end; die: praise, short
then forming two rows between the hoops. Already before and
Blithe amd dew all summer in the crowd on the
ant Crambe (Cureulio alauda Grm., to Ratzeburg.) 3) Fuwas grisser, by their inspection, except for the crack> 4
sels, very yellowish, on the university side, especially the shoulder covers,
dark colored, with coagulated , laterally unhickered [rustsehild. Scale bristles stand between the wings of the wings in three to four rows
dend, thighs hardly a trace of thorns, body something. longer than
the Deeken, Tn. amount on the reps. Overcoming doubts in the ground
Nérdlinger, the little Foinde 12

B
during de
REP; ael

     
   

 

    

     

 

 

178

temd, or shortly, developed before the reps bloom, since one sees him so frequently
before the Repsbliithe and often soiled with earth (Curculio Napi Noch?) 4) Same size, mottled with tawny yellow and black, with light. t white-yellow shield marriage, the same small Héekerchen to each side of the
brisket and before the end of each elytra a strongly granular,
wide stool, thorny thighs, in front of the blithe on reps. On too
Summer turnips in July. much rarer,

The one or the other of the above arias should be the one
their very mobile brown and small-headed, red-mouthed, white larva
in the reps pods some of the kernels are eaten before they are ripe
and eats itself through a round, small hole, around itself without a doubt
transform into earth 2n. Also a note in Oken's Natural History V, p. 1636 encourages me
here in; she lantet: Finally the so-called piper seems to have gotten higher
hear whose maggot the seeds of the oil plants, especially of the lepses
eats away and causes great damage in many years. The pods
turn white towards the tip. The stoner jumps [? the ceutorhynchs
do not jump], but has not yet been precisely determined. Whether Rh. assimilis? Where this note comes from is not specified in Oken. One or the other species seems to me to lay their eggs in the reps branches
and to dig out the marrow of their young and to cover them with filth
fill, like the Repsmauszahnrißler. They also wear znr
Urgency of the Repses essential and seem to me precisely because of the
early maturing of the, if also had krippel, Kirner for the sparrows the
Reason zn be that the Reps fields are already in front of the Reite
search and pick the yellow pods,

Also on camelina, Myagrum sativum L., mix is ​​another known
++ knows; of black ground but wise-grand, especially at the fly
sutures, of strong, grey-white, short bristles; proportionate
the broadest of all named, chest scarcely hunched at the sides. Wing-coverts not strong towards the tip, but slightly grained. leg
thornless. A weevil larva can also be found in June in the month radish. Oken V, p. 1660, with allegiance by Frisch IX, p. 35, m. 18,
£ 1-3, speaks of a 'beet borer', 1, lines long, shiny vio-
Latvian and slightly hairy. Proboscis thin, curved downwards and
longer than the neck. As a larva in the small field ribs which they warm-
makes stingy. Since Frisch does not see me 2n bid, I keep this note
without comment. Low, the, 8. 45, copied this note, sets the
name Curculio napi. Whether the same, which is analogous to the Reps-
hidden secreters (Figure p. 176) in the roots of the white turnips
Jebt and these, especially the Ileinen, completely through the warts that have formed
makes shapeless? Oe

179

Finally, after Degeer, there lives on the rye herds a very small one—
long, greyish-black rift, carrying the rift against the breast
selkiifer with brown antennae and jumping feet. He does, according to Oken,
that the axes shrink. Curewlio (Oregestes) segetis 1. B) The wood eaters, xylophages. The one above
Page 75 discussed wood bores in relation to Kér-
structure, larval form and lifestyle related, but different
distinguished by a distinct antennae club, mostly legless
larvae and in relation to way of life in that the
Kerf creates so-called mother lines. Withrend namely at
dice the eggs individually or in groups under the wood borers
a flake of bark, in a crack or accidentally in one
gait that the mother-kiifer of himself, not
who had laid out because of bread, make most of the wooden
feed beautiful regular broodstock, and these will
almost in every species after another, but always in the-
created according to the same plan. — the larvae,
as noted above, mostly oline legs, round, short,
with a horny head and viclen Wilsten, so those of
Rattles most similar. The young pines are just
slightly yellow at first. The incomparably greater number of wood-eaters live in trees. But there are also some in bushes, never in roots
of their plants, even in seeds. Nic goes cin bark-
wood eaters without need in the wood or vice versa. It has already been said that trees, what wood eaters
always carry the germ of disease in advance
rude in itself and would in any case have come to an end. This is partly correct, insofar as not easy a tree
becomes ill without wood eaters soon settling on it
and contribute to its rapid demise. Some
Wood eaters can also be seen attacking more often, i. H. small
search drill holes, e.g. B. on diseased apple trees
and give yourself away again because, it seems, the
State of health of the tree not yet adequately
seems sunken to roast in it. Just as often or
at least not infrequently, one also sees that the wood kifer

    

 

180 attack and judge to grande, which uur passing
walking, eg. at too great dire, distress suffered, but,
without the coming of the pine, at the first rain
would have recovered. — The Tolzeaters lay theirs
Giing and brood pliize best in parts of the trees
to where the juice Jangsamer runs, e.g. at knots, branches
places, often also at the summit. They often attack a tree
and leave the same one close by untouched
stand. Detection of their presence is provided by the drilling
flour, which the weevils constantly knocked against their
sen, schr relieved. The Vorbanungsmitiel are already in general
Theil, page 45, dealt with. They mainly exist
in leaving and later debarking or splitting
of the wood after the insect has settled in it. 1) The bark weevers, Bostrichus, have
\ club-shaped antennae, unlobed, third
Foot link, sloping barrel-shaped body and rear

very steep wing-coverts,
The unequal bark beetle,

PRA iis: dispar Hello. female ca
drmgen, cylindrical, dark bramn bi

black. Male hemispherical, Braula-
similar, lighter brown. The mating of the kifer can already be seen in the
observe the first shining days of spring. she finds
both outside in the voices and in the heart of the
insect instead. As late as October, Radzay saw himself in the
captive mating kiifers. I found a pair too
dispar, which soyar did not tremble in death. It fills this
all the more so, as the mating of the other bark weevers
usually selien can be observed. You hit it
more and more females, according to Schmidberger eiwa five
times as much as Ménuchen. The kiifer inhabits the most diverse types of wood. Apart from
he bores into the apple, plum and plum trees

 

 

 

 

 

   
 
 

    

 

 

 

to i
‘

181

the Buehe, the Platine, in sick horse chestnuts, in the
brittle passages of the mean Aho: and the Kiehe, Eud-
I also found his voice in little voices of the Koel-
reuteria paniculata,

Schmidberger first saw him on 3 May on a top
apple tree and not near the earth, but
burrowing in close to aesia or healed wounds
After him, the kifer drills his borehole askew in the bawn"
to the core or near it, then rises upwards
sideways and then down again. After Ratzeburg's arrival
gifts that refer to young Bane, the kifer makes
was a circular passage in the sapwood. All these Crimean
ments now seem to be due to the fact that in weak
No support for the usual form of jaw gait
space is. Where there is no lack of the latter, as in
kern Siiimmen, is the normal form of the Ginge

   

 

   

 

   

     

 

 

the beizeletc. An actual Kainmer

 

 

mn end of the entrance, of which Schmidberger
speaks, I remarked as little as Ratzcbury, §
if you don't have that place there
fir wants to recognize, which as a result of the Zn-J
cumulative discharge of several gangues arises. The Kier lets Mr. Schmidberger the insect
right behind the Kingang. Mr Rad-

 

 

  

vay only speaks of the ends of the branches
we as Bratpkitzen, Olme Zweitel happens the brood
both places, in the first place especially as long as the gang is still there
has not achieved much development. According to Sehmid
snow white: chen, cinerseils elwas spiked:
zelm in a heap, such
different parts of the course
elay in all thirty to forty kids, you should
to

   

 

 

    

sen, li

     

Kier lie from seven to

 

     

Heaps are inv

 

     
     

awar e@
Schmidberger the first larvae at the end of May. leave after a few days id

 

ever lay, dem
hempwei:

 

n Towards the end of Kier in deu Géngen
speaking, not individually, but sociable with each other. Possibly

182

when they got bigger, each one got a special spot
of the aisle and could no longer advance or rack at the hind
weirts finally, in wormy larvae, it was even shown
some dilatation in consequence of the separation of the schwa
zen crust. The larvae seem to be more stretched
than that of the other bark kifers,

Because the mother gang isn't quite right from the start
done, but led branches even further and
are still being laid, this explains that
one at the oetfimng of a gauge in summer larvae and
Kier and even young stoners find confused. But what do the larvae live on? With most of
of the bark pine trees each eats its way out of the mother passage
its own so-called larval passage and in this way
outside she finds what she needs for her sustenance
gunmmi- and glue-like substances. At the unequal Barkktifer
one is therefore amazed to find the larvae in the mother sacs
find, Schmidberger now found the Giinge with a white
fairly thickly coated and _holds the latter
fir the food of the larvae. He also says that to the
Place where the larva
were, this substance had been consumed. I found in too

    

  

   

 

 

 

   

 

fully grown and progressing

 

the oelreuteria voice marriages with a thick,
but lined with black substance, wid in the maple
at least the black coloring of the same was found later
still. But whether these blacks as food or as
I dare not examine the excrement of the larvae
decide; only sovicl I noticed that the excremente
the larvae are black. The actual toy caves
I have never seen what Mr Radzay is talking about. At the
24 June n at Schmidberger in most aisles
young chicks ; that these the old Ganga weige in the wood vel
lingern, seems beyond doubt. The mother beetle is holding on
partly for the purpose of cleaning the passages and around
to increase the Brnt, still with this on, usually on
amgs. « Only several weeks after the

   

 

 

 

 

Kingang of the Matterg:

 

183

last transformation, the kiters achieve their dark brown
color and are flying, so to speak. Before that they lie
Jos in the genes. According to the foregoing, in
Summer probably still time to create a second, i. H.
half a generation, which often observed spite
The genus of the pine leaves no such exception. In this
But my numerous traps would have to, with a lot of bugs
crfitilien Ginge in Ahorn (March 1846) from spit in summer
herrithren briding Kiifern. harmfulness. Schmidberger reports that in
Jair 1834 not insignificant damage caused by the insect
done sci. Of 42 potted apple trees judged him
the Kifer 22 to Grande. The state of health of the Béium
Chen had no influence on those of the Tnsckt among the same
met Answalil. The potted trees were on a
erected lustrate; those in the rebates remained v
chont. On May days the kifers attack themselves
to inbolize, they were not yet deeper than through the bark
squat, so there was not enough, or only a little, and through
The tree was saved because of the beetle. Was there-
whom the Iusekt penetrated a little deeper, however
only so loud that one could see the rump of the beetle in the corridor
could still see 'so flowed, of the applied sticky wax
unchecked, sap approached, the tree withered and died. In any case, those such trees were lost to those
the juice plentifully from [through?] the bark flowed, even though
the kifer been taken out, this information of the _before-
not the slightest bit of excellent Schmidbergers in me

 

 

'to arouse doubt' does not refer to the outpouring of the juice of a
» healthy tree as a result of the small bark! nboh-
tion: for not something enigmatic. At least in May
after the expulsion of the exfoliate, the discharge should not
Find. Mr. Garieninspektor Lucas I about this
asked for information about my misgivings, but informed me that
that the accuracy of Sehmidberger's information
probably not too zveifelu sci by late April to mid-May

   

      

 

 

 

 

  

injuries inflicted on the apletbiimuen than in the
falling the first string, very happy to get hold of the
result in open positions

Sclunidberger also states that one of his friends
likewise by the attacks of the same kiifer among his
Aplelawergbiéiumen have suffered losses, and just those
healthiest, most secure in the best growth
had been infested. This message has nothing right now
Striking, because in hot summers like 1834, suffer
hiiulig the most important, many soil moisture: requiring
mehv as a kriippelhatte with many-branched, bulging crown. With these, the dying of summits is much rarer
yeah This is not to say, however, that the beetle koune
assuring

   

 

 

 

 

not, like others, the real Verani
ben a tree w 1. Just a hot soumer
can, as already remarked earlier, grow a tree so much

  

scoop, that a small other outflow tédlet him, wiih-
nd soon occurring Regeu revive him again, vou Untel

   

! gang erretien and almost all traces of drought verwisehon kanu. Bostrichus Saresenii Rtz., cin ~~ lauger, more stretched, rather smooth,
black, thin bark beetle; is usually found in company
of Bostrichus dispar, eg. in the apple tree, I also have it sometimes in
filled cherry-hay stumps, laying out gingerbread, found, doubt, by the way
not that one ilu with greater attention, like the previous one, noeh
will be found in other fruit trees. Its gorges are very narrow at first,
horizontal. ran feud in the Sime of Jaluesringe. However, they will
numerous larvae, which dev mother-kiifer as Kiifer irregularly there and
there freely in the Ginge, soon too wide. also black fi-
existing familial passages extended. The datebark kifer, Bostrichus dactyliperda F., the dispar in the
For dilich, + Jang, the miiuuchen hardly more than half as long, heell-
brown, in autumn as a perfect kifer in quantity in the date stones
the apothecary facility, at least in southern Enropa. — Br helps someone”
the flesh of the dates spoiling, disgusting with filth,
Small caterpillar, though in a lesser degree, this fruit in the 3rd
guzin destroy. The hairy barkweeper, Bostrichus villosus' F., - light brown, vou
yellow hair shaggy, lives as in the nest, so also in the tame nest
siauie, in tunnels on the ¢ize wWisen bast aud sapwood The larvae

 

      

 

    

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

185,

 

and young kiters. as it seems, not infrequently sociable from the Gingen
au: or downwards inside the bark,

The larger beech bark fer, Bostrichus bicolor Hb. + Light until
dark brown, the forehead of the minuchen a dense, brownish-yellow brush
carrying. Brisket clearly crooked in front. Last third part of the covers
fir strongly sloping, the whole kiel with strong, yellowish bristles
occupied. which are thinner and denser in front, but especially behind. Ginge
under and in the bark. -~ Should be except in forest trees, according to the specification
Herra Perroud's zu Lyon also occurs in walnut (Juglans regia). namely in the branches, as far as I remember the statement. 2) The bark beetle, Hylesinus. third foot
lapped as in the weevils. AI

 

 
   

e.g

      

 

 

  

song

 

   

1e little
ger beetles that almost die after death
always let your chest hang down like a neck
senior The wing-coverts sloping behind as in the bark kifer

The Kleewmzelkifer, Hylesinus trifolii Mill, brown, often yellow,
‘hh ours

igur adequately designated, smaller
Zn when he his actual Elugzeit
t be any closer, I met him
in September 1850 with pupae and some larvae in
freshly developed specimens are stronger in the middle
three-year-old clover plant
externally no sign of the Zehien also see as have
dev Kifer got the same already in the second year, a regular one

 

 

         

     

   

    

   

1 Giingen

 

   

Ginge's shape was not conspicuous. - There the stoner there
and there called the destroyer of Vothen Klees, by important authors

 

 

 

but other

  

ts or
inugste here too

 

Melt will. that it occurs ibe pl in the clover,
This imperfect note will find its place. The related Hylesinus paligraphus L., the double-fingered Bast
As large or scarcely larger than the previous one, with short, yellow-grey bristles:
chen beset, wole the kifer not infrequently a somewhat gray seminal Anselien
give What him whole. specifically indicated, i man in particular
which can easily be seen in the nveifed keifer, the eye divided into 2 white lobes. In addition to coniferous wood, there are also cherry trees, but I found them
him here only in branches of 1 1/2 inch thickness The Bohvlicher were tr
made into the smooth bark. In the rule there is a very large one:
Rammelkannner, from where half in the bark, half in the sapwood,
Mother giinge star-firm, strassensibulich - hence the name poligraphus -
fall apart, We in the above branches, the space is cramped,
the kifer often only makes a cinfacheu walk (Loihgang). I never have
with him balance; nl. number of
allegeton Kier very small. They are lying pretty awkward kings der

 

 

   

 

t be, ww

   

   

      

 

    

 

    
    
  

 

  

never seen, from whom Ratveburg spi

 

 

186,

gear arms. Even in October one finds mutations for ‘part of le-
inhabited by pine trees. The very small, only 1 million. long, very short, strongly swollen,
dark brown. somewhat hedgehog-like bristly Hylesinus fici Dej. + lives- in the open-
gene tree. in all dying, weak parts of the uterus, especially anch
in the frozen shoots,

In the occlusal lebi cin + larger, in the body shape very similar,
short, gnarly yellow bristles, kiifer with long bristles on the breast shield, but with
large crops Fithlern, Phldotribus Oleae P.

  

3) The bark weeper, Lecoptogaster. lobed
fourth phalanx. Plane wing covers, but a crooked against
Abdomen cut out (rising) at the top. In hardwood:
The large sap bark weeper of fruit trees, Eecoptogaster pruni Rts,

(and pyri Riz). 4, to 4.7 mill, long, fhigel
rather mangled at the back, breast shield finely punctured
Awise en the elytra not strong, da-

“the whole top of the kiifer mostly shiny. black, coverts black or brown-red, legs

 

 

   

  
 

= hey
Body and Brastst
and filler red:

 

‘Anf plum, cherry, apple, pear trees, even cloud cherries

and hawthorn, otherwise found only occasionally in the elms. Its joints between bast and sapwood are simple solder joints. the
Ramming chamber, into which the borehole falls, nt in strong bitumen
often space for 5-6 kids. In general, the whole gang is much stronger here
developed when found in the usually weaker aplelbiums, animal
I generally shorter lengths that showed no Rammelicammers
was. The end of the larval rings usually in the bark. * The
size of the insect does not appear to be very close; at least in
Larvae can be obtained in rooms for a year. After the end of June. fend
I freshly laid out ginge. P

With regard to its healthiness, the above applies in general terms of the
Cork beetles said, Rarely will he actually kill trees, because the
many small, unsuccessful drilling sites and apple
bitunien prove that the kifer often hit several years and one
Tries the criuk tribe, before you finally entrust him with his roast,
So-called Fanghiiame will probably have a great effect. even though one observation can be made right away that the kifer
filled wood is scornful, - it is remarkable that the roast of the
Kiifers is sometimes pursued by parasites in such a way that, for example, by a

 

 

 

  

      

 

  

   

1 Fecoplogaster pyri Rlz, if it is really a peculiar species, stands for the pruni
so uahe (see Nordlinger, addendum m Ratzeburgs Forstinsekten, in the Stettiner
tomological journal) that beer boule could be thrown togetherR

     

         

 

187

big family in a hawthorn not a single beetle got along and
the bark of the wedges of ichneumon wings looked completely sieved,

The small fruit bark weeper, Eccoplogaster rugulosus
Cook, + 2-3 million long. Throat shield is extremely heavily and densely punctured. Also very dense rows of dots on the wing covers, which
“ligh and dull cappear, black. Inner body arched_ ascending. End of elytra yoth. — The insect lives on apple. quince-. Pilaumen, cherry, bird cherry sehbii

In July 1817 I even saw it in abundance in freshly
tree stumps of rowanberries bore in, usually they are free
only branches or very weak voices he touches. But I found
him also in a fairly strong Zovetsehgenstamm. Around the borehole, in which there are women, gather in
usually several males, I couldn't exactly do the mating
observe, but I do not believe that it takes place backwards. Where the kifer has a lot of space, he lays it down
Lothgiingchen (a), sometimes also Quergiing-
chen, however, these are more common in branches, where
more omissions on a deviation from
Lothgang are present. The dam
fiingt, when hardly made a short Gangstiiek! is, Eicr za put on, and puts sotches in the
help the gait lengthening, hence man
because later larvae of different sizes around
cinen and meet the same mother gang, Letterer,
run on the boundary between bark and sapwood
fend, reaches a length of 12-30 million at the end,
There is no actual storage room
den, The egg cells are very close to each other
gerill. The larvae attack otters, especially
in branches with thin bark, strong in the wood
cin; The larvae also pupate here in sapwood
weigh (b), while I am in the thick vision room
of a cherry tree the larvae ringed entirely in bast
verlanfen saw, so that when the bark was peeled off
nothing to do with the larval growths, man
sees in our figure (f) also the Lécher (flight
lécher), through which the young Kiifer ans the
cradle drills out. Of what duration
Generation sci has not yet been precisely determined. I
found at the beginning of June 1845, admittedly in mild
climate, larvae which develop into kiifers at the end of June
transformed, Except this Bent touched

 

 

 

 

  

   

men. hen

 

 

 

ugh

\

WZ
in

hey

 

   

\Y
ZAM

   

_—

   

 

 

 

188,

vom Hrithling ler, so the entire development period would not be very
sxosse, Sclunidberger called a younger dauner for a generation
the brood of beetles which had burrowed in May came to him in the
April next year for preview. The insect still heects until s]
in the year; even in October 1842 I found friselr arranged ginge with
very young girls, such a brat would have to be
guided. Attribute larvae transformed into beetles at the end of June, when
Sclunidberger's claim of a greater duration the greater wire. 4) The heartwood weepers, Platypus, stand out
very cylindrical in structure and thin, fragile, unlobed
phalanges of which the first is as long as the
whole track. The mean Keruholz! in kichen, in ten chestnuts

    

 

 

   

fer, Platypus cylindrus Hb,, -i- lives outside
both in standing voices and in
Put. His attached feet from the outside through the bark tie
in's Nolz, even - with this tomcat that's striking
narrow, 6 million Jange, 1 million broad, dark brown Colydium elongatium F.

 

   
 

   

   

 

©. Malmkifer. Mihler just a little against the top
thickened, usually the last three segments are particularly enlarged,
as in Apate. body cylindric or broadly bulging, lar-
ven with three pairs of legs, dencu the Bolrkiifers page 26
very similar. Without actual mother-giéings, in wood,
grain and the like live. 1) The Capuchins, Apate. Fithlerkeule flat from
signed form. Head like under a hood
stuck. Body mostly cylindrical. The largest species with us: Apate eapucina L., 7-14 million. long. Black

» with fothen covers, in beech wood. The Beetle does not rarely lift up
worked beams, cords and dug sticks,
lays his children and only after a few years, as far as I can
minthe, the Kiifer develops from the Lorkeukiiferiihuliche but
strong three-legged larva, then suddenly breaks out in crowds
large lights from the oak frame in rooms and quiets, often through
jwse Tiinche out and flies to the windows. An obvious remedy
is against him, the beams, as soon as they are shod clean, no more
to leave it outside, but to build it up. I doubt that
fer his Kier anch into the building in the Ifinsern able
The six-toothed capuchin, Apate sexdentata olive. Black nit
red-brown covers and burned fillers and foot limbs, deeken
strongly separated at the back At the unicircle of the separated point three

 
 

  

 
 

I mean ¢

   

 

   

   

 

 

the w

 

      

     

  

       

 

189

    

   

ridge-like ling squat: next to the outermost edge above the seam a strong
ker, sharp tooth, — In the wood of the fig tree, where I thi

amount of bland According to Mr. Solier also in vines in the south
France. a

The grain capuchin, Apate fM@mentaria Nordl. Pitch brown little kifer that eats the wheat
core inhabited and in a similar way
eats, like the black grain kifer. I got >
Kxeniplare of this kerf without a name to Lorraine, found
but also in larger ones
Tican wheat in G

   

    

     

Zalil in Egyptian or Ame-
ssclischaft des Reisskiif In
some cores one notices a number of keeners at the same time. Find out more about this strange insect
I nowhere
2) The pinworm, Lyctus. Very narrow, something
downcast kifers; the last three limbs
lich_kenlenformig thickened. Non-lobed phalanxes. The coagulated sapwood, Lyctus canaliculatus F
varies in size depending on the individual and gender
2.5 and 4.1 million The pitch brown beetle
Head and chest, which have a pit-like rim
yellow-bristled. Also the ceilings with many narrow-bristled liings
lines, It is found from mid-June to the end of June
skinned and unskinned trunks in the forest, on room
flashing and wood storage, also in houses, even in the rooms,
where cin eye-catching wood is located. He is or
rather sehwi is floating. Anan finds its larvae in the wood of walnut, oak,
acacia, ash, %
wise in the sapwood. This will be left to you
a thin, heating surface, entirely yellow
flour transformed. From this flour they work great fortunes
approached, the Gfters looked like sulfur powder
Nile

 

   
   

   

 

   
 

 

 

irgelbaum (whip embroidery), preferred

 

shen and
“t cover the wood gana. The larva looks sel der-
those of Anobiwn striatum, but still the one
Apate iihulich, is very strongly boiled

 

  

  

  

umm, white

 

190

long (curved), in front 1.9 mill. wide, has transparent
Head with a brave mouth, very strong first body rings
hairy, white three pairs of legs, very flat, boned
hollow belly. The doll is 4.8 million. long and only 1.4
million broad, white, with brown eyes, feelers quite like
the yperfect insect. Abdomen strongly tapered. The development of the pine is a year, by . Walnut that I dropped in the winter of 1850-1851,
So that's what the kifer without a doubt in the beginning of summer 1851
covered with eggs, in the summer of 1852 already win-
melted The beetle hans in one and the same stick of wood
until it is completely destroyed. From one with oil paint
painted window frames in my zither
Kéifer has been out every year for several years. part
well-heated rooms, of course, the development of the
Insect faster and you meet the finished beetle there
quite often

   

 

 

1 March and April. The destruction that the Kiifer wreaks here and there,
is very important, In the Mineralogical Museum in Paris
he has destroyed everything of the oaken carpentry that
was not good heartwood. Main rule must therefore be, at
Buildings and wooden equipment, which should have duration, everything
to avoid sapwood. Gerithe made of sapwood,
must not be left uncovered, but must
immediately get their proper thick coat of paint. development
but there are cracks here and there, though not significant,
so the Kiifer will soon adjust to
because the mother beetle lays in these joints without a doubt
his kids. A species of Lyctus that no doubt already has its entomological name
f and the 2u million also in the Egyptian or American

Grain that came to Wiirtiemberg in 1847 is very smooth and
brown-red, the breast is finely punctured and has two shallow indentations. Also the covers very finely punctured and still under a sharp magnifying glass
visible longitudinal lines. The grain or six-toothed pineweed, Lyctus frumentarius F.
46 dentatus Burnt yellowish. Breast with three ridges and on each

side with six strong teeth. Cover alternately dotted striped

 

 

  

     

 

    

 

  

 

 

191

 

and done, — In the rice, spit up
other pharmacy goods. through ¢

 

herten grain, old dattey and
1 Trade spread everywhere. 3) The breadkiifers, Trogosita. body long, flat,
lati. Severely incised between chest and abdomen. The common kind, the common bread beetle,
Trogosita caraboides F. (mauritanica L.); is
black to brown-red. Feeler_always >
thickening towards the tip. Remind
by his look at the Mehikiifer, The at
During the summer Kiéifer can be found at various locations,
in rotting poplar wood, oak wood, and also in autumn in that
of Linden, Vichten, Buehen, after Erichson in Aranci and
other things are common but he is actually

from baked in bread. ~

The dirty-white larva flattened according to Erichson,
wavy, at the sides with long, projecting parts
hair. head stretched out horizontally, flat, horny,
somewhat slimmer than the body, elongated, almost square,
blackburned. On the first ring a horny, black-
brown shield. Two each on the two following rings
brown horn patches. Likewise the ninth with a burn
rough, horny shield running in two heels. Legs
pretty short; the anus, protruding like a cone, serves as a
follower. According to Rozier, this larva would
southern France under the name Cadelle the Koru aut
would be very detrimental to the soil, noted after the statement
one four days to three weeks after the Ernie die
Larva on the threshed grain. The description
agrees exactly with Erichson's. It is only
also noticed that the larva attached to the two
hang up tail tips kone, be very lifelike and
have such a leathery skin that you can
could hardly crush. They gnaw the grain
only from the outside, and do not settle for just one
Korn, like other Korukéfer, but need because of
greater size of several, therefore cause greater damage,

 

special
travel and from there

 

 

 

 

 

192

especially after the winter when she grew up, man
also often find the larvae in old, completely vou ilmen ange-
dry bread, of which the rind remains dead. sic
are to leave the memory in the spring, by Léel
and creeping up crevices and in the dust or in the
Sede za puppen see. I have doubts as to whether the
larva really live for grain and not predatory,
not quite settled yet. After a remark by Dorthes
(Autumn) larvae locked together with grain eat each other
unicr each other on. — Also after one of Oken from the
mem. en Yes Soc. R @agric. 1787, p. 64 escaped
nt he would only eat grain husks and no grain, and
Kiifer, with this mute locked, don't touch it,
but § Ibst Fillhérner and legs off
To pre-reduce the larvae, it is recommended that
Kor, if you don't fly until October or November,
mm tubs, whereby they are taken from washing

 

  

     

 

  

 

   
        
 

i.e

 

  

senior

 

 

 

of the grain with water-before winter to remove dic Kier 2,
feasible and certainly ineffective. By the way
ken yor the insect

is can
should the grain
stay. #

The blue kifer, Trogosita coerulea I. + with bluish bill or blaw with green, head and bro
| shiny, cover numbly, therefore more matt, Comes main-

certainly in southern Europe, especially in Provence,

Italy, Corsica, and also in part Eastern
veln even more northerly, perhaps through the
wweise of Kiifers is after

 

 

 

smile
St

   

   

 

 

rich before, cil
trade delayed. the Lebeu
the information the same, v that of the common Brodkéler. He is in the grain and devours the tenderness of the bread. 4) The flat kifer, Cucnjus. Also long and narrow;

 

 

       
 

 

ye vou the numerous related species abroad, at which
cher four limbs of the fiiblhorn. form a light club, faud ai
in your Egyptian-American grain in July 1847, of which many times already
the talk was. The larva was also found there, but not in
large number. eh thought she was a relative of Clerus at the time. 193,

Avian breast and abdomen are very strong
extraordinarily flat, almost paper-thin. feeler kiuger
as head and chest together. The brown-yellow flat beetle, Cucujus ferrugineus Creuts. Brnsistitck strongly narrowed towards the back,
on the other side with a Liangslinic. i
yellow. Everywhere, with —on the wing covers =
standing in fine rows of dots — short, yellow hair
bristles. Deeken towards the edge of the length after
keel. y

This quirky little kifer lives in large numbers in all
tem saved item. Tm Mouat July 1847 was
ey at Tansenden in the strangers who came to Sinttgart
Vorritten. ! D. The Bockk
and dolls dur
drew Kiifer. They live in the growths, mainly
in bark or sapwood. Larvae ridged, slender, rare
pressed. Completely legless or with short legs. head
flat. Kérpervinge severely truncated, the first the largest. Often noticeable somewhat rough at the top and bottom of the rings
jar, useful for pushing away. The larvae pupate
in a depression in the bast or sapwood, often in one
comfortable bed of wood fibers (cradle). Pappen with arched
deviating long antennae, afterdormen and thorny stools
head and tail, the few who are interested in farming
siren goat

1) The actual longhorn beetles, Cerambyx, are
usually large, with completely covering winged eardrums,

     

 

 

 

‘fer, Capricornia. Four-jointed, as kifer

 

   

) her ang horns adequately

  

 

 

  

 

 

 

kiifer almost entirely in bitumen. rounded but thorned breastplate, somewhat broadened
but not platin bodies.

' The related somewhat smaller Cucujus pusillus Schh. is weaker
hairy, the breastplate rather square. The blankets amit something
stir core lines and rows of dots, according to Erichson in Reis and others
Plant goods, presumably sold through trade xu ms,

found 13

 

 

 

Nordtinger, the small

 

t94

The Wrinkled Buckkifer, Cerambyr Cerdo L. Kérper etwos
broadly pressed. Filer slightly longer than the body. That on both sides
| Breastplate wrinkled crosswise with a strong thorn. This
also the origin of the blankets, The whole kifer black. Some-
sometimes under the bark of diseased apple trees. A large larva that
I cinzwinged in 1843 did not come until May 1847 as a kifer
with appearance. Has here also the dryness of the room
preserved wood stopped the development, this must
but in any case it will take several years. 2) The Saperda arias have feelers scarcely as long as
the body and are chubby, narrow,. pretty much the same
moderately round beetles without thorns on the breast piece. The fierce-headed longhorn, Cerambyx (Sap.) scalaris L. Very pretty

green and black piebald. On the Eliigeldecke, the
Nath along, a green or yellow ladder and alongside
patches of the same color. ‘Shows various occurrences, firstly in alder
tree stumps. In May 1849 I found the beetle in his
cradle. Since the Siiitzen in 1847 at the prospect of the
my fruit blessing had been filled, so I conclude from this on cine. maximum two-year generation, 'Second in quantity in standing sick

ken or hardly ever become ill strong cherry
Qa men at the foot of the Alb. on the 7th June 1849, in
warm midday air, I saw the kifer from tree

fly to the tree and the female with firmly stuck in a crack in the bark
Legrihr wean his brood. Vicle Baume from the many lights, through
dic the kiifer had come out of the bark, as if with shrewdly coarse
shot shot, Third, in France, I found a stick in the
Cradle under apple tree bark. It's a bit small and the green ladder
a bit irregular on the blankets, but hold it, Professor Ratze-
castle for nothing but a sealaris,

The Haselbickchen, Cerambyr (Sap.) linearis F
Schr narrow. All dark black with yolk yellow legs. The beetle is in May and June and is said to be very fleeting. His
He lays eggs on young, one- to 2-year-old hazel shoots, in which the
footless, yolk-yellow, hairy larva lives. Approximately /,' under the
Ratzeburg found a small, scaly, gnawed one on the tip of the lap
Place of 23 Linge; from this led 1-2 fine holes in
Markréhre in which the young larva had descended. The
grown larva reverses to Réscl to make the kifer more comfortable
come out The shoots inhabited by the larva show frith in autumn
withered leaves and even in winter one knows by their withered ones
Bud the enemy hidden within. Age-old generation. Geflers should exclude the hazel, of course preferably hazel, noticeably
damage caused by the Kiifer, it is recommended to cancel the
withering ‘Tricbe and immediate death of the larva. The grain beetle, Cerambyx (Sap.) gracilis
Guér., described by Guérin-Meneville in Monit. industrial du 4 Mars 1847 (see Voigt Zoologie XIV. 8th. 375), lives in
the corn stalks in France and runs in the area
of Barbezieux among the peasants called Aigulounier. The small kifer appears during June when the fruit
has sprouted and blossomed; dam drills the woman
I make a small hole in the stalk and put a bi in it. Since the same in the ovary probably has over 200 eggs
and puts only one in each [alm, then the woman can
Attack little ones over 200 stalks and thus just as many
bring ears to fall. The egg, which is up to
has lowered the first knot of the stalk, there is soon a small
ne larva the existence, which in the tube until rahe au
the achre climbs up and the stalk from imen rand heram
bobbed so that only the outer hat remains
the isolated axis no longer produces any nourishing juice,
stays loose, dried up and filled with the first wind. To-
where the larva the interior of the valley: close to the river
eaten away, she descends, pierced for cinander
the knot and finally settles in the lower part of the
Halms, 1!, fixed to 2 inches above the ground in order to dew from
eroded part and its excreuts formed
Mulm stay the winter but zm, Weun the grain to
When the tendons are mature, the larva has already reached its full wax
thun reached and nested in their camp. in
early next July she becomes a pupa, and after a few
days the complete insect creeps out, rises in the
Réhre up and breaks himself with his tongs
exit a hole. It is also added that the Ver-
lust for ears of corn lost by the attacks of the insect
go, up to a sixth, sometimes even up to a quarter
amount. 196

The larva endures even very severe cold, stay too
vin years or two in the straw if this is not in the ground
come, but die for lack of strength. Let me
so stand the stalk on the ground, so see the
Warmer and make their metamorphoses in the next year
through, while, if you take yourself away with the straw,
they do not transform and finally by drought
to die. (Ansland 1847 No. 6

The burnt goat, Cerambyx (Sap.) pracustus L. Black with

yellow front legs and blankets. This black at the back, hence the

Surname. — From May onwards, the little chick drifts over to the summer
on fruit trees and likes to sit quietly on the back of the blitter. It lays its eggs in gnarled branches of apple trees, branch trees,
but also in half-dead ash tops and rose stems. Certainly
without great importance. 3) The Callidium species have rather wide spread
body, thornless pronotum and completely covering fhigel-
cover. The longhorn beetle, Cerambyx (Call,) bajulus L.
9 to 20 million long, is flat with diameters, half-length

" feelers. Broad, round, with two black ones
* += grey-haired with bare elevations
breastpiece. Cover ditm, with hint of a gray
cross tie. The whole insect brownish black. many specimen
incompletely developed and then covered with dirty yellow
common deeken. (C. bajulus imperfectus Fald.) The meanest insect in pine, damp-standing bal-
ken and things in and around houses, in fences,
old lids, even in planks and the clapboard covering of the
Tyrolean Hauser. In posts usually by foot, so far
whom the recoiling rain envies. In June and July
one sees the perfect insect; the female is looking
its flat, short but clearly visible Legréhre
to deposit its eggs in cracks and joints. Oil painting undoubtedly gives good results in many cases
Protection against the insect. Otherwise the roofing is necessary
of the structure etc. recommend a1. 197

 

Iu this near also belongs:

The bristly goatee, Cerambyx (Pogonoch
Duucel brown not spread out, with antennae as long as
the body, a thorned pronotum and in the middle of which two further humps. Covers in front and behind with a cheeky brown-yellow bandage, in the middle of each one
with two tufts of bristles and eroded behind, so that on each side*
a strong tip protrudes. The whole Thirehen something piebald and
Everywhere with single bristles, - Flies already in the first warm ones
March days, but is also not often found in summer, and in
late years, like 1850, still in November on the apple bitumen. But
its actual fishing season is probably May and June. The larva is born
mine between the bark in diseased, rather strong branches of the apple tree
and sapwood, especially in knotty places, the kiifer leaves behind when making
dig an elliptical hole out of the bark where it lives
canoe easily later. — Cause of dying branches
the emperor is probably not, but he contributes to the same thing — burning
of the diseased branches together with the insect can only be partially effective,
while the pine tree also marries lime and elm branches, even priests' kiipps
gladly inhabited. In passing I want to be under the eyes of the country
wirthe coming name: Cerambyr (Rhagium) inquisitor L.. of
Larvae I already in large numbers under the bark of stale, on the ground
lying nut bitumen found, and a delicate, 9 million. long boekehen,
Cerambyx (Clytus) arietis F; black with yellow horizontal stripes when larvae
in diseased rose stems. E. The leaf beetle, Chrysomela.' Very pretty
small, more often very small, often strongly convex kifers
with pearlescent blemishes, sometimes threadlike,

 

  

    

short legs, which are often designed to jump,
Larvae usually extend towards the back into a point

* The seed leaf helper, Chrysomela cerealis L. Thick and rand, already
with red, blue and green longitudinal strokes over breastpiece and
Deeken, shall in May and June often see on the seed fields in —
large amount and then not insignificant damage
stifien. Otherwise not uncommon in the grass. His balls, they say. he hangs up
Broomstick and Giuster. Its significance could therefore only be
eat the grain husks or stalks bribe through the kiifer and his
gung-happens easily by skimming. Collar leads, 8. 139, the
Chrysomela 6 punctata F., black, with a red thorax, followed by two
Points, and red covers with three black points as destroyers
of fatter criteria, I recommend checking the above information. 198

noisy, bulbous autyetrieben or also Janzettiirmig ait
small head, with a kind of pronotum, through somewhat larger ones
strength and color indicated, and three pairs of black,
ken legs, over the soft tapering towards the back
Several rows of dark dots or
warts. The pointed anus serves as a pusher. Dice
larvae live and the tomcats eat from the leaf substance
different growths. 41) The Lema species with almost cylindrical, narrow
brisket, and very thick, reminiscent of snails
and short, scaly grey-green larvae. The Lilicupteiter, Chrysomela (Lema) merdigera L., with black

body and legs, red breastplate and blankets. , as a kifer who
tL in the Haud pfcift, from the first warm days of Frithling to the
1 White garden lilies, Lilium candidum, and the crown imperial, Fritillaria
imperialis, there also somewhat later its rubbish on the back
accumulating, disgusting larva. Kiifer and larva eat the lily petals. Easy to collect. The awolt-spotted asparagus weevil, Chrysomela (Lema) 12 punctata L.
+t Roth are chest, head and legs. Covers yellow with “12 black
points. The yellow-leek asparagus weevil, Clerysomela (Lena) asparagi L.
Schmiiler. Black head, red shield. On the red-gestiamten
dark green covers each three white, almost square spots, with the
previous on asparagus as soon as the shoots come to the ground, He ,
gnaws them and lays its gray eggs on it, causing them to
become unclean. Spiter also the short, dirty grey, slow one
Larva, which releases a brown sap from the mouth, into the soil
a yellow pupa transforms to three to four weeks after Résel
to be seen later as a perfect beetle. The grain chickens, namely the whole Ulaue Clrysomela (Lema)
cyanella 1, + and the rolly-necked Clirysomela (Lema) melanopa Le +

bluish or greenish-blue with a red shield and
red legs. At the end of May and June are the kifers
hinfig on different types of cereals, Soon after

the greasy, thick, snail-like lar-
Veu on the cereal butters, which they scrape off in long strips,
so they turn yellow. Pupation after Réaumur in the soil and
At the beginning of August the young chick was hatched. In fact I found it
the Kiifer in September for the second time. Whether of importance? the
The kerf can easily be disturbed by skimming off the chick and the larva. 199

The treatment of the seed with sulfur, Fischthrau, mentioned in Low
and the like belongs to the delights. A black, soft, elongated, somewhat buckeye-like chrysomeline,
-+— with alternately yellow and black colored legs and fibulae,
as long as the body, Chrysomela (Luperus) rufipes F., or somewhat shorter,
dieker, with yellow breastplate and short fillers, Chrysomela (Lu-
perus) flavipes L.—- (Minnehen uid Weibehen), — just as common on stone,
like anf pome fruit trees. Sometimes so numerous that there are also Schmid-
Let the litter clear so that it becomes like a sieve. larva
unknown whether Schmidberger's statement that she lives in the ground
is based on positive observation or is simply based on the fact that he
Larvae not found on the bees, I leave it open. 2) The Gattuug flea beetle, Maltica, forms cine
very species-rich and easily recognizable grappa. you
herigen are just as small, mostly short and squat,
strongly convex above, of green or brown metallic
shiny, head usually tight, and hind thighs very
thick, designed for jumping. Hence the beetle one of the
named best jumpers and common earth flea. with corpse
activity he finds in the ilug scine food plant, and soon
begins on this mating, because usually are
Beetles together in large company. Preferably
they hale on sunny and warm places, much more
niger in the shade of Biumen. — Searches in rainy weather
he to hide, or sitat through and pretty
rigid at the leaves, the Erdilohkéfer hibernate as
Kifer in countless numbers under leaves, stones, in the cracks of you
Bawnrinden and come already in the first warm
spring days out. As is well known, they corrode the bitter and especially
the seed lobes and first pods of the young mushrooms,
as a result of which a large part of the seeds is often hit
will, Acltern Blitteru harm the Erdiloh little more. Fine quantity of large holes in blitters, which one caterpillars,
snails, generally tended to be attributed to larger cores
is, roars from Brdfléhen hey
e Li

   

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

they eat into the sprouting end,
here. With the discharge of the
But Blatis grow larger to the same extent

 
 

still small sheet small

 

 

200

Locher, — At night the kifers squirm, of course
loud in the neighborhood, in the flowers and drgl. Doh
many remain on the leaves, but if
It is said that she likes to go to the Blithen
the Naehtviole and the Barenlauehs back, so like
this on the one hand by chance, on the other hand by confusion
with the one in the Beirelauuehblithen so dusserst
Glauzkiifer, Nitidula, are based. Several arias live sociable on one and the same
Plant, but also often a beetles species almost entirely
finally a certain weight. The Kii ine Here on the green parts, on
most commonly on the leaves of the plants, and mostly
lower field and garden crops. That Kiihn white earth
found flea larvae in the moist worm meal,
certainly rests on a mix-up. Because the ones from the
The larvae live on the leaf matter
They are colored white or dark, and carry: the general
my character of the leaf beetle larvae. More detailed descrip-
exercises of those of the individual arias are still lacking. the
Development of the kifer must generally be done quickly
be. The Repserdiléhe z. B., which one end of June in quantity
on the Reps, probably belong to the second generation
food on. We know the means against all flees of the earth at once
deal by the way of life of similar species very much
matches. materials. Nature protects the land
often against the insect by persistent mild
Rainy weather, which accelerates seed germination and
the development of the seedling is so demanding that it grows rapidly
ji over the happy period come over. Removal of Krant, Lanb, Stroh, Stoppelu n. drgl.,
and what the beetle tends to dwell on is
awar in the garden, but soon to be carried out in the field » and
berdiess presichtliche not ciumal effective enough, because

   

  

 lays

 

 

 

   

 

    

 

 

e.g

 

Where

201

there are also mosses in the lawns of the ditches and hedges,
under the scales of the bark, even under stones and in
the bare earth still opportunity enough for the beetle, a
to find suitable winter quarters. He flies a lot
easily and happily from one garden to another,

Equally far-reaching is the suggestion, 'only new, noel
to choose unused or used land for garden beds,
because with new creation of Giirt the upper earth iit the
from the seeds planted on it come deep down. *
Apparently this unfortunate proposal rests on Volls
ignorance of the way of life of the earthiloh who lays his eggs
not put on the ground, and ibe
as well

 

 

   

 

s iu cinen new garden
t flies as in an old one. Likewise 1
seems to me that given by Wnndram, even by Kollar
repeat Rath, the seedbecte in the middle of a meadow ana

   

lay, because the surrounding grass the exercise of Sprat

 

ability of the earth flea hinder! who only remotely dart
hated, will have noticed that the Erdiloh his
Food source almost flying around and not hopping up
finds. shading of the growths, covering with ‘tanmen’
rice may have some effect, but of course it is
Development of the mushrooms not important, male and female
can only be referred to on a small scale. Scatter the beds with Sigesspinnen and Kichenlohe
is of little use as a root with skin, garlic, etc. iv the human na ie be-
do not affect the kifer per se and all the less so as he
flies away easily. Fertilizing the beds with chicken manure is also
toh resist £2}. e unsightly plants,

 

 

 

but due to earlier off:

 

Anyway you

 

works. drive the planzon nocturnal
1 (with salawnsser, turpentine and
anderu oclene, garlic water, dung puddle, urine anit nitrate
ter) are at least partly ridiculous, denu

   

Kinbitten the Sam

 

 

   

never touch the seeds. the insect leg! 202

Also dousing the borders with horn spilim water
don't stop, but the remedy works, as do several of the
other with later repetitions, this does not happen
about the means, but about the fact that the insect can be treated at all
has often stared. However, if you want time for that
Using an insect allows much more thorough riding. A means of dissipation against the ground flea consists in the
Transplanting the beds with radishes, cress, lettuce [?!] and similar But it is a very cunning and expensive and not cin-
wal safe means, especially since it also increases the
Insect transported. The proposed means of extermination have to
'week, partly to drive away the insect, partly to destroy it. The pouring over with ice-cold [!] well new water
det and drives away the insect as little as a short cold one
Rain. Scattering brown pea and bean stalks is al-
Bern. Dense dusting with ash wid lime or road
dust is selu cmrecommended. It must be very grindy
drive, it really can be a hindrance to the Iusekt
should, especially in the morning when the plants are covered with dew
are wet, it is also to be repeated after each rain. The latter also does not apply to the Gréssern anyway
reversible sprinkling or much more overlaying with
Hithner, ‘pigeon, horse manure. The various recommended infusions, such as fish thrane
with water, herring slaek, salt water, sauerkraut brithe,
penkraut infusion, ham broth, waste water from purified
Fish, even green or sandy water, are partly
harmful to the plants, partly not to be used on a large scale
the, partly even too innocent. Bouché recommends Wundram'sche remedy (Beg
with wormwood water: a bucket of boiling water, twine
left for hours with a handful of wormwood, and
an infusion of tobacco: a Himer water tiber 1, bis
2 pounds of tobacco), and assured that the bitter taste

 

 

    

eat

203

of wormwood drive away the earth. Piléinclings tauelite
one before the pilanzen in the decoction. - But how is that supposed to be?
english Sprinkle the plants with sulfur powder the kifer
kill? The ground flea machines have never had a bigger one
enjoy recording. They are all too awkward and in many
no need for len jen. Your Kinrichtang bribes in
Essentially made of a board, covered with tar, Sy-
rup n. the like, which is drawn across the field,
so that the earthly marriage, startled by the approach
the machine or scion which the young plants
bump, jump up and in more or less larger
Amount left hanging on the sticky substance

Inir, the skimming off of the
Kiifer and at the same time larvae with a large creator. (Please refer
above page 50.) The cabbage flea, Chrysomela (stop.) oleracea L. Ge
woolly ~- All olive green. More or less in the blue
piercing. Acusserst widespread, as far as Grénland. Not infrequently
on forest trees, here also much larger, blue, from the
Kinen as a separate species, H. violacea Ent. I. considered. Most injurious to garden and field crops, such as
young cabbage, mustard and camelina, also agree with the information
Reps, turnips, cloves, levkojen and many more uncritters. It applies to him everything in general from the earth
beg what has been said, especially the strong increase
good weather. In unfavorable wet years, on the other hand
is often a specimen can be found. The kifer should put the kifer on the underside of the leaves
lay, the dirty brown, voracious larvae in May
crawl on the kidneys, within a fortnight some hay
dureli, attach to a leaf, pupate
and appear after a few weeks as a kifer,

More commonly on cruciferous plants, themselves
Meervettig, although much smaller are: Chrysomela (Ialt.) -nemorum L., «- 3.8 million. long. black with a long

   

  

 

204

Langssireif over each wing-covert, and Chrysomela (Hult.) lepidii Ent., + blue-green or olive-green, tlacher iit lin-
better mistakes. Chrysomela (stop.) napi Ps. (chrysocephala L.).-+- Pretty in front

and pointed at the back, greenish-blue to oli-
=> vengreen, lower half of the face and
Legs except hind thighs

and bold yellow-brown. In abundance as chicks and larvae, especially towards the end
June on Reps, white and other types of mustard a. the like Not well known to me, but as very mean and becoming sexual
quoted by Zenker and others:

Chrysomela (stop.) hyoscyami F., smiling green: with _yellow feet
mad violet thighs. Chrysomela (stop.) brassicae F., black. Deeken pale yellow red,
all around, like a building in the middle, black. Antennae pale. One Chrysomela stop.) concinna Kirby nud Sp. crushed the tender ones
Hop sprouts (Kirb. and Sp., Introduction 1, p. 201.). A brownish olive green has happened to me several times.
men, which runs through the very young leaves of the hops, -+. The-
the same or a sel related drove up the same mischief at the beginning of June
jyoung hemp and in September on the kidney bean leaf. Many others
Species would provide enough material for 2u observations. 3) The genus Fall pine, Cryptocephalus, shows short,
slender kifers with long, thin capillaries, hidden against
below backing head, ordinary, not to jump
capable hind legs. On the other hand denotes the Kiifer,
that, in order to flee, he quickly drops to the ground. The grapevine kifer, Chrysomelu (Cryptoceph.) vitis L. Forehead quite vertical, so that
the Kiifer, given from above, no head
au have seeint. Chest much narrower than

= abdomen, globular. Black, matte finish. Antennae base and coverts reddish brown. The summer tiber aut
the leaves of the vine. that he becomes hi 'idlich,
except doubt. Not mur says Fabr., he 20

 

 

 

means

   

   

sse in the stid
male (nisere depascit), other
iculture V. p. 382,

 

lichen Europa dic Reben e
then also vach Rozier

 

Cours compl. 205
'

{.27. £5, he eats off the first rungs, the ranks
ken, blitter and young tallows, making the vine
suffers damage even for the next year. see the leaves
from him sometimes like a sick (Oken). only true
the specification of the blood-red feet is not. I found him too
never what is said there, even in the first days of
Frithlings. But if it is correct, the further one can hardly
Indication doubted that he was returning to the. Cold on the Rebholz [in the cracks, as they say, well
hardly] hide or crawl back into the earth. That he
the winter over the tender roots of the young grapevines
gnaw, appears, if not otherwise, from the larva
Speech is, quite unbelievable. And also the larva would
if she lives here, certainly less in winter than at everyone
harm other seasons. The only remedy against the stoner should be cautiously
tapping the Kiifer seeds into the catch screen. 4) The tripartite kifers

2

are poor in genres and touch us only through one who
the ladybird or sunbug, Coccinella. you tra-
the most diverse names in the mouths of the people
ments are hemispherical and smooth, mostly with lobes
Colors, red with black, black init red, yellow with
black, yellow with white etc. Already in autumn very weak,
they hibernate under bark scales, in the dry grass, on
Foot of rocks and trees, etc., come éfters im
Winter on warm days in the houses at the windows,
live on small, soft insects such as B. of leaf
léiusen nnd relatives, Schmidberger assures that if
for only such a kiifer on a leaf covered with leaf lilies
sat on his lap, he was almost certainly on it
be able to count, a wide day no more Blatilaus

 

 

 

206

to meet. They are probably also pursuing Schild-
lice. Aueh Bouehé, who still leads a few more arias,
says the flower gardeners are sometimes looking for a larger party
of it and put them on plants they like from
Aphids freed, whereupon immediately the same hunting
start Mating takes place from spring to autumn
brood instead. The females lay their yellow lingual eggs-
on greens. The larvae that appear shortly thereafter are chrysomelia-like
lanceolate (tip backwards), have long, black,
bristly legs, small head, bristle-haired body. you lau-
fen very much alive on the leaves of the most diverse
Plants around and eat aphids ete! and this
of course in much greater quantity than the pineapples. the
adult larva attaches itself to a leaf and pupates
grabbing the bursting larvae skin by the back
preparatory Pupa chrysomelia-like. Nah twelve to four-
ten days the kifer hatches. The commonest of the larger species is the symmetrical ladybird, Cocei-

+ nella 7 punctata L. Rothe, with seven black spots
|. Cover. In multitude together with their garnet-black, red and yellow

| fleected larva on the ears of the hop. Here you can find in
June and July often the handsome dirty light yellow, slightly above
Spit eggs, they are about ten to twelve in a heap
and fastened to the underside of the leaves with some kind of glue. the
young, still completely black, lizard-like lizards keep
'crawled out of the eggs, still reasonably sociable near the

ite. thin-skinned, shriveled up, open at the top

Bs seems thus, since one already at the end of May
Larvae found on fruit trees, at least two generations in summer
give m_. fully grown

 

‘Collar, 8. 138, borrowed from Dr. Hammersehmidt and
Heeger dic news that the larva of Coccinella impunctata F. als
Larvae on vetch, esper, lucerne and other types of clover including blitter
graze, leaving only the ribs. This message is in
Contradiction with all other experiences about the way of life of the
coccinella. I fear another horrible confusion
friend and foe. 207

A similar, slightly smaller, common on ribs

Finally the extraordinarily frequent, well-known double
punctured Coccinella bipunctata 1. (Fig.) with red blankets
and two black dots,

 

II. . butterfly order. Harmful, with the exception of the silk butterfly. The moths usually have long, sometimes thread-like, sometimes
buttoned, soon kimmie or notched filers. Il Ris
sel is hollow, of very different length, in most
designed for sucking flowers; but there is
also butterflies, which because of the stunted structure
take no food of their tongue
know. — To those with dusty shovels
little covered upper and lower wings
if you see the front edge, hem edge and back
earth. In the females of some butterflies
species, the wings are always crippled
really small. The season of flight does not change with any insect-
family as scary as the moths. Some appear
in the first days of March, the others in November or even
Dec. Your great fertility is almost sprit-
verbatim.—However, their numerous propagation depends much
more than with other Kerfen from nice weather. This must be their flight, mating and especially that
Laying the eggs on the plant, which will become the caterpillar
should eat, favor. That of the moth laying eggs
observed “procedure is often highly peculiar. development
neither are they sold individually or in bulk, often in
ranks, pie-shaped, naked or with hair
covered. 208

The eggs of the butterflies are much clearer from ansscror
Variety in size and shape, soon to be baked,
soon almost spindle-like striped by bewnnderswiirdig s 1,
latticed, crinkled etc., surface. Most is at
the tip of the ling lightened freely upwards, but
others lie on their side again. The tears that gnawed out of the eggs
often eat the eggshells in whole or in part
on. Those who survived the egg shelling mostly remain sociable

   

  

 

together, but those that have sprung from individual fiers
live like a settler. The caterpillars usually pull through
colorful coloring ans. Dic for the butterfly genera
there is a constant difference in the number of legs
most comfortable Kintheilugsgrund. Especially from important
activity are also the various Auhéingsel w
Forks, hickers, horns, warts, bivsicn, blisters, girdles,
bristles, soft hair etc. The caterpillars are at their swift
Grows very fluidly and touches them too closely
been skin repeatedly, some up to 7 times. seam
When such a skin approaches, they usually sit in twos
Days in a quiet spot and wait until the earlier one
Skin behind the head flat. They squirm along alsdaiun
out of their fresh clothes, but mostly a few stay

   

 

 

  

    

  

 

  

Sitting quietly next to the remote alien skin for hours, mm
air to
your perfect
Big ones in less than half a year. The ranches
incr Schineticrlingsart either eat up afterwards
a certain Pilanze and perish more than that
eat her from another. But others are comfortable

 

only remember the impression of

  

dream Reach most ramps

 

 

 

easier to other food, and these usually come
Lich also already in nature on several plants. The caterpillar Unrath is peculiar, short cylindrical,
often pressed as if through a model, with impressions of length. To present her transformation into a puppet,
hangs a part of the ramps at the end of the tail,

 

209

also makes a silk belt around his body. Others weave themselves in a single or double silk
housings in the most varied of orientations, and others
just insert a small ciférmige earthen hole, after

 

few days, some only after several months
they then die aut al and appear as pupae of very
Varying but con-
permanent shape. Sometimes «they are angular, sometimes round, sometimes init
a nose, with anal tips, anal ticks, etc.
sometimes bald, sometimes hairy. ‘

The dolls always already press in cuts and
Outline the future general shape of the Schintterling. Only the Flaigel still appear on a smaller scale. But as soon as the time for the cut of the butterfly has come
is coming, sooner sooner sooner later, the cardboard bursts
breast and hindquarters, and the young butterfly rises again
on an object up, the ili allows his
Wings hang down and let it grow. the
Webs in which many pupae rest make it necessary
that the butterfly to the Spinnge

  

 

 

 

use to rotate
chen, before leaving a softening juice on the mand,
Most moths give up after the metamorphosis
a copious juice from the anus. their wings stretched and they are with the
whole moth ctwas crhiirtet, so fly
expects the dimmer for this
We can probably remember the course of the previous one
to explain

 

 

Have

 

   

the same way or

 

 

 

n, Warnm a species in a
eating is particularly tricky, but not bad
ranch out of order, report about an unusual
zn liche ranch propagation zn. \

 

The generation of butterflies is usually
cine cinmale, in that the faller in Frithling or Vorson-
ier ans the Poppe kémuit, after mating Kier lays,
the resulting caterpillars during the summer
will be welcome and get mixed up and in the coming

Nérdlinger, the little Foide. Mh

 

 

210

Spring or summer appear as Schinetterlings, that is
branched from egg to butterfly almost a Jaly. Or, by stopping the Ranpen in the summer
reach their perfect size next spring
eventually eat up, pupate and soon thereafter as
butterfly to appear — but simple ones
Generation. But even shorter generations are not at all
rarely, e.g. the butterfly appears in spring,
the young caterpillars in early summer, the moths here in the
Summer, but their young caterpillars, thus the second generation
ration, still in the fall, to grow as Ranpen or pupae
to overwinter and fly next spring. here
so a double generation, Tn likes a single fill
even a third generation occurs in the year. Only when they are young, as caterpillars, are the moths through
their gluttony, admittedly often in a high degree harmful. Since the caterpillars almost without exception in the open air
live, they are at the time of their skinning to the detrimental
influence of bad weather and the attacks of Ichneu-
far more subject to mons than those more commonly in the ground,
larvae of others hidden under stones and in plants
Familys. Also, they have their own peculiar diseases
hen observed. 1) Butterflies (Papilio)

excellent you
buttonie Killler, long
Pair of feet, large and wide, mostly Jebhatt colored fl
the ones at rest vertically below the pretty hairy
Kier hiiwig

hh fudenforme, at the Spi

   

Riissel, 6flers stunted, first

 

 

gel,

in

 

 

body standing. They only fly at T
goggle hat or cake! or in groups, in this case viclecki
hairy caterpillars with eight pairs of legs. dolls on the tail
attached, angular. The cherry moth, big fox, Papilio Po-
lychloros L. 39 mill. long, 57 million wide, beautifully angulated

 

mig anit or without ribs, solitary

. Thorny or

   

 

 

oN
and fringed, red-brown, black-spotted upper side of the
Wings, especially four large ones on the front of the forewings
black spots. Underside mottled brown and black. Forelegs blunt, like feelers, the female with diekem
Body is often said to contain several handert Kier. The moth gives immediately after crawling out avs
of the doll cine rothe Fliss ch, which after Réaumur
from the legend of
The main time of the sehnell tli
from the beginning of July. Spiter in summer there are fewer
more, how will cinzene (in the autumn of 1850 but rather
many) spillings or non-legate butterflies in
stuck, garden sheds and the like. during the winter and in Frith
fly again. The Cherry Butterfly lays its obcu steruformig zcichueten
red-brown eggs often up to 150-200 in a firm
cin twig glued laterally or the twig half
embracing cows, on cherry and Vistula,
Pear, apple, quince trees, but also on elms,
willows, aspen. The eggs are usually im
mer ge & But Ratzeburg also only saw one in Fri
ling gegien Kierkuchen. The Kic
remain unchanged until spring. But then fr

 

 

 

   

goodness vou si

 

m ,Bhitregen® has given cause. —
at the end of butterflies is summer

 

     

 

 

   

   

   

 

SSen
the ramps dure the roof of the Kier out. she
are black-grand with fiuen Hiireh

 

 

1, already after the first
Harness, however, recognizable by its veraveigton rusty yellow
thorns. They keep themselves from the beginning to the pupation

 

sociable and also weave a common web. thre nourishment consists in the buds and tsaria
leaf star; In the morning they go to the pasture, in the evening in it
Spin back. They grow very quickly and would grow back
Ochsenheimer already fully grown in LO—~L2 'days, So
much is certain that by the end of May you will already be tall
Clumps of tendrils visible on the branches. are fully grown
them up to 45 million long. head heart! per grey-blue w
with rust-red branch thorns and § Is the time of

  

 

 

    

    

 

212

 

Coming to transformation time, d. H. the first third! of June (1852), they run anf hundreds of paces
together and clung to houses, walls, battlements,
Voices begin and after 1-2 days the caterpillar is already there
Pupa: ocher or brown-yellow with sharp eeks and four
golden patches on the back, after 10-12 days,
also probably after three weeks (Zeuker) the butterflies appear
terling and flies everywhere. — The generation of the cherry
falters is, according to the previous one, a simple one and Zenker's
note that Ranpen can be found from fribling to autumn,
should justify an exception to be examined more closely. The moth and the caterpillar are often only individually and rarely
ten, but also very often in some years. But look
you only ever defoliate branches and I keep up
Ratzeburg the eating of whole bins for rare
acceptance; although it is repeated by Bouché. - The
Pupae very often inhabited by ichneumons. The caterpillar webs are easy to see, even if
lends to the caterpillar societies by the defoliated branches
betrayed and can be torn off and trampled on. Shaking off (Low) is useless. ;

The construction white, vein white, papilio
crataegi L. Fligel
white with black
veins. According to Schmid
Berger in Austria
he lies from the end
May to end of June
i) depending on the year-
LY gang. In year 185%
I saw the first in Hohenheim towards the end of June. hn mountains
of course he appears later; so in 1850 in Bavaria
‘Tyrol throughout July. RO: st him himself still in
occur in August. But this should certainly be an exception
be where not based on error. The moth roams the fields and the garden,
especially likes to be found on flowering red-knuckles,
wn to suck from the flowers, and visited after Bouché
also garden flowers, including fire lilies, heavy lilies,
night violets, sages, foxgloves and others. Willingly
flutters around the fruit trees. Here you can find both
Mamuchen as females together. The latter because of
of Kidding. But, as is easy to understand, the
always be mostly males. The same thing
applies to the often countless crowds that gather at puddles
and bichen settle down to drink nm. The moth lays its brood eggs on each fruit bii
Apple trees, among which he, like Sehmidberger
y assured, the lower ones give the higher preference. Bir
Plants, plums, medlar are also to him
desirable, according to others also bird cherries. besides
is he mean anf We
Rowanberries, sloes and ‘Tranbeukirs
even thought it appeared on Kichen. The Kier which the female Schwetterlii
shaped free on the top
the blitter sets are gold-
yellow, above and below etc
Lituge after

 

 

 

   

 

‘de

  

 

 

 

 

 

dorm (hence its name eratuegi),
hen. we claim

   

 

kneheu-

 

 

 

 

pointed and de
turbed. Schmidberger counts¢
in a bunch about 150,
After him, the Kier become syllable in mid-July
that the caterpillar is about to:
the kids some

  

  

will. Schmidberger's

   

 

Approach, the heung from the leaf
suck, may rest on an Irethuw, However, supports

him Kier au! he bases his statement on the ex-experience, i

  

darren Blitter did not seem like on the green ones. the Riiupehen is said to be after ctwa v
few days ago. They have black heads and
shwiiralichen Thusring, are dirty yellow with brown-red

Stripes on both sides and very hairy (Schunidberger). The crit

       
    

 

 

24

— They spit a leaf over themselves and gnaw tiredly
em aut der Ob

   

 

vou cite the green away until nav yet
the nerve skeleton remains. After Résel they do

also probably on the sheet, word they sit, about themselves eiu
white flat yarn. In the second week zichen sic
add a new sheet to their Wolnblatt and thus form a
Kind of nest, into which they go in bad weather and
strong sunshine (Schmidberger)., Schon
After the first sound they will be ready in two days
to eat a leaf, but a single Sehoss is enough, un
men to give food for the winter, they go by the way
many of them perish and Schmid-
berger 20-80, often even very few vow a family in
the winter. Already in September you can start to tresse Das
Nest is immediately pinned to the lap by many fiids
married and only a little bit left free, —each
Ranpe sees a special place in dean's nest,
where they spinut a ecigene cell. Kiilte harms the
Réiupehen dureban: t. .

It is said, but probably without reason, that un-
probably large such nests in an upcoming one
cold winter hinds. With the first Frabling, early April to Sehmid-
berger, at 12—14" after Bouché, leave the Nestriiup-
their winter lodgings. Indeed left
in the spring of 1851 they gave me their nests much drier than those in
similar nests hibernating marriages of the goldfish,
Only one or a few come first, then all the others
he time dirty

   

 

   

     

 

   

 

 

here:

   

My Réupchen saw zn i
le darker back
a slightly wider side
line. They soon refer to the blossom buds and
ten instead of the old dur
crazy cin new geriiuniges. Also in this one
In the evening, with bad weather, he returned. They are

line

  

 

bramnroth, had cine very nice

   

and awis sei

   

and back each ¢

 

 

ch their excrement contaminated

 

hey

215

Flower buds consumed or withered, so they go
tender young leaves and grow from min selir fast,
especially cry the second, also Sclimidberger in mid-April,
to Ratzeburg (northern Germany) only at the beginning of May
sufficient sanitation is over. The individuals, woe
should have settled first on the leaf buds
which on the Blithenkospen int growth precede. —
After the second hatching, two appear on the caterpillar
rows of yellow spots down the ridges; between
and next to these a black stripe; on the rick
yellow and white hair. From the black side stripes
transverse ash grains run down to the abdomen. Even the third
Schmidberger already leaves hints for individual caterpillars
To occur in mid-April, which seems very fh indeed. The caterpillar no longer has a black head and three legs

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

   

 

black longitudinal stripes on the back, two in between
brane on the side and below it is gran and. trigt
white, black id tawny hair. From now on the ramps should run out of the way. at
me on an orchard

 

work in the room
they held each other

 

noi

 

still,
if not all, yes
partially cecellular, and

 

by the fact that I
ren sic zuin part
reconnected. that she
gladly in Asigabelen
I have sapien (low).
not noticed. BEnd of May or early
June the Ranpen reach their full size, In selir fr
hen Jahven but, e.g. 1854, they are already in the last April
ready for pupation. To pupate is the caterpillar
in the selection of a suitable place not very w
Risch, cin Zann, Sti

kara ni

 

cinzelt, v

 

  

 

 

 
 

nm or branch (Fig.) do you suffice;

  

 

216

she fastens herself with her abdomen to a itbersponmenen
Place, ‘spinut a rope (g) around your body, and after
After 2-8 days of rest, the white-yellow appears with black
Dots and lines beautiful doll. After 2-3 weeks
the sea creature unfolds. This flies in cinzelnen
years in extraordinary numbers. So Preyer tells that
in 1838 almost every leaf was covered with rn. From the multitude of tree whites, which after
also slip a crimson drop on the
anus, explains the sometimes observed blood;
rain* most naturally. For more details see Oken V. 8. 1142. The-
nor is the caterpillar after Selunidberger's and my cigenes
Annuity never present in such quantity that they like
the Frosispanner or the Goldafter gauze Obstbiume
defoliated. On the other hand, Ratzeburg speaks of Béumen,
who were eaten completely bald or dencu not cine
flower stayed. According to Oken, there are often very large white larvae
due to an illness in which they are réthlich and
soften and her bowels go all the way into a rith-
lic juice autl

That little V
in summer

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

wel, especially tits, which the juvenile *
yen Raupehe and ¥riihling very after,
also int winter after ilmeu and destroy their nests
win one hiulig to watch, than cifrien enemies
‘The caterpillar bezcichuet also Sclunidberger the bugs:
also of parasitic wasps, e.g. Panpla rufatu Cire. (look there),
are often plagued. It should also cine after Schmidberger
Fly her white-yellow Kier to the stiffening ver-
lay pupal caterpillars. On low bees you can easily see the yellow aut
Kier sitting on the brats and canoe devour such. With high bitumen mnss inan wait for the winter to
then the caterpillar nests to 7 s, Ks this can
» happened to the nests of the goldfish, from which

     

 

ZAMscul,

    

the young

 

 

 

     
     

ond

    

I the Bauuweißtings by ihee Kleinl

chen

   

Eee Oe

217 q

 

simple composition off only from Kinem leaf mnt
separated, which is mostly driven back and forth by the wind. The farmer therefore also calls them 'little caterpillar nests'. These nests must be cut down before the beginning of April at the latest.
ten, you also have the 7 lying on the floor
collect carefully. Also the initially social living
The caterpillar could still be reached, she in soapy water 7
spray or smother with sulfur. Even the destruction of
often in small groups on trunks, tree trunks, wine
the sitting Pappen is recommended. (The dark colored
ten contain semen and are therefore, according to Bouché's
spare.) To create a puddle and the
20 fan-
yen and zn tédten, is time-consuming nd after the above
obne great success with the females, in order to destroy
it is mainly to do. So fminer stays
the destruction of the nests the most effective and simple means. The large cabbage white, Papilio brassicue L.
306 million long, G1 Mill. wide. White with broad, black
front corners of the forewings. These when maunehen with
two black spots. Underside of hind wings butter-
yellow, grey_ dusted. The butterfly flies from May to autumn
often in generally large crowds, in the year 1752, the
according to Résel's, he was noted in the lives as
_ dense clouds, notwithstanding this shines
ling by not after marking from the doll
red, but cinen bramen juice gives out, not
the initiation of the schou repeatedly cited blood regrowth
to be. In ordinary years it falls on the imeis
both blithezcites of lucerne, i.e. H. in July and August
to September in the eyes, in which he hundreds
flutters around the blue trees. Also the scabious and
he flies after other meadow flowers. In Giirten he sucks
very often to Rettig. and other cruciferous flowers and
chse which receive its brood

 

 

 

regulation to v"

 

 

   

 

 

   

   

 

 

also looking for the wg:

 

 

218

must. One sees him settle down for this purpose
and Gfters with the abdomen the leaves, mainly open
touch the underside and drop a ki each, like this
that loose nests are easily more visible, smaller,
but ze! 1 sugarloaf-shaped, initially griuiger, spiter
find golden eggs. This incubator runs the
Caterpillar from May to October

The food plants of the caterpillar are Reps and Rib-
sen, old mushrooms like young ones, ribs, kohlrabi, cabbage,
Savoy cabbage, radish, horseradish, types of mustard, levkojen,
even mignonette and nasturtium. After ten to fourteen days the young Réiup
all emerge from it in one day., First they feed
on the kiel shells from which they crept out, then
mow yourself, dieht sitting next to ecinander, but yours
Food plant forth, Zuersi uur by platawise
scraping on it, but soon by making holes in the edges
eat. Although one sees them hanfig aut the surface of the
Bhitter, but sit rise on their riek side. Your growth is incredibly rapid; according to the task
Eating day and night, they graze the entire cabbage plant

. the heart leaves and the

  

   

 

  
 
 

 

 

 

 

      

ie preferably

 

    

   

 

see you
ten leaf veins off. the amount of feed,
which they should take daily
ily own weight about double
climb over. Grésser has become
Caterpillar no longer gregarious, however
without the caterpillars imitating each other
the. — They crawl rather sluggishly. Di Rany
shaped head with V-like Ga
bel line. She's cute yellowy)
with four large and numerous small
a black dot on each one
Ring. Over the back and on the
legs

 

 

 

vachs shows bullet

      

  

      
 

pulls a light yellow

 

219

 

Line. The whole body covered with small, stumpy little
puts. One finds young and adult caterpillars on the
“Kraut in October, after Low even in November,

The full-grown rampart runs away from the herb, seeks

 

somewhere on a fence, a tree trunk or a
Wall, crawled in through the windows even on the
Deecke of rooms, in Scheuern ete, a little place to
pupation. For this purpose she hangs herself in a belt,
usually with the head held high; but also across. the
after one to days appearing pupa is yellowish-
grin, her head with a point, the ridges in the middle with
sharp yellow keel, a sharp corner, whole behind
small spikes down the abdomen. Zn each side of
the latter still a strong corner and yor this one weak

 

     

 

safe corner. The whole pupa with black spots

 

and pink sprinkled. After fourteen days bri
butterflies out of the pupa. Only the autumn
Standing specimens overgrow and appear in May of
th year. The generation of

 

 

not

 

Cabbage:

 

ings has to do it himself

 

in possible years most of us a double scin, since the
development of the ramp is supposed to take fourteen days,
and the butterfly all: but flies md
thus Brni can store, Ln June t one of
numerous ranch broods originate from the spring fallow trees. Vo
this rihreu without a doubt the many flying in July
Falfer ago, from which then under the ground
above fourteen days for kids, fourteen days for caterpillars-
stood those found in September. pay again
range or much more numerous crawler cranes than
Generation quite well deduce, In 1852 would run
Late August in the Stuttgart area near

summer

 

no)

  
 

   

  

A lot of cabbage was planted on the paths and on the houses
to look for a pupation site. Already after Résel's assurance the Kohlweis
1 killed in winter cold. Also should

   

 

linge dur

 

220

many caterpillars, although not sensitive to weak
lich, in severe cold and wet perish. very
many caterpillars die on their migration to the
pupation site. After Low they would also have sparrows
and recreate Amuera, finally breaking out of the dolls
an immense amount of Chimarotzer. Especially inr
In late autumn, the majority of the caterpillars show up. One small parasite, Microgaster glomeratus L.
th Bouché, break out of the caterpillars and spit
1 cling to them so that they breed on yellow chicks
appear (see [chneumons, Fig.). Audere, Diplolepis puparwn F.,
which one immediately before the Verwuudlung to the doll or
au sees her balls cinsteehen still very white doll,
nibble through their entire transformation inside the doll
I only bore out of her as perfect wasps
out. Will not all of these inhibiting circumstances
Reduce the number of Kolilweißlinge, so would they in the
appear in indescribable masses. In kitchen belts of not too great an extent
one goes through the Piluuzenveihen during the Kiumal week
the leaves and crushes the yellow ones, falling into the eyes
loin chicks. Success is a very rewarding one. Also
if the Réupeheu have already crawled out, however
still sociable to cinander selunigen, many can on Bin-
to be crushed. Mau is then through their crass
draw attention to their presence, it is wire
deun that Schuecken also participated in number. (Of course
one decides easily about the origin of the grub
the droppings or filth left by the caterpillar
matter of snails.) The later, i. H. bigger you
Ranpen anfsucht desio leiehicr they are to be found individually,
but the lower is also the ans of the business
leaping benefits. A whole cabbage field has been eaten up
and if the ranches are not yet ready to pupate,
so they look for further pasture wnher and a 'part
finds the neighboring fields. The pursuit of the

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

 

221

wandering caterpillars, however, will dent more in this case
threatened as the damaged field owner came to good
men. The destruction of the Hansern ete. hanging dolls
while bypassing the brinuliche of parasites
lived is mostly because not in agreement with
all neighbors executable, laborious and for the individual
almost useless piecework. The further of Léw against the
Cabbage white indicated means are too impractical or
ridiculous to be counted here. The little cabbage white, Ritbenweissling, Pu
pilio vapue, L., 24 mill. long, 53 million wide. As a moth in
Shape and color characteristic of the large cabbage white. But the black at the tip of the forewings is shorter
and brighter. The tip, as well as all the hind wings on the
Underside pale yellow, dusted with gran. The moth is in many
Jahven awfully mean all summer, flies in the
Garden with the large cabbage white, otherwise also in the
St n, at small puddles, where he often
collects to quench his thirst. The female
lays its eggs on various growths. One calls except
all types of cabbage and turnips: radish, horseradish,
leek, the fragrant mignonette, nasturtium
cress, levkojen, gold lacquer [? ], night violet. Of the
Butterfly shows a remarkable instinct. (Odor),
they also grow around even the smallest mignonette plants
buried under other flowers, on the third floor-
work of the Hauser. He gets used to it quickly
lays its pointed, conical
sarcastic, cheeky grimes: Egg and flies on. always
only one Ki is laid on a hand, but Gfters lay
several females one on the same leaf, so that the case
not strange that a small mignonette plant with so many

  

 

  

   

 

  
    

 

  

Len Réinpehen is translated that these are dying of hunger
eat when they have grazed the plants and not
find another food plant in the neighborhood. —

 

The one that comes out of the egg after one to two weeks
°

 

222

Reupees are all light green. Initially they gnaw uw
the surface of the blitter, but soon they make their way through
lights that they eat into the leaves, and by grazing
of the blossoms, also noticeable through their dark filth. They are also located at the base of the blitter and on avar
flower stalks, but more often on the petiole, and especially
ders if they have to go through cuts, above aut
the leaf, along the main rib. — Already after fourteen
Days reach thick & heavy, but lazy caterpillars
ihve whole cracks. grin, something velvety
NEN yellow, dtler's not clear Li
down, also a yellow line at the
s, in which the very small air lecher
the large caterpillars are often found in the
August, September and even in October. Pupation often occurs on the stalk of the
wool mushroom. But beware. you are not
mn a wall, a tree or digital. to soften with it
sic hang up chins. The doll is grin or grin-
gray with sharp head, rickeu and sciten points, three yellow
ben longitudinal lines and black dotsu. The doll state
lasts about fourteen days in summer. On the other hand
hibernate in the open-the pupae which only emerged in late autumn-
pen Keeping it in a warm room attracts the moth
out in the middle of winter. The moth's generation seems to have been eroded with that of the moth
cabbage white ibe: immen. With the very rapid development
development of the caterpillar is also a third generation for her
in years conceivable. Although the caterpillar turns when they are on cabbage and drgl. occurs, in terms of dreadfulness not on the side
of the great cabbage white, but it is all the more tricky
their gluttony on Toplewsichsen, such as mignonette and the like. The most effective remedy is the extermination of the
n, of course not so easy to utter from the leaves

 

    

  

nS umpteen,
with fine deer, and a fine
over the back

leave over the

     

 

 

stitch. special

   

 

gave way to a wide Wi

   

 

 

    

    
   

  

 

 

   

   

      

       

       

hey

223

crawling caterpillar. Those who have practiced their eyes can also get through
Crushing eggs nips many caterpillars in the bud. Recommended for destroying dolls on and in houses
Bouché, the straw-yellow, usually parasitic wasps contain
tend to spare. ‘

The rape seed white, Papilio napi L., is known as
Butterflies very similar to the Ribeate white in size and shape
exercise, but is differentiated by the black-pollinated
Endeu of the forewing nerves and after their whole
Linge black spotted veins of the yellow underside of the
hind lily. On the front wings, the male has ever
one, the woman two black spots. the butter
terling is said particularly in areas where much summer rape
is built, often very often and more in the forest than in
Meadows and gardens fly. Be considered prime times
April and June or July designated. The food plants of the insect are except the ribs
according to the various statements still Reps, Kohl, Rii-
ben, mignonette, woof [? ], Waid (isatis tinctoria), Tharm-
weed (Turritis glabra). The yellow eggs should be the female
in small round games [?] npehen al
ir

   

 

  

 

 
  

n» the blitter lay, after
ccreep. You are them
il me, of the same line, je-
but a little darker, dull or brownish grin, at the
Sides lighter, finely hairy. Red-yellow Lufilécher, white
Spices and black pinkies. She eats the bliss
however, according to Low's post, the food would
also eat into the pods [? ] to the soft seed-
to eat grains, is called in Thuiringen, Pleiffer~
[Confusion with Pyralis margaritacea]. — She appears
to Bouché twice in the summer, namely in June and
August. Poppe yellow grin, similar to the previous one. Sehmet
terling after two to three weeks or only after the
wintering. few days the Ra

  

of the previous moth s

  

escape

   

   

 

The proposed middle] appear very inadequate
accordingly, because the umpiliigen of Ritbsenland and removal

 

224

 

of straw and the like. may destroy many
dolls, but is evidently only a partial prophylaxis
to next year. .,Kinfeet of the field* with hemp strips
is without effect. Mel maybe you should get pa
promise send selected seed time, in which not main
flight time of the moth and first development of the pilin cloves
together. The German C, Papilio € album L. The moth with strongly jagged,
on the top brown-red, often black spotted, on the bottom
rear side brown, brown-black and grin colored wings. hind iris
on the bottom in the middle with a clear, like printed one
white German ¢. You meet this fast-flying butterfly from Mirz, so ge-
wiss dflers overwinters until October. His -
long, beautiful, brown-yellow, white on the rear part of the back,
Ranpe, which is abundantly covered with thornbushes, often lives in not too
Surprising amount on currants and gooseberries, as well as anf
Elms, after Résel also sometimes on stinging nettles, finally I believe them
to have already observed on hops, their development goes raseli
of stats. From the with sharp quirks and pointed abdominal
wrestling, with a pair of golden spots adorned, hanging doll
the butterfly comes after 2-3 weeks, so that, like Résel
presumed, inelr than one generation per year is to be assumed, distribution
not sehwer, dureh Abehiiitelu,

The Mallow Butterfly, Papilio Malearum Il. 15 million long, 35 wide,
changing in the basic color; blackish grey, ocher brown or olive
Colours. Fore and hind tags each with about six black-brown ones
Tips, On the wings, the winged cattle have parallel black ones
dice spots. Flies in May and July, — The ————--——~ long, aseh-
Grane or reddish-grey, fine-haired caterpillar with a black head and
3-4 bright yellow spots on the neck, almost all bouchéy
Malvaceen, especially Althaca, was very much affected by Lavatera
vu by rolling the blisters around itself, in the manner of winder ramps. Also the transformation from the black-brown but bluish frosting,
with a small tail tip, not angular pupa found in the
bleeding stat. He recommends searching the caterpillars. Common among the agriculturally beneficial kei
but hardly worthy of elaboration

The swallowtail or wet-weather butterfly. Papilio Machaon 1
ciner the schdusteu and grimaced dentschen butterflies, up to 58 million. long and 404 million broad, sulphur-yellow, with a broad, black edge band,

       

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

   

        

 

en aufigefiihs,

 

 

 

which are yellow on the forewings and blue on the hindwings
is, also with black spots and bars, hind wings black,
tailed, with a rude, brown-red lunar spot. Pretty mean
on Haiden and also on fields; flies aweimal, in May and July up
September. He should eat the white, hemispherical, yellowish eggs
on Méhren, parsnip, burnet (Pimpinella Saxifraga), also aut
Fenehel, parsley, celery, caraway, wormwood and rue
* lay down. In the month of June and again in September the nice greetings,
+ lage caterpillar with double black
Kingen, on which large red dots sting, stretches when touched
a peculiar, orange-yellow pronghorn protrudes from behind the head. She makes. to change, a strong belt around the body,
becomes a greenish, yellow-striped, double-tipped, high-
rickety doll. In the summer after 44 days, otherwise only in the next few days
Spring the butterfly. The Scarce Swallowtail Butterfly, Papilio Podalirius L. Related to the previous one,
62 million tang, 85 mill., broad, even more heavily waggoned, but pale yellow with
long, black stripes running parallel to the body should be yellowish,
conical, cinzelue Kier on sloe, but also on plum,
apple, almond, bichen, even on blue cabbage]. the
young grinc, later grey-yellow caterpillar, is as long as the previous one
whitish-yellow lines over the ridges and on the sides, along with brown-red ones
Points on sedates, 1m May, July and August. goes very
sam and came ateh sending out a horn. pupa brown, yellow behind,
with two blunt heads and one back
On plum and damson trees and on sloe
according to the information also found on cherry and peach trees i
June, in early years like 1854 already in May, and a second time in
August and September a + + long, cigen-like , below
flat, strongly convex at the top, therefore selmeeke-shaped, _light green,
short-haired caterpillar with short but full legs and lateral ones
yellow stripes and brown humps on the back: she crawls
thick as a snail's marriage, and hangs himself in a belt to shut
a short, blunt, dark brown pupa with white bordering
to become, from which after a fortnight a dark burned,
schwinat butterflies emerge, 21 million, long, 33 million. wide, with red
Marginal spots, on all four wings in the female hay, only in the Méimichen
on the hindwings, underside with white transverse lines and daz)
black on the inner side, dotted blue, red band. - Of this
No doubt butterflies stir the pretty, oven-shaped, finely punctuated
thirteen, white cherries, which one often sees on Riugel-
wiiehsen and branch angles of the above trees or shrubs. (Pilaus Age, Papilio Pruni 1). Fr, the Little Enemies. 15-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
  
 

   
      

 

ish

   

 

 

 

226

On plums, damsons, sloes, cherry trees, birches one
similar *—————+1 and grass-green ones found at the same time
Caterpillar with a pair of yellow, somewhat raised ridges and yellow margins
Stripes and white bristles on hips. Reddish brown, dull
Puppet. butterflies 24 million long, 39 million wide, iridescent black-brown. Sewing toes. and small lobes on the hind wings orange-yellow, from
same color in Minnchen cin large moon spot on the front
gel, underside of both brown-yellow with rust-yellow edged with white
in the. butterflies in summer. still in fear and September on hedges and
pimen, in the year 1850 in October (birch moth, Papilio Betulae L.

One performed by Zeuker deserves just as little attention
triribbon yellow-striped and black-spotted caterpillar with light green, yellow
spotted and black-spotted head on Wau (Ieseda lutea), all species
Cabbage and many other dandelion flowers, doll grins
bwauntich or grav. Fall the cabbage white in size and shape
snug, but fore wing tip dull and upside, especially the
Hindwings gray-green and spotted white (Raukenfalier, Papilio Daplidice L.). 2) Swarmer (Sphinx)

are mostly large, stout moths with short, vou der
Root at thickened, however 6fters also almost stabféi
moderate feelers, which in the end look again into a small one
tip, with a usually long rolling tool,
which they swarm in the evening, some also in broad daylight
and hovering, sink into the flowers. Fligel in relation
short to the thick body, but all the more powerfully built,
covering the body like a roof in repose. Naked caterpillars
with eight pairs of legs and tail with cinem nach
rear fleshy horn. Very few of the
Mer caterpillars spin fiids on their way, hold on to
against the more firmly with the legs. to pupate
dig them under the ground and make a spinless one
Vaults, in which the ramifications become strong, with strong
laced doll is going on, which at several
reren the future fissure in a sheath as a species
crooked nose sticking out. The cardboard is waiting for
usually expires in the next spring; in other words,
«the generation is usually a one-year-old. the
all of their species are of no great importance. 227

NB. Since the body of the swimmers flies far above the shepherds! stands out
the given lengths of the moths also draw the lengths of their bodies. The evening peacock, Sphing oecllata L, 38 million. long, 100 million,
wide. Kin very thin moths with yellowish feelers, brownish-grey
Breast; on the upper side a stuiapf quadrangular, dark brown velvet
leak Ekige forewings with gray and brownish and wavy lines! Underside of the same from the root from hochrot. lower wing on the upper
Side of the Worzel through the middle to the Ifinterrand hochrot, with a
pea-sized, blue eyes with a black border and a black core,

The Sclunetterling appears in May and June, single after Rosel
even in July from the hibernated pupa. He: drops a few drops
brown sap, swarms around flowers in the evening and lies there
round, smooth, griiueu, scattered Kier on several Banmararten. Apart from
Apple, peach, almond, willow and poplar trees are also grown
called Schlehen and Linden. Only after a month, i.e. in July,
let the young riinpehen crawl out of it. According to Oken's information, they eat them, coming fresh out of the fi,
the ki bowls open, are as if covered with felt and turn purple
reddish-brown horn, according to Résel they would be like the adult caterpillar
selir be fllich, nor high no pointed, head, proportionate
have a lighter horn and a thoroughly green colour, which at the same time
the adult
a ramp is
The copy of
latter is
jinglichrand ,
more blaw al
grit, mitzwe
crooked
have, yellow
ben, am see
phone in cinema
angle to
collectible
fending lines. between
see smooth,
whole caterpillar
zat light green
with a we
sen line of
each side of
head to nn-
the third

 

 

  

   

     

  

 

 

   

  

  

 

      

 

Body ring and from here towards the point on each side there are white ones
Slanting lines, the last of which slopes down to the blue horn, The skin
also by a lot more sublime. white point rough. the
The caterpillar crawls very slowly and when at rest takes a stiff, sideways start
aligned position. She is jerking off slowly and is only on her second
Help Angusts fully grown and easy to find because of their size. In Banmseulen often a single ranch grazes on a whole marriage. In any case, one recognizes the presence of the eaten laps
the caterpillar. Towards the end, in warm summers maybe as early as 2:00
Angusts, the ramp crawls down the ground and works its way into the
Earth, about its pale green color with a dirty tan
mt mess up, also strongly shrink. After about xen
‘Days she’s a doll, and she’s wearing this one
the wing sheaths initially brown-black,
towards the back lighter brown ; split whole. brown-
: black and lately very stiff. she has
strong tail tip, but no so-called nose,

Frithe pupae sometimes hatch after four weeks. rule is
wintering and development in May and June,

The caterpillar of the evening peacock often appears in nurseries
in larger numbers and the Entbl resulting from each individual
mation of the orchards is striking, On adult fruit
Biumen it may be of little importance - reading the young
Ranping on the occasion of the appearance of the young voice marriages. ‘On fruit trees, especially pear trees, the same will also be given to the previous ones
lurid caterpillar of the linden moth, Sphine Tiliae L. indicated. She is at most little finger long, grin, with a pointed head, yellow sides
very light stripes and a red shield bordered with jagged yellow
the tail flap. Ochsenheimer also found them on elms, alders,
ken, even on hills. He doesn't have them any more than Westwood and I do
so far anf fruit trees given. The rain willow shwarmer, Sphine Ligustri L. Approximately in the
size of the previous one. Feeler knows. head rithish grey. back black,
mixed brown and white, front wings reddish gran with black veins
streaked and black-brown inner edge, the color of which changes through the
middle of the forewings, tinterwings rose-red with two very
yen, parallel to the hem and a short, black band at the
Wurvel, abdomen bright red with black, through brown over the
Minterbody, double girdle, interrupted fingers. Long season May and June, after Résel July. The magnificent, finger-length, delicate light green, almost yellow on the back
The caterpillar has a bramn gestated head, on each side seven violet ones, against
below white bordered slashes and a pointed, crooked, yellow

    

    

 

 

 

   

 

 

  

229

 

Horn with brown quill. In Spitsonimer. Your food should be better
Blitteru of willow, ligustrum, and lilac, those of viburnum,
be ash and elder. According to Bouché, it is particularly harmful
Small flower marriages of Viburnum Tinus and lucidum. She pasture says
sometimes these ornamental shrubs completely, ~ transformation to brown,
nose doll lying in the ground in late summer. Falter year thereafter
in May and June, easy extermination of the large, conspicuous caterpillar. Noel are performed on the vine:

The wine worm, the vine caterpillar, Sphine elpenor L.. cin
34 million long, 83 million broad, slender moth with white fiddlers, w
Yellowish olive-grey basic color of body and wings, forewings
lined with red and with three rose-red neckerchiefs, crimson, white
fringed mintfly with black root, over the back and
Abdomen various red longitudinal stripes, the abdomen at the tip
(three rings) red. is in may and june, its pretty big
green, litiglichtrniden Kien he puts on the vine, cben so often and
still more frequently on Epilobium hirsutum £. to Biicheu, to Ochsenheimer
and others also on loosestrife (Lythrum Salicaria), Springkrant (Im-
patiens), bedstraw (Galium verum) and in the garden on Onagra Rivini. The hijulig more than fuger long (105 million) and finger-thick caterpillar is in
different in colour, sometimes black-brown, sometimes yellowish-brown, sometimes seen
light green. Head small, like the first two or three tinge, so that the
Ranpe contracted a d igen, iberiiess
seems to have two distinct, large eyes with a different head, Thre
Forelegs light brown, a stripe on the sides and oblique
roam, The skin with a lot of fine, dark veins, Stomach through
fine stalks rough, rear stalks particularly well developed. Goes
Jangsam, bangs his head violently when touched
goes to earth as an adult at the end of July and mows under
the vine weed, using some earth with, a very muperfect
flat, brown, wider tissue or goes gauz into the earth, The
after ten days it turned gray. liner
light reddish brown with pale awns and a lot of black. he-
have kernels, black-grey, strongly curled tail-
top. Falter in the next Frithling Has, as not helpful enough, certainly
not the meaning attached to it by some. That however
Reading the caterpillar takes two weeks less than Feucrauziinden (Low) needs
not first proved 2u will

2 The large white swarmer, Sphinx Celerio L., as a moth
and caterpillars almost identical to the previous one and to Grisse
on the south and east wad is rare in Dentsehland. butterfly
more brown, with 1'/, white longitudinal streaks on the fore-wings. min
terlliigel black, brivinlich, gran tuned with schooner, carmine red

  

 

 

 

 

    

    

 

  
       

 

   

    

ken for his part

      

     

  

 

 

    

 

ne cardboard is seenyv in front

 

 

   

    
     

    

   

 

230

Root; through the middle a red transverse band, so you have six
pale squares appear behind, abdomen dark brown above with several
longer white and light brown longitudinal stripes, — the longer, brown one
Horn caterpillar, also with eyes, had yellowish side stripes underneath
and crooked stripes. In July and August on the vine, si pupates
in autumn under the ground without weaving, Rothbranne, black in front
gray doll. 3) Bine small, quite similar to that of Elpenor, but hardly little finger-
lye, hornless caterpillar of a red and olive-green colored swarmer
(Spline porceltus 1.) lives on the meadow and the true bedstraw,
according to Ochsenheimer, by the way, on the same pillars and at the same time
like the wine swarmer, Elpenor. Without meaning. The little pigeon, the star crescent moon, Sphinx stellar
tarum L., a dark gray, 27 mill. long, 50 million Urreiter Sehwarmer
with gray antennae and front iliem, yellow, small hindwings and
broad ‘pigeon’s tail, flies very easily all day long,
Spring to late autumn in the garden and on windows, around flowers
from which he, hovering quietly in the same place, with his long
Tear the honey juice saugi. The caterpillar lives on the star or Labkrawt,
Galium verum and aparine and ant madder, Rudia tinctorum. she lindt
h then in June and July, after Ochsenheimer she was in zyveiter
generation in September before, after Westwood in three generations: March,
June, Angusi, she is up to 58 million, long, thin in front, sea-green, on the side
a few bright longitudinal stripes, approaching from a crowd, white grain covered,
the blue horn with a yellow tip. Grow fast, change before spinning
change their color and become dirty brown-red; mows down to Résel
extracted splinters cin coarse tissue on the ground and will
after four Lis {inf days to the beginning ocher yellow, later black-brown
Doll with protruding ruffle squeezed from both sides
silky and a short, straight tip of the tail. Schmeiterliug uach Oxen-
heimer still in the same year; he hibernates during the winter. Ranpe is said to be harmful to madder more often. — reading the same,

Hardly worthy of Erwithnang are: . 1) The magnificent one, up to 110 million long and thick, sebiu yellow-
Grime caterpillar with yellow head bordered in black, small dots
anf the spine and half yellow, half blue slashes in det
sides, and a narrow, yellow, curved horn, which with the
Makes a grating sound from July to September
on potato cabbage, and according to the information also on datura,
Jasmine, (Jasminum officinale), Hant, Madder, Méhren, Spindle tree
and foreign Lycium species lives. Pupation in soil in sporeless
(iewolbe, our biggest doll, bra, oline nose, moth appears
neither soon. i.e. H. after three to four weeks, still in autumn, or not until then

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

     

 

 

in June of the next year. He is the got deathLteukop tse hmet-
terling, Sphine atropos L., so named because of the familiar character
on his rick, as already noted on page 38, he whistle with the
Tongue. The pupa is usually destroyed during the potato harvest. she
should also be easily damaged by kite. In Wiirttembergi
caterpillars and moths always appear so sparsely that I think of one
Harmfulness (Léw) of the insect never heard, yes even the country people, dic
find such Ranpen, always carry them to the cities as a rarity. I suspect that the potato disease also affected this ranch
significantly harmed. Several. copies make me croak from the ver-
pupation without any other visible cause. Especially in 1852
I noticed that a caterpillar I was feeding with diseased potato tops
ate. although this always greedily ate, but had no solid meat
came. thready excrements of herself that often remain longer on her Ivingen
finally crawled under the ground for the pupation, here
died. 2) The rare in the cone, only in some years in Dentseh-
in gardens solitary on oleanders, strong finger lye,
Ne or brown, short-tailed, blue-eyed caterpillar of the green
Oleander worms, Sphine Neri L.

Also a subgenus, Sesia, indicated by large parts
vitreous transparent, narrow wings, elongated abdomen and
long thorny legs, flying by day, with sixteen-legged ones inside
of the growths living Renpen, is still mentioned here and there. Zenker
Mentions the sphinx (Sesia) culiciformis L., whose white-grey, finely
hairy, light brown-tipped rape in the bark on pilaf and apple
bitumen lives; also Sesia tipulacformis L., in May and June on hot
Noon swarming around currant bushes. your whitish,. with a-
Ranpe, which is covered with individual light, fine hair, has a brown head and 2
brown neck licks, also brown forelegs, in the pith of the locust
beer smack,

A xweile subgenus, Syntomis, with falenformigen, same
thick antennae, broad forewings, small hindquarters with
visible spots on both, long abdomen. beer caterpillar. tissue
spinner-like, sphine (synt.) phegea L. The moth with black geiins
Figures, whereupon white, see-through am yellow ring wm the
abdomen. Occurs in most areas after Ochseuheimer, and
Weighs in July, The black caterpillar with brown tufted hairs ant
Ampter (Rumer acutus and acetosa), plantain (Plantago lanceolata),
Report, Lowenzalu, Teufelsabbiss, Tranbenkirsehen, hibernates under
Bitten, or moss, makes a light, hairy web under in June
Scallops, becoming obtuse, black-brown to lingual at both ends
Poppe, and after three weeks to the butterfly. This more southern

    

 

   

 

    

 

 

 

  

 

      

 

 

 

     

     

 

232

here

 

Insect becomes of Kinigen, perhaps without meriting it. among the
Jichen insects listed. reading the caterpillars. That Sphinz (Atychia) Statices L., as caterpillar the young sproutsii
of the vine is said to be harmful, as Zeuker states is
Not known to Ochsenheimern and Herrich-Schiiffer. After them, and
Rather, Hubner smd Westwood lives on sorrel, Rumer acetosa,
Globularia, Statice armeria and Cardamine pratensis. 3) Spinners (Bombyx). net due to the very short roller nose. fiih

 

Butterfly excised
rather short, indistinct in females, in males
n double kiiimut. abdomen rolled, blunt,

 

marriage

 

    

next to it thick, especially in the case of the female. big width
Flagel, you hiutern relatively large, in the

Quiet Rooftop. Kier flat, dented in the middle at the top
or oven-shaped, globular or egg-shaped. The sixteen-footed caterpillars in the R
hairy, howling with tufts of hair or pelagic, soon rolled,
soon arched, but flat on the build. Only some bald, i
in this case increased over an inch long. Thr Koth
with lengthwise, often also with transverse pressure. dolls whale
ig with a very short rivet sheath, finely haired or with hair
bischen, with blunt rounded or stippled or
anal end provided with pointed hips etc. In the
Usually in a more or less tight spun, Coeon,
however, that 6fiers also uur by some fiids, only rarely
rar not intended. The butterfly leaves to get out of the
spun to get closer, to the mouth a juice,
pinnst softens, so that the moth unr
how wet blotting paper has to break through. is number the order of agricultural
* Caterpillars grit

 

 

 

1 heavily

   

 

   

  

 

Where did the G come from?

 
 

and quiter distinctions:
a) Caterpillars with colorful stripes over the quills: Bombys neustria,
bucephala, quadra. b) Caterpillars down the back are striped and hairy:
chrysorrhoca, auriflua. ¢) Down the back with rows of front and blue warts: dispar. 233

 

d) With large, blue rings of bristle warts all over the body:
pyro. ©) Brush and Rinselranpen: pudibunda, fascelina, antiqua, gonostigma. f) Birenranyin: rabi. s

2) Underside very flat with rows of large spots over the chins
down: populi, cratacgi, lanestris. h) Underside very flat, nicely colored nape inset: transverse
folia, pruni. i) Hairless caterpillars:

  

 

 

cossus, aesculi, lumuli, coeruleocephala. a) Caterpillars with colorful stripes down the ridges. The ring moth, the liverece or fork caterpillar. Bombyx neustria L. The whole
butterflies of the same colour, slightly
between ocher yellow and saturated
tem red brown. through the front
two reddish-brown ones are flying
or yellowish transverse stripes, whose
Space often dark, and especially in the female
is filled, so that cinc bandage arises. hind wing
Afters an extinguished transverse band. Winged French alternately
brighter and darker seen. — Through all of Oul
mean. Folds in July, seldom found by day,
he likes to fly towards the light at the windows in the evening and
demands to be let in

Barely eight days after mating, as Résel
If there is, the sluggish otherwise rarely flying female begins this
hatching business. Someone is looking for this job
fruit tree, of whatever kind, wire it itself
Dwarf almond, Amygdalus nana, or a hawthorn, S
hienbuseh, rose bush in ciner he or even something
select a deciduous tree in the forest, look for a branch (on
Biumen, from héel s three-year-old wood), and lays here
the same sickle in a circle around the Zw hen moving, cin
Ki to the other, up to a hundred the two walk in shape
want S, 234). Hence the

 
  

 

   

   

 

pa tius first

       

 

 

   

       

     

   

 
   

of a ring (see Fig

  

Walter's name. The children have the ki
obtuse inverted pyramid, at the top with a
dimple. They lie in an initially soft, sticky
dark mass, which, however, heats up closer
that the ring becomes quite firm and hard, like with
covered with varnish, and only with force tore it apart
can be blown up. Since the cherries are very close to cinnamon
they form like the scales of pine cones
among themselves helixes around the two-going. If this
female only lays such an egg ring, which freely lent
may contain three hundred eggs, or more, will uir-
indicated. The riiupmarriages are coming soon
spring, supposedly at the end of April or beginning of May, or
perhaps more correctly, mid to late April from the Kiern;
which in the not warm Frithling 1852 I met Ho-
gnhieim young caterpillar tumors, which in the last few days
Aprils were already finished with the first hatching. It takes time
gnawed through the hard eggshell top center
to have. The children on rosebushes should be a few weeks
earlier, sometimes already early April, 'for development
come than those on peach trees. The reason for this
Observation Réaumms possibly aut' the accidental
due to the fact that those who are nearer to the ground also see
warm more than those on trees, rather than on one
Usual earlier laying of the female in the pictures
outside rose bushes. Ratzeburg saw her after the marriage in spring
with cold weather there are still more days on the egg ring
I with innumerable

 

  

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

awei days until the jmgen Rénpehen laboriously

 

 

   

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

bring and
The weather generally has a great Kinily
development of Réupemarriages. in dems
ciner dwarf almond still has a marriage family with the first
hindng damaged
biimhen be
Résel uuter

over thread. Above:
against the
ben Giivichen, where aut

 

    

&

 

 

igl, made another one on a fruit

 

ils the two through. The little ones out

 

 

235

the magnifying glass already looks at the signs of the
adult caterpillar. This is g: incorrect, rather are
which, in accordance with Ratzeburg's statement, is 2.5 million long caterpillars all black, with long light brown
Hair and barely visible blue ring interior. the
Belly feet pale at tip. Immediately before the first
skin I found the long hair of the réiupchens gran,
and the ground color of the caterpillar is dirty greyish-yellow. A broad dirty yellow all-
however mainly formed by the yellow indentations
bandage. After the first Hiiutwng they have sel
and collar, and over the back a burnt yellow and
blackish_ subdued longitudinal tires. *B:
yellow. That in April their food grows in the buds
must exist is understandable. Ratzeburg see them half in
stuck the buds, the blossoms bursting in the bud-

     

 

 

 

 

ven. Initially, the riiupchen remove themselves. not far from you
the kier shells, but go skinned for the first time
they go to Ratzeburg on another branch; yes even zunt
During the first hatching I saw her in four
I far lower branch fork in and on a
go crazy together. liner is what they call yours
Repose by a strong wolverine. always sociable,
they reconnect each time, often in several hundred
terten after they were in the pasture of cinander cnt-
had removed. Do they have their lower youth more in the
twigs (after Low they are here called the Blitter
contract by weaving), so they beat their quartz
animal lower down in strong branch forks (forked caterpillar) or am
Stem on and make a new sprocket here. at
bad weather, allan cunning heat (iff them here
united. In warm weather or when calmed,
as in the understanding of the child, put the front of the body into the
Height. Thr Frass wiihrt after Ratzeburg day and night. From a grazed tree they go together
another. man

 

  

 

Schmidberger once saw her in May with Aus-
Improvement and Enlargement of a Goldafterspinnest |
shit. Yes they related the same thing with the gold after caterpillars
in rainy weather, went with them to the pasture and
behave like members of the same family. Only after
third maintenance they adhere less to cinander.. Trig
is, in my observation, Low's claim that
more of lichen and der after the third moult
bark live than from the leaves of the trees. How true
so that the great damage assured from all sides
of the caterpillar and even Léw's statement that the caterpillar (re
time of their greatest need for food) not everyone has to
fruit trees, but finally also almost all garden
plant cool eat?! . The full-grown caterpillar is long-bodied, soft and thin
hairy, blue, red and yellow,
~ straight forward and once argued
: dorsal line; Riv

     
 

 

 

 

    

   

 

  

  

with’ white
back yellowish brown, head
blan with avei like eyes out-
seeing black Poukten. You meet until the beginning of June
them on trees and bushes. She is now walking restlessly
Everywhere around, a column, biscuit or anything else that fits
Looking for a place to make her doll's weave. Often she also has some blotters on her legs for this
“week sent together to a proper housing. The outside weave is transparent and spacious. | in the
Inside, a solid, white, opaque one forms
Hille, which when tearing up a lot of white-yellow,
that sends similar dust flying. After several days of
Calm shows it is blunt and round in front,
all tipped towards the back, into a blunt point
ends, and by a multitude of short hairs, dull black-
gran, is done. She is very fidgety and lies in the middle
the yellow, already touched Pader. After 3-4 weeks,
so Kude June, but usually in July, the moth breaks through. 1 the doll, di

 
 

nig

   

   

 

     

237

 

The caterpillar is one of the most harmful
she eats whole orchards bare in a few years, especially
ders in 1837, says Freyer in Augsburg, scien their
devastation immensely. Ringed eggs so light
the coldest winter ttherdanern, so seems the Ranpe
not to those that are very insensitive to Wiltering
héren, at least when cold inclement weather is in them
hits her hats. On May 7, 1852 I found with the
caterpillar families that are free on the first hatch
most of their web has perished
was; very many réupchen half in the old one
skin stuck. So you see through the very rough,
self. snowy weather in the first days of corn
to have been killed. The main enemies of the caterpillar are:
jackdaws, magpies, knkuk and especially finches and sparrows
lings who are supposed to feed their young with it. But especially
also various ichnenmons, among them some extremely

 

 

  

small species, woe to the little cherries in the rings
sting, so that often out of a gauze ring hardly cin cin-

 

rimpehen emerges. Middle. Low recommends the trees at the time of flight
to shake the lazy fertilized females down-
to dance, must also seek out the hierringe, which
one, as Bouché says, when pruning the trees
notice. However, it likes the rocking of the trees
in vain, but searching for the Kiervinge, except at
Espaliers and dwarf trees, difficult » Thus become
probably the best thing to do is track the caterpillars, which yes, especially
devs a certain times of the day, sitting together, and in
companies crushed with a rag or straw wiseh
will gills. Are you in big company on cinem
Branch versuumeli, this can be carefully separated
If you touch the caterpillars carelessly, they fall
quickly descend by a thread and are heavier to

 

 

 

 

   

     

destroy. - If the caterpillars are isolated, you have to remove them

 

238

 

:
sehiitteli and crush. On the cmploblene Riue
I don't hold too much because, as Schou Résel remarks,
many stunned fallen caterpillars are tracked individually
have to, or reach the tree again. sprinkle with
Soapy water works where it's easy to get at. Even crushing them with powder destroys them, except for the trees
wu sehaden, dirfie but neither faster nor more rude
act as the means just mentioned. The moon bird is almost irrelevant for agriculture,
Bombyx bucephata L., which usually only grazes, but sometimes also
defoliates roses and also occurs on fruit trees. the
up to 45 million long, with yellow Lingstripe and transverse bands
marked black-brown caterpillars live from the end of June to the end of September
tember in knaulfed societies and can therefore be easily removed

~ become. . / 7

Likewise the four-spot moth, Bombyx quadra L. Seine

~ 36 million long caterpillar has black head, light-colored legs, is green below
light grey, grey-brown above, in the middle with a broad yellow, toothed
wavy long band, in which on the second, third, seventh
and there is a black spot on a ring and on whose oxen he is
single or paired red spices and on the eleventh ring between
bluish-black warts are located. There is no longer any doubt about their unimportance. Although more
other writers, including Bouché, their at times noticeable
Asserting Jichkeit on many forest and fruit trees, but stands
found that they only attached to lichen and, mosses vou biumen, and walls
eats, as isss in the year 185%, where the caterpillar was extremely large:
a thousand times. The caterpillar spins itself in cracks in the bark. The moth in July and August, after Résel often only in Frithli
The young raisins appear in autumn,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

   

b) Caterpillars striped on the back and with hair. see the flow

The Goldfinch, Bombyx chrysorrhoca L. moth im
Average 20 million long and 34 million wide. Atlas
knows. male slimmer, has beautiful
brownish-yellow combed feelers; abdomen
almost entirely reddish brown, the anterior margin of the forewings
narrow black-brown, often there are a pair of black spots

 

239

a hem and back edge of the front
deriliigel. The female has white abdomen, on whose
At the end, however, a thick, golden-brown hair pad. It is very
trig and hardly walks by day if you calm it down
from the spot. The flight time of the butterfly is over
June and July. Zenker behanptet, man tree Goldafter-
butterflies until September, which is probably a rare one
Exceptionally his heart. * The number of B:
dedicated to nature

 

chen at the angle z

 

 

tune to which the butterfly from
n is very significant. Except start
Forest trees, such as oaks, buehen, Mainbuchen, Uhnen,
Willows and many coming in pleasure pens, among which
foreign Pyrus and Mespilus species, also on sloes, sea
Krenzdorm and Rosenstréuhern. Even on Berberis fund
I laid the female Kier. Above all, he wants
all fruit trees, especially plum, diphtheria,
pumice and apple pear. 7

The female can be found on them at the beginning of July, weun
it lays its here. It usually sits on the flip side
the blitter. But with the hanging leaf of the pear tree
to Schinidberger aw! the upper flight. to building voices,
as Ochsenheimer states, I never saw the moth lay. Perhaps it only happens out of necessity or in exhaustion. The scourge of laying is incendiary; the female-
little tears, as the ancients observed,
by means of two scales at the end of the abdomen hair
from his hair pad and embeds in this the same time
laid Kier, which in a heap on top of each other
lie down. The polisher's butt hair will be 2u-
first used, later more and more front ones, so that last
if after one or two days the egg laying is over. the female is almost bald on the back with her hair
the is. Laying down invalidates it to such an extent that it
soon perishes, and dies in distress from the beer heap
remains seated. The heaps of kibble, bigger than the body of the
Mother, looking like yellow tinder and hot

   

 

 

   

  

  

1 ,, small

 

240

 

swim*. become remaining
Often about an inch long and Schmid-
Berger scored 275 in a single
kid These are round, smoky yellow-
shiny. The caterpillars crawl after 15-20 days, which is the end
July from the eggs. However, there are also years in which
-You stay longer. That's what I found in Tyrol in June 1850
a lot of gold-
after and auriflua females who store the eggs in the room
lasts until the following winter. —
The swimmers watch you crawl out like needles
pierced out. The resulting riiupchen are
very small, dirty yellow, green with a black head
and black neck ring, four rows of black dots
down over the back, causing them to move out of their
14 days later publication of the Banmweiss
ling m distinguish. By the way, you can already recognize them
very fri on closer inspection on the two front ones
red-brown huartliushchen and two red Würzchen,
which will be discussed later. Depending on the Réup
n summer,
wet before winter. wi

  

    

 

1 frie

  

cl
still agree

Her first pasture is the place of the clump of hair,
from which they emerged. They eat the Oberhant

   

or spite! and the underlying blatigrin. Soon ilmen
however, the clump of hair no longer limping Selntz

 

 

and they protect themselves against wind and weather on the hollow
leaf upper side, they find threads from a leaf edge to the
pull other. After a while, a disadvantaged
beard leaf connected to the wolverine leaf by a thread
set; later still more blitter. Dic petioles become
fastened to the lap by fiiden, lest they accident
lead away. The Riiupelia leave siets ¢ free Kingang
into a web and often form several chambers inside
meri. On apple trees, where the blitter are not so neighborly

 

 

 

241

at cinander standeu, they attach theirs to Schmidberger

Nest leaves where possible on the lap. In late summer, according to Schmidberger, cine
Skinning done in the dwelling. Finish later
the rips sometimes make a new nest. rule seems
this, by the way, not to be, since one, like Ratzcburg correctly
infiltrated, in the nest which they inhabit in winter,
in the middle still the original chanterelle
finds. In mid-September the riiupees stopped eating
and locked themselves in their dwelling, which they through

 

always mel
on a warm, windless day

   

leaving. Solidify in November
the trees that have lost their limbs fall
St
they large caterpillar nests to

 

nests especially in the eyes, Mau hei

separate you from those of Banmweißling. loading
look souders big and thick spun
me the nests on Kicheu wid the Seekreuz-
mandrel. The Réupchen tiberspinnen see in-
outside of the nests dic inconveniences, dic
I offer the butterflies, very diligently,
so that a kind of spider cells
stand, which often appear gangformig, me
generally occur much more irregularly,
than with aurifluz, wid mostly- several Réup-
chen, often a dozen and more,
keep. The nests in which one does not

 

 

   

fasten it to the lap and héchsiens still
few hours
i¢ gradually. - As soon
these caterpillars

Sponge wool finds more seem of one

" Which

 

Raiupehen to stir

 

 

ch from the Hanpi family

have parted and lost, through their weaving stained,

the rhymes defy every unpleasantness of the winter

Schnidberger harmed de
from 20° nothing at all
the 6° part only froze temporarily. Riiupehen in the nest cine Kiilte
nd also outside the same ma
The same sellic

 

also to convince oneself of the relationship that

Nirdlinger, you little enemies. between the re-creeps of the Réupehens and the
development of tree leaves, there is a special
look at On a pear pot in the room
the ridges only appear after the tree
had already sprouted inch-long shoots. This is striking,
since it is assumed as a rule that the Réiupchen already
with and even before the development of the buds in the fyith
year like h is the daily course de
Temperature in a go nmer and in the fribling

 

 

 

  

     

crawl out, free

   

  

fen
still very different. This is already proven by the

stood that I had ranch nests on seakhorn cinen large
‘Keep away in an inhabited room for part of the winter,
without the réupe ​​marriages creeping out. So much stands
but notes that both in winter few Réupchen dureli
perish in the cold, as well as the naughty cold in the
The transitional period of spring does little harm to them. At the beginning of April there is usually rain in the Frejen
Nestripchen. They deal immediately with the
Fres of the buds, which are often not yet fully developed. Soon
you see them in heaps on the sunny side of the branch
gimmick
's old nest

own

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

put gabelu and again by cin selbstverti

  

protect. By the way, many go back to ii
aurick, in which ohuchin according to Schmidberger always egg
Ranpen are hit, which are init the repair of the
Employ Nestes. At the end of April Schmidberger observed in Austria dic
wide maintenance, and 22. May the third. Whereas rat
burg from the Berlin area does not intend to have the third diet

Granted at the end of May. I'm ansser to say what dates the caterpillar is in their booth
Hantnngen in Swabia cinbilt, but I remember that much
in the summer of 1851 21 rentlings on the Alb front busses 7—10, June 2wei
Third of the strands already spun and the last third just im
searching for a suitable place for pupation. In that through
rough east and north winds delayed the spring of 1852, on the other hand, I found
at Stntigart in a pretty well-protected little house on the 9th. May
Ranpe families in the midst of the pear blossom season in loose cocoons,

 
 

 

 

243

of which individual individuals have already survived the last hunting
18.5 million Linge had, but the others just understood it and on
May 22, partly already in the weaving would have been in the real Girichen
I remember such large caterpillars because later, about the end of May
see am have, woler now this deviation in the development time? It can only be caused by a remarkably rapid development:

the Rinpehen in Frithling or by a particularly rapid already on
end of the previous summer. Evsteres is can accept, because
The spring of 1852 was one of the definitely late days. as above
note(, the. Birnbinme only blossomed at the beginning of May, so Meibt
just the acceptance of a special preliminary development in the autumn of 1851, what
again surprising. with the well-known coolness and the bitter frost
become of all fruits, especially because those observed
Caterpillar families accidentally dic cinzigen gow:
Banme remained, because in Wed

  

      

  

 

   

cn would have to be that on the
z I still had all the visible caterpillar nests
removed from the pear tree, moreover the ripweeds contained therein

found no larger than I usually found in winter, had on
Even the rime marriages, which have already developed particularly well in the autumn, do not end

in a web of leaves, but in an asi fork or at the foot of the
Banms spun in the grass? Schmidberger saw the third tliutmmg of a part
of the caterpillars in the original one, from another in the
newer nest, of several, since the weather is just getting better
was to be passed freely on the trunk. The dark garnet brown ramp has
fourth ring of each cinen white
Spot. From the sixth to the tenth |
Two red rings on the back
ebwas loopy stripes and
which is particularly significant, ant
the ninth and tenth in the
In the middle of each a red sealing wax wart. The hair is star-shaped
wisps; the fourth, fifted umd
cilfie ring wear a bramen cropped
flange. The hair of the caterpillars is extremely brittle and
excite those who deal with the latter, especially when si
falling on his neck, cunning itching and decontamination
of the skin. Freyer (Germany's loveliest seebutterflies)

on the side of

 
 

  

   

  

 

244

but complains immensely about the schtimucn consequences of this
Kigeuship of the caterpillar hairs of the Goldatt It_ shines
by the way, that here too the susceptibility of individual
Sons for skin inflammation of great influence sci. the
other caterpillar families, which I have fitted, do not have any
more than the displeasure of a passing itching anf dei
skin causes. — Feces of the caterpillar completely lumpy. —
As the caterpillar gets larger, its vasculature increases
can always be linked, buds, flowers, butterflies
consumes them without Uniersehied. Schinidberger does it
Notice that you can easily grin your lrass with that of the
Spammers may confuse this, but gold caterpillars do this
Leaf stems with a part of the main rib standing in branches

 

   

       

   

 

 

   

let them even, che sic attack them, liber from
Baume go, while the
consuming peepers all over the tree nothing grimes lesse. ine, also dic leaf stalks ver

 

After the fourth hatch the caterpillars disperse. Many
even run from the tree, and you meet them on different
new other things

The Einspimen
neither cinzelu between ci
is the hiiuliger case).
berger not infrequently ten to f Ranpen, zo cinander wad
intertwine in some lightning connected to a kuiinl
ter, Schmidberger also says that the caterpillars that
If you want to spend some time pouring towards the plum tree. The web is mostly with cinzeluen threads between the
Bhitter attached, up to 18 mill. long, not very tight, though
interwoven with individual Ranpeuhawen, but still like that
transparent, that pupa and caterpillar handle are clearly inside
1

 

  
 

folyt early to mille June,
couple of kitters or (and stuff like that
‘h mebrere, after Sehimid-

  

     

 

 

   

 

 

are visible, pupa broad on the head, black with light
Kinschuitten, ci Endspit
confirmed, as Freycr they a
Development of the Goldatt
tion. Tm late autumn 1827 and 1828 were after Schmidberger

 

 

0 hakeuborsti

      

°5 rough
the
wigemein von der Witle

iebt, I can't find her

 
    

 

 

the nests of the golden otter are equally numerous, the night
the garden owners in destroying the same;
nevertheless in 1829 there were very few Binme of the
Caterpillars eaten off while they were large in 1828
wreaked havoc. The reason is there
that the spring of 1828 the development of the caterpillars very
gusty was the rain at the end of April and May 1829
greatly promoted the growth of the trees, trend
the caterpillars had enough zn than to defend themselves against the
to protect against bad weather. Anch the moth, the trio sitting on the blisters
Kier lays, prolonged heavy rain must be fatal,
be very cumbersome in any case. According to Schinidberger, the birds represent the hairy gold
old caterpillar, but the tit tears up its nests
in the winter: among the enemies of the golden after leads
Schmidb en other names under the name
Diplolepis chrysorrhocae Sehm. a little parasitic wasp
one that puts her children in the child's child
Bug, Cimex custos, which it hunts for a caterpillar
sharpened the others with their rifling,
also robbery and murder. Middle. For dwarf biéumen it is recommended that already the
easily recognizable E lhwiimme in July and August zi
collect, but with Mochstummen the only thing is, datir
but all the more certain: Mittcl, avoiding the Ranpen-
it the tree n winter, In many places
© police rightly those Garlen owners with

 

 

 

 

   

 

  

 

 

 

 

  
 

  

 

y and ans

    

 

   
 

     

 

   

nester 1 here
occupies you

street
let him come. Gathering the Raupennes

     

  

, which a Veriumniss in it zn Schnl-
ol
in

  

maybe

     

Réimpchen haven't completely withdrawn yet,
and can be better given after the fall of the land;
t after the end of Mérz, because of the warm April weather
upchen already starting to make ansilige, and
veut, selien more completely together

 

   

 

 

if they are once destroyed:

 

246

are made, and anu, the later the transaction is made
the more the swollen buds are eliminated. The nests that fell on the ground come because of the
Soil warms up more easily, earlier than the buds
and therefore especially dwarf trees suffer, too
such marriages have wandered from the ground, uugemein
(Schinidberger). Such nests must therefore be carefully
hums and ebeu because of the easy migration of the Rau-
pen also roughly in the vicinity wild voice, white
thorn and rose bushes cleaned of nests if necessary
will. Later one lat uur to destroy the caterpillars, the
escaped by crossing a nest iné-
gene and iin May branches and forks to visit. Résel also recommends destroying dev sociable cinge-
spun cardboard, but with high voices such smells
be difficult to titrate, and every
always hitting the branches and falling of the caterpillars
still effective in. The garden pear moth, Bombye auriflua Lb. Of the
Valter the Vori
stalt and atla
he's a bit taller and long-haired
little wid females have white back-
body and golden yellow IL wwanz, so that cr the most
deserved the name Goldatier. Fore wing_ on hind
edge heavily fringed. Children at Méiunchen some
Smudges on the Vordeviliigel, so they are not black,
but brownish-black, — Dev Falter flies unhappily
same time the gol wicks and lays his knees in the-
the same way under a indeed golden glittering hair-
poles! on litter of different legs and strincher,
Apart from fruit trees, especially pear trees, the insect lives there
Sloes and wild roses, in the hedges and in the forest
a lot of tree and shrub species: willows, rowan,
Hawthorn, den, Haselu, Elder, Geis

 

  

 

 

 

if amichte di

   

 
 
 

 

 

     
  
  

hr dilulich in Ge-

w, but is

 

ver, min-

  

   

    

     

 

 

 

   

 

   

lat us. we

 

247

The caterpillars do resemble the adult caterpillar
when they've barely come out of the eggs. initially
hold the pad of hair together and gnaw it
Green from the poppy leaf. The hair pad, on various
provided with arch entrances, serves to
curse place. Soon, however, the riupe marriages lose their drive
for socializing, and run apart, each
but following the senses. In September they seek each other out individually
a winter quarters. I believe that you zn this Lei
usually have survived a hiuting, so littlethey
I remember the ones I observed earlier, wiih-
rend those whom I in this moment, 21. sep
tember 1854, before me and from their brain cells
nehime, without hair 8 million. Measure Linge and probably already 2
times are skinned, a consequence of the usually beautiful
and warm Augnsis and Septembers. — This one- bis
Twice-skinned Réupe-marriages are looking for cinzel in Sep-
tember cin winter quarters. After Ratzeburg they are z-
rolled up in the grass 1d moss at the foot of the von ihuen
inhabited Biéiume, I found them like Résel and others etn-
or two in wide bark riizes, under braids
d in small cavities, abandoned Kiifergiingen u. the like,
of marriage in one
own, quite roomy, about 6 million, long, brii-
half durel

 

    
 

Be

     

 

       

  

    

and voices

 

1d bitching ;

 

 

light grey

  

at forced Riiup-

 

   

 

little but pretty white smock, from which there is
slrt, even in the most beautiful weather and when it is heated
room, not easily apparent and worn

 

 

winter fasts. But the craziest spring heat is tempting
cs, Sehon Ende Mitrz (1852) found
cine lively, through the preceding warmth from her
Ranpe hidden from 8 Mill, Linge (without the
! Buds break out of their cell through a hole

 

  

on the way

 

 

 

uh). Usually the Réiupemarriages eat each other up with that

 

out and go after their food. are on

 

catch J

 

they grow up, as big as those of the common Goldafler,

 

248

 

but ebwas thicker, black with vermilion doubles

doeling stripes. On both sides cine wavy white
Line. On the fourth, fifth and last ring is je

a black tangle of hair dusted with white, over the feet
cine vermilion litngslinie, which in the young caterpillar
next to the black head for a bright red wart
is swollen. The whole caterpillar heavily coated with black

To pupate, the caterpillar pulls a pair of blitter
a wide crack in the bark,

   

 

 

out or used ancl
makes a transparent, burnish white coconarti
spun and becomes a dark black-brown, wit
borrow

 

  

sharp end point, the ehrysorrhoea i
Puppet. After fourteen days to three weeks, i.e. in
July, the moth appears. Find out after Résel
iglich only towards the fall instead, what

  

 

 

slipping common
however, neither with my experience nor with the
hen the Rétupe marriages agree in September,

The caterpillar, although mean, is herded because it sirs
lives, not among the most important, although Low states that
them by gnawing on the fruit sticks or young fritters
bring fall. It should be particularly useful in small household
be in towns where the insect is less pursued by vigles
become. The Observation of the Extremely Hilly Occurrence
of chrysorrhoea in such places would be in kinkling. One recommends against the Réiupchen that also against
haniissig scraping off the rough

 

   

 

z\ve some other insects
Bark or brush with lye. The former must cinige
see the ban, Rats

  

    

have effect. lye you
burg rode the sumueli of the sponge eggs. Well
but died through the tearing down of the caterpillars
Concussion might be the most recommendable. c) Caterpillars with red and blue rows of warts over the
» Ricken down. The odd spinner, bighead, Bombyx dis-
par. L. Besouders in the size of the sexes anfitllende
odds. .

249
The smaller Méunehen is 24 million. long, 45 million wide,
has black-brown si head, back
and forewings are brown-grey. with darker ones
Shadows and jagged transverse lines and a point. tinter
stay slim, yellow-brown. Hind wing brown-yellow with dark
Crescent and the same wide hem. The female, out of 43 million Linge, 80 million width, is
far larger, has black, weakly articulated feelers. There-
abdomen very thick, sinewy white with thick brown hair-
upholstery on the Afier. Drawing of the wings of Minneheus
accordingly. -- As a very harmful insect from. stidal
to northern Europe. The moth can be found in August, but
also in September, crawled to the cardboard, he gives
en white-grained juice from himself. But instead, like almost everyone
shmctterlinge to leave the place of birth remains
the female trig in the nithe, 'motionless for days
on a Zauupfail, a wall, a trunk and naeli
Ratzeburg's insurance particularly likes on the lower side
mostly visible tree trunks end, meets in these places
one even often kills it. The Ménnehen, on the other hand, is
very lively, flies even in sunshine, but especially so
smolders cs in the evening fleetingly around nm his own kind
hen, — The mating of the moth is to take place immediately after
the crawling can take place. The laying down
but starts after R only eight to fourteen days later
the same. Léw also repeats this statement, but says
below that 48 hours after birth the female
most part of his children

  
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

egg

 

  
 

 

   
 

  

    
  

 

 

           

 
 

   

 

 

chen already mated and the gré

  

have discarded kdune. None st the female like the golden otter
ss you

 

When laying down

   

most of his brown hair goes like this
dressed up, the look of a lady-
bekowimen large Stiiekes fire sponge, three hundred bi
Five hundred spherical, light-grey cherries can be found in
4th heap. So are the butterflies very

 

  

pile of beer, there

 

 

   

   

 

a ¢}

 

250

frequently, so the offspring must also first
become rich. So Léw tells of a year (1829), in
4,000 to 5,000 Kier on individual willow trees
have counted. By the way, not just to all fruit
bénme and after Ratzeburg also to all forest béune
the female swims his eggs, but also
Wide, piles and the like. The young Réupemarriage must therefore
often seek out their food first after they have crawled out. The egg ponds left by them look like
pierced by needle pricks. The crawling out of the sponge rips takes place, however
only in April of the next year. They are black-brown, with
long black hair, whatever color her hair was
have zen When the weather is cooler they stay for a few more
‘Days on her chanterelles. However, Schmidberger saw her
also in April on the advancing buds and
young leaves.' He says at the same time that they
Weather on a trunk under the crown or in forked branches
collect and wrap in a web. Even later
the caterpillars bite at the rainy weather here
Tribe. I often found them in men's hollow plum trees. The gluttony of the growing caterpillar is very
big, even if she goes about her food individually, and
usually only at night. You v ter and
petiole. Does she have the trees on which
properly fed, completely devoured, or is it caused by an
if thrown down, she does not care
brush her. As such, who with him from the Ranpe
had suffered, Bonché leads in addition to Rosen, Brica, Melaleu
myrtles, pomegranates, Nenhollinder mushrooms. Ratzebury
even found out that they had Cicuta virosa and June
perus subina ate, but once anch their death on Sadebaum
found. — The Ranpe w st in comparison with her Gefriissi
quite slow. Her head was up to the last hint
in relation to the body, but with the last one she gets
cinen, large, thick, burns, yellow stripes, filling

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
   

i nrsspring-

    

   
 

   

  

  

head Caterpillar distinguished by three light yellowish longitudinal lines
over the black-grey, lighter rippled and speckled
Body, but especially through the large hair warts, whose
two blue on each of the five first paragraphs, two red
on each of the seehs last. She rolls to Ratzeburg
like to have on hand. At the end of June or beginning of July she is looking for a full-fledged
Ranpe in a hole in a tree, on a fence, one
wall or between a few leaves a place to
laying their web. This one is burnish, very loose
and wide-knit so that the doll is not protected
but serves as a stop. She is brown-black, has clearly
bulging eyes; around this and on various
Areas of the body and abdomen yellowish hairy hairs. At the top is a long, blunt anal style
which she hangs up with the threads of the web,
She has the habit of getting very lively when touched
and continued a circular motion with the abdomen
ouch — The pupal state lasts an average of three weeks. wedge. The Raape of the same Spinner ge-
hort because they the fruit trees éfters of all leaves, according to Gebhardt so-
even the right one is scarred, among the most hideous garden insects. Fortunately, she has many natural enemies. Under
these are particularly lankifers, bugs, chneumons,

pen (Sphex), Spimmen and sammtrothe soil mites
(Acarus holosericeus) yenaunt. Vou Vogelu have them as
Ranpen after Bouché little to fear. — Hers is too
Destruction not difficult. Above all, the zuderéhu-
little nests of pines at the places indicated,
thus destroys the largest quantities in a short time
be repaid. Bonché says that given the distance
the kid before winter voruchme, at the delicacy of-
same against cold N > enough, same on the ground
Ratzeburg recommends dropping it, wean this vunt
would have been, the Ghöfers still staying at the pine nests

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

   

   

 

 

252

   

Rénpchen have to grate with a rag
once destroyed on the trees, then from the Ver-
little to be expected after Bouché. You can
but they, when they have become larger, i.e. more visible,
in the times when they are in branch forks or on the trunk
have gathered together socially, destroy with a broom. Whether at this age the caterpillar is not useful
sledding down and killing on top of this is not specified. Strinchers and pot waxes miss I get comfortable
men, as Bonehé says, to read them individually. Low wants ooh
have the cardboard swept up with straw mops. Ratzeburg
doesn't help anything, but he recommends it with Bouché
Tédten of the white female moths sitting around lazily
together with the here, which they are just laying off, - Low impfichit
the creation of Ranpengreiben. This measure ditrite out
from the forester's office and in Girten, where you can do it
has to do with a fiche to be reviewed, hardly of
practical: to be useful. P

Kollar, harmful insects, p. 145, also has a further one
higher in the system, the Liilehspinner, Bombyx morio L., than
harmful. His black-headed, completely black, in the Einsehnitte
and sides have yellow caterpillars with red-yellow, ash-grain warts
on the reign of Archduke Karl in May in shady places mid
in the nith of a brook by eating away the meadows great damage
donated, the details about these usually in subordinate
hh, Loliwn perenne, occurring rape themselves at the mentioned place,

 

 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

           

 

qty

 

   

d) Caterpillars with large rows of blue bristles on
whole body. i.

The great Plauenauge, the pear moth (Wiener), Bombyx pyri
Seltr., one of the largest Enropian butterflies (136 million, wide),
but not occurring in southern Germany, probably wrongly
be expected with the actually harmful insects, although the
106 million None long, yellow-green caterpillar with light blue [iekerehen, worant
long, star-shaped bristles, considered by Ochseuheimer not to be
in July and August for pear, apple, cherry, almond, apricot
biiumen, but especially anf Wallunssbiiumen is indicated

  

    

 

   

     

©) brush and brush ramps. Redtail, walnut moth, stretch foot. Bombyx pudibunda
1, antennae brown-yellow, already in males, weak in females

 

 

"253

cinched, hindbones ash-grey, abdomen white-grey. Forewings white:
Gran, blackish lesting and clouded with black-burned transverse spots
and moonspot, interwings whitish with obscured, hazelnut
Central ilvek and lighter, rare shade band, alternating French
seekig. Female grisser, 23 mill, long, 60 mill. wide, light grain,
sparse black grained, also the hind wing! bite. Overall
common in Europe and Germany, The front legs of the moth
Sitting stretched out cigentically straight (extensor foot). flight time of the moth
May through June. The woman usually lays her hands on the tree itself,
which are supposed to shelter the feisty caterpillar, i.e. fruit trees, according to Résel
Lespecial Birubiume, Walnussbiiume, In addition, next to a
Lots of forest trees, tame chestnuts, hazels, rose bushes and hops
exactly

According to Ratzeburg, who explains the Inseki's way of life very closely
beselibt od from which we borrow the higher belongings, puts the W
the kier to 90-100" together on the bark of the trees. But saw
he oh several times that the lazy female, no doubt shortly after
Crawling out through an approaching Miinuchen fertilizes the Kier
on which coon deposited itself from which it came. The eggs are
very smooth, at first already light grim, grim, later brown gren, in the
Big little pin buttons, almost globular, with a 'pointed grain'
up in the middle. Ratzeburg saw them hatch in the middle of July,
in the room, however, the rape marriages were already creeping out in June,
In trees, where the sun came to work in the forest,
Therefore, hatching usually takes place in July. the
young chicks appear all black because the ground color is red
Querrethen black sausages with long black and shorter, thin
ner, whitish hair is completely covered. So they miss it noek
Brush nud Huarbiisten, These jmgen riiupehen only gnaw the upper
hant dey Blitter and only from August onwards the full thickness of the leaf
With a length of 10 million show them the brushes and the brushes
of the adult caterpillar, about 34 million long. This one has a big head and
is somewhat thin towards the back, its color is inconsistent, greenish-yellow
to briuntiehroth, strong hairs. Kinsehnittes four yellow velvet warts,
propped hairbrushes on the back and a dinner, rose red
Brush on the last joint (hence the name Rothsehwanz). sic
has a habit of bunching up shrewdly when touched,

Their fluidity is quite significant. 'Cause when they see the forest
biitnne has eaten bald, she defoliates the undergrowth, from gardens

the same complained, but they should if available

apparently not meant in individual bills
be. like you from several authors ater the country

    
 

  

 

 

 

  

 

 

  

 

 

  

   

   

  

 

 

 

      

 

   
       

   
 
 
         

hey

 

 

harmful to sheep is listed. Mr. von Kathen has
observing that bitumen suffered the most on poor soil, such as such
is the case with most insect infestations. after rat-
burg the caterpillar rises in the forest at the end of Angust, with us in September and
October, from the Binmen and nihirt see up to the pupation of Haiden. I didn't see the latter, although I miss them every year, but a few
End of September on forest paths ete, occurs. From the beginning of October, to Ratzcburg from mid-October to the end,
it pupates mostly on the ground between moss or blizzards, — That
Spun is doubled, but still lets the pupa shimmer through, That
flow mainly with the longest hairs woven through, the inner,
the actual cocoon, yellow from the shorter bristles. - The doll
fairly broad on head, brown, darker in front than behind. Fine, fairly dense, gnarled villi
hair, regular pistils on the front part of the pupa. The set of styluses has fine hooked bristles at its tip. —
The pupa lies during the winter to May or June,

That the growth of the caterpillar is favored by a sunny position
and poor growth, is already mentioned above. You work against it
sehlechite' Witternng enigegen, Ratzeburg and Herr von Kathen saw them
Ranpen can be killed very quickly. In addition, you set an Ic
neumon zn, Pimpla pudibundae Rtz., of which often 10-12 cocoons like Bie-
Cells clinging to each other, the space of the inner ranch web
fulfil, Already in the first year of cines Frasses, Herr von Kathen looked uncomfortable
The thirtieth puppet Ichneomentarven her and as a result of this hiatus
white-yellow color cinnchmen. She is also said to frequently catch mosquito [flies?] larvae contain. When the caterpillar was taken seriously, Tan-
sent surrounded by spiders. Ratzehurg recommends collecting the dolls as a means of destruction
iiher winter, also the crushing of the trees that fell from the trees in the autumn
coming caterpillars. In the garden, shielding off is probably the first thing to do
to show off, 5

Of very minor importance, though here and there below
called the insects fatal to fields and gardens are:

The clover moth, - grane brush ranch, Bombyx fascelina
L., 20 mill., long, 51 mill., broad, ash-grey moth, with at the end
rusty foreparts and granary abdomen. front wing ash-
gran, dusted black, white and gran tumbled with a white rusty yellow,
black lined, curved (horizontal stripes. Hindwing_ almost
uniform grey. The moth lays its white anal hairs covered with brown
In summer, as a rule, hyacinths are attached to the bitterness of woolly willows. The resulting marriages were still piling up in the autumn

   

  

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

few times and are then of black body. ‘To every point of the
On the head stands a black, imperceptible brush; but on the back
a white larger, sliver and three white or yellowish, ideincre hairbrushes. Also very yellowish hairy with long, black kinzeluhaaves
Creep over the winter under bark scales and the like. and appear
again in May, now to grow rapidly, to shed their skin
and as a grany caterpillar with just a brush on each side of the head,
five black brushes at the top, behind them two yellow-red knobs
nnd to appear on the last ring a long black brush. This
Ranpe, which becomes 40 million long, lives besides grazing on the various
densest horns; layers, rose bushes, clover flowers, brom-
becren, gooseberries, dandelion, plantain, are named. she
crawls slowly, hunching or rolling on approach
look all together, The weave that Tuli makes is double. The inner tissue is transparent with medium hair that dies inside
with hair like gefilat, the doll 24 million. long, black, with long
Afier tip and with reddish-brown hairs on the back. After 3-4 weeks
The moth. — should hardly ever become harmful,

The Apricot Spinner. Lastcarrier, Bombyx antiqua L. Miinnehen
17 million long, 34 m, broad with burnt-grey feels. head, ricks,
Abdomen dark brown, fore ivy brown-yellow, two black across
brown, mostly faded wavy stripes, in between a lighter dull one
moonspot marriages. Against the Inneuwiukel a ceky, very white fleek. el rusty yellow on the top and bottom of the moth,

ibehen 11 mill, long, 6 mill. thick, with very kk Krippelilii-
yellow. very gran hairy, almost woolly, yellowish on the sides. At the
End a wart-like tip, the leg tubes, which the animal marriage persists
emotional. — The apricot moth flies from July (to Bonehé from June)
until the ok(ober. The name burden bearer, should he derive from the earlier
have received the Ménneleu schleppé. in mating that
up the trees in flight, The lively, longing, but
«J nnd gusts flying men, carrying its feelers erect,
wakes up the sluggish, clumsy woman, who usually sits on the spear
itself remains seated, from which it came, fruited or not fruited
place it against 3-400, in the middle with an indented dot
hene, white egg marriages Ilumpenweis or flat next to each other and griiss-
partly on the weaving. According to the usual information, they will only appear in the early morning
Year out, but there is also another process taking place. In July 1852
Ieh cin weave of antiqua together with the seated and Kier in
Lot of laying women, More than a third of the Kier came ctwa
ten days or three weeks after laying to emerge. the
Rupture marriages ate up their eggshells almost entirely, strayed

  

 

 

         

w

 

 

 

   
    

 

  
  

 

   
  

   

 

 

 

 

256

yet and went 2m reason, the remaining remained studed and with
filled with yellow sap until they came into development in the spring of 1853. Too bad I didn't bring up the Juliriupchen! — The young Riinpehen
eat, as already mentioned, their beer bowls, they
are initially light gran, in shape and with their especially in front and
very long hairs on the back, reminiscent of the caterpillar of Bombyx dispar. They only catch a few to three days later, after they have become darker
‘Eat on Blitter 2, namely on sprouting, delicate little rose petals
whole mass, only the Oberiléche of solid blitters. you grow old
At first sociable, but soon, according to Risel's publication, oh that
first to second hue to the cinader, there are four hinds
tnngen, after each in other, impossibly in brief 0 description
present dress appearing. After the first their colors are black,
yellow red. yellow; after the second black, red, red-yellow, with something
white hair and two seal-wax red roots on the ninth and
tented ring; after the third black, red, yellow, white-yellow, with two
yoilien warts,.after fourth sic has black head and body; the
first ring red front wheel and right and left on the big one
Wart a conspicuous Maarbi shell with feathery hairs. The second
The third ring each has red warts with light and black ones
hair; the fourth to seventh each one of the same color, yellow or tan,
somewhat pointed breasts and six each with red, black and white hair
Warts, (on each side of the fifth ring there is a black-haired bit-
schel or brush, which is often missing.) The eighth ring with eight reds
Warts with black and white hair, the ninth and tenth as well,
and each with the sealing wax wart. The half like the other rings,
but the brush on the back like those on the first ring. Of the
last, twelve King with golden hair warts. — legs scaly light brown,
Male and female caterpillars essentially only due to the size,
22 million and 29 million, different, - one finds the virtue of their greatness
The eyes drop the caterpillars mainly in June and July, sir
they are of course already available in May. The ramp creeps slowly, when it sits still, likes to make one
Bnekel and curls up at Berihrong, She lives on the ver-
various types of trees: pear tree, quince, pilaumen, plums,
Weissdom, Schichen, Rosen, Klacagnus argentea; even on top
According to Bouché, she is also said to do some serious damage, In
Forests are given to kichen, alders. willows, bilberries. In July, according to the information, she makes herself between the Blittern
feed plant or soust in a hiding place a brownish-grey,
simple, but oval with the knuckle-shaped maars woven through
spun, in which a male, 12 million, or a female,
15 Mill, long, rather thick, orn and pointed at the back, with a

   

    

   

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

   
  

 

 

 

  

 

257

small stem tip versehione, soon light yellow. crosswise dark mottled,
soon more brame, but always something metallic to pour. to the
Fligelseciden sees the black-brown, hairy pupa lying. at
the wing sheaths of the unwinged females are of course almost non-existent
hand. After three weeks, even with the Angust and September
rasp, the moth appears. The only means is to lightly pluck and kill the caterpillars. The pea spinuer, Bombyx gonostigna Ochsh. the previous in
Shape and way of life very related, with the 12 mill., long and 31 mill. wide faces, the fuller dark burned, the body dark brown Dis
black, front iliettes brown, streaked and shaded with black-brown; at
the root in an almost quadrangular, dark spot; cine dune moon flaw
in the middle of the wing. Before the sand edge cine wide cut off,
inwardly black, swelling at the tip of the wing by four or fi
smal spots, bordered on the inner corner by a white lunar stigma
curved band, which appears reddish-yellow and dashed at the front edge. U.N-
underside of the root blackish-brown with a light spot on the wing
top. interwings dark black burned on both sides. woman
16 Mill, Ing, 11 Mill, broad, like the previous one with faint wing marks
and even clumsier, dark ashy, woolly. Flight time June and July, and to Ochseuheimer also at the end of September. Rasel assured that in copulation with the female
little greeted men together with this one from a corner of his room
flew into the other. The fertilized female is laying eggs
drive his gray wool dust and cover the heap of kibble with it, The
little flowers are round and white, they need to be picked out

1 fortnight or a little more. . The caterpillar lives everywhere in yards and forests, and usually does so
in larger numbers on limited space, as food plants
If one calls plums, wild roses, raspberry, sloes, birch,
Oaks, alders, blueberries, They are found in May and June; to
Ochsenheimer for the second time in Angust mid-September. She is, ever
according to their future sex, greater or lesser, the minute of
head up to the Nachhiieberu (oli hel) 23 million, long, the female
are almost as big (35 million long). On a black background
beautiful, orange-yellow striped marriages. On the rings are Pare
s and yellow-haired fur warts, On the fourth and seventh ring
four pairs of yellow-brown double hairbrushes, two on the head
above the last joint a black feather hair brush. Am

 

  

         

 

 

 

 

 

      

 

  

 

   
    
 

   

   
      

tte
yellow. Crawls also slowly and rolls, The pupal tissue is
ciferous, brittle, transparent. The significantly smaller mint-like pupa has distinct feather sheaths,
is black-brown on these and over the back, its abdomen is ocher

 

rdlinger, the little pain, 17

 

 

 

yellow. The female is much thicker, without wing sheaths, shiny
black with shiny reddish-yellow incisions on the abdomen. Both with
provided with a sharp terminal point and haired bramn grey. After a fortnight
the moth appears up to three weeks. One easily takes out the above, partly to the Risel and
Ochsenheimer borrowed information that here as well as at home apricot
spinner cine double generation in the year. Destruction of the caterpillar, which usually does not appear in abundance
given case easily by cutting off and killing. .f) Pear caterpillars, covered all over with strong hairs. Low also includes the bramble moth, Bombyx rubi L
on the harmful insects, the caterpillar is beautiful in its ingend
black with bright yellow incisions. Later in September and October
falls as a finger-length, likes to curl up, velvet burn,
the sides black pear caterpillar with black-blue incisions and
rather long red-brown hair, especially in the eyes. she eats
next to the leaves of Brombcere and lower plants, where the accident
it leads to plum, rose, cherry and almost any other
tree and shrub bliss. Notwithstanding, since they were ge-
usually not in farms, but in fields, but only after the harvest
wrongly counted among the harmful ones, and we perish
hence the details of their way of life. _ 8) Underside flat, rows of large spots over the back
down. The silly moth, Bombyx populi L. corporeal limbs 19 million,
leaf tension 47 mill. Black-grey filers, dirty brownish
head and collar. Grey-brown rickety and hindquarters. Diiun
scaly, black-grey, rust-brown wings with two pointed
curved yellowish horizontal stripes. hind wing with extinguished white
binding. Franzen mottled brown and yellowish. The moth lives
Late September and October, even as late as November (1852). the eggs
which he then lays are, according to Résel Kinglich, somewhat flat, grav, economical
sprinkled with dark dots. They hatch after Résel before winter. But where is this one?
raising, is not approached, probably at the foot of the trees
or under flakes of bark or in cracks, you meet them in spring
Caterpillar common: on fruit trees, larger or smaller, depending
according to which sic advanced in their development before winter
was or not, at the end of May and June it is almost or fully
grow, it also inhabits many forest trees, even wild roses. on

 

 

259

on the upper side it is sometimes lighter, sometimes darker gran, finely hairy. Minter
there is a red crease on his head, over his chin
has a brown or blackish strip of cubes and on each joint
four raised dots are repeated. She will be 58 million. long. three
Movements are very slow, spins in June or July
on a branch or the trunk with aligena gnawed bark spiders in cin
solid earth-like shell, in which, after eight days, they split into a short,
thick, black-brown pupae with reddish-brown abdomen, with a blunt end
end transformed, in order to appear as a moth in the autumn*
men. The only possible destruction on fruit bitumen by tapping off the
ran into a parachute,

The hawthorn moth, Bombyx crataegi [. A vothliehgrey
butterflies of 18 million corporeal and 85 mill, wing tension, with
feathered antennae, tired, white-grey wings with
brown, 2-lobed, broad bandage, light granary hindwings and broadly
wobbly abdomen. Flies September and October in the plane like
in the mountains. :

The caterpillar up to 46 million long, changing, bluish black, dim
hairy, each joint with a white or yellow band between two
ziegelvothen, hairy Würzchen. On the sides a longitudinal line whiter
Stains. Oval weave with a smooth cover. She can be found in
May and June on hawthorn, sloe, plum trees, apple
men, willows, afters in larger numbers. Any eradication where the
should occur, as in the previous case. The cherry nest moth, woolly tail, Bombyx lanestris L.
Body kings 17 million, wing tension 35 million. Fithler brown-yellow with white
lichem Sehafi; head, back and abdomen dark red; the great
the female's thick mustache is white and dark grey. front wings
red-brown, dusted with white towards the outer edge; at the’ root cine
white, sometimes larger, sometimes smaller blemishes, in the middle a white round one
Spot and towards the outer edge a white wavy horizontal stripe. Hind wing thinner, with a whitish transverse band through the middle, the kerf
is found everywhere in Europe. He flies to Ochsenheimer and Verrich-Sehiifer in October or
Frithling. Résel and Ratzeburg observed him in April or May. last
terer particularly cites that even in the cold spring of 1839,
found Kier that had already been laid down in mid-April. The female lays
namely a large hemp (about 200) white or grey-white F
together wn a very dim, cinjilirige womb and led deect them
with the gray wool of his thick pad of hair on the Ninterlei
put the beers on branches of cherry trees, plums, stalks, white
thorns, birches, willows, which form the future abode of the ranch
must. send it

    

   

 

260

The young tears are black, with a few warts on the ears
first rings, The adult caterpillar, 51 million. long, black-brown or
black-blank. with two rows of warts, which barbed red-yellow
wear mnare;; on each joint between the roots three white dots. In the sides usually a white or yellow interrupted longitudinal line. rat
As soon as the birch trees began to open, Durg found young marriages

tnd after a few days a walnut-sized web in which the caterpillars,
remembering the procession caterpillar, always living sociable and eating
or to retreat to the nest, group hikes
do. They always inhabit the same web, at least Ratze-
regularly burgled the woolly heap of fish inside
they started to spin, but the nest is always enlarged,
to provide the necessary space for the rapidly growing caterpillars. ‘Zn-
finally it gets cracked fists and wears one on its lower part
sack drawn down from the great mass of filth contained in it. Ratzeburg often saw the ramparts staying outside the nest overnight,
but during the breeding season and when the heat is persistent: regularly: zm
Nests migrate, remaining during the two to three days of herding
whole, at home, stuck in the many individual web cells and let
back the shed skins that at last fill the whole nest. at
bad weather they suck Gfters also under the nest, as under one
Cover protection, when the weather is nice they sit on top and jolly
by cinander. — With the last hiutnug they disperse little by little
in a few days they are often up to 100-200 paces from the nest. ver-
run, in July and August they disappear altogether; because this is hers
pupation time. They produce their short, crescent-shaped, yellowish, mn-
transparent, lined with hair on the inside, a bulge on the side
Limited Lichen bearing, fairly firm, with a kind of lid
provided web, in which the ranch initially together in a horseshoe shape
lies beaten, on fences, on the ground, under leaves or moss ete. It takes 4-5 days to transform. The pupa is very short and
thick, 14-15 mill. long, slightly on the head with strong eyes. Rear
a tuft covered with short hair, gray or buff-yellow, on the
finishes lighter. -- According to Ochsenheimer, the butterfly sometimes pops up
no longer in autumn or next spring, but only after one or
awei years out of the pupa. According to Rateburg, a ranch family usually goes with theirs
Subsistence with ciuem voice marriages. However, since it also
comes that the Wollafierraupen eat Biiume so kali that no
leaf remains, ilve destruction is highly recommended. the same
can already happen in winter when the caterpillars
nests atch the quite visible woolly pads at the top
the branches removed; further by destroying those by their grisses and

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

     

 

261

 

white farle from afar conspicuous raopeun nest, Eu
and June. each May

h) Underside flat; with Schou colored Naekencinsehuitten. The copper hen, the early pear moth, Bombyx quereifolia L.
Finger-thick butterfly, depending on sex. from 60-90 million Plitgs
voltage, with toothed wings, all rusty red, Dkiulich jittering u
with a lot of caped, dull transverse lines, everywhere in Europe
not infrequently. Flight time July and August, the female sits very sluggishly
on fences, voices, etc. etc., with strongly roof-shaped upper wings,
about which the subordinates! in a far arc Die Fier, die
the female seems to lay singly, si
striped, with a green bordered in white on each side
Point. You will be referred to Biru-, Apple-, Plum-Ubiiume ond
Houché also placed on wild roses and on Seldehen (Och: ner). The young Kiupe marriages come out of the Kieru in September,
co cinmal before winter, but until then no longer reach the
Linge cines Zo.ls. They hibernate, as Bouché states, yin open air,
amage stretched on the branches. or probably on the trunk, under
Hat tendons or at the foot of the trees. In Friibling on it
the caterpillar mumbles to the fore again, eats at night, especially gladly
Giplelblitter and you growl so fast, at the end of May and Aulang
veits its full growth with 100 Mil. Linge and third
above. She is then very platy on the seeekigen Baueh, with two
a dark blue nape cloak and a small, quiet cone
on the penultimate joint, ‘Tie on the sides of each ring reel
on the left is a zapienformige stiff hairy wart, Dureh the h
the legs are covered by rows of cut-off warts,” by the way
The caterpillar changes color through all types of grain and has on the
Back still small Héekerchen became numerous little herrehen, The Ge-
Spinust that the caterpillar here or there on a branch or a fork
ig, vou the approximate form
cr Fish-Ehrensse or Mingmatte, black-grey, but of an as
foam-like mass coming out of the mouth of the ranch, white dust of flour
thoroughly penetrate. The doll is also stubbornly confirmed and
colored, it appears three days hours
accomplished kertiging of the spit; 18 mill, long, strong in front and behind
bruised, dull black, with voth-brown kinschuitia on the abdomen,
The moth appears after 3-4 weeks. The caterpillar never hung before anything in view of its large size
a fortunate circumstance. On high voices it should have all the meaning
be, but in tree schools you have to watch out for them and crush them,
You often notice them in autumn, but more easily in the Frithliday

 

 

 

 

    
 
 

 

 

 

   

Ha

 

 

 

   

   

 

June has her be

 

   

 

il

  

        

 

 

or cinem Zann anlegi is almost finge

egg

 

bluish white

   

oh the one in little

 

 

 

   

 

 

262

the bunny, because si

   

convenience of cutting ete. vicuslich ©
ll sit on the Molze, she is sometimes hard to eat,

The plum moth, the fishtail caterpillar, Bombyx pruni
L. Smaller than the previous one, but similar to it, as a moth (only réther and
with a white spot on the front ivy) and as a ramp, which however
how cin Fishehwanz has split followers. ‘Although on Zwelschgen-,
Sloe, apricot, peach, apple and pear trees, also in the forest,
but rarely, as seen by Zenker, as a passeude
place among the harmful insects. i) hairless smooth

 

upon. The willow borer, Bombyx cossus L. Kérper des
Females as thick as a finger, 45 million long, wing spamming 88 mill. Maunchen significantly smaller and with a far more dimeric posterior
body. Feelers strong in males, slightly larger in females
fied
the tail is brownish-brown, whitish at the end, black-arched
limited. Abdomen ash-grey, ringed with white-grey. front
Hill hedgehog mouldy, cloudy black-brown, with nuzi pits
lines. Hedgehog dark grey,

 

   

head and the yellow-faced ruff white-grey,

 

     

black cross
delete ficherart

The willow borer is distributed almost all over Wuropa
and hifig. The Valter flies at the end of June. Kr sits by day
rulig and trige meisiens tie! below at Bawu votes. That
Weibehen has cine Legréhre, who vorstveeken it because and
can be branched, the cherries deep into cracks in the bark and
Pushing columns, Ks is likely it that
Laying of eggs preferentially ‘i in brittle places of the
Biune undertakes, at least otherwise it would be obvious that
one so numerous Cossus-Réimpchen every year in one
fenen willow trees tril,

The trees on which it lays its brood are white
many woodland trees, willows, poplars, both headwoods and
slender, grown-up voices, 'Sweet cherry eyes, Wall-

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

   

  

founded

nut trees, fruit trees. You are after Rise! 1.6 million long, ling light edge, fresh light burn, si
streaked anit” sticky

 

weurz

   

, covered with brown substance, the

263

 

guscheuds dries wid zun protection of the Kier serves. the gai
young boys are pretty pink over their chins,
paler towards the bottom and due to relatively long hair
wezeichnel, you'll probably eat your way through right away
the bark. Your first courses (if they are not soon in
the wide passage of a diller caterpillar), run
initially superficially in the sapwood. The Ginge are of pressed
ter form, that of the wide caterpillar body corresponds
dd. With the progressing growth the caterpillar makes
ner deeper slopes, which often go into the heartwood of the trunk,
mostly according to its length, but also wrong. Around
to be able to clean the passage of filth and splinters,

    

   

 

 

* che

 

   

 

  

she usually eats it crookedly through the bark-
miinden, Here the gaps are often so wide that you can't
fingers, especially at the foot of the voice,
partially again
We all know that (and sweat) that
when the wind came breaking, When the strength of the tree
or sapling not enough if all the caterpillars or one

which éfters so much vou ueuen and old:

 

‘ibe

 

 

It seems that it is not uncommon for them to have to eat individual foods
emigrate. At least Hiefir talks about how Ratzeburg
fiihet, the fact that one so often sees individual ther
Wey crawling caterpillars tritit, They are these by the way, so
as far as my observation goes, usually quite large
sene. But Ratzeburg also tells a case where int
Plants which do not provide sufficient food for the caterpillars
wm offered her full education, she faded

  

 

 

 

 

 

ind only dwarf butterflies delivered,

The Ranpe is one of the largest when fully grown

     

 

pische, up to 90 million long, on the Ricken sehmutzi
dark red, flesh red on sides and abdomen. The very critical

yebaute Kopt, the horny Na, divided into wedges

 

misery shield
on the crest ring, as well as the hooked feet black. the

   

warty-capped banchtisses with little bristles. The caterpillar is alive and well, tenderly kissing,
and lets out some juice

   

if slightly smelling of wood vinegar

 

264

the mouth, from the smell of which all the caterpillar's movements
are filled. They spinut on their way like other Ranpen. Do the captives they eat themselves when there is a lack of food
among themselves (Résel). The caterpillar's dark droppings, of what
however, there is very little to be found in the Gingen because the
Ranpe works hard on him, is only regular, without
Star impressions, In the raw is the ranch, from which
Collar eight [2!] Hiutungen accepted, full of cum. Whether you
whendamy is two or three years old, it's not over yet:
might. According to Herrich-Sehiitfer, the entire development
daner of the insect two years. With Ratzeburg and Loudon
a three-year development period is almost more likely. One meets, namely in the wintertime in the warm Bin-
men very small and also by no means grown up
Caterpillars hum along, which of course probably all up
outgrow the following May. At that time uiim-
Finally the run is finished, it lifts slowly in the aisles
hernm nnd looks for a suitable place aw pup-
ping For this purpose she makes a thick one, thin on the outside
Holanagsel bed, which is tightened by Fiiden and
usually munitbar behind
cinom ejection hole created. Manelunal does it too
into the ground, and according to Rutzeburg's assurance and
In a story by Bechstein it must be the case that she
fueh in a corridor without Gespimst verpappl, also not
be rare. + The 41 million long doll is ranh of spikes
on the head and Wikehenskriizen on the abdomen, — réthlich-
brown, behind, especially in the rings inchr getb. To
three to four, exceptionally well after six weeks schiliiptt
Puppet
t the
at the

 

 

 

 

  

 

   

    

 

   

         

   

   

spins out inside. It

 

 

  

 

   

 

 

 

the moth works and shifts d
out of the web and Lutiloch hey
Butterfly. Bechstein saw four dolls behind
through the same hole and connect. The harmfulness of the Ranpe is less than two. beeh
help in one Biruhawn 266 Ranpens anch myself
in a cinem alien wild bimban in the forest vi

  
 

1s and ent

 
 
  

 

 

 

stone

 

    

dozens of young ones

 

Caterpillars, at least I could not mistake them for anything else. That the caterpillar in magnificent miticold weeping willows
occur, I still have no sign of date that they
quite healthy wood is concerned, because after a few years are

the annual rings in the tuners of the weeping willow like most
Weiden can almost be regarded as iodé, much more like that
It's unfortunate that one finds them in very young Ulnen, — Dei
According to Loudon, the stomach of the green woodpecker often
have a real smell from this wooden ranch. It is recommended to protect against the laying of eggs
Woman stroking the lower part of the stanchion with one
thick layers of clay and cow dung, or unhooking
the caterpillar. I mean Sulfur in the locked passage
ignited on the caterpillar should be more effective, one on all sides
but we have to cut out his mute. Horse Chestnut Moth, Bombyx (Noctua)
wesewli L., body 31 million, long, wings tension 59 million. ; has black,
in the female at the same time white-woolly fissures at the root; Head,
Back,wings very white with a lot of blue or greenish
‘Spots, Minterleid black-blue with white rings, rarer than the previous ones,
albeit also across the whole of Europe and down to Sweden
occurring. The moth is very lazy and sits perfectly upright during the day. According to Ratzeburg, the female lays at least 200 eggs, these small
round, orange. — The caterpillar comes out of the egg in August, behind
September and winters. At this time it is 4 million. long, see you high the black dots,
black spots on the head, the broad neck plate shiny
black, she never lives in societies like Cossus, but individually, since-
against more diverse bins in weeks: walnut, pear, apple
tame chestnut and hazel trees, according to Ochsenheimer himself
in the pomegranate tree. Also the gums in sumac (thus typlina) and gymno-
I write eladus to him, he also lives in: forest trees and
Hedge trimmers, He does not take his leave of absence bless in voices
and strong branches, souder aneh in weak, soon preferably in
of the piths, soon in the wood of merely a few years of age, so that the
Branches often break off later, the caterpillar keeps, like the willow
drill, cin Auswnrisloeh for their rubbish. After Raizeburg this is it
Hole only small (Cornus), but according to Résel as wide as the other caniile
the caterpillar (Apielbaum), on my specimens (see, alders, buehen)
Often mehvere appear, soon as far as the main course,

  
 

 

 

 

  
     

  

 

 

 

still un

 

zelb, with many raised glina

   
  

 

 

 

     

 

 

   

 

 

266

  

soon also noticeably narrower, Ratzeburg says, fit the length of the rune
n ejection hole on both upwards and downwards 3 the feces that the
a lot out of the hole, pretty big, wal-
igen irregular transverse rows, without Sterncindriieke, gli
like laquered, rithish or brownish-yellow. Is the same on the
Earth and when it rains, so it colors, according to Ratzebueg and Rosel, so
brannroth that the presence of the Ranpe dadureh easily betray
The full-grown rampart is ready at the end of May or June, sometimes
sometimes only in late summer a solid housing made of wooden spits
Pupation, from which later, at Rémunur, initial anxiety arose
Oehsenhciner tiberhanpt in August, pushing the pupa half out, um
dismiss the moth a, I have the relation to the moth as something
earlier in the summer in the memory. According to Kollar, the insect described was found in the area of
Vienna cause the same damage as the Willow Borer. In the
other rarity and the low-social occurrence of the caterpillar
but it only ranks very low among the canonical
be cinzuriumeu in economic cores, since the moth is rarely found
there is no other remedy against the insect than the
Wanted to remove branches or plants soon in May. The silk butterfly, Bombyx mori L., is
arose from the industry of agriculture and is therefore dependent on it
not in our current treatise. The main
most works about the same are: ~

-Dandolo del arte di Governare i bachi da seta, Kd. 3. Milan 1819. 8th. . 2 ‘tab. W.G. Dunder, Guide to Practical Accelerated
and lucrative silk breeding in large and small,
3 gang. big 8th. Wicu at Pfantseh and Vos:

Bonafous Matthien, Lrart ¢ he les vers a soie au
dJupon. Paris 1847. The German Silk Umeht, Auteitung mun Seidenbau,
its history, statistics and literature of De. Robert
haas Le Weber. 1852 Complete instructions for the zweekin

 

   

  

 

 

 

 

      

  

 

 

 

i at

   

   

eu Bohandl

   

of silk production and reeling of the S

 

ie, as well as to He. Design and treatment of the denominated
ston experiences and observations from W. y. Titrk, with

+ image unven. Potsdam 1829. 3 parts. 3. edition. 1843

" Mulberry tree, nu

 

 

267

 

Julien, on mulberry cultivation and silk production in China. German by Lindner. Stuttgart 1837. ¢

The hop root moth, Bombyx hwnuli F.,
Body length 25 million, wing tension 64 million. striking
short rosy fithler, short crack, head, quills and
the long, rather thin abdomen brown-yellow,
lancet-shaped, in males silver-white above, red

   

 

 

umt, whiteish brown below; in the female the anterior

 

scaly yellow with matt brick-red oblique stripes wid
Spot rips mn pale reddish yellow. Subscite how
the upper one, but without drawing. The moth is fairly common throughout Europe
spreads, mainly to the north. It is due in June and
July in the plain as in the mountains. At this time (July 1850)
log cranch in large numbers in the evening on the meadows of
Badorts Kreuth in the Bavarian Tyrol, Tangsam between the
Meadow plants swarming. Ochsenheiwer remarks, by the way,
that he was more or less rare, and Herrich-Sel
says cr is missing in several areas of Germany. the
Kiers of the insect are unusually small, initially we
but after Degeer they soon become very difficult

 

 

the rear

   

 

 

      

   

 

z and see

 

from v

 

¢ cin Héinfchen Sehiesspuly

The up to 48 million long caterpillar is dirty yellow-white,
The head and nape are brown-yellow. On the following
Rings of yellow Héckerelen with black bristles, the
Body mostly trimmed with a few short bristle stitches. She lives from August to April of the néichsien Jalwes witer
of the soil, except on Mwnee obtusifolius roots, mainly
ly on the hop roots. She crushes them into a
zeluen Jalwen with larger numbers so significant that, like
is assured, gunze Hoptengiivten go to Grand aud
you feel compelled to lose the hop planter,
Especially old di

 

       

 

 

 

   
   

© Wuarzelu, the three to four years in

 

ground would remain

 

» tre:

 

sen the ranches or hollow

 

UUs. They crawl rickwiirts, curve snakingly and
search iit your sty

 

   

ken |

 

far zn bite if you s

 

268,

 

 

Hop roots a special spinust, again like that
long than the pupa itself, with grains of sand or earthen cling
interwoven and so loose at the end that the doll,
denying the caterpillar skin came to push out the hide. The 20 million long, elongated red-brown pupa has short ones
Kligel sheaths on the head and on the abdomen, on this in
Rings placed rows of horn tips, it can bend strongly
mn and turn, and turns , che the moth on
Puppy shell bursting at the back leaves, half on the ground
approach Whether relocation of the hop garden and temporary
Ban from others Grown nithig or at least purpose

 

  

 

     

 

     

      

 

 

idle sci, mn to get rid of the hop wartworm
I leave it there, because if all the caterpillars in the
Pupate Krihjahe seems to be the remedy behind the damage
te it be, the hop
to

      
 
 

CD

 

mau gi ,
planing were not too old

especially on and in éilfern rootu. en, because si

ky) hairless caterpillar with bristle-toes,

Bluehead, Bombyec (Noctua) coeruleocephala L.,
panning 40 mill, The inéunliche
Moths with double-breasted coolers. These like the neck-
slightly brown. Blushing gran, glistening certain forewings
with the darkest bandage, beginning of these four
large, greenish-white, two ver
Flee! Minterwings gran with a black spot on
i.e. The male with strong Afierbiis i
In females the whole abdomen is very hairy. — The everywhere
pretty pretty 5;

 

corporeal L7 Mill, plague

 

 

    

1, maculous turned in

wearing glasses

   

    

in Enropn common Fulte
in the autumn,
times in Erihling
ne much Ravcburg grin, above ge
wranish white, with dark brown, often uctallic bila dieht
bark of all Aten fruit trees,

flies

      

Ochenheimer often in November, man
However, it is hard to find. He puts
Ibten, after Low

 

 

   

eu Kier to you

 

fiberglass

 

 

269

   

on apricot, peach and almond trees, sloes,
Weissdorm, Waldbaume. After Ratzeburg they would become one
velu laid, according to Léw in lituglichten, firmly adhering
Heap. [2]

The marriages develop very early in the year, so
that, according to Bechstein deu Kuospen, they are particularly harmful
should be. In any case, you always meet them shortly afterwards
already quite big. They eat blizzards and flowers. Low even lets her eat the fruit and the stalks. The caterpillar is yellow gray with three broad ones,
pale yellow tires, light blue
Head, on which two round ones, black
stains stand. She lives in cinzelu, waxes
in their gluttony and inertia
quickly and is therefore the beginning of June
She then connects au
Aweigen or the stem bark, or on ciums, walls ete. Schuppon, lichen, wooden splints, rubbish, lime or the like. Materials in ilvem Beveich 21 cinew zicwlich
solid, somewhat flat-looking geli
she after Réscl several weeks, che she transformed. Doll quite like a lunatic, in proportion small and short,
dull red-brown, with siarken Kinschniticn wad a thick
wide short bead at the end. Although uur living alone, the caterpillar is with you
of their frequency, especially in a few years, according to Bouché
and Schnidberger not without importance. will be special
the fact mentioned emphasized that the caterpillar the
barely unfolded buds heavily bet

  

already ready for pupation

 

  

   

 

etc. In this lies

 
  

   

ft. Sparrows mid Fin-
ken ellen as their greatest feathered enemies by
their youths tremble with the caterpillars. The caterpillars are said to be thunderstorms, there
are footed, in Awzahl vou den Bien w
especially being smothered by Sehittte

Useful but effective miticl against them

   

strong
» like dber-
n the Biume the cin-

dolls, butterflies
In any case, insects and children are too difficult to ignite than,

 

    
 

    

   

 

270

      

that also ¢ ¢ should, as already recommended, zt

Fields are drawn kinuen. 4) The Owls (Noctua)

stand out as a faller ans by small, fairly in the
Shoulders tucked head with long ruffle and simple
filiform, short-haired, or ciliated in males
saturated, seldom doubly crested fithler. Don't fly
large but strong, without shoulders, abdomen conical
sharpened, mostly short. Dolls quite stretched, all-
moderately thin, with a long proboscis sheath, smooth, in the
Usually with two anal tips, rarely surrounded by a tissue
give. caterpillars, with exception very few (group n), with
eight pairs of legs, fairly stretched, mostly without I
or derg], appendage; usually bald (b—n), nit
beautiful, hunt-dyed, delicate skin. Kier naked, rarely by the way
quite smooth, usually single gel As it appears at
all enlen almost cinjih

Ochsenheimer and Treitschke have the family of
Entles joined into quite a few genera; their sub
identificaion traits that the moth removes and does not
falling in your face, assuming too much study,
than that we should kinni them as a basis. moreover
we have to do it before Alem with the Ranpen and want
get to know them without first waiting for their transformation. This Gfter's already claimed consideration moderate
anch the following ewpirische Kintheilung the enlenarten
justify. 1) Caterpillars, eight-paired and there
a) long-haired, variegated, similar to spider caterpillars: Noctua rumicis, tri-
dens, psi, ludifica. b) Naked (i.e. without hair), of a non-green ground colour,
with sircifen or lines: N. popularis, pronuba. ©) Naked, green, without or with some lines: N. chi, chenopo-
dii, meticulosa. generation. hey

dy Naked, dev Linge after wide yellow stripes

©) Naked. variegated, yellow and black: N. lactuear. f) Naked, all black, with very whom
N. satellitia. g) Naked, striped, sehim or discolored, with dots: N. atri-
plicis, oleracea, brassicae, segctum, tritici, aquilina, crassa,
dysodea, flavicincta, instadilis, pyralina, trapezina, petrificata,
suastt, capsincola , typical. h) Naked. yellow with brown dots

i) Naked, first and last joint, covered with hard smooth shell

_ Clothes: N. graminis. k) Naked, last ring raised to stool or tip:
pyramidea, oryacanthae,

1) Naked. with Héekerehen or small horns:
culta, maura. 2) Caterpillars, paired, i.e. stretchable (see p. 296):

Noctna gamma. — Appendix: N. typhae and Coseus arundinis. pi

white or gel:

 

 

 

N. ochroleuca. N. persicariae. Y. paranynphe,

a) Caterpillars eight-legged, long-haired, bnut, those of
Spinner quite similar (Bombycoides Hiibn.). The Ampferenle, Noctua rumicis L, butterfly of 39 million. Flagelspanmmng and 17 million. bodylings; Back gray with
mixed black and white. Front wing, gran init black
zen transverse jagged lines and blemishes, white here and there
Fleeckehei and a small white moon within the
rear angle. abdomen and underwings, as well as the whole
Underside of the falier bréuntichgran. His beautiful caterpillar is 39 million. long, bramble yellow, rather
slightly stocky and of equal thickness, with a row above
red patch over the back, a series of crooked,
bright white spots on the sides and a yellowish white. Vth-spotted longitudinal stripes over the feet. In youth
Ah yes, only less vividly colored. She is found in the summer
mer and autumn, according to Ochseuheimer in June, August and
September, Ofiers even up to iv November into the
various plants, such as fruit trees, rose
stuck, lilac, Sanerampfer, Kohlarten, Boragen, Bros
ling, delicate garden and pot plants. The ramp is very

ge

 
   

 

 

   

 

  

 

 

 

fiddy. She curls up tighter when touched. 272

When the transformation time is approaching, choose wood or
Bark a little chip, gnaw off a little chip and make it out of it
a wiewoh) quite Jeichtes Spied, to look for some
‘Days to become a doll. This one is black burned, has
two distinct points in front and rotates when touched
will, with great agility and with noise in the
spimust around. About three weeks after pupation
the moth appears: that of the late-season caterpillars in the
next spring. — Herrich-Sehéffer ninunt, w
Above ibercin agrees, double generation. Bouché gives the insect noxiousness because it is very
gluttonous, where it frequently appears, as significant
nnd recommends that in the conspicuous coloring the slight
look for the caterpillar. s init dem

 

 

 

 

 

The Apricot Owl, Noctua tridens L. Kine very Sehine, 38 Mill. long, thin but very long haired, black caterpillar, tipped with orange
Riteken strip, which in the Linge through a black Li
The other stripes, spots and dots red,
The fourth ring carries a strong pin. On all fruit bins
men, also sloes, hawthorn. rose bushes. Résel_takes one
tiny generation of caterpillars in the year. After ‘Treitsehke but finds mon
she twice, namely in June and again in Angus until October. the
Ranpe makes a dense one out of gnawed wood splinters on the tree trunk
Tissue from which, depending on the generation, in June or in May of the following
ing year the moth emerges. He has 19 million. body liners and
42 million wing tension and is ash gray on the forewings, in’s
Rithliche stinging, with many black ¥ marks, hindwings and
abdomen w

The Schlehenenle, Noctua psi L. Similar to the previous one as Ranpe,
but less cheeky. The sulphur-yellow band on the back is mushy
than at fridens, undivided(, the black flail on the yed ring
selr long, a real kinhorn, way of life the same, but very
grown caterpillars early July, mud in September and October. auto
the same mushrooms. moths July to August and May to June of the following
ing year: the apricot encule tibervaschend tihnlehn in color wud characters
nnng; but somewhat larger, forewings ash-grey; i.e
only paler, minterwing and abdomen. These two species, which are very closely related, probably have no real ones
Importance because, as Schou Wisel says, one seldom has more than 5-6 caterpillars
found on the same tree. the same:

  

ever shared. yellow, white, black. 273

‘Zenker (8. 260) still leads here in the form of Bombyx dispar
Similar white-yellow and black-piebald budded caterpillar of
Noctua tudifica L. aut pear, cherry trees wd sloes, but we
absolutely must be put aside, since they are nowhere else considered to be physical
is priidicirt, occurs locally and according to Treitsehke even
among the rarities. b) caterpillar eight-paired, naked, of non-green ground colour,
with stripes or lines,

The Lélcheule, Noctua popularis F. (lolii Esp.) auto
falling, elongated, elongated structure of the body. The female
from 24 million bodily sparrows and 49 million flag voltage, mil
provided with a laying spike. The Méunehen, from 38 million Flagel voltage, has strong feathering filler. front wing
with white veins forming a lattice, which
Finely brown basic color fading into violet
hiss In addition, toggling and other drawings. The insect is fairly common in Dentschland but in
usual years not often. About the times of Yahweh, in which there were different ones
states, there are various statements. To
for some the flight time of the Fall would be July or
taste but after Esper and Borkhausen he would
ling, sometimes as early as April, from German overwintered
pen koumien. :

‘Treitschke describes the caterpillar as cylindrical, glistening
vend glait. Their basic color is dark brown, with black transverse
stripes gitierférmig drawn through. Walk to both sides
light-grey, ciwas flesh-colored schaitirie Si tires that
of the linge from the head to the tip of the end. To
Freyer are the semi-adult caterpillars black-brown with
two dazzling white lines or streaks across the back
and a whitish-grey side ridged in the middle
striped, the pronotum and the anal valve are horn-like
glowing brown. On such begin and end the
noticed stripes. Adult is the caterpillar 2¥ inches long,
sometimes the thickness of a little finger. Your color

Nérdlinger, the little enemies 18

 

  

    

 

 

 

/y

 

274

is grey-brown. Three light brown, brick red in the middle
striped lines, pull up from the first Horu-like joints
to the horn-like anal valve, in which they unite,
«inch the whole length of the body, namely cine but the
back, and two below the rickeu line on each side. No further, similar line forms the so-called lateral
stripe, on which the black Liiffer stand. The head
is shiny ocher yellow. The whole caterpillar is smooth without
Hairy, and glistening as if covered with varnish. According to all information, the caterpillar lives very voraciously at first
Euglian ryegrass (Léleh, Lolium perenne), couch grass,
also on the grain, lying under the ground by day and gnawing
the roots, but comes at night from the stalks-
start It is like this on the Lechmoos in Bavaria in May 1833
too rich and gluttonous aufyetveten that through them almost
Immanliche Wiesgrunde were eaten cool. sic
spared plantain (Plantago) wid Liwenzahin (Leonto-
don taraxacum), so that Freyer believes she lives exclusively
different types of grass. From mid to Eude June went there
the transformation into a doll freely in an imaginary earth
house in front of you. Esper and Borkhausen give June, July
and August as the time of completed growth,
Dahl ('Treitschke), on the other hand, faud the caterpillars in April, the
Pupation happened at tim in May and the moths appear
in August; so that the caterpillars would hibernate. According to Freyer, the pupa is red-brown, smooth, with two fine ones
end tips are missing, — After the same author go in
Years of extraordinary rental of dogs from caterpillars
of a contagious disease, a lot through one
Micken- [Tachina? Ichneumon?] Kind to reason, as larva
au hundreds of thousands crawling out of it, so that from
a large number of caterpillars scarcely a few moths
come,

He recommends for consumption sourcing of wine,
Wouldn't have to fight and win beforehand
of the hay to advise? 275

In autumn 1852. before Evite, I became 2 Hohenhicim on one
little caterpillar alerted, ywich dic

Rye grains in the ears befvesse, ishch gins,
better to get. I found her easy

but only in a few pieces between the grain. =

sitting on the axe, and indeed so fidgety and leaping that
it was very difficult to keep 2u on hand. I want them in the
describe exactly

The head of the Riupchen (Fig. ), with its very fall into the Augon
the fork line, is pitch-brown, very smooth, almost lustrous, like the Ials-
screen and carries on both sides fifuf small through-slicing acu-goals 1nd
on the upper surface of each unfithy noun longer or shorter white,
at the bottom: black bristles, of which you streaked every bit in one view. bare deepening is level with the fork line. Neck shield sel smooth, in
awei aids divided by a clear Itinne, to which, a
Forming a crest, each time a lighter impression is left. against you
There is always a strong border on the pronotum on either side of the caterpillar
Bindvuek, next to this strong bristles
each side of pronotum groove, latter in median line white, right
and left awishow gutter wd side cine zwcite brituntiche gutter so that
the shield crumbles into four fields burned with pitch. The white middle line of the shield
Set a dirty gel and slightly wavy in width
down the ridge to the end. Both towns runs a broad,
faintly defined and musty brown band, followed by a
lighter band. Finally, in the scite itself, the color becomes more bland again,
In the brown band, next to the yellow white dorsal line, stand on each
Ring of a white small, dark weevil with completely black bristles, chenso
two in the sides next to the airs, underside malformed. Of the
Affiar shield gleaming like the pronotum, also due to the yellow Riteken
line divided into two halves and some black, light at the apex
bristles, claw feet light pitch brown, ventral feet dark pitch
brown, Sehwana feet even darker, rather black. The body against
in front, but especially blurred towards the back. Judging by the attacked axles, the riupchen has
in its early youth from the floury interior of the rye-corns
cermin, The white filth still often sticks to the awns
the top of the hollow Kimer, Spiiter, after being in the captivity
guarded herself, she always kept to the bottom of the glass, in-
in the middle one of awns and their réthlichen large, angular Uitrath
formed hiding place. After some dry 1
very imager and scarred. But she recovered quickly
taking a few drops of water and wet chaff 7m. After eating, she kept pulling herself into her Versteek uuriiek. Never

  

 

 

 

similar to that of the head; four to

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

 

 

  

ge she appeared

    

 

 

 

276

I saw them in this period feeding on the corn itself or on the grass,
that I repeatedly voriegic her. In the winter. i.e. H. a few minutes later,
she had 22 million Linge. Unfortunately, as a result, she perished on me. —
For the time being, I can't call this caterpillar anything other than Lolehowl
and draw attention to the fact that they are available in somewhat larger quantities
Firing rye would have to be very tiresome. your extermination wire
easy to do by skimming with a large hammock
leagues,

The domestic mutants, Noctua pronuba L. Kine of the larger ducks,
of 26 million Body limbs md 60 mill, wing tension. Riieken and you
rather narrow, with a few blemishes and jagged lines in front
the wings are gray through all deviations, brown, even almost black,
abdomen red-yellow, hedgehog bright yellow; slightly inside the hem
with strong velvety black bandage. Spread everywhere in Germany. The moth appears in June and July, when it is not uncommon to see it on rocks.
and in clear groves fly, but you also meet him
hidden behind window shutters and in houses, in such he should s0-
even sometimes hibernate. He flies and runs very quickly, looking for himself
by slipping 2 hides and wears*his wings just fine. Man
says the moths like to flutter into the light (hence his nickname, Lichtenle*). The insect's fiers are said to be button-shaped, serrated, slate-grey, in
quite a lot put together. The resulting 50 million long rampant of equal thickness has a small brownish head?, dark
Thin body, with three lighter dorsal lines. From the fourth section
on lanfen on both sides di line black stepped st
which always become st y downwards, the 2wei lines fiber
eng Feet clearly red and the black spots on the air vents
white bordered. It also shows green, yellowish or earth-colored brown ones
Fiirbing, the moth Gfiers same-colored collar and lack of ge-
walnish , lighter colored edge line. Treitselike gave him the name
Innuba, but has this in Volume X. 2, p. 38 declared as a mere variety
nud fed as a species. The caterpillar crawls into you during the day
Earth. or under wide banks, withered leaves, stones and lies here zn-
rolled up. She goes about her food only at night. we
ch bouché in the bhiters of sorrel (Rumer acctosa), primroses,
Auricula, lavender, violets, cabbage and the like, after others too
consists of butternut squash, mashed potatoes, lettuce, message, it hibernates, it's over
Adult in April or May and pupates in a slight
Jeimten, fragile earth help. Cardboard glistening red burned very much
lebhasi,

One recommends near the places where the Ranpe eats, if
It is not easy to find something to dig up during the day, or when there is light
Snach to find. hey,

   

nnd

 

      

 

hey

 

 

 

 

   

 

277

) Caterpillars eight-paired, bare, green, without or with some
lines,

 

The Chi-Bule, Noda chi £.. 41 mill, long caterpillar, tlach, slender,
grass-green, more green over the ridges, with two lateral white longitudinal
sirvifen and pale dorsal stripe, after Treitsehke in two generations
(in May and August to September) in garden on lettuce, aquilegia and
occurring on Keldunkern, yes even on Biumen, Falter, July andnd
September. Whether of importance? The Giinsefussenle, Noctua ehnopodii F. The 38 mill. long,
comfortably lighter or darker green, sometimes also lighter or darker
brown caterpillar is somewhat cylindrical, has a tearing over the paws
red line bordered with white on both sides, also on both sides of the
A white one, interrupted in the incisions, runs from the back
Stripe bordered with black streaked lehen, also runs over the Riteken
a black line. — Often ant from July to September and October
celery (Apium graveolens); lettuce, cabbage, asparagus, reporting (Atriplex) Giinse-
foot (Chenopodium). The chardcule, chard caterpillar, Noctua meticulosa L., is a
machine, 46 million long, safflower, sometimes brown caterpillar with thin,
“white dorsal stripe, which, by the way, is sometimes inconspicuous. It can be found from Frithling to Angust on several types of cabbage, especially
ders chard, levkojen, gold lacquer, celery, burnet, mallow, key
flowers, woolly wreath, sunflowers, aster, lavender, roses, by day
hidden and feeding mainly at night. She goes in at the end of August
the earth and is transformed here into a loose, superficial earth
hiuse to the shiny dark red pupa, from which the moth emerges in October
emerges, From whose here arises a generation that one éfters
meets in the middle of winter, and which turns into a butterfly as early as April
trains. The same is hitbseh flesh-red, with at rest half lings-
folded, nicely green-angled, strongly jagged outer edge
deriliign. Since Hervich skipper of two flight times, May and July, nnd
Westwood speaks of May and September, the generation seems min-
to be at least a double. d) Eight pair of legs, backed, broad yellow along the length
striped. . The pea sencule, Noetua pisi £. Almost all of Enropa as slender,
48 million long, initially grime or brownish, yellow stripes, later
red-brown caterpillar with flesh-colored head, feet and abdomen, dense
sprinkled dark brown and with band-like light yellow longitudinal stripes, where
from one on either side of the back, another over the feet;
joins with the front body for defense wm, lives from

 

 

   

 

278

May to August, naclt Risel to September single on Larkspur, Boh-
ne, vetches, peas, sorrel, grass and clecaria ete. transformed
itself in the earth in a soft web. Pupa red-brown, with reds
Finsections and dark spots. The one in the basic color red burn
moths adorned with straw-yellow jagged lines of 18 million bodylings and
36 million Wing spanking appears in May or June of the next year. ©) Eight-legged, bare, yellow and Holstein. The chine, yellow and black spotted variegated, large, fully grown, 52
million long horned owl caterpillar, Noctua lactucae F., lives in July
until September on lettuce and the like, but hardly allowed here as too rare
earn a job. f) Eight-legged, bare, velvety black, with very little
white or yellow. The Prithbirneule, Noctua satellitia L,, quite schianke, 38 million. long, smooth but black, scented and like velvet
A caterpillar to look at, with a shiny light brown head. Some white or
yellow lateral strokes on the first, second, fourth, fifth and eleventh
section. (Above the legs, as it seems, a ctwag interrupted
white line). Underside and legs pale, earth-colored. Lives in May and June
namely from different grits together on several fruit biiu-
men, gooseberries, currant cherries, raspberries and in the forest. she
is quite lively and should like to eat other caterpillars (Merrich-Seliitfer). She is due to pupate in the ground in June, Missing her last
tere, it lies on the ground for weeks and shrivels up a lot, spins
but quickly transforms when given earth. The rule-
idle pupation daners we also rose! only 8 days. earth spin
lingliehrund, the moth after 3-4 weeks, d. i. in August and September
temperature as late as November (1853) I found the moth in the dead foliage
of the forest, according to Borkhausen the insect would have two generations a year,
- In case of abnormal reproduction of the caterpillar - Shed,

  

  

x) Eight-paired, glabrous, striped, fair or discolored. punctured,

The Meldencule, Noctua atriplicis 1., from 20 mill. bodylings
and 47 M1, Fligelspamnuug, tanned, head and back marked with green
flew, front ilie! with two somewhat rithian transverse lines and strong green ones
Fleeken and moon stigmas, next to which cin obliquely towards the inner edge
longitudinal dentate nitlichwhite spot running; abdomen and hind
third wing ash-grey with lighter rims. Flies to Rise) in May or
June, to Westwood in June and September. 279

2 million long caterpillar is found from July to September anf Am-
ig, Giinsefuss (Chenopodium), Meldc, Wasserpleffer ete. she
is cylindrical, light reddish brown, has an ocher yellow stripe along the feet
and above these two pale-grey lines, joined at mid-back
vin cinzeluer black-grey stripe. On every ring in every stripe there is
three white dots on each side, a yellow spot above the face. The reason
sprinkled between the stripes with delicate black dots. The Caterpillar
is 44 million long, trig, volt, however, when one nithers, together
and falls down. Only late in autumn does it go into the ground to
in a small hollow without webbing 2u. morph after
about 14 days (Risel). The shiny red-brown fat doll is ain tho-
vax punctured, bears a terminal apex and is not difficult to find. Bonché assures that in some years the caterpillar will
eat ampler's throat so that you don't do anything about it, he em-
recommends shaking off, picking up and destroying the ranches. The head lettuce owl, Noctua oleracea L.
moths of 18 million corporeals and 38 million wing tension,
dark, rusty. Fihler scaled with white. Double Riteken

Abdomen ashen with burned tufts, Viisse
single yellow ringed. front iris no
near transverse line. The round center fleece white cin-
caught. The renal spot is orange-colored, crescent-like. On the wiped bandage sometimes very delicate, v
black dot The F
weak line ci
» against you

  

 

 

   

 

sc and

 
     

cn strongly ciiled, with a
Tinterwings ocher yellow
eu Franzen darker

   

and sel
shaded. The Gentiiseu'

 

white

 

 

‘everywhere in Enropa common. she lies
in May or ; do Herrich-Schiiffer in August too
and lays her hands on the blowers of lettuce, types of cabbage,
Swiss chard (Beta), according to Low himself on peas and boh
uen, report ele. The resulting ramp finds
on these plants from July to summer
About, preferably but mid September
man

 

 

Yu

   

 

   

 

  

s. in her youth,
1 even in space, their basic color is green
ssen, black tinged punkia. The color of
adult Ranpe against it is usually reddish or
yellow brown. Knotted across the back and on each side

  

with w

 

 

280 pp
A grateful quarrel and close to the feet a whitish one. Belly and feet are light bramn, between the two dark ones
Stripes stand and black dots. Before winter the ge-
dingy caterpillar in the earth to a
shiny red-brown pupa, which
remains lying until Frithling. According to Réaumur, it is this Ranpe,
which one often stalks of lettuce
finds aushhhlend and this too
Basically judges how he heads form
can. The caterpillar was very lively. calculated

  

At the beginning of June she was leaving
the root to the stalk to get in the ground between
to pupate some cores glued together. Bonehé recommends to annihilate the occasional thoughtful
injurious insects the reading of the caterpillars; Low: Bestrene:
of watered or sprinkled plants with ashes and salt,
but what, because of the destructive effect of the salt water
sers on most plants, done with caution
smelled The Kohlle, Noctua Brassicae L. The moth of
18 million Kéxperlings and 40 million wing clamping. The head,
Neck collar, ken and shoulder covers blackish-grey with
individual short hair, quills with double star-
crest, on the back of the black-grained hind
abdomen black tufts. Front wing gran with yellow and
whitish mixture. Front edge to itber dic middle am
lightest and darkest dotted, Above the white bandage
stings three or four close yellowish spots. Significant transverse
jen, the first half, the following whole wide, dark cin-
caught; The usual central spots are bordered with white
shaped, in the middle with a white-grey, black-
lightly framed crescent; the cone stigma dark, brown
edged. The whitened bandage is the lightest and ends
on the white spikes marked with a W

  

 

  

 

   

 

 

 

   

 

 

  

 

281

Not the first arc of this line comes a
pale, rust-colored stain. Next the edging of the
graven, yellowish-lined and bristle-deaf Franzen stands
a series of small, black, triangular characters. hiuter
wings light gran with dark veins and central spot, towards the
Outer edge dusted with black. The moth flies in May and June and like its most
ten relatives of the night. The female puts his ran-
den, yellow-gritied, ribbed eggs in large numbers, each
but scattered in implements and in fields, most frequently
on bags of cabbage, savoy cabbage, cauliflower] (in the
usually between the ribs and in the buehten), after Ar
but also on lettuce and sorrel. After about
14 days the Huiu-marriages hatch; they scrape at first
only on the skin of the blisters; how they become stirrer
den, they eat lights and dig themselves eating in-
mer deeper against the heart; especially on the white head
kraut this is very noticeable and cunning, though man_ often

\_Inwardly I can perceive that cabbage larvae are
have eaten, Vou this hygenesis, themselves vou
to eat into the heart at the last warning, they drive
among the peasants the name »,Herzwurin.¢ To theirs
Gingen is piling up
disgusting rubbish, like that
that when several
caterpillars in one and the-
same head together-
find the Inneve strong
enjoined, “when it’s wet
rotting and. self
for the Vich unenjoy-
get cash came. In youth is the
caterpillar mainly green,
later her green becomes more
or less overlaid with gray or black. On the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

282

A dark stripe runs down the back, in which a faded one
indefinite dotted line stands, Above is the caterpillar iit
fine white dots and sometimes stir in it sometimes, sometimes
paler Lingsileckeu busy. In the sides lands in
tiger-yellow stripe tarnished at the top on the réthlich. Closely above this stripe are the white, black-lined
caught Luftlécher, '

The caterpillar is found from August to October, after
Bouché from July to September. She goes at the end
on the ground, burrows into the earth and is
fold elevation of the earth after 12-14 days to bright red bramium
Doll with embroidery lace. She will remain un-
lie changed. The damage dealt by the coal owl's ramp
is usually struck even higher than that of des
cabbage white, at least in years of particularly strong
moreong. The main means of destruction is the
read the caterpillars. At this point, Résel remarks that it is very important
be ready to do this thing before the ramp dies
last skinning, because of this:

 

on drill
i invs heart of cabbage plants. Also the deep dumping
can exist in a field for the destruction of numerous
rich dolls can only be advantageous; but it's coming
much too good to the neighbor than the owner himself, helps

 

sic

 

 

therefore little if the neighbors do not follow the same. The Winter Seedle, Cutworm, Moissonneuse, Noc-
tua segetum FP. Kirperliinge 19 million leaf tension 42 mill. head and stalks sometimes ashen gray, sometimes yellow burned, filer light
brown. Abdomen whitish or réthlichashen. Look grey
and ringed black, ground color of the slender forewings
ashy grey, yellowish brown or barklike. She's with you everywhere
black dots itbersat. Usually there are three jagged ones
cross lines. The usual central spots of blackish
core are edged in brown. hindwings_ of the male
snow-white with a fine brown border; in the female
chen more gran. Although distributed throughout Europe, yes

 

 

 

2833
according to the editions preferably in the northern parts
At home in Germany, Prussia, Poland and Russia
and has been notorious for centuries. Flight time of the moth: May, June, July, to Kollar
August. The females should appear a little later than
you little girl. During the day they keep themselves hidden in something
a hiding place that presents itself to them and fly
only when aroused; only the male sees
to fly around here and there during the day. Actual flight time
is only the late evening when the fertilized females lay
in Girton and in fields hung their eggs on the low-
the leaves or prostrate stems, even
Mushroom waste, The egg is said to have the size of a Moln
sunenkorns and creeps up after 10-14 days. In the course of six weeks, the Riupe
reach length of 9 lines, whether;
will. The caterpillar is heavily fed
slightly diluted in front, well

   

 

 

 

 

 

1 hardly the
gauge it last 2" long
thick, towards the back and *
ckt, a bit shiny, but nman-
dirty coloring. The basic colors
are namely brann and dark grey, which are in broad litngs-
alternate stripes, but at the same time agree under cinander
mix masses. On the back runs a pale, almost
the other side dark bordered stripe. stand next to it
four dull black dots on each section. you too
Lufilécher are black, the caterpillar likes to curl up
men when touched. She will mainly
in September and October, i. lh. between time of germination
of the grain striking. She lives hidden in the daytime
Earth, clods of earth, under stones ete. and comes at night
on their forage plant. She devastates the young mushrooms of-
masses that often large areas are eaten away by the young
Bitter or roots are destroyed. that she at her
even leaves and stalks in it
earthly camp ziche, seems a bit unbelievable, though
they attack twigs, stalks and roots even during the day
may, di¢ directly cover their hiding place. especially

 

 

   

  

 

—longingly because of her

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

   

  
 

 

 

 

284

 

it is agreeable to the young winter seed, especially
rye and waizeu; it eats away the roots. Further
jerked off the reps and cabbage, lettuce, spinach, raven and
the auricles in the garden, whose stalk and shell they
hides finally even the grass if there is nothing else
thinks Above all, it is the "strong, warm* fields
who are suffering and those who have been appointed to you in good time
are. With the approach of winter, rusts or
the ramp creeps about 3-4 inches deep into the earth and
stays here in a cirand den until she sees the spring
lures out again. Even if usually the
drive the devastation
to ser will, ever
bigger the caterpillars are
so this is how ve
is secured at the
Saatenle not the case
t just goes in

 

  

 

 

 

   

  

 

    

0 g

   

 

 

because not
part di
to hibernation
Gronde, but long
time they would
not at all and but
eat only briefly
seu Is she fully
grow, the caterpillar breeds according to its birthday
wid vintage, late April, May, or June again 3—4" deep
into the earth. Supposedly she smooths herself here ciue, in-
agile as if covered with a varnish [?] Cave. dice
Pupa is only half the length of the caterpillar. she is beginning-
Slightly light brown ind _ turns darker and darker. Four weeks
after turning into a doll bric

 
 

Caterpillar at

  

  

  

    

 

 

with the moth
— One is poor
s insect, which in years besouders

 

and works its way through the earth
middle against you
strong proliferation to become a true plague came and
at different times (Ostpreussen, 1808, 1827). 285

Many kinds of middle] are recommended: some want
that one sows the seed in good time, which
that they are sent out. I believe that it is better
is, in general, to decide who is right in his proposal
Has. Early Reps will be present before September, the main
reproduction time of the caterpillar, cher bestoeken, more
the one that resists the ramp better and the damage
rthis better come in the winter
men as a senior. But he will from the caterpillar
seized, this will heal his stalks, while
in the first case they destroy all the young mushroom cloves
will. winter cerealssaid when we usually start
end of September, October, or even November
lend, will seldom suffer from the caterpillar dem
from October on she is dull and hardly eats again. At the
the choice of seed

 

   

slightly overgrown, Tibet

 

 

aweckmiissigsien see me at

 

time not to be put off by the Saatenle, if
hecrend ​​occurs, lie the field by October,

 

she but vei
he winter seed

 

alsdam: let fiefpfliigen zn and only now ©
pre-cut. Before the end of September before;
every reseeding again like the first one

J mainly warm and covered with horse manure
ellie soil are involved in the historical devastation
have suffered, one recommends cooling dimger species, It
appears king, soon to pluck the dung, that
with no hiding places for the ramps. Man
but also recommends that no
grazed paths to dniden, from which: the caterpillars on
the grain ete, easily reach kémen. This suggestion
bernht now apparently on the Annalime that the caterpillar
possibly take their usual abode in the grass. This now seems striking, since it is nowhere stated that
prefer also wiire can

cuommen, drift

  
 

will eat

 
   

    

 

 

    

that they grass the cultivated plant
assume that those of the moth for the small area

 

of the rattled ridges certain eggs scien, uach-

going to devastate large Kelder ai. Of course you knew

 

286

get the idea that the moth translates necessary
urge the lawn splinters with many children. But we have
stated above that the flight time is in June or, July
falls, i.e. at a time when the moth ft its
come at the table in all fields,
covers finds. With the answer to the question of whether the caterpillar eats the grass
prefers to grow, the question will also be settled
how far the fallow affects the propagation of the caterpillars. It may well not be of such great importance as
you could work out, because it doesn't just want the fallow
field with its passing characters, but also,
and preferably the meadows as the undisturbed seat of the Kerfe
be considered in those days where he has no special
their propagation on the F

Drill culture differs have its firs and cons, in that respect
as a result, on the one hand, the plants stand drier,
so the Ranpe become more accessible, on the other hand the vegetation
tation of the plants demanded and the pursuit of the Ranpen
is facilitated. Field furrows are also recommended as Fanggraibeu
for collecting and destroying the caterpillars. on the two
The validity of this measure is indicated by a remark in the M
Lenburg weekly journal for agriculture and housekeeping,
that no
Repssaat immigrate, but Aundrerscits should the seed caterpillar
as the gi part of her life left,
less easily embarrassed in the pits,

 

 

 

 

    

 

I don't mind. similarly the caterpillars like to eat from adjacent fields

 

 

ate it in the ground

      

than other caterpillars, which always live on plants and at
for whom even walking on earth is almost never part of their lives
before. {piliigen, also Sc airciben appear as Ve
means of redemption where there is nothing left to spoil, ang
measure up. I don't expect much from sprinkling lime. The direct collection of the caterpillars is also special
by lantern light and reading together thoseii which

       

 

 

 

287

for the skin to be above ground even during the day
and the destruction of the unier stones or nests
recommended. —Care of criths and other birds
but will not be more successful against any insect species than
against this

In August and September Hohenheim and Ochseuhausen were devastated
in Upper Swabia a caterpillar the young Reps so much that Fleichen von
several mornings had to be broken completely. on the Iohen
heimer Feld, she hollowed out the stalks of the young reps so that the
angen plants xu grand had to go. To Ochsenhansen on the other hand
They did not attack the older Reps or Awdl plants, but they did
young freshly germinated ones, namely the first two florets of the seedlings;
the repseed on ten acres of land was crushed three times in succession
stirs and one finally had to eat winter grain; this was spared. The drier parts of the fields suffered the most. The ramparts ate
also here only at night and their presence was only detected during the day
Lighter in size than those revealed by gray field shrews. The same Ranpe, assures Herr Ockonomicrath Horn zu Ochsenhausen,
I was very sad to him in August and September 1847
done to the Runkelviiben by eating out the blobs of the heart. It
as a result a standstill in the growth of the buds and beets
entered, the latter remained small and in the middle of the regrown
a replacement leaf wreath at the site of the earlier heart leaf rotten
* become
With

  

 

 

    

  

 

The caterpillars that died there pretty much agreed with 'Treitsehke's
Description of the Noctua segetwm together. However, I have
fiigen that my specimens in September, stretched out, i.e. H. walking
18 mill, Linge had. (Now in November they are much more kiir and
very rumpier.) They weren't quite straight, but rather flat on the banch. Thr head rather small, glistening bra through the two opposite rear
especially dark halves of the head. Zine black, mouth parts together with
bung musty and pretty light discolored. On the first ring a
dirty grey, scarcely noticeable dorsal shield. In a red-grey
back band at the height of each ring in the 'trapezium four dirty-
shiny, somewhat darker dots with a short brown border; at
three equally on the left, arranged in a triangle around the black air hole
dirty spots, more noticeable over the legs. Above
behind the transparent skin, the dark, visibly pulmonary
siren spinal vessels; in the middle of which there is a bright, darkly delimited longitudinal
line. There are a few things running between the belt and the air vents
narrow, lighter, thinner lines, which come together again as a band
can be viewed, more airy black. All bene wd the whole

 

   

 

 

     

 

288,

Underside of the Luftloheren on the cheeky brown-colored, on the
Anal valve a barely noticeable brownish shield. A number of pale specimens are found under a ranch, with
lighter head and scarcely visible wart points, but otherwise the others
very similar, so it would be possible for me to have several species together
owned. In fact, according to the descriptions, the caterpillars of
Noctua tritici L., Noctua vitta Liib., Noctua exclamationis Hiib., corticea
Hiib., crassa Hib. so akin to segetum in reputation and way of life. that it must appear appropriate, the protruding notes at hand
not to mix with those itber the dehte segetum completely, this around
more so than my caterpillars in captivity byrehaus not grass
wanted to attack, which is claimed by the segetum. The wheat
owl, Noctua tritici L., whose caterpillar is so haunted
About an inch thick, thinning from the thickness of one
Quill pen... On the quill olive grim, with
some yellow admixture. Each ring has two que eu
far apart, blackish spices, with short
with stiff hair. Head brown, with yellowish in the middle
Triangle. Belly and feet cheeky yellow, more like air
recently. — In 1835 it played an important role in the Marchfeld
tend gehaust and early July the six-figure book |
wheat in more than half of the fields in eight days

    

   

 

     

completely eaten up. The caterpillars disappeared afterward
heavy downpours. Apparently the appeared in September
Other caterpillar genera from Roggeufelderu
and totally devastated these wif significant stretches so that
not a trace remained. The same happened to Kiner Nachsaat. The later destruction was again strong October
attributed to rain. ation on the ju

 

   

    

 

The corn owl, Noctua crassa OT., a sallow-haired Ranpe,
nd the head and dull black spots on the joints, like
n cine relatives, Noctua ralliyera F., with ash gray body
each four black dots on the joints, those of grass: and grain
roots, young leaves and culms and according to Herrieh-Sehiiffer also in
Potato seed lives.. It overwinters underground; in June and July the
Butterfly. Probably too rare to be described here. The forest straw howl, Noctua aquilina Hiib., welehe to Kollar
as a caterpillar in areas of Austria at the beginning of June 1833 Weinsticke

 

 

 

other

 

 

 

 

289

deserted, d. uh, foliage. Inflorescence and shoots slightly grazed
Has. Usually it lives on bedstraw, Galium verum, and'nach Kollar's
observation she had only done the damage to the wine out of necessity,
because they could no longer find food in the surrounding fields. Nitheres at collar 8. 173 The parsley newle, Noctua dysodea The dark grass green,
shagreen-like*rare rape, with dark-
green head, whitish stripe on the sides, as well as very dark
Fiissen and underside, in May and June on garden lettuce, Aketei, Peter-
silie, artemisia and other kitchen plants, moths in anguish and
September, according to Herrich-Schiffer in June and July. The garden pear, Noctua munda F. The 1'/, inch long, brown,
on the sides crooked and marked with a wavy line, somewhat white
dotted, rind-like looking Ranpe in Frithling on plum,
Pear, sloe and forest trees. The cherry duck, Noctua flavicincta F., a smooth but with
many delicate dots, lighter or darker green ruupe, with
darker dorsal stripe and pale yellow lip stripe over legs. Adult two inches long, in May or early June on sagebrush (Arte-
misia. vulgar ), gooseberry, chicory (Cichorium intybus), garden lettuce;
after Low also on cherry trees; Butterflies in July. The Mandelnele, Noctua instabilis Esp., lives as a common
garish-yellow rampant, with a green irregular stripe over the dorsum, and
a broad yellow stripe on each side, with four rows of smaller yellow
Point marriages over the body in May and June on almond, cherry,
and plum trees, pupation in the soil near the
Voice. The moth forms in the red-brown pupa before winter
ans, so that ihu lures out the first Frithlingswirme. He sees the pisi
and oleracea rather similar, but varies immensely. Noctua pyralina Esp., a green rampart, with a green head and
five white (according to others yellow) lines, the thickest of which over the
Backs, a thinner on both sides and again on both sides a different
half of the air holes, With white (yellow) dots on the back. vou *
taming against Dieke in front; at rest the first two
Rings tightened together and especially pointed upwards. she
is pretty helpful. The insect usually only occurs singly. On the other hand, Schmidberger calculates that it is numerous on fruit trees.
coming, to the noticeably illegitimate, the caterpillar lives here from the first
Vviihling to the end of May or beginning of June, she turns on the
Trees in a spun leaf into a short, dliulich-
white frosted pupa, from which after 24 days, i. h, in July, the moth
comes with red-brown or copper-colored forewings; on the latter,
at the front edge, near the tip of the wing, it is pointed inwards

Nordlinger, the little enemies. 19

  

 

 

 

    

 

 

forward, bluish-white arch, vieweg (treitschie) wants the Ranpe
also already found in September, suggesting a second generation
would interpret. The Trapeze Winged Owl, Maplecule, Noctua trapesina L. Ranpe
matigriin, with three faint white lines over the dorsum. and two
dark green and two sulphur-yellow lines over the feet; head
yellowish, with small spelled-brown streaks; upper body with black
cloves on a white background; black front teeth, green banch teeth
with black spot; very fond of killing other ramparts; in May and June
next to many forest trees on cherry trees, hazelnut trees ros ;
brazen etc. Pupae in or out of the ground, pupa with bluish frosting:
moths after 3-5 weeks (Bude July to Ochsenheimer, with me Au-
beginning of July). Léw still has the news that the barely crawled out
Small caterpillars at the end of April quite frequently on the bees in the just
developing flowers, most commonly on apple trees,
but also on plum wd Zwetschgenbiumeu. She should herself
staying in a hiding place of cinigew contracted blitteru,
also in one sohen, given by a thin new tissue, end
May or beginning of June 2 a bramben, blue-pollinated, 5 livia started
doll, Law speaks of a dfters very significant
by destroying flower buds. In fact I see them
Caterpillars also eat large holes in rosettes. Hervich-Schiiffer em-
not shaking off,

The Holm Owl, Noctua petrificata As a cylindric
Apple-green caterpillar, with a white, broad dorsal stripe, next to the small one
white dots sit, and under which both sits a white line
runs in May and June on two-seed and forest trees. To

6 — 8 weeks rather rare butterfly. Dic Steinkleceule, Noctua suasa Esp, ranpe in youth grassy
grit, later more red, with three siahi-blue riiekentinia and black ones
Points, summer and autumn on garriac plants, specifically
cabbage, garden lettuce, chard, garienmekle, sorrel, plantain, and

“ Different types of clover cte. ; dark brown pupa in a light earth spike,

Driver next May or June. The capsule owl, Noctua capsincola, Hsp. The earthy
large, fine black-dotted caterpillar has on the first
cut two blackish lines, on the following to each
side a crooked, blackish line, which all furrows
the rickety in angles, the tips of which are at the rear end
of the joints lie, unite. Behind every corner
stroked two whitish warts. Run over the rickety

 

   

 

291

a distinct, whitish line. Head light brown, shiny:
black striped over the forehead. belly dirty grey. —
Lives in the pods of carnation and lyelnis species
and eats the seeds. The caterpillar wire the information
after twice a year, mainly in the summer and in the late
autumn, available. From the first generation enistiinden
Augusifalier, from the September caterpillars, whose pupae in
The spring butterflies overwintered in their oval earth shell. Bouché at the garden milkings often signifies me
tending damage by emptying and puncturing the
capsules on. The extermination, he says, is difficult
you don't cut the ramps early enough. remark to them a-
to collect. Low, on the other hand, recommends sprinkling
of plants with burnt lime, ash or gypsum [wn
stop the falier from laying fish? or for trituration
the caterpillar?). -

Bonehé and Zenker lead after the negotiations of the garden ban
club VII]. 2, p. 208, T. 111. among the silky caterpillars also these
that of Noctua typica L. It is about 47 million long, smooth, black-
brown, head small, dorsal surface of last section slightly raised, from
white gray color. The first sideline, which runs through
ht, is red, bright yellow or also extinguished; after her follow zyvei
uh between the two are some darker points. she lives in
usually on cottonweed, grass, violets, etc., according to Westwood also below
»), on the banks of streams or Rainen, but she has herself
shown in 1830 and 1831 to be harmful to Wi cn by
they sprouting in various gardens in Berlin and the surrounding area
Angers of the same devoured. Presumably she did so, says Bouché, ans
Longer, because in those wet years the rest of the fodder was partly lost
The water was standing and the caterpillar had to climb up
Fatter to look for, the ranch overwinters and is mature in May. Pupa reddish-brown, with a fine terminal tip, lying in a box with grains
mixed tissue. moths of 18 million, body sparrows and 39 million winged
spammy, with brownish or light-grey, dirty-white barred ones
front wings, in July and August,
vig, as the caterpillar usually appears during the day
the earth under blisters, stones and the like, with the vine behind the
Helps voices and trellis latia and at night pursues her futier. In these shelters you have to take them during the day or on the pillars
visit at Lieht wad tidten. :
.
.

 

292

h) Eight-legged, yellow, bare, with brown spots,

The white-yellow owl, Noctua ochroleuca Giitze, as a straw-yellow 1'/,
Inch long, particularly small, brown-dotted caterpillar, mid-June
winter wheat hers. At the end of June the little doll. After three to four
weeks of moths. i) Eight-legged, bare, first and last joint with
clad in a hard, smooth shell. The grass owl, Noctua graminis L. 16 mill. Body-
long, 32 million leaf tension; Front wing brown-grey, with
a white three-pronged line and a line colored in the same way
Point. However, the basic color and the drawing are extremely
resourceful the former from reddish-yellow to dull grey-brown and
Drawing partially or almost entirely absent. - The insect
has been known since the earliest times, but in Germany
rare and preferably only significant in the northern. The flight time of the moth is given in different ways:
May, July, August. — The caterpillar is brown or blackish,
with five lighter stripes down the back. The first and
last joint with a hard smooth shell. The stripes meet at the end point. under each
(The strips are still several parallel over all
running rings, but they do not reach the incisions,
Posterior feet protruding beyond the end. This caterpillar
is notorious for her great devastations, you
occurs mainly in May and June. their food are
the softer grass types; Alopecurus, all cereals,
as well as the clover she shall leave untouched. Especially in or
in front of groves, or lying on mountain slopes, very dry
their presence seemed like wet wipes and a patch of grass. she
lives by the roots and gnaws at the sprouting ones
Blatter, without, however, consuming them entirely; also_ stirkere
She bites off straws. In a few days a meadow is
eaten and looks scorched. The caterpillars migrate
then from one meadow to the other, without the intermediate
to damage lying fields. In Germany she is only

 

 

a

293

 

cial, although near Bremen, on the Harz Mountains and in East Prussia

started badly. At the latter place she helped the Noctua

gamma destroy the linen. Her main ravages: judges. reportedly mainly in the north. In

Swedes she often becomes a nuisance, -by in her

followed by an almost terrible lack of fodder. In England,

Norway, Grinland hailed them all; also from

Russia and Curlaud report on their dealings:

heirs before; even to the Au > Where one is forced

have seen, because of their devastated Hen. from England

let land come. © Although after “Keller Schon im

Autumn and Frithling Available, your friend can imagine

but only at the beginning of June after the last handling felt

bar. The caterpillar is mature at the end of June or early July. She transforms on free earth or with a light one

Speared into a black, shiny cardboard, from which

After fourteen days to three weeks the moth appears. The insect multiply. sicli especially in dry and

were summers. In these two brnteu are allowed,

as such also with regard to the different flight

The crows should have a lot of grass

 

 

      

 

    

 

 

   

times will probably

 

eat caterpillars. Recommended as a means of extermination is vigorous rolling,
. * heavy liming, tilling or toiling and when
weather permitting, rapid drying of the grass and
then Kintriebeir you Sehweinen or Sthafeu, also probably
Gelli that the caterpillars should like to eat, other means,
under these digging to the caterpillars at Auswa
to prevent derm should have helped little. As sources to which these messages from Oken nnd
Others are given: Linné, amoen. ac, HD, p. 585. Swedish treatise: IV, 8. 51. It-
by U1, p. 342 Beckmanu's Gkonom, Library IL, p. 318 Besecke, about the grass ranch, 1787, Germar's Magazin IL, p. 837:
I, p. 434 Oken, Isis, 1831, p. 599 Otto Fabricins, Flora
from Greenland. Collar, harmful insects, 8. 118

 

 

    

,

    

 

 

 

 

 

294

k) Eight pair of feet, naked, last ring to point or stool
raised. The Flea Crane Owl, Noctua persicurive L. Has 18 million amount and 43 million wing voltage. head and chest
Abdomen ash gray with a few tufts. Forelegs deep wart with a round black stigma
init kum some white content, duuker, duller, hobler
Cone stigma and bright white renal stigma, in which a yellow-
light black semi-inoud. Hind wings with brown veins
and Mitteltleek, band-like black on the outside. of the case
Léw and Oken give way to the way of taking off the Kier
Kleeman a most strange description for which
we, the exact reporters, want a guarantee
let it be. caterpillar 45 million long, lighter or darker green, sometimes
sometimes fading into brown, running down the back
a yellowish line. Just behind the brown head stands
A bramble-green, square, yellowish-edged spot. on
the fourth and fifth sections are two consecutive
standing, reddish-green, triangular spots, on the
the last section has an oval fleek of the same kind; then
follows an elevation wid sudden incline against that
hind feet. Running under the riding line on both sides
two more black lines; but whitish from the belly,
dark grim shadow crooked strokes forward, up to dic
lower backline, and from the second sideline, just-
if schief, such lines backwards. Belly Dlassgrimn. The entire caterpillar has a diamond appearance. One finds
she easily from August to September, md although to Résel
on yellow beets, green peas, lettuce, hemp, tobacco,
after Bouché on Philadelphus, Hollander, sorrel and
linger on small potted plants, as well as Kuéterich and others
weeds; according to Treitsehke also on wild hops,
Lich after Léw on raspberries. Before winter pupation and
ter of the earth without web. Next May, June and
July development of the moth. body! 29 The significant damage to the often attached caterpillar
selin pot and garden plants mainly goes out
Bouché's information. He encourages searching the
Caterpillars as the only means of extermination. The Wing of Flame. the walnut owl, Noctua pyramidea 1. 20 million Body length and 48 million, wing span mg. Forewings dim-
brown with three yellow wavy transverse lines and a eyespot,
Hindwings strikingly rust-red, one heavily sporulated. The butterfly is lying
mid-July and lays its eggs on all sorts of fruit biiume, walnut, hazel
nus, currant bushes, even Flicder ad Fiburnim Tinus, except-
that of forest trees. The small Ranpe that appears in the aftersun makes a difference
two more hutches before winter, crawls into it and
does not appear again until the following Frithling. In May and June it is
Easy to spot on fruit trees because of its size. On Vibur
num Tinus I found her in March 1853 almost fully grown
wichshaus. She is 42 million when fully grown, long, sea-green, with head and neck
Not grass-green, A white line runs down the back, one
likewise through the white, black-edged, oval air vents. ‘Between the two stand in groups, over the legs also some w
white dots. Particularly noteworthy is the pyramidal shape
provided Ehéhuug, xu who rise the two last seats. Tue
Caterpillar is a bit lazy. According to Risel, she pupates into a on the ground
a few fallen flakes, which she pulls together around her tissue. To
about four weeks the Selunetterling appears. In any case, no large
dention. to devour by tapping,

The Hawthorn Owl, Noctua oryacanthae L. In May and June as
hilsche 38 million long caterpillar, quite high on fruit trees
different kind Ive basic color is sometimes white-grey, sometimes white, sometimes
inaun It is variegated and has, in particular, over the back down
brame diamond-like drawings. Head flat and at right angles against
sloping down the Ritekeu. On the penultimate paragraph a strong gehiirfie
Double hicker, she only eats at night. moths in August and September. Perhaps ex is this caterpillar that Borkhansen lists under aqu
and ant fruit trees, while Herrieh-Sehiitfer recently
tere soust only meets anf Kichen. 1) With alarm clocks or small alarms. The two-tailed gencule, golden plum moth, Noctua paranympha L.
than 46 million long ash grain, aten completely flat, front strongly thinned,
Slightly heavily curly caterpillar with raised tips on the fourth, eleventh
th and awilf heels and a long meat stool on the eighth. 296

In May on lower Aestew and especially rough root and stick
exclude pilaf, plums, stalks, hawthorn etc. ver
spins itself according to Borkhausen on the trees between leaves. The wooden pear, Noctua culta F, The 45 Mill. long green ones. black and white dotted, wavy colorful on the back, on the last
teh rings provided with three pairs of fleshy spikes, otherwise very
oxyacanthae reminiscent caterpillar.” also on plum trees,
Schi¢hen ete., in August and September, however geivist to sclten, wm cinen
to earn a place among the visual insects. The same can probably also be applied to lettuce and others
Mushroom-living caterpillar of Noctua maura L. be said. She will
according to Treitschke 63 million long, is almost the same thickness, has small yellow ones
Head; Body black-grey with whitish back line and similarly colored
Dyed it on the tenth ring two, on the fifth one
white thinker. - Air vent black, . °

 

 

 

 

 

  

m) caterpillar with only six pairs of legs, so spanner-like
(Semigeometrac Miibn.). The Wye Duck. Sweet Pea Owl, Noctua
ganma L. In Grisse and Fiir-
exercise very changeable, front
body brown-grey. — abdomen
yellowish gray with Huarbiischeu ant

    

 

the Ricken, Vordertligel on

rear
shiny metallic, gray, grim, reddish marbleict
and with lighter and darker transverse bands, indicated
by the sign of a gold or silver Greek
schen y or Jatein:: Ypsilons, that almost in the middle
the wing stands. French dark. Hind wings yellow-brown:
in front of the wreaths a wide, light black band. French
Underside of all wings rusty yellow. This moth is common throughout Europe. From the
Spring to autumn swarms nearer in crowds, yet
Freyer claims that July is the lowest. Even in
the last few days of October and November
you can still see him in the field and in the neighboring fences
fly around, so it's not surprising

 

edge a little tooth,

 

 

white

 

 

 

 

 

> if ile

 

297

Borkhausen in December and January under the roofs,
Garden houses, and Ochsenheimer in the first few

ling days found under tree bark, The moth does not fly

only at night, but also during the day and even in the

sten sunshine He swarms in large numbers on rocks

dern to sip the blossoms; self

send it

   

 

I settle down
t he never calm, but rather carries the birds into school
trembling movement. The female 'lays' her kier down after the heseateom
semicircular; flat at the bottom, covered with a knépfehay at the top,
full of pimples and ribs and pale 1 individually to the
Underside of the leaves of various garden and field plants
jerk, you shouldn't be much longer than 14 days
stay changed. The caterpillars that cuistchen from it, have
uur six pairs of legs, are
green, with individual dimes
Hiivehen,, bréunli¢hgrimem head. six very fine whitish ones
or yellowish Li

 

   

 

 

 

 

n itber
the chins, over the feet
leaves a yellow stripe. Air
léchev blackish grin. To
Breyer, the color of the caterpillar is very unknown
these came in dark green and brown. According to the reports from East Prussia, the Gamina
Caterpillars in the first four days after hatching
most drowsy. This uu probably obvious on any one
error. In the devastation they suffered in June and
Jnli 1735 judged in whole Districtén France,
ngwise the vegetable garden, di
wiistefen, and in which they nothing but stalks and leaf veins

  

   

dig and

 

    

est

 

 

   

     

were ¢s before they

left ; tibr they also lend all I

    
 

triichte, especially peas and beans, also hemp and
KI auletat the green bark of the seals
shed, strong home, even tobacco and all meadow herbs
were taken so badly by them that the cattle

     

rclisfelder in which

 

 

298

   

only feed necessities committee. The grain remained daima'
because it was already nale of perfection, to the point
missed. They only did it on the Haber, by the way
also futile attack, because he already for them
was too hard

Tu Ostpreussen, in 1828, the caterpillars destroyed
on the longest stretches the leash, in some fields to
Helped, in others whole. They ate the leaves starting at the bottom
a stem up. The eaten stalks gave none
long flax more, but tow. After the flax you suffered
Peas mostly, then beans and cabbage. Dech ate them
in case of lack of something better also grass, potato herb, heap e'
In Hesse, they destroyed the turnip seed fields:
in Italy they seized the Welschkorn, melon, even Maul. beerbloitter on. The caterpillars were near Nérdlingen (Freyer).
in July the 5th; the linen was her main and
Favorite Urang, although they also nettles, viper's bugloss,
Eat reps, hemp, thistles, siork beak, the news
from France and Prussia, the gamma
Caterpillars from an eroded field after a bi
ate and ate all the lower plants on their train,
they found, even grass. Even pulled on the country road
them in large numbers. They didn't dig up, only
of course, water. According to Ochsenheimer, the development of kerfes is one
very rapid, as he says, from spring to autumn. not infrequently three generations occur. The caterpillar
spins itself in a white web. The butterfly stays behind
Ochsenheimer and according to Résel' 2-8 weeks in the pupa. On the other hand, after Résel, the last generation overwinters in
Years as a pupa, but also in ki condition. Freyer lets (and his statement is very likely),
caterpillars also hibernate; after him these are the caterpillars
two generations; they will appear next May
in much smaller numbers or only individually. With the depicted voracity and multiracial wedge

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

OO —————— ee

a
299
the caterpillar is the great damage it causes, obviously
tend; because either the growths are completely destroyed, or .
. they become almost unusable, e.g. B, the leash on which . they adorn flowers, dam blitter and the immature capsule
eats, so that the plant only noel bad goods or
Werg delivers. Freyer reports that he was among the crowds at Nordlingen
Caterpillars have great mortality, a plague-like disease
have observed. Whole hours of dead caterpillars appeared
been overcast. In East Prussia one saw whole crowds
Krithen eat the caterpillars and the swallows the fall-
pursue ter. This is more understandable than that in Hessen dic
Accidents wn Reps mainly only took place there,
where there are no orchards and therefore no songbirds
found. With regard to the extermination of the insect,
hanptet, wet, short summers favored the development of the
Ranpe detrimental, and therefore leave for what follows
year little, while the insect spreads in long,
warm summers until well into the autumn
thus increase the reason for the devastation in the
next year. One must nnn, it is said,
in this case, in which stage of the Eut-
wicking the insect get through the winter and that
next spring to start this year by postponement
the seed to avoid the main development time of the caterpillar. But we don't only have the experience in the brands
the devastations just in the last planted hemp and
proven flax, but the above remarks

 

 

  

make it visible of the appearance of the caterpillar in Frithling
probably that it is mainly the summer generation

 

   

which devastates and is abandoned to the mau through spike crops. Bouché recommends tapping and destroying the lightly
falling caterpillars. Unfortunately, this is not possible with Lein
at. Otherwise, sharp, vertical cuts will be
protected fields recommended; in full

 

300

but a whole young field would be ripped off, Aberuten
and destroying the caterpillars so that at least the neighboring
known fields are to be shaved,

See Jacobson, dissert. de noctua gamma 1829. — Prussian provincial
blitter 1829. — Bir, Devastation of the flax in 1828 in East
Prussia fooled by the caterpillar of the Gantmacule and the grass ranch. Okew's Isis, 1831, p. 593, and 1832, p.144.—Poll's archive for Germans
Agriculture - January 1841. That the reed-leaves, N. typhae such as Cossus arundinis, in the
dwelling among reeds, with the reeds devoured by the Vich
cause this a budding disease, 2 seems to be
believe to limit when it appears in place. the insects closer
to deal with Save low by the way. 5) The Tensioners (Geometrae)

have as moths small but quite strong
the big head. Viihler-rather long fading,
often nicely double combed when married. Pretty much
*short rolling chisel. Body and abdomen supple, the
the latter rolled and only thinned out at the top. delicate legs. Large but shy, often with corners and wavy lines
ornamented wings. Spread flat or raised when at rest
directs. Your flight slightly hovering or very irregular
negligent, mostly at night. Kier plump, jerky, striped or
gtubig, seldom completely smooth, mostly grizzled. caterpillar usually ten feet; very rare
takes are: 12 or 14 legs; elongated, with mostly. il a rounded or heart-shaped head; sparingly
hairy or smooth. Significantly with excesses ete. and shiu
bright colors, she usually lives alone, makes bein walking
a cat's bow and likes to rest stretched out straight,
so that they are easily mistaken for a small stump of a branch

    

 

can

 

Pupa stretched, gradually diluted, with long snout
sheath, mostly simple or divided anal style, in which
y small hollow olme weaving. generally naked in a

 

301

Here, too, are the subgenera which anize-
puts have not to use. The old Linnaean distinction
of the species which have crested fissures, of which those not crested,
is pronounced in the endings aria and ata,

A preliminary, admittedly very empirical and not always on
cigener Anschawang-based point of reference for finding the clamping
caterpillar species may offer the following classification:

1) caterpillars with stubs, such as: hekers, stubs, hooks,

spikes, warts. a) warts , spikes. Hook; Body thickened towards the back: Geo-
‘metra prunaria. b) An itch and sticky swellings; third pair of hooks
Feet protruding: G. hmaria,

©) Two elevations and two warts; back diamond-shaped
wilssert: G. rhombotdaria. 4) Five pairs of tips, some of which are yellow on the sides: G. al-
niaria,

©) Ringworm rough and with small thorn tips and prickles :
G. pomonaria, bajaria, sericearia. 1) Few stools, hicker marriages or peaks. Wrinkled skin in the
pages namely:
a) with many dark longitudinal wavy lines: @. sambucaria,
#) laterally ciliated towards the back; griiti: G. cratargala. g) The elfie ring above hickerig. With several yellow, dotted ones
Cross-bundles: G. hirtaria. h) Two red tips above the anal valve, grin: G. psittacata,

i) Angular warts. Looking barred from above: G. pilosaria. k) Small pairs of squids from the fourth ring onwards: G. elinguaria,

1) Covered with many raised dots and bumps: G. cer-
vinaria. 2) Without excesses of any kind:

m) With a shiny black neck shield: G.”prunata. u) Brannrothe, back transverse bandages corresponding to the rings; G.de-
foliaria. .0) Earth colour, some dots on the back: G. fluctuata. p) Rothbrann, according to position matigriin and yellowish stripes :
G. clypeata. 4) Gritne Tensioner:
@ head with awei tips. dark green and white; the ling
after striped: G. vernaria,
A) Head ordinary, white longitudinal lines: G. brumata and
cerasata,
7) With a red dorsal line: @, rectangulata. 302

3) Hairy peepers:
¥) White and yellow, black patches: @. Grossulariata. 8) Bluish green, striped yellow and white, quite a lot
black dots: G. wavaria. a) Warts, points, hooks, body thickened backwards. The plant moth, Geometra prunaria L. Die on plums. Schiehen, Gaisblatt, Hazel, Flicder and several Wildbiumen, yes even
caterpillar living on broad plantain (Plantago major). in September
over the egg, reached before winter an inch long, their full
wealth, however, with 48 million Linge, not until the following May. | Zn
At this time the body appears gradually deepening towards the rear:
on the second and third rings there are four small toes across; at the
end of fourth ring two peaks; each at the iiusscrn side still from
vei spices deglitches; behind the two spikes a long outgrowth ;
on the rotten ring two warts, almost as large as the tips
the fourth ring, behind it a couple of puuki-sized condiments; two such
Pairs of pips after the sixth and a third pair on the middle of the
seventh ring; at the end of the seventh ring and a few such large Wirz-
chon, like that of the fifth ring; at the middle of the eighth ring again
two small cloves, behind these 7
couples, 2wish ihuew cin Answuehs, which also has two small
The middle warts on the ring dedicated below can be seen
bar; the rear ones the grisseru of the fourth and fifth ring gletehkom-
send, everyone from the Hoéekern standing in the middle of the eleventh ring
has one wir toe to one side and at the end of this ring are two more
spices; anf dom awolflen ring across four in a row, flat
so many on the tail flap; under this stand two fleshy bor-
stencils on the side behind each air hole a hen, under
Welehem and the air hole are still three others to be seen; head yellow-
light brown; body pale brown, here and there darkly shaded; on the abdomen
and the sides dark and light small strokes, also vin dark
Dranner Sirich from the end of the first ring; by same we die
follower. — In June of the 26-27 million long, 46-52 million third,
yellow or burned moths covered with many small cross-streaks. Kinfold or double generation? — Deserved in my opinion as
not often enough did we get a frivolous marriage among the harmful germs.

 

 

 

 

    

   

 

   
 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

   

      

 

}) A stool and hechy swellings; third pair
Hooked feet strikingly built. The wood pear spanu, Geometra lunaria FP. The caterpillar, up
32 million long, has a ciruuden, flat head, at the top with the length

303

awei dark strokes, The first ring with a stool, the seventh and
pay attention to the fact that they are wanted to look at and are quite squishy, ​​strikingly long
built thirds pair of hook feet; color according to the houseplant sch
different, sometimes bloody, sometimes pnrpmrrot, green-yellow, yellow cte, in June
and a second time in August and September on wild pear, pilaf,
Sloes, hawthorns, hazels, rose bushes ete, - salience, how
at the antecedent.

 

 

) Two elevations and two warts, ridges diamond-
formally known. The peach-bud moth, Geometra rhomboidaria Gitze (gem-
Maria Borkh.) caterpillar 40 million long, black, brimnish grey, on each
side, over the edges of all paragraphs diamond-shaped, soon light-
yellowish-grey, soon dark brownish-gray spots, on which in the
In the middle of the fourth to seventh paragraph, there is a small, black line
shows, in front of which there are always two light yellowish, gray lined elements. head slightly smooth forwards and divided into two chicks at the forehead,
light grit brown, with brown spots and black on both sides
cenclosed. On the first shelf, just behind the head, two
elevations, on each side of the fifth a black, raised wart. — Lives after black on obsi, especially stone fruit trees;
comes out of the egg in September and lays one egg before winter
Take off, then start her winter seblaf, from which she will return in April
who awakens, in June she reaches the great big, twenty lines,
However, she appears in two generations in the Jair, After Bralim finds
one often freezes them in winter and, if one nicks them, can
sitting moving on deu trellis. Their first food would be in spring
in buds and often in the bark of juugen' shoots. You dark burn
shiny, rather stout pupa lies in the ground. The 37-45 Mill,
exciting brown-grey, wavy moths after four or five weeks,
the first time at the end of June or July, the second time in August or September
temperature,

 

 

   

 

 

d) Five pairs of tips, some yellow on the sides. The alder moth, Geometra alniaria L. The sly, 64 million,
almost as long as a finger, rather changing bram- or (black) granc
Caterpillar has a small, somewhat divided head, hardly recognizable
posed, whitish dots and up
five pairs of points on the back, the first three of which are yellow on the sides
lich; between the pair of baneh feet and the pushers a yellow Lings-
strich, — She also lives on many forest trees, on $tein- and Kern
Obstbiumen and Haselanss, You meet them in June and July, then takes place

   
 

sehuitte, several like a string of pearls

 

 

304

the pupation, as it appears on the ground, in a very loose
Tissue from which it grows after four to six weeks, or in sparrows
only in the following Frithling, the 61 million. exciting butterflies, with
sulphur-yellow, reddish-brown sprinkling, on the edge many serrated flii-
developed. e) Ringed and with small thorn tips and
Staehelin. The fruit moth, Geometra pomonaria Esp. men
common moth 17 million body sparrows and 34 million sash clamping
tion, with black crested fibers of the whitish feelers. Collar and chins dirty white. - abdomen black
woolly, with long rust-colored and whitish hairs. Feet very shaggy. Fore wing dirty white, almost
sight. Four obliterated black-dusty transverse lines that
fourth bordered towards the hem with a white jagged line. French light. Hindwings only traces of at most two
Transverse lines and an indistinct mold stain. — female
flagello. Head front colored. collar whitish, sehwara ge-
siumt, Ricken black, with long white and rust colored
hair. Filer finely filiform, white and black veined
wriggles. Small black, rust-colored mixed fliglets. Feet Jang, white and black. Appears in spring. The caterpillar, 42 million long, according to Oehsenheimer almost
tuberous, whitish-grey, with smaller brown thorn tips throughout
and spikes standing on tangerine spots,
Margin of head, somewhat criss-crossed at the top, grainy and brown
mixes. The first ring bordered in orange yellow. Breast-
feet brown. Belly and caudal feet orange yellow. Also occurs light gray, almost without yellow. — In May, June
and July on most fruit trees, including mazel
perennials

 

 

 

  

According to several statements, this species would be elsewhere
fairly rare or rare. The Hiibner's see also wants
formation of the caterpillar does not really match my caterpillars. Nevertheless, after much swaying of the grisse, I have to

305

accept because of the caterpillars, you decided very much
common and harmful type of spam that I land here
always in abundance with the large and small winter moth
meet and also in the Hohenheimer Woehenblatt 1853,
No, 25, 8. 140 described as a Weichselspanner
not bajaria, but the current pomonaria. I
in this acceptance by Mr. Adolph Keller
Reutlingen encouraged. Him like me wanted raising the
moths do not succeed. My caterpillars are up to 43 million. long. sometimes dirty yellowish, sometimes brown, sometimes
md most common, black-grey. three
Surface is very rough from bursting

 

bearing warts and toes; four
particularly strong, so to speak, a wart
wreath, standing around the fourth, fifth
and sixth body ring, in between two angular,
light dashes. Small ones analogous to the others
Spices on all the other rings, a few stronger ones too
on the penultimate ring, like the two neighboring ones
Abschuitie is pale on the underside. The caterpillar does not search how many relatives it examines
Bkittern to hide, but usually sits freely
twigs or petioles. It is found on all fruit
bitumen, walnut, but rarer here, roses, hazels,
Linden, generally on the bitumen and straws, whereupon
the winter moth live, whose constant companion she is. —
She reaches her full growth about ten days later than
the small winter moth and goes about with the big one
Winter moth from the Biéumen. — The doll that I always
perished until 17 million long, 5.1 million wide, black-
brown, with broad crested fibrils and forked terminal
top. Since the woman is unwinged, must against it
harmful insect create yon 'Theerringen in the first
Frithjabr be effective. Also, the caterpillar which
Stick-like on the young wood, easily and successfully
knocked off. Nérdiinger, the little enemies. 20

 

 

 

 

306

The sour cherry moth, Geometra bajaria Hiibn. |
The 17 million long, 34 million wide, grey, rusty in places
colored and crosslined male moths
variable in color and more accurate only with much circum-
speed to. describe. The white hay wingless, rust-
coloured, white-spotted especially on the sides, with warts
has a thick tuft of hair at the end of the body
carrying. — The moth develops after most
Data in October and November, according to Ratzeburg
especially in the spring of the year. The caterpillar, on fruit trees, is
2% mill. long, now lighter, now darker grey, even
pale yellow. The. front rings thicker than the’ itbri-
gen. On the fourth, fifth and sixth lies cin rhom-
Boidal whitish spot edged with black. On the ,
Fifth, there is a square wart on each side, the one in front
white, black on the back. In addition, some fine
black condiments, two of which are raised ‘on the
form a bulge on the eleventh ring. late May or early May
June adult. Transformation in a cave in the ground. - This
Spanner is one of the meanest, according to Herrieh-Schiiffer too
Regensburg in some years even more frequently than defoliaria. I don't know him exactly. As a means against him and the
previous seen the tar belt, shaking off or tapping off. ’ Léw also mentions the stone fruit moth, Geometra sericearia
Borkh., which initially light brown as a caterpillar, finally darker sci and through
delicate, even darker longitudinal lines appear streaked. In front on the riieken
a brown-yellow spot. Head divided at the top, dark gran, selwarz
caught. Body heels severely incised, dotted with black. on
the fourth and fifth rings a stool on each side, brownish-yellow in front,
is edged in black at the back. Kilfier heel with two small tips. Pectoral feet brown. Bauebfiisse and Nachsebieber gran. In May on plant
menbiiumen. This note is, I remark, Borkhausen's natural
layer of European butterflies, V, p. 212. To
Treitschke VI, 2, page 37, and according to Herrich-Sehiiffer is the serial
cearia Borkhausen's none other than the above bajaria. Still believed
I use Borkhausen's statement as a contribution to the knowledge of the caterpillar

* from bajaria, not to be allowed to put aside. 307

f) Few hickers, squats or peaks, pleats
skin in the sides,

The elderberry moth, Geometra sambucaria L. smooth caterpillar,
with wrinkled and wrinkled skin on both sides, over the back
Two stools quickly appear, which are already on the young caterpillar
present siid; also on the anterior and latter rings are located
the same, but shorter. color dark brown or blackish gray,”
The ramp along the whole length with many dark brown wavy lines
drawn to look like a scrawny Banmaweig; comes
already out in summer and hides 20 different times before winter, *
In May she reaches her whole length, Sf Mill, Lives anf Birnbiumen,
several species of Prunus, but mainly on, elderberry, willow ete. Pupation in May, in loose shell; the sehdne, big, yellow,
slightly tailed moths in June or July. — Seems not himfig either *
enough to threaten danger a. ,

The hawthorn moth, Geometra crataegata [. The 28 million long caterpillar extending 2u different times of the year and up in the
November hincin anf apple, pear and pilane meubiums, sloes and
Hawthorn to the touch, has red, flatly raised above, hollowed out in front
Head, with prominent forehead and upper lip. rings at rest
schr unequal; The skin is felted on the sides, two on the sixth ring
Héeker overgrown at the root; on the sides of the three letate rings
a kind of French; anus in three fleshy peaks, of which the
outer are provided with a long, bristly horn and under the
protruding schivanza flap ; the third pair of breast bites particularly long:
in addition to the usual pair of building feet, there are two pairs
tighter feet on the seventh and eighth rings. The caterpillar is in its youth
green, sometimes after the last minute, brown, my apple tree
men called mplare always fell through their firm flesh to me
and the beautiful rich green color; they turned into a rose-
red, almost opaque web, The sulphur-yellow moth, with a
A pair of rust-red spots on the anterior margin, appearing after a fortnight
or next spring. That according to Stephens the moth three to four
Times a year to appear: April, June, August, October, indicates
triple generation. — Fairly common everywhere — tapping,

    

 

 

 

 

 

g) The eleventh ring above hikerig; with several yellow ones
punctured qner bands,

The cherry moth, Geometra hirtaria L., The 44 mill. Long
Caterpillar from July to September on cherry and other Prunus
species, even sloes, also on many forest trees. she will
more than two inches long, almost cylindric; head slightly split

 

almost cirund, pale red, dotted with black; Color changes with age
and food; usually she is brownish-brown, sometimes reddish-brown, ash-
gran, selien red; flesh-colored along the whole length, but overall go-
touches Anterior edge of the first ring yellow, the fourth to eighth likewise
chen the elfie, spiky ring at the top, with a yellow, dotted cross
tape; Head, belly and sewing slide vosenroth. During the day you sit
usually lodge in the furrows of the bark of trees, to which they closely resemble
see. Fourfold warning before the relatives taking place in the autumn
Young in a single cavity, in which the thick, very hairy one is grey
bestiiubie, wavy moths from 16 million. body lengths and
39 million wing tension develops before winter. At Degeer kany
a moth only emerges from the pupa in the second spring. Usually call
him the first March or April, yes often a few warm February days
out. One then sees both sexes united in voices. Wianden ete. to sit. Several serif plates have this ubiquitous insect in
set the series of harmful ones, but without positive evidence for its
to teach malice. h) Two red peaks above the anal valve, green. The grass moth, Geometra psittacata F. On apple,
Cherry trees, roses etc. Smaller, very slender, yellow-green , below
dark green tensioner. The yellow-green color begins in the front in the sides
shape of two stripes that thicken towards the back and that's it
on the fourth ring cover the entire upper half of the body. Under the
Anal valve two red tips. In May, a second time in July and
fear. Although frequent, certainly also without great importance. i) Angular warts. Dispensing grilled from above. The pear moth, Geometra pilosaria Hitbn. Lives on Birnbinmen,
Apple trees, stalks, hawthorn, the long rampant coffee-brown . but also more gray or rust-colored, with cekigen from the third joint onwards
warts A double, fine, dark-
brown linic, both sides of which are black, orange-colored eyes
points sit. A dark burned line runs crookedly from the side
the following leuk, 50 that the upper side has a latticed
th reputation. Comes out ring-shaped (in the manner of the ring stretcher
around thin branchlets.) with long brown hair covered red-
brown, thin-skinned cherries and crawls with the first flowers
out, according to Schmidberger, at this time equal to the frost strainer. I
she found all yellow with numerous black eye-spots. Selimidbergern

   

309

waolye the ants follow her very much. July pupation. moth ian
next March to May, Not a lot and even after Schmidberger, the
lists this fruit tree insect as only slightly harmful, teh
hardly believe that, as he supposes, the extermination of the egg-
inge Leita pruning the trees in the spring lends a hand. The dark
The color of the egg rings makes them not so easy to notice:

 

     
   

 

k) Small pairs of wiry toes from the fourth ring on. The honeysuckle moth, Grometra elinguaria [. Kine caterpillar, that
mun winters and half-grown in May on honeysuckle (Lonicera Capri-
folium), mebveren fruit trees, 2. B. pears, sloes, but also anf
woodland trees. Grey-brown or mottled mixed grey-brown, yellow
and rithlich; manehe aueh with grinfich. On the first three paragraphs
to the side a few hollowed-out brown slashes, also mostly cin
brown side stripe on the seventh heel, otherwise small dark ones
Pairs of warts.. Up to 46 million. long, but always very compact,
Head flat, triangular on top, with dark brown cross-streaks. Light tissue between moss or leaves; in this the lively,
°U mill. long, shiny, reddish-brown pupa, which after two weeks
usually in July or August, the moth develops. a second-
times, and then more frequently, the caterpillar appears in August; this aberwin-
tert in half a crack in the earth,

1) Covered with many raised dots or buttons,

The mallow moth, rose poplar moth, Geometra cervinaria
Hiibn, The last 46 million long, dull green, with many raised ones, a hair
The caterpillar covered with bearing dots or knobs has pale green
Head, notched pads with tiny yellowish folds in each joint and
yellow forefeet, resting very stretched out or coiled
roll. She lives in June and July on the blitters of mallows and ales
thaca, Ks are usually said to be seldom more than two on a stalk
find caterpillars. transformation into a light web, either un-
ter butter or under a little earth cover in a proportionate way
small, shiny, dark-brown specimens with two short terminal tips. butterfly
usually after three weeks, — cutting off or reading off the tendrils. m) Without certificates. with shiny black pronotum,

The plum moth, Geometra prunata 1, as Ranpe vom
May to July on all fruit trees, especially plums, also aut
Staehel and Johannisheren ete. Contracted by him in between
Khittern alive. Ramp 34 million long, sometimes grin, sometimes gran, sometimes brown,

 

   

 

310

 

A broken red line on each side. Over the back, up
the artery, there is a row of red, sometimes brownish spots. se reddish. Pronotum shiny black. transformation between
blemish Butterflies July, September. meaning as before. un) without exceptions; brown-red, corresponding to the rings
back ties. The great frost moth, linden moth, Geo
metra defoliaria L., is found in the plain as in the high
mountain. The menu of 14 million bodily sparrows and 41 million Flag tension has in relation to the physical body
large, dimue Fliigél. The front yellowish white, yellow,
also brown, dusted with dark grey. Against the front edge
in the middle a black distinct point. On Y, Ent
a brown transverse band extending from the root. an
liches jagged on ¥, inside the border of the seam. hind wing
pale yellow or off-white, with a granary central spot and
grey. antennae sclinal, carved,

females, 11 million long, 4 million thick, completely unfl-
yellowish-white with long threadlike filars. Breast-
back with six black spots, other body wid
Legs with a lot of black spots. The moth, the Méunchen, diegt towards the end of October
and the November jiber, especially in the years when
even the little Frostspanuer is humbly. So e.g. B. in German
years 1852, 1853. He flies in orchards and wilds:
mainly at night, but also in the evening and on mild days
self. afternoons. Flight is then not sustained
and slightly floating, as in the small Frostbutterfly, but
straight out and quick, He likes to get down on the ground
fall down in the dead leaves, under which he hides himself
also like to rain and wihit
not reached before winter, later to his winter qnarticr. The reason for the lack of wings in the female is the
wise this smear of the common frost
spiumers dulich. As we have seen, you are a woman from Ki

 

 

 

     

 

 

   

when cr his end of life

 

 

 

 

 

 

walk

EEE

3it

limited. But it adjusts this quite well, it's easy
and quick with his long legs. Especially fell 1
on that with me in captivity even on glass
was able to climb. female lays when it
has reached a tree and has crawled up,
his Kier (page 314, fig., b.) individually or to some
together on buds or branches, often with those of
small Frostspanmers together; it is supposed to be 400 pieces
can lay. The little cherries are elongate, yellow-white, pointed
orange-colored, noticeably larger than that of the small frost
spanners. The Réupemarriages sate the kiss in fine springs
mid or before mid-April, before the cherries
bloom and hide under the scales and between
the flower buds and the unfolding buds. she
are darker on the back than on the sides. the awei
Pair of ventral fissures still quite dark; yet recognized
one in them quite well the large frost caterpillar,
which are opposite, d. H. in May and June aut
a wide variety of fruit and nut
men finds and by the way, as well as there <¥
where the harshness of the climate the fruit trees”
no longer let it flourish, on a crowd
Forest trees and shrubs, oaks, lime trees, beeches, Else-
berries, rowanberries, cotoneaster, hawthorn, sloes, roses,
hazel bush ete. They bite each other, they say, almost the same
Teach the buds like little Krostspanner
but stays more in their outer parts, rolls
and doesn't get tangled up easily between kitters, but
sits freely in a slack sling position on the
Lanb, This is her usual food, but eats her
also, just like the little frost moth, the grieving church-
schen unilaterally and that's why they are called in the area
by Zirich Kellenmacher. Mainly she eats
night, but one often sees them during the day with
schifligt. — Is the spell shaken so that they descend-

 

  

 

 

 

 
  

 

  

 

312

slirzt, sv she reels back like all peepers on hers
very coarse safety thread up. In warm years, from the beginning of June, in kithlen, like
1853, from mid-June to about mid-July (not August, wic
Résel indicates), so always a bit later than the gray Span-
ner, she goes into the ground, Aueh one hits while the
small ones already going from the bitumen, still very young large ones
frosispamm caterpillars. She spins her hollow with little
gene thread and becomes the 43 million long, short, red-
brown doll, with a kind of "ears" and short, but
sharp apex, antennae sheaths thick and striated
(Mimichen). With regard to frequent occurrence and
The great Frostspuner is inevitably caught up in the liquid
the little one. - Its destruction happens at the same time
that of the latter through the Theerring. 0) Ole selection

 

lise, some points on the Ricken. The Mecrrettigspanner, Geometra fluetuata L., is a small,
million long, slender, often earth-brown, but in their primary color
slantingly changing caterpillar, with a few dots on the back
taut and mostly sitting stiffly stretched out. On horseradish, however
also after Treitschke on Koll, several flower varieties, even plum
and forest bins. Jeh found them in abundance in October and even November. The handsome, 33 million width, 15 mill. long, grey-white, with three eyes:
in May of the following
the end of the year on the branch black, brown ringed on the chin
th doll lying in a delicate web on the ground. Treitsehke gives
vine another generation, of which the ranch in June, the moth four
Woehen nach (in July) appears. You look at the moth very cunningly
zivunen and houses sit,

 

 

   

Pp) Without excesses, reddish-brown along the length matigreen
and yellowish stripes. Low mention of a plum moth, Geometra clypeata, ¢
as a hairless, red-burned caterpillar, with a dull longitudinal stripe on the
yellowish dorsum and sideways with delicate lateral lines, over which black ones
Points stand, also in each side with a wavy,
whitish-yellow, broken longitudinal line dies on Baneh, in spring
and at the beginning of the summer aul Zwetsehgeubaumen, settle in
the earth, pupate wd should only be laid out in the best spring. she
is unknown to me, but I can't find any information about it anywhere. le a
313’

q) Without ID; great tensioners. Frithling moth, Geometra rernaria L. The caterpillar, 29
million long, with its head divided into two réthliche points, is light-
green; A dark green line runs across her back. to walk
two cinfold or also fine double white lateral lines; joints with
lined with white lines or dots. On pork, plum,
Apricot and forest bitumen and shrubs, but not hard enough
to earn great observation gu. Twice a year, once in the spring
ling and Frithsummer, for the second time in midsummer and autumn. ¥
Totatere generation of Treitschike doubted. Pale Grane Doll, apple-
green moth. The little Frost Spanu, green Span
ser, Geometra brumata L. Das Munchen GB
is a brownish gray moth, with
large, delicate, solid to look at
wings, on the front of which fine, dark,
jagged transverse lines run. Hind iris gran, almost without
drawing The female is much stiffer of body, hind-
body large and filled with eggs; has short, unr small lobes
forming wings, over which a darker transverse stripe goes,
Incidentally, intro white-spotted leg with brisk walk
cinrichtet, because the female is outside
Siand to fly >>

This probably most harmful for the Obsibiinme
lusekt appears in the lowlands as well as in the high mountains and up
up to Sweden, everywhere in devastating numbers. —
The moth only comes from the end of October due to the
vember, Gfters even in snow and frost, who only dic
Cool is not significant, still on the ground in December,
In ordinary

 
 
  
 

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

 

'en appear Naehziigler still in
the following Frithling, after the snow has gone. last
teres is not after Spiijahyen as in 1852 and 1853
the case; rather, the mild forewinter began here
smell the Ans! hen of all moths before winter, and indeed

 

one sees the male moths everywhere in Wildern and Fel. then with the usual bad weather, even on a bright day around-
latier, — Kinige Falier demand at my bellowed

    

 

 

B14

window to fly towards the light. The crowd was then
so big that even non-understanders noticed it. - Already in
On November one found a few dead male moths, because
their purpose in life is, as with other insects, with the
past copulation completed; but this one was as before
said, was greatly promoted by the mild early winter. At the end of December pretty much everyone was dead and found it
dozens of mimic small and large frost
folds at the broad foot of strong trees, particularly distinct
lying dead on the green moss of Kichen. — Linger
no doubt the fertilized ones live, by nature init the
Females in charge of laying their eggs. But we ask
First of all, how does mating take place? — The floor
rising females are looking for the next Heeke or the
to reach the nearest tree trunk and climb on it
up. They will soon have Minnehen, because the
Because of her fluttering about is none other than a woman
chen, Now you meet her in the copulation, like that
that when you have a fluttering little man with your fingers
takes away, the female goes along with it. in short-
the female is in a position to vou her Kiervorrath
Sell ​​200-300 pieces. A few favorable, i. H.
mild days and evenings fir the female towards his
lay off whole brood. It sticks the same to the tips
i of the branches, on buds or dar-

under the Ringelwiiehse u. the like,
g short usually in the immediate
bare neighborhood of the later

nourishment of the resulting-
the Riiupchens, in case of emergency or
accidentally only on thicker wood,
the trunk of the trees, or at
standing or even fallen off
Unfortunately, initially

  

 
 

jinen, before crawling out

 

red-yellow, very small, through

 

B15

their puncture au cin Mohukérnchen reminiscent Kier
chen (a) points individually laid. However, Ratzeburg saw them
also combined in small bangs of 3-20 sticks. It
usually includes a petty search, om
to uncover them on the buds over the winter. Just
in years like 1852 and 1853, the task is not
difficult. Rather, init got involved with all confidence at the time
extremely numerous occurrences of the. Frost tensioners for the
Frith years 1853 and 1854 prophesy, like this also unfortunately
realized only too much, The blissful bitch
‘puts its eggs on all fruit trees, especially cherries
see, bi and plum trees, apple tree, walnut
tree, on Weissdorm, Schlehen, Hasecluuss, roses,
hedgerows and the forest bees. that there is
put, as Schmidberger thinks, especially those with Blithen
select budded trees, is in, the circumstance,
that it is unwinged and must be content to walk
only to have reached a tree trunk at all, hardly
suppose, if it is further correct, that the trees
the later kick out and start to bloom, especially
the apple trees suffer less from eaters, so should they
this fact not from the careful selection of the trees
to be derived from the part of the elegant female, but
from the fact that the lingers are closed on such bitumen
Buds resist the delicate réupchen better when
but as devastation unfolds,
grow than earlier and therefore slower driving ones. With the warmth of spring comes life
the kicinen eggs, near Berlin, however, would go to Ratzeburg
the Réupchen only get along in May. They are indeed
At first so small and delicate that you hardly notice it. At first the réiupehen is gray; after the first hearing
it becomes light and yellowish pale green and it siches
white, barely visible lines across the back. The head
black and behind it such a spot. To
the second day the sweat disappears, the basic

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

  

 

 

 

 

     

 

316

color becomes greener and one notices the light ridge lines. After the last Huutung, wit
which they lengths of an inch
reached is the base color
sometimes yellowish green, sometimes dark
Jer, the head in two rnnd-
curved halves separately,
dull yellowish or shiny
light brown. A darker, delicate back line, next to the two
others, whitish-yellow ones, and among which there are cine
extremely fine, brighter located, zicht over the whole
body. Luftlécher, below the last line as dark
points appearing. — The Réupchen, barely out of his
school, seeks by its smallness and tenderness,
which escape the ordinary eye, under the scales
and especially between the floret and the her-
emergingu Blithen protection, those who at Lanb-
buds sit, gnawing at the tender sprouting blitch
those of flower buds like to bite their s¢
loin buds hincin, often coming out of the wound
a sweet juice flows out. Moreover, they search through
Twisting of the bud parts under each other from rain and
weather zn mountains. fs can change as a result
the bud often unfolds imperfectly. Still ko:
men many, especially flower buds, for development and
the caterpillar finds itself constrained between flowers and foliage
But looking for shelter also eats into one's own soul
bloom in. If the weather is favourable, you will grow
Blithe and Lanb fast, but so does the Ranpe, albeit
she eats violently only at night, makes vasche word steps in the
growth She usually curls up for her protection
animal to each other,

 

  

 

 

  

 

 

 

   

 

sheet together, or spin a few B
or hold if their number is very large and:-they whole
Have defoliated cherry trees, in the withered Kuospensehuppen
and remnants of the Blitfer, If she has no hiding, so as sic
usually at-the-downside of the bitter, you cunning

  

 

—
see

finally, apart from the rough skeleton of the leaf, nothing gritnes
in a tree, she especially likes to gnaw the green ones
Kritchichen, as in the Lenninger Thal in 1853' almost all
Cherries hollowed out on one side. yes even
like me, a very good observer, Mr
Schott zu Lenningen, insured, eats them in destructive
Wise the female blossom of the nut tree. The little ones
scolds her and the beech trees in the forest are im by her
eroded the largest scale, thus destroyed. would she
on the cherry trees only the laggard none
Shredding cherries that fall off later and from the
Bhithenblittern are given when the tires intended for
ten already revealed and pea-sized or even larger
standing, the disadvantage would not be so great; alone that
Eater just prefers the latter, eats a big hole
down to the still very soft core and destroys all the more
Kinger on cherry after cherry, the more cin wet Frith-
jal, like that of that time, the rapid ripening of the cherries and
the lignification and hardening of the green parts is accelerated. This is particularly striking because the
Ranpen not only completely eaten leaves and leaves,
but also on cherry trees deep into the soft green
Shoots have eaten into it, leaving the young shoots
hung down as if from a twig (Rynchites
conicus, 8. 139) cut off or scalded by frost. The bare Binme as seen in 1852
frequently on the Bergstrasse, in the years 1853 and 1854 in
Covering masses and entire terrain in Lemninger and iilm-
lichen Théilern see, see from a distance how
Beseureis and the cherry trees turn red, sohes of the
smudged brown bud scales and leaf remains. —
If a tree is eaten bare, the ranch ran around
and look on a neighboring tree or on bits
Nalumg. Is it entirely lacking, s0 they go last when
they are only partially grown, for reference
into the earth. If they are twice as late, they die

 

 

 

 

318

from hunger (1827). In the year 1853, hardly at the beginning of June, otherwise
soon after mid-May, one sees cinzelne, not just that
from the wind and theg]. fallen, but intentionally
descending on thread from the bees, now
Hey, adult caterpillars, we leave it there,
whether, how. it is claimed that the cool weather that occurs
Caterpillars: destined to leave the Baim a little earlier, further,
whether it is the stragglers who are the stragglers-
Deliver Schnetierlinge in the following Frahling.—The
descended caterpillar now penetrates into the earth to cine
appropriate place to pupate. Lacking
you on earth, such as B. in captivity, so pupated
you too olue the same. . In the open air, however, 'as remarked,
'does she superficially dig in an inch or two [?] ran,
and makes an oval one with a few threads. lined
mind. Will she at this work, and in particular also
nor until she become a pupa; from nicer, not much wetter
Weather permitting, few have accidents. It is there-
partly because of the warm, dry weather
of June and July in 1853 that in late
year as many frost butterflies came to enfaliag. the
Caterpillar transforms in her gchiéus after a short time
(how many days?) into a short, thick, yellow-brown Pitpp-
chen, at the pointed end with two 'little ones at the end of one
Stylus standing tips that together almost the shape
form an anvil. The doll lies up to the
Late autumn unchanged. At this time of year, however, the
Just snap off the chrysalis of the pupa, crawl out of the
Dollhouse, breaks through the dirt, sits down at one
Trunk, a clod or the like, um, at least that
little man, giving his wings the necessary space to
grow*, ‘and flutters the next evening
around. The great harmfulness of the winter moth goes out
the above to Gentige out. The trees, her
Blossoms and leaves, often even all of them

 

319

Schosse Leraubt, only miss again with the Johannistrieb
to greet oneself with enthusiasm; for is also this second instinct
in young trees lastingly and often longer than the
lingsshot, it is only in adult bienes
in short, as Schmidberger fared, so died in the
Lenninger Thal many, two years hitter cinander, from Span-
ner devastated cherry trees from; a part went to Grond
or already suffered a lot because the wood that was driven after
. was killed by the following winter. in 1853
I raised the dureh the small wd large frost moth
and the fruit spammer alone in the cherry yield
twenty-seven “communities” in Uer Kirehheimer Gegeud
damage done. It amounted to roughly 170,000 fl. For more details see Hohenheimer Wochenblatt from 6. Anger 18:
No, 32.' ,

Inhibitory influences. When the ground is severely frozen
the moth hidden in the pupa can of course change
not developing and the developing kanu
perish. In addition, Schnidberger wants to be observed
have that strict kilt and wetness killed the moth; des-
half, he says, the females like to scratch themselves by
hide between willow and straw trusses,
Gen Ratzeburg says that even a kilt of 12°
after the ground has been thawed again, the frost butterflies
appear funny and lively, Sclunidberger derives it from
Previous alternate wet and cold weather 'off,
that he found many females dead at the foot of the voice (nan
compare what about here 8. 314 was said). It's a shame that
he does not indicate whether these females might already have their eggs
had filed or not, because in the first case could
she, as in December 1852, after the fulfillment of her last
died an unnatural death. The Kiern sotl, which is easy to understand, smooth cis on the
Twigs become harmful, but Kilte even more so
creeping out tsaria Rémpchen. This is the reason why
according to Schmidberger, a cold May you always

 

  

»

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

320
very desirable for tree owners. I want the attached rule
not examine closely, but I believe that if a wet
cold May is desired, the reason even more
teneren dropping of the flowers as a result of drought
be sought than in the hindrance of the activity of the
caterpillars; this is at least evident from the year 1853,
in Welehem trot which extends into June
the wet and cold weather the Ranpen only all about well.
wrapped. Viehnehr seems the opposite Meimmg
Rouehé's that the Ranpen especially in cold springs with
their rapid development of flowers and buds on
pernicious! ven enemies at
remain the most untrustworthy, the more natural wd plausible
Even at the time of the herds, during which the
according to Schmidberger sensitive to prolonged rain
should be weather, dirfte ilmen in the fact that sic
mostly in rolled leaves, spun leaf
biischeln etc. hidden echoes and shooters, the Witte-
tion can not easily harm something. — Understandable
but seems that persistent, greatly softening the ground
rainy weather the insect at the time of development of the im
pupa lying on the ground become very detrimental to the moth
can. Besides the inanimate moths, the winter moth has
Elements also enemies in the series of animated creatures. Small birds eat its wier and many of them
feed themselves and their Jamgen preferentially in May and June
wisely with frost moth caterpillars. Ground runners (Calosoma) and,
according to Schmidberger, ants fetch them from the building
men. Ratzeburg names four enemies from among the
disturbing parasites (ichnewmonen). Black leaves her vou
be pursued by little mosquitoes. Let's add the
Bugs and even murder cats that you could in 1853
the number of them appears
Enemies not small. However, daily experience teaches us
nevertheless, that all together are not enough to make one through

   

 

   

ten work, also there

    

   

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

OIL

321

extraordinarily beneficent Uistinde into life
to prevent proliferation. We have in the choice of Massregen, which against
the frost moth be seized, especially to
. remember that it returns every five years. It
it is understood, however, that on cine regularity of his
Kinkehr durehaus is not to be counted, rather he if
circumstances favored him, two years behind cinander
appear in the same mass and then another
number of years can only occur in small numbers. Herein lies the fact that a preparatory means should be cheap
must, in order not to grow to capital 2u, in the case of
Eater stays away for a long time, and at the same time therein lies the
Difficulty in choosing appropriate remedies. First of all, I believe, is that
Fruit tree grower who first creates a property or something like that
adds to recommend that he spit sprouting varieties
plant. These alone develop quickly enough not to
to succumb in a gluttonjahy. My prospect finds
their confirmation in the statements of intelligent tree owners
of the Len
ninger Thals, further in the obvious perception,
that the cherry, which has been at the time of alternately
sprouts at the rough beginning of spring, most of the feeder
suffers, the pear tree less, the apple tree the least,
although the caterpillar like each of these bees as food
seems to find angelenin. So spite, swiftly kicking out,
fruit tree varieties that long outgrow the caterpillars! je shé-
at the same time the buds through tightly fitting scales
of the variety remain closed until they sprout, the
better. On such trees must very many caterpillars,
because they already with the development of the Frihbiiume from the
Eggs come, prowling defenseless among the branches,
partly starve, or enemies, probably also the Witte-
tion, and when later the buds develop
fold, focus more on the foliage and some blotches

Nérdlinger, the little enemies. at . 322

restrict. On the other hand, Aut Sriih and slow-growing varieties
they have time to comfortably eat one eye to eat the other. One should also choose varieties that are suitable for our climate
enjoy a strong vegetation. Those who are
is too cold for us and therefore a short miserable,
also drive manchinal freezing Schésschen, suffer from
in turn Therefore, also, involving the gimstigen
Activity of the sparrows, in the years 1853 and 1854
many cherry trees, the worms and in the garden land in-
outside of towns and therefore quick and strong
sprouted, little damaged, while the trees
on the mountains kab] and stood there red. Old Biume, the
only expel spirlich, one replaces with times
boy, if you don't want to go any other way than at Kirschbiéiumen
allow "rejuvenation" to take refuge. Voice finally
those on high ground in the barren, dry soil of
Allmanden rooted, several years in a row need
have suffered are only due to deep loosening of the soil
and bring fertilization back to strength in early summer. (In late summer and autumn, fertilization is no longer allowed,
hooked or even watered, because otherwise the young
Shoot no longer before Wiuter ripen and the whole tree
could freeze to death.) To bleed the bald-eaten beasts
to leave, does not appear wnziveek- in wet vintages
moderately, but in dry years, with poor growth
thum of the bawn and on dry bids not riithlich,
for here is sap in the regeneration of the lost-
desired organs. The use of beacons in which the moths
should fly is with the Frostfalter as with other Taltern,
however all the more unsuccessfully, as with him the females at all
cannot fly, and, albeit a great many males
perished in the fire, but still sufficient enough
would exist for fertilization, but there is this one
Lack of wings for something else, namely the main
ste means of planning at hand; the application of adhesive

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

wrestle for the Bauni tribe. That this means, belongs in
applied, has full effect, about it
experience leaves no doubt. You cut it
the little-winged females the way to the crown of the tree
off, so they can't get their kidneys in the natural place,
the buds or twigs, shedding and those who she
unia deposit on the trunk are easy to destroy. it
layer this ~deterrent by so-called tar rings,
The tar binder, the tar is applied directly to the bark
worn in the form of a ring, it penetrates the bast
and the tribe would suffer; therefore ‘the tar-
ring a basis of melw times summed up
in good condition, tight and unbroken by a cord
or paper bound with wire. Also to
Smooth, thin spruce and poplar ends peeled off the juice time. bark
can be used for such strips. The approximately
existing gaps between the ring and trunk are the former
mmbound, or afterwards, with clay, lime or the like]. to fill out well, the tar to be used when it is thin
is liquid, one has ¥, to Y, to add resin in the heat,
so that he can get his body. You have to handle it hard
apply wide, and know the first layer of paper
has been sucked, renew, even during the bratzcit
des moths every few days, d. H. freshen up as often as the
Mass threatens to lose its stickiness 2u, so do the moths
to be punished for it. That also otherwise none
opportunity, e.g. B. over bushes or on stubs left
Tree supports to get on the trees must be available
may, trust yourself. Substances that are too thin
like cart grease, oozes off on sunny days
nd damage the tree, Schmidberger settled for the same
Purpose to make wooden boots, of which cine laterally
drawing made according to his description,
The foot b appropriately still extends in
the ground. The tar is
sims a anf deleted. He stays when a-

 

 

  

 

 

    

 

 

   

——

   

 

328

times the wood has been permeated by it, eight to
ten days sticky. Regarding the to be used
A lot of tar are therefore advantageous for these boots. But Schmidberger had to buy 30 [no doubt
of different dimensions} 2 fl. 80 DKK silver money, right?
in Rhenish mint 3 fl. pay. Such an output
seems to anticipate a lifetime of the boots of even 10 years-
set, fir the small farmer and the owner of large
tree trellis up. Attempts to do so would, however,
official. Sehmidberger also had his tar belt replaced by copper
. However, these are very expensive, yes themselves
the use of ordinary sheet metal is too expensive
and the affixing of such bands too cumbersome and time-consuming.
. Extremely comfortable and the stick uur on a few
Totaling cruisers, I found faintly hand-
wide tarmac fastened with a few pins
tobacco lead binder. The figure provided
The Mahe lifts me up, closer to use
to give guidance. It should also be of particular value
to examine whether a mere canvas
ring a below with an expanding
Tin ring achieve the same purpose cheaper
than through a tar belt. Namely allowed
the sanin e the butterflies under the one column
around the trunk offering canvas belt
come, it is very likely that they
in constant striving for an exit
up the attempt yersiumen, the sheet metal ring
to climb. Perhaps even cin mere ranges
extended below and supported by pins or a white
ten wire prevented from tightly fitting coarse canvas
ring out to hold back the females, so that she cumulates
her balls could be crushed under the belt. A mere ring of wool, which Pezold proposes, in which

 

 

hey

325

supposedly the females with their Hiakchen each other when up
get involved doesn't seem to be enough. These are means hitherto tried by experience
so terring. Above all, put them in good time, i. H. from the
20 October to. Should one choose the right period in
If you have missed something, hit before you move
all branches repeatedly vigorously in order to
swooping down on a female. Until the New Year, they intissen
bands be coated, d. H. the tar always refreshed
be before he has to dry, d. H. the moth here and there
threatens to let dry feet pass. Yom 1, March on,
by the way, depending on the weather conditions, they are up again
refresh. By the number of those left hanging on the tar
females you get the measure from day to day
stab of the need for repeated encouragement. Very fit
It is send also, before the time of the sprouting of the blitter
the whole part of the trunk under the tarriug
good for destroying the eggs laid there in large numbers
to coat init lime or clay, or the tar of
All around until after the time of hatching the kids fresh zn
obtain. — Not only the fruit tree grower, but also the forest
man is in a position to use the Theerring
turn. There are a few in almost every hardwood district
strong eaves beeches inclined to abundant seed bearing,
with whose seed yield at least the seed schools are ordered
could be. In view of a year now like that
from 1853, where in the spring even pole wood Aeckerich
promised, but probably 90 percent of the books turned out
have been, it is certainly in place, at least the
Yield such strong mulberry trees through tar binding zn
to back up. Painting the trunk of a tree with clay or
Lime along the whole trunk without tarring is in
tveff of the eater, as well as most other obsitree insects
almost useless; for the females of all species lay

 

 

 

326
their kier near the Kuospen and seldom on the bark
of the tribe. Bouche recommends. against Kier, thy on buds of fresh-
grafted scions sit, smearing the shoots or
Eyes with soft bawu wax. This prevents, he says,
welcome the intrusion of the youthful rips in
the buds, more so because freshly grafted or copulated
Trees sprout later and hence their tree wax coating
later and only at a time when the marriages break up
have been looking for food elsewhere. This in fruit
Baunschulen, i.e. applicable on a small scale and very
This method is of course inappropriate for large tree grids.
lit. means of extermination. Are the young Réupcheu a-
once come out of the balls, so is them because of her
Smallness, concealment and also vitality not: so-
to get at it right away, Schinidberger dived in -once
Clamped apple tree marriage with flower buds
fifteen hours in water, ole that they bottom
went. Only once the Kuospens have unfolded
are forced to

 

 

 

    

and. the frosted caterpillars more freely
have also gained more body weight, can be done again
take something against them, In fact, can also: der
-small* winter moths with the ,big* in number down-
shaved, or even better by looking at the branches
be thrown down. Alone, since he is mostly in during the day
a light leaf hide, and this one to open
the pasture m go, preferably at night yerlisst asks
whether against the green tensioner not earlier
recommended non-binding to the branches of still
greater success. Kin attempt made by me
the species provided me with proof of probability
this assumption, however, no certainty because apparently a
large part of the green moths at the moment already from the
Biumen had descended to pupate. That mau
‘iberhanpt by hitting if it happens as soon as the

 

 

  

  

 

 

327

Buds have unfolded (Sclunidberger recommends the
Period from 8th to 14th May), can bring very great benefit,
it is easy to convince oneself of this, one only needs
to hold an umbrella under the battered branches,
to find a mass of tensioners in it afterwards and uoch
to be concerned with it on hat and clothes. Schmidberger
shot from a tiny half-stem apple tree
500 caterpillars down. I'll add what's going on, however
actually by itself, that the caterpillars all the more so
more terribly from the ban, the calmer the air, because
than the caterpillars cling less tightly, feruer,
the harder the first shocking blow is delivered. The
Caterpillars hanging by a thread are cut off with the
by hand or in some other way from the thread. Unless you
caterpillars shoot down on meadow ground, so not with them
can crush a blunt broom, it is good to have a grass
cloth to be removed and attached to re-
can be prevented from climbing the tree. Against the state of the dolls, if they are not"
slightly more than' finger-deep in the ground is. heavy something
prepare. They are scattered about, not just under the
surface of the tree, but also up over its eaves. Besides, those of the grinen tensioner are zn small, as
that one can also turn back from the recommended
in many cases it is recommended to break them out
by pigs should be able to promise great success,
Far more expedient is Bouché's
then Ticfumspaten and later Festireten the soil on-
to speak. It is rightly seldom just the Spanuer
because of happened, but it must be called here because
the riveting of the stretcher dolls with a grand zn
whose performance can be — Banmgiiter near vou
have suffered

         

   

 

 

Flnsufer should little from the winter moth a
's in late autumn the pup-

 

by the start of the water
pen tedte. Some more in Low's natural history of the harmful

 

328

Insect-collecting remedies are too silly to list
to become. About the costs associated with the Theerring
Extensive and accurate experiments are very helpful
desirable They are significant in comparison with that
donated benefit apparently not, especially with the opposite
cheap price of tar. In addition, the
the one who applies the remedy as long as himself
his neighbors, with folded arms, bestowing their trees
be eaten bare by the caterpillars, the significant advantages
part of a crop at the time of wasted years, i.e. H. currently high
fruit price. Moreover, consider inan that the winter moths
are present every year, albeit in smaller numbers
and crush a number of leaves corresponding to their quantity
ren, whose preservation is essential to cover the on thee
ringe must contribute costs to be used. Geometra boreata Hiibn., the small Frostspun as a moth
and caterpillar extraordinarily related, only a little larger, would later
‘Treitschke more north to Hans. I often find him here in over-
in accordance with 'Treitschke's statement in Laubwaldern, where he mitidem
Frostbite flies together and appears as Ranpe, so he canoes
stay here untouched

Low leads to another in May on cherry and other fruit trees
men occurring, but no significant damage entailing, green
and caterpillar of Geometra cerasata provided with six white longitudinal lines. which is supposed to fall into the ground at the end of May, completely unknown to me; also find
I have no information about it in entomological works,

The apple moth, Geometra rectangulata 1. (cydoniata Borkh.) Small, relatively short, thick, but slightly in front and behind
thinning ramp, apple-green in color, small, brown-cu
head and rather deep ring parts, front fin dark brown,
across the back a stripe of purple, which breaks in the middle of each ring
ter will. On beta and pome fruit trees; according to the information
especially on apple bitumen, also on quince trees, I find them whole
particularly common on pear trees. — The caterpillar emerges in autumn
the egg and overwinters in the cracks of trees. You can find them with the breakout
of the leaves again next year. She often cries out to her
stay a bloom; which she hollows out in such a way that often the
closed petals turn brown, as of apple blossom weevil; often
but also she connects the oxen of a Blatics by fiden, something like
a winder ramp, and then consume only the smooth top ole a

  

 

 

 

 

   

 

  

 

i

i 329 7

Loch to inach, your whole length, 12 million, will reach you at the end of May or
Beginning of June, metamorphosis also into a contracted leaf
light, whitish tissue, pupa short, slightly smaller than
those of the winter moth, *quite thick in front, tapered behind, with sochs
crosier-shaped, attached bristles; on head and wing
silk greyish-brown, otherwise yellow-brown, moths fourteen days later, im
June, He has 8 million, sparrows and 20 million. wing tension, griiul

wing base with lighter, jagged transverse bands, and the front
wings with a dark brown spot, flies at night and keeps itself alive
Days with wings spread on the back of leaves on trees
and bites. — In my opinion, without great importance. - It will
The ridges of the rolled-up leaves inhabited by the caterpillar
plohlen, “Also smearing the trunks with lime or
'Thon she must know,

 

 

r) Hairy, white and yellow, mottled with black. The gooseberry moth, Grometra grossulariata L. Schéner
butterflies with 17 million long, dirty yellow, over the chins, in the
Sides and banch black fleeced body and rounded white
Fliigelu, out of 43 million voltage. The front ones with two yellow bands,
some with large black spots, some of which have coalesced
are bordered. In addition, on the fore and hind wings still more
similar rows of spots. — The moth flies lazily and swaying, ,
Oflers gregarious, in July and August in gardens, lceken and shady
biting The female prefers to start her brood
Stache] and currant bushes, in case of need also on stalks
and pastures. Wipe them by the dozen in late July through early August
the leaf veins on the underside of the leaves are oval,
somewhat pointed, straw yellow, very delicately latticed. After 12-14 days
or a little later, after Bouché in September, after the
When the eggs have turned yellowish-grey, the hay will come out
the shells, in the beginning they are dark-grey, only in the
with tender

   

 

 

‘eyes brighter and
en occupied. They don't actually stay sociable, though
they still grow together to some extent, they gnaw at the first
underside of the leaf, but soon betray themselves by the lights which they
gobble it up. Their growth is slow, at first
Sometimes they shed after 12 days, after another 12 days for the second time
Times; but then they do not yet measure two lines. this is how it goes
until the leaves fall off in October, then they hide under
this or seek some protection from the cold in cracks in the branches. Having come to life again in the next spring, they hide
Ranpen twice more until June. But now they will soon have theirs

  

 

  

 

330

perfect grisse with 34 mill. reached, the caterpillar is in this state
strangely enough, in the colors that faller iihulieh. Anf white-
basic color, down the back of the caterpillar, are

Equally spaced black spots, the middle ones are almost square. Head shiny black, belly saffron yellow. Black on the sides
Pointed hairs, the whole body covered with short hairs. breast feet
black, the others yellow. For the purpose of transformation, the caterpillar hangs in a few
fids tightly drawn on a leaf or a stem. The doll is
15 million long, extremely shiny yellow, then dark red burned, finally almost
black. Abdomen rather pointed, with yellow rings. Of the
Moths after 3-4 weeks. Kinfold generation, wow! manofi Ranpen from
of different ages and even dolls and hemlocks at the same time. Several letters complain greatly about the insect and direct vou
its often not insignificant number the calloused prickly and
Currant bushes off. 'Partly, however, the devastation that
one has in mind, also by after-rapes of approximately the same coloring
(himself Nematus ventricosus) herviihien; at least I always find them
much more frequently and in larger groups than the peepers. Natural enemies are said to be several birds and wasps. Every-
but if one has in the industrious undercutting of the you the bee
fallen leaves an effective means of destroying those overwintering

furthermore, tapping the bushes frees later even more safely
By the way, as noted above, the insect is mainly
lich mur quite often where the bushes are fairly close and shady
stand, i

 

      

  

s) Hairy, blanched green, striped yellow and white; one
: Lot of raised black dots. The currant moth, Geometra wavaria L, in May and
June on currants and gooseberries than 26 million Long,
Bluduly green caterpillar, with a light yellow, broad longitudinal line 2m both
Pages. A delicate dark line over the back with a noeh 'ziirtern
white edged. The whole hant with raised black little hats
adorned with supporting points. Head shiny, greenish-brown with many
small spots, forewings brown. The. the rest green and black
sprinkled. Red-brown or violet before metamorphosis. transformation
in thin tissue underground, 2u of a small red-brown bulbous
Short-toed doll. moths in June and July. Often, as ex seems,
very low. knock off 6) Small moths (Microlepidoptera). Under this collective name one understands four Linnaeans
Main genera, which oppose the previously discussed
distinguish iniles in general by their smallness. she
disintegrate into

A. Giiusler, Pyralis, The Ziinsler differ
as moths from the following small moth families, like
of almost all moths, by particularly strongly developed ones
Lip feelers, 'purring,* which like a riddle in front of you
head sticking out. Her body is slender, her hind legs
Jang, the winglets often delicate and in most species in
of tranquility a double roof-shaped triangle over the core
per forming. Caterpillars small, thickened towards the middle, with 14 or
16 feet, but not yet in terms of number of legs
observed exhaustively; ine is with small warts and hairs
on the body, transformation in tight tissue over the
Earth, pupae long and narrow. The caterpillars can be presented in the following way:
1) With sixteen pees. a) Caterpillar yellow, grin, yellow-green: Pyralis forficalis, parialiy vurticalis. b) Leathery, brown: P. pinguinalis. ©) Striped yellow and gray: P. margaritalis. 2) With fourteen feet. «) caterpillar grin: P: rostralis. e) Broadly stretched, brown-red-blue: P. palliolalis. 3) Not yet examined in detail with regard to the number of legs. f) In flour and powder: P. farinatis. g) On cereal seeds: P. frumentalis. h) In cereal stalks: P. silacealis, secalis. a) Riupehen seawater, yellow, green, yellow-green. The Meerrettigziinsler, Kohlziinsler, Pyralis forfi-
calis, L. The moth has 13 million. bodily sparrows and 31 million wing tension. Short straight purrs and bristly ones
filer. Both, like head, body and abdomen, silky

 

332

nice yellowish white. Fore wing with rather sharp, éus-
serer tip and a central spot, as well as two stronger and
some faint rust-brown streaks, hindwings
a darker arc line. Flies in May, June and August,
only in the evening on flowers, during the day only when he
is scared. Those on cabbages, mecrrettig and
In the growth of a living caterpillar one finds a first one
Times in June and July, after Kollar in May and June. she
becomes ~——— long, has light brown head, yellowish green
Body, with blackish longitudinal stripes and spots, white
fine lines between; also white joint rings and air
lécher and 16 legs. She lives hidden and transformed
no doubt on the ground in a brownish, yellow,
smooth cardboard with blunt, only two kicine little tra-
gender tip. At the beginning of August, the butterfly
terling. A wide caterpillar generation emanates from him,
found in September and October and the moth
delivers the following May. — The caterpillar does, oh Bouché,
in some years, when it appears frequently, the cabbage
species and horseradish significant damage. For the
Garten Bouché recommends tapping as the only remedy
and destroying the ranches. Pyralis parialis Treit. (Tortrix pariana L.) Lives as small ————,
long, spindle-shaped, I think sixteen-legged, lively, fidgety, yellow
Caterpillar with a brownish head, black hooked feet and eight black eyes
punk-sized bristle cloves on each section, in quantity on apple
bitumen and, according to Treitschke, also on shrubs. I found her in the
summer, late September, particularly frequent. It is at least this
second generation, for in July (1854) I found the moth frequently in the
sucking on yarrow flowers (Achillea millefolium). the
first caterpillar generation moves Treitschie to June, initially closed
the caterpillar folds the edge of the leaf downwards into a wide fold,
in which it, removing the wool of the leaf, eats out the handle
leaving only the upper epidermis. Such wrinkles imitate it
Need several. In September it makes its way over the lower leaflets
vin flat, light web, eats underneath still places like before
the green gone, finally the flat fabric deserves that it hardly anymore
shines through, manufactures a white web of fish reindeer underneath
senform, is inside a black-brown pupa, which develops in October,

 

 

 

 

in a part in the next spring pushes up to half the body
and according to Treitsehke, always at noon the Valter unhits, This one is pretty
brown and pale marbled and in shape very much resembles the angular
len. In September, cinzele trees show a whole through the Ranpe
disfigured support. Further, probably wrongly, it is listed as physical:

The nettle worm, Pyralis urticalis Hitbn. On stinging nettles, white
Bindweed (Convolvulus sepium), rarely on currant bushes. When
dirty pale yellow or green, somewhat glassy transparent caterpillar with
narrow green longitudinal line bordered by two yellowish-white lines
graze over the quirks, The existing wads of the color of the
body, only the tips and the hair sticking to them are black, nape
shield greenish, bordered on both sides by two black spots. head
black, with three different large white spots on both sides
ten, Another straight white stripe across the man}. air écher
appear as small black dots, sixteen fluffs of the color
of the body. Grown up in September, between hollow tree bark and
the like in cin light white fabric weaving to there up to
to hide unchanged in spring, in April for a king light red-brown
a pupa with a slightly detached head, around mid-May
as a white, plentiful and mostly black-spotted moth
appear, whose progeny in June already again
is capable of lunging and in early or mid-June 2am the third time in moth form
appears. b) Rump toes sixteen fissured, leathery, brown. *

The Schmalzziinsler, Pyralis pinguinalis L. sixteen-footed,
——_——- long, leather-hard, dirty-shining, hazy brown caterpillar,
with chestnut-brown head, light dorsal line on the first ring, broad
terem, formed from triangular ridges second and third ring. The other rings are very clearly formed from two half-rings, one of which
. has the feet on the underside and, like the latter, is always lighter. by-
four Javge bright bristles stand in the bulge, In the houses, of butter,
Lard, bacon, tallow, even according to Leder, Bucher-
cinbinden and the like. live. That they also in human bowels
yorkomme, already explains Treitsehke for a labor marriage, Réaumur found
them also under the bark of old elms, here probably from dead insects
alive, which he also fed them in captivity. You finished
him on the substances on which she nourishes herself like wax
long tubes protruding chiefly from their refuse cores. in the
March, April and beginning of May, grown up, it crawls on the winds of the
Houser to find a good opportunity in some corner

 

 

334

pupation xu find. According to the information, the web is firm; that,
Welehies I received was of poor solidity, of white durelish
nender silk, the bramurothe pupa finely dotted, awei at the tip
Pair of yellow and two solitary yellow bristles. After four weeks
transforms into a tan, fat glistening, on the front
wings of short moths marked with dark brown wavy lines
purring and notched antennae; the male with an anus cup,
the woman is provided with a leather tube. The moth sits hinfig
roof-shaped on the walls in the houses and lays his arms
according to Degeer in heaps, From his early June occurrence
until July. and August followed 'Treitschke' to a second generation
in the year. About the extermination of the insect can be, ele of a larger one
Harmfulness is something known, not much special to say that isn't
Seen at the bacon kifer and the like. been said. c) Rupees sixteen feet, striped yellow and gray. The Ritbseatpfeifer, Pyralis margaritalis Treitschke. 14 million bodily sparrows and 31 million wing tension, pale
Sulphur-yellow forewings with a large rust-colored spot
in front of the hem. Also two light brownish jagged ones
Transverse lines and a few brown longitudinal dots. tinter
wings yellowish white All frets brown-grey. All wings
shiny shell-colored. Flies in June and July in the
most localities Deutsehlanis, places its lingually oval
Fish marriages to cruciferous plants, such as rapeseed and ribs,
Sisymbrium, Iberis et. The ramp is 20 million. long, slightly in front, strong in back
yerdiimt, with black head and two
black, through a wide, yellow Riteken-
strip separate neck shields. To both
(cies of the doe stripe cin broad grey

1

 
 

    

  
  

 

 

gsband with three black bristle warts
on every ring. Lufilécher black. Before the-
legs gran. Otherwise yellow. Eats in the capsule stalls of Repses and Ritbsens,

 

335

cinzeln between cin white
Tissue hidden, Lécher
into the capsules and consumed
through this, with head and
breast penetrating that
menkérner, so that you
pods [necessary] ans-
see like Fléten, therefore be
Name Piper. * Used as
very disadvantageous. I find the caterpillar in September
tember on summer reps and
so little selien that I
increase the possibility
well understand damage. Extinction seems to me merely by crushing the caterpillar
possible in spirit. 4) Rliupehen fourteen feet, grin. The Hopfenziinsler, the Springranpe, Pyralis rostralis L.,
of 14 million body lengths and 31 million wing tension. a mean,
A ubiquitous moth of somewhat variable coloration. With
long purrs, the foremost joints of which point upwards. feeler
notched, threadlike in the female. Minnchen with a small anal
little. On the forewings, those on the fringes towards the tip
are somewhat cut out, usually on the innermost third,
jagged, black line; in the middle of the wing, near the front edge
eye-arliger, white-lined hair tuft spot, behind which a darker one
longitudinal dash stands; the outer part of the wing has a light whitish colour
Bind, divided transversely by jagged shadows, Towards the tip of the wing deeper
black line. Franzen light and dark mottled. hind wing silky
1, matigran, the moth flies to Treitschke at the beginning of August
ler in autumn, according to Herrich-Schiifier in July and September. He
winters in buildings and garden sheds. Likes to fly into the light. That
Female lays its eggs on the hops, both the wild ones in hedges
growing than on the cultivated, according to Treitschke also on Breunnes-
seln and according to Fabrieius himself on hornbeams, Whether the Kier cinzeln or
being deposed in crowds is not stated, but by some
Interesting as large numbers of caterpillars are often found on the same shrub. 336

The caterpillar is all grin, with a dark wrist,
a white line 2u both sides of the back and
ciner let, translucent under the skin, in. the middle of the ring disappearing white, further
downward stabbing line; on the head, like on the
remaining body black, hairy warts; fourteen-footed (that
first pair of bane feet missing); Body fairly silky and a little behind
diluted. She is very lively and jumps when held by the hand,
wriggling and flailing like an eel, back and forth. your main
time is June according to Treitsehke, June and August according to Résel. to
At this time, the caterpillars often eat away at the hop buds to such an extent that
nothing of it remains as the ribs. — Beginning of July, also ‘Treitschke,
the caterpillar steps between blitters or on the ground, or also, after
Résel, in the earth the transformation. In a grey, transparent
ing tissue lies the dark brown, elongated, with a sharp edge
doll with front part. After four weeks it will appear
Butterfly, which, according to 'Treitschke, sets a new brood, which is still in
Autumn appears in the perfect state and then in garden sheds
u, the like sitting on wall and deeke is found. I'm in better shape
to make a judgment about this myself, because the moths that I still have in the
October and November in garden and vineyard houses in company
of P. Polychloros found hibernating were so flattened
tert that they are just as good of the first as the second of ‘Treitschke’s
generation could angchéren. Destruction of the caterpillars by shaking the plant or the hop
bar, in which the caterpillar can be thrown down very easily. e) Riupehen fourteen-fibed, broadly crocheted, brown-red-blue. The Kirn ziinsler, Pyralis palliolalis Hiibn. (Tinea cucullatelta I.) The peculiar réupchen on fruit trees, sloes, hawthorn ete. is end of May —————1 long, fourteen feet, black head, core
the broad, reddish blue on the sides, with yellow-brown warts
and deer; over the back a broken, white, broad band,
striped slate gray in the middle; on the fourth, sixth, eighth and
tenth ring it is darkest and double-crescent-shaped; end of May
as it grows, it turns into an inch ¢ on a flat spot
a boat-shaped web to the brown, bulbous, in the middle
lenen pupa, from which the moth can be seen after three weeks. - Everywhere
common, but hardly important. f) caterpillar eggs liquid, in flour and powder. The Mehiziinsler, Pyralis farinalis I. The little caterpillar
15 million long be imag, lives in Mchl, hair powder and the like, is

 

337

Strangely enough, it is nowhere described in detail. She must yewiein xein, da
the moths are everywhere inside and clinging to the walls of buildings
finds and also through dic gaps in garbage and grain bins cin-
penetrates you can recognize him at first glance by his position, because
at rest he keeps his wings spread but depressed, with-
while he raises his abdomen in a striking arch-like manner; feeler
bristling, palpi short. The color of the sciden-like shiny, pretty
edged fore and hind wings yellowish-brown; at the root and
at the tip of the forewings, one separated by a white arcuate line. beautiful burnt field; Hindwings slightly variegated,
wavy lines. I have found the moth again from May to June and so far
in the fall and, like Treitschke, would conclude that there was a double generation. g) Rips liquid, on cereals. The Saatzinsler, Pyralis frumentalis L. moth with
bristly, flat, gray feelers, short conical
shaped, brown purrs. From gleaming yellowish white
base color. Yellow-brown curls over the front wings
gene binding. White hindwings with brownish exterior
Edge. Flying socially in Hungary, Austria in June
and several areas of Germany, but rarer than
in Russia. The caterpillar not described in detail becomes éfters
mentioned, 2. B. von Pallas (journey to Russia*), as tine
Land plague in the Kazan Mountains. He fwid a big one
Part of the fields cultivated by her until winter seed
mar root eaten off. Mainly the early ones
were full of it and later ones lay in between very nicely
growth and intact. It will be for the area there
recommended to reivh the fields where the ramp starts
to sprinkle with ashes, for which the buckwheat
and pea straw use chinne, which was grown there
dwells as useless to burn. h) Raéupehen liquid, in corn stalks. The Hirseziinsler, Pyralis silaccalis Treit. Lives from July
except in the stalks of hops and Welschkorn, also in the
Stalks of millet, Panicum miliaceum. Mier inserts the female
up to two eggs to the still young Schafi; the riinpehen digs in
and eats up the marrow from above, through an opening to nothing
It creates its yellowish-white fx increments in a knot. the

N Grdlinger, the small 22

 

 

338,

damaged stalks dry up and break off, or yield
back. According to the collar, the caterpillar often walks from a hollowed-out stone
gel in a fresher to erode it too. By the time the harvest came, the caterpillar had already penetrated the roots
eat and usually brings the winter in the stubble that has been tilled under
zn. It only becomes a yellowish-brown pupa in mid-May or early June. moths after 14 to 16 days — plucking and burning is recommended
the stubble. Perhaps even deep devotion would be enough. Finally in Lw there is a description of a rye ziinsler,
Pyralis secalis, about which I find no information anywhere else. To
Low it is a small whitish gray glittering butterfly, with a
black V's on the front ivies, the small green and brown striped one
Réupchen lives in June when the rye shoots into the arachnids. It
eats into the stalks of rye and feeds on the marrow. the
Ears of corn get stuck in the sheaths and usually just come along
the tips of the awns, become thin and white
or yellow and die off. In this way many Achreu will be destroyed. Luckily it hasn't been as numerous in recent times as one
cause significant damage to the rye. It will be at Léw anem-
to pluck out all white or yellow stalks in order to dariu the caterpillar
riachher to destroy and thereby to seize even more stalks
prevent, also early turning over of the stubble and hoeing
the grassy paths between the fields. B. Winder, Tortrix, you belong to the smallest
» Moths, your head isn't very hairy, that

Bodies mostly shorter and stronger than those of the
Ziuslemm and cockroaches. Fubler fem notched. Vorderilage] you from the root wide and at the front edge
protruding in an arc, ,shouldered* (s), mostly with variegated
Colours. Hind wing more rounded than long, The French
siume of the wing never so wide as in the cockroaches or
moths Flagel in the rube roof-shaped. The moth sits by
Days quiet and flutters only with the twilight
around. Yet its flight is safe and fairly rapid. The Ranpchen have eight pairs of legs. head with
clear fork line. Behind him a divided neck-
shield, siets with very sparse hairs. The bristles
are often dusky transparent, different georduct. the
Afier area of ​​the Réupcheus not particularly desig-
calling. They only live on vegetable food, roll

 

   
 

 

 

  

 

339

or wrap abruptly frequently to live in it protected. Leaves together, hence their common name. Several
however, also live in leaves, fruits, berries, some
in young shoots, the bark, finally the wood. Stért
if you put them in their dwelling, they often throw themselves
tumbling or rolling down a thread, they also run
like to be behind and are generally very lively. The Caterpillar
usually spins over the ground in a light
Tissues between or on flakes, between or also in
a solid between bark. The pupae of the winders have fairly broad flagel-
traces, which mostly extend over half of the body. ,
The gradually thinning abdomen wears wreaths
rear-facing stiletto. The end of the doll soon
blunt, soon ending in a hooked style. behaa
formation of the pupa is very insignificant. ‘

Ratzeburg is a simple generation of winders
at. (However, in this regard see the information
different authors for the individual species.) With the difficulty of describing such small caterpillars as that
the sympathetic Wiekler and the inconvenience that some are not exactly _
are known enough to be described sharply, I choose as Schr
simple, albeit empirical, element of healing the way of life and
the living plants of the individual Avten,

2) Rips in fruit trees: Tortrix pomonana and nigricana. b) Réupe marriages in fruit tree buds or leaves: 7, rariegana, ocdllana,
Priniana, cratacgana, ameriana, heparana, cylosteana,, laceigana,
ribeana, holmiana, eerasana, sorbiana. ¢) Réupehen on the bark or in the wood of garden trees: 7. Woberiana, arcuana

) Ruplets in the flower or berries of the grapevine: 7. uvana,
reliquana. ¢) Riupehen in vine leaf wraps: Pilleriana. 8) Caterpillar marriages in buds or between rose petals: Bergman-
niana, Forskacleana, ochroleucana, aquana, oporana. a) Ruptures in fruit trees. The codling moth, the fruit maggot, Tortrix pomo-
well TL. Dev Falter changes. strong the Griss. He

 

340

appears in June and July, including Schmidberger
already in the first days of May; probable
I'm so excited about that, says Schmidberger

the female already has fruit ready to lay her eggs
find. During the day the moth sits quietly on trees; At evening
first it comes alive and then the female lays hers
Eggs on apples and pears. About the way such
history, the information is different. After the ones
it puts the kids on the fruit itself, after the others,
among which Schmidberger, usually on the chalice or
between the sepals or into the stalk cavity. Without a doubt, all of these statements are correct, at least
I conclude this from the numerous I have examined
worm-eaten apples, on which the caterpillar bores the kin
must have found status in various places. She particularly likes to shine at the top of the fruit,
that is, to have penetrated at or in the calyx; also is always-
conceivable, if not probable, that this
Réupehen not immediately drill into the fruit where it is
leaves the egg, but first looks for a suitable place. The eggs should be pale, yellowish-red. That
the number laid by a female can be significant
must, concludes Schmidberger from the rapid propagation
ability of the insect. The same cites the year 1822, in
where the butterfly was extraordinarily common,
whereas he was so seldom met in 1821
have. As already noted, the insect inhabits apple and
Pear trees and, Schmidberger assures us, especially the fine ones
fruit varieties. ‘On an apple tree, half white winter
Calville, half-carrying boiled apples, is from the former
sort not an apple escaped, while the latter,
the boiled apples have suffered little. It is mentioned here and there, even by Treitschke
give that the codling moth also eats plums and damsons
gene live however, this is more than doubtful (regarding
a possible confusion Plumenroller p. 346). hey

341

Since the moth spreads throughout Germany and England in
June and July flies, the caterpillar but after eight days
the egg should come, the creeping out of the rips
in the second aid of Juni's and Juli's and Schmidberger, the
let the moth fly in the first days of May,
speaks of caterpillars, which can be found in the fruit at the end of corn
wireu (see generation). Your main period is the
development and ripening time of the fruit. But she only needs it
4-5 weeks to their complete training and is therefore,
depending on whether the egg was laid earlier or later,
Mature in late July or August. — Initially knows
the riupe has become more and more réthliche colouring-
and is flesh-colored or yellowish as a caterpillar. she
has gleaming hatbmond-shaped, divided neck shield. The body bears large gnarled roots with rather long ones
hair. anal flap grey. When touched, she lets go
a brown juice flow from the mouth. The way of life of the caterpillar, as of the destroyer so
lots of fruit is of particular interest. It has already been said above that the caterpillar attaches itself to different
those places
the fruit
can drill

usually
now you're jerking off
drilled
fruit at the same time
with the
drilled caterpillar
so it's the
the latter through
from to near
not
breaks. _ But
you can also find
maggot apples which have fallen off very early, the frithes of which

 

 

342

Tree traps are certainly often left by the caterpillar,
perhaps especially if they prefer the core house
has devastated, the freight usually remains
with the caterpillar on the tree and only fall for a short time
before the maturity of the unpierced and with the color
the ripe fruit down. — Hang two apples on one
4weig so close that they touch, so goes the ramp
gladly from one cargo to the other and spins them
both apples to cinander, likewise today cin is close
standing leaf in front of the big maggot apple visible
bare hole spun, so that when the apple is nothripe itself
detached from branch, he remains suspended from Blait. — Fault
the cargo the caterpillar is in, so it goes
out and, what else not infrequently, without revealing
Reason happens, pierces into another cin, the fruit falls
healthy from the tree, the caterpillar stays in it,
provided that she had previously been comfortable in her. I
know well that it is said in part that she goes here-
out, climb back up the tree and dig in again
another fruit. But how should it be so easy?
quite distant tribe wicde: find to go up there-
mu climb? By the way, after Schmidberger comes the Réiup
chen in its youth 6fters on tlie surface of the apple. In these cases it is found naturally on the fruit
a starting point corresponding to the thickness of the réupchen
channel. — The caterpillar is often found in the core house and
practice ily the cores eaten out from the side, yes even
should one sometimes enclose them completely driu
fiuden, with no visible trace of the King Gang, that you can get out of it
had to conclude that she was very young for the core house
penetrated and immediately drilled through the cores. But they don't just serve her for food
Cores of apples and pears, as has been claimed
is, but also the flesh of the fruit. Hiefor speaks. that the gut of the caterpillar is not always the nucleus e:
rich and that the caterpillar so much rubbish out of the apple

  

 

   

 

  

 

 

 

 

343,

out. — The very small spot on which the Réupchen
burrowed, however, may be vanishing and
easily escapes investigation, at least in Aepfelu, who
were only drilled late. (After Ratzeburg she will
be recognizable as a black spot.) Further
is conceivable in apples with a wide core that in this
find a place for all rubbish. As a rule, however, one finds
the worm-eaten apples, that the caterpillar through a wide
Opening to the plentiful ones accumulated in their long corridor
carries out red-brown rubbish. For this excrement
channel she sometimes uses the top of the core house, sometimes the
for this purpose extended corridor, through which they entered
was coming, soon also a specially created one, if
through such a short way to the surface
long. The adult caterpillar comes out of the fruit and
crawls down the thick trunk to crawl into the cracks
the rough bark or on a tree wound to the left of the bulge
or even in a rotten spot in rotten wood a splinter
to choose, in we
step in mind. For this purpose it wraps itself with a white one
zaihen tissue, in which she mixes the scrapings of bark, which
has exhausted her around her. The thicker, the rougher the bark,
the more caterpillars will attach themselves to a stem from the root
weave up to the branches. But it is clear that
the greatest number of caterpillars which descend in the
have fallen, as well as those on young Baéwnen
smooth bark, have to spin themselves on the earth. In the
The caterpillar looks for joints in boards or in fruit stalls
on beams, and mingles their tissue with woody ones
gnaw off. The pupation of the caterpillar in its web
only in the next spring. Schmidberger found the of
him examined in early May not yet pupated and yet
full of life and activity, although we

 

when she accepts her transformation

 

   

become him. the

 

344

It seems that the transformation into a puppet takes place only after
where the apple trees have faded. The doll has am
pointed end hooked bristles. — When crawling out of the
butterfly out of the chrysalis, this is far out of
spins pushed out and stays with her bristles and
Hiccups hung in the cracks, so that one often had to stir
rough-barked fruit trees, especially pear trees, a lot of yellow,
sees stuck in transparent doll cases. Generation, Schmidberger already lets the caterpillar
Come of adulthood in mid to late June, and is presided over by the
butterflies appearing in July an autumn generation
ab, an annalm, which admittedly harmonizes very little with
that he didn't have the previous year's ridges at the beginning of May
once pupated found in the spinning thimbles, thus the fall
fer, set aside the known usual flight time. but kénute can appear before the end of May. But how should the caterpillar even under this assumption?
come of age by mid or late June, as he assumes? The autumn generation created by him would become the moth
belonging to whom he assumed in September 1822
intending to lay beer, after the sun rises
eng fruits running back and forth salt; just like the hardly uadels-
thick Réiupe, which he at the time of the fruit harvest
chen fruits faud. — The assumption seems more natural to me,
imaginary individuals are offspring of the ordinary
Been another generation, Spiitlings, as they are with so many
butterflies occur. :

harmfulness. Not in all circumstances has that
Drilling the caterpillars into the fruit has the same effect, because
depending on the size of the hole, earlier or later and on this one
or that place of the fruit is applied, thus at the same time also
the air gains entry through the ginga, or the inflow of sap
is shortened or lifted from the stem,
different appearances: sooner or later the attacked one becomes
Kucht at the same time as the rest of the veif, soon it will be earlier
but still hanging on the ban, soon finally konunt

 

 

man-

 

 

 

345

 

_ the cargo not affected in its main vessel bundles as
even to an exceptionally large wax tower. the Sehid
the insect for orchard owners is still
interpretive, because in some years half of it goes
fruit harvest lost, so it's no wonder that different
who has suggested anti-kerf remedies. - The nature
send us to our support woodpeckers, tits, which
especially the caterpillar in its pupation hiding-
know to find. The proposal made, the butterfly
to seek out and destroy insects is impractical, cleaning
tion and sweeping out of the angles, smearing of all gaps
and cracks in orchards can be of little effect
be, because you prefer only the apples that are not maggots
and pears collects and preserves. washing up and
brushing the fruit trees with lye and soap is
the caterpillars eat into the bark, perhaps also frequently after
fro ineffective because of the fairly powerful protection that
give the cobwebs to the réupe ​​marriages, Works better
apparently pass the tree trunks with Leha and that
cleaning of the older trees suggested by Schmidberger
from the broken bark. :

But even these means are only partially apparent
be accompanied by success, since in their application the main
mass of caterpillars, d. H. those are not destroyed
which fall from the tree in wormy fruit, also because
they are just as good for the neighbors as for the tree
owner himself and this little use if you don't vou
the neighbors are also obeyed. agreement of all
or only many property owners can hardly be brought about
most likely in relation to the best means, namely that
Gathering and the immediate destruction of the wormy down-
falling fruit. That such must have the best effect. emerges from Schmidberger's investigations; this
found a live caterpillar in almost every fallen apple. As a supplement to the measure, this is the only thing left to do
the careful passing of the rough-barked voices in the

 

346,

May with Lehin and Kalk, damnit also those individuals
be destroyed, which have not fallen down with the fruit,
but fell from the branches to the trunk
and stuck here as dolls. The réthliche plum caterpillar, Tortrix nigricana
make to Schmidberger. ‘Treitsehke never mentions nigricana, while Herrich-Schiiffer mentions nigricana,
Minnchen, which is why, with regard to the correct determination of the

lying insect a doubt remains, because after Herrieh-Sehiiffer one would catch
the nigricana, male marriages, always around. Needlewoods passionately,

 

* + upper surface black, shimmering in violet, from

* Rear edge quite deep into the wing with
possessed of very fine silver dust. Kin black, white lined
grasped point at the extreme tip of the upper wing. the case
ter will probably appear in May, i.e. at the time when schou
small fruits are present on the bitumen on which
to nourish his offspring. She actually lives in
Plums, especially in the plums and is here
known to everyone as a réthliche, small caterpillar. You meet
they usually near the stone core. On the Sti
at the end of the plum it entertains a small offences hole, at
which the wormy plums can be recognized,
They usually fall earlier than the non-earned ones and
gwar with the caterpillar from the tree. Schmidber
make sure that Réiupchen in the columns de
Tighten the bark of the plum tree like this
penetrated deep into the finest cracks, so that it could not be explained to him
how she got through to it. However, since the
larger part of the caterpillars in late August and Ant Sep-
tember falls from the tree with the plums, it is clear that
only relatively few réupchen the bad opportunity
to twist between the bark
know. The Réupcehen spun between bark had
did not even get lost at Sehmidberger in April
del. It wasn't until the beginning of May! zy hellbranacn peippelia,
which slip out at the time noted above, — Schmid-

 

 

 

 

 

    

  
 

 

” has observed

  

shattered

 

   

 

 

 

  

347

berger does not find it unlikely that this moth,
as he assumed the codling moth a double
generation have. He derives this from the fact that
one already fully grown in spring plants at the beginning of July
Réupemarriages, during which also at the end of August in late
pilaumen are still very small, hardly going to be found days old
be. Such still very small bunches can be found in all
thing in mid-September. About the explanation of the
one can, however, as with pomonana, use different ones
be in view. — Since the caterpillar marriages in some years very
are numerous, and often the greater part of the branch
occupied, it is recommended that the early
and by gently shaking the bin to fall
brought, pricked plums carefully collecti
and use 21 for brandy distilling. The little caterpillar that you go through probably also belongs here
all of France, as well as on the Schwarawald in the fruits of the
tame Kastanic finds. The fruit can be half with rubbish
falls be. It falls off earlier than the healthy fruits. The insect
is given by Réammur II, T. 40, F. 146-19, p. 506 described. The ramp
has eight pairs of feet with full bristles, is naked, whitish, with
a large translucent brown spot. head brown. she goes
from the fruit, around itself on the ground a brown shell with cores of earth
to spin. At the end of May, the small cockroach appears with thread-like ones
Fihler and rounded roof-shaped wings, brown, in the middle of the

ing gray dumbbells and three others in the triangle. 4ligel ash gray. According to Réaumur IL, ‘T. 38, F. 15, 16, p. 507, lives in the Dattelu
coming from the Levant, between kernel and flesh a caterpillar,
'Similar to that in apples and chestnuts, but slightly larger. she
pupates at the end of June and flies in autumn as a rather large,
shiny light brown moth with filiform feelers and spurs on the
feet. If you examine the core, you will find a hole on the side,
and the whole contents of the core consumed by the ramp and with filth
fulfilled. The pupa from which the moth develops lies between
kernel and flesh, compare Bostrichus dactyliperda, which is also found in
Date stones and tinea elutella, whose réupchen I in Marseille
also seen in dry dates. b) In fruit tree buds or leaves. + ~The Gray Kuospenroller, Vortria
== variegana Tr. (cynosbana L.) The appearance and
the way of life this, it seems, everywhere

common insect can be found most precisely at Schinidber-
described. — The moth has brown spots; the top
Wings gray on two-thirds of the limbs and outwards
especially shimmering in the blue, with brown and white
speck; the last third part is white, with individual
ash-grey patches running across the corner
band, with black lines, but with one at the top
have dark blemishes; the underside grey. the butter
terling develops from mid-May to mid-June; he
usually sits freely on the blossom of the fruit trees,
but flies when approaching. away immediately. The female
no doubt hangs up at night, probably hangs up
the young leaf and fruit buds themselves. It will only be one
Egg deposited on each bud because you never notice later
more than one caterpillar in the same. Usually you meet
the réupe ​​marriages in flower and leaf buds of the apple
tree, and in leaf buds of the pear tree or plant
tree. Caterpillar ———— long, with prominent ventral
wrestle At rest she is against the head and abdomen
dimuer, grey-green, with a black head and neck shield
and black fine dots; on the streets are a-
some long, white hair. The caterpillar is very lively and
She quickly struts out of her room when I see this
effect. Crawling out of the egg, she bites into the bud
into it until it begins to unfold. She glues them
Tops of the general floral covering of the fruit bud above
together, this will prevent it from developing
changed and the caterpillar gains zcit, the individual blossoms
one after the other. Only occasionally, still penetrates
cine or other blithe to the side of the bud out, but
this blossom seldom bears fruit, because either

 

349

already worn or too weak, uni should be applied. the
Deciduous buds of apple, plum and pear trees but
are used by the caterpillar once it tries to
has taken, largely consumed, so that neither
a womb, nor supporting wood can form more. Does she have the
uppermost bud of the branch, which form the future main branch
shall, possessed, such is the beauty of the young
Tree is lost for a while because the sap shoot pushes
now several shots to the side, which the main
turn branches into willow heads and thus the crown of the tree
deface,

In 1822, these caterpillars were already in the middle
April and before the end of the same Schmid-
berger almost fully grown specimens. In 1823
the first sighted at the end of April and on 10. May they had their perfect Gréssc. This rapid growth
thum is made possible by her great composure. Meanwhile
gives her a tiny bud food enough for training. She also rarely leaves them and even chooses them to the site
her transformation. The doll is black and very life-
dig each abdominal ring has two spiked circlets, where-
through which it becomes rough and slightly crooked at the tip
rod-shaped bristles, on which the light weaving of the
caterpillar attached. Moths after a maximum of three weeks. In
Swabia is the insect on the fruit trees every year,
however, I have not yet seen it in large numbers, Schmid-
berger, however, describes it as very insignificant in some years
and harmful to fruit trees. On low trees he recommends destroying the
Caterpillars in all flower buds with glued together
general floret and in adhered deciduous
bud, What escaped the eye as a caterpillar, he says,
falls into our hands as a puppet when we search diligently
half-dead, crippled blotches in the hinds. at high
however, this distribution is obviously unfeasible. The red budworm, Tortrix ocellana Treit. 330

Cluscuna #.). —t— , thus smaller than the previous one; also
Gray; an eye-catching and for the species designated
ing white transverse band with gray spots
runs, taking more than the third part of the upper wing,
right through the surface] from one edge to the other. sits
the butterfly quietly with closed wings, so shows
the transverse band on the back of the moth narrows,
than down. — The moth appears at the end of May and in
June, is shy, hangs up his kids at night, probably
the buds. The kids won't get along until the next Fvithling. The resulting bundle is at the beginning of its small
means not visible to the eye; it bites in first
Spring enters the bud and therefore frequently emerges
this cin honey drop. It's even smaller when fully grown
than the previous one, brown-red, with black head and very
lively. His dwelling seems to be mainly the apple
to be flower buds, but it is also found in
the leaf buds of the apple trees, especially when dicse
have no flower buds; sometimes also inhabited
Pear trees, quince trees and forest trees. She is in early ©
ling already on the trees, when the sap kawn in
stimulates the buds, i.e. earlier than the gray bud moth. She bites the bud and grows with it,
so that it is sufficient for her, notwithstanding the wound
supplies food. In this case, dussevlich shows none
Drops of honey over her king gear. Such a one shows up
but not infrequently when the caterpillar is too frith or too deep cin-
is squat, causing the bud to grow 21 and
you no longer deliver the necessary food. She must as-
then emigrate and take a new home. Lest her buds outgrow and unfold,
before it has reached its full size, it also glues it
Tops of the common floral cover of the fruit bud above
gather she thereby gains time, the individual blossoms
of the bud gradually consume. Does the ranch come a little later in the bud when

  

 

 

 

   

35l

this has already begun to unfold, so save
often one or the other blossom and the bud setat
a fruit on; only as soon as the caterpillar has a fruit in the
Finds near her chamber, she eats herself into this cin and
eats part of her. In 4-5 weeks she'll be out-
formed, One then finds in her chamber, wherein the ver-
transformation is taking place, a white shell with a light
brown doll. Appears after 3-4 weeks (beginning of May).
already the Schinetterling. According to Schmidberger, the caterpillar does not cause any
significant damage to large trees, but it is a
cunning guest on dwarf and orangery, especially apple
béumen. Few buds remain 6fters on small trees
scared. In the tree nurseries she sometimes still makes us
great annoyance because they especially eat the apple and pear
oculants and grafts becomes very harmful. she takes
namely, in the absence of flowers also with leaf buds
ago and almost always destroys the top bud of the
or two-year-old graft. The trees become thereby
defaced. Ratzeburg reports in his Ichneumonen a.
Forstinsckten I, S, 43 that in 1839 the present
Insect (ocellana) in its region the apple blossoms far and wide
widely devastated. As a center] in Géirten and Baunschulen, Sehmid-
Berger inspection of the flower buds; but you have to
he says, be careful because if the caterpillar will notice that
if you follow her, she pulls herself down to the fruit soil. Man treme At first only the glued buds-
blush and let the bud unfurl a little; see
then the individual flowers come out, so one fetches
the caterpillar out with the tip of the knife. one saves
in this way always single blossoms, which fruit
put. The plum moth, Tortrix pruniana, Hiibn. dem graven
I Kuospenmoth very similar, antennae dark brown. Head,

— Back and forewings slightly more than to the aid of
of the root brown, blackish and white marbled. the

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

352

Awful help against the white sand. hem itself. and a speck
before its middle brown-grey. This also the color of the hindwings and
of the abdomen. legs whitish. The moth has when it is calm on a
Leaf perched, much resembling a small bird's drop. Flight-
time after Bouché in July, after 'Treitschke and Westwood (England) and
as far as I can remember it was already in June, Ranpe in April and May anf
cherries, plums and the other Prunus species, together
pulled blisters. It often does, according to Bouché, especially the young
Trees suffer significant damage from eating out the young shoots. she
is, according to the same, grow #/, inch (20mill.) long. The rolling core
per: dirty green in youth, gran-green in old age, sometimes
black-green; a dark green stripe on the back; the body with
individual brown hairs, which rest on gleaming black warts
chen stand, The round head is not white, as Zenker stated, but
shiny black; the same is also the color of the broad neck shield
des, des Aftersegments and Luftidcher, She pupates in May
and early June, partly between the leaves, partly on the ground below
moss, blades of grass, etc. Piippe marriage 8 million long, brown-black, with
thick chest; Abdominal section with transverse rows of fine tips. Bouché, from whom some of the above notes are extant, recommends
also with this the crushing of the ritual in the spun together
blemish He says that if you don't do it, it often destroys the second one
and third drive. The smearing recommended as a precautionary measure
of the eyes with soft tree wax, since the Kier already in June
and July will probably be of dubious effectiveness, -
Further, he proposes brushing down those trees with sharp brushes
in winter, at the same time to destroy a lot of caterpillar and leaf
lanseier, as of scale insects, before, The smelling of the bees to
Destruction of this small insect (Liw) seems easy. I must Ratzeburg's guess, Forstins. 11. Volume 8 190 that under
this insect from Bouehé the previously described Tortrir variegana
be understood, find justified; at least I meet pruniana as
Butterflies only seldom on trees, although often in hedges and
Gebiischon (from Selchen u. etc.). The vou Bouché also seems
showed measure of caterpillar length indeed too great for pruniana. Zenker and Sehmidberger go even further than on fruit trees
living Wiekler on:

Tortria cratacgana Hiibn. After ‘Ireitschke often associated with others
weehselt, Austria, Bavaria, Swabia. lin Frithjahr, but not
frequent, on the fruit trees. The moth in July and Angust. Otherwise
pretty unknown. Tortrie ameriana [, (rosana [.) flying tm June and July, finds
according to Schmidberger anf Top fbiumen., but the woman rarely. After Anderu also on the roses, barberries, willows and many others
bushes. Tortrix heparana Treit. Flying in July; to Schmidberger
Apple trees, according to others on various other trees. Caterpillar
towards '/, inch long, light green; Stronger or weaker over the back
flown in. Dirty white warts, with some of the same color
hair, stand in ordinary order. head and neck shield
shiny greenish. claws and feet light green,

Tortrix aylosteana L. Jini Vis July flying , except on hedge-
cherry and rowan et., also on fruit trees. Certainly without
interpretation. Tortrix lacvigana Vienna. dir. Common, from early to late July's
flying. Ranpe in May and June on the various Biéumen and
Striinchern: hazelnuts, currants, roses, Weissdom, and without
She also lives doubts about fruit (apple) bins. %/, inches long,
dirty white, light gray or yellowish green or tinging to brown. In
in youth the relatively broad head is black, later dark yellow
or burned, The nape of the neck burned brightly or darkly, clawed feet
mottled blackish or burnt. Banch and Baveh feet off-white
or white-green. Thin back line and according to Freyer such a one
side prank. Visible only when magnified, not visible through color
Distinguishing little Wirts with light hair, which are particularly
young caterpillars stand out more conspicuously. You can find them at a young age
socially, in spread webs of many confused ones
strands woven together, later lonely. In their misery
filled, contracted leaves from late June to mid-July
the transformation takes place. Tortrix ribeana Hiibn. moths late June to mid-July. grass green
or greenish caterpillar with darker, through the guts visible
formed rear stripe. Extremely fine, black savory; uur the des
second and third rings clearly. Head mixed green and yellow, black-brown
licked. The anal valve forms a red, black mark. Neck-
shield burned black, with a very fine white longitudinal line, claws black. Belly and feet greenish. In May and June on apple and pear
bium. Rolls up your living sheet very nicely. She too throws herself at the
Attacking it just got closer, bonding between leaves,
Westwood drops his ribeana Hiibn. anf sickle- and currant-, too
live on berberis stalks. Birnwickler, Tortrir Holmiana L. Moths in July and early
fear. The simple yellow raiup with a red head and a black one
Nape shield and warty elevation on the eighth ring is common
on fruit trees. Pupa yellow-red, moth .schin réthlich-brown with
blunt triangular blemish, distinctive of the insect at first sight. Nérdlinger, the little enemies. 2

 

 

354

Tortrix cevasana Hiibn, moth from June to July, lays its beer
near the buds of fruit trees: cherries, pilawnen, sloe
hen ete, the caterpillar feeds on the young leaves and buds
muy time of departure in Frithjehr, you reached at completed
Growth, in May, about */, inch. Thr head is heart shaped and like
the horny nape and clawed feet black-brown, body
light green, slim, hairy. In one or more by a wide-ranging
white web of tangled leaves. between these
it also folds into the brown one on the back, on the wing sheaths
nnd below but grime doll with almost anchor-shaped anal tip,

Tortrir sorbiana Hitbu. Flies in June, The caterpillar is said to be on Kirseh-
leaf live, which rolls them up lengthwise, Will */, inch
long and has dark gray, also bluish gray gold color. head glistening
black, neck brown and the gauze body with whitish spots
protected. Pectoral feet black, ventral feet brown, metamorphosis in May
to a black-brown doll. In addition, Schmidberger speaks of another on his
fruit bitumen, close to ribeana, and
I myself have raised several species of the same origin, without but
to record the nature of the caterpillar, a species 2. B., which the Sehosse von
Birnbanmen durebnagie, about like the 'Zweiabstecher',* is miv
according to the moth unknown. Ebeuso cine caterpillar on apple trees,
ciwas longer than the fruit maggot, fairly flat, pale yellow, with réth-
head, six-footed, the hooked feet fleshy, almost white,
the third pair of the same started for the bladder, long transparent ones
Horsts on small, barely visible lumps. The family of the moths thus offers fruit tree growers an opportunity
that is, the knowledge of agricultural entomology still many times over
vu stay. ©) Under the ridge or in the grove of garden trees. Tortrix Woberana W. V. The - ————— long, yellow-green caterpillar
has a brown head, is covered with thin standing hair and eats
Going under the bark of cherry, plum, apricot
Almond and apple trees You can recognize them by the wooden scraper,
that expels them from the ranks. You should stop the leakage of sifts
result in unnatural growths and the death of the bark. After hibernation in May, the packaging takes place in a narrow
tawny pupa. with rows of very closely standing maidens and
pressed spittle with four curved bristles, after 3-4 weeks, mostly
. In early July, the moth flies, moving through marble-like

— | mixed lighter and darker brown and in between
lying glittering gold spots and silver lines, in particular

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a black-lined gold mirror toward the tip of the forewings
award. ~— It is recommended against the insect to scrape,
cut and spread the old cracked bark and morbid
Places to destroy the beers, marriages and dolls,

A silly species of butterfly, Tortrir areuana., in hazel stems. d) In the flower or berries of the grapevine. The grape moth, the grape maggot (hay
worm, sourworm). Tortric urana Oh. (uvae Henn,
Roserana Treit., ambiguella Miibn.) This shameful, of all wine
farmers known Kerf is from Herm
Director v. Roser in the correspondence
blatt des wirttembergisches land
economic club in a heff. but, very thoroughly,
wrote. The kerf is found in moral Germany, the
Switzerland, northern Italy, France and is true
apparently as widespread as the vine. — The butterfly comes
appears for the first time in the year after the first warm, with mild
the spring days accompanied by noon, according to Herrich-
Schiffer in April, according to others in May or June. (With me
a moth came out in a heated room as early as February.) Only the ones before the flowering period. moths that have flown out of the vine
are said to be able to damage the vine through their brnt, which
rend of the Blithezcit flying »spients* against the vine
no longer be dangerous [?}. The moth sits there all day
on the vine on a Plitz-
chen and lies only from the onset of dusk until morning
7-8 p.m. His lifetime is only a few days. The female (of the first gencration) lays his supposedly
white, glistening Kier on the Blithenbuischel and after
Henning also anf the most tender vine shoots, so that the
Sone Kier and blooms at the same time. The resulting Riu pehen, the hayworm. *

 

 

 

356

 

remarkably barely visible, waxes
look bright and reach a length
_ by % inches. Your color is beginning
lich Vothbraun, finally flesh-colored, She lives from the Tranbeu-
blithe, weaves 3—4 flower heads together and tears, in
sitting in the middle, cen button around the other on. Are
all consumed, others are reunited. The brioche
should not endure the sun and
does not live long. It is also claimed that white
the first time the caterpillar persistently warm sci, vicle hay-
worms go to great lengths from the heat. In addition, it is missing
them in this case, albeit their own development
development will be accelerated as a result, but soon at
min. Incidentally, since the next generation of riiupchen
exclusively from Grape Becren Jebt! — At humid and
cold weather, holding back fading, on the other hand
the Ranpe have time and leisure to wage their devastation
judge and the second generation of the insect shall wur mun
so plentiful appearcu, — The spinning of the raisins
does not take place in the blithe, as is often said,
but in cracks in the bark and crevices in the vine stakes. But probably many also go down to the ground
around here, fallen leaves, nests and drgl. using it,
or on the earth, you soft white, silky webs-
to make. — Decided after 8-14 days
the pupa the butterfly, so that is 2 — 3 weeks
after the grape blossom the moth flies for the second time. This would be around July, although there is still a lot
later moths occur. These July butterflies are about to start
to lay Kier again and put them after the one

   

 

 

 

     

   

  
    

    

 

sift through the young berries one at a time
Sting of the butterfly into the becre itself. Therefore, at the beginning of September, one finds bluish spots

' niiclist' the berry stalk. Aut hiinfigstén looks than you at

a’ den dem

   

 

closed Tranben and here whole. especially
If you search briefly

 

 

Main stitch first * hanging berries. 357

then after the Réupemarriage, then one hits it first
core, or even in this. A little later, however, when the
berry has become grittier, with the rump in the pit,
with the head against that in the middle of the bluish spot
standing hole gekehri. This serves ili to get out
of rubbish, which often sticks to a thread in quite a bit
quantity of the berries. The Ranpe (at that time
called sourworm) gradually hollows out the berry completely or
a part to the skin and core, goes through the
fiiiirted hole and eats into a neighboring one:
berry hiuein u. s. f., making a caterpillar
in a day 8-4 berries should be crushed
ven come [2] and if ilr life
takes a long time, manclinal cine whole
'Grape. None | One should in the latter
Kalle uoch mnter all aushdhlien
berries on the drilled core die-
able to recognize those, vou
whence the caterpillar went out. - Of
spread the eaten berries wis
Mold, Séiure, Fituwhuiss. Also
in September, they say, live them
Caterpillar not long when lighter somen-
seem to rule, but consume in
in this case a dozen at most
Berries, always be restless and yer disappear before the end of Sep-
tember, while in cool and damp weather:
Devastations continue and often right up to the end of October
find be, This second generation Ranpe is called
Described somewhat larger and flesh-colored, before winter
The caterpillar digs like the frithere into cracks and crevices
of the arrow and the vine. But they certainly get confused
also vicle in dead foliage, in captivity with: me
have the Réiupchen several times from a yellow

 

 

  

   

 

 

 

' Apparently, considering her small size. -

358

Adorned foliage in a stack and cin faltentor-
dingy dress, or if you want, a flat yellow sack
Manufactured, with which they are made in the manner of the Sacktiger caterpillars
the height rose and settled somewhere to be in the
sac to pupate and in the next spring as a moth
appear. Certainly the caterpillar watches this process
also often in the open air, That made by the autumn caterpillar
When spun, it should be a little denser than that of the summer caterpillar. {near next spring the butterfly develops,
mentioned above. y. Roser and also Dr, Nenning take a double
generation on as set out above;
the former even finds the beginning of a third in the year
conceivable. harmfulness. The rampant damages the vine two-
times a year: once at Blithezcit. Nenning found on one
Bunches 5-12 weeks. But he assures that through
the Riupehen not a single grape would be completely destroyed. the
but what is more significant, he says, is the damage caused by them
second generation. This lingers far longer in the berries,
eats them up, contaminates them and, in wet weather,
which the grapes were seized and eaten by the gods
be harvested as soon as possible. In dry weather,
for the eaten berries dry like cibes. If it is true that the heat of the sun is the excellent
enemy of the insect, this explains why steep vineyards,
where the sun's rays are quite glaring, after the ver-
security little or no you have to suffer him,
the lowlands, on the other hand, are very exposed to it. than that
The proximity of lakes, brooks,
called meadows. You also look for yourself, but in
connection iit the grape species, erlliven that the island
Reichenau in Lake Constance especially much of the grape moth
wu has suffered, which falls under the category of soft grape
varieties of tranben, such as the small
berger, the Austrians, Grinfreus, Lambe

 

 

 

 

     

 

 

    

   
 
 

 

Is, with us the

359

Elves suffer most of all. On the other hand, one hears
Damage to the Rissling, Burguuders, Orleans, Muska-
tellers little or no complaints. «To protect the insect
begen, avoiding the vines on deep cool will
shady places, as well as the choice of softer grape varieties,
a lower cut of the sticks is also recommended. why
Get things done for the insect to reproduce
should be beneficial, it is hard to shave off! Rath for the extermination of the existing butterflies
one looks at the ever-recurring ineffective fires, in
which they are to fly,—The crushing of the little ones
Caterpillar in the bloom is probably only on a small scale, au cam-
mering e.g. B., be possible. The appropriate one is also recommended
Processing of the vineyard soil, 4-6 weeks yor and
immediately after flowering; apparently around the ones on the ground
spun puppets zn tédten, But it will be yor everything
mi watch his whether really the number winders that are
spun on the earth, so big business is worthwhile. - At
in some places there is a regulation, in winter the bark
wuhen scrape and burn the vine, In this one
Relation is again only to determine whether a not so
deep scraping the dolls properly destroyed, because
a deeper scraping chew evidently the ohuchin the frost
so easily subdued vine only become unholy. Remarks on the hayworm and sanerworm on the grapes,
by C.v. R, 1835. Correspondence sheet, XVI. Band, Decbr. 1829, 8 244 dr Nenning: About cin the grapes highly harmful, excellent
native insect on the island of Reichenan near Constanz, Constanz
1840,

A very similar way of life leads to Kollar
and Treitsehke the grapevine moth, Tortrix reliquanw Treit. (vitisena Jacq.) The moth with yellow-brown head, black-
ringed bugs. Forewings rust-colored, flower- yp. light gray marbled. Likewise or w hy two une |
perfect transverse ties. In the middle of the first, after
inside, a dark, rust-colored point. The second bandage
several such dots and dashes and one confused one

 

  

 

the

 

   

 

 

360

drawing consisting of four pairs of hooks in the front margin
jumps. Space between innermost pairs very dark
filled in. Hind wings white, with brownish veins and
snow-white Franzen. In April and May on. the vines
sitting. The eggs are attached to the branches or buds
lays. The young Réupchen develops with the latter. Ks
pulls Blithenknépfehen together with thread and eats them
leaf parts out. Especially detrimental when the blithe
slowly drives out. caterpillar marriages 9 million long, dirty green
with whitish hairy bits. Head and first body ring
yellow-brown. Forefeet blackish, pupation in one
fabric or in scalloped sheet. End of June's pup-
pung. After awolf days, that is in July, the moth. Vo
arising from this, at the end of August the second caterpillar
tion, on the grapes. Living much like the Tranbenwi skler. Pupation at the foot of the vine, overwintering
Puppet. — Especially on espalier embroidery, only in egg
years in the vineyards. Extermination just like in a wedding
developer. Under the name of Pyralis vilana, Bose also destroyed it. Mim, soc. right
Wagricullure 1786, Coquebert lustrations J.t. 7. f. 9. a domestic caterpillar
the grapes, whose moths have greenish wings with three crooked brown ones
have strokes, (Oken II. 3. 8th. 1201.) e) In vine leaf wraps. The Springwickler, Tortrir Pilleriana Ill. Head, Ricken nud

+ antennae of the moth, also the particularly long divided ones
palpi brown. Wings change color soon
—--+ == of shiny golden-green, soon almost nut-brown

| Ground on which the drawings sometimes sharp, sometimes completely
appear washed out. At the root of the forefeet! , on the inner edge,
if there is a brown spot, then two oblique, angular spots follow
and knitted brown bandages, a third such argument before Franz:
edge, hind wing brown, — According to the Constanzer Zeitung (1838, No. Supplement) the moth flies 2u at the same time as the grape moth. The caterpillar is ------——~ long, dark dirty green, somewhat
going brown. Leather type head, shiny brown. pronotum
lighter maroon. A dark line across the back and a
Streak in the sides. Many white plinkichi visible only with magnification,

 

 

 

361

according to Freyer, they are solely distinguished from lacrigana by their denseness
According to Freyer, the caterpillar is often in in some years
the vineyards near Constanz, and she lives in rolled up ones
Vine leaves and causes damage in the case of strong propagation, The
Vineyard owners call them the jumpworm, (interesting analogy with
the pruner.) According to Treitschke (Vienna. pref.) would the caterpillar aut
Stachys germanica live. The pupa is black-brown with a thin back
I love you. Where it pupates is not specified. — butterflies
after 3-4 weeks. The extermination, by crushing the Rainpehen im
coiled sheet, is stated to be fairly light. f) In buds or between leaves of the rose,

The golden-yellow Rosenwieller, Tortrir Bergmanniana L. (rosana
hitbn.) moths with light golden front lien, whereupon mehvere t
bits of orange color and transverse lines. — Fleury Lily — Si
of four silver cross bands bordered in orange
pulled. French light yellow. Hind iris reddish grey. Flies at the end of June
and early July. The caterpillar lives on garden roses and appears with the leaves
unequal, in April. In its full size it is light yellow, previously green
pale mat yellow, over the back with moving green, through the pulse
or resulting spots. Head shiny black, first joint ring
with two closely adjoining, horn-like, black spots. Fore wing black. After brown, 'Triige in her movements. she
hears the flowers buttons, but remains unnoticed until they. ~ —— Long Kuospen has gone out. She likes to help herself at the end of the
'Twigs, from the young leaf and flower shoots, pull up here
they cinige blitter together, fastened them with a fine weave and
goes only when there is a lack of food. She points to the roses 2
while doing great damage and often eats the blisters of the same pretty badly
together, The transformation takes place in May in a small web,
between tightly closed leaves. pupa first yellow, then brown-yellow,
finally brown, at the beginning of each ring two rows of different sizes, oblique
backwards directed spines. The end in crammed Hikehen starting. After 14 days or 3 weeks the butterflies of the evening mn
dic Rosenstriincher, Black takes a second generation in September
but which ‘Treitschke doubts. Bouché recommends against the lusekt the laborious inspection of all shoots
and buds, for the best means he holds iibvigens brushing the
Rose bushes in winter with strong bristles, especially in the forks
and behind the eyes, then he considers it advisable, the old, outdated
remove wood at times 2 because he accepts fob with right? }, there

 

 

    

    

  

 

 

 
 

 

   

  

   

  

   

 

36

iy

 

like to silt the kids in winter. Freyer wants you to ramp up
remove the contracted leaves. The Garden Rose Wiekler, Tortrix Forskaeleana L. Flies in
—— and July, head and back golden yellow. hind wing and

Feet white-yellow. Front wing shiny _light golden yellow, very
finely gridded in orange color. Below the yellow front edge there is one
orange-colored line, which, becoming rust-colored, extends at the tip of the wing
towards the inner edge. Hind wings dull golden yellow. The yellowish-green, individually haired caterpillar has a brown head and one
Pronotum with brown spot. The hair root warts form black ones
dots. It is after Bouché the garden roses, especially centifolia
sometimes very harmful. Extermination as in the previous one. By the way, several subordinates still live on roses, however
sometimes} Boxy moth species, In May and early June a sehmutzig
Green, stretched, the variegana very succulent caterpillar with shiny black
on the head, shiny black, came a grooved neck shield, black
Sternums and from each section four standing in the trapezium lighter
green cloves with yellowish bristles, a same hair point on the
side of each ring, next to the black ringed air hole, wnd a
further below this, end of May pupa; black with thorn crimson toes like
pruniana. In mid-June the variegana iiusserst in size and colour
similar moths, but whose forewings are white toward the tip instead
are earth yellow. In July the second Ranpengeneration, the beginning of July
fully grown, so that at least two generations a year
exist, Tortrix ochroleucana Hiibn,

With the previous one, numerous in individual years, such as e.g. B. 1853 in
the delicate spring leaffish of wild and soft-leaved garden
roses, but also from Centifolia, ee — ————., lye, somewhat clumsy,
Matt, dirty brown, finely shattered curler bead, with strikingly light
fem yellow-brown head, gleaming black divided neck shield,
black forelegs and black anal flap, four pitch browns with
on each ring and some
in the sides. May and June, pupates in latter month
in a cugen white spun-on case between the leaves. Pupa yellow-brown with Doruen wreaths, moth with white forewings
gel their root, marginal edge and specular spot brown. Cande June and
Early July (1853). Defeat one by spinning and gnawing
Lots of rosebuds and chew away just by opening the clusters
will be, without a doubt, several generations. Tortrix aquana Hitbn. (robo-
rana W.VJ

Westwood leads, no doubt, to the Vienna, Verz. next, nor tortria
oporana Hiibn. than on roses and blackberries. after v. ‘Tischer
(reitschke) but this species would live on white marvels. 363

C. Moth or cockroach tinea. If so, too deu

y smallest moths, even the very small
P sten butterflies comprehensive. — With pre-

ing, heavily clogged head, long journeys
long, not shouldered, usually narrow, narrow
which almost encircle the body when at rest (see Korumotte,
$.373), have a strong fringed hem, especially at the back
Terwings, the margin of which looks upwards at the same time when at rest. — Remarriages at 16, rarely at 14, 8 or even
groomed legs; the latter with the Blitterminirern. head
with forked line, behind it a divided neck shield. savings
Sam hairy or smooth, with regular rows of warts. Lifestyle extremely varied. The ones in the marrow of
wood, the bark, others on and in the leaves and blossoms,
or from the seeds, or in the products of the Biencu
live; still others in animal matter. some creeping free,
the others in an artificial sack. Dolls thin, embroidered, often with a long tail:
Wing sheaths and a long rattle trail, at the end of the tail
with rounder Afterwnlst or all kinds of Auhingsclu. Naked,
very rarely with a half-crown of thorns on the back. Free
or turning into cocoons. generation mostly simple,

The key to finding the likewise small or very small

Riupehen again, like the moth moth, is based simply on food
and place of residence. a) In bee sticks: Tiuca cerella (melonetta). b) In hair and wool fabrics: 7. pellionella, sarcitella, crinella, tapezella,
lactecla,

©) In the stored grain: 7. granella, cereatella. 4) In dried fruits and stems: T. elutella. ©) On fruit trees: 7. cognatella, padella, evonymella, asperella, per-
sieella, cacsiella,

t) In pilaunt and cherry blossoms: 7 pruniella,
¥) Ant Spiny Becren: T. grosswlavietla. h) On Mbbren and Kiinmel fields: 7. daucetla,

i) On reps and kitchen plants: 7. zylostella. k) On night violets: 7. porrectella. 1) On epilobia: 7. epilobiella. ui) On spinach: 7, Rocsella. 364

n) On rosebuds: T. rhodophagella,
0) sack and Blatiminreirumare in tree, shrub and vine leaves,
(Appendix: Alucita rhododactyla anf Rosen.) a) In beehives. The wax cockroach, bee cockroach, tinea cerella
hitbn. Qnelonella L.) Méaunchen significantly smaller than that
Female; Body with heavily dusted grey, indented
Forewings with dark purple colored ones on the rear edge
stand at the last lick. Hindwings lighter at the base, opposite
the tip grey. The stout, wit diimem legstaclel
yerschene female is of brown-
grave body colour, —diuklergraven,
purple colored ones, aim Sanu
slightly sinuate forewings, w

 

eat
granen hindwings. — The accidental
equality of both sexes in Grésse
and Form used to give the other Aumalme two verses
which species, a honey and a guard cockroach, causes
let. (Tinea metonella and cerella.) The wax cockroach, even schou deu ancient Greeks and
Rémer well known, inhabited by the beehives, mainly
lich if these contain old comb, aim lightest
one observes their way of life in notches, their people
is extinct over winter. The moth is not found before Eude Mai, usually
from early June, through July and August and into the
September near and on the sticks, win here
to shed its brood. — The bees know the danger
which threatens them from their feud and fall if the
Moth tries to get into the hive, raging over it. Notch with Schr wide flighty, or solehe, thy free,
dv h, wiverstrichen sit on the board, are for him sel
cheap, but the best thing he can do is to get his eggs,
when at the top of the basket, where there is a little cup,
Cracks or small openings through which he put his E
to the honeycomb, notch, which

 

 

   

 

 

 

  

 

  

 

 

eeee

365,

 

are not managed properly, so seldom swarm
of wax cockroaches. That the bees themselves the young réup- . should often carry in their sticks, as Léw states,
seems silly and is certainly based on a confusion
with the meloé larvae (page 112). The cookies are up
falling small, for its thickness is only 0.85 million, i. H. the-
same as thy relatively small hair cockroach
shows in her eggs. Her shape is a sharp blunt ki-shape,
here and there taste spherical. They eat at the moment of
be very soft, deun da sic, probably in the
rule, are laid on flat heaps by the cake,
do not push yourself hexagonally. you are under
connect to and with the substrate with glue. Color dirty red white. translucent and, because
covered by a lot of pressed flat points, without all
Shine; sit together after crawling. The little tears that crept out of the tree
eat into the honeycomb and a hair-
spinning fine going. However, I must note that
I, like Résel, numerous very young Réupe marriages at
raise the notch between: basket and board found, thus always-
conceivable is what Résel claims, that namely the
young Ritupchen Initially enough food in the growth
find traps on the pedestal board. Probably thin
they both. After Kollar live mainly at night,
where they are less controlled by the bees. During their development, they always keep in their
As already mentioned, they would not work with silk
are very tightly spammed. With the thread weaves the
Ranpe always at the same time in a few layers wax crimson ~
and brown, somewhat black rubbish, which is nothing else
res is than that consumed by the caterpillar and through their
Intestinal wax and a cigen-derived down

 

 

 

 

 

   

   

should

 

 

 

has a squashed and at the same time longitudinally striped shape, with
meuder Grésse also widen the ginge up to spring
keel thick and in 24 hours the caterpillar is stationary. the

     

 

 

366

 

Continue passage through 5-6 cells, hilly from one side
a comb through the bottom of the cells through anf the other
honeycomb side. The nourishment of the ranch is the wax itself,
she deserves it, however, only slightly, because she can
several generations of caterpillars could feed on the rubbish. They sometimes also occur in the honeycombs, if
their true nourishment does not consist of honey. However, Réaumn has also been associated with other substances: leather,
Paper, dry land, wool in multiples for years
fed generations. The very young Réaupchen very much
small, transparent with reddish transparent intestine. Head brownish yellow, rather flat. The adult caterpillar, +
umpteen spindle-shaped, rather thick, off-white. head and that
divided neck shield chestnut burnt. The white partition
line runs further down over the Ritcken. Pectoral feet white
with brown-yellow incisions and tip. Second and third
Body section with eight pairs of yellowish ones standing in a wreath
Point warts with pale hair. The following with eight
simple spices of the same kind. Closing flap light burned. Résel takes only three as a daner of caterpillar development
weeks on. I hereby agree that in a
young beehive, taken only in June, in mid-August
moths already abandoned, attached to the base board
crazy found. On the other hand, the later Ranpen need which
hibernate, of course a longer time. To pupate, the caterpillar produces a dense elastic
stic, white silk boat-shaped, also with filth
interwoven web in a crook of the honeycomb or ciner
Cell. The caterpillar lies three, according to Résel four weeks and
transformed in the housing. — The doll is timid
very soft and always remains tender. she's bruiun-
light yellow. Down the whole ridge, from the head on,
a strong, robust, rothbramner keel that particularly
expresses itself strongly in front of the tip of the pupa. Zn his
on both sides is the back of red-brown nuclei

 

 

———~ long, whale-

 

367

rough uh. On the sides of the abdomen ovate bristles, against
the tip plantar warts. The tip itself very idiosyncratic
lich, obtuse, split into awvei halves. The top one
Species unholy brown shield forming. The lower stop
in the middle with a bipartite wrinkled hump, nehen
a triangular, brown shield on the right and left. Of the
Butterfly does not appear until 14-18 days after
transformation into a doll. A double genera-
tion in the year by claiming that the tiber-
wintered caterpillars appear as moths in the Frith year and
Ranpen, which fly in July, originate from these moths
(Zenker). This Amalie has a lot for herself and I believed
very much in mind when I inven am Milte Augusts
Backing board of a young swarm caught in June
already. webs abandoned by the moth. Here, dachy
I, apparently, were put in the basket in June Kier,
and the resulting caterpillars have under the
Effect of summer heat rapidly developed into moths, Will
I aunch me nothing else, the caterpillars which the ge-
described weaves made, en from the winter herrith-
rende, who have migrated from my neighboring notches, so
So I have to assume a short summer generation. But that pupae hibernate and a spring generation
exist (Zenker, collar ete. ), as indicated above
is taken, my observations do not want to be taken
stiitigen, which find in: contradiction with Zeller and Zenker
I, even if over the entire summer, then in the spring
ling no moths. Rather, my caterpillars pupated
in captivity as late as June 1853 and at the same time
in 1854, but the moths appeared in June, July,
August, a few in September, they laid a mass
Kier, which soon crept out and now, at the end of September,
only 1 million have reached a goal (the latter also their goal
in other years in October in the notches), so that
I would be inclined to assume a simple generation, init

 

  

   

      

 

 

 

368

long flight time of the moth with slightly different grip:
the Ranpen, the above observations in the
Path. — Each fulls further observations are caught,
all the more so as those on forced-in Ranpen for the
dwelling in the warm hives of bees, concerning the
development data are not entirely important. E

Résel complains very much about the disgusting smell that the
to spread wax cockroach caterpillars in the sticks. I
don't find him that bad. In addition, the damage
which they donate in the beehives, thoughtful and fabri
often when there are hundreds, to the total
destruction of the stick. True, the Iusekt lives, like us
have seen, usually in the murmuring of the honeycombs,
occasionally the raipen seem but also faces like
cover with spider web. That's how Mr.
strator Brodibeck a very populous hive in spite of its h-
store of honey from hunger 2u reason, because wax
cockroaches that had combs jiberspun whole. - In the
Frithling the bees seemingly create dozens of caterpillars
out lifeless and fly with it like they just aut's
Pedestal board thrown down soon recover and rise
again at the inner Uinfe

 

 

  

   

   

 

ig of the basket up to the honeycomb. easily through
the flat longitudinal ones, with longitudinal notches

 
 

Her nature, by the way, always reveals itself

 

'
' ties a provided brown or brown-black

Mele &, Unrath, which the bees daily out:
sluggish

Above all, careful custody is a precautionary measure.
tion, to name the extinct notch in which one can
wants to catch a swarm. one squanders

  

 

don't forget all
gen and Rizen, so that the moth does not lay eggs or
even crawl in ramps. One has an observant
Keep an eye on the moths that cheer the summer on with dachfér-
medium wings on tar notches en; one destroys them anf

£ <=Sa' of the place; as well as the dolls that often
A 7 .in its web between standing board nud"

 

 

 

309

Find undersaiz board. Recommended by those against the Faltef-
some torches, on which they shall burn their wings,
what was said in general about the beacons applies. Kin Stoek, who does not have very many caterpillars, becomes ¢
ttber master, and creates the ramps from time to time, be-
especially in spring, out. I saw this on a pre-
excellent stick, from which a multitude of caterpillars came out
created, around which I only insofar under the arms
gviff when I saw the numerous vou in April Gfters morning
caterpillars thrown by the bees on the bed
accepted, so that she would not, as often happened, go back to the
honeycombs. Herm Brodtbeek even managed to
pen very afflicted stick bordered by a ueu
populous and active swarm completely
and get rid of all cockroaches. Such a hive manned by sea caterpillars
to clean yourself is merely by cutting out
honeycomb, or if the basket can be dismantled,
removing and reinserting the combs possible, after
the caterpillars in theirs by means of a sharp wire
Géangen taught a powerful stab. you approach
tberiliissi seems to be hooking or drilling

I have here the tinea “colonella Hiibn. Ex
still grinning eyes, with rithlichgranen jagged unu with a
forewings marked with black dot. you sol! as a caterpillar in the
nests of the manror bee. In fact, I don't have them yet
Raised from beehives, however, find them all too common in July, especially
In the evening, near my hives. not to suspect 2
that they also play a role here. Also a small species of 16 million. (Minnchen) md
26 million (females) wing tension, with yellow-grand, cin-colored vertebrae
wings and ocher-yellow head, lives in the bee-stalks, whether sexual,
is still there. Tinea aleearia PF. tilmung thun, ciner

 

 

‘b) Maar and woolly cockroaches. The cockroach, Tinea pellionella L., with
rough, red-yellow head, glistening gray . |
Nérdlinger, the enemies of Klemen. *

 

370

abdomen, brownish lighter ringed abdomen, selwar-
zen feelers and feet, metal-like light golden-brown
of the wings, on the second third part of which a dark brown one
Point stands, as well as closer to the root, on the first
Third part, usually two such dots or dashes, are filigree
notched against the fringes. Franzen after imen
particularly wide, whitish. Winter wings shimmering yellowish. The fallier flies in late May, June and often late
July in the houses, mainly in the evening and in the light,
into which one sees him flying Gfters. The female lays
his Kier in Pelazwaaren, and it appears afterwards
8-12 days small tears, which from the refuse
of the fur hairs they eat, a robe of
in the form of a tube that is more wide than round,
that when the bundle is 14 days old, already 2 million. The tube shows an opening at the front
before hanging out with the front body
cry it eats, and an enigigengeseizie zany emptying
of rubbish. As she grows, this one will too
Hill expanded. In November or December it's over-
grown, narrow, yellowish white, oil
deer; head wid cervical
shield bright or black-brown, Ueber
——~ the doe runs through the skin through
shining red-brown line. It gets alarmed quickly
to his sack and back there again, can also be done
likes to descend on a safety thread, and makes up if
it scines sacks beanbt, a new one, from Febroar
until April they go together for the purpose of breeding
men, close the openings of their sleeves, shorten
see, and transform at the end of April, but mainly in
May into a white, later tan pupa without a stalk
pointed, from which the moth emerges after 14 days. —
Treitschke now has two generations a year (Juni caterpillars
and fiberwintering). This hair-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

sit

cockroach it is well, which I so houlig in houses, and
as sack-carrying hay in the hair stores of the hair
kriusler, as well as with the carriage cockroach in the upholstery factory
find my companion. The little cookies they mean before
eyes are lingual, quickly deviating above and below
blunt, glistening translucent, amileh white, with ling-
marriage. They will be single or a few like that

loosely glued to the hair or bottom of furs that
they fall off very easily. The cockroach, Tinea sarcitella T., has the same size. Her
Kirper is whitish-grain, shimmering with metal dust in the sun; 2u both
On the sides of the back, at the beginning of the wing, there is a white often barely visible
bare pinky. Fithler fulenform, blackish, delicately veined with white
curls, also dyed the feet. All wings ash grey. Only at the Franzen
edge of the front, more or less clearly, two darker dotted umd
a white cross line. Fling in May and Jui. She lays her eggs though
generally of the same objects, but particularly fond of
dead butterflies, the longer time open in collections or
connected to clamping boards. After about 14 days comes
the Réiupehen from the egg and bites into the insect, clogs
the hole with webs and rubbish, and only later does it reveal itself
a larger hole he mown through which the casting fell out,
After three months it is fully grown. Head ruthbrann, Naekenschild
brown, divided into two angular spots by a white central line
The area of ​​the abdominal feet is the thickest. Much smoother towards the front. The ocher yellow skin sprinkled with many black spots on which
Arte Irehen stand, usually spin around the belt to the Ve
puppung in his own volition. But history outside, so
she makes herself a brown-grey boat-like mess mixed with rubbish
weave. She remains unchanged until March or April and then becomes
to the yellowish brambly, shiny, very flexible, with a small stick tip
provided doll. After 3-4 weeks the moth,

The feather cockroach, Tinea crinella Tr it, is something common
smaller than the previous ones, has rust-red head; body and
Flagels are paler, cinnamon red-yellow and shiny, more
silky than metallic, the butterfly flies to the same
time like the previous ones

The Réupchen according to Treitschke 8-9 million. long, eylin-
Thrid, white, glabrous with brown shimmering through
Longitudinal line over the ridges and burned horn-clear

 

 

eg

 

    

 

 

 

    

  

 

 

  

 

372

Head. Nothing is said about a neck shield, and also
I didn't catch a glimpse of those I was under
hand. It lives with the previous en masse in the
upholstery on the backs of furniture, especially in the beard and
the scele of feathers and on dead insects. to Freyer
it is intentionally in one cm sack. Treitschke speaks of this
not, on the other hand he says that after sic the summer and
spent the following winter in the Gegeustinden,
in the spring they cin lingliches on their outer ropes,
yorn offenses fabric, in which they used to at the beginning of April
yellow-brown very agile doll. Treitschke
assumes double generation here as well. The taptense, Tinea Tapesella L., is in the

 

     

   

 

 

' rule noticeably larger, and by their drawing
~~ ung affected. The head is white, the
| ridges and the first third of the wing root

black-brown. The two remaining thirds are white with
bluish-gray Jichten stains wid Gfter's own black
zen points. Hedgehog granu. — Butterflies in May, June,
July flying with the previous ones, puts those of pellionella
very tiny eggs on clothes, fur, wallpaper,
lodie insectia, snuffed birds, feathers and the like. The one not described in more detail, similar to the previous ones,
but certainly by their greatness among the relatives aut:
falling ranch grows in a cylindrical sack from the
randomly inhabited by ihy substance, will he ile with increasing
idet ilm since wiris,
and also lengthens ilm. transformation into

 

 

 

   

   

If the big one is narrow, then it's sclui
seizes something ci

 

,
this sack in the interior of the objects, so that only

pushes the doll halfway out. Protective means against which hair and wool cockroaches are
above all cordoning off the endangered objects against
the females laying eggs, common use, little ones,
Knock, keep clean. In addition, care is rightly
filigree wrapping of objects in sulphurized or in salt
Linen towels washed with nitrate or saltpeter water are recommended. Also

373

lightly rolled in paper, in clothes sinks ete. laid
Tinsel candles, pine wood, Juchten are supposed to deter. — engine
tencicr kéumen, 'since they lie very loosely on top, slightly
be tapped or brushed off. But once they are
Caterpillar marriages in the objects, so movement drives them away
etc. not. On the other hand, nan solehes of palvrigem assures
Misenvitriol to strent into. At the erinella, where
the webs with the dolls especially on the back walls
of the furniture, these can be removed by bursting
will. . The white-shouldered cockroach Tinea lueteella W. V.
(betulinella Hitbn.) “Fin little moth, with on:
falling white head and shoulders (eream-shoul- —-—-
tered, Westwood), silver-grey forewings init ctwa fin
black-grained spots, sometimes also large soles
spots, réthlich-grey very large fringes and réthlich-
gray hinler flags, felters and be brown. — last
tere curled. Carries the wings flat over the body. —
Hines of the meanest insects, that in summer, almost that
flies in the houses all year round in the evening and at night,
in wool clothes and hair, probably as sackcloth
supporting Ranpe lives quite like the preceding ones, and the-
has the same meaning. After a letter from Dr. Her-
rich-Schiiffer, who had the gite, gave me the moth's nemen
a, the ramp would match Staint’s
follow in the Gelreide live. This may be right. s
but hundreds of specimens come from upholstery and
hair, I also have the moth from his hair saek
self educated. nm. Think

 

 

c) In the stored grain. The Korum otte or the white =
Kornwarm, Tinea granella L., is a
Small butterfly with thread-like =

at the same time fine-grained Vithler, thick, light yellow hair
clap on the head. from each other standing purrs,

 

 
      
 

 

374

duawen one consisting of two fudenformigen aids
ruffle. The wings cover the body when at rest
of the Selunetterlings, like a rounded roof, are in the hin-
terrand fringed and form with this fringed Mint
rand a kind of high-rising Hahuenkamms. They are
silvery whitish-grey, ctwas buut of white, bran and black;
4-5 particularly large spots of the latter color. body and
Hind wings whitish gran. The female somewhat larger,
but his abdomen, which is often said to hold a few 100 kier. From the end of May the moths can be found in most
sten jaliren in large quantities in and at granaries. Hardly born, they mate, in the evening
men they wuher tid you can also see them very hinfig in
fly to residential buildings. The moth does not live as long as the black one
Korn because already at the beginning of July the last ones die
butterflies. At 16. July 1851 was found on the
henheim seed soil no longer a single one, although
the thousands of dead animals found in the spinu
ben found hanging, betraying the great Auzabl, in which sic
had existed shortly before. Nevertheless find each other at ease
individual Spiitlings until autumn, So Kude August flew
and early September 1851, in the evening when I
authoritative article, some corm moths in my
Room near a small Quautitéit grain. In order to lay eggs, the female seeks
stored grain. Rdésel provided Gliser with grain
up in his room and soon saw the corn moths
and fly in, Mau says the butterfly ziche fir his
Incubate the new grain before the old. This walrschein-
Lich, because fresh grain is more thirsty and therefore
which makes moth more noticeable than old grain. But she is certainly also looking for very old fruit that is lying low
like on. Erath also sts her children on the field
put on axles. This allegation loses a lot of truth
probability, considering that the juuge caterpillar

  

 

   

    

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

375

at these cores cine gauz different way of life than usual
had to drive. — Résel observed that the moth a,
put at most two Kier to a Korn. They were tight (walir-
apparently mostly glued to the soft tip of the same),
only properly visible through the magnifying glass, round,
according to others oblong round, yellowish white, reticulate
third The female is supposed to lay about 30 eggs, very small ones
Mites, however, visit and eat these children more often. Every
Kind of grain is the moth equally good for its future
Brut, from Rye and Haber to Welschkorn. It is particularly common in Waizen, by the way. After 10-14 days the caterpillars have emerged. One finds alsdaun at the soft tip of the Kérner
Klimpehen of all white little balls, which are nothing else,
as the rubbish of the raisin, which turns into the mealy
has eaten into the interior of the grain. Thus in the year 1851 am
26 July. The easily recognizable caterpillar has yellow-brown
head, behind it a small brown nape
chen, is white as bone, has three like all common caterpillars

 

 

 

 

  

Pair of clawed feet wid four pairs of ventral feet, also one
Couple of followers. It is repeated several times. The few aut
you can hardly see the bright wart brushes on each ring,
even when cs is fully grown. — Does the réupchen have them
mealy substance of the grain that serves as food
eaten up, it looks for a neighboring one
grain around which it first of the original high
visited and to which it, its rubbish shared
zenud, a covered passage spit. This is it
6fters back and forth, Soon it also has the softness of
sometimes grain, if this is small, e.g. B. a rye grain,
, Yerzehvt and ht alsdaun cin third grain in délulieher
way. This is how a whole thing comes about in the end
Klimpehen under cinander connected Kér-
uer, up to 20 and 30 in number. Of the-
inside remains bare except for the shell
1 part of the Mehisubstauz zuviick, viz

   
        

 

 

 

    

 

376

the less, the more unassailable the grains were before. Triticum turgidum and durum, which are mostly not gauz with us
ripen, are drained in the purest way. Dus Réupchen
fully grown in August and September, 10 million long. young years it should already be growing up in July
thu have accomplished. Ks is getting restless at this time, léiutt
every now and then, always spinning along the march, so that
over all the grain heaps, even from one day to the next
others, spread out in a silky white-grey tissue
is. That the grain covered this coating even earlier

come, if you don't turn it around diligently, appears
something inexplicable. A part of the Réupchen makes itself
ner to the powerful transformation

    

now finished grain ké
rightly so. But another, and apparently the greater one,
creeps away, in cracks and beams of the Bretians, especially
if they have become a bit rotten. The Rei
Here we weave a marriage between form and G
of a grain of rye and weave a wooden scraper here, which they
from the structure. gnaw away, Frequently one finds at the same
Put together a lot of such little spiders. until
n Frohling, the little ring remains undiminished in
After Résel, the transformation falters
vShulichen time, in

 

 
  

    

 

 

not at all! his cell
to the cardboard of Miz and April, the ge
especially popular until May. The little doll is in front, as well as the flying
Sheds, thanks brown, skin lighter, they
EXZ, carries a few Afierdérnchen at the top. Chew something about three weeks after Rosel,
14 days after others, the pupa remains in its state. After she last got darker, she pushes herself along
the front body! half an hour later the butterfly steps out of his
fille. He sits quietly until his little wings fly
streekt and assumed its full length, and soon
then he looks for company mn. (The stay-
ing yellow cardboard sleeves, which you can easily attach to beams

   
   

  

 

 

     

    

 

fle out of their lair wd one

 

   

 

 

377

protruding from cracks are an easy
signs of earlier presence of the corn moth on a
Storage). According to the above, the Kormuotia needs to be fully
coming education a whole year; so there is only
a flight and snack time (from the end of May to July). The corn cockroach goes to the side in terms of harmfulness
of the black Koruwumi. Kings even beat the sh-
the one she made 6fters even higher. Resel says
that it is most often dangerous to rye because
this serves more as an object of the Wueher and therefore
longer preserved. become, than wheat, oats and barley. In any case, this remark agrees with our above
according to which the white grain was old grain
at least as welcome as new, iibert

preventive. Erath gives, as schou said,
indicates that the grain usually comes from the field
nature of the insect
lich make every means of pre-banning on the memory pointless
would. But it is certainly unimportant and the Motie lays hers
Kier on the memory. Smearing of the cracks on beams and in the boards
Béden with lime, tar ete. is very zweekmiissig, so that the
Riiupehen have no opportunity to pupate. Tobacco lye, vitriol lye come as a smear if they
the rétupehen gnawing away from Hol
Anti-movement of their web lily or night
zn spit, because the Ranpehen only hit it when s
and From the potency of Haunt,
The same applies to hops as to black grain worms
of the concealing fragrances has already been said. F it
Turning of the crops at the butterfly's flight time, ie
from late May to July, appears quite appropriate, See
one then at the walls of Speich
no butterflies after searching

 

   

 

 

 

 

  

  
 

close zor
are lig
at the

   

  

    

      

grain already out s

 

  

 

let's

 

   

also with care
U.N. fly
especially in the evening no nearer, so it is advisable to use the attic

  

 

to keep closed; but in the other case, especially whom
one throws grain or any unrest in the attic
prevails, more appropriate zn 6open. means of extermination. Have you made sure that
a store of moths is populated in large numbers and these
have certainly already put their little pebbles on the grain,
that's how the butterflies stay during the day, so long
they sit quietly by the wounds, being watched dead. It
However, this assumes that the memory is not too large
and be whitewashed, also contain no cracks
where new moths emerge, otherwise they must
work to be repeated frequently. But the children came
idtet if you transfer the grain in batches
overnight in a hot oven. This too
Téltung the caterpillar suitable means is hardly
can be carried out on a large scale. Suffocation was more likely
in large barrels, as is already the case with the black cornworm
the talk was to be carried out. After all, one wonders at the same time
whether the labor costs also by the resulting benefit
be outweighed, because complete extermination of the cormoth,
which so easily passes over again from the neighborhood, yet
not definitely in prospect for more than a year. Throw at a wall during crawl time
the torn ridges from the hi probably destroyed a part
the same, but the remaining ones and you later say:
still eat into each other’s grains and defeat them
the same, at least as far as it is up to them. Hicissig turning around at the ramp time should be effective s
However, made later in the summer, i. H. if the
Riupchen already likes to hike anyway, it just seems
effective without actually being. They say it should
be made every three days because alsdam
again a hefty number of strips on the top
accumulated

The individual, of which Jautenden Rimpehen with Mithe to
ic on, put in the gadget, stiben or with

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

pursue, ¢

 

to catch Leimuthen or in dug-in Vlasen, and
the kérnerklitmpchen with the bewolken of the Réiupchen
Letting fingers rub it —- is petty. on development
I don't believe in the development of ammonia in the hemp, denu
Riupemarriage, which I spent half a day in an init office
moniak haze plenty of different little flowers had linger
let, did not suffer as a result. With fresh sala water
to sprinkle has its evils, because the grain afterwards
retain an unfavorable humidity. but dry salt
what Résel recommends doesn't work at all; I have a week
plentifully mix the seized grain with salt
mixed and yet the Réiupemarriages lived on
still. Not even crawling out of the cores
they held fir néthi: That is why the salt,
nm to act, to be applied as salt water. The same thing
probably also applies to pepper and saltpetre, apart from that
of the costliness of the remedy. The Vorsehlige, in the corn heap
stuck or, as is said of good success in Dublin,
is said to have found layers of sheaves and fine sand
mu dou [? ], finally burned Spanish pepper,
Letting Kohlmeiscu take a walk and the like. go in the
Series of gimmicks or frivolities. Ks is the place here, aveicr grain moths Erwihuung
au thun, which is performed by fray writers
will,

One, described in detail in Oken V. p. 1207, Tinea cerealella
Reanmur IL. 'P 39, £921 and page 486. She has a riddle, big one
Purrs that curve upwards and resemble two ram's horns
protrude the head; threadlike fillers. Wears the wings south, so
that they cover each other, cinnamon burned above, below like the back anf at-
the sides grainy white. The latter on the inner and rear edges with long ones
hair. The female's abdomen chews under pressure
to double the length of the whole body. Beginning of May until
if they only stay in June, the moth, which is dormant until July, appears
see. Mating lasts several hours when the eggs are laid
'Not by saving it anf

 

 

 

   

 

   

henbane stalk

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

  

 

380

puts it in the gutter of a corn, so that later the creeping gutters
have to argue about the core or disperse, because one finds
ever since, me a single caterpillar drilled into it. The little hole through
You can see that it has eaten itself with the magnifying glass
can't find it, probably because it's at the end of the gully on the white
Rather lies at the top of the germ, If this is the case, then it can also easily be found
defend against the intrusion of neighbors. It is that fact
remarkable, since, as Réaumur states, even if there are so many caterpillars
get by when grains are present. A grain yet uu yer of
Kiner caterpillar is inhabited, so the majority of hangers must die. Dus Riinplein isn't as mean as the black Kornwurm,
yet, without noticing it, it devastates whole hemps of wheat, but especially barley. It is found in the summer, singly in the autumn and late autumn. To
Réaumur's drawing would it be sturdier than the corn moth rampant,
of 7 Mill, Linge. completely naked and completely white, only the head a little
brown, with eight pairs of feet, of which four pairs of banchtisses
only noticeable with a magnifying glass and a little bristle burned from a little bit
surrounded, - a nucleus extends from the ranch to the pupation
must eat, so she eats all the flour so completely from the grain,
that nothing remains but the thin shell, which, if one sic
something presses, gives way. If you open a half-eaten grain, like this
one finds much rubbish, so that Réaumnr assumes that Ranpe is eating
Lastly, when she tackles the flour, her own kirns of dung

A thin, but dense white one makes itself for the sake of replenishment
Spun, a little smaller than the filling and lets out the filth:
the same, so that two cavities are made in the grain
wand finds separated, The septum corresponds to the ins
of the grain. However, the compartment the doll lies in is larger than that
other. - In the spring (one calls almost nothing more than pupae. That
The moth finds a small hole in the side of the grain
instead, somewhat closer to the pointed end of the same. Hangs on the hole
usually a flap from the bowl. She probably has the ramp like that
made so that the defenseless moth only needs to push them off. That
Insect suffers from numerous parasitic diseases, the harmfulness of which ben
Réanmur high, although less than that of granella, Schr
it is obvious about her that she is not disturbed by any rubbish,
rather only betrayed by the softness of the corus when this
presses between fingers 5

_ The other is given without a name, but note that it
not granella, Kirby and Speuce (II. 8, 537 and JIL. 8, 299).
their description by Bonnet and this one by Duhamel, according to later
In 1760 the moth wreaked havoc in the province of Angommois
arranged in wheat; the puppang find in the outhdhiten

 

 

 

    

 

 

    

 

    

 

   

 

 

     

   
  

  

 

 

 

381

Wheat koru itself stait. Since the reason why you came in,
no further than the point of a needle, thus for the exit of the moth and
muddy, she finally gnawed a circular piece out of the grain. but not fully. so that the more posterior, with the head lying close behind
Push it down with ease to get free passage. It would have two generations annually:. the first in May ind
Appearing in June, laid her children on the ears of wheat in the field, the second
at the end of summer or in autumn on the wheat in the barn, these
the latter overwintered in the larval state, hatched in May and June in the
hire out, but headed towards the grain in the field to get theirs here
to lay eggs. This process, as well as the lack of a closer reference
some error was implied by the moth in question
this most striking different way of life cines and the same
Insects, no doubt the same is identical with that of Réaumur
cercalella. d) In dried fruits and stalks. The dried fruit cockroach, Tinea (Phycis) elutella Miibn. Dr. Herrich-Schiiffer hate the Gitte, me
to determine the core. it

The butterfly sits in the manner of the Zitnsler,
the snout high in the air, often without the front legs
to need, the wings close together and in the hin-
terrand pressed firmly on the object to which it is attached. sits,
in July fell in Hausern. Everywhere in old and new
Houses I found them here and there in honeycombs, also in
of my new house, which was built a few years ago,
spacious apartment in Hohenheim, the insect was mine
constant plague. part
ch | and found them also in herbaria made by Sar-
dinien md from the cape of gated hope came, the butterflies
little flies in July and sits quietly at this time during the day
in rooms, went to the picture. A few I found it:
already in the field (whether accidentally sitting on their grain,

 

 

 

 

y. Martens learned of it in Venice

  

 

Schorndorf), Soon afterwards it's gone, On the other hand
one finds nmmmore the Kereien at the most diverse
vegetable dry substances. They will be isolated or in
loosely affiliated cow-company groups to the food

     

 

 

382

objects placed. They are 0.5 mill, long, ovoid, but
chwas_ flat. Surface rough and dull from corpses
Sublimities, which in connection with the semi-
visible, not well-formed mass of the small egg
crinnern snow drunk with water, the ramp in the
Angus and September. Especially in the herbaria,
if they are not mechanically protected. At Mr. v. March
tense they mainly picked legumes, sent to me
the willows, but besides these also other plants,
Blossoms and younger leaves devoured abominably. At
pithy stems, e.g. B. Jerusalem artichokes eat them in the
Periphery of the marrow, On dried fruits: apples,
Pears, whitebeams and all Crataegus species, without a doubt
Also on plums and dates, they transform all flesh
and almost the whole Hant in a bunch criminal, with
thread connected caterpillar ukoths wm. Also in houses
wherein hay is stored, the insect finds itself in
endless crowd and startled by his sudden
on all the walls of the house the house-
women. You caterpillar, you Herr v. Martens zn Ulm, over one
Living in Hleumagazin, from mid-August to early October
harassed in crowds (Wiirtt. n, Jahiesh., p. 216), was sure-
lich our elutella and not Tinea foenella L.

The caterpillar —-—— long, with pale yellow braimem, likewise,
however somewhat darker in color due to a light stripe
neck shield divided into avei parts, next to which aut
same first ring a smaller almost triangular one
Signs sit above all other rings, from the second to
to the tail flap, flies a row on each side of the back
yellow-brown spices, two of which stand on a ring
come, only the second and third just says Kin
Wiirzchen and on the last ring the points flow
a large square spot together, on the still
a much larger afler flap shield follows. against the side
of the body runs a second but simple row of warts
from the outer ring to the tail flap, with a face

 

 

  

   

 

  

383

wart beginning and an eye wart and a spot
closing. A third inconspicuous simple Wirtsrow
at the junction of the side and abdomen. body color,
of all abdominal feet and the pushers, as well as the long ones
simple yellowish-white bristles on the stalks. The claws yellowish. Often especially on the j
The alimentary canal shines through the skin. She frequently leaves her feeding place and looks for one
other. So she can stand in a whole insect box
only here and there crush the finest insects
ren. Besides, she spins a lot and I don't know where she is longer
dwells in a light cocoon walk. generation of
Insects a one-year-old. See. Wiirttembergische Naturwissensehattl, annual booklets, year 1. issue 2,
1845, p. 215 ©) On fruit trees. The spider moth on the apple tree, Tinea cognatella
Miibn. (Fig., ML) Snow-white except for the
gran abdomen and the gray hind wing, on -|—
which, however, especially towards the top. the
Franzensanm is white. There are about six black ones on the back
Dots, about thirty on each forewing. From the Strande des Occans (England, France) through all of Europe
every few years in quantity, fug time end of June, beginning of July and little-
At least in the summer of 1843 (Brittany) in mid-July, the moth sits lazily on
Blistering and voices and easy to take away with your fingers. He puts his beers in heaps of 20-30 on the buds. The young
Rénpehen come to Schmidberger already in autumn, grazing
still a little on the leaves and weave together sociable; after rat
castle, it is more likely that they usually do not emerge until spring
slipping. My observations agree with the latter assumption
agree, the young ribs keep themselves in lumps and spin-
are as sheltered as possible between the blossoms and the blossoms
Nests, The first food consists in the leafy green, which they from the
young blitters, even after Lewis they would initially im
Inside the bitter miniven [?2} Even later is their Hanpi food
the green of the leaves on the upper side of the butter, so that of these mmr that
entire nerve skeleton and the lower epidermis remains. (Fig., a.) your
There are food bins except for the apple tree, on which they are very poor

 

 

 

 

 

 

384

is, according to Bouché, also plum species fob Verweehshing with padella|
and euonymus (Heonymus). Here you can see in May and early
June lightly in their large cocoons. They are (Fig. R) a little bigger

 

 

 

and thicker than the two following, Jang, in front
and noticeably thinned behind. Head strong, nape of the neck divided, pale
yellow. Fairly long yellow-brown toes standing on black warts
Hair. Each ring shows 2 large black kidney-shaped spots
next to the main hair warts, For transformation they spin their white ones
opaque, almost bonnet-shaped pods in bundles in a long
are spinning together. In it the 11 million. long Piippeeh (P.), which almost entirely
They are pale yellow and have 6 hacky houndstooth at the thin end. Regarding the vulnerability, Sehmidberger notes that at him
the trees have often suffered greatly from the spider moths
the leaves of Gauzer Pilaumenee ate him down to the ribs,
so the trees as much as were defoliated, and on some plum-
bitumen therefore all fruits were lost. Herr Richter in Dessan

 
  

 

385

(Ratzchung) ninth the moth even seehy sideways. However, Teh inuss ‘ge-
xtehen that I ilve salience, as often as the Tusekt int
Big ones already happened. never could find big. At least
I saw the trees and their fruit quite well in spite of the moth rattles
bring maturity. — As a simple means, the timely removal (in May)
to indicate the webs of the fruit trees. with scifen lye
pouring, as Westwood suggests, is impracticable on binines. Extremely related and so often confused with it that I, to fer-
neren mistakes to prevent me except mine completely with
Ratzeburg inconsistent observations, no further citations
useful, are : . Tinea padella [. moth a little smaller than the previous one and from
distinguish him only in that the fringes of the hind wings are whole
are grey. Flight time the same: late June or early July. (Brittany 1843
and Statigart 1847.) On rowanberries, Birubiiums, Mlispel, Schlehehen,
Hawthorn and without a doubt it is her, too, which I, as well as Sehmi
berger and Bouché, found on Planmen species, caterpillar also smaller,
rope anchor, grey, otherwise like those of the previous ones. The weaving looser than
Lei of the same and the doll cases hung up in it individually and such
thin that she is the smaller, fallen, dark one lying in it, i.e. H. at
Head, torso and part of abdomen blackened with enppe
shaky bristle hairs. Tinea evonymelta Hiibn. Moths as big as cognatella and on the
recognizable at first glance by the fifty or so black dots of the
derfligel. Flight time same, beginning of July, (Stuttgart 1847.) in bulk
Bird cherries in gardens, bosquets and licks, maybe it is
this species, which Schmidberger found numerous on cherry trees, Ranpe
(somewhat dirty) yellow, behind the two kidney spots of each ringlet
two smaller kidney spots. Also spins in dense
sleeve bundles. In these also the bran doll with six hooks
bristle hair on

Tinea asperella Hiibn. ‘Zenker and Schmidberger do this fruit
tree insect He The 16 million. lye, seehlauke, after yorn and
behind very narrow, pretty light green, with two white longitudinal stripes
sixteen-legged rape graced either side of the back lives in late May
and early June on various fruit trees, turns into
a silky, almost boat-like spun into a heli green
Doll with a long blunt hindquarters. late June and early July
Butterfly. After Treitschke there is a 2nd generation that is rarer. Tinea persicella Hiibn. The rampant similar to asperella, on Ptir-
to look at, but because of their rarity unimportant if you look at them
by Zenker pag, 218. Tinca caesiella Hiibn., as a slender, 12 million long, very narrow in front,
3,

 

 

 

 

 

inside end. —

 

 

 

 

  

Nordlinger, the kloinon enemies. 386

pale yellow, brown-red ridged and longitudinally striped_ black képti-
whole riiupehen, which in July and September under a tissue between
spun bliss of apple, cherry and plum
men biumen lives. f) In plum and cherry blossoms. Tinea prunictia L. Riinpchen only G Mill. long, whitish green; head
and first section shiny brown, Feeds on plum in May
flowering and tickling, attacking cherry blossoms
sometimes very detrimental. Pupation in the ground, butterflies know,
with black eyes and a dark brown horizontal stripe on the light
brown front wings; Hind wings and body green. g) On gooseberries. Tinea grossulariclla Hiibn., holds itself as a sixteen-footed, slender,
naked, grass-green caterpillar, without wart-points and with glossy black
Head and nape between the leaves of the gooseberries (Ribes
grossularia) and eats deep holes in the half-ripe fruits in June. h) On carrot and caraway fields. The carrot cockroach, sky cockroach, tinea daw
Cella Treit. (carvella bull.) This one I don't know
Molie lebi after several lines of information on Méhven (Dau-

t cus carota) and according to Dr. Bulie's report in
in Pohl's archive of German agriculture,
Jan, 1844, with illustration, also on Kimmel,
hence both names above. Reddish-brown head and quills with isolated black
zen duster. The w-ringed abdomen and the
Legs light ash grey. On the reddish-brown forewings
after the course of the tendons many black ones, especially against
Longitudinal streaks becoming distinct on the outside. hindwing ash-
grey, lightest at the roots, their fringes yellowish. Underside of forewings dark, hindwing lighter
ler grey. This in Germany and after Habner to the
Ukraine common small butterflies twice a year,
emerged freshly in August and hibernated
numerous in March and April on Kimmelfelder,

 

 

 

 

 

 

You only notice the Ranpe at the end of May after
further development of the blossom. None head of the caterpillar
black. Back sign in voth yellow with the drawing of a
regular triangle; on the sides to three dark black-
green lines running lengthwise over the otherwise grey-greenish ones
Run down to 21 in a black framed in yellow
triangle On the side still a réthlich yellow broad stripe
and a sharp grim stripe running down the legs. Belly light yellow with a darker midline. Rick at six
r and two sided black, white nm circled
wake up. Claw feet black. Caterpillar in front and behind
sharpen upud. — Dic Ranpe Jebt up in the Blithen-
rmmhen; she spins them together and eats them up,
likes to lower herself to the ground by a thread and
crawls on this lively, rich for their food
if the flowers don't die, she gnaws off the stalk of the flower
the green shell off. — The mature rampart creeps
down the stalk and looks for a spot to settle in
eat and pamper. Such round pupation
lécher are often found at seehs and eight close together;
even in the side stems, so that at a stande
30-40 can find. Each caterpillar prepares itself mn
Woven in which she turned her head towards her stomach
her transformation awaited, which will take place shortly afterwards
got to. The flattened pupa is dark red burned, with
pale abdomen and short bristles at the tip of the tail. Soon some young fathers find their way through their lights
away, because already after seed maturity, when the plants
to dry out completely, fly off when
Toasting several sea creatures. The main development time
of the butterfly, however, occurs from mating onwards
two to three weeks, in August, so only when
the caraway straw, as is sometimes the case, can be seen on the
Fields threshed and brought to Schener. the
numerous butterflies still in the straw
so we have a good opportunity here, safe and dry

 

   

   

 

 

388

wu hibernated and in the next spring their broods
kick off. The generation of the moth is the ordinary ecin-
fold. Most butterflies only appear in the
to mate spring. But Buhle notices that in
July and August caterpillars, pupae and moths at the same time
find. In addition to the frithern or spéi-
tern laying in Frithling, also any pre-brood in late
summer to the root leaves of annual plants
wear. The devastation caused by the caterpillar on Kimmel-
Aickern are often so important that love in the most beautiful
Blossoming standing fields by the suddenly appearing small
caterpillar saw to be devastated, so that idly struck
half of the yield was lost. Bonehé speaks of
complete destruction of the seed crop in carrots.—Already
from the difference in the above names it can be assumed that
that the caterpillar also on various meadows and water
umbrella plants occur, so great caution when using
use of means against the insect become necessary. cop
tell me that he has house sparrows for the caraway
fly and the réupe ​​marriages [just the belts?] got out-
see pecking. He makes at the same time anf the circumstance anf
notice how many Réiupchen in the meadows under the sickle
fall with the food plant and go to grande iniissen. He recommends as a cigentliche middle]: as soon as possible
threshing out the caraway straw and burning the last
teren. By carefully keeping the caraway in dry
on a ground in the spring by sheep one has so many
on the young blitter Kier sitonde smashed, that one
instead of %/, only ¥, the caraway crop has lost. Finally
after him the sprinkling of the plants covered with bedewed shall be included
lime dust be of very good success. — Bouche assured
in the intermediate planting of parsnips (on six to eight
foot distance) between the seed heads a good one
Means against the insect have discovered 2u. The maternal

     

 

 

389

Fkulter actually, as he says, much prefers to lay his eggs
parsnip than on carrots, they are therefore kept from these
from [probably only if the insect is in
more and not in excess) and can do it
devour on the parsnip. i) Grown on Reps and Kiichen,

Tinea cylostella [, a 7 million long, sixteen, voru and
behind tapering, shin green tears, which in large quantity
‘Early June and again at the end of summer on garlic, cabbage,
Lettuce, reps and the like occurs, usually on the underside of the
Blitter stop and here, as also on Stengeln, in a light, flor-like through-
transparent fabric spun and attached to the dark doll after a few weeks
as brown butterflies, with brown, broader, towards the rear
border of wavy jagged, brown band emerges. k) On night violets. tinea. porrectella Hiibn., lives as griines, mikroseopisel black punk-
tirtes riiupehien, with light brown head and forefeet in the first Frith
ling in the heart blobs of Hesperis species, especially the night tviole
(Hesperis matronalis [. ); At the beginning of May and again in July, the butterfly marriage. Extermination by opening the spun together heart leaves and
take the caterpillar. 1) Anf Epilobias. The epilobial moth, Tinca epilobiella Sclirk. 3 lines long,
smooth, ebony gray-yellow ramp; head, chest, buttocks and anal
segment black, wrapped after Bouché, $. 118, in June and July the
Points the epilobes together and destroys the flower buds, so
that sometimes you don't bring up Blithe. transformation between
blemish Butterflies in August. — Reading and ‘Todten. m) On spinach. The very small spinach moth, Tinea Rocsella Treit., with its golden
coloured, silver-spotted little wings, lives as a small, yellowish-green
Riupehen in May and early June on common and strawberry spinach,
and shall eat the mushroom cool afters. Caterpillar marriages sociable in a small
spun in Blatuwicketn ete, pupation in tree cracks, wall
spalien and the like Man arimmit three generations in the year. 390

n) On rosebuds. The small rosette, Tinea rhodophagella coll. In the first morning
jubr as a sack-carrying, little ruffle that tears out the rose-teeth,
The butterflies lay the eggs on the buds in May. That frcilich mih-
Kollar recommends the same search for the Riupehen,

0) Sack and leaf miniri caterpillars. Selmidberger, short practical lessons ete. None 98, also recommends
the small ones, some in a kind of post horn, some in a small sack
covered, in spring sitting on the buds of the fruit bimine
biting the lights into the buds, and later the grin of the leaves
hollow out, remove carefully

Only in passing did the very small mini-marriages appear
rithrt, which wim in so many plant leaves, but especially in
those of the fruit trees, they are lost with a head,
but plait and (useless. — The least, on fruit trees in summer
occurring species, from which the leaf of the apple, cherry and plum
often seen by many curved lines through sections, is tinea
Clerliella HMiibn. Nachilem the riinpehen has minimized in the sheet, omit it
the sheet together with strong thread and makes it to the relative
A young species of insects, from which the silver-colored moth soon emerged
arises. Other species stay inside the Blatis for transformation and
only the pupa pushes itself out of the fold heevorn, wherein the riupehen
lived. Oddly enough, these traps remain, even if the whole thing
Leaves have turned yellow in autumn, because the vessels have been eaten away
and grins for a long time because of reduced leaf activity! (matifo-
Liella etc.) Apparently you Oken also belong to one of these two groups
V, §. footless described in 1189, in France minirond in ReLenlaub
coming Motienraupe, Feruer

Tinea syringella Scirank. The Bramipige, dirty yellow-grey,
single-haired riupees, with dark riieken, becomes tawny from ronehé,
beginning of his tightness because it is often devastating in May and June
Crowd the butterflies of the lilac species (Syringa) mined and defoliated,
Eradication is possible. The Spirit Marriages, Alucita, The Butterflies by Feathery, im
Wings split keel, carried horizontally, delicate, stretched body
and heavily spined—the caterpillars have broad hairy bodies
six legs and a slow gait. — Well deserved
this sub-family here a spot, but you can find the Heckrosengeist-
chen Alucita thododactyla Hiibn., in some years, % B. 1853, booth
May and beginning of June, towards autumn no doubt for the second time,

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

391

as a caterpillar in quite a number on white-bloated , 2, 1B, Priucese Euroses,
Moss roses in the gardens, The rampart is ———— long, with a glittering,
greenish head mottled with black around the circumference; Forearms black. Body thickest towards the back, dull grayish yellow, with a broad, opposite
yorn thicker back stripes: the whole body with plenty
long, light and many short greenish-yellow glandular hairs
She thinks she's hidden in the still-closed peaks of the Rosew. the rosebuds and only these, chiefly at night, out, pup-
png in a belt like that of butterflies. The Perfect Insect
could come out of the green doll in July. — Opening of the laps and
read the rips. saint wasp order. partly useful, partly harmful,

 

The wasps in the broader sense or vein flyers, hyme-
nopteren, bdilden cine alternating in many respects
Family. The perfect kerf has between his
ordinary eyes always have three subsidiary eyes. his feelers,
consisting sometimes of just a few, sometimes of many, up to six
umpteen, limbs, are of the ver: Jensten forms: thread-,
bristly, crested, doubly crested, straight, kinked
ete, The mouth parts are just as different, although always
as with the Kéifern for biting, cockroaches, but also, wid
often shy clear, at the same time are intended for singing. (bees, Fig. S 31.) The flagels are rarely and almost always absent
hei sexless (ants). In silence they cover
the abdomen of the kerf, they are only in for wasps
folded according to the rest of the Linge. The main forms of the
poor, often in fact very much
poor wings are shown in the illustrations, 8. 304-433,
Certainly, twenty cells in the fore iris are the highest;

 

 

 

whole of cells

 

 

 

392

most wasps have twined, many less,
a number none at all. The sometimes stalked, sometimes sessile hin-
ter body has eight rings in the sawfly, in the Aineisen
seven, with the actual wasps and bees six
the wasp by merging often even less. Many
the Gatimgen (wasps, bees, digger wasps) are with a
sensitively hurting thorn provided from the outside
cannot be seen. All the numerous veinwings
on the other hand, the one dumbly visible sting, drill
or drive leg pipes, can not or at least
sensitive to sting. presence of Legr
not the females. Besides, the shape of the feelers is very common,
also sometimes the presence of a spine or body
size, or shape of abdomen for gender
and. The Veinfliglers have full metamorphosis. In the form of imperfect states, greatness reigns
odds. They either come from Afterranpen with
three pairs of clan feet and apart from these only a few
hilly followers (page 397, Fig. A ): spun
sawflies, or with three pairs of clan-feet, five to seven
Pair of banch feet and a pair of pushers (page 409,
figure ): ordinary sawflies, or ans larvae with three
A pair of thin pectoral feet and a pair of bumps behind:
cactus wasps, or legless larvae with a distinct head,
this usually turned against the chest: wasps, bees, ani
sen, digger wasps; or from maggots: gall wasps, scavenger wasps. The puppets of the Aderfligler, who soon in a spun,
soon lie bare, are chiselled as in the Kiifers and
let the parts of the future Iusekt perfectly recognize-
to. The whole development of the beast depends on some
just a few weeks, for others several years. In the . They vary greatly in their way of life, as well as in
their talents: some are clumsy, stupid and _fried-
light, the others slim. nimble and intelligent, the one
vinberish and single. others in ordered states m-
living together,

 

 

 

     
   

 

   

 

 

 

 

   

 

393

   

The distinction of the families of this Ordu is in relation
On the fully conimencn conditions very easily by the in the individuals
supplied illustrations. The imperfect states also come under
‘Adopt the lifestyle without difficulty being recognized you
break down into:

Larvae, fleshy, white, with three pairs of thin pectoral fissures and
a couple of hedge marriages on the last ring. Living in stalks:
Claw wasps, Cephus, page 393:
After caterpillars, dyed namely:
1) with three pairs of pectoral feet and one pair of side pads at the back
huddle. In cocoons on bienes:
Web sawfly, Lyda, 8. 395:
2) with three pairs of pectoral feet, more than four pairs of pectoral feet,
also a pair of followers; freely on mushrooms, only a few
in Sehossen: Common leaf or saw wasps, Tenthredo, 8. 400:
Legless larvae or maggots, generally white, white:

 
    

 

1) in tissue paper-like honeycombs: wasps, Vespa, 8. 412;
2) in sea-side wax honeycomb bees, Apis, p. 421;
3) in loose dough combs. . . . . Bumblebees, Bombus, p. 421:
4) in own plant outgrowths: — gall wasps Cynips, p. 430;

5) in passages in the earth filled with insect corpses or in
Trees and plants: Digger wasps, Sphex, p. 431:

6) in, sometimes on living kerfes, sehmarozeriseh :
‘Wasps, Ichneumon, p. 432. The agriculturally interesting wasps or vein
tlagler can be broken down into a few groups, which themselves
the layman recognizes at first glance, and which also
have common names in my life. 1) sawflies,

distinguished by rather clumsy, clumsy core
per, on which front and abdomen with one
who have grown together. They fall into three genera. namely ;

 

 

A. Halim wasps, Cephus. head wider than d
Killer multi-limbed, club-like against the mushrooms
thickening. slender. abdomen of both S

¢ body,
ch ver-
HL ZAMS

   
     

 

 

394

knitted, the first ring of the same split at the top and
presenting a triangular bliss. Wings as in the figure. the
Larvae fleshy white with three pairs of inner breasts,
also a pair of snags from the last ring. In the marrow
the cornstalks, etc., where they are from Westwood and Lingst
also been found by Mr. Director von Roser
the are. The corn-stalk wasp, Cephus pygmaeus L. Nach
Hartig (Klug) only 6.5 million. long, with shiny black
head, yellow-spotted upper lip, yellow mandible with rust-
red tip, yellow palpi, brownish side eyes, with
yellow fleek on the middle sternum (i.e. the hornbill
the one at the rear edge of which the middle legs are articulated). Abdomen shiny black, second and third segment with
yellow lateral spots or undespotted, the fourth with broader
yellow edge band, the fifth edged cari yellow, the sixth
with a broad band, the seventh with a narrow band, the next
segment all yellow. Legs black brown above, below
yellow, all tibiae and anterior 'tarsi quite yellow. fly
gel water clear with burnt edder, marginal vein and wing
grind brown. — According to Westwood, in a devastating mae in
wheat stalks,
Eye wasps, which Ih very often in June trige pecietaenhs of
Spel Binkorn and several other grains, or somewhat livelier in the
found the sun sitting on caterpillar flowers
essentially with the one just delivered
match description; but are my specimens
consistently larger (between 7.5 and 9 million), the
Head shiny, but rather dense with short,
black carnations occupied; eyes black; thorax
ole yellow spot on the midsternum, small
in front of the front iris root; abdomen microscopically mucted,
cs abdominal segment laterally cine spnr of yellow, fourth
and seeth ring with wide, yellow band on the rear edge, seventh ring
narrow all over or on the back and laterally on the Eeke narrow yellow-
edged ninth ring posteriorly faintly yellowed; below the cattle
of the laying apparatus bordered with yellow; all joints of the insect, at the bottom of the
Feelers between the breast shields, the insertion sites of the wings
inner legs yellow; wing meal and limbs brown: thighs black ;

 

   

   

 

 
  

   

 
 

 

 

395

tibia and phalanges of the two pairs of forelegs brown; Riieken the
Middle tibia and middle tarsi, as well as the hind tibia almost completely, and the
Hind tarsi entirely brown. This description, as well as the larger one
Long brings the wasp observed by me to the 11 mill. Ingen Ceplus
troglodylus L. close, but on the other hand from the cr by its black
Eyes, (other than in the pallors of the joints) unspotted metathorax, lack
the yellow band of the third abdominal ring, not Tlassbrown tibiae
and tarsi* and not rust-red vultures. B. spider sawflies or broad-bodied aphids
wasps, Lyda. wing construction quite complicated, from which uiich-
most figure visible. Acusserst articulated mistakes. children
distinct dorm on the inner edge of the front tibiae. There-
abdomen stretched out from top to bottom. The Kier iénsser
lightly glued to leaves. The larva has short filars, three
Pair of hoof legs and hide right and left a pair of feeler-
similar attachments. She rattles on in her spinus
back and forth. However, this rarely happens nud yor-
at times, if it is disturbed. She goes to relative
Young in the earth and forms one of its size
speaking, not spun out vault, in which they
crammed, but essentially unchanged for many years
stays there until the transformation into a pupa finally takes place

 

  

  

 

 

 

and very soon afterwards the wasp appears,—Vertil-
fairly easily, by removing the caterpillar
spinning (The sawfly genus Loplyrus standing next to Lyda has in the

 

Agriculture bi role played). The gregarious pear sawfly, Lyda pyri Very. (clypeata KL) AL—12 million. long and 20-24 ns
Mill, (May marriages and wives) Fligelspan-
nuug, bald dirty grey-black, on the ee. base yellow. Between the two big first S57
foal limbs on the forehead a yellow heart
fleck (female). oral parts of the female
yellow. When Méunehen the whole forehead and ruinpt
black, both, especially the label coarse and
tie? punctured. From the edge meal through the front and back

 

  
 

 

   

 

396,

winged, in the latter extending to the flagel root at the rear edge
vicheud, a gray veil of mist. Minnchen's legs whole
yellow, on the front and middle legs of the female
Had and a shaved ring black. abdomen of
Minnchens according to Ratzeburg brownish yellow with indeterminate
with a spicy base, mostly blue in the female
Black with light-saturated Réinder and_light-binding under-
page. [My own copies (after the above capital
according to Ratzeburg's description, they are females)
in death show a black base and a dirty brown upper
abdomen and bright red underside with yellow
ben section margins and yellow side flaps). The pear sawfly comes from Sehweden to
sillichen Austria yor, both] on hawthorn species, as
anf Birnbdéumen. I soon found her in Hohenheim
the latter, soon on Aronia: botryapiwn. Where trees are
just as agreeable to her as shrubs and dwarf beeches. To
Schmidberger it can also be found in Ermanginng von Birn-
grow on plant trees. The wasp appears late
May to mid-June, in later years even only in the second
th half of June. According to Schmidberger, the female lays
40-60 lingish, yellow, fatty fish in rows, and themselves
like a brick pavement covering each other, on the
reverse side of a sheet. Another month later
one @fters the hollow white Kierhéute with careful
Searches at the first beginning of the nest. A few days
after laying the small white-yellowish lirv-
chen. That they shouldn't be too busy like Schmidberger
states is incorrect according to my observations. at ra-
schem Waehsthuin reach the after caterpillars (Fig. A) znletat
23 million Linge. and are yolk yellow with a black head,
divided horn shield on the first ring, and zn bei-
the sides with tiny Kleen labels. the larval
stick, often more than 20 stick, spin themselves, immediately after
creeping out a tissue that is somewhat similar to the vou
list. The rubbish of the

 

   

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

    
 

 

T. cagnatelta thn

 

larvae that always
new blitter in-
bite and eat. You pull yourself
with the claws in
Threadwork back and forth
her, and hung zam
rest —hogenfr-
moderate, as in ciner
Mat. with a
let touch
look at the
Ground: down. That
they are greedy
not to doubt
where however liw the
has borrowed
that their greedy
not at all
write, and her
30 to 40 able
appear within 24 hours
the one medium
gene tree completely bare
mu eat, so that
the after caterpillars seem much more harmful than the dense tendrils,
is a simple but strong exaggeration that I don't even care about
want to refute first. The larvae need for their education
4-5 weeks. Between the beginning of June and the beginning of August
they descend to earth. On low branches and bits
it follows Offers by spitting it in the form of a tube
of Liw's statement to earth. They dig here
2—4", often even deeper cin. according to my observation
follow, the wasp comes at the end of May next year. after the transformation of the larvae in their burrow
first. happened very shortly before, into the light of day. 398

Since whole pear trees are often eaten by them
den, it is necessary to destroy the larval communities. You can easily recognize them by their yellow color. This in-
Sekt suffers a lot from intestinal infections, e.g. B. of Ophion
Mercator according to Schmidberger. This, as well as the long time,
which the larvae spend in the ground before pupating
must, and the sensitivity to drying on the
are the reasons why the upbringing of the pear
sawfly in the room mostly fur-sloughed, and also, so often
the insect in some years, it is often a longer series
has disappeared without a trace for years. The stone fruit wasp, peach sawfly, Lyda drupa-
cearum Nérdl. Schmidberger calls this wasp Lyda populi F.
Now, however, Linné, Syst. cur. Gmelin, after a remark
kung Bergmann's, the after caterpillar on poplars what I
necessary. Hartig, on the other hand, uses the names populi
in its comprehensive , sawflies and woodwasps¢ not anf, ent-
neither because he had more detailed notes on the above insect
were lacking, or because it was in Linné-Fubricius'sche L. populi
set second. Schmidberger's description of kerf
also does not want to fit any of Hartig's other Lyda species. So I decided, by creating a new one
Namely to prevent future confusion. my
surprise but i don't want to hide that a through
its way of life so conspicuous kerf, its after caterpillar
Réaumur and Degeer as well known and described in
the newer works do not even have a fixed name
drive. According to Schmidberger, the wasp is as big as one
Housefly, black, the abdomen on the back and banch
with whitish cuts coming from both sides
run towards the center without colliding. Yellow pincers and yellow legs with black thighs. According to Schmidberger, the insect lives on the various
Stone fruit trees: apricots, plums, especially peaches
biumen. He also leads to the guarantee of others

 

 

 

 

 

 

: 399

nor, as noted above, the black poplar as a residential
pilanze an, — lin Frahling with the unfolding of the first
Blifter of the stone fruit, that is, in the spring of April, is also coming
already the wasp foreshadows. Then you look at them
on bright warm days around noon to lay eggs
prepare, she often runs around for a long time before she finds a suitable one
sheet for this finds. But if she has chosen such a thing, then so
if she clings to it, stays on it for some time
sit and then lay one egg after the other, usually
in two rows, at the edge or towards the top of the
leaf. The kids are put very close together,
never more than four, at most six at a time. The mother
afterwards it leads back and forth with its abdomen over it,
to squeeze them out more firmly or with sticky moisture
m iüberzichen; at least the fishes like butter
smeared out. Quickly afterwards the female flies
away. It's probably the same which after some
Time again to add another child, until after a few
‘Not uncommonly 80—40 days in several rows next to each other
the lay. The kids are 2 million. long and 1 million the! elongated, cylindrical, rounded at both ends, light
yellow; they stick firmly to the sheet. Laying down then
at most three weeks. A few days after incubation
schiifie the eggs become when the weather is bad,
animated and scarcely stir the whitish-grey Réiup-
chen, so they're already starting to spit themselves. enfold When they move from one leaf to another
pull, so they make a new one again. they are hiking
so from branch to branch, always the better part of the same
consuming. After 5-6 weeks they are fully grown
have the size of a grim spammer, are light green with
black head, three pairs of hooked feet, no abdominal
feet, on the other hand provided with a pair of followers, which
they come into their own quite well when they are in their
Pull back and forth on the stomach or back. Like the other used arias, they want in the

   

    

 

 

 

400

captivity take no food. Are: they
fully_ developed, they leave the biums
down.. end of May. one rarely encounters a caterpillar’ ant anymore
them. ‘They bury themselves in the ground, slid here one
chamber and should contain a dark brown egg-shaped
make ample help [2]. They stay until spring
still larvae, then the transformation into a pupa takes place and
Wasp swiftly at each other. The insckt is according to Schmidberger
not infrequently numerous and very harmful, since it is often: particularly
Trees on railings completely defoliated. such leafless,
like trees covered with cobwebs bring their fruit
not to maturity. With the ease of overlooking the children,
If the jangs, in their weaving, could not surprise 2u-
be destroyed by the caterpillars without difficulty. None The Sigewasps, Tenthredo in the narrower sense, have
At most nine error links, but the first two of them
usually so short that Liné and Fabricius use them
don't pay at all. Body more proportioned and not wide
as broadly expressed as in Lyda. According to type-the following
Figureu built wings. They prefer to freak out
flowers and below them a multitude of green species on meadows
umbrella flowers around, are usually peaceful in nature
and live on the sap of plants. Yes you can see
they sometimes catch other insects, even kiifers, and
consume. They put their Kier to the Bitter, the latter with it
mostly with their happen-like Legréhre 2 Unter-
bringing the brood slashing, rebellious, where did that come from
Name Stigewasps comes. Accordingly, the Kier
usually placed in rows on cinander inside the leaf. The resulting larvae are extremely easy to catch
know. They are useless or after caterpillars (fausses chenil-
kes), d. he caterpillars with horny heads, three pairs of claws-
fiissen and more than four, i. H. five to seven pairs of warts
or belly fissures, also a pair of followers, the
should not be forgotten when counting the number of feet. three
Mant is usually colored, sometimes with forked spines or bristles

 
  

401

covered, soon finally smooth, or even covered with mucus
(snowflake-like after ramps). — The afterworms are mostly alive
free on and off the blitter, keeping themselves sociable at times. often beat the tail-like twisted
beguiling abdomen in the air, see, troubled,
like to fall, roll like a sleeping dog, or better
still like cin tendrils together and also hold
usually curling the tail a bit when eating. Some of the
After ranches are found inside fruits (plum
wasp), or in swellings of the cell tissue of leaf
tern, or even in the marrow of shoots, or in soft
Wood, ~~ The extermination of the wasps is only history
rare and difficult by trapping the wasps, in the
Usually, however, easily by shaking and patting the anal
rapping from the growths,

  

 

 

For the lengthy description of the subdivision:
wasps, found (largely on the band of the wings,
look through drawings replacement 2u strips

Tenthredo (Hylotoma) rosarum F, one after Degeer 23 mill. Long,
4 mill thick after caterpillar with deep
centered rings, dark yellow or pale
brown head and rump, on the sides and
belly light green and whitish or yellow-
Lich, two small black spots on the forehead
Fleeken with short ears, eyes black
in black field. Body tiber everywhere with many
Little shiny black deer or hairy
group-carrying wiry toes. Just five pairs of banch feet, the clan
lisse aweiklaig. Almost completely dark green in childhood. sehwal
zen points, according to Rosel, the caterpillar is initially blind-grim with po-
meringue head and nine such spots on the black point
lirten body, In June and September grown, the whole body
tangerine yellow with the mentioned black spots and black ones
Pectoral feet, the baneal feet black-brown. According to Degeer one finds these
Caterpillars Beginning of August, after Bouché from August to the end of October
Garden roses whose leaves they eat from the edge in such a way that only
nor the main ribs remain. They writhe in kind of a
Snail Hanses and, if you calm them down, like to sit on you
Earth fall, you go to the surface of the same and 2ur transformation
after here, without using the earth 2u, a silk, externally light

Nérdlinger, the little enemies. 26

the leaf
we want

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

402

brown and gritty, wide-meshed, but fairly firm tissue, which
inside there is a second, white one that isn't attached anywhere. Only in the next year, at the beginning of summer, does it transform into
pupa, from which soon afterwards the wasp arises, and by cin itself
eaten hole crawls out. Of black color are thy
tripartite filler, head, thorax and fore wing leading edge; the back
abdomen and legs yellow. The wasp cuts in May, according to Bouché
in July (second generation or Spiitlinge 2) the Roseublitter begin to in
whose' interior lay against 50 or 2u, fin cin simple remedy against them
Caterpillar, which often eats the roseubia kal, consists in cutting off or
patting on a cloth or an umbrella,
Similar, at least as a larva, and leading the same way of life
Tenthredo (Hylotoma) pagana Pz. The caterpillar has dirty
> a yellow head with black eyes and dark forehead
shield and mouthparts, body yellow-grey with eight
Rows of black glistening warts, of which three lateral rows are mainly
are clearly well developed. front and ventral feet at the anssen
side black, On centifolics in gardens and on wild roses in Fa-
milia, which only have their ribs pricked by the leaves; especially in
midsummer. Will not go into the ground until October. The dark blue
fledging wasp with a yellow abdomen longs for the end of May
Cin summer fiber in gardens and outdoors with her laying knife
Longitudinally cut into the quill-thick rosewood to make a row of ling-
to yersenken lighter Kier, so to speak, to graft yin the gap 2u. *
Tenthredo (Cladius) difformis Ps. The caterpillar according to Brullé 14 million. long, with six pairs of ventral legs, next to the hooked feet
a and the end pair. pale green; rust colored head with im
black field standing eyes. Every segment except
~~ the last three, carries on both sides a small with bii-
cone-shaped elevation decorated with scaffolded gray deer. In addition, the whole body is covered with rows of such gray hair tufts
Deckt, According to the same author, the larvae feed on the underside of the
Rose petals around the edge, breed towards the end of June between
the leaves in a dense double-layered cocoon and follow
13 days in July, 2um appearance, I regret the recording of the
texture of the ramp. which I also found on roses and drew,
to have refrained. Because I didn't get to Ranpe until autumn
find and the arrived wasp already in winter todi in the kennel
lay, it emerges that there is probably another autumn generation,
which either before winter or in the following Frithling
ipft. The wasp is inconspicuous, 7 million long, black, with musty
white legs,
Tenthredo (Ath.) pink T, according to Hartig, only accidentally leans towards roses

 

  

       
 

 

 

 

 

403

 

and probably bears his name, - maybe finally, that anch
Tenthredo (Sclandria) bipunctata Kug., which according to Hartig is always called a wasp
u only catches on rose bushes, on these plays a role as an after ramp ? Tenthredo (Clad.) albipes Mus. class The ranch has a short one
Brown head densely covered with bristle hair, which is also covered by a
black triangular vertex, black eyes surrounding and
black mandible tips are marked. Body dense with fairly
long hair, handsome grim, lighter on sides and belly. Breast-
feet hairy. Apart from clawed feet and followers, see a couple of belly
legs. Throughout May she always feeds on the bottom of the church
see sheets. As long as the caterpillar is small, it only gnaws the
fleiche, later she skeletonizes the leaves completely. She sometimes appears in
so much that no healthy leaf remains on the bees, end
In May she drops and spins near the surface of the ground
a light web in which it usually rests until the spring of the future,
Not infrequently, however, a second generation of caterpillars appears at the end of June,
that eats through July. It arises from the early generation, whose
Wasps catwrap after only ten days of pupal stage. the
Wasps that swim usually end of April or beginning of May lay theirs
eggs at the bottom.of the cherry leaves in the leaf veins, is 9 mill
long, black, with whitish legs, blackish pine root and
mid-thigh. Hind legs brown towards tips. Tenthredo (Nematus) ventricosa, Mus. class reddish yellow. The head and mouth are black
and bottom of the Fithler, further
three spots on the breast tick,
the chest more or less; ‘Ti-
tip and tarsi of hind
legs brown. The male has
black base of abdominal segment
ment. The approximately 15 million Long,
dirty grim, on the sides and the last three
tendons yellowish, black-headed, short-haired, with
black hair warts, twenty! sleazy after caterpillar
in May on gooseberries and currants, at the end of May
the ranch spins in the ground into an irregular shape
yellowish-brown [black-brown according to my observations]
Cocon and appears as a wasp in mid-June and July. To
Bouché, another feast takes place in July and August. 404

which I in vei

 

 

The caterpillar of this wasp decided it. lying masses found on the said shrubs and
raised to be wasps. In terms of the accuracy of so much
matching descriptions, I am afraid this larva
also have to describe those of grossulariae and
morio and therefore have the wish to also
newly comparatively examined

 

 

ren larvae
will. Tenthredo (Nematus) appendiculata Hirt. Smaller smooth if I
don't err, green deer caterpillars, with eyes in a dark field, which I in
large quantity on currant and gooseberry smear 2 stone
heim aufdem Albuch found you had almost all Blitter at the beginning of July 1649
grazed, soon turned into a 5 million over the earth. Jangen, dirty-yellow web, whereof, still in the course of the same
month, the likely heavy wasp of 4-5 million, Linge. With
whitish legs, rust-red undersides of filers and thighs, more yellowish
wing root and burned wing meal developed. The girdled sawfly, Tenthredo (Emplytus) cincta L. Nach
Bonehé a gray-green, slender, slightly thinned back caterpillar
dark green back, with pale dorsal stripe and four rows of veh
torn spots; tan stigmata; two rows close above the legs
gray patch, Very common. After Hartig through the autumn on roses,
she digs if she doesn't make a crack somewhere, especially
gladly in the marrow of pruned rose branches, sometimes two to three
inches deep, to pupate here 20 and hatch next spring
come as black, 9 million lage wasp, with white bandage on the
fifth ring (females) and brick-red tendons, with a whitish one
Root. Tenthrido (Emph.) rufocineta Klug. The ones after Degeer, except claws
and anal after-sliders, caterpillar provided with six pairs of ventral feet
ocher yellow head and black eyes, dark green, slightly greyish
Chem back, whitish sides and abdomen and pale color all
legs, also has across the hauifalten body, especially the
Ribs, many small, hard, cone-shaped, very white kernels, through
which the skin becomes shagreen-like. In August and September on roses
eating, from where sic themselves, fully grown, ciwas under the surface of the
Earth goes and remains without a web until next May, around itself
then converting to a pupa and soon, in June, to a wasp. Wasp 9 million long, black, abdomen with red band on the fours
and five ring; red-yellow ‘tibiae and tarsi; white ankle rings. Tenthredo (Emph.) grossulariar KI, gray-green, black-headed larva; ouch

 

 

 

   
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

405

the three first and three last rings pome-
ranch yellow; over the whole body zich seehs
Rows of black hair warts. According to Bouché in
October on the gooseberries, The Ver-
walk in the earth, The Wasp (after Har-
tig, 10 million, long, black, with yellowish white
legs, brown Randmah! and white Sehiipp-aware
cheu, partly white legs; after Bouché, black. with yellowish
Legs and mouth, black wing mark! and barely 8 million. Jaug) found
Hartig in mid-May and mid-August often in Gar

Zenker leads S, 190, under allegation of Réanmur Ins. V.T. 10,
figure 6 and 7, yet another 22-footed, before the last hatching
dongriine and ran through numerous Wairzchen, after the herd smooth-
bodily, white-yellowish after caterpillar, which in summer the soft of
currant leaves completely grazed, and look into a yellow leaf
wasp with a rust-colored spot on each wing, 7: flava L.
transformed, which lays the kidneys on the underside of the leaves. hard,
8.197, but believes with every reason that Réaumur's (V. Tab. 10, figures 4-8)
and Bechstein's Tenthredo flava L. are either Tenthredo ventricosa
or Tenthredo serva F. or flavens Klug. or even Tenthredo rosae. Furthermore, Bechstein is listed under the name Tenthredo (Sel.) Moro F.
a five-line long, 20-footed, black-tipped, green, with many
black dots, living sociable on currants
after caterpillar. pupation in the second half of May; after ten to four-
ten days, late May and early June, nd black wasp. I feared a confusion here too. — At last Zenker is due too
p. 190 a grim after caterpillar, with a brown-barbed head the blitter of
red currant bush, Tenthredo (AU.) ribis Schr. ; and
Hartig, p. 306, caught the Tenthredo atra L, as a wasp often on Ribes,

The plum wasp, Tenthredo (Selandria) ful-
vicornis Klug. Schmidberger is the only one
who as far as I know these also in Swabia &
so common and harmful pig wasp exactly

  

 

 

 

   

 

  

 

 

    
 

 

describes. He calls her Tenthredo morio F., _—_—
But since his description, so short, is not included
that of morio F. in Hartig's leaf and holaw wasps
wanted to agree, I asked Mr. Vorstrath Hartig
even nm Auskunit, and put the wasp on his authority
out, above name at. Since Sehmidberger says that it is different from the Pilaumen
no other black, yellow-legged wasps at flowering time

 

 

406

wasp on the plum trees when the existing
I have no doubts that the numerous vou inir
plum wasps collected in April, and
put in the place of the allan short Schmidberger's
write the following: Linge 4.3 million. The whole body
somewhat wide, shiny black. Just head and
Trunk somewhat dull, with very fine and dense punctures
and you have short yellowish hairs, legs yellow; no
the hind thighs on %/ their length from the black ones
Mtfien on black; the blackish hint on the
Rteken the phalanges of all Beiuc, on the hind legs on
strongest. Wings slightly drifted. According to Schmidberger, the wasp often just stands up
cinigen , sometimes) but also on all plum varieties,
cin less on plums, I found them very skiny
Plum blossoms, no doubt because these may happen earlier,
But also on plums it must be common
to conclude from many fruits inhabited by its larvae
sen, — The wasp refreshes itself at the plum and
plum blossoms, and penetrates to reach the honey-juice
put your head in deep.” Once the leaf buds
break out, the breeding business of the female begins, Ks
sticks his leg siige crookedly into the goblet, without
in all to you eu, and setat zngteich in the deep
of the sting from his little egg. It takes this work
1¢ minute. However, there seems to be a significant
pay to lay beer. After it you the pierced
Blathe has flown, nan sees nothing but cin in this one
a few very small spots or lines, the I
light:

  

 

 

  

   

 

 

  

is green-
» transparent, and becomes alive after 8-14 days,
The larvae bite when the plum gets big
of a hemp seed, in the middle of the kernel, which then is still there
is very soft, and its food forms, Jn krimuut
like a grub lies the delicate yellowish-white here
Larva with yellow head and two small dark eyes
and brown mouthparts, She has six pairs of abdominal feet besides

 

     

407

the usual three pairs of Brusitiiss
and a pair of followers. you v
spreads, like the ex-
kremente, a very striking wall
zen smell. At the beginning of June I found sic
already schr big in deeper, just through
resin and oozing filth
closed cavity. If you take them
out and puts it on your hand, it crawls so well
farther than other caterpillars, and crawls away again,
when you offer it to her, into the plum that has been cut out. Tlieraus and from the fact that one many apparently
plums abandoned before perfection with consumable
found in the core, 2 infer that the caterpillar
also often a plum leaves, and another bezich
According to Schmidberger, it needs 5-6 to be perfect
weeks. They fillé with the immature falling pilaume
Earth, dig into this cin and make up (end of July)
A beautifully glided chamber in which to meet with a
brown paper-like egg-shaped shell. still
in December Schmidberger found himself unchanged as a bright
green larva in the shell. It is therefore to be assumed that
they too, like other sawflies, pupate only briefly
before the transformation into a wasp. Schmidberger found over 8000 such larvae on one
Tree and uur 15 plums spared, I also found it
1850 a noticeable part of the fruit on the
Plum trees destroyed by them; also in 1853. Some, albeit unintentionally, lived in so-called Fool. Sehinid
berger thinks the insect mainly devastates the tree,
for whom the flowering period with persistently beautiful weather
had passed over, and the spray-
word: 'if the plums are supposed to go, it has to be in the
Regulate flowers. * Admittedly, rapid fading should occur at very
nicer weather by analogy with other insects
have the same success. —

 

 

 recommends the black one

 

408

Wasps, which one easily notices on the flowers and
remove chew, to crush [should not be tapping
everywhere that you can get your hands on it,
be even more effective?) and later the pricked plums
prunes or prunes soon after they have faded. In fact, one recognizes them easily by the one from the fruit
flowing resin and uurath,

The light brown, sharp often in company with the previous ones in the plants
Meubliithen occurring wasp is according to Herru Hartig: Tenthredo
(Selandria) brunnea Ki. A 7 million long, green, brown-tipped deer caterpillar, with kura stalks
th, usually seated directly on a thick black wart
Fork thorns, also otherwise covered with small wiry toes, faud shark
Quantity at the end of May in rose petals, rolled like Wi pis
rupen, pupation in the soil at the beginning of June. Tenthredo (Bel.) brevis Kt. The dwarf wasp, Tenthredo (Athalia) spinarum
Mostly yolk yellow. mouth white
SED lich, head, foal, side lobes and
= posterior edge of the breast, the wingtips
derrand, the tips of the rails and
the kissable limbs, finally the tips
the flaps deep black. — F
in summer from May often in Girten, on Gebi
on meadow flowers, and usually seems to climb up
to limit, but in individual years, mid-August zai
Hohenheim, she faced the falling crowd
Repsfelden cin. You can easily recognize them here by their black
zen and yellow color. Most immobile and lightest
you'll be females to catch on the blisters,
which lay their eggs at the same time of year. you see
by the way, she quickly said goodbye to the Velders again
men, of course not without leaving their brood. other sawflies, as remarked above, slit theirs
Kier to salvage, mostly leaf veins on, and put
educated column their different verfiih
Art, if my observation is animal. Ieh received uiim-
lich by Prof. Fischbach zn Hohenheim Repsbliitier

 

     
 

 

 

 

   

  

   

 

 

  

   

 

with which he locked together several rep-wasps
had. On these blitters I notice in groups, there
and there also line by line, as with a fine one
needle-made lingual, transparent, whitish dots,
which I take for nothing other than those in the parenchyma
brought egg places kaim, so ehef, 'than each
Kierstelle, probably as a result of breaching the
young Réupchens, on one side, sometimes the upper, sometimes the
Underside of sheet, open and raised edge
has, and awar such that the same group always open
on the same side of the sheet. Of course one wonders
now whether this wasp in the open air exactly the same procedure
observed. However, it shouldn't be very different from this
be. — In September and October, probably eh
sometimes sooner, one finds the half or full
growing after ranches on the reps plants or also
the stubble ribs (see Schwab. Mercury). After Zenker
they also eat the leaves of the garden rose (centifolia). she
graze the blitter from the edge in, or
also for them large holes in the leaf
file. The after ramp has grown
15 million long and 3 million thick, has glin-
very swaying head and very black
zen eye and face shield, comes with 7
Provided with a pair of pad feet, the body
dirty dark grey-green, completely un-
hairs, but a bit shaggy and therefore /
dull, The front legs grey, black pmik-
ti the whole ramp by very narrow
uniform forests ringed. On the
erin
Line. Where they are numerous, as in the year
1853, came the gan
be planted. This works when the season is over

 

  
 

       

 

Réeken down a dark sehniutz! Saat zn reason go, and must new

 

is not unfavorable, nor is it good. — The caterpillar begibi
in October, depending on the weather. also in

 

410

November from the leaves to the earth, and makes himself here,
no doubt about 1” ticf in the bottom an oval, outside er
Diges, easily breakable, internally with a dull glow
burner, brittle, smoother, dinner crust ansgektcidetes
spin, from which the wasp comes out the next year. If it is correct that it flies in May, then it should be more
as a simple generation, and it is the second caterpillar gene-
ration in the year, which one in the autumn to the young winter
repseeds, already Gfters in very decreasing amounts, and
probably also found on winter peas; demi it seems
that it dwells on several plants. Every year believe
I raise them in small numbers in the garden in late summer
to have met kitchen plants. In big
A lot, on the other hand, and quite detrimental, it only appears from
Time to time, in the year 1840 or 1841 i read dw. magazine, which I no longer care about, one of
Pictures accompanied long article but these caterpillars. After the sweat. Mercury was the Jahy 1842 cin Verhee-
rangsjabr, In 1853. the caterpillar generally stepped off

      

   

Lake Constance to Stutigart, so there are warm or
hot summers towards autumn at least, which
development of the wasp from the ground, mating and that
Firing Favor. As a simple and effective remedy
of the extermination the skimming of the wasp appears when
they show up on the young reps and later the ab-
scoop the caterpillars. With the Kinzch reading with the
Inan uatirlich, hand does not reach the goal. Terr Scheitlin
to St. Gallen, to whom I read some notes about this,
owe, insured by sprinkling with soot a vou der
vs Ritbenfeld from the after caterpillar
to have brought rinen, too bad

 

 
 
 

repse wasp liberated
m rep
that the millel on the whole, depending on the weather, something

   

difficult and must be difficult. The Tenthredo (Allantus) aethiops. F. (cerasi L.), long, stocky;
abdomen almost ovoid, somewhat depressed; Fithler little shorter than that
abdomen; shiny black, slightly hairy; just a part of it

 

Ouch

mouth, the front splints, the grizzled part
dler front tarsi, as well as the knee joints yellow-
brown; wing smudged, rim black
brown, — The main flight time of the wasp is July. But sometimes I come to Réaumur
an earlier Mlugzeit in the year before and Bouché =<
even speaks only of May and June, She lays her small, light yellow ones. oval, slightly flat beer marriages on the blitter,

The larva is in September, according to Réanmur sometimes also selon
very common in July on apple and pear trees, but more often aut
the latter and still particularly high on cherry and plum
biiumen, I also found them individually on the American hawthorn
species, the larva crinners
by their shape to a
Small, naked snail. she
is inevitably gyinlieh-
brown what they have
covering sea glue comes;
wiped she needs cinige
days to close this again
replace, The description
after hiitte the after ramp
a stripe on the back
fen. My copies ze
ten solehes only if you
were still colored light yellow after a heap, and thus the derm
could see through. Shortly after was the color of the gi
as already said, greenish brown, The underside and all the legs. captivating
in three pairs of hooked legs, seven pairs of banchdated legs and almost not forward
those close-ups, very bright. If Degeer handles the larvae
only wander along at night, so I don't want to deny such things, like that
but much is certain, that by day, as a result of the slightest disturbance,
move with relative ease when the larva sheds
80 she lets the black appearing Hant as, a disgusting, black
gleaming line back on your leaf, The food of the larva ordered
in leaf green, which she together with the upper epi-
dermis tears away. September and October are the time of the Lai
to pupate, the larva does not wriggle in, as Zenker thinks
Bkitter cin, but she digs into the earth and spinuts a black here
Silken 'Témnehen' woven with earth knots on the outside. in the
in captivity only in late July of the year, outdoors a little earlier,
this is where, according to Degeer and my observation, the wasp wraps itself. But Ratzeburg accepts Réaumur's statement, which is already in the. zen body,

   
 
   

 

e. Around

 

   
  

 

 

 

 

AI2

Juli Birubiiune saw, whose blitters had gone as a result of a bream,
already booked an earlier flight. In some years very low. But will the damage because of
Frass usually falls very late, seldom so important that it is mithe
rewarded to spray the attacked Lanbwerk, how
recommends such Loudon. Whether the 22-fid, white-grand, brown-tipped caterpillar$ with a triangular
dorsal spots, on Gaisblatt, Lonicera caprifolium. xylosteum et
Tenthredo (All) tricinctus F. after Martig, among the noxious
has to be guided, as Low says, I'll leave it there for the time being
posed. At the end of the pig wasps, I have to say that Zenker,
Réaumur V, m. 12, fig. 13, 14, 16, another Tenthredo pruni L.
touches, yellow, with brown, shimmering wings, whose
2Liquid, deep green caterpillar, with bipartite, mur at last hatch
direction vanishing, white thorns, plum and damson
bite off. Hartig does not list this species, which is also unknown to me. A waxy yellow anal caterpillar thickened towards the front, with yellow-red,
through a shattering head, on which black eye-points and red mouth-
share, with gi

 

 

 

  

 

nn byrehsehi

   

spiral intestines, three pairs, into small brown ones
Pointed banch feet, seven pairs of flat feet, on the sides
something short of ranh vou, transparent little girl, is found at the end of Jali
on rose petals and scrape off the top or bottom of these
the green off. I would doubt it for an Allantus if
she showed slimy skin. On roses, especially Rosa ciamamomea, namely the summit trichomes
Hollow, in summer there is often a cine already vou Réammur
volume V, 'T. 10, figures 1 and 8 130 au arte after caterpillar. 2) The actual wasps (Vespa)

are easily recognizable, even to the layman, durely ih
© and yellow coloring, her kneeled

ror

 

 

domineering schwa:

 

at B

   

ihler, ih ) and sucking equipped oral
parts, which in the calm of the Linge after assembled
heinenden Wing , and the
fins connected to the chest by a dim stitch
ho wwith a respectable sting
provided, which still stings when inan dicwasp tédilich

even if you sic what, Ks flows

hurt, yes
lich at the Staehel. while cr is drilled into the skin

 

ten and dadureh very schinal e

 

 

body. The latter is bekau

 

 

   
      

      
 

ANS

 

becomes, from a poisonous bubble
the pain
joins. There are some species of wasps which live in settlers
and walk from the outside in crumbling beams of
baiuden aulggen, so that they, through the Gekvabhel in
made aware of the wall, often surprised under the
digs out the whitewash of the room. They pile into these
their passages to the food of their young insects or also
Anf larvae that they have hunted, It is therefore one for them
not to deny certain usefulness. But they pull
other attention in relation to the sociable
wasps only to a small extent. This company
lich, i.e. wasp species living in numerous families
show great resemblance in their way of life to the
Bees and ants, insofar as they are also divided into three
badly decayed, namely Méuncheu, females and males
bad or working women. We want to the subject of our description the ge. my wasp, Vespa vulgaris L. sake. the vou Réau
mur and Degecr so apparently been observed
den is and to the scale of the rest
came to serve. The menu has longer
and thicker ones, also by more min-
whose kinking indicated filers. Dev abdomen
has seven rings and does not run out to a point, md also has no
a spike. The consecration, probably weighing three times as much
than in a man's marriage, has severely kinked antennae and six-
jointed spiked abdomen. They see it too
sexless women workers, but they want something like that
have half the weight of my ménnehen,

Way of life. As we shall see below,
only a few come and maybe just in the
previous summer fertilized by the winter,

répfehen juice down that
inflammation of the affected area

 

 

 

    
  

 

  

     

 

   

 

 

     

ge wasp

for it is probable that all Ménnehen before winter

 

m Grande go, thus also in the Frith year, if ¢

 

414

women not already for the sake of establishing the winter
colonies contained previously fertilized eggs, because
lack of Maunchen not even a mating took place-
could find. According to the information found the mating of the
wasps in mid-October, which of course was out of consideration
on the decreasing heat spit appears. Probably
it takes place in the nests. So the thrifty wasps,
that you see flying in spring are females. you are looking for
somewhere cin clever place to found their
numerous family, soon among poets on a rafter
or on a tree, or even in the ground. Use here
they often have a mouse or mole hole or the like. (in the-
but it must be later, when the family becomes more numerous,
the whole thing was significantly expanded and earth was extracted
will). To ban her nest, the wasp scrapes with hers
-Pliers on a weathered tany an old
Beams or fibers of trees standing in a bare spot
away, which she wets with her saliva and
Shaped small balls kneaded after use
how liquor paper mass appears and from what it first the
Stem and the first honeycomb made on it. Eager though
lonely, she works on her case. She'll have one soon
number of cells, if not to the wax, then at least out
Blotting paper ready, all with the opening facing down
reverses, hexagonal, like that of the bees. As soon as they
are enough to meet the needs of the future boys
corresponding, a white, transparent, ling-
lichen egg with the apex stuck to the base of the cell
placed, but always alongside the cells that have been started
further down, the first floor of the building a second,
however against mmten, namely on one or more
Stems, 'Trégersiulen, attached and the half-finished cells
immediately occupied by Kier. The whole thing gets a wrap-
tion of blotting paper, which is a first protection against the
The weather was unfavorable, but not the rain, of course
and the fire evades the enemy's enemy. The bigger

ang

    

AAS

this work is for a single wasp, the less
which we wonder if they are in the first part
her offspring raises helpers, who with her the various
should share business. Therefore arise in the cells
the first and for the most part also the other below
Floors preferably worker wasps, which we after the
Date of laid Kier first as small Liarvchen, but
in a short time with the careful care of the mother, which
it acts like the birds, as large ones, gradually the whole cell
see filling larvae. They have light brown, three-
square head bent against the chest, are thick and conical
formed, footless, but with a white small fleshy end
Provided with warts, with which they are in their hanging position
hold on to the cells. Fully grown and
When the metamorphosis is ripe, the larva spins easily
weave around the body and also closes the wide opening
ming of the cell with a silky, more or less
vaulted lid. Soon she got herself under that cover
transformed into a milky-white, later yellowish pupa
brown eyes, on which the parts of the future wasp
can be seen quite neatly, and from the uach ciniger
Time the young wasp develops. She frees herself
of the cell by gnawing off the lid all around. until now
here comes the generation of the brood by the sole
Female. It takes care of the business of further construction and
cleaning, as well as excursions and feeding, so
as long as the weather allows it, only when it's bad
weather she stays at home and shares the
fasted. Until they but at their never resting
Activity which often consists of hundreds of boys
Brat wrapped up, fed, cared for and big

 

 

has lost a large part of its charms
gone The hair on your head has disappeared, your chest ev-
seems worn down and bald, their wingtips are fringed
worn out. You can also recognize them by their faded yellow
she light among her numerous freshly colored children. —

 

ANG
These, according to their purpose, almost entirely workers. bring new life to their dwelling. during the
mother from now on, d. H. from June to September, no more
flies out, they take over this function and support it
in domestic work, with the exception of laying eggs,
which the female is still responsible for. Without ever inside
have received lessons, they know with the same
propriety as the Mutians to wood fibers as building materials
win, yes they even go to paper, with which shattered ones
Windows are glued and the like. Like the mother they draw
the paper dough when making the cell wounds with their tongs
like potter through his fingers until he finds the right
term thinness has reached. They lay new floors in the nest
on, enlarge the existing ones by adding new ones
Cells at the edge, into which, as well as into which have become empty
old cells, the mother wasp immediately lays new eggs, so that
one finds kier and larvae of all ages together, and
heighten the too short cells according to the needs of the inhabited
larvae, or they fly out for food. siis
Sweets are their favorite food, so they seek them out
flocks of those originating from the leaf and shield lilies
the honeydew on the leaves of trees, bushes and
low growths. Especially in late autumn
they are almost exclusively occupied with it: busy and
the smallest traps don't seem to collect any
even the bee could not. I saw wasps
which lark trees swarmed around and the sweet exerc
ments of the cinzein and hidden aphids
visited the smelling gernch, also after the act of the ants
leaf lens hiteten to the freshly developed castings
to be received immediately. On the other hand, they iiss them
must leave unused juices in deep blossoms, because for this
her tongue is too short. After honey they are particularly delicious. Soon they penetrate, to stand him,- into beehives,
are, incidentally, on this occasion by populous
Stick stabbing and thrown out, soon weeping

 

 

 

 

ANT

they nm the beehives on the bees, which from the
Flower harvest return, you grab it, you drag it
fly away, cling to the ground and bite them
neck and torso to take only the abdomen,
containing the entrails filled with honey, at all
they hunt insects very vigorously. Minor bugs
like flies, they eat except for the wings and legs
whole, from larger ones they usually only take the most valuable one
Theil, the belly, and drag it on. they do
but it's also more convenient if they're in the neighborhood
ciner butcher bank hansen. Here they bite flesh-
cut off, especially from the spleen and liver, and carry
also a little marriage between the legs away [the nest
zn] They go just as much after the sweet fruits (grapes,
pears, apricots, plums, melons etc.) after, and the
Pomolog and Weingiirtner count the wasp among his
worst enemies, even more so than they proverbially only
take on and gnaw the best fruit to make the sweet
to lick juice. After a reasonable raid, they return
workers home and divide the booty with the females,
male, and even the 2 house workers
with those who gather around them and peacefully their
receive a share. This is according to Réaumur's
Insurance never in bits, but always in a drop
Juice that the wasp draws out of its mouth, often repeatedly
drives and sucks away. - The young larvae are also killed with the mouth juice
fatters but with more advanced growth they should also
get bits of chewed insects to eat. the
Cleaning the cells of old doll's skins and the like,,
the removal of the dead is another task
of workers. Often they tear the corpses to pieces,
to be able to remove them more easily, while we
on the first floor mainly female workers
standing, and in the next few in a strong relationship

the males developed, arise in the lowest,
2

  

 

Nordt ie Little Enemies. AIS

i.e. h, youngest stories, preferably females. Man
as with the bees, recognizes them with ease
tir the different sexes determined cells by
the larvae of the workers the cells with a flat covercl*
close, the male cinnae raised arches
Open the lid, -finally the cells of the females, of
the wasps on duty especially lengthened, ticfer
(longer) than the other cells appear. The young
females, of which there were several hundred in the last
who are kéunen, work with. Also get the little men
certain works and are not as asocial as you are
Drones of the bees, Deimnoch unravels between Ar-
beiterinuen and Miinnchen often quarrel, as a result of which in the
rule the miannes seize the fecht. To manslaughter
the Sireit seldom drives. How big a family of wasps can get
shows that you can climb up to cin dozen floors
like the floors of a tall building on top of each other
can hit (in which case the middle floors or walls
ben are the widest), and that one iiltern cells
lined with 3-4 of the delicate spun yarns, with what
each of the larvae raised in the cells will become relatives
lung had given. families of several hundred
are something common. Réaumnr found a nest in the
Earth you several thousands, we ask wan also,
how such a large family is destroyed again, so experienced
we by Réaumur that the females only come back in
September and October fly into the field, maybe because ilmen
then instinct says that the brood is now closed
must be. Yes, the anticipation of the dissolution of the family
Goes so far that the mothers and nurses who were so tender before
no longer feed the young and the workers and manufacturers
tear the not yet covered larvae out of the cells
and drag out of the nest when the first tires cin-
fall, the wasps still go out at somenblick that
worker bees, probably also freeze all meanches,

 

 

 

AND

but the females keep themselves on their toes and go
himself to reason, with the exception of a few who den
Winter olme food survive it and even if you give them
“Offering honey or sweets, take no food. So Ks is hardly one of the largest family left
Dozen (fertilized) females back, dic next
Leave the nest forever in the spring and go on a grind
as many new colonies. The stalks of wasps also penetrate through
handkerchief or gloves. They are mainly in the
to fear a hot summer. It's not the sting that
causes the pain, but the poison that takes one
ain the bottom of the sting attached bubbles ii the sting
wound flows. That is why one must also, if a sting
gets stuck in the wound, do not use two fingers to
like, but remove with the nail so that you don't
the attached blister of poison presses and more poison
drives into the wound. The more you irritated the wasps,
e.g. B. by destroying your nest, the more susceptible it is
her stitch. That wasps in large numbers humans and
even horses should come tédien, Réaumur doubts,
though he also acknowledges the well-known 'fact that
Horses stung and pursued by wasps run away,
overturn wagon ctc. and thereby bring misfortune
know. Those who have been stung by wasps
Ratzeburg recommends laying on cool earth, scraped
tomato or apples, cabbage peanuts; Léw wants a drop
and also assures that
the mere strong rubbing of the puncture wound hurts
in the beginning étiirker, but the pain subsides soon and
there is no tumor [2]. In a row of several
Stitches of violent inflammation that have occurred become envelopes
of cooling liquids, such as lead vinegar with water or
Lead water, also a viscous mixture of lime water
and Leinél recommended. Affects the farmer no less or more than you

 

 

  

   

 

 

420

Wasp stings the Schadeu that the wasps at. fruit and
Arrange grapes. In order to protect them from
fruit or valuable fruit trees hung tree
Zichter 6fters Gliser with aids and half-filled with diluted
tem honey or sugar water, which the liisterous wasps
lures and in which they crawl into the glass and drown. Wasps reproduce regularly in rich obsidian years
in an extraordinary way. It is then probably the Mahe
worth, on those in roof gables, barns, hollow trees,
Erdléchers existing wasp nests his attention
judge and destroy these nests. But it has to be
be done properly, because the wasps build, even though
no matter how shattered a nest always reopens. freely hanging
Nests are burned with a light touch through a straw
wipe or a torch at night whom the wasps something
are sluggish, taking due care when
use the window inside buildings, or fold them into
waffle iron or a pitcher with a hinged lid, or,
better yet, scoop the whole nest into a butterfly
have. Bechstein recommends shooting. nests in
Dirt leaks and hollow trees do not come from fire
be destroyed, since this, put on the hole, not
works deep enough, even if a lot of wasps die
burn. Even clogging doesn't help, because the intelligent
Wasp scratches a new exit here or there. Much-
more one sticks a sulfur section on and in at night
the entrance film to the nest in the banm or ground, under
Blockage of any side passages to keep the wasps safe
suffocate Related common speciesS are Vespa communis Kt,
just as large, with triangular central points and merged
zen points on the posterior side of the black bands of the
Hinterlétbs~ Furthermore, Vespa germanica I, relating to the previous one
very similar to drawing of abdominal rings, but
only 15 million long. As belonging to this species. designated
me Ratzeburg the wasp, whose schr big/tus seven

 

     

 

  
  

 

A2t

Storey nest I from the Schwarawald
received. in the

Less common are Vespa rufa L. with their half-red front
abdomen and other species named by Liw. The Vespa gallica L.
with her slender body, severely constricted abdomen, also yellow-
red feeler flagellum, which is mostly cin-stalked and has few cells
encased nests on walls, rocks, trees, shrubs, even weeds
active plants,' doesn't sting easily, and I've never had them
see eating fruit and the like. Indeed it is stated that
they feed their young only with flower juices. the honey with what
after Ratzeburg the cell honeycomb falls, I have not yet observed. The greatest, albeit in her gauzen demeanor
wasp species related to smaller species is the 82 million Long,
Everyone known Horuisse, Vespa crabro L. She lays
like the smaller wasps make their nests in hollow kichen or
other banks, barns, on granaries, under straw
Diichern, in the Moose, yes even, after that of Ratzeburg again-
got insurance, also under the ground. your nest is
proportionate to the size of the insect and often magnificent. When
Building material uses the Hor
Ash, birch, beech, white alder and she does this work
until late autumn. That the hornet only in the hot
she has
like their whole way of life with the outer wasps
mean, except about that of the young hornets
when crawling out, not deu Deekel ¥ nin off, but in the
eat through in the middle. She rhears the same fruits,
which the wasps attack, iusspecial she does:
Ratzeburg am Wein major damage. The hornets' nests
As a rule, they are easily revealed by the strong banging
of the swarming hornets. You suffocate them
the same way as the wasps; first of all the easiest
in late autumn, because at this time it is lazy and not dangerous
are. But the more bitterly in the year one destroys them, the more
fewer benefits are saved for the current year. According to the system belong the bees, -Apis, and
Hummingbirds, Bombus, next to the wasps. The reader will too

 
 
  
 

se the bark of young

 

  
    

   

 

 

422

in going through the way of life of the latter, the great one
Find conspicuous kinship, which avian
both families exist. The way of life of the bee itself
I don't consider myself to be able to describe it at the moment
sufficiently justified, as the same on the other hand
all too significant chapter warde and have formed
Title of our book does not belong here. to .em-
there is no lack of recommended books on beekeeping. I call:

"De Reaumur, mdnoires pour servir & histoire des
insectes. Paris, Imprim. royals volume V

Swammerdam, Nature's Bible, 1752. fw Gundelach, the natural history of the Honi
bees. Kassel, 1842. Published by Bohné. J.M. Freiherr jv. Ehrenfels, the Biencnaucht after
principles of theory and experience. Prague, J.G. Calve,
1829 S. F. Wurster, Complete Guide to Magazine
Beekeeping. Tabingen near Heerbrandt, 1802. Chr. Beef, the bee or beekeeping. Jena, August Schmidt, 1836,

Klaus, the bee father to Bohemia. Saaz, 1853. at
Theodore v. Scheufeld,

Dzierzon, New Improved Beekeeping. third recording
position. Self-published. 1849 Printed by Wangentield in
Neisse. CF L. Fuckel, my bee breeding. Third edition,
Darnistadt, 1846. Printed and published by C. W. Leske. Franz W. Hofmann n, The Beekeeping, Vienna, 1854. Printed and published by Wallishausser. F. B. Busch, Beekeeping method. Kisenach. Publisher
by J.BF. Barecke, 1853.4

 

 

  

3) The Ants (Formica). This is even more evident here than with the wasps
Presence of three kinds of sexes, namely again

423

 

Munich, females and working anesthetics, last
tere are distinguished by the lack of flagella, and the
by far the most numerous in number. Otherwise they are
‘Ants are recognizable by their triangular shape, especially in the
flagellate workers very large , head with clear,
strong jaws, often found on the abdominal
petioles selir characteristic scaly ete. shaped hecker
chen. The flagels of the ants are long, stretched, amit
few nerves, lying horizontally; abdomen short, at
the female very short, often globular. Several species of ants
hide a small thorn in the tip of the abdomen,
with what they defend themselves; that bit of moisture, that
let it flow into the small puncture wound, causes itching,
good swelling. Others lack the sting,
but defend themselves except with their jaws, like all ants
sen, by a sour juice (formic acid), which they, the
Abdomen turning towards the enemy, towards him
spray quite a distance. From this acid also stem
the red spots, sometimes the blue flowers
Chicory, Rilterspur, Boragen and other plants
get when irritated ants have crawled over it. The mating of ants is related to interesting appearances.
together, which I need to remember for the time being,
that in summer, especially from the beginning of August, in
the anthill numerous females and numerous
yeicher Manncheu are located; they sometimes mate in
or on the hemp and then, as one understands,
secured, not left out by the workers; this Ilam
rather, take an interest in them, tear out their flags
and keep them jealous, that they may baptize their brood
file yourself. More often it happens that the gender
ants look for the eggs to mate. That's how they run
winged lawn ants en masse upon their heaps,
Crawling on the grass stalks in the Yfohe, and preserved
at the same time food from the workers. Is it
eat, then some Imndert Méimehen will soon arise,

 

 

 

  

   
 

right hey

 

 

424

and also, but less numerous, females in the Lutt,
Often forming whole cloud-like trains. your winged creatures
shimmer like a rainbow. You can see the couple
tion from Minnehen and females already in the air, many
but fall on the ground, the miunchen is often so small,
in comparison with the woman, that it is from this
only like a small appendage is dragged along. Is the
When mating is over, the males soon get lost
go down. Neither are the females stationary. to find their former, often very distant cluster again. There's nothing like that in their plan, they're looking for a lot
more somewhere cin suitable place to justify a
new colony. Not just by going back and forth, in
crawling the ground and into the lights, although
many a winglet may be squeezed by the female,
lose your wings, but tear them up on purpose
lich anit the pines out. It is not uncommon to have the opportunity
to share this with; also the ground is often full of wingless lint
Female From the grain of sand small, sweet, white,
smooth hierchen of the individually fertilized females
now the very small colonies emerge, which one often subsumes
a stone. in a hollow tree and the like. finds, existing
from cinigen workers and larvae, as well as the female. that in the beginning alone the pileus of the brood and so long
must take until workers are educated. the duties
the last one and all the hustle and bustle in the small state
we want to investigate more closely, however, when
pull from males and females and through repeated
Breeds also the sexless Birgerinnen hedcutend
have increased Then let's take an ant-
heaps, then the smell of the already mentioned Amei occurs to us
sensiiure against; there is a great crowd, because the
Ants that are closest also notify those below
dwelling on the past disturbance and soon everything is booming
mixed up in order to avoid any further attacks together
to weave, save the young 20 and the devastated parts

  

  

   

 
 

  

 

  

 

 

 

425

to rebuild the heap etc. The common sense that
Diligence and the intelligence of the ants don't jump
less in the eyes when we look at their everyday goings-on
to watch. Their restless activity grows with age
referred to as ant diligence, although it has long been known
noticed that the ants don't create vorrithe. the
Members of one and the same bunch recognize each other by
meet on the street; they greet, touch and stroke
smile, even sometimes one deceives the other. What they find on the way is towed home, big ones
Pieces often with the help of a larger number; in this
But Palle lacks the necessary harmony and
one wonders that at the end of apparently haphazard
To and fro they bring their burden to the heap. On level ground, garden paths, etc. track them at
their own, often overbuilt with earth
Ameiseuwegchen, Ratzeburg but contradicts the assumption
that they keep going home the old way,
for he says the ant finds himself too, off with prey
heavily laden, from the greatest tangle of graves and
Got to go home again, olme that you
could possibly assume that she was pursuing him
the way they came. — The outgoing amei-
They are looking for sweet, juicy fruits such as cherries, pears, etc. the like,
also sweet juices pouring out sores on buds,
to lick it. This is how you see them on young, juicy
blobs or stalks sang in the places where yellow-throated
have eaten caterpillars or larvae. take it peacefully
they themselves receive the superfluous juice that comes from the
soft mallow stalks, while Apion aenewn his
ripple in. As one assures, they also gnaw on
sen Friichien and are supposed to own flowers. she
a lot of dry kernels haul home, however, how
one says, always only as building material. they track insect
ten, drag them home alive or dead and eat
them down to the shells anf. They are the declared enemies

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 
 

 

 

A26

almost the entire insect world, only for the benefit of some, be-
especially of those genera they make an exception,
who prepare for them slisse sifte. Because of the sugar or
Syrups they often get into the Hans-
attitudes; because of the honey in Bicneustécke, and this one
Because of their fondness for sweets, they have a very special
their friendship for the aphids and tortoiseshells, woe
excrete juice from her hindquarters. One sees
not easily an aphid fanatic, in which not some
Ants stayed around the sweet castings by day and
to receive at night. Yes, her presence betrays
us often only that of the aphids and especially the scale insects. To speed up the secretion of the sweet juice,
they keep drumming their feet on their bodies,
they are even supposed to keep them close to their heaps. However, this consideration does not seem to apply to everyone
leaf and scale insects, because Ratzeburg says
that they often tortoiseshell, especially imianliehe, to death
pub. — Might still be worth mentioning
m the big ones, the Maikiiferengerlingen,
p.96, similar to that of the gold miners, Cetoniu, page
106, dnid in their heaps without pursuing them. - All
Activity zn Hans and on the field is only of the
Developed workers, male and female
Ants do not linger and do not work, but leave
eat comfortably; they are also very cowardly and seize
immediately the flight, where there are dangers to exist, with-
while the worker ants are so warlike
that in fights between ants of different kinds or
different hemps, one with the most romantic scenes
can see torn off heads or whole dead ones

 

 

 

   

  

   

 

 

bitten the enemy's legs, and on these
hanging, being dragged along. Now, however, is the diligence of the industrious

 

in the

 

Bread has not yet happened, As already

notes. always remain in the sticks fertile memes and

 

females, which are particularly affected by the working
to be watched over and carefully fed. Of

This is how you stir the roast, i. H. the eggs, larvae and
pupae (the latter, the pupae, from the common man,, ant-
called eggs*), which one at different times, inannahmemal
found in the hemp even in winter. The workers treat
delu them with great attention, wear them soon to the
Surface of the heap to the warm sun, or tow
with the threat of rain and in the evening in the interior of the house
window If the dolls are in danger, they look for them
to save with mortal contempt, and ants have been seen
hen, with their abdomens severed, but thy dolls
carried their place of refuge. The larvae are almost headless,
clearly ringed, rather short, curved, especially in front
pointed, soft, white. Their food consists of cinem
Droplets of sweet aphid juice. Which ripen to pupation
larva spins; yet there are among the ants with
two-ringed stalk also species not spimeu. The cocoon is tichenfinig, ditim, sehlaif, brownish-white,
nndruehsicht, at the end of the anus with a mischief-
reuds, black spots; it is j
female or a minnehen, larger or smaller;
the latter are always the lower ones. It is strange that the
boys ready for transformation, soft and white,
but finally turn dark in the weave, so that the
dark color shows through, si
because

 

 

 

 

 

hdem it on

 

 

   

 

th not help out kénuen,
Halle does not resist to, as with
Wallien Gatlungen to be gnawed through. rather iniis-
let the workers help them out, and these zichen
sometimes evident to them soon, i. H. short time
after pupation, the Hille off. The discarded shells
be in the farthest corner, or entirely out of it
Pile carried away. Ratzeburg assumes that the
wickluugsdaner ciner bread average of three to four
weeks, but of course depending on the place, season,
Witling often deviating. With the Abuahime of heat

 

   

 

        

 

428

the vitality of the ants also decreases, and
they freeze at two degrees below freezing. First
if the soil is properly warmed up in the spring, in
During April, they reappear. The meaning of ants is different. The forester likes to see the ants because they
get rid of some harmful insects. The pharmacist sam-
melt them for medicinal use. Some country people
take the ant puppets (so-called Kier) from the bunch to
them as birdseed for nightingales and the like. for sale. (One carries the one containing the bulk of the pupae
Part of the heap on a clean path or scrubbed
place where, around the heap, one can
deepenings dug and with a twig or the like. covered. Has; or does. the shaded vev indentation in the middle
and heaps up the heap in its circumference. The ants
then carry all the dolls into the wells
which you can only take out after waiting for a while
may. The puppet harvest chews to Ratzcburg on the same
Heaps held four times a year. However, you can with him
Business probably watch some caution in order not to use the
bare hand to stir into your heap because the
Formic acid attacks the skin and it peels off easily.) The zoologist finally lets himself be after seeing smaller animals
peeled off the skin and put it in an ant heap
has to prepare nice skeletons from them. This benilzuu-
gene of the ants but preferably extend to the
Larger Wood Ants (F. rufa L.).—Contact Farmers
they usually in an uncomfortable way. anti-ant remedies. Against those who dflers from -
garden and fields come into the houses and eat
chambers wid de:

  

 

   

   

    

 

gl. browse for sweets, recommended
Ratzeburg passed the openings with a through
Coloquinte decoction of lime mash made bitter:
of strong poisons seems too dangerous here, of course. anti
Meadows where the lawn ant through their fir den Méhder

 

clearing

 

429

burdensome heap becomes detrimental, one recommends the
see prit or stomp the heaps, probably at
wet weather. Watering works naturally on the basic
lightest. In the garden, where they also sometimes
If rotten trees become cunning, several can
means are used, apart from the fact that ant
families who are not calmed down, sometimes by themselves
emigrate. Are they on individual healthy fruit trees
hold, one surrounds them with cine Theerring. hand
but it is about the destruction of hemp in manure beds
or in the ground, then you stomp it where cs is concerned,
or pour over the quickly opened hemp in the evening
simmering water, or even better simmering long, or
one mixes the heap with freshly burnt lime and
Quickly quench it by pouring water over it. On too-
water from vitriol, fish oil, herring varnish, tobacco or
Walnut leaves and putrid urine or buried sea-
fisheh: let them drive them away. That the gernch of Peter-
silie should be so repugnant to you, I leave it open
ebeuso the energetic effect of potash with sugar
water mixed. Against formal, mixed with sugar
I have already spoken out about the offered gifle above. Plain sugar water set up in bottle jars, should
not effective enough sem. Some other things more or less
ger impractical or cumbersome middle] one finds
that in Liw 8. 107 a to z. The individual arias of the ants we want briefly and nor
deal wisely, partly in the absence of the special ones, partly however

obsolete literary aids for a closer study of the species. partly to the lesser acquaintance with the latter. 4) Ants with triangular upper jaws, one sipe
or hiekerehen on the abdominal stalk and stingless. but with caustic juice, which they spray. Hiher those of the wood ant, very related but somewhat smaller, darker,
brown-red ant (from Degeer), which one sees in meadows in grassy bushes,
in small hemps on the dry grass or hay stalks and leaves

 

430

 

earth mixed up. Degeer saw larvae in June, nymphs in July,
Late Jnli young ants. The jet black ant Formica fuliginosa Latr, The species
which lays long passages in all hollow trees. Furthermore, many more
other dark species. The yellow ant of Degecr (not flava Latr., it seems). So different in their sexes that one
rR shouldn't think they belong together,

7 -* + they did not dwell together on the ground, in

Small heaps, on ridges, also under stones. SR Lerven in April, you're pretty stretched

a are In the enclosed figures the yellow one
— Worker and the Black Minnehen. 2) Ants with triangular jaws, without rattling on
the humped two-part abdomen stitch!, with a
spike. The red ant Formica rubra Latr. down on the abdominal
In marriage, in women, a short, forward-pointing thorn. At the
Brisket two straight spines. Dirty yellowbr Under Stone
hens and in the ground, already in April with larvae, often in fields
and in the forest. We mention here by name after the Cynips
or gall wasp family, which maybe also in the
Agriculture has a certain, albeit limited, role
plays. With their legs they lay kier in vegetable thiles,
who immediately wake up and to the delight of the madeniiln-
common larvae dicuen. As an example of this kind, they like
mossy outgrowths or "sleepy apples" on the young
Shoots and leaf stalks, and the little ones, at most pea-
large knuckles on the back of the leaves, both open
wild roses. The gall wasps have
much resemblance to a part of the wasps, the so-called pteroimalines. 4) Useful wasps

here

 

Here we can only briefly describe the main points of:
neatly numerous species of wasps or veined lilies
be the speech that live exclusively on other insects,

   

 

434

thus all to some degree, except many,
are uiital. Their way of life is very different. A The digger or road wasps, sphex, are those
who pursue their Ribber way of life most openly. From spring to autumn you can see on paths, \Fel-
dem, drifts and desert places very often long-lived,
mostly black and red colored wasps run, which
constantly beating with the wings, embroidered very dtimn-
ten abdomen and, if we take a closer look
and want to catch them, us through sensitive
tings about not being unarmed in
bunch of insects,

Other digger wasps, preferably black and yellow
colors and thereby reminiscent of the dense wasps, but
usually smaller, flatter and with a silver-white mouth
on the leaves of Biéumen and on the screen
blossom in the meadows. And they live from the rough
like the previous ones, but do not make their prey on the
soil, but on the plants, Both the former and
these spider wasps “manufacture themselves in the education of their young
Would go in sandy soil, the latter not infrequently even in
the soil of the flowerpots. They drag flying
Ranpen, Rénpehen, aphids and the like, häud or im
Catch, so that the subterranean, to the dwelling
to fill the jangen specific gear nud her balls iit
to lock up together with the food supply. From-
crawled livestock live on the stock of insects,
finally pupae into a bag-like web and
finally appear as spider wasps. Other spider wasps, mostly ga
from his mouth, rob in the same way as the previous ones
but they always go in bitumen
and bushes, some of rotten, soft wood, which
others in cut branches or cuttings by
they dig up the wood or pith to make a roar
form, The imers of the lengths are usually in a series

 

 

 

move away from Eindde. They rob

 

 

 

 

 

 

black with silver

 

  

white

     

on growths, lay

 

  

 

432

cells divided. — All these digger wasp species that are caused by her
frequent occurrence and their lively 'taperament itself
the layman deserves to be spared everywhere,
because the observer is amazed at the immense mass of
aphids or reptiles, and the like, which they have in their
pile up nests for food for their young. parasitic
The nests of the spider wasps are frequently visited
the cuckoo wasps, Chrysis. These are the gorgeous blue ones
red, grinned, shiny, short, fat wasps that you
hustle and bustle in the sun at walls and fences
sees, whose usefulness would thus be denied,
Didn't they also make nests like the cukuk
actual wasps. B. The wasps, ichnenmones, are extraordinarily
ig and therefore of interest. Also apply
they very generally fi useful by other insects
destroy. So we want to devote a few lines to you here. The wasps break up into three fairly well apart
separate groups, viz., Iehneumonids, Braconids, and
pteromalines. We have fir each of them for long
to make writings superfluous, an illustration
give. . The first, Pimpla rufata Grv,, belongs to the Ichneumonids
at, and is a hoiufigor parasite im
tree white. She eats her way out of it
Doll, p. 215, “through a large hole
towards the front on the side. Mr
Fligelgeiider can be used as a type for the
Ichneumonids apply. The other is a Braconid, Bracon clavatus Ps. very
often as a parasite in small wooden
kien, like Anobium striatum 8. '76,

 

 

 

in
nnd therefore often on the windows in
Hiiusern, The Fligelgeider der Bra-
conids somewhat easier than in the
previous. 433

 

The third is an emerald green pieromaline
in large quantities as a parasite

Carrot fruit occurs and dic

in red maggots of Ceetdomyia in dex
—

Pteromalines can represent. The most significant of this group
are apart from the mostly beautiful green, blue n.

like color of the little animals of the wactst
simple ban of winglets. We now want the way of life of the wasps
briefly discuss. They drive themselves en masse on the weight
sen nm, soon to nip some food at the flowers
pen, soon to do something in large and colorful company
to lick sweets from the leaves (honey-thane of the
lens; late autumn, alder buds). In warm weather
she is extraordinarily lively and mobile. In the begat
one sees them sclten. — The main activity of the
female consists in seeking out hiern, ranpen or
larvae in which they lodge their brood parasitically
They constantly feel for them with their feelers
back and forth, and finally have them on a tree
or a lower plant, in the wood, or even within
of a leaf is found, an egg is found with the ovipositor
stabbed. Some very small pteromalines bore theirs
Kier in the Kier of butterflies, e.g. B. in the ring
gel spinners. Instead of a little bag, datin slips in the nich-
sten Frithling out a wasp. Other wasps sting
their kidneys in larvae or caterpillars, sometimes with, sometimes without
all resistance of the latter. Or will the Schmaro-
just put eggs on the animal. These occurrences
speaking, the consumption coming to the Sehmarozerei lives
wasp maggot, or several, internally or externally
sucking, from the suckers of the caterpillar (or larva), without that
this is why they lose their appetite. But you notice
you can already see wet spots. You cut it
a ranch or larva inhabited by a parasite

first rinse it with water and you will find an or
Nordlinger, the little enemies 28

  

 

 

 

 

434

 

surer Schuaro worms, which are twin-ringed, stretched,
chubby, both scits narrowed, sel soft, are footless,
nor having a very wiperfect or no head, wid
move with ease like other maggots. - The
Maggot shown mw side is that of the Pimpla pomorum
Ratz. , a small parasitic wasp, which

parasitic in the larva of the apple

bliithenstechers, page 167, lives. she consumes

= gradually so completely,
that when the grub last emerges from the larva, uur
the horny head and the dim skin of the letatern abrig
remain, and the maggot shows the same size as that of
her inhabited Lary
Oddly enough, a species of wasp is now pursuing
always one or more definite species of insects, and eiue
dusektenart, on the other hand, can have dozens of Si
to have pursuers. Moreover lives vou many little ones
Species not just one, but often many individuals in one
and the same caterpillar. In this way I brought up from a

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

only caterpillar I keep fir Noctua radicum, 1800
Piece of a small Pteromaline. Yes even in the scam
other parasites live on it. — Depending on the species

   

   
 

of the parasite and the caterpillar the grub is already boring itself
from the early days of the inhabited caterpillar through the skin,
or only at an advanced age of the caterpillar, or when
to the

 

 

she has already spun herself. But many stay until
Doll stand and transform into the doll so that one
then a butterfly or the like. expected out of the box
and to his surprise raises a wasp. Yes
in individual cases the cellophane wasp only comes out of the
full-fledged insect. — Lots of wasp maggots,
whether crawled out of the pupa wins towards the wasp
transform or already out of the caterpillars, surround each other individually
or gregarious in close proximity or a little further from
the dwelling animal with a lingish little lantern. So
spin a lot on a banch of cabbage white caterpillars

   

   

   

 

 

small brakonids (Miero-
gaster, ¢) and the caterpillar
/ ken weekly olne

food sit on it-
2 as if it had to
they broil her. — Others transform completely naked;
such are in large numbers, almost radiating around the
collapsed skin of the caterpillar berum; although how-
the other caterpillars and just by very numerous giists
inhabited after being abandoned by the Zehrinads
that retain their shape entirely. — The dolls of consumption
wasps are usually very soft and white,
wanduden something shepherd and darker. The wasps, the
turn into ghost monsters, eat each other at the top
of the cocoon somewhat laterally through an irregular hole
out. They soon appear earlier than the inhabited animal
flown in normal condition, soon at the same time,
soon too, such as B. the wasp in the turnip maggot,
only later than the insect. The importance of wasps in the ecosystem is
not yet determined. The usual view is that
the scavenger wasps were created by nature, nm one
there is a limit to excessive breeding of insect species
However, Ratzeburg opposes this assumption
claiming they're more likely to come through in a row
za large increase in the disease that has occurred
sects up. Under such circumstances, and since the parasite
zey of agricultural insects only in very limited
tem measure -closer gotten, let's come to anf'
don't let individual species in here at all. In general, be something
Bouché S, 149 says, touched on here, that one is sick
Caterpillars and cardboard, which betray that by their discoloration
they are inhabited by parasites, not with the healthy ver-

   
       

 

  

   

 

 

 

 

  

must in order to discover the inner enemy
development, as is often the case for caterpillars
holding Ichucumone spiders on the belly of the caterpillars. not, but him! wv. locust order. private. The locusts in the broader sense, or straight
flagler, Orthoptera, can be, except already in the
general overview given characteristics, more
draw by means of one almost always directed downwards
Head with perfect masticatory organs, mostly distinct
long antennae, sometimes narrower, sometimes wider wing
deeken who, as a rule, ran with nerves, either
flat or daehform. The actual or sub-
wings are in longitudinal folds like a fan, sometimes also
still folded in transverse folds. The abdomen on
the forebody grows abutting. Legs éfters to
jump set up. At the end of the abdomen Legrehren or
Auhingsel or tongs, which 2usame in most
Fillen serve to easily distinguish the sex. The metamorphosis is a durehaus imperfect, dic
Development of a very simple, with imperceptible shape
change. Most fly, or jump and fly
musame. They live mainly on vegetables and are
you're greedy. Sander claims to have seen that
cin catchy tune whose body was cut in two, his
own guts aunfirass. Kin other example of the kind
safe Werre,

Since it is just as common in this grappa with the
to do perfect states as imperfect ones
has, and the higher belonging genres even to the layman
sufficiently known and also in the presence of the nncomplete
to guess the coming state

 

 

  

 

 

  

 

 

d, can the Kintheihing
happen after the -perfectcu state:

a

437

a) With long roof-shaped deekes and wings. Long stilt-shaped jumping hind feet. grasshoppers
(Acridium). -

 

 

The migratory locust, heerlieu cricket, the
Straw or migratory haystacks, physically and large
oriental hay
called horror. Gryllus (Acrid.) migratorius L. Der
perfect
Kerf is easy zn
recognize by a quill, i. hb and
Bar provided pronotum and blue NEN, The color
of the body is somewhat different, although shape and drawing
tion, as given in our figure, very constant

 

  

 

raised back

  

 

stay. The wings of the Zughenschreeken are long and large;
the lower ones whitish, by which they can also be seen in the distance
Wlug are easily recognizable. This puts you in a good position
yeet, wide flights 2 nuts (see later). killed

 

or nar cool weather makes them lazy, so that sic
bounce rather than fly. On bright warm days or in
but they are alive during the warm midday hours, they bring
by violins with their hind legs on the bell covers
a jaut rasping sound out. If you approach them
in warm weather, you notice it with some
fernmng quite good, rise and fly fast and
far away. — The flight time of the migratory locust is upon us
Late July, August and September. Like you, the migratory locust has
© andentet, the habit of moving from one area to another

 

    

  

  

i.e
to pull. She is said to be particularly howling from the Orient
go west. She is bt, special
common plains of Tartary, From this one
il math should have different moves
ius western E have spread_, about many speak
che

   

lich how to angi

  

1 the grassr

 

        

here york

    

 

438

According to the notes collected by Oken, im
Jaby 1730 cin locust train duveh Poland to the
Check out Mark Brandenburg. Devastated in 1747
the stick locusts Siebenbirgen. fin year 1748 ka-
from Wallachia and Moldova through the
towards Bergpisse in August in droves to German
country. The rest is reported from the same year (1748)
ted that a Henselweekenzug through Hungary, Poland, Schle-
sien to Holland, England, Scotland, mud yourself on dic
Arcadian Islands and went to Sweden. It
is regrettable that not enough emphasis has been placed on
to find out how far the actual Wauderzug
stuck, and what are the benefits of the Jokale development of the
broods in the different regions of Germany,
lands ete, ualinen. Say yes but individualuc that the Sehaa-
angel ge

 

  

only from Bent zn Brunt or dureh Nahron
pushed on, — Korte names the year:
the migratory locusts more or less entanglement
Directions: 1475, 1527, 1686, 1686, 1693, 1696, L7L2, L714,
1715, 1719, 1727, 1728, 1729, 1730, 1731, 1734, 1746,
1747, 1748, 1749, 1750, 1752, 1753, 1754, 1759, 1763,
1803 One can see from these numbers how von Korte is right
it is noted that Olmue probably also immigrated from
the devastating insect continued in the Orient for a long time
Germany develop from its cigen broods and
reproduce count. Moreover, one finds the insect too
in normal years at least in individual specimens
plaren in southern and northern Dentsehland and also
near the world sea in the heathland steppes of the old
Armorica. Ks can therefore probably be combined with Résel and Kérte
be taken that it is also im to the migratory locust
western Enropa to multiply in devastating quantities
see how with other Kerfen only ciniger tol-
This is already

  
   

we, in which

  
 

 

   

 

   

particularly good-natured generations. therefore of interest because developing with us

Don't just see them like the immigrants because of theirs

gE EEEOOOOOOOO

439
Cleverness than full insects , but also through
devastating those already employed during their youth
will. Kérte observed mating in 1827 or
1828 from 23. July to 10. October; even later
he kept seeing couples in the fields. The Méun
Some often died shortly after mating. That
The female, however, completes the laying of the brood from the beginning
August to September. Noeh spit found in October
Korte filled with perfect locust females
chen. The eggs are supposed to be under bushes,
placed on grass stalks, stones, under manure or on roots,
usually however*in the earth, and above all in
a loose, warmly laid soil. That penetrates into this
Females with its abdomen 7-8 lines deep around the
to vacate. Duss this, like Oken after an ester-
rich reports from 1748, often up to
are to be laid a foot deep seems very implausible
apparently, since the locusts do not dig when they are old, but
which sink their children into the ground with their abdomens. They are placed in lumps, G0—70 together, after
anderu up to 100, the Kliimpehen a kind above and
nul rounded, 8 lines long, cascading, which,
probably if it is smaller, in the form already
has been compared to a broad bean. The mass of
Kiers laid as in a cord are white,
flaky, like beaten egg white. In the middle are those
zavten yolk yellow, later dark yellow, even brarmen
Kier, The foam covering them soon turns brown and
sticks it together so tightly with the surrounding earth that
they get protection from this crust and also difficult
are to be found. By the way, Kin Grasshopper Female is supposed to
‘¢ Lay down and tüber d chiift, which also pro-
is apparently, probably 6 weeks go. The death of
Females takes place shortly after dei tablag
single grasshopper egg has the grisse e

  

 

 

 

 

  

 

  
 
 

   

 

more

 

   

tion, kin a:

 

small rye

 

AW

grain. The time for creeping out is spring, huugt
but very much from the Wilterung. In warm springs
the locusts come as early as March, April or May
from, otherwise also older news only in Juui, what
but is certainly too sharp. The insect, even in Sweden
Degeer's in perfect condition as early as July
caught, so will usually appear in May, Die
small wingless locust marriages one notices that
what has been said about the breeding place, mainly to the
warmer times of day in the places where the brat is deposited
was, since they are very delicate and weak, also not
living together socially, they are often difficult to notice. They immediately begin to eat green ones. Up to the stand
of their perfection, according to Frisch, they would
according to Karte five times. Near the first hint and
after reviewing them, the young Heuseck-
little dark brown-red, blackish and more in the eyes
falling. Between her third and fourth
already eat as much food as the adult hay
terrified, their food goes on the torn-off
fields, they move to neighboring ones. Two weeks
after the fourth, the fifth, last, birth takes place. As in
all locusts, the wings only appear with the last
teu transformation; they give the film its main character. — Even her gluttony in itself is extraordinary. she
are able to in a few hours or during a
warn of the greatest devastation in the fields at night
to prepare soon by taking the spring rye entirely
eat from the ears, or only half of the kernels
bite through so that they look like crushed grain
get, sometimes also, when they am the whole axis
Basically bite off that when you cut uur empty straw
finds. But where their crowds are large, they eat
of grain, oats, meadow and potato flichen up to the
floor full
what was there, and they almost cover the floor with it

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

dig off, you can judge more afterwards

ooh

AAA

their bodies, now they eat, unless they starve,
move on. 20-30 rise at warm daytime,
describe a circle in the air, 20-30 class wide,
what the locusts in the neighborhood are also
if raise and fly along. Done this fly now
also often only in streaks, so that between the Kelders
on which locusts invade and graze, 6fters
the next fields can be spared, that's how it is
understandable that through the daily repetition of this
Fleeting whole areas can be completely eaten away
n, whereupon the locusts finally into the gardens and
Dérfer come on, or at last in multitudes, often like clouds
hiss You saw them like a cloud in the last century
bursting into hearts and for several hours in a hundred
Fathoms wide and even higher trains and so crowded
fly that sun and people on 20 steps do not
were seen, they flew far above the water after the
Linge cines river and finally fell exhausted on the rocks
the and meadows down. Elucidated from the foregoing
the harmfulness of the insect to suffice. It can géinz-
lack of bread, seed and fodder as a result of their
often occur, they are particularly pleasing when
the devastation begin so early that even the early
succumbed to her teeth. Some fruits, e.g. B. the Kar-
toffelu, eaten up and sprout again, there are also several
experiences that from the locusts yor the shis-
barley that had been eaten off again, see how usual
grew and gave a very good harvest. Furthermore have
the locusts the cinemal grazed the buckwheat,
let stand. —After the above are
several consecutive favourable, i.e. H. dry, hot
Annuals capable of extraordinary multiplication
bring in locusts. Likewise, the largest
Masses diminished and destroyed by wet vintages. It is especially the wet and cold springs that
destroy, but they also have ele in the kingdom of Thiel

 

 

  

 

  

the other time alone

 

 

   
 

  

   

  

 

 

enemies; Stérche, ravens, crows, jackdaws, Krammetsvégel
gathered in crowds where locusts amassed in masses,
Even the sparrows eagerly follow them and lead them
despite its size in its beak. Pigs eat them
very gladly, even Hithner and Giinse, but which if
they eat too many locusts, get sick and themselves
perish. Even the crickets are said to be their enemy. Have the hayhoppers once in significant numbers
increases, it is natural that man is not master of them
if he only misses them in a developmental stage
follows. The war must meet several states of justice
be clinked. One notices in a region in the summer
or fall individual stick insects, so sci one on the
Huth. Are there only a few dozen that you can
is to get, then there is an unusual grasshopper
increase in prospect and it is worthwhile in common
common agreement with all communities in an area
on cloudy and cold days, and on beautiful days in the
cool mornings and evenings, with pauses from
reasonable prices, through which Jugeud in the villages of Hen-
to catch vertebrae in vessels and let them kill. If their number were a little larger, then Kérte's
beat to line up the whole communities to patrol and
provided with twigs and shrubs in a slow pace
back over the flanks and all abutting hay
among which, of course, a lot of women satisfied with the British
chen, to be killed, really be in place, there
here, as Kérte says, actually none for her size
grasshopper can remain unscathed. [st but this Sain-
n lifting

 

 

 

 

  

   

   

 

 

 

been missed and can be found on sunny days
in the autumn dead grasshoppers in Unzathl, so is yoranszn-
her brood

 

torben after si

 

put that
had entrusted to the earth. In addition, the beers
Indians, on Wai-
eu, near wooded areas and hedges, finally too

you here y

 

particularly common in rifts and ravines

 

 

on fields. Since it is now very difficult, the individual i

443

to find lumps by frequently looking through those around
the earth's crust are withdrawn from the eye, it is good
to take more drastic measures. Wherever it goes
to use the pilug, one tucks and lets the earth in
the rough furrow lie, so that you are right from Nésse and
and the eggs contained therein,
which are probably protected against cold and some nuts, but
cannot endure prolonged wet, get quite soaked
den , freeze and rot, Kérte gives the message, 'that
the eggs in the winter corn sown before Michaélis,
often seemed to get by, but none in such that
after Michaelmas: been (and just as little in the barley
field and in the fallow). He then bases the regulation
the winter order as late as possible, the spring order
but eat as early as possible. On cattle, Migelu, aut
Waiden, where you can't reach with the Pilug or
also don't want to stab with the haunch cte., one looks for oneself
to help in another way by using a pickaxe
uncover the bottom to 1-14 inches and reveal the
coming brood riveted or taken out. Iu the Mark
should in the last century troiz the exercise, dic to
easy to recognize the lumps of kidney, large quantities
liten Kier have been read together like this. One cmplichlt
also very much the Kintrciben vou pig herds, which very soon
accept the smell of the kids and the insurance
follow the soil then to rummage most carefully, too
from trampling or smashing the eggs in the ground with
Temenpatschen reports to Oken (Résel). has a hay
terrifying devastation not already for cinem or some
Years lasted, but is sic only in the outbreak, so will
incist the Wierzerstéren has been missed s Man has in
in this case, as well as in the case of insufficient destruction of the
attention to the destruction of the young
To judge hens, The very young haystacks

chen, depending on the weather, already in Mérz and
April noticed at the breeding sites at the warmer time of the day,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ben, its all autinerks

 

   

At

are the hardest to track because they are so small
and we like to socialize together. Doeh riith Korte,
once you recognize her, she in the midday hours
the one where they are out of their hiding places, from children
to collect and zn yannihilate. That's even better
would, adult persons at least at the same time as the children
to have them collected should not be subject to a second],
because working with children all too easily degenerates into gimmickry. At the time of the first skinning (see above) one notices
she in the warmer daytime strains already in fairly strong,
About initially only individual swarms of some rich and
sheltered places on the Velde, at cooler times and at
cold weather but they hide themselves. They are in though
still too weak at this age to do the slightest harm
but Kérte believes that the Heusehreeken
before the second hiiutimg, she knows when the weather is nice
en Keldgriben and water
stop furrows, in the morning and afternoon hours
found and by a few people in the shortest possible way
covered with earth, met and destroyed
only have to, he says, because the brood of the hay
scare do not develop quite evenly, often after-
seen and the same thing repeated, not just to
to do work. Depending on the circumstances, you can
oh well now, but in any case if for the future
more danger loomed, to Zichang of small, '/, - 1 foot
deep ditch with so-called. Fullléchern, in which you
drive in from their Hanptanfhaltsériern and tédte. Between the second and third hay occurs fir
agriculture enters the most dangerous period in which
no other means than throwing gribenaws and driving the kin
and Tédten der Meusehreeken are applied
that can, it asks mer Grüben at
lay? Especially in a way that will drive you in-
the locusts against the wind or uphill
otherwise soon ermiden and

 

 

 

 

laid in a dry and warm place

  

 

   

 

 

 

  

   

where are these

 

 

be tricked, because si

445

go no further or lose the direction of their
change. It should also be noted that if you remove them
pursued from their usual place of residence, they gladly join
return there at the slightest alarm, thus un-
ter circumstances expediently separated from it by pits
can be seen, but if they are already on the train
are understood, for the pits a decent projection
must win. The position of the ditch is determined naturally
after the swarm has spread and you can see them
also give Fligel directed against the Schwarin. In the
Width and depth, however, considers Kérte 1'.-.2 feet to be sufficient, fir
even better, however, several narrower trenches one behind the other
the. If the ground is sandy, the slope should be as strong as possible
recommended, on clayey soil, where possible the ditch
narrower at the top than at the bottom. The pose
comes as steeply as possible to the opposite side. on
the ground are lowered at appropriate distances
right depressions, so-called Hanger attached. When driving
ben you put the staff behind the swarm and let it
with leafy branches and rods! make movement
also beating gently on the earth, but without the locusts
au meet, lest they be frightened and advance
are preserved, if the drivers do not remain in the proper
far from the train, it gets confused and comes
not moving or even turning around. In this case
the drivers had to take a few steps and less
float. By racking in from the flanks in an arc
the Grében one looks for the evasion of the locusts
on both sides to prevent, If the train is in the ditch, so
those who stay behind at the edge, exhausted, will join in
Force pushed in completely, earth thrown in and firmly z-
kicked. This is essential, since the observed
tung do that locusts buried for five days
lying in the air for a short time, jumped away again. It

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

' It could be even better

be using the drivers according to Kollar's suggestion
wide fay

hamen (page 50) to bewaftny

   

 

446

Gfters also the case that a driven hay
rectangle train in the face of an obstacle, such as a tree,
odors and the like. u not want to go further and its direction
changed; then encloses the obstacle from afar,
the drivers must keep quiet so that the hay
Very few corners go apart, and meanwhile one throws
Mégliehst quickly a ditch in the direction of which
they make a straight face, that's how battues are
often to be repeated when noticing neve broods. also
permanent, always open-ended ditch with appropriate fall
léchern so that the captives do not escape
can, Kérte finds appropriate. You have to do it daily
Always read. Are the locusts already in the
fall on large contiguous winter strands
made noticeable, so riith Kérte when ordering the same
Leaving strips unseated and in the spring, at the time where
the Henschreeken can be found on both sides of the stripes
furrows and several greens across the stripe.
to throw up the grain on either side
are sufficient. Straighten between the third and fourth skinning
the locusts because of their great voracity ung
my damage, just as great as the fully trained
the winged. You can not in this period
cindrift into ditches more so easily than into the frihery, the
they usually sit in the adult winter crop

 

 

 

 

 

   

3
also they jump too far to be held together anymore
to be able to. Only very frith morning after seey star-
no dew and right after a rain, where it still rises
fer, the hustle and bustle can take place with success. The GE-

 

gluttony compels her to this period for want of nourishment
tion often move zigs from one field to another. sic
with these, by the way, slowly moving,
Do not easily deviate from the path you have chosen

  

 
 

lea neither hunting, nor riding, nor falwen prevents her advance
ride. Makes a fair in the middle of the train

Oe

AAT

Getise, so they tremen, but connect at once
again when they're past the noise. If such
take place, one places on both sides of it,
about 50 steps apart, people opposite, and cunning. now with banana weeds, straws and brooms without much
Noise and chasing, the people alternately and not
all at the same time, the passing locusts die
gen. This will not disturb the train and what the
escapes the first, gets caught by the second or the third,
so that few insects will escape alive. The closer the locusts are to perfection, the
Of course, the effort in terms of people is greater, desio
greater but at the same time the sense of community. It's hardly allowed
also require the remark that all measures in
a larger area must be executed harmoniously,
if not often driving out of a hallway so much so
result in greater devastation to an adjacent one
should, — Did the migratory locusts through the fifth hiiu-
get their wings, so init success nothing more
against them, for, as we saw above,
provinces and

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

fly through if the weather is good

 

   

eat everything they meet on the field, especially
what view They pay less attention to what is left behind. what mbg-
Lich, one looks for them through Fritheres Maihen and the like. to
revoke. Attempts to destroy them with cannon shells and
to shoo away defensive fire where they threatened to fall, ha-
only had an effect in some cases. One has too
Fille observes, in which flights, already over a hallway
were gone, a few hours later, after suicide
Wind, return to the same. From the invaded
i are deducted everyone stays

   

  
 

    

 

  

 

less fertile women between those for foundation
are concerned about child custody. — Where cin hay-
schreekeulicer abstirbi, spread by the many

 

Halmen hiugendeu and hermliegen cin uachtheils

 

448

Stink, yes, diseases are said to result from it
to have broken out. — Even if it is in the Orient and in Africa
there are edible grasshoppers, it is the stick grasshopper
not edible, and where, as in Milan, one does so
had decided to have them collected, it should
It's best to give them small portions to the pigs and dem
To fit fowl, but to use large masses as fertilizer
turn. — Be especially sure of the very good treatise by Fr. Korte, Professor at Méglin, Berlin 1828, with A. Ricker. According to Kérte and Léw, the one native to the Orieut and edible
Main grasshopper species Gryllus (Acrid.) cristatus L. After Bur-
Usually this statement is based on Linné's cincem Irrihum, who only used this in
America occurring species referred to as at home in the Orient,

Also Gryllus (Acrid.) itaticus L., 6-T Mill. long, brown and
sprinkled, with a little keeled brisket; buttocks at the Inuen
s¢ite and also the whole series rosenroth, In Germany, little-
Mostly in the southern, rarely, She too is a rambling hay
scare and has entomol after deu Annales de la Société. de France. Tome I
Paris 1832. p. 486, (Zenker) already caused great devastation, je~
but preferably in southern Europe. Several writers on the agriculturally harmful insects
deal with other locust species, such as the red snare hay
Gryllus (Acrid.) stridulus [., with its red lower ivies and
buzzing flight; common in late summer on dry hills, with
her the somewhat rarer blue Gryllus (Acrid.) coerulescens L. mil blue
underflight With the previous, but somewhat rarecr. Furthermore, the mean, light green, finger-length hybrid marriages
schreeke with Jangen thin feelers and sible-shaped Legerdrei, Gryl-
lus (Locusta) viridissimus [., which occurs in July, August and September
so hempy on fruit trees, in hedges, as well as in Haberfelder at the moment
of the harvest chirp. Finally a less common green, with reds
Legged and quilled winged eardrums, Gryllus (Locusta) verrucivorus L. teh
keep them as long as I have positive issues anywhere (except in low).
their misunderstanding fiude, and also according to my own opinion fir
agriculturally indifferent. b) With shorts lying flat (not longer than the body)
blankets and bowties; with thick thighs. grilling
(Acleta). The home marriage, the house cricket, Gryllus (Ach.) do-
mesticus 1. The hind wing in a kind outstanding

Any

 

prickly eulogy. dice

Thigh strongly thickened a

and too far

gene suitable, although

the little animals should also fly more often. A frequent
live in warm houses, especially in the country. It:
stays there all year round near the Ocfen
and hearths under the ground or in maner crevices. Because of its great predilection for the heat it is also
very often in breweries, breweries, boiling houses. at
The house crickets hide during the day, but at night
they come out of their hiding places and their close
after. This consists of mealy substances,
bread, wet grain, and the like. They should also be very
be steady, who seek out Mileh and when there is water
miss, even wet shoes and clothes do not spurn. After Léw they also went after young pilanzen [' These
Habits, also the chirping of the miennchen, the less
is brighter than in the field cricket, also by rubbing the
Flagel is produced and especially when approaching
should be strong in the rain, finally her clumsiness
sometimes falling into the food makes them cunning. That
Peasants in some areas believed that one should, olme
that it brings misfortune, harm no cricket than. According to Résel, the female lays the lingual yellow-
in July and August in rubble, rubbish and the like!. After 10-12 days the young come out. Naeh white

 

 

 

 

 

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

  
 

ter 8 days they shed, later again, and after
a further, the third day, they receive flying
divorce, and the female the Legréhre. Now appear
also the dark spots on the whale and abdomen. With the
At the age of six weeks they hugged each other for the fourth time and
get their wings, which are white at first, but gradually
after becoming yellowish-brown like the body, they will not
older than a year, — your great enemy is the cold, from
which they are easily killed, To themselves i

Nordlinger,

 

 

 

to get rid of
29

 

he Kleinow enemies. \

 

450

one has to plug up the hiding places as much as possible
and to pass. Kingiessen or Kinspritzen of hot
his water is also effective. If you put peas on them. straw, leather boots or an open cork in the
Eeken from fireplaces or rooms, so you can use them with
pick up and kill. They can also be caught in Résel
in crooked bottles, in which you put some sugar and
has strewed flour and to whose neck one ihuen through one
also built a bridge with Spahn sprinkled with sugar
has, or in sugar jars with some earth and the like, with
tied with a piece of paper, in the middle of which is a star shape
hole etc. more. — After Léw we brought milk with me
Pepper for them a potent poison, and young elder-
sprouts or the stench of green browned follunder-
twigs and twigs will drive them away. It goes without saying
however, that these remedies, while they work, by no means
have the effect of a formal poison, and that malt
boiled with some arsenic or mercury, and on 'days
which one to choose

 

 

is and during which that
house can be closed to men and fowl,
far safer and in less time set us free. The Field Cricket, Gryllus (Ach.) campestris LE. Mimichen about 25
million, females 34 million long, slightly awkward because of their astringency, diekem,
almost spherical head, the male with yellow wing root and strong
annoying flies, which means that it flies as little as the female. last
teres with longer, greener, more finely latticed wings and against the
Tip thickened Legrélire. It is known to live in large numbers
Rainen, on dry meadows, especially mountain meadows, in a small
Earth cave, which she digs herself and in front of which she sits with beautiful
Weather hear their loud chirping all day I The brood will be in
Summer laid in the ground!. The boys do two more skinnings
Winter through, with fine autumn weather also the third; otherwise in
next May and June the third and fourth, with which they complete the
coming wings, d. H. get their vocal tools to get the
the whole summer, you live on grass, herbs
and seeds, should also gnaw at fruit, but are nevertheless without cigen-
significant importance for agriculture, although they have to
be treated fisherlich. I would have skipped them altogether if I had
they should not be confused with one of the first farmers. 451

©) With flat-lying shorter, whole valiant and wings,

With grave (front) feet. Gryllotaipa (Courtilitre, Grillon taupe
of the French). The mole cricket Gryllotalpa vulgaris Latr. (Gryl-

lus Gryllotalpa L.), leads to others depending on the area. but nevertheless for the most part significant designations. Already Résel grounded them ctymologically. Earth cancer is called
them from their own peculiar, reminiscent of cancer
breastplate. She got her name Moldworf from the old
German word mold, touch earth, Werre from Ver-
werren (old German) or devastating the field, scrap
worm from eating the roots of plants, worm from
yon that plants, from ilm unterhdhit, as it were torn
fall over, barleyworm, pumpkinworm from him
should particularly like to eat or destroy these growths,
and besides they call him aardwolf and field
werbel, the latter probably difficult to explain. The mole cricket is one of the largest in Europe
Insects, which are particularly offensive because of their blunt nature
figure, its lye fihler, feelers and tail fiids, the
hand-shaped kvifuges closely resembling those of the mole
the front legs that gave him his name,
finally through the cigenthiimlichén breastplate. the miinn
is different from the female only by larger, more regular,
and the rest opposite now more equal cells and something
deviating ban of the environment of the historical parts ver-
divorced We find them almost entirely, Enropa very
spreads. Only in the far north, e.g. B. in Sweden from”
Sparing anfwiirts, it no longer occurs. she has
a very enterprising lively temperament, perhaps
the liveliest of all relatives. She is not a tsar

 

 

 

 

more capable of leaping than crickets, alone sic
flies fast, digs with extraordinary agility, and
also swims well when dropped into the water. The man-
During the breeding season, chen gives a whirring, Gfters deposed one
Loud of himself, who with the distant whine of a target
have genmelker's wretchedness, and should be gentler than
that of crickets, usually at a distance of only
20-30 paces, mostly in the morning before and in the evening after Sunday
rise under the earth yverbar, - One has each other
much argued about whether the actual food
the mole cricket an animal or a vegetable
may be. Ratzeburg believes both and so do I. Teh going into this
view especially by examining the
strengthened this year's hopes, which the Werre in May
made in 1854. On large fields planted with corn
Then she ate those who were to be pursued on her way to the ego
for a very long time, all the young plants went through, even
whom she had been able to avoid easily. Apart from-
he noticed the grain in the fields at the same time
big flashes eaten by her to. But anyway
this dispute can be irrelevant for the farmer, since
cs it suffices him to know that the subterranean

  

 

 

no

       

 

 

   

 

 

 

   

 

If the mole cricket is disturbed, they also want some of it
Pursuit of Engerlingen ete. have for the purpose, for the
plants after
Eating the roots for food or from destruction
of the roots for the purpose of laying out the paths of the tussect
have a explain. — The mole crickets are water themselves
courageous, and bite each other when locked together
become, fihler and legs, also probably eat zn
part up. What goes beyond all concepts in this respect
hung my father looked at, Kr had one while editing
Start flower beds in the garden with a spade
figured out the way! ge
push, in the erroneous opinion, animal thereby killed
av have, Than after a quarter of an hour his eyes again

 

ig are, regardless of whether we ns from the

 

   

 

 

fen and entaw through the middle

 

 

  

453

on the Werre ficlen, their front part was occupied, (who
don't know if not hot in the feeling of the emptiness of her building
hungry to consume the soft abdomen. The Greutiche
A few more groundbreakings quickly turned drama
interrupted. The mole handles hanst in the forest, on meadows,
Fields and in gardens, almost all types of soil. That
they do not inhabit the sandy soil, as Léiw states. is
Zlich unfounded, because just in these Rata fights
most against the wer

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

   

re. Ex found her luck too
in peat soil; perhaps, however, that in this mere im
Sonuner at the time of its greatest drought,
s generally applies the amalgamation that they tro-
prefers a dry floor to a wet one, and therefore he does too
more can be found on the south side of the beds. I have to
add that on the 6th June 1849 at the foot of the Alb
numerous, half-grown Mauhwu ill at the hem of one
found a puddle without being able to explain
they there are looking for, I also find their reasons there
all summer fiber in appreciable numbers in the mud,
eng a gently rushing brook deposited in a bay
has, and me
For all |
evenly. to

 

least

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

every heavy rain again itherschwemmi. groove-like growths is the Mauwerfsgritle

   

 

right, therefore e.g. B. the names pumpkin

 

wn, barleyvrm its food plants only almost universal

 

 

ndig udents. One kiémite him just as well still wooden,
Korn, potato, Leimvuem nemen. Because the Pilanz
past those or under which he does his superficial
throws up running gear md digs (moldworm, i.e. graveworm)
soon bow their heads for want of food or fall
um, because they bi to the root

  

A,

          
   

have been robbed, which

   

sonudere also applies to young piliin toes. In Rebland has

man nichis vou to fear him. The Manlwurts cricket is very attentive i
and quickly retreats if they encounter danger anywhere
whitened. Ire mating and singing times are dic

her walk

   

 

454

Months of June and July; in these you will also find them
often outside the Bodeus, sometimes itself
rising above the earth. Although your flight is difficult
taller and only walks a few feet off the ground, yet
you have to make an effort when the flying Werre is in the Lau
to fetch; moreover, it eludes you when you get it
Soft, swollen between grain or clods of earth. over
gens it's not a special Glick, a' mole cricket
to get hold of, because she usually squirts the one she grabs
her faeces, in the form of a thick-lipped
black fibula-smelling brithe over the hand. Ratzeburg
describes the brood very precisely. He says that
pinch the broods indirectly at the time of mating. This
thus begin around the end of June, around 2u. until the beginning of Angus
last, because on 6. August found Ratzeburg still intact
fresh kid. .The generally badly swollen female
extended in the area where it intends to lay its eggs,
the subterranean passage at first with an unusual
chen Kriimnning, and even usually forms some smaller and smaller
expectant, allni, ie byliiulig across hand deep
sinking circles, in the center of which a formal nest
stands. This can be seen as a fist-sized ball of Evd-
lift, always with a rounded or slight height
ment from the grisse of an idle potato or ciuer
large walnut. The dressing solid earth wall is Wali-
apparently by turning the insect over, gnawing and
made drool. Ratzeburg found some
sometimes only a few, 5-10, occasionally but about 200; the
highest number he noticed was 238, and
half he doubts the usual in the descriptions
higher figures of 300. Risel says the female
place the eggs at 12-24 hour intervals. This
obtains probability from Ratzeburg's remark,
after which the female does not leave the nest even after laying
left, but as long as there are still few children in it, in
near the nest with a thickly filled belly

   

 

 
     

  

 

 

 

 

  

ACE

just. Bouché suspects that it eats even with this clutch:
n large part his own boys. the kids
h Ratzeburg von der Grésse strong millet drner,
but somewhat slimmer and longer, elliptical, smooth, grim
light yellow burnt; they are difficult to crush, and contain
ten-at first a somewhat valuable substance. — After loss
of 2-3 weeks (Ratzeburg), in len places of four
or even more, the young crawl on the eggs. she
are 4-5 million long, musty light brown deep yellow, here
and there darker and mottled and have large thick heads. The freshly hatched young remain at first
gather and nourish themselves according to Ratzeburg's assumption
like the young grub larvae of humusous ‘parts, wes-
because the insect also likes things so much. To
From another point of view they will be separated from tender twisted marriages
near their caves, and on and on
and within 14 days a hand-wide spot in the round
withlen. After Résel goes namely the further development
masses of young mole crickets in front of you. To
four weeks when they get the smack of a big ant
have, they guard themselves for the first time, Alsdam, d. hb in the
Ang. and September, they are light brown, when their stay-
places are on meadows, the eye-wide spots with yellow
grass easy to spot. If they are 67" in length and already
have assumed their dark color in September
you. himself for the second time. In October and November, where
when they have reached an inch of length, beware
a third time, and then refer to it without
the winter quarters. eh Ratzeburg they take this,
depending on the type of soil, sometimes flatter, sometimes deeper. Low says that when her winter supplies [1?] ansge, to autlress each other, why you
frequently eaten belly sticks under the ground. je
also mildness or severity of winter, d. H. the next she
could eat over winter or not,
sem stronger or weaker from the body, In April or

 

    

 

 

 

   

 

 

    

  
 

 

en you out of

 

 

May the fourth Huutung takes place, after which they
the show, and with their significant size very much
cause significant damage. Only with the fifth hatch,
whereafter they, as well as after each of the preceding ones
Skins appearing white for an hour develop
the wings. They now have their perfect size
and now throw up! Harmfulness of mole crickets to land
wirthschati elucidates sufficiently from the foregoing, Ive
insignificance or usefulness [2] for the vineyards
remain undecided, at least it will everywhere at least:
doubtful where interculture you other growths
is operated, such as B. in the for viticulture potent
geographically less suitable areas. Equally problematic appears the alleged V
of Chrysanthemum sailum by the mole cricket of
the fields. Cold, dry, snowy winters should
Destroy mole crickets almost equally. Big ones too
According to Raizeburg, it's seldom unanuelnu to them,
everything prevents her from her work. Likewise, theirs is persistent
Nuts harmful. So thought z, 2. Kier, ie Ratzeburg
had put in the water for four weeks, discolored
but then and spoiled. Native enemy of
Mole cricket is the pig. But it will be rare
be possible to use it in this sense. That the
Pigs that have eaten a mole cricket. should die, because the latter tore the king's willow
scratch, should belong to the series of painting weeks. - Of the
mole riveted, it is commonly assumed,
Certainly many things, but it may be mainly nor
Take place, as long as they are young, at the significant
tending force, which the adult Werren with their
Develop forelimbs—thus moving to Résel
on a flat surface 2-3 pound bodies on the
side — they allowed the mole with his whole
weak snout vigorous resistance. Bouche

  

 

 
    

 

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

        

 

     

drive

hey

457

rightly cites criers and jackdaws as their adversaries;
also the Nenutédter impales them after Ratacburg ofters,
but that the nightcap (Caprimulgus) and the re-
hop after her very much, I can't believe it either
than that this is done by sciting the lizards and vipers. Among the ranbin insects, the ground beetles are probably the main
opponent. Furthermore, the one against their own is already above
Young sweeping gluttony of old mole crickets
been mentioned

It is recommended as a pre-construction agent
not by yearly plentiful fertilization to' s
better because that attracts the mole crickets, vielhnely them
damn and wam lie fallow for the cups. Solehes would go now
in my opinion, indeed far, contradicts anch
our other advice to support the growths as vigorously as possible
~pull, because then they're more likely to
senior As is well known, water is a means of digestion
pour some Ocl or soapy water into the ginge,
whereby the Werre is driven out, nm killed
will; or you dig a flower pot with a corked bottom
to the subterranean path that people usually use
uinunt, so deep, however, that in their walk they
has to fall, or do you draw small pits at the end of them
to engrave such téptes (bouché). These means like
deserve fir garden recommendation
of means, with regard to their effectiveness and practical
Applicability I do not want to assume any liability. They excel at: 1) laying out horse manure in pits,
‘Pépfen u. etc., if they occur in winter due to the
to attract procreative worms and afterwards to destroy them;
2) in the dimgen with pig dung, which they hate
and shall drive them out; 8) in the sprinkling of the of the
Were haunted fields or beds with a mixture
of unsalted lime, sulfur blossoms and wood ash or
with soapy water; conditioning the seed with s
the Stotten, Vermi

 

 

   

the fields
hy to ver-

 

   

 

 

    

   

 

 

   

 

     

  

     

n. — Now follow a series

 

 
 

 

ner

 

 

 

 

ink

 

 

hung the soil with powdered carbon and

 

Use of fragrances that are put out here and there
or to be put in the ginge; here rechue
I use the recommended sulfur balsam, turpentine oil, Steindl,
flammable Ocl, phosphorus, rotten crabs or fish and the like,
(Lew). With a clear conscience, however, we can recommend
the destruction of the wereren's nests, at which one
often after the stunted or withered vegetation
can judge; also the earlier drying of the hollow passage
covering guides us. You have the least luck
Ratzeburg on non-vegetated ground with persistent dry
ner citing; during such the Werren run sparsa
mer and dic Ginge like to fall behind them again;
on the other hand, the ejection works particularly well after a
Rain or strong morning dew, and one errith daun anch
lighter the uppermost curves of those circling around the nest-
the gang; you lift the found nest out as a bale, crush-"
crushes the eggs or leaves them on in hot weather
Some yer dry. Near the nest is
always also the female that one, especially who else
no or very little Kier “lying in the nest, moving through
some stalking or digging in the area:
must provide. Ratzeburg 'says in his forest garden
are during the breeding season, Joni and July, uur © quite uebenh

  

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

by “the attentive workers daily ten to twenty
nests destroyed. In the. this year I live here in the country
at least something similar. In a French garden
within six weeks 2080 nests stért, It rewarded
thus obviously this work, which Ratzeburg in chord
gu give advice, with suspension of about % size yon
Nest. the elimination of the kick
so will you blunt the young Werren
inhabited place, in the middle of which the nest, especially

   
    

   

 

 

 

iester_ siiumt- been,

       

several times repeated pouring boiling water on
secure destruction of the brood recommended. a

459

a) With short whole covers and wings lying flat. With ordinary legs, cockroaches, Blatta. The cockroaches, Blatta, catch your eye through hers
flat physique. Their bristly, eighty-limbed
antennae as long or nearly as long as the body; the
Head is weighted downwards and locked under the breastplate
plugged; the leathery front wings lie flat on the
broad abdomen aut; the females often have no tails; Long,
thorny legs; on the abdomen right and left a nine-lobed
dry tip. They crouch down four or five times and come
soft and white on the skin, and their color only gradually
to get back and to recover; run fast
nud are very timid. Their diet consists mainly
ly in human foods which they ingest at night
Request chambers, kitchens and closets. — The female
bear their very large, seed-like,
on a sharp-chewed side multi-toothed child, long time
stuck in the anus, around, to get rid of it:
the protruding tip is light and colored like after-
here the whole ki, only gradually dark red in the air
brown. Although it takes a week for an egg to vomit
-Female falls off, the lifespan of the cockroaches decreases
a year is given, their increase is strong,
because, as is assured, they are children all year round
lay. The common cockroach, (in many areas
Swabian"), Blatta
orientalis L., is dark brown
to black. wing of the man
chens kiuzer than the rear .~
body,

The cockroach- should, whether-
immediately originally at home in America} via the Orient
must have come; now she is over gaz Kuropa
breilet; Now you meet them mainly in Miller and Biicker
house what is partly attributed to the circumstance

 
 

 

 

that they love warmth. They keep themselves hidden during the day
under screws ete. ; but at night they come in greater numbers
Number to show; however, they do not fly for freshness
the light, but the person who carries it. All kinds 8 pei-
seu and Vorrithe, especially bread, flour, dried
They consume flesh, even wet hair, woolen clothes
der, linen n. drgl. gnaw them. Also the sleeping ones
they often become cunning, as tberhanpt because of their nimbleness
Lanfs and her unappealing figure to everyone

 

 

are against. — The hedgehog shall egg the cockroaches in Tiusern
pursue. Well-built houses, without many dark shelters:
angles, Ritzou and Fugen, and cleanly gchation, rarely have
to suffer from cockroaches. Wherever they are present, may
who does not scine time high, the cockroaches glue sticks,
Set catch pots or traps of Breticrn, or them by light
see dead, or even make a mistake about whether to pass away
Types of ranching or oven gravy mixed with food,
really harmful and effective to them, it is claimed
are. If it is darnm to do, tell them in a short time
To finish off, they will be in their hiding places with Schwe-
smother field steam or pour boiling water into it or
squirt, and them on a day when everyone falls for that-
Chickens or ducks eating poisoned cockroaches, or
fall into food and etc., is removed with cockroach

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

powder (terra arseniculis), d. H. Arscuik sprinkled bait
present. In magazines of the Curopian harbor stiidie one finds
still related to the previous species, but somewhat larger
Sere American cockroach, also called cockroach,
Blatta anericana L. It is light voth brown, with dark yellow,
double-spotted pronotum, and obliquely long antennae. ver
repayment as in the previous one. , The dentsche Ki chabe, Blatta germanica LL. | Brownish yellow, with two black lines Want
|
|

 

 

hens

 

   

 

~ the breastplate. Also very common through Eu

ropa, as the local names already indicate,

 

461

In Russia this species is known under the name die
Prussia*; in Tirol, where I found them often the last time, named them
they, the Russians! * The five judgments should be after eight,
zelm, fourteen, thirty, and forty-four days. take place
which, therefore, five months, from April to around September,
need until they get Fligel. They are referred to as
much nicer than the previous one. In particular, you should
Ships zn millions often eat up the biscuit entirely. over
otherwise she leads a way of life in kitchens and
chambered, like the common kind; she even eats the wafers
on the pen away and loves sour objects v
Lemons as much as sugar. The Kier, also 1é
been dragged here at the Hintortheil for a while, are supposed to be in April
be placed. ©) Flat, abbreviated F'
Wings, earworms

  

el corners, but whole
Forficuta. The earwigs, Forficula, have, like our figure
shows, in general appearance, resemblance to the short
fliglern, page 65, among the beetles, showing their Vorderflagel
coriaceous, short and hiding hindwings; these are
very finely hermed, but incidentally on two joints
beaten up lengthwise so that they noticeably
this way have space under the short Deeken. The common earwig, Eargritbler, Forfieua auri-
cularia L., is distributed everywhere with all
my known. Kr has as full koninexcy
Has a brown-vothed head, with granular, 13-14 jointed
Vithler and black eyes; breast brown; the flying ideas
transversely sharply truncated; the actual wings so long
as the abdomen; legs ocher yellow; abdomen dark chest
nienbraun, with a large pair of pliers, on which we
chen a Worzelstitek with ten beme: en; the whole
insect smooth. The catchy tune stays sociable during the day
hidden under bark scales, in Astléchern, Mauervitzen,
under His deep Bhimen-

   

 

 

 

     

 

 

462
calyces or the leaf sheaths of Welsehkorn or in ha-
selnut loaves and the like Your Leeker dishes are sweet
Fruits, like apricots, peaches, pears, which sic, after
Bouehé, often all the way through in warm, humid weather
weir Plums also appeal to earwigs, and
hollow the sissen, semi-ripe grains at the tips of the
Corn on the cob, as well as the half-ripe Mébren seeds
gnawing, especially at the top of the plant; even the
They insult carrot roots by digging deep holes. That they the flower petals of carnations, georgines and the like. in gardens and in front of the windows pitilessly above the
Gnawing the bottom of a flower is known to everyone. Also the
Beekeepers know how to tell that the oilworms in the
Beehives seek to come to nibble honey. It. this might sometimes cost them their lives, at least
I found dead earworms in the Stéeken myself. —
Since I also have the kerf between leaves in caterpillar webs
sten met in which caterpillar or pupa had grown,
I suspect that he also did not kill dead animal food
very disgusted. Wherever he lives, he leaves a very
zen, criminal rubbish, If you touch the catchy tune, like this
he spreads an awkward rumor and criminalizes it
Buttocks like a scorpion, to start with the wide open
tongs to grasp his child, although he is not able
is pinch sensitive 2u. — The common catchy tune can
fly, but I never saw this, also none of the observers speaks
baehter that he confessed to it; in any case
it would have to be done in the evening or at night. The mating
takes place according to Degeer in such a way that the male hay turns to the female
before approaching from behind, both of them hang longer
time together in this averted position. Unfortunately says
Degeer not 20 which season he observed the copulation
probably in the late summer, since he's already
ngs April had Kier laid by the woman. The mark
dignified here is that the female lays her eggs under stone
puts it in a heap on which it sits, as it were

 

 

 

  

 

AGS

 

roasting the children; if you take it from him, it carries her
carefully put it back together in its mouth. The here are
quite large (about 1.2 million long), smooth, oval, white, and
the young coming out after six weeks tberra-
- quite big, so that one should hardly believe that they were hitting
Found a place in the membranes, These boys, what
one often finds, in fact, at the end of May and beginning of June,
have very large heads, with achi-limbed feelers, and
are quite white except for the eyes and teeth; the breast
consists of three equal rings; instead of the spiters
Scissors on the tail, only a pair sit on the young Kerf
bristles united at an acute angle; her whole reputation
reminiscent of the wood liius (Psocus). They stick to hers
mother and hide under her, like the little kid
under the wings of the hen. It seems that those still
observed certain educational duties. — How many Hiiu-
things that earwigs go through is somewhere
send specified; only so much comes out of the illustrations
emerges that they turn dark gray as they shed their skin
become nine-membered feelers and thereby the ¢
first body rings begin to cut off towards the chest, which”
Neck rings shorten more, and the pliers end themselves
closes. Degeer says that the boys in his family
captivity devoured the brothers who had gone to great lengths. At the penultimate shed, the wing sheaths appear,
and the jaws of the tongs are already preparing to hook
to become mediocre. Up to this shape, dicess goes
Degeer's shy observation, the young ear needs
worm at least seven weeks, so development is complete
not very quickly and for about a year. The British in April
the females were considered perfect ludividuals
of the previous summer and autumn. Well believe
but to remember that I had already read the penultimate
Overflowing earworms associated with the mending period
found under the rough bark of trees, which is more likely
Sages of an autumn generation herribrt. 164

The harmfulness of the ear wwms goes out of his
foods listed above. preventive means
against its propagation seem infeasible. are against
the catchy tunes that are available somewhere are not difficult 2u fw
gen and to exterminate. You are attached to or in you
Near the endangered pilances hollow bodies, like reed or
Paper rosettes, elderberry, sun flower or Jerusalem artichoke
bursting sticks, from which the sweet marrow was expelled
has (the remains of which attract earwigs at the same time),
or one puts or puts a horse's drill in a suitable way
stalks and the like on; the earwigs crawl after their non-
in large quantities before the day, and can
be taken away and given away. Single flowerpot
or flower (especially carnation) stand recommends| man
with their feet in shards of saucer filled with water
place. To call this a very safe means,
one should know whether the common Olrwurim at night
not also used his wings. — They say the catchy tune
like to crawl into people's ears; know this, however
s it just a game of chance, and anyway
brings the matter no more danger than if another kerf
crawls in. It is easily and safely killed by a
pour a few drops of oil or cinders from some tree
want

  

  

   

n-

 

 

 

happens like this

 

s, on which a few drops of turpentine have been dribbled,

The small earwig, Forficula minor L. has a ify the ling
—+— of the common kind, limbed feelers, black head and thoracic
sign; otherwise it is in form after testing like the previous one. He flies
frequently and throughout the summer in warm sunshine in the
'ihe from Dungstitia, with the small staphylins. You recognize him
woz its rapid flight easily by its large milky-white FI
lent. It also runs very quickly. I have never considered il harmful
learned to know, although he was by Zeuker and Low in addition to the common
Ohworm is caught,

 

 

 

   

J) Platinum-flying, linear, narrow. uniform
fleeing. Bucky mouth. small animals,
Bladder feet, thrips. Bladder feet, thrips. Atrophied, beak-shaped parts of the mouth. The jaw only threadlike. Imperfect metamorphosis, i. H. dax

 

— ~~ a
465

Young very similar to the perfect kerf, but mainly because of the
Distinguished lack of wings, The soles of the feet seem three-legged,
but without actually being it: at the end of the two actual links
there hangs a bubble, power bubble, and the claws are missing. on
accustomed. sucking the buds of flowers; also hitinog under bark-
scale. Thrips hiimorrhoidatis Bouche. This tiny, only 1 million Long
The little animal is flat, matt black, The large square head bears
long yellowish antennae with eight segments, the first two of which are thicker
are , the four following spindle-shaped, the seventh small, the eighth with
fine, very long bristles. Front and hind wings mur in the
Large slightly different, parallel, narrow Janzettlich, with a longitudinal
vein, fringed of unequal length, legs yellowish, the whole body, with
taking the fairly smooth middle of the abdomen, finely latticed in the form of a net. abdomen in the last section red and in the female with sibel-shaped
gem, down-going drill spike. Jump briskly with help
les abdomen, the imperfect kerf is pale yellow translucent,
with a transparent water bladder on the Afler. Bouche describes. this
Small originally foreign insect as a plague of warm and
cold hothouses in which almost all plant species, especially
but Malvaccen, attacks and sucks ibve Blitter from the bottom
and makes you dizzy. Ks, says Bouché, is very hard to eat,
entitiliche, d. h, slip away and become also because of its smallness
easy to see. The best remedy is diligent brushing off the leaves,
where at least the tender larvae and kidneys are crushed. over
Generally, he says, healthy plants are less bullied than sick ones

and therefore it is advisable to keep the plants in really critical growth
must get. The grain blister foot, Thrips cerealium Burm. (physapus L. Trans.) ‘Two mill, long, rusty brown, head somewhat hidden, broad in front. Feelers with achi segments, the last two the smallest, the eighth not longer
as the seventh; black except for the first and sixth segments. wings
absent in males, with two parallel invertebrates in females
Lingual veins, unequally fringed, hindwings shorter and more delicate, legs
and indentations of the abdomen pale. According to Burmeister, it is this way
about which Kirby in Linn, Trans. IL. 242. as about a destroyer of the
young grain kernels complains, and which one very mean to the greedy and
found in grain, especially wheat ears, Burmeister gives it
Not looking at the larvae, as far as I can remember they were-
those which I often found in unripe spelled litres, bright red,

By the way, according to Burmeister, there is another related species,
which he does not describe nither, Thrips obscura Miill, zool, dan. on the
wheat before. —Other allied species frequently in flowers

Nérdlinger, the little enemies. 30,

 

 

 

B. the

 

AGG

black thrips physapus Hal. with brown forewings and something
yellowish legs and the orange-red larvae in the flowers of the Ci-
chorie ete. ae . VY. Ovulation of the bedbugs and aphids. Bad, a minority useful. Contains the bugs, chirps and aphids, i.e. louder
four-lobed suckers without complete transformation, otherwise too
Half-flyers, called hemiptera. . The kerfe have in the perfect as in the imperfect
menen state cincn for sucking furnished, in which
Rest mostly against the chest lowered beak. the ladies
Feelers are not at the perfect kerf in most
longer but kiwzer than the body, or even very short. There are often sidewalks and these are mostly standing
removed by cinander. Very significant, if by the way
the different genera are the wings. Soon, as in the case of bedbugs, the larger basic
half the fore wing leathery or colored paper-like
and only the tip is glassy transparent (hence the name
halfwings) and the hindwings entirely transparent, both
but flatly approaching the animal at rest, but soon
are the forewings similarly colored to paper, or
completely transparent, more or less rich in veins and
lying on top (chirping or cicadas), soon all the way through
visible (plant centiuse), soon not present at all, as in
the female Sehilliusen. The clumsy, un-
Helpful body is soon of a solid build like a child,
soon very soft. He wears mouthful appendages behind,
like ovipositors, hooked wheels, little pigs, and is hauly
entirely covered with a sort of excreted wool. 467

The four-lobed teats have an incomplete
metamorphosis, which is particularly common in aphids,
where the same family of a species sometimes lays eggs, sometimes lives
dige birth, soon can have Fligel, sometimes not, téusserst
is strange. The propagation is usually rapid
yon places and aphids even come in one
year 16—20 generations ago. — The grilled in begati-
ing individuals, united at the back, ‘with the head off-
turned to each other. There are in the same family of four
winged suckers useful and harmful, but the majority
pay at least cunningly for the farmer. A classification of the imperfect standards appears
by the likeness of the imperfect kerf, the nymph,
with the perfect, superfluous. 1) The bugs

are characterized by a broad, fairly flat body, large,
clearly protruding, mostly four-lobed feelers, cinen in
dimen laid against the chest of rest, but long
Proboscis, big shield, Almost all have wings, where-
transparent at the end of the anterior ones, at the root un-
are transparent, opaque (semi-winged). legs only
prepared to walk. bug odor known. the eggs
are placed in cin heaps on trees, stalks, winds, etc. placed. The mother often stays with them until the lids are
been bumped and the young ones, ballier than them
Elderly and wingless, but just as smelly as they outside
have emerged. They follow the old fiers too
few days after. food partly thicric, partly vegetable
sometimes both, depending on the occasion or year
time was therefore sometimes helpful, sometimes useful. letatere property
schaft after Ratzeburg the predominant.' Indeed suck
they often prey on kifers, caterpillars, leaf suckers, aphids etc. out of. The bugs fall into a multitude of subgenera. touch us:

 

 

 

468

A. Broad bugs, Cimex, with their usually
more or less arched, broad ridges, strong
solid body and wings, therefore of a kiifer-like appearance
see. a) Winged and solidly built. The cabbage bug, Cimex oleraceus L. The female

= with red, the male with white

drawing on a glittering metal,

gray or green-blue at the top, reason. In the Linge strongly deviating from

6-8 million Very mean. One finds

sic, as far as I know, the whole year in perfect condition

Condition on fields and in Girten, but especially in

spring. The plants on which it usually lives and

from which they eat the juice with their beak as food

pulls are reps, cabbage, lettuce, according to Zenker and Burmeister

also asparagus. They are often seen in pairs

each other hung. Degeer assures that in individual

years multiply very strongly and then, like 2. B.

in 1760 in Sehweden, by sucking off the young
plants have destroyed almost all cabbage,

Collar, Shiid), Insckten. None 157 also carries the pretentious bug,
Cimex ornatus I, 8 million, long, blood-red or whitish, on the other hand black
on the head, antennae, legs, base of the label, inner edge of the cover
and two abdomen licks, as a ravager of cabbages,
which they often sift through the flowers like a sieve, after Burmeister
though at home all over Europe, but nowhere hilly. Soust are also called: . The red-legged muzzle, Cimex rufipes L. Bronze colored, spotted
Red-legged and with a red tip of the shield. shall th beside her ruminations of juices that

feed themselves trees, — I saw a boy with one
a young earwig of the same size hanging on its beak, the well
she herself had killed. The Becreu bug, Cimex baccarwn L. Rothlich, whitish below
and black dotted, black white ringed fithler. tip and raudi corners of the abdomen white. very
| common, on woolly flowers, cherries, iimberries,

 

 

 

 

  

 

 
    

  

 

   

alee gs

EE

46D . Blackberries and the like .. which she cokelhatt by her smell hiulig
reset
The green one, just as large, with a yellow body edge and yellowish ;
Tip of the shield: Cimex juriperinus L., on plants, and insects
singing out The Bicolored Bug, Cimex bicolor L, Hairy Feelers. Black, with white front breast edge and white bays
wing margin patches. Thorny tendons. frequent; not only on K ii- a
herbs, but also, as stated, on plant
men, apple and especially pear, preferably Bonchrétien-Birnbiu :
men, under whose blitter they are staying, pull out the marrow and
shall make them wither and fall off. fier on trellis than Hoehstim
men, also very harmful for the fruit,

The black-striped bug, Cimer nigrolineatus L.
Blood red, streaked with black along the length. tags very ao
large and almost entirely covering the upper wings. The edge bug, Cimex marginatus L. 15 mill. long. grey-brown. Abdomen red on the back, middle of the antennae pale red, last joint
black, spines turned inwards at the base of the feelers, which
stand on an almost non-prominent head. Should rhubarb plant
tongues. The small only 3-4 minutes. long Cimex searabaeoides L. All metal-
metallic black, parallel lateral cattle. vertebrae large, arched; vou
only the horny edge is visible in the wing eaves. tendons with short
spikes covered. Very often after Burmeister in the flowers
that Ranunculus,

The large brown-grey bug, finely punctured and trickled with black,
with half white, half black antennal segments, one against
yorn directed long point between the legs, the +— i
under the name of the field bug so common in autumn
When the room comes, it is Cimer griseus I. (punctipennis II)

Main means of extermination against the vo
standing bug species, if they become lislig, that is
Tapping off the trees or jerking off. Also over
watering with harsh bitter substances can be of use. The rest partly impractical, partly dangerous, partly
I surmise the conventional means that Léw p. 125 gives. b) Unwinged and of white body. The bed bug, Cimex lectularius L., does not have one
very long ones, turned against the chest when resting, only

 

A470

reach to the roots of the front legs-

the crack. She is wingless, dim and

flat, so that, laid on the back,

get back on his feet with Mihe

= judge came. Linnaeus believes the bed bug

was originally non-European. Others (Kirby and Spence 1. p. 115) stated that it was only a few centuries old
known in England. Similar claims are, however
easier to set up than prove. Anyway they are
very doubtful, because already the ancient Greeks and Rémers
she was well known and present she is in all
other parts of Europe, especially in areas where you people
very close to each other, from Sweden to the middle
laindian sea, all too notorious. In the warmer parts
Enropa's the bed bug reproduces far more rapidly and is
also no doubt more cunning than in the north. you hold yourself
known in Riizen of Maner and Holawiinden, in the
Joints of stools and wooden crocks, the curtains, but
also, as is assured, in pigeon and Iithner stills
up, where the helpful fowl-dung particularly dams their broods
should demand, especially since the silence of the chickens, one assures, have
often completely brown, duveh sic colored wind, however, without that
it has been positively proven that they are derived from the blood of the chickens
eat, — The bedbugs behave quietly during the day
in their hiding-places, but at night they creep un-
come and seek to suck blood, She particularly tempts them
‘Perspiration on the sleeping person and they let themselves through
the same leads down from the ceiling to the sleeping
the fall, probably stems from the different
Tendency to transpiration also the difference that sic
ayvian different persons za make seem real

 

 

  

 

    

 

 

In fact, they follow the cinen far more vividly than the uudern. They run smoothly, If you put a light in the night
to find the bugs, so they crawl away. Your filth is slippery and black. It dries soon and
will sprid. Especially in places where they hide

 

 

47

he accumulates. Reproduction and mating
time fall in the middle of the year. Male
and females hang backwards on cinander. the kids
which are deposited in the shelters are white
and pouchy. Are they due to warm climate or weather
tion favoured, the multiplication of the kerfs takes place
quickly ahead. The young bedbug marriages are in the beginning
very small, light, even whitish in color, and her head and
Breast shields are relatively larger. about the duration
their growth and the number of their moults
news yet. — Kollar takes four generations
in years. The sting of the bug, d. H. the insertion of her tendon
bels and her sucking, excites a small swelling and dar-
for a cunning cheer. That she sucks particularly in places
where the skin is soft understands itself. Liéisty and disgusting
are also the blood stains and the ugly stench that
arises when crushing the foolish bug. With Kialte, the bug is wearing, finally rigid. Deunoeh she wears the tallest kilt, even in Sweden,
out without damage. She endures even long fasts in
falling degree. Géze saw bugs for over six years
bed curtains and like white paper so bloody
become empty without perishing. One gives legion remedies against the bugs. Low
init scinem Koéhlerglauben counts 200 of them! the
stated that they cannot climb glass is difficult
to make use of. That they sometimes strengthen them
Sucking out weaker certainly never finds to a large extent
Instead of. The proposal to use ants or stink bugs for
Using to drive out bed bugs in homes is testifying
from ignorance of the nature of these animals. However lives
in the houses the fecal bug, Cimex personatus, p. 474, the
is portrayed as a keen pursuer of bed bugs, alone
as Degeer has already remarked, it is too small
Amount available and cannot be propagated artificially. A72

Have once in a house as a result of unfairness
or through immigration from the neighborhood the bugs
opened their Wohusita, so must vigorously intervened
are, they sit behind half-cheapest wallpapers in the
Corners and on the ceiling of the room, so you tear at
clean the wallpaper completely, and burn it, sweep it
Roughly wall, dibertiincht and wallpaper them on top of that
to. The wooden crust is particularly good for bedbugs
on walls and ceilings. It is partly avoided
for this reason in the construction of the new vicler Hiiuser and rips it out
seem to age. I can't letateremn myself. decide, it's probably best to sweep it in, everyone
Fill in cracks and paint with white lead or euent
not too quickly drying turpentine varnish or tar
paint over Simultaneously with this renewal of the winds
or the structure must also have all wood and bed frame,
curtains and the like. be cleaned thoroughly. Anything that does not suffer from this is poured into boiling water
laid, or sprouted. In joints, that's not easy
can be dealt with, boiling water vapor is discharged
the pointed snout of a cig teapot and
If possible, delete them later, depending on the circumstances-
which one still has a poison mixture placed in it. In hospitals and the like. the French have
take care against the bugs ciserne instead of wooden bedsteads,
The aforementioned means, accompanied by appropriate cleaning
Alertness and vigilance often suffice, often
but the locality does not allow a proper thorough one
Application of the means, or threatens the Nacharschaft new
to send contingents, so that it does not seem worthless
the various means of extermination otherwise given against
Bugs to review in brief. application of
scraped alder wood, cucumber pulp and the like. very indifferent-
ten fabrics seems silly to me. You need a lot
fragrance c. But if Degeer's experience is inadequate-
demonstrated the ability of sulfur vapor to kill the bugs,

ok

A73 . so we also know what we get from the mere smell of you
cow dung or tobacco smoke, fresh hemp, rue, bohuen
herb, basil, sage, parsley, lavender, mint, calamus
and have to keep Attich. That has to be more effective
recommended coats with a decoction of lark
(Pinus larix) nade, sallow tree, tobacco, zcitloses, nut
bumble, cologuine, aloé, wormwood, myrrh, spanish
Pepper, short of aromatic-narcotic-bitter substances. Also greasy substances, especially soap porridge, fish oil
and the like are calculated, but especially stronger bee h-
ocle or spiritual substances, such as tobacco oil,
Hirschhornél and turpentine, which is particularly suitable for
delete vou joints cignet. Alcohol alone shouldn't do anything
utitzen, also lyes, particularly sharp ones, vitriol water,
Grispan solutions certainly work. become even more
Mixtures recommended, which (because of the destruction of the
Eggs) Wise strongly sucking bodies, e.g. B.
the distillate of 1 pound sal ammoniac, 1% pound potash,
') Pound of quicklime, Y, pound of greenshavings, all pul-
Verified and distilled over with a pot of Koru brandy. The compound is particularly easy to inject. The same
if recommended Schcidwasser is its known properties
schaft because of not angurathen. Finally you can
rely with complete confidence on the coatings mentioned,
if unincludes, the same as Ratzeburg em-
Suggests mixing in some calomel or arscnik, I think
however, except in cases where this was brought into cracks
Poison can be well disguised by gypsum or lime deposits, yes
do not advise the dangerous remedy. As a means of protection
when traveling, sprinkling the beds with lemon juice or
Vinegar exactly. It is also stated that the bed bug winged in the houses

occur. According to Schilling (Oken's Isis 1834. S, 278.) wiire dicss however
a specifically different species. Cimex domesticus Scltill. B. The lard bugs. More arched towards below;
flat above, especially behind; Small sign, therefore
free wings, and

 

 

 

 

ATA

a) Eutne behind the eyes clearly and uncovered to an avt
Neck constricted and the feelers on the top of the head cinated:
Reduvius. The feces bug, Cimer (Reduv.) personatus LE. next door body
_ 1 __lings without fithler.—Sehmal, all brown-black,, white be-
t hair. Doesn't find himself alone in houses and lives after more-

fold insurances from vermin: bugs, flies, spiders they
pursued at night, todtstict with the rift, and sucks. She is particularly interesting in her youth, To this
Time lingers especially in the sweeping direction and the like
and you hardly recognize her, because she is Tiber and Tiber with
Covered in dust and scum, and ugly indeed. She should go through
be able to make a sound when rubbing with the ruffle. She brings the
Winter starving and becomes very flat. How far the famous of her
Useful by tracking bed bugs and other vermin
going to determine wire from Nenem impartially. I see that Degeer,
who considers their effectiveness to be low, should be right. To
Burmeister dare the Spimen, who know their sting, which is dangerous for them
not to attack them when they go about their nefarious robbery
into their tissues and let them hang therein, so that they are
frequently starved and found dead in it. Many other activities are outdoors, e.g. B. on meadows
hereabouts. They frequently grab other insects, even thick-shelled pine
kill them and sing them out. So I saw it cinen Reduvius annulatus
F, make a Cryptoctphalus sericeus,

b) Or with little or disappearing constriction behind the
Eyes and feelers on the underside of the head: Lygacus.

. The green corn bug, Cimex (Lyg.) nassatus Latr, is after
Bouehé wud Zenker 7 millimeters long, grim, spotless, shaggy above,
Zeildehen at the base, as well as the inner and outer edge of the Halbdeek
yellow; lives on various plants, The unwinged young sting
in Frithjabr, especially in ‘drifts, the young rose shoots,
so that they wither and bring no more flowers. Bouehé calls
the only means of extermination is reading and killing. In addition, there are a lot of lard bugs in the woods and fields. You see them too, like the broad bugs, their beaks to sing,
soon into white eyes, flower buds and the like. drill, soon others
tracking insects. A very common yellow lard bug species put down
me even, in the woods on the outside of my hand and started several times
wi suck, The sensation was that of a strong browning Nesscl. ATS

2) The Chirps (Cicadas)

have large, blunt triangular heads with inconspicuous ones
bristly antennae and large, widely spaced
the eyes, flagel in the rest roof-shaped, towards
ten sharply tapered. The rear transparent, the front
papery opaque or colored transparent, or colored
trots. hind legs for jumping. The rose cicadas, Cicada rosae L. Small white animals with
thin pale lemon yellow, striped with brown at the apex
ten wing thoughts and completely transparent background
teasing Females with a leg tube, with which the
Eggs are drilled into stalks, all over Germany
Summer jiber in abundance on the rose sticks, from which they
telu in number and their young shoots, buds
and leaves prick themselves and spoil, in the places where the beer
gene, the bark is raised like a grain of millet, the young one develops
under the bark into a nymph with winged heather, crawls out and
lit air on the Rosenstéeken hernm,

Foam is also of great interest for agriculture. cieade, Cicada spumaria [, Brown with a musty white
scribbled stripe across the forewings. Everywhere and the =i
all year round on various plants, e.g. in June and July
Singing in crowds of potato stalks, The young lives on -pastures,
goat's beard (Tragopogon pratense) ete. Bs sang the laps, but un-
harmful to, hidden under a liquid, Otter's dripping foam-
lump, which bears the name Kuekueksspeiehel, is found in it
the pale green nymphs, still with short wing stumps,

The Cicada, which Léw still considered to be human, is of no importance
sanguinolenta L., red and black, which is often found on trees
and likewise the Cicada interrupla L., striped black and yellow and
often on fields and meadows, singing on various plants. The Weinziirner, Weinzwirner, Cicada (Teltigonia) also have
matodes F, ent as an interesting phenomenon in the vineyards
Here a modest Pititzehen, Lr is about as big as a Mai
> ie. he has 32 mill, body lengths, 11 mill, body width and 80
1. wing tension. Head with protruding eyes and short
they are almost entirely black. The broad neck (fore chest) almost entirely
red Central and rear breast black with four reds in the ‘trapezoid’
the signs, the transparent, shiu yellow-red veined Eliigel without
Mleeken, but here and there the cells in the corresponding mounds of-
same kerfs slightly different. womb ringed with red. legs red,

 

    

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

   

 

earn

 

   
     

  

 

476

Komunt following the news, I particularly appreciate an earlier one
Schiller , Mr. forest candidate Pfizenmayer to thank. in the steepest dry
most and hottest vineyard heaps in the area of ​​Lauffen am
Neckar in front. He suckles at the time of the vine blossoms, seldom later, and only
when the heat is at its most unbearable, so loud that you can turn it up to 200
Footsteps, yes, a whole heap of mountains to the left. His ‘tone is the same
most like that of a small children's ride, the kerf is found sitting

chen stake and vine or otherwise quite hidden. Alone he is
very alert and flies away quickly and nimbly on approach. — According to the analogy, he should live on the juice of the vine, tear his kidneys
henwei in dead Rebholz put, the peculiarly formed boys with
crooked-clawed diggers dig themselves into the ground by sucking on the roots
eat and after a year or two in perfect condition

 

see,

The kerf is not only not considered to be physical, it is
Occurrence in the vineyards is said to be a 'splendour', since it
can only be found in the best and warmest locations. —

Water bugs are often found in puddles, ponds and ponds,
Notonecta, which swim on their backs, partly quite sensitive
stabbing, and living from robbery. Kine larger, yellowish-grain semi-
merging species, Notonecta glauca £., is also said to be of young fish brood
adjust. 3) The suckers, Psylla,

are small animals, which in perfect condition
stood by body shape, type and position of the wings, finally
also because of their ease in hopping away
Cicadas remember they have fithler about half as long as
the body, somewhat indistinct, tenfold. The head divides
forward into two blunt conspicuous mouth or forehead
cone. Next to the big eyes is right and left
the tips of the divided triangular frontal shield cin mostly
clear side eye. Rifle hidden against your chest. nerves of the mostly ylashelle winglets limited in the
the wing by an anterior and posterior marginal vein. between
A thick central vein arises from both, which extends into awei
Main part divides, one of these, the front, bifurcates
at a distance, the other splits in two
Knots, which, on the other hand, only branch out shortly before the edge. —

  

 

 

477

The young psyllium, with long bristly, against
swept chest, aphid and bug-
similar, but covered with a lot of white down, suck
salivate on young shoots and exude copious amounts of honeydew
drop by drop. The great pear sucker, Psylla pyrisuga Forst. (pyri
Schmidb.)' On: 8 May 1858 I made the following description

' Linné gives such a short description of his (Chermes) pyri cine,
that after the recent time several ver
wall has taught the psylla species to know, may not yet have decided
which of the newer species he had before him. Goodbye Schmidberger in our story of transformation
of the insect is certainly pyrisuga, although so is its description
of the perfect kerf is inadequate, To over the insect (pyrisuga),
that I had before me, to leave no doubt, I therefore gave the above
more complicated characteristic. However, I must point out that
which Schmidberger already indicated, that the insect that one crosses
winters in May tiff, no doubt much darker in color than that in the
Summer freshly developed, and that the Untersehied
between these two age groups we would still say, 'dead specimens
planes usually have their color darkened even more and are often to
Examination quite useless, - For the same reason I dare not
another related species, except pyrisuga, which I found in Swabia
pear tree found, with one of the names (P. pyri L., P. pyricola, apio-
phila) call her, which in the overview of genera and species
in the Psyllode family of Hen. Forster, in the negotiations
of the Natural History Association of the Prussian Rhineland 1848. 3.
are written, the less I want in the choice of the name
cilen, as also Mr. Forster his pyri after a ciuzigen, presumably
delivered dead specimens. — So far the marks without a doubt
also arrive at the living specimen, mean provisionally subsequent ones
Characteristics apply: Linge can be more than half that of
pyrisuga. Munich are women red and black, dark cones of the mouth,
black wing nerves and almost black rim; a black
rough spot on the rear edge of the front iris and two gray ones in the
neighboring cells. (According to Degeer's figure, the Linnaean pyri
at least six smoke corners on the front wing.) May, October and
November on pear trees, rarely on apple trees,

At the end of September 1852 I found my way to Stutigart on a pear tree
cine branue psyllium nymph without wool on the anus, which without a doubt
soon transformed into the perfect 'animal and on the reverse

  

 

    

  
 
  

 

478

 

daytime deitisects. Wiebelien vom
a Kopr to 2ur valve tip 3.7 mill. long, antennal as long as the shoulder

— flagel cell, dirty tawny; the
bulge on which they sit, crimson, the first two
short limbs almost entirely red; towards the top at the end -
the limbs ringed with black. The black mouth cones
hardly from the liner of the eyes. The one made of two triangular
front shield composed of yellow-brown shields (between
the eyes) has a sensory root at each upper corner
corresponding blunt red tip. eyes dull, dirty,
reddish brown, neck indentation strong, light dirty yellow. Breast-
riteken dirty réthlich yellow-brown. Front breast piece with
a yoke shape bordered in black at the front and rear
gene Ritekenquerband, to the following little sign
the crimson reds push to the right and left, with some black
breasts marked with zen Fleeken. The next big one
The shield, which wears its wings to the side, has a cen in the middle
bright, almost completely closed circle, in welehem right and
left a wide, in the middle a narrow dark stripe
required. Outside the circle another dark, almost pa-
broad broad stripe. Wing root a mixture of Roth,
Reddish yellow and black, as is the underside of the breast. Hiif
ten of the two pairs of front legs in the main seam black,
those of the hind legs reddish yellow. legs and splints black,
but knees and phalanges red. Wing bright, but something
milky white, with a brownish-grey border and yellow
tingly translucent veins. abdomen is blacker
Yoke drawing* touches the chest
queriber on the front half of each ring cin black |
rectangular belt. Each band in the broad red
Scite a fairly large black screen dot
speaking, tail flap black. Before the same on the

 

 
 

d; above and below

 

   

 

a large drop of honey-juice while sitting on a leaf
had. What species was this nymph? hey

'
479

Often produce a white casting. On the fresh specimen
often the whole body is covered with a light white scent. Manichen 2.5 million long. antennae and head red-black,
only the base of the sensor and the two corners of the front plate light-
red eyes dirty dark red. Front breast ring black. The central chest label dirty red-black with light red,
pattern corresponding to that of the female; the cattle
the breast shields red. On the sides_behind the head and
under the wings the body is reddish-yellow to yellow-
piebald. Legs black with red phalanges. only the
Hindchiiften bright red; behind, the same a few distinct ones
black ones (less conspicuous in the female, tiach behind
directed) thorns. — The winglets as in the female, but
but especially often clouded with milky white at the root. abdomen at the base in the form of tiny transverse folds (particularly
ders an_den Seiten) bright red; dark black towards the back
and only the posterior edge of the individual rings, especially
in the jagged sides where the back and belly side
bumping together, bright red. Tail flap black. The big pear sucker appears in crowds every year
in spring, from mid-April to the end of May, on the pear
boom a. One also finds individual Aptelbiums. With the eruption of the foliage and the unfolding of the
thenbuds, he sits on flowers, but more often on
the stems of flowers and leaves. Very often one finds
mating couples, with mennehen, the
remaining end to that of the female, nebeu
this sits. If you touch them, they fly with a leap
of that. Soon afterwards the woman lays her eggs. sebinid
berger describes the process in detail. The woman is stuck
the egg with the tongs deep into the hairy felt of the lap. Lay-cs, he says, eggs on a leaf, that's what happens
the downside, probably because it's here through the re
Hairiness is favoured. The same applies to the newly
formed fruit, on which the kidneys attached the felted part
be pushed under the cup sections. The Thicr

  

 

480
chen takes almost a minute laying a gravel
za; but the large ovary seems to have proper fruit
ability to interpret the individual. Especially in May hits
the children as yellow spots on blotches, smallpox and
shooting; they are single and lined up close to each other. The egg-bearing organs curl up
nnd are fairly easy to recognize here. In some
The cubs, which are very unlike the mother, become days
alive you have according to Schmidberger a linglichwal-
dense body like a young peach aphid, two long
whitish antennae, shapeless whitish feet, very long
bristle-like tongue for sucking on blitter or stent
gel. They are wingless; dark yellow from head to anus;
but the eyes are red. Soon they cut and become
brownish with white stripes over the back. the brunt
sign shows cinige Réthe with black dots and stripes
cheeks, breast and abdomen pale green, as well as feet and antennae;
both black at the apex. Anus blunt with bristles. The double wing sheaths are already showing on them. They are flat and bug-like. Shortly after the first
Hiut they bite down from blotches and smallpox,
in order to be close to the origin of one- and two-year-old wombs
laying close to each other, forming a camp zn. They catch
now on, their branches and leaf-sticles with filth, d. H. one
drop-like, transparent, coming out of the anus
sticky liquid to get dirty. They won't
disturbed, they remain quietly in their place. ants and
other insects visit piinfig, and one recognizes easily
at their presence the presence of a camp. cutting
berger believes that the nymph of the pear sucker does at most
three herds, the last in the camp in the midst of the
Enjoyed. In the last nymph stage she will
more cellular and has a somewhat darker colour. For the sake of
Transformation into the perfect insect she is finally looking for one
lonely place, always footing on the lower side of a leaf,
and clings. After a few minutes splits

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

481

the hant on the forehead and in half an hour that's it
Insect perfect: lovely grim with rosy eyes,
delicate filigree. It remains for almost a whole tug
sit quietly on the sheet to gain strength and color zn
receive,

During the summer and autumn one does not notice any eggs
more, and it thus seems the perfect insect about itself
to wait for the next spring to propagate. The beautiful
it acquires the red color which it shows in spring
doubts until the winter itber. Schmidberger looks at the nymph of the pear sucker
as very visual. The above said writhing ones
Leaves and shoots mourn and gradually die off when
do not remove them from an insect with a barley or a brush
freed and this crushed. The capture of the winged
Pear sucker is obviously too petty. The Perfect Insect
I saw being sucked by bedbugs (Lygaeus). The apple sucker, Psylla mali Forst. (Psylla pyri mali

Schm.). The one caught in September
Méannehen is lively grin, about the
Ricken striped yellow or dark yellow —

with brown stripes, or almost entirely green with dark yellow
points; the whole belly yellow, the women shiner
and somewhat larger, Riteken red to the pincers, green-yellow
and brown striped. Belly yellow or green. The Screen Points
in the sides of the abdominal rings simply black. Apart from
mating season grim or grinning yellow without stripes. in the
September finds, as Schmidberger correctly observes
hat, copulation and egg-laying take place. You meet them
then often on apple trees that are already turning yellow,
also singly at this time on Crataegus (crus galli). To
Schmidberger 5—6 individuals gather on cinem
usually already yellowed apple leaf. The women
under are easy on the large extension of the abdomen
to recognize. The kerfe perish over the winter. At most, a few unmated individuals should survive. Nordlinger, the little enemies. 3

 

482

According to Schmidberger, the Kier- are assigned at both ends
pointed and white. “They turn yellow before crawling out. The female lays them on different parts of the branches,
extremely scaly on buds, but usually in the fur
chen of marigold; By the way, often also to the elderly
quills when they have a strong hairline; lays on leaves
they never do, because when they fall away they perish
walk. The Kier lie cinzein or in heaps without all
Orduung, and are not easily washed off by the rain. The ones I always prefer to those of the apple sucker
held. and still hold, were réthlich yellow. The first Nj
phen notes mun Antangs April. Right after birth
they have red eyes, black legs and are dirty-
yellow with four rows of dots over the ridges. abdomen
ringed brown. Anus dark tan with whitish hairs. The young nymphs embrace the nearest kisses; sic
bite through the dandruff in the still cold weather
pen the same through, aud camp on it, wn protection
to have. The first moulting takes place on the second day. The new nymph is similar to the previous one; drives by the way
from the anus a whitish transparent blister, which almost
is as big as herself. The bubble is attached to one
whitish thread, and rests off on the quill, but will
if the thread is quite long, the bubble will fall away, mm immediately
again by another he:
aw second in we

 

yim

 

 

 

 

   

now to become; and immediately until

 

agen taking place. the
Nyimphe is afterwards durehaus lichtgria, the abdomen, becomes
wider than the Ricken, umd on the sides are already
the wing sheaths clearly stand out. bubble and thread appear
nen again when the haitung is scarcely over, and in
few days the whole nymph is partly with viiden,
partly covered with fine curled little hirsutes, whereby
the insect gets a strange look. Exactly because of
this thread and thread easily becomes the second tiutung
overwhelm. In about eight days the third Hiiu-
take place. Now the wing sheaths are very dense and

   

 

483

 

mucr bigger and whiter, the more the nymph
jerk off Body lichigrin, eyes black, antennae black-
lich. After skinning again bubble and thread and numerous
richly curled Iarches surrounding whole little animals. Finally the nymph looks for a separate place on a leaf
other place where she clings tightly. His forehead splits
itself and it appears cin the pear sucker although dhuliches
Insect, but instead of pink, it has snow-white eyes
has black fear stars. His rickety and breastplate
are pale green. The intemal body is ringed with yellow. the glass
like wings have strong white ads The tongue extends
to beyond the anus, it remains for almost a day
soft little animals sit quietly, The diame skin, Fig., which
stays thick during the transformation, still indicates quite well
the form of the nymph. — The whole development
According to Sehmidberger, the Tusekt is full at the end of April
jendet From my observations in 1850
and in 1852 the perfect insect evolved
mainly at the beginning of June, only a part still in
the last days of May. In some years the apple sucker is very numerous. In this case many flowers perish, while others
Sticlen that sucked Iusekt. Among the very bad ones
lest it be counted. Since the apple sucker does not have a juice like the pear
expels, but a blister with thick mucus, so
it is not very visited by the ants; are against
mites dangerous to him, and bugs that impale him and
sang out Ini great to pursue him wiir cit. If you want to remove it from potted trees, then flowers,
and fruit at most after the first
get brushed

The brick-red apple sucker, Psylla cratacgi Scop? man ~~
Mouth cone scarcely as long as the nath of the frontal triangle, black, only on the
Granular green above, fillers about as long as head and breast 2usam+

men. Antennae base dirty pale green, like the fore-hips of the
two first (short) feeler segments. The further (long) limbs

 

   

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

~

 

 

 

U.N

  

 

  

 

484

 

dirty greenish yellow, black at the ends, as well as the whole
last limbs. The forehead triangle and the first neck ring musty green
light yellow with brown-black marbling, first breastplate black,
with a dirty reddish-green border and a dirty reddish central
linic, second shield drawn as in pyrisuga, with half red light
yellow and black, the breasts black, tinged with whitish, all
joints pale waxy yellow, wings shorter than in mali, rather dull white;
‘Veins dark musty greenish brown. Green hips. tendons with
greenish knees, all black on the hind legs. rails green-
lily, sweaty on the hind legs. soles greenish. end of the chest
black above with yellowish ridges, below very dirty waxy yellow. The first clearly cut off abdominal ring bright yellow in front, wrinkled. ‘All rings black, bordered narrowly waxy yellow towards the back, In the
also colored jagged soft side fangs black triangles, tail~
flap all black,

Females around '/, larger. head as in male; but eyes
and frontal triangle more red. neck and breast are black and flesh-
or rose red, especially the joints. Breast sides black, white lining
with flesh-red joints. Legs black and grim, like Minn-
hens, as in male marriages, the wings and abdomen start black
and wrinkled crimson. Each ring crimson, white frosted, with
a black rectangular back cross band; a shorter such am
belly of each ring. Iu the red sides of the rings in pairs
standing black dots. Flap - black, often white above,
woolly excretions, on the stout females the car-
mosin red, often yellow-green, especially on the abdomen, like me
others found my little ones, whose yellow-greenish quite, with some
siark stung into the red and also become crimson red on the abdomen
count — After death, the ‘little animal, in particular, changes colour
the back, even more red. One might think it was this species
nothing else than the overwintered mali, which has become darker in colour. This is by no means the case, however, because Mali has somewhat longer feelers

1d wings, different back markings and simple black shield
stains in the sides of the rings. Plenty before and with budding, in April and early
May; only in late years on May 15; anf apple trees; hiuig
in mating. Those from the dismembered abdomen of the woman
bulging egg marriages white. The same or a very related species at the same time on Crataegus
crus galli in the bosquetes. Also a pale trioza (like Psylla, only a three-pronged central vein
and without marginal mark) I found in November zu Oberstenfeld not less often
on apple trees. The Pxyllodes thus offer new observations
there is enough material on garden trees. AS5

The smaller one is rarely found on plums
brown-winged Psylla pruni Scop. Zenker also has a rust-colored one described by Réaumur
Peach warbler, Psylla persicae F., Ansserdem describes
Léw a Psylla buri F. on the Boehsbanin, and Psylta ficus F. ant Fei-
bitumen in weight houses. 4) leaf or plant lice, aphis,

knows everyone, but we want to know your general
to summarize my character briefly, win so more than
the space would not allow man before subordinate
Species and characteristics more laboriously dealt with. the
Leaf lice are usually small, clumsy, musky,
slow animals, mostly with six to seven members
Feel those who stand on high stools like the stags
antlers on the sucked. rose stems. thr more clearly, against
anten swept, melr or less long suction riddle or
Beak is tripartite. Legs long and thin, none
set up for jumping. The four wings very common
entirely absent, but very tender in the winged, fairly
laterally and when at rest daehformig covering the abdomen. On the latter, right and left towards the back, the two sting
so called juice tubes. Where this name comes from is me
not known, but I would be against the assumption that these raw
ven separate the sweet excrements of the aphids, the
Honeydew, out. This is often used as a clear Trépfehen
sprayed through the anus. In addition, stands on this
often a toe, which often occurs in the adult
state of the animal is significant. The aphid species are
usually green or black, brown, red, bronze, doeh
the color often changes significantly, depending on the lining and
Season. They are mostly shiny smooth, but many are
dull, powdery or even shaggy with wool. The mean are
smaller, slimmer, more domed and rare. The aphids usually cut back four times until they
are selected. Sitting for most of their lives
quietly, her rifling in the green plant tissue,

 

 

 

 

 

A86

on a leaf or fleshy twig to sing wn sap,
at the same time, however, from time to time lighten a droplet
squirting clear juice from the anus. Uni Bainmen
which are plentifully occupied by aphid colonies, one betindet
often turns into a real fine rain in warm weather
such stubbornness. Especially remarkable, zn part noe
rithselhaft is their increase. There are ways that
only propagate through children, others only through
born boy. For most people, however, both
each other in such a way that in the late autumn months,

 

often in November, repeated mating of Minn
chen with unwinged females occur, as a result
the latter in groups on branches or the trunk
sluggishly large, initially green, later shiny black,
lay cucumber-shaped eggs, on which the woman usually lays
dies of infirmity or is killed by the kilt. In the spring that follows, often in the first few days
February young unwinged females appear from the eggs
marry, which begin without any mating, unlawful
to give birth to boys. These catch erratic after a few days
to give birth to each other, also to undefiled mothers,
Only with the warm months of May, June and ete. appear and
under the broods also winged female, which, the supreme
population to some extent preventive, fly on and

   

 
    

if without mating on other plants or votes
living young give birth to new colonies
start gaining weight So it is, there in one day by cinen
single female numerous births occur, and after
few days auveh the young begin to give birth, the
Propagation of aphids extraordinarily strong. Against
towards the autumn hears the fires of bereaved women,
e.g. B. starts again with the green apple aphid; (from others
Species can of course be seen on clear October days in Heeken
completely surrounded). It also appear at this time
in sparse numbers, my dear. The copulation takes place,
but not with such females, which give birth to young,

 

 

 

EEE

487'

but only with such, which only beer to lay
are determined. :

It is natural that on the development of such delicate Ge
create like

 

 

Aphids outside of the environment
must have an exceptional influence and the natural ones
Epochs of development can change in many ways, so, ever
according to the mildness of the heavens or of the year, Ge-
Births continue well into winter, and during in
aphids are usually killed by the severe winter frost
are killed, individuals or companies of those who
were interrupted in giving birth or laying babies, necessary
survive the winter. This also applies in particular to the
Aphids in greenhouses. Sheltered windless location. at the same temperature and rich vegetarian
tion of their food supply is most favorable to them; therefore
appear in many years leaf lentils, iti bad
years, I still doubt whether you
Ratzeburg augeliihrie assertion of farmers that only
diseased plants are said to suffer from the aphids. It agrees with his further statement, ss
lack of air exchange and strains light under the windows
aphids is favourable, nevertheless, the majority of the
going there, all else being equal
straight strong nud even appy growth of the
grows best for aphids is that's why
if you meet the aphids preferably in young
men, in nurseries. That they are at the bottom
of leaves hold, has various interacting origins
things,

A previously widespread misconception is the Annalime that
one and the same species of aphid usually attaches itself to the same one
keep plant species. It has shown much Walker (Annals
and Magaz. of nat. hist. volume I — see. ser. 5. 872.) that the-
same Blatthwusart a large number Pilanzeu common
Lich can belong and in such a way that they after Hol
and thereby becoming unpalatable to one, may he

  

  

  
 

 

      
 

 

 

Observation:

 

   

 

  
   

 

488

 

females betrayed to another, and from this one perhaps
transferred to a third plant. The disadvantage which the pilauene suffers from the leaf
Lause grows, is above all the withdrawal of confinement
of soft green leaves, petioles and shoots, and
a resulting debilitation, frequent wilting
will. Linked to this are various, mostly one and
peculiar growths of the same kind of soft plant
tissue, gall-like swellings, blisters, cramps
the leaves and shoots, which often come together or
a form peculiar to a plant for many years
to lend,

A tiresome addition to the inner destruction of plants
ten parts is also the honey produced by the aphids
dew That this, at least in the infinite majority of
Fille, is nothing else than an exertion of aphids or
Tortoiseshell or leaf suckers, is my most complete review
procreation — It is true that glandular organs, e.g. B
the petioles and the underside of the Blitter vou Volka-
meria, from Viburnum Tinus, the flowers of Asclepias car-
nosa, siisse, falling on the bkitter underneath
Drops of honey, which, at least in the Volkameria,
be used by the wasps. To outdoor growing
Planting, however, I did not get such a process,
but I must remark that an excretion of Sissig-
ness from the glands of the stipules of the vetch
will. It is also necessary to examine whether the sticky substance melts
Lychnis species and similar plants, more so than often

. Flies stick to it, maybe contains some sugar. Finally, it remains to be determined whether the alder blitter, which
of so many flies, ichneumons, and even beetles
be sought, in addition to the bitter substance also some honey
thaud-like excrete. [It doesn't seem to be the case to me
to be, rather I find aphids as the next cause; the
thereupon likewise frequent psylliums are ‘droplets,
but not likely to result in sweets.] — injured

  

 

young mushroom parts, e.g. B. suggested by ruffles
or punctured buds, shoots or leaf stalks,
also leak juice. Ants, Apion and others
Kerfe look for ibu anf and drink 'him. — In all the others
Fallen but the so-called Honeythane appears on deu
Mushroom flakes, especially when they are in a crowd
occurs, which allows the bees to collect it, as an ex-
crement vou aphids, scale insects or leaf suckers. it is found most frequently and most plentifully, in favorable ones
Annual growths, on the leaves and under the leaf screen
of lime trees, oaks, plums, tallow cherries, birches,
Hop, elder, because on them the largest batches of leaf
leusc occur. A visible rain of small traps
chen falls on a balmy sunny morning at aphid season
down and soiled and varnished brush, grass and
low plants, garden stools, and even the ground. There
The aphids mainly on the underside of the leaves
sitaen, the top of the tree tops shows no
a Houigthau. Often the whole environment, but rarely
the spot. covered with honeydew on which the aphid
sit, whom they squirt their liquid excrement in the arch
in the air. With a gentle wind, the droplets are sometimes
sometimes taken so far away from the tall trees that you
during superficial examination of sprayed plants,
on which there are no aphids, at the animal origin of the
Honigthaus could doubt; but soon the bamn will be found,
where the honeydew comes from. That the aphid does not
living off honeydew, as André fidglich thinks
that you really do it through the anus
can see squirt and that they are in the majority of
Sit trap away from Honeythane. The occurrence of
Honigthaus in Niederungen is explained by its origin
from aphid-covered trees shading; be preferred
wise demeanor in June, from that this month dic
number of aphids present has peaked. If the honeydew were an excretion of the plant, then

 

  

  

 

490

the tops, as the most succulent parts of the tree,
sweat, and yet we have seen that sic usually
are spared from the honeydew, he also knew in this one
Kalle certainly not in the vicinity of the Pilanze
to all bodies, stained glass windows, winds ete. spirited around
den, - the squid also inject a copious amount,
nudge Safi, at least the wasps and amcisa do
fetch, e.g. 1B. on myrtles, Réanmur saw an extraordinary
lily strong secretion in the scale insect of the peach tree
(p. 515). The young shoots of the pear tree are Gfters of
Honey thane sticky, in the midst of which the young
gene psylliums or leaf warblers (p. 477) sit, The leaf warblers
alone do not excrete their honey than splashing. According to Mr. Stern's observation, recorded in the
economic news 1841, no. 51 and 59, and in
No. 17 of the Viennese general. agricultural and forestry
From 1854, the honeythane is in spruce groves
the product of a known tortoiseshell (Coccus racemosus). Whether aphids sometimes participate, whether it also
h aphid, much-
slightly in insignificant association with a leaf sucker species

 

 

  

 

  

 

 

exclusively in the silver fir forests! are, which deliver the local Honigihan, whether finally the
large aphids on pines and larks none for dic
Beekeeping is a significant contributor to honeythane
first examine 2n more closely. (cf. forest and hunting season,
Oct 1854, p. 361.) to the bottom
ments that everyone came and repeat

 

rich observer

 

 

© cs in the middle
n, stands fiw
nich after all, that the main and almost exclusive
Source of the Honigthaus the Blatt- and Schildléiuse and winter
are ordered leaf suckers. The black mold that
one as a result of the Honigthaus on leaves, branches, ‘tables
and Baénken finds is only a product of its decomposition. The number of aphid enemies is extraordinary
big. They are found in very different classes of animals. How fond some finch arias in the room at the leaf lens

 

Winter, on the aphids of its potted flowers

 

 

 

491

Embroidering roses is well known. Certainly, cine
large number of kéru-eating birds in the open this service,
the actual insectivores are not counted at all. Apart from-
but to him they become easy prey from a multitude of bastards. The locust or sunflowers, Scite 205, and still
more their larvae , living mainly on aphids ; as well
the maggots of the lacewing (Memerobius). by the thousands
they are fed by the numerous species of bugs and the
Maggots of hoverflies. I also suspect that the very
small red maggots, which I have in abundance on the aphids
saw the nasturtiums singing, also second-lily maggots
otherwise they would have to attach small Iehneumonen
héren, whose chnehin cine large according to species and quantity
Number one internal, the aphids highly pernicious
war against them, for whole stalks are often covered with _
occupied by parasitic aphids. Particularly peculiar, behaved towards the aphids
as noted earlier, the Amcisen. you are looking for
eagerly climb on trees and low growths and
they very often guess by their presence. Often 2 dozen
which are sitting on the beds of the aphids, they last touch
tore constantly with her hostage-like clits, so that she
sweeten the juice in their eyes all the more plentifully
to give measure. Strange is what Schmidberger
observed that the same ants that had just eaten leaf
liuse on the tree in the manner specified as theirs
Melkkithe had used peacefully when he took her along with the leaf-
liusen shaken down to earth, these anticlen and away-
towed. The Schadeu that the Landmann and Gértner through
the aphid grows is notable, though common
not expressed in positive numbers. Kirby and Spence L.
$, 193, but report that in 1810 the extermination
nearly the ga 1 Pea crop in England by the Blatiliuse
been a real calami. Schmidberger assures
that Biéume gave him 2 reasons in total

 

 

 

 

 

 

492

became; how cunning and detrimental they finally tir the garden
are, need to be mentioned. Middle. Crushing the aphids with the fins
gladly, although it has been suggested to all Erustes
not just disgusting, but if it is supposed to work, aueh fir
the plants harmful. On the other hand, on a small scale, i. H. at
Potted plants brush lightly with a feather brush or
recommended with a feather beard. However, this operation is open-
bar very time-consuming and laborious and stay anyway,
if you don't do it thoroughly, always
individual aphids, which quickly disperse again afterwards
mottle. Hence the large number of proposed, soon-
promoting, if for the most part not effective means. Here the sprinkling with water, usually without
Success, since the aphids are quite tight and at the same time
on the underside of the leaves, where it is not so easy to
can come. Schinidberger left an apple list at twenty-two
submerged for hours and upon approaching found
the aphid then apparently lifeless, but after a
half an hour for the most part fully recovered. Just
Sechmidberger finds the approach of the
fallen blitter with tobacco smoke. The peach aphids are
awar through repeated touching together and separately
gone, even the green apple leaf lentil at twenty
umpteen times approaching everyone died; tenfold call
But I have only killed a few of the latter. Furthermore be
smoking can only be used as long as the blitter is
have not yet rolled; therefore be in rolled
Leaf-leaved peach aphid of the third generation
on protected against its effectiveness, and the rdthliche
Apple leaf lice, which, free-seated, at ten to twelve times
Roughhern go down, remain almost unchanged in the roles
very. Just as sclinell as one with free-seated dureh
If you reach your goal, you reach the goal by
brush. Bouché, on the other hand, recommends tobacco smoke
fir ‘Mosquito and mainly potted plants by he

493

indicates that about 14% lbs tobacco anf on the cubic rod
coal is to be spread. decoction of smoking and snuff tobacco, of anise and
Aloé, ash lye water, infusions of tar or gloss
soot, urine, sciven water, caustic lyes also have
the evil of having the aphids on the underside
the leaves, in the leaf rib angles and the like. when loading
squirt easily enough to make a
to have lasting success from it. Spicy lye but and
probably also side waters are for the plants themselves
lich if not quickly washed off;
even watering the field beans, Vicia faba, with
According to Low, the plant has apple decoction with the aphids
self killed. Washing off the blitter one by one with a
sponge soaked in soapy water imag right
be effective but also laborious and at least caution
make necessary. — Ratzeburg also recommends the remedy
Bouché's consisting in a decoction of a hand
full of wormwood with a bucket of water, which before the
Evidence of use for twelve hours. — Willlfischthran, below
poured on the plants, damage without a second as much or
more than cr nitzt. Sprinkle the seized Welder on
a dry day with a powdered mixture of
ten pounds of salt to two sacks of peat ash,
should, according to Low, a farmer within twenty-four
hours have spent all leaf lens; also gypsum or
Lime dust kills you wherever it falls, but it's very hard
just starting to sprinkle the aphid nests. — It's finally
used by Schnidberger on fruit trees
ten smearing of the buds covered with aphid eggs
and to mention young shoots with loam or garden soil;
the eggs are supposed to be smothered in the process, Bouché certainly has
That's right if he doesn't expect any full success from it.
speaks in that the rain washes away the clay soil and thus
the remedy ceases to be effective before the children crawl out,
your only at the time of the latter one can benefit from it

 

 

A94

expect; therefore did not seem inappropriate to me, the fat one
Quite a quantity of earth to increase cohesion
to watch oxblood. — An even more radical means
gene aphids on trees, in cutting back the
consisting of young wood, one finds in the fruit tree leaf
shown. — Finally, a procedure must not
remain wiilint, which Bouché infallibly calls and often in pot plants
Wank has applied, It consists in making Lar-
ven by Sonmenkifern, Coccinella, procures, which aut the
infested plants, soon with the blood tleuses
room. Those are the easiest to get
coccinella? be punctate. She is one of the biggest, and so howling
on hop plants that they are reduced in number by these
Can be knocked or shaken. Kaltenbach's classification of aphids, Aphis
in Unierarten, because largely on the construction of the false
limbs founded, cine quite tricky, so I think
do without it here and the individual species only after the
a few higher, walker-shy groups, but in
may put together another order. a) Most species group: winged and wingless habitual
lich mixed up, the latter, in spring out
Occurring from eggs, winged females and these give birth
fly to other growths where wingless colonies develop
stand and reproduce until autumn, At that time
only minnies and egg-laying females appear. aphis
rosae can be identified as a prominent specimen of this group in
Regarding the shape of the head, the sap tubes and the hind
serve by using these royalties
several species are somewhat blurred,

The rose petal lens are so well known and
whose occurrence on the young shoots of the roses,
in the garden as in the rooms, well marked. walker
has shown that, having been differentiated hitherto,
four different species of aphids live on the rose, which are
Size and color differ greatly, namely in brief:

        

  

495

Aphis rosae 1. Viviparous wingless females, attached :
Vivid grass green, ovoid, arched. she lives
digging-bearing winged females
from the end of March. On garden-wi wilden'
Roses (R. spinosissima, centifolia, canina,
eglanteria), scabious (S. arvensis, cohanbaria,
succiva), — ​​Survived, at least in England, =
fiers mild winters and multiplies rapidly from early February. Aphis dirhoda Walk. Live-bearing wingless females: cifor-
moderate, pale green-yellow, from the first through paler color, shorter feelers,
broader bodies. The winged women born alive
similar in color to the wingless. Wings of April or Maian, beer legend
Wingless in October and November, earth-colored. Often with pink on
a twig and sometimes much heavier in spring and autumn,
but appearing less regularly. On tame and wild roses. In summer on cereals such as rye, wheat, haber, barley
and on Grisern (Bromus, Dactylis, Holcus, Poa), where they are attached to the lightning
tern fesisetat (while the oat leaf prefers the flowers), over-
tert in England also more often to reproduce in the first Frithling. Aphis tetrarhoda Walk, viviparous tigerless females, he
grow dark green, ovoid, very convex and clumsy and below with
covered with a white scent, winged women of mid-May, black
and stronger. Aphis trirhoda Walk, viviparous, hillless females ellip-
table, slightly convex, not shiny, whitish-green, with white scent
covered and marked by the cigential femininity and velvet
kindness of the skin. Winged in May, pale green-yellow, Very dull. in the
Frithling abounds on roses, 'Retires as soon as they get Fligel
away on the Aguilegia, from whose blizzards she occupied both sides,
causes red spots and persists until the end of October,

Aphis rosarum Malt. Live-building, wingless females dejected
grin, lighter underneath, more flat and very long. Live-birth bellowed
Females black, from early Mirz on roses (centifolia, gallica,
spinosissina). Aphis sonchi L. The viviparous; wingless females wide,
oval, domed, shiny, bronzed, with six rows of little stools on top
Back and black extremities, Composed of a multitude
Flowers, Cichorium Intybus and the like. Aphis ulmariae Schrk. (pisi call.) Broad, a little frank and arched,
yellowish green, glistening, three green lines down the back. on Spiraea,
Cytisus, Lathyrus odoratus and pratensis, Pisum sationm, arvense, Phaseolus
vulgaris, moutiflorus, Vieia sativa, faba, sepium, Kronm, Hedysarum,
Lotus corniculatus, Trifolium pratense, repens ete,

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

—

The oat aphid, Aphes avenue F., on rye
(Sec. cereale), Triticum aestivum, oats, common barley,
Mouse barley, Bromus species, Holcus lanatus, Glyceria fluitans,
Poa annua ete., especially at the inflorescences of these plants

A496

jerk off Aphis hicracti Schrk., on endive (Cich. Intybus), as well as others
composites. Aphis lactueac E., on lettuce, sonchus and the various ribes
species. The currant aphid, Aphis ribis [. smooth pale green,
bluish-green aphid with black eyes in autumn. body pretty
bulbous, shorter than the feet. The latter and the Fithler against the top
dark; otherwise, like the juice tubes, translucent. From March to
November on all Ribes species (rubrum, nigrum, alpinum, grossularia,
uva crispa). Especially on the underside because of their stitches more puckered,
driven leaves. Kid big, black, cucumber-shaped, on the juveniles
shots. Aphis avellanae Schrk., on hazelnut. (Walk.) The cherry aphid, Aphis cerasi F. The adult,
alive birthing wingless shiny coal black, almost
spherical; clear points on both sides. Young, red or
reddish brown. Coming out of the Kiern in April. winged
in June. Kierlegende Fligellose in November. On the
domestic and wild cherry tree (Prunus avium), and
when it is plentiful, the cherry harvest
harmful. Sometimes also on peach trees, that's hers
color faded. In England another greenish-yellow species with two black stalks-
lines, Aphis cerasina Walk., on the Wildkirsehe. The cabbage aphid. Aphis brassicae L., the unfavour-
are valid, living births young pale gray, fully grown
pale yellowish green, very phunp and globose, usually
densely covered with white powder. — On white turnips
(Brassica raja) Koh! (Brassica oleracea) raps and ribs,
Mustard species (Sinapis alba, nigra, arvensis), Crambe maritima,
Wild radish (Raphanus raphanistrum), Capsella bursa, Lepidium
sativum, spinach and the like. Coming in June from wildwach-
send growths to the Kobl and the others mentioned

———eeEGuEeEeEeeeeEeEE

AQT

flown over the garden plants, and is confused here
especially in July extraordinarily, one then sees whole
dusty deposits on the underside of the blisters; the occupied
Places become discolored and suffer distress. the juice kingdom
thum of the cabbage in damp weather you shall not gimsti¢
be. The scattered powder and the hanging bilges
the cabbage aphid often have to adopt a mehithaus,
the sugary liquid she squirts to that of a
vegetable Honigthaus given cause. The pale green, elliptically flat Aphis eapreae F. in quantity (except
on pastures) early May on fennel, Ancthum forniculum, Pastinaca sativa,
Apium graveolens, Heraclewn sphondylium u, derg). The peach aphid, Aphis persicae Sulz. In Europe
and in North America on the peach tree, at times
also the cherry tree and sloe stranch. The black ones
skinny winged minions are found from mid-September to . tember to November; at the same time, at least
from October on (Walker), the crimson velvety {ligel-
loose ecierlegend females. The fertilized females
after mating lay their eggs on the buds of young ones
Schosse' and bouquetaweed and in the marigold. she
can continue this business for quite a long time because of the
peach tree, its shoots still sharp against the winter
reached, and thus the aphid got the necessary food
maintains, furthermore because the peach aphid is one of the living ziths
which, according to Schmidberger, had a frost of 6° without
able to withstand damage. Yes, go over the winter
all individuals to reason, so that one pruning
which shoots in winter when it hits a peach aphid. —
If there are only a few nice warm days at the end of January,
so you can also find some that have just come out of the egg
young aphids, which soon attach themselves to the already swollen
go to the flower buds in search of food. If it gets cold again, their growth stops
gang, but Schmidberger saw such young peach aphids
not perish even at 7-9° cold, and with again-

Nérdlinger who have enemies. 32

 

498

returning heat in February, and further development
of the flower buds you can see them with their dark green
Color to appear again on top of the latter
to take pasture. Bad weather again
them back again. The first quite warm days at the end
April, however, impede their development in such a way that they
fully grown, d. H. pale green, ovoid , convex
and clumsy ausselien, and by the end of May already the fourth
generation may be present. This peach aphid
live in smallpox, which are caused by the many punctures
have rolled up. This story is all the easier than on
In a sheet maybe several hundred sit together. Spiiter'in the summer it changes color from Blassvoth or
Grin to peach red or black red, sometimes all the way
Black. With the fourth generation in May a appears
Part of viviparous Matter, winged, black
with grim chest wd abdomen, amd the whole
In the summer they are seen among the unlawful
generations arise. The development of genrations is
Very quickly, like the apple aphid, because in hot
Weather are from birth to 'truth only 6—8
‘Days required, but often in wet cold summers
12-14' days. Hence also in these the number of generations
tion is lower, while Sclmidberger dry in warm
Observed summers 16-17 generations. Schmidberger complains very much about the damage that
also caused him this leaf lansart. its extermination
medium are somewhat thsam and small; but they must
be listed here. Fin's best he holds, already the thin
small on the young laps sitting, for a good eye
easily recognizable Kier to eat what on occasion
of the ohuediess necessary, imprudent broom

 

   

eiidens the
Mau
have, he says, preferentially focus on those
To judge voices, which in the summer before vou aphids
been inhabited. Those who had suffered greatly wid

  

uu

 

Peach trees ké happen in the first frithling

P'

499

therefore am-jihre wood are occupied with many pines,
he riith to cleanse them thoroughly, except for one and a half;
Cutting back wood, or at least clogging it all over with clay
cross over (which to increase the zithiness something
ox blood should be added). The ones from the kids
crawling young aphids are the progenitors fir dic
countless, arising in the summer. That's why Schmid-
berger fir in the event that the destruction of the Kier not
“would have been thorough to declare war on them too. {
Therefore, he says, to catch these dark,
collect on the first emerging flower buds
progenitors trained as garden lads; these had to
inspect the flower buds a few times before they unfold
and found, if not all of them, almost all of them. Scien the peach aphid once to the third or four
th generation, then their propagation is so un-
hener that there is no means against you but the way
cut the top where the aphid beds are located,
and which in consequence of the top twisted blitter
shed like a lump, The aphids by vertilgang
It would not be possible to take away the camp at this time
expect, because since the aphids are constantly fed by amcis
are quilted, there are always some outside of the camps
scattered, and these produce cine again in a few days
young generation. Once the best extermination
time was lost in the Krihling, one would have to
only to save a part of the peach harvest, at least all
four to five days again and into September
Search to destroy the new Leaf Lens. be it
Incidentally, heavy, cincn peach tree, which once from the
aphids have been severely attacked, of which again:
free

  

  

 

 

  

 

   

 

 

 

The dock aphid, Aphis runicis L. One of the
big species. The viviparous wingless females
young: stretched, dark red; adult: egg-shaped, convex,
plump, trith black, each side with a row of dots,

 

500

The viviparous winged females, with dark gray
ner front breast, black abdomen, which also the ornamental
legends wingless very similar. — Kine plague far
vicle plants: poppy (Pap. somniferum), sorrel
(Rumezx acetosa) and other sorrel species, broad beans (Vicia
faba), vetches, phaseoles (vulgaris, coccineus), peas, stinging
broom (Ulex), lotus, more (Daucus carota), parsnip (Pa-
stinaca sativa), asparagus, scorzoneres, Brassica rapa [white _
rides ? ], horseradish (Cocklearia armoracia), lettuce, endive,
Spinach, chard (Beta vulgaris), oleander, solanum, galium
types etc. w. — She sits in large, dark beds, especially
conspicuous at the top of the inflorescence of arable
beans, you are causing the decline of the summit
flowers and their excrements (Honigthau) often have a
Browning and diseased foliage and tickling
of the whole plant. — According to Walker, she sucks
spiter, i.e. when the summit lap is no longer juicy enough
is, their nourishment lings out the nath of the pods. The green apple aphid, Aphis mali F. Von
Schmidberger, whom we want to follow completely, under the name
men Aphis pyri mali excellently described. The female
is light green when fully grown, ovoid and bulbous, with light
grim feet and blackish toes ; Fithler bristle
Formed, rather strong, brown, grin and ktizer at base
than half the body length. — The born alive
females flew pink or pale red. Fligel in mid-May;
then the insckt is deep black and dark green. — Dic
egg-laying wingless females alternate in the fall
very much in color after her age; at last they are green,
— The winged males in late autumn, slender and
smooth d. h, almost half as thick as the females,
dirty yellow or brownish, only a little green here and there
lich, black long filers, dark feet, a kind of winged
part without wings. The green apple aphid mainly inhabits the
Apple trees, but she also despises the young wombs

 

 

501

of the pear tree and in some years it attacks them
both without distinction. In addition, she is often on quince
trees, medlar, rowan, hawthorn. The two sexes are found only in the last
‘Days of September and October. Schmidberger saw them
previously described, in recent generations with the
are far more animated
drive than the opposite sex, and init vicr far-
mate after cinander. This must also be the case, there
the males among the females only occur sporadically
men, because on cincin sheets one usually finds cines, hdéch-
at least two minnies. In the womb of females one meets
at this time of Yahweh and even before mating Kier. With
these in the body they die if they are not used for copulation
come. If she fertilizes a male, they lie down
already the day after cin egg and later still cinige, cin
Females usually 3-4 pups in the whole. These are in
first 24 hours after laying light grim, later
pitch brown, roughly the shape of a hen's egg. the
Kiers are rarely attached to the tree's buds or the foliage
sticl, usually on the branches themselves or on the trunk
placed. From the beginning of October the number of children increases
on the trees until cold occurs, and on small bunches
are the branches through the mother who lives on it
often besiiet with eggs. The first stronger freste killed all of them before
existing apple aphid whether they are fertilized or not. Only the strong sprout of young bees delivers a number
Aphids are still the necessary ones in particularly warm late years
Food and eke out their existence until November, Ueber
But in winter everyone dies. - With the sprouting of the trees
the young aphids also get to the eggs, crushed
one finds an egg just before hatching,
that the aphid trapped in the egg in her abdomen
already has several imperfect young, later
burt determined by the aphid inhabiting the egg. At the

 

   

  

 

 

The young aphid nudges out lilies at one end
the egg with the head off a lid. In a few days
the here on the trees are all empty. —- The newborns
Apple aphids are grass green, have dark red eyes and
blackish ankles, but no wings. you linger
not Jang at the place of their birth, but sit down
the delicate bliss. They like to camp at the main
rip or at the tip of the advancing buds, or
on the tender young womb itself, and sting her long one
proboscis into the epidermis. They always join
several together and close tightly to each other, so
that often the advancing bud as with grim scales
is covered by them. Already on the second or third day
after birth, aphids shed their skins by
times the skin of the entire body hums the limbs
sweeps down the abdomen; the empty skin then sees
like a light white fabric. They won't
starved, the young aphids stay up at cinander
the same leaf and cut a second and a third
Times; finally they exist, the day before they have their first youth
give birth, or also on the 'day of birth, a quarter hind,
which, however, gives them as little flair as the previous
gone. This birth usually takes place from the ninth to the
twelfth day instead, so that ulso the Blatilaus to mother too
are only reached an age of nine days. At this
A Manuchen contributes so little to propagation that

 

 

 

 

 

 

Time is not just one, rather it was
previously as Ki in Womb of Ménn-
nted, On the same day she still brings
at most, however, six young per well. For it
is erroneous that the aphids so much in one day
to give birth to many young; much more takes to Schmid-
berger's observation cine birth almost half an hour, in
individual cases over an hour, and even after that
the lightest birth takes at least half an hour,
before the animal gives birth again. Often, however, they left in between

 
  
 

 

 

503,

2-8 hours. Overnight they hesitate to ruli completely. At least Schmidberger never found a new one early in the morning
born aphid. But it did take place after sunset
usually one more birth. That happens with this one
Young from the abdomen of the mother as smooth, as it were
ground off, somewhat pointed roller at the end. man
notice her red eyes, but no limbs,
Only after a few minutes do the fillers gradually rise,
Dam the feet, then the rest, and at the same time the horns
at the back of the body. Now the young becomes alive and active. But it is still stuck with the forehead in the womb and is too much
tender to flee from her, This happens in the
Menses only about a quarter of an hour after the limbs are regsum
have become by the boy clinging to the felt of the leaf
or Lap clinging, favored by the fact that the
Mother bends her abdomen down a little. Gradually strengthened
the newborn hekomint a grime color and seeks himself
a decent place next to the rest, wu zum
for the first time food to itself to new. The one that originally came from the egg, i.e. the first
first generation Blatilans mother, you der
we went out and gave birth to the first Mat on April 26,
fell on the 7th May ans weakness from the lap and died tags
then after giving birth to only 20 young. But others lived 15-20 days and gave birth to 80-40 young,
only a tiny one as the utmost, 42. So these boys formed the second generation,
They also remained flagellated, like their mother. On 2. May
one of the oldest among them began to give birth,
uh give existence to the third generation,
on May 3rd and 4th the remaining ones. Znerst gave birth to the mother wn-
winged women who have no wings until their death
got, — Spiite but the same mother brought young
Aphids are born, which already after the second moult
separate from the previous ones, i.e. H. on the sides initial
cylindrical, on both Euden, pointed, fitting

   

 

 

  

>

 

 

 

 

 

504

Flagel sheaths provided wareu. This when she was her last
skin, separated from the sex
society, looked for a lecre spot on the sheet or
Shot and peeled off the skin. Soon there were four. formed with white wings and directed upwards. Simultaneously
they dulled appearance and color. The breastplate was
first hecky, dark yellow, the head reddish yellow, the
abdomen light green; later but, d. H. within 24 hours
flowed, Hérner, head, breastplate and anus turned black,
the pale grin, ringed black, feet dirty grin
with black joints, abdomen heligreen with cinigen
dirt stains. rivet sheath to the forefeet,
Tongue reaching to anus, as in the unwinged. The aphids with wings stay on the verge for 2-3 days.
conversion office; some were then caught by Schmidberger
another branch, gave birth there to a young, but flew
next day. All others leave the tree altogether,
without putting down brood and you didn't return there anymore
aurick. — These winged female aphids are eaten by you
the second half of May to the end of July
flown on the Biumen and next to them already one
or some new born young. They stay, they don't know
be expelled, on the new Wohublatt to au her
Deaths. — Saw the three generations discussed so far
Schmidberger the same in every year, i. hb the two first
were always new wings, the third partly wings, thei
unwinged. In the following generations, however, cini-
great difference, which other circumstances left out. — Let us follow Schinidberger's continued observations in
the years 1828 and 1829 attached to the descendants
Female! In 1828 he took a newly flown hen
into the room on a potted tree, The Thi
2 June au born and lived until 16. June, achdeu
it brought 82 young znvr world in all. these boys
forming the fourth generation, s&é probably {liigellos,

   

 

n started on

oe

505 1
as did the fourth generation in 1829. the first
born wingless animal started on 12. June the first cub
to be born on, i.e. on the tenth day of his age. your and
her peers' boys made up the fifth, too
in 1829 consisting entirely of unwinged females
Generation. The fifth generation started on 23. June 1828, °
so to give birth a day later (by the way, that brought
first to give birth wingless females still at the last house
day two young were born) and thus the
sixth generation, however, the Tauptzah] after you
Bugs was eaten, so that from the few tibrig
Not with certainty in the case of the surviving new copies
to the absence or presence of wings in one
Part of the generation could be closed. In the
'That provided the observation in 1829 also belliigelte
wife. The seventh generation began on April 7th. July
1828 from one of the remaining wingless females
to come to the world; they were nothing but unwinged women
chen, The eighth generation, from an untrustworthy
coming from Weibben, started already on the 17th Judi 1828 the ‘daily
to see the light. She contained among the unwinged
Females also winged. Likewise in 1829. The ninth
generation, from an undisclosed female the 25th July
started in 1828, consisted in 1828 of nothing but
apply to females, in 1829 partly from unbeliigelien,
partly from winged. The tenth generation began
arising from an unwinged female, on 2. At-
gust 1828, thus on the eighth day of the mother, in consequence of the
plentiful food and the just prevailing warning
weather This time Vicle Blaitliuse came again
cumilie by enemies wn. The remaining survivors were all
without damage. But in 1829 came
also belong to the ninth generation

 

 

 

 

among the unaffected
winged leaf
lanse to the fore, which is otherwise not the case
was, cine winged among those born in the first days. The eleventh generation he

 

 

 

ranked by one of the ioldest

 

? 506

unwinged females of the tenth generation on 10. At-
gust 1828, so again and for the same reason on
eighth day of mother. Likewise amo 1829; in both
years to the sheer unwinged female bribing. the
twelfth generation owed its beginning to an
winged females of the eleventh generation, which the
49, August 1828, i.e. on the day below after his birth,
gave birth to the first cub. Louder in both years
unwinged females, the thirteenth generation
one of the oldest aphids started with the first birth
middle of twelve generation, on 29. August 1828, the tenth
Mother's Days. The whole 13 generation was wingless,
also in 1829. The fourteenth generation nalim
their beginning with the first young of an unwinged one
female of the 13th generation, on 10. Sep 1828. It
were all unwinged females. You fifteenth
generation, from cinew unwinged females of the preceding
generation on 23. Coming from September 1828, existed
as in 1829 from lanter wingless females, but dic,
as also in 1829, until late October or early
November all with the Kien in the body to the ground
went because they didn't have a minnie to befriend. With a further education of all generations in the year
1829 by nothing but wingless females on potted trees,
who were kept in the room from the first frithling,
Schmidberger obtains essentially the same result
evident from the occurrence of the winged females, as in
the offspring shadow of the flagged females, he brought
but the number of generations this year to 17, too
called the fourth and fifth generation, in contrast to
above experience, also flying females. The conclusions which Schmidberger himself draws from his
education derives, are mm above all that the Daner,
Warm and nice weather of the summer, also the
Abundance of existing succulent food from we-
essential promoting influence on the prosperity and the

 

 

 

 

 
  

    

 

  

   

OO

. 7
;
507 . merging of aphids are. Therefore the Blati- :
7

lausmiitter, following the genealogical list, at the
some generations falling in the hot July and August
Days less to become ripe for childbirth than in that
cool May and June. While further from the seventh
Generation in 1828 those individuals which
Schmidberger from her old potted tree to a new one
Béumchen, brought to the room, moved in ten days
When children start giving birth, they need those on the old potted tree
three days longer for the remaining females. Also the appearance of the flagged females
seems to be dependent on the weather. It has apparently
the purpose of preventing overpopulation and
settlements on other bitumen possible, especially
especially at times when the sap shoots in most trees
dormant, so the aphids were in danger of starving to death
or to be annihilated by their numerous enemies. We now always have the first two generations a year
no winged females; also lack the
same all autumn generations. Schmidberger derives from it
from that to train the winged females a higher
Temperature or more food is necessary With this
In fact, Annahine agrees surprisingly with the
stood together that in 1829 where Schmidberger very much
busy for ample nourishment of the leaf lens by changing
who took care of pottery, the sixth and seventh genera-
tion there were also winged females, which in 1828
did not appear in the two generations. He also believes that winged females remain
in the fourth and fifth generation 1828 and 1829 yon
the cold and oppressive prevailing throughout June

 

 

Weather to be allowed to derive, The succession of the
ulions, if abused women
act, elwas slowed down, because the latter have to
to reach their final formation in a few days
longer zn thin than the unwinged ones. While the latter in

 

 

508

begin to bear young within eight to ten days,
the winged ones will only come in twelve to fourteen days
to it, and while the unwinged the day after theirs
last birth, or already a mother on this day
the winged ones still have a few days: noth-
nimble to gain strength, so that they usually only
third or fourth days from the place of their final training
fly away. The lifespan of the apple aphid
is at most some but twenty days. With the end of
In the summer their vitality also decreases, i. H.
the last generations are becoming less and less rich,
also the fertility of individuals decreases, so that
there are females who only give birth to eight to zchn young
bring. Schinidberger even saw a woman from the fitness
tenth generation that dies after birth from the tree
fell. On the other hand, together with the females, the
Mémuchen also lived in smaller proportions in recent generations. Such are the observations of Schmidberger in Austria,
It would now be very desirable that also in others
Are such timely observations of the same species
would be asked, as in Austria. Without a doubt
depending on the climate and inconveniences, in the way of life
even greater discrepancies come to light than they
Schinidberger only alms. This is at least indicated by the
by Walker in England in the Annals of Zoology,
volume V. 8.269, in which it is said: Am
By early November the winged female is persistent
occupied with giving birth to boys, while the winged
loose women Kier lays. And yet at Sehmidber-
no more winged females in October
present,

The red apple aphid, Aphis sorbi Halt. (A, mali Sehmidb. ), von Schnidberger rather g 1
schvieben is slightly grissier, more rounded and bulbous than
an apple aphid. The old mothers dirty red
< or dirty

 

 

 

 
 
   

the g

and as if covered with a bluish scent:

 

509

  

cheers Linige observed flying females in June
reddish with tiny black dots on abdomen. The first failed boys dirty yellow, the something
increase rethlich. Inhabited according to said observer
this species, in addition to the apple tree, the rowanberry and sparrow-
tree. It is generally less common than the grine
Apple leaf lans, but predominates in some years. She also appears a little later in the year, and suggests her
Bearings on the downside of the tide, but according to Walker too
on young shoots. You can often find them in groups
hundreds on the same sheet. If the latter is the case, so
Initially, the tip of the leaf curves downward and rolls
towards the inside, as then also the side margins
curl together so that the whole leaf is disfigured. In June such leaves lose their green colour,
the last black and fall off; the laps, at least
on dwarf and potted trees, sting in growth and
the fruits remain small. No doubt also understands
Reaumur Vol, II, 8. 296 with its coffee-brown pear leaf
rolling aphid, the cben described. As long as the Apfelblaitliuse.
are available, their importance is, however, small. noticeable
and it becomes very noticeable, however, because of the circumstances of it
Propagation have been favorable. the first aphids,
that settle down always sit on the main ribs of the
Leaves fixed and spread from there over the leaf surface and
the young shoots out. Schmidberger saw whole dwarf biium
chen, whose splinters withered, withered and death
the little trees followed. Otherwise you see little flowers,
their tricbes crooked by aphid bites, later dem
give whole little trees a distorted shape. We have generally seen parts of the leaf lens
how numerous are their enemies. Schmidberger
raises a red mite in apple aphids in particular
emerge that will help us in the pursuit
should go. — Ks is obvious, Biume, that of aphids

 

have suffered or are suffering; by manure in the soil
wanting to, Sclinidberger missritth but such, by
thereby the propulsion of the shoots and the leaf
léusen all the more scope for devastation and
planting will be prepared. For high-voiced trees
it is hardly possible to indicate effective means; in the
‘That too there is far less damage done
than on Niederon Biumen, seedlings, grafts and the like. in bamboo schools, because here the bolts are much longer and kr
drive tiger. She has therefore Schmidberger especially im
eye by declaring the means of extermination to be
acts. As the main means he gives the annihilation of the
on the young shoots, branches and sometimes the
Voices sit there, looking like gunpowder canisters
Fier, This shall be done by brushing, if not
by cutting away or painting over with clay or
Garden soil, which the child did if it were only a few days
stay seated. He avoids lime because of himself
not so soon losing desirability of the tree. That
Business, he says, isn't as big as you think
because as a rule only a part of the bawnchen with kidneys
besett sci and the investigation occasionally of snow-
dens of espaliers and dwarf trees, as well as unbinding
happened to the young trees in Frithjakr

 

 

and from
kéune. But even later you should
females flew, especially the third and fourth
Generation, be fooled. You find them every few days
looking, slightly on the underside of the leaves. This works
now of course a bit far, but on the other side falls
also the correctness of the objections in the eyes, which
Schmidberger against the others already negotiated above
Destroyer asserts one in summer at
already existing large Blattliusezah] in use bring
should. Q

Aphis padi L. on bird cherry, Prunus padus. The plant leaf lans, Aphis pruni L. The live-

 

i

sit
giving birth flagellate female is light green, elliptical, entire

and even covered with white powder. This covers 7
also the bliss on which the insect grazes. On Zwetseh-

gene (Prunus domestica), sloes, apricots, sometimes

also reeds (Phragmites). I found her at the end of November
bers 1853 individually on the completely stripped summit laps

yon Zwetsehgenbiumen, and Schmidberger has in 1835,

i.e. H. as a result of the extraordinarily valid Jaliv

1834, their Here with those of the Pfivsichblattlans

met together on the peach tree, and their big ones
Devastations at Pilaumen and Peachbiéumen in 1822

with angeschen, His description fits so exactly to the
Perceptions that could be made in 1854, a
that the words he used scarcely changed

The plum aphids multiplied
extraordinary! quickly and spread from a bane
on the other hand, no leaf remained unseated, the womb
stood still in growth, the fruits already set
fickle off. The young blitter, according to the Linge something, all
rolled across, were from the excrement of the aphid,
i.e. H. covered with honeydew, later kvank and blackened,
so that the trees showed a sad look, young all-
gradually lost their foliage, older in 1835 more
years to recover and after this year's
will need. Also with the plant leaf lentils
the winged females appear in the third generation
tion. The female gives birth to at most six young in one
Day. p

The carnation aphid, Aphis dianthi Schr. pale green with grey-
yellow extremities, anf different types of carnations, but also on
Horseradish, cabbage (Brassica oleracea), ribs (B. rapa), rapeseed, rape (B.
napus and camp. ), the Sinapis species, radish, chard (Beta vulgaris),
*Potatoes, asparagus, tulips, Nareissen, hyacinths, Mesembryauthemum,
verbena, myriae, lemon tree, cactus,

Apliis berberidis Walk, aut peas (Berberis vulgaris). The hop aphid, Aphis hwnuli Schrk. The Le-
limbless female is quite long,

 

  
 

  

 

 

 

512

- narrow and flat, in shape between oval and elliptical,
pale greenish yellow with a lively grim line on the
Ricken and a number of such spots in each side. Fithler very pale yellow, darker towards the apex and ctwas
more than half as long as the body. eyes dark red,
Mouth pale yellow with a brown tip. Juice tubes pale yellow and
a little more than '/, of the bodylings. Thighs pale yellow or
greenish yellow and somewhat long; against the soles of the feet they are
legs darker. On sloes, hops, Prunus Mahaleb. It is undoubtedly this species that woe to him in the summer of 1854
has done so much damage to hops. The Harvest of
grown hop plants in Swabia,
in that the leaves on the underside are literally covered with leaf
ldusen covered and were so emaciated by them,
that the foliage is gradually falling off and the bare tendrils
had to drive blitter again, but of course none
Blithen could start. The Nonigthau, which is on all
found such hop plantations in abundance, was
according to the assurance of Mr. Registrator Brodtbeck 2
Stuttgart, for the neighboring apiaries cine productive
Source of honey.—Walker, who asserts that the hop
aphid always swept from the sloes on the hops,
rith, in the neighborhood of the hop gardens . no hedges
tolerating with sloes. By the way, there are also a few other species: Aphis prunina Walk. and Aphis prunaria Walk., on the Schichbusch,

Aphis viburni F. Schr small, dark green or black, on vi-
types of burnum e.g

b) There are wingless, viviparous females,

but the winged females far predominate. Scattered, not united in camps. wing veins
borrowed more or less trifled. Here:

Aphis coryli Gitze, on hazelnut. Aphis juglandicola Cold. yellow, oval, flat, hairy. July to October. nut leaves.

. 513

ce) Striking because of their special construction:

 

Aphis juglandis Frisch, — Walker only describes live-bearing ones
winged females and egg-laying wingless, the former over four million,
Jang, Lass orange yellow, with fudeuformigen Fubleru, '/, to '/, so
long than the body. Angen red. Chest partly black. shorts
Safirihven, scarcely 1/4y of the body long. With the boy over the back
four rows of brown spots. The middle row when growing one
forming a crossed line at each chin level. Brown veins of the clear ones
Wings with driven cattle. — This aphid from July to October
stored along the midrib on the top of the walnut leaves. Zenker also wants an Aphis vitis scope. and Walker, IL, 8 192,
der Aphis vitis Kalt., with the remark that he does not know her,

In what respect the Aphis secalis Zenker, on the green axes
of rye alive, 20 of the above Aphis arenac F. and Aphis dirhoda W.
stands, I dare not 2 decide. There were other species which I did not find listed by Walker
I intentionally gone, because with my little acquaintance with the so
numerous and so extraordinary in structure, color and living plant
I am not in a position to make a critical judgment of the changing species of leaf lans
zi and yet I consider useless, in the range of an unimportant
Leaving aside matters that are doubtful and expanding the
to reserve the subject of the future,

 

5) The scale insect, coccus,

differ from the aphids (Aphis), with which
sic have the most resemblance in way of life, inn
That's amazing, - The little ones, because of
almost never gets to face their small size, are without
beak, have a complete metamorphosis and
finally appear with little wings, with which they whir
fly, but they are also relatively fast walking
ginger The females have a singing beak, never-
mal Fligel, no metamorphosis and fall in the eyes
by the cigential form of her shielded
covered bodies. — Some species, males and females
chen, but the latter to a greater degree, are with a woolly
secretion covered. — The way of life of the scale lice
is generally the following: After the regular. nnd
Nordlinger, dlo Keinon enemies, 33

 

ola . gwas not, as in the case of the aphids, of several genera-
tion has taken place, mating has taken place,
the females swell even more stirrer. With a great many
kicks, or squirts a droplet sweet on the back of the back
sap from which wasps, ants, ichneumons and
attracts a lot of other insects. betray the latter
the presence of the scale insects, which one would otherwise not
would be nice, but in other cases where the scale insects
are very numerous, like 2. B. on myrtle pot
plant, the honeydew betrays them, with which the whole plant
disgustingly covered. Even among bees (peach bees,
Réaumur) it often forms entire genetate plates. this
accordingly, the female sucks constantly on the
part of the plant on which it invariably sits, and finally becomes
lich when the children in his womb have grown,
often almost unrecognizable as an insect. One kind stays
incidentally flat, the other curves almost into a ball ete.,
but in any case the woman becomes lifeless in the summer
dries up, If we read it off, it will then be found
a mass of small eggs under the protective skin, and
after several weeks, among the Réinder, the
numerous boys leaving the boats,
of which the females will soon become trig again and themselves
suck tightly so as not to close up the spot again
yeed, The indian scale insects have a simple,
the foreign types of hothouses, according to Bouché, one
multiple generation. So goes their propagation too
not as quick as that of the aphid in front of it, it is
still so strong that the tortoiseshell is a real plague
of the gardener and flower lover. come over
many species also in the open field, especially on trees. Their harmfulness consists in sucking in plant
share, which become paler and tingle as a result. Their destruction is far heavier than that of the leaf-
lance. Tobacco does not harm them. Grane soap, moderate and similar. help according to Bouché only when applied so strongly

MS

that the plants also basically draw from it. As besies among the imperfect means of extermination
Bouché recommends the well-known brushing off of the branches or
Voice,,. or, in the case of more delicate growths, wiping with
a towel or bath sponge. Although, as already
notices that the scale insect has grown into its place
are and do not go, advise Bouché out of consideration
some existing species, and the resulting young, which
could crawl back up onto the plants, the cleaning
to carry out in a remote place, — actual
Tortoiseshells (females) have a simple body shell. The Rebschildlans, Coccus vitis L. Wide, boat-shaped, brown. Not uncommon on the vine shoots, Réanmur describes it
young insect nearer, He says find the young and
Old vine sometimes with flakes like tree
covered with wool, which are the nests of the vine scale insects. loading
if you shake them, the fiids stick to your fingers
and can be pulled out for a long time, often with the attached
the rithlichen eggs, most of them remain in it
a hemp. Of these also by moving blitter
When fides are undressed, the cane often gets the look
as if he were hanging full of cobwebs, the children will be in June
laid and the mother's body then by a s
Surrounded by a wreath of fiids, — The Rebschildliuse, which one, passed through
the presence of ants, found on espaliers in spring (Fig. ),
igen scarcely any traces of these summer previously existing fiids, -
Dry brushing in spring or autumn. The peach turtles, Coceus persicae Schr. (L?) After Bouche
very similar to the orange aphid, but probably six times as large when old
than these (9 million Jang), the shield is also a bit more curved. Hiinfig on
peach trees. Especially in the branch angles of the side branches. Of
of the same without a doubt acts Rédumur, IV. Bd,, S, 22, saying,
the female contains 2000-4000 heretics, from which after 10-12 days
the very small, completely flat, barely visible to the naked eye,
nearly oval boys come forth en masse, quite malevolent at all
Get branches of the peach tree, Followed by ants find
they are on a leaf or stalk, of different sizes and colors,
whitish, greenish, yellowish, reddish, mostly close together when they
Having grown larger, the biums look like scabs and lose
to Réaumur by sucking and Ausiessen [squirting out the
shield lens?] often so much sap that the ground beneath is drenched

 

 

 

   

 

  

 

 

  

 

 

 

56

 

turn, "In autumn they shall fall from the trees with the blots,
let go, crawl back onto the knees [2], grab the tether
sit, and stay here all winter long into spring, si
are now all réthlich, lose mobility wedge in M., become firm
on the branches, are now swelling, almost spherical in April,
take care again, look like little galls in May, and
stuck yoll whitish Kier, mid-May they begin to lay, fall
out and die. Also anf peach bins cine
Shield-depicting species, 2 mill, long, with gel
broken bindings. Coceus costatus Schvk. The apple scale insect, Coceus mali Schrk. Females shield-shaped
elliptical, with leaf-like translucent, folded or wrinkled
Edge; adult, all whitish burned and same with white rmnz-
liger ellipse surrounded; young light brown, without ellipse. On apple trees. Whether the same, which I deviate somewhat in size, shape and texture,
a solitary, but dead on the annual or annual apple tree

holx bland and which, especially yorn, elwas more or less
is highly arched. tapering towards the back, at the first third
has a few clear or hardly noticeable rear marriages, cin a few such
large, glistening, nearly in the middle of the body, closely dabinter cin
few smaller ones. Transversely clearly or visibly folded, Gran-
white except the Héckerehe, or completely burned,

Anf-year and biennial mola of pear trees often live
gregarious cine just as large, almost globular, but humpbacked, shiny bright
burn art Kine very similar on cherry trees. Anch the plum tree houses a species. into elliptical brown
back stripe and the like),

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The orange scale insect, Coccus hesperidum L. The
well-known, clliptical, brown, on twigs and leaves
of orange trees, lemon trees, myrtles, oleanders,
Laurels and other Kalinin su, especially in the
Corners of leaf ribs, so common species, beginning of June dic
kid September you boys. On the Pineapple, Justicien and Hibiscus, especially when very warm
kept, the coccus bromeliae Bé., gran, which is very similar to the hesperidum, lives
burned marbled, clliptical, rather sublime. It all multiplies
year jiber. The fallen young climb back up the plant
up. For the pineapple, crush and strip with your fingers—
On verse! lenen species Cestrum in warm greenhouses Coccus cestri Bé.,
similar to the previous beginnings, then the female much larger, with many
Fierne wrapped in wool, Several generations. — a

oT

The figure that Kellerasselu ithhiieh, while ritbliche, completely white-
pushes with twelve lateral small appendages, the coffee louse, coccus
adonidun Bé., although of Indian origin, but entirely cinhcimiseh and
a plague in our greenhouses, on Coffia, Justicia, Ruellia, Cestrum,
Mua, Canna, Renculnia, Hanclia, Alivertia, Gardenia, Banisteria,
Erythrina ete, Diligent Abpiuselu, The juice of those who are crushed,
harm the plants. You HW well on foot until old age,

A number of tortoiseshells (Sehildtiger), Aspidiotus, do not swell
as strong as the spruce lens of the screen, has no secretion either
sweet liquid, on the other hand, there is a special
standing shield present, which protects the animal. The oleunder tortoiseshell, Coccus (Aspid.) nerii Bé., a
yellow. round, flat image, under which the lenticular,
yellow Kirper, who sucks out the manses with the rift. original
lich stranger, 'To millions on various plants of the cold and
warm Gowiichshiiuser, especially oleander, acacia, arbutus, magnolia,
Aloe, palm trees and the like, only to be destroyed by diligent brushing,

The Rose Tortoiseshell, Coceus (Aspid.) pink Bé. wife dem
previous completely, properly, 1 million. long. At votes and old branches of
Species of roses, especially the centifoli, which are often entirely covered with it and how
look heavenly. They will be exhausted and thirsty,
whom one does not destroy the 'animal marriage. It happens through sharp
Bristen, F

On Cactus species, Coccus (Aspid.) echivocacti Bé., the previous tihn! The laurel stalk, Coccus (Aspid.) lauri Be. Musehel
Formed, brown, with eccentric red-yellow elevation in front, 1.3. mill,
long. Deny the laurels. With a hard, pointed object
on removing

Finally lives an extremely mean, -+ 2 million. long, narrow, flat-
convex, mussel (mytilus)-shaped, dark brown, in large
number on the trunk, branches, sometimes even fruit of the apple
tree. 518

vi fly trim. Sly or cunning. few useful. The Fliegeu, Zweifligler, Diptera (see above
page 58) in perfect condition show a large one
Variety in the construction of their Fithler, but the same is more
only noticeable when viewed with a magnifying glass, and at
superficially, there are a few basic shapes
which nature varies in subtle differences
Has. — Of special importance, because often as schr
serving essential characteristics are the various parts
of the head. One distinguishes on him: the lower face,
lying between fithler, eyes and mouth. about last
terem the mustache and the forehead, d. bra. the area
between the eyes and above the feelers. at the top of the
forehead the vertex. under the eyes
face the cheeks. The mouth consists of either cine
fleshy snout for licking, like that of a housefly,
or from a bristly, long pumping apparatus, such as
at the gnats. The two accompanying side appendages
are the buttons, but there are many transitions
and modifications of the mouthparts. The torso carries
the two wings with front edge, tip
and hind or imenrand. The Wings
are very simple, mostly from Liings- and
cinigen ktwzen transverse nerves passed through and
often have a riot. — The hindwings are with them
Doubtful only by swing, from stem and button
existing, represented, often the wrestlers with one
Shovels more or less overcast. — abdomen and
Legs do not require special consideration. The eggs of the second ivy are elongated, very common
cucumber-shaped, inéis soft. With the hatching of the

 

 

 

 

 

   
  

 

 

 

  

519

Boys seize the egg together. The boys of the two
fligler are maggots, d. H. have no legs and mostly
like a part of the Veinfligler, no head in its place
but often a few gemshorn-shaped hooks. there is
but also maggots with heads, which make us believe
they might be larvae of kiifers or wasps. we
however, as two-winged larvae, they can easily be recognized by the
retractability of the head. This can be released from the larva
pull it in together with the first ring so that it is stuck in it
like a cork in the neck of a bottle. Besides, they are
larvae-like double-winged maggots by their softness and
the extensibility of her body, reminiscent of leeches
excellent. In some of the maggots we find clearly
pronounced cuts, in others they are not closed at all
recognize. The skin is sometimes completely smooth, sometimes with thorns
and similar occupied. Very significant, moreover, are the
thimlichen, attached to the rump of the maggot, against
behind standing two air lights, and often a few smaller ones,
on the first body ride. The most important forms for us
Doubters are depicted in our copperplates. —
The transformation of the maggot into a pupa and a fly, yes
above, page 35, drawn in general outline, 'is a
perfect. But the strange thing is that in dér
Rule the transformation into a doll under the stiff, dire and
barrel-shaped cn latvae skin is going on, which
the appendages of the larva, such as spikes, lumps, lumps
léchertréiger and drgl. often still shows itself. Yes there is
there are also teardrop-shaped pupae, and the so-called gall-
miickchen have sculpted dolls. Initially the
Pupa filled with fluid like the moth pupae. later
but one recognizes the shape of the ténnchen when the lid is opened
future fly, and usually bursts after a short time
the fly will cleave its pupal shell, revealing either a cleavage
in the direction of the length of the pupa, or else one
round cap is pushed off. The generation of the flies
is often a multiple or a multiple, with the last

520

Set overwinters in the year, and therefore has the longest duration. But there are also genera in which the annual

generation is the rule. While with the beetles and butterflies it is
preferably the larvae and caterpillars that cause us harm
and it is therefore by far the most important to
knowing is the status of the Zweiliiglern
Perfection is at least as important as the imperfect
come. Hence we have the classification of species,
admittedly highly empirical, based on the general body shape
met the perfect fly. For the maggots, some of which are not yet
enough, some are not even known yet, serve,
as far as knowledge of the larvae permits us, the following
Overview:

'ig. Scite 523 in swamps: Culex. figure Page 539 in Biehen: Simulia. 3) Gray skinned
a) cylindrical larvae with a distinct head, individual bristles and

transversely wrinkled, in the soil: tipula 8. 536 and Bibio 8. 545. Very similar, also in the earth, Tabanus 8. 571.

b) elliptical, wrinkled, with crowns of thorns and indistinct

head [2]. In Nareissen bulbs; Merodon 8 574 ©) Smooth dirty, with a dark head, sometimes with, sometimes without

Small.- Im Unrath, sludge ete. Eristalis 8. 575. 4) Transparent, white skin, with a distinct head. in lazy trees,
Ctenophora 8, 537. 5) Without a distinct head, more or less conical. body
more or less truncated, usually with points or hoeker
implemented. Bone white, sometimes also transparent and therefore
the color of the full intestine showing through. (In this group
according to the probability, I would need several for the time being
or generally unknown species of maggots below.) a) in putrid animal substances and sputum. Musca vo-
mitoria, carnaria, cadaverina, domestica, Caesar (Kiise: M. casei. M. vomitoria ?) 8, 546-555 and 562.

b) inside caterpillars and aftercaterpillars: Tachina 8. 555. ©) in onions: Musca ceparum 8. 559

d) in cabbage stems and roots: Musca brassicae 8. 560 and bras-
sicaria $. 556.ji

 

 

 

521

©) Destroying lettuce seeds: M. lactucurum 8. 564 1) in the radish rootu, M. radiewn 8, 561.

g) in Runkelblittern, I. conformis 8. 556.

h) in the buds of burdock, coltsfoot, rabid weed: M. cal-
citran 8. 568

i) in cherry flesh: M. ecrasi 8. 563.

kx) in Méhrenrootu: M, pink 8. 565

}) in acidic liquids: M. funebris 8. 567.

m) in olives: M. oleae 8. 56°

n) in cereal plants: ML. frit and lineata 8. 566 6) figure Page 534, flat, narrow, pointed in front and behind, white
or yellow, in tree fruit or corn stalks: Cecidomyia
8th. 521 Sciara 8. 533. 7) Short, fleshy, with crests of short thorns or rough with kernels. Under the skin or in the intestines of domestic animals: ocstrus
8th. 575, Gastrus p. 581. 8) figure page 573. Leech-shaped maggots colored grin or peppy
among aphids rphus p. 572. 9) Formation of the maggot partly peculiar, in the body of the
Mother, partly unknown. On pets: hippo
bosea 8 585. 1) Elongated two-winged insects: mitcken or gnats. Feeler composed of six and more parts. rts
sel mely or less long. body stretched. swinger
uncovered. _ay

A. Mosquitoes, gnats, Culex. Four-

- ; limbed, with short bristles in the female, in the. little boy

plume-shaped feelers. Proboscis extended, longer than
the fithler, scales on the edge and veins of the wings. The common snipe, Culex pipiens L. (éousin.) With. yellow-brown, through two dark ones
Longitudinal lines ~divided ~back shield, ~
pale gray abdomen with brown stripes
and pale legs, — all got through
all of Europe, as one of the meanest, most mischievous Zweilligler-
species, but in the south even more cunning, even more dangerous than with
us. Most common in swampy areas where they
especially the females, rise in great flurries

  
 

 
 

    

522

wnd dance in the air. — Ks gives stinging gnats the whole thing
year, however, and even in winter one sees many on walls,
Woinden or sitting in houses, you will soon be
times already stung in April. Truly cunning by number,
But they only become palpable and the consequences of the sting in
Summer. It's always only the females, of which
ian is stung. But these persecute people and
animals by day and by night. At the latter time they leave
perspiration to find the sleeping ones. Mau
notices their alignment through the well-known fine, song-
loud hum accompanying the whirring of their wings. —
If you let the gnat bite and suck, see
soon her abdomen will fall with blood, and finish
bursting with it. The sting evokes a most subtle wonder
development, as a result of which the skin easily becomes inflamed
and swells. It is claimed that the mosquito
same with sucking, perhaps to thin the blood and
Facilitating the drilling of its beak, a species
Let saliva flow into the wound, and that saliva
one of the reasons for the swelling of the injured area. It is natural that of the millions of mosquitoes that
Come the world, a large number dies, without ever once
to have tasted blood. Then they get on with their lives
a little moisture. So you see z. B. those in houses
overwintering, with their cracker. Haze on cold feet
suck up star. In April 1854 a little snail sat down
at my supper table for a decent gratin, and so-called
at the Brihe. i.

Propagation is particularly characteristic of cigen. the
mosquitoes. Degeer observed the mating. He saw one
In the evening the whole air full of mosquitoes and louder
Male. Females soon arrived and departed
themselves among the first, which they immediately seized
sat on them and were carried along in flight, the whole
Act elapsed a minute. The eggs are stalled
Water with vegetable resia placed. Kin Kettle,

 

523

that I heated in winter and summer over, with water
Filled with water and some hay, left standing, was in
Autumn flew from a lot of mosquitoes and filled with
a mass of mosquito larvae. But the main breeding places are
swamps, and in wet years it is said to be theirs
Greatest increase, presumably because then they too
brood in a quantity otherwise for them to drier places,
The woman sits down to lay the eggs according to the instructions
usually early in the morning on a leaf by the swamp or up
the water and touches the tip of the hindquarters
surface of the water. In two minutes time are from
put 30 kids on it, let it get up with both hind legs
right on the water, so they are next to each other
glue. Tin whole puts it at 300. The little unbound
which boat of bottle-shaped eggs floats on the water
ser back and forth; but after two days they hatch
young maggots or larvae out and the raft of empty ones
Shells keep swimming. — The maggots are about
12 million long. You are footless. your head round-
lily flat. midsection thick. The awful one
Tlint body at the end with two tubes, one
to draw in air, the other to empty the
excrements. One often sees hundreds of Lar-
ven at the surface of the water with her
funnel-shaped trachea hanging and at the
the slightest touch of it suddenly, as if at a sign
chen, go into hiding together, but also soon again
come up. You live off vegetable scraps, Degeer
_ as a result of small insects and parts of the earth, Nach
2-8 weeks they transform into a
Krimmie, front fat, two-horned doll. This, something
lighter than the water, hangs on the surface, dives
but also, tiring with the tail, according to uniter. To
The selmake develops in 8-10 days. She stays until
e is strengthened, on doll's shell and water level
to sit. If there's a wind before she's ready to fly, she has to

 

   

524

drown: cin Loos, which many gnats share. —
Even in Sweden we find the gnat larvae
late April and early May. The Kinen therefore take
in a single summer three, others even a sixth
and seventh generation [?] at. This seems something to me
daring. At the very least, the development time would then have to be considered
of the insect be so short that other observations
kau reconcile with it. That's how I found in
the however cool year 1854 dic first marriages in
July. Since one namely the winter and in the first
Frahling no males, but only fertilized females
noticed that have not yet deposited their brood
probably the first males noticed in the year from the first
in the year emerging generation scin, but needs this
only one of the observations mentioned until the end of June
to finish it, it is hardly conceivable that before Win-
five or even six more generations
standing. .

A queer lineage that so extraordinarily
In honor must also have numerous enemies. to these
héren many birds and fish.—Draining of swamps
and Gr cinzig means against the mosquitoes 2u
fields to . -

In southern countries, where their stings are far painful
stickier and more consequential, sensitive people swell
Whole parts of the body were exposed as a result of the stitches. Natirli
the ill-dressed suffer the most; the prosperity
therefore protect them by covering them with pile or gauze,
Preposition of gauze windows in rooms, by Réiucherun- _
gen, wearing undergarments, etc. The resulting cn
‘Swellings are treated with a so-called volatile ointment*
grated. It is also recommended to wash off the
engraved 'places immediately after the engraving. A related, similar, also hardly larger
species, the grove cranefly, Culex nemorosus Meig., has brown
yellow dorsal shield with brown welts, brown back

 

 

   

 

a

525

 

body with white rings, and a skin-white pant
at each K Lives anf same way as the previous one,
but in shady deciduous forests. Sings to horses
oozing with blood from foresters and woodcarriers. lo

mass from may to the summer itber,

   

 

1, Bearded Miicke, Ceratopogon. Thirteen-membered (dieefiint le
teu lengthened) thread-like antennae, bearded in male marriages. ripple kiir-
than the fillers. All legs the same. Very small parasites on animals. Ceratopogon niicavis 1. Black dorsal shield ash gray iridescence:
fly! white, spotted brown, With the grove flycatcher in May
large crowd of horses in the shadow of Lanbwaildern, Nach

 
   

 

Meigen in low wooded areas, and in the evening on willow shoots. and stinging rather sensitively, like more of their relatives

 

Species are often said to settle and sting our skin in droves. C. Gallmiteca, Cecidomyia. Feelers a lot, at least
awilfglicdrig, beaded, whorled,
in the male as long as the whole body. Short riddle marriage, wings haavily, dull, with

three longitudinal nerves. Long your legs with un-
Spurred Schicuen. Mostly small, aun part
very small and at the same time very delicate animals
chen. The maggots clearly divided into absiiize
den, éfters a bit flat. Turning into dolls, on
whose wings and legs are vaguely recognizable and
which during the transformation like to get out of the
push the body out. In plant outgrowths or
fruits. The black gall midge, Cecidomyia nigra
Meig. Schmidberger describes one under this name
species observed by him, with which dus female sex
bad is definitely something greater than what is inward, and
gwar, over a quarter line [1 mill.) long and more than
a half line [1.5 mill] thick [?? ]; according to Meigen 2 million long [with? — without the long legréh?]. Fahthérner black
brown. Ritckensehild black, shimmering ashy at the back,
with a black dorsal line. scutellum granular, back
tails and abdomen blackish: the latter with yellow ones

    

  

   

 

 

 

526

 

cut, female's legs dirty yellow, so
longer than the whole body, legs sallow. wings with
wiped third ling vein. transducer pale. Schmidberger met the black pear gall mosquito at the time
since, in the individual pear blossoms, there is a petal between
schen dpu calyx excerpts* showed, i.e. from the 12th to the
18 April. She almost stood in the middle of the individual flowers
vertical, pricked the petal with her long legree
through and laid her eggs anf the anthers of which are still whole
closed blossom. But he also noticed a mosquito
her Legréhre physical by chalice and corolla
drilled. After the gall midge had taken off, Sehmid-
berger in the en{two-cut pierced blossom, in
lying in a heap over the anthers, which soon close
few, soon too many, sometimes even more than 20
united eggs. They were white, lingy, on ciner
Side pointed and transparent. You would, special
in warm weather, revived in a short time. Already on four-
ten days Schmidberger found the small maggots on the
fruiting soil of the flower, engaged in or in
to drill into the nithe of the calyx tube. Marry the
Bloodhe unfolds, they rise, so that they are unfolding
no dangerous ray of sunshine may hit, to the core building,
their actual place of residence. In the same
they divide and start to sew it up on all sides
wolf down. Have they the flesh of the little fruit within
exhausted, they are also trained and wait for it
A good opportunity to leave your home. As soon as z. B. rain occurs, the Biruchen occurs in places
in Kiiulniss and gets cracks through which the maggots
try to get out. You let yourself be
to take, fall to the ground and dig in, Come
but no rain, that's what they're sometimes called by the
bark of the pear through; however, they usually remain in the
Core house until the bulbs fall off and cracks appear on the ground
get, or pass their whole relationship

 

  

 

 

527

in this. In 1881 the grubs of the gall and pear
Miicken from the 14th to the 20th completed their training in May
enough, in 1832 because of the cool weather only from
20th to 26th So you need about four to five weeks
to full growth and maturity. In November Schmid-
berger some trapped maggots to quite dark yellow ones
Piippemarie transformed, in which one felt little bit
and could see Fisse in the vagina. Apparently the
time when the little chicks hatch, the springtime, when they
at Schmidberger in captivity from December to
February developed. They took prisoner
if you don't buy the juices offered to them, mate
neither, but soon died. Birngallmitcke, Cecidomyia pyricola Nordl. I call
this little animal pyricola, to avoid confusion. To Ratzeburg, Forstins. I., p. 157 has namely Bonché
discovered a species of gall midge on the pear tree, which he
Cecidomyia pyri Be. names, which however not like ours
pyricola lives, but the young flowers on the branches
twisted together sharply. The present small species obtained
I at the same time with the little sorrow, p. 533, from the
formed failed pears of 1851. the body
of the animal, without antennae, is 1.9 millimeters. long, filer
of the drying in front of me, probably miinnli-
specimen, made up of distinctly separated, stretched hair
whorls, blackish grey. head like it
appears, shriveled up, a glittering black mass
forming. Back and legs blackish grey. Fligel with the
voluntary nerve formation of the gall mite, rather trib-
gray and gray beliaart. swinger knows. abdomen dead
Specimen like the posterior part of the breast a cute brown-yellow;
on the living kerf, I remember, belly up-
red Because the foregoing description does not apply to any of Meigen
I gave her the above
names, ready to rescind the same as soon as he
should be regarded as premature. my few

 

 

528

 

examples of the Birngallhuicke developed at the end of
gust 1851 and lived to the 10th September. The maggots
may be very similar to those of tear girls. Unfortunately, the species of gall midges living on grain are
not yet properly put into the light. The following
We mainly digest the most precise information about it
collar. The wheat bug, 'Hesse fly', Cecidomyia
destructor Suy., hence the latter German designation
get that one im. last century in Nordame:
believed, this Mitcke sci of Hessian soldiers in the year
Carried in her straw anus to Germany in 1776. Anch in England, the Kerf has already shown and big
Terrors spread and finally are from him in 1833
on the Hungarian Altenburg estates of the archduke
Great devastation has been caused to Karl. the perfect
Mene Kerf, the mosquito, is soft and tender after the collar
hardly has the size of the common mosquito. Thr Ker-
per is covered with short black doors. the back-
shield strongly convex, smooth and shiny; the label
prominent, rounded behind; the breast golden yellow in parts. The abdomen brownish. The wings blackish; the gold-
yellow of the root sometimes spreads to the veins, where
it appears lighter and gradually disappears before the middle
det, Schwinger yellowish The legs at the thigh
root golden yellow. The female has on abdomen and abdomen
a black welt. The other information describes the
Kerf as a wicked little mosquito, all black, even that
Flagel, these except for their reddish-brown root. Paleness. black hairy feet. Kollar designates mech Say as Micke's first catch
den’ June, and says that between this month and that
Fall females his Kier, cins to eight in number,
with its ovipositor between silk and stalk, zn-
get to the root. Also look at the stalk
crawling out dic made their food. She is after the

 

 

 

 

  

    

 

 

 

529

refraction fusiform, w h, its posterior end
plially deserved; the head cinwuirts curved, above through-
sight. One notices, it is said, in her interior a short one
grime line, the alimentary canal. Below she is dirty white. In younger specimens this coloring appears as nine
Stains on each side and smaller than a row noel
such spots in the middle. They hibernate with abwirts
directed head at the neck. Your main devastation is only filling
in the next spring. In Hungarian Altenburg lay down
with the end of May and the beginning of June, when the Waizen is at its best
The beginning of the beginning was, many ears of corn, the straws
became tangled and whole stretches got such a tangled
confused appearance. At that time one found the adult
seven maggots regularly in transverse segments [?} around the halin,
and then against the head with indefinite little heekers
or spikes. Thre Linge ¥, inch, Their Width Yq Zo. Taken from the stalk they are immobile. One believed
initially, the falling of the grain sci a consequence
strong winds, alone on beautiful, windless, warm days
the devastation spread faster and faster; from schwa-
chen she went to strengthen, and finally 20 the fittest
wheat fields tiber. Within barely eight days, % of the
culms on the ground, and several rains in the second half
of June they were so depressing that one hated
kiémien believe Vichheerden are over the wheat fields
gone, the small ahreu set us a few uncompleted
arrived kernels. One found the sick surrounding

* culms in the first culm node first the bottom of nester-
inhabited by wise living maggots. Kinzelue stronger penetrated
also higher up into the Halmröhre. Removed the maggots
so the stalk its juice, so that it last on the first stalk-
node died, fell or spread to its neighbors. The period of life of the worms [maggots? or maggots and
dolls?} is accepted at 24-30 days. with the time
tigumg the stalk they changed their color ir

 

   

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

's British
lichen and schrampfien together. Herennier should

Nordlinger, the little enemies, BiG

 

530

to understand the doll zw, because the cardboard
are described as like the full-grown larva,
only dark red 1 and without any movement. The dolls
found at the crown of the root or at the first node between
dev leaf sheath, and in fact there were whole bunches of cardboard
together. The spot where they touch the still juicy stalk
stuck, showed up at the mung bran, withered, ziih,
but without physical injury. — After the course of
yer weeks Kollar found one of his dolls created
those [living?] Miicke described above that this in
Austria really devastated Kerf the Hessen-
was, Kollar also confirms through the said over-
cin the mood of the damaged wheat
halme with the vou Say ' pictured. There is no doubt that the Ham-
Mersehmidt's information about the increase in wheat stalks and
Ahren in Hungary by Cecid. tritici on our Cecid. destructor 20
cattle. I'm adding some more from the American, official
Weg collected news about the Hessentliege. They filled 200
Octavblitter (Youuges Annals of Agriculture XT. 406 ), without ans
the same, nor to the many other ministerial reports, Au;
aug magazines, and letters from individuals who made their way through the
Kerf had really lost light on the ‘little animal and its life-
wisely spread, until 1818 the Schnakemmatur of the animal
chens had been recognized - It is said to have been eaten in the autumn
of stalks and branches of the wheat plants [probably the maggot 2]. In mild Frithling weather, the fly appears and puts its eggs in
the heart of the main stalk which they [i.e. H. grub!] rotary drilling and such
weakened that when the ache began to grow heavy and in . kick Mileh xu, break off and go 2x grade. the whole harvest falls
as far as she extends her flight. She was born English around 15-20
Penetrated miles more inland. After others they and themselves
Miles advanced inland and not until the year 1788 did their
started to a significant degree. Although the single flight
a swarm of such Hessian flies usually not more than 5-6 feet
all at once, since on their way they will not go through mountains,

transform:

 

  
 

 

  
 

x

 

   

 

     

 

    

  

 

 

  

  

 

 

   

 

' Jonmal of the Academy of Nature
Part. 4, 1817. pag. 45 PL 3.l

 

1 Sciences of Philadelphia Vol. 1. 5at

even the widest pleats were held. but the one she like a cloud
aiehen seen. Their mass was so enormous that they were in the houses
to Tansenden in bowls, Gliser ete. fickle As Micke's natural enemy, Say becomes one
small parasitic wasp, called Ceraphron destructor, which itself
usually found in such quantity that from the maggots
only a few get to the Verwandlong. Also Kollar found
most of the pupae of the wheat mosquito with hatching
maggots fulfilled and prophesied the real in
complete disappearance of the kerf in the next year. Against the little gnat, her kids and young maggots
don't bother to do anything, because you only have to do a lot later
knowledge of their existence through the falling of the grain
received. It is therefore recommended that the grain be
livable za cut the stubble but with those in it
to burn contained dolls, in the case of Umnig
However, in the ninest year in the area I'd rather have one
planting other crops. The wheat envelope, Cecidomyia tritics Wirb.. is described as
The common gnat bears the same thing, but only one line
Janges Schnakehen, with anger retractable Legrélre. body bitterness
yellow; wings water-white, hairy on the edge; Eyes black: Fiihlhérner
pearlescent, kingr than the pronotum, feet rather long. the
Miicke lays her eggs in the middle of the blossom. The larvae prevent much-
easily by eating the flower stem [2], fertilization
of the grain. The larva is lemon yellow, wrinkled or warty on the sides:
head pointed; Hiutertheil dismissed. Cardboard narrow, on both Euden
pointed, reddish, collar assume the pupae are lying in the ground. - Of the
damage done by the maggot chew the news 2u-
follow 'Yo the gauze erute amount. It is at the point of destruction of the kerf
and to do little about it when it's getting bad, it would be
for cultivation of a different kind of grain in the following year. (8th. Linnean
Transaet. III. 242-245; IV 224-239; V 96-110.) Zeuker says, p. 281, it has F. Muse in Silliman Ameriean Journ. of seinee and arts, vol. XXII, p. 71 n.f. provided evidence that
the Hesseutliege, which he calls Aphis tritici, not a species of gnat
but an aphid, the size of a flea, with cinge-
curved snout, becoming half as long as their thin filers, chest
stiiek and triangular shields are black and separated by a
faint thorny ledge. Back light yellow and rear banch ring with

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

   

 

  
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

532

in a glittering yellow band, from which two honey tubes emanate. The short wings hung down: their outer half black, and
yellowish spotted; Chest, belly and feet dark black. these insects,
If the observer continues, they hit each other several times and the wings appear
only after the last Hiutnng. One was observed within 10 days
skinned three times, becoming more and more beautiful and having a buprestis
shined. As soon as they emerge, they appear whitish, show
but feet and wing tracks. The larvae [?| creep few
hours after being glued to the leaf or malm,
from the thin surrounding skin [bihant?] and immediately after
nearest lower node. They drilled in here with the rift [2],
grew rapidly and became dolls in a few weeks. From these
they emerge after a short time when the season is warm; to change-
if they hibernate and return next May perfectly as
winged Kerfe, all the wheat groves where they sit,
incline and finally fold completely. Burning all stubble
is recommended, The above description is not correct
suitable to determine the aphid nature of the insect ofler also only large
Confident in the above observations cinzafléssén, which is why we
exst decisive information about the future itber dic Cecidomyia tr
tici Kirb. and the references of this kerf and Muse's Aphis triticé
Hesseniliege (Cecidomyia destructor) want to wait and see. In Germar's Magazin fir Entomologie and quoted by Kollar:
The grain grinder, Tipula cerealis Saut, The small perfect
mene Kerf brown-red, with two silver-colored fleurs, bristle-shaped,
three-toed, more than body-length feelers, he should only cinige
Live hours, the grub, footless, ans wrestling and head and a-
erect tail, is mennigred, 1 to 1½ lines long. In May and June sociable between leaf heather and straw, eats the
The stalks become warty, jagged, crooked and then die off. During the metamorphosis, the larva goes into the earth. The lifeguards of the kerf
seems to be 2-3 years,

In the years 1813 and 1816 in several areas of Baden
as a larva by destroying the grain fields, especially the husk
and the barley made firehtbar. — I jass the kerf until further notice,
More specific news at this point, also list the ones already from here
Several pages of complaints about the destruction of Haberfeld
at. can't nither yet for lack of more accurate news
be appreciated, I also refer to the subject of Schmid-
berger, contribution IV S, 213, initial barley and wheat destruction
ments on the Fritiliege, p. 566. Kine Avt Cecidomyia it is without a doubt which is the swelling
and causes failure of many seeds of seed moths, Man

   

   

 

 

   

i.e

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘
533,

finds the orange-red maggot in it, but usually no mosquito, but
from which a parasite (Pteromalus) emerges. D. The Mourning Marriages. Seiara.' no
black, somewhat less thin-bodied sinews, with thin ones
sixteen-membered, hardly hairy feelers, knvzem crack,
yothen eyes, lying, fine-haired, large, stunr
pup, mostly turbid wings, with five strong longitudinal nerves,
of which the iittler is a Gabelnery. Legs long and thin. Rails double-spurred at the end. abdomen at the mother
cylindric, the females taper into a point
cheering. The pear mosquitoes, Sciara pyri Schmidb. Schmid
berger's description lantet: Kanm ¥/, lines
(2 million) long nid, line (0.8 mill.) thick;
Head; Breast piece and pahler black. last
tere wal ven Glicdern bribing,
of which the two roots are thicker. Fisse QQ
long md dim. vibrator club-shaped,
with black-brown head and whitish stem. the lead
coloured, black ringed abdomen slender, seven-ringed,
in Méimehen at the end with a bulbous, single-membered
Tongs. The whole kerf fem hairy. — This description
fits the specimens raised by me quite well. I just want the dead, dry specimens

 

ic, mostly

 

   

 

 

 

  
 

  

 

  

 

The species of black sciatica are, like the gall gnats, extraordinarily
widespread in the Pilanzenveich and certainly will be xahlveiche in Zulonft
species of these two delicate snake genera as male or
become strangely known at least in agricultural terms. such as B, one meets the pods of Repsspiitlingen in June
filled with white tiger lilies, which I remember very much
bear much resemblance to those of the pear mosquitoes. You x hiss
I didn't succeed. Furthermore, the Landwirtschafthe know that Mr. Cunowsky in his own
Writing: The cause of the 'dry fillet of potatoes is the internal
sects, Berlin, at Veit 1845, tried to treat potato disease from
A pair of small dipterans: Seiava vitripennis Klug wid Borborus timosus
Meig. to be deduced, which, however, arise here as a consequence and not
occurred as a problem

  

    

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
  

Feelers black-grey, the Schwinger sticks dirty-gray, the
Abdomen dirty brownish-grey, legs even lighter
call dirty yellowish gray. — Found after Schmid-
berger on undeveloped pear blossoms, in
which the female cuts dice eggs out of’ those
Maggots arise, which extend into the nucleus
under work, and the early marriage, long-
become light, shrink in the middle of the skin (lig. and
Cause pears to fall off. They are 1 line,
(nearly 3 mill) long, '% line (L mill) thick, without
Feet, have zelm official rings, and on that
mug-pointed two heads firmly to cinanderstchende
black dots. With the second half of
Complete training is achieved in May. they go
damn out of the fancy pears into the earth,
around here in a beautiful vaulted chamber
au yerwanden. But some remain in
the pear back. The larvae can still be found in June
unchanged. At the beginning of July, Schmidberger saw a wrinkled,
yellow hise, and fluctuated from mid-July to mid-August
for him the time of the first flight of the fully
Men's Insckts. It lasts until the middle of September: With me
came out in July Miickchen. However, until now
Winter a lot of untransformed little lilies in the sick

Little pears and the one on the right also comes from these

figure. The specified length only from the
riming. — Schinidberger distinguishes this from cine
re kind, under the name big pear mosquito,
ra pyri major. sh (S. Schmidbergeri coll.) Tue
Female is after him ctwas tiber 1 line Jang and 4 linic
thick. The male is slimmer and short
of the insect blackish, not so long as the body. head
black. Escutcheon black and shiny. button ash-
gran. Of the same color the Viisse. The soles of the feet and
transducer black. Minnie's hindquarters black, der
of the female brownish, ringed with black. anal tip

   

    

    

 
    

 

  
    

 

 

  

 

 

 

entirely black,—Hanshalt no doubt as in Cecidomyia. Schmidberger raised the insects in July and August
Amount of the above-described shrunken bottled
pears. — I don't think I'd use these tear mei-
chenart among mine and the sick little pears
have moved, you can't be sure at the time of the
Birnbliithe come to the track, because I have to accept
that several of the small species of Sciara and Cecidomyia,
who visit the Birubithen, of the sweet blossoms
salts, and not to lay their brood, on the pear-
adjust business. In 1851 was the devastation that devastated the Birn
miickchen in the company of the Birngall
dished up a little, in Swabia you were sensitive. In the year 1850 I already had selimid-
berger, in the garden of noble pyramid pear trees the more
number of pears seized by the larvae may fall off,
In 1851, however, almost all varieties were domesticated as a result.
senbiinmen lay at the end of May and

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

snowed, and to the sir
At the beginning of June the larger part of the pears, on many
The entire pear yield, on the ground, is right. darts
so these klemen Micken probably cine the most serious plagues
the Buumzichter neuen. —- Sclmidberger notes that
the sickened pears initially a little more tender

 

   

  

 

than the others. Such is in agreement

lends

 

with some other similar phenomena,
however, the faster growth rate is only apparent, because it
is probably understandable that the mickeys prefer with

 

 

her children the first, slow-blowing, but on
thesten attached Blithen provided. The awfully significant loss of Obsiertrag that one
endured in individual years, dirite well reward the effort,
every year the early falling pears together carefully
read, and samint the numerous dariu existing small ones
Rivete maggots, crush them or throw them into the water

 
 

 

 

reaht diess Kinsamimeln only when the pears

 

to let, (

536

have been lying on the ground for a long time, especially
some lights already broken on the side of the bulbs
are, then Liirvehen fall out and stay
wm ground, so that unr still a half, that is, cine
ineffective destruction is possible. Schmidberger mentions in his contributions to fruit tree breeding, Ml. Page 221, under the name 'paradoxical pear wasp' of a small one
wasp, from which he ascribes a way of life similar to that of the Birngall
and 'Travermiickchen, Das 2 Mill. long, on the stalk of the woman's abdomen
with a strange forward-facing hollow morn
animal has broken achiglierige antennae, sharply pointed posterior
Icib, the female a ovipositor; the wings are nerveless. It must
therefore the suspicion arise, that of Schmidberger when egg stinging
of its pears in the still closed pear blossoms, W
chen had only the purpose, his brood according to their kind
turned parasitic wasps into the pear gall and traner mice marriages
put on, and she herself is nothing but a pteromaline species. also brulle,
histoire nature, des hyménoptéres. volume IV, Paris 1846, p. 608, is this one
View and consider the animal to be Inostemma Boscii Westw. E, Erdschnack, Bachmieken, Tipula. three-toed
articulated, stretched-out fitlers, in males and females
chen simple, head lengthened into a short snout. Back shield in the middle with a curved cross. Fligel standing half open. Legs are very long. The Kohischnake, Wiesenschnake, Tipula oleracea L., with granem,
brown striped dorsal shield,
red-burned abdomen, bruim-
common Eliige with. brick redhem
front edge. Except for the
all year round, be-
but especially in September, aut
all meadows; almost every year very much
mean, if you come near her,
so it flies at a short distance
: continue. The female sits. to the
laying here and half floating with spread legs,
Abdomen vertical with the tip in the ground. After Réaumur seems
lay it at a time only 1-2 Kier 2u, These are black as powder
elongated and somewhat curved. The children are in Wies and Giirlen
placed. The resulting wavy. ashen, transversely wrinkled, with

 

  

    

  

 

 

537

with very isolated short bristles, with black receding
bare-headed larvae are found in loose, powdery perineal
earth, in Wiescuboden and that of Krautlinder. They should indeed nar
from Dammerde nourish themselves, but at the same time loosen the small roots
and to dry up, so that it is not uncommon to go through them whole
grass patches that have turned yellow, or meet such rings on the meadows. on
fields, in gardens and herb lands they shall plant the roots of cabbage
destroy species. However, Bouché directly contradicts this information,
by claiming that the larvae of the meadow cranefly are only found at
Fillig on the cabbage roots and especially only on those that previously
already from other fly maggots (Musca Anth. brassicae) have been destroyed
and scien passed into Fiule. Based on the experience that I
the larvae in whole powdery, from Wurzclu cutblister garden soil in quantity
observed, I might agree with Bouché's view. - The doll
is almost completely walvig, uneven, wrinkled, dirty brown, with awei on the head
small horns, some similar ones on the breast, also with one
Crown of thorns on the rear edge of the rings. in the development of tendons
the pupa splits on the back of the front part. An effective vertilguugmittel is not known, the said
according to also without special meaning. In relation to the Tipula cerealis Saut. see 8. 532. Smooth white maggots, thicker than a quill, with black teeth
one finds hinfig in rotten wood of Obstbiumeu. You own him
related comb tendons, whose males have ridged antennae
(Ctenophora). without any detriment,

The black-brown Win-
terschuake, Trichocera hiemalis Deg., with their hair-like feelers,
gray brown streaked Ritekenseshild, pale brown tipped scliwin-
happily and greenish wings, which one all winter
A mild day comes, in the streets of the Soune you dance, and on
whose expression the farmer made all sorts of wildlife prophecies
knipft, like z, B,: If the gnats fiddle in horns, they have to
be silent in March." As useful families belonging to this place,
the medium-sized snipe flies, Lep-
tis, the greater predatory lying, Asilus, the mordi lying, Laphria, the 1
fly straight, Dioctria, and many other doubters who are
everywhere in fields and meadows, in hedgerows and mountains
and hunting for a multitude of larger and smaller flies and others
do kerke,

 

 

 

   

 

  

 

538,

2) sniffles,

Body shape between mosquitoes and flies standing. in general
A. Blackflies, Simulia. Effortless, ziw

short fithler, black eyes, in M

little ones touching, wide in the female
: Cut. Short, vertically protruding tear
sel. Fligel accruing wide, triangular, clearly juridical
right. Abdomen cylindrical. Pretty little chicks. Fine of the craftiest genera of Kerfen; ¢ all parts
len Europe’s, Germany, Switzerland, Sweden and
Lapland described as a plague. They appear with me
the first Frithling, are the whole summer, and at
warm weather in autumn, even in November
present, they usually stop at or near
from streams, ditches, generally in damp places,
so much Lebeus

   

    

 

  

 

 

 

and a dull atnosphere is for s
condition that they be in dry air, 2. B, in the room cin-
locked, after cinigen Stimden 21 basically go while
she thrives on wet moss for a week
hold. Their food consists of flower juices and
Blood of animals, That's why they pursue, but only you
females, bluish 'thicre and men, and deceive
they especially in the forest, on wet blades and water
grilling Hiinfig me at the Oberfeldveiten in the spring
anf that as soon as I approached a moat,
my yorher quiet horse suddenly by creeping gnats
Len was, by the way, one recognizes immediately when
cattle of Kir jet will. are namely
of the latter few, look above all into the ears
of the cattle. Horses in particular are affected
me with my head
have crawled or

   

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

chuaken be

   

 

get upset and shake badly
the cri
you removed them. Tue
was not chewed for a long time and you had all sorts of things
I have ideas about the way you are coached

    

hschuaken hei again
Development of crawling

 

    

 

adventure

a

made. Evst recently has 1 the development of the larvae
observed in the water of pits and books. teh
must even accept that the many summer
itber and at all times on the fists of the cold
Mineral bath cabinets available in Kamnstadt
Creeping creepers developed in mineral water
to have. The larvae are designed ecigenthically. The illustration on the right, made according to the collar, is the one
the S. sericea. The larvae sit with the Auhingselu at the
Hindquarters stuck to stones and water plums. The Ver-
wandlang found in the light case on the sheet
a mushroom instead. Development period without a doubt a short one. In areas where the crawlers live in cloudy
small masses, is to drain all over
liquid shallow water to be careful. Cattle,
which goes on the pasture, one protects quite purposefully
by rubbing in ciner Mischuny repeatedly every three days
of tobacco decoction, fat and Steindl. (Two pounds of tobacco
leaves half soaked in twenty pounds of water,

539

 
 

 

   

 

    

 

   

poured off, then cinged in a bowl to a thickness of honey
steaming and a pound of old grease, finally Y, Loth Steinit
mixed in.) Where they are only present in small quantities
who are, the house thicren with all the advantage dic
known against the "creeping gnats* directed ear
case, "ear cap" put on. (8. by the way below: Gollu-
Batter Mike.) The numerous individual species are as to their
Peculiarities of life still very little known. Even the differentiation of the species is
gender unity and especially because of the
shriveling and discoloration of the little animals after death
still difficult. We therefore want the species according to Meigen
on theirs and about the way of life of individual acquaintances
switch on at the appropriate location. Simulia ornata Meig., 3-5.5 mill. long. black brown,
Dorsal shield haired golden yellow (Mamrchen) or white in front

     

 

  

540

with brown spots (females). Abdomen with graves
side licking. Legs mottled brown and white. appears
to Meigen in Fréhling, especially in the evening, often to gauze
Swimming, also afterwards in summer, and in autumn ant
ivy flowers. Here, too, she comes to the country in April
and May not infrequently. Simulia reptans L., 2 mill. long. Ritekenschild DI
light black, gray in front. abdomen black burned. Legs
brown. rails white. Front feet deep black. Just that
female known. To be sent to Meigen in the spring,
especially in the evening in the wild, where they are stung by their stings
very insulted. According to Linné a great plague Lapp
country. Simulia variegata Hgg., 2 million. long. Rickenschild
black-blue, grav in front, black-brown abdomen. leg
yellow. rails white. Front feet black. Simulia varia Meg., 3.3 million long. Riding shield
b granu, from the third to

 

 

 

  

black, whitish in front. legacy
fifth ring with black back licks. legs whitish
with black soles. Only the woman got it. In
Swabia behind. (May 1851.) These also belong to this species
numerous copies, I say from Mr. Arthur Schott
under the name Kolwnbatzer Micke from the Banuat
received. The Kolumbatscher or htiger Gollubatzer
Miicke, Simulia maculata Meig, females. ' line long. Blind ashy. Feelers and legs black brown init
whitish iridescence. Riding shield with three blackish ones
Longitudinal lines, the middle finer than the lateral lines. Behind-
body with connected black dorsal spots,
which form a wide welt, toothed on both sides. swinger knows. The Gollubatzer Micken are cine Hanpl-
plage dev below the Donan areas, both on the right
as on the left bank ¢ They appear there yom
evsten Kriihjahr annd amount that they often
People and cattle like a drifting cloud of fog

 

 

 

   

 
    

 

oat

envelop, and cover the body several lines thick. Black skin is said to be affected more than white skin. [I also remember something similar about hunting dogs in
to have observed the stinging hook, Culex]. Wine
the creeping gnats appear in large numbers, they fall
the people mainly in the corners of their eyes. The cattle
put them in their ears, the nose-holes, the mant,
the genitals, yes, they even come down to the throat
and the elevator watch, so that the animals éfters formally
have to suffocate. How other mosquitoes and horseflies are
also the creeping tendons, especially when it is warm and at the same time
Thunderstormy and fenchicr air very liist, namely in
Anen and Gebiischen more than in the open field. After all
According to the information, it is the females who sang blood. The males cavort (according to Kollar's »Judgment of the
Reports made by Dr. Medovies to the Serbian government
reports on the creation and destruction of the Gollubatzer
Macken, Simutium reptans Gollubatsense ,* in the session
judge the kaiserl. Academy of Sciences, 2. booklet, math business class. 5) like the mosquitoes
elevated peaks and around bare from the midday sun
beautiful rocks, but without women beneath them
finds. So where and how the pairing is going on is
not yet observed, because Kollar p. 9, ain
cited place, will Verdat after Degeer assume that
the pyramid-like columns of various mosquitoes which one
rise into the air on blustery summer evenings,
are nothing else than Miickenbille, on which the pairs
rank will be accomplished. The partial treatment
tmgen, with regard to the discharge and formation of the brood
make the cricel, I pass. Collar has after cigner
and the experiences of Audrer convincingly demonstrated that
the same neither stand in rock caves where they are going
rather just flee in storms, still out of the wet
soil of the Bueheny 1 dung on the cattle pastures,
npfe, but like you

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

 
 

      

the, yet
even in the morass of

 

542

numerous related species such as creepers in clear
Mountain books, which also exist in the areas concerned
there are numerous, Into this stream must the dreaded woman
chen put down his children, because in them one finds later
the numerous larvae and pupae. From the foregoing it is evident that in the small
light, which up to now about the first states of creeping
ken is widespread, also from a precise edition of the but-
winding time and the number of repetitions of the roast
not yet been mentioned in the same year. In the area of ​​Gollubatz the people take after Dr. me
dovies generally three breaks of the creeping tendons
ken in the year, but according to his observations
the sweating is not strictly related to these three periods
be. However, according to the information, at least two
develop a swarm once a year. Visual damage, every sting of the creeping gnat
according to the reports stands a burning itching and selinell
e small, hard, aching tumor, scarcely 1 ch
eight to ten days. Teh itself can without d
To know Kolnmbatzer Miteke himself, who thinks so, woe
My 1st None 295 pronounces that namely of the genera
Simulia, Ceratopoyon, Culex, only the latter sensitive
ight, because I erium me

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

prick, by no means beiptl
still remembering my Kuebenzeit that I liked the name of the
Micke would have known, who often took me to the forest in the summer
so very sensitive, and whose image as that of a Si-
mulia, together with her peculiar groping gait, me
kept my memory very private. Especially small ones
Children are said to suffer terribly from the bites. With them, as well as with particularly sensitive adults
seneu should be numerous stitches, zmmal close pray, hef-
inflammatory fever, male cramps and convulsions
sometimes even lead to death, bein
Cattle develop from it at least long-term diseases,
Desire, loss of milk, weakness, emaciation

   

   

 

  

 

lack of F

 

343

 

Premature births, according to Dr. Schéubaier in his history
the Kolombatzer Miicke 1795 fell in the Banat in 1783
as a result of being killed by this insect: 52 horses,
131 cattle, 816 sheep, 130 pigs. After other
direct, in 1813 to Baulock in the Palatinat of Arad
200, and in custody 500 Stiteck Hornvich. On the banks of
Mareh died in 1830 several 100 stick horses,
Kithe, pigs suffering from injuries sustained by the
creeper. Serbia is said to have suffered particularly large losses
suffer,

Middle. Micke is already in the Re
numerous enemies. A lot is said to be in the larva

 

the animals
stood by
fish are consumed. Swallows and Wasse:

 

 

 

pmaidens
grab you Micke away. But also the elements should
ilen very much, in that large crowds at her tender
Go body through pouring rain and storms to gimade. Like
now, of course, the effectiveness of the elements is too high
struck, if e.g. B. in the Hoheuheim weekly
sheet 1848, attachment. za no. 50 is said, the mildest pressure,
Rain and wind take their lives, so is nonetheless
less true that they are far more delicate and less life-threatening
are, as e.g. B. the sinews. Against the perfect insect, the Micke, on the field
wanting to draw to devour it appears after de
above explanation of their origin inconsistent, eb:

 

    

 

 

0 wee
but there is little to be said, as against their brood in the books
should be able to do a lot. Kin Deriving and Dry
e.g. would have to, apart from the enormous costs,
take place several times in years; to find a relative poison
i.e. H. a poison that is only for the larvae and not afterwards
the same for the beasts and the fishes that weep from the beeches
would be dangerous, might be difficult, although this Wi
most likely to lead to a suitable middle].
Who does not fall the Kockelkeme (from Menispermiun Coc-
clus) cin, which yes, in small quantities into the river water
throw, the ruin of Fis

 

    

 

 

     

 

u follow the flow znr,

 

Yes a

 

and yet, as far as is known, the water not tir the Hans-
animals, make perishable. You look for the cattle in the
uanalleviate, as said above, against the Creeping clmarks dnrel. a decoction of tobacco shreds mixed with lard
and Steind! protect by having at least all three
‘Days being rubbed with it. Also by igniting
Dung, dry wood and heaps of straw should help themselves
search. The cattle, it is said, run instinctively
the Fener zn to shelter under the developing ranch ”
mi seek, as on the other hand the persecuted herds like each other
should fall into the water. Finally fulfill, says nan, because-
same purpose for travelers to put on pine bridges,
pitch torches etc. Simulia sericea L, 2 mill. long. dorsal shield col-
black, with some golden yellow hairs. White rimmed abdomen
deep black, with three snow-white lateral spots, rails
eat Forefeet deep black. swinger knows. mine
thinks that this species could be related to Simalia reptans
is, there collar and
contain
evish

 

  

 

 

we

   

 

be, which is not probable! Verdat (Mémoire pour servir 4 hist. of the simulation:
in the scientific gazette of the Swiss:
scientific society
Meisner, Year 5. Berne 1823. ), and Fri
Monographia Simularinm Sneciae, Stockholm 1824, which she
know exactly, treat the same as a separate species. she is
Distributed over most of Europe. verdate lat
observed them in Frithling and autumn, also collat,
who found the fully grown larva in February,
takes her metamorphosis in the first spring, and one
double generation per year. The larvae and pupae
hang in thousands from water mushrooms and the stones
on the bottom of the Biche, often clumps of hundreds
‘on a single stone, see p. 5389 above, figure. ,

   
 

  

 

given by
in its

 

   

 

  
 

  

imulia lineata Meig., 3 million, long. burning Ri ild with three
dark lines, of which the middle ones are wider, Schie ch. To
Meigen not selien in April and May in the forest, Only the woman is known. 55

 

Simulia marginata Me Mill, long. Ash grey, Lback visor with
three brambly lines, abdomen with black insular centers, semen
rarely be 2n. Simutia elegans Meig., 1.6 million long. ‘Vietblack, Riekensehild white
edged. abdomen with three silver spots in the sides. legs brown,
Foremost layers white. Just the little one. After Meigen maybe
change of the previous one. Simulia auricoma Meig., 1.5 mill. lye. ‘Deep Black, Riickeusehill
golden yellow hair, white fringes in front. abdomen with two white sciten-
spots, one burned and piebald, my dear. Austria. Simulia latipes Meig., 2 mill. long. ¢ red yellow. front rails w

iefblack, golden yellow-haired,
At tendons and first phalanx
of the hind legs fold-pressed and ancestors than in the other Arteu, Ménn-
chen, Selien. Simulia uigra Mcig., 2 mill. Jang, black, abdomen with granew
Kinsehnitlen. Rarely. B. Hairy midges, Bibio. Pretty fly-shaped, short ones
nine-membered leafed Fithler. In short, something before. stinging rift. Front tibiae at the end of a stiff
spike. Body quite strong, aviator slow
and with drooping legs. The garden hair mite, Bibio hortdanus L. Méim-
little black, covered with white hair. Glassy Pligel
Aim females are head, Riteken-
1, breasts, shields and legs black. Everything else yellow-red or red. lige) bruiuntich. 6-10 million jan April and May. The maggot comes to the in August
Ki, Sic is grown up. -_——, long, round, finely sprinkled,
dirty brown grain. The oval, black-brown head iit
clothed with single long hair. Leth folded across
lays. On each section there is a transverse row ki er, ge-
more crooked, and on each side around the Luftlee rather two smaller ones,
four strong spines on the tail, She is sociable, off too
hundreds, and lives in Giirfen from all kinds of roots,
also sometimes destroys whole mushrooms. In Bouché's garden
has sic cinmal by eating away the tubers a bug with
Ramunkelu completely devastated. She's only grown up in the Mer
of the following year

Nevali

 

O

 

 

 

 

 

Newcisser Spily

    

 

 

 

It then makes itself darch fine
+, the little Fointe. . a

 

546

Slightly noticeable churning of the earth. Mau can do the whole thing
Scoop out maggot communities easily. Vou den Ranun
kelbeeten she stopped Bouché by making the beeten
earth free of maggots in autumn, which was all the more natural
seems, since in any case the earth has to be renewed every year. 3) Short-bodied double-winged flies, true flies, musca,

Due to their body shape very similar to the usual room
or reminiscent of the flesh fly. All here belonging Ga-
ments have prostrate or lowered, tripartite,
blunt filers below. Third antennal segment with a dorsal
bristle. Crack retracted, bent at the root. dorsal
shield with a Quernath. Abdomen with four to six rings. A. Common flies, have fully feathered filer-
bristle, ovoid, bristly hin:
body, and cine cross vein
the tip of the wing. There Ma- 43,
they are cone-shaped, ringed, =
with movable heads and live in different substances. The Housefly. Musca domestica L. Well known
Guest in all human branches, under that
Equator as in Lapland. It is striking that some villages
ten, such as Muggensturm and Malsch in the area of
Karlsruh, are so badly afflicted by flies that their
quantity particularly noticeable to those passing through. the
Houseflies keep in gardens, houses and stills
on, especially in the countryside, near Dung-, before
All horse manure dumps. — Toward the fall, take hers
Number in dwellings and stables too. With the appearance of the
Fréste even more, because then the warm rooms
pull. Some of the house flies always come too
through the winter. — The obtrusiveness of the fly is
literally. She is particularly abusive in the warm
Season both day and night. The sleeping ones
betray themselves to her with the good sense of smell she has,

     
 

 

MAT

through perspiration. Also known is her sweet
courtesy. She tries everything she can with her riddle
can cost, especially sweet fabrics. What is dry
wets them with her ruffle to suck it up. It even feeds on paints of all kinds, and it already is
before by her liquid and sharp, Mébel, mirror,
Geniilde, Gliiser, shotguns etc., yes almost everything vi dirt-cleaning
Unrath the plague of the house fringe, so it will, where it color
can suck in substances, and the various pigments
mix in their excrement, still particularly troublesome. over
Gens she has little pads between her claws, one of them
excrete sticky fluid and what it comes up with
smooth bodies such as glass, metal, etc. can hold
and which also the objects on which it is concerned
drive, soil. Finally, how tiresome the frequent falling
in food, burning candles ete, everyone knows. *
The nature has through a great fertility on the

Reproduction of the housefly more than naught considered
taken, itber takes place all, or most of the year
few mating pairs; this often lasts several hours
Soon, eight days later in the summer, the female lays her eggs
Kier, These will be in heaps, in 4 hours probably 60-70
laid, and such a Ki set repeats itself [at the-
same female?] several times in summer. — The beers will
in the dung, especially of horses, on meat, even
broth, melon slices, rotten bread or grain,
also-to fodie animals, even sometimes in not borrowed
ehalterie spit kii are lied. [That they also in swamps
lay seems very doubtful.] The little kids are
long, almost cylindrical, pointed at one end, they have
a delicate, clastic skin with a shimmering white like a mother-of-pearl. In the sunshine after 12, soust at the latest after 24 hours
the ki becomes awkward, especially at the pointed end
which the maggot will now emerge in 3-4 minutes
is working. At first it is completely transparent and still alive
longer than a few days later. Although without eyes

 

 

 

 

548

/

flee the light. Your growth is a scrupulous
lich rapid; after fourteen days they are
grown, about 9 million long. They are white, cone-shaped. multi-ringed, truncated at the back, wn muzzle have an own
black hook attached to a forked stick. Under this hook are two fleshy homers, whose
each has two small spikes on the sides. The body
stands out of many glittering rings; on the first of the same
sit the two front Lufilécher, which are light brown,
are rounded, with a raised edge, and in front with a
standing, six-part, buttoned lamella. The rear air vents, sitting at the clipped end,
are larger, brown, horn-like, almost circular, somewhat raised,
each with a small, folded-margined Knipfe, in which
_ the opening to Athens lies. The adult maggot
takes off and becomes one after a few hours
'Tomnc, which after another 4-5 hours their dark red
has taken on color and has hardened. After 2—3
Days you can already see the designed in their Junern
pupa, and again after 44 days if the weather
is warm, the fly repels, also due to the inflating of the
head, the barrel cap off. The hatching happens
always by day. Of course there is one in a summer
Series you generations, the dolls of the last ttber-
Wvinfern and plant, in communion with the doverwin-
flying flies continue their kind in the following spring. The fly has many enemies, above all the Hrost
their adversary and destroyed all at the beginning of winter
legions, that's why at the beginning of the winter
frost's room inhabited by numerous flies likes to cross the river
one night open to the following morning
Groups joined flies half frozen by Kéilte
Easier to smack Mahe to death, or rummage out 20 That
the sparrows and swallows them in crowds of cornices
d snatch away the winds of the houses, and others besides
el catch in the open air, I may as known

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

59

 

 

require. The spiders make webs for them. mites should
If you cling to them and become cunning with them, many die
at a peculiar bloating, wind addiction, in whose
Follow them humbly with your legs spread out at one
Window or the wall dead sit sight. Your stomach is strong
tricked. There was a rush of steam coming from him
taken place, which has hit the glass all around the fly. One notices this especially in certain rooms
Wallpaper paint maybe for the fly was poisonous. Middle. Where you don't want to be fooled by flies
eatables, especially sweets, fruit, if possible
to keep away, because of the Vorriithe at the latter one is
Oflers in the countryside as well as near stables
plagued. — For rooms whose windows are only on the right side
walk, and in which one always smells fresh air
hold, recommends Voigt in the Heidelberg Natural History,
Zoology IV, page 199, a post-Entomological Ma-
gazine already to the Rémé fishermen who do this with their nets
used, known means, consisting in that aman in
the door that should remain open, cinseizt a frame,
the one with twine threads lengthwise and crosswise so wide
may be spammed that the Viiden L inches and more vou
stab each other, they should before this imprisonment, equal
sam yor a Spimengeweb, which are in the open air
fall back into the room, and not into the room that

    

   

 

    

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

  

 

finding but cher uoch hinanstli must dice Art

   

of the declaration and the guarantee of the effectiveness of this
By means of the gene

although I'm in a

entrust them to
want,

    

el, however, do not hide

 

 

   

 

 

Two doubts, which to separate here lead too far
would. In the summer, moreover, the rehearsal was immediately
might. — The usual well-known projectiles against
Flies are made with gauze, canvas and the like. covered, the
is so cug that flies cannot crawl through, —- In

many houses one uses dev of course in the main
very disgusting to have and to look at, but at tei

 

550

Application of very effective fly glue sticks that you put on
tables ete. sets up, and from time to time again with
coated with fly glue. — In other houses one asks
large glasses, half-filled with water and some brandy
wine and well covered with a loaf of bread, which at the
Underside is smeared with honey or the like, in the
Has a two finger hole in the middle, the flies in the glass
lures and makes you fall into the water when lying down, — a
however quite effective middle] fir persons who their
Do not write 20 high. — tobacco and other smoke,
which one recommends against flies seems to me when he
not used to any great extent, not much
awakening, and damages Gegemiilten ete. just as much as
the flies themselves. Very common are solutions of bitter
plant substances that affect the sensitive nature of flies
Poisons or have a sedative effect, e.g. B. Quassia Extract. Cooks
the quassia is sufficient, i.e. for a few hours,
bestrent the edge of the plates on which to put the extract,
where somewhere near a window, starts, with sugar,
so one sees the greedy flies, which the bitterness
which does not stop quassia, in fact soon 21 hundreds
dead or stunned in the fluid, as at nnd in the
near the plates, lying around; it was me but iumner riith-
strange that on some days the quassia extract is not so
wanted to look strong, wic an audern, They are also everywhere
dead or dead flies lying around disgusting
to look at, are trampled on and sanitized because
through the floors of the rooms. I would like something similar
tell the various Kligenwassers that one of the
with much satisfaction, but sometimes without noticing
successful. Some use a light poison as a poison
Cobalt light that kills flies easily and without
great danger can be used if careful
goes to work, so that children and domestic animals do not
reach the crafted poison, and the flies not ere
they die, nor fall into food, arsenic to the same

 

 

 

 

Sat

purpose of using it, I don't want to
advise, - In the autumn time one has an excellent center)
in the well-known beautiful fly-
swimming, Agaricus muscarius L., which are associated with hot Mileh
watered and sweetened with Zncker, even in small quantities
work excellently, by the way, since these swimming pools are also suitable for
People are poisonous, also be careful when setting up
make necessary. With all poisons of the kind it may be
at all gnt not to set up in schitzseln, but
clwa to coat a board with dainit and always keep it moist
keep. — Killing the larvae is certainly of great value. Besides, they have a pretty tight life, keep in mind
Ocl and spirit of wine at least ¥, day out, in turpentine
barely ¥ hour. Kiilte is said to be most pernicious to them

The fly, very similar to the house fly, with a black four-streak
according to the shield on the back and a rust-yellow, black-checked abdomen
black root, which by thousands licks the sweat of cattle
which also gets very annoying for us outdoors in the summer, Musca is cor-
vina F,

The carrion fly, Musca cadaverina L. Shiny golden green. ‘button
black, dorsal shield unicoloured, scales brownish. apex cross vein
with an obtuse angle, According to Meigen, is very rare in Germany
but, according to Low, often put their children in the wounds of animals, especially
This is the case in the seefpox at the thrine points and those that have emerged
Larvae cause much pain to the animals. As middle] against it
Diluted arsenic solution, tobacco smoke, mercury ointment, aloe solution
specified. (By the way, be sure to make sure.) . The blue meat or Schmeiss fly. Musca
vomitoria L. Black head, brown-red An- t
Gen. Push button pink. Shovels black. - 1
wings with a sharp angle of the transverse vein,
vig. $.546. Abdomen shiny blue, iridescent, with black spots
cross ties. It's pretty strong in the grisse
changing blowfly, from Frithling to late autumn
in and outside of the houses, around and
feels like the housefly decreases, due to its strong buzzing
men cunning, but above all in pantries, kitchens,
Butcher workshops ete. becomes a real plague. The fly

 

  

  
 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

:
Namely puts Jive Kier on the meat rack, fresh
like dilfere, also to dead animals, e.g. B. the poultry
the head They will soon be in small quantities, soon in
rather large, conspicuous hooves of
several hundreds (geschmneiss) dropped. The kids are
white, 4-5 times as long as thick, somewhat crinkled like a . Cucumber and in the bow with a ling bar, in which
the egg opens, and from which 24 hours pass,
the maggot comes out, This immediately scratches some flesh
off and swallow it. Soon sees the surface of the flesh
looks like a sick. It also soon goes over the fiulniss tiber,
where the fitissisen rubbish of the maggot contributes not a little
like, feeding on the flesh, the maggot grows
very quickly; and is already grown up after eight days. sic
is then white, fleshy, conical, multi-ringed, has
at the spilve end (head) two blunt horns, and below
the same two burned, crooked, horny hooks, with which they
the flesh splits. Between the two hooks is a cin branner,
horn-like, sharp fine spear, vou ¥, dev Linge dev Hakeu
and below the mouth opening. The rear thick part
the maggot is clipped crookedly, you can see at the clipped
two burned, almost round spots, with button-
perforated air lights. The upper part of the section
is radially divided into eleven longer or kiezeve Spiizen
divides, The two front air vents sit on the sides
between the first and second ring, are funnel-shaped,
on the edge as if teased, Since these Réaumur'sche Be-
very similar to the illustration provided next to
OB tion of the great Kasemade tibercinstinnnt, which
until the fly avfauzichen I yprevented by chance
was, I'm assuming for the time being that it was the blowfly mannade,
which one in the summer as, large Kt
generations in brick and similar types of kiise, in ge-
vaults and larders, (See also carrion
lay.) — The adult maggots leave their feeding
stand and crawl quite a distance to_ yourself,

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

  
   

    

nade* in uve}

   

ven

 

 

 

53

where possible in the ground, but also free to pupate,
They convulse into an eager, brown, sprite
doll together. After 5-6 days, under tr ep
crusty shell the fly still knows, but the

Limbs are formed and burst after another 8 days
the same by touching the head, the three anterior rings
anf or away, and crawls out. The first against the
Winter chrysalis come the following spring to like
the wintered flies, for the reproduction of their kind
To take care. Js it follows from what has been said that the spring
and summer are enough to feed many generations of Schmeiss
let fly

Weiss describes the bluebottle (vomitoria) as the
those whose children also suffered from diseased spots
of animals would lay, causing malignant ulcers, so-
so-called worm or animate ulcers develop. Also
Voigt reports after Larrey, surgery milit. T.I.S. 310,
that the maggots of the bluebottle frequently lodge in the
found and
have consumed so completely that dadureh
an immensely longing Heilang was brought about. To shit yourself from the Schneissfly stays
no other means of setting up poisons (see housefly)
or mechanical degree, which is more common, a lot
easier than with the noticeably smaller parlor
Fly. One therefore uses the pile, gauze or fine
drath boxes for keeping the meat. The upper
side is best covered completely, because according to Redi's
note, the flies if they don't get to you soust
can, their kidneys down through the gauze on the flesh
drop. Go to the meat yourself, welehes
hangs in a far too warm smoker's chimney. —
Whether when storing meat that has not been cured for a longer period of time
Covering with ashes is expedient, I'm on my feet

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

   

 

  

that of the French soldiers in Egypt
the suppuration

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

to judge. Fleiseli already attacked by maggots

 

recommend salting it heavily or rubbing it with pepper,
or put in nitrate solution. — The maggots are from
Poultry gladly eaten. The common goldfly, Musca cacsar 1. Shiny golden green
1 with rusty yellow buttons and white cheeks, Alleut-
| half in summer and autumn, but mostly outside
“~~ half the house. She sits down in crowd on thie-
irish and human ejections, on concerned
flesh and carrion. In this sol] probably the. Made live. B. Dic gray flesh fly, Musca (Sarcophaga)
A carnaria L. Longer and taller than that
| bluebottle. bright yellow head,
with feathered, but bare at the top
Fibula bristle, brown-red eyes, black
Palps, strongly bristly, white body. back shield
nt, abdomen wrinkled black. nach

  

 

 

black strict
shiny black

Jm summer and autumn in ind anss
Quantity; often to be found in mating, if one presses dei
abdomen of a female, so numerous small, white ones appear
Maggots appear, because the flesh fly belongs under
the few living insects. oh the
observations of Réaumnr contains only female
extraordinarily large boy in the Kierstock. She puts hers
Boys, like the bluebottle, on meat, according to Fallén
also on horse things, and dies soon after, The Lérv-
little ones feed on meat. They also grow
very quickly, in 8 days they are perfect
achieve greatness. According to Degeer, they are conical, white-
grey, with two black, horn-like hooks on the head, iiber
which sting two fleshy warts. The trimmed anus
has a cavity with warts all around,
which the larva can put together so that the cavity
ment is thereby closed. In this cave you lie
two brown-yellow, oval spots, with elongated air holes,
Behind the pointed head on both sides a small,
toothed air hole. Thus in all parts of the maggot the

 

 

the mice ii

   

 

 

 

 

 

eh a

355

Similar to a fly. She pupates after she dies
Flesh run away, at some angle to a
brown Ténnehen, from which, in summer after about 18-20
Days when the fly slips on. The whole development
duration is therefore only about 4 weeks, so that in a year
about 4 generations can arise, over whose products
one has already made smirking calculations on the fabulous
Has. Measures against the gray squid see blowfly. C. Schnelltliegen, Tachina. A useful
tion, whose numerous species in their general appearance
nnng great resemblance to the common flies, especially
have the shearing and flesh flies. you differentiate
separated from both by a simple feeler bristle, and
from the former by mostly bristly bodies. In
they have something cheeky about them and their fling
is very chubby. One finds these flies hoiulig in
forest and field on flowers, especially cross- and intergrown
stay
the skin of the ranch, also of the after caterpillars, soon preferentially

   

    

 

 

 

own. — They lay on their Kier sehmarozerically

 

eis cine kind caterpillars, soon schr different yerfoigend,
one species usually only one egg, one other usually
putting several kicr on one upe. The larvae which
of the common fly species very much, grow rapidly as a guest
in the belly of the woolly caterpillar (of the host), mostly che
which is always mangled, but not always growing
advanced caterpillar comes to pupate, the crawls
Maggot out, solidified to a smooth tome, and 8-14 days
then the Schnelitliege appears. — The species of these species
tion are very numerous. As a very common example
Might apply to the fast couch, whose head is shown above
is. They are raised very frequently from April to 2am the following autumn
from the caterpillars of the golden aphrodisiac and the large cabbage
left. I would them for the Musca (Tach.) concinnata Meig. hold, their black fillers would turn brown. D. Squirrel Flies, Ocyplera. body somewhat fast-flying,
bent down, three-part, third part longer than the other:
ses musamine-pressed, blunt, at the root with bare dorsal bristles. 556

Rim of mouth with goatee. Wings open. abdomen long, cylindrical
shaped, somewhat lorsty, four-ringed. The cabbage fly, Musca Ocypt.) brassicaria F., hut aseh-

granen Riiekensehild with four black welts, grey-
wings with rust-yellow roots, red-yellow abdomen
S with black root and lace. This swiftly flying. i Lively flies are not uncommon in summer and

Although after Meigen on the Bkithen of Erynginm campestre, also lost in
living quarters, on the windows. According to Degeer, the larvae live in the roots of the goblin bee and des
garden colils, which are driven by it and perish,

F. The flower flies, Anthomyia, have near
the shape of a housefly. Your feelers are more tickled than
the lower face, prostrate, tripartite, the third joint
lingual, squeezed together. blunt, at the root with
feathery, hairy or bare dorsal bristles. forehead with
nc is darker, broader in females, thicker in males
talling narrow welt. Mouth with gag bristles, eyes
little. Abdomen four-ringed, ornicular. Fligel without

 

   

 

 

  

 

 

  

Pointed

The Thunderfly, Museu (Anth.) meteorica L., hat
fust the length of the rod fly, fine-haired bristle,
black dorsum and legs, red, naked eyes,
cirund, ash-gray iridescent abdomen
with black dorsal line. — In summer in quantity
Wailders and, especially when the air is heavy with thunderstorms, people
and animals swarming over their heads. According to Weiss she is
the cause of many eye and ear cutting infections
Vich by penetrating this into Angen and Olven
seeks to suck there zn. Stinging, as Zenker says, can
they don't, braking threads and ear caps are also allowed
fully protect this fly. The Musca CAnth.) conform case. With naked eyes,—legs
dirty yellow with black
soles, — The female of
now hull. head matt
: between the silver

 

 

   

 

leaden

   

silver white

 

granc-framed, brick-red, darkening in death-
the orange-colored welt runs down the eyes. lower face

 

matte white. Antennal root orange-yellow, on the other hand letates VII
limb black with ackier bristles, palps yellow with darker
Top. Five undeniable, black-bristled longitudinal lines across
the back of the chest. abdomen greasy gran yellow or yellow
grey, with a black, blackish dorsal line. swinger
yellowish white. Skimpy water white. Fligel something triib,
without edge spine. Cross vein almost steep, straight. — The Minn
little stretched, dirty yellow-grey, only at the bottom
Chest stabbing into dull silver-grey. eyes between them
leaving only one line, bugs inconspicuous; root
dirty orange. — Abdomen yellow-grey with very distinct
Dorsal line, more bristly. oscillating dirty yellow. Otherwise
Everything like the female. The above description fits the vou quite well
Meigen given hei Anthomyia conformis. I have to
therefore also for these halien, although it is immediately clear that Meigen
of this common fly the little man does not know,
and the female specimen he described ans
Swedes originate mnissie. The fly is already early in the year on the field, probably
before the turnips germinate. Because hardly have the same
unfolds its first little leaves, one already notices them
presence of the maggot. — When incubating, the female lays
several children in a flat bundle (Fig. ), almost always
to the underside of the Runkelblitter. I only found once
the eggs on the upper side. sometimes! you find them
Herechen scattered, d. H. 2 or 3 may pray on this or
that spot on the sheet; usually 5, 6 8, sometimes
also on large leaves in autumn up to 14 in a bundle
chen, Gfiers you are quite regularly in a row
next to each other, but often also in a flat pile,
however parallel to each other. On a big autumn leaf
(1854) I saw fifty-four little eggs in six groups,
These are dazzling white, and on the surface with

 

 

  

 

558

you are dainty, but only under sharp
Magnifying glass visible mesh fabric. 'Certainly
after a few days at the latest they creep
young, small maggots from the eggs; Everyone
at the same end of the Kier bundle. They soon bore into the inside of the leaf
and start by making the grime between
remove leaf epidermis and subcutaneous tissue,
4) sociable or in two participles one or two
finger. This will soon expand to
gang, and inan noticed the tide against
holding the light, which at the periphery of the middle
@: nirten place further guzzling, cushiony, with
/ the fingerable maggots. towards the end
in their time they grow and minimize extraordinarily quickly. If very hot weather occurs, the Ginge hits the sun, so
often dry up the ilter duct parts, turn brown or
yellow. Uceberall scattered in the aisles you can see the
dark granary filth of the larvae. i
The maggot is dirty yellowish white. sex
AED po behind, nan sees the dark grin on her

———= feces shine through,

I found an adult maggot that came out of hers
Going straight through a fissure coming from her
crawled and slid a distance further along the leaf. It appears, therefore, a part where not the greater part of the
Maggots to go out after reaching adulthood, and
to transform, for example on the ground. The others stay

in the excavated part of the leaf, creep and
back and forth quietly, finally becoming idle,
the maggot form, and become the linglichen, itself
soon red-brown colored pupa. (Fig.) From this
Runkelflies emerge after about 14 days. Of course, no exact ones can be found in the foregoing
information about the duration of the various states; indeed
I can say some about the development periods

 
 
 
  
  
   
   
  
 

 

 

   

   

 

559

provide clues. - Some of the flies hibernate
certainly as a ‘barrel doll. The cine brood rattles from them
that soon after the germination of the runkelribben
becomes noticeable. In June (1841) I found pupae and flies. These no doubt at once put on heats again, and
I suspect that not only this second brood in summer
not yet reached perfection, but probable
still a third, depending on the weather, their development
brings more or less far. However, it is this
taking a third, about half a generation, until now mur
guess. At 4. October of the year 1854
I have hardly found any maggots that have emerged. The black fly is naturally present every year. In 1841 it was almost as common in Hohenheim as in
year 1851. But the fact that between the leaves
tern hidden insect does not catch the eye so easily,
has certainly often suffered the damage caused by the maggot
fir a mere leaf disease. The damage done to the turnip by the kerf
Wanks is not always without meaning, because turnips, on
which many leaves are ruffled, grow
stand back. Unfortunately, however, means of extermination must be difficult
to find — By the way, the maggot put a shiny-
black, long-horned Brakonids. The following three types I completely agree with Bouché's
Natural history of garden insects, where also Zenker and
Others have scooped. The onion fly, Musca (Anth.) ceparum Meig. Half
as large as the housefly, solid color, ash gray (females),
or with a black back line (male). wing glass
bright, broadly iridescent with tawny veins. One finds
this fly in several generations throughout the summer
tion. The fly lays its eggs close to the ground
leaves of the onions. The maggot that has crawled out bores itself
through the first sheet, and then climbs between the
Flicker down into the onion to the base where

 

560

she completely destroyed it (so that she soon overcame in viiulniss
goes. They are found solitary and gregarious throughout the summer
in various leek (allin) species. She's conical, glin-
smooth, fleshy, naked, white; dic incisions rough: the
Lufilécher behind the head with a small, yellow, furrowed,
shell-shaped scale. The crooked, changeable
Afterseginent is around the support surface with eight
Surrounded by small spikes of meat. The round, flat, burn-
Each of three long, in a triangle, carry an air hole carrier
stinging air holes; among them are four small ones
Meat tips, Linge 4-6.5 million, goes to Verwandhing
the grub out of the bulb into the earth and will
mu a clliptic reddish-brown wrinkled Ténnchen,
from which the fly emerges in summer in 10-20 days
wraps, The Spiitlings hibernate as a pupa. The onion maggot often ranks among the white Zvi
(Allium cepa) cause great devastation and are destroyed
sometimes the whole harvest. Their extermination is very difficult. Almost all the means suggested up to now, as: scatter ashes
and the like, have remained ineffective up to now. aim
best practice is to sprinkle the beeies with
pounded coals, but only where it wasn't
has been widely applied, so since I've been following the fly
vacant spots to shed their kidneys
lay. It is therefore advisable to leave some areas unsprinkled
leave and sacrifice them rather than the whole rod
at the yerlicren. You can also find them in these places where sic
collect, take out easily with the onion and
wiped out by deep burial. In general it is good
to remove all infected bulbs from the beds in good time
take and remove, otherwise the flies will
wrap and multiply. Such infected onions are recognized
one easily at the yellowing of the outer blotches. The cabbage fly, Musca (Anth.) brassicae Bé, something
smaller than the previous one; « The thorax with
three indefinite black backs, wings clear as glass. sun

Abdomen liuienform with black Riekenkampf' mud
black chin cuts (Méimehen), or plain ashy rough
(Female). Linge 6-7 million Fly all summer
through. The larva is shrewdly similar to the previous one, but
thicker. The indentations are smooth. After segment trimmed:
go over the wearing surface with ten flesh points, where
form the four lower twin peaks. the air hole
triger reddish brown. She lives in a few throughout the summer
Generations underground, in the roots and voices
the cabbage arf. She eats gainge in it and does dadureh. that they pass into fiiulniss. The maggot destroyed: sometimes entire kohifeld doceh is
a fairly effective and practical one up to now
Means of extermination not yet found. The advised
Kin diving d yreplacing plants in oil or ash
long, or pickling the plums with the like,
mostly spoils the plants, and is therefore not 2n
recommend. Avoiding the fresh one doesn't help either
Dingers by not allowing these root-eating maggots
nm deus same worry, also not, as one thinks,
be led to the field with the same. The only
This is a means of reducing this harmful fly
early escape and removal of the maggots
grasped plants, which one immediately at the mat
Lead paint and the withering of the leaves in the souncii light
recognizes,

The lattie fly. Musca (Anth.) lactucarum Bé. Sic is something
smaller than the previous one. black-brown. The lower face and sides
of abdominal incisions gransehiller, When Ménnehen are the hedgehogs
brown, iridescent in broad stripes. The female is entirely monochromatic. dark gran, and has pale wings. Length 5-6 million, it is in July,
The maggot bears a great resemblance to the previous one, except that it is smaller
and glitter, and their color is more yellow. She destroys the
Seeds of lettuce and other lettuce species, so that for their sake in
some years there has been a bad seed harvest. The destruction is
almost inevitable. Zenker still carries the radish fly, Musca (Anth.) radicum

+ on. This has a blackish nodular shield with three black ones
linger, the little Fointe 36

   

 

 

 

 

 

   

  

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

562

Welts, elliptical grans abdomen, black (or grans) abbreviated
Back line and center of the island. Be black. In the female rusty yellow
Forehead welts, everywhere from spring to autumn very common and later
Zenker especially destroyer of radish roots. F. Piophila, fubler procumbent, tripartite, elliptic
(flat third segment with bare bristle at the root. Lower face receding, flat, bristly. Eyes
round, forehead broadly arched, almost gnawed. abdomen edge,
smooth, five-lobed, shorter than the wings. The cheese fly, Musca (Pioph.) casei L. .(putris var. t_ Gmel.) Glossy black, smooth. lower face Filer,

' Front forehead and legs voth yellow. front legs and
cin ring around the hind thighs black. In amount of
the windows of Kiisegevaulten. The larva likes+—— long
will. each is twelve-ringed, from a firm handle, has two
short antennae and two horny pine needles, Behind the
two air ducts protrude from the first neck ring, as well
behind the penultimate ring. The last ring ends in
awei warts, With the curved jaws the maggots hide
Kiise out, they grind and defile him, in this
Business often greatly aided by kissel mites. the summer
More fiber one finds the same in thousands in the kise,
especially the hot varieties, the maggots crawl to
Morph out of the Kise and pup look in
the straw that surrounds the cheese or on the walls. After three to four days, the grub becomes stiff and bt
itself. The fly comes out of the yellow-brown Ténnchen
Appears after 12 to 14 days. We recommend
except the measures, woe the flies mechanically from
Kiise can resonate, like good closure of boxes,
Fassemm, Gavevorsatzfenster u. Like., They also by strong
fragrant herbs to hide the smell of the kiss as much as possible,
what may be of effect with a mild kiss, with a strong one
smelling: but appears problematic. Already existing
Maggots should be soaked in boiling water or brandy [?] or by a solution of salt or nitre
be killed, even in the sun they should close quickly

 

 

  

 

 

Grande go, iter probably assuming that
they are not in the Kéise, but only on its upper part. G, The check flies, Ortalis, have depressed ones
limbed fithler, the third limb elongate, together
drikt. at the root with bare bristles. lower face
convex in the middle, (. Strong bows on the forehead
and door, eyes elongated, abdomen five-ringed, Fla.
gel with brown bands, in life eminently on} and
no west. The cherry fly, Kirscheumade Musca (Loc.) cerasi 1. (Lephvitis cerasi F.), Mouche des bigar-
real. antennae, a and lower face pomeranian
zen yellow, body shiny black, doe shield
with four broad Greek longitudinal welts. Shield- — —~
little light yellow. Fligel white with chestnut broads
Qner bandages, legs foamy yellow with black thighs. Doesn't the stylhmgy of the fly armbands agree with that either
from my illustration of a Fligel provided, speaks further
Strikingly, most of them didn't even know about the yellow sign
chen, so I'm not waiting for a sight, above names
to leave you with Linnaean description as well
a fly than fits on the Meigen''sche, since further Ré-
aumur and Degeer, which Meigen alleges, expressly
highlight the yellow doe sign. Not a little mean
to the confusion regarding the description of the cherry
fly 1) the remark: Linné's that the maggot tn cerasorum
nucleis dwelling, and 2) unfortunate illustrations of the fly
have contributed. Man sche Oken's (no doubt after
Flad_ designed) drawing, tab, 24., which almost as well
well imagine a hippobosca kinute, and incomparable
is worse than that already of Réaumur Il. 'T, 38. £23
given. The cherry fly is, although also soust, so mainly
certainly widespread in the Rhine regions, that's why we find it
also a very precise description of their way of life
John Flad, Decree of the Churptiilzer Academy 1777,

  

   

   

     
   

i

       

   
  

   

 

   
      

    

 

 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

iA

After this, reproduced in Oken Y. p. 800, and after
in one of my own observations, the fly appears in dev
captivity late April, outdoors early May. find it
likes to get together in pairs, if one ¥/, dozen in one
Glass flask locked in helps. Already five to six days
after mating she lays her eggs in the church
s. However, I almost think I have to assume that
she only lays her eggs on the very young Kirsehe and the
Lavve the effort is reserved to get into the cherry marriage
to fresson, the egg will no doubt close to the spot
placed; where the stem sits on the cherry. -Dic fly is supposed to
die soon after laying the baby, however, one can
alive for three to four weeks in inntem sugar water
received come. Meigen lets them out on the distillery in June
nettle and occur in the grass. This statement seems
However, I am suspicious and agree with the above assumption
confirm that Meigen did not have the real cerasi in front of
have. According to Flad, maggots are never found in the forest-
cherries, neither the red nor the black ones, but they are

 

 

in the white

 

sissen cherries, especially in the

 

Sweet cherries (Ligarreaur), in honeycombs the so-called. Herzkir
s. Manehimal, however
in the sour ones, but then only in those with red blood
juice or the sour cherries, and never in the Amarelle. Man
usually finds only one, at most two maggots in the
same cherry. The cherry in which an adult maggot
-stuck is usually soft and soft in the region of the sticl
internally decomposed. Disgusting juice flows when you press it
out. If the maggot has already left the cherry,
also often a small hole through which sic
has come out. The yellowish-white maggot, the deu others
similar to plough-maggots, and where one hardly sees the 12 rings
noticeably, namely does not pupate in the cherry marriage,
but crawls out and falls no doubt in nature
from the tree to the earth, where they still have a few hours,
however not far, creeps around, soon stiff and rigid

che rare, you can find them too

 

you notice ay

 

 

  

a
i.e

 

becoming, together:

 

eht, and to a small oval,
yellow, ringed Téunchen, dus which the fly,
the foremost ringlets of the length also splitting, only in the near
th year breaks out. — Ui the displeasure that us the
Cherry maggot prepared to spare, we have no other choice
Means, than just raising fresh cherries, or dic
later varieties only to be used with branut wine. I The tip flies, Psila, have surrendered, shot,
somewhat distant, tripartite antennae, the third segment of which
Compressed narrowly, with hairy dorsal bristles
the root. Lower face flat, bare. Circular eyes. Naked stim, more searingly, more stretched. fine-haired, not
bristly abdomen. Females with long leg ears. Only one
interesting species so far:

 

The carrot fly, Musea (Psila) rosae F. Slender, glossy
__ black, head and legs yellow, wings white, wings clear as glass. 1 (Borrowed from Bouché.) Fly fiber all summer. larva
rolled, pointed in front. parchment-like, glossy smooth, nude, pale yellow. Anal segment rounded, behind, above with two black, somewhat raised
nen, at the top with a short
Lives in the tendrils, where it eats gullies, especially at the bottom of the
tip of the same. The Mébren gradually die off from this, in that they are
the fine side roots do not live and go last in fiul
eat jiber, then they lose their sweet taste. Call the gardeners
they are iron maggots because of the pink color that the maggot's veins take on. It turns outside of the beet, in the soil, into a light brown cross-
forty Tomichen. The short, rounded head end is truncated to
something outhdhit upstairs. The air hole
small tail tips. Tiny means to reduce them, the prospect
and early removal of the diseased punctured beets that are protruding through
yellow fuzzy flakes and frithes withering noticeable,

 

Top marriages of air thieves. of the larva appear as two

 

 

 

I The gnawed fly, Chlorops, consists of small
ne or very small flies, with downed,
protruding, tripartite feelers, the third limb
plate-shaped with almost bare dorsal bristles below
descending, na! Broad, fine-haired stim. round arrival
gen. Elliptic na cliger back loan, Fligel
queradem in dev center ethered. 566

The frit fly, Musca (Chior) frit. L., Oscinis frit. Case, Blos +. long. ‘Shiny black. white fibl
bristle and vibrator. Slightly brownish wings, dereu
Marginal rib goes to the mouth of the third longitudinal vein. Pale yellow viisse. This little fly lives especially in the
northern Europe, yet speaks. Slimidberger from one
through them also in Oeste: p whether the Enns in the yes
1816 and 1817 caused great devastation, which
one you didn't remember before or after kiu-
nen, Mansche by the way because of possible mix-ups
the also Austrian news about the grain
fly, above p. 528 and follow. According to Linnaeus, the fly lays the eggs in the gersias,
and the brat destroys the grains. According to his statement
the second part of the harvest would be lost to the maggot
can go, yes he speaks of a damage that
amounted to £00,000 ducats. Lev, 8. 67 of the same
if the fly lets its kier to the Achren ey, wants
a few lines below their elimination by execution
and Unterpiligen des Dingers in late autumn or February
carried out, so that you inscktebrood contained therein
be ruined by the harsh weather. *
Such contradictions may in ciuem, according to the author
Insurance, thrice revised opus properly removed
stay. Let's admit that before we go into more detail about that
Insect is known, one also no sensible means in
can bring a suggestion

The Rye Fly, Muscu (Chlor.) lineata F
milionis Gmel., Oseinis lineata Latr.) None Yellow. 8th
black triangle. Escutcheon gliinzeud selwarz, with
white yellow lines, winged veins as in the previous hin-
leave black. Scallops and legs reddish yellow. From the north
to the Central Indian Sea, the maggot is said to be yellow,
with a spiky head, black at the tip, and alive
in the spring in the heart of the rye stalks, just above the
wuzel. As a result, the Sehosses only gain a few

 

 

 

      

   

  

 

     

    

 

 

 

    

 
 

 

.-.SsrS sé‘ a~ewuvwuveY

567

inches high, wither and perish, sometimes
but the root side shoots, which the lost main
replace straw. The Swedish farmer shall fly this,
because of their great devastations, call the "buyer". Hs seems the kerf is also affecting the wheat in England,
at least say Kirby and Spence 1, 8. 185, he is the
M. pumilionis closely related if not actually the same,
and describe its way of life in the wheat according to Mark
wick completely identical to our above in the rye. only will
remarks that instead of succumbing under the attack of Iusekt-
the plant benefits from it by im
1791 the fields initially by the same very
get wispy reputation, but after loss- der
Main culms the root on all sides young sprouts
driven, and these have yielded a richer harvest than
Fields in which the insect had not been active. K. The olive fly, Musca (Dacus) oleae F. Sechief
drooping fithler with three limbs, as long as
the vertical naked lower face, of which the last '
narrow, blunt, compressed, with bare back-
bristle at the root. Broad, somewhat bristly forehead, dorsal
Shield ash grain with three longitudinal lines. crystal clear
Fligel with brown punké at the top. abdomen four-
ring-shaped, naked, red-yellow with black half-bands. When
Made in southern France and Italy the olives
rough. L. The vinegar fly, Musea (Drosophila) funcbris Meig., oline Zsveitel
Musca cellaris L. The small 3 mill. long fleece with fringed eyes,
bristly brick-red head and just such a dorsal shield and legs,
attached wings, which are longer than the body, and lingual six-
ringed black abdomen with yellow bands. From Frithling to
Autumn in cellars and shacks. Is everywhere cin, as soon as_ siisse
liquids or fruit (pears, cherries), or honey. apple mash, wine,
beer have become saner, therefore also in quantity at the tap and bung-
hole from wine, beer, vinegar bottles, from where they come off into the bottles;
even on Dintegesehi their brood consists of white little maven,
which can be found on the objects just mentioned soon after the
tion finds, twelve-ringed with xwei black Mindhikeben and rear

  

 

 

 

 
  
 

   

 

   

 

568

four warts, of which the middle ones are yellow. Yellow after eight days
Piippemarriage. from which the little fly will soon emerge. — Who through her
is deceived, the Fisser immediately has the blade after each use
to stop with a cork. M. The stable flies, Stomoays, have tripartite,
depressed, below stamp feelers with a mostly gé-
feathered dorsal bristles on the third joint. rift long forward
erect, bent at the root, with short tusterns. Sehwin

    

covered with a double flap. ie
ye

The common stable fly, Museu (Stom.) caleitrans
=, . well-known. The common lounger
ly, but due to the half-open posture
r wings and their long kinked ones
d 7 > rivulet, finally by pricking sensitively,

= quite easy to distinguish, hn Sommer
and autumn she finds herself together with the housefly
in the rooms, but also in large quantities in the
breastfeeding and outdoors. The_constant hitting with the
Cock and stomp of the afflicted cattle vich on the
Willow and in the quiet in September has no other
Cause than the harassment by stable flies. The horses,
which shake their heads at crawling gnats, at brake
twitch their hands, the stable flies look for which ones
like to sit down on the cutters and sides, with the
to reach Mal. By the way, they also sting people
very sensitive, in rooms often late in the year, in
especially in the cold winters, even in December and January
(1852-53). Like most bloodsucking Kerfe takes
but they also drink other juices. Tan October 1854
I noticed a bite in my room, which with
Comfort tnd method on the Blithenbischela of
Eupatorium odoratissinum des sweet saties because of their
put a rift in all the little flowers. According to Mr. Heeger in Kollar's harmful Jusekten
the maggot 9 mill, long, the thickness of an Haberkorn,
dirty white, with retractable black tongue and

 
     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

569

 

tiny warts on the posterior. and Jebt iinirend in the
leaves of burdock. Arctium lappa, Mnflattiy, Pusilugo fur-
Jara, deadly nightshade, Atropa belladonna. grown creeps
it hangs out in a fold on the underside of the leaf
by means of some fiids at [?!] or go into the ground. To
14-20 days the fly. As a result of this information, you must
Uncommon frequency of the common Steehflicge in Swabia
notice, because the coltsfoot is very here in the country
widespread, but I did not see any infected leaves on it,
just as little in the also not widespread kletia,
Deadly nightshades can only be found on the Alb and the
Sehwara forest. We don't want to take that, anyway
other growths give the maggot shelter and nourishment,
so we milissen to cine rather great wanderlust
Close the bow tie. Kinrei-
ben init turpentine; Wallouss leaf decoction, tobacco,
Wormwood, Garlic, Aloe, Coloquintes, Ox Gall iit
Boiled oil and vinegar, yes, even grating kin with hemp plants
recommended. leh beguiige inieh, the framed fabrics for
To have started here for the sake of experiments, but would like to
glauben, those given above for the creeping gnats
Mixed fangs may also be used against the stable flies.
to be messy. There is also cine Musca (Stom.) stimulant Meig. ; like the vo-
but with keys as long as the key, only Méigen found them
anf flowers; but it should sting the Vich just as sensitively as they do
mean, also a Musca (Stom.) irritans L., smaller, dark grey,
‘Palp as long as the rift. This is particularly plaguing in northern Enropa
Cattle,

  

    

4) brakes. Cooler pre-stretched, ge at the root

rt, either
threefold or sixfold. Cracks clearly protruding. Schwinger half covered(, dewclaws, i.e. ¢
I wish you

   

he the two

 

 

Little Lips simped at every must. 570

A. Horseflies, Tubanus. Tuon. third foot
erlimb fanfriuelig. Without side eyes. Commonly known
as pests of man and beast from the beginning of June
until autumn. One is still on the highest Tyroler Weideu
followed and plagued by ihuen. You think you're special
likes to be found in the wilds, and one could argue about that
whether they are more frequent and troublesome in deciduous or coniferous forests
be. On cool days they behave calmly and
eat up necessary yegetabil moisture,
e.g. B. the brown sap that comes out of the bark lifts sicker
oak flows. Here you can often see them sitting and sucking. Silvius, related to the Tabanes, I found, except on horses,
in the forest on Spirienblithen. The warmer and more special ever
the dull warmer the days, the more bloodthirsty are the Breu
sen and in the quicker flight they pursue the poor
cattle scented at a distance from them. There are
again preferably the females, which humans and
Animals accrue, although I have already Méunchen dec
large horsefly next to the females on horses,
without wanting to claim, however, that I take them to the latter
saw sucking Also about the brakes
assures Degeer in the evening Téiuze the Maiunchen in the air
to have seen through which the floating Méann-

 

 

 

cheu the females cinladen. The larvae of horseflies are alive
partly in the ground. (See horse fly.) Some maybe
in Waldpfitzen, Here I saw at least one species of horseflies
(2. tropicus) itself, after the act of the water scavengers above the
Closing water back and forth, move around and from time 20
Time like a game beritlien the water level. From the
one-time occurrence of the brakes may well be on simple

2e

 

 

  

 

Generation in Jalve be closed. Against the torment which the gadflies brake on domestic animals
hurry and under which they often almost succumb, dripping with blood, or
like the cattle usually standing in the barn despair
try to save themselves by fleeing, protect the animals
at least largely through the well-known horsefly yarns. i

before

Zeuker can be brushed with camphorél, turpentine,
Laurel oil and rite markings. With all success rub the schii
brake their cattle on the sides with them at harvest time
some stone (Compare Creeping Schnaken p. 539) When riding
one can by a ficherformigen branch the majority of
Brake: hold off the horse. Weidevich* and Wild go
likes to be in the shadows of the forest, where they are less of
be plagued by the Bromse, or get caught up in the bush
or in the Wa The most common types are:

     

ic pawns against:

 

 

 

   

The horsefly, Tabanus bovinus L., because of their
Greatness very important, and
vaguely known. After Degeer is dic
larva of the horsefly of the terrestrial
gnats schr slender, cylindrical,
st the same thickness, but pulls against the head
Ibraam, Tinglich, horn

 

 

   
 
   

pisses. This gin
two small, short ones
zen hook
Imen, color whitish-white and yellowish, with blackish

Cross stripes at the ring joints. om Find a Small, Iituate AAS OLAS Dye
cone-shaped wart, a small, horn-like stalk
with a column, Qprobably an air hole), and a large one! own
increase with the anus, on the sides and white flesh
warts to walk, the larva can become very significant

dent and shorten, in soil of meadows. The doll
inches long, waltzes

 

 

ig, with

   

    

 

hlers and beard tips and two ¢

 

ate

 

 

   

 

 

nig, as thick as the larva, in front and

with a spiked wreath at the back. On the hem of the rear

   

life rings a woman

 

shorter gran hair. black, on the dorsal shield and
of the abdomen by white splints
ge Tabanus albipes FP. June. to horse
the, but quite rare. You are just as big
the fore

drawn

   

     

   

greeshaa

 

The commonest species aveiter large, 15-18 million. long,
are 7. autumnalis L., with a blackish, gray tint

   

 

572

Rickeu shield and yellowish-grey abdomen, with four shoots,
black spots on each ring. Tabanus bromius L. Likewise, but the blackish Hin
body with three rows of yellowish or gray patches, woven
the lateral ones united with the brighter ring rituern. Tabanus fulvus Mig. Through his golden yellow hair
all over the body, and the broad, yellow side spots
Distinguished by the three first rings of the abdomen. July. B. Nonsensical brakes, no less cunning, are:

The rain fly, Tubanus (Haematopoda) pluviali

' L., anit four-ringed, third fibril segment;

El anch without side eyes. Elongated,black;

| gray wings, tribgrau with transparent ones
dots and wavy lines. The meanest kind and dureli
their great number so blissful, or more blissful than the outer ones, because
their sting is also quite painful. bonded

The blind horsefly, Tubanus (Chrysops) coccutiens L.

’ With a fantring-like third fibril segment, and
—three punk eyes on the side, magnificent
fiery net eyes, helper fligelu with
brown, broad transverse tie, and quite a crotch-like one
Shape of the body colored black and yellow. Frequently on
cattle and men, but never in large numbers. Sits down on the horses especially at the Miihue roots. In addition, many, more local or temporary,
but always noticeable through the same way of life
making Arteu. oA

 

 

 

5) Hoverflying. With three-pronged feelers hanging forward, on what
the third circular o¢ ciround and compressed, with
a fine bristle. Finger-pulled rift. Flatter, mostly
very dinner abdomen. It
of all orles. and the strange levitation at one and

  

 

not their usual occurrence

same spot in the air, warn them landed here

 

573

will ufissen, specialu* the way of life ilver maggots, these
are leeches &hulich built, nud cry on them
also through their movements. You can find them everywhere
grow, on which many aphids occur, soon
amidst these, or where they are more sparsely present,
wandering after them and constantly groping for them. » grab an aphid after it with great gluttony
anderu with the tip of the mouth, suck them out, throw them
the bellows away to be on an equal footing with the nearest other
way to fall. You can usually find them in the middle
nate the aphid communities without the leaf
liuse they least feared, The development of the
Maggots are very quick, like the condition of the pupae,
which have the form of a triine last only 8 days. So it becomes understandable that there are several generations in the
years there. At the beginning of June several fly
the young of the old ones flown in the spring. there are many different visuals that work with
more or less constancy on certain, of aphids
desired growths occur. As an example, from the
set of common species. mdge serve the greater, grime,
with white dorsal stripe, from Syrphus pyrastri L., under
the aphids of the Obstbénme,
as among those of the coral
lenbiiumehens, Solanum pseudo-
capsicum — Since the Syrplus
maggots nus in destroying the
Aphids on bees, garden
and field crops very frequently
go hand, yes even after
several writersmm, umn
by applying the same aut
leaf-lentil-covered mushrooms these
can soon get rid of aphids, the Mithe rewards it. to memorize the shape of the leech-shaped maggots. and the frennde, hi how ft

 

 

 

 

 

 

species do

 

 

 

 

 

 

     
 

   

happens to the enemies

ava

au exterminate, the closer knowledge of the species must anf the
actual entomological works are referred to. some
more closely related species in Bouché, p. 159. 6) Bumblebee or bee-like dipterans. A The leg flies, Merodon. error as with
the floating beds, but the third limb is elongated or elliptical. Lower face flat, hairy. hind legs thickened, at the
Pointed at the bottom with a razor. The daffodil leg fly, Merodon nareissi P.
Metallic dark green, with rusty yellow fur, black ones
legs. Hind splints inside with a stool, 13 mill. long. According to Bouché, the grub is 9 million. long, elliptical,
grey-yellow, heavily mottled, brown, rough, with short transverse rows,
thorns curled backwards. On each side of the neck

 

schilds stands a rothbrannes, rear-facing,
air hole. Aftersegmeut rounded, with black, horizontal
he top surface

 

Like Luftlochtriiger, at its strutted
punch the two round, recessed air holes. the larva
turns into ansser the bulb, in the earth, in a
black-brown, otherwise similar to the maggot. —
After your life she lives alone in the onions of the
Types of narcissi from which she eats the heart, wouach her
get into fiéulniss. With the Marseilles or Italian
Tazetten come every year a crowd to Berlin. the
Onions covered with larvae are characterized by
that they don't spawn germs. Unfortunately, one notices the damage done by the larva
Damage a1 spit, a1 must be able to intervene. The saddled flower, Merodon equestris Meig. Red-yellow furry. Rear shield with
__black bandage, black legs. Behind-
appeared inside with a stool, — Nach

 

  

 

| Bonché are grub and way of life this
Sort of like the previous one.> Réanmur found her too

 

in November in daffodil bulbs, one each, also two
Maggots in an onion. He describes them as
shaped, slightly dinner at both ends, wrinkled. The head
has two, side by side, horn-like,
sharp hooks. Over every hook, another fleshy one,
horn forked at the tip. hant microscopically hairy,
shagreen-like. Some maggots turn into the twigs
inside, others outside into a gray nymph. The fly
in May after that. B. The sea lamb flies, Eristalis, related to the previous ones and when
also not physically, but still catches the eye, have than
perfect kerfe in size and shape' very close resemblance to
Bee drones uy) are therefore often called "wild bees" by farmers
called, spread throughout Somnicr itber on Aster- and a lot
other flowers are floating around and when you touch them, they hum like
a bumblebee. They are meaningless. But their maggots live in the
Manure, rubbish, sewage drains, even between the paving slabs,
where impurities have accumulated. They fall through their disgusting
stick gren color and their long tails in the eyes, on the
Dung and the like emerged, they fly in silence from the windows
mu and are often found here, with the grooms under the name
"Stable flies," by the hundreds,

C. botflies or bot ticks, (estrus. Small antennae with three segments, of which the third segment
with bare bristles. Closed, ruffleless mouth. Haari
eng abdomen. Some species have a hummiel, others
with a brake in the outside form very similar
honesty. This resemblance is also reflected in your
lowing sound, which they are sitting, and in the strongu
Hum that sic give in flight. The maggots
rather short, with a rough or prickly surface. Under
the skin or inside of domestic animals. - About the
Effect which the biesflies in general on the
organism of the inhabited animals you are still
not fully agreed. Funke thinks the existence of the
Bidflies as an inherent visual marozer in the higher animals
be an institution of nature, from which the latter does not
could be taken that they are thereby in contradiction

 

 

 

576

i with himself guessed, and in the bends cinen
harmful disadvantage for those afflicted by them
animals have founded. Clark, on the other hand, finds the ocstrus
maggots are harmless, so don't use them in too large a quantity
begin, yes he considers them partly as salutary
their irritation to the gastric membrane, or the secretions
of the ulcers they produce on the hant. Schwab
on the other hand, consider them like the intestinal worms, as pa-
They rage obviously at the expense of the animals who are harboring them
and therefore also live at their disadvantage. He counts one
Anauhl will begin, in which the maggots are indeed sick
symptoms of heat, even gastric perforation
have called. I consider his view to be "the more correct one,
when ciumal ,generally* said about the oestrus species
should be judged. But can Vélle think quite well,
in which a smaller number of oestrus maggots completely
may be undamaged, such as a slight Auzalil
Lice harmless on the heads of unworthy people. Of all philosophical reflections on natural purpose
and drgi., even with some comparisons, e.g. B. the whole
incorrect, with the kichbaum and ivy, (Schwab p. 61),
no use can be made, much more you can
just as easily derive the opposite opinions from it. The only fruitful way is close observation and
comparison of past phenomena in the various
to those oestrus species, like this from Schwab, quite expediently
happened. a) Real oestrus species: Fitigula with a transverse vein at the tip,
Schwinger covered with a double lock. The cattle fly, Oestrus bovis L. Black.
' Riiekenschild furrowed, Hinterteih at the
. JIS Winzel with old people, on the Afier with yellow ones
\ hair. Schr common. Kine plague of
cattle pastures, especially wooded areas
the. The kerf flies from mid-July's through Angust, Clark

 

S17

still found maggots in September, which only hatch
in late autumn cntwiekelu germinate, or what cher anzimeh-
men, in the next Springling would have to appear. one says
when a bies fly with its buzzing to the cattle
allowed, the whole herd often instinctively follows along
erect tail and try to go into the water;
this is what the peasants call the "tuck" of cattle. Vo
On the other hand, however, it is claimed that this is not the case
Biesfly, but only with the big horseflies, Tubanus,
the case. In order to get closer to the facts,
one now of course also learns whether the animals are large
feel pain when the female bot fly touches them
pierces the eggs into the skin, But even that fact is. not yet decided. Yes, while the kin assume
the Thieve are stabbed into the Legerehre in the
Hant, painful in every case where nerves are pierced
stung and eagerly seek the legendary insect
deflect and wipe away the tail, remarks Réaumur,
one often finds the maggots in places from which it is dem
This would have been an easy thing that Iusect with the tail
out. Finally, the question does not seem to arise once
decidedly done, if Kier not just on the skin
or the hair is glued, how you treat the other
turned species and the larva itself has the task of itself
to drill in, From the long yorschiebbaven Legréhre des
Females can be neither in favor of the eim nor the
deduce something from other of these prospects

A single female contains Kier enough, about one
Occupy entire Vichherde with Brut za. By the way it is
especially the young Rindvich who is haunted. The fly usually puts the here on the vich
Ricken, sometimes only 8-4, sometimes 30-40, soon
occurs more and more at the drilling sites of the skin
nascent, finally tan-egg-sized witter ulcer, which
the food for the larvae growing in the same ratio
delivers. This . Later burned, a lot

NGrdiinger, the Small Enemies a7

 

  

 

   

with that

 

 

 

       

 

 

 

st half grown w

 

 

578

thick, with [1 strongly separated rings, i. H. in generalu
from the shape of the Schmeissiliegemnade, Sic is on the
Slightly hollow on the back and arched on the belly, has six
Longitudinal scars, no nipples, but a lot smaller
thorny grain with which, it seems,
the wounds of the bump to discharge the child
ters irritates. Instead of the mouth hooks she has unr

' Two little horny knobs, along with four white
chen Heckern. Except for the two rear large crescent-
some breathing elements are still on the same disc
eight other small ones in a straight line, from which one bis-
because sees air bubbles coming. The maggot lies free inr
fiter of the bump, but usually with the two big buttocks
Breathing toward the opening in the boil. If you press the bulge, what the Vich, which still
stop, seems to do well, one misses the movement:
of the kiter with the maggot, which is always for the public loan
and the expansion of the last 7 million expand, oc
the bump is concerned; it empties easily
nice pus, and often, at the time of maturity, the maggot comes
out with it myself. Fifty days before Verpuppong hal-
almost constantly the posterior part in the skin
Offmmg, and the filter leaking out will be
prevents. Finally they repeatedly stretch out 1-2 rings
and pull them back again until the hole is big enough
and she very close in the morning between 6 a.m. and 8 a.m.
slip and fall to the ground to hit the ground somewhere
reach or between grass or the like. hang on to stay:
24 hours after! t the bump already collapsed mud
closed; she seldom trembles for 3-4 days. You she middleM
approaches, the maggot lives in the Mant for about 9 months. After the kinei cut, the fly wraps from the to the hard. black maggots, bulging like a rope, froze
several, even six weeks, according to another
eight days [2]. The erupting fly is said to explode
the front and rear part of the pupa.

  

 

} 579

The pebble loungers should preferably be fat vich with gee
tense skin, and therefore the Landlente that with
Maggot bumps, because they believed that it was better to eat
deihe, rather buy, also look at some of them
Bumps are not always considered harmful, but on the contrary
in the manner of the fountains as a cincn drain for diseased
sifts. Schwab does not accept this approach
nnd fits as a counter-moment that the Rinderbiesfi
it removes a large selection among the individual beef
pieces of cattle to (reef, rather also on the backs of
put his brood on horses, donkeys, mules, sheep
[possibly only in the achievement of Rindyieh 2]. Cattle-
stiieke, which, while they have Benlen, slaughtered
have to be, of course, have a lighter hand of
lower value. It is recommended that the Bies-
fly from animals, these mil bitian or fetien substances
rubbing. I don't think much of this as Schwab does. There
however almost all insects, nin ilve residential or near
animals, especially their smell.
serve, dirfien egg scrapings of Weidevichs with 'Thran,
Turpentin, SteinG] but don't be tempted to reject. Of course, help to kill the maggots in the ulcers
Kin frictions nothing, Schwab also rejects the Aufschuciden. On the other hand, he describes as the simplest and easiest
drive the expression of the maggots with their fingers and
notices that it will be done better the earlier it is, and
especially in the case of Schlachtvich because of the skin. The bumps then soon close and disappear
dew without a trace. The sheep's fly, the forehead gribler, ocstrus
ovis 1, almost completely nu-hairy, head brown,

| Back grey, hindquarters silver-grained and

  

   

    

 

 

   

 

 

black marbled with molasses, one kue-

on horseflies (Lubanus) very similar, but ant'

the first glimpse through the embankment, dieken,
tearless head marked,

580)

~ The fly should be from Frithling to late autumn. in front-
come. I often found them in Inli and Angus in Wilderness, in
near sheep and goat pastures, on rocks or wooden
cken sitting and zn several times so stupid that I
could easily grasp with fingers. The female-
chen puts his beers on or in the sheep's naslécher. supposedly also of the goats. Schwab believes, by the way, that
The leiztern tiger fly is a cigene species. the
maggots that have arisen from this work themselves on the host
in the nose to the frontal and maxillary sinuses, where
they feed on nasal mucus, one finds
usually only a few grumblers, selicn more than
However, 7 or 8 Schwab found ecinmal 34 vei
different sizes in the same head, the maggots are in
white when young, later more brown, especially on adults
features of the middle and rear rings, in these
brown stripes you can see four dunk in the sides! spots standing in a transverse row. On the lower Scit
in the folds of the rings, a lot of microscopic redness
Kwiirl's crooked spines, Two brown ones on the head
horn-like hooks. Aim butt thick end two brown
kidney-firm plecks (Latdcher), each again
concentric ring divided into awei. How long the maggots
m need their development is not exactly known,
but Schwab does not accept more than five months. Are the
Larvae ready to transform, so they come through again
nose out, fall to the ground and become a doll,
which is only half as long as the grub, After about six
weeks the fly appears. Meigen goes to Réaumur
several generations in the year, because, like letaterer
says maggots of various sizes from April to July in the
Killing of the sheep find, This conclusion, however, does not seem
quite right, because if the perfect insect flies the whole
zen summer over the Tiber, they also come from their children
originating maggots in their development around several mo-
nate pulled apart we

  

 

  

 

   

  

  

 

 

 

 

through a

    

 

 
 

 

 

 

  

den, Freilich would then appear

581

 

but the developmental daners of the made longer than those above
five months assumed by Schwab. It will
ensures that you flocks of sheep when they fly the sheep
muscling to lay their knees at the nasal opening,
become shy and try to hide their heads. The thicra physicians have the error of the old assumption,
that the Schafbiestliege is the cause of the rotational disease of the
Sheep sci, recognized as soon as possible, cause them the
Maggots increased by mechanical irritation and pressure
Nasal mucus discharge, snorting, sneezing, absent
pleasure, strolling, which is why this evil is called oestrus
laurven disease. Schwab helps anf the
beaten sneezing agents, which one deu sheep iu the
blow your nose or squirt cin, Nothing, because they
not reach the comfortable seat of the maggots and these, so
long as a very young linger in the nasal cavity, so small
seem that they do not irritate, and therefore do not affect
make me aware, selected cndlich only himself anyway
stop there for a moment. sulfuric acid fumes, blown in,
says the same, are for those with tender, sensitive and frequent
tuberculous long-lined sheep zn dangerous and
on the other hand, do not easily reach the seat of the maggots. Trepanation and infusion of Mittelu, separated from
dev dangerousness, reach only those in the frontal sinus, not
the maggots sitting in the jaws. The same and
still greater danger can be derived from the falling of the hor-
ner promise, accordingly would little against you
to do maggots

 

   

 

 

      

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

}) Uniehte Oestrusarten: Pligel without apical transverse vein. swinger
uncovered. Gastrus (fly flies according to Schwab). The Horse Mageubies Fly, Oestrus (Gast.) equi F
resembling a bee, in the
but, especially because of the strong
ever singing, ciner
ht kennilich at the gold

to:

  

 

 

Pulling the banch and the vie'
Little Bumblebee. lei

  

 

582

brown fur, the rough-grey band across but the flégel,
and 2 white gray patches at their apex. The fly vou
mid to late, but preferably late July; mass
Schwab, still in August and September on horse pastures,
especially alive in the morning. Mating can soon after
hatching staltfiude The number of males and
According to Schwab, female marriage is about the same. according to him
the woman would immediately afterwards be able to 1
Ks she lays the grazing ones in nice warm weather
Horses on the hair of the front legs, less on Mihne,
shoulders and hind quarters. The discarded ones remain immediately
Glue Kier to the hair. The decorative female sets
hardly a moment and gets up plétalich
again to lay more Kier. A female hosts
4 Fier gene has to fill several horses with maggots
core, the cherries are white, lengthened ciférmig, et-
re wus bent. A blunt, truncated end
one of the lids falls off, the d we Made
to crawl out [i How now these into the entrails of
horse come
men by licking the horses, especially under cinau-
he, the others, let their instinct against it. Man] and through this in Schhind and stomach, od
crawl through the anus hi, special ny niin
h, preferably on the left side, are the
maggots later often in several thousands,

The larvae are flesh-red, have double spiked wreaths
and on the mouth awei Uiikchen. They live in the digestive ca-
nal of the horse, with their mouthhikes, singly or g
sellig, each attached to a pea-sized, self-produced cell
sticking and twisting like leeches, they branch out
file zchu months for development. still growing-
send motion: Hen
last, from the end of May to the end of June, with a dark red colour
with the excrement on the W:
ate to the observation

 

hey, after

   

 

 

 

 

       

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

   

    

   

   

=

 

 

 

 

is not yet matched. The one

 

 

en us

 

or finally

  

 

     

 

   

 

 

 

  

   

 

 

n_ she later dent the rectum and

 

  

bra. This statement

 

in the small

 

a

583

Hohenheim. Meigen, on the other hand, gives July as the ripening time for the maggots
or August on. Arrived at the Waidegrund, freeze
the maggots soon, burrow into the earth, or stay where
this not possible, on open ground Ii y, UN zo one
black tone, from which uae

about five weeks, also later, 'ie al
Kliege ausbricl Only horses that go to the pasture,
harbor such larvae. Ju usually take the horses
no damage by a not too large amount. earlier
one assumed, of course, wrongly, their presence in the
Stomach is even beneficial, In individual cases comes
it occurs that they are the upper part of the intestines and stomach
drill through, there should also be examples in which they
eng left dead (Schwab). When they're stuck in the gullet
remain, difficult swallowing occurs when in the larynx,
laryngitis, cough, respiratory problems
etc. w. As a permanent effective means of their destruction

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

turns next to saltpete! U.N. Ocl, which is deadly to so many insects, doesn't work. Whether diligent grooming and drgl with this as with the audern
Arteu can be successful is only to be decided when
man about the way the fly the
will be better informed. Maybe we would lock up
about the warmest hours of the morning and noon when
the fly lays its eggs, not for the benefit of that

 

  

vou low-filed swallowing lacquered wine

     

burst, win the maggots to the stomach and

eu

 
 

ride. = I don't want it

  

drive, like Thi
ciulenchien. This here about the means Ges:
ides of the horse living species. ate also applies to you

 

 

the other in the Kingew
With the horse mageutlies

The rectum biestlice, estrus (guest.) heamorrhoid
lis F. Maavig, yellow-haired or old man. rit
ckeuschild voru with the Minnchen British yellow furry, with the female
Chen bite and dinner; dark-haired behind, female
almost naked. Hidomum glistening black at the base

 

 
 

» sometimes lives together:

 

    
 

black; face

 

 

584

white-yellow hairs, then black, golden yellow hairs at the tip. a With the yorigen to pasture horses. to Schwab
= less frequent than the previous one, in 1852
| to Kteinhohenheim skinnier than she. fly main

 

stichJich spitier, cinzelne at the end of July. Allegedly
less numerous than the previous one, dark blackish brown,
almost black, somewhat flat, at the pointed end long fine
stalked. Clark believes that sic to the lips, Numann that
they are glued to the hair, only harder to find
be. Maggots mostly in the stomach, also on the soft palate
and in the duodenum, red in color, double spiny
kviinzen, only half the size of the previous one, and flatter, Sic
linger, un reaching maturity, several days in the anus
of the horse, At first they are still red, then gritty, Mit
of this color they fall and dig into the ground,

The duodenal botfly, Oestrus (Gast.) Salutaris Clark. (Duodenal Schwab.). 12-13 million Linge. at 24 million wing tension,
so cin little bigger than the rectum bies fly. face golden brown
haired. Ritekenseshild densely shiny golden brown furry. underbust black,
sides white-yellow hairy. Miuuehen's abdomen dark brown without
Fleeken, white-yellow hairy at the root, then fine black hairy, finally
thick shiny golden hair. Body of the female black, on the
Wartula as in Miunemarriage, but with whitish-yellow hairs on sides, as
also the rest of the abdomen, wings black-brown at the base. Intended to
not sing. beer as in the gastric fly; but not on one
blunt end, and apparently opening through a fissure, prob-
probably also glued to the hair. Larvae selenium, in the duodenum
in a hemp on the gatekeeper, rarely in the stomach, from the shape of the ma-
genbeast, but smaller, with cinfachom spiny keaux, pale yellow, uur
ide marnehnal red,

The nose fly, Gastrus nasalis L. The 14-15 million long,
conical elongated maggots with double, triple on the abdomen,
Smile wreaths are blood-red and are also found in the stomach of the
horses, and my hands also of mules, sels, deer, goats,
together with those of the stomach and rectum flies, but only in
yelow number. Fly with red-yellow haired back shield, black
Abdomen, white-grey from the root. rosy yellow hairs behind. wings strong
smoky, uugelect,

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

  

 

at the

 

   

 

585

7) bug flies,

ie. bug-like flat, leather-hard second-lilies, (Kine Art oline Fligel.) Hippobosca. The Prerdel Fly. Mippobosca equina L. Dinner short snout
bel. Cumulatively visible bristly filers, shiny brown
yellow licked Ritekeusehild. double-pronged claws-
panre to the strong, strikingly bewildered,
rust-yellow, black ringed horns. Leathery
blunt veined wings. Minterlobe blunts, short, '
hairy, grey-brownish, They are found in summer, but especially gezen
the autumn, very hilly in some areas, au horses, cattle,
even sometimes on dogs. The fly is lebhatt mud crawly, so that
she worried about the animals, especially the dogs, and horses
Oehsen it especially helps itself to the less hairy soft parts
awi look up at the clubs and under the tail, because of their chastisement
keit, @lilte and holding on to the hair you can do it with your hand
don't crush it and catch me with me, chased away she follows
short flight back from Thier. You don't want your sting to be more sensitive
than that of a flea. The propagation of the
horse lounger. The larva already bills itself in the thickly distended
dies completely from the mother insect and is finally formed as a pupa in
Form of a first white, then brown, finally like polished. black
Korn laid by the mother. From this strangely large hard
After four weeks, the young louse flies emerge from the grain. it seems
that the louse-fly mainly occurs in areas where grazing takes place,
is very hempy and Histig, and here there is nothing left but to
Cooler time of day at the united herd which to groups under the
Black flies about through, laying a class marriage with syrup
or some similar sticky substance and with sharp edges
To catch corn musanines, For fly yarns they may, since si
wchr sehlupfon and slide as brakes ete., worry less, Ki
frictions, which are also recommended, w
lie alone because of pregenuine wendeu, (See, by the way, remse §, 571.) The sheep tick, Hippobosea orina [. (Melo-
phagus ovinus M
and wingless, abdomen stumpti
like the previous one. V
cat. Kin Playegeist de
stigt, pull at the wool and spoil the pile, tae
ders at certain Ragen liv
wool hermn. Often one finds
anf hanging from each other. rarely the louse

  

    

 

  

 

i. claws curved,
story of change still un-

 

 

 
   

They crawl up and xwiseben the
in the paaving like two crits

    

 

586

Here, too, rubbings of turpentine, tobacco decoction,
We recommend cleaning mud like this, washing your scalp in water
It is said that washing with Lange, soap or salve is not enough
water, if necessary shear off the wool. at least in warmer years
rest time In no case, however, does the insect seem important to me
with collar of arsenic biders of sheep speak 2 kivnen. vi maiden order. useful,

 

hu few sebiidliel. The Jungtorn in the further Sime or Netziligler,
roptera, are generally more useful than harmful. They therefore play subordinately as economic players
role and we have only to describe it in rough outlines,
Unfortunately, these outlines meet those on the net
tigers that upset us the most, not particularly scared
fillig am. The Netziliigler stand in several relation
closest to straight lizards. Whe body is in the
rule elongated. With the mermaids are the eyes
exceptionally large, shimmering, with the fir wns important ones
small species not unintuitively developed. The Fithler at
nig,

otherwise long and very articulated, — anterior and posterior

   

    

 

 

 

 

 

the water maidens schr kniz, few-limbed, bristle-tir

 

wing in Grésse and Ban incist t agree , big:
and broad, with usually dsserst zuhleuhen, in the
Hundreds of walking cells, cntrusting through di
Ling ribs and qne veins. (Dragonflies and Kintag
in several of the generations described below
they're already numerous, and the wooden lens has mmr
yole-poor, about awiltzellige forewings, or are they whole
tliigellc The back loan of the Netztliigler i
and anyhow kingr than head and rump zn! In the metamorphosis they behave according to Gatiungen

 

numerous
(lie) with

 
 

 

 

     

     
 

; me! {very long

 

 

yim, —

 

ve

   

separated: the lacewing, whose larva from the fully
den appears, pupates in one
self-made web to an unnecessary, chiseled doll:
the camel-necked fly, on the other hand, shows a very lively
mobile, flailing doll, but despite it
great resemblance to the larva
take with the wooden lens, on the other hand, have an imperfect one
Metamorphosis — The food of the nettle lily is pre-
namely an animal one. The water-
virgins are the true predatory birds among insects,
which the latter catch in flight—The imperfect ones
States live huuuuuugly in water, consume small water
animals, some even small fishes, like Westwood
indicates, but serve their secits grizzern fish sur food. Solehes especially in perfect condition. That
the fish jumping out of the water in the evening
no other purpose than snatching one but that
Water floating kintagsiliege. Hence the shape
of artificial English eyes Kintagsiliegen and dre]. dav-
poses, even the freshness are great consumers of network
flaglern (mermaids), wid hop after them from the
Water, Whom the cry of freshness in a little
‘I’m bothersome, come get rid of them. He doesn't
brightly colored cloth lips hanging on a hook, uahe over

 

 

a Tusekt very verse

 

  

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

   

to the water, and will take one frog after another
jump out after the

 

nilden Bnten Jnngfer snap
pen and see yourself caught on a fishing rod (little rural sport). With the very small number of those approaching us

 

Genera and Species is a survey of the genera throughout
iberiliissig. Really harmful or apparently harmful being alone

   

 

the genus of

A, wood lice, psocus. Excellent by very
large head, with eight to ten-membered feelers, of which
the first limb kneads my soles,
and with or without wings. Thisc, where they yorhauden, very

 

 

Kk, two to threegli

 

 

588

 

unequal in size, with about 13° cells in front
theligel. The bicher louse, Psocus pulsatorius L.
sometimes called the death clock. Known to anyone as barely
more than 1 million Janges, you are tender, unwinged, in
in shape reminiscent of a Lans vou paler
Color, red mouth, slightly excellent, black
or brown eyes, with or without strong thighs
hind legs. One finds it individually between paper, in
Books, following the glue and paste, in cracks vou
Very rich and similar, but primarily in herbaria and in-
sect collections. In the first it gnaws particularly
fine parts of flowers, ranunculus, papaver, cistus,
Hibiscus, Hypericum, willows, even on lichgs
the insects it is the softer parts that prefer

 

 

Also

 

wisely destroyed and turned to dust. — The increase
des Thiercheus does not, it seems to me, proceed very rapidly
itself. The more frequent use also protects against it
of objects and crushing the small ones, in spite of her
jerky, almost tapping gait, but slowly dissipating
the little animals. Moreover, they avoid the light and

 

fresh air, and leave boxes ete. who one who
even for just an hour. his uatiir-
common enemy is the paper serpent, 8. 19,

The howling louse, Psocus domesticus Burm, is a small animal
black with red head, light legs wid Fih-
learn and live in abundance in magazines, especially in
li. It's completely harmless just by being
yon Absehabselu, dry hay flowers ete. fed. In 1846 or 1847 cs appeared in some barns on the Gebiilk in
such a quantity that there are many laudwirthen who appreciate his way of life
did not chew, even with authorities aroused great Besgrguisse, from di
sem grou I recorded it here,

Bb, termi
related but four-jointed soles, and the F

   

 
  

 

, white ants, Termes. all four the same size. only at the front edge with two to three folds
horny veins and otherwise in uur cells recognizable by their curvature
divided, living in colonies like ants, dencus siv overlaid in

 

 

589

very close to the body shape, but with very pale colour, the
‘Yermites have different sexes, There are winged ones among them
Mimmchen and nugelelt much larger females and two kinds of gees
bad-free individuals who always remain iliiglos and of which the kin
Except for their significant size, completely resemble the larvae, the others
have very large heads and are called 'soldiers', they are for
Protection of the defenseless working sexless and the male and
female individuals present, The termite teachings knew very little. The yellow-footed termite, Termes flavipes coll. only 4-5 million,
long, like a yellow ant, glistening, with a brown mouth. Acusserst
fink and fugitive. According to Kollar, coming from Brazil, but from there
come to Schéubrunn, where they are
in the tanner's tan and in the wood of the flower pots mottled white
and last, not visible from the inside and from the outside, shredded and zee
disturbing, moving the palanzes into new buckets, moving the inhabited
blaze and in the most extreme case leave the empty and unheated
'men Hanses witen sure means against the kerf. Also Termes lucifugun Latr. and flavicolle F, are replaced by collar
listed as nuclei, which damage the olive trees in southern Enropa
are supposed to do, I almost suspect that the order will only change itself
brush over the broken interior of the trees. In this case she would have
Not more appealing than walking through the soft, arid mass of wood
in the Ttnern in their whole habitus the Oliver
head hola willows. men so borrowed

 

G. The aphid lions or lacewings, Hemerobius, Near
same as the spinster pictured on p. 59; i.e. h, delicate, dainty animal
of about 30 million wing spanning, gleaming metal rings,
mostly grin or reddish in colour, but above all marked by
the tufted, extremely beautiful wings. There are many types of Bs you
Distinguish between lacewings. They look for it in crowds over the winter
Mansern protection, From May and the summer often on Binmen,

Shrubs and other mushrooms where they grow
A fidehen confirms a white oval. Kereiermarriage <..
settle individually or in groups

from this, depending on the individual arias, nymphs of 3 :

very different shape (Fig. ), distinguished by two large suction tongs. pupate in a small spinning barrel. The nymphs are
by their boldness and the pine with which they sniff up leaflets
suck to rank among the quite useful 'animal marriages. The scorpion fly, Panorpa communis 1. the previous
turns, but at first sight differentiated by beak-shaped
Maul, fewer cell-rich spotted wings and the little minnie durel eiucu
scorpion-like tail that it threatens to twirl about. Mau finds.them

   

 

 

     

   

 

 

 

590

first days of May also the whole
Zen summer in garden, fields
mad wilds. She is a tiiu-
feeding insect. than you often do
Plant sap sucking finds and
—— it is therefore understood that they are harmful to 2
hold, 2. B. on the young Welschkorn-
but she sang very hempy, but without any noticeable disadvantage. livestock
herds her as a zealous pursuer of bucks, especially the soft-hinged ones
Ranpen, to the decidedly useful insects,

Because of its lesser frequency, it is worth mentioning that of the previous ones
generally similar, but distinguished by a long neck
Camel neck fly, Raphidia. Their larva is inch long, brown, slightly
piebald, of the general form of a stretched vogellans with broad
(em delicious, furnished head. It is not uncommon to find them in the
The bark weeders ate in fruit trees. villa Single wing regulations. ‘Partly harmful. partly cunning. parasite, the
yer is ge-

The non-wingers, apples, include the se
Springtail and Bristletail. Your Ke
articulated, but trunk and abdomen often not clearly
divorced They are part chewers, part singers. Always
without wings. 1) parasites on humans and animals. a) With complete metamorphosis and the perfect
Provided Kerf with singing tools. The Fleas, Pulex,
which we have not only described 2. The common Ploh, Pulec irritans L. Admittedly everywhere
well known, but in the worms
\ parts of Enropa far more cunning than in the colder ones. 591

 

Not just a plague for people, but also for others
‘Animals like dogs, cats. Yes even on Méusen and Tanben
it should be hump, but slightly smaller on this one. - The
The way of life of the flea is very precisely described by Résel
been. Right after the Paaroug he watched the egg-
lay. This happened, according to him, on the part of the woman
chens in churches, unclean rooms or in bastards,
either so that the Kier on. to be laid haphazardly
or the woman accommodates them in Ritzeu. True-
but it seems to me that Kier is between the hairs
laid by the dogs, from which they dragged them to the Brntérter
will. But I read that generally the eggs with cinem
glue should be attached [?] — From a female
saw Résel be laid up to 20 fier, These are very small,
elongated, white. They need about 6 days in summer
to slip off, in winter, even in warm lemonade
wow] 12 days. The resulting, almost completely white
Larvae are elongate, with a head on top of it

Side a few blunt little hornets stand, as well

the mouth is a little shorter on both sides. The body is stretched, has 13 seats, small 4
Legs, on the last paragraph two standing under each other, something
curved, yellowish tips on the aftercut. she crawls
quite quickly from the spot wid krinumt like to see worm-
and snail shaped. — The larvae live on all sorts of
rish rubbish, rubbish etc. Résel raised her with
moistened blood mass. After 11 days they were
grow, gave filth vou themselves, and turned into
white fleas with 6 legs, which vary according to their
he or small
— The dolls became darker over time, and finally. after 11 days the pleas came to
The entire transformation from egg to flea
So lasted 28 days or 4 weeks in summer, in winter
6 weeks. —8 days after laying the eggs, the female
dying even when fed.

 

 

  

 

 

 

' were

  

future gender gi

 

is
means in the summer

 

 

suggestion

 

 

392

tm Angust and September are the flee. how easy
explainable, most often, soon after they disappear in
the main thing, but there are a few throughout the winter

To reduce the discussed cunning vermin
fers is used to keep the room floors clean and dry
Angle u, drgl., Especially where contamination by small
children or dogs had taken place. Sure is too
the recommended pouring over and sweeping of the same with hot water
water useful. It is also recommended that this
water some mercury salt or common salt, vitriol, sal ammoniac
u, drgl. to miss. Stinking chamomile, savory (Sa-
twreja hortensis) shall drive away the flea [2], he shall also vicht
come in moss mattresses. Animals are rubbed with snuff,
Wash with wormwood, laurel and rosin decoction
advised. It is not specified whether they have a powerful effect. Tree-
@l,-which is supposed to have the same effect, I don't have w
sam enough found, supplication that I smeared all over
didn't perish. On the other hand, it may be enough to
to stun and approach a flea that has strayed into the ear
Float, Supposed to be chasing a single flob
be used, a flannel cloth is used to advantage
on which he entangles himself with his prickly legs
or forced into a bowl of water
jump. The Jägerpractica is multiplex. The dog flea, Pulex canis Curt., is considered a separate species
give. I don't know his relationship to the common flob
canoe. I also regrettably miss the one that deals with the pulices
chapter in Walekeniir, but it seems that the common mul
the dog flea replace each other in their functions. Other species on cats: P. felis Ré., on trees: P. columbac
Steph., on Hithnern: P, gallinae Schrk. hb) Without transformation. the liuse,

They break down into
a) kanende, or Vogel- and Thicrliuse, with pincers

593

for gnawing feathers or hair, not for singing. One differentiates
«) those with filamentous feelers, olme lower jaw feelers, with nominal
ringed abdomen. aa) One of them with. five-membered feeler, two-clawed
Feet, living on birds: feather lice (Philopterus). £8) The others with tripartite antennae, legs clawed with cinnamon;
females with setten flaps on the penultimate abdominal ring; start
Animal animals: hair lice (Trichodeetes). A) Fiibler club-shaped, four-membered; proper lower jaw feelers,
body decagonal; while with lip feelers, two-clan Fissen
and Hafilip marriages; on Voge: Hattfiisse (Liotheum)

7) Crippling feelers with a single bristle. abdomen beef. That

whole insect in the form of a small bug; to bees: Braula. We want to content ourselves here with just briefly
ten to make known, woe to the handlers more or
fall less cunningly:
On the chicken:

1) the big chicken feather: Philopterus hologaster Burm. 2) the light brown chick Philopterus dissimilis Nitesch. 3) the variable humpback: Philopterus variabilis Nitzseh. 4) the shy feather louse: Philopterus heterographus Nitssch. 5) the pale Hafifuss (Hiilmerlaus): Liotheum pallidum Nitzseh. (gal-
Tinae P=.) On the guinea fowl:
the guinea fowl featherlings: Philopterus numidae Denny and numidianus
Denny,
the straw yellow Hafifuss: Liotheum stramineum Nitzsch. On the peacock:

the sickle-eared pancake: Philopterus falcicornis Nitzseh. and the rectangular peacock feather: Philopterus reetangulatus Burm. On the Italian rooster:
the big turkey feather: Philopterus stylifer Nitzsch. ,
the four-spotted powder feather: Philopterus polytrapesius Nitzseh. the straw-colored Haftfnss: Liotheum stramineum Nitzsch. Anf of the dove:

the sociable pine feather: Philopterus compar Burm. ,

the tanbenstabfeather: Philopterus baculus Nitzseh. (columbac Ps.) on the goose;

the old Giinsefederling: Philopterus jejunus Nitzsch. (anseris I),

the white giinse feather: Philopterus anseris Gurlt.,

the large joint foot: Liotheum conspureatum Nitzseh. Nérdlinger, the little enemies, 38,

s

 

 

594 . Beginning of duck:
the burnt duck feather: Philopterus ieterodes Ni 5
the dirty duckling: Philopterus squalidus Nitzsch. On the horse:
the horse hairling: Trichodectes equi Steph. On the ox and donkey:
the buffalo bite: Trichodectes scalaris Nitsseh. (bovis T-)

On the Sehaf:
the Schathaarling: Trichodectes sphacrocephalus Nitzsch: (Ped. Ovis 1.) On the goat:
the goat hair ling: Trichodéctes caprae Gurlt. (climax Nitzseh.?) On the dog:
the dog biting ling: Trichodectes latus Nitzseh. (Ricinus canis Deg.) On the cat:
the cat biting: Trichodectes subrostratus Nitzseh. On the bee:
the burnt bee louse: Braula cocca Nitzseh. head against chest
bent; 1 mill, long and as wide. Especially important at the bidding
nenkénigin, on which Herr Stern counted 14. But also at Ar-
bees and usually not individually, but several on the same bee. It is very reminiscent of a small bug or even more of the milun-
lichen Bostrichus dispar, Figure' S, 180. At their noticeable size
you can easily see them on the bees going out and in. Mery Canon Stern 20 St. Florian assures that it is winter
chiefly the bees afflicted with these lenses, which 71
Basically go and fall on the flying board and you therefore on the
Removal of the Lituse I've taken care to take something like this through once
Changing and cleaning the flight board in spring, and by im
Summer the brown Lise with the beard of a feather from the bees
cross out, says Herr Stern, he has 94 in this procedure
Piece killed in less than two hours. b) Sucking or actual liius, with sucking ri sel,
pediculus, on humans and siiugethicren , especially bad
nourished and unclean,

On humans:

the head lans: Pediculus capitis Deg. On unclean indi-
viduen, especially children. More female examples than
males, the former more than 50 eggs (nits) in 6-7 days
to put fithig, which iffuen in a lid and the
give birth to young that in Kingstens three weeks away-
are eligible for planning, so that in two months thousands of ex

 

 

 

   

to be able to stand;

595

the Klelderlans: Pediculus vestimenti Nitzselt., mainly in the Sla-
Vis-a-vis nationals, collars seem to regard them as the same 2u who:
is listed below as Auszelwangslans:
the pubic louse: Prdiculus pubis L.
the consumption louse: Pediculus tabescentium Alt. as a symptom of illness. On horse and donkey:
the horse and donkey Lans: Pediculus asini Steph. the cattle louse: Pediculus curyster from Nitzsch. and Pediculus tcuuirosteis
Buria. On the beef:
the cattle louse: Pediculus eurysternus Nitzseh. On the cold
the Kilberlaus: Pediculus vituli: Steph. On the Sehwein:
the Sehweinclaus: Pediculus suis L.
Anf of the goat:
the goat laurel
on the thin
the dog louse: Pediculus piliferus Burm. (P. canis fail. mill.) On the rabbit marriage:
the Kauinchenlans: Pediculus renteicosus Denny. \

 

 
  

Pediculus steuopsis Burm. Among the remedies against liiuse of all kinds, so far as these
the same do not appear as actual symptoms of illness,
tion and cleanliness, especially anch
freedom of silence ete. at the top. Where they once over-
have taken hand, frequent combing appears or
Bursting, especially with soapy water or salt water
suitable. Also turpentine, laurel oil, anise oil, Spik6l, Ta-
baks6l and the like are recommended; however, i
Caution must be exercised in their application. After collar
witre against the head lice powder of sabadilla seeds the un-
most effective means. You sprinkle it in cine,
so that the powder doesn't bite hard on the head, sanguine
nightmite greased with fat and puts sohe
after freshened powder several nights in a row
on. The most effective remedy against all Liiuse is Lituse
ointment, Mereurial ointment, but only on medical prescription
tion can be used safely, like it at all
with all larger ones that cannot be removed by cleanliness a

 

 

view: belonging Erni

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

   

     

 

 

596

rude to take the assistance of the doctor
men is. :

2) non-parasitic: jumping and bristle worms. Made up of distinct annuli, but without distinct ones
‘Separation of the breast and abdomen are the related
lungless, provided with chewing tools:

a) Spring tallow, Podura. They affect the farmer very much
They are small, usually metallic, mostly lead-grey shiny,
with little sprang fiids sitting at the end of the abdomen like earthen fleas
hopping beasts with chewing implements, as they do on the
Fi come, its finite form is reached. You can find them all
Year round in abundance under bark scales, stones, in the grass, in the shade
ten, anf and in moist soil, but also not infrequently on flowers
men, Recently, cit Herr Pastor Bonnat wants to be observed at Uzts
have the Springwine (in company of Cryptophagus) by
their numerous bites on young wood, leaf and grape stalks and
Heeren who are supposed to prepare grape disease, Except for the information
au check, I abstain from judgement, but I can believe
that the role played by the buckthorn in 'grape disease' is not one
accidental and highly subordinate. Podura plunbea L. is bluish tanned with pale head and legs,
Kine the commonest on fenchten Orlen nud also between old windows
frames and the like, The Podura nivalis L., schiralich gran with
symbolic black drawing on the back, may be called
ten "Schnecliuse", i.e. the little Springschwiin toes belong to the
often in small numbers on the
crawling or hopping, Podura alba L. is the small white
Podura species not capable of hopping, which can be used especially in spring
other podures in quantity at first and in the soil damp flower-
tpfe, even noticed in the rooms. Their diet probably consists of mold, i. H. rotting vegetable
substances. But Low speaks of their detrimental effect on young plants. Since I cannot determine where he received this message from,
I have to leave in doubt whether there is not a confusion here with earth
fldhen took place

b) the bristle tails, Lepisma, are without metamorphosis, and
have caning mouth tools. They touch us in a tiny way. This forms

the sugar guest, Lepisma sacckarina L, alive in schr

 

 

 

  

  
 

     

 

 

   

 

597

animal, which is hinfig under the
Pots in pantries, under
furniture, in cracks and crevices” _
also found on privies, addiction —~—
if you catch it, it breaks
it usually the fillers and loses its silver coating from which it
not inappropriately named Piscean Marriages. It's main
Active at night, should vexations, pastries, according to Gervais also killed
Insects eat, yes Liw and Zenker themselves wool, linen, paper
tackle pier and leatherwork. Cleanliness, frequent sweeping, smearing of cracks and joints,
in case of emergency, edible substances help against this delicate little animal.
know very easily. — Liw's is occasionally unimportant
harmful Lepisma polypoda L.

 

Others not included in this family
kerfe are;
the nursemaids $8, 422,
the house bug S, 469;
the sheep louse S, 585;
the Bitcherlaus p. 588, and
the female and sexless termites p. 588. _

 

Errata and Adjuncts. Page 53 Line 2 from the top tics: sulphurous, instead of sulphuric,

1» 61, 9¥, 0. is protected from Laufkiifer mi: A. (A. Lautkifer). «61, 7 From below lios: fire stealer, instead of fire stealer. , 83 4, BV, 0, read: cephatotes in, instead of cephalotescin. wy Hd 4, ITY, 0, read: because of the kifer instead of because they. «123 4, 10, etc. read: desired, instead of usual,

{M9 4) GV. u, read: Silbergrdnrissicr, instead of Silbergraurissler. sy 186 44 v, uw. read: still, instead of after,

© 489 is the width of Lyctus eanaticulatus in the cross around the hall
given large, After 4.1 million, one estimates: Linge. The rock beetle larva shown, although originating from a cherry tree

hidrt probably the wizened goat-kifer, Cerambyz Cerdo, and not
the green-headed €, scalaris. » U8 ie 5 Vv. 0, read: petite instead of pretty. , 376 4, 15 ¥, 0. read: in cracks in beams and boards, instead of in cracks and beams
the boards

« 319, GY. 0 read: chehen, instead of fluff,

M2,, 19. Uw. is before Tenthredo (Cladius) difformis Pz,, switch on: Tenthredo
(Hylot,) berberidis Schrk, blue-black, on barberry bushes
sh mean wasp. Ibre aftercaterpillar, very similar to the one before
lich, over the summer frequently on the same shrub, you
grazes 'fers completely, Easy extermination by' tapping. « 44 4, 18 B.C. 0, read: girded sawfly, instead of girded sawfly. » 4M, 21 v, 0. read: ash and white alder, supposedly also birch, instead of: ash,
Book, white alder. BUT,, M4 from above, read: gray pear gall midge instead of pear gall midge. oy 194

   

 

 

  

 

 

‘table 1. ‘Compilation of resolved issues by occurrence, below
indication of their eligibility. Abbreviations used. Kiifer. fh flea, 8. see, =
Butterfly. | Ls. = louse. ‘a sch, = pretty bad. Wasp. / Of Ohnfliigler. sh, = harmful,

grasshopper. ' larva. jucseh, imerki. caterpillar. nn, sh. = not harmful. after caterpillar. very annoying. pretty cunning
‘imperceptibly Tistig. annoying. A. Men and useful animals,

   

plagued by Page | side
Culex pipiens, Fg, sk... . 881 | Tabanus species, Fg, sk... sit

» memorosus, Fg, L . . . 821 | Haematopoda pluvialis, Fe, sl. O72
Ceratopogon pulicaris, Fg, L . . 825 | Chrysops coccutiens, FR. l. . . . 572

 

Simulia species, Fg., see 1. and see, . . 538 | Musca corvina, Fg, 21... . S8L

* The concept of harm is relative and somewhat changeable. We know
just take an insect according to its schooling for a cultivated plant, and the
Address the level of harm for this Pmance, Apparently now has one
Cultivated plants, in agricultural operations, one according to region and economy
different importance. Yes, even if one, general feasibility of the principle
cips, the pecnntire damage caused by a kerf to measure
stab, different individual opinions will still exist. §
Will the farmer with grain beer tend to have more schooling,
if it hasn't caused him any greater loss of money than the trustee in Kerf,
the cine precious ornamental plant xerstirt and drgl. So there is only one sche conercten
Measure of a kerf's economic skill level and it is not possible
to bring about his own positive mood in this regard. That's why he wanted to geneigle
Readers of the present designations of the economic disadvantage not too high
attach value,

The terms cunning and crafty also get mixed up here and there.
the one that can hardly be kept separate (housefly), while in an~
of traps, with most parasites on humans and animals, e.g. B., the designation
ment would seem incongruous. ua =

 

  

 

 

  

  
 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

      

 
 
 

 

600
page ) page
Musca cadaverma ? Ly, kL . . . 361) The dog:
» —meteoriea, Fy, WI... . 356 | Hundsflon, Fh. 1. 592
Stomoxys species, Fg, 8.1. . . 368 | Mundslaus, Ls. and Nph. 1... 594 0. 595,
~ home, Ls. a Nphy 1. + 592 | (llundszeeke) (August), 20
Flho, Fh... ‘ + 590 | (Schafzcko} (A. u. J)ar)
(Ticks) (Au J). Bacon 2
(Eingeweldewtirmer _verschiedcner {mite) (A. us JL), Le. a)
Art) (Av u dy 1 bis seh... 13 (Bingeweidewdirmer) (A. J) 13
The cattle in particular still | The cat:
byreh: Hundsitoh, Fh 1... 592
estrus bovis, Md. 1, and see... 3H | (Katzenrautdemitbe) (Au. Jko 23
Hippobosca equina, Fx, s.t. 585 | Useful cores, however,
Rinderlaus, Ls. u. Nph, ko... 593 through:
Kilberlaus, Ls. and Nphy ko... 399] Predator Weeper ue Lvs. ees
(Oehsenzecke) (A. u. J.J, . . 20} Iehneumon, Md. (Schafzeeke) (Au. J) 1. 20 | Tachina, Md...
(Rindsmitbe) (Au J), 23 | (Padenviirmer) (Aw. 4.) |
The Plerd by: (Mitben) (A. u. J). 3
Gastrus equi, Md., z. see. . sat | bees in particular
>» haemorrhoidalis, Md., z. sch, 363 | Wasp, Wp. 8. sch... 2... AR
» — Salutaris, Md., and see... 584 | Black bee louse, Ly., u. seh... 12
» — nasalis, Md.) 0. see... . 584 | Brow Bicnenlaus, Ls., 2. already on
Hippobosca equina, Fg, 8.1... 385 | —(Spiral) (A. u. 5. ), sh. 8th
Horse and donkey louse, Ls. and Nph, 1. 593! In bee sticks:
Cow louse, Ls, 1, Nphy 1. + 999 Clerus apiarius, L,, sch.? 3
(Horse smileye) An. J}, 1. B » —alvearius (? ], Ly, m sch, . 73
The Ese ‘Dinea cerella, Rp., s. sch... . 64
Gastrus nasalis, Md., u.seb, . 384 » colonella (2), Rp, sch? . 369
Horse and donkey louse, Ls. and Nph, 1. 585 » alvearia, Rp, n.sen, . . . 369
The goat: | Forficula auricularia, Hseh., 2nd sch. 461
Gusteus nasalis, Md., and Sch. . S81 | Men, ducks and other birds:
Goat louse, Ls. & Nphy 1... . 895 | Rinige Moharten, Phyl... . 592
The chat: | Very different lenses, Ls.u.Nph.jl. 533
estrus ovis, Md, see... . . 379 | (ticks) (A. u. J), L 20
ippobusea ovina, UL, 2 seb 585 |. (Muben) (A. and J), 1 2
(Quese) (A. u. 5), ssh. 13 | (ringworms) (A. and J), I 13
(Schafvecke) (A. u. J ), 2. sch 2 | Fish:
(Sheepwood mite) (A.W J. ), 8. sch. 23 | Sebwimmkiifer, KA. a. ly 2, sch. 66
The Pig: Water Bugs, Wa. a. Nph., zsch. 476
Pork Louse,*Ls. & Nphi, |. 595 | (gut worms) (A.'u. J ), 13
5 B In apartments and stores of all kinds. Iu rooms, chambers, aul Ab- | (Scorpio europaeus) (A. etc. ), s.seb. 19
kick; Riatta orientalis, isch. etc. nph, sh. 459
Plinus fur, Kat, see. . +. 79 Blatta germanica, sch... nph., sch. 460
Dermesteslardarins,Kif.u.Ly., 8 sch. 86 | domestica, Fg. and Md, 8.1. 516 » — pellio, Ki. u. Ly, 5th sch. 88 | ickerhausern in particular
Anthrenus species, Kiif. and Ly., s.scl. 90 ‘Tenebrio wolitor, Kaf. and lv, see. 107
‘Tenebrio molitor, Kil. etc. lv., sch. 107 | Wlatta orleutulis, Hsch. & Nph, see. 459
Cimex griseus, Wey %. 1 469 jrytlusdomstions, sch. u.) 408
»» — lectularius, Wi 469 | a, the grain insects, s, sch... 601

 

601

side
In kitchens and butcher shops
strode:

Musca domestica, Fg. u.md, see.. 546.
carnaria, Fe. and Md, Sch. . 554
vomitoria, Pg. and Md., sch, . 551

» caesar, Pg ML? 2. 584

Wasps, Wp. and sh... . 412
lo pantry: *

‘Tenebrio culinaris, Ki. U.LY.,u.seh, 109

Ants, Wp, sche... A

Wasps, wp., sch. 412

Lepisma saccharina, Of.u.Nph. sh. 597

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. the meat insects, see... . 601
Blatta oricntalis and germanica, Hsch,
and Nph, sch... . 439u, 460
In the basement:
Blaps mortisaga, Kaif u. Lv., n, sch. 109
(on the vinegar:)
‘Musca funebris. fire Md, u.sch, 567
In Hiibner and Taubenstalten:
Tencbrio molitor, Ki. u Lv., n.sch. 107
Cimex lectularius, Wa.u.Nph, see.? 469
(Gaming) (A.W. Jobo... 20
Lise, Ls. and Np lo. 593
In and on Pleisehwaaren
Teucbrio culinaris, Kil. lv. ?u.sch, 109
Nitidula bipustulata, Kif, sch.? , 84
Couples, wp, and sche... . 412
Blatta orientalis, Hseb. u.Nph.,u.sch, 336
Musca carnaria, Fg. and Md, Sch. . 554
» eacsar, Fg. around? 2. . 558
» Vomitoria, Fg. and Md, see, . 551
» domestica, Fg. u. Wed, sch. . 546
Blow, butter, fat, bacon,
tallow: . Corynetes violaccus, %
Nitidula bipustulata, Kil, w.Ly. sh.? 84
Dermesteslordarius, KaGU.LV,s.sch, 86
Tenebrio Kat, w. sch. 109
Pyralis pinguinalis, Rp., u. sch... 336
Anundiniliuten, holidays, wool,
want clothes, furs,
Naaren, upholstery:
Dermestes lardarius, Kif.U. LY. 86
1» peli, Ly., 8. sch. . 88
» — tomentosus, Ly. s 89
Authronus species, Ly., s. sch... . 90
Puinus fur, Ki, u. ly., sch. 79
Pyralis pinguinalis, Rp... seh. 333
Tinea pettiouelia, Kip., s.sch. 369
yy Sareitella, Rp s.set. . a7
ny erinella, Mp., 8th sel, at

 

| On iltcrem cheese:

Musca vomitoria, Md., Sch. Oy Casci, we see...
(fellows) (A. u. J ), m. sch..
Aufalter milk:
(Mithen) (A. u. 4), and see. 2. In old bread, Zwichack, Ob-
late:
Anobium panicoum, Kaf. and Ly., sett
Tenebrio motor, Ly. sh. ‘Trogosita caraboides, cat. u, lv., sch,
»» _Coerulea, Kiif, sch. Cucujus ferrugineus, cat. n. Lv, sch. Blatta orientalis, sch. and nph., sch. 2

 

»» germanica, Usch.u, Nph, sch. 460
Gryllus domesticus, Hsch. and Nph. m8. . oe ANS
(siden) (AUS). tm flour:
Tenebrio molitor, Lv., sch. 107
Pyralis farinalis, Rp., 2nd sch... . 336
(mites) (A. uJ), sch... 2 ge
In the rice:
Lyctus frumentarius, Kaif. u.Lv.,sch. 190
Cucujus pusitlus, Ka and Ly. sh. 193
Curcutio oryzae, Kil and LY, S.sch. 163
Of sugar, sweets:
Wasps, Wp, sch, ‘i 412
Ants, wp., sch. Blatta germanica, Els«ph, sch, 460
Of dry, sweet fruit
Lyetus frumentarius, Kit and Ly., sch. 190
Bostrichus dactyliperda, Kil, and Ly,
vesehy it oe 81
(Mitben) (A. u. J), sch. . a
Tinea clutella, Rp., s. 381

 

 

On dry, vegetable matter
fen (stem, root, hen):
Anobiutu paniccum, Kif.u, Lv, sch. Ptinus fur, Ly., s.sch. 7 ins, Lv., seb
Tenohrio molitor, Le., sch, . Bi fu. ly ti. sh. Trogosita carahoides, Kil. t, ly., sch. Cucujus pusittus, 1
Lyctus frumeutarius, Kif.u.Lv.,
Tinea elutella, Rp. s.sh
Psocus domesticus, JiNph. On the vinegar:
Musca funebris, Fg, u,
(Essigilehen) (A 1. 5. ),
On ilefe:
(Mitben) (A. ut. Ma, u, sh,

hey

  

    

 

and sh,

 

567
and

n

 

th collections of stuffed
gel, Reptilicn, Insects
8th. white

Dermestes pellio, Ly 8. sch. +

 

» _ lardarius, Kitf.u.Lv.,8.seh

Anthrcnus musacorum, Ly., s.Sch. ” scrophulariac, Ly.,8.seh,
» varius, Ly., s.sch. Plinus fur, Lv. 8. sch. None » — Scotias, Lv, see? . None Tinea clutella, Rp., sch... -
(Mitben) (A. u. J), see sch... In herbaria
Awohium paniceumy Kaf.u. Lv.)8.8eh. Anthrenus musacorum, Lv., sch. » — Yarius, Ly, see.
}) pimpinellac, L¥., see. Plinus fur, Lv, 8 see 5s

‘Tinea clutella, Mtp., see. Psocus pulsatorits, Jf. u. Nphiy sch,
(Scheoren tick) (A. u. J) m. sch. «
In libraries, on leather ones
Tie me up:
Anobiuin panieciim, Kif,u, Ly. sh. Ptilinus pectinicomis, Kif-u. LY., sh,

 

 

Be2ee

9

381
and

a
92
1
9

+ 381

19

Dermestes lardarius, Lv., sch. .
Plinus far, LY,, sch. .
Pyralis pinguinalis, Np. sh... +
(Scheerzccke) (A. and J. ), m. see. | Between papers:
| (Visual tick) (A. u. J ), n. see. .
lin stored grain
(also Welschkorn), Kleic
and drgl:
Ptinus fur, Ly., sch. .
Tenebrio molitor, Lv., sch. »— Chllinaris, KL? u.ly.u.seh,

Trogosita caraboides, K3f.u. Ly., Sch. > coerulea, Kit. and Ly. sel

2 2 Kill & LY, see,

Lyctus frumentarius, Kf. v. LY:, Sch. yy DK BLN, Sele
Cucujus ferrugivous, Kit. w.LY. Apate feumentaria, Kat, and Ly. see,

Apion framentarium, Lv. ?2

Cureulio granarius, Kil. u, Ly... Sel

wy oryzn6, Ki, w.LY. 8. sch. | Tinea granctla, Rp, s.sch...»

| yy cerealelta, Mtp., s. see...

 

 

 

  

 

86
fr
333,

9

www

 

9
107
109
19t
192 192
190
190
193)
199)
143
153
163,
373
379

(. In the wood of beams and scaffolding, tree supports,
Farm tools, in wooden pillars, posts, shingles, etc. firs. Auobium pertinax, KE w, LY, see. Cerambys bajulus, Lysch..
kitchen Ptulinus pectinicornis, Ly., sel. Apate copucina, Lv., sel. Lyclus eanaliculatus, LY, s.sch, . booing Pulinus pectinicornis, Ly., Sch. aborn. omnis, LY.) sh. _ ornamental tree,
tus canoliculatus, Lv., 8. sch, . acacia,
Ptinus imperialis, Ly., seb. D

Staphylinus species, Kil, n, LY,
Melolontha vulgaris, Ly, 0. » — fruticola, Lv. a. see. «
Scarabacus species, Ka, & Ly. 2+
Blaps mortisaga, Kf. u.ly n.sch. sh,

 

 

a
196

approx

188
189

%

189

8th

6

3)

106,
3
109

birches. «
} Anobium striatum, Ly., 8. sch,
Ptinus imperialis, Lv. sh. «
Walnut. | Anobium striatnm, Lv.) 8. see, + +
Plilinus poctinicornis, Ly., sch. = +
Lyetns canalienlatus, Lv., 8 sch. cherry tree,
Anohinm striatum, LY., 8th sch. softwood. Vy 8th el. imperialis, 1. Plinns fur, Lv, Sch... it
lon. Corambyx sealaris, LV Us see. In animal sputums. istalisarten, Mi, sch.? Musca domestica, Md, sch.? 5
rn

 

 

{oy ean
| » Caesar? . . .
| (ategenwurm) (A. u. J) seb. ? 6
Bt

®
139

8th

8th
7%
81
9

19

a5
36
ont
951

5

 

E

in the water of rivers, rivers and lakes,

and thereby crafty to man or beast. Page | side
Dyticns marginalis, Kaif. u.Lvy z.sch.? 66 | (cancer) (A. u. J) nm sche, u
1» latissimus, Kaf.u. Ly., 2sch.? 66 (water flea) (A. u. J), n. sch. . i
Hydrophilus pyceus, Ki u.Lv.,z.sch.? 67 (IMlutegel) (A. u. J ), m sh... 15
Notonecta glauca, watermark below Nph, z.seh.? 476 (Drathwuirmer) (A. u. J), m. sch. rn
Schnaken, Ln. sh... . Sat
F. On growths. a) Of the most varied kind, j (cellar donkey) (A. u. J ), see. 7
Types of bugs, Wz.u.Nph.,u.sch. 468.0. 474 eS iene i 2
Schaumeicade, Wz, u. Nph., w. sch... 475 i) ‘

On young seedlings :| Bb) On growths of the kitchen
(cellar donkey) (A. uJ), sche 2. 7 gardens. mites) (Au. J), sch. 2... a7 . ,
fregerdorer) (Aud), see. 5. 15 | aphiths; — Raspberries:

In manure beds: | Dasytes niger, Kalu. Ly and sche. 72
(cellar donkey) (A. w. J), see, 47 | Gureatio rubi UL. z see 171
(PManzenspine) (A. u. J ); see. 2 biliters:

In hothouses and greenhouses. Bombyx gonostigma, Rp., and sch. . 237
On various foreign plants: | Noctua satellitia, Rp. z sh... 278
Tombyx dispar, Rp., see... 21g |» —-persicarine, Rp, sch... 294
Goccus hesperidum, Shu, Nplta sch. 516 Rombecron

» Brometiae, Sl. u.nph, sch. 516, Curculio rubi, caf. u, lv. 2. sch, . 171

» adonidum, Stu. Nph., sch, 517 | Bombyx fascelina, Rp. and sh... . 254

yy nerii, SL. Nl sch... 517 Gemiiso of different kinds:

» echinocacti, SI. and nph., sch. 517 | Noctna gamma, Rp., s.sch... . 296

‘Thrips hacmorthoidalis, Hsch. and |, dysod s - «289
nph, sh. . . » 463 | Tenthredo spinarum, AR, sch... . 408
(cellar donkey) (A. u, J. ), se + VF | Gimex bicolor, Wz, u. Nph, sch... 469
(PManzenspinne) (A. u. J sch. | 27 |» omatus, Wa. and Nphy seb, 5 168
On oleander: (red snail) (A. u. 4. bb
Sphins nerii, Rp, n. sch. 517 | (geawe Ackerschneeke) (A.U.J,).8. sh, 3
On Onagra: | (earthworm) (A. & J), 8. seh, . , 1S
Sphinx elpenor, Rp. u. sch, * 229 asparagus:
On Jasminum: | Chrysomela 12 punctata,Kafu.Lv.,z.seh. 198
Sphinx atropos, Rp. n, sh. ai | pavagi, KEE U, LV» Z.8ch, 198
On viburnum: | Cimex oleraceus, Wz. and nph., sch. . 468
phinx ligustri, Rp. and see, 228 | Aphis rumieis, Blu. Nph., se «499
Noctua pyramidea, Kp, uw. sh. . 29 |, dianthi, Bu, Nph,y 2nd sch. | SIL
On different pot seorzonors
plant: | Aphis rumicis, BL etc. Nph., sch... 499
Bombyx antiqua, Rp, 2 sch... radish:
Noctua rumici ++ 20 | Wurzet: 5
"Persiear! 294 | Musea radicum, Md, z. sh... + 561
Aphis dianthi, BL etc. Nph., 2. = 50 faire
In Blumentdpfon: Eee ree ae - ei
Melotontha horticola, Lv, see. . 105 » rapac, Rp. . a
(Springsweet) (A. u. J), 8 596 | Aphis dianthi, Hv, Nphy zo sch." BIT

 

 

 

604

 

Mobreu:
root side
Blater segetis, Lx., zsch. 68
Musca rosae, Md., 2nd sell. « + 565

 

 

 
 

(Julus guttulatus) (A. uJ), % sch. 29
Herb:
Papilio machaon, Rp. and sh... 224
Noctua persicariae, Rp, sch. . . 294
Aphis rumieis, Bl. v, Nph, uv. sh, 499
Biiithe:
‘Tinea daucella, Rp , sch. 386
Samu:
Cocidomyia, Md, z. sh... . 532
bipod. root: :
Melolontha vulgaris, Lv., 8th sch. . 98
Musca ceparum, Md., %, sch. 38
Garlic. Tinea xylostella, Np. % sch. 389
Salad. Worcel:
Elater segetis, Lv, sch. 68
Meloloutha vnlgaris, Lv., s.sch. ry
Herb:
Noctua pronuba, Kp., u. sch. Chi, Rp, nm. sh...

 

+ chenopodii, Rp, a. sh. »» — lactucae, Rp.y at sch. ss oleracea, Rp. sh. «

+) hirassicae, Rp., sch. » setuned, Rp, see Sch. + flayicineta, Kp. and sh None ddysodiea, Rp., u. seh. Rp, ue sch, 6
rine, Rp., and see. \ bp m.sh...

   

 

 

 

 

4 Tinea xylostella, Rp, % sch... 389
Cimex oleraceus, Wz. and nph. see 468
(Pottled Lick) (A.J), s.sch . 3 |

seeds: i
Musca lactucarum, Me 561
endive
Noctua flavicineta, Rp., u. sch... 289 |
+» bicracii, Blu. nph, w.sch, 496}
netucae, BL. u.Nph. tt see 496 |
Aphis rumicis,BL a, Nph., sch 499 |
messengers,
Roots and none:
Nelolontla vulgaris, Lv., s. seh. 93 |
(Sulus guttulatus), (A.u.J. ), see. . 29

tte
Halticaarten,
Noctua pisi, Rp,

1 oloracea, Rp. sh. incl
sh,

    

  

 

{rothe Selmecke), (A. u. J ), sh. (grey field slug),(A.u.J,),s.sch. Phaseoles and Lathyrus. Curculio lineatus, Ki, 2nd sch,
Aphis ulmariae, BI. u, nph, u.sh. + Fumicis, BL Wu. nphy see .

chard. Noctua oleracea, Rp., sch. P
»» stiasa, Rp U. sch,

Aphis rumicis, Blu. Npb., seb. » — dianthi, Blu, Nph., 2, seh. Spinach. | Noctua segetum, Rp, s.sch. ‘Tinea Roesclla, Np., 2nd sch. Aphis rumicis, Blu. Nphi, sc
» brassicae, BL a. Nph., ww
Report. Sphinx phegea, Np. and sh Noctua pronuha, Rp and sch
+» chenopouii, Kp., ¥. sett
} atriplicis, Ip. sel...
oleracea, Rp., sch, =. yy suasa, Rp, uw sch... 5
amphora. Apion miniatum, kill, and see,
Sphinx phegea, tp. and sh... .
Sphinx statices, Rp. Wesel...
Bombyx humuti, Hp., seh. Noctua rumicis, Rp, sth, ,
+. pronuba, Rp, etc. ,
yy psi, Mp, Ww. . . 4
; atriplicis, Rp., seh. .
% Rp., sch 5
wy suasa, Rp., u. scl. » persicariae, Rp., sch. Aphis rumicls, Blu. nph., sch. wormwood. Papitio machaon, Kp. and sh Rhubarb. Gimex marginatus, Wz. u.Nph., z.seli,
umbel plants Warzel s
Gurculio ligustici, Lv., 2 sch. pastiugk. Papilio machaou, Kp. uh «
Aphis cerasi, BL. and Nph 2 see. » Tumicis, BL un. Nph., etc. sh. Fennel. Papilio machaon, fip., and sch. Aphis ccrasi, Bl. u, nph., %sch,
kimmel,
Papilio wachaon, Rp., w. sch. .
Tinea daucella, Rp., s. side

2
3

no
4195
499

19
290
499
su

282
389
499
496

 

7

oo)
196
499)

ry
i96

2 ae

 

celery,
Papilio machaon, Rp., w. seh. Noetua chenopodii, Kp., 0. seh. »y meticulosa, Rp. and sh Aphis corasi, Bl. and Nph., 7th Sch. Peters: . Papilio machaon, Kp. and see . 2a
Noctua dysodea, Ry, w sch... . 289
strawberries roots:
Melolontha vulgaris, Ly., s.sch. . 93
Berry

 

it ti
Noctua rumicis, Np, sch... . 270
(field sedges), (A.w.J. ), sh. 3
pumpkin. germs:
Noctua gamma, Rs. sh... 296
(gr. field slug) (A.u.4. ), 8. see. 3
(tutus guttolatus) (AvuJ. ), sh, . 29
mushrooms. Staphylini, Lv, sch? 66
(red Sehmecke) (A.u.J. ), sh, . 2

(grey Ackersetinecke) (A. uJ), see. 3

¢) On Grown of Flower
garden. On different flowers
plants,
At the roots:
Bibio hortulanus, Md, z. sh, . . 545

Melolonthi horticola, Ly., sch... 105
To the leaves:
Noctua rumicis, Rp. sh... . . 270
cloves. To the Planzei
Curculio nigrirostris, Ly., 2nd sch. . 153
» Néselii, Lv, 2 sch... 152
» — polygoui, Lv. z see... 152
Aphis dianthi, Blu. Nph, 2nd s. S11
At the Bithen:
Forficula auricularia, Useh. and nph.

 

 

 

 

  

Sach, ee no. . del
In the Kapsetu:
Noctua capsincola, Kp. sh... 290
Levkojen. Maltica, Kif, sch. .. 199
Papilio brassicae, Rp, sch... 27
» Fapao, Wp, sh... . . . 10 p.m

  

ho... 26
wow

 

Noctua promuba, Rp. » — meticulosa, Ip. a. see,

  

 

goldiack
Papilio rapae, ? Rp. sh. mallow etc. lavateren,
Apion acneum, Rif. Lv, 2 see. Papilio malvarum, Rp, sel. Noctua meticulosa, Rp., w. sci. Geometra cervinaria, Kp., and sch. primroses. woreet:
Curculio suleatus, Lv. z sh...
Noctua pronuba, p..w.seh,

auricle. Noctua promuiba, Rp. tt. sh. . .

» segetum, Rp. s.sh,
flower bulbs,

 

© Worn:

Merodon nareissi, Md., 2 see. »»equestris, Md., z, seb. Herb:
Aphis dianthi, BLu.Nph, 2 sch. .
lilies. Clrysomela merdigera, Kif-u. lv., sch. georgines aria, sch, pl, seh. Mignonette. Papilio brassicae, Rp., seh. Tapae, Rp, sh...
tapi, Rpy sche. +» Daplidice, ip. and see «

Night Violet (Hlesperis). Papilio rapac, Kp., sch. .

‘Tinea porrectella, tp. z see . .

  

 

 

  

Forficula auri

 

Nasturtium (Tropacolum). Papilio brassicae, Rp, sch... .
» Fapae, Ip. sh. Lavender. Noctua meticulosa, Np. and sh Aster,
Noctua meticulosi, Rp, u. sch,
Delphinium,
Noctua pisi, Rp u. sch, . aquilegia Noctua dysodea, Kp. and sh .
chi, Rpy ue sch. violet
Noctua pronuba, Rp., a. see. .
»— typiea, Rp, z seb . epitobic
Tinea epilobiella, Rp., u. sch. ? Saxifrage roots. Cureutio sulcatus, Ly. % sch. .

 

 

 

. oi

out

uh

461

- uF

RI

BS

226

-

389

27
21

 

ory

nT

- 289

mz

- %6
- at

 

1) On garden shrubs. On Lilac (Syringa):
Knight:
Cureutio moltis, Kit, w. sche...
Lytta vesicatoria, Kit, se...
Sphinx tigustri, Rp. w. sh... «
Noctua rumicis, Rp. uh .
>» pyramidea, Rp., and Sch. Geometra prunaria, Kp., w. sch. «
Tinea syringella, Rp., uw. sh...
Start Gaisblatt:
Lytta yesicatoria, Kit, sch. None Geometra etinguaria, Rp., and sch...
»— prtinaria, Rp, uw. sh...
Tentredo tricineta, AR., u.sch. .
Ribesarte

  

 

Man
Sesia tipulaeformis, Rp., uw. sh. middle
rapitio C atbum, Np., seh,
Bonibyx fascctina, Rp. 7. sch. Nocttia sateltitia, Ip., 2 sch. v Mlavicincta, Rp., and sch. «
hs pyramidea, Rp., a. sh. Geometra prunata, Rp., 0. sch. y rossulariota, Ip, 2nd sch. wavaria, Rp. sh. nrticalis, Rp. None sh. Tortrix laevigana, Rp, m. sch...
nope. , Mpa, etc. Tinea grossutaria

‘Tenthredo ventricosa, AR. 2. sch. .
+ Brossulariae, AR, w, sch. appendiculataAR,, usch. flava, AR, x, see. » — vib, AR. 2. Aphis ribis, BL etc. nph..
» lactueae, Rl. and Nph
On barberries:
Bombyx chrysorrhoca (2), B., Sct
‘ortrix amerinna, Rp.) v. sh. » Tiheana, Ip, m sche. ‘Tenthredo herberidis, AR, f.sch. Aphis berberidis, Blu. Np n.sch. For roses:

 

 

 

 

   

In the marrow:
Curculto tigustici, Ly.[? ), 2nd sch. Corambyx arietis, Ly., and see...

 

‘Fenthredo cincta, AR, u.sch. Under the bark:
Magélatis primi, Ly., 2nd sch. Corambyx praeustus, LY:

 

10
309
302
412

231

by)
21
28
289
295,

309 *

329
330
933
953
933

403
404

etc
197
aeon

etc
196

se |

roses

Apion pomonae, Ki
Magdalis cera:

On laps:

 

mmiex massatus, Nphiy 2nd sch. Gieada rosac, Wz. vu. Nph 7 sch. On the foliage:

Metolontha vulgaris, Ki, s.sch. .
» —_ borticala, kif, sh...

Lytta vesicatoria, Kiif, sch, . Bombyx neustria, Rp. 8. sch. bucephala, Rp. 2. see = chrysorthoca, Ip. s.

+ dispar, Rp, 8 se...
, faseetina, Rp. w.seth, «
ss antiqua, Rp. % sch. »— gonostigma, Rp. and sh .
populi, Rp., u. sch. quercifotia, Kp. and sh _Noclua rumicis, Ip sch. .
wy meticulosa, Rp. uh sy trapezina, Rp., x sch. Geometra tunaria, Kp, etc. see...
»— defotiaria, Rp. see see
»— Psittacata, Rp., etc. » bromata, Rp. she. ‘Torteix ameriana, Ip. n.sh
»» laevigana, Rp mi. sh. athredo rosarum, AR. and sh .

 

 

 

pagana, AR, U.sch. v»—— dliflormis, AR, tt. see. «

» Tifocineta, AR, and see,

~ shinarum, AR, s.sch. .
brevis AI, and seb

Aphis rosarum, RL u. Nph., 2nd Sch. hy Tosae, BL uw. Npb, sh...

Aspidiotus rosae, Bl. and Np, it. see,
hosp)

Curcutio ineurvus, Ki, n.sch. .

‘Yortrix Bergmanniana, Rp. x. sh. vs Forskoetcana, Rp., 2nd sch. «
y» oporana, Rp. 2...ss
> Ochroletieana, Ip. wt. sh. aquana, Rp, wu. see...

Tinea rhodophagella, p., 0. sch. Alucita thododactyla, Rp., 0. sch. «

 

¢) On fruit trees,
in fact? In Hotz and bark, at the

 

 

Spice! Melolontha vulgaris, Ly., 8. sch, . .
Rombyx cossus, Rp. she. 6.s+

Buds or Mtatter:
» % 8h. 2,

  

ly te

a4
45

93 105
110
232
238,
2398,
218
254
25,
07
258
261
20
wow
200
302
310
308
ats
302
398
401
402
402
408
408
408,
495
495
SIT

 

www
361
362
362
36
362
390
340

93
262

uh
145

 

side

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Curcutio rauens, Kit, 2 see, 148
+» picipes, Kat, 2nd s. 438
pyri, Kat, sche. 149
+» atborator, kit, u.sh, 149
yy argentatus, Kaif, x. see, 159
» — oblongus, kiif, s.sh... . 150

parvulus, Kié, u sch. 150
+. splendidus, kit, 2, sch, 191
» sericcus, Kit, ush. . . 151
wy mati, Kib, see... TSE
Pomorum, Kiié, see. 164

Cheysomela rufipes, Raf x sch, |. 189

Bombyx neustria, Rp., 8th sch... . 232
» ehysorttoea, Kp, s. seh, | 238
ws quadra[?, rp, m sch... 238
» — aurifia, Rp, sch... . 26
v dispar, Rp, s.sch... . 28

pudibunda, Bp., a seh, Dt
Populi, Rp., tt sch. 238

vy prlini, Rp, we see... 262
» Coeruleocephata, Rp, sch. . 268
laundry . . . 20
Weasch, . . . . . M2

, ms, Rp. uh m
» chi, kp, tt see. a7
»y Satelitia, Rp., 7th seh. m8
vv Pyratina, Rp., 2nd sel... 289
» — trapezina, Rp., 2 sel. 20
»OxYacanthac, Rp) Wh. sh, 295
»» — pytamidea, ‘Rp. w. sh... 295
» —culta, Rp, ne sch . . . . 296

Geometra atniaria, Rp. a. sh. 303
» — thomiboidaria, Rp., i seh, 303
» pomonatia, Rp, s.sch. . 304
» — bajaria, Rp, s.sch. . 306
»— pranata, Rp. a. see, 309
»— elinguaria, Rp. t. sh... 309
» — defoliaria, Rp., s.sch... 310
hy brumata, Rp. see see 313

rectangulata, Rp, % sch. . 328,

orttis eratacgana, Rp, n.'sch. . 352
»— -xylostemna, Np. n. sett, 338
»— holmiana, Rp. n. see « 353
» ribeana, Rp. n.sch. . , . 353
» — laevigana, Rp, m. sch... 353
») CerasanA, Kp n. seh. , 354

Tinea caesicla, Rp. M.sch, 385
» _asperctia, Rp., a. sh, 385

Minirumaren, Rp, wu. sh. . . . . 390
thredo acthiops, AR., w. seh... 410

Grylus virigissimus,Hsch.u. Nphttsch, 418

for the flowers:

Curcutio pomorum, Ly, see. 164

On the pear tree:
Under the bark or in the wood:
Buprestis, Lv. sh. 2...
Ecoptogaster prnini, Ly 2nd sch. Corambyx pracustus, Lv., u, sch,
Bombyx acsculi, Kp, 2sch, . On young shoots:
Rhynchites Bacchus, Kat, sc
» —_conicns, Kat, sh.” . Psylla pytisuga, Wa, Nphy 2sh. Cocens mati, Sl. a. Nph., u. ;
In Rimmbuds:
Carculio pedicularius, Ly, see? . On the leaves:
Rhynchites betuleti, Kit w.Ly., u.seh,
Curculio mali, Kaif, sh...
Papilio polychtoros, Itp., sch...
ny cratacgi, Np, 8th sch. .
Rombyx pyri, Np. nm. sch 6.
 antiqua, Rp, 2 sch...
»—quercifolia, Rp. m. see Noctua tndifiea, Rp, m. seh. » Munda, Rp, etc. sh...
Geometra lunaria, Rp. and seb. «
» — Sambucaria, Np. and seb. Sete

 

 

  

 

    

  

 

 

 

 

 

» — pilosaria, Rp. etc. see. 7
Pyratis palliotatis, Rp. u.sch '
Lyda pyri, AR, sch. 2 2 Gimex bicolor, Wz. and Nph., sch, . 469
Aphis sorbi, Blu Nph., z sel. . 508

In Birnbtiithen;

Curculio pontorum, Ly., sch... . 164
Tortrix ocellana, Rp.. sch... 349

In Birnbtattern:

Curcutio cet (hy bw? a WS 4

Tn young pears:

Cecidomyia nigra, Md., s. 2
- pyricola, Md. e.g. sh. . 527 ;
Sciaraarten, Md, sch, . . . 348
In and on gutters:
Tortrix pomonana, Rp, sch... . 339
(Snails) (A. u.J)sch, 2
(Jutus guttulatus) (A. u. J) 2 sch, 2 :

apple tree:

  

  

   

 

In the wood:
Anobitum striatum, Ki yusch, 76
Rostrichuis dispar, Kiif. etc. lv., sch. 180
» —— Saxesenil, Rif Ww. lv,
cc | hey + 18h :
‘ccopbogaster prtini, Kil. Ly, 2.8eh 186
»— Fugulosus, Kil 0, LY,
west ee eo NBT
Bombyx acsculi, Rp, 2 sch...» 269

 

 

Under the round:
Magdalis pruni, Ly., 2nd sch. y» barbicornis, Ly. Cerambyx Cerdo, Lv, U.scl
scalaris, Lv., % sch. .
 pracnstus, Ly U. sch. »)— hispidus, Ly., u: sch. Sesia culiciformis, Rp. and sh .
Tortrix Woberiana, Iip., 2nd sch. .
At the Kuospen:

seb. side

ry)
145
198
194
196
197

33
+ 855,

Rhynchites acquatus, Kif, x. sh. .

Curculio pedicularius, Ly, sch. ‘Tortrix variegana, Rp. 2. see «— ocellana, Kp, sch. .
‘On young shoots:
Rhynchites conicus, Kiif., seb. 138 |

Psylla pyrisuga, Wz. and Np. 2. see cratacgi? wr...

 

On the remaining wood:
Cocenisarten, Sh, u. sch. On the foliage:
Mclolontha vulgaris: Kill, sh.? . Nhynchitesbetulcti, Kit. L
» Bacchus,
Magdlalis pruni, Kab, v. sh...
Cureulio mali, Kil, she...
Papilio pulychloros, itp. w.seh. » crataegi, Rp. s.sh...
» Podalirius, Np., m.sch. «
Sphinx ocellata, Kp., and see. Hombyx pyri, Np, n. sch. .
» erataegi, Rp z. sh. » — quercifolia, Kp. and sh Geometra cratacgata, Ip., u.se

  

 

 

 

 

i others, Wz... 2.

sh. iE, us sch. 195
170

39

199
48
483,
481

316

93
417
434
144
151

210

212

= 25

252
259

= 261

»— psittacata, Ip. and see .
~ 803

> pilosaria, Rp, w. seh. Pyralis parialis, Mp. 0. sch, . Tortrix ameriana, Rp. ml. sh. » — heparana, Rp., mn. sh,
‘Tinea coguatella, Rp., and see. ci
Aphis: mali, BL u, Npha sch. .
» sorbi, Bl. and nph., sch. $n ater aplet flowers :
Corenlio pomorum, Lv., see. » — pedicnlarius, Ly., sel
On young apples :
Melolontha horticola, Kit, 2nd sch
Rhynchites Hacchus, Kit, sch. Tortrix pomonana, ip. sh. (tendons) (Au. J) 2

 

 

  

 

 

 

  

307
308,

332

+ 952

bicolor, watermark and nph. see 353
383
409
500

~ 508

164
10

405
134
339

2

 

  

 

   
 

 

. cite
plum tree,
Sloes:

Under the bark, in the wood:
Magdalis pruni, Ly, z-8eh. 2. . LM
Tostrichus dispar, Kaif. u, Lv.. sch, 180
Eccoptogaster pruni, Kif.u. Ly., 7th Sch. 186
y ogtlosusy KE ULLY.u.seh. 187
Cerambyx pracustus, Lv., and see. . 196
Sesia culiciformis, Rp. U. sh... 231
Tortrix Woberiana, ftp. 2. sh... 334
On young buds and shoots:
Rhynchites aequatus, Kit, % sch. . 195
» — eonicus, Kat and Lv, sch, 139
Apion pomonae, Kil, sch. 112
Curculio lacvigatus, cat, 2 sch, . 148
Coceus, $l.u. nph. os. . 56

On the bhitters:
Melolontha vulgaris, Kiif, s.sch. .
Magdalis pruni, Kat, z. sh. » corasi, raf, sh...
Corculio ovuhim, kit, and sh...
» argentatus, kilt, z sch. .
» mali, KBE, sch...
splendidus, Kitf, 2nd se. » — parvulus, KE, etc. .
Papilio erataegi, Ip., s.sch. » — Podalirius, Rp. n.sh...
» pruni, Rp, uw sch...
yy hetulae, sp. th see «
Bombyx fascelina, Rp. v. sh. .
 —antiqua, rp, e.g. sh...
» — Kowostigma, Ip. u, sh. .
»— lanestris, Np. 7. sch. » eratacgi, Rp. % she. y» — quercifolia, fip., u. sch. Nocta ludifica, Np., m sch, . » — instabilis, Rp, etc. y Munda, Rp, w. sch. »— petrificata, Rp, ii see... 290
»— parantympha, Rp., u. sch. . 295
Goometra hmaria, Rp. n.sh... 302
» — prunaria, Rp. and sh . 302
pomonaria, Rp 8. sch. . 304
erataegata, Mp., U.sch. . 307
sambucaria, Np. u.sh, 907

Mp, w. see... 307

saria, Iyp., etc. sh. . 908°

clingnaria, Rp. and sh . 309

+ defoliaria, Rp., s.sch. . 310
Muctuata, Ip. uh, . 312

brumata, Rp. & sch, . 319

» — Yernaria, Rp, n. sch, . 313
Tortrix variegana, Rp. 2 sch... 348

 

‘ortrix oectlana, Np, seb. » proniana, Rp. 7th blessed
»— Cerasana, Kip. n, sh. ‘Tinea cognatella?, Ip., and see
» pruniella, Rp, 2nd sch...
Lyda drupacearum, AR., sch,
‘Tenthredo pruni, AR, 1, sch,
Cimex bicolor, white, 2 sch. Aphis persicae, Bl. u, nph, u..sch. » mali, Bw Nphy see...
> pruni, Bl. w.nph, sch. .
"Bumoti, Wu. Nph, uw, sch,
Phlaumenbiithe :
‘Tinea pruniella, Rp. 2. sh...
Tenthredo fulvicornis, Wp, s.sch
+» brunnea, Wp... ? In and on plums or platimer
Nhynchites cupreus, Ly sch. Curoulio rubi, Ki? . Tortrix pomonana, Rp. 27...
»— ulgricana, Rp, seh. . >
Tenthredo fulvicornis, AR, s.sch. Forficuia auricutaria, Table, . Julns guttulatus (8th u, J), x. sh, . cherry tree:
In wood and bark :

 

   

 

 

 

  

 

Ecoptogaster pruni,
3 Saxesenti, Kilt, Ly. week 6,

Ecoptogaster potigraphus, Rif. w
Lvs, u. sch. Fecoptogaster rugulosus, Kill. ly
wash . . . oe
Magdalis proni, Ly, 2nd see. None Cerambyx Cerdo, Ly., u, sch. » scalars, Lv, 2nd sch, . Yortrix Woheriana, Rp,, 2nd sch...
‘On young shoots:
Nbychites conicus, Kaif. u.Ly.,
SL and Nph. uh sh,
At the banks:
Magdalis pruni, Kf, and sch
» cerasi, by. pl
Papitio polychioros, Ip, sch...
ny erataegi, Rp, 8th sch...
» — hetulac, Rp, uw see...
»— prtini, Rp, etc. Bombyx pyri, Up. n.sh. > Tanestris, tp, 2nd sch. Noctua trapezina, Rp, 2nd sch. .
flay Np, u.sch. » — Indifica, Rp, m. sch...
unstable, Rp. and sh .
Nordlinger, the little F

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

171
339
36
405
461

2

. 186

 

Gcometra brumata, Kp, s. see...
» — defoliaria, Mp, s.sch. y+ pomonaria, Np, s.sch, . » — hirtaria, Rp, uw. sh, . »—psittacata, Ip, u.sh,
Tortrix sorbiana, Rp., m sch...
i la, Kp nm. sh...
‘Tenthredo alhipes,.AR., u, sh...
Aphis ccrasina, Bl. u, Nphy t, sch. » cerasi, Bloat, Nphy 2nd sch. » Persicae, BL, u. Nph u, sch. irsehbloithen and bud

 

   

 

 

    

Tortrix eerasana, Rpy m.sch, . ,
‘Tinea prunicti

Rp, z sch. .

 

Rhyuehites cupreus, Ly., seb. Magdalis cerasi, Lv...
Corcutio dyuparum, Ly. 2.) » cerasorum, Ly., scl
Musea cerasi, Md, sch... .
apricot tree:
Under the hind:

Magdatis pruni, Ly, u. sch...
wna, Ra 2. sh tern:
nites conic

  

if, 2nd sch. 4M. see. Hombys pyri, Rp, me sch. . .
Gicomctra vernatia, Rp. n. see Lyda drupaccarum, AN, sch
Aphis pruni, Bl. 1. On the fruit:
Wasps, Wp, seh. Ants, Of, u. scl. Forficula auricularia, Hsch,, 7th sch,
peach tree
Papilio pruni, Mp., and see,
Tinea persicelta, Rp, w. scl
yda drupacearum, AIL, sch,
Aphis cerasi, SL. u. Nphy 2 sch. .
persicae, Sl ut. Nph., sch, . Coceus persicae, Stu. Nph, x sch. almond tree:
Bark and Holx:
Tortrix Wobcriana, Kp, 7th sch. Bitter:
Papilio podatirius, Rp, n, s
Hombyx neustria, Rp. sh
PYTi, Np, n.sch. .
n» Coeruleocephats, Rpy Sch. Noctua unstable, Np, 0, see. In Mandein:
Cureutio nucum, Ly. 2? 39

  
 

   

 

 

    

 

 

 

   

 

 

- 35H

2

2a
+ 252

268

vit

 

Quince tree and medlar:
Bark:

 

 

Magdalis pruni, Lv., u.sch. 1a
who? AN, x ah. 145
Eccoptogaster rugutosus, Kil. ly
sth...Gia 187
Leaves :
Ithynchites betuleti, Rf, u.sch. . 117
» conics, cat, e.g. sh. . 139
both Magdalis, Kil, u. sh. 144
Papilio polychloros, Rp. uh, . 210
Bombyx antiqua, Rp., u. sch... 255

Geometra rectangulata, Mp. z Sch. 928

 

 

Aphis mali, Bl. w.nph. sh. 500
walnut fume:
wood and bark:
Ptinus imperialis, Lv., v. sh... 8
Pyrochroa coccinea, L¥., n. sch. . 110
Rostriebus bicolor, Kif. u.LV., u.sch. 185
Rhagium inquisitor, Lv. w. sch, . 197

‘On smallpox:
‘Melolontha vulgaris, Kit, e.g. sh. 99
2532

Bombyx pyti, Kp, n. seb. » pudibunda, Kp, u.sch, , 254
ty cossus, Rp, sch... . . 262

} aesculi, Rp, sch... . 265
Noctuo pyramides, Itp, u. sch... 29
Aphis juglandicola, Bl.u.Nph, u.sch, 512

y» juglandis, Bl. u.nph, u.sh. 513
Bird cherry, Prunus padus:

In the wood:

Eccoptogaster pruni Kil

 

 

Lv.,v.sch, 186

  

 

 

: rugulosus, Rif-u. L
and see 6... 18T
jombyx cossus, Ip. sch 262
On young shoots:
Rhynchites conicus, Kaif, w. sch, . 139
In the Rithe :
Curculio incurvus, Ly., v. sh... 171
In the bliss:
Popilio cratacgi, Np, and see... . 22
Sphinx phegea, Rp, wu. sh. . . . 231
‘Tinea evonymuctia, Ip, sch... . 385
Aphis padi, BI. and Nph, e.g. sh... 510

In the stone cores:
‘Anthonomus druparum, Ly, u. sch. 170
Zabme Chestnut:
In the wood:
Bostrichus villosus, Ka,u,Lv.,u. sh. 184
Platypus cylindrus, Kaf.tu.Lv,,z.sch. 185
To Bhitters:
Melolontha vulgaris, Kat, see. 8th
Bombyx pudibunda, Rp., uw. sh. 254

 

1 page:
| In the mornings:

 

 

Tortrix, Ip. see. ae
Mazelnut tree:
In the bark:
Tortrix arcuana, lip, etc. sh. . 355
In the laps:
Corambyx linearis, Lv., 2nd sch... 1st
‘On buds and young shoots:
| Cureulio coryl, Kat, z. sh... 146
Am Lau:
| Apoderes coryli, Kaif. etc. lv.) and see 117

| Rhynchites betwloe, Kit, u.Ly., v.sch. 117

 

Curculio arhorator, Kal, and Sch. . 149
| Bombyx pudibunda, ftp. v. sh. . 254
Noctua trapezina, Rip, 2nd sch... 200
» pyramidea, Kp, wu. sh, . 285
Geometra lunate Rp, a. see. 302
« prunaria, Rp, u. sch. . 902
> alniaria, p.m sch... 303
i) pomonaria, Kp, s.seb, . 304
y defoliaria, Rp, s. sch, . 310
» brumata, Rp., 8th sch... 313
| Tortrix laevigana, Ktp., n. sch. 353
In the hazelnuts:
Curculio nucum, Lv, sch... wt
| On Mulberry Houm:
(.white? black?) Noctua gamma, Rp, sch. . . 26
, (silkworm), Wp... ws ss 266
| fig tree:
| Motz:

Hylesinus fici, Kif, and Lv 0. seb.. 146
| Apate 6 dentata, Ki. v. Lv, u.sh, 168

 

   

 

| psylla ficus, Wz u, Nph, m sch. . 485
| boxwood
Pylla buxi, Wa, and Npby n. sch... 485
gronat boom:
| Hombys dispar, Ny 8sche «28
»aesculi, Rp., 2nd see. 265
| Olive tam (fruit) :
Docus oleae, Mil, sch... ss + 367
\ Date fruit
Bostrichus dactyliperda, KAEwu. LY,
ws 18%
| Tortrix, Rp, sh... a7
| Tinea elutelta, itp, seb. L aR

At the roots of the
then field plants:
Melolontha vulgaris, Lv. 8. sch, . . 98
| GryllusGryllotalpo, Hsch. uNph.s.sch. 451

| £) On field plants. 61

On the rattles and stalks of the

various field plants:

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

Page |
Chrysomela 6 punctata, Lv. ?, see.2, 197
Gryllus migratorius, Hseh. 0 nph.
88thAT
Gryllus italicus, Hsch. and nph., sch. 448
nn coerulescens, sch, u. nph.

Ws ee NB
Gryllusstridulus, Hsch.u.Nph. etc. 448
Bombyx rubi, Rp, u. sch... , 258

On flax plants:
Noctua gamma, Kp, s.sch... . . 296 |
At the root of the flax:
Melolontha vulgaris, Ly., s, seh, 93
Wanking on cross-blithon
in general :
Nitidula acnea, Kif, p.sch... 84
Ceutorhynchus species, 4% Sch. . 176
Papilio Daplidice, Rp. n.sh. . 26
Pyralis forticalis, Np, 2, sch... . 331
” margaritalis, Rp. sh... . 334
On Reps and Biibsen:
In pith, stalk, root:
Cureulio chloris, Lv., sch... , 175 |
» — alauda, ​​Ly, 2 see, . iz |
» and others, Ly... wT
‘At the Wlattern:
Hattica oleracea, Kaif. and lv. 8. sch. 203
» — napi, Raf. ue Lv, sh... 204
» and others, Kaif, and Ly. . 204
Papilio brassicae, Rp, sch... . 204
” napi, Kp. seb. 23
Noctua gamma, Rp., s.sch... 296
5 cents, see sch. 282

Tenthredo spinarum, AR, s, sch. . 408

Aphis brassicae, Bl. vn. nph, u.sch. 496 »y dianthi, BL v. Nphy 2. sch, . 511 |
repsbitisias

Nitidula aenea, Ki Bh

Melolontha vulgaris, oe8

Haltica, Ly, 2nd sch. . oa co

‘Tinea xylostella, Np. x. scl 389,
Young Repsschétchen :

Sciara%, Md, z sch... . . 539
grated pods

Pyralis saritalis, Rp. sh. ah

Rows:
Roots: |

Ceutorhynehus, Lv. 7. sch. 176 |
Stalks and kitters:

Papilio brassicae, Rp., sch. . 217

» — Fapae, Rp. see... at |
napi, rp, see, . 2 B

side

Noctua segetum, Rp., s, sch. ‘Tenthredo spinarum, AR., sch, . Aphis brassicae, Rl, u. Nph,, u, sch,
rumicis, Rl. u, nph., u, sch,
» dianthi, BI. and Nph, 2nd sch. ,
(field slug) (A. u. J}, s, sch..
cabbage, cabbage:

 

young plants
Talticaarten, Kiif, 8th sch...
At the roots and stems:
Elater segetis, Lv., 2nd sch... .

‘Melolontha vulgaris, Ly., s. seh. .
+» horticola, Ly, sch...

Tipola oleracea, Md., 1st sch. .

Musca brassicae, Md. 2, sch. 1» brassicaria, Md, z, sch,

On the rlitters:

Papitio brassicae, Rp., sch...
» Fapae, Rp, see... 2.
ss Mapi, Rpy see, see. Podalirius, Rp. n.sh...

Vaplidice, Rp. n. see...

rumicis, Rp., i, sch, . pronuba, Itp,, 1, sch,
ss — meticulosa, Rp., w, sch. + chenopodii, Mp, u. seh, . + Drassicae, ip. sh...

oleracea, RP, sch...
segetum, Np. s.sh, . » Sasa, Rpy we sh...

Geometra fluctuata, Rp. a. see. .

Pyralis forficalis, Rp., sch...

‘Tinea xylostella, Rp., u, see...

Cimex oleracens, Wz. n. Nplt, sch. Aphis brassicae, Bl. tt. nph., t. sh. » dianthi, RI. v, Nph, u, sch,

(A, 0. d,)s §

Beets:

Young mushroom

Silpha alrata, Ly see...

Root:

Hlater segetis, Lv. incl. .

Miter:

Musca conformis, Md, 2sch. Types of mustard:
Ceutorhynelns, Kit, and sch...
Malticaarten, Kat, sch. Papilio brassicae, Rp, sch, 4
Aphis brassicae, il, n, Np, uw. sh. dianthi, UL. 1. Np, u, sh,

 

Camelina (Myogrum sativum):

Coutorh 1 W, 8eh,

 

ns, rif,

 

subtitles

 

282
408
496
499
su

208

8th
93
105
536
560
558

a7
221
RA
226

270

26
etc

29
232

 

312
331
389
468
496
out

see

68
596
16
204
Tr
496
su

etc

 

Maltiea oleracea, Kaif, seb. and other

woad:

Papilio napi, Rp. sh...
Horseradish:

Halticaarten, if, sch... =. Papilio brassicae, Rp. sh. » rape, Rp » sh...
Geometra fuctuata, Rp., u. sch. .
Pyralis forficalis, Rp., sch. Aphis rumicis, BL. u. Nph, w. sch. » — dianthi, Blu, Nph, w. seh. 79

2 B

27
mat

12

ait

- 499

uh

Pod waxes in general

say:
Curculio tineatus, Kiif, 7th sch. .
peas:
Plant:
Curculio lineatus, Kaf, 2nd se...
Noctua pisi, fip., u. sch...
ny Oleracea, Up., sch. »» Persicariae, Rp. see. Aphis rumicis, Rl. and Nph. seeds:
Bruchus pi

  

i, Ly. see. .
Lenses:
Aphis ulmaria, RL and Nphy z. seb. broad beans (faba):
Curculio tineatus, Kiif, 2nd s. .
Aphis rumicis, Bl. and nph., sch. » — wmaria, Blu, Nph., seh. Bohneo:
Birnchus granarius, 1
sweet peas
Apion craccae, Ly. x. sh. .
Noctua pisi, hp, and sch... . .
Aphis ulmariae, Blu. Nph, 2 ‘ech,
»y rumicis, Bl, uw. nph, sh. Mant:

 

see...

  

Worcel :
Melolontha vulgaris, Ly., s. seh. Sphinx atropos, Rp., n. se,
Noctua gamma, Bp, 8. sch, . .
»— persicarine, Rp, sch. Potato:

 

tubers :
Elater segetis, Lv, u.sh. Mololontha vulgaris, Ly, s.seb. Sciara vitripennis, Md, n. sch...
Borhorus limosus, Md. n.sh. .
(ulus guttulatus) (A. u. J ), 0. seb
Herb:
Sphinx atropos, Rp, n. sch, . . .
Noctua gamma, Rp. sh. Z

 

1st

147
a7

09
24

499

114

495

it

- 499
- 495

116

142
he

 

499

93
231
296

29d

6s
93,
933
533)
29

231
296

Noctua valtigera, Rp., n. sch. Aphis dianthi, Bl w. Nphy and sch. (red Schneeke) (A. uJ.) (grane 4) (Ad) 7
Tobacco:
Noctua persicariac, Rp. sh, . » gamma, Rp, 8, see. .
sunflower:
Noctua meticulosa, Rp, and sch...
knobs:

 

root :
Rombyx humuli, Rp. see. -
iitter:
Haltica, Kaf, 7th sch. . 2. .
Papilio album, Rp, and sch. Bombyx pudibunda, Rp. and see Noctua persicariae, iip., see. Pyralis rostratis, Np, sch. » —_silacealis, Bp., u. seh. Aphis bumuli, Bl. u. Nph,, s. seh,
Madder:
Sphinx atropos, fp. 1. sh...
yy stellatarum, Rp, 0. sch. .
Moha
Aphis rumicis, BL. and nph,
Wheat:

 

 

 

n / A

Worcel:
Blater segetis, Lv, &, sch
Melolontha vulgaris, Ly. » — Tuficornis, 1
Noctua crassa, Hp., 0. sh.? Stem:
Carabus gibbus, Lv. see...

1» cephatotes, Ly. 2...
Corambyx gracilis, Ly., s.sch. -
Noctua crassa, Bp. etc. sh.? . Cephus pygmaeus, AR., e.g. sh. Cecidomyia destructor, Md. 8. sch. » tritici, Md, s. seh, . Musca lineata, Md, s. sch...
ter:
‘Chrysomela eyan
»_ melanopa,

Us Lee ee
Noctua segetum, Kp. 8. sch. 1» oehrolevica, Rp., n, sch. Pyralis frumentis, Rp. sh...
Aphis avenac, Bl. and nph., sch. (field slug) (A. u, 3. ), s.sh. Bhithen:
Melolontha fruticola, Ly., e.g. see. ‘Thrips cerealium, sch. and Nph. sh. Kaif, and Ly. + 288

 

la, Kaif-u, Ly.,u.scb. a
© a9
. 337

288
Ty

+ 294
+ 296

at

+ 267

201
mom
24

-

335

uh

+ 2st

499

63

62
195
393
528
531
566

198

198 496

106,
465,

 

Noggen:

 

root
Elater segetis, Lv., sch. .
Melolontha vulgaris, Ly., s.seu. Root and shoots:

Noctua tritici, Rp. s.sh... ,

laps:

Pyralis secalis, Rp., scl...
Musca lineata, Nd s. sch...

Ukitter:

Noctua segetum, Rp. s. see...
Aphis avenae, BL u, Nph. sel...
(field slug) (A. u. J), see seh. alites:

Melolontha fruticola, Ly., e.g. thank you Cureulio segetis, Kaf,, sch.? . Barley:

Root;

Elater segetis, Lv., sel... |
Aphis avenae, Blu. Nphy sh...

 

 

Abren:

Musca frit., Md. s.sh... 2. But:

Root:

Elater segetis, Lv., sch, . 5
Aphis avenae, Rl. u.nph, scl, . Gryllus Viridissimus, IIsch. and nph.

  

MS
Corn:

Noctua gamma, Rp. s.sh... .

Pyralis silaceatis, Rpy seh...

Forficula auricularia, Isch., sch, -

 

Panorpa communis, Jf, n. sch, . Millet:
Vyralis silacealis, Kp., sch,

G.
Secondary root or bolt:
Lethrus ceplialotes, Rif, w.Lv., s.sch. Apate sexdentata, Ki. u, lw, usch,
Coccus vitis, SI. and ph, 2nd sch
Vine buds, shoots or blitter
Meloloutha vulgaris, Kit, see, . dull, cat, 2, see,
Rhynehites betuleti, Ki
Cureutio geminatus, Kat, sch...
» Tauets, Kat, 2nd sch...
» Suleatus, Kat, 2, sch. Chrysomela vitis, Rif, sch

 

 

  

 
   

  

 

08
196

3668 |

68
4196

448

296
337
4G
590

+ 397

At

92,
188,

. 515

93
106
417
146
148,
18
204

side

 

 

 

 

 

 

Grass:
Elater segetis, Lv., u, sch. 68
Melotontha vulgaris, Ly. s. sch, | 93
» full, LY, m sch... 105
» agricola, Ly and sch, . 106
| Noctua crassa, Rp, u, sch? , 288,
| Mayme:
| Noctua poputaris, Rp, s.sec... 279
rs Rp, u.sch, 2. a7
: » — Segetum, Rp, sch? . 2, agp
crassa, Wp. 2... | 8g
| 3 type, Bry zs sete a1
| graminis, Mp, s. sch... a92
| Gryllus campestris, table, u, ph,
Ws a0
(field slug) (A. uJ) 2. 1. 3
! Types of clover:
Cureiilio lincatus, Kit, 2nd sch... . 147
Coccinella impunetata, F, Kal? None 206
Bombyx fascelina, Rp. and sh... | 254
Noctua pisi, Wp. and sh... . . 277
} » stiasay Rp and sch, . . . 290
Aphis ulmariae, BL u. Npli, u, rare.. 295
(A. u. J), sch... 3
On red clover in particular:
Apion apricus, Ki, u. sch. . 13
|, Mlavofemoratum, KSC, etc. 139
Hylesinus trifolii, Kf and Lv,, and sch. 185
| White Clover:
| Apiou flavipes, Kit, usc, . . 149
| Bsparsette:
| Aphis ulmaria, 11, u. Nph., w.sch. 295
Book woizen(Polygonum fagopyrum):
| Noctua tritici, Rp, scl. 2...285
the vine,
| Sphinx Gelerio, tp, n, sch, aay
»— Elpenor, Rp, wt. sh. . 29
» — porcellus?, Rp. n.scl... 230
Noctua typica, Nip. 2. sh .
» _ aquilina, Rp, 2, sch. . B.S
Vine flowers or berries :
‘Tortrix uvana, Kp. s.sh... . 385
» — reliquana, Kp, sch, 339
» Pilleriana, Rp., 2nd sch. 360
Pyralis vitana, Rp. sh... 360
(Garlenschnecko) (A. u. J ), 2. see, 2

 

Table St. Calendar for the application of the means of preparation. The current calendar is to be considered as a second attempt. The first such and known to me was recorded by Pezold in 1794.
been asked. With the numerous doubts that still remain regarding the effectiveness
of many means of extermination and the life-phases of many selvidischen Kerfe
pes stand, it will be found justified that I use the
omitted means of extermination in the same. It makes this all the more special
happened when the pure means of extermination, as a rule, only
If damage has already begun, our book also comes into play
nothing failed to draw the reader to the name and slaughter of the
Kerfs concerning him and thus lead to his destruction. January. Orchard: Careful Sanmelu and Destroying the Little Rau-
pemester, from the tree white, 8. 212, and the big one, from Goldafler,
p. 241, after the canoe sitting at the Spitve dinner branch
wiper-shaped beer nests from the cherry nest spinuer, 8. 259 'Save the 'Terrings if the bottom should be open. February...
Orchard: Same as January; for the destruction of the golden aphrodisiac nests
is it high time
Theerringe, as in January. March. House: mid-month. Storage and perfect integration
(in linen) of all fur, hair, and wool objects found in this
out of use for a month, p. 48, to keep them completely safe from egg
laying of the bacon kiifer, 8. 86, and the fur kifer, 8. 88, and the wool
and hair moti, $8. 369 to protect. Obsigarten: If the weather is exceptionally fine,
so the rules for April are to be observed,

‘Ter rings like in January. Field: end of month. attention to young draft hayricks,
S, 437, if such exist in the neighborhood or jars before,

April. House: store fur goods after careful cleaning
(see March). " '

Apiary: Every morning the wax cockroach caterpillars, $. 364, to
to create the notch

Orchard: The fruit tree, particularly valuable and wragbud-
amie, blooming or not blooming when there is weather, mor-
when it gets warm, by hitting it hard and shaking it
Falling down onto cloths, or in large by the former all and
falling down into the grass, from the majority of the harmful cores 2m
liberate, as from the apple blossom stinger, 8. 164, the Griinriissler, 8. 148,
Psylla, 8. 476, Cecidomyia, 8. 525, Sciara, 8. 533, young caterpillars of the
cherry moth, 8. 210, the fork caterpillar, 8. 236, Gold Afterranpe, 8, 243,
Bud caterpillars, $. 348, and others; Pilanmen- and Zwetsehgenbiiume vou
the pilaf wasp. On trellises and dwarf trees, history
same; msame one breaks out the Kuospens, which by not driving their
internal enemy, budworms, S, 348 and 349, etc. betray,

wu end of the month: removal of the stone fruit wasp
spinnste, p. 398, -

Laying out some catches against the unequal bark cutter,
5. 180, in bane schools by strong girdling of some superfluous ones
wildlings,

Draining of the hazel fat lobster
hazel bushes,

Tapping off the caterpillars, p. 329, from the locust and prickly
beer beer,

Knocking off many moth and moth moths from the rose
brush. Field: From the middle of the month: skimming shiners,
8th. 81, concealers, 8. 176, Erdilehen and their larvae, p. 199,
cabbage bugs, 8. 468 and other kerfes, from the Reps, especially that in
standing in rows. i

Yughenhorrors, as in Miv2. sslers, p. 146, and others from the

 

Hans: Pekavaaren only after careful knocking Birrsten av
keep, put ciniger alien fur rags under furniture, next to them
Eggs of the moth rampant m burn,

Schr busy knocking and brushing upholstered furniture and. s.w.

Storage: end of month. When. on the granary of Korumotien,
S, 373, are present, todipatSee these on the winds, and, provided
casually, rummage out, or daily sweep up with a tarred broom;
if none are available, keep the store locked properly, that too
Turn grain frequently. Apiary: Destruction of the wax dolls, 8. 364 in
the surrounding of the baskets,

Obsigartens: In very late spring and late sowing
continue the work started in April, the ampleness of the kerf
ansboute gives the standard of continuing necessity, why sic
are to be continued all the more experimentally even in ordinary years. when a number of cysts first hatched in the meantime, caterpillars
us. w, come from the Eicru, or grow so strong that they with
Security can be tapped or skimmed off. This is especially true of the plum borer, p. 136, the branch
stecher, p. 139, brown Gritnriissler and other riissellsifers, from the
pilanmeni wasp, the spider mite, the stone fruit sawfly,
the spider moth caterpillars, 8. 384 and 385, the caterpillars of a series vou
Spinners, owls and tensioners, — The forked ramps are jeta selon in Ne-
contracted star at the forks, easy to find and destroy 2. The rough bark of the apple and pear trees is probably covered with lime or
Stretch Lehi 2m to avoid the fruit
moth dolls, p. 342, zt destroy. Towards the end of the month in recent years you are with Gall. nud 'Tranermitekehen, p. 525 mud 533, filled, fallen pear
p. 534, to collect and crush or place in the middle of a dung-
to put hemp. The currant and gooseberry bushes are all 14
‘Tap off days thoroughly (gooseberry wasp, 8. 405), the supporting ones
Hazelnut stalks, with nice weather, 6flers in the morning (lasseluussriissler. None 171), as well as the blossoming raspberry strands (Himbeerstecher, p. 171),
wid the rose strine rather because of several types of pen,

Vineyard: Attention to the glittering Rebenstech

Flower garden: tap the bushes every day
because of several green wasps. O17

Feld: Skimming off the Sameukiifer, p. 114, Grauriissler, 8. 147,
wd aphids, from the peas and field beans, especially the reiken-
wise seeing. ‘

Rep', like in April. — migratory locusts, sure Mirz,

June. Furs not yet denied, go such is no more
alright, you're going through a lot of pounding twice a week
and brush 2u, as well as the upholstered furniture and the like. Storage: corn moths as in May; diligent turning. New bee status: As in May, with the destruction of those on the baskets
sitting moth. Orchard: 4. June, burning of the catch bitumen for deu un-
same bark kiifer

Removal of the after caterpillars, 8. 397, from Birn-, and the
Pupae of the Spit Moth, p. 384, and the pupae
of apple, plum, damson and other fruit trees
men, annihilation of sick pear marriages with tear miickehen u, 8th f.,
sure May. Every 14 days tapping off the currant and strawberries like in May

Knock off the bearing hazel bushes and raspberry bushes,
in May. ‘House: Are you

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Kiichegarten: extermination of cabbage whites, 8. 217, egg nests
on the underside of the herb and so on leaves. Binmengarten: Beating the rose bushes every 14 days, how
in May. * Weiuberg: Gathering of the glindenden grapevine stingers, 8. 119 as soon as
they present. On trellises, - as far as feasible, also in vineyards, - Zer-
pressing the 'Tranbenrollerritupchen', p. 355, in the flowers. Hopfenland: cutting off the jumping caterpillar, 8. 336, from the mushrooms,
Keld: Skimming off several kernels of peas and field beans,
like in may

 

Tulip House: furs and cushions like in June,
Storage: Korumotten as in May, Ficssiges turning. New bee status: As in June. orchard
spinners, 8. 246

fish swimmers of the Goldafters, p. 240, and garden

 

 

618

Pupae and pupae of the tree white, 8, 213, so far as they are easy
reachable, destroy 20,

Removing the afterworm webs, p. 397, from the pear trees. Every 14 days tapping off the currant and gooseberry straws, how
in May,

Tapping off the bearing hazel bushes as in May. Kitehegarten: Destroying the nests of kittens and young ripweeds
Cabbage white, like in June. Reading the cabbage owl caterpillars, p. 281, before they eat their hearts. Flower garden: Pat off the rose bushes every 14 days, how
in May,

Field: skimming off several kernels of peas and field beans,
how! in May. Attention to the Repsseed: skimming off the earth tan, 8. 199,
cabbage worms, 8. 217 and 435; the yellow repsiid wasp and soon after
their young decuse caterpillars, p. 409. August. House: extermination of the legpels, safe May. Apiary: extermination of the wax cockroach moth, see June. Orchard: Destruction of the ornamental Goldafter women,
p. 238. Destruction of the miserable Spinuer's kidney swimmers, 8. 248 Diligent Gathering and Grinding of the Early Fruit, p. 341. Kiichegarten: As in July. Field: repseed as in July. September. Q

Bienenstawd: Like in August. Orchard: extermination of the kidney swimmers of the unequal spin
ners. Diligent gathering and grinding of the frith fallen fruit. October. Orchard: Theerringe, p. 324, from 20, on and constant
get mixed up,

 

November and December. Orchard: to keep tar rings fresh until the soil
is frozen. Carefully raking up the fallen leaves of the Johannis-
wid gooseberry bush (Spanner, p. 329). Register. pre-note. The very complete register gives immediately after the alphabetical place di
Seitemzalil, on which there is a lost object, on, 7. 8 cherry fly hei Ki,
Fleischiliege hei Flei., and not hei fly, Only if a property word is the head
word accompanied, x, 1. green-eyed fly, search one hey fly, who is the genus
Knows a 7m searching Kerfs, but not the type, will be with better advantage
use the table of contents (see front page XV), unless he prefers otherwise,
to skim through the genre in question in the text itself,

 

  

page ' page

  

 

 

 

Carrion Fly ©... 1 2 ss OBL ce NB
Carrion Helper 2 2. BL a
where black. . . . . , 2) domestica. eB
conclusion, more mechanical, than means . 47 Field Toad ae ee
Chip off the core. . . . . . 30 field slug, gue... . . . 8th
evening peacock eye. . . . . . . 5 RF | arable, 6. 6 6ee5 ABE
Acanthocephala... ss.) MW! Acridium sss 86
Acaus se eB]yy Coeruleseens. . . . . . 48
5 agitis. a). cristatum 8. » avium itaticume HB
» biidus. »— migratorium . 2...437
» bovis Bboooo y—stridulum . . . MB
CO ee BB AderfMiigler 2... |
»» eoleopteratorum . 2... 27 | veined white ee ees
» eynotis . 2 . . . . 28) Ankalkwasser, as means... . . 53
» destructor, 6. 6... 22 caterpillars a :
domestics. 2. 2.) Qt) Aprils. 2 0
meq 2 28 aorments it 20
» eruditus . 22 maple wood, as a medium . . 2... 56
wy Weoulae ee... 22 Silly Spinner 6... ss 288,
) fecularum.. . 2... . . 22) Allantus aethiops ©...2...410
» gallinto. . |» cost 2 2... .. . M10
vy Hippodgs es WB] ​​Aieinetus a
yy holosericeus . . . . . . . 251 | Alucita rhododactyla, . . . . . . 910
» dectis. 2 1... Bt | Ants 2... we aD
longing raunrothe . 2
w OW By Bebe... es a0
y passularum 2. © WM) pitch black . 2. 430
» pronorum . a + roto. 2. a)
» seabiel as ny Weisse . None 588
Oe eee: a | Arnca, ee 18

» (lars... » dliadema. hey

 

Arunea domestica

Ascaris...

obtextrix . dock aphid . Sorrel Owl 2...

anobium . Anthonomus druparun. Authre

anthril
Apate

apis . Panicum . .

pertinax,
striatum

brassicae. ceparum

conformis . lactucaram
meteorica ,
radicum

incurvns
pee

 

quiet . must, 2.
hirtus
museum

pimpinellac -
serophulariac

varins . ibus Scabrosus . capucina . fruitaria, . 6 dentata

Apfelblattiaus, ertine

apple sucker . hey

Apple Schilaiaus ' ee
apple moth. ||

apple piercer,

 

 

ayellanae , . avonae . .
berberidis . brassicae. .
capreae . cerasi. cerasina ,
cory!i. dianthi . dirhoda . hieracii . Imumuli

‘ularius
pomorum

reddish

 

purple red

 

620

side

19
19
15

» 499

a
1%
8th
a

556

189
eat 21
500 508
481
483
516

+ 338

134
s3y
485,
496
496
uh
496;
497
496
496
512
out

uh

Aphis juglandicoly .-,

 

» pisi. » pronaia. . |
» prun. 2,

» prunina . .

 

» This
» pose,
> Fosarum, 2. » Fumicis . .

» secalis ,
» sonchin 2
Sorbia
»» tetrarhioda . trirhoda. | 2) ||

» ulmariae . .

 

Apion sl

»»-aeneun
y»apricans. . ,
 Craceae 2. .
1» flavipes

” flayo-femoratuin oe

» frumentarium . » miniature

» pomonne . None » mucho. . 2. Apoderus coryli. Apricot Eulo . 2...
apricot spinner ,

apteren . arachnids . . .

Aromatic Stoffo, as a means

Arsenic, as Mitel 2. Asand, as middle...

Asis...
Aspidiotus echinocacti
» dw
re
» pink
Woodlice Bocce

Athalia rosae. .
» Spinarun, . breathing of the core ..

+ sitting | Attelahus frumentarius,
495 | Atychia staticos. 496 | brook mosquitoes ,

wire caterpillars. 2...

 

313

 

wow
oi

5I7
3I7
7

: 402

408
3
mom

= 2H
. 536

233

 

62t

 

side

Walaninus . oe ot
yy eorasorum An

” glandium . . . + 4

» mum... HL

» Yenosus, . 2 1
timber buck kifer . . . . . . . . 196
Balkensebroter . . . ae 107
Bandasscl, brauwo =... 9
” emitting 6 6 2... 9
edgeworm. 8th
Baris 2nd ee 1st
» cbloris. 5... - Ad
Bartmiekehen . 2 2... B.S
Bastkifer 2 2nd ee 185
Bamweissting. 2... 2... 22
berry bug . . . . . . . . a8
Baste, as a medium. . . . . . . sat
Splashing, as a means . ns! Meste oaks with lime, as a medium . . 50

 

 

rescue bugs . . . . ws. M69
Bibio hortmlanus ©... . 45
bees. 2, at
bee cockroach .. . . . . . . 364
beekicker. . 2... 8
Bee louse, brane... . . 584
n black . . . . . . MR
beewool . . , en)
Biesiegen 2... 815,
Bilson herb, as a remedy. . 2... 56
birch age . 6... 8
pumice sawfly. . 6... . 395
Pear gall midges 2... |, 385
grave... Wt

Black. 5...525
pear mice . 2...533
dirt sucker . 2. 2. - att
pear stretcher . . . re)
pear spinner 2... aR
Pear wasp, paradoxical . . . . . . 536
Birnwiekler . . . . . . 2... 958
Birnaisler 2... . 336
Bitter substances, as means . 2... 56
Blops mortisoga . . . . . . . 109
bubble feet . . . . . . . . A
bladderworm. . . 2... 18
sawflies. 6. 2... . 988
»—— wide-bodied . . . . . 395
Blatta. 2 a8
» americana. . 2. 2...460
» germanica. . . . . . , , 460
orientalis. , ce A88
leaf kiifor . , ee: 197
Aphid lions 2... 589

Wlattliuso. 2 2...
leaf rodent . sawflies, . ,

Mlaukopf 6...
blue sieve . . oe
filind brake . . i
flower bow tie. . . oe
vy saddled . flower kifer . .

»— meaner
flower stinger . oe
” red-winged . Blood of the Kerfe. . . . .
leeches 2 we
blood rain
Buckkilfer, 6 6. »)— burned . »— bristly . . .

»» actual

» — grim leader

»» Tunzeliger. . .
wobrkifer,

» — meaner

» — imperial

Rombyx . ye aeseutli
” antique . arifina
” Bucephala

» — Chrysorrhoea . » coeruleocephala
Costus
» eratacgi . .
dispar, 2. » faseelina. . .
» — onostigma ,
multicoloured :
» — lanestris . oe

 

 

ee corte ee
motion bw ss
» Meustria. ws
» popular ss...
» Proni . nS rn
» aqnadra . » quereifolia.. . .
» TUbi

Rork kifer . a
» — bigger thuchen=
» dates . » — hairier. 6. >» Unequal ..

Rorstensehwinze , . + 207
267
259

= 266
. 2

+ + Bz
aoe oa
= 262

+ B52
B.S
26

- 238

. 180
185

184
184
. 180
«58, 996

hostrichus . bicolor . dactyliperda . dispar. .

domesticus

Saxesenii . villosus

brakonids . . .

Braula

broadwat

coca...

Zen...

brooms. . .

fchto. . .
plain . .

Brodbobrer . . .
Brodkiifer. . . .

gemciner
bluer . .

blackberry moth . .
Bruchus . .

»

granarius . .
psi...
rufimanus

sertatus . Chest of the Kerfe
book louse . . .
book scorpion . brush helper ,
dry caterpillars . grey

Buprestis 2...

candens

, German
Calandra. Granaria. oryzac

Cattidium.. . .

bajulus. .

Cancer Duyiatilis. Canthari

carabou

Byeen
dispar. fasea . melanura . obscura. » Tustica. Capricornia . .

aencus. . .
auratus
cephalotes
communis. coriaceus . cuprous

. 184

622

scite

180

Beesse2eausaen

 

Carabus curynotus. » gibbus. » Branulatus. +» hortensis . 3. morbidity |. cocidonyia ,
destructor . » higra
»— pyricola
»— tritich

cops 2. »— pygmacus

troglodytus . .

Cerambyx. » — arietis . .

bajulus . » cerdo. » gracilis. » — hispidus . «— inquisitor

» — Tinearis..

» —-moschatus

»—Pracustus . » — Scalaris. .
Cerapliron destructor
Coratopogon i

» —— pulicaris
Cotonia aurata. .
Coutorhynehus . » aléuda
” assimilis,

_ papi. Chermes pyri. ss
Griewle 2. 2...
Culor, as middle...
| chlorops . . . . .

» lineata...
Chrysops coccutions. . .
Chrysomela. .

»— asparagi. i» brassicao

» cerealis

» —_ chrysocephala

> coneinna

» eyanella . 42 puntata

» flavipes . » — byoseyami . » —— melanopa

» — Merdigera . > hey,

»—— memorun

+) 204

 

side
62

62

2 888
a)
1 at
. 394

193
197

196

194
195
197
197
194
110 196

- 15
52
106
176
17
178,

 

at

om
197
198

197
208
198,
198
199

198,

 

Chrysomela oleracea . ~ — tufpes . 6 punctata . » Vitis. crysis. 6...
Ciesla. 2. +» hacmatodes
»» interrapta . Cicada rosae
+s Sanguinolenta . » spumaria
ooh
cimex . » bacearum
» bicolor. » eustos. » domesticus
rise...
» juniperinus ,
» Teotutarins
marginatus...
= massatus . » higrolineatus
» oleracens. .
» ornate . .
% personatus . + penctipennis
» Tufipes. scarabacoides . Gladius albipes
differmis . Glerus alvearius
> apiarius
Ciytus arietis
Cneorhinus
 corylt

»—— geminatus . Coccinella...
» — bipunctata
»— impunctata

» 7 points
coceus. 6...

+ adonidum . » bromeliae . neath. » echinocacti
»» Nesperidum
» dauri. Mali. »—neril
persicae. tose » vitis. . .

 

623

side

Fs
197
204

- 432
a5,

45
55
MTS
475

4&5

62

«468

468
469
239
73
469
469
469
469
ah
469

. 468

468
74

469

468
469
4031

* age

a
73
197
146
146
146

205

207
206

513
sly
516
516
517
516
nT
516
517

+ 515:

5t7
513

= ae
| coleoptera . convolvulus . \
|
'
i

 

Corynetes violaceus. Gossus arundinis. Cryptocephalus, . Guenjus

 pusillus |

Vitis. >» ferrugineus ,

Culex. + net

morose . » pipiens

Cureulio. Cynips

alauda . arborator
argentatus
assimilis . cerasorum . chlorine . cory...

druparom . .

flavipes

fuscomaculatus . geminatus . elondium
granarites:
incurvus
igus
ligustici . tineatus . ,
maculicornis,
Mali. Marquardtii
mollis. nigrirostris
nucom . oblongas

 

oryzae. =

ovule |
parvolus,
dedicularius. picipes
polygoni. pyri se
Taucus
quiet. .
segetis . .
sericeus
splendidus . sulcatus . veins. side

146
v7
149
{49
178,
174
175

- 16

170
151
114
16
tn
153
71
148
17
17
150
131
18
151
153
m1
150
163

149

150
170
148,
12
149
148,
in the
179
11
151
198
174

Cysticercus
Dacus oleae. mosquitoes
Dasytes niger . .
Dermnestes domesticus...
» — fumatus . . .
y— Tardarius. 5.
} 0 murinus. ..
y pellio. None tomentosu: . Diekkoper os...
Dickleissler 2°...
Dickmavirissier

» brown footed . » feared
Diplotepis chrysorrhoea
Diptera . .
Dirrstube, as a means :
double hole . . . ss
Drathworm . 2...
Drill culture, as Mittet
Drosophila funebris. Dried Fruit Shee . .

 

 

Dytios
» — latissimus . . .
» marginal 5...

Becoptogaster . ss
» pron. nn
» — ugulosus . Kin frictions, as a remedy

Hermit. ss ss
Division of the Kero...
Biater .. . a
yo murinos. » «Sepetis 2 we
» Sputator.. se. » striatus 2...
» Voriabilis . . . .

Emphytus cinctus. . . .
» — Bfossulariae. .
” rafocinctus . 7

Duck feather ting, browner

" dirtier . grubs 2...
peas evle . . 2. peanutrition 2. Pea Spinner. ©...
terrestrial kifer . rd cancer . .

Frdraupe. ss ss
Erdschnaken .. soe

187

68,

594

35, 93 |
27
114
257
199)
451 |

- 282

 

+ 536 |

 

earthwool
eristalis . .
alder moth —
Smothering, as a means. None Eselsius. 2. 2. Vinegar 3 ouiiene
Vinegar vapor, as a remedy |
Vinegar fig 2...
Bolen...
white-yellow . Fusomus ovule. . .
Threadworm 2... Butterfly...
Fanghiume . , F
Fangtopte, as a means
feather louse, spotted
redderlings . . .
Pedershabe as
torment of the kerfe . . .
field cricket . Feldia skiifer . .
field spider . reld bug ae
fennel age. 6... ws
Four, as mean 2...
Feuerstebler . branch...

» ervearmm
Fiklaus. .
fishtail caterpillar
fish marriages. . .
flaming wings . . .
Fleischiticge, blue . .

» roe

To fly. . . BES

» grinning eyes . > Spanish (false)

 

 

 

 

Fhe oe
Plobweed Owl . sae
blossom flies . Wings of Keres... .
Forficwla 2...
» — woricularia. minor. .

» flava ad
»» fuliginosa, . .
» tuba

Pressspitzon, . 2. eating tongs . . . .
frieze . .
Frostmouse, large

 

 

1...HO

19

oe WD
469
ms
- 54, 52

etc
1. Mf
++ 585

262

» 295
551

+ 8
517, 546
+ 565
- 10
- 59, 590
201

32

464
464
san

430
430
313 32
31

a)

 

Frostbite, little one

early pear owl . Friibbee Spinner . spring tensioners . fox, big . PGhlborner . five-hole,

Feet of Kerfe
foot limbs . . .

foot sole

fork caterpillar . .

ginset teddy, narrow
whiter . Ginsefusseulo . .

Ganshattuss, big one

honeysuckle moth . gall midges . gall wasps . .
Gammarus fluviatilis
garden pear owl . .
garden pear moth
garden hair mosquito . horticultural

stoner. garden rose moth . garden show
gastric

» equi

tease

 

hy acmorthotdalis
» Rasalis..
yy salutaris
spirit marriages . stinginess

 

vegetable owl . .
Generation of Kerfe

geometry

Nérdlinger, the little ones

alniaria
bajaria . horeata . brumata
corvinaria
clypeata

fly

crataegata. defoliaria . elinguari
fuctuata

grossulate . hirtaria. lunaria . pilosaria
pomonaria
prunarta
prunata

psittacata . 625,

side
. 313

1B

261
. 319
20

25

sat

 

 

 

Geometry rectangulata. ,
» — thomboidaria » . »»—Sambucaria
» — Sericearia . »— Yernaria

» — Wavaria

Geotrupes nasicornis

straight wing

barley worm

Fucked the Kerf

spider wasps
Woven Matto . Stinks as

middle_

Grain bubble cup
Groidobject . Grain buns . Grain Halniwospe
Grain capwziner
Grain Lautkiter . grain leaf weeper . grain chopper. .
browner
meaner . sewarzer
God grain flayers . itctiler
thunder fly . .

grain spli

Gypsum dust, as a remedy

shine kifer

 

 

Jars with sweetness than ite
arthropods

Goldafter . gold fly, gi

Goldkilfer . .
moth. cuckoo wasps . gold plum! crayfish | |

spidery . my

Gollubatzermiieke,
Gordius aquatious

digger wasps . grass owl

grass lindone stretcher

Grouriissler . .
apple greener

Grilling ..

 

nowhere

browner . goldseiduer

grayer

more . Where

rn

+ M7
151

- WT
448
18,

190
1a

. il
191

 

Gryllotalpa vulgaris
gryltus 5 5
y» campestris. i» coerulescens
a eristatus . «domesticus
>italicus. .
»»— migratorius
» — stridulus . verrucivorus
yiridissimus . Gum arabic, as a middle. maarlings . .
hairy gnats maar cockroach . . - +
hawk flies . Haematopoda . .

i pluvialis
oat aphid
Maftfisse . 5. »— paler

»» —_ more straw-like

» — straw yellow
hawthorn moth . .
grove cranefly
hookworm -
MotbMigler . eye wasps. Mattia...

ny brassicae...

yy chrysocephala

»» coneinna

> -hyoseyami. oleracea

» napi. .

» Remorum . violacea

Moms as Mittet -
hemp, as a means . Manneton. . .
Hazelnut biscuits . .

Hazelnut crackers ..

mouse cricket. housemother . mouse bug . . .
skinkifer. .
tolls of the guys
cricket. None Helix hortensis. Hemerobius . .
hemiptera . . -
Hesse flight
henlavs . 626

 

side

488

451
436

4a8,

2 ats
. 43

72

a)

48
438

. 448

515
369

. 372

199

 

 

side
Locusts 2 BR, $86
hayworm . . c 885
Himberkiifer . . me
Himbecrstechor 5 5. s+ =» Wt
Tlint body of Kerfe tee 8
Tlippobosea . . no 885
» equina . SS 88S
Moving 5.eee = +O88
Mirsezinsler. . . . = + +) + + S87
Nitze, as a means .. 2. +) + St
Elderberry Moth —. for 807
Wood pear owl 2... ss - + 296
pear moth . « 5 ~ 902
Wood drill 2nd ss : %
holafeater . - . . 179
Holaiuse. . ee + BT
Hop aphid sees SH
hop root spinner . sos 287
Hopfenziinsler . Le 888
worries ; tea aM
Hhnerfederting, big . |. . «598
” light brown . . . 593

- more vulnerable . . 593
mumbling. oe it At
dog fow . 2 2 2ss 988
dog bearliug . 6. 1 it + 88
dog louse 2 6 it 595
centipedes | it
dog mite. 2.) 8th
dog tick. 2. 2 it
hydrophilus. . 6
Hylesinus —. Se = 185
yo 186
*) poligraphus .. . +. 185

y trifolih se + 185
Hylotoma > aL
» pagan... 42
» fosarum 5. ss 401
Hymenoptera . None | 1 8, S08
iebneumons . None ss = ~ 482
a as means . . 49
beetle. . 2. it 8
infusoria 2. 8th
Inostemma boscii. . + + 536
insect, definition . 2... . 30
Insect powder, Persian, as a remedy 56
Instinct of the Kerfo . so. 38
currant leaf iaus . . . . . . 496
Johannisheesspanner . . . . . - 330
Johanniskifer a: a
Ips quedripustulata. . 5... 86
ulus. a)
yy gutulatus 7 2

 

Julius terrestris

boys .. . 5

trodes. » columbae. .
»» marginatus...
n reduyius) 5.

y reticulatus 6...
ricins 2... se

cabinet kitfer

Kiler 0... oo
Decherhdrnige. 2. »» crimson . 2...

iy tripartite . . .

» Gin-limbed . . .

» Club Horny . .

jy speedkiiferous . .

1» Unequal . . .

fourfold . 6. beetle mitbe on
Coffee Claus os
calf louse coe
Kiscfige 2. 6...
cockroach
Lime dust, as a medium
rabbit rope . comb borer . . .
Contharid 2 2...
capsule duck . . oes
Capuchins 2...
1» six-toothed

cat biting. . . . .
Katvenraudemilbo . . .
kelo donkey. 2)...
Kerfe, Definition . 1» unfolded . heartwood kifer
Fi meaner

jaws. 2...

cherry aphid . irish new
Cherry Butterfly
cherry fly 5
cherry maggot,
Cherry Nest Spinner . Cherry laurel blossoms in the middle! Adhesive substances, as middle! pine flower spinner
Kleowurzetkiifor Bin ic
Clothes louse 5
clothes template . . . . butterfly.*. ae

* 258, 586

+5%, 61

107
113
a

57

35, 56

. 594

289

505
562
460

595,

%
110
290
188
188,

23,
w

697
188
188

31
496

200

- 563

963
259
307
174

of

251
135
595
government office

Sat

 

Garlic, as a remedy
Budworm, red . . . . . .
» grave. kobi aphid . Kolterdoh . 2...
Kohloutle 2
cabbage 2. 2
cabbage fly. 2. 2 2 1 ea
cabbage roll tliego . . 5...
cabbage bug . 6...
Cabbage white, large. . . . .
2 cats. 6 2...
Kohiziinsler 6. Coloquins, as Mittet . . . .
head of the kerf. 2...
head lettuce owl. . . 6...
Head out 5... ee
Cobalt, as middle... 2. Piston water kifer oo al
Komkifer. 6... a
corn moth . .
grainworm
» Fother. 5th se
n White. Kothwanzo 2nd ee
crabs . . bot
crayfish. 2.
icbetmiicken . . .
Kiichenkiifer ..
Kiichon cockroach, meanue . . . .
» German...
cockroach. pumpkin worm. . 6...
Kupfergluko 2...
Kiirsehner ——
Kuraffluger
Kurziusstarven . . .
Lampyris moctituca. . 2. Uuse 2...

» actual . f
Liuse ointment, as a remedy. 2...
long-footed tarven . ,
Lopbria 2...
barve. 2... we . Last triger 2... -
Lattictculo 5. 2. lettuce lounger . lguikiiter . Life conditions, dussere der Kerfe
liver flukes! . >
loma...

»» asparagi . yeyanlia. .... . me

pEeeueaees

 

    

‘ema melanopa . » Merdigera |. m» 12 punetata . lepisma . 2 2
»— polypoda ss. y— Sacelirina. lepidoptera . . hey
Lepis.. to...
Lepyrus co...

Letlirus cephalotes. glowworm . ..
Lovingstick Rissier 5 2 2. League. Limax agrestis. . . . .

» ater. wee ary

y»—byalinus . » tufus . Lilion Piper. . . O
Linden Swimmer. 2...
lithium. . . . .

+» conspurcatun

 

  

» pallidum... 1. +» Stramineum . 5 =. lip button. . . . 5
livery caterpillar . . 0...
focusta . 1...

» Yerrucivora, . » idissima . . . .
Valehowl, 2. 2. 2 2 Lophiyrus . . .
Lillehspinner . .
Lucanus parallclopipedus . oe
Luperus flavipes... =

mn rapes 2 se

Lumbricus terrestris
Lyetus. . .

»» canaliculatus . »» frumentarius ,
yO o oe o a0 6 olpeo
my elypeatas 22. » drupacearum

»» popu

pyro. Lygecus

hy massatus |

 

 

Magdalis . ” barhicornis
ny corasi
" prun. . .
” violacea. cockchafer

2 382

. 474
. 474

  
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
   
  
   
  
 
 
 
 

395

107
199 |
Assy
6
189
189
190
395
395
398
398
395, |

110
35
144
415 |
15
441

146,

 

Maikifer, bluer

mayworm. 2... ee
Malochius. 2 2...
»— aencus on
» bipastulatus ..

Malmblifer 2. 2...
Mauve Butterflies. . . .
mallow moth . . . .
Almond Owl. . . . 2. chard owl. . . 5
mongold caterpillar . . . .
Ladybug . hey seven-pointed . aweipunktirtes
rectum bending fly . 2. wall donkey. . 2. we
woodlouse . 2 2...
mole grill
mouskifer. 2 2...
Mouse Zabnrissler 2... .
i of the repses . horseradish moth. . . . .
Horseradish Zinsler . . . .

Mebitkiifer =
Mealworm 6. 2. it
Mehalai Islands © 2...
Reporting Owl . . . . .
Molo® prosearabacus . .

Melolontha . . . 2...
» agricola...

» Frizehii . » — fruticola . 2...
no fallo. None hippoeostant. |;
b horticola
» dull. » oblonga. ss
» — uficornis . » Begetis, . .
Beesoay! at
» — Solsttialis
Yulgaris :
Melophagus oyinus- . 2. people critter milbo . . Merodon..-.-- -
»— equestris . 7

 

» mareissi ss
Metamorphosis of the Kerfo. .
Microgaster . 2... 1s

lepidoptera, . . . .
mites 2ee
mite mange . Minirsfiupemarriage

. 2

24

he

mT

= 206
- 207

7
_ 7
dept
hey

174
. 14
. 32
331

107

+ 336

12
93,

108

105
108
105
106
108

~ 108

. 106

- 106
109

uh
a7
. or

 

. 931
and

34, 990

 

manure manure, as a remedy
dungkiffer. 2...
means, preventive . mold mite . . .
Mbbrenflige . 2. cockroach . .. .

moissonneuse . . .

Moldworf. 2...

mollusks . . .

Moon Vogct 2 2). |

Mordella aculeata. .
moril flies . . .
Moths 2...
mosquitoes 2 2 » — Columbatcer

 

motherfucker . |

Mouth parts of the kert | | |

Musca. 2...
1 brassieao . » — brassicaria,
» cadaverina, . » Gear...
yy caleitrans
oy carnaria . » cash » cellars...
»» ceparum . NY Corasi

» conformis . .
and corvina. .
domestica...
fit 2 » funebris. .

» lactucarum,

 

» lineata...
1» meteorica
» olea...

») plimitionis . » Fadienm
» Teso. »Yomitoria,
nail biter, 2...
NareissenschenkelNiege . nosebeastliego. .
Rhinoceros Kifer 2...
Necrophorus . a
» — mortuorum
ny Nespillo. clove aphid . . .
Nematus appendicolatus. .
» Yentricosus
Corfe nervous system

  

 

. 546

110

560,

- 501

562

554
563,

567

- 509

366

563
556
951
516

3o7

+ 561

366
556
367

+ 566

56
565,
551
15
on
581
107
St
8t
8t
uh

+ 408

403
37

 

nettle civets
Netafligler . .
neuroptera . Nitidula acnea. bipustular |

Notonceta glauca. Noctua. . .

 

 

walnut mento . acceuti
aquilina
atriplicis
brassicae
‘eapsincola
‘ehenopodii
ce

 

  

 

coeruleocephala . corticea,
crassa. culta. dysodea. exclamationis

Mavicineta . gamma. gramineis
unstable
actucao
ludifica ,
Maura,
mouth . meticulosa
ochroteuea
petrificata . bi

‘oleracea
oxyacantliae

  

paranympha

persicariae
popularis
pronuba
psi. pyralina
pyramidea ,
rumicis . satellite
segetum
suasa. traperina
tridens ,
tritici. typhae . typea
valligera
vitta . zp

TTT rT tar er eer

 

 

Nutcracker . nymphs . . :
Obisium cancroides. ck, as mean. fruit maggot. . . . |
fruit stretcher. . . .
fruit shrews
bull tick. Ocyptera . . -

estrus 2...

mee tovis .. .

b omf......

»» — bimorrhoidalis

pcre»

yy salutars . .
non-compliers
footless larvae
Ohegriibler a
Obrwuirmer . 5...

» meaner . = smaller. .
Oleander shield bearer. None Oleander Swallows . olive bow tie
Oniscus. 2...

» asellus . orange scale,
Orchester segetis. orthoptera . .
organization, interior, of
Ortalis . .

 

 

Oscinis frit,
n lineato. Otiorhynchus...
nevigatus
» ——ligustici . » — Marquardtii. » — beeps . yy faueus
» —— suleatus . Oxyuris 2

palisade thorns
Panorpa communis. .
paper scorpion . .

papilio . 2. » betulae. ,
» brassicae...
» Galbum
yy orataegl. 5.
yy Daplicide . » Machaon . » malvarum. .
Meanie se ee

 

a7
36
19
of
339
304
142
20
955,

. 315
. 576

081
583
579
5h

- 59, 590

35

461

- 461

+ AGE

461

517

231
. 367

7
7
516

. 179

58,

~ 2t0

al
2 right

212
228
2a

-

 

Papilio Podalirius. . . . .
_polychloros . . .
» prune, 2 . » Fapao
Pediculus asini. . . . .
” capitis... y
curysternus . piliferus 2...

 

  

w»— stenopsis
ventricular
v»_Yestimenti
vitul
poachworm. None |
fur kifer 2...
Guinea fowl feathering . parsley owl . .
peacock eye, big . paw leatherling, more rectangular

 

 

» —_ sickle-faced . pepper, as a remedy. . . .
horse hairling . 2...

horse louse . .

horse mite. so...
Horse stomach biesfliego . . .

Peach aphid .. .
peach leaf sucker
peach sawfly . . .
peach bud moth,
Phirschschildiaus . . .
plant lily
plant mitbe . E
plant spider. . . .
Pilasterkiifor. .
plum aphid . plum borer
thumb butterfly , 2. Puffworm, rithliche . plum weevil ,
downy wasp . plum moth . :
plum moth . . . .
plum moth . Awl tail 5
Philopterus . . . . .

»—anseris . »— bacutus. .

iecterodes . hy compare...
»— dissimilis . .
> faleicornis . + heterographus

 

 

Beer eeeeeeee

aaiseeak

RESUN B88

262

+ 598

ge

2
&

36
Mt

351
15
503

593. 593
393
393

 

631

 

 

 

  

side side
Philopterus hologaster.. . . . . . 593 | Ptinus erenatus. . , a)
» joiums . . . 588] fre ag
» fumidae . . . . . . 593], imperialis 2 | | gL
» — Polytrapezius. . . . . 593 | ,, scotfas ‘ae
» — fectangulatus. . . . . 593, | Pulex 2... 2... 590
» — squalidus. 2... 593 | canis. ban
mw Stylifor . . $99 |, columbae. OR
variable . . . . . . 593] yy felis...ORR
Phosphorus, as a remedy. 2 2 22, cr » gallinae. . . 7 . 592
Phyois etutola. . 2... . . 38 | 4, itvitons 590
Phyllobius arborator. . . . . . 149 | dolls .. . . . -. -—
» — atgentatus . None 9 » chiseled 2... 8S
»» —-maculicornis. . . . . 1504, maskirto . ahhhh
» — oblongus. . . . . . . 150 | Putorfederting, large. . . . . . 593
» parvulus 2... . 150 F square flocculor . . 593
» pyle... M9 | Psyla busi. a8
phytonomus. . . see WR] flue... AD
> wigeirostris, |). | 482 | pyratis. 2) lL) ae
nm polygon... . 192 | 4, farinalis. . ) . . . . 896
» — Roeseli. + 12} 4, forflcalis . . 88H
Pimpla pomorum. 2. 2... . 434 frumental, 2... . 337
» Pudibundae . . . . . . . 254 | 4, margaritalis . 2. 2...338
» rufa. 2... . . 26 |, palliolaris 2... 996
Piophila casei. 2... . 2. . 62 | 4, parialis. 82
flat kifer. 2. 2 2... 892 |, pinguinalis. 6 2... 933
yy brown getber > 2). 99 | | rostralis. » | 1)... gas
Platypus 168. |, socalis . . 2... . . 398
» eylindrus, 2. 2...188], silacealis 6. 2... . 997
Podura. sw. urticalis. . 2... , 888
» plumber... » Vina... ee. 880
Pogonocherus hispidus. . . . ... 197 | Pyrochroa coccinea... . . . . M0
Potydrosus . . . . . . . . . . 151 | Mercury ointment, as a remedy. . . . 55
» flavipes... . . . , 15 | mercury sublimate, as a means, . . 55
we Ae... . SSI Quece. 0 i). gene no
» Mollis... . . . . . 151 radish fliego . . . 2... . 561
» — Serious . . . . . . . ISL) Riuoherpfamne 2...
splendidus... . . . 151 | hedging, as a means 5...
polyps. 2.2. 2 | Randwamo.. .
potash, as a remedy. . . . . . . 55 | Rain Willow Swimmer . . . . . .
Glorious pineapple . . . . . . . . . . 70 | Caterpillar, actually . . 2...
pPrussia. . 2... 2... HL y= valley 2. 2
Psilarosae . . . . . . . . . . $65 | Marble Moth. 2... 2...
psocus. . . . . . . . . . « $87 | Caterpillar nests, grosso . . . .
domesticus 2... 2... 588 a No...
» pulsatorius . . . . . . . 588 | Rhombus, as a mean 2...
Poyla s,s M6 | Beef twws 2.
cratacgi . +s + + « 483°] Robe cutter, 2. 5 6th se
Mali. 6... 1... . 481 | Vine Stinging Chorus . 2...) subtitles
person... . . . . . . , 485 | Robsehildlaus 2... 2... 51S
» prun. . + + +. 485 | Roe Bromso , 5... . «+ S78
pyrisuga. eeee AIT | Negemworm eB
Pulinus peotinioornis. None |) 75 | Cleanliness, as a means | |. | a6
pins oe 18 | Relsskiifer. . . no te e168

 

Repsglanckiifor . repsiig wasp . Reutwurm . . . .
Magnesium inquisitor . Rhizotrogus solstitialis. Rhynebites

 

 

water . allariae . auratus. bachus . betulao
betuleti . eonicus
cupreus
Fragrances, as a remedy
Ricmenseurm
horse fly
Beef Biesfliego . cattle hairling . beef mibo
ring moth
rye flyego . .
Roggenziinsler . roller tail 4. rose aphid
Rosencicade . Rose cockroach, little . Rosearoller, golden yellow . rose poplar moth . Rossskiifer . horse chestnut maikitor -
horse chestnut moth
Rothkleospitzmieseb . Ribenbobrer. Ribeaweissting
rapeseed whistler . Ribseed White . riddle picker
rift of the kerfe
ripper
Runkelfliego . .
roundworms

Russians"

seed weevil
Seed speeder. Saatziimsler

house wasps . .
gosiirtelto
lettuce buckhorn

Salticus scenicus. seed kifer . Saperda

gracilis,

1. 410
. 451
197

+ 96
+ 309

105
47
135
139
135
131
ug
N.T
139
136

a

18
uh
976
598

566

+ 438:

15
494

A

101

+ 265

143 1738

+ 221

334

= 228

113 32
117

MW
461
197

337
400

= 408

19
114
194
195,

 

 

Saperda linearis. . . .
»» Pracusta Be
» sealaris 2...

Sarcophoga carnaria. . .

Sourworm 2. 2...

sougerr. 2. ee ee . suupwormer. . - . . -

Scrape. .. ae
> americaniseho | |
” German ©... .
» mean . . . on
» — White-shouldered 5. sheep bee fly . . . .

Sheep ling © 2. 1 www

eye mite . 2... s

eyesore . Occult flyego . . 2...

Sehafrawde 2... ss
sheep tick . shadow stoner . . 2 2 5
foamieado . . . . 6. checkflies . 2...
sea ​​tick . . . .
pseudoworm. . 2. . 6. Sehkol the Kerfe . . .
femur . . . . 2. Se bee of the kerf. None -
Shields of Kifer. screenfist . . . . .
Senildtiger. 2. 2 2 Shield butt cule . .
Seblafipfol . .

mud flies ,
Seble Owl . . . . 2. bugs. . . . . ss

, grim 2...
Sebmalziinster 2 2...
Selimeisfiego Ao Gln
mosquitoes. . . ah
sclinak flies . . .

 

Seharrheusebrecke,

snowworm . see
Cutter. 2...
tendon flies . .
tendon kiifer . . .
darker . Sebuepentiicgen . eyeshadow, as a means . .
sen redworm . . . .
Shaking on Tueher, as 'means
Sehwabo. see ee

 

   

 

194
198
tf

476
13
459

460
579
91
23
23,

109
M5

- 363

2
ul

. Hours

. BIT

33,
32 513,

430

- 315
72

473
474

a)
551

521

596
7

535

68
68

. 537

50 451
49
459

  

‘Swallowtail
Swimmer . . .

hoverflygon . . . |
Schwofel, as Mitel <2 | |

pig drive, as a means . .
pig louse . . 2... .

swimming kiifor . .
Scarabacus . .

»— stereorarius . .

1» typhocus . Sclara. . . .

» pyri major

j) Schmidhergeri | |. |

scolopendra . .

» forfieata. 2). » —_ hortensis
Scorpio... . .
Swallowtails . .
scide butterfly

Soapy water, as a remedy. .

Sclandria.. . . .

» brunnea . .

» _ fulvieornis

» —_ morio
Sesia culiciformis. yy tipulaeformis
Silver Griinripper
Silpha qua

 

ipunetata . w atvata . hey

» sinuata . maculata... 0

»ormata, 2. ,

wondered

simulia . » auricoma . » — @legans. latipes . » lineata,

» — marginata

» nigra

» — Feptans

» sericea. » various. »» — Variegata . Site...

» lineata _
Scorpion lounger . . . .
Sunkissies

a7)
Spannor oS ae

» @tinerr. caterpillars . .

Spargolkiifer, 12 point

third

2”

 

Asparagus weeper, yellow-spotted . bacon kifer 2...
Spex...
Sphinx. 2. we
» atropos.. . . .

celerio 2. » culiciformis . .
»» elpenor . . .

» ligustri . » nerii. » oeellata. . .
» phogea. . . .
and Poreellus 2...
» statis...
» Stellatarum 5. » tillage. 2...
spinach moth . spiders 2 Crackhead...

ny unequal :
Spiroptera. 2nd ss
Spite fly 2. pranks. . . .
i" er2colored. » ——_Belbfiissiges
ns yellow-shanked . %» _innoberrothes
Cotter pine tree 28
»—Brinned. .
Grihwniger . .

 

Jumper . 2. .
» —_niiusecolored
jumping caterpillar. . . . .
Springwine . . .
jumping spider . . . .

 

roundworms

gooseberry moth . . .

Stingohkiifor . . .
Staphylinus. . .

» — caesareus

» — erythropterus . » — maxillosus

» murinos. » — olens . » —_ stereorarius
stick flies. . . . .

»— mean . mosquitoes
stinging gnat . a mean
stone oak cule . .
drupe spike

2193

- 329

 

3
143
143 189

+ 189

190
67 596

19

+ 960

15,
110

66
66 66
66
65
66
568
568

eat

521
52
290
170

 

stone clover owl . .

Stcin fruit moth . stone fruit wasp
Starwort Swimmer . Stimeribler. . 2. Sharp fabrics, as center)

Voice of the Kerfe . housefly. . . .
Trimming bark kiifer . " greater . * Smaller . Stomoxys .. .
» — calcitrans . » — intitans. » — stimulants . strongylus . ray crab pus mite
radiation cardioid
stick insect
synonym. . . ..
» — phegea. Syrphus pyrastri. ‘Tobacco, as a remedy. . .

taboo. . . 2. .

» albipes |. f autumnalis ,
» —-Bromius. » — coeutiens . .
» — fulvus
»— phuvialis. Tochina 2. 2...
Tacnia. 2...
day age . . . . .
wallpaper cockroach . . .
Tactile sensation of the kerfo

 

‘Pigeon featherling, gosclliger . -

dew tedder mitbe . .
pigeon stick feathering
Pigeon tail . pigeon tick . Taupin... 1. ‘Thousand Feet . . .
Tenebrio, culinaris . » — molitor
Tenthredo. 2...
» aethiops
» —_albipes ,
+» appendiculata . Pesirapeen
brevis
» — brunnoa . .
» cerasi . we cineta. 2,

405,

Seito

. 579

210

2)

. 107
400
410
403

408

 

408
410
404

Tenthredo difforans. flava... .

 

  

tepl

fayens . fulvicornis

grossulariae . morning...

pagan . prun
rihis . pinko

rosarum,
rufocincta
hello
spinarum,
tricincta
‘Yentricosa
ccrasi

Teredili . . . .
terms . .

termites . . . .

flavicolte . flavipes
tucifugum

yellowfiissi

Tettigonia hacmatodes . ‘Ter rings . .
Theer Binder
Thicriuse . tinea

alyearia . asperclla
betulinclla . cacsiclla
carvella
cerealclla
corolla. Glerkella
cognatolla
colonelia . crinella
daucella . eluteta
epilobiella
evonymella . granella . grossuli
laeteclla. .
melonolla
padella
pellionetia
persicetla
Porrectclla. Thran, as Mitted . mom HSEcSSRSSSSEEE

zg

GEESaSSREEE:

58

Section

 

‘Vinea pruniella . »» Thodophagella . +» Roesella. .
» sarcitella
» syringella
» tapezella.. .
xylostella . .
Tipu...

» eorealis, |...

oleracea,

Todtengraier . None ‘Deathkiifer, . . .

‘Toutonkopi butterfly . Death Nubr 6... . .

fortrix. 2...
»»— ambiguella. y—ameriana, . .
» aquana . . .

» areuana . .
” Bergmanniana. »» cerasana . , — erataegana

» eynosbana . * Forskaeleana .
}) Neparana. .
» Holmiana
yy in chestnuts

» — Inevigana
»»—luseana . » Migricana. .
» Ovellana . »» — ochroleueana
»» oporana . ima...
» Pilleriana
} pomonana
»—pruniana
» — Feliquana. » ribeana . roborana. NY Fosana. .
» — Roserana. » — sorbian,
» vas. »uvana . 5
» Narlogana . » — vitisana :
»» Woeberana . .
xylosteana
‘Tracheen of Kerfo. |
‘Drinks, as a remedy
‘Trapeze Winged Owl . ‘Trusted maggot

 

. 37

+ 889

'382, 861

635

side
386
- 390
a)
. or

- 390

. 972
. 989

Loe. 838
« . 582

right
+. + 109

. 231
77, 388

+ + 938

+ 985
352
362

a)

. 364

- 384

- 392

348

. 962

. 359
859

353
349
346
349
362

vs 862

- 360
a)
351

998
362
355

. 854

. 955
355

. MB

. 389

+ 334

- 993

37

. 84

290
385

 

‘grape moth

‘Bereavement marriages . Trematoda . Trichius eremita ,
»» — hemipterus |

Trichocephalus—. Trichocora hiemalis. . .

Trichodectes 2. |

» — eaprae . ” equi . » — Act 5
» —_ Stibrostratus
»— Sealaris 4
»— sphaerocephalus ..
Trices... . .
Thrips... ol

yy ceroalium . . .
}» himorthoidalis . » obscura... .
y physapus . . .

Trogosita. . . . - . > earaboides . » coerulea
‘Trombidium telarium
trotecopl. . . . .
Uloma culinaris
» opatroides . .
Disparate beetles. unguentum mercuriale, as
Ver blanc. 2...
Vorborgenripper . . .
Yortage . .
Metamorphosis of the Kerfe
Vespa... ss
» erabro
» gallica
» Fafa. bo
» Wwigaris. 2...
Vibrio acti. organic or
Four-point spinner .. .
fowl mite . . . . -
Vogeltiuse
advance payment
wax template
wood ant . P
» as a medium . Wood Moth Moth . Forest Straw Howl >...
waltz flies . .
Wandor Locust
Women... .
» gerated . sy Fothlegged

 

electrical

 

‘Medium

+ 888

- + 288

“86, 488

 

+ 107

412
 4at
+ that
. at

28 ats

14

as)
592
. 8th
364
429
. 310
. 288
+ 595

437

468
~ 468

Bugs, squabbling
» — two-colored. . .
bug flies. . . .

goods kifer 2 2...
Water, hisses, as a means . Water thread 2... se
water flea . 2 6 2. water bugs. . . . . «
spider wasps. . 2. . -
Weeping Weeper . . .
weeselspanner . -
willow borer . . . . .

 

Vine Fallkiifer . . .

 

Woinziirner. . . .
Weinawirner 2...
hawthorn owl . . . . .
Hawthorn moth . . .
wheat evlo. . . .
wheat mosquito . . . . 2. wheat wrecker . . 2. workaholic
Wormwood, as a remedy . .
Merepy-w--
Werren bellows . . . .
Wasps so... ss
» naughty 2. » — some . . .
» mean. .

spirit, as a means...
grapevine . 2... .

636

 

side
. + 469

:. 8th
.
. ae
- + 46
481
hey
- + 306

262

- my
- + 204
+. B29

. 29

475
. 45
+ 295
+ 907

- + 53h

+ + 8B

- 2 8
- 98, 391

430
- ane
oo 418

 

sweet pea mixes . .
wicker. - ened
Meadow Crane . . . .
winter seed owl . . . . .

winter crane . None 2. wool tail 2 2. 2. Worms, cigentliche . .
xylophogen. 2...
Wye Owl . . . 2. coneworm 5.
take...
Zebra wasps.. .
goat hairling . .
goat louse
Zipens . it oe
zoophytes . . .

sugar peas evle . . . .
‘Drag Insect . . . .

tongue of kerfe . . . .
Zinio. it
double 2 0...
» —— honey bees . i» stretched . .
>» strolling tickets
» — short-lived. Twoig detour . . . . .
Dwarf Griinriissier . 2...
plum culo . . . .
‘Plum moths . . .
onion fliego . . . .
onion maggot . . . .
chirping locust . .

Duodenum fly . 219

2) 208

: ae

= 439
- . 508
+ 595
2 AI

296

331
37
- 91d
+. Sat
. = o4

546

 

s+ 139)

+ + 150
295
312
. 589
+ 500

- ANB

584

 

 

 

hey sae,
; bye