IAUATATS Osborn ETCH

c rip, 4100s Mo onesaranin npeactanseno Gais0 Bb Morey
1 ; R )-£0,
Kowurers ysaxonennoe auexo oxsewmanpows, Mocksa, Toss . 1861 roam, Heneopu: Me Hpwtur w HE, Bescosmewcs. TO THE

KNOWING the RUWNCHOTEN. DESCRIPTION NEVER FAMILY SPECIES
PSYLLODEA Burm. YO

dr Gustav Flor. Kine trip through Germany, Switzerland, Oecster-
rich, northern Italy and southern France offered me
oliers opportunity for entomological excursions, where-
I call my attention primarily to Rhynchoten
directed. Submit as a partial result of the same
I to the entomological public in the following the
Description of new and some not yet sufficient
precisely described species from the family Psyllodea
Burm. Unfortunately, the processing of this family is still pending
Much to be desired, since Forster, the only
who was specially concerned with the same, his
The monograph announced in 1848 did not appear
let and the oversight which he had over the
There is well-known material (see Note 1) for the
reliable determination of the species éffers not sufficient,

No 2. 1861, . 22

t Deg! eiit, Ge °
v From the -“convex of the. A

“Rich genera Peylla and Trioza two chersicht~
tables,’ of which- the 2nd. mainly | the different
i i aman find, recom-

I don't. durable,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

334

as bounded by the basal portion of the inferior marginal nerve. Tip piece of the outer edge I nine in the genus
Trioza the section of the same, which between the
radius and the extreme tip of the upper wing. From departments ate only on the upper wing
recognizable narrow Claaus, on the lower wing a Claus

vs corresponding appendix. . The nerves of the lower phalanges are very fine and their
run so evenly in all genera that they
no clues to characterize the genera
and species offer. .

On the female genitals. I distinguish
an upper and a lower Genitalplaite, which between
enclose the ovipositor. The male genitals
sole parts. standing. from a the tip of the abdomen
men engaging trough-shaped segment open at the top,
the genital segment, which is attached to the top. pages in the
Near his rear end 2 differently shaped
mostly together ‘movable progression forming a pair of tongs
sitze shows the pincers; at the front end of the Geni-
{alsegments one finds a = high mostly vertical
movable, but the preceding segments (only
apparently belonging to the genital segment, sometimes
with + long horizontal lateral extensions
hene, rarely (in Homotoma ficus) split in the middle
lene plate, the genital plate. Note 4. Overview of genera and species
in the Psyllode family of Arn, Forster, in the
Negotiations of the Natural History Association of the Prussian
sian Rhineland, 1848. 3. 335

. The natural arrangement of those known to me and partly
in present. Essays partly in my writing about
Rhynchotes of Livonia described species of the genus
gene Psylla, Trioza, Aphalara and Rhinocola after her
relationship is as follows:

a. psylla. 1) Spartii Hartig, 2) torifrons m., 3) spe-
ctabilis m., 4) perspicillata m., 5) Fersteri
m.,'6) Alni Linn, Zett., 7) Betulae Linn.,
8) Pyri Scope. Forest., 9) insignis m., 10)
albipes m., 14) salicicola Farst., 12) nota-
ta m., 13) flavopunctata m., £4) pityophi-
la m.,.15) Reunj Scop. Sih, 16) Hartigii
m., 17) Saliceti Forst., 18) Pineti m., 19)
Ledi m., 20) austridca m., 21) costalis m.,
22) crataegicola. Férst., 23) alpina Forst.,
24) Mali Forst,, 25) ‘melina m., 26) bre-
viatennata m., 27) unicolor m., 28) Fra-
xini De C., 29) discrepans m.

 

bra. Trioza 1) mesomela m., 2) Walckeri Forst., 3)
abieticola Forst., 4) marginepunctata m.,
5) alacris m., 6) yiridula Zett., 7) nigri-
cornis Forst., 8) recondita m., 9) abdominal
nalis m., 10) albiventris Farst., 41) Urticae
Lion. Forst., 12) Striola m., 13) Galii Forst.,
14) velutina Forst., 15) distincta m., 16)
munda Férst., 17) acutipennis Zett, (non
forest ), 18) femoralis farst., 19) cabinetii
m., 20) flavipennis Forst., 21) proxima m.,
22) rotundata m., 23) dryobia m., 24) as-
similis m.

  

c. Aphalara 1) exilis Weher et Mohr., 2) Polygoni

 

 

 

336
Forst., 3) affinis Zett., 4) Artemisiae Forst.,
5) nervosa Férst., 6) picta Zett. 337
6. (3) Forehead as you transition to the crown
olne conical extensionon (chne
forehead cone). 7. (10). The unpaired subsidiary eye at the front edge
of the vertex in the transition of the same
to the forehead, visible from the front. 8th. (9). Margin wide and clear. (genital plate
the $f simple, without continuations). . Rhinocola First. 9. (8th). Edge mark missing. (genital plate of @ init 2
Jangen horizontalen rope continuations). None Aphalara Vorst. 10 (7). The unpaired secondary eye on top of the
apex, from the front edge-of-the same
removed. (Upper wing without edge mark). Exphyllura Forest. 44 (2). Feel dense and long hairy, from the |
Sides broadly compressed. (Forehead |
cones are missing. wing without rim mark). |

Homotoma Guer. 12. (1). Part as long as with the eyes shut-

same wide. eyes not over-the head-

i.e. Rhinocola 1) subrubescens m., 2) speciosa m., 3)
Ericae Curt., 4) Aceris Linn. Ferst.°

Overview of the genera

1. (12). Parting much shorter than with eyes closed
together wide. eyes over the surface of the head
rising. (3rd fitler link usually
lich the Vingste, always considerably longer
than the 2-le. pronotum on the sides with
clear impressions),

. (11). Filer white-hairy, stringy (not from
pressed together from the sides). 3. (6). Forehead in front at the transition to the vertex

in 2 mostly conical forts, the

Frontal cone, lengthened. no

 

4. (5). Cubitus stalked, hence the lower margin
only gives off 2 branches. (random mark-
ingly present, seldom absent; no nerves
veustricheln at Fligelrande between the

f sharp : : tes Wihlerali |

{ first and 4th prong; top of the surface | rising, a th feeler member :

| fit! always rounded) Poylla Goole the lingest and much longer than the 3rd, . j
Bor stots abgoruneee ss st iy . Pronotum without child ridges on the sides). .

4% (4 Gubitus seated, hence from Unterrandnery Livia Late. (Diraphia Illig.) Sacrifice 3 branches, 2 of which come from the

i originate from the same points. (The edge mark
i is always missing; on the wing edge between the
\ first and 4-th prong 3 distinct short
nerve strokes; tip of the upper wing
habitual + sharp and clearly angular). Trioza Forest. GENUS PSYLLA. goof First overview of the species. 4. (40) Randmal is completely foblt, or is extreme
short, hardly recognizable, oiler just through

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1).

. (8th).

. (8th).

. (3). 338

a thickening of the peripheral nerve
indicates. upper wing widest before the middle,
or at least not more narrow than behind the-
the same. .

Slira cone shorter. as the vertex in the
Mitta, almost toric, broadening at the end
rounded. (Marginal mark missing volistindig). Upper wing a little more than twice as long
wis wide, widest in front of the middle,
translucent with light brownish yellow

approaches. 2... ee ee Ps. torifrons m.

. Oberiltigel 3 times as long as wide, before

the middle just as wide as in and behind
the same, wasserhel! with brown liings
streaks and stains. . .

Frontal cone long, 11/, times as long as that
apex in the middle, (upper wing with the
Hint of a Randinal, 3 times as long
how wide, water-white, at the top unre-

gel-like blackish colored). . p.s. spectabilis m.

. Upper wing widest behind the middle

(less than 3 times as long as wide).

. Apex very broad, deep on the posterior edge |

cut out, barely in the middle */, go
long as wide at the posterior edge. Stirnke
gel very short, as long or a little shorter

as the apex in the middle, . . . p.s. Fersteri m.

» +» Ps. Sparti Hartig. 9. None 10 (A). 44 (16). 42 (8th). 43 (14). 339

Apex at center nearly 3/4 as long as
at the poorly cut out rear edge
wide. tuning cone rather long, about Dy,
times as long as the parting in the middle. p.s. perspicillata m.

Edge mark clearly developed (only in Ps. Alni often narrow and short, somewhat un-
clear). handle of the dussern fork of the cubitus not
or only ‘very little crooked and with
the radius completely or-almost completely pa-
rallel (by only at its beginning
and end of radius' biswoilen' something
is further away than in the rest of the course). Inferior marginal nerve from the radius to the cubi-
do as long or elwas Inirzer' than that
Stem of the Cubitus. (Radius in the big picture
parts of its course to the Aussonrand
nery parallel, the greatest distance between
schen them amounts to about 2 /, the grissten
width dos. upper wing). Upper wing clear with darker coloring
'at the top, within which also the
nerves are colored black. The dark coloring at the top of the
Upper wing not sharp against the light
delimited. (The fithler insignificantly
xer and the upper wing very little
less than with Ps. Fraxini, the body coloring
brighter than there; the most important

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

340
difference lies in the pincer shape of the
- rr Ps. diserepans ni. 44, (13). The dark coloring at the tip of the
upper wing sharp against the bright
selate se ee ee we Ps. Fracini De C.

45 (12): upper wing completely clear with very pale
yellow nerves. ... 0 Ps, unicolor m,

416 (14). Stem of the dark fork of the Cubitus =
strongly curved, not parallel to the radius
lel. Unterrandnery from the radius to the
Cubitus always considerably longer than the stem
of the cubitus. (Radius of the peripheral nerve
not or only for a short distance
rallel, his greatest distance from the same-
ben is deullich less than 1), the
largest broite dos Oberlliigels). AT, (18). Antennae very short, barely reaching the
base of the upper liigel. front cone-bare /,
as long as the parting in the middle,
(upper liigel wasserbell, in the final third ao-
rogolmissive grey-brownish colored). p.s. breviants~
nata m.,
48 (17). feelers extend to the base of the surface
gol away. Stira cone at least 5/, so
long as the crown, — ~

419 (22). upper wing within the cells and between
schen dea nerves with lighter or darker
gray Léingsshadow, which after the
straighten the course of the nerves, . 25 26 27 28

. (21). » (20). (19). » (28).

. (28).,

(24). (27). (23).

. (30). 344

Upper wing widest behind the middle. Tuning cone with a fairly sharp tip. p.s. Pyri Linn. Upper wing behind the middle not or at least
hardly noticeably wider than in the middle. Forehead cone with blunt, broadly rounded
ter Spite, . eee Ps, insignis m.

Oberiliigel without long switching between

the nerves and in the cells. tip of the clavus brown or black

colors. A black spot on the first tin

ke. (vocal cone, sharply spat with

radem outer edge) .. 2... Ps. albipes a.
No stain on the first tine. Vocal cone sharply tapering from the base

from diverging, straight at the outer edge. p.s. notata m,

- end cone with blunt = wide rounded

deter tip, lying on each other’ or
nw. little diverging, at the outer edge
weakly concayv. 2... Ps. salicicola First. Tip of the clavus light, with the coloring
the other parts of the upper wing
agreeing,

All rails with. Not a black one
Spots at base. (nerves of
upper wing fine, brown or blackish,
aur the base of the inferior marginal nerve, the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

342
Randal and the Ausseuranduery up to
~ tip of rim mark, griia or yellow). p.s. Alni Linn. zett. 30, (29). Rails without a black spot on the outside

a

33

the base. - (40). Colored upper wing. (Filer short, enough

. (38)

scarcely to the base of the lower wing or
only very little beyond the same).

. Frontal cone 5/, as long as the apex in
the middle (diverging from the base). upper wing transparent, equal
moderately light yellowish in colour. . p.s. flavopunctata m.

- (32). Frontal cone at least as long as

the apex. 34 (35). Frontal cones bordering each other, rare

38 (34). 36 (37). 37

38,

something. diverging, their tip broadly
tuned. (Second prong of upper wing
evenly and very ~weakly
curves). - oe ee Ps. Saliceti forest

Frontal cone always clearly diverging with
sharp or narrow rounded tip. Frontal cone at outer edge concav. . p.s. Pineti m.

. (36). Face cone on the outer edge straight or

(39). convex. 39 (38). AA,

2. (45

» (B.A.)

(80).

. (Ad).

. U3). 5. (AQ). 343

Fithler reach a little over the base
the underwing gone. (upper wing through-
shining yellowish, at the base
len a little eller)... 2. . p.s. Hartigti m.

Upper wing undyed, glass or water
bright. (Feelers sometimes extend beyond the
back chest out). Stire cone on the outer edge straight or
scarcely perceptibly coneav, starting from the base
gradually and evenly narrowed. Filers reach to the end of the rear
breast or beyond the same. — *

posterior edge of the crown quite low
cut, parting in the middle almost et-
what less than 1/, as long as between
the eyes wide at the posterior edge. Forehead-
cone as long as the apex. feeler
extend to the 2nd or 3rd abdomen
nalsegment, .pronotum in the mille des
Posterior margin distinctly concay. . . p.s. Betula Lin. posterior edge of lateral almost straight,
tel in the middle a little more than ?/, so
long as am: posterior margin between the
eyes wide. Stira cone slightly longer than
the apex. Feelers reach to the end
de the hind breast, pronotum in the middle
of the posterior edge almost straight. . . p.s. Alpine Wirst.,

antennae barely reach the base of the
terfliige] or just very little over it. 6. (47). Forehead cone with blunt rounded tip

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AT. (46). AS. (49). 49 (48). 80 (44). B.A. (86). 52 (83). 83 (82). B.A. (58). 344

ze, somewhat shorter than the apex in the
Mitlee 2... oe

Frontal cone sharply pointed, as long as
the apex. posterior margin of the apex faint but distinct
lich coneay. (Feiler scarcely reach to the
base of the underwings. Forceps of the 32nd

times as high as breil), 2... . Ps, costalis m.

Rear edge of crown almost straight. (Feelers 'reach' very little beyond the base
the lower wing out. Pliers of the jf 3
times 80 high as wide), . Frontal cone at the outer edge clearly con-
eav, more rapid from the base to the middle
merged than in the final help, which
letatere is sometimes the same width everywhere. Fihler hardly reach to the base. the
Unterfliigol or just a little over the same
out. Seheitel in the middle (up to the front a
Beside) a little less than ¥/, as long
as on the posterior edge between the eyes
wide. (Filers extend to the base of the
underwings. edge mark to itther the middle

more or less of the same width). p.s. Pinett m.

Parting in the middle (up to the front
side eye) full 2/, as long as-at the hin-
terrande wide between the eyes,

Feelers extend slightly above the base of the

» s+ Ps, austriaca m.

+ Ps. crataegicola First. 85 (BA). 58 60

. (84). » (60).

. (89).

. (88). 345

underwing. Randmal to over the
Middle of its length pretty much the same
Broad. (frontal cones lying on top of each other ==
diverging). . 2... Ps. salicicola Furst. Vilhler barely reach to the base of the
underwing. edge mark from the beginning
gradually faded away. (Forehead cone always
diverging from the base). . p.s. Pitysphila m.

Feelers reach almost to the end of the hin-
gate breast or beyond the same. antennae almost reach the end of the posterior

chest. (Upper wing 22/, times as long as

breil). Body coloring light blue, bluish gran or

light yellow. (Outer margin of the upper wings in

the middle straight). ©...Lk Ps. melina m,

Body coloring lighter or darker red. (Outer edge of the upper wing in the middle
weak but clearly convex). . . . p.s. ledi m.

Fithler reach over the back chest
away. (Upper wing 3 times as long as
Three)... ee Ps. mali forest Second overview of the species. (with special consideration of the differences in the genital

apparatuses). 1, (50). Mannechen (see note 4). 346

2, (41). Edge mark is completely absent, or is it yourselves
short, hardly recognizable, or just through
a thickening of the peripheral nerve
indicates. 347

translucent with light brownish yellow

Appendices oe Ps. torifrons m.
10 (9) Surface! 3 times Jang as wide, before

middle just as wide as in and behind the-

same, water-white with brown longitudinal

streaks and stains.. . . . . p.s. Sparta artis. 14 (2). Edge mark clearly developed (only at Ps,

Alni often narrow and short, somewhat un-

clear). 42 (17). Genital plating on the sides with short

posterior projections. 413 (13). Pliers hatchet or hammer-shaped (preferably

derrande at right angles or’ strongly

3. (8) Pincers 4—5 times as high as wide, am
Yorder and hind margins whole or at least
almost completely straight, not at the top or
hardly noticeably wider than before. 4. (7) Superficial! widest behind the middle. Pliers at the tip no more slender than
at the base. None (6). Laterally very wide, deep on the posterior edge

cut out, in the middle hardly '/, so
Jang as wide at the rear edge. forehead cone

wriggles). very short, as long or slightly shorter than . ) a, ;
the apex in the middle. . . .. p.s. Fersterd m. 44. (15). Pliers axe-shaped. 2... 2... p.s. unicolor w.
6. (8th). Parting in the middle almost '/, as long as ' 18. (14). Hammer-shaped tongs. . . . . p.s. diserepans m.

at the. posterior margin broad, moderately excised
ten. Frontal cone rather long, about 4*),
times as long as the vertex in the
Middle... 0... 6 6. p.s. perspicillata m.

7. (4). Oberfitigel behind the middle almost a little

narrower than before. pliers all- . mildly very sharply pointed. . . p.s. spectabitis m.

16 (13). Zangeu snapper firm, on the straight
derrande higher than at the concayen back-
edge, at the upper edge verydg from the front to
sloping at the back. 2... e , Ps, Frawini Det. 17, (12). Gonital plate simple, ome extension to the
Pages. 18 (21). Pull in front with a forte. 8th. (8th). Tongues na 3 ma 50 high like three, © 19. (20), extension of the pincers above from the apex
at the front and rear - ‘ ° My t
writhing, at the apex clearly tapering off, simple, horizontal. . . . p.s. insignis m.i
testing. 20 (19). Extension of the pincers from the middle of the pro |

derrandes outgoing, first horizontally, then
bent almost at a right angle and
. link. 6... . . . Ps, Salicete Borst. <M 2 1862 23

). (40) Oberlltigel little mebx than 2 times as long
how wide, widest in front of the middle,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

348

24, (18). Pincers simple, without extensions. 22, (23). Pincers strongly curved forward. . p.s. Pyri Linn. 23, (22). Pliers straight or slightly backwards
crooked. 24, (28). Rear edges of the pincers to about */, their
High (from the base) opposite
arc and touching each other so that
them from the posterior edge of the genital segment
upwards no open space between
can be (they are hardly 3 times as high
how close to the base wide). . . , p.s. Pinété m.

28, (24). Hind rims of the pliers not or only
weak against each other
curves, never colliding. therefore
between them in all their height
open space at the back. 26 (29). Pliers slightly crimped by the pre-
themargin weakly convex, the posterior margin
is correspondingly concay. 27 (28). Genital plate scarcely higher than that
pincers, the latter about 4 times as high as
wide. Fithler range a little over the
base of the lower wings. (top of
Clavus usually brown or black
dyed). . ee Ps, salicicola Férst. 28 (27). Genital plate clearly higher than the teeth
gene, the latter 8-6 times as high as wide. Fithler barely reach the base of the
terftigel. (Tip of clavus not darker
colored as the disc) . . . . p.s. pityophila m.

  
    
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
  

349

29, (26). Pliers straight, with straight rims or
at the front and at the same time at the rear edge
sel weakly concave. 30 (38). Clavus deep black in color at apex. 34, (32). First prong on the rear edge in the final
half with blackish shadow. (Zan-
hardly noticeably towards the top
smiles. legs pale yellow, letates tar-

32 (31). First prong without a blackish shade. (Pliers gradually towards the tip
warned. Legs light yellow, shanks
= far black)

33 (80). Tip of clavus no darker than
the disc. 34, (37). Pincers low, 2-3 times as high as
wide. (Feiler short, hardly reach to the
base of the lower wings). 35 (36). pliers about 2 times as high as breif,
Frontal cone sharply pointed, as long as
the parting in the middle... . . p.s. costalis m.
36 (38), pincers 3 times as high as brei. Stirnke

gel with a bluntly rounded tip, something

Idirzer than the apex. . . . p.s. austriaca m.
37 (84). Pincers high, 4-6 times as high as broit. 38 (43). Fithlor reach over the back chest

away. 39 (40). Sharp-tipped pliers (they are up to

the same width everywhere near the tip,

23*

sal part black-brown) . 2... Ps, albipes mi. See eee Ps. notata m,

 

 

 

 

 

350

only shortly before the same allmilig zu-. gepitdl) oe ee ee Ps, Mati Pérst. 40, (39). Wide-tipped pliers (which ones so wide. or slightly wider than the base). Al, (42). forceps to the tip tiberall yon same

cher widths, this one a bit wider. (Ner-

ven the upper wing evenly colored. See without a black spot on the

as) Fee ee Ps. Betulae Linn. 42, (Al), pincers at the base and apex of gl-
wide, a little narrow in the middle
ler. (nerves of the upper iliige! uneven
sig dyed; they are fine, dark brown
or black, the Randnery on the outer
rande, the rim mark and base of the un-
terrand nerves green or yellow. rails
usually with a black spot on the outside of the :
base) ee ee Ps. Alni Linn. zett. 43, (38), antennae barely reaching the base of the
inferior or little about the same
out. S i of the base
4A, (48). Pincers 4 times as high as on d ss
“) wide, always 2ugespital. . p.s. Pruni Seop. worst 48, (44). Forceps at least $—6 times as high as
broad at the base, everywhere but dis
near the tip of the same width. AG, (47). Pincers kura blurred in front of the tip. ; 7
(Surface! clear as water) . . p.s. erataegicola Vorst. AT, (46). Pincers at the tip no narrower than
pre. Upper wing transparent with yellow

 

 

351
light eye or completely yellow-
borrowed). 48 (49). Front cone as long as the sea heitel, ye
Outer margin + distinctly convex or almost
just. (upper lily gel translucent yellow-
left). Ps, Hartigii in. 49 (48). Frontal cone shorter (8/5 as long) than the
Apex, its outer edge very faint
concav. (transparent upper wing with yellow
slight approach). 2 2... Ps, flavopunctata m.
50 (1). female (s, note. 2). 51. (60). Randmal is missing Volistindig or is due
karz, hardly recognizable, or just dure
a thickening of the peripheral nerve
indicates
52 (57). Lower genital plate shorter than all 4 above
connecting abdominal segments together
men, gradually narrowed and
tapers, but not into a long diane
tip pulled out. 53 (54). Upper wings little moti than twice as long
how wide, widest in front of the middle,
translucent with a light brownish-yellow om
attachment. .. p.s. torifrons m.
54, (53). Upper iris 3 times as long as wide, in front
the middle just as wide or hardly noticeable
much wider than in and behind it,
Wasserlell with brown Zoichnuag. 35 (56). Edge mark is completely missing, Stiru cone
slightly shorter than the vertex.. . Ps, Spartit Hartig. 352

36 (88). Marginally indicated, but very short. Forehead-
cone is actually longer than the disc

87 (82). Lower genital plate at least like that
long as all previous abdominal
segments together, into a long ditn-
pulled out a tip. 38 (89). Lower genital plate about as long as all
preceding abdominal segments 2u~
together, their dinnere long undressed
Endhilfete clearly by deepening

then the basal half was removed. p.s. perspicillata m.

89 (58). Untore Gonitalplatte considerably Winger than
all preceding abdominal segments
together, their end half not against 'the
Basal help removed. None + + + °

60 (81). Edge mark clearly developed (aur at Ps. Alni often narrow and short, somewhat wn-
dull). 64 (66). Lower genital plate in the middle with long
ger lash-like hair (wihvend
the underside of the abdomen hairless
isl), split at the apex. 62 (68). Upper iris bright as glass with bright colors
at the Spilze, within which also the
nerves have died black. 63 (64). The dark coloring at the top of the
Upper liigi not sharp against belle
delimited. (The Tithler insignificant kitr-

Ps, spectabilis m.

Pr. Fersteri m.

 

 

353

and the upper wings very little

less than with Ps. Praxini, body coloring

brighter than there; the most important

difference lies in the pincer shape of the

(o> Ps, diserepans m.
64, (63). The dark Férbuug at the top of the

upper wing sharp against the bright

_ seta. Se ee + + Ps. Fraxini De G
68 (62). superficial! villig crystal clear with very pale
yellow nerves. . hey pe unicoor m

66 (61). Lower genital plate hairless or with
isolated short non-ciliated ge+
posed Harchen, at the top not posed
columns. -

67 (70). Lower genital plate into a long thin die

-Use the tip that takes your length
undressed (and so Jang or a little
Kinzer than the preceding abdominal
segments of the underside all together). 68 (69). Nerves of the upper wing unequally colored
(dark brown or black, only the
senrandnery along with the marginal mark and the
Rasis of the inferior marginal nerve grtin or
yellow). Rails on the outside of the base with
black spot... , . . . . p.s. Almi Linn. zett

69 (68). nerves of the upper wings evenly
colors. splints without black spot

. outside at the base. . ..Ps, Betulae Linn,

70 (67). Lower genital plate gradually narrowed
and acuminate, rarely ending in a

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(74).

. (73). (72).

. (1).

. (76). (78).

. (18). (17).

. (82). 354

dfinne tip pulled out, dic but then
significantly less than */, as long as
the gauze genital plate. Lower genital plate so long or scarce
shorter than all preceding abdomens
nal segments together. Upper wing water white. forehead cone with
blunt tip.. . . . 1. . « Ps. alpine forest. Upper wing translucent yellowish. Top
the frontal cone sharp,. . . . . . p.s. Hartigii m.

Lower genital plate distinctly shorter than that
preceding abdominal segments
together,

Lower genital plate in the last third in
a very fine point drawn out. p.s. breviant
nata m.

lower genital plate gradually tapered,
but not in a thin point
pulled. Upper genital plate extends at the top
at least for the help of the Linge of
below beyond the latter . 6... Ps. Pineti m.

Upper genital plate is not enough or only
little over the top of the lower ones. upper wing within the cells wd between
the nerves with lighter or darker
gratien Longshadow, 'which after the
straighten the course of the nerves

 

. (81).

. (80).

. (79).

. (86). » (88). 3. (84). (88). - (92).

. (89). 355

upper wing widest behind the middle,
Tuning cone with a rather sharp tip. Ps, Pyri Linn. Upper wing behind the middle not or at least
Hardly noticeably wider than in the middle. Stira cone with tamper wide rounded-

ter tip. . . . p.s. insignis m.

 

Upper liigel without longitudinal shadow between
the nerves and in the cells. Tip of clavus brown or warty
colors. Stira cone sharply pointed, from the base
from diverging, straight at the outer edge. p.s. notata m.
Stira cone with blunt =: broadly rounded
deter tip, lying on each other or
only slightly diverging, at the outer edge
weakly concayv. . 1... » Ps. salicicola Ferst,

Tip of the clavus light, with the coloring
the other parts of the upper liigel
agreeing,

Upper wing colored. (Feiler short, enough
scarcely to the base of the lower liigel or
only very little beyond the same). Frontal cone */, as long as the apex in
the middle (diverging from the base). Upper wing transparent, the same everywhere
discolored light yellowish. (lower gen-
talplatte almost as long or slightly longer than

 

 

 

 

 

 

89

90

or

93

94,

. (88).

. (94).

. (90).

. (87).

. (98).

. (98). 356

the 3 preceding abdominal segments
musammeh) ... ee eee Ps, flavopunciata m,

Frontal cone at least as long as
the apex. (Lower genital plate a little
slightly shorter or slightly longer than the 2
preceding abdominal segments
together). Frontal cones bordering each other, rarely et-

which diverges, the tip is broadly rounded

de. (Second prong of upper wing same-

weak and sel weakly curved). Ps, Salicetd'
forest Forehead cone always clearly diverging, with
narrow edged tip, on the outer
edge straight. (Fillers barely reach to
at the base of the lower wings. overwing
transparent yellow-brownish or brown,
progressively darker toward the tip
the base lighter, often water-white). p.s. Pruni Scope. forest Upper wing uncolored, glass or water
bright, (Filers sometimes reach over the
back chest away),

Stira cone on the outer edge straight or
Slightly concave, starting from the base
gradually and evenly merged. End cone with blunt rounded tip
ze, somewhat shorter than the apex in the
Middle... ee eee Ps. austriaca in. 357

98 (04). Stira cone sharply pointed, as long as
the apex. 96 (97). Posterior edge of crown weak but
clearly concay. (Filers barely reach to
to the base of the underwings. Forceps of the 4th
2 times as high as wide). . + Ps. costalis m.

97 (96). Rear edge of crown almost straight. (Feelers reach very little over the Ba~
sis the lower wing away. Zangon the
of 5 times as high as wide). p.s. crataegicola forest. 98 (93). Frontal cone at the outer edge clearly con-
eay, more rapidly from the base to the middle
narrower than in the final half, which
letatere is sometimes the same width everywhere. 99 (102). Feelers scarcely reach the base of the
lower wing or very little about the-
same out. 4100 (401). Feelers extend slightly above the base of the

underwing away. Randmal to over the

pretty much the same in mid-length

Broad. (Frontal cone lying against each other

or = diverging), . . .. p.s. salicicola Ferst. 104 (100). Fithler barely reach the base of the

~ underwing. Margin mark from the beginning from al- ~

mildly melted. (Forehead cone always from

diverging from the base). . . . p.s. pityophila m.
402 (99). Feelers reach almost to the end of the

posterior breast or across it. 103 (106). Fihler almost reach the end of the

|
|
i
i
|

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

358

terbreast. (Upper wing 2*/, sometimes as long as
wide). 404, (105). Body coloring light blue, bléulicigrita
or bright yellow. (outer edge of the surface
gel straight in the middle), 2.2... Ps, melina m.

408 (104). Body coloring lighter, or darker red. (Outer edge of the upper wing in the middle
faintly but distinctly convex), . . . p.s. ledi m.

406 (103). Feelers reach over the hind chest
away. (Upper wing 3 times as long as
wide). oeeeee Ps. Mali First,

note 1 Yn the overview of the % the species are missing: alpina
Forst., melina m., breviantennata m. and Ledi 1. note 2 In the overview of the Q felt Ps. ‘albipes. 1. Psylla Spartii Wart. Light green, almost with a bluish tinge, or light green
light yellow, rarely dirty light yellow; head and thoracic
usually with dirty light yellow, brownish yellow
ben or brown, rarely black, dots and spots
chen (usually 4 on the vertex and on each side am
Pronotum 2 darker dots). abdomen either
all black (sometimes at 3), or black with
very narrow light yellow bordered side and rear ring
dern of the segments, or above. black with very narrow
light posterior margins of the segments. below monochrome light,
grin or greenish yellow, but often the first

  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  

359
segment and the sides of the following gray or yellow
are black, or finally the whole abdomen
big light green or light yellow. For the dark colored ones
In some specimens most of the breast is also black. crest rather faint at the Hivterra margin, but clearly
Lich, cut out, in the middle half or at least almost
half as long as on the posterior edge between the eyes
wide. Star cone light green, rarely light yellow, at the top of the
base in the border furrow often very narrow black,
short and thick, about */, as long as the vertex, from
moderately diverging from the broad base and only slightly
merged, ‘with a very blunt, broadly rounded apex
ze. antennae soften yoll to the base of the abdomen,
black, the first 3 segments except for the tip
of the 3rd, often also the basal half of the 4th, seliner
nor the base of 5, light yellow or dirty light brown-
fawn yellow; Member 3 11/,—17/ as long as 4. throat cones
now light, now black. Pronotum slightly longer than
usually in the species of Psylla, horizontally, in the
Barely noticeably longer in the middle than on the sides. Legs
U-yellow or light green, ibr last tarsal segment =: German
Sebrdunt, or they are dirty brownish yellow
with brown thighs and lighter at the tip
vm. last tarsal segments. Genitals of the a
he coloring of the abdomen correspondingly soon
id dark, lower genital plate of 9 all times
© long or slightly longer than the 3rd previous
minal segments together. Forceps of the 4th
rigier than the simple genital plate, broad,
so high as on the just trimmed
from the base gradually a little
orderrande faintly convex at posterior
at Concay. upper wing relatively narrow,

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

360

about 3 times as long as wide, in the middle third] of them
Long of equal width (with parallel edges) and at the same time
widest; they are crystal clear with brown spots
and siripes and pale yellow veins,. without border
times. Colored brown are: a broad longitudinal stripe between
radius and cubitus, which is approximately at the level of the original
jump of the radius beginning to the edge and
close to the stem of the cubitus and the 4th prong
clinging to the greater part of the cell, rarely the
whole, complete; on the edge, in the middle of the two
bel cells such as between the 2nd and 3rd prongs,
a dark brown point, from which widening
a short, irregular brown swipe against them
disk extends towards; in the inner basal cell
light brown éfters indistinct longitudinal stripe, from which
often only a spot can be seen at the tip of this cell
is. The tips of all 4 prongs, rarely also those of the
Radius, very narrowly colored black at the edge of the wings. Long. ff 2'/,—2',, Q 3m. m. (13 y, 15 q). In July and August. Harz, Drachenfels on the Rhine,
Ruffec in France. Burm, ZLoolog. Hand Atlas tab. 29. fig. 28 Psylla Ge
nistae. Curt. brother Ent. volume 12. 565 Psylla Ulicis. frst. l. c. p. 69 Arytaina. Hortig in Germar's Zeitschr. for
the Entome. ill. p. 375 9. psylla. Distribution. Berlin (Hartig) Frankfurt (Heyden) Aa-
chen and Boppard (Forster) England (Curtis). 2. Psylla torif{rons m,

Light green, sometimes with a yellowish tinge. feeler

from 'j, or nearly from '/, G.L., range somewhat over the

    
    
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
   
   
 
 
 
  

361

base of the underwings away, dirty light yellow, the 3—4. Terminal segments black, the tips of the preceding ones
up to the 3rd downhill very narrow and = clearly
tan or blackened; Limb 3 nearly 412/, times. so long
like 4. Parting in the middle sometimes with réthlichem
Approaches, in the median line to the anterior subsidiary eye
a little more than */, as long as at the rear edge between
wide at the eyes, its posterior edge very faint
cut out. Pronotum very short, horizontal, each-
laterally with 2 deepened points, the slightly curved one
Anterior and posterior parallel to each other. forehead cone
very short, about '', as long as the vertex in the
“Middle, a few short thick front wide rounded but
bordering cinander visible from the very top
depicting wiles. Underside of the forehead cone and the
Legs extremely fine and short, hardly noticeable, light
hairy, at the tip of each forehead cone ridge a long
fine white almost bristly hair. legs dirty
light yellow or light yellowish grin. Lower genital plate of
“@ as long as or slightly shorter than the 3 preceding ones
“Abdominal segments together, gradually narrowed
and pointed. Genital plate of the 4 little higher than. the
‘Pliers, simple (without fortifications). tongs mischievously high,
at the top a bit wider than before and thus at the
*Anterior and posterior margins slightly concay, about 3 times
“yo high as wide at the top, the top with sharp-

he slightly advanced front and back corner. upper
. el-quite short, a little over twice as long as
‘it, widest in front of the middle, towards the apex
filigree somewhat narrowed, the tip quite narrow
rounded; they are semi-transparent with light brownish
same approach, almost always in the final half or
“slightly darker toward the tip; the nerves

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

362

light, rather thick, powerfully protruding; the edge mark
completely missing. Handle of the first fork. of the cubitus
about 1, times as long as the first prong, the stalk
2nd fork about 2 times as long as the 4th prong;
the 2nd prong very weakly creased. m. (4$, 7. Q). Kemenos near Marseille, beginning of June, quite numerous
rich. Long. ff almost 2, @ a little over 2 m.

3. Psylla spectabilis.m. Dirty light greenish yellow. or grayish yellow, breast
rings above’ with indistincta brownish spots and
Stripes, frontal cone at the base almost to the apex
towards deep black; on the chest, acetabulum and
hips, =: black spots and stripes. abdomen above
all black, or the hind rinds of each segment
mente very narrow, hardly noticeable, light green or light
yellow; the connecting skin. between the upper and lower
underside light (green or yellow) with a longitudinal row of
black spots; bottom of the abdomen in the
Light center (green or yellow), blackish on the sides,
the 2nd segment in the middle of the posterior edge
with a small black spot. Forehead cone long, says
horizontally stretched, jang and densely white haired,
diyergirend and far apart from each other, already on
the base apart; they are something more
than 1'), times as long as the parting in the middle up
to the anterior subsidiary eye, narrow in relation to hers
Long, slightly narrowed towards the tip,
the latter blunt! rounded.' Throat cones brown. FPihler
almost of bodily splints, dirty light yellow, the apex. 363

of the 4th segment browned, the 5th segment and the following
ends from dark brown fading into black; element
1 somewhat longer and significantly thicker than 2, 3 barely 4'/,
80 long as 4, apex in the mille of each dividing aid
with an indented blackish dot on the back
tervande very faintly cut out, almost straight, in
in the middle about half as long as wide at the posterior margin. Pronotwm short and broad, horizontal, tivers of the same
«Long, its anterior and posterior edges parallel to each other
and only slightly curved (therefore it is similar to ci-
neryAphalara formed appears); in the vicinity of the
tonrinder a deepened black longitudinal line, which
® dis lateral cattle like scales settles, and inwards
voit the same' an indented black dot. Schei
Legs and underside of abdomen with fine wid
ton white hair occupied. legs dirty bright-
Top. deg.last tarsal segment and the claws
n'the rear upper side and at the bottom
the votdéeiz thigh a brown or black~
sometimes indistinct long streak, sometimes too
Hinitérschenkél” colored brown at the base below. lechtsthetle: “the g black or brown, the lower

 

 

“and pointedly, not quite that long
fhergeli¢nden:- 'Abdominal segments together-
shanks of the 3" dark brown, almost black,
igen ‘Sshmtelg nego genital plate of yes

broad at the base, decreasing from the base
narrowed and sharply pointed; at the
E hinforrande near au straight. Oberfigel Tang

 

24

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

364,

already, widest from, the middle. indeed. hardly
slightly broader than farther_ towards the tip), through-
Visible, water-white with pale neryes or slightly (almost
streaky) smoked, irregularly black at the tip
lich. colored, with 2 spots at the edge, each. a between
between the 2nd and 3rd and between the 3rd. and
4th prong, stay pure white. first prong -bright,
but j sells with a faint, stain that er-
re). Rand abelzelle eiss,.. lings their tines
c fringes, the radial cell.at the. lace, white. radius in the final third . slightly crooked. Of the. subrapd
nery forms an indistinct very’ short with the Randnery
ze stigma. fe, Ginnere) marginal fork, broad,,. but sch
more _than,3 times as long-as.dig first
4.89 long like the Randne i
between the first and 9th tine ..,
edge fork. nearly. 24), like this

Long... 3. something

Getiienio' at Margeill

  
   

 

  
  

 
 

   

 

 

     

   

    
  

 

      

\ below, grin, .above schwavz3i. everyone on
den -Hinter indern..der, 2, first segments wide, der, fol-
very narrow, light green chest.with some black
lichen patches of origin.of the legs. Forehead-
cone. from the base. from diverging, from massive... broader
Base. gradually , sharply pointed, yellowish white, at the -In-
inner and: outer edge straight, -slightly longer than dor. Schein-
tel.in the. Middle to: to the front: .side eye.. crown
at the rear edge, moderately cut out; in the middle

  
     
 

 

 

  

e

Brown. or “dark brown: with, scl

B65

te about, half that long. as wide at the rear edge, throat
cones swollen, feeler dirty light yellow, limb. 6
except 'its base, all of the following: limbs and
tips of 4 and $, black; they are hardly enough
is "to the base of the abdomen, segment 3 about 1'), so long

  

_ like 4. Legs pale yellow, almost whitish, only the last one

tarsal limb. black-brown and the horns brown. sex
badly the. slimy light gritty yellow; zan
gene tanned,” fairly low, distinct, lower. as
the. Genital plate, not quite 3 times. so. high as wide,
to the. Barely noticeable at the top. merged, at the front
cand posterior margin, almost_ straight: (very. weakly convex). ‘Upper wing water-bright .with. hello, 'Neryen. and, quite
lich. wide. ever. narrowed whitish:, marginal
anal, tip of: Clavus liefschwarz, the, tip of. At-
slope of the Unterligel with, light-grey, approaches.. First
prong on. the top.. schwarai and in.der, final help
from. a blackish on the JTinterrande wide at the
'Anterior margin' barely: discernible shadow, accompanied. Long: almost a bit over 24
- End of May in Gemenos

  

 

8 Paull

~*< Black, back chest dirty. yellow or brown
Aichroth. Top of the head.and: the: Brudtringé roth-
len yellow réthlichen

 
 
 
 

‘Long stripes: and stains,’ seléen
"6 black, éflers against it.-sch ig» reddish--or
“Yellow yellow with =: expanding lighter or darker
‘Who’ fry spots. Abdominal segments sometimes gain
'black (with some 'g'),- often saber: below .and then

    

“Wder rule at the same time at the top of the hinler-tind side-

Dae

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

366

margins dex individual segments very narrow dirty <

light yellow; sometimes with the Q, very rarely with the ¢
the entire underside of the abdomen, except for the
first segment or this one too, light green or
dirty light yellow (in a female specimen

en I also dirt the whole top of the abdomen-»

umpteen light yellow colored). Apex weak at the posterior edge
but clearly cut out, in the »middle about '/, like this
long as at the posterior edge~ between the eyes. wide. Frontal cone yellowish white, only at the base in the fur
che,-which she trents from the Sckheitel) narrowly blackened,
or they are yellowish-red, brownish-red. brighter or
darker brown to black, only at tip
yellowish white, rarely entire, black; They are quite
short, about as long..as the parting down the middle
to the anterior subsidiary eye, gradually sharpening from a broad base
acuminate, on the outer and inner edge. straight forward. fih
lor hardly enough-:something. over the base of the lower limbs
away, light yellow ,.-the. 3 last links - or just the 2nd
last and-the top of the .,8-th, like the first term
and the. Base:.di te black, the, tips of the tibri-
gen. limbs ~ the -4th from often very narrow
tanned. Legs 93 thighs black with light yellow
Above apex, “i pale yellow and bare at base
+ far black; the. front hips black. sex
“ dirty light yellow, brownish yellow,
zy always .but is at least the top
light yellow,.. the latter without lateral extension
Iecho..than the pliers. pliers
lich low, wai,3 times as high as wide, up to
middle almost the same width, in the end half gradually
gleams with a sharp point, on the front and rear
edges almost straight. Private parts of the @ dirty

 

    

      
   
  
      
  
  
  

 

 

 

367

pale yellow or grizzled to brown in color at the tip
always darker;' the lower genital plate fairly. short,
gradually tapering, almost as long as the 3 preceding-
the abdominal segments together and in the: middle et-
wa '/, as long as on the (expanded) ba-
sis wide. Upper wings water-white with: whitish veins
and white rather wide.
mal, the tip of the clavus and appendix of the un-
underwings jet black, densely colored dark. Cla
pointed and almost contiguous with this coloring
in the inner basal cell—sometimes lighter, sometimes darker
brown colored streak or spot, At the tip of the
upper wing, in the: middle between: the nerves,
len a hint of light brown longitudinal stripes. Long. f and 9 1*,—1'), m. m. (10 J, 15 9). Gemenos hei Marseille, late May and early June,
quite numerous. .

I would consider this species Psylla apiophila Forster
ten, if he hadn't particularly emphasized that
the edges of the abdomen in apiophila zinnoberroth

are colored. 6. Psylla flavopunctata m.

© Gelbréthlich, bright red or brown red, seliner dun-
dark brown, head and breast rings light yellow above
Dots and stripes, specifically mark each other
fig 4—~6 pinkies in a transverse line on the prono-
tum and some on the vertex. abdomen soon black,
on the scilen and rear edges of the individual segments
mente schr narrow, hardly recognizable, or wide wind,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

368

clearer, light yellow sometimes bright red; soon is only
the upper side of the abdomen black, its lower side
dirty yellow-reddish, light yellow or light green, © seltner
the whole abdomen is light green in one colour, - sometimes ‘is
dex whole body solid light green, greenish yellow or
light yellow. Frontal cone rather short, about' */, 'as long as
the apex, -narrow, .towards the top -gradually ver=
flattened, rather sharply acuminate, distinctly diverging
inner edge straight, outer edge very faint
concay;. they are: light yellow or light green in colour; . Rare
with réthliche approach.- Crown: flat on the posterior edge
cut out, in the: middle. very little more-than 1, s0
long as am. posterior margin wide. Pivot depending\ after the
Body coloring soon brown or black. soon bright
colors. Pale light yellow with réthliche touches, the 2 end
glicder and the tip-' of the 8th black, mostly too
the tips of the preceding limbs . from the 4th onwards
see shinal' brain or black; they are hardly enough_ et-
which is beyond the base of the lower wings, segment 3 only
little: longer than 4. Legs light yellow, often with réth-
lichem: approaches; Thighs browned at the base
or’ blacked out, “soon only to the. hind legs or
hind legs, soon at all, the hind thighs: at
the darkest specimens. almost entirely black. Lower
Genital plate of the Q gradually sharply pointed, almost so
long or slightly longer than the 3 last abdominal segments
mente -the bottom together. 3rd genital plate
simple, something: higher than the pliers. latter high and
very narrow, the same width everywhere, at least 6 times as much
high as. wide, - at the front and rear edge: straight. Even with a black abdomen, the sex
le of light colored, light yellow or brownish yellow. qder
juigel transparent with a yellowish tinge and light yellow

 

 

369
berNerven., Randmal. quite: wide, gradually changing
lert.s ~ . sea ​​Se who

hong. J 1%f;, 9 2m. m. (18 y, 12 9). emenos near Marseilles, late May and June, See
p.s. pityophila m. very close, . &

  
 
    

 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
    
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  

7. Psylla' pityé in. oe Dirty light yellow,~* on. dem Sheitel: and “an-den
Breast rings- with: yellow-redli¢henF! corners:-and stripes; ' the
-himself ‘6fters: like that. spread very much, *that<the colour: yellow-
becomes réthlich;: abdomen ‘light green, light yellow or: griii-
light yellow, the middle of the segments and © the sides
-the underside sometimes 'golbréthlich' or yellow-brownish. In dark colored 'specimens'*, 'the 'breast' is au dér
_ Place of origin of the legs spotted black. and also the
nst light throat cones black, apex.at the posterior edge
h cut out, hardly anything in the middle. as
as long as on the posterior edge between the eyes
'wide. Frontal cone, always pale yellow, moderately long, otwa_.so
long.like the apex in the te, from the pretty
Third base from to the middle rapidly merged, in the
End half narrow and only pointed from the outside,
the inner edge straight, the outer edge swollen' (con-
seay,:.convex again at apex); they diverge
you« and from the base, .feilers light brownish yellow, the
aGrind joints: dirty light yellow, the 3 last joints
nd..die: tips from 4-47 dank brown or black,

here. already from the 3rd member. ab alimiliy yon
I yellow ‘through brown to black, grading (the

of the feeler links 4-7 so-not. more -small-
susie rich.-kaumi. up to the base of the Unterfliigt,
Hod:3 insignificantly longer than :4.. legs dirty bright-

    
 
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

370

yellow, -sometimes with a brownish tinge, last tarsal-
limb browned lighter or darker. Lower Genital Plate
the 9 allmilig sharply pointed, as long or something
longer than. the 3 previous ones. abdominal segments to
together the upper genital plate reaches with its tip
tt beyond the lower one. Genifalplatte of the GJ without
sit, clearly, higher, dls the pliers, now sigh
and high, about 5 to 6 times as high as wide, everywhere
equal width,. at the. posterior margin.. very:'weakly-.concav,"am
Anterior margin - correspondingly convex. Oderfligel clear as water
With. fine, brown or brownish-yellow veins, marginal
sometimes quite wide, gradually narrowing, bright, at the

Tip sometimes barely noticeably browned (sometimes he-—

is known at the tip of the wing between the nerves
a trace of light gray lens shadow). Long. J and Q 2m. m. (7 ff; 8 Q). From June to September on Pinus Abies. Harz, Thiringen, Aflenz and Scewiesen in Styria,
Ljubljana. This species is associated with Ps. costalis m. related,
but differs slightly by the shape of the forehead

he's a cone! sexual parts. 8th. Psylla Pruni Scop. first,

Yellowish or light red, the top of the abdomen
often something. darker colored than the lower one, sometimes
red-brown or black-brown with narrow, lighter backgrounds
cattle of the individual segments. Rarely is the body
coloring reddish brown, the underside of the head and the
breast rings for the most part and the abdomen black,
the posterior edges of the individual abdominal segments are shinal

and the conjunctiva on its sides bright red,
the latter with a longitudinal row of black dots

   
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
  

374

(h-Q). Fithler short, barely reach to the. basis of
third wing, light yellow,-rarely with a bridal tinge, the
both end members and the tip of the 8th, just like the
ize. of the 6th very narrow, black, sometimes the
Tip of -4 black, rarely 5 and 7 at the tip very
narrowly tanned; Link 3 hardly noticeably longer than 4. “Forehead cone light yellow, sometimes with a *réthliche approach,
seldom tawny, as long or almost a little shorter than the
Apex, diverging, of rather broad base gradually
lig but not very sharply pointed, on the outer and
» Interior walls straight. sea ​​unit. but flat on the posterior edge
‘Clearly cut out, in the middle. hardly anything more
than half as long as on the posterior edge between the
gen-broad. Legs pale yellow, sometimes with réthlich touch
yellow, rarely brownish yellow with black, at the apex
narrow lighter colored thighs. Lower Genital Plate
the Q as long or slightly longer than the 2 Totz~
ten abdominal segments together, sharply gradually
sharpened. Genital plate simple, slightly higher than
the pincers, pincers narrow, about 4 times as high as
broad at the base, towards the apex. towards gradually
“Pointed. upper/little transparent, yellow-brownish or brown,
_ Blessing colored gradually darker towards the tip, while
_ they are often water-white at the base, their nerves yellow-
pale or light red. Margin fairly wide, gradually
pointed. lingual nerve of the clavus very much at the apex
-narrow white dyed. The fork you usually use with different
It lacks long stems. ong. 3 2, Q a little over 2 m.m. (6 J, 5 Q). ‘uf Pinus Abies. Férster and Kaltenbach caught them

Are on Prunus spinosa, Heyden 4 specimen on Pinus
vs 8yl Vestris,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

372

Forster loc 77.23, Psylla. (probably belongs. p.s. fumipennis forest. None None p. 76 22 also here): . Scopoli
Ent...carn. p. 140. 414, Chermes. gs

 

 

 

   

 

grin, dirty
hell réthlichgelh, 'above sometimes with. a hint
of darker horizontal stripes. Scheilél' at the rear edge
cut out flat, *ii.somewhat in the middle. more than half
as long as wide at the rear edge between the eyes,

antennae scarcely extend to the base of the lower wing,

dirty light yellow or slightly tanned, limbs 4—7 on
: ie 3. Endgheder schivara (the basis of
', $0.as well as 4 at the top assign-
ten not black); Link 3 hardly longer than 4. Forehead-
cone thick, gradually narrowing from broad base with
blunt rounded tip, rather short, a little
shorter than the crown, somewhat diverging, on the inner
and outer edge straight. Throat pins on the sides, his-
stay blacked out. Legs light yellow with a reddish tinge
ge. Lower genital plate of @ progressively sharply pointed,
ctwas longer’ than the 2 preceding abdominal segments
ment together. genital plate of the gi higher than that
pliers, easy. Pliers about 3 times as high wic an
broad at the base, -a little narrower towards the tip-
narrows. Superficial water-white with light brownish-yellow
neryene; Marginally light, fairly clear, gradually sharpened. Long. J 2%, Q 3m. m. 3j,-4Q). 373

End of August on: Pinus. Abies;.Poltschach in Styria
2 aibach. on Ps. pityophila m. and’ costalis.m. differs
This species by the shape of the frontal cone, squat
general physique, more significant size, finally too
still: by the shape of the Zangon two J. 40 Psylla costalis.m. oRlellgrin, Mitelvicken with some, bright, reddish yellow

Stains. Kihler quite, short, barely reach to the”

Base. the underwing, -lightgeth, coder' I not_tanned, the
2; terminal limbs and the mushrooms yon. 37 (the top of

miler. and, less, distinctly), black; gli
‘Y; so. long as. 4, frontal cone from the base quite
ark diyering, amous. long, as long as that
Tin der. Middle, from: rather broad base alma
must be pulled over, straightened on the inner and outer edge
« flat on the rear edge, cut out, in the
Milte, almost. */, as long as on § terrande between the
Eyes. wide. Legs heligreen, genitals of J and
eligriin., lower genital plate of the 9 allmélig
» slightly shorter than the 2 previous abdomens

      
 
 
  
   

 

 

  

   
 
 
  

 

nal segments together. Genilalplatte der & easy

rope extensions), slightly higher than the pincers,
drig, only about 2 times as high as wide, ger
tip not noticeably narrowed. upper wing
water-white with fine light brownish-yellow veins, marginal

~ Rerv on the 'outer edge and the *margin light green or

grinish yellow, marginal mark moderately wide, allma
Long. 3 a little over 2, 9 24m. m.

 

     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

374
14 - Psylla alpina Forst. «

Dirty light yellow with a reddish touch, central rib
ken with tawny spots; Medium chest to the largest
parts black. Abdomen black, on the lateral margins
narrow dirty yellow. Feelers reach to the base of the
abdomen, black, the first 3 segments light réthlich-
yellow, the 4th brown at the base; Link 31*/, so long
like 4, frontal cone thick and rather long, somewhat longer
than the apex in the middle, moderately diverging, gradually
lig narrowed with a blunt tip, on the inner and
Outer margin, straight, dirty brownish yellow, at the
Underside darker. Barely noticeable on the rear edge
slightly cut out, almost straight, a little in the middle
more than half as long as on the posterior margin between the
Eyes wide, throat cones black. legs dirty yellow,

hind legs almost whole; the front thighs behind . and above at the base and the 2nd tarsal segment dark-
brown. Genital parts of the 2 long, the lower genital
plate nearly as long as all preceding abdominal
segments together, up to about */, their lengths gradually,
then melted a little more quickly, but not with a sharper one
thin extended tip; the upper genital plate
slightly curved upwards at the apex, a little over
reaching across the lower one. Upper wing water white with
rather strong brownish-yellow nerves; edge mark
narrow, but clear and rather long, gradually
smiles. .

Long. 2 slightly over 3 m. m. (1. None Simplon Hospice, mid-August. Forster 1st ep. 84, 33 Psylla. {
Distribution Mivren in the Bernese Uoch Alps (Heyden). 'black. Legs dirty light yellow,' let
_ tip dark brown, thighs behind' wid above

< out 375
12.. Psylla breviantennata m.

Yell yellow, head and breast rings lightly mottled with reddish yellow
so that the latter coloring almost predominates; abdomen black. brown, on the lateral and posterior margins of each
Segments very narrowly lined with light yellow. Schetitel behave
moderately long, at least */,’ as long as most weakly
excised rear margin wide. Forehead cone short, half
as long as the apex, light yellow,. hardly noticeable di-
yergirend, from miassig -broad base 'fro only a little-
narrowed, with a broad blunt tip, on the inner edge
straight, convex at the outer edge in the terminal half. Fithler
very short, hardly enough. to the base of the upper wings

light yellow, the 2 end segments 'and. the top of the 8th

zth tarsal segment

  

the base blackened. Chest with scurvy spots
at the point of origin of the legs; rails outside
blush, throat cones black. genitals of the g
black-brown, their lower genital plate scarcely longer than
die: 2 preceding abdominal segments together
nis about */, their things quickly and evenly ver
narrowed, in the last third to a very fine point

raised. upper wing water-white with light yellow veins,
ndthird irregular grey-brownish stained with
rscattered somewhat darker dots,-whereby thick-
Coloring on the inner edge a little further towards the base
pulls as the outside and also the tip of the cla-
and the inner basal cell, but remains
yordere helped the first fork cell crystal clear. Edge-
white, rather broad, gradually acuminate. Long. 2m. m. (4 Q). Seewioscn in Styria, early September. 376
13. Psylla diserepans m.
. ss
This species is right: in size, shape and colour. so
very agree with Ps, Fraxini that only the differences
need to be emphasized by the latter. Head usually quite light yellow, rarely with schiwar-
zem spot on the posterior margin of the vertex. face cone light
yellow. Fillers almost soften. to-the-back edge. the
hind breast. Central breast whole, light yellow, or in the middle
te black and on the sides under the upper wings with
black spot. underside of abdomen at &
light green, sometimes the individual segments at their
the edges narrow black, her. Genital segments black
and somewhat longer than the yon Ps. Fraxini. beige
Sometimes quite light yellow, - mostly, j hind legs -
Kel ob n n spatrol, the
1, also on the front thighs
, Upper wing very insignificantly narrower than
p.s. Fraxini, whole, also dead, only the Dankle is
Drawing only weakly indicated. and not. spicy
Set off against the bright pane, but. goes allma-
lig lieller becoming blurred into the same ther. gender
parts of the & whole as with. p.s. Fraxini, are against
the der-f formed very differently. genital plate the
considerably higher than. the pliers, on the sides, je-
but somewhat closer to the base, with short broad posterior
 broadly rounded processes. pliers quite low,

so tall. like broad at the top, very much at the top
broader 'als' at the base, hammer-like, with the base
the pincers the thin handle, the broad almost stretched
4-cornered horizontal tip forms the hammer. Ham~-
mer and 'stalk form' at the front edge. the pliers one

  
     
   
   

    

 

 

  
   
 
  
     

B77
right angle, -wihvend: they

right h at the posterior edge gradually
merge into one another. Long. Found 2 2, m.m.(6 J, 4 Q). _afremenos Deir Marseille, end of May. None In general, this “species is lighter colored than Ps. Fraxini and: the drawings are by name: the upper
figel, only blurred, but by the way are the 2, with
take? the barely noticeably shorter viihler wd schmi-
ert', Oberiliigel, the Q of Ps. Fraxini

_ Against what. the $ conspicuous “through the
Gogehlechtsthejfe distinguish from that kind:

 

villig right away
shape of her
de

        
  
 
  

  

GENUS. TRIOZA. Porst. >

a first’ report: of the species. 2

“ 2@). upper wing aut

 
      
  

f lighom: Grande with
dark brown nudes densely
kelt, init 3 glass-clear pinned Flee
Ken, of which the: 2"grisseri on “Aus~
senrande, the smallest ant hinenrande. (Outer margin: the upper wing in the final quarter
straight or slightly concay. To Grés-
be coloring “the most agreeable kind. / ve 2 Tr. Walckeri Forst,
2. (1), upper wing without darker spots, nor
: sometimes black dots on the inner edge~
de-at.dén ends of nerves. (outer edge
the’ upper wing in the final quarter’= deullich
convex). oh :

 

 

: . 3. (4). Upper wing translucent and light yellow, der

whole Clavas uad an.den Unterfligeln of

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

378

whole appendix jet black.—Grige of
upper wing rounded). 4, (3). Clavus and appendix of the underwings ontwe~
the very bright or just at the top
black, the litagnery of the clavus 2u-
dwell with black ling line in the
Center. >

8th. (10). radial cell at the widest point

at least 8 times as wide as the ‘goringsle
Distance of the radius from the cubiitus, (Ais
senrand of the upper wing completely or almost
quite evenly curved, the apex
' of the same very shart, the Ri
or very weak against the Gubitts',
convex, nilindet far in front of the wing tip,
Radial piece box Aysseitindes so.dang
or: only insignificantly longer or shorter
as the top titek. filer black,
Link"3 and the 'top' of 2, at times. also the base v of mn A, white). 6. (9). Fithler @oppelt as long as the front
schionem, actually hinger than the
randnery from the base of the upper wing to the. Departures of the Cubitus. 7. (8) upper lily: almost 3 times as long as: wide;
Hind thighs and the base of the hind

8th. (7). Upper iris a little more than twice as long
how wide.. thighs black - with

 

  

 

 

Tr. mesomela me

rail-black'. 6. eae it Tr. Galit First. 379
bright. brownish-yellow tip, hind-
very slightly browned at the base. (Upper wing in velutina clearly sharper
less fungi than in Galii and mostly distinct
colored wine-yellow, in Galii as a rule
very clear). 9. (6). antennae 1%/, times as long as the anterior
appeared, just as long as the lower margin-

nervy from the base to the outlet of the
Cubitus

10 (5). radial cell at the widest point up-
at least twice as wide as the smallest
stood the radius of the cubitus. mm (12. 38, 44), feelers completely black, (forehead cone]
very short, rather far back
riiekt, not visible from above. Top
the upper wing very obtuse, almost
edged)

412 (14. 38 44). Fithler knows that the 2-4 end segments
and often also the 1-2 first members
the black. 413 (14). crests with 2 depths exactly pa-

“it sjow. Tallelen long strokes, which almost

stretch over its entire length. (Fith
“Ter reachlien up to’ the base of the lower leg,
white, just the 2 end links black. Radius straight or very slightly gogen
convex towards the cubitus, ends far in front

“of the wing tip, radial piece of the outer
No2. 1861, 25

Tr, velutina Furst,

See Eee ee eee Tr. distinct m.

saeeee Tr. nigricornis forest,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

44, (48). 48 (24). 16 (21). 17 (18). 48, (17). 19 (20). 380

randes as long or very little lain-
shorter than the top piece. The 3 nerves
dashes flow into one at the inner edge
deep black dot) Tr. alacris m.

crest with 2 very flat indistinctly
bordered depressions, rarely with 2 shallow ones
forward hiv divergirendeh kommadhn-
lichen Eindviicken (letateres at Tr. mar-
ginepunetata).~

Upper wing with a rounded tip. (Atis-
edge of the upper wing in the final third of
slightly more convex than. in the almost straight
lined middle, the "Fihler mostly 'short,
reach at most to the end of the Obor-
wing base. Radius straight, only at the end
very little, often hardly mork, ge-
Intact). The third prong is hardly noticeably longer, that is
as long or a little shorter than the first. Handle of the first fork not quite twice as much
long as the first prong. (Withler range
to the anterior edge of the upper wing base,
they are, the 2 main members deducted,
still significantly longer than the front slats

Stem of the first (inner) fork about 3 times
as long as the first prong. Fithler, the 2 basic songs settled,
still. significantly longer than the front slats
to the end of the surface

« Tr. rotundata m.

   
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
   

 

JMoY 4)

381

gel base, third prong as long or de-
much shorter than the first. .

feelers, the 2 basic elements are recimed,
scarcely as long as the front tibiae, they
do not quite reach the upper wing
sis. Third prong hardly noticeably longer
as the first

20 (19):

Third prong significantly longer up to 2 times

24 (16). ' as long as the first. 22, (23). Fithler hardly reach to the front
edge of the upper iligel base. 23 (22). Fithler reach up to the Enda of the Oberfli-
gel base, 2... dr. Upper iris with clearly angular, anterior
sharp tip. 24 (JB). 026°(28). Fithler scarcely reach to the anterior edge

the base of the upper iris. (The 3 nerve
dashes end at the inner edge in the
gel into a black dot). 26 (27). Third prong 1'/,, rarely 1'/, times as long

like the first, edge piece between the
. 1st and 2nd prong no more than 2 times
as long as the first prong. top of the
Clavus and the appendages of the lower wings
bright. 21 (26). Third prong 2 times as long as. the first. Margin piece between the first and 2nd
“Left 3 times as long as the first prong.

. Tr. flavipennis Porst. ‘tr. prosima m.

. Tr. viridula Zot. abdominalis m,

. Tr, abieticola First,

25*

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

382

Spitee of the Clavus and the beginning of the

Underwing black. . . Tr. marginepunciata m.
28, (28). Filers extend to the base of the sub-
wings. 29 (30). Upper wing sharpened bluntly at the end, you
Outer edge clearly thicker in the final third
convex than in the almost rectilinear mitto. Radius clearly curved, which grimaced
Width of the upper wing behind the middle. Tr. femoral
oh forest,
30 (29)..Upper ilicus at the endo, sharply pointed, her
“ Outer margin uniformly convex everywhere. Radius straight or barely noticeable at the end
slightly crooked. The widest width of the x
superficial! in their middle. 34 (82). Frontal cone ticked far back,
quite drooping, not from above
visible . 2...ee+. + Tr. recondita m.

32 (31). tuning cone as usual, ge-
inclined, visible from above. 33 (34). Pale yellow or reddish yellow, abdomen hiu-
fig green. Upper wing bright as water. or with
slightly wine-yellow touches. . Tr. mouth forest. 34, (33). Black. Upper iris mostly wine-yellow with
water-white or whitish base, not
rarely quite wine yellow . . .

85 (11. 42 44). antennae black, the first 3 segments
the or at least the 3rd member and
the tip of the 2nd, white (. anner
king 1),

  

. Tr. acutipennis Lett. 383
36 (37). Third prong just as 0, tang or shorter than

37 (36). Third prong clearly. longer, 1*/, to 2
times as long as the first. 38 (39). Filhler Teichel to the base of the surface
glee ee on

39 (38). Fithler extend to the base of the Unierfiii-
gel or almost as far. 40 (41). Radius clearly and strongly curved, ra-
dialstuick of the outer edge 21/, until something
over 3 times as long as that. lace stitch. Tr. striola m.

At, (40). Rains' straight or very weak,
katim noticeable, wavy curved, radial
piece of outer edge 41/, to etivas
over.2 times as long as the tip piece. 42 (48). Stance cone strongly divergent from the base
ren. Pliers of the often very high, re-
slightly higher than the genital plate, lower go-
nital plate of the Q 80 long or slightly short
than the 3 preceding abdominal
segments together. .. . . . Tr. Urticae Linn,

43 (42), forehead cone sor little, Sflers bless on the

pointed, divergent. pliers of the German
much lower than the genital plate. Lower
genital plate the @ hardly linger or et-
what shorter than the last abdominal segment-
ment def bottom. . . . Tr. albiventris forest. 44, (33.42. 44), Pihler dirty light yellow, the 3

terminal phalanges black, the 1—3°

¥

the first . ooh, see . Tr, dryobia m.

+ Lr. closetii m.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

384

with violent approach (see Approach
note 2). (Upper wing clear and
sharply pricked, weak at the outer edge
and evenly curved.. radius nearly
just. Radial piece of the outer edge like this
long or almost shorter than the lace piece. Third prong so jang or a little tickler than

the first) Fe ee Tr, assimilis m.

note 1 In a variety of Tr. Urticae goes the fi-
Exercise the 4th to 8th sensory segment gradually
Yellow-brownish in black-brown over, with some others
Varietal of this species the fithler are as colored as un-
ter Ns 12 of this overview was given. note 2 Slightly possible that with the only one in this
dividing species the feelers sometimes so
are colored as under Ne 35, indicated in this overview

give. Second overview of the species. (with special consideration of the differences in the genital

apparatus). 4. (2). upper wing on a brownish background white
densely mottled with kel-brown dots,
with 3. crystal-clear unpunched spots,
of which the 2 gréssera on the outside,
the smallest on the inner edge, (outer edge
the upper wing ‘in the final quarter straight or

totally concave), .. . . ta Walckeri Forest. 385

2. (4). Superficial] without darker Pitukichen, only

sometimes.at.the inner edge. the ends
the nerves black dots. (Outside-
edge of the overwings in the final quarter =
clearly convex),

3. (4). Upper wing translucent light yellow, - der
whole clavus and on the underwings dor
whole appendix jet black. (Upper wing on

rounded at the tip). None . . Tr. mesomela m.

A (8th). Clavus and appendix of the lower wings either
the very bright or just at the top
black, the langsuery of the clavus bis-
dwell with-black Lingsstriche in the
Center. 8th. (42), Weibohen (see note 4). 6. (17). Lower genital plate: in a diane point
undressed, considerably longer than wide,
at least. as long as the 2 previous
connecting abdominal segments together. 7. (8th). Rains strongly wavy curved, the wing-
point very close-mouthed, radial piece
of the outer edge 31/,-to over 4 times as much

» Radius straight or barely noticeable

ketimmty ends. moderately far or very
away from the wing tip, radial
sftiek the outer edge at most 21/,
times as long as the lace piece. of aw 2). Brsto, zinco long, so long. or something lin-

ger.than the 8th. (Stalk of-innorn fork

long as the lace piece. . Tr. abieticola Furst,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

40

4

12. 43

14

18

. (11). - (10). (9).

. (16).

. (18),

(10. 386

at most twice as long as the first
Prong). stamped tip upper wing, their
base and apex distinct
more curved than in the almost straight
Middle, Fithler black, the 3 basic limbs
who knows, but 1 and 2 on the

side mostly black... 2... 2. Tr, dryobia m.

upper wing with a sharp tip,
senrande faintly and evenly
wriggles. Fiibler dirty light yellow, the
3 last segments black, the 2 first

often brown or black below. . Tr. assimilis m.

First lines significantly shorter than the 3rd. (Stem of the first fork at least 2'/,
sometimes, very exceptionally. just 1'/,
times, as long as the first prong). =

Filers extend to the basis of the sub-
wings. *%

Radial part of the outer edge as long or
only very slightly longer than the top
stick. Fihler light yellow, only the 2 end
limbs black. Front cone shorter than
the vertex, with a blunt tip. . Tr. Radial piece of the outer edge 4'), to
over 2 times as long as the tip piece. antennae black, the 3 first segments,
or just the 3rd and the -tip of the
2nd, white; sometimes the Fithler
white and only the 3 end links and that

alacris m.

 

387

first segment black, forehead cone so Jang

like the parting, sharply spat. Tr. Urtieae Linn? Fillers barely reach the base of the

Oberliigel -. ee Tr. viridula Zett,

. Lower genital plate rear either wide

rounded or blunt-pointed or sharp
sharpened (but not into a thin point
undressed), only selfen so long, mostly
significantly shorter than the 2 preceding ones
abdominal segments together. Lower genital plate broadly rounded behind
det or with a blunt tip, soon
lich wider, soon only slightly wider or
just as wide as long

Lower genital plate as long as the 2 last
ten abdominal segments of the underside z1-
together,

radius distinctly wavy, radial
stick the outer edge 3 times as long as
the top piece. On the inner edge of
Upper wing black dots and dashes. Tr, marginepunctata m.

Radius straight, radial stick of the outer
of as long as the tip stick. upper
‘wings without black dots or dashes

on the edge. © 2... 1... . Tr distincta m.

Lower genital plate as long or only
nig Minger, sometimes a little shorter than that
Jetzle abdominal segment of the underside. 388

23, (26). antennae long, reaching to the base of the
domes. Radial piece of the outer edge like this
long or just a little bit shorter or longer
shorter than the top piece. 24, (25). Upper iris almost 3 times as long as wide. buttocks and the base of the hind
- pretty black... . 1. +s Tr. Gali Forest. 28 (24). Oberlliigel somewhat meliir than 2 times so. long
how wide. Hind thighs black with light
bluish yellow tip, hind tibiae on
very faintly burnt at the base. (The
Upper wing of yelutina distinctly sharper
more pointed than in Galii and mostly distinct
wine-yellow, "in Galii usually whole

clear as water) . 0.ee it Tr. vehitina Firs'. 26 (23). antennae short or of moderate length, re-
chen to the base of the underwings or
only to the base of the upper liigel. radi
as part of the outer edge of the upper wing
steis more than 43/, times as long as that
lace piece. 27 (28). Mihler whole, black, forehead very short,
not even half as long as the Schei-
tel, only from the side, not from

above, to see... . - . Jr. nigricornis Forst. 28 (27). At least, the 3rd and the top of the
2 ton sensor element white. forehead cone of
ordinary thing, also from above
ow recognize. 389

29, (30). Fithler extend only to the base of the upper
fitigel ee, bee

30 (29). antennae extend to the base of the under-
gel or almost as far. 31 (32), radius clearly and strongly curved, ra-
dialstiick of the outer edge 21) until something
iter 3 times as long as the tip piece. (Forehead cone mostly dirty light yellow with
very narrow -gear tip, rare

dark yellow-brown, almost blackish). Tr. striola m.

32, (34). radius straight or only very faint,
barely recognizable, wavy, ra-
dialstiick of the outer edge 1°/, to something
it over 2 times as long as the Spitzonsliick. (Frontal cone very little diverging, deep

black)... ee Tr. albiventris Furst,

33 (18). Lower genital plate gradually sharpened

pointed, as long or slightly longer than width,
just a little narrower than the last abdomen
nal segment or significantly shorter than that
same. 34, (37). Lower genital plate so long or something
longer than the last abdominal segment. ..-

35, (36). Feelers reach to the end of the surface

- gel base. Frontal cone from the base from di-
~ forgetting, */, as long as the vertex. Tr. flavipennis First. 36 (38). Fithler and Stira cone very short, the Fith-

ler almost reach the Oberfitigelbasis;

» Tr. closetii m.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

390

Forehead cone not at all or only very much
little apart from each other, chew more . as ?/, as long as the apex. ..tr. prowima m.

37 (34). Lower genital plate considerably more ticklish than that
last abdominal segment. You i ie the letate
38 (39). She is scarcely 1/2 as long as a—
abdominal segment.. . . . . Tr. femoral first. 39 (38). It is at least */, as long as the last
te abdominal segment. 40 (4A). body light yellow or reddish yellow abdomen
men often griia, upper wing as white as water
or with a slight wine-yellow touch. : Tr. mouth forest. AA, (40). body black. Upper liigel mostly. Wine- :
yellow with water-white or whitish Ba- . sis, not sellen quite wine-yellow, Tr. acutipennis Zett. 42 (8th). Miénchen (see note 2). A3. (80). Genital plate on each side with a distinct
== lay horizontally backwards
dead extension. .

AA, (48). Fithler all black. forehead cone very kura,

not visible from above. Tr. nigricornis Vorst. AWAY. (44). Fiibler with =. White. Inc. (47). Fithler black, the 3 basic links, or
just the 3rd link and the tip of the

Q-ten, Weiss. 6ee Tr, striolam. 47 (48). Fiihlor knows the 2- 4 end segments and

  

48 (49). 49 (48). 80 (43). B.A. (82),

82 (4). 83 (64). 391

often also the 4-~ 2 first limbs

black. Genital plate very low, slightly lower

than the tongs, each with a long

rizontal process, pincers from dor base

gradually narrowed with sharp et-

what forward-curved tip, ain
anterior margin slightly below the middle in ci-

ne small corner pulled forward. (Upper wing

sharply pointed). .. . . . Tr. acutipennis Zett. Genital plate as high as the pincers, above
on the sides in a wide 3-cornered
extension lengthened. pliers against the
Tip scarcely noticeably merged, at
Posterior margin very faintly convex. (Upper
mitigum rounded at the end), . . . tv viridula Zett. genital plate without horizontal extensions
the side margins (often the latter are in
the middle + strongly convex and thus up to-
while extended almost lobularly towards the back). Stiro cone far back: pushed back, from
not visible above. . ++ + Tr. recondita m.

Forehead cone posed as usual, from
visible from above. Pincers sobr long and narrow, 6-7 times
as high as wide (they are the same everywhere
wide, only just before the tip
slimmer, considerably longer than the
nital plate and so long that it is always free
lie there, not from the genital plate

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AEE ISLE a vere een

  
  
  
 

392~393
covers or into the genital segment- | , narrowed so that the leading edge near-
can be laid). . . - - Tr. Urticae Linn. au is straight, the rear edge in the vicinity
the base margin-angular, the apex
2 i short, at most : >
54, (83). Zags arent aia (se can in's zo Barely noticeably bent backwards, Tr. flavi-
once that long; s'" ahs
Genital segment to be drawn in md pennis First. are therefore often hidden). 64 (63). Zangon ties wah Voriornde her raseh
narrowed, hence the rear edge near-
Tongs with dinner sharper often something , : ~
88: 9) yorn or backward curved tip. au is straight (very weakly convex), der
Anterior edge, on the other hand, in the vicinity of the
. . Forceps from the base gradually and
56 (61) ; se fissig narrowed, sharply drawn 0-sis angled, the tip_ a little to the front
evenly * curved, 2. Tr. albiventris First. sharpens. 87, (58). Shits of the pliers straight (reder after 65. (62). Pincers in the basal envelope at the same time from
' yorn still bent backwards. Tr. femoral forest. -Front and rear edges are quickly
Flattened, hook-shaped with the tip |
88, (87). Tip of the pliers_ slightly curved forwards or backwards.. . ... . Tr. proaima m.
curved inside. -
Also back ' Spit, I back go 66. (58). Pincers of equal width along their entire length
59 (60). Pliers with the tip pointing towards hn - . wow : . . -
8 9) init little more than half as high . or allnalig gogen the tip towards ves
mune, we vl . Tr. Cabinetii m. gleams, with a blunt tip, but on
like the genital plate. . . . . . 47 the tip éfters with sharp rear

60 (89). 61 (86). 62 (68). forceps with the tip forward
curves, only a little lower than the

nital plate. ©... 8 « » Tr. abdominalis m.

Pliers only from the narrow middle
against the Spitzo evenly, from
the broad base to the middle irregular
mischievous, faded. Forceps in the basal aid only from the front
derrande or merely from the posterior margin
quickly faded. 7. (68). ~ stick, 2,

edge located corner. radius strongly wavy curved, radial

piece of outer edge $1/, until something

over 4 times as long as the peak

Dee eee Tr. abieticola First. - Radius straight or very weak

curves, *radial part of the outer edge
at most a little over 2 times as long as
the top stick. 69; 10). The 3 nerve lines on the inner edge
. . de in a deep black point. 63 (64). Pincers quickly grasped only from the posterior edge Tr. alacris m.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

394

70 (69), upper wing without black spots on the inner
edge. 71 (74). Radual cell at the widest point 3-4
times as wide as the smallest distance
the radius of the cubitus. iemli iter basis from all
72 (73). Pincers of rather broad oe
' mildly melted. 2... + Tr. velutina forest. @ i tip’ out of
73 (72). Pincers close to the Sp _—
© same width. . 2... +s Tr. Galit First. 7A. (71). radial cell at the widest point up-

at least almost twice as wide as the slight
ste distance of the radius from the cubitus,

Third prong significantly longer than the first,
Stem of first fork 3-4 times as long
like the first prong.. . . . . . Tr. taunda forest. Third tine as long or shorter than
the first, handle of the first fork at most
2 times as long as the first prong. 7b. (76). 76 (78). 77 (78). Radial piece of the outer edge just 80 long
or only slightly longer than the peak . piece. (Upper lily gel clear). . . . Tr. dryobia m.

Radial piece of the outer edge. at least
2 times. as long as the lace piece. (Upper wing mostly light yellowish with. réth-
slight approach). . . .. . . . Tr. rotundata m.

78 (77). note 1 In the overview of Q, the following 3 items are missing

ten, of which I only know @: abdominalis m.,
Foundata.m. and recondita m.

   
 
 
 
 
    
  
    
  
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
  
  
  

 

395

jineeung 2. In the overview dor # feblen: distincta my
-- Marginepunctata m. and assimilis m.

1. Trioza mesomela m.

. fblack, dull, abdomen light green, rarely light
yellow;-back breast light raf} the brownish-yellow, -ab-
omen above. dfters with e:mer series of small black-
en spots in the middle of the 3—4 first segments,
rare: are (hei some, F) the first 34 segments
top and bottom, m3” except for their margins,
pale, with the darker coloring gradually disappearing
hellor and lighter turns gray and so into the light-
coloring of the tip of the. abdomen. Srirn
rz, only about */, as long as the apex in
‘Centre, rapidly sharpened from a broad base, dense
closing into each other. or only slightly diverging; you
are sometimes dyed deep black, sometimes black-grey, yellow-
or grayish yellow, rarely light yellow; are they yellow
This coloring sometimes stretches in the middle. up to the posterior edge of the apex. filer
f4/o bodylings, reaching -to the base of the un-
erflagel, white, the first, rarely the 2 first, and the
limbs, sometimes too. nor the §
izten, black;
by

  

top of the
the 2nd segment usually brown
elten light yellow, sometimes also the first brown
© -as at the Fiblerspitze. sometimes only
limb black; Link 3 about 3 times Jang
legs light yellow or. yellowish white, only the hit. tin'or. black, sometimes also the hind
outside at the base brown. pliers the

much higher. as wide and
2. 1861, :

FF pretty
only slightly lower
26

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

396

simple genital plate, gradually starting from the base
Genital parts of Q very short, the lower one
Genital plate not extended into a point, but
broadly rounded at the rear edge, aholich the abdomen
nal segments, much wider than mid-length
and scarcely slightly longer than the hetate abdominal segment
Upper wing translucent light yellow, the whole clavas je~
yet jet black; their tip rounded or very blunt,
hardly recognizable, the 3 nerve lines of the inner
des indistinct. Radius rectilinear, fairly far-in front of
wing tip mouthed; Radial piece of the outer edge 1*/,,
to 12/, times as long as the tip piece. The largest
Distance of the radius from the marginal nerve (the widest
Each of the radial cell) almost twice as large as its small-
ste distance from the cubitus. Third left 1'), to -4'/,
times as long as the first. outer edge of the upper wing
clearly more strongly curved in the first and last third
than in the middle, Avhang the lower wing horny thickened
and colored deep black. Long. fi and Q 1%), up to almost 2m. m. (10#, 5@)-

Gemenos hei Marseille, late May and early June,
on dry slopes overgrown with low grass

hang,

as the ¢
spat on. 2

Trioza marginepunctala mM. Light green, the breast rings sometimes dirty heligeth. with a brownish tinge and the mid-back with yellow:
brown Fle
ohea sometimes hraun. Schettel little geneigl, ziemli
long, mil, 2 comer: similar in front. diverging ling:
cindviicken. Frontal cone badly inclined, almost. so long w! the apex to gam yordern side eye, from each other

      

   
    
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
 
  
   
   
  
   
 
   
   
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
  

ridges, the 3 — 4 first abdominal segments

397
‘Protruding, gradually pointed (in one specimen
a blackened at the top). Throat braid hellaviin
or' gram. Feelers short, not even reaching the
Base “the surface flight? (they are except dor 2 grounds
gtieder about as long as the front shins), light yellow
or-whitish, the 2 exdphalanges and the apex of. adnite
fen black (link 4: and 6 in one specimen
dee tip dusserst: narrow;. hardly recognizable: brivint,
Segment 3 about 1°, to 1°/, as long as 4. legs light nl
ell 3 otwa ‘ e light yellow
r sehinuizig light yellow.. Lower Genttulplatte dev Q et-
8 wider than long, bluntly tapering, about as long
the 2 anterior abdominal segments nuts
at the base as broad as the last abdominal
ant, - upper wing water-white with bright nerves
Middle widest, clearly pointed (the left e-is markedly nearer the midline than the In
border ‘One thinks to oneself-the same with the end di :
eT Finke and the radius by straight lines " "
'n, 80 is the resulting angle at mar. (netata a very close to a right ' itzer,
mid the same with abieticola: a blunt one). The 3
a . of the inner edge flow into a deep
me tall, almost half-circle punks
finsserst that of the 4 teeth on the edge of the wing
yarz. Furthermore, black or! black
de Clavus and the appendix of the Unterfliget,
inner angle of the latter and = German

 

  

 

 

  

Outer margin of the upper wing at the base
ater curved than in the middle. radius
Y ellig curved, opens near the

Radial stem of the outer edge efwa 3 inal
as mushroom stick. Untorrandnery from Raditis
26°

 
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 

398

up to the cubitus almost 14 times as long as the radius
to the outer edge. The widest point of the radial cell
le 4/, to 11/, times: as wide as the closest distance
the radius of the cubitus. Stem of the first (inner) Ga-
bel almost 5 times as long as the first tine third tine
twice as long as the first; Finnenrand between the
1st and 2nd prong 3 mai as long as the first
Prong, the latter stands almost vertically on the inner edge. Long. 2'/, m.m. (2 Q). Gemenos near Marsville, late May and early June. %
Hat with abieticola Forst, big. resemblance
but separates by slirker eugespitzie Oberiligel,
the darkly colored apex of the clavus and appendix
the lower wing, the shorter first left, as through
more pedigree Grésse, but specifically by the -other

shape of the genitals. 3. Trioza alacris m.

Fleur yellow, often with a lighter touch, on the
Center back sometimes yellowish-red spots or streaks
fen; hei den # on top of abdomen, dense
at the base, a narrow made of white secretion
ter transverse stripe, the 3-4 first abdominal segments above,
rarely all, brown or black; at the 9 is the top
page. of abdomen light or with narrow ones in the middle
interrupted brown horizontal stripes on the rear
that of the 3-4 first segments. Fuhler and Berne bright
yellow, only the last 2 segments black. vertex
and frontal cone very little inclined, almost horizontal, the
crest with 2 broad parallels over its entire length
ge extending depressions. Forehead very fine

 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  

399

4 d fairly short white hairy, short (about 2/, so }
like the crest in the middle to Nebo in front
‘eye), standing apart from each other, gradually merging
blunt mushrooms. Fithler slender, reaching to wu Ba
or lower wings, their 3rd link not quite 1%, times
as long as the 4th. Zengen of the 4 almost as “high ve
the simple Geuitalplatte, about 4 times as high as bn it
and almost the same everywhere. Genitals he 2
just like Tr. dryobia m. Oberfhigel water-white long
d rather narrow, with dewtlicher rather sharper

© and light yellow or sometimes light reddish yellow
jerven the 3 nerve lines of the inner edge open
a jet black punk. Sometimes you notice
gs the longitudinal nerves ei
a soft hint: from bright brown ones gliding
if. Outer margin of the upper wings weak and even
ig bent, its inner edge weak in the final third
mmt, the Pliigelspitze the inner edge a little
he than the outer edge. Radius even and
Very slightly curved (with the convexity to the “cubic
is directed), almost straight, ends because in front of the wing
» the radial stem of the outer margin as long or
chr little longer than the lace piece. The big ones
radius of the Randnery (the widest part
radial cell) almost twice as large as its small
distance from the cubitus. Unterrandnery from the radius
to the cubitus 1¥/, to almost 2 times as long as from
us until. to the outer edge. Inner fork handle 3
ial" or a little more than 3 times as long as the first
the inner margin between the first and 2nd
or nearly 2 times as long as the eastern prong
Prong 1Y,—1%/, as long as the first. ,
onge J 2, Q By mm (15 4%, 15 @). 2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

400

around mid-June I'll pay you

the young light green leaves of Prunus laurocera

wit holding on to the legs, den
rocking sees: through

nymphs roll their leaves

the long way up. Gemenos near Marseilles,

su; where to
Body hestindig every now and then
the sting of the larvae and
tex on the side edges

4. Trioza recondila m.

Pale yellowish-red, abdomen black above, pit Aus~
taking the Geseblechtsteile, on the underside the first
Segment light green (3). Piihler about '/, Rorperling,
ge, reach to. to the base of the lower wings, white, the
Mushrooms of 6 and all following limbs black, 4 and
2 light burgundy yellow; Link 3 little more than 2 times so
long as 4 Frontal cone about 80 as long as the apex
to the anterior subsidiary eye, because it is pushed backwards, 80 |
that they are not visible at all from above, vertically
pendulous, strongly diverging, sharp from a broad base
spined, yellow with black tip, dirty legs
umpteen light golden yellow, last segment of tarsal black; the

yorderen thighs up and behind, and the yorderen
with black

rails outside. and back at the base,
long stripe. genital apparatus of the 3 at my eip-
umpteen specimen completely hidden, so that I can't say anything about it
can further state than that the pliers sin low
and, it seems, sharply acuminate. upper wing water
light-with light reddish-yellow veins,. sharply at the end
pointed, widest in the middle, all over the outer
yande rather uniformly convex, the inner margin ge~
rade, only very weakly curved in the final third, the
Fligelspitze dem f

edge. Radius straight, ends well in front of the wing tip

 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
     
   
  
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
   
     
 
  
  

inner edge much closer than the outer

   

401

Analetiek” of the outer edge only tenig linger (sthé
Bjy:8o long) than the tip piece, lower marginal nerve vat
A in Cubitus.hardly a little longer than 'vom ta. ius *to the edge of the fhigel. The mash ‘L:
is : last place of the radia
azélle étiva 1'/, times as wide as di i lente
elle “et F ; he least duck
avvisehich Radius and Cubitus. Stitchl of the desert fork fate
aan o catch like the first prong; Fligeliand avishon
‘dub first and 2-teh prong something 1

H first | | more than 1'

3+te prong 1'), times, as long as the first f times

Long. 3 1°/, m. m: (1-H). Genienos near Marseille, early June

 

 

 

 
  
 
 

5. Trioza distincta m.

sh. i matt shiny, back breast light brown
ne ril soba, link 3 and the tip of 2
eis) to the base of the lower limbs, si 3
dang. like the Unterrandnery from the base De coon abe
gage of the Cubitus and hardly 114 times so i fan the
ruarachienots limb 3 about 21/, times. as long as '. ns eas ark inclined, short and thick, elwa”
with the Stheitel to zat vordeti Ne :
feng: with the aL anterior accessory eye. ea coer gradually eye spittoon with quite sta
i ane hy yellowish white, hinds (with exception
thift),; thigh rings and

1 nh thigh black
oreren thighs at the top schthal vathlih. hn i appeared blackened at the base. below
one ove the 'gil in the previous Abdo-
a ten en e formed, not drawn into a point atus
“fw nines wide-toned, clearly rel:
Slang, ler middle about as long as the 2 before:
mating abdominal segments together. major league

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

402

water-white, along the nerves with barely recognizable
yellowish approach, sharply pointed, their greatest breadth
in the middle, uniformly con-
yex, inner margin straight, only very faint in the final third
curved, the tip of the wing is much closer to the inner edge
closer than. the outer edge. Radius straight, only where he
closest to the Cubitus is hardly noticeable against the
both sides convex, it very much approaches the cubitus and
ends far in front of the wing tip, the tip piece of the

outer edge just as long as the radial piece, The ~ ;

largest width of the radial cell about 3 times as large as

the smallest distance of the radius from the cubitus. under,
marginal nerve from cubitus to radius about as long as
from the radius to. outer edge. stalk of the first
bel 3 times as long as the first prong, 3rd prong 11.
times as long as the first, inner margin between the first
st and 2nd tine almost twice as long as the first
Prong. /
Long. Q almost 2m. m. (1 Q). Ruhla in Thiringen, mid-June. This species bears the closest resemblance to Tr. vela-
tina, but the antennae are significantly shorter and the upper
wings a little shorter and wider, the frontal cones et-
which is more acuminate.. In distincta the upper wings are
only about 2 times as long as wide, at’ velutina dage:
gen. significantly more than 2 times as long as broad; also
is the inferior marginal nerve on the distincta. place of origin
le of the cubitus from the inner edge 11/. times so far away

distant as from the outer edge, in velutina on the other hand from the

Inner edge only slightly further away than from the outside
yande, . 403

   
  
 
  
     
  
   
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
     
   
   
  
   
  

6. Trioza Wardrobei m.

wart, hind breast dirty yellow. Fithler are enough
Base of upper wing, slender, black, segment 2
3 light yellow, 4 and 5 black or through brownish
and brown gradually merging into black, limb
il or nearly twice as long as 4; they are hardly
catch like the Unterrandnery 'from the base to the
Jt pi ng' of the Cubitus (while 'they at Tr. femoral
are significantly longer,' at the front edge usually clearly
‘Heels show at the top of the 4th his 6th
“Gis it, and. are also somewhat thicker than hei Tr. anki). Stirakegel allmilig zagespilat, just close in front
jtip from the edge of the june "somewhat" squashed faster
rt, almost spiky truncated, about */, as long as the scabbard
's:to the anterior subsidiary eye and scarcely perceptible from
other protruding: (while at acutipennis and fe-
“diverge clearly from the base). Legs
_light yellow, shells, leg rings, base. the
and the last tarsal segment brown or browned. nital plate of Q. short, behind not in one
ed but broadly rounded, considering
than broad and only a little longer than the yor-
“Abdominal segment. Pliers of the $ dirt
» njedrig (little more than half as high as
tte), narrowed from the base, with
sharp and very narrowly dyed black
slightly curved backwards, at the hind
hwise. genital plate of the j at the lateral
posteriorly convex, almost lobularly expanded. fhigel
leg wing with blunt almost rounded
(ze inner edge of the clavus very narrow at the base,
nornig thickened inner margin at the base of the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

404

underwing, black. Upper wing behind the middle am
broadest, their outer margin at the base and apex distinct
slir more convex than in the almost straight middle. radius
rade, in the final half hardly recognizable curved, Ra-
part of the outer edge. a little over 2 times as long
like the lace piece. Unterrandaery from the radius to the
Cubitus as long or slightly longer than vom
radius to the outer edge. radial cell at ‘the broad-
most place as broad or insignificantly > broader than the
smallest distance between radius and cubitus. stalk
of the first fork 3 times as long as the first. Prong,
the latter 9/, as long or almost as long as the marginal
sliick between the 1st and 2nd prong; 3rd prong
a little over 1'/, to almost twice as long as the first. Long. 3 2, “Q a little over 2m. wed(1#,1Q). Mariazell. in Styria, early September. Tr. Cabinetii has very great similarity. with door uiid feioralis; with femoralis the form is correct
the top 1 perfectly match, but the radius is
not trimmed and the feelers clearly “shorter, and
slimmer, the 4th, 5th and 6th link at the top not
thicker than at the base; differs from aculipennis
Séhrankii by the other shape of the upper wing
are therefore shorter feelers; from both by the very
slightly divetted frontal cone and the other coloring
the filer,

 
 
    
 

7. Trioza proxima mw. Yellowish, .. the middle back hardly noticeable thanks
(Q) or black with dirty réthlich yellow behind:
chest and also colored tongs (@. 5. notice

 

 

405

1), forehead fairly strongly inclined, an.cinander achlies+

- send. or scarcely a little diverging, very short (hardly

more than half as long as the parting in the middle),
sharply mushroomed, broad at the base. Fihler seey short,
not even reach the base of the upper wings, yellow-
light white, the 3 end segments black (the 8th segment up to
while brown instead of black), with the # also the
first segment black, the 2nd brown; Limb 3 almost 3 times
as long as 4; the 2 basic links are settled the
Antennae scarcely as long as the front tibiae. Kehlza
pips sometimes light reddish yellow, sometimes dark brown or black. Legs light yellow (Q) or dirty light yellow and outside
ai°the base of the thighs ruffled (¥). Lower Geni:
talplaite of the Q quite long, a little longer than wide
and a little longer than the previous abdominal
segment, sharply acuminate. % simple genital plate,
without extensions, as high as that. dirty réthlichen
pliers. pliers of. quite ‘low, .about 2 times

~ as high as at the base, thin at the apex and

hoe-like curved yorn, very much at the base
wide, strongly wavy on the anterior and posterior margins. Wingtips not very transparent, light yellowish with reflective
chem Anflige (Q) or completely transparent, water-white
(Gf), its tip rounded, the outer edge in the middle

 

almost not at all, much more strongly curved at the base and apex. lius almost straight, in the final half only slightly
Well, pretty close to the tip of the wing, that
mushroom piece of the outer edge gelit 2 times or. something
heals 2 anal in that. radial piece. The greatest width
radial cell a little larger than the smallest
approx. the radius of the cubitus. Unterrandnery from Ra-

  
  
 
  

 

"Dius. to “the Cubitas ¢twa 11/, times as long as from
Radius up to the outer edge. stalk of the first (inner)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.06

Fork. about 3 times as long as the first cirus; third
Tine scarcely a little longer than the first, the edge piece
between the 1st and 2nd prong a little longer
as the first prong,

Long. f and Q 2mm (1J, & Q). Late August and early September,' Seewiesen in
Styria, Ljubljana, on Pinus Abies. This species differs from rotundafa.m. through
somewhat shorter antennae and frontal cones, with the antennae
are colored somewhat differently at the same time, due to the lower
Long of the first prong and through the other form of
manual genitals. From flavipennis Forst., wel-
Although she is still closer, she differs slightly
through significantly shorter fithler and frontal cone, also through
the slightly different shape of the pliers over there. Note-1. The color differences between
the only one known to me -7 and the @ pass,
absent: perhaps in other male specimens or
are compensated for by constant transitions. "8th. Trioza rotundata in. Yellowish, the middle back hardly noticeably darker,
Abdomen smudged brownish on upper sides
colored, down on the sides of the first segment a
wiped brown spot, the following segments to the
Sides slightly darker than in the middle. forehead cone little
inclined, 'rather diverging, sharply pointed, rather
lich short, about */, as long as the crest in the middle
up to the front eye. Fithler short, just enough
to the base of the upper wings, slender, yellowish white,

  

407

Link 1 on the underside and the 3 end links black,
the fourth to last segment gray or black, segment 3 2 times
as long as 4; they are, the .2 basic members settled,
significantly longer than the front tibiae. throat cones dun-
kelbraun. Legs light yellow, hind thighs outward
slightly blackened at the base. pincers of the 4 wide,
but quite low, slightly lower than the genital
platte and about 3 times as high as breif, up to near the
Equal in width towards the apex, shortly before the apex rapidly from
Anterior edge merges towards the posterior edge, so that
the sharp very narrowly blackened tip on the straight
rear edge lies. while the front edge just before the
tip is heavily crimped; genital plate on the sides
convex backwards, producing a sort of very short
zem_breit rounded extension is formed. surface
gel slightly transparent, light yellowish with a reddish tint
flage, rounded at the apex, the outer edge in dor
Almost not at all in the middle, much stronger at the base and tip
wriggles. radius straight, in the end half hardly mork-
slightly curved, - ends pretty close to the tip of the wing,
the tip piece of the outer rim goes 2 times or something
more than 2 times in the radial piece. The greatest width
of the radial cell a little larger than the slightest
stood the radius of the cubitus. inferior marginal nerve yom Ra-
dius to cubitus about 1'/, times as long as from
radius to. to the outer edge, stalk of. first (inner)
Fork not quite 2 times as long as the first left,
the latter as long as the inner margin between the first
and 2nd prong and just as long as the 3rd prong. Long. 2m. m. (2#),

Aflenz and Seewiesen in Styria, early September
calculated AD8
9. Trioza assimilis m.—

Light yellow. with a reddish touch, some of the first
abdominal segments or all on each side at the posterior
margins very narrow brownish or yellowed above and below
blackened, sometimes with a very fine dark transverse
line just before the posterior margin of each segment. antennae slender, reaching the base of the upper wings,
dirty: light yellow, the 3 end segments black, but not
the bright coloring is very sharply contrasted by
some of the preceding limbs 'a brownish
approach, the 2 basic links on the underside of-
ters brown or black; limb 3 hardly more than 4 '/,
to 17/y as long as 4. Vertex distinct, the frontal cones
even more stirrer (the latter: about under 45°), inclined. vertex
with 2 short flat but clearly pronounced Lings-
deliveries. Frontal cone almost a little longer than the
tel in the median line to the anterior subsidiary eye, somewhat
protruding from citiander, gradually pointed_ with -quite
sharp 'point.' Legs light yellow. Genitals of the Q
at" tip-brown, perfect as in Tr. dryobia
m. formed.. Upper fin water-white with bright nerves
long and: rather narrow, about 3 times as long as wide,
with a distinctly sharp tip; its outer edge: faint
and evenly curved, the inner margin in the terminal third
tel weakly curved, the tip of the wing {alt quite
in-the middle of the wing width. Radius almost straight (very
faint," scarcely 'perceptible, sinuous, with the conveyitat
to the €ubitus), ends. far ahead of toadstools,. that
Outer margin radial stitch as long or almost as long
shorter than the tip piece. The greatest distance of
radius from the marginal nerve (the pulpy “point of the radial
cell) almost twice as large as the smallest distance

 

409

of the radius from the cubitus, Unterrandnery from the radius to
gum cubitus as long or very little longer than vom
radius to the outer edge. Stitchl of the inner (first)
Gahel 2 times or a little less than 2 times as long as
the first prong, the latter °/,—'/, as long as the marginal
stick between the first and 2-(en prong. Third Zinc
ke as long or a little shorter than the first. Long. Q 2',—2'/, m.m. (4 Q). Gemenos hei Marseille, early June. This species is the Tr. alacrig in coloring and im
Construction of the wing very similar, but differs
jeep by the lack of black dots on the
Nerve lines of the inner edge, the "longer first line
ke, longer and differently positioned ‘forehead cone, somewhat kiir-
break up feelers and by the shape of the indentations
the crown. She is even closer with Tr. dryobia m.
related, but can be easily replaced by the other
shape of the indentations on the vertex, the stretched-
ren, narrower and sharply pointed upper wings, the
a little longer and sharply pointed voicing cone,
as can be seen from the different coloring of the feelers, etc.
know. at Tr. assimilis is also the pronotum
equal length everywhere, protruding at an acute angle in the middle
and not or only very slightly inclined; while it at
Tr.. dryobia slightly longer in midline than at
'protruding to the sides and less clearly angularly,
at the same time clear and strong. inclined; at both of the latter
~Species (assimilis and dryobia) shows the middle ridge
in. the middle of its front edge into a kyrzen mute
plen stool preferred. Maybe it will
a difference in the male sexual organs
put out. ~

hey

6

440
GENUS RHINOCOLA Forest. Overview of the species.

. (6), Seheitel and Stira not by a sharp

fen margin separated, arching into each other
passing. Forehead. to yora and below
directed.

. (8th). Upper wing widest behind the middle. Posterior edge of crown concay. (The
nerves of the upper wing sharply over the
Fly rising. upper wing dus-
very finely and densely punctured,
not wrinkled). uo

- (4). body yellowish or redish yellow
colors. upper wing unspotted. . v4. Rh " (8th). Kotper = brawn or black. died,

superficial! with black' Ptinkichen and
spots mottled. terrand of the vertex straight, (The nerves
the upper wing little over the surface itself
uplifting. Body coloring griia or yellow. upper wing light yellow-brownish,
seeing).. , . Stim separate, latter all-down
directed. (Body coloring light green, green
lich or réthlich yellow. upper liigel nnge-

subrubes +
cens m.

wa + 2.RA. speciosa m.
. (2). Upper wing widest in the middle. -There-

+ 2s 8. RA, Evicae Cart.
. (A). crest by a sharp edge from the

stains).... . . 4. Rh Aceris Linn. (Abietis tare. ALLES
Rhinocola subrubescens m.

Kin-colored yellowish yellow or light reddish yellow, the un-
back of abdomen sometimes pale yellow at base,
Fihler' soft - almost to the base of the upper urchins, yellow-
light white, - the 2 basic members light reddish yellow, the 2
Terminals black. Posterior edge of crown concay. Eyes black, silvery-white in certain directions
memorizing Legs light yellow with a hint of red. gender
‘théile of the Q short, the -lower genital plate gradually closing-
tipped, only slightly longer than the last abdominal seg-
ment. genital plate of the -# little higher than the pincers,
fold, but the Scitenrinde are below at the base
posteriorly convex. pliers narrow and rather high,
about 4 times as high as wide at base, yon' der
~ Base gradually narrowed a little, at the front
'-tande very weakly convex, at the rear edge corresponding

chend concav, so that each blade of the pincer weakly after

appears curved behind, upper wing soon through

nefd, light reddish yellow, their prominent nerves
Ven but scarcely noticeably darker than the disc; stop
= Are they whitish and almost transparent, where. the
fothish-yellow nerves stand out more strongly; You are a
tig broader and more rounded at the tip. as
jei' Rh. speciosa, but otherwise “the course of their nerves is
as in the latter species (8. Note 1). underflow
m inner margin near the base horny and
reddish yellow' colored, tibrigons very tender and water-

 

        

 

a

FAY—2, @ 2-2), mm. (7J, 8Q). August: Castel Sarrazin, on the banks of the Garonne near Tou-

2. 1361. 27

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ALD

This species is associated with Rh. speciosa m., which I

early and in the same places, very close to
synandt, but differs except darch the whole
different coloring also due to the slightly stiffer
cut posterior edge of the crown, as through et-
what broader and broader rounded top at the top
flail. .
note 1 With regard to the overwings, the following applies:
Margin wide and quite long, until just short of his
Tip of the same width. Radius straight, ends very
near or into tip of wing; the tines of the
2-th (outer) marginal fork straight or almost straight, ye
Handle as long as or just a little longer than the 4th prong:
the tines of the inner marginal fork go almost under right
tem angle from each other, the 2nd prong straight
or scarcely noticeably curved. Gatiung Homotoma Guer. (Anisostropha Forst.) Head without front cone, only on the underside of the head
pfes close in front of the non-protruding throat pin 2
contiguous truncated conical very short ones
Stool as a hint of the same. Head short, crown
and forehead rounded into each other iibergehead. filer
shorter than half the body, with rather long bor-
Stigen harchen densely covered, flat on both sides
pressed, therefore very narrow at the front and rear edges,

appearing broad on the sides, towards the tip
decreasing only very slightly in breadth, the two basic

limbs not wider than the 3rd, the latter the longest. dug awkwardly big, something about the head he himself

  
   
  
  
 
   
   
    
   
 
    
  

43

lifting the unpaired subsidiary eye only yon yorn, not
yor above, visible. Pronotum very short, as a mere . Hem appearing at the front edge of the center back. At the
end of the back 2 erected rather low

ge pointed hackers. Subject and sex parts as in the
Genus Psylla, however the genital plate of the J above in
the center with a large gap. Oberfiiged transparent ha-
tig, distinctly pointed, similar to many species
by Trioza, the Cubitus stitched with 2 large forks

of which the tines of the posterior. a right win. form a circle with each other and enclose the tip of the wing
The nerves on top of the wing blade on both sides

with fairly narrow, very fine light-colored eyelashes
occupied, which are quite isolated and under
right angle from the nerves, horizontal +
dseka Be eattibe lay up. The lower edge forms

Homotoma ficus Linn. ~-Light green, head and breast rings usually dirty
light yellow, the whole body dirty light yellow,
dull, only the head shiny in front. top of the head
: vend 'the thoracic segments often brownish yellow is eelb-
“brown, the top of the abdomen not infrequently entire
or dirty dark green on the sides, Schetted yorn
with a broad: brown or black transverse stripe that does not
' is seldom broken in the midline. eyes brown
need helivoth. antennae with long bristly black
i, hair densely covered, about from *), bodylings,

aun, dirty tawny or brownish yellow, the 2
“ghee oe usually also the top of the 8th
ee sed 3—8 very narrow at the joints light-
Ter, whitish (which stands out all the more clearly the darker
27*

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

ALA

for which the feelers are colored); Link 3 as long or un-
significantly shorter than 4—5, 4 almost 1/4 times as long as
5.5-8 pretty much the same length, 9-10 as long
like 8 The 2 terminal bristles of the last sensory segment short,
of unequal lengths, the shorter a little thicker than the
longer. Top of the head and breast rings as such
the legs are densely covered with very fine light hairs,
which are somewhat shorter than the branches of the filers;
- Underside of the abdomen with still shorter very fine ones
bright hair occupied. Legs pale yellow or dirty
light yellow, the front rails on the outside in
all of their legs with a black longitudinal stripe, which
only very few missing, 2nd tarsal segment on the front ones
legs whole, on the hind legs at the tip,
black. Genitals of Q Short, the lower genital
ialplatte alimélig but not very sharply acuminate, so
long or slightly shorter than the 2 preceding abdomens
minal segments together. genital plate of the cf something
lower than the pincers, above: in the median line up to
Split at the base, making them one after each other

lobes rising at the rear, straight at the rear edge a

forms; through the slit enters the vertical at its base
protruding black anal tube, which
is significantly higher than the pliers. Pliers narrow and
rather tall, about 4 times as tall as wide, therall
of equal width or towards the rounded apex

hin kaam noticeably wider, very faint at the posterior edge |

concave, correspondingly convex at the anterior margin. surface
gel water-white with light yellow nerves, the peripheral nerve
tig and also clearly on the inner edge, The tip of the
The inner edge of the upper wing is somewhat closer than that
outer edge, the latter clearly thicker in its final third
more crooked than before. The 3rd prong at least the

  

JAB

Fligelspitze e(wa 21/, times closer than the 4th and is
straight, while the 4th is very weakly criminalized
Radius shortly before its termination in the edge of the wing
weakly curled. Outer marginnery between the re
dius and the 4th prong a little less than '/, to almost
|; as long as between the radius and the bottom
randnery. The inner (first) fork large, short gosticlt
their stem only about half as long as the first tine:
the 2nd prong sprouted evenly and weakly.,
Radius and 4th prong from their minimum on the outside :
edge from a small distance far black colored. Of the
Marginal nerve on the inner edge to the tip. of the clavus
alternately light brown or brownish yellow and light, ib
or white Sefirbt, stretches within the first fork cell
the brownish coloring of the rim eryen also changes somewhat
towards the disc; the 2nd prong in its end
hall and the 3-th in all its length narrow and
often indistinctly edged with light brownish yellow. clavus on
the apex narrowly white, in front of the same up to just yor
its middle lighter or duacer brown, in the same
extension also at the inner edge of the corium a narrow
ler brown together with the brown coloring of the clavus
menhanging longitudinal stripe. Also are brown
or dyed black: the stitch of the dussern fork of the
ubitus at its base, with narrow white interruption
tinting of the dark coloring* in their middle; the radius
“but his. Base; the Unterrandnery cine Small range
at the end of the radius (but ‘at the
ea. If the latter branches off, it is narrow and bright

ong. F 3-3'), Q 34, m.m. (7 3, 26 9). “ "Gemenos near Marseilles, on fig trees at first

 

416

June very numerous; I caught a specimen at the end of August
in Stresa on Lake Maggiore. .

Amyot Rhy p. 440 541. Psylla, — Am. et S, Hém,
p. 593. 1, Psylla.—Ene, inéth. X p 229 3. Psylla,—
Fabs, S.Bh. p. 306 18 Chermes. : — ‘Forster 1st cp. 92 anisostropha. —~ Linn. None N.V. p. 525 47. tab. 12. fig. 12. Chermes. me
Distribution. Aix (Boyer de -Fonscolombes). Genus Euphyllura Forst. Head large, flat, thin with sharp edges,
shield-shaped in front and wide at the front edge
rounded, almost truncated, only in the “mid with shallow
Neckline, horizontal or only slightly inclined, without
'Forehead cone and with very thin not prominent
throat cones. The pit for the throat pin was wide
deep, 'reaches a little narrowed almost to' front
edge of the forehead. Eyes wide, Mach. Next to all on

‘the top of the head, the unpaired anterior in front of the . Votderrande.—In the middle.of the Schettel a fine “bis
‘Lowered longitudinal line reaching to the front edge. Stir
horizontal. Feeler short (about as long as the head),
turned in under the sharp side edge of the head,
so that the first member is seen from below only;

  

 

   
   
   
 

OLD

soft. legs -short,. but very powerful, the thighs and
-rails of the front. Legs thicker than those of hind
heine, the rails of the middle legs are quite widened. Rear edge of rear breast 2 No stumple hicker
_instead of the sharp thorns in the other species-
gen.. Sexual parts of the g and Q- as in the Gat-
tion Psylla formed. upper wing of = clearly rhom-
of his shape.with, rounded angles, their apex
is very close to the outer edge. the lower edge-

onery forms one. wide margin, gradually narrowing

sund sends dlters a lot of the edge mark through-
connecting links to the marginal nerve. radius

; at least in the tip of the wing or very close to it
;,foot edge. Stitched Cubitus, with 2 forks. This genus has in the formation of the wings and fih-

“The much resemblance to the genus Rhinocola is gone
but significantly reduced by the construction of the head. Note 1. Yorster erroneously states that the
only from 8. limbs exist; that apparently
'Ache 3rd and 4th link appear under the micro-
e clearly as each consisting of 2 members. overview of the species,

they are 10 members (s. Note 4), “the individual |
limbs differ only slightly in length, the 2 basic
members. much thickened, head and breast rings above - very
‘finely and densely punctured, “the front edge
of the forehead covered with short ciliates.. “Prono-
tum very short, only in der.Mitte to recognize the
sides embraced by the eyes. which are addressed to the Mi
partially leaning almost the base. the ear wing e

(2). Upper liigel thombiseh, the inner edge with ab-

. > rounded - stamped angle, -the ver- /
Separation of the same from: inner edge
her arch begins in the middle between-the-
st and 2nd tine, pliers of the BA
- times as high as wide, (Anssenrandstitek

 between the radius and the tip of the
Randmal at least half as long as

  
     
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

418

the edge mark, letateres not from-cross ;
most nerve endings). . 1. E. Phillyreae First. 2. (1). Upper iris less clearly rhombic, in-
which the narrowing in front of the inner edge
starts with the first prong
and the inner edge is almost the same
appears miserably convex. Pliers of the oj
2 times as high. how wide. (outer edge
piece between the radius and the apex
ze of the marginal mark significantly less than balb
as long as dab. Randmal, letateres from
transverse nerve nodes mostly
ly enforced). .. 2. E, Oleae Boyer de Fonscol. Euphyllura Phillyreae. forest Dirty brownish yellow or light brown. abdomen at
9 usually grass green, rarely reddish yellow, above
either all black or black with light. There-
changing the individual segments, rarely’ the whole
Upper abdomen light,. below often the middle of the
first segment blackish in color. With the gf it is
Abdomen usually all black except on the sides
and’ hind bovine segments very narrow
green;- or the underside green, only the last segment
and the genital apparatus, like the whole top,
black; sometimes. the whole abdomen green, only that
Genital apparatus black, rarely also the latter green. The pricked points of the head 'and: the thoracic

rings' usually colored somewhat darker than the intermediate
lying parties. Legs dirty light yellow or light

  
    
   
    
  
  
   
   
    
  
    
   
   
  
    
 
   

419

dull yellow, the anterior tibiae outward and huular
edie’ anterior thighs + dense with very fine
'én'point occupied; the @ are the back-
sikel “often almost entirely or only at their base, sometimes
aiich- the base of the median thighs, black. The two
river
Genital parts of Q as in E. Oleac. Genital-
"the o' little higher than the pincers, plain (without
e). Pincers narrow wnd rather high, about 4
'o high as wide, with evenly rounded
ey just before the tip - very little wider than at

interrdnder the pliers very little inwards
immit not ‘combining,-therefore between
an opening remains. Overfhigel translucent,

are usually allowed to be in nD the Nihe don Fae
a dam inner edge between. the first and 2-th
ike special to; sometimes they flow in the middle
‘Liquigel to a broad wedge-shaped transverse spot
ammen, whose base at the inner edge, the tip at
mrande is located and which front and rear
is bordered by an almost pure white quor stripe. The first prong ends in a deep one at the edge of the wing
up point. The Unterrandnery does not send any: that
al penetrating branches from, ends. without Crimean
invden wing margin, considerably farther from the
'inmiiniduin frames of radius removed as at-E. oleae,
the: stick of: outer edge: between 'the tip
than and the radius at least ¥, lo long,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

420

Oleae .hardly. None $0, long, is like the rim mark. stalk of. outer fork of the cubitus usually clearly
longer. than.the inner and_so long or hardly more
Kdich Idirzer, but mostly. Deittlich .Jinger than the 4th
'Left. The narrowing of the upper wing is just beginning
in the, middle between the 1st and 2nd prong,, until
where the same are nearly equal in width, dadarch shows
a blunt, broadly rounded win-
kel and the shape of the wing becomes almost rhombic,
with rounded corners.. The tip of the upper wing is a rather blunt tip, something like this. long like that
ae ar ete dee eee nates net anterior abdominal scgments together. genius
'Welcome to the radius at the top. as in Oleae. ee simply, iat. ee pout bher
The head is forward. very little: schméler than , everywhere the same width:smue 'just before' the
at Oleae. yo oo : ym ‘front edge -her:: narrowed, : hence «der
Long. GT 242. Q 3-3"), -m- m. (13h, 24 Q). : id dase, convex, appears; their hind cattle
Pye a ae : . bent inwards and touching each other, so: that

ju Gomenes pei Maree middle of Jal, 2atireict auth hen Hhnen hein fEnos aun Mbt. Oberflpa-sohe
excretion of a white flaky the body eink a otcre after raneslgs ' my ong translucent,
Yenden Stoffs tune the nymphs and larynx ure Kaur Welss'ehs idiafig dieht with ufire-
match those of E. Oleae. barely recognizable light brown spots
ee enkelt, the first prong ends at the edge of the wing
jet black point; cin 2-ter chen as big
point is often found in the inner basal
“Close to the origin of the Cubitus, except for these
much finer scattered black pimples, na-

424

eyes brown. accessory eyes bright red, or
hroth. feeler something. kivzer than the head, sehmu-
the last link and: the top of the 9th
'advice, . oflers. also the 4th, -6th and 8th member
almost noticeably blackish. Throat cones brown. “heligreen or light yellow, the front rails on
Outside mostly with scattered black dots
WGé genital parts of Q--brown at tip or
red, -the lower genital plate gradually shrivelled-

   
 
  
  
  
    
   
  
  
  
    
  
  
   
   
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
 
 
    
    
  
  
  
   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

Forster lec. p. 93 2. Euphyllura. Distribution. Aix (B. de Fonscol.). ,

Euphyllura Oleae Boyer de Fonscol. ‘light green; head and breast rings hiwig dirty hey! yellowish-green, often 3° on the mid-chest ridge
light yellow or brownish spots, in front on the sides: "
Japping of the middle thoracic spine, not infrequently, 2 brown, rolling branches descend to the outer marginal nerve, which his
Small dots composed of spots, often making them slightly irregular, and ending with
Pronotum with indistinct réthlich- or sbrayalichge! slight curvature. also the radius at the end

in the other cell spaces. The inferior nerve
as far as he doesn't distinguish himself in anything

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

422

slightly curved (both with the convexity towards the
inner edge of the wings directed), The ‘stem of the dussérn
Forked cell «of the cubitus as long or only insignificant
longer, sometimes even a little shorter than the inside,
significantly shorter than the 4th prong, the 3rd prong weak
wavy. crooked, or weak only at their: end
curved (with the convexity towards the outer edge
returns). The shape of the upper wings less clearly rhom-
bit than in E. Phillyreae, the inner margin more even
moderately convex, the narrowing already yon
starts from the first prong. None Long. g-2, Q 21/9"), m.m. 12gy 18°). Gemenos near Marseille, around mid-June on olive

men. very numerous; the animals are trige, do not jump
slightly of it, the lar

ses. Secretion. wrapped. oe
Forster 1st ce. p. 93.44 Euphyllura. |
Distribution. Aix (Boyer de Fonscol). ven and nymphs in fluffy white *

  
 
 
 
    
  
 
   
   
  
   
   
    
     

XYLOLOGICAL STUDIES. Of. C.vy. gladly. (Mid panel.) ©

The elements used in dor shaping the vegetable
Orgism are effective, seem so numerous
seia that one in these studies more doubts than
Conclusion, more problems than results. I.Criiger. rv the structural relations of the stem of Tha-
Lctrum flavum. ,

dley, after a brief description in his introductory
Bolanik some of the strangest deviations
yler plants. from the so-called exogenous
hum, closes the chapter about it with the

that in all those cases of abnormal training
it stems or stalks always the innermost,
entrum initially sensitive region none, or
otherwise only very insignificant deviations. show

ah

siceomninshtespccingiss

gsi

BULLETIN

DE LA

SOCIET IMPERIAL

OF THE NATURALIST

Be WiaP ssa maP Ue

Tome XXXIV. ANNE 1861. No. OIL

MOSCOW. Turaisente pe x' Unrvensiré Imptniace. 1861