=e
ee
ewe:=

——
SSS

 

Year cl 3-3
1870/73

 

 

 

 

(you

moons [I] -3

43

 

May 1, 1870. Neil. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

 

 

SUBSCRIBER PRICE

 

MENT:

For France. ......ss0006 en. 3 per year. | For Pitranger .............. ft. 4 per year. Send the amount in limber ow money order on the post office. We subscribe to M. Eugéne Engel, to MM. Dollfus-Mieg et Cie, In Dornach, or at
Mr. Ernest Dollfus at Geissbithl, 8 Dornach (I1'-Rhin). To our readers. Tentanda omnia. In this first number of a new sheet, we believe we should expose
our purpose and our reasons for undertaking a task which may well be
heavy for us. We will not go back on what we said in our
circular, but today we want to explain a few points that we
we could only indicate then. For some years now, natural history
occupies all our leisure, we have been able to observe by experience the great
difficulties which stop beginners at every step in a very attractive science
however. It is with the aim of diminishing the difficulties inseparable from the first
not in this science, that we establish in this journal an exchange of
communications among young naturalists, whereby those who have had the good
fortune to cross without shipwreck these Charybdis and Ssylla of natural history,
will be able to help their colleagues, who are preparing & overcoming the obstacles that
stand before them. May our common motto be: One for all, all
for a. We will never accept interested advice; in other words,
our exchange of information will never become an announcement page. But, it may be said, all that is very good; only, what advantage
can we take away from natural history? Here is a big question: Cui bono? This subject would require many developments, but we will limit ourselves to
indicate some of the most salient advantages. Always, and above all
in this time of industry and commerce, the study of philosophy was praised
as a useful counterweight to the interested occupations of each day: the history
natural pairing this privilege with philosophy, to be completely detached
of any commercial interest. From this advantage comes another. Naturalists of all countries, united
by the bond of the sympathy of studies, stronger and more durable than that of interest,
form a vast Freemasonry. Also, that a naturalist arrives in

FREE
NEW
botat

GAR

—
a strange city: immediately, his colleagues, who have never seen, who do not
may not even know his name, welcome him & open arms, and all
ceased work, show him their collections, celebrate him like an old friend. We
have more than once experienced the benevolence of naturalists towards young
beginners. Moreover, natural history provides 4 all indiscriminately pleasant and
useful distractions; neither examination nor diploma is demanded at the door; what we ask,
that's what everyone can give: the love of nature. Isn't it a beautiful
and useful occupation, only that which has as its aim both the interest and the pleasure, the
health of body and of mind? Always the same, but always changing,

 

nature delivers 4 whoever comes to ask her, her most admirable secrets, and
to surprise its mysteries, it is not necessary to go to distant
countries, to glean the painful fruits of science, & through the fatigues and the
vations. One cannot take two steps outside, however little one wishes to observe
work of the great Artist, before whom

 

nature, without finding some leader-"
Men go by every day without even suspecting its existence, or without
lower their eyes to a

+++ puny insect, exercis of the earth. And never the interest, never the observations are lacking & the one who loves the
nature: Latreille in his prison observes the Necrobia; Pellisson charms leisure
of his captivity by taming a spider. Nature is also admirable in
heart of a city, or in an icy desert, than in the middle of the exuberant vegeta-
tation of the virgin forests of Brazil. If the practical usefulness, which is sought above all today, is less
in natural history than in some other sciences, it has a usefulness

 

morality at least as precious, and for which it deserves to be encouraged
and cultivated. It is the second goal that we will strive to achieve, happy,
if we can inspire in some of our comrades the desire to know

 

The wonders of nature. And now, in closing, we are happy to announce that
our project has received approval from several naturalists, as well as from a certain
number of young people, followers of science or aspiring to become one; we
hope the zeal will not slow down; from our side, we will do all our
efforts to keep us up to our task. The committee responsible for editing:
Ervest Dott
Event ENGEL;
Maurice Horer;
Avauste Karcnnm;
Gustave Weiss. THE MONTH OF MAY. April 15. We hope to be useful to more than one of our readers, indicating & approximately
the searches and hunts that will be the most successful during the month
at the beginning of which each number will appear,

For our first attempt, it is a very vast subject & to treat; the month of May
is the month par excellence for the naturalist, and we advise first &
our friends ide leave cdté, until July, all the preparations late,
all the items in the collections, all the studies to be done & at home. Quills p: yt all the time they can in the middle of nature: they amass-
will be as many treasures in May and June as in the other ten months of
year ended. The crucial point is therefore to take advantage as much as possible of these
two months. This year especially, the harvests were almost fruitless,
& due to bad weather until April, but we will take our
on the other hand, it is to be hoped. The ornithologist will find to observe the charming little birds that go
begin 4 to build their nests, & lay their eggs, and brighten the woods
and the countryside of their twittering. The reptiles shook off their numbness
winter comfort and come to warm themselves in the rays of the spring sun. The waters are peopled with a crowd of curious animals, and although the season
of fishing is a little advanced, we will still find many riches for
little that one takes the trouble to search with a net the plants and the bottom of the
streams and ponds. Now is the time to garmin the aquariums. We
will hardly find any rubbish any more; however, after the snow melts on
the mountains are after heavy rains, do not neglect to examine the
small heaps of leaves and stems left behind by the current; we will collect
thus almost without fatigue a large quantity of Beetles and shells. As for Coleopleres and Avx Hemiptera, it is the true season; we find
everywhere; the sweep net especially will begin to be a valuable auxiliary. We cannot advise too much not to neglect this hunt for a moment;
preparation will come in the summer months; just put the crops in
boxes with cherry laurel shavings, to prevent decomposition,
and a label indicating the locality, The Lepidoptera come out in droves: we
sees flying, among the many "commons," more of a rarity. The Hyme-
nopteres, the Diptera hover over the flowers; Neuroptera and Orthoptera
begin & appear. As for the Spiders, they run with agility through
el earth on the walls; now is the right time for this hunt
so interesting and so rare. Molluscs can also be hunted
& present, though your real time is mostly autumn. We will Wover them
the rain, in the woods and the hedges. phansrogamic plants are in all their splendour: they have replaced
placed mushrooms, autumn mosses and winter lichens. Finally Pentecdle is not far; with the month of May the excursions will return
the races in the mountains, from where one returns the boxes and the
bottles full of flushes that will provide a pleasant and interesting occupation
health during the long winter evenings. Happy naturalist! your kingdom
extends & all nature; it is both you and you alone and everyone. Let everyone run;
there is room for everyone at nature's feast! The Editors. =

NOTES ON THE TOAD (Buro vutearts). I. Disgust it inspires. — Its venom. This animal, nature's bizarre game, which seems to be a product of humidity and
of rot, as Boffon's continuator Lacépede calls it, is a
striking example of the disposition of men to jog from the interior after
Outside. The toad is certainly not an ideal of beauty; we can't hold back
an involuntary movement of disgust when, under some large stone, under
some plank, in a dark and humid place, paradise of mold, we
suddenly sees a shapeless beast, with slimy skin and covered with
warts, with round and shiny eyes, which slowly jumps away
lazy, to escape the importunate light. I fully understand the
instinctive repugnance inspired by this tenebrous Za7d, repngnance shared
almost all men, and that we find at all times. Moreover, the disgust and even the fear that the toad inspires in most
of men does not have its source only in its Jaideur. If we try
to seize one, it will pull its skin like a drum, thanks to its lack of adhesion
to the muscles, thus protected by an elastic air envelope, it d:
perfectly to the blows of a stick or the stones with which you want
bored. If now we want to take one in the hand, it will defend itself
an average of his urine, and also by oozing glands and pustules
placed on the back and the neck a liquor lailense and Acre which, without being a
true poison, may produce skin irritation. Crest this mood
slime that gave birth & all the tales in which the toad
passes for an animal composed almost entirely of poison. This venom da crapand has been Vohjet of serious studies on the part of a great
most natures have come to the following conclusion: the
erapand cannot poison his victim by stinging, biting,
spitting, blowing at it, or looking at it, all things that have been
formerly insured; but the acrid, yellowish, lactescent mood, of an odor
fetid, which it secretes when you mop it and especially when you sprinkle it with
salt, produces burns and even rashes on the hand. Gratiolet and Cloez
have inoculated it & birds, which after staggering for a few
minutes closed their eyes and died without a convulsion. two milligrams
of this humor previously desiccated, then introduced into the circulation
a greenfinch, are killed in a quarter of an hour. Vulpian found that the venom of the
common toad (B. vulgaris) and that of the jones toad (B. calamita),
introduces the pean of mammals, such as the guinea pig, the dog,
the bone, made them die in less than an hour. This fluid. it seems, acts
by stopping the movements of the heart. The very sand, impregnated with this
bumenr, kills the birds when they are introduced into the first cage (The
Fallas and other observers speak of dogs that would have died for having
taken toads in the mouth, which would confirm Vulpian's observations. However other animals, such as ducks and buzzards, eat them,
without experiencing the slightest inconvenience from such food. White(/ Natural
History of Selborne) speaks of a charlatan who ate a toad to astonish
farmers; after which he drank from Ubnile. Besides, some nations eat
this animal. Reichenbach believes that when the toad fed on insects
whose sweats are acrid (carabus? vesicants? ), its venom acquires more than
strength and acrid. (To be continued.) E. Doutrus. —5—
BUTTERFLIES. My aim here is not to begin a general study of butterflies, nor to
repeat what can be found in the first treaty that comes along. It's uniquely
give a description of the main species of Lepidoptera in our region,
caterpillar, chrysalis and butterfly, so that they can be easily recognized.
is lying; to add the names of the plants on which they meet, etc. ;
in a word, to provide like a file of each species, containing the
practical details that it is important for your collector to know. This work, done only by me, could not be complete; as I go
dil, it would limit itself to the main Lepidoptera of Alsace and to the species that I
. But our door is open 4 whoever wants to go there: he is here
their won't leave us all the weight of the

writing. It will therefore be up to them to complete their journal, and we will publish
with the greatest pleasure the articles that they will be able to send us on the
foreign species. For my part, as a beginner, I will gratefully accept
read the observations that you would like to make to me on what I write

In addition to these descriptions which will appear in each issue, I intend to deal
but a few practical details which will be of interest: the student of
the caterpillar, the conservation of the chrysalises, ete. I will also be happy to
answer any questions that may be directed to me. I will begin with the first family of the Rhopaloceres, or diurnal, that
Papilionids; it includes three genera: the genus Papilio, the genus Thais
and the genus Parnassius. In this issue, I will describe species of the genus
Papilio. that I know, that is to say the Machaon or Quene-d'Hirondelle, and the
Podalirius or Flambé. Quant & the Alexanor, although it was vn in our
about once or ten times, To my knowledge, I do not pretend to talk about it, and I
leave this lich 4 my colleagues from the South. If anyone wants to send us
its description by May 15, we will publish it in our next issue. The Swallowtail and the Podalirius present many similarity trails,
so that the entomologists of the last century considered the second as
a simple variety of the other. However, they are two distinct species:
Jenrs characters are fixed enough for us to be able to affirm it, and we have not
yet found a copy of neither that could establish the passage
between the two. Their caterpillars offer a singular particularity. The first ring is
provided with two retractile tentacles about two lines long, of a yellow
transparent, which give off a penetrating odor; it seems that it is for
they are a means of defense against insects; they take them out when we
excited. However, when the caterpillar approaches the moment of its transformation,
she no longer seems to have the ability to use it. These two caterpillars live on
the same plants are: fennel, carrot, parsley; that of Podalirius
there is also the rose bush and some fruit trees, such as the plum tree,
the apple tree, the apricot tree. The swallowtail caterpillar is better known as the carrot caterpillar. At first black, after each moult it takes on a slightly less dark livery,
comparable in this to the little night peacock: it is covered with green dots and
gnaws that get bigger each time. After the last moult, she is green
tender, ringed & each ring with a velvety black band, spotted with red
orange. The pupa is quite thick; the thorax is rounded, the head flattened and angu-
read. We can hardly recognize it & the color, which varies too much: it is in
generally a yellowish green, sometimes light yellow or even brown. On the back,
a lighter longitudinal band goes from the thorax to the extremity! know
hear in advance that our

 

         

 

        

   

   

      

 

   

 
           

 
 
 

 

    

   

 

       

 

   

  

  

 

 

=o—

The Swallowtail, like the Podalirius, is common and fairly well known
so that I spare myself a minute description of the insect. It will suffice to
say that it is one of the largest species in Europe: it has in general 80"/™ of en-
verger. Its color is a more or less whipped saffron japne, embroidered with designs
black. The lower wing bears like an orange-red eye, circled superiorly
of blue; it ends with a black quene, characteristic of the genre. Let's move on to Podalirius. The caterpillar changes completely by its last
moult: before this moult, it is a beautiful green; a yellow stripe, longitudinal,
extends over the back, and a similar parting along the legs on each side; Between
these lines are oblique streaks of the same color; it is punctuated
of red and has on the eleventh ring two red spots on each side of the
median line. After the moult, the caterpillar is yellow, punctuated with black, the stripe
median is white. The first is very difficult to see and is found laughing;
we find much better the second, so much has evuse of its color more
apparent, only because of the trips she makes before transforming. Its chrysalis has the same form as that of the Machaon; its color is variable
also, but it is usually yellow with flesh-colored wings; She is
dotted with black. Finally the butterfly. Ia forms more elongated than the Swallowtail; his color
is clearer; at the link of the black drawings are bands

These two species exist & dwell in all the coasts of Europe,
except the northernmost ones. They are found all year round, from the first
days of spring until autumn, but the main outbreaks are linked
in May and August. Hs mostly flies in damp places
el meadows of watercourses. We will not be able to describe in the next issue the genre
Thais, who live only on the shores of the Mediterranean. We pray those
of our readers who can, to make up for it. THE OSSELLES CAVE (Doubs). The cave of Osselles, located & approximately 5 links of Besancon, is dug
in a hill near the Doubs. It is nearly a kilometer deep, and
Geologists know it well for the large quantity of fossil bones
that Fon truncated there. The entrance is very narrow, but the cave widens soon
and forms several chambers which communicate between them by conloirs
tightened by stalactites. At the bottom of the cave is a stream that
there to unclog outside, and over which we threw up a stone bridge. It was in 1828 that the first fossil bones were discovered there, which were
after the object of active research, as the numerous exca-
vations which one notices in the cave. We find mostly bear bones
caves, Ursus spelwus, in the clayey silt, reconverted by a layer
stalagmites which form the floor of the cave. This clay, which is very fine,
could perfectly serve the potters, if the extraction were less difficult. By having a single homine excavate, novs pames, in half an hour
to extract a certain number of doments from Ursus, which were found
in clay & a depth of 40 & 50 centimeters. The main parts
that we wanted to extract were the upper jaw of Ursus speleus, with
four molars, as well as a lower jaw with three molars. The

 

 

 

   

   

 

 

      

=

the best places to search are usually at the corners
formed by the cave. Let us now add a few words on the causes to which one can
to attribute the presence of bones in certain caverns Hy has two causes
main ones: either the animals, whose bones are found in these caves,
are brought there by predators such as hyenas, or approach
of the torrential catastrophe, a large number of animals came to
taken refuge, drowned there, and their corpses were engulfed in the silt
brought by the eanx. The caves of Lunel-Viel near Montpellier, and Kirehdal in England,
offer us an example of ayault caves served as lairs & predators:
There are, in fact, bones of ruminants showing traces of bites
hyenas,

 

 

i. ENGEL. COMMUNICATIONS. We ask that our correspondents send us, in addition to the communications that they
may have a
4 mind about the writing, etc., of our sheet. We obviously cannot
promise to adopt these observations, but we will take them into consideration.
we will answer & all letters, as much as it will be possible for us by letter, or otherwise
in the newspaper itself. The number of items we have received and continue to receive is too
considerable so that we can insert them all, for the moment at least; we pray
therefore those of our correspondents who will not yet see their articles appear, not to
blame us; we hope to make a choice that will satisfy readers and
correspondents. to make about natural history, the observations which come to them

— We are asked from different sides why our publication is not illustrated. In
here is the reason: bad engravings are more harmful than helpful, good illustrations
are very expensive, and in complete ignorance of where we are still at the moment when
we write, from the number of responses we receive, we would see ourselves in the
need to increase the @subscription price quite sharply, which would then harm our
main purpose of spreading natural history. But if the number of subscriptions we
permits, the engravings are among the earliest improvements in our sheet. — We wish to publish in the Feuille des Jeunes Naturalistes the names and addresses
of those of our correspondents who wish to do so and who will tell us about their specialities. It will be a means of spreading exchanges and of facilitating communications between colleagues. — Slugs. Does any correspondent of the Feuille des Jeunes Naturalistes know
a way to keep slugs their shapes and colors? The study is strong
interesting, but it is difficult because we do not have a good way to preserve them. E.D.

- Trades. I ask for European spiders in alcohol, with the indication
localities at least approximate, and offers in exchange beetles and hemipterans
determined in part, as well as terrestrial (Alsace, Switzerland, Nice) and marine molluscs
(Nice). Here, for more details, 4 Ernest Dolifus, at Geissbih!, Dornach (Haut-Rhin). — Maurice Hofer, Riedisheim (Haut-Rhin), wishes to exchange beetles from our con~
very against European spiders or beetles. Please write 4 address indicated. soe
— Acme fusca. The conchologists that their travels will bring to the valley of the
Simmen (canton of Bern), will be able to make an abundant harvest of Acme fusca there. In Sep-
September 1869, after a violent storm, I found in the rubbish of the Simmen a certain
number of samples of this species which is generally rare in other localities,
E.Engel. — Vilrina, During the month of March, we found in the vicinity of
Mulhouse, on the banks of the I'lil, a large quantity of Vitrina (pellucida, probably), in
an area of ​​a few square meters. These molluscs were hidden under a thin layer
of rubbish. Most of the shells were empty; only about ten contained
the living animal. D.E.— 5.5. — Coccinella bipunctata, During all this winter, I have found a fairly large number of
Coccinella bipunctata against felts, in the interior. Co fact is it common? The same
spice also spends the winter torpid under the bark of trees. D.

— Superstitions. I will ask the correspondents of the sheet what they know of
popular ideas and superstitions from different parts of Europe, relating to reptiles. E, Dolifas. — Bibliography. Small Entomological News, sheet appearing every 15 days, and
intended to keep entomologists informed of all the little facts of the insect world.
logic. Useful for anyone who already knows a little science. Paris, B. Deyrolle, street
of the mint, 4 fr. per year. — Gailo-Rhenish Fauna, by A. Fauvel; the two issues published so far contain
generalities on beetles, Very interesting in its kind, for all beetles
terists who want not only to collect, but also to know insects. Caen,
Le Blanc Hardel. Subscription price: Fr. 3 50 per delivery. In bookshops: fr. 4 50. — I ask to exchange Tertiary fossils from around Mainz for
fossils from around Dax, Biarrits or other localities. Bug. Engel. ‘Type. Oberthitr and sons, 8 Reanes. — Maison & Paris, 4 rue Salomon~de-Caus (square des Arts-et-Métiers),

ie June 1870. NR

 

YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE:

For France ............ fr. 3 per year. | For Abroad........... fe. 4 per year,

Send the amount in stamps or money order on the post office. OVERVIEW OF NATURAL HISTORY. Natural history began with the creation of the world. The oldest
document of the human race makes us see the origins of this administered science.
saddle. As man advances in the knowledge of the universe, the circle
of his ideas about nature grows and expands. Egypt seems to have been the
first who had more or less exact notions of the nature of bodies;
among the works attributed to Hermés Trismegistus, there were some, it is said,
some on the virtues of plants. In general, in remote times,
natural history has been cultivated only to draw from it help to relieve
humanity. Thus the heroes of Homer make use of various medicinal plants
to heal wounds received in battle. We won't talk
@Orpheus, of Linus, of the centaur Chiron, who & conp stir were not
naturalists; we will not learn about these fabulous times ot ta é
always mixed up in the fable. Antiquity provides us with only one worthy man
to be decorated with the title of naturalist: it is Aristotle; his story of animals,
said Buffon, is perhaps the best we have done in this genre. This vast
genius, who embraced all human knowledge, was the first to establish
solid divisions in the animal kingdom, distinguished erlebrates from inver-
tébrés, laid the foundations of comparative anatomy. After him, we do not meet
trons more than Theophrastus and Dioscorides, who created botany; then, &
a lower degree, bond and Oppian. All remained well below their
master, Around the same time, Columelle, & Rome, wrote his work on the a~
agriculture; Pliny brought together in 37 books all the knowledge of the ancients
in natural history. Do not search in this work for profound insights,
of solid divisions: it is only a vast compilation which deserves only the
respect di a laborious and active research. Pliny's work does not
nevertheless remains the most precious treasure of antiquity. After him, science
grave; The historian now meets only a few Arab doctors touching
from time to time a history of nature, or a few monks passing their laws
sirs 4 read and & comment on Aristotle, el sometimes to study the nature that surrounds them. Quillons this time of darkness, and arrive at a century of observations
and research. The 18th century opens for natural history an era of
progress and discoveries. It was then that the field of science grew and

laughed a form: darkness gave way to light. Linnaeus appears. He kisses
I create entirely and imagine a new language for it. He divides all
beings in three kingdoms. He creates this cover, the most astonishing that has ever

 

 

 

     

 

 

 

  

    

 

0

undertakes a human TV: the System of Nature. Linnaeus opened the car-
rier, his pupils, his admirers enter it, and under their hands science makes
very great progress it is also changing into a dry and arid nomen-
closure. By wanting to imitate the happy conciseness of their master, they fall into
Darkness. The same period produced Buffon; this great writer, who in his
eloquent pages has failed the poetry of nature, poses as an unabashed adversary of
any nomenclature; despite his many errors, despite his brilliant hy-
untenable assumptions today, Buffon has contributed no less to the progress
science. The writer was worthy of the subject he was dealing with: Majestati nature
by ingenium. Without doubt, without knowing it, the head of this school who, neglecting

ignoring all observation, all regularity, was lost in verbiage
bombastic, in the miserable eloquence of a sterile imagination | Without the genius
Linnaean who spread the goodness and the study of it, natural history would have remained
stationary in France. It is and this genius, which some Buffonian views have fertilized, that we must
the generalization of the science of nature: it is this genius finally that we
owe the Jussieus, the Lamarcks, the Cuviers; the latter, reminiscent of the bosom of the
land of lost generations in I forget, created the true story of the
nature, true zoology. ALBERT COURVOISIER. THE MONTH OF JUNE. Beetles. — We are now in full entomological season;
another month and a half, and there will be a stop in the hunts which will start again
will be in September. It is therefore a question of taking advantage as soon as possible of the weather
We have until July. The fanchoir net always does its job: it is
The indispensable instrument for any coleopterist; it is he who provides good
half of the harvest. Provided it is both strong and light, the rest is less
important. You can mow all the plants: the net will never be empty;
however there are certain plants which are preferable 4 others: Alfalfa,
for example. On each umbellifer we are almost sure to find some
Strangalia, Leptura, Clytus, etc. ; they must be examined with the greatest care. The scythe can usually i i de troubleau; we can always
to fish in the water; the favorite shelters of the Hydrocanthares are in the clumps of
aquatic plants that horde ponds and ponds. With a single swipe
sometimes several hundred individuals are removed. The umbrella too is a pre-
auxiliary skies. We beat the trees, the bushes above the first umbrella
come, and especially the bushes which are in bloom; hawthorns, sourberries, etc. “The hawthorns especially always furnish a valuable crop. It takes
general examine all the flowers: you will arrive quickly to recognize those that
are best for the entomologist. It's still now the season of
excursions of one or a few days in the mountains, or in some
locality rich in insects. I] should not be neglected: first, because they
provide a most enjoyable distraction from everyday life; then
because one almost always comes back laden with precious booty. Those are
very pleasant memories than those of the miraculous hunts which are
than in these excursions, and we will not long forget our excursion.
sion of Pentecdte 1869, of which in half a day we collected each
a thousand people, and not the worst. Our Alsace is excellent for excursions of this kind; we can
vary indefinitely and always come back with new riches. The Vosges,
the banks of the Rhine, the forests of the plain are inexhaustible mines for
lentomologist. Let us not forget to mention again the cut trunks, the pieces of

  

   

 

   

  

 

 

 

  

   

 

  

 

 

are

wood, cuts in forests, etc. It's only 1a that we can take
most Longhorn beetles and Buprestids:

Hemiptera. — It is easy for the coleopterist to also collect the
Hemiptera. This class, which includes only 1,300 European species, makes
closes a crowd of insects of great delicacy; i need to take more
precautions with them than with the Coléops! . ter to bring together top
in the same bottle, and especially to touch them with the fingers; we do them
fall into the bottle without touching it, because they lose their legs very easily
and the antennae. The net and the umbrella are the two indispensable instruments.
sands for those who are starting a collection of Hemiptera. Plas late, if necessary
especially on his eyes to distinguish through the grass, under the
moss, thyme, etc., the rarer species found only in

Lepidoptera. — The butterflies hatch in droves. The year is a little
delayed and hunting in June will be more abundant. Plain
as in the forest one can make one's profit. On the shaded roads, in the

ercées of the forests, fly the Satyrs, the Nymphales, the Irises, the Polyommates,
es Argynnes, etc. It is also the month par excellence of the Sphingides: they begin to hatch,
and towards the end of the month their caterpillars will be found. — The Sesies appear
especially from May 15 to June 15. As for the Bombyxes, one can practice, to catch them, the hunting with the
lantern. By day they fly in dark woods or cling to
old Gbarks. In the countryside | Let's take advantage of the sunny days before the strong ones
heats. Arachnids. — One will find in the sweeping net and in the umbrella of
many spiders that we strongly advise to take; it's a
a hunt very neglected and which in no way deserves the disdain we have for it. We
will find 4 on page 13 how to prepare them. The months of May and June are the months of lentomology, and we have
nothing special to say about the other collections for which spring
and fall are preferable. SOLIDARITY BETWEEN PLANT AND ANIMAL. Without wanting to enter here into all the relative details & the important act of the
breathing, I will only content myself with highlighting the main phenomena
names to which it gives rise, the relations which exist between the
animal respiration and plant respiration. It is around us, in the atmosphere where we live, that animals
incessantly draw air, the essential food for respiration. This tune
is a mixture of two gases, oxygen and nitrogen; oxygen, this gas which enters
holds with so much energy the combustion, and by continuation if breathing, But of which
nitrogen, this iverte gas, comes to moderate the too great and too vivifying energy. the
blood arriving from the veins through the lungs, is, in these spongy organs,
brought into contact with the air in which it dissolves oxygen; then, thus changed into blood
arterial, i} passes into the left heart which launches it into the arteries. arrives in
the last ramifications of these vessels, which present channels of a
Extreme thinness intersecting like the meshes of a net, the blood, through
of the oxygen it contains and which burns the carbon coming from the blood itself
and living tissues, becomes charged with carbonic acid. Dv this combustion result,
for the animal organism, heat and life. Thus modified, the blood, which then takes
the name of venous blood, passes through a new system of conduits called

*

 

 

 

   

     

     

  

—12—

veins, and arrives by 1a in the right heart from where it is launched by the lungs. Here it is back to the starting point. Here he will exhale through the respiratory tract
its carbonic acid, with which it is charged in the capillary vessels, and & the
place of this carbonic acid, i! dissolves an approximately equivalent quantity
of oxygen intended to serve as food 4 a new combustion. Kill that gas
carbon dioxide exhaled by animals, is no longer a breathable gas, far from:
animals immersed in such an atmosphere would soon perish there
asphyxiated. But it is now that the role of the plant will begin, rdle
renovator, thanks to which the air stale by the respiration of animals is
calf made clean for use as food. It's pat these thousands of leaves, by
that rich greenery which crowns the plants, which the plant draws from the
carboniferous mospher a food that supports it in its regenerative role. In
effect, just as in the capillary system of animals, in the parts
green of the plant are slender branches, thousands of channels
which distribute the sap, which is, so to speak, the blood of plants. In these
organs give rise to a series of the most curious reactions. By their
roots the plants draw the sap which rises through appropriate ducts
I along the throne of the plant, and which is therefore called ascending sap. From the throne, it passes into the branches and finally into the leaves. ’, and under the influence of the sun’s rays, the carbouic acid is decomposed:
released into the atmosphere; as for carbon, it is
absorbed by the ascending sap, which is thus changed into a new liquid
named cambiuin. The cambiam circulates between the bark and the sapwood, and deposits a
layer of one and the other on the walls of the conduit which it traverses. It's here

 

 

 

 

 

    
  

 

   
     

   

 

a veritable vegetable assimilation; this is how the plant collects food
necessary for its growth. Such are the phenomena of diurnal respiration
nil plants, plants exhale carbonic acid: this gas is

    

drawn directly from the ground by the roots and does not come, as we have
believed for a long time, with a nocturnal breath. It follows that this is only a
aet the negative or, to put it better, the complete cessation of the phenomena which
produce during the day. Wai tried to point out, by this incomplete glimpse, the intimate relations which
exist between animals whose respiration incessantly vitiates the air which
surrounds, and the plant that revives this corrupted air and draws its nourishment from it,
while making 4 the atmosphere the essential part for the respiration of
animals. Mont-de-Marsan. G.S.

        

 

SPIDERS. How many curious and interesting customs we find and study among the
spiders; how many new and useful observations 4 to make on this order if
not very well-known! And yet one hardly sees from time to time a naturalist
cuper of this study, when certain other branches of natural history
seem on the contrary privileged and attract to them all eyes, all
research. Why are there comparatively so many collectors of
butterflies and beetles, and so few spider collectors? We are
will say that it is difficult to take, difficult to keep these last; but this
difficulty is not so great as one would like to imagine, and one must also
attribute the cause of the abandonment of this study to the repugnance, I would say
almost as frightened as some people are to touch these innocent insects.
sives, Spiders, it is true, or at least some of the most

   

 

     

— 13 —

munes, have a rather repulsive appearance, an ungracious form, a color
dark, legs tongue and very fragile, finally a soft body that crushes
easily between the fingers when you want to grab them too hastily; but
is there really anything to discourage a naturalist? Sil wanted to give himself
It is difficult to examine these insects more closely, he would then recognize that he
there are many exceptions, and if there are ugly spiders, there are also
many which are adorned with the most vivid colors and the most varied designs. All you have to do to be convinced of this is to look carefully at one of these
spinners, such as the cross-bearing spider. Unfortunately these exceptions
do not make others forgive their ugliness, and this is an agreed thing,
that when we talk about a spider, we are talking about the most hideous beast and the
dirtier than you can imagine, worthy at most of being crushed. Nobody
will not believe that, on the contrary, one of our auxiliaries has both the
plns useful and cleanest; no one thinks & admires with what sea-
watchful instinct, the spider stretches out its fine and regular webs, and seizes the
gnats and the small insects that come to take it. It has also been claimed
that spiders possessed a venom which could be dangerous for
Man. But it is not so, at least for those of our regions; and if, at
by means of the liquor secreted by glands placed near their mouths,
they can paralyze almost instantaneously the small flies which they
do their food, however they cannot in any way bite the hand
who wants to grab them. Let us therefore reassure ourselves on their account, and let us renounce
to the disgust and the fear that we have had until now for these animals
harmless! Preparation and preservation of spiders. Several means have already been employed to preserve spiders without
they shrivel up or lose their color. If you want the con-
serve dry, i.e. without placing them in alcohol or in any other
liquid, it is essential to blow them or stuff them with cotton. But these two means, which can only be applied to large
cash, are impractical and very time-consuming to put into execution. I leave them
of cdté to speak only of conservation in alcohol, which compensates for the in-
agree that it sometimes has to tarnish the colors after a certain
time by more than one advantage to which consideration must be given, especially since if
the colors are slightly erased, the characters necessary for the distinction of
species still persist. It suffices therefore to employ the means which we are going to
indicate here. Tl fant, above all, do not leave too long out of the spider alcohol
that we want to prepare, without whom we will see it quickly wrinkle and dry out. It must first be glued with gum arabic which is not soluble
in alcohol, on a strip of thick white paper or on a glass slide.
roughly the size of the bottle in which we want to introduce. The paws
and the palps will be extended and fixed also to paper or glass with
gum. Thus prepared, the spider will be placed in a wide-necked bottle,
or better yet in a test tube filled with good quality alcohol. In this way, we can easily keep the spiders we have
harvested, and it will be easy to study them without taking them out of alcohol, which will be
very convenient for the observer. M.H.

4 —

THE ROSE. The rose is part of a vast family, that of the Vosaceae, which can be considered
to be considered as an association of several groups, but which it is impossible to
separating while dissociating them, She divides into six or seven different tribes;
we will leave them aside to deal only with that of rosacea
strictly speaking. ;

In beginning this little study of the rose, we must precisely separate
the wild rose or wild rose of the cultivated rose, As much as this one charms
sight and smell, as this one has less fragrant flowers and of a
more simple. In the wild, the rose has only five petals which form
its corolla, usually pale in color, while the rose in our gardens
varies from the brightest red to the dazzling whiteness of snow. Glamines, so numerous in the wild rose, are rarer in the rose
cultivated; culture changes into petals the yellowish stamens which occupy the
most of the rosehip flower and cover its ovary. We know today about one hundred and sixty different species of roses,
but culture has created many thousands of different varieties. In his scholar
work: Monographia rosarum, published 4 London in 1820, Mr. John Lindley
arranges all species into eleven sections. We give here their accom-
accompanied by a short description and the name of a rosebush that can serve as
type in the section and guide the research of those who would be tempted to bring together
the various species of roses:

1° Rose simplicifolic, whose simple flowers have only five petals, like
Berberis flowering rosebush. 2° Roswasseraces, the stem of which is armed with strong thorns; such is the rose
of Kamtschatka, whose slender branches are crowned with purple flowers
clear. 3° Rose bractwale, i leaves accompanied by bracteales, like the rosebush &
bracts, native to China, ’ double flowers, white or flesh-colored,

4° Rose cinnamomec, which has the type of cinnamon rose, thus named &
cause of the conlenr of its eorce; this species gave birth to the name-
many varieties, especially the rose de mai. 5° Rose: pimpinellifolic, the main species of which is the rosebush with leaves of
burnet; i! grows in hedgerows all over Europe and provides by cultivation
single, semi-double and double varieties. 6° Rose centifolic, such is the rosebush & cent fenilles, so remarkable for the
size, the rounded and globular shape of its flowers, as well as by their smell
exquisite and their delicate hue; to this section are attached the mossy rosebush,
the rose of the four seasons, the rose of Provins, etc. 7° Pink villose, all parts of which are covered with a cotton down-
neous, like the white rose that grows along all the hedges

8° Rose rubiginose, whose type is the rusty rose, whose leaves are
covered & their inner face with small rust-colored glands which
distill a resinous sne whose Vodenr recalls that of pippin apples. 9° Canine rose, whose type is the dog rose or dog rose
commmon; we also refer to this section the Bengal rose, whose flowers
Mune great freshness are odorless. 10° Rose systyle, whose flowers have their styles united in a bundle
elongated exceeding the flower, as in the evergreen rose, a native species,
4 evergreen leaves, ’ white flowers one incarnate. 11° Rose Banksiane, i climbing stems, without prickles, 4 white flenrs
al edorantes, or yellow and odorless; the type of this section is the rosebush of

anks. —15 —

Let us say, in conclusion, a few words about the culture of the rose. This flower
asks for a light ground, in general the exposure to the midday, and assiduous care. It is necessary, during the winter, to protect the roses from the cold, either by sheltering them
in a greenhouse, either by empaillaul them, that is to say by covering them with straw,
canvas, or other materials that prevent the cold from penetrating them. We repro-
produces roses in different ways, or by seed, or by cuttings, but
the safest and most expeditious means is the grafting on rosehip. Colmar. PAUL MOSSMANN. NOTES ON THE TOAD. He. Use as it was in the past. We only saw the toad, without being an animal, strictly speaking.
imeux, produces an irritating mood. We now come to a page
curious about the natural history of the past: the many uses of the toad in
medicine and witchcraft in the centuries. It would be impossible to repro-
reduce here all the fables that have been debited urtoul, on this unfortunate
batrachian. The hateful calumnies
of which he was the hero, the owners

 

    
 
 
 

         

   

 

medicinal (supposed) which made it re-
sought by alchemists, would fill entire volumes. Several of these
facts are so curious, so astonishing at times, that I cannot get bored.
sin to name a few. They will serve to illustrate the science of our fathers,
this science mysteries, object of dread and superstition for the populations. On seeing a toad, one is struck by its strange and even hideous appearance;
it is therefore not surprising that the alchemists and the ancestors of our doctors
have given such a considerable place to poor Bufo in their ma-
gico-medicinal and in their unique experiences. Indeed we see it
in the front row, with the bird of darkness and the bat, bet the animals
unfortunate evils martyred by the alchitists; because, in these dark labs-
of the light of day never penetrates, the poor animals, gifted
for their misfortune of a strange physiognomy, undergo a martyrdom whose
Already rather cruel operations, which present-day physiologists subject their
victims, cannot give an idea. Judge by a few examples:

“Bufo, Physalus, Rubeta(l), in French erapaud, is a species of frog
terrestre about as big as a fist, ugly, hideous, appalling, covered
gray, brown hard skin, dotted with spots that look like so many puss.
lules; his head is big: his back is wide, his belly is swollen and ample; he ha-
bite damp, dark, hidden, stinky places; he eats grass and worms. It is said that the herbs he touched or moistened with his drool
be poisoned. .. It is also necessary to fear that there has remained venom in
the dead toad, that in the dead viper, mortua bestia, mortuum est vene-
number Aquatic toads are found in marshes, but they do not have
as much virtue as terrestrial toads, and because they do not contain so much
of volatile salt... We sometimes find in the head of the biggest and oldest
toads a small white or other colored stone called ordinary-
ment toad or toad stone: it is embedded in the rings and it is
wears on her finger, believing that she has a great virtue to resist & malignity

      

  

 

  

 

 

  

   

  

 

 

(1) From rubus, bramble, because the toad is often found under this plant. We find
already this name in Pliny. — 146 —

moods...; but I have little esteem for amulets...” (Dietion-
of simple drugs, by Nicolas Lemery, doctor-doctor, 1727). Title
obliges, and Mr. Lemery, of the Academy of Sciences, no longer dares to put in his
dictionary the absurdities spread aplenty by his predecessors However
the colors under which he paints the toad are hardly pleasant, although
My portrait does not lack truth. On the other hand, there are still many errors
crude, but nothing compared to the appalling writings of others
older, and even more modern, tors. Here, for example, are some excerpts
a Botanical and Pharmaceutical Dictionary from 1790 (!) whose lantear keeps
Vanonym. It's because he's probably not from the Academy of Sciences...: "We
pierces toads in July by the head or by the neck with a stick
pointy, then allowed to air dry for both internal and external use...
inevitably stops bleeding from the nose, if it is applied behind the
ears, if you hold it tight in the hand until it warms up, or if you
hangs around the neck of the sick. — Toad powder is made by trituration
simple from the desiccated animal; but charred toads are better. Faztes
boil 3 or 4 toads thrown alive, for an hour, in a pound and a half
olive oil; pour the oil and keep it to detect the stains on the face. »

Here is now a third recipe. The reader is free to try it, if there
cross:

“To prevent the birds from spoiling the seeds by eating the
grain. We gotta get the biggest toad we can find, and we'll shut it down
in a new clay pot with a bat, and we will write inside the
lid of the pot this word: ACHIZECH, with raven's blood, and we will bury
this fart in the middle of the sown field, and need not fear that the
birds approach it: when the grains begin to die, you must remove
this pot and throw it away from the field in some sewer" (Secrets Concerning
urts and trades. Naney, 1724). Above all, my friend reader, if you use the recipe, do not forget Aehiseeh. —
This one is even older, and comes from England:

"We cannot get the precious stone that is in the head of
toad by the dissection of the animal, it must be forced to reject it on its own. But stupid art, in the way of having it rejected, because the animal must be
urge. For this we put the toads on a piece of scarlet cloth,
which pleases them very much, and on which they extend all their length, as
to play; they then reject the precious stone, but they immediately swallow it-
ment, if we do not manage to steal it from them by trickery; and for that there must be
a hole in the sheet, so that the stone falls into a vase of cold water,
ot the villain does not dare to follow her... We test this stone by
Approaching a live toad: if he turns his head towards her, she is good. »

Now here is the use that the doctors of that time made of
Vanimal himself: "The Duke of Saxony, Frederick, always carried a toad
skewered in a piece of wood and wrapped in canvas. When he met
someone who was bleeding from the nose, he made him hold the toad in his hand
Until it has acquired a certain warmth; the blood then ceased to flow,
The only explanation doctors have ever been able to give for this phenomenon,
it was that horror and fear compelled the blood to flow back to its own
place, for fear of an animal so contrary to human nature! »

What else do you say about this? Anyone who touches a leaf of a nearby tree
which a toad has lived is seized with violent cramps. It's due to the liver, qni
is of an extremely evil nature; luckily the toad has one
second which acts as an antidote. They also used, against toad venom,
of a recipe that I will translate in full, because it shows the ideas of the ancients
doctors EUHIES remedies all the more energetic as they were more compli-

 

 

  

       

 

   

 

 

     

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

=a

és: “Take plantain, black Vellebore, powdered crabs,

sea ​​turtle blood mixed with wine, pieces of dog's tongue,
the pulverized straight horn of a deer, cumin, quintessence of molasses
and the oil of a scorpion. Mix and take ad libitum. »

(To be continued.) y E. DoLirus. ROOT ABSORPTION. Plants feed, but in a different way from animals; they
find and draw from the very soil which surrounds them and to which they are
fixed, the necessary materials 4 their development and & the formation of or-
new ganes. We can notice that water plays a big role in their
nutrition. Indeed, we know that a plant placed in a soil almost devoid of
@humidity does not take long to perish otherwise, we water it in a way
suitable, we soon see its stem leaning towards the ground rising, its fenils,
Half-dried, green again; in a word, this plant, almost lifeless, resumes
vigor. It is therefore the water charged with nutritive principles that the
Plant; but nevertheless there are organs different from the root, which
enjoy the ability to absorb are the leaves. The leaves, in fact, are provided on their surface with small openings or
stomata, one of whose roles is to pump carbonic acid or oxygen into the air.
gene, gas which, combined in different proportions with the principles of the sap,
form various products (oxalic acid, tartaric acid, starch, cellulose, etc.). In
plants with roots (Phanerogams and most Cryptogams),
absorption is carried out mainly by the part fixed to the ground, without which
plants cannot exist. But it is not the same with some acoty-
ledones, 'lichens, for example, which, devoid of roots properly speaking,
and compounds “the membranous expansions bound 4 of the raw bodies, draw only
Throw their food into the atmosphere. Hales, a famous English physicist, was the first to calculate the force of suction
roots. After laying bare a root of a pear tree, he cut off its end,
fitted a tube filled with water, the other end of which plunged into a tank
& mercury. After six minutes, the mercury had risen 27 ™/™ in the
tube; but how could this water have penetrated the root tissue? It is by a force that Dutrochet called endosmosis. The ends of
rootlets, the only parts of the root which, according to observations, have the ability
to absorb water laden with various nutritive substances, are favorable to
Vendosmosis, because their tissues being full of juices denser than water, it is
obvious that the humidity located in the ground tends through the porous walls of the
cells to the denser sweats they contain. As has been said above
high, not all parts of the root can draw watery substances
which must develop the plant and form new tissues; there are only the
root tips that are specific to this function. In fact, the roots
grow as a result of the formation of new cells; they lengthen
in a direction opposite to that of the rod, and therefore their ends
are composed of young and tender tissues, gorged with thick juices and devoid of
of this membrane of the epidermis which opposes the introduction of humidity
of the ground; also these tissues, always new, promote endosmosis, and do not act
not, as was once believed, in the manner of sponges. Luneville. A. LEMAIRE. (To be continued.) —18—

EXCURSION AROUND MAINZ. We took advantage of our Easter holidays to do in the surroundings
from Mainz a geological race. The main work we have con-
sulted before undertaking this journey, is the work of M. Sandberger on the
Tertiary fossils from these surroundings. The tertiary lands outcrop near Mainz on a fairly large
extended, on both banks of the Rhine. They are formed of main marine layers
mainly, as well as other layers of lake formation. Like everywhere
elsewhere, all the layers are not equally rich in fossils: however
one notices there several principal giles known by their extraordinary richness
nary. Such are the surroundings of the small town of Alzey, about 430 kilometers
south of Mainz. For a year we have been able to get there easily, thanks to the establishment.
ment of a railway which, starting from Worms, will also link Alzey & Mayence. The marine layers rich in fossils come to the surface 4 Weinheim, a
About 2 kilometers south of Alzey, along a sunken road. They are
rather thick, formed of a very soft yellowish sand, and separated for the
most between them by harder parts. They offer an immersion of
15 to 20 degrees from the Colé de Weinheim. The lower layers which contain the greatest number of fossils
better preserved than those of the upper layers, they provided us with
for a short time a fairly large quantity, among which mainly dominated
Peclunculus, Turritella, ete, as well as some species of bivalves. Not a single sample of the Vatica erassa, which is however characteristic
from this horizon. The fossils contained in the upper conches are much more

scattered than those of the lower strata, and for the most part of such
fragility, that it is virtually impossible to extract them without breaking them. tls
differ even a little from those of the lower layers. Peclunculus crassus
disappears almost completely to make room for a smaller species. We
also find there a Plewrotoma of which we have not encountered a single
sample in the lower layers. The very sand with which they are compensated
the upper layers differ: instead of being yellow and rather coarse, it is
thin and gray. The teeth of Lamna, of which we collect a good number of specimens,
meet in all layers, but they are not very common. is of this gite, in a field, we find debris from Perna, as well
only Pectunculus and Ostvea in abundance. In the next issue, I will explain the other points that we have
explored around Alzey, as well as the results of our research on the
right bank of the Rhine,

 

   

 

   

 

      

     

 

   

    

 

     

 

 

 

 

 

st

V

    

 

  

  

E.ENGEL. CHARITY TAUGHT BY INSECTS. Few years ago,
a bottle filled with water from the agabes, and I washed them:
given & themselves. Although these small beings are very voracious of their
nature, and that they must have been hungry, neither of them attacked his neighbor and did not
thought that it is permissible to feed oneself at the expense of one's kindred. That's it, you have to
confess, already a lot; human heroism does not always go that far...
However I had to witness 4 of the most interesting scenes. Elant to consider
my friends, I noticed one towards the bottom of the vase, which, head down, and ab-

 

my return from a country excursion, I put in
sai for several days abandoned

     

   

 

 

19) —

domen placed almost vertically, seemed to be making vain efforts to move
to place. Either forgetfulness or weakness, he had stayed too long before renewing
his supply of air, and his heavy body could not rise to the surface. Asphyxiation was beginning to all appearance; The animal was about to perish. His cameras
harbors noticed it, and three or four, grabbing him quickly by the legs,
passed through the liquid column, in order to put its stigmata in contact with
atmosphere. There, the patient, having breathed for a moment, regained his strength and his
ordinary vigor, then he descended joyfully, preceded by his charitable
companions. This feature surprised me so much that, in the moment following my observation,
I don't know of its reality, and it took a new one to convince me that I
I'm not dreaming. Since then, I have several times enjoyed this curious spectacle
also olfert the beetles; I even noticed in some and in others, a
second fact which is like the complement of the first

If an agabe or a beetle comes to die, those who remain try immediately
to bring it back to life. Numerous and useless attempts do not discourage them
point. They constantly raise above the water the inanimate body of the deceased,
and make a sort of halt at each ascent, about the time required by the rest.
spiration to recover. Believing to have saved their brother, they abandon him to
himself: the corpse falls back and remains inert; they grab it again
and repeat their maneuver without more success, without less perseverance. When fatigue overwhelms them, they rest, but as soon as they feel
strong, they resume their task and continue it for a long time yet. S. DE PRINSAC. COMMUNICATIONS. We will translate into French the English and German articles that we will be asked to
publish. — Coceinelia bipunctata. I noticed during several winters 4 Lorry-les-Metz (Moselle)
the fact of which you speak in your number, In April 1870 in particular, when we opened for the first
re from my natural history cabinet, I found 20 4 25 of these ladybugs
who had taken refuge between the shutter and the window. This fact must be common, for in the groove
from the window there are many scratched ones which seem to have been dead for a long time. From
Gleves who do not concern themselves with natural history have also noticed this fact. GP. miter times the window

 

— Planorbis corneus. We found last month, in a marshy part of
VIII, near Modenheim, 4 Yembouchure of the canal which connects "Mau canal du Rhène au Rbin,
a large quantity of Planorbis corneus, a species which is not very common everywhere. We
we can send a few individuals to those who request it. The Editors. — M. Meyer-Diir, & Burgdorf Suisse), makes available to entomologists the product
of its hunts: beetles, wasps, hemipteres, etc. The prices are not high, the
considerable choice and all the individuals of an irreproachable conservation. Mr. Meyer delivers
all specified orders (except beetles), if asked. We recommend
& all those of our colleagues in entomology who will pass 4 Burgdorf, to visit the
executives of Mr. Meyer-Dir. We er

 

   

We do well by indicating some of Mr. Meyer's prices: not determined.
minés, beetles and diptdres, fr. 10. — The hundred, hymenopters and hemipttres, fr. 15. - The PI-
doptera, neuroptria and orthoptira, fr. delerminata, hymenoptvres and hemipterans, fr. 20. — Orthoptires and Neuroptera, fr. 25. E, D. — M. HL

 

— 20 —

— Deutsche malakozoologische Gesellschaft. This society is the most considerable of those
whose purpose is the study of molluscs. She founded a swap shop ott’ we can
exchange her doubles, as well as buy the molluscs indicated in the catalog that she
public, The annual subscription is 2 thalers (7 fr. 50). Contact 4 M. D.-F, Heynemann,
6, Domplatz, Frankfurt. — Molluscs of the Haut-Rhin. Since 1847, date of the publication of the Essay on Mol-
lusques des Vosges, of Dr Puton, no one in our surroundings took care of this branch
interesting natural history. In the hope of somehow filling a void too
important in the fauna of our country, we are collecting materials for a catalog of the
Haut-Rhin molluscs, on the advice of a distinguished conchologist who is kind enough to
help us from his experience. As it is impossible for us to know thoroughly by ourselves:
even the malacological fauna of the most glorious parts of the department of Mulhouse,
we ask all those who will be willing to do so, to send us as many molluscs
alive or dead (not excepting slugs in alcohol) as they can. Indeed, without a
considerable number of individuals of the same species, our work would be almost impossible.
possible. We will endeavor to send in exchange, as much as possible, samples
natural history 4 those of our correspondents whom I will desire; when we don't
we won't be able to, we are counting on their generosity. It's not so much for ourselves
we make this request, that in view of a work which, we hope, will have a certain
ut to the necessary, it will doubtless take us several years;
however, we ask those who are willing to send us molluscs, to do so
as soon as they can, for they will thus spare us a double work. Also a hint
exact as possible of the /locality and date of capture is essential. We will receive
also with pleasure some bags of conchiliferous detritus left by the rivers after the
waters. E. Engel — E. Dollfus.

   

. To bring the mats together

— Collection for sale. One of our correspondents wishes to sell a collection of beetles
neatly arranged and determined, composed of 609 species (1400 individuals) in 5 boxes, for the
small fee of fr. 50. —This is a great start for a beginner.—Contact
to the editorial staff. - Trades. We ask for plants from Alsace, the Meuse or the Moselle, in

exchange of plants common to the iridescent marls of Lunéville. Write 4M. Adrian Lemaire,
at the College of Lunéville. — I would like to exchange some rather rare beetles which are only found on the pines
and the heather of the Landes, and several others that I have in duplicate, against insects from other
country. — Henri Sourdois, rue de la Préfecture, 8 Mont-de-Marsan (Landes). — Cyclostoma elegans. I found in May 1870 some dead shells of
cycle elegans in the ruins of the castles of Hguisheim. I would like to know if this species
a ac encountered further north in Alsace. — E.Engel. CORRESPONDENCE. S. de P., Lusy. — Thank you for the articles, We insert some of them. The soul of beasts comes out
a bit of our framework and does not seem sufficiently proven. Gorin. — We will write shortly. Pick up with ardenr, without worrying about the rest. P.M., Colmar. — Lack of space forced us to cut out some parts. ‘Type. Oberthir and son, in Rennes. — House in Paris, rue Salomon-de-Caus, 4 (square des Arts-et-Métiers). ter July 1870. The Number: 25 cents. No 3. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE:

 

For Brance.. .. fr. 3 paran, | For foreigners .......-... fr. 4 per year. Send the amount in stamps ow maniat on the post office

    

We subscribe to M. Eugene Engel, to MM. Dollfus Mieg and C*, 4 Dornach,
at Mr. Ernest Dollfus at the Geissbiibl, 4 Dornach (fH! Rhine, and at Madame Péu
of the Arsenal, 4 Mulhouse. y, bookseller, street

 

       

 

 

your RY
CURSION AROUND MAINZ. ty V YORK. (Continued) BOTANICAL
GARDEN
The next morning we went to visit Mr. Simon's collection of fossils,

in Alzey. Colle collection, very interesting in terms of surrounding fossils, is
currently for sale, it is divided into several series that we can buy
as a whole or separately. The fossils which compose it and which are among
30 4 40,000 samples, largely from a layer located
above a mill on the road to Weinheim, and which we have not
explored. The many excavations which have been carried out have, so we are told,
adil, almost destroyed, and could only be found by digging & quelyue
meters deep, clearing the layer alone would take several
working days. The fossils which M. Simon encountered there are all of conser-
perfect and very varied vation; a number of species have also been found there
news. Parm: the main pieces that we noticed in the pass
tion were teeth of Afastodont, from the Tertiary sands
around Eppelsheim, remains of Mammoth, Rhinoceros, as well as
some Hadianassa teeth (1). In addition to the fossils of the surroundings, this collection also contains a good
number of tertiary lands around Paris, Bordeaux, etc., as well as
Belgian coalfields. We strongly advise all collec-
visitors who will go to Alzey, to visit this callection, which will give them
quickly an idea of ​​the fossil fauna of the surroundings. 1 was left to us after that To explore the new works of the railroad,
as well as some quarries dug in a hill to the right of the road which
leads to Weinheim. The trenches opened for the railroad, had bare 4 some benches
of rocks north of Alzey, @ the very place which should serve as the location
at the new station, this rock is especially interesting for the marine shells
and land that it contains. The inarine shell test, as well as that of
others, has completely disappeared and the footprints left are in large
part broken. Among the terrestrial fossils, we hardly noticed that
helixes, and the marine shells consist of a considerable number
most likely from Cyrene. Work on the railway will no doubt uncover a large number of

 

 

 

     

    

 

 

 

 

 

       

 

  

 

 

   

 

(1) B species of cetacean close to the current dugong. — 22 —

fossils, because from Alzey to Mayence they will only cross land
tertiary. What a rich harvest of fossils for the collector who can
follow these works day by day! From Ja, skirting the hill on the Weinheim side, we reached the
quarries from which stone is extracted 4 batir d’Alzey. The first ones we see
tames contain almost nothing in fact of fossils, but in those of the middle
there is a really huge amount of well-preserved Ostvea forming
real beds of fossils. We found some fish teeth there
as well as some other fossils. The rock itself contains Pectunculi
crassus poorly preserved and mostly stripped of their test. Above
these rock layers are found, in some of these quarries,
interrupted layers of lignite. The quarrymen told us that they had trotted a few days earlier in
the quarries, fossil bones that they had rejected with rock debris: there
We were unable to find them, despite all our searches. We their
achelames however a fairly large tooth of Carcharias (1), as well as
some ribs from Halianassa. (To be continued.) E.ENGEL. THE MONTH OF JULY. Beetles. After a two-month sleenle-chase, here is finally something
respite time. It's not that you don't have to hunt anymore, far from 1a, but it doesn't
you no longer have to devote your time exclusively to hunting. what we have
said for the two previous months is still true for this month; only
the heat has reduced the number of insects and the hunts will no longer be
also fruitful. It is now, while waiting for September, that it is a question of
make aware. If there is any advice we have to give to our readers,
it is above loul not to leave anything behind. The bad fold is very vile
taken, the objects accumulate and one cannot escape the chaos which threatens,
than by sacrificing the greater part of the product of the chisses. It is therefore necessary to
set to work with courage, prick all the insects that have been put aside,
stick on small rectangles of strong paper those which are too small to be
stitched, and arrange everything temporarily in frames, from which they will be taken
in winter to incorporate them into the collection. One will find at M. E. Deyrolle,
rue de la Monnaie, in Paris} everything you need to prepare the insects. I'm enough
for the rest Wune forceps & prick, a bottle of entomological gum,
a few corked boxes and a few thousand German pins from the
humeros 2, 3, 4 and 6 (french pins are less expensive matte they do not
worth nothing, because they bend very easily). Lepidoptera. The month of July is less favorable for Lepidopleres
than the previous one. The main diurnal species that can be found during
this month are: Vanessa Antiopa-prorsa (tin of the month), Salyrus Sylvander; enough
rare in some localities, Nymphalis Camilla, and some polyommates. The two main nocturnal species are the Cossus ligniperda which hatches
from about June 25 to August 10, el la Harpya fagi, rare in dark woods. 2) Kind of sharks,

— 3

CIRCULATION AND RESPIRATION IN ANIMALS
AND PLANTS. I do not propose here to retrace in detail all the phenomena which
stimulate circulation and respiration, whether vegetable or animal; I
just want to point out some striking analogies between
the animals and the plants, in the construction of the origins which aceoniplisent
these functions, in these functions themselves and their ts, finally in Ja
composition d z alisorbed and released. Nor do I have the pretension
to exhibit only neve things; all that i can say has been deconverted
by other wai only gathers scattered materials to form
a whole easier & kissable in one go. The vascular system of man and two trees have often been compared.
the parts would be inverse; tree of red blood will have its roots in the
lungs, its throne has the aorta, its branches the capillaries
widespread in the organs; the tree of black blood, on the contrary, will have its roots
in the organs where nutrition is made, and its branches in the lungs;
Varterus pulmonalis would be the throne. Each of these two trees would have
at the junction of the hole and the roots, at the named place glued into the plant,
one of the halves of the heart. If I go through the series of animal species, I notice that the mode of
blood circulation becomes more and more simple. After the double circulation
and complete with man and the higher animals, I find the circulation
double and incomplete of reptiles and amphibians, the simple and com-
plete of fish, the circulation of insects using a y. on the back and
gaps, the purely vascular circulation of the anuelids, and finally the circulation
zoophytes, in which the blood is animated by generally strong movements
irregular, and whose circulatory apparatus even often escapes us. So we see it, and as we go down the scale of animals, their mode
of circulation is closer to the mode of circulation of plants, because
the last one operates only 4 using vessels, serving either the march
of the ascending sap, or to that of the descending sap. But it is not only in the structure of the organs of circulation
that there is a great resemblance between the animal kingdom and the vegetable kingdom;
several of the motor agents which serve for the movement of the blood in the arteries,
Capillaries and veins. also contribute to the progress of the sap
in vessels, fibers, medullary cells In this case again, as
presently, the more I descend the animal scale, the more I find analogy between
the two kingdoms. In (man, indeed, and the higher animals, the forces
through which the many and varied soul circulation takes place; the principles
are: the contractions of the heart, the elasticity of the arteries, the eapills rite, V'a
mosis of the veins, the presence of all-particular valves
veins and arranged in such a way as to oppose the retrograde course of the blood
solicited by the action of gravity. But in the lower degrees of the kingdom
animal, in the annelids and zonphytes, for example, the blood which he
circulates more than with the help of vessels and lacunae quite similar to vessels
el to the micats of the vegetarians, is hardly pushed any more but by the capillary force
el by the anastomosis of the tubes which facilitates its march; these are the same forces
which set the sap in motion. Wais same as in traffic
of the animansx we find motors that can not be found in the cirenlation
plants, such as the contractions of the heart and the elasticity of the vessels,
similarly, the phenomenon of endosmosis and the evaporation that takes place on the surface
leaves are not found in animal traffic, or at least
do not play such an important role. s of which

     
 

    

    

      

 

 

   

 

      

 

   

 

     

   

   

      

   

 

 

 

 

 

has

After comparing the two circulatory apparatus and the forces which
contribute to plant circulation and animal circulation, I will now
nant examine blood and stve — their composition — their functions
respective—finally the renewal of blood and sap by the phenomenon
of breathing. The blood abandoned to itself soon separates into two distinct masses,
one solid, the other liquid: I clot the serum. The latter almost forms the
nine tenths of blood; it is composed almost entirely of water holding in dis-
solution of gases, mineral or organic salts and albumin, substances
all of which are of great importance when considering that blood contains
it carries all the raw materials of the organism. As for the sap, it is
also composed almost entirely of water holding in solution the juices or
| Is that the earth contains; but & as it moves, it mixes with
liquids that the vegetable contained before, either in the cells, or in
canals. The basis of blood and sap is therefore the same: water; and this water, in the
vegetable as in the animal, holds in solution salts and gases. However
there is an even more striking resemblance. We distinguished the red blood
or arterial running from the coon to the organs, proper to nutrition, and black blood or
venous, going from the organs to the heart; then to the lungs. We distinguish from
even the ascending sap and the descending sap, the ine improper, the other clean
to our knowledge and mainly under the force and in the
laticiferous, to form the cambium, element of a new layer ¢
It is easy to draw a comparison between the ascending sap and the
veins, the descending sap and the arterial blood, — Eufin, thing remark
is by breathing that sap and blood become clean a now
organs and tissue repair. Because we can say that plinths breathe as well
although animals, since respiration is a function whose purpose is
Wintroduce gaseous principles borrowed from Pat~ into the feed fluid.
mospher, and to exhale the gases unfit for life from which this liquid has clarified.
during feeding; absorption and exhalation of gases, such is also respiration.
tion in plants. Animal respiration is essentially characterized by absorption
Woxvgene eb an exhalation of carbon dioxide; for your water vapor which
emerges, it is a real aqueous exhalation of the entire internal membrane
of the airways. In plants it is the fenillae which are
ment the seat of respiration and of the aqueous yn 5 the slomates per-
allow air to penetrate easily into the parenchyma to wax
around the cells that form it. But the release of gases is done in the direction
inverse in the animal kingdom and the vegetable kingdom During the day and under Vin=
fluence of light, the plant through its green parts absorbs carbonic acid
hiqne that it decomposes and from which it retains the carbon; of pus, she makes &
Oxygen atmosphere resulting from this decomposition. But it also happens
absorption of oxygen and evolution of carbonic acid. This phenomenon
a link in a continuous manner on all the non-green parts of the plant,
and even on the green parts in darkness. "The diurnal respiration of plants by their green parts has therefore on the air
environment a restorative influence can be regarded as one of the
the most effective causes for maintaining the composition of the air, and ensuring the
generation of oxygen. We have often insisted on the admirable harmonies
> that facts of this kind reveal to us: the mineral matter, sublimated under
» the form of gas oa of dissolution, penetrates in your plants and Wansforme
or living matter; these feed the anmans, and the organized matter
» sabit a thousand metamorphoses j “what putrid fermentation resuscitates it

 

 

 

     

  

   

      

    

  

 

   

  

 

      

     

      
  

 

          

 

 

     

    

     

 

     

  

      

   

  

    

   

   

 

   

     

      

8

   

 

    

   
    

» to the mineral kingdom; among the four elements which have thus passed into the
» living burns, carbon plays a role, Animals take it away
» borrow from plants in very diverse forms: then they exhale in

     

    

       

       

» carbonic acid 4 the place of losygére that they borrow from Les
plants take it up again by their daytime respiration, bring it back to the state of
» carbon that they keep in them, and return to the Oxygen Atmosphere

   

 

essential for animal respiration and even for their own respiration
nocturnal” (A. Focillon, Lratlé d'histoire naturelle). Nancy. E.G.

NOTES ON THE TOAD. Ill. Modern superstitions. We boasted absurd emedes still less than a century ago
i; but how to rise from it when Linnaeus himself,
the founder of natural history, leaves in his medical matter remedies
stranger still? But these are ancient superstitions, it will be said, and
today all trace of it has disappeared. Didn't do it. — The erapand, if we don't
Employs him more against the plague, has nevertheless preserved his animal ion
venomous, and not only the peasants, but also the people who should
to know & what to stick on all the stupid fables about animals
that we see every day, he can see a toad without
high eris and without seeming that he jumps on them. Mr. Wood, in his Common
Objects of the Country, tells in a very pleasant way a walk he
in the forest of Mendon, where he had to defend an unfortunate toad against
the altaqnes of the French who accompanied him. I regret that my limited place
forgive me for reproducing this little story extenso; I will only say
than Waprés the naturalist, one would be in France with growing teeth
and when he turns 50. Some year, said Mr. Wood, me ay
promised to show me one that he kept at Jui's in a box, but
I was never able to see her. It is certain that if Mr. Wood has perhaps
considered too general in France the superstitions concerning this animal, they
do not exist perfectly, and that in all classes of your society. I'm not done
not superfluous to repeat that the venom of the toad, since there is venom, is
very easy to hear, and that we get off with a penny of swelling. a

Citing popular ideas about the toad would be long and boring:
let's take one or two examples at random. M. Bétous writes to me that, according to the
peasants of the Landes, the toad and the mole made an exchange one day: the first
mier gave up his tail & the mole, who in return gave him his eyes. When a
peasant encounters a toad, he hastens to kill it, for if he does not
not, the villain would strangle him while he slept. — The naturalist
Switzerland Tschudi has heard people report in good faith seeing
erapands as large as a dinner plate, but i] doubt with reason the accuracy
of the fact. In the French Snisse, it is quite commonly believed & a hatred
deadly between the toad and the spider, and more than one person claims to have
saw the batrachian die from the bites of his little opponent. No need to watch
that it is a fable, because if these two animans have any relation with one
The other is that the spider serves as food for the toad,

We now come to a most curious fact, at first regarded as
an absurd fable, but which seems today, after long discussions
and numerous experiments, agree almost entirely with reality. we have
by a stranger, he is life

   
         

 

     
   

    

 

 

    
  

   

 

   

 

 

   

   

 

 

 

  

    
       

 

 

 

 

— 26 —

Very often workers have said that they have found a live toad locked up
in a block of stone or in a tree throne; but most natura-
lists, judging truth from plausibility, had hardly failed to wait.
tion which they regarded as a fable, or as a few isolated facts

and poorly observed. However, the sightings multiplied little by little, and a
further examination, made by great authorities in matters of history
natural, changed the face of the question. Here are roughly the results
we arrived today: we can divide the localities of which we claim to have
found ermile toads in two groups: those that looked like
ences of reality, and those which are very probably the product, either of a
not very lively imagination, either from a desire for mystification, or from observations
incomplete . Among the first we will rank the pieces of wood, the
plaster blocks, summer. ; among the scennaesy' the heart of the trees, the stones
extracted from the bottom of quarries, coal, geodes. See how we
explains the failures of the first category: life is not very active in the toad,
el, usual consequence, it is Urés tenacious. His action can greatly
decrease in hibernation, without being entirely destroyed. We think that
in a crenx tree throne for example, the toad. & a moment ot his
size still allowed it, will have slipped through a slit that remained unnoticed or
mouthful since, and will have lived there, for months, even years, in a
state of torpor oti contact a pea of ​​air on the pean enough to prolong
his existence. It is the same for the plitre blocks; this body is porous,
and this: air which penetrates through the pores which prevents the toad from dying and
dry out. This fact was proved in 1817 by Mr. Milne-Edwards, who put
plaster blocks containing toads living under the skin; after some
time, the air no longer being renewed in the . the crook was found dead. An English naturalist, Dr. Buckland, made an ae (experiments which seem
& first sight prove the contrary, Indeed, in the artificial bloes intended
To imitate as faithfully as possible those in which had been found
toads, these were found dried out after a few months; but
from these experiments one must simply conclude that the conditions were not
not the same; one would have said to take very young animals, on the point
to go into their winter numbness, and first leave an opening
that we will have reduced little by little. As for finding toads enclosed in
a hollow having exactly the shape of their body. at the bottom of a quarry or
of a mine, which would suppose that the stone would have formed around the animal,
that is simply impossible. The toad can live a very long time,
fifty years and more perhaps, but not thousands of years. What he is
more reasonable to suppose, t still that animal will have entered by some
crack, some crack, which will have escaped observation, These facts,
elsewhere, are almost. always distorted by observers, without them
suspect it; the workers are stupefied to see a living animal come out of the bosom of
the earth, cry out for a miracle without taking the trouble to deepen this mystery. (To be continued). E. DOLLFUs. TRANSPIRATION OF VEGETABLES. Everyone knows that during breathing animals exhale
fear of water, there is a very conclusive warning in the small clouds of
vapors that escape from our mouths on cold winter mornings,
Plants like this exhale water vapour, and through the same organs which
are used for their respiration, by the slits; only this water does not have the same
origin than in animals. In the latter, it comes from the combustion

   

 

27

complete respiratory foods; in plants, on the contrary, water has been
drawn from the ground with the nutritive juices which constitute the sap. It is only at
moment of this water being completely stripped of its nourishing fluids
that she is reudue & the almospheere. To give convincing proof of what I am advancing, at the same time
only a fair idea of ​​the quantity of water evaporated, I will quote the experiment that
in 1724 a famous English naturalist, Zééenne Hales. This scholar took denx
sunflowers, plants that take their name both from the resemblance and from their flower
with the apparent aspect of the sun than they usually have to turn
Days their drive towards the face of the sun Hales therefore took two sunflowers & little
nearly the same size and put them each in a glazed uo pol. Moreover, it covers
covered the vase with a sheet of lead, in order to prevent the evaporation of the soil,

With such a disposition, it was impossible & ean du vase to get lost
either by the walls of the pot which were glazed, or by the upper opening
which was closed by a metal cover. This done, he stripped
completely one of the sunflowers of its leaves, weighed exactly in the morning its
two plants, noted their weight and went to put them in the open air in the middle of his
Garden, by a magnificent summer sun. In the evening, he weighed his sunflowers again
el noticed that the one who had all his leaves had lost near a hilo-
gram of his weight in the morning, while the one who was stripped had
experienced only a very minimal loss. Where did this loss come from? Obviously evaporation. But we have
vn higher than it could be done by the vase; it is therefore linked by the
plant and by the haylofts of the plant, since the greatest loss was
tested by the one who possessed them all. With this brief knowledge of the phenomenon of perspiration, he cannot
it will not be difficult for us to explain why, after a rather long drying time,

 

resse, the plants die. Indeed, to live, the plant draws from the soil the
soluble principles intended to supply it with the sap; she draws them with their dissol-
Next, the water, which will then be evaporated as we have seen, is if the
plant is in dry ground and a considerable amount of time has elapsed.
rable before it comes to rain, the roots will soon have exhausted the
provision of water that they had at their disposal, and the plant, no longer receiving
in sufficient quantity the nourishing fluids, first pales, then withers and
then dies. The amount of water vaporized by different plants on the surface of the earth
is enormous, because if a sunflower, a fairly small plant with few
of leaves, reduced to vapor nearly one kilogram of water, nearly one liter of water
liquid, how much will a great oak exhale? How much a big fordt? How much all the plants of the world and especially in the tropical regions of
Ja vegetation is so lush? Countless amounts. And if we compare
the evaporating surface of plants has that of the sea, one wonders who
of the two supplies the most water vapor to the atmosphere. Because if we extend
moon & following the other the stalks of all plants, in a way & to produce
a continuous surface, there will be some to cover, I am not saying the surface of
seas, but once and ten times your surface area of ​​the globe. Let us therefore judge the
amount of water vapor released every day! What admirable order reigns in all these operations of nature! water,
after performing its function of supplying the nutrient particles & the
crashes, becomes a useless worker; it then goes away, becomes vapor, then
fog, then nnage, and finally settles again in the form of rain for al
lie again the plants that had sent her away as a servant &
charge. I will end this quick overview on perspiration with Luli's review.

 

     

    

 

   

 

    

    

 

 

 

——

of this function of the vegetanx to stop the floods. When a month ago,
two months, that there has not been any considerable rain (which often occurs
during our summers), foul A conp a storm rises and dean torrents flow
of the sky. That such a downpour falls on a rugged region devoid of
drink. the eanx, arriving with too much rapidity and abundance to allow the
ground to absorb them, rush like a raging torrent down the
hill, carrying with them the topsoil and ravaging the plantations. They
flow in such abundance into the beds of the streams or rivers which contain
in the valley, that, unable to find a place there, they spread into the
waterfront properties and produce the unfortunate disaster of flooding. But if
such a quantity of water came to fall on wooded hills, these thousands
of vegetal mouths, altered for a long time, half-open to absorb
in abundance lean which is necessary for them. The spongy mass of lerreau
formed by the detritus of the leaves takes care of the exeedent part, gorges itself on it
and the guard pony the drip transmitter to the floor below. Thus is averted the disaster of the flood. TsiDORE BeéTous. AN OBSERVATION ON THE AQUATIC SALAMANDER. On June 6, we were hunting beetles in the Vosges, near Trois-Epis,

when, by the side of the road, in a small channel of thought in the middle of the meadows,
filled with clear running water, on a bottom of sand and dune-colored earth
ronged we receive some of these batrachians that our readers
know dente za aqnatic salamander von still adult. Soon,
following the , we see the bottom of the creek almost entirely
lined with these little animals, whose size and color varied considerably-
is lying. We start fishing, and in five minutes, we caught some
about forty, which swarm at the bottom of the sweep net. A few occur
women stop, very surprised to see us so occupied. Know
sant lo on, we get some details from them on:
animals that inhabit the creek, and we learn that our salamanders
especially in the patois of the country, eratches, crayfish, grawets, finally
Jes sangsnes "who suck your blood, and who soul de mathonnetes bees,"
pdchepies. As we continue our sin, we witness a very curious fact,
and probably little known On three different occasions, we saw
sounds of the salamanders elongated, greyish masses, having somewhat
form of a salamander As I withdraw from the skin, we see that
these gray masses are other salan andres, already almost completely decomposed
posed and without consistency, my pain inferior in size to those that
had swallowed, for these host pans had half of their bodies buried in
Ja throat and! stomach of their executioners, who seemed to appreciate very much and terrible
feast, We did not find anything concerning this fact in the works that we
consulted; alone, Mr. Wood talks about an adult salamander he wants to try
to snap up a young girl, without succeeding. Thirty of these animals currently inhabit a tub full of water, where i
find perfectly well, A fact which we have since observed
counter the salamandrophagia of these kind hosts: one of the smallest
of the weakest, placed in a tub with the others, seems ill or wounded. Apart from that, we notice that she has the extremity of her skin stripped and
reduce a thread. This salamander died a few hours later. G. Weiss—£. DOLLFUuS. - 29 —-

THE PIE — PICA CAUDATA. This beautiful bird inhabits Europe and some parts of Asia; it is enough
widespread among us. In winter, especially towards the melting snow, we see:
numerous troops & proximity to our dwellings to roam & search for
lear non-food; the beautiful season returned, the magpies disperse, move away from the
liewx inhabited and go to seek in the most “raised fo s trees to y
build their nests. In the wild state the magpie is extremely fierce; It is
very difficult to approach it, especially if you are armed, when you get away
to obtain a, do we almost always have to give up hunting and
waiting in an ambush for this wary bird. However, as far as the magpie is
not very sociable when she enjoys her freedom, as much she is therefore and not very shy
when she is captive. This love of freedom seems to vanish so quickly=
lie in her, that the magpies to whom one wanted to return her refused to leave
the house of they had G16 fed It is claimed that it is quite easy to him
teach & pronounce a certain number of words, and that, 4 my sense, has nothing
very surprising, because there is certainly a certain analogy between the cry of
the magpie and that of the parrot, this talking bird par excellence. But one thing
that we never managed to get across, it's the instinct of flight, so developed
in this bird, and which has given rise to so many curious tales about its
complete. The magpie is about the size of the crow; its plumage is black and white:
the head and neck are matt black, while the fore and tail have a sheen
greenish metallic; the white is especially noticeable on the edge of the wings and
body lessons. E lea le bee, legs, eyes and general body structure
similar & those of crows. His gaits are more jerky and have a certain
Drnsqnery; its flight is not so heavy as that of the crow; his pacing
Maile her much more numerous and she seems to have a lot more trouble to
advance, She feeds, like the crow, mainly on seeds, fruits,
worms, flesh very often in patrefaction, eggs, and even small birds:
i is a quite unpleasant hdte in a garden of Von hold & keep
songbirds, and it is rare to hear both the cry of the magpie and the
song of the nightingale. She lays twice a year from four to eight confs of the
size of the partridge's eggs, of a greenish white color, and sprinkled with spots
brunettes. Her attachment for her is great, she constantly watches
snr them, and as soon as it appears and near its nest a bird den,
she strives to ward it off by muffled 8s
not, like a hawk or even an eagle, she does not hesitate to attack a
open force, preferring to succumb, rather than renouncing & defending his convoy. But it is in the remarkable construction of its nest that
above all his foresight and his tenderness for his little ones: this nest deserves well to be
examined a penin detail. fest formed mainly by assembling strong
tree branches and roots of all kinds, joined together by a
layer of earth so thick that a crow's nest weighs no less than 3 kilograms. This layer of earth completely protects the conve against the attacks of
fire arms. One day I was watching a magpie fly away to its nest: when it
I was there, I walked up to a short distance from the tree and I unloaded my
weapon in the direction of the nest: what was my disappointment when I saw
Voisean flew away with his mocking cries; angry and ashamed
to have missed such a good opportunity, I wanted to make sure if I was in pain
fired: I lowered the nest, and my astonishment was great when I saw the
lead sinking barely 3 or & millimeters into the layer of earth. The outside
of the nest may be 90 centimeters in circumference: the interior seems a
little small for such a large bird: it is barely 15 or 16 centimeters in length.

       
       
  
  
 

 

           

   

 

 

   

    

 

 

 

 

  

 

        
         

  

    

         
 

      

 

         

    

 

    

   

 

   

   

     

 

 

- 30 -

diameter; the bottom is lined with hay and thick feather down. To give back
this nest even more comfortable and more pleasant, she covered it with a kind of
web of intertwined branches, which shelters its brood from the rain. She penetrates
in this small fortification by an opening which she practiced there on the side
defended better. Here is another rather interesting detail which clearly shows what
degree this in*nious bird possesses an instinct for self-preservation. He is not
rare to see in a forest three nests of magpies placed & a hundred meters
away from each other: two of them are very visible; the third,
it is more difficult to distinguish it. The magpie takes care to conceal it with its
better, either on the top of a fir tree where it merges with the branches, or

 

   

 

 

in the thick cracks of a poplar. If we examine these nests more closely, we
Isle

would see a big difference between these three constructions: the one who e
best concealed is solid, well made, and similar & to the one I have just described
the other two are much bigger 3; they do not have the layer of earth
they offer no resistance. It is that these are not real. nests: they are only there for appearance: while the female is on her
eggs, and rests quietly without making the slightest b: male flies from one
nest to another by making the air resound with its cries, and attracts the hunter or the
inexperienced heart far from its true nest and its dear brood. G.W.

  

      

       

   

    

 

AN ENTOMOLOGICAL RACE IN THE VALAIS, IN 1869. (Translated from German.) ;

In the interest of science and its constituents, my father resolved to do
that year, like the others, a little trip to the Alps. He felt
particularly attracted to the Valais, whether one is El Dorado of entomolo-
and who had provided new riches @ my father in each of his
many trips to this country. This time, which still helped to attract him
this summer, after having seen in the Pampas of South America, on the
edtes of Brazil, Cape Verde, 4 Tenerife, on the coasts of Morocco and! 'Europe
south, nature in its most varied aspects, was the ardent desire
to exchange the impressions produced on him by these diverse scenes, against
the alpine world of his homeland, in order to be able to compare the aspect of the
nature in such different points of the globe, and to be able to join its
comfortable with the deep joy of seeing his beautiful homeland again. There is only one Switzerland! Except
The surroundings of Rio-Janeiro, a real terrestrial paradise, there is certainly no
no link of the land that can support the comparison with our Switzerland
alpine

 

 

      

 

  

    

if that formed I plan a trip that I will never forget, grace
to the pleasure and interest he gave me, and which I will endeavor to trace here
the main circumstances. On Sunday July 44 we leave from Burgdorf
in the most favorable weather. I will not speak of the road to Berne &
Lanzanne, who is too well known; I cannot, however, pass over in silence
The admirable spectacle which presents itself after the woods and the uniform hills of
the Oron valley, at the exit of the Chexbres tunnel. We see everything & suddenly
its feet the lake of Geneva, opposite the snow peaks of the Alps of Savoy and
tones around the lake. After spending the few hours of stopping to visit
the well-located town of Lauzanne, we left for Saint-Maurice. Riverbanks
of Lake Geneva offered us first a series of picturesque views, then, almost
of Saint-Maurice, the boundary of the Pays de Vaud and Valais, the nature of the links
completely changed. High walls of rocks closed the valley at

    
 

   

   

 

    

—3l—

right and left; at the entrance to the gorge thus formed is the small town. Like most towns in the Valais, this one is full of misery, disorder
and uncleanliness. Above, on a Glevé rock, is Romanesque Fermitage.
tiqne of Notre-Dame-du-Sax. The next morning we leave for Sion by the first train. On the
road, it is easy to observe the misery of the inhabitants. Except a few raves
fields of corn, the traveler only sees swamps. It's only on
On the inline flanks of the mountains we see some portions of cul-
tive; on the other side, aigniers and walnut trees are very abundant. The
almost sheer rock walls bordering the valley on both sides are strong
rich in water: we see continuously large and small torrents rushing
in the plain in charming However, as soon as one sees
Pisseva guifivnts are onbli*s. Leaping Eeumantet,
the torrent is meadow of a 120 feet high rock in the valite
du Rhone, where its dust and foam are scattered far and wide. Near
from Vernayaz opens the narrow gorge of the Trient, a wild torrent which makes its way
passage through rocks 300 feet high. The small town of Martigny, 00 we arrived soon after:
thanks to the passage of numerous travellers: this is where the roads cross
of the Simplon, the great Saint-Bernard and the Téte-Noire, Martigny is renamed
for its wines, but its water, which is generally the case in lower Valais,
is loadable. Cretinism no longer grows there, as it once did, in all
its horror. We then crossed several localities, among others Saxan, the bre
hell of jea, and from afar we saw the three hills of Zion (Sitten),
Tourbillon, Valeria, and insignificant Mejoria, and at their feet the little capital,
whose appearance is really imposing. Arrived at Sion, ot was to begin the
enlomological part of our trip, we return to the Hotel de la Poste,
then we walk through the city which we like. She has a wide
main building and several buildings, including the Casino; but here
laziness and Valais disorder continually appear,

(To be continued.) LEOPOLD MEYER. is very lively,

 

     

 

   

   

 

   

 

 

  

  

    

ROOT ABSORPTION. After.) However, the roots can only absorb materials that are completely
in dissolution in lean; but they do not find long days in the soil
completely dissolved substances: they have the property, according to Liebig, of
secrete carbonic acid which renders substances soluble. A plant that
yéyéle in sunflower tincture colors it red; let's boil your
dissolution, it takes on the color blene. We investigated whether the plants
could indiscriminately pump harmful or useful matter into the ground:
Several experiments show that vegetarians do not take long to perish if they
absorb poisonous substances. Myself, according to some expe-
ences, I have observed the disastrous effects produced on plants by cyanide
potassium. The Anenione nemorosa placed in a soil soaked with a dissolntion of
this substance soon perishes. Its stem bent back to the ground, its leaves
turned blackish and its flowers withered completely. The same experiments
Successes repeated on other plants gave similar results. Any matter taken from the soil by some plants is not suitable for all

   

    

   

   

  

 

 

 

plants, because plants are above all related to the constitution
geology and mineralogy of the soil, although the ex jon, the climate and several
other causes exert an influence on vtion. We know that certain plants which vegetate in a calcareous soil can
would live in a soil completely devoid of carbonate of lime, in a
mol, that calcareous plants are subject to other laws than plants
silivicultural, for example. We can say that sometimes some vegetables
denote the nature of the soil on which they live. I will cite for example the v7olette
calaminaive which indicates to the minenr the deposit of zinc ores. As well,
for a plant to pass & all the phases of Ja vegelation, it must be before
whenever it finds in the soil the various substances proper to develop it. Prince Salm Horstmar made some observations about Vavoine on this subject. Without silica soil, he says, the oats cannot develop enough resistance to
to solemnize, since his epidermis lacks this hard material which makes fire
a lighter, of that material which firmly supports the stubble of grasses; without
calcareous soil, it dies already & appearance of the second leaf; without soda
and without polasse, it barely reaches a height of 0"09; without alumi-

    

   

 

   

 

    

 

 

    

neous, it remains weak and layer ns phosphorus, it becomes very straight,
but however weak, it bears no fruit; without iron, it remains pale, fuble
cl irregular; with iron, it takes on the highest degree the dark green tint;

  

without manganese, it does not develop at all and produces pew
flowers. The experiments which have been made on Pavome have been repeated on
W@other plants, so that plants, to live, must grow in
a soil containing the various products capable of nourishing them. Luneville. A. LEMAIRE. CHARITY TAUGHT BY INSECTS. In Wartiele, which appeared in this liter in the second issue of La Feuille

 

  

by Ini on water insects, and he concludes that
general very voracious, not only watlaquent never their neighbors, but
still seek 4 bring them back to life when they're dead, I've ob:a
made of the same kind, but it seemed to me that it was rather to decorate their
brothers only to make them live again that certain hydroe attach themselves to them
el Jes brought up 4 the surface of Veau. We see them, in fact, after having
worked for some time with their jaws on the bodies of other insects,
fix their Jans them and go up with them. What makes me believe
although a fact contrary to the general opinion of naturalists:
occur in these little beasts is that we have often seen
same species, caught at the same time in the same pond, tackling, s
to pieces and devour each other, — But I may be mistaken; the only way to
check Mr. de Prinsac's observation. it's about putting yourself in place & observing the insects
of water: the truth will appear very vile then. i. DOLLFUs. put

 

 

    

THE COURTICIERS — THEIR HUNTING. There are about eight species of mole crickets; I will only talk here about the
Common Curlew (Gryllotalpa vulgaris). Cetorthoptere has an elongated shape,
a fairly large abdomen, terminated by two filiform extensions; his body
is usually fawn in color. What characterizes the mole cricket is a

 

aoe

small head, partly nested in a long corselet, forming a kind of cara-
pace that envelops the sides of the protothorax; folded wings with protruding nets
without the elyres. But the character above all proper to this genre is the shape of the
anterior pates. They have acquired a considerable development at home
and corresponding vigour; the ends have elongated and out formed
a kind of hand rather analogous to that of the tanpe; also they were given
the name of daupes-grilions (Gryllotalpa). The word mole cricket seems to come from
Old French word courtille (garden), and because of the abundance in these places. Mole crickets usually inhabit vegetable gardens, wheat fields and
general the friable grounds, of which they dig wes meadows of the ground of numerous
galleries. They pass the bad pu in vn tron ​​practiced its ground,
which corresponds to the exterior for a long time by a more or less vertical opening. depending on the nature of the terrain

The female lays, at the end of spring, two to three hundred cents, which she deposits
in an eruse nest on the ground, of corresponding numerous galleries. The young hatch soon; first white, then they took the color of
their parents, whom they resemble in everything, 4 except the wings which lear
are defending. It is said that they take two and three years to reach lear
full development. It has long been recognized that mole-crickets are herbivores, and
that it was for the sole purpose of replenishing themselves that these Orthoptera cut
roots of x. A few observers have assured since it i
they only cut the roots of plants to clear a path
age and look for insects,

Whatever their way of life, the neighborhood is always pernicious.
to the cultivators; so many ways of holding them have been sought. I will speak here only of a very pleasant hunt, at the same time as very useful
to do in spring. During the month of May, about an hour after sunset, the
mole crickets run to the entrance of their galleries and there, their abdomen half
outside, the head in the direction of their retreat, produce a strident noise,
just as monotonous as that of the cicada, although faster. It's the mo-
ment propitious for hunting: two individuals set out, one armed with a torehe
or a lantern. Belly of a small spade. The greatest silence and the march
the most measured are essential, under penalty of seeing the operation fail. Guided speaks ehane of the mole cricket, one can thus advance in silence until
above the hole where it is. We approach the light without it being
disturbed, and as soon as it is spotted, the one who carries the spade gives a
conp a little above the animal, so as to lift with a pen of earth
which he quickly withdraws 4 him. We have nothing more then than to seek out our courtesy and
use 4 as he pleases. It does. we walk in the direction of lon we still hear
noise. If by chance the courtlier comes to perceive some suspicious noise, that
from the march of those who hunt her, for example, she cuts herself off, and he will then be
very difficult to find it. The wisest thing to do is to go from another direction
summer; soon the mole-cricket no longer hearing anything, will start all over again
to sing and we can come back to Latlaque again. We can't be too sure
deliver @ this hunt during the charming evenings of May; it is moreover a
pleasant distraction at the same time as a great service rendered to the fields
neighbors. is not uncommon for two people of mediocre skill to take
in one hour about fifty of these insects. We can easily see that he will saffira
of some of these sessions to rid his polager of these hdtes
inconvenient. J. BErous. - bone

 

SCIENTIFIC URSIONS AROUND MULHOUSE. About a month ago, Mr. Reebrig, Professor & Evole of Commerce of
Mulhouse, took the initiative Won project which can become as interesting
quatle: a series of excursions in the surroundings, Nons exirayous de la
answer that W. Rohrig was willing to make & our membership leture, the development
Joppement of the plan he proposes to follow:

“You urge me to take the initiative of the excursions that I have proposed. I
I would value your ds i, considering my inability in certain:
parties, I feared that I could only meet the aspirations Wun small
number of persons. If I feel strong enough to develop methods of analysis
lysis of the superienss vegans, I would stay short for the appro knowledge
melted mosses and mushrooms that I have only studied until now
perspective of intineal structure. It is true that there is an immense amount to learn without going beyond the questions that
have nne wulilé real practice, and they would be, & my opinion, the only ones that are
conform to the tendencies which manifest themselves in such varied forms as
Mulhouse. I am going to try to outline in a few lines the explanatory program that
I believe I should adopt, in case I would be called upon to lead excursions:

» 1. Distinction of plant species (grass and dawn) by characters
very simple, which fall immediately under the senses. » 2. The study of the species with the terrain and the climate: such
plant likes one soil, another chooses an entirely different terrain. - Here is a
fodder or industrial plant which abounds in our regions and which is disappearing
both to the North and to the South. — Lei is a tree that is giant in the
plain and hand on |

» 3 Soeiability. Some plants are looking for an in
around them they bond so thinly that we go and look for them
somewhere else. Example. : the bluet, which is loved by children for conronnes, and
which they know how to find with certainty in the fields of wheat and rye; - and
the Vergissmeinnicht, counn of all, will we ever look for it elsewhere than
among the thick grasses of a humid and shady corner? Ft so many others! & Conquering Dispositions. Do you know welte ilestable manvaise
grass called quackgrass? Well, let your spade and pickaxe rest

for a few weeks and then return to your field, you will find it
Fitiéralemsit invaded by a green felt, knitting of corks and dog twigs=
tooth; and potatoes, beans or broad beans will be choked by this
Naughty neighbor Who does not know this soft grass called chickweed
oiseanx, el to which it only takes two days of rain to cover all
the flowerbeds of our vegetable gardens! Hs are many, hey
which surmount the place of the useful plants which work out the subsistence of man. _ ke Mean see the means at their disposal to multiply. Parasitism. MW ouil seem to exclaim some individuals of the world
ground ie why painfully search for my food under the hard crodite of the
floor? Isn't it more convenient to draw it ready-made from the veins
from a neighbor? The mistletoe, which you see grafting onto your fruit trees, is a
of these vampires

One sees the sap of these vegetable tigers, not of a robust tree which
supports this bloodletting, but in tender grass which dies of the blow. > 6. Forage species: their relative value. » 7. Industrial species: their special applicaions, their immense role
in human activity. inet if stir them

 

  
     

     

 

    

 

 

    

   

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

» 8. Notions on the chemical principles of plants. Food value
medical or industrial of these principles. — Poisonous plants. — Plants
inuliles (weeds).”

» 9, More or less deep modifications that the hand of man has
printed & most cultivated species: vegetables, fruit trees, plants
of ornament. 9

» 10, Notions on agriculture and forest management. Affecting
vegetation on the climate of a country. These would be the main questions which would interest, I think, the
more people. They all have the gift of highlighting the useful side of the
acquired concept, . It goes without saying that people who would apply themselves to the study of science
knowledge of species and varieties, as well as knowledge of the structure
anatomy of organs and their physiological jen, would find in
conferences made apart from my advice at their disposal. » By placing questions of zoology, mineralogy and geology on the
same field as botany, that is to say, neglecting the details purely
scientists in favor of notions relating to the usefulness of species, I nevertheless
perhaps at the same time remove these parts. But better than
someone braver than I undertook this task. »

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

   

Mr Reehrig started his weekly excursions on Sunday morning
June 12; the report of the premiere appeared in l'Industried alsacien. COMMUNICATIONS. We have given this issue double the pages of the first, because we will be
probably have to come back & 8 pages during the next holidays. — Erratum. An error has crept into the article entitled Charity Taught by the
Insects, in the last issue. Page 19, line 19, it should read brother at the link of pi

 

— Exchange association for beetles. We offer our coleopterist colleagues
@establish some kind of exchange association. It often happens that one finds in great abundance
dance a rare or local species; one does not know what to do with so many individuals, while they would
the happiness of more than one entomologist. We therefore propose that they send us the
insects which are not common everywhere and which have been taken in sufficient quantity. the
sharing will be done as equally as possible, in proportion to what each has sent. We cannot accept liability for damage to shipments; the only ones
costs will be those of postage and frames. The insects sent must be, as far as possible,
determined. We urge young entomologists who are willing to enter this
arrangement, to send us as soon as possible their adhesion and the doubles that they
will want to entrust to us. Ermest Dollfus—Maurice Hofer. — Bibliography. Entomological catalogs. A good catalog is essential to the collec=
reader, we will therefore indicate a few of them. Catalog of the beetles of Alsace and
of the Vosges, by Wenker and Silbermann (1868); 4 fr., Paris, Baillitre. — It contains the localities
Alsaciennes ott every insect was found. Since its publication, we have discovered a certain
number of species and localities which are not included in this catalogue, but none

— 36 —

no less indispensable for any Alsatian cold-optcrist. It would be desirable for the
logisticians of our province note the new spices and localities by cu

tomo=

 

 

discoveries. Catalogus coloplerum Europe, by B. de Marseul, 1867. Paris, Deyrolie, | Fr. 50; containing
only 'Goomeration of European species and the circam* Mediterranean basin,

Catalog of European hemipleras, by Dr. Paton. 1869. Paris, Deyrolle. 4 fr, Donnaat synonymy and homeland. A Clover's Guide to Insects. Containing the hunting, preparation, preservation of all
insect orders, 2¢ Guition. Paris, Deyrolle. 1869. fr. 2.50. — Hydrophilus piceus, We have just received communication of an interesting fact
and which we believe is still very little known. When leaving a larva of. piceus at rest,
and when you seize her bracingly in the water, she utters a cry similar to a slight whistle. The organ that gives rise to this noise is not yet known; research followed
might discover. Eug. Engel. — Lepidium draba. 1 exists in some clay-limestone fields of Lunéville, a
rather large quantity of_Lepidium draba, plint naturalized, that M. Godron, in the
2¢ Gdinon of his Flore de Lorraine indicates only 8 Nancy et & Metz, Jenverrai with
pleasure this plant 4 anyone who asks me for it. A. Lemaire, Mon

 

girl. - Exchange. I desive swap rocks (Grauwa
Pebbles, Iron Oligist, Qu

   

Limestone cke, Dolomite, Greywacke &
1z hyaline, Minette, Quarizite, Schists, Barite) from around
Schirmeck (Vosges), and porphyroid granite, spilite red sandstone around Senones,

 

 

against Granites, SyGnites, Porphyries, Buritine, Melaphire, Diorite, Amphibolite Granites
Feres, from P Alsace. A. Lemaire, Luneville. — Planorbis corneus. PL. corneus is common da

  

sthe graves and small sources of
cantons Ad and Ebrlen, ausnord of Colmar, One finds there sometimes subjects of wes large size. Cyclostoma elegans. The Cycle. elegans is quite common in the Rhine islands, Je Pai
found at Kerenheim in fairly large numbers. Faudel, Colmar. CORRESPONDENCE. M.R., Borew:
E.G., Nancy. — Thank you for your advice; but you know that our goal is to encourage
Personal vinitiauve. You see that the botany is well represented,

 

— The shipment will be made in some time. We haven't received Particle. ‘Type: Oberthiie et tls, 4 Reunes. — Maison & Paris, 4, rue Salomoude-Caus. 4** August 1870. The Number: 25 cents. Do 4. YOUNG NATURALISTS BUILLE

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE |

 

 

For France. .... are. eee. Fr. 3 per year | Power abroad........e00++ fr. 4 per year
Send the amount in stamps or money order on the post office

We subscribe to M. Eugéne Engel, to MM. Dollfus-Mieg and Co., 4 Dornach,
at M. Ernest Dollfus at Geissbihl, in Dornach (I1'-Rhin), and at Mle Pétry, bookseller, rue
of the Arsenal, & Mulhouse. AUGUST. — THE NATURALIST'S HOLIDAYS. Another month of respite, and then on the hunt again! The heat made
disappear these numerous phalanxes of insects of all kinds which made the
less fruitful walks for the entomologist; a few latecomers
can still be picked up on rolls, flowers, water, etc., and
whoever knows how to use his eyes, will never return the empty bottles,
even in mid-August, however, there is no longer any question of these monumental hunts.
tales, as they are made in the spring. For the molluscs, we will do well, after the rains which have not flooded the

grounds, to go to the bushes, the hedges, the foot of the walls; all that
wet and slimy class will have come out of their retreats by mutual agreement
hidden, and it is then that we will take in number the molluscs which, by the
ordinary times are only encountered in isolation: Helix pomatia, arbustorum,
fruticum, nemoralis, hortensis, candidula, lapicida; Bulimus radiatus, mon-
tanns, obscurus; Pupa; Clansilia, and many more. In the waters, what
whatever they are, but especially in the ponds, one will be able to make abundant and
interesting collections of Lymnea, Planorbis, Cyclas, Physa, Ancylus, Unio,
Anodonta. - In botany, forced stop, as well as in entomology. He must reach more
several thousand feet of elevation on the mountains to find something
thing like proper flora. In the plain, there are no more phanerogams and
no cryptogaines yet. Well! here is all that we are promised for the holidays? Insects, few;
molluscs, few; plants, right? It's funny! will exclaim our colleagues glued-
giens. Palience. Collections, for any naturalist worth their salt, are a
average, won a goal. Certainly, if he only stung microscopic beasts
in boxes, read a long grimoire and then write two sovs words each
animals, the naturalist would be ridiculous, and one could laugh at
Ini with good reason. But the great goal to which he must strive with all his might is
knowledge is the love of this infinitely varied nature which en-
everywhere, of which we ourselves are a part. Qanything
we have a splendid collection, the finest pieces brought together from the five par-
parts of the world? Of what use will they be to us, if they serve only to
peel names? What you need to know is the history of each of these insects,
of each of these shells; and what a wonderfully beautiful and varied story
than that one! So these thousands of beasts that we only looked at to the point of
view of their singularity, their beauty, their rarity, will take on for us a

 

="es =

greater and more powerful interest. Each one will no longer represent a jewel
inert, but a drama full of life and strange adventures. Tl does not however
must not neglect the collections. Far from 1a; as in all things, the theory
will not know how to do without practice, and the practice of theory, likewise, in
natural history, the study of nature cannot do without collections, which
are like a catalog, a memento of daily work. Do you see that you should not be impatient? Go in the middle of nature
reveal its secrets, profile rainy days to study in books,
under the microscope, with a magnifying glass, to draw what you observed, what you
you have brought back from your walks through the woods and the countryside. You
You will soon recognize how captivating this study is. One more tip: dice
the beginning of the holidays, get into the habit of writing down in some notebook
everything you will have noticed; first, as in all things, you
find some difficulty 4 never neglect this little work, but soon
you will get used to it, and you will see later with pleasure these pages written
at the time of the impression of the fact was still fresh; you will have, in the middle
of many insignificant observations, some remark which will be able to solve
a glaring problem; you will finally have an analysis of the development
your knowledge of natural history. Finally, remember that often
a firm will to learn happily outweighs the spirit
gifted. And now, happy holidays everyone! THE EDITORS. HERBARIATIONS AND HERBARIA. If? PART. A botanization is an excursion made in the countryside for research
Plant. :

On the subject of herborizations, one can ask oneself: 4° what are the periods
of the year in which they should be undertaken, and in which they are carried out with the greatest utility;
2° what are the localities to explore more particularly in such or such
season; (3) what is the most propitious time; 4° which are the objects most
useful or the most essential which the botanist must have in order to obtain the
better crop of plants; finally, 5° what is the way to harvest the
plants, and what are the portions of these which it is particularly necessary
choose for the herbarium. First of all, what are the times of the year when one must undertake the
herbalizing? We must botanize in all seasons, if the goal we propose is to
provide the flora or complete collection of species of a given locality. Every season, every month, and so to speak every week see flairir
their special species. In winter, don't we see the hellebores, helio~
trope d'biver, who follows them closely? In the first days of spring appa=
are the violet, the primrose, the golden crocus, etc. Thus the botanist who wants
bring together a complete collection of plants that make up the flora of a locality,
cannot neglect any season. But if herbalization has a special purpose
ampler collection of species or individuals, one will have to choose especially the month of
May (inois des flenrs), then the months of June and July. Secondly, in each season, the localities which the botanist will most
particularly visit, will vary. In winter, he will look for places exposed to
noon or those sheltered from the wind. In the spring, he will hasten to visit
the edges of the woods, the sloping land facing south, the terfés

   

      

 

 

=

dry. In summer, shady places, cool or damp ground, the edge of streams
buckets etc. Finally, in autumn, excursions should not be so local
less than in another season, because the species are more uniformly
widespread, It follows from this that it is essential to make a judicious herborization,
to know the habitat of such and such a species, such and such lives only in the woods, such and such
other on the ground nn, ete. :

As a third link, what is the best time for herbalization? A
of the most essential conditions for the plant to enter the herbarium of
way to be well preserved there, is that it is not damp, and here, for
humidity, we don't want to hear the one that, normally existing in
its tissue, is due to the presence of nourishing juices circulating in its
vessels, we want to indicate only the moisture that may occur
accidentally on its surface, for example, that brought by dew, rain,
or the water in which the species would have come. The presence of super humidity
it would be detrimental to good drying, or even in some cases,
prevent it, puilrefaction taking hold of the individual in the period
time that is generally allowed for the aeration of the desiccation. Rest,
tn subject picked in the humid state retains its color better than another.
drying out. It is therefore necessary as far as possible that herborization takes place in
dry weather. What are now the objects necessary for the bataniste for the harvest of the
plants? — An instrument for extracting plants from the ground — A box for
press them down — a few sheets of paper to press on those which are under the
more delicate. The botanist's box is in varnished tin; it has the shape of an eyeball
slightly flattened; open in its middle on one of the flattened faces, it is
provided in this place with a lid & hinge, Its languor can be 5 deci-
cimeters; in its largest diameter, it must have 10 & 12 centimeters. 5 A simple staff will be needed by the botanist to extract the plants. She is
often useful when you want to have the roots. The botanist must be provided with a notebook of paper to immediately tighten
Species that would suffer too much from long transport. The most ordinary format
naire is the big in-4°. Equipped with his instruments, the botanist goes in search of the plants he
wants to enrich his herbarium. As this harvest is subject to a few rules,
we will present them briefly. As far as possible, the plant should be represented in the herbarium with
all its parts, as it is in the living state. The principal organs which must be represented are those of reproduction;
however, the other parts of the plant are also needed; the form
position of the slits, the dimensions, the structure of the cork, the nature of
the root, being able to be a useful helper. The bulbous root, for example, is
characteristic of orchids, liliaceae, etc. ; in the labiatae family, the
cork is square, in the grasses it is noose, tubular inside, the
bulb in an orchid, the stem in a labiate, the culm in a grass,
are therefore indispensable to the herbarium as well as the flower in these same
families. It is often useful also to obtain the fruit and the seed of cerlaines es-
coins. We will mention, as absolutely demanding the conservation of the fruit, the
Umbelliferae family. Thus the botanist replants the whole plant if possible, or takes only
only the main parts if the subject is out of proportion. We can still
fold in half a species that is too large. ~: Harvested plants are successively introduced into the box, all the

    

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

aar=

roots of the same colé. As their numbers increase, their conservation
becomes easier. Now, this condition is not indifferent to certain periods
of the year, ov the heat of the sun would act too strongly on the contents of the
box, if only represented by a few individuals. Back home, the botanist will begin the task which concerns more specifically
especially the herbarium. ,
Nancy. E. BAGNERIS. NOTES ON THE TOAD. (After. 1V. The rains of Toads. There are still some failures that have greatly intrigued the world: these are the
toad rains. Often we see the so! strewn, after a storm, with quantities
innumerable pelils toads; some people have even claimed in
having seen lears fall on ov houses upon themselves. We meet again
here the fabulous mix with the truth: after the rain, the young toads, melamor
phosés since pen, leave in fonle the ponds which they have inhabited until! to choose a home on dry land. As for people who
claim to have seen, with their own eyes, rains of toads, or else
they want to mystify us, or else they have been misled by desire
to find an explanation for this sudden abundance of toads strewing the
earth; a third possible explanation, if it does not seem very probable,
it is that of a waterspout removing these animals from their swamps, and making them
Reveal on the ground, far from all the water. I am obliged to dismiss those of my Jectors who would come to know
more details the facts of which I have spoken, to the Animals has metamorphoses, from
M. Victor Meunier, interesting work, but which I had, unfortunately;
knowledge too late to be able to use it here. There will be a crowd
facts about hermit toads and toad rains; as to the conclusions
let each draw them for himself. Would know how to say a few words about a singular fact, recently observed, and
submitted, a few months ago, to the Academy of Sciences; but I couldn't
still gather the necessary materials, and I see myself forced to go beyond, by
saving it for another time. V. — Utility of the Toad. We have one more important question to trailer. Should we destroy the toad
like a venomous animal, should we protect it like a useful animal? Come-
meox it isn't, @ strictly speaking; useful, it certainly is. But
first, I am going to astonish you by telling you that this sad beast is of a characteristic
tere sweet and obedient; it is very easy to tame, and learns in a short time.
time to know his protector and to obey his call. Mr. Bell owned a
erapaud who used to come and sit on his hand. Apart from domestic animals, man still has many and
precious auxiliaries, whose immense services he too often rewards
by unjust persecution. The toad is one of these little-known animals. Pro-
ask one of our gardeners to deliver him from this terrible race of slugs,
caterpillars, phytophagous insects, which gnaw its vegetables, its flowers, which
pursue him without giving him either truce or rest; he will look at you
incredulous. And yet the miracle is possible, at least up to a certain
point; and the savior of cabbages and roses will again be the toad. Prom-

 

   

  

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

  

= 4 =

nose in an alfalfa clamp, on a May evening, and give it some
a few strokes. You will be amazed at the amount of slugs that are found-
roam in the bag, with a crowd of beetles. It's because the night is above all the
time of destruction. But it is also then that Bufo comes out of his dark
retirement, and I assure you that however lazy it seems, there is no
dead hand. Its tongue, which is shaped in a particular way, is thrown
with lightning speed on the viclime; then it goes into the mouth,
both the insect that adheres to it. And this merry-go-round continues all night, because the cra-
paud is a voracious animal, and he has a lot to do with emptying the garden of slugs,
larvae, worms, insects that swarm there. English gardeners, and
even those around Paris, wiser in this than ours, have understood
Vutility of the toad, and around London and Paris they make a little
trade, for the sole purpose of protecting vegetable crops against
ravages of the enemies of agriculture. .

Entomologists' (these people stop at nothing) have taken advantage of the
voracity of the toad to make it a very involuntary auxiliary. They kill these
animals and open them; the stomach is filled with insects are in perfect
conservation, sometimes even still alive, and very rare. But it's a way
that should not be used systematically; it is destroying a precious anxiety
agriculture, and at the same time uselessly killing an animal that is suﬂering
much more than insects. :

I do not know if it is true that people sometimes feed lovers of
thighs of. frogs from cnisses de crapauds; I've heard it said from different
celes, and Mr. Meunier affirms it positively; there is nothing impossible about it. In this connection, I will venture a word in favor of frogs. We fish them at the
line, and often, on the spot, without killing them, they cut off the posted part-
of the body, then we leave them where they fell, imagining that the
palms will grow back. This is not the case, naturally, and batrachian panthers
have to undergo a slow and terrible agony, which lasts for hours, even days,
before bringing death. you

(To be continued.) - ~E.DoLiFus. EXCURSION AROUND MAINZ. (Fifth and sixth day.) Driving rain during mowing at night and during the morning. We are
foreés, 4 our great regret, to leave Alzey. After having carefully em-
packed our fossils, we leave for Mainz, where we arrive in the evening, towards
three hours. A visit to the museum. was doing. part of our program; we
We were surprised to find it so poor in fossils from the surrounding area. Her wealth
in other branches is remarkable, particularly in antiquities-remains
and Gallo-Roman. —

It takes a few minutes to go from Mainz to Hochheim. We leave
in the morning at nine o'clock and our first care, on arriving, is to inform ourselves
of the residence of Mr. 0. Boetiger, on whom we relied to guide us
in our tour. Couldn't find it; it was a Sunday: it was in:
vain that we knock on several doors. Our embarrassment is extreme: 4
the hotel itself, impossible to have any information about the cottage
of nearby fossils. We see how essential it is to prepare the
excursions of this nature, so as not to waste time. No doubt, if not
We asked 4 to visit the vineyards that produce the famous Hoch-
heim, we would have found ten guides for one! But a lodging of fossils... For
is therefore to go a little on an adventure. Guided: by the ruts’ profoad

 

 

  

==

cteuses: by the tanks, we arrive, after an hour, of walk, .a'des. exca>
vations from where We drew stone @ lime Once 1a, no more doubt. we
are fine. on the outcrop of Landsvhneckenkalh,\nshown on the map
geological. No fossils, however, in the first. careers that we
Let's meet, and it's only after we've explored them all that we. for yelrons
in the real gil. — And again, is it only thanks to the help we
donate a few little boys that we manage to amass. meine j jove
and the next day, a-certain number of fossils.,

To visit this gite 4 fond, you would have to go there, enliéres days i
ada hand, examining the earth and the sand that come out of your career,
my collection of Pupa acicula, etc., whose size does not Abaca a
limit. However, despite the short time we spend there, we amass,
grace & nos. petils: improvised collaborators, a certain one. quantile of
including Stropostoma tricarinatum A, Br,,. including Jouverture. is
returned in the air, from the colé de da spire; beautiful Cycloslomes, including one
with the operculum; several species at Helix, another 1H. densipapillata
Sandb. and I'H. imbricata A. Br., of which the last spiral is streamlined with
cane; then tH. stenotrypia A. Br., which looks a lot like a. our big ones
snails,. which are so commonly found on the hills of the Leh. End: the
Limnaus pachygaster, of which we do. find only one sample. Amongst
all these fossils. it is especially the ZHelix which dom ut; we have some
Tdported a dozen species

Here is the order of the layers in - the last
4° Movable land; — 2nd, upper marine layers whose fossils have
served their test, but are very fragile; — 3rd loose lacustrine layer
compact. Viert then a layer vd we have. not found any. fi
then the lower marine layers whose fossils are reduced to Fetal de
interior mould. We recommend a.cenx. which, would be slow W! xplorer, the Gile of Hoch:
heim, to take their tickets to Floershein, from where Von, can,-in-one, hon
quarter @ hour, to arrive at the careers that one glimpses, moreover, has

To complete our excursion, we: eussio| and others 10
such as Wiesbaden, Oppenheim, etc. There were elements of a race
most interesting, but unforeseen circumstance made us hasten our
return, and this is how I regret that I can only give an overview
shortened finds that could do in a longer run
combined-the aiatenr who would like to devote ten days to it,
Se earG for a of this 28 Ace

EUGENE ENGEL. magnifying glass
in

  

  

     

   

 

 

   

 

         

  

  
 

 

   

         

 

 

   

 

 

 

A: TOMOLOGICAL EXCURSION IN THE VALAIS. * After.) From. the afternoon, we. we returned with our nets and insect boxes
on the. calline Valeria, ob my father often went hunting during the prbcdileall
sojourn he made in Sion. We had barely arrived at the foot of the hill, when we could already hear
in some neighboring gardens the strident eri of the Cicada orni.L.., which does not
usually find that in the warmest parts of the southern Snisse
nal; we also spotted, when we arrived, several species of grasshoppers, rare
garlic s abundant in this place; these were the Calopus ttalicus at
iEdipoda aigrofasciat ou seemed Uéja that.we were no longer in our

 

 

—s=

  

rosaic and mountainous regions of Ja-Suisse-eentrale. Moreover, 4 cause of
he excessive heat: which had dried up everything; there was hardly anything to take
what nes: pretty deptera and some mutilations. ea maT past

We were taken to the chapel of the old castle, to show us the
antiquities it contained; but what we liked above all was the magnificent
panorama which one enjoys from the courtyard of the castle, and which embraces the whole country
from Bas-Valais to Martigny. :

The next day, we resumed our hunt with as much ardour, but without
no more sneves, and we took advantage of a moment of pleasure to make visible &
hn entomologist, amide my father. Finally the following Wednesday we leave
for Sierre, the surrounding area is, so to speak, the meeting place for all,
entomologists. None ;

_As soon as we arrived and got rid of our luggage, we set off
of a charming hill on which stands an old castle and where we played! Whe wonderful view. We are first struck by nature so animated, so
variety of these places and the many hostels that swarm on these carpets of
greenery. ‘ ¥ in
~-Despite the oppressive heat, we take our light nets and our scythes,
We hunt until our boxes are completely
full of the finest and happiest captures. The Mantis redigiosa and the
rare Deanthus pelducens had hardly appeared yet; but parini our best
taken were the Rhopalus Schilling? who had never been caught before
before, and the charming Camptobrochis Falleni. ,

“The following morning, the harvest was even more abundant, thanks to a rain
beneficent who, fallen in.the svirée of mereredi, had a.little downcast the
lighten and refresh the vegetation. .” ~ q.:
The colling on which rises the castle of Sierre is covered with pines,
young oaks and tall, tight wild plants. As its ground is
stony and that itself is exposed 4 to a bright sun, its fauna is
southern fault. ye garlic-s

By beating the pines, the 'species' of heiniptera the most
rare, such as Phytocoris albo-fasciatus Fieber, etc. ; on the dear ones
sins de latourdn chateau, we found {' Holcogaster Abulatum-Germ., the
Dichroseytus rufipennis and two individuals of Megacalum infusum. -

By mowing the lawns, which are made up of an assemblage of sagebrush and
others, your low ones, we have collected innumerable capsids,
dl unls dipteres, lesichneumondes, eryptides. Among other hemipteran
we are lucky to capture a species that has not tried hard
Taken in Switzerland: Monanthia sinuata. At the same time we took the
Chorosoma Schilling?, a sample called Leprosoma inconspicuum and a
quantity of Lurydema ornatum, var. concealed. On all the trees were
the Cicada sanguinea and ornt; who deafened us with their songs; on the
; came to rest. Mylabris variabilis and Fuesslini. slopes, stony and bristling with rocks, innumerable orthop-

tci and la making their shrill cry heard; among enx is hole=
were the @dipoda cerulans, niyrofasciata, cerulescens, stridula; gerina*
nica, el les Chorlippus hemorrhotdals, stigmaticus ev vagans; in a word,
we eliminate: in the true land of grasshoppers and hemlocks.. 5. < _.
fortunately the afternoon could not be used to continue our hunt:
We had to prepare the insects we had just caught: * = =
Burgdorf, Switzerland. (To be continued.) _ " L. MEYER. Ah
a' COMMUNICATIONS. © ‘

Our correspondents will save us a waste of time by sending their written articles
on one side of the sheet only. _ We ask those of our subscribers who have not done so, to let us know as soon as possible
possible changes of addresses & make for the holidays. — Coccinella bipunctata. I believe the fact of which you speak common. Like you, I
observed this biver several times In the presence of ladybugs, against the windows, and not
Only that of the biponetuée, but still of another smaller one, flesh-colored pink,
with many black spots (Harmonia impustulata). It seems to me that Pon could
explain this fact in the following way: the lady beetle overwinters, either in the small cavities
the stones of the walls built without mortar, either in the cracks of the
Seorces, or under the eeoree even when the latter is separated from the throne by some interval. Its purpose is to find shelter; would it not be an analogous reason which would also engage the
individuals that we find in the 4 houses come there? Once installed, very often
insects find, instead of a more or less severe cold which numbs them, a
mild temperature which warms and revives them; they set & travel in the bedroom
of they have taken up residence, and, like all insects that enter our homes, they
They direct preferably on the side from which the light comes, and arrive at the window. S. pe Prinsac. Lusy. = Toad, A learned doctor assured me that he had seen a charlatan devour the
legs of a toad; this fact is similar to that reported by White. 8. of P-

__ Scientific excursions around Muthouse. Here is the series of
weekly excursions initiated by Mr. Reehrig, the main purpose of which is
a botany, without neglecting zoology and geology:

June 42, The edges of I'lll and Didenheim. 419. — The banks of the Napoleon Island canal. 26 — The vineyard and the Tannenwald. July 3. Brunstatt quarries. 10 — The banks of the Doller. 17 —~ The edges of Vil and micrography session. “<__ grata Two errors have crept into the July article, from our last
Aumero. Instead of Vanessa antiopa-prorsa, and Satyrus Syleander, read Vanessa antiopa and
prorsa, and Satyr Sylyander. J

 

CORRESPONDENCE. War-induced difficulties in communications will most likely cause
a delay & the arrival of the shipment of entomological pins expected from Carlsbad, We
let us advise those of our readers who are waiting,

‘—=’Lorin, M, A. Reg. Eoreur. Thank you, We will write shortly. __ 5, from P, Crest with pleasure that we have read your letter,
— M. La a R. We accept with pleasure, and we will send you shortly
our list. yp. Oberthiir, & Renne

 

4th* September 1870. The Number: 25 cents. No 5. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

From

 

 

SUBSCRIBER PRICE
For France ........ 6 fr. 3 per year. | For Abroad........ sees ft. 4 per year. Send the amount in stamps or money order by post,

We hang out at M. Eugene Engel, at MM, Dolifus-Mieg et Cie, & Dornach,
at M. Ernest Dollfus at Geissbiihl, 4 Dornach (H-Rhin), and at Mile Pétry, bookseller, rue
of Arsenal, 4 Mulhouse. SUPERSTITIOUS BELIEFS ABOUT REPTILES. Everywhere we find the deep antipathy of man for the reptile, and &
every step, the naturalist who wants to instruct the populations of the countryside, the
shed light on pustile or stupid fears, comes up against absurd tales,
has superstitious terrors of which the townsman himself, despite the superiority
which he believes he has acquired from the peasant, is not always exempt. The fabulous salamander of antiquity lives again, in this century of light,
in the belief of good people who make an animal of a modest batrachian
powerful that fire cannot reach and to which the destructive element obeys (1). The Jura mountaineers on the borders of Switzerland Ja fear in excess and
assert that his power is in no way inferior to that of the terrible basilisk whose
look once gave Ja mort 4 Vinfortuné who was seen before seeing him
himself. The individual bitten by a salamander is said to be in great danger
of death, and in order to be cured, a number of small
incisions equal to that of the pustules which cover the animal's skin; the misfortune-
rous who would drink wine from a barrel into which this animal would have entered,
would inevitably die. The frog, no doubt & because of its brilliant adornment and its kindness,
is the only one spared by popular prejudice; do you still meet people who
do not dare to touch it and boors who associate it with the toad. I remember
even having heard that the absorption of a lot of water leads to
frogs in the heavy drinker's stomach. In the evening at the wake, we listen with dread to the surprising story of impercep-
tible snakes that get into the stomach when drinking from fountains,
who soon, growing up, devour the entrails of their host; sometimes the
narrator adds that a man having slept with his mouth open, a snake
took advantage of this door to enter her body, where she continued to live,
occasionally causing acute pain from repeated bites. I have more than once been assured of having seen a viper which, in a stable,
rolled after the thigh of a cow, was suckling quietly, and that this cow
instead of a white and pure liquid as & the ordinary, then gave a fluid
slimy, thick and bloody. In a certain meadow where heifers usually grazed, the vipers, apparently-”
there, were numerous, and as soon as the herd arrived, the reptiles, choosing
each their own, came very quickly to read. In the Vosges, we lend to

 

 

 

 

(2) A Jaiteux sweat which crackles on the lit coals and could perhaps extinguish them in
certain conditions, appears on the surface of the skin when the salamander is irritated. — 46 —

snakes the singular ability to bring together and weld in contact with a grass
particularly the scattered stumps of their mutilated individual, which from then on resumes
movement and life. It is a country where people look, I don't really know why, at the gray lizard like
a friend of mankind; he watches over a sleeping man in the fields,
and if an evil reptile, a viper, approaches, intelligent animal
alsoldl, passes over and over the figure of the sleeper, in order to awaken it and
To tear away from the danger that threatens him. The green lizard, on the contrary, is an enemy
formidable; we advance in support the example of a young and brave boy who
bundler had been bitten on the hand and immediately cut off his thumb,
who had been found several days later, still squeezed between the jaws of the
saurian. He bites with such eagerness, when angered, that
sometimes his jaws become disarticulated; in this position, he cannot open
the mouth, nila shut, and that's why we find some who had kept
between his teeth the objects on which he had cast his fury. In the Morvan, snake charmers are believed to be; he was very naive to me-
of the surroundings infested with vipers, ot the owners, before the

harvest, will first ward off the venom of these reptiles which from then on
no one went all through the harvest. Quite generally we are convinced of your presence of a sting in the mouth
snakes, and one often has a thousand difficulties in making the peasants understand
when instead of stinging, these animals bite; this erroneous idea can be ex-
plier: 1° by the manner in which the viper bites which, throwing back its head
back, springs up, mouth dilated, and strikes as it were with the jaws
superior; 2° by the two small holes which result from the pressure of the
hooks; # by the appearance of a thin tongue, darted and divided into two parts which
resemble, the peor helping, & stings. We went so far as to say that for nailre, the little ones with
patties, puncture their mother's womb, and cog eggs laid in
the manure el smoldered by the heat of the stables, there emerges a Benen monster
the terrible, which sows terror in the distance,

Finally, in closing, I will add — the fact is well known — that the imagination
capriciousness of the Frane-Comlois mountaineers gave wings & some beautiful
snake to make the wyvern, which comes to walk in the evening on the edge
streams, fountains, ponds or solar lakes, with an e:
euchissed loop in
oi the precious gem sparkles from fen ri Wun matchless brilliance; the reptile

. loves to dive into the waters, but before abandoning himself to the
from the bath, he takes off his carbuncle and lays her on the shore: Happy passer-by who
seizes it and remains deaf to the heart-rending complaints of 'a panyre vavre, deprived
with his one eye, holds in his possession a specific one hundred times more precious
than the philosopher's stone itself. It is, I think, useless to insist in conclusion on the falsity of all these
pelils more or less impossible tales which circulate from village to village,
deeply rooted in the spirit of the people; a little common sense helps
justice of such gross errors. annal. S. DE PRINSAC. his forehead to serve as an Aumilian guide of darkness

 

 

   

 

     

  

OBSERVATION ON THE LAYING OF DYTISCUS MARGINALIS. Although Dytiscus marginalis is fairly common around Evreux
and that I have been feeding a certain number of individuals for several years, I
however, I was only able to observe its spawning once. Hy is two years old, at the month

— 4 —
January, I took a female in a ditch near Evreux; I put it in a
jar full of water, with stones and aquatic plants. year month of march
next, I saw her one day land on a reed line, cling to it strongly,
Your head in the air, by means of the four front legs, her antennae
eLagilize a little the fins or hind legs, which were placed paral-
Element to the body at the same time she brought out from the extremity of the abdomen
a broad, sharp back, very thin and slightly curved. This auger
sings applied to the jone and made a longitudinal incision there, long
About no centimeter. So I removed _Tapidemut the rod of jone with the insect
to closely observe the auger; my petgy out of skin, he tucked her in
letting fall; & no sooner was he in the lean than he took it out again in the air.
giant and dropped an auf i] or six millimeters long, narrow and very:
weakly arched. This egg, with a resistant envelope,
Five minutes later i again ur a jone rod. As I know: ait, I leave you 7
started from top to bottom, & several times, until she had won the
center of the marrow: 1a it stopped and swelled a little; then the insect
returned and went to get some air. THfit thus quite a number of Wincisions which
each disputed a cent placed in the longitudinal direction. I only had
more than knowing the auger: it is made up of two scaly blades, very
thin, welded by one of their edges. the interior of these two blades is lined
an expandable membrane; it is between these two blades that theeul
slides to place itself in the marrow of the pk intes. This year, I found in
submerged fenils of sagittarius several incisions which contained
each a Dytis que egg. Conine other species of the genus Dytiscus are
very rare & Evrenx, I have never been able to observe their egg laying; but i noticed
that the auger of the females always had the same conformation, whence I can
conclude that spawning is done in the same way.—- In the Cybister Reselii,
the tar is long and narrower. — The female of Acidius sudcatus has a

long, very narrow and weak; also she lays her @eggs in
discovered. — I have noticed in: x genera of aqua-Himiptera
Noctonecte, Naucore, the same way of laying eggs as the Dytisque. For this, these insects are also placed on a t or a sheet, 'em-
brew with their legs, and to act rancid, sink their beaks
in Ja plant. In this way, the rear can move with more force;
but the eggs are never snfoned deeply like those of the Dytisques. These bugs are hiding! thus their eggs in order to subtract them & the voracity of
many enemies, such as waterfowl, fish, Ba-
traciens, the same Hydrocanthares and others, who are very fond of it; moreover,
is a means of maintaining them in the necessary humidity 4 their development.

 

  

 
   

 

 

 

   

 
         
     

        
 
   
  

     

     

 

what that s

      

    

     

 

   

 

    

    

 

        

   
    

     
 

     

          

   

        
   

     

 

       

    

     
 

 

   

 

is lying; because if they simply stuck to the plants, the height of the water would be

   

very subject to variation, the eggs could find themselves out of lean and
cherished, while plants still retain moisture within them,
whether they are sub-energized or out of the skin. The larvae, ponr emerge from the plant,
take advantage of the incision that the swelling of the egg keeps a little open. Evreux. Mr. Stroke. ReGrparr,

ORGANIZATION OF FERNS. I do not claim here to do a complete work on the organization
ferns; I am content to give a quick overview of this vast family
cryptogamic, in order to facilitate the curious study of these plants, a study that the

 

 

=

most young people fear @approach, and which however offers no
serious difficulty. Ferns are part of the class numerous in interesting species of
filicines. Most of them grow in the forests they beautify
by their pleasant greenery and by the fine cut-outs of their leaves. others
enjoy themselves in the crevices of rocks where they draw the juices that are
required; finally, some live in peat marshes. In the
country temp! ferns have a low consistency and are lean;
one of them, Pteris aquilina, so common in our woods, reaches the
plus the height of 2 meters; but if the traveler visits the countries siluated under
the Tropics, where the vegetation, says A. de Humboldt, unfolds its most
more majestic, he then feels transported with admiration & the sight of these
Imposing plants. They are no longer those humble fungeries of our lands,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

but. slender trees which raise in the air their stem which goes up to
10 meters. But how small are these tropical trees still,
comparison of these immpenses vegetables which, buried under the ground since

 

centuries, have been brought to light, thanks to the genius of a few elite men! It is these ancient ferns which, pressed against each other, and
mixed with the immense tree trunks of the Carboniferous period, formed these
honille banes that the industry uses today. The lineage of fugitives is variable depending on the species. In the Polypodiun,
it is creeping; every year she destroys 4 one of her extremiles and
lengthens by the other, so that one is very surprised to see these plants change
space. In others (S: uthiopteris), it is vertical, but like that
of the Polypoda, it narrows at one end and lengthens at the other. Finally, in
the tree ferns, the Nerticale line always grows 4 its summit
without destroying itself At its base. It is simple, cylindrical, and bears no leaf,
if it is not 2 its summit or these form a vast bouquet. She's got one
port great analogy to palm trees, but it differs from them in structure. Externally one observes on all its length circular marks which
are nothing but the scars of old leaves; at its base it pr
sometimes consists of a conical mass formed by adventitious roots which,
independently of the roots properly speaking, are intended to fix it to the ground;
most of the time the cork is as thick at the top as at the base; his 
acerification is not done in diameter like that of dicotyledonous trees,
but by the continuous elongation of the fibres, and by the development of a
terminal bud. It is for this reason that the liege is usually simple
and without ramifications; however |’ Alsophila Perrotetiana, Indian fern
of which the Jardin des Plantes has an individual, present in its upper part
a bifurcation which arises from the production of denx terminal buds. Cut transversely, the stem is formed of a pale utricular tissue, in
which we notice, near the periphery, several bizarre clusters more colorful
than the parenchyma. These clusters, composed of striped, scalariform vessels,
present by their rennion the appearance of a ring. Each of these clusters is
surrounded by a variously twisted black line, which is nothing but
fibrous tissue whose continuous elongation produces the increase in height
of these acotyledonous plants. Outside the ring is a cell area
which a kind of epidermis covers in the young time, and later a
hard membrane produced by persistent bases of old leaves. For example of bizarre figures, I will cite the large fern, Pleris aquilina,
whose oblique section represents, especially near the root, a double eagle. Luneville. (To be continued.) A, LEMAIRE. =o

CHARITY TAUGHT BY INSECTS. It happened to me very often to feed Dytisques, Acilius, Iybius and
other water insects in an aquarium. At this very moment, I have enough
large number of living Dytiscides and Hydrophilides. As soon as a Dytisque, the
male especially, is carried by another, he rushes at him and attaches himself to him with the
yentouses of its arses. If it is a female, he mates with her immediately;
if it is a male, it often seeks to devour it, but its robust mandibles
only slip on the hard shell of his adversary, & unless he does not
bites sides of abdomen; then he engages in a struggle soon over,
for insects recognize that they seek in vain to bite each other. But if a
Dytisque meets one of his fellow dead, he applies his mandibles and
his palpi on all parts of his body, until he finds a
easy place & attack: then he starts tearing it up. During this time, solely occupied with its prey, it seldom thinks of
hide, and most often it rises to the surface of the water, not to carry
assistance to the other, but to be able to eat and breathe at ease. Because I
noticed that water insects, when eating, always seek &
put their sligmates in contact with the open air. What I say about the Dytisques can also be said about the Acilines, Ilybius
and others, who showed me the same habits. So I convinced myself

read once that if certain water insects carried their dead fellows
on the surface of the water, it was to eat them at ease. However I don't
would not assert that these critters have no benevolence towards each other
for the others. Evreux. IMBART. AN ENTOMOLOGICAL RACE IN THE VALAIS IN 1869. After.) The next morning, we leave Sierre 4 pied to arrive again from
day at the Louéche baths via Salgetsch, Varon and Inden. Everywhere
on the flanks of these mountains were excellent places for
hunting, and this is how we estimate the pleasure of taking a certain amount of
tile of rare and beautiful Dipleres. Among our best catches are:
many species of Anthraa, as well as Argyromeba who came
on all sides to land on the path. Among the Lepidoptera, the Syntomis
phegea, Naclia ancilla, punctata, as well as Zygena ephialtes, come
brighten the slopes of the valleys, in the company of magnificent Hymenopleres,
such as Seolia bifasciala, quadripunctata, Odyneris antelope, Hedychrum
vulilans, Eumenes pomiformis and Metopius nigratorius. Of all keys
sounded the shrill sound of the Cicada orni, interrupted from time to time
time by the crash of a torrent. A little beyond Varon the path suffers
ment a 4 left elbow. Hardly have we passed this place, that
& our eyes the wild gorge of the Dala, dominated by huge rocks. This
torrent roars its way through the depths of the abyss to Louéche, where
it flows into the Rhone. The path, skilfully cut into the rock, runs along these
verliginous precipices up to the vicinity of the village of Inden, of a bridge
built with boldness on the Dala, joins it to the motorable road of Louéche. Not far from this bath, near a waterfall, we take in abundance
Caddisfly, among which Limnephilus griseus L. and

 

   
     

  

 

— 50 —

bipunctatus Curt., whom my father had met some time ago for the
first time around. These two species of Caddisfly, as well as the
Limn. centralis, appear to rise highest in the Alps. Arrived 4 Louéche, we take advantage of the evening to visit the locality and to
go and see the ladders which, rising & a prodigious height on the esearp
steep parts of the Torrenthorn, lead to the small village of Albine, located
3,990 feet high,

The next day, after a visit to the baths, we went back to
marehe to find us 4 noon & Susten, of od we were planning to take the
post to Brieg. Along the way we catch a quantile of insects from
species. In a single sweep we capture up to twenty Lycena
on Erebia, The dominant species: ent: Adonis, Escheri, Danon,
Sebrus, Cordula and Melampus. Among the Nevroptera, we find on these han-
lenrs species very different from those of the Sierre valley. We meet
in abundance Chortippus morio, Arcyoptera variegata and Ch. dorsatus. Sierre, we immediately cross the Rhone to go to Susten,
take the road to the valley. In this place, we take the diligenee which
takes us to Brieg, in addition to several interesting localities,
such as Visp (Viege), which is almost completely destroyed by water and
earthquakes, and from where you can enjoy a magnificent view over the valley of
Visp and on the Weishorn. (To be continued.) L. MEYER. HERBORIZATIONS AND I
(2¢ par.) Herbarium, ~ Desiccation of plants. In our previous article we left the botanist at the time ott
he returns from a distant excursion laden with his precious booty. sound dice
back home, he must take care of the desiccation of the plants, because if he
were to delay any longer, he would see his plants tense up and he would no longer be able to spread them
properly between the paper slots. To dry the plants, the botanist carefully spreads on a sheet of
paper a first plant; it extends the organs of it, separates the parts
too close together; he seeks, in a word, & to preserve as much as possible &
Ja plants his physiognomy and a Ini do: ‘on natural port; he superimposes a
another piece of paper, on which he lays another plant with the same
precantations, then a third sheet of paper and a third plant, and
so on until it remains in a notebook of a certain thickness,
four 4 five decimetres, for example. This first packet completed, he proceeds to
the making of a second, and so on until the complete exhaustion of its
harvest, The product of a good day, especially in the summer, can compose
several of these notebooks,

For the desiccation of plants, the paper generally used is paper
gray unpasted, ordinary folio format. This kind of paper has more than any
another is the property of absorbing the humidity of the plant, as
releases during the period of the However, in a few cases,
when the organs of the plant are very delicate, it is inconvenient to
fold this paper, whose too coarse paste could go to the fabric wes end of
I plant; then we Ini sul Lite thin paper, but still not glued. This last
paper also has the advantage over the previous one of retaining the colors. Once the packages are finished, they have to be subjected to a certain pressure. The way that we will advise as the most convenient consists of 4 taking

      

 

            
        

       

  

   

   

 

  
     

     

 

 

   

    

 

   

 

 
        

=

strong, to place the package between them and to tighten them with
obtained is intended to hold the organs

 

two ass planks
two good straps. The pressure ass
plants constantly extended, despite their de: ation, and to prevent the
twitching, which would inevitably followmeat if left in the free state. The bundles stay tight for about twelve hours; then the botanist
unravels sheet by sheet, and renews the paper, because the first is
considerably soaked with the exhaled sweats of plants, which in such an environment
would be exposed 4 mold. They are put back in the press for twelve hours, and
this operation is repeated until each plant is perfectly dry. When herborizations must be renewed often, it becomes necessary—
sary to hasten the desiccation to remove the bulk. It has been proposed
various means such as a hot iron passed over the plants by interposing a
paper, or a hot tole plate, or finally a low oven. The first two
hous seem dargerenx, the last can say employed, but he does not fant
forget that a catent which exceeds 5 degrees centigrade harms the rain,
by disorganizing its tissues. Once desiccation is complete, the botanist has only
individuals in the herbarium. intercalate the

 

Classification of plants in herbarium and their conservation. The paper of the same quality as celni which is used to dry the samples
tillons can also be used for the conservation of plants in herbarium, but
generally we choose a stronger, finer and whiter paper, always
however not glue. Carefully place the dried plant between the two pieces of paper,
the sheet is covered with a simple sheet, which will serve to absorb the humidity of the
plant if there are still some left. Plants can be fixed in the herbarium; for us, we believe that the use
fixing the plants with gum has a disadvantage, that of attracting
insects that would be harmful. To prevent the action of certain insects, in particular of the genera Ano-
bium, Scolites, Lepismus, which often cause great damage in a
herbarium, we would consider moving the plant to a spirit-of-mind dissolution.
wine and corrosive sublimate (chloride of mercury — extremely violent poison),
at the rate of 20 grams of sublimated for one liter of spirit-of-wine. We dive
the plant quickly, so that it does not have time to soften, or we
of

 

 

 

 

      
 

 

   

 

 

         

      

 

       

 
   
 

     

pass the solution on the plant by means of a pincean. For more,
you can do the same on paper. What we have said so far
way of harvesting plants, of | dry and keep them in herbarium, do not

 

 

not apply strictly in all kinds of cases: there is a way
particular to harvest certain plants, such as fiens, kelp, various
conferves; to dry out plants, certain mushrooms; of con-
serving fruits, charms, pulps, etc. We reserve the trailer later
each of these topics in particular. The order 4 to adopt for the classification of plants in a herbarium can
vary as does the scientific classification of plants. We know
several methods: the so-called natural and the so-called artificial. One can
still I classify them according to the alphabetical order of names, genera or species;
@anires finally classifies them by region and according to geographical order. Such a particular consideration may lead to the adoption of a mode rather than a
else, we won't stop here

The herbarium once arranged, all that remains is to keep it in a dry place,
well ventilated and of an average temperature. Nancy. E. BAGNERIS. — 52 —

COMMUNICATIONS. Our correspondents will save us a waste of time by sending their articles
written on one side of the sheet only. — Erratum. Please correct as follows an error which has crept into the pre-
first part of my article on herborizations, page 39, paragraph 2:
subject picked in a humid state loses its color more easily than another. Nancy.

 

. Bagneris. — The Grasshoppers of Africa. I have the following details from one of our soldiers about the
grasshopper hunting in Algeria, When they arrive, they form like a cloud
which darkens air; there is such a quantity that it is impossible to imagine it when
we did not see. We can get a faint idea from this: each soldier receives four
centimes per cubic meter of grasshoppers he buries, and he often happens & is done by this
average 8 4 9 francs per month, so more than 200 cubic meters! To destroy them, we use
the following way: as adult grasshoppers would be difficult to capture on a large scale
quantity, we choose a location where a swarm of these locusts has come to deposit
countless eggs in the sand, and when the beasts hatch, as they cannot
fly again, she
a leader. The column is then surrounded by a circle of wood and other combustibles.
ony sets fire and all the grasshoppers perish in the flames. When they fly
already, we are chasing them by making a terrible hullabaloo with cauldrons,
pans, etc. Soon the column takes off and will fall on high piles of
brushwood prepared & Pavauce, and set on fire. As these columns follow
always the wind, they sometimes fall into the sea, and our narrator has seen, over an expanse
considerable, a wall 2 meters high of grasshoppers brought back by the dredgers or
washed up on the beach by the waves. Also, when they are not buried immediately,
this results in dangerous epidemics. 4 earth remain, and when they start moving, they follow

 

- Exchange. I ask for ferns from the Hautes-Vosges: Rotabac, Gérardmer,
Bruyéres, Neufchateau, Ballons de Soulz, Servance and Giromagny, in exchange for
plants from the Champ de Feu and the Bruche valley (Vosges). Adrien Lemaire, 4 Luneville. — I would like to exchange plants from the Ballon and the Giromagny Valley for
beetles or rocks; for further details, write 4 M. L. Pourchot, Bellevue,
pres. Giromagny. :

— Excursions. Mr. Beehrig temporarily interrupted his excursions in the vicinity
of Mulhouse: he will take them back to school. .

 

CORRESPONDENCE. J.-B. Grand Janan. We wrote a fortnight ago. — L. Nogaro. All published issues have been sent. typ. Oberthiit and sons, 4 reindeer. — House in Paris, rae Satomon-de-Caus, 4 (square des Arts-ct-Métiers). In April 1871. The Number: 25 cents. Do 6,

YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE:
For France... .......... fr. 3 per year | For UMtranger. ..........0.. fr. 4 per year
Send the amount in stamps or money order on the post office. Subscribe to M. Eugine Engel-Dollfus, 4 Dornach; at M. Ernest Dollfus, at the Geisbihl,
4 Dornac. We will not be blamed for having suspended the advertising of our Leaf for
The duration of the war: communications had become so uncertain that many
subscribers risked not receiving the numbers sent; @elsewhere we were
entirely to the painful preoccupations of the moment, and no one, no doubt,
felt inclined to do natural history. Today we resume our publication, interrupted since September 1st.
member, and, despite many difficulties that make our business even less
easier than before, we hope to be able to continue it without further interruption, and
for this we count on the zeal of all our friends and colleagues. OVERVIEW OF TOURNEFORT. The seventeenth century introduced into the study of all the sciences a new spirit,
a new method. Do we not see, indeed, in this brilliant century
scholars, Kepler, Galileo, Bacon, Harvey, Huyghens, Papin, Pascal, Désa
gues, make the most important discoveries in physics, astronomy,
in natural history and mathematics? Isn't it at this time that ap-
part of the discovery of the laws that govern planetary movements,
that of the movement of the sun around your earth, that of the circulation of blood,
and many others of equal importance? It is also in this century
what happened to the scientist who was to illustrate botany and make it a science
very important, trying to make a classification of plants. That man,
whom we will even call a genius, is Joseph Pitton de Tournefort, born
& Aix in 1656, and died in 1708. In a short outline, we will try to show what was his spirit, what
were his method and his superiority over his predecessors. But, before doing so,
it will not be superfluous to recall in a few lines what was before him the state
of botany. Before Tournefort, most authors were silent on the classification of
plants. L'Ecluse and Lobel, eminent botanists, had not dared to undertake a
\iche as difficult as that of a method of classification: and yet it is

 

 

 

 

CC
where

1a the fundamental condition of the constitution of botany. Gessner had
tried to establish genera, considering the flower and the fruit. Cesalpin had done
an important essay in this respect. In his Plants book, he exposes a
method of classification that it bases on the consideration of the fruit. His cenyre was
continued by Morisson; but the organs on which his classification rested
were too unimportant for it to be able to subsist and give great rewards.
results. Ray had also undertaken to lay down rules for distributing the plants,
but without success. Rivin, a famous botanist of the time, in a treatise entitled:
Introductio generalis ad rem herbariam, divides the vegetable kingdom in two
major divisions. In the same class he puts the plants which produce the same
flowers and even fruits. When, in the same class, the fruit is dissimilar,
it forms subdivisions based on the shape of the fruit. The author did not have
happiness to succeed. Such was & nearly the state of botany 4 the time of Tournefort published
his Elements of Botany. In the plant, the illustrious botanist considers certain parts, according to their im-
relative lift, & know:

The flower, fruit, leaves, stem, roots, flavor and outward appearance. The first five of these parts constitute the plant; knowing them
perfectly, by studying them well in such a plant, it is easy to recognize
that such other plant is the same, or at least differs little from it, when
all the parts of these two plants are similar or nearly so. By arranging in the same class all the plants which have the same flower,
same fruit, same leaves, same stem, same roots, same flavor, same flavor
outward appearance, Tournefort created a methodical classification. He formed
classes which are divided into genera, which are themselves subdivided into species. Each of these divisions, classes, genera and species is determined by certain
some parts of the plant. The corolla determines the classes, divisions obviously
the biggest. In the same class are arranged all the plants which have
a corolla of the same shape. The genera depend on the flower and the fruit. The
species are formed by means of all the accessory parts: leaves, stems,
roots, flavor and outward appearance. Such is, in a nutshell, the method that Tournefort followed in the study
of botany. Based on these principles, he did not claim to create
a universal classification of plants; he was in no way aiming at this goal: he
thought impossible. He only wanted to establish groups of plants that were
convenient and easy to understand and apply. I] took, as much as possible,
Nature as a model, an essential condition for a good classification. Tournefort ful therefore, we can say, the first who applied himself & founded
a classification in botany. He divides the plant kingdom into two large groups
natural: trees and grasses. I will not put before the eyes of the reader the distribution table of the
plants according to the Tournefort system, because it can be found in many
books. I will only say that this system was the clearest, the most precise and the
more comprehensive than has hitherto appeared. Tournefort, by creating it, made a great
service to science. He opened to the study of botany an easier and
more affordable. He has — shall we say it? — gave birth to great
spirits who, coming after him, were to take advantage of his labors, and continue with
glory and success the work he had begun so well. Audincourt (Doubs), August 18, 1870. Ed. Duvrrnoy. — 55 —
LARGYRONETE (ARGYRONETA AQUATICA),

One meets sometimes, in the ditches or the calm waters of Belgium
and from the north of France, this spider whose instinct and habits are as
extraordinary than the exterior forms are. Nothing, when you don't
sees not 4 the work, will not be able to recognize in it one of the most skilful
workers; but if we study it more closely, if we follow its movements and
especially if one manages to surprise it at the moment when it is constructing its habit.
tion, one is struck with astonishment and admiration. She deploys in this work
an instinct more marvelous perhaps than the titmouse or the hummingbird
to hang their graceful nests from the trees. And yet very little
born this humble artist! The argyronete is essentially aquatic: it is in the water that it finds
its food, it is under water that it establishes its residence, lays its eggs and raises
his little ones. But, as she can only breathe in the open air, she has recourse,
to be able to stay at the bottom of the ditches it inhabits, 4 a strong expedient
ingenious: she built a real 4-diver bell there. To build this
bell, our spider begins by diving quickly, training with
she a certain amount 'air attached to the fine and tight hairs that cover
his whole body. Arrived at the bottom of the water, it will place itself under some enchantment.
clothing of stems or roots, el, rubbing her body with her paws, she
loosen the air bubbles that covered it like a silver garment. Those-
these are retained by the plants, and the mass they form is soon increased.
mented by new bubbles brought in the same way as the first
When the argyronete judges the quantity of air sufficient, it surrounds the mass with a
tighter and tighter network of threads, which eventually take the form of a dice a
sew a little narrowed at the base; the bell, thus completed, is maintained in position
tion by sorts of ropes, attached to the plants or to the surrounding stones.
nantes, and serving at the same time as a trap for the industrious spider. When the air contained in the bell comes to be vitiated by a long stay of
its host, the latter empties it by overturning it, then he introduces a new
amount of fresh air that it seeks, as before, from the surface of the water. It is in these silken shells that the females lay their eggs, and this is the
also, it is said, that they pass the winter after having carefully closed the only
opening. The Father of Lignac also tells that he saw the male of the argyronete
build its bell 4 side of that of a female, and, after having practiced a
opening in the wall, establish a communication gallery between the two
dwellings. M.H.

  

 

 

    

 

 

 

  

 

THE HEDGEHOG. The hedgehog belongs to the order of predators and to the family of insectivores. He has his body stretched out, although it appears to be otherwise, as we explain.
ask soon. Its limbs are very short; its legs, quite similar to
those of the mole, are provided with five fingers ending in nails rather
weak. Its head is small: it is quite wide towards the neck, but it lengthens and
ends in a muzzle which looks rather like a pig's snout. The eyes
are hidden and small. The number of teeth of the hedgehog is 36, of which 20 are the
upper jaw and 16 4 the lower jaw; the incisors are missing. The
quene is very short, bare and spindly. The skin of this animal, instead of being covered
green with hair like that of animals of the same order, is equipped with a

 

  

— 56 —

smooth, if I may say so, composed of spines of great hardness, long
of 6 4 8 centimeters, Jarges 4 their base of 2 to 3 millimeters and ending in
a fine point. When the hedgehog is not worried, its quills are extended
horizontally on his back; but, should he come to perceive some danger, has
feel some fear, he also rolls himself up into a ball and presents to his enemies
an almost invulnerable surface 4: its prickles bristle on its body and
whoever has the temerity to want to seize the animal, is not without
find it very inconvenient. The belly is less unassailable; the quills that
defend are much fewer; also this part of the body is
Only the fox dares to attack to master the hedgehog. The head
is folded under the belly, between the animal's legs, when it is rolled
in a ball; so that one sees everywhere only menacing bayonets. The only
surefire way to force the hedgehog & uncoil is to plunge it into
water, because then he seeks & saves himself by swimming, for that he is forced to
return to its original form. As we see the hedgehog most often on its
beware that otherwise, it follows that one could, & at first sight, attribute to it
drink a massive form; but you only have to see him walk to be convinced
on the contrary. . The hedgehog has two very curious particular faculties: that of pou-
see, without inconvenience, eat large quantiles of cantharides and that
not to resent the bite of vipers. The first of these faculties was
revealed by the naturalist Pallas, the other by the German Lentz. Despite the air
stupid that characterizes this animal, it is not without a kind of foresight. He
know perfectly well that, if he is not on his guard, skunks, martens have
because of him: so he takes care to roll himself into a ball before falling asleep. He ... not
fate only at nightfall; it is then that he sits down & takes a step
slow in procuring its food, which consists of insects of all kinds,
in verse and snails. HI searches the earth with his snout to find
what to eat. I also sometimes attacks the roots of plants, but the damage

he causes in this way are largely compensated by the destruction he
makes insects those enemies of the gardener. During the day he stays asleep
in a dark corner, in a hedge, in a pile of wood. In our country, it is very difficult to tame it; but on the edges of
Volga, it seems, he is kept in domestic service like a cat. In the past, we made him
hunting for its prickles which were used to card the wool; later we
Temploya in medicine; today, it is almost useless. The hedgehog inhabits almost all of Europe, and is widespread there. We
found mainly in the woods, at the base of trees, in moss and
let's bless; it is sometimes even seen in the fields or the meadows. Audincourt. Ed. Duvernoy. AN ENTOMOLOGICAL RACE IN THE VALAIS, IN 1869. (After). Artivés & Brieg, we go down to the Hotel de la Poste, but boredom
soon takes in this village composed only of churches and hotels; also
are we heading towards Naters, whom my father has known for a long time for
to be one of the most favorable places for the hunting of insects. In the evening,
we return to our homes, our boxes and our bottles filled with rich and
many captures, which we prepare until a very late hour
of the night, for the next morning at six o'clock the diligence was to bring us

 

 

 

to the Rhine glacier. Among the Hemiptera collected at the foot of the rocks of
Naters were the Alydus lateralis, Phygadicus semicolon, Brachycoleus
scriptus, Hoplomachus bilineatus, Monanthia vesiculifera and Odontolarsus
grammicus. On the other hand, the Rhone having flooded about eighteen small islands, it
we are unable to find a single copy of! 'Atractotomus Rhodani
Mey., that my father had taken there in previous years. The next day, departure from Brieg on a splendid morning. The road rising
continuously on the steep mountain sides, the fauna and flora
Soon take on another character. The cicadas disappear to make way &
some species of grasshoppers among which dominates the graceful Arcyoplera
varviegala, Chortyppus morio, Parapleurus typus. We exceed success:
tively Viesch, then Obergestelen, which a terrible fire had devastated the year
previous. After crossing the endless zigzags of the Furca road,
hous we suddenly find ourselves, at a bend in the road, opposite the glacier of the
Rhine, whose imposing mass we see, brilliantly lit by the fires
of the sun. It's a sight that will remain etched for the rest of my life in my
mind. Time to take down our luggage, to get us a room
4 hotel, and we were on our way to the glacier near which we
let us take a few more rare and particular species in the Alps: a species
of Trechus, Hydroporus, Salda orthochila and flavipes Fieb., as well as a
many Paryganes. However not a single species of Oreina or Po-
disma, which are usually found in abundance near the glacier. The cold wind from the glacier forced us towards evening to return to the hotel, which we
left the next morning with a guide, to reach Meyringen again the
same day. Before going back down to the Hotel de la Grimsel, the chemia gave us
along the Todtensee or lake of the dead which, in 1799, served as a grave to the French
¢ais and to the lost Austrians. Burgdorf. Leopold Mryrr. (To be continued.) THE MONTH OF APRIL. Hy has a lot to do this month for the naturalist, and particularly
for the entomologist. There are first of all the detritus, small heaps of stems,
seeds, shells, which the current of rivers and streams collects
The meadows, the fields, the woods that he has flooded, and that he then comes to deposit
places ot i! is slowed down by some obstacle. This rubbish, during the prem
week after they were abandoned by the current, are a fe-
conde for the beetle; the hemipterist will also find there to collect

a few insects. The best way not to let the plapart escape
ES microscopic insects which accidentally inhabit these localities, it is
to carry one or two bags that will be filled with fine rubbish chosen from the best
their places, either on the bank or still in the water. Arrived at home, we
will lay them out in portions on a sheet of white paper, and one will be amazed at
the quantity of insects of all kinds, especially Staphylins and Carabids,
who will run away & full speed. We take them with a wet brush
and we immerse them in a bottle of alcohol, or we can leave them until we
have time to prepare them (however avoid leaving them for more than 2-3 months
in alcohol, because then they become shriveled up, the colors darken, and these in-
sects, often 1"/"4 long, become indeterminable). I'm better
take too much than too little; often it is difficult to distinguish at first

  

 

 

oge =
glance of neighboring species, and we can always keep those that we
has too much in bottles as doubles. The conchologist will also find a lot in the detritus: few shells
alive, but among the innumerable quantity of dead, there will always be
a good number of well preserved. By means of rubbish, it is very easy~
how to make yourself complete with the fauna of a region, because by collecting a few
handles in different places, we will probably find a more or less
large number of representatives of almost all Lestacean molluscs inhabiting
both around the stream. Conifers (firs, pines, etc.) as well as willows, hawthorns, trees
fruit trees and others that bloom this month, beaten over an umbrella
or a tablecloth, will provide many beetles and hemipterans (cicadas and -
drawing pins). It would also be good to get a sieve or sieve 0.40 in diameter,
equipped with a wire mesh @ mesh of 3 1/2"/" 4 pen meadows. It will serve & sift
dried hay, moss, thyme, ete., on the tablecloth. We will collect a
crowd of beetles and helicopters. — We will report another hunt
relatively recent, that of myrmecophilous insects. The anthills re-
celent, in addition to their legitimate hosts, a whole world of beetles who have elected
home, some as allies and servants of ants, others as para-
sites, the others as executioners. According to the anthills, tantol we find
a large number of these hosts, sometimes we do not find any; it's morning,
spring and autumn, that searches are most fruitful. Like
we will try in vain to distinguish these insects, dark and small for the
most, in the midst of the swarming world of ants, it will be well to place &
Vavance, on the anthill and around, some porous and flat stones
under which the myrmecophiles will come to shelter. ORGANIZATION OF FERNS. (After. ) The leaves called fronds are, 4 with the exception of those of the ophioglosses,
rolled up as a butt as soon as they arise from the rhizome. Sometimes they are
simple (Scolopendriwn), but usually they are cut into lobes
more or less deep, arranged on both sides of the common petiole, like the
barbs of a feather, from the name of pinnules. When the sling divisious
are simple, the frond is said to be penalised (Blechnum boreale). If each
of these pinnules is divided in turn into several lobes which go as far as Ja ner-
median vure, it is said to be bipinnate, and the lobes take the name of
segments. As for the structure, the leaves consist of an utricular tissue, located
usually between two epidermis, the lower of which bears stomata. At
middle of this tissue are disseminated fibro-vascular bundles which
form the veins. The veins are sometimes simple (Plewrogamma), sometimes
they branch into several veinlets which, in most ferns, are
placed on each side of the main rib, and follow a parallel direction
to each other. In some the veins form a vast network
and leave areolas between them. In the first case, they are called pinnate (Polypodium), in the second
anaslomoses (Woodwardia). Venules, in the greatest number of species

 

  

———Ke
. — 3 —

reaching the edge of the leaf blade, but sometimes equal or thickened in
club at their top, they do not penetrate to the edge of the sling. If, at a certain time of the year, we consider the underside of a
frond usually paler in color than the upper one, we see
agglomerations called sori, rounded in the Polypedium, linear and
lying in the Asplentunr. These sori, independently of their forms,
are born at different points on the leaves, sometimes they occupy the edges
and are marginal (Adzanthum, Pteris); \antot they are placed at the extremity,
either the armpit or part of the venules; finally sometimes they hide
all the veins under which they are located veins that are pinnate
in Gymnogramma, elanastomoses in Hemionitis. The sori are often
completely naked, often also they are covered with a thin membrane
fixed to the sling, sometimes by its center, sometimes by its circumference or by its
edge. This membrane, called endusia, seems to be a fold of the epidermis; She is
orbicular (Aspidium), linear and elongated (Blechnum). Sometimes the sores
lack indusium and are covered by the reflected edges of the frond
(Struthiopteris); finally, instead of being covered by scales, they are
sometimes enveloped by a sort of chalice of various shapes (ypoderris). Cha-
any of these sores is composed, if one examines it with a magnifying glass or a micro-
cope, of globules qni play the same role in the ferns as the capsules
in phanerogams. These sporangia contain in their interior the semi-
null, in a word, the spores capable of reproducing a plant. As I indicated a little above, the sporangia are usually born
on the underside of the leaves; however there are species (Ophioglossum,
Botrychium, Osmunda) which are exceptions. In the ophioglossus the sporangia
form a spike surrounded by a particular axis responsible for supporting them. In
Osmunda regalis, one of the most beautiful ferns in Europe, the primary axis is
divided into secondary axes, one of which is terminal and the others opposite and parallel.
the anx pinnules of the fronds. These small axes bear the sporangia forming
a bunch. But if we seek & realize the mode of formation of
these ears and these clusters, we see that the parenchyma of the leaves has been destroyed,
while the upper part of the rachis, or common petiole, has formed the large
axis, and the main ribs the secondary axes. In the Polypodium all the fronds bear sporangia, but there are
certain genera (Blechnum) of which some leaves are never covered with it;
of the I name of sterile leaves. Also Mr. Fairy calls diplotactic ferns
those which have sterile leaves, and monotaxic ferns those of which all
the fronds are fertile. The sporangia are sometimes sessile, sometimes equipped at their base with a net intended
attach them to the fronds. In some genera they are surrounded on their edges
of an incomplete year which Hedwig calls connecticle. This connector, arrived
at a certain degree of development, stiffens, and by its elasticity breaks the
walls of the sac and drives the spores out. In the Hymenophylla, the con-
necticle forms an ulricular membrane which completely surrounds the sporangium;
but in other species this ring is missing. The mode of opening of the spo-
ranges varies between genres; in the Polypodium they tear irregularly
late at maturity. In the Ophioglossai and the Osmunda they separate
into two valves. It is then that the infinite spores they contain come off,
and if placed in suitable comin, will form plants
similar to those from which they came. Z

Placed in moist, warm soil, the spore germinates with a
analogous process & that of the pollen of phanerogamous plants when it goes to fertilize
the eggs. Its outer membrane swells, tears, giving passage to the
internal vesicle that enlarges into a tube and eventually develops into a

 

     

 

 

has
— 60 —

cellular expansion of green color, which takes the name of prothallium. This is &
this moment when fertilization takes place. The underside of the prothallium, as
Pont shows MM. Neegeli and Thuret, is covered with small hilly bodies and
prominences which consist of three layers of utricles and which contain in
their cavities corpuscles excessively fine and slender like a rnban, the
antherozoids. When they have reached their full development, they
escape from the male organ, in other words from the antheridium, and penetrate,
according to M. Sinminski, in an archegonium to transform into an embryo there. It is 
while we see appearing, on the edges of the cellular expansion, a species
of bud which distinguishes the prothallium of ferns from that of liverworts. This bud develops and gives birth to very different leaves from
those which will come later and will cover themselves with sporangia first & their
sommel, then on all their lower faces. The fern family is subdivided into nine tribes, but I will name only
four main ones, i.e. those containing the species that come naturally-
ment in France. These tribes are:

Ophioglossai. — Sessile sporangia, arranged in a spike or cluster, without
annulus, opening into two valves, no inducia, sterile uncoiled fronds,
in crook during prefoliation (Ophioglossum, Botrychium). Osmunde. — Pedicellate sporangia, arranged in a cluster, without a ring,
opening into valves, no indusium, frond curled into a crozier (Osmenda). Hymenophyllous. — Sessile sporangia around extended veins
of the sling, surrounded by a ring which opens transversely, el covered
of a bivalve indusium (Hymenophyllum). Polypodies. — Sporangia sessile or pedicelate, sori placed abreast
lower part of the fronds, sporangia provided with an elastic ring, vertical, opening
running crosswise and irregularly, bare or provided with an indusium. coiled fronds
laces en lacrosse (Polypodium, Asplenium, Pleris, Polystichum), ete. Such is, in short, the organization of ferns. ad. THE MAYOR. COMMUNICATIONS. Those of our subscribers

   

who have not yet paid the amount of lears subscriptions, we
ient service by sending it to us as soon as possible. We ask those of them who have changed their domicile since the publication of the
latest issue, to send us their new address. — Excursions. Since the season permits, a few young people all get together
fortnightly, to take a nature walk Sunday afternoon. We start from

 

the Dornach meeting room,

 

‘Type. Oberthiir, Rennes—Pau

dee May 1871. The Number: 25 cents. No 7. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE:}

For France Fr. 3 paran | For foreigners fr. 4 per year

 

Send the amount in stamps or money order on the post office. Subscribe to M. Eugine Engel, 4 Dornach; at Mr. Ernest Dollfus, 37, cours Léopold,
at Nancy. FLIGHT IN BIRDS. 1

Before dealing with the theory of flight and studying as a whole
the mechanism that produces this phenomenon, it is essential to examine
quickly the different bodies that contribute to its accomplishment. The wings, by means of which the bird rises into the air, are only one
transformation of the forelimbs of other vertebrates: we find there
indeed the arm, the forearm and the hand, this last part however passing
badly atrophied. On this lever arm are fixed, by their base, feathers
stiff and light, which bear the name of quills; the largest, which end
the wings, are called remzges. They consist of a hollow pipe, a
spongy stem which follows it, and barbs fixed on both sides of this
liege. These beards, seen under the microscope, appear to us as real
stems themselves furnished with barbules which, with the help of the asperities of which they are
covered, connect the beards together by intertwining with each other
others: the pen thus becomes almost impenetrable to any resistance of
the air. On one side of the stem the barbs are much wider than on the other;
the narrow side rests on the wide part of the next feather, and serves as its point
downforce when the wing drops. The muscles that impart movement to
wings are inserted on the sternum; also this part, because of the volume that
cuts muscle tissue, presents a very large surface; moreover, the weight
relatively considerable portion of the sternum is intended to place the center of gravity
as low as possible in the anterior part of the body, which is that which must
overcome the resistance of the air by its mass. The vertebrae, which in mammals
are articulated and mobile, are welded together in the bird, except those
of the neck and the tail and thus present a very great solidity. These two
parts obviously could not be built like the rest of
the vertebral column, the neck being generally excessively mobile,
same as the tail, which must, by its impulses in different directions, modify
the direction of flight. To keep its wings 4 distance apart, the bird is equipped with
strong collarbones; but one thing to notice is that these clavicles do not
are not only solid: they are also endowed with a certain elasticity
and thus impart to the wing which has fallen down a springy movement which helps
to raise it. Well! despite its extreme solidity, the bone structure of
Yoiseau is very light. These bones, indeed, instead of being like those of
mammals, heavy and filled with an oily substance, which increases

 

Co

weight, not only are nearly all empty, but vast cells
air travels in all directions. This contributes above all to lightening,
it is the particular organization of the respiratory organs: the lungs, on the one
considerable size, are welded to the celes and communicate, by the
many canals running through them, with membranous pockets called
air sacs, which line the chest cavity and intestinal mass. These bags
air conduct hot air to the vertebrae of the neck, the collarbones and almost
all the bones of the throne and of the limbs: also the body of the bird acquires
this way a remarkable specific lightness: and not only that, but
the power of breathing gives birds the liveliness and energy
they have great need, and at the same time makes them very little accessible to the cold
intense in the upper regions of the atmosphere. As we know more or less the structure of this admirable machine,
now let's see how it works. Air is a very sparse and not very resistant medium, and at first sight
it must seem surprising that it offers a sufficient point of support for the bird; however
rant, here is what happens in flight: “When the wing, under the impulse of the
muscle, violently pushes the air in front of it, this air,
close by the neighboring atmospheric layers, cannot cross them, having the
denser than them, and only tends to repel them. But the air is compressed
sible, eb as the inertia of the surrounding layers prevents the movement of
spread far in the middle of them, it follows that, 4 some distance from the
point struck, the air remains still, so that the lowering of the wing had
for the effect of compressing the nearest layers of air step by step. But between the lower wall of the wing and the still air layers, the
portion of air which has compressed takes on an elastic force which pushes the wing back
from bottom to top, and, at the same time as the wing, lifts the bird. »

Now that the lowering motion of the wing has imparted a force
ascending, what would happen if the bird, thus having its wings outstretched, wanted to
raise them sharply in this position to strike a second blow? The air,
compressed this time above the wing by this shock in the opposite direction to the first,
will join & gravity to determine an up and down motion of
Bird. This would result in a continual coming and going, and the bird, ultimately, remains-
took the same place. But things don't happen that way: instead of raising
his wings extended, he folds them and Jes pulls back to his body immediately
after having lowered them, and raises them in this position without experiencing great
air resistance; then he extends them violently with a movement
obliquely from bottom to top, thus cleaving the air from the anterior part of Jaile. Returned to their first position, the wings are lowered again as
beforehand, and a new speed is thus added to the acquired speed. (To be continued.) G. Weiss. THE LAKE DWELLINGS OF WAUWIL (NEAR SEMPACH)

Everyone knows today, more or less, lake dwellings,
either for having read descriptions of them, or for having made excavations
same; but if the number of the first is considerable, it is not
even others. Books, however, cannot give you an idea
perfect description of what these primitive dwellings cause: to understand them well,
you have to go to the site itself and have excavations carried out,
which in truth we cannot do everywhere. 163 —

When a lake station is discovered, there is no shortage of archaeologists
to remove everything that can be taken from it, and to tear
Tests of poles which supported the dwellings of their ancestors. We understand
only takes a few years, and however rich the station, it should not
nothing left of it. But it is quite different when I lake on the location on which have
been discovered remains of lake dwellings belongs to either 4 a collec-
operator, i.e. 4 an owner who has this station operated in order to obtain
of money. That of Robenhausen, for example, which has been exploited for several
several years already for this purpose, has provided a good number of samples
museums or private collections. But what is then boring for
the buyer is that, when he is not a perfect connoisseur in such matters,
he often risks being overpriced by the merchant who, sometimes too, can,
among real lacustrine flints, slip him one or two carved by
modern. It is, moreover, very difficult to distinguish a flint of the age from the
stone, with a gleam of flint cut in the x10th century, and it smells of well-trained eyes
and in-depth knowledge of the subject to recognize fraud. In fgeneral,
these objects are sold at very high prices, which makes them unaffordable for
people who are not decided 4 to put a fairly round sum into it. Now, not being connoisseurs, but, on the other hand, very desirous of seeing a
(these lake stations and to carry out excavations there ourselves, if there were
instead of doing it, we leave Lucerne early in the morning for Wauwil, small
village in the vicinity of Sempach, or, according to certain samples of all
beaulé of the archaeological museum of Lucerne, must have been one of these
resorts. Get off the train, before arriving & Wauwil, we ask
all possible information to the people of the country, but from this side,
no answers that can shed much light on us. Finally, after three
after four hours of walking, we arrive on a hill dominating a
vast circus of turbiéres, with a flow on the side of Lake Sempach,
and which, to all appearance, must have originally been a lake. THE
were to find the lake dwellings that we were looking for with so much
darter; that's where they were. At our request, some
workers, working & extracting peat, answer affirmatively, and one
among them, in the hope of gratification, even offers himself to accompany us.
paign on the site of the lake dwellings and carry out excavations there
in our presence. Along the way, he told us that we had already found many objects there.
ressing, and that we could have had a beautiful deer's head, provided with its
antlers, if we came & Wauwil a few days earlier. If I don't
remember well, he also told us that a human head had been found there; but here
my memories do not allow me to guarantee the fact. Finally we arrive
on site. Excavations, recently filled in, proved that the excavations
executed did not date back a long time. Here, first happiness! one of us
encounters a hard object with his foot. A pebble in this peat soil? Impossible,
& less than i! has been brought there; it must have been an ax or a hewn stone. We bend down, we pick up the object; indeed, it was quite a good one
serpentine lacustrine axe. Fortune decidedly favored us that day;
to have only to bend down to pick up an ax at his feet, it was a joy
extraordinary. We found ourselves happier still in our excavations, as we
besides seeing it. Our man begins to dig, after having chosen the location for this
which he thought was the best. The layer of peat could have in this place
about 41 meters & 4 meters 50 thick. When we had crossed it, we
met the old bed of the lake, formed of white clay, greasy and unctuous

 

 

 

 

— 64 —

to touch. This clay, mixed in its lower part with fragments of granite,
contained an abundance of fossil shells that had once lived in
Lake. They consisted mainly of Valvata, Limnea ovum, Pla-
norbis carinatus, el de Paludines. Of course there must have been other
species, but they were much rarer, and our veritable excavations
prevent us from dealing with it as seriously as we should have
youlu. These shells were white and very friable, but nearly all were
whole. On the other hand, however, the excavations progress, and soon we come across a
layer containing a mixture of all kinds of debris. This layer rests
immediately on the original bottom of the lake. Bones of all kinds
not delay 2 see the day. Among these were even broken bones
charred by the primitive inhabitants of the region. These debris, in small
quantity moreover, were mixed with pieces of charcoal. At last,
we find the first cut flint, flint followed, within an hour and
half, six & seven others, and a new serpentine axe, infinitely
more beautiful and better preserved. Finally, the spade of our researcher also encounters
a small millstone to grind grain, a navel cut from a rib of deer and
well preserved, bone needles, flint arrowheads and debris
quite a number of pottery. This day, we had a chance that we
had rarely favored in our other races. However, the afternoon progressed; it was now a question of leaving this
place ott we could have stayed whole days. After careful-
packed everything we had found, after taking leave of
our workman, repress us, as quickly as the weight allowed us
of our booty, the path we had traveled in the morning. E.ENGEL. AN ENTOMOLOGICAL RACE IN THE VALAIS, IN 1869. (Continuation and end.) It was curious to see as far as the silent summits of the Alps and
in the middle of the snowfields many neuroptera that one meets or-
dinary in the plain: these were the Micromus variegatus F. and a Halescus
which appears to be Zeclisopteryx dalecartica. There was still the quantity of
Diptera, and already in the Meyenwand we have a few Anthomyides. A rough road, cut in the rock and covered with snow, led us
at the Grimsel Hospice, we stopped for a moment. From the road that
we took off on leaving it, and which descended gently, sometimes skirting
from the precipices, one could see, in the valley, the waters of V'Aar. River
sinks in this place, like the Rhone, between two walls of rocks;
then, roaring and laden with foam, it cascades from the top of a
huge block of granite to then break on two other rocks. All
around us rose the steep sides of the mountain; in a word, we
let us go to the very heart of the alpine world. But we soon left these places
wild to take the road to the Handeck. We went straight-
ment at the fall of the Aare, where one enjoys the most imposing spectacle. River
rushes with all its mass from a height of 225", making a
dull rumble like thunder; it breaks as it falls and
reduced to a fine dust, where the rays of the sun are happy to form

 

 

— 6 —

the most beautiful rainbows. On the left, |’Erlenbach comes out of a glacier, and,
& already halfway, it comes to mix its silvery waters with those of the Aar. After being torn from us with difficulty 4 this grandiose spectacle to go to us
rest for a moment at the Hôtel de la Handeck, we set off again. A
narrow path leads us, 4 through a thick forest of pines, in a
meadow (the Spitelmatte) covered with short grass, and at the extremities of
which were several ponds whose waters, transparent as
the crystal, were almost freezing. We prized a number of caddisflies there
(including Lemnephilus centralis) and Hydrometra Coste. In the
good season, this locality must be very rich in Lepidoptera. Further away,
the character of the landscapes changes completely; the wild and Roman nature-
nesque des Alpes vanishes little by little to make way imperceptibly for the
less imposing nature of the plain. At Gultannen we rested for a while, then we followed a
min sometimes rising, sometimes falling; crossing here stony slopes,
1a of green meadows, and along the Aar to get to Meyringen. From Meyringen we go to visit the Reichenbach, which is located 4 half a
hour, on the height. This site somewhat resembles the chule of
VAar; but here the waterfall is much wider, and the surrounding landscape
is not the same: the river falls from the top of two huge sheer rocks. Finally, after a march of well-counted eleven hours, we reached
Meyringen, where we found a good supper and the rest we needed
great need; it is only there that we unpack our entomological hunts. When, the next morning, we started back home, we were
as delighted with the captures we had made as with all that we
had seen again. The crossing of Lake Brientz in splendid weather,
the view of the Giesbach, the picturesque shores of the lake and of Interlaken with its
walks, its hotels, its gardens, its shops animated by a crowd of
foreign tourists: all this had so many charms that it is only regret
that we cast a farewell look at the world of the Alps that we left behind

behind us. A few hours later, we returned to our homes, after
having spent nine days in Valais that I will never forget. Burgdorf. Leorop MEYER. SOME REFLECTIONS ON THE USEFULNESS OF ENTOMOLOGY AND
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ENTOMOLOGICAL GARDENS. The taste for natural history should be more widespread than it is today.
today. After having collected many small beasts, we end up wanting the best
know, by wanting to learn about the so striking mores of these beings, about their
instincts often so prodigious, then by wanting to appreciate them from the
their usefulness, as well as the damage they can cause. entomology is
intimately linked to ornithology and botany. Nothing is harmful in the
nature, provided that the original balance is preserved; between the animated nature
and inanimate, there are marvelous affinities. A predominant element in
the latter can help the development of the animal or the plant, while
as well as it can contribute to the decline of one or the other, or of
one by the other. Plant dieback or impoverishment can also
contribute 4 to the spread of vermin which hitherto were ¢

 

— 66 —

to plants in their normal state and under the influence of their own climate. On the other hand, it is easy to prove, and by numerous examples, that if
nature often opposes 4 an excessive multiplication of certain insects,
she takes, on the other hand, the most ingenious precautions against the disappearance
full of species that are our greatest enemies. It comes from the state
artificial in which the needs of humanity sustain nature around
human dwellings. To fight, what has God given us? - A lot :
intelligence. What do we get out of it? It depends on the free will of
man, and therefore his wisdom is meritorious. When these charming little beasts are targeted for the fight, nature
abandon & their instinct for self-preservation, their only strength. But if lenr
spread becomes too invasive, natural enemies will be 1a for the
exterminate. It is 4 us to know how to take advantage of everything, to discern everything and to have everything
influence to make our crops prosper according to our needs. The insect at rest
is naturally weak; you have no doubt noticed that, in this state,
almost all have such an identity with the object on which they sleep, that it is
difficult to distinguish them. The butterfly commonly called Aurore "Z'a-
chyplera aurora" usually rests on the flowers of wild parsley,
and has, while resting, its wings perfectly closed, so that one does not
sees more than the underside, the design of which has such a complete analogy with parsley,
that he pays, in the evening, a sustained attention to manage to distinguish the butterfly
of the plant. Chrysalis, more exposed than butterflies to multiple attacks,
have the right to photograph on their envelopes the color of the middle
where they await their metamorphoses. The same chrysalis will be brown,
suspended & a wall colored with bran, or green behind a trellis. others
still have colors of gold or silver which defend them against the birds;
perhaps they take them for a piece of metal. Examples are
numerous, but I will confine myself to those mentioned above, and of which it is
easy, moreover, to experience. Intelligence must guide us to
make us profit from everything, and the most seemingly idle observation can
become exceedingly useful to us. An entomologist, M. Déforge, often talked to me about it in charming
interviews. It was from these 4 bitons broken conversations that the idea of ​​creating
entomological gardens in favorable localities. It would be necessary, for that, to arrange each group of plants, in such a way as to
that they answer 4 a group of insects which will be attracted there by the need
find ways to support themselves. Wouldn't we have this
way under his eyes the phytophagous insects, their parasites, as well as the
predators who would come there, attracted by an easy prey to seize? The birds
themselves would be taken according to utility. What curious revelations
for science; what a tangle of evidence, facts and denial |
Do not believe, as M. Desmarest, secretary of the
Entomological Society of France, that a great expense would be necessary. All it takes is a lot of goodwill. These experiences should be divided
by localities; fractionation here, as in fish farming, would give
better results than a model institution, almost chimerical for
Applied fentomology. Don't many entomologists have a garden,
however modest he is? Then some leisure for this so recreational task? I am not saying that after some difficulties overcome by day-to-day practice
Finally, we would not be able to use the botanical gardens for the work
which occupy us at the moment. But this would only be done for instruction
of a public that we would like to initiate & its interests. Colmar. A. CLAUDON. —iyS

THE MONTH OF MAY. The month of May, and especially the end of this month, is, for the naturalist as
for everyone, the most beautiful time of the year. The whole nature has
awake: the trees have taken back all their leaves, the meadows are covered
of tall, dense grass, dotted with flowers of all kinds. And these leaves
this grass, these flowers serve as a retreat, either for the birds that stun us
of their songs, or to the myriads of insects that greet spring in a rush
giving or making their little shrill cries heard. The waters are populated
of an infinity of larvae and aquatic insects, which can be collected for
to prepare them or to keep them alive in aquaria; it is quite easy,
with some care, to raise them there and to observe their movements and their meta-
morphoses. To fish them, one can use the sweep net, if however the
fabric of which it is made is loose enough to allow water to pass between its threads. This
type of hunt can be very fruitful: the beetle will collect
hydrocanthares, such as Dytisci, Agabus, Hydroporus, ete. ; Hey-
mipterist, heteroptera, such as the Notonectes, the Nepes, the Hydro-
meters. Caddisflies and dragonflies gracicuses fly above the water
and on the grasses of the edge, and several species of leafhoppers are fond of
same places. Finally, a few strokes of the net will remove water from many
shells, Lemnae, Physes and Planorbes, which are held in the mud or on
the seaweeds. It will be necessary especially to explore the ponds whose water is calm and
populated by aquatic plants. But if this hunt can give many
el good species, it is certainly much less productive and above all
less appealing to the entomologist than hunting with nets and umbrellas or
Single sight hunting. Walk the scythe for a few minutes on the

branches and the flowers of a meadow, or on the various plants bordering
the paths, and, when you want to empty the contents, you will see
a crowd of insects of all orders. Diptera, which are the most agile,
will fly away first; el, as long as there are a certain number of them, we
will rarely be dexterous enough not to miss most of them. 1! will have to
also hasten to take the Hymenoptera and the Hemiptera; as to
to beetles, they are generally less lively, especially if the heat is not
too strong: many remain motionless in the back of the net. We must not neglect the cuts either, and particularly those where the
chopped wood has stayed long enough. On the thrones and fagots exposed to the
sun, you will find several good species of Longhorn beetles and Buprestids,
especially in the morning. The small corpses, those of moles, for example, that we
will meet in its races, will have to be also carefully examined: one
there will almost always be a quantity of Necrophori, Sitphids and
many species of Scaphylins, which can easily be caught with
pliers. Finally, wood mushrooms of walnut trees and fruit trees will have to
to be detached and scrutinized with care: they serve as a dwelling place for many in-
sects whose larvae operate their metamorphoses there. fl is good even, if
it is possible to take fragments of it home; because we can be sir
to see beetles of various genera and some species emerging little by little
of microlepidoptera. — 68 —

A NORTHERN LIGHT. We were able to witness, 4 Mulhouse, on the evening of Tuesday April 18,
of a phenomenon which manifests itself quite rarely in our regions, especially
with as much brilliance: I mean an aurora borealis. Around 8:4/2 a.m.,
we saw appear, in the direction of the North and North-West, on a very
wide expanse, intense gleams of pinkish red color, which are accentuated
more and more. It is approximately 49 hours minus 20 that I phenomenon had
reached its peak. At this time, the entire northwestern part of the sky was bright-
lit up as if by an immense fire. At first sight, indeed,
everyone could believe that he had before his eyes the gloomy reflections of some
sinister; the sound of the tocsin alone was missing for the illusion to be complete,
so that some walkers were already running in the direction of the lights,
shouting “Fire! » It was only after a while that we knew what was going on.
hold. From the middle of the part of the horizon thus illuminated rose, during
a moment, faint yellowish rays, and one sees, as & through
a rosy veil, the stars shining behind the gleams cast by dawn. Woe-
Fortunately, this beautiful spectacle was of short duration, and half an hour after
its appearance, there was no longer any trace of the phenomenon. Like 4 the end of the month
last October, the aurora borealis appeared after several days
born hot and humid during which a violent wind never stopped blowing
accompanied by squalls of rain and hail. FL

Mr.

 

COMMUNICATIONS. M, A, Claudon decides to change, against alpine or oriental beetles,
myrmecophilous insects, such as:

Thiasophila angulata; Dinarda Moerckellii; Homalota talpa and flavipes; Tachinus
subterraneus; Stenus aterrimus, speculator and proirdus; Catops meridionalis; Heterius
sesquicornis; Coxelus pictus; Monotoma formicetorum; latus symbionts; Eimis Germari
and Dargelasii,

 

‘Type. Oberthir et fils, 4 Rennes, — Maison & Paris, 4, rue Salomon-de-Caus,

ter June 1871. The Number: 25 cents. No. 8. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE:

 

For France......+ ceeseee ft. 3 per year | For Abroad .........2..06 fr. 4 per year
Send you amount in stamps or money order on the post office

You can subscribe to M. Hugéne Engel, 4 Dornach; at Mr. Ernest Dollfus, 37, cours Léopold,
at Nancy. LINNE. At the beginning of the seventeenth century a man was born who was to surpass
all his contemporaries in the study of nature. This is Charles Linnzeus, born
& Roeshult (Sweden), May 24, 1707, and died at Uppsala, January 10, 1778. In
his youth, he had to fight against the greatest obstacles: his persevering love.
rant of science triumphed over it. [I then found powerful protectors who
ensured an honorable position throughout his life. [1 became, in 1741, pro-
professor of botany at the University of Uppsala, a position he held until his death. The name of Linnaeus is associated with the most illustrious names of the xyi® century in
sciences: Stobwus, Celsius, Barhaave, Clifford, B. de Jussieu, de Géer,
Maller, Adanson, Butlon, etc., were his masters, his protectors, his friends, and
also, especially the last three, his censors. From his childhood, Linnaeus took care of natural history. At the age of 23, he
publishes his "Hortus Upsaliensis" in which we find the first indications of
the sexual method. In 1735, the Systema nature appeared, a vast picture of the three
reigns. Before Linnaeus, no exactly defined species, no rigorous methods
reuses, of uniform plan, of precise terms, etc. We felt a great need for it:
Césalpur, Gessner, Tournefort, Kay, Charleton bear witness to this. But what
distance between their works and the System of nature! Here, in summary, is the
division of this work: the mineral kingdom is divided into stones, comprising the
salts, fuels and metals, and in fossils, including soils,
concretions and petrifications. The vegetable kingdom is divided, according to the method
sexual, based on relative position, proportion, connection and
the number of stamens and pistils. The animal kingdom is divided into quadrupeds,
birds, reptiles, fish, insects, worms. This last class (Vermes) comprises
took all the animals that Linnaeus could not classify. Botany was the subject of several works of which we are going to indicate the
titles and content. The Fundamenta botanic: (1736) result of seven years
of studies, contain, in 365 aphorisms, the classification of authors and
systems, parts of plants, and especially those of fruiting. Linnaeus
then describes the sex, the mode of fertilization; then he gives assured rules
for characters, names, different species, synonyms, etc. The
first part of this work (authors and systems) was completed by the Biblio-
theca botanica (1736). The choice and creation of names is explained in the
botanica (1737). Finally, he gave in three successive works (Genera,
Species, Classes Plantarui, 1737-38), the characters of classes, genera,
species of plants, according to the sexual method. Fifteen years later, a book
summed up the entire doctrine of Linnaeus: it is the Philosophia botanica. He had a

 

  
   

 

   

'

=o

remarkable success throughout Europe. We know what J. J. Rousseau said about it. It was in botany that Linnaeus achieved the most fame. Still today-
@hui we follow its nomenclature. It was he who proclaimed the whole brilliant system
of the sexual method, the invention of which does not belong to him; this is & Millington
(of Oxford), Bobart (1681), Grew, and & our Vaillant, to whom this honor belongs. In a letter of Burkhardt de Wolfenbiittel, 4 Leibnitz (1702), the method
is indicated with the considerations Linnaeus has since made. This ingenious system
tem has been dethroned by the natural method, studied, after Tournefort, by
Adanson and the two Jussieus. In zoology, Linnaeus established divisions more in keeping with natural relationships. The first, he characterized and named the particular species of insects. But
Already during his lifetime, Pallas and Fabricius surpassed him in this branch; her
classification was completed and established on certain bases by Daubenton,
and especially by Cuvier. In mineralogy, he must yield the palm to Cronstedt, Vallerius. He made known
the importance of crystalline forms, but did not know these forms, & because of the
degree of inferiority of the chemical science of that time. The other works of Linnaeus are: many travel accounts
scientists, which gave rise to the publication of some Flores (from Sweden,
of Lapotie, etc.) ; a general history of all the animals of Sweden:
Fauna Suecica, Linné acquired the Herbarium of Jean Burmau, of Ceylon, and published
on this subject the “Flora Zeylanica. Finally, he published his friend's manuscript
Arledi, who drowned & Amsterdam: Ichthyologic (1738, Leiden). mention
still its classification of diseases, as well as numerous researches
medical. Finally, he published some Muscaruns, and collected all his dissertations.
tations in six volumes, enlarged by Schreber, under the name of Amanitates
academic (1749-1763). To fully appreciate the widow of Linnaeus, it is necessary to refer to the time when he
yes. Today, his voice no longer has the same authority. We sometimes forget,
was wrong; for it is he who, by a whole consecrated life 4 study of the
nature, gave this science the liveliest impulse, and prepared the great
works of the fia of the eighteenth and the beginning of the tenth century. A.C.

OF VEGETABLE RESPIRATION. Air is necessary for plants to live, because without it the sap becomes
unsuitable for nourishing organs and forming new tissues. The function by
which the sap comes into contact with the air to convert into a fluid
nutrient is called respiration. The main organs of this function are the
leaves, as Bonnet observed. This scientist noticed that a green leaf,
submerged in water and exposed to the sun's rays, released from its surface
gas hulls that Priestley, a few years later, recognized to be from Yoxy-
embarrassed. From then on, several naturalists dealt with this question, one of the
most important in plant physiology. Senebier reported on this
oxygen released by the green leaves, and recognized, with reason, that this gas
came from | carbonic acid absorbed by the plant, acid decamped by the
plant in carbon which it assimilates, and in oxygen which it releases; however,
for this phenomenon to take place, the leaf must be green and
exposed to the rays of the sun, because during the darkness an action quite opposite
occurs: the plant absorbs oxygen and eliminates carbonic acid:

—7—

of the expressions of daytime breathing and nocturnal breathing, admitted
formerly by physiologists. But lately we've shown
The fallacy of the term diurnal respiration: it is now proven that the
phenomenon explained for the first time by Senebier, is nothing but a
fact of assimilation, and that vegetable respiration properly speaking consists in
absorption of oxygen and evolution of carbonic acid. This is what we see
the experiences of scholars today. Some plant organs need oxygen to perform their functions;
without this gas, the currents of the liquid contained in the cells, between the membrane
utricularis and the nucleus (protoplasm), no longer occur, the irri-
tables lose their irritability. The rarefaction of the air is harmful to the latter,
as Dutrochet proved by his experiments on the leaves of Mimosa and
of Robinia. This naturalist, having placed leaves of sensitive (Mimosa) in
container of a pneumatic pump, noticed that these organs became
rigid. Robinia leaves, gentle movement in water containing
of air, lost this property in water that no longer contained it. Any gas other than oxygen is harmful to the organs that perform
certain movements. According to Kabsche, the stamens of Berberis lose their
irritability in nitrogen and pure RRyRORaNS. In pure oxygen, the stamens of
the same plant are irritable for some time, but the irritability disappears.
soon: so that if oxygen is essential to all these organs, this
pure gas also becomes harmful in consequence of its too energetic action on the
fabrics. According to Kiihne's research, protoplasma currents do not occur
more when the plant is deprived of oxygen. The gyration of the staminanx nets of the
Tradescantia ceased when these were surrounded by a layer of oil which
blocked the access of air. These experiments show how great is the influence of oxygen on
plant organs; but there are other more important ones which have served
to elucidate the different points of true vegetable respiration. On this subject, I
I will partly cite the various observations of several scholars on the absorption
gases, first in seeds & germ state, then in plants
yellow or devoid of chlorophyll. In germination, seeds, according to Théodore de Saussure, absorb
oxygen and eliminate carbonic acid formed by part of the ox. gene absorbed at the expense of the carbon found in the seeds. They clear
also generates water vapour. The elimination of carbonic acid is different
at various times of germination, and varies with the size of the seed. This
oxygen that the seed absorbs is essential to it, because without it it cannot
give a new plant similar to that which produced it; it is this gas, in
effect, which in conjunction with humidity and heat, transforms into a ferment
energetic, called diastase, the albuminoid and nitrogenous matters which
the radicle. This ferment, in its turn, renders the starchy matter soluble.
“naked in the tissues of the cotyledons, transforming them into glucose or sugar
of starch which serves as food & the radicle still unable to draw from the
ground the necessary materials 4 its development. It is after having absorbed
soluble matter as the root grows and elongates in the soil, while
Ja tigelle heads in an opposite direction, sometimes rising with her above
I land the cotyledons that are still yellowish (epigeal cotyledons), but which are turning green
soon in the presence of light; because as soon as the sun's rays have them
struck, one sees appearing in their tissues grains of starch and matter
green (chlorophyll). This is when gas absorption becomes complicated. During the day, these parts, made green by the light, absorb acid

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

  

  

  

 

—?2—

carbon dioxide and reject oxygen, in a greater proportion than is
Oxygen absorbed by the seed. ;

If it is not just seeds that have the property of absorbing
oxygen. The same phenomenon manifests itself in the cryptogams without
chlorophyll, such as fungi, the study of which was made by Marcet and
Grischow. The latter, having placed a young Ammanite (Ammanita muscaria),
2 cubic inches, in a container containing 22 cubic inches of air, let it
first in the dark and then put it in the sun; the air had then
cloud of 1/2 cubic inch and its composition was in 100 parts: 13 of acid
carbon dioxide, 5 oxygen and 82 nitrogen. Marcet plaga des Lycoperdons in a
balloon containing 87.7 nitrogen and 23.3 oxygen. After the experience, the air was
composed of 87 azole, 23.7 carbonic acid and 2.3 hydrogen. During the
night, the results were the same. Several experiments, made on others
mushrooms, prove that these cryplogams absorb 4 hourly of
Oxygen and exhale carbonic acid. The phanerogams without chlorophyll are also in this case; According to Lory,
whose experiments have been made on the Orobanches, the plants without chloro-
leaf during the entire vegetation period, during the purest day
as in the deepest darkness, absorb oxygen and eliminate
carbonic acid, and the higher the temperature, the greater the elimination
becomes considerable. Non-green organs have the same respiration as Orobanches. According to
sure, the flowers take in oxygen and continuously release
carbonic acid, in greater quantity than the green leaves in the
same plant. This is why in certain flowers and certain periods
the production of carbonic acid is so energetic, that it bears the flower
At a temperature above that of the ambient air. Such is the spadix of
the Arum which, at the time of fertilization, releases a heat high enough to
be easily perceived by the hand touching it. Sterile flowers consume
less oxygen than ferliles; this phenomenon depends on the presence of organs
of generation, which have the property of absorbing more oxygen than the others
parts of the flower. At equal volume, the {their doubles consume less oxygen
gene than simple ones, and the respiration of {their males is more energetic than
that of the female flowers. Luneville. A, LEMAIRE. (To be continued.) DEEP FAUNA IN THE GREAT LAKES. This summary of an article in American Naturalist seemed to us to include
resent our readers:

The Chicago Academy undertook to dredge the bottom of Lake Michigan; the
The results obtained are already of great interest. On a sandy bottom or ~
pebbles, & the inconsiderable depth of 14 fathoms, animal life was
almost nil: the instrument brought back only the larva of a neuroptera, a Clep-
sine (1), a flesh-colored leech forming a new genus, a
Lymnea (2), two Melania (2), a Plumatedla (3), and in fact plants,
one moss and three algae. (1) Genus of Annelid of the Hirudinea family. (2) Freshwater gastropod molluscs. (8) Genus of Bryozoa. have =

Debris of crustaceans, found in the stomachs of some fish, make
know how to presume that the lake contained animals of marine form; also the
searches made with the help of the dredge were of great importance. The instrument brought back, in fact, from the deeper parts of the lake, 45 fathoms (bottom
of mud mixed with sand), the species already mentioned, plus a small Plana-
ria(1) white and a new species of Psidiwn (2), each in large quantities. There were three species of crustaceans: an AZysis (3) and two Gammarus. However, the genus Myszs is marine: it abounds in the North Atlantic and the seas
arctic; the Al. velicta was found by Lovén. along with several others
marine crustaceans, in the freshwater lakes Wener and Wetter (Sweden), which
proves that these basins were once part of the sea, from which they were
separated by the gradual uprising, which still continues today, of the
Scandinavian Peninsula. The presence of AZysis in the lakes of the United States
proves that it was the same for these basins, although we do not find
of marine shells in the quaternary deposits of their shores. He is pro-
bable that, when it existed, the communication between the lakes and the sea was
narrow and deep, and that the streams brought in enough fresh water to
filling the upper part of the lake, while the denser seawater formed
the bottom layer. When the upheavals interrupted the
communication between the lake and the sea, the water gradually lost its saltiness,
in a way 4 to make this change of element possible for crustaceans. The Lake Michigan Mysis is allied & some arctic forms, allowing
to suppose that its introduction into the lakes took place during the period
cold of the quaternary period. Another sea-shaped animal, the fish Triglopsis Thompsonii Girard,
also inhabits the depths of lakes Ontario and Michigan. E.D.

OVERVIEW OF THE VEGETATION OF THE PRIMITIVE WORLD. In tackling a subject as vast as that of fossil flora, I will try
simply to show how the vegetation of the primitive world relates
4 that which we have before our eyes, and how nature, always proceeding
in a way by degree, finally arrived @ this admirable perfection that
we like to watch as the end result of his long and arduous
efforts, because the man himself considers himself the king and the leader
supreme of creation. It is in the midst of numerous revolutions, and after having gone through a long
following modifications, that our globe has arrived & its current state. The story
of the fossil plant merges with that of these very revolutions: 4 hardly
earthly crotite was formed, that the creative force, which, from the
highest origins, incessantly renews the face of the world, began
to spread its beneficent and fruitful germs there. We have divided the history of
primitive world in phases of evolution or periods each of which has its own flora
particular: types develop to disappear like individuals;
they are followed by more perfect forms which disappear & in their turn, and so
immediately, until nature has arrived at a relative perfection which she

 

(1) Genus of worms most of which inhabit fresh waters,
(2) Freshwater bivalve mollusc. (3) Crustacean of the order Stomapoda, family Mysiens. —4—

he won't keep forever. These are the general characteristics of these different
annuities periods that I will try to sketch quickly. I, PRIMARY period. 1) Vegetation during the transition period. It is the lower base of the Silurian terrain that we find the traces of
first plants. These first-born of the earth naturally presented
a great simplicity in their organization: they were marine plants
which is related to the family of Kelps or Fucoides, which developed
in a long ribbon or ramified in several branches, such is the Bucholepis
antiquata, found in the calcareous sandstone of the lower Silurian terrain of New-
York, or even gigantic trees with very simple foliage, such as
the Lomatophloyos crassicaule, corda, whose branches, arranged in a spiral,
carried at their extremity a thick tuft of fleshy leaves; others
finally, & stem cylindrical and without leaves. The numerous marshes of this period were doubtless covered by the
strains of Stigimaria ficoides, Brogn., whose short throne, low above
above the water, divided into long branches usually submerged and furnished
at their extremity of fleshy leaves. All these plants, sometimes ligneous,
but most often fleshy, had neither flowers nor fruits and bore to their
place of simple sporules. In a word, it was the reign of the vascu-
areas. In addition, cryptogams quite similar perhaps to our mushrooms,
were to form the greater part of this primitive vegetation; however
their remains have not come down to us, no doubt because of the lack of
consistency offered by their fabric. Towards the end of the transition period with the Devonian formation, vegetation
tation seems to have taken a more considerable development; we have some
the proof in the anthracite deposits that characterize this period. shales
anthraciferes and the greywacke group already present us with some beautiful
geres (Cyclopteris hibernica) of Sigillaria, Tree Calamites and
Annularia, a type of which only the city of Java can still offer us today
“a few rare samples. Among the plants particularly suitable for
Devonian terrain, it should be noted with Cyclopteris hibernica, Asterophyllites
coronala. Strasbourg, May 1871. P.kK. (To be continued.) TIPS FOR BEGINNERS IN ENTOMOLOGY. The beginner in entomology is, most often, some schoolboy who has
felt one fine day the taste of collections, seeing a comrade catch
butterflies and then stick them in a box. Eager to limit, he pro-
traditional fe cure net in green muslin, and a few provincial pins. His ardor soon knew no bounds; he has no pity for all that
is butterfly. The boxes, at the bottom of which he stuck corks,
filled with a mass of butterflies crossed by real nails; basically
of the box, it is a confused mixture of wings, legs, detached antennae, o

  

 

7

the Anthrenes and the Plinus frolic at their ease. It's chaos—whatever
& our-hunter! It is in the fields and the woods that he must be seen; each
catch is a treasure. And when it is one of those famous "rare" of which it is so
often heard of, of which he dreamed more than one night, when it is a chan-
giant, a tan, a cordon bleu, whom he sees yolling over there for the first time,
look at him: here he goes—nothing stops him, no ditches, no bushes—he is
up close — he raises the net, misses, hits at random — victory | It is booked! You have to have gone through 14 to understand this anxiety, this joy, this pride. The capture would likely be dismissed with contempt by a lepidopterist
among the "ubiquitous," but our ignoramus would not give it up for the lepi-
adopt the rarest. Generally, after chasing butterflies in this way for a few months,
it takes our friend's fancy to "pick up insects." (Note, in passing,
that almost everyone agrees on separating butterflies from insects.) He begins, in fact, & to walk around with a bottle in his pocket, which
bottle most often contains spirits of wine or sawdust
impregnated with benzine; we stuff in it the big insects we find on our way,
the little ones go unnoticed; at home, we impale them with the nails already
cited. A few months pass like this. Our collector continued patiently
and all alone his research, or he had the good fortune to meet at a
comrade a conformity of tastes which most often gave rise between them
a strong and lasting friendship. But then a doubt, and like a discouragement,
grabs it. He sees ordered collections which seem immense to him. forgetting
that they result from the patient, continuous work of many years, it is said that
he will never manage, however zealously he puts into it, to create something
bable. If he is alone, he will plant there, no doubt, his formless collection essays,
and will throw themselves, perhaps with ardor, into imbrophilia.
will support one another, and sooner or later, either on their own or with the help of
some more experienced entomologist, they will manage to make a collection
science, and will be able to render more than one service to entomology. Reader, who have had the patience to follow me here, you are wondering
where I'm coming from. I was long, too long no doubt, but I couldn't
prevent me from retracing what I have seen repeated often, after having
experienced myself. Since this sheet is intended to help beginners and
to attract new adepts to the most charming of sciences, I ask
Ja permission to give here some practical advice 4 those of our readers
who would like to start a collection of insects. It will then be, if you will for the next month,

  
 

 

  

 

E.

THE MARITIME PINE. The cultivation of maritime pine (Pinus maritima), which Bremontier used
to fix the dunes of Gascony, took a very great development in
the departments of the south-west of France, and in particular in the moors
that line the coast. We recognize it & its slender port, 4 its bare stem up to
a fairly large height; its leaves are long, pointed, with an odor
aromatic, with an acidulous flavor, which leaves an acrid and resinous aftertaste. The flowers are monoecious: the males in the form of branching catkins, ovoid,
covered with overlapping scales bearing two anthers; females

 

— 76 —

also in the form of catkins, but whose scales support two flowers
reversed females. The fruit, which looks like a cone, is called
pine cone or pinecone. :

This tree is cultivated in the moors to extract turpentine from it. For
this, one practices in the bark of the broad incisions of ten 4 twelve centimeters,
one or two meters (square) long, the resin flows along these incisions
in the form of tears, composed largely of turpentine holding in
dissolution of resinous substances of various kinds, some of which
resinifies & air and forms lumpy white droppings along the slits
of the trunk (bars of the galipot). This turpentine is collected using a
bucket of earth or a reservoir dug in the ground at the very foot of the pine. After
the harvest, the product obtained (gem) is distilled with water in a still. One thus obtains impure essence of turpentine, which passes to Ja distilla-
tion, while we find as residue pitch and tar which serve
has various uses. Careful rectification gives the pure and colorless essence,
as required by the trade. When the tree is exhausted, which happens after a time more or less
long, the wood is heated in closed vessels, after having cut it into small ba-
pussies. We thus obtain tar. We can still make a light coal,
of good quality and much used for the service of the forges. Finally, the fruit
conou Vulgarly under the name of pinecone, constitutes an excellent fuel:
everything finds its use in this precious plant. Unfortunately, the malice-
spear has destroyed, in recent times, a large number of forests (pignadas)
by fires that spread, especially in the strong summer heat,
with such violence that it often becomes impossible to circumscribe them and
W@prevent the entire plantation from being destroyed by flames. Mont-de-Marsan. G. SourbeTs. CORRESPONDENCES. M.G., 4 Riom. — We thank you for your willingness. It will then be for
Next year. A. L., & Vienne.— We will receive your article on mineralogy with pleasure, and we will
will publish, if necessary. Collect diligently, and don't neglect to collect insects. COMMUNICATIONS. The Cynips mdle.— It is a well-known thing that among all the Cynips (hymenoptera)
living in the galls, we had never managed, despite countless searches,
& find a single mile. It's AM. Walsh, an entomologist from the United States, whom Phon-
ner to have first discovered this mysterious insect, which he described two years ago
approximately. Unique food. — An English entomologist observed moth larvae
(Tinea pellionella) appearing to eat cobwebs. He took a number
and brought them up without giving them anything but this insubstantial food,

 

‘Type. Oberthiir and son, in Rennes. — House in Paris, rue Salomon-de-Caus, 4,

ter July 1871. The Number: 25 cents. Do 9. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE:

For France.

 

. fr, 3per year | For PEtranger +. Fr. 4 per year

 

Send the amount in stamps or money order on the post office. We subscribe to M. Bugtne Hagel, at Dornach; at Mr. Ernest Dollfus, 37, cours Léopold,
at Nancy. TOBACCO, ITS CULTURE, ITS MANUFACTURE. The name tobacco is commonly given to the plant itself or to the different
all the preparations to which he is subjected. The cultivated species is called Nicotiana
tabacum. The origin of the word tobacco has been hotly debated. Two versions, that
I expose briefly, bring him one from Cuba where Columbus saw him for the first time.
first time, the other from the island of Yabago, one of the Lesser Antilles. This name has
remains, varied according to the country and the personages who imported it there. This is how
called: nicotiana, herb of the grand prior, herb of the queen, herb of
Sainte-Croix and Tornabonne; his real or supposed virtues earned him
then the names bugloss or Antarctic panacea, holy grass, grass 4 all
evils, henbane of Péron, ete. Like all things the use of which spread rapidly, tobacco had
soon its detractors and defenders. In 1699 it became the text of violent
disputes between doctors. However, around 1622, the Tabaco-
Neandri's lodge. A little later we find Braun's dissertation, de fumo
tabaci, and that of Simon Pauli, sua the abuse of tobacco. It would take too long to recall here all the works that were written on the
tobacco. I will only quote a thesis from Doctor Contugi: Non ergo nocet
cerebro tabacum, and another from Doctor Fayou: Ergo ex tabaci usu fre-
quenti vita summa brevior. Finally, I will recall the more recent observations
de Portal, de Pia and de Gordanne, on the fumigations of tobacco in the as-
physies, the analyzes of Vauquelin, and the remarks of Guiton-Morveau. Tobacco needs cool, substantial, well-smoked ground to produce
large and beautiful leaves. It is sown in layers from the month of March, | am
the young plants are transplanted 4 2 or 3 feet apart. You have to be careful
prevent the plant from flowering, by cutting the ends of the stems before
panicle drooping. Harvesting begins approximately 40 days after trans-
planting; we first pick the three or four lower leaves, which we
ranks among those of mediocre quality, & because of the stains with which they are
complaints. This operation is repeated every eight days. When tobacco is
picked, we proceed to the sorting and the éboulardage. (I will not explain the detail
operations, which will be read with more interest in the special works.) We
the tobacco then dries up, then it is fermented in heaps. Then comes the trimming. The tobacco is then prepared to be smoked or sniffed. After this quick overview of its manufacture, I will end with its description. Tobacco has been classified in the Solanaceae family, monogyny pentandry of the
sexual system. Its stem rises 4% or 5 feet; its leaves are large, without
cut-outs, and a little slimy; its funnel-shaped flowers are colored

   

— 72 —

dew, and form elegant twigs (panicles) & stem tips. His
seeds are enclosed in an oblong capsule; Linnaeus counted on a
single foot 40,320 seeds, which retain their virtue for several years
germinator. The plant exhales a strong and virense smell; its flavor is Acre and
bitter; aunual in our climates, the Nicotiana is perennial in America and can
pe er for ten & twelve years. Another species is grown, the
Nicotiana rustica,
Nancy. E. BAGNERIS. TIPS FOR BEGINNERS IN ENTOMOLOGY. After.) There are only two orders of insects that are suitable to begin with.
a collection; all the others are too difficult to prepare and to determine. hs
are too little known and less attractive to the inexperienced eye. We generally start
rally by the butterflies: they all strike the eyes, present a great

y tes, and are the best known of all insects;

ation of the caterpillars offers, moreover, and it alone a considerable interest. Only one will allow me to make a distinction between the simple piqueur of
butterflies and the one who makes a scientific collection of them. We often think we have
a beautiful collection when we have brought together almost all the large butterflies (sur-
all diurnal and twilight) of a country. But in such a collection, it
three or four hundred species at most, known down to their smallest
ties, and no longer of little scientific interest. To have some
chances of finding something new — and, in this case, the interest is on the contrary
very large — one would have to devote oneself entirely & collect the smallest
between the Tineins, the Phalenites, all the microlepidoptera, which are extremely
delicate and incredibly difficult & prepare well. But then this
collection does not have any of the advantages that attracted the beginner: the small
very difficult butterflies & classify, & determine, their most difficult caterpillars
still & elevate, have nothing that strikes the eye; finally, it is not given & all
to bring together the many qualities and the leisure required by micvolepidoplerology. It will therefore be necessary to fall back on the beetles. The field is still
vase; You will realize this as you go through it, and I urge you, especially at the
beginning, to study this order. In this collection, the pupil of the larvae
is far from being as easy as that of the caterpillars, and it has only one interest
scientific ; so do not try to raise larvae first, or only
how to do it exceptionally. Any budding entomologist will certainly ask this question: Indicate-
me a book, with as many engravings as possible, containing the name and
description of the insects which are with us, and that in the most
moc. The answer will be, no less certainly: I! is painful to me, my
poor friend, to give your first request such an unsatisfactory answer.
doing, but... we forgot to write such a book, and that for two reasons:
Firstly, because good works of natural history and moderate ones
are mutually exclusive; and then, Messrs. the:ants are so busy describing
their countless 2. sp. (new species), & establish a synonymy that
is increasing every day, and dividing, subdividing ad infinitum the divisions of the masters,
Linnaeus, Fabrici fill pages and entire pamphlets with dis-
cussions on such doubtful specific character, on such disputed right of priority,
they are so busy they lose sight of the main thing in the mass of details,
and forget to facilitate access to their science. Classification and description
species are essential things, and binary nomenclature is not one of the

 

   
 

   

 

 

 

 

     
     

 

    

    

 

   
 
 

  

 

 

 

 

    

 

   

 

 

—m—

lesser liters of Linnaeus & the recognition of all naturalists; but it's
there is always a way, and our goal is to know the beings around us.
rent, and to find everywhere an occupation full of interest

The amateur entomologist, who does not aspire to know thoroughly the critical part
of entomology, does not attach much importance 4 to a discussion of synonymy
of a Meligethes or even of a Bembidium, and seeks rather to have a con-
complete birth of the practical part: localities and fauna, preparation and
hunting insects from the country. But our science can still be studied & a
third point of view, too neglected in general; this part of entomology,
higher, more general, perhaps more interesting than the others, it is
The study of the life and movements of insects. I strongly recommend to those who
will read these pages not just to pick up, poke and determine
beetles, but also to observe them in nature, and to check their
own observations by means of the works written on this subject. We say that there is no book that can be suitable for a beginner
beetle (because the butterfly hunter has a number of works
elements that more or less meet the desired conditions). He will therefore have to
During the first two or three years, learn & know the shapes, the
main divisions, and especially the hunting and preparation of beetles, in
taking advantage of the advice of entomologists and visitors to museums and collections
that he can consult. Let him not worry about this terrible legion of names
Greco-Latin people who frighten a large number of people: it will happen little
little, and almost without effort, by the sole effect of habit, and knowing and
to call most of the genera and many of the species by their scholarly names
a little widespread. It will, however, be very useful to practice following a
superficial termination of collected insects, by careful comparison
with specimens from museums and entomological collections; we become familiar
will thus relate to the method to be followed in determining the insects, and to the
names that modern science has given them. It is from this point of view that a
project of which Mr. Deyrolle had taken the initiative in the Petites Nouvelles entomo-
logic, and that a group of entomologists in Paris had begun to
execution last year, could be of great use. It was about
elementary collections of different orders of insects, consisting of one hundred
has three or four hundred species widespread in our countries and determined
exactly, that we had to distribute, for a very modest price represented
sensing the value of the boilers, to the debntants who would request them and to whom
these insects would have served as valuable points of comparison. Let's hope that
this project has only been postponed

I end here these somewhat general and vague advice to begin with, the
next month, & give the indications relative to the formation of the collection. E.

 

 

 

 
    

 

   

 

    

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
       

OF VEGETABLE RESPIRATION. (Continuation and end.) The experiments of the same scientist prove that the underground organs without
chlorophyll respire like non-green organs. If we place; for example,
a root in a container filled with oxygen, it absorbs a quantity of
this gas which varies with its volume, by eliminating a volume of carbonic acid
a little less than that of absorbed oxygen which it partly retains in
its tissues; but if we transport this oxygen-salted root into a den
container, it will then release a volume of carbonic acid equal to that of
Oxygen absorbs. — 80 —

In plants with chlorophyll, the phenomenon becomes more complicated when,
under the action of the sun's rays alone, the green parts absorb acid

 

 

carbon dioxide that the plant decomposes into carbon that it assimilates, and into oxygen
emanating. De Candolle investigated whether artificial light would produce the same

effect than sunlight. I! employed, for this purpose, silver lamps, which,
producing a light roughly equivalent to that of daylight, were not enough
to determine the phenomenon; also, some physiologists believe that the
decomposition of carbonic acid is due to chemical action exerted by
only the sun's rays. — The elimination of oxygen, resulting from this decomposition
position, varies with light and tempera; 2 shadow, the release of
this gas is less energetic than in direct sunlight; moreover, among I'ons who have
the most influence on this phenomenon are the rays, red and ver
while blues and purples have almost zero influence. I will not quote
point out the experiments made on this subject, for I] am not permitted, in such a
short work, to treat the question of the 7th of the moon sux Vassinilation
cegelal. It is not just green leaves that absorb carbonic acid during
the day; certain leaves of various colors enjoy the same property. In these, the elimination of oxygen is due, according to Corenwieder to the presence
of green granules, scattered in the leaf tissue. Some algae are in
that case; in some, we can make the color green look like Jes carrying
in fresh water. Sachs noticed that a red alga (Laminaria saccha-
rina) turned green when placed in a potash solution. During the night, green plants absorb oxygen and exhale
carhonic acid. According to Th. de Saussure, this acid would be formed by a
part of the oxygen absorbed at the expense of the carbon located in the tissue of the
plant. According to Liebig, this gas, which would come from the ground, would be absorbed by the
roots, and would exhale without being decomposed. As I said above, the ph
sions of inne breathing and? ologists first gave the expressions
nocturnal spiration with two phenomena
that occur during the day or at night in plants 4 chlo-
rophyll; but today that plant physiology has made progress
immense, the term diurnal respiration has (16 replaced with reason by that
(assimilation. For a long time it was believed that green plants only absorb
only carbonic acid during the day; but the experiences of
water have proven that during the day as during the night the leaves
s absorb oxygen and eliminate carbonic acid. This elimin
nation decreases with temperature. To achieve this result, Garreau did
Vnext experiment: in a flask filled with air purged of carbonic acid, °
and whose bottom contained a pure solution of lime or barite, it
introduced, and through a cork, a branch of a tree which held
branches. He noticed that during the day the lime water became cloudy and left
deposit lime or barite carbonate. It is evident that this carbonate
came from the carbonic acid exhaled by the ramean, acid formed by oxygen
which the plant had taken at the expense of carbon. From this he concludes that the
green plants seize even during the day of the oxygen of the air, gas which
contributes to the formation of their tissues and which serves to produce the various acids
organic (oxalic, malic, tartaric, etc.). The experiences of Garreau, Grischow, Lory and Th. of Saussure,
have served to distinguish assimilation from vegetable respiration, which is the
tion by which the sap of the plants comes into contact with the air to
seize oxygen without which it would be unfit to form new
smooth. Thus, as can be seen, the respiration of plants has the greatest

 

    

      

     

   

 

  

     

 

  

 

Sie

analogy with that of animals: like them, they absorb oxygen and
give off carbonic acid, and if formerly we confused under the term
general breathing two very different functions, it is because we do not
had not realized the continual absorption of oxygen in the organs
underground, in the flowers and in the vegetables, devoid and provided with chloro-
phyll. It was only after long work that we managed to establish the dis-
inctions which exist between assimilation and vegetal respiration properly
said, and today, as Sachs says, it is also wrong to use the term
of diurnal respiration than to say of an animal that it breathes its food. Physiological science has thus succeeded in filling the great gap which
tail between the respiration of green plants and that of plants without
of chlorophyll. Nature would have taken too big a leap if she had given a
different respiration to the beings known under the general term of plants, and on
On this point one could not have said with the School: Natura non facil saltus. Luneville. A. LEMAIRE. OVERVIEW OF THE VEGETATION OF THE PRIMITIVE WORLD. (After). 2) Vegelation during the Coal and Permian terrains. The lower coalfield offers us much more varied vegetation.
than that of previous courses. Where found in Burbach, in the valley of
Thann (Haut-Rhin), a large quantity of plant fossils generally
z well preserved. The arbyes which now dominate and which we find
we will continue throughout this long coal period, are the Lepido-
dendrons, gigantic lycopods characterized by their scaly bark and
their dichotomous branches which somehow recall our fir trees by their
form and by their fruits; the Sigiddaria, whose simple and undivided throne
to the top, bore a bushy crown of linear leaves and drooping
haunts. A considerable number of parasitic plants lived on the trunk of these
trees; they all belong to the fern family and generally belong to
generally to the genera of Hymenophyllites, Sphenopleris and Cyclops.
Teris. In addition, we must not forget the family if many in cash of the
Sphenophyllum, of which one of the most frequent representatives is the Spheno-
phyllun enarginalun. Among the fossils most often met with & Thann, mention should be made-
especially the Cardiopleris /rondosa, the Cyclopleris Kachlini and the Sphenop-
leris Schimperi, all three 4 belonging to the fern family, then the
Stigmaria ficotdes and thrones of Sigilaria and Lepidedendron. The
plant fossils from the lower coalfield are usually found in Burbach,
especially on a feldspathic rock and never meet carboni:

It is especially during the middle and upper coal period that the veg6-
nation has taken a prodigious development which has been of great
importance. It is indeed the debris of these plants accumulated during
thousands of centuries which have, as we know, formed the coal, called & so rightly
titles the bread of our modern industry. However, this vegetation was formed exclusively of cryptogams, but
their species reached considerable dimensions and multiplied with
a speed of which we no longer find any example today. The subscriber
dance of coal deposits and their thickness can give us an idea
of the vastness of the forests which covered the numerous islands of that time
and whose traces we find up to the pole, but more particularly
ment in the northern hemisphere. The Saarbriick coalfield is

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

  

— 82 —

composed of 230 layers which each correspond to a new formation. It is one of these layers that took up to 300,000 years and even more to form. If the prodigious duration of the coal period one adds the exceptional conditions
which then favored vegetation, an atmosphere that was always warm
and humid, overloaded with carbonic acid, one will understand the immense development
ment she took. The Lepidodendron, the Sigillaria and the ferns continue to offer us
many species. Let us cite among the first and as the most characteristic
ticks, Lepidodendron erenatum, elegans, pulchellum, etc., and Sigil-
lavia alceolaris and elegans; the seconds are mainly represented by Pecop-
leris, Sphenopteris. Neuropteris, Odendopteris and Callipteris,
which offer us numerous and beautiful species, of which the most characteristic
are Pecopteris aquilina, arborescens and Defrancii, Sphenopteris
nervosa, Schlotheimii and Haninghausi, Neuropteris heterophylla ev
gigantea, \ Odendopteris Schlotheimii and Callipteris conferta, found
frequently at the lower base of red sandstone on spherosiderite. The tree ferns, of which trunks and branches have been found, do not
were certainly not lacking in this luxuriant vegetation; they belong
all in the genus Cyatheites. Among the Annula, the Annularia brevifolia and longifolia are the most
characteristics and the most frequent. .

The Calamites which appear already during the transition period, and whose
many species were found during the coal period (Calamites
transitionis, caneformis, Suchoviri, etc. ), offer us a whole character
particular: their Glancées stems are crowned with branches covered with leaves,
while the gigantic horsetails of the variegated sandstone are already showing us the sheaths
membranous that the Equisetaceae have kept until our time. At the end of the coal age only appear the most representative
lowest of the Phanerogam series, i.e. the Conifers of which we
found some sparse debris in the coalfield; they belong to the
Arancariaceae family, of which we still find some representatives in
the islands of Au ie and which have been referred to the genus Walchia (Walehia
Schlotheimii, pinniformas). The long period of rest during which the coal age lasted is all
Suddenly interrupted and we see the appearance of an excessive period
sively troubled and characterized by a series of revolutions, especially by d
volcanic phenomena; this is the red sandstone period. We will understand
cement that during this turbulent period, the development of the reign
organic has been almost completely destroyed. However, we found in the sandstone
red of large silicified stems belonging to conifers or to arho-ferns
remnants of the genus Psavonius. and a few rare prints of ferns and
calamiles, but in the vosgi sandstone never encountered fossils: this sandstone
was deposited too quickly and was not made to preserve the organic debris. The Zechstein shales alone can give us a fair enough idea of
Permian vegetation. In the country of Mansfeld, and especially IImenem, we have found enough algae
large number (Fucotdes selaginoides) of the genus Caulerpa, and several species
ferns, Sphenopteris and Pecopteris. In addition, an unknown family
until then, that of the Cycads made its appearance. The genus Negerathia, doubt
we found fenils in fairly large numbers (N. expensa), approaching
many of this family. The conifers of this period still belong
to the genera Walehia and Ulmania (U. Brouni). Strasbourg, May 1871. (To be continued). — 3 —

VARIETIES. The following letter, which we are asked to insert in our Fewélle, had been
addressed to the Revue horlicole, the editorial staff of which is suspended today:

CATERPILLAR RAVAGE ON APPLE TREES. “Mr Editor,

The desiderata that you express about Paris exist here as
all over France. We had already seen our apple trees affected last year. The general drought which is spreading even in Germany has allowed the mul-
cation of these Lepidoptera. At some point, all the apple trees have us
appeared as if garrotted with {white they, covering all the leafy parts, then
myriads of microscopic caterpillars devoured all the leaves. Branches, twigs, thrones, resumed the adornment of winter as when the
snow has bleached them. These caterpillars, swollen with all the devoured foliage, descend
they then wore with their silk, while covering the tree with a shroud;
then occupying themselves with their metamorphi 'ysalides, they met
as in a cemetery of mummies aggregated by row and superimposed,
covering again with a new shroud with denser threads. We harvested
several of these nests, in order to know the butterfly author of this plague. One can
touch them with impunity, they have no quills like the nests of the Processes.
missionaries. > What suffering, or better, what disturbance for these apple trees having
to live all the same without leaves and, moreover, buried under a silk lace! However, they come out victorious. Saint-Jean brings new foliage. The second sap soon gives them enough vines to live on. In examination
nating carefully the pupae, we have found an analogy & minima
with those of the hive moth, Galeria cerella, larger, not aggregated. We unfortunately conan this one in a few hives that she
a destroyed, which makes us suppose a very close degree of kinship. We
we therefore believe that the butterfly, author of this scourge, belongs to the family of
Nocturnes, seventh tribe, the Tineites, genus Lithosie, espice Lithosie sieves. What to do against her, scorch her? but how to act on an entire tree
especially when he is big? Poison with tobacco juice? but it would take
like rain from the sky, and yet Lithosia is protected by its
velum. So far we have let it happen, and the scourge has acted; it only stopped when the
foliage has disappeared. Should we stay in idleness? The evil being known, that
Jui oppose? > In spring, when the leaves are developing, after a rain that
would have wet, to drop the flower of sulfur which would thus attach to the
foliage. The toxic property of sulfur on all insects in general would act,
el by immediate and remote contact, by the property that this agent has to shine
& open air. Covering the tree with a sulphurous atmosphere, 1! would act in a way
general on the caterpillars which would be asphyxiated. » We could also produce a fake wetting using gummed water
holding in suspension the flower of sonfre which one would throw on the tree with
Spray can 4 syringe; one could also knock down the flower of sulfur with a
fitted sieve. Puymaurin. D'HERS. »

Here is the response to the letter just read:
“Paris, July 18, 1870. “Dear Sir,
"Today only I have been informed of the name of the insect

— s4 —

that you gave me, last June 30, in the state of a chrysalis. It's I' Zpo-
nomeula signatelia Freits. This name is indicated to me by one of the first
mologists of the Museum 4 who I had given your sample. I would have liked
give you more complete information, and especially to be able to add
to the information you provide to destroy this devastating insect. I cannot, and for good reason which you will easily understand. » Accept, dear Sir and Collaborator, the homage of my best
feelings. » A. CAREER. »

COMMUNICATIONS. fly about a month ago, we had planted, in a garden in Nancy, a dozen
young Ranunculus arvensis. However, almost every morning, we noticed that ''one or the other
of these plants had 6
not possible ¢

  

cut almost flush with the ground, the section of the stem was neat;

 

Vassign 4 an insect or & a mollusc, which would have gnawed the leaves. Suspicions hovered over a medium-sized tortoise, which inhabited the garden; home
He always found the other end of the garden. Finally, the suspicions are changed
when

nt in certainty
a few days ago, in the absence of any other malefactor, the villainous Chelonian was surprised
4 side of the buttercups in question. Thus the poisonous juice of the buttercup does not delfet
on turtles. Fiony. Sesia tepuliformis in Oceania. — According to a communication from M. ereday
European can be found in the New:
seilliers, on which it feeds. throw hope

   

Zande, where it would have been imported with

 

CORRESPONDENCES. ML. A. R., Evreux.— A Gé box stocked For you with Hydrocanthares, there is
a long time ago; but, so far, the upheaval of the railways has prevented
Sending. Will you be sending us an article soon? M.D. — Thank you for your monograph. fH is unfortunate that we
we did not know that of Flér. M., Chdlons-sur-Marne. — You will soon receive a new shipment of molluscs. We wish you good hunting this year. 4M. L., Valenciennes.— We are at your disposal to send lepidoptera from M. M. D.,
qwil sent us to send it to you more safely. We will send you
elsewhere, as soon as it is possible for us; we think you understand the causes
of this delay. None K., Constantine. — Go on and hunt with ardor, and gather, if you can,
insects of all orders. ‘Type. Oberthiir ev son, 4 Rennes. — M:

 

or In Paris, 4, rue Salomon

   

of August 1871. The Number: 25 cents. Do 10. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE:

For France + fr. 3 paran | For foreigners. .. Fr. 4 per year

   

Send the amount in stamps or money order on the post office. We subscribe to M. Eugene Engel, & Dornach; at Mr. Ernest Dollfus, 37, cours Léopold
at Nancy. THE ILYBIUS AROUND EVREUX. These insects, with dark but shiny colors, are of medium size;
the shape of their body is oval, convex above and rather narrowed towards the ex
mile; the short corselet has a slightly rounded posterior edge; | crest is
very small and the patles are quite short. Whole body, when they're in
water, is coated with a kind of oily coating more abundant than in the others
Hydrocanthares, this (ul makes them slip very easily between the fingers when
let them be seized. Moreover, when they feel caught, they push out through the joints.
lations of the head and the bodice a viscous and thick liquor of a white
bluish, with a strong and disagreeable odor which resembles both those
ants and ladybugs. It is obviously a means of defense for them. Around Evreux are found the Ldybius ater, quadrigutialus, fenes-
tratus and fuliginosus. The first three species live in ponds; the
the latter prefers running waters, ditches and basins whose water is
frequently renewed. The T. ater has head and bodice of a glossy dark black; the elytra, likewise
color, are each marked with two small yellow spots very little apparent
rents, the tne elongated, towards the middle of their length and fairly close to the edge
lateral, the other round, almost 4 the extremity. Below the body the color is
black-brown, as on legs and antennae. The length of the body is
13 1/2 millimeters. [I is rare. LI. quadriguttatus is very similar to the preceding; the elytra have a
more coppery in color and their spots are usually more apparent; in
below the body the color is browner. This species, about
41 4/2 millimeters, is much rarer; she likes it in full ponds
Mherbes. LI. fenestratus is 11 1/2 millimeters; the head and the bodice are brown
dark black and copper; the elytra, blacker and also coppery, are bordered
dice of yellowish brown in their first half, and marked with memes
spots than the two preceding species; the antennae, the paltes and the underside
of the body smells dark brown. This species is common in limpid pools and
full of grass, in the middle of the fields and in the forest. The Z. fuliginosus is a little more elongated and less conyex than the preceding ones. The head, corselet and elytra are black or black-brown with a copper tinge;
these, edged with a thin yellow band at the ends; the underside of the body
and the legs are ferruginous; the length of the body does not exceed 10 1/2 mil-

imetres. — 8 —

Most hydrocantharids usually stay at a certain depth
in the water, and hardly come to the surface except to take in air or
to eat. The Ilybii, on the contrary, almost never stay at the bottom of
water, except when being chased or the surface of the water is rough;
they like very much to stand at the edge of the ponds and to walk on the plants
and rubbish 4 half submerged. Very often they even run out of
Yeau on the damp mud, and the search for a prey. They are, in fact, of
extreme speed, as evidenced by a fact that I observed in the vicinity, 4 the
Mare du Coudrai, where the Fenes¢ratus is very common. It is not uncommon for one of
these insects, running in the sun on the moist and warm mud, encounter a
frog ; his palpi indicating to him that he is a succulent prey, he does not hesitate
point & bite his skin with all the strength of his mandibles. Frog,
feeling thus bitten, seeks & to get rid of its enemy; if she is
fat, the thing is easy; but it is not the same if it is small, because
she may jump, dive, get out of the water and rub herself in the grass, she does not
gets rid of his relentless aggressor only by leaving him a piece of skin
or even flesh. The llybius continues 4 to eat what it has removed, even if it
found out of the water. I saw several mutilated frogs, mainly
tadpoles undergoing their last metamorphosis. Ilybius often gorge themselves on food to the point that their abdomen can
exceed the elytra by 3 or & millimetres. In this stall, they are so heavy that
even taking a lot of air under their elytra, they fall to the bottom of
Yeau; speak their gluttony cause death, for, losing almost absolutely
Mare the move, they're having a hard time 4 renewing their supply
I have observed these facts on the Ater and the Fenestratus; the Quadriguttatus must
have the same instincts; as for the Fudiginosus, it often stays on the edge, but
I never noticed that he ventured out of the water, except to fly away;
he eats less greedily than the others. It is very interesting and at the same time very easy to feed these insects;
they are content with a little water, provided there is plenty of grass; if we
gives them a fly, they eat it entirely, leaving only the wings,
the legs and the hardest parts of the thorax. Evreux. A. Reward. TIPS FOR BEGINNERS IN ENTOMOLOGY. After.) I. Hunting beetles. Let's start by indicating the necessary devices for hunting insects. Simpler things are usually the best. — This is one
principle that should not be forgotten. 1° The /iZet is the most important of all these instruments; also we see
all shapes, sizes and prices. After trying
many of these nets, I went back to the simplest: it consists of a
iron rod, strong enough (about 4 millimeters), forming a circle
being a little less than a foot in diameter. The two ends of the circle are
welded & a slightly conical tube, in tin, in which will fit

 

 

— 8? —

an ordinary cane. If the net is to be used for mowing, which is generally
usually the case, a 2 centimeter tin blade will be welded to the rod.
meters in width, intended for scraping weeds, etc. We'll break into this
blade a certain number of holes through which will pass the strong wire which maintains-
dra the bag; without this precaution, the wire will be worn by friction against the
blade, after a few hours of hunting. The bag, in white canvas, must have
a length of 0"50; we will sew a circular bottom of the same fabric; it
should allow water to pass easily. However, for fishing, it is better
have a special net, a little lighter, in solid canvas or canvas leaving
better pass the water, and without a tin blade. It is often embarrassing or disa-
pleasant to hold the net continuously 4 by hand, so we can
make a large pocket in the lining of the suit to hold the nets. One can thus walk through the streets of a city, armed from head to toe, without
that the profanum vulgus suspects that you are an entomologist. 2° Another equally indispensable instrument is the umbrella. We have
invented special umbrellas, 4 folding handle, in white cloth. size
To shelter a patriarchal family; — a device called ¢héren-
thome, quite complicated, and which certainly cannot give any results
conch shells only in a well-appointed shelter. Each of these devices can be
employed with success when hunting in the neighborhood of his dwelling, but
it is still the simplest that must be preferred: the most ordinary umbrella,
With a large curved handle, more solid than elegant, will provide the most service. We
can be worn across the back, tied at both ends with a ribbon,
el, come a shower, it will protect the hunter against the water of the sky. 3° When we have in mind a special place to explore, we can take
a tablecloth, that is to say a piece of canvas of 2 meters on all sides,
which is spread on the ground and on which the surrounding trees are beaten; we have not
more than bending down to pick up. The tablecloth has less use than the umbrella,
which can be used in many places where it cannot be extended. 4° Another very useful instrument, when the locality to be explored is not very
remote, and that we have no town & cross to get there, it is quite a
great friends, whose meshes, formed by intertwined wires, will have
% square millimeters; we will also provide ourselves with a small tablecloth on which we
will sift. If we fear the clutter produced by such a large in:
trument, it can be replaced by a sieve of slightly smaller dimensions,
and whose walls will be made of canvas instead of wood. It will be easy
then put it in the big pocket with the nets. This sieve will be less useful
than the first, but it will still render good service when the other cannot
to be employed. 5° A very solid knife is essential to detach the bark,
dig the ground, etc. ; it replaces the special debarker. 6° We will take a few small test tubes with cork stoppers, enough
solid so as not to break in the pocket, and in which we will put the
delicate or rare insects. 7° It will always be necessary to be provided with a certain number of entomolo-
fine gics, to prick on the spot, in a small oval jotte at the bottom
agave (1) or peat (the pins sink into it better than into cork),
very hairy beetles and especially those covered with dust
yellow often quite thick (Liwus, Larinus, Cleonus, etc.) or scales
delicate (Chlorophanus). 8° A forceps & fine points is necessary to take the small insects,

 

 

   

 

 

       

 

 

(1) These hosts are found at M. Deyrolle's in Paris. - It is easy, moreover, to get away with it.
build yourself. 8R =

those Yui are too delicate to be taken by hand, or who live in the inter-
rocks, stones or bark. You have to choose it with a lot
of care: as well as pliers that meet the desired conditions, provide services
long el varied, so much a bad clamp is useless and vile out of order. It is rare to come across a good instrument of this kind on the first try: it is
The experience that teaches the required qualities. I don't attach too much here
of importance ace choice of a clamp; she must, indeed, always accompany
Ventomologist, and she continually renders valuable services. 9° A good pocket magnifying glass, magnifying objects two to four times,
is still very useful, as well as:

40° A case containing a bottle of liquid ammonia, thanks to which the
Stings from wasps, bees, etc., have no unfortunate consequences. 44° Don't forget to bring pencil and paper, because any good
naturalist must note on the spot his observations concerning the localities and the
mores of the animals he studies. 42° It will no doubt be noticed that I have not yet spoken of the containers
intended to contain insects during the hunt, which constitutes an essential part
sentinel of entomological paraphernalia. This topic requires some development.
lies. The entomologist must always carry with him a very solid glass bottle,
which is generally preferable to tin bottles; when he "goes away
hunting," he will take two or more, of the same size or larger than
the first. These flasks must be 8,444 centimeters in height; they
will have a good cork stopper, which can be pierced to pass a
small glass tube or quill, also a mouth, through which one introduces
will drive away small insects without fear of seeing those who are in the
bottle. But although this has been proposed by a few entomologists, it is not
can leave the bugs as they are in the vial until returned. It is therefore a question of finding a way to put them out of a state of damage, and
it is on this means that entomologists are by no means in agreement. We will throw
large beetles, coprophagous insects, hydrocantharids, and in general
ral large and medium-sized insects, which have neither down nor scales,
nor delicate colors, in a bottle of very strong aleool (spirit of wine). Mr. Le-
prior advises to poison lightly in a snivant way: Put in
a bottle 30 grams of arsenic acid in large pieces, el fill it
alcohol; decant after a few weeks, avoiding causing a
little acid. The amount of acid dissolved in the alcohol is too low to
Toxic glass, and the insects thrown into this alcohol have the advantage of being sheltered
beetles. We can add a hundredth of carbolic acid, the big
naturalist's remedy. Although the operation does not present any danger, it is necessary
proceed with caution, and above all keep the arsenic alcohol and the arsenic acid
out of reach of curious or inquisitive hands. Besides, it poisons-
lies of alcohol! is not essential. How to preserve during the hunt the insects which would be damaged in
Alcohol? Several methods have been proposed, each of which has its advantages and
their drawbacks. Here are the main ones of these methods:

@) We fill a bottle with a wide neck and a cork stopper pierced with a tube,
twists of unglued paper that prevent the crowding of insects and
absorb moisture; the paper is changed 4 at the end of each hunt. So that
insects are not damaged by hatting, they will have to be asphyxiated at the
medium of a few droplets of edher or chloroform, poured with pre-
deposit in the vial. Disadvantages: the etherization must be renewed very
often this liquid evaporating quickly and numbing the insects only
for a limited time; chloroform, which is much more effective and that it suffices to
renew two or three times a day, does not kill all the insects and is

 

  

 

 

 

   

   

 

  
  

 

     

  

   

 

 

 

    

 

  
       

 

— 89 —

at a relatively high price. Finally, when these two substances are used,
it is necessary on the return to kill the insects which are only asleep, which is done in
plunging the uncorked bottle into boiling water until the insects
no longer make any movement. b) The English use a process which has the merit of being very simple. They crumple a few leaves, fresh or dried, of the cherry-lawrier, and
put in a flask: the prussic acid released is enough to kill most
insects, without having any toxic effect on humans. I haven't tried this method yet, but the experience is easy to do:
laurel leaves are found at all druggists. ¢) Many entomologists take sawdust separated from its
coarsest and finest elements by double sieving, then washed
With plenty of water, then dried; they pour into it a considerable amount of bensine.
maple to quickly asphyxiate insects, however insufficient for
soak the sawdust. The downside here is the penetrating smell of gasoline that
you always carry it with you: you reduce it by taking care that the cap closes
hermetically. Another disadvantage: the insects have to be left for several
several hours in the bottle, so as not to expose yourself to seeing them come back to life. - For
avoid having to separate insects that are often almost invisible
and sawdust, you can dig the stub and introduce a soaked tampon
Wa mixture of carbolic acid and benzine. d) A fourth process consists of potassium cyanide. It's a
fairly unstable salt which decomposes gradually and partially, producing
release of prussic acid. I have to take it in white pieces, that it
Care must be taken away from moist air. I use it the following way:
I put a piece of cyanide the size of a hazelnut, wrapped in
lead paper, at the bottom of a cylindrical tin bottle, having 10 centimeters
intres high by 4 1/2 in diameter; the whole is covered with a slice of
very thin cork, fitting as exactly as possible to the walls of the bottle. Thus prepared, it can usually be used for a month or two, provided
that after each hunt we change the twists of unglued paper which we
will have half filled the bottle. The use of cyanide has a disadvantage
serious enough to cause it to be abandoned by almost all entomologists: this
substance is a violent poison, not only when swallowed, but also
when a small amount enters the bloodstream, for example
a cut or scratch. Photographers use it quite often
to get rid of the stains that silver nitrate makes on their hands;
but we have seen poisonings occur in this way, and the mere idea of ​​the risk
that we run is sufficiently disagreeable. I repeat, with the precautions
indicated, there is almost no way that a few patches of cyanide will in—
lroduce in circulation; nevertheless, cyanide proponents will adopt
certainly another effective and convenient method of killing insects without
damaging them — and making them suffer as little as possible. That the young chi-
misles, readers and contributors to the Feuille des Jeunes Naturalistes
put 4 to work: perhaps they will discover the process so dehydrated! I'll put off until next time the indications concerning clean hunting-
said, and I end by recommending once again 4 my colleagues
beginners not to load themselves with useless instruments, and to rely on them-
memes rather than on their devices. E.

0)

OVERVIEW OF THE VEGETATION OF THE PRIMITIVE WORLD. (After.) I]. SECONDARY PERIOD. 1) Veyetalation during the Triassic period. With the Permian Epogne we have closed the series of primary terrains;
secondary period, in which we enter with the Triassic period, opens
again by a sandy formation of great importance: it is the bi-
parked. During this period, the vegetable kingdom underwent a very great development.
ment, but physiognomy has completely changed. We no longer find
no trace of Lepidodendrum or Sigillaria of the coal period, and the
senles ferns still bear enough resemblance to those of this
training; but the number of Equisetaceae increases considerably, and the
phanerogamous plants, in their lowest representatives, the dicoly-
gymnosperm ledones arrive at a very large development. The sandstone bi-
parked Glant a riverside formation, we ponvail, moreover, to expect 4 to find
buried in these deposits are many remains of plants that have been carried
by inland waterways into the sea, where the sandstone was deposited. Unfortunately, we know so far only a few localities that
have been able to provide a sufficient number of fossils to give us an idea of
the physiognomy of the vegetable kingdom during this period. The quarries of Soultz-
les-Bains, near Molsheim (Bas-Rhin), are certainly the best known under
this report: an entire fort was buried in this place and has been preserved for us
with all its flora. Nothing is missing: the footprints of the most
delicate, the fine cut-outs of the ferns, the whole twigs of vonifera
with their catkins, their cones and their seeds, enormous thrones,
wind in a perfect state of conservation, either in the marls which alternate
only with the sandstone, or more rarely in the sandstone itself. We can say that the gr par excellence reigns conifers:
we meet two very particular types whose descendants are above
now exotic and eu are found in only a few localities. Meadow-
mier belongs to the Cupressinaceae family: it is the Araucaricaceae type.
of which a few rare species still live in Chile and New Zealand. tl
is widely represented in the variegated sandstone by the genus Voltzia, of which we con-
nail of many species (Voltsta brevifolia, heterophylla, acutifolia,
tenuifolia, elc.) entire branches converted into leaves and laden with cones,
large trunks of these trees, have been preserved to us, and show that the bearing of the
Voltsia must have looked a lot like that of Arauearia eacelsa de Vile de
Norfolk, conifer grown in our greenhouses as an ornamental plant. The typical autve is an Albiretaceae: it is that of the Damaras which we do not
against that almost exclusively has New Zealand, but which, during the
variegated sandstone period, had many representatives and constitutes the genres
fossils called aidingera and albertia. The characteristic species are:
Haidingera speciosa and Albertia elliptica, latifolia. In addition to the conifers which made up the greater part of the forests of this
period, we find the remains of many beautiful ferns growing
in parsites on the rotten twigs of old trees or in the crevices of
rocks, and even tree ferns. They represent genders. fossils called Neuropteris clegans, Voltzii, polypodioides, Crematopteris
typica, Sphenopteris palnetta el Anomopteris Mongeoti, this large and beautiful

 

 

 

iS$a

 

 

 

 

  

   

      

  
 

    
       

 

   

  

 

   

  

 

  

— ol =

fern that characterizes variegated sandstone so well. You must not forget either
a monocotyledonous plant that has sometimes been found in variegated sandstone
and which is considered to belong to the Yucea family: it is V Yue-
cites vosegiacus, a low-rise tree, branched only at the top with
tufts of leaves like the Yucca. Alongside this forest vegetation, we find traces of numerous
aquatic plants that have developed in the large marshes of this
era. There we also find forms all particular to the family
Equisetaceae continues to play a major role in this vegetation; but
while the tree preles of the coal age were lined with
long branches 4 whorled leaves, those of variegated sandstone already appear
with the sheaths that our Equisetaceae of today have consery espoces
especially of these gigantic meadows meet in this ground: ¢'est I' Lgzé-
seliles arenaceus and \ Lquiseliles Mongeoti. Some scholars have arranged in
this same family of Equisetaceae a very unusual plant that we have
wind joined to the Smilaceae family: it is the Schisonnera paradoxa. Her
stem, which could reach almost a meter high, was divided into several
twigs furnished with leaves which present, for the external form, a cer-
analogy with those of laurels. But-of all marsh plants
of this period, the most remarkable is certainly the famous Athophyllum
speciosum Schimp., a very curious type which unites, in a way, the family
grasses and typhaceae. The superb sample found at
museum of Strasbourg was found & Soultz-les-Bains: it is a stem of a
meter twenty-five centimeters 4 approximately high, being subdivided into five or
six woody branches, each terminated by long floral spikes. Besides this
sample, another much smaller one was found, which may form
a particular species called by Mr. Ad. Brongniard thophyllum stipulare,
and which also belongs to the Strasbourg Museum. 2. § 2. The formation that follows the variegated sandstone is that of the conchylian limestone or Mus-
chelkalk: A vast, shoreless sea has once again erupted into the
earth, burying under its waves the forests and marshes of the preceding period.
toothed. If development lasts in animals, and particularly in molluscs,
Crinoides and Re Nothosaurians was very large in this limpid sea and
shallow, that of the vegetable kingdom was almost nil. We will easily understand
that seaweed alone could have prospered, and still do we not find

seldom see their footprints on the lime. They all belong to the
family Fucoides which arose with the first development of the
organic kingdom. This is the genus Spherociles, of which we will find representatives
smelling in the bituminous shale of the upper Lias which dominates in the
Muschelkalk Sea (Spherocites Blondowskianus Gepp.). Additionally, we
see unicellular algae, & siliceous shell, of the family
diatoms. These algae, which will form during the tertiary period the famous
tripoli of Bilin, in Bohemia, are represented in the conchylian limestone by
the genus Bactryllium (Bacti. canaliculatum). Today, the Diadomees
are found more than in microscopic forms and develop from
preferably in fresh waters. The terrestrial vegetation of this period, as much
that it is possible to judge from the rare plant fossils that have been found there.
countered, should hardly differ from that of the variegated sandstone. Besides large trunks
probably belonging to a great conifer, the Pintles Gappertanus, we
encountered fern footprints (Neuropleris Gaillardoli). Strasbourg, July 4871. P.K. (To be continued.) COMMUNICATIONS. To encourage those of our young subscribers who would like to engage in 4 The study of
hemipterans, but who perhaps recoil before the difficulties of the beginning, M. Meyer-Dir
will compose small collections where the main genera @hémiptares will be represented;
all the species will be determined exactly, and each of them will be represented by
2.44 individuals of impeccable preservation. A box of 100 to 120 species does not exceed
will not pass the price of 20fr., plus 1 fr. for packaging costs, summer. The price will be double for
a double number of species. Mr. Meyer will also prepare beetle collections
(100-400 species), neuroptera and orthoptera; but, for these last classes, the
number of species will be fewer. Preferably contact Mr. Meyer-Dar directly,
4 Burgdorf Switzerland). .

We have received a number of slabs of a kind of peat intended & replaced
advantageously and Ceconomically place the cork. We can give some to our readers
at the price of 2 fr. 50 per dozen, delivered 4 Mulhouse. Write to the editor. There is a remarkable antagonism between rats and scorpions: an observer,
Mr. Horne, having placed some of these animals under a bell jar, noticed that the rat
always put his adversary in a state of defense by seizing him by the tail;
after which he tore off its legs, but never ate it. Bees and mice. — The same naturalist found in India a nest of bees, constructed
in Pint
which had entered a hive, had established itself there, undoubtedly killing the bees, but
eating only the head. Exchanges, — I can offer the Serica brunnea, by scries of 12 individuals, in exchange
. Lancelevée, in Romilly-sur-Andelle, via Pont

   

 

 

game of a mouse nest. Mr. Westwood, from his editor, once observed a mouse

 

against other species of beetles. Saint Pierre (Eure). CORRESPONDENCES. Mr. £, Mr., @ Lunévillle. — All the numbers were sent to you, but you are not
not the only one who did not receive things sent at the end of last July. We sent
the collection this time & your new address. ML. B., & Vesoul. — The requested numbers were sent as soon as they arrived at Nancy. You will find the answer to your questions there. Your comrade would have said to send us his address for the holidays. M.T. V., & Lyon.—Have you received all the issues of the Leaf? If you miss it,
please write. 4M. R.Y., @ St-N. — We hope to receive an article from you shortly. There is
than the first step which costs. MG. H v. R., Hoogenkamp. — We strongly recommend that you start a
collection of insects, It is not so difficult as it seems, and it is very interesting. You
find directions in the Sheet. Erratum. — On page 53 there is an error which everyone will have promptly made
justice. typ. Oberthiir et fils, & Reunes, — Maison & Paris, 4, rue Salomon-de~Caus. 4th and September 1871. The Number: 25 cents. Do 41. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

 

PRICE OF AGONING:

For France. 3 paran | For PBtanger...........- fr. 4 per year

 

Send the amount in stamps or money order on the post office. One subscribes at M. Eugine Engel, in Dornach; at Mr. Ernest Dollfus, 37, cours Léopold,
at Nancy. GEORGES CUVIER. In studying the life of Cuvier, one is seized with a deep respect for this
activity so great and so varied, before these imperishable labors, before this
tireless love of science! What a fine example does he not provide to the gene-
rations present! His life is a great proof of the truth of this saying:
All by work, law of life! Georges Cuvier was born 2 Montbéliard, August 23, 1769, and died in Paris, August 13
May 1832. After completing his classical studies for fourteen years, he was adopted by
I owed Charles of Wurtemberg, who placed him in the Academy of Stuttgart. We
let us quote from that time his zoological diary which he composed alone during his
recreation hours. From 1788-1795 we see him in Normandy comine pre-
receiver. Father Tessier brought him out of this retreat by recommending to
luminaries of science at the time. Arrived in Paris, he soon obtained front seats.
taggers; he makes himself known; we loved him, and little by little he came to this empire
intellectual that he kept for nearly forty years. (For more details on
his life, see the works of MM. Laurillard, Bourdon, Flourens, Goguel, of
M*° Sarali Lee, etc.) All of Cuvier's work can be divided into five groups: 1) zoolo-
eig; 2) comparative anatomy; 3) fossil bones; 4) history of science
natural; 5) eulogies, speeches, reports, ete. Zoo.ociz. — One remembers the class of Linnaeus's verses. In a memoir
(1795), Cuvier separates the white-blooded animals that made it up into six large
classes. The already show his elevated views on the subordination of characters. Then come studies on molluscs, zoophytes, nutrition
insects, the circulatory system of worms, etc. All these works are based
in one: The animal kingdom distributed according to its organization (1817). It's here
that by means of the method he coordinated all his discoveries. It is 1a that he
founded these divisions so clear that we still follow today. But for Cuvier,
the system was not complete; he would have liked to describe all the species. For
give a model of! application of this system, he undertook natural history
fishes. Bloch and Lacépéde had 1400 species. Cuvieren described up to 5000. Unfortunately he did not complete this work: his pupil, M. Valencienne, the
continued. What is most remarkable in this book is the application
Cuvier's high principles on the classification of animals. COMPARED ATOMY.—Pending his death, Cuvier meditated on a great work
He collected all the results of his comparative anatomy studies. This ou-
sorry, he couldn't compose it. But he left us however on this matter
a large number of memoirs, and especially his lessons, collected by Duméril. — 94 —

We know that Aristole founded this science, that Perranel, Daubenton, Haller, Vieq
of Azir, etc., carried it & a fairly high degree of development. Facts
were Cuvier coordinated them and brought out the laws of organization. The discovery of these laws is the glory of Cuvier. This is how he perfected
The theory of the formation of the teeth, which he made known the organ of the voice
of birds, the metamorphoses of frogs, the relationship of the brain with
Intelligence, etc. PALEonTOLOGY.— But Cuvier's greatest discovery is this science
so beautiful and so fruitful. Bernard Palissy had foreseen it: the modest potter
died at the stain. In the seventeenth century this study made surprising progress. Cuvier was to give him the coronation. His most brilliant discovery
is that of the fossil bones of quadrupeds. Nothing more interesting than
The story of the laborious research of so many scholars to arrive at this
solution which the man of genius was the first to find and which he exposed, in
of the year IV, in these words: "These species, they all belonged to beings
of a world prior to ours, has beings destroyed by some revolution
of the globe, 4 of the beings of which those who exist today have filled the place. »
With the help of the laws that comparative anatomy gives him, he determines these bones:
he makes the history of these three populations of the globe. All these results are
recorded in a large number of memoirs and in works entitled:
Research on fossil bones (1812-1825) and Discourse on the
changes on the surface of the globe (1825). IIiSTORY OF NATURAL SCI. — The lessons of Cuvier are a
magnificent study on the workings of the human mind in the sciences. Over there,
the history of man went hand in hand with that of things. The philosophy
figure prominently in these lessons. Cuvier wanted to fight philo-
german nature sophie. Several memoirs are devoted to the refutation
of the theory of unity of composition applied to the forms of organized beings
or derivation as from a single type. He did not admit the scale of
beings. The theory for him came after the fact. It was he who said, "We must
consider the edifice of the sciences as that of nature: everything there is infinite,
but everything is necessary

Let us mention, finally, his Gloges of the members of the Academy of Sciences, in the
number 39, where the qualities of style are especially noticeable; its many
academic speeches; finally, his administrative reports, where the great naturalist
also proves to be a great administrator. I will not add any comments 4 this table informs too much of the work of
Cellar; he speaks enough of himself. I will only add a delay: the science of
Cuvier did not lead him to materialism; on the contrary, the more he Gludiated
the laws of nature, the more he discovered there their Author! It's clear proof.
well understood science is a powerful testimony to the existence

the God. A.C.

TIPS FOR BEGINNERS IN ENTOMOLOGY. 1. Hunting beetles. (After.) To be properly treated, this subject would require entire volumes;

I will content myself with giving here the most useful indications for entomo-
the inexperienced lodges to whom these lines are addressed. Nothing is more true

— 9 —

than the kind of axiom: one can hunt always and everywhere; still need to know
how to find insects, and I assure you that this is not
always easy. It takes a lot of experience, patience and skill to
to arrive & a somewhat complete knowledge of the localities and dwellings of such
or suchinsect. Only, each time we go hunting, you have to remember
that by looking well one will always find something, and that only the entomo-
a superficial and careless logist may return home empty-handed. You can hunt in any season, but the months of April, May, June, September
and October are the most favorable. Every month, moreover, has its kind of hunt
particular. In the heart of winter, in December, January and February, there is often
beautiful days that must be put to good use: we will then find under the bark,
dry leaves and rubbish, at the edge of the skin and in inhabited places,
in the earth formed of organic matter at the foot of the trees, many
insects which thus spend the winter in colonies 4 sheltered from the cold. It is true that in
proportion to what is brought back, these winter hunts are rather painful,
but it may happen that you come across the nest of an insect that you can only find by
isolated individuals the rest of the year. Moreover, as the temperature does not have
hardly 4 a long station at the meine place, you can carry in a bag
or a box the scrapings of bark, the detritus, the compost, after having noted
that there are more or less insects there; 4 the house we can make a subscription
dante harvests as conveniently as possible by placing the detritus in portions
on paper. — Another very easy hunt which often yields enough
good results, is that of the insects which, in autumn, in spring and the beautiful
winter days, are found on the exterior walls of houses. During
several years, I was doing my rounds several times a week, and I
thus grows a great variety of insects of all orders. We can find-
worm in this locality a good number of Cogonocherus dentatus, one of our
smaller beetles, which are rarely found elsewhere. From February, but especially in March and April, nature wakes up. It is then that you have to look for the detritus of the rivers, streams and
ponds. As for this easy and extremely successful hunt, I
refers 4 to what was said in the Fewille, p. 57. We must not neglect to trim
to surround the trees, to search the grass at their base, to lift and sift the moss,
to carefully turn over all the stones, to beat above the tablecloth or the
umbrella the withered reeds and fagots that have spent the winter in the woods. One will thus find a large quantity of insects which hardly appear until the
spring. In May and June, you have to take advantage of every free moment to hunt: it is
Well really then find beetles everywhere, and everywhere different. It's time to mow the meadows, the clearings, all the low plants;
Each dragnet we catch Chrysomelids, Charencons, Longhorn beetles,
Scarabs and Click beetles in quantity, You also have to beat above the umbrella
the various trees on the edges of the woods, in the clearings, the hedges, etc. The pines or firs are very good in April and May. Cut tree trunks
(oaks, beeches, pines, etc. ), are sometimes covered with longhorn beetles and bupres-
tides with dazzling colors, which the ardent rays of the sun bring to bloom in
crowd. It takes agility to catch these splendid soaring insects
with remarkable ease. At the water's edge, when the swamps are 4 halves
desiccated, one will find a large number of Staphylins, Carabids and even
Hydrocanthares taking refuge in the mud at the bottom of the stems of reeds and plants
amphibians that grow in these marshes. In the evening, while mowing the clover trees and
the edges of the wood, we take a certain number of species of Colon, Catops,
Ainphimallus, Odonteus, Serica, and sometimes the rare Bolboceras unicornis. Hold your eyes wide open and you will see a crowd of beetles

 

 

 

— 9% —

would probably fall neither into the net nor into the umbrella: such are the
Cerambyx, Saperda, Buprestes and stag beetles on trees, Buprestes, Seara-
beids and Longhorn beetles on a large number of flowers, umbelliferae, yarrow,
Chrysanthemum leucanthenrum and other composites, buttercups, onions,
spirea, etc. On the plain, you will no longer find anything under the stones, but in the
mountains, by turning over the flat stones which are not deeply sunk in the ground,
along the banks of watercourses, in the parched beds of torrents, wherever there is still
a little humidity, on the moraines of glaciers, one will find throughout
year of very good species of Carabids. Don't be discouraged if you
find nothing at first: often you have to demolish veritable heaps of
stones, or lift a large number of them before discovering the true locality;
but then you will be rewarded for your efforts by seeing running in all directions
Carabus, Cyinindis, Nebria, Bembidiwm, etc. Wherever there are
sandy rains, on the beaches of the sea, the edges of the rivers, the roads, the
mountains, we see the beautiful and voracious Cicindeles flying rapidly and the cuirass
of a green bean crossed by bands or whitish spots. is one of the in-
sects that the beginner always takes with the most pleasure, and I have a memory
very pleasant of a certain arid terrain Gérardmer, theater of my first
tiger beetle hunts. At the edge of the water, on the reeds, irises and other plants
aquatic, or in their sheathing petioles, one will find many species
of the charming kind Donacia. In July and August, some species are still found, but these two months. are mostly a rest interval between spring generations
and fall. The small Cicindela germanica, \res-¢elegant and quite rare. Fly
in the bright sun in the wheat fields after the harvest. In August and September, we
makes fall in the umbrella, beating the ivy that smothers the old walls,
several rare and curienses species: Sitaris, Mniophila, Lamprosoma. The
old trees & half rotten: willows, oaks, beeches, poplars, are sometimes
excellent localities where one takes large beetles often very rare. Beetles Abound in Water: Times of Fishing
are the months of September and October, and the first spring. The localities
more fruitful are ponds, pools and streams stocked with plants
aquatic areas that must be searched with the net to draw many Hydrocan-
thares great and small. In running waters, Blnis and Macronychus
hold fixed by the tarsus to plants and stones, The genus Hemonia, which
counts six species today, has very curious measurities: this insect inhabits
the roots of Potamogeton and Myriophyllum, in brownish shells. We
found from May until October, but its habitat makes it quite difficult
to discover, since it is necessary to pull the plants from the water with their roots to
see the insect. Another very singular aquatic insect, 'Orectochilus
villosus, has nocturnal dies, and takes refuge during the day under stones or
pieces of wood at the edge of certain lakes, streams or ponds; he is very-
difficult & to grasp, because as soon as you lift the stone it rushes into the water. This insect belongs to the Gyrinidae family, these agile little beasts,
similar 4 silver beads, to which their evolutions have given the
Tourniquets name. The autumn hunt par excellence is the Cryptophage hunt. We
collect all mushrooms, lycoperdons, boletes, agaris, fungus barks,
old pieces of wood 4 half rotten, put in sacks and peel-
che at home the debris and the mushrooms which cannot be preserved. As for woody mushrooms and dead branches, we put them in
closed jars: we sometimes see insects coming out of them from time to time
very rare. One can even put in a room blocks of wood appearing
contain beetle larvae; it is sometimes a way of taking into account

 

 

  

    

 

 

     
 

    

    

   
   

         

  

 

   

O70

number of very rare insects in collections, such as Anthawia
candens, buprestide of which a dozen individuals were found in a block of
pranier from Wasselonne. Next month I will complete the indication of the entomological localities
more interesting. r

FLIGHT IN BIRDS. After.) I.

Thus, the act of theft is made up of two quite distinct periods, that of abais
ment and that of raising the wing. The first is only active, because it is
while the bird, with its descending wing stroke, leans on the air and launches
in the space ; the second period, essentially passive, is used to return to
wings the initial position which allows them to lower again, el, as
we have seen, this second movement takes place under the most favorable conditions.
rable so that the speed of translation acquired is impeded as little as possible

But how does loisean steer in his flight? how does he manage to
raise vertically, to advance in a horizontal or oblique line, then again
to go sometimes to the right, sometimes to the left, according to his will? We don't
we will not go into very scientific developments here, we will not speak
not the parallelogram of forces, etc., which would no longer fit within the framework
a short summary; but those interested in the subject in its details would
good to read the remarkable works of M. Marey, which have been published in the
Review of science courses. We will therefore content ourselves with saying that the management
The more or less oblique position of the flight depends almost entirely on the inclination
(in the direction of their width) of the wings when they strike the air: when I'oi-
bucket will want to rise vertically, they will have to be completely horizontal.
zontal. The relative length of the flight feathers greatly influences the ease with which
which birds can rise in this way in calm air; thus,
the most suitable for this kind of flight are those whose wings are truncated at the end,
as for example the eagles, the sparrowhawks; those with long feathers
and resistant 4 their extremity can only rise in zigzag or by flying
against the wind. To advance horizontally, if we disregard the
gravitation, the bird should, when striking the air, hold its wings vertically;
but let us not forget that gravity tends to make it descend; also the blow
wings, instead of being given with a vertical inclination, should be slightly
oblique so that the tendency to descend is neutralized by this movement
slightly uphill. Quant 4 an intermediate direction between the two
previous ones, it will be obtained by an intermediate position of the wings. 1] we
stay & see how the bird directs its flight 4 left or 4 right:
it is by means of its tail, as well as its wings, that it obtains these changes.
movements of direction: the fact will compare very well with the different movements
that the rower is obliged to execute to move on the water: thus, the wings
of the bird will be the oars, the tail the rudder. What will the rower do for
make his boat deviate in the direction of the left, for example? I will give asa
right row much more energetic impulses than the other, and, helping each other
more rudder that he will tilt left 4 right, he will do it immediately
turn in the desired direction. Likewise, the bird, depending on the side of it wants to
steer, will strike the air more violently with one of its wings at the same time

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

 

 

 

=or=

that it will deploy and incline its rectrices in the favorable direction, making
thus playing the role of rudder with its tail. Do not neglect! 'importance
what the tail generally has for the bird: besides helping to direct it, it
is very useful in horizontal flight by the support it offers when
is deployed. In the plane it is she who, by her large surface joined to that
wings, helps a lot to support some birds in the air, often
long enough, without seeming to make the slightest movement. For a bird to be a good sailor, it will have to join 4 a great power
wing muscles very large compared to the volume of its body,
this is obvious; the bird with small wings will not only advance more slowly,
by this fact that the resistance surface of the air is smaller, but still it is
will tire more quickly and sustain less time in the air, because
its wing beats will have to be repeated much more often. Thus, we have
the condor and the frigate, two quintessential examples of powerful flight. the
first does not measure less than four meters in wingspan: it usually chooses
recently his residence has an elevation of three hundred thousand meters; he is not
rare to see it hover & heights of more than seven thousand meters above
from the level of the sea, and to swoop down in the plain on some troop of
sheep, one of which he will carry in his greenhouses to his inaccessible retreat. As for the frigates, they have such powerful flight that they can fly away from
land at distances of more than four hundred leagues; their wings, relatively
a their size, are even longer than those of the condor. Moueltes, by the way
of Hans Sloane, in Barbados, go in troops more than two hundred miles from
distance and return the same day. Buifon tells us about the king's falcon
Henri Ul who, having lost his temper after a canepetière & Fontainebleau, was taken
next day at Malta, and recognized by the ring he wore; of the Canary falcon,
sent to the Duke of Lorme, who returned from Andalonsia & City of Teneriffe in sixteen
hours, which makes a journey of two hundred and fifty leagues. G. Weiss. OVERVIEW OF THE VEGETATION OF THE PRIMITIVE WORLD. (After.) § 3. With the formation of Keuper or iridescent marls, the physiognomy of the
land surface has changed little since the variegated sandstone, although it has been uplifted
considerable limestone deposits formed by the Muschelkalk: it was a country
flat and marshy, devoid of mountains and even hills, and dotted
large laes which, on drying out, gave rise to deposits of rock salt
exploited in this area. It is in the lowlands often invaded by water
and ol! reigned a humid and warm atmosphere, which developed the vegetation
tion of the Keuper. We find traces of it especially in the sandstones which, in
certain localities and particularly around Stuttgart, form the
upper part of this ground, and in which more than sixty
characteristic species. The dominant family throughout this period is still that
of the Equisetaceae, of which a representative, the Calamites arenaceus, formed
alone in entire forests: it was a very graceful tree, whose fluted trunk
rose to a certain height without growing branches, and portal 4 its
summit a large cupola of light and drooping branches, furnished with
whorled leaves like those of the coal period. 499) —

A pretty climbing plant from the exotic Smilaceae family, the Preisleria
antiqua, established on the throne of these trees its stems with elliptical leaves,
portwes on long petioles, and the fruits of which formed clusters of small
berries. In addition, several ferns must have populated the soil of these forests; among
the most characteristic, I will cite: Lepidopteris Kurrii, Dancopsis maran-
thacea, Pecopteris Stuttgartensis, etc. But what characterizes Keuper stoneware more particularly is the development
development of a family of gymnosperm dicots, close to conifers,
and of which a few rare representatives have already been found in variegated sandstone
it is of the family of the cycads that I want to speak. These plants, which
maintained to the present day, are characterized by a short and gnarled trunk
reminiscent of the creations of the primitive world, while their elegant tuft
of pinnate leaves announces the palms of future formations. Most
Keuper cycads have been referred to the genus Peerophylium which presents
several characteristic species (Plerophyllum Jegeri), the essential terrain
tially swampy had an entirely different character: two types
undermine. The first is still an Equisetaceae of the genus Hquisetites. It was
a gigantic horsetail with membranous sheaths, and whose long columnar stem
portal of elongated and scaly fruits quite similar to those of our horsetails
Wavjourd'hoi (Equisetites columnaris). The other type, Palaoxyris, is a
species of reed which must have reached the height of a man and which we meet
already in variegated sandstone, although more frequently in Je Keuper. § 4. The Rhaetian formation and the infra-liasic sandstone. Before entering the series of Jurassic lands, it is necessary to stop a
moment on a very interesting formation which was reported by geologists
sometimes to the upper ages of the Triassic, sometimes to the lower Lias: it is the
Rhaetian formation which is particularly developed in Franconia,
around Bamberg and especially Bayreuth, where it contains a very
large number of fossil plants which, in certain localities, gave rise
has piles of coal considerable enough to be exploited. The Gymnosperms, and especially the Cycads, seem to have formed
the distinctive character. This family, which made its appearance already with the period
coal (Cordaites, Neeggerathia, Trigonocarpon, elc. ), and which was
cloud during the Permian period, variegated sandstone and iridescent marl,
reach the maximum of its development with the Jurassic period and
will not stand alone with conifers for the duration of this period. To the side
of the genus Pterophyllum which characterizes the variegated sandstone and the Keuper sandstone
(Plerophyllum Jeegeri), it is necessary to place the genus Zamites, particularly
unique to Jurassic terrain. The most frequently encountered species
ment in the Rhaetian beds is |'Olosanites brevifolius. Among the coni-
fores, note the Palyssia Braimii, which belongs to the Cupressinaceae,
and an Alretaceae, Piniles microstachys. The ferns of the Rhaetian Formation belong largely to the
fossil orders of the Teniopteridae and the Dictyopteridae which, until now,
had few representatives. They are very rich in genres and in
species ; among the most characteristic, I will cite: Angiopteridium, Miin-
steri, Dictyophyllum acutilabrum, Sagenopteris rhoifolia, Thaumatopteris
Miinsteri, Clathropteris platyphylla and Camptopteris quercifolia. order
of the Sphenopteridae, however, offers us some species, less frequent
it is true (Sphenopteris Reessertiana, Coniopteris Braunii), and the Pécoptes-
wrinkled complete one of the largest and most beautiful ferns of this

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

— 100 —

formation, Pecopteris (Alethopteris) Reesserti, Genus Nilssonia, ranked by
M. Brongniart in the Cycadées, remained there until recently,
but we have since discovered its fruiting bodies which seem to him
assign its true place among the ferns of the order Newropteridae. Two Nilssonia, V. polynorpha and N. acuminata, are characteristic for
the Rhaetian formation. To close this rapid examination of the fossil plants of
the Rhaetian formation, we must also name an Equisetaceae, Lquisctum
aliinsteri, and a Rhisocarp of the Marcileaceae family, Seanpaulia
Miinsteriana. (To be continued.) Pp. XK. COMMUNICATIONS. I recently saw, in a town in the west of France, a living Helix hortensis
and of a prodigious size, She was, indeed, 60 mm. of anteroposterior diameter. The height of the shell was 52 millim. The crawling animal was 14 centimeters tall.
long, and its weight with the shell Gwas 63 grams. Quant & Lage of this mollusk,
he was 12,415 years old,

Helixes are known to overwinter at a very shallow depth underground and only rarely
they freeze, although the ground is deeply frozen. Why do Helixes freeze
always when the hand of "man buries them 4 a depth twenty or thirty times more
considerable ? The cannibal. — Recently, I surprised a Malachius bipustulatus, a small beetle of
the Malacoderm family, devouring one of its cousins, Malachius marginalis,
much smaller than him, the head had gone madly, and he was getting ready
& continue its feast holding its victim tightly between its paws, when it was interrupted
by the observer. TRADES. M.Th. Lancelevée (at the Romilly forges, via Pont-Saint-Pierre, Eure), would like
exchange for Carabus coelatus, nodulosus, cancellatus; Lina vigintipunctata, Cleonus
marmoratus, Bolboceras unicornis, Outhophagus camelus, the following species: Serica
brunnea (in sets of 12), Cicindela germanica (in sets of 10). ), Bolbo-
ceras mobilicornis (depending on the species offered in exchange), Omophron limbatum (1 ex. ),
Carabus auronitens (2 ex.) and C. intricatus (2 ex.). ‘Type. Oberthitr and sons, 2 Reanes. — Maison & Paris, rue Salomon-de-Caus, 4.

ter October 1871. The Number: 25 cents. Do 42. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

 

 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE:

For France......0e00005 fr. 3per year | For PEtranger.. fr. 4 per year

 

Send the amount in stamps or money order on the post office. We subscribe to M. Eugene Engel, & Dornach; at Mr. Ernest Dollfus, 37, cours Léopold,
at Nancy. TO OUR SUBSCRIBERS,

With this number ends the first year of the Fewille, founded in the middle
of general peace, it had to pass through a period that was sinister for all. What-
that it seems to have to disappear as a result of the war and its consequences
disastrous, we believed it our duty to continue a publication whose
The utility could always be the same. Therefore, in the midst of difficulties
of all kinds, the Leaf continued & appeared, less regularly it is true
than we would have liked, but we are convinced that our readers will
will take into consideration all the embarrassments against which we have had to struggle. We had the hope, at the beginning of the year 1870, of being able to give
each month 12 or 16 pages, perhaps even a few engravings: but the war
cut short & all these ambitious projects, by interrupting the work of our
collaborators and sending new subscriptions. It will be easy to understand the reasons which lead us to transport the writing
& Paris. Mr. Weiss has agreed to be our correspondent for
Alsace, and we hope that our Alsatian subscribers will keep
this link which also binds them to France. TJ remains with us & sincerely thank for their support all the people who
are interested & the Leaf, and To ask all our readers to contribute

with us A Ja spread and 4 improve it during the coming year. WRITING. — 102 —

ON THE ROLE OF IRON IN VEGETATION. It is only for thirty years that we have recognized the importance
iron in vegetation. At the time of de Candolle, we did not have
say no data on the effects produced by this metal in plants
Has chlorophyll. It is to the year 1843 that the experiments which served
& establish the necessary presence of iron in plants. It was Eusebe Gris
who paved the way for physiologists by the numerous experiments of which he
recorded the results in two works entitled: De U’actzon des compounds
soluble ferrugins on the vegetation. — New experiences on the job
soluble ferrugins. Although we have not yet been able to discover, by means of the analysis
chemical, a trace of this metal in the tissue of the leaves, it is nonetheless
true that iron, although diffused in small quantities in the tissues, plays a
most important roles in plant life. It is his presence, indeed,
what is due to the green matter of the leaves: chlorophyll which, as we know,
is essential for assimilation. Experience shows that if we subtract
iron salts, the leaves have an appearance similar to that observed
in autumn in most plants, that is to say that the green color
is replaced by a pale yellow hue. The green granules of chlorophyll
are disappearing, and it is for this reason that plants devoid of iron soon
not to perish, since, devoid of chlorophyll, they are incapable of
milate the carbon coming from the decomposition of the carbonia acid ues absorbed
by the leaves under the influence of the sun's rays. This state of the leaves constitutes
so for plants that lack iron a real disease called chlorosis,
which offers a certain analogy with that which affects man. In the latter,
chlorosis, resulting from the lack or too small quantities of iron,
characterized by the hairiness of the face, by a weakness sometimes so great, that it
causes death if not cured by the use of an iron salt,
which restores the complexion to its normal color and restores vigor to the organs. We can make chlorosis disappear in plants and make the color green
to the leaves affected by this disease, as was first shown
E. Gris, by making them absorb a solution of an iron salt, either by the
roots or by the leaves themselves. However, we cannot carry a remedy
ala chlorosis as long as the leaves have not suffered too great a change. Later, Salm Horstmar put an end to the chlorosis, by submitting plants (rapeseed,
oats) 4 the action of ferric salts; and Sachs made green in the space of two
or three days of chlorotic corn, by transporting this plant in a solution
sulphate, chloride or phosphate of iron. The same scientist showed that one
can artificially produce chlorosis, by causing germs to vegetate in
sample solutions of iron, but containing the other nutritious principles
indispensable, such as nitrate of potash and phosphate of lime, etc. Resulted in leaves, the first of which were completely green,
but whose following ones were only green at the top, then completely
white. The green matter that we notice in the first leaves comes,
in this case, from a small quantity of iron contained in the seed; and that's only
when the supply of this element is entirely exhausted, the leaves
take on a whitish tint. Iron therefore has a great influence on the greening of the leaves; moreover,
there is no metal capable of replacing it, as MM. Laugh and
Sachs by the many experiments they made with manganese and
nickel. But if the green matter is due to iron, does this metal enter for that,
as claimed by Verdeil, in the composition of chlorophyll, or else

 

    

 

 

— 103 —

is it] used to develop this substance? So far chemical analysis has not been able
discover the trace of iron in chlorophyll. It was Arthur Gris who studied the phenomenon that takes place in the fabric of
fenillae chlorotic and made green by means of an iron salt. This scientist examined
undermined under the microscope the transformations undergone by the protoplasm of plants
chlorotic, when subjected to the action of green vitriol. According to observations
tion quwil fit on the Digitalis micrantha and Glycine chinensis, the proioplasma
in chlorosis is similar to a yellowish, granular jelly, which takes on
of green corpuscles, when it has undergone the influence of iron. His observations have
led & conclude that "chlorosis is characterized by an arrest of development
which prevents the complete evolution of the chlorophyll grains, and that the salts
of iron act, by making 4 chlorophyll the faculty to develop. »

Iron, as we see, is necessary for the development of chlorophyll;
but nevertheless it can only act with the aid of light; because if Pon
have vegetated germs in mixtures which contain iron, but put &
Sheltered from the sun's rays, the germs will take on a yellowish tint as if they
lacked iron, and will only turn green again when exposed to the light of the
sun, whose various rays act in a different way on the greenery.
sow. What is remarkable is that the more the quantity of iron absorbed by the
plants (assuming they are exposed to adequate light)
is considerable, the more the granules of chlorophyll are numerous and the more the color
their leaf green is dark. It is for this reason that the plants which
freeze in a soil where iron abounds have a higher degree of green tint
dark. This phenomenon is particularly noticeable in the vicinity of the iron mines. More than once I have admired 4 Framont, in the Vosges, the magnificent greenery
plants located at the edge of the rui whose ferruginous water leaves
iron oxide. More than once I have observed in the vicinity of the mines of this town
lage the beautiful green tint of the flared leaves of Adenostyles albifrons, which, because
of their width, especially attract the attention of those who examine the vegetation
from this country. Iron is therefore one of the metals which, without a doubt, plays the greatest role
in plant life. Contributing to the development of the green matter of
leaves, it makes plants 4 chlorophyll capable of assimilating carbon,
essential element of plant nutrition. tunnel. A. LEMAIRE. NOTES ON HUNTING SERICA BRUNNEA AND BOLBOCERAS
MOBILICORNIS (Opont-xus). I had the opportunity, in June, to capture a large quantity of Serica brunnea,
nocturnal beetle, in a way that offers enough interest to be communicated
to beetles. The Serica brunnea comes out of its retreat in the evening around half past eight. He ... not
can sustain long-duration flight and rests frequently on the lines
Wherb; it is then only a question of arming oneself with a lantern and inspecting the grass &
The place where we suspect its presence: the insect, stunned by the unexpected arrival
light, can be grasped with the fingers and, in this way, I was assured
abundant harvest in minutes. Due to its slow flight, the Serica brunnea cannot undertake
long journeys, so I have concluded from this that it emigrates little, that it reproduces
within a small radius, and that he no longer abandons this lair as long as he
finds there the element necessary for its life and especially for that of its larvae. *

 

 

— 104 —

I found my insect & profusion in a low island, having about a
hectare of surface; beyond this island I met him only very rarely. I have made this important remark that all good species of herbs
fodder of this island disappear little by little, destroyed without pain by the
Serica larvae, to make room for 4! 'Ulmaire and Water Mint, which
will necessarily bring in a more or less long time, the change of stay
of Serica. ' Suse also of another means of hunting almost analogous to the first, and which
gave me the pleasure of taking in the same place the Bolboceras mobilicornis,
flying in concert with the Serica. This method, well known to Lepidopterophiles,
consists of spreading a tablecloth on the grass and placing lanterns at the four
corners to attract my beetles; sitting quietly next to my device,
I await their arrival, and my net does the rest. The flight of the Bolboceras only took place from half past eight to nine o'clock,
And still it needed clear and warm weather, otherwise he remained huddled in the
ot holes: he hides during the day, and I did not see a single subject of this
that's why I took a lot more males than females. Romilly-sur-Andelle. VERY LAUNCHED. We took Serica brunnea in isolated individuals, with S. holoserica
in large quantities and very fresh, by sifting tufts of thyme between the
roots from which they dwell. They are insects about a centimeter long.
ron, almost cylindrical in shape, of a light brown or a velvety black bruo,
belonging to the Scarabaeians (group of cockchafers, celoines, etc.). no

   

TIPS FOR BEGINNERS IN ENTOMOLOGY. I. Hunting beetles. After.) Before ending this chapter, it remains for me to say a word about a few localities.
which contain species, often even genera of insects quite par-
particular. Nobody knows that insects, and especially beetles, must
to be ranked among the most energetic agents of public health; we
notice this less in our ized countries where, in general, all the pre-
guarantees are taken to make disappear what could give rise to &
t epidemics or other diseases (of which one, so terrible, is called in the
everyday language; Ze chavbon); but in the eastern and southern countries, where the
corruption is quicker, where precautions are less great, insects
appear as a true blessing of Providence, and the ancient Egyptians
links may not have been wrong in placing the Sacred Scarab among the
animals they worshiped because of their usefulness. I just have to see, even in
temperate, the truly feverish activity with which the scavengers
housiers make disappear all the matters which could spread in
the air of healthy germs, to convince oneself of the immense service which they
tooth & Phumanity. However, the hunting entomologist does not stop
such considerations, and, for my chapter to be complete, I will find myself forced
Went into some details for which I apologize & my readers
hon entomologists. Of all matter putrescible or in the process of corruption
lion, the coleopterist must not neglect any, 4 less however than their state
of too advanced putrefaction does not make hunting impossible or even dangerous,

    

 

   

    

   

 

 

 

 

    

   

 
    

— 10 —

which is the case for medium or large animals, such as dogs,
sheep, horses, etc. As for the little corpses, rabbits, rats, mice, moles,
frogs, toads, etc., the danger is practically nil, provided one
prevents flies that have been in contact with the object from staying on the
hands or face. When these animals are already completely dry, they must be
shake in the net or on the tablecloth. We will thus take a large quantity
scavenger insects: Necrophorus, Silpha, Staphylins, Thisteridae, Catops,
Trox, etc., which it is necessary, especially at the beginning, to take without distinction and to throw into
alcohol. We take in particular in the Vosges, under the dead fish in the
edge of the torrents, as well as under the foam which covers the rocks, the rare and
beautiful Carabus nodulosus, with black, strongly bumpy elytra. - Some
entomologists go even further: they establish a sort of mass grave, where
they pile up small corpses, bones, mushrooms, soaked bread
in the fat: the medium is good and must provide many good species,
but I believe it would be well not to employ it in the neighborhood of a resident.
tation. In any case, the same inconvenience is not encountered in the excavations,
both unpleasant and productive, which the entomologist cannot do without
to do in dung, dung, farmyard manure and even soil
a few centimeters below and around dung and small corpses. He will thus take a host of coprophages quite different from necrophages. ; his
hunts will consist of Spheridium, Staphylines, Thisterides, Geotrupes,
Copris, Onthophagus and Aphodius. Among the latter, which have more than
50 species in Alsace alone, there are many species that look alike
first first; it is therefore necessary to take at least a few individuals from each
locality where it is found. Finally, do not neglect to examine the soil,
layers, decomposing plants, tan; we can find the
large and singular Oryctes nasicornis (rhinoceros), as well as other insects. It goes without saying that all these insects are caught with the forceps. I can't wait to move on to a more pleasant and interesting subject. I will say
a few words about a very special hunt, to which I will perhaps return.
be a day longer. I want to talk about my beetle hunting
mecophiles, or hunting in anthills. A relatively short time ago,
forty years at most, that entomologists began to study
beetles that live with ants; today we discovered
several hundred species of myrmecophiles, and we still discover
each day. It is 4 Mr. Merkel that are due the most patient research
and the most interesting about these insects. Among these beetles, which
belong mainly to the families Staphylinidae, Pselaphians and Histeridae,
and who generally take up residence with a particular species of four-
put, some are employed by the little republicans as milk cows,
the Clavigers for example; others, helpless themselves, find shelter
and protection in the anthill; others, finally, such as the Myrmédonia
(Staphylins), are terrible enemies for the poor ants they devour,
when they can. There are two ways to take these beetles, but,
above all, that we arm ourselves with a good dose of patience, because some
miliéres often contain thousands of hosts, can that a nearby anthill
does not contain a single one. What is it? I do not know. We use the most
often a heroic means: we dig down to the heart of the anthill,
betting, in a sieve closed at the top, fear of flooding, and on a
sheet, the whole anthill by successive shovelfuls; we will find the most
of beetles in the central region of the cdne, meadows of Ja land, Only, i
Vai dit, this means is heroic: first, we destroy from top to bottom this
admirable work — an anthill; then, despite all the precantations, we,
exposes himself to being stung or at least really inconvenienced by the acid for-

 

  

 

 

 

— 106 —

mic released in large quantities by the exasperated inhabitants. I prefer it
following method: We place in the anthill and around it a certain number
planks and flat and porous stones that we visit as often as possible;
On the underside almost always adherent myrmecophiles in addition or
less number. You can also sift the leaves around
from the anthill, and one will thus find the Staphyline brigands who watch for the
ants On their return, All ants have their myrmecophiles, those which
skilful under the bark, under the stones, in the branches, like those which
build cenes of twigs in the forests. This hunt is not frac-
killer only in spring, in autumn or very early in the morning in summer. Must have
great care to separate each myrmecophilous species, indicating the species of
ant with which it lives, or better still, by pricking or sticking an
ant 4 the same pin. Everyone knows that a good number of insects live as parasites on different
ferent animals, and the beetles seem to hold the first rank. We have
already spoken of myrmecophiles: each society, each Hymenoptera nest, (bour-
dons, hornets, wasps), the nests of processionary caterpillars, are also
inhabited by legions of small parasitic beetles, little known and very difficult
ciles & take & because of their formidable entourage. I] must numb, at the
means of chloroform, turpentine or ether, the watchful guard
on these precious beetles. But there is a whole genus of large Hymenoplera,
resembling gnepes, the genus Cerceris, which is even more interesting:
each species has its exclusive food from such a family or such species of co-
leopleres. One of these Cerceris seizes only Cleones ophthalinicus;
another, the best known, Cerceris bupresticida, contains in its ma-
gasins, located several feet underground, the rarest woodpeckers and in the
more perfect state of conservation. I cannot here give details on this instinct
wonderful, but maybe we'll come back to that later. Happy. the entomo-
logist who lays his hand on such a nest, a veritable collection of buprestides! Very often I have desired it, without having succeeded until now.— The genus Drilus,
numbering three or four species in Western Europe, comes very close
shot of the lampyrids.Like the Lampyrus (glow worm), the female has no wings
and looks very much like a larva, while the male is a brown, winged insect,
medium sized. The female and the larva attack different species of mol-
lusts, mainly Helix nemoralis and hortensis; they are quite rare,
but an almost sure means of obtaining it, consists in collecting hundreds
of these empty snail shells: there will probably be a few drilles,
females at the bottom of the box. — Some beetles are parasitic, others
beetles: I will cite as an example |’ Aphodius porcus, which establishes itself in the
holes dug by the Geolrupes slercorarius to devour the eggs of this last tree. We must not neglect either to collect certain insects which, although
not strictly belonging to the country, were brought alive from America,
from Africa or from some distant country with colonial foodstuffs, rice, coffee,
roots, exotic woods, silk, cotton balls, etc. It's a
mine fruitful and interesting, because & Montpellier and elsewhere, it has little & little
formed a small heterogeneous flora that is not found at any other point, and
which must certainly be accompanied by an entomological fauna and
corresponding malacology. The seaside is also home to a whole special entomological population. The fish, the rayfish, the algae, thrown on the beach, out of the reach of
ordinary tides, must be examined with great care, shaken on the tablecloth,
and the sand they covered dug 4 a certain depth. Many
tiger beetles fly briskly over sandy beaches. In the crevices of rocks
that the tide does not touch, we sometimes find colonies of fairly rare insects. — 107 —

In the dunes, you have to look for a large number of insects that take shelter under
sand, at the foot of grasses and other plants, as well as under pieces of
wood or stones. The wind sometimes blows in the small sheltered valleys and
mated by the dunes, and generally inhabited by |’ dZgialia sabuleti she Broscus
cephalotes, a crowd of insects which one picks up almost in handfuls. — Stric~
ment, the sea does not contain a single beetle; however there are a few-
some who spend most of their lives in the sea, under rocks or on
sandbanks, protected against the waves of the open sea. They breathe the air & pain
one or two hours a day: these are certain species of carabids and stamens.
phylinides. — Finally, salt marshes, lakes and brackish water ponds,
both inland and by the sea, almost all have a fauna
special and extremely interesting entomological. These small fauna are
remarkable as much for the hydrocanthares as for the geocanthares inhabiting
the plants, also particular, which grow in the surroundings. The cellars furnish an asylum 4 a host of beetles, that i! have to look
in the straw, under the planks, or even against the barrels, like the Ortho-
perus alomarius.Unfortunately, without two or three exceptions (Pristonychus,
Blaps, Sphodrus), these insects are no more than a millimeter long, so
that it takes a light and very good eyes to see them. The caves and caverns of certain countries, of the Alps and especially of the Pyrenees
(the others do not seem to have been sufficiently explored yet) give asylum
has a population of beetles belonging to the arabics, staphylinids,
to pselaphians and curculionids, and completely lacking eyes. We
only knew about ten in 1849; today their number has risen
well over a hundred species, and growing daily. But their
hunting is extremely painful: first, for a cave where we will find
cave insects, we will explore ten of them without success, and what an exploration! He
you have to stay for hours in the mud and bat guano,
lifting every stone and ever watching, lest some of
these insects, of medium size, but of a horny and transparent yellow, which
makes it very difficult to see, do not flee to one side or the other. It's 14 a
hunting that I do not recommend to the beginner, unless he is in
exceptional circumstances, without which he will return almost immediately
empty-handed and maybe sick. I have finished here the indication of the localities which seem to have to be explored from
preference by the beginner; this is not to say that he should neglect others;
everywhere he will find more or less beetles. Besides, experience is in-
dispensable if one wants to become a good entomologist. I would spe-
cially, however, to the beginner, two excellent little books concerning the
Hunting and Preparing Insects: The New Insect Amatew's Guide,
published in Paris, by Deyrolle; and La Chasse aux Coléopteres, by M. Leprieur;
Colmar, Decker. It should also be remembered that nothing is different in general like the
entomological fauna of two countries, despite many apparent resemblances
relatives; so I strongly recommend to the young entomologist, who happens to be
in a country that has not yet been completely exploited, especially in the
mountains, to take absolutely everything he can find, not only in
made of beetles, but still other orders: it may happen that it renders
thus a service signaled to his hemipterist or hymenopterist colleagues, and by
them have science. The penalty will not be great, since, if he does not have time to
prepare all these insects, the hunter will only have to put them in a bottle
filled with cherry laurel leaves. The few entomologists who deal
of hemiptera know from experience how useful the hunts are for them.

    

 

 

 

 

— 108 —

of their many coleopterist colleagues, when they take the trouble
to pick up the hemipterans they find in their net. Entomology is closely linked 4 botany: each plant, so
say, has its peculiar insects. It is therefore essential that the entomologist have
a working knowledge of the main plants and as much as possible of their
scientific names. E.

TOBACCO, ITS CULTURE, ITS MANUFACTURE. After). The use made of tobacco and the form in which it was used
plant were not the same everywhere. Men of the crew of Columbus, sent by the admiral to explore
Vile of Cuba, reported to him that they had met on their way many
of Indians, homines and women, carrying a small burning brand, composed of a
kind of grass from which they inhaled the perfume. Las Cazas, contemporary of Columbus,
gives details of this fact in his General History of the Indies (chap. XLV 1). “The grass from which the Indians inhale the smoke is, he says, stuffed in a leaf
dried; the Indians light it at one end and humeot at the other, sucking
inwardly smoke with their breath, which produces drowsiness
throughout the body and degenerates into a kind of drunkenness. They claim that then
you no longer feel tired; these tabacos, as they call them, are in use
among our settlers. » According to other authors, the Indians would not have used
tobacco only as a remedy. In Brazil, tobacco smoke servail 4 intoxicate
augurs; this stimulating vapor also played a great role in the ass-
seemed public: puffs of tobacco were puffed on the speaker's face
to prepare him for good advice. Even today, Orientals present
try the pipe to their friends. The introduction of tobacco in Europe dates from the mid-seventeenth century. In 1560,
Ambassador of Francois I to Sebastian, King of Portugal, having received
of a Flemish merchant, returned from America, the herb in question, presented it
to the Grand Prior in Lisbon, then to Catherine de Medici, 4 her return to France. From this period, the use of tobacco spread rapidly in all
parts of the old world. Amurath IV, Emperor of the Tures, as well as the czar
of Russia and the Shah of Persia soon saw themselves obliged to defend
use in their States under penalty of having their nose cut off, which would lead one to believe
that the habit of snuff was then the most widespread. In 1604, by a bull
(Urban VII, all who snuffed in the churches were excommunicated. The bishops went further on the orders of the successor of Saint Peter;
we read in the ancient Synodal Constitutions of Bartholomew of the
Camara, bishop of Salamanca next article: Let the priests not prize
not before saying mass, nor two hours after; defense of the clergy and
parishioners to take snuff in churches, on pain of excommunication and
A fine of 1000 maravedis each time they commit such a crime. »

Nancy. E. BAGNERIS. (HAS. to follow.) PREPARATION OF LEPIDOPTERA. There is a very simple method for preserving Lepidoptera and
sea ​​of ​​pretty paintings. The word preserve may not be quite accurate, because

— 109 —

it is not the insect itself that we keep, but rather the whole
scales covering its wings. None For this preparation, we use a particular mucilage composed of:

   
 

 

  

Grams. Gum tragacanth a
Ordinary eraser. 6
Cooking salt... 0.4
Distilled or rainwater 60

 

(Only use 30 grams of water for large butterflies.) A small square of thin paper is coated with this mucilage; then we apply
on this coating the wings of the insect carefully detached using pliers
fine. Care must be taken to turn the upper face onto Penduit; moreover,
the wings must be placed in the position they occupied on the insect
alive. The wings thus extended, they are covered with a sheet of paper, and
With the help of the nail, rub lightly to trace the scales that remain
adherent to the coating. Then all you have to do is remove the fabric from the wing
stripped of its scales. ; we have the preparation by figuring in pencil the body of the insect between
are wings. Norah. — It is good to operate on both sides of the wing at the same time, introducing
ducing it between two squares of paper covered with the designated mucilage. We thus have, by using this method, the top and the bottom of the pa-
pillon, and that using only one subject. A FEW WORDS ON THE FLIGHT OF INSECTS. An ingenious means has been employed by M. Marey to determine: 1° the
speed; (2) the shape of the wing beats of the different insects. In the first experiment, this naturalist directs one of the wings of the subject
so that it rubs lightly with its tip against the surface of a
eylindre smoky and leaves there & each blow the trace of its passage. Like
the cylinder rotates around its axis with a known velocity, it is easy, in
counting the number of zigzags traced there, to evaluate the speed of the flight
of the subject submitted & the experience. The observer found in this way about
330 wing beats per second for the common fly, 240 for the
bumblebee, 190 for the bee, 110 for the wasp, 28 for the dragonfly and 9 for
cabbage butterfly. But it should be noted that, in these meticulous researches
ches, the number of movements calculated cannot be exactly the one that
produces the insect when it flies freely. Whatever, indeed, the delicacy
clamps used to hold the insect, the pressure that is exerted on
his body accelerates his movements a lot. To perform the second experiment, which everyone can repeat for themselves, M. Marey
fixed, & with the help of a varnish, a small flake of beaten gold at the end of the Vaile
of the insect, which he places in a ray of sunlight. The luminous figure that we
obtains in this way a, approximately 4, the shape of an 8, and it indicates the points
space successively occupied by the end of the wing. Colmar. CC. OVERVIEW OF THE VEGETATION OF THE PRIMITIVE WORLD. (After.) The arenaceous formation of the infra-lias, which is found developed mainly
a Heer, in Skåne, 4 Halberstadt and & Quedlingburg, in Germany, and 4 Hetlange

—nho—

(Moselle), follows the Rhaetian layers, and forms with them the passage of
iridescent marls in the lias itself. It is generally a fairly large sandstone-
sier, impregnated with silica, not very compact, in which the vegetable imprints
could not be preserved with the clarity that characterizes those of variegated sandstone or
shales of the Rhaetian formation. The physiognomy of the vegetation
of this period seems to have differed very little from that of the preceding formation. Among the ferns, it is still the Teniopteridae and the Dictyoplteridae which
dominate and which present the same genera, often the same species as
in the Rhaetian formation. The most characteristic are: Clathroptis me-
niscioides, Clathr. platyphylla, Angiopteridium larense, Dictyophyllum
Nilssoni and Pagenopteris rhotfolia; furthermore, I order Neuropteridae we
offers one of the most frequent and most remarkable species of the will of
Vinfra-lias, the Cycopteris Bergeri (Odontopteris cycadia), genus often
confused with Plerophyllum and Nilssonia, but distinguished by
its bipinnate fronds and leaf veins. The genus Nilssonia counts during this period two very representative
common, especially 4 Haer, in Scania. They are: V. brevis and N. dongata. Among the Cycads, the genera Pterophyllum and Zamites are continued and
seem to have taken a very great development, judging by the lignites
who meet in this formation, & Hettange, for example. The conifers of this period belong mainly to the cupressinaceae. the
genus Brachyphyllwn, which appears with the infra-liasic sandstone and which we
will find during the Jurassic and Cretaceous period, belongs to this
family. I! is characterized by its short fleshy leaves, very close together
against the others (Brachyphyllum peregrinum). In addition, the infra-liasic sandstone
de Heer, in Scania, contains an Equisetaceae of the genus Schisoneura, whose
the first representatives meet in the variegated sandstone: it is. Schiso-
neura herensis. COMMUNICATIONS. How teeth once wore. — There is a human jawbone in the Nancy museum
found in a cave in Page de Picrre, and whose teeth are completely worn out. I find an explanation of this fact in an English newspaper: primitive men used
to grind their grain two pieces of very hard gray, which were pulverized little by little,
and whose fragments mixed with the flour and thus contributed to slowly wearing down the teeth. Quite a nest! — Recently, I found on a hill, near Nancy, a very small
pond, about two square feet, ct in which there is a small crevice containing
two or three stones. I remove these stones, and to my amazement, I find them
completely black Agabus guilatus, quite large hydrocantharus that I had never seen
in the same quantity, I took about fifty, and at least as many escaped. Where did they come from? what were they doing? Two days later, I returned to the pond, but
there were only 2 or 3 Agabus left. B. Doutrus. We ask all our subscribers who are still missing Numbers to do so.
to know; later, it will be difficult or impossible for us to complete their collections. We
still have complete collections from the year 1870-71, which we will send to
new subscribers who request it. The prices will be the same as the
second year subscription price. We advise our subscribers that the 1" issue of the 2¢ year will serve as a prospectus. —ill—

CORRESPONDENCES. Hl, S., Mont-de-Marsan. — Please make your shipment to the address indicated 4 Paris: we
will do ours to you as soon as we can. M.A.R., Evreux. — We hope you received the hydrocan box in good condition.
thares sent to you. T. V. — Thank you for your letter. Mr. a'l., Puym. — We regret that, according to our rules, we cannot insert your
article, but we will use the interesting information it contains. TRADES. M. G. Paquy, & Lorry-les-Metz, wishes to exchange, against various Tertiary fossils,
determined fossils from the Jurassic lands around Metz. I wish to exchange determined Hemiptires (Heteroptera, Homoptera, Psyllodes),
against other species of the same order. — E. Douirus, 29, avenue Montaigne, Paris. — 112 —

TABLE OF CONTENTS. To our readers, by Les Répacreurs. The month of May, id. Notes on the Toad, by E. Dott! Butterflies, by A. K..

The cave @Osselles, par 5. Exct. Overview of natural history, by A. Courvorste
The month of June, by your Repactevns. Solidarity between plant and animal, by G. 8. Avaignées, by M. H.
The rose, by P. Mosswann
On root absorption, by A. Lewains. Excursions around Mainz, by E. Exce
Charity taught by insects, by S. pe Par
The month of July, by Les Rénacrevns. . Circulation and Respiration in Animals and Plants, by E. G
Transpiration of plants, by J. Bérous. An observation on the Aquatic Salamander
Magpie (Pica caudata), by G. W...

An entomological race in the Vaiais, by L.
Charity taught by insects, by B. Dou
Les Courtilières; their hunt, by J. Bérovs..
Scientific excursions around Mulhouse, by Rocuni
The month of August, by your Repacteuns.. ..

Herbalizations and herbaria, by E. Baayent:
Superstitious beliefs relating to reptiles, pz
Observation on the egg-laying of Dytiscus marginalis, by M. A. Résimpanr. On the organization of ferns, by A. Lewaine. charity taught by insects, to M. A. Récrvnant
Overview of Tournefort, by B. Duverxoy. Largyronete, by M. H.. The hedgehog, by Ev. Duvensor. The month of April, by Les Rénacr
Flight in birds, by G.
The lake dwellings of Wauwil, Pp 5. Some thoughts on the usefulness of REA oraclowieN cloM naa Concan
The month of May, by your Répacreuns
An Aurora Borealis, by M. H.
Linnaeus, by A. C.

Plant Respiration, by A. Lewaini
The fauna of the depths in the Great Lakes, by BE. D
Overview of the vegetation of the primitive world, by P. K.
Advice for beginners in entomology, by
The maritime pine, by G. Sounnets..... Tobacco, its cultivation, its manufacture, by E. Baaxurts. Ravages of caterpillars on apple trees, by D'Hens. The Llybius around Evreux, by M. A. Réciwpart
Georges Cuvier, by A. Counvorstst
To our subscribers, by Les Répacteuns
On the role of iron in vegetation, pa
Note on the hunting of Serica brunnea, etc., by
Preparation of lepidoptera..

A few words on the flight of insects, by C.

  

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

  

 

 

typ. Oberthiir and son, in Rennes. — Maison & Paris, 4, rue Salomon-de-Caus. November 1, 1871. The Number: 25 cents. No 13,

YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE
Payable in advance by postage stamps or money orders:

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, f. 3 per year. | For you

 

 

Subseription for Great

 

3s, Od, British subscribers can remit in penny or Ivopenny postage stamps. Address: 4 Paris, at M. Ernest Dollfus, 29, avenue Montaigne: @ Kingersheim (Haut-Rhin),
with Mr. Gustave Weiss. NATURAL HISTORY. In founding this newspaper, we had above all the desire to make known to
young people a science as appealing as it is not very widespread. We counted
on the help of hundreds who know by experience all the interest and the charm of
natural history, and the sympathies which the Leaf encountered exceeded
our drive. We sincerely thank the people who helped us from
their advice and support. Among the innumerable reviews and newspapers that naturalists of all countries
have at their disposal today to record their studies and observations.
vations, it seemed to us that there was room for a small journal that would serve
organ to young naturalists, guide to beginners who have to fight against
the thousand difficulties of the unknown that new studies present, and could
thus making known the science for which we are passionate about
people who would care to go and study in special books. Our columns are open to the writings of young people concerning the native history.
turret taken in its broadest sense; we hope to encourage our
colleagues & observe, & study more especially certain parts, which pre-
feel great benefits

Indeed, in natural history more than in anything else, it is fatal to
embrace too much at once, and although no science lends itself more to
studies too extensive for the forces or the time at our disposal, we must
resolutely set a limit. We therefore advise all of our readers
who have the desire to arrive & know nature, without devoting themselves exclusively
& its study, to choose one or two branches that they will work & background; but
at the same time, under penalty of having only an imperfect knowledge and
erroneous science, one must have a general knowledge of other
branches of natural history. A few criticisms addressed to us from different sides and which put
questioning the usefulness of natural history urges us to point out again
with some detail the advantages that this science seems to us to have. Today that almost everything is schooled and estimated at its mer-

 

—~2—

cantile, our science is reproached for having no practical utility. It's here
an objection that the people of the countryside do not fail to formulate
met a botanist or an entomologist: "What are all these
herbs or these beasts that you take? And, on pain of being considered mad in
country, some medicinal use must be improvised. Impossible to put into the heads of these good people the idea that we can

collect such vermin for the simple pleasure of knowing them and studying
their walls. But it is not only people from the countryside who
fail to understand the occupation of the naturalist, many people,
who would seem to better understand the usefulness and the attraction of such collections,
limit themselves to considering them as childishness which they place in the same
rank than collections of postage stamps, and for them the naturalist is a
brave man unable to harm anyone. It is & hardly believable how far, in almost everyone, goes
ignorance of mores and even of the existence of what surrounds us in any
have we ever given a thought & this world of insects of which we know
today several hundred thousand hope All those who have wings
are flies, the others are grasshoppers or beetles; everything is
understood under the name of vermin We see one on the path, what has he done? —
We don't know, but we have the principle of crushing the insects we meet
because they are so ugly. "Has anyone ever looked at it closely to say that it is
ugly? Do we know if it is not one of those precious auxiliaries that Providence
opposed to the insects which ravage our woods and our fields? how to complain
the farmer whose trees are destroyed by the cockchafer and white grub, whose
the fields are crippled by innumerable armies of insects, so cheerful of
heart he will destroy his own allies wherever he meets them. How many animals, which one sees every day, are singularly slandered:
The bat must be a bad animal — we are afraid of it — because it
flies at night, and that a mouse should not have wings. We take revenge, in the
massacring, when it can be done from afar: few people suspect that
this harmless animal, which is by no means a sonris, with its jerky flight,
Is a relentless destroyer of insects that only come out after sunset.
sun. — Ants are well known to everyone; we vaguely know
that they form a model republic, but what we know very well is that
that they stock up on grain of wheat for the winter; only these so-called
grains are only the nymphs of the insect. Another animal that we destroy
and who fears, without giving a thought, a glance & a government
organized in a complex way, but in which all the cogs work with a
order, an ease that should give us & reflect. — We have rare=
ment met people who did not object when learning
that no insect grows any longer once its last metamorphosis has been accomplished. How, they exclaim, you want us to believe that all these flies,
large and small, which haunt our homes, will not change in size? - We
do not suspect that there could be several esy We will not speak
not innumerable superstitions which have as their objects innocent animals,
toads, death clock, blaps, etc., elc., that would take you too far. In
general, we observe with astonishment that it is the people of the countryside,
The workers and the peasants, living in the midst of animals of all kinds, who
are the most ignorant in this matter, and who give you the fancies the most
more absurd about what surrounds them; in the city, some readings give
an idea, it is true that it is very vague and very false, of the principal animals,
plants and minerals. _However, if we are astonished to see natural history so little spread in
general, we do not hide from ourselves that it is also largely the fault

  

 

 

  

 

  

 

 

  

  

   

 

   

   

   

 

 

 

 

    

  

    

   

 

 

=a —

   

naturalists. Accustomed 4 not to be comp: cient with each other, avoid
all contact with the vulgar as much as possible, and do nothing for the popula~
rise not precisely the arid science, but the parts of science having
a practical use or a particular interest. In recent years, the number
publications concerning the natural sciences has multiplied in a

colossal and almost frightening proportion, and it is almost impossible & a
aaa to know all the works which, in different countries, have trailed
its specialty as long as it is a long pen. One of the main characteristics
teres of this avalanche of publications, it is the birth of a class already
numerous valuable works intended for the popularization of science. Erits
for the most part by educated and conscientious men, these books are des-
lined to people of the world who wish to have some knowledge of history
natural, without deepening the subjects by themselves, rather than young people
people; this is why we believed that a body, specially founded
for them, will still find a place in the midst of the numerous pe-
existing periodicals. This science, in fact, seems destined especially for youth; she
bring together all the desirable advantages find an incessant source of observation
vations and interest as soon as you leave the house, not depending on anything
financial point of view, develop a host of qualities of body, mind
and from the heart: activity, skill, spirit of observation, order, independence
of all external circumstances, moderation; always have on hand
a useful and interesting distraction, never a moment of boredom or
courageously, to offer the widest field of reflection, to speculation
based on facts, & the study of the highest questions
of human understanding; see wonders a thousand times more ad-
mirable and more astonishing than those of the Thousand and One Nights; Finally, what
must precede everything else, give birth! love and reasoned admiration of the
el nature of its almighty Creator; Isn't all this worth it
try natural history? Add to this that our dear science is not so useless
practical as we want to say; we begin & realize that the animals. that surround us have a considerable influence on our living conditions.
ence: thousands of species of nnisible insects, a tireless and inexhaustible army
sand of workers, attack with your sides your plants, the b the animals
which are useful to us, — here the locusts; phylloxera after oidium, 1a the
xylophages, parasites, on all sides we must defend ourselves against a per-
petty invasion. Microscopic germs floating by the billions in
atmosphere or are born, when the circumstances are favorable, cause
most contagious diseases. On the other hand, we discover every day of
new animals which, if they return to their original conditions in our countries,
lives of existence, can each become a source of wealth for us. We
knows enough about the usefulness of geology from the point of view of sources, mines,
careers, etc. These few examples will suffice to clear up the natural history of the
reproach addressed to it, of being futile and useless. In the presence of all these advantages, we are convinced that one day
will come, a day which is perhaps not far off, when natural history, better known
of everyone, will be placed, in the opinion, and the height of the others
science and the arts. This requires each of us to work,
that museums — which are too often still moles indigeste rerum, or
many collections specially intended for study, and which teach nothing
to the uninitiated, for whom museums are created in large part — from-
come a veritable popular exposition of the three kingdoms; you have to present
to the public science stripped as far as possible of its inextricable classi-

*

 

 

 

  

  

 

 

 

    

 

  

  

  

 

 

     

      

  

 

 

 

 

has

fication, of this vocabulary of apparently so barbarous names, terror of those
who have not recognized the absolute necessity of a single classification. We
we hope that the Leaf of Young Naturalists will contribute for its
small share in this work, and we will draw from this hope the patience and
courage to overcome the difficulties we will encounter on our way,
happy if we can procure some new followers for the most captivating
yanle of science. THE BOLET. THE INDIGOT BOLETUS. Boletus belongs to the large class of mushrooms and is part
of the family Funginaceae. Ul approaches the Agaric by certain characters. Thus, like the latter, it has a hairier or stipe of usually
cylindrical, and intended to support a kind of dome called a hat or
hymenophore which varies in shape and color with the species, and whose
underside is lined with radiating blades in the Agarics and tubes
in the Bolets. These blades and these tubes are lined with a very
thin called hymenium, formed of barides, that is to say of globular utricles
Sets or ovoids which bear 4 their apex one or more terminated filaments
each by a spore. It is by the hymeninm or rather by the cellular layer
that it covers that we recognize the Boletus of the Agaric, since in one
the hymenium is tube-shaped; in the other it is lamellar. The tubes of
Boletus, open only 4 their lower extremity, are welded parallel
to each other and can easily detach from the hat. It is by these characters that this genus is distinguished: 1° from the Polypores, whose
tubes are closed with distinct walls and adherent 4 hymenophore; 2° of
genus Fistulina, whose tubes of unequal size are free, not welded
between them, but are closed and open only to let escape the
spores. There are about 25 species of Boletus in Lorraine, of which only four
are edible and two poisonous. The edible species are: Boletus
edulis, — B. wreus, — B. aurantiacus — and B. scab:

4° The edible boletus (Polish cepe) (Boletus edults) is characterized by its
cap very wide, sooty yellow (color of soot) or brownish. His
White tubes at first turn pale yellow as they age. Its mainstay is
short, reddish white and bulbous. This species, which has been growing since the month of
July until September, is quite estimated. Its flesh is white, firm and
has a very pleasant flavor. 2° The bronze boletus (B. @reus) has a blackish-brown chapean and an aspect
velvety. Its tubes, short, are of a sulfur yellow: its pillar, long, is of a
pale yellow. It grows in autumn, in the woods. 3° The orange boletus (B. aurantiacus) has a domed hat, brick color
or orange. Its tubes are white, its stipe is long, cylindrical, whitish,
dotted with russet scales. It is found at the edge of the woods, in the region

you,

4° The Boletus rude (B. scaber) has a hemispherical cap which varies in color;
sometimes it is pale, sometimes brownish: its tubes are white; its pillar, shaped
spindle-shaped, bristling with blackish scales which make it rough to the touch. These four species of Boletus do not change color when cut

   

  

   

   

 

 

 

    

   

 

'

their flesh; it is not the same for B. cyanescens and B. rubeolarius,
harmful species, which have the property of turning blue when broken. The indigo boletus (B. eyanescens) is characterized by its cap, of a
Pale red and slightly tomatenx, by its white flesh, by its white tubes
or lemon color. Its pillar is large, reddish and constricted at the top. It grows in fairly large abundance in the woods of the sandstone region. The Boletus sanguine (B, rubeolarius) differs from the previous one by its flesh
yellow and by its yellow tubes with red orifice. These two species, as I said above, have the singular property of
turn blue when you cut you break their flesh. According to MM. Saladin and Macaire,
who were the first to study the phenomenon, this blue stain is independent
of light, for it occurs even in the deepest darkness; but
it is dia action of atmospheric oxygen on a product that contains
these mushrooms. This phenomenon manifests itself in pure oxygen and in a
large number of gases in which this metalloid enters into composition; but,
in pure azole, hydrogen, etc., bluing does not occur. The ex-
experiences of the two scholars of whom I have just spoken thus prove that the color
ration comes from the oxidation of a compound that exists in these two
Boletus species. In addition, Marcaire, who analyzed the juice of these two mushrooms
gnons, found iron there. This metal, according to him, combining with other elements,
would form a compound body which, at first white, would turn blue by absorbing
of oxygen from the air. If potash is poured into an alcoholic solution of the juice of B. eya-
nescens rendered blue in the air, it immediately changes to a yellowish color. This fact led me to believe that this juice was nothing but a cyanide compound.
of iron. But I cannot ignite it, since the chemical analysis I made by
wet process of the alcoholic solution made yellow by potash did not
revealed no trace of ferro-cyanogen and ferri-cyanogen. However, there
been able to do that the reagents that I used in search of acid or dn
body combined with iron, exerted no action on this compound, because
of the very small amount of this metal that exists in these mushrooms. But
if this juice comes from the combination of cyanogen with iron, the phenomenon
blue stain is easy to explain, because there are inorganic substances,
such as the double ferro-cyanide of iron and potassium, which, obtained by
moist, are white at first and quickly turn blue as they absorb
Oxygen from the air. This oxygen has the role of superoxidizing part of the metal of
the white substance, while the other part forms with cyanogen blue
of Prussia. It is not impossible that the juice which exists in the Boletus indigo and
blood, or an iron cyanide, since we know that cyanogen is
made up of two equivalents of carbon and one equivalent of nitrogen, elements that
enter into the composition of plants. =

    

 

 

 

 

 

Senones (Vosges). A. LEMAIRE. BEGINNING TIPS. NTS IN ENTOMOLOGY. ll. Preparation of beetles. Lentomologist returns from his walk or his excursion the bottles
well-stocked, as well as the tubes which contain the rare or delicate species. ~~

==

Most often, he lacks the time to prepare the product on the spot
of his hunt; but be careful not to leave the insects in the bottles:
The humidity that continuously forms there would damage all the catches. It's necessary,
also returned, empty all the bottles, kill those of the insects whose asphyxiation
is not complete by immersing the (tin) bottle in boiling water,
then spread the whole on fine blotting paper, and fold this paper over the
insects so as to protect them against dust. The insects will stay
thus flexible for six to twenty-four hours, depending on the species, the
size, etc They can be prepared in the evening, @ the lamp, but it is much preferable
to do it early in the morning, in a way & less straining the eyes, while not
loser not 4 prepare your hunts at favorable times to harvest
news. If the excursion is to last several days, I recommend to prick
and stick every morning the hunt of the day before. We cannot tell the difference
that there is between the preparation of fresh insects, whose capture is still present

 

    

 

 

 

 

4 memory, and that of soft insects, too numerous to be glued
a bottom of peat or agave are not
s net hunts, we feel
i by the sound-

 

or pricked with care. A few boxes
a heavy baggage, and when we put every day s
much more disposed to resuscitate new ones than if one is prosecuted
come from the many vials whose contents are waiting to be
a favorable moment which is perhaps a long way off. Moreover, in regulation
the beginner must always be up to date in all the work which concerns
his collections: if he neglects this rule, he will have all the trouble in the world
catch up; — I speak of it, alas! by experiment. Let's gather on our work table what it takes to prepare quickly and well
the beetles that make up our hunt. Let's take a pocket magnifying glass, &
two lenses of different magnifications; — pliers @ fine points and
d@ piyuer forceps With curved ends; — one or two fairly small brushes,
in sable hair; — one or two entomological pins and solid needles
tightly fixed in small wooden handles; — a bottle of gum
mological, prepared in the following way: on 60 gr. of gum arabic in
pieces and 30 gr. sugar (which prevents the gum from flaking when
it is dry), enough distilled water is poured in to give 41a preparation.
ration of a syrupy consistency, and we add a hundredth of sublimate cor-
rosif (against beetles), and as much carbolic acid (against molds). If you don't want to take the trouble to prepare this gum yourself, you
you can get some from MM. Deyrolle, in Paris, or Meyer~Diir, & Burgdorf;
— a rdmolissoir, consisting of a dish with a lid, containing sand which is
moisten when you want to use it; — distilled water, in which one

 

 

 

    

     

 

 

 

  

 

 

        

 

   

  

immerses the microphones for a few minutes to soften them; - many
agave or peat slabs covered with paper; — a stocked kettle

 

Entomological pins, of German manufacture (Calsbad, in Austria),
more expensive, but much preferable to French pins: you must have some
Nos. 4, 2, 3, 5 and 6; — n% 3 and 6 are the most used (1); - finally,
thin cardboard or strong, very white paper, which is cut into strips of
8 and 10 millimeters in width, divided & in turn into small rectangles having
8 and 10 millimeters by 4 millimeters, or in small triangles of the same dimen-
let's go. When we have time to spare, during the evening or in winter, we will
good to prepare many of these small boxes in advance; here's how
we proceed: we place on a peat plate a certain number of boxes

 

     

   

        

 

   

_ (1) We find all the objects born
insects, at M. Deyrolle, naturali:

     
 

areas & preparation and a

preservation of
2, 19, rue de la Monnaie, & Pari

is. =

which are skewered near their base with pins n° 5 or 6. We take
a small box pierced with a pinhole, and we slide into this hole
Pin that holds the cardboard until it hits the bottom; this
which must be when the cardboard is about two-thirds of the pin: we
wins in the same way as Lemps, and all the cards are at the same height. I will only say a word about the lively discussion, which is far from over yet.
mined, on the value of the various processes of preparation of the Micro-Caleoptera:
pierce them with an extremely fine iron or platinum wire, which is fixed 4 of the
pelils cubes of bone marrow, seems to me an expensive, long, demanding mode
a great tension of the organs of sight, without real utility and almost
impracticable. The use of mica seems unnecessary and has been abandoned by most
entomologists. That of the triangles, excellent for certain difficult insects.
cils & glue otherwise, such as the Micro-Curculionids, has for others the
serious inconvenience of exposing the most fragile and important parts
of the insect (the antennae and the legs) 4 all the shocks, and seems to have to yield
the step to the system of rectangles, in the middle of which we stick the insect, which
thus finds himself protected on all sides; — nothing is easier than sticking
a few individuals of the same species on the back, or, if there is only one specimen
please, to detach it by wemping it in distilled water, when you want
examine it. — With practice, you can easily cut and skewer
four hundred of these cartons per hour. So here we are, equipped with the necessary instruments, seated in front of our
collects, composed of three 4 four hundred insects of all shapes and
all sizes. Let's sort them roughly; take the biggest ones; toward
two-thirds of the right elytron (starting from the tip), we insert
Pin vertically, taking care not to remove any of the
legs of the second or third pair, between which the pin must
to go out. According to the size of the insect, one will use one of the numbers indicated
upper; it is better to take a pin that is too thin than too thick, because
this would disfigure the insect. We start by stinging all the insects like this,
large and medium-sized, which are placed on a peat slab as they are
sting. You must first pierce with a needle certain Coleoptera (mainly
ment of the Curculionids) whose elytra offer too much resistance 4 a
ordinary pin. We bring the legs as much as possible under the body and
antennae along the corselet. — The insect is less fragile then when
one fled gives the attitude. If we have taken a very large number W'individuals from a
same species, We can keep some in supply in sawdust
soaked in alcohol] to the sublime corrosive, or in a bottle containing leaves
of laurel. Insects which are less than 5 millimeters long should not
be bitten. In general, when in doubt, it is better to stick than to prick, which
always more or less damages the insect. For this, we put a small drop of
eraser on one of the cards or triangles, using the pin fixed in a
sleeve, then we take the inseccle with the wet brush; we place it on the
eraser, we compress it a little to make it adhere to the cardboard, and we arrange
approximately symmetrically the legs and the antennae. One can, to save pins, skewer several cards at the
same pin, when it comes to insects that must enter the boxes of
doubles. Before placing the bitten and stuck insects in the collection,
will do well to let them dry for some time uncovered in a
cupboard. Finally, each pin will be attached to a small square of paper indicating the
locality, date of capture, etc. In this preparation, it is necessary to seek to bring together elegance, order and
good preservation of the collection, to have both light and firm hands, &
simplify the preparation while doing it with great care, finally & practice

 

   

 

 

——
=o
unceasingly and to make continuous progress. Let's not forget that what

worth doing, worth doing well. The next chapter will be devoted to the collection itself. E.

THE NEST OF THE STICKLEBACK. Not long ago naturalists discovered in several
species of fish of the most curious movurs, and every day other observations
vations shed new light on the lives of these animals, which were thought to have
so to speak, no manners. I'll say a word today about a kind of pea-
sounds that builds nests to shelter its offspring. There is in Europe a
twenty species of Sticklebacks, of which we have 4 or 5 in France, without
count the Spinachie or Lancon, a large sea stickleback. Everyone
knows these small agile, bold, voracious fish, which swarm in all our
streams, which they clean and purify, and even in brackish waters and
salted. They are seldom eaten, 4 because of the thorns on their backs,
though they 'trump, say the amateurs, on the gudgeon. We use them
mainly as fertilizer; the Kamchadals feed their dogs with it;
in Prussia, it is made into a kind of oil. It is around the months of June or July that the male builds the nest on his own,
the size of a two-franc piece, and composed of stalks of hay,
@river herbs. The nest finished, the little builder advances towards his
marries and tries to convince her to enter his apartment. It revolves around
delle and imperceptibly directs her to the nest, into which the female rushes
suddenly. There, she lays a large number of almost imperceptible eggs,
that the male smolders assiduously. During spawning, [ standby
of a wil milestone that no object exceeds the limit of its property, because
these animals seem to have a sense of ownership. Whatever the intruder,
the jealous child rushes at him with a fury that soon makes people fight back.
treat the foreigner. But here's a rival male stepping forward, swords drawn, looking-
sing the battle. Our faithful guardian did not see him sooner than he rushed
encounters him, and then engages a combat worthy of the heroes of Homer,
aggressor fights for glory, the other fights with energy of despair pro
domo sua. These are only feints, assaults, tricks, body & body struggle: it is a
duel & death, because often one of the combatants falls pierced right through
swords of his adversary. Other times, he admits defeat, and then he goes
hiding in a corner, loses his colored clothes and retains the humiliating
gray uniforine of the vanquished, until he found the opportunity to take his
revenge. Meanwhile, the pride that his victory causes him has given the
conqueror a dazzling cuirass, green above, silver below, purple
and gold on the head and sides. [struts around in this costume, searching, everything
like a valiant knight, new opportunities to show his worth. The
loyalty of! 'Epinoche mile 4his residence is quite remarkable: put it 4 cent
meters from there in the river, after an hour it will be back in the nest, after
having fought more than one battle on his way. One can observe this life so integrated
ressant, if you carry a few sticklebacks in a large enough aquarium. We will find three very well done engravings, representing 'Epinoche and its nest,
in the atlas that accompanies d'Orbigny's Dictionary of Natural History. —9—

The Spinachia builds a similar nest in the sea, but larger than
that of L'Epinoche. The materials she uses are algae and coral-
lines, which she joins together by means of a kind of silken thread, the origin of which is
still a mystery. Is it secreted by a special apparatus of the Spinachia? Is it a foreign marine product, some byssus? We know nothing about it. E. DOLLFus. GE OBSERVATION

 

LOGIC IN THE TIME OF SAINT LOUIS. Joinville reports the following fact, in the year of grace 1253:

"While the king was 4 Sayette, a stone was brought
» scales, the most marvelous in the world; because when we lifted a scale, we
I found between the two stones the shape of a sea fish. The fish was
of stone, but there was nothing missing in its shape, neither eyes, nor edges, nor color,
> nor anything else that prevents him from acting as such unless he is alive. The king asked
>
»

 

 

a stone, and found a tench in it, of a brane color, and in such a way
a tench must be. »

 

 

(History of Saint Louis, by Joinville; text close to the French
modern, by Natalis de Wailly, chap. CXVIL)

It is probable that the marvelous stones of which the companion of the
holy King, were nothing but schists containing, either
traces of fish, or even of their fossil skeletons. It seems to me, however, that the good Seneschal of Champagne exaggerates a little
what he saw, saying that nothing was missing, "neither color nor anything else that
sin that he only did so if he did alive. »

Be that as it may, this naive account shows us that at the time of the Crusades we
had already observed what barely a century ago we still regarded as
whims of nature: these "figured stones" that today we have recognized
and classified by giving them back the place they should occupy in the fauna
antique from the first ages of the world. Digoin. S. DE PRINSAC. BIBLIOGRAPHY. We believe we are doing a service & our readers by publishing a monthly
short analysis of a few outrages which seem to us to have a usefulness
or a special interest in young naturalists. UAmateww* Guide to Inseetes. — Elemental Fauna of Coleoptera of
France, by Mr. Fairmaire. Paris, Deyrolle. These two little books, whose modest price puts them within the reach of all
purses, are absolutely essential to the beginner coleopterist. Since
For a long time, we felt the need for an exact, clear work, enough and not too
detailed, intended to guide the beginner in the middle of the difficulties of the first
determinations. Mr. Fairmaire's book has come to fill this important

e~
—10—

gap. It contains, stripped of their too scientific part, the reports
more than a thousand species — the most common, about one-eighth of the
species found in France to date. Let's not forget a pre-addition
cious, consisting of six plates, representing the principal genres. He is
regrettable that we did not have the choice of species & to represent; we will have pn
then preferably breed the most common species. The Guide con-
contains a great deal of information on hunting and the preparation of different
rents orders of insects. We hope to see the chapter dealing with Coleop-
here to serve as an introduction to Elemental Fauna in the next edition of
this excellent little book. The Beaches of France, by A. Landrin, Bibliotheque des Merveilles. Paris, 1866. The sea, with its innumerable inhabitants, offers 4 all those who
have the good fortune to find themselves on its shores, an immense field of study,
barely explored and most interesting. Mr. Landrin summarized what have been written on
this subject of many authors. He reviews the sea itself, the struggle of
Man against the sea, and its principal inhabitants, both vegetable and animal. One of the greatest merits of this book consists in the engravings, very
light and perfectly executed, which accompany the text. COMMUNICATIONS. Communications contain small notices, observations, requests, summaries of
works, exchange offers, concerning natural history. We will be happy to insert what we
will send us. By giving another 12 pages this issue, we believe we must warn our subscribers that

  
   

even giving now only 8, the number of subscriptions we currently have-

alone will not suffice

 

cover our summer printing costs, which have almost doubled with
. It is therefore up to them, if they want to see it prosper and increase
Ja Feuille, & help us by getting us new subscribers. our change of residence

 

We urge that we be notified of errors and changes of address,
which avoids ments. No sint from previous issues, — we pray
consequently, readers who would like to write to us, enclosing the value
(0 fr. 25 per issue) in postage stamps. “has many dice:

    

 

we only have enough left;

  

We will send subscription cards, along with this issue, to people
who will ask us to distribute this publication. We will send peat slabs to entomologists who request them.
advantageously and economically replacing the litge. These plates cost 2 fr. 50
the dozen, postage extra. dica-

 

Butterfly hunting. We find in the Small Cntomological News Vi
tion of a much more successful method than micllee for harvesting moths,
One suspends on the trees of the pomines and half dried in the oven, and plunged in lher

= —
nitric. We make our night wave and we introduce the apples with the butterflies that
cover in a cyanide bottle. This hunt can be done during the greater part

of the year: the most favorable seasons are summer and autumn. I would add that the 16-
Bernese pidopterists had long been using baits similar to this one. Mr. Deyrolle

 

your. is responsible for providing nitric ether to the entomolo;
people who would have found the composition of the juice of B. in-
pleasure in doing it to me

Indigo Boletus. - Young people
digotier, or by their research:
without knowing. — Adrien Lemaire, in Senones (Vosges),

Heluiinthes. - I would like
ask entomologists who come across them to send them to me, in exchange

 

be in the works, would make me

    

 

 

get intestinal worms that eat insects: I

  

against insects. —Ernest Dollfus. The homing locusts. — In October 1869, a large number of grasshoppers (Acridium
peregrinum) appeared in southern and central England. As we don't have
nalogue on the continent At the same time, it is permissible to suppose that
ue, and that we have’ in Europe, will have
left the northwest coast of Africa, and that some of them will have been carried by
I wind southeast to England. It is known that the flight power of these insects is
very considerable. nothing noticed

 

     

these insects, originating from Afri it not yet observed

 

 

Hunting small birds. — This hunt, usually prohibited in the department
de la Meurthe, was authorized this year. As a result, the little birds
sell en masse 4 Nancy, and I was able to see in particular the incredible consumption
that the hotels have made of robins caught by means of pitges called grasshoppers and
snowshoes. In England, on the contrary, the very urchins set the red-bloods free.
throats qwils take. We are fine there. "Let's hope the insects don't
will not make here the disappearance of their enemies to harm the crops. It also seemed
that governments begin to concern themselves with the war waged on the small
war which has as a direct consequence the frightening multiplication of harmful insects. bird,

The Italian government has just, it is said, proposed an international law punishing

TO THE. E.D.

 

 

‘ison any act resulting in the death of the little ones o1

 

New guano. — We begin to export bat excerpts from Egypt
to replace the guano. Apiculture, — In 1863, Germany alone published 412 books or pamphlets concerning
nant Papiculture. Conservation of Podurets. — These small insects, generally greyish in color,
core little studied, and of which there are a hundred species in Europe, are hunted by means of
from a flask in which they are blown up, Tl is fa
several weeks, putting damp swirls of blotting paper in the bottle. We have
thus observed the Tomocerus plunbeus changing its skin, then devouring its old skin by
a few hours. The Podurelles are easily stored in a dalcoo mixture! weak
and glycerine. island to keep them alive for several

 

A funny blackbird. — A correspondent of the American Naturalist writes 4 this review which he
heard and observed a mouse whose song was as varied as it was harmonious. Someone
of our readers a~

 

also had the pleasure of hearing such a strange solo? Vitality of marine motluscs. — The marine testaceous molluscs generally live very

little time out of the water: those who spend a few hours exposed to the air between the flow

and ebb hold tight fi

    

s to the rock. However, shell gastropods

~—
— Pr

thick, —- Trochus, Cerithium, Littorina, ete., — have a harder life, and we quote

Littorina muricata which lived more than four months outside the skin. Such vitality, what-

during, seems exceptional. Quite a nest! (See Ne 12, page 110.) “Here is something similar. In July and until mid-August, when I left Luzy, I noticed the pre-
sence of several species of the genus Agabus in a cemented tank, about
two feet by one in width and height; a pipe throws water into it, which was used for
washing vegetables. This small fountain exists on the slope of an embankment, opposite the station:
the overflow flows into a ditch where I only met two or three Agabes, although

 

that I have explored it on several occasions. sure existing in the corners of the tank, and they
@ enough

 

The insects usually came out of
quickly took refuge there when they thought they were
frequently I took well over fifty; it still remained
s were, the largest, dull black; the other smaller ones had two spots
these last dominated (A melas and guttatus, probably.) 'S.pe P.

Shooting Stars. — I found myself yesterday, October 26, around seven o'clock, leaning on a
window turned to the south, when my attention was drawn by the fact that here: six stars
shooting, presenting the appearance of stars of second otf, of third magnitude, placed three
in threes, following two parallel lines, spaced out as regularly as soldiers in
ang, suddenly appeared at the zenith, moving from N. to S. with a vibrating movement.
who are you in the lights

   

worried. Chasing them
The individuals:

 

 

 

captured
russets on each elytron:

   

  

quite accentuated. We said the fall of these Roman candles
strings, burst into the air and fall
that simultaneously, a little before @reaching

 

     

ppe, leaving behind a small

 

dar

   

1 C. They went out, almost
sharp ir; the fog prevented us from seeing the

trail of light

 

 

Horizon. The atmosphere was very calm, T

       

 

other stars, even that of the first magnitude, which proves, as astronomers
They also teach that shooting stars are infinitely closer to our globe
than fixed stars. B. Ganpen. (Nancy). did

& /

 

CORRESPONDENCE,

MMOB., @ Caupenne: We will be delighted to learn about your work,

 

which will be able to fit, we hope, into our program. BE. I., @ Strasbourg: Let us know the results of your hunts this year, —
we will gladly help you 4 put your collection in order. .

L., @ Amboise: We deeply regret the delays that you are reporting to us. You re-
receive a letter shortly. D., @ Audincourt: Please send us the end of your work. ‘Typ, Onenti0n and sons, 4 reindeer. — Me & Paris, rue des Blanes-Manteaux, 35. 4th* December 1871. The Number: 25 cents. No 14,

YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE
Payable in advance in stamps or money order by post:

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr.3 per year. | For French foreigners, 4 per year. Subscription for Grea-Britain, $s. 6 d British subsribers can remit in penny ot Wwopenny postage slamps..

 

 

Address: & Paris, at M. Ernest Dollfus, 29, avenue Montaigne; @ Kingersheim (Haut-Rhin),

Ches M. Gustave Weiss. People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed,

FROM THE CRY OF THE SPHINX ATROPOS. Not long ago, I was brought a magnificent Sphinx Atropos (S.
skull and crossbones) alive. I made him scream by squeezing him lightly between my fingers
and tried to find out how he produces this kind of
hissing. I saw well, on each side of the thorax, a tuft of hairs deviate
and vibrate; it is generally considered to be the seat of pro-
reduction of the cry. But an experience which seemed to me more convincing and which,
rest, I had already tried the previous year, almost persuades me that the S.
Atropos produces his singular cry by rubbing his horny proboscis against his palps,
as certain beetles produce an almost analogous sound by rubbing
their elytra against their abdomen or tarsi. Indeed, by raising the
the trunk and unrolling it little by little out of its lodge with the help of a pin, we
finally the sound decrease small 4 small and finish nar stop completely. do we let
return the trunk to its place between the two palps, the noise begins again,
weakly at first, then louder and louder. — It should be noted that during
throughout the experiment, the hairs on the side of the thorax continue to vibrate
without producing sound. — I repeated the experiment several times with success;
however, I urge entomologists to repeat it and check it. Everything is
to have an S, Atropos alive and not to worry about damaging it a little. Mulhouse. JS. Here is the explanation given by various naturalists of this sound, which some call
plaintive and lamentable, which others compare to the sound produced by certain beetles:

Schroeter: Rubbing of the trunk against the head. Reesel: Rubbing of the chest against the abdomen. Réaumur: Rubbing of the palps against the tube; when it is unrolled, the cry
stops to start again as soon as it wraps again between the palps. The sound ceases
when the palps are no longer in contact with the tube; it is weak when only one
palp touches the tube. —14—

Passerini: Alternate aspiration and expiration of air from the central channel of the fallopian tube into
a special cavity of the head. Finally, Messrs. Duponchel, Aubé, Boisduval, Pierret and Rambur, after a series of experiments

ences, concluded that the cause of this sound was yet to be discovered. E.D.

TIPS FOR BEGINNERS IN ENTOMOLOGY. Ill. The Collection. Collecting will perhaps be the part of science that will cost the most
difficulty to the beginner and will cause him the greatest disappointment. How many times
may it not be necessary to modify it, replace badly stitched or damaged insecles,
before owning a real collection arranged with order and method! not
let us not aim from the beginning 4 for a perfection which we only approach by dint of
care and effort. The beginner will have to confine himself to hunting during the first year; he will put away
Insects captured in well-closing boxes, such as boxes
cigars with a peat base. He will be mainly concerned with stinging well
el stick the insects, to fix the pins vertically in the boxes, &
Vaide of pliers & prick which must be used as soon as it is a question of fixing a
entomological pin, to bring together individuals of the same species, and the species
and genera of same family, but only 4 country view el without employing
descriptive work, finally, if he can, to obtain the names of the insects
which he captured, appealing to the complacency of entomologists more
advances. The program for the first year can be summed up as follows: hunt the
more, prepare as best as possible. From the second year, we will be able to put ourselves & determine ourselves, and those
who have not gone through 1a cannot understand the true happiness of the young
enlomologist who, after long and meticulous research, finally finds the
long-desired name: one more victory over the unknown! The little importance —
others would say the futility — of discovery does nothing; this insect, unknown
for us until now, revealed, with its name, the new interest which attaches to this
that we know of him, of his mores, of his rarity - it's already an old con-
birth. Ah! Nodier was a thousand times right to say: There is something
wonderfully sweet, in this study of nature, which attaches a name to
all beings, a thought to all names, an affection and a memory to all
the thoughts, and the man, who has not penetrated into the graces of these mysteries,
may have lacked a meaning to taste life well. "Certainly, Nodier, without
being a naturalist, understood that one cannot be; he loved nature, and that's already
a lot. Determination, especially today, is not easy. I will say
later a few words on the difficulties that rile science today,
but I will limit myself here to advising the beginner to stop only at determining
minations of which he is sure, without making useless efforts to understand dis- tinctions
too scholarly cussions. Let him put aside for later the species whose
he cannot find the name exactly. In general, the number of species
between which one can hesitate is restricted; a catalog of Ja pays oi
Yon finds himself doing invaluable service here. The determinations, moreover,

 

 

  

 

aro —

are always subject to caution, and it will be well to review them from time to time.
weather. Individuality nowhere shows itself more than in collections; the
some are absolutely clean and regular; others are messy,
contain labels of all kinds, a host of indications, names,
of synonymies, of doubts; insects are often poorly prepared; but these
collections-the are more interesting than the first, because they belong
to the workers, to the pioneers of science; they are revised every
week, every day, and their owner knows how to find himself in the middle of
his dear insects, which he knows each individually. That's not to say
that order should be neglected, far from it; but don't do it I drank it
collection. If the beginner strives to avoid these two pitfalls: disorder and excess
care, he will have taken a big step forward in entomology. Here, next
me, how must be a collection of beetles; it will be contained in
ain number of brown boxes, cardboard, of 26 c. on 19 4/2¢., closing
the best possible; the labels, of medium size, black, that we find
vera at Deyrolle, as well as the boxes, will each be fixed using
two truck hairpins in six rows, widthwise or crosswise
length of the box, at your choice. The variously colored labels of
order, family and genus, before those of species, which will carry the
dication of the subgenus, when there is one, of the species, of the author who described it
the first, and of the fatherland (of the province, when it is a question of a collection
local; of the country, when the collection is European, will arrange
a leave between the labels an interval approximately equal to 2/3 or, if necessary,
has half of the insect or cardboard that carries it. The genus tag will be above, the species tag below.
insects. Care must be taken not to accumulate the columns of cash, in order to save
the place; today especially since the rights of species are constantly being
tested, that there are almost inextricable synonymies, and that the exchanges
between colleagues have taken a great extension, a collection must be able to
hold at least 6 to 8 individuals of the same species and sometimes even more
floor; the facies, moreover, seems to change with the localities, and it is very interesting.
It is interesting to be able to compare insects of the same species from
localities are very different. More than one darkness, more than one doubt
would thus be clarified. We saw a collection rich in rare species and
curious, but which loses @ our opinion much of its merit & because of the number
singularly limited number of specimens representing each species. You will have to decide 4 completely redesign your collection every few
years: there is no other way to keep Ja up to the level of science. It was advised to place in the boxes the labels of all the species
that one intends to collect; but that doesn't seem practical to me.
less for beetles. They are too numerous for us to be able to
the beginning, thus erating the skeleton of a complete collection, whether European,
or even French: the expenditure of time and money would be very considerable
for a beginner and little related to its real usefulness; because when we
would have succeeded in bringing together some of the species in question, the progress of
science would have transformed genera and species, and there would be no room for everything
increase in the country's fauna. It will be better to limit oneself for a few
years to determine the species, bring them together in boxes according to the analogues
's of the species together, and stitch the plain paper labels to the
even pins that fix insects. It's less beautiful, but it's infinite
more practical. Later, when the number of species united will have become enough

    

  

 

      

 

  

 

 

   

 

 

    

 

 

— 16 —

considerable, we will arrange the collection as I indicated above, but
placing the labels only every two columns, so that you can
insert successively in the columns that remained empty the species
sines As they are procured. The collection should be compiled according to one of the modern classification systems.
sification and will follow, in its order, the most recent catalog of the region
that is to be explored. For insects that have not yet been described, we
will replace the species name with n. sp. (nova species). Today there is an easy way to obtain a host of species that we
could not capture oneself; I want to talk about exchanges, which are practiced
on a large scale, among colleagues from different countries. We will do well
to bring together, in the boxes of doubles, a good number of individuals from each
species, provided with their specific name. To learn about entomology in an interesting and enjoyable way, one must
visit the museums and especially the private collections, these very different
interesting in general than these: their owners, with a
complacency that seems inexhaustible, always show themselves ready & encourage
beginners in their desire for instruction. I will not repeat what was said in last August's issue.
on the usefulness and scope of the collections, and I will confine myself to recalling that they
should be a means and not an end: it should not be made a mere recreation
tion for the eyes, nor seek above all, for its collection, the loss
in individuals; the true naturalist does not stop at objects, he goes beyond them,
he considers them only as a means of arriving at the knowledge he
continues. I will end this article by citing a few lines from M. Fauvel, who paints
with spirit and fidelity the charms of the collection for the naturalist of pro-
vince: “The insects placed in his boxes interest him, especially because they
took them himself and that they come from his province. It doesn't matter to him that a
species is known in nine tenths of France, it has not lost its
day if he discovers this species at home for the first time. Open its
boxes, you will see there, distinguished with minute care, the insects of the
land he dwells in, and there is none more precious; he knows their manners,
the time, place, circumstances of their capture; he won't hide from you that
his sympathies are for his collection of the country. These indigenous collections
deserve the most serious attention, because on them rests the future of the faunas
national. »

 

   

 

        

 

 

E.

OVERVIEW OF THE VEGETATION OF THE PRIMITIVE WORLD. Vegetation during the Jurassic period. _ The Jurassic period presents a great gap for paleontological history.
gic of the vegetable kingdom. Indeed, if the intermediate layers between the marls
ripples and the lias offer us great riches for the study of the fossil flora.
sile, above the documents are completely missing, or they are not

 

has

  

only very incomplete fragments. The Jurassic formations are
all of the algae alone have been able to be preserved with ease
the small number of terrestrial fossils that have gathered in a few low:
@ water therefore from the great oolite or from the Portlandian is insufficient for us
give an exact idea of ​​the physiognomy of the vegetable kingdom & this period. the
lias, whose powerful foundations are so rich in fossils belonging to the reign
animal, is very poor as far as the vegetable kingdom is concerned, & unless one
do not want to report & this elage the vegetable deposits of W hitby (Yorkshire), which
we present hopes. It is only towards its upper part
higher that we find in the Marnenx shales very named traces
sea ​​vegetation of that time. Traces of terrestrial vegetation from the Jurassic period can be found
mainly in a few small freshwater formation basins of the large
oolite, Portlandian and Wealdian formation (if it is necessary to
stain to the Jurassic series), of the plants, carried from the interior of the lands
by watercourses, have been deposited at their mouths in a sea or in
a very quiet lake, as it happened for the basin of Solenhofen (Ba-
life). Among the localities which have furnished the most material for the history
paleontology of the fossil flora of the Jurassic terrain, we must cite for the in-
bottom and the large oolite the basins of Whithy and Scarborough (Yorkshire),
where carbonaceous deposits of arid importance are encountered, and this
of Stonesfield, near Oxford, famous above all for the discovery that one
made up of numerous didelphian mammals; then, for the upper floors:
of the oolitic system, the lithographic schists of Solenhofen, the clays
of the Kimmeridgian of ‘Wonileur and the portlandstone of the peninsula of Port-
land, south of England. The Wealdian formation, which is mainly composed of water deposits
soft, offers us a relatively much larger number of plants
fossils: they are mainly found in the Deistersandstein of the Germans,
with many advantageously exploited coal seams, near Os-
nabriick (Hanover), then in England, in the Purbeck-beds, the Hastingssand
and the Weald-clay of Sussex. A quick review of the land's most characteristic plant forms
Jurassic will suffice to indicate the physiognomy of vegetation at that time. Algae bind a large place there, and their footprints meet
in almost all Jurassic formations; but it is in the mar-
neux of the upper lias and in the lithographic sehists of the Jura blane
that they are more particularly developed. The first
are closing, especially in Württemberg, around Boll and Wasseralfingen,
an immense quantity of marine algae generally very well preserved: their
vegetable substance is replaced by a light gray marly earth, which
stands out very clearly on the dark color of the schist and which, after having been
removed, put & uncovered plant impression. Among these algae, I
cilerai three, remarkable for the elegance of their form and especially for the development
The prodigious joy they seem to have taken. They are: Phymatoderma
liasicum, an alga of the order Caulerpaceae, then a Florida, Chon-
drides. bollens Ss, then a Fucaceae, Teniophycus liasicus. In certain
localities, the marly shales are kneaded with these algae, which seem to have
formed into veritable beds at the bottom of the sea. The Solenhofen lithographic shales also show a large
number of prints reported to algae; but we recognized that many
many of them come from conifers or even from the animal kingdom, from
sponges, for example (such are perhaps the algae of the genus Miinsteria

   

   

 

 

   

    
     

 

 

 

 

   

 

     

   

 

 

 

  

 

 

and so on

referred to the order Fucaceae); this is how one of the characteristic fossils
of this formation, reported to the order of the Floridas and described under the name of
Baliosthychus ornatus, belongs to the genus Arthrotazites, of the family of
Cupressines. There are, however, a large number of footprints from which the
nance leaves no doubt, and which can be linked with certainty to the class
algae: they belong mainly to the genera Spha@rococcides
(Spherocites), of the order Floridas, and Halymenites, of the order Fuca-
ceses, both of which present numerous species, among which
I will cite Spha@rococcides ciliatus and Halymenites Brongniarti. Another
variety Spherococcides ligulatus, frequently found in the Jura Blanc
of Württemberg, with Nullipora hechingensis, a very widespread algae in this
floor, and which constitutes & Geisslingen (Wurlemberg) a limestone bench
enter,

The Equisetaceae have only a few representatives during the
Jurassic period: however, several species of the genus are known
Equisetwm in the Deistersandstein of the Wealdian Formation of Germany
from the North (Eq. Philippsii), in Yorkshire oolite (Eq. colwmnare) and in
the upper lias (Eq. liasinum). Among the ferns, we find in the Whitby and Scar-
borough, and in the Wealdian formation, many species belonging
4 of the genera whose appearance dates back to the coal formation. They belong
largely belong to the order Sphenopteridae, several of which
species are characteristic for the Yorkshire oolite (Sphenopteris den-
ticulata, arguta) and for the Wealdian formation (Sph. Manteln). From
Neuropteridae, it is necessary to cite, in addition to the genus Cicopteris, which
tion already with the liking of the infra lias, the genera Baiera, Otopteris and Pachyp-
teris which are particularly specific to an oolitic system (Baiera digi-
tata, Olopteris undulata, Pachypteris ovata); among the Pecopteridae, the
genera Pecopteris, Alethopteris and Stachypteris, the latter, a genus eminently
coral reef (Pecopleris Wilamsoni, Alethopleris denticulata, Whitbyensis,
Stachypleris spicans). Orders Lieniopteridae and Dictyopterid
which include the majority of the ferns of the Rhaetian Formation and the Sandstone
infra liasic, form no more during the Jurassic period than a weak mino-
ity (Wacroteniopteris major, Phlebopteris polypodioides, Sagenopteris
Phillipsii). The Gymnosperms, whose number has constantly increased since the forma-
coal industry, still occupy throughout the duration of this long
Jurassic period the first rank; but soon they will give way to
Apetalous angiosperms, whose reign begins with the Cretaceous period and com-
still takes the first part of the tertiary period, the Eocene. Cycads of the genus Plerophyllum and Zamia continue to offer us
many species, among others Zamia Feneolis, which is characteristic for
Portlandian stage and the Solenhofen lithographic schist. Besides these two
genera, we met in the peninsula of Portland, ott is the type of
Portlandian vegetation, large silicified sections marked with numerous scars
left by the old leaves, having probably belonged to Cycads
from which we made the genus Mantellia (Megalophulla). These trunks are found in
large quantity in place in the middle of a layer of vegetable humus perfectly
well preserved. _ The Conifers of this period largely belong to the Cupres-
sinate; they constitute the genera Thuites, Brachyphyllum and Arthrotazites,
genus particularly specific to lithographic limestone, whose representations
children have often been mistaken for algae (A. princeps, lycopodioides,

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

aS

expanded tuites). We also found cones that belonged to Abie-
taceous and which differs very little from those of our ordinary fir trees. Next to the Gymnosperms, it is perhaps necessary to place a fossil of very
which has been referred sometimes to the Cycads, sometimes to the Euphorbiaceae
arborescent and from which we made the genus Mamillaria (Mam. Desnoyersi). It is 
with the Jurassic period that monocotyledonous plants, the first of which
first forms are already found in variegated sandstone and iridescent marl
with the lophyllum, the Paleowyris and the Yuceites, arrive at their first
real development. It is not however that the number of their species
has increased significantly, but only then do we encounter

 

  

    
 

types whose vegetal character cannot be overlooked. The
most characteristic representatives of this great family of the plant kingdom

during the Jurassic period are certainly trees of the family of
Pandanes, exotic today, whose favorite homeland is Senegal, but
also found in Polynesia, New Zealand and the
Guinea. So far, 4 have not been found in the fossil state, neither the leaves nor the
roots, no more than the trunk itself, but only the large fruit of
spherical shape that leaves no doubt about the nature of the entire plant
which constitutes the genus Podocarya (Bucklandi). The Wealdian formation
presents us with two more monocotyledonous plants of which we find the
traces in the Deistersandstein of northern Germany: it was first Cla-
thravia Lyellii, a very little-known tree, and Temskya Schimperi, which represents
maybe smell a palm tree. Strasbourg. P.K. (To be continued.) BIBLIOGRAPHY. Picturesque Walls of Insects, by V. Rendu, Paris, Hachette, 1870. (Illustrated pink library.) We saw the publication, a few years ago, of this book whose title alone
must already tempt us. Open it, and we will see that among the thousand
examples of curious manners which offered themselves to him, the author perfectly knew
to choose those which were most likely to excite the admiration of his readers for these
small beings that we too often despise without knowing them. Many of the facts reported by Mr. Rendu are new or at least
little known: I will cite, for example, the manners of Cerceris bupresticide; but
The history of this hymenoptera, of which a few words have been said in our
fenille (page 106), is certainly not the most curious of those
carries the autenr: he still reviews the mores of forty other
species of all orders and knows how to paint each by its particular line. Naturally bees and ants also have their place in these stories,
because, even after all that one could already say on their account, the subject is
far from exhausted. Mr.

 

— 20 —

COMMUNICATIONS. We call back & our qwils correspondents will do us a favor by sending us their
copy made on one side only. Dextral and sinister heliw, — We know that among molluscs, certain individuals are
dextral, that is to say that they have their mouth directed to the right, while almost all of
Species is scene, and vice versa. These aberrations being very rare, we do not yet have,
as far as I know, observed if they are hereditary, which could give rise to a
constant race, either dextral or sinister. I therefore call the attention of malacologists to
these two points: do these monstrous molluscs reproduce themselves and, in this case,
do they give birth & molluscs having the mouth in the usual position, or
Is paberration constant? The question is more important than it seems Petre au
First on board. ELE. The iron needed by plants. "Although I was perfectly certain that the iron is
necessary for plants, I had never however directed my experiments in this direction. The interesting article by M. Lemaire made me decide to undertake them. So far I have acted
with two geraniums, cuttings that I had made on the same individual. both put

under the same conditions, one was left alone and the other treated with iron. I him
caused the roots to absorb one gram of iron protoxide sulphate per 100 grams
@water. — The first developed well, but withered very quickly. The second has

sprouts very vigorous young branches, of a remarkable green; moreover, the parenchyma
was much thicker, more spongy. A fortnight later, the plant was
. The effect was not long in coming. the

 

carried & the cellar and completely immersed in the dark
treatment was the same, but the leaves turned a little yellow at first, then started &
shrink and eventually fall off completely. Baxenis. Exchange. — M. F. Ancey, 56, Grande-Rue-Marengo, & Marseille, offers Coléoptres
all determined against especially terrestrial and fluvial Molluscs. icle on the Boletus, read

 

Erratum, — In the last issue, page 4, at the 8th line of Var
basidia instead of baridia,

 

CORRESPONDENCES. MM. A. W., @ Hertzenburg: We thank you for your article, but we regret-

tones of not being able to insert it, at least @here & for a while. A. G., @ Mulhouse: Did you receive our letter? We are waiting for your news
impatiently. F.A., @ Marseille: Should I send you the twelve numbers making up the year before
edent? A. L., @ Senones: Your work reached us too late to be included in the
this issue; it will appear next month. typ. Oberthilr and sons, 4 reindeer. — House in Paris, 4, rue Salomon-de-Caus. 4°" January 1872. The Number: 25 cents. No. 45. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

Payable in advance by postage stamps or money orders:

 

ral

 

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, f. 8 paran, | For PE f.4 pr,

 

 

Subscription for Great-Britain, 3 s, 6 A British subsribers can remil in peony or Inopenny postage slamps,

 

Address: 4 Paris, at M. Ernest Dollfus, 29, avenue Montaigne: in Kingersheim (Haut-Rhin),
at Mr. Gustave Weiss. People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. LAMARCK. Humboldt's thought: "He alone works the rich carpet of humanity
which, full of energy and inner strength, rises freely, "finds its
application in the life of this modest scholar. Like Linnaeus and so many others
naturalists, he had to struggle against the greatest obstacles; like them too
he can triumph over it, thanks to his energy and his persevering love of work. Jean-Bapliste-Pierre-Antoine de Monet, Knight of Lamarck, was born on
August 1, 1744, & Bargentin (Somme), from a noble family, but not well off. Destined at first in spite of himself for the priesthood, he entered, after the death of his father,
in the career of arms, and was commissioned as an officer on the battlefield of
Willingshausen (Seven Years' War, 1761). Sent to garrison & Monaco, he
had an accident which forced him to come to Paris for treatment. Pen-
during his illness, he took govt & natural history, and it was in 1769 that he
brewed the medicine. Ul! studied for four years amidst the most difficult
bigger ; then he fell back on botany. He worked tirelessly during
for ten years, and published, in 1779, his first work: Flore frangaise. This
book, sponsored by Buffon and Daubenton, was a great success. Lamarck tried
to reconcile in his system the method of Linnaeus and the more rational one of
Tournefort, by B. de Jussieu, etc. The advantages of his dichoto-
mic were all material; but it contributed much to popularize
natural history. Returning from a scientific trip he made in 1781 41782
in northern and eastern Europe, with Buffon's son, Lamarck, named
assistant to Daubenton in charge of the collections of the Jardin-Royal, did not
to quietly continue his studies of botany; but the garden was, by
decree of the Convention, issued on the proposal of Lamarck, transformed
in the Natural History Museum; despite his many merits, Lamarck could not
obtain only the last chair, which included the study of animals then known
sounds the vague names of Insects and Worms. At the age of 50, he was obliged
to study in depth a matter which was completely foreign to him. Thanks to he-
great efforts and & his genius, worthy of a better fate, he worked so well that he could
give, as the fruit of his work, the System of animals without vertebrae
(1801). In this fine work and in the Histoire naturelle des animals sans ver-
darkness, Lamarck overthrows Linnaeus's system, divides all this insignificant

 

 

     

 

 

  

       
  
   

  

 

 

 

2 . 7

into twelve classes and shows how interesting the story of these little animals is.
healthy and useful. Shells and polyparies were the object of many observations.
vations on his part; he even studied fossil shells. His classification of
animals is based on the natural ratios of form, structure, proportions
tions, elc. It was he who introduced into science the distinction of animals
in vertebrates and invertebrates. Finally, he outstripped even Cuvier in ideas of
coordination that were born instinctively in his mind. After these three
great works, the most important is his Soological Philosophy, which contains
Lamarck's ideas on the highest questions of physiology, and which
contains, besides numerous errors, very important and lofty views. We will not talk about his work in physics, meteorology and
chemistry, which announce a bold genius, but which also contain concepts
too bold, and unfortunately devoid of solid foundation, Lamarck
also occupied himself with philosophy; he even published a book of this kind: System
analysis of the positive knowledge of man (1820.) The end of Lamarck's life was unfortunate. He became blind and could not
continue his studies only with the help of his daughter, 4 whom Cuvier (1) returned
a magnificent and just eulogy. He endured adversity unabated, and finally died
December 18, 1829. His name will remain as that of the unfortunate scientist,
too modest to rise in the same way, but to which the disinterested worship of
science procured the noblest enjoyments. May his example excite the
Youth & persevering love of work, selfless devotion to
science! Mulhouse. A. COURYOISIER. Society for Scientific Studies of Angers (2). APUS CANCRIFORMIS Cuvier. Classified by Linnaeus with monocles, by de Lamarck with horseshoe crabs, and
designated by Geoffroy under the name of Binocle, the Apus cancriformis
is today part of the branchiopod crustaceans, and belongs to the order of
Phyllopodes and to the genus Apus, of which it is the type. This crustacean is quite reminiscent of the shape of Horseshoe Crabs, but with a slight
review it is easy to see that he diflers essentially. His body is
composed of about forty segments, of which the last seven or eight do not bear
no legs and form the tail, which ends in two nets. The head is confused with the body and the whole is covered with a bonclier
olive tree formed in one piece, flexible, indented & its lower end
and be imperfectly guaranteeing the soft and fleshy body of the small animal,
which is often preyed upon by aquatic reptiles. The lamellar legs, reddish brown, are in a state of movement.

 

(1) Praise of Lamarck. (2) This Company, founded

young naturalists of this city, kindly
hous pampering a this

written by its members. =

ment continuously, even when the animal is at rest. This movement must have
intended to form a current between the lamellae and thus to bring, to the branches
shits, new lean and charged with oxygen. I observed this crustacean 4 Montjeau-sur-Loire (Maine-et-Loire), in
water flags which being fed by the river, dry up when it comes
To lower. Then the ground, és sablonnenx, becomes shiny, the grass dries up,
and the Apus, which were observed a few days before, die with the dis-
appearance of the element which is clean, leaving & earth a layer of
their fragile corpses, which the birds take care of removing in a short time. When, in the spring, the crucs of the Loire filled by infiltration these
short-lived ponds, and the April sun has cooled their waters, the Apns re-
appear in such great abundance that by plunging the hand into them one often withdraws
many of these little animals. A very remarkable fact is that on a course of more than one link, there are
n large number of ponds and only in a few, neighboring
On the other hand, we find the crustacean in question. I have consulted, on the subject of this Branchiopod, several authors, and tell them
not knowing his moves. Dr. Chenu (1) believes him to be a hermaphrodite, but has
nothing certain & this snjet; he even thinks that careful observations will
would help discover the males, naturalists having so far not reported
only females, which they suppose capable of fertilizing themselves. Wai seen in an aquarium, where I studied them, my Apus indulge 4 uo act
very fast, it is true, but could well be a coupling; and if
Von consider the shape of the animal's legs and shield, it will be easy
to convince oneself that a somewhat lengthy rapprochement is impossible, because
not having, like certain aquatic insects, dorsal striae and
larses 4 sucker, and not even prehensile limbs, the act of fertilization
dation can last only a moment. From this no doubt comes the opinion einized by
certain scholars that the genus Apus, and mainly the cancriform Apns, is
composed exclusively of fertilized females like those of aphids and
Daphnia (2). I would think that the rapidity of the development of these
crustaceans by saying that they appear instantaneously, after a plnic, in
places where they had never been observed, and are in simple
flasks of water. — I believe, on the contrary, that the birth and the existence of this
curious animal are subordinated 4 a tate of circumstances, this one being
of extreme delicacy. It happened to me often. carrying in a bottle
a supply of Apus, to lift them all dead, after a very short journey. Similarly, if in the aquarinm which contains them too cold lean is added, if
this water does not come from the place where they were born, we run from
great risk of seeing them perish in an instant. These various facts therefore lead me to believe that these animals do not develop
point as easily and as quickly as one wants to say. They
are, moreover, quite rare; I have never met them except in the place
mentioned above, during my entomological excursions

Out of twelve individuals that I owned, seven spawned in my aquarium. The cents were placed on the walls of the vase in groups of twenty or so.
near. Each egg is yellowish, about the size of a pinhead, and with the
microscope we see in the middle a purplish point which must be the germ
of the embryo. (1) Encyclopedia of Natural History (Crustal
©, Same work as above. Es, p. 59). 4 ow

These eggs are enveloped in a transparent viscous coating that adheres
strongly to the body where it is fixed, dries out quickly out of the water and
takes on a gray color. Cuvier says that these eggs can be kept dry for several
years without their germ undergoing alteration (1). I haven't been able to check yet
this last fail, but of the eggs which I had collected and which I put in the water
had not changed in appearance after several weeks of immersion. As for the food of these crustaceans, the authors do not mention it. I saw
mine successively eat lentils (Lemna minor), fragments
aquatic plants (Callitriche stagnalis) that have fallen to the bottom of the aqnarium and
half decomposed; small achae martes; and finally, with extraor-
dinner, they devoured vermicelli intended for & some sticklebacks. From these various foods it can be concluded that these small animals are
omnivores, but I still believe that half-decomposed bodies are
especially those who their; agree, el, in this, continue the role if
important purifiers that nature has entrusted 4 the family of crustaceans. Angers, June 18, 1871. Ernest Chauveau. INFLUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGETATION. Light is an agent which has a very great importance in life.
general. It is she who, penetrating into the tissues, gives life to plants
submitted & its action, which varies with the opacity, the transparency of the organs and
with a large number of other But among the many sources of
light, there is only plant light; because if
The artificial Inmiére succeeds in greening etiolated plants, it cannot
while making the fenils able to assimilate the carbon absorbed in the air
in the form of carbonic acid. The light which has the greatest influence on the
gelation is, without a doubt, sunlight, composed, as we know,
of rays which, varying in color, act in a different way on
the tissues of plants and on the formation of certain principles. Most plants need this agent: however some,
like the Orobanches, the Mushrooms, can reach their complete
development without its assistance. As for the quantity of light necessary for plants, it varies with the
very nature of plants. : Thus, young people, destined to live in an environment
exposed to the sun, need a more intense light than the others, which
grow naturally in the darkest forests; however the light,
weak as it is, is indispensable & all vegetarians provided with
chlorophyll, because it is this agent that gives rise to the fragrant principle of the leaves
and certain organs; it is he who gives most plants the power
to release oxygen and to fix in their tissues the carbon which comes
of the carbonic acid of the atmosphere. But the light is not only born~
necessary for the formation of chlorophyll in imitation; she still plays
a very big role in the circulation of sap and in transpiration. The ex-
Experience proves, in fact, that during the day plants pump more water
only during the night. Finally, certain forms that the

 

 

     

callus
sunscreen that plays a role on |

 

   

  

 

    

 

   

 

 

 

 

   

  

(1) The Animal Kingdom, t. ll, p. 67. — % —

plants and certain movements performed by the leaves, the calyx and the corolla
of some plants, are still due to this agent. 1. — Role of light in the creation and destruction of the principle
plant dye. The green color which exists in the fabric of
leaves. If Gn indeed exposes & this agent germs that have been eliminated in
laying seeds in a very dark place, the fenils, of a yellow tint
nitre, will soon turn 4 the color green. A large number of expe-
These facts prove that light is indispensable for the formation of chloro-
phyll; if, for example, a green plant is transported to a place sheltered from
yous solar or any other light source, the beautiful green tint is rem-
placed by a pale yellow color. This can also be observed in the
dark cellars where potatoes sprout. So we can green a plant
etiolated by placing it in an enlightened environment, and what is remarkable,
it is that one can produce the partial etiolation of a plant. If, for example,
as Mustal did on a laurel tree, we partially shelter a plant against
The action of the solar rays, it will be noticed that the parts which develop-
under this shelter will turn white, while the others, exposed to the
eyes, will turn green as usual. The same phenomenon can be produced by
sticking a strip of lead on one side of a sheet, so as to in-
catch the sun's rays. The lit part will remain green, while the other
will take on a yellowish tint. Sunlight has, as we see, a very great influence on the green.
dissent; but is she the only one who can produce such a phenomenon? The
experiments of some physiologists have shown that artificial light
could in this case replace it. Humboldt was able, by means of two lamps,
color etiolated fenilia of Lepidium sativum pale green. From Candolle
has greened germs (Sinapis alba, Myagrum sativum, with six Argand lamps,
and Hervé Manjon produced, by the electric light, the same effect on
rye chaff. Light does not only act on the surface of the organs; because sometimes she
grows deep enough in tissues to produce greening
Thus, some embryos like those of Gui, Maple, Astragalus,
ine, quite transparent it is true,

  

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

    

     

   

glitch

interior
although surrounded by the membranes of the g
owe their green color to the sun's rays. Some physiologists have
think* that these embryos could turn green without light; but
it results from the researches of Bohn on the embryos of Viscum and Acer, that
x-ci are unable to color in the dark. Humboldt nostenda that certain gases can replace Inmiére and
green plants placed in the deepest darkness. This great genius
asserts that he found himself in the dark underground mines of ‘Treyberg des:
green plants (Pou annwa ef compressa, Plantago lanceolata) whose colo-
ration came, according to him, from the hydrogen which was released from these mines. But De Candolle, who caused a large number of plants to vegetate in
bocanx containing this gas, could not develop the chlorophyll of the plants on
which he experienced. Among the organs that turn green even in the dark are the coty-
pedons of some gymuosperms and the fronds of ferns. It's the doctor
Sachs who demonstrated that light is not necessary for the development
chlorophyll in the germs of Pinus. Here, in a few lines, is the expe-
nothing that he did about this. I dug into two or three inches of dirt and

 

 

   

   

     

   

       

   

 

 

— 0™

covers with an opaque container the still colorless cotyledons of Pinus pinea
and canadensis, etc. After a while, these cotyledons turned green, well
that surrounded by the testa of the seed; like grass seeds,
sown at the same time and placed in the same place withered away. This
experience proves that the germs of gymnosperms do not need
light to color. As for the fronds of ferns, they take the crown
their dark green, even when they are sheltered from direct sunlight. Nevertheless,
the greening of gymnosperm sprouts and fern fronds does not
and as long as the temperature is favourable. Rol could not green
pine woods placed in a dark place and subjected to a temperature of
7 degrees Reaumur. According to Sachs, the chlorophyll of these genes cannot
form at a temperature of 4 degrees 7 centig. Thus the light ue can act
without the aid of heat. This is what the experiments still prove.
of this last scientist. Germs of Phaseolus which, exposed to the sun, turned green
in a few hours at a temperature of 30 & 33 degrees centig., and in
only seven o'clock & 8 and 10 degrees, took on a greenish tint only at
after fifteen days, 4 the temperature of 6 degrees. similar experiences,
made on the Allium, the Carthamus and the Cucurbita Pepo, showed that
neither light nor isolated temperature are capable of producing greening.
sow. From these experiments on Cucurbita Pepo, Sachs induced this law: "The
light remaining the same, the speed of greening increases as the square of the
temperatures. »

As I said above, the Inmiére contributes to the development of
chlorophyll in fenils and in some embryos; but there are gold-
particular ganes, as the corolla, the ealice of some planes whose cou-
their green comes from sunlight. Some colored sheets must
also their coloring in the light. In this category can be placed the
gnawing leaves of orroche and gnawing algae (Ulva fusca). It is in
ranting on these facts that scholars have claimed that the colors which decorate
the corollas are due to the action of the solar rays; but all these opinions
are in contradiction with the experiments that have been carried out to date;
ar those who have experimented on the corollas of various plants agree
4 say that darkness does not alter the color of flowers if they are normal
poorly developed. The corollas, in fact, remain as brilliant when:
that they issue from a dark place, and even then that the sepals of the ealice,
modification of the leaves, are etiolated,

As for the rays which play the greatest role in greening, this
are according to Guillemain, Gardner and Sachs, the least refrangible and the plas
vibrant, i.e. reds, yellows and greens. To achieve this result
tal, Sachs sowed seeds of Triticum, Carthamns, elc., in moist sand
placed at the bottom of two glass test tubes of equal size, which he placed
in a very dark place. As soon as the seeds erupt produce sprouts
completely etiolated, he transported in two glass cylinders, of a volume
more con-iderable, the test tubes closed by good stoppers, to which
was fixed. by a wire, silver chloride paper. After this di
position, he poured a solution of potassium hichromate into the gap formed
by the two unequal cylinders of the first apparatus, and a solution of oxide
of ammoniacal copper in the interval between the secoud test specimens. The first dissolution did not leave the red rays.
some greens; the tenth provided only the blue, violet and
ultra-violets. According to ¢ riences, the etiol germs were going green
faster in orange light than in blue light. Moreover, the
photographic paper which had remained intact in the cylinder, surrounded by bi-
copper chromate, had strongly braised in the apparatus & the copper oxide. — 27 —

 

His experiments therefore prove that the least refrangible rays pro-
rather evoke greening, and that the influence of light on the formation
action of chlorophyll is not parallel to that which it exerts on chlorine.
money rush. As for the transformations that take place in the tissue of the leaves when a
plant withers, you can see this through a microscope. If we
ohserve with this instrument what happens in the leaf cells
when these lack light, it will be noticed that the grains of chlorine
rophyll dissolve and lose the starch to give way only to
Jannes Wun corpuscles gray aspect x. An entirely opposite phenomenon occurs
nifest when light shines on etiolated leaves; because there is forma-
starch and chlorophyll granules. But where does this last one come from?
substance? Is it the result of a combination or a mixture? Dap! Senebier, this matter would be due to the blue-blackish carbon, which comes out of it. posing under the action of light in the yellow tissue of the leaves would produce the
green color. [| gives for taking only Indian ink crushed with
gamboge gives green. According to Frémy, whose opinion seems to me more
true as that of Senebier, because it is based on experience, the chloro-
phylle comes from the intimate mixture of a blue substance, which originates
under the influence of the solar rays, and of a yellow matter, which exists in
all neme leaves etiolated. This chemist made the following experiment on this subject.
boasts: he poured two parts of ether and one part of hydrochloric acid into
a test tube containing an alcoholic solution of chlorophyll. After
Stirring the mixture, a yellow-colored layer of ether formed and a
another of hydrochloric acid colored in blen. It was this experience that brought
Frémy believed that if an etiolated plant is subjected to the influence of
Inmiére, a blue principle is produced, which by mixing with the principle
pre-existing yellow, forms the green conleur. As for the greening of some
organs in the obseuril, Sachs, which turns green with sulfuric acid from the grains
of etiolated chlorophyllc, claims that it is di a substance which would act on the
protoplasm in the same way as light. Light therefore has a very great influence on plants, because it
contributes to the formation of green leaf matter, without which a plant
cannot assimilate the necessary carbon & its development. But the lu-
miter not only serves 4 to form chlorophyll; she still has the
singular property of bleaching the organs which have become colored under its
influence. Often the green leaves exposed to intense light undergo
an alleration which comes from the too energetic action exerted by S Organs
Sun rays. The green matter decomposes to leave a
yellow tint. This can easily be noticed, by submitting &
Direct action of the sun's rays on an alcoholic solution of chlorophyll. Sachs has researched which rays play the greatest role in the
discoloration of green matter. The experiments he conducts by means of solu-
colored tions, have led & concluded that the destruction of chlorophyll
occurs faster in white light than in blue light. It was Jodin who first observed the chemical
pagnate discoloration of green granules. I! follows from his observations that the
chlorophyll, in decomposing, absorbs oxygen and releases a small
amount of carbonic acid,

As well as the green matter of the leaves, the color of the flowers is destroyed
by light. All horticulturists know, in fact, that the color that decorates
the corollas of tulips deteriorate when these liliaceous are exposed too much to the sun
Also it is for this reason that they place their plants in a sheltered place.
solar rays, — According to the researches of John Herschel, these are still

   

 

 

   

 

 

   

   

 

  

   

 

 

 

 

    

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
   

        

 

    

 

 

  

 

  

— Ba —

the most illuminating rays that have the greatest influence on the destruction of matter
coloring flowers. Moreover, this physiologist thinks that each color is
destroyed by its complementary color; than for example, the color yellow
is decomposed by the blue rays, the blue by the yellows, reds and
oranges. R

We already see from this chapter how important is the role of the Inmiére on
the plants, since it is she who by her action on the plants erates and
destroys their coloring principle. Senones. ; A. LEMAIRE. (To be continued). THE SATYR PETEDE (Cuampienoy). On November 8 last, I went to visit the Bois de la Haie, a locality which during
these last months uous has offered such a rich collection of cryptogams, and parti-
especially mushrooms. Most of the species I had noticed there
or collected during the months of September and October had disappeared;
however, I was still able to note the presence of Boletus edulis, of the Aga
ricus buibosus. of Clavaria coralloides cl amethystea, etc. ; moreover I had
the good fortune to come across a species as rare as it is curious, and so far
search in vain, I believe, around our town. I want to talk about
Satyr (etid (Phal impudicus, Lin. Sp. 1848 — foetidus Sav. lung. 329),
mushroom well known to botanists for the oddity of its forms and for
Vodor wfecte that he spreads around him. The few observations I have
been able to do on this mushroom, added to the fails that I have collected in different
aulenrs, will allow me to draw a fairly faithful picture of it for you, and to
follow in the different phases of its development. Phallus impadicus, of the Phalloideae family, belongs to 4 genus
yoisin des Morels, from which it differs mainly by the presence of a yalva
complete, and auxqnelles i] was even united for a long time, under the name of Morille
immodest or felid. Before coming out of the ground, it is completely enclosed in its valva el presents
then the appearance of a whitish ball, of the shape and volume of a centenary.
about. This mass is soft and as: ante, cl commonly designated as
the name of the devil's egg or of the soreières. If we cut it vertically, we
note the following parts, going from outside to inside:

1° A whitish membrane, firm, which forms the outermost envelope
exterior of the fungus and does not present any solution of continuity;

2° An almost translucent, gelatinous yellowish mass; she forms
a thick layer, which covers the upper and side parts of the egg,
but which is interrupted towards the base, where it ends in a cul-de-sac. It is 
this substance which gives the mushroom its weight and its consistency. The base
is foried by a sort of disc & concave upper face and composed of a
white, compact tissue to which rootlets are attached;

3° An analogous membrane & the most exterior membrane Ja and lining the
internal face of the gelatinous layer, so that this mass is maintained
between two firm and resistant membranes. _ 4 A thin membrane, a sort of whitish film, often difficult
a sight, placed immediately under the internal membrane of the valva and

 

 

 

   

 

    

  

 

      

  

 

      

 

   

 

          
 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

~ 29 —

forming an internal and partial valve. This film envelops, in fact, the
mushroom proper, i.e. the cap and the pedicle, and sends
mimics an extension in this last organ. She is often torn
before the rupture of the valve;

5° The chapean, when we have made a vertical section of the egg, presents itself
in the form of two tapered greenish blades & their extremities and incarnated
towards the center. It is composed of a greenish substance contained in
large polygonal cells;

6° The pedicle is fusiform, hollowed out by a wide channel lined by the pellicle
of the internal valve. tl is formed by a kind of very loose cellular tissue,
but then firm, as if pleated and compressed strongly. This provision
easily explains the rapid development of the fungus. Such are the different parts which compose the Phallus & the state of the ball. Its lower plate is, as we have said, provided with long radicles,
numerous and resistant, which are nothing else than the mycelium. The valva takes a few days @ to arrive 4 matured; reach this point, he
tear violently, even sound, says Bulliard, with an explosion,
strong, especially in dry and stormy weather. Then the new being, after having

 

 

 

      

 

   

 

 

      

 
     

 

     

8
torn his prison into unequal shreds, springs up all mucous from this receptacle,
el, vivified by the light, grows with astonishing rapidity: in less than ten
minutes, it can reach its almost complete development. fl then takes on
a whole new look. The pedicle is elongated, fistulenx, bulging towards its part
medium ct tapering & its extremities; it is like spongy, and its surface is
hollowed out with a large number of small cells. 1 is weakly attached to the bottom

   

du_valva and crosses the hat that ends it, so as to form its part
superior a small white disc which presents an orifice communicating with
the inner canal, but usually closed by a remnant of the internal valve. The terminal cap is relatively small and cone-shaped; he is formed
by a small lamella whose internal face is plain and of a white mother-of-pearl, and whose
the outer face has a number of polygonal cells filled with
a soft, greenish substance called latex. We also notice, on the for-
around the hat, a small white border formed by a fold of the inner face
dull. Such is the aspect of the arrived & matured Phallus; but this fungus is destroyed
almost as fast as it grew. Soon the greenish coating that covers
The hat takes on a darker color and resolves into a material
semi-liquid, fetid and blackish which flows down to the ground, dragging
the feelings. The hat without its end:s' then only presents a framework
thin has polygonal surface. In moult time, the pedicle swells more
in addition, his tele tilts covered with his hat which ends up itself
detach, finally the whole mushroom falls into rubbish. According to Bulliard, the latex is made up of the reproductive organs of the
mushroom. Numerous spores, first round, then elliptical, would be
attached to the walls of the alveoli, and the intervals they leave open
would be filled with a mucilaginous substance which would be nothing other than
the fertilizing liquid. Fertilization would take place instantaneously, at the moment of
rupture of the valves, and the latex, flowing to the ground, will ensure germination

 

 
 
  

   

   

 

 

   

 

spores. These spores are not, however, the only means of reproduction.

 

of the Phallus impudicus, because it most often has, 4 its root, a small tu-
bereule intended to replace the primitive fungus. The appearance of this cryptogam, the cadaverous odor that exhales from it, are not very
to tempt mushroom lovers. However, he does not seem gifted with
poisonous properties. It is indeed said that wild beasts are looking for him

 

_- ie

 

when it is & the state of ball and that the cats are fond of it, even after its
full development. (I could not ascertain this last fact). 7

Moreover, the insects devour the latex with greed, which is perhaps a
because of the rarity of this species. Finally, several authors report that
peasants in certain parts of Germany dry it, reduce it to
powder and 'administer 4 their cattle, when they want to excite the activity
genes of these animals. ; >;

Chemical analysis, on its side, did not recognize any poisonous principle.
neous, but unlike fungus and bassorin in large quantiles. All these facts seem to sufficiently prove the harmlessness of this fungus;
despite this, a certain number of authors agree to regard it as true.
nenous. It is up to the brave and intrepid botanists to fix science on this point! Angel! Gustave MAREAU. Society for Scientific Studies of Angers. NELIX DEXTRES AND SENESTRES

In the latest issue of the journal, Mr £. E... called young people's attention
naturalists on a case of monstrosity which rarely occurs among mol-
glasses; he engaged the malacologists to collect new observations
ix se - We believe it useful and interesting to make today the
next message +

In the Journal of Conchology of MM. Fischer and Bernardi, vol. Vile, page
414, M. Récluz quotes the sinister monstrosity of the Helix aspersa "It is,
he said, very fond of La Rochelle, where she perpetuates herself in this state. »

Later, in the same volume of this journal, page 231, Mr. Caillaud affirms,
speaking of the same monstrosity, which I "have brought up sinister animals,
hoping to have them reproduced; they only gave Dextral Helixes. »

Finally, still in volume VII of the same work, & page 238,

Mr. Fischer expresses himself thus: “A most curious fact, without contradiction, is that
» of the production, in large quantities, of sinistral monstrosilates in a
> same locality; this is what we observed in La Rochelle. What to think of this
singular coincidence? — Could there be an entirely local influence due to the
meeting of certain conditions external to the life of the mollusk? »
We see that the question of hereditary monstrosities has been the subject of
look for more than one malacologist, even among the best known. And yet
However, the last word has not yet been said on this point. science asks
new research and observations; like Mr. E. E., we don't
would know how to engage the naturalists too much in dealing with a point that is still very uncertain.
tain and very controversial history of molluscs. Note. — We will be very happy to receive the information that we
could get us on the Sinister Helices of La Rochelle. Duai. Jules DE GUERNE. —3l—

BIBLIOGRAPHY,

    

Essay on a historical fauna of the wild mammals of Alsace, by
Charles Gérard, lawyer, member of the Natural History Society of Colmar,
— Colmar, Eugene Barth, 1871.4 vol. 8°, 7 fr. This book, from the pen of the witty author of "L'ancienne Alsace @
table," is likely to interest not only Alsatian readers, but
still those from other parts of France who deal with natural history. For a few years, Alsatian scholars, in the forefront of which I
you do not hesitate to place Mr. Aug. Stoeber, have failed popular superstitions a
special study. The whole private life of the people, its whole moral history
see through these last remnants of primitive naivety. What mainly provides
a rich mine of observations is nature. The book we are announcing in
is the take. Crest with the help of these childish traditions, these naive super-
which have been perpetuated in a host of proverbs, legends,
tums, local denominations, ete., etc., which Mr. Gérard was able to repeat to us
tory of wild mammals in Alsace. He did it with a conscience and
remarkable accuracy. Let young naturalists take this book into
hand! He will show them how we can take advantage of the most insightful things.
gnifying in appearance, because it is a fine study, that of the reports of the
penple with nature: everywhere one can find the documents of this history
Loire. Let us study only the superstitions relating to plants, the denominations
various mines which are attached to each of them, and one will be astonished at
the richness and variety of these jewels which have no brilliance for the observer
superficial, but which are invaluable in the eyes of the serious friend of the
nature. We recommend this book to all Leaf readers, and we
we believe that he will urge them to pay more attention to what is said and what is done
almost at their side. A, COURVOISIER. COMMUNICATIONS. We remind & our readers that we take no responsibility for their articles & our
correspond. They did us a favor by sending us, when they could, Uen-
seems of their work in one go. Trades. — We desiv
ment ferns and d
of the south of France
in Strasbourg. it exchange cryptogamous plants from Guadeloupe, in particular
lycopods (about 20 specific species) against plants
or Algeria. Contact 4 Mr. Paul Kienlen, rue Saint-Guillaume, 2.

     

    

     

would gladly trade coss fh
lists that would like to address & me. ncaises or exotic with the natura-

Jules de Gurnne, 9, rue de Lewarde, & Douai (North). Diplera parasite of oranges. — A new parasite has been reported this year which is
a lot of trouble with oranges and lemons in Algeria. This colonic, we know, withdraws

  

— 2 — P
from the trade in these fruits considerable income. We hold some of the details
which will follow from an entomologist currently in Algeria. The ravages caused by the
small diptera Ceralitis citriperda Mae Leay are very considerable and grow every year
and lemons are already lost in the province
disasters do not come to increase in the course of:

  
 

 

 

 

since 1869. More than half of the oranges
dAlge
following years, because there is no compensation for the immense development of

 

   

. It is to be feared that this:

this Ortalidie. Insectivorous birds are relatively rave, probably due
Igerian, and especially from Ia¢
Arabs and settlers are the envy. In addition, jellies stant not
can combat the multiplication of this graceful, but formidable enemy. Maybe
would it be necessary to order the continual collection of fallen fruits before the evolution of
the insect, and their submersion in pits filled with water strongly mixed with

   

of the poverty of the vegetation has

 

¢ incessant as their

 

   

in this country, nothing

 

 

quicklime, until their complete destruction. Help of sound 0

 

This fly pierces the fruit iduct and deposits under the bark a certain
number of eggs. The fruit exudes a kind of gum from the pigire, then turns yellow and

eventually fall. Several entomologi

 

es, currently in Algeria, are studying this scourge with
care; in any case, if we do not seriously advise, our beautiful colonic will soon sufivir
cruelly under this

 

report. Iylophages. — Could someone tell me a way to destroy larvae of
Xylophages who have settled cient in old paintings and who threaten
to multiply there? Hydrogen sulphide cannot be used, because it would damage the
board. D.

 

  

of! The study of ants. — M. Vorel employs for this purpose an apparatus composed of two glasses. of glass approximately one square foot, separated by an interval of one centimetre; the sides are

 

made of iron plates

 

r-white, Inside is sawdust and sand,
leri

The device is covered with a sheet of cardboard, because these insects work with more
safe 1)
reil, a rubber tube abou-

in which the ants dig their ¢

 

‘ies. ity in darkness, To feed his prisoners and introduce pure air, M. Fo
applied, & an opening, in Pun des edt

 

 

Pap's)

     

weaving A small wire cage, about 2 cubic inches. This
ines the

food for the ants that Mr. Forel also feeds by means of honey with which he coats the

 

nt ane cap
cad

   

a small door by which one introduces the captives or the insects of the

bars of the cage, of which it is greedily collected,

CORRESPONDENCE. MM, A.C., Feldkirch. — We have received your letters, to which we will reply more
has.

 

W. 7., @ Taunton. — Thank you for the article by Mr Me G.; cherons de Pinsertion

in number 16.

 

we

 

 

G., @ Mareiae. — We have received the amount of your subscription for 1870. ‘Type. Onentuon et fils, & Renues, — Mo a Paris, rue de: Manteaux, 35.

der February 1872. The Number: 25 cents. No 16. YOUTH NATURALIST SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE
Payable in advance in stamps or money order by post:

 

 

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr. 3 par. | For V'Eitranger «fr. 4 per year

 

 

Suabserplon for Greal-Brlaa, 8s. 6. British sub-seribers can remit in peony or ivopenoy poslage stamps. Stadresse: & Paris, at M. Ernest Dollfus, 29, avenue Montaigne; & Kingersheim (Haut-Rhin),
at Mr. Gustave Weiss. People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. INFLUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGETATION. He. — Its role in chlorophyll assimilation. Plants find in the soil and in the atmosphere the carbon which
is essential; but it is mainly in the air which surrounds them that they
draw this element, not, it is true, from the state of a simple and solid body;
but in the form of combination with oxygen, that is to say, of carbonic acid.
fuck. This gas, penetrating through the stomata into the tissue of the leaves, comes
put in contact with the protoplasm verdi by the chlorophyll and the, under the in-
ompose into oxygen which partially returns
in the atmosphere, and in carbon which, fixing itself in the plants, contributes &
their growth and the formation of new organs. This phenomenon, which has been given the name of chlorophyll assimilation,
was discovered by Bonnet, and then studied by Senebier and Ingenhouz. It is 
to these two phtes that belongs the glory of having recognized the nature and the

origin of the gases absorbed and exhaled by the green leaves placed in

"water and subjected to the action of the sun's rays. They are also the ones who showed
that the decomposition of carbonic acid cannot take place if the plants
are devoid of chlorophyll and are protected from light. Assimilation is, in fact, intimately linked to the presence of green matter
in plant cells; because the plants which do not owe their coloring &
this substance do not enjoy the property of assimilating carbon and
to release oxygen. — M. Lory's research on broomrapes and
on most parasitic phanerogams; those of Messrs. Grischor and Marcet
sor mushrooms, prove, in fact, that all non-chlorophyllous plants
liferous do not eliminate oxygen during the day, but carbo-acid
nic, the release of which increases with the rise in temperature. So, he
only green plants are able to fix carbon in their
fabrics. However, there are colored leaves that behave similarly.
way as green leaves. We can place in this category orache
eats away at gardens and the fronds of most algae. Loved himself is, indeed,
assured by numerous experiments that all green, red or
brunettes eliminate oxygen during the day, the quantity of which is such that

 

    

fluence of the sun's rays, it becomes

 

  
  

 

 

  

    

   

=y. this observer was able to collect a liter of it by shaking plants spread over
an area of ​​less than one square meter. The thalli of Florids and Corallines reduce like algae
green carbonic acid under the influence of light. This is what has not
remarked M. Van Tieghem (1), who compared to broomrapes and mushrooms
let us know the plants belonging to these two orders. When this physiologist came
to discover the presence of starchy globules in the tissue of the Florids, he
was surprised to find in these algae, considered by Ini as exclusively
comburents, a principle not very different from starch, from this substance which,
always accompanying the chlorophyll, plays for this reason a very big
role in assimilation. It was M. Rosanoff who demonstrated by his experiments on Ceramium ru-
brum, Dumontia filiformis, that "the Florids are not more oxidizing
than any chlorophylliferous plant. They release, under the action of
solar rays, oxygen, and care is taken to constantly supply them with
carbonic acid. The decomposition of this last gas is all the more intense
that the plant receives more light and is subjected to a higher temperature
closer to 15 & 20°. (Rosanoff, Note on the physiological role of
Florid red pigment. — Anne. sc. natural, 1865; volume LV,
No. 5 and No. 6.) To explain the singular phenomenon presented by algae, some
physiologists claim that the pigment to which they owe their hue is not
other than chlorophyll whose green color would be masked by a
acid which will act on this substance in the same way as all acids
weak or energetic on certain vegetable dyes, such as that of tour-
nesol for example. This opinion has some reason to exist, since a large
many red algae and branes can turn green when brought into contact
potash or soda. These bases would have the effect of neutralizing
Vaction of! acid and consequently to transform the colored pigment into a ma-
green clay whose alcoholic solution behaves like that of chlorine.
rophyll. — That the coloring substance of seaweed is chlorophyll
transformed, it is no less true that there still exists in the fabric of
thalli of verl granules disseminated in the pigmentary mass and under
of which these cryptogams, according to MM. Cloez and Gratiolel, decompose the acid
carbonic. Of all the experiments of the scientists whom I have just named, one can
conclude that the presence of chlorophyll is necessary for assimilation; but
this material is not sufficient to determine the production of this phenomenon:
the help of light is still needed. Let this agent come and go, the green plants cease to absorb
carbonic acid and eliminate oxygen. If, for example, we transport
in a dark place of the plants placed under a bell, we will see at the
After some time the bell will contain carbonic acid. He
thus produces during the darkness a phenomenon inverse to that which manifests itself
during the day, since the plants, instead of decomposing the carbonic acid
oxygen and to reject oxygen, on the contrary inspire this last gas which, in
combining with their carbon, gives rise to a production and an expi-
ration of carbonic acid. It is also for this reason that plants lose a
part of their weight. This fact was recognized by M. Boussingault, who, having

 

   

 

 

      

 

 

 

 

(!) Van Tieghem. — Note on the anylaced globules of the Florids and the Corallins
(Annals of natural sciences, 1865; volume 1V, n° 5). ==

vegetate ten peas in a dark room, noticed after two months
a loss of organic matter equals 452.9%/o. This loss, suffered by the
vegetables put 4 sheltered from light, comes from the fact that they consume a
part of the carbon that they have assimilated by the action of the sun's rays,
to form with oxygen inspired carbonic acid, the proportion of which,
as this chemist demonstrated for Je Jaurier-rose, is, ’ equal surfaces
and for equal times, much less than the quantity of the same gas
broken down in the cells during the day. Obscurity therefore exerts unfavorable effects on plants provided with
chlorophyll, since these, instead of increasing in carbon, burn
expense of their own substance. A host of other experiments show that light is an indispensable agent.
thinkable of chlorophyll assimilation, which in recent times has been
subject of much research by physiologists

MM. Cloez and Gratiolet have studied this phenomenon on portions of Myrio-
phyllum, Potamogeton,Ceratophyllum and Naias immersed in water. 1] results
of their experiences that aquatic plants give off in the sun, by the face
upper part of their leaves, of oxygen, the abundance of which is such that six stems
of Potamogeton perfoliatum, bearing 145 leaves and 160 centimeters
cubes of volume, can produce, in ten hours, 2 liters: of gas, that is
i.e. nearly fifteen times their own volume. These two scholars have moreover
observes that light exerts, according to its intensity, an influence more or less
less on the elimination of oxygen which, slowed down by a simple cloud,
becomes more active when the sky is completely uncovered. Placing
screens in front of devices that contained aquatic plants,
way 4 to intercept the solar rays, Mr. Cloez was able to make insensitive
Exhalation of gas. MM. Calvert and Ferraud, by methods different from those which had
put into use before them, arrived & determined the quantity of gases
produced by plants during the day and at night. The analyzes that
made these two physiologists of the air contained in the hollow lines and in
certain parts of plants that stick to the ground (baguenaudier pods, stems of
hogweed, reed, brass), led them to the following conclusions:

1° The gases included are composed of oxygen and a proportion of car-
bonique stronger during the night than during the day. 2° The reduction of the carbonic acid which is carried out with more vivacity &
a fiery Sun that has a weak light, begins as soon as dusk arrives
to continue even under the influence of diffused light. It therefore follows from all these experiments that solar light plays a
considerable on assimilation in cells & chlorophyll. This source
light is, moreover, the only one that can produce such a phenomenon; because the
artificial light which can cause the greening of etiolated leaves is
unable to cause green plants to eliminate oxygen. Biol, who enlightened
by means of a lamppost of his geodesic apparatus of Agave leaves
americana dipped in Skin, noticed no bubbling
carbonated. — De Candolle also did not obtain any result by exposing Lyctun
barbareum and Aristolochia i the light of six Argand lamps. As for the rays that have the greatest influence on the elimination
Woxygene are, according to the research of MM. Daubeny, Draper, Rosanoff,
Cloez, Gratiolet and Sachs, the least refractible and the most enlightening. Daubeny, who made experiments on this subject by means of various cylinders.
colored and in which were enclosed green fenillae belonging
a terrestrial plants, found, in analysis by the eudiometric method
the gases contained in its apparatuses, which Jes leaves exposte 4 fa Inmicre

*

       

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

  

   

 

  

     
  

   

 

  

archo

orange give off more oxygen than those hit by the rays
red and purple. . i. According to Draper, who presented to the different regions of the spectrum sheets
dives in water saturated with carbonic acid, the elimination of oxygen is
Ason maximum in the yellow ray, while the red and purple rays
produce virtually zero effects. M. Rosanoff, who has researched the various roles played by luminous rays
on the decomposition of carbonic acid in the tissue of the colored thalli of
Floridées, thought he could conclude from his experiments that half of the spectrum,
composed of the most refrangible rays (blue, violet), is the least
conducive to the release of this gas. MM. Cloez and Gratiolet, placing in glasses of different colors
flasks containing aquatic plants soaked in water,
recognized that the volume of oxygen removed is much greater than
rable in colorless and yellow glasses than in reds, blues and violets. Mr. Sachs, instead of determining, as those physiologists had done, the
amount of oxygen removed by the leaves of submerged plants, arrived
to the same result by a much simpler process, which consists of 4 counting
the gaseous bubbles that exhale from the mutica of the leaves. The devices that
this doctor used for this purpose consisted of several glass cylinders
Equal capacity containing solutions either colorless or colored by
various substances (red dichromate of potash, — ammo-copper oxide,
nical, etc.). In these cylinders was successively transported a
velle that encloses the leaves (Ceratophyllum, Myriophyllum) plunged
in water charged with carbonic acid. This acid, destined & Ja saturation of
Skin, was produced by carbonate of lime and hydrochloric acid in
a bottle which communicated with the test tube by means of a glass tube
one end of which fitted the bottle cap and the other
plunged into the interior of the liquid. It results from the experiments made by this botanist on a multitude of plants
aquatic bubbles, as the number of gaseous bubbles, & an equal temperature and
for equal times, is much more considerable in white light
than blue or violet light. All these experiences suffice to show how important is the
role of light on assimilation. It is this agent, in fact, which, acting on
Carbonic acid absorbed and brought into contact with the green matter of plants,
causes this gas to undergo a decomposition by virtue of which the plants increase
contain carbon, an element that is necessary for them to grow and
to develop. This reduction, which takes place more quickly
of the most illuminating rays only under the action of the most refrangible,
not having light as a true cause, incapable of producing it on its own. If so, what is the main organ of assimilation? It is, according to the
most physiologists, the protoplasm colored green by chlorophyll,
by this substance which, according to them, will have the property of decomposing,
competition with light, the carbonic acid that plants draw from
atmosphere through the stomata of their leaves. Nancy. AD. THE MAYOR. TIPS FOR BEGINNERS IN ENTOMOLOGY. IV. — Preservation of the collection. There are few collections that require more careful monitoring than a

— 37 —

tion of beetles. These unfortunate insects, constantly persecuted for
their life, still have many enemies after their death. Don't please us-
let's not, it's a law of nature; but let us strive, by our vigilance,
to ward off the danger that constantly threatens our entomological collections. He
is much easier to prevent than to cure: often one is possible when
other is no longer. let's come. And first, let's place our collections, either in a cabinet &
closing well, furniture which should not be nenf, under penalty of seeing the
play, cracks form, and dust and moisture creep into the
collection, - soil, and I believe this preferable, in boxes of which one will find
the description in my last article, which close well, are fa
carry and dressers & handle, and which will then be placed in a closed cupboard. If these boxes are new, he will want to keep them for at least a few days.
before using it; if they have already been used, they will be put on a high temperature.
perature, in a stove for example, taking care not to damage them,

As for the insects themselves, they will be preserved from many attacks.
by placing at the corner of each box a small piece of sponge fixed by a
pin and 4 half soaked in a mixture of equal parts carbolic acid
el of benzine: the sponge is moistened in this way every two months or preferably
every month. We find at M. Deyrolle a small device as simple as
quintile, called vaporizer, in the middle of which one can water directly
insects from the collection of the preservative liquid reduced to a state of dust
fine which cannot harm anx insects, and on the contrary preserves them from mold
or parasites. Attacks can still be prevented for a long time
parasitic animals and plants, by immersing the insects in alcohol
carbolic; the same means should be used for suspect insects or
already achieved. Two things must still be carefully avoided in a collection: dust

which serves as a shelter for moths, which removes all their freshness from insects and
limps, — and clumsy fingers that break the antennae and tarsi into
willing to take or replace an insect. Finally, if by misfortune the enemy has entered the place, he must prevent it.
to make progress, by immediately removing the attacked insect, treating it
in a suitable way, and replacing it only when it is completely
freed from its parasites. I forgot to say that we generally recognize a
attacked insect & a fine brownish dust which is below it
in the bottom of the box. What are these enemies that the entomologist fears so much and how
can he get rid of it? These are first the beetles, small beetles of
oval shape, who know very well how to play dead when they are surprised; then
the plinus, small brown beetles, elongated, & fairly long antennae;
the dermestids, larger and therefore less to be feared, since they can be seen
more easily; finally, the larvae of these three genera, which settle very
comfortably in the box of the hoites, and which must be destroyed without pity. These parasites devour the soft, badly dried parts of insects; they
eat away the tissues and the joints, and this necessarily results in the fall
legs, head, which will roll pell-mell at the bottom of the box. It's not
not all: an acarus that most often escapes & observation by its small
size, the Uyroglyphus entomophagus also attacks in large numbers the
collections; it is found either on insects, or in their interior, or in the
dust, at the bottom of the boxes. The causes that promote its development
are moisture, poor desiccation; the insects turned greasy and the
large beetles are favorite victims. The frequent display of the boxes
in the sun can contribute to hunt and especially to prevent these parasites. S556

The entomologist has other accidents & fears for his dear insects:
when the verdigris puts itself on a pin, there is only one way of salvation,
is to change the pin. When an insect turns to fat, ov will plunge it
in a separate mixture of benzine and acid. If it appears
moulds, we will pass several times on the insect a brush
soaked in strong alcohol in which one hundredth (no more) has been dissolved
of corrosive sublimate. Finally, if you break a leg, an antenna, etc., you will have to glue them back together very
carefully (which is not always easy) by means of a dissolution
rather thick shellac in alcohol, to which M. Leprieur advises
allowed 1/100° Canada balsam. You can also use strong glue
liquid. (To be continued.) E.

   

  
    

   

 

 

NOTES ON TWO MINERALOGICAL SPECIES. Among the many mineralogical spaces contained in the sands of
the Loire, there are two which, until now, have been confused in the on-
local variations, although they have been carefully studied by Dufrénoy
in his Treatise on Mineralogy; they are: 1° magnetic or oydulated iron
litaniferous; 2° the titai iron

These two species have been brought together by M. M
mineralogy of Maine-ct-Loire (Bull. of the Soc. academ, d'Angers, t. seventeenth),
sounds the names of iron tilané, nigrine, with those of ménakanite, sand tita-
nifere for synonyms. This mineralogist, however, seems to suspect these two
variegated when it gives the character of the species qwil sometimes describes to be
alterable by the magnet, however not. Also, speaking of wydulated iron,
he cites a variety (granular oaydulated iron or arenaceous) "in rounded grains
in the middle of the sands of the Loire, forming streaks in the coves of the land
riparian... and usually titaniferous," variety which, certainly, must relate
a One or & other of the two species we wish to distinguish. These two species, or rather these two varieties, are so called by
Dufrenoy:

4° Oxidized iron titanifer
Vamant. 2 Titanium iron — Dulr., Mineral., t. 1, p. 626 — not attractive to Paimant. This last species contains much more titanium oxide than the first.

D. According to Dufrénoy, we must bring menakanite, gregorite,
ne, gallisinite, nigrine and titaniferous sands of several

 

eniere in his Essay on the

       

   

 

 

    

 

— Dufr., Mineral., t. 1, p. 561 — attractive &

   

 

 

localities. Our colleague and friend, M. Préaubert, found the tinned iron in grains quite
large in the sands of Ja Loire, opposite June; this observer is even par-

came 4 to separate the titanic acid from the oxydulated iron with which it was mixed. Qant to oxidized titaniferous iron, I have observed in the fine sands of the
Loire which border the island of Saint-Jean-de-la-Croi With the help of a magnet, I was able to
separate in very significant quantity from the foreign materials to which it was mixed.
Jange. In addition to titaniferous oxidized iron, the sand of Saint-Jean also contains
a small amount of titanium iron not attractive to the magnet. Now it remains to know the role that titanic acid plays in iron
oxidized and titanium iron. Is it in the state of combination or of simple mixture
with iron oxide? Or are there two distinct species, intimately
combined, oxidized iron and titanium iron? — 39 —

Of these three opinions, the last seems to us the best, because it
explains at the same time the simultaneous presence in the same sands of iron
oxidized non-titanium iron, oxidized litanium iron and titanium iron, such as
as found by the researches of several mineralogists. Finally, according to
that this titanium iron would be more or less united with oxidized iron, it would be attractive
or not has the magnet and would constitute the two species distinguished by Dufrénoy. Angers. Georges Bover. Society for scientific studies @Angers. OVERVIEW OF THE VEGETATION OF THE PRIMITIVE WORLD. Continuation and end.) 6. — Cretaceous period. The Jurassic period is coming to an end: the powerful assizes have been raised
that time are invaded by the waters, and an immense sea comes to extend
between the reefs of small islands formed by the most haunting ridges of limestone
Jurassic. It is on the most humid shores of these desert islands that
the meager vegetation of that time. The weak documents that are available to us
reached were buried in the two sandy layers to which the
Cretaceous terrain gave birth to the green sandstone and quadersandstein of Germany.
North Mani; they thus correspond to the two extremities of this long
period. What forms the distinctive character of the Cretaceous vegetation is
the appearance and the first development of the true dicots; they are
unquestionably represented in the upper courses of the quadersandstein
by a very singular form of which we have not yet been able to finish your place
in the plant world; it constitutes the genus Credneria characterized by its
large leaves 4 three veins crossed by a large number of veins. In
at the same time, the number of cycads and ferns has greatly diminished; has
their place, palm trees (Flabellaria chanweropifolia) and
new iferes mostly belonging to the genus Brachyphyllum,
appearance dates back to the Jnrassic period. their species of fungi, some of which are arborescent, meet
re in the clay layers of the green sandstone of Aix-la-Chapelle. They belong to the genera Pleridoleimma of which we know many
species, Alethopteris, Pecopleris and Beinizia,

     

   

 

 

 

   

 

  

 

 
     

    

HE. — TERTIAM Period. § lt. — Lower Tertiary terrain (nummulitic and Eocene system). The mainland has grown in extent; the islands, 4 originally few in number and
dispersed in a sea without shores, came together to form con-
holds; everywhere, in the fauna as in the flora, we see dawning
The dawn of the new world that man will inhabit. The tertiary period opens with a marine formation characterized to the point of
zoological view by the nummuilites, and from the botanical point of view by the develop-
development of a particular family of marine algae, those of the Floridas which

 

— 40 —

appeared with the first sediments of the Cambro-Silurian terrain:
it is the nummulitic or epicretaceous system which is particularly
developed in the Alps and in the Pyrenees, and which in certain Jocalities
gave rise to considerable losses. It often contains such a quantity
Walgae that we gave to the floor which contains them I noi de grés a fucoides;
it consists of a dark-colored schist, resting directly on the cal-
nummulitic cairo and containing, at Monte-Bolca (Italy) above all, the imprints
fish and many species of algae. This schist goes with a quartz sandstone on which we also find
seaweed footprints; they almost all belong to the genus
Chondrids (Fucoides) and present numerous species, the most
characteristics are: Ch. Targioii, intricatus and furcatus. The flora of the Eocene, which has been preserved for us by the limestone tuffs of ean
around Epernay and by the lignites of Soissons, can be considered
derea as the continuation and development of Cretaceous vegetation. It is marked by the reign of apetalous angiosperms, which already appear
with chalk, and recalls as a whole the present-day flora of New
Holland combined with that of Brazil, Ceylon and Mexico, while
families & essentially European physiognomy completely miss him.
is lying. Phanerogamous plants now dominate; however, 4 rating of
dicots, we still truncate many monocots,
especially palms (F/abellaria), but very few herbaceous plants: these were
particularly evergreen plants, whose floral organs
were not yet developed as in our time. These are the
Eucalyptus from New Holland which we find next to the fig trees,
laurels and acacias of India, as well as many plants belonging to
belonging to the leguminous and malvaceae families, which would seem
indicate a tropical climate for the entire duration of the Eocene. §2— Miocene period. During the Miocene period, the vegetation, favored by a mild climate and
by many streams abundantly spread over the entire surface of the
continent, took on a development which is comparable only to that of the erypto-
s gigantic of the coal period. Peat bogs as far as the eye can see,

Huge forests, settled around large freshwater lakes
of that time and accumulated for centuries an enormous amount of
substances which formed the greater part of the char-
s today under the name of lignites. It is in these depots,
s fenilletes and in freshwater molasses from Switzerland,
find the materials that have revealed to us the history of the vegetable
tation of the Miocene terrain. With this formation, the flora became much more complicated: at the Apetalées du
erstaceous and Eocene terrain first join the Dialypetalous or
plants with 4 free petals, and later the Gamopetalaceae. What strikes us all
first, it is a variety and a multiplicity in forest trees (there are
knows nearly 200 species) which are only found today under the
lorrid zone; indeed, many species of eyprés (Taxodium), elms,
maples, walnuts, willows, birches, poplars and oaks
stand next to magnolias, tulip trees (Lyriodendron), acacias,
mimosas, fig trees and laurels from the tropics. Among the (petalate), it is especially the families Salicinae, Eupali-
feres, Proteaceae and Myricaceae which dominate; Corolliflora or
plants with 4 free petals then appear with Laurines, Myrtaceae,

 

     

           

  

   
 
 

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

 

=e

the Tiliaceae, and especially with the Acerinae, the Rhamnaea and the Leguminenses;
the Gamopetaleas are represented in very small proportions, and only
ment towards the end of the Miocene period, by the Synantheraceae, the Ericaceae, the
Oleaceae, Rubiaceae and Convolvulaceae

Among the most characteristic plant forms of the Miocene terrain, there
must especially mention the laurel-seamphrier (Daphnogene polymorpha), beautiful tree
who now inhabits China and Japan, but who during the period
Miocene was abundantly spread throughout Sui: then a laurel-
cinnamon tree (Cinnamomum polymorphum) which bears a great resemblance
with the current species of Ceylon; several species of oaks (Quercus lig-
nitum), maple (Acer tritobatum) and walnut (Juglans acuminata); finally
among the conifers I will cite the Penites Dionid of which we have found many
charred cones, and among the legumes, the Carsalpinia ambiqua. This rich and diverse flora seems to indicate a still tropical climate;
however, the Australian types have almost entirely disappeared, and the temper-
erasure seems to approach that of the southern part of North America.
North and Upper Mexico. A very interesting fact which proves that at that time
the climates were still uniformly distributed over the entire surface of the
earth, is the discovery made in Iceland and in Greenland of a flora
fossil, almost identical to that which characterized our regions; the vine, the
chestnut, maple (Acer olopterya) and walnut flourished there 4 célé du
tulip tree, magnolia and laurel: se. To Spitsbergen and to
the pale extended thick els composed of conifers, such as the pines
and yews, and about twenty species of dense trees including four species of
poplars, several beeches, oaks, plane trees, elms and walnuts. § 3. — Pliocene period. The flora of the Pliocene period has been preserved for us by the beautiful prints
veg*tales of the fetid limestone of ningen, on the shores of Lake Constance, of Haring,
in the Tyrol, and of Parschlug, in Siyria; it is getting closer and closer to the one
of North America and seems to indicate for this period a chmat
temperate, analogous to that of Upper Mexico or California. The numbers
palms of previous formations, mimosas, acacias and Proteaceae,
have completely disappeared; in their place are willow forests,
maple, walnut, birch, etc. So far we know about
140 species of fossil willows, 40 species of poplars and 30 species of maples,
including 16 4 Eningen alone. The number of species found in the latter
locality is immense; the conditions under which this deposit was formed
appear to have been the same as those which favored the formation of callus.
Lithographic Cairo of Solenhofen. Among the most characteristic species, I will again cite the lanrier-
camphor tree (Daphnogene polymorpha), a walnut tree (Juglans acuminata), three
very common maple species & especially Eningen (Acer tricuspidatum,
trilobatum and productum), two species of poplars (Populus latior and
ovalis), a willow (Salix Bruckmannit), several conifers (Taxodium euro-
peum, Pinus furcata and Ilex stenophylla), finally a rhamnée (Rhamnus
eningensis), a legume (Casalpinia major), a fern of the order
Polypodiaceae (Pteris eningensis) and an intermediate form between the
Rhizocarps and Lycopodiaceae (Isoetes Brawnii). One of the most interesting vegetable products of this time is succin
or yellow amber, precious substance, that since the highest antiquity we go
collect on the shores of the Baltic Sea, but which is also scattered
in small kidneys or in grains in lignite. — 422 —

Succin is nothing but a fossil resin, secreted by conifers
which formed immense forests on the site occupied today by the
Ballic Sea. It very often contains insects, such as ants,
Diptera, Hemiptera, Coleoptera, etc., as well as tree bark,
mosses and lichens, and even flowers of which all the organs are admitted.
ably preserved. Strasbourg. © Pp. K

     

ADVICE TO YOUNG MALACOLOGISTS. There is a class of animals whose study is of great interest and provides
to the naturalist's observation of varied facts, so to speak, to infinity. We
we want to talk about molluscs whose organization, mazurs and distribution
geographical distribution are fairly well known today, thanks to naturalists
of talent who have done extensive research on these various subjects and
thorough. We gladly collect molluscs or rather their outer shell.
nothing, the shell. Many are inclined towards this class of animals by the
singularity of forms, the beauty and brilliance of colors, finally by the number
even shells that Von imagines must encounter 4 each { i
how many esperans are rapidly degenerated! The d*bntants ren
first of all difficulties they did not foresee: instead of distr:
they were waiting for, these are searches made painful by the inexy
meticulous studies, many things finally to which they did not have
dream. Native molluscs are nowhere near as beautiful as exolic ones
and it is so difficult to obtain these! Frightened at the sight of the slow
obstacles, beginners imagine that they will never arrive 4 no re-
result; most form a misconception of science that they have not been able to understand.
be born again; they abandon it never to return to it. Some advice, a clear and educated guide would probably have attached
4 Natural history these minds repelled from the troubles of beginning. Soon
they would have been able—they too, like their elders—to appreciate all the advantages
stages of the study of nature. Unfortunately, it is well’ few young people
people who are lucky enough to meet, from the start, a naturalist
zealous who helps them with his experience. In this lack of advice and encouragement, some articles on the
research and conservation of molluscs will no doubt be welcomed
by the correspondents of the Feuille des Jeunes Naturalistes. - We
propose to snivre, @ very little, the plan that one of our collaborators
has already been drawn for the beetles. Hunting, preparation, conservation
molluscs, will successively be the subject of our studies. We do not claim to make here a most complete presentation without omission
none; many practical details, particular fails will escape us
without a doubt. That the critical spirit of our readers endeavors to discuss our
articles: we even ask them earnestly to communicate to us
the remarks suggested by our work. It will be the way to be more
complete, more accurate, and ultimately more useful & each. So then, dear readers, see you next month; we will begin to examine
explore together the various ways of procuring molluscs. Duai. JULES DE GUERNE. — 438 —

FORMATION OF MERCURY IODIDE (1). (translated from English.) Pour potassium iodide into a clean test tube and add
goutle & goutle a dissolution of one of the salts of mercury, bichloride by
example. The first drop produces a yellow precipitate from the formation of
Mercury iodide. Potassium iodide gives up its iodine and seizes
chlorine, while mercury seizes iodine; it is formed from Viodide
mercury yellow, this is immediately transformed into red iodide,
which is soluble in an excess of potassium iodide, and consequently disappears
quence if the liquid is stirred. By adding a certain amount of disso-
lution of mercury chloride, a stable precipitate of mercury iodide will be formed.
mercury as soon as the excess potassium iodide will be neutralized. We filter the
liquid that contains the precipitate; we wash this one & several times in
Veal distilled, then dried in a warm place. When it's dry,
we detach it from the 4 fillrer paper and place it in a porcelain crucible
on a lamp & alcohol. Gentle heat reduces red iodide to a vapor
irritant which sublimates into prismatic yellow scales on the less
warm from the vase; it can still be sublimated on a prepared glass slide
for microscopic examination

When viewed under high magnification, these crystals or scales exhibit a
interesting look. They are first yellow, but if you touch nn with the
tip of a penknife or a needle, it immediately turns red. This heater
Gently extends from this crystal 4 to all the others. The cause of change
change in color of the first crystal is due to a transformation of the shape
crystalline resulting from the shaking produced by the instrument. Plus the crystal-
reading is slow, the larger the crystals will be; if they are enough,
we will easily see the transition from the yellow prismatic form to the red form
octahedral. Taunton, College School. H.-S. Mac Geacu. COMMUNICATIONS. We remind @ our subscribers that the second year of the Leaf begins with issue 13
(November 1, 1871), and we ask those who have not yet done so to send us
the amount of their subscription. — We owe our readers and correspondents a few words of apology for certain
Leaf's imperfections: they won't blame us, we're sure,
if they remember that the second year of this publication is a year of testing and
of trial and error. Despite our best efforts, with the limited sum at our disposal, we

 

(1) Our readers know that we have said that we refuse to extend our program at this time
4 pure physics and chemistry, given the lack of space in the Sheet, ete. We have taken
however the freedom to insert this 'small article, da 4 the pen of an English schoolboy, in the poi
to encourage our colleagues on the other side of the Detroit 4 to finally send us articles of history
natural, often promised, but never sent,

=
can give at most 12 pages per month. In order to make the Leaf accessible
sible To all, we have set a low subscription price; so we hope that
by the end of the year, the number of our subscribers will have grown enough for us
allow for some necessary improvements. We therefore ask our readers to take
be patient for a few more months. As for our correspondents, whom we thank for their zeal and whom we would like
see more numerous, we will allow ourselves to address & some of them two
or three observations. We urge that the scientific names and the names
clean are written very legibly and with correct spelling. The articles should
be sent, as much as possible, before the 15th of the month, and as a whole: we have
recognized more than once what happens to items sent in single pieces, & times
irregular, leaving us uncertain about the greater or lesser length of the work. This
you can say a word about the kind of articles that would best suit the Leaf
and who are too often defeated. We have not forgotten that our main goal is to popularize
accurate, yet elementary and engaging, natural history in schools and families,
our other purpose being to serve as an organ for the young students of nature. But we don't
only receive more or less long works, which indicate in their authors
taste and Appetite for science, but which are not enough to fill our double
goal. We sometimes, but rarely, receive some short, practical and elemental article.
keep quiet, on the collections 4 to do, on some animal, plant or mineral well
known, etc ; but we would like to see these articles become much more numerous,
without for that those of the first category diminishing in number, quite the contrary. Let our correspondents multiply, and everyone will find his advantage. Why
would we not be addressed to such an observation which seems interesting, such an object which intrigues
the beginner? We are ready to respond as best we can. A little
initiative, and everything will be for the best. Trades. — Mr. Charles Bureau, lover of Lepidoptera, Petite-Place, 5, & Arras,
would like to enter into an exchange relationship with lepidopterists from France or
Foreigner. Errata. — At a time when it was difficult for us to give & the Leaf all the care
required, several errors have crept into the articles entitled:- Overview
on the vegetation of the primitive world; author asks us to correct them as follows:
p. 82, s. 2, read Odontopleris; para. 5, read Calam. Succowi; para. 9, read Ilmenau; —p. 99,
2 4, para. 2, read Plerophyllum Jegeri and Palyssia Braunii; para. 3, read Munsteri; —p. 100,
read Jeanpaulia Munsteriana; —p. 110, read Angiopter. Havense; para. 2, read N. elongata,

 

CORRESPONDENCE. MM. J.G., from Douai. — Could you tell us approximately the length of your
work, which will undoubtedly be very useful? — We regret that we cannot include
Poffer by M. F.; we can only accept those from our subscribers. E.L., & Amboise. - You will soon receive letter and dispatch. We have received a number of communications and inquiries when this number
was already composed; we will answer them in the next issue. Typ, Oberthiir et fils, 4 Rennes, — Mos in Paris, rue Salomon-de~Caus, 4 (square des Arts-et-Métiers). and March 1872. The Number: 25 cents. Do 47. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

 

 

Payable in advance in stamps or money order on the post office:
For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr. para. | For foreigners.......+600000-+ fr. 4 parameters Sabseripion for Great Britain, 8 s. 6 4. British subscribers can remit in peany or twopenoy postage stamps,
Contact: & Paris, at M. Ernest Dollfus, 29, avenue Montaigne; in Kingersheim (Haut-Rhin),
0 . at Mr. Gustave Weiss. People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. CLASSIFICATIONS IN NATURAL HISTORY. This title, a little severe, could make fear a very unpleasant page,
and most readers would hasten to skip this article if I did not
know a little in advance about the subject of my work. I don't want to make a
list devoid of interest and utility of names still discussed by the
naluralists, but present only, in such a short and also
exact as possible, the history of the classifications to which are attached
big names, and bring out the usefulness that comes with this necessary chapter
of natural history. To follow the order generally adopted in the courses,
I will start with zoology. I. — Ratings. zoological. The zoological classifications, like all the classifications in
general, are of two kinds: the one arbitrary are called artificial, the
seconds are natural. In the former, the divisions are based on the mo-
changes presented by certain parts of the body chosen arbitrarily;
in the seconds, we base ourselves on the whole organization of each of the
animals, and they are classified according to the degrees of resemblance and difference
that they offer to each other. Artificial classifications are generally easy to apply, but
we are led to compare them and to place animals in the same category.
evils which often have only an apparent analogy between them. In a word, we
knows their names, but we learn nothing about their nature. - We can say,
on the contrary, that the natural classifications are a kind of table ot
are arranged the characters provided by each animal, according to their degree of im-
lift. Thus, knowing the place an animal occupies in this
painting, we immediately know the most remarkable features of his or-
organization. The condition of a natural classification is therefore the study of
dominant characteristics that distinguish animals from one another. It then becomes
essential above all to know the structure, the functions and the mode of dis-
development of animals to be classified; this is where physics comes in
siology and anatomy. It is, for example, natural to think that the parties

 

— 446 —

least subject to variation in the various animals are those which have the greatest importance
lift. Fixity is therefore an important wes character to distinguish between
they are very numerous groups of animals; but it may happen that the import~
tance of an organ varies considerably from one group to another, and so such
organ which dominated in one group is in last place in another. We cannot know the anatomy and physiology of all animals,
and naturalists do not always agree on the relative importance of a
structural change. Also there is no real classification
natural and is it not surprising to see the authors differ in the choice of
methods. For zoology, it is 4 Cuvier that we must have taken the principles
natural methods for classifying animals. A naturalist as methodical as Linnaeus, a more extensive genius, but less
majestic as Buffon, Cuvier was the first naturalist of modern times,
although he counted among his contemporaries Lamarck, Blumenbach, Kiclmeyer,
Lacepede and Humboldt. A constant and capital difference that he noticed
between petrified bones brought to him from the quarries of Montmartre and
those of recent animals in his collection, made a deep impression in
his mind. He immediately understood that he would not know for good whether the bones
fossils come from species now lost as far as he would know
the species still extant, and not only these species, but also their
exact structure, their anatomy. It was then that he hastened to publish his
Tableau des animaus (1799) and its Comparative Anatomy Lessons. Finally, in
1817, appears the Animal kingdom. He does not yet divide the animals into ver-
tebrates, molluscs, articulates, radials; but & the occasion of each series
Whore, he reviewed the different classes of animanx. We notice
that, in his works, Cuvier always insists on the dissimilarities of the or-
ganes much more than their similarities. In summary, its purpose was to
distribute animals naturally as Jussieu had distributed plants,
not from frivolous and capricious motives like Linnaeus, but from the state of
most significant organs. Accordingly, it assigns the first rank &
those who are the most constant in the animal chain. The bone framework
takes first place; the animals are vertebrates or invertebrates. The gold-
traffic ganes come next; the animal breathes through the lungs, or
by gills, or by skin, or finally by tracheae. Finally
come the organs of nutrition, then those of reproduction. An example
will suffice to show! sequence that exists in this classification. I guess
give you teeth and feet. You will immediately know what
is the diet of the animal, for claws and teeth fit to tear a
prey indicate a predator; a hoofed foot and flat-crowned teeth,
a herbivore. Moreover, this animal ruminates, and from then on its jaw will have to be
move horizontally, which sufficiently shows a flattened condyle. Such is the Louvre of Cuvier. I think he has the biggest share
in the progress that natural history has made at this time. As for Lacépede,
its works its! many; but his classification of fishes into osseua and
cartilaginous does not offer you a soflisant rigor. We will now deal with the basis of the classification adopted
today. This is to indicate the nervous system. Nancy. E. BAaGNERIS. (To be continued). ree

Society for Scientific Studies of Angers. EXCURSION TO THE PONDS OF CHAUMONT (MAINE-ET-LOIRE). The presence in Angers of a botanist from Deux-Sévres, M. Giraudias, made me
plan a herborization for jendi 10 august. At six-thirty
morning, six of us are at the rendezvous; all do themselves proud and
pleasure to have among them their president and master, Mr. Boreau. Soon we leave the city, arrive at Saint-Barthcélemy, and throw in

glancing, I would almost say disdainfully, at Pignerolle and Chaufour, because
The interest which the plants of these localities might have had for the plants was entirely
lately erased by the lure of the riches that awaited us in the ponds
of Chaumont. While conversing about what we had to find, we
let us reach Corné and quickly cross the space which separates this village from
Read. In Lué, the Alyssum calycinum grows on the walls. Between Lué and Chaomont,
in the fields, along the road, we see several plants:
Falearia Rivini, Kentrophyllun lanatum, Melampyrum arvense, Lathyrus
tuberosus, Delphinium consolida, Specularia speculum, Stachys germanica,
Thymelwa arcensis Lam. (Passerina canceled Wiestr. ), Lycopsis arvensis,
Euphorbia exigua, E. cyparissias. Arrived at Chaumont, the Society separates into two groups which, by means of
different paths, reach the bed of an old pond, now converted into
meadows crossed by a stream. The freshness that reigns in these places
makes, & @time of we find ourselves, curious 4 explore, as the pronvent
the following species we pimesy collect in the creek: Epilobiun
hirsutum, EB. vululareWahlenb., Sium angustifolium, Equisetum telmateia,
Spirea ulmaria, Bupatorium cannabinum, Cirsium oleraceum (very rare);
—In meadows and boggy places, Campanula trachelium, var. urtica-
folia, Leontodon hispidus, Lobelia wrens, Betonica officinalis, Linum
cartharticum; — In the hedgerows comes the Sorbus terminalis. On the flowers of
Yeupatoir, Mr. Huttemin was able to seize two varieties of Callimorphe hera
(lepidoptera). This first harvest promised a lot from the localities that
4 remained to visit; also it is with pleasure that we take after the
clear the road that leads to aox étangs, through the moors. While the
botanists, under the direction of M. Boreau, recollect in the thickets formed
by Quercus toza, Peucedanum gallicum, Solidago virga-aurea,
Erica cinerea, LE. tetralix, Calluna vulgaris, Hypericum pulchrum,
Erythrea centaurium, Melampyrum pratense, Mr. Huttemin, on his side,
notices the presence of the ant-lion, thanks to the ingenious work that this little
insect knows how to do in the sand to arrive & seize its prey. Moreover, i]capture
two beautiful nymphs of Alantis religiosa (orthoptera), as well as the flamed,
Papilio podalirius. Soon the vast pond of Malaguet is oflered to our eyes. Dn middle of the jones
who fill it fly away, frightened by our approach, several herons
purpurea (Ardea purpurea), a magnificent bird which for only ten years
took possession of this locality, the only one in Maine-et-Loire where he nests. The very low water in the pond had left bare sandy beaches where
know: Juncus uliginosus, var prolifer, Caren aderi, Littorella lacustris
Radiola linoides, Anagallis cerulea, Samolus Valerandi, var. nana, Gna-

*

 

 

   

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

 

 

— 48 —

phalium uliginosum, G. luteo-aibum; Microcala filiformis, Cicendia
pusilla, Centunculus minimus, Ilecebrum verticillatum, are much more
rare, it is in vain that we seek Pinguicula lusitanica and Wahlen=
bergia hederacea, however found several times in this locality. All
4 At the end of V’élang, in a marshy place, we collect:
Eleocharis mullicaulis, Scirpus pungens Vahl. (Rothii Hop. ), species mari-
time that it is curious to find so far inland, Zplobium rivulare
Walhenb., Scirpus tabernemontani, Cyperus flavescens, Anagallis tenella,
Heloscidium repens. On your surface waters float: Zrapa nalans, Polamo-
geton natans, Limnanthemum nymphoides, Nymphea alba, Nuphar luteum,
and it is under water itself that the rare Nilella hyalina must be collected. Encouraged by the rarity of several of the species we had just
later, we decide, despite the heat, to visit the pond located above
of Malagnet. The pond itself is nothing very curious; he is entirely
filled with Cladium mariscus with dense leaves, it Phragmites com-
munis, var. nigricans. But on either side are ditches full of water
Vwinter, @ hardly wet in this season, of come in abundance: Juncus
squarrosus, Lobelia wrens, Drosera titermedia, Carum verticillatun,
Spivanthes wstivalis, Blodes palustris, Lycopus europwus, Schenus nigri-
cans, Salix repens, Salic fructiculosa de la Croix, new plant for the
flora of Maine-et-Loire. Despite active research, we cannot put
I have my hand on the rare Liparis Leeselii that I collected in the company of M. Le-
dantec, a few years ago, quite at the tail of the pond. The neighboring moors produce: Genista anglica, Ulex nanus, a series
very varied heath rica ciliaris, L, tetraliz, var. flora albo, E. cinerea,
. scoparia, Calluna vulgaris; finally, the graceful Gentiana pneumonanthe
of which we expect to collect several samples. Let us also note in these moors
the presence of a rare reptile, the Lacerta bilincata. Returning to our starting point, we continue to descend the thalwey,
much surprised to find, instead of a pond full of water, in which, in other
circumstances, we had collected the rare Utricularia minor, a ground
almost entirely dried up, and grew only a few feet of
Rumex maritimus, Sparganium simplex, Alisma ranunculoides, Al. repent,
Hippuris palustris, Veronica scutellata. On the road and in the thickets
neighbors believes the Juniperus communis. The bogs which are a little lower, although still very spontaneous
difficult to visit, presented this time at our feet a soil resistant to
lanl, easy & explore, but all the more poor in plants as it was less
humid. However, we have been able to make ample provision of the following species:
Drosera rotundifolia, Scutellaria minor, Polystichum thelypteris, Spha-
gnum... several species; Osmunda regalis, Epilobium palustre, Hydro-
cotyle vulgaris, Linum catharticum, Parnassia palustris, Brisa minor,
ilolinia cewrulea Moench. (Festuca ewrulea DC.) The Pinguicula vulgaris, the
Menyanthes trifoliata, long since deflowered, were recognized &
lenrs leaves, and !pipactis palustris milk into fruit. Meadows of 14, in a ditch,
the Utricularia neglecta raised its beautiful yellow flowers above the sur~
face of the water

A little tired from this long walk, we cross the pond of
Mesnil, which is filled with Typha angustifolia, and we find ourselves facing the
castle of Rochebouet, on the road leading from this property & Chau-
mount, A few steps from 14 we stop with pleasure in front of a small
fountain dug on the very edge of the road and whose waters, which arise
eretaceous and tertiary terrains in contact at this point, contain pro=
very notable portions of iron, and consequently have a pronounced atramentary taste,

    

 

  

 

     

 

 

 

 

 

   
 

 

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

     

   

 

where

which earned the spring the name of Rusty Fountain. Strengthened by this water
beneficent, we head towards Chaumont, gleaning this and a few
plants: in the fields, Sedum cepwa, Thymelwa arvensis Lam., Che-
nopolium hybrilum, Lrysimum cheiranthoides, Plantago coronopus,
P. intermedia, Herniaria hirsuta, Aithusa cynapium, Linaria spuria, Or=
nithopus perpusillus, Galeopsis angi olia Ehrh., Nigella arvensis, Bu-
pleurum protractum, Echium Wiersbich cca; in places
és, Serophularia Balb Althea officinalis, . us ebulus, Mentha rotundifolia, Tragopoyon pratensis; in ean
Chara fretida; on the walls, Sedum album, Asplenium tricho-

 

 

    

   

    
  

manes. Back & Chaumont. we make a short but interesting visit to the
elite church raised on the highest point of the village, and whose sculptures,
though very rude, are none the less very curious, then resume

We take the road to Angers, but this time via Suette. In the ditches
bordering the road near this town, we see the Dipsacus pilosus, which
has persisted for many years in this focus. The day would have ended the way it started, the way
more pleasant, without a slight accident happening & our car, and which, while
hous emptying our pockets, gave us the opportunity to meet the
next day and laugh at this little adventure. Angers. George Bouyer. THE BAT. Sunt notanda genera et ad certum
number paucitatemque revocanda,
\Cicenox (from Oratore). When we study nature, we do not limit ourselves to recounting the observations
and the eri have a loftier object in view. We want to try to
discover, in the midst of the variety of species and the multiplicity of phenomena
men, the immutable order which presides over their accomplishment and the unity of plan
of creation By grouping, according to the subordination of the characters and the degree
of their respective affinities, the beings which present the same mode of organization
classification, natural classifications aspire to reproduce the very order of
nature. But this admirable order, this happy harmony, seems to present

sometimes strange contradictions. The sight of a piseiform mammal, like
a whale or seal, a carnivorous animal provided with wing membranes, like
the bat, rightly strikes him who seeks in the spectacle of the
nature what one must indeed meet there, I mean a marvelous plan--
carefully designed and wisely combined. It is the triumph of modern science
to have justified the apparent disorders, assigned their place in the classifications
these hitherto little-known eires; to have finally clearly demonstrated
that there are no whims in nature. The bat early caught the attention of naturalists. She
is close at the same time, by its singular structure, to mammals and
birds, since it is viviparous, it carries lactation organs, in
at the same time it is able to support itself in the air & with the help of the folds
membranous skin of the flanks. This also contributes to making the bald
deformed mouse, these are the striking disproportions that we notice between

     

 

 

— 50 —

the different parts of the body. The head especially presents a certain number
bi es peculiarities; the eyes are small, sunken and covered; the mouth
is split from one ear to the other; the nose is more or less wide, depending
species, but the musean bears integumentary appendages which affect
the most curious forms. Tant6t they are similar extensions
has a spearhead (Vespertilio hastatus) or has an oval leaf; sometimes
it is a horseshoe-shaped bead (V. ferrum equinum) which surrounds
the nose and still adds 4 the deformity of the face. These integuments accompany
also the ears and acquire, in a certain number of species, a length
disproportionate gueor, especially in the eared ear, designated for this reason under the
name of Vespertilio auriculus. Thus, bats approach
birds, not only by flight, but also by these sorts of membranes
and crests which they have on the face, and which often meet, as one
knows it, around the beak of the latter. However, the body of bats
is, like that of most mammals, covered with hair whose
color varies with different species. It is most often greyish, although
that in some genera it is a brownish red or a light yellow; in
generally, it is quite long and very soft to the touch. But the hair does not extend
beyond the body, and the wing membranes are completely bare,

Knowing the external shape of the head and the body, let us now study
I structure members, and seek what modifications the existence
of a new function, flight, has di bring into the organs of the locomotive
tion. M. G. Weiss has given us, in his interesting article, the theory of
theft (1). It will therefore be useless to enter here into considerations which have certainly
neatly caught the attention of readers. It will suffice to find out how the
bat resembles birds in its mode of conformation. the
integumentary system takes, as we have seen, a development
prodigious; it does not only unite the forelimbs to the body of
Panimal, it stretches to the hind limbs and even wraps the tail
which, as Baffon observes, thus becomes by this bizarre junction, one
fingers. These alar membranes are made up of two layers of skin
very thin and very light and distended by the bones of the arm, forearm and
metacarpus. These indeed present a particular shearing dis ion that it
important to note: the humerus and the radius are very elongated and at the same time
able to withstand considerable effort; in order to give to the forearm
greater solidity, the ulna which articulates in mammals and in
the birds themselves with the anterior extremity of the radius, fuses in
I bat about a third of the length of the latter; moreover, the apophysis
olecranon which forms, as we know, the upper part of the ulna and which
adapted the pulley of the humerus, remains constantly separated from the body of the bone. As a result, this apophysis is transformed into a true patella
brachialis; nevertheless, the size of this kind of patella seems to depend on
I size of the ulna, since in subjects where the latter is only small
size, the olecranon is rudimentary. This fact remained unknown until 1824. This is
Mr. Isidore Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire who pointed it out after extensive research
on the big horseshoe. It seems surprising, at first sight, that Cuvier,
who studied the astrocture of the bat and who described with scrupulous
exactness of the articulation of the arm and the forearm, did not suspect this
metamorphosis. The great naturalist had probably observed the species
in which this characteristic feature is not very prominent; but a further examination
attentive has since demonstrated that it can also be noticed in all
genera of bats. 5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

   

  

 

    

    

 

 

(1) See the issues of May fe and September 4, 1871 (Du vol ches les Oiseaux). —51—

Do we not know, moreover, that in young animals the extremity of the bone is not
only imperfectly welded to the body itself, and that there are cases where the apophysis
olecrine remains distinct from the middle part throughout life? Thus, the dis-

The position of the arm and the forearm is precisely that of the thigh and the
Leg ; for the rest, the forelimbs of the bat execute only
flexion and extension movements that are specific to the limbs
posterior. If the humerus and the radius impart movement to the wings, the
metacarpals transmit it and communicate it, since they distend the
wing membranes. The metacarpal bones actually lengthen like a bas-
lookouts whose size even exceeds that of a radius by several lines. But
as these' serve exclusively for flight, the phalanxes which carry the
nails in other mammals are completely suppressed; the
thumb alone remains normal and presents a curved and strong nail, which, like
we will see in the sequel, must serve 4 the bat to hang on
roughness; finally, as in birds, the scapula and the apophysis
coracoid are very developed, the clavicle is long and powerful, and the
sternum bears a protrusion for the attachment points of the pectoralis major muscle. It will be superfluous to insist on these last modifications; Mr. Gustave Weiss
We have already failed to bring out the range by studying the different organs of flight; we
We will examine how this function is carried out in the bat. Luneville. Ernest Paulin. (To be continued.) PLANT HISTOLOGY. In these short studies of plant histology, my aim is not to follow
a regular and methodical march. This would be the characteristic of a course, el ce
is not a course that I claim to do. But he's in the story
histology of plants obscure points left aside by most
micrographs, and which nevertheless deserve to be studied; it's these dots
that I will endeavor to clarify, aided by the best memoirs of scholars
lasts, and controlled by the microscope. Until now, either because of the indifference of naturalists, or rather &
due to the imperfection of microscopes and other observation instruments,
micrographic studies had been somewhat removed from the field of
ordinary science, and it had only been resorted to incidentally and as a
regret. Today, a reaction is occurring throughout the scientific world
in favor of micrographic studies; and guided by the Germans, we must
I recognize, French scholars have walked boldly along the new path.
yeau and have known & the science of veril domains. illustrious names
attach themselves to the new method of study, and in the first rank that of Robin,
which has given us the best and most complete study of vegetable histology. I apologize to the reader for these few historical details which
will serve as an introduction and preface. Today, to immediately address the subject which must concern us,
I will study the histological structure of a fern stem. This study is in-
interesting, in the sense that first of all it makes known a type of acoty-
numerous and important ledones, and then that it illuminates a point which is
remained in the shadows for a long time and which has provided the subject of many controversies.
mics between French and Germans: Do we agree or not, in the leagues

 

  

 

   

 

— 52 — 2

ferns, winding windpipes? First of all, let's say that the micro-
copique notes their presence and leaves & this subject no doubt

We know that any stem, whether it belongs to a dicotyledonous plant, mono-
colyledon or acotyledon, consists histologically of two elements
principauy, I was going to say primordial, which would be a mistake. These elements
are the medulla and the fibro-vascular bundle. I don't understand the bark here,
which participates at the same time of these two elements or rather of these two systems. The variable arrangement of these different parts characterizes in a general way
neral the stems of the three types of plants. J

7 icotyledons, marrow more or less developed, with me-

in primaries and secondaries, fibro-vascular bundles
regularly arranged around the medulla and separated by the medulla
dullaries. -

In monocotyledons pith pen or point developed, more rays. medullary proper, irregularly dissected fibro-vascular bundles

 

  

 

 

          

   

finally the acotyledons, two kinds of perfectly distinct stems and
ant from the rest two important subdivisions: the cellular stems and
vascular ges. It is to this last category that stems belong

of ferns. In these the marrow is superabundantly developed, and we shall see
soon it is possible to distinguish also kinds of medullary rays. The fibro-vascular bundle which, in dicots and most mono-
cotyledons, constitutes the main element of the stem, is here poorly developed and
affects the most bizarre and varied forms (Pleris aquilina). He is
composed essentially of two singularly curved blackish blades,
which form the limits of the beam proper, and between the blades, by
particular fibers and vessels. The laminae are formed of elongated cells
old, thick, brown, tightly packed together and forming
a kind of prosenchyma. The fibro-vascular bundle is remarkable sur-
‘ause (the vessels which constitute it almost exclusively. Those are
striped vessels and more especially scalar prismatic vessels
characteristic shapes. I said that there were also tracheae uncoiled there.
This particular kind of vessels is mostly found in young people.
(Blechnum brasiliense, Aspidium) has the outermost part of the
u, ot the tracheae are as if joined to the internal walls of the laminae. aux are usually composed of multiple coiled wires, and are
therefore analogous to those found in large quantities in
Nepenthes and banana leaves. The fibro-vascular bundles, limited by the James, can be welded
between them, so that in the horizontal section of the stem they represent uo
ring, or else narrowly separated, feels between them a space more or less
Less considerable filled by medullary cells and which I consider
like a sort of medal ray. We wanted to base on these various delimitations of the fibro-vascular bundles
ification of ferns, but it was soon recognized that this
was impossible, the fibro-vascular bundles not retaining between them
The same ratios at the different heights of the stem. _We do not find in the stems of ferns, or at least we have not yet found
neither bast cells nor latticed cells (an element discovered in the stems
ae cones: and especially in the vine), nor veri-
able:

The bark of the fungi is blackish, formed histologically from the two layers
cellular: one formed of properly dilute cells, and another more in-

 

 

 

 
   
  

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

        

   

 

 

 

— 53 —

dull, made up of elongated cells, reminiscent although imperfectly
bast fibers. In addition to the epidermis which covers the entire stem of ferns, we
again and especially at its base, encounters scars left by the petiole of the
fallen leaves, very important scars in fossil botany for
determination of genera and species. Gabriel Roux. Physiophile Society of Lyon. A NORTHERN LIGHT OBSERVED AT EVREUX. In the evening of Sunday January 4, we saw 4 Evreux a brilliant
Aurora borealis. About six o'clock in the evening, the sky began to be red, and
this coloration became more and more vivid until nearly seven o'clock, ott
it diminished a little. Then, until nine o'clock, the red tint, spread
especially in the north and west, has remained quite lively, and from time to time
it was furrowed by a few lighter rays, but dimly visible; his 
intensity increased until ten o'clock: this is when it reached
its maximum. The meteor then had the shape of a curve whose
more rounded facing the south-east, and whose extensions of a very red
sharp were heading, one to the north-north-east, the other & the west-south-west. Moreover,
to the east and south, there were very bright spaces of a greenish tint
which blended imperceptibly with the red. The middle of the most
rounding of this curve was a little south-east of the zenith and occupied by Jupiter. It is from this point that emanated the many very bright rays which, by
their pink or greenish yellow color stood out against the bright red background of the interior.
laughing from the curve. Outside, we also noticed some rays
yellowish, less apparent and diametrically opposed, which furrowed a
tinged with a dark red. For ten minutes, the light produced by the
rays which appeared and disappeared alternately, was quite strong
to allow me to make a rough drawing of the meteor. From ten
a quarter past the rays have become much less visible; but the
The red tint continued for a long time. What was most noticeable
possible in this aurora, it is that Jupiter, which shone very brightly, was
the center from which all the rays diverged. I'm sorry I couldn't get it.
serve from beginning to end. This aurora is one of the most
beautiful and most brilliant that we have seen 4 Evreux. :

 

      

     
 

 

 

  

  

    

       

Maurice RéciBarr. MARITIME PINE HYLESIN. Pine beetle (Hylesinus pineus) is a tetrameric beetle. Classroom
by Fabricius in the family of xylophages, this insect is looked at above
Jourd'hui as part of the schoolboy tribe. This little eater
of wood wreaks the greatest havoc on pine plantations. The insects
of the xylophagous family (Hylesinus pineus and erenatus, Hylurgus pint-
perda) hardly differs from rhynchophores or weevils except by the absence
trunk; they have very strong jaws for attacking and gnawing
the substance of the wood; their body is almost always rounded or depressed. ‘All xylophages constitute a cursed race; when they grow
beyond measure in the forests, it is a real calamity. Ste

The hylesin has a size of 4 4 5 millimeters; its body is rounded and the
elytra of dark color as well as the whole body merge very well with
the color of the bark in which this insect is intended to live; also
he often conceals from the eyes of the naturalist. The elytra bear several stripes
longitudinal formed by a multitude of small dots very close together;
they are bristling with yellowish hairs which also cover a good part
of the bodice. They are hard and notched & their extremities, because of the friction
easily on hard bodies. The head ends not in a bee, but in
short, very resistant jaws, intended to pierce the bark of the pine. - We
will see very well described the characters and mores of hylesin in |’ Histoi
des Insecles du pin maritime by M. Perris, — The rapidity with which this
sect bores its galleries is very large, and it is usually between the bark and
Vaubier let him dig them; the naturalist must, if he wishes to make a successful hunt
slayer, rummaging under the old pine bark. In these winding galleries
find the white larvae and replicas of the hylesin, and it has been found that these
larvae wreaked as much havoc as perfect insects. - A method
easy to follow to get these insects is to make several bells
wire mesh; or arrange at the bottom of these bells a small layer of
sand and we introduce pieces of pine bark that we believe have been attacked by
the hylesins. At the end of eight to ten days, one finds, either in the sand, or
in the bark, the nymphs; a short time is then enough to see appear
the perfect insects. I have seen several times the speed of these insects
to dig their galleries. - Having one day locked up in a boiler containing
fairly large pieces of pine bark, three beetles, two of which &
perfect state and a larval state, I saw, after two days, the bark
completely pulverized. — How rapid must the damage be then
exerted by these insects, when they are in large numbers in a plantation! Another insect which, together with the beetle, ravages the pine and fir forests,
is the Tomicus; the damage caused by these insects is so great that,
in several localities, entire forests are perishing victims of their voracity. Another species of xylophage, |'Hylurgus piniperda, is yet another of these
animals that can be ranked among the scourges that afflict men. Also the
naluralist who would manage to find the means to destroy the species
more harmful would it deserve all the public recognition. Mont-de-Marsan. Felix Barrere. COMMUNICATIONS. We warn our subscribers that our supply of issues 2 of the first year being
exhausted, we will only be able to send single issues of the first year of the Leaf. Trades. — I would like to exchange mosses from the schists around Angers
against mountain species. Contact 4 M. Bouvet, ruc Saint-Jean, 25, 4 Angers. Conservation of slugs. — Is there no preparation for preserving in their
natural state molluscs, and in particular slugs? Isn't there also a way
to kill them without giving them time-to contract as they do when
immersed in alcohol? H.R. — To preserve testaceous molluscs, they are kept alive for twenty-four
At forty-eight hours in a closed vase filled with water: animal then develops
as much as possible out of the shell; then we put it in alcohol. I don't know if the inéme

— 55 —
system would be suitable for slugs, I don't know of any way to prevent the
considerable keel produced by alcohol, and I believe that it is necessary to be content to study the
live or fresh slugs. Perhaps M. de Guerne can provide us with some

information above. B.D.

A new perfume. — I have seen nowhere recorded that Phyleuma spicatum acquired
drying the scent of vanilla. This is a fact that I have personally observed this
year, and it is curious enough to be noted, apart from the practical utility that
could have this discovery. J. Gmavpnas. Elementary collections. — The Entomological Studies Encouragement Committee
continue to operate. Beginners only have to do in writing, To M. Deyrolle, the request
of a collection of this or that order. The Committee would like to receive collections from the hemip-
teres, hymenoptera, diptyras, etc., which are often requested. Xylophage larvae. — M. D... (see the papers in No. 15) will, I believe, not have
what to rent from the following means of getting rid of the larvae in question. These xylophagous larvae can easily be destroyed by hydrogenated water which, far from harming
4 the color of paintings, will, on the contrary, restore their original brilliance, by transforming the
sulphide of lead already formed by preceding Gmanations, which is black, in sulphate
which is white. .

The preparation could not be easier: in skin held in suspension of the
baryte (Ba 02, HO) you pass a current of carbonic acid; car-
insoluble baryta bonate which precipitates, and oxygenated water remains. Like this
hydrogen peroxide decomposes fairly quickly (4 + 20°), it must be used as soon as the pre-
paration made. We thus have an ingredient which will certainly destroy the larvae without
no danger for the paintings. I. Bérous. Note on a salamander. "We found, some time ago, buried in
flat 4u feet from an old wall, a salamander completely dried out and in perfect condition
conservation. The body was slightly folded in on itself; the tail curled in a spiral
still had some flexibility; in a word, the body presented no other degradation.
only a slight expoliation of the skin of the skull; the colors, it is true, had
lost some of their luster, but that only because they had been soiled by
the plates. After opening the salamander's body, we found the viscera

 

intact. We will not attribute this to the influence of frosts, given the mild climate of the
Landes; on the contrary, the humidity of the country, added to this mild temperature, could only
promote putrefaction. Could we not explain this singular preservation by
Vaction of the saltpetre contained in the plitras, a body which has antiseptic properties
pronounced enough? Mont-de-Marsan. G. Sounners—F. Bannine. (We will observe that Y'one frequently finds on the roads, summer, newts
title withered, but intact; Is the above observation analogous to the fact that
we indicate? — Ed.). Tools. "I would like to know, through the Leaf, where I can
provide the pliers and other instruments necessary to free the fossils without
damage. RN. Common errors. — An opinion which seems to me quite widespread among the peasants of
all countries is that which consists in believing that the large butterflies, caterpillars or beetles
are the parents of the little ones, and that, consequently, these will grow, provided that God
their short life. I will cite as an example a peasant who, each time he brought me

— 56 —

a caterpillar of sphinx or bombyx, said: it is a good mother of oldnes (caterpillars,
in the north of France). ‘About this word, which is spelled as I will hear it pronounced, someone
could he give me the origin? While writing, I think of the participle of oleo, olens, which
smells, and by extension, that smells bad. In the same localities, a butterfly is called
a pourvole or a glaine-Dieu (a glaine is a hen). I would be happy to know
the names given to caterpillars and butterflies in different countries. E, Leuivae. Superstition. — In Touraine, when a person is bitten (we say stung) by a
snake, the inhabitants are convinced that its breath can communicate the venom to them
of the snake; also not an individual who wants to approach him, except the doctor, E. Leniévae,

 

Role of artificial light on the decomposition of carbonic acid. — When I have
treatise on the role of light on assimilation, I said that artificial light was inca~
able to produce the decomposition of carbonic acid in plant cells &
chlorophyll; but it would seem to result from recent experiments, due to M. Prilleux, that
the light of a magneto-electric machine, that of Drummond and even that of gas
@lighting, can bring exposed plants Vabri from the sun's rays 4 Gliminer
of Poxygine (See, for more details, Figuier, Scientific year 1870-71). A. Lemame,

 

The Blue Cossus. — Several entomologists have seen in certain collections of the epidop-
tres a variety of Cossus ligniperda dyed dg blue; many wonder how
this butterfly, usually so dark, can acquire a color so different from the type. Here is
the way to get it: just get (easy thing) caterpillars of this species
up to about normal size; place them in a cardboard box
having served 4 put blue balls that are used for laundry, with the precaution of
place a little bran to which a ball of fine powder has been mixed; the caterpillar, which
still needs to eat some food, decides to taste some bran and goes
even to attack the walls of his home; she soon turns into a chrysalis, and &
Hatching of the butterfly, we are quite surprised to obtain an individual whose wings, thorax
and even the antennae are coated in a gorgeous ultramarine blue color, without hiding
by no means the drawings of the type. .
Arras, CN. Office. CORRESPONDENCE. We will henceforth disregard letters that are not signed in full.
letters, at least for the drafting. M. E, B., @ Cz, — We sent you a catalog where you will find what
you desire. A subscriber & Montbéliard. — The communication in question having no connection with
natural history, we cannot insert it; but we will make it known to those whom it
may interest. The articles of Messrs. Lemaire, Régimbart and de Guerne will appear in the next
number, as well as the rest of Advice for beginners,

 

‘Type. Oberthir and sons, & Rennes. ~ Maison & Paris, rue Satomon-de-Caus, 4 (square des Aris-ct-MEétiers). iron April 1872. The Number: 25 cents. No 18,

YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE
Payable in advance in stamps or money order by post:

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr.3 per year. | For Foreigners fr. 4 par. Subscription for Great-Brilain, 3 s. 6 d. British subscribers can remit in penny or twopenny postage stamps. Contact: & Paris, at M. Ernest Dollfus, 29, avenue Montaigne; i Kingersheim (Haut-Rhin),
Ches M. Gustave Weiss. People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as rtsubscribers. CLASSIFICATIONS IN NATURAL HISTORY
(After). If we examine the entire animal kingdom, we soon recognize four
general structural plans. The fundamental differences that distinguish
between them these four branches depend above all on the mode of arrangement-
ment of the various parts of the bodies and of the conformation of the nervous system,
These are the two dominating characteristics of the whole organization of animals. We understand that we cannot separate them from each other, and the modifications
of the nervous system necessarily entail with them cor-
corresponding in the faculties of animated beings. Although the differences are
well-defined from one branch to the other, however, on the extreme
moths, the organization seems to hold both types at the same time. So he is
very difficult to specify 4 which group an animal belongs to. The nervous system, perfect and symmetrical in man and the animals which
possess an internal skeleton, constitutes the class of vertebrates. Among those-
here, the special organ is the brain, from which leave the nerves going to the head,
then the cerebellum, the elongated medulla, finally the spinal cord. -— In the se-
second class, that of the avticudes, no more brain, but two fused ganglia,
from which depart two nerves which then approach in a circle in the middle
from which passes the esophagus, it is the esophageal colcer. Then come two
other glands and so on for each article. It is & note that the body
is no longer supported by an internal skeleton, but that the muscles attach
all to the external integuments, modified in such a way as to take the place of a framework
interior. The third class is that of the mol/usques. Here the body is soft,
generally covered by a calcareous shell-like secretion. It exists
two more lymph nodes with esophageal collar, but only a portion of
this system occupies the dorsal side of the digestive tract, then we no longer encounter
only completely asymmetrical nerve threads. - Finally the fourth
class includes vayonnes. Here the nervous system is most often lacking,
and when it exists it is reduced to a rudimentary state. We then perceive gan-
glions arranged in circles, from which leave nervous nets which radiate in
all senses. — 58 —

Such is, in a quick outline, the classification of animals. Naturally
the needs of science have led to a more extensive division, but in
the details of which it is useless to enter, because it would then be necessary to approach a
different topic from what I want to deal with, and it would be better to open immediate-
there is a book dealing specifically with this subject. Nancy. None BAGNERIS. THE BAT

Continuation and end). The flight of the bat is not very rapid, and in its impulses it always follows
an oblique direction. Who among us has not noticed on summer nights the
uncertain volligion of this somber inhabitant of the ruins, he only followed his
sudden and tortuous movements? It is observed, however, that despite the
darkness, this strange mammal never collides with obstacles and
sail perfectly turn away from all bodies that meet on its
passage. Spallanzani, famous naturalist of the XVII° century, put out the eyes & several
bats and saw them heading into his apartment with the same
constantly eying the ceiling and the walls. He concludes that these animals
were endowed with a sixth sense, intended to announce to them the approach of an object
solid. But it has since been demonstrated that it is the sense of touch whose pro-
tegumentary lengths are the most delicate organ, which makes them perceive
to the eddies of air caused by obstacles. We have even seen
bats avoid in their flight silken threads that had been stretched, and between
which only enough space has been left for them to pass. We conceive, in fact, that these animals, sometimes inhabiting caves ol
never penetrated the light of the sun, need to move in the middle of the
darkness to discern the slightest contours of the subterranean. But, if the bat
mouse is able to support itself in the air, it generally only rises
with great difficulty, especially when it is on a flat surface, the cor-
Buffon's respondent, M. de la Nux, reports that the fruit bats of the island
Bourbon can only take flight by climbing a hill. He
even happens that, surprised by a clap of thunder or some other noise
capable of terrifying them, they drop from the top of the trees to the
land without being able to resume their flight. The bat makes even worse use of its feet than of its
wings. Is it 4 earth? She only drags herself with the greatest difficulty,
stricken by the now useless folds that surround her limbs. She
painfully advances the thumbnail which she fixes 4 some roughness, and attracts
then the rest of the body, pushed forward by the hind limbs. But
mechanism imparts to the body an oblique direction in the direction of the limbs
which give the movement. I arrive thus that the animal is carried alternately
from right to left, according to the member that applies to the ground. However, well
that at each step the body receives oblique impulses, like these im-
impulses are equal, we can determine the final direction. Mr. Isidore
Geoflroy Saint-Hilaire has demonstrated that it is along the axis of this series of
zigzags. —o—

The walls of the bat are no less curious 2 to study than
its structure and interesting nons & as many titles. But it is difficult to
observe, because captivity profoundly changes the habits of these animals,
and they are not long in perishing when they are deprived of their freedom. Mr. Daniel did not
not kept pipistrelle females longer than eighteen days. However,
White asserts that the vespertilion can be easily tamed: “I had fun
a lot, he said, of the doings and gestures of a tamed bat which
there were flies on the hand that presented them to him. His address & shave the wings
of flies which she constantly rejected was worthy of observation; she me
was very entertaining. She did not refuse raw meat, although she preferred
insects; so that the peasants are not so wrong when they claim that
the bats descend along the chimneys to eat their bacon. »
Most bats are indeed insectivorous, and it is easy to get away with it.
ensure 4 the inspection of their dental system which presents molars
bristling with conical tips matching each other exactly. They seize
in their flight the insects on which they make their food, and especially the butterflies
moths, which only come out at night. Buffon reports, in his HisTorReE DE
ANIMALS, that having descended into the caves of Arey to examine the
stalactites, he saw the floor of the cave covered with a dark earth which was not
anything other than bat droppings, made up largely of
undigested portions of wings and legs of various insects. Some
bat species are frugivorous; such are, for example, the you-
seties, which inhabit southern Africa and feed almost exclusively-
ment of plant substances. Their molars, instead of ending in
sharp points, as well as those of other genera of bats, have a
flattened crown, intended & crush the fruits of which they are accustomed to
to feed. Bats tolerate diet more easily than cold. They
can live several days without taking food, but they pass
winter numb in the holes of the old walls, wrapped in their wings
like a mortuary mantle. Others {ois they hang by the legs
from behind 4 the way of the caverns which serve them as a refuge. The fingers of
hind limbs are in fact pressed against each other, and their following not
interrupted forms a half-circumference, which allows them to cling
easily has all the roughnesses. "Here," said M. de la Nux in his correspondence.
dance, flying fox resting latitude; they only have this one, and it is
the one in which they stay the longest during the day. Now, imagine the head of a large arteey stuffed in its
around and in the middle of one hundred, one hundred and fifty, maybe two hundred
similar girandoles, having no movement except that which the wind gives to
branches, and one will get an idea of ​​a painting that makes itself looked at with
pleasure. Buffon's correspondent also adds that the eri of fruit bats has not
nothing dreadful, as was claimed then, and which they make heard
their chirping when they fight over the bananas and guavas they
devour with greed. I heard an earpiece cry out to which I simultaneously made touch the
two conductors of a Ruhmkorff coil, and I was able, by the same circuit
lance, examine his dental system, while he held his mouth ajar,

The arrangement of the molars was that which I indicated previously, but
there were no incisors, neither the upper jaw nor the lower jaw. Their role is in fact only secondary in insectivores, and we often 2
instead of noting their absence or their rudimentary state. As for the cries that
redeemed the excess pain from the animal, they were weak, but sharp and piercing. *

   

 

       

 

 

 

 

    

   
 

 

 

 

 

     

 

0

Thus, we see, the mores and habits of the bat are those
of a soft and inoffensive animal, object however of the most ridiculous beliefs,
of the most absurd superstitions. We are always inclined to judge pre-
first seen from appearances, to make ferocity the necessary attribute of
what seems to us Jaid, imperfect or bizarre. Antiquity seems to copy the
bat in the allegorical representation of the Harpies who personify
the pestilential winds and symbolic image ng Ja death:

a Celerique fuga sub sidera lapse
Semesam prcdam ct vestigia foeda relinquunt. (Vinata.) Middle Ages load Satan's shoulders with the dark wings of the bat.
smile, inclined el & all creeds, dread the terrible omens of this
st lugubrious. The bat becomes the companion of wizards whose
dick the mysterious lairs:

   

At night, when the demons dance under the dark sky,
‘You follow the magic choir as you spin through the shadows. (v. Huso.) Dollfus, exposing his research on the toad
and the superstitions connected with it, she entered into the marvelous pre-
parations, in the strange combinations of alchemists. It took a lot of
time to uproot these inveterate superstitions, and At the same time: ot
Buflon was writing his History of Animals, it was still thought that the great
Ainerique's bat, otherwise dil the vampire, aimail & breathe va-
fear of blood. Based on the testimony of M. de la Condamine and the other
Travelers, he searches in his NATURAL HISTORY how it is that the
vainpire (Vespertilio spectrum) can suck, without waking them, the blood of
You man and animals. It is obvious that if he practiced his incisions in the
flesh, by means of his teeth or his nails, the pain would soon warn of the
danger the sleeping animal. "It is therefore," said Buffon, "only with the language that they
can make subtle enough openings in the skin to draw blood from it
and open the veins without causing severe pain. We have not been within reach
to see the vampire's tongue; but that of fruit bats, which Mr. Daubenton has
carefully examined, seems to indicate the possibility of the fact: this language is
pointed and bristling with hard and fine papillae, very sharp and directed in ar-
laugh; these points, which are very fine, can insinuate themselves into the pores of the
pean to widen them and penetrate far enough for the blood to obey 4 the suc-
continual cion of the language. But Buffon, while appearing to admit the
Daubenion's assertions, seems to doubt a fact that he had not been able to ascertain for himself.
even and speaks of this subject only with the greatest reserve. And it is with good reason,
because it is shown today that the wounds caused by the Ves-
pertilio spectvune are very small and not very dangerous, if they are not
influenced by the climate. __Science has done its work and artificial classifications, the first effort
of a thought which tries itself and which still staggers, give way to the classics
natural, less arbitrary and less artificial cations. What rank does the
bats in the latter classifications; between so many characters, what
are those which we must take into account, and among these which are the characteristics
subordinate characters, what are the dominating characters? When we want
find out what place should be assigned to the bat among the mammals

Finally, as Mr.

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

— 61 —

feres, they are the most fixed characters of this vast zoological class which he
must be examined, i.e. the lactation organs, the conformation of the brain,
the dental system. On the contrary, to establish the subdivisions of your family
of the Cheiroptera, we must consider the structure of the fingers and the integumentary system.
mental; in a nutshell, all the brilliant characters that gave birth to
this new family. The CHELROPTERA family is divided into two
tribes: the GALEoprTHEques and the Cu at Sounts. The different Galeopitheca
made of these last in that your fingers of their forelimbs
bear nails and do not take on the same development as in the
Bats. In addition, the lateral membrane cannot
fills that the fonetious of para Finally the wibu of the Bats is
subdivides itself into two insectivores and frugivores, of which
the main characteristics are the conformation of the jaw. It would take far too long to study here the different species of Bats.
Mouse; their number is considerable, and, in spite of the progress of natural history
real, there are still some which are not exactly determined. Anyway
Either science has succeeded in linking particular facts to universal laws.
saddles, it commands us the greatest admiration for what an unexpected eye
tentil ¢ of anomaly, she finally teaches us that "out is also
perfect in itself, since lul is sorta from the hands of the Creator. »

Luneville. Ernest Paulin. ADVICE TO YOUNG MALACOLOGISTS. After.) Molluscs are widespread in all parts of the globe; we find
from the coldest countries to the equator, and, as well as several
Lerrestres species rise to great heights on the tops of mountains,
likewise certain marine shells live in the ocean and the depths
considerable,

The continent, the rivers, the3 lakes and the seas also nourish good
number of molluscs, and it is easy to conceive how much the means of
provide the shells must vary according to the living conditions of the animals.
ailments; each habitat, each station would require, so to speak, a mode
special investigation! —We will observe, in passing, that the mind
of our readers will have to supplement 4 a host of details including the enumeration
would undoubtedly become tedious; it's up to the naturalist & perfectiouner
the primitive means to accommodate them to its particular use in the manner
which seems to him the most advantageous. To proceed with order and clarity, we will here divide the molluscs into
three categories: terrestrial, fluvial and marine molluscs. 1. — Terrestrial molluscs. Land molluscs are widely distributed in nature, and
if they provide few generic cuts, on the other hand the number of species
is considerable there. — 6 —

Earth shells, more than all others, require & ¢ be
carefully sought; their harvest requires great attention; often too
it is more painful than that of fluvial or marine shells. let's add
even that patience is essential to arrive at some result, because the
terrestrial molluscs are not (generally) found together in quantities
like those of the other groups. — He can, so to speak, pick them up
an aun, el that, in different places; here, it is especially important for the
naturalist to know the places where he is most likely to meet
the objects of his research. The localities most favorable to the collection of terrestrial shells are the
calcareous, rugged, hilly and humid countries. In a place that unites all
these conditions, one can be sure of reaping an ample harvest of dulimes,
lice, ele. Calcareous soil provides the animal with the necessary elements for the formation of
test. Humidity attracts molluscs out of their retreats; everyone could
note that the rain makes slugs, helixes and bulimes appear; if we
If you look closer, you can also see the clausilia, pupa, caryclinem coming out. In the North, I have often heard, on rainy days, mediocre peasants
happy to exclaim in a significant way: "It's raining slugs!" ! »

As for uneven and wooded terrain, observation has shown that the
preferably would connect there. — They find more shelter in sites
less uniform, and the cover of the woods retains the necessary freshness and humidity.
necessary for the play of their delicate and inconsistent organs. Let us note in passing that the sandy countries planted with conifers are very
unfavorable to the development of molluscs. This is how the sick fauna
environment of the Landes department is infinitely less rich than that
of several neighboring departments where the ground is more rugged and the vegetation
more varied. — As an example in support of the preceding observations, I
I could also cite the Nord department, or the arrondissement of Avesnes,
less flat than the rest of the department, also provides more molluscs than
the surroundings of Douai, Valenciennes, etc. In the woods, the molluscs prefer to live near the
lights, fountains and on the edge where the air circulates more freely and where the
plants are more vigorous. Observation has also shown that we
against generally more shells at the foot of the heights than at their summit
or in their environment. The neighborhood of Ja mer attracts a certain number of species which one does not encounter.
against not elsewhere; the Helix maritima, Alexia myosolis, Bulimus acutus,
seem to like the humid saline beaches. Finally, some molluscs seem to deviate completely from their con-
genera: we mean the Helix candidissinia, maritima, muralis
deserlorum, exotic Pupa, ele., who gladly expose themselves to the ardor
of the sun. "These are, moreover, the easiest shells to find." The colds of winter numb the molluscs and the heats of summer
keep them hidden in deep retreats; spring and autumn
are therefore the most favorable seasons for harvesting terrestrial shells. It is at dusk and especially early in the morning that it is advisable to look for them:
The naturalist will have to examine the bark at the foot of the trees, stir up the thick
clumps of foam (he will shake them on a white cloth to see more
shells easily); we still have to turn over the stones, examine the woods

 

 

 

   

 

 

— 68 —

decaying, the fagots and branches buried in the grass, in one
word anything that can shelter some animal. We will particularly point out
lie as attracting many molluscs the old walls at the foot
from which dead leaves have accumulated. The cracked walls and over-
all the abandoned ruins conceal a large number of shells; some
species seem particularly fond of bricks, under which
they are fixed in preference to any other stone: probably because the
brick being porous Jeur easily lets in "moisture? - In the
strongholds of our borders, the high walls of the fortifications show
often several species of helices and slugs that are not encountered
somewhere else. Thus, one can collect, & Douai, at the return of spring, a
quantity of Vilrina annularis coming out of the crevices of the walls, and it is &
note that the Vilrina annularis has never been found in the vicinity in
no other place. The detritus deposited by the waters on the banks of the rivers is still useful
to obtain some terrestrial shells, the Achatina acicula, among others,
which one sometimes sees in abundance amidst the remains of fluent molluscs
viable. Finally, we will again engage young malacologists & examine carefully
vely, when they walk on the quays, certain goods in
unloading. “I have a fairly rare species; the Glandina Liebmanni,
found @ Dunkirk in one of the countless cavities that criss-cross the wood
of Campeche. The shipment came directly from Mexico, and the animal is
arrived alive, but numb, 4 because of the diflerence of climate. From all that precedes, it is easy to understand how much experience
must facilitate the search for terrestrial shells; moreover, that the young ma-
lacologists were not frightened! — This experience, they will acquire little by little,
so to speak without suspecting it; it is by seeking and reaping that one
learn 4 seek and & collect! — We arrive & distinguish at first sight
Weil the adult shells of those which still lack a peristome; we
soon refrained from picking up the dead, faded and
speakers; finally, one learns & moderates this unfortunate ardor which, although
often pushes the beginners & strip, by raising too much
large number of individuals, entire stations of their species. The malacologist does not have to undertake, for the search for the shells ter-

   
   

     

remains, of many instruments: tin hoites pierced with holes,
to let the molluscs live; some tubes for rare, small species
or islands; a magnifying glass and above all good pliers, here is all the luggage of the
naturalist. — Let us not, however, forget the pencil and the paper, so useful for

 

immediately note interesting observations and identify localities. In the
mountains, where the same species often varies with height, it is necessary to separate
the individuals immediately picked up at various altitudes; it would even be necessary,
if possible, immediately note the elevation of the ground above the level
of the sea; in any case, it is important to take on the spot indications
to have this elevation recognized later. We will recommend to young malacologists to always look for the
at least two tin cans: one for shellfish, the other for
slugs; if we do not take care to make this separation, we run the risk of
find on the way back all the species spoiled and soiled by the mucus of the slugs. — About these animals, we will recall how important it is to have them
living, their determination becoming more difficult when they are contracted
and shriveled in alcohol. — 644 —

Several naturalists have given the advice to carry a small jar filled with
@esprit-de-vin ctended, and intended & to receive small species 4 as long as we
find them: we believe this idea bad, because it is always better
2 leisurely examine live molluscs when you return. — We don't
We will not speak here of the instruments, boxes and baskets necessary for hunting
molluscs in hot countries, this subject should not directly concern
our readers. Let us pass to the examination of some artificial processes, of traps, so as to
say, destined 4 to harvest shellfish. There are hardly any; however the
dummy shelters that can be created by spreading ¢a and la stones,
branches, etc., are sometimes useful; it is also good to throw some
lime debris in damp places; quarters of seeded fruit
in the lawns, the paths of the woods, alter the slugs, which come
devour them; you can still get some terrestrial shells in ca-
song in the ground of the species of funnels whose narrow part comes to open
live among the grass; in a pinch, decanters, 4 wide-mouth bottles
whose orifice reaches the surface of the ground, can serve as traps; we find the
inatin the molluscs which have fallen into these sorts of traps while circulating
night. The ¢estacedle may give rise to a special hunt; let's talk
Mr. Bouillet, the author of the Catalog des mollusques de l'Auvergne:

"I have long indicated & M. le Baron de Férussac and & several
» other scholarly conchologists, the means that I employ to obtain a
» certain amount of ¢stacles. — I get Vavance, especially in summer.
ment, very large worms (earthworms), which can be seen coupled on the surface
» of the earth, early in the morning, & the dew; after a rain, I cut these verses by
» small moreeaux; I place them 4 at nightfall along the walls, on the
» lawns where I presume there are plots, taking care to plant &
stuck, to recognize the place, a small piece of wood or a straw. » When I return to the scene at night, with a lantern, or at the tip of the
» day, I have the assurance of seeing the testacelles eating or carrying away Vappat
insi - — I must add that ve average in'a always perfectly

 

   

 

 

  
  

Sometimes, in the morning, we see worms & moilié coming out of the ground, which
seem to twist in a desperate way. By removing them, we bring you more
often a detachment who, feeling abducted, does not, however, lick her
prey, — The voracity of these animals makes it possible, as we can see, to
cure easily. Let's finish this article, only many details and long lists
have perhaps made it somewhat arid and monotonous, by the indication of the parties
habitat characteristics of several species. — All our readers know where to find
the Suceinea, on marshy plants; |’ Helix aculeala is found at
base of trees, on the underside of leaves that almost squint the ground;
The Achatina acicula likes to live in the cavities of old 0s; I’ Acne /uscahabite
I foot herbs; the Clausilia are fond of moss; the lima arborun
el scandens are always found on the trees; others live in the cellars. In hot countries, several species are constantly fixed under
the $6p leaves of cacti and succulents; in Carniola, the Zospewins
and some Z/elices do not come out of the dark caverns; I' {clix (ristis. of
Corsica, always sinks into the ground, under a very thorny plant, the Genista
Salzmanni, no doubt to protect himself against any accident. Finally, we have

 

 

   

— 65 —

noticed that monstrous or abnormal individuals were constantly looking for
lies the dark places. Such are the principal considerations which can give rise to the
search for terrestrial molluscs; if the beginning seems painful and
difficult, the end is all the more pleasant, and we could not finish this better
nolice than by an old adage, often repeated, but always applicable:
Courage and patience! The roots of science are bitter, but its fruits
are so sweet!! Duai. Jules DE GUERNE. SPECIES VARIATIONS IN PLANTS. pece in general is the reunion of all individuals presenting the same
clerks. In organic gripe, an important sign of the species is that
the individuals that make it up can fertilize each other to give
birth 4 a series of similar individuals, capable 4 in turn of reproducing
reduce with the same characters indefinitely. According to Messrs. Naudin and Decaisne,
Vegetable Vespece is: "The collection of all individuals resembling each other
to each other as much as they resemble their parents or their
rite. And the same authors have added: "The essential characteristics of the species
are less in the resemblance of the individuals who compose it than in
the impossibility where it finds itself of being able to give, by its crossing with
another species, a series of beings capable of perpetuating themselves indefinitely
way of sowing. As we see, by this definition, culture would be the
best guide to get species knowledge; unfortunately
this means is only practical for a very small part of the plants which
cover the surface of our globe. According to the above, if we compare individuals of the same species believe:
health under identical conditions of exposure of terrain, climate and alti
India, we will recognize between them the most perfect similarity. But under the influence
many and most diverse causes, this similarity can sometimes be singular.
bound to modify and even destroy itself completely; so, for example,
that individuals growing in dry and arid places will have their parts, as long as
aerial than underground, hailstones and chelives, their flowers will diminish and
number and size, their pubescence will be exaggerated and their smell will become
more penetrating; while i é é
feeling that all the most favorable elements of the vegetation are present, such as a
fertile, deep soil, together with sufficient heat and moisture, reaching
will have their maximum development and will present diametrical characters
totally opposed. The same will be true for aquatic plants, and lean
being one of the conditions indispensable to their existence, they will offer
servant of very different characters, according to the depth. Thus, the Sagét-
taria sagitte/olia, so common on the edge of ponds, if it comes & grows in
deep water, will present, instead of spearhead leaves, long
striped leaves, characters which some authors have judged sufficient for
form the variety Valisneriifolia (G, and G.). The Scirpus lacustris, the Ranunculus
aquatilis would present analogous modifications no less interesting. — 66 —

If these different causes are still joined by the influences of climate
and altitude, we will reach the maximum of variations that the species can undergo. The plant of the temperate plains, transported to high peaks, diminishes
of greatness to the point that often its stems and leaves scarcely exceed
one decimetre; its roots, on the contrary, penetrate the ground or cracks
rocks, & a considerable depth; its flowers grow like
greatness and take on a more intense color. On the other hand, the plant of mon-
tagnes, growing on the limit of eternal snow, transported to the
plains, presents radically opposite modifications. Finally, culture is not without bringing its contingent of variations in the
specific characteristics of a plant; variations which, shallow in the
indigenous plants subject to its influence, can in exotic plants,
especially if they are multiplied by means of repeated sowing, carry over the almost
totality of the characters, and these moditications coming in some cases to be fixed,
produce what we have come to call races or varieties. The ornamental plants
mental fruits, fruit trees, cereals, etc., offer numerous examples. It must therefore be recognized that the more trouble one brings to the conditions
natural existence of a plant, the more it departs from its primitive type. Felix Chassagneux,

Member of the Physiophile and Botanical Soviets of Lyon. BIBLIOGRAPHY,

 

The Scottish Naturalist, a Quarterly Journal of Scottish Natural History. — Annual subscription: 3 schillings; apply to Mr. A. T. Scott, Clydes-
Dale Bank, Perth (Leosse). This English quarterly journal was founded by a naturalist who is
well known for his multiple and scholarly works on the natural history of
Scotland, Doctor Buchanan White. Alongside numerous articles and communications of local platot interest,
there are many works and notes made to interest all
naturalists. Up to now, zoology and botany have alone occupied
Five issues have appeared; geology will no doubt soon find
also a place. The primitive ionme, by L. Figuier, Paris, Hachette, 1 vol. 1870. —
Materials for the primitive and natural history of man; received men-
only illustrated, written by MM. Trutat and Carthailac. Paris, Ch. Reinwald
and C¥. — 12 fr. per year for France. Less than forty years ago, no one would have allocated more than 5 4 6 thousand
years of antiquity to man. The origin of our species was only generally known
by the Bible. But for half a century, countless proofs have been corrobo-
each other, have come to assign to man a beautiful antiquity.
ae backwards, and today the study of primitive man has become a
most important branch of anthropology. These studies are difficult;

 

 

(77
they require a great circumspection and a great force of reasoning;
but for that very reason they are attractive, new, full of interest, old
new views and unexpected discoveries. M. Figuier has put the elements
ments & the reach of all, by publishing his book 'Momme primitif qui, bien
that it contains, it seems, a certain number of errors, is precious for those who
who wishes to initiate himself in this science, thanks to the numerous engravings which accompany
pay the text. — We also strongly recommend those of our readers
who would like to be kept informed of discoveries concerning man
primitive, les Matériaux, a review which contains a large number of French works
people and foreigners who can shed some light on the interesting question of
Man before history. There is also a bibliographic bulletin. This
publication complete six years of existence. Ernest DollFus. COMMUNICATION. A negligence due 4 printer, as well as an illness of one of the editors and various
other reasons, caused confusion in the dispatch of numbers 17. We fear,
for the same reasons, errors and delays in the printing and dispatch of the
this issue, and we count once again on the indulgence of the reader. B.D. CORRESPONDENCES. MM. E. €., @ Angers. — We will gladly receive your item. A, L., “Nancy. — Your article for the next issue. A, K. son. — Thank you for the communications. E.R., @ Os. “We will write later. Contact directly for books. FHL, & Valenciennes. — Exhausted supply of peat
A.M., in Nice. “You'll probably find Scarites in the sand there. As to
others, we don't know. E.L., @ Amboise. — Your information will be inserted soon. MM. B., @Evreux. — We will write to you regarding your article. ‘Type. Oberthiir and son, in Rennes. — Maison & Paris, 4, rue Salomon-de-Caus. We share the pain of our subscribers 4
the cruel loss we have to experience in

the person of our friend and collaborator

Ernest DOLLFUS

Member Companies ontomologiques Frangaise Swiss ot. He has just been abducted in his twentieth year from the
his own and the science he loved, by an illness

of heart contracted for several years. We are convinced that anyone who has it
known from near or far will take a real part
To our mourning and that of his family: several

come, like us, to lose a friend. La Feuille des Jeunes Naturalistes was his work:
she was his last concern. This issue had
yet been composed by him, in Le Havre, the day before his

dead; we didn't want to change anything. The Repaction. last May 1872. The Number: 25 cents. Ne 19. YOUTH NATURALIST SHEET

 

 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE
Payable in advance in stamps or money order on the post office:
For France and Alsace-Lorraine, Br. 3 per year. | For foreigners.......+ fr. 4 para,

 

Subscription for Grett-Brtao, $s, 6d. British subseribers cam remit ia penny ot tnopeany postage slamps,

 

Address: d Paris, & the editorial office of your Leaf, 29, avenue Montaigne; ch
bookseller, rue de VArsenal, & Mulhouse (Haut-Rhin). Mal Petry,

  

People who do not unsubscribe will be considered resubscribed. GENERAL INFORMATION ON HYDROCANTHARES

As their name suggests, the insects of this family are aquatic. Their size varies greatly according to the species: some have only
two millimeters, while others reach more than three centimeters: the
shape of the body always remains very nearly the same: it is oval, slim
on the sides, rather flattened above and more or less streamlined below. The lele is quite large, rounded and fitted into the corselet; the eyes are
large, not very prominent, the filiform antennae, the arched mandibles, truncated
serrated character; the very sharp jaws, provided with a tooth and ciliated
laughingly. The palps are six in number: the external maxillae of
four articles, the internal maxilla two and the labial three. The
upper lip or labrum wider than long and usually indented;
the lower lip or tongue is slightly widened & its extremity and cut
almost outright. The corselet has the shape of a trapezium whose front edge
encases the head; one often notices on the middle of the posterior edge a
projection directed behind and which, quite often, replaces or covers the escutcheon;
this one, when it exists, is quite small, semi-circular or triangular. The
elytra attached to the mesothorax are very hard, the length of the body and have
a rim that decreases in width from the base to the end
edge is intended & hermetically close the space between the elytra
and the top of the body; it is abruptly interrupted a little before the end,
in order to allow the last ring of the abdomen, which is retractable, to lengthen
beyond the elytra. The lower wings are membranous, supported by
thick ribs and bend under the previous ones. The prosternum is
terminated with a sharp tip that can play into a matching dimple
from the mesosternum; this is intimately fused with the metasternum which is
very large. The abdomen is composed of hard, horny segments which, except for
tion of the last, are not very mobile. The first pair of legs directed in
front only serves & gripping; the second pair serves 4 the prehension
and sometimes also swimming; she is slightly ciliated: the hips of these
two pairs are free and mobile in all directions; the posterior hips
are on the contrary fused to the metasternum and have in some the form
very developed lamellar extensions, and in others resemble

 

    

 

fy

has small sharp or rounded diverging spatulas, Hind legs,
specially shaped for swimming, are long, wide, compressed,
very hairy and robust; moreover, as their hips are motionless, they
can only move back and forth. Unlike most other insects, hydrocantharids live
up to three years and even more. Another faculty worth noting is
that in winter they do not become numb, even in the greatest cold. We
here they are indeed swimming under a thick layer of ice, in search of
air bubbles, and mate with as much eagerness as in the beautiful
season. Females usually lay eggs in late winter or spring. The
larvae which come out of the eggs are as carnivorous as the adults; they are
elongated, almost cylindrical, rounded in the middle; the head is big, armed
powerful, very sharp mandibles pierced with a canal through which
I suck. The last segments of the body are increasingly elongated
to the last which ends in two small long divergent appendages.
cilia that spread out over the water and in the middle of which the orifice of the
air channels or tracheae intended to revitalize the blood. These larvae move
with the patles, which are quite weak and not very ciliated, or rather with all the
body to which they cause pot lining to feel undulations; the two appen-
dices of the last segment serve them a lot for that. When they are
reached their full size, they come out of the water and sink into
Ja wet earth from the edge; they dig themselves into it, and a few centimeters, a cavity
4 smooth walls yes they turn into nymphs. These all show
the parts of the insect perfectly wrapped in a thin film and
folded against the body. Finally, the film splits on its back and the insect which
comes out limp, dries up, hardens and leaves its underground home to
return to the water in its perfect form. The hydrocanthares are therefore
essentially aquatic in the larval state, essentially terrestrial in the
of nymph and amphibians the perfect state. They can indeed come out of the water

day to move from one body of water to another, for they all fly
done. When they want to fly away, they start by inflating their
tracheas; other insects do this by abruptly lowering the elytra on
the body repeatedly; those we care for do it all
otherwise: after having placed themselves on a dry place, they stand up on their legs
anterior wings and cause the lower wings to vibrate under the elytra and without deploying them.
higher. They thus produce a kind of song with a clear sound that one could
close to the buzzing of the bee; they can vary the intensity by
lowering more or less the elytra. When they feel sufficiently swollen,
they jump by means of their leg-fins and fly away. This flight is very
noisy in larger species. Do they find on their way a ditch or
a pond that suits them, they drop into it and quickly dive
basically. The hydrocanthares are very carnivorous; they devour caddisfly larvae,
dragonflies, etc., flies, salamanders, tadpoles and even
already fat frogs; miles often attach to fish with
forelegs and gnaw their flesh while letting themselves be dragged away. The
individuals of the same species fight and often eat each other when
they are deprived of food. If I seize those of the large species without
precaution, they bite until they bleed. In a confined space where there is
a large enough number, if a prey is thrown to them, they fight over it and
engage in fierce battles. I have often seen in my aquarium up to six
dytisques attached at the same time 4 sticklebacks of four or five centimeters
meters. These insects are very agile, and thanks to the elliptical shape of their

 

 

 

 

 

 

=e

body and & the strength of their leg-fins, they cut through the water with ease and
speed. It is not the same on earth, their movements are embedded there.
shaved and they crawl more than they walk. The small species however
run pretty fast. Depending on the species, they inhabit ponds, ditches of stagnant water or
whitewater currents, such as rivers and prairie rills. They like
4 hiding under stones, rubbish and submerged roots. When the
the weather is cold, they hardly move except to breathe; if the weather is
hot, they are almost always on the move; they then often come out of
Water to dry off; for although in the water their bodies are coated with a
a sort of viscous secretion, it is none the less subject to being affected by
certain molds which develop preferentially in the mouth, in the
culations of the limbs, on the elytra and & the extremity of the abdomen. The air
dries out these molds and destroys them in part, if not totally. So
why we often see in the sun water insects perched on a body
dry stay there for several hours without blowing away. To breathe, they
rise to the surface of the water, usually without making any movements; they
are then in an oblique posilion, the head down, the raised fins
and the abdomen a little removed from the res; so they go up easily, because
the air they already have is enough to make them lighter than water. Sometimes,
& barely have they touched the surface than they rush to the bottom, causing a
relatively large enough air globule; usually they stay somewhere
motionless times, and suddenly bringing the abdomen closer to the elytra, they
return to the bottom of the water. Evreux. Maurice Recimparr. THE RED SPIDER OR THE GIFT GOBEUSE

We know how numerous the enemies of lepidoptera are in their
different states; however, no one, perhaps, has yet reported their enemy
the smallest in size, and yet one of those who, in my opinion, commit the
greatest ravages among these insects. This enemy who, from the first
Days of February (I took some this year, the 7th of the said month), attacks the eggs
memes of butterflies, is quite simply a small red spider whose
the head is furnished with two rather long antennae and which seems to me to live only
insect eggs; I nicknamed her, for lack of knowing her real name,
the egg gobbler. This is how I saw his ride: a few years ago

I had already placed an aborted female of Smerinthus ocellatus against the
trunk of a tree, in the hope of attracting males of its species, which did not
not fail, in fact, to arrive. She had, a few days later, laid
numerous eggs against the aforesaid trunk. But one day I realize that the skullcap
from some of the eggs is removed, as after hatching, and at Ventour,
it is impossible for me to discover any caterpillar; only, I distinguish, without
take good care of it again, two small red spiders placed on the
plate of eggs. The next day almost all the eggs were empty and my little ones
spiders were still there. I then decide to examine them and am not
a long time to convince me of the work they accomplished; they
did obey the wufs of my butterfly. Since then, I have noticed a hundred times the
fact. I therefore report to the revenge of entomologists these little spiders
reds that are found almost all year round in gardens and woods,
against tree trunks, mainly in spring. Amboise. Ernest LELIEVRE. —2—

SLUGS CONSERVATION

I have not personally been able to study the slugs enough to indicate any
truly satisfactory way of keeping these molluscs in a suitable condition.
able. My opinion, however, is that these live animals should be examined, not
only to consider their tentacles, colors, etc., but still
to see them walk, retract, even spin, all things that we can
read valuable information to determine the species. When it is impossible to study them alive, it is good to kill
slugs like molluscs & shell, by plunging them for some time
in a closed vase completely filled with water. These animals are usually
nary, so sensitive that they contract despite everything; but maybe
could we numb them little & little without them contracting, by adding
drop & drop, in water, alcohol, acetic acid, hydrochloride
ammonia, etc. In any case, it is easy, when the mollusc comes from
to die, to pull out its tentacles with fine forceps; we can then study
after having, with a brush, removed the mucus with which the animal is covered. M. Dubreuil recommended, in the 12th volume of the Journal of Conchology,
a particular process for the preparation of slugs. I have not experi-
lied this procedure myself, but I have no great confidence in it; animals
must lose their color, if not their shape; moreover, the preparation must
take a relatively long time. — We must empty the slug from which we
keep only the skin dried, glued and varnished on a cardboard. Three preparations
rations (at least) are required for the same animal, one for each
side, another for the foot; the head of the slug is undoubtedly very difficult
4 dispose. I will, moreover, take advantage of this opportunity to draw the attention of
our young correspondents and collaborators on the means of preserving the
naked molluscs. This would render malacological science a signal service
who would find a way to keep them conveniently and easily. Duai. Jules DE GUERNE. INFLUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGETATION
Ill. — Its role in certain physiological phenomena. Nutrition consists, as we know, in the absorption of materials
dissolved in the water of the soil to which the plants are attached. This water which
charged with nutritive principles, penetrates by endosmosis into the tissue of the
roots and e/ve in the stem changing more and more in nature
is not yet specific to nutrition. She only becomes able to feed the
organs only after having undergone transformations in the leaves where it is
brought by the ramifications of the vascular system which composes the ribs
of these membranes. It is after being in contact with atmospheric air
and having stripped itself of part of its water that this sap, called ascending,
can contribute to the formation of new products and new cells

which, being added to the old ones, determine the reduction in height
Plant. —723—

All these phenomena are subject to the influence of several agents, among
which light can be stored. HAS. TRAFFIC. — Data relating to the role of light on the circuit
lation of the sap are still incomplete and very imprecise. Since the time
de Senebier, 4 to whom we owe the first experiments made on this subject, little
many physiologists have directed their researches in this direction; also our knowledge
on this point they are few. It was Senebier who was the first to observe that the sap rises with more
faster day than night. To verify this fact, this illustrious scholar transported
first 4 the light and then in the darkness of the plants whose extremity
stems or twigs laden with leaves were plunged into a quantity
determined amount of water contained in bottles which presented to their part
upper part of long and narrow necks, in order to prevent any evaporation of
liquid. "Weighing the plants after the experiment to realize the weight
of water absorbed, he could recognize that the absorption, which is quite considerable
during the day and slows down significantly during the night, is all the more
active that the intensity of the light is greater. Some plants, such as sugar areng and horse chestnut, pre-
sense an entirely opposite phenomenon. Thus de Labillardière and Mirbel
convinced, by notches made 4 these completely different branching trees
rent, that the sap which escapes from it drop by drop is much more abundant
night than day. Although the circulation of some plants seems to be active in the dark
rity, we can say that light favors this function which, as I still have
shows Senebier, also depends on the hygrometric state of the atmosphere and the
number of leaves on the stem. It results, in fact, from observations
ments of this botanist, that the ascent of the sap which, the light remaining the same,
takes place more rapidly in branches laden with leaves than in
those without these organs, slows down all the more as the atmosphere
approaches its water vapor saturation point. These latter facts would tend to suggest that traffic activity
does not depend on the direct and immediate action of the rays of the sun, but on
perspiration to which it is intimately linked, and which considerably 4 the
Light happens slowly in the dark

Thus, as we see, we have not yet arrived at the solution of the pro-
problem with the role of light on circulation. To have more notions
accurate on this subject, it would be necessary to find out what action can
exert on this phenomenon the different rays of the spectrum, and to keep complete,
on the one hand, the influence of external agents, such as humidity and heat;
on the other, perspiration which plays an immense role in the absorption of
matter in the ground. B. TRANSPIRATION. — Light exerts a considerable influence on
Watery exhalation which occurs on the surface of the leaves. Senebier and Guet-
later demonstrated this fact by placing a direct action of solar rays and
then in a dark place leafy plants contained in bal-
glass lons. These two physiologists were able to notice by this means that the
amount of water evaporated is much greater in the first case
than in the second. De Candolle further observed that a sheet of paper, or any other
opaque body placed between plants and light rays, sufficient to render
less active perspiration which also occurs, but with less energy,
it is true, 41a lamplight. —_

Light therefore acts favorably on evaporation, since
this function slows down in the dark, without however becoming zero, as
Go pretended some physiologists. It was M. Duchartre who, through his research on the shrubby speedwell,
Vhortensia, has in fact demonstrated, contrary to the opinion of Triviranus and
de Candolle, that an appre- ciable transpiration takes place on the surface of the leaves.
targetable at night. Although light plays a very important role in the aqueous exhalation, it
is not, however, the only agent influencing this remarkable function. Heat also acts with great power on this phenomenon.
for this reason that, when one wants to deal with delicate research on this
subject, many difficulties must be overcome. 1] would take to arrive 4 of the
positive results, make the plant temperature and "humidity
atmospheric do not change, and the latter goal could be achieved by
containing plants in a very narrow container. Mr. Sachs overcame some of these obstacles in his experiments relating to
effects of light and heat on perspiration. The process
which this doctor employed for this purpose consisted in first exposing to the rays
direct sunlight, then & diffused light, and finally in the dark, plants
who, vegetating in glass vases near which were suspended
thermometers, were placed on the pans of a balance, in a chamber
heated. It follows observations made by this physiologist on the Brassica
oleracea than this plant which, sheltered from the sun's rays for five hours
evening until eight o'clock in the morning lost only 1 gr. 10 cent. water
at a temperature of 14° 8° Réaumur, and which, transported to diffused light,
showed, in the space of an hour and a half, a loss of 4 gr. 66 at 4° — 3.5°,
of 4 gr. 50 at 14.5° and 7 gr. 6 4 15.2°, on the contrary exhaled in full sun and
at a temperature of 16.6° a quantity of liquid equal to 17 grams,

 

  

  

 

C. Secretions. — It is a generally accepted fact that the lack of light
prevents the formation of certain juices (latex, wax, resins, essential oils
tielles, etc.) that a large number of plants secrete internally,
such as conifers, crucifers, many synanthers and umbellifers. Everyone knows, in fact, that a plant which must have oils or
analogous substances its aromatic property loses its fragrance when
Expose it to too prolonged darkness. It is on the basis of this principle
that gardeners make more palatable vegetable plants which,
subjected to the action of light, would possess sweats of too strong an odor
too bitter in taste, and sometimes dangerous to use. They cover,
For this purpose, soil the lower portion of their plants. They make them lose
by this means the color green, they whiten them; but at the same time
these plants wither, their Acretity disappears more or less completely. The light therefore favors the secretions; but how does she get to the
form? The explanation for this fact is very simple. Wax, resins, etc., being
largely composed of carbon and hydrogen, elements which are the
result of the decomposition of carbonic acid and water vapor under
the influence of the solar rays, it is evident that these bodies, and consequently the
resinous matter which abounds mainly in the leaves, the bark,
that is to say, in the organs struck by the light of the sun, will not be able to
produce if the plants are sheltered from this agent. Nancy. ad. THE MAYOR,

 

(To be continued}. and ed

COAL FORMATION

To explain the formation of the great quanlity of hard coal qni is found
within the earth, there are only two possible hypotheses. These carbon deposits
niferous must be the result of the burial of seeded plants by the
waters, or from the decomposition of an accumulated mass of plants which are
born and perished in the very places where they are found

The first hypothesis can be explained as follows: & the sequence of
large plnies, these streams coming to overflow, invaded the forests
neighbors, whose plants were carried away by the waters and carried i
"mouth of the great rivers, where they accumulated. This idea has against it the enormous loftiness that one would have to suppose & these
kinds of rafts to make layers as thick as those of our
mines (1); rafts of a similar height certainly could not
to float in rivers, & hardly in certain seas. Besides, the plants
accumulated could not have been distributed evenly enough to form
layers of a thickness as equal as those known to us. Some
geologists claim that these rafts, before arriving at the mouth of the
rivers, would have divided into other smaller rafts disseminating themselves
even on the banks of waterways. But it seems easier to admit that the plants, then so numerous and
so developed, thanks to the enormous quantities of carbonic acid diffused in
atmosphere, caused by their weight subsidence of the ground still badly
consolidated; immense forests were submerged, then new ones
forests, which had developed in the same place as the first and on
their debris sank in their turn; so that all these vegans, entwined
thus decomposing and carbonizing little by little, coal was formed. It is,
moreover, roughly 4 what is still happening today for the plants of our
marshes that time converts into bogs. The fauna of this period, represented by several species of polyps,
Orthoceres, Gonialiles, Belierophons, Encrinites and some
fish, is composed mainly, as we see, of aquatic animals. The
seas alone offered numerous inhabitants and the vegetal ones reigned almost
undivided 4 the surface of the earth. What silence must have reigned in these forts
without Borders! Never I song of a bird, the cry of any animal, the
noise of the flying insect, did not come to disturb these deep solitudes! Mont-de-Marsan. F. BARRIER. SNOW AND THUNDER

Yesterday, between seven and eight o'clock in the evening, a rather singular phenomenon
observed & Arras. Lightning flashed through the air and thunder roared for
snow was falling heavily. One would have said that the atmosphere had
separated into two layers: one closer to us, cold enough to allow
4 snow to occur; the other further away, warm enough to promote
formation of a thunderstorm. It is & suppose that these clouds have reached the high

 

(1) It has been calculated, in fact, that the coal seams can only represent the
about 35/1000 of the thickness of the rafts necessary to form them; however, we know
layers of 30 meters. —76—

regions, and that there they have condensed in such a way as to determine a thunderstorm. The
electrical discharges undoubtedly caused the rain, and this one, falling
towards us and encountering an atmosphere whose temperature had dropped
below zero, turned to snow. March 22, 1872. Cu. OFFICE. COMMUNICATIONS

We failed to mention, in the last article of our Advice to young people
malacologists, a rather productive hunt, which consists in threshing the grasses of the prairies
wet with an ordinary sweeping net; one can thus collect small species of Pupa
and Vertigo, sometimes in fairly large quantities. J. pe Guerne. CORRESPONDENCE

MM. E.R., @ Cz. — The description is insufficient. G. de la S., @ P. — We cannot answer you until we have seen with our own eyes
The insect in question

H, Villanes. — We can only send you from No. 13, that is to say
from the beginning of the second year. G. R., & Lyon, — We will be happy to accept your articles @plant histology. —
The secretary of the Society of Angers is M. E. Chauveau, 5, rue des Champs-Saint~
Martin; please contact him. E.C., @ A. — We will insert your article as soon as we know; but it will be us
impossible to reproduce the figure. E.L., @ A. "Your gobense of eggs probably belongs to the genus Trombidium,
M. M. Hofer, 19, rue Monge, Paris, would be pleased to receive some information from you.
vidus of this spider caught in the act. B., & Tarbes. — We thank you very much for your letter, as well as for your
article that we will insert in the next issue. We will write to you pro-
chaining. 286, rue de Vaugirard, would like to enter into exchange relations with
sts; it offers above all insects from around Paris. We ask our correspondents to send us, as far in advance as possible,
the articles or communications they wish to have inserted; we also ask them to sign
their letters in a legible way and to always put their address at the bottom to avoid
inconveniences that may occur. Typ, Osenraun and sons, at Renues. — Mo & Paris, ruc des Blanes~Manteaux, 35,

ter June 1872. The Number: 25 cents. Ne 20. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE
Payable in advance by postage stamps or money order:

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr. 3 pat a2 | For Pitranger.

 

 

 

. ft. 4 para

Sabseriphion for Greal-Britao, 8s. 6 d. British sub-seribers can remil in penuy or twopeany postage stamps. Contact: Paris, the editor of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne; in Kingersheim (Haut-Rhin),
with Mr. Gustave Weiss. People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. GENERAL INFORMATION ON HYDROCANTHARES
(Continuation and end)

The hydrocanthares are divided into three tribes: the haliplids, the dytis-
acids and hydroporides. The haliplids are small: they make the passage of carabids or
land predators to hydrocanthares or aquatic predators. Their
body is oval and thick, more or less elongated; their paws, even the
hind legs, long, slender and sparsely ciliated, reminiscent of carabids and
are the instruments of slow swimming. The articles of all the tarsi
are very distinct; but the most remarkable character of the hadiplids is
the enormous lamellar extension in the form of a thin, rounded plate, which
present the posterior hips and which covers the abdomen on a large
6lendue and the thighs over almost their entire length. These insects have all the
body dotted with large sunken dots arranged in longitudinal lines on
the elytra and without order on the corselet and the underside of the body. They swim with
the middle and hind legs which they move, not simply
tamely, but one after the other; that is to say that the one on the right rises,
while the one on the left hits the water, and vice versa. This movement
alternate joint @ the shape of the body makes the haliplids not swim
very quickly and that it is easy to grasp them. In the dystiscides, we will leave aside the genus Pelobius which, by its
conformation, approaching haliplids; it differs from it only by
her hips, which are very small. The insects of this tribe are characterized

ar their oval shape, by their five clearly visible articles 4 all the tarsi, by
their very strong, very flattened and very ciliated fins which, thanks to their action

. simultaneous, make swimming very easy; the hips of the latter are
small, in the form of more or less sharp spatulas. In males, the three
first segments of the anterior tarsi, and sometimes intermediate ones, are
dilated and provided below with brushes of stiff bristles and stalked cupules
of various sizes that act as suction cups and firmly fix the
males on females during mating; some females, especially
in the large species, have in addition the elytra streaked or chagrined,

— 7m

 

always with the aim of ensuring fertilization. The crest is very visible on the
greater number; in some one can perceive only by removing the
elytra. This tribe includes the tallest, strongest and most
carnivorous hydrocanthares; they make an incessant war against the larvae, the
insects, molluscs, worms, fish, etc., which they grasp with their feet
anterior and intermediate and which they tear with their mandibles. During-
grasped, almost all of them come out of the articulation of the head and the
corselet a thick and milky liquid, of particular odor & each species, but
always fetid especially among the Cydists: it is obviously for them a means
defense. Most hydroporids have the same shape as the previous ones:
however in Zyphydrus the body is much less elongated, rounded and
thick, which does not prevent them from being excessive In this tribe,
Vécusson is never apparent; it is replaced by a slight rounded projection
and directed backwards, which is on the middle of the posterior edge of the
bodice. But the most distinctive character is found in the conformation of the
anterior and intermediate tarsi: the first three articles are very dilated
in both sexes, and the fourth, very small, is hidden in a deep
indentation of the third, so that, & less than a very careful examination,
it looks like there are only four items. Moreover, the hydroporids have the
same characters as the dystiscides, but are all small in size. J is very easy to raise hydrocanthares. So far I have used a
very simple and excellent way to study their mores. We get a
fairly large glass vase, for example a beautiful gardener's bell; we size
a patch of this little grass that grows at the edge of the ponds, we plant
rushes, potamogetons, buttercups or other aquatic plants, and we
fixed firmly to the bottom of the vase, so that it fits well against the
walls and that the gases produced by the decomposition cannot make it
mount & the surface. It is good that some fairly strong lines come out of
Water, to allow insects to climb there when they want; but he
Care must be taken to cover the vase with a sieve or wire mesh to
prevent them from flying away. We can feed them with insects, fish
or a little meat. Although the water does not need to be changed often,
however, it is preferable to renew it every two or three days,
means of two siphons, one of which brings in water, while the other withdraws
Vancien; in this way the water level does not vary. With this device
very simple and which encodes almost nothing, one can obtain the pleasure
to observe the habits, evolutions and fights of these curious insects. Evreux. Maurice REGIMBART. CANDOLLE

Augustin-Pyramus de Candolle was born in 4 Geneva on February 4, 1778, from a
family of Protestants who took refuge in this city in the 16th century. Dreaming child and
poet, he spent his days in the midst of nature which spread out in all its
beauty in front of Ini. He studied at the University of Geneva: the lessons of
Ch. Bonnet, de Saussure, de Vaucher, Jui made history take on a taste
natural, yet nothing announced the future botanist. Florian pre-
even said a brilliant career as a playwright. But during troubles
of the Revolution, he was obliged to take refuge in a small village; 1a he passed
his 4 days running the mountains to look for plants that he classified the

 

— oe

evening, without books or method, according to their natural relations. The young botanist
Fat noticed by the learned Dolomieu. He came to Paris in 1796 and settled immediately
in the Plant Garden. There, seated on a watering can, he was constantly busy
describe and & observe di 3 The fruit of his work was the History of
succulent plants (1799-1803), Astragologie (1801) and various memoirs very
curious about the sleep of plants. Through Ja he learned 4 to know the intimate life
of beings, a study in which he was later to distinguish himself. Lamarck
did not hesitate to entrust the young scholar with the second edition of the Flore fran-
easy. He undertook this work with remarkable fearlessness, climbing the
the steepest slopes in the Alps and only resting after having enriched
of 6,000 new species and descriptions. Shortly after, he was appointed profes-
sister & Montpellier. A new career began for him. He revived in
this city the love of great and strong studies by putting itself at
Work with indefatigable zeal. These lessons are reproduced in three or-
vrages: The Elementary Theory of Bolanic (1813), The Organography
(1827), and Plant Physiology (1832). The first of these works, the chef-
work of de Candolle, marked in the history of botany. Already one
man of audacious genius, Goethe, in his book on the Metamorphoses
of plants (1790), had studied the mechanism of plant development,
these changes from leaf to calyx, from calyx to corolla, from petals to
elamines, stamens into pistils, ovary, fruit. This theory is
supplemented, enlarged and brought back to proper limits in the work of de Candolle. All beings for Ini are subject to a general, symmetrical plan: this
primitive symmetry is destroyed by a series of irregularities and this is the primary type.
mitif that it is then a question of finding. Goethe's transformation thus becomes
a degeneration. The Restoration removed M. de Candolle from Montpellier and returned him to his
country. Geneva founded for him a chair of natural history and a garden
botanical. There, another stage occupied him. In 1815, he conceived the project of erecting
the complete catalog of vegans. Theophrastus had counted 500 species;
Linnaeus carried this number & 7,000. In 4817, de Candolle had already
57,000 species; in 1840 he had $0,000. He could not complete this bean job:
he composed seven enormous volumes, where he describes each plant with precise precision.
and remarkable accuracy. This work, first published under the title of
Systema naturale regni vegetabilis, was included in 182% under that of Pro-
dromus systematis naturalis regni vegetabilis. In all these works is shown the philosophical idea that de Candolle has
lays the foundation of science. He opened the study of the inner laws of beings, and by
it ensured the triumph of Jussieu's natural method. His contemporaries appreciated him at his fair value; he ful member of almost
all the learned societies of Europe; the academy of curious nature
nicknamed him Linneus. In addition to his major works, de Candolle has also published a Bssat on the pro-
medicinal properties of plants (1804), a Vegetable Statistics of France
remained unfinished and a large number of memoirs. He also took care of
The administration of his hometown: an enlightened philanthropist, he was everywhere where he
was to contribute to the moral and intellectual development of mankind. He ended his beautiful and useful life on September 9, 1841. Mulhouse. A. COURYOISIER. ANTISEPTIC ARSENICAL LIQUID

Various attempts have been made, especially in recent years, to substitute
kill with alcohol a preservative liquid less confusing and less altering the

= a) =

colors of preserved parts. So far we have succeeded poorly in general.
neral, and alcohol always prevails; however, experiments made on several
several compositions have given satisfactory results. Among these liquids,
I will cite one which, while still not entirely responding to the desires of
naturalists, seemed to me in certain cases a rather advantageous use. Its composition responds to the following:

    

Water.. +”. 830 gr. Alcohol........ 150
Arsenious acid. ... 5

   

  

Experimented on various species of animals, it gave me results quite
variables, hence it is still rather difficult for me to specify its effects. Nevertheless
My observations generally lead me to the following conclusions:

In certain circumstances, it gives perfect preservation. It does not turn yellow
not like alcohol and usually does not alter colors, even the most sus~
likely to pass. For scaly reptiles, it seems worth the alcohol. The
saurians and ophidians, on which I tried its effects, remained there
completely intact and their colors remained much more vivid than in
Vesprit-de-vin. This is even the most advantageous property of this liquid. As for batrachians, the results are more doubtful. Having experimented on
several species of tritons and frogs, I noticed that some remained
perfectly preserved, while the others deteriorated. I probably need
attribute this fact to the difference in the preparation of the samples of liquid
bent. Another reason is the following: Arsenic coagulates the mucus that se-
ordinarily create the batrachians by giving insusceptible gelatinous products
luble, which removes almost all of the arsenious acid from the liquor. tl
would therefore be necessary for such preparations to change the
contents of the bottle before definitively disposing of the item & keeping it. We
can also, by immersing a few hours in alcohol,
coagulate the mucus, and after having carefully removed them put the animal
in the condom in question. One of the most serious drawbacks of this liquid is the ease with which it
is exposed to freezing. Alcohol, as we know, does not solidify & no tempera-
ture known, whereas this mixture is preud 4 a few degrees below
zero. In private cabinets, this inconvenience is unimportant; but
in public galleries that are difficult to heat, it is enough to cause some to be rejected
Vemployment. We know, in fact, that not only the preserved pieces would suffer
great deterioration, but still most jars would be inevi-
broken if the temperature dropped low enough to cause solidification
cation of the aqueous part of the liquid. Besides my few experiments on reptiles, I have researched
molluscs. Here, the results are better, but the preparation of these animals
ailments demand greater sweats. To be completely successful, I advise-
enough the process that I used for the Limax maximus, because this
species is one of the largest in our country, and therefore one of the most difficult
cils 4 prepare. '

I began by killing the animal in a flask filled with watery liquid.
weak nical; this done, I placed it in the ordinary liquid, until the
mucus has been sufficiently coagulated. So I took off with a towel the
adherent dandruff and I started a new immersion, until I
that the skin has been perfectly deprived of these gelatinous matters. When this mollusc seemed to me suitably washed, I gave it back its ex-

 

 

   

= sie

primitive voltage; I developed with braxelles its tentacles. I only remained
more than placing it in its bottle. A few days later, I changed the liquid,
and since that time the animal has remained as intact as on the first day. His necks
theirs are in no way altered, the shape is still just as natural; finally, the
liquid has not lost its transparency. Unfortunately, I have not been able to multiply experiences of this kind. I will have
wanted to continue these studies and in particular trailer by this condom the
strongly colored species. Everything leads me to believe that the results would be
as good, but I have said to confine myself to a small number of observations which, while
in Glant advantageous, are not enough for me to be able to decide with
full insurance. I add, in closing, that I successfully applied the arsenical liquid to the
helminths. Its perfect transparency made it very suitable for the preservation of
these. It would also be good to study its action on zoophytes, arachnids,
and in general the animals of the lower orders. This is a subject of study
can only be recommended to naturalists who are in a position to
enjoy time-consuming experiments with ease. Paris. Ch. Of house. NOTES ON LYCOSA SACCATA

Some of our Casters are no doubt not without noticing
in spring small brown spiders, very agile, running or jumping between
clods or on dry leaves in the woods. Many of
they are loaded with a globular greyish bag which they seem to carry
with great ease, although it is several times larger than their
abdomen, to which it is suspended by loose threads. This bag, whose walls
are soft and silky, first contains the eggs of the spider, which are
usually very numerous, spherical and yellow in color. Later, after
their hatching, the bag will serve as a dwelling place for the young spiders; these may
come out of it and return to it as they please, as the little sarigues return to the
their mother's pocket when danger threatens them; i] often happens to them too
to spread over the outer surface of the bag and stick together
4 keyed from the others, then resembling small gray scales. When we
detaches their dwelling from the abdomen of their mother, they then spread &
ground or on the hand of the observer and disperse in all directions. The lycosis shows for its wufs and for its young a tenderness really
surprising; she is as good a mother as she is a terrible wife, and if it happens to her
often to devour her husband, weaker than her, she would give
on the contrary his life to save that of his offspring. If you are looking for him
forcibly remove her precious fardean, she will go to desperate lengths to
snatch it from you and will cling to it with all its nails without thinking & flee for
save his own life. If then you come back to him, his movements
lively and eager will seem to indicate her joy, and she will hasten to
safety the object of all his cares, of all his anxieties. The naturalist
Bonnet tells us how he was able to see how far the devotion went
of a spider mother. Having once thrown a lycosa and its bag into the trap
of an ant-lion, he saw the poor victim making vain efforts to steal &
his enemy the bag he had managed to seize with his formidable claws;
she fought for a long time without losing courage, constantly returning to

 

— 82 —

charge, she did not even make up her mind to leave this unequal struggle when she had
saw his bag dragged and buried under the sand by his opponent. Hat had to
use force to pull the poor mother out of the sand funnel or she
had just seen what she held most dear swallowed up,

It is, moreover, a rather general fact of the intestine in animals that the mother
sacrifices itself rather than letting its little ones perish, for the preservation
and the multiplication of the species matters more than the lives of individuals. Paris. Mr. HW. INFLUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGETATION
(After)

 

D. INCREASE. — One could assume that the elongation in height
plants is much better in light than in darkness; but one
a large number of observations tend, on the contrary, to prove that the increase
ment of the stems is much more considerable during the nocturnal period
only during the daytime. Mr. Duchartre has in fact noted that the vine, the strawberry plant, the rose pass, the
hops and gladiolus lengthen much more between six o'clock in the evening and
six o'clock in the morning than between six o'clock in the morning and six o'clock in the evening, and that
the elongation of the stems of these plants during the night is double or triple of
Diurnal wandering. :

Mr. Martins, who also directed part of his research on this side, has
noticed that the growth of the stems of Dasylirium gracile and Phormium
tenaw is almost twice as large in darkness as in light. We can, moreover, realize the action that light exerts on the
growth by comparing the height of two trees placed in relation to the
light under almost opposite conditions or by transporting
herbaceous plants in a dark place. Let us examine for example
attentively the length of two oak trees, one of which vegetates in the open air and
the other hardly receives the rays of the sun, as it happens in the
dark forests, we will realize that the throne of the first will be much more
wide, but stockier than that of the second, whose loose fabrics, it is true,
will be quite long. The same effects occur, but with more energy, when diving
plants in complete darkness. The lines present in this case a
extreme weakness, but reach an inordinate length. Thus, the fineness and the length of the fibers are all the greater as
The lighting is less bright. This property possessed by light of acting on
The increase in inverse proportion to its intensity does not lack a certain
importance. The inhabitants of Belgium have used it to make
develop long and remarkably delicate fibers with hemp. They plant & for this purpose, 4 a very small distance from each other, the feet of this
plant which, receiving only a small quantity of light, produces fibers
delicate for the manufacture of lace so renowned in this country. It is easy to infer from what precedes that, among the different radii of the
spectrum, the dark rays should play the greatest role in increasing
Plant. Mr. Pleasonton, who made remarkable experiments on the vine
by means of violet light, recognized that cuttings of Vitis, planted

 

33

in a greenhouse lined with violet glazing, can emit, at the end of ciny
months only, branches fifteen meters long,

ROLE OF LIGHT ON GERMINATION. — To end this chapter,
I only have to say a few words about the influence of light on the
germination. According to Senebier, Ingenhouz, Boitard and several other physiologists, the
light, far from favoring this function, would only slow it down, and this delay
would be all the more considerable as it would itself be more intense. boitard,
who germinated auricula seeds in three vases with which I was covered
of a transparent glass bell, the second of a frosted glass bell and the
third of a bell surrounded by black paper, observed that the germination
was more active in the latter case than in the former. This experience,
as said by Candolle, is rather doubtful, because it could have happened that the rays
burning rays of the sun determined the desiccation of the seeds sown in the
first apparatus and that the accelerating influence granted by Boitard
The darkness was due to the fairly high temperature of the bell which, covering
green with an opaque body, absorbed a considerable amount of heat. Mr. Morren, who has researched the part played by the various colored rays of the
spectrum on germination, thought he could conclude from his research that this
function, slowed down under the influence of the more illuminating rays, takes place
with rapidity in blues and violets; but M. Brongniart failed to notice
that these results could depend on the quantity of white light that
colored glasses let through. All these facts observed by these physiologists seem, moreover, to be in
contradiction with the experience of Th. de Saussure who recognized that if one
sows seeds in two bell jars of equal capacity and placed in the same
conditions, but one of which is transparent and the other opaque, they germinate
better in the first than in the second. M. Milde has again come to confirm this opinion by his researches on the
germination of Hquisetum. According to this botanist, the spores of these cryplogams
grow very irregularly in the dark. Although these two experiments tend to prove that light is not
harmful to germination, we cannot however say whether this agent plays a
favorable role on the development of all germs. It would even seem
result from the observations of several scientists that this accelerating action
is not general. Thus, M. de Bary claims that the spores of Peronospora
macrocarpa germinate better and faster in darkness than in light. We cannot therefore up to now regard this question as complete.
ment resolved. Nancy. ad. THE MAYOR. (To be continued.) HUNTING HYMENOPTERA

Among the means of capturing the Aymenopleres, there is one that we
especially recommend to our readers; if it is little known and rarely put
in practice, it nevertheless allows to obtain different species of this
order that would often be difficult to take otherwise. Here are a few
words of which it consists. — Some time before the hymenop-

. — 84 —

teres lay their eggs, cut perpendicularly or slightly obliquely
only on the axis of the branches of certain shrubs whose center contains
not quite abundant marrow. This marrow is thus laid bare, and the females
@hyménopteéres, found it suitable for them to prepare the home of their
larvae, almost inevitably come to sink their auger there and deposit
eggs, not being able to suspect that a trap is being set for them. After some time,
when the egg-laying time has passed, we detach the end of the ramean
over a length of 15 to 20 centimeters, for example, and we enclose the
chopsticks thus cut in a jar closed at its upper part, but oi
the air can renew itself somewhat. The eggs hatch; young larvae
that come out of it develop in their cells and carry out their meta-
morphoses, as if the branch had remained attached to the plant that carried it. Finally, when the perfect insect has shed the envelope of its nymph, it
finds a way out and leaves its first dwelling; but then it turns out
in another prison, in which it is easy to study him. If, at various
times of the year, we split, along the axis, the sticks that we keep, we
can follow the full development of the species therein and make
thus a study too neglected, but which does not lack utility; it's not
indeed, it is all about knowing the perfect insect; you also have to know the egg,
The larva and the pupa. We could probably also replace the section of the upper part of the
twigs by fairly wide notches made at intervals along the
these branches and which would expose the marrow 4 at several points. We cou-
then pierces the branches above and below each cut, at a
suitable distance. The twigs of brambles can provide excellent traps, and the species
which lay their eggs there are quite varied; but to vary them more,
the branches of various other shrubs must be cut in the same way. It will be good to put and share the rods of different species, in order to know
from which came the wasps that were collected. i. COMMUNICATIONS

We remind our correspondents, some of whom seem a little tired, that
it is always with great pleasure that we will receive the articles that they will want us
to send; especially those who record the results of their research and observations.
personal wishes. We ask those of our subscribers who are still missing a few numbers of
our publication, to send us their complaints as soon as possible. Those who want
would be able to obtain isolated numbers will receive them at the rate of 25 c. the number. CORRESPONDENCE

MM. 4. L., d.N. — We await the end of your article for the next issue. HAS. ., @ M.— Thank you for the article you sent us and we
hope that you will continue to be an active correspondent for our Leaf. G., @K. “We remind you of your promise. typ. Oberthiir et fils, & Rennes, ~ Maison & Paris, rue Salowou-de-Caus, 4 (square des Aris-ei-Métiers). ter July 1872. The number: 25 cents. No. 2t. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

 

Payable in advance by postage stamps or money order:

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr, 3 param | For fBwanger........... fr. @ per year. Subscription for Great Briai, 9s. 6 d. British sub-seribers can remit in penoy ot tvopenny postage stamps. Contact: d Paris, at the La Feuille editorial office, 29, avenue Montaigne; 4 Kingersheim (Haut-Rhin),
with Mr. Gustave Weiss. People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. SOCIETIES OF YOUNG NATURALISTS. It is with a great feeling of satisfaction that we have seen, for two
years, French youth, long indifferent to natural history,
turn with a little more ardor to this science and begin to
to understand, to taste its charms. Too long behind, in this respect, the young people of others
nations, England and Switzerland above all, we have done today
a few steps to follow them; it remains for us to match them and later, perhaps,
to get ahead of them. Before 1870, I do not know that there existed in France any society of
young naturalists constituted in a durable way; but since that time
— that is to say, since our misfortunes — have been successively founded: the
Physiophile Society of Lyon, Ja Society for Scientific Studies of Angers, the
Douai Society, and more recently, the Society for Scientific Studies
of Nancy, whose foundation is largely due to our late colleague,
Mr. Ernest Dollfus. All these Societies were created by young people and for young people
people; their purpose is the same as that which we have ourselves

proposed to achieve by founding the Leaf of Young Naturalists, that is-
to say that they seek & encourage among the youth the study of science
pattrelles or even physical sciences closely related to it. We believe we are doing our readers a favor by giving them about these Societies
emerging the information provided to us. The Physiophile Society of Lyon, founded in 1870, is one of the first seven
days of each month, in this city, a compulsory meeting for all
active members, and during the month, other scientific meetings
not mandatory. A common collection, including all branches
of natural history, as well as a library, were created to serve
studies of each member of the Society. Records are published, and
to support the various costs, a monthly contribution is fixed at the
beginning of each year; corresponding members only have to pay the
half of the contribution. To be part of the Society, as an active member,
you must live in Lyon or its surroundings, be introduced by two members

  

 

 

—- 36 —

 

and declare to adhere to the regulations that have been established; to be part of it,
a liter of corresponding member, i! just make the request in writing; in
both cases, the assembled members will vote on the admission of the candidate (1). The Society for Scientific Studies of Angers, whose work and studies
relate above all to the natural history of the department of Maine-et-Loire,
revives on Sundays, twice a month. She has also founded collections including
councils and publishes an annual report of its meetings. It also organizes scientific excursions in which
its members, as well as foreign persons authorized by the president. The annual contribution is set at ten francs for active members and five
franes for corresponding members. To be admitted as a member
active, it must be presented verbally or by correspondence by two
members of the Society, who will discuss with the bureau the admission of the candidate;
to be a 4th corresponding member, it suffices to be presented by a
only member and approved by the bureau (2). The Nancy Society for Scientific Studies regularly holds two meetings
per month, and from time to time 4 additional sessions. She ered, instead
of its meetings, natural history collections, organizes excursions
communes and will publish a bulletin when possible. To be part of the Society as an active member, it suffices to be
recommend by two members and send a written request for ad-
mission to the secretary, together will proceed to a vote which will decide
the candidate's admission. The latter will be required to present to the Company at
least one job per year. Any young man wishing to be part of the Society
as a corresponding member deyra to make the request in writing to the secretary
silence, by enclosing 4 this request a work on any subject of history
natural: a vote will decide its admission. The annual fee is,
like that of the Society of Angers, fixed & ten francs for active members
and five francs for the corresponding members (3). We strongly urge our young subscribers 4 to match
dance with one or other of these Societies which, we are sure, the
will always receive with eagerness parini his workers, until they
can, too, surround themselves with a small circle of friends with the same tastes
queux, and thus form the core of a new Society. We don't doubt
that there are in many cities of our country people who have the
enough love for natural history and enough activity and perseverance
rancid to undertake a work whose usefulness would soon be felt. Our desire would be to achieve in Paris what has been done in the cities of pro-
vince we talked about: so we ask those of our Parisian subscribers
who would be willing & help us in our task of wanting to put themselves
in direct correspondence with us. The Reaction. (1) To receive the rules and more detailed information, contact
aM. Gabriel Roux, 37, rue Duhamel, Lyon. (2) For further information, please contact the Company Secretary, Mr. Ernest
Chauyeau, 5, rue des Champs-Saint-Martin, in Angers. (3) For further details, please contact 4 Mr. Eugéne Gardeil, Company Secretary,
rue de la Nursery, 25, Nancy. =i

NOCTURNAL RAPTORS. .os nocturnal raptors, called owls, are, as their name indicates,
birds of prey that hunt at night. They form a family called
the Strigidae. The mournful cry that these birds make heard at night, joined to the neighborhood
cemeteries and churches, some of which sometimes inhabit the
towers, usually instills a sense of dread in weak minds
superstitious. For them, the idea of ​​a cemetery, of tombs, of the dead,
is always associated with the presence of this bird, and if by chance it flutters
around some house where there is a sick person, the vulgar, always

rédule, does not fail to draw from this circumstance the most fatal omen. done & we, who have closely studied the minuses of this animal, to try
to destroy this unfortunately too widespread prejudice, especially in our
loincloths; no, the owl is not made, as some people claim,
to come and announce grim news. If we can invoke here the testimony of the ancients, we see that this prejudice
existed among the Romans; the Greeks, on the contrary, had this bird in esteem
eLen veneration; they had made it the symbol of wisdom and attributed it
specially 4 Minerva. These general considerations laid down, I will try to depict the subjects
that make up the Strigidae family. The birds of this family are easily recognized by the characters
following: large, flat head, provided with two tufts in certain species,
smooth in a few others; eyes very large and directed forward, are
surrounded by a circle of slender feathers forming a disc, and are noticed
quantifiable especially by the size of the pupil; their beak, short and very hooked,
has no membrane at its base; their feet, short and robust, end
by free fingers, armed with hooked and very sharp nails which are called
greenhouses; their plumage, soft and silky, is irregularly dotted with
loose, streaks and lines. Intended to stop the excessive multiplication of rodent mammals and
burrowers who do not come out of their retreats until after sunset, the
nocturnal birds of prey seem to have been endowed with all the faculties
could favor this nocturnal hunt. The meaning of louie is with them of an extreme delicacy, and it seems, says Buffon,
that they have this sense superior to that of all other animals. They can
close and open 4 will the auditory concha of their ears, proportional-
very large and whose pavilion is replaced by feathers very ~
mobile, which is not found in any other animal. The singular development of the pupil in Serigidae means that these
birds seem, to use Buffon's expression, to be dazzled by the clarity of the
day and entirely blinded by the rays of the sun: so most of them remain
they Lapis during the day in holes in old hovels, hollows in trees
or thick thickets. A few rare species can, however, withstand
Brightness of day, but usually only at dusk and daylight.
moon that we see them taking flight and looking for their prey. Nocturnal raptors make no noise while flying, allowing them to
seize their prey when it least expects it, and
the slightest noise would awaken all nature. This holds 4 what the device
of flight has little strength with them, and that the first pinnae of their wings
*

 

 

 

 

  

  

 

 

ee

offer no air resistance at their edges. Their movements, moreover,
do not need to be fast, because the animals they pursue flee with
little agility, or at this hour do not dream of fleeing. On earth it is a gre-
noodle, a field mouse, a mouse; under the foliage, and still very rarely and everything
exceptionally, they are sleeping birds; but still it is necessary to
approach them quietly, because once awake, they would escape unexpectedly.
fallarily. Their way of hunting is curious enough for me to say a few words about it. As soon as one of these animals has seen its prey, it has a way of placing itself above it.
above where she is, then he swoops down on her in a straight line with
incredible precision. I] immediately gobbles up the animal without skinning it,
then start his search again. When he has satisfied his appetite and his
digestion is finished, it rejects in the form of pellets the bones, the hairs, the
feathers or the elytra of the animals he has swallowed. To get an idea of ​​the huge
number of harmful animals that the owl destroys, for example, it is necessary to examine
mine the balls that this animal rejects in the place which serves as its retreat. Each ball contains four to five mouse skeletons. Doctor Franklin,
from which I borrow this observation, I have been in an owl's nest more than
measure of pellets deposited by this animal in the space of sixteen months. Some
species, however, owls (Siri psilodactyla), among others,
their prey and know very well how to pluck the little birds they have caught. The
large species, the eagle-owl (Stiia budo), for example, hunts hares,
rabbits, squirrels, etc. ; but when this game is lacking, they are content
rats, moles and even insects. Small species feed internally
differently from passerines, frogs, lizards, small rodents and
of insects. Generally the female lays two & four eggs, of an ordinary white
very pure and approaching spherical form. She lays them in holes
of walls and rocks, in the hollows of the trees, under the canvas of the great buildings,
or even in the abandoned nests of magpies, crows, or even
squirrels. Only one species, the greater owl (Siri passerima),
build a nest on the ground, on a hill or in the tall grass of the mara
The mile and the female share brooding care; they are full of solli-
tude for their little ones that they only bowl when they are in a state of
provide for their subsistence. After this time, they separate and live together.
silent. q

The number of species that make up the nocturnal raptor family is
quite considerable. We have fourteen in Europe, but there are
a large number in all parts of the world. The differences that pre-
feel these species are so vague that their classification has been rather
difficult & establish. They are divided into four classes: superninae, bubolinea, ululinea,
the striginae. I will say a few words about each. 1° SURNINEES. — The birds which compose this class form the passage
from diurnal to nocturnal raptors. They have a rounded head and without
egret. We commonly find in France one of the main types of this
family is the common or noctuid owl (Strix psilodactyla). 2° Busou — The bubolines have a flattened head, adorned with feathers
forming two lateral tufts; the disk of feathers around the eyes
is a bit wide. The type of this family is the gand-due (Strix bubo). It is 
the largest of the nocturnal raptors. — We also have the grand-due
(Strix scops). It is a pretty species, common everywhere and which makes a war
relentless against field mice, caterpillars and beetle insects. — The owl

 

 

    

 

  

  

 

  

          

 

    

 

 

          

    

   

     

 

  

 

  

  
 
 

 

 

— 89 —

common or long-eared owl (Strix otus) is fawn, with longitudinal spots
brown on the body and below. This species is very widespread in France. 3° ULvrintes. — The ululines have a rounded head, without tufts and the
extensively developed and complete disc. The most common species with us
is the owl-tawny cat (Strix aluco). The background of the plumage is greyish
in the mile, russet in the female. 4o STRIG S striginées u have no crests and are distinguished
especially by the d | és marked and very complete. — The main type
is the common owl (Strix Flammea), known as the owl
steeples. Its plumage is grey, dotted with white and black. All birds have an incredible antipathy for owls. As well,
when one of them has the misfortune to venture out in broad daylight, it is immediate-
ment assailed by the sparrows which are in the vicinity. The first
of those who become aware of their theft, throws out a cry of alarm which suffices
to bring together all the others in an instant, and then magpies, jays, the smallest
even birds surround it, screeching, and the owl, surprised thus
in broad daylight, only responds with laughable gestures to these attacks and these
insults; we see her swinging heavily from side to side her TV alone or
his whole body at once, blowing horribly, sometimes cracking loudly
its bee, according as the ardor or the number of the combatants increases, and swell
singularly all the feathers of the body, in particular of the wings, as for
better to scare them off by making yourself look bigger. If the hatred that birds have for owls is justified up to a
certain point, the antipathy that men foolishly show them has not
of raison d'etre. Nocturnal birds of prey, especially small species,
render great services to agriculture, by destroying in the countryside
a host of harmful insects and small rodents. It would therefore be preferable
to favor the multiplication of these birds, instead of destroying them. Vienna. G.B.

 
    

    

  

 

   

   

 

 

 

   

 

PLANT HISTOLOGY. LEAF. The leaf being one of the most useful organs, the most indispensable even
to the plant 4 of certain periods of its existence, it seemed to me suitable
to place its histological study in the forefront, and to overlook its
intimate constitution of the details which interest at the same time his anatomy
and its physiology. The vital role of the leaf is indeed multiple, and its structure responds to the
different physiological acts that it must produce. Apparatus of excretion and exhalation, it has on the plant, on the stem, a
position which puts it in a position to contribute effectively to these various orders of
phenomena. Breathing apparatus, it has a special histological constitution,
Exacly conformed for this act so important in the life of beings. Protective device finally under certain conditions, it changes from
could not be more varied and always related to the role she has to

player. . ;
We will leave aside the study of the leaf taken as a whole, including

 

— 90

posed with tones of its elements, of the living leaf in a word, to tie us
only & the study of its constituent parts and of the diverse grouping of
its anatomical elements. The study of its appendages, such as hairs, glands, etc., will be the subject of a
|

next job. To properly study any leaf histologically, to penetrate
truly in the intimacy of its substance, one must not be satisfied with
examine it from a single point of view, i.e. on a cross section
only. Longitudinal sections will also be necessary and must be
made on different points of the sheet; they must relate to the beams
scular (ribs) which furrow it, and also on the parenchyma inter-
placed between these beams. In addition, special cuts will have to be made, in order to
to be aware of the position of the stomata, their number, their
shape and their more or less depth. Histochemical preparations
special, which I will indicate in time and link, will also have to be undergone by
cuts to expose certain elements, separate them from each other. If we consider a cross-section of any rift, of
firier for example, we will first find there the cut of the superficial epidermis.
perieurium made up of small more or less branched cells. We
we will come back in a moment with more details on this epidermis which deserves
to focus our attention. Below this first cellular zone is
a specific parenchymal tissue, the whole of which has been given the name of
mesophyll, because it is interposed between the two epidermis. This meso-
phylle is itself subdivided into two perfectly distinct courses: one,
placed immediately below the upper epidermis, is formed of two
or three rows (rarely more) of these cells, palisade cells, cells
elongated, vertical and usually filled with chlorophyte grains. Those
grains of chlorophyll, very visible from the rest under the field of the microscope, without
having undergone no prior preparation, can testify to their nature
nitrogenous if treated with sugar water and sulfuric acid; after a few
hours, they turn pink more or less dark. The successive treatment
by azolic acid and ammonia also gives a characteristic yellow tint.
tick of nitrogenous matter. In some cases finally ot i! would be useful to
the chlorophyll grains from the starch grains, we could do it easily,
by soaking the preparation for one or ten days in saliva (1). The palisade cells which, by the amount of chlorophyll grains
they contain, give the leaf its characteristic coloring, do not
leave between them no void, no lacuna; they are pressed together
against the others and indeed constitute a real parenchyma in any lac-
perception of the word. it is no longer the same for the second zone that we have indicated in
the mesophyll. — Here we are still dealing with cells, but their shape
is different and their grouping is even more so. The cells are rounded or ovoid, containing little chlorophyll and
leaving between them vast gaps which can be considered as
kinds of 4 air chambers, and which caused this portion of the mesophyll to give
the name of lacunar system or loose and spongy parenchyma, as
Call Schacht. It is here that the histological study truly confirms what observation
vation had pointed out what experimental physiology had foreseen. All the

 

 

   

   

      

     

 

   

 

 

 

   

  

   

 

 

  

     

    

 

 

   

  

 

(1) We know, in fact, that saliva contains a ferment capable of transforming starch
insoluble in sugar that dissolves in water. — 91 —

antes at least the stomata are of
leaves than their upper side
ve-
lower dermis
particular stem

  
 

world knows that in most
much more abundant on the inner side
higher, and that these stomata are specially intended for the
general. Now, it is precisely immediately above I'é
bearing these stomata which the microscope has made discover this s:
shortcomings of which we have just spoken. We understand then what
phenomenon is happening and of what use are the gaps in the mesophyll. The air
penetrates through the stomata into the interior of these chambers, where it
freely and where it is constantly in contact with the cells of the area
upper, filled with chlorophyll. This one, as we know, decomposes
carbonic acid contained in the air, fixes the carbon, lets it escape lox
ene, and the phenomenon of lar

In addition to these different res fabrics that we meet &
microscopic examination, there is not a single transverse section on which
we do not observe lines of a particular fabric, paler than those studied previously.
above and which are perpendicular or oblique to the cut which has been
done. These lines represent to us the sections of the fibro-vascular bundles
or veins of Ja fenille, and with a sufficiently high magnification it will be easy
to recognize sections of fibers and , among the hundred
unrolling branches persist until the last ramifications, ’ condi-
tion, of course, that they already exist in the petiole and in the stem. I promised to come back to the epiderin of the leaf; is that indeed this
part, which is common to the stem, to the root and to the leaves, has been well studied
he truly deserves credit

The Germans divided the epidermis into three categories: the epidermis pro-
first said, the epiblema and the epithelium. We will have the opportunity to study more
later these last two; let’s talk today about the description of the epidermis
proper, which is especially that of the leaves. What is commonly called the epidermis is an outer integument, analogous
logue to that of animals and which forms a veritable integumentary system,
which is made up of two distinct parts: the epidermis proper
and the cudicle (discovered by M. Brongniart). The cuticle is not simple as previously thought; it's necessary
distinguish true cuticle and cuticular layers whose difference is
based on histochemical reactions:

The true cuticle is anhystic (without apparent structure); it does not contain
no cellulose; tincture of iodine and sulfuric acid do not color it in
blue, but in yellow; it therefore behaves like a nitrogenous matter. She
is soluble in caustic potash, cold or hot. The culicular layers are placed between the cuticle
epidermal; they are so called because they have several
layered coatings that do not dissolve in caustic potash,
even when hot, but swell there by losing a substance analogous to suber. After having heated them in caustic potash, if Viode is added
of | sulfuric, we obtain the blene coloration, characteristic of the
cellulose; but if we treat directly with iodine and sulfuric acid, there is no
has no reaction; this is, in fact, then masked by the suberi material
form that disappears after boiling in potash. Finally, the epidermis itself is made up of 4 reaction cells.
losique and of different shapes. We will soon study the histological structure of the petiole and the
leaf appendages, such as hairs, stomata and some crystals. Gabriel Row
Member of the Physiophile Society of Lyon. e and the cells

   

    

 

 

=

 

 

   

 

— 2 —

Society for Scientific Studies of Angers. NOTE TO SERVE IN THE HISTORY OF A NEW INFUSORIUM. I have been observing for some time a most curious being who has developed
Suddenly in a vegetal vase, somehow, a Nitella hyalina
which I brought back from Chaumont (Maine-et-Loire) on August 10, 4871. For the seven months that this plant has been in my possession, it has given birth to
ance & a fauna as varied as it is interesting: it was first the Vordi-
those which showed themselves, but which, too delicate no doubt, could not
endure captivity and soon disappeared. I could then observe a
quantile of Systolides, Volvos, Chilomonas granulosa,
Various monadians,! Euglena viridis, \ Astasia limpida, etc., and finally, since
about a month, i.e. after six months of maceration, you will be extremely
bizarre which is the subject of this article (1). Here is the exact description of this infusorium:

Ovoid animal, covered with a membranous, glutinous, diaphanous integument. Body filled with granulations and bearing in the center a clear spot surrounded
with a darker edge; whole body colored green. Two filaments used for
locomotion and ceasing to be agile when the animal is stable. slow motion
of rotation in all directions and fairly lively progression, the filaments (which
Mr. Ehrenberg will no doubt name the trunks) carried forward. These filaments
are extremely thin and of such perfect transparency that it is very difficult
to see them; this can only be achieved by placing the microscope in the sun
and by creating shadows with the help of the diaphragm: we then see two
long threads which the animal waves in all directions and which out about three or four
times its length. This being stands in regular groups of four individuals agglutinated by the
edges of the integument which, due to its diaphanousness, is quite difficult 4 aper-
cevoir, which would lead one to suppose at first sight that these animals do not touch
not. q
Reproduction by div

     
 

 

   

     

 

 

         

    

 

   

spontaneous ion
0™™,012 to O™™,015;
0.017 & 0™",020;
0™™,045 & 0™,055. Diameter. ..
Length. . . :
Thread length. When the animals form a group, they occupy an upright position and
therefore present the top of their bodies 4 to the observer; we would think
see four lentils joined by the edges and forming a square. Seen in this
position, the contours of each infusorium appear slightly wavy, which
which would suggest that the inner envelope is delicately pleated. - When
the group bows and takes an oblique position, we see the four animals
malcules having an oblong ovoid shape and waving their filaments. - He
Sometimes the groups split up and there are only two animals left.
malcules joined together, these nevertheless continuing their movements of pro-
gression and rotation. I don't know if these infusoria can reproduce other than by division

 

 

, (1) These observations were communicated to the Society for Scientific Studies on March 10
last,

— 9 —

spontaneous; in any case, this last mode seems to me not to be able to be con-
tested, because I saw opened a large rounded individual, devoid of
filaments and somewhat enfysted, wes obviously segmented a lin-
interior of the teguinent. This mode of propagation explains, moreover, this di
reunited animals
take, if last
was quaterna

It was impossible for me, 4 Using ammonia or compression, to obtain
The slightest sarcoid exudation. I thought I had to unite this being to the family of Thecamonadians and to the genus
Diselmis; here are the ns: Without appreciable internal organization, considered
the non-contractile membranous tegument with which it is covered, then by
its coloring, this infusorium can only belong to the family named above. This was easy, but gender determination stopped me longer,
thanks to a strange coincidence. M. Dujardin described under the name of Crypto-
monas socialis wn microzoan which has, at first sight, more than one point of
contact with mine. This infusorium was found only once (In Paris, the
January 26, 1841, in water from a watering barrel) by Villustre micrographe. This animal formed it well, like the one I observed, in groups of
four individuals; the body was green, but showed a red coward in the center;
it bore only a single flagelliform filament; there were traces of
spontaneous division. Despite the obvious similarities that exist between these
two infusoria, a slight examination suffices to demonstrate that they cannot be
confused. — What essentially characterizes the genus Cryplomonas is
that the individuals which compose it are but a single filament; gold, the
protozoan which is the object of this study bears two filaments. This last
organ, so important for the classification of these infinitely small, does not allow
therefore not, by presenting itself double in the animal that occupies us, of
confusing this one with the species described by M. Dujardin forces us to
close to another kind. In addition, the red coward observed on the
Cryplomonas socialis does not exist in ours. It is therefore necessary, despite the strange relationship that exists between these two beings

as to regular agglutination & four individuals (fact which was unique

in natural history), to admit that a second species, quite close, it is
true, of the first, but which must nevertheless fit into another genre,
has the same singularity. I therefore believe I should understand contentious infusorium in the genus Diselmis
thus characterized by M. Dujardin: “Animals 4 ovoid or globular bodies,
coated with an almost gelatinous integument, non-contractile and provided with two
equal locomotor filaments. »

This definition fits perfectly with the organization of my proto-
zoaire. Now the genus Diselmis contains only four species, of which
two navies, and neither of these can relate to the object which
to keep busy. It is therefore necessary to admit that this microscopic had not yet
been observed, or at least has not been noted, no special work on the classi-
fication of the infusoria having, I thought, not been published since the work of
M. Dujardin (Zoophytes infusoires, Paris, 1841). A new species among these microscopics must not, moreover, be
a matter of astonishment. If a class of beings is numerous, I will say more,
almost limitless is that of these zoophytes; because organisms which,
for the most part, are due & spontaneous genesis, must vary and vary
effectively in shape and appearance with each new infusion. I] enough to have done
a few heterogeneous experiences to be convinced of this, and where we know that

 

 

       

 

e singular disposition
usually by four, which would be impossible
you didn't exist. It is useful to note that the segmentation

     

      

 

   

     

 

     

 

     
    
      

   

 

 

   

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

=i=

M. Pauchet asserts that hundreds of spontaneous generations of Colpoda
cucullus, which passed under his eyes, never presented individuals
perfectly similar. If I had not found myself in the presence of an animalcule
whose spontaneity may be doubtful because of the origin of the environment it has
produced, I would not even have attempted to define and determine its species. But as it has been observed that the infusoria of the genus Disedmis do not appear
point in artificial infusions (1), and that if this new microzoan is
particular to the marshes of Chaumont, there may be a real species,
I undertook to determine and classify this little being, until this day, I would be,
unknown

I therefore propose the name of DisELMIs SOCIALIs, this specific designation
adopted by Dujardin for a Cryptomonas which has with our Diselmis this point
of remarkable contact of regular association of four individuals living in
society, having the advantage of clearly indicating one of the characteristic features and
certainly the most curious of this infusorium. Angers. Ernest CHAUVRAU. INFLUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGETATION. ITS ROLE IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CERTAIN SUBSTANCES. IV. — Development of starch in chlorophyll cells. (After.) Starch is a very common organic substance in the plant kingdom. It is found in a large number of organs, including seeds
of a host of grasses and legumes, in the fruits of certain
plants (banana), in tubers and underground stems; but it's
mainly in the leaves, which owe their coloring to chlorophyll,
that this matter abounds. It was M. von Mohl who first pointed out the existence
presence of this product in the green matter of the fenils and showed that its formation
is later than that of chlorophyll. This physiologist thus destroyed
Mulder's opinion, according to which the green granules are nothing else
than processed starch grains. Most leaves contain starchy grains in the protoplasm
coloved by chlorophyll; however there are leafy membranes, in
which this product completely lacks. It happens then that the starch is replaced by other substances which
seem to play the same role. Thus, according to M. Sachs, the green parts of Aldium cepa contain
glucose instead of starch; and according to Neegeli, droplets of oil re-
mark in the granulations of the parenchymal cells of the Rypsalis
funalis. Some physiologists think that this fatty liquid is nothing else
than the result of a transformation of the pre-existing starch. This opinion
seems to agree with the fact observed by M. de Bary, who saw the starchy grains
some algae (Spirogyra, Zignema) dissolve after fertilization,
to leave room & drops of oil. (1) Dujardin, History of Infusorian Zoophytes, p. 341. — 95 —

Although the stalks of some plants do not produce starch,
can be said, however, that this matter generally accompanies the chloro-
phyll; however, the formation of starchy globules in the green matter of the
sheets can only be performed under the influence of scleil light ons,

It is to M. Sachs that we owe the first research relating to this subject. This physiologist has, in fact, demonstrated that if we transport light
etiolated germs from seeds sown in a dark place, until
until all nutrient materials are completely depleted, starch appears
in the first leaves to spread from 1 in the petioles, from where
can follow it to the buds. He showed, moreover, that this substance,
whose quantile is all the more considerable as the light is more intense,
demand to occur, superior lighting & that which is necessary for the
development of chlorophyll. To arrive at this result, this botanist carried out the following experiments:
seeds of Cucurbita pepo were sown in a dark place until,
all their starch was entirely employed in the growth of cells,
At this time the etiolated germs born from these seeds were transported to the
light, some for five days, others for ten. - The reactions
microchemicals detected no trace of starch in the leaves even
colored light green by the chlorophyll of the first germs, while they
showed a quantity of starchy globules in the green matter of the
seconds. — The Zea mais, | Helianthus ammus and Phascolus vulgaris,
tested in the same way gave similar results. (Nancy Scientific Studies Society.) ad. LemAtre. (To be continued.) CONSERVATION OF CATERPILLARS AND SLUGS. Several of our correspondents have kindly shared with us the
means which they considered to be the most practical for preserving the
slugs and molluscs in general. We are informed, & this subject, of
Villefranche a note that will undoubtedly interest those who
engage in research and experiments in this direction. This process has been used successfully for many years.
by Dr. Missol, who has brought together a fine collection of lepi-
dopteras. This naturalist makes a small incision in the anus of the caterpillars, then, by
gentle compression, he completely empties the animal and then injects
the wax in his remains. If this wax is carefully melted and you do not
Ja carries only a few degrees above its melting point, the
the body of the caterpillar fills in regularly and the coloring of the integuments
is not altered. The injected wax passes successively from the liquid state 4
solid state; the operator seizes the moment when it is malleable to shape
Yanimal and make him take the attitude he will have to keep in the collection. Dr. Missol excels in thus giving 4 his caterpillars the appearance of life. When the draft is thin and borrows its color through transparency
to the underlying tissues, the wax can be colored artificially, and after
some trial and error, manage to reproduce the desired color. 196

By suspending by stirring in the molten wax a little arsenious acid,
the indefinite storage of these preparations is ensured. This process, applicable to bare or hairy caterpillars of all sizes,
also does well with slugs. M. Darras has in his collection of molluscs the red slug (Arion
empiricorum) and the black garden slug (Limax cinereo-niger) thus pre-
trimmed, and whose conservation, for four years, is perfect. We urge malacologists and entomologists to repeat themselves
even these experiments, in order to be sure of the services which this
method which we can only reproach for one thing: it is to be rather
artistic than scientific. Perhaps the process would also give good results for the preparation
larvae of beetles and other orders of insects. Writing. COMMUNICATIONS. We are told as a way to kill quickly, and without damaging them, the insects
even quite delicate, and as a means of preserving entomological collections 4 Vabri
destruction, a mixture of 1/3 creosote for 2/3 benzine, a mixture which keeps
its properties for a long time. To use it, soak a small sponge or strips of it.
letters of paper, depending on the use you want to make of them. It's a try & do. R.

   

One of our correspondents asks us this question: What happens during the great
winter cold, the shells of ponds or rivers? Do they sink into the mud? do they stay underwater, under the ice? A number of people who have asked us for the first three issues of the
Leaf, which have been out of print for quite a long time, we warn our subscribers that when
the number of these requests will be suissant, we will reprint the numbers that we
missing. La Répaccioy. CORRESPONDENCE. We ask M. J. de Guerne to kindly give us some information on
the Society of Naturalists of Douai, so that we can inform 4 our
subscribers. — If any of these have knowledge of a new company existing or in
way of formation, we ask him earnestly to kindly inform us. The Reaction. M., colldge de T. — We regret that we cannot, at least for the moment, publish
your item. A. M., 4 V. — Thank you very much for your information. ‘Type. Osencuun side Gls, & Rennes. — Mea Maris, rue des Blaacs-Manteaux, 45.

of August 1872. The Number: 25 cents. Do 22,

NATURALIS YOUTH SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

 

ESP

Payable in advance in stamps or money order by post:
For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr. 3patan. | For 'Foreign............6005 fr. 4paran,

 

Subserpton for Greal-Britan, 8s, 6d. British subserbers ean remit in penny or tvopennyposlae stamps. Sadvesser: 4 Paris, from the editorial office of La Feuille, 22, avenue Montaigne; 4 Kingersheim (Haut-Rhin),
with Mr. Gustave Weiss. People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. NOTICE ON PARMENTIER. Antoine-Augustin Parmentier born Montdidier, in 1737. His bit of
fortune did not allow him to make in-depth studies; he only received
some Latin lessons from his mother and an ecclesiastic; but he lives well
soon obliged to choose a profession, in order to bring some help to his mother,
widowed with three children. This ill-finished education always left
traces in his works. In 1755 he entered the service of an apothecary in Montdidier; then he got
to be employed as a pharmacist in the army of Hanover (1757), arrived &
his post, he traversed the country, always examining the factories, the pharmacies,
the practices of the farmers, in a word, all that offered some analogy with
his studies. He was soon noticed by Bayeux and by Chamousset, the surgeons
chief of the army corps: these took an interest in him and procured for him,
in 1766, an appointment as apothecary at the Invalides. Subsistence was thus assured.
sour; henceforth he could devote himself without fear to his dear studies. He began the series of his books with a memoir, addressed to the Academy
of Besancon, on materials which in times of scarcity could replace
the bread. Then he supported with all his strength the potato, recently in-
troduile in France; this is what is and always will be his glory. It took him
resist the vexations, the jokes of all kinds caused by his
walk; but he had, on the other hand, in his old age, the joy of seeing the apple
of land used successfully in his country. Today his name is inserted
similar to that of the precious tuber. It was also he who improved and perfected
maize cultivation; he then made studies on the chestnuts which
brought no result; finally he gave salutary advice on the
manner of grinding wheat, which had hitherto been used without separating it
sound. Later he was deputy at Bayeu in the military pharmacy and died
soon after, in 1813, aged 77. Parmentier was one of the benefactors of humanity; if he was not one of those
superior geniuses who shine from time to time in the sciences, he nevertheless
dant does more good to the people than many other scholars. His life ou
shows once again how far united labor can lead to perseverance. Mulhouse. L.B. — 98 —

ARTEMISIA ABSINTIHIUM. ITS PROPERTIES. The properties of absinthe are so varied and so generally used
today that in my opinion, a study on this plant cannot be here
moved. My plan is to treat Ja plant herself, then talk about the
liquor that bears his name. Arlemisia absinthium, or simply! absinthe belongs to the family of
Synantheres. This herbaceous plant, about 80 centimeters high, grows
naturally in the uncultivated and steep places of a fairly large part of
Ja France, but chiefly over the mountains of the Jura and Ja Switzerland, and
it is from these places that the greatest quantity and the best species are obtained;
it is perennial and blooms in July and August. Its line which, as I said, is 60 centimeters 1 meter high, is drawn up,
branched, streaked, whitish and covered with short hairs. Its leaves, which make it
especially recognize its sisters (A. camphorata, A. culgaris, A. campestris),
are skinless, unarmed, dotted with dot-shaped spots, white
silvery below and whitish green above. Considered
in relation to their form, they are very de bes (bipinnatipartites),
obtuse an apex eld segments narrow, linear, or lanceolate, while the
ramial leaves are almost entirely entire. As for the petioles which
support these sheets, they are simple:

The flowers of wormwood, arranged in small terminal clusters quite
long, fissured and spreading branches, borne on one side of the cork
that, for this cause, they lean towards the earth; They are little,
yellowish and globose, and, as for the pericline, it is composed of obtuse scales
oval, broadly scarious at the top, and its surface is covered with hairs. Before finishing the external description of this plant, it is

(moreover useless to seruter down to the smallest details for the recognition=
nary, I would still say that the jewels of the disc are numerous, five-
toothed, hermaphroditic or neutral, tubular and regular, that the florets of
circumference are few, subulate, entire, and fertile females, that
the receptacle is very hairy and even has a bitter taste, although it
is very fragrant. (rtemisia vulgaris, which one meets everywhere under the name of grass of
lu Saint-Jean or dherbe aux cent govts, does not differ from A. absinthium than
by the calyx which is ovoid, has small, pointed scales, the erect branches,
the glabrous receptacle, the auriculate petiole, its unpunctate fenils and its
calathids which, in addition to being pedicellate, are sessile. From the point of view of the medicinal virtues of plants, absinthe is without
contradicts one of the most precious plants, the use of which has been, if not
again, one of the most familiar and whose properties are well known. Of all
time, in fact, and everywhere, absinthe has been attributed a stomachic virtue,
aperitif, hysterical, febrifuge, summer. But also what accidents has she not had
caused! This is how used & low dose, it is suitable for waking up
Vappeuil, to facilitate digestion and to fertilize the stomach; while on the contrary,
used in large doses, it produces an intense heat in the stomach; from 1y
an consuming thirst and headaches similar to those produced by liquor
of the same name and of which I will speak in due time. In intermittent fevers, some infusions of leaves or flowers
sometimes suffice, it is said, to cure the patient; but if, by chance, these
infusions do not produce the desired effect, 4 grams of cinchona extract,

  

 

 

        

   

   

  

   

 

 

    

   

  

 

 

 

  

 

   

      

 

 

    

 

 

 

      

   

  

 

— 99 —

 

mixed with 60 grams of the juice from the leaves, produces a large
improvement in its condition. Finally, especially in the countryside, together
garlic or olive oil, we see it used with sweets against worms and
against other diseases which it would take too long to enumerate here. Absinthe also produces, with various liquids, a host of liqueurs which
all have the properties of the plant itself, if however they are not
taken in excess. Among these, I will cite absinthe wine,
used in medicine as a tonic, wine that we often make when we want
give weak and spiritless wines more flavor and more power to
keep; others replace it with beer, devoid of hops, which they
make intoxicating by the previous process, that is to say by macerating
absinthe itself; lastly, comes this beneficial and earthy drink.
rible at the same time, which Con calls absinthe; but before talking about it, I
am going to show the action produced only by the emanations of absinthe
(A. absinthium) on silkworms. is 4 Mr. E. Faivre that returns the honor of this interesting experience
which he made at the same time on four plants: absinthe, fennel, balsamite and
tansy; but let M. J.-H Berthoud speak, who reported it in the
Little Chronicles of Science:

“We placed the leaves of the plants at the bottom of four boxes, and
covered with perforated diaphragms, on the surface of which the worms were placed. Thereby
separated from the plants they could not reach, the silkworms had to
to be affected only by odorous emanations; the boxes were closed, each
containing two healthy worms and two diseased worms which all four arrived at the
first days of the fifth age. The submissive animals and the action of the absinthe were seized with a lively excitement.
tion; they were trying to flee, preyed upon by instants 4 of real movements
convulsive; defecation was almost immediate, profuse, repeated; the
beats of the dorsal vessel are noticeably accelerated. In five hours,
One of the worms is dead; a sick worm, suffering from intense gatine, did not resist
More than an hour. »

Fennel produced the same effects; diseased worms succumbed in

had time, and the two healthy worms lied their cocoons in less than forty
time; balsamite killed them in eight hours, and tansy, whose
pheres are analogous to those of absinthe, less active however, has made
produce a cocoon for diseased worms, something that was seen for the first time. — If such is the influence of odorous emanations, of the possible absorption
of these emanations by the integuments of the worms, of the action exerted on the system
nerves and the secretions, how energetic must be this influence on the
absinthe drinkers |

Absinthe, — If there is a drink that should be avoided, certainly
nally it is the one I am going to talk about and which unfortunately occupies a rank
too important in habits. This mixture of alcohol and various plants
which all have formidable properties produced on the body the most
deplorable effects, hits the stomach and drives straight, by a short and
infallible path, & Intellectual stupefaction. We discussed for a long time on
which gave this liquor the properties that we know of; some Vattri-
drank & alcohol alone; others attributed it to absinthe (A. absinthium)
she mine. According to many experiments, witness the one I cited above
above, and others in which we swallowed the extract of A, absinthium
ide animals which did not fail to perish (1), we are today of the party
of these. (1) However the cows ate it without seeming bothered by it, but their milk has
a sharp bitterness. .

— 100 —

Absinthe, which must be a mixture of alcohol at 72° and plants at
number of six, is most often affected by more poisonous substances. This is how at the heights of absinthe, at the roots of Calamus aro-
maticus and angelica, as well as leaves of dittany from Crete and oregano vul-
gaire who alone must compose this liqueur, the manufacturers or traders
blend of peppermint, lemon balm, fennel, hyssop and juice
dortia, sometimes even sumac, indigo, copper sulphate (poison
very energetic) to give it the dull blue, a color which is proper to Jui. How can we be surprised now at the ravages, the accidents caused by this
fatal drink? Toul. G. MAILLAND. Stickleback Nest. Last May, I went fishing in the ditches near the Tone,
river about 2 miles from the town of Taunton. Armed with a net &
long handle, I took sticklebacks (Gasteros-
teus decispinosus) three males and four females. Having put them in a
aquarium, the smallest of the males, of which auenn moreover had no more than 3 cents-
Limetres de Jong, began almost as ldt 4 to build a nest; its color became
of a dark gray, presenting beautiful black tints under the play of light,
green or blue. The females, on the contrary, who offer no help to
the construction of the nest, always kept the same color of a greenish gray. One of them, however, though she had ten thorns and belonged for
this reason has the same species, was mottled with brown. To build the nest, the male looked for the roots of aquatic plants and
the basket-shaped lia 4 a forked grass; he thus built a species
sleeve closed at one end; then, the frame failing, he continued his
work, by plunging into this horizontal bag, the head forward and a root
in the mouth. After four or five days of this work, the nest was complete.
recently completed. Then twenty eggs were probably laid by more than one
female; unfortunately, as the laying took place in my absence, I could not
clarify this point. Having laid the cents, the mother no longer cared about her
children and even the devoured if the father had not protected them night and day,
with remarkable diligence and fearlessness. This valiant
pelil warrior repelled without weakening the females, the other males, the small animals
guilles, tadpoles and aquatic insects. Finally, his care was rewarded.
thought after ten days by the hatching of the eggs. At the first moment he
seemed that the small sticklebacks were only formed of a tele with
very prominent eyes; the body and tail were almost imperceptible. But little & little their forms took shape and & as they grew the
nest was shrinking. Finally, at the end of eight days, the young left the nest and
took refuge under the pebbles, All that remained of the nest was a small beam
of roots that quickly dispersed. The father continued for a few days
to watch over his children; peas, I having given up, these were proba-
devoured by small eels, because I haven't seen them since. The
two other males soon followed the example of the first. Taunton, College School. Jolin-E. Jones. — lol —

ON THE VENOM OF BATRACIANS. The toxic properties of Batrachian venom on
animal economy. —That acrid humor which oozes from their bodies, inoculated into
wounds, can be fatal to certain small animals, but it is & suddenly
so harmless to humans. — The venom of Batrachians is usually
enclosed in sorts of verrucous glands placed on the skin, —
When the toad is surprised, it swells its body and sometimes projects
away his acrid and felid mood. I will cite the serious experiments made by MM. Gratiolet and Cloetz for
study the action of this venom on animals. — After having obtained a certain
quantity of venom coming either from the pustules of the toad or from those
of the salamander, they inoculated it & fresh under the skin of a lizard and a
bird ; they could see that the venom had brought on an immediate narcolism
and soon, after several convulsive movements, death ensued
(Journal of Medical Knowledge, 1854). The same experiments, repeated on rats, squirrels, rabbits, do not
produced only passenger accidents. — They then inoculated a small
amount of venom under the right hind leg of a small tortoise (Lestudo
mauritanica) and observed the following facts: first the venom does not leave
exert harmful action on this animal; but, a few days later, the member
injured became paralyzed, and the animal, at the end of six months, had not recovered the
movement in that part of the body. MM. Gratiolet and Cloetz also wanted to see if the venom stored for a
some time retains its properties. For this they dried up 2 grams
about toad venom (April 25, 1851), and, having inoculated a small
quantity & a goldfinch (March 16, 1852), death immediately followed. To better understand the chemical composition of this venom and
in order to better study its nature, attempts have been made to isolate the active principle. After
having taken care to dry out the poison, it is treated cold with rectified ether which,
subjected to evaporation, leaves a residue; this residue, examined in the middle
croscope, has oil-like granulations, and this may
even discover there crystals formed by small prismatic needles. Before complete desiccation, the residue, inoculated into a greenfinch, immediately brought
deep sleep, interrupted by convulsive movements, and death
followed after a very short time. I then remained to examine whether the matter treated with ether and isolated from the
greasy food was always poisonous. After several experiments, we have
demonstrated that the properties were still very active, it was concluded from 1a
“that the poison, a part at least, is not found in the substance
oleaginous in appearance than ether dissont. » 7

The poisonous matter was then dried and pulverized; one resulted
fine dust that caused violent sneezing; — the powder obtained,
treated with hot alcohol, left a residue which was separated from the materials
soluble by filtration and even by washing with boiling water. - Had
again & examine the alcohol which had been used for the treatment and the
free. A fairly large quantile of this residue, soaked in distilled water and
inoculated under the wing of a linotle, produced no effect; a few days later,
the wound was healed. This residue therefore does not appear to possess any real properties.
neuses. We then examined the alcohol! boiling water which had been used for the treatment; this alcohol
left a resinous-looking material, after being evaporated in the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

— 102 —

bain-marie, a substance which, when inoculated into a bunting, produced terrible and
almost immediately fatal. MM. Gratiolet and Cloetz separated by evaporation
alcohol the poisonous substance, which is soluble in sour acidic water
hydrochloride. Having treated this solution with bichloride plating, they had
a yellow precipitate; with a solution of bichloride of mercury (sublimated
corrosive), they had a very abundant white precipitate, reactions, as one
voila, specific to alcohols. With ammonia, they obtained a precipitate
fluffy, insoluble in water, but soluble in acetic acid. By eva-
poration, the solution deposited a residue of crystalline aspect qni, inoculated 4 a
linnet, produced peculiar excitement, irritability and cheerfulness;
after an hour paralysis of the limbs set in and death
soon followed. A really curious fact, which I cannot omit, is that in all
Oiseanx subjected to experiments and died convulsively, half-cananx
ear rings have always been found filled with blood. We can therefore conclude from these experiments:

4° That there is a possibility of partial poisoning in certain small animals
ailments;

2. That the dried poison retains its poisonous properties for a long time. We see, by this rapid overview, how much interest there is in the study of the action
venom of batrachians on animals. It is up to each of us to repeat these ex-
experiences, to verify them; 4 us again, to try to determine the compo-
chemical sition of the active principle of this venom, which is not yet definitive-
ment stopped. Tarbes. Felix Barrere. AFERNE AND FALSE AFERNE. Barley (Amanita aurantiaca) belongs to the agaric genus. His cha-
skin, at first convex, flattens with age; it is smooth and of a beautiful color
red. Its flesh is white. The blades are thick, smooth and sinuous,
uneven, yellow; the stipe e: nearly cylindrical, full and of the same length
them than the blades. Towards its upper third, there is a collar. Like
most of the agarics, the barley can be recognized by the veil or cortina which attaches the
edges of the hat to the stipe. This veil tears at a certain age and does not leave on
the stipe a kind of collar or collar. In the oronge, the cortina takes
a greater extension. It starts from the very base of the pedicle and envelops
then completely the fungus. When it tears, a part remains
which, like a sheath, envelops the stipe up to a certain height, It
exchanges the name of cortina against that of volva, specific to the other agarics. Barley is one of the most beautiful mushrooms; one could even say that
it is the type of the genus agaric. I! likes the woods and especially those of
chestnut trees. It grows around September. Fairly common in the west and
in the south of France, it is hardly known in the east. For my part, I
only saw one; but the sample was more beans. He is very com-
table. Its flesh is firm, its taste exquisitely delicate. The Romans the
knew well; so they had called him the prince of mushrooms. It is even said that Agrippina poisoned Claudius with one of these chain-gears,
which she had arranged in a very special way! A mushroom with which loronge has a lot of resemblance, but which
is far from enjoying the same properties, it is 'amanita false oronge (Am. mus-

 

 

 

 

— 103 —

caria). It differs from true Voronge in several characters. His chapean, in
general less convex, is visquenx, while that of true loronge is dry. It is to the viscosity which covers the surface of the cap that the particles are due
of the volva which remain adherent to it after the rupture and which are as much
white spots. The false oronge does not have the same volva as the loronge yraie. It is, like the other agarics, enveloped only in part by that
membrane. Moreover, instead of being yellow, its blades and its pedicle are
blanks. This fungus grows in the woods, sometimes next to true loronge. He
shows up in late summer and early fall. He is very
common in eastern France. It is very poisonous and has often given rise to serious accidents by its
resemblance to true barley. At first sight, we can take these two
oranges for each other; but, when we examine them both and
carefully compares all their characters one by one, it becomes easy to
distinguish one from the other. Ed. DuvERNoy. Paris, May 18, 1872. INFLUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGET

(After.) TION. Other no less remarkable experiments still led
Mr. Sachs has concluded that green plants which, subjected to the action of
light, contain starch in fairly large abundance, can, if one
places them in darkness, very quickly losing this matter, the disappearance of which
Tilion does not cause any disorganization of the chlorophyll grains,
ae are still capable of reproducing starchy globules, if one exposes

the new these plants under the influence of solar rays. This illustrious scholar
has, in fact, observed that the disappearance of starch grains can take place
after 48 hours in the leaves of Nicotiana, even when the granules
of chlorophyll have not yet undergone any appreciable alteration. One can
judge by 1a the rapidity with which the destruction of blood cells takes place
starches in the profoplasma. _ From all the experiments that I have just indicated, we can draw the conclusions
following sessions:

4° Etiolated germs do not contain starch, but can
produce when brought into contact with light;

2° The starchy grains only form as long as the lighting is sufficient
and that the chlorophyll granules are fully developed; . 3. During the night, the leaves lose part of this matter; but
increase however in starch in almost all the course of their existence,
el especially in summer, ot the diurnal period is longer than the period
nocturnal. Thus, as we have just seen, light exerts a remarkable influence.
able on the formation of starch, of this substance which many physi-
logists consider it the first product of vegetable assimilation. HAS. FORMATION OF CELLULOSE. — Cellulose is a material that consti- tutes
tilute the plant cell wall; mixed with other substances, it
forms the woody tissue of trees. Its chemical composition is the same as
that of starch, with which it is therefore isomeric. — 104 —

Cellulose derives from protoplasm which produces it by means of substances
of which starch is considered by several physiologists as one of the principal
capitals. What tends to prove this fact is that the starchy granules disappear.
come more or less completely from the organs, when these give
birth has new cells. Thus the spores of cryplogams and the
seeds of pharenogams lose their starch & as germination
takes place. This substance likewise disappears in part from the stalks and tubers.
cules, at the time of the blossoming of the buds. — If starch is a
principles of cellulose, it is not surprising that your light influences the
development of this latter substance. This agent, who contributes to the for~
formation of starchy globules in your cells & chlorophyll, play, by that
even a role in the production of new tissues. Let him come to do
otherwise, the plants will soon stop in their development, and
then to waste away as soon as the starch has disappeared from their own substance. Yes
light exerts a certain influence on the creation of cell membranes
losiques, it is obvious that the more it will have inten, the more the ti will acquire
consistency and development. This is what Davy observed who, having
I have to vegetate chicory, some in the light and others in the dark
noticed that the first had 53 parts of ligneous fibers, while
that the seconds only contained 31 parts:

The difference in hardness that exists between the ligneous tissue of trees is due
still very often at the intensity of the sun's rays. Direct observation
indeed shows that the ligneous fibs acquire all the more solidity
trees are better exposed to light. It is for this reason that
the oaks which vegetate in the dark forests have a looser and more
blane than those that live in full sun. Light therefore influences the development of cellulose; however he
must say, it is not necessary for the production of this organic matter.
fuck. This agent has an influence on the formation of this product only because it
contributes to the creation of starch in the protop/asma of chloro-

hyll. If we come to flee vegetate 4 shelter from the sun's rays of plants that have
stored in their tissues a greater or lesser quantity of starch,
these will give birth to new cells so well, until the
moment of all the starchy materials will be completely exhausted

We see from this that light is not indispensable to the creation of
cellul I will say more, the darkness sometimes seems to act in a favorable way
on the development of cellulosic membranes. This holds, according to some
physiologis ace that during the day the plants accumulate in their interior
the materials suitable for growth, and that during the night they produce
produce new organs. - — Role of light in the formation of cells. Light is not indispensable for the formation of vegetable cells. He
happens very often that these elements occur minex & darkness
only under the action of this agent. It should be noted that in superior plants
in which all the organs each perform a special function, some
one of these organs, intended for | assimilation, place themselves in a favorable position
able to receive the rays of light,* while the others, seats of
production of new cells, surround themselves with opaque membranes which
protect against the action of light. I will quote for example: 1° the buds
which remain completely enveloped in scales until the division of the

 

 

     

   

— 105 —

cells has undergone surgery; 2° the endodermis or generative layer which is always
surrounded by several layers of tissue which together form Vécoree. —
In the lower plants, in which a large number of functions are
found localized in a single organ, there appears to be, as Mi says. Sachs
in its physiology, division of labor in relation to time. During the day,
these plants accumulate in their interior the various products necessary for their
nutrition, while during the night they give birth to new
cells

A large number of observations tend to demonstrate this. Let us first notice

ue among the mushrooms, some, such as truffles, reach full lenr
development in Vobscurit®; the others, like the agarics. boletes,
hyone, etc., come into contact with the light only when the
cell division is complete. These fails already show that the light is not
point requires 4 cell formation. Many sightings
still come in support of this thesis. I results, in fact, from the research of
M. de Bary on entophytic fungi, as the zoospores of Peronospora
infectans grow better in darkness than in light. Mr. Cohen has, in
furthermore, noticed that the formation of the spores of Psilobus cristallinus com-
begins in the evening and ends at night. Eofin, according to M. Braun, the movements
executed by the protoplasm of Spirogyra and Ullotrix before the division of
cells manifest themselves mainly during the night. The lack of light therefore exerts a considerable influence on the
mation of the cells of the lower eryplogams. He also plays a role on the
production of certain root hairs) which
are born on the surface of planetogams and cryplo-
superior games. Aïn
ronica speciosa adventitious dev cines &
VPdarkness, a fact which does not occur in the light. The aerial roots of
Selaginella and fern root hairs always form on the
darkest portion of these plants, that is to say the underside. At last,
everyone knows that vanilla plants and other epiphyletic orchids do not vegetate
than in dark forests. All these facts therefore prove that the formation of cells takes place better &
*darkness than light. VI. — Role of light on the growth of colored organs. All the colored organs do not grow in the same way under the influence of
fluence of light rays. Some provided with chloraphyltle (petioles, fenilla:
usually lengthen under the action of light; others, as |
flenrs, reach their full development without the intervention of this agent. B. GROWTH OF ORGANS PROVIDED WITH CHLOROPHYLL. - Researches
failures on the growth of organs provided with green matter are due
mainly & Mr. Sachs. It results from the observations of this physiologist on
a large number of plants that darkness tends to increase in length
inter-nodes and petioles, while it helps to reduce the surface
da leaf blade. has. Internodes, petioles. — Internodes and petioles elongate
usually of a length which is much more manageable 4 Vobscurity
than in the light. This fact, observed for the first time by Bonnet, was
observed in recent times by several scholars, including the
main ones are MM. Duchartre, Martins and Sachs. MM. Duchartre and Martins, who made numerous and patient observations

 

     

   

  

 

 

— 106 —

ments on the growth of stalks during the day and during the night (1), have
recognized that the growth of the vine and the apple tree is greater during
the night period than during the evening period. M. Sachs, who has studied in a special way the influence of light
on the development of internodes and petioles, found that the
internodes intended @ to bring the terminal bud of Phaseolus vulgaris,
of the Vicia faba, etc., above the level of the ground, lengthen when they are
placed in a dark place, but decrease 4 as the intensity increases
light

This botanist also noticed that the part of the buckwheat knotweed, located
an below the colyledons, reaches a length of 2 4 3 centimeters below
the direct action of the sun's rays, from 15 centimeters to diffused light, from
30 4 40 centimeters in the dark. I have recently observed similar facts on other plants. Having done
vegetate in the back of my room an Arum maculatum and a Rumes patientia,
I recognized after only eight days that the petioles of these plants
subjected to a low age had increased in an abnormal way. All these facts suffice to show how much influence darkness has on
petiole growth. I] must not be considered as general
the favorable action which the lack of light exerts on these organs. There are
indeed plants whose stems and petioles develop better at the
light than darkness. These are, for example: 1° Agave americana which,
according to M.C. Martins, increases better during the day than during the night;
2° I'Humulus lupulus, whose long internodes do not seem to lengthen
in darkness. b. Leaves. — Light influences growth in a different way
leaves, depending on whether these are long and narrow, or whether,
with a petiole, they have a fairly wide blade. In the first eas (garlic,
lilies and most of the lilacs), the fenillae behave vis 4 vis the light
like the petioles of many plants: they lengthen and contract
i as the intensity of this agent decreases. In the second case, the
surface of the leaf blade decreases when these organs are exposed in a
dark middle. Thus, according to M. Sachs, the leaves of Phaseolus vulgaris are

 

    

   

 

  

 

   

     

 

   

 

     

always much wider in shady places than in places
submitted 4 insolation, and the surface of the fenils of the Tropwolum majus, which is
equals 4 1—1 4/2 square centimeters & darkness, expands & light

 

up to 30 square centimeters. _B. GROWTH OF FLOWERS. — The flowers seem to be developing too
both in darkness and in light, provided they receive the various principles
necessary for their growth. If we come to vegetate in an environment sheltered from the sun's rays
plants which have already accumulated in their tissues a large quantity of prin~
nutritious cipes, corollas will be produced which will achieve lear full develop-
expansion. This is what happens, for example, when we expose
bulbous plants whose stems are loaded with buds ready to open. In this case, the materials for the growth of the flowers come from the
bulbs or tubers where these assimilating substances are stored
in considerable quantity. — I have very often observed that orchids placed
in a dark cabinet can give rise to such large flowers
and as rich in coloring principles as those subjected to the action

   

 

 

 

(1) Yoir M. Duchartre: Report on the progress of physiological botany, 1868,
or the 22nd number of this sheet: Role of light on growth. =O

bright lights. I even noticed that the Orchis mascula, whose extremity
moth of the stem had retained its characteristic purple color in the dark.
istic, could give fruits as large as this plant will produce
in the light. There are other ways to realize the role that light plays
on the development of the corollas, without resorting to plants provided with
bulbs or tubers. It is by placing in a place sheltered from mowing
fuminous source of plants whose leaves have already assimilated carbon
under the action of the sun's rays; but it is then necessary that the stored carbon
the tissues by the leaves is in sufficient quantity, otherwise the flowers
have only an incomplete way. Moreover, this process does not give
usually not good results, because it very often happens that there is only
the older pimples that develop, while the younger ones remain
on my way. The best way to study the growth of corollas is to expose &
the end of the branches only and leave the rest of the stems in
contact with light. In this eas the leaves receiving the rays of the sun,
assimilate products intended for nutrition, product which, chart i through
the stems, will contribute to the growth of the flowers, the number of which is
so much more considerable that there are more assimilating organs and that Vinten-
sity of light is greater. Mr. Sachs has employed this last process by acting on various plants
(Cucurbita pepo, Petunia, Ipomea purpurea, elc. ).— Here are the results
obtained this physiologist:

The Cucurbita pepo, which had 11 leaves & light, developed
22 flowers almost all normal. The Petunia produced 21 flowers & the darkness and I'Jpomea gave birth
in the same conditions & 8 beautiful flowers. Most of the corollas which Mr. Sachs obtained were nearly all well
developed; a few, however, were abnormal. This stop of development
development which (curiously enough) was especially noticeable in the lower part
branches, provenail, according to the opinion of this botanist, of what the flowers
placed & lax of etiolated leaves, and therefore unable to feed them,
could only receive nutritive materials through leaves exposed to the
light and located below them, but whose distance was such as
before these substances reached these flowers, these had the
time to wither. (To be continued.) ad. THE MAYOR. (Company

 

scientific elected officials of Nancy.) EXCHANGE

 

 

MY. de Montfort, Vi, quai Sud, & Macon, offers beginners who would like to
to cure this insect, the Cerambya heros, from which he took a certain number of individuals. M.A, Méhu, 160, rue Nationale, @ Villefranche (Rhine), appeals to the generosity of
young naturalists who would like to help him with donations, however small, to create
natural history collections for the Ecole Normale du Rhdne. Mr. Méhu promises to
Pay, say he can, to the donors, and, from & present, he offers in exchange

  

— 108 —

your plants from Beaujolais, Lyonnais, Maconnais, the banks of the Sadne, forming the
duplicates of his herbarium. He will have the number collected, if necessary, the cash
that he will be asked, provided that he is notified in advance. It may also provide
amateurs the Garabus granulatus and several species of feronia particular to the surroundings
of Anse and Villefranche. Mr. Gabriel Rour, 17, rue Duhamel, Lyon, would like to obtain fossils and rocks
Cretaceous and Tertiary lands, he would give in exchange fossils and rocks of the Tertiary
Lyons Jurassic rains, and in particular the Sinemurian, Liasian, Toarcian and
Bajocian. COMMUNICATIONS. Several of our correspondents wishing to get in touch with young people
dealing with the same branch of natural history as themselves, asked us for a
list of those of our subscribers who are particularly concerned either with botany or
dentomology or some other branch. We therefore ask those who would like to
their side, to create relations, to give us, with their name, their address and their
speciality. We will publish the list as soon as we can and the number of
addresses thus collected will be sufficient. We thus hope to facilitate exchanges between
young naturalists. La Repacrioy. Answer @ M. L. — River molluscs sink into the mud during
extreme cold: they are hibernating animals. For the rest, a sudden freezing of Veal
If it were to surprise them, they would not always perish: I saw marshes,
catches & two different recoveries in a block of ice, to be in perfect health
when the block was melted. It is obvious that, from this point of view, the molluscs oper-
cules or bivalves have an advantage over the others. During high heat, the mol-
many are subject to aestivation, but their functions are then less suspended than
during winter. G. pe Matarosse. Speaking of the growth of plants under the influence of light, M. Lemaire
omitted to speak of the increase in diameter which is done in a completely different way than in
length, and which is indeed here in direct proportion to the quantity of light received; for the
to demonstrate, I will quote only one observation: that one makes, for example, a section of the
throne of any tree, one side of which cant be sheltered from the sun's rays by a
wall or any other natural screen, and we will see the concentric layers of the fiber bundles
vascular very wide on the side exposed to the sun, very narrow, on the contrary, tight
against each other, and sometimes even almost nil on the side which was defended
solar rays. The action of solar light is manifest here, and two proofs
are accumulated on the same stem. Lyons. Gabriel Rovx. Hence comes the difference in coloration that is observed in the caterpillars of the sphinx of the
vine? Would it indicate a future gender of the butterfly? Is it due & the constitution of the
caterpillar or the influence of food? Manchester. Mug

‘Type. Osentave and sons, 4 Reanes. —

 

* 4 Paris, rue des Blanes~Manteaux, 35,

September 4, 1872. The Number: 25 cents. No. 23. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

Payable in advance in stamps or money order by post:

 

For France and !Atsace-Lorraine, fr. per year. | For

 

Fr. 4 paran,

 

Subscription for Great Brilain, 8 s. 6 d. British subscribers cam remit in penay or tvopenny postage slamps..

 

Contact: 4 Paris, the editorial office of La Feuille, 22, avenue Monlaigne; ¢Kingersheim (Haut-Rhin),
Gustav Weiss. chest 3

 

 

People who do not unsubscribe will be considered.

 

as resubscribed. BUFFON. Georges-Louis Leclerc, Count of Buffon, was born 4 Montbard, on September 7-
member 1707. Strongly inclined to study, he first occupied himself with mathe-
matic. Returning from a trip to England and Italy, he translated the
Statistics of Vegelans of Hales (1733) and Method of fluxions of
Newton (1738). In 1733, still young, he was appointed associate member of
the Academy of Sciences, in the class of mechanics. memories enough
important relating to experiments on plants, made from the point of view
industrial and agricultural, made him named, in 1739, associate member of this
Academy. But he went to the botany section. The same year, ot the

doors of the Academy of Sciences were thus open to him, he had to be named
steward of the Jardin-du-Roi. He had been designated for this position by Dufay, his
predecessor, who had just died. By accepting this charge, Buffon resolved
to discharge it with honour; also, grace 4 his honesty, & his disinte-
and its activity, this establishment quickly became one of the most
beautiful and one of the most important in Europe. It is only after Vavoir com-
completely revamped and enriched without sparing his own money, whether
scholar quit Paris and went to settle in his castle of Montbard, of he
wrote the immense works he was already meditating on. In 1753 he was appointed
member of the French Academy, and it was on the occasion of his reception that he
gave his famous speech on style. Until 1788, Buffon saw &
Montbard, not without making many trips to Paris. He kept all the
strength of his mind and labored 4 his works until death took him away,
April 16, 1788. In 1739, Buffon had begun a gigantic work; after ten years
with assiduous work, he brought out the first three volumes of his work,
which contained the Theory of the Earth and the History of Man. In the
following volumes, i] described the viviparous quadrupeds (1769); the birds
(1783); enfia, in the last five volumes which appeared from 1783 to 4 1788, he
took care of the minerals. To these voluines already so bombrous, came to be added
nine more; it was in one of these that the Epochs of the
Nature, opus 4 part, so to speak, in which Buffon gives a new
explanation of the globe. — 110 —

For the execution of this immense work, Buffon had joined collaborators
borers. Daubenton, his compatriot, helped him up to the chapters on the
birds. Then he was replaced by Abbé Besson and Guéneau, from Montbéliard. Bulfon wrote his volumes on minerals alone. This work, which this great scholar completed shortly before his death, is for
so to speak gigantic. Buffon admired and loved nature above all; he has
wanted to describe it, and he painted it with admirable colors. If sometimes his
descriptions do not seem to belong to pure science, they must, in
in any case, to be ranked among the finest monuments of literature
french. We reproached 4 Buffon for having sometimes left a little too much
method and classifications. It is that, I believe, Buffon's mind was not
not fail to submit to rules; and, if he had done so, his work would have been there.
perhaps lost much of its character. It was up to Buffon's successors
to complete his work by submitting to systems, classifications,
everything he had described so well: this is what Cuvier was to do for a few years
later. Audincourt. Ep. DuvERNoy. THE GLOW-WORM. The glow worm, which everyone knows for I have seen shining in the lawn during
on hot summer evenings, is the female of a known beetle insect
by entomologists as Lampyris noctiluca. He is cousin ger-
hand of those fireflies which abound in certain provinces of Italy and, in
general, in the hot parts of the old continent, and which give rise,
in these countries, 4 one of the most charming sights of which one can be
witness: it is sometimes a real rain or cloud of sparks. Our worm
glowing (1) is forced to be more modest than the fireflies, because i] is absolutely
devoid of wings or has only the imperceptible rudiments of them, and its legs, short
and spindly, only allow it to trail timidly, between the strands
@herbes, the anneanx of her abdomen which seems to Ini a heavy far-
dean. But if the fireflies leave him far behind in agility,
it regains the advantage in relation to the intensity of the light which it produces. This light, which offers nearly the brilliance and color of that which we
returns the moon when the sky is clear, originates in the last se
ments of the abdomen: 1a is housed a glandular apparatus which has been studied
with care by several scholars; the secreted matter that produces light is
lodged in small clumps of cells; it is thick, grainy and does not pre-
feel no trace of phosphorus, contrary to what we had believed before
To be subjected to chemical analysis. The cells are surrounded on all sides
by a network of tracheas of remarkable richness, a feature that has made
suppose to several observers that the production of light was due to 4 a
slow oxidation of granular matter in contact with air. An important fact
2 to note is that the will of the animal, its activity, exert a great
influence on the intensity of the light produced; it is often enough to excite
Vinsect to make it shine brighter. (1) I am talking about Lampyris noctiluca; we find, in the south of France and Germany,
the Lampyris or Lamprorhiza splendidula whose winged male is himself quite luminous
to reproduce, although very well, the spectacle given to us by the Luciola ialica and
His congeners. — he

The light that the glowworm spreads seems destined to attract the male who does not
comes out of retirement only when night begins 4 to fall. fl then sees
far away in the grass the companion that awaits him and that it would be impossible for him,
without this brilliant signal, to distinguish in the dark, among the grass
who hide it. I often noticed that, when we leave open, 2 the campaign, pen=
on beautiful June evenings, the windows of a lighted bedroom,
it does not take long to see male lampyres flying around the light. Those
insecret, flying from side to side & I am looking for a companion, are without
doubt deceived by the gleam which they perceive and which they take for the signal
look for; they then come up against the glass of the lamp or burn each other
the wings & the flame of the candle which lights up the room, and manages to
great difficulty & recognize their mistake, because they often come back several times
time in a row without getting discouraged. We see exactly, at the same time and in
same time as the male lampyres, a medium-sized carabid fly
around the light. Wouldn't it be possible that, deceived also by the
light he takes for that emitted by the glowworm, he is attracted by the hope of
devour one of these insects or to take its share of the prey seized
this one, carnivorous like him? I want, before finishing, to make known the male of the glowworm and the
general characteristics of the species. The male of Lampyris noctiluca differs essentially from the female in
that he is winged like the fireflies and much smaller than his companion. Its size is, in fact, about 10,443 millimeters, while that of the
towards Luisanls reaches 20 millimeters. Its elytra 4 times 1/2 longer
than the corselet, very flexible, of a dirty black, marked with four sides
very slightly oblique giludinales are rounded outside at their extremity
they completely cover the abdomen; this one is flattened and formed of rings
not very consistent, grayish, more or less broadly bordered with dirty yellow. the
corselet, of a yellowish gray around its circumference, blackish in its middle,
larly the shape of a semicircle; it envelops and exceeds the head like a
sort of shield or hood. From the head, we hardly see more than two large
rounded black eyes, between which are born short antennae, has articles
almost grainy. The legs, of a more or less yellowish gray, depending on the
regions, are slender and bear all five-pointed tarsi. The Lampyris noctiluca male is generally considered not to be at all
luminous; but one can nevertheless see, under the abdomen of certain individuals,
two small dots which, seen up close, glow slightly in the dark, after
the hottest days; this is what I was able to observe in the summer of 1870. As for the Lampyris larva, it looks a lot like the female. Like
she is luminous, although to a lesser degree; but his eyes are less
developed; its antennae formed of a very small number of articles; his horn-
selet more elongated; its shorter legs; its general color much more
dark, with an orange spot on the side of each ring; finally, we
sees no trace of rudimentary wings in it. .-

   

 

 

 

   

  

 

   

     

 

LE HAVRE AQUARIUM. The da Havre aquarium was founded a few years ago by Mr. Lennier,
director of the Museum. This beautiful establishment covers an area of ​​4,000 meters
squares; it is formed on the outside of a meeting of rocks representing the different

=e=

ferent geological sections of Normandy. The interior is divided into three parts
separated by pillars or rocks. The width of the aqnarinm is in
within 63 meters by 8 meters 50, not counting the ferries, which each have
& meters 25 long by 1 meter high, and which are 23 in number; they
contain many ier fish, an almost complete collection
of European freshwater fish, a large number of crustaceans,
lusci, zoophytes, algae, etc. This aquarium is interesting to study, both for the variety of species that
are found there only by the facility which it presents 4 the amateur eager to know
their manners. Let us now mention some of the most remarkable animals contained
in the building. We find in the first place the octopuses or pieurres (Octopus vulgaris). These molluscs which have been talked about so much present, in fact, a bideux aspect,
When we see them extending their arms converted into suction cups and clinging to
rocks where they lie in wait for their prey, ready to embrace with their formidable temptations.
cules some unfortunate stray fish. After having thus feasted, the
octopus jumps up from the stone that had only served him as a refuge
for a moment, and folding his arms, goes in search of a new
observation post. .

After the octopuses, we notice another kind of animanx no less
interesting 4 to study are the polyphemus (Polyphemus Limulus). This cru-
tacé is one of the most curious that we can see. His whole body is hidden
under a shell made up of two parts and ending in a long point
in the form of a sword. It is very amusing to watch the polyphemus trying to
climb on the rocks, fall back on the sand and discover its unique legs.
loosely arranged, which have the function of bringing food to its mouth. There are still a large number of seahorses (Hippocampus gut-
tatus), whose head structure resembles that of a horse, which made them
give the name of sea horses. At first glance, Veil searches in vain
these curious fishes, but one soon notices that the marine plants
closed in the tank are covered with immobile seahorses; suspended by
their gripping tails seem like so many branches of a new species. But what characterizes them the most is their skeleton which pierces the skin of
everywhere and makes them look dried out. The collection of actinias (Actinia) is very beautiful there. These zoophytes, that their
resemblance to flowers has been named sea anemones, are also
varied in form as in color; they are in
effect, sometimes white, lilac, pink, green or brown, and one could not
weary of admiring these charming animated flowers, each time blooming or
closing their corollas on the prey they have just seized. We then see four beautiful lobsters (Palinurus vulgaris)
the scarlet carapace, 4 the majestic and elegant gait, constantly moving
barely their palpi. Let's say a few more words about fruit bats (Scyllum) with a spotted body
and nicknamed sea dogs, who hang their eggs on the seaweed, where we
can see the embryo develop; conger eels (Murocna conger), which
range up to 3 meters long; the trigles (Lrigta), with an enormous mouth,
whose pectoral fins transforming into lenr appendages serve as

go to walk on the sand; finally the angelfish (Squalus squalina),
forming the transition between rays and sharks, whose body, agitated by
from time to time with convulsive movements, seems to want to hide
under the gravel. We will not talk about the more famous fish that this aquarium contains.

 

 

 

     

  

 

 

  

     
   

     

  

 

 

 

   

   

  
     

 

 

 

 

— 118 —

a very complete collection. We just have to hire the amateurs
@naturalhistory went to visit this aquarium, the most interesting
resenting from France. Le Havre. Adrien DoLtrus. A FEW WORDS ON PSYLLIDS. The Psyllids belong to the numerous group of homop-
teres, of which they constitute one of the most elegant families. For the characters
in a word, I would say that they are cicadas in miniature. Like these, they
have a stocky body, a broad forehead, two large, prominent compound eyes,
accompanied most often, if not always, by three ocelli or simple eyes,
very spaced between them and placed, one in the middle of the forehead, the other two quite
near and stuck compound eyes. The thorax is generally robust and bulging
above; the trunk, a singular thing, does not seem to start from the head, but
come out of the corselet, as in the cochineal, between the 1st and the 2nd pair of legs. The abdomen is proportionally quite small and terminated in the female by
a kind of conical auger with several valves, and in the male by a pincer
accompanied by quite variable appendages. The antennae, formed of 8,210 ar-
ticles usually filiform, deeply circularly ridged, terminate
in most species by two very divergent stiff bristles. the pates,
of medium length, bear tarsi of two articles armed at their extremity.
miles of sharp fingernails; the posteriors are longer and stronger than the
others and serve above all for the saul. It is, indeed, the jump that is for these insects
the safest means of escape, when threatened; they can get started
4 immense height and distance, in proportion to their size;
moreover, they never fly directly from the objects on which they are
placed; they always begin by jumping; then, once in the air, they deploy
lenrs cute wings. These are four in number; the upper two
completely cover the lower ones during rest, and are, in the
position, arranged in a sharp-edged law; they are membranous, general-
transparent like glass, more rarely greenish, brown or par-
dotted with elegant black flecks. Their limb (if I can use this
mol) is supported by a few ribs, the arrangement of which varies
little of a species 4J another in the same genus, but characterizes quite well
the different genres. Viewed under the microscope, these delicate veins appear
(especially in the genus Psylla) armed with thorns from distance to distance and
dug 4 their center of a capillary canal. The blade appears, under a magnification
ment sufficient, dotted with more or less regularly arranged dots
depending on the species, and kinds of short hairs comparable to small
tears, especially abundant towards the periphery, in the interval between the veins, and
being able to group there by giving place has kinds of false ribs. The nerves
lower wing lines are only formed by two double rows and
very regular of these kinds of hair implanted on a thickening 4 barely
limbus sensitive. This one, very finely punctuated, is of such transparency
that when it is not colored (and this is the general case), it can hardly be seen.
see if viewed perpendicular to its plane. The psyllid larva bears a great resemblance to the perfect insect
and has the same habits as he; but its legs are terminated by small
membranous expansions; his eyes are incompletely developed and the
wings are naturally missing; they start to show at ia nyuiphe

     

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

— 14 —

in the form of two knobs and are well developed in all individuals
miles and adult females. The females of some Psyllids, making in the tissues of some
plants incisions to lay their eggs there, determine at the pricked point
a considerable influx of sap, and consequently, monstrosities of forms
various that serve as homes for the younger generation. I will cite, for example,
these often quite voluminous tuberosities which it is not uncommon to find on
fir trees, or those nests lined with down, formed by the meeting of a few
boxwood leaves made concave by the bite of the insect, or even these
sorts of grassy bundles which deform the stem of the jones. Often too, we
sees pine needles covered with all the delicates of a white davet, which
are nothing but the lodging of the larva of a Psyllid which inhabits this
tree. Psyllids mostly live in imperfect societies, but often
very many. They feed on all the sap of plants: this is what
showed us the only inspection of their oral apparatus and what confirms
Experience. Many plants have their own psyllid; but the same
species can most often live on all plants of the same genus,
of the same family, or even be found on plants of different families. Crest as well as Psylla pyrenea appears to inhabit exclusively the broom
spiny, while the Psylla breviantennata is found indistinctly on
all conifers and that Psylla prunt is almost as common on the
fir than on the blackthorn. Mulhouse. M.H.

 

 

OF THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH. My intention is to present to you today what are the data of
modern science on the origin of the earth. When we consider the solar system, the unity of action which makes all
the planets revolve around the sun by obeying common laws and do not
ever varying, the relative isolation of this system in the midst of space, remote
that it is 4 of the infinite distances of the other stars, since the annual parallax
of the earth is 0° for most stars, we conclude that this system
must have been formed at the same time. But how was it formed? If we could only consider in this study the earth and the planets,
and even the greater part of the stars, we could only deliver ourselves &
guesswork; but thanks to the powerful optical instruments of which science
has today. whitish masses are recognized in the middle of the space
and more or less luminous which have been called nebulae. On further examination, it was noticed that some of these
bubbles contained in their mass incandescent points; that others,
on the contrary, presented a uniform hue: the first were named
solvable nebulae and other unsolvable nebulae. Here is what
way we explain these facts: the nebulae would be only masses of
incandescent material in the vapor state; these masses constantly radiating from
heat, would cool little by little, evil would form in their interior
nuclei of matter condensed by cooling, but still possessing
enough calories to stay bright; Solvable nebulae would be
therefore more cooled than non-resolvable nebulae. Based on these facts, it was concluded that the solar system is only one
cooled nebula. The following mechanical experiment will make it clear

 

 

 

 

— 11 —

how the ilo nebulosity came out our system split into nuclei,
which formed the planets and the broken star which is between Mars and Ju-
pound, revolving around a central core which is larger and less condensed than
all the others. When in a vase filled with a mel
such that the liquid thus obtained
pours a globule of this last

 

mixture of water and alcohol in proportions
n has a density equal to that of the oil
ubstance, it is obvious that he will remain in
suspension in the interior of the m: Suppose now that this vase
can rotate around a vertical axis. If the device is set in motion,
we notice that immediately there forms around a central gontle a
kind of ring which soon after breaks, collects itself in a single body which,
endowed with a centrifugal movement, deviates almost from the walls of the vessel. At this
moment, far from continuing its spreading movement, the centripetal force
Wins, and the balance being established between the two forces, the globule is gifted
of a circular movement around the central core and in the opposite direction of the movement.
ment of it. The menie phenomenon occurs several times, but each
new globule which deviates moves away 4 a lesser distance; moreover, in
turning, the latter divide themselves into nuclei, into rings, and then
in small globules revolving around the first and in the same direction. If now I examine what is happening in the solar system, I notice
a great analogy between the events which occur there and the phenomena of
the preferred experience. Indeed, I notice that all the planets revolve around the sun; that
the farthest planet is the most cooled, and therefore the oldest.
cienne; that most planets have satellites comparable to small
masses of oil rotating around the large ones (1). Add to this that the movement
ment of the planets is in the opposite direction to the proper motion of the sun, and that
that of the satellites is of the same direction as that of the planets. Let us now examine what is the origin of the primitive movement of the nebu-
looseness around itself. We think the whole solar system is one
fragment of the milky way, which would have 66, by an unknown cause, detached
of that immense mass of matter launched into space. This mass would have
then been given a movement of rotation around itself, and will have pro-
duct the planets, as we said before. I am not speaking here of the probable movement of the sun, and consequently of
the whole solar system, around another unknown star, a movement which exists
would be independent of movement around its axis. This fact is of pew
of importance for the sequel. I have entered into all these details only to lay down the bases of the
geogeny. Let us return to the earth and now study successively the differences
phases through which she had to pass, from the moment of her
has been detached from the central mass until modern times. The earth has 616 the seventh ring formed around the generative mass, if
I can express myself thus; it describes in a year an ellipse around the sun; the

  

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

 

      

   
    

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

areas described are proportional to the times, and the square of the time of its
revolution is proportional to the cube of the major axis. At this moment the earth is an immense globe of volatile matter, thanks to the
excessively high temperature it possesses. It has been calculated that its

 

diameter must then have been as considerable as that of the sun today. It is to this period of the existence of the globe that we must, I think, attribute the

 

(1) Lianneau of Saturn would be nothing other than one of these rings which were to form
a satellite and which cooled too soon. — 1146 —

formation of the moon, and probably another satellite which has since broken up,
and of which we thought we recognized the remains in meteorites and fireballs
which we see from time to time falling on the surface of the earth. I will say
later some words of these meteorites whose nature has a great importance
stance for the knowledge of the substances of the center of the globe and its
firm foundations. Let's go back to earth. Radiating endlessly on his caloric run
towards space, the matter condenses little by little, and a nucleus of
molten substances far less luminous than the thick gas atmosphere
which surrounds it. At a given moment a part of these gases themselves pre-
rush. There is no need to speak of the thousands of centuries that have been necessary
to accomplish these transformations. VY. LOMULLER,

Member of the Nancy Society for Scientific Studies. (HAS. to follow.) COMMUNICATIONS. As the first three issues of the Leaf will be reprinted, we will be able to
again send to those who request it the complete collection of
first year numbers. One of the correspondents of La Feuille, in an interesting article on nocturnal birds of prey,
told us about other birds' antipathy for owls. This antipathy is
used daily in certain countries for
is both simple and advantageous; because it allows you to take birds of the species
the most varied and to take them alive. Here's how it's done:

When we have been able to seize a living owl we go, at daybreak, to
a favorable place, such as the edge of a wood or the edge of a pond. We dig into the ground
a certain number of piles crossed in a cross by thinner rods, so as to
form sorts of perches that are coated with glue. At a short distance, we attach a
owl whose cries are quick to arouse the attention of birds. These, all
happy

 

capture the birds. The hunting mode

 

 

to see their enemy prisoner, approach from branch to branch and end up
by gaining enough confidence to go and land on the perches coated with goo glue
they can no longer free themselves. So it's easy to get hold of it. London. CL. Could any of the Leaf readers tell me
light on a crowd of insects of different orders

explain this powerful attraction exerted by
‘nts: cousins, moths, etc.? Ea

 

The opening of the holidays giving & many of our young subscribers the leisure they
will be able to devote to the study of natural history, we believe the time has come for their
make a new call. Let everyone send us the results of their research,
from his personal observations, or relives him from his scientific excursions or his offerings
@Gchanges. Let no one, out of fear or selfishness, keep for himself what might
instruct his colleagues or help them in their study. We consider all items
sent to us, even though we cannot always publish them immediately. typ. Onznraue et fils, in Rennes. — Mo in Paris, rue des Blancs-Manteaux, 35. 4th October 1872. The Number: 25 cents. No. 24,

YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

 

Payable in advance by postage stamps or money order:

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, Br. per year. | For 'Foreigner fr. 4 per year

 

 

Subseriplon for Grea-Brtaa, 8s. 6d. British subsribers can remit in peany ot twopenny postage slamps. Contact: in Paris, from the editorial staff of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne; & Kingersheim (Haut Rhin). with Mr. Gustave Weiss. People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. ANTISEPTICS IN ALL TIMES. I. — Embalming among the ancients. From the earliest times, the preservation of corpses was studied with
much care and achieved a high degree of perfection. It would be
difficult Wassign an exact origin 4 this science. However, in state
current of our knowledge, one can conjecture that the Egyptians were the
first who sought to save their dead from common destruction. This hypothesis seems confirmed by the fact that, in the burning deserts of
In Africa, one frequently encounters desiccated men or animals
and preserved quite perfectly by the rays of the sun and the heat of the
sands. In temperate countries, on the contrary, these natural conservations are
rare. It is therefore not surprising that, more often witnessing these phenomena
natural minnows, the Egyptians sought the first to reproduce them
artificially. Powerful motives committed them, moreover, to this research. Without speaking
here of their religious beliefs, of their theory of the transmigration of
Ames, there is a reason which must have contributed a great deal to push them towards
that study. In the other lands of the ancient world, we braled
generally the dead or they are buried. In Egypt, the rarity of
fuel made the first of these practices impossible; from another side,
the overflows of the Nile were an obstacle to the second. For this double
cause, this industrious people dug cavities in the rocks of its hills
and made them his tombs. The work was long and difficult. So it was thought &
collect in the same sepulcher as many corpses as possible. It was then necessary
everything necessary to prevent its putrefaction: the means were sought, and
modern discoveries have sufficiently proved what success was crowned
these studies. Such is, it seems, the origin and the first source of this
science of antiseptics which, in our day, has assumed such great importance. Let us now examine the processes employed for the preparation of
mummies. They can be distributed in several classes. The conservative properties of
sodium chloride (sea salt) have been known for a very long time. We do not know

   

 

 

 

— 1s —

not exactly whether this substance was used for edible meats;
but it is certain that a large number of mummies had no other pre-
The corpse was subjected to the action of salt and the sun completed the preparation.
ration. As can be expected, these mummies are light: the skin remained
whitish or brown, the trails are disfigured, the hair no longer adheres
at the head or are completely absent. Ordinarily, mummies are prepared by another method. The
intestines are removed and replaced by a mixture introduced by fusion of
resin and asphalt. The rest of the body is treated with salty materials,
containing, for example, natron (sesquicarbonate of soda), sal ammoniac
(ammonia hydrochloride), etc. Finally, there are others which, filled like these with resin and bitame
flavored, are also trailed by materials containing tannin and
perfumes. These are mummies of this kind that can be seen at the Musi
Louvre. A rather large quantity was also sent, in 1867, to}
universal. In general, the features of the cadayre thus preserved are very altered,
sometimes even completely shapeless. At the Egyptian Museum, 4 Paris, is exhibited
an uncovered mummy's head, and it is easy to judge, by his sight, of the state of
most. The nose is flattened, barely prominent. The nostrils close to
the upper lip seem welded to it, and we only recognize its existence
through a narrow slit. The contracted mouth reveals white teeth
key intact. The mummy's hair seems to adhere very little to the mane, but
is in a remarkable state of freshness, and it is very surprising to see these
black braids in such good order after several thousand years of burial
smoothing. Sometimes the features of the face have suffered less from time. We even found some mummies whose eyes had kept their sphericity,
result sufficiently indicating the perfection of the embalming process,

To facilitate the penetration of condoms, the corpses were wrapped
bandages so tight that they seem to be one with the mummy
itself., These cloths, of a fabric often very rear e were impregnated
@aromates which still spread a very pronounced smell today. After this rapid presentation, it will perhaps be interesting to read how
how Diodorus of Sicily expresses himself about the way in which the Egyptians
carried out their embalming: "The Egyptians," he says, "have three kinds
of embalming: the pompous, the mediocre and the simple. The first ones
» collect a silver talent; the second, twenty mines; the third, almost
" nothing. Those who make a profession of embalming the dead have learned it from
france. The first indicates, on the left side of the dead, the piece of flesh
which must be cut. After this, comes a second, called the cutter
or paratrooper, who performs this operation by means of a stone
(Sharp Ethiopia. Those who salt come next. They assemble
around the corpse that has just been opened, and one of them introduced by Vincision
samain in the body and removes the viscera, except the heart and the kidneys. Another washes them with palm wine and fragrant liquors. They
then anoint the body for more than thirty days with the gum of
cedar, myrrh, cinnamon and other scents that contribute
not only to keep it for a very long time, but also make it
spread a very sweet smell. They then return the body to the parents.
Tevenu has its first form, so that even the hairs of the eyebrows
and eyelids are disentangled, and the dead man seems to have kept the appearance of
his face and the bearing of his person. »

Heerodotus and Porphyry describe in much the same way the emhau-
ments of the Egyptians; but they add that a solution very
concentrated natron, which dissolves fats and makes them rot-proof. vveey

 

vvyvevese

 

=

 

—19—

Often even, according to these authors, the whole corpse was allowed to macerate
in a bath very rich in the same salt, for quite a considerable time. These descriptions of the embalming of the Egyptians by the authors of the anti-
quilé, had sometimes been regarded as implausible, particularly
bound by the Comte de Caylus. But the researches of modern analysis
have fully vindicated these assertions, and there can no longer be any
gue 2 on this subject. The methods employed by the Fgyptians to preserve their animals
sacred, laurels, hawks, cats, etc., were the same as those we
have exhibited. Many of these taxidermy pieces of a very particular kind
appear in our galleries, and one can notice in the Museum ibises and
crocodiles which are a curious example of the perfection and duration of these
preparations;

According to Herodotus, the Ethiopians also kept mummies, ma
in a slightly different way. “First we dry out the body 4 the way
of the Egyptians or in some other way. We then coat it with plaster
that we paint, so that it resembles, as much as possible, & the person
" same. After that, it is enclosed in a hollow and transparent column
of fossil glass which is easy to work with, and which comes in abundance from
» mines in the country (1). We see the dead through this column, in the middle of
of which if is placed. It does not exhale any bad odor and is not at all unpleasant.
> pleasant. Next of kin keep this column for a whole year
" in their house. During this time, they offer him victims and
firstfruits of all things. They then carry her outside and place her
somewhere around Ja town. »

Among the other civilized peoples of antiquity, we have already seen that
Embalming was not generally in use (2). It is not the same with
old savage tribes. In the Canary Islands, mummies have been found pre-
es by the Guanches. These last were & what is simply believed
dried in the sun, then sewn into sheepskin. In Mexico and Peru similar observations have been made. A curious remark is that formerly fragments were sent from the Levant.
ments of mummies which were used in medicine. Did this substance not act
than by the aromatics with which it was penetrated? It is quite likely, because the
dried flesh does not seem to be of very advantageous therapeutic use:
Nowadays, we have renounced this custom so opposed to respect for the dead,
and mummies no longer come to Europe except to serve & enrichment
of our museums and to the study of our archaeologists. Paris. ¥

  

       

 

 

 

   

 

   

(To be continued). Cu. OF HOUSE. (1) Possibly salt that Von does, indeed, get from the earth, which is transparent and hardens
Aterre (Lupone, Hist-£thiop.). (2) However, certain great men, and some of the Roman Empire's characters
opulent were embalmed, Thus “Alexander had Darius embalmed. Later he does it
even by Chalds and Egyptians. Genesis (ch. 1) reports that Joseph
had his worst embalmed, which lasted forty days, as was the custom. Holy
John I Bvangelist (c. xtx) also reports that after the death of Jesus Christ, Nicodemus
embalmed his body with a composition of myrrh, aloes and other substances
balsamic. Perse says somewhere that the body of Tarquinius was embalmed. Cleopatra was
also embalmed and found intact 126 vlympiads after by Emperor H
Raclius, under the pontifical of Sixtus LV, the body of Tullidla, daughter of Cicero, was discovered;
it was in the best state of preservation. Dr. L. Lagat. »

   

in:

    
   

 

  

   

 

    

see

*

—h12 =

 

GENERAL OVERVIEW OF THE PHENOMENON OF GERMINATION. Germination, one of the seven phenomena of vegetation in plants,
is the act by which the embryo ruptures the seed coat and continues
apart from its development. For a seed to germinate, it needs the cooperation of several agents.
without which the principle of life contained in the embryo remains inert and for
so to speak in a latent state. These agents are: moisture, air and heat (4). Humidity acts in three different ways on germination: 1° by penetrating
entering the kernel, it moistens and swells it; 2° it softens the integuments
from the seed and prepares them & break to deliver passage Ja young plant;
3° it dissolves the soluble principles which must serve as first nourishment
to the embryo. The air. This agent must be in abundance and as pure as possible, because it is
as essential for seeds to germinate as for animals and plants
to live. In a vacuum, no seed grows, and experiences
of Th. Saussure show us that a seed completely deprived of air or
doxygen does not germinate (It is on this principle that the use of keeping
Is seeds by burying them in underground cavities called silos, ot
they are 4 sheltered from air and moisture). This is also why seeds
buried too deep in the ground can be stored for a
indefinite time without vegetation occurring

Heat is essential for germination; it is she who, joined & the human-
idity, especially accelerates the development of the embryo. The temperature which
is best suited is that of 15° to 25° centigrade, and should not exceed
40° & 452, because instead of favoring the development of seeds, it would not
that would dry them up and destroy in them the principle of life. As soon as these three conditions are met, the seed swells by absorbing
humidity; the substance of the cotyledons partly changes into a liquor
soft and milky which is called diastasis, and which must provide the young
plant a food proportionate to his forces. Thanks to this wonderful
property the starchy masses, united in the cotyledonary body, are trans-
gradually form into a sugary substance, glucose, which, transported by water
in the rudimentary orgones of the embryo, will provide them with the materials for
their growth. These first dissolutions provide the elements of the
sdve of the young plant, and the sweet matter which is there oxidizes little & little
by respiration and furnishes carbonic acid which is exhaled into J'almos-
“This slow combustion, analogous to that which constitutes breathing
animals, is accompanied in germination by a rise in temperature
perfectly appreciable deletion. —- FOCILLON. »

The envelopes soften and soon break; the radicle
appears first, lengthens and moves towards the interior of the earth, then the
feather straightens, also lengthens, but to move towards the surface of
I land and show myself in the open air. The cotyledons spread out, and sometimes remain
hidden in the earth, sometimes rise above the ground, like 4 two
thick leaves that turn green & the Inmiére and take on the name of leaves
éminales, After having acted as a nourishing organ in relation to the plan-
tatula, the colydeons wither, fall or destroy naturally;

 

   

   

   

   

    

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

  

    

 

 

(1) Messrs. Davy and Becquerel demonstrated that electricity exerts a tras
pronounced on germination; Negative electricity makes it livelier, while negative electricity
positive hinders it and ends up killing the young plant. — 121 —

from then on germination is complete, and the young plant provided with its roots
and from its first leaves will be able to pnise ​​itself, in the soil and in the atmosphere.
mosphere, the proper materials 4 its growth and traverse the various
stages of its vegetation. Soil is the usual place for seed germination, but it is not
not absolutely essential for successful germination; she has the fore-
to bring together the most favorable conditions of heat, humidity and ventilation.
rable to the phenomenon. It also has the further advantage of providing the young plant with
feeder nets and a fulcrum. However, land is not indispensable.
thinkable & germination: thus, there are seeds that germinate in the fruit
meme, which thrive in the air on water-soaked sponges in
sand. The duration of germination varies according to circumstances; it also varies
under equal circumstances, depending on the species. Thus millet and some grains
mines sometimes rise in a day; garden cress takes two days; three
with turnips, beans, spinach; four with lettuce; seven 4 Vorge; eight
wheat; ten to cabbage; one year in sin; two years in the rosebush, etc. There are seeds, such as those of coffee, tea, which lose the faculty
to germinate a few days after their maturity. The seeds of the mangrove tree
which grows in the marshes of hot countries, must germinate and develop
completely on the tree itself, from which they soon detach themselves,
to also implant themselves in the mud. Most seeds can retain the ability to germinate for a
more or less considerable time, for a year, two years and even
sieles. A London botanist managed to germinate seeds from Chile
that he kept in boxes for thirty years. Cornflower seeds and
other plants found under the head of a skeleton in a Gallo-
Roman, dating back perhaps fifteen centuries, having been S
germinated rapidly, and after going through all the peri
tion, reported new seeds. All these causes contribute to this
that I said above; this long duration is partly due to the deprivation of
Air and humidity. Also, the bosom of the earth, the mortars of the buildings which
fall into ruin, those that come from the demolitions, the growing pond
mule at the bottom of ponds and rivers contain and preserve heaps
prodigious of seeds, which wait, to develop, only for cir-
favorable constants. Vannes-le-Chatel. OF Mercy. THE BIBIO MARCI. Our readers certainly remember the black flies which, in the
last time, showed themselves in such large numbers in Paris and the surrounding area. The
Parisians, unable to explain the invasion of this insect which they saw for
the first time, named it corpse fly, attributing its appearance
rition 4 the large quantity of corpses buried, often on the ground, in the
surroundings of the capital. Almost all the newspapers adopted this opinion; a few more leaves
sericuses imagined a report of the Academy of Sciences, ov it was
solemnly declared that this pretended fly was a Neuroptera of the
caddisfly family. Once on this path, the journalists spread

   

 

 

— 122 —

encouraged their entomological science and gave daily solutions to
increasingly ingenious. . , bes

This diptera was quite simply the Bibio Marci or bibion ​​of Saint-Mare,
of the floritipular family. This insect, 12 millimeters long, has the body
black and slightly smoky wings; his long legs, which he lets hang
during the flight give it a singular aspect. The previous year, its larva had been the object, 4 the Entomological Society,
of a communication from M. Lucas, in which the learned naturalist pointed out
its great abundance and gave some details about its mores. This larva
vile geophagus in society in the interior of the earth and only appears on the surface
if the temperature is therefore: it is brown and armed with stiff prickles, al-
long, testaceous russet and posterior direction; the head is of iron bran-
ginose shiny stigmas, twenty in number, are of a dark reddish colour; his
movements are agile, although it lacks legs. In the midst of the Bidio Marci are trowvail, in the proportion of one in a thousand,
Bibio hortilanus, whose male resembles B. Marci and only diflers
by its smaller size and some white hairs, as well as the tips of the wings;
the female is vermilion red

The cause of the invasion has not yet been explained, nor have others
i of Various Insects Observed at Periods. Several explanations
lions have been proposed; but none is, & my sense, sufficient. If some
more skilful entomologist can discover the cause, I will be very
grateful. I would also be happy to receive communications
which can help determine the geographic extent of the Bibio Maret invasion. J. OF G.

OF THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH. (Continuation and end.) We know from the laws of physics that many liquids of

different densities being contained in the same container, these liquids
superimpose and place themselves in an order which is inversely proportional to the weights

  

    

 

which was also to produce in the liquid mass of the earth. The less dense materials therefore had to float and form like a
kind of foam & the surface: the cooling continuing, this farent therefore
they too which solidified in the first place. One could compare this phe-
noméne & what happens in a heated body of water containing
fat emulsion. When the temperature of the liquid decreases, the
fats soon float, and if the temperature drops further,
they are also the first to solidify and form a kind of
crust & the surface. A similar phenomenon is observed in the production
slag which solidifies & the surface of the molten iron of the tops
stoves. ,
But this growth did not remain intact for long; at each moment, the mass
internal fluid broke it by its continual movements, and its debris covered
that sea of ​​fire, like the icicles that the ocean carries; but soon after, the
solidification took place again and brought together the debris. The solid turd
so anginated little by little in thickness over the centuries;
these were the first foundations on which were to form later the

 

  

 

   

   

 

 

 

— 123 —

sediments that were to allow life to appear. Here is how
stratified terrains were formed. The terrestrial atmosphere was & this moment,
thanks to the very high temperature which she still possessed, endowed with a
very strong reaction; it contained an immense quantity of water vapour,
saline, carbonic acid and various other gases. Pressure
soon forced all these substances to rush to the surface of the earth:
torrential rains produced vast seas; the waters left
deposit the salts they contained, moreover, thanks to their temperature and
with carbonic acid, managed to dissolve part of the igneous rocks. Thereby
the first sediments were formed; they are the oldest rocks
that we knew, i.e. granite, gneiss, porphyry,
shales, etc. Later, the other layers were successively deposited. But &
lnsure that we get closer to the diluvian grounds, the extent of the layers
decreases ; this is understandable. Indeed, from the beginning, the seas occupied, for
so to speak, the whole surface of the earth; but & as the mountains
raised, the basins were delimited and did not allow the layers to
form only at determined points, always more and more restricted. When new mountains were formed, the waters poured into
new basins and produced new beds. As I said before, we only know about igneous rocks
by meteorites; they have been classified into four sections: the holosiders, which
are all iron; syncideres, in which iron is associated with a substance
stony; sporadosides which contain only a small amount of iron
disseminated throughout the mass; asiderids which do not contain iron from
everything. What is remarkable in these meteorites is that iron exists there
in the native state, contrary to what we notice on earth; we find it
often associated with nickel and cobalt. Besides iron, nickel and cobalt,
The meteorites still contain two particular substances, peridot and
vastatid; there are still various metals, for example, manganese,
Vetin, copper, etc., and finally hydrocarbons. We conclude from all this
that the interior of the earth and the igneous rocks are almost totally metallic
lics (1). Besides, other considerations could lead us to the same
result: the average density of the earth's crust accessible to our research
is 2.50 and the total density of the globe is 5: this increase cannot
be produced only by metals, since these are heavier than the
metalloids. -As my intention is not to speak to you here of the stratification of
fossils, etc., I will therefore finish, but after having said a few more words
of the primitive fluidity of the earth. One could perhaps impute to me for having founded geogeny only on a
simple analogy of the solar system with the nebulae, so I will stain
to prove this thesis in another way: this will only corroborate what
that I established earlier. We know that the earth has an ellipsoid shape,
and as mechanics teaches us that a body subjected to a movement of
rotation around itself can take this form only if it is fluid, it
It is easy to conclude that the earth was fluid at the beginning of its existence. Of
plas, it is proved today that the great mass of the earth is still
liquid now. When, in fact, in whatever place we find ourselves, we
digs the earth, we notice that at a certain depth the Lemperature remains
constant throughout the year; this temperature, by the way,

    

  

   

       

 

         
   

    

 

    

   

   

   

    

 

 

     
  

 

     

 

 

     

   

 
   

 

 

(1) It has been noticed by the analysis of the lavas of the volcanoes that these lavas contain a little
near the same materials as meteorites. — 124 —

is equal to 4 the average temperature of the surface. If we keep digging,
temperature increases on average by 4 degrees per 30 meters. which makes that
even accessible depths & our research, the temperature is
almost unbearable. There is a mine in England whose temperature
is so high that the workers are forced to work there almost naked and
to take turns every half hour to get some fresh air. At 300 meters, the temperature must therefore be about 100 degrees, and if the
law persists, of 3,000 degrees & 20 leagues; gold, & that temperature, all
ancestors, even the most refractory, experience fusion. The solid turd
would therefore be only 1/80 of the Earth's radius in thickness: weak film on a
ocean of fen. The earth is therefore, as Laplace so aptly put it, only an extinguished sun, only a
cooled nebula. Y. LOMULLER,

Member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Nancy. THE MESSENGER PIGEON

HIS INSTINCT OF ORIENTATION. Vanity already, pigeons have been used to transmit
ges; we find them among the Romans, the Egyptians and even the
s: in Modena, fit

my
Hebrenx. Pliny tells us that Decius Bratus,
reach the camp of the Consuls of the letters patles of the pigeons
Messengers: "What," he said, "did Antoine serve his intrenchments, the
vigilance of the besieging army and even the nets stretched in the river,
since the mail went through the air? This rapid correspondence was very
honestly before the invention of the telegraph and the Chinese are still making it big
In Enrope it was little 4 little fallen into disuse, and it is especially in
€ competitions that were formed, mainly in Flanders,
pigeon societies. We know, however, how, in 1870, Paris besieged
knew how to make skilful use of these messengers, 4 a moment when he no longer had
be the means to receive news from the province. They are probably not old breeds, used in the countries
Oriental pigeons, directly descended from our current pigeon$: the pigeon
Belgian messenger, which we can choose as a type, comes, according to
most probable opinion, of the French tie-pigeon and of a variety
pigeon known in Belgium as pigeon camns. He is small
like the cravalé, but of a more robust constitution; his lively and shining eyes
are almost always surrounded by a distinct white membrane; his 
plumage shows varied and irregular colors; its long wings and
pointed tips give it a very fast and powerful flight; we have calculated that it can
cover, without forcing your pace, twenty-eight meters per second, or a hundred
kilometers & hour, which is the fastest speed of a locomotive. Thereby
pigeons have been observed which, released in the morning on Spanish soil, have
been able to cross the whole of France and reached Belgian territory in the evening. But what is far more remarkable than this power of flight is this
extraordinary faculty of orientation possessed by the messenger pigeon. How
understand that pigeons, transported in tightly closed baskets, & gins
of a hundred leagues from their nest, can find & read-from-wing the dovecote in

  

 

has

   

 

         

2

 

  

 

  

 

 

 

    

“= 125 —

which they were fed? This is !4 a question full of interest, which has been
often debated and which, despite this, does not yet have a complete solution. Let us examine the main hypotheses that have been proposed to solve it. One of them is to pretend that the messenger pigeon is always heading
from the south to the north, following the instinct of migrating birds, which take
a similar direction in their periodic journeys. The lack of foundation
of this supposition appears self-evident in the presence of the facts: the pigeon can
reach his loft in all directions; we chose cities in Italy,
from England and Germany for competitions, and the pigeons arrived
as well as following the line from Spain to Belgium. We also invoked
almospheric impressions: na said on the one hand that the pigeon was guided by
these facts that the north blows the cold, the south the hot, you're the dry, the west! hu-
mide, and that thus, & these different sensations, he had to recognize the road he
had followed before; on the other hand, that it was according to the density of the layers
almospheric he was heading. The first objection to these hypotheses
theses is that they are based on an extraordinary sensitivity of the pigeon
that nothing in its entire constitution authorizes us to admit; then re-
find a way after a few days, during which the state of
The atmosphere could have been modified, according to the impressions it received in a
basket full of pigeons, at the bottom of a balloon basket or a wagon
railway, and forced most of the time to make enormous detours, seems
obviously an impossible thing, even for the being endowed with the most sensitive
more remarkable; moreover, as regards the density of the atmospheric layers
pherical, we do not really understand how this density, which decreases as
and 4 as one rises, must be able to serve as a guide in one direction
parallel to the ground. Let us therefore leave this interpretation to pass to another hypothesis which
admits that it is by means of his keen eyesight that the pigeon manages to find
his dwelling. Even granting the pigeon a limitless development
of the organ of sight, such that it can distinguish, I suppose, a set of
steeples, roofs, chimneys and trees, place 100 leagues in a straight line
in front of Ini (which is probably unreasonable), you must not ou-
to realize that the earth is spherical: however, a very simple calculation shows
that to see these objects at a distance of 100 leagues, it would be necessary
that he can rise 4 to a height of 45,000 meters, that is to say more
three times the height of Mont-Blanc above sea level. Such a supposition seems contrary to common sense; moreover, the facts
are Ja. We know that when a pigeon is released from the top of a balloon that has arrived at 4 a
elevation of 6,000 meters, the pigeon rushes towards the earth, describing
large circles; he no longer flies, i! grave. Moreover, it should be noted that when
the pigeon takes flight, it is still perfectly visible, and we have stalled
that it would disappear entirely from our eyes before reaching 2,000 meters of
high: it should therefore hardly fly at a height of more than 1 kilometer. We have
given to this hypothesis of orientation by sight a more admissible form:
the pigeon, it is said, is not sent at once 4 these enormous distances; we have it
submitted 2 prior training. Instead of sending it all at once, by
example, from Brussels 4 Rome, we first send it to Paris and bring it back,
then 4 Lyons, then to Marseilles, and only then to Rome. Thus, when he
takes off, it just needs to be able to recognize the nearest station,
that of his last trip, and to see another one, to return from
this way step by step & its usual abode. But you have to answer
this is why it often happens that we dispense with this preliminary training,
there are examples of pigeons that had only ever done the trips of
Paris, Orléans and Bordeaux, and who, then suddenly sent to Liverpool,

   

  

   

   
 

         

 

 

 

 

 

— 126—

immediately all returned to their former home. And how many times
doesn't it happen that, when pigeons are released, the horizon is veiled by a
heavy rain, or that clouds prevent the pigeons from rising very high
and thus only allow them to see at short distances? They come back
however mostly at the loft. What explanation can be found then? — If nothing prevents it, one is tempted to ad-
put the intervention of a new sense quite distinct from sight, from a faculty
special whose nature we do not know. From where then comes, it will be said, that by thick fogs, by times of
heavy rain or snow, pigeons have already strayed, if not the view
who drives them? But if it is not sight that drives him, in what state
do we believe that a pigeon must be who cannot see around Ini? As he is
(a very fearful nature, he is afraid, he feels in danger, he feels at the mercy of
his enemies ; this fear paralyzes his faculties; he no longer orients himself and gets lost
the free activity of his faculty of orientation requires the integrity of others:
This is not surprising, it seems to me. Admitting the last hypothesis, it
would still remain to establish the nature of this faculty, and the question does not seem
easy to solve. Kingersheim. G. Weiss. RESEARCH ON THE TRIAS FIELD. The triassic, also called new superior red sandstone, is included
between the Jurassic terrain and the Permian terrain; according to M. Cordier, he
constitutes with this last formation the Salino-Magnesian period. But,
according to the qualification of Mr. Lyell, which is today most generally
followed, the Permian terrain is reported & the Paleozoic or primary period,
el the trias & the mesozoic or secondary period. Indeed, before the
formation of the triassic, when it was about to settle, the
emerged lands which were one day to constitute France were for the
mostly flooded; and if we consider the movements of
Earth's crust to establish the place that this land should occupy in the
geological series, we will not fail to relate it to a new period. But, in the rest of Europe, this irruption had taken place much earlier,
that is to say towards the end of the coal period. So at yue point of

 

Europe in general and no longer France in particular, the Triassic continues the
Paleozoic period with the Permian terrain. On the other hand, the main
characters of flora and fauna seem rather to link the triassic & the
Mesozoic period: M. P. R., of Strasbourg, in his OVERVIEW OF THE
VEGETATION OF THE PRIMITIVE WORLD (1), has already shown that the Trias is the beginning
cement of the kingdom of gymnosperms, I will try to demonstrate in the following
this work that it is at the same time that of the reptiles. Most geologists
based themselves on these paleontological characters, and placed the Triassic among
Mesozoic terrains, recognizing however that it is above all a
transitional ground. Considered in itself, the trias contains three stages characterized by their
mineralogical nature and their fossils: variegated sandstone or bunter des
Germans, the zuschelkalk and iridescent marls or keuper. The disposition
stratigraphy of these three stages is constantly the same, in some
locality where they are observed; but one of the three terms is completely missing
in certain countries, in England for example, where the muschelkalk does not exist

  

 

 

   

(1) See the issue of August 18, 1871. — 27 -

not. M. d'Orbigny distinguishes two sub-periods in the Triassic period: the
conchylian sub-period, including the variegated sandstones and the muschelkalk,
and the saliferian sub-period, which corresponds to iridescent marls. But we
preferably follow the division into three sections; this is how the rest
d'alberti shared the trias in his Essay on a monograph of the bunter-
sandstein, du muschelkalhk and du keuper, published in 1834. Luneville. E. Paulin. (To be continued.) OBSERVATIONS ON ONE OF THE PARASITES OF THE CAT. Without wanting to research too far what are all the parasites of animals
that we have before our eyes daily: dogs, cats, even birds, I
will only talk about chips. Are you laughing, reader? Let this joy pass
will be short-lived when you know the infinite number of animals that
you may be carrying on you. This chip word will no longer attract your lips
that disdainful smile that I seem to see there! "It won't be useless, I
think, to recall here that fleas are part of the phylum of Art?-
cules, of the class of the Apterae, order of the Sucewrs. Insist on its description
would be tedious, especially for you, dear reader, who know bullet points
unfortunately as well as me. A little head armed with a sucker
imperceptible, very long and very strong hind legs, such is in
two words the animal of which I am going to give the successive transformations. Here is
the series of observed phenomena:

I found, last June and during a strong heat, my cat
lying on my work table. By his side was my hourglass. I noticed
a white dust all around the cat, but attributing it to the rollover
sand by the animal, I contented myself with chasing it and removing the dust
supposed. The same thing happened again in aneloles. Finally, I realize
that the cat filled with a similar sand & the one that I had noticed on my
table all the places where he slept. I accidentally pressed a few
grains of Celtic dust, and I was surprised to see my finger a little red and
slightly damp. I then collected and exposed to the sun this dust
despised at first, and here is what I observed and noted day by day:

June 25. — White gufs, as big as grains of sand. On the 26th. — Same condition. On the 27th. — Very lively white worms hatch under the rays of the sun. The
heat is increased by the glass bell which covers them. The verses are
almost imperceptible & the naked eye. 28. — Worms with black stripes, larger than the previous days. Black droppings. 29th — Same condition. The 30. — Almost all the eggs hatched; small very lively white worms. July 1. — Same condition. The 2. - Taller. The posterior part is white and the anterior part
black fur. The 3. — Apparent death. Transformation into nymphs. Same condition for four days. The 7. — Almost complete disappearance of all the larvae. What is more remarkable is that, during all this time, these verses
have not eaten anything. If the larvae had disappeared & my eyes and suddenly, I was not long &

 

 

  

       

 

 

  

— 1288 —

realize their existence in the state of perfect insects. My room was riddled
thousands of chips! Are you still laughing, dear reader, now that you know that the simple
touch of a dog, a cat can bring on you that seed and cause it to hatch
so thousands of parasites! The facts of which I have just spoken have explained to me the disease of the cat. The exam
attentive 4 the magnifying glass on her back, showed me that the white eggs were attached
at the root of his hair. The observer will be grateful to any of his readers who can give
more details on this curious parasite of almost all animals. Vienna. G. Bouar. CORRESPONDENCE. Comte de M., dC. — We take your advice into account; but the articles on the
subject that you have indicated to us have, in spite of ourselves, been lacking so far. COMMUNICATIONS. Many of our subscribers have already told us about the special study to which they
deliver; but we still have to wait, before publishing our list, for it to be
more complete. Living in Alsace, I would be grateful to any of the Leaf subscribers who could
tell me a practical and effective way to destroy Acanthia lectularia, Pulex
irritans and other parasites which for some time have multiplied prodigiously

 

in our province. R.
We thank through our Sheet, and on behalf of Mr. Mé¢hu, those of our subscribers

who so generously responded to our call. s of the tobacco fame to hunt the
insects found in tree trunks, under bark or inside galleries
dug into the wood; it is often the only way to get long-term people out of retirement.
gicornes and other xylophagous insects, known to be rare because it is difficult to reach them
14 oft they lie. It is in the same way that we take, under the mosses and in the
clumps of grass or heather, quantity of small species of beetles and @hemipteres
that is almost impossible to find otherwise. We believe it is useful to point out to entomologists who have the advantage of not being
smoking point an instrument invented by a member of the Entomological Society, who
allows the hunter to smoke the insects without having to inhale the tobacco smoke. It is a metal pipe, cylindrical in shape; 4 One of the ends is the small hole
through which the smoke escapes and to which a rubber hose can be fitted; other
end is threaded and receives an obturator which screws onto the body of the pipe. The obtu-
rator is itself perforated in a way 4 to allow passage & Pair breathed in by the hunter,

To use this instrument, it is stuffed like an ordinary pipe; we place a
piece of tinder lit on the tobacco, and after quickly screwing the shutter, we
breath. Or thus obtains for fifteen minutes a very powerful continuous jet of smoke. J. of G.

Several entomologists use with success:

 

 

 

typ. Oberthur and son, in Rennes. — Me in Paris, rue Salomon-de-Caus, 4 (square des Aris-et-Metiers). TABLE OF CONTENTS

From the 2¢ year. Natural History, by ves Répacreurs. The Indigo Boletus, by A. Lewains. i beginners in entomology (continued), by 2.
night, by E. Dotrus. Geological observation at the time of Saint Louis, by
Bibliography (by various authors). From the cry of the Sphinx atropos, by J. S.
Overview of the vegetation of the world pri
Lamarck, by A. Covrvotsten
The Apus cancriformis, by E. Cuavveac
The influence of light on In vegetation, by A. Lawaine,
The Fetid Satyr, by G. }
Helix doxtres ct sGnestres, by J. Note on two mineralogical species, by G. Bouver. Advice for young malacologists, by J. ne Gunns. Formation of liodide of mercury, by f1.-S. Mac Geacu. Classifications in natural history, by E, Bacnents. Excursion to the ponds of Chaumont, by G. Bouvsr. The Bat, by E. Pautin. Plant histology, by G. Roux
An aurora borealis observed in Evre
Maritime pine shoot beetle, by Fé
Variations of Species in Plants, by Félix
General information on Hydrocanthares, by Maurice Résiwparr
The Red Spider or the egg gobbler, by E. Lau
Conservation of slugs, by Jules pe Guerse. On the formation of coal, by F. Banniine
Snow and toanerre, by Ch. Office. De Candolle, by A. Courvorster
Antiseptic arsenic liquid, by
Notes on Lycosa saccata, by M. H.
Hymnoptera Hunt, by {1
Societies of young naturalists, by La
Nocturnal Raptors, by G. B. . Note for serving 4 The story of a new infusorium, by 5, Cuauveac. Conservation of caterpillars and slugs, by LA Répactiox
Note on Parmentier, by L. B.
Arthemisia absinthium, by G.
Stickleback Nest, by John £. Jox:
On the venom of Batrachians, by Ff, Bannréne. De POronge and false Oronge, by Ed. Duveryoy. Buffon, by Ed. Doverxoy
The Glowworm, by Hl. The aquarium of Le Havre, by Adrien Doutrus
A few words on the Psyllids, by M. I
On the Origin of the Earth, by V. Lomuller. Antiseptics in all times, by Ch, Demarson. General overview of the phenomenon of germination, by ps Mercy
The Bibio marci, by J. de G...... The Messenger Pigeon, by G. Weiss
Triassic field research, by E, Pavut
Observations on one of the parasites of the cat, by G.

 

 

 

 

 

      
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

    
 

End be ta 2¢ a! YOUNG NATURALISTS

 

Third, Year |"! OATAMIAAUTAM COUR Cd FRIEND

 

 

gsanA omdieio1T

 

4th November 1872. The Number: 25 cents. Ne 25. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

 

Payable in advance in stamps or money order by post:

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr. 3 per

 

| For Abroad. Fr. 4 per year. Subscription for Great-Briain, 8s. 6 d. British subscribers can remit in penny ot twopeany postage stamps. Contact: & Paris, & the editorial office of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne; at M''e Pétry,
e bookseller, rue de VArsenal, & Mulhouse (Ilaul-Rhin). People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. TO OUR READERS. =

The Sheet for Young Naturalists begins with this number sa
third year of existence, in improving conditions
every day and in calmer times than those she had a
cross 4 its start. The number of its subscribers has
significantly increased over the past year; but its costs also have
almost doubled following the transfer of the editorial staff to Paris. It's here
which has prevented us from pursuing, so far, 4 several projects
reforms and improvements; but the accomplishment of these projects
is only updated this year and depends on
The ardor that our readers and correspondents will put into spreading
the Leaf and 4 get us articles and new subscribers. Yes
the number of these was 'doubled again (and we do not doubt
soon), the Young Naturalists' Leaflet could
become an illustrated newspaper, which would not contribute insignificantly
4 increase its importance and therefore its usefulness. I] is undisputed-
table, in fact, which a simple sketch illuminates or even replaces
wind a long description. We therefore count, for the coming year, on the zeal of money,
and we hope to now be able to choose each month from
number of articles those which are the most made to interest our
readers. We remind you that our columns are open 4 all our
young subscribers who will want to record their observations, even
the most modest, to help their colleagues. The Re&paction. —2—

PHOSPHORESCENCE OF THE SEA. The phosphorescence of the sea is a phenomenon analogous to the power of
to put light with which certain insects are endowed. It is due, in fact, ala
presence of a more or less considerable number of zoophytes in the layers
upper sea; among these zoophytes, most of which belong to the
class of acalephes, the one who plays the most important role from the point of view
of the phenomenon which occupies us is an extremely small animalcule, the Nocti-
luca miliaris. It is very rare to be at night by the sea, after a hot
summer day, without having the opportunity to enjoy the magnificent spectacle of its
phosphorescence; long luminescent streaks criss-cross the ecu-shaped yagues
mantises; the movement of boats or the blowing of a somewhat strong breeze
sparkling sheaves of light rise from all sides. The moment is then
propitious to seize the’ noctiluca, because it is Note that in Peau de
sea ​​drawn in broad daylight one never finds a single one of these zoophytes, which
will undoubtedly illuminate deeper layers until the return of night. If one pours into a basin water collected under the individ- ual circumstances
and that one finds oneself in the dark, the slightest agitation printed &
The surface of this water makes it phos; PoreScents and this phosphorescence ap-
appear mainly on the edges of the ba; Often even, if one finds oneself
in a room, it suffices to strike (arene with the foot to produce the phe-
name. A curious fact is the attraction which these animalcules seem to have
for each other; do they come & meet, they form immediately in
compact groups and thus present the appearance of a globe of fire, each
carries his little spark. Considered in the light of day, they appear as
thin droplets of fat. Their existence is very delicate; they die
quickly as soon as they have been taken out of the sea; also it is necessary to
haste if one wants to make some observations on their mores, As for their
physiological constitution, it is quite rudimentary. Their body is not
no larger than a poppy seed; seen under a microscope, it affects the shape
of a sphere, or of a slightly depressed ellipsoid of revolution
following a small circle; in the center of this small circle is a thin opening.
ture surrounded by six or nine filaments of extreme delicacy, proper to their
to move in the water and can even grab hold of other
animalcules smaller than themselves, to swallow them. The zoophytes seem not to have alone the power to illuminate the sea; he
seems very probable, if not beyond doubt, that a certain number of crustaceans
microscopic speak with them this privilege (1). Before determining, allow us to capture the attention of our readers
of a fairly recent theory, put forward by an English naturalist, Mr. William
Swainson, on the place of the phosphorescence of fish. Consider, says
this scholar, how many hundreds of species of fish living in the waters
the deeper ones are covered with extremely shiny silvery scales,
and which must be even more so when 'instead of being removed from play
natural element these fish swim there full of strength and italy, it is very
probable that this beautiful finery which covers them is more than a simple adornment.
ment and that these families are intended to illuminate the deep layers of the

     

     

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

(1) We refer those of our readers who wish to pursue this question further
& a special work written on the subject by the scholar Viviani and published in Genoa in 1805,
under the title of Phosphorescentia Maris. =

 

sea, where the light penetrates only with difficulty, or even never. In favor of
this hypothesis, Mr. Swainson points out that most fishes, such
than the serrans, the perches, the blennes, the gobies and a host of others whose
the body is not covered with silvery and shimmering scales, but with colors
bright, sharp and often dark, inhabit only relatively shallow waters
deep in the vicinity of edtes; — while those that are silver and
brilliants are found almost exclusively in the deepest regions
of the sea: witness most of the gymnétéères, with the exception of the genera
ophidium and cepola; further witness the well-established phosphorescence of
moles ct which comes from the gelatinous substance which lies under their skin;
however, if we were able to recognize this property & these fish even after their
death, isn't it natural to suppose that she must be far more powerful
when they find themselves full of life in their own element? This theory, almost exclusively based on induction, is however
revealed with a certain stamp of verisimilitude worthy of arresting the attention of
naturalists. London. cL. has

 

 

 

 

PLANT HISTOLOGY. THE LEAF (continued). After having studied general histology of the leaf itself, and made

notice what physiological role was related to the various tissues that
make up the successive coatings of the limbus, I still have to do the examination
micrograph of the petiole and the various secondary organs which enter the
more often in the general organization of the sheet. _ Petiole. — To fully understand the anatomical organization of a petiole,
it is necessary to imagine a half of a stem folded back on itself, to
so that the most internal part, that which is directly related
ort ec.the medulla, becomes external, and the external part becomes
internal. Immediately below the epidermis which covers the entire petiole,
the elements that are encountered are usually uncoilable tracheae,
vessels which, as we know, constitute more particularly in the stems this
called the medullary sheath. Next come fibers with vessels
annulars, and it is finally & the innermost region that meet successively
sively the ligneous fibres, those of the bast and the laticifers, which always
oceupent in the stem Ja outermost region. Thus is demonstrated the
proposition above stated, that the petiole is half of an upturned cork. To properly study histologically the direction of the fibrovascular bundles
which are distributed in the petiole and the way in which they divide &
their entry into the limbo, it is absolutely necessary to associate cuts
transverse & longitudinal sections, and that from distance to distance. Yes
Yon wants to study separately the various elements that go into the composition
from the petiole, it is useful to dissociate them by macerating the sections for
some time in caustic potash, or even by boiling them

years a test tube with a mixture of nitric acid and chlorate of
potash (maceration process of Schulz of Rostock). Stomata. — It would take a long time to review the different theories
that have been made on the subject of the nature and physiological role of these

*

 

1% —

organs; I will content myself with indicating the means of examining them at the micro-
cope; I have already spoken of their role in connection with lacunar tissue. To examine the stomata, it suffices to remove with forceps a slight
flap of epidermis, to moisten it and bring it under the field of the micro-
cope. One then sees from distance to distance sorts of particular cells
formed of two reniform utricles joined by their two extremities and
leaving between them an opening in the form of a mouth (stoma) or button-
nier; it is the Ja stomata with its most general and characteristic aspect.
tick. The two ulricles which serve as lips 4 the stomatal opening
are most commonly filled with granules of protoplasm and some
sometimes veritable grains of chlorophyll. As one examines these
dry or soaked utricles We the liquid of the object holder, one notices
great differences in the diameter of stomatal opening. If the utricles
are filled with liquid, the mouth is gaping, while it is almost
completely closed if the lips are dry. The stomata vary a lot, either by their position, their number, their
grouping and their size. Most often, they are found in addition
great abundance & underside of leaves; but in plants
aquatic, whose underside of the leaves is continuously in relation
with water, like the Potamogeton, the Nymphwa, it is on the upper side
only that slomates exist. Sometimes, but exceptionally, stomata are found in the
sepals, the petals, & the surface of the ovary and into the interior of
this one. (Ovary of mignonette, primulaceae, crucifers. Fact reported
by Mr. Eugene Fournier.) The stomata are sometimes located below the upper surface.
of the epidermis which protects them, and then seem to be placed at the bottom
from a well. Variations in the number and size of these organs have been
the object of numerous studies, and the conclusion of this work was that the
woody plants, tough, are richer in stomata than grasses; the
fleshy leaves have less, on the contrary. From the point of view of their formation, the stomata, according to Hugo Mohl, are
first constituted by a single cell, which is divided into two chambers
by a vertical wall. This partition splits soon: the two branches
duplication diverge from each other, and it is this distancing which consti- tutes
tilute the opening of the stomata. Fur. — Hairs are cellular appendages, outgrowths of the ,
the most superficial tissues which, most of the time, have a sheath which
is formed by the epidermis. They are usually divided into simple and
branch, depending on whether they are formed in a single jet, representing a throne
unique, cu although they are like trees and they send prolong-
ments & right and 4 left; they may, in the latter case, present the
the most bizarre and diverse forms. In the Malvaceae family,
example, they are always arranged in stars, and said to be star-shaped. But, to the point
histologically, they must be further divided into unicellular and multicellular.
cells, depending on whether they are formed by the elongation of a single cell or
well by the juxtaposition of several. It is generally very easy to
account for these anatomical arrangements, by simply placing
the hair & flat under the field of the microscope; sometimes, however, he is born-
necessary to make longitudinal cuts and to clear them with acid
crystallizable acetic acid. The hairs, like the stomata, meet in
greater abundance & the underside of the leaves; they also vary
increase in number, depending on the age and exposure of the plant. Inorganic crystals. — In the interior of the cells of the mesophyll, and

 

  

  

—

also from the epidermis of the leaf, there may be crystals of unusual material
ganic, silica, sulphate, carbonate, lime oxalate. It is necessary to be aware of the presence and arrangement of these
various elements, and to determine by histo-chemical means their true
nature. Silica is found in a crystalline or amorphous state in the epidermis of stems
and grass leaves, equisetum stems and saxifrage leaves:
to ascertain its presence, a shred of leaf is incinerated on a blade of
platinum, then the residue is brought under the field of the microscope; we can then see
easily perceive the silica and ascertain the state in which it is found. The salts of
lime affect two sorts of well-caused groups in plant cells.
which are called Cystolith and Vaulre Raphide. Cystoliths
constitute a cluster of crystals enclosed in a pocket or utricle of
azole nature, with a small suspensor that connects it to the cell walls
(Urticaceae; leaves of the ficus elastica). Cystolith crystals are almost
always constituted by carbonate of lime. Raphides are clusters
prismatic crystalline rods & pyramidal peaks, oxalate or
lime sulphate; they are found in large quantities in a large number
plant cells; but it is especially in the fenilla of Bilbergia gigantea
(Bromeliad) that we can observe them perfectly and in place. Here is what
observed on a transverse conp of this leaf: first, the epidermis
superior; then, the first part of the mesophyll formed by a parenchyma
tight, has almost tubular cells and engorged with grains of starch, that it is
very easy to make sensitive by means of the tincture of iodine which colors them
in blue; then, the lacunate parenchyma and, below this parenchyma, two
one three layers of colorless cells, elongated, filled with Raphides; finally,
lower epidermis. Nothing is simpler than to now recognize the chemical nature
crystals in our eyes. Pass through with a pipette
a few drops of hydrochloric acid on the preparation. If it doesn't happen
no phenomenon, the crystals are of sulphate of lime; if, on the contrary, he

s crystals without gas evolution, we are dealing with oxalate
If finally the dissolution takes place with release of acid vapors
carbon dioxide, we have before our eyes carbonate of lime. Issoire. (To be continued.) GABRIEL Roux,

Member of the Physiophile Society
and the Botanical Society of Lyon. OYSTERS. Everyone knows oysters or thinks they know them; but how many
delicacies, whose whole pleasure consists in eating them, have never wondered
oi el how these molluscs live, el by what care they are made clean
& satisfy their sensuality! However, one could almost say that oysters
have a history: they form an immense people that numbers billions
citizens scattered everywhere around the continents and islands. Long before
until man appeared on our planet, oysters had
colonized all the seas, all the coasts and had taken their share of the great
work of mineralization that takes place at the bottom of the ocean, the Silurian terrain,
one of the oldest, already offers us several species of acetic molluscs
phales, belonging, if not to the genus os¢rea, at least to closely related genera:

—-6— ’

their number increases rapidly on the upper floors. The race of
oysters is therefore much older than ours; some naturalists,
some philosophers have even wanted this mollusk to mark one of the
rungs of our gradual improvement and have gloried in such
origin. But let's leave this serious subject of discussion to occupy ourselves only
characters which have not been perfected and which still form today
the genus ostrea. This kind, quite numerous

 

 

in species, belongs to the branch of
molluscs, the class of the acephala and the order of the lamellibranchs, We say-
about sixty species of oysters alive today, but they are
difficult & characterize, because there are, perhaps, no bivalve shells more
irregular and more apt 4 to change shape or size. The most known
are:

The edible beetle or small oyster (Ostrea edulis. Lin), who vile on our
Channel and Ocean celes: its upper valve is flat and the lower
domed is the smallest, but also the most sought after of all. oil
d'Ostende is only one variety and the horse's foot oyster (0. Hippopus. lam)
is, for many observers, only the same a Velat of old age or a
which the nature of the ground has given a very rapid growth. The oyster spoon (0. cochlear. Pauli) or Mediterranean oyster, whose
shape is oblong and the upper valve concave. The Polacestion (0. lacteolata. Mock). Pleated oyster (0. plicata. Chemnitz) or gravette. The oil of the Adriatic, with thin and denticulated valves, etc. All these species and all their sisters are of a fairly
simple. Their body is completely enveloped by the two blades of the mantle,
themselves covered with the valves of the shell. These valves are a gray
more or less yellowish or purplish, hairy, composed of a multitude of
flexible, translucent blades, which were successively formed by the man-
tean and are sometimes liable to detach from each other under the influence
of intense heat. The outermost of the blades is the oldest and also
the smallest, so that during growth the shell increases in thickness.
sor at the same time as it widens. Inside, the oyster's house is
lined with a thick layer of compact and shiny mother-of-pearl secreted with the
outer layers by the mantle of the mollusc. The oyster has no distinct head, and therefore neither organ of sight nor organ
of hearing, nor organ of smell; two bilobed lymph nodes constitute the system
central nervous system, and one easily distinguishes, by dissecting the mollusk, a
mouth large and very dilatable, bearing 4 tentacles, a stomach with very
thin, an intestine, a voluminous liver surrounding the two previous organs,
a heart composed of an auricle and a ventricle crossed by the rectum. the
blood reaches the heart by two large vessels after being vivified in the branches
shits; there, special veins had brought him directly from the different parts
from the body. Three main routes starting from the heart go: the first &
the houche, the second to the digestive organs and the third in all the rest
from the body; but, on emerging from these arteries, the blood (which is here a transparent liquid
uncolored rentet) goes into gaps; traffic is therefore not
complate. The organs of locomotion are completely lacking, and the only movements
but what the oyster can do is to open and close the two valves
of its shell, and expand or contract there a little and do
oscillate with a continuous movement the four large leaves which constitute its
gills, These extend into a finely ridged strawberry; transparent and
lasts almost all around the large central muscle. As for this muscle, very vol-

  
  

 

 
     

    

 

       

 

 

   

  

 

  

 

   

 

 

— t=

minor relatively to the other organs, it is attached by a large surface to the
center of each of the two valves and serves the animal 4 to close its shell, while
than an elastic mass, placed at the hinge. always tends & maintain it
ajar. This gap, although quite limited, allows the water to bathe.
disturb the body of the mollusc and to carry into its mouth always
gaping the food it needs. At the slightest shock, at the slightest
touching, the child, warned of a danger, hermetically closes her two
valves; it is his only resource, his only means of defense against his nomads.
Drous enemies; yet this means leaves much to be desired and does not protect it.
Isn't it against murex or periwinkles el les nassa or courmaillaux
(gastropod molluscs), which puncture its shell to laterndre and the
devour; he would not protect her either, if Valmont Bomare is to be believed,
against the slime crab who employs trickery to satisfy his gluttony,
sometimes suffocating the oyster by burying it or pressing down on it with all its weight,
sometimes skillfully throwing between its two open valves a small stone which
prevents them from closing and thus delivers the poor defenseless mollusk &
his cruel enemy. Paris. M.I. (To be continued.) LUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGETATION. Vile. — HELIOTROPISM OF STEMS AND ROOTS. Everyone knows that the two parts which constitute the axophyte of a
gelal head in an entirely opposite direction; that the stem rises to the sky,
that the root tends towards the center of the earth. These directions are those that
would take these two organs no disturbing cause came to act on
them; But very often it happens that these tendencies have gone under the influence
of certain agents, among which light is ranked first. That rays of light of equal intensity come to strike the entire surface
Mune liege for example, there will be no deviation in the route of this one;
but that one side of this organ is subjected to a stronger light than the other,
this will result in a curvature sometimes concave, sometimes convex, on the side most
enlightened. We say that in the first case the rod seeks the light; that
in the second she flees it; or that there is heliotropism in the first place
positive, second negative heliotropism. HAS. — Role of Light on the production of curvatures
that affect the stems. Of all the plants that vegetate on the globe that bears us, some and
it is the largest number, possessing tissues of great solidity, elevating
vertically their stem to the sky; the others, too weak to support themselves in
Atmosphere, crawl on the ground or coil around bodies that serve them
fulcrum. This last fact, which is noticeable on bindweed and hops,
received the denomination of volubilism. Some physiologists have investigated whether the Inmiére has no action on the
spiral twist of some rods. De Candolle, Knigt and M. Isidore Léon have
believed to be able to explain this phenomenon by the uneven distribution of light
on both sides of a voluble stem. According to these botanists, the part of the

   

——

line subjected to the strongest lighting would take a much greater increase
larger than the other less exposed to the action of the Juminous rays, and i this
unequal elongation would result in a concave curvature on the light side
the weakest. This ingenious theory, if true, has been refuted by MM. Modal and Sachs. —
His experiments on the stems of Ipomea, Phaseolus multiflorus,
on the tendrils of Bryonia dioica and Cucurbita pepo; those of Mr. Mobi on
the tendrils of Pisum sativum and Lathyrus odoratus, etc., show a
obvious way that most voluble stems can wrap around
from their supports in the deepest darkness. - However, it is not necessary
consider this fact as general; because there exists, according to the research of
Mr. Duchartre, plants, such as Dioscorea Batatas and Mandevillea,
whose volubilism can only take place insofar as they are subject to
fluence of light. Stem Heliotropism. When a plant grows in an environment that receives light from only one
only on the side, its stem bends towards the part where the lighting is strongest. Thereby,
that everyone was 4 even to observe in a general way in a
apartment or on the edge of forests, has been particularly studied by
Pay. This physiologist, having germinated seeds of garden cress in a
box has only one opening, recognized that the rod leaned towards this one,
and that all the points of this young crucifer were capable of presenting
concave curvatures towards the surface exposed to the sun, curvatures which could
fade away and then become convex as soon as the plant is turned over. Payer did not stop at this experience, so to speak, known to the bota-
ists who preceded him, he still wanted to find out what action would exert
on the rods a light variable in intensity. Two holes were drilled on one side of a rectangular crate. During-
that an equally bright light penetrated through each of these openings,
the lines did not curve towards one or the other, but towards a
intermediate line between the two. The inflection of the rods towards one of these small
windows only took place as long as it was clearest. Instead of two openings on the same face, two small windows were
practiced on two opposite faces, and if each of them received a certain
quantity of light equal in intensity, it happened that the rods solicited with
the same energy in opposite directions remained straight. It was not the same
when the light rays that penetrated through each of these holes had not
not the same power. In this case, there was concave curvature on the part
the most exposed & the light. These experiments, which were repeated on a large number of other plants,
prove that most of the stems tend towards the Jumiere. We don't know
hardly any ivy departs from this general rule. Dutrochet has indeed
observed that the extremity of the branches of this plant separated from its support
apply after some time turning away from the window. If the sun's rays cause the heliotropic curvatures of the stems, the
is artificial light capable of producing the same phenomenon? MM. Herve
Mangon and Hallier came to demonstrate by their observations that the inflection
rods can be performed under the influence of any light source. Thereby,
after the first of these scholars, germs of wheat moved towards the light
electricity, and, according to Hallier, a stem of an ornithogallum bends under the action
of a lantern 80 feet away. =

All these researches make us know the influence exerted by light
white on bending stems; but they tell us nothing of the role that jonent
the colored rays on this remarkable phenomenon. Payer undertook the first studies on this subject. His experiences have
led to conclude that the rods bend towards the violet and blue rays, tan-
say that they undergo no deviation under the action of the red rays,
oranges, yellows and greens. . .. .

Some time later, Dutrochet submitted to experimentation the facts stated
ar the latter ERtaHTetey A young stalk of garden cress was placed in a
oil blackened inside el with an opening provided with a red glass. The stem of this plant did not affect any curvature; but chance having made
germinate in the device a seed of alsine madia, this one inclined strongly
towards the opening which received the colored rays. How come the
the same rays acted in such a different way on these two plants? Dutro-
chet thought that this fact was due to the diflerence in the thickness of these rods. This
opinion soon became a reality for him, when, after having germinated in
the same apparatus of small seeds (trifolium agrarium, mercurialisannua,
Senecio vulgaris, etc. ), capable of giving rise to delicate stems, it
saw curvatures occur on the lit part. From then on, there was no longer
of doubt for him that the plants bend not only towards the rays
blues and purples, as Payer had indicated, but still towards the rays
red. Senones. AD. The mayor. (To be continued.) TRIAS FIELD RESEARCH
(After). The variegated sandstones reach a very great development in the Vosges, in
Alsace and in Lorraine, and especially in Württemberg, where they reach
has a height of two hundred and thirty meters, In Württemberg, these are sandstones
quarizeux, which contains patios of rounded and fairly large grains of quartz;
at the upper part of the floor, these sandstones present patches of mica,
which give the rock a certain shine. In Lorraine and in the north of Franche-
Comté, "the lower part of the variegated sandstone is made up of grained sandstone

fine, usually amaranth red, containing small flakes
of irregularly scattered mica. These first layers are strong
» thick, and furnish very fine freestones everywhere. While getting up
» more in the formation, we find thinner ones, which are exploited
to make grinding wheels. Higher still, there are very many
" thin and very fissile, which are exploited as slabs to pave the

houses. They sometimes become very inconsistent and pass
»> even 4 a variegated clay, which is used as. land 4 bricks. The
» Upper beds of the variegated sandstone formation often contain
» thin layers of marly limestone and dolomite. (Zap. of the
geol map from France.) Now that the petrographic nature of the bunter sandstein is sketched,
it is advisable to inquire what were, during this period, the organic beings
nations who lived on the surface of the earth. In the fauna of a period some-
conch, we must always distinguish three elements: some fossils still

©

=

Bone

few appear in the field, their existence has not yet
signaled element; others, on the contrary, are characteristic of this terrain, as they
abound there; they arose during the preceding epoch; a third
group, finally, includes the species which, after having appeared and developed
ages in earlier periods, are only very rarely encountered
and will disappear in the following period. Thus, what characterizes the triassic,
it is the simultaneous presence of Paleozoic and Mesozoic species.
zoiques: the first have only a few representatives left and are on the
about to die out; the seconds are like messengers, pro-types
phetics, if I may express myself thus, genres which must in the sequel
take all their development. Fossils are quite rare in the Bunter Sandstein stage; what is ex-
plies perfectly if it is assumed that, before settling and forming
consistent rocks, the elements of variegated sandstone have long been agitated and
destroyed by the friction of the organized debris they held in suspension. But the skeleton, however deformed, a skull, teeth, the imprint
even steps, sulfits geologists: according to these documents, he restores the
extinct species. We shall see on what data Mr. Owen establishes the existence
tenth, in ancient times, of gigantic batrachians; what profit Mr. Hit-
chock drew from the examination of the physiological footprints and tae ornithichniles
specifically; how finally Doctor Dana confirms by the ingenious processes
the assertions of this last professor. Before approaching the study of genera which are properly Mesozoic,
let us stop at the Palaeozoic types, of which the Triassic contains the last debris. Fishes are not yet homocercal, according to the expression of
Mr. Agassiz, who designates by 14 those whose caudal fin is also lobed
is exclusively supported by the tail rays; they won't present this
essentially Mesozoic character only from the Lias. These are always the
forms inherent to the Paleozoic period; the caudal fin is uneven-
bilobed and the vertebral column extends into the upper lobe,
a then takes on a large development; in a nutshell, the triassic fish are
heterocerci. Appearing from the Silurian terrain, this type, which shows up for the
last time during the Triassic period, there are nevertheless numerous representations
feeling. The debris encountered in the Triassic terrain is in nn
perfect state of preservation; among the most notable genres of bunter
sandstein, we must mention the ischyopterus, of which six or seven species are known. Lischyopterus, first confused with paleoniscus, was clearly
separated by Sir Philip Egerton, who made it a separate genus, different from this
last insofar as it is less heterocercal, in other words, in that the
vertebral column projects less forward in the caudal fin. I do not want to insist on each of the species of fish specific to the
Bunter Sandstein. What was important above all to indicate was the line
characteristic of this large class, during the formation of variegated sandstone;
the particular study of genres would lead us too far. Let us now take a look at the Mesozoic types: the reptiles
take on great importance from the beginning of the Triassic period,
and we can predict that they will play the main role in the fauna of the lands
secondary. The labyrinthodonts especially, whose appearance goes back to the
Devonian period, reach all their development in the terrain of
trias; the footprints they left on the variegated sandstones served as evidence
ter their existence and have guided geologists on the path of research. Indeed, we had noticed in the layers of the bunter, in Saxony, and in

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

=

white quartz sandstone, vicinity of Liverpool, footprints (1)
very clear and very distinct, quite similar to a human hand: strikes
of this resemblance, Mr. Kaup gave to the quadruped which had produced them
the name of cheirotherium. But nothing specific was known about his_conforma-
tion. The disproportion existing between the trace of the front feet which
measured 10 cents. in length and 7 cent. wide, and the footprints of
behind which reached up to 20 cents. in length and 12 cent. of width,
gave Mr. Kaup some reason to believe that the cheirotherinm should be
reported & the order of marsupials. We thought more than the quadruped
stranger was not organized to live under water, since he had been
impossible, in such an environment, where bodies lose a certain amount of
their weight, to leave such deep imprints. The discoveries of
Mr. Owen gave a lively comment on the question. Later, in fact,
observed in the Triassic organized fossil remains which he attributed to reptiles
of a frightful size, Based on the characteristics of the skull, the jaws
and teeth, the learned geologist made a new genus of them, the labyrinthodon,
of which he pointed out three different species. But it turned out that the size of
each of these species coincides with the three dimensions of the footprints
studied by M. Kaup. As we had already noticed that the extremiles
posteriors of the labyrinthodon were much more powerful than the ante-
ricures, it was enough to conclude that the footprints |
by the so-called cheirotherium were none other than the trace of the p:
labyrinthodon. To what order should the labyrinthodon be brought? This is a problem that paleontology has not yet solved; the doctor
Mantell regarded this reptile as a species of crocodilian, relying
on the shape of the long, conical teeth and on the typical structure of the
skull, particularly the muzzle. But if we stop and consider other
anatomical considerations, we tend to agree with the opinion of Mr. Owen, who makes
his side a real batrachian. The labyrinthodon indeed presents, likewise
as the batrachians, teeth implanted on the vomer and the palatine bones; as
in them too the skull articulates with the atlas by means of two occi-
pitals; in crocodiles, on the contrary, it does not rest on the first vertebra
only by one condyle. I said that the physiological imprints provoked on the part of the pa-
leontologists of many researches, I must add that they became in
at the same time for them a subject of meditation. "They are," observes the geo-
logne Buckland, like a mockery thrown at the most powerful polentats
human societies. Neither the ruins heaped up by the conquerors, nor the
monuments erected to consecrate their victories and ensure their immortality,
have not withstood time and upheavals. But the traces left by the
foot of the ancient world reptiles on the rocks in formation appear to us
still appear, after so many centuries, distinct, incontestable. A poet could say on the ruins of the Colosseum

 

 

  

 

  

“Nature has its irony. (LAMANTINE.) Luneville. Ernest Paulin,

Corresponding member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Nancy. (1) These are the impressions that paldontologists have referred to as the impression
physiological. Ornithichnites are nothing more than the footprints of birds. — 12 —

COMMUNICATIONS,

Several of our readers having pointed out to us that the numbers of the Leaf
often arrived dirty by post, we wanted, as a first reform, to carry

 

remedy 4 this inconvenience by putting a cover 4 on our publication. The reaction. We remind & our subscribers (many of whom will forget last year), that the
amount of their subscription is payable in advance or at least at the beginning of each

 

year, in stamps or postal money orders and & one of the addresses indicated at the top of
leaf. The reparation. — We receive:

 

Neerology
news of Mr. Enx's death
tifiques of Angers. We are convinced that all those who knew our young and ardent colleague
will associate 4 our regrets. Lus Repacreuns. at the time of going to press this issue, the sad
CHAUVEAU, secretary of the Society for Scientific Studies

 

 

   

The cricket has a special fondness for fabrics dyed with cochineal; he gnaws them
voraciously and can cause great damage in oi! these fabrics are
deposited. It is destroyed by pouring oil into its holes or by poisoning the color
employee. ME

 

I point out to lovers of Lepidoptera two accidental varieties of vanessa cardui
that I get from my hunts this year. — In the vanessa cardui type, below
In the white spot of the note, there are three white dots, two of which are small
and a bigger one. The first variety that I report also bears a circled white spot
black. This spot, as visible below as above, is placed in the middle
of the large fawn stripe of the milicu of the upper wing, ct in extension of the three points
blanks; it is of the size of the smallest points of which I speak above. .

In the type there are two white spots 4 to the side; the second variety bears three,
and, moreover, four white dots, two small and two large, instead of three, under the second
white spot on the side, as usual. T.Herre. from the god:

 

 

    

TRADES. Mr. Hetle, rue de Mons, 107, @ Valenciennes (Nord), would like to receive Satyrus Dejanira;
Argynnis, Adippe ct Daphe, ctc., in exchange for Nymphalis Populi o and 9, Apatura,
Iris g and 9, Endromis Versicolor ¢ and 9, ete. CORRESPONDENCE. T.H., @ Valenciennes. — The first year of the Leaf will be sent to you shortly
in full, as well as to our other subscribers who have requested it. ‘Type. Onentnun et fils, Rennes, — Me» & Paris, rue des Blancs-Manteaux, 35,

ter December 1872. The Number: 25 cents. No. 26,

YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

ABOD PRICE

  

Mr.
Payable in advance in stamps or money order on Ja poste:
For France and P’Alsace-Lorraine, fr. 3 par. | For foreigners... +20. fr, 4 per year. Subscription for Gral-Britain, 9s, 6 a. British subseribers ean remit in penny or (vopeany postage slams,

 

Swiresser: @ Paris, to the reaction of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne; Dear Mrs Pelry,
bookseller, rue de VArsenal, & Mulhouse (Haut-Rhin). People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. THE BORDEAUX SCIENTIFIC CONGRESS. The French Association for the Advancement of Science held its first
session & Bordeaux, from September 5 to 12, 1872. It was desirable that beau-
young people would have gone there, mainly the subscribers of this
sheet and members of societies of young naturalists; some there-
would have found a powerful stimulus for their scientific studies; all there
would have extended the circle of their knowledge, by listening to the most learned
most renowned in our country and in neighboring countries, while hearing about the
most important scientific problems. This almost complete absence
cadets of science is explained by the ignorance in which they found themselves without
doubt of the character and perhaps even of the existence of the French Association. Having had the good fortune to attend & its first session, I believe to be useful to
readers of the Young Naturalists Leaflet by introducing them to the
formation, purpose and mode of action of the Association, and giving them
details on the cohgrés de Bordeaux. I would be happy if these few lines
could decide a large number of my readers & come to take part
next year at the second session, which will be held 4 Lyon in the last
days of August. At the end of 1871, some men of science, to contribute to the
moral support and intellectual development of France, had the idea of
establish an analogous Scientific Association & British Association, which
produced good results in England. Create major centers in France
scientists, animate and feed in all parts of the country this curiosity
which is the source of all work and all progress, work & difference
fusion of sciences, while contributing to the development of pure theory,
that was their goal. Their way was to interest the big cities first, then
those of secondary importance, to the progress of science, by bringing together each
year in one of them a congress of general science; to encourage, by
relief money or equipment, people working on research;
Wenlighten, through conferences and publications, all classes of the
society. — But, before producing their work in broad daylight, the promoters
wanted to ensure its success by giving above all a solid base; they
decided not to start their work until they had raised capital
share of 100,000 fr., divided into shares of 500 fr., which would be provided by

 

 

to

200 founding members. In a very short time and with admirable enthusiasm,
this capital was subscribed by scholars, industrialists, large companies
of railways, etc., and on April 22, in a first general assembly
of the founding members, the Association was definitively constituted. An advice
@administration, chaired by Mr. Claude Bernard, was responsible for deciding different
annuities questions not yet resolved, in particular to choose the city or
would bring together the first congress. After having started, but in vain, with the mayor
of Lyon, negotiations unfortunately interrupted by the death of this
last, the council yielded to the entreaties of the municipality of Bordeaux, which pro-
gave the members of the Association the warmest and widest welcome
hospitality; he decided it would be in this city, so dignified & in all respects
of this honor, that we would meet. The council also sought to recruit a
large number of ordinary members, paying an annual contribution of 20 fr. or a sum once paid of 200 fr., but enjoying the same rights as
founding members. His efforts were crowned with success: in the month of
At its full capacity, the Association had over 800 members. As soon as the board of directors had accepted the offers of the municipality
of Bordeaux, a local committee was formed in this city, which undertook to
prepare the way to Association. It is to his constant devotion,
like 4 the friendly welcome of the whole population of Bordeaux, that the
congress has da a good part of its success. He did his best to receive with dignity
The members of the Association: it is through its care that all the museums of the
town put on a festive dress: museums of arms and paintings, collections
@natural history, prehistoric museum, public garden, of a huge greenhouse
contains the rarest and most sought-after plants! It is thanks to him that
the members of the Association found superb premises ready to receive them.
to see ; the concert hall of the Grand-Théatre and the premises of the Philoma-
ethics. It was at the Grand-Théatre that these scholars, flocking from all sides, trained
in intimate conversations strong friendships; this is what they received
their letters, that they could write them, that they read newspapers, that they
found the schedules for sessions and excursions. Company premises
philomathique seemed on his side to be made on purpose for the Association; a
a large room, well ventilated and well lighted, was intended for the general meetings; a
a large number of smaller rooms were allocated to the different sections. It was under these conditions that the Bordeaux Congress opened, of vitality
of this great national and scientific work has asserted itself, and its immense
ulilile has been demonstrated with such brilliance. Everything was ready to receive all
those who would like to come and strengthen their knowledge or acquire new ones
yelles. 200 members were provided by the city of Bordeaux; £00 around
came from all parts of France; some foreign scholars, invited
by the board of directors, came from neighboring countries to lend to the scientists
French their valuable assistance. Immediately reunited, the members of the congress
began their work. They had to pursue a double goal, the popularization
ation and the progress of science: to interest the inhabitants of Bordeaux in
scientific questions, such was the subject of the general sessions, and mainly
evening lectures, the public was admitted for a small fee.
goal; to promote the progress of science, sessions of
sections, where the scholars of the same branch communicated the results
of their observations and their work, and discussed the consequences. These sections were 12 in number: 1° mathematics, astronomy, mechanics,
fuck; 2° navigation, civil and military engineering; 3° physical; 4° chemistry; 5° me-
theeorology; 6° geology, mineralogy; 7° botany; 8° zoology; 9° anthropo-
logy; 10° medical science; 11° agronomy; 12° geography, economy and
stalists. They worked simultaneously; each was installed in

 

 

 

   

 

  

 

 

 

 

    

—15—

one of the halls of the premises of the Philomathic Society; each had its president
and his secretary. To make known to the members of the congress the surroundings
from Bordeaux, the local committee also organized charming excursions in
localities remarkable for their natural resources or their industry. My readers may be grateful if I end with a brief summary
business of the congress

September 5. — At ten o'clock. Quatrefages, President of the Association:
Bordeaux; Mr. Cornu's report, dry! report by Mr. G. Masson, treasurer. At eight o'clock. doctor Broca on the Z'roglodytes of the caves of the fyzies. September 6. — Morning, section scans. At two o'clock, general sitting
groan. M. Laussedat, lieutenant-colonel of engineers: services that science
can render to the art of war. M.l’abbé Durand: explorations in
the Amazon basin. M. Jannsen: spectral observation of the sun. Mr. Res-
pighi, from Florence: last solar eclipse observed in India. At eight
hours, lecture by Mr. Francis Garnier on the exploration of Cambodia. September 7. — Excursion to Arcachon; visit to the oil parks of
Arcachon basin and the aquarium. September 8. — Excursion by train to the caves of Les Eyzies. September 9.—Malinea, section sessions. At one o'clock, visit to the works
from the Bordeaux docks. At eight o'clock, lecture by M. Cornu on the constitution
physical tution of the sun. September 10. — Excursion by boat & steamer to the mouth of the
Gironde. Visit of the works intended to protect the Pointe de Grace against
efforts of the sea. Visit to the Cordouan lighthouse. September 41. — Morning, section sessions. At one o'clock, general meeting. Mr. Alexandre Léon: from the Landes de Gascogne industry; services that the
science is called upon to give it back. Dr. Lefort: on the organization of the
army medical service and the role of casualty relief societies
in times of war. Mr. Lafont: oyster farming in the Arcachon basin and the
4 fish tanks. Captain Périer: French geodesy and merit
dienne of France. Evening, reception by the mayor of Bordeaux, at the Hotel-de-Ville. September 12. — Morning, section sessions. At four o'clock, session
general: appointment of office for 1872-1873; choice of the city of Lyon
for the 1873 congress. At five o'clock, lecture by M. Laussedat on the
scientific equipment necessary for officers in the field (conference intended for
officers of the Bordeaux garrison). At eight o'clock, conference of
Mr. Levasseur on commercial geography. September 43, 14 and 15. — Excursion in the Landes and on the border
from Spain. Visit, at Labouheyre, of a blast furnace where
pine charcoal, from an injection workshop for firewood
pine, of a resin products factory. Visit to the schools of Morcenx,
founded by the Compagnie des chemins defer du Midi for the children of its
employees. Visit of the thermal baths of Dax and the saltworks of the surroundings of this city. Visit, 4 Irun (Spain), important iron mines. Excursion to Cambo,
former Celtic camp near Bayonne. Such was the first session of the French Association, interesting in
as useful. All those who attended certainly did not repent
of the use they made of these ten days spent in Bordeaux; all will return
in Lyon, next year, drawing 4 from this source will fertilize a new ardor
for their scientific research; all will seek to involve their friends there
and their knowledge. May I myself not have made a vain effort
to bring some readers of the Young Naturalists magazine there! Paris. E. Ka@cuuin, *

 
 
 

   

 

opening session: speech by Mr.
response from Mr. Fonreand, Mayor of
area, on the history of the Association;
lecture by Mr.

 

      

 

    

    
   

 

  

 

 

 

——

ANTISEPTICS IN ALL TIMES. MODERN TIMES. The science of antiseptics, having reached such high perfection in antiseptics
Egyptian city, lost much of its importance in snite. She stayed
stationary for a very long time and was abandoned in the Middle Ages. At that time,
we were too imbued with prejudices and superstitions to concern ourselves with a week.
blable matter. Everyone knows how much we hated dissections
and how one was dominated by religious fears, when it came to
bring the knife to the inanimate remains of a human being. Without wanting to encroach on a subject foreign to the one who occupies us, we
We will recall what odious traffic these superstitions had engendered in England. There, as everywhere else, doctors could only dissect secretions.
ment, and the corpses were very expensive. Also scoundrels, known as
name of Burkins, did they profess to kill men to sell them
students. We understand that in the presence of such ideas, it must have been
little question of embalming in the Middle Ages. This is why we will transport ourselves to the time when the Vesalius, the Sylvius,
the Fallope and the Ambroise Paré, fighting against the trends of their century,
came to re-establish the methods of anatomical studies still followed more or less
Nowadays. So we want to reappear embalming for adults
characters, especially for the kings of France, and new processes
arose on the same bases as the ancients. The knowledge gained from
antiquity, joined 4 some more recent discoveries, led to operate
as follows:

The cavities of the body were opened to extract the viscera. These were
washed in plenty of water and rolled in astringent powders composed of salt
décrépilé, tan, cinnamon, benzoin, Judas balsam and others
aromatic substances. In the interior of the caves, we practiced long
and large cuts that were washed with 4 large amounts of water, then with vinegar and alcohol
camphor. A concentrated solution of sublimate was spread over the whole.
sif and varnished. This first operation completed, the
ceres like the corpse, with the same substances. There was no more
put them back in their position, filling the gaps with the
above mentioned powder. Except for the introduction of corrosive sublimate, this method comes close by a
many points of the Egyptian process. Often even the corpse,
like the mummies of old, was surrounded by varnished strips. I] was good
@elsewhere to place him in a lead coffin welded and filled with powders
aromatic. Sometimes we embalmed in a different and less costly way, by immersing
holding the dead body for quite a long time in a concentrated solution
of corrosive sublimate. Not long ago, we were reduced to these long and
difficult. To Gannal was reserved the most important discovery; It was Ini
which was to make the science of antiseptics take the greatest step, the progress
the most serious. To arrive at satisfactory results, it was necessary to direct his studies from a
Sire way and start from well-established principles. However, if we consider that the
pulrefaction is produced by organized Gtres which develop in the
putrescible material, we will immediately seek the solution of the problem which

 

 

  

 

 

  

=e

occupies us in substances which oppose the life and growth of
these people. Although at the time of Gannal's first research the theory
fermentation has not been brought to light as nowadays, it is
notice that the processes of this skilful chemist (I am not speaking of his
antiseplices which leave something to be desired) fully meet the requirements
of the theory. The first products which were recognized as good antiseptics were
necessarily toxic and indestructible products, because these are the ones that
most easily poison the animalcules, without time weakening
notably their action. So we saw Chaussier, a worthy predecessor of Gannal,
use arsenic and chloride of mercury, like the old Pralicians,
but without the addition of aromatics. One of the first, he embalmed by injection,
thus avoiding the inconvenience of the old processes by which one could not
keep the corpse only on condition of cutting it into pieces. Gannal began by seizing Chaussier's method, while
the latter continued the course of his experiments; but he was soon arrested in
his studies by a royal ordinance prohibiting the use of arsenic and, little
after, mercury salts. There was, in fact, in the embalming by these
substances, an easy way to hide the crime of poisoning under
the outward appearance of respectful piety. It was necessary & our new chemist
research on non-toxic products 4 small doses or one
impossible to use in poisoning. Employed as a preparer in the service of the Government, Gannal was led,
at the time of the capture of Algiers, 4 to study the properties of the gelatin he wanted
milk to enter into the composition of food substances for the army. He failed in this attempt and recognized that this product contained almost
no nurturing principle; but the analysis showed him in the gelatin several
states. The first, the only one that should concern us here, is that of géline. It is 
in this state that gelatine enters organized beings and undergoes fermentation.
putrid tation. In the course of his work, Gannal discovered that this geline
decomposes alumina salts becoming incorruptible. His process was
henceforth found. Alumina salts are not dangerous, they meet the
requirements of the decrees, and moreover their effectiveness seemed indisputable to the
yentor. So we soon saw the Academy of Medicine seized of the new project,
and according to Gannal's proposal, alumina acetate and a
mixture of aluminum sulphate and aluminum chloride. At the same time,
Sucquet recommended zinc chloride. We did a comparison test. Of them
corpses, taken under the same conditions, were delivered into the hands of the two
embalmers, under the eyes of a commission appointed for this purpose. The two
pieces were buried in the same place, in two beers carefully
sealed, and we waited fourteen months to verify the result. The test
was unfavorable to Gannal, while Sucquet was a complete success. We
found that the zinc chloride had indeed mummified the corpse which was
injected; the other, on the contrary, was in a state of advanced putrefaction. Poisenille, rapporteur for the commission, expressed the opinion that alumina had not
valuable, as an antiseptic, only with the addition of arsenious acid. Why did Poisenille decide so? It is likely that we
had suspected fraud in the first preparation of Gannal. In effect,
arse-acid had been found in the liquids he used for this.
nieux, and Marsh's device had detected large quantities. We judged
therefore that the conservative properties of the new antiseptic were not due
what this substance has. Jealousy getting involved, the illustrious chemist was accused
of having contravened royal orders. But soon a more analysis
careful analysis showed that the arsenic came from the impurity of the salts of alumina, and

 

 

   

 

  

 

=o

contented himself with asking Gannal to watch more closely the composition of his
products. u Let us add that the experience of the Academy was not entirely decisive.

sive, and that the most well-founded reproach that one could make of the alums was to

dissolve and attack the bones. Gannal was not discouraged. He continued his studies, and conforming to the
recommendations of the Academy, arrived, without toxic products, with salts
of purified alumina, has very satisfactory preservations. Despite the resistance
that he experienced from the School of Medicine and the denials of many
scholars, he ended up triumphing over criticism. At the 1839 exhibition, he sent
a child mummy whose face had retained all its expression and that Jes
parents came frequently to contenple. Following Gannal, other physicians or chemists carefully studied the
antiseplices. Filhol, Straus-Durckeim and Falconi recommended sulphate
zinc. In a memoir of 4853, Falconi gave preference 4 this salt over Je
chloride, 4 because of its greater stability. It is true that the salts of zine
have very marked antiseptic properties; but they present an incon-
come that forces them to be abandoned for anatomical parts or embal-
mements. They are rarely pure and contain, in particular sulphate, a
quantity of arsenic which can become considerable. To purify them completely
it takes rather expensive operations that rarely succeed in removing
any trace of foreign bodies. On the other hand, the sufficient dose of arsenic
for a poisoning is so weak, that its presence in a corpse
embalmed by the process in question would always be attributable to the impurity
zinc salt, without it being possible & an expert to give proof of the
opposite. The greatest difficulty of embalming 4 the Gannal method is
Injection. It is not enough, in fact, to simply introduce the liquid into
the body, it must completely penetrate it, so that all
its parts receive the condom. This is how Gannal and his
contemporaries:

We opened the carotid and the jugulars and we pushed back into the first the
saline solution using a hand pump. Blood was leaking from the
jugulars, and the liquid was circulated until it became colorless to his
exit. We immediately see the disadvantage of this method. The subjects
fibrinous and gelatinous could partly coagulate at the beginning
of the operation and, consequently, obstruct certain channels. It resulted that
parts of the body, especially the extremities, were sometimes not injected
and remained subject to putrefaction. Moreover, the corpse was drying up and
lost its shape and its physiognomy. I

The same process was employed, but with little success, by Dupré, to
inject a mixture of the two acid gases carbonic and sulphurous, obtained by
Hot attack of sulfuric acid by charcoal. Bobierre proposed, on his side, camphorated methylene bihydrate, but
didn't get the results he was hoping for. Paris. CD. (To be continued). ON CHLOROPHYLL AND THE COLORING MATERIALS OF FLOWERS. The in-depth study of the coloring principles of plants is still to be done:
the cause is that the bodies on which one must experiment are excessive.
delicate; the reagents which act on them in nature are not

— 19) —

comparable to laboratory reagents, and these manipulations of the chemist are
still today coarse and primitive, compared to these slow phenomena
and multiples that are accomplished in the tissues of plants. The coloring matters, with which science has been especially concerned, are
those which form part of the raw materials used in industry. It is 
so, for example, that the colored pigments of madder and Vindigo were,
for many years, the object of assiduous research by the chemists
more distinguished. This work recently led to magnificent results.
to the point of achievement of science and industry: one succeeded in accomplishing
remarkable syntheses, fruits of the use of methodical and rational processes
which open to chemistry a new way, where it will not stop; the other
saw itself doled out of a product for which, until now, quantities had been grown
immense land, and which are now being withdrawn, so to speak, from the bosom of
earth, coal whose distillation produces anthracene, a raw material
of the manufacture of alizarin. But what are the principles of these many and varied colors that we
observed in nature? By what laws do these transformations of Leintes operate?
which strike us especially in the forests, from the birth of the foliage until
what is its end? Here the works undertaken are not comparable & those previously
people: however, some experiments made on this subject have begun to throw
of the day on these issues. We know that the leaves owe their green coloring 4 to a body, the chloro-
phylia: it is a green powder, insoluble in water and contained in the ut
cells of the cellular tissue. In the spring, chlorophyll develops slowly;
it is definitively formed when the green color has reached its maximum
intensile, i.e. in summer; in autumn, the green color gradually disappears
little, and the dead leaf contains only the products of decomposition
chlorophyll. How did these changes take place? In a word, what
chlorophyll? The following experiment, due to M. Frémy, will teach us this. We begin by obtaining chlorophyll; for this, we exhaust
greenery with boiling alcohol; by subjecting the solution thus obtained to 4 different
different treatments, we have an almost pure product, soluble in acids and
the alealis. By subjecting this chlorophyll to the action of alkalis, it is transformed into
a yellow body, soluble in alcohol. This is 1a the first degree of the reaction,
the result of which in plants is the decomposition of the coloring principle
green: the first degree, because there is not yet destruction, but simple clearance
ably as we will see. In a tightly stoppered flask, one introduces two parts of ether and one
part of hydrochloric acid; stir vigorously and add to this mixture
swish the alcoholic solution of the yellow body; we still agile strongly and we
let it rest. After a while, a separation of the
liquid in two layers: one, higher, is yellow, it is the ether which dissolved
a yellow principle; the other, lower, is blue, it is the acid solution of a body
blue. Chlorophyll would therefore be formed by the union of a yellow matter,
phyllocanthin, and a blue substance, phyllocyanin: the latter,
by the action of alealis, has changed from blue to yellow, or has been discolored by taking
the name of phyllomantheine, and is regenerated by the acids which dissolve it,
while the yellow body, doubtless remained unaltered and whose mixture with the blue
gives green color, is dissolved in ether. When the leaves, towards autumn, lose their green color, it is then

 

 

    

 

 

   

   

 

   

 

— 20 —

there is not only splitting and transformation of phyllocyanin-into
phylloxanthein, but destruction of phylloxanthein. Indeed, the solution
alcoholic yellow leaves is no longer capable of giving rise to the phenomenon
of separation which has just been quoted. At the birth of the leaves, phyllocyanin probably does not yet exist;
it is under the action of light that it develops slowly; however
the action of the Jumiere is not necessary: ​​one knows only sprouted leaves
in the dark are yellow; approach them with acid vapours, and they
will quickly turn green. What is striking when observing the flowers is the multiplicity of colors and
tints; fortunately we will classify them easily: we know the seven
elementary colors, and each hue will be referred to its parent color; it is
there a physical process. Chemistry goes even further: it tends to make
to derive all the various tints of flowers from a few principles only,
which are transformed by different agents and produce new
colored compounds. It is thanks to different reactions of one and the same body,
obtained artificially in laboratories, that this opinion has been arrived at. If, for example, blue flowers, such as cornflower, iris, etc., are treated with
Boiling alcohol, we obtain the solution of a blue body, which we named
cyanine; this solution turns red under the influence of acids, green under
that of the alkalis. Moreover, it has been noticed that generally the red flowers and
roses are acid reaction and blue flowers 4 neutral reaction; finally,
scarlet red flowers, immersed in ammonia, sometimes turn blue,
sometimes in green. These failures are explained ain: the red flowers contain
cyanine transformed by acidic juices; The purple flowers are none other
thing that a mixture of blue cyanine, that is to say neutral, and red cyanine
acidified. When you dip some red flowers in ammonia, you
saturates the acid and regenerates the blue cyanine; often the scarlet tint does not pro-
comes only from yellow matter, which then unites with blue to give green. Cyanine is therefore one of the essential bases of the colors observed in
plants ; vegetable juices, according to their acidic or basic properties, the trans-
form to produce the red, pink, purple and green hues. These metamorphoses, which are produced rapidly in laboratories, can
operate slowly in the air, under the influence of atmospheric agents; thus
in the spring one finds in the woods a plant which often carries both a
blue flower and a pink flower which are of different ages. Paris. INFLUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGETATION. Giving red light an action on the positive heliotropism of the stems,
Dutrochet wanted to know if the intermediate rays have no influence on
producing this phenomenon. He left the key, for these new experiences,
other colored glasses, which never transmit homogeneous light;
but he had recourse to the solar spectrum. He then recognized that all the rays
are able to make the plants bend: only some do it with
more energy than others. Thus, according to this physiologist, the movement of
bending begins in the violet rays; he then shows up on the shelves
indigo and blue, then in the yellow ray, later in orange, finally in
the red ray. These ideas, in contrast

 

 

 

ion with those of Tayer, were accepted by science,

I

especially since MM. Gardner and Guillemin came to update the result
of their research. The American doctor Gardner employed wooden boxes receiving from a
side of the blue light, on the other side of the Inmiére red, orange, green or
yellow. It follows from his observations that all regions of the spectrum can
give birth & heliotropic curvatures. This scholar would have had more than
rite of discovering a fact which had not yet been established, it is that the stems,
independently of their derecated bending towards the light, still tend to
carry sideways towards the indigo ray, i.e. & undergo a sideways flexion. According to M. Guillemin, the stems bend under the influence of all the
rays, & with the exception of the least refrangible caloric rays or those
of low temperature. There are two energy maxima in bending: Yun which
one sits in the most refrangible (ultra-violet) chemical rays, the other
in the green ray. Lateral flexion, which has its center in the indigo ray,
extends beyond extreme red and violet,

To these experiments must be added those of Mr. Sachs. This eminent botanist
having caused the etiolated germs of Triticum vulgare to vegetate, Carthamus tinc-
torius, Sinapis alba, etc., behind the orange and blue light obtained
by means of solutions of dichromate of potash and ammo-copper oxide
niacal, recognized that the blue rays very energetically determine
curvatures, while no effect was produced under the influence of light
red and orange. Mr. Sachs therefore admits the nullity of action of the caloric rays, and in this he
disagrees with the preceding scholars. This difference in results can probably only be due to the means employed.
bent to produce the various lights. — Such research requiring,
to succeed, homogeneity of light, we understand that colored glasses
can give rise to some errors since they always allow a
certain amount of white light. The color separation method
by a crystal prism is no less infallible, for the spectrum always contains
days by diffusion of undecomposed light. The best way
Warrive 4 positive data, it is to use & thick layers
colored solutions. *

Despite the contradictory opinions expressed on certain points of the question
by the physiologists whom I have just named, all however agree
to say that the so-called chemical rays, or the most refrangible (blue, violet,
ultraviolet rays) have the most influence on the heliotropism of the stems. B. — On the heliotropism of petioles and peduncles. Just as stems, petioles and peduncles are capable of affecting
heliotropic curvatures. The effect of unevenly distributed light on these
organs is intended to cause them to undergo a bending such as the flowers or the face
pipe rims are always facing the side where the lighting is the

read louder. y When you grow plants in an apartment, you are surprised to see the
petioles located in the part opposite to the window stand up little by little and
then bend to put the upper face of the fenils in contact with
rays of light coming from outside. - We can in the same way
study the heliotropism of the peduncles. Place a primrose, for example,
in your room, turning the concave portion of the peduncles towards the part
Ja less enlightened, you will then witness the following fact: the organs erase
ront little by little lenr primitive conrbure to assume an upright position and
will then bend towards your window, dragging with them in their march
slow the flowers of which they are the supports. ==

These changes of situation are nothing compared to the movements
that the flowers of Helianthus annuus or sunflower perform. What we examine
carefully this composition at different times of the day, we will find that
each peduncle, leaning in the morning towards the east, twists on itself to
bear to the south, in the direction of which it comes in the middle of the day,
and from there wins the west, following the sun in its apparent course around
of our globe. These curious movements originate from the action of sunlight
coming to strike the various points of the peduncle which, because of its growth
fast, has tissues of extreme sensitivity. It results from this action
curvatures which, varying every moment, cause the torsion of the supports
floral ports, so that each group of small corollas turns
always towards the radiant star. C. — From the heliotropism of the roots

Although the heliotropism of stems has been recognized for a long time, there is none.
was the same as that of the roots which, most often buried in the ground,
are shielded from the influence of light. The discovery of the bending of these organs towards light rays is due
to Dutrochet, who noted this fact on the radicles of Mirabilis jalapa vegetating
in the water and free to move; but this physiologist having noticed that
the young roots of this plant were green, he attributed their curves to the
presence of chlorophyll. It was only several years later that
Mr. Durand, of Caen, came to demonstrate that the radicles of Al2iwm cepa, of
Scilla lusitanica and W Hyacinthus orientalis, devoid of green matter,
point towards the light. These researches annihilated the ideas of Dutrochet, de Candolle and the
physiologists of time, according to which light rays do not exert
of attraction on the organs as much as they are colored by chlorophyll. Since M. Durand's experiments, other scholars have studied the question.
positive root heliotropism. Mr. Sachs came to add to the list
known to species whose roots bend over the light, the roots
of Phaseolus, Zea mais, Cucurbita pepo, Juglans regia, Myosotis,
Callitriche, Beta vulgaris, Quercus, etc. Despite the fairly large number of species whose roots are heliotropic
positive, that of those same organs which enjoy contrary Peo pacs,
that is to say, who tend to shun justice, is much more considerable. Senones. ad. THE MAYOR. (To be continued),

 

 

 

TRIAS FIELD RESEARCH

We understand how important it is to study the footprints and to
examine carefully. In a formation where one only encounters a small
number of organized fossil debris, they are the only data on the
that it is possible to rely on to restore the disappeared creations. But it is not only in Germany and England that the layers of
variegated sandstones present physiological imprints. Mr. Hitchcock discovered
green in the new red sandstone of the United States of many vestiges of which it
gave the description. According to this geologist, the footprints left on the

 

— 23)

Connecticut Valley's hardened red loams should be attributed &
birds. It would therefore be necessary to link 4 the Triassic period with the appearance of
this great class which plays one of the first roles in the current fauna. Good
that no bird bones have yet been found in the rocks of
Connecticut, Mr. Hitchcock's assertions are generally accepted. In
indeed, if one carefully observes these imprints, the shape and arrangement
of the three fingers do not seem to leave any doubt on the nature of the animal which
produced them. As with three-toed birds, we always notice
days three phalanges in the inner finger, four in the middle finger, cing in the finger
outside; sometimes there is behind a fourth finger & the rudimentary state. In a few samples submitted for Mr. Owen's examination, the gangue con- tained
served with faithful impression of the integument; the scientist did not hesitate to
know the skin of the ostrich. Now, if we follow a determined line
of ornithichnites, instead of studying each footprint in particular, we find
an intimate relationship between the distance of the two consecutive imprints and the
toe length; when the stride is 1™35, for example, the toe
measure 030. These dimensions assume birds of such extraordinary size
nary that paleontologists have long refused to side with public opinion
by Mr. Hitchcock. But the discovery of giant birds in the layers of the
New Zealand demonstrated the possibility of the fact. Finally, Mr. Dana dispelled
all doubts, by proving that the coprolites found in this formation
and comes from animals whose traces have been found are close to the
guano by their chemical composition. Such are the general characters of the fauna of Bunter-Sandstein; after
having successively reviewed the birds, the reptiles and the fish,
I must also mention the molluscs of this floor, The main molluscs
The species cataloged by d'Alberti are: Rosteddaria, of which we know more
several species, 2. scalata, R. obsoleta, R. antiqua, R. detrita; the Natica
Gaillardoti; \es Myophoria musculoides, vulgaris, curvirostris; ! Avicula
socialize; Plagiostoma lineatum, etc. Luneyille. Ernest PAULIN,

Corresponding member of the Society of Scientific Studies of Nancy. (To be continued.) ELECTRIC INSECTS. Who does not know the history and properties of torpedoes and gymnotes
electric? But few people suspect that these fish have their
analogues in insects. Yet it is perfectly proven that the eduvius
serratus (West India bug) can also cause a concussion
electricity to the careless person who touches it. General Davis, Constable Observer
clever as well as indefatigable collector, reports that having once taken
and placed on his hand one of these inseetes, he received a discharge as sensitive
than that of a Leyden jar and which was felt up to the shoulders. Having
then lowered the inseete, he saw on his hand six marks indicating the place
six legs of the bug. Two analogous facts have been communicated to the Entomological Society by
M, Yarrel: one is mentioned in a letter from Mrs. de Grey, from Groby; this
time the concussion was caused by a common water bug and Se wire felt in the
hand and up to the elbow in contact with the insect; the other was observed in

 

 

 

 

has

South America by Captain Blakeney; having picked up a large
yelue caterpillar, he felt, on touching her, such a violent electric shock
that he lost the use of his arm for a moment and that the doctor who accompanied him

thought his life was in danger. (Translated from Vangais.) COMMUNICATIONS. Note on 'Ononis striata Gonau, — MM. Grenier and Godron, in the Flore de France,
volume I, p. 376, give this plant 4 small strongly veined leaflets. M. Boreau, Fl. cent., 3¢ edition, p. 125, the leaves described with three strong leaflets-
ment striated nerve. Finally, Mr. Lloyde, Fl. West, p. 4
nervous. Each of these excerpts reproduces the same error. If Mr. Gonau had described his plant on
the live, he would probably not have given it the name of Qnonis striata, because the veins of the
leaflets, in this state, are not sensitive to the touch and in no way justify the
diagnoses given above. In the dry, on the contrary, the leaflets take on the character
authored by M. Boreau; they become by desiccation strongly nervous strides, almost
wrinkled in the direction of the veins; also the dry leaflets present a completely
different from those of the living plant. It is therefore necessary to rectify as follows the
ion of the authors: Leaflets small 4 veins, becoming very prominent by the desic-

 

reproduces this same character: leaflets strongly

 

  

description
cation. Limogne. L. Giravptas. Shrewdness of a cat. — A physicist put a cat under a pneumatic machine, and understood
menca to actively play the piston: animal was not long & feel embarrassed in a
an atmosphere which was becoming more and more scarce; he soon realized where the danger was coming from and
placed his paw on the hole which gave an exit to Air, thus preventing him from coming out any further. All the efforts of the physicist were useless; when he wanted to pull the piston, whose leg
du chat stopped the game, he let air into the container to unblock the hole in the board:
Ja immediately withdrew; but on the first try

 

I cat, whose paw was then d
piston, which deprived him of a portion of air, he hastened to put it back. G. Saven. July to around August 15, one second

 

A lilac placed on my terrace gave me,
flowering, when the seeds of the first were still on the tree. Is this fact

common in Touraine? EL. Mr. Ernest Lelitvre, 4 Amboise, asks us to inform our subscribers that he undertakes to
facilitate the study of the epidopters of serious beginners, by sending them, on their
request, a certain number of well and carefully determined species. The young people who made up the Society for Scientific Studies of Paris, newly
founded, offer themselves to determine to the beginners, as much as it will be possible for them to do it, the
plants, insects, fossils, etc., which will be sent to them for this purpose. Each species should, if
possible, be represented by several individuals, so that the Company can retain
one or two specimens. The shipping costs will remain the responsibility of the person who will send it. —Apply to M. Jules de Gaulle, 280, rue de Vaugirard, in Paris. We ask our correspondents to write very legibly the Latin names (of genres or
desspices) that may appear in their articles, in order to avoid misprints. ‘Type. Ovsnruun and Sons, & Rennes. — Me= & Paris, rue des Blanes-Manteaux, 85. January 1, 1873. The number ; 25 cents. Do 27,

YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr. 3 par. | For the Buranger........ 00.6006 en. & per year,

 

 

Subserphon for Great-Brilin, 8 s, 6 d Brtah subscribers can reilin penny or topenny postage stamps. Paris, @ the editorial staff of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne; dear Mrs. Pelry,
bookseller, rue de PArsenal, @ Muthouse (Haut-Rhin). People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. PREPARATION OF SLUG

FOR NATURAL HISTORY COLLECTIONS. Doctor Missol (from Villefranche, Rhone) has been preparing the
caterpillars which appear in his collection of Lepidoptera, by a process whose
he is the antor, I had the loreasion, in 1869, to make known this process in
a thesis devoted to the study of the ’yrale and the Cochylis of the vine (1),
and more recently, the editorial staff of the Young Naturalists Journal
(July 12, 1872, page 95) described summarily, on the indications which I had
provided, the main details of the operation. The idea of ​​applying the same preservation process to slugs belongs
4 a naturalist from Villefranche, Mr. Darras. At his insistence, M. Missol did something
a few attempts which seemed satisfactory. The best-performing subjects had been
deposited as a curiosity, in the conchology collection of Mr. Darras,
and we proposed to pursue these experiments at leisure when one of the
readers of the Leaf (March 1872, page 54) asked whether there was
“a means of preparing slugs, to preserve them in their natural state. »
The investigation was open. We have expected the result with the liveliest
curiosity. No one better than M. de Guerne is aware of all the practical delays
which are of interest to malacology. His answer, inserted in the Leaf in the month of
May 1872 (page 72), summarizes on the question raised the present state of science. We have concluded that the method of MM. Missol and Darras was really
news and that there was a real interest in pursuing the results. We
mimes alsolot at louvre. The first part of the operation consists in emptying the subject on which we
operates. — Is it the arion of charlatans (Arion rufus Moq “Tand that
manipulation will not suffer difficulties. By producing a slight pressure
using a hook & embroider on the musciparous gland that exists at the end

    

 

   

 

 

 

 

  

 

(1) — Comparative study of fuels used in furnaces for scalding
age of the vine. — La Pyrale et la Cochylis (in collaboration with M. A. Barbelet). Villefranche, July 1869. — 2 —

caudal, we pierce the pean and we look for the fold of the intestine which is in
the neighborhood. By one of the easiest manoeuvres, we amue the intestine to do
hernia through the small opening It is immediately grasped with Brussels pliers and
one Vatuire gently year of s by favoring the exit by menacing pressures
ges that are practiced on the animal in the direction of its length, using a
card on which one presses the hand

Following the ar intestine
dependarces, the ganglia:

        

       
   

    

 

 

us Veffort of the pressure, the stomach and its
bulky reproductive apparatus. The operator must pay the greatest attention to this part of his work. If the pressure practiced with decay has governed with snin and if the traction
with brussels is too hasty, the viscera all engage at the same time in
the small openness and cause tearing that compromises the
final success

The other arions have the museiparous gland less developed than the arion of the
quacks; soul slugs devoid. To all these animanx, we practice
At the caudate extremity of the crawling apparatus, using very thin scissors,
an opening as small as possible. Through this opening, we engage the
hook to embroider and we execute, to empty the subject, the same maneuvers as
We have just described more so. It is in the deponilla avnsi obtained that we practice injection,

We begin by introducing into the path by which we emptied the animal a
straw of 3.44 centimeters in length, the length of which is calenated
on the size dir subject & inject We fix the remains on this straw with a thread
of wool; the ligature must be done carefully, so as to produce an adhesion
perfect. In the flu, we introduce the tapered tip of the device & injection. Mr. Missol's apparatus consists of a rubber pear
vuleanized, in which a curved glass tube is rubbed in, which
is swollen in tank & its hub part (1) (See. pl., fig. 4). — Mr Darras,
Ini, hni prefers the bottle & two tubes (fig. 3) who serves in the la-
chemical laboratories To wash the precipitates on the filters. I have represented (fig. 4)
The attitude of the operator who uses this latter apparatus; both hands are
ployed to maintain the subject and to direct the operation, With M. Missol's device,
on the contrary, one hand only supports the animal, while the other
mine the jet of liquid by the pressure of your rubber bulb. To inject the caterpillars, Mr. Missol first used the white wax
melted, but this material has the great disadvantage of agglutinating the hairs
hairy sajets. Meme sue the animals 4 naked pean, a drop of wax, falling
on the surface. contracts with the tissues such an adhesion that one cannot
rise without compromising the preparation, Under the same conditions, stearin
Vongle sounds quite easily. So it should be given preference. For steatin, Mr. Darras substitutes paraffin which, with the same quality
still has the advantage of a finer grain and a better consistency;
it is more malleable and less healthy, and as it is not very translucent,
it better simulates through the skin the underlying tissues, while the pre-
stearin preparations, which become yellow and opaque over time, are
less flattering. Rufin, parafline still has the advantage of
give by its cooling a reliable trail. A skillful operator
mnettra, following the example of Mr. Darras, that circumstance 4 profit to shape the

   

      
          

       

  

  

 

   

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

   

   

   

 

   
 

 

 

 

       

 

 

 

 

     

 

(1) It is not enough, to practice this tank, to blow a bulb on a point of the
tube; the thinned walls would not present sufficient resistance. You have to solder
end & end has the lamp two tubes of very different diameters. subject and trace on the body the furrows that naturally exist on the
body of the slug and which had disappeared under the effort of the injection. It is not indifferent to heat, to melt it, the paraffin & a degree
any. If the temperature is too high, the remains will be cooked by the
shiny liquid; it will shrink and tear in all directions; Popé--
ration will be missed. — Conversely, when the temperature is too low, the
paraffin solidifies on contact with the glass and the tubes are clogged. To maintain a suitable and constant degree of heat, we have
had to construct, for M. Missol's apparatus, the small utensil represented in the
fig. 2. 1 consists of two tin vases which fit together one in
Yother. The paraffin, contained in the central vase, plunges into a water bath
hot, the temperature of which can be adjusted as desired. The shape of the rectangular vase
elongated, allows the curved arm of the device to be plunged down to the
serve. The glass thus assumes, over its entire length, the temperature of the bath;
the tubes no longer run the risk of clogging, — We simply pare
again with the same inconvenience, with the second device, by depositing the bottle
in a hot water bath that the operator holds between his arms (fig. 4). Oh
only allows the tapered end of the injector tube to emerge. To practice the injection, the first jet is launched vigorously, in the
purpose of determining, if possible, the extension of the tentacles. Peace, after
having sufficiently inflated the subject, it is quickly plunged into a tub
cold water to solidify the paraffin. We then remove the straw and cut
carefully the wool thread which would now leave a furrow on the preparation.
ration. Finally, the subject is placed in a dry place, until the adhesion
is perfect between the paraffin and the skin. M. Darras' experiments have so far focused on Arion rufus Moq.-Tand. (A. empiricorum Feérussac), var. vulgaris and nigrescens; on Varion fuscus
Moq.-Tand. (A. hortensis Ferussac), var. limbatus; on the Limax cinereus
Mall. (L. maximus Linneé, Moq.-Tand. ), var. vulgaris; on the Limaz agrestis Linnaeus. The arions are getting ready without any difficulty. Pigment coloring
red, which characterizes the Arion ru/us, largely escapes when emptying
the subject, dragged down by the phlegm that the animal secretes in abundance during
the operation, and the last traces of this coloring matter, very soluble in
The water disappears when the preparation is immersed in the tub of cold water. But I! it is easy to restore the animal's own color afterwards, by means of
@a colored varnish. Some tests that we propose to make in this
meaning will have quickly made us triumph over this small difficulty. Slugs are not as easily successful as arions. Up to
present, Mr. Darras could not obtain, with Limax agrestis, var. reticulatus
Miller, cineraceus Miller and sylvaticus Dupuis, dirty subjects. However, he was happiest with the Limax cinereus. By operating on
subjects of medium size, he arrived at beautiful results. We are very keen to experiment with the methods that I have just described.
write about species of arions and slugs different from those I come from
to mention, and especially on individuals of neighboring genera: Parmacelle and
Testacelle. We beg the naturalists of the South to come to our aid and
draw up 4 M. Darras (1) the living subjects which they would like to dispose of
our favour. We will receive them with the greatest gratitude. We will be happy, on the other hand, to put us in touch with the ma-
lacologists whom our research may be of interest. We will provide them with
as much eagerness as pleasure all the means in our power to
pursue by themselves the experiments which I have just made known. Villefranche (Rhone). Adolph Menu. (1) M. Darras, & Villefranche (Rhine). .

— 28 —

SOCIETY OF SCIENTIFIC STUDIES OF PARIS. It is not without a lively feeling of satisfaction that we can
today announce 4 our readers the creation of the Society for Scientific Studies
of Paris, formed by a small circle of young people brought together by study
of natural history. Such foundations, however modest they may
be in principle, cannot be over-encouraged, and we undertake
once again those who read us & imitate the example given to them
first the young naturalists of Angers, Lyons, Nancy. It is only in
such meetings that beginners can draw and maintain the fire
sacred necessary to ensure their progress; only then will they be able to
fearlessly present their first works. With the limitation of companies already in existence, the Society for Scientific Studies
of Paris appeals to all young people who study natural history and
ask for their help. Its regulation is analogous to that of the pre-existing societies.
unfounded; but she also offers 4 her members, as she
butting who will contact her, to determine or have the plants determined,
insects, molluscs, etc., which will be sent to him for this purpose. For information and communications, please contact & Mr. Jules de
Gaulle, 286, rue de Vangirard, & Paris. THE EDITORS. CAVES OF BOURNOIS (Downs). and Villersexel, near the
x: Pune, very vast and very
lair, much less extensive,

These caves are located between the [sle-sur-le-Doub:
Bournois village. They are di
deep, is divided into a large number of galleries
is also much less curious to visit

The entrances to these caves are on a low, rocky plateau. One penetrates in the first by two holes or kinds of wells dug in the
middle of the fields, one of which is steep, about 15 meters deep,
and gives access to one of the galleries; but it's easier to go down
by the other less deep, by means of a rope or a ladder. Once
on the floor of the cave, we find ourselves at the meeting point of the two main galleries
cipales, in which one penetrates easily by bending a little Let us pass
first in that on the right, at least 800 meters long, sometimes
8 10 meters, sometimes from 2 to 3 only, very wide ivi, 1a narrowed and barred
by huge masses of stalactites; this gallery ollre 4 our steps a furnished floor
flat, slippery pebbles or larger boulders of carbonate of lime; in one
another point, we sink into a kind of black mud resembling
earth and is said to be bat guano. The ceilings are
as plastered by an infinity of small points almost all ending in
a gontte dean and whose pect is charming. These points are the first
limestone deposits which will gradually form gigantic masses of stalactites
similar to those under whose feet we pass; these bring together
the floor of the cave under sail and offer our gaze sculptures and
carvings such as never an artist will execute. Occasionally the walls
are hollowed out in semi-circles and as if polished. This fact is probably di 4 of ancient water currents. Right and & left,
are the entrances to narrower corridors which, usually on a low

     
 

     

  

 

   

 

   

 

 

 

   

 

—- 29 —

length, run parallel to the main gallery, but approach it
soon to come to it, On the ground, wet and slippery in truth, we do not
find that there is little water that simply flows from your flow. This gallery, although already very beautiful, does not equal that on the left nor in height.
tenr of the votites, ui by the mass and the really admirable sculptures of the
columns. One enters the latter just as easily as the other. We first descend on a fairly steep slope, but not long, and covered
of flat stones mixed with earth and slippery. We are then in a
vast hall, very high and very wide, 200 to 4,300 meters long. The journey in
is quite easy; the passage is blocked only by a few gigantic columns
between which we pass without difficulty, The end of this room seems, at
first approach, being that of the gallery; however, this is not the case. We
are not long without seeing a place where we can
maybe pass. In fact, after we had been hoisted up hand and foot and
pushing each other, we come to a crack that separates
two columns and whose width just allows us to pass. One again
little courage and we are in the prettiest room of all. Behind
this barrier that for a moment we believed insurmountable, no
between, after a few steps, in the midst of calcareous masses, in an immaculate room
mense which far exceeds in grandeur and majesty those which
we have already seen. From 8 to 10 meters wide, 200 meters long
perhaps, it is of such a height that, in spite of the six torches which serve to
enlighten us, we cannot see the ceiling. At the bottom rise, grandiose
and imposing, three enormous columns three meters in diameter, whose
peaks are almost lost in the dark. We dare not say more
on this room, because the longer description would be much below
reality. The columns which terminate it nevertheless still leave us
pass, and, sinking deeper and deeper, we still find, super-
posed one to the other, two other less important galleries, but whose access
is more difficult and even dangerous. The ground, on a fairly steep slope, covered with
chanx carbonate and completely smooth, is very slippery; and woe then
to the clumsy who misses the rare and small asperities where he can put his foot! At the bottom of the last cave, we still find a hole; but we didn't
we don't have a rope and, without it, the descent is impossible, because we don't know
nor where it abounds, nor how deep it is. It is easy to assess at what depth we must be, since
from the entrance of the cave we have, so to speak, only descended. The size of the blocks and stalactite columns testifies to the origin irés
old of this cave; thousands of years separate us from the time of
its formation. In traversing these galleries, one wonders quite naturally if they have not
not been the refuge of antediluvian animals. One can, I believe, answer no,
if we consider that the entrances to this cave are inaccessible to animals
and that the masses of stalactites that we see there are not found in quantity
like in real bone caves. The only current inhabitants of
these galleries are the bats, and the only bones, remains of skeletons.
horses or oxen, evidently modern. Quant & dig
in this cave, the difficulties would be great, and because of the thickness of the
limestone layers. The other cave, which we are going to talk about now, would be
much more conducive to such work. It is located 4 a few steps from the previous one, and you reach it by descending
a pe in a kind of funnel surrounded by trees. The entrance is a vault
of 4 4 5 meters. The length of the cave is about 300 meters; the height
generally does not exceed 6 to 8 meters. The ground, slightly sloping, is entirely

 

 

 

  

   
  

 

 

   

     

   
    

 

 

 

 

 

—_—

barely covered with flat pebbles. There are no stalactites and no
limestone deposit. Visited after the other, this cave no longer makes any impression;
but its easy access, the nature of its soil and some other circumstances
suggest that it may have been the refuge of antediluvian animals; of the rest,
excavations there would be, if not easy, at least very practicable. It is believed that in much earlier times, the two caves shared
were fucking with each other; this is even what is still said in the neighboring villages;
today there is no longer any trace of communication,

These caves, which are hardly known except to locals, are
yet quite remarkable for their dimensions and the openness of their stalac-
lists for reporting to naturalists; and it is certain that all those who
who visit will find real pleasure there and will not repent of their race. Audincourt. Ed, DvuvERNoy. OBSERVATIONS OF A BIRD HOBBY. 1. — Month of April. ROBIN. Blackbird (Merula vulgaris Ray, Turdus merula Linn.) belongs to the
family of the turdidae, to the group of the subulirostres. It has compressed beak and
arched; but its tip does not curve as in the shrikes; her
length is 9 inches; in the adult state, its plamage is of a shiny black
more lively than that of the crow; the beak and eye rims are yellow; the feet
black. The female differs from the male by her plumage of a dirty and reddish black;
its beak is blackish, its chest adorned with brown spots and its belly ashy. In its old age, the blackbird's wings and back may turn white; he is me
recently arrived to see an individual of this variety; it is therefore a
lying proverb than he who speaks of the white blackbird as of an ima-
ginaria; but let's come back to the blackbird: he is fierce and solitary; besides his
singing, it has a particular cry that it makes when it is frightened; he praised
very fine; however, as is easy to notice, he is more fearful
than cunning, because it is easily trapped, as long as you make yourself invisible. As winter approaches, he leaves the woods to approach the fields.
plowed, which provide him with more abundant food. As soon as the cold
makes itself felt, it takes refuge in the evening in the tufts of ivy to find a
stir shelter against snow and frost. The blackbird is quite greedy by nature;
he likes earthworms, and here is the process he uses to bring them out,

process which is common to thrushes and starlings. I] dig the ground with his
ec, and when he sees a worm crawling under too thick a layer of earth, he
starts hitting this place with his paws; then, as soon as the annelid shows the
head, the bird seizes it with its hee, and tugging it gently, the fact soon s
whole; it then flies away with its prey on a tree and devours it at its

It is in April, before all other birds, that the blackbird begins
his nest. The house is built with great art; it is covered &
The exterior of moss, small branches and small roots that bring together
wet earth; inside, to cover this mortar, are accumulated
horsehair, feathers, straw and other soft materials intended to receive
eggs and to provide the little ones with a softer warmth. — sy —

The making of the nest lasts about ten days, during which the male and
Ja female compete in activity. This time elapsed, the female lays four to five
eggs of a greenish gray, speckled with light brown dots. Evil, to charm
the troubles of the incubator, perches near her and makes her hear his tunes
the most melodious, its most dazzling notes. I never pauses time
in time than to spring upon an insect which he brings triumphantly 4 his com-

loincloth.

' fiinqabalion lasts 18 days, after which the young hatch converted from a
whitish down. The mother covers them with s them for a week, then
leaves them alone to look for them, in concert with the male, worms,
maces el all that is necessary 4 feed them. Nothing can be enough are i
those always open throats to calm the cries of the little ones; the mother distributes &
each an equal share, and woe to anyone who would seize the destined pasture
One of his [rres; a blow of bee would soon punish his greedy At the end
of twenty days, the little ones, already strong, leave their nest and try their
wings around the branch that shelters them; after 4 or 5 days of testing, they
feel the courage to abandon their parents forever, and leave
further seek a new cottage. Males prefer to nest in white thorn hedges,
the ivy-lined walls, the lower branches of large trees, the
nieres and the edges of the ponds. They are common around Paris. Is the
easily tamed and they can be taught various tunes; their song,
well known, is very melodious. To satisfy my gourmet readers, I will say in Llerminant that the blackbird
is very good to eat and that there is very little difference between its flesh and that
of the thrush. Paris. E. ALBANEL,

 

 

  

  

    

 

 

 

 

. Member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Paris. (To be continued.) INFLUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGETATION. (After.) Dutrochet had the merit of discovering the negative heliotropism of the radicles,
by observing the aerial roots of Pothos digita in a row. Pager later recognized that seeds of Sinapis alba, Brassica, Sedum
telephium, Chicerium, Ithagodiolus lampsanoides and some others
plants, germinating on cotton placed in water, give rise to radicles
that head into the dark, while the stemlies bend to the
brightest part. It is necessary to add to these researches those of Mr. Hoffmeister who noted
negative heliotropic curvatures on the radicles of Cordyline vivipara, and
especially those of M. Durand which have the same effect on the roots
of twenty-six plant species, among others Kaphanus sativus, Cheiranthus,
Isatis and Lathyrus odoratus. There is therefore a difference between the bending of rods and a large number
roots; but, regardless of their opposing tendencies, these two
parts of the axophyl do not produce their curvatures in the same way. — The whole length of the root is not, indeed, like that of the stem,
capable of affecting heliotropic arcs. There is only a small space above

 

  

 

=

above the end which may be deviated from its normal direction. are we coming
To reverse the orientation of a radicle, as soon as it will have been subjected to
fluence of the light, it will not erase all its primitive curvature, as
this has link for the rods; there will be only the youngest and most developed part
posteriorly that will flee enlightened space; also, after several reversals
successive, the root will offer a zigzag appearance oi convex parts
will be separated by straight and concave parts. Such is the action of the white light on the roots; but what rays
colors exert the most repulsion on these organs? According to Dutrochet, the escape of light by the roots has its maximum in
the violet ray, and the lateral bending, zero in the indigo ray, begins
in the yellow ray to end in the blue ray. Thus, hehotropism
of the roots, like that of the stems, has its greatest energy in the rays
chemicals; only "movements in the soul roots inverse to those
rods. In rods, there is bending towards light and bending towards space
illuminates with indigo rays; while in the roots there is bending for
flee the light and bending to flee the space lit by indigo rays. »
(Dutrochet, Reports.) Causes of heliotropism. Some physiologists, struck by the tendency of rods towards rays
luminous, wanted to grant these organs a kind of instinct which
door & search for light. This opinion has been opposed by
Candolle who, based on the fact that the growth of etiolated plants is
much faster than that of plants placed in the open air, emitted the first
The idea that the heliotropic curvatures are the result of an unequal increase. According to this physiologist, in fact, the most enlightened side lengthens less than
Vother. This theory has recently been confirmed by the following experiment.
yante, due to M, Hoffmeister. The two extremities of a rod were fastened by two double-bite pins.
cork strips glued to a glass slide, @ a roughly equal distance
the length of the stem. This plate was then adapted to the opening of a
boiled, blackened internally and made moist with blotting paper
soaked in water. After a few days, this rod, placed at the upper part
of this device, ful curved, the concave side turned towards the light, and of
moreover, the pins and corks were not disturbed from their original position. This very simple experiment therefore proves that there is an elongation of the two necks
of the cork, and not shortening of the most illuminated part, as
claimed some botanists. Where does this growth inequality come from? De Candolle thought that the fabrics of the part most exposed to the sun
elongate much less than those of the opposite cable, due to strength
which results from the greater decomposition of carbonic acid and by snite
of the more considerable fixation of carbon, this hypothesis, which could
rigor explain 'heliotropism of green organs, is unable to render
full of heliotropism of the roots which during the whole period of life
vegetative absorb oxygen instead of carbonic acid. Mr. Sachs has offered another theory. According to this physiologist, light
would cause the membranes to undergo chemical modifications which would not
would not take to store so much water as in the dark. Mr. Sachs, he
must say, does not claim that the heliotropism canse is due to a
greater poration on the brighter side; for him, "modifications

      

 

     
  

 

 

  

  

 

 

   

 

— 33 —
caused by light reach the molecular state of the membranes, not the
sap. (Sachs, Plant Physiology.) Senones. Ap, LEMAIRE. (To be continued.) RESEARCH ON THE TRIAS FIELD. (After.) Allow me now, after these few data on the bunter-
sani n, to pass, without dwelling on a transition, to the study of Mus-
chelkalk. In Württemberg, which we will take here as a term of comparison,
the Muschelkalk can be divided into four courses:

1° The undulating Culcaire, which received from Alberti the name of Wellenkalk; he
is so designated & because of the undulations which one notices on the surface. The

 

 

 

 

  

 

layers of limestone alternate with marls and enclose an a:nd
number of fossils belonging to the same species as those of the third

band. 2° The group of Anhydrife, includes saliferous clays of a bluish gray
or greenish, which contain sea salt and different varieties of gypsum. The
texture of this last substance is sometimes saccharoid, sometimes fibrous or
laminar; as for the colour, it is a fairly pure white or a light grey. No fossils are found in this system. 3° The Upper Muschelkalk group, called by d’Alberti Calcaire de
Friedrichshall, contains, as its name indicates, a multitude of co-
fossil skittles. The joints of Encrinites Liliiformis meet there if
frequently that it has sometimes been named Limestone @ trochites (Trochiten-
kalk) (the upper part of the floor passes to dolomite. 4° The Letlenkohle is composed of carbonaceous and schistoid clays. The Muschelkalk is also widespread in Alsace and Lorraine, but
the type of this stage, and in particular of the upper Muschelkalk, is found in
the Meurthe, around Lunéville. The quarries exploited south of Luné-
town, near the village of Rehainviller, open on a limestone gray with smoke
presenting a large number of lerebratules and bones of saurians; it's here
that Doctor Gaillardot discovered the remarkable samples according to the
which MM. Cuvier (1) and Brongniart gave the description of new species. In Xermamenil, a village located in the same direction as Rehainviller, 4 kilometers
lometres of this commune, "the compact gray limestone takes on a more
less than ordinary. It contains layers of a compact blue limestone in
inside the blocks and yellowish towards their surface, kneaded with a multitude of
small fragments of shells (probably Lerebratuli), lying in
the sense of stratification, and which make it a veritable lumachelle. We also see,
in the same quarry, several layers of a compact limestone, of a gray
yellowish, & uneven earthy fracture, some parts of which are filled with
cockles whose test has been destroyed and replaced by an ocher material, and which
presents flint fits, of a more or less dark blackish gray. (Memoirs
to serve @ a deseript. geol. from France.) Beyond Xermamenil, &
Gerbéviller, the Muschelkalk is broken and cracked in every direction. Gases and ma-

 

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

(A) See Research on fossil bones, tome V, 2¢ part, p. 355. Ba

foreign parties have caused great disturbances there; the layers are dislo-

gypsum, flints have flowed there, bringing in their wake clay vases.
Needle crystallized chanx carbonate, strontian and barite
sulfated, fill some cracks; others, left empty, provide
to the waters of the underground passages to lead them 4 from great depths,
or return them far from the point which engulfed them. The ground surface feels
of all these accidents. The reader will forgive me for this geological excursion around Lune-
city. Hl would like to accompany me again in the middle of the squares
viller and Mont (1) to study fish and large clean sanriens
on the floor of the Muschelkalk and mainly 4 the seat of the upper Muschelkalk. Between Lunéville and Rebainviller, the workers brought to light, by piercing the
so-called Chaufontaine mound, black clay and marl schisles,
very rich in fish debris. 0™50 side slabs are converted
scales, and one could extract even larger ones if these sc
were not cracked The teeth and the scales, unevenly distributed a
the surface, most likely come from diluted coprolites. It's even
in this form that the coprolites present the most interest, because the debris
undigested then appear as much more distinct as they are released
earthy matter whose isolated and rounded coprolites are constantly
ment encrusted. We also find in the clayey sandstones penetrated with ocher
remains of perfect preservation, m: as before, they
accumulate on certain points of the slab, while “antres are left
bare. The scales observed on these sandstones are very shiny and most
beautiful enamel that can be seen, smooth in part of their surface,
grievous and sorrowful in the other. Although most are visible to the eye
no, there are some that require the use of a strong magnifying glass, if you want
study the forms they affect. These are extremely varied: they
can be rectangular, spatulate, pointed, etc. ; however,
Not all of these modifications involve distinct species, because
we know that in the same fish the shape of the scales differs according to the
parts of the body The teeth themselves are perfectly characterized; those
of the Hybodus, which occur fairly frequently, present a point
placed in the middle of the tooth and furrowed on all sides on enamel; but
central cone tends to fade in the siluated molars towards the angles of the
blocked. In general, the most numerous remains are referred to the genus
Suaurichtys and Acrodus, which already proves to us that these species abounded
in the seas of the Triassic period and that the eaters made them the
chase. Thus, the discovery of coprolites not only makes us con=
born the conformation of fossil fish, its scope is more extensive; she
at the same time gives us the key to their moods and their instincts. Luneville. E. PavLin. Corresponding member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Nancy. CA follow.) AUTUMN COLORING AND DEFOLIATION OF PLANTS. 1. — COLORING. One of the phenomena which without a doubt will always arouse just curiosity
of an observer, it is the metamorphosis that occurs each year, in addition
tomme, certain parts of the plants. Indeed, why, after having covered

 

 

(1, Mont, village located 4 7 kil. N/A of Luneville,

— 35 --

flowers, laden with frnites, the earth seems suddenly and as if by
enchantment to want to strip itself of all that made its adornment? Is she
tired after so many Wavaux? Physiologists have not been content with
simple assumptions like these; is scientifically researched what
could be I' { see-et that causes nature to enter into this lethar-
gic & approach to winter. Unfortunately for this question, as
for many others, we have not yet been able to ascertain the certain truth; this does not
are only hypotheses more or less well established and defended by their
authors. .

content myself with talking about these different suppositions, without
let go especially & none of them. I will end this short work with a
rational explanation of the phenomenon in question. Before dealing with the causes which, in autumn, can act on the
leaves, it may not be inniile to say a few words about the different
parts which compose the organ of which we have to establish a transformation. to say as briefly as possible what is the usefulness and importance of
leaves, and what are their functions in plant life. Leaves are usually membranous organs, frequently flat,
the more one less co: s and very are green, which are born from the bark; they
are continuous with the root, the stems or the branches. The leaves are com-
pubes of vessels and fibers which, after having traversed the petiole, come
ure a prodigious quantile of offshoots that form the true
fenilla skeleton. An ordinarily soft cellular tissue, which we
names parenchyma, fills the intervals of this network, and this apparatus is
covered above and below by the epidermis. Leaves are essential in the plant economy, since they are the
principal agents of the functions which contribute to the material life of plants:
Vabsorption, Verhalation and Respiration. Plants usually absorb through the roots. my friend and
colleague Mr. Ad. Lemaire demonstrated this in an interesting article (1). Without entering
in lengthy detail about the exceptions that come up quite often
and of which Bonnet, in his researches on the leaves, spoke at length, we
can say that, despite the importance of roots from a nutritional point of view,
tion of the plant, it would not be correct to consider these organs as
exclusively responsible for providing this supply. The leaves are also
element of nutrients; they intervene in the most useful way for
complement the action of the roots relative to the absorption of gases, such as
carbonic acid or ammonia. It is noted that, under the influence of the
light, the carbonic acid is absorbed by the leaves and other parts
verles with great activity. At the same time, by the surface of these
there is almost always a more or less considerable exhalation
rable @oxygen, which is the residue of the decomposition of carbonic acid
whose carbon has been fixed in tissues The absorption of carbonic acid
occurs only under the influence of light. A plant relegated to
darkness ceases to absorb carbonic acid, and therefore ceases
almost completely to feed; i] lose weight and wither, like an animal
reduced to Vinanition. As long as they exist, the leaves allow 4 the ascent of the sap and
reject superabundant water: this is what exhalation consists of. All the
parts of the same plant do not exhale water in the same quantity and the
experiments all resolve & prove that, except for a small number of exceptions,

  

       

 

        

 

   

    

   

 

      

 
     

       

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

     

 

 

 

 

 

(1) See. n°2, 1** year: Le Uabsorplion des ravines. =o

all other things being equal, the emanation of each part is in
direct reason of the number of its stomata. If we compare the vegetarians between
them, we arrive at the same general results; thus the fleshy leaves which
have few stomata exhale little; the petals and the fleshy fruits which
they do not seem subject to anything but an insensible loss. All these facts
result from experiments carried out by Guettard, Saint-Martin, Bonnet and Senebier
before we even know the existence of stomata. Kingt confirms them by
showing that a vine leaf only exhales water droplets from the side
lower, that is to say the one where it has stomata, and not on the upper side. Vienna. G. Bonar. (To be continued.) COMMUNICATIONS. We ask those of our subscribers who have not yet sent us the amount
of their subscription to have it paid for as soon as possible. We remind & our readers, whose generosity has already made itself known, that Mr. Méhu
(rue Nationale, 160, in Villefranche) will always receive from enx with gratitude the objects
natural history that will be sent to him for the purpose of creating and increasing collec
Ecole Normale du Rhone — It is to the kindness of M. Mss that we owe
The pretty lithograph that accompanies this issue. vibliographic information. — Of H. Schlegel's work, nine have been published
books; nothing has appeared since 1867; the publicativa is suspended. We can finally make available to those of our subscribers who have made
the request the n° 1, 2 and 3 of our first year. We apologize for the

delay which occurred in spite of us in the reprinting of these issues. The Repacreuns. Bibio Marci — In the note on B. Marci published in October, I asked
Leaflet subscribers, please send me your comments on this
bug; several have responded to my call and thus allow me to give some
new information. According to Mr. Leliévre, the larvae of our Bibio differ from those of several other
diptera, in that they change their skin and leave it entirely at the end of winter to
change into a nymph; The perfect insect takes forty days to form. These larvae would not only be gophagous, they would be found in manure,
tritus and other decomposing matter, in marsh mud, summer. However, he
results from other observations that this larva feeds in the earth only on substances

 

 

 

 

plants. At the end of winter, we see them appear in large numbers on the surface of the
floor; it is only then that the beetles will find its parasite, Agyrtes bicolor. The invasion of Bibio Marci seems to have occupied the center of France, except the edges
of the sea, and some departments of the North. J.ve G.

C.B., @ Arras. “You will hear from me shortly. E.Gaver. typ. Onentuun and sons, 2 reindeer. — Me & Paris, rue des Blaucs-Manteaux, 35.

der February 1873. The Number: 25 cents. Ne 28. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

 

Payable in advance in stamps or money order on the post office:

    

For France ct! Alsace-Lorraine, Fr. 8 paras. | For Foreigner.... fi, 4 paran. Sabstrpton for Greal-Britain, 3 4, 6 d. British subscribers cam remit in peany or Lwopenny postage stamps,
Stadresse: @ Paris, & read the editorial staff of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne,
or at Mile Pétry, bookseller, rue de VArsenal, & Mulhouse (Haut-[hin). People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. THE SOLANEES FAMILY. The solanaceae are, & all points of view, very interesting & to study: the
some, like the potato, the tomato, the anbergine, play a great role
in food; others, such as belladonna and henbane, received
numerous applications in medicine. On the other hand, many of them
were used in the magic operations of antiquity and the Middle Ages. Solanaceae inhabit, for the most part, the intertropical zone; number of
those growing in temperate regions is quite restricted. The Solanum
nigrum she S. dulcamara alone reach a somewhat high altitude. In this family the stems are herbaceous or woody and sometimes reach
uo meter or two in height (4eropa, Nicotiana); the alternate fenils
simple or compound; the persistent monospalous calyx; monopetalous corolla
more or less regular; the stamens inserted on the corolla tube and
allernes with its divisions; capsular or baccian fruit; seeds
many. We cannot review all the genera of this numerous
family; we will content ourselves with saying a few words of the following: Solanum,
Physalis, Alropa, Mandragora, Capsicum, Lycium, Hyoscyamus, Datura,
Nicotiana. The genus Solanum contains many species. Solanum dulcamara L., popularly known as Douce-
Ainére, because of its flavor. It is very common in damp hedges, on the
edge of streams. It is a climbing plant whose lower leaves
are heart-oval and the upper ones more elongated. Its flowers form
pretty purple clusters; its elamines are coherent, protruding out of the
corolla; its red, egg-shaped berries. Bitter Sweet was proclaimed a universal panacea, but it is not used
more than in chronic skin diseases. Solanum nigrum: Lord., grows near houses, on
rubble, in vague places. Its flowers are white, its berries sphe-
black rics when they mature. These produce the symptoms
most serious narcotics, they often cause death. We assure

   

 

— 38 —

however that the cnisson makes the plant lose its poisonous properties and
its leaves can be eaten as spinach. are

The potato (Solanum tuberosum) is nthe precious gift that
America did to the old continent. She is from the Cordilleras of the
Peru and Chile, where she servail & the food of the natives for a long time
before the discovery of the New World. We do not agree on the precise date
of its appearance in Europe, nor on the country where it was first cultivated. Some say that it was imported into Galicia around 1530; the others say that
the slave trader Hawkins introduced it first in Europe (Ireland)
in 1545 and that it was not until 1578 that Franz Drake Ja popularized in
England. Everyone knows that the culture was spread in France by
Parmentier. Since that time, this precious plant has made real
services ; shortly after its appearance in France, it saved us from the
scarcity of 1793, and it rendered us the same services in 1816 and 1817. A large quantity of starch is removed from it, which can be converted into sugar and
in alcohol. Here are the products of the tuber analysis of S. tuberosum:

 

   

 

   
 

 

   

 

Cellulose and parenchyma.......... 6.8
Starch sone ea eee 43.3
Albumin. 1.0
Glucose. : 3.3
Acids and salts. 1.3
fat. 0,
Water eee eee Eee eereen Th,2

100.0

About the middle of this century, the potato was attacked by two
diseases. The first, called dry gangrene, affected a large part
of Germany in 1830. The attacked tuber gradually transformed
into a hard, brown mass. She was attributed 4 a fungus, the Peristo-
rium solani. The second broke out in Holland in 1845; of Ja, she won
quickly Belgium, England, France and Germany. She is character-
terized by brown spots on the tops and on the tubers. It is attributed
4 an alteration of nitrogenous matter in the tuber. We have proposed many
remedies, but none are effective. The leaves, the stem and the tuber itself, when it is not yet ripe,
contain, like all other Solanum, an alkaloid called solanine,
which makes them narcotic. The tomato (Solanum lucopersicum L.) is grown in vegetable gardens. It is 
a plant 3 to 8 decimetres high, hairy, with irregularly pinnate leaves,
with yellow corolla. Its berries, used as a condiment, are very large,
dark orange, 4 5 or 8 more or less prominent sides. We still call it
love apple. Eggplant (Solanum melongena L.) is an annual plant, 4 leaves
simple, hairy, oval, with solitary flowers, 4 corollas white, pink or bluish. Its berries are very large, egg-shaped, white, pink or bluish; we have it
grown for the pulp of its berries, which is edible. Physalis alkekengi L. is widespread in vineyards and places
waves. It is 3 to 4 decimetres high; its leaves are oval, hairy; his
flowers, yellowish white, hairy, solitary; its berries are red, from the coarse
sour of a cherry, completely enclosed in a vesicular calyx, swollen
and a vermilion red when ripe. Its sour fruit is used, says
on, in Spain, Switzerland and Germany, as tomatoes Women

 

  

39" —

of Athens found its fruit so beautiful that they used it to adorn their
hairdressing. The genus Atropa includes about twenty species, of which only one believes in
France, Alropa belladona L., widespread in our forests. belladonna
reaches the height of 1 2 meters; she has a sad aspect, da ala purple color
laced with its stem, its veins and its flowers. Its stem is branching from the
militia; its lower leaves are alternate, petiolate, oval, elliptical, in-
vines; the upper ones are geminated. The flowers are solitary, stalked,
placed between two g¢mined sheets; its corolla is campanulate. Its berries are
hues, globose, of a striking black, 4 crimson purple sap; they have the
size of a cherry. Every plant contains an active narcotic principle
called atropine. The powder, tincture and extract of belladonna are of a fre-
quent use as tranquilizers, it enjoys the curious property of dilating
male rings; also, if we make it swallow & any animal, we
don't delay @ notice that his pupils are dilating. The appetizing berries
belladonna often cause accidents, especially among children,
eat without distrust these sweet fruits. We tell the story of a
French detachment which was entirely poisoned by belladonna. The
solidats wanted to quench their thirst with the berries, but some fell madly.
droyed; the others, seized with delirium, wandered in the forest and went to
take by the enemy. However, some authors claim to have seen eating
belladonna berries without unfortunate accidents. It is certain that the goats
can eat this plant with impunity; they even seem to seek it. It may be useful to indicate the counterpoison; just have some coffee,
milk or an emetic. Nice view. PourcHor. (To be continued.) NOTE ON THE GLACIERE DE LA GRACE-DIEU. The Glaciére cave is located & about 20 kilometers from Baume-les-
Dames (Doubs), a short distance from the Grace-Dieu convent. Access is quite easy. From the neighboring house, which serves as an inn,
descends into the cave without difficulty, by a path dug in zigzags in
ground converted from stones and slippery earth. The entrance vault is about 100 meters high; but this one
soon decreases, and in the very middle of the cave, it barely reaches
33 meters. Almost circular in shape, the cavern has a maximum width
from 35 to 40 meters. The ground is covered with a layer of ice 0™40 4 0"50
thick, interrupted in some places by puddles of water. Large blocks of ice, most generally irregular in shape and py~
ramidal, rising above the ground. Their height varies from 5 4 6 meters; she
can go down to at least 1 meter. They are formed by freezing
drops of water constantly falling from the sail. It is quite curious to find ice creams that never completely disappear.
only a few hundred meters above the level of the
sea; so we have sought to explain its presence. It has been said that the cold
intense enough to freeze the water in this cave, and above all to allow
has the ice to keep there during the heat of summer, was di a des -
particular air currents. I have to admit that I really tried to feel
these so-called currents, but that this ful in vain. — 40 —

For us, here is an explanation that seems easier to us:

The cave being dug 4100 or 200 meters below the ground, when in
winter the temperature goes down to—45° ov —20°, it is not surprising that
the water freezes. In summer, when near the cave the thermometer marks
20° or 25°, warm air, less dense than cold air, rises and leaves cold air in the
bottom of the cave. This air, in contact with that of the exterior, takes hold of it, it is
true, heat, but this is then used to melt a small part
ice. In addition, a very important fact to note is that the cave is surrounded
on all sides by high forests which stop the rays of the sun and must,
therefore, powerfully contribute to the conservation of ice. It is,
indeed, what we could observe a few years ago; as we had,

uring one summer, cut down all the trees around and above the cave, the
the layers of ice which were there disappeared almost entirely; also,
from then on, take good care not to mop these forests. Accepting these explanations, it is easy to understand why the air remains
always 40°, temperature that we noted with the help of a thermometer
Jerked for more than an hour inside the cave, the temperature,
A few meters from the entrance élant de 15° R. Immersed in puddles of water
that we find in some places, the thermometer also gave us 0°,
which was quite natural, since this water comes from the partial melting of
ice. I do not know if other coolers of this kind exist in France; but this one
is, without a doubt, one of the most beautiful natural curiosities of the department
of the Doubs. Paris. E. DUVERNOY,
Member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Paris. AUTUMN COLORING AND DEFOLIATION OF PLANTS. I. — COLORING (continued). Alongside the two essential phenomena of which the leaves are the seat under
the influence of light and which have the effect of absorbing carbonic acid
content in the atmosphere, the other to exhale unfit liquids 4 the nutri-
tion of vegetarians, there is a third one which is much less localized than
the other two, however, can be compared to the respiration of animals. Plants also have respiration; but it is not operated by
special organs, as in animals. The stem, the flenrs, the fruits are the
seat well noted of a continuous exchange with the almosphere; but the leaves,
by their number and extent, seem to be the main instruments of
plant respiration. However, their action is limited, because they do not
work, in reality, as respiratory organs, only in the intervals
where the influence of light does not transform them into digestive organs. The most-
most authors agree that plants breathe at night like
the animals, and the day, in quite the opposite way; because, indeed, if the
night they exhale carbonic acid and absorb oxygen, during the day it is
very probable that the carbonic acid exhaled by their tissues is in
largely taken up and decomposed at the same time as the carbonic acid
from outside (1). (1) The admirable discovery of the respiration of plants was made by Priestley, who saw
by chance bubbles of gas emerge from a fountain at the bottom of which was a

=i) —

Now that the sheet is known to us in its main functions,
what are the agents that influence the coloration and what are the
who produce it. The parenchyma, we have said, is formed of utricles pressed together
against the others, in such a way as to leave between them only narrow evils. In
each of these utricles, there is a globule colored green which, according to Pelletier
el Caventou, one names chlorophyll and chromule after Candolle. This
substance, the nature of which is not yet well known to chemists, plays a
very important role in the life of plants. However, experience has shown
so far that chlorophyll is an immediate principle, containing carbon,
oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen and an iron salt that Richard (1) understands
rightly parries with that which the blood of animals contains. This one, in fact,
like chlorophyll in plants, is the essential principle of
life in animals, because the globules that make up the blood contain
iron el are stained red by hematin which presents enough analogy with
chlorophyll. One can, moreover, easily verify the fact. That we take
a weedy plant in a dark place; that we water it with a solution
of iron salt, we will see it resume, in a very short time, its green color and
its former vigour(2). It would be the same for any animal.
affected by chlorosis; submitted & a food containing iron in quantity
reasonable, he would soon regain his lost strength. Besides carbon, oxygen, etc., chlorophyll contains fatty substances,
stearin, etc., and azole substances, albuminoids in small quantities, which
associate with the former. The greater or lesser abundance of chlorine
rophyll in each cell and its more or less complete carbonization determined
undermine the various shades of green of leafy surfaces. However the
leaves of all plants are not green; there are many red ones;
there are even yellow ones; but this last case is rather rare (3). Schubler
el Funk, in their Investigations into the color of flowers (4), believe that the
red conleur of the undersides of the leaves of poclaues plants, by
example of the Cyclamen europe@um, from \'Hepatica triloba (5), belongs to the colo-
ration of their epidermis, while Macaire relates it to chlorophyll. But
how carbon, which is black, deposited in a whitish matter, determines
does it mine a green color? Mustel (Treatise on vegetation), according to
notions of ancient chemistry, says that plant tissue is yellow; what
is greened by the phlogiston which is blue and which the sun deposits in the
vegetal. Senebier (Plant Physiology) approaches him, saying that
carbon is not Strictly speaking black, but a very dark blue. Mr. Chevreul (Chemistry applied @ dyeing) also admits that carbon,
very divided in water and seen by transmission, looks blue. Blue mixed with
yellow gives green. Senebier cites as proof the green that we obligate with
India ink and gamboge (6). Nevertheless it is not
chlorophyll alone, which depends on the color of the plants; there are others

 

 

 

 

  
 

green. Ul collected this gas and recognized that it had the properties of vital air. Ingenhouz demonstrated that, for there to be production of this gas, the presence of
solar light. However, the experiment did not always succeed. So an observer
de Gendve, Senebier, found that the presence of carbonic acid was still necessary in water. (1) A. Richard, Elements of Botany. (2) See n° 12, 1st year. On the role of iron in vegetation. ad. The mayor. (3) Fucus luteus from Bertoloni, yellow algae. (4) Schubler and Funk. Ueber Farden der Blumen. (5) Red cn below in their youth, the leaves of the Hepatica triloba pass
sometimes 'winter in the woods without perish

(6) See n° 15, 2nd year. Influence of light on vegetation, I. ad. The mayor. ——ee

agents which have an enormous influence on it are: light and atmosphere.
mosphere. Light, everyone knows it, has experienced it many times, is a
principles which acts with the most activity on vegetable life: the color of
trees and that of herbaceous plants are proof of this. His influence extends
further still, it makes itself felt even in animal life. The light, in
effect, possesses enough potency on snails to determine the colo-
ration of their shells; the same is true for our fabrics and our dyed fabrics
with animal matter: they pass, as we say vulgarly, that is to say,
say that the too intense action of light causes them to change colors. Isn't it
not a similar phenomenon that we observe every year, in autumn? Don't the leaves seem to change color the same way? Without
doubt; but the cause which, in textiles and fabrics, suffices alone to alter
their color needs, for plants, other principles, as we
we will demonstrate later. The influence of light on the leaves is proved by
one of the simplest experiments, by an observation that everyone has
made and which presents itself every day & our eyes. That we place, in fact, in
Vobscurity, 4 Vabri from the light, from the branches. whole or parts of
slits; no change will occur in the coloring of these plants:
the branches, the leaves will dry up and fall while remaining green. If only part of the fenilla is darkened, the rest of the parenchyma
will change shade, but the sheltered part will always remain green. Taking
a fenille which will have already arrived at one of the tints which succeed green in
the autumnal transformations, we would likewise see that it would not change
of color. Shelter, for example, fenils or portions of leaves
yellow on the verge of turning red, but which are not yet, they
will fall off turning yellow or will retain the same color; to
contrary, the parts remained exposed to the light will follow the ordinary course
of the phenomenon; they will turn red and fall at the desired time. A simple remark pronve more than all the experiences that your light
must have an action on the vegetanx, and mainly for the subject that we
oceupe here, their state in autumn. The light of September being other than
that of the month of July or August, which is proven, must naturally have
other effects on plants; but these effects exist none the less for
this, because if we examine the leaves which naturally partly overlap,
we notice that the uncovered portion is colored more quickly and acquires a
coloring much more accentuated. — We can judge by this quick overview of
The influence of light on the coloring of the leaves, especially in autumn. Like light, the atmosphere plays a big role in existence.
plants, as well as animals; we have proven it for
first, speaking of their breathing. Nevertheless the action of \'almosphere
is subordinated to that of sunlight, for the same green parts of the
plants that give off a large amount of oxygen, decompose acid
carbon dioxide contained in the air and assimilate the carbon. The experience has
demonstrated that leaves which have already taken or are about to take
their autumnal hues cease to exhale oxygen in the sun; they continue
however, to breathe in during the night, but always in quantity
decreasing & as their new coloration increases. In this
period of their existence, the oxygen contained in the organic tissues does not
more; it attaches itself to the coloring matter and oxidizes it, just like the oils, the
fats, the colors of the clods, etc., which demonstrates why the sheets
change color in the fall. The honor of this discovery belongs &
Th. de Saussure and Senebier. Experience proves that the sheet, arrival & mon
of its two oxidation states, yellow or red, no longer exhales oxygen

  

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

 

  

 

   

 

 

   

   

2 hours
during the day; on the contrary, it constantly absorbs this gas and only gives
Carbonic acid. In fact, if we scoop up the exhaled gas and put it in
contact with lime water or baryta, we see it become covered with
small carbonated flakes. Vienna. G. Bouat. (To be continued.) OYSTERS (continuation and end). Oysters prefer to inhabit shores where the water is calm and shallow.
based; they propagate there so easily that they form shoals whose height is
tense often reaches several kilometers and whose surface is literally
covered with their shells: rocks, stones, debris of all kinds
which litter the bottom sometimes bear veritable clusters of them. We will not be surprised at this abundance when we know that each oyster
(which has both sexes at the same time and therefore reproduces alone)
can provide more than one and a half million eggs in a single clutch and that the
spawning usually takes place several times a year. The eggs, lodged between the Jobes of the mantean and the respiratory fenlets,
receive a kind of incubation there until the hatching of the young molluscs. These, once free, escape in a whitish swarm that disperses
water movements. In this first epoch of their life, they are
provided with a transient swimming device which allows them to go in search of
looking for a solid body on which they can settle for the rest of their
existence; but their journey is not long: many are content to elect
domicile on one of the valves of their parent; others stop at the first
obstacle or are carried away a little further by the conrants; the biggest
number, finally, serves as food for numerous and very fond enemies
of such a meal. It is in the natural beds that we first fished the oysters and that we
still catches them today on certain coasts, to deliver them immediately-
consumption; but, for many centuries already, we have recognized
that these molluscs, placed in particular conditions, acquire a
much more delicate flavor taking on a greenish tint. The experience
had taught the Romans that Lake Lucrinus (today almost entirely
fulfilled) offered 4 a very high point these favorable conditions; it's there that
Sergius Orata was the first to imagine penning the oysters. Oyster farming, while spreading to different points on the coasts of Europe
and America, had pretty much stuck to the old practices until the
recent works of some men of science, in the head of which it is necessary to place
Mr Coste. Under their influence, this industry, long neglected, took,
in our country and among our neighbours, a new upsurge; we start to take
measures to prevent a slow deterioration of our ratings, which threatened
not to be long gone, aulantd cause of the disastrous means
of fishing used up to now as a result of the invasion of the banks by
mud and marine plants. The fishing of oysters in natural banks is still carried out today
almost everywhere has cruising (1); but this instrument is advantageously

 

 

 

(1) A sort of very solid net held open by an iron frame whose lower edge,
cutting edge, scrapes the bottom and detaches the shells. — 44 —

replaced by rakes or American tongs, which do not cause
same equals and allow to detach only the oysters of a certain
cut. The molluscs are not, therefore, caught, sold in commerce; for
make them fat and green (i.e. give them a specific disease),
they are deposited for a period of time varying between a few days and a
months in parks about one meter deep. The bottom of these pools
must be covered with sand or pebbles and well purged of silt, which would
for oysters a deadly poison; the water is renewed there, i.e. 4 each tide,
like & Marennes or in Dunkirk, either once or twice a month, as in
Haven, for example. Apart from the natural banks and improvement parks, we have since
few years, created artificial banks or breeding parks intended to favor
riser Ja reproduction and development of oysters. For this purpose, we put &
the litter of young molluscs (spat), fascines, tiles or
other manifolds whose shape and arrangement may vary ad infinitum, and
where, as soon as they are born, the oysters will find it easy to settle, to stay there.
then stained. These devices are always arranged in such a way that I
can easily, at the desired time, remove them from the water to detach the
shells that have reached market size and are then 4 years old
approximately; we strive, moreover, to keep away from the collectors the many enemies
(both animal and plant) oysters. This method, which I did not want
explain here that the principle has been applied for a few years, but has given
already the best results: real clusters of molluscs of all ages
soon cover the collectors, to the point that, on a single tile, 4 Arcachon,
there are more than a thousand young people. If osiréiculture, on the details of which I will not expand, no more,
is an ancient science, much older still is the food use than
lon made of our precious mollusk. Without going any further back in history,
we already see the oyster very much in honor at the table of the Athenians, which
were not even content, at the time of their power, to eat the parts
fleshy of the animal, but still used the valves of its shell to
cast their votes in popular assemblies; often, alas! for
satisfy some jealousy, to banish some great citizen, The Romans
did not, as far as I know, play a political role for the oyster, who did not appear
them only in meals; but such was their passion for this dish, that fresh
immense transports did not prevent some wealthy citizens of Rome
to send ships to the coasts of Great Britain to
fish the oysters reputed to be the best. It has often been cited as an example
gluttony the high deeds of Vitellius, who boasted of eating a
each of his four meals a hundred dozen of these molluscs. These numbers
probably seem exaggerated; but i] is proved that it is almost not
food more prompt and easier to digest than this; however,
the flesh of the oyster is not very nutritious and contains only a very weak
proportion of nitrogenous matter. As for the use of oysters in medicine, it is now completely abandoned.
given; but they were once part of drugs against rabies,
goiter, etc., and the calcined and pulverized scales were used as
absorbent material, in short, they do not appear to have any other properties
than the carbonate of lime which composes them almost exclusively; this one holds
perhaps an extremely small amount of iodine borrowed from seawater in
which this body exists in very small proportion. Paris. M.H.

Member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Paris. ie

RESEARCH ON THE TRIAS FIELD. (Continuation and end.) The main fishes of the muschelkalk belong to the genera Cela-
canthus, Pal@oniscus, Amblypterus, Ceratodus; the latter's teeth
often encountered in the upper dolomite of the muschelkalk, sometimes
in the white marls which cover the limestone & terebratules between Mont
and Rehainviller. The molars of this fish announce a terrible animal; those
that I have seen in the collection of M. Le Brun, geologist & Lunéville, have a
width of more than two fingers. The same collection contains very beautiful
jaw fragments of Saurichtys; the teeth, though small, are nom-
light and strong; those of Saurichtys conidens in particular affect
this provision. The aforementioned Hybodus includes in the muschelkalk three
species: H. major, H. tenuis, H. dimidiatus. Gyrolepis species
the common ones are G. maximus and G. Alberti. We usually find
the remains of Gyrolepis, as we have said, in the clay shales
of Chaufontaine. However, Mr. Le Brun discovered in the middle of the layers
which are found in the separation of muschelkalk and iridescent marls, in
an excavation above the Moulin-de-Platre (Luneville meadows), peas-
whole sounds 0"04 2008 in length, belonging to the Ganoides family. The scales of these fish were extremely thin and came off at the
slightest touch. M. Mougeot united them to the genus Gyrolepis and gave them
the name of G. Lebrunii. From what precedes, it has been seen that the characters of the fauna of the bunter-
sandstein are found in the muschelkalk: among the reptiles, the labyrinths
thodonts (1) are still abundant; they will cross the Triassic period for
disappear into the lias, which only contains one species: the
Rhynosaurus Jasy-Kovi. Enaliosaurians therefore take all their
development; this great order includes two families: the Simosaurians
and the Ichthyosaurians. The last are special 4 the liasic period; but
simosaurians have many representatives in the muschelkalk; the
Thecodontosaurus, Paleosaurus, Protosaurus, Rynchosaurus,
Simosaurus. The bones of these great saurians meet in droves
in the quarries between Mont and Rehainviller. The two skulls of sau-
like which appear in the collection of M. Gaillardot and that I was 8 even
to examine come from these quarries. They were first referred to the genus
Conchiosaurus before the studies of M. H. von Meyer; but this geologist, who
had the coins in his hands, saw there completely new species and
signed under the name of Simosaurus, from a Greek word meaning camus, because
the tip of the muzzle is very flattened in this saurian. These beautiful heads have been ad-
miraculously prepared by the German scientist who succeeded in discovering
portions of bones wrapped in stone, so that one can see through this
skilful work the posterior part of the skull, with the foramen magnum and the apophysis
basilar; in one of the heads, M. H. von Meyer has laid bare the vodte palatine. The two lower miachoires from the same collection were submitted
to the analysis of the learned paleontologist: he also freed them from the rock and
recognized in the largest of the jaws the one that holds to the skull and in the

 

 

 

(1) I extract from the Memoirs of M. H. von Meyer the following note: "It is more particularly
lightly in the sandy and clayey layers of variegated sandstone and keuper, on both
extremities of the triassic, which are the labyrinthodonts. »

— 44 —

smaller another species of its genus Simosaurus. The skulls and the big
jaw received from him the name of S. Gaillardoti; the little one, the name of
S. Mougeoltii. The lower jaw fragment from S. Gaillardoti has
truly frightening dimensions. The width is approximately 008 between the
lower edge and the alveolar edge. Let Ja get an idea of ​​what
must be that saurian! Among the molluscs, we will cite as characteristics: Spirifer
fragilis, Pecten inaquicostatus, Avicula Bronnit, A. socialis, Mytilus eduli-
formis, Natica Gaillardoti, Terebratula vulgaris. The latter abounds such-
only in certain layers of the Lorraine muschelkalk that they received the
limestone name @ spiderworts. In the department of Meurthe, this cal-
caire is marly and varies from blue to dirty yellow; there forms a sheet of
continuous band, of about 15,416 meters of power, made up of
fragments of stones piled up without visible cement, or united by a marl
white, crumbly, quite soft to the touch and strongly gripping the tongue. The
spider mites probably lived in quiet places with little
deep; it is without doubt to this cause that we owe them to find them in such
large quantity in certain layers, instead of in others as well
formation this geare lacks almost completely. Besides, how
thunder of the agglomeration of the terebratules, if one thinks that one of these
molluscs can produce in one year, according to M. Deshayes, from 500 to 600 inches
divilus. In the muschelkalk, we no longer see a productus; they completed
ment disappeared; but there are already two species of Ammonites: 1'A. nodosus,
I'A. semipartitus. Hate us to say that they do not present such per-
furrows which mark, in those of the posterior terrains, the junction of the
partitions with the outer envelope. Anyway, they are at that time
what I have called prophetic types, what have sometimes been called
vanguard species; they preceded the army corps (we will pass the ex-
pressure) which must invade the following period. But the gryphées, characteris-
ticks of the lower Jurassic terrain, have no representative in this floor. It can therefore be said that muschelkalk diflers from zechstein in that the pro-
ductus no longer exist, and of the lias in that the gryphea and the ammonites
marbling do not yet exist. The layers of the Rehainviller quarries dip to the west to sink
under the iridescent marls. We can divide the kKeuper into five groups:

4° The group of gypsum and Keuperian clays, composed of clays
reds going with gypsum beds; . 2° The group of green or reed sandstone (schilfsandstein); grain sandstone
thin, greenish or rongeatre:

3° The group of variegated clays; clays usually magnesian;
bright and varied colors;

4° The white sandstone group;

5° The yellow sandstone or Tubingen group. The iridescent marls "usually consist, in Lorraine, of a marl
variegated with wine red and greenish or blenatre grey, which is
disintegrates into fragments 4 conchoid forms, in which we do not recognize
no trace of schist disposition. Towards the middle of the thickness of the
iridescent marls, one constantly encounters a system composed of layers
blackish shale clay, fine-grained and glassy sandstone, gray in color
blenatre or amaranth red, and compact dolomite, greyish or yellowish,
with a splintering break, sometimes cellular. Sandstone and clay layers
schisleuse very frequently contain plant imprints and often
also fuel layers which are the subject of various works. The

   

   

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

  

 

and so on

masses of rock salt recognized at Vic, Dieuze and several other points
of Lorraine, are located, for the most part, in the lower part of the
iridescent marls, that is to say below the system of dolomite layers,
sandstone and fuel. There are also masses of gypsum at this
height, while others, less constant, show themselves in the part
superiority of the system” (Exp. of the geol map. from France). I do not want to raise here the important question of the furmation of salt
gem. Is it due to the evaporation of salt lakes and lagoons on the shores of
the ocean, or is it a product of volcanic origin, as supposed
Mr Lyell? It would be reckless on my part to decide that. Substances
deposited in the waters which were the seat of chemical reactions were
obviously unfit for life; also it is in sandstones that meet

generally the keuper fossils. This fauna does not offer anything particular and

differs little from that of the muschelkalk. All we could say is that
the Mesozoic types are even more numerous there: in addition to the ammoniles, the
keuper also presents some species of Belemnites. But the discovery
without a doubt, the most important that has been made in this floor, is that of a
insectivorous mammal, Microlestes antiquus, whose teeth have been
found and particularly studied by M. Plieninger, of Stuttgart. Lappa-
rition of mammals would therefore be prior to the Stonesfield schisles; the
Microlestes would be there to announce the large mammals of the period
quaternary; it would be there, I say, like the hyphen that connects the creations
old to new, like a transition arranged by nature. Luneville. E. PAULIN,

Corresponding member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Nancy. COMMUNICATIONS. We can finally indicate to our readers the special study of some of our
subscribers who wish to enter into relations with other young people studying the same
branch than they of natural history. The publication of such a list appears to us to be one of the best means of promoting
exchange and other relations between young naturalists and, therefore, 4 enlarge the circle
of their studies. Knowledge of local fauna or flora is not
complete when it has not been compared with the fauna or flora of several other regions,
and nothing is more useful to the naturalist than to know in various localities the address of
some colleagues who will always be happy to answer his questions about
the natural history of their country, or even to procure for it the samples which might
serve for his studies. We therefore dare to hope that a greater number of young naturalists, including
we would like to count some of our subscribers from abroad, let us know
their specialty, so we can publish a new additional list soon. We ask those who are registered or who will be registered later to indicate to us the
changes that may take place in their address or in the direction of their
studies, so that we can inform their correspondents through your Sheet. The Revacrion. = aR —

E, Albanel, rue Honoré-Chevallier, Paris. — Ornithology. Félix Barrivre, 24, place Mercadicu, Tarbes. — Entomology, Coleoptera. G. Bouat, 11, cours Romestang, Vienne (Isére). — Paleontology. 8. Bourgeois, 7, rue Saint-André, Rouen. — Entomology, Coleoptera and Hymenoptera. Georges Bouvet, rue Saint-Jean, 25, Angers. — Botany, Bryology, Paleontology. A. Claudon, 56, rue de Rouffach, Colmar. — Entomology. V. Collin de Plancy, 85, rue Dareau, Paris, — Erpetology. Adrien Dollfus, 29, avenue Montaigne, Paris. — Botany. Eouard Duvernoy, Hotel Saint-Sulpice, rue Casimir-Delavigne, Paris. — Botany. Bugtne Engel, at M. Frin, 10, rue Garanciére, Paris. — Geology. L. Giraudias, receiver of the domains & Limogne, (Lot). — Botany. Gaillardot, 20, rue du Faubourg-Stanislas, Nancy. — Geology. Jules de Gaulle, 286, rue de Vaugirard, Paris. — Entomology, Coleoptera. Edouard Goutay, 32, rue de PHorloge, Riom (Puy-de-Déme). — Entomology, Coleop-
land. Gruet, 4 Renan (Jura-Bernois). — Entomology, Lepidoptera. F. Hette, 107, rue de Mons, Valenciennes (North). — Entomology, Lepidoptera. Maurice Hofer, 19 rue Monge, Paris. — Entomology, H¢mipttres, Coleoptera. Paul Kienlen, 2, rue Saint-Guillaume, Strasbourg. — Geology, Paleontology. Edmond Keechlin, at M. Poupardin, rue du Temple, Bordeaux. — Entomology,
Beetles. Emile Keecblin, 85, boulevard Saint-Michel, Paris. — Entomology, Lepidoptera. Th. Lancelevée, 4 Romilly-sur-Andelle, p. Saint-Pierre Bridge (Eure). — Entomology,
Colgoptera. Charles Langrand, 37, boulevard Saint-Michel, Paris. — Entomology, Col¢optera. Ernest Lelitvre, 90, rue Montrichard, & Amboise. — Entomology, Lepidoptera. Adrien Lemaire, 2, dream Isabey, Nancy. — Botany. Mailland, professor at the College of Dunkirk (North). — Botany. ad. Méhu, rue Nationale, 160, & Villefranche (Rhone). — Botany. From Mercy, in Vannes-le-Chatel (Meurthe-et-Moselle). — Botany. Léopold Meyer, & Burgdorf, Canton of Bern (Switzerland). — Entomologic, Hymenoptera. B. Paulin, medical student, 27, rue de la Poissonnerie, Nancy. — Geology. L. Pourchot, Bellevue, near Giromagny (Haut-Rhin). — Botany. Prouvost junior, 36, rue Pellart, Roubaix. — Geology. Gabriel Roux, 17, rue Duhamel, Lyon. — Botany. E, Sourbien son, 35, rue Sainte-Lucie, Carcassonne. — Entomology. G. Weiss, Eulerstrasse, Basel (Switzerland). — Ornithology. CORRESPONDENCE. M.A.K., & Mulhouse. "We have received your letter and what it contains. ERRATA. A misprint which was already in the table of matitres of the 2* year,
reoccurred in last issue; instead of G. Bonat, one should read G, Bouat. typ. Onenrnun et fils, "Rennes, — Mee a Paris, rue des Blancs-Monteaux,

 

March 1, 1873. The Number: 25 cents. Ne 29. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

 

Payable in advance in stamps or money order on 1st post:

 

For France and! Alsace-Lorraine, ft. 3 para. | For PEtranger., .........-..6 fr. per year

 

Subseripton for Great-Brilain, $3.6 @. Rrilish subseries can remit in penny or twopenny postage stamps. Contact: & Paris, & the editorial staff of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne,
or at Mie Pétry, bookstore, rue de V’Arsenal, 4 Mulhouse (Haut-Rhin). ‘res as resubscribed. People who do not unsubscribe will be considered.

THE SOLANEES FAMILY. (After.) The mandrake does not believe in France; but it is abundant in Greece and
in Italy. She has played such a large part in the superstitious practices of
Antiquity and the Middle Ages that we cannot pass over here in silence. According to
ancient autenr, here is how charlatans used the root of mandra-
gore to fool their dupes. “The charlatans and abusers of the world, he says,

they will show the ignorant people roots counterfeited in figures

“men, for those of the mandrake, and which they call mandeglories,
take the fresh roots of the couuvrée (bryony), marshmallows,
reeds (Iris pseudo-acorus), and other roots which withdraw & form
human and press grains of barley or millet on the part which represents
I suck; they bury them and cover them with sand until the grains have
root product; then they dig them up and build up the roots which represent
horses, then make believe that they have cried under the gibbets of those who
were executed by justice, granting them monstrous properties. »
Others say it cried out when it was torn off; that is why
they had it torn off by dogs, or else they covered their ears with
pitch, for those who heard the cries of this root must have needed
barely die. Pliny also makes his remarks on the manner of tearing off these
famous roots; i] recommend turning the des to the wind, describing three
circles around the plant with the point of a sword, then tearing it off
turning towards the sunset. We wouldn't end it if we wanted to bring it all back
the uses to which the mandrake has been employed by sorcerers of all
ages. The properties of the mandrake are about the same as those of
Bellaillon. The pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) appears to be native to the East Indies.
tales and South America. Its berries are leathery and bright red; their
form varies according to the varieties. They contain a resinous substance,
Acrid and balsamic, the flavor of which is analogous to that of pepper. Chilli
activates digestion; also it is used as a condiment, especially in
southern countries. In high doses, it is emetic and can poison the
way of acrid poisons. :

 

 

— 50 —

 

Lycium europeum L. originates from southern Europe; it serves &
make hedges. It is a thorny shrub, 4 flexible branches, with oblong fenils.
lanceolate guages, & pale purple or lilac axillary flowers, & red berries,
ovoid,

Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger Dodon) grows in rubble,
vacant places, near dwellings; it is very fleeting. The plant is green
pale and covered with hair; its leaves are soft, hairy, sinuate, angular;
the flowers, without peduncles, in an arched spike, siluated on only one side of the stem,
are livid yellow, veined with purple. The calyx, with five teeth, is tubular. the
fruit is a capsule named pyxis. Henbane is used in medicine
against toothache, neuralgia. It is a fearsome poison; she must
its properties 4 an alkali, hyoscyamine combined with malic acid. The prickly apple (Datura stramonium L.) is native to Asia; she
is naturalized in Europe. She believes in gardens, vague places; She is
very fleeting. It lets out a vicious and nauseating smell. We use it
as a sedative and against asthma. Its calyx is tubular, its base alone is
persistent and forms a collar at the base of the fruit; the corolla is very large,
funnel-shaped, pleated; the stem is erect, smooth, ramose; oval slits,
angular, angular, sinuate. Capsule the size of a large walnut, & surface
thorny. Seeds reniform and black. Jimson weed produces delirium, weakens
Memory. It owes its properties to daturine. The taba (Nicotiana tabacum L.) is 1&2 meters high and ramenx towards
the apex in a broad corymbiform panicle; its lower fenils are
oval, oblong, elliptical, 3 4 6 decimetres long and 8 to 15 wide
centimetres, whole, slimy; caulinarians are sessile or briefly

etiolated, acuminate. The corolla, purpurin pink, is large, tubular, has
acute lobes, swollen under the throat, twice as long as the calyx which is
glandular, slimy. Tobacco was imported from America to Portugal around 1520. The Ambassador
english Nicot sent seeds of it & Catherine de Medici; he then took the
name of Medicea, from grass to the queen. It was under Louis XII that he began &
generally spread. Sometimes it was highly praised; on Ini gave the name
holy grass, antarctic panacea; sometimes it was banned. Jacques 1° attempted
to have it rejected and wrote a satire against smokers; Urban VIII,
Clement XI excommunicated ten who took tobacco in the churches;
Elizabeth of England had the snuffboxes seized by the beadles; in Transylvania,
the property of those who cultivated the plant was confiscated; in Persia, Turkey,
in Russia, it was forbidden to use it, on pain of a small nose. But when the
rulers had noticed that the population's enthusiasm for tobacco
could be useful to the Treasury, they tolerated it, struck it with a tax and got away with it.
reserved the monopoly. It was in 1621 that the first tobacco tax was
established in France; it was about 5 centimes per kilogram, In 1674, the
General farm had the tobacco monopoly, which in 1697 brought in 250,000 pounds
tournaments. In 1718 it brought in 4 million; in 1789, 37 millions. In 1791, we
removed the Farm. The tax of 1801 4 1804 gave, on average, an income
annual of 4,800,000 fr. The monopoly was restored in 1814. From 1814 4 1844, the
tobacco has brought the French government a net profit of 4 billion
625 million. From 1844 4 1864, the profit was 2 billion, and the profits
are always getting worse. Tobacco is an acrid, narcotic, energetic poison. I} contains nicotine, one drop of which is enough to kill an average animal
cut. Santeuil expired in the midst of terrible colic for having drunk wine in
Jequel a bad joker had emptied his snuffbox. Tobacco abuse produces
dizziness, nervous tremors. The habit of smoking can become a
need, some individuals can no longer do without tobacco. Medicine does not

  

 

 

 

 

 

    
     

 

 

  

   

 

    

  

— dl —
seldom used except in the form of intestinal fumigations to remind
the asphyxiated & life. .

Another species of Nicotiana less common than NV. tabacum is the
N. rustica L. MW is not widely cultivated like N. tabacum
and one only meets him in the garden of the peasants. It is smaller than the
N. tabacum; its flowers are yellowish; its capsules are globose. Nice view. Pourcnor. THE SWIFT AND HIS NEST. At the end of April, long after the return of the swallow, we see the appearance of

in our cities, flying around our great buildings, our steeples,
fairly similar birds 4 this messenger of spring. So sem-

that the vulgar still confuse them sufficiently often. The naturalist has created for them a genus, even a separate family. They are coming back,
like the swallow, in the suborder Fissirostres and serve as a type a
the Cypselinea family. These are the swifts (Cypselus apus). We par-
We will first learn about their faces and their morals, and then we will come to the
capital point of this notice, the nest. They are bigger, stronger than the swallow. Their entire plumage
immediately black, is very thick, very tight. It presents a peculiarity re-
markable. Around the anus exists a perfectly circular space, of 5 or
6 millimeters in diameter, completely bare. The beak is very widely split,
the arcuate commissure; the TV is wide and very flat. So much for their faces; now see their way of life. Their life? It's theft. Stealing constantly, always stealing, that's the life of the mar-
linet. Endowed with chest muscles of considerable strength, provided with wings
immense, very pointed, they spin 4 vertiginous heights during
whole days. As our great Michelet said very well in his admirable book, the
martinet, “it is the oisean par excellence. The air, here is his element. All in
him, his wings too long, his feet too short, indicate a being foreign to
Earth. Stil touches the ground, he is lost; it is now impossible for him to re-
take off; its very massive edges are made for climbing, hanging on,
not to wear. They let his chest drag; its long quills beat the
earth. He crawls like this until he comes across some mound, some
wall, branches of salvation, on which he climbs and from where he drops into
space. A fish thrown on the shore is ridiculous; a swan waddling left-
ment only inspires laughter. Fallen from the sky on the heavy ground, the martinet is
more than ugly; he is awful. Awful in his dark black livery, with his
big flattened tele, his big dark eyes. Horrible, this bird which all of a sudden
suddenly became a reptile. Ignorance is afraid of what it does not understand. From 1a, the tales that are told about the swift. More than one naive has seen me with
the error took these birds in my hand and asked me if I knew a
remedy "against the bite of the swift. “More than one has told me that
this bird entered the nest of sparrows to suck the blood of their
little ones and that his pennies were poisonous. When shall we see the instruction
tion enter the penpley When then naturalists and philosophers
will they no longer be obliged to make sandwiches on stupidity in their works?
and the superstition that prevents man from living in harmony with nature? *

     
 

  

 

 

 

— 52 —

Like swallows, swifts eat while flying. They spin through the air,
engulfing any insect they see. Their power of vision is in-
believable. Spallanzani found that from 300 feet away, a swift saw
distinctly an object 2 millimeters in diameter. I will not say that they also drink while stealing. I have never seen a marti-
nets skimming the water, like the swallow, and taking a bath at the same time as they
have a drink, they know only too well how dangerous the neighborhood of
the earth, and they keep always far away from it. I would even recognize
santa who would teach me oft and how they drink. If the swift is well known to all ornithologists, it is not
even from its nest, and I have seen, in recent publications, dontes emitted
again & this snjel. What seemed most proven was that the swift deposited
and brooded her eggs "in the dusty holes of great buildings,
steeples, tall towers. "I do not want to invalidate this opinion, and I
would be very embarrassed to prove that our bird does not nest "in the
dusty holes of tall buildings. »

But what I can say is that when he finds a sparrows nest
in a place that suits him, he does not hesitate to seize it, and does all his
efforts to evict the rightful owners. I lived for a long time in a house where a large colony of
sparrows. One day, a band of swifts came and passed that way, saw the
nests, and from that day we saw no more monks. They had entered
franduly in the house in |abseuce of these last, and until j
where their young were hatched, they never left the solitary nest. Always
male on female side by side. Occasionally
a sparrow arrived worried, landed on the goutliere and tried to resume
his home; but a shrill and prolonged cry, uttered by the intruder, warned him
that the enuemi did not leave the place, and sad he went away. The day after
day when the swifts had taken over the nests, I found at the foot of the wall
several broken sparrow eggs and several young still naked. I don't doubt
not that they were precipitated by Jes niartinets. I also witnessed real fights of sparrows and matinets for
capturing and defending a nest. The pair of swifts passed and repassed
in front of the coveted hole. The couple of moineansx cling to a branch or
a nearby wall, and the male swooped down on the enemy each time he appeared. This ride lasted until a swift managed to jump into the hole, or
that the couple, weary of the struggle, went to look for another place less well
defended. I believe that during their stay with us, from April to September,
The swifts make two parties. I found cubs in July. The
clutch usually consists of two eggs of a pure white and fairly
elongated. When the young are hatched, the male and the female fly constantly
around the place of is the nest. At home, I saw the whole gang of parents
describe a large circle around my house, and fly past
their holes pushing pergant eris. The young people responded with shouts
less strong, but still acute. In the evening, I heard all these families
lawn in their respective homes. From time to time a
swift which was not long in coming back, probably bringing back to its brood
some night insect; when ! one came in, Vantre went out. They arrive at the nest
with unheard-of rapidity, darting like an arrow; and I add entirely
have faith in this naturalist who recounts having seen swifts falling dazed when hitting
pant against a glass plate placed at the entrance of their hole. The swifts emigrate before the swallow, and at the end of August we do not see any

 

    

   

   
    

       

       

 

   
   

   

   

 

      

 

  
    
 

 

 
   

   

 

 

 

  

—5at—

only one left in our countries. They probably go to the same climates
than their close relative. The following year those who escaped safe and sound,
of the trip return faithfully to the old nest. I found on the swift and in the nests the Ornithomya viridis, which lives there
in parasite. I reserve the right to speak of it in my studies on diptera, when
I will arrive 4 this very curious family of Pupiparous. Rochefort-sur-Mer. George COLLIN. THE DYTISQUE BORDE. The bordered beetle (Dytiscus marginalis L.) is a little over three centimeters
long. Its body, oval, elongated, is of a dark brown, with olivatre reflections; a
yellowish band, which borders his corselet and his elytra, Ini has earned the name he
door. The female is almost always recognized by the ten deep grooves
she has on the elytra, the male having only two or three furrows on these
Fine Ués, 4 penalties scored,

The front legs, which are mainly used by the insect to seize its prey and to
cling to the plants and the walls of the pond where he lives, offer, in the male,
a particular arrangement: the first three articles of the tarsi dilate,
by forming by their reunion a kind of disk; the hind legs serve
& swimming: they are depressed, very long, provided with hairs: quite long, and
constitute a veritable pair of oars with the aid of which the beetle
moves with speed in lean. This insect is very carnivorous and attacks
enemies often much larger and stronger than him, whom he tears 4
beautiful teeth. Having one day left a moment in the same aquarium a dy-
lisque and a water turtle about ten centimeters in length, I soon
not to see the latter killed by the insect, which gouged out her eyes, then, of her
sharp mandibles, severed his neck muscles, thus preventing him from
tuck his head under his shell. To breathe, the beetle climbs to the surface of the water, stands there upside down,
The extremity of the abdomen emerging a little, raises its elytra slightly and
fills with a supply of air the interval which these leave between them and the
insect body; it is in this sort of air reservoir that
vrir the tracheas which are distributed in all the organs, where they will vivify
the blood. The fare of the bordered beetle reaches, after several moults, a length of
about six centimeters; its body is composed of eleven rings; his tele door
on each side six small distinct eyes, placed next to each other,
as in the 6 of the dice to play; his mouth is armed with two strong jaws
bules, which it uses to seize the larvae, insects and crustaceans whose
it feeds, or to attack tadpoles and even small frogs. These hooks are hollow and pierced with a hole through which, according to Lyonet, the larva
would suck the blood of its victims. When she is going to change into a nymph, that is to say about ten days after
its last mune, it comes out of the water, digs a hole near the edge and
buried. The stigmata are then clearly visible on the side of the rings, while
that, after the previous moults, they were not yet seen, the larva
breathing through the extremity of the abdomen which she wore from time to time 4 the
surface of the water, almost like the perfect insect. The beetle stays
about a month in the nymph state; then he comes out with barely any elytra
developed, but which form in a few hours. The banded leather beetle is commonly found in still waters. travel

  

 

    

 

   

 

—s4e—

from one pond to another and can thus cover very long distances; because he
flies very well, although noisily and rather heavily: it is not very
rare to take it in the evening on the fly. We can easily raise the beetles in jars or aquariums,
by feeding them raw meat or worms, larvae, etc. ; they live strong
a long time, relatively to most other insects, as insects
fails, they spend the winter in this form. They are quite often seen swimming under
ice. Females spawn more than once in the spring, and each clutch is
about 40 to 50 eggs, which are white, oblong and slightly curved; but he
it is rare for these eggs to hatch in the vases where the beetles are hatched; they
are very delicate and almost always die before the young hatch
larvae. Bale. R.H.

 

 

 

 

AUTUMN COLORING AND DEFOLIATION OF PLANTS. 1. — Coloring (continued). The leaves which, as everyone knows and as I said, are the organs
most usually green, pass 4 other colors in different cases. First, and this is the case that interests us the most here, in autumn their color
green turns into yellow, as for example in the poplar of Lalie
(Populus italica), maples (Acer pseudo-platanus, A. platanoid:s, 4. cam=
pestre), the leaves of A. succharum turn red in autumn. the orange trees
or citers (Citrus aurantium, C. medica, etc. ), horse chestnuts (Hippo-
castanum vulgare, elc. ), or else in red, as in the sumacs (ihus
cotinus, Rt. coriaria, 2. varnish, etc. ), amaranths (Amaranthus retro-
flexus, A. blitum), barberry vein (Berberis vulgaris), honeysuckle
(Caprifolium rotundifolium, C. periclinenum, etc.). Mr. Guibout (Journal
pharmaceutical) thinks this change is dd has a principle that replaces
the green chlorophyll of the leaves, but Macaire (Mémoire sur la coloration
fall of the leaves) noticed that shortly before the time of this change,
the leaf stops exhaling oxygen in the sun! without ceasing to absorb
overnight; hence he thinks that his chlorophyll is oxidizing, and that this
oxidation, 4 a first degree, determines the yellow conieur, has a second the
Red color. Observation has shown that red, even the most decided,
always begins by going through the yellow tints. Schubler and Funck
(Untersuchungen tiber die Farben der Blumen) notice that the colors
red are more frequent in flakes which contain some acid. Such are those of the vine (Vitis vinifera), of the pear tree (Pyrus communis), of
plum (Prunus domestica, P. spinosa), sumac (Rhus cotinus, ete),
dogwood (Cornus mas, C. sanguinea), viburnum (Clematis vitalba,
C. erecta, C. flammula), sorrel (Rumex acetosa, R. pratensis, etc., etc.). The red coloring matters, drawn from the leaves, form infusions which,
like those of gnawed flowers become more intense by the effect of acids. The yellow fenillas are known in this respect as the yellow fenillas. M. Lemaire-Lisancourt (Bulletin philomatique) also believes that red is di
& some acid development and the other colors & some acid development
alkali coating; but, says de Candolle, although he clearly demonstrates that very
small quantities of these materials are enough to modify the colors, it is

far from proving that these developments are actually taking place in all
colorations. you

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Patoo

 

The same discolorations that the leaves present in autumn, they
may present as a result of certain accidents; so it often happens that
the leaves bitten by insects pass partially or totally to the
yellow stains or stains; what is most remarkable is that these
di case of alteration make pass the fenille & the color it would have taken
by itself in the fall. Thus, the splits of poplar, of lilac become
yellow, and those of sumac or pear turn red in accidental cases.
lacy, as they become in autumn. Where does this resemblance come from?
of discoloration in such dilferent cases? We cannot say, and we
let's leave that to you

In addition to the aforementioned den, there is a rare third one that the
two others, but which nevertheless has some importance for me to say two
words. Some sheets naturally offer a face in whole or in part
marked with special colors; the janne is rarely noticed there, but on the other hand
rodents are found there a great deal. Thus, the leaves of the beech (Fagus sylvatica)
and those of the hazel tree (Corylus avellana) are red in spring; it
is the same for certain vine stocks, for red cabbage, orach (Atriplex
hortensis rubra), red spruce (Berberis vulgaris violacea), etc. At the house of
other plants, the red color is only accidental, as in grass
& Robert (Geranium Robertianum) and the Calystemum. I is other plants
which offer us these three colors at the same time. Arum bicolor, for example, bears
on the fenillas spots both red and yellow on a green background. The Ama-
ranthus bicolor has leaves of two different ronges, dark and bright fiery. Finally, we find plants, such as Geranium, for example, presenting
a band which, standing out against the overall green background, appears brown
more or less reddish. As we have just seen, the whole brilliant spectacle of vegetable colors
tends to disappear either in morbid or accidental cases, or after their
dead, and, de Candolle very carefully adds, which makes this study very
curiense is that we often see there that the discoloration is determined by the
same agents which in other circumstances determine the coloration, and that
some organs, which do not stain during life, take 4 upon death
a very pronounced color. Sunlight appears to be the universal agent of
these pearls or these color changes. During the life of plants, it
acts, as we have vn, to color them, but in a few cases its
too intense an action discolors them. Most aquatic plants take
when dying a white tint; it is often seen, especially, on algae
marines which, from the most green bean or the plns gnawing bean, pass to white
when they dry out, which happens very easily in the air. water algae
fresh and several aquatic grasses exhibit the same discoloration system.
ration. The atmosphere obviously acts by moving their probable chlorophyll
ably, says de Candolle, in Ini removing his carbon, because it is the ordinary effect
air on all the dead vigétanx. The Chara, in particular, dried in the air,
become completely & completely white, which undoubtedly takes place because of the enormous
amount of calcareous matter that these plants have accumulated in their tissues
during their life. Horsetails (Equise/um), which when dying also become
very white, also contain a fairly large amount of matter
earthy. The leaves when dying usually take on a uniform color
a redhead or a bran dirty gray, which is known as the color fewille
dead. This color can be compared with that taken by fruits that have become
overripe, such as rowans (Sorbus domestica) and loquats (Mespilus germa-
nica). Vienna. (

(To be continued). Boat. =r

 

PRACTICAL ENTOMOLOGY

LECHE:

 

ILLAGE,

 

The study of lentomology offers the greatest interest, when one allaches
relations of insects with the plants on which they are found or with
thoughts of which they live, and whenever chance or research make
discover these ratios, it is very important to note them: they are materials
to add to science. Knowledge of the shape and especially the arrangement of the eggs of the
insects is one of the important parts of entomology, and a dail conp
exercised makes it easy to determine on the spot the insect to which
hold the @eggs that chance sometimes presents to observers and that the
a little experienced naturalist easily manages to discover somewhere
they are hiding. To destroy these eggs is to destroy all at once a whole long series of
generalions of insects. It is therefore the study of some of these that I will endeavor to
present today, as completely as possible. I will deal first with the four most apparent species whose
damage is the most detrimental to the fruit trees of our gardens and our
orchards

Surely everyone noticed these scholarships a long time ago
silky leaves that we see suspended, from the month of August, at the end of the branches
trees, mainly pear and hawthorn. But few people wonder how can be formed and who
fashioned so solidly these whitish heaps which resist the worst
weather. They are quite simply the small caterpillars of the bombyx (Porthesia
chrysorrhwa) vulgarly called white moth with brown bottom or arctea
golden tail. In midsummer, one might see on the fenils or on the branches
shrubs, hedges, mainly on the leaves of fruit trees,
stinging hairy masses; These masses contain eggs laid in bundles
oblongs by the female of the bombyx in question, who stripped herself of the long
hairs placed & the extremity of his abdomen to cover his lineage. The
small caterpillars which hatch from it towards the end of July or at the beginning
of aodl, spin in society, as soon as they emerge from the egg, and form, by innovating
together a few slits, these white canvases which are not very difficult to discover
end of summer and perfectly visible during winter; they are easy
el to destroy by conpant the branches: r which one finds them pl
canvases, more or less vast, are usually fixed to the tops of the
trees. The caterpillars of our bombyx have a length of 36 willimetres; they
are brown, with an Eeeve spot on the sides of the bottom five or six
seginents and a small red tubercle on the last three; the whole body is
covered with bundles of brown hairs. It is mainly against the purses of this caterpillar that are directed
the measures prescribed annually for weeding; I would even add that
it is absolutely against them, which is insufficient, since it is not the
only pest species. To finish and make this terrible pest well known, I still have &
to describe its manner of metamorphosis and the perfect insect itself; we
we will then know the complete enemy. Arrived at their full size during June, the caterpillars build
separately, but often in small groups, a soft shell, intermingled with
few hairs, between the leaves or in the bifurcations of the branches. the
butterfly hatches after three weeks. He has white wings, as well as the
body, 4 with the exception of the last rings which are of an obscure bran. All that I have just indicated for B. chrysorrhea relates equally-
ment, or & nearly, has its congener, B. auriflua (white moth with ass
yellow or awned golden bottom). Only, the caterpillar of this last bombyx is well
less common than that of the preceding; it is therefore less harmful
sible, for it prefers to inhabit woods and thorn hedges. The female of
this moth lays its eggs towards the end of July and the small caterpillars
hatch during the month of August. Like their congeners, they
eat, we rather devour, until the first frosts, the parenchyma of
leaves, of which they make a kind of lace. But they differ essentially from those of B. chrysorrhea in that
quwelles weave for shelter, and each of its edté, a small
shell of a greyish brown, like those made by spiders.
genes. They are found, three to six in number, rarely more, applied under
the beanconp barks of trees. caterpillar also differs from its congener. Body hair is
grey, instead of being brown; the double red line on its back begins at
second year, and it expands in a crescent on the fourth, which, thus
that the following, offers a fleshy bump whose summit is white; the two
series of white spots are elsewhere longer and of a more cheerful tone;
with this, the tubercles which border the legs are of a ferruginous brown
and circled in red; the Léle is leaner, and there is on the first ring
three straight lines, longitudinal and parallel:

Its wufs differ from those of the previous Vespece in that instead
d@tre crimson as in B. chrysorrhea, they are of a millet yellow
and the silken stuffing that covers them with a pale golden yellow. $a metamorphosis into ehrysalis like that of the preceding species, takes place
towards the end of June or at the beginning of July between the sheets or at the table
branches, in a soft but tight shell, interspersed with a few hairs. Perfect bug @clot after three weeks. As for the butterfly, it looks a lot like the brown ass moth. But he is
of a purer and brighter white; its first wings have the anterior edge
visibly more arched; its back is all white and its anus a golden yellow;
its antennae have beards that are more gray than yellowish; Finally, he feels the muse
when alive, while its analogue has no smell. The caterpillar of these two vile pests on the oak tree. hornbeam, elm,
birch, willow, poplar, hawthorn, blackthorn, pear, all
fruit trees, moreover, almost indistinctly; everything is good for him, tree,
plant or shrub. Where the chance of her birth has placed her, where the winds have
jelée, she devours again and again. Amboise. Ernest LELIEVRE,
Corresponding Member of the Society
scientific studies in France. (To be continued.) HE. THE CROW (Corcus Lin.) ORDINARY CROW Worvus corae Lin.) Corvus maximus (Scopoli)

The crow, a passerine bird of the cultrirostre family, is one of the largest
birds of this genus; its plumage is a beautiful black, enhanced with shades
purplish and of a mel to agr eye. His vigorous fingers support
strong and erochus nails. Its length is 15 inches

In 616, the crow roams the forests and the mountains; Vwinter, it falls_ by
troops on the fields and on the plains, ott then attracts him a great quantity
worms and other insects which, together with small mammals, such as mice,
voles, field mice, with fruits, seeds and rotten meat,
make up his regular food

The crow begins building its nest in April; this building,
which costs him about ten days of work, is preferably placed on the
tallest trees, and the ends of their branches. The exterior is lined with
dry branches, with uneven roots, straws artfully joined together;
the interior is lined with the same materials; only they are chosen
among the tiniest and therefore the sweetest, for the eggs they will have to
receive. The female lays 3 to 6 eggs of a dirty green, speckled with brown
blackish. Incubation lasts 18 days. We don't need to expand here on
the education of young crows; it has no particularity. When
some important detail will present itself, we will hasten to
record in our observations. The crow's nest is not common around Paris; we could
explain this fact by the small extent of the woods which do not provide
places specific to his stay, he happens to find some on
the lisiéve of the Parisian forests; but it could be the crow
black. A remark that we can make is that some crows are
sedentary and that others like to travel and emigrate annually. This
fact, already reported by certain naturalists, is worthy of the attention of ornitho-
logisticians, for it would be possible that the migrating crow and the sedentary crow
are two distinct species. The crow is very harmless, and it is 4 wrong that some people have him
attributed ideas of unhappiness; in the people of the towns as well as among the
inhabitants of the countryside, he is the object of ridiculous superstitions that are
could summarize with these verses of Jean de Meung (1):

 

 
 
     

 

 

  

  

 

   

  

 

  
   

 

 

Prophet of male adventure,
messenger of pain
In its cry, its shape and color. The life of a Corbean is very long. Each of us remembers this
phrase from Latin grammar, extracted from an ancient antor: Hominum vita

 

(1) Roman de la Rose. — 59 —

brevior quam cornicum vita, Others went further and claimed
that the crow lives a hundred years and beyond, We think that these assertions do not
are just lies. If some ornithologists refuse to agree with our opinion, we
recommend doing like M. de la Palisse, buying a crow and waiting. The crow is easily tamed; on Ini learns to speak and he arrives & pro-
say a few words quite distinctly. Let us plead here the cause of the crows against the farmers.
cullers. This bird follows the plow four steps during plowing, and from the furrow
which has just been opened, he removes all the worms and eats them greedily. This is
so it is quite wrong to regard it as harmful. Another trait proves the sagacity of crows. When a troop descends on
a plain, it poses on all sides its vanguards and its sentinels, to
warn him in case of danger, As soon as a man, a dog presents himself, all are
warned by a particular cry that the sentinels utter and fly away. The crow sails with great skill to avoid the deadly lead of the hunter.
sister. As soon as he notices that he is being played with, i! fail several hooks
which allow him to ward off death. 4

We urge ornithologists to send us any in-
interesting things they can collect on the crow. Desiring to satisfy gourmets, we hasten to communicate with them.
fuck a precious recipe. Young crows taken from the nest are an excellent food, when they are en-
wrap around a bard of bacon and cook them 4 small fen in their juice. The
Viennese crows make a very good soup; the broth is all white and pro-
produces a foam similar to snow. It's delicious, but the flesh is black
and most detestable. Paris. Emile ALBANEL,

Member of the Society of Scientific Studies of Paris. COMMUNICATIONS. Hunters, around Mulhouse, killed a revard which, quite a phenomenon
extraordinary, had around the body a wire undoubtedly coming from a pitge
whatever he had gotten caught in and could have broken. This iron wire surrounded
the body completely and entered the skin which was beginning to form a bead while
around, which proved that for quite a long time already master fox had been carrying this Gstrange
ornament. Besides, he did not seem to suffer from it, for despite this belt of a new
kind, he led the hunters far enough, and still lived so well after having slept
on the ground by a murderous shock that had to be literally knocked out,

It is not impossible that if this fox had lived longer, the skin would not end up
completely cover the wire, as one sees the bark of certain trees covering
little by little the ties that bind it. — Profound surprise of the one who would then have been flayed
to meet under his knife an object so resistant and which, in general, does not enter into
the constitution of a fox

Mulhouse. Ts. — for —

We can add the following addresses to the list we published in the
last issue of the Leaf. Charles Barrois, 17, rue Roussel, Faubourg Saint-Maurice, Lille. — Geology. Charles Bureau, 5, Petite-Place, Arras. — Entomology, Lepidoptera. Georges Colin, 10, rue Lafayette, Rochefort-sur-Mer. — Entomology, Dipteres. Charles Demaison, rue Rogier, Reins. — Entomology, Lepidoptera and applied chemistry
4 Natural history. ;

Louis Demaison, rue Madame, 69, Paris. — Entomology, Lepidoptera. Daniel Mieg, Quai du Barrage, Mulhouse (Alsace). — Entomology, Lepidoptera. TRADES. I propose to form during the beautiful season collections of Lepidoptera including
Posces of 100 & 150 classified and labeled species. I will ask in exchange for well-defined insects and of an irreproachable preservation.

chable of the following orders:
Aptires, Diptera, Hemiptera, Orthoplera, Hymenoplera, Neuroplra. Amatenrs who wish to enter into exchange relations with me will never have
& complaining about the freshness and preparation of my butterflies. Ch. Office, Petite-Place, 5, in Arras. Mr. Barrois can currently have a good number of fossil species from the north of
France and Belgium. We offer plants from Bas-Rhin, Jura, western and southern France in
Collection of about thirty species characteristic of the Haut-Rhin, especially of the forest
from Rouffach, from the hills of Westhalten, Ingersheim, ete. Contact Mr. P. Krextex, 2, rue Saint-Guillaume, Strasbourg. CORRESPONDENCE. MM. Ch. D., @ P. — We are sorry to have received your article too late to insert it
in this issue; we will insert in that of April th,
A.-S. P., @ Salem. "We have not yet received an answer to our letter. Didn't it come to you? typ. Onentuca et fils, 9 Renne 4 Paris, rue des Blanes-Mantewux, 35. 1st April 1873. The Number: 25 cents. Ne 30. SUBSCRIPTION PRICE
Payable in advance in stamps or money order by post:

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr. byan, | For foreigners........++0+++ fr. 4 par. Subscription for Great Britain, 8 s. 6 d. British sub-seribers can remit in penny or twopenny postage slamps. Address; & Paris, & the editorial office of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne,
or at Mle Pétry, libraive, rue de VArsenal, & Mulhouse (Haut-Rhin). People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. THE SONG OF THE MOCKER. Everyone knows the mocker and makes more or less judgments about him
erroneous; it is generally compared to the nightingale, and it is claimed that its accents
surpass the sweet harmony of the cantor of our woods; others refuse him a
melodious voice, and make it only a tasteless imitator of other birds. Both opinions are true, but the mockingbird not only sings,
does not only imitate, he skilfully imitates the voices he has heard, and
embellishes by repeating them. Allow us, before examining in particular the song of this bird,
to say a few words about the habits and manners of the mocker. It is a gracefully variegated passerine & plumage of white shades,
red and blue. Her adornment is elegant, without being superb like those of the
bucket-flies and the many birds of America in the colors
The mockingbird inhabits the forests of Louisiana, but is not afraid of
approach the dwellings where he finds support against the attacks of
his enemies, on the part of the American planters, whose respect for this
bird is the same as the love of our farmers for the swallow. The usual call of the mockingbird is an ominous nole resembling that of the
Turdus rufus or French mockingbird. It is on the branches of the trees, near
some fountain, let his lugubrious voice be heard. In the evening, when night covers the forests; at dawn, when the sun rises, and
during the day, while he spreads his torrid heat, the mockingbird throws his
chants all echoes. These are not the weak and softened sounds of the flute
or the oboe that one would believe to hear, but the most beautiful notes that the
natural music can express. The harmony of the song, the varied modulations
remain unequaled. Such is the voice of the mocker; this is how Au-
dubon (1), who had often heard it in the woods of Louisiana. The ros-
signol does not have this power, he adds, and naturalists as well as
lovers of bird songs, who compare the song of the latter to that

  

 

 

 

 

 

(1) Audubon, Ornitol. american, volume Ter, p. 108. — Buffon, Edition Flourens, volume Vis,
p. 85. — Aged, Hist. nat. Birds of North America, Volume I, p. 12. — 62 —

of the American bird, are mistaken, for the mockingbird far surpasses the
nightingale. Not only does the mockingbird sing well and with godt, but he sings with
action, with soul, or rather his song is only the expression of his affections
interior; it comes alive with its own voice, and accompanies it with movements
rhythmic, always matching the inexhaustible variety of its natural accents. First it rises little by little, its wings outstretched, then it falls, its head inward.
cline, at the same point where he left. Only after continuing some
time this bizarre exercise that the agreement of its various movements begins
or, if you like, of its dance, with the diflerent characters of its song. Vieillot, in his Ornithologie de V Amérique septentrionale, does not speak
of the mocker with praise; he doesn't seem so enthusiastic about the song of this
bird than the famous Audubon; and as the mockingbird could not please him
the loud ones, i] presumed that his voice became more melodious during the capti
Each yants his country; but why want to mislead science? old we
a man of bad taste, for, according to all the American naturalists,
Waprés many other foreign scholars, and as much as we ourselves have
could judge him, the scoffer has no rival. Moreover, observation has shown that the bird we are talking about grows strong
well caged, but it must be taken from the nest eight or ten days after its birth. He becomes very familiar and sometimes fond of his master & such a point
let him follow him to his apartments. But even if we lavish &
this bird all possible care, his song would never have in captivity the
same melody as the state of freedom. The mockingbird amuses by the innate talent that it has to counterfeit the song or rather
the calls of other birds; it is undoubtedly from there that the name of
mocker; however, far from making ridiculous these foreign songs which he repeats,
he seems to imitate them only to embellish them; one would think that by appropriating
nsi All the sounds that strike his ears, he seeks only to enrich and &
perfecting your own singing and practicing in all possible ways
his indefatigable throat. It's not just I birdsong, but also the voices of
some quadrupeds they’re repeating. It is said to limit the human voice;
we do not affirm it, but we can assure that the mockingbird reproduces
the sounds that man makes when whistling, either to call the dogs, or
animate his horses, or for entertainment. Also the Ini savages gave the name of cencontlatolli, which means
four hundred languages, and learned men that of polyglot (Turdus polyglottus, Lin.) which means 4 nearly the same thing <

In closing, allow us to make one wish: that we try
acclimatize this pleasant bird in France, either to replace the canaries
insipid that we see everywhere, or again to leave it free and make it the
charm of the woods. Paris. I.F.

 

 

 

 

  

  

 

   
  

 

        

 

   

 

  
 

     

   

 

ANTISEPTICS IN ALL TIMES. After following developments in the science of antiseptics, i] can
be interesting to consider the state in which the most recent works have left it. So we'll take a quick look at the latest discoveries and
asset reviews the main preservative products that we obtain from chemistry
modern. — 6 —

Some new methods of preparing cadavers have been proposed
to replace those of Gannal and the embalmers of his time, but the
most have remained unknown until now. Seeking in their discoveries a
source of profits, the inventors keep, in ¢ I, the secret of their é
thodes for a more or less considerable time, alin of power
sufficient trials, we get the fruits they expect. Therefore
The Institute received, a few years ago, pictures by Gorini in
Italy, and offering all the appearances of an island consery, without
We know the means used to achieve this result. were
heavy, petrified so to speak, and could be sawn out of marble,
This process is lost to science, because the inventor took his secret
dying. stor more at length on this subject, we will end in d'b-
deriving the method found recently by M. Brunetti, From an application
long, costly, and therefore impractical, this treatment would only have one
little interest if he did not give particularly remarkable preparations. So we'll be there for a moment. Brunetti opens the carotid like Gannal
and jungulars; 4 the first, i! adapts a tube that communicates with a
' ient of water ssion, and makes it possible to maintain a current of this liquid
until complete expulsion of blood and other fluids from the body. This op-
preliminary ration finished, the corpse is subjected to an injection of alcohol
which is practiced in the same way, and whose purpose is to expel the water that the
blood vessels had retained after washing. A third injection
succeeds this one, but this time what we are looking for is to eliminate as many as
greasy portions possible. We use & this effect of the solvent for example
cells of sulfuric ether. Rest & proceed to the real
chemical treatment. This one is very simple; it consists in doing
circulating a tannin solution in the same way as washing liquids. When it is judged that the preservative substance has thoroughly penetrated all the
parts of the body, we stop the operation. The piece is then carried in a
oven whose temperature must be kept constant, while by the
lanes open for injections, we fail to arrive a current of air at 50°. This
last operation is very important, and the care taken in it depends
in large part the final success. Its action is indeed to allow a design
regular and complete payment. — Pieces subjected to the Brunetti treatment
are completely incorruptible and keep their natural shapes, if the pressure
of injected air is properly adjusted. They have a re-
marked, and are comparable in this point to the white mummies of Arabia. As for their tint, it is grey, uniform, and if one wanted to reproduce the
appearances of life, one would be obliged to resort to make-up to hide the color
their unpleasantness that these preparations offer. We will not develop here all the processes currently in practice.
and which all start from the same principles as those of which we have spoken.
meration would be tedious and useless, because each practitioner has his own method
particular more or less good, which most often differs only by
insignificant details from those of its competitors. Anyway, we don't
We will not dwell on this interesting question without saying a word about the
temporary mements. So far, nows have exposed only the main solutions of the problem of
indefinite conservation, proposed until today. The history of the
temporary mements is entirely contemporary; so it won't be long. The small population of our civilized countries, and especially of our great
cities, has made hygiene studies necessary, and naturally we have
found led to seek ways to combat the terrible scourge of miasma

   

       

 

    

      

 

    

 

 

 

   

 

 

    

 

  

 

 

 

— 64 —

cadavers so easily engendered by epidemics. amphitheatres,
hospitals and cemeteries were the most dangerous centers of these enemas.
pestilential nations. In the latter, very simple precautions suffice
of which the severity of the police ensures the full execution. But in hospitals
they dissection rooms, where the dead can stay for a while
considerable, it was necessary to resort to 4 chemical treatments to prevent the
corruption, and numerous studies have been made to obtain a clean-up
ment of these different places. For a long time, fumigations were the process almost exclusively
employee; but in addition to giving off often unbearable odors,
they did not always succeed in arresting putrefaction. We had the
resource of embalming, but in the presence of the number of corpses for
which it was to be used and its expensive price, it was not necessary to think
to use it, and on the other hand it has been totally inapplicable to snjets
anatomical studies. This was not yet 1a the biggest drawback of
this practice. Ilen is another, infinitely more serious, which is easily understood.
account, considering the consequences that would result from the piling up of
thousands of bodies guaranteed from imminent corruption. In the presence of these obstacles of every kind, the question shows itself in
a completely different aspect than the one we have studied so far. I
it's about finding a way to achieve perfect, but limited, preservation. As it stands, this problem is easier to solve than one would think.
first approach, and the well-directed researches of the scholars of our time have
led 4 very satisfactory solutions. Paris. L.D.
(To be continued.) INFLUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGETATION. (Suile.) ITS ROLE ON THE MOVEMENTS. If we take a look at all the beings that make up the kingdom
plant, we are surprised to see that the least developed organisms, those
a are formed of only one simple element, only one cell, enjoy
of the property of being transported from one medium to another, a property which is,
as known, common & most animals. There is none of the more superior beings who are constantly fixed on
bodies which surround them and from which they draw part of their nourishment
unable to move. It is however that there are movements
ments in plants of a fairly high order; but these movements are not
not, it must be said, carried out by the organism as a whole; they are not produced
only by special organs, such as leaves and corollas. Who of you
dear reader, was not once & even to observe the curious movements
leaves of the sensitive, or has not heard of the oscillations which
culent the leaflets of an exolic legume, Hedisarum gyrans? Who of
you finally did not notice the displacements of certain corollas whose
petals spread out during the day close at the approach of night to
early in the morning the following morning? All these total or partial displacements, which are produced either by a
elementary organism, by a cell, or by a combination of elements,
may be referred to as mass movements; but, independent-

 

  

 

— 6 —

Apart from these movements, there are others which have their seat in the interior.
of the cells in the young state, in this living matter of an albu-
minoid 4 which has been given the name proloplasma. 1° Movements of the protoplasm. Protoplasm is that nitrogenous matter, usually transparent, which
is an integral part of the plant cell. Its chemical composition, as well as
the reactions it forms with certain mineral products, have made it rank
among the protoplasma © albuninoid substances which in most
is surrounded by an outer membrane consisting of cellulose plas or
less pure, for the principal role in cellular life and consequently in the
plant life, it is he who transforms the inorganic principles (carbon acid
nic, water, ammonia) drawn from the ground or from the atmosphere, mainly
organic (chlorophyll, starch, seed, sugar. albuminoids), ca-
able to increase and modify pre-existing elements, and to produce
new elements, which following their differentiation and integration,
tituate the various ti and plant organs. The protoplasm is therefore the seat of a host of chemical operations, including
the result is the formation of elaborated principles and the production of forces which
organize raw matter and compete with light, heat, summer, &
performance of vile functions. He is the substance truly
active, without it plant life would have no raison d'etre. The protoplasm is, as I said above, contained in a membrane
cellulosic more or less thick. This state exists in all phanerogams,
in vascular cryplogams, in mosses, lichens and a large
part of algae and fungi; but in most beings the most
simple, in these ambiguous beings which are both plant and animal
and form, so to speak, the boundary between the two living organisms, the plasma
constituting an elementary organism is presented in a free state, without being
surrounded by an envelope. In this class are the amoebas, mixo-
mites, etc. This protoplasm, whether or not contained in a membrane, is composed of molecules
cules which affect, according to Negeli, geometrical forms, like the
mineral substances, and are each enveloped in an atmosphere of water
more or less considerable. When this albuminoid inate is young, its
molecules are imprinted with a movement sometimes continuous, sometimes intermittent,
which often is followed by a change in the shape of the protoplasmic mass
mic itself.— A fairly large number of plants pretended to observe
of these molecular shifts. Such are, for example, the Chara, the
Vallimeria, the Tradescantia, the Cucurbita, ete. If we examine a weak

scorching a cell of a Chara, fairly common algae in the waters
dormant and calcareous, it will be noted that the protoplasm, which forms a
narrow band lining the inside of the cell membrane, carries, without
significant change in shape, granules of chlorophyll and matter
foreign. Let us now turn our attention to the cells of the stamen hairs
of the Tradescantia, we will witness different movements. In these
cells, in fact, the protoplasm, instead of forming a pariel band,
present in the form of slender filaments starting from various points of the envelope
cellular envelope, which come to converge in the interior of the utricles towards a
plasma mass surrounding the nucleus. I] results from this provision that the

 

  

        
 

  

 
 
 

 

  

 
  

 

 

  

  

 

   

 

 

 

    

 

   

   

   

 

— 6 —

molecules do not move along the walls, but wax in various
directions. All these changes take place, so to speak, without interruption, as long as
the cells are not too advanced in age; but besides these trips
continuous molecules, there are others that come close and yet
different in that they only occur during a limited period of life
cellula We classify in this category the movements which have their seat
in plasma, when a cell is about to form two or more
others. — Everyone knows that when a utricle is about to give birth
has similar elements, it generally occurs and in the first place two
or several cores which each become a center of attraction around
from which a part of the proloplasmic mass is grouped before
spread throughout the interior of the parent cell. These currents, called intermols-
cular, which, according to Hoffmeister, arise from the variation in the proportion
dean in the various regions of the plasma, are activated or slowed down by the
physical and chemical agents. This would be an opportunity to make known the influence of heat and
light, certain bases and certain acids on protoplastic currents.
migues; but the subject that I proposed to trailer not allowing me
To insist more on all these points, I see myself forced to give up for the
moment, except to come back to it later, these various interesting questions, for
immediately study the action exerted by light on the changes
albuminoid molecules. A, Movements of bare protoplasm. — Some lesser beings, such as
amoebas and myxomyedtes, offer us remarkable examples of or-
organisms consisting solely of protoplasm which is not contained
in a membrane. If one carefully examines an amoeba under the microscope,
we will witness, not only the production of molecular currents in
from the protoplasm, but still from a continuous change in form of
the mass itself. These changes in the contours of the substance Re
mic result from the formation at various points of extensions which first
weak, grow little & pen, then a to their maximum length, di
nuent and finally disappear at the same time as other pseudopodia
originate at other points of the sarcode. Myxomyeetes execute & a certain period of their existence
similar movements. We know positively that a rise in temperature, if it does not exceed
a certain limit, makes ameeboid movements more active. As to'
mode of action of light on the emission of these pseudopodia, it is, up to
this day, still little known. The only research that has been directed from this
colé are due to a German naturalist, and even these researches have not
porlated only on a few myxomyceles whose fairly considerable plasmodia
lend themselves very well to the observation of movements under the influence of
light rays. Here is one of the processes that this scientist implemented. A Plas-
modium a’ Ethalium septicum ful exposed partly 4 to light, partly a
Vob. Extensions whose number and length varied with each
instant extend from distance to distance on the lit side, phenomenon
which did not manifest itself on the side placed & the shadow. This fact alone teaches us
that the Plasmodia of these beings perform amoeboid movements when
that they are submitted to the action of light, while they do not change
forms when they are sheltered 4 from this agent. This research sheds some light on the question of the influence of
light, on the movements of bare protoplasm; but they don't solve
point completely. We will only have truly precise ideas by experimenting.

 

 

  

 

   

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

       

 

 

 

        

 

 

 

        

  

 

      

    

 

  

 
     

 

—67—

rhyming on a greater number of species and by studying the action not only
partly from diffused light, but also from direct sunlight. Nancy. Ap. THE MAYOR,
(To be continued). Member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Nancy. COMMUNICATIONS. The crow. — M. Albanel mistakenly put as subtitle & his article on the crow
the scientific name of Corvus corax S. which is the common raven; but the maurs he
described relate only to crows and rooks (Corvus corniv, 0. corone,
©. frugitegus). The common raven avoids man and the bonds he inhabits; we can't find it
than in the mountains, the great forests, where it cannot be disturbed. "It is rare in
us and lives only in pairs or families (Brehm). »

The Swift. — Mr. Colin says he does not know how the martin drinks.
authorized when it comes to the mores of birds, Brehm son (The Life of Animals illustrated),
teaches us that he drinks like swallows. "Many observers," he said, "believe
that he does not drink; this is not correct, as I can assure you, from my own observations.
servings. What is true is that he only bathes when it rains and he does not dive
not in water, as swallows do. The same antor also teaches us that

 

the swift agglutinates the materials of its nest with a viscous saliva secreted in this
goal and which solidifies quickly. We know that this process is that of the swiftlets and of
almost all the birds of this family. Moreover, the hostilities of the swifts 4 towards the sparrows have been perfectly observed.
ved by M. Colin. We ourselves have noticed the same tyranny exercised by the
swifts on chimney swallows in a house we lived in Poitiers;
these arrived in the spring, almost a month before their fierce enemies, and seemed to
are preparing to nest under the roof beams on the garden side; they remained
mistresses until the appearance of marttincts; but these, 4 barely arrived, were hunting
their frail neighbors settled under this roof, heated all day by the sun, and
asserted their exclusive domination over the neighboring gardens, by performing there in pursuit
insects of the insane and deafening rounds which everyone observed. The
swallows passed on the side of the street, and it was 1A that I saw them, in pairs, performing
their hunt less noisy, like two sentinels who have passed each other from
headline hours in front of my window. Dr Trovssanr. NOTE ON THE MARTINE. Nothing still existed, the employee who occupied the post installed in the
top of the tower of the church of Saint-Pierre, 4 Besancon, observed the following:

Swifts, in large numbers, had established their nests on the top of the wall, immediately
ment below the roof of the tower. These nests were made of twigs and earth, the earth serving as a mortar to bind
together the twigs; their shape was that of a crown, that is to say that the nests
had no bottom, and that the eggs rested directly on the stone of the wall;
it was, and the truth, less a nest than a partition serving as a delimitation of acquired land,
than one of these little works seen up close; a barritve surrounding a reserved enclosure
or, 4 Pexcept the owners, no one had the right to p

The nests were by no means welded to the wall and here is why:

When the couple had neither coufs nor babies, either because the place displeased them, or because

 

tr,

— 68 —

quarrels with households that are too close together or dislike for incomprehensible neighbors.
fashions he wanted to go away, as soon as he did. To this end, each nest was armed, from its construction, with a kind of tail or drawbar
formed by the meeting of a certain number of firmly fixed twigs & the crown. The project was carried out as follows: one of the owners seizing this pole with his beak and
Dragging backwards, with the help of his half-open wings, calmly led his
residence 1a oft he had resolved to elect domicile; always ready @elsewhere & start again
move, if he did not find new neighbors at his will. The swifts are, it seems, a teasing mood, because the tower of Péglise Saint-Pierre
there were many moves. observed Pan Dernier & Digoin (Sadne-et-Loire), a fact analogous to that reported
Mr. Georges Colin in his article entitled: Martine and her nest. Bn opposite the professional window from which I worked, a biti hangar had recently been erected
and where sparrows had settled. One day a couple of swifts that I noticed because they were the only ones that
surroundings, came to the outskirts of the shed, and gradually tightening the circles he was describing
around the building began to flutter close to the sparrows' nests; he settled in this place,
and for some time we saw pierrots squawking on the roof. At the chosen licu always remained a guardian, his companion moved away little and returned
frequently. S.ve Pnusac. We are very often embarrassed when we find ourselves in the need to degrease a
lepidoptera reaches fat. This is achieved by means of a very simple operation and
that not all Winsect collectors know. Just get wet

  

Vindivida greased with rectifying benzine, or even to immerse it completely in
this liquid if the stain is very tense. That done, we prick it into a corked box containing
mant a fine and abundant earth which one finds easily in the trade, under the
name of earth @ detach, ct Yon completely covers the insect with this dust. At
after a few hours, the benzine is absorbed and carries with it the fatty matitre. The efficiency of this process is certain, and if Pon operates with precaution, its disadvantages
are zero. Butterflies with the most tender colors can be subjected to this treatment,
without fear of damaging them. An experiment I made & this subject reminds me
seems very conclusive, After having completely coated with soft grease an individual of
Macroglossa stellarwn, I operated on this lepidoptera according to the method I have just
to describe. After twenty-four hours, I took it out of the ground completely cleaned and
in the state it was in before the experiment. I cannot recommend highly enough
the use of this process which, not to be new, is not sufficiently known to
mologists, especially those who are beginning. Cu. D.

 

 

 

Names to add & our list:
Dr. Trouessart, & Ville-l'Eveque, by Pellouailles (Maine-et-Loire). — Ornithology, Mam-
malogy, Palcontologic. Henri Viallanes, 9 rue Lambin, Dijon. — Conchology. In Mequelle, Manosque (Basses-Alpes). — Entomology, Lepidoptera. Louis Demaison, 39 (instead of 69), rue Madame, Paris. TRADES. Mr. Viallanes offers in exchange for land and river molluscs ma-
rins, fossils and coldophthalmic insects. ‘Type. Onxarnun and Sons, & Remmes. — Met & Paris, rue des Blanes-Manteaux, 35,

ter May 1873. The Number: 25 cents. Do 34. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE
Payable in advance in stamps or money order on 1st post:

For France and? Alsace-Lorraine, Fr. 3 para. | For PBtranger.. ...esseeeeeee fr. 4 para,

 

Subserption for Greal-Brilao, $s, 6d British subserbers cau emit i peony or twopenny postage stamps. Reading of the Leaf, 29, avenue Montaigne,
rue de UArsenal, @ Mulhouse (Haut-Rhin). Contact: & Paris, at the r
or at Mle Pétry, bookseller

  

 

People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. THE BORRAGINEES. The borraginaceae family is certainly one of the most interesting 4
to study; it is not that its flowers are of a beauty that charms the yenx,
but their properties always furnish us with an object of curiosity and
of study which is not without attraction. This family is certainly the most
known for its uses and it is also the most useful, because not only does it
offers no danger to Cimprudent, but it still provides many
remedies for evil

It is distinguished by its always alternate fenils which are in most
esp those bristling with sparse hair. The flenrs affect a uniform layout
and singular; they are unilateral clusters, rolled into the tail of a scor-
pior before lew blossoming. The fruit is very remarkable: it is composed
four carpels (rarely two or one) arranged squarely at the bottom
of the chalice which protects them. We can especially notice in this family the genera: Borrago, Symphy-
Anchusa, Nyosotis, Cynoglossum, Lithospermum, Orcanum, Pulmo-
naria and Heliotropium which claim 4 an interesting study and at the same
useful time. The genus Borrago is the type of the family and gives it its name. I! does not contain
that one only hopes:

Borrago officinalis L. (floss, coarse hairs whose stems and
fenils are bristly). Borage is a plant whose leaves are
thick, ribbed, wavy, oblong, the lower ones narrowed in
a long winged petiole, the upper sessile and semi-amplexicanlate. The
flenrs are of sky blue bean, in stars, sometimes pink or white, in
terminal or leafy clusters. There is no slightly pharmaceutical garden where borage is not grown for
its leaves and flowers. It is one of the best emollients, sudorifics and
diuretics for use in inflammatory conditions. It is used in infu-
poultices. Borage is edible; its shavings are eaten
soup or frying. Its flowers give a rere pat color to the dye
Borage is native to the East, it comes everywhere; just introduce it
once in a garden so that it perpetuates itself there and without cultivation. =

Symphylum officinale L.. lives in covered and humid meadows. Its stem is angled and branched at the top, bristling with whitish hairs. Its leaves are oval, soft, a little rough and the petiole is all the more
Jong as the leaves approach the bottom of your stem. The flowers are of a
yellowish white, sometimes purple, in nodding racemes, lateral and terminal
nal. Its fruit is a smooth nut with a protruding and pleated edge. The name
of comfrey (from the Latin consolida) which is commonly given to this dish
sufficiently indicates the vaunted properties of comfrey. She is employed
in pltisia, chest inflammations and blood spitting. His
tops and its roots are edible. Anchusa italica Retz. The name beef tongue that we still give to
this plant for the roughness and the shape of its leaves is the faithful taduetion
from the word gree duglos That of Anchusa makes it presumed that the ancients
believed to be good for sore throats. What is certain is that she
enjoys the same benefits as borage, being like it an emollient,
sudorific and pectoral. She earned the nickname borage for this.
bastard. There are few borraginées so beautiful; its majestic stems, its long
hairy leaves and its blue or pink flowers of a certain size make it
one of the most graceful ornaments of the calvarious and parched grounds where it
preferably please. Myosotis palustris With. Who does not know and has not picked this little flower on
the edge of wet meadows and shady streams? Its leaves are
oblong lanceolate and sessile. The radicals usually form a
rosette. The flower is small, rounded and has a yellow throat. The forget-me-not takes in the language of flowers the names of: Do not forget me
not, Remember me..., ele., and it is said that this denomination
a really touching origin: A young man was bathing in a wave
pure, a tuft of forget-me-nots tempts him, he swims towards it, picks it up and throws it
his friends, exclaiming, "Don't forget me. “We don’t see it again, but the plant
has kept his last words and his memory. All forget-me-nots are mucilaginous and antiophthalmic, applied in ca-
taplasma. Cynoglossum officinale L. and C. pictum are among the native species
ressanles of this kind, the only ones which deserve the name of dog's tongue by
the shape of their leaves and the softness of their down. Or find them on the edge
of the calcareous paths, their flowers are of a fanx red or a veined blue, and
their leaves have an unpleasant odor reminiscent of solanaceae; also by-
ticipent, especially by their root, taken & a rather strong dose, anx pro-
narcotic properties of the latter. Mixes & opium, they serve to make
pills, and the plant reduced in egg-laying is a remedy against the bite of
snakes; its leaves applied externally are emollient. Georges LEyAssort,
St. Vincent Institution, 4 Senlis. (To be continued). ANTISEPTICS IN ALL TIMES. (After.) The materials most commonly employed are those whose power
conservative is quite weak, or else those which, destroying themselves 4 in the long run,
more or less quickly lose their antiseptic properties. ~

 

 

ie

The processes used can be distinguished into two categories, depending on the
particular goal that we have in mind. If you want rooms for study or
for the legal expertise we will follow a prdent step and we will forbid ourselves cer- tainly
some products which would hamper subsequent research; while for
simply prevent putrefaction or delay it, as for example when
a body is transported far away, it will be possible without inconvenience to use
much larger processes

Deoxidizing bodies are particularly good for temporarily preventing
corruption, because we know that this phenomenon is mainly a
oxidation. If therefore absorbed oxygen is immediately withdrawn, its action
is necessarily destroyed, and as long as the product used remains in quantity
sufficient, i! there is no chemical reaction other than its transformation into a
composed of o: i superior. This is how | minimum iron are good antiseptics and a
action bit pe . Sulphate, mainly, offers the double benefit
@absorb oxygen and decompose hydrogen sulfide which may
form. Despite their low commercial price, these fer-
ruginenses are little used, because of the short duration of their effects. We
prefers to use today, in amphitheatres, hyposulphite of
soda, whose oxygen saturation capacity is much greater
and Vallinity in this metal stronger than that of the substances of which we
just talked. We evaluate & approximately two months the time after which the
parts injected with this salt begin to decompose. Proposed by Sucquet,
hyposulfite of soda is currently fairly widely used for the bodies a dis-
sec. If it is not as good an antiseptic as certain metal salts of
last sections, it offers the advantage of not altering so quickly that they
steel instruments. Its only disadvantage is to damage the tables of
ber, by attacking them deeply, We still employ for the same purposes
others are potash or soda, such as the nitrates, chlorates, and
various organic substances, such as sncre, carbolic acid, etc.,
which we will discuss later in more detail. Zine salts are of a
less persistent effect than alealine hyposulfites, when, to avoid the attack
scalpel blades, they are used in very extensive solutions. Nevertheless,
experience proves that water charged with one thousandth of chloride or sulphate
of this metal gives fairly long preservation for most cir-
constancy. When we simply want to preserve corpses whose burial must
to be far away, one does not need great precautions, and one must seek
other methods less difficult & to put into practice and less costly than
Injection. {1 will generally suffice to put the body in a coffin which
filled with antiseptic substances and which one takes care to line with metal and
of sounder. Sometimes alcohol was used, especially at sea; but what
liquid is too inconvenient to use to recommend it;
also it is only used in the absence of any other antiseptic. In 1853, the health council authorized the use of sawdust soaked
with a solution of zinc sulphate and perfumed with essence of lavaade. We
we have already exposed the disadvantages of this salt; we will not discuss it further here. We are only saying that without the arsenites contained in this product, the
sulfate of zine would be very convenient to use. For his part, Mr. Wafflard, director of the funeral directors of Paris, proposes
a mixture of bor sawdust and carbolic acid in the ratio of 4 to 4. With
these substances, the only thing 4 to fear is too persistent preservation,
and even indefinite if the coffins are placed in macgonian vaults and
little humid. It is true that corpses subjected to this treatment shrink

   

         

 

 

 

 

     
 

 

   

 

   

 

   

   

 
  

 

    

 

 

 

 

   

*

=? struction is of great length

 

Gt almost lose their shapes; but lenr d
tor. We could obtain immediate r s with so doing and less
persistent only by this process, by constituting the gondron 4 the carbolic acid. We must compare this method with that of MM: Corne and Demeaux, who
consists in the use of plaster mixed with coaltay, and that which the for-
molar from military hospitals in 1869, and which does not differ from that of Mr. We
later than by substituting charcoal for wood. 14 again the con-
servation is due to the antiseplic properties of carbolic acid or
phenates contained in the substances employed. Another is the action of lime, which is very often used when one has to
bury a large quantity of corpses, such as on battlefields or
in times of epidemics. This material acts less as an antiseplication
as an agent of destruction or as an absorbent of putrid gases. Particularly phosphides combine with it with the greatest
ease, and the fatty matter loses its intrescibility by giving under its
influence of insoluble soaps. So far lime has been almost exclusively
used for large burials. However, for some
years we talked about superficial cremation by mineral oils as
offering more advantages, but apart from the fact that such a process offers some repe-
gnance when it comes to human beings, it has not been used enough
so that we can judge him. Paris. DD
(Followed

 

     

 

 

 

   
       

   

     

 

        

   

 

 

     

 

INFLUENCE

  

   

B. Dies of protoplasm before cell division. - A
cell can be considered as an elementary organism capable of
reproduce The birth of daughter cells for a mother cell (I leave here
aside the production of cells by renewal, by conjugation and by bour~
genement) begins, as we know, with the formation of nuclei which
went antonr two the molecules of the protoplasm, to form so many
groups that there must be new elements. I obviously follows from this
attraction of molecular movements that bring about changes in
the contonrs of the albuminoid substance distributed in the first place in the in-
parent element. Several scholars have sought to realize the role of light on
the movements which have their seat in the plasma before the division of the cells;
but despite some observations, this question is not entirely
olue; there are still many gaps to fill. The experiences of naturalists who have taken up this subject agree
to the point that the movements of the protoplasm which precede the division of
cells operate mainly in the dark. Ainst, according to Braun, the mass
protoplasm from the mother utricles of Hydrodictyon, Spirogyra and
Pollotriv splits off during the quit into separate groups. — Cobn has the same
observed that the plasma displacements that take place before the formation of
hao of Pilobolus cristallinus begin in the evening and end during
ja night. The action of light on these molecular changes therefore appears to be
After these opposite researches & the one she exercises on the movements
amoeboids. has

C. Movements of protoplasm surrounded by a membrane. - We saw
previously that the protoplasm has the property of emitting outside
extensions. It is no longer the same with plasma, the deepest conche of which
external is limited by a cellulose membrane. This fact partly truncates its
explanation in the presence of the envelope whose resistance thereby puts
even an obstacle to the production of exterior extensions. Under this state,
the proteinaceous substance of the cells is endowed only with molecular movements
which generally do not lead to the deformation of the plasma mass. Those
displacements of molecules to which we gave the names of gyration and
soperent rolation in a large number of young plant cells; but
the organs of plants on which they are best observed are the inter-nccuds
Chara etiles Ditel/a, chalice hairs of Cucurbita and staminal filaments
of Tradescantia, the rootlets of Hydvocharis and the leaves of Vallisneria. It will be interesting to make a more in-depth study of these movements.
clothes; but as the title of my work indicates, I cannot dwell
too long on this subject; so I will immediately address the question of the
role of light on gyration. I must confess that I will be very brief here, and for the very simple reason that
the data on this subject are very incomplete. A single relative fact & Viifluence
Jumineus rays on the plasma rotation for the vegaux I come
to point out is accepted today in science: it is that the absence of
light slows down without canceling the protoplasmic currents. This problem is far from solved! Fortunately, physiology
is more advanced on the subject of the action exerted by light on movements
analogues which have their seat in the plasma of particular organ elements,
I mean the migration of chlorophyll granules under the influence
luminous rays, displacements which are not undergone, as one believed it
first, by the green substance itself, but have to cover them
rants of the living albuminoid matter, in which these grains are for
so to speak immersed. A naturalist from Germany, Mr. Bobn, observed several years ago that
the green granules of certain plants of the Crassulaceae family, exposed
for an hour in the sun, gather in groups behind the cell walls
lular. Some time after this discovery, which at first caught the attention
botanists, a Russian scientist, M. Famintzine, recognized in the cells of
shavings of a species of moss (Miu) changes in the place of the grains
light-dependent chlorophylls. To easily account for this movement, M. Famintzine examined
under the microscope the various positions occupied in light and & obscured in
a same cell by colored grains of a fenilla holding & the stem put
on the object holder and placed under normal conditions of humidity and temperature.
peralure. — Observation showed this botanist the following facts: & light,
the chlorophyll grains line the upper and lower plane of the cells,
while in the dark they are placed along the side walls. - If we come
As a result of the natural or artificial lighting of the leaves in which the
granules occupy the nocturnal position, these are seen to move and leave
the side walls to move towards the upper walls:

M. Famintzine has moreover studied the action of colored rays on the displacements
green matter, by making use of lamps whose flame was rendered
yellow by the chromate of potash and blene by the oxide of copper. Under Wine-
fluence of white light and dark light, chlorophyll grains
undergo appreciable displacements in the space of a short time, if we
took care to put the sheets for several hours in a dark place,

  

 
 

 

 

   

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

   

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

  

 

   

 

      

have

 

so that all the grains of green matter are applied against
the side walls. Under the action of the janes rays, on the contrary, the grains
remain motionless and only gain the superior plane of the cells as far as one
replaces yellow light with white or blue light. Thus the migration of the coloring substance from the leaves does not take place
only under the action of the most refrangible rays of the spectrum. M. Faminizine has dolé, by his fine observations, the science of a new fact;
he paved the way for other botanists. A Russian scientist, M. Bourdine, resumed the study of the distribution of granules
of chlorophyll under the action of luminous rays, eluding its research
has several species of moss and has some phanerogams, such as Stellaria
and the Lemna. His experiments confirmed those made by his predecessor on
the Mnium; but this naturalist had in addition I deserve to point out the peculiarity
remarkable that direct sunlight acts as darkness on the moving
ment of chlorophyll. According to him, in fact, the grains of green matter, distributed
In diffused light on the superficial walls of the cells, reach the walls
side if they are exposed to the sun and form groups on these walls if
Insulation is prolonged. When these two foreign scholars came to bring to light the result of
their observations, the French botanists only received them with a certain
reserve. Their discoveries were only accepted in France thanks to the
work of M. Prilleux, who studied by means of a lamp which he
Jumait 4 will the movements of the chlorophyte in the cells of a
another species of moss, Funaria hygrometrica. This scientist saw taking place on this plate the same displacements which
dues on the Mniwm, the Stellaria and the Lenina, and following him, the changes
of the night position & the day position can be done in one hour
about. I have started to do some research on this subject. Wanting
I must first check for myself the faults noted by Mr. Prilleux, games
use of Funaria hygrometrica. I put under my microscope a line of
that foam subjected & normal condilions of life, and followed, by varying
Veclal movements of green matter in the same cell. I
known, as the French bolanist, that the grains of chlorophyll undergo
movements under the influence of light. — Similar changes
were observed on two Bryum species. — I didn't hold on to these
some research and I continued the course of my experiments on several
other soft! (my studies were in the fall), some of these
vegetables made me see the migration of the coloring substance; but I must
say here that I did not, on the other hand, capture the slightest movement in several
of these cryplogams. Having placed Adrichium, Mnium affine, Barbula in a dark place,
I removed these plants for a good six days to examine the leaves in the middle of
eroscope. Most of the cells showed their green granules not dotted
applied, as one might suppose, along the side walls, but
behind the surface walls. These positions suggested to me the idea that the
chlorophyll of this plant did not perform any movements, and this suppo-
situation soon became a reality for me, when after having left these foams
In the diffused light for several hours, I saw that the grains had
served their primitive situation. I have yet witnessed a more curious phenomenon on a species of
Bryum. I did indeed remark that the green granules of certain cells
of the same leaf underwent migrations under the action of light rays

miner, while the grains of other ulricles remained motionless under the
same influence. :

 

 

 

    

 

   

     

  

   

    

  

   

    

 

    

  

   
   

     
 

      

   

      

 

   
       

     

   

 

 

—7—~—

Where does this lack of movement come from? For me, this stability is not
not a permanent state, it depends partly on the length of the cell and the
differentiation of protoplasm, What tends to like to demonstrate it is that I
I have not generally seen movements take place without membrane cells
thick; moreover, the diverse distribution of the grains of green matter in difle-
cells of the same leaf, according to the same quantity of light, comes
so to speak in support of my hypothesis. Ap. THE MAYOR. (To be continued.) AUTUMN COLORING AND DEFOLIATION OF PLANTS. If. — Defoliation. (Continued and fia.) Now that we know more or less your leaves, from the point of view of
their ordinary coloring in general and autumnal in particular, let us study the
phenomenon which follows eclni of the discoloration or which very often comes from inter-
break when it is close to ending, the reader's thought has overtaken us,
and already he expects us to explain to him the causes which produce the
plant defoliation; in other words, you believe yourself, dear reader,
about to read a categorical explanation of this prodigious change
which, although recurring every year, none the less strongly excites
your curiosity all the times you seek & we will report on it. Why do the leaves, those magnificent ornaments of vegetation, fall
in autumn? This is what you have probably asked yourself many times, Des
special men have also asked themselves this question; unfortunately
so far they have, I believe, not yet been able to agree, and here are their differences
Reviews +

There are phy:

 

 
  

 

 

 

  

     

    

iologists who claimed that the button, born in summer, has the base
of the petiole, gradually grows away from the cork, and enlarging beancour
the approach of autumn forces the petiole, and consequently the leaf, and
separate from the stem. — Other authors have thought to see the cause of the fall of the
leaves in a disease of the latter, occasioned by the abundance of
affluent juices in autumn and by the imperceptible decrease in perspiration,
De Candolle is of this opinion, and here is what he says and this statement: "It is thus that
various terms, the leaves of all the vegetable varieties end in
to move from a death really comparable to the death of old age of animals;
their fabric is obstructed by the continual deposit of the soils which approach it;
evaporation can no longer take place and suction itself stops; the
organs seem to lose their contractile capacity and an irremissible death is
the aftermath of these phenomena. The articulated leaves on the stem disarticulate,
continuous leaves partially die. "Finally, there are some who have ex-
pliqné the phenomenon that we seek & to know by the difference of ac~
crossing that they thought they saw between the circumference of the stem and that of the
etiole, difference qni should, according to them, cause the rupture of the fibers which make
adhere to each other the two organs og

These explanations have not been satisfactory. effect, by examining the
first opinion, we note that the pressure operated, according to these physiologists,
by the button on the stem, does not take place in a constant fashion; we find some
many examples. The acacea, which never wears pimples in the armpits of
its leaves are lost before the petiole has detached from its cork. Nevertheless, there are exceptions. Here is what M. Vaucher says (4), who

        

 

 

   

   

    

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

   

 

    

   

 

(1) Memoirs of the Historical Society. nat. from Geni:

 

oom FG ee

aspecially studied the question: "There is a single case in which the pressure
pimple is, if not the main cause, at least the secondary cause of the
bean drop; it is when the petiole, instead of being placed below the
button, according to the common law, the envelope, on the contrary, like a bonnet
envelops the head that bears it. Then it is obvious that the button, growing,
must lift and tear off the petiole that covers it from its stem. But this arrangement
ment is quite rare, and the only trees on which I have seen it are the
plane trees, tree species of summacs, glandular lailante,
acacia and honey locusts. — As regards the second hypothesis, we cannot
cannot attribute, in an exclusive manner, the fall of the flakes to an excess of
juices becoming engorged in the cells of the stem, mainly in autumn, because
often we see your leaves fall still green, after the strong g
white or too hot winds. Besides, don't the leaves fall
always, even after a very dry autlonine, as it often happens? —Enfio, if we closely examine the third hypothesis, we see that it is based
on a free principle, because the fractures which the stems of the plants present do not
are in no way similar to those obtained by breaking an appendix organ.
any dicular of a plant. In fact, the section operated by nature is
straight, regular and similar on all plants. Here are the three destroyed hypotheses, but what is a rational explanation?
How can we give the much-discussed phenomenon? Careful observation
and smart can provide it. Let's give the floor 2 a most competent man
tents on this matter. “The reason for this fact (the fall of the leaves), says M. Vau-
expensive (1) is not difficult 4 to return; it is due to two principal circumstances. The pren that there exists between the stem and the petiole a substance which
unites and known to botanists as the parenchyma. As long as
this parenchyma is permeated with vegetative and performs its vile functions,
adhesion is maintained and the rupture that one would attempt would only be a tearing
rure (as we said for the third hypothesis). But, when
laulomnue arrives, this interposed parenchyma dries up or deteriorates, and it ceases
to be continuous with that of the liege, as we can see examples in
several plants, and in particular in the vine when it strips itself of its
cracks. The second is that the fibers which envelop the vessels in the
cork where the branches are not of the same nature as those which penetrate
in the petioles. At the time of the first development, i.e. the year
time, the difference is not noticeable; but in autumn, the first ones
hardened, while the others remained herbaceous: the first conti-
boo to live, while others die, and therefore there must be
between them a natural separation, In addition, the cork and the twigs increase
in diameter, while the petiole, on the contrary, contracts as it dries. This new circumstance further favors the separation, and finally the rupture.
becomes complete. But it must be remembered that this difference in increase
between the stem and the petiole is not the first cause of the fall of the
leaves, it “is only one of the incidental circumstances. The real one, Vunique
cause, it is the solution of continuity, and this solution of continuity depends
primarily from the difference in the organization. Never have that difference,
the leaves would not have separated from their stem in such a general and
uniform; they would have been, on the contrary, torn on all sides; they
would be broken off irregularly, like the peduncles of a large number
of fruit, and aspect Fun tree stripped of its leaves would have “presented
rameans laden with the useless stalks of their old leaflets and a species of
disorder which is never found in the works of nature. » The fall of

 

  

 

   

 

 

   

 

     

     

 

     

   

 

   

        

 

 

    

    

 

  
       

 

   

   

 

 

 

   

 

      

 

    

 

   

 

 

(1) Quoted plus hsu',

 

staves is further favored by the torsion of the peduncle; it is observed very:
well on the leaves that are about to fall and especially on those that are already there. I will
view with evidence. adds Mr. Vaucher, sare the leaves of saute, cherry,
apple, peach and several 8 ante: . This avneau or this groove
which indicates in advance the point of seeing, above all
autumn approaches. She/them, whose leaves
break sometimes by the prenve Pat sometimes by the second. She is T
remarkable in viniers (Berbers) or barberry, where it is placed
below the point of contact of the leaf with the cork

Explanation can only apply to simple slits. The fall of
leaflets in compound leaves link to another cau Indeed, they
adherent so long as the parenchyma terposed between the fibers of the petiole comman
and those of the particular potioles continue their functions; but the sheet arrived
4At its maximum acerification, this parenchyma dries out and loses little
pen its properties. The slightest wind then, the smallest shock, is enough to
separate the free disunited. The leaves, yielding sometimes 4 Vaction of heat, white frosts
or other causes, fall before the time. This explains why,
in the south the heat is most felt, the leaves fall so early. That same year, towards the end of June, I saw trees almost
completely stripped of their shins

Before concluding, we still have to name a few evergreen trees.
and whose leaves never seem to fall. I] sutlit to examine them, for
realize that the same phenomenon is happening to them. And, indeed, take
a leaf of evergreen trees (Laurus. Pinus, Abies, Cupressus semper-
virens, Taxus, Ilex, Bucus, Magnolia, Veronica or \' Hepatica tritoba including
I spoke) and you will see that these slits do not resemble those of the others
arb: they are hard, of a tough material which has more analogy with the
ligneous part of plants as well as that which constitutes their Lissus, Also
do they persist longer than the others, and is their fall only due to
when the stem has grown large enough to break the bond
with the petiole. The phenomenon of animal life which could best be compared with the
fall of the fenillas would be the fall of the feathers or the hairs, that of the bots at
deer or even the fall of the wings of some insects. But what
prodigious difference in the importance of these bh noménes in the two lives! Vienna. Gustave Bouat,
Corresponding Member of the Society
Nancy scientific studies. PRACTICAL ENTOMOLOGY

 

  

ENILLAGE (swzle). HE. Another even more terrible enemy for our fruit trees is the Bonbya
Neusiria, commonly called Zicrea. Its name comes from the fact that its
z pretty, but soft to the touch, is dressed like velvet
s This of blue or dark red-brown longitudinal bands, forming
a flashy suit. Its head is of an ashy blen, with two black stains, and
there is on the summit of the eleventh ring a small bifid eminence of this
last color. Its belly is entirely blackish and present at each
segment a darker spot. All its legs are also blackish, but the
membranous have a bluish crown. =a is

 

we take place towards the beginning

 

The female of this Lepidoptera, of which Vappari
of July, lays its eggs, about 250 in number, around the smallest
branches of trees (sometimes found on the stems of the rosebush); they seem
probed between them form what can be called a real ring or a bracelet. They are 4 uncovered, but protected by a layer of blackish brown coating
which hardens 4 in the air, and so adherent that they pass the winter without either the
rain, nor snow, nor the most rigorous cold of our climates are the
least harmful. Unfortunately, by their thinness, lear color and situation, they
completely escape the eye of the most skilful weeders. Also, despite all the care that the most attentive gardener can take,
the most far-sighted amateur, most of these rings escape their investors.
tigations. It is therefore preferable, for this pest, to wait for the caterpillar to hatch,
which relates to the beginning or the end of April, depending on the circumstances
atmospheres of the year. As from birth to adulthood all individuals of a
same spawn live in society in a common web, it is easy to see
the young larvae as soon as they emerge from the nest. One therefore waits either for the evening or for the morning, moments when the whole brood is
reunited; we cut carefully, to prevent them from falling,
the end of the branch where the caterpillars bind together, and we throw them into the fire
branches and caterpillars. It has also been noticed that during a heavy rain or by a
cold weather these caterpillars also return home. Without this Saint-Barthélemy, we soon see the caterpillars grow at the expense
leaves, buds and even flenrs of the tree, until at least
month of June, having reached their full growth, they spin between the leaves
or under the cornice of the walls a shell composed of a double fabric, the first of which
first layer is very wide and the second tighter. This shell is oval, soft,
Smooth and internally driven by a liquid substance which dries very quickly
and forms on the outer surface a sulfur-yellow dust, dust
which I have subjected, after many others, to the action of fire, and which is certainly
not flammable, as has long been claimed. The chrysalis is dark yellow finely powdered with pale yellow, with
the dark black stigmas, the rings and the extremal dens furnished with cilia
russets. It has the posterior part abruptly reduced or terminated in
an elongated and obtuse tip. The jay, it seems, destroys a large number of them. This species is much
more common in the North than in the South; it is also found in |’Amé-
northern risk. It remains for me to tell you about the Bombyx dispar (genus Ocneria or Liparis),
vulgarly bombdyz ilisparate or dissimilar, formidable species and to which
we pay, so to speak, no attention. Réaumur calls his larva the 4-eared oak and elm caterpillar. His
name of dispar him comes from the great difference which exists between the male and the
female; while the first has wings of a greyish brilliance, the female, at
contrary, has them of a white slightly tinged with yellowish or gray; their size
also differs a lot; your female is bigger and her body, which is
very bulky, has a yellowish-white front and a brown-grey back,
with a bead of hair intended to cover the eggs, which are spherical and
with a pale onion peel bite. The female remains constantly motionless, sticks, so to speak, against the throne
trees, where she lays years and after mating a multitude of eggs
(about five hundred) which form brown hairy masses, in all sem=-

 

      

   

 

 

  

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     

   

        

   

   

   

 

 

     
 

 

    

  

 

—%9—

blables 4 a sponge on again & a piece of tinder, what! even did
nickname the gypsy moth. Rarely it lays on small branches, but preferably on wood,
between the cracks in the bark of poplars, ash, hazel, pear,
apple tree, plum tree, and particularly peach, apricot,
linden, beech, elm, oak, ete. One often finds its wufs towards the bifurcation of the large branches,
sometimes even on the stones of a wall,

      

   

 

    

The plates that enclose these eggs are usually placed quite low and
are quite visible. It suffices to detach them using a spatula or a scraper.

      

   

you, to crush them or to burn them, The caterpillar of this last species is
of a finely reticulated blackish-brown with ash-grey; each segment carries
tubers with black and red hairs; the four anterior segments
have the blue tubers, the other segments the red ones. She stands pr
ferable move between the eras of the trees. It hatches at the end of April and its
metamorphosis into ehrysalis during July, after reaching
of 60 4 70 millimeters in length, according to the se:

The pupa is blackish-brown, with lighter incisions and
rings furnished with small clumps of yellowish hairs. Its extremity post-
higher ends in a wide point terminated by two bundles of small hooks
ferruginous. It is enveloped in a light greyish network, or simply
suspended by the tail following the breakage of the threads

The butterfly hatches after fifteen to twenty days, and appears from the end of
July until the fifteenth of August. As much as the female is slow and lazy, so
the male is lively; it flies rapidly, with a jerky mauiére, in the heat of the sun,
looking for a female that he finds only too easily. This species is also less common in the south than in the north and
the center of France, and it is hardly known in the mountainous countries. A rather remarkable particularity of its chrysalis is the faculty that it
a, when touched, to roll upon itself with great rapidity; but
as this movement continued in the same direction would break the thin thread which
supports, it changes the direction of rotation from time to time. Hunting caterpillars of these species requires a great deal of care.
dence; because the hairs of which their body is converted enter very easily into the
peal and cause very painful blisters and itching
capable of inducing fever. Dn remains and to come back 4 my starting point, I cannot recommend too much
Mander Ja hunts anx eggs, easier and more expeditious

  

      

   

    

 
    

     

 

 

 

 

    

 

    

        

 

 

 

 

     

 

 

Many others also have noisibles @ more than one title and deserve
a special mention; r the subject of a few other articles. Amboise. Ernest LELIEVRE,
Corresponding member of the Societies for Scientific Studies of Angers
CA follow.) ct of scientific studies of Paris. Erratum & my article of March 1, 1873. Page 57, line 24, instead of maiyre, black should be read; page 56, line %; page
57, line 11, it is not arctée, but arctie which it is necessary to read. E.L.

COMMUNICATIONS. Names & add 4 to our list. Adrien-Charles Corcelle, Priory, 13, Paquis, Geneva. — Entomology, Lepidoptera. René de Maupeou, 10, rue Garancitre. — Entomoloxia, Lepidoptera. — 80 —

Judie currently the Bombyx Yama-Mai

    

. Worm 4 auxiliary oak silk; he cares, &
my knowledge, three or four Gducations In Geneva, The eggs are hatched, there are eight
days, and it's 4 grand'peive that we were able to get some buds of
Oak. In times of scarcity, the young caterpillars have adapted quite well
young quince shoots and burnet leaves. This observation may
serve 4 cents who, like us, would find themselves caught off guard by the spring bloom
eggs from B. Yama-Mai. Genive, A.-C, Concette. A REVOLUTION IN SWALLOW ARCHITECTURE. Spallanzani said, speaking of swallows: "The structure of birds' nests is
an interesting point in their history; each species builds its own on a model that
ais and is perpetuated from century to century. »

This opinion must change today. M. Pourchet, the learned director of the Museum
@natural history of Rouen, was convinced that Vbirondelle de feuctre has greatly
perfecttoned the construction of its nests since the beginning of our century. He has
compared freshly collected nests with
Monuments and which are preserved

its own, which never changes

 

 

 

   

those he had once removed from old ones. at the Rouen Museum for about forty

 

years, then with the drawings and the in
considerable. "I could see," says M. Pourchet, "that the
hai have significantly changed the construction method of their fathers and

ptions of naturalists wanother time. Changes

 

architects of today

 

that at this moment a great revolution is taking place in the work of this species
animal. »
M. Pourchet wanted to be clear about it. A lnnette

of the surroundings and the old monuments. Among the nests hanging from the arches of the portal

 

4 hand, he went to scratch the rocks

churches

   

pure,
third parties Gconomes or
mansions recently built by backward archilects? From place to place there was
nests of modern shape, of a comfortable appearance, which betrayed Peace and taste
Residents jelly. built on the new model; but

some still offer the ancient stre

 

Faiicnt these old dwellings restored by he

 

In the streets peree
it's likely, @aillears, there were still some
ments. s for a short time, the nests were all

  

latecomers faithful to the antiques ¢
The new model is more spacious, more practical, more comfortable than the old one. the

z animals? (Excerpt from L. Figuicr.) Gustav Bovar. would luxury and progress permeate ch

 

 

ME. Lair, Grande-Rue, 4 Amboise (Indre-et-Loire), asks where he could get
Ramich seed (Urtica tenacissima), a new testile plant, recently tested
in France, particularly in Bouches-du-Rbone. He would be very grateful if he
would send a small quantity of it or would address it & who owns it, any kind of expense
remaining his charge. CORRESPONDENCE. You will soon receive a reply to your letter, which has arrived &

 

EL, @A. —
destination. typ. Oneninun and son, in Rennes, —

   

8 Paris, rue des Blaues-Manteaux, 95.

 

ter June 1873. The Number: 25 cents. Do 32. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

 

Payable in advance in stamps or money order on the post office:

 

For France and ?Alsace-Lorraine, fr. 3 par. | For PE fr. 4 par. Subserplion fr Great-Brlan, 8 s. 6 d. British subscribers can rewil in penny or twopenoy postage stumps,

 

Contact: & Paris, & lu védaction de la Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne,
or at Mie Pétry, bookseller, rue deV Arsenal, 4 Mulhouse (Haut-Rhin). People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed,

THE PIE-GRIECHE (Lanius). THE FLAYER SHRITTLE (Lanius colluris). The red-backed shrike (passerine of the dentirostre family, Cuvier)
comes very close to the crow in its manners and does not show itself less
intelligent than he, but his character in the wild is of a cruelty that one
cannot be explained. The red-backed shrike never misses, when the hunger does not urge me
too energetically, to thread into the thorns of the bushes large insects which she
captures, and even the little newborn birds she steals alive in the
maternal nest. Placed on some nearby branch, she likes to contemplate
its victims writhing convulsively in the pangs of agony and
to listen to the desperate cries they utter. Sometimes hours go by
having that she decides to give them the coup de grace. Often even after
having enjoyed their tortures, she abandons them without touching them and leaves them
prey 2 a slow and painful death. As with the crow, domesticity softens or rather completely changes
lies the manners of the shrike. This bird is gentle and affectionate
for his master; of rare intelligence, he learns in a short time about
utter words and even whole sentences that he often says very appropriately
and of which it would seem that he understands I feel. Historian Turnus reports that
Francois I** owned a shrike of this species. He took her hunting
and carried her on her fist like the falcons with which she rivaled in audacity and
of address. Not even recoiling from a heron, she flew to that bird,
whirled around Jui and ended up falling on his head and killing him
both eyes pecked. She then came back to the royal fist and said
very clearly and cheerfully these words: "We had a good hunt,

time. »

y The Eurasian Shrike differs from other birds of its species in a
plumage of a bluish gray, mixed with brown, white and pink tints. A black stripe extends from its beak to the ears, crossing the eyelash. 92

Nomadic, she travels with her family, arrives in France around spring and leaves
as autumn approaches, to go either to Africa, or even to
South America. Senlis. Henry Ricar. ANTISEPTICS IN ALL TIMES. (After.) Main known antiseptics. To get a clear idea of ​​our current knowledge of ancient
liseptics, it is quite important to know which bodies enjoy
of the property of preserving animal substances and to what extent they
own it. The history of embamments has already led us to the study of
uel some of these bodies, but the ones we have reviewed are
join

be the only ones that exist, and one can say with some reason that the
art of the products that chemistry offers us are antiseptic to different
likings, all the more in general as they are more soluble and more toxic. We have already spoken sufficiently of the salts of potash, of soda, of aluminum.
mine, of sinc, of iron, of mereu. so that it is useless to return to it; we
we will content ourselves with adding that we have tried, not without success, the dichromate of
potash, and certain salts of manganese, magnesia, copper and lead
are more or less suitable for injections. Binary compounds, and
mainly those of the ehdore series, offer quite a number of applications
cations; this is how we have already observed the effects of chlorides of
sodium, zine and mercury, and one could add to these the
Soluble iodides and bromides, if their rarity did not limit their use. Serious acid, much prone in the past, is far from being such a good pre-
servant as is generally believed. It gives rise to arsenides of hy-
unpleasant and dangerous drugs to breathe and only provides enough parts
bad. This product, as we know, is the basis of Beécceur soap, of which
all preparers are currently using it while waiting for better. His prin-
main object in this paste is to prevent the attack of the skins by the larvae of
beetles or other destructive insects, and not to oppose corruption
tion. Indeed, in animals stuffed with care, it should remain the least pos-
sible of corruptible materials, so that the piece could 4 the rigor
dry out and remain intact without the intervention of soap. In sum, it is not
not especially with the aim of preserving the flesh that we have recourse to arsenic,
but good to prevent I attack parasites. .A far more powerful, but inapplicable, antiseptic is!eyanhy- acid
dric. The handling of this body is too dangerous and its stability too
weak to be used, and should only be regarded as
presenting a great interest for the theory which occupies us, without one having to
even seek to facilitate its use. !| is almost impossible to attempt a
injection with a liquid as deleterious as its dissolution; the large amount
that would be necessary and the lightning effects of its vapor are as many
powerful reasons to divert the most intrepid experimenter from it. On the other hand, its easy decomposition would limit its action and make it
nil after a fairly short time. Also the experiences we have had
on hydrocyanic acid have 616 directed in quite a different way. They have,
in. general, consisting in the exposure of the anatomical piece or of the animal

    

 

 

   

 

   

 

fa

keep in the midst of an atmosphere of this vapour, in a perfect vessel.
closed, ot the decomposition of the acid is nil if it is dry and preserved from
Vaction of light. By taking all the precautions indicated by
chemistry, we arrived at surprising results. Not only the conser-
vation of the pieces put into experiment was complete, but still these kept
lost their suppleness and came out of the vases which contained them in the state
they had been introduced there. The same process practiced with coal oil, succeeded in a way.
almost so complete, and the experiments repeating themselves, we noticed that a
large number of volatile liquids enjoyed the same property as acid
hydrocyanic, although to a lesser degree. We will mention in particular the
alcohols, ethers, chlorides, bromides and iodides of carbon of the series
ethylene and formene (particularly chloroform and viodoform),
Acetic acid, essential oils, tars, creosole, sulfur
carbon, etc Another way of preserving animal matter is by immersion in
liquid. The best known of those used is without a doubt the adcoo?,
so we will not say anything in particular about it. We will content ourselves with re-
mark that it prevents decomposition, but produces con-
siderable submerged parts, which makes it impractical for Jes animanx
& soft or slimy skin such as molluscs, and inapplicable for
first class animals. On the other hand, it leaves almost nothing to be desired,
when it is used for scaly reptiles, whose very firm flesh cannot
hardly contract, and whose skin wrinkles only with difficulty; still don't
shouldn't these animals exceed a certain size, because the results
would no longer be so satisfying. The great snakes of the Museum
show enough that it would be useful to perfect the process. We can what-
sometimes prevent, at least in part, the unfortunate properties of the spirit-of-
wine by the addition of a soluble body in this liquid or by a dilution more
or less considerable. This is how we proposed to sweeten slightly
Valcool, when you want to keep caterpillars & smooth skin & & colors
tender, or to weaken it by an aqueous solution of ereosole, when one has
affair & a fairly large room. Despite the disadvantages that we have just listed, Valcool is still
the most widely used condom for preservation by immersion, and we have
not yet been able to substitute it in practice with another liquid. This problem,
however, holds great interest, and many essays are daily
tried to solve it. Here are some of the main results obtained
so far in this research:

Glycerin or the sweet principle of oils, as Scheele called it,
harmless and commercially abundant substance, can be used with
success in anatomical preparations. Soluble in water, it is very
stable, does not dry out and has valuable antiseptic properties. If we
make sure to add some other substances to it, such as metallic salts,
carbolic acid, sugar, etc., we obtain an excellent condom which

has a great advantage over alcohol. Indeed, if we take for example
the mixture of ten parts of glycerin, two of sugar and one of asotate of
potash, we will obtain a liquid in which a temporary immersion
enough to ensure the preservation of the piece on which we operate. If we
will reread this one from this bath after only a few days, it remains flexible,
does not generally shrink, and can even be dissected with ease, without
We have to fear the alteration of scalpel blades. A simple solution of carbolic acid, even very extensive (1/500 of acid
enough), a glycerol of carbolic acid & 4/200 also keep indefinitely. *

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

    

 

I

We could also add to this list thymic acid, creosote and
acids from the distillation of wood. Finally, Doctor Ozenne gives a composition specially intended for the
preservation of molluscs, and which is nothing other than an aqueous solution
ammonium asolate, potassium iodide and mercuric chloride. “Such are the principal antiseplicating substances known to-day. He
There are many more that it would take too long to list. Most
of those that we have been forced to pass over in silence, so as not to leave the
limited framework that we have imposed on ourselves, are generally less
less than those of which we have said a few words. We will stop
therefore in this somewhat arid nomenclature, especially since the history of several
of these products will come more naturally when we talk about the conservation
vation of wood or food substances. Paris. Cu. d.
(To be continued.) BORRAGINEES

(After. Lithospermum officinale L. (pearl grass, pearl millet). The se-
mences du grémil are remarkable enough to have deserved all these names;
they are, in fact, small white pearls, shiny, pearly and of a hardness
extreme; its leaves are oblong lanceolate and sessile; its flowers are
yellowish white, small, in terminal spikes. 1] grows in clumps and rises
up to 60 centimeters in height. It is found mainly in the fields
limestone and at the edges of the paths. The infusion of its seeds is said to be di-
retic and appetizer. Its root is used to make up and color butter. Two other kinds are distinguished: Lithospermumn arvense and tincto-
rum, to which we recognize some properties. The Lithospermum arvense L., is distinguished by its flowers constantly
bluish; it is very common in spring, in land & wheat; its seeds
are black and rough and its root has the same uses as that of the
previous. Lithospermum tinctorum L., grows abundantly in Mediterranean countries.
ridionales. Its root contains the yerilable oreanette and gives a reddish color.
quite solid. It is used to color medicinal preparations,
Jes syrups, and it is also used in paint,

Pulmonaria tuberosa 1. , is the only lungwort species which
here are some properties worth investigating. Its leaves, dotted with
white leaves, are no less remarkable than its flowers, which, though
on the same peduncle, vary in color with age. They are first red,
then violet, and at the end sky blue, arranged in short and tight clusters. As early as the primrose, it is found in the same places, fixed
Pay attention and deserve the case that we make of it. It is softening and clean 4 to expectorate. Its leaves are eaten
soup and as spinach. Its resemblance to Primula officinalis
Named you Blue Cuckoo. The kehium vulgare L., commonly called Bugloss, had formerly the re-
reputed to paralyze the action of the venom of the viper. Its roots were the seat
of that property. Its seeds are said to imitate the head, and the spots of the stem
those of this dangerous serpent. She believes in rocky and sandy places-
neux, at the edges of the paths. — % —

This plant is extremely common and everyone knows it. Its rod
is bristling with prickly hairs inserted on blackish tubercles, its flowers
are blue or purple, sometimes pink or white, arranged in clusters
unilateral, and form by their unitedor a pyramidal panicle. Its luminaries
flowers have the virtue of borage. Its root dyed red and is part of
those called alkanets. Onosma arenarium L. We give in the south of France & several Bor=
raginées, whose roots color in ronge, the name of Orcanelles. That of the botanists is recognizable by its yellow flowers and its bristly leaves.
sounded. Its taproot has a beautiful red bark. The old ones in com=
put on their makeup. The color is not very solid and is only used for
light dyes. It is used in pharmacies to color potions and in
households for kitchen and pantry. Winter is the time when the root gives the most color, so hasten to
do we pick it and dry it quickly to deliver it to the market. Heliotropium europeum L. This plant, has white or lilaceous flowers and in
unilateral ears, grows on the edges of the roads, on the rubble, at the foot of the
walls and in arid or cultivated fields. Its flowers, unlike the
species grown in our gardens, do not give off any scent, except
a few late individuals which are a little fragrant. It is usually given the name of éowrnesol or girasol des champs,
but it seems that what the Greeks elegantly called by this name was a
any other plant than our current Heliotrope. In the past, its seeds and leaves were attributed active properties
against warts and cancers, but they are refused today. We thus see that the Borraginaceae family has its many uses and that a
many of its genera are used in medicine and dyeing. Moreover, almost all varieties of the plants of this family are grown
in our gardens, where some present to us the charin of their flowers and the
others intoxicate us with their perfumes. Georges LEvAssort,
Saint Vincent Institution,

 

Senlis. Excerpt from the newspaper “DIE GARTENLAUBE. »

Translator, traditore. G@ENINGEN LAKE. Anyone who has visited natural history galleries as a true observer
probably remembers noticing yellow-white calendered tablets
natre, having kept with their finest veins the imprints of leaves
tree, the most varied forms of beetles, flies or ants, and
sometimes even very beautiful little fish perfectly preserved. All
these pelrifications come from the renowned quarries of Eningen. Until
Today, there is no other locality that can compete with Eningen for
that specialty. Samples from this provenance are found throughout
great collection of natural history. Long before we really appreciated the scientific value of these

SS ee

petrifications, they were already preserved as rare and curious objects. The
monk of a convent of the order of Saint Augustine, formerly located at 4 Eningen,
are said to have made the first collections. A scholar from Zurich, Scheu-
chzer, had, towards the beginning of the last century, described, in a way
special, some finds made in Eningen. These discoveries were
at that time, consider them as supporting evidence of the story of creation.
tion following Moses. Scheuchzer crat even found the skeleton of a
man drowned by the waters of the flood. His enthusiasm was at its height and it is
in this state of mind he composed a poetic essay much appreciated by
the faithful of the time. Scheuchzer challenges the petrified man in these terms:
“Sad collection of bones of an old sinner, soften the mind and the heart
modern children of vice! »

Later it was recognized that Scheuchzer was mistaken. The famous anatomist
Cuvier proved, to the evidence, that the alleged antediluvian man was not
than a huge silamander that must have inhabited Lake Gningen. From
Similar species of gigantic salamanders still exist today
in the swamps of Japan and America. ningen is located in the south of the country of Baden, in the vicinity of the lake of
Constance, 4 the place where the lower lake, or lake of Zeller, is lost insensible-
lies in the Rhine. The quarries are about half a lieve away from the
town. One is elevated 550 feet above the level of Lake Constance,
Yautre about 700 feet. Limestone and marl are extracted from it
slate puff pastry. Paleontology is still a young science, but nevertheless quite advanced.
and it was not very long ago that we recognized your true scientific value
petrifications. So it is only nowadays that the fossils
of Eningen have been studied and determined exactly. Lots of observations
vators took part in this research; one of the most ardent was without a doubt
I Professor Heer, of Zurich, who has studied with the greatest care the plants
and fossil insects from @ningen. The results of his research
give a most faithful picture of the aspect of our country in times
the most remote. They tell us that several thousand years before
Thomme appeared on the scene of Creation, our lands were covered
of plants and inhabited by animals whose species we no longer find
similar to countries in the torrid zone. So far, in the quarries of @Eningen, about 500 species have been found
different fossil plants and nearly 900 species of animals. There isn't one
only character which agrees perfectly between these and the animals which
live nowadays; they can nevertheless be stored for the most part in the
classes of the latter, and some fossil animals have, in the present state of
By nature, very close relatives, but almost always to be sought
in warmer regions. When it comes to plants, most only offer
isolated parts 4 examine and usually only leaves, although none
less sometimes flowers and fruits remained there. It has been recognized by
strict comparisons between this debris and the plants that now live,
which come largely from wood species, trees and shrubs,

have at least half, about 150 species, once stood out
by their continual greenery. There is therefore a big difference
between the current flora and that including a herbarium containing limestone debris
of Eningen could have preserved the traces; because, in our forests, we do not find
no longer a single tree that retains its evergreen leaves, all the people
tooth at the beginning of winter (1). At most a few little shrubs

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

(1) See. no 27, p. 34, 2nd year. = yes

importance, such as holly, ivy, mistletoe, are green all year round. The more one turns towards the South, the more the number of evergreen trees increases.
lie until finally they are in complete majority. Plants
trees which grew near Eningen in those remote times, develop
pay, therefore, like those who live today in the areas
hot. The Eningen fossil remains come in part from or come close to
plants that like moist soil; however, there are many who
seek drier woodland. Among the animals, some belonged to
species living on land and others living in water. We notice there,
for example, river mussels, marsh slugs or snails; of
plus, and in large numbers, remains of fish and reptiles. Shapes
bodies of the envelopes of these debris lead us to presume the existence of a lake
at the edge of which a large quantity of aquatic plants must have
prosperous. Some river has swept through this lake, coming out of the virgin forests
existing in the vicinity, a large quantity of leaves of trees which would have been:
confused in the mud with plants and animals and would have been so
preserved from destruction and transmitted to us. The configuration of the
country at that time must have been very different from that of today. The
Middle Switzerland and part of the neighboring Baden country must have been then
a low, marshy plain, partly criss-crossed by waterways
slowly flowing. Geology gives the time when Lake Eningen dated
exist the name of tertiary period or more specifically that of period
Middle Tertiary or Miocene. Let us now examine some of the plants and species
rarer animals among those which were found in Lake Eningen,
we will notice in the first line, the cinnamon tree, the camphor tree and the laurel
which seem to have existed chiefly among trees with evergreen foliage. in the vicinity of virgin forests. The cinnamon tree of the tertiary period (Cinna-
momum Scheuchseri) left in the vicinity of (Eningen not only
leaves, flowers, fruits, but also whole branches. The bark of
this tree can probably no longer be used as a spice @ our housewives, but it has:
much resemblance to the plant currently existing in Japan. The tree & camphor belongs to the same family as the cinnamon tree. species
who believes in Japan can be considered a descendant of the previous one,
with which it has many analogies. Among the laurels, we must then
especially notice the magnificent long-leaved Laurus princeps of a
half foot (016), and one and a half inches wide (003). He is getting closer
many of the Canary Islands laurel which forms 4 Tenerife and & Madeira the most
large part of the forests still green. The most remarkable species of fig tree,
which was to form the principal ornament of the primitive forests of Eningen, was
no doubt the linden-leaved fig tree, of the American type; its splendid
leaves are heart-shaped. Many oak samples are found among the petrifications
from Eningen. Sixteen species have been counted, quite different from those which
exist nowadays. The leaves are usually leathery, partly
rounded, partly serrated; there are similar ones today in
America and Mediterranean countries. It seems that the forests of the time
tertiary must have been somewhat distant from Lake Eningen, because their
remains are not very numerous. A species of myrtle is also noticeable, and
its remains, although scanty, at least prove that the crowns of
fiancées were not lacking in the young farms of the salamander-men of
Scheuchzer, Among these plants are certain pinnate leaves of a
woody species now extinct and which has great affinities with Acacia

   
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

to: 189

Nowadays. Up to six species of Sodogonia have been discovered near Eningen
neighbors of the East Indian tamarind (Lamarindus indica). Those
plants are of particular importance in geology, because they do not
find that in layers contemporaneous with those of limestone
from Eningen,

In the vicinity of our lake there was also an ebony approaching
of those who grow in the south of Europe and a tree & soap that recalls
Vespecie living nowadays in the tropics. On the marshy shores of
lake was to flourish the cypresses of the ponds; this species preceded the existing one
currently around Mexico and which is so widespread in all the countries
of the southern United States of America. These shrubs succeed especially in
land that is constantly flooded and saturated with water, and their favorite place is
principally in the marshy bays and basins on the banks of the Missis-
sipi. When these shrubs take on growth, they are engulfed
imperceptibly and end up completely filling these basins. so
rn when the waters are high, they sometimes remove entire banks

trees which, tightly intertwined with each other, look like
floating islands that the waters carry with them. Among the plants which rap-. closest to those of the chand countries, let us also mention the palm trees, which, it
is true, rarely meet in Eningen, oi! we find a few
species reminiscent of those existing in India today. The great number of leaves of poplars and willows which are in the car-
Eningen Riéres proves that the wetlands around Lake
Tertiary period produced these trees in abundance.
finds similar ones either in our countries, or more in the South. There was already a
that era of alders, birches, elms, ables and heather. On the banks of the Jac grew enormous jones, marsh grasses and
reeds; Bright lilies and water lilies bloomed there. Let us take another look at the animal kingdom of this period. One of the
most interesting creatures that inhabited Lake Eningen is a ent the
famous giant salamander of which we have already spoken at the beginning and which
reached almost four feet long (1"29). One finds it from time to time
skeletons that fetch a high price in the great natural history museums. The very developed orbits of the eye, a disproportionate mouth, which occupies a
large part of the periphery of the head and which is provided with a large number of
small sharp teeth, unmistakably detect the salamander and do not
Don't let her confuse it with the skeleton of a man. Also, the lake
of Eningen was populated by thirty-two species of fish and by crabs.
pauds and huge frogs. As for the crocodiles that are supposed to have
live there, without being able to affirm it in a certain way, the surroundings make
this very probable hypothesis, 4 this point that in towns not far away
and whose grounds, as old as those of the quarries of Eningen,
are located & a lower level, still show animal remains
similar. A water turtle existed there. Among the beings of this country who have
inhabited the shores of the lake and whose remains remained buried in the silt,
we can cite: deer, hares, mastodons and some species of birds.
buckets. The mastodon belongs to a race which has been lost; he is getting closer
many of the elephant. This proves that at the time of Lake Eningen, an innumerable multitude
Minsects hovered in the air, so far we have not discovered less
of 826 different fossil species, which include the most numerous
varieties of beetles, grasshoppers, ants, bees, bumblebees, wasps, can-
tharids, gnats and bugs. At the time of the existence of the lake, several volcanoes were in full activity.

 

   

has

 

 

  

  

 

 

 

 

==

live in the surroundings. The Hohenwiel, the Hohenkrmen and other mountains
of conical forms of Gegauer then jangled by their crater of enormous
volcanic masses of sand and stones. From 1a it follows that we could not
find in the volcanic tuff of Hohenkraen such beautiful plants and
as many as a (Eningen. The flora and fauna that existed in our regions & the time of the lake
of Eningen cannot nowadays withstand the harsh winters, from which one can
conclude that the climate was much milder in this country. scholars
research on plants from the Tertiary period led Professor Heer
& conclude that at this time the average annual temperature rises
18° or 19° Celsius (centigrade 18° or 19°), i.e. 9° more than ac-
really. This temperature corresponds to the climate of the island of Madeira, from the south
from Spain, from the south of Sicily and even from the south of Japan. It would be difficult to specify the period at which there must have existed a subterranean flora.
tropical around Tertiary Lake Eningen; but what would be allowed
to affirm is that the years that have passed since could be counted, not
by thousands, but by millions. The man had not yet appeared, but he
monkeys already existed. Although among the petrifactions of Eningen even
no remains of these have been found, other contemporary localities
show samples. Translated from German by L. Wartemberger,

by Gustave BouaT,

Corresponding member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Nancy. ON THE COLORING MATERIALS OF PLANTS. the study of coloring matter in plants is not very advanced until
whohere; this fact is sufficiently explained by the difficulty of their extraction and by
their quick alterab moreover, their relative quantity in the vegetal cells
gelales is very low. What we say here does not apply to colors
employed in industry, which are the object of a large number of works and
that we know 4 almost completely; but, in these articles, we
we will just talk about chlorophyll and some coloring matter
petals. The chemical constitution and composition of chlorophyll are still
unknown. Some consider it as an immediate principle, others
like a mixture of two bodies, one blue, the other yellow. But the officers
employed in its extraction are not harmless enough, chemically speaking,
so that one cannot fear a decomposing action. According to Verdeil, the plant is exhausted by alcohol, the solution is precipitated by
lime and the limestone lacquer is decomposed by the acid eh arh yaria
adds ether which seizes, by agitation, chlorophyll and abandons it
pure pen evaporation. It is a dark green, unalterable, insoluble powder
in water, soluble in alcohol, ether, acids and alkalis; aluminum hydrate
mine forms with it a lacquer insoluble in alcohol. Verdeil admits iron in it
in a state analogous to that found in the coloring matter of blood;
according to Mulder, it contains nitrogen, but this chemist undoubtedly operated
on a product containing protein. —Gor

M. Fremy, according to certain experiments (1), adznet the existence, in the chlo-
rophyll, of three substances: phyllocyanin, phylloxanthin and phyllocyanin.
loxantheine. Phylloxanthein is a product of transient alteration of the
phyllocyanin; its color is yellow, and under certain influences, such as
acids, it becomes blene again; it is also soluble in water. Phylloxan-
thine is insoluble in water, neutral, yellow in color and has a potency
very intense dye. Phyllocyanin is blue, insoluble in water, soluble
in alcohol, ether, acids and alkalis; water precipitates it from its solutions. The etiolated leaves contain a mixture of phylloxanthin and phylloxanthin.

loxantheine; but at the Inmiére the plant develops acids which regenerate the
phyllocyanin and restores the green color of the plant. The yellowed leaves of
Vautomne now only contain phylloxantheine, phyllocyanine has
oxidized and disappeared completely. We will only mention the opinion of Pfaundles and Hlasirvetz, who
assume that plant colors depend on the presence of queninin,
esculin and analogous principles which produce various shades under
The influence of alkalis, air and iron salts. They rely on the opinion of
Verdeil, cited above, relating to the presence of iron in chlorophyll and
on the experiment of Salm-Horstmar, who observed a real chlorosis of the
plants grown in iron-free soils. We see that science is far from having found the nature of chlorophyll;
but for these bodies as for the albuminoid matters, which do not crystallize
pas, which are not volatile, it is difficult to purify these products and
to prevent mixtures like those obtained by the most skilful
experimenters. Paris. Nae

 

  

  

 

THE ROUSSATRE SCORPION (2). Scorpio occitanus Lat., Buthus occitanus Leach, or commonly
russet scorpion, belongs to the family of the scorpionids, of the order of the
dipalps, of the class Arachnids. The scorpionid family is distinguished from neighboring families "by a body
coated with a leathery integument; the abdomen formed of very
distinct; two eyes on the middle line of the cephalothorax, and, on the sides,
eyes smaller and in variable number; clamp antennae equipped with a
mobile finger and not giving passage to any secretion; big paws-ma-
choirs terminated either in pincer or in claw. These arachnids lack
of organs affected 4 the secretion of silk; their respiration is carried out by
variable number of pulmonary sacs, open at the base of the abdomen (3). »

The sexes are separated, the orifice of the miles organs and the female organs
is located in the same place, in front of the combs, between the two rudimentary arches
abdominal passages. Hs are viviparous. The Buthus occitanus has a length of 7 to 9 centimeters; a color
pale yellow which darkens after death; its abdomen is intimately united to the
trunk by all its width and composed of twelve rings, including those of the
tail, which ends in a slender tip curved into an arc, in the shape of an wing
very sharp guillon to deliver passage 4 a poisonous liquid which is produced

 

 

 

 

(1) Ann. of physics and chem. (4), t. VII, p. 78. (2) Note read at the Société physiophile de Lyon, in its session of March 12, 1873. (3) Blanchard. — Maurs of insects, etc. =

by a double gland. Combs that have about thirty teeth; two eyes
on the middle line of the cephalothorax and six other smaller ones placed lateral-
lies (1); four pairs of legs, each consisting of five parts and three
feedback items. The russet scorpion feeds on worms, insects (2), and its voracity is
as it devours its young. It still holds while walking the posterior part
with his raised abdomen always ready to strike the victim who must
serve food. If the insect he picked up with his pincers fails no
movement, he eats it alive; but if he makes an effort to escape, he
brings the caudiform pottion back from its abdomen above and in front of the cephala-
lothorax, and he pierces his victim with his sting. His sting is lethal to
himself. us

According to my observations, if you put two of them under a bell, they
watch, their mouth appendages and claws are animated, they seek
to move away by retreating, but seeing the impossibility of escape, they
advance towards each other, still holding the back part of their
abdomen raised, they seek & avoid being bitten, and it is to the one who has been
the most skilful in the combat that returns the victory. But sometimes it sucks
combe afterwards, because it is rare that he himself did not have some bite. There is a fable which is still listened to among the vulgar, in which one
claims that the scorpion being surrounded by a circle of fire, prefers to read itself than
to let yourself shine bright. Having wanted to make myself complete, I experienced
on several scorpions of Europe, but I can affirm that the fable remains the
fable and that the scorpion, on the contrary, seeking all the means of escaping
no less falls prey to the flames. A rat dies after an hour from the sting of a russet scorpion, and a
man can feel the effects for twenty-four hours. According to some naturalists (3), it would be less painful than that of
Bee. To prevent its consequences, liquid ammonia taken
internally & the dose of a few drops in a glass of sugar water and
instilled externally into the wound to destroy the venom; the use of
cruciferous is sometimes recommended. " Mating takes place in July and August; the female gives birth
on various occasions. For the first few days, she carries them on her back and does not
does not come out of retirement, watching over their conservation for about a month; & this
Age the little ones are strong enough to provide & sustain themselves and they are
expelled from the paternal house. But it was only after two years that they
have reached their full development. The russet scorpion is quite widespread in Europe, mainly on the
shores of the Mediterranean, but the classic place in France where I took it
in fairly large quantities under the stones is the mountain of Cette (Iérault). Mr. Dubreuil has indicated several localities around Montpellier ot
Von would not have expected to meet him. It is also located 4 Sommières,
in the department of Gard. Lyn. Galen Mincaup,
Member of the Physiophile Society of Lyon. (1) The European Scorpion (Scorpio europxus Lin.) only have four. That's what did
erer & Leach the genus Buthus. (2) It must probably feed on Philax lilloralis, the beetle
of the Tenebrionid family, which is quite common in this place where I have found
remains of legs, elytra, etc., under the stones where he was. .

(3) Messrs. P.Gervais, H.Lucas, etc. -:

   

 

 
 

—92—

COMMUNICATIONS. Names & add to our list. Dubois, domain auditor, rue Madeleine, 6, Blois (Loir-et-Cher). — Botany. Galien Mingaud, Quai de Est, 8, Lyon. — Entomology, Coleoptera, Lepidoptera,
Entomological botany. ;

TRADES. ... Last Lanné, a friend of mine discovered the Ganterie, near Dinan (Cétes-du-
North), a workshop of weapons in cut quartzite, type Saint-Acheul and Dumoustier. It is, I
believe, the only one existing in France; it is now classified. I could provide some
Swatches, as well as polished stone axes (especially diorite). We have also
in our surroundings, in the Rance valley, two limestone sand quarries in the
which there are many remains of fossil animals from the Gothic period. I ask-
I would like carved or polished axes, or bronze utensils. A. Ropixor pz Saist-Cyn,

Chateau du Lattay, in Guenroc, by Caulnes (Cétes-du-Nord). Several hundred Hochina hedera Sturm., having emerged this spring from ivy stems
that I had kept since last autumn, I have samples of this species
available to those who request it. J. ve Gautte,
286, rue de Vaugirard, Paris. ‘Type. Opzntuen and Sons, & Rennes. — Mor In Paris, rue des Blanes-Manteaus, $5,

July 1, 1873. The Number: 25 cents. No. 33,

YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE
Payable in advance in stamps or money order on the post office =

For France and Alsace-Lorraine, fr. 3 par. | For PBtranger.........0+.0.0+ fr. 4 parameters,

 

Subseriplion fr Greal-Brilan, 9s 6d. Briish subscribers can remit in penny ot Iwopenoy postage samp. Contact: @ Paris, @ the editorial office of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne,
or at Mile Pétry, bookseller, rue de U Arsenal, 4 Mulhouse (Haut-Rhin). People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. GENERAL INFORMATION ON TACHINARIANS. Of all the orders of insects, the most despised, the least known up to this
day is certainly that of the dead. And yet the manners of the species
which compose it are far from lacking in interest, and this order is perhaps that
which plays one of the greatest roles in the natural economy. We can, however, explain the abandonment in which he finds himself, if we consider that among
the entomologists of our time, very few are serious and work in the development
development of natural history. Most, in making a collection, have
in view that the pleasure of the eyes and naturally choose the beetles and
lepidoptera, insects of good conservation and easy determination. We cannot, therefore, encourage beginners too much to take a look at our
hambles diptera. dark and petty sneral, the exterior of which has nothing good
attractive, but the study of which promises wonders. In all the orders of insects, it is perhaps not, from the general point of view
of nature, of more remarkable and more important family than is, in
Order Diptera, family Muscid. The species that compose it
are hardly noticed either by their adornment or by their size. They have neither the
brilliant colors, nor the large dimensions that surprise us from some
Coleoptera or Lepidoptera, but the active role and pu play in the
creation makes them interesting for everyone. Small, obscure, dressed in a livery
dull and gloomy, as befits their mission, they are spread throughout
place with frightful profusion. Other diptera that live on flowers;
in the sun, have a face suitable for the environment in which they will spend their life,
The anthraxes, the asylums, the bombyles all have their own type which recalls
their manners. Muscids also have their particular type, and like the

The first flower insects are adorned with bright colors, even these,
humble workers of the great insect nation, are dressed as required
their role. In the woods, in the fields, even in our homes, we
are surrounded by their innumerable hordes. That the prodigious number of
Their species and their individuals do not surprise us, they must be
a lot. They are the ones whom God has appointed to maintain universal health.
towards her; they are the travel agents of the globe. In concert in this with the necro-
pheres, silphes, etc., they were created-to make all impu-

   

 

 

 

 

 

   

 
 
 

      
 

  

 

 

- Oh -

related, all organic debris likely to putrefy the air and spread
infectious principles. Generalities about muscides, however general, would require
far too wide. We save them for the day we can
to publish in each issue of this journal a story followed by diptera
native. Today we will choose one of the divisions of this tribe whose
the mores seduce the most, the sub-tribe of the éachinaires. All muscides which have the style (1) of bare antennae or simply pu-
becent, and whose abdomen is bristling with hard, long, rigid bristles,
placed on the edge of the segments alone, or on the edge and in the middle, all these
muscides are lachinaria. The entomologist who will observe these two characters
on a diptera can safely conclude that he has encountered a tachinaria. In the adult state, they pump the juice of the flowers or the serums which flow
from the throne of the trees. They are found in large numbers on the flowers of the umbels.
feres and especially of I'Weraclewm spondyliwn. But if we want them
see by their interesting side, it is necessary to observe the females during the time of
maternity

The tachinarians represent among the diptera what the ichneumonians re:
present in Hymenoptera. We are there to put a brake & exuberate
multiplication of certain species, and particularly of certain lepi-
dopteras. The females choose, to be the cradle of their larvae, the
bodies of other larvae on which they deposit their cents. They have not
from behind like ichneumons and cannot pierce the skin of their victim;
they simply lay the egg on the back of the larva, and it stays there
by the viscous matter with which it is coated on leaving the oviduct. It's the larva
of the tachinaire who is responsible for practicing an opening herself on the day of
its hatching. Once in the place, his life passes like that of the ichneu-
monians. Until the day his pantry takes the form of a nymph
or chrysalis, it respects all the essential organs and feeds only
fatty tissue. It is only after the transformation that she devours all, ne
leaving only an empty and dried shell. All lepidopterists have had these
unpleasant surprises and saw with amazement emerging from a chrysalis...
flies! Tachinids attack all insect orders, even insects
perfect. Léon Dufour found some in hemipterans, in Cassida viridis,
and we found some after him. Robineau-Desvoidy would be stronger than false
tenthredinian caterpillars give them shelter; he saw spider skins
desiccated and empty that he strongly suspected of having sheltered our larvae. So there you go
a vast and promising field of study; nature smiles in advance to whoever wants
get started. We do not despair of one day seeing this principle established: that
each insect, like each plant, has its parasitic insect. The tachinaria appear throughout the insect season On the first
spring, we see flying small Tachinus, Echynomia, Metopia;
etl Lchynomia grossa is one of the last flying diptera & fall on
the last umbellifers. By varying the location of his excursions, by exploring a
day the meadow and the next day the woods, we will soon get a good number
species. But to the workers, to the true friends of science, we con-
we will especially collect and raise all the larvae, caterpillars that they
will meet, each species being set apart. We will advise them to

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

       

     

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

    

    

 

(1) The name of style is given & an appendix of ordinarily sclacce form which accompanies
loincloth most often the anteanes of diptera brachocera. It attaches to the 3rd article and
is itself composed of several articles. — 95 —

put in a large cage, 0 are various species of larvae,
various species of live adult tachinids, and then isolate each
species of larvae. In this way, they will see what species of tachinaria lives on
some larva. It is a cabinet job, quite arid and which requires
lots of attention; it does not have the charms of the excursion: it has better, it
in the hope of discoveries. We end by putting ourselves and our small collection at the disposal of
sition of tones our colleagues in entomology. We ask them in return
if you would like to communicate to us all the species of diptera which
will be superfluous. We are preparing, to the extent of our means and our
science, a history of the species of our country, which we would like to
Note here: we can never have too many materials. Rochefort-sur-Mer. G.COLIN,

Medecine studient. INFLUENCE OF LIGHT ON VEGETATION
ITS ROLE ON THE MOVEMENTS. After.) Causes of chlorophyll movements. The changes that chlorophyll grains undergo under the influence
of light have seized (astonishment) a large number of naturalists. Some physiologists have claimed that the property of moving is
inherent in green matter; but this is not so, as demonstrated by
the research of some scholars. The opinion which now reigns in the
science is that the green granules are not endowed by themselves with
movements; they owe the various positions they occupy to light and
has obscured the protoplasm of cells whose molecules in circulation
entrain the grains of coloring substance. Bohn first suggested that chlorophyll contributes to the currents of the
plasma, but it is above all & a German botanist, M. Franck, that the
deserved to have demonstrated the fact experimentally. I] follows from his research
recent developments that the movements of chlorophyll are all the more rapid than
the protoplasm is richer in water. According to him, light diffuses, all
other things being equal, gives, so to speak, the proteinaceous substance of
cellular elements the power to store a quantity more or less
large amount of water, while the absence of this agent and insolation produce a
opposite effect. The migration of chlorophyll in the granular state therefore depends on the variation
in the imbibition of protoplasm. 1. — Its role in the direction of the movements of the lower organisms. The lower groups of the vegetable kingdom, 1a of I organization is the least
complex and where the individual is represented only by a cedeude, contain
a multitude of types and corpuscles which enjoy the property of
to place. The great class of algae abounds in organisms of this nature. *

— 6 —

The molility of these unicellular individuals seems to be most often devolved
4 particular appendages which, formed of albuminoid substance and a
extremely slender, covering their surface in a more or less
great in their extent. However, the presence of such filaments (cilia or fla-
gellums) is not necessary for the execution of the movements. Thus, all
a family of algae, the diatoms, perform similar acts without
be provided with these appendages. Among the organisms endowed with movement, some vegetate freely in
the liquid environment which is specific to them for almost the entire duration of their
existence. They are born from beings similar to themselves and reproduce to their
turn of the lower plants which bear the greatest resemblance to them. Such
are diatoms, desmids, etc. The other organisms are formed in
special organs belonging to the higher plants. In this cate-
gorie must be arranged the fertilizing corpuscles called antherozoids,
and those ovoid cells which, arising on certain algae, such as the
vaucheries, surround themselves with vibrating cilia 4 a certain degree of their development
ment, then separate from the parent plant to become free and move
in water until the moment when, coming to be fixed on foreign bodies, they
lose their locomotor filaments and produce an algae similar to that
from which they come. They are animated or motile spores, in a word,
zoospores. Several botanists have researched the role played by light
on the movement of these simple organisms; but despite the number enough
large number of observations pursued in this direction, this study is not yet
complete. First of all, it must be said that the research that has been done
to date have only focused on colored organisms, and we will understand
take for what motive! we have not yet studied the action of luminous rays
on the displacement of transparent beings. It is easy to conceive that we
cannot, without falling into serious errors, make such observations
microscope, whose small field does not allow to examine the totality
organisms living in a small amount of water; moreover, this instrument
makes it impossible to illuminate a single part of the drop of liquid deposited
on the object holder. We are therefore obliged to have recourse to another method. The simplest process that has been used up to now consists of 4 observing &
Naked eye the place occupied in a liquid medium by a considerable mass
of these microscopic beings; but as he likes this set of bodies
organized slice by its coloring with the environment where they live, we are in the
need to take stained organisms. A. Movements of zoospores and antherozoids. Neegeli was the first to observe the singular fact that zoospores move
towards the blade. It is by examining the movements of the corpuscles of this
nature vegetating in a saucer full of water, placed near a window, that
this physiologist discovered the action of light rays on the locomotion of
these beings. It vile in it, the zoospores carry themselves in a short time to the edge
the brightest of the vase. Neegeli, not content with this observation, had recourse to experiment.
nothing. A glass tube wrapped in black paper in a fairly large
expanse of its upper portion ful filled with water greened by means of spores
of Tetraspora. After only one hour, all the zoospores placed
in the dark region corresponding to the length of the tube surrounded by paper,
headed for the bottom of this little device, which was then colored with a
green bean, while its upper part had become colorless. So =

This discovery of Noegeli was followed by a few others. — M, Thuret re-
known that a large number of green zoospores of conferves and zoospores
olive trees of pheospores are attracted towards the light; he saw, however,
some of these corpuscles move towards the less illuminated parts of the
vase which contained them, and even, according to him, the zoospores of Vaucheria,
Codium tomentosuin and Ectocarpus firmus neither seek nor flee this
agent. In addition to this research on zoospores, M. Thuret carried out others on
orange antherozoids of fucaceae. It follows from the studies of this botanist that the
fertilizing organs of these algae behave towards light
like other organisms. Let us add 4 to these results the curious observations of Mr. Cohn on the zoos-
pores endowed with a rotary movement. According to this naturalist, zoospores
turn on themselves during the darkness as well from right & left as
left & right, while light "adopts a determined meaning
which is opposite to the course of the hands of a watch, and the same as that of
ke rotation of the earth, when the north pole is regarded as being placed in

self. »

These facts already suffice to show the powerful role played by the rays
luminous on the direction of the movements of unicellular organisms pro-
produced by fairly complex algae. B. Movements of the lower algae. MM. Cohn and Cienkowski were the first to study the influence exerted by
light rays on the movements of the lower algae. The first of these
scholars recognized that the Volvox globator sometimes seeks the light, sometimes
darkness, and Mr. Cienkowski witnessed the same tendencies by observing the
movements of Protonocus fluviatilis. This different way in which the same organisms behave vis-a-vis
light attracted the attention of these botanists. In-depth studies
that they made on the movements of these single-celled vegetanx led them
to admit that the opposite directions taken by these organisms result
of the more or less perfect state of their development. Thus, according to Cohn, the
volvox is attracted towards the light at the first age, while it flees this agent during
that it is about to pass the motionless state. According to Cienkowski, young people
On the contrary, Protonocus seek darkness and do not go towards
the most illuminated parts of the vase which contains them only when they enter
in the state of rest. In 1868, a Russian scientist, M. Famintzine, resumed the study of the lower algae
green in color. I] has shed new light on this interesting question.
health, pointing out as yet unknown facts. It was he, in fact, who demonstrated
that direct sunlight and diffused light exert an action while
opposite on the lowest plants. His experiments brought snr two
species of algae which have been given the name of Huglena and Chlamydo-
monas. From the water of the pond where a considerable number of these beings vegetated
poured into two saucers each covered in 3/4 of a plan-
shred of wood, so that only a quarter is exposed to the light. A
of these saucers was placed in the shade, the other was exposed to direct rays
of the sun. These two vases were left in this position for some
weather. Changes soon took place in both saucers, but
they were not carried out in the same way. In the first, organisms
formed a single green band along the wall closest to the
window; in the second, on the contrary, this marginal line did not exist,

 

One

but it was replaced by another band extended transversely over the whole
the length of the shadow line projected by the planchette. It is by comparing
the different positions occupied by these organisms in the two saucers
that M. Famintzine was led to conclude that Huglena and Chlamydomonas
seek diffused or medium-intensity light and avoid light
direct. If we observe, in fact, with attention the formation of this surface
green, we will see that it is produced on the one hand by plants which, while
first placed in the dark portion of the saucer, went to the
day to near the edge of the plank, od, struck by the solar rays,
they stopped as if an obstacle prevented them from advancing further;
on the other hand, by the individuals who, located in the illuminated part of the vase, fled
the light of the sun too energetic to direct itself towards the diffused light representing
felt by the shadow cast by the board. Another experience due to the Russian scientist makes full of repulsion
exerted on I'Zuglena by the solar rays. Does one come, and the example of M. Famintzine, to cover the illuminated part of the
second saucer of a sheet of paper, as soon as the green band indicated more
hant is completely formed, we will not delay & notice displacements
ments from these algae which do not then form a marginal line
nale, as in the case ot! the saucer is put in the shade. Such are the discoveries with which science has been enriched in recent
years. I should stop 4 this brief account of the research undertaken by
M. Famintzine on the Huglenas; but I still can't finish this job
without discussing for a moment, dear reader, the curious movements of
the Oscillatoria, of that alga which, meeting quite frequently in the
Tuisseaux, vegete & its first state of development at the bottom of lean and
remains attached to the stones by its center, from which radiate green filaments. If anyone disturbs the arrangement of these threads, they will be seen to oscillate slowly.
slowly to resume their original position. M. Faminizine, astonished at these movements, had the idea of ​​looking for their cause.
in the light. This scientist recognized, contrary to the opinion of Mr. Cohn, that
light acts on these algae with less energy, it is true, than on the
Euglena and Chlamydomonas. Here are the conclusions of his experiments:

4. The movement of the sons of the Osciddatoria has light as its principal cause. 7 2° In the dark this movement also manifests itself, but with an extreme
ent. 3° The sons of the Oscit@atoria seek only the light of the middle
intensity or diffuse: they avoid the rays of the sun as much as darkness. I] results from all these researches that the Juminous rays influence the
direction of the movements of the lower organisms. Diffused light acts
by attraction on these simple beings, while the direct solar rays,
like darkness, exert on these same beings a kind of repulsion. Ap. THE MAYOR,
Member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Nancy. (To be continued.) ANEMONES. The genus of Anemones (Anemone) is part of the Ranunculaceae family.
and the anemones group. The corolla is null, it is replaced by ua

— 99 —

petaloid calyx composed of five 4 nine sepals. The involucre is placed
At some distance from the flower it is usually multifid. The cracks are
all radical, stalked and more or less divided. We mainly find the
anemones on the high mountains, however some species occur
also in the plains. These are pretty plants frequently grown in
gardens, but hardly used in medicine, although extremely sour. Anemones can be divided into two sections, the pudsatillas which are
recognize their carpels ending in a long feathery awn, and the
anemones proper, the carpels of which have a short or no awn. Among the pulsatillas, we will name: The spring anemone (Anemone
vernalis L.), plant covered at the top with long tawny hairs, with white flowers
inside-and violet outside. Its leaves are nearly hairless, five or
seven lobed leaflets at apex. It is found in the spring on the mountains,
it is quite common in the Pyrenees and in the Alps. THE. Pasqueflower (A. pudsatilla L.) has a stem from three decimetres high,
terminated by a large purple flower a little hairy on the outside. its leaves
are very jagged, with linear leaflets. This plant is found in the woods
and the mountainous meadows; it is even sometimes found around
Paris, where it bears the vulgar name of coguelourde. Pulsatile extract is
very acrid, it has been used against paralysis and especially amaurosis. THE. by Haller (A. Hadleri DC.) is often regarded as being only one
simple variety of the preceding. She is shorter and covered with long hair
and silver. It is frequently found in the Alps, it is rarer in
the Pyrenees. THE. of the Alps (A. alpina L.) is distinguished by its large white flower or
dew and by its involucre with petiolate leaflets. It flowers in summer on the high
mountains, in the Alps and the Pyrenees; it is also found, but rarely
in the Jura, the Vosges, and even in Burgundy. We distinguish a variety
has yellow flowers (A. sed/wrea L )

The anemones properly so called offer us a greater number of species;
Among the main ones we can cite:

THE. crowned (A. coronaria L.), which, by its beautiful and large flowers
red or blue, has long attracted the attention of horticulturists. She
grows spontaneously in the South and particularly in the surrounding meadows
from Nice. WA. florists (A. hortensis L.), a beautiful plant from the South of France, which
is easily distinguished by its *stars, pink or red. Variety
paconina & sipals numerous, sharp and red, grows especially in the Basses~
Pyrenees. THE. des floristes is one of the first flowers of the year; we have it
found in very large quantities from the month of January, in the sterile places of
Provence and around Nice. She is prone to various monstro-
sities, such as virescence, fullness of flowers, etc. narcissus flowers (A. narcissiflora L.), which can be recognized by its
glabrous shovels and its white flowers in umbel. She is on the high
mountains, in the Vosges, the Alps, etc. THE. sylvie (A. nemorosa L.), res common in our woods that it lines
in spring its beautiful white or pink flowers; we sometimes find
a variety with entirely purple flowers. She is known as Sylvie,
paguette, flower of Good Friday. THE. buttercup (A. ranuneuloides L.) is very similar to the previous one. It only differs from it by its flowers of a beautiful yellow, upright and smaller;
she is found at privtenips in the woods, under hedges, but much more
rarely than the sylvia anemone. The A, sylvestre (A. sylvestris L) is also similar to the last two, of which

 

        

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

       

— 100 —

it differs in having small carpels close together in a woolly tela. She is
common in Alsace, around Mulhouse and Strasbourg, and throughout
the south-east of France. Some authors admit a 3rd section, that of the liverworts, which we
distinguished by the involucre with 3 entire leaflets close to the flower. This
section contains only one species:

THE. liverwort (A. hepatica L., Hepatica triloba DC. ), pretty little plant
4 lilac or white flowers, with trilobed, shiny and firm leaves, growing
spontaneously in Alsace, Lorraine, Provence, etc. We cultivate it often
in the beds, because of the beauty of its flowers. Paris. A. Do Lirus. PRACTICAL ENTOMOLOGY. TRACKING (track). ul. The few species of caterpillars that I am going to tell you about are far
to be as harmful to gardens and orchards as the four preceding species
teeth; one might even believe, at first glance, that they do not
no appreciable harm, since they generally only attack species
forest and usually point to fruit trees; however it seemed to me
it is useful to make them well known in order to combat them on occasion. As the
voracity of the most destructive species is such that they almost devour
all plants, trees and shrubs, or at least a fairly extensive selection
to attack with equal avidity those of the same family, they
would happen, 4 a given moment, and if the atmospheric circumstances came &
promote their multiplication, also become detrimental to gardens
and orchards. First, there is the Bombyx salicis (willow bombyx) (genus Leucoma). This moth applies its eggs, which are greenish, against the willow thrones,
poplars, and covers them with a gray varnish to protect them against
rigors of winter. It sometimes happens that the female, in a hurry to deposit her
burdened or blown by the wind on a slender plant, lays its eggs en masse
almost rounded; in this case, these eggs are surrounded by a white foam,
similar to soap essence diluted with water, but offering a great
consistency is due to the varnish of which it is formed. These eggs, after having
spent the winter under this protective shelter, give birth, at the end of April, to
young caterpillars found wherever there are willows and poplars
(mainly white willows) and arrive in June & all their thickness;
it is at this time that they spin a shell of a white and tight fabric, in
slits that they bind with silk threads or in the wrinkles of the bark. The chrysalis is very shiny black, with tufts of yellow hairs on
the back and on the sides of the abdomen. The tip of the anus and the little fangs
with which it is armed are entirely black. The perfect insect, @ qni its color
Brilliant silvery-white w has earned the name of apparent and which makes it be seen
from very far away, after fifteen or twenty days, that is to say in the current
of July. This species is so abundant in some years that sometimes
in the evening, in the alleys of poplars, one would see, during the heat of the

 

 

— 101 —

heat wave, see fluttering snowflakes; or rather, like those butterflies a
thick abdomen barely know how to use their wings, it looks like the ground
itself strewn with snow. Last year again, I witnessed this phenomenon.
come back, on a hot summer evening, from the forest of Amboise, following
before the main road to Bléré. The ground was literally covered with these
butterflies. For the first time since this alley of poplars has existed, we
there practiced weeding on a large scale. We have just cut down the trees, which moreover
Almost all of them are dead, at least at their tops. The caterpillars of this insect have a row of yellowish dorsal spots and
elongated, sharp on a black background with a row of red tubercles
hairy we see on each side. The ttle is of a blackish ash and garnished
whitish hairs. The belly is a purple-brown, the legs membra-
neuses are tawny and the scaly ones of a shining black; they are numbered
of oneself

Here is another species which has some analogy with the Liparis dispar whose
I spoke to you, it is the Bombyx monacha (genus Psilura), the zigzag &
red belly, the monk; although quite common and widespread everywhere, it
is never so abundant as its congener, and therefore cannot harm, at least
in France, in a noticeable way; as its name sufficiently indicates,
the caterpillars of this bombyx like to make lavish meals. In Germany, this species in the caterpillar state often causes great damage.
Magi, especially in the pine forests. Although preferably living on conifers, it is also found on the
apple, pear, oak, birch, beech, poplar, linden and
charm; it even feeds on bilberries or cranberries. Like fire, it destroys everything everywhere it goes. Blooms in the spring,
it arrives at its full size towards the end of June; it is long then
50 millimetres, of a dirty yellow on the sides, with the fourth segment pos-
exterior entirely of this color, except below where it is black; the body
is black, covered with bundles of hairs of the same color. The metamorphoses are done in a light woolly fabric placed in the cracks
tree bark or between leaves; the perfect insect hatches towards the end
July or August, after fifteen to twenty days, depending on the temperature. The female lays her eggs in a single oblong pile of one hundred and fifty eggs
approximately or in small balls of twenty & fifty eggs, but always close
soil, cracks in the bark or among mosses and lichens. They
are round and of a shiny pale green. The male of this species, unlike that of the Liparis dispar, does not fly
not during the day, unless disturbed; it remains stuck on the surface of the
corks or against the trunks of trees, and does not take flight until evening. A peculiarity that these caterpillars have, and which is common to them,
moreover, with many others, it is to be able, ranant the first half
of their growth, produce threads of silk by means of which they
hang, el, helped by the wind, pass thus from branch to branch and from tree
in tree. During the day, they prefer to stay on the bark. They
eat only during the night and cut the leaves in two parts, do not
eating only the base and dropping the rest on the ground, which, when they
are numerous, immediately manifest their presence on the trees. The chrysalis, enveloped in a light network of whitish silk, is equally
ment curious to observe when it is between the crevices of a tree;
it is of a shiny bran, with the lighter incisions and of such a brilliant tone
that she seems surrounded by a halo. She has, moreover, the rings
eainis small clumps of hairs of a pale minium red which adds even more
a Villusion. — 102 —

The moth has the end of the abdomen pinkish; the upper wings in
both sexes are yellowish-white with black zigzag lines, and
the lower ones are a pure ash-grey, with the tip whitish, divided
transversely by a more or less dark band, behind which there is
has a series of black dots placed on the bangs. The male is always sensitive
much smaller than the female. Amboise. Ernest LELIEVRE,

 

Corresponding member of the Societies for Scientific Studies
@ Angers and Paris. (To be continued.) WHAT CONTAINS A SHELL OF SATURNIA PYRI (Pavonia major). (LARGE NIGHT PEACOCK.) As of last March 30, I noticed, for several days, in a
crate filled with shells of Saturnia pyri, a continual outbreak of
entomobic diptera. This lasted until about April 9, about forty of them hatched out to me. And
not a single night peacock showed itself. Finally on the 19th, the first appeared, soon followed by about fifteen others. Curious to establish how many subjects the museides had devoured me, I opened
shells attacked, and in each of them I found eight pulps of ento-
mobies, which simply brought the number of large peacocks to five
stung. The most curious thing is that these cocoons dated back two years, and all the en-
tomologists know that often the pupae of this bombyx remain two
years without hatching, and sometimes even three years. Its parasite is therefore subject 4
Ja same periodicity. I take this opportunity to point out a point that I encountered in par-
familiar with the very interesting work of M. Maurice Girard (the Metamorphoses of
insects). On page 281, we read the following about entomobies:

“It should be noted that the larvae must metamorphose outside,
because the adult fly lacks the organ to puncture the animal's skin.
mal oti lived the larva. In China, the silkworms are attacked by insects of this section, which
called fly disease. Sai published similar observations,
made in France on worms & silk bred & Passy by M. Caillas. Instinct
had deceived the female of the entomobia, seeking only living flesh
for her children, because the larvae cannot leave the thick cocoon and the
flies find the grave next to the cradle. It is by opening cocoons
intended for graining and which did not give moths that could be recognized
born these fails. »

However, my flies came out perfectly alive from the shell of the S. pyri,
and yet its pear-shaped hull is made of a kind of felt
very gummed, brown in color, and covered with intertwined threads which, certainly,
offer much greater resistance than the ordinary silkworm cocoon
(Sericaria mori). It is true that the shell of the big peacock is open & its upper end,
which does not exist in the silkworm. — 103 —

The chrysalises of the latter have at their head a vesicle discovered by
M. Guérin-Meneville and containing a liquid that allows the butterfly to spread
the silk threads by unsticking them, in order to clear a passage. I therefore do not claim to invalidate the testimony relating to the silkworm, I
I content myself with proving that the fact is not general. Amboise. » LELIEYRE. PRESS FOR DESSIC FOR HERBARIUMS,

 

TION OF PLANTS

 

The desiccation of plants is, for botanists, one of the most important questions.
more important. Especially for beginners, who have a lot to gain
first of all, it is necessary to have a means of rapid desiccation, to
he does not compromise the harvest by crowding. Besides avoiding a
enormous expenditure of paper, the press of which I give the explanation here will make
I believe, in this respect, some services. The idea ep belongs to
Mr. Moride, pharmacist 4 Nantes, but it has been modified and improved from the
following way:

The press is made up of two iron rectangles with a pen over
length and breadth as paper & wither: blades of thin iron,
posed sux field to give them more resistance and intersecting with angle
right, divide each of these iron frames into twelve regular squares. On
each rectangle is tightly stretched over a sieve board, so as to present
two perfectly united interior surfaces. The lower frame is provided on
one of its side dongs with two long screws themselves provided with shields &
ears and provided with hinges & their point of insertion; the other side is
provided with two nut supports also hinged, supports in which
tangles a long screw 4 crank. This arrangement of plows allows
to play the different pidces 4 wills,

The plants are then arranged in the middle of three or four leaves of
gray blotting paper and placed on the flat surface of the lower tray (we
can easily put a layer of 10 to 15 centimeters), the platean su-
perianr is put on top; the screws are inserted into their respective cavities,
and we squeeze ad libitum. The plants thus pressed are exposed to the heat of the
sun or & the moderate heat of an open fire or an oven. They
dry out with extraordinary rapidity, the heat warming the sheet and
The walls with which it is screened allow rapid evaporation of the humidity
After a few hours of exposure to heat, it is sometimes born.
necessary to change the two or three sheets of paper that wrap the
plant (because it has given up part of its moisture to them) and rec-
smooth out bad folds. It is then enough to give the nuts a few turns, to
cut them down and the press then opens like a book. Experience shows that moderate pressure and heat give
the best results if you want to hasten desiccation by heat
too intense, the plants become brittle and crumbly and the flowers lose
their colors. This machine has, in addition, this approval, that it can be easily transported
from one place to another, and returned in all directions so that the evaporation
moisture is made on one and the other side in a uniform way. Amboise. E. Air. and

         

 

         

        

     
     

 

 

   

        
    

 

  
 

— 104 —

COMMUNICATIONS. This is the moment when insects of all kinds appear in the countryside; at this
By the way, I find in the Union séricole an effective remedy against the bite of insects. "To instantly calm the pain and even change it into a pleasant sensation,
» just rub the bite with a porreau. The discovery of this remedy is due to the
chance, like that of many others. A dog, stung in the muzzle by a hornet,
ran to his master's garden, burrowed against a porrean, tore it with his
paws and rubbed his muzzle there, The swelling and pain disappeared in a moment. »

 

I had, a few days after reading

 

this article, the opportunity to make use of the remedy
on myself, I have found it most effective. I must confess, however, that I have not
6experienced no pleasant sensation. Geneva, Adrien-Charles Concenues. Contrary to what M. Berce says, in his book (1) about Cnethocampa pro-
cessiona, I can affirm that the caterpillars, whatever the number (i.e. a
part of the nest or the whole nest), rise perfectly and even without care. In 1372, I
raised for a month 150 catches together At two different nests, they are perfectly
arrived

 

's. My friend L. Renaud, given the difficulty of obtaining oak, had them make
vigil and fasting several times a week; despite these frequently renewed divts
he did not have to note any deficit at Péclosion. G. Rovast. Names & add to our list. Gustave Debernard senior, 7, place d'Aisne, & Limoges. — Entomology, Coleoptera. Ernest Hervé, ramp Saint-Melaine, in Morlaix, — Entomology, Coleoptera. Lucien Reynaud, 19, rue de Lyon, & Lyon. — Entomology, Lepidoptera of Europe. Georges Rouast, 29, quai de la Charité, & Lyon. — Entomology, Lepidoptera. NOT

 

ECROLOGY. We are sorry to inform our readers of the death of Mr. Jean Schlumberger,
Fun of our correspondents, who had given the Sheet several notes on Pentomology
and on some other subjects of natural history. ERRATA,
At no. 31, p. 77, line 20, instead of this year, read Pannée last. At number 32, p 88, first line, at the licu of Sodogonia, read Pudogonia. At no. 32, p. 90, line 15, instead of queninin and esculin, read quercitrin and esculin. (1) French entomological fauna, t. UM, p. 178. ‘Type. Ovenruen ot son, 2 reindeer. — Me* in Paris, rue des Blancs-Manteaux, 35.

 

of August 1873. The Number: 25 cents. No. 34,

YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

 

Payable in advance in stamps or money order by post:
For France and Alsace-Lorraine, Br. 3 par. | For

 

Fr. 4 para,

 

Subseparation for Great Britain, 8s, 6y. British subscribers can remit in penoy or tvopenny postage stamps. Contact: & Paris, the editor of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne,
or at Mie Pétry, bookseller, rue de V Arsenal, & Mulhouse (Haut-Rhin). People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. ON THE COLORING MATERIALS OF PLANTS
(After). In this article we will examine the coloring matter of flowers. So far they have only been studied by MM. Fremy and Cloéz (reviews
of the Academy of Sciences, t. XXXIX, p. 194), who admit the existence of
three principles: ('one blue, cyanine, and two yellow, one soluble, xantheine,
the other insoluble, xanthine. Cyanine is a blue, amorphous powder, soluble in water and alcohol,
insoluble in ether; it turns red under the influence of acids and green
by the alealis. Reducing agents bleach it, oxygen restores the shade. The red matter, isolated, is none other than cyanine. According to the authors
mentioned above, all pink or red flowers ofier an acid reaction,
blue flowers a neutral reaction. Some red flowers, withering,
turn blue, then green; this can be explained by the decomposition
of a nitrogenous matter which furnishes ammonia, and the latter, by saturating
Vacid, turns the color red to blue; then, by its predominance, it
then produces the color green. The scarlet red flowers contain in
besides yellow matter. The petals of aloe and some other plants
of the same family contain, instead of cyanine, a matter very little
soluble in water, insoluble in ether, soluble in alcohol, and does not turn
sounds the influence of acids or alealis. Althea vosea or black mallow contains a coloring principle, soluble in
water and alcohol, sparingly soluble in ether; its aqueous solution is red
purplish and becomes crimson red with acids and green with alkalis; this
matter was used formerly to color the wine; we use it now,
especially in Bavaria, for dyeing and printing. Xanthine is best obtained from the great sun (LJelianthus annuus);
Ja xantheine, yellow dahlias. Xanthine is resinous, soluble in alcohol
and ether, Xantheine is soluble in water, alcohol and ether; the alkalis the
stain dark brown; the acids bring it back to yellow. She can form
Colored jacks and give quite bright yellows on mordanted fabrics. Such is the state of science on the coloring principles of vegetarians in
general. As for the plants used as dyeing materials, they offer

 

 

— 106 —

a much more considerable interest, and are the object of a host of works than
we will endeavor to present as clearly as possible & our readers
in the following articles. We will now study dyeing materials; first the woods, then
roots; then indigo, lichens, resins; finally, the other subjects
which could not find a place in this classification. In this article, we understand
we will begin the study of wood stains. Under this name we understand the cam-
peach, red woods, sandalwood, yellow woods, quercitron, fustet,
rhubarb, vineberry and turmeric. Most of these woods come to us from hot countries. They are found in
the trade in tarpaulins, such as they are brought to Europe, in shavings and
extracts obtained by exhausting the chips with boiling water or under pressure, and
evaporating the liquid in a vacuum or in vapour. Campeche is provided by the throne of the Hematoaylon campechianum. “is a thorny tree, from the legume family. I] believe in America
southern and West Indies; its name Jui comes from the Bay of Campeche, in
xic. Its importation took place shortly after the discovery of America. We
distinguishes, according to the place of origin, several varieties which differ
by the quality and quantity of the products: 1° Campeche cut from Spain;
(2) the English cup, coming from Jamaica; 3° the campéches cup of Haiti
and Santo Domingo; 4° that of Honduras; 5° Campeche from } Martinique,
and 6° that of Guadeloupe, which are the two least esteemed varieties. It arrives in stripped does, weighing 200 kilograms, of a color
bran red 4 on the outside, much less dark in the preseryed parts of the con-
Vair's tact; very hard, capable of a beautiful polish and offering wide cre=
vases; their flavor is sweet and astringent, and they color the saliva in
red. The coloring principle was studied by Chevreul and Erdmann. It exists in the
wood in the free state or in combination with glucose (glucoside); moreover, we
finds its oxidation products, which give the inperficial parts their
dark tint. The crystals are light yellow, sweet in taste, sparingly soluble in
cold water, solubles in boiling water, alcohol and ether. The decoction of the wood offers the following reactions:

Dilute acids cause it to turn yellow, alkalis purplish red. 'The
reducing agents discolor it. Metal oxides form blue lakes;
the dichromate of potash gives a magnificent purple black. Redwoods or Brazilwoods belong to the legume family.
and grow in the same bond as the Campeche they serve to falsify. They we
arrive in bitches or in hard, compact stumps, of yellow color inside
dark and brown on the outside; odorless, sweet and astringent flavor, and! co-
turning saliva red. We mainly distinguish:

1° Fernambouc wood, Casalpina erista, from Jamaica and Brazil,
the richest and most esteemed; pale yellow inside, red outside;
slightly aromatic smell;

2° Brazil wood, Cwrsalpina brasiliensis, of a brick red color in the
fresh and brown sections 4 Vair; » . ee

3° The wood of Sainte-Marthé and of Nicaragua, of Cesalpina echinatos, believe-
aac Sierra Nevada, Mexico, and 4 St. Martha; covered at dawn
plane;

4° The wood of Japan, Cwsalpina Sappan. East Indies, Japan, China, islands
Molnques, Antilles, Brazil; hinds or branches with central medullary tissue
very fine grain, very fine red. Lima wood is one variety; >

5° Brazillet wood, Cesalpina vesicuria. Guyana, West Indies, sticks of 5
6 centimeters in diameter, covered with sapwood; Red color; little valued;

 

  
 

CC

  
 

   

 

 

  

 

 

— 107 —

6° Bahia wood; hinds squarely cut and skinned; quality
medium, yellow color, astringent bitter flavor. The coloring matter is little studied. It is a glucoside, brasilin, so-
soluble in water, slightly coloured; the air oxidizes it slowly and makes it pass little by little
red more or less brown: Alum and lead nitrate do not precipitate it. Paris. Drea

 

NOTE ON THE USE OF PATCHOULI

FOR THE PRESERVATION OF ENTOMOLOGICAL COLLECTIONS. Since the creation of the first entomological collection, everyone has
everted & find a condom strong enough to keep insects out
destructenrs to penetrate there and to devastate in a few months what the patience
of the collector had taken years to collect. Lots of research and few successes, we can say. Indeed, it is recognized that if such and such a product, for a time more or
less long, according to its power of action, manages to ward off their ravages, it
does not come at least a moment when this condom can become impotent, either
first that he could not, for some reason, most often independent of
of the will of the collector, to be renewed in good time, even if its
evaporation was quicker in such a less hermetic closing carton-
other, because all the condoms known to date are not efli-
only as long as they are renewed often. This is well accepted. From this it results that rarely, and & unless of continuous monitoring,
sometimes impossible, one cannot go too far on a comprehensive conservation.
plete and general, even with the most reputable agents 4 the current hour, the
inine and phenol, of which I am however far from doubting T'eflica~
, under this condition, I repeat, of assiduous supervision and
frequent renewal. Another reason also made me strongly desire to procure for the entomolo-
there is the competition of a less nauseating odor than the two precilates, because
I am not speaking of camphor, the disadvantages of which are more 4 to be dreaded than
the services he can render; I wanted, I said, an agent to come and replace them.
place by offering a better perfume, while requiring in its use a
less rigorous accuracy. Indeed, it is unquestionably more agreeable when the confraternity of
tudes, or sometimes even the simple politeness, we oblige to show some
of our boxes, either to colleagues, or to simple indifferent people, not to have
to offend the delicate nostrils with odors as unsweet as those of
gasoline and phenol. I know very well that the sense of smell of my colleagues who have already been warned will not be surprised.
taken; but how many others will find it detestable to be concerned with
things that smell so bad; because two-thirds of the simply curious attribute
will first smell the odor to the insects themselves. This case has arisen & each
from us at least several times. So I looked for a persistent fragrance, so that the collection would be main-
languishes in its atmosphere so to speak indefinitely and thus puts 4 Pabri
destroyers, regardless of the time during which, for whatever reason,
conch, we are necessarily obliged to neglect its supervision. My process is one of the simplest; I give it today for what it can

 

  

  

 

— 108 —

there. It certainly needs to be used and studied on a wider scale.
scale. What I do know is that he succeeded marvelously well, and until
evidence to the contrary, I believe it effective. 4~

The basis of my perfume is the dry leaf of patchouli, to which I add
a few thyme leaves, cloves and semen-contra, mixed together
for two thirds patchouli and one third of the three other named plants. I
proceed as follows:

I crush in a mortar, or simply with a hammer, the nails of
clove, then I crush the seed of the semen-contra by rubbing this seed between the
thumb and forefinger, so as to reduce it to fine dust, which is done very
easily, or I grind it in a mortar, which is better, because it is very
friable. These two preparations made, I mix everything together with my dry leaves
of patchouli and thyme, and I break it all up again, taking between the
two palms of the hand the leaves that I rub strongly against each other
until they are reduced to fine debris, but not to dust. This done and all the plants well mixed, I form with white canvas
small bags filled with this mixture and beds tightly from below with a wire
strong. These balls are the size of a small walnut. I cross them longi-
finally with a strong No. 40 pin, which I prick at one of the corners of
I box & preserve. If the box is big, I put two at two corners
opposites. Canvas that has been washed several times is better; she is then no longer
porous and allows the perfumes it contains to escape better. Muslin
very strong can also serve the purpose very well. Every time we have the opportunity to open a box, it will be good to understand.
prime the ball and roll it between your fingers to release new ones
scents. Lyons. Lucien REYNAUD,
Member of the Linnean Society of Lyon,
(To be continued). A FEW WORDS ABOUT GLACIERS. When you haven't explored the high peaks of the Alps, you don't get used to
general not a very exact idea of ​​the importance of these masses of frozen water
which Goethe rightly called rivers of ice. If the waters that
rains and the condensation of the vapors bring on the earth recovered im-
mediately on a journey to re-enter the basin of the seas, the earth would pass
suddenly from flood to drought and would often remain for months
without this element which she cannot do without for a single day. Two ways have been
implemented to retain the waters on the summits of the globe and to leave them
flow with wise parsimony, so that the provisions may suffice & the
length of the scarcity. Rainwater and condensed vapors collect
seem in the cavities of the mountains, escape through the cracks of the rocks
dear and will flow along the valleys; or else the waters run in
abundance harden on the highest points of man's abode, and
by melting slowly during the dry season, maintain the

 

— 109 —

springs and rivers. — It is the glaciers (1) that actually generate the
most of the great rivers of Europe, the Rhine, the Rhone, the Po, the Adige, the Inn. the
Rhone, for example, does come out of Lake Geneva, but the lake is not in reality
than an expansion of flenve. Going up higher, in the mountains, we
sees the river rise from the foot of a glacier; if we climb the glacier & turn, we
ends up entering a huge snowfield. The accumulated snow makes
the glacier, and the melting glacier forms the river. In fact, a glacier is a solid river that occupies valleys throughout
their width, and whose depth is often considerable. This is not a
rividre jelly & the surface, it is a solid mass from the surface to the bottom, a
gigantic casting. The thickness of the ice cannot be measured exactly; but different sound-
data suggest that in some glaciers in Switzerland the thickness
must be greater than 300 meters. Often, on the edges, one finds more than
50 meters deep, and sometimes the glacier is 1 kilometer wide. Glaciers follow all the sinuosities, all the curvatures, all the
narrowings and widenings of the valley; they mold themselves somehow
in the hollow that separates the ridges from the mountain. If two glaciers meet
counter like two rivers, they unite to follow the common valley;
their surface is sometimes smooth, sometimes rough, jagged, sometimes furrowed with
crevasses which are sometimes veritable chasms thousands of feet in length,
50 and even 100 feet wide. These frozen rivers are not still;
like real rivers. they advance very slowly, but at last they pro-
grumble. The lower part of the sea of ​​ice 4 Chamounix moves every
year of about 160 meters. The glacier carries with it, in addition to the scree
rocks, all the objects that are on its surface. These masses advance in an insensitive and noiseless manner, with a vileness
variable, but about 2 centimeters per hour for sea ice. Soft-
ment is irresistible. The glacier breaks like wisps of straw all the obs-
tackles that interfere with his walk, scraping the rocks, digging furrows in the
granil, destroying trees, pushing in front of him the houses that bar him
the path. It is a silent, slow, implacable force, and which nothing
resist. Mr. Tyndall found that the flow of the ice was absolutely
like the flow of water in the rivers. The highest speed is
in the middle of the bed and decreases at the edges and towards the bottom. As for the
rivers, the line of greatest speed leaves the middle and approaches the edge,
on the side of the concave sinuosilates. The current of a river is strong, indeed,
of the concave cdté than of the convex c6té. The bottom of the glacier is less than half
the speed of its surface. Slippage is much less marked in winter
only in summer; it is also, according to Mr Tyndall, only about half of what he
is in ele,

The advancing movement of glaciers remained an enigma for a long time.
for physicists. How could the ice, which breaks so easily,
to mold itself in a way on the sides of the valley and to flow in the way
viscous matter? It is a Faraday experiment which, well explained
by M. Tyndall some fifteen years ago, has made it possible to explain the phenomenon
led. Two pieces of ice in contact stick together, even in hot water. Snow packed in the hands compresses, becomes ice; small
pieces of ice thrown into a mold, then compressed, form a whole

 

 

 

  

 

 

(1) All that follows is taken from an article by M. H. de Parville on the work, Jes
Glaciers, by J. Tyndall. — 10 —

solidarity, a single block. This remark made, one can easily go
account of the progression of glaciers. Indeed, on the high peaks, the snow
falls every winter and does not melt; a layer is formed which protrudes
often 100 meters thick. The bottom snow, compressed by the snow
upper layers, coalesces and turns into ice. The pressure and the
slope of the ground bring down these icy patches, which first break
on rocks, then coalesce as a result of contact refreezing;
- slide and spread out in the valley. Each year bringing its quota, the glacier advances, and when it meets
against a sinuosity, a constriction, it breaks, it splits, but the
pieces are united again and the solid river continues its course,
shrinking or swelling, following the vagaries of the path. The ice breaks through
tensile stress, it is welded by compressive stress. We can go
account, by invoking these very simple principles, of all the phenomena ob-
serves in glaciers. At the end of the glacier, at the bottom of the valley, the blocks pile up and form
vofit. From the desssons of the ice creams i} arises a muddy eat, and it is not without a
certain disappointment that one sees this dirty water coming out of these blocks of a
crystal so pure and so blue. It is that the water of fasion, which has infiltrated through the
cracks, took with it the dust, the detritus of the rocks polished by
the glacier; but it regains all its limpidity when the current slackens. Thus, the Rhone carries the materials it carries into Lake Geneva. The,
the dust settles and the river has only blenes and lime waters.
feet out of the lake. The lakes of Geneva, Thum, Constance, Como,
de Garde, etc., fed by water from the glaciers, are filled in this way.
the years and will eventually fill up. The ice that terminates a glacier is precisely that which was at the origin.
gine under the snow of the haunted peaks; bit 4 bit, lower layers
thus come to light. The heat of the sun works, in fact, from one end
on the other, an icy river to melt it; also, when we reach 4 extreme som-
moth, we meet the ice which, at the start, was the deepest
located. It is as a result of this mechanism that the objects buried in the crevices
vases eventually appear on the surface. After forty years of disappearance,
the remains of three sunken guides were found near the end of the
Bossons glacier, 4 several liewes below the ¢revasse in which
they had slipped. The glaciers of Switzerland are manifestly diminishing; they shrunk
for twelve years very noticeably, and formerly the sea of ​​ice, for example,
had dimensions much more considerable than those raised by
dle Saussure in 1788. It is impossible to be mistaken. Mr. Tyndall reviews the different assumptions that can be made
forward to explain this shrinking of the glaciers. The glacier, we
we said, plane the rocks he finds in his path; much better, he em-
carries with him the rocks he has lifted or fallen from the heights;
gold, & 50 meters in height above the current bed, we see the sides of the
plowed mountains, streaked with ice. At high altitudes there are
rocks that come from very distant points. The stone blocks’ transported
by ancient glaciers are easy & recognize; they are enormous, their edges
is lively; we see that they have not been rolled, but deposited ov they are like
by magic; they are brought one after the other exactly in
"order according to which the different rocks follow one another on the mountain
from which they come. By taking advantage of these observations, geologists were able to
demonstrate that the glaciers of Chamounix, Mount Rose, Saint-Gothard,
flooded through the valleys of the Arve, the Rhone, the Aar and the Rhine, up to

 

 

  

 

 

-ihn—

in the plains of Ja Suisse and as far as the Jura, where they brought their blocks
has a height of more than 350 meters above the current piyean of the lake of
Neuchâtel. In Ireland, in Scandinavia, we find the same traces of the work
ancient glaciers. In the north of Germany, one encounters blocks of
granil belonging to the Scandinavian mountains, These blacs, no doubt, encompassed
in floating ice, will have crossed the sea and come aground
on the continent. 7 a

 

PERSEVERANCE OF SWALLOWS. In the spring of 1872, at Digoin, a couple of swallows came to
set up in front of my house. The nest was built in a corner of a window, on the first floor of a
house being a pied-a-terre. It had been completed for several days when
arrived the owner, who opened his windows, and like this nest
almost entirely, in its width, the amount of the frame to which it applied

on one side, it shattered, falling to pieces in the street. The apartment having been

  

  

evacuated shortly after and the window closed, the swallows
they hastened to consolidate an appendage which still clung to the wall, and
working incessantly, rebuilt their dwelling within a week; this time
I nest barely adhered to the chassis, too much however, because the owner
having returned, the windows were again opened and more than half of the
nest collapsed. The swallows were not discouraged: the owner immediately left and
closed windows, indefatigable masons and at the same time patient architects, they
set to work, so that they would soon be able to finish their third nest. That's why I wrote to you-
ci, supported only by the ashlars and by the fixed part — irés narrow
— from the accursed window, no longer rested on the frame than it even touched

ace. y Since then, although the windows had often been opened, no damage
has not arrived & this last work, cradle of a young brood that has
ably raised the persevering couple. Around the same time, other swallows having painfully installed their
little earthen huts at the top of the great gate of the church, were chased away
stoned by kids who destroyed the modest buildings. This incident was well suited to dig up forever the poor birds of the
place where they saw themselves so little respected. rn

Nevertheless, calm having been restored, they remade their nests which they occupied
throughout the summer season. Besangon. S. DE Prinsac. COMMUNICATIONS. Names & add & our list. Mr. E. Lair, 4 Amboise. — Botany and beetles. M. A. Méguelle, town hall square, Rol house, Digne. M. Rivé, master tutor, at the lyege of Dijon. — 112 —

Applications of !Eucalyptol or essence of Eucalyptus,

Dr. Miergues, from Boufarick (Algeria), has attempted various trials with the essence of Zucalyptus,
and this is what he found:

When a paper coated with Eucalyptol is applied to a print and subjected to
4 the press, we obtain a reproduction of this printed matter. If you want reproductions
more vigorous, the engraving must be moistened with water. I use, he adds, 'Eucalyplol, to keep insects away from my herbarium and
furs, to remove greasy stains, to asphyxiate and preserve insects
intended for collections. A lung, injected with this essence, dried up retaining its color and shape; he
is of an extreme lightness and allows to make perfect cuts for the microscope. Yes
we dissolve rosin or galipot in Eucalyptol, we obtain a varnish which
makes the paper transparent and makes it one of the best tracing papers. I use

 

 

this varnish to preserve, between two glasses, microscopic preparations... Wax
virgin, dissolved in this essence and applied to paper, gives it the property of
retain the color of the butterflies by suitably arranging the wings between two sheets
of this paper and putting to the press. (Excerpt from the journal Science for All). TRADES. M. H, from Mercy (college of Toul) would like to change plants from the Meuse and the east
of the Meurthe against about fifteen species specific to the Hautes-Vosges. In order to facilitate the study of Pentomology, Mr. Henri Delalande, residing
Rennes, rue Saint-Georges, 34, offers beginners boxes of 25, 50, 75 and 100 beetles.
lands of western France, carefully named, in exchange for the same number of beetles
lands of another country,

 

It also offers botanists rare plants from the West region, in exchange for
those of the country they live in. Tlest able to make many shipments. M. B. Lair, Grand'Rue, Amboise, collected a large quantity of Hoplia exrulea and
a certain number of Capnodis tenebrionis, which he will send in exchange for other beetles,
Longhorn beetles, Lamellicorns, Buprestids well determined. typ. Oberthiir et fils, 4 Rennes, — Maison & Paris, rue des Blanes-Manteaux, 95. 4" September 1873. The Number: 25 cents. Ne 35,

 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

Payable in advance in stamps or money order by post:

   

For France and! Alsace-Lor

 

ine, fr. 3 par. | For PEtwanger....... 2.20.6. Fr. 4 par. Subscription for Great Brilan, 8s, 6d. British subscribers ean remil in penny or (wopeany postage stamps. Address: & Paris, & the editorial office of La Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne; Dear Me Pétry,
bookseller, rue de C Arsenal, & Mulhouse (Haut-Rhin). People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as re-subscribed. LEPIDOPTERA. The subject I am addressing has long been treated by specialists
competent, and certainly the second year beginner will not be
without having read some of the many writings published on this subject, written
for the most part very well done and from which one can only draw very
good information

However, I have this observation that for the beginner, what is needed
before lout, it is a clear, precise explanation, and I will say more, descending
sometimes in minute detail, which is not always found in
ccrils best trailed by their authors. This is the gap that I have come to try to fill. And remembering first
that I address myself to beginners of the first year, I engage these 4 lire
seriously what I write has their intention, It is certain, for so little that this
either, that they will find there some information which will be useful to them. the
result often comes down to little, and the lack of results almost immediately
diats can often divert from that occupation the one who intended to engage in it

    
 

   

       

 

logic is undoubtedly the one that forms the most new followers. By
Velegance of their forms and above all by the richness and brilliance of their colors,
the lepidoptera, indeed, can be considered as the first among
insects from the point of view of beauty, and we understand that they went
the first looks. But it is not enough to walk in the countryside, the net in the hand,
current from here, from 1a, after some most often very common species,
to be able to say that we take serious care of their hunt and to arrive
to possess a scientific and numerous collection of this order of insects. I
is to attain this end other more effective means, by the employment of which
we arrive quite easily 4 to obtain snjets that never without that one does not
could acquire otherwise than at the price of money, while very often
Purchased species is abundantly found in the fauna of the inhabited locality
by the hobbyist. —114—

I will therefore try to pass under the eyes of my young colleagues
all the means known to date to capture, raise and preserve these char-
insect mantles. And starting from this idea, I will successively give the descrip-
tion of all the processes 4 to put into practice to obtain during
time a fairly large collection of Lepidoptera. I will start with the
way known to all: hunting with a net. I will stretch out during
remains on this kind of hunt everywhere well described as a whole. A few details only on the choice of utensils and their use. BUTTERFLY HUNT,
Utensils,

The utensils necessary for this hunt are few; fillet first. This well-known instrument must be 37 & £0 centimeters in diameter, or
about 120 centimeters in circumference. This size will not seem too
great after test. It is all the more useful 4 a hand still unskilled,
that it most often catches the conyoilated insect on the first try,
without it being useful to run after Ini too much. Green color should be used
to the exclusion of any other for the gauze with which it is furnished, and that for two
reasons: the first, the most important, is that this color blends
with greenery, do not scratch the butterfly. The second is that in some
case this color attracts. It is recognized that certain diurnal species pre-
rush on their own 4 Vagainst the net, we can cite above all: Antho-
charis cardamines, Euphwno and Rhodocera Cleopatra. The nets that Yon
found on the market are usually made of green silk gauze. One can
very easily replace this coiiteuse gauze by colon muslin, known
under the name of tarlatanne, which renders the same services. The clamp & rackets. This instrument is unquestionably the most useful of all. It is used first to catch in the net even swords subject to
easily damaged in the hands. And then, to capture the moths that
flutter around and 4 inside the nests, of lon cannot introduce the net,
on pain of lacerating it completely, while missing the individual pursued. This clamp is still in many other cases; we will have to remember
its use in several other articles. For now, we will describe
the one we use ourselves. They are two flat iron ovals, half a centimeter wide and
measuring about 40 centimeters around. The oval should have approximately the shape
of a ceaf, that is to say wider at the base than at the top; i that basis, are
welded two rings, similar in all respects to the rings of a curling iron,
and distant only & centimeters from the base of Vovale. The clamp should not
not exceed 18 centimeters in its entire length. The long claws car-
cut at the end, Von sells in Paris and which measure from 30 to 35 centimeters
timers, are neither advantageous nor convenient to manage. Do we want with
these penetrate into the interior of a bush, one is often stopped by the
square part which terminates them and which cannot pass through the twigs
quickly enough not to give the butterfly time to fly away. The
length of the handle is fold: s very inconvenient, both for transport and
for use. We garnish the two ovals with an unfinished tulle, well stretched by the seam
and whose mesh must be proportionate to the size of the heads of pins n°
I am more generally employed in hunting. - The pelota, decoration that the lepidopterist is obliged to suspend from one
of his buttonholes by a carabiner or any hook. This ball

 

  

 

  
  

     

   

— 165—

is made in this way: two discs of thin cardboard about 8 centimeters are made
in diameter, which is covered on the outside with a fabric of your choice. These two'
discs are tied together by a fine silk ribbon, sewn at each edge;
one fills the interior of its sifted well and in all the circumference are
prick the pins. Care is taken to go beyond the ribbon, which forms the circle
of the ball, enough to attach the hook intended for it & suspend it from the
buttonhole

The pins with which they are stuffed must be of different sizes. The
numbers 2, 5, 7 and 10 are approximately the senls used by the lepidopterist. Those of German manufacture are superior in terms of rigidity and elasticity.
cited and as points for French pins, especially for numbers 2, 3 and 5. If we are dealing with microlepidoptera, the German number 1 is also indispensable.
thinkable. Brussels or watchmaker pliers are the same everywhere. They serve &
sting and kill butterflies if necessary; for this, we raise the wings of the pa-
pillon against the body and the corsclet is pressed with the pliers, without however
so squeeze & crush the insect. This way is only good for small
species, especially for dinnes, moths and some moths. We
will give further a way to kill large species, such as sphinxes,
Deilephila, homby

As a complement to these utensils comes the hunting box, intended &
receive captured subjects. Any box having at least 7 centimeters of
deep and corked at the bottom can be used for this purpose. However, here is the des-
description of a box used with advantage by entomologists from Lyon,
and whose invention is due to one of them, Mr. Lucien Reynaud. This is the botanist's box applied to entomology, with modifications
following. It is divided into three parts, two of which are equal. The middle part,
the largest, measures about 25 centimeters and closes with a zipper.
verele, absolutely like that of the botanist, only the bottom is corked. As the cork sticks with difficulty on the tinplate, one makes leave by the iron
blantier responsible for making it a tin rim, on each side of
opening, in the sense of length; we bend our cork on the model of
that of the box and we insert the ends, previously thinned 4
the ripe, under these edges, which one then tightens against the cork, thus maintained -
solidly. At both ends of the box is another smaller one, closed.
mant like the ordinary boxes, by means of a throat and a lid &
hinge. One of these boilers is furnished, in the middle of its lid, with a
disc of very fine wire mesh, and on the side opposite the hinge is
made a round hole, closing by means of a slider which slides over it. This box will serve & put the collected caterpillars in hunting. On the other side,
is a box nearly the same and which can be established as identical, but we
better not put wire cloth in it and cork the bottom; she
is then used to receive the microlepidoptera or other small species that you want
take special care of and which could in the large box in the middle
risk being damaged by contact with other butterflies. This box dispenses with a
multitude of other pocket boxes. Another of these advantages and which is not
4 to disdain is not to attract the gaze of the curious as all
another box. That of the botanist, by its well-known form, has its entrances everywhere;
the most rustic of peasants, seeing her, does not ask you what
you do. It is the same when crossing a city, by car and on the way
of iron. How many indiscreet questions did this form of box give me?
spoiled since I've been using it! Equipped with these utensils, the lepidopterist can go into the field as soon as
beginning of the beautiful season, and he will always find & use them with

*

     

  

 

 

    

  

 

 

— 116 —

more or less successful; but to procure the rare species, which he
would encounter them only with great difficulty, if even he ever encounters them, he is
other means that I will try to pass under his eyes. Various methods for the hunting of Lepidoptera. This chapter is divided into several parts. Can't recommend highly enough
each of them has the beginner's attention. On their putting into practice depends a certain success, and such of these means
will procure what the other will have refused. Hunting & the mallet. For this kind of exploration, we have a boxwood mallet weighing three &
four books, leaded and furnished at one of its heads with three or four leaves
rubber, or a single one, five centimeters thick, the diameter of the

head and held by large nails; the handle of this instrument, to be more
flexible, must be in white or soft wood, with screw in the part that is introduced
in the mallet, bigger 4 the other end, in order to grasp it well, and long
two feet to two and a half feet. Towards the part opposite to the one being struck, we hold a cotton umbrella,
special, solid, & covered ribs and of the diameter of 30 inches, to re-
catch everything that falls from the tree; on the stroke of the mallet we take care to carry
eyes elsewhere than on the umbrella, so as not to lose the objects that
go somewhere else. This kind of hunting, to be useful, must be done at dawn, because at this
moment lout falls well and that the butterflies being still numbed by the
morning freshness, do not fly far and are easily stung. From nine o'clock, if the sun is hot and hits the explored part, the
lepidoptera on the blow of a mallet often fly away, or so quickly
that they escape sight, so at this moment we grasp very little of them. In gray weather, this kind of hunting can very well be done usefully all
the day. We understand that the rubber paralyzes the noise of the blow and
prevents it from harming the throne of the tree. It is in May, June, September and October that you have to do this hunt. Hunt for honey. It is a nocturnal hunt; it operates in July and August, with the help of a
portable lantern giving lots of clarity, and pliers to grab the
Pee ene it begins at dusk and can last all night; It's certain
the leaves of the Mahaleb plum tree, or wood of Saint Lucia, that we make it. This shrub is common in the hedges of our countryside; around the month of
July, its leaves are attacked by aphids which deposit a liquid
sweet: perhaps it is the sap that circulates in the leaves that comes out through
following the bite of aphids. Still, these sheets, in this state,
twitch; than the moths and geometries, certain species only,
come to settle there, stay there, and that we can look at them and choose those
that suit you. Osiers, plums, oaks, chestnuts, willows and others
trees also honey, and it should be noted that the species that we take
honey flows from one tree are not found on those from another. This is the natural honeydew; we can make artificial honey flows and which do not
are not without giving good results. For this purpose we use molasses or

—hi—

sticky and sweet liquid on which the fond lepidoptera come to forage. II
you have to brush some trees with it, in the clearings of the woods for example,
or in a place believed to be conducive to attracting butterflies. Apples
or tapped pears soaked in nitric ether are also very good. Autumn
is best for doing this hunting; however one can in the spring take
good species. Chase @ the noise. This hunt is nocturnal and takes place when the heather is in bloom, and on its
flowers where the moths come to forage and rest, so with us in the twentieth
August to September. It starts at dusk and can be done all Ib
null. The localities exposed to the south, discovered and in the vicinity of the woods,
are the richest for this mode of exploration. Tongs and a lantern
are essential there. Ivy hunting. Nocturne also and takes place from the beginning of October until the end. It is practiced 4 with the help of a lantern and pliers, on the flowers of the ivy
who thrive at this time. As this flower is often high, it is
Useful to carry a net. You firmly fix your lantern & a large cane, you
illuminate the leaves of the ivy to see the lepidoptera that are there, and
when there is, with the cane to which the lantern is fitted, we give a blow to
the flower ot rests the insect; below this flower, we place the opening of its
net; at the stroke of the cane the moth falls there. We can thus take more
gentlemen without biting them, because 4 that time, how cool the clouds are,
moths fly very slowly. Flush aw sheet. Cloth hunting is done at night, on the heights, as much as possible
near the woods or in clearings. We draw up our sheet in the form of a tent
with two or three pickets and the lantern by the pole, or better above. We
waits for the butterflies to rise, elated by the light which dazzles them; we don't
then seize them with a very small net, and taking them with the pliers, we prick them. This hunt was mainly put into practice by M. Gueynon, a lepidopterist
Lyons. She is very successful. ;

All hunting modes listed in the previous chapter are good and
can provide excellent subjects 4 the perfect state. But if the amateur wishes
actually procure the rarities, and thereby increase in a short time
the riches of his collection, what he especially needs to practice is the
hunting caterpillars. A zealous commendant obtains easily, even in the first year, the most
large number of common species; but if he tries to breed caterpillars,
how many things on which he does not please come to be grouped in his
boxes! I will try to lead the way in this essential practice
to the lepidopterist really desirous of obtaining a scientific collection of
actual value. TRACKS IN GENERAL. Many people have a repugnance for caterpillars for so
say instinctive. They hardly dare to look at them, let alone
they touch them. However, it is recognized that none of them are venomous
The hair of which some are covered, such as Processionnea and Py-

ns—

tiocampa, can, it is true, by detaching itself, penetrate into the skin, on the
which he always occasioune a sharp itch accompanied by a small
button. To conclude from this that the animal is venomous would be grossly wrong.
lie. It is with these Velne caterpillars as it is with Vortie's down. Everyone knows this plant and its disadvantages, and yet no one
again declared it venomous; we only touch it with precaution, and we do
good; it is a question of using the same 4 with regard to these caterpillars, which are moreover in
very small number. I myself have often bred a few hundred Cre-
thocampa (bombyx) processionnea and pytiocampa, almost without feeling
of this inconvenience; and these two species are those which, from this point of view,
are the most & redouble; other hairy caterpillars are almost not, du
less until the moment they spin their cocoon. Like most
their hairs and their silk to form their shell, one should touch only with pre-
guarantee this hull, under penalty of seeing some of the hairs that enter
in its construction penetrate under the skin, because then they are dry and brittle. The advantages given by the education of caterpillars are immense: besides
the irreproachable freshness of the subjects obtained, there are species that cannot be
only rarely to procure the perfect state, and even when this chance presents itself
feel, more often than not they are found faded. How again, without this means,
Will the amateur be able to procure these little negrillons, composing the numerous
el interesting family of Psyches, and so many other species including one of the sexes
do not steal? I believe it useful to recall here that the caterpillars cannot have more than sixteen
legs, otherwise they are insect larvae called false caterpillars, and
which do not give rise to Lepidoptera. Caterpillar hunting. It can be done at any time, but it is much more productive in
the right season. In winter, caterpillars are much more difficult to find,
for they take up residence under monsses and stones; several pass the
bad days in a hole they made in the ground, the caterpillar of the
Bombyx rubi, for example. The hunting of caterpillars gives more results at night than during the day; but
as some species only meet during the day and others only at night,
it would not be proper to leave one for the other. Utensils for hunting and training caterpillars. Anyone who begins in the education of caterpillars is often very embarrassed
on systems and utensils & employ. I will review one way
succincle cent which I use and which I consider to be the best. I
I will believe myself amply rewarded if my few indications can be
helpful & commendant. These utensils are of great simplicity, it is true; but still need to
The experience of older people in the game. We could stay
long before having acquired by reflection and practice all that study
Lepidoptera require care and attention. Boxes. A pine crate is the easiest way to elevate the caterpillars. This box must have an average height of 40 centimeters over as many
side. We saw it to a third of its height and all the way around. From a cable, we fix two

— 119 —

hinges and on the other a hook; this sawn part therefore forms a lid
that we garnish with a metal mesh nailed on it and that we choose more or
less fine, depending on the size of the caterpillars & raising. This fails, we garnish the
bottom of the box of 7 48 centimeters of good earth of heather; Above
this land, we spread a bed of moss and a bed of dry leaves. It's necessary
always take care never to introduce into the box with the glass or
the moss no insects, spiders or anything else. We will therefore visit it with if
before using it

These boxes thus prepared, because it

 

      

 
       

 

 

 

“hear that we must have some
shade, the caterpillars are placed inside, taking care to put with them a
little grass or plant on which they feed in freedom, and care is taken
keep them fresh food, carefully removing any that is
desiccated. We must always

 

     

 

s present to the caterpillars of the plant on which they have
6té Lrouvées, given that if some are polyphagous, that is to say
mavgent of everything, others feed specially only on such essence
they die without touching other plants. When you find a caterpillar either
in the ground, either under the stones, and we don't know her, we present her
several plants of those that you believe should be suitable for him, until
one is fixed on his food. Besides, it's 4 the habit that you have to ask
that; a few months of practice will teach more in this respect than anything I
could tell. The generality of the caterpillars does not need much light; a
most eat only at night; we will therefore do well to replace the food
ritnre, especially in the evening, but it is much better to change the plants in the morning
el evening. Education oils should never be put in an apartment
constantly heated or inhabited, for these small animals are delicate and strong
sensitive anx odenrs of any kind. If one raises in a garden or in a
any yard, the boxes must always be sheltered from the rain and
jelly, as well as ensuring that they do not completely receive the
rays of the sun, which produces considerable heating in the boxes, and
by it kills the caterpillars; food also dries too quickly. At last,
what you want to avoid above all, if you are walking in a garden, is that the spiders
and the ants do not enter the boxes; only one of these insects penetrates
enough to bring desolation there. To prevent this, we hang with
advantage to use an easel, like those on which we place the vases
of flowers in the greenhouses and whose four feet rest in terrines
which one takes care to keep filled with water, which the ants cannot
to pay. When we cannot, for lack of space, use this means, we will
good to make use of the one I am going to indicate. With plain white chalk
nary, we draw around the box, & 6 or 8 centimeters from the bottom, a line of
2 centimeters in width, and care is taken to cover the line well with chalk;
no ant, I guarantee, will cross this sanitary cordon; as soon as she
touches it, it moves away quickly, or if its ¢lan I throws it, it falls back
immediately. In the education of the Psyche, unlike other caterpillars, one must
a lot of light; the more the sheaths are exposed to the heat of the sun,
the better off they are. Many of these caterpillars do not hatch without this
essential condition, because deprived of the sun, they dry out in their sheaths. I said the lid should be a third of the way deep. This
condition is indispensable for the education of all spinner caterpillars

nor pupate in a cocoon. Indeed, if these caterpillars are reared in
the boiles which are not made thus, as they always have the tendency

   

 

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

— 120 —

4 to chrysalise at the top of the box, they would spin their cocoons inside
serlion from the lid to the walls, and by opening you would destroy their work
begin; in this case, the individual is lost, because most often he abandons it
and allows itself to die of languor without building a new hull, which, from
remains, could have the same fate as the first. The caterpillars that bury themselves
to pupate do not, if need be, need this, because the signaled danger
is not 4 to fear; Habit will get to know them. Nevertheless, as
this or that box may be necessary for you at different educations, and allendu
that it does not cost anything more, I am of the opinion that any box must be
build. As much as possible, do not put too many tracks together, the inconsistencies
the consequences are terrible; besides the diseases whose accumulation provides the
cause, like muscardine which is the constant result, there are other in-
cons 4 point out which are not least. Several species of caterpillars
spinners, and especially the Chedonia, put in large numbers in the same
box, do not succeed or pen, because they spin the most without their hull in
the corners of the box on top of each other, and sometimes several
close in the same shell. What happens? It is that the cocoons spun the
first ones are covered with a quantity of others, which, at the moment of
hatching, intercept the passage of the butterfly, which then bursts into its shell;
or if it comes out, by dint of pain and work, it does not expand, and you do not obtain
hold more than an abortive butterfly; at the end, the wings are lacerated and withered
if it manages to expand, which is rare. In other cases, some caterpillars pa-
resuses, like the Chelonia civica, for example, sensing the coming moment
to pupate, introduce themselves unceremoniously under the web formed by a neighbor
just to change skin. All she has to do now is double this canvas
of a few sons to make this conquered dwelling his own; the caterpillar as well
dispossessed, who does not always have the strength to start her work over again, leaves
burst in some corner of the box. Lyons. Georges Rovas T. (To be continued.) THE NORMANDY SOCIETY. One of our subscribers, member of this Society, newly founded in Le Havre,
Please let our readers know about it. We access its
asks with all the more pleasure that such foundations are things
unfortunately too rare to report in France; we are sure that
all who are interested in the progress of the natural sciences will applaud
with us 4 the initiative taken by a group of real workers eager to learn
pay their tribute to French science. Although created almost two years ago, the Geological Society of Normandy
did not want to make himself known before being 4 even to prove by the pub-
cation of its bulletin that it was formed to act, and that from the beginning,
she didn't waste her time. His studies, restricted to geology and paleontology, relate particularly
freely on the grounds of the five departments of the province (1). (1) For further details, s'2 aM. Drouaus, 69, rue dOrléans, at

Havre, Treasurer and Assistant Secretary of the Society. — 121 —

Among the works contained in the first bulletin she has just published,
we will quote the first part of a very conscientious description of the
Echinides of the Seine-Inférieure, where the author, M. Bucaille, gives indications
precious, essential even & those who approach the study of the rocks of the
Picardy and Normandy; let us also cite interesting studies on the
is looking for coal in Normandy: the scholar M. Lennier, director of the Museum
the natural history of Le Havre, after insisting on the service that the
discovery of new coal deposits capable of being exploited with
profit, shows there how much research undertaken in the country of Bray
rely little on knowledge of the terrain and how much more logical it would be
to direct them towards the English Channel and Calvados. The Editors. NOTE ON THE USE OF PATCHOULI

FOR THE PRESERVATION OF ENTOMOLOGICAL COLLECTIONS. (Continuation and end.) It remains for me to say on this mode of preservation how I was brought to em-
bend, the causes that called me to make this heterogeneous mixture, and what
services he has rendered me since his application to the safeguard of my collections. Everyone, and especially the entomological world, knows very well that
essences of labiatae are sovereign to prevent destruction by in-
dry rodents. The essence of thyme or wild thyme has been recommended for a long time.
time by some authors (see Boitard, Manuel du Naturaliste
teur, Roret, 1825). Only these essences, like all those of the same
kind, are of an inaccessible price, and moreover completely evaporate in
a few hours. I therefore looked for a labiate giving its perfume in a dry state, in a way
persistent and strong without distillation. I encountered these qualities united in
The dried patchouli leaf, to which I added the thyme flake, which has
the same advantages, but in a less penetrating way and thereby
health alone. [addition of the semen-contra in this combination will seem weird &
more than one reader, however this is the result of an observation of my
part and which I have often made, that a worm placed on seeds of seed-
contra does not take long to perish there in convulsions. However, by the mere fact of
often repeated pressure of the ball, it is certain that the seed has already reduced
in dust will escape from its sides in impalpable atoms more or less
numerous, which will spread throughout the interior of the box. But, in this case,
woe to the larva that passes or falls on one or more of these atoms,
by surrendering or changing its destruction list. From the idea of ​​employment
pulverized semen-contra, as I said above. As for the crushed cloves, I must state that I only added
this ingredient that for the sole purpose of mitigating, as much as possible,
Smell of patchouli. I don't even know if this aroma plays a role in my
combination under the condom point of view. But it is certain that by his
employment, I managed to obtain a pleasant smell, and above all almost indefinite-
sand, which, although very penetrating, is not easily guessed at first
on board. We will therefore do well, in my opinion, to maintain it as it is said. Under the conservative point of view, I only have to praise myself for the results
obtained. For about fourteen years I have been dealing with Lepidoptera. During

   

 

 

 

 

— 122 —

the first five or six years, I used in turn all the condoms
known, without ever obtaining complete resnitat. And yet it was to me
all the more useful than by my p n commercial of then, I was obliged
has long business trips of eight ten months a year (i.e. more than
time than the beetles require to reduce 4 nothingness the most beautiful of
collections). During these enforced absences, despite gasoline gasolines
and others, the smell of which disappeared in a month or two, beetles
were doing their best in my boxes, 4 my great despair. For eight years that I have been using the designated means, it will not have bothered me.
posite to supply 4 a coleopterist a single anthrene from my
collection. And yet, during these eight years, my absences have not
decreased in length; on the contrary, they exceeded fifteen months. And never,
& my return visitors, I did not even see a flour moth in my
boxes, while a shop cabinet, better closed than my collection itself-
even though I had intentionally been without a condom, always gave me
a varied collection of beetles, beetles, etc. I must add that I live in the countryside, that my collections are in the south
and in the garden, very favorable conditions for the development of insects, if they
were not really removed by the means that I indicate. For a long time already I have given my collection & several entomologists of
my friends and my correspondents, dealing with all entomological orders. The information I gathered from them confirmed its value,
and since they don't use any other cho: 'have also noticed that the subjects
quills addressed to me in exchange came to me strongly impregnated with this
smell. Patchouli enjoys, in fact, in the first place, this property of composition.
communicate its perfume to the objects in the midst of which it has been placed. MM. Rouast father and son, enlomologists of our city, of which I am honored to
have the esteem, have been good enough to apply my system to their collections,
and they got the same results as I did. That in the common interest, each of my colleagues therefore try this means,
however bizarre it seems to him, before rejecting it. Weirdness is never a
cause of unsuspected, and I am of the opinion that if each one communicated his observations
ith the most bizarre, science would often not lose. My process joins 4 its advantages that of being very inexpensive. For 2 fr. 50
or 3 fr., one can preserve at least sixty boxes, and this lasts indefinitely. As supporting evidence, I affirm that I have not yet changed the first
balls placed eight years ago. They still smell as much as the
first day. May my colleagues obtain the same result as myself, and they will not have
step 4 sometimes lament the loss of precious subjects, for the possession
which they will have often sacrificed their patience and their time! Lyons. Lucien REYNAUD,
Member of the Linnean Society of Lyon. ERALITY

 

G

The mosses are placed today by the authors in the group
phyllophytes or muscinae. This group is characterized in the scale
lesser beings and probably also in the order of appearance of the
living beings 4 the surface of the globe, by the existence of leaves. He distinguishes himself
oe The phylum of the vascular cryptogams or rhizophytes by the absence

and roots. ON MOSS. — 123 —

Mosses are small green plants that emit & the surface of the ground
branching stalks adorned with a large number of small leaves without stigmas and
without slips; these stems are attached to the ground by simple hairs. At the extreme
wilé of the branches develop the fruiting bodies which are of
two species; the moss therefore represents the sexual being. The sexual organ has the
shape of a chalice; sometimes in the same chalice, sometimes in different chalices.
rents, find the male organs and the female organs. These deruiers,
called avchéyones, are species of swollen, bottle-shaped hairs,
at the bottom of which is the oosphere or mass of female protoplasm. The male organs have the appearance of a small club composed of
cells each of which contains an antherozoid; they are called antheridia. The antherozoid consists of a pelile mass of protoplasm topped
a corkscrew filament whose end is armed with two vibrating cilia
tories. This luni structure allows to print a rotational movement
around its axis and to penetrate by this movement into the interior of the arch.
gone, by the neck of the bottle which is very narrow. There, he meets !oosphere

combines there in some way while losing its own individuality; it is
while the egg is formed by the intimate, complete fusion of the two proto-
plasma. The egg develops in the calyx and attaches itself to the parent plant;
soon it lengthens until giving birth to a long filament ending in
what is called the fruit of the foam: it is a large capped bulge & its
upper part by what remains of the archegonium; this fruit becomes a wene
when the cap falls off and the spores, which originated in I inte-
laughing, poured out. Spores are grains of dust
yellowish single-celled; when germinating, they emit a filament,
the protonena, which branches like a conferva. It is on this felting that
little by little grow buds that rise perpendicularly 4 the
surface of the ground and each of which becomes a rod of foam. So only one
spore yields a large number of distinct stalks, which is why the mosses
are always found in small forests. In summary, mosses breed
thus by eggs and by spores, and to study the complete cycle of their genera-
rations, it is necessary to examine successively the stem itself,! 'egg, the fruit, the
spore, and finally the protonema. vs. L.

of scientific studies in Paris. Member of the Society

NOTES ON THE MEDICAL PROPERTIES OF ANEMONES. I read in an article entitled "Zes Anemones" and published in the Leaf
des Jeunes Naturalistes (No. 33), this assertion: "These are pretty plants
frequently grown in gardens, but little used in medicine. »

However, anemones have four main species:

1° Anemone pulsatilla (pulsatile vulgaris or coguelourd). 2° A. pratensis (Pulsatilla pratensis or black pulsatilla). 3° A. nemorosa (wood anemone, sylvia or Herba sanguinaria). 4° A. hepatica (Hepatica triloba). All four are employed daily by German physicians and
Americans, and even more by those of the homeopathic school. The first three have an energetic local action due to the anemonine,
an acrid, crystallizable substance, the crystals of which produce on the tongue a
stinging and throbbing sensation and leave behind white spots
as escharolics. — 124 —

“The fresh plant reproduces the vesicant, irritant and even
"caustics of its immediate principle" (Giibler). So much for the local action; the general effects are analogous to those of
Vaconite. Let us add that by desiccation, they become so inert that one
could easily deny all their properties, however there are many of them. Thus the pulsatile anemone was advocated by Storck against paralysis;
by Bonnet, against the rebellious darts; by de Ramon, against whooping cough;
finally, it has been recommended as a catheretic, aperitif and febrifuge, and
homeopaths make it a sovereign remedy against coryza. 1'A. pratensis shares the effects of the other species, and moreover, Storck in-
dique in cases of amaurosis and corneal staining. THE. nemorosa, according to Chomel, would have an excellent effect against ringworm
that she would destroy in two days; its vesicant properties have also been used
elrubéfiantes in ringworm, and arthritic diseases (rheumatism and gout). Lean distilled from 4. hepatica is finally recommended by Simon Pauli for
remove freckles,

Let's say in conclusion that the experiences made every day in Germany
seem to call these plants has even more uses and that the
medicine of the future demands them as a powerful auxiliary. COMMUNICATIONS. The American Naturalist (VU, 3) gives very interesting details on the production of
sexes in the Lepidoptera. It would be, from this jonroal, possible to hatch at will
either males or females, feeding the caterpillars more or less copiously
during their last molts. Those 4 who would be given fresh and plentiful food
dante, constantly renewed, would almost without exception turn into butterflies
females; those, on the contrary, which one would let throw away, would become males Of very
numerous experiments by the author seem to come in support of this theory, which
nothing inadmissible. Don't we see, indeed, something similar
happen in the bees which instinct has learned to transform into queens, by the
choice of food and enlargement of the cell, of the larvae destined first & to become
simple workers unable to reproduce? We strongly engage our young people
colleagues to undertake experiments on this subject which only require patience
and accuracy and 4 inform us of the results of their observations. All those who have
attempted a number of educations will be able to remember how much was greater than
in nature the proportion of male individuals they have obtained; that's what without
doubt most had & reproach themselves for letting their pupils be too willingly
change their food as little as possible. ori

  

 
 

  

       

  

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

One of our subscribers asks us to inform Is entomologists i who this pou! service he would like to eeder, at the price of 200 fr. instead of 275 fr., a copy in perfect
t, hardcover, untrimmed, from "Genera des coléoptires d'Europe," by Jacquelin Duval. Contact the editor of the Leaf. — We can add to our list the name of M. Michel Prudon, pharmacist of the
Uriage waters (Istre). — Botany. CORRESPONDENCE. M. L. G. We have received and read with great pleasure your interesting brochure on
the birds; we would like to see you these little helpers of our farmers
protected and respected everywhere because of the services they render to us daily;
We can therefore only hope that your plea in their favor is understood and
hackneyed, The Redactors. ‘Type. Overrun and Sons, i Reanes. — Mo in Paris, rue des Blanes-Manteaux, 35.

te" October 1873. The Number: 25 cents. Do 36. YOUNG NATURALISTS SHEET

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE

 

 

Payable in advance in stamps or money order by post:

For France and PAlsace-Lorvaine, fr. 3paran. | For 1

 

en, 4paran,

 

Subscription for Greal-Briain, 8 s. 6 d. British subseribers cam remil im peouy or Iwopenny pusage stamps. Stadresse: @ Paris, & the publication of the Feuille, 29, avenue Montaigne,
ow at Mie Petry, libvaire, rue de UArsenal, & Mulhouse (Haut-Rhin). People who do not unsubscribe will be considered as resubscribed. EDIBLE INSECTS. Several articles on applied entomology have already appeared in our Leaf;
they have sufficiently proved the usefulness of the study of this science. I do not have
step 4 reconsider the reasons justifying it; I just bring a
new arguments that have already been exposed, showing a whole application
practice of entomological science. Edible insects, here is an ap-
application which has the advantage of “being direct and natural; it is more consecrated
by long sideles of experience. Considered from this point of view, the study of
tomology will perhaps have some new charms. It is also interesting for the history of our science to show that it
has been cultivated from the most remote times and to make it seen in honor, in
core today, over almost the entire surface of your earth. We will still be able to find reasons for emulation and encouragement
studying, thinking that there are many other insect lovers who, without
to adorn themselves like us with a name derived from the gree, and without having published a name-
large volumes on the subject, can, for more detailed reasons
perhaps and drawn from the very nature of things, to justify their godt for
these interesting animals. Among these amateurs, the Mexicans deserve special mention; because
they have found a way to make a kind of bread with insect eggs. They de-
lay in the vast lagoons that surround Mexico fascines of reeds,
sedges and other grasses which soon become covered with the eggs of
two large species (aquatic hemipteres very common in these waters (Co-
viva femorata Guér.-Mén. ; Corixa mercenaria Say). These eggs, dried in
sun, are used as flour for the manufacture of pancakes called hautlé, which
are sold in all markets. Their taste is similar to that of caviar from
Russians. The Spanish conquerors adopted this dish from the Indians and
consider delicate (1). The eggs of a hemiptera lair, Noctonecta
unifasciata Guér.-Mén., are also often harvested and eaten with those of
two previous species. Grin-Méneville, Bulletin de la Société @acclimatation, 1857, p. 578. This fact had
reported by Humboldt. — 126 —

The Egyptians feed in the same way on the eggs of the Corira escu-
slow. The Mexicans still make a spirit liquor, in which they
macerate a beetle, the Cicindela curvata (1); but they are not
only in America 4 have I privilege to feed on insects. In the West Indies and
4 Guyana, the Whites like the Indians eat the larva of the weevil
mist, the Cordylia palmarum, which they roast or boil. Travelers
agree to recognize a tasty taste. Great beetle larvae,
such as Prionus damicornis and Macdontia cervicornis, also enter
in the diet of the natives. The numerous peoples who live in the forests of the Amazon make a
large consumption of insects. In Brazil, the nymph of a
cicada, Cicada septemdecim, and the abdomens of two species of ants,
rolled in a resin, which serves them as a sauce, are considered there as a
large treat (2). In Oceania we see, as in many other places, the larvae
beetles to be held in great honour. Australians eat various cicadas,
as well as the caterpillars of Nycterobius; another Lepidoptera, |'Euplea ha-
mata Mac Leay, is wanted by the natives of New South Wales,
where it is extremely common during our winter months. This butterfly
is oily and offers a pronounced nutty flavor; we eat it either smoke or
roasted and passed to the van, so as to remove the wings and the down (3). Lesson reports that the people of New Caledonia are very fond of
of a spider, Aranea edulis, which they roast on a fire (4). Asia still offers us many insect eaters: the Chinese
feed chrysalises, sphinxes and other large butterflies. The appearance of
ephemera is awaited by them with great impatience; as soon as they
hatching, they spread out at night, armed with lanterns, along the banks of rivers and
(the channels, and net myriads of these insects, attracted by the
light: some are thrown immediately into boiling frying; the
others, pounded in a mortar with honey, make a tart jam of a goat cheese
very nice MG

The beetle larvae are also appreciated by the Chinese and the
Hindus. In Ceylon, we eat ants. In India, the poor find
an economical and substantial meal in the termites, and thus succeed in drawing
advantage of this insect whose ravages are so formidable. I stop here for a moment to note the disgust felt by each of the
readers of the Feuille des Jeunes Naturalistes 4 this enumeration of beasts
reputed to be filthy & wrong or right, and which are however employed in
the cuisine of all peoples. I'm very sorry for them, but I'm forced
to note that our civilized Europe is far from being behind in this point
on other parts of the world. The inevitable Aristotle teaches us that the cicada
was greatly appreciated by gourmets in Greece, which greatly affected the
good Elien, because the cicada is dedicated to the Muses. The famous plush of the Romans
of which Pliny speaks to us, is referred sometimes to Lucanus cervus, sometimes to the Prionus
coriarius or 4 some other large beetle. It is 4 wrong, no doubt, that Linnaeus
gave this name to the willow caterpillar, Cossus ligniperda, an uncommon insect

 

 

 

 

 

(1) Silbermann, Entomological Review, I, p. 238. (2) Kirby and Spence, Introduction to entomology, 1865, p. 176. I drew many
information in this excellent book. (3) Benett, Wanderings in New South Wales. (4) Journey in search of La Pérouse, t. II, p
(5) Henri Berthoud, the World of Insects, p. 13

 

 

— 7 —

in Italy and which serects abundantly a dere and caustic liquid which serves it &
gnaw the wood and make it unsuitable for any culinary use. A com-
parative will decide the question; advice to amateurs. Réaumur himself suggests bringing into French cuisine the
noodles of various pest species; it designates among others those of the Plusia
gamma(A); elsewhere he recommends the larva of Oryctes nasicornis, which lives
in the layers of manure! We see lovers of certain cheeses
eat it only when it walks on its own, i.e. it only offers one
mixture of mold and Tyrophaga caser larvae. In our campaigns,
pea shellers consider it their privilege to eat all the peas
attacked by the larva of Bruchus pisi: ga fattens, they say. We could
cite here the well-known example of Lalande eating spiders. One of my friends,
editor of this sheet, sometimes delights in the abdomens of ants
which he finds sweet and has a very pleasant fragrance. In some provinces of the
Sweden, the flavor of rye brandy is enhanced by distilling
ants with the grains. JULES DE GAULLE,
Member of the Society @scientific studies of Paris. (To be continued.) NOTES ON THE FLORA OF URIAGE (Dauphiné). Uriage is a bathing establishment located in the department of Isére, 4
12 kilometers south-east of Grenoble and at the entrance to the small valley of Vaul-
naveys, which read its name from its shape, very reminiscent of that of a ship
(vallis, navis). It is bounded on the east by rather high mountains, exceeding
often 14 or 1,500 meters and dotted with small houses or
farms & half hidden under beautiful walnut and chestnut trees. Above, between
1,000 and 1,500 meters begins the region of fir forests which precedes
that of the alpine pastures. Beyond these mountains, we see part of the
chain of the granitic and schistous Hautes-Alpes of the Dauphiné; the main
peaks are Chantouse or Champrousse, Colomb and Belledonne, which have
of 2,300 & 2,900 meters of elevation and which therefore exceed the limit
eternal snows. To the west, much lower, the mountains or hills that separate the
Vaulnaveys valley from that of the Drac are covered with fields of wheat, with
some wood at the base. The main sommilé of this cdté is the monagne of the
Quatre-Seigneurs, 900 meters high. ity of the Vaulnaveys valley opens that of the Romanche, which
crosses the entire length of the Grenoble & Briangon road, lined with
two sides of rocks and very high mountains, at the bottom of which rolls
the Romanche with gray and torrential waters; this beautiful valley narrows from
more and more, and & Séchilienne takes the name of Oisans, famous name just liter
among all the naturalists in the province. Rare plants are there, indeed,
very abundant, and one could almost call it the Valais du Dauphiné. The climate around Uriage is warm, although tempered by the neighborhood
high mountains; it rarely snows, so cereals are grown until
a very great height; we see beautiful wheat fields 4 over 4,200 meters
elevation. There are no large forests, but woods are abundant. (1) Reaumur, t. II, p. 341. — 128 —

Under the chestnut trees, to the northeast of the establishment, one finds above all
as interesting plants: Cucubalus baccifer L., pretty caryophyllous a
whitish flowers, very rare in many parts of France and especially
lies in Alsace; Hypericum montanum L., hirsutum L., Geranium nodo-
sum L., it is one of the particular plants of the surroundings of Uriage where it
abounds; its flower is large, of a very light lilac, streaked with darker lines;
Impatiens noli-tangere L., with its large yellow flowers, similar to those
balsam from our gardens; Irifolium agrestinum Jord., Astragalus gly-
ciphyllos L., Aphanes arvensis, L., Epilobium obscurum Reich., Circea
luletiana L., Sambricus ebulus L., Prenanthes purpurea L., Lysimachia
nemorosum L., Digitalis grandiflora Lam., lutea L., common everywhere &
Uriage; Orobancherapum Th., a parasite on broom; Epipactis latifolia All.,
Polygonum amphibium L., Salvia glutinosa L., large flowering sage
dirty yellow, sometimes grown in gardens. On the side of the road to Grenoble, there are still woods, but you can't see
chestnut trees, and the flora there is different; the main plants are:
Thalictrum aquilegifolium L., or columbine-leaved pigamon, which belongs
athe Ranunculaceae family; it has no petals, but they are replaced
by small and long sepals exceeded by the stamens; these are
white or purple and numerous, and the flowers are arranged in a
broad panicle; it is a large climbing plant that is sometimes cultivated
as an ornamental plant; Aconitum lycoctonum L., Spirwa aruncus L.,
goatsbeard spirea is fairly common in woods and shady lieax
mountain elders; its flowers are yellowish-white and arranged in spikes
cylindrical whose union forms a large panicle; Rosa repens Scop.,
in very large quantity; Lithospermum oleifolium Lap., 4 small flowers
of a beautiful ultramarine blue; Cynoglossum officinale L., Melumpyrum nemo-
rosum L., this melampyre can be considered as the type plant of
surroundings of Uriage; it is there of a very beautiful color, its flowers are often
an intense reddish orange, which is well enhanced by the beautiful violet shade
of its bracts; its size usually varies between 20 and 50 centimeters; I
I have seen individuals whose stem reaches 7 or even 8 decimetres. Without completing the M. pratense which is very common everywhere in the fields
of wheat, we still find M. sylvaticum, but it only grows in forests
of fir trees, & more than 1,000 meters of elevation; Polygonum convolvulus L.,
Paris quadrifolia L., Arum maculatum L.

Le Havre. A. DOLLFUs. (To be continued). SYNOPTIC TABLE OF THE LEBIIDES OF FRANCE. In order to recognize among all the other predators the insects which
oceupent, the authors thus circumscribe that i! follows the Lebiid@ tribe:

HAS. — Forelegs not indented inwards... Py
YY. — Forelegs notched very visibly. B. — Elytra squarely truncated at the extremity. C. —Thin, cylindrical and somewhat bulging corselet

in the middle or in front of the middle...

CC. — Heart-shaped bodice, quite often bordered...

CCC. — Corselet in a transverse square, generally
created at the posterior angles, which are salient,
straight, but blunt. First article of the an-
tennes not reaching posterior edge of
1a) .01e eee eee eee EEE eee Lesit

 

— 129 —

It is thus placed between the Dromids on the one hand and the Mazoreus on the other. The Drômeids are easily distinguishable, thanks to their more elongated shape, their
narrower elytra and their very different corselet. The same part in
Mazoreus is very short, wide, rounded on the sides, transverse; the head
is almost triangular and the body constricted between the prothorax and the elytra. We can add that with our Lebias, the TV is a bit shrunken ala
base, not engaged in the prothoray; the body strongly depressed; the red corselet
colorless geitre, wider than the head, and the elytra wider than the corselet,
square, leaving the extreme portion of the abdomen uncovered; |the postero-angle
external very rounded; the articles of the anterior larses are dilated as well
in the ° than in the o, furnished below with squamous papillae little
tight (here). This tribe includes two genera thus characterized:
HAS. — Maxillary palps with last oval segment; horn-
selet a little narrowed towards the base. Before last
article of all bilobed tarsi; all those of
heart-shaped posterior larses. . ... genus Leta, Latr. YY. — Maxillary palps with last cylindrical segment;
square bodice; posterior tarsi almost
filiform. . 2.2.2...++. genus CopropeERA, Dej. Gender LEBIA, LATREILLE. A. Blue, purple or emerald green elytra; black head
or blue (subgenus Lamprias Bonelli). Ik. — Deep and well marked elytral striae. None Larger size (10 to 12™/™),
— Red breast. + ... + L. fulvicollis L.
Head hlene purplish, strongly dotted; antennae
brown, not too dark, almost reddish; basis of
articles three and four cyanotic; elytra turning blue
blackish, heavily streaked; convex intervals,
zaux. Blue abdomen, but red chest and legs
testaceous. — Southern; sometimes goes back to
the Loire. — Forez Mountains, -H. Goxtauoian. DD. — Blue chest..... 2... -..... L. pubipennis Duf. Heauconp looks like the previous Ja, but is
certainly distinct, ear, besides the invariable color
of the po’ the punctuation of the elytra is less
tight, more exclusively southern dwelling; to
meeting especially in Algeria,

CC. — Smaller size (S a7")... 2.2... . LD. Rufipes Dej. Antennae reddish, browning at last segments;
even pr n of color in the palps; TV
blackish blue; purple elytra; minus intervals
convex than in the preceding; dotted; no rabo-

 

 

   

 

   

 

such; red chest, as well as the feet in their
entire. — Mountainous species. BB. — Slightly marked striae, barely visible. C. —Red chest, interstriae slightly pitted
killed. D. —Elytra plus tongues ......... Z. chlorocephala Hoff. Antennae brown or black, with the first two
red ware and base of third; black head; palps
brown; elytra appearing smooth with naked eye and varying
do emerald green to purplish blew; fully paws
red, without black spot at the knees; tarsi brown. —
Northern species; not rare above Paris. — 130 —

dp. — Elytra a good third shorter. L. chrysocephala Motsch. Differs from the preceding by its blue, shiny and
its elytra proportionally shorter. - Reside
Provence, where it is exceedingly rare. De Morscuorxs. CC. — Chest black or brownish black. D. —lInterstries 4 hardly punctate; patles en-
completely red; filiform antennae;
(laTGP AB SP o)F Ween sie

Purplish blue tote, shiny; black palps; year-
black lennes, with the’ first two articles, the base
whole of the third and that of the fourth, below,
testaceae; black chest; red legs 4 black larses. — A single copy taken by me, 4 Montlucon, on
Crataegus oxyacantha. This copy has, without any
doubt, accidentally a cloudy black spot, which
occupies the middle of the bodice,

 

micans, 0. sp. DD. —Inlerstries Jisses; dirty antennas;
(waist: 647"/") ..... 2... . L. erassicornis Motsch. Differs from following Ja only in the characters
drawn from the antennae and interstriations, which are completely
smooth. — Provence. From Motscnvue. DDD.— Interstriae flat, slightly punctate; knees
black; filiform antennae. . . . . . . . Z. eyanocephala L.

Size: 6 4 7"; black or brown antennae, with the
first article only red; sallow head; palps

    

brown, elytra green, blue or purplish. — Species
widespread and not uncommon throughout France. The color of
article can p:
I

 

antennae often varies. The first
brown at the same time as the
as turn black... (V. obscuricornis). Sometimes they appear ringed with yellowish
basis of each article; the streaks are then stronger
and the more punctuated intervals (VY, anuulata Buuwrt:

     

 

 

YY. — Elytra black, with red patches, or red, & spots
black, black tele (s.-g. Lebia, in speeic). B. — Larger (5 8 7/™); antennae mixed. C. — Legs yellow, marked with black or black. . L. erua-minor L.

Black head, dotted in front, smooth on arrival; brown antennae
black; the first three articles and the base of the fourth
geiters; reddish elytra, adorned with a black sutral brdure,
attenuated towards the middle, widened at Técusson; of a band
transverse diary and a thin, sometimes widened border;
black chest; worse; black knees and tarsi. Y. black paltes; yellow crest; the border of the elytra ne lat=
don't dye. On the air, only two clear articles
(L. nigripes Dejeau). CC. — Legs completely yellow.. ...... . . L. cyathigera Rossi. Autenes brownish, lighter on the first ar
black crest; elytra finely ridged, as in the pr
yielding, but adorned with a black sutural band, constricted
in the middle, side of two spots, one on each side, located
towards the outer end, without touching the edge; intervals
very punctuated; black chest. — Not too common and more
southern than L. crur-minor. — Gannat (Desbrochers
Lodges). — Montlucon (P. Moadom). BB. — Smaller (4 4 5"/"); antennae reddish yellow. L. furcica Fab. __ Tote black, rough, smooth back; yellow crest; elytra
4 strong punctate streaks, black, sometimes tinged with greenish,
with a yellow humeral spot, lunate, curved inwards,

  

— 131 —

sometimes reaching as far as the middle of Velytre; bodice
yellow, as well as the legs. Sometimes the elytra have a
Second spot towards the end (V, 4, maculata Dejean). —
Quite common and not very rare. AAA. — Elytra black, spotted with yellow or red; heat
red. B. — Red head and chest; elytra strongly
striped. Very similar, @ apart from that, & the species
previous, of which it is only a variety. L. furcica, c. ruficeps. BB. — Abdomen and chest black; elytra & barely visible
clearly black streaks, 4 extremity red. L. hymorrhoidalis F.
Small (3 4 4 1/2

/9); antennae one-coloured, testaceous, red
gates; red tele, smooth; glossy, colored elytron, as it has
been said; legs entirely reddish yellow; widespread
but moderately common. Genus COPTODERA DeirAn. Only one species........~ see eee ee ee ees GC, elevata Dej. Reddish head; antennae testaceous, unicoloured; red bodice
gate; elytra testaceous, with a transverse black band towards
the middle; dotted streaks, with punctate intervals; poi-
trine, abdomen and patles testaceous. This exotic species, imported from Mexico on our vessels,
is frequently found in ports, and especially in Marseilles,
or she seems to have acclimatized. Montlucon. Mr. dEs Gozis,
Member of the Society for Scientific Studies of Paris. A VISIT TO THE SCIENTIFIC CONGRESS IN SOLUTRE (Saéne-et-Loire). While all those who deal with science, from the scientist to the
young naturalist, humble worker busy clearing a portion of the most
of the vast scientific domain, while all have their eyes greedily
turned towards the new hearth of lights lit by the most
illustrious of our beautiful France, why the Leaf of the Young Naturalists does not
would she not come, she too, mingled with so many others who surpass her, to seek
a new ardor, new stimuli, to continue without weakness
a path already so worthily traveled for three years? Why she too
in the words of its late founder, why would it not “contribute
not, for its small part, the work of popularization pursued by scholars? Why, too, should she not sometimes give an account of the work so interesting?
which are carried out almost every day and everywhere by meetings, societies
created for the advancement of science? Without having in this the merit of originality or initiative, we have
thought that the story of a walk made in such illustrious and rare company that
that of the members of the Scientific Congress of Lyon could, without distracting
attention, finding space next to more serious articles; following the example
given last year for the Bordeaux Congress, and partly filling our
better, the wishes expressed above, may we be useful to the reader by
Vinitiant anx occupations of the Scientific Congress meeting this year in Lyon! "That said, let's go. Here we are on the way..., and from now on we
let us enter into the function of cicerone for our readers only, of course. — 132 —

If ever some motive made you take and follow the line of Burgundy,
turning your back & Lyon, did you not notice on the left, some time
before arriving 4 Macon, two huge rocks, including the tall silhouette, cut
& peak, contrasts so strangely with the hills covered with the vines of Ma-
know, between Prissé and Charnay, and stands out against the sky? A thousand things without
doubt have turned you away from it: today none of that, we will have to for-
cement to contemplate this beautiful spectacle, because we are on foot, the train is not going
no further. — We forgot, at the beginning, to warn the reader
that the train, which until now has served us quite well as a place of observation, has been
formed especially for the circumstance, that it is the “train of the scholars; »
finally, that we have nothing to do with this last denomination, that the
presence of the reader would perhaps justify? — Despite the difference, let us
follow! "Well, what you see over there is Vergisson, it's Solutré." It was there that the most important remains of a race of men were found.
and of a civilization that is lost in the mists of time, 4 such a depth
that no one dares to guess a positive date. This is what we named
the Solutrean age, and whom other scholars have rejuvenated, believing they discern in him
a transition to the time of the polished stone, and called the age of the reindeer. M. Arcelin, together with M. de Ferry, member of the Geological Society, is
the first who, in the month of September 1866, studied the archaeo-
logics of Solutré and undertook there, from that time, regular excavations,
unfortunately interrupted by the death of M. de Ferry in 4869, but
repeated since with the assistance of M. de Fréminville. M. 'abbé Ducrost, geo-
very distinguished logne, made many and important discoveries, fruits
of his studious and active research. Let's take a prehistoric car as to the springs and go to the liew
Searches. We are working on it especially for us, and each stroke of the pickaxe puts & un-
covered with quantities of axes and knives in white flint, as well as
pieces of bones; but let's not stop at these particularities, let's see
whole. The main excavations, three large shallow excavations, were
made on a small mound, at the foot of the great rock of Solutré, which carries the
strange name of Crét or Crét-du Charnier. It is a wasteland on the
landslide which, like a fan, spreads out at the base of an escar-
ment of the lower oolite and rests on the upper marls of the lias, Les
deposits extend well beyond and under the same conditions, over a
stretch of several hectares, to the bottom of the valley. The landslides that
often produce on marls after heavy rains have frequently
agile and moved this landslide. Let's come closer and recognize each other
trons in all its thickness and even on the marls which form the rock
underlying the bones and debris of the industry of primitive man. Stacking of these objects, in large quantities in certain points,
is called an archaeological site proper. Let's see what it is
composition. :

These deposits consist of: 1° hearths, kitchen and living waste;
(2) heaps of horse bones; 3° burials. Hearths are found buried at varying depths under the ground
@scree, from the surface to two or three meters. In fgeneral,
they contain fragments of burnt bones, more or less pulverized, bones
sometimes intact, most often broken, instruments, weapons
in flint, all the utensils of domestic life in stone or bone, but
very rarely sculpted figures. Their circular or ellipsoid shape seems
represent the area of ​​huts or dwellings; they are very irregularly in-

 

 

 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

— 133 —

lined with rough stones and sometimes provided with large slabs of limestone
having served as others. The accumulation of numerous debris in the surroundings leaves
4 presume that man said make a long stay on this. The bones are sometimes found as melted together in large masses
and forming breccias or magmas by limestone deposits. You can see
he Museum of Lyon has a very complete collection of bones found in Solutré,
among other things an admirably preserved female skeleton. It is estimated, according to
him, 4 7,000 years the time elapsed since the existence of peoples who do not
knew neither iron nor bronze, when the bison, the primitive elephant,
the antelope strolled along the banks of the Sadne. The skeleton of the horse
Solutré is also very complete. It is a small race comparable to that of the
Camargue and which Mr. Vogt found consistent with the Icelandic horse. The frontal bone
had broken it, like all the subjects we met, to eat it
the brain. This horse could have been nine years old and most of those of Solutré
were slaughtered at this age, which is an indication of their domestication in these
regions. There are sepultares from several periods in Crot-du-Charnier: some
Burgundians, the caves undetermined so far

Flint weapons, arrows or spears, finely carved Wes by small shards,
all derive from the rhombus, although they present fairly large varieties
number. The willow or bay leaf shape is the most common. Without doubt, the savages of Solutré adapted them to sleeves by means of
twisted boyanx, tendons, strips of skin from the fruit of their
hunts. Knives; flakes, core scrapers of all shapes and
of all sizes meet by the thousands. — But the no saws, no
hatchets, wedges or hatchet-shaped puzzles. Sharp instruments
sharpened 4 the grinding wheel is also missing there. If you ask me now, dear reader, how were
all these instruments among the prehistoric peoples of Solutré, - not forgetting
not the role of cicerone that I took on, and without letting myself be stopped by
a question so simple, so natural, I will take on a doctoral air, and in a
deep voice that seems to weigh all his words, - here, I will say, what think
scholars :

First, they were going to collect the raw material, the flint, in the depots
surrounding tertiary, 4 Saint-Sorlin, ala Gri e, near Macon, a Char-
bonnieres. Huge workshops were also established in this last place. The flint kidney was roughed out using a percussion instrument of
hardness equal to his: a pebble of quartzite, for example; then when he
had lost its rough envelope, they cut it to pieces. Retouched by
a series of small blows, depending on the use for which they were intended, these
prismatic or rectangular gradually became spears, arrows, scrapers. Despite the improvement of the tools of which we are proud, we would arrive
difficulty, & our time, has results as surprising as those
presents in the collections the large number of instruments of a work so
completed. Bone instruments are simple pen smoothers or handles
tools which sometimes bear notches similar to nu-
meration. There are no bone arrows or needles; no command sticks
demented. With the remains of hearths are abundantly mixed substances, such as
sanguine, ochres, rock crystal, iron and manganese ores
(Romanéche is not far away), hard rocks, foreign to the locality, having
probably served as hammerstones, marine shells, fossils, etc. ; no
pottery. — 134 —

The remains of animals are prodigiously abundant, and one cannot estimate
that by the thousands the number of reindeer or horses butchered around the hearths
of Cret-du-Charnier. They found there, in addition to human remains, those of
many animals. Here are pes i hale recognized species: the wolf, the fox, the
horse, ine, deer, ox, badger, weasel, hare, marmot and
birds, which are still found there today; the bear, the cave tiger,
the lynx, the cave hyena, the elephant, the reindeer, the ostrich, which have changed
of climates and are now scattered. — In short, the Solutré station has
few or no rivals in the world; we can cite those of Lantrerie-Haute (Dor-
dogne), Pont-de-Lesse (Belgium), Ganterie, near Dinan (Cotes-du-Nord),
quoted by M. A. Robinot de Saint-Cyr. Such are the interesting remains, the only witnesses of a forgotten Age, that went
visit on August 23 the members of the French Association for the Advancement of
science. We cherish the sweet hope that the general report
of the Lyon session, which will appear next year, will only develop
the subject of these few notes taken on the spot, far from contradicting the opinions
scholars that only they report. Did the men of the Solutrean age ever suspect that seventy
centuries after them, in the same place where they met to
their feasts, were to and in turn, but for a less material purpose,
meet the luminaries of science, to prove once again by their
cordial understanding how much science can inspire feelings of brotherhood
and mutual tolerances 4 those who follow it! — There, thank you, dear readers, you listened to me until the end, and it is
that I am grateful to you. That the cicerons don't all hold the
same language! To me,

    

"I'm fat Jean as before. »

Vienna. G.B. COMMUNICATIONS. I don't want to miss this season, which is usually not very fertile for insects.
logisticians, without indicating 4 all my colleagues a kind of hunt that I have been experimenting with
many years ct which has always given me the best results. From the end of September until around October 25, I beat the walls with an umbrella
de bower, on the side where the sun strikes them. Bathed in these warm rays whose ardor
reminds them of the beautiful days of summer, so I take many, if not rare, species of
less unexpected, given the plant on which I harvest them. I will quote: Marolia
variegata, Aulonium sulcatum, Dorcatoma dresdensis and D. chysomelina, Scolytus destructor,
hostrichus bispinus, several Aphodius; quantities of Coccinellids, Staphylinids,
of Monotoma picipes, Scymnus fulvicollis, Cryptophagides, Dromius, Lebia, twenty-
three determined species of Apion, not counting those that I have not yet been able to unravel, and
among these: A. cerdo, A. ochropus, A. elegantulum, A. Hookeri, A. Spencei, A. colum-
binum, etc., etc. All in large numbers and collected without difficulty on a single
bower about twenty meters in length at most. It is useless, moreover, to seek ob
the sun does not give. Montlucon. Gozis. — 135 —

M. Merget, member of the Society for Agriculture, Natural History and Useful Arts
of Lyons, has lately made curious experiments relative to the search for ways of
release of the gases contained in the plants. Leaves that have absorbed ammonia,
pressed between two papers coated with mercury nitrate, give, almost instantaneously,
on the od side are the stomata, the imprint of the parenchyma, and on the other side, the imprint
ribs. A glass rod soaked in hydrochloric acid and presented successively
vement on both sides produces abundant white vapors on one side, on the other side
almost nothing. Finally, if Pon consults the meaning and Podorat comparatively on the two
faces, this last take, confirming the previous ones, shows that the gas is released
in abundance from the underside, ott the stomata afford it numerous avenues of
exit, and in negligible quantity from the upper face, from which it can only escape through
the cuticle of the veins. Vienna. G.P.

 

— 136 —

TABLE OF CONTENTS

From the 3rd year. To our readers, by La Répacrioy. Phosphorescence of the sea, by C. L.
Plant histology (continued), by G. Rovx. Oysters, by M. H.. Influence of Light on Lighting (continued), by A. Lewame,
Triassic field research (continued), by E, Pavuix
Communications (by various authors)... 12, 24, 36, 47
The Scientific Congress of Bordeaux, by E. Koecnuiy..

Antiseptics in all times (continued), by C. D.
On chlorophyil and the coloring matters of flowers, by A. D.
Electric Insects. 104, 111, 124, 134

   

 

From the caves of Bournois, by E. Duverxoy. Observations of a bird lover, by E
Fall discoloration and defoliation of plants, by
The Solanaceae family, by Pocncior. Note on the Grace-Dieu icehouse, by
The Swift and its nest, by G. Cox
The Bordered Dytisque, by R. H.
Practical Entomology by E. Lewis
Le chant du Moqneur, by L. F.

The Borragines, by G. Levasson
La Pie-Grivche Gcorcheur, by H. Ricien
OBningen Lake, translated by G. Bovar. .

 

 

 

       

 

   

 

   

     
  
 
 
 

 

 

  

On the coloring matters of plants, by A. P. 105
The Russet Scorpion, by G. Mixaawp .. 90
Generalities on Tachinaria, by G. Cour 93
Anemones, by A. Dottrus 98
What is in a shell of Saturnia pyri, by 102
Press for the desiccation of plants, by E. Lar . 103
Note on the use of Patchouli for the conservation of entomological collections,

by L. Reyxavp. 107, 124
A few words about glaciers. 108
Perseverance of the Swallows, by DE Pruxsac it
Lepidoptera, by G. Rovast..... 119
The Geological Society of Normandy, by res Réoacreuns 120
General remarks on mosses, by C. L 122
Note on the medical properties of Anemones. 123

 

Edible Insects, by J. vz Gavtie. Flore d'Uriage, by A. Doutet: . Synoptic table of the Lebiide of France, by M. pes Gozs
A visit to the Scientific Congress in Solutré, by G. B..... Fix FROM your 3¢ YEAR. typ. Oventucn and Sons, t Rennes. — Meet in Paris, rue des Blaues-Manteaux, 35,