CATALOG

HEMIPTERA

FROM THE NORTH DEPARTMENT. CATALOG
HEMIPTERA

; NORTH DEPARTMENT

By L. LETHIERRY. 2nd EDITION. LILLE,
;

PRIMERI£ L, DANEL. 1874. CATALOG
HEMIPTERA
FROM THE NORTH DEPARTMENT

By L. LETHIERRY. 2 EDITION. FOREWORD. In 1869, I presented to the Société des Sciences de Lille
a catalog of the Hemiptera of the Department of the North. The
insects of this order have hitherto been the object of so
little research, not only in the department,
but even in the rest of France, that I could not
claim to make a complete enumeration of the
country species. So it was not, as I said then,
a test, a first milestone intended to pave the way,
to facilitate research and to spread the taste for study. Imperfect as it was, this modest essay served the purpose.
that I had proposed to myself, by stimulating the zeal of the entomolo-
gists from the north of France and pushing them to make
more thorough research of the most neglected genres
so far. Thanks to this doubling of activity, in five years
the number of species making up our yardstick has been found
double: this is 1a the result of which I save the details in
this catalog. Kn 1869, I had only mentioned

 

=e

373 species inhabiting our department: today I have
complete 670; and yet this figure could be increased
a lot if I had made a more in-depth study of the
aphids and the following genera. This is the first part
weakest of my little work; and it is good 4 to regret
that no one in France devotes himself exclusively to
search for those little beings whose morals are interesting
health & all points of view. But there is so much to do
in this path, however narrow it may seem, that the life of a
man could not suffice. Exceeding a bit too much perhaps
be the limits of a simple catalogue, which should be reserved
ver only the enumeration of native species, I have
drawn up several dichotomous tables of some
lesser-known genres: may they be of some
useful for beginners, and make it a little easier for them to determine
species mining. I cannot thank enough the excellent friends who have
powerfully helped in my research: M. de Norguet,
at Lille, and M. Lelievre, at Valenciennes. But despite their
efforts joined to mine, I still cannot flatter myself that I have
makes a complete list, even with regard to only-
ment the Heteroptera and the Homoptera. In the absence of other
merit, I will have at least avoided duplication, all
the insects that I quote having passed under my eyes. For five years, the study of Hemiptera has made in France
great strides, and promises to make greater
Again. Several important works have appeared in various
no:

 

 

 

 

In 1868, the Cicadines around Wiesbaden and
Frankfort, by M. Kirschbaum. In 1869, my learned friend M. Puton published a catalog
logue of Hemiptera Heteroptera of Europe, adopted everywhere
for the classification of collections: it is the one that served me

to

guide. A new edition will appear in 1874, with
many additions. In 1870, Messrs. Mulsant and Rey put out a vo-
lume containing the history and description of the Coreids,
Mrance Alydides and Berytides; wn new volume of
same authors, concerning the Reduvids, comes from pa-
born in 1874. In 1871, Mr. Meyer-Diir presented to the Société Ento-
Swiss mology, a monograph of the Psyllodeae of the
Swiss. .

In the same year, Mr. Sahlberg published an excellent
work in Latin on the Cicadines of Finland; MM. Reuters
and Thomson, interesting descriptions and remarks
on species from Scandinavia and Finland. In 1872, Mr. Stal, of Stockholm, proposed a new
classification of Pentatomids, Coreids, Ligeids and Redu-
European vacuums: I will only mention the work
by the same author on exotic species, which are con-
siderable. As can be seen, there is no lack of work
not in Sweden and Finland, and to this day, Prussia
and France remained far behind. That same year, 1872, appeared in Vienna the catalog of
Cicadines of Europe, by M. lieber. A large number of es-
parts mentioned in this catalog are still unpublished;
The author was working 4 on a manuscript that was to contain the des-
description of each species: unfortunately after death
of author, this manuscript has been lost; only the
colored drawings, the accuracy of which is so great that they can
enough on their own to recognize the species. In England, Messrs. Scott, Douglas, Marshall, etc.,
continue, in the Hntomologist's Monthly Magazine,
their interesting studies on the Hemiptera of England. infin, in France, in the Annales de la Société En-

 

 

 

 

=p

tomology, M. Signoret undertook a vast monograph
phy of the Coccides, as complete as it can be in
Current state of science. With regard to these important works, it should be noted
a capital loss, and a mourning for science. In 1871,
Mr. Fieber, my revered master, died almost suddenly.
ment at Chriidim (Bohemian). Author of a monograph on Hemiptera Heteroptera
of Europe, published in German in 1861, every year it enriches
read the memoirs of the Société de Zoologie et de Bota-
of Vienna, of which he was a member, of descriptions
isolated or monographs of the greatest merit, such as
than those of Deltocephalus, Tettigometra, &c. Gifted
with unfailing patience, and a talent for drawing
remarkable, he figured and colored with the greatest care.
meticulously all the cash that was sent to him from all Jes
points of Europe. His strength and his life have worn out little
gradually to these uninterrupted labors, and death came the sur-
take pencil and brush in hand, at the age of
64 years old. CATALOG OF HEMIPTERA

FROM THE NORTH DEPARTMENT. First Division. — HETEROPTERA. 1° Famite. — MEGAPELTIDA. COREOMELAS. White. C. Scarasazores. Linnaeus. Fairly common around Lille: for-
tifications, Lambersart, Ostricourt, on buttercups; spend the winter
in perfect condition. ODONTOSCELIS. Door. O. Fotsarxosa. Linnaeus. Dunes of Calais and Dunkirk, in June, less
plentiful as the next. O. Dorsauis. Fabricius. Dunes of Calais and Dunkirk; fairly common
in June. PSACASTA. German. P. Pepemontana. Fabricius. Very rare: fortifications of Valenciennes,
in May, on the symphytum officinale (A. Leliévre). EURYGASTER. Door. E. Maunus. Zinné. Very common everywhere: fortifications of Lille, Em-
merin, forests of Raismes, Mormal, etc. ; passes the winter in perfect condition. E. Horrororus. Fabricius Common, especially in covered areas
broom and heather: forest of Raismes, wood of Phalempin, Ostri-
short, Thumeries, Mont-Noir; passes the winter in perfect condition. PODOPS. Door. P. Inuncrus. Fabricius. It is one of our most common species,
it is on the ground, especially in the fortifications of Lille, under the

—6—

tufts of grass at the foot of the walls; in the fields, on the embankments
grassy ditches; in the woods: Emmerin, Libercourt, summer. ; pass
The winter is in perfect condition. cyD)

C. Fravicons. Fabricius. Essentially lugworm species found
sometimes in the dunes of Dunkirk, deeply buried in
sand. It is necessary, to have chance to meet her, to choose the days ot
the wind, lifting the shifting sands, puts it & uncovers it in its retreat

  

US. Fabricius. underground; passes the winter in perfect condition. C. Nionra. Fabricius, Common in spring wandering on the sand, in the mount
des Bruyéres, near Saint-Amand. 7

GEOTOMUS. Mulsant and Rey. G.Poncrutarus. Coast. This species, indicated by MM. Mulsant and Rey
as mainly southern, is nevertheless very abundant in the
Dunkirk dunes; it lives there at the roots of various plants including
she sucks the sap; we see it from the month of March wandering on the ground, especially
when it's windy. Pass the winter in the perfect state. SEHIRUS. Amyot and Sercilla. S.Morio. Zinné. Rare: fortifications of Lille; list of Phalem wood
pine, in a field of clover, in midsummer. S. Lucrvosus. Mulsant and Rey. Rare: an example taken in May on the
edge of the Ostricourt wood. TRITOMEGAS. Amyot and Serville. T. Brcotor Linnaeus. Fairly common around Lille, on the nettle
and various other plants: fortifications of Lille. Lambersart. Pass
Winter & perfect condition. CANTHOPHORUS. Muisant and Rey. C.Dunts. Scopoli. Very rare: a single copy taken in August in the
dunes of Wissant (Pas-de-Calais). ADOMERUS. Mulsant and Rey. A. Bicurrarus. Linnaeus, This space is mostly found in the woods, ot
it is common under the moss in autumn, winter and spring +
Phalempin, Ostricourt, forest of Raismes. —1-—

GNATHOCONUS. Fever. G. Atgomarainatus. Fabricius. Found by M. de Norguet in the surroundings
rons of Boulogne (Pas-de-Calais); may end up in the
boundaries of the Nord department

G. Prcrns. Fallen. This species, indicated MM. Mulsant and Rey like
mostly southern, sometimes found around
Lille, at the foot of trees or at the roots of low plants: Ronchin,
Mons-en-Barceul. It is very common in the dunes of Dunkirk
and Calais, under the mosses. Passes the winter in perfect condition. SCIOCORIS. Fallen,

S. Terrevs. Schrank. Not uncommon in the dunes of Dunkirk and
Calais, in the spring and in 616, under the mosses. Spend Winter in State
perfect. ALIA. Fabricius. (B. Acummata. Linnaeus. (Rostrata Mulsant and Rey). Commune in summer surles
grasses, especially in the woods: woods of Libercourt, Marchiennes,
fordts de Mormal, de Clairmarais, Passe Vhiver 4 in perfect condition. G. Kuver. Hahn. Rare; Mont-Noir, Mont des Cates, in June in the
places covered with broom. AELODES. Dohrn,

G. Invtexa. Wolf. common louse; in the summer in the woods on the stechys
syloatica; woods of Phalempin, forests of Raismes and Clairmarais. EYSARCORIS. Hahn. E. Metanocernatus. Fabricius. Fairly common in spring and summer,
on the scrophularia: fortifications of Lille, wood of Phalempin, forest
from Nieppe. E. Pertatvs. Fabricius. Rare in the vicinity of Lille (fortifications);
very common in a sandy meadow in the forest of Raismes, in
Gte; Hollebeke wood. STRACHIA. Hahn. S. Festival. Linnaeus. Very common in the forests of Nieppe and Mormal,
in the middle and at the end of Summer, on crucifers; less common in
Phalempin wood. =e

 

S-Overacea. Linnaeus. Fairly common in the woods of Phalempin, Liber-
short, in summer; sometimes in gardens, on crucifers; I don't pay
never seen abundant enough to do significant damage. Linnaeus rap-

 

bears that cabbages and turnips were partly destroyed by this species,
in 1760, in Sweden. CARPOCORIS. Kolenati. C. Baccarum. Zinné. Rare ; a specimen taken in September in the woods
of Marchiennes. Forest of Raismes. C. Nioricornis. Fabricius. Quite rare: around Lille (from Norguet),
forest of Raismes. C. Vernascr. From see. Very like everywhere, especially in the woods: for-
tifications of Lille, Phalempin wood, Mormal forest, Dunkirk,

etc Pass winter 4 the perfect state. PERIBALUS. Mulsant and Rey. None Venatis. Wolf, Fairly rare; in the woods, in the middle and the end of
V6té, on the brushwood; wood of Libercourt, forests of Nieppe and
Clairmarais. PALOMENA. Mulsant and Rey. P. Vininissiwa. Poda. Very common, especially in the woods, in summer; we have it
found on a host of different plants and trees: Phalempine, forest
of Nieppe, forest of Mormal, Trélon. P. Dissnmms. Fabricius. As common as the preceding, and in the
same places: the top of the body is a beautiful pink color, and the
posterior angles of the corselet, are a little less rounded than those
dela P. Vinipissnva: but these differences are too little characterized
so that we can make it a separate species. PIEZODORUS. Fibber. P. Incarnatus. German. Very common, seems to like especially the
broom: Bois de Phalempin, Mont-Noir, Mormal forest. We find
ordinarily, in the department of the North, that individuals above
entirely green, belonging to the variety Attiaceus, Germar; but
on the hills around Bruay, near Béthune, the type & color
purpurin occurs more often than the variety, Overwinters in state
perfect. —9-

RHAPHIGASTER. Delaporle. R. Grisevs. Fabricius Species common in Paris, but very rare in
our department: Montignies-sar-Roc (Belgium), Anzin (A.
Lelidvre). ACANTUOSOMA. Curtis. A. Haworthomare. Zine. Rare: Eperlecques forest, near Watten (from
Norguet), forest of Raismes (Giard), Anzin, wood of Angre. (A. Lelitvre),
forest of Mormal, under the moss in October. SASTRAGALA. Amyot and Servitle. S.Ferrucator. Fabricius, A specimen of this species was found by
Dr. Marmottan in the dunes of the Somme; can it be
Will she find her in the dunes of Dunkirk or in the interior of the
North department. ELASMOSTETHUS. Fibber. E. Dexrarus. De Geer. Uncommon, on the marceau willow, in spring,
and in autumn: Emmerin, wood of Phalempin, Trélon, fortifications of
Lille: forest of Raismes on the pines; winter pass & perfect condition. E, Inrerstixcrvs. Linnd. Uncommon: Forest of Mormal, Forest of Rais-
my, on the pines, passes the winter in the perfect state. TROPICORIS. Hahn. Ruries. Linnaeus. Very common in the woods, during all Pété, on
various shrubs; Phalempin, forest of Raismes; is also found, but

 

ay

more rarely, at Fives and as far as the interior of the town. She exhales
a very strong smell. PICROMERUS. Amyct and Serville. fortify-
Lille cations; marsh of the Dede, 4 Emmerin; forest of Mormal. P. Bivens. Zinné, Common in tidal places, in 6t

ARMA. Hehn. A. Custos. Fabricius. Rare, wood of Phalempin, on the bushes, in May. PODISUS. Herrich Scheffer. P. Luriwus. Fabricius. Quite rare ; on the bushes, in summer, in the woods:
Libercourt, forest of Clairmarais; dunes of Dunkirk, in August, on the
Cakile maritima. -w—

ASOPUS. Burmeister. A. Puscrarus. Zinue. Very rare; a single individual found on willow
marceau, in the fortifications of Lille, by M. de Norguet: another
in Emmerin Marsh. JALLA. Hahn. J. Deaosa. Lind, Very rare; a single specimen found under a clump
@Erodium, in the dunes of Calais, in May. ZICRONA. Amyot and Serville. Z. Coerutea. Linnaeus, Is not uncommon; on the bushes, in the middle and at the end
of summer, in the marshes of Emmerin. 2° Famite. — COREIDE. SPATHOCERA, Stein. S.Lovara. Herrick Scheffer. Vres-rare, two copies taken in Septem-
ber under heaps of pine needles, on the edge of the Bois de Douvrin,
by M. A Lelievre. PSEULDOPHLOEUS. Burmeister. P. Tired. Schilling. Common pen; dunes of Dunkirk, in the spring,
in the sand, at the foot of the tussocks of Hrodinm. Winter pass & state
perfect. P. Waurit. Herrich Scheffer. Rare: dunes of Wissant, at the foot of the dune
clump of Zchium vulgare, in August. CERALEPTUS. Coast. C. Squatapvs. Costa, Very rare, a single copy taken in May in a
alley of the wood of Carvin. COREUS. Fabricius. C. Hinnicorsis. Fabricius. Uncommon: fortifications of Lille (from
Norguet), forest of Raismes, wood of Ostricourt. STENOCEPHALUS Latreille. S.Acnus. Scopoli. Common throughout the season of spring and
Pets, on ?Luphorbia sylvatica, in the forest of Mormal. I'm not going
never encountered elsewhere. -u

CAMPTOPUS. Amyot and Serville. C. Laveratas. German. Very rare ; surroundings of Lille (from Norguet). ALYDUS. Fabricius. A. Catcaratus. Linad. Uncommon; on the brooms, in July, at Mont-
Black; fortifications of Lille. CHOROSOMA. Curtis. C. Scutixet. Schummel. Is not very rare in the dunes of Dun-
kerque, in July, on the stems of! 'Ammophila arenaria. This species
is not exclusively maritime; she was found in places
arenacés., around Paris. MYRMUS. Hahn. M. Mirivorwts. Vaden. Very common during !’6é in some lanes
shaded woods ott grow composites of the genera Centaurea
and Senecio The development of tiles is lacking in many indi-
vidus , which nevertheless mate in this state. Wood of Libercourt, of
Verlinghem; forests of Raismes and Mormal. SYROMASTS. Latreille. S. Manaixarus. Linnaeus. Not widespread in the immediate vicinity of Lille;
very common in the woods: Phalempin, forests of Nieppe, Raismes,
of Mormal, of Saint-Michel. According to M. ‘A. Lelièvre, the plant he
favorite is the Rumex Friesii. VERLUSIA. Spinola. V. Ruompea. Linnaeus. Quite rare; dunes of Calais and Dunkirk, fortifications
cations of Lille, forest of Mormal. Pass Vhiver in perfect state. GONOCERUS. Latreitte. G.Venator. Fabricius. Found in the Somme, by M. Obert, this
space has not yet been encountered, my acquaintance, in the department
ment from the North. ENOPLOPS. Amyot and Serville. E. Scapa. Fabricius. Very common in the fortifications of Lille, in
spring and autumn; climbs on low plants, at the foot of
walls. Vbiver pass Perfect condition. -R=-

THERAPHA. Amyot and Serville. T. Hyostamt. Lind. Quite rare; forests of Mormal, Trélon, Rper-
leques, in May and June. Lives on henbane, according to the authors. CORIZUS. Fallen. C. Anuriton. Rossi. Rare; forest of Raismes (A. Lelitvre ). C. Crassicorsis. Zinné. Common in June in the forest of Nieppe, on the
Cirsium malarial. C. Macuratus. Field. Rare; Phalempin wood, on the low plants,
June July. C. Carraros. Fabr. Common in the woods, on St. John's wort, in June
and July; Phalempin, forests of Nieppe and Mormal. C. Parumpuncrarus. Schilling. Fairly common in the woods, on the
St. John's wort, in June and July: Phalempin; forest of Mormal; dunes of
Calais and Dunkirk, on a Galium & yellow flowers, in August. 3° Faumte. — BERYTIDA. NEIDES. Latreille. N. Panatzetus. Fibber. Not uncommon in May and June in the dunes of
Calais and Dunkirk, on the flowers of Hrodium, oh we find it
coupled.

 

. Tipunanwus. Lind, Rare; Mont-Noir, wood of Marchiennes, in the
sandy places, in September. Surroundings of Valenciennes (A.
Lelitvre). BERYTUS. Fabricius. B Stoxorens. Fibber. Uncommon, & ground or climbing on grasses:
Lambersart, Carvin wood, Dunkirk dunes. B. Moxivacvs. Mayer. Rare; around Tournai, in the quarries
abandoned, dunes of Calais, on the Hrodium. B. Pyanaws. Fibber. New species, determined by Mr. Fieber. Rare ;
fortifications of Lille, wood @Ostricourt. I don't know if this species has &

 

  

Written in Fiber's latest works or in his manuscripts:
Jen gives a short description below (1). ‘tus pvowaeus. Blond. Head adorned with a crest appearing rounded in front,
. Antennae a 1" section a little longer than the pronotum, blond, as well as

 

-We

B. Virratus. Fibber. Very rare, only one from the forest of Kaismes,

B.Coanatvs. Fibber. Very rare: Fordt of Nieppe; Mormal forest, climb
on the grasses in the warm days of spring,

B. Cravives. Fabricius. Rare ; around Tournai; on the grass in
abandoned careers. B. Minor. Herrich Schaffer. It is the least rare of our Berytus: it
found everywhere, under the grasses or climbing on their stems. Winter Pass
in perfect condition. B. Comuvratus. Douglas and Scott. Not uncommon, same die as pre-
Highlights: fortifications of Lille, forest of Raismes. Spend the winter in the state
perfect. METATROPIS. Fibber. Mr. Rurescens. Herrich Scheffer. Rare: it is taken by mowing in
the very shaded alleys of the woods: Aubry wood near Raismes, forest
of Mormal, in June. METACANTHUS, Costa. Mr. Fiecans, Curtis. Not very rare in the dunes of Dunkirk, under the
mosses, in April. Pass 'winter in perfect condition. The fragrant insect appears,
around the middle of the month @aodt. Valenciennes, on the Bugranes. (HAS,
Lelitvre). his club, the 2nd blonde, the end of the 3¢ and the 4th black, this one fusiform, as long and
‘as thick as the 1** club. Pronotum raised in hosse the base like that of the
B, Signoreti ct Montivagus, but convert big points only in his basi half
hairy, punctuate and dull in anterior half; charged with three longitudinal reliefs,
the medirus rather lively above, weakening a little towards the base, the lateral ones weakening

health little by little and disappear on the callus. Blond cories, with posterior angle
ts the junction points of the membrane ribs black. Subrounded membrane &
Pestremity, offering its greatest breadth towards the base of its outer edge, pes more
wide at that point that the corie has its greatest transverse diameter; adorned between
its ribs of two slightly marked longitudinal bands, more visible and wider &
their end. Legs entirely blond, with the end of the deraer section of the torsos
and black fingernails. Long. 0.005 millimeters, width. 0.0009 towards half of the cories (less than one millimeter). Intermediate between B. Signoreti and Montivagus: it differs from the first in size
smaller and the membrane more rounded at the extremity, of the second by this extremity
less rounded, and of the two by the club of the antennae and of the concolorous eisses, and on~
all by the distinctive sculpture of the corselet,

 

Her
4° Fawittr. — LYGAIDES. PYRRHOCORIS. Fallen. P. Aprenus. Linnaeus. This species has not yet been found in the district.
dissement of Lille, and in the rest of the department it is not
common. Mr. de Norguet took in August in the dunes of Amble-
teuse (Pas-de-Calais), MM, Giard and A Lelitvre in the fortifications
of Valenciennes, at the foot of the walls. LYGEUS. Fabricius. L.Saxaritas. Scopoli. Very rare: department of the Somme (Obert), wood,
WANgre, end @April (Giard, A. Lelidvre)

L. Eqursras. Linnaeus. Rare ; surroundings of Valenciennes (Giard, A.
Lelidvre). NYSIUS. dallas,

N. Tuywt. Wolf. Uncommon & Lille, in the fortifications: Lam-

bersart: common & Dunkirk, in salty land, in August. N. Forscrxesus. Kunze. Rare: two copies taken & Dunkirk, in
salt lands, in aodit,

PLOCIOMERUS. Say. P. Fracriconsas. Schilling. Not very rare; on the grass and at the foot
plants in marshy places: fortifications of Lille,
emmerin. Gets through the winter & perfect condition. P.Loriwus. Herrich Scheffer. Rare: Only found at the edge of
peat marsh, marsh of Arleux. OPUTHALMICUS. Schilling. O Patuipipessts. Coast. Common in the dunes of Dunkirk and Calais,
in spring, running on the sand or crouching at the foot of low plants. His gait is fairly rapid, but jerky, and recalls that of
Beetles of the genus Notiophilus. Pass the winter in the perfect state. O.Aver. Fabricius. Rare
sandy. (To Lelidvre). :mont de Lamet, Beaudour, on mounds

 

PLINTHISUS Latreille. P. Binexrunus. Herrich Scheffer. Rare ; dunes of Calais, or spring,
Pass Vhiver & the perfect state, Forest of Mormal. year

P. Brevirennis. Latreille, Very common under mosses and at the foot of
plants: fortifications of Lille, Dunkirk and Caluis dunes, Passe
winter in perfect condition,

 

DRYMUS. Fever. D. Svivanicus. Fabricius. Very common in spring under the mosses,
fallen leaves and grasses; fortifications of Lille, wood of
Phalempin, forest of Mormal, etc. Winter pass & perfect condition. D. Brus Sahlberg. Quite common in the woods, under mosses
and fallen leaves: Phalempin, Tourmignies, Mormal forest, ete. Winter pass & perfect condition. ISCHNOCORIS. Fibber. J. Hemprenvs. Sahléerg. Rare in the fortifications of Lille; trs-
common in the woods of Libercourt, Ostricourt, Raismes and towards the
summit of Mont-Noir, at the root of the heather. His gait, when he
is worried, is very lively; which, together with its smallness, makes it difficult
grab. Passes 'winter in perfect condition. MACRODEMA. Fibber. Mr. Microprera. Curtis. (Nigra-Signoret). Mont-Noir, at the foot of the heather,
together with Ischnocoris Hemipterus, but rarer. This pretty
espice is also nimble and also goes from winter to a parfia state. MEGALONOTUS. Fibber. Mr. Axexnatvs. Schilling. Uncommon, in the woods, under the mosses:
Phalempine. Pass the winter the perfect state. M. Pravrextatus. Herrich Scheffer. Common in Dun-
kerque and Calais, except the mosses; I haven't found it yet
interior of the department. Winter pass & perfect condition. Mr. Duraratvs. Herrich Sche/iron. Uncommon ; at the foot of the heather,
in the woods: Ostricourt, Hollebeke, Mont-Noir. Spend Winter in State
perfect. Mr. Curracrs. Fabricius. Not widespread in the vicinity of Lille: embankment
arid areas of the railway line & Ronchin, under the moss: embankment
from the Mons-en-Bareul, Arminitres, Raismes forest railway. Passel winter in perfect condition. Mr. Sapviicona. Thomson, New species, formerly confused in

 

iG

the collections with the Af. Chiragra, It differs in size plus
small and all the shins completely young until the end. very common
in the Dunkirk and Calais dunes, under the Passe Vhiver mosses
in perfect condition. PTEROTMETUS. Amyot. P.Srapnyisnowes. Burmeister. Very rare and pretty species, which lives at the foot
heather, in the dry places of the wood of Ostricourt, near the
Hourglass. PERITRECHUS. Fibber. P. Axousticoutis. Saklderg. Very rare, only one copy was found
in the forest of Raismes by Mr. Exnest Leligvre. P. Nusiws. Fallen. Common under mosses in spring: fortifica-
tions of Lille, Ostricourt. Passes winter in perfect condition. P. Puxcricers. Thomson. Differs from P, Nudilus by the larger points
of the head, and the much thicker antennae. Very common at the foot
grasses, along the walls, in the fortifications of Lille; forests of
Raismes and Mermal. Passes Winter in perfect condition. P. Lusicen. Schilling. Fairly common, under mosses, especially in
the woods: fortifications of Lille, Ostricourt, forests of Raismes and
Moral. Pass 1 winter in the perfect state,

TROPISTETHUS. Fibber. 'T, Honosrnicevs. Scholtz. Rare in the fortifications of Lille; very-com-
Mun & Touray, under the mosses, in the abandoned quarries;
common in the wood of Ostricourt and the forest of Raismes. pass the winter &
Perfect condition. PIONOSOMLS. Fibber. P. Vanivs. Wolf, Common in the dunes of Colais and Dunkirk This
charming species runs with agility on the sand, at the foot of the plants
low, and winterizes in perfect condition. LASIOSOMUS. Fibber. L. Exenvis. Herrich Scheffer. Fairly rare, in June, on ferns,
gifts the forest of Mormal. it
ACCOMPUS. Fibber. A. Rivers. Wolf. Common in marshy links, especially at Emme-
rin, all year round: Calais; fortifications of Lille. Forest of Mormal. STYGNUS. Fibber. S Rusricus. Fallen. Rare ; Libercourt wood. Forests of Nieppe and
Moral. S.Sanvrosus. Schilling. Common in woods, on heather: Liber-
short, forests of Raismes and Marchiennes. S. Anenanius. Hein, Common in the fortifications of Lille, at the foot

walls, in dry places, Raismes forest, Dunkirk dunes. Winter pass & perfect condition. GASTRODES. Westwood. G. Ferrvoreus. Linea. Rare: a copy taken in April by M. de
Norgnet under the bark of a plane tree & Lambersart, in a pare ob se
find many pine and larch plants. Libercourt wood,
on the Scotch pine. Pass VPhiver in perfect condition. EBREMOCORIS. Fibber. E. Enranicus. Fabricius. I only once found a large colony
nie of this insect, in the forest of Raismes, at the foot and under the bark
@an old pine stump, in April. — Surroundings of Abbeville (from
Norguet.) E. Presesus. Mallen, Rare: at the foot of the pines, Libercourt wood, forest
of Raismes, in March and April. Pass the winter in the perfect state. SCOLOPOSTETHUS Fieber. S. Connacres. Herrich Schaffer. Common in the fortifications of
Lille, & the roots of herbs: Fives, Ostricourt, Dunkirk dunes. Pass Phiver in the perfect state. S. Prcrus. Schilling. Quite rare: one specimen found in the woods
of Annapes, under the bark of a willow (Ch. Barrois). Phalempin wood,
shaking lives

 

bundles, in May. S. Eniceroru. Lethierry. (melanocerus, Thomson). Common to the prin-
time under the mosses, at the foot of the heather at Mont-Noir: wood
@Ostricourt, forest of Raismes. Phivert pass & perfect condition. pls) —

S.Arrinis. Schilling Thomson. Very rare: only one specimen found
in July in the forest of Mormal. B. Popacricus. Flower. Thomson. (adjunct. Douglas and Scott.) Very-com-
mun in the fortifications of Lille, under the mosses and at the foot of

Fives, Mons-en-Bareeul, in damp places. We

finds at the end of winter, in wars, a few individuals in perfect condition,

but a greater number have the state of larvae, which have had to hatch during

Pwinter: perhaps the species has several generations per year. mu:

 

  

S. Decoratus. Haku. Thomson Rare: fortifications of Lille. The genus Scolopostethus lant quite well represented in our department.
ment, I think it useful to give here a table with a description of all
the species found there, & my knowledge, table that I translate
as verbatim as possible from the work of Fieber, for the species
formerly known. However, I am making a few changes.
to include three species recently recognized as distinct
by Mr. Thomson. 1. Black pronotum, white marginal keel, Veusson, antennae and
black thighs: extremity of the thighs red-ferruginous: shins brown-of-
dots, red-yellow forewings at base, extremity of intermediates
and gnaw-yellow posteriors, as well as the tarsi. Gray hemielytra,
posterior half of the bran-dark corie: in the middle of the margi- band
nale whitish, a brown marginal spot. Clavus bran on his last
third: brandtre membrane, largely white base. the brane ribs. Long 0.003 millimeters. ScoLoposternus Contaictus. Herrich Scheffer. — Pronotum yellowish-gray or iron-red behind; Angles
hind legs sometimes black. 2. 2... ee ee ee e Q

2. Dirty white hemielytra with sunken brown dots: posterior third™
of the brown cory: towards the middle of the edge which is whitish is seen a
brown spot, behind which, approaching the suture, an ow
two small elongated white lines. Brown or yellow beak, the 4th article always
Drees) coreg ctee obec eo tetiteyist te oll ott ems tee

3. Slender antennae 2. 2.2... ee ee ee 4

oh

—Robust antennas. . .-.-.---+ +--+ + +e

4. Antennae entitling yellow, as well as the tip of the crest. Third

— 19 =

posterior to the coria with a trapezoid tapering band
at the end between the two inner veins a spot, on the tip of the

 

oidal & internal angle;

clavus a line, branes. Membrane of a dirty yellowish-white, a point
on the external angle, and at the end of the internal angle a large point of a
milk white; the brane veins in the brownish part, their end
usually ending in a triangular spot, basilar angle
internal bran. Brown or yellowish-brown fore thighs, their base and
their end
nitre. Pronotum behind with a spot most often brown, hemis-
pherical, always separated by a smooth whitish median line, Glabrous,
Long. 0.003 1/2 4 0.004 millimeters ells. Hind thighs with a brown terminal ring

ScoLopostetus pictus. Schilling. — Black antennae: the base alone of the second article, narrowly ferru-
ginosa. Hesson black. Posterior third of the black corie: on the clavus,
near the internal suture, on each side a small oblique brown spot. Membrane dull white, with brown veins, Anterior thighs
brown, their tip yellow. Yellow intermediate thighs, the posterior
upper leaves yellow with a brownish terminal ring. All tibiae and tarsi
yellow. Posterior portion of pronotum ferruginous with two spots
indecisive brown in the middle, separated by a whitish smooth line. Edges
of the pronotum finely edged with white, up to the four fifths o&
this margin widens and ends abruptly. Black posterior corners
Long. 0.002 3/4 millimeters,

ScoLoposretuv's Entcetonem. Lethierry. Similar to Scolopostetius pictus, affinis, podagricus and decoratus, including
it reproduces approximately the design of the hemielytres. Differs from the first by
its smaller size and the dark color of the antennae, from Vaflinis by its
antennae more slender and its cories glabrous; S. podogricus and decoratus
by the slenderness and the different color of its antennae. 5. Antennae with articles 3° and 4° black, I 2° yellow, except its ter-
mine which is black. Cories covered with white, bristly hairs, visible &
a strong magnifying glass. Article 1 of the antennae yellow (mile), or black, yellow
above (female). Black crest. Corie with a triangular brown spot-
ary & the tip and & the end of the second external rib; a line
brown at the end between the two inner veins. Livid membrane, the
brown veins Feet yellow: fore thighs black, yellow & the

we

base and end; middle and hind thighs with a wide
brown or black ring’ their extremity. External carina of the tran-
sing, refee; lowered behind, dotted with black. Top & fine pu-
beescence of a golden yellow. Abdomen black. Belly border and connexivum
gnawing-yellow. Males most often with a shortened membrane. Long. 0.003 millimeters ScoLoposterius Arrixts. Schliling. — Antennae & articles 3° and 4° black, the 1st and 2nd entanglement yellow. Cores glabrous 2. ee eee ee ee es 6

6. Tuberculous mesosternum: rudimentary hemielytral membrane. Fore thighs stout, their middle brown above,

Drawing of the pronotum and cories as in S. ericetorum and
affinis. Long. 0.002 3/4 millimeters ScoLorosteruvs Popacricus Flor. Thomson. —Mesosternum not tuberculate: membrane entire, white, with some
some of the brown veins. Fore thighs more slender, title-
are yellow. Same drawing as in the previous ones. Long. 0.002 3/4 milli. ScoLoposTETHUS DECORATUS. Hah”. Thomson. NOTOCHILUS. Fibber. N. Linmatus. Fiedler A new species, described by M. Fiéber in the
memoirs of the Zoological and Botanical Society of Vienna (Austria)
1870, page 257. I have never found this beautiful insect, remarkable for its red color,
only one place, but sometimes in fairly large numbers, in the
Bois d'Ostricourt, in April, near a sablitre. by sifting foams
under which were several ant nests belonging to three
species: Ponera contracta, Myrnecina Latreillet and Formica rufu. I
I even took a few specimens from inside the nest of this last
nitre. I learned that Mr. Rey also found this Notochilus in the surroundings
Lyons. Pass Phivera the perfect state. TRAPEZONOTC

T. Acrestis. Fallen. Very common in the dunes of Dunkirk, under

 

Curtis. el—

the mosses, all year round, or running on the sand, pass the winter in the state

perfect. 'Y. Dispar. stall. Uncommon, in the hois, in the spring: wood of the
Douve & Warnéton, woods of Hollebeke, Marchiennes, Passe Vhiver &
Perfect condition. T. Usinrent. Fibber. Pay this species from Versailles; I think
that M. A. Leliévre Pa taken in the vicinity of Valenciennes, but I
do not follow, having no longer his insect in front of him. Here are some diagnostic sentences taken from M. Stal (Genera
Lygeidarun Europe; Stockholm, 1872), who will be able to recognize
these three closely related species:

1. Article 1 of the posterior tarsi equal in Jongeur to both
last together. 2 0

— Article 1 of posterior tarsi at least half as long
than the last two together. Trapezoxorus Uninicut. Fibber. 2. Smaller than the next: the male has the apical part of the thighs
exterior, except the extreme vertex, the posterior tibiae and the tarsi
black; the intermediate tibiae are sometimes flaves & extremity. The
female has black feet, with bent knees. Th ipezoxotus AGRESTIS. Fallen. — Larger, The male has a beak and flaved feet, a spot missing
sometimes on the anterior thighs after their midline, a ring suba-
pical on hind thighs and extremity of tarsi black. The female has
beak and feet black, with knees, tibiae and tarsi flaves;

sometimes the posterior tibiae are smoky towards the base. You \pezonotus Disean. Stat. GODS. Dohrn
D.Luscus. Fabricius. Rare; marshes of Emmerin, Douyrin, sandy land-
neux, on the pines. (HAS. Lelivre.) RHYPAROCHROMUS. Curtis. R, Rotanpar. Linnaeus. Is not rare under the barks, especially those of
pines, in spring: Ostricourt, forest of Raismes, Bruay prés Bé-
money. — BR

R. Apsrersus. Mulsant and Rey. Very rare, an example caught in the net in
July in an alley in the Bois d'Ostricourt. R. Lyxcevs. Fabricius. Rare; among the mosses, perhaps on
labiate, in spring and at the end of summer: Ostricourt wood, dunes of
Dunkirk and Calais. Winter Pass 4 Perfect condition. R. Pint. Linnaeus Fairly common in August and September in Mont-Noir, and
in the forest of Marchiennes, on the pines. R. Pevgsrats. Panzer. Rare; Valenciennes (A. Lelitvre), Abbeville (from
Norguet). BEOSUS. Amyot and Serville. B. Qvapnatus. Fubricius. Very rare. A copy taken in current April
on dry leaves in the woods of Phalempin, near Tourmignies. Must pass the winter in perfect condition,

GONIANOTUS Fieber. G. Mancixeruxcratus. Wolf. Uncommon; in the dunes of Dun-
Kerqne and Calais, under the clumps of Erodivm or running on the sand, &
the end of Pete,

EMBLETHIS. Fibber. E. Purrons. Zetterstedt. Very common in the dunes of Dunkirk
and Calais, under stones or at the foot of low plants, in spring
and at the end of I

   

 

ISCHNORHYNCHUS. Fibber. S.Diyas. Zetterstedt. Common in April and May on various plants,
in particular the pines, in the woods of Phalempin, forests of Raismes and
of Mortal. Pass ’winter & the perfect state,

PHYGADICUS. Fever. P. Unric: Fabricius. Fairly common in summer on P Urtica dioica: Fives,

Lambersart, fortifications of Lille. PLATYPLAX. Fibber. P+ Satvia. Schilling. Rare. Found by M. de Norguet in the fortifications
Lille cations. egies

CYMUS. Hahn. C. Granpicouor, Haku. Common throughout the department, in the
marshy places; Emmerin, marshes of Arleux, fortifications of
Lille. C. Cravicutus. Fallen, Common throughout the department under moss
or at the foot of the plinths; fortifications of Lille, Phalempin, etc. Pass
The winter is in perfect condition. 5¢ Family. — TINGIDA. ZOSMENUS. The door. Z.Quavnatus. Fibber. Dunkirk Dunes, rare; common at the end of
Farted in the salty land around Abbeville (Norguet). —
Forest of Guines. Z. Lavonrer. Wieder. Rare; Phalempin, forest of Mormal. Z. Cartratus. Wolf, Common in the woods, in spring and at the end of
Vété: Lambersart, Mont-Noir, wood of Hollebeke, forests of Nieppe and
Moral. Pass Winter & Perfect State,

AGRANMA, Westwood. A. Ruricore, Germar, I only found it once, but in large
quantity, in the peat marsh of Acleux, on the jones, at the beginning
cement of May. A. Lotus, Fallen. Uncommon, on rushes; Mont-Noir, dunes of
Dunkirk and Calais, in April and before. Pass the winter & the perfect state,

MONANTHIA. Lepeltetier and Serville. Mr Ampuira. Fieder. M. A. Lelidvre found this species in fairly large
quantity in a meadow at the edge of the Bois d'Aubry near Raismes,
on the buds and flowers of a carduaceae. Mr Carpur. Linnaeus. Common on the leaves and flowers of compositae,
especially Carduns and Cirsium, the whole year; it must have several
generations per year, as well as many species of the same family. Fortifications of Lille; Emmerin, Phalempin, 'lournai, etc. Mr Rencutata. Herrich Schaffer. Very rare: wn copy taken from
an alley in the Bois de Sains, near Trélon, in June. Bugny, near Abbeville
(from Norguet}. -has-

Mr Cosrata. Fabricius. Unusual ; in dry or sandy woods:
Ostricourt, Hollebeke, forest of Raismes. Mr. Quapaimacutata. Wolf. Rare; on the sheets of Paulne, in the spring
weather: woods of Libercourt and Marchiennes,

Mr Dumerorum. Herrich Scheffer. Rare; in the hedges, on the hawthorn:
Mons-en-Bareeul, wood of Marchiennes and Phalempin. Mr Surtex. Herrich Scheffer. Is not very rare in the forest of Mormal,
during the months of summer and May; wood of Angre, a single copy,

Mr Honus. Fabricius. Very common on the edge of ditches and rivers;
fortifications of Lille, Landrecies, banks of the Sambre, Emmerin, wood
of Annapes. Mr. Fieber says it lives on the Myosotis palustris. DICTYONOTA. Curtis. D. Crassiconis. allen. Very rare ; a specimen taken in the vicinity
of Tournai, in May. D. Srricnnocera. Fibber. Quite rare ; fortifications of Lille, wood of Pha-
firewood, wood of Raismes. DEREPAYSIA. Spinola
D. Foutacea. Fallen, Very-rare; a single specimen taken in the spring

under the moss in the wood of Qstricourt. Lives on ivy, according to
various authors. ORTHOSTIRA. Fibber. 0. Cenvina. German. (Platychila. Vieber ) Quite rare, under mosses,
in the spring, in a pare & Lombersart, Mont-Noir, Phalempin,
drilled. of Mormal, Arleux. At the end of March and the beginning of April
only larvae and water lilies are still found; you have to wait at
least the end of April to get the perfect insects. 0. Concixna. Douglas and Scott. Seems special to Mormal Forest, ot
it is rare, under the mosses, in April and May. had not yet been

reported in France. O.Gracttis. Fieber, Very-rare . a copy of the forest of Raismes

0. Onscura. Herrich Scheffer Commune under the niousses, in the
dry land in the spring; railway embankment at Ronchin, fordt de
Raismes, dunes of Dunkirk. -3-

O. Niorixa. Fallen. A specimen taken around Abbeville by
M. de Norguet: perhaps one day she will find herself in our
department. 0. Pustita. Fallen. Rare: dunes of Calais and Dunkirk, under the clumps
@’Brodiun, in August. CAMPYLOSTIRA. Fibber. C. Fates. Fibber. Very rare, only one taken from the swamp
@’Emmerin. C.Verna. Fallen, I only found one place, but enough
commonly, in the first spring, under the mosses of the slope of the
railway, & Ronchin. 6° Faiz. — ARADIDA. ARADUS. Fabricius. A. Crxanonsus. Panzer, Common in June on Scots pine; forest of
Raismes, wood of Hollebeke, Mont-Noir. The Aradus leptoplerus, Germar,
is the evil of this space. A. Deprussus. Fabricius. Common in cracks in the bark of various
standing trees, all year round: Annappes, on willow bark;
forest of Mormal, on the bark of oaks and beeches. In all know-
his; colonies of this insect are found on the bark, composts
Aadult individuals and larvae of all ages, which must make suppo-
ser that their generations must succeed each other rapidly in the course
of a year. ANEURUS. Curtis. A.Lanis. Fabricius. Rare ; under the bark at the foot of the birches, in the
bois @’Ostricourt, in May. 7° Famttr. — CAPSIDA. The insects of this family, with rare exceptions, do not meet
that during the spring and P6té, we do not find any more during the winter,
even in the larval state. ==

ISOMETOPUS. Fibber. J. Auunus. Fiber. Very rare: a specimen taken in June, in the forest
of Nieppe, on a willow marceau. Raisnes forest. MONALOCORIS. Dahlbom. Mr Funcis. Zinné. Very common on ferns, in woods, in
spring: Phalempin; forests of Raismes and Mormal, Mont-Noir. BRYOCORIS. Fallen. B, Prenipis. Fallen. Rare; on the ferns. I haven't met yet
found elsewhere than in the forest of Mormal, under the tallest forests. PITHANUS. Fieber
P. Marxext. Herrich Scheffer. Fairly common in summer on bushes:
fortifications of Lille, Tournai, forests of Raismes and Trélon. MIRIS. Fabricius. Mr. La:vicarus. Zinné. Common in grasslands and woods; Phalempine,
Libercourt, forest of Mormal. One finds some under Jes mousses, in April,
well-developed individuals who said they spend the winter in this state. Mr. Hoxsatvs. Fabricius. Very common in the forest of Mormal, all summer,
on herbs; is also found in the forest of Clairmarais. BRACUYTROPIS. Fibber. B. Caccarara. Fallen. Very common in summer, on the grasses, in the
fortifications of Lille: wood of Annapes, wood of the Douve, Warnéton;
Phalempine. NOTOSTIRA. Fibber. N. Erraica. Linnaeus. Very common on grasses, all around
of Lille; Perfect Vinseete develops towards the middle of summer and lives on
grasses from that time until the severest winter frosts. LOBOSTETHUS. Fibber. L. Vinens. Linné, Rare: is caught by beating the pines: Mont-Noir, wood
de Libercourt: all those found in the department belong &
the fulvus variety. —wt

MEGALOCEROEA. Fibber. Mr. Loxaicorsts. Fallen, Rare: around Tournai, on the grass around
abandoned quarries, May and June. TRIGONOTYL'

T. Revicorsis. Mallen. Uncommon; on the grasses, in the places
wet, during summer; fortifications of Lille, Dunkirk; forests of
Raismes and Mormal. Fibber. LEPTOPTERNA. Fibber. L. Dotanrata. Zinné. Common in prairies, in summer; fortifications of
Lille, Fives: Mont-Noir, Busigny. L, Feravaata. Hahn. Common in the prairies, in summer: fortifications of
Lille, Mont Noir. ONCOGNATHUS. Fibber. 0. Bxorarvs. Fabricius. Uncommon, on grasses in summer in lee
marshy places, fortifications of Lille, Emmerin. ALLOEOTOMUS. Fibber. A. Goruicus. Fallen. Not uncommon on pines, in July and August: wood
of Libercourt, forest of Raismes, Mont-Noir. CAMPTOBROCHIS. Fibber. C. Puxcruatvs. Wallen. Rare: Lambersart, under the bark of a plane tree,
in March. CONOMETOPUS. Fibber. C. Tuxicatus. Fabricius. HAS
around Saint-Omer, on hazel trees, in August, by M. de Norguet. encountered once in abundance at

Forest of Marchiennes, in September,

MEGACOELUM. Fibber. Mr. Inrusum. Herrich Schaffer. Fairly rare, on young leaves
oaks, in July and August: forest of Nieppe, Mont-Noir. HOMODEMCS. Fibber. H Fernvcarus Vabricius. Rare; on the grass, in summer, in the fortifications
cations of Lille (from Norguet), Ostricourt, on the umbellifera, in June. — wow

H. Mancineius. Fabr. Rare, taken by M. de Norguet in memes
places than the previous one,

BRACHYCOLECS. Fibber. B. Brmacutatus. rambur. Found in the Somme department by
Mr. Obert, but has not yet been met in the North. DEROEOCORIS. Kirschbaum. D. Srratetius. Fabricius. Common in July at the edge of the woods of
Phalempin and Ruismes. D. Sexcurratus. Fabricius. Very rare: only one specimen taken in July
in the forest of Mormal. D. Fuvomacutatus. De Geer. Rare, on the grasses of a lawn a
Lambersart, in summer (from Norguet). D. Arrinis. Herrich Scheffer. Common in summer on grasses, in
fortifications and all the surroundings of Lille. D. Biruncratus. Fabricius. Very common in summer on umbellifers and
various other plants, all around Lille. D. Curxorovtt. Fallen. Very common during the summer throughout the department-
ment, on the papillionaceae and the umbelliferae. Dunkirk dunes,
on Eryngium. D. Quavripuncrarus. Fabricius. Common in the forests of Nieppe and
Mormal, in July, August and September. D. Lermernyi. Fibber. Described by Mr. Fieber in the memoirs of the
Zoological and Botanical Society of Vienna, 1870 (page 260), after
a copy of the surroundings of Lille that I had sent to him. I have no more
found traces of this insect in his collection. For colors,
should look a lot like Megacelum infusum. D. Sericorts. Fabricius. Common on grasses, in July and August,
in wet meadows; fortifications of Lille, forest of Mormal,
dunes of Dunkirk. MIRIDIUS. Fibber. M. Quaprivircatus. Coast. Rare: in July: Mons-en-Bareul, Emmerin,
Duai. PHYTOCORIS. Fallen:

P. Unt. Linnaeus. Cotte espice seems to prefer dry or calcareous places*

—we

Mont-Noir, quite common in summer: dunes of Calais and Wissant, in
are. P. Divers. Mayer. Common in the woods in soft and September:
Lambersart’, Phalempin, Ostricourt, on young oak shoots,

P. Porurs Linné. Quite common in September on the thrones of the big
poplars & Lambersart: Fives, in the gardens, forest of Raismes. (A. Lelidvre). P. Danputus. Kirschbaum (Jongipennis, Flor; hirsutulus, Flor). Asser
common in August and September on the young shoots of white poplar,
in the woods, & Verlinghem, Libercourt: Nieppe forest: Lambersart,
on the poplar thrones. P. Tuc. Fabricius. Common in July, August and September on young
poplar shoots: Marchiennes forest, Verlinghem wood,
Libercourt, Lambersart, on poplar trunks. antecedents,
at the same times: Mont-Noir, on the pines; Fives in the Gardens;

P.Mixon. KirschOaum. (Crassipes, Flor). Rarer than pr

Lambersart, on poplar trunks,

BOTHYNOTUS. Fibber. B. Puosus. Fallen (Minki, Fieber). ‘Very rare, only one copy
caught in a net on the grass of an alley in the Bois de Carvin, at the end of May, —
Had not yet been reported in France. PYCNOPTERNA. Fibber. P. Sraiara. Linnaeus. Quite rare; in July and August, on lisidre of the woods:
Phalempin, forest of Mormal. RHOPALOTOMUS. Fibber. R.Aver. Linné, Very common during the summer, throughout the department,
on various plants, in meadows, gardens and woods. CAPSU. Fabricius

C. Trirasciarus. Linnaeus. Rare; wood of Verlinghem, in July (from
Norguet). Libercourt wood. C. Capusanis. Habricius, Fairly common in July and August, in Jes jar-
dins and the edge of the woods: Fives, Emmerin, Libercourt, forests of
Raismes and Mormal. ~%=

LOPUS. Hahn. L. Arpomancinatus Quite common in July in the forests of Raismes
and Mormal: Bois d'Angre. L.Mar Rossi, Rare; Bois d’Angre, in July (A. Lelivre). L. Lixzotatus. Burnt. Fairly common in July and August in the woods
dAngre: wood of Artres, on the Clematis vitalba. (A. Leli'vre). This
space seems to me to be only a yarie
please the white border of the elytra darkens, to the point that one does not
can no longer distinguish them from L. Mat,

  

ZL, matte; in some specimens

 

elytra without border. L. Gormeus. Linnaeus. Quite common in July in the Mormal forest,
on the Epilobinm. CAMPYLONEURA. Fibber. C. Vincuta. Herrich Scheffer. Rare Assex: wood from Verlinghem and
Libercourt, in July, on the bushes. DICUROOSCYTUS. Fibber. D. Rerwennis. Fallen. Uncommon: lives exclusively on pines,
in July and August:; forests of Clairmarais and Marchiennes, Mont-Noir. LIOCORIS. Fibber. L. Tawusturaus. Fabricius. Very common in the fortifications of
Lille, on various plants, especially on nettles, in June, July,
August and September: Annapes, Mormal forest; a few individuals not-
feels even 'winter 4' perfect condition. CHARAGOCHILUS. Fibber. wexuati. Fallen. Rare, in dry places, in June: forest of
ais , dunes of Calais, on a Galiwm yellow flowers. LYGUS. Hahn. L. Prarensis. hubby
fortifications of Lille, Phalempin, forest of Raismes and Mormal,
dunes of Dunkirk. us. Common on many plants, all year round:

L. Campesrais. Fair. Even more common than the previous one; in the
same places, all year round, even in winter. L. Arosanius. Mayer. Bugny, pits of Abbeville (from Norguet.) on the

Her

pines, Will very probably find himself one day within the limits of our
department. L. Rupmicats. Fallen. Rare, Mont-Noir, on the Scots pine, in summer,
around Abbeville, on the larches (from Norguet). L. Contamixatus. Mallen, Fairly rare; Lambersart. L.Luconus. Mayer. Common, from the end of June, on the

young willows and alders: fortifications of Lille, Emmerin, forest of
Death. L. Panuraxus. Zinnd, Very common, on the willows, from the end of
June donations to the whole department. L. Curonis. Fieder. Less common than the previous two: forests of
Nieppe and Mormal, Wissant (Pas-de-Calais). POECILOSCYTUS. Fibber,
P. Uniwasciares. Fabricius. Fairly common in July and August in the
fortifications of Lille; dunes of Dunkirk, on the Galium. P.Vorxeratus. Wolf. Dunkirk Dunes, in July and August, with the
previous, but much less common. HADRODEMA. February. H. Ree A. Fallen. Rare:
in September, beating the oaks. some specimens taken at Mont-Noir,

 

H. Pixasrnr. Kelle. Quite common, in July, on the Scots pines,

in the forests of Raismes and Marchiennes.
.

ORTHOPS. Fever. 0. Pastixacer. Fallen. Fairly common; fortifications I Lille, Lamber-
~ sart Posse Phiver &Y6lat perfect, sheltered under the barks, as well as
the 0s. Flavovarius and Kalmii, where it differs & first seen by Pangle
apical of cories not stained with black. 0. Cenvinus. Mayer. Rare: surroundings of Lille, (from Norguet). Valen-
cienues, on the throne of lime trees, marsh of ’Epaix. (A. Leligvre). O. Fiavovanivs. Febricius. Very common on certain plants of the ma-
ruis: fortifications of Lille, Emmerin, forest of Mormal, Wissant, all
fart

 

to winter under the bark,

 

0. Kataur. Zinaé, Rarer than the previous one: fortifications of Lille,
tmmerin, Lambersart: spends the winter under the bark. -

 

= 92

STIPHROSOMA. Fielder
S. Leucocupuata. Linnaeus, Rare; around Lille (from Norguet,. HALTICUS Hahn. H. Lererconts, Panzer. Rare, forest of Mormal, in July. H.Patricornis. Fabricius. Common, on grasses, in July and August,
gifts Emmerin marsh,
H. Eavrnroceruatus. Herrick Scheffer. Rare, Fort of Clairmarais,
in July. The insects of this genus, as their name indicates, are endowed with
the ability to jump. CYLLOCORIS. Hahn. C. Hisrrioxicus Linnaeus. Very common on bushes, in woods, in
July and August; Phalempin, Verlinghem. GLOBICEPS. Latreille. G. Fravoxorarus. Bohemian. Quite rare, on the bushes, in June, July
and August, wood of Ostricourt, Mont-Cassel, fortifications of Lille. G. Fravomacutatus. Fabricius. Less rare than the previous one: especially
in the woods: Ostricourt, Tournai, Dunkirk dunes. MECOMMA. Fibber. Mr. Axmutans. Fallen. On I meet in good numbers, but few fre-
occasionally, on the grass, in certain very shaded alleys of the
wood: Libercourt, forest of Raismes, in June. The female is much
rarer than the male. TYTTUS. Fibber. T. Pyomavs. Zetterstedt. Very rare, only one specimen caught in the net on
jones, at the edge of a pond, in the dunes of Wissant. Species of
northern Europe, not yet reported in France. TORHINUS. Fever. Axautares. Fallen. Common in July, August, September, on Paulne. Fortifications of Lille, Emmerin, Libercourt, forest of Mormal. #, Buantatus. Fallen. (Kirsbhbaumi, Flor.) ‘Very rare, only one exem-
please caught in a net in an alley in the Clairmarais forest, in June. Not yet reported in France. = 33 —

PACHYLOPS § Fever. P. Cutororreaus Kirschhuum. Quite rare, sar the Spartivm scoparium,
in june
near Bethune,

 

around Lille (from Norguet), Mont-Noir, hills of Bruay
LOXOPS. Fibber. L. Cocernus. Westwood. 'Ires-rare: Aubry wood near Raismes. —
Epaix marsh near Valenciennes (A. Lelitvre). July. LITOCORIS. Fibber. L. Ericerorum. Fallen. Common in summer on heath, wherever believed
this plant: Mont-Noir, forest of Raismes, etc. ORTHOTYLUS. Fibber. 0. Fravospansus. Sahlderg. Very common in August and September on the
chenopodium album: Marly near Valenciennes: (A. Leliévre). Dunes of
Calais. 0. Concotor. Kirschbaum. Rare: surroundings of Lille (of Norguet), marshes
of Epaix near Valenciennes. (A. Lelidvre). O. Nassatus. Fadricius. Very common in summer in meadows and woods,
on the willows, throughout the department. O. Prasinus. Fallen. Uncommon: in July and August on the willows,
in the fortifications of Lille. 0. Srancornis. Kirschbaum Rare: fortifications of Lille (Ch. Barrois),
of Valenciennes. (A. Lelievre). 0. Slides. Kirschbanm. Uncommon, on Salix repens, in August,
in the Dunkirk and Calais dunes. HETEROTOMA. Latreille. H. Meniorrera. Scopoli. Pretty common space in July, August and September
member in some damp places of the fortifications of Lille;
forest of Mormal. Amyot says she mostly lives on Portie; in the
places where I took her lives on Paulne. HETEROCORDYLUS Fieber. H. Tuanprcornts. Henry Scheffer. Very rare, only one copy taken
in the wood of Sains, near Trélon, in June. — 34 —

H. Tisisnis. Hahn. Very common on spartium scoparium in July and
Aoiit in the forests of Raismes and Mormal: Mont-Noir. H.Unicovor. Haha. Very common in the wood of Ostricourt, on the
English Genista. Cap Gris-Nez (Pas-de-Calais) on Ulex europaeus. ORTHOCEPUALUS. Fibber. 0. Saurator. Hake, Communi Ja late summer on herbs: fortifica-
of Lille, Mont-Noir, forests of Raismes and Mormal, dunes of
Dunkirk. O Muranitis, Fabricius. Fairly common in summer on grasses, in
same places as the previous one. ATRACTOTONUS. Fibber. A. Onscunrutus. Mullen, Reuters. (Pini, Douglas and Scott; Meyeri, Fie-
Jer), Rare: on the Scots pine, in May and June, in the forest of
Raisms. — Mr. Fieber in his drawings and works did not recognize
the two sexes of this species: he placed the male among the Atractotomus
and the female among the Ayalliastes. A.Matt. Mayer. Lives in the nests of caterpillars of 'Hyponomeuta padella,
on the @aubépine hedges (from Norguet). Not uncommon throughout the de-
department. HARPOCERA. Curtis. H Tuoracica. Fallen. Rare in the fortifications of Lille (from Norguet);
fairly common in May in damp woods around Mar-
female dogs. ANOTEROPS. Fibber. A. Survrosus. Mayer. Very rare: surroundings of Lille (from Norguet). ONCOTYLUS. Fibber. 0. Decotor. Fallen. Rare in the district of Lille, on the Chrysan-
themum leucanthemum: Libercourt.. —

 

és common in June in
certain alleys of the Clairmarais forest, where chrysanthemums grow
thames. 0. Tanacett. Fallen. Tres-rere: surroundings of Valenciennes (A. Lelidvre). TINICEPHALUS, Fieber. T, Horrutanus. Mayer. Rare: fortifications of Lille. -35 =

CRIOCORIS. Fibber. C. Crassicornis. Hahn. Rare: Artres wood (A. Lelitvre). PLAGIOGNATHUS. Fibber. P.Arpustorum. Fabricius. Very common in the woods, in summer on the
bushes: Emmerin, Phalempin, forest of Mormal. The variety drwnni-
pennies. Meyer, is as common as the type. P.Viniputus. Fallen. Very common in summer on the bushes, in the
fields and in the woods, throughout the department. It's one of our
Most common capsids. P. Bonemann. Fallen. Common in August and September on the Saliz repens,
in the Dunkirk and Calais dunes. P. Puronr. Fibber. New species, figured and described by M. Fieber. She is in the company of Fr. Bohemanni, on the same shrubbery,
in Dunkirk and Calais, but it is much rarer: she says

APOCREMNU. Fieder. A. Ansicus. Fallen. Uncommon, on bushes, in summer, swamp
@Emmerin. A, Osseurus. Kirschbaum. Rare: fortifications of Lille, in summer, on
Vaulne. you,

A. Varianis. Fallen. Very common on the bushes in the woods pen-
in summer, throughout the department. PSALLUS. Fibber. P, Saricertus. Mayer. Not uncommon in summer on young oak shoots,
in the countryside: Verlinghem, forest of Mormal. P.Quercert. Fallen. Common in summer on various willow species,
mainly in the woods: fortifications of Lille, Verlinghem,
forests of Nieppe and Raismes, etc. P. Sancurneus. Scholtz, Rare: on the willows, in June and July; fortify-
cations of Lille, Verlinghem, forest of Raismes. P. Scoxrai. Mayer. Rare: Marly near Valenciennes (A. Leliévre). P. Atpicincrus. Kirschbaum, Rare, in June and July on various species
of willows, in the woods, Ostricourt, forests of Nieppe and Raises. =e=

P.Rosgus. Fallen. 'fres-rare, one taken from the swamps @'Em-
sea,

P. Kirscupaumt. Fieler Uncommon, in June and July, on willows:
fortifications of Lille, Libercourt, forest of Raismes. P. Vantaxs. Mayer. Common on the willows, in June, in the forest of
Guineas,

STHENARUS. Fibber. S. Roermuni. Scholtz. It is sometimes quite abundant in June and
July on the young shoots of the white poplar: fortifications of Lille,

& Lambersart, Valenciennes,

S. Virrarus Fieler. Taken at the same time and on the same trees.
buckets than the Rotermundi, but rarer: fortifications of Lille. AGALLIASTES. Fibber. A. Avoennis, Fallen. Quite common in June & Calais and Dunkirk,
on P Artemisia maritima. — Roleur, banks of the meadows of Marly
(A. Lelidvre). A. Saurrans. Fallen, Rare: Dunkirk dunes, in June, under the
Brodium tufts. A. Versasci. Herrich Scheffer. Rare: around Valenciennes; near
of Etreux, in July (A. Lelievre). A. Putts. Reuter. Very common in the Dunkirk and Calais dunes,
throughout the year, at the foot of various low plants. Pulicarius difler
by its black thighs on their first half, the longer antennae
guement black, the size smaller. — Not yet reported
in France. A. Punicarius. Fallen, Quite rare: Emmerin marshes, in August and
september. A. Pixerentus. Zetterstedt, Rare , on Scots pine, in July: wood of
Libercourt, forest of Raismes. — Had not yet been reported in
France. BYRSOPTERA. Spinola. B Carters. Fallen. Very rare, wood of Annapes, in the wet alleys,
had not yet been reported in France. -has-

PILOPHORUS. Hahn. P. Ciynamoprerus. Kirschbaum. Rare: two copies taken in September
member in a garden, & Fives. P. Cravatus. Linnaeus, Quite common in August and September ¢ in the fortifications
cations of Lille, on the willows and on the thrones of the elms. Very ~ -agile
and difficult to grasp. P, Coxrusus. Kirschbaum. I have never found Him except in the dunes of
Dunkirk and Calais, where it is common in August and September, on the
Saliz repents. PHYLUS. Haha. P, Metaxoceruatus. Zinné. Common in July and August on hazel trees,
in the woods of Verlinghem, Ostricourt, summer. P.Corvus. Zinné, Common in July and uotit on hazel trees: Fives,
in a garden, wood of Verlinghem, of Phalempin, @ ' Ostricourt. P. Avertanar. Herrich Scheffer. Rare, on hazel trees, in a small
woods around Wissant (Pas-de-Calais). Wood of Artres (A. Lelievre). HOPLOMACHUS. Fibber. H. Rateperar. Fallen. Common in 6th in Mont-Noir and Mont-des-
Cates, on Chrysanthemum leucanthemum. AMBLYTYLUS. Fibber. A. Aveinis. Fibber. Fortifications of Lille, Lambersort; very common
in June in the vicinity of Hénin-Liétard, on the grassy land
uncultivated, audi coal pits. MACROCOLUS. poe

Mr. Payxutr. Fallen. Common on Bugraies in August and September
throughout the department. M. Motticutus. Fallen. Rare: Calais dunes, in August. Mr. Souranivs. Mayer. Rare: Sameon (A, Leli8rre). MACROLOPHLS. Fever. Mr Nusuus. Herrich Schaffer. Rare: in June and July on the grass,
at the edge of the ditches, & the edge of the woods: forest of Raismes, wood
@Annapes. = —

MALACOCORIS. Fibber. Mr. Cronizans. Fallen. Common in aod on the young shoots of the bou
the waters, wood of Libercourt, of Verlinghem. M. Swaracvinus. Fibber. Rare: Libercourt wood, in September:
Sameon (A. Lelievre). BRACHYCEROEA. Fibber. B. Patuicornis. Fielder. Very rare: a single copy taken in June in
the forest of Saint-Michel. B, Axvutata. Wolf. Very common in spring, on the Ononis and
other low plants, in the pools & half withered formed in
the dunes of Dunkirk by the winter rains. B. Grosutirera. Fallen, Fairly common along the edge of wet ditches in
wood, on various plants, in June; Emmerin, wood of Marchiennes,
Trelon. DICYPHUS. Fibber. .

D. Errans. Wolf. Common from the month of June in the woods, on the
Stachys sylvatica; wood of Carvin, Aubry, forest of Mormal. D. Patuwus. Herrich Scheffer. Common in damp places, on
the Epilobium; forests of Nieppe and Mormal, dunes of Wissant, in
July, August and September. 8° Famine. — ANTHOCORID. TEMNOSTETHUS. Fibber. fi!

. Can
T.Puss. Herrick Scheffer. Common pew, on the barks; Lamber-
sart, on a throne of poplar, in July; Libercourt and Aubry woods
Mont Noir. T.Lucorus. Fallen. Rare, on Scots pine, in May and June; wood of
Libercourt and Marchiennes. ANTHOCORIS. Fallen. A.Nemoratis. Fabricius. Fortifications of Lille, all year round; Lamber-
sart, common under plane tree bark where it overwinters; on the
flowers in summer, Dunkirk. ro

A. Sarcruamnr. Douglas and Scott. Rare, a copy found at Mont
Cats. Differs from nemoralis in its darker color and its
black entitling antennas. A.Limpatus. Fibber. Rare. Fortifications of Lille, on the Saule marceau
— Feeds on aphids. A. Nenonum. Linnaeus. It is the most common species of the genus: it
found everywhere and at all times, in winter under the mounds and debris
plants, in summer on all the flowers; from April the kittens
willows are covered with it: it must have several generations per
an: it lives at the expense of aphids and other small animals, likewise
probably than other species of the genus. LYCTOCORIS. Hahn
L. Douusticus. Schilling. Very common especially in the woods, on the
pile of fagots: fortifications of Lille; Dunkirk; Trélon, forest of
Raismes, any year. TEZOSTETHUS, Fever. P.Gatacrinus. Fieder. Malaria species. Bourlain Marsh in Sep-
limb; meadows of Marly on the banks of the Rhonelle, end of August (A. Lelidvre). Rare. P. Rurwennis. Dufour (Bicolor, Scholtz: latior, Mulsané). Common under
the bark of all our indigenous trees, all over the year; fortifications
of Lille, Ostricourt, forest of Mormal, eic. TRIPHLEPS. Fibber. T. Minurus. Zinné. Very common everywhere and throughout the year; in April on
the catkins of the willows, in the company of the Anthocoris nemorum, and car-
naughty like him. T. Nicer. Wolf. Quite rare: Emmerin marshes, in September. ,

 

BRACHYSTELES. Mulsant and Rey

B. Fovgotatus. Lethierry. I have found this species quite often in
sieving the debris of reeds and other marsh plants, at the end of
In winter, in the fortifications of Lille, and sometimes also under the
elm bark. It looks a bit like Brackysteles pilicornis,
Mulsant ct Rey: it differs from it by the more slender antennae, less
pubescent, the much weaker punctuation, the black color of the

= 0=

prothorax, the clearly visible dimple of crest and half size plus

large, Here is the description:

Body short oval, subdepressed, covered with greyish pubescence. ‘Tote transverse, dotted, pitch color. Beak short, testaceous. Year-
slender tena, longer than head and prothorax combined, color
pitch, almost glabrous, covered only with a few long hairs
on their latest article. Pronotum covered, broad, transverse, anteriorly constricted; rise
scalloped at anterior edge, strongly at base; dotted, shiny, black,
marked on its middle with a transverse furrow. Ticusson dotted, color of pitch, marked in its middle with a
wide dimple crossed in its middle by an obtuse pelite carina,

Hemielytra the width of the pronotum at their base, in a short oval,
finely punctate, dark testate, with pitch-colored appendage. Dark membrane. Underside of the pitch-colored body. Legs hairy, testaceous, with thighs sometimes slightly
browned, Long, 0.003 millim. Width, 0.002 millimeters. CARDIASTETHUS. Fever. C. Testaceus. Mulsant and Rey. Rare; only a few copies
were taken in the forest of Raismes, by M. A. Lelievre, shaking
pine bundles. XYLOCORIS. From the oven. X. Aver. From the oven. common pen; under the bark of felled trees:

fortifications of Lille; Armentidres. MYRMEDOBIA. Baerensprung. Mr. Corzorrata. Fallen. Common in the woods, in summer on heaps of
bundles covered with mushrooms: Phalempin, forest of Mormal. Mr. Sinorett. Frieder. Kare: Emmerin marshes, under the debris of rock
buckets. Mr Tristis. Fibber. Very-rare: Emmerin Swamp. MICROPHYSA. Westwood. M. Psetapmionsis, Westvood. Very rare; a single copy taken from
the fortifications of Lille by M. Ch. Barrois. M. Biruncrara, Perris. Very rare: only one larva found in the wood
of Verlinghem, and determined by M. Fieber. shou

ACANTHIA. Fabricius. A. Lecrurania. Linnaeus. This species, too well known by the name of bug
beds so that it is necessary to devote long details to him here,
which, moreover, will be found in the work of Amyot (Entomologie Fran-
caise, Rhyncotes), is unfortunately as common in Lille as
in @other major cities in central and southern France: the
best way to get rid of it is to use powder of
pyrethrum, which, when not fanned, not only repels
bedbugs, month kills them quickly. A. Conumparia, Jenynson. Commune in the dovecotes of the surroundings
of Lille (from Norguet). CRYPTOSTEMMA. Herrich Scheffer. C. Auenum. Herrich Schaffer. Is not very rare under the stones_ °~
almost submerged at the edge of the river in the Bois d'Angre, in May. 9° Fasutia. — SALDIDA. SALDA. Fabricius. S. Pruosa. Fallen. Exclusively maritime species, as well as the following:
I Vai met abundantly 4 Dunkirk, on the indications of
Mr. Doctor Marmotton, at the very edge of the sea, in places
where salicornia grow, covered by the tide. August and September. S. Lareratis Fallen. Lives in the company of the previous one, in the same
places and at the same times, and no less abundant, it varies greatly
Suddenly, some specimens are entirely whitish, with the nerves
yures of dark hemielytra. S.Sanraroria. Linnd. Very common at the edge of ditches, but a pen
less malarial than the Cincta: fortifications of Lille: Fives; Dun-
kerque. It is sometimes found after long series of rains
even in the paths of the gardens. All year. S. Opacuta. Zetterstedt. Very rare: in April at the edge of the marsh ditches
@Emmerin. S.C. Arson. Fieder. Rare ; forest of Mormal, in the damp moss, in the
edge of the ditches. S. Mezanosceta. Fibber. Rare ; in August and September at the edge of the ditches
of the fortifications of Lille. AWys

S.Patures. Fabricius. Very common i late summer in some
dry ditches of the fortifications of Lille: common also on the edge of
freshwater ponds formed by the rains in the dunes of Dunkirk. S. Prrosetta. Thomson. New species, created at the expense of the S, pal-
lips. She stands out at first glance by her long hair
black bristling on the head, the pronotum and the base of the hemielytra. —
Uncommon in Dunkirk and Calais on the edge of salt water ditches,
in April. S. Lrrrorauis. Linnaeus (Flavipes, Fieber). Quite common in summer in Calais,
in saline soils. S. Gemvara. Coast. Rare: At the Edge of Running Waters: Fortifications of
Valenciennes (A. Lelidvre), river in the Bois d'Angre, in June. S. Cincta. Herrick Scheffer. Very common throughout the year on the banks
ditches and rivers; fortifications of Lille; Emmerine; Annapes. The Salda possess a high degree of jumping ability, and fly
easily when the sun is hot. The larvae walk slowly, without
to jump. These insects are carnivorous, just as much as water bugs
proper, of the families Hydrometride, Pelogonide, Nepide,
Notonectide and Coriside. 10° Fatte. — PHYMATIDA. To date, no representative of this family, moreover few
numerous, has not yet been encountered in the department. 11° Fasattr. — REDUVIDS. PLOEARIA, Scopoli. P. Errarica. Fallen, Rare: Marchiennes wood,, on old bundles. P.Puosa. Fieber, Rare: around Abbeville (from Norguet). Doesn't
yet been found in the department. P. Vacanunpa. Liana. Rare: Valenciennes, on the thrones of lime trees
(A. Lelidvre). We will easily recognize these three species with the characters
following:

ace

1. Antennae and thighs glabrous, brownish, ringed with white: spine of

Long pecusson. P Ernatica. Fallen. — Antennae and legs white, with brown rings; escutcheon thorn
short. ee ee ee. 2. Thighs and first segment of long-haired antennae: tibiae and le

rest of antennae shortly pubescent. P. Punosa. Fibber. — Antennae and legs very finely pubescent. P. VaGabunpa. Linnaeus-

PYGOLAMPIS. germ
P. Birurcata. Linnaeus. Very rare ; a single copy taken in May
in Douve Wood, at Warneton. HARPACTOR. The door. H. Anxutamus. Linnaeus, We sometimes meet this wandering species
in the woods, from June until the end of September; Phalempine,
Mont Noir. CORANUS. Curtis. C. Grisevs. Rossi, Rare, forest of Raismes. (A. Leligvre). C. Pepesrris. Wolf. Uncommon: Forest of Marchiennes, in September,
on the heather; dunes of Dunkirk and Calais, under the Hrodium
and other low plants: in August and September. REDUVIUS. Fabricius. R. Personatus. Linue. Fairly common 2 Lille, in houses. This
espice is preferably installed in the uninhabited attics of old
houses, where she hunts spiders and insects; Nevertheless
I even know in the countryside, houses built some time ago.
Barely a few years, where the Reduoius has already come to establish itself. You do no harm, when you don't take care of it: we even say
quwil is a bitter enemy of Bedbugs; but you don't have to
seize without precaution, for its bite is very painful, This bite
appears to be very poisonous for the insects which have been attacked; those-
they die almost immediately after experiencing it. (See Amyot, Rhyn-
chotes, page 287):

= Uys

The perfect insect is found in the middle of summer, and perhaps dies in
winter. The larvae probably hatch in the spring. METASTEMMA. Amyot and Serville. Mr. Gurrvta. Fabricius, Fairly rare; he is sometimes found wandering on
the suble during summer, in the dunes of Dunkirk: Mont-Noir. NABIS. Latreille. N. Brevirennis. Hahn. Fairly common during summer on bushes;
Lambersart, forests of Raismes and Mormal. N. Supaprerus. From Geer. Very common throughout the department, in
fields, gardens and woods, during the summer. The length of
hemielytres is very variable, sometimes they exceed much
the abdomen. N Brevis. Scholtz. Very common everywhere, especially in the woods, the in-
perfect sect shows itself from the month of May. N. Ericerorus. Scholtz.Common on the Spartium scoparium: Mont-Noir,

forest of Raismes, since May. N. Fravowaraivatus, Scholtz. Uncommon; a few copies only
part of the surroundings of Lille. This species seems to extend very far its
housing in the North; I saw some in the collection of the late Alexandre Lefebvre,
individuals from Greenland. N. Livparus, Dahldom. Common year milian and at the end of Péé in the
wet alleys of the woods: Verlinghem, Libercourt, Ostricourt, forest
of Nieppe, fortifications of Lille and Valenciennes. N Masor. Coast. (Pilosulus, Fieber. Quite common in summer and autumn:
fortifications of Lille, Fives, Lambersart,

N. Ferus, Linnaeus. Very common throughout the year; fortifications of
Lille, Fives, Phalempin, Calais, there are many individuals
who spend the @winter season in perfect condition. 12° Famtz. — HYDROMETRID. HYDROMETRA. Fabricius. H Roroscurentata. Latreitle. Quite rare: fortifications of Lille (from Nor-
watch), Valenciennes. (HAS. Hare.) Beautiful species, which resembles &

= S

thoracica, but differing in its large size and the long ter-
abdomen. H. Parvpum. Fabricius. Rage; only two copies from around
from Lille. Seems to live in the same waters as Hydrometra lacus-
tris, from which it is easily distinguished by its large size and long
some straight spines with which its abdomen is fitted at the extremity. H.Nasus. De Geer Commune during the summer in slightly cloudy waters
streams: Arbonnoise, Dedle, streams in the Mormal forest. This is
piece ordinarily remains fit throughout the course of its existence.
tences and mates in this state. Very rarely the wings develop
slope H. Tuoracica. Schummel, Rare in the spring in the fortifications of
Lille: very common even at the time in the puddles of fresh water in the
dunes of Dunkirk. H. Grpiena. Schunmel. Has not yet been met in the vicinity
sde Lille; it is quite common in summer in the ponds of the
ir, in company with the Lacustris. H. Lacustais Liané: Very common all year round; especially in the waters
stagnant throughout the department. H. Ovoxrocasren. Zetlersted. Uncommon, in the fortifications of
Lille, with the Lacustris and the Argentata: the males are remarkable
by the two strong oblique teeth of penultimate ring of Pabdo-
men below. H. Arcentata. Schummel. Uncommon: fortifications of Lille, forest
from Raismes, Mont-Noir, river Clarence, to Lapugnoy near Béthune,
in May,

VELIA. Latreille. V. Rivutorum. Fabricius. Very rare: a single copy taken in a
many freshwater streams that descend from the Cape cliff
Blanc-Nez in the sea, near Calais, in August. V.Correns. Fabricius. Common in running waters, less common
mune in stagnant water: Mons-en-Bareeul, Ostricourt, forest
of Mormol lives & larval state in mid-summer. The perfect insect
only develops later, later and spends winter to mate in spring
weather. — 46 -

MICKOVELIA. Westwood. M Scunetem, Scholtz Commune in summer on the Zemna in the waters
stagnant; fortifications of Lille, Annapes, banks of the Detlle, summer. MESOVELIA. Mulsan. Mr Furcara. Mulsan. Very rare; a single individual caught in the fortifications
cations of Lille, by M. de Norguet, This species remained unknown
aM. Fieber, this author limits himself to reproducing in his work the des-
description given by M. Mulsant in the Annals of the Society
Linnaean of Lyon. HEBRUS. Curtis. H. Pusuivs. Fallen. Uncommon; on sles Lemaa, in summer in the
fortifications of Lille and the dunes of Dunkirk. We find
the larva & the end of March, together with that of the Microvelia
Schneideri. LIMNOBATES. Burmeister. L. Sracxorum. Linnd. Common in all stagnant waters, ponds
and ditches; fortifications and all the surroundings of Lille. The perfect insect
is hardly before the month of May. 13° Family. —- PELOGONIDA. This family is represented in Europe by only one species
who lives in southern France, and is not located in Cans the department
North. 14° Fault. — NAUCORIDA. APHELOCHIRA. Westwood. A. Msnyauss, Fabricius. Rare: banks of the river in the Bois d'Angre,
under the stones. (HAS. Lelidvre.) NAUCORIS. Fabricius. N, Crncowes. Zinné. Very common in spring and autumn in the

-has--

mud at the bottom of stagnant pools; fortifications and all surroundings
from Lille. The larvae are born in 616, then comes the perfect insect which
spends the winter and succouples in the spring. It is said that its bite is very
painful. Macutara. Fabricius. Very common in the spring in a ditch of
new fortifications of Lille; I haven't found anywhere else yet. 15° Family. — NEPIDA!. NEPA. Linnd. Cinura. Linnaeus. Very common in the spring and & I fall in the
mud from pools of stagnant water; fortifications and all the surroundings of
Lille. Its transformations are linked to the same periods as the species that
precedes and the one that follows. RANATRA. Fabricius. R. Livzanis. Linnaeus, Quite common in stagnant waters, in the spring
time and & Pautumn; fortifications of Lille, Annappes, Ostncourt. 16° Stuffing. — NOTONECTIDA. NOTONECTA. Linnaeus,

N.Gravca. Linnaeus. Very common in all stagnant waters; for-
cations of Lille, dunes of Dunkirk, etc. Everybody said
often remark the singular manner of swimming of this insect, the
belly up, back down, and hind legs extended in
form of oars. The larvae hatch in mid-spring, arriving
wind has their perfect state in the course of summer, and their life is prolonged
rarely until the following spring. But maybe there are two
generations per year. Their sting causes a fairly sharp pain, but which
is not persistent. The Furcata Fabricius variety is quite common in the ponds of
dunes of Dunkirk. The Marmorea Fabricius variety is rare in the vicinity of Lille;

several authors, notably M. Meyer Darr, make these varieties two
distinct spaces. you

PLEA. Leach. P. Mixvrissiva. Fabricius, Common in stagnant waters; Annapes,
merin; backstroke like Notonecta

 

17° Fasatte. — CORISID. The insects of this family are carnivorous, such as the Notonecta,
but do not swim on their backs,

CORISA. Gooffroy. C. Grorrrovr. Leach. Fairly common in spring and autumn in
standing water; Mons-en-Barceul, Dunkirk dunes; fortifica-
of Lille. C. Srats, Fieber (Salina, Puton\, common in late winter and
spring at Dunkirk and Calais, in stagnant salt water. This
species had not yet been reported in France, Mr. Puton and I
We found it in the same conditions in the south of France,
& Aigues-Mortes (Gard). C. Hieroctypmica. From the oven. Uncommon, in the ditches of news
fortifications of Lille, near the Arbonnoise, in the first spring and in
september. C. Santzerct. Field. In the stagnant waters of the fortifications of
Lille and the whole department. That is, with the @. Striata, Vespece la
most common in our area. C. Liner. Fieber, Very common in certain stagnant waters: forti-
fications of Lille, Mons-en-Barceul, Emmerin marshes. C. Limrrata. Fibber. Rare ; fortifications of Lille, in summer. C. Semsrriata. Fieber, Uncommon; in freshwater ponds
dunes of Dunkirk and Calais, in spring. C. Nicrorineata. Fieber, Found once in abundance in a
Mont-Noir pond, near a sandstone, in spring; around
Tournai, common in stagnant waters at the bottom of quarries
abandoned. C.Satara. Zinné. Common in stagnant waters, as well as in
the running waters of all the rivers and streams of the department. roe

C. Fattent. Fibber. Unusual ; in the spring in the nowvelles forti-
fications of Lille, near Arbonnoise; running waters of the forest
Trelon. C. Massa. Fibber. Quite rare; fortifications of Lille, dunes of Dun-
kergue. C. Fapnic, Fieder, Very-rare; a single specimen caught in a pond
dunes of Dunkirk. Excerpt from Fieber's work, abridged a great deal and does not indicate
the easiest characters to enter, the following small table, which
can be used to distinguish among them the Corisa of our department, and
may help & discover new ones. 1. Pronotum and hemielytra punctate, shiny, not raked. . . 2. — Raked pronotum and clavus: punctate cories, their base only

barely raked, Hemielytres of a grayish white or yellowish with lines
black higroglyphs. Coniss ieRoGLyPHIc\. From the oven. — Pronotum, Clavus and Cories raked. . 2... 2... 2. 3. 2. Pronotum adorned with 15 to 16 yellow transverse lines. Coarss GrorFnoyr. Leach. — Pronotum with only 748 yellow lines. Corts' STALI. *

3. Corie and clavus with straight, parallel, gently undulating lines.
leafy, seldom forked outwards. 2... ee ee

— Corie with transverse lines almost parallel, shortened,
interrupted, more rarely confused, sometimes with one, two or

three interrupted, wavy or toothed black streaks. .. . . . . 5. 4, Pronotum slightly elongated, with 8 4 9 entire yellow lineoles. Contsa SAULBERGE. Fibber. — Pronotum short, with six transverse yellow lines, entire. Conisa Linzi. Fieher. 5. Clavus entitlement gerni with transverse lines parall:'s s, spa-

 

6B ew ee ee te ee ee el

+50 —

— Clavus only & basilar half with rare trans-
slopes parallel or of unequal width, yellow or black. Cories and half
end of the clavus furnished with more or less raceourcis transverse trails,
wavy or forked. . 2 2... 2. 7 ee ee ee el D

6. Cory lines undulating, transverse, not crossed by three
black lines. Conisa Limrrata. Fibber. — Irregular lines of the core, forming a kind of hiero-
glyph crossed longitudinally by three irregular black lines. Conisa SemisTRIATa. Fibber. "7. Yellowish white or greyish white top, lined with black. Conisa NIGROLINEATA. Fibber. — Dark above & yellowish lineolus. . ... . . . 8
8, Pronotum with 7 a9 black (or yellow) lines, of equal width. 9. — Pronotum only with 6 a7 yellow lines.. . .. . . . 10. 9. Base of clayus yellowish with narrow black lines, somewhat
uneven: on the rest of the clavus and on the corie these lines are angular
and wavy. A little short pronotum, with 7 & 8 yellow (or black) lines. Conisa STRATA. Linnaeus. — Base of clavus with darkest parallel black and yellow lines
often whole,
Pronotum somewhat elongated, with 88 9 yellow lines,
Contsa Fallen. Fibber. 10. Brown, with pale lineoles, Hemielytres with trans-
rare, undulating, arched, interrupted and sometimes forked verses,
parallel on Ja base of clavus, Pronotum with six transverse lines. Conisa Moest. Fibber. — Black or black-brown, with pale lineoles. Basilar half of the clavus
with nearly parallel transverse lines, wavy, ca and ld rac-
shortened. Almost black corie, & inconspicuous lineoles. Pronotum with

7 transverse lines. Conis\ Fapnicit. Fibber. CYMATIA. Flower. C. Corgoprrata. Fabricius. Fairly common in marshes and ponds,
in spring ; fortifications of Lille and Valenciennes; marsh of Em-
Merin, Verlinghem. SIGARA. Fabricius. S. Scnonrar, Fieber. Not uncommon in PEscaut, & Valenciennes
(A. Lelivre). End of August,

Devtzue Division. — HOMOPTERA. {

Q
1° Fame. — MEMBRACIDA. 0
CENTROTUS. Fabricius. 9th
%VS. Conxurus. Linnaeus, Very common, on the oaks, in the woods,
Phalempin, Ostricourt, forest of Mormal. The perfect insect appears from the
month of June. GARGARA. Amyot and Serville. O.G. Genisrx. Fabricius, Quite rare, forest of Clairmarais, on the broom,
in summer (from Norguet). 9
2° Fancy. — CICADID. No insect of this family has yet been encountered in the departure
ly. 0
3° Family. — FULGORIDE. © ‘TETTIGOMETRA. Latreille. OT, Vinescens. Latreille. Rare; forest of Mormal, in July; Dunkirk. Bee

=e)

It is, of all our native species of Homoptera, that which is the
better organized for jumping. She jumped suddenly more than a
meter in height. © 'T. Onuigua. Panzer, Rare; Epaix marsh, near Valenciennes
(A. Lelievre). According to observations made by M. Rouget at Dijon and
by M. Puton in the south of France, certain species of this genus
live in the formalities; maybe the same is true for
species from our department. © CIXIUS. Latreitle. C. Prosus. Olivier. (Contawinatus. Germar). Very common, especially in
the woods, on the bushes, in the spring and throughout the summer, in all
the Department. > The Aldicinctus variety, Germar, is a little less common. C. Nervousus. Linnd, Common throughout the department, on bushes,
during the summer. C. Cunicuarius. Linnaeus. Fairly common, especially in the woods, during
Tété: fortifications of Lille, Emmerin, Libercourt, forest of Mormal. © C. Sriamaticus. German. Quite rare. in the woods in the spring and in
616: Phalempin and Marchiennes woods: Eperlecques forest, meadows
Watten,

© C. Inreruepws. (Fiber). Tres-rore: two copies taken from the swamp
a@’Eimmerin. This species is not described by Mr. Fieber, nor even
mentioned in his catalogue, but he drew it with his habitual care.
tuel: it is very similar to the Stigmaticus, from which it differs
Yellow crest. ‘

© Issts. Fabricius. V® I, Cougoprrates. . Fabricius. Common in all the woods of the department,
on young oak shoots. The parfuil insect hardly appears before
the middle of summer. I] jump pretty high, but he's slow & take his
boom and easy & grasp. © ASIRACA. Latreitle

A. Craviccorns. Fabricius. Found only once near Tournay, in

May, on the grass, in the abandoned quarries. © AROEOPUS, Spinola,
A. Purcnenivs. Curtis. Fairly common in August and September in the
morais: fortifications of Lille, Emmerin, Lambersart. 2s 7
—(s3)—

© MBGAMELUS. Fibber. © M. Noruus. German. Very common in the marshes, in September:
fortifications of Lille, Emmerin, forest of Mormal. © STENOCRANUS. Fever. © S. Lincotus. German. Common on beards at the edge of ditches and
marshes, in April and September: fortifications of Lille, Lambersart,
Verlinghem, forest of Guines

© S. Fuscovrzarus Stal. Found only once, but in abundance, in

June, on the cares of a small pond, on the edge of the Bois d'Ostricourt. © KELISIA. Fibber. driedfortifications

 

°K, Patuputa. Boheman, Rare: 4 half pits
from Lille, in September: forest of Raismes. © K.Gurruna. German. Rare in the vicinity of Lille: Emmerin marshes,
starts. — Very common on grasses in a small wood in the vicinity
rons de Wissant, in August. OKAY. Virrwennis. Sadiderg. Found only in the forest of Nieppe,
on the grasses of the damp paths, in July, and sparingly. —
Differs from °Guttula by the less distinct colors and the vertex
less prominent beyond the eyes. .

© DELPHACINUS Fieber. ©D, Mesometa. Bohemian. Fairly common in summer on grasses, in Mont-
Noir and Mont des Cattes. © CHLORIONA. Fieber

© G.Swaracputa. Stal, Very rare: two copies caught in the net in
September, in the Emmerin Marsh. © EUIDES. Fibber. © E. Speciosa. Bokeman. Rare; Emmerin marshes in August and September. ° 7 oe > by - so
C.Lamarus. Fabricius. Very common on the rushes, in July and August
in certain woods: forests of Nieppe and Mormal: surroundings of
Wissant. CONOMELUS. Fibber. bae
ale
LIBURNIA. stall. © L.Quaprimacutata. Signoretto. Rare, in marshy places; forti-
cations of Lille, Bois d’Annapes, Wissant, in August. — Having seen the
type of this space, sent by Mr. Signoret, I have no doubt about
her determination She had remained unknown & Mr. Fieber. She looks like
ble much to the Megamelus notulus, but the shape of its vertex must
place it in the genus Liburnia,

o L. Discotor. Bokeman, Uncommon, in wet meadows, over-
everything in the woods: Phalempin, forests of Guines and Mormal, in June
and July. © L. Pettucma. Falleu. It is the most common species everywhere, in the

meadows, from the end of April until the end of autumn. L. Exzcantuta. Bokeman. Quite rare, in the prairies, in May and June:
Lambersart, forest of Raismes, wood of Sains

L. Sorpipyta. stall. Not very rare in May and June on grasses in
clearings in the woods: forest of Raismes. L. Coxtina. Bokeman. Quite rare: meadows in the sandy areas of the
forest of Raises; Lambersart: June and July. L. Oscunetta. Bokeman. Fairly common in June and July, especially in
Mormal forest: Marcq en-Barceul. L. Forcipata. Bohemian. Fairly common in June and July in places
wetlands in the Carvin wood and the Mormal forest. L. Fuscurnons. Fibber. Rare: Arleux marshes, in May; forest of Mormal. Not yet described, but drawn by Fieber. has
L. Lepiwa. Bohemian. Very rare: fortifications of Lille; dune ponds
of Wissant, in August. © L. Luausnina. Bokeman, Rare: Found only in the Forest of Mor-
poorly, in June and July. L. Coonara. Fibber. Common in July, August and September in the dunes
from Dunkirk, Gravelines and Calais,

L.Exiava. Bokeman. Has only been found in a glade so far
sandy area of ​​the Raismes forest, in July. L, Denticaupa. Bohemian. Very rare: wood of Angre, of Carvin, of Liber-
rout, in June,

L, Spinosa. mink. Very rare: Bois de Libercourt, in June. L. Neeizcra, Flor. Common, in June and July in the meadows and
wet alleys of the woods: Emmerin, Verlinghem, Carvin, forest of
Nieppe. °

© DICRANOTOPIS. Fibber. © D. Hawata. Bohemian. Fairly common in June on prairie grasses
Lambersart, Mont des Cattes, forest of Guines. STIROMA. Fibber. © §, Avzomancinata. Curtis (adelpha, Flor), Fairly common in June on the
prairie grasses: fortifications of Lille, Lambersart, forest of
Moral. © S. Prenipis. Gend, Very rare: I only found two copies, in
July, on the ferns, in the wood of Ostricourt. ©§. Bicarinata. Herrich Scheffer. Rare gifts around Lille, wood
“de Verlinghem, in the damp alleys: less rare in the forest of
Mormal, in July. ©§. Avrinis. Fibber. Uncommon, in July in the damp alleys of
wood: wood of Carvin, forest of Mormal. (has)
4° Fame. — CERCOPIDE. 9
~TRIECPHORA. Amyot and Serville

T. Vernenata. German. Very common, in summer, on various plants, in
wet meadows; fortifications of Lille, Verlinghem, Phalempin,
Trelon, etc. LEPYRONIA. Amyot and Serville. ~L. Couxorrrata Ziané. Does not seem to meet in the vicinity
immediate Lille. Dunes of the Somme (Marmottan), surroundings of Saint-
Omer (from Norguet). oO. APHROPHORA. German. The larvae of this genus, as well as those of the genus Puu.cenus, are very-
common on various plants, especially willows; they suck
laseve. This sap seeps from their bodies in the form of slimy foam

and serves them as a rampart against the too ardent rays of the sun or the

 

Qho
= (s6)—
attacks from their enemies. The inhabitants of our countryside give to these
clumps of foam called cuckoo spit. A. Contents. of Geer. Less common than the following; is like
it everywhere, at the same times and on the same trees. Om. aunt. Fallen. (Spumaria Dufour). Very common throughout the region
ment on the willows: The perfect insect appears from the month of June,

 

°
PHILOED

 

. stall. ~P. Liveatus. Zinaé, Common in June, July and August on the bushes:
fortifications of Lille, marshes of Emmerin. OP, Campesrais. Fallen. Rare: has only been found in parts yet
the most calcareous in the Guines forest, in June and July. )P. Spumanius. Liang. Very common everywhere, during Veé; lives no-
only on the willows, but also on a host of other plinths. I saw in a garden a stalk of lavender completely covered with

ves of this species, in the spring, and of perfect insects in the summer. The colors of this species are very variable: also Fieber in his
catalog cites no less than 27 varieties, all of which have names
from different authors: the principal of these varieties are the P. Fasciatus,
Fabricius Lateralis, Linné°Lineatus, Fabricius, etc. OJ 5* Fame, — ULOPIDA,

SEO ULOPA. Fallen. iS

V U. Rencurata. Fabricius. (Obtecta, Fallen.) Very common on the
heathers, wherever these plants grow. The perfect insect develops
lopes at the beginning of summer and lives in this state until the middle of
next spring. V° 6° Famtz. — PAROPIDA. 4 MEGOPHTHALMUS. Curtis. J” M. Scanicus. Fallen. Is not uncommon in July on grasses: swamp
@’Emmerin, forest of Raismes, Tournay. 6 7° Do. — SCARIDE. V OLEDRA. Fabricius. ace
vo L. Avnrra. Linnaeus, Uncommon: lives mainly on oak, in the woods
in summer: Lambersart, Bois de Phalempin. oO
8° Fanitre. — JASSIDA. rptocercs. Lewis. 0

°F. Germans. Fibber. Uncommon, on the trunks of poplars, & Lam-
Bersart, in August. O1. Snus. Kirschbaum. Rare: forest of Raismes, on poplars, (A. Leligvre.) OL. Livuratus. Fallen, very common in August and September in the dunes
of Dunkirk and Calais, on the Salia repens'

 

OF, Deciriens. Kirschbaum, Is not uncommon in Fe
silvestre, wood of Libercourt, forest of Raism

February and March on the pine

 

 

ae

V.I.L. Lauinar

  

s. Flower. Rare: a copy from around Lille. OL. Cocwatus. Fieder. Common: Lambersart, on the trunks of poplars
in august: fortifications of Lille, wood of Annapes. O1. Usrunatus. Mulsant and Rey. Very rare: forest of Raismes, in February and
march, on the pines. I. Conrusus. Flower. Common, on poplars, in July and August: wood
of Phalempin, forest of Raisnes. J. . . I. Socrazis. Frey. Very rare, on the pines, in February and March, wood of

Marchiennes. °f. Porutt. Linnaeus. It is, with the following, the most common species. On the poplars, one June, July, October and September, in all the department
ly. “I. Futomwus. Fabricius. Very common, with the preceding, throughout the
department. Ouacrosis. Lewis. ESSreanTITO) Dregaets ext pastrire tite leaitoitzunles\chénees alias
summer, forests of Phalempin and Raismes, wood @’Angre. Wednesday
(3) ~
 Byrnoscor Us. German,
OB. August. Schrawk. Common in summer on Vaulne leaves, throughout
the Department,

OB, Fruricona. Fallen. Very common in summer on various shrubs, in

the whole department. oO

~ PEDIOPSIS. Burmeister. 0
CP. Tie. German. Very rare, I only have one copy in the
Bois d’Angre, in August, on Tilia sylvestris. OP, Cerra. Germar, Common in summer on willows, especially in woods;
fortifications of Lille, forest of Nieppe, Mont-des-Cattes

"
. Fuscura. Fibber. Rare, fortifications of Lille, Ostricourt, Ce ne es

DF Fieber. Rare, fortifications of Lille, Ost t. It's not
maybe just a variety of the cerea. P. Virescens. Fabricius. Fairly common on low plants, in
damp places, in the middle and at the end of summer: fortifications of Lille,
marshes of Emmerin, wood of Marchiennes. OP, Mexpax. Ray. Rare, a single copy from around Lille. P. Impura. Bohemian. Common in August and September, in the dunes
from Dunkirk and Calais, on the Salia repens. OP. Nassata Germar. Pen commune: fortifications of Lille, marshes

@’Emmerin, Lambersart, on the trunks of poplars, in August. DP. Scureuara, Boheman. Uncommon: on the willows in the woods,
in July and August: Tournay, wood of Phalempin, forest of Nieppe. ° AGALLIA. Curtis. A. Pounders. German. Uncommon: in mid and late summer:
Emmerin marshes, Libercourt and Angre woods. O A. Vexosa. German. Very common everywhere: fortifications of Lille,
foot of the grass, in winter: Dunkirk dunes, under the clumps of Ero-
day, all year round. Passe V’hiver is in perfect condition, as well as many
@other homopterans. © TETTIGONIA. Geoffrey.

. Virints. Fabricius. Very common in the middle and at the end of Pété, in
wet meadows and woods; fortifications of Lille, Emmerin, forest
of Mortal. 23
+ 59)—
/ / 3 EVACANTHLS. Lepedletier and Serville. Yo ¥, Iyrennvrres. Linnaeus. Sometimes very abundant in certain en-

shaded rights of the fortifications of Lille, on Vortie, in July: Envi~
rons de Wissant. OE, Acummwatus. Fabricius. Common in July and August in the aisles
wetlands in the woods: Ostricourt, Verlinghem, Wissant, fordts de Nieppe
andde Mormal. puppet. German. OX. Cuseiwata. Fabricius. Fairly rare, in June; fortifications of Lille,
dunes of Dunkirk, forest of Raismes. OE. Propukra. Germar, Very rare: a copy of Mont-des-Cattes;
another from the dunes of Dunkirk. OstRONGYLOCEPHALUS. Flower. “S. Asrestis. Fallen. Uncommon: only found in swamps,
among the Carea: fortifications of Lille, marshes of Emmerin, wood of the
Douve @ Warneton, from August to May
next. xcocernanes. German. not

"HAS. rusticus. Fabricius. (Striatus, Fabricius, Costatus, Panzer.) 'Very-

common everywhere, on prairie grasses, throughout the department
The perfect insect appears at the end of June. O.A. Innurrus. Fibber. Very rare: a single mixed copy, taken
July in the woods of Ostricourt. O.A. Avpurrons. Linnaeus. Rare: around Valenciennes. (HAS. The book.) OA, Pouxstotus. Fibber. Fairly common in June and July in the aisles
wet from certain woods; wood of Carvin, of Aubry. A. Histmionicus. Fabricius. Quite rare: Dunkirk and Calais dunes,
in July and August, under the clumps of Erodium: the male is much
rarer than the female,

O.A. Rivutaais. German. Uncommon: Lambersart, at the foot of the
Pliers, in July, August and September; Emmerin marsh, Aubry wood. The mile ey rare than the female. The genus “Acocephalus is remarkable for the great dissimilarity which
exists between males and females: also the synonymy is strong

acy
—(60)—
embronished, each sex having been described as a distinct species by the
old authors. The females all have dull colors, which make them
tooth difficult & well determine. 2
GNATHODUS. Fibber. O.G. Puxcrarus, Thunderg. Rare: in June on the bushes: wood of Liber-
short, from Marchiennes; forests of Raismes and Saint-Michel. Insects of this genus have the habit, appearance and size of Typhlocyba
but they recall the Pediopsis in the shape of the vertex. Coreaputa. Zetterstedt. OC. Movesra. Fieber, Very rare: two specimens were found in
the fortifications of Lille, one of which was sacrificed to be designed by
Fibber. OC, Sexnorata. Fallen. Swarms in summer in certain ditches of the fortifications.
tions of Lille, on the reeds; Anuapes wood. This spice varies for
the color, which sometimes changes from green to brown. OC. Poxcrvnoys. Fallen, very common in August and September in the
dunes of Dunkirk and Calais, on the Satie repens: has not yet been
encountered within the department. “YC. Vantaa. Fallen. Quite rare on the reeds, in September, in the
fortifications of Lille. OG Sepremnorata. Fallen. Very rare: two copies only taken
in the humid parts of the wood of Annapes', in August. GRYPOTS. Fibber. O.G. Pixelettus. Boheman, Tres-rure: an example caught in the dunes
from Dunkirk, in August. O.G. Diapmanvs, Hieber. Rare, on the pines, in July: Bois de Libercourt,
Mont Noir. © DORATURA. Sahiberg. °D. Srytata. Bohemian. Commune in July and August on herbs in Mont-
Noir, and in the dunes of Dunkirk ct Calais. O THANNOTETTIX. Zetterstedt. O’y, Mantra. From the oven. Quite common in July and August, in the dunes
from Dunkirk and Calais, on 'Ammophila arenaria. RS

—(61)—

Now, Crocea. Herrich Scheffer. Very common all year round on grasses
in the fortifications of Lille; dunes of Dunkirk. Winter pass &
Perfect state. On, Avrexuata. German. Rare: Dunkirk dunes, August. OT, Sprenpiwura. Fabricius. Very rare: Libercourt wood, on the leaves
oak, in August. OF. Torneeita. Zeltersted. Rare: in the alleys of the woods, in June and
July: Bois de la Douve & Warneton, Ostricourt, Ebblinghem. Om, Oxarsois. Frey. Rare: Ebblinghem wood. OV. Crurnrava. Panzer, Rare, in June: forests of Nieppe and Clairma-
tracks. Oh. Quavrivorata. Fabricius. Common in summer on grasses and
reeds in marshy places: fortifications of Lille, Em-
sea,

Of. Frontvaris. Herrich Scheffer. Very rare: fortifications of Lille:

We. Vinescens, Fallen. Uncommon: forest of Raismes, in summer. OTHYSANUS. Burmeister. Oh. Ancentarus. Fabricius. Very rare: a single individual taken in June in
the forest of Clairmarais, by mowing. O.A. Stators. Fallen, Common in August in the dunes of Wissant (Pas-
de Calais), on the jones and sedges of freshwater ponds. OX, Oscurstius. Kirschbaum. Very common everywhere, on plants
lowlands, meadows and gardens, during spring and summer: fortifications
of Lille, Lambersart, dunes of Dunkirk and Calais. The perfect insect
hatches from the month of May. © A. Gnisuscens. Zetterstedt. Rare: forest of Mormal, in the her-
drunk, in June. OA, Supruscotus. Fallen. Very common all summer on the oaks in
all our woods: Phalempin, Mormal forest, ete. O.A. Ervrnrostictus. Fibber. Common in woods during summer: Pha-
spring, Verlinghem, Mont-Cassel, Mont-Noir. O A. Prienesus, Zetterstedt. Very common everywhere: on low plants,
meadows and gardens, during spring and summer: fortifications of
Lille, Fives, Ostricourt wood, Dunkirk dunes. able
—/e)—

Oy, Lurescens. (Fieder). Rare: a few specimens taken in the dunes
from Dunkirk, in August. New species, not described, but drawn
by Fieber. O.A. Russzowus. Fallen. Rare: on heather, in July and August: mont
heather near Saint-Amand (A, Leligvre); Mont Noir. QA. Sorpius. Zetterstedt. Uncommon, in July and August, especially in the

wood: fortifications of Lille, Tournay, Emmerin, forests of Raismes and
of Mortal. O.A. Variecatus, Kirschbaum, Uncommon, in July and August: fortifica-
tions of Lille, Mont-Noir. OA, Ossorervs. Kirschbaum. Very common in August and September, on the
rushes and sedges of the Emmerin marsh: Dunkirk dunes, at the foot
stems of Ammophi'a arenaria. O.A. Prasinus. Fallen. Common in the woods, during the summer, with

O.A. Subfusculus and Erythrostictus: Forests of Phalempin, Raismes,
of Mortal, etc. OA, Brevipesnis. Kirschbaum. Uncommon, on bulrushes in swamps:
Aronville, Valenciennes meadows, Lambersart, Aubry woods, forest of
Nieppe. © A. Pettuciwus (Fieder). Rare: Mont-Noir, in July. new species,
not described, but drawn by Fieber. OGONIAGNATHUS. Party. O.G. Short. Herrich Scheffer. Rare, in July, at Mont-Noir, on the
slopes covered with heather and broom. ative US. Fibber. O.A. Aromanius. German. Common pen: wood of Phalempin, on young
oak shoots, in August and September, Mont des Cates. "HAS. Miatus. German. Rare: sandy woods around Wissant, in
august. O.A. Novis. (Hieber). Very rare: Libercourt wood, sour oak, in
August. New space, not described, but drawn by Fieber. 9 DELTOCEPHALUS. Burmeister. OD, Puracmitis. Boheman, Common in August and September on reeds

AGT
—/as)—

du morais d'Emmerin: has not yet been found elsewhere in the department
ly. p. Foruosus. Bokeman, Rare and pretty species that has not yet been found
than by M. A. Lelidvre, in the marshes around Valenciennes. OD Mave Fieber. Rare: I have only found in the forest of
Guines, on the grasses of a calcareous ground, in June. OD Repteres Fieber. Common in the woods, in June and July: forests of
Pholempin and Raismes. OD. Disrincuenovs. Flower. In the alleys of all our woods, in June and
July; this is the most common species. OD. Tired. Fibber. Rare: Ostricourt wood. OD. Forehead. Fibber. Quite common in June in the forests of Trélon and
Saint Michel

OD. Pouicarws. Fallen, On the rushes; rare in Phalempin wood;
more common in the forest of Mormal, in June and July. OD. Sraatvs. Linnaeus. Fortifications of Lille, in spring, in the
dry places: very common in May, & Dunkirk, on! Ammophila
arenaria. OD. Cepuatotes Herrich Scheffer. Fairly common in July in the
shaded places: fortifications of Lille, wood of Phalempin,

OD, Minxt. Fibber. ‘’r’s-common in July, August and September in the
marshy places: fortifications of Lille, wood of Annapes and Pha-
spring. Mr. Fieber has published in the Memoirs of Ja Society of Zoology and
botany of Vienna, in 1869, an excellent monograph of the species
of the genus Deltocephalus, with drawings of their characters
distinctive. TYPHLOCYBA. German. The Yophlocyba are very pretty insects, with designs and colors
very varied; unfortunately their small size, their fragility and their
extreme agility, make them very difficult to grasp. It's during the month
of September that we find them in greater numbers

Fieber divided the old genus Yyphlocyba into several dis-
tincts: we will see in the following table on which characters it is based
for the establishment of these genera:

ALY

¢,
—foa)—
1, Lower wings with a marginal vein... . . . . . 2. — Lower wings with three apical veins, without marginal. 4. — Lower wings with four apical veins. ‘Typutocyas. 2. An appendage has the membrane of the homelytra. .
ALBBRA. — No appendix & membrane. . ........... 3. 3. Three apical cells to the lower wings. Nores. — An apical cell. © kvpos and Cuconirs. ©
4. Two apical cells to the lower wings. Avorn, O
— Three apical cells
Zyeixa. O

D ALEBRA. Fibber. O & Armosramts. Fallen. Common in the woods on the oaks, in August
and September: Phalempin, Ostricourt, Mont-Noir. Pretty easy species 4 to recognize & its pink or yellow homelytra, tra-
poured by a white longitudinal line. The appendix of the membrane
further distinguishes it from species in other genera. Two varieties are commonly found

  

principals: Pune has the upper hand
completely yellow or greenish yellow: this is Fulveola, H. Scheffer:
Another has the disc of Pronotum and Pécusson, and sometimes the disc of
black or smoky homelytra, it is ° Wakldergi, Boheman. NOTUS. Fibber. "NOT. Aunnowus. Fallen, Rare: on the heather, on the mount of the heather, /

near Saint-Amand (A. Leligvre). WE. Cupnators. Proud. Surroundings of Tournay, end of May, rare. DN. Acxatus Fieber. Fairly common in May and June on grasses: Lam-
Bersart, forest of Raismes. N. Fravwennis. Fabricius. Very common in August and September on the
reeds of the marshy places of the fortifications of Lille. N.Faciaris. Flower. Rare, in May and June: surroundings of Tournai, forest of
Raisms. WE. Craineiius. Zetterstedt. Rare: fortifications of Lille, in September,
on the trunks of elms in the company of Anomia ulmi. ON, Scusnwri. Fibber. Quite common in July and August on gromineas
in the woods: forests of Phalempin and Raismes. Somontra. Fever. °c, Apicais. Flower. Rare: Forest of Raismes, Mont-Noir

OC. Fravescens. Fabricius. Tres-commune sur le Pin lvestre in February
and March; disappears during the summer: wood of Libercourt, of Marchiennes,
forest of Raismes. C. Souant. Kollar. Common throughout the year in meadows and woods,
throughout the department: its fragility makes it difficult to grasp. KYBOS. Fabricius. This genus is distinguished from other neighboring genera by its rounded vertex
forward, having in length less than half the length of the prono-
you; by its homelytra without appendix, but advanced towards the suture
after their militancy of manner & overlapping each other on a weak es-
space at the end. Lek. Suanacputus, Fallen, the only species in the department, is trts-com-
mon in August and September, on the willows in the fortifications of

Lille and in the dunes of Dunkirk and Calais. ula will easily recognize & its large size, (relatively), by its
color green, & its homolytra green asuture black, usually in-
fumes longitudinally on either side of this suture. The end of
the membrane is smoky: the pronotum and the escutcheon crossed in the middle
by a thin, pale longitudinal band. (}

TYPHLOCYBA. German. Oi vinc ett AW 7cnnd4 Commune(deans|les eazonslet\auibord) des fosaés| from
fortifications of Lille: Verlinghem, forests of Marchiennes and Mor-
mal, August and September. Q
Qed. Diuixera. Kirscldaum. In the same places as 7. Vittata, and
at the same time, but a little less common. We. Gunwant. Zettersiedt. Uncommon, on the Scots pines, in summer,

 

period when it replaces on these trees the Chlorita flavescens, which is
finds there only in winter: wood of Libercourt and Marchiennes, forest of
Raisms. TO. Fucus. Newport. Rare: forest of Mormal, on the ferns, in
July. O'y, Concixna. German. Quite common in August and September on the
oak leaves; wood of Verlinghem, of Phalempin, of Mont-Noir. TO. Porcuenta. Fallen. Occurs with T. Concinna, but rarer-
ment, on the oaks in August and September, in the same places. Oh”. Zevrersrentt. Bohemian. Fairly rare: on alder leaves, in
August and September; fortifications of Lille, marshes of Emmerin. Oh. Onnava. Frey. Very rare: Bois d'Angre, in June. TO. Bixorata. Field. Fairly common in June and July on grasses
in the shady thickets of the forest of Phalempin. OT, Lenievres. Lethierry. Rare, in June and July, in the same places
which 7. Binotata. Of. Canpint. Fouscroy. Tr’s-commune & the end of Véé on the herbs; for-
tifications of Lille, bos de Phalempin, dunes of Dunkirk. TO. Acrara. Linne. Even more common than Ja T. Carpini, to memes
places and & the same time. TO. Units. Linnd. Quite common, in August and September, on the Urtica
dioica; fortifications of Lille, Annappes, Emmerin. TO. Curmst. Flower. Commune Ja end of Summer on Stachys sylvatica and
YUrtica dioica: Emmerin, fortifications of Lille: wood of Carvin,
Mont Noir. TT. Coutana. Flower. Kare: wood of Angre, in summer. 2, Mexisx. Curtis. Quite common at the end of Pété on the Mentha agua-
tica: fortifications of Lille, marshes of Emmerin. syomua. Fibber. 4. Nmputa. Fabricius. Rare: Libercourt wood, in September: forest
of Raismes, on the leaves of Ulmus effusus. (A. Lelidvre). About
rons of Abbeville (of Norguet). AD. Non-warning. Lethierry. Very rare: I only saw two copies,
Pun taken around Abbeville, by M. de Norguet, Vautre, without
indication of homeland, from the Fieber collection. wow
< yY

WE. Lacrea. Lethierry. I found only a few copies of
this species, in the month of August, in a garden, at Fives, on fields
woodworkers. Oh, Rosa. Linnaeus. Very common, especially in gardens, on roses
and the fruit trees, in the middle and at the end of Summer,
Amyot says that this species lays its eggs on rosebushes. O.A. Sutureia. Zetterstedt. Surroundings of Lille, very rare. O.A. Geowerrica, Schrank, Rare, in August and September, on various shrubs-
the: fortifications of Lille, Emmerin, wood of Libercourt,

O.A. Grattosa. Bohemian. Very rare: fortifications of Lille, Lambersart. O.A. Ura. Linnaeus. Very common in September on the trunks of trees in
the fortifications of Lille, Loos, Lambersart. A, Quercus. Fabricius. Ain't uncommon some years on the young
oak shoots, in July, August and September: Bois de Verlinghem,
of Phalempin, Mont-Noir. O.A. tenernita. Herrich Scheffer. Common Assex in June and July,
especially in the woods: Fives, forests of Phalempin and Nieppe. Onyaina. Fibber. OZ. Auxemt. Daibom. Rare, in August on the hazel trees in the small woods
around Wissant, (Pas-de-Calais). OZ, Hyeenict. Herrich Scheffer. Rare, in July and August on Hypert-
cum: fortifications of Lille, forest of Nieppe. 2% Portus. Bokeman. Commune in July in the woods: forests of Pha-
lempin and Nieppe. OZ. Parvuta Bokeman. Common in spring and summer in the woods:
forests of Phalempin, Nieppe, Raismes and Mormal. OZ, Rosea. Flower. Very rare, on the Scots pine, in February and March, in
the forests of Raismes and Marchiennes. OZ. Buanvuta. Rossi. Very common in February and March, on the pines: wood
of Libercourt, forests of Raismes and Marchiennes, Mont-Noir. OZ. Tur. Fallen, Fairly common, with Blandula, in February and March,
on the pines of the forest of Raismes. OZ. Axausta. Lethierry, Very rare: Lambersart. 2, Resrowrrrara. Lethierry. ?Ericetorum, Sahlberg). I did not find this

donkey
-(bone)-

espice that at the top of Mont-Noir, on the brayres, The best

times to take it are the months of March and April, because then

we only find individuals who have passed the winter, and have acquired all
their development and coloring. M. Sablberg, in his Cicadines de Finlandg, 1871, has described this
let us specify the name of Wricetorum: it is indeed the ftubrovittata of the first
edition of my catalog, 1869, as I have not been sure from
a guy sent by Mr. Soblberg has Ficber. The following tables for-
ront, I hope, will facilitate somewhat the determination of Typhlocyba and genera
neighbors who live in the North of France. If xne NOTUS. 1. Body (to the end of the homeolyters) short, having & little pro qua~
be the length of the head and pronotum together. rounded vertex,
having only half the length of the Pronotum. green vertex,
sometimes pink; crest and homelyters green. Black abdomen in large
part. Forehead below and pink paws. Norus Aurgows. Fallen. 0

— Body (to the end of the homolytra) long, having about six
)
2. Extended, triangle-shaped vertex, as in most

O Deltocephalus, equaling in length three-fourths the length of the
Pronotum. Head wider, eyes included, than the pronotum. Eyes very
large, set obliquely, much longer than wide.......... 3

times the length of the head and the Pronotum together:

  

— Vertex less triangular in front, only equal in length
half the length of the Pronotum. Narrower head, eyes included,
than the Pronotum. Eyes smaller than in previous division, less
oblique, shorter

 

3. Head, Pronotum, escutcheon and homelytra of very deep green. 4

— Head, pronotum, eousson and homelytra of a bright orange yellow,
when the insect is quite adult. Norv Fuaviwensts. Fabricius, ©
4. Vertex, Pronotum and Homelytra of uniform color Homelytra
hyaline, shiny, & pale veins. Abdomen black above,
except the base of the last segment which is yellow. Notus Ceruatores. Fibber. ©

x 7S)

+e)
— Vertes and Pronotum crossed in the middle by a longitudinal line
nal indeterminate white. Opaque homelytra, & robust ribs,

quite apparent. Abdomen entirely black above. Norvs AGnatuss. Fibber. ©

5. Head, Pronotum and homelytra very bright yellow, almost
white, not very shiny, Vertex a little angular in front. Abdomen having
its segments broadly striped with black transversely above. Norvs Frctuuas. Flower. ©

— Teete, Pronotum and homelytra of a lemon-yellow or a green-yellow;
vertex rounded in the middle forward... 2... 0. .+ e+e + 6

6. Engraving of a lemon yellow, including Pubdomen. Norus Crrnixenwus. Zetterstedt. O

— Of a uniform yellow-green, except the upper part of the abdomen which is
mostly black. °o

Notes Scusipti. Fibber. oO
Genus CHLORITA. 1. Entirely pile, with the membrane and the end of the corie

smoky,
Crmonirs Apicatis Flor. ©

— Entirely green, with the hyaline membrane and part of the
dark green legs. 5.2... ee ee ee ee
2. Head as wide as Pronotum; ribs of robust homelytra,
clearly visible. Legs less pale. Cutonirs Fuavescess. Fabricius:,

— Head narrower than the Pronotum ribs of homeolytra fine,
hardly visible. Paler legs. °

SoLant cutters. Kollar. 5
Genne TYPHLOCYBA. ael®

1. Homelytra with drawings, bands, lines, strokes ow
brown or black dots. 5. — Homelytra of a uniform color, sometimes smoky ex-
wemite ee BB. 2. Immaculate forehead, immaculate vertex
near the pronotum. . 2...

, or only smoky at its base

cam-ae

3. Homelytra each having a black longitudinal band or a
dark brown, deeply and angularly indented towards the middle of
its side edge; indented a second time towards the middle of this edge
lateral; this band covers the entire dorsal part, including the suture;
we see a big rounded yellow spot with black spots on this suture,
immediately after the escutcheon, and a few other smaller spots and
@a lighter yellow at the tip

— Front or vertex, or both smudged with black. . ,

  

homeolyters, Vertex often more or

less smoky at the base... .. 1... eee eee ee ee
— Stacked homelytra, smoky at the extremity, each having a line

very fine black starting from the side edge, towards its middle, directed obliquely

dayant backward, reaching only a third of the width of the home-

lytre; and another line of equal Jongueur, transverse, towards three quarters

pposteriors ee een) ee
4. Vertex rounded forward. Average height. Typnocyea Virrata. Linnaeus. Q

— Vertex angularly rounded in front. Size small. TyPHLocyBA Dminuta. 5. A black dot, very clear, in the smoky part of. every home-
lytre, near end,
Trentocyes Poucnenta. Fallen. O
— Smoky part of homelytra without black point. Tyertocy Ba Concina. German. ~~

6. Two rounded spots on the vertex; forehead below without stains. 7. — Denx rounded spots on the verlex; forehead with rounded spots
below, on its middle or on its sides... . 2.2... . . 10. 7. Two rounded spots on the vertex; forehead without spots below
not bordered with black on the cdts. Pronotum with five black dots. Crest
with three black dots. Homelytra with longitudinal bands
brown or smoky obliques. TypHLocyBA ZeTTERSTEDTI. Bohemian. ©)

27S
D)
-fab
— Two rounded spots on the vertex; forehead without spots below,
but bordered with black on each side. 2... ee ee ee ee Be
8, Large, kidney-shaped vertex spots. Two large kidney spots
forms on the Pronotum, Bosilar half of the no're escutcheon, crossing at the
middle by a yellow longitudinal line; its yellow apical half, Home-
Ytres with brown and black spots, forming a complicated design.. 9. — Spots of the vertex rounded, as well as those of the Pronotum and
Pecusson. Homelytra with an indeterminate longitudinal band of one
pinkish-brown, widening & extremity, without black spots, or only
with a small black dot very inconspicuous towards two thirds of their cdtés,
near the lateral edge. .

TyentocyBa ORNATA. Frey. ~~

9, Forehead more Jong than width of head with eyes. Homelyters
yellow, having the whole sutural region occluded by a wide brane band
irregular, containing black spots and pile spots, and emitting
in its middle towards the lateral edge a large square black spot, of
each side. Tremocres Acnaa Linne O

— Forehead less than the width of the head with the eyes. Homelyters
yellow with irregular brown and black spots forming by their dis-

position two interrupted transverse bands, arched. Typutocyns Cawpint. Fourcroy. 10. Forehead with two rounded spots, on its sides, below the
eyes, but not edged with black. Pale homeolyters, with a large black dot
clearly visible on two thirds of each of their sides, near the edge
lateral. Typntocys\BinoTata. ~

— Forehead edged in black, with two small but clearly visible dots,
black, in its middle, below the vertex. Homelyters stacks with Jes
Ocellated brown spots forming an intricate network or pattern. . . 11

11. Hind tibiae almost entirely black. ‘Tyeunocyss Untice. Fabricius. — Hind tibiae black only at extreme apex or entirely
ment batteries 2. ee

 

12. Base of vertex with a large square black spot, touching
almost the Pronotum; two other smaller ones, square or triangular
at the top of the vertex. Typutocyss Cuntist. Flower. 0

— Base of vertex with two large black spots welded together,
but diverging forward; two other smaller ones at the top. Typutocyas Cotta. Flower. — Base of vertex with a small, rounded black dot; two others
spots of the same size, but triangular, at the top. ‘Plus size
small and homelytra more hyaline than in the two preceding species. TyruiccyBs Meniss.n. Curtis,

13. Forehead below the eyes, vertex, pronotum and escutcheon having

each two black dots. Hyaline homeolyters, without spots. Typutocyns Lenievnet. Lethierry (1). — Forehead, vertex, pronotum and escutcheon without spots. . . . . . 14. 14. Fairly large size. Dirty and dull white green Wun homelyters,

smoky 4 Vextremity of their membrane. Sooty lower wings. Typniocys Gerwant. Zetterstedt. ©

 

oh

(1) Tyrurocyps Leuievunr Lethierry. Pale yellow. Forehead with two small black dots
on each side below the eyes, vertex rounded in front, having in length the
half the length of the pronotum, with two large black dots in front. Pronotum
with a large square black spot on each side, bordering a lateral edge and located immediately
behind the eyes. Bousson with two black dots at the base, one from each cové
Hyaline, transparent homeyria. Abdomen pale yellow, with black scu-
ment & base and on its disc, horde of yellow on the sides ct & Vextreme, Legs
fully batteries. Length 0.004 millimeters. It looks a lot like Zyphlocyba Binotata, Feber, but differs in its
spotless homeytra and by its abdomen less completely black above, entid-
only pale yellow in-dyssous. Also looks like 4 TUrnata, Frey, month had differe by its forehead not edged with black on
the sides, but marked with two black dots under the eyes, by his homily without traces
colored band and by the different color of the abdomen. ‘Quite rare, wood from around Lille,

I am pleased to dedicate this space to Mr. Alfred Lelitvre, from Val-nciennes, & who
I am indebted for many documents and interesting discoveries concerning Ja
Entomological fauna of the department. ++ Average size. Homelytra of a golden yellow, with the extremity of
their corium and the base of the hyaline membrane, the rest of the membrane
smoky. Hyaline lower wings. TyPHLocyB\Fiicum. Newport. ~~

Oh

Gexne ANOMIA. 1. Cories of homelyters having on their disk bands or

brown, red, pink or yellow cowards; or headlines brunettes
ace

— Cories of the homolytra of uniform pale color, without spots, at

2. Cories with a longitudinal band, either on the disk or on the

ouroses. . . . .

less on their disk. suturing, ..
— Cories without longitudinal band. ............4,
3. Cories each having a brown, narrow longitudinal band, born
sant in the middle of their base and joining the suture at their end in
front of membrane, smoky escutcheon. ANOMIA GEOwETRICA. Schrank. QO

— Cories with a longitudinal strip around the crest, and
opening the suture to the end. Smoky membrane, as well as a
part of crest. ANomiA GRratiosi. Bohemian. 4. Cories with brown transverse bands, or entirely

brunettes. 2. 2... where

— Cories pale, hyclinic, with brown, pink or yellow spots. 6
5. Cories very pale yellow or dirty white, with two large
brown transverse bands, one at the base, the other & the end Mem-

 

hyaline brane. Black crest. Axowi\Nitipcna. Fabricius. — Cories entirely brown, except at their apical edge. Membrane
hyaline. Black crest. :
Axoiy Noneveti. Lethierry (1). ~

 

°
(1) Asouta Nonovens, Lethierry. Head, prothorax, abdomen and legs of a pale white
nature. Ecussion brown, Cories opaque, entirely brown, except their pree extremity

274

-has-

6 spots of black or brown cories, punctiform, often indeterminate
mined, Vertex with two black dots at the top. Pronotum with four
black dots, arranged transversely, at the top, and two others (one of
each c6té) towards the base, near the lateral edge. Crest with two spots

black,
Asomta Sexpunerata. Fallen. O

— Spots of pink or bright yellow, oblong or rectangular cories

res. Membrane has white veins, their smoky cells. Head, prono~
tum and crest without black spots. AvoMiA Quenct's. Fabricius. ©

7. Two small black dots at the top of the vertex, and a small black dot

at the top of the Pronotum, touching the base of the vertex. Some stains in-

fumes & the extremity of the corie: edges of the cells of the membrane

smoky. ANomtA Utat. Linnd. ©

— Vertex and pronotum without spots or dots. ...... . 8
8. tip of the coria and cells of the membrane with some

smoky spots. ANOMIA TENERRIMA. Herrich Scheffer. — End of corie without stains
RaGHeS MeN -MicMNeEN > “> c-Met o) 2) (else eee

hyaline membrane, without

 

9. Body of a very pale yellow: hyaline, transparent homolytra. Admitted Rose. Linné.O

— Dull white body: dull, milky white homeolytra. Axomta Lacres. Lethierry (1). of the membrane, hyaline over a flimsy expanse. Hyaline membrane, as well as the wings
lower. Head narrower than the pronotum, the vertex rounded forward, having in
length half the length of the pronotum. Length: 0.004 millimeters. Surroundings of Abbeville. oh

This species closely resembles 8 1’ Anomia Nitidula, Fabricius, of which it is perhaps
being just one variety, it is distinguished at first glance by its entidremont cories
brown to near their extremity. I am happy to dedicate it to my friend and colleague M. de Norguet, who discovered it,
and which has enriched our local Fauna with a host of interesting spices. (1) Axosta Lactss. Lethierry. (Catalogue, 1"*edition.) Entitlement of a milky white

299
= b)—
— Body pale yellow: head and pronotum bright white: homeo-

lytres of a golden yellow, shiny, with the extremity of the core and the
brane of a hiyalin white, transparent

 

ANOMIA SULFURELLA, Zetterstedt. PS

0
Genne Zygina. Fibber. 1. Entirely yellowish white, dull. ZyGINa ALNETI. Dahibom. O

 

a different color or with spots, bands of various
colors on the homeytra, or black dots on the vertex or
Pecusson ee ee Q

2. Abdomen largely black above. ..... =... 3

— Abdomen yellow more or less directly above and below, &
except for the first segment sometimes stained black above. Above of the body more or less stained with bright pink. 2...0. 2. 5

3. Crest uniform black or brown. A big black dot
elongated, continuing on the pronotum in a brown band, widening
back and forth. Homelytra suture largely red, sometimes
Brown. Zyoin, Hrpentct. Herrich Scheffer. — Eeusson with two large triangular black spots, one of
each cdt6 2. ee ee ee eee ee 4

4. Two large black dots in the middle of the vertex; four very small
black dots on the pronotum: homeytra with one or two obligatory bands
cues of a dirty yellow pink, indeterminate, often erased. ZyGiNa Panvuta. Boheman, ©

— Vertex without black spots, but smoky in front: homelytra of a
pillage green, without darker bands. ZyGIN\ PULLULA, Boheman. dull, slightly yellowish on the head and pronotum. Vertex rounded, half shorter than
the pronotum, Lower wings dull milky white, & inconspicuous veins. Length: 0.004 millimeters. Surroundings of Lille,

Easy to distinguish from neighboring species by its dull white color, which gives it
a bit like a microlepidoptera of the Tincites family. 5. Black crest. A band of red-brown, triangular color,
whose point begins at the top of the vertex and continues by widening
lying on the pronotum up to the crest. Homelytra with a band
sutural of a brick red twice indented on its sides. very body
narrow. oO

ZyGINA ANGUSTA Lethierry (1). — Pink crest or stained with pink. . 2... 1... + es 6

6. Bright pink vertex in the middle, paler on its edges. Pronotum unifor-
mement of a bright pink, crossed in the middle by a long line
more pile tudinale. Homelytra uniformly pink, at least on their
ribs. ZyGin\ Rose. Flower. — Vertex, pronotum and escutcheon crossed by a longitudinal band
pink, sometimes divided in two by a pale longitudinal line in
IS OLSEN TCU e ey road! 'o) + =i cle culo anc Cite Coder ee
7. Homelytra each having a thin pink longitudinal band,
in zigzag, which touches the suture at two points, at the anterior third and in
before the third period... 2.2... ..-+--- 2 es 8
— Homelytra with a fire-colored longitudinal and sutural band,
wide, covering the suture to the end of the lacoria: small size. Zyoin, Rupnovirtata. Lethierry (2). (1) Zvorxa Axavsra. Lethierry. Narrow, elongated, yellow underside and legs
pile, Abdomen yellow pile above and below. Head narrower than pronotum;
vertex oval in front, only one-third shorter than prootum, pale yellow
as well as the pronotum, but both crossed in the middle, 4 from the top of the vertex,
by a longitudinal band of brown red, pointed in front, widening little by little
on the rest of the vertex and the pronotum up to the crest, Black crest. Pale homelytra,
with a brick-red sutural bend twice notched on its sides. Length: 0.003 1/2 millimeters. Surroundings of Lille. has)

This species somewhat resembles Zygina hyperici, but is quite distinct from it by
its larger size, the twice indented band of its homolytra and the color entid-
rement stack of abdomen, . x

It differs from Zygina Blandula, Titice and fosea. by the narrower shape, the crest
\elytra covering the suture in
its entire extent almost to the extremity of the corics. Differs from Lubrovittata by the narrower and more elongated shape, by its colors
erentes et lenr disposition, by its narrower sutural band, twice indented. black, the darker color of the wavy band of hi

 

(2 Zygina Rubrovittata, Lethierry. (Catalog, 1st edition.) Pale yellow, with

8. Hind tarsi pale. ZyGin\BLaNbULA, Rossi,

— Posterior tarsi black. ‘Zycina THLE. Fallen. ©
The previous tables make it necessary to study the apical veins
of the lower wings and the cells they form: this study could
to be a cause of embarrassment to beginners, and obliging in all
case to spread or break the homeolytra or upper wings, operation re-
grettable when applied to rare or unique species: I believe
useful to make a general table of Typhlocyba and related genera, not
not mentioning the lower fender modifications, and by which can-
being able to arrive also at the determination of each species. TABLE OF? YPHLOCYBA AND RELATED GENERA

(Disregarding the nerves and cells of the lower wings). 1. Membrane with an appendage. Pronotum and homeytra with
white longitudinal lines. ALEBRA ALBOSTRIELLA. — Membrane sounds appendix ............... 2

2. Vertex extended in a triangle forward, as with most
“Deltocephalus, only one-third shorter than Pronotum.. 3.

 

 

the middle third of the pronotum pale red, and a sutursle band over the homelytra of a
fiery red shines. This band is located on two-thirds of the internal base of the homelytra, and is
continues on their suture to the membrane. On each of the outer sides of this
band, a slight angular indentation. Hyaline membrane. Vertex rounded, half shorter than the pronotum, of a joune
pink. Crest of a pinkish yellow. Length: 0.003 millimeters, ae

Differs from 12Z, blandula by the smaller size, 1a wide sutural bung, slightly undulating
Teuse, the paler escutcheon and the immaculate vertex

Differs from PHypersci por less dark pronotum and Vécusson, by the color of the
sutural band, of a brighter fiery red, the vertex not stained and Vebdomen pile,

 

 

 

sep
2GR

(78) —

— Vertex oval ow rounded in front, half shorter than the
Pronotum, a third shorter in lf) Zygina angusta only. . 5
3. Head, Pronotum, escutcheon and homeytra of very pure green. . 4

—Head, Pronotum, crest and homeytra bright orange-yellow. NotUus FLAvIPENNIS.. ~

4. Vertex, Pronotum and Homelytra of uniform color. Homelyters
hyaline, shiny, & barely visible veins. Abdomen black below
sus, except the base of the last segment which is largely yellow. Norvs Cepnatores. ~

— Vertex and Pronotum crossed in the middle by an indeterminate line
white. Opaque homelytra, with robust, clearly visible ribs. Abdomen entitling black above. Notes Acxatus. 7

5. Unicolor homelytra on their disc, even on the suture: Pex-
top of the cories and the membrane sometimes smoky. ... . . 6

— Homelytra with the brown suture, or with the brown cories, or
with bands, lines, spots or dots of various
shapes, black, pink, brown, or smoky on their disc; or roses. 22

6. Entirely bright green well marked above, except some
sometimes the vertex more or less yellow onrose... ...... 7

— More or less yellow, or very fine green, or whitish in
above. ee ee ee D

7. Short form. Forehead and pink patties: abdomen mostly
black above. Norvs Avrgouvs. °

— Elongated shape, green with part of the legs of a darker green
bottom... ee ee ee ee ee 8B

8. Tote as wide as the Pronotum: ribs of the robust homelytra-
your, clearly visible. Legs less stacks. CaLonita FuAvEscEN:

— Head narrower than the Pronotum: fine homeolytral ribs,
hardly visible. Paler legs. Cuontra Sonast. O

 

9. Cories of a bright lemon yellow, shiny. ......... 210

— Cories of a dirty yellow or very light yellow, or almost white,
or very pale green, sometimes smoky at their ends. . . 12

10. Abdomen partly black above: membrane partly encased. Typntocyna Fiticua. QO

— Abdomen entitling pile)... ...........
11. Head and Pronotum yellow,

Notvs Crraixettus. — Head and pronotum of a brilliant white. ANOMIA SULFURELL\. 12, Abdomen partly black above. . . 2... 2... 13
— Abdomen right above and below. ......... 19
13, Keusson having two black spots, one on each side of

the base. 2. 1.ee. ee ee ee ee ee ee

— Crest without stains. ee ee. aL)

 

14. Vertex and Pronotum without black dots, the vertex only a little
smoky ahead. ZYGINA PULLULA

— Vertex and Pronotum each having two large black dots. TypnLocyBA LELiEVREI. 15. Large size: smoky membrane at the end: lower wings

sooty. °
‘TYPULOCYBA GERMARI. — Small or medium size: lower wings hyaline. . . . . 16
(6. Smoky cories at extremity: smoky membrane. . . . . 17
—Coriesand membrane not smoked. .. 2.2... 0... 18

18. Vertex a little angular in front. Abdomen having its segments
diaper with black stripes above. Head, Pronotum and homelytra very
pale, not very shiny. Norvs Faciatts. O

284

$4

~(80)—

— Vertex rounded in front. Abdomen almost entirely black below
above. Head, Pronotum and homeytra of a dirty greenish yellow. Nores Scamors. 17, Two small black dots in front on I vertex and a small dot
black on the top of the Pronotum, near the vertex. Avowns Una. ©

— Vertex and Pronotum without black spots. 2
ANOMIA TENERRIMA. 19. Tip of cories smoky, membrane smoky. Cunonra Avicatis

— End of cories not smoked: membrane not smoked. . 20

20. Entitlement of a very dirty yellow: body and homelyters al-
lengthened. Zyoins Ausert. O

— Of a white more or less light, more or less matte: body and home-

lytres of normal length... ......... = .... 21

4

21. Brilliant, hyaline, transparent homolytra. Axo Rosoë. — Homelytra of a dull milky white, opaque. and
Anomta LACTEA. 22. Homelytra never pink or stained with pink or red, except
in MAnomia sexpunctata, which sometimes has these organs very slightly
ment tinted lilac pink very-pile.. 2... 0 ee. 8
— Homelytra pink or stained with pink or red, on the disc or
on the suture. 2. ee ee ee 42
23. Homelytra brown with end of coria and membrane
piles, or piles or of a green pile, sometimes with uniform suture-
darkened, without spots on their disc: the membrane and the extremity
corie sometimes smoky.. 2.2... ee ee QE
— Homelytra stacked or pale green, with spots, bands,
dark brown lines or dots on the disc or on the sides: membrane
and extremity of the corie sometimes smoky: sometimes a complex design

 

folded on the dorsal part of the homelytra. . . 2... 22. 7

24. Suture of the brown homolytra, the other parts of these organs
bladesccgc ge 2 ae eo
— Suture and disk of homeolytra of uniform brown color. . 26

aes
Lai)

25. Closely brown suture, not bypassing the crest. Cut

big. Kynos Smanacprius. ©

— Largely brown suture, skirting Pécusson. Size small. ANOMIA GRATIOSA,

26. Homelytra brown, except the membrane and the extremity of the cories. Black crest, the rest of the insect very pale. ANoMIA NonGvett. 27. Homelytra with two large transverse black or brown bands
dirty, occupying their entire width, Pune at the base, other & Pextremity
from the corie. ANoMIA NiTIDULA. —Homelytra without large transverse bands. . . . .. . 28

28. Homelytra with a very fine black line starting from the side edge
towards its middle, directed obliquely, having behind and reaching only
only one third of the width of the homelytron; and another thin line
Wequal width, transverse, towards the posterior three-quarters. Same-
smoky brane, 2.2... ee ee ee eee es

— Homelytra without transverse bands throughout their width or
ee err)

29. A very clear black point in the smoky part of the membrane,
towards the end. transverse lines. .

TrpnLocyBA PULCHELLA. — Smoky part of homelytra without black point. TyputocyBs Concinsi. 30. Homelytra each having a narrow longitudinal brown band
trés-clear, being born year mid year from their base and joining Ja suture &
The extremity of the corium in front of the membrane. Avot Geomerntcs. ©

— Homelytra not having this narrow longitudinal band, but bru-
nes on their disk, or with less distinct oblique bands, or with
spots, or with more or less black dots, ov with a more or
less complicated, 2.2... 0.0.20 00-04. 4 31

266
—(s2)—

31. Immaculate forehead: immaculate vertex, or only smoky at its
base near the pronotum. Homelytra each having a longitudinal band
nal black or dark brown, deeply and angularly indented
towards the middle of its lateral edge, indented a second time towards ex-
end of this lateral edge: this strip covers the entire dorsal part, including
including the suture: one sees a large rounded yellow spot ocellated with
black on this suture, immediately after the escutcheon, and some others
smaller, lighter yellow patches & the end of the homey-
Wes ee ee ee BB

— Front or vertex, or both, smudged with black. . . . 33

32. Vertex rounded forward. Average height. Typutocyaa Virrata. ©

— Vertex angularly rounded in front. Tile small. ‘Trentocyas piutxera. O

33. Two black rounded spots on the vertex: forehead without spots. 34

— Two black rounded spots on the vertex: forehead with spots
rounded, below, on its middle or on its keys... .. 39

34. Forehead unblemished below, not bordered with black on its sides, 35

— Forehead without spots below at least on its disc, but bordered
black on each side. 6. ee ee ee 86
35. Pronotum with five black dots. Keusson with three black dots,
Homelyters with a few oblique longitudinal bands branes or en-
fumes. PS
TYPHLOCYBA ZETTERSTEDTI. ~~

— Pronotum with six black dots, four placed transversely
near the top, and one on each side near the base and side edge. Feusson with two black spots. Homelytra each having four or
five brown spots, often indeterminate. ANow\Sexpunorara. ©

30. Vertex spots large, kidney-shaped. Two large spots re-
niforme on the pronotum. Basilar half of Pécusson noire, crossing
in the middle by a yellow longitudinal line; its apical half yellow. Homelytra with brown and black spots, forming on the part
dorsal a complicated design ..........-...-. 38

— Rounded vertex spots, .. 2... . 2... . 37. 37. A few very small black dots & barely visible on the Pronotum. Top of the black forehead, near the base of the beak. Homelytra with two
indeterminate oblique bands of lilac brown. Zveixa Panvets. ©

— A large black dot on each side of the Pronotum. Top of the forehead
pile, Homelytra with an indeterminate longitudinal band of one bran
lilac, without black spots, or only with a very little black spot
visible about two-thirds of their sides, near the lateral edge. Typutocypa Onxata. O

38. Forehead longer than width of head with eyes. Homely-
very yellow, having the whole sutural region occupied by a wide band
uneven brown with black spots and pale spots, and
Going in the middle towards the side edge
square black spot. 1, from each cdté, a large

Tyemtocyas Aunars. ©

— Forehead less than the width of the head with the eyes. Home-
lytres pillaged with irregular brown and black spots, forming, for
their arrangement, two interrupted, arched transverse bands. Tyentocyna Canpist. 2

39. Forehead with two rounded spots on its sides below the
eyes, but not black-rimmed, Homelytra pale, with large black dot
clearly visible on two thirds of each of their sides, near the edge
lateral. Tyeuvocyms Bixorara, ©
— Forehead bordered in black, with two small but clearly visible dots,
black, in its middle, below the vertex. Homelyters more or less
piles, with ocellated brown spots forming a network or com-
sting. ee ee . 40,
40, Hind tibiae almost entirely black,
Tyentocya Untice. — Hind tibiae black only 4 the extreme apex or title-
ment batteries Oe Re me nace)

41. Base of vertex with a large square black spot almost touching

the Pronotum: two other smaller ones, square or triangular, at the top
puts vertex. Typntocyss Curtist. ©

— Base of the vertex with two large black laches welded together,
but diverging in front: ten other smaller ones at the top. °

Typntocyss CoLLina. — Base of the vertex with a small, rounded black dot: two other spots
of the same size, but triangular, at the top. smaller size and
homelytra more hyaline than in the two preceding species. TypuLocyBA MELISS. ~

42. Homelytra almost entitling roses, or with all their nerves
pink eyes. 2ycixa Roses. O

—Homelytra with bands, sutural or subsutural, or spots
square or oblong, pink, red, or bright orange-yellow. . 43. 43, Homelytra with pink or red bands, sutural or subsutural,
but without square or oblong spots. ... 2... 2... 44. — Homelytra without bands, but with five large oblong spots
pink or bright orange yellow. Membrane & white veins, their
smoky cells. Avowt\ Quercts. ©

44. A red band covering the suture almost to its full extent,
to near the membrane. .... 2... .++..24 45. — Pink subsutural band, zigzag, thin, not touching the suture
only at two points, in the anterior third and in front of the third third, 47. 45. Vicusson a uniform black or brown. ....... 46. — Eeusson heads or tails. Vertex ow yellow spotted with very pale pink. Wide sutural band, color of fire. Zvcrsa Rupnovirrara. ©

46. Abdomen mostly black. Sutural tape of the homelyiaries
Narrow, brick-red, straight, tapering to tip. A big
black dot at the base of the vertex. Zyctxa Hypenic, ©

ag? +s

)

g

— Pale abdomen. A narrow longitudinal line of dark red on
the vertex. Sutural band of homeolytra brick red, twice

indented at its edges. ZYGINA ANGUSTA. 47. Posterior tarsi stacks. 7
ZYGINA BLANDULA. — Posterior tarsi black, mostly or partially. Zyeins Tue, O

Division. — PHYTOPHTHIRES. 1 Famitte, — PSYLLOD. These insects, like those of the preceding genera, have organic legs.
nized for jumping, and live on the leaves of the plants from which they suck
the sap. The fairly solid consistency of their upper wings and their
body makes it easy to store them. MM. Faerster and Flor have given good monographs of these insects 3
that which Flor published in 1861 is especially very useful to consult. Those of our country belong to 4 several genera, of which here is the
board :

1. Vertex, eyes included, much shorter than wide. Sailing eyes
lants above the level of the head. The third article of the antennae
is usually the longest, always much longer than the
second. Some impressions alongside the Pronotum. . . . . 2. — Vertex, including eyes, as long as wide. Eyes not protruding
lants above the head: second article of the antennae much more

longer than the third. Pronotum without impressions at its sides. . . 5

2. Front charged, towards its junction with the vertex, with two eminences,
called frontal cones, which almost always have a conical shape. 3. — Front without frontal cones.. 2... 1. 1 ee ee ee

— 6

3. Petiolate ulna: i.e. that of the lower marginal vein
only two branches come off. The stigma usually exists,
rarely misses. No small free ribs at upper edge of wing
between 1¢ and 4° forks. Tip of the upper wings all
rounded days. Psyuts. Geoffrey. — Sessile ulna; that is to say that from the lower marginal rib
three branches stand out, two of which start from the same point. The stigma
always missing. At the edge of the upper wing, between 1** and 4° four-
chons, one distinguishes three short free ribs, Extremity of the wings
upper usually acute and distinctly angular. Threesome. Foerster. 4. Broad and distinct stigma. Rutnoco.a. Foerster. “No stigma. APHALARA. Ferster. 5. Second article of the antennae much longer than the first,
brown, very swollen. Livia. Latreille. — Second article of the antennae of the same length as the first,
both slightly swollen, almost of equal width, piles. Divpui. Waga. PSYLLA. Geoffrey. P.Forstent. Flor (Alay, Forster). Very common all over Paulne;
fortifications of Lille, etc. The perfect insect has been found for the month
from June until November. P. Spartioruita Ferster (Lorifrous, Flor). Common in May, June and
July on the Spartium Scoparium, in arid places: Mont-
Noir, Mont des Cattes, Mont-Cassel, Bois de Phalempin. P. Sparta. Hartig (Genist, Fabricius). Very common on Spartium
Scoparium, everywhere where this plant grows: Mont-Noir, Orchies, forest
of Mortal, etc. P. Fraxini. of Geer. Commune in July on the frenes: fortifications of
Lille, Emmerin, Phalempin. at=

P. Fraxinicota. Farster (Unicolor. Flori). Commune, some years,
on the elms in the fortifications of Lille, in August and September. P. Triozies. Lethierry. Very rare: dunes of Wissant, in August:

P. Saricicora. Ferster. Common in summer from the month of May on the
willows, especially on the willow marceau: fortifications of Lille, Emmerin,
forests of Raismes, Guines: Tournay. P.Aunt. Linnaeus (Heydeni, Ferster). Rare: found only in June
in the forest of Guines, on the alders. P. Bux1, Fabricius. Rare: Fives, in the gardens, on the boxwood, in August. P. Sauicert. Ferster. Common in the dunes of Dunkirk and Calais,
in August, on the Sadie repens. Usually dark green, the insect
turns brown when adult. P. Syzvicota. Lethierry. Rare, in summer, in the woods, when mowing in
the places covered with blueberries, under the pines: forest of Raismes. P. Avrantiaca. Gowereau. Rare: Valenciennes, on the pear trees, in the
gardens. (HAS. Lelivre.) P. Hivropnars. Ferster. Very common in the dunes of Dunkirk and
Calais, & from the month of June, on! Hippophae rhamnoides. P. Craraaicora. Ferster. Uncommon, on hawthorn in May and June:
Marcq-en-Bareeul, Phalempin. P. Pivert. Flower. (Ornata, Meyer Diir; Similis, Meyer Diir; Oxyacan-
the, Meyer Dir.) Common in February and March on Scots pine. forests of Raismes, Marchiennes, wood of Libercourt. The Psylla ornate, Sinilis and Ozyacanthe, described by M Meyer Dir
in the memoirs of the Swiss Entomological Society ‘July 1871), must
to be gathered at P. Pineti de Flor, as far as I could convince myself
from copies sent by author. P. Pereorina. Ferster. (Melina, Flor.) Very rare: forest of Raismes,
on the pines. P. Husband. Ferster. (Rubida, Meyer Diir.) Rare: around Abbeville,
on apple trees. (from Norguet.) Body sometimes green, sometimes red more
or less dark, depending on the age of the insect. There is no doubt that in the vicinity of Lille there are still several
other species of Psylla, if you bother to research them. take care of these insects. I have not yet met the Psylla pyri, Linnaeus,

= 88 —

and Pyricola, Forster, common on garden pear trees in the
surroundings of Paris. CHART OF PSYLLAS. 1. The Stigma is completely missing, or it is entirely short, has
scarcely indicated by a thickening of the marginal vein. . . . 2

— Distinct stigma. (Only in Psylla alni is it often
narrow and short, a little indistinct. ........ ..... 4

2. The upper wings have their greatest width before their middle
or at least are not narrower in this place than behind the
middle. ee ee ee 8

— The upper wings have the greatest width behind their
middle. (Their length does not reach three times their width.) Vertex very
wide, deeply indented & its posterior edge, barely a third
as long in the middle as wide & its posterior edge. Short frontal cenes,
as long or a little shorter than the vertex in its middle. 3. Frontal cenes shorter than the vertex in its middle, almost
bead-shaped, broadly rounded at the top. upper wings
slightly more than twice as long as wide, widest in front of
middle, of a light yellowish-brown hue, but transparent. P. Spanriopnita. Ferster,

— Frontal cones of the same shape, but upper wings three times
longer than wide, of the same width in front or behind the
medium than on the middle itself, hyaline, with longitudinal lines and
brown dots. P. Seantu Hartig. 4, Petiole of outer fork of ulna not or very slightly curved, and
parallel or nearly parallel with the Radius. lower marginal vein
from Radius to Ulna as long or only a pen shorter
than the petiole of the Ulna. Radius in its greatest parallel length
a the outer marginal vein: the greatest distance between them is
about a third of the length of Yaile........ 2... 5

— Petiole of outer fork of ulna more or less curved, no

apes

parallel to the Radius. Lower Marginal Vein from Radius to Ulna
always longer than the petiole of the Ulna, Radius not parallel to the
outer marginal vein, at least in large part; the biggest
distance between them is distinctly less than one-third of the greatest
Wargeurdelinila); 5... -....-.+-s+-+-+-+-.--- *6
5. Hyaline upper wings, dark in color At the end: their
veins also dark at the end. P. FRaxini. De Geer. — Upper wings entirely hyaline, with the veins of a
pale yellow. P. FRAXINICOLA. Farrster. 6. Summit of the Clavus of brown or black color... . . . . 7
— Summit of Clavus clear, of the same color as the other parts of
i eee ee)
7. All the veins with a small black spot at their end on
“the inner edge of the wing; another small black spot on this edge, at the
middle of the space located between each of these veins: these spots are
triangular, having their greatest width on the very edge; that of
first fork of the marginal forks is irregular and the largest
all. P. Truozowes. Lethierry (1). — No stain on the inside edge of the Vaile except at the top of the

Clavus. P, Saticicona. Ferster. (1) Psviza Trrozowes, Lethierry. Head, pronotum and crest orange yellow with
lighter lines. Abdomen testaceous, mostly black above. cenes fron-
ows short, pointed, diverging in front, much shorter than the vertex in its
middle, Pale antennae 4 the base, stacks stained with black in the middle, black 4 V'eatremity,
long, exceeding the base of the lower wings. Testaceous legs, the joints of the
tarsi and their dark nails. Upper wings hyaline, transporent, with the
top of clavus black; all the veins are pale with a small black spot & their
end on the inner edge of the wing and another small black spot on this edge, in the middle
of the space situated between each of these ribs, having their greatest width on this
edge even, and extended a little towards the interior of the wings in a sooty shadow,
pointed; the spot of the first prong of the marginal forks is irregular and the most
great of all. Petiole of the outer fork of the ulna strongly curved. Length (without wings): 0.003 1/2 millimeters (a little smaller than P. Feersteri). Dunes of Pas-de-Calais,

 

— 9 —

8. All shins with a small black dot on the outside & the base. The
veins of the upper wings are fine, brane or blackish: there is no
as the nozzle of the lower marginal vein, the stigma and the midrib
outer margin which are green or yellow. A.ALNI. Linnaeus. —- Tibias without black spotedlabase..........=. 9
9, Colored upper fenders. . . 2.2... ..-.+.. 10

— Upper wings hyaline, colourless, having the transparency of
glass. Antennae long. .....-....+-+..+.+.+-+- *W
10. Upper wing veins very large, protruding: antennae
long, notably exceeding the base of the lower wings, Upper wings
upper leathery, opaque pale yellow. P. Buxt. Fabricius. — Upper wing veins thin: antennae short, reaching a
barely the base of the lower wings. . .....+-..+--. 11. Frontal cones contiguous, their end broad and rounded. wings
very short upper. P. Sauicems. Foerster. — Frontal cenae diverging strongly anteriorly, their apex acute. Upper wings a transparent yellow-brown. P. Sytvicoua. Lethierry (1)

12. Straight frontal cones; i.e. not concave at the outer edge,
shrinking little by little from the base and with an equal maneuver. . . 13
— Distinctly concave frontal cones at outer edge, plus
strongly narrowed from base to middle than from middle to tip; their
last half is sometimes of equal width everywhere. . . . 15

 

(I) Psvita Sruvicona. Lethierry, head, pronotum and crest orange yellow; paws
testaceous, Abdomen black cn large part, Antennae rather short, reaching & barely
at base of lower wings, stacked in their first ticrs, pals spotted with black at the
middle, black & V'extrémilé. Frontal cones short, no longer than half of the
vertex in its midpoint, diverging strongly in event el pointed at the end. Super Wings

     

  

laughs of a sooty brown yellow, but not related; their fine veins, a little
salient, yellow. Petiole of the external fork of the ulna curved. Length (without wings): 0.002 1/2 millimeters. Surroundings of Valenciennes

burp =

13. Frontal cones Blunt-topped and rounded, a pew shorter
than the vertex in the middle. Head, Pronotum and escutcheon orange yellow,
abdomen green, antennae yellow, spotted with black on their last two
third. ;

P. AURANTIACA, Goureau. — Very pointed frontal cenes, as long as the vertex. . . 14
14. Antennae long, extending far beyond the base of the lower wings.
riewres. Larger size, less transparent wings, more ribs
robust. P. Mmreoruaés. Ferster. — Antennae only slightly exceeding the base of the lower wings. Smaller size, transparent wings, fine veins. P, Cratorcicons, Ferster. 15. Antennae barely reaching the base of the lower wings, or not
exceeding only a little. Upper wings usually transparent and
colorless, sometimes only a little sooty, their veins
black or dark brown, except at the base. Body darker than
the other spaces. P.Pineti. Flower

— Antennae almost reaching the top of the metasternum or the
exceeding. . . 2... 1s Pee eee ee 0)

16. Antennae almost reaching the top of the midsternum. wings
upper two and a half times as long as diapers. green body
very pale, almost whitish: outer edge of upper wings right
between. P. Perecnina. Farrster. — Antennae extending beyond metasternum. Upper wings also three times
long than wide. Green body, or a pale red or brown more or less
dark. P.MALI. Foerster. TRIOZA. Foerster. T.Gatun. Ferster. Rare: Emmerin marshes, Raismes forest, Mont-
des-Cattes. T.Vewurina. Ferster. Rare in the interior: very common in August and

—2—

September in the dunes of Dunkirk and Calais, on a Galium a
yellow flowers: at least a few individuals spend the winter in the state
perfect. T. Nicriconis. Ferster. ‘Ires-rare: forest of Raismes. T. Viawura. Zelterstedt, Very rare: Libercourt wood, on pine
sylvester. T. Fenorauis. Ferster. (Sanguinosis, Meyer Dir.) Fairly common in
February and March on the Scots pine: Libercourt wood, Rais-
mes and Marchiennes. T. Hamaroves. Ferster. Very common in February and March on the pine
Sylvester, with the preceding one, in the same woods. T. Avpiventeis. Ferster. Uncommon: Marcq-en-Bareul, in the prin-
time, on Paubepine. T.Urrica:. Zinné. Very common everywhere during summer on the Ur-
tica dioica. T. Europa. Ferster. (Bicolor, Meyer Diir). Uncommon: fortifica-
tions of Lille, on the Lycopus Buropeus. Mr. Meyer Dir dit Vavoir
found in Switzerland on willows. This species is doubtful, and is not
maybe a color change from the 7. Urtice. TABLE OF THE TRIOZAS. 1. Radial cell & widest place at least three times also
wider than the smallest distance between the Radius and the Ulna. Antennas
black, the third article and the extremity of the second, sometimes also
the base of the fourth, white... . 2. ee ee ee ee 2

— Radial cell & the widest point at most twice also
wider than the smallest distance between the Radius and the Ulna. . . 3

2. Upper wings three times longer than wide: posterior thighs
rear ct base of hind tibiae black. T.Gatu. Ferster. — Upper wings wn for more than dens times as long as wide. hind thighs black with light yellow-brownish top; shins
hind legs very slightly darkened 8 the base. T. VELuTINA. Ferrster. — 9s —

3. Black entitling antennas. Black body. T. Nigniconnis, Ferster,

— Antennae piles, the last two or four articles, black. 4

— Antennae black, the first three segments alone, white. . . 6
4, Upper wings having their apex at a very rounded angle, Body
a pale green: unicolored legs, of a greenish yellow. T.

 

IRIDULA. Zetterstedt. — Upper wings having their apex at a well-marked angle. . 5

5. Legs of an orange-yellow, all the thighs having above a
large elongated black line. First white antennae articles. T. Fewonstis. Foerster. — Legs orange-yellow, sometimes with a small black dot on the
knees. First segments of the antennae orange-yellow. T. HoemA Topes. Ferster. 6. Frontal cones diverging very strongly from the base. . . . 7. — Frontal cones very sharply diverging, sometimes only visible an
Mountain peak. Head, pronotum and crest of an orange red spotted with brown. Abdomen red or brown above, white below. T. Avhiventnis. Foerster. 7. Head, pronotum and escutcheon stained with brown or black lines. Abdomen yellow or brown. T. Unticx. Linnaeus,

— Head, promotum and crest very pale yellow. green abdomen

T.Europ,. Forster. RHINOCOLA. Ferster. R. Encx. Curtis, Very common on the heath, everywhere you believe this
plant, in July and August; forests of Phalempin and Raismes, Mont-
Black,

R Acénis. Linnaeus. Quite rare; Aubry wood, near Raismes, on
P Acer pseudoplatanus, in June. The R. Brice is smaller; its vertex is not separated from the front pa
a distinct edge; the transition from one & Pother is rounded,

--has

The R. Aceris is twice as large; its vertex is separated from the
forehead by a sharp rim; both species are very small, green
clear more or less yellowish. APHALARA. Ferster. A. Exius, Weber and Mohr. Rave, in June on Rumex acetosella;
Mont-Noir, Mont-des-Cattes. A. Nervosa, Ferster. Rare; banks of the meadows of Marly meadows Valen-
ciennes, under the leaves of Achillea (A. Leliévre). Forest of Raismes,
around Tournai. A. Outcast. Lethierry. Quite rare; forest of Mormal, in the large
grassy paths, in July. A.Potycost. Ferster. Fairly common; found once in abundance
in Emmerin Marsh; on Polygonum, at the water's edge, in
July; often found on Scots pine, in February and March, wood
of Libercourt, forest of Raismes and Marchiennes. A. Fiavipennis. Ferster (picta, Zetterstedt). Very rare, marshes of Hel-
lesmes, Valenciennes meadows, in the meadows (A. Lelitvre). CHART OF THE GENUS APHALARA. 1. Upper wings only twice as long as wide,
having their greatest breadth distinctly after their middle, opaque,
marked with small dots or small black spots with a band
transverse brown or black shortly before the apex. SZ exiis. Weber and Mohr. — Upper wings two and a half times as long as wide, without
black dots on the disc and without transverse band near the top. . 2. 2. Upper wings covered with transverse roughness extremely
thin; having near the top small elongated spots branes following the
direction of the ribs. A. Nenvosa. Forster. — Upper wings unicoloured, without transverse roughness. . . 3. 3. Upper wings more or less brown yellow. . . . “4.

eG see

— Upper wings colorless, transparent
In Patti, Lethierry (1). 4. Upper wings pale yellow, transparent. Marginal rib
lower nal black & its point of junction with the inner edge of the wing;
the neryura are prominent, darker yellow than the cells. Antennae yellow, black only & tip. Size small. A. PotyGont, Ferster. — Upper wings darker yellow, less transparent, without
black dot at tip of lower marginal vein; all ribs
fine, more piles than the cells. Antennae yellow, black at tip,
middle sections smudged with black. Large size. In Fravires: Ferster. LIVIA. Latreille. L Juxconvm. Latreille. Common in summer on the jones; fortifications of
Lille, wood of Anuapes and Phalempin, is also found on the Scots pine,
in February, March and April; wood of Libercourt, forest of Raismes. DIRAPHIA. Waga. D. Lumara. Waga. Very rare; a single specimen taken in May from
jones, in the wood of Phalempin. 2° Famite. — APHIDIDE. CNAPHALODES. Amyot and Serville. C. Lanicis. Macquart. Common on larches in gardens; Fives,
Lambersart. The larvae of this species, a few days after their
hatching, become a white filamentous matter and remain
motionless on the leaves of the larch where they are fixed. See on this

 

(1) Anatana Patipa, Lethierry. Head, pronolum and crest yellow; stacked legs;
abdomen green, Upper wings two and a half times longer than barleys, having their
greater length near the middle, colorless, completely transparent; the ribs
as colorless as the cells. Antennae reaching at least to lower wing base
upper ones, entirely pale, their last article black. Length (excluding the wings): 0.002 1/2 millimeters,

Forest of Mormal. — 96 —

subject of interesting details published by M. Macquart, in the Memoirs
of the Société des Sciences de Lille, year 1819. APHIS. Linnaeus. (APHID.) The insects that make up this genus and the following ones have been little studied. Their bodies at all ages are soft and swollen with liquids, become deformed and
fades after death. We must give up preserving them and we must
content to observe them alive on the plants on which they feed. Also this part of our catalog will be very incomplete, and we
can barely mention that the fifth part of the aphids which
must live in our department. Their species are very numerous, and it has been said that each
plant nourished one or more species of aphids which were
clean; but this is going too far, as it is shown that many
these insects, Aphis papaveris in particular, live on a crowd of
plants of different genera and families. The sap, absorbed by the aphids, turns into a sweet an
which oozes from their body through two small hollow horns located on the
above the abdomen. Ants, a few other wasps and
diptera, very fond of this liquid, cause it to flow by
gently squeezing these little horns with their legs, their antennae
one their mandibles. Also all plants attacked by aphids
are they invariably covered with ants; and too often we have been
tempted to attribute To the latter I badly produced only by fleas-
ron. We think with Lepelletier de Saint-Fargeau, and most
entomologists that, far from being the cause of evil, ants do not
than attenuate it. The sweaty head, worked up by aphids, is very abundant.
spreads on the stem and on the leaves of the plant, and dries up
form like a kind of varnish, or a forinous dust & half
slime that intercepts communication with atmospheric air. If a beneficent rain does not come promptly to wash the leaves and
dissolve this viscous coating, the dust attaches to it and increases
Thickness: the pores, the respiratory organs of the leaves, can no longer
work, and the plant will soon suffocate. Fortunately the
ants are here! they absorb the sweet liquid as soon as it forms,
they even provoke its secretion by their excitations, and prevent
to spread on the leaves. The generations of aphids are very numerous, and follow one another
quickly, especially in dry summers. Motionless on the sea side
leaves, aphids have only two occupations: drinking the sap and
to give birth to their posterity, which they do without respite or rest; in their youth
dig they have to change their skin several times, an event that produces
in some species a change in color. All aphids
and also the coccus and the kermés, excessively fear Cold skin and
the rain; to be better preserved, most live on the lower face.
lower part of the leaves, and their pigiires there produce blisters
Clogs by gardeners. These blisters form a roof spice
we @shelter from the weather. However when the wind is violent and
heavy storm rains, these shelters are insufficient, and aphids
then perish by the billions. If we want to get rid of these insects
harmful, it is enough, in most cases, to sprinkle them with water
fresh. A sprinkler pump, arranged in such a way as to project the skin
droplets from bottom to top, is an uncomplicated utensil and will produce
the best effects by reaching the aphid in its retreat. This
This method is particularly successful for peach aphids. In other
cases, in greenhouses for example, it is to fumigation of tobacco or
Other substances which must be resorted to. (1)

The system of generation of these insects is very complicated: in
many species the female, winged, lays eggs on the end of Pau-
tomne, after mating with the mile; the eggs pass the winter, and
we close in the spring to give birth & larvae which grow
sit like those of the other Hemiptera. These larvae, having reached a
certain size, give birth to young who come out alive from
their comps; these become mothers in their turn, also give birth to babies
unwinged individuals like them, and so on sometimes for fifteen
or twenty generations, and without mating. The last single of this s
generations gives females which cease to be viviparous and lay eggs,

 

(1) Doctor Boisduval published, in 1867, an Essay on Horticultural Entomology,
which we recommend in a special way to gardeners; they will find a lot
instructive information, especially on insect pests of plants and shrubs
of pleasure, and on the most practical means of destroying them. It is the part devoted to aphids which is treated with the most detail. The author has made a special study of those of these insects which infest the greenhouses of
surroundings of Paris; his book should be in the hands of all horticultural enthusiasts.
culture. 5

= oR —

after mating, eggs which must serve the generations of
Next year. I will confine myself to indicating in the following list the species most
common aphids in our region that I was able to recognize by the des-
too brief descriptions given by the rare aators who took care of it. A.Rosa’. Linnaeus, very common on the stems and buds of roses,

the whole year; green, sometimes pink, elongated; surroundings of Lille. A. Rosarum KaltenJack. Much less frequent than the previous one,
smaller, shorter, janndtre, It lives & the underside of the leaves
of different varieties of roses. Surroundings of Lille. A. Cereatis. Kaltenbach. Green or russet brown; very common
some years on wheat to which it is very harmful by obstructing
& flowering. Surroundings of Lille. A. Soncut. Zinné. Brown, common on lettuce. Surroundings of Lille. A. Acris. Kaltenbach. Mont-Noir, common in May and June on? Acer
pseudoplatanus. A.Urrica. Kaltenbach. Green or dark green with more streaks
dark. Abundant on nettles in the fortifications of Lille. A. Tanacericoa. Kaltenbach. Scarlet red: fortifications of
Lille, under the leaves of Zenacetum vulgare, in July. A. Humors. Kaltenbach. Green with dark spots. It is said that this
species causes great damage in hops in Belgium and
in England. I only found a few individuals in a hou-
blonnière & Busigay. A. Lacruca. Réawmur. Green, common on lettuce, with PA. sonchi. Surroundings of Lille. A. Diantat. Schrank, Yellow-green; on many garden plants and
greenhouses; surroundings of Lille. Common in Dunkirk dunes
on the rodiums. A. Cerasi. Fabricius. Black; on the cherry trees, in the gardens, surroundings
from Lille. Very common. A. Anunpinis. Kalt. Green; common in the fortifications of Lille, in
middle and late summer, on the slits of Arundo phragmites. A. Grossutanix. Kaltenbach. Dark green; common in gardens
around Lille, & the underside of the leaves of the gooseberry &
clusters. Fa

A. Hepere. Kaltendach A matte dark bronze. Fives, common on ivy. A.Maur. Fabricius. Green; on the leaves of the apple tree. It's a plague
for our gardens. A. Prunt. Fabricius. Green-matt. I have only found on the shelter yet
coast, on the inner side of young leaves, in August. Surroundings of
Lille. A, Avettana. Schrauk. Green; on the noisclier; forest of Marchiennes. A. Ruaicis. Black Linnaeus; common in the surroundings and the fortifications
of Lille, on Rumex acetosella. A. Samnut. Linnaeus, Black with bluish sheen; around Lille, on the su-
hedges. A. Persicx. Kaltendack. Bran; on the leaves of the peach tree, in the gardens
in summer, long after the appearance of P Aphis amygdali,
which you only see in the spring. Very harmful. A. Ayepatt. Blanchard. Green, sometimes pink; on the leaves and
peach buds, in the spring. A. Henicnryst. Kaltenbach. Yellow-green; very common on various es-
species of chrysanthemums, in the gardens, especially at dusk. A. Pist. Kaltenbach. Wgrass green, with darker spots. Common in summer in the dunes of Dunkirk, on alfalfa. A.Jaceu. Kaltealach. Dark brown dun: fortifications of Lille, Mont-
Black, on cornflowers. A. Pray
on the plantain. aGinis Kaltenbach. Dark matte green. Fortifications of Lille,

  

A. Eprosu. Aaltenbach. Dark green dune, Forest of Marmal, on the
Epilobium. A. Jacobex. Kaltendach. Dark green. ‘I’res-common in summer in the
dunes of Dunkirk, on the Senecio jacobea. A.Carre Kaltendach. Green, common from spring in the dunes
of Dunkirk, on the saliz repens. =

A. Satucis. Linnaeus. Blackish, hairy; dunes of Dunkirk with the previous
tooth. on the same plant. A. Paraverts Fabricius. Black; very common on poppies, beans and
a host of other plants. The bean fields are infested with it and
feed billions, It is the same species as Aphis faba, Sco-
polite. One also finds in the bean fields, another species of

— 100 —

larger size entirely green, whose name I do not know, and which is
so abundant. Let us also point out an aphid, small, bran, rounded,
on the leaves of the willow piece, and another equally small, rounded,
yellowish, on the rosebush. LACHNUS. Illiger. Genus close to Aphis, and has the same mavurs, but differing
by the absence of comicules on the top of the abdomen. L. Pixs. Kaltenbach. Bran; very common on young shoots of pine
forest, in the forests of Raismes and Marchiennes. L. Aarts. Kaltenbach. Green; on the Scots pine, forest of Marchiennes. L. Pixelt. Kaltendach. Brown with a greyish-white villi. On
the pine forest, in the forests of Raismes and Marchiennes. L. Junwent. Katenlach. Hairy, Wun black brown. Forest of Trélon, in June,
on the junipers. SCHIZONEURA. Hartig. S. Lanicera. Haussmann. Brown, covered with a cottony secretion,
common on the young branches and the trunk of the apple trees which it exhausts
and whose death he sometimes causes in the gardens. S. Una. Linnaeus. Green, lined with a cottony villus. On the leaves of
elms. The female pricks the leaves with her beak and deposits her eggs there. Large blisters form as a result of these bites, and serve as
cradle to young aphids. Common in parks. FORDA Von Heyden. F.'Trocopyres. Vou Heyden. Common, on the roots of escarole,
chicories, lettuces, in July, & fives. This aphid commits great
damage, the extent of which I was able to verify myself. Here is what
said M. Boisduval. Essay on Horticultural Pentomology). “It is oval,
elongated, pale yellow or dull grayish white, hairy. Never he
» does not eat grasses. He lives in large families in the midst of
» ants, exclusively on the roots of synanthera, such as

 

» dandelion, thistle, sow thistle, artichokes, piloselle, lettuce,
» chicory, escarole. He is an enemy who does a great deal of harm & our
» maratchers, during the @autumn months. When he invaded a foot
Withered, the plant which at first seemed very vigorous, withers. — 101 —

» and is completely lost....... We can try, to destroy
» this aphid, watering, with a solution of iron sulphate, a
» Aecoction of acre plants, such as enphorbia, walnut leaves,
» tobacco, etc., added with a pinch of cooking salt. »

This genus Vorda differs from the preceding genera in that the
males are fit as well as females: their very short antennae
consist of a small number of items. Highly probable test that a second species of the same genus, indicated by
es authors as common throughout Europe in the nests of four-
mis, the Forda radicum, Kirby, is also found in our department. 3° Wilt. — ALEURODIDE. WHITEFLY. Latreitle. These insects stand out at first glance from all the others
phytophthria by their opaque, white wings, which make them look like &
a microscopic microlepidoptera. Their bodies no longer protrude
one millimeter. A. Carpist. Koch, yellow body, white wings. Common on bushes
in the woods in June and July: Phalempin wood, Eperlecques meadows
Watten. I saw, in the woods of Carvin and Mont-Noir, two other species,

One large laugh, another smaller, distinct by the pronotum and a

black body part: j

 

don't know if they have been described. 4¢ Phase. — COCCIDA. The insects of this family are as harmful to plants as the
previous ones and produce, like them, a sugary substance which is strong
searched for ants. The females, at the time of laying eggs, remain fixed
on the leaves or on the bark, and their body, which rather resembles A
a gall ov A fungus, which an insect has, covers the eggs up to
Hatching of the larvae. The males are small, winged; they are very difficult to obtain, and the

— 12 —

most are still unknown. We only see them when mating.
ment that lasts a very short time. ASPIDIOTUS. Blocked. Females, for most of their lives, are
covered with a hull or hoist, and remain attached to the plants whose
they feed. (1)

Miles are also covered by a shield, but only in the state
of larva. A.Canes

A.Nern. Blocked. Fives, very common on the underside of the leaves
oleander grown in pots. Boisdual. Fives, in the greenhouses, on the Cametias. DIASPIS. Costa

This genus differs from Aspidiotus only by the shield of the males, more
elongated than that of females. D. Levenu. Signoretto. Fiyes, common on espaliered peach trees,
D. Osrreceronis. Curtis. Fives, on apple trees and poitiers

which she very harmful,

MYTILASPIS

 

ignore. This genus includes species with a long and narrow shield and likewise
form for male and female. Mr Pomorum. Blocked. Common in gardens on apple branches
miers and pear trees. It invades the leaves and the fruits themselves. have
often seen quien pears were covered, The shell is easily

recognizable its brown color and its comma shape. AONIDIA. Targioni. Species of this genus have two overlapping shields, the second, or
interior forming only a thin film & through which one can see
sting the insect. A.Lauri. Blocked. Very common on the underside of the leaves of
oleander grown in pots. (1) See, for this genre and the following ones, the complete and scholarly current monograph-
currently being published in the Annals of the Entomological Society of France. (Years 1869, 1870, 1871, 1872, 1878 and 1874.) — 103 =

PULVINARIA. Torgiont

In this genus, the females lay their eggs in a fluffy nest
which for the species of our country reaches a length of 6 to 7 millimeters
about 243 wide. Egg-laying females have free limbs, are
Wun yellow a little orange, and advance a little forward as and me-
sure that the size of their fluffy nest grows, which retains on
cut its length to the same width, which is that of the insect,

P. Casticoxa. Signoretto. I saw this curious species once enough
large number on cameo sheets

 

  

ias grown in the greenhouse, at Fives: au
slightest contact with the cottony texture of the eggs became sticky and
liquid: after a few days it becomes drier and clean
save the eggs. LECANIUM. Jiliger. Species of this genus are hullless or bare when young,

but take after fertilization forms quite different from those
qwelles had before. L. Hesreripum. Latreille. on the leaves of orange trees in pots: Fives. L.Matt. Schrank. On the branches of apple, pear and currant trees:
Fives. KERMES. Geoffrey.

. Back to sleep. Reaumur. Common on oak thrones: forests of
Phalempin, of Raismes, of Mormal. K. Ture, Linnaeus. On the leaves of the lime tree. In 1862, the tillenls of the
place Verte, Condé, were converts of these insects, to such an extent that
had lost hope of keeping a single one of these trees; the following year
the plague is gone. K, Viris. Latreille, Common in the interior of the city of Lille, on the
branches of the vine. K. Saticis. Fabricius. Surroundings of Lille, on the trunks of the willows
mareaux,
COCCUS. Linn. The Coceus, since the release of oouf until the end of their existence,
retain the same shape, while among the Kermés the skin of the back

- the bone -
hardens, dries up, the rings fade away and the animal no longer resembles
has an insect (females). C. Avoxipum. Linnaeus. Common in greenhouses on the leaves of camellias
and many other plants. United C. Latreille. Fives, on the trunk of young elms. DORTHESIA. Bose. In this genus, the females are covered with a lamellar secretion
white resembling & wax. D. Unricos. Linnd. Quite common during summer in the woods: forests of
Phalempin, of Marchiennes, of Mormal. wil

i]

Vf}
/

 

 

 

    

 

 

Alebia
Motus. Chlorita

 

p. 4. O Fig. 5. Fig. 1. Superintendent of Soylte. Fig. 2. so-called upper Triesa

 

 

— 105 —

EXPLANATION OF THE BOARDS. SHEET 1

Fig. 4. ALEBRA. A appendage of Vaile's membrane
superior. Lower bail. has marginal vein. Fig. 2. Ratings. B lower wing. @ marginal rib. 460 apical cells. Fig. 3. CHLORITA. B lower wing. @margit rib
b apical cell. Fig. 4. Kaos. B lower wing. @ marginal rib. ¥ apical cellute. Fig. 5. Tyentocys:

   

Lower bail. aaa apical veins. Fig. 6. ANomna,

B lower wing. @ aa apical veins. bb apical cells. Fig. 7. Zein. B lower wing. 6 bb apical cells. PLATE I. Fig. 4. Stigma. R radial cell. BE outer (or anterior) basal cell..
BI inner (or posterior) basal cell
mid lower marginal stripe pro~

running along until the stigma. f radial rib or radius. ¢ ulna (petiole of)
¢’ two branches of the ulna. ff ff" first, second, third and
fourth forks of the forks
marginal,

   

Fig. 2. ¢' two branches of the ulna (not stalked)
speaking of the marginal vein in-
inferior even. n Three small free ribs between the
first and fourth prongs. 7

 

— Wi

ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF GENRES. Acanthosoma. Acanthia...

Acocephalus. Acompus. Adomerus
BUI

 

 

 

 

  
 
  
   

Agalia. Agalliastes. Agramuna

Alebra... .
Whiteflies. Alleeotomus. Allygus
Alidus. Amblytylus. Aneurus..
Anomia
Anoterops. Anthocoris. Aonidia. apocremnus
Aphalara
Aphetochira
Aphis. .
Aphrophora. Aradus. weapon
Arwopus. Asiraca
Asopus. Aspidiotus
Athysanus. Atractotomus
Beosus. Beritus. Bothynotus. Brachyeerwa. Brachycoleus. Brachytropis. Brachysteles. Pog. Bryocoris 26
Byrsoptera. 36
Bythoscopus 58
Camptobrochis 7
Camptopus. AL
Campyloneura, 30
Campylostira ...... 23
Canthophorus. 6

Caps 29

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

  
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  
 
 

Cardiastethu: 40
Carpocoris 8
Centrot bt
Ceraleptus..... 40
Charagochilus 30
Chlorion ... 52
Chlorita.. . 65
Chorosoma. At
Cicadula. 60
Cixius 83
Cnaphalod 9%
Coceus - 103
Conometus. 83. Conometopus « 27
Coranus, 43
Corcomella 8
Coreus 40
Corisa. 48
Corizus 42
Criocoris 38
Cryptostemma. has
Cydnus 6
Cyllocoris 32
Cymatia 3
Cymus. 23,
Delphacinus 53
Deltocephalus. ... 62
Dersocori 28
Derephysia. %
Diaspi 402
Dichroos 30
Dicranotropis. BS. Dictyonota. . %

 

 

 

Page

   

 

 
 
 
 
  
 

  

 

  

 

  

 

 

60
104
45
9
22
Enoplops it
Eremocoris 7
Built 53. Eupeliv. 5a
Eurygaster 5
| Bvacanthus. . 59
Bysarcoi 7
Ford 100
Gargara..bt
trode 7
Geotormus 6
Globiceps. Gnathoconus. Gnathadu
goniagnathus
Gonianotus
Gonoceru:
Grypotes
Hadrodema

 
 
 
  
 

 

harpactor
Marpocera. Hebrews. ..
heterocordylus
Heterotoma
Momodemus
Hoplomachus
Hydrometer. idiocerus
Ischnocoris.. .
Ischnorhynchus. Isometopus. "
Derived. Jalla. Teptopterna
Lepyronia
Liburnia. Lobostethus. Lopus
Loxops. Lyctocer
Lygeus. Lygus...
Macrodema. macrocola
Macrolophus. .
Macropsis. .
Malacocor:
‘Mecomma.’. Hegacelum,
Megaloceraa
Megalonotus
Megamelus ...
Megophithalmus. Mesovelia

Metacanthus
Metastemma
Metatropis
Microphysa. Microvelia

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

      
  

 

 

 
      

Miris. monalocoris. monanthia
myrmedobia
iyrmus. Mytilaspis
Nabis
Naucoris. Neids. — 108 —
Pogo. 20
Notonecta 47
Notostira - 26
Not 64
Nysius. 4h
Oslontoscelis. 5
Oncognathus: 7
Oncotylus 34

 

 

   
 

 

 

 

   
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
   
 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 
  

Opbthalmicus. 4s
Orthocephalus. 38
Orthops. 3t
Orthostira oh
Orthotylus 33
Pachylops 33
Palomena. 8
Pediopsis. 58
Poribalus. 8
Peritrechus. 16
Pithanus. 26
Philaus. 56
Phylus. 37
Phygadicus 2
Phytocoris 28
Picromerus. . 9
Piezodorus. 8

ostethus, 39
Pilophorus 31
Pionosomus. 16
Pithanus. . 26
Plagiognathus. 35
Platyplax 2
Plea... 48
Plinthisus Ms
Plociomerus a
Plocaria 42
Podops. 5
Podisus 9
Paciloscy tus. BT
Psacasta .. 3
Psailus. 33
Pseudophlaus 40
Psylla. .. 36
Plerotmetus. 46
Pulvinaria. ... 403

 

Pycnoplerna.. .. . 29
Pygolampi

 

Lille. imp. L. Davel. Pyrrhocori
Ranatra. Reduvius. Rhapbigaster,
Rhinocola. .”
khopalotomu
Rhyparochromes. Salda...
Sastragala
Schizoneura
Scivcoris..
Scolopostethus. Schirus
sigara
‘Spathocera. Stenocephalus. Stenocranus. Sthenarus..
Stiphrosoma. Stiroma. Strachia. Strongy
Stygnus'
Syromasts

   
  
  
 

Tettigometra. Tetligonia
Thamnotettix
Therapha. Tinicphalus. Trapezonotus. Triecphora
Trigonotylus. Threesome....
Triphleps. Tritomegas
Tropicoris

Tropistethus. Typhlocyba. Tytlus
Ulopa. Velia......
Verlusia. Xylocoris. Zicrona. ‘Zosmenus. Zygina..