TO THE KNOWLEDGE OF SWEDEN'S PYLLODES
AF

O. M. REUTER. In Attonde haftet af sina Opuscula entomologica, pp. 820 ff. THomson has published a 6fversigt af Skandinaviens Chermes-
species, ’as he calls the Psylloderna. The extremely short species
the diagnoses afven of sésom new established species, which in addition
usually indicate only one of the many costumes in which they
most species occur according to different seasons, but lazy unfortunately
andra an forf. themselves in many cases remain in uncertainty about the spe-

* THomson begins this essay with the following words: »In the catalog éf-

ver Finland's Psylloder, which ReEvTER recently published, he states at the beginning that
Sternorhyncha has been almost completely neglected by Finnish and Swedish Hemi-
pterologists. This reputation seems to be somewhat unambiguous with regard to
the author of Insecta Lapponica, for ZETTERSTEDT has returned home alone and
described several species of Psylla from Lapland 4n all of Finland's older and newer
entomologists férmatt hopbringa. » The meaning of these lines is unclear to me,

enir ZETTERSTEDT in Insecta Lapponica describes in all only 12 Psylloder,

 

of which 4 Psyllae s. strict., and my above-mentioned catalog contains 36 ar-
ter, of which 17 Psyl / ae. THOMSON thinks that ZETTERSTEDT is from Lapland
brought home and described several species, tin the Finnish collectors formatt bring together from
this country, he has gone so far as to say that Z. wants to return home, but does not describe
white several species, fin the Finnish entomologists kiinna from Lapland, But about
iifven Z. had described several Lapland species, included in my catalog, said hin-
This does not mean that this group will be free in Sweden and Finland until the end
time has been largely neglected in jimférelse with 6friga hemipterer; and
iinnu Aterstér much to do, there inheriting these species and sirdeles their biology
blifvit properly illuminated. This essay shows, by the way, that I by no means had si
orditt i mitt p & stiende; THOMSON mentions in his Ofversigt 44 sven-
ska species. Already now, four years after its publication, 61 species can be used
foras from Sweden; and dnnu certainly drew more to add, to judge from it,
that I have found in southwestern Finland some species which have not been found in Sweden.
rich, but without a doubt there is no shortage. 146 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881.

cies referred to in them. During the summer of 1880, I had the opportunity
to examine the Swedish National Museum's collections of related animals, af
which many were determined by THomson himself, and to compare
those with copies, belonging to the same museum and destined
of the eminent Psyllod kinnaren in Vienna, Dr. F. Low. Pa
During the autumn of the same year, I visited the assistant professor THom-
son in Lund, who willingly showed me his
Psyllod collection. During the examination of sdval Riksmusei, which
THOMSON's collections were discovered that the vast majority of this
fattares sasom new erected species were already known below
f6rut given names and therefore miaste withdrawn. Derjimte upp-
thanked in the Stockholm Museum some species, which are not
taken in his 6fversigt af Skandinaviens Chermes-arter, och till
I have these through collections around Stockholm and in Bohus-
have been able to add additional species, so that the
taken species with 17 numbers Exceed them, as THOMSON
in front of Sweden. I have therefore below compiled what me
been aware of the prevalence of Psyllods within this country, as well
leading information 6fver resp. species' way of life and nutrition
plants, which THomson almost completely forbids, but without
whose fame to be Psylloder, however, can be said to be mere
partly familiar. In addition, several synonymous notices,
sdrskildt Gfver THomsons arter; to regret is, however, that my
short stays in Lund did not allow me to examine the species
which stand in the Zetterstedt collection and which derfér annu
partly remained me and choice afven most other hemipterolo-
ger oklara. With his view of the system and the nomenclature, I have
féljt_ Lows accurate and on an extremely rich material
based surveys, and drew his work from the European
Psylloderna will inevitably be necessary for anyone who wants to
these specific determinations of these small responsive insects,
where I take the liberty has fixed sirskild attention
pa desamma. ' Finally, I have that to the assistant professor THomson

) F Léw's works 6fver Psyllodae aro samtligen inforda i Verhandlungen
the k. k. zoological-botanical society in Vienna. From iro:

1. On the biology and characteristics of the psyllodes in addition to description
two new species of the genus Psylla. Mit. Table I and II, i & rgingen 1876,
pp. 187—-216. REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER, 147

express my gratitude for his willingness to
ning lemna sitt material af svenska Psylloder och i icke minder
connection, I turn to Dr. Low, who not only during my
in Vienna has given me a lot of informative information and
often me comparisons of my species with those in his collection
rade typexemplar af savail hans egen, som Forsters och FLors
species, but afven dessfdrinnan many went willfully determined
tskilliga dubidsa species, til foljd hvaraf below anférda nafn
should be able to make all claims true. Fam. PSYLLODAE. THOMSON takes on for this family Linnaeus' name Chermes. But since this battle difven includes other species, e.g. Aphzs-spe-
cies, si it would be more correct to adopt Grorrroy's nomenclature,
ocks ’whether Linnaeus with his designation actually intended the species
as now bendimnas Psylloder. Even in the case of Linnaeus had described
only the pages under the name Chermes, in this case the
tenskapliga puritismen béra vika for en uppfatt af namnet,
as yunnit firm foot in the public language, which with
this name and its derivatives (Chermetin, etc.) refers to some
Coccider. We therefore retain the above names. Subfam. I. Liviinae F. Low. Gene. r. LIVIA Latr. 1. L. juncorum Larr., Zerr., Ins. Patch. 306, 1. THom-
son, Op. ent. pp. 841. 2. Beitriige zum Kenntniss der Psylloden, mit einer Tafel, i arg. 1877,
pp. 123—154. 5

3- Zur Systematik der Psylloden, mit einer Tafel, i arg. 1878, pp. 583—610. 4. Mittheilungen tiber Psylloden, mit einer Tafel, i arg. 1879, pp-
547—598. 5. Turkestan psylloden, mit einer Tafel, i rg. 1880, pp. 249—266. For Gfrigt recommended FLors 6fversigt af Livlands arter i> die Rhyn-
choten Livlands, II »and the work of the same author in the Bulletin de la Soc. empér. d. Nature, Moscow 1861. 148 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881. Skane, Oland, Smaland, Oster-, och Westergétland, Bohuslan,
Nerike, Sodermanland, .Stockholm, sédra Lappmarken. - This
art dr icke sallsynt p & Funcus-arter, pad vilkas blomhufyuden den
produces strange, already long familiar deformations. Subfam. II. Aphalarinae F. Low. Gene. 2. RHINOCOLA FRrst. 1. Rh. aceris Linn., F. Sy. Oath. I 214, 695 (Chermes),
Tuoms. Op. ent. pp. 841, 1. Although already described by Linn, this species is still missing in
Swedish National Museum collections. It lives, according to Linnaeus and
Low's information, on Acer campestre, but I have in the southwest
Finland took it in large quantities even in Ulmus montana and
once in one specimen pai Quercus robur pi en holme, hvar-
est Acer alls icke férekom. The history of the species' development history
was first made by Low in his ofvan anférda work, Mittheil. iiber Psylloden, 1879, pp. 559 and 560. The edge is laid against
hdsten behind the outer bud scales, the larvae develop annu
fore winter entered and Gfvervintra behind the bud mountains; if
the goods take Ater their development interrupted during hibernation,
but the 4th to the third skin6msms remain those behind the outer ones
bud mountains, Then they go behind the innermost bud-
the mountain to the base of the young shoot, soak there and leave
not this stiille forr, ain they drew ready to be transformed into ima-
gines. In order to be able to undergo this transformation undisturbed,
séka the lower side of the leaves, where-they fasten themselves with recessed legs. According to Doucras, this species should occur in England in two
generations about the year. 2. Rh. ericae Curr. - Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 841, 2, -
Chermes Callunae Bou., K. Vet. Ak. Handl. 1849, pp. 266—
267, sec. spec. typic. This small species, the smallest of the Psyllods, occurs
probably Gfverallt within Sweden, where heather grows. BoHEMANS
type specimen hirstamma from Gotland. In September, 1880, I took

. Ent. Monthl. Mag. XV (1879), pp. 255. REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER, 149

imagines and small larvae on & Dalaré niara Stockholm; numerous dro
imagines in August, towards the end of which month the aggen is laid. According to Léw (I. c. P. 561), the larvae grow extremely slowly, 6fver-
winter mostly half-grown and undergo the following were atmin-
stone annu a skincare, before they become imagines. ’At coal-
its burglary they draw to the lowest parts of the rod nearest
the dishes and 6fwinter in a kind of dyala hidden between moss,
old l6f m. m. The larva is depicted by Low 1. c., Taf. XV,
FIG. 1o — r1. 2

Gene. 3. APHALARA FRrRst. 1. A. exilis Wes. and Monr. - Fatt., Hem. Sv., II, p.
80 (Chermes). Tuoms. Op, ent. pp. 840, 1. This species thrives from where it grows all summer long
in single copies among pigs on angar. THomson says that
it occurs on sand fields, usually on Ramex; and FALLEN
and later HeypeN have indicated Ramex acetosella sisom dess
naringsplanta. It is found early in the spring and late in the autumn
pa vara barrtrid, der den 6fvervintrar sisom imago, Exemplar
is in the National Museum from Smaland, Sédermanland and Stockholm. 2. A, affinis Zerr., Ins. Patch. 208, 6. (Chermes). THoms. Op. ent. pp. 840, 2. The discovery of the Zerrersrept in Lapland. Copies in Riksmu-
seum fran Séderbotten (? ); I took it on Dalaré. The
lefver p4 moist, starling dngar, but nutrients and tidi-
Greater stages of development are still to be sought. Like
foregdende finns afven af ​​denna tidigt pa varen 6fvervintrade
imagines pa be barrettrad, according to what I observed in the southwest
Finland, where this species is not uncommon on damp meadows. 3. A. Calthae Linn. F. Sv. 263, 1005 (Chermes). THOMS.,
Op. ent. pp. 840, 1. A. polygon Forsv. (verisimiliter). Early in the spring occurs® in abundance in the flowers of Ca / -
tha palustris an Aphalara species, which much choice agrees 6f-
verens med Linnis diagnos 6fver Chermes Calthae, According to F.
Low ar this species not separated from A. polygon Frst., Which

* This in the vicinity of Vienna.
? TI southwestern Finland and probably dfven flerestides in Sweden. 150 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881.

i Riksmuseum féretrades af exemplar frin Skane, Oland och
Stockholm and which I found in southwestern Finland on Polygo-
num aviculare. * De pa Caltha funna exemplaren, sadana de
dfven i Riksmuseum sta fra Sm & land och Stockholm, dro emel-
however slightly larger and have more brownish-yellow wings. Low writing
ver likval till mig: »A. polygont Frsr ist vol A. calthae L. vol-
lig identical. In all psyllodes, the overwintered eczema-
plare larger and darker than those of summer ». The question is
however, it is decided only after a large number of specimens have been collected
from Caliha and after examining whether they have grown in it
flowers about the spring so numerous Ap / a / ara individuals developed on
mentioned growth and underwent its transformation, or if the
dast aro 6fwintered individuals, who belong to the one on Polygonum
in itself the living species, but if the goods occur on one
for them really free-flowing plant, on the same as many
others, which do not develop at all on the battery, during this
time quite often antriiffas on these. Ocksad individuals of this
species occur during the said season on spruce and pine. The former
the stages of development afven by A. polygont iro annu undeskrifna. 4. A. nervosa Frsr. sec. spec. type. - Fror, Rh. Liyl. II, 538, 5, sec. spec. typ., nec THoms. Of this on Achillea millefolium according to Scorr and ifven
according to LOws information given to me living species, which did not
taken in THomson's Overview of Sweden's Chermes species, in the THom
son's species of this name dr another, I found a specimen in
ScHONHERR's collection without local information; another is available from An-
germanland, taken by SrAL; I have observed it in Stockholm
surroundings. Its development history is not yet described. Obs. This species is considered quite right by most authors
sisom Forsrers A. xervosa. THOMSON, on the other hand, occupies below
this name a completely different, double si large species (the following)

'It occurred in September 1880 numerous on & Dalaré on one with Rumer
acetosella look overgrown cultivated iingsbacke, but d: r LOw férmodar that according to all
probability 7o / ygonum vixte nirmast marken, Emellert anfér DouGias ar
1879 in Ent. Monthl, Mag. XV, p. 255, that in England it lives on Polygo-
num hydropiper and Rumex. acetosella, from which later it also grows
digare noted by Hatipay. Even this plant deserves to be
mare is examined with regard to the species in question. REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER. I5t

and has told me that he determined this according to from
Forster himself to Dantsom siinda copies. This latter species
ar, however, without the slightest doubt = Chermes picta Zert., si
that Forsrer's appointment in such a case would be to * be admitted only
sisom synonymous with ZerrersrepTs. THomson for pa alldeles obe-
gripliga skal ZerrersTepts fzcfa sisom synonym under Calthae
Linn. ’However, in Dr. Low’s collection in Vienna, I have
copies of FOrsrer's description, labeled with his
own handwriting, and his description indicates ifven clearly enough
the species, which dies the same, which dfven Fior called nervosa
Frst. The specimens of the specimens to Dantnom must
due to any confusion or misrepresentation. 5. A. picta Zerr., Ins. Patch. 308, 3 (Chermes). Fior,
Rh. Livl. I, 539, 6. Aphalara nervosa Tuoms., Op. ent. p.
840, 4 sec. spec. typ., nec. FRsT. Of this first by ZerreRsTEDT according to copies from Lapp-
land and Norrbotten described species are in the National Museum specimens
frin Smaland and Stockholm. THomson indicates that sisom all-
mine in southern and central Sweden. I took it dfven in Sep-
tember by Dalaré. The most numerous occurs on * ® in August and
meet you on their stills in a not insignificant number of individuals on Chry-
santhemum leucanthemum, usually in the flowers and stems
6fversta del. - F. Low has sasom firgvarietiter under this
art anfort® A. flavipennis, soncht and innoxia Frst and A.
alpigena M. D. and indicates Leontodon hastilis sisom its na-
ring plant. In the places where I collected Chrysanthemum
A. picta, however, does not occur at all Leontodon hastilis,
and it is therefore possible that, on closer examination,
gon of the listed varietites could prove to be a real
different species or at least one associated with another nutrient plant
the distinct form. The earlier stages of development of were p2cta
I have not yet found. * To guide in their search

Se hirom afven F. L6w, Mitheilungen tiber Psylloden, pp. 562 and 563.
? According to my observations in southwestern Finland. Beitr. z. kenntn. d. Psyll. pp. 124, 125. Dr. L6w, who shares my above thoughts, wishes you all the best.
tal exemplar som mijligt af var pa Chrysanthemum \ efvande art, om gorligt i
all stages of development. Get it, as 4r in the event of fulfilling the said wish
informs Dr. F. Léw's address: Vienna, Wiedener Hauptstrasse 37. Entomol, Tidsky. Bd. 1, Arg. 2, H. 3 (1881). LT

152 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881.

m & fdljande ur d: r Lows observationer 6fver de pi Leontodon
Aastilis in Austria observed specimens in summary announced. *
The female lays (in Austria in June, with us elections not before 4m in July or
August) gnaws glistening, pale yellow, mostly in a row, with the sides facing
each other silent gills between a shelf leaf and the flowers; after
often several ginger repeated mating is laid again new agg on dy-
like the stems in the flower head. Not long after that, re-
dan de spaida ungarne och qvardréja i blomhufvudet, sa linge
as the shelf leaves annu offer them sufficient juice. But soon
these begin to wither, they migrate to the rosette of leaves and attach themselves
there at the youngest leaf axes. Have they become the source of the source-
crime and pull d & down to the root neck or possibly annu
deeper down along the root, in order to overwinter there. About the item
the larvae reappear on the leaves and now attach themselves to their
dre side. After another skin review of the product,
change develops image. In Austria. If our climate causes
The significant differences in development would be interesting to experience. 6. A. artemisiae Frst. - Toms. Op. ent., pp. 841, 5
Psylla matachitica Danvp., K. Vet. Akad. Handl. 1850, I, p.
177%

This species, which in Sweden was first found on Gotland
af Dantsom, har jag taget i mangd under Augusti och Septem-
prays at Ostra stiket and pA Dalaré near Stockholm. It lives
Artemisia absinthium and A. campestris, but its development
lingshistoria ar annu oskrifven. 7. A. nebulosa Zerr., Ins. Patch. 307, 1. Reur., Medd. Soc. F. et Fl. Fenn. I, 77,: 5. - Aphalara graminis Tuoms.,
Op. ent. pp. 841, 6, nec Linn. ”

This is a northern and subalpine species. The ir tagen i sé-
draw Lapland, in the mountainous regions of Norway and Dalarna, but turn
breath down to Stockholm. Regarding its way of life, I can
that I found in the old Schénherrska collection several examples
plar from Stockholm with note: «in Epz / obio angustifolio». For the time being, the history of development and life is unknown. * Mittheilungen iiber Psylloden, pp. 563—566.

? F. Low has already in Mitth, iib. Psylloden, pp. 566 and 567, shown that
LinnEs Chermes graminis by no means belongs to this species and that it does not even
hor to the Psyllods,

REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER. 153
Gene. 4. PSYLLOPSIS Low. 1. Ps. fraxinicola Frst. - Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 829, 3
(Chermes). Psylla unicolor Fror, Rh. Livl., I, 479, 15. In the National Museum from Smaland and Stockholm. Férekommer
probably 6fverall that ash vixer. The kids are sitting on the lower side
of the ash leaves mostly in small colonies at the midrib and
secrete by secretion in the margin of the wing skins and trailing edge
of the abdomen extremely fine, long, white tradar, which flock-like con-
manhinga and finally bite not only the whole insect, but
aifven often hinga 1—3 cm. ldngt down from the blade. They cause
no deformities of the leaves, sisom the young of the féljande species. *

2. Ps. fraxini Linn., F. Sv. nio 1013. (Chermes). THoms.,
Op. ent. pp. 829, 1 (Chermes). - Chermes sorbi Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 829, 4 (= var. alis impictis) forte. Probably occurs everywhere where the ashes grow. I Riksmu-
seum fOvarvaa copies from Smaland and Ostergétland. Lar-
verna lefva under den blasartadt swollen, nedvikta, blekgréna,
yellow or reddish leaf margin of Fraxinus excelsior and in-
enclosed in a white cotton-like secretion. 3. Ps. discrepans Fior, Bull. Soc. Imp. d. Nat. Moscow
1861, pp. 376. - Chermes sorbi THoms., Op. ent., pp. 829, 4,
sec. spec. and THoms. in Mus. reg. Holm. determ. (varietas alis
immaculatis), vix Linn. *

Of this species, hitherto taken only by FLor at the Mar-
seille and by me at Abo, I have seen in the Stockholm National Museum
a variety from Gotland with niastan unflicked wings, determined
by THOMSON sasom Ch. soréz, what kind of him character:
sera just through the water-clear, over-irritated wings. Low har®
quoted THomsons sorbz sasom varietat under Ps. Sraxini, rest-
ken afven sometimes férekommer with oflickade vingar. I THom-
SONS collection star a female (in Op. ent. p. 829 he describes a
dast this k6n) from Sk & ne and it is possible that this really
whore to Ps. fraxint, di honorna af denna art och discrepans

* F. Low, Beitr. Z. Kenntn. d. Psyll. pp. 138.

? Low has already fully demonstrated the uncertainty of THOMsoN's identification
ring of its kind with LINNEs sordi, what uncertainty becomes your greater, about it

Adagaligges that the species, as probably dr, lives on Fraxinus and not on Sordus. * Zur Systematik d. Psyll. pp. 589. 154 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881.

aro each other extremely similar; but the male from Gotland in Riksmu-
seum hdr with certainty to this latter species, which is somewhat recognizable
nes on the strangely formed genitals. I have therefore
been nédgad to quote Ci. sordc Toms. during both this and
previous art. Subfam. Il. Psyllinae F. Low. Gene. 5. PSYLLA GEOFFR., Low. 1. Ps. pruni Scop. - Tuoms., Op. ent., pp. 838, 22
(Chermes). Tuomson states the species in southern Sweden. In the National Museum
are specimens from Gotland. I took it in June (6fver-
wintered) in Djurgarden near Stockholm. It lives according to Low pa
Prunus species, from which one takes care of the goods, while the buds annu pulled
closed, they meet the Wintered Imagines, who later sit theirs
ag on the young shoots and on the lower side of the leaves. Short
then the young develop, which attach themselves to the outermost shoots.
the tips at the angles at the petioles and stipules. De annu
not 6fwintered imagines fro much brighter firgade an de,
one finds about the item. 2. Ps. costato-punctata Forstr. - Chules annulicornis
Bou., K. Vet. Akad. Handl. 1851, pp. 124—125. Chermes
quercus' THOMS., op. ent., pp. 834, 12, vix LINN. Chermes punc-
ticosta Tuoms., l. c., pp. 834, 13.7

Found so far only in Skane. It lives, according to Low, pa
Crataegus oxyacantha. Imagines Overwintering and demanding hir-
under to a great extent its color, which ar fallen with a great mingd
Psylloder. They then become reddish-brown with many wings. The
light yellow iiggen lies if the item after repeated matings isyn-
proximity to the nerves and leaf stalk. The kids breathe a sigh of relief
second skin change on the leaves and then go gradually 6f-

This synonymy is already extensively touched upon by Low in Mittheil. iib. Psyll., Pp. 570 and 571. I was in Lund on occasion to see the types of THom-
SONS functic cheese, which in addition to the color dfven would differ through
shorter frontal cones (which I have not been able to find) and can not in them
se annat iin de éfvervintrade, fully colored individuals of costato-punctata. REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER. 155

ver to the young shoots, to be spiritually gathered in greater or
smaller colonies on the front of the shoot. In the area around Vienna
imagines imagines at the end of June, * in sédra Sweden férmodligen
something later. 3. Ps. pyri Linn., Syst. nat. V., 522, 4. THoms., Op. ent. p- 835, 14 (Chermes). Of this species I have not seen more than a Swedish specimen
in the old Schénherrska collection, without a specified site. Lar-
ven lefver in the leaf axils of Pyrus communis. * A very niir-
standing art, Ps. pyricola Frst., lefver pa P. malus. 4. Ps. peregrina Frst. - Ps. crataegicola Fuor, Rh. Livl. II, 474, 12, nec Frst. Of this kind, which is not included in THomsons Ofversigt,
are specimens in the National Museum from Oland. I found it numerous
pa Dalaré nira Stockholm i September pa Crataegus oxyacan-
tha. The larvae sit alone on the lower side of the leaves, without
cotton-like secretion. * I have this species in my essay »Fran
Dalaré i September »ordtt anfért sadsom Ps. crataeg? Frsr;
the copies have since been examined by Dr. Low, as enlightened
me about my mistake. Imagines 6fwintering not. 5. Ps. mali Scumpzc, Frst. - Tuoms. Op. ent. pp. 835,
15 (Chermes). It probably occurs everywhere, where it grows and grows twice as much. I know specimens from Smiland, Ostergétland and Stockholm. It is for Gfrigt mahanda the species which occurs in us
largest mass. The larvae lack woolly secretions. - And nirstaende,
insignificantly larger species, Ps. udm, which lefver on Ulmus mon-
and which I took in south-western Finland should not be
seen in Sweden, although hitherto overlooked as a result of its resemblance to
orvansteende. 6. Ps. crataegi Frst. - F. Low, z. Biol. u. Char. d. Psyll., P. 20, Taf. I, figg. 13—14. Of this new species for Sweden I have taken some specimens
at Stockholm, which are determined by Dr. Low. It varies in hog
degree to the firgen. The 6wintered imagines emerge early on
= Sonew 1: Gp. 572:

* Low, 1. c. P. 570. SLOw, lhc..sp. 5733

156 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881.

the item to add agg. De nakna ungarne lefva stidse pi de
outermost shoot-tips of Crataegus oxyacantha. 7. Ps. nigrita Zerr., Ins. Patch. 309, 9 (Chermes) nec
Reuter, Medd. F. Fl. F. I, 74, 2, Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 836,
17 (Chermes), sec. spec. type. - Psylla Pineti ¥ uor, Rh. Livl. II, 471, 10 sec. spec. type. Chermes pulchra Zev. 1. c. 309, 19. Copies are in the Riksmuseum from the middle and sédra Lapp-
the lands, Westerbotten and Upland. I have jimfort them with
copy, communicated by Low sasom type copy of Ps. peneti
FiLor and found them in allo identical. Ocksi THomson has
modat that Ps. pineti FLor would héra to zägr7ta, »men>, sager
he, »FLor has apparently mixed up two species, sisom man
sees of his assignment on C. Led, of which he found 28 females,
but no rooster ». Fiors pineti and / edi iro, however, at all
not confused by this author and the motive which THomMson
for fdr sin Asigt, is for me incomprehensible. The actual is
that the males of Ps. dedi aro very herring; * I have fun-
nit 6fver a hundred females, but only four or five males. Through
the identification of Ps. peneti med nigrita far nu Fiors bendm-
ning happily give way to ZerrersTept's older name; the former
the name was namely ill-chosen, di, as Low has shown, *
this species is not at all on a barbed wire, but on Sa / ices undergir
its transformation and only occasionally met the fly to someone
narstiende Pinus. ZerrERSTEDT also states his species
quite right «in Sa / ice». Low, however, states that Ps. tweezers
Fror lives in Austria exclusively on Salim purpurea, but di
this shrub is not found on the premises within Sweden where the species
has been taken, dterstar annu to explore which Sa // x-species with us
serves as its food plant. The cubs sit according to Low °
either at the blade angles at the tip of the shoot or at the
gena or also on the lower side of the leaves. Imagines evolve in
Austria towards the end of May, leaving shortly afterwards its
plant and then drive around to all sorts of nearby
liga vixter (sisom t. ex. Pexus, in which they togos of Fror). * FLOR uppgifver iifven af ​​Ps. pineti only 2 gf, but 23 Q, sf att
THomson's thinking with a fixed view of hira becomes even more inexplicable.

? Zur Biol. u. Char. d. Psyll. pp. 193. * Beitr. to know. d. Psyll. pp. 136. REUTER! SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER. 157

The 6wintered imagines, on the other hand, arrive early in the spring
pai de annu completely leaf through the branches of his actual ndrings-
plant, Sadie. During the Overwintering, they become much thicker
and are there Annu not fully-fledged individuals, like ZerrersTeDT
described under the name of Chermes pulchra. Obés. The species, I in Medd. from Soc. for Fauna and Flora
Fenn. I, p. 74, 2, described from Finnish Lapland below
name of Psyl / a nigrita is not identical with ZeTrERsTEDTs (?) and Tuomson's species, of which I have seen by this later author
certain specimens. D8 I determined my avven from Lapland
harsammande art sisom nigrita, this happened mainly
due to ZerreRsTeDT's statement on the copulation tains of
the cock of Ch. pulchra, which are described »hamis incurvis, reflexis,
ut in priores (zzgrzta). Unfortunately, I have not been in favor now
that Anyo examine my species. °

8. Ps. saliceti Frst. (mec Ftor). - TxHoms., Op. ent. p.
839, 23 (Chermes). ;

Copies from Stockholm are in the National Museum; Skane, en-
lies THomson. Its development and nutrients are unknown to me. 9. Ps. salicicola Frst. - Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 839, 24
{(Chermes). Led by THomson from Skane. I have not examined
copies and omnaimner only that a narstiende, dfven in southern
western Finland on Sa / é found species is described by Low under
name of Ps. zteophila. ’De 6fvervintrade mérka honorna af
Ps. salicicola Frsv, meet early if the item is in place
pa Sake caprea and S. aurita; nigra days then hatched
the pups, which lack woolly secretions and for the penultimate skin
The painting is marked by black drawings and girls. 1o. Ps. stenolabis F. Low, Pet. nouv. ent. 1876, pp. 65. Beitr. Z, Kenntn. d. Psyll. 144, sec. spec. type. - (Chermes
annelata Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 836, 16 (Chermes) sec. spec. type. - Oh. salicis Lixn. (forte). Found in Smaland and near Stockholm. It lives on Sa-
fix caprea and S. incana. Tuomson's annelata ir according to af
self-determined specimens in the National Museum identical to this. The development history is still unknown.

? Zur Biol. n. Char. d. Psyll., Pp. 198. 158 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881. 11. Ps. parvipennis F. Low, Beitr. to know. d. Psyll.,
pp. 134, sec. sp. type. Ps. saliceti Fuor, Rh. Livl. IL, 470, 9
sec. spec. type. Chermes microptera Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 838,
21, sec. spec. type. This species is found in the National Museum from SkAne, Halland and
sédra Lappland. According to my observations made in southwestern Finland
it occurs in Sax rosmarinifolia early on
on the spring in 6fwintered specimens, which drew somewhat larger and
much darker with brownish wings. Already in the middle of June
appear new imagines of drets generation, to the color yellow. Lar-
ven ir obeskrifven. To judge from the Artal, which F. Lows and THomsons pu-
blications only, it could seem uncertain which of the names
parvipennis (Low) or mzcroptera (Tuoms.) are age and
led eger priority. Jen if one takes into account that Low
presented his dissertation for d. zool.-bot. Society in Vienna re-
then on March 7, 1877 (as indicated on the title page), under it
THOMSON in a letter dated 13 November to Dr. Low,
which I have been to see, he announces, that he was
employed with a synopsis 6fver Nordic Psylloder, si torde doubt-
yelsutan the Lowska name bora tillerkainnas priority. But af-
even if both names had been published at the same time, I would
dock gifva féretrade at Lows benimning, emedan hans beskrif-
ning not only is more characteristic, but adfven atféljd of good
figures, further because in his nature he quite rightly echoes FLors
Ps. saliceti, wnder it THomson perceived this saisom identical
with sin / utea (= / edi Fior) and finally because in the Psyl-
pilot collection, which belongs to the National Museum and which has been partially determined
by Low and (later?) also served THomson in and for his
6fversigt, afven exemplar funnos, bestémda af Low sasom far-
vipennis, of which name THomsoys is apparently only one
Greek Translation. 12. Ps. ledi Fror, Rh. Livi. I, 473, 11,.: Sec. \ Spec. type. - Chermes lutea Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 833, 11, sec. spec. type. Tuomson's type dr from Smaland. I have taken this species,
which has so far been missing in the Swedish National Museum, p & Dalar6é next to Stock-
holm and in Bohuslin (and in Ringerige in Norway). The pre-

REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER. 159

mer pi Ledum palustre, men afven nagon ging pi Vaccinium
myrtillus. Artens lefnadshistoria ar fér Ofrigt annu okdnd. 13. Ps. Hartigii Fror. - Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 838, 20
(Chermes). Ps. sylvicola Letu., Reut., Medd. Soc. F. Fi. Fenn. I, pp.-73:

Found so far only in Skane. Development and living
history unknown. I have taken it in southwestern Finland
marker. 14. Ps. elegant Zerr. Ins. Patch. 310, 11 (Chermes)
forte. THoms., Op. ent. pp. 837, 18. In the Riksmusei collection, one of THomson's is kept with this
name determined ¢ ', derived from the old Schonherrska
the collection and taken in sédra Lapland. Zerrer-

I have not seen STEDT's type. Anmirkas lives to s Yy
ZETTERSTEDT in Ins. Lapp .. only knows the female,

of which only one copy fans in his collection. About the rooster described by THomson really here

to the same species, I must therefore leave unsaid. This male, which
kens genitalstruktur nagot naérmar sig den hos Ps. parvipennis
Low, however, can not be confused with the just mentioned species,
which it also significantly 6fvergar in size, nor with
someone else familiar to me. Next to the drawing Return
over the peculiar structure of the male comparatively short and
high genital segments and miraculously formed copulation things,
according to the copy in the National Museum. - Obs. Ps. nigrita
Reur. nec Zerr. from Finnish Lapland I have not been now
in case of comparison with this species; however, it is not probable
that it is synonymous with this,

15. Ps. betulae Linn., F. Sv. 214, 697 (Chermes). Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 831, 9 (Chermes). In the National Museum there are specimens from the north, middle and
sédra Lappmarken, Angermanland and Smiland. Its_development-
history is now completely unknown. In southwestern Finland has
I found it numerous multiple times on Betula alba. The copies
frin Angermanland, taken from STAL, drew somewhat less and havva
ragged wings and pulled according to attached information collected from
Betula nana. However, Dr. Low considers them fully identical with

160 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881.

of the above kind, with which they afven Ofverensstimma in genital-
the structure. Oés. Low has' as a synonym for Ps. detulae Lixn. occupied Chermes elegantula Zery. and founded this task
on examination of specimens, determined by this name in the Riks-
museum and collected in Lapland by Boneman and ZETTERSTEDT
himself. However, it is not known whether they have been determined by
ZETTERSTEDT himself and then saw different species, such as those of the genus
Psylla, \ to be confused in collections, it is possible that this also
been the case with these. In all trades, THomsons Ps. ele-
gantula a very choice different species. - From Norway has THomson
described in Ps. detulae niarstiende art under the name of Ch. Zetterstedti, Op. ent., 832, 10, which remained unknown to me, but
which in ZETTERSTEDT's collection (according to THomson)
there name of elegantula, under the type specimen of this species
stitt bland a / zé. Mahinda has been notified of such copies
d: r Low, who does not consider them separate from detu / ae, which they
dfven, according to THomson's description, seems to come extremely close. 16. Ps. fusca Zerr., ins. Patch. 307, 2 (Chermes). Psylla
perspicillata Fuor, Rh. Livl. Il, 457, 1. Fuscermas
Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 830, 5, sec. spec. type. Copies in the National Museum from central Lapland and Sma-
country. I have taken it in Bohus linen. Its development history
ar annu okind. The nutrient plant is A / nws, according to my observations
seen in Norway and southwestern Finland, in particular A. zucana. Obs. THoMson quotes sisom synonyms under this species,
which he by mistake called fwscu / a in the place of fusca,
sival Ps. perspicillata Fuor, with which it really is identical
tisk, as afven Ps. alpina Frst, which later according to Low ’and
according to specimens, which I have been to see in his collection,
likval ar a separate species. Ps. fusca Zerv. varies greatly
to the color and the individuals described by Zerrersrepr went
bland de mérkaste (6fvervintrade?). 17. Ps. Foérsteri Fror. - Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 831, 8
(Chermes).

? Mittheil. tib. Psyll. pp. 577 and 578.
? Zur Syst. d. Psyll. pp. 602. REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER, 161

This is a common species, which from Skane to central Lapp-
land férekommer pi Alnus glutinosa, similar to the following. The young meet often, especially at the petiole angles, often
gathered several together, and was immediately separated from them by the following
species in that they lack the slight, whole-body thickening
cotton-like fungal secretions, which mark out these. Sina excrement
only those with them in the form of a hyit in the tip thicker string,
which, after reaching a certain length, is interrupted and then
ater is formed Anyo. In contrast to the young of other Psy // a species
they also drew very lively and flee, in which they were worried, with great speed-
het nedfér grenarne, wherein they always lépa pa den fér askadaren
frainviinda side of these *. 18. Ps. alni Linn., F. Sy. Oath. I, 214, 698 (Chermes). Zert., Ins. Lapp., 309, 8 (Chermes). Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 831
(Chermes). One from Skane to Lapland on Alnus glutinosa and in-
cana often in large mass emerging species, the development of
history carefully depicted as early as 1773 ° by DE GEER in his
Mem. for serv. 4 hist. des Insectes and depicted in Tab. X,
figg. 8 — z20. Those with a thick, white, woolly hair covered with larvae
yerna dro kinda of a hvar, who looked around in nature. TG; EES) HUXt SLINN :, 9.) Natebid, XibIy LoPi i, 738)
7 (Chermes). Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 831, 6 (Chermes). This species is found in Sweden only in Skane. Its
development history is already 1737 fully described by Réav-
mur, Mem. III, pp. 351—362, and the various stages depicted
Tab. XXIX, figg. 1—16. 20. Ps. obliqua THoms., Op. ent. pp. 838, 19. Found at Skalstugan in Jimtland. THomson for nothing
about, the species' habitat. - I have not seen any specimens of
the same. It is possible that it is identical to mine (not Zet-
TERSTEDTS) Ps. nigrita and Medd. F. Fl. Fenn. I, pp. 74. * Low, Zur Biol. u. Char. d. Psyll. pp. 201 and 202.

? Low includes Zur Biol in his dissertation. n. Char. d. Psyll. pp. 202
after the German edition of Géze 1780, but the French original was re-
and 1773. 162 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881. Gene. 6. ARYTAENA Frst., Scort. 1. A. genistae Larr. - Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 828, 1
(Chermes). So far found in Sweden only in Skane. It lives on
Sarrothamnus scoparius and Ulex europaeus. De forut obe-
kanta the cubs (nymphs) were recently described by Scorr, ’but
the species' life cycle in its entirety remains to be explored more closely. Subfam. IV. Triozinae Low. Gene. 7. TRIOZA FRrst. 1. Tr. Walkeri Frst. - Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 824, 1
(Trioza subg. Trichopsylla). This beautiful species dr in Sweden found only in Skane,
der den lefver p & Rhamnus. THomson does not disclose
ken species, but according to FLor and Low it lives on RA. cathartica. The fr anmiarkningsvard for the malformations of the leaves, the
causes. For a start (in the spring) this shows
narrowly rolled up at the edge, but later in the summer
the malformation its full development and appears d & sdsom one
thick, kéttig, somewhat hard, taken closed roll, in which inner tail
only a few (hdégst 5 or 6) young live, which (in Austria in July)
turns into imagines. *

2. Tr. galii Frst. - Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 824, 2. THOMSON states this species as not uncommon in sédra Sweden
rich. The National Museum contains specimens from Smaland. I have
taken the same at Warmdén near Stockholm on Gakum palustre,
on what growth I have found it even more frequent in south-western Finland
country. Its life history is 6frigt unknown. 3. Tr. chenopodii Reur., Medd. Soc. F. Fl. Fenn, I,
76, 4. j

This is Sweden's new species, which I first discovered in the south.
western Finland, I found in September 1880 at Dalaré in saval
imagines, as nymphs, which lived on Chenopodium. . Once
I also took some imagines at Atriplex.

' Ent. Monthl. Mag. XVII (1880), pp. 132 and 133.

? Low, Zur Biol. u. Char. d. Psyll. pp. 209 and 210. REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER. 163

Of the hitherto unknown, pale yellow, usually brown-girl nymph
announced next to standing drawing, in which 4 in dn stronger
magnification shows the fine and short
pins, which serve all aspects of the body
dorinder; c produces the natural
the size. 4. Tr. remota Frsv. sec. spec. - Tr. dryobia Fuor, Tuoms., op. ent. pp. 825, 4. Led by THomson from Skane. I found it in September, 1880,
ligen talrik pa Quercus robur pi Da-
Jaré nara Stockholm. These copies
were all yellow, while THomson
on the other hand (after Gfvintrade specimens?) describes the species as black. I have
however, seen THoMSONS types, which
are fully identical with the species taken on Dalaré, which
also by Dr. Low examined and found to be Zr. remota. Are-
tens lefnadshistoria annu icke kand. 5. Tr. Saundersii Mrever-Dir. - Jr. acutipennis Fior,
Rh. Livl. Il, 516, 12, nec Chermes id. Zerr., THOMs. This species is celebrated in the Riksmuseum by specimens from Sma-
country and Stockholm. I have found it in southwestern Finland
among Carices pA karrangar. Its livelihood is for Ofrigt annu
okandt. It sometimes winters on Adzes. Obs. Di Txomson, which set ZerrersrepTs type copy,
i sin Ofversigt af Skandinaviens Chermes-arter p. 826 anfor att
Fiors Jr. femoralis, which according to specimens is completely identical
with Forsrers, dr synonymous with Zerrersrepts Chermes acuti-
pennts and thus another species 4n Fors of this name, must
this species is called 77. Saundersti Mryver-Dtr, which, sisom
Scorr (Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876, p. 506) and F. Low (Verh. sole. cure. Ges. Vienna 1877 p. 140) ddagalagt, is identical with
Fiors Jy. acutipennis. Since Ftor clearly points out the differences
between the acufzpennzs and the femoralis, one can not
assume that THomson would have confused these species. A sideways
taking is contradicted even by THomson's description. Tyvarr was

 

164 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881.

I do not happen to see ZerrERsTEepT's types in Lund itself. - Ofvan-
standing species are not included in THomson's Overview. 6. Tr acutipennis Zerr., Ins, Lapp. 308, 5 (Chermes)
Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 826, 5. Z ». femoralis Frst, For, Rh. Life]. II, 518, 13, sec. spec. type. Led by THomson from northern and central Sweden
funnel. The National Museum contains specimens from Angermanland, Stock-
holm, Smaland and Gotland. Its development history is annu
uncharted. - I have always taken it in southwestern Finland
damp dngar, but FLor states about his Zr. femoralis that it
derjimte antriffas pi Adzes och Zerrersrepr anfor om Ch. acutipennis that it occurs «in Pinetis», where it
gen Overwinters. - This species differs from the previous
heat through another form on the wings and various formed genitalia. 7. Tr. striola FLor. - Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 826, 6. Anfores af THOMSON sisom templigen siillsynt sammen med
previous. The specimens in the Riksmuseum harstamma frin Angerman-
country and central Lapland. I found it on Dalaré niéira Stock-
holm in Sept., di several individuals fnnu were completely newly developed. These were taken on Salix caprea, on which I also found the species
in southwestern Finland. Imagines 6fwintering and férandra harunder
significantly its color. The pairing takes place around the item, after which ho-
nan lies its resentments in the harludden of the lower side of the young leaves,
on which they ofvantill with temporal linga, whites have téitt be-
tick the cubs stay dnda until they are transformed into imagines. Since they are much like bravely hiding in the fluff of the leaves and
in addition, protected by their this similar hfrighet, they pulled in
generality difficult to detect. * Wintering specimens are met
according to FLor om hést and var pa Aédzes. 8. Tr. salicivora Reut., Medd. Soc. F. Fl. Fenn. I, 75, ° 3. Copies of this new species to Sweden are kept in the National Museum,
taken by SrAv in Angermanland. I have wintered imagines
found in southwestern Finland on Sadzx species. For the rest of the life
history annu okind. 9. Tr. albiventris Frst. - For, Rh. Livl. Il, 503, 6. Tr. hypoleuca Tuoms., Op. ent. 828, 11, sec. spec. type. * Léw, Mittheil. tib. Psyll. pp. 580. REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER. 165

Of this species I have on Dalaré on Sal’x (which species
have I unfortunately not noted) in September taken a female copy,
for which determination I am in contact with Dr. Low in Vienna,
In his collection I was even in the case of seeing an individual, who-
ken seemed perfectly 6fverensstimma with that of me in Lund
examined the type copy of THomsons Ps. hypoleuca (afven fun-
nen by Sa / x). According to Dr. Low ', this species lives in Austria
Salix alba, purpurea and Russeliana and occur sisom
larva in single specimens pi saval Gfre as the lower side of bla-
trained to imago first in August and September and 6f-
yintintrar sdsom sadan. Mitt pa Dalaré in early September
found specimens also seem to have just been clicked out (exactly colored). 10. Tr. nigricornis Frst. - Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 826, 7. Found by Tomson near Lund. Life history unknown. Occurs according to Fror on dry rock formations. 11. Tr. urticae Linn., F. Sv. Oath. I, 216, 7o2 (Cher-
mes). Zevy., Ins. Patch. 308, 4 (Chermes). Tuoms., Op. ent. pa d27,08-

A 6fver all of Sweden breathes up in Lapland on nettles all-
male species, which depending on age vary in color. Overwintering
sisom image. For its development history has already pE GEER
reported in their Mém. for serv. & Vhist. your s. III, p. 1, and af-
formed the different stages of development in Table IX, figg. 17—26 samt
X, figg. 1 and 2. 12. Tr. abdominalis Fior, Rh. Livl. I, 502, 5. This for Sweden new species, which Dr. Low kindly
examined and determined at me, appeared numerous pa

Dalaré in the beginning of September 1880 saval sisom]
imagines as even larvae on a dry with sight 4
Chrysanthemum grown hardvallsiing. Osakert ZN
ar dock whether its niringsplanta ar némnda

growth. D & annu no figure gifvits of the cock fae

strangely formed genitals and da Fior not
at all described the female, I have left next to it a drawing
these. 13. Tr. viridula Zerr., ins. Patch. 309, 7 (Chermes). Txoms., Op. ent. pp. 827, 9. ~ _! Mittheil. ub. Psylloden p. 582. 166 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 188r. Found in Lapland and Angermanland and near Stockholm. I took a copy of Dalar6é in September among pigs on one
ang. Even in southwestern Finland, I have found it during the
maren pa dngar, men early on varen trdaffas Ofvervintrade ima-
gines p & Adzes. The life story and the real nutrition plan
tan okdnda. 14. Tr. obliqua Tuoms., Op. ent. pp. 825, 3. This species, which according to Dr. Low, who examined an
plar, determined by THomson, nothing else is known to him
species, found at Stockholm and on Gotland and according to
Tuomson dfven in Skine, but its biology is still perfect
unfamiliar. 15. Tr. cerastii H. Low, Stett. Ent. Zeit., 1847, p. 344,
Taf. I, figg. 1-5 (Psyl / a). F. Low, Mittheil. ib. Psyll. pp. 589,
Taf. XV, figg. 26—28. Of this since Linnaeus' time (see below) sisom Swedish not
marked species are specimens in the National Museum frin Gotland and
Smaland. It lives on Cerastium triviale (= vulgatnm L.
partim) and C. semidecandrum (= viscosum L., partim), on which
it causes peculiar deformations, consisting in
the ternodes are extraordinarily shortened, the leaves are more widespread
or smaller and become shell-shaped or bat-shaped and flower-
morna eventually become gréna or Atminstone Aterhallas in its ut-
winding. Through this shortening of the internodes they accumulate
malformed leaves and flowers to a greater or lesser extent
tika ball or heads or irregular masses, in which
occasionally the larvae reside. Their body edge is surrounded
of a radiance of sndhvita tradar, which is gradually interrupted
and anyo is formed, whereby between the deformed blades
white flocks of ninth secretions, under which the larvae lie
gémda. Linnaeus already has the edge of this species, for in Faun. Sv. he mentions under No. 1,003 a species of Chermes, which he
lar Ch. cerastii, without, however, describing the same, and if
which he announces: »Haditat in Cerastio viscoso monstroso
Solis ventricoso-inflexis in capitulum. »*

16. Tr. aegopodii F. Low, Mittheil. iib. Psyll. p. 585,
Tate SX whe, 2: 3. ~ _? Low, Mittheil. iib. Psyll. pp. 589. REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER. 167

This species, which is not occupied by THomson, has been found at
Stockholm af Boneman och forf. It lives according to Low * on Ae-
gopodium podagraria. Imagines 6fwintering and mating about the item. The female usually lays her eggs at night on the lower side of them
young, not yet fully developed leaves. On every quiet, there
she laid a grudge, already during the same night a kndllik arises
swelling on the 6th side of the leaf disc, followed by a counter-
corresponding depth on the lower. Da sddana malformations
numerous occur on a leaf, this bends wrinkled in and
down and visible above through those with each other confluent
sick-knees swollen. The larvae live in wonder
side of the leaf, but those of them which are attacked by parasites, draw
mostly back to the lower part of the petiole or to
stalks. *

17. Tr. proxima FLor, THoms., Op. ent. 827, 10. The find of Boneman near Stockholm, according to the
provided information on Funiperus. According to Low, * which sasom sy-
anonymous to this species anfor Mryer-Durs Zr. junipert, can
its occurrence on one, however, be only accidental, as its
are often found in large numbers on the lower leaves of the HHéera-
ctum-arter, fororsakande malbildningar pa bladen af ​​HZ. pzlosella
and pratense; * probably it is 6fwintered individuals, which if
will occur on one, in the same way as during this season
on the spruce, 6 wintered specimens of Apha-
lara exilis, A. affinis, A. calthae, Trioza viridula, Tr. femo-
ralis, m. fl. species, whose nutrients, however, are somewhat integral
another growth. Sésom species, whose life and development history annu
either not at all or only incompletely known, summarized
Finally, we consider the following observations:

Aphalara exiles W. and M. Lefver by Rumex acetosella;
previous stages of development undescribed. ‘Lc. pp. 584. Low, 1. c. Pp. 584 0. 585. Beitr. z. Kenntn. d. Psyll. pp. 142. * Léw, Mittheil. tb. Psyll. pp. 583. Entomol. Tidskr. Bd. 1, Arg. 2, H. 3 (1881). ¥ 2

2

168 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881. A, affinis Zert., Biology obekant. A. Calthae Liyn., Earlier stages undescribed; Polygonum,
Caltha and Rumex acetosella bora are examined separately. A. nervosa Frsr., Biologi okand. A, picta Zerr. The development of Chrysanthemum is unknown. A. artemisiae Frsv. pi Artemisia; earlier stages
written. A. nebulosa Zerr. pa Epilobium, but the history of development
unfamiliar. Psyllopsis discrepans Fuor, biologi okand. Psylla saliceti Frst. pi Satices; previous stages undescribed. Ps. stenolabis Low pi Salix caprea and incana sisom
previous. Ps. parvipennis Vow pa Salix rosmarinifolia, \ ikaledes. Ps, Ledi Fuor pa Ledum och Myrtillus nigra, afvensa. Ps, Hartigii Fior; biology and nutrients unknown. Ps. elegantula, Zevr., THoms., weaned. Ps. betulae Linn. pa Betula alba and nana; previously published
developmental stages unknown. Ps. fusca Zevv. pai Alnus; sisom previous. Ps. obfiqua Tuoms., biology perfectly okind. Arytaena genistae arr. pai Sarothamnus and Ulex. Nym-
described, but the life cycle has not yet been fully investigated. Trioza galit Frsv. pi Galium palustre (verum and uligt-
nosum); biology for 6frigt unknown. Tr. chenopodii Reur. in Chenopodium and Atriplex; nym-
ferna bekanta, men biologi for Gfrigt obekant. Tr. remota Ersv. pi Quercus robur; earlier stages
written. Tr. Saundersi Mey..Dtr and Tr. acutipennis Zerv. ; biology
unfamiliar. Tr. salicivora Revur. pai Salices; earlier stages unknown. Tr. albiventris Frsr. pi Salices; but the species with us does not
indicated. Tr. nigricornis Frst. ; biology unknown. Tr. abdominalis Fuor. Nymphs described, but nutritional
plant and biology unknown. REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER. 169

Tr. viridula Zevr. and Tr. Tuoms obféqua. ; biology full-
comically unknown. Tr. proxima Fuor pi Hieracium pilosella and pratense;
previous stages undescribed. Finally, the following list 6 of the species,
nade after their niringsplanter, di these dro acquaintances. I. Pa tree and tree-like shrubs. ACER. Rhinocola aceris Laxn, by A. platanoides. ALNUS,

Psylla fusca Zevr. pa-A. incana and glutinosa; Ps, For-
steri Fior by A. glutinosa; Ps. Admi Linn. pa A. incana och
glutinosa. BETULA. Psylla betulae Linn. pa B. alba and nana. Buxus. Psylla buxi Linn. CRATAEGUS. Psylla costato-punctata Frsv., Peregrina Frst and crataegi
Frst. by C. oxyacantha. FRAXINUS. Psyllopsis fraxinicola Frsr. and Ps. fraxint Lixn., san-
nolikt afven Ps. Fiore descriptions by Fr. excelsior. PRUNUS. Psylla pruni Scov. sirdeles pa P. spinosa. Pyrus. Psylla pyri Linn. pi P. communis and Ps. malt Scum. by P. malus. Quercus. Rhinocola aceris Linn. and Trioza remota Frsv. pa Qu. robur. RHAMNUS. f

Trioza Walkeri Frsv. by Rh. cathartica, causing bile
formations. SALIX. Psylla nigrita Zerr. (Salix-arten annu icke angifven), Ps. saliceti Frsv (likasa), Ps. salictcola Frsr. pa S. caprea och

170 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881.

aurita; Ps. stenolabis Low on S. caprea and incana; Ps. couple-
vipennis Low by S. rosmarinifolia; Zrioza striola Fuor pa S.
caprea; Tr. salicivora Reur., Tr. albiventris Frsv. (Salix species
not specified). Sorsus. Psylla mali Scum. by S. aucuparia. ULmus. Rhinocola aceris Linn. pi U. montana. Il. On Grter and Grtartade shrubs. ACHILLEA. Aphalara nervosa Frsv. by A. millefolium. AEGOPODIUM. in
Trioza aegopodi Low, causing bile formation on Ae. podagraria. ARTEMISIA,
Aphalara artemisiae Frsv. pa A. absinthium and A, cam-
pestris. ATRIPLEX. Trioza Chenopodit Reur. CALLUNA. Rhinocola ericae Curv. CaLTHA,
Aphalara calthae Laxn. about the item. CERASTIUM. Trioza Cerastii H. Low, causative malformations pa
C, trivial and semidecandrum. CHENOPODIUM. Trioza chenopodii Rev. CHRYSANTHEMUM. Aphalara picta Zevr. by Chr. leucanthemum. EPILoOBiuM. Aphalara nebulosa Zevr. by E. angustifolium. GaLiuM. Trioza galii ¥ rsr. pa G. palustre, uliginosum and verum. HIgRACIUM. Trioza proxima Fuor, malforming leaves of H. pilosella

and pratense. REUTER: SWEDEN'S PSYLLODER. Ey. Juncus. Livia juncorum, causing deformities of the flower head
vuden, sirdeles pa J. conglomeratus. Lrepum. Psylla ledi Fior pa L. palustre. MyrtiLuuvs. Psylla ledi Furor by M. nigra. POLYGONUM. Aphalara calthae Laixn. on P. hydropiper and aviculare. RuMEx. Aphalara exilis W. et M. and A. calthae Linn. by R.
acetosella. SAROTHAMNUS. Arytaena genistae Late. pi S. scoparius. ULEXx. Arytaena genistae LArR. by U. europaea. Urtica. Trioza urticae Linn. pa U. urens and dioica. Occasionally (6fwintering) occur on.
Abies and Pinus. Aphalara exilis W. et M., A. affinis Zurr., A. calthae
Liny., Psylla mali Scum., Ps. nigrita Zery., Trioza Saunderst
Mevy.-Dtr. Zr. acutipennis Zery., tr. striola For, Tr. virt-
dula Zerr. and pa

JUNIPERUS. Trioza proxima Fuor. It should also be noted that leaf deformations of Zyzoza species
caused in addition to already supplying plants (Rhamnus, Aegopo-
dium, Cerastium, Hieractum) further afven pa foljande ocksa
species belonging to the Swedish flora, which are therefore taken into account,
da de mahanda herbergera Psylloder, som annu icke iakttagits
with us: Lactuca muraiis (Trioza flavipennis Frst. ), Taraxacum
officinale (Tr. dispar Low), Rhamnus cathartica (Tr. rhamni
Schrk), Berberis vulgaris (sp. ign. ), Chrysanthemum leucanthe-
mum (Tr. chrysanthemia Low, already taken by me in sédra Fin-
land, Uusimaa), and Leontodon hastilis (sp. ign.). *

? Low, Mittheil. tb. Psyll. pp. 583 and 584. 172 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1881. As far as the collection of Psylloder is concerned, this ~
andamilsenligast in small glass tubes, observing that species from
different plants are not brought together and that the changing plant, di it
observed, recorded for each species. The animals prefer to die
by chloroform, in which case the wings and legs usually separate
themselves are excluded, as well as those characteristic of the species
the genital appendages, which, however, are sardeles in the genus Z7zoza often
need further preparation, a thing which one should not do
summa att géra pi nyss dédade, annu mjuka exemplar. Insect
The sheets are either glued with rubber on small paper sheets.
strips, however, so that the genitals become easily accessible to
dersäkning, or also appeared on in myrtle pieces embedded silver-
vertrad. Insect needles are too coarse and disrupt the insect a bit
through, ergbildning. ENTOMOLOGICAL
JOURNAL

pA MEASURES OF

ENTOMOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION IN STOCKHOLM

PUBLISHED
JACOB SPANGBERG

SECOND ARGANGEN

1881

STOCKHOLM
PRINTED IN THE CENTRAL PRINTING COUNTRY
1881