SMALL FAUNA

ENTOMOLOGICAL

FROM CANADA

AND PARTICULARLY FROM T.A PROVINCE OF QUEBEC

FLIGHT. IT

FIFTH ORDER

 
 

THE HEMIPTERA

BY

 
   

FATHER L. PROVANCHER

    
 

addemia, Member
Canadian ist,

 
   

    

TYPOGRAPHY BY C. DARVEAU
oY, me of the Mountain,

LIGRARY

 

    

THE CANADIAN NATURALIST

STERNORHYNKS. Bee born neither from the forehead nor from the chin as in the
previous divisions, but from the sternum, from the lower part
of the chest, which often extends to the inter-hip
mediators,

G.. ranks them among the Homoptera with regard to the consis-
tance of their wings, depending on the venation and the number of these
wings with the mode of reproduction could justify making them
a special Division, The veins of these wings are rare-
ment bifurcated and end at the very edge of the Vaile. The
females are often flightless and the males, without a rostrum,
only have two wings. The tarsi are & one or two articles. These insects are all very small in size, and often harm
wind to the rains as much by their innumerable stings as by
their agglomeration on the young shoots which they smother in
clogging their pores. We divide them into two tribes, the Phythoptires, of which
both sexes are always capable of locomotion and
Phytathelges whose flightless females attach themselves to the bark of
plants. Fam, XXUI.—PSYLLIDES. Psyllid. Head broad, short, bilobed or bifid; protruding eyes, very
protruding, overflowing strongly the prothorax. long antennae,
very slender, inserted under the eyes. Thorax divided into three
sections by transverse furrows; short crest,

Ample, transparent elytra, folded over the roof in the re-

pos, rarely spotted with brown, their three veins surrender
directly to the outer edge. Tarsi of two articles. ns them
higher
inter-

sonsis-
death
n do
_ rare-

The
rostrum,
tickles,
it sou-
do not
2nt in

2s of which
and the
ree des

ix, very
ointments,
in three

1s the re-
render

XXI[—JASSIDES 303

Ordinary legs, neither tucked, ui disproportionate in
their length; however these insects are easily sickened. The Psyllides, by general form of their bodies, are rap=
close to the Cicadas; like the latter also they have
distinct metamorphoses, the count ts larva forms all-a-
makes different from perfect Vinseets evlle, Los? have too
a highly developed oviduete. These tiny insects live on different plants including
they pump the sweat,

Three genera in our fauna. Antennae approximately the length of the body, the
basal articles Slightly thicker than the
lairs 5
Head is square forward, the anterior edge is
blely indented...-...--.- «1, Psynua. Teto split forward, forming on each side
a conical projection....2s-+eseeeeeeeee 2 Dimavmtta,
Antennae much shorter than body,
2 basal articles returned, the last clo
terminated by 2 bristles; hollow head above,
& barely twisted forward oe...seeeeeeee eee

1. Gen. Psytts. Psyllu, Geoffroy. (Do psylla, chip; referring to their ability to jump)

Toe short, transverse, Slightly indented forward,

with a line sunk in the middle, and a depression in each
side Eyes large, very protruding. Ocellus 3 of which 2 sitnds on
prominences, near the eyes, and lo 3¢ forward in the sample.
err of the head. Filiform autenna, the length of the body
& roughly, inserted in front of the eyes, on the forehead, has articles
cylindrical, the first two shorter and thicker than

41—Dfare, 1990,

 

304 THE CANADIAN NATURALIST

Jes others, the 3rd longest, the last short with 2 small
bristles at the end. Bee very short, reaching up from the sternum,
3 urticles, thorax domed above, very short pothorax,
Hyaline elytra, a slightly firmer consistency than the
wings, with three longitudinal ribs, of which the intermediate
forked at the end forms a triunglar cell an sum-

puts de Vaile. Conical abdomen, A very developed tariff
within 2. Clean vattes 4 skip; tarsi of 2 articles, the
last longest. These small insects have not yet been studied very much.
in America, so that their species, probably very
numerous, are yet to be described. Fitch named some
some, but his descriptions are so imprecise that one
remains uncertain about their application. The psyllids, although devoid of those cornicles which the
Aphids bear on their abdomen, however exude like
them a snerate liquor, which adheres to the flakes and makes them
roll and often perish by clogging their pores,

There is no one who after walking through our forests
did not notice on the spruces and spines these tufts of
twigs that our people call devil's balwis. According to
Geoffroi, these abnormal productions are due to 4 des Peylles. The female, it seems, pierces the epidermis of the branch with her auger.
to deposit its eggs there:, the stve deviated from its course by this
pitted—and probably vitiated also by a foreign liquid—
escapes in an excrescence or swelling which, in connection with
pursue axis dn raincau, spreads in weak twigs
and very numerous, originating from this exercise, to form
these balls, these devil's brooms,

Two species encountered. Grass green.......: . recticeps, n. sp.
. quadrilineata. um,
ourt. and the
inire
som-
ppee

" the

little

very
what. y'on

ie the
mime
don't-

forests
are from
after
ylles,
reed

able
elm

XXIT—JASSIDES

1 Psylla a tete-drolte, Psyl/a recticeps, n. sp. Long. .12 pee. Green, often tinted with junnf're. Heat
short, trinsversal, & barely notched year mid year, the vertex with
a line sunk in the year milian starting from ['échanerare, ct a dé
pressure each summer; the reddish eyespots, shiny, 2 on
an elevation was from the posterior border of the head,
and the Be in Péchanernre from the front, Gray eyes on bru. nfitres, large, siillants, mid year of the sides of the head, the donkeys
filiform tennae, slightly hairy, the 2 basilar articles
edly, the 20 longer than the previous one, the terminal
slightly thickened ot ending by 2 small bristles of unequal length
guenr, green & the base and branes in the rest, Tue bee strong, of
3 articles, usually straightened vertically, article ends
black nal. Conrt prothorax, its anterior and posterior edges
rights, bearing snr the sides two small cetexes separated by a
furrow; lo mesothorax large, t se toward its midline by a
sitlon; Méeusson swollen, Biytres transparent, quite concise
aunts, sometimes washed with jaundice. With raised ribs, the
midline forming an acute aungic ceilulo at the apex, enlarged
towards In base and rubattnes in roof. Underparts and concolorous legs,
the abdominal segments edged with redness at the top, the
farses A terminal article bran, — Common in grasses, —
CapRonge, Islands of In Madeleine, ote. Perhaps this species is included in those de-
written by Fitch, however we were able to recognize it by

his descriptions. 2, Quadrilineolated psyllid. Psyllu quadrilineata, Fitch,
—Senate, 30, 64. Long, .12 pee. Orange-yellow, variegated with black below;

the paler prothorax, the posterior part of the mesothorax par-

geo longitudinally on 4 small furrows; the elytra lexere-

ment yellowish, the ribs brownish & the extremity. Below,

abdomen and chest, black, vablomen somethin tucked black
also we on it. Legs of the color of the body.—CapRouge,

 

306 THE CANADIAN NATURALIST

Less common than the previous one. With hesitation we
let us assign him the name of Yosptee de Fitch,

‘Very close to Ja Ps, crutegi, Shrank,

2. Gen, Dinaruiz, Dirvuphia, Latr. (From ruyhé, suture, seam)

Same characters qne in the previous genus with the
following exceptions:

The head is long split forward, and each division
sion is rounded in conical projection, Pocelle anterior is located
At the origin of this division, completely hyaline elytra. The abdomen is terminated internally by long appendages
whose 2 lower ones are in the form of pincers, and in the ? the
dry with its valves and almost as long as the body,
fat, straight or slightly raised; the metathorax, below
scus of the posterior hips, also ends in 2 projections
tapered joints. The conical projections of the head allow to distinguish
guer 4 first sight, these insects precedents. Is the
also found on plants in grassy and damp places,

Two species encountered,

Uniform green color. 1, 4-cornis, n. sp. Varied color of blood red and black... 2. sanguinea, n. sp. 1. Diraphie has 4-horns. Diraphia 4-cornis, n. sp. Long. .20 pee. Grass green more or less clear with tint
Worange in some places. The cephalic bones with the
legs and antennae slightly hairy. The green antennae a
Ja base, yellowish in the rest with the end of the brane articles,
almost as long as the body, The bee strong, erect, quite
short, with the black end, The anterior part of the meso-
thorax with its lateral lobes, orange more ov less dark
Elytra perfectly hyuline, the veins strong and raised. we are

see them

1st division
st situd
yalines,
sales
the 9 the
@ body,
diced-
project-

2 distinct
Is the
numidians,

11. Sp. 2a, n. 8p. not. sp. rec tint
with the
8 green
the branes,
se, ASe%
meso-
ins,
raised. XXU—JASSIDES 307

Metathorax forming an dea of ​​the posterior hips by two
projections which walleate in conical points. Abdomen in

the QA tarid long and strong, reddish, brandtre At the end,
duns the J terminated by appendages of which the 2 lower ones are
shaped like pincers—CapRonge, Ottawa, Common. 2. Blood-colored diarrhoea. Diruphiusunguincea, u, sp-

Long. .13 pee. Yellow bean more or less washed flea-
move of blood red and variegated black, The three lobes of the meso-
red chest: ; Vend of the beak, an anneawa every seg-
ment abdominalx, with the spines of the tarsals, black, The head
yellow washed only ronge sung above, pile below,
Elytra hyaline, the very long and triangular erminal cell
very sharp. Abdomen shiny, with alternating red and black bands,
the long, pointed, conical tarid.—Cap Rouge. Very distinct from the preceding in its coloration. 3. Gen. Livin, Livia. Tate concave, squared, slightly indented in front. Antennae short, & barely as long as the thorax, strong,
the 2 basilar articles swollen, the others very small, not very
tincts, the terminal reuflé, terminated by 2 small bristles. Eyes
non-protruding, triaugular, eyespots uuls, darker elytra
than in the preceding genera, & veins as prominent and
very often grannies, .For the rest as in the pre-
assignees. Two species encountered. Yellowed elytra ns distinct bands.... 1. saltatrix, n. sp. Brown elytra, 22 keyed bands.....-++++. difasciata, n.sp. 1. Jumping Livia, Liviu saltatria, n. sp. Long, “11 peo. Year yellow. Iddly ferruginenx, the head
finely granulated, the antennae white in the middle with the 2
swollen and black terminal articles. Barely hyalive Blytves,
Raised veins, coriuess intervals, Black eyes. 308 THE CANADIAN NATURALIST

Below with the black breast, sometimes the buttocks too
black-—CapRonge. Var. Sometimes the color of the head and thorax is red
blood. Is it the Pinsect that Harris brought back & the Psylla pyri,
Linnaeus, from Emioje? We Vignoron:. Packard after examining
undermined enrop ers types, said Harris had committed

erred, and that the inscest which he had thus called ns was yas
Linnean insect; but then what is i] 2 Waiting for the
question be 1églév, we do j o:ter an netre wn nom dis-
tinct, except to rectify if we come to notice an error,

We see no difference from L. juncorwm, Latr,
d@’FEurope, only in the form of the 2nd article of the antennas, in
the juncorum this 2nd article is double the first in length
and fusiform, while in ours it is slightly longer
than the first and cylindrical. 2, Livia has-2-bands. Livia bifasciata, n. sp. Long. .12 pee. Of a ferrugineus brown, with the yens and los
2 terminal articles of the black antennae, The bladed antennae
middle, more or less dark brown elytra with a white band
oblique in front of the end and an antrum At the base extending
on the clavus; the grained veins of black dots in cha-
pelets, Dessons ferruginenx variegated black, black thighs.—
CapRonge. It is probably this species who is Pastor of the brooms-
of the devil, because it is encountered more frequently in children's
quite dry rights. family XXIV — APHIDE! Aphid. Transversal head, quite strong, sometimes very strong,

Null ocelli, one in the shade of 3 when they exist,

Antennae varying from 7 to three articles, generally also
long as I body.