The Victoria Mistory of the
Counties of England

EDITED BY H. ARTHUR DOUBLEDAY

A HISTORY OF
NORFOLK

VOLUME I

THE

VICTORIA HISTORY

OF THE COUNTIES
OF ENGLAND
NORFOLK

 

DAWSON
FOR
THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
INSTITUTE OF HISTORICAL RESEARCH

Published by
Archibald Constable & Company Limited
in 1901

Reprinted for the University of London
Institute of Historical Research
by
William Dawson & Sons Ltd
Cannon House
Folkestone, Kent, England
1975

ISBN: 0 7129 0645 2

Originally printed in Great Britain by
Butler & Tanner of Frome and London
Reprinted in Belgium by Jos Adam, Brussels

INSCRIBED
TO THE MEMORY OF
HER LATE MAJESTY

QUEEN VICTORIA

WHO IN HER LIFETIME GRACIOUSLY
GAVE THE TITLE TO
AND ACCEPTED THE
DEDICATION OF
THIS HISTORY

THE ADVISORY COUNCIL
OF THE VICTORIA HISTORY

His Grace Tue Duxe of Devonsnine, K.G. Siz Henry Maxwett-Lyre, K.C.B., M.A., F.S.A.,
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge aot
His Grace Tne Duxe or Rutzan, K.G. Keeper of the Public Records
His Grace Tue Duxe oF Porttano Cot. Six J. Farquiarsox, K.C.B. INGE ecineiDerlorsAncvoun KT Sir Jos. Hooker, G.C.S.1., M.D., D.C.L., F.R.S.,
Tue Most Hon. Tue Marquess of Satispury, ae
G. Six Arcuipato Geixit, LL.D. F.R.S., Ftc. ee aac SA are Rev. J. Cuantes Cox, LL.D. F.S.A., etc. Tue eo Tur Bart or Rosteerr, KGs 1 Cue dug, MA, FSA, ere

Director of the National Portrait Gallery
Tur Rr. Hox. Tue Ear or Covenray '
President of the Royal Agricultural Society Dr. Arsert L. G. Gunter, F.RS. President the Linnean Societ
Tue Rr. Hon. Tue Viscount Ditton exident of the Linnean Sciey

President of the Society of Antiquaries Cor. Duncan A. Jonnston
irector General of the Inance Surve)
Tue Rr. Hon. Tne Lorp Acton Director General of the Ordnance Suroay
Regius Professor of Modern History, Cambridge Pror. E. Ray Lankester, M.A., F.R.S., etc. Tur Rr. Hox. Tue Lop Lister Director of the Nat. Hist, Museum, South Kensington
President of the Royal Society Recinatp L. Pooxe, Ese., M.A. Sir Freverick Pottock, Bart., LL.D., F.S.A., University Lecturer in Diplomatic, Oxford
ETC. F. York Powe, Esq, M.A., F.S.A., ec. Corpus Professor of Jurisprudence, Oxford Regius Professor of Modern History, Oxford

Six Epwao Mave THomesox, K.C.B, D.C.L, J, Horace Rouxp, Ese., M.A. LL.D., F.S.A., etc. Director of the British Museum Warter Rye, Esq. Sir Crements R. Marxuam, K.C.B., F.R.S.,F.S.A. W. H. St. Joun Hope, Ese., M.A. President of the Royal Geographical Society Assistant Secretary of the Society of Antiquaries

General Editor—H. Artuur Douptepay

 

GENERAL ADVERTISEMENT

Tue Vicrorta Hisrory of the Counties of England is a National Survey showing
the condition of the country at the present day, and tracing the domestic history of the
English Counties back to the earliest times. Rich as every County of England is in materials for local history, there has hitherto been
no attempt made to bring all these materials together into a coherent form. There are,
indeed, histories of English Counties; but many of them—and these the best—are exceed-
ingly rare and costly ; others are very imperfect ; all are out of date. Tue Vicroria Hisrory will trace, county by county, the story of England’s growth
from its prehistoric condition, through the barbarous age, the settlement of alien peoples, and
the gradual welding of many races into a nation which is now the greatest on the globe. All
the phases of ecclesiastical history ; the changes in land tenure ; the records of historic and
local families ; the history of the social life and sports of the villages and towns ; the develop-
ment of art, science, manufactures and industries—all these factors, which tell of the progress
of England from primitive beginnings to large and successful empire, will find a place in the
work and their treatment be entrusted to those who have made a special study of them. Many archeological, historical and other Societies are assisting in the compilation of this
work, and the editor also has the advantage of the active and cordial co-operation of The
National Trust, which is doing so much for the preservation of places of historic interest and
natural beauty throughout the country. 1 vii 6

The names of the distinguished men who have joined the Advisory Council are a
guarantee that the work will represent the results of the latest discoveries in every department
of research. It will be observed that among them are representatives of science ; for the
whole trend of modern thought, as influenced by the theory of evolution, favours the intelli-
gent study of the past and of the social, institutional and political developments of national
life. As these histories are the first in which this object has been kept in view, and modern
principles applied, it is hoped that they will form a work of reference no less indispensable
to the student than welcome to the man of culture. Family History will, both in the Histories and in the supplemental volumes of chart
pedigrees, be dealt with by genealogical experts and in the modern spirit. Every effort will be
made to secure accuracy of statement, and to avoid the insertion of those legendary pedigrees
which have in the past brought discredit on the whole subject. It has been pointed out by the
late Bishop of Oxford, a great master of historical research, that ‘the expansion and extension
of genealogical study is a very remarkable feature of our own times,’ that ‘it is an increasing
pursuit both in America and England,’ and that it can render the historian useful serv’

 

Heraldry will also in this Series occupy a prominent position, and the splendours of the
coat-armour borne in the Middle Ages will be illustrated in colours on a scale that has never
been attempted before. The general plan of Contents, and the names of the Sectional Editors (who will
co-operate with local workers in every case) are as follows :—

Natural History. Edited by Aveyn B. R. Trevor-Battyr, M.Ax F.L.S, etc. Geology. By Cursent Rein, F.R.S., Horace B. Woopwarp, F.R.S., and others
Palzontology. Edited by R. L. Lypexxen, F.R.S., etc. Contributions by G. A. Bourenorn, F.R.S., F. O. Picxanp-Camantpcr, M.A. H. N. Dixox, Fi
Flora H.C. Daver, M.A. F.LS., Watter Gansraxc, M.A. F.LS, Heenert Goss, F.LS., FES,
Team R. I. Pocock, Rev. T-R. R. Steaninc, M.A. F.RS, etc., B.B. Woopwarn, F.GS, F.R.M.S,
etc. and other Specialists
Prehistoric Remains. Edited by W. Bovo Dawxins, MA, F.RS. FSA. Roman Remains. Edited by F. Haverriztn, M.A., F.S.A. Anglo-Saxon Remains. Edited by C. Hercures Rean, F.S.A. and Reowato A. Sautn, B.A. Ethnography. Edited by G. Laurence Gonme, F.S.A. Dialect. Edited by Josern Wricut, M.A. Ph.D.
Place Names
Folklore Contributed by Various Authorities
Physical Types
Domesday Book and other kindred Records. Edited by J. Horace Rouxv, M.A. Architecture. By Various Authorities. The Sections on the Cathedrals and Monastic Remains Edited by
W. H. Sr. Jonn Horr, M.A. Ecclesiastical History, Edited by R. L. Poor, M.A. Political History. Edited by W. H. Stevenson, M.A. J. Horace Rounp, M.A. Prof. T. F. Tout, M.A. Janes Tarr, MA, and C. H. Fiera, M.A. History of Schools. Edited by A. F. Leach, M.A. F.S.A. Maritime History of Coast Counties. Edited by J. K. Lavcatox, M.A. Topographical Accounts of Parishes and Manors. By Various Authorities

History of the Feudal Baronage. Edited by J. Horace Rovwp, M.A. and Oswatp Barrow
Family History and Heraldry. Edited by Oswato Barnon

Agriculture. Edited by Si Enxesr Ctarxe, M.A. Sec. to the Royal Agricultural Society

 

   

 

Forestry. Edited by Joun Nisser, D.Orc. Industries, Arts and Manufactures \
Social and Economic History By Various Authorities
Persons Eminent in Art, Literature, edencel|
Ancient and Modern Sport. Edited by the Dexe or Beauront
Fishing. Edited by H. Cnormonpetey PeNNet
Cricket. Edited by Home Goroox
Football. Edited by C. W. Atcocx
Bibliographies
Indexes

Names of the Subscribers
viii

With a view to securing the best advice with regard to the searching of records, the
Editor has secured the services of the following committee of experts :—

RECORDS COMMITTEE

Sir Epwarp Maunpe Tuompson, K.C.B. Wm. Pace, F.S.A. Sir Henry Maxwett-Lyte, K.C.B. J. Horace Rounp, M.A. W. J. Harpy, F.S.A. S. R. Scarcrtt-Birp, F.S.A. F. Mapan, M.A. W. H. Stevenson, M.A. F. Marrtanp, M.A., F.S.A. G. F. Warner, M.A., F.S.A. ILLUSTRATIONS

Among the many thousands of subjects illustrated will be castles, cathedrals and churches,
mansions and manor houses, moot halls and market halls, family portraits, etc. Particular
attention will be given to the beautiful and quaint examples of architecture which, through
decay or from other causes, are in danger of disappearing. The best examples of church
brasses, coloured glass, and monumental effigies will be depicted. The Series will also contain
160 pictures in photogravure, showing the characteristic scenery of the countics. CARTOGRAPHY

Each History will contain Archeological, Domesday, and Geological maps ; maps show-
ing the orography, and the Parliamentary and Ecclesiastical divisions ; and the map done by
Speed in 1610. The Series will contain about four hundred maps in all. FAMILY HISTORY AND HERALDRY

‘The Histories will contain, in the Topographical Section, manorial pedigrees, and
accounts of the noble and gentle families connected with the local history ; and it is proposed
to trace, wherever possible, their descendants in the Colonies and the United States of
America. The Editor will be glad to receive information which may be of service to him
in this branch of the work. The chart family pedigrees and the arms of the families
mentioned in the Heralds’ Visitations will be issued in a supplemental volume for each county. The Rolls of Arms are being completely collated for this work, and all the feudal coats
will be given in colours. ‘The arms of the local families will also be represented in connection
with the Topographical Section. In order to secure the greatest possible accuracy in the descriptions of the Architecture,
ecclesiastic, military and domestic, a committee has been formed of the following students of
architectural history, who will supervise this department of the work :—

ARCHITECTURAL COMMITTEE

J. Buson, F.S.A., F.R.ILB.A. W..H. Sr. Joun Horz, M.A. R. Biromrietp W. H. Knows, F.S.A., F.R.1LB.A. Harotp Brakspear, A.R.I.B.A. J. T. Mickternwarre, F.S.A. Pror. Batpwin Brown Roranp Paut

Artur S. Frower, F.S.A., A.R.LB.A. J. Horace Rounp, M.A. Grorce E. Fox, M.A., F.S.A. Percy G. Srong, F.S.A., F.R.I.B.A. J. A. Gorcn, FS.A., F.R. A. ‘THACKERAY TURNER

A special feature in connection with the Architecture will be a series of coloured ground
plans showing the architectural history of castles, cathedrals and other monastic foundations. Plans of the most important country mansions will also be included. The issue of this work is limited to subscribers only, whose names will be printed at the end of
each History. THE
VICTORIA HISTORY
OF THE COUNTY OF
NORFOLK

VOLUME ONE

DAWSON
FOR
THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
INSTITUTE OF HISTORICAL RESEARCH

County Committee for Morfolk

THE RT. HON. THE EARL OF LEICESTER, K.G. Lord Lieutenant, Chairman

Rr. Rr. Rr. Rr. Hon. Hon. Hon. Hon. e Rr. Hon. Tue Rr. Hon. Tue Rr. Rey. Norwicu

THE
Tue
THE
Tue
THE
THE

Tue Lorp Bisxop oF

Eart or Romney

Eart or Krperiey
Lorp Hastincs
Lorp WatsinGHAM
Lorp SurFigLp

Lorp Farquuar

S
S
Ss
8
Ss

R Kennety H. Kemp, Barr. R WILLIAM FFOLKES, BART. z

ALFRED JopretL, Barr. 3

Hucu Bervor, Barr. R CHARLES
FSA. x Epmonp C. Nucent, Barr. H, Sruarr Ricu, Barr.,

Ss
Ss

R Tuomas Foweit Buxton, Barr., J.P.,
D.L. Sir Jonn Cotoms, K.C.M.G., M.P. Perer Eave, M.D., F.R.C.P. Tue Very Rev. THe Dean or Norwicu

Sir

Tue Ven. ARcHDEACON NEVILL
‘Tue VEN. ARCHDEACON PEROWNE

Nicuotas H. Bacon, Ese. Wiiuiam T. Bensty, Eso., LL.D., F.S.A. Leonarp G. BotincBroxkE, Esa. Gen. W. E. G. L. Butwer, C.B. Gerorrrey F, Buxton, Eso. Russett J. Couman, Ese. Jj. A. H. Ferrier, Esq. P. Berney-Fickin, Esq. Joun H. Gurney, Esq. F.Z.8. Rev. Witttam Hupson, M.A., F.S.A. Rey. Canon Jessorr, D.D., F.S.A. Henry Lee Warner, Ese. Rev. Avucustus G. Lecce, M.A. T. Barrett Lennarn, Eso. Hamon LE StRancE, Esq. Rey. Arrnur T. Micuett, M.A. Rosert H. J. Parcrave, Ese., F.R.S. Sims Reeve, Eso. Tuomas Sournwett, Ese., F.Z.S. Rey. O. W. Tancock, M.A. J.C. Tincey, Ese., M.A., F.S.A. Tue Worsuirrut THe Mayor of Norwicu
Tue WorsnieruL THe Mayor oF Ktnes

Lynn

xiii

CONTENTS OF

Dedication

VOLUME ONE

The Advisory Council of the Victoria History. 9...

General Advertisement
The Norfolk County Committee
Contents
List of Illustrations . Preface . . . . . .
Natural History
Geology
Paleontology
Botany
Rubi and Rose (Braméles and
Roses) . Menthe . .
Naiadacez
Filices (Ferns, et) . 0. Characew
Mosci (Moses) and Hepatic
(Liverworts) . Marine Alge . Diatomacee . .
Lichenes (Lichens)
Fungi 2. ee
Zoology
Marine Zoology . . .
Mollusca (Snails, etc.) . .
Insecta (/nsects)
Orthoptera (Grasshoppers, etc.) «
Neuroptera (Dragonflies) and
Trichoptera (Caddis-fies)

Hymenoptera (Bees, ete.) By H. B. Woopwarp, F.R.S., F.GS. By Ricuaro L. Lypexker, B.A. F.RS., F.G.S,
Edited by Heesert D. Getpart . By Hersert D. Getpart

By the Rev. G. R. Buttock-Weaster, M.A. By H.N. Dixox, MA, F.LS. 5. By Herserr D, Gevpart 2. By the Rev. J. Croat, M.A. F.L.S., F.G.S. By C. B. Prowricut, M.D., L.R.C.P., F.R.C.S. .

By Watrer Garstaxc, M.A., F.L.S. By B. B, Woopwaro, F.G.S., F.R.M.S. By J. Epwaros, F.E.S. By Cuartes G. Barrert, F.E.S. xv

62
67
69
7°
72

77
87

89

91
94

CONTENTS OF VOLUME ONE

 

PAGE
Coleoptera (Beetles) . . By J. Eowaros, RES.  .  . . .. 0
Lepidoptera (Butterflies and

Mots) . By Cares G. Barrert, RES. 2... 135
Hemiptera (Bugs and Cicadas). By J. Evwaros, F.E.S. tee, 162
Myriapoda (Gentipedes, etc.) . By R. 1, Pocock. =. . . .  . 471
Arachnida (Spiders, ex.) . . By F. O. Pickaro-Campaivce, MA, 2 2-173
Crustacea (Crabs, Lobsters, etc.) By the Rev. T. R. R. Srensixc, M.A, F.R.S., F.LS. 183
Pisces (Fishes) . . «By Jowx Lowe, MD, PRLS. 6 0... 200
Reptilia (Reptiles) and Batrachia
(Batrackians) —. =. By Tuomas Sournwett, F.ZS. 0... 217,
Aves (Birds) . 5 ek » » » Se 220
Mammalia (Mammal) 9. . » » tees 246
Early Man... sBy Georce Cuncn, GS... 0... 853

Romano-British Remains. . . By F, Haverrtetn, MA, FSA... «279
Anglo-Saxon Remains. . By Recinao A. Suita, BAL. = 325

xvi

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Norwich Cathedral, by William Hyde
Palzolithic Implements
Palwolithic Implements
The Weybourne Pits _. Section through one of the Pits at Weybourne
Neolithic Implement
Bronze Tools found at Carlton Rode
Bronze Palstave found at Stibbard
Bronze Spearhead found at Stibbard ;
Bronze Celt-mould found in Unthanks Road, Norwich
Bronze Dagger found at Little Cressingham . Late Celtic Horse-trappings found at Saham Toney . Late Celtic Pot found at Mundesley
Late Celtic Ornament
Coins of the Iceni
Outline of Caister-by-Norwich
Wall of Caister-by-Norwich
Building outside the Walls of Caister
Terracotta Fragment
Small Bronze Bust . Small Bronze Objects
Gold Coin of Nero
Plan and Section of Kiln near Caister
Bronze Mirror 0
Roman Well and Urns found in it, Ashill
Plan of Enclosures near Ashill
Tron Knife, etc., from Roman Well, Ashill
Key, Threxton . . Sketch Map to illustrate Roman Roads
Plan of Brancaster . . . . . . Section of Wall, Brancaster
Plan of Brancaster . : 2 5 . . .
Sel of Ring. . . . 2. Bronze Objects from Felmingham
xvii

PAGE

+ 5 «Frontispiece

full-page plate, facing p.

full-page plate, facing p.

full-page plate, facing p.

full-page plate, facing p.

full-page plate, facing p.

255
256
264
264
266
268
269
269
270
272
273
274
281
285
289
290
291
291
292
292
292
292
292
295
295
296
298
300
304
304
305
305
308

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Sandhill containing Urns, Felmingham

Pottery from the Sandhill, Felmingham

Pewter Dish from Welney

Silver Dish found at Milcham

Gold Ring from Poringland Heath . .
Um alleged to have been found at North Elmham . Samian Cup from Beachamwell

Glass Vessel, Geldeston

Bronze Object, Geldeston

Bronze Statuette, Haynford

Ur, Hedenham

Brooch from Swaffham

Brooch and Cinerary Urns with Details

* Gold Ornaments, etc

LIST OF MAPS

+ Geological Map of West Norfolk
+ Geological Map of East Norfolk
© Botanical Map

Pre-Historical Map

Roman Map . Anglo-Saxon Map

* Reproduced in black and white in this edition,
+ Not reproduced in this edition owing to technical difficulties,
@ Reproduced in black and white with red over print. xviii

PAGE
309
309
~ ee Zt
Sull-page plate, facing p. 310
foe eH
Sall-page plate, facing p. 312
313
317
317
317
317
321
Se 38
. coloured plate, facing p. 340

«facing po

on
» 39
5 + = 253
279
325,

PREFACE

HE Advertisement of the Victoria History sets forth the scheme

under which the History of Norfolk is projected. Only a small

part of the whole undertaking there detailed finds a place in this

volume, and it will therefore suffice to refer here only to the
subject matter now presented to the reader. The principle underlying the plan of the Victoria History is that of
co-operation between local students of history and archwology and those
who possess expert knowledge in certain periods of history or depart-
ments of archxological research. The contributors to this volume have
cheerfully acquiesced in these conditions, and it is hoped that by the
method adopted greater accuracy has been obtained than could otherwise
have been secured. The investigations which have been made in the course of compil-
ing the natural history of Norfolk have brought to light the want of
special studies from which the county suffers in various departments. The tastes and inclinations of students of local natural history lie
mostly in certain directions, and the less popular orders in Botany and
Entomology have received comparatively little attention. Much difficulty
has therefore been experienced in obtaining representative lists for some
of these orders. While the imperfections to which this work must plead
guilty are to be deplored, it is possible that the energies of local
naturalists may be directed thereby to those departments of the flora and
fauna which require further study. It has been reluctantly decided that the Domesday Survey of Norfolk
cannot be dealt with on the same lines as those adopted for other
counties. Its abnormal length is but one of the difficulties; more
serious are those which arise from the unsatisfactory state of the text and
from the obscurity of its formu/e, even when the text is sound. Any
translation would in fact be almost unintelligible. Those who are most
competent to judge are of opinion that the time for dealing with this
most difficult record is not yet ripe, and its contents are at present so

imperfectly known that Professor Maitland has to speak in his Domesday
xix

PREFACE

Book and Beyond,’ of that period, as yet in the future, ‘when the
Domes
however, will of course be used for ascertaining the ownership of the
manors in 1086, and it is hoped that if his other engagements permit,
Mr. Round may be able to contribute, in another volume, something on
the special features of interest that it possesses. The editor desires to express his indebtedness to Mr. Thomas
Southwell for assistance in many directions ; and for permission to use
certain of the illustrations reproduced in this volume he wishes to thank
Sir John Evans, K.C.B., George C. Castor, Esq., the Curator of the
Liverpool Museum, the Committee of the Norwich Castle Museum,
the Society of Antiquaries, the Royal Archeological Institute, and the
British Archeological Association. y of East Anglia has been fully explored.’ Its evidence,

1 Domesday Book and Beyond, p. 106. XX

INSECTS

ORTHOPTERA

This order comprises the earwigs (Forficulide), the cockroaches
(Blattide), the common grasshoppers (Acridiide), the long-horned_grass-
hoppers (Locustide), and the crickets (Gry/lide). In Norfolk we have
besides the common earwig (Forficula auricularia), two other kinds,
namely the small earwig, which is about half the size of the common
kind and is frequently to be found flying in the day-time; and Cheli-
dura albipennis, which may readily be distinguished from the common
earwig by the absence of wings and the straighter and narrower
pincers. It is not uncommon in the Norwich district, and may be
obtained by beating mixed hedges in the autumn. It is a curious
fact that although the common earwig is quite as well provided with
wings as its smaller relative, it is very rarely seen on the wing, or
found in situations to which it must necessarily have been transported
by flight. Earwigs are said to be fond of their young, and the writer
has on more than one occasion found a female of the common
earwig with a dozen or more small young ones hidden away under a
stone. In this case, however, it cannot be said that the young showed
any disposition to avail themselves of parental protection, since mother
and young promptly dispersed and ran into hiding in different directions. The cockroaches (B/attide) present two groups: the out-door, truly
native species, which are small pale insects less than half an inch long ;
and the indoor, more or less naturalized species, which are of a dark
mahogany brown colour, and in some cases attain a length of more
than two inches. The common house cockroach, or so-called ‘ black-
beetle’ (Perip/aneta orientalis), is easily known in the male sex by the
shape of the upper wings, which appear as if they had been cut off
straight across at some distance from the end of the body. In the
females the upper wings are small and scale-like, and the lower pair are
quite rudimentary. The song or chirp of the grasshoppers (Acridiid@) is
of course well known, but it is, perhaps, not so generally known that
each kind has its own song, and that it is possible with a little attention
to the difference in the sounds produced to distinguish some of the com-
mon grasshoppers (Stenobothrus) even when the insects are not in sight. The sound, which is produced by rubbing together the outer face of the
upper wing and the inner face of the hind thigh, is the result of a rapid
vibration of the upper wing set up by the friction between one or more

89

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

projecting veins on the latter and a row of minute bead-like prominences,
or some similar apparatus, situate on the thighs of the hind pair of legs. The common grasshoppers, especially the females of Stenobothrus parallelus,
which may be known by their abbreviated upper wings, afford excellent
examples of what is known as ‘protective coloration,’ the colour of
the insects often exhibiting a marked similarity to that of the ground
vegetation. A few stragglers of the migratory locust have from time
to time been found in Norfolk ; but it may be remarked, in passing,
that the ‘locust’ of the country folk is Réizotrogus solstitialis, a rather
stout pale brown hairy beetle about three-fourths of an inch long,
which may be seen in hundreds flying round trees and hedgerows
in the summer twilight. Perhaps the best-known member of the
long-horned grasshoppers (Locustide) is the great green grasshopper
(Locusta viridissima). This insect is not uncommon in Norfolk, but is
very intermittent in its occurrence ; it often betrays its presence
by its peculiarly harsh cry. Another member of the same group
(Xiphidium dorsale), a pale green insect, reddish on the back, with very
slender antenna more than twice as long as the body, may be found
commonly by sweeping low herbage in the fens of east Norfolk ; its
female is remarkable for its large sword-shaped tail, which is nearly as
long as the body of the insect. The crickets (Gry//ide) are well repre-
sented in this county, the house and field crickets are both abundant,
and that grand insect, the mole cricket (Gry/lota/pa vulgaris), will
probably prove to be generally distributed if properly searched for. The name of Ccanthus pellucens has been retained in the following
list because the Norfolk record is the only one of its occurrence in Britain. The record of an insect of which a single specimen only has been
taken, and that, probably, some time prior to the year 1812, is neces-
sarily attended with some doubt, which in the present case is some-
what increased by the fact that the late Professor Westwood, who
purchased the insect at the sale of Haworth’s collection, said that the
specimen had been misnamed, and was in no manner related to the
insect in question. This statement would have been entitled to more
weight had the learned professor stated what the proper name of
the insect really was. I have ascertained from Professor Poulton,
the present custodian of Westwood’s insects at the Oxford Museum,
that this specimen ex coll. Haworth cannot now be found; and Mr.
Malcolm Burr, a specialist in Orthoptera who has often been through
the Orthoptera collections there, has not been more successful in his
endeavours to find it. There is evidence that Haworth collected
at Halvergate, where his brother-in-law Robert Scales had a farm be-
tween the years 1808 and 1812; and the fact remains that the
entomologists of his day believed that he had taken a specimen of
Gcanthus there ; and as the insect had already been figured by Panzer
there appears no initial reason for assuming an error of identification. On the continent the species has occurred as far north as Fontainebleau. In the following list two species which have not occurred to the
90

INSECTS

author have been given on the authority of J. F. Stephens (Id//ustrations
of British Entomology). Forricutip® AcRIDIUDA (continued)
Labia minor, L. Tettix bipunctatus, L.
Forficula auricularia, L. — subulatus, L.
Chelidura albipennis, Meg. Norwich Locustipm
Biatripz Leptophyes punctatissima, Bosc. Ectobia panzeri, Steph. Meconema varium, Fab. | Arminghall
Phyllodromia germanica, L. Xiphidium dorsale, Latr, Horning, Ran-
Periplaneta orientalis, L. worth
AcrIDIDA Locusta viridissima, L.
Mecostethus grossus, L. Horning Thamnotrizon cinereus, L.
Stenobothrus viridulus, L. GryLupa
— bicolor, Charp. (?) CEcanthus pellucens, Scop. Halvergate
— elegans, Charp. Cley, October (Haworth fide Stephens)
— parallelus, Zett. Gryllus campestris, L.
Gomphocerus maculatus, Thunb. — domesticus, L.
Pachytylus migratorius, L. Yarmouth Gryllotalpa vulgaris, Latr. Stoke Holy Cross
(Stephens)
NEUROPTERA’

Three families in this order, namely, the stone-flies (Perlide), the
May-flies (Ephemeride), and the alder-flies (Sia/ide), contain insects
which are well known to anglers as excellent baits. Owing to the
absence from Norfolk of swift torrents and waterfalls the Perlide are
represented by very few species, although individuals are sufficiently
numerous in the neighbourhood of water. The Ephemeride, apart from
the interest attaching to the mode of flight in some species, are worthy
of notice on account of the development of the eyes. These organs,
which are more highly developed in the males than in the females, are
very large and prominent. The males of certain species bear on the
head, in addition to the two globose compound eyes and the three simple
eyes (oce//i), twoshort, stout, slightly diverging pillars, the top of each of
the latter being occupied by a large compound eye ; so that the insect has
in fact, seven eyes in all. The dragon-flies (Odonata), notwithstanding
their forbidding appearance, may really be caught and handled without,
risk of injury—although it would be difficult to persuade a rustic to handle
a ‘ horse-stinger,’ as they are sometimes called. They may occasionally
be taken when at rest after sundown or in dull weather, but otherwise
the capture of the larger species calls for the exercise of much patience

1 In the following list of Neuroptera the determinations of species recorded from the
collection of the author have been made or confirmed by R. McLachlan, F.R.S. In the case
of species which have not occurred to the author, the names of the captors or recorders have
been added after each entry. The entomologists referred to in this list are: C. G. Barrett,
F.ES. ; John Curtis, in British Entomolgy ; W. E. Leach, M.D., etc. ; W. J. Lucas, F.ES.,
in The Entomologist, xxxiii. p. 201 ; R. McLachlan, F.R.S. ; Edward Newman, F.LS., F.Z.S. ;
C. J. and J. Paget, in 4 Sketch of the Natural History of Great Yarmouth and Neighbourhood ;
J. F. Stephens, in I/ustrations of British Entomology; H. J. Thouless of Norwich. For the Trichoptera the nomenclature and sequence is that of McLachlan, Trans. Ent. Soc, Lond., 1882, p. 329 ; and for the Ephemeride that of Eaton, Ent. Mo. Mag. xxv. p. 10,
et 30g. 91

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

and considerable dexterity in the use of the net. So far as the number
of different kinds is concerned, these insects are scarcely so well re-
presented in Norfolk as might reasonably be expected, several species
which occur not uncommonly in the London district being as yet unre-
corded for this county. On the other hand, Norfolk appears to be the
only county where one particular species of 4schna is now to be found. This is A’schna isosceles, Mull., an insect about 24 inches long, having
a bright sienna-brown body with a triangular yellow spot just behind
the base of the hind-wings. Something like sixty years ago it appears
to have been not uncommon at Yarmouth, but it has been entirely
lost sight of for many years, the most recent recorded examples
being one taken by my colleague Mr. Thouless in the Norwich
district within the last few years and two taken near Norwich
in 1871 by Mr. Barrett. The snake-flies (Rhaphidiide) are easily
recognized by their comparatively broad flat head and the neck-like
appearance of the parts succeeding it ; they are rare insects, and occur
only in wooded districts, where their larve are believed to feed on
insects that harbour in old timber. The females have a long slender
exserted ovipositor. We have in Norfolk three out of the four British
species, and with regard to one of these (R. cognata, Rbr.) Mr. McLachlan
writes that he had never previously seen a native example less than sixty
or more years old. The specimen in question was taken by Mr.
Thouless in Foxley Wood, on the 14th June, 1886. The lacewing-
flies (Chrysopide), sometimes called ‘golden-eyes,’ are really common
insects, though not frequently noticed. They are however of consider-
able importance since their larve, which feed most voraciously on
aphides, are to a great extent instrumental in keeping these pests in
check. The aphidivorous habits of the larve of the allied family
Hemerobiide are equally noteworthy ; and the larve of some at least of
the species in that family have the habit of covering themselves with the
empty skins of the aphides which they have sucked. The scorpion-flies
(Panorpide), so called from the resemblance of the hind part of the body
in the male to the tail of a scorpion, are also remarkable for the shape of
the head, which is drawn out into a broad deflexed beak. Besides the
common and well known scorpion-flies (Panorpa), the family Panorpide
contains Boreus hiemalis, which is of local interest from the fact that the
first recorded British example was taken by Dr. Leach very many years
ago at Costessey. The Boreus is a curious little insect about one-fourth
of an inch long, and looks like a minute wingless scorpion-fly ; it occurs
occasionally in moss from October to March, but has not, apparently,
been taken in Norfolk for more than seventy years. The caddis-flies
(Irichoptera) are moth-like insects of small or moderate size, sober
colours and retiring habits ; the surface of their upper wings is more or
less closely covered with hairs, Their larve are aquatic, and the curious
cases which they make of pieces of grass stems, small fresh-water shells,
and aquatic debris generally are probably more familiar to non-entomolo-
gical observers than the perfect insects. 92

INSECTS

PSEUDO-NEUROPTERA
Psocipz

Atropos divinatoria, Mall. Psocus longicornis, F.

— nebulosus, Steph. — variegatus, F.

— fasciatus, F.

— sexpunctatus, L,

— bifasciatus, Latr. — quadrimaculatus, Latr. — morio, Latr. Thetford (Curtis)

Stenopsocus immaculatus, Steph. — cruciatus, L.

Cecilius pedicularius, L.

— flavidus, Steph. — vittatus, Dalm. Peripsocus phzopterus, Steph. Elipsocus unipunctatus, Mall. — flaviceps, Steph. — abietis, Kolbe

PERLIDE

Leuctra geniculata, Steph. — (?) fusciventris, Steph. It is probable
that two species are included under
this name

Nemoura variegata, Ol. — (?) cinerea, Ol. EPHEMERIDZ
Ephemera vulgata, L.
— danica, Mall. Booton Common

Leptophlebia marginata, L.
— submarginata, Steph. Habrophlebia fusca, Curt. Ephemerella ignita, Poda. Cenis dimidiata, Steph. — halterata, F.

Baétis binoculatus, L.

— vernus, Curt. — pumilus, Burm. — niger, L.

Centroptilum luteolum, Mull. Cloton dipterum, L.
Rhithrogena semicolorata, Curt. Heptagenia sulphurea, Mall. Ecdyurus venosus, F.

— insignis, Etn. ODONATA
Lipeturip&
Sympetrum striolatum, Charp. Platetrum depressum, L.
Libellula quadrimaculata, L.
— fulva, Mall. Sprowston (Curtis)
— cancellatum, L. Horning, Fakenham
(Curtis)
Corputip®
Cordulia znea, L.
GomPxuip&
Cordulegaster annulatus, Latr. 93

ZESCHNIDE

Brachytryon pratense, Mall. fEschna juncea, L.

— cyanea, Mall. — grandis, L.

— isosceles, Mall. Yarmouth (Newman) ;
Halvergate (Stephens) ; near Norwich
(Barrett) ; Drayton Drewray (Thouless)

Catorrerycipa®
Calopteryx virgo, L.
— splendens, Harr. AGRIONIDE

Lestes sponsa, Hans. Platycnemis pennipes, Pall. tis)

Pyrrhosoma nymphula, Sulz. Ischnura pumilio, Charp. (Lucas)

— elegans, Lind. Agrion puella, L.

Enallagma cyathigerum, Charp. Norfolk (Cur-

Norfolk, 1899

NEUROPTERA-PLANIPENNIA
StALIDA
Sialis lutaria, L.
RapHipup&
Raphidia xanthostigma, Schum. — cognata, Ramb. (Thouless)
— maculicollis, Steph. HEMEROBIIDA
Micromus variegatus, F.
— paganus, L.
Hemerobius micans, Ol. — humuli, L.
— marginatus, Steph. — stigma, Steph. — pini, Steph. — subnebulosus, Steph. — lutescens, F.
— concinnus, Steph. CuRysoPIDA
Chrysopa flava, Scop. — vittata, Wesm. — alba, L.
— vulgaris, Schn. — abbreviata, Curt. (Paget)
— perla, L.
Nothochrysa capitata, F.
ContopreryYGID&
Coniopteryx psociformis, Curt. (Curtis)
— tineiformis, Curt. PaNorPiDé
Panorpa communis, L.
— germanica, L.
— cognata, Ramb. Boreus hyemalis, L. Cossey, December,
before 1826 (Leach)

Yarmouth, June

Norfolk

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

TRICHOPTERA

INEQUIPALPIA

PHRYGANEIDE
Neuronia ruficrus, Scop. Phryganea grandis, L.
Agrypnia pagetana, Curt. LimnopHitipa®
Colpotaulius incisus, Curt. Grammotaulius nitidus, Mall. — atomarius, F.
Glyphotzlius pellucidus, Retz. Limnophilus rhombicus, L.
— flavicornis, F.
— marmoratus, Curt. — lunatus, Curt. — centralis, Curt. — affinis, Curt. — auricula, Curt. — xanthodes, McLach. Norfalk Fens
(Winter, fide McLachlan)
— politus, McLach. Norfolk Fens (Mc-
Lachlan)
griseus, L.
bipunctatus, Curt. Lachlan)
— extricatus, McLach. — luridus,Curt. Norfolk Fens (McLachlan)
— sparsus, Curt. — fuscicornis, Ramb. Anabolia nervosa, Curt. Stenophylax stellatus, Curt. — concentricus, Zett. — vibex, Curt. Norfolk (Curtis)
Halesus radiatus, Curt. — digitatus, Schrank. 1

Norfolk Fens (Mc-

LIMNopHILiD# (continued)
Drusus annulatus, Steph. Cheetopteryx villosa, F.

SERICOSTOMATIDA
Notidobia ciliaris, L.

Goéra pilosa, F.

Silo pallipes, F.

— nigricornis, Pict. Brachycentrus subnubilus, Curt. Lepidostoma hirtum, F.

EQUIPALPIA

LEprocerIDé
Berza pullata, Curt. Odontocerum albicorne, Scop. Leptocerus bifasciatus, L.
— fulvus, Ramb, Fens (McLachlan)
Mystacides azurea, L.
CEcetis furva, Ramb. Norfolk Fens (Win-
ter fide McLachlan)
HypropsycHIDE
Hydropsyche angustipennis, Curt. Plectronemia conspersa, Curt. Polycentropus flavomaculatus, Pict. Holocentropus dubius, Ramb. Fens (Mc-
Lachlan)
— picicornis, Steph. Tinodes weneri, L.
Ecnomus tenellus, Ramb. (Winter fide McLachlan)
RuyacoPHiLipzé
Rhyacophila dorsalis, Curt. Hyproprinip&
Agraylea multipunctata, Curt. Fen district

HYMENOPTERA

The sawflies of the following list have mostly been collected in the
neighbourhood of Norwich ; but a few have been obtained elsewhere
by Messrs. F. Norgate and E, A. Atmore. Doubtless much more could
be done in this group by working the eastern part of Norfolk. There
are a few notices in Paget’s Natural History of Yarmouth, Curtis’s British
Entomology and Farm Insects, and Stephens’s I/lustrations of British Ento-
mology, which have been used. The economy of the sawflies is extremely interesting. They are, in
the larval state, vegetable feeders. The majority feed on the outside of
the leaf, but a few are leaf-rollers, some mine the leaves, others form galls
on the leaves of various species of willow and on poplar, and two or three
make woolly galls on the young shoots of willows. In some species the male fly is very rare, and in a few instances

94

INSECTS

quite unknown. The male of the common sawfly which makes the
galls found on almost every willow (Nematus gallicola), is exceedingly
rare. The late Mr. J. B. Bridgeman, of whose arduous labours the pre-
sent list is a result, thought himself fortunate to rear one. The male of
the very common Eriocampa ovata, the female of which abounds every-
where among alders, is quite unknown. This is a case of parthenogenesis,
the eggs of the virgin female producing larve in due course, and ulti-
mately the perfect insects. These have been reared by Messrs. Cameron
and J. E. Fletcher. On working out the Aculeates much help has been given by tne
Rev. J. Landy Brown, Messrs. H. D, Geldart, T. G. Bayfield, and E. A.
Atmore ; the late Mr. Frederick Smith of the British Museum con-
firmed the accuracy of many of the captures, and Mr, Edward Saunders
has brought several species to light which had been mixed with others
and so overlooked. Several entomologists early in the century collected
species of this group in Norfolk. The Rev. W. Kirby, author of Mono-
graphia Apum Anglia, mentions four bees which he had taken near
Norwich ; Curtis, Stephens and Paget, already alluded to, added to this
information ; and Mr. F. Smith published the results of his collecting at
Cromer and Mousehold in the Entomolgists Annual for 1868-69. In Curtis's Entomology two bees are recorded which, though not
included in the following list, should be noticed. The first is Andrena
Airbii, It is figured and described, and the following note is appended: —

‘The rare insect figured was in the collection of the late Mr. W.
Griffin of Norwich, and was probably taken in the neighbourhood of
that city ; it now enriches the cabinet of Mr. Stephens.’ With the
rest of Mr. Stephens’ treasures it is now in the collection of the British
Museum, and was included in the first edition of the Catalogue of British
Bees, by Mr. F. Smith, but was deleted in the second edition, published
in 1877, in the introduction to which the following remark appears :
‘Ten species are entirely new additions to this part of the British fauna,
whilst two, formerly believed to be British, have been omitted, Sphecodes
fuscipennis and Andrena kirbii. The other species is Heriades truncorum,
a very rare insect, of which Curtis says, ‘I believe that my female came
from Norfolk.’ Concerning both species some doubt exists, and it is
very uncertain whether the first named is a British insect. Of the Ichneumonide this list is doubtless far from complete. Parasitic Hymenoptera have been much neglected in this county, especi-
ally the Ichneumons, owing doubtless to the absence of any handbook on
the subject in the English language. Much assistance has been given
by the Rev. T. A. Marshall; and lepidopterists have supplied information
of the species inadvertently reared by them from larva of their favourite
groups, as well as of those which they have captured. Many species also
were obtained by sweeping herbage by the side of ditches, and the banks
beneath hedges ; also in dull weather by beating hedges into an old
umbrella, but this will not serve when the sun shines, since the insects
are then far too active to be thus secured. When a good hunting ground

95

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

is found it does not seem to matter how often it is visited, as something
fresh is almost sure to be taken. There is a peculiar habit found in the larva of Limneria kreichbaumeri
when in the cocoon ; it has the power of leaping a considerable distance
into the air. The cocoon is semitransparent, and when held up to the
light the larva may be seen to bend itself into the shape of a U ; then
press its head and tail against one side of the cocoon, and suddenly
release them so that they strike the opposite side, hitting it a sharp blow

which causes it to make a leap. distinctly be felt and heard. ‘TENTHREDINIDE

Tenthreda livida, Linn. mon, June and July

— colon, Klug. Norwich; one female on
Mousebold

— solitaria, Scop. Sparham ; two females
taken by Mr. F. Norgate in June

— rufiventris, Panz. Sparham; three fe-
males taken by Mr. F. Norgate in
June

— dispar, Klug. Twice taken in the
county ; once at Fe/thorpe in June

— maculata, Fourc. Taken by Mr. Nor-
gate, probably at Sparham

— bicincta, Linn. Common

— mesomela, Linn. Common at mid-
summer

— obsoleta, Klug. Taken at Lynn by Mr.
E. A. Atmore

— olivacea, Klug. One female taken by
Mr. Norgate and another by Mr.

Norwich ; com-

Atmore
— punctulata, Klug. Common
— viridis, Linn. Common

— lateralis, Fab. Norwich; in May and
June, not common

— gibbosa, Fall. Common, occurring as

early as April

Tenthredopsis cordata, Fourc. apparently uncommon

— microcephala, Sep. Norwich, Lynn

— caliginosa, Step. Once taken

— nigricollis, Cam. Norwich, Lynn ; com-
mon

— ornata, Sep. Sa/house, June

— tristis, Step. Taken by Mr. E. A. At-
more at Lynn, in June

— dorsivittata, Cam. Earlham; end of
May, uncommon

— inornata, Cam. Norwich ; June

— nassata, Linn. — sordida, Klug. Synzrema rubi, Panz. folk by Stephens

Pachyprotasis rape, Linn. Very common

— simulans, Klug. One specimen taken

Norwich ;

} Gxamen fin Joe
Recorded in Nor-

96

When held in the fingers the tap may

‘TENTHREDINIDE (continued)

by Mr. F. Norgate, probably near
Sparham ; rare

Macrophya blanda, Fab. common

— neglecta,
common

— 12-punctata, Linn. Twice taken:
once at Wroxham ; once at the osier-
carr at Heigham—this locality since
destroyed

— albicincta, Sch. Brundall; end of May

— ‘ibis, Schr. Brundall, Eaton; single
specimens, at the end of May and
beginning of June

— mustica, Linn. Very common

— punctum-album, Linn. Norwich; in
privet hedges, in June

Allantus scrophulariz, Linn. Brundall,
Postwick ; about Scrophularia nodosa

—tricinctus, Fab. Brundall; August,
not common

— marginellus, Fab. not common

— arcuatus, Férst. Very common

Dolerus vestigialis, Klug. Norwich, Brun-
dall; two specimens, in May and June

— triplicatus, Klug. Very rare; one
taken by Mr. F. Norgate at Sparham,
in June, 1880

— fulviventris, Scop. Equisetum

— anticus, Klug. Brundall; end of April

— arcticus, Thom. Brundall ; two males,
May and June

— gonagra, Fab. Very common

— puncticollis, Thom. Brundall; un-
common, end of May

— hematodes, Schr. Common

— anthracinus, Klug. Rare; one at
Eaton, in May

— fissus, Hgt. Common

— varispinus, Hgt. Rare;
three taken in spring

— intermedius, Cam. Norwich, Brundall;
not uncommon, April and May

Norwich ; June,

Klug. Norwich; June,

Earlham; June,

Common among

Norwich,

INSECTS

TentHurevinro” (continued)
Dolerus niger, Linn. Common in June
— encus, Hgt. Norwich, Lynn; May,
June, not uncommon
— clongatus, Thom. Not uncommon
Strongylogaster cingulatus, Fab. Female
common among ferns
Selandria serva, Fab, Very common at
midsummer in marshes
sixii, Voll, Norwich, Brundall
flavescens, Klug. Norwich, Brundall ;
May, June, July
straminipes, Klug. Norwich, Salbouse,
on fern ; May, June
morio, Fab. Brundall; August
aperta, Hgt. Buckenham ; one female
only
Taxonus equiseti, Fall. Common
— glabratus, Fall. Common
Peecilosoma luteolum, Klug. Not un-
common in marshy places; larva
feeding upon Lysimachia vulgaris

— pulveratum, Retz. Sparham, Brundall,
Lynn

— longicorne, Thom. Norwich; May,
June

— submuticum, Thom. — Strumpshaw,
Brundall; end of May and

June
excisum, Thom. Ear/ham ; one male
only, taken in August
Eriocampa ovata, Linn. Common on
alder ; the female only is known
annulipes, Klug. Norwich, Brundall ;
common, June, July
varipes, Klug. Norwich, Brundall ; not
scarce, June to August
limacina, Retz. Norwich ; common,
on fruit trees
cinxia, Klug. Earlham; one female
in August, 1878
rose, Harris. Norwich, Wroxham
common in May
Blennocampa_sericans, Hgt. one male in May, 1882
nigrita, Fab. Norwich; end of May,
not uncommon
albipes, Gmel. Norwich, Brundall;
common in May
ruficruris, Brullé. Norwich,
May, in numbers
— nigripes, Klug. Heigham, August
— fuscipennis, Fall. Brundall; marshy
places, in June
— ephippium, Panz. Brundall, Hellesdon;
common at midsummer
— fuliginosa, Sch. Norwich, Brundall ;
May to July
— subserrata, Thom. July

5

Brundall ;

Brundall;

Brundall; May to

1

97

‘TENTHREDINIDE (continued)
Blennocampa pusilla, Klug. common in May and June
— betuleti, Klug. AZousehold ; one female
in August, 1880
— assimilis, Fall. Norwich ; two females
only, in May
Hoplocampa ferruginea, Panz. Recorded
by Stephens as rare in Norfolk
— crategi, Klug. Norwich; about
flowers of whitethorn at the end of
May
Emphytus togatus, Panz. ham ; rare
— cinctus, Linn. garden roses
calceatus, Klug. Brundall; August
tibialis, Panz. Sparham ; taken by Mr.
Norgate in September
carpini, Hgt. Norwich; frequent in
May
grossularia, Klug. Norwich; not un-
common, May to July
tener, Fall. Norwich; common at
midsummer
— perla, Klug, Norwich ; rare
Phyllotoma vagans, Fall. Common on
alder, the larva mining in the leaves
— microcephala, Klug. Norwich, Brun-
dall, Lynn ; July and August
— fumipennis, Cam. A single specimen
taken on alder at Brundall, May,
1878. Found to be a new species
Fenusa melanopoda, Cam. Norwich ; on
alder, in July
pumilio. Htg. August
pygmaa, Klug. Earlham, Lynn ; single
specimens only

Norwich ;

Earlham, Spar-
Common on wild and

Norwich; May and

— pumilla, Klug. Norwich; bred from
leaves of birch
— ulmi, Sun. Norwich ; end of May

and June
Athalia ancilla, Sep. Common in June
— spinarum, Fab. Formerly a destruc-
tive pest among turnips; I do not
know that it has recently been taken

at all
— rosa, Linn, Abundant everywhere
— lugens, Klug. Brundall; scarce, May
and August

Hemichroa alni, Linn, Female common
on alder in June; male rare

— rufa, Panz. Norwich ; rare

Dineura stilata, Klug. Abundant every-
where in hedges

— verna, Klug. Norwich, Lynn; single
specimens only

— viridorsata, Retz. Norwich ; rare, May,
June

H

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

TenTHREDINID# (continued)
Cladius pectinicornis, Fourc. usually in gardens

Common,

— mfipes, Sep. One at Eaton in August,
1881

— eradiatus, Htg. Norwich; April to
June ; also bred from __perfor-

ated bramble sticks collected in
winter

— drewseni, Thom. June, scarce

— padi, Linn. Very abundant

Croesus latipes, Villaret. Lynn ; taken by
Mr. Atmore in May, 1887

— septentrionalis, Linn. Downham; Mr.
Norgate

Nematus fulvipes, Fall. August

— hibernicus, Cam. Two specimens at
Norwich and one at Lynn

— crassicornis, Htg. Norwich; May to

Norwich; May,

Brundall; July,

July

— appendiculatus, Htg. Norwich; two
females only

— ceruleocarpus, Het. males in June

— lucidus, Panz. Eaton; two

Norwich, Sparbam ;

May, June
— capree, Panz. Common
— obductus, Htg. Norwich, Brundall;

end of May to July

— leucogaster, Htg. Norwich, Brundall,
Felthorpe ; July, August

— curtispina, Thom. Heigham; one, in
June

— viridescens, Cam. — glutinose, Cam. Lynn; one male, by
Mr. Atmore in June

— miliaris, Panz. Common on willows

— tibialis, Newm. A single female taken
many years ago

— myosotidis, Fab. Common; June to
August

— abdominalis, Panz. A single specimen
taken in Heigham Osier Car

— ruficapillus, Gmel. Very common

— ribesii, Scop. Very common on goose-
berry bushes

— albipennis, Htg. Norwich, Brundall,
Felthorpe

— xanthogaster, Foer. Norwich, Brun-
dall; April to August, common

— leucostictus, Htg. Brundall, Lynn ;
May, June

— gallicola, West. Female abundant on
willows, the male is very rare

— bridgemanii, Cam. Brundall; from
galls on sallow

Cimbex sylvarum, Fab. Stephens says that
it has been taken in Norfolk

98

‘TENTHREDINIDE (continued)
Trichiosoma lucorum, Linn. taken by Mr. Norgate
— betuleti, Klug. Norwich ; common on
whitethorn hedges
Abia sericea, Leach. Brundall, on flowers
of scabious ; Di/bam, on alder
Hylotoma ustulata, Linn. Eaton, Cringle-
ford, Brundall ; May, not uncommon
—atrata, Foer. Sparham; one female
taken by Mr. Norgate
— melanochroa, Gmel. twice captured
— cyanocrocea, Foer. Sparham ;

Eaton; June,

Norwich; common

— rose, Linn. Generally distributed

Lyda sylvatica, Linn. Norwich; two speci-
mens only

Xyela pusilla, Dalb. Recorded in Norfolk
by Curtis

Cephina pygmeus, Linn. Very common

— pallipes, Klug. Felthorpe, Lynn; July

— floralis, Klug. One specimen recorded
by Stephens

— tabidus, Fab. specimen

Curysipipz

Cleptes semiauratus, Linn. mouth ; July, common

— nitidulus, Fab. Yarmouth ; on the sand-
hills

Ellampus panzeri, Fab. Eaton, Mousehold ;
three specimens from flowers in
August, 1875

Homalus auratus, Linn. Common

— caruleus, de G. Common

Hedychrum lucidulum, Fab. Eaton, Mouse-
hold; July; in plenty at the latter
locality about a mixed colony of
Cerceris arenaria, C, labiata and C.
ornata

— ardens, Curt. in June

— roseum, Rossi. Mousehold ; two speci-
mens, in August

Chrysis ignita, Linn. Abounds from the
end of May about old posts, rails

Earlham; one female

Norwich, Yar

Eaton ; taken sparingly

and walls

— viridula, Linn. Harford Bridges ;
June

— cyanea, Linn. Abundant everywhere

— austriaca, Fab. Eaton, two specimens
in June, one at Brundall
ACULEATA
HETEROGYNA
Formica fusca, Linn. where
— fuliginosa, Latr. cayed trees
— nigra, Linn. Abundant everywhere
— flava, de Geer. Generally common

Abundant every-

Common about de-

INSECTS

HeETEROGYNA (continued)

Camponotus herculanea, Linn, Females
and neuters found alive (among
timber from New Brunswick) in
a sawyard at Norwich, in April,
1877

Tetramorium lippula, Nyl. One male
taken near Norwich in 1878

Myrmica ruginodis, Nyl. Norwich ; not
very common

— scabrinodis, Ny!. — levinodis, Nyl. wich district

— lobicornis, Fab. Mousehold ; taken by

Very common
Plentiful in the Nor-

Mr. Thouless in 1886; a rare
species
Leptothorax acervorum, Fab. — Neuters

were taken from the trunk of an old
tree at Earlham in 1888

Diplorhoptrum domesticum, Shuck. This
little pest, the red house-ant, is to be
found in some of the houses in Nor-
wich

Fossores

Mutilla ephippium, Fab. Norwich ; on dry
sunny banks, in August

Myrmosa melanocephala, Fab. district ; end of July

Tiphia femorata, Fab. Norwich, Cromer ;
on Umbellifere, end of July and in
August

— minuta, Lind. Eaton, Mouschold ; a few
females, end of June and beginning
of July

Sapyga 5-punctata, Fab. Pompilus fuscus, Linn,
where

— trivialis, Dahlb. On every dry bank

— consobrinus, Dahlb. Norwich

— pectinipes, Linn. Mousebold

— plumbeus, Fab. Yarmouth, Cromer,
Bawsey Heath

Norwich

Brundall ; July
Common every-

— niger, Fab. Recorded in Paget's list
— rufipes, Linn. Yarmouth, Earlham ;
August

Priocnemis sepicola, Smith. In hedgerows,
commonly in the spring

— affinis, Lind. Recorded in Mr. Smith’s
catalogue, in Norfolt, in August and
September

— exaltatus, Fab. and August

— hyalinatus, Fab. Norwich, in garden ;
Meousehold, in July, August and Sep-
tember

— parvulus, Dahlb. females, September

Agenia hircana, Fab, Earlham, Eaton ;
two females and one male on trunks
of trees, in June and July, 1878

Everywhere, in July

Mousehold ; two

99

Fossores (continued)
Ceropales maculata, Fab, Norwich; on
Umbelliferze, in August
Ammophila sabulosa, Linn. May
— viatica, Linn. appearing later
— lutaria, Fab. Afousehold ; scarce
Miscus campestris, Latr, Mousehold ; early
in July
Tachytes pompiliformis, Panz. Norwich,
Cromer, June, July, not rare
boops, Schr. Mousehold ; July,
August, not common
Nysson spinosus, Fab. Latenham, Brun-
dall; May to July, frequent
— trimaculatus, Rossi. Norwich, Heigham,
Brundall ; July, August
— dimidiatus, Jurine. Earlham, Eaton,
Brundall; July, August
Gorytes mystaceus, Linn. Norwich, Brun-
dall; May and June, common
— quadrifasciatus, Fab. Heigham, Brun-
dall, Horning ; June, July
Hoplisus bicinctus, Rossi. Eaton ; a fine
female of this very rare wasp
Harpactus tumidus, Panz. Sandhills, Yar-
mouth, June; Earlham, Eaton, in
July and August
Mellinus arvensis, Linn. Eaton, Earlham,
Mousehold, Brundall, Yarmouth,
Bawsey Heath; very common
— sabulosus, Fab. Brundall; July
Trypoxylon figulus, Linn. Very common
— attenuatum, Smith. Abundant
— clavigerum, St. Farg. Scarcer than the
last two
Crabro clavipes, Linn. Norwich, Harford
Bridges, Earlham; June to Septem-
ber
tibiale, Fab. Brundall
signatus, Panz. Eaton ; one male, June,
1874; rare in this county
‘luteipalpis, St. Farg. Lynn, Norwich,
Brundall ; June, July
podagricus, Lind. Brundall; August,
1879
varius, St. Farg. Earlham, Brundall ;
July, September
leucostoma. Norwich ; common
exiguus, Shuck. Earlham; one speci-
men, July, 1874
walkeri, Shuck, Cromer
wesmacli, Lind. Cromer ; one speci-
men, August, 1877
obliquus, Shuck. Norwich, Brundall,
Cromer; August
quadrimaculatus, Fab. Abundant, July
and August
scutatus, Fab,

Abundant in

Less abundant, and

Astata

Norwich ; July, August

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Fossores (continued)

Crabro cephalotes, Panz. Horning, Cromer,
Brundall; August

— cribrarius, Linn. — patellatus, Panz. — palmipes, Linn. males not rare

— vagus, Linn. Brundall ; June, August

— chrysostomus, St. Farg. Brundall ;
June, August

— albilabris, Fab, Norwich, Cromer 5 very
common

— panzeri, Lind. Cromer ; taken by Mr.
F. Smith, August, 1868

— brevis, Lind. Norwich, Cromer ; abun-
dant, August

Oxybelus uniglumis, Linn. Abundant in
summer on every dry bank

— mandibularis, Dahlb. Norwich; one
male, identified by Mr. E. Saun-
ders

Spilomena troglodytes, Shuck. One speci-
men, flying about palings in Norwich,
August, 1875

Stigmus pendulus, Panz. Norwich ; abun-
dant about old palings in garden,

} Very common
Mousehold, Earlham ;

June, July

Diodontus minutus, Fab. Abundant every-
where

— luperus, Shuck. Equally plentiful with
the last

— tristis, Lind. Less frequent than the
last two

Passalecus cornigera, Shuck. Generally
distributed

— brevicornis, Thoms. Common

— gracilis, Curt. taken
Pemphredon lugubris, Fab. abundant
Cemonus unicolor, Lind. |

One specimen only

Tolerably

— lethifer, Shuck. Nerany teat

Psen pallipes, Panz. June to August

Mimesa shuckardi, Wesm. Mousehold,
Eaton, Brundall; scarce

— bicolor, Jurine. Generally distributed,
July, August

Cerceris arenaria, Linn,
bold; July, August

— labiata, Fab." Norwich, Bawsey Heath ;
July, August

Yarmouth, Mouse-

— ornata, Fab. Equally common with
the last
Dirtoprera
Odynerus sinuatus, Fab. Heigham, Brun-
dall ; July

— gracilis, Brullé. Postwick; taken by
the Rev. J. L. Brown

— spinipes, Linn. — Harford Bridges,
Brundall; July

Dirroprera (continued)

Odynerus melanocephalus, Gmel. Brun-
dall; one specimen, July, 1873

— parietinum, Linn. Not uncommon in
some seasons

— parietum, Linn. Very abundant

— quadratus, Thoms. Equally abun-
dant

— trifasciatus, Oliv. Not uncommon

— pictus, Curt. Norwich ; occasionally
taken

— antilope, Panz. E. A. Atmore

Vespa crabro, Linn. — vulgaris, Linn. — germanica, Fab. — rufa, Linn, Not uncommon

— sylvestris, Scop. Not rare ; a nest was
taken in 1875, out of a bank; it is
not its usual habit to build under-
ground

— norvegica, Fab. Witton ; a nest taken
in July, 1875, by the Rev. J. Landy
Brown contained all three sexes;
not otherwise noticed in Norfalk

ANTHOPHILA

Colletes succincta, Linn. Mousehold, St.
Faiths, Bawsey ; abundant at heather
bloom in August and September

— fodiens, Kirby. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Lynn; July to September, at ragwort
blossom

— picistigma, Thoms. female in July, 1875

— daviesana, Smith. About every sandy

Lynn ; taken by Mr.

Generally distributed
} Common anywhere

Norwich; one

bank

Prosopis communis, Nyl. Common ; June
till August

— confusus. Earlham, Brundall; not

common, at flowers of bramble

— signata, Panz. Generally common, at
flowers of mignonette

— hyalinata, Kirby. Common

— perforator, Smith. Earlham ; at bramble
flowers. — varipes, Smith. Norwich ; one male

Sphecodes gibbus, Linn. Generally dis-
tributed and common

— rufiventris, Wesm. Generally distri-
buted and common

— subquadratus, Smith. uncommon

— ephippius, Linn. Very common

— pilifrons, ano} Taken with S.

— similis, Wesm. rufiventris

— ferruginatus, Schenck. Brundall; one
female

— variegatus, v. Hag. — dimidiatus, v. Hag. — affinis, v. Hag. Brundall, Eaton ;

Taken with S.
ephippius

100

INSECTS

ANTHOPHILA (continued) AntHopnita (continued)

Sphecodes puncticeps, Thoms. One male Mousehold ;

Andrena hattorfiana, Fab. only taken
Eaton, Wor-
stead; July, 1876, at flowers of
Knautia arvensis
decorata, Smith. Norwich, Brundall,
Costessey ; end of July and in August,
plentiful at bramble blossom
cetii, Schr. Eaton; on flowers of
Knautia arvensis in August
cingulata, Fab. Norwich ; May, June,
in flowers of Veronica chamacdrys
pilipes, Fab. Norwich ; occasional in
May and June
thoracica, Fab. Norwich, Brundall,
Wroxham ; April and May, and if
the weather is hot, again at the end
of July
nitida, Fourc. Norwich, Brundall,
Lynn; not common ; end of April
to June
vitrea, Smith. Mousehold, Brundall; at
flowers of bramble, July, scarce
albicans, Kirby. Common every-
where
analis, Panz. Fe/thorpe ; once taken in
June, 1881
clarkella, Kirby. Yarmouth, Horning ;
March
gwynana, Kirby. Abundant in early
spring on dandelion flowers
bicolor, Fab. Norwich, Brundall ; June,
July
helvola, Linn. April to June
varians, Rossi. Norwich ; not so com-
mon
atriceps, Kirby. One of the earliest
of spring bees; abundant at sallow-
bloom and other spring flowers
nigro-enea, Kirby. Abundant
generally distributed
trimmerana, Kirby. Norwich ; fairly
common, April to June
picicornis, Kirby. Aousehold, Cringle-
ford; three females and two males
only taken, April
bimaculata, Kirby. Norwich, Brundall ;
very local, April
smithella, Kirby. plentiful
nigriceps, Kirby. Norwich; female
plentiful on ragwort flowers in July
and August ; male very rare
pubescens, Kirby. Mousebold ; at heather
bloom, August
tridentata, Kirby. Mousehold and
Eaton; males common on ragwort
flowers in July ; female scarce

Norwich ; common,

and

Norwich, Brundall ;

Or

Andrena angustior, Kirby. Cilissa hemorrhoidalis, Fab. Halictus rubicundus, Kirby. one female only, May, 1875

fucata, Smith. Carbrooke ; taken by the
Rev. J. L. Brown

aprilina, Smith. One specimen taken
in April, 1873

fulvicrus, Kirby. One male taken at
Brundall in 1874 by the Rev. J. L.
Brown

albicrus, Kirby. Generally distributed
and common; April and May

labialis, Kirby. Eaton, Harford Bridges,
Brundall, Yarmouth, Lynn ; in June,
but not common

chrysosceles, Kirby. Carbrooke, Eaton ;
very rare

coitana, Kirby. Norwich, Brundall ;
common in July and August

parvula, Kirby. Very common ; end
of March

minutula, Kirby. Norwich, Lynn 5
July, August, uncommon

nana, Kirby. Eaton, Earlham, Mouse-
hold ; May, June

dorsata, Kirby. Common at flowers
of bramble; July, August

combinata, Kirby. Norwich, Brundall ,
at sallow bloom; sometimes com-
mon

connectens, Kirby. fuscata, Kirby. May

afzeliella, Kirby. Common, April,
May and end of July

convexiuscula, Kirby. Norwich; plenti-
ful, April to June

collinsonana, Kirby. Recorded by
Kirby as taken in the county in
June, 1799

xanthura, Kirby. Generally distri-
buted ; April, May

 

Norwich

Mousehold ; April,

Frequent
on flowers of campanula ; July,
August

leporina, Panz. Eaton, Brundall ; July,
August, occasionally at the flowers
of white clover

Not un-
common at Norwich

leucozonius, Schr. Very common

quadrinotatus, Kirby. Abundant

cylindricus, Fab. Common
malachurus, Kirby. Cromer ; taken by
Mr. F. Smith

albipes, Fab. Very common

fulvicornis, Kirby. Cromer ; taken by
Mr. F, Smith

villosulus, Kirby. tumulorum, Linn. Norwich, Cromer
Very abundant

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

ANTHOPHILA (continued)

Halictus smeathmanellus, Kirby. Nor
wich, Brundall, Cromer ; occasional

— zratus, Kirby

— morio, Kirby

— leucopus, Kirby. Norwich ; scarce

— minutus, Kirby. Generally distributed

— nitidiusculus, Kirby. Generally distri-
buted

— punctatissimus,
district

— minutissimus, Kirby. Very common

Dasypoda hirtipes, Latr. Caistor Marrams,
near Yarmouth ; August

Macropis labiata, Panz. Brundall; on
flowers of creeping thistle, wild
peppermint, marsh potentilla, and
yellow loosestrife

Panurgus banksianus, Kirby. Mousehold,
Eaton ; very abundant from the end
of June till August

Nomada ruficornis, Linn. end of April to June

— lateralis, Panz. Brundall, Cringleford ;
April and May

— ochrostoma, Kirby. Earlham, Eaton ;
‘one female each in June, rare

— armata, Schaff. Eaton ; four females
only

— obtusifrons, Nyl. Brundall; July and
August, on flowers of the creeping-
rooted thistle

— flavoguttata, Kirby.

} Very common

Schenck. Norwich

Very common,

Lynn; end of

May
— furva, Panz. Not uncommon, flying
about the burrows of the small

Halicti at the end of May and in
June

— solidaginis, Panz. Plentiful on ragwort
flowers, July, August

— jacobez, Panz. Plentiful in 1874,
otherwise not common

— lineola, Panz. Mousehold ; end of May
and in June

— sexfasciata, Panz. Norwich; about a
colony of Eucera longicornis in a
bank near Thorpe Asylum, end of
May, June

— alternata, Kirby

— succincta, Panz. } April to June

Epeolus variegatus, Linn. Bawsey Heath,
near Lynn ; common about burrows
of Colletes daviesana in July and
August

Melecta armata, Panz. Generally common
about burrows of Anthophora acer-
vorum from the end of March till
May

Stellis aterrima, Panz. Norwich ; in garden
at flowers of Coreopsis, scarce

Very common from

ANTHOPHILA (continued)

Stellis pheoptera, Kirby. Brundall; one
specimen, in August, 1879

Coelioxys quadridentata, Linn. Postwick, Yarmouth, Lynn

— simplex, Nyl. Very abundant, June,
July

— acuminata, Nyl. Not uncommon

— tufescens, St. Farg. Eaton, Mousehold,

Eaton,

Brundall

Osmia rufa, Linn, Abundant in early
spring

— 2nea, Linn, Not uncommon, April

to June; female at red nettle

— fulviventris, Panz. Norwich, Eaton,
Brundall, Harford Bridges ; common,
June, July

— spinulosa, Kirby. Brundall; two
females from ragwort flowers, in
July and August

Chelostoma florisomne,
Bridges, June, July

— campanularum, Kirby. Norwich, in
gardens, about flowers of Cam-
panula

Anthidium manicatum, Linn. at midsummer

Megachile centuncularis, Linn. Very
common in gardens and at bramble
flowers, from June to August

— versicolor, Smith. One female in the
garden, 1873

— circumcincta, Kirby. Linn. Harford

Abundant

Norwich ; June,

July

— willughbiella, Kirby. Norwich; plenti-
ful, June to August

— maritima, Kirby. Mousebold, Yarmouth ;
not scarce, July and August

Eucera longicornis, Linn. Norwich, Post-
wick; end of May

Anthophora retusa, Linn. Mousehold ;
plentiful, May, or even end of
April

— acervorum, Fab. Every dry bank ;
abundant in earliest spring

— furcata, Panz. Eaton, Earlham, Mouse-
hold, Brundall; frequenting flowers
of red nettle, middle of May till
August

Bombus muscorum, Linn. dant

— agrorum, Fab. Norwich district

— venustus, Smith. Not uncommon

— elegans, Seidl. Mousehold, Brundall,
Yarmouth, Cromer

— sylvarum, Linn. Very common

— derhamellus, Kirby. Common

— pratorum, Linn, Abundant

— jonellus, Kirby. Norwich; two neuters
in 1873

Very abun-

102

INSECTS

Ichneumon heracliana, Bridg. Lynn 5 has
been reared from Depressaria hera~
cliana

ANTHOPHILA (continued) IcHNEUMONIDA (continued)
Bombus lapidarius, Linn. — lucorum, Linn. Common every-
— virginalis, Kirby. where

— hortorum, Linn. — latreillellus, Kirby. Generally distri-
buted, but less common
— subterraneus, Linn. Common
Apathus rupestris, Fab. } — vestialis, Fourc. Abundant
— barbutellus, Kirby
— campestris, Panz. Males plentiful, but
females quite scarce
Apis mellifica, Linn, Everywhere
IcHNEUMONIDE
Chasmodes motatorius, Fab. Very com-
mon
Ichneumon consimilis, Wesm. Cromer;
one female, end of May
— lineator, Fab. Brundall; two males
— impressor, Zett. Lynn, reared by Mr.
Atmore from larve of Gortyna
flavago
— derasus, Wesm. Eaton; one male,
July
— bilineatus, Gmel. A common parasite
of Abraxas grossulariata
— molitorius, Linn. Yarmouth,
— languidus, Wesm. Eaton, Earlham ;
two males, July, August
— vaginatorius, Linn, Common
— confusorius, Gmel. Males common,
females less so
— tempestivus, Holm, Mousehold, Yar-
mouth ; Mr. Thouless
— gracilentus, Linn. Earlham; one
female, August
— luctatorius, Linn. Common
— macrocerus, Thom. Brundall; one
male
— labrator, Fab. Earlham, Brundall,
Cromer
— insidiosus, Wesm. Brundall; August
— primatorius, Forst. Mousebold ; one
female taken by Mr. Thouless
— emancipatus, Wesm. Norwich; one
male
— cessator, Mull. Norfolk; in June
— gemellus, Gr. Heigham, Earlham,
Brundall, Lynn ; not common
— saturatorius, Linn. Earlham, Brundall,
Lynn
— bimaculatorius, Panz. Brundall; one
female, September
— nigritarius, Gr. Sparham; taken by
‘Mr. F. Norgate
— curvinervis, Holm. Norwich
— fugitivus, Gr. Norwich ; common ;
perhaps a variety of I. fabricator
— lanius, Gr. Norwich; common
103

— leucomelas, Gmel. Mousebold, Earl-
ham

— vestigator, Wesm. Norwich

—lepidus, Gr. Brundall, Norwich ;
males only

— anator, Fab. Norwich ; two females

— bilunulatus, Gr. Common

— ochropus, Gmel. Norwich

— ridibundus, Gr. Eaton; one male,
July

— plagiator, Wesm. Eaton

— albicinctus, Gr. Very common

— deceptor, Gr. Norfolk

— expectatorius, Panz. Norfolk

Amblyteles palliatorius, Gr. Mousebold,
Brundall

— amatorius, Forst. Norwich

— oratorius, Fab, Mousehold ; two males
in September

— vadatorius, Rossi. Norwich; one

taken by Mr. Thouless

occisorius, Fab. Common

negatorius, Fab. Norfalk

castigator, Fab. Common

messorius, Gr. Earlham ; two females

funereus, Fourc. One male, at

Eaton

— alticola, Gr. Common

Trogus lutorius, Fab, Norwich, Lynn

— alboguttatus, Gr. Norfolé; in June

Platylabris rufus, Wesm. Lynn; bred by
Mr. Atmore from larva of Cabera
pusaria

— pedatorius, Fab. Common

— viridipennis, Gr. Norwich

— dimidiatus, Gr. Mousehold

— pactor, Wesm. Earlham

Apaleticus inclytus, Wesm. Latenham,
Earlham

Herpestomus nasutus, Wesm. Ear/ham ;
August

— furunculus, Wesm. Earlham, Eaton,
Mouschold 5 August, September

— intermedius, Wesm. Eaton ; August

— striatus, Bridg. Eaton, Earlham,
Brundall

Colpognathus celerator, Gr. Lynn

Diccelotus pumilus, Gr. Mousehold ; June

— cameroni, Bridge. Heigham, Earlham ;

bttd

August

Centeterus opprimator, Gr. Brundall ;
common

Trachyarus corvinus, Thom. Earlham ;
July

Phaogenes semivulpinus, Gr. Norwich,
Brundall ; common

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

IcHNEUMONIDA (continued)

Phzogenes planifrons, Gr. August

— stimulator, Gr. Norfolk; June

— calopus, Wesm. Common generally

— varicolor, Wesm., and var. intermedius. Gunton ; August

— fulvitarsus, Wesm. Common

— bellicornis, Wesm. Brundall, Earlham ;
May, September

— nanus, Wesm. Eaton

— ischiomelinus, Gr. Common

— trepidus, Wesm. Hethersett, Wroxham ;

Brundall ;

May

— impeger, Wesm. Earlham; August,
September

— argutus, Wesm. Eaton; Earlham;
common

— collaris, Gr. Eaton; July

Oiorhinus  pallipalpus, Wesm. Eaton,

Earlham, Mouschold ; autumn

ZEthecerus longulus, Wesm. Earlham ;
August

— discolor, Wesm. Earlham ; one female
in September

— nitidus, Wesm. Earlham, Lakenham,
Heigham, Gunton, Lynn; reared
from larve of Cosmia diffinis

— dispar, Wesm. Common

Ischnus nigricollis, Wesm. Norwich

Epitomus parvus, Thom. Norwich ; taken
occasionally

Alomyia debellator, Fab. Male
common ; female rarely seen

Stilpnus gagates, Gr. Brundall ; July

— pavonie, Scop. Eaton; July

— blandus, Gr. Norwich; June, August

Phygadeuon caliginosus, Gr. Sparham

— nigrita, Gr. Earlham, Eaton; Sep-
tember

very

flavimanus, Gr. Mousehold ; July

— dumetorum, Gr. Common, July,
August
variabilis, Gr. Common in May

fumator, Gr. able
inflatus, Thom. |

Very common and vari-

Norfolk ; localities

scaposus, Thom. eee)

dimidiatus, Thom. troglodytes, Gr. jejunator, Gr. ereus, Gr. brevitarsis, Thom. Earlham, Wroxham ;
August, September
nitidus, Gr. Earlham, Eaton, Heigham ;
September
ovatus, Gr. exiguus, Gr. Norwich
brevis, Gr. Earlham ; August
improbus, Gr. Earlham; September

Common

Earlham ; August

Ill

IcHNEUMONID (continued)

Phygadeuon hopei, Gr. tember

— vagabundus, Gr. Common

— cinctorius, Fab. Acie; a female taken
by Mr. Thouless

— quadrispinus, Gr. — graminicola, Gr. ham

— abdominator, Gr. Eaton

— jucundus, Gr. Very common

— arridens, Gr. Common

— oviventris, Gr. Earlham

—erythrinus, Gr. Norwich, Horning,
Foxley

— brachyurus, Thom. Earlham ; June

— flavipunctatus, Bridg. Mousehold ;
October

— perspicillator, Gr. Earlham, Lynn;
bred by Mr. Atmore from Trachaa
piniperda

Phygadeuon rotundipennis, Thom. Mouse-
hold; August

— nanus, Gr. Earlham

— sperator, Gr. Felthorpe

— lacteator, Gr. Earlham, Brundall ;
July, August

— hercynicus, Gr. Eaton, Heigham, Brun-
dall; July, August

— subtilicornis, Gr. Heigham ; June

Lakenbam ; Sep-

Brundall; October
Brundall, Laken

— parvulus, Gr. Brundall, Heigham,
Lynn

Cryptus viduatorius, Fab. Norwich

—lugubris, Gr. Heigham, Brundall,
Horning

tarsoleucus, Schr. moschator, Fab. | Common

parvulus, Gr. Heigham, Brundall
anatorius, Gr. Mousehold ; August
stomaticus, Gr. Eaton, Earlham ; June
titillator, Gr. Eaton ; June

Pldttddad

dianz, Gr. Lynn
obscurus, Gr. Generally common
hostilis, Gr. Earlham 5 July, Septem-
ber
— porrectorius, Fab. Eaton ; July, Sep-
tember
— analis, Gr. Generally common

— peregrinator, Linn. Norwich, Brun-
dall, Cromer ; June, August

— ornatus, Gr. Eaton, Brundall; May,
August

— amznus, Gr. Norwich

— migrator, Fab. Generally common

— cimbicis, Tsch. Norwich ; reared from
larva of Trichiosoma betuleti

— pygoleucus, Gr. Generally common

— carnifex, Gr. Brundall; July, Septem-
ber

— elegans, Desv. Brundall; July, October

104

INSECTS

Icuneumonrp: (continued)
Cryptus antennatus, Bridg. females only ; April
— incurbitor, Stroem. Norwich ; reared
from larva of Saturnia carpini
— signatorius, Fab. Norwich ;
from perforated bramble sticks
Mesostenus obnoxius, Gr. Brundall ; para-
sitic on Zygena filipendula:
Nematopodius ater, Brisch. Norwich ;
males only taken
Hemiteles biannulatus, Gr. Eaton; two

reared

Brundall ;

ay
— patecialaruy Bridg. Earlham 5 Sep-
tember
— hadrocera, Thom. Earlham; July
— fulvipes, Gr. Common generally ;
bred from both moth and bee
larva
— submarginatus, Bridg. Mousehold ;
reared from cocoons of Apanteles
congestus
rufipes, Bridg. Earlham ; June
areator, Panz. Generally common ;
parasitic on moth and saw-fly larvae
bicolorinus, Gr. |
wstivalis, Gr. anralbren, Gx J)
aberrans, Gr. Generally common

Hit

Brundall ; one male in

June

— chionops, Gr. Earlham, Eaton ; May,
August, September

— sordipes, Gr. Aylsham ; has been

reared from galls of Cynips kollari

— similis, Gr. Generally common. — obscurus, Bridg. Eaton; two reared
from spiders’ eges

— tibialis, Bridg. Earlham ; September

— conformis, Gr. Lynn; reared by Mr.
Atmore from larva of Lithocolletis
frolichiella

— scabriculus, Thom. Eaton; July

— castaneus, Tasch. Earlham; July;
parasitic on Trichiosoma betuleti

— inimicus, Gr. Eaton, Earlham

— pictipes, Gr. Earlham ; July

— furcatus, Tasch. Frequent ; has been
reared from larve of Gracilarida:

— oxyphinus, Gr. Earlham ; September

— incisus, Bridg. Earlham, Heigham ;
July, September

— balteanus, Thom. Norwich ; August

— varicoxis, Tasch. Earlham ; July

— imbecillis, Thom. Norwich, Brundall ;
generally common

— floricolator, Gr. Earlham, Lakenham

— stagnalis, Thom. Norwich, Brundall ;
reared from spiders’ eggs

— fragilis, Gr. Generally distributed ;
reared from spiders’ eggs

IcHNEUMONIDA (continued)
Hemitcles ruficaudatus, Bridg. Earlham; July
— gyrini, Parf. “Brundall; May
— formosus, Gr. Earlham; June, July
— gracilis, Thom. Norwich, Brundall ;
parasitic on spiders’ eggs
— validicornis, Thom. Eaton ; September
— mixtus, Bridg. Brundall
Orthopelma luteolator, Gr. Common ;
reared from rose gall-flies = Rhodites
elegantria
Catoglyptus mangeri, Gr. Brundall, Horn-
ing; rare ; June, September
Agrothereutes abbreviator, Fab. hold ; one female in August
— hopei, Gr. Common ; parasitic on
Micro-lepidoptera
Aptesis nigrocincta, Pz. Eaton, Mousehold
Hemimachus piceus, Bridg. Mousebold ;
August
— rufipes, Bridg. Norwich ; July
— ovatus, Bridg. Brundall; September
— tufotinctus, Bridg. Felthorpe ; June
Pezomachus tener, Fst. Norwich ; com-
mon
— zonatus, Fab. Common; reared from
eggs of a spider, Agelena brunnea
— timidus, Fst. Norwich ; one female
— nigritus, Fst. Earlham, Eaton, Brun-
dall
— spinula, Thom. — posthumus, Fst. Mousehold
— costatus, Bridg. Norwich ; common
— rufulus, Fst. Generally common
— corruptor, Fst. Common; reared by
Mr. Thouless from larva of Cionus
scrophularia
ochraceus, Fst. Generally common
mandibularis, Thom. Norwich; one
male in September
distinctus, Fst. Mousehold
intermedius, Fst. Norwich ; common
millleri, Fst. AZousehold
fron yee } Norwich s common
juvenilis, Fst. Eaton
xylochophilus, Fst. Brundall, Horning
analis, Fst. Generally common
agilis, Fst. Norwich ; one male
viduus, Fst. Norwich ; three females
hortensis, Gr. Brundall; one male
transfuga, Fst. Common ; reared from
eggs of a spider, Agelena labyrin-
thica
— rufocinctus, Gr. Common ; parasitic
upon moths of the family Tineina
— detritus, Fst. Mousebold ; females
reared from larve of Apanteles con-
gestus

Wroxham,

Mouse-

Norwich ; one male

PPltttttitdd

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

IctiNEUMONIDE (continued)

Pezomachus vagans, Gr. parasitic on spiders’ eggs

— tonsus, Fst. Mousehold ; females
reared from larve of Apanteles con-
gestus

— fasciatus, Gr. Common ; parasitic on
bees as well as on spiders’ eggs

— impotens, Fst. Earlham ; one female
in July

— insolens, Fst. Lynn; parasitic upon
Micro-Lepidoptera

— avidus, Fst. Norwich ; one male

— anguinus, Fst. Norwich

Eniscospilus merdarius, Gr. Norwich 5
reared from larve of Trachea pini-
perda

— ramidulus, Linn, Heigham Osier Car

Ophion obscurum, Fab. Sparham

— luteum, Linn. Generally common

— minutum, Brisch. Norwich

— distans, Thom. Norfolk

Anomalon xanthopus, Schr. Lynn ; reared
by Mr. Atmore from Trachea pini-
perda

— cerinops, Gr. Brundall, Sparham

— clandestinum, Gr. Lynn; reared by
Mr. Atmore from Eupithecia valeri-
anata

— perspicuum, Wesm. Lynn; parasitic
on Noctua and Geometre

— anomelas, Gr. Lynn; reared from
Retinia turionella by Mr. Atmore

— procerum, Gr. Lynn

Agrypon flaveolatum, Gr. on Noctuz

— tenuicorne, Gr. Lynn; parasitic on
Micro-lepidoptera

— canaliculatum, Retz. Lynn ; indiscrimi-
nately parasitic on Lepidoptera

Trichomma enicator, Rossi. Lynn; reared
from larve of Tortrices

Opheltes glaucopterus, Linn. one female

Paniscus cephalotes, Holm. Norfolk

— ccellaris, Thom. Norfolk

— testaceus, Gr. Generally common

Parabatus virgatus, Gr. Foxley

— tarsatus, Brisch. Lynn ; reared by Mr.
Atmore from Eupithecia larve

— nigricarpus, Thom. Lynn

Campoplex falcator, Thunb. Sparham ;
reared from larve of Pygera buce-
phala

— augustatus, Thom. Lynn; from larva
of Cabera pusaria

— facialis, Holm. Norwich

— bucculentus, Holm. Cromer; August

— xenocampus, Fst. Drayton

— terebrator, Fst. Earlham; May

Buckenham ;

 

Lynn 5 parasitic

Brundall ;

TcHNEUMONIDA (continued)
Campoplex leptogaster, Holm. a

— anceps, Holm. Norwich; August ;
parasitic on Pelurga comitata

— disclusus, Fst. Earlham ; September

— erythrogaster, Fst. Generally abundant

— confusus, Fst. Norwich

— zonellus, Fst. Lynn; reared from
larve of Eupithecia pulchellata

— tenuis, Fst. Eaton, Earlham; July

— subolicita, Fst. Felthorpe; June

Cymodusa leucocera, Holm. Mousehold,
Eaton ; October

Thymaris fasciata, Bridg. Norwich; a
single specimen ;_ very rare

Sagaritis erythropus, Thom. Brundall ;
May, July

— zonata, Gr. — annulipes, Tsch. Brundall; June

— brachycera, Thom. .

meas eeislet } Ear barn); July,

— macrocera, Thom. Eaton ; August

— fasciatus, Bridg. Horning; June

Casinaria orbitalis, Gr. Brundall, Sparham

Eaton ;

Generally common

Limneria aberrans, Gr. Earlham; one
male, June
— albida, Gmel. Generally common ;

reared from larve of Eupithecia ab-
synthiata
— apostata, Gr. Lynn; reared from De-
pressaria assimilella
argentata, Gr. Earlham ; August
armillata, Gr. Norwich; common
barrettii, Bridg. Earlham; July,
August
bicingulata, Gr. Earlham ; August
brischkei, Bridg. Generally common
carnifex, Gr. Mousehold
chrysosticta, Gr. Earlham; July
consobrina, Holm. Eaton ; July
concinna, Holm. Norwich; August
coxalis, Bris. Lynn 5 very rare
crassicornis, Gr. Earlham
crassiuscula, Gr. Earlham
cursitans, Holm. Generally common ;
August, September
cylindrica, Bris. Brundall

Plttdddidl

— dispar, Gr. Earlham ; September

— dolosa,Gr. Norwich, Brundall ; reared
from a larve of Gastropacha querci-
folia

— dorsalis, Gr. Norwich, Horning ; June,
August

—clishe, Bridg. AMousebold, Earlham ;
parasitic on Micro-lepidoptera

— ensator, Gr. Generally common ;
parasitic on Tortrices and Tineina

— erythropyga, Holm. Norwich, Brun-
dall ; June, July

106

INSECTS

Tcuneumonto” (continued)

Limneria erucator, Holm. Canidia pusilla, Retz. Nemeritis macrocentra, Gr. Meloboris gracilis, Holm. Cremastus interruptor, Gr. Atractodes vestalis, Hal. Exolytus levigatus, Gr. Brundall

exareolata, Retz. Earlham

faunus, Gr. Generally very common

femoralis, Gr. Norwich ; parasitic on
smal] Micro-Lepidoptera

fenestrafis, Holm. Mousehold

fulviventris, Gmel. Norwich; May,
June
geniculata, Gr. Lynn

hydropota, Holm. Brundall; July
gracilis, Gr. Mousehold, Earlham
interrupta, Holm. Generally common
kreichbaumeri, Bridg. Brundall ; para-
sitic on Tzeniocampa instabilis
latungula, Thom. Brundall; July
longipes, Mall. Norwich, Lynn; July
lugubrina, Holm. Earlham ; June
majalis, Gr. Generally abundant
molesta, Gr. Lynn
mutabilis, Holm. Norwich ; common
notata, Gr. Norwich, Harford Bridges ;
July
pagana, Holm. paludicola, Gr. ruficincta, Gr. Aylsham
ramidula, Bris. Lynn; reared from
larve of Retinia pinivorana
reticulata, Bridg. Brundall, Sparham ;
June, July
rufiventris, Gr. Norwich, Eaton, Brun-
dall ; July, August
robusta, Woldst. Earlham, Lynn
tibialis, Gr. Norwich; reared from
larva: of Coleophora lineola
tumidula, Gr. Aylsham ; one specimen
vestigialis, Retz. Generally distributed ;
reared from willow galls=Nematus
gallicola
virginalis, Gr. Earlham ; June
Felthorpe ; June
Brundall, Earlham,

Norwich district
Earlham ; July
trochantella, Thom. Earlham ; Octo-
ber
exigua, Gr. subcincta, Holm. Brundall, Gunton ; July
Eaton ; July
Lynn; reared
from larve of Ptycholoma lecheana
Brundall
Yarmouth
Generally com-
mon
gilvipes, Holm. Latenham; May
exilis, Hal. Ps
bicolor, Gr. \ Norwich ; May, July
properator, Hal. splendens, Gr. compressus, Thom. Generally common
Brundall ; July
Wroxham; June

Generally com-
mon ; a very variable species

IcHNEUMONIDA (continued)
Mesochorus tenuicornis, Thom. ham; August

politus, Gr. Eaton; July

nigripes, Retz. Lakenham ; June

pectinipes, Bridg. Earlham ; May
vitticollis, Holm. Eaton, Wroxham ;
June
testaceus, Gr. sylvarum, Hal. July, August
crassimanus, Holm, Eaton; August
vittator, Zett. Lynn; common, reared
from larve of Nola cucullatella
tenuiscapus, Thom. Brundall; May
stigmaticus, Thom. Earlham, Sparham
pictoralis, Retz. Mousehold, Earlham ;
reared from larve of Apanteles
tachypus, Holm. Norwich, Salhouse
confusus, Holm. Generally common

Laken-

Brundall ; May
Generally common ;

— convexicollis, Thom. Norwich

Aperileptusalbipalpus, Gr. Earlham ; July

Plectiscus spilotus, Fst. Eaton; May,
June

— eurystigma, Thom. Earlham; Septem-
ber

— melanocerus, Fst. Buckenham

Idioxenus erythrostomus, Gr. Aylsham ;

May
— mediator, Schio. Proclitus grandis, Fst. ber
Eusterinx obscurella, Fst. Earlham ; May
Porizon hostilis, Gr. Brundall; one female
— harpurus, Schr. Eaton
Thersilochus carinatus, Bridg. Lakenham ;

Brundall; July
Earlham ; Septem-

July
— jocator, Fab. Generally common
—Tufipes, Holm. Eariham; end of

August, September
triangularis, Gr. Norwich, Hethersett ;

May, June
— versatus, Holm. arlham; August,
September
— moderator, Linn. Norwich; May,
June

flavicornis, Thom. Eaton ; reared from
galls of Nematus gallicola
morionellus, Holm. Brundall; June
Collyria calcitrator, Vill. Generally com-
mon
Exetastes osculatoria, Fab. Earlham; June,
ul;
caldboes, Gr. Earlham ; September
illusor, Gr. Harford Bridges ; July
albitarsus, Gr. Norwich; common
guttatorius, Gr. Mousehold
Banchus falcator, Fab. Norwich
Scolobates auriculatus, Fab. Brundall; one
specimen, June

107

A HISTORY

IcHNEUMONIDE (continued)
Mesoleptus testaceus, Fab. ea S* } Generally common
fregax, Gr. Norwich, Felthorpe
marginatus, Bridg. Brundall; May
macrodactylus, Holm. Horning; June
— sulphuratus, Gr. Brundall; August
Catoglyptus fortipes, Gr. Norwich, Brun-
dall; June
-— fusicornis, Gmel. Norwich

Lynn ; June

Rhastus bipunctatus, Bridg. Eerlbam ;
May
Euryproctus nigriceps, Gr. — Norwich ;

reared from cocoons of Trichiosoma
betuleti
sinister, Bris. Earlham ; September
minutus, Bridg. Brundall; May
atomator, Mull. Norwich, Brundall,
Buckenham ; June, October
geniculosus, Gr. Norwich, Brundall ;

July, August
July,

albopictus, Gr. August

Prionopoda stictica, Fab. Mousehold ; July

— glaber, Bridg. Norwich ; July

Perilissus filicornis, Gr. Generally very

Brundall ;

common
variator, Mall. ‘ Usually common
vernalis, Gr. subcinctus, Gr. | Generally very
limitaris, Gr. common

pictilis, Holm. Norwich
gorskii, Retz. Norwich, Lynn; July
pallidus, Gr. Brundall, Horning ; June,
July
scotopterus, Gr. Earlham; June
bucculentus, Holm. Lynn; June
ier ivae ornatus, Holm. Earlham ; Sept.
— fontinalis, Holm. Mousehold ; on heath
Mesoleius sanguinicollis, Gr. Brundall,
Cromer
hematodes, Gr. furax, Holm. aulicus, Gr. dubius, Holm. canine, Bridg. Norwich; reared from
larvee of Eriocampa limacina
vigens, Holm. Earlham; August
parvus, Holm. Earlham ; August, one
specimen
filicornis, Holm. Brundall
transfuga, Holm. Lynn
— virgulatorum, Gr. Eaton ;
multicolor, Gr. Norwich
unifasciatus, Holm. Earlham
dorsalis, Gr. Earibam; one female
rufinotatus, Holm. Earlham
difformis, Holm. Norwich, Salhouse

PIITtitt

Norwich

Eaton, Mousehold,

June, July

198

OF NORFOLK

IcHNEUMONIDE (continued)

Mesoleius pedatus, Bridg. female, September
ignavus, Holm. } Norwich

leptogaster, Holm. calcaratus, Bridg. Norwich, Brundall
erythrogaster, Holm. Brundall; one
male
armillatorius, Gr. rufilabris, Zett. Generally common
hamulus, Gr. Norwich, Lynn
semicaligatus, Gr. insolens, Gr. — testaceus, Fab. Saotus compressiusculus,
June
Trematopygus atratus, Holm. reared from Croesus varians
— procurator, Gr. Buckenbam Ferry

Brundall ; one

Brundall

- Generally common

Norwich
Thom. Eaton;

Lynn 5

Dyspetus prarogator, Gr. Generally
common in autumn
Otoblastus luteomarginatus, Gr. Norwich

Tryphon elongator, Fab. Norwich ; com-
mon

rutilator, Linn. Generally common

trochanteratus, Holm. Generally com-
mon

vulgaris, Holm. Norwich

signator, Gr. Generally common

ephippium, Holm. Latenham, Eaton

bicornutus, Holm. Cringleford, Brun-
dall, Felthorpe; July, August

confinis, Holm. Brundall; September

mitigosus, Gr. Earlham

— albipes, Gr. Earlham; July

Grypocentrus bipunctatus, Bridg. ham; June
— albipes, Ruthe. Lakenbam, Earlham ;
reared from Fenusa pumilio

— anomalus, Bris. Earlham, Brundall

Lathrolestes ungularis, Thom. Norwich

— marginatus, Thom. Mousehold

Rhastus lativentris, Holm. Earlh

Adelognathus chrysopygus, cr} aameaad

Monoblastus levigatus, Holm. Norflk

— neustria, Retz. Brundall

Earl-

— caproni, Bridg. Earlham
Polyblastus  varitarsus, Gr. Generally
common
— stenhammari, Holm. Lynn
— pastoralis, Gr. } Brundall
marginatus, Holm. — carinatus, Holm. Earlham

pinguis, Gr. Generally common
Erromenus brunnicans, Gr. Earlham

— frenator, Gr. Brundall, Eaton, Poring-

land
Acrotomus lucidulus, Gr. } ire
Earlham

Cteniscus erosus, Holm. — lituratorius, Linn. INSECTS

IcHNEUMONID# (continued)

Cteniscus sexcinctus, Gr. mon

— triangulatorius, Gr. — apiarius, Gr. Bawsey Heath, Lynn

— pictus, Gr. Norwich, Lynn

— bimaculatus, Holm. MST iimbatas Holm: a

— limbatellus, Holm. Eaton, Brundall

— dahibomi, Holm. Horning

— hostilis, Holm. Lakenham

Exyston cingulum, Gr. Generally distri-
buted

Generally com-

Lynn

Sphecophaga vesparum, Curt. Norwich. Parasitic on Vespa vulgaris
Calpotrochia elegantula, Sch. Generally

distributed

Triclistus holmgreni, Bohn. Lynn ; reared
from larve of Tortrix decretana by
Mr. Atmore

— nitifrons, ‘Thom. Heath, Lynn

— pubiventris, Thom. Earlham

— podagricus, Gr. Lynn

— globulipes, Desv. Lynn; reared from
larve of Paedisca semifuscana

— niger, Bridg. Earlham

Metaccelus mansueter, Gr. Norwich

Exochus nigripalpus, Thom. Generally

Mousehold, Bawsey

common

— flavomarginatus, Holm. — Norwich,
Brundall, Lynn

— consimilis, Holm. Lynn

— tibialis, Holm. Brundall

— woldstedti, Holm. Earlham

— albicinctus, Holm. Fe/thorpe

Chorineus cristator, Gr. Generally distri-
buted; parasitic on Tortrices

— funebris, Gr. — talpa, Hal. — Aavipes, Bridg. Mousehold ; one speci-
men in August, 1872

Orthocentrus anomalus, Gr. ham

— affinis, Zett. — longicornis, Holm. ham ; two males

— flavipes, Gr. Mousebold ; on heath, July

Bassus letatorius, Fab. Generally com-
mon

Mouschold, Earlham,

} Generally common

Eaton, Earl-

Generally common
Brundall, Earle

— varicoxa, Thom. Mousehold

— nemoralis, Holm. Generally common

— annulatus, Gr. Mousehold

— dizonarius, Gr.‘ Buckenham Ferry;
August

— lateralis, Gr. Brundall, Lynn

— cinctus, Gr. Eaton

— exsultans, Gr. Norwich, Lakenham,
Mousebold

IcHNEUMONIDA (continued)

Bassus pictus, Gr. Norwich; common

— pumilus, Thom. Eaton

— strigator, Gr. Generally common

— nigritarsus, Gr. Mousehold, Eaton,
Brundall

— areolatus, Holm. Buckenham Ferry

— pulchellus, Holm. — cognatus, Holm. — dorsalis, Holm. Brundall

— signatus, Gr. hold

— festivus, Fab. Cringlefard

— hygrobius, Thom. Brundall

— obscuripes, Holm. Earlham, Bucken-
ham Ferry

— elegans, Gr. Brundall

— holmgreni, Bridg. Brundall, Felthorpe

— insignis, Gr. Earlham, Buckenham
Ferry, Lynn

— pulcher, Holm. Brundall

— ornatus, Gr. Heigham, Brundall,

Generally common
Norwich, Mousehold,

Brundall, Eaton, Mouse

Lakenham, Earlham,

Bawsey Heath, Lynn

Metopius migratorius, Fab. Yarmouth,
Brundall; one specimen

Rhyssa persuasoria, Linn. Norwich, Spar-
ham

Ephialtes imperator, Krei. Norwich. Reared from Saperda populnea
— tuberculatus, Fourc. Norwich. Reared
from Saperda populnea
Perithous mediator, Fab. — divinator, Rossi. } Norwich
Pimpla examinator, Fab. — turionelle, Linn, Generally common ;
parasitic on ‘Tortrix larva
rufata, Gmel. Norfolk
flavonotata, Holm. Norwich, Brundall
seanica, Vill. instigator, Fab. opacellata, Desv. Norwich
occulatoria, Fab. Earlham
graminellze, Schr. Generally common ;
reared from larva of Plusia festucee
didyma, Gr. Generally common
stercorator, Fab. Earlham
brevicornis, Gr. Generally common
similis, Bridg. Earlham, Brundall
sagax, Retz. Lynn; reared from larve
of Retinia turionella by Mr. Atmore
detrita, Holm. Generally common
pomorum, Retz. Drayton
roborator, Fab. Norwich
diluta, Retz. Brundall, Lynn
— punctiventris, Thom. — Mousehold ;
parasitic on Micro-lepidoptera
Polysphincta varipes, Gr. Brundall ; May
— subrufa, Bridg. Lynn

} Generally common

Pttt

109

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

IcHNEUMONIDE (continued)
Acrodactyla degener, Hal. Norwich, Brun-

dall

Clistopyga incitator, Fab, Norwich

— rufata, Holm, Brundall; only one
female

Glypta monoceros, Gr. Brundall

— ceratites, Gr. Generally common ;
reared from larva of Phycis betula
by Mr. Atmore

— vulnerator, Gr. Mousehold, Lynn ;
reared from larva of Catoptria scopo-
liana by Mr. Atmore

— heesitator, Gr. Mousehold, Lynn

— teres, Gr. Norwich

— mensurator, Fab. Eaton

— incisa, Gr. Earlham, Lynn; reared
from larve of Penthina picana by
Mr. Atmore

— bifoveolata, Gr. Generally common

— resinane, Retz. Lynn; reared from
larva: of Retinia turionella

— flavolineata, Gr. Eaton, Brundall

— flavipes, Desv. Lynn; parasitic on
larve of Tortrices

— trochanterata, Bridg. AZousehold ; about
heath, June

— pictipes, Tasch. Earlham, Lynn

— genalis, Mall. Lynn; reared by Mr.
Atmore from larva: of various Tor-
trices

Lycorina triangulifera, Holm. Lynn, one
male taken in May, 1887, by Mr.
Atmore ; very rare

IcHNEUMONIDE (continued)

Lissonota variabilis, Gr. Lynn; reared
from larva of Penthina picana

— parallela, Gr. Earlham

— bellator, Gr. Generally very common

— commixa, Holm. Generally distributed

— cylindrator, Vill. Common everywhere

— insignita, Gr. Eaton

— sulphurifera, Gr. Generally common

— femorata, Holm. Earlham, Brundall

— linearis, Gr. Mousehold

— leptogaster, Holm. Norwich, Strump-
shaw ; common in autumn

— carbonaria, Holm. Lynn ; reared from
Retinia turionella

— transversa, Bridg. Earlham

— unicincta, Holm. Brundall, Eaton,
Earlham

— errabunda, Holm. Brundall

— vicina, Holm. Earlham

— dubia, Holm. Lynn

Meniscus setosus, Fourc. — agnatus, Gr. Earlham

— impressor, Gr. Generally common

— suborbitalis, Gr. Brundall, Mousehold

Phytodietus segmentator, Gr. Norwich,
Lynn, Wroxham

— coryphzus, Gr. — obscurus, Desv. Sparham

} Generally common

Cryptopimpla blanda, Gr. Earlham,
Buckenham Ferry
CEdimopsis scabriculus, Gr. Moderately

common

Stilbops vetula, Gr. Eartham ; May

Schizopyga circulator, Panz. Not un- Zygonomus pilicornis, Gr. Earlham
common — securicornis, Holm, Earlham
Lampronota nigra, Gr. Bawsey Heath, Apanteles stauropodis, Marshall. Norwich;
Lynn reared from a larva of Stauropus
— caligata, Gr. Lynn, Earlham fagi
COLEOPTERA

Notwithstanding the fact that some eighteen hundred different
kinds of beetles are known to occur in this county, not one per cent. of
that number are at all likely to attract the attention of the non-entomo-

logical observer. In the house, B/aps mucronata, a dull black insect about

an inch long, of slow movement and unpleasant odour, with its body
drawn out into a short point behind, shares with the cockroaches

(Blattide) the name of ¢ black-beetle.’”

The ‘ ladybirds ’ (Coccinellide), of

which we have fifteen different kinds in Norfolk, are deserving of

mention from the fact that they are largely instrumental in counteracting

the ill effects to vegetation arising from the extraordinary fecundity

of the plant-lice (Apsides) ; in their larval as well as their adult state

they feed upon the latter insects, and as they are generally found in

the largest numbers where the supply of food is greatest, they not
110

INSECTS

unfrequently get the blame for the blighted appearance of the aphis-
infested trees on which they occur. Though of comparatively small
size, they are for the most part brightly coloured. The red kinds with
two or seven black spots (Coccinella bipunctata and C. septempunctata) are
probably the most familiar, though Coccinella 22-punctata, of a bright
lemon colour with about twenty-two roundish black spots, is one of the
most elegant; it may be found on nettles by almost any roadside. There are probably few asparagus beds where the asparagus-beetle
(Crioceris asparagi) is not to be found, both in the larval and perfect
states, during the summer and autumn ; but though this beetle is usually
classed amongst the ‘ insect pests,’ it may be doubted whether its presence
has any deleterious effect on the crop, except in those cases where circum-
stances arise which favour its development to an abnormal extent. Though the asparagus-beetle is only about a quarter of an inch long, it
is very effectively coloured ; the head, antenne and legs are blackish
green, the thorax is red, the wing-cases are pale yellow with a very dark
blue marking in the shape of a cross, and the whole insect shines as
though it had a coat of varnish. The rose-beetle (Cetonia aurata), a broad rather flat insect about
three-fourths of an inch long, of a beautiful metallic green colour with a
few irregular transverse wavy whitish lines on the hind part of the wing-
cases, is usually accounted a common insect, and such it undoubtedly
was in this county some five-and-twenty years since, when it was to be
found abundantly on various kinds of showy flowers, particularly roses
and white lilies, and four or five at a time might be taken from a single
head of flowers of the mountain-ash in suburban gardens around Norwich. It is however now many years since the writer saw a living example
of this fine species. One of the beetles most familiar to the ordinary
observer of Nature is the ‘ dor-beetle,’ ‘ dumbledor,’ or ‘ clock ’ (Geotrupes
stercorarius), a plump shining black insect about an inch in length, often
found flying about roadways at dusk with a loud humming noise. When
in full flight its steering powers appear to be defective, as it not unfre-
quently comes into collision with pedestrians; and, when the point
of contact is the face, a stinging blow is the result. On the underside
the black colour of the insect is relieved by metallic reflections of blue,
purple, and green. When taken in the hand and forcibly detained the
dor-beetle endeavours to bring about its release either by feigning death,
in which case it stretches out its legs to their utmost extent in the most
awkward and unnatural positions and then remains absolutely motionless
for some time, or it sets up a feeble squeak, standing still and moving
the hind part of its body up and down. The mechanism by means
of which it produces this noise is worthy of notice. On that side of the
basal joint of the hind leg which lies nearest to the body is a con-
spicuous oblique ridge, the surface of which bears a number of ex-
ceedingly fine transverse ridges, thus forming a sort of file, whilst the
hinder edge of the cavity in which the joint works bears a fine smooth
ridge; the friction between the latter and the file when the hind

it

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

part of the body is moved a little up and down produces the squeak. This kind of file and scraper arrangement is not uncommon amongst
beetles, but there is considerable diversity in the situation of the apparatus
and the organs involved. The common oil-beetle (Melo? proscarabaus),
a large heavy blue black insect with oval pointed wing-cases which over-
lap at the base, is so-called from the power which it possesses of exuding
a clear yellow fluid from its joints when handled. On this account,
although it is common enough in grassy places in the spring and early
summer, it is by no means a prepossessing object. Its claim on our
attention is due to its wonderful metamorphoses, the latter having been
for the most part well ascertained. The female deposits an immense
number of minute yellow eggs, in from two to four batches. These
eggs are glued together and deposited in small holes in the ground, dug
by the parent beetle. After an interval of from three to six weeks the
young larve hatch out ; they are extremely small elongate orange yellow
insects with the body nearly parallel in front and much narrowed behind,
the tail bearing four very long hairs, two on each side ; the legs are very
long and terminate in a single claw, on each side of which there is
a slender hook-like process, so that the end of the legs appears to be split
into three parts (hence the name ¢rixngulin which has been applied to this
first form of the larva) ; this contrivance enables the little larve to cling
very tightly to any object. They appear to remain dormant for some
time, but under the influence of sufficient warmth exhibit great activity
in running over low plants, chiefly those of the Natural Order Ranuncu-
Jacez. From these they attach themselves to the hairy clothing of bees
and other insects which visit the flowers. Such of the larve as happen
to attach themselves to bees of the genus Anthophora are carried by the
latter to their nests, where the larva, in the course of a period during
which it devours the eggs of the bee and the food stored up by the latter
for its own young, changes its form at least three times before it becomes
an ordinary beetle pupa from which the perfect oil-beetle emerges. It
will be seen that only a very small proportion of the offspring of the
oil-beetle can possibly reach maturity ; and on this point Dr. Sharp
says (Cambridge Natural History, vol. vi. p. 274) : ‘It is no wonder that
the female Mes’ produces 5,000 times more eggs than are necessary to
continue the species without diminution in the number of its individuals,
for the first and most important act in the complex series of this life-
history is accomplished by an extremely indiscriminating instinct. The
newly-hatched Me/o# has to get on to the body of the female of one
species of bee ; but it has no discrimination whatever of the kind of
object it requires, and as a matter of fact passes with surprising rapidity
on to any hairy object that touches it ; hence an enormous majority of
the young are wasted by getting on to all sorts of other insects. These
larve have been found in numbers on hairy Coleoptera as well as on flies
and bees of wrong kinds. The writer has ascertained by experiment
that a camel’s-hair brush is as eagerly seized, and passed on to, by the
young Me/ as a living insect is.’ The oil-beetle cannot fly, and its
112

INSECTS

occurrence in situations apparently far away from any colony of the wild
aa at whose expense it has passed its early stages, is not easily accounted
or. Turning now to the water-beetles, we shall find the whirligig beetles
(Gyrinide) conspicuous by reason of their numbers, and interesting on
account of their structure. These insects are known to all from their
habit of floating lightly on the surface of the water, and performing
graceful complex curves round one another, apparently without colliding. They are admirably constructed for a mode of life which is comparatively
rare in the insect world. They have four eyes, one pair on the upper
surface and another on the lower, and very short antenna which can be
packed away in the space between the upper and lower pairs of eyes on
each side of the head. They are able to dive to escape danger, and then
carry with them a small supply of air under the wing-cases, from which
a portion of it protrudes as a bright silvery bubble, but they do not stay
long beneath the surface. When handled they exude a milky-white fluid
which has a very disagreeable smell. Their two hind pairs of legs are
beautifully modified so as to serve as paddles, expanding when moved in a
backward direction and collapsing into an extremely small space directly
the resistance they meet with is in the other direction. The construction
of their fore feet is very peculiar. In other water-bectles the soles of the
fore feet are directed downwards, but in the whirligigs the fore legs are
so set on that the soles of the fore feet are not turned downwards,
but towards one another, and the assemblage of suckers which constitutes
the prehensile apparatus proper to the soles of the fore feet in the males
of water-beetles is in these carried on what is really the side of the fore
foot and not the sole. As might be expected from its physical features,
Norfolk is especially rich in Gyrinide, nine out of the eleven kinds known
as British having already been found there. Some of the species congre-
gate in immense numbers in the open water near the banks of rivers,
whilst others perform their gyrations in the shelter of the stems of water-
plants, and are rarely seen except by entomologists in search of them. In some kinds, as Gyrinus elongatus, found in ditches near the coast,
and G. dicolor, a denizen of Hickling Broad, a small percentage of in-
dividuals are of a different form to the others, being quite parallel-sided ;
whether this abnormal form is of advantage or otherwise to the in-
dividual does not appear. In the following list the names of the captors or recorders of species
when other than the author are given after each entry. The ento-
mologists referred to are : C. C. Babington, F.R.S., Professor of Botany
at the University of Cambridge ; T. Hudson Beare, F.E.S. ; Alfred
Beaumont, F.E.S. ; E. C. Bedwell, F.E.S. ; W. G. Blatch, F.E.S. (ob. 1900) ; J. B. Bridgman, F.L.S., F.E.S. (ob. 1899) ; Thos. Brightwell,
F.L.S., formerly of Norwich ; the Rev. J. Landy Browne of Norwich ;
the Rev. John Burrell, A.M., F.L.S., F.E.S., Rector of Letheringsett (ob. 1825); E. A. Butler, F.E.S.,; G. C. Champion, F.Z.S., F.E.S. ; the
late Rev. Hamlet Clark; the late G. R. Crotch; the Rev. C. T.

1 11g 1

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Cruttwell, sometime Vicar of Denton ; John Curtis, in British Ento-
mology; the Rev. J. F. Dawson, in Geodephaga Britannica; Henry
Denny, author of Monographia Pselapidarum et Scyamenidarum Britannia,
Norwich, 1825 ; H. St. J. Donisthorpe, F.E.S. ; T. P. Dossetor, who
lived in Norwich 1876-87 ; E. G. Elliman, F.E.S. ; the Rev. Canon
Fowler, in The Coleoptera of the British Isles; W. L. Fox of Harleston
(ob. 1866) ; Charles Garneys, surgeon, formerly of Bungay ; William
Garneys, formerly of Bungay; M. J. Griffin, formerly of Norwich; A. H.
Haworth, F.L.S., author of Lepidoptera Britannica (ob. 1833) ; W. C.
Hewitson ; Joseph Hooker formerly of Norwich ; the Rev. W. Kirby,
F.R.S. ; W. E. Leach, M.D., F.L.S. ; John Lindley, F.R.S., Professor
of Botany, University College, London; the Rev. A. Matthews, in
Trichopterygia Illustrata et Descripta, 1872 ; Frank Norgate, sometime of
Sparham ; C. J. and J. Paget, in 4 Sketch of the Natural History of Great
Yarmouth and its Neighbourhood ; Robert Paul formerly of Starston Hall ;
the late J. A. Power, M.D. ; the late E. C. Rye, co-editor of The
Entomologist’s Monthly Magazine ; J. D. Salmon, sometime of Thetford ;
Robert Scales of Halvergate and afterwards of Beachamwell (ob. 1828) ;
David Sharp, F.R.S. ; the Rev. T. Skrimshire of Syderstone (circ. 1825) ; the late F. Smith of the British Museum ; Joseph Sparshall
formerly of Norwich; J. F. Stephens, in I//ustrations of British Entomology ;
the Rev. A. Thornley, F.E.S. ; H. J. Thouless of Norwich ; J. J.
Walker, R.N., F.E.S. ; the late John Walton, F.L.S. ; C. O. Water-
house of the British Museum ; Robert Wigham formerly of Norwich ;
Simon Wilkin, F.L.S., formerly of Norwich ; the late T. V. Wollaston,
F.L.S. ; the Rev. Theodore Wood, F.E.S. CICINDELIDE
Cicindela campestris, L.
— maritima, Dej. CARABID
(CYcHRINA
Cychrus rostratus, L.
CARABINA

Carabus catenulatus, Scop. — nemoralis, Mall. violaceus, L.
clathratus, L. Halvergate (Haworth
fideStephens) ; Burgh Marshes(Paget);
‘Bungay (Garneys)
granulatus, L.
monilis, F.
— arvensis, F. Norfolk (Bridgman)
Calosoma inquisitor, L. St. Faiths Wood,
before 1830 (J. Hooker)
— sycophanta, L. Norwich (Stephens)
NotiopHiLina
Notiophilus biguttatus, F.
— substriatus, Wat. — 4-punctatus, Dej. (Thouless)

Cromer, Yarmouth

NorropHiLina (continued)
Notiophilus aquaticus, L.
— palustris, Duft. — mufipes, Curt. Sparham (Norgate) ;
Hunstanton (Fowler)
NEBRIINA

Leistus spinibarbis, F.
— fulvibarbis, Dej. — ferrugineus, L.
— nafescens, F.
Nebria _livida, F.
Gimingham (Butler) ;
(Wood)
— brevicollis, F.
ELaPHrina
Blethisa multipunctata, L. Bardolph Fen
(Burrell) ; Horning, Hethersett (Cur-
tis); Norwich, before 1829 (Wig-
ham) ; Yarmouth (Paget)
Elaphrus riparius, L.
— cupreus, Duft. Loricerina
Loricera pilicornis, F.
ScarITINA
Clivina fossor, L.
114

Cromer (Thouless) ;
Happisburgh

INSECTS

Scartrina (continued)

Clivina collaris, Hbst. Dyschirius thoracicus, Rossi, IW retham
Heath (Thouless) ; Gimingham (But-

ler)
— politus, Dej. Norfolk Coast (Dawson)
—nitidus, Dej. —,, 4, _ (Fowler)
— eneus, Dej. /Vaxham (Champion) ;

Hunstanton (Thornley)
— globosus, Hbst. Broscrna
Broscus cephalotes, L.
PanaGaIna
Panageus crux-major, L. Horning (Wig-
ham) ; Caistor (Paget)

Licrnina
Badister bipustulatus, F.
— sodalis, Duft. Harford Bridges, Nor-

wich (Beaumont)
— peltatus, Panz. Brandon (Thouless)
Licinus depressus, Payk, Mousehold Heath,
1810 (Curtis)
CHLANIINA
Chlzenius vestitus, Payk. — holosericeus, F. Norfolk (Skrimshire)

Oopina
Oodes helopioides, F.
STENOLOPHINA
Stenolophus skrimshiranus, Steph. Faken
bam (Skrimshire)
— vespertinus, Panz. Norwich (Griffin)
Acupalpus meridianus, L.
Bradycellus placidus, Gyll. Horning
(Thouless)

— cognatus, Gyll. — verbasci, Duft. harpalinus, Dej. collaris, Payk. — similis, Dej. HarpPALINA
Harpalus rotundicollis, Fairm. Yarmouth
punctatulus, Duft. azureus, F. Norfolk (Stephens)
rupicola, Sturm, Hunstanton (Fowler)
puncticollis, Payk. Latenham (‘Thouless)
rectangulus, Thoms. nifibarbis, F.
ruficornis, F.
eneus, F.
consentaneus, Dej. stanton (Fowler)
rubripes, Duft. — discoideus, F. Brandon (Walker)
latus, L.
melancholicus, Dej. tardus, Panz. — servus, Duft. (Fowler)
anxius, Duft. Yarmouth
ignavus, Duft. AZousehold Heath, Holkham

Yarmouth ; Hun-

Yarmouth

Yarmouth ; Hunstanton

Harpaina (continued)

Harpalus picipennis, Duft. Thetford,
August, 1888. Norfolk Coast (Daw-
son)

ANISODACTYLINA

Dichirotrichus pubescens, Payk. Anisodactylus binotatus, F. Banks of the
Yare at Postwick
ZABRINA

Zabrus gibbus, F. Norfalé (Burrell’s list)
PTEROSTICHINA

Stomis pumicatus, Panz. Platyderus ruficollis, Marsh. Pterostichus cupreus, L.

— dimidiatus, Ol. Mouschold Heath, 1883
lepidus, F, Norfolk (Dawson)
madidus, F.
aterrimus, Payk. Horning (Curtis)
niger, Schall. vulgaris, L.
anthracinus, II. nigrita, F.
minor, Gyll. strenuus, Panz. diligens, Sturm. picimanus, Duft. Hunstanton (Fowler) ;

Denton (Cruttwell) ; Sparham (Nor-

gate)

— vernalis, Gyll. — striola, F.
AMARINA

Amara fulva, Dej. — apricaria, Sturm. consularis, Duft. Afcusehold Heath ;

Brandon, Hunstanton (Fowler)
spinipes, Auct. convexiuscula, Marsh, Cley ; Hunstan-

ton (Fowler)
infima, Duft. Norwich

Norfolk (Stephens)

Mousthold Heath

Norfolk (Stephens)
rufocincta, Dej. Yarmouth (Thouless)
bifrons, Gyll. Pastwick Grove, 1875 ;
Cromer, 1890 (Thouless)
ovata, F.
similata, Gyll. acuminata, Payk. Mousebold Heath
(Thouless)
tibialis, Payk. lunicollis, Schiod. Mousehold Heath,
Horning (Thouless)
familiaris, Duft. lucida, Duft. trivialis, Gyll. communis, Panz. — plebeia, Gyll. Norwich (Thouless)
ANCHOMENINA
Calathus cisteloides, Panz. — fuscus, F.
— flavipes, Fourc. — mollis, Marsh,
— melanocephalus, L.

115,

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

ANcHOMENINA (continued)
Calathus piceus, Marsh. Taphria nivalis, Panz. Pristonychus terricola, Hbst. Sphodrus leucophthalmus, L. Lower Close,

Norwich

Anchomenus dorsalis, Mull. — albipes, F.

— oblongus, Sturm. Near Norwich
(Griffin fide Stephens)

— livens, Gyll. _Norfolé (Stephens)

— marginatus, L. “Norwich ; Yarmouth

(Paget) ; Salthouse (Thouless)

— sexpunctatus, L. St. Faiths (Brown)
— parumpunctatus, F.

— atratus, Duft. Norwich (Dossetor)
— viduus, Panz. ; var. meestus, Duft. — fuliginosus, Panz. — gracilis, Gyll. — thoreyi, Dej. eybourne
— puellus, Dej. Olisthopus rotundatus, Payk. BEMBIDIINA

Cillenus lateralis, Sam. Cley, before 1828
(Brightwell) ; Heacham (Fowler) ;
Cromer (Thouless)

Bembidium rufescens, Guer. quinguestriatum, Gyll. obtusum, Sturm. guttula, F.

mannerheimi, Sahl. biguttatum, F,

riparium, Ol. zneum, Germ,

Brundall

Stoke Holy Cross, Bixley
Trowse

fumigatum, Duft. Ranworth
assimile, Gyll. Brundall
clarki, Daws. St. Faiths

articulatum, Panz. minimum, F. Cle, etc. normannum, Dej. Hunstanton, Mor-
ston
lampros, Hbst. » Var. velox, Er,
nitidulum, Marsh.) Gimingham (Butler);
affine, Steph. } Cromer (Elliman)
stomoides, Dej. Mousehold Heath
quadriguttatum, F.
quadrimaculatum, Gyll. lunatum, Duft. Norfalt (Fowler)
testaceum, Duft. Mousehold Heath
femoratum, Sturm. Aylsham (Wood)
bruxellense, Wesm. Brumstead Com-
mon
— saxatile, Gyll. — anglicanum, Shp. Gimingham (Butler) ;
Cromer (Elliman)
— littorale, Ol. — pallidipenne, Ill. Norfolé Coast (Fowler)
— ephippium, Marsh. Ciey, August, 1888
— flammulatum, Clairv. Pldtbtrri tre

frbttttttte

BemsipunA (continued)

Bembidium varium, Ol. (Paget)

Tachypus pallipes, Duft. less ;, Wood)

— flavipes, L.
‘TRECHINA

Trechus discus, Norfolk (Stephens)

— micros, Hbst. Denton (Cruttwell)

— rubens, F, Waxham (Champion)

— minutus, F.

— secalis, Payk. Norfolk Coast (Stephens)

Patrobus excavatus, Payk. Pogonus luridipennis, Germ. Sa/thouse (Bur-
rell, 1806 ; Brown, 1840)

— chalceus, Marsh. Masoreina

Masoreus wetterhalii, Gyll. (Fowler)
CyminpDINa
Cymindis axillaris, F.
1810 (Curtis)
ODACANTHINA

Odacantha melanura, Payk. Lesrina

Lebia chlorocephala, Hoff. Aétophorus imperialis, Germ. Horning,

etc. (Fowler) ; Paling, April, 1889
(Cruttwell)

Demetrius unipunctatus, Germ. — atricapillus, L.

Dromius longiceps, De}. — linearis, Ol. — agilis, F.

— meridionalis, Dej. quadrimaculatus, L,
quadrinotatus, Panz. — quadrisignatus, Dej. — melanocephalus, Dej. — nigriventris, Thoms,

(Dossetor)
Blechrus maurus, Sturm. Metabletus foveola, Gyll. — truncatellus, L.

Breydon Bank

Cromer (Thou-

Hunstanton
Witchingham Heath,

Brundall, etc. Holkham

Horning

Norwich

Norwich district

— obscuro-guttatus, Duft. Norfolk (Fow-
ler)
PoLysTICHINA
Polystichus vittatus, Brull. Cley (Leach
(fide Stephens)
HALIPLIDE

Brychius elevatus, ae
Haliplus obliquus, F.

a confnis, Steph. } Ranworth, etc. — favicollis, Sturm. Colney, Heigham
— fulvus, F. Horning

— variegatus, Sturm. Ranworth

— tuficollis, De G.

— Atuviatilis, Aub,

116

INSECTS

Haliplus striatus, Shp. — lineatocollis, Marsh. Cnemidotus impressus, F.

PELOBIIDA

Pelobius tardus, Hbst. Swardeston Com-
mon, Wretham Heath, Mousehold
Heath

DYTISCIDE

NorTERINA
Noterus clavicornis, De G.
— sparsus, Marsh. LaccopHiLina
Laccophilus interruptus, Panz. — obscurus, Panz. Hyproporina
Bidessus unistriatus, Schr. Waxham (Champion)
— geminus, F. Brandon
Hyphydrus ovatus, L.
Ccelambus versicolor, Schall. — inaequalis, F.
— decoratus, Gyll. Horning, Brandon ;
Waxham (Champion)
confluens, F. Mousehold Heath, Wey-
bourne
parallelogrammus, Ahr. Ciey, Mouse-
hold Heath ; Waxham (Champion)
— impressopunctatus, Sch. Brandon ;
Waxham (Champion)
Deronectes assimilis, Payk. Coley; Ayl-
sham (Wood) ; Waxham (Champion)
— depressus, F.

— 12-pustulatus, F. Colney; Stalham
(Wood) ; Vaxham (Champion)
Hydroporus pictus, F.

— granularis, L.
(Champion)

— lepidus, Ol. — davisii, Curt. Harleston district (Fox)

— halensis, F. Horning (Clark); Brundall
(Sharp and Crotch)

— dorsalis, F.

— lineatus, F.

— scalesianus, Steph. Stephens)

— neglectus, Schaum. Stratton Strawless,
1875

— umbrosus, Gyll. — angustatus, Sturm. — gyllenhali, Schiod. — vittula, Er,

palustris, L.

— incognitis, Shp. Arminghall

— erythrocephalus, L.

— nufifrons, Duft. Brandon

Hickling ;

Horning ; Waxham

Norfolk (Scales fide

Hyproporina (continued)

Hydroporus memnonius, Nic. — obscurus, Sturm. St, Faiths ;
Waxham (Champion)

— nigrita, F. Brooke; Waxham (Cham-
pion)

— pubescens, Gyll. — planus, F.

— lituratus, F.

— ferrugineus, Steph. Horning
— oblongus, Steph. Brandon ; Horning
(Fowler)
Dytiscina

Agabus paludosus, F, Eaton Common ; Ayl-
sham (Wood)

uliginosus, L. Horning, March 5,
1840 (Brown) ; Yarmouth (Paget)

unguicularis, Thoms. Brandon ; Horn-
ing (Brown) ; /Vaxham (Champion)

— didymus, Ol. Mousehold Heath (Thou-

less) ; Aylsham (Wood)

— congener, Payk. Norfolk (Stephens)

— nebulosus, Forst. — conspersus, Marsh. Ci/ey (Thouless) ;

Waxham (Champion)

—— striolatus, Gyll. Horning, March,
1839 and 1840 (Brown); not re-
corded as occurring elsewhere in
Britain

femoralis, Payk. — abbreviatus, F.

— sturmii, Gyll. — chalconotus, Panz. — bipustulatus, L.

Platambus maculatus, L.

llybius fuliginosus, F.

— fenestratus, F.

— ater, De G.

— obscurus, Marsh. — guttiger, Gyll. Horning, St. Faiths

— subeneus, Er. Brandon, Wretham

Heath ; St. Faiths (Thouless)

— znescens, Thoms. St. Faiths

Copelatus agilis, F.

Rhantus grapei, Gyll. — exoletus, Forst. — pulverosus, Steph. — notatus, Berg. — bistriatus, Berg. — adspersus, F, Norfolk (Stephens)

Colymbetes fuscus, L.

Dytiscus punctulatus, F.

— marginalis, L.

— circumflexus, F. Yarmouth (Paget) ;

Burgh Castle (Thouless)
— dimidiatus, Berg. Yarmouth (Paget)
Hydaticus transversalis, Berg. Lakenhan,
Sept. 13, 1898
Acilius sulcatus, L.

Wretham Heath
Norfolk (Stephens)

117

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

GYRINIDE

Gyrinus minutus, F, Hickling Broad, Horn-
ing

— suffriani, Scriba. Horning, Ranworth,
Hickling Broad, Roydon Fen

— colymbus, Er. Ranworth, Hickling
Broad

— natator, Scop. — elongatus, Aub. — bicolor, Payk. ing (Fowler)

— marinus, Gyll. — opacus, Sahl. Orectochilus villosus, Mull. Hickling Broad 5 Horn-

HYDROPHILIDE

HypRoPHILINA

Hydrophilus piceus, L. Horning (Wig-
ham) ; Brundall (Brown) ; Yarmouth
(Paget) ; /Vaxham (Champion)

Hydrous caraboides, L.  Burrell’s list. Yarmouth (Paget)

Hydrobius fuscipes, L.

— picicrus, Thoms

Anacena globulus, Payk. — limbata, F.

— bipustulata, Steph. Philydrus testaceus, F.

— maritimus, Thoms

— nigricans, Zett. — melanocephalus, Ol. Brandon

— minutus, F. Brandon, St. Faiths

— coarctatus, Gredl. Cymbiodyba ovalis, Thoms. Enochrus bicolor, Gyil. Helochares lividus, Forst. — punctatus, Shp. Laccobius sinuatus, Mots. — alutaceus, Thoms. — minutus, L.

— bipunctatus, F.

Berosus spinosus, Stev. ler)

— signaticollis, Charp. St. Faiths ; Yar-
mouth (Paget)

— luridus, L.

— affinis, Brull. ley)

Limnebius truncatellus, Thoms. — papposus, Muls. — nitidus, Marsh. — picinus, Marsh. Hunstanton (Fowler) ;
Waxham (Champion)

Chetarthria seminulum, Hbst. hall; Waxham (Champion)

HELOPHORINA

Helophorus rugosus, Ol. — nubilus, F.

— intermedius, Muls. Armingball

Horning

Hunstanton (Fow-

Hunstanton (Thorn-

Arming-

Chey, etc. HELOPHORINA (continued)

Helophorus aquaticus, L.

— dorsalis, Marsh. Norwich

— encipennis, Thoms. — mulsanti, Rye. Wretham Heath, May

26, 1890

— affinis, Marsh. Mousehold Heath

— brevicollis, Thoms. Felthorpe

— nanus, Sturm. Horning (Fowler)

Hydrochus brevis, Hbst. Horning ; Stalham

(Wood)

— clongatus, Schall. — carinatus, Germ. Brandon, May, 1888

— angustatus, Germ. Octhebius marinus, Payk. — pygmaeus, F.

— bicolor, Germ. — rufimarginatus, Steph. Aorston, 1887

— eratus, Steph. Hydrena riparia, Kug. — gracilis, Germ. Lakenham, Sept., 1898
SPHARIDIINA

Cyclonotum orbiculare, F

Sphaeridium scarabzoides, F.

— bipustulatum, F.

— » v. marginatum, F.

Cercyon littoralis, Gyll. — depressus, Steph. Hunstanton (Thorn-

ley)
hamorrhous, Gyll. hemorrhoidalis, Hbst. aquaticus, Muls. //axbam (Champion)
flavipes, F.
lateralis, Marsh. melanocephalus, L.
unipunctatus, L.
quisquilius, L.
nigriceps, Marsh. pygmaeus, Ill.
terminatus, Marsh. analis, Payk. lugubris, Payk. Norwich
— granarius, Er. — minutus, Muls. Megasternum boletophagum, Marsh
Cryptopleurum atomarium, F.

Norwich

STAPHYLINIDZ
ALEOCHARINA
Aleochara ruficornis, Grav. Norfolk (Lind-
ley fide Stephens)
— fuscipes, F.

— brevipennis, Grav. lanuginosa, Grav. villosa, Mann, Arminghall
— meesta, Grav. — nitida, Grav. — 5 var. bilineata, Gyll. — morion, Grav. — grisea, Kr. 118

INSECTS

ALEOCHARINA (continued) ALROCHARINA (continued)

Aleochara algarum, Fauv. Hunstanton
(Thornley)

Microglossa suturalis, Sahl. — pulla, Gyll. Gimingham (Butler)

— nidicola, Fairm. Oxypoda lividipennis, Mann. — opaca, Grav. — alternans, Grav. — umbrata, Grav. Gimingham (Butler)

— longiuscula, Er. — formiceticola, Mark. — hemorrhoa, Mann,

Thiasophila angulata, Er. Ischnoglossa prolixa, Grav. Ocyusa maura, Er. — picina, Aub. Horning

Ocalea castanea, Er. Tlyobates nigricollis,Payk. Brundall; Horn-
ing (Fowler)

Calodera nigrita, Mann. — exthiops, Grav. Chilopora longitarsis, Steph. Atemeles emarginatus, Payk. Near Nor-
wich (Wigham)

Myrmedonia haworthi, Steph. Norfolk
(Stephens)

— collaris, Payk. Horning ; Postwick
(Dossetor)

— limbata, Payk. Norwich

T= fumeratis, Grav 1 Norwich (Dossetor)

— laticollis, Mark. Astilbus canaliculatus, F.

Callicerus obscurus, Grav. Alianta incana, Er. Horning, etc. — plumbea, Wat. Homalota insecta, Thoms. — gregaria, Er. — littorea, Shp. Sa/thouse (Elliman)

— luteipes, Er. Horning (Sharp)

— fallax, Kr. — luridipennis, Mann. gyllenhali, ‘Thoms

hygrotopora, Kr. elongatula, Grav. vestita, Grav. vicina, Steph. pagana, Er. graminicola, Gyll. halobrectha, Shp. puncticeps, Thoms. Gimingham (Butler)

nigella, Er. zequata, Er. angustula, Gyll. linearis, Grav. debilis, Er. cesula, Er. Thetford

ircellaris, Grav. immersa, Heer. cuspidata, Er. TErhititttbibbtri rt

119

Homalota aubei, Bris. Horning (Sharp)
analis, Grav. exilis, Er. depressa, Gyll. aquatica, Thoms. zncicollis, Shp. xanthoptera, Steph. euryptera, Steph. trinotata, Kr. fungicola, Thoms. ignobilis, Shp. boletobia, Thoms. Gimingham (Butler)
coriaria, Kr,
gagatina, Baudi
palustris, Kies. atomaria, Kr. perexigua, Shp. sericea, Muls. atricolor, Shp. Gimingham (Butler) ;
Cromer (Elliman)
inquinula, Grav. nigra, Kr. hodierna, Shp. Herning (Sharp)
cauta, Er. villosula, Kr. — fuscipes, Heer. Norfalk (Crotch fide
Fowler)
atramentaria, Gyll. intermedia, Thoms. longicornis, Grav. sordida, Marsh. aterrima, Grav. pygmaa, Grav. muscorum, Bris. laticollis, Steph. montivagans, Woll. Horning (Fowler)
orbata, Er. Cromer (Elliman)
fungi, Grav. » var. dubia, Shp. Schistoglossa viduata, Er. Merton (Crotch)
Gnypeta labilis, Er. Tachyusa scitula, Er. Gimingham (Butler)
— flavitarsis, Sabl. — umbratica, Er. Waxham (Champion)
— atra, Grav. Xenusa sulcata, Kies. Hunstanton, Heac-
ham (Fowler)
Falagria sulcata, Payk. — sulcatula, Grav. — thoracica, Curt. Hunstanton, 1807
(Kirby fide Stephens)
— obscura, Grav. Autalia impressa, Ol. — rivularis, Gr. Encephalus complicans, Westw. Hun-
stanton (Fowler)
Gyrophzena affinis, Mann,
— gentilis, Er. — nana, Payk. Hunstanton (Fowler)

 

 

 

} Norwich (Dossetor)

PEPE ETE Ebb titra tied

PEPPt bettie

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

ALEOCHARINA (continued)

Gyropheena fasciata, Marsh, Hunstanton
(Fowler)

= leevipennis, Kr:

— manea, Er. .

“Agaricochara lzevicollis ”@rwieb (Dessetor)

Placusa infima, Er. Epipeda plana, Gyll. Silusa rubiginosa, Er. /Vroxham (Fowler) ;
Norwich, 1889 (Walker)

Leptusa fumida, Er. Bolitochara obliqua, Er. Phylosus spinifer, Curt. Vaxham

— balticus, Kr. } (Champion)

Diglossa mersa, Hal. Hunstanton (Fowler)

Hygronoma dimidiata, Grav. Oligota inflata, Mann. — atomaria, Er. Horning

— punctulata, Heer. Myllena dubia, Grav. — intermedia, Er. — gracilis, Matth. — brevicornis, Matth. Gymnusa brevicollis, Payk. Horning

Deinopsis erosa, Steph. ‘TACHYPORINA

Hypocyptus longicornis, Payk. — seminulum, Er. — discoideus, Er. Horning (Fowler)

Conosoma littoreum, L.

— pubescens, Grav. — immaculatum, Steph. — lividum, Er. ‘Tachyporus obtusus, L.

— formosus, Matth. Ay/sham (Wood)

— solutus, Er. — pallidus, Shp. Horning (Fowler)

— chrysomelinus, L.

— humerosus, Er. — tersus, Er. — hypnorum, F.

— pusillus, Grav. — brunnens, F.

— transversalis, Grav. Cilea silphoides, L.

Tachinus humeralis, Grav. — rufipes, L.

— subterraneus, L.

— marginellus, F.

— laticollis, Grav. — collaris, Grav. Megacronus analis, F.

Bolitobius Junulatus, L.

— trinotatus, Er. — exoletus, Er. — pygmzus, F.

Mycetoporus splendens, Marsh. — lepidus, Grav. — longulus, Mann,

— angularis, Rey. Cromer (Elliman)

Waxham (Champion)

‘Tacuyrorina (continued)

Mycetoporus clavicornis, Steph. Waxham
(Champion)

— splendidus, Grav. — longicornis, Kr. Horning

Habrocerus capillaricornis, Grav. STAPHYLININA

Heterothops binotata, Er. Hunstanton
(Fowler)

— praevia, Er. — dissimilis, Grav. Horning

Quedius microps, Grav. Hunstanton (Fow-
ler)

etn Ol. cinctus, Payk. fuliginosus, Grav. tristis, Grav. molochinus, Grav. picipes, Mann. nigriceps, Kr. fumatus, Steph. maurorufus, Grav. mufipes, Grav. attenuatus, Gyll. semizneus, Steph. ler)

— boops, Grav. Creophilus maxillosus, L.

Emus hirtus, L. Beechamwell (Scales fide
Curtis)

Leistotrophus nebulosus, F.

Staphylinus pubescens, De G.

— stercorarius, Ol. — erythropterus, L. Horning

— casareus, Ceder. Ocypus olens, Mull. —‘cyaneus, Payk. Mousehold Heath,
Lakenbam ; Drayton (Thouless)

— brunnipes, F.

— cupreus, Rossi. — pedator, Grav. — ater, Grav. — morio, Grav. — compressus, Marsh. stanton (Fowler)

Philonthus intermedius, Boisd. — laminatus, Creutz. — eneus, Rossi. — decorus, Grav. — politus, F,

— lucens, Er. — varius, Gyll. — marginatus, F. Mousehold Heath

PPT titittie

Hunstanton (Fow-

Caistor (Paget)

Norwich 5 Hun-

Kirby Bedon

umbratilis, Grav. East Rudbam (Wood)
cephalotes, Grav. fimetarius, Grav. sordidus, Grav. ebeninus, Grav. debilis, Grav. sanguinolentus, Grav. 120

INSECTS

STAPHYLININA (continued)

Philonthus cruentatus, Gmel,

— longicornis, Steph. — varians, Payk. — agilis, Grav. Ringland, 1876

— vernalis, Grav. Hunstanton (Blatch)

— discoideus, Grav. Norwich; Cromer,
Aylsham (Wood)

— quisquiliarius, Gyll. ; var. dimidiatus, Er. — nigrita, Nord. Ringland, 1876

— fumarius, Grav. Arminghall,
East Rudham (Wood)

— micans, Grav. — trossulus, Nord. — fulvipes, F. Norfolk Coast (Skrimshire
fide Stephens)

Cafius xantholoma, Grav. Actobius cinerascens, Grav. October, 1876

Xantholinus fulgidus, F.

— glabratus, Grav. — punctulatus, Payk. — ochraceus, Gyll. — tricolor, F. Hunstanton (Fowler) ;
Cromer (Wood)

— linearis, Ol. — longiventris, Heer. Leptacinus _ batychrus,
(Wood)

— linearis, Grav. Othius fulvipennis, F.

— leviusculus, Steph. — melanocephalus, Grav. — myrmecophilus, Kies. mon, September, 1874
PDERINA
Lathrobium elongatum, L. Ravworth
— fulvipenne, Grav. 1876;

Arminghall,

Cromer

Gyll. Dunston Com-

— rufipenne, Gyll. Horning (Fowler)

— brunnipes, F.

— quadratum, Payk. /Waxham (Cham-
pion)

— terminatum, Grav. — pallidum, Nord. Cromer (Elliman)

— multipunctum, Grav. Postwick Grove,
September, 1874

Achenium humile, Nic. Sa/thouse, October,
1890

Stilicus rufipes, Germ. — orbiculatus, Er. Hellesdon, April, 1879

— affinis, Er. — subtilis, Er. Roughton, August, 1900
(Beare)

Scopaus sulcicollis, Steph. Cromer (Elli-
man)

Medon propinquus, Bris. — melanocephalus, F.

Lithocharis ochracea, Grav. Sunius diversus, Aub. Ranworth, Oct.
1888

PDERINA (continued)
Sunius augustatus, Payk. Paderus littoralis, Grav. — riparius, L. Waxham (Champion)
EvastHETINA
Evasthetusscaber, Thoms. Norfolk (Denny
fide Stephens)
STENINA

Stenus bipunctatus, Er. Cromer (Elliman)

— guttula, Mall. Gimingham (Butler) ;
Cromer (Elliman)

— bimaculatus, Gyll. — juno, F.

— longitarsis, Thoms. 1877

proditor, Er. speculator, Er. providus, Er. ; var. rogeri, Kr. lustrator, Er. /¥axham (Champion)

buphthalmus, Grav. melanopus, Marsh. (Rye)

— incrassatus, Er. /Vaxham (Champion) ;
Aylsham, East Rudbam (Wood)

— melanarius, Steph. Horning (Fowler)

— atratulus, Er. Gimingham (Butler)

— canaliculatus, Gyll. Aylsham, East
Rudham (Wood)

— nitens, Steph. Herning (Crotch) ;
Waxham (Champion)

— pusillus, Er. — fuscipes, Grav. Horning (Crotch)

— vafellus, Er. Horning (Crotch) ; Wax-
am (Champion)

— opticus, Grav. Horning, Ranworth
(Crotch) ; Potter Heigham (Wood)

— carbonarius, Gyll. East | Rudham
(Wood); Horning, Ranworth (Crotch)

— argus, Grav. -

eee Ga } Horning (Crotch)

— brunnipes, Steph. — ossium, Steph. — palustris, Er. Horning (Fowler)

— impressus, Germ. — zrosus, Er. Hunstanton (Fowler)

— erichsoni, Rye. Aylsham (Wood)

— flavipes, Steph. — pubescens, Steph. — binotatus, Ljun. — pallitarsis, Steph. — bifoveolatus, Gyll. — nitidiusculus, Steph. — picipes, Steph. — cicindeloides, Grav. Trowse, Feb.,

Horning (Crotch)

Pld

Norfolk Fens

— similis, Hbst. — solutus, Er. Horning (Fowler)

— tarsalis, Lynn. — paganus, Er. Ringland; Waxham

(Champion) ; East Rudbam (Wood)
— latifrons, Er. 121

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

STENINA (continued)
Stenus fornicatus, Steph. Stratton Straw-
less; Horning (Fowler); Waxham
(Champion)
Oxyporina
Oxyporus rufus, L.
OXYTELINA
Bledius taurus, Germ. etc. (Fowler)
— tricornis, Hobst. Hunstanton (Fowler)

Salthouse ; Wells,

— unicornis, Germ. Hunstanton (Fowler)

fuscipes, Rye. Gimingham (Butler) ;
Cromer (Elliman)

— subterraneus, Er. Cromer (Fowler)

— longulus, Er. Gimingham (Butler)

— fracticornis, Payk. Norwich

— opacus, Block. Hunstanton (Fowler)

— atricapillus, Germ. Wells (Fowler) ;

Waxham (Champion)

Platystethus arenarius, Foure. — cornutus, Gill. Norwich (Dossetor)

Oxytelus rugosus, Grav. sculptus, Grav. — laqueatus, Marsh. inustus, Grav. sculpturatus, Grav. nitidulus, Grav. complanatus, Er. tetracarinatus, Block. Haploderus ccelatus, Grav. Trogophleeus bilineatus, Steph. — elongatulus, Er. — fuliginosus, Grav. — pusillus, Grav. Norfolk (Fowler)

Syntomium zneum, Mill. Gimingham
(Butler)
Coprophilus striatulus, F.
Omatuna
Lesteva longelytrata, Goeze. — punctata, Er. Trowse; Waxham
(Champion)

Acidota crenata, F. Norwich

Olophrum piceem, Gyll. Lathrimeum atrocephalum, Gyll. — unicolor, Steph. Philorhinum sordidum, Steph. bam (Wood)

Omalium rivulare, Payk. — leviusculum, Gyll. — riparium, Thoms. — excavatum, Steph. — cesum, Grav. — pusillum, Grav. rufipes, Fourc. — vile, Er. — planum, Payk. Norfolt (Fowler)

concinnum, Marsh,

rene yIN
— striatum, Grav. J Norfolk (Fowler)

East Rud-

orfolk (Fowler)

Salthouse (Brown); ,

Omatuna (continued)
Anthobrium minutum, F,
— ophthalmicum, Payk. — torquatum, Marsh. PRoreINa
Proteinus ovalis, Steph. — brachypterus, F.
— atomarius, Er. Megarthrus denticollis,

September, 1876
— depressus, Lac. — sinuatocollis, Lac. — hemipterus, Ill. Norfolt (Fowler)

Phlceobium clypeatum, Mall. PIEsTINA
Prognatha quadricornis, Lac. (Denny fide Stephens)

Hunstanton (Fowler)
Beck. Thorpe,

Norfolk

PSELAPHIDE
PsELAPHINA
Pselaphus heisei, Hbst. Norfolk (Denny)
— dresdensis, Hbst. Horsford Heath, Aug.
17, 1886; Leddon, Woodbastwick
(Denny)
Tychus niger, Payk. Bythinus puncticollis, Denny}
— validus, Aub. — bulbifer, Reich. curtisi, Denny
— burrelli, Denny. Near Letheringsett,
April, 1824 (Burrell)
Bryaxis sanguinea, L. /Waxham (Cham-
pion) ; Céngham (Wood)
fossulata, Reich. helferi, Schmidt. haematica, Reich. — juncorum, Leach
impressa, Panz. (Wood)
Trimium _ brevicorne,
(Denny)
Euplectus karsteni, Reich. } South Creake
— nanus, Reich. (Skrimshire)
— sanguineus, Denny
— ambiguus, Reich. SCYDMANIDE
Neuraphes elongatulus, Mill. — angulatus, Mill. — sparshalli, Denny. Arminghall Weod,
November, 1823 (Sparshall)
Scydmanus scutellaris, Mall. — collaris, Mull. Horning
(Denny)

 

Weybourne

Horning; Congham

Reich. Norfolk

Horning (Denny)

— exilis, Er. Norwich (Fowler)
Euconnus denticornis, Mull. Near Loddon
(Denny)

— hirticollis, Ill. Horning (Fowier)
— fimetarius, Chaud. Eumicrus tarsatus, Mull,
Cephennium thoracicum, Mall. 122

INSECTS

SILPHIDA
CLAMBINA
Calyptomerus dubius, Marsh. Horning
(Elliman)
Clambus pubescens, Redt. Gimingham
(Butler)

— armadillo, De G.
— minutus, Sturm. Horning (Fowler)
ANISOTOMINA
Agathidium atrum, Payk. Near Norwich
(Kirby fide Stephens)
— seminulum, L.
— levigatum, Er. — marginatum, Sturm. (Fowler)
Amphicyllis globus, F. Cromer (Elliman)
Liodes humeralis, Kug. Stratton Strawless
— orbicularis, Hbst. Ringland, June, 1877
Cyrtusa minuta, Ahr. Postwick Grove,
June, 1875
Anisotoma dubia, Kug. Stratton Strawless ;
Waxham (Champion)
— badia, Sturm. Mousehold Heath
— scita, Er. Hunstanton (Fowler)
— punctulata, Gyll. Cromer (Elliman)
— calcarata, Er. — curta, Fairm, Near Norwich (Brown)
— rugosa, Sahl. Mousehold Heath (Griffin
Jide Stephens)
Agaricophagus cephalotes, Schmidt. Ring-
land, September, 1876
Hydnobius punctatissimus, Steph. bourne, October, 1888. SILPHINA
Necrophorus germanicus,L. Norfol#(Burrell
fide Curtis);  Mousehold Heath
(Stephens)
humator, F.
mortuorum, F,
vestigator, Heer
ruspator, Er. interruptus, Steph. stanton (Fowler)
— vespillo, L.
Necrodes littoralis, L.
Silpha tristis, Ill. Burrell’s list
— obscura, L. Burrell’s list. Burgh Castle
(Paget)
— quadripunctata, L.
— reticulata, F.
— opaca, L. Norfolk (Burrell fide Curtis)
— thoracica, L. Ringland
— mgosa, L.
— sinuata, F.
— dispar, Hbst. Norfolk (Stephens)
— levigata, T. Burrell’s list
— atrata, L.
CuoLevina
Choleva angustata, F.
— cisteloides, Fréhl. Dunston Common
Norfolk Fens

Wey-

Pld

Norwich; Hun-

Burrell’s list

CHoLevina (continued)
Choleva agilis, Ill.
1884

velox, Spence

wilkini, Spence. Thorpe, August, 1875

anisotomoides, Spence

fusca, Panz..

nigricans, Sp. Near Norwich (Dossetor)

coracina, Kell. Brose, October, 1888

Mousehold Heath, Oct.,

grandicollis, Er. Brandon
tristis, Panz. kirbyi, Spence. Norwich

chrysomeloides, Panz. fumata, Spence

watsoni, Spence

Promophagus sericeus, F.

Colon brunneum, Latr. Stratton Strawless,
September, 1875

PTET Tt tttdd

HISTERIDA

Hister unicolor, L.

— merdarius, Hoff. Norwich; Aybham
(Fowler)

— cadaverinus, Hoff. — stercorarius, Hoff. Norfolk (Stephens)

— purpurascens, Hbst. — neglectus, Germ. May, 1882
carbonarius, III. 12-striatus, Schr. April, 1876

— bimaculatus, L.

Carcinops minima, Aubé. Dendrophilus punctatus, Hbst. (J. Hooker fide Stephens)

— pygmaeus, L. Norfolk (Fowler)

Myrmetes piceus, Payk. Burrell’s list. Nor
wich (Fowler)

Gnathoncus nannetensis, Mars. Norfolk
(Norgate) ; Cromer, 1889 (Walker)

— punctulatus, Thoms. Near Norwich
(Dossetor)

Saprinus nitidulus, Payk. — exneus, F. Thorpe Hamlet; Waxham
(Champion)

— immundus, Gyll. Hunstanton (Fowler)

— virescens, Payk. Norwich (Fowler) ;
Forncett (Brown)

— metallicus, Hbst. — rugifrons,Payk. Yarmouth; Hunstanton
(Fowler) ; Vaxham (Champion)

— maritimus, Steph. Teretrius picipes, F. Near Norwich (Paul
(fide Stephens)

Abreus globosus, Hoff. Burrell’s list

Acritus minutus, Hbst. Onthophilus sulcatus, F. Mousehold Heath;
Roudham Heath, May, 1893 (Thou-
less); Great Witchingham Heath
(Curtis) ; also in Burrell’s list

Framingham Earl,

V1

Thorpe Hamlet,

Norwich

123

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Onthophilus striatus, F, Norwich ; Norfolk
Marshes (Curtis)

SCAPHIDIIDA

Scaphidium quadrimaculatum, Ol. (J. Hooker fide Burrell)

Scaphisoma agaricinum, L. Foxley Wood,
August, 1888

— boleti, Panz. Hunstanton (Fowler)

Norfolk

TRICHOPTERYGIDE

Ptinella denticollis, Fairm. Trichopteryx atomaria, De G.
— grandicollis, Mann. — lata, Mots. — fascicularis, Hbst. sericans, Heer,

— bovina, Mots. — kirbyi, Matth. Ranworth, April, 1863
(Matthews)

— longula, Matth. — montandonii, All. ) Hunstanton

— guerinii, All. } (Fowler)

Smicrus filicornis, Fairm. | Hunstanton
(Fowler) ; Denton (Cruttwell)

Nephanes titan, Newm. Ptilium marginatum, Aub. 1868 (Matthews)

— exaratum, All. — foveolatum, All. Nossidium pilosellum, Marsh. Hunstanton
(Blatch)

Ptenidium nitidum, Heer. — evanescens, Marsh. — atomaroides, Mots. — kraatzi, Matth. July, 1883

CORYLOPHIDA
Orthoperus kluki, Wank. — atomus, Gyll. Corylophus cassidioides, Marsh. Horning
(Elliman) ; Gimingham (Butler)
Sericoderus lateralis, Gyll. Norfolk Fens,

Brandon (Fowler)
Dunston Common,

COCCINELLIDE
Subcoccinella 24-punctata, L. Whitwell

Common, Booton Common

Hippodamia variegata, Goeze
Anisosticta 19-punctata, L. Weybourne ;

Yarmouth (Fowler)

Adalia oblitera, L.

— bipunctata, L.

Mysia oblongoguttata, L.

Anatis ocellata, L.

Coccinella 10-punctata, L.

— hieroglyphica, L. Drayton, Mousehold
Heath, etc. 124

Coccinella 11-punctata, L.

— 5-punctata, L. Burrell’s list. — 7-punctata, L.

Halyzia 12-guttata, Poda. — 14-guttata, L,

— 18-guttata, L.

— conglobata, L

Micraspis 16-punctata, L.

Scymnus redtenbacheri, Muls. (Butler)

— frontalis, F.

— suturalis, Thunb. limbatus, Steph. /¥axham (Champion)

hemorrhoidalis, Hbst. Bixley Wood

capitatus, F.

Chilocoris similis, Rossi. — bipustulatus, L.

Exochromus quadripustulatus, L. Ringland

Rhizobius litura, F.

Coccidula rufa, Hbst. — scutellata, Hbst. (Fowler)

Gimingham

Weybourne ; Horning

ENDOMYCHIDA

Mycetza hirta, Marsh. Mouschold Heath

Lycoperdina boviste, F. Burrell’s list

Endomychus coccineus, L. Norfo/é (Skrim-
shire fide Burrell)

EROTYLIDA
Dacne humeralis, F.
— rufifrons, F.
Triplax russica, L. Harford Bridges,
February, 1891 (Beaumont)

PHALACRIDA
Phalacrus corruscus, Payk. — substriatus, Gyll. Hunstanton (Fowler)
— caricis, Sturm. Olibrus corticalis, Panz. — eneus, F.

— millefoli, Payk. Brandon; Horning
(Fowler) . — pygmzus, Sturm. Horning; Cromer
(Fowler)

Eustilbus testaceus, Panz. — oblongus, Er. Horning (Fowler)

MICROPEPLIDE

Micropeplus porcatus, Payk. te Ti

— staphylinoides, Marsh. } Burrell’: list

— margarite, Duv. Ringland, April,
1877

NITIDULIDE

Brachypterus gravidus, Ill.
— pubescens, Er. — urtice, F.

INSECTS

Cercus pedicularius, L,

— bipustulatus, Payk. — rufilabris, Latr. Epurea decemguttata, F. Eaton

— exstiva, L.

— oblonga, Hbst. — florea, Er. — deleta, Er. — pusilla, Er. Omosiphora limbata, F. Ringland, Sep-
tember, 1875; Hunstanton (Fowler)

Nitidula bipustulata, L.

Cromer (Elliman)

Rhizophagus dispar, Gyll. Burrell’s list

— bipustulatus, F.

Pediacus dermestoides, F. Cremer (Elliman)

Lxmophleeus ferrugineus, Steph. Norwich
(Fowler)

— ater, Ol. Norfolk (Stephens)

Psammaechus bipunctatus, F.

Hypocoprus latridioides, Mots. Brandon
(Crotch)
Nausibius dentatus, Marsh. Norwich

Silvanus surinamensis, L. Yarmouth (Paget)

— rufipes, L. Norfolk (Stephens) MONOTOMID
— quadripustulata, F, Ringland ; Hunstan- Monotoma brevicollis, Aub. _ton (Fowler) — picipes, Hbst. Soronia grisea, L. — quadricollis, Aub. Omosita colon, L, — rufa, Redt. — discoidea, F. ,
Pocadius ferrugincus, F.  Cossey Park LATHRIDIIDA
(Curtis)
ae Meee, Scop. ae depressus, Curt, Norfolk
pase ects rufipes) YI Lathridius lardarius, De G.
'
— fiulvipes, Bris. Hunstanton, September, pean ed
1874 © . > /
— coracinus, Sturm. Ringland; Hunstan- Earn
_ alas) — testaceus, Steph. — Vitidescens, F Cartodere ruficollis, Marsh. — Gifficilic, Heer Corticaria pubescens, Gyll. ye Ey — crenulata, Gyll. pe ceoocaea ke, — denticulata, Gyll. — brunnicornis, Sturm. falva, Com. — bidens, Bris, MW hitlingham. ~ clontata, Huram,
Seam ea er ne] Laan) Melanophthalma gibbosa, Hbst,
— picipes, Sturm. — fascula, Humm ,
— serripes, Gyll. Brandon; Cromer P
Fowl
ecw) CRYPTOPHAGIDA,
, Er,
— obscurus, Er. Cromer (Elliman) Telmatophilus sparganii, Ahr. Horning
Cychramus luteus, F. (Sharp)
Cryptarcha strigata, F.  Cossey, April, — caricis, Ol. 1874 — typhe, Fall. Cromer (Fowler) ; Vax-

— imperialis, F.  Forncett (Brown)
Ips quadripustulata, L.  Norfolé (Skrim-
shire fide Burrell)

Pityophagus ferrugineus, F. — Norfols
(Stephens)
COLYDIIDE
Orthocerus muticus, L. Burrell’s list. Winterton (Wood); Yarmouth (Paget)
Synchita juglandis, F, Thetford (Crotch)

Cerylon ferrugineum, Steph. Stratton
Strawless, June, 1884
cuUCUJIDE
Rhizophagus cribratus, Gyll. Eardham

— depressus, F.
— parallelocollis, Er. /axham (Champion)

125

‘ham (Champion)

— schinherri, Gyll. Arminghall; Horning
(Fowler)

Antherophagus nigricornis, F. Brandon
(Fowler)

— pallens, Gyll. Dunston Common, Ketter-
ing Common

— silaceus, Hbst. Hunstanton (Fowler)

Cryptophagus lycoperdi, Hbst. — pilosus, Gyll. populi, Payk. Near Norwich (Stephens)

dentatus, Hbst. Gimingham (Butler)

acutangulus, Gyll. cellaris, Scop. affinis, Sturm. Cromer (Walker)

Micrambe vini, Panz. Paramecosoma _ melanocephalum,
Cromer (Fowler)

Hbst. A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Atomaria barani, Bris. — nigriventris, Steph. — umbrina, Er. linearis, Steph. elongatula, Er. fuscipes, Gyll. munda, Er. fuscata, Schin. pusilla, Payk. atricapilla, Steph. basalis, Er. MWoodbastwick (Fowler) ;
Aylsham (Wood)

Norwich, July, 1875
Cley, Aylsham (Wood)

— rhenana, Kr, Yarmouth (Rye)

— mesomelas, Hbst. Ringland, May,
1876

— gutta, Steph, Horning (Elliman)

— apicalis, Er. — analis, Er. — ruficornis, Marsh. eRe globosus, Waltl. Near Nor-

wich (Dossetor)
MYCETOPHAGIDE
Typhza fumata, L.
Triphyllus punctatus, F.  Arminghall ;

Forncett (Brown)
Litargus bifasciatus, F. Cromer (Elliman)
Mycetophagus quadripustulatus, L.
— piceus, F. Norfolk (Fowler)
— populi, F. Harleston (Fox)
— multipunctatus, Hellw. Burrell’s list ;
Forncett (Brown)

BYTURIDE

Byturus sambuci, Scop. — tomentosus, F.

DERMESTID

Dermestes murinus, L.

— undulatus, Brahm. Blakeney
— lardarius, L.

Attagenus pellio, L.

Tiresias serra, F. Burrell’ s list
Anthrenus muszorum, L.

— claviger, Er. BYRRHIDE
Syncalypta us Rossi. } Norfolk
— hirsuta, S) (Fowler)
Byrrhus aan L.
— fasciatus, F.
— dorsalis, F.
— murinus, F, Mousebold Heath
Cytilus varius, F, Mousebold Heath ; Wax-
bam (Champion) ; Aylsham (Wood)
Simplocaria semistriata, F.
Limnichus pygmzus,
(Elliman)

Sturm. Cromer

Aspidiphorus orbiculatus, Gyll. (Elliman)

Horning

GEORYSSIDE
Georyssus pygmeus, F.  Arminghall

PARNIDAE

Elmis zneus, Mall. — volkmari, Panz. Ketteringham Common

— cupreus, Mall. Whitwell Common

Limnius tuberculatus, Mull. — troglodytes, Gyll. Eaton

— sp? Honing

— sp? Colney, Horning

Parnus prolifericornis, F.

— auriculatus, Panz. — algiricus, Lucas. St. Faiths ; Horning
(Power)

HETEROCERIDE
Heterocerus flexuosus, Steph. Hunstanton
(Fowler)
— marginatus, F. Burrell’s list. mouth (Paget)
— levigatus, Panz. Yar-
Burrell’s list

LUCANIDE
Lucanus cervus, L. Kirby Bedon (Wigham)
Dorcus parallelopipedus, L.
Sinodendron cylindricum, L.
list. Norfolk (Wigham)

Burrell’s

SCARABEIDE

Corrina
Onthophagus ovatus, L. Mousehold Heath ;
Roudham Heath (Thouless)

coenobita, Hbst. Burrell’s list. Carlton, July, 1874. — vacca, L. Norfolk (Hocker fide Burrell)

fracticornis, Payk. nuchicornis, L. Yarmouth; Hunstanton
(Fowler)

Aphodius erraticus, L.

subterraneus, L.

fossor, L.

hemorrhoidalis, L.

foetens, F.

fimetarius, L.

scybalarius, F.

ater, De G.

granarius, L,

nitidulus, F. Hunstanton

sordidus, F. Norwich

rufescens, F. Swanton Morley, Eaton
Common ; Hunstanton (Fowler)

plagiatus, L. Norwich (Fowler)

porcus, F,

tristis, Panz. East

Norwich

126

INSECTS

Corrina (continued)

Aphodius pusillus, Hbst. — quadrimaculatus, L.  Burrell’s list. Roudham Heath, May, 1893 (Thou-
less)

— merdarius, F.

— inquinatus, F.

— sticticus, Panz. — punctatosulcatus, Sturm,

prodromus, Brahm. contaminatus, Hbst. obliteratus, Panz. luridus, F.

rufipes, L.

depressus, Kug. Postwick Grove, May,

1875 ; Horning (Wigham)

Heptaulacus sus, Hbst. Norwich (Fowler)

Oxyomus porcatus, F.

Psammobius sulcicollis, Ill. Norfolk (Fowler)

Agialia arenaria, F.

Odonteus mobilicornis, F. Burrell’s list. Mousehold Heath (Sparshall fide Cur-
tis

Geotrupes typhus, L. Mousehold Heath,
Wretham Heath

— spiniger, Marsh. — stercorarius, L.

— mutator, Marsh. — sylvaticus, Panz. Trox sabulosus, L.  Burrell’s list

— scaber, L. St. Martin’s Lane, Norwich
(Thouless) ; Brandon (Fowler) ; Bur-
rell’s list

MELOLONTHINA

Hoplia philanthus, Fuss. Burrell’s list. Yarmouth (Paget) ; Forncett (Brown)

Homaloplia ruricola, F. Norfolk (Stephens) 5
Roudbam Heath, May, 1893 (Thou-
less)

Serica brunnea, L.

Rhizotrogus solstitialis, L.

Melolontha vulgaris, F.

RvreLina

Phyllopertha horticola, L.

Anomala frischii, F. Coast Sands, also at
Brandon

CEroNIINA

Cetonia aurata, L. Formerly common

Gnorimus nobilis, L. Norwich Market-
place (Thouless), one example

BUPRESTIDE
Agrilus laticornis, Ill. Horsford, Arming-
hall (Thouless)
— angustulus, Ill. Hethersett, Howe
Grove, Booton Common (Thouless)
— viridis, L. Burrell’s list
Trachys minuta, L. — Poringland (Wig-
ham)
— troglodytes, Gyll. Pritt

St, Faiths (Power)

127

THROSCIDAE
Throscus dermestoides, L.

EUCNEMIDE

Malasis buprestoides, L. Gawdy Hall Weod
(Garneys)

Microrrhagus pygmaus, F. Norfolk (Wil-
kin fide Stephens)

ELATERIDE

Lacon murinus, L.

Cardiophorus ascllus, Er. (Dossetor) ;
(Thoutess)

— ruficollis, Linn,
fide Burrell)

— thoracicus, Er. Burrell)

Cryptohypnus
etc. — quadripustulatus, F. Norfolk (J. Hoo-
ker fide Burrell)

Elater balteatus, L.  Burrell’s list

Ischnodes sanguinicollis, Panz. (Stephens)

Melanotus rufipes, Hbst. — castanipes, Payk. Stratton Strawless,
June, 1895 (Thouless)

Athous niger, L.

— longicollis, Ol. Norfolk (Stephens)

— haemorrhoidalis, F.

— vittatus, F. Sprowston (J. Hooker fide
Burrell)

Limonius cylindricus, Payk. Brandon

— minutus, L.

Adrastus limbatus, F.

Agriotes sputator, L.

— obscunus, L.

— lineatus, L.

— sordidus, Ill.

— pallidulus, Ill.

Dolopius marginatus, L.

Corymbites castaneus, L. AMousehold Heath
(W. Hooker fide Stephens)

— cupreus, F. Aousehold Heath (Hewit-
son fide Stephens)

— tessellatus, F. Horning (Fowler) ;
Cringleford (Brown); = Waxham
(Champion)

— quercus, Gyll. Drayton (Thouless)

— holosericeus, F.  Mouschold Heath ;
Yarmouth (Thouless);  Congham
(Wood)

— eneus, L. Mousehold Heath

— metallicus, Payk. Foxley Wood (Thou-
less)

— bipustulatus, L. Burrell’s list

Campylus linearis, L.

Near Norwich
Westacre, Brandon

Norfolk (Skrimshire
Norfolk (Hooker fide

riparius, F. Brundall,

Norfolk

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

DASCILLIDZ

Dascillus cervinus, L. Burrell’s list

Helodes minuta, L.

Microcara livida, F.

Cyphon coarctatus, Payk. /Wacton, August,
1883

— nitidulus, Thoms. — variabilis, Thunb. — pallidulus, Boh,
May, 1876

— padi, L: Horning, etc. Prionocyphon  serricornis, Mall. Chapel
Field Gardens, Norwich, July, 1894
(Thouless)

Scirtes hemisphzericus, L.

— orbicularis, Panz. Brundall, July, 1885

Eubria palustris, Germ. /Vhitwell Com-
mn, June, 1895 (Thouless)

Framingham  Pigot,

MALACODERMIDA
Lycina
Platycis minutus, F. Norfo/k (Stephens)
LampyRina
Lampyris noctiluca, L.
TELEPHORINA
Silis ruficollis, F. Horning, etc. ; Brandan
(Fowler)
Telephorus fuscus, L.
— rusticus, Fall. — lividus, L.
— pellucidus, F.
— nigricans, Mall. - BS var. discoideus, Steph. Spar-
ham (Norgate) ; Eaton (Brown)
— lituratus, F. Hellesdon, Morston ; Wax-
ham (Champion)
— figuratus, Mann. — bicolor, F.
— hemorrhoidalis, F.  Ketteringham
— oralis, Germ. Howe Grove, Cley ;
Waxham (Champion)
— flavilabris, Fall. Cley ; Horning(Brown) ;
Waxham (Champion)
— thoracicus, Ol. Ranworth, Poringland,
Eaton Common ; Aysham; (Wood)
Rhagonycha fuscicornis, Ol. Horning,
July 2, 1835 (Brown)
— fulva, Scop. — testacea, -L.
— limbata, Thoms. — pallida, F.
Malthinus punctatus, Fourc. — fasciatus, Ol. Dunston, Cossey; Hun-
stanton (Fowler)
— balteatus, Suff. Dunston; Hunstanton
(Fowler)
— frontalis, Marsh. Hethersett, August,
1879 ; Hunstanton (Fowler)
Malthodes marginatus, Latr. Horning

TELEPHORINA (continued)

Malthodes flavoguttatus, Kies. (Wood)

— dispar, Germ. — minimus, L.

— nigellus, Kies. Near Norwich (Dos-
setor)

MELYRINA

Malachius zneus, L. Burrell’s list ; Long
Stratton (Brown)

— bipustulatus, L.

— marginellus, Ol. Norfolk (Stephens)

Axinotarsus ruficollis, Ol. Dunston Com-
mon (Thouless) ; Horning (Brown) ;
Brandzn (Fowler)

Anthocomus rufus, Hbst. (Paget)

— fasciatus, L.

— terminatus, Mén. Dasytes flavipes, F.

— erosus, Kies. Psilothrix nobilis, Ill. Near Norwich
(Dossetor) ; Harford Bridges (Thou-
less)

Aylsham

Horning ; Oby

Horning, Ranworth

CLERIDA

Tillus elongatus, L. Hoarleston district (Fox)
‘Thanasimus formicarius, L. Burrell’s list

Trichodes apiarius, L. "Norfolk (Stephens)

Necrobia ruficollis, F.

— violacea, L.

Corynetes ceruleus, De G.

PTINIDA
PTININA

Ptinus germanus, F, Norfolk (Fowler)

— lichenum, Marsh. — fur, L.

Niptus hololeucus, Fald. Hedobia imperialis, L.

ANOBIINA

Dryophilus pusillus, Gyll. Earlham, Foxley
Wood, Ringstead Downs; Brandon
(Fowler)

Priobium castaneum, F.

Anobium domesticum, Fourc. — paniceum, L. Yarmouth (Paget)

Xestobium tessellatum, F.

Ernobius mollis, L. Thorpe, June, 1874

Ptilinus pectinicornis, L.  Swardeston
Common ; Yarmouth (Paget)

Ochina hedere, Mull. Ccenocara boviste, Hoff. Norwich ; Horn-
ing, Ashwicken (Power)

Dorcatoma chrysomelina, Sturm. (Cruttwell)

BOSTRICHIDA
Near Cromer

Denton

Bostrichus capucinus, L.
(Stephens)

128

INSECTS

LYCTIDA

Lyctus canaliculatus, F. Earlham, July,
1885 ; Wroxham (Fowler)

CISSID/E

Cis boleti, Scop. — bidentatus, Ol. Harleston
(Fox) ; Horning (Elliman)

district

— nitidus, Hbst. Sparbam (Noxgate)

— festivus, Panz. Octotemnus glabriculus, Gyll. Cromer

(Elliman)
CERAMBYCIDA

PRIONINA

Prionus coriarius, L.
CERAMBYCINA

Aromia moschata, L. Norwich (Thouless) ;
Sparham district (Norgate); Oby
(Paget)

Hylotrupes bajulus, L.
‘fide Donisthorpe)

Callidium violaceum, L. Norfolk (Ste-
phens) ; Norwich (Thouless)

— variabile, L. Norwich (Thouless)

Clytus arcuatus, L. Burrell’s list

— arietis, L.

Gracilia minuta, F. Norwich ; Sparham
(Norgate) ; Yarmouth (Paget)

Molorchus minor, L. Westacre,
(Thouless)

Rhagium inquisitor, F.
Horning (Wigham)

Cromer (Lewcock

1900

Burrell’s list. — indagator, Gyll. Edgefield Wood (Wig-
ham)

— bifasciatum, F. Brundall; Horsferd
(Thouless)

Toxotus meridianus, Panz. Arminghall ;
Sparham district (Norgate) ; Hellesdon
(Thouless)

Leptura sanguinolenta, L. Norfolk Fens
(Winter fide Waterhouse)

— livida, F

Strangalia quadrifasciata, L. Ranworth ;
Horning (Wigham) ; Oby (Paget)

— armata, Hbst. ~~ nigra, L. Norfolk (Fowler)

— melanura, L. “Foxley Wood

Grammoptera tabacicolor, Dej. (Thouless)

— ruficornis, F.

Lamina

Acanthocinus aedilis, L. Norwich

Leiopus nebulosus, L.  Fox/cy Vood, Howe
Grove, Boston Common (Thouless) ;
Aylsham (Wood)

Pogonocherus fasciculatus, De G. Near
Norwich (Stephens)

Brandon

Lamuna (continued)

Pogonochirus bidentatus, Thoms. Giming-
am (Butler)

— dentatus, Fourc. Monochammus sartor, F. Norfolk (Ste-
phens)

— sutor, L. Norwich (Stephens)

Agapanthia lineatocollis, Don. (Stephens) ; Oty (Paget)

Saperda carcharias, L:

— populnca, L.  Foxley Wood

Tetrops prausta, L. Postwick Grove, Ring-
land ; Norwich (Thouless)

Phytoecia cylindrica, L. Ketteringham ;
Eaton, Gawdy Wood (Brown) ; near

Norfolk

Norwich (Bridgman); Yarmouth
(Paget)

Oberea oculata, L. Downham, 1888
(Norgate)

BRUCHIDE

Bruchus cisti, F. Near Norwich (Dos-
setor)

— pisi, L.

— nufimanus, Boh. — atomarius, L. East Rudham (Wood)

— loti, Payk. Swanton Morley ; Rudham
(Fowler)

— villosus, F, Eaton, St. Faiths; Rudham
(Fowler) ; Aylsham, Potter Heigham
(Wood)

CHRYSOMELID
Europa
Donacia crassipes, F. Rantworth
— dentata, Hoppe. Lakenham
— versicolorea, Brahm. Hickling Broad ;
Becton Common, Horning (Thouless) ;
Aylsham (Fowler)
sparganii, Ahr. dentipes, F.
— limbata, Panz. bicolora, Zsch. Harford Bridges, May,
1875 5 Horning (Thouless)
— thalassina, Germ. Latenham, Arming-
hall ; Brundall (Thouless)

— impressa, Payk. Ranworth, Lakenham ;
Horning (Thouless)
— simplex, F.

Arminghall ; Cringie-

— vulgaris, Zsch. Harford

ford, Forncett (Brown) ;
Bridges (Thouless)
clavipes, F.
semicuprea, Panz. cinerea, Hbst. Ranwworth
sericea, L.
discolor, Panz. Whitwell Common
braccata, Scop. Horning, Ranworth ;
Surlingham (Thouless)
— affinis, Kunze. Ranworth (Thouless)

1 129 K

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Europa (continued)
Hemonia curtis, Lac. Near Fakenham

(Skrimshire fide Stephens), Cley
(Babington fide Sharp)
Zeugophora subspinosa, F.
Lema cyanella, L.
— lichenis, Voet. — melanopa, L.
Crioceris asparagi, L.
CAMPTOSOMATA
Cryptocephalus coryli, L. } Edgefield Wood
— lineola, F, (Burrell)
TH sere So) Barrel's list
— bilineatus, L. Norfolk (Fowler)
— fulvus, Goeze. Mousehold Heath
— pusillus, F. Sprowston, Foxley Wood
— labiatus, L.

— exiguus, Schneid. Eaton Common, Au-
gust, 1888 ; Horning (Thouless) ;
Weadbastwick (Power)

— frontalis, Marsh. Foxley Wood, July,
1885

Cycxica

Lamprosoma concolor, Sturm. (Stephens)

Timarcha tenebricosa, Fab. — violaceonigra, De G.

Chrysomela marginalis, Duft. — banksi, F. Kirby Bedon

— staphylea, L.

— polita, L.

— orichalcia, Mall. Lakenham, June, 1883

— haemoptera, L. Weybourne, Oct., 1890

— varians, Schall. Foxley Wood, Septem-
ber, 1891

— goettingensis, L. Burrell’s list. Mork-
house Lane, Norwich, April, 1880

— graminis, L. Burrell’s list

— menthrasti, Suffr. Norfolk (Stephens)

— fastuosa, Scop. Burreli’s list

— didymata, Scril

— hyperici, Forst. Melasoma populi, L. Ranworth ; Horning
(Thouless) ; Oby (Paget)

— longicolle, Suffr. Burrell’s list

Norfolk

    

Phytodecta rufipes, De G. ) Brandon
— viminalis, L. } (Fowler)

— olivacea, Forst. — affinis, Suffr. Norfolk Fens (Winter

fide Waterhouse)
Gastroidea viridula, De G.

— polygoni, L.

Phadon tumidulus, Germ. — armoracie, L.

— cochlearie, F.

Phyllodecta vulgatissima, L.

— cavifrons, Thoms. — vitelline, L.

Hydrothassa aucta, F, Burrell’s list

Cycxica (continued)
Hydrothassa marginella, L.
Prasocuris junci, Brahm. — phellandrii, L.
Phyllobrotica quadrimaculata, L. Horning,
Brundall; Surlingham (Thouless) ;
Oby (Paget)
Luperus nigrofasciatus, Goeze. Mousehold
Heath
— rufipes, Scop. Stratton Strawless (Thou-
less)
— flavipes, L.
Lochmaa capree, L. Stratton Strawless,
ete. ; Potter Heigham (Wood)
— suturalis, Thoms. Mousehold Heath
— crategi, Forst. Galerucella viburni, Payk. Foxley Wood,
Howe Grove
— nymphee, L. Horning, etc. — sagittarie, Gyll. — lineola, F.
— calmariensis, L.
— tenella, L.
Adimonia tanaceti, L.
Sermyla halensis, L.
Longitarsus anchusae, Payk. East Rudham
(Wood)
— ater, F. Caistor, Norwich ; Ditchingham,
Ashwicken (Power)
holsaticus, L. Horning, etc. quadriguttatus, Pont. Burrell’s list
castaneus, Duft. luridus, Scop. brunneus, Duft. fuscicollis, Steph. atricillus, L.
melanocephalus, All. nasturtii, F, Norwich District ; Ditch-
ingham (Power)
— ballote, Marsh. — flavicornis, Steph. } Ditchingham
(Power)
Aylsham, Hunstanton

femoralis, Marsh. pusillus, Gyll. (Fowler)

— tabidus, F,

— jacobez, Wat. — tutilus, Ill, Eaton, August, 1875

— ochroleucus, Marsh. — gracilis, Kuts. — levis, Duft. Gimingham (Butler)

— pellucidus, Foudr. Ditchingham (Power) ;
Hunstanton (Fowler)

Haltica lythri, Aub. —criceti, All. Mousebold Heath, Roud-
ham Heath

— coryli, Brit. Coll. Foxley Wood

— oleracea, L.

— palustris, Weise. Wbitwell Common, etc. Phyllotreta nodicornis, Marsh. Norwich 5
Aylsham (Wood)

130

INSECTS

Cycuica (continued)
Phyllotreta consobrina, Curt. (Fowler)
punctulata,
(Power)
atra, Payk. crucifere, Goeze
vittula, Redt. undulata, Ruts. nemorum, L.
ochripes, Curt. sinuata, Steph. tetrastigma, Com. exclamationis, Thunb. Aphthona lutescens, Gyll. Horning, etc. nonstriata, Goeze. Norfolk
Marsh. Ditchingham

Pldtbtbid

Ranworth,

— venustula, Kuts. Ringland
— atroccerulea, Steph. Bix/ey, June,
1875

— virescens, Foudr. Ditchingham (Power) ;
Hunstanton (Fowler)

Batophila rubi, Payk. Ketteringham

— erata, Marsh. Sphzroderma testaceum, F.

— cardui, Gyll. Apteropeda orbiculata, Marsh. a eval Hunstanton (Blatch)

Podagrica fuscicornis, L.

Mantura rustica, L.

June, 1878

— obtusata, Gyll. Ochrosis salicaria, Payk. Crepidodera transversa, Marsh. ferruginea, Scop. rufipes, L.

ventralis, Ill.

nitidula, L.

chloris, Foudr. — aurata, Marsh,

Hippuriphila modeeri, L.

Chztocnema hortensis, Fourc. — sahlbergi, Gyll. Honing Common, July,

1887

Plectoscelis concinna, Marsh. Psylliodes chrysocephala, L.

— napi, Koch. cuprea, Koch. 1877

affinis, Payk. marcida, Ill.

dulcamare, Koch. (Fowler)

chalcomera, Il]. Hunstanton (Fowler)

hyoseyami, L.  Burrell’s list

picina, Marsh. Brundall, April, 1886

Framingham Earl,

-_ St, Faiths (Fowler)
Burrell’s list
Thorpe, July, 1874

Armingball, September,

Hickling ; Horning

CryPTosoMaTA

Cassida murrea, L. St. Faiths Wood

(Wigham)
131

Crvprosomara (continued)

Cassida nebulosa, L.  Ludham, Woodbast-
wick (Thouless)

vibex, F. Stoke Holy Cross (Thouless) ;
Ditchingham (Fowler)

sanguinolenta, F. Heigham Osier Carr,
June, 1877;  Mousehold Heath
(Thouless)

vietata, Vill. Norfolk (Skrimshire)

nobilis, L. Norfolk (Burrell)

flaveola, Thunb. Dunston, Mousehold
Heath ; Aylsham (Wood)

equestris, F.

— viridis, F.

TENEBRIONIDE

Blaps mucronata, Latr. Crypticus quisquilius, L.
Brandon

Heliopathes gibbus, F. Yarmouth, etc. Microzoum tibiale, F. Sandy coast, also
Brandon

Phaleria cadaverina, F. Yarmouth ; Hun-
stanton (Fowler)

Heledona agricola, F. Norfolk (Fowler)

Scaphidema metallicum, F. Arminghall

Tenebrio molitor, L.

— obscurus, F.

Gnathocerus cornutus, F. Norwich (Fowler)

Tribolium ferrugineum, F. Norfolk

Hypophleeus bicolor, Ol. } (Fowler)

Helops coeruleus, L. Lower Close, Norwich 5
Yarmouth (Paget)

— striatus, Foure. Sparham district (Nor-
gate); Horsford (Thouless)

CISTELIDE
Cistela Iuperus, Hbst. — murina, L.
Eryx ater, F. Norwich (Fowler)
Cteniopus sulphureus, L.

Sandy coast, also

LAGRIIDE
Lagria hirta, L.

MELANDRYIDA
Tetratoma fungorum, F.  Whitlingham
(Wigham) ; Forncett (Brown)
— desmaresti, Latr.. Harleston district (Fox)
Orchesia micans, Panz. Forncett,- Broome
(Brown)
Hallomenus humeralis, Panz. Lakenham
Conopalpus testaceus, Ol. Dunston Common,
July, 1883
Melandrya caraboides, L.
Yarmouth (Paget)

PYTHIDA:
Salpingus castaneus, Panz. Stratton Straw-
less, etc. Burrell’s list. A HISTORY

Salpingus ratus, Mull. Norwich
Rhinosimus ruficollis, L.
— viridipennis, Steph. — planirostris, F.
OEDEMERIDE
Ocdemera nobilis, Scop. Postwick (Dos-
setor)

— lurida, Marsh. Oncomera femorata, F. Starston (Paul fide
Burrell)

Nacerdes melanura, Schmidt. Heath ; Yarmouth (Paget)

Ischnomera ccerulea, L. Eaton, Kirby
(Brown) ; Yarmouth (Paget)

Mousebold

PYROCHROIDA
Pyrochroa serraticornis, Scop. MORDELLIDA

Mordellistena brunnea,F. Hellesdon ; Bir-
cham Newton (Fowler)

— pumila, Gyll. Horning; Aylsham
(Wood)

— parvula, Gyll. ; var. inaequalis, Muls. Hellesdon

Anaspis frontalis, L.

— pulicaria, Costa

— geoffroyi, Mall. — nuficollis, F.

— subtestacea, Steph. — maculata, Fourc. RHIPIDOPHORIDA
Metcecus paradoxus, L.  Burrell’s list. Cossey (Wigham)

ANTHICIDE
Notoxus monoceros, L.
Anthicus floralis, L.
— antherinus, L. Yarmouth (Thouless)

XYLOPHILIDA

Xylophilus populneus, F. Heigham
— oculatus, Gyll. Dunston Common

MELOIDA
Melot proscarabeus, L.
— violaceus, Marsh. Reepham (Thouless)
Lytta vesicatoria, L. Norwich, 1877. Once taken by William Hooker and
once by Skrimshire (fide Burrell)

ANTHRIBIDE
Brachytarsus fasciatus, Forst. (Hooker fide Burrell)

Anthribus albinus, L.
Platyrrhinus latirostris, r}

Norfolk

Norfolk
(Stephens)

OF NORFOLK

Tropideres albirostris, Hbst. Near Norwich
(Stephens)

— niveirostris, F. Norfolk (Stephens)

Choragus sheppardi, Kirby. Forncett (2)

(Brown)
CURCULIONIDE
ATTELABINA
Apoderus coryli, L. } Foxley
Attelabus curculionoides, L. J Wood

RHYNCHITINA

Byctiscus betuleti, F.

Topi, Le } Fosley Wood
Rhynchites cupreus, L. Burrell’s list
— equatus, L.

— eneovirens, Marsh. Burrell’s list
coeruleus, De G.
minutus, Hbst. nanus, Payk. Burrell’s list ; Catuston

Heath (Wood)
uncinatus, Thoms. Horning (Elliman)

— pubescens, F, Foxley Wood

Deporatls betule, L. Foxley Wood, Brooke

Wood, etc. APIONINA

Apion pomone, F.
cracce, L.
subulatum, Kirby
ulicis, Forse. malve, F,
urticarium, Hbst. miniatum, Germ. hzmatodes, Kirby
rubens, Steph. pallipes, Kirby. rufirostre, F.
vicie, Payk. /Vaxham (Champion)
difforme, Germ. varipes, Germ. apricans, Hbst. bohemani, Thoms. trifolii, L.
dichroum, Bedel
nigritarse, Kirby
confluens, Kirby
hookeri, Kirby. zneum, F.
radiolus, Kirby
onopordi, Kirby
carduorum, Kirby
flavimanum, Gyll. virens, Hbst. punctigerum, Payk. pisi, F.
zthiops, Hbst. ebeninum, Kirby. ler)
striatum, Kirby
immune, Kirby. ononis, Kirby

} Norfolk (Fowler)

Ditchingham (Fowler)

Yarmouth

Waxham (Champion)

PELTEEP PPT Pt bt rrr brat

Ashwicken (Fow-

Thorpe, Oct., 1875

It

132

INSECTS

Apiontna (continued)
Apion spencei, Kirby
— envi, Kirby
— vorax, Hbst. Aylsham (Wood)

— gyllenhali, Kirby. Gimingham (Butler)

— meliloti, Kirby. Ditchingham (Fowler)

— scutellare, Kirby

— loti, Kirby

— seniculum, Kirby

— tenue, Kirby

— simile, Kirby. — curtisi, Walt. — limonii, Kirby

— marchicum, Hbst. pion)

— violaceum, Kirby

— hydrolapathi, Kirby

— humile, Germ. OTIORRHYNCHINA

Otiorrhynchus raucus,F. Cromer (Fowler) ;
Roughton, August, 1900 (Beare)

— scabrosus, Marsh. — picipes, F.

— sulcatus, F.

— ligustici, L. Burrell’s list

— ovatus, L.

— muscorum, Bris. Hunstanton (Fowler)
Norfolk (Fowler)

Waxham (Cham-

Hellesdon

Trachyphleeus aristatus, Gyll. Gimingham
(Butler)

— squamulatus, Ol. Ringland, Sept., 1876

— scaber, L.

— scabriculus, L.

— spinimanus, Germ. Cromer (Walton)

Czenopsis fissirostris, Walt. emer

— waltoni, Schén. Heath

Strophosomus coryli, F.

— capitatus, De G.

— retusus, F.

— faber, Hbst. — lateralis, Payk. Brachysomus echinatus, Bonsd. Sciaphilus muricatus, F.

Tropiphorus _carinatus,
(Burrell)

Barypeithes sulcifrons, Boh. trict (Norgate)

Liophloeus nubilus, F.

Polydrusus micans, F,  Foxley Wood

— tereticollis, De G. Burrell’s list

— pterygomalis, Boh. — flavipes, De G. Brooke Wood, Kettering-
ham Common

— cervinus, L.

— chrysomela, Ol. Wells, Brancaster

— confluens, Steph. Brandon (Fowler)

Phyllobius oblongus, L.

— urtice, De G.

— pyri, L

— argentatus, L.

— maculicornis, Germ. Mouschold Heath

Mull. — Norfolk

Sparbam dis. OrtorRHyNCHINA (continued)
Phyllobius pomonz, Ol. — viridieris, Laich. — viridicollis, F. Brandon, May, 1888 ;
Yarmouth (Fowler)
Tanymecus palliatus, F, Cromer (Fowler) ;
Waxham (Champion)

 

Philopedon geminatus, F, Yarmouth ;
Waxham (Champion)
Atactogenus exaratus, Marsh. Mousehold

Heath

Barynotus obscurus, F. Hellesdon, May,
1879; Caistor (Paget)

— clevatus, Marsh, Aylsham (Fowler)

Alophus triguttatus, F,  Burrell’s list

Curcuttonina

Sitones griseus, F.

— regensteinensis, Hbst. — crinitus, Hbst. — tibialis, Hbst. — hispidulus, F.

— humeralis, Steph. — flavescens, Marsh. Gimingham (But-
let) ; Horning (Bedwell)

— puncticollis, Steph. — suturalis, Steph. Gimingham (Butler)

— lineatus, L.

— sulcifrons, Thunb. Gronops lunatus, L.  Mouschold Heath

Hypera punctata, F.

— fasciculata, Hbst. ee Ces } Norfalt (Stephens)

— pollux, F. Heigham Osier Carr, May,
1875 ; Aylsham (Wood)

— alternans, Steph. Rudbam (Fowler) ;
Waxham (Champion)

— polygoni, L.  Felbrigg, August, 1883

— suspiciosa, Hbst. Hellesdon, July,
1874

— variabilis, Hbst. — plantaginis, De G.  Forncett

— meles, F. | Yarmouth, Foxley Wood

— nigrirostris, F.

Cleonus sulcirostris, L. AZousehold Heath,
Holtham ; Yarmouth (Fowler)

— albidus, F. Hellesdon (Hooker fide
Stephens); Thetford, before 1837
(Salmon)

— nebulosus, L. Burrell’s list. Mousebold
Heath

Lixus paraplecticus, L. Halvergate

(Stephens) ; Horning (Thouless)

Liosoma ovatulum, Clairv. Liparus coronatus, Goeze. Burrell’s list

Hylobius abictis, L. Stratton Strawless 5
Sparham district (Norgate) ; Arming-
hall Wood (Wigham)

Pissodes notatus, F. Yaxbam (Wollaston
fide Walton)

Orchestes quercus, L.

133

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

CurcuLioniNa (continued)

Orchestes scutellaris, Gyll. Drayton Drew-
ray, June, 1889 ; Norfolk (Smith)

— alni, L:

— 4, var. ferrugineus, Marsh,

— ilicis, F.

— avellane, Don. — fagi, L.

— rusci, Hbst. — stigma, Germ. — salicis, L.

— saliceti, Payk. Norfalé (Stephens)

Ramphus flavicornis, Clairv. Orthocz#tes setiger, Beck. Mousehold Heath ;
Yelverton (Brown)

Procas armillatus, F. Norfalé (Stephens)

Grypidius equiseti, F. Cringleford (Brown) ;
Aylsham (Wood)

Erirthinus bimaculatus, F, Norfo/é (Fowler)

— acridulus, L.

Thryogenes festuca, Hbst. Horning, etc. — nereis, Payk. Horning (Fowler)

Dorytomus vorax, F.

— tortrix, L. Lakenham

— hirtipennis, Bedel. Thorpe, Sept., 1876

— maculatus, Marsh. — costirostris, Gyll. — agnathus, Boh. — pectoralis, Gyll. — salicinus, Gyil. Horning, May, 1889 ;
Hoveton (Power)

Smicronyx jungermanniz,
Faiths (Power)

Tanysphyrus lemne, F.

Bagous alismatis, Marsh

— petro, Hbst. Brandon, St. Faiths Common

— binodulus, Hbst. Near Norwich
(Stephens)

— tempestivus, Hbst. — lutosus, Gyll. Norfolk (Stephens) ;
Wretham Heath, August, 1890

Anoplus plantaris, Naez. Elleschus bipunctatus, L. Stratton Straw-
less, St. Faiths

Tychius quinquepunctatus, L.
Creake (Stephens)

— venustus, F. Norfolk (Stephens)

— meliloti, Steph. Ditchingham (Fowler)

— tibialis, Boh. Yarmouth, June, 1883

Miccotrogus picirostris, F.

Miarus campanule, L.
August, 1881

— plantarum, Germ. Bixiey, Sept., 1878

Gymnetron villosulus, Gyll. — beccabunge, L.

Brandon, July, 1882
Foxley Wood

Stoke Holy Cross
Cromer (Fowler)

Reich. St.

South

 

Barton Bendish,

— melanarius, Germ. —Ashwicken (Fowler)

— rostellum, Hbst. Harford Bridges, May,
1878

— pascuorum, Gyll. Postwick Grove,
June, 1875

Curcuttontna (continued)
Gymnetron labilis, Hbst. — antirrhini, Payk. — linarie, Panz. Norfolk (Stephens)

Mecinus pyraster, Hbst. Anthonomus ulmi, De G.

— rosine, Des Gozis

— pedicularius, L.

— pomorm, L,

— mbi, Hbst. Nanophyes lythri, F.

Cionus scrophularie, L.

— thapsus, F. Framingham Pigot, June,
1878

— hortulanus, Marsh. Forncett (Brown)

— Dlattarie, F.

— pulchellus, Hbst. Orobitis cyaneus, L.  Foxley Wood ; Wax-
ham (Champion) ; Yarmouth, Yelver-
ton (Brown)

Cryptorrhynchus Japathi, L. Heigham
Osier Carr, Eaton Common; East
Raynham (Wood)

Acalles ptinoides, Marsh. ousehold Heath

— turbatus, Boh. Ringland; Bircham
Newton (Fowler)

Coeliodes quercus, F.

— ruber, Marsh. Dunston Common, Thet-
ford ; Ashwicken (Fowler)

— cardui, Hbst. — quadrimaculatus, L.

— geranii, Payk. Norfolk (Stephens)

Poophagus sisymbrii, F.

— nasturtii, Germ. East Rudham (Wood) ;
Heacham (Fowler)

Centhorrhynchus assimilis, Payk. — setosus, Boh. Ringland, June, 1877 ;

St. Faiths (Fowler)

constrictus, Marsh. cochlearie, Gyll. crice, Gyll. AMousehold Heath, etc. erysimi, F.

contractus, Marsh. cyanipennis, Germ. chalybeus, Germ. quadridens, Panz. geographicus, Goeze. Thetford

pollinarius, Forst. viduatus, Gyll. Horning (Elliman)
querceti, Gyll. Horning. All the re-
corded British examples of this species
come from this locality
— pleurostigma, Marsh. —alliarie, Bris. East Carlton, June,
1879; Brandon, May, 1888

— resede, Marsh, Horning; Waxham
(Champion) ; Cromer (Walker)

— rugulosus, Hbst. Aorston, May, 1888 ;
Waxham (Champion)

Norfolk (Fowler)

Eaton, Earlham ;

Prldddttttte

134

INSECTS

CoRCULIONINA (continued)

Centhorrhynchus melanostictus, Marsh. — asperifoliarum, Gyll. — chrysanthemi, Germ. Near Norwich
(Sparshall fide Stephens)

— triangulum, Boh. Afousebold Heath,
July, 1886 ; Brandon (Walker)

— trimaculatus, F.

Centhorrhynchidius floralis, Payk. — hepaticus, Gyll. Ditchingham (Fowler)

— pyrrhorhynchus, Marsh. — pulvinatus, Gyll. Hunstanton (Blatch)

— melanarius, Steph. — terminatus, Hbst. — horridus F.

— troglodytes, F.

Tapinotus sellatus, F. Horning, 1838
(Brown) ; one specimen which re-
mains unique as British

Amalus hzmorrhous, Hbst. Ringland,
May, 1878; Bowthorpe, June, 18793
Ashwicken (Fowler)

Rhinoncus pericarpius, L.

— gramineus, Hbst. Hickling, June, 1888 5
Brandon, May, 1889

— perpendicularis, Reich,

— castor, F. Mousebold Heath ; Waxham
(Champion)

— bruchoides, Hbst. Mousehold Heath,
June, 1883 ; Ashwicken (Power)

Eubrychius velatus, Beck. Eaton Common ;
Aylsham (Wood) ; Waxham (Cham-
pion)

Litodactylus leucogaster, Marsh. Phytobius comari, Hbst. Heigham, Brum-
stead Common

— waltoni, Boh. (Fowler)

— quadrituberculatus, F. Norfalé (Fowler)
— canaliculatus, Fahr. Poringland, July,
1888 ; Waxham (Champion)

Limnobaris T-album, L.
Baris laticollis, Marsh. Burrell’s list. — picicornis, Marsh. Cromer, Sherringham

Gimingbam (Butler)

Woedbastwick, Horning

CuRCULIONINA (continued)
Baris lepidii, Germ. August, 1888
Balaninus venosus, Grav. Park, Foxley Wood
— nucum, L. Foxkey Wood
— turbatus, Gyll. Durston (Thouless)
— betule, Steph. Eaton, May, 1888
— mbidus, Gyll. Ringland, September,
1875 ; Ashwicken (Power)
— villosus, F. Brundall, May, 1883
— salicivorus, Payk. — pyrrhoceras, Marsh. Magdalis armigera, Fourc. — cerasi, L.
— pruni, L. Aylsham (Wood)
CALANDRINA
Calandra granaria, L. } Norwich
— oryze, L.

Swanton Morley,

Ringland, Beeston

SCOLYTIDE
Scolytus destructor, Ol. — multistriatus, Marsh. 1893 (Thouless)
Hylastes ater, Payk. Eaton, August,

— opacus, Er. Ringland, June, 1877
— palliatus, Gyll. Stratton Strawless,
etc. Hylesinus crenatus, F. Cromer, ete. (Fow-
ler) 5 Zylsham (Wood)

— oleiperda, F. Bewthorpe, June, 1879 3
Cromer (Fowler) ; Aylsham (Wood)

— fraxini, Panz. Phiceophthorus rhododactylus, Marsh. Weeting, May, 1888
Cryphalus abietis, Ratz. East Cariton,

May, 1877
Pityophthorus pubescens, Marsh. } Cromer

Dryocetes coryli, Perris. (Elliman)
STYLOPIDA
Stylops melitte, Kirby. Several times

bred from Andrena by Bridgman

LEPIDOPTERA

The county of Norfolk, from its somewhat peculiar geological forma-
tions, its extensive coastline, and its very considerable area of fens and
marshes, possesses a more than usually extensive, rich and varied

entomological fauna. The total number of species of Lepidoptera is at

least 1,460, and so large a proportion of these are of interest from their
local distribution or actual rarity, that a local list, to be of value, must be

of exceptional length. 135

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

A slight preliminary sketch of its more important features may be
useful. By great good fortune, records are preserved of some of the
more interesting species in this county from a much earlier date than in
most others. Thus with regard to that extraordinary species, Hypogymna
dispar, of which the sexes are totally unlike each other ; which has so
mysteriously disappeared altogether from this country, and yet by acci-
dental introduction to the United States of America has so devastated
vast tracts of woodlands that it has cost and is now costing the govern-
ment of that country hundreds of thousands of dollars in the struggle
for its extermination ; we are supplied with indubitable evidence of its
former abundance with us. Mr. John Curtis writes thus (British Ento-
mology, 1825-40) : ‘It is not easy to conceive the delight I experienced
when a boy on finding the locality for the “Gypsy moth.” After a long
walk I arrived at the extensive marshes of Horning in Norfolk, having no
other guide to the spot than the Myrica gale, and on finding the beds of
that shrub, which grows freely there, the gaily-coloured caterpillars first
caught my sight. They were in every stage of growth, some being as
thick as swan’s quills. I also soon discovered the moths, which are so
different in colour as to make a tyro doubt their being partners. The
large loose cocoons were also very visible, and on a diligent search I found
bundles of eggs covered with the fine down from the abdomen of the
female. With eggs, caterpillars, chrysalides and moths I speedily re-
turned, enjoying unmixed delight in my newly-gained acquisitions.’ Now,
although Myrica gale still flourishes in abundance at Horning there is no
trace of the moth, and no evidence exists as to the date or means of its
extinction. The Rev. T. H. Marsh however records its existence fur-
ther west, at Cawston, not uncommonly, till 1861. Since that date it has
apparently never been seen in Norfolk ; and except in most rare and
casual instances, not within the British Isles. The fens of Norfolk extending for many miles along the banks of
the Yare, the Bure, the Thurn and the Ant form still, with those of
Cambridgeshire, the sole haunts in these islands of that handsome and
striking butterfly the swallow-tail (Papilio machaon), a species which
abroad is by no means confined to fens, but flies at large in most parts of
Europe, even ranging over mountain districts, and in hotter regions, as in
Asia, especially affecting such situations. Why it should with us so
scrupulously attach itself to fens, hardly ever flying a mile away from
them, is probably an insoluble mystery. Happily the fens themselves are
so situated, and so extensive, that there is little risk of its extermination. This advantage it shares with species of similar proclivities, such as
Spilosoma urtice, Arsilonche venosa, Nonagria neurica, Meliana flammea,
Herminia cribralis, Schaenobius mucronellus, S. gigantellus, Peronea shepherdana,
P. lorquiniana, Phoxopteryx paludana, Ergatis subdecurtella, Xystophora
palustrella, Laverna phragmitella, Cosmopteryx lienigiella and C. orichalcea, all
of which are common to the Cambridgeshire fens as well as these. This
protection is perhaps even more important in the cases of Lithosia muscerda,
Calamia brevilinea, Chilo paludellus and Sericoris doubledayana, which seem

136

INSECTS

not to be found in Cambridgeshire, and except perhaps in the case of
L. muscerda, nowhere else in the United Kingdom. Calamia brevilinea
has a wonderful, and even a rather complete history, so far as the history
of any species can be completely worked out. It appears certain that it
had no existence in Ranworth Fen at the time, forty years ago, when
W. Winter collected for two or three years largely there, sending his
captures to purchasers everywhere, and showing himself to be a very
skilful and accurate collector. In 1864 the first specimen was captured
in the same fen, and after much hesitation and enquiry was described and
published as a new British species. Several years elapsed, and then
another was taken, and immediately afterwards a few more ; after this it
steadily increased in numbers, until it is now in some seasons almost the
most frequent noctua to be seen in an August night, at ‘light,’ in the fen. Moreover it has now spread to other fens at least ten miles away. Yet
no record exists of its occurrence, except as a single example in Belgium,
in any other part of the world !_ Much the same may be said of the pretty
little Sericoris doubledayana, which I had myself the pleasure of discovering
in the same fen in plenty in 1872, which continues commonly there,
but of which I have no certain knowledge anywhere else. Another species of interest is Macrogaster arundinis, which, con-
versely, used to be found only in the Cambridge fens, and which I tried
to introduce, in the egg, into Norfolk about the year 1868. The capture
of two males in the same spot ten years later seemed to indicate success,
but no more have been found there ; yet within the last ten years
specimens have been secured in other fens at more than ten miles distance,
giving colour to the belief that it may after all be one of the ancient
inhabitants of the county, hitherto overlooked. Leaving the interesting subject of the fens there is another tract of
country to which especial attention must be drawn, that lying around
Brandon, Thetford, Watton, Merton, and extending into the west
of Suffolk and the east of Cambridgeshire. It is known as the
“Breck-sand,’ the soil consisting of sand so loose that a field, if ploughed
up in the daytime, may not unfrequently be blown level again by a strong
wind in the night. It is understood to be the ancient sandy coast of the
sea of the later Post-Glacial period, but now has lost the peculiar botanical
features of the sea-coast, except in the existence still in plenty of two species
of sea-side plants—a grass and a sedge—yet to all appearance its insect
fauna remains unchanged, such sea-side species as Agrotis valligera, Mames-
tra albicolon, Anerastia lotella, Bryotropha desertella, Lita marmorea and
Argyritis pictella being still to be found, often in abundance ; and more rarely
Agrotis precox and Mesotype lineolata. All these as is well known are
otherwise distinctively the ordinary inhabitants, almost exclusively, of coast
sandhills, and most of them are to be found on the present coast of Nor-
folk, distant twenty or thirty miles. But this ‘ Breck-sand ’ also furnishes
a home to another series of species of even greater attractions, since
though well known on the continent of Europe, they are for some reason
of too delicate organization to exist at all, or only very rarely, on any

137

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

other soil in these islands, yet in the district now under notice are often
abundant. Such are Agrophila sulphuralis, Acidalia rubricata, Lithostege
nivearia, Oxyptilus distans, Tinea imella, and more rarely Dianthecia
irregularis. A circumstance which must not be overlooked is the geographical
position of the county, and the great probability of its serving as a refuge
for insects driven by the occasional migratory impulse from the opposite
shores of the Netherlands, Denmark, the Baltic coast, or Scandinavia. To such an impulse in themselves or in their progenitors may possibly be
ascribed the occurrence of such exceedingly rare species as Syrichthus
alyeus, Notodonta torva, Noctua fammatra, Cloantha perspicillaris, Heliothis
scutosa and Ophiodes lunaris ; while to more successful immigrations may
be due the presence as residents of such species as Eupithecia extensaria,
Cateremna terebrella, Tortrix decretana, T. lafauryana, Coccyx ochsenbeimeriana
and Bryotropha tetragonella; possibly also some which we have been
accustomed to look upon as restricted to northern mountain districts—
Mixodia palustrana, M. rubiginosana and Cedestis gysselinella. There is work of abundant interest to be found also in the
extensive tracts of heath land, interspersed with bog and marsh, lying
between Sandringham and King’s Lynn, with their apparently inexhaus-
tible riches in Micro-Lepidoptera ; also in the chalk districts around
Swaffham and elsewhere, or at Ringstead near Hunstanton, with their
casual or frequent production of the insects of the South Downs. In
the following list universally common species have not been enumer-
ated :—

RHOPALOCERA

Papilio machaon, Linn, In the fens of the vergate, Potter Heigham, Merton, Thet-

Pieris crategi, Linn. Colias edusa, Linn,

— hyale, Linn. Bure, Yare and other rivers. This fine
species, which is very extensively dis-

tributed over the globe, is in this Thecla betulx, Linn. country usually confined to two coun-
ties, of which Norfolk is one. Here,
flying swiftly along the fen drains, and

the banks of the slower rivers, or haunt- — w.-album, Ill.

ing the beds of wild flowers in swampy
spots, it is by no means uncommon, and
its larva may often be found feeding upon
the leaves of the milk parsley (Peuce-
danum palustre). or almost inaccessible nature of much
of this ground there is good cause for
hope that it will not readily be exter-
minated in this county
Formerly taken in the
county ; but, as in most other parts of
England, now extinct
Extremely irregular and
uncertain in its appearances, but at in-
tervals widely spread in the county
Norwich, Lynn, Hal
138

— quercus, Linn. From the difficult — rubi, Linn. Chrysophanus phleas, Linn. ford, Aldeby ; very uncertain common
in the years 1868 and 1900

Found at Sall by the
Rev, T. H. Marsh, and also recorded
by Curtis (British Entomology, p. 264)
as found in Norfolk

Very local ; Newton St.
Faiths, Lynn, Denton, Stoke Holycross
Local, upon the out-
skirts of woods and occasionally in the
fens

Norwich, St. Faiths Heaths,
Swannington, Stody, Merton, Thetford,
Broome Heath, and commonly at Caw-
ston

Common. Varieties with pale clouding on the
fore wings are not unfrequent on boggy
heaths, and a form having the hind
wings wholly black, and the fore wings
broadly bordered with the same colour,
while the usual spots are nearly
obliterated, has been taken near Lynn

INSECTS

Polyommatus xgon, Bork. on boggy heaths
agestis, Schiff. (medon, Esp. ; astrarche,

Bgs.). Norwich, Hunstanton, Lynn,
Merton, Thetford, Broom Heath
corydon, Fab, Abundant at Ringstead
Downs ; found casually at Hunstanton,
Lynn and Snettisham
argiolus, Linn. Cawston, Booton, Thetford,
Broome and Gillingham; but not
common
alsus, Fab. (minima, St. C.). Cromer
and South Creake, scarce ; but found
plentifully near Swaffham by Mr.
Atmore in 1898
— acis, Sch. (semiargus, St. C.). Recorded
in this county by Haworth and
Stephens in the early parts of the
century, but, as in other parts of
England, long since extinct
Apatura iris, Linn. Foulsham, Dersingham,
but rare; formerly at Whitlingham ;
not scarce in Foxley Wood
Vanessa c.-album, Linn. Very rare in the
county. The Rev. W. F. Welch
informed Lord Walsingham that he
saw a specimen in his garden at Stead-
sett in October, 1858, and took one in
the same place in September, 1861 ;
the Rev. J. W. Colvin took one in the
Rectory garden at Yarmouth; and
Mr. E. A. Atmore reports a specimen
at Walpole
— polychloros, Linn, Widely distributed
and formerly common ; now very un-
certain in appearance
— antiopa, Linn. An occasional migrant. In 1872 it was suddenly observed quite
commonly in the county, especially at
its north-east corner, and a considerable
number were taken. Within a few
days the course of the migrating flock
was traced in some degree across the
county and onward until specimens
reached scattered localities in the West
of England. It has been recorded
casually in the county so early as
1834, and in various other years to
1891
Argynnis paphia, Linn. Generally _uncom-
mon; much more plentiful in Foxley
Wood
— aglaia, Linn. Almost confined to the
east coast, but once found commonly
at Whitesley
— adippe, Linn. Local in the woods of
the north and west of the county
— lathonia, Linn. Excessively rare. I

Locally common

have seen a specimen which was taken
at Plumstead, near Norwich ; others are
recorded at Beechamwell, Halvergate,
Caistor and Booton

Argynnis ,euphrosyne, Linn, Local in this
county. Stratton Strawless, Horsford,
Tindall Wood, Cawston, Runcton, Mid-
dleton ; in woods

— selene, Fab. Local in most of the same
woods; also at Hoveton St. Fobn,
Hethel and Wootton

Melitea artemis, Fab. (aurinia, St. C.). In
marshy meadows; very local, Nor-
wich, St. Faiths, Horning, Cawston,
Aldeby and Beachamwell

Melanargia  galathea, Linn, Found locally
at Kirby Cane by Dr. W. M. Crow-
foot, who also noticed that it moved
from one spot to another almost every
season. Recorded in Norfolk by
Curtis

Satyrus semele, Linn. Common on coast
sandhills and inland heaths

Pararge zgeria, Linn. Norwich, Merton,
Thetford, Ditchingham, Sparham ; un-
common in the county

Epinephile tithonus, Linn, Abundant

— hyperanthus, Linn. Plentiful in damp
woods

Syrichthus alveus, Hib. Several specimens
were captured about twenty-five years
ago in a damp hollow at the edge of a
wood at Cawston, by the Rev. T. H.
Marsh. These I found in his collec-
tion under the name of the next species,
to which he had referred them—the
latter being apparently absent from
that district. The locality has been
carefully searched in many subsequent
years, but no more specimens have
been found. ‘This species is scarcely
known otherwise as British, and it is
supposed that a small migration from
the other side of the North Sea may
have taken place, but without causing
a permanent settlement

— alveolus, Hb. Weedton, Tyndall Wood,
Ditchingham, Ketteringham, Horning ;
scarce and very local in the county

Hesperia comma, Linn. Taken by Mr.
Atmore, near Swaffham

Cyclopides paniscus, Fab. A single specimen
was taken near Thetford, in the presence
of the Rev. H. Williams

Nisoniades tages, Linn. Ditchingham, Ket-
teringham, Cawston ; very local, yet re-
corded in the county by Haworth and
Stephens

139

A HISTORY OF

NORFOLK

HETEROCERA

Smerinthus ocellatus, Linn, Widely distri-
buted, and rather common in the fens,
feeding quite as frequently upon Salix
caprza as upon the narrow-leaved wil-
lows

— populi, Linn. Common, and not con-
fined to poplar, but feeding also upon
broad-leaved sallows

— tiliz, Linn. Scarce, but found on lime
near Norwich, Merton, Thetford, Lynn,
Raveningham, Sparham, Cawsten and
Horning

Acherontia atropos, Linn. Found occasion-
ally in all parts of the county, but
usually in the larva state

Sphinx convolvuli, Linn, Also found occa-
sionally in various parts of the county ;
in the year 1887 it suddenly appeared
in considerable numbers, and many
were taken—nearly thirty in my own
garden at King’s Lynn

— ligustri, Linn. Generally common ; its
magnificent green larva, with lilac and
white oblique side-stripes, and a caudal
horn, may be found on privet bushes in
the gardens, and at the road-sides

Deilephila galii, Sch. Very rare, but taken at
Denton in 1888 by the Rev. C. T.
Cruttwell; also at Gillingham near
Becles by Dr. Crowfoot ; and at Yar-
mouth

— euphorbiz, Linn. I had the singularly
good fortune to capture a male speci-
men, hovering at flowers of verbena,
in my garden at King’s Lynn, on Sep-
tember 7th, 1887. This I believe to
be the only example ever taken in the
county

— livornica, Esp. There is a reliable record
of the capture of a single specimen at
Thetford in 1857 ; and another of the
occurrence of an example at the electric
light at Carrow near Norwich in 1891. Stephens gave this rare species as an
inhabitant of the county (I/lustra-
tions, vol. i. p. 127), but without
locality

Charocampa celerio, Linn, Also recorded
by Stephens, but without definite
locality

— porcellus, Linn. Norwich, Yarmeuth,
Ketteringham, Horning, Lynn, Hun-
stanton, Cawston, Merton, Thetford,
Broome ; not very common

—clpenor, Linn. Generally distributed,
especially frequenting marshy spots

Macroglossa stellatarum, Linn. Widely dis-
tributed ; rather common on the coast ;

most attractive from its habit of poising
itself at flowers like a humming-bird
Macroglossa fuciformis, Linn. Merton, Hey-
don, Cawston, Horsford, Briston, Drayton
and around King’s Lynn ; not common
— bombyliformis, Esp. Wocdbastwick, Caw-
ston, Horsford ; scarce
Sesia spheciformis, Sch. Taken by the Rev. T. H. Marsh at Horsford near Nor-
wich ; possibly wherever alder is abun-
dant
tipuliformis, Linn,
Lynn ; in gardens
myopiformis, Bkh. Norwich; in gardens,
among old apple trees
culiciformis, Linn. Norwich and Dilham;
rare
formiciformis, Esp. Norwich, Brundall
and Kings Lynn; among osier
ichneumoniformis, Sch. Recorded by
old authors as having been taken at
South Creake in 1823. It does not
seem to have been noticed in the
county since that date
Sphecia apiformis, Linn, Common around
Norwich; also found at Costessey, Mort-
ham, Cawston and elsewhere, on pop-
lars; more frequent in the eastern
counties than elsewhere in the United
Kingdom
— bembeciformis, Hb. Foxley, Hockering,
Sparham, Hindolveston, Kerdiston, and
Neatishead ; among sallow
Procris statices, Linn. Brandon; recorded
by Paget long ago at Caistor; found
recently in plenty by Mr. Atmore near
Lynn; and singly at Hemsby by Mr.
Knights
Zygena trifolii, Esp. Near Norwich and
Lynn, also at Cawston, Ranworth,
Horning and Neatishead; in damp
meadows and fens
— lonicere, Esp. Foxley Wood and Aldeby ;
local
— filipendule, Linn, Thetford, Aldeby,
Cawston and near Lynn ; but uncom-
mon and very local in this county ;
abundant in many parts of England
Macrogaster arundinis, Hb. Two specimens
were taken at Ranworth Fen in June,
1878, by Mr. W. H. B. Fletcher ;
three near Horsey in August, 1898,
by Mr. Percy C. Reid, and one this
year near Hickling, by Dr. F. D.
Wheeler
Zeuzera xsculi, Linn. Norwich, Lynn, Yar-
mouth, Thetford, Merton, Denton, Gel-
destone, Whitwell; scarce. Dr. Plow-

Norwich, Yarmouth,

140

INSECTS

right discovered, at Lyn”, that the
greater spotted woodpecker extracts the
larve of this species from their burrows
in the twigs of trees, and thereby
doubtless prevents its becoming com-
mon

Cossus ligniperda, Fab. Generally distri-
buted, and very destructive to willow,
poplar, ash, and oak trees, its larva
burrowing under the bark and through
the solid wood, and causing decay

Hepialus sylvinus, Linn. Locally common
on heaths

— heetus, Linn. woods

Limacodes testudo, Sch. Cawston, Drayton,
Felthorpe, Horsford 5, scarce

Hylophila prasinana, Linn, In woods gene-
rally ; not scarce

— quercana, Sch. Merton, Foxley Wood,
Horsford ; rather common at Croxton
and Lynn

Earias chlorana, Linn, Norwich, Barton
Turf, Horning, Ranworth and other
fens ; not scarce at Lynn

Nola cucullatella, Linn. Generally distri-
buted among hawthorn and blackthorn,
and in gardens about fruit trees

— strigula, Sch. Recorded by Paget at
Yarmouth

— confusalis, Hb. Not scarce around Nor-
wich and at Foxley, Cawston, Sparham
and Hockering ; also found at Lynn and
Denton

Nudaria senex, Hb. Very common in the
fens, and to be found more sparingly in
marshy spots generally

— mundana, Linn. Merton, Aldeby, Yar-

Local, but common in

‘mouth, Cawston and Horning; not
common
Calligenia miniata, Forst. Widely distri-

buted in woods and on wooded heaths

Setina irrorella, Linn. Mr. F. Norgate re-
ports the capture of this lacal species in
Foxley Wood

— mesomella, Linn. Widely distributed on
boggy heaths, and in woods and even
fens

Lithosia muscerda, Hb. Common at Ran-
worth, Horning, Irstead, Dilham, Brun-
dall and elsewhere in the fens. Plenti-
ful in some seasons ; but almost confined
to the fens of Norfolk, so far as the
British Isles are concerned

— aurcola, Hb. Norwich, Merton, Denton,
Sparham and Lynn, occasionally ; much
more frequent in Hockering and Foxley
Woods

— helveola, Ochs. Cawston, Cromer, Strat-
ton Strawless; scarce

Lithosia complana, Bdv. Merton, Thetford,
Yarmouth, Cawston, Lynn, Horning, St-
Faiths near Norwich. A variety tending
towards that known as L, molybdeola,
Gn., is found on heaths near Brandon
and Merton

— griseola, Hb. Generally common, and
abundant in the fens, where also its
beautiful ochreous variety, L. stramin-
cola, is not scarce

— tubricollis, Linn. Generally distributed
in woods, but not common

CEnistis quadra, Linn. Norwich, Horsford,
Merton, Barton Bendish, Drayton,
Horning ; very uncommon

Euchelia jacobea, Linn. Generally distri-
buted ; often abundant

Callimorpha dominula, Linn. Two speci-
mens have been taken at Burgh near
Aylsham, by Mr. Godfrey Burr

Euthemonia russula, Linn. Of general dis-
tribution on heaths

Nemeophila plantaginis, Linn. Ketteringham;
very local

Arctia villica, Linn. Norwich, Thetford,
Merton, Brandon and Broome

Phragmatobia fuliginosa, Linn. Norwich,
Merton, Brandon, Billingford, Sparham,
Cawston, Horning ; scarce

Spilosoma mendica, Linn, Norwich, Lynn,
Cawston, Sparham, Merton, Horstead ;
not common

— urtice, Esp. Norwich, Surlingham, Horn-
ing, Lynn, Barton Turf, Gillingham,
Thetford ; mainly confined to fens

Porthesia chrysorrhaza, Linn. This species
has been found at Norwich, Yarmouth,
Aldeby and Sparham; but I know of no
recent captures

— auriflua, Fab. about hedges

Liparis salicis, Linn. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Thetford, Gillingham, Horning, Hick-
ling, Clenchwarton, Lyng, Barton ; for-
merly plentiful, but now apparently
extinct in some of these localities, and
generally greatly reduced in numbers

Hypogymna dispar, Linn, At the beginning
of the present century, or the end of the
last, very plentiful at Horning, where
Curtis found it flourishing in such abun-
dance that ‘eggs, caterpillars, chrysa-
lides and moths’ could all be collected
by him upon the same day. It was
also found at Cawston, and there con-
tinued until the year 1861, since which
period it has not, I think, been observed
at large in the county, and scarcely in
any other part of the British Isles

Psilura monacha, Linn. Near Norwich, also

Everywhere abundant

141

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

at Merton, Denton, Cawston, Foulsham
and Foxley Wood ; usually confined
to large woods

Dasychira pudibunda, Linn. Generally dis
tributed, sometimes common

— fascelina, Linn. Norwich, Yarmouth ;
found occasionally, in the larva state
only, and generally on hedge-banks

Demas coryli, Linn. Thetford, Foxley Wood;
local

Orgyia gonostigma, Linn. worth Fens; scarce

Fumea roboricolella, Br. Merton, Cawston,
Foxley Wood; probably widely distri-
buted

— betulina, Z. Ranworth and Horning ;
scarce

Poecilocampa populi, Linn, Generally distri-
buted, but not very common

Trichiura crategi, Linn. Norwich, Lynn,
Sparham, Cawston, Hackering, Foxley
Wood 5 scarce

Eriogaster lanestris, Linn. Plentiful in some
seasons, its larve forming large silken
nests on the hawthorn hedges

Horning and Ran-

Clisiocampa neustria, Linn. Generally dis-
tributed

Lasiocampa rubi, Linn, Widely distributed
on heaths

— quercus, Linn. In all wooded districts

Odonestis potatoria, Linn. Common ; more
especially so in the fens

Gastropacha quercifolia, Linn, Widely dis-
tributed, but not very common

Saturnia carpini, Bkh. This usually heath-
frequenting species, is here far more
frequent in the fens, and seems to feed
most freely upon Spirea ulmaria

Drepana falcataria, Linn. Generally distri-
buted, and sometimes abundant among
birch

— hamula, Sch, Oak woods in the Norwich
district, Merton, Thetford, Barton Ben-
lish, Wormegay, Foxley, Drayton, Fel-
thorpe and Alderford

— unguicula, Hb. Merton and Thetford ;
among beech, but very local

Platypteryx —_acertinaria, “Linn. Northweld, scarce

Cilix spinula, Sch. Generally common

Cerura bicuspis, Bkh. Two larva of this
very rare species were found upon alder
at Aylsham in 1881 by Mr. F. Nor-
gate. The cocoons (empty) have been
observed at Merton and Sparham

— furcula, Linn, Yarmouth, Thetford,
Merton, Stratton Strawless, Hoveton,
Irstead, Barton Turf; most frequent in
fens, and usually captured on sallow in
the larva state

Merton,

Cerura bifida, Hb, Norwich, Thetford, Aldeby,
Cawston and Drayton; among poplar
and aspen

— vinula, Linn. Generally distributed ;
quite common as a larva upon Cana-
dian poplar in gardens in the suburbs
of Norwich

Stauropus fagi, Linn. Norwich, Horsford,
Stratton Strawless, Thetford, Drayton,
Cawston, Foulsham, Hackering Wood,
Cromer ; always about woods or wooded
heaths. A black variety was captured
by Mr. Thouless at the Carrow electric
lights. John Curtis is said to have
found it in the beginning of the cen-
tury in the Cathedral Close at Nor-
wich; and more than two centuries
ago it was said by Mouffet to be com-
mon in Norfolk

Notodonta dictea, Linn, Norwich, Cromer,
Thetford, Merton, Gillingham, Foulsham ;
not common

— dictzoides, Esp. Norwich, Cromer, Thet-
ford, Merton, Foulsham ; and Mr. At-
more reports that it has recently be-
come of frequent occurrence near Kings
Lynn

— ziczac, Linn, Apparently in all the fens
and wet woods; usually found in the
larva state on sallow

— trepida, Fab. Norwich, St, Faiths, Strat-
ton Strawless, Merton, Croxton, Dray-
ton, Kings Lynn ; scarce

— torva, Linn. The only satisfactorily
known British specimen was reared by
Mr. F. Norgate from one of a batch of
larve found by him upon white poplar
in the north-west of Norfolk. The
remaining larve unfortunately died

— dromedarius, Linn. Norwich, Aylsham,
Cawston, Runham, Lynn, Foxley, Dray-
ton, Whitwell, Merton ; not common

Drymonia chaonia, Sch. Norwich, Stratton
Strawless, Howe, Drayton, Cromer,
Cawston, Denton; rare

— dodonea, Sch. Norwich, Rackheath,
Stratton Strawless, Cromer, Cawston,
Merton, Thetford, Denton, Gillingham ;
scarce

Lophopteryx camelina, Linn. Norwich, Lynn,
Cawston, Thetford, Gillingham; com-
mon in Foxley Weed

— cucullina, Sch. Very rare; once taken
at Norwich by Dr. F. D. Wheeler ;
larve found at Runton, Arminghall,
Sherringham, Horning, Morten and
Sparham

Philodontis palpina, Linn. Widely distri-
buted among poplar ; sometimes rather
common in marshes

142

INSECTS

Petasia_cassinea, Fab. Norwich, Merton,
Thetford, Cawston, Sparham, Hockering,
Lynn and Foxley Wood

Clostera curtula, Linn. Merton, Thetford,
Hingham ; rare

— anachoreta, Fab. Barton. A colony in-
troduced here from the south coast, is
said to be thriving

— reclusa, Sch. Apparently generally dis-
tributed on boggy heaths and in fens
among the dwarf sallows

Diloba caruleocephala, Linn. Generally dis-
tributed, and in some seasons plentiful. At Denton Rectory 1 saw larve feeding
freely upon Pyrus japonica, its ordinary
food being hawthorn or blackthorn

Gonophora derasa, Linn. Widely distributed
in woods, but not common

Thyatira batis, Linn. Also rather uncom-
monly in similar situations

Cymatophora duplaris, Linn. Norwich, St.
Faiths, Merton, Aldeby, Foxley, Poul
sham, Neatishead, Horning, Lynn ; not
plentiful

— or, Sch. Foxley, Foulsham, Denton, Neatis-
head

— ocularis, Linn. Norwich, Lynn, Cawston,
Foulsham, Yarmouth, Denton, Gillingham,
Thetfird ; not rare among poplar

Asphalia diluta, Sch. Merton, Neatishead,
Foulsham ; not generally common in
the county, but plentiful in Foxley Wood

— flavicornis, Linn. Merton, Drayton, Strat-
ton Strawless; common near Lynn and
at Wootton

— ridens, Fab. Norwich, Stratton Strawless,
Felthorpe, Catwston, Drayton, Denton ;
not very common

Diphthera orion, Esp. Taken near Aldeby by
Dr. Crowfoot; not observed else-
where in the county

Acsonycta leporina, Linn, Norwich, Strat-
ton Strawless, Lynn, Runham, Horning,
Foulsham, Cavwston, Foxley, Merton,
Thetford’ not very common

— aceris, Linn. Generally distributed
— megacephala, Sch. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Thetford, Merton, Aldeby, Foxley,

Cawston, Horning ; sometimes common

—alni, Linn. Merton, Foxley, Cawston,
Foulsham, Sall, Aylsham, Stratton Straw-
less 5 always rare, but recorded in the
county by Haworth and Stephens

— strigosa, Fab. Recorded at Foulsham by
the Rev. T. H. Marsh. Stephens
writes: ‘Mr. Haworth possesses a
single specimen of this insect, which I
believe was taken in Norfolk” The
headquarters of the species are in Cam-
bridgeshire

Acronycta tridens, Sch. Norwich, Dunston,
‘Thetford, Merton, Aldeby, Lynn, Cawston,
Horning, Barton Turf ; not very rare

— menyanthedis, Esp. Two larvae were
found by Dr. F. D. Wheeler in fens,
one at Hickling Broad, the other at
Barton Turf ; of these one was reared,

and is unquestionably the present
species. Usually quite a northern
insect

— rumicis, Linn. Merton, Thetford, Aldeby,
Cawston, Horning; not common in
this county

— ligustri, Sch. Merton, Thetford, Aldeby,
Foxley, Cawston, Foulsham, Lynn; not
common

Assilonche venosa, Bkh. (albovenosa, St. C.). Ranworth, Horning, Reedham ; found
only in the fens . Agrotis valligera, Sch. (vestigialis, St. C.). Common on all the sandhills of the
coast, and also on the loose sands of the
ancient coast known as the ‘Breck-
sand,’ near Thetford, Brandon and
Merton

suffusa, Sch. Generally distributed

— corticea, Sch. Norwich, Merton, Thet-
ford, Cawston, Lynn, Hingham, Horning ;
not scarce; sometimes in very black
forms on the coast

puta, Hb. Norwich, Aldeby, Thetford,
Lynn, Cawston, Hunstanton; not very
common

ripe, Hb. Caistor, near Yarmouth, Hun-
stanton, Heacham; probably wherever
Salsola kali grows on the sea-sands

cursoria, Bkh. Abundant on the sand-
hills of the coast, at Yarmouth, Caistor,
and Hunstanton, Not found inland

nigricans, Linn. Generally distributed,
and in great variety

— tritici, Linn. Very abundant upon
coast sand-hills, and richly and variably
coloured ; also, in similar rich forms,
in plenty throughout the ‘Breck-sand’
district ; and in more dull and ordinary
forms to be found occasionally on all
heaths

—aquilina, Sch. Norwich, Brandon, Thet-
ford, Horning, Cawston, St. Faiths ; some-
times common

— agathina, Dup. Lynn; on heaths, but rare

— porphyrea, Sch. Common on heaths

— precox, Linn. Yarmouth, Caistor, Hun-
stanton ; on the coast sand-hills ; also
rarely near Thetford on the ‘Breck-
sand”

— saucia, Hb. Norwich, Yarmouth, Lynn,
Cawston, Dilham, Sparham, Thetford,
Aldeby ; uncertain, usually scarce

143

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Reported to have

Agrotis pyrophila, Sch. but

been once taken at Yarmouth ;
very doubtful
— ravida, Sch. Lynn, Hunstanton, Thetford ;
scarce. Recorded as a Norfolk species
by Haworth and Stephens
Axylia putris, Linn, Widely distributed
Triphena fimbria, Linn. Generally distri-
buted in woods, and rather common at
Foxley
— janthina, Sch. Widely distributed
— interjecta, Hb. Also generally distributed ;
to be seen flying along hedges in the
afternoon sunshine
— subsequa, Sch. Thetford, Croxton, Bran-
don, occasionally ; more rarely at Yar-
mouth and Lynn
Noctua glareosa, Esp. Thetford, Aldeby,
Croxton, Sparham, Cawston, Neatishead,
Lynn, West Winch ; common
— augur, Fab. Widely distributed, especially
in fens. — triangulum, Ochs. In most woods spar-
ingly, but common at Foxley
flammatra, Fab. A single example of
this great-rarity was obtained at ‘light’
at Cromer in 1875, by Mr. W. H.
Thornthwaite. It is figured in the
Lepidoptera of the British Isles. One or
two other British specimens are known
ditrapezium, Hb. Foxley Wood 5 rare
thomboidea, Tr. Thetford, Merton, Aldeby,
Hackford, Sparham ; not common
brunnea, Sch. Widely distributed in
woods, but not very common
dahlii, Hb. Aldeby, Denton, Wootton,
Horning ; scarce
neglecta, Hb. Denton ; taken by the Rev. C. T. Crattwell
Eurois herbida, Sch. Very local here ; found
at Cawston, Foulsham, and Neatishead,
and in abundance at Foxley Wood
— occulta, Linn. Very scarce, but has been
taken at Yarmouth, Geldestone, Thetford,
Foulsham, and near Lynn
— adusta, Esp. Aldeby, Horning ; scarce ;
more plentiful at Foxley Wood
Chareas graminis, Linn. Generally distri-
buted, but not common
Heliophobus_popularis, Fab. grass land
— cespitis, Sch. Norwich, Merton ; scarce
Neuria saponarix, Esp. Widely distributed,
but not common
Aplectaadvena,Sch. Aldeby, Thetford, Ketter
ingham, Hingham, Foxley, Cawston, Foul-
sham, Lynn; rather local. Recorded
in Norfolk by the older writers under
the name of nitens
— nebulosa, Tr. St. Faiths, Thetford, Hocker

General on

ing, Foxley, Cawston, Foulsham, Horning,
and near Lynn ; not common

Hadena thalassina, Sch. Norwich, Thetford,
Aldeby, Cawston, Lynn ; not common

— suasa, Sch. Norwich, Yarmouth, Aldeby,
Thetford, Cawston, Lynn, Ranworth,
Horning ;, scarce

— pisi, Linn. Generally distributed

— geniste, Bkh. Horsford, Thetford, Bran-
don ; scarce

— chenopodii, Sch. Norwich, Lynn, Caw-
ston, Thetford, Brandon ; common in
the ‘Breck-sand’ districts and on
some parts of the coast

Mamestra albicolon, Hb. Yarmouth, Hun-
stanton and elsewhere on sandy coasts,
and also rather commonly near Thetford
and Brandon on the ‘ Breck-sand’”

Hecatera dysodea, Sch. Norwich, Thetford,
Aldeby, Cawston ; local

— serena, Sch. Generally distributed

Dianthecia irregularis, Hufn. This rare
species has been taken by the Rev. H.
Williams and others at Croxton and else-
where around Thetford

— carpophaga, Bkh. Norwich, Merton,
Thetford, Croxton, Foxley, Cawston,
Cromer; rather common in the
‘Breck’ district

— cucubali, Sch. Frequent in the fens
and marshy places among Lychnis
flos-cuculi

— conspersa, Sch. Aldeby, Geldestone, Thet-
ford, Ketteringham, Horning , scarce

Polia flavicincta, Linn, Norwich, Thetford,
Kirby Cane, Yarmouth, Lynn, Horning ;
often in gardens

Dryobota protea, Sch. Norwich, Thetford,
Aldeby, Cawston, Lynn; very local,
occasionally common

Cleoceris viminalis, Fab. Aldeby, Merton,
Cawston, Ranworth, Horning, in marshy
places, but not common, more plentiful
in Foxley Wood

Chariptera aprilina,, Linn. buted in oak woods

Miselia oxyacanthe, Linn. mon

Cerigo cytherea, Fab, Generally distributed

Hama abjecta, Hb. Yarmouth, Horning ;
rare ; more frequently on the coast near
Lynn

— anceps, Hb. Generally distributed

Xylophasia sublustris, Esp. Yarmouth, Aldeby,
Foxley, Cawston ; not common

—rurea, Fab. Norwich, Merton, Aldeby,
Cawston, Hingham ; rather uncommon

— hepatica, Linn. Norwich, Aldeby, Hing-
ham, Hockering, Cawston

— scolopacina, Esp. Geldestone, Gillingham,

Widely distri-

Generally com-

144

INSECTS

Foxley, Wootton, Lynn, Cawston, Beeston
St. Andrew ; scarce

Apamea basilinea, Sch. Norwich, Kirby Cane,
Thetford, Merton, Cawston ; not common

— gemina, Hb. Norwich, Aldeby, Thetford,
Cawwston, Lynn ; not very common

— unanimis, Hb. Norwich, Brundall, Mer-
ton, Thetford, Aldeby, Foxley, Cawston,
Ranworth, Horsey, Lynn; in the fens
and marshy meadows

— connexa, Bkh. Foxley, Foulsham, and
Neatishead ; very local, and uncommon
in the county

— ophiogramma, Esp. Norwich, Aldeby,
Horning ; in fens among Phalaris arun-
dinacea

Celena Haworthi, Curt. Lynn, Merton,
Horning, Ranworth ; scarce, and here
confined to fens, but larger and more
brightly coloured than in its more
usual northern localities

Miana literosa, Haw. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Hunstanton, Thetford, Aldeby, Foxley,
Cawston, Horning, Thurn ; most fre-
quent on the coast

— fasciuncula, Haw. Norwich, Brundell,
Yarmouth, Aldeby, Thetford, Cawston,
Rising, Horning; abundant in the
damp meadows which border the fens

— furuncula, Sch. Norwich, Aldeby, Merton,
Brandon, Thetford, Hunstanton, Wootton,
Cawston, near Horning ; local, butiabun-
dant in rough fields on the coast, and
in chalky fields inland

Eremobia ochroleuca, Sch. Norwich, Aldeby,
Thetford, Denton, Hackford, Hunstanton ;
scarce

Dipterygia pinastri, Linn, Widely distributed
in woods

Cloantha perspicillaris, Linn. The capture
of a single specimen at Yarmouth was
recorded in the Entomologist, 1st series,
p. 128 (1841). After the lapse of
half a century, a second was secured by
Dr. E. W. Carlier at a gas lamp in the
outskirts of Norwich in the year 1892. This is one of the rarest of British
species

Trachea atriplicis, Linn. Thetford, Croxton,
Middleton,and Bawsey near Lynn ; very
scarce

Helotropha fibrosa, Hb. Norwich, Surling-
ham, Aldeby, Cawston, Ranworth, Horn-
ing, Lynn ; common in the fens

Hydrecia nictitans, Linn. Norwich, Merton,
Hoveton, Horning, Hunstanton

— petasitis, Dbl. I have seen a single speci-
men which was taken at Costessey near
Norwich ; probably it is in some degree
overlooked

Gortyna flavago, Sch. Norwich, Surlingham,
Yarmouth, Merton, Thetford, Lynn,
Cromer ; not very common

Nonagria cannez, Och. ‘Taken at Barton
Broad by Dr. F. D. Wheeler, and also
near Stalham. Strictly confined to the
fens, and in them very local

—typhe, Esp. Norwich, West Caistor,
Aldeby, Merton, Horning, Barton Broad,
abundant near Lynn; probably every-
where in wet places among Typha
latifolia

— neurica, Hb. Yarmouth, Aldeby, Merton,
Ranworth, Horning ; probably in all the
fens, but of obscure and secret habits,
and rarely taken except at ‘light’

Coenobia rufa, Haw. (despecta, Stn.). Pro-
bably in all the fens, flying plentifully
at suinset over coarse grasses and herb-
age in the more open portions. Found
even in small isolated marshes

Tapinostola fulva, Hb. Moderately common
in all the fens, and also in damp
woods

— helmanni, Evers. There is a record of
a single specimen taken many years ago
at Yarmouth, Asa constant inhabitant
of the fens of Cambridgeshire, its appa-
rent absence from those of this county
is especially noticeable

—dymi, Tr. Caistor, near Yarmouth,
Hunstanton, Snettisham; on the coast
among Elymus arenarius

Calamia lutosa, Hb. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Aldeby, Lynn, Horning, Neatishead ; in
the fens, and also especially frequenting
the broad ditches which drain marshy
tracts near the sea

— phragmitidis, Hb. Like the last, fre-
quenting the fens, and also drains
and ditches where reeds abound ; com-
mon

— brevilinea, Fenn. Horning, Ranworth, and
other portions of the fens of the Bure
and its affuents. The first known speci-
men was taken at Ranworth in 1864, by
Mr. Chas. Fenn, and for some years it
remained unique, but gradually the
species appears to have become estab-
lished, and has increased in numbers to
such an extent that thirty specimens
have been taken at ‘light’ in a single
night, and the insect has become well
known. It does not however appear to
have spread more than a few miles ;
has not been found in any other British
locality ; and has been taken once only
abroad—in Belgium

Meliana flammea, Curt. Merton, Brandon ;
rare; much more plentiful in the

I 145 L

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

neighbourhood of Barton Broad and in
the fens of the Bure
Leucania pudorina, Sch. Aldeby, Merton,
Ketteringham, Cawston, Lynn, Ranworth;
probably in the outer portions of all
fens and in many damp woods
— straminea, Tr. In all the fens, sometimes
commonly
— obsoleta, Hb. Very scarce in the fens,
noticed at Horning, and also at Merton
and Cawston
— littoralis, Curt. Yarmouth, Caistor, Horsey,
Hunstanton ; frequent on sandy coasts
among Ammophila arundinacea
conigera, Sch. Generally common
lithargyria, Esp. Widely distributed,
doubtless in all woods
turca, Linn. Recorded at Foulsham by
the Rev. T. H. Marsh
Panolis piniperda, Esp. In all fir woods 5
sometimes common
Teeniocampa miniosa, Sch. Taken by Mr.
F. Norgate in Foxley Wood
— populeti, Fab. Gillingham, Catuston ;
scarce. Mr. Atmore found its larva
commonly near Lynn in 1897
— instabilis, Sch. Generally common
— munda, Sch. Aldeby, Thetford, Cawston,
Lynn; not common
— gracilis, Sch. Norwich, Aldeby, Thetford,
Cawston, Lynn; not rare in marshes
Pachnobia rubricosa, Sch. Norwich, Aldeby,
Beachamwell, Sparham, Cawston, Lynn 5
not uncommon
Rusina tenebrosa, Hb. Norwich, Merton,
Aldeby, Cawston, Lynn; not very
common in this county
Mania maura, Linn. Norwich, Aldeby, Mer-
ton, Thetford, Sparham, Lynn, Horning ;
tolerably common
Amphipyra pyramidea, Linn, Norwich, Yar-
mouth, Broome, Merton, Thetford, Ketter-
ingham, Lynn ; very local ; abundant in
some seasons
Toxocampa pastinum, Tr. Aldeby, Catwston,
common near Lynn
Hydrilla palustris, Hb. A. single specimen
fell into my hands at a gas lamp in the
outskirts of Norwich in June, 1869. I know of no other capture in the
county. It is always rare, but oc-
casionally taken in the Cambridgeshire
fens
— arcuosa, Haw. Norwich, Thetford, Foul~
sham 5 not common
Caradrina morpheus, Hufn. Norwich, Alde-
by, Merton, Thetford, Lynn, Cawston,
Horning ; common

— alsines, Bkh. Norwich, Aldeby, Merton,

Merton, Thetford,
Neatishead, rather

Foxley, Cawston, Lynn,
Horning ; not very common
Grammesia trilinea, Sch. Norwich, Aldeby,
Merton, Thetford, Wootton, Catston ;
apparently not common
Dyschorista ypsilon, Sch. Generally common
among willows
— suspecta, Hb. Norwich, Thetford, Caws-
ton, Lynn 5 scarce
Euperia fulvago, Sch. by Mr. Upcher
Calymnia diffinis, Linn. Merton, Gillingham,
Thetford, Lynn, Cawston, Ketteringham,
Kimberley ; local among elms
— affinis, Linn. Norwich, Gillingham, Thet-
ford, Lynn, Cawston, Ketteringham,
Neatishead ; not common
Tethea subtusa, Sch. Norwich, Cawston,
Lynn, Croxton
— retusa, Linn, Merton, Hingham, Horning,
Ranworth ; scarce
Orthosia rufina, Linn. (helvola, St. C.). Norwich, Stratton Strawless, Kirby Cane,
Thetford, Caruston
— lunosa, Haw. Norwich, Cawston, Thet-
ford, Kirby Cane
— litura, Linn, Generally distributed
— lota, Linn. Norwich, Kirby Cane, Thet-
ford, Cawston ; common
— macilenta, Hb. In the same localities ;
sometimes common
Cirredia xerampelina, Hb. Norwich, Gilling-
ham, Merton, Thetford, Cawston, Lynn,
Castle Rising ; very scarce
Xanthia citrago, Linn, Norwich, Kirby Cane,
Denton, Cawston ; very local
cerago, Sch, Generally distributed
— silago, Hb. Norwich, Kirby Cane, Merton,
Thetford, Cawston, Sparham, Wootton ;
not very common, more plentiful in
Foxley Wood
aurago, Sch. Norwich, Aldeby, Kirby Cane ;
very local and scarce
gilvago, Esp. Norwich, Denton, Merton,
Thetford, Croxton, Lynn, Mintlyn, Sher=
ingham ; a very local species, but not
scarce in this county

Neatishead,

Taken at Tivetshall

 

Cerastis ligula, Esp. (spadicea, Stn.). Gener-
ally distributed

Scopelosoma  satellitia, Linn. Generally
common

Xylina rhizolitha, Sch. Norwich, Reepham,
Kirby Cane, Thetford, Cawston, Sparham,
Sall, Foxley, Hockering, Whitwell; in
woods, occasionally

Xylocampa lithoriza, Bkh. Norwich, Hors
(ford, Coltishall, Merton, Thetford, Lynn,
Cawston, Sparham ; not common

Calocampa exoleta, Linn. Widely distributed,
but not common

146

INSECTS

Calocampa vetusta, Hb. scarce

Cucullia verbasci, Linn. Probably wherever
in the county Verbascum thapsus and
V. pulverulentum are found ; rarely seen
except in the larva state

— scrophularie, Sch. Excessively rare, but
a few specimens have been reared by. Dr. F. D. Wheeler from larve found
at Bramerton, and by the Rev. H.
Williams from some found near
Croxton, upon Verbascum

— lychnitis, Ramb. Found by Dr. W. M.
Crowfoot at Aldeby ; rare

— asteris, Sch. Stephens stated that this
species occurred in Norfolk, but gave
no locality, I took it sparingly at
King’s Lynn, and also found its larva
feeding on Aster tripolium in salt
marshes

— chamomille, Sch. Norwich, one speci-
men ; several more obtained at Cromer
by Mr. W. H. Thornthwaite

— umbratica, Linn. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Broome, Merton, Thetford, Lynn, Horn-
ing; not very common

Plusia chryson, Esp. (orichalcea, Stn.). Curtis
(British Entomology) says that this species
was taken at Hethersett. I know of no
more recent capture in the county ;
yet it is constantly obtained in Cam-
bridgeshire

— chrysitis, Linn. Generally common

— moneta, Fab. This beautiful and most
interesting species was discovered in
the south of England—evidently then
a migrant from the Continent—in the
year 1870, From that time it has
gradually spread and increased in
numbers and in area of distribution, and
in June, 1894, a specimen was captured
at Sprowston, Norwich, by Mr. Eric
Tillett. The following year another
was taken in the same place by Mr. B
C. Tillett, and subsequently others, at
Norwich, by Messrs. Hinde and Pit-
man

— festuce, Linn. In fens and wet
meadows generally, flying before sunset
at the flowers of Lythrum salicaria and
Tris pseudacorus

— iota, Linn. Widely distributed, but not
common

— pulchrina, Haw. (v—aureum, Gn.). Nor-
wich, Denton, Aldeby, Hingham, Cawston,
Sparham, Foxley ; scarce

Habrostola urtice, Hb. Generally distributed

— triplasia, Linn. Thetford, Cawston,
Hemsby, Horning ; scarce

Chariclea marginata, Fab. Caistor, Cromer,

Thetford, Cawston ;

Sparham, Whitwell, Foxley, Merton ;
scarce

Heliothis armigera, Hub. Yarmouth ; rare

— peltigera, Sch. One taken at Cromer in
1875, and three more in 1884 ; rare

— dipsacea, Linn. Yarmouth, Denton, Mer-
ton, Thetford, Brandon, Barton Bendish,
Lynn ; most frequent upon the ‘ Breck-
sand,’ where it flies about fields of
Onobrychis, Anthyllis, and other cul-
tivated Papilionaceous plants. Also
reared from larve found on Linaria,
Daucus, and other flowers

— scutosa, Schl. ‘Two specimens were ob-
tained at ‘light’ at Cromer by Mr. W.
H. Thornthwaite in 1875. One of
these is in my possession. Another, in
the collection of Dr. Mason, is labelled
“Captured by A. Coburn, flying in the
sunshine, 24th June, 1880, near Att/e-
burgh” The insect is excessively rare
with us

Heliodes arbuti, Fab. Croxton, Denton,
Broome, Cawston ; rather common near
Lynn

Acontia luctuosa, Sch. Merton, Thetford,
Brandon ; confined, in this county, to
the ‘Breck’ district, where it fre-
quents fields of sainfoin and trifolium

Hydrelia argentula, Esp. Curtis (British
Entomology) says, ‘Taken at the end of
June among reeds and rushes in bogs
in Norfolk by Mr. Haworth.” A
similar statement is made by Wood
(Index Entomologicus), and by Westwood
(British Moths and their Transforma-
tions). But Mr. Haworth did not
himself mention this in the Lepidoptera
Britannica, whence it seems probable
that his captures of this species were
subsequent to the publication of his
great work. In a copy thercof, which
formerly belonged to Mr. N. A.
Vigors, is this statement in his own
handwriting: ‘A pair were given to
me by Mr. Haworth which were taken
in Norfolk.’ The locality in Norfolk
is understood to have been Beachamwell,
but I can find no evidence of the exist-
ence of this species there since the
time of Haworth—quite early in the
present century. But I find that speci-
mens were taken at Stoke Ferry by
Mr. W. T. Cross of Ely within the
last four years. Elsewhere it is an
extraordinarily local species, but it is
common in one of the Cambridgeshire
fens

Hydrelia uncana, Linn. Cromer, Holkham,

Aldeby, Merton,

147

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Surlingham, Hoveton, Horning, Ran-
worth, Cawston, Wormegay ; confined
to the fens and marshes, but in them
sometimes common

Agrophila sulphuralis, Sch. Merton, Didling-
ton, Croxton, Thetford, Brandon; plen-
tiful in the ‘Breck’ district among
Convolvulus arvensis, not only in this
county, but in Suffalé and Cambridge
shire, Very rare elsewhere in the
British Isles

Erastria fuscula, Sch. St. Faiths, near Nor-
wich, Merton, Foulsham, Foxley; in
woods, usually of fir

Bryophila glandifera, Sch. Lord Walsingham
has recorded the capture of a single
specimen on the Merton estate

— perla, Sch. Abundant everywhere on
walls

Phytometra enea, Sch. Merton, Holt Heath,
Cawston, Wootton, Lynn, Horsford ; not
very common

Anarta myrtilli, Linn. on heaths

Sarrothripa revayana, Sch. Merton, Croxton,
Felbrigge, Horsford, Cawston, Lynn; in
woods, scarce

Gonoptera libatrix, Linn. mon

Ophiodes lunaris, Sch. A single specimen
of this, one of the rarest of British
species, was captured at ‘light’ at Strat-
ton Strawless, in 1878, by Dr. F. D.
Wheeler

Catocala fraxini, Linn. Lord Walsingham
has recorded the capture of a specimen
of this noble species at Holtham; and
the Rev. T. H. Marsh of another at
Cawston. Dr. Paget noted the occur-
rence of an example at Yarmouth, and
another has been taken at Hunstanton. The capture by Dr. E. W. Carlier of
a fine specimen near Norwich, in 1894,
was rendered less satisfactory by the
discovery that two specimens reared that
season in Norwich from foreign larvee
had accidentally escaped

— nupta, Linn. Generally distributed
wherever willows abound

— promissa, Sch. Foxley, Foulsham, and
once at Hethersett; an exceedingly
local species

Euclidia mi, Linn. Widely distributed in
meadows, but not common

— glyphica, Linn, Aldeby, Merton, Caws-
ton, Heyden, Horning, Neatishead ; not
common

Aventia flexula, Fab. Norwich, Chedgrave,
Marton, Thetford, Neatishead, Hingham,
and the Lynn district ; very uncommon

Generally distributed

Generally com-

Herminia barbalis, Linn. Foulsham, Cawston,
Horning, Denton, Castle Rising, Lynn

— tarsipennalis, Tr. Generally distributed

— grisealis, Sch. Widely distributed ; not
very common

— cribralis, Hb. Ranworth, Horning, Lynn,
Merton, Aldeby, Diss; very local in
fens and marshes

Hypenodes albistrigalis, Haw. Aldeby, Mer-
ton, Ranworth ; usually in fens

— cortestrigalis, Steph. Merton, Cawston,
Horning, Ranworth ; scarce ; more fre-
quent on the boggy heaths near Lynn

Schrankia turfosalis, Wock. Very abundant
at Wootton, Bawsey and elsewhere on
boggy heaths in the Lynn district

Hypena rostralis, Linn. Norwich, Aldeby,
Thetford, Horning, Lynn; not very
common

Rivula sericealis, Sch, Widely distributed in
marshes and damp woods

Brephos parthenias, Linn. Thetford, Neatis-
head, heaths near Lynn ; very local

— notha, Hb. Has been taken at Horsford
near Norwich

Ourapteryx sambucata, Linn. Common
generally

Angerona prunaria, Linn. Aldeby, Denton,
Foxley, Foulsham, Lynn; in large
woods

Venilia maculata, Linn, Merton, Havering-
land, Cawston, Horning ; very local

Cabera pusaria, Linn. Mr. Atmore has suc~
ceeded in uniting this species with its
variety rotundaria by rearing both

Bapta temerata, Sch. Norwich, Ketteringham,
Merton, Yarmouth, Neatishead, Cawston,
Lynn ; not very common

— taminata, Sch. Norwich, Merton, Thet-
ford, Cawston, Sheringham, Lynn ; most
frequent in West Norfolk, and in cer-
tain seasons abundant

Macaria liturata, Linn. Generally distri-
buted in woods of Scotch fir

Panagra petraria, Hb. Generally common
among brake-fern on heaths ; a singu-
larly pale variety has been found in
Ranworth fen

Strenia clathrata, Linn. Generally distri-
buted, and common in clover fields ;
variable in colour in this county

Fidonia piniaria, Linn. Abundant in all
woods of Scotch fir

Numeria pulveraria, Linn. sham, Hingham

Aspilates strigillaria, Hb. Horning ; scarce

— citraria, Hb. Norwich, Merton, Thetford,
Brandon, Hunstanton, Snettisham ; com-
mon in open fields in the ‘Breck’
district

Cawston, Foul~

148

INSECTS

Eurymene dolobraria, Linn. Norwich, Cos
tessey, Merton, Thetford, Aldeby, Foxley,
Cawston, Wootten, Neatishead, Swaff-
ham, Lynn; always scarce

Odontoptera bidentata, Linn. Norwich,
Aldeby, Merton, Thetford, Cawston,
Lynn ; not very common

Ennomos alniaria, Linn. (tiliaria, Stn.). Nor-
wich, Merton, Thetford, Lynn, Sparham,
Ranworth, Neatishead ; frequent where
alders grow in the neighbourhood of
fens

— fuscantaria, Haw. Norwich, Lynn, Den-
ton ; scarce ; more common in the fens
which line the Bure

— erosaria, Sch. Norwich, Merton, Denton,
Brandon, Carsten, Lynn ; scarce ; also
more frequent in the fens of the Bure

— angularia, Sch. (quercinaria, St. C.). Norwich, Merton, Thetford, Carwston,
Lynn ; not common

Crocallis elinguaria, Linn. buted

Himera pennaria, Linn. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Merton, Thetford, Cawston, Lynn

Selenia illustraria, Hb. Thetford, Lynn, Bar-
ton Bendish ; scarce

— lunaria, Sch. Merton ; once taken at
Norwich by Dr. Wheeler

Pericallia syringaria, Linn. Widely distri-
buted, but not very common

Epione apiciaria, Sch. Generally distributed ;

abundant in the fens

— vespertaria, Linn, Very rare; single
specimens are said to have been cap-
tured at Cawston and Neatishead

Ellopia fasciaria, Linn. In all woods of
Scotch fir

Biston hirtarius, Linn, Common at Nor-
wich ; found at Denton, Lynn, Watton,
Cawston, Raveningham; but more
rarely

— prodromarius, Sch. Lynn, Sall, Cawston,
not common

— betularius, Linn. Generally distributed ;
the black variety made its appearance
in this county about seven years ago,
but is still rare

Phigalia pilosaria, Sch. Norwich, Sparham,
Cawston, Raveningham, Lynn, Wotton ;
not very common

Gnophos obscurata, Sch. Merton, Barton,
Northwold, Yarmouth ; scarce

Cleora lichenaria, Sch. Generally distri-
buted

Tephrosia biundularia, Esp. Horsford, Strat-
ton Strawless, Foulsham, Lynn; not
common

— extersaria, Hb. Widely distri-

Norwich, Thetford,
Raveningham ;

Foxley Wood

Tephrosia punctularia, Sch. Merton, Gilling-
ham, Wootton, Foulsham, Lynn; not
common

Boarmia rhomboidaria, Sch. | Everywhere
common ; a beautiful black variety is
found, not very rarely, at Norwich

Hemerophila abruptaria, Thunb. Norwich,
Merton, Thetford, Cawston, Weotton,
Lynn; not very common

Hibernia aurantiaria, Hb. Norwich, Merton,
Thetford, Aldeby, Cawston

— leucophiaria, Sch. In the same locali-
ties ; not common

— rupicapraria, Sch. Probably everywhere

in hedges
Abraxas ulmata, Fab. Merton, Ketteringham,
Aylsham, Mintlyn, Lynn 5 scarce ;

much more common at Castle Rising
and at Sheringham

Ligdia adustata, Sch. Norwich, Aldeby, Mer-
ton, Thetford, Horning, Cawston ; com-
mon in lanes on the chalk

Pseudoterpna cytisaria, Sch. On heaths
among furze and broom, commonly ;
also in waste places on the coast

Gcometra papilionaria, Linn. Norwich, Sur-
lingham, Merton, Gillingham, Thetford,
Cawston, Irstead, Ranworth, Lynn;
rather frequent in the fens wherever
birch and alder are in plenty

Todis vernaria, Linn. Denton, Yarmouth ;
rare

Nemoria viridata, Linn. Horning, four speci-
mens taken in 1873. It does not seem
to have been noticed in the county
since that date

Phorodesma bajularia, Sch. AZerton, Denton,
Foxley, Foulsham, Lynn ; not common

Hemithia thymiaria, Linn. (strigata, St. C.). Generally common

Ephyra porata, Linn. Lynn, Brandon, Horn-
ing 5 scarce

— punctaria, Linn. but not common

— trilinearia, Bkh. Merton, Croxton, Strat-
ton Strawless

— omicronaria, Sch. among maple

— pendularia, Linn. Foulsham, Wootton ;
common near Lynn

Hyria auroraria, Gn. (muricata, St. C.),
Merton, Aldeby, Cawston, Hingham,
Hoveton, Neatishead, Ranworth, Horn-
ing, near Lynn; rather common in
some portions of the fens

Acidalia rubricata, Sch. (rubiginata, St. C.). Norwich, Merton, Brandon, Thetford,
Cawston, St. Faiths, Minthyn, Lynn ;
very common in open fallow fields, and
in lucerne fields, in the ‘Breck’ dis-

Generally distributed,

Generally distributed

149

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

trict ; extending in very far smaller
numbers and in darker colour on to
some of the boggy heaths ; and occur-
ring casually elsewhere. Except in
this and the adjoining eastern counties,
a great rarity
Acidalia dilutaria, Hb. (interjectaria, Bdv. ;
osseata, Stn.). Generally common
— holosericata, Dup. A single specimen
of this very local species was taken
some years ago by the Rev. H. Williams
near Thetford ; the presence here of
this one specimen seems inexplicable,
except on the supposition that others
are sometimes mistaken for the preced-
ing species
— promutata, Gn. (marginepunctata, St. C.). Norwich suburbs ; Merton, Aldeby, Yar
mouth, Brandon, Lexiate ; locally com-
mon
— ornata, Scop. Merton, Wood Dalling ;
local and scarce
subsericeata, Haw. Norwich, St. Faiths;
common at Stratton Strawless ; Merton,
Thetford, Barton, Lynn; usually not
very common
immutata, Linn, Abundant in all the
fens ; and found in many other marshy
spots
remutata, Hb, In woods and on wooded
heaths, but less abundant than usual
— inornata, Haw. Merton, Denton, Bran-
don, Wootton ; rather local
Timandra emutaria, Hb. Lynn, Wootton,
Croxton; a scarce species, more par-
ticularly attached to salt marshes
— imitaria, Hb. Generally distributed ;
most frequent on the coast
Bradyepetes amataria, Linn. Widely distri-
buted, but not very common
Ania emarginata, Linn. Generally distri-
buted ; rather common in the fens
Melanippe rivata, Hb. Lynn, Denton; scarce
— galiata, Sch. Said to occur rarely at
Cawston and Horning
Melanthia rubiginata, Sch. In damp woods
and fens among alder ; common
— ocellata, Linn. Generally distributed
— albicillata, Linn. Norwich, — Aldeby,
Ormesby, Neatishead, Horning, Barton
Bendish, Mintlyn ; not common
procellata, Sch. “Norwich, Aldeby, Denton,
Cawston ; scarce
— unangulata, Haw. Norwich, Merton,
Aldeby, Denton, Cawston, Lynn; not
plentiful
Anticlea sinuata, Sch. (cucullata, St. C.). Brandon, Thetford, Beachamwell ; very
scarce
— tubidata, Sch. Aldeby, Denton, Merton,

Thetford, Brandon, Cawston, near Lynn;
not common
Anticlea derivata, Sch. (nigrofasciaria, St. C.). Norwich, Aldeby, Denton
— berberata, Sch. Brandon, formerly at
Beachamwell
Coremia propugnata, Sch. (designata, St. C.). Norwich, Merton, Aldeby, Cawston,
Horning, Ranworth; not common
— quadrifasciaria, Linn. Norwich, Aldeby,
Denton, Merton, Cromer, Cawston, Bar-
ton, Wootton ; not common, but more
generally distributed in the woods of
West Norfolk
— pectinitaria, Fuess. Norwich, Horsford,
near Beccles, Merton, Ranworth ; very
local here
— multistrigaria, Haw. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Merton, Thetford, Cawston, Neatishead,
Lynn ; on heaths
Asthena luteata, Sch. Norwich, Costessey,
Denton, Barton, Cawston, Wootton,
Mintlyn ; among maple
— candidata, Sch. Widely distributed, but
not plentiful
— sylvata, Sch, (testaceata, St. C.). Foulsham ; scarce
Eupisteria heparata, Sch. (obliterata, St. C.). Generally common among alder
Emmelesia affinitata, Steph. Merton, Caws-
ton, Horning, Wootton; more common
at Castle Rising and Lynn
— alchemillata, Linn, Widely distributed,
but not very common
albulata, Sch. Generally distributed in
meadows among Rhinanthus
decolorata, Hb. Widely distributed
among Lychnis vespertina
unifasciata, Haw. Hingham, Lynn, Den-
ton 5 scarce
Cidaria psittacata, Sch. Rising ; scarce
miata, Linn. Norwich, Yarmouth, Aldeby,
Buxton, Cawston, Lynn ; not uncommon
corylata, Thunb. Generally distributed
picata, Hb. Merton, Aldeby, Catwston,
Ketteringham
sagittata, Fab. Norwich, Brundall, Al-
deby, Thetford, Stoke Ferry; among
Thalictrum, in fens
immanata, Haw. Generally common
suffumata, Sch. Norwich, Aldeby, Denton,
Cawston, Lynn ; not common
silaceata, Sch. Norwich, Costessey, Foxley,
Aldeby, Caroston, Foulsham, Lynn 5 in
moist woods ; not common
prunata, Linn. Generally distributed in
gardens, but not common
dotata, Linn, Norwich, Yarmouth, Al-
deby, Lynn, Horning ; not common

Foxley,

Thetford, Castle

150

INSECTS

Cidaria pyraliata, Bkh. Norwich, Aldeby,
Cawston, Horning, Lynn
— populata, Bkh. Carwston, Barton Bendish,
Lynn; on heaths, very scarce, but re-
liable
— testata, Linn. Everywhere common, but
especially so in the fens
Pelurga comitata, Linn. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Aldeby, Thetford, Brandon, Lynn, Caws-
ton, Horning; common in this county
Scotosia vetulata, Sch. Surlingham, Aldeby,
Thetford, Denton, Horning, Ranworth,
Lynn ; among buckthorn in wet copses
in the fens
thamnata, Sch. Norwich, Merton, Thet-
ford, Ranworth, Horning ; in similar
situations to the last named
— undulata, Linn. Kings Lynn, Denton, Al-
deby, Merton, Foulsham, Foxley, Barton
Bendish ; not common
— dubitata, Linn. Norwich, Aldeby, Mer-
ton, Cawston, Ranworth, Lynn; not
very common
— certata, Hb. Norwich, Thetford, Caws-
ton 5 scarce
Phibalapterya fluviata, Hb. sham 3 very rare
— lignata, Hb. (vittata, St. C.). Norwich,
Brundall, Aldeby, Merton, Thetford,
Brandon, Cromer, Ranworth ; especially
in fens and the meadows bordering
them
— tersata, Sch. Denton, Ditchingham, Thet-
ford, Foulsham ; local and scarce
Thera firmaria, Hb. Norwich, Horsford,
Plumstead, Hevingham, Thetford, Caw~
ston, Lynn ; among fir
Hysipetes ruberata, Frey (literata, St. C.). Kilveston, West Tofts, West Walton,
Walsoken and Lynn ; not very common
— impluviata, Sch. Generally distributed
among alder
Oporabia dilutata, Sch. Norwich, Merton,
near Beccles, Cavwston ; probably in all

Horning, Foul-

woods

Cheimatobia boreata, Hb. Narborough ; once
taken

Lobophora lobulata, Hb. Lynn, Croxton ;
scarce

— hexapterata, Sch. tremely local

— sexalata, Hb. Norwich, Surlingham, Alde~
by, Geldestone, Merton, Foulsham, Horn-
ing, Ranworth, Lynn; not scarce in
fens and marshes, among sallow ; some-
times sitting on the stems in the day-
time among the thickest herbage

— viretata, Hb. Geldeston, Ketteringham,
Neatishead ; scarce

Lithostege nivearia, Sch. (farinata, St. C. ; non

Barton Bendish 5 ex-

griseata, Sch.). Brandon, Thetford ;
only very locally in the ‘Breck’
district ; among Sisymbrium sophia and
S. cheiranthoides

Chesias spartiata, Fab. Norwich, Denton,
Aldeby, Merton, Thetford, common near
Lynn; among Spartium  scoparium
(broom)

— obliquaria, Sch. Norwich, Thetford, Lynn ;
among the same food-plant as the last

Anaitis plagiata, Linn, Generally common

Mesotype lineolata, Sch. (virgata, St. C.). Yarmouth and Cawston sandhills, Crom
also occasionally to be found still linger~
ing on the ‘ Breck-sand’ around Thet-
ford

Eubolia palumbaria, Sch. Generally common. on heaths

— bipunetaria, Sch. Brandon, Merton,
scarce; said to have been taken at
Horsford

—cervinata, Sch. Norwich, Yarmouth,

Kirby Cane, Thetford, Cawston, Lynn ;
not scarce

— mensuraria, Sch. (limitata, St. C.). Nor-
wich, Gillingham, Merton, Thetford,
Ranworth ; by no means so plentiful
as is usually the case

Collix sparsata, Hb. — Surlingham, Aldeby,
Shadwell, Ranworth, Horning, Barton
Turf, Stoke Ferry, Lynn ; probably in all
the fens

Eupithecia venosata, Fab. Norwich, Hors-
ford, Merton, Denton, Thetford, Cawston,
Barton, Lynn ; among Silene inflata

— consignata, Bkh. (insigniata, St. C.). Nor-
wich, Shadwell; very rare

— extensaria, Frr. On the coast, usually at
the edges of salt marshes, from Lynn to
Hunstanton and IVells ; the larva feeding
on the blossoms of Artemesia maritima. The first specimen was taken by my
eldest son in July, 1887, and Mr.
Atmore subsequently took others and
also larvee. It is a species which ap-
pears to have migrated to this coast
from the Baltic, and the only previous
British specimens known had been
taken on the coast of Yorkshire. It
has now so increased in numbers in
Norfolk that almost every cabinet is
supplied

— pulchellata, Steph. common

— linariata, Sch. Norwich, Merton, Thet-
ford, Brandon, Cawston, Lynn ; common
among Linaria vulgaris

— centaureata, Sch. (oblongata, St. C.). Widely distributed, especially in gardens
and waste ground

Lynn, Croxton ; not

151

Eupithecia succenturiata, Linn,

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Norwich,

Aldeby, Denton, Croxton, Hingham,
Wootton, Hunstanton

subfulvata, Haw. Norwich, St. Faiths,
Ketteringham, Aldeby, Merton, Thetford,
Lynn, Ranworth ; not scarce

subumbrata, Sch, Taken near Stoke Ferry
in July, 1891, by Mr. W. T. Cross

irriguata, Hb. Hunstanton, Merton, Den-
ton ; rare

indigata, Hb. Horsford, Catston, Mint-
dyn ;, in fir woods

lariceata, Frr. Merton, Shouldham, Mint-
dyn, Sherringham, Denton; in larch woods

virgaureata, Dbld. Horning ; apparently+
scarce

albipunctata, Haw. among Angelica

pimpinellata, Hb. Vell; very local

satyrata, Hb. Found near Lynn by Mr.
E. A. Atmore

plumbeolata, Haw. Lynn, Denton ; scarce

isogrammata, H.S. (haworthiata, Dbld.). Lynn ; among Clematis

pygmeata, Hb. Lakenham near Norwich,
Stoke Ferry; found commonly by Mr.
Atmore at Vormegay and Bawsey near
Lynn

valerianata, Hb. (viminata, Dbld.). Nor-
wich, Brundall, Merton, Ranworth ; in
fens and marshes among Valeriana

fraxinata, Crewe. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Lynn, Horning ; among ash

subnotata, Hb. Lynn, Wootton ; apparently
not common

campanulata, Crewe. Merton ; rare

absynthiata, Linn. Aldeby, Merton, Caws-
ton, Hingham, Horning ; local

minutata, Hb. Norwich, St. Faiths,
Brandon, Cawston, Lynn common on
heaths

assimilata, Dbld. Norwich, Lynn, Caws-
ton, Hingham ; in gardens

tenuiata, Hb. Common about sallows in
fens and marshes

subciliata, Gn. Denton, Gillingham, Thet-
ford, Cawston ; among maple

dodoneata, Gn. Lynn, Thetford ; among
hawthorn and oak

abbreviata, Steph. Norwich, St. Faiths,
Denton, Runton, Aldeby, Cawston, Lynn ;
in oak woods

exiguata, Hb. Norwich, Aldeby, Lynn,
Bawsey ; not very common

sobrinata, Hb. Norwich, Merton, Thet-
ford, Brandon

coronata, Hb. Merton, Aldeby, Hingham,
Cawston, Horning, Lynn

pumilata, Hb. Norwich, St. Faiths,
Cavwston ; apparently not common

Horning, Lynn ;

Pyralis fimbrialis, Sch. Horning ; scarce

— glaucinalis, Linn. Generally distributed

Pyrausta punicealis, Sch. Ringstead Downs

— ostrinalis, Hb. Kings Lynn ; not common

— purpuralis, Linn. Generally distributed

Herbula cespitalis, Sch. Widely distributed
in sandy places

Endotricha flammealis, Sch. Norwich, Mer-
ton ; more frequent in the Lynn district

Acentropus niveus, Oliv. Brandon, Merton,
Ranworth, Barton Broad; plentiful
near Lynn

Cataclysta lemnalis, Linn. Paraponyx stratio-
talis, Linn. ; Hydrocampa nymphe-
alis, Linn. ; and H. stagnalis, Don. All common about rivers, broads, and

Merton, Cawston,

fen-drains

Botys pandalis, H.S. Merton; taken by Lord
Walsingham

— hyalinalis, Hb. Merton, Thetford, scarce

— lancealis, Sch. Beachamwell, " Aldeby,

Barton Bendish, Lynn in
marshy woods, local

— fuscalis,Sch, Generally distributed where
yellow rattle grows in meadows, some-
times also in marshes

Ebulea crocealis, Tr. Norwich, Gillingham,
Thetford, Cawston, Barton, Hunstanton,
Lynn ; among Inula dysenterica

— verbascalis, Sch, Plumstead, St. Faiths,
Aldeby, Croxton, Cawston, the Lynn
district, among Teucrium scorodonia

— stachydalis, Zinck. Taken at Denton by
the Rev. C. T. Cruttwell

Lemiodes pulveralis, Hb. On July 27th,
1870, I captured a single specimen of
this rare species upon the embankment
of one of the drains at Ranworth Fen. So far as I know no other specimen has
ever been taken in Norfalt, or indeed
in any part of the United Kingdom
except on the extreme south coast ;
and the occurrence of this single ex-
ample, which I still possess, is to me
inexplicable

Pionea margaritalis, Fab. Recorded at Beach-
amwell by Stephens and Curtis, but I
know of no recent captures here

— stramentalis, Hb. Very widely distribu-
ted in fens and marshes

Margarodes unionalis, Hb. A single specimen
of this rarity was captured at Yarmouth
on June 15th, 1880, by Mrs. Wheeler. It was sitting upon a grass-culm on the
sandhills. It has been placed by Dr.
F. D. Wheeler in my collection

Spilodes sticticalis, Linn. Merton, Thetford,
Brandon, Beachamwell, Hunstanton ;
rather common in the ‘ Breck’ district

district ;

152

INSECTS

Spilodes palcalis, Sch. In the year 1875 this
species was obtained at Croxton, Thet-
ford, Booton, and Barton Bendish, con-
firming the records of Curtis, Stephens
and Wood of its presence in the county 5
so far as I know none have been ob-
served since ; and the species has be-
come very scarce in the British Isles
— cinctalis, Tr. Generally distributed ;
occurring in clover ficlds
Scopula lutealis, Haw. Norwich, Aldeby,
Ketteringham, Lynn, Cawston
— ferrugalis, Hb. Widely distributed, and
occasionally common
Eudorea basistrigalis, Knaggs. Aldeby, Denton 5, scarce
cembre, Haw. Norwich, Aldeby, Wootton,
Cawston, Hunstanton

dubitalis, Hb. (pyralella, Sch.) abundant ;
its pretty variety ingratella has been
taken at Brandon and Hingham

lineola, Curt. Norwich, Croxton, Hingham,

Denton 5 very local

crategella, Hb. Norwich, Cawston, Bran-

don, near Lynn, not common

resinea, Haw. Norwich, Denton, very local

truncicolella, Stn. Norwich, Horsford,

Cawston; abundant near Lynn, upon
trunks of Scotch firs

coarctalis, Z. (angustea, Curt.). Norwich,

Denton, Lynn
pallida, Curt. marshes

Adactyla bennettii, Curt. in salt marshes

Platyptilia isodactylus, Z. Norwich ; among
Senecio aquaticus, in marshes

Amblyptilia acanthodactyla, Hb. — Norwich,
Aldeby, Croxton, St. Faiths, Cawston,
Cromer, Lynn

Oxyptilus teucrii, Greening. Norwich, Mer-
ton, Croxton, Lynn ; local among Teu-
crium scorodonia

— distans, Z. Merton, Thetford, Brandon,
Swaffham; principally upon the
“Breck-sand’ ; little known elsewhere
in the United Kingdom

— parvidactylus, Haw. Croxton ; very local

Mimesioptilus pheodactylus, Hb, Hunstan-
ton; taken by Mr. Atmore

— plagiodactylus, Fisch. Norwich, Merton,
Croxton ; among Scabiosa columbaria

— zophodactylus, Dup. Norwich, Merton,
Hunstanton ; among Erythrea centaur-
jum

FEdematophorus lithodactylus, Tr. Hunstanton ; among Inula

Leioptilus lienigianus, Z. Norwich, Ringland,
Horning, Lynn; very local among
Artemisia

Norwich,

Abundant in fens and

Hunstanton, Lynn,

Lynn,

Leioptilus microdactylus, Hb. Merton, Crox-
ton, Ranworth; among Eupatorium
cannabinum

— brachydactylus, Tr. The only recorded
occurrence of this species in Great
Britain was in Norfolk ; yet the locality
is unknown. ‘There seems no reason
to doubt Mr. Farr’s capture of it, which
took place fifty years ago. This speci-
men was for forty years in the collec-
tion of Mr. J. Jenner Weir ; and was
recorded as British by Mr. H.T. Stainton

Aciptilia galactodactyla, Hb, Norwich, Mer-
ton, Denton, Sparham, Foxley, Hockering ;
among Arctium lappa

— tetradactyla, Linn. Taken at Swaffham
by Mr. Atmore

Platytes cerusellus, Sch. Aferton, Brandon,
Wootton ; locally abundant

Crambus alpinellus, Hb. Yarmouth, Huns-

tanton ; on sea sandhills, rare

falsellus, ‘Sch. Brandon, Cawston, Ran-

worth, Denton, Lynn ; scarce
sylvellus, Hb. (adipellus, Tr.). scarce in the fens

hamellus, Thunb. Croxton, Little Saxton ;

frequent on heaths near Lynn
uliginosellus, Z. Common in fens and
marshes

pinetellus, Linn. Generally distributed,

but not very common
latistrius, Haw. Norwich, Croxton, Caws-
ton; abundant on the denes near Yar-
mouth, and frequent on the heaths about
Lynn

perlellus, Scop. Abundant; curious
varieties approaching and even actually
representing the form known as C.
warringtoncllus, have been taken at
Brandon, Croxton, Hunstanton, near
Lynn, and elsewhere

selasellus, Hb. Common in the fens, and

in some marshes

salinellus, H. In a salt marsh at Lynn

contaminellus, Hb. Taken near Hun-

stanton by Mr. Atmore

fascelinellus, Hb. Yarmouth, Hunstanton,

Heacham, on the sandhills. So far as I
know this handsome species is only
found with us in the county of Nor-
folk

chrysonuchellus, Scop. Merton, Thetford,

Croxton, Brandon, Swaffham, Ringstead ;
in chalky places

Chilo paludellus, Hb. Ranworth, Horning,
and other fens, particularly those of the
Bure and its tributaries. Not known
elsewhere in the United Kingdom

— phragmitellus, Hb. Common in the fens

and marshes

Not

153

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Schcenobius forficellus, Thunb. Generally
distributed in weedy ditches and the
higher portions of the fen and marsh
drains

— mucronellus, Scop. Norwich, Barton
Turf, Horning ; abundant at Ranworth ;
found also at Merton and near Lynn, in
fens

— gigantellus, Sch. Diss, Merton, Barton
Turf, Horning, Ranworth ; on rivers,
and in the deepest fens, among the
great reed-beds

Anerastia lotella, Hb. Yarmouth, Caistor,
Hunstanton, on coast sandhills; and
also at Thetford and Brandon, still
common on the ‘ Breck-sand’

— farrella, Curt. The original specimens
were taken near Yarmouth more than
sixty years ago by Mr. Farr. His
locality was lost at his death shortly
after, and the insect was not redis-
covered till 1881, when many speci-
mens were secured by Mr. Atmore
nearer to Hunstanton

Cateremna terebrella, Zk. Merton, Lynn,
among Pinus abies (spruce), its larva
feeding in the young cones. Dis-
covered by Lord Walsingham, and, so
far as I know, not to be found in any
other part of the United Kingdom

Tlithya carmella, Linn, Once taken near
Horning ; not in the fen

Myelophila cribrella, Hb. Merton, Thetford,
Croxton, Brandon, principally upon the
“Breck-sand.’ Larva in the stems of
Onopordon acanthium

Homceosoma nimbella, Dup. Caistor, near
Yarmouth, on the denes ; abundant

— senecionis, Vaugh. Norwich, Lynn, Hun-
stanton ; uncommon

— nebulella, Hb. Norwich, Merton, Crox-
ton, Brandon, Horning, Lynn, Denton;
locally common

— eluviella,Gn. Aerton, Brandon ; very local

Nyctegretes achatinella, Hb. On the sand-
hills near Caistor, Yarmouth, in the
more settled portions, this insect is
sometimes common. It is a rare and
excessively local species elsewhere in
these islands

Ephestia kuhniella, Z. This species, which is
known to have reached Europe within
the last twenty or thirty years, and
this country much more recently, has
now become common in flour mills and
stores in Norwich, Lynn, and Downham

— ficulella, Bar. Norwich, Lynn; in seed
and oilcake warehouses

— passulella, Bar. Common at Norwich and
Lynn in similar places

Ephestia pinguis, Haw. on old ash trees
— artemisiella, Steph. among Artemisia
Cryptoblabes bistriga, Haw Horning, Should-
ham, Lynn ; scarce
Plodia interpunctella, Hb. Norwich, Lynn ;
abundant in grain stores
Phycis carbonariella, Fisch. Norwich, Crox-
ton, Lynn; on heaths
— betula, Goetz. AZerton ; common among
birch near Lynn
— dilutella, Steph. Hunstanton ; very local,
taken by Mr. G. Balding
— splendidella, H.S. AZerton ; one specimen
reared from a cone of Abies
— abietella, Sch. Norwich, Merton, Croxton,
Brandon, Lynn
— roborella, Sch. Norwich, Horsford, Mer-
ton, Croxton, Lynn
Pempelia palumbella, Sch. buted on heaths
Rhodophaa formosa, Haw. ston 5 scarce
consociella, Hb. oak woods
— advenella, Zinck. Norwich, Croxton,
Cawston, Lynn ; not common
marmorea, Haw. Norwich, Croxton;
scarce
suavella, Zinck. Cawston ; scarce
— tumidella, Zinck. oaks
Oncocera ahenella, Sch. Merton, Brandon,
Barton Bendish, Swaffham
Galleria cereana, Linn. Norwich, Thetford,
Croxton, Wootton, Sparham
Meliphora alveariella, Gn. Thetford, Croxton,
Denton, Sparham, Lynn; this and the
last named species are both very de-
structive in beehives
Corcyra cephalonica, H.S. Has been found
in a grain warehouse at Lynn by Mr.
Atmore
Tortrix crataegana, Hb. Barton Bendish ;
very local
— decretana, Tr. British locality
— sorbiana, Hb. Common in oak woods
— lafauryana, Rag. Lynn, on boggy
heaths; among Myrica gale ; discovered
by Mr. Atmore; the only known
British locality
— cinnamomeana, Tr. Cawston ; scarce
— corylana, Hb. Widely distributed in
woods
— costana, Sch. Generally distributed ; very
common in the fens

Norwich, Cawston ;

Norwich, Lynn,

Generally distri-
Norwich, Caw-

Generally distributed in

Norwich, Horsford,

Lynn, Denton, among

Lynn; the only known

Merton, Easton,

154

INSECTS

Tortrix viburnana, Sch. St. Faiths, Wootton,
Lynn 5 on boggy heaths

— icterana, Frél. Merton, Aldeby, Hingham,
Wootton, Cromer, Lynn, local

Dichelia grotiana, Fab. Merton, Brandon,
Despham, Hingham, Lynn

Leptogramma literana, Linn. erton, Denton,
Cawston, Lynn ; scarce

Peronea sponsana, Fab. Merton, Hingham,
Norwich ; among beech

— rufana, Sch. Taken at North Wootton by
Mr. Atmore

— mixtana, Hb, Merton, Horsford, Lynn ; on
heaths

— schalleriana, Linn. Common among
sallow in fens and marshes
—comparana, Hb. Ketteringham, Ranworth;
not common
— perplexana, Bar. Lynn, Ranworth
— comariana, Z. Merton, Lynn, Ranworth,
St, Faiths
— cristana, Sch. — hastiana, Linn. among sallow
lorquiniana, Dup. Ranworth; taken in
1878 by Dr. Wheeler and Mr. W. H.
B. Fletcher; previously not known
nearer than the Cambridgeshire fens
— ferrugana, Sch. Norwich, Merton; not
common
tristana, Hub. Denton ; taken by the Rev. C. T. Cruttwell
aspersana, Hb. Common in fens and
marshes
shepherdana, Steph. Norwich, Surling-
ham, Merton, Ranworth, Horning ; in
fens and local, but sometimes abundant
Teras caudana, Fab. Common in the fens
Dictyopteryx holmiana, Linn. Generally
common among hawthorn
— forskaleana, Linn. Widely distributed
among maple
Ditula semifasciana, Haw. Merton, Ranworth,
Horning, Wootton ; not common
Penthina picana, Frol. Merton, Cawston,
Costessey, Horning, the Lynn district
— betuletana, Haw. Widely distributed
among birch
— capreana, Hb. Found near Lynn by Mr.
Atmore
— pralongana, Gn. Merton, Lynn ; scarce
— ochroleucana, Hb. Norwich, Kettering-
ham, Cawston, Horning, Croxton, Mint-
‘yn 5 not common
— sellana, Hb. Croxton, Swaffham ; very
local
— marginana, Haw. St. Faiths Bogs, Mer-
ton, Cawston, Ranworth ; very local
— carbonana, Dbld. Recorded by the older
writers. Taken at Lynn by Mr. Atmore

Merton, Cawston ; scarce
Widely distributed,

Antithesia salicella, Linn, Merton, Croxton,
Clenchwarton, Hingham
Spilonota lariciana,Z. Norwich, Lynn ; local
—aceriana, Mann. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Denton, Lynn ; common
— neglectana, Dup. Norwich, Denton ; local
— rosecolana, Dbld. Norwich, Cawston,
Lynn ; in gardens feeding on rose-buds
Sericoris bifasciana, Haw. Norwich, Merton,
Thetford, Denton, Croxton, Lynn ; among
Scotch fir
— fuligana, Haw. Lynn, larva found feed-
ing on Carduus arvensis
doubledayana, Bar. Ranworth, Horning;
discovered in these fens, and sometimes
found there in plenty ; hardly known
elsewhere
littorana, Curt. Salt marshes on the
coast beyond Lynn
cespitana, Hb. Yarmouth, Merton, Bran-
don, Swaffham

—conchana, Hb. Norwich, Surlingham,
Merton, Ranworth
— micana, Hb. Merton, Croxton, Hingham,

Horning, Ranworth, Lynn ; local

Mixodia rubiginosana, H.S. Lynn, Thetford,
Shouldham ; usually a Scottish species

— palustrana, Linn. Taken once near Lynn
by Mr. Atmore

— ratzeburghiana, Sax. Merton, Lynn;
among fir. Lord Walsingham finds the
larva commonly on Abies smithiana

Euchromia purpurana, Haw. Denton, Hun-
stanton ; scarce

Orthotenia antiquana, Hb. Wormegay, Car-
brooke, Mintlyn, Cawston ; not common

— striana, Sch. Norwich, Yarmouth, Lynn
not scarce

— ericetana, Bent. Lynn; not rare

Eriopsela fractifasciana, Haw. Merton, Swaff-
ham; very local

Phtheochroa rugosana, Hb. Norwich, Mer-
ton, Lynn

Cnephasia lepidana, Curt. Lynn ; on heaths

Sciaphila nubilana, Hb. Norwich, Merton,
Denton, Lynn ; common

— pascuana, Hb. Castle Rising, Lynn;
local

— alternana, Sch. Sphaleroptera  ictericana, Haw. Denes, common

Clepsis rusticana, Tr. Merton, Horning,
Ranworth, Lynn; in fens and on bogey
heaths

Bactra furfurana, Haw. by Mr. A. Balding

Phoxopteryx siculana, Hb. Cawston, Hingham,
Ranworth, North Wootton; in wet woods

Norwich, Merton, near

St. Faiths, Merton,

Norwich ; very local

Yarmouth

Taken at Walsoken

155

A HISTORY

Phoxopteryx unguicana, Linn. Merton, St.
Faiths ; scarce
— biarcuana, Steph. Merton, Ranworth,

Lynn district ; local
— inornatana, H.S. In the same places as
the last, more frequent

— uncana, Hb. Heaths near Lynn ; local
— paludana, Bar. Ranworth, Horning; only
in the fens

derasana, Hb. Merton, Lynn ; scarce
diminutana, Haw. Merton, Ranworth,
Wootton, Wormegay, Lynn, Denton ; very
local
mitterbacheriana, Sch. Merton, Cawston,
St. Faiths; not common
Grapholitha nisana, Linn, Merton, Wootton,
Ranworth ; local, among sallow
cinerana, Haw. Merton, Lynn; local,
about poplars
nigromaculana, Haw. Norwich, Merton,
Cawston, Lynn
minutana, Hub. Yarmouth ; on poplar
obtusana, Haw. Merton, Foxley ; common
near Lynn
Phlceodes immundana, Fisch. Norwich,
Merton, St. Faiths, Ranworth, Lynn,
Wormegay ; among alder
— demarniana, Fisch. /Vormegay ; common
in some seasons near Lynn
Poedisca bilunana, Haw. Widely distributed,
among birch
oppressana, Tr. Norwich, Ranworth,
Lynn ; on poplars, very local
profundana, Sch. Merton, Ketteringham,
Rackheath, St. Faiths
occultana, Dgl. Norwich, Merton, Lynn;
among larch
ophthalmicana, Hb. Lynn, Denton ; scarce
semifuscana, Haw. Ranworth, Horning,
Lynn, in fens ; very variable
sordidana, Hb, Generally distributed
among alder
Steganoptycha rufimitrana, H.$. Taken, and
reared, from Abies cephalonica, at Mer-
ton by Lord Walsingham
Halonota bimaculana, Don. Merton, Cawston,
Wootton, Lynn
cirsiana, Z. Widely distributed
scutulana, Sch, Norwich, Merton, Caws-
ton, Lynn ; not very common
brunnichiana, Sch. Croxton ; not com-
mon in this county
foeneana, Linn. Norwich, Merton, Horn-
ing ; among mugwort
trigeminana, Steph. Common among
ragwort
— tetragonana, Steph. Ketteringham, Stoke
Ferry ; scarce
— nigricostana, Haw. ‘Ringland, Lynn

Merton, Denton,

OF NORFOLK

Halonota ravulana, H.S. Lynn 5 rare
— ephippana, Hb. Merton, Ranworth,
Wotton; scarce
Olindia ulmana, Hb. Brooke, Lynn
Semasia spiniana, Fisch. Norwich, St. Faiths,
Merton, Ranworth ; not scarce
— janthinana, Dup. Norwich, Lynn, Horn-
ing ; local
— tnfillana, Z. Norwich, Merton
— weeberana, Sch. Generally distributed
among fruit trees
Coccyx strobilella, Linn. spruce
splendidulana, Gn. ton
pygmaana, Hb. Merton, Lynn, frequent;
usually a great rarity
ochsenheimeriana, Z. Merton, Denton,

Merton, Hingham,

Merton ; among

= Merton, Lynn, Runc-

Lynn
— distinctana, Bent. Merton; common
near Lynn
— nigricana, HS. Merton, near Lynn ;

‘not common ; among Pinus picea
nanana, Tr. Norwich, Merton, Lynn;
locally abundant

Heusimene fimbriana, Steph. ston, Wootton, Lynn

Retinia buoliana, Sch. woods

— pinicolana, Dbld. Merton, Cawston

— turionana, Linn. Norwich, Merton, Crox-
ton, Lynn; with it at this last locality,
its supposed variety, posticana, Zett., has
been found by Mr. Atmore

— pinivorana, Z. Common among Scotch
fir

Carpocapsa splendana, Hb, Widely distributed
among oak trees

— grossana, Haw. Merton, Croxton, Swaff-
ham, Lynn

— pomonella, Linn. orchards

Opadia funebrana, Tr. Norwich, rare ; among
plum

Endopisa nebritana, Tr. Generally distributed
in pea fields

Stigmonota orobana, Tr. Stoke Ferry

— coniferana, Rez. Norwich, Merton, Crox-
ton, Shouldham

Merton, Caw-

Common in all fir

Generally abundant in

— perlepidana, Haw. Merton, Cawston,
Lynn
— nitidana, Fab. Merton; scarce; taken

by Lord Walsingham

— weirana, Dougl. Taken by the Rev. H.
Williams at Croxton

— erectana, Bar. The only known speci-
men of this species was taken among
broom at Merton by the Hon. Mrs.
Carpenter

156

INSECTS

Stigmonota internana, Gn. Norwich, Merton,
Lynn; locally abundant

— composana, Fab. Norwich, Merton, Ran-
worth ; among clover

— regiana, Z. Norwich, Merton, Cawston,
Lynn, Holt ; local

— roseticolana, Z. Norwich, Merton, Swaff-
ham, Lynn, Ringland, St. Faiths ; among
wild rose

Dicrorampha politana, Sch. Norwich, Seething,
Merton, Cringleford, St. Faiths ; \ocally

abundant

— alpinana, Tr. Taken near Lynn by Mr.
Atmore

— sequana, Hb. Norwich, Merton, Denton ;
very local

— saturnana, Gn. Merton, Lynn
plumbagana, Tr. Merton, Brandon;
locally abundant
— simpliciana, Haw. Norwich, Merton,
St. Faiths ; among mugwort
— acuminatana, Z. Merton, Gayton ; local
— consortana, Steph. Merton ; scarce
Pyrodes rhediella, Linn. Norwich, Merton,
Lynn ; common
Catoptria albersana, Hb. scarce
— juliana, Curt. Norwich, Merton, Cawston,
Horning, Wootton
microgrammana, Gn. Merton, Lynn,

Yarmouth Denes ;

scarce
— conterminana, H.S. Hingham ; scarce
— fulvana, Steph. Norwich, Merton, Denton,

Croxton, Brandon, Swaffham ; locally
common
expallidana, Haw. Denton, Lynn; rare
candidulana, Nik. Lynn, in salt marshes,
among Artemisia maritima ; excessively
local
— citrana, Hb. Norwich, Merton, Croxton,
Brandon, Swaffham ; rather common in
the ‘Breck’ district
Trycheris mediana, Sch. Lynn ; very local
Lobesia permixtana, Hb. (reliquana, Stn.) MZer-
ton, St. Faiths, Wormegay, Wootton ; not
common
Eupoecilia nana, Haw. — Costessey, Horsford,
Merton, Croxton, Lynn; among birch
— sodaliana, Haw. (amandana, H.S.). Taken
near Swaffham by Mr. Atmore
— dubitana, Hb. Croxton, Gaywood, Lynn
Docks, among Crepis tectorum
pallidana, Z. Yarmouth Denes, Middleton
near Lynn ; scarce
— atricapitana, Steph. Norwich, St. Faiths,
Merton, Brandon, Wormegay, Lynn ;
among ragwort
maculosana, Haw. Norwich, Yarmouth,

Denton, Horning,

Norwich ; scarce

Eupecilia hybridella, Hb. Hingham ; scarce

vectisana, West. Hunstanton ; common
in salt marshes

— affinitana, Dougl. salt marshes

udana, Gn, Merton, Horning, Ranworth ;
in fens, scarce

manniana, F.R. Once taken near Lynn

by Mr. Atmore ; a very rare species
— geyeriana, HS. Brundall, Ranworth,
Lynn; in fens and marshes among
Pedicularis palustris
— notulana,Z. Also in fens, among Mentha,
but not common
— rupicola, Curt. Merton, Lynn; among
Eupatorium cannabinum
degreyana, McL. Norwich, Merton,
Brandon, Croxton, Denton, Lynn; dis-
covered by Lord Walsingham in Nor-
(folk and named in his honour ; reared by
him from Plantago lanceolata, and by
Mr. Atmore from Linaria vulgaris

ciliella, Hub. Merton, St. Faiths Bogs;
in the latter locality is a remarkable
local race of this species

— erigerana, Wlsm. Norwich, Merton,
Brandon, Croxton, Swaffham, near
Lynn ; rather plentiful on the ‘ Breck-
sand’ among Erigeron acre. This
species was long mistaken for E. an-
themidana, Curt. Xanthosetia zoegana, Linn. Generally dis-
tributed; its pretty var. ferrugana is
taken occasionally

— inopiana, Haw. Lynn district ; among
Inula dysenterica

Chrosis tesserana, Sch. Yarmouth, Merton,
Brandon, Ringland ; very local

Argyrolepia baumanniana, Sch. Hingham,
Ketteringham ;, scarce

— subbaumanniana, Wlk. Norwich, Mer-
ton, Ashill, Croxton, Swaffham ; local,
but sometimes common in old chalk-
pits

— badiana, Hb. Merton, Brandon, Lynn
district, Denton ; scarce

— cnicana, Dbld. Croxton, Wootton, Caws-
ton, Ranworth ; among thistles

Conchylis francillonana, Fab. Taken near
Swaffham by Mr. Atmore

— smeathmanniana, Fab. Merton, Cawston;
scarce

Aphelia pratana, Hb. local in this county

Tortricodes hyemana, Hb, Merton, Croxton ;
in oak woods

Choreutis scintillulana, Hb. Lynn, Hunstanton ; in

Thetford, Horning ;

Norwich, Mer-

ton, Wormegay, Holine-next-the-Sea ;
among Scutellariagalericulata in
marshes

A HISTORY
Xylopoda pariana, Linn. Denton, Cawston ;
scarce
Epigraphia stcinkellneriana, Sch. Lynn; among blackthorn
Xysmatodoma melanella, Haw. (monilifera,
Geofft). Merton ; very local, but not
uncommon
Ochsenheimeria birdella, Curt. Merton
— bisontella, Linn. Merton, Lynn
Scardia carpinetella, Gn. Merton, Brandon,
Horning ; among fir
corticella, Curt. Lynn, about a decaying
oak
granella, Linn, Norwich, Merton, Woot-
ton, Lynn; in granaries, sometimes in
multitudes about even the adjacent
streets
ruricolella, Stn. In woods, frequent
arcella, Fab, Norwich, St. Faiths, Mer-
ton, Denton, Ranworth
Tinea imella, Hb. Brandon, not rare ; other-
wise a very scarce insect
ferruginella, Hb. Norwich, Thetford,
Brandon, Lynn
misella, Z. Norwich, Merton, Wootton,
Lynn ; in granaries
merdella, Z. Lynn ; in houses
pallescentella, Stn, Norwich, Lynn; about
houses
nigripunctella, Haw. Lynn ; rare
semifulvella, Haw. Norwich, Merton,
Denton, Swaffham, Lynn
bistrigella, Haw. Merton, Lynn district,
Beccles
Lampronia quadripuncta, Fab. Wormegay ; scarce
— luzella, Hb. Merton ; not common
— pralatella, Sch. Merton, Brooke, Ran-
worth
— rubiella, Bjer. Merton, Ranworth ; com-
mon near Lynn
Incurvaria pectinea, Haw. —cehlmanniella, Hb. local
— capitella, Linn, Lynn ; among currant
Nemophora metaxella, Hb, Norwich, Mer-
ton, Ranworth, Lynn
Adela rufimitrella, Scop. Wormegay
— cuprella, Fab, Lynn, Horning ; not
rare
Nemotois scabiosellus, Scop. Norwich, com-
mon at Merton
— cupriacellus, Hb. Mr. Atmore
— minimellus, Z, Merton, Ranworth
Swammerdamia oxyacanthella, Z. Lynn;
locally abundant
Scythropia crategella, Linn. Lynn ; scarce
Hyponomeuta vigintipunctatus, Rtz. Hick-
ling Fen, Carbrooke

Norwich,

Norwich,

Lynn

Lynn, Wormegay ;

Swaffham, taken by

OF NORFOLK

Hyponomeuta plumbella,
Surlingham, Merton

— evonymella, Linn. Sprowston, Merton ;
among Prunus padus

Anesychia funerella, Fab. at Lynn, at ‘light? Plutella porrectella, Linn. Merton, Lynn ;
among Hesperis matronalis

Cerostoma sequella, Linn. Merton, Denton,

Sch. Norwich,

Brandon Fen, one

Carbroske

— vittella, Linn. Generally distributed
among elm

— costella, Fab. Merton

— sylvella, Linn. Norwich, St. Faiths,

Merton, Hingham, Carbrooke
alpella, Sch. Zerton ; among oak
lucella, Fab. Denton; taken by

Rev. C, T. Cruttwell
Harpipteryx scabrella, Linn. Faiths, Merton
— horridella, Tr. Walsingham
— nemorella, Linn. Merton, Lynn
Pteroxia caudella, Linn, Norwich; among
Euonymus europaus
Orthotzlia sparganiella, Th. Common in
fens and marshes among Sparganium
Enicostoma lobella, Sch. Norwich, Merton,
Denton, Lynn, Gayton
Exeratia allisella, Stn. Taken at Lynn by
Mr. Atmore, recorded from the ‘coast
of Norfolk’ by the late Mr. Stainton
Depressaria scopariella, Sch, Norwich, Yar-
mouth, Merton, Brandon
thodochrella (?)H.S. Norwich, Yarmouth ;
scarce
vaccinella, Hb. Norwich, Merton, Den-
ton, Ranworth
hypericella, Hb. Hypericum
conterminella, Z. Common in the fens
yeatiana, Fab, Common in the fens
ciliella, Stn. AZerton, Denton, Ranworth
granulosella, Stn. Norwich, Merton, Den-

ton, Brandon ; very local
albipunctella, Hb, Norwich, Merton,

Denton
pulcherrimella, Stn. Norwich ; among

Bunium flexuosum; taken by Lord

Walsingham commonly at Merton
weirella, Stn. Norwich, Merton, Bran-

the

Norwich, St.
Merton ; taken by Lord

Merton, Denton ; among

don

— cherophylli, Z, Norwich, Merton, Den-
ton

— badiellag Hb. Norwich, Yarmouth,
Cromer

— nervosa, Haw. Taken at Hoveton by
Mr. Norgate

Z. Lynn; scarce. Psoricoptera gibbosella,
Formerly at Merton

158

INSECTS

Gelechia nigra, Haw. Croxton, Lynn ; scarce

— muscosella, Z. Ranworth; rare

— rhombella, Hb. Norwich ; among crab-
apple ; scarce

— distinctella, Z. Norwich, Merton, Yar-
mouth, Brandon, Lynn ; locally common

— sororculella, Hb. Merton, Ranworth ;
among sallow

Brachmia mouffetella, Sch. honeysuckle

— lathyri, Stn. Merton, Irstead, Wormegay,
Lynn; in fens

Bryotropha politella, Dgl. mon ; Merton

— desertella, Stn. Most abundant on the
“Breck-sands,’ as well as on the present
coast

— senectella, Z. Norwich, Merton, Lynn,
Hunstanton ; abundant

Merton ; among

Lynn, rather com-

— mundella, Dgl. Yarmouth, on the sands

— similis, Dgl. Near Lynn, Merton

— umbrosella, Z. Yarmouth, Lynn heaths ;
abundant

— tetragonella, H.S. Hunstanton 5 ex-
cessively local

Lita artemisiella, Tr. Merton, Swaffham,
among thyme

— atriplicella, Fisch, Near Hunstanton, on

the coast

— instabilella, Dgl. Hunstanton, Thorn-
bam

— obsoletella, Fisch. In salt marshes on
the coast

— suedella, Rich. Hunstanton, Heacham;

common among Sueda fruticosa; a
newly-described species—hardly found
elsewhere

— plantaginella, Stn. On the coast ; common
among Plantago coronopus

— acuminatella, Stn. Norwich, Merton ;
not common

— habneri, Haw. — maculiferella, Mann. Lynn ;, local

— semidecandriella, Th. Thetford, Lynn

— vicinella, Dgl. rare

Teleia scriptella, Hb. Lynn, Hingham,
Denton, Merton ; among maple

— sequax, Haw. Denton

— fugitivella, Z. Norwich, Merton, Lynn,
Denton ; on clm

— humeralis, Z. Merton ; taken by Lord
Walsingham

— notatella, Hb. Norwich, Merton, Ran-
worth ; not common

—— luculella, Hb. Merton, Lynn

— dodecella, Linn. Not uncommon among
fir

Croxton ; rare
Norwich, Merton,

Merton, Croxton,

Hunstanton, Heacham ;

Recurvaria Linn, — Norwich ;
scarce

Peecilia albiceps, Z. — gemmella, Linn. Lynn, Denton

Argyritis pictella, Z. Yarmouth, Hunstanton,
Merton, Croxton, Brandon; on the
‘Breck-sand’ even more commonly
than upon the present coast. With it
Lord Walsingham has taken the form
hitherto supposed to be a distinct
species, under the name of tarquiniella,
Stn. Nannodia neviferella, Z. Norwich, Merton,
Lynn, among Chenopodium

— hermannella, Fab. Wotton; very local

Apodia bifractella, Mann. Lynn 5 very local

Sitotroga cerealella, Oliv. “Norwich, rare ;
abundant about grain warchouses at
Lynn

Ptocheuusa subocellea, Steph. AZerton, scarce

— inopella, Z. Lynn ; among Inula dysen-
terica

— osseella, Stn. Norwich ; rare

Ergatis subdecurtella, Stn. Ranworth ;
among Lythrum salicaria ; rare

— ericinella, Z. Near Norwich, St. Faiths,
Merton, Lynn ; on heaths

Xystophora palustrella, Dg). Ranworth,
Horning, near Beccles ; in fens, rare

— arundinetella, Z. AZerton ; rare

— lucidella, Stph. Merton, abundant ;
Lynn, very local

— suffusella, Dgl. Ranworth ; rare

— morosa, Z. Ranworth, Lynn ; scarce

— servella, Z. Taken by Mr. Atmore, near
Lynn; recognized and recorded by
Lord Walsingham. I know of no
other locality for this species in the
British Isles

Monochroa tenebrella, Hb. Norwich, St.
Faiths, Brandon, Merton, Denton, Lynn. M. tenebrosella is now recognized as
its female

Lamprotes atrella, Haw. Merton, Ranworth,
Surlingham, Denton, Lynn

— unicolorella, H.S. Lynn; on heaths

Aprozrema ligulella, Z. In the fens among
Lotus major

— taniolella, Tr. Cringleford, Croxton,
Denton, Lynn, Hunstanton

— albipalpella, H.S. Lynn; on heaths

Acanthophila alacella, Dup. Several taken
at Merton by Lord Walsingham, and
one at Lynn by Mr. Atmore

Ceratophora ruafescens, Haw. Frequent in
the fens, also found at Merton on dry
sandy ground

Cladodes gerronella, Z. Not scarce in the
fens

leucatella,

Lynn, Merton
Norwich, St. Faiths,

159

A HISTORY

Parasia _metzneriella, Dgl. Merton, Lynn ;
local

Cleodora cytisella, Curt. Merton, Easton ;
more common near Lynn

Chelaria conscriptella, Hb. Merton, Denton,
Lynn

Anarsia spartiella, Schr. among furze

Nothris verbascella, Sch. Norwich ; among
Verbascum pulverulentum ; hardly
known elsewhere in the United King-
dom

Ypsolophus schmidiellus, Heyd (durdhamella,
Stn.). Near Swaffham, among Ori-

num

— margincllus, Fab. Merton, Stanford ;

locally very common

Widely distributed

Sophronia parenthesella, Linn. Norwich,
Merton, Cringleford, Lynn; ocally
abundant

Harpella geoffrella, Linn. Norwich, Denton,
Hingham ; common
Pleurota bicostella, Linn. abundant on heaths

Cataplectica fulviguttella, Z. (favimaculella,

Merton, Lynn;

Stn.). Merton, Ranworth; among
Angelica

Ecophora minutella, Linn. Norwich, Mer-
ton

— trisignella, Z. Norwich, Denton, Lynn
lambdella, Don. Aerton ; one specimen
taken by Mr, Durrant
lunaris, Haw. Norwich, Cringleford,
Denton, Merton
tinctella, Tr. Norwich, Merton, Denton,
Lynn
unitella, Hb. Merton
flavifontella, Hb. Norwich ; very local
Butalis grandipennis, Haw. Norwich, Horn-
ing; among furze
— fusco-znea, Haw. Lynn ; taken by Mr.
Atmore
— fusco-cuprea, Haw. Swaffham

Amphisbatis incongruella, Stn. Horsford,
near Lynn; scarce

Pancalia leuwenhoeckella, Linn. Merton ;
scarce

Acrolepia autumnitella, Curt. AZerton, Denton,
Ranworth

Glyphipteryx oculatella, Z. Denton

— equitella, Sc. Norwich, Brandon ; among
Sedum acre

— scheenicolella, Stn. Merton, Ranworth,
Barton Turf; common in the fens ; its
only other locality in this country seems
to be in Cornwall

fEchmia dentella, Stn. Norwich, Easton,
Merton, Denton, Lynn; \ocal

Perittia obscuripunctella, Stn. Merton, Denton,
Lynn

OF NORFOLK

Tinagma sericeella, Haw. buted among oak
— hammomiella, Sorh. Taken among birch
near Lynn by Mr. Atmore, and the
mines found at Merton by Lord
Walsingham
— resplendella, Dgl. Lynn, Wormegay
Douglasia ocnerostomella, Stn. Merton, Bran-
don, Thetford ; among Echium vulgare,
in the pith of which the larva feeds
Argyresthia ephippella, Fab. Merton, Denton,
Lynn 5, local
— conjugella,Z. Costessey, St. Faiths, Mer-
ton ; among mountain ash
— semifusca, Haw. Norwich, St. Faiths,
Denton ; among hawthorn
spiniclla, Z. Lynn, Wootton, Merton
— glaucinella,Z. Merton, Ringland ; among
oak
atmoriella, Bks. Lynn; discovered by
Mr. Atmore ; Merton, larvae found in
the shoots of Pinus larix
dilectella, Z. Merton, Wootton ; among
juniper
curvella, Linn. Norwich, Merton, Denton,
Lynn ; among apple
arceuthina, Z. Norwich, Denton ; very
abundant at Merton among juniper
precocella, Z. Merton ; taken by Lord
Walsingham
Cedestis gysselinella, Kuhl. Merton, Croxton ;
usually a northern insect, but abundant
at Merton
Zelleria insignipennella, Stn. Merton ; local
Gracilaria hemidactylella, Hb. Merton
— phasianipennella, Hb. Lynn ; scarce
semifascia, Haw. Denton
omissella, Dgl. Norwich ; among Artem-
isia vulgaris
auroguttella Steph. AZerton, Ranworth ;
among Hypericum quadrangulum

Widely distri-

Merton, Ranworth,

5

Coriscium brongniardellum, Fab. Norwich,
Merton

— cuculipennellum, Hb. Aerton ; among
privet

— citrinellum, Fisch. Merton, Sandringham
Ornix betula, Stn. Norwich, Merton, Den-
ton, Lynn ; among birch

— torquillella, Stn. Norwich, Denton, Mer-
ton ; among sloe

— scoticella, Stn. Near Lynn, taken by Mr.
Atmore ; reared at Merton

— guttea, Haw. Norwich, Merton, Lynn,
Gayton ; among apple

Coleophora spissicornis, Haw. ; (fabriciella, Stn.) North Runcton, Merton, Denton

— deauratella, Z. Taken at Merton by
Mr. J. Hartley Durrant

— lixella, Z. Merton, Swaffham

160

INSECTS

Coleophora tricolor, Wism. Merton, 1899 ;
taken by Lord Walsingham ; not yet
detected elsewhere

paripennella, Fisch. Lynn

— potentillar, Bankes. Lymn | These a
— wilkinsoni, Stn. Lynn Wie, Aen

pyrrhulipennella, Z. Lynn. ibipennella, Heyd. Merton, Ranworth

currucipennella, Fisch. Ranworth, Den-
ton ; rare

niveicostella, Fisch, Merton

geniste, Stn. Merton, St. Faiths, Lynn ;
among Genista anglica

leucapennella, Hb. The only known
British specimen of this rather distinct
species was taken by the Rev. C. T.
Cruttwell, near Denton, in 1890

saturatella, Stn, Merton

inflate, Stn. AZerton, Croxton, Brandon ;
among Silene inflata

graminicolella, Heine. rare

siccifolia, Stn, Taken at Merton by Lord
Walsingham

glaucicolella,
Juncus

alticolella, Z. Hunstanton,
among Juncus lamprocarpus

murinipennella, Dup. Merton, Norwich

meniacella, Fab. In salt marshes on the
coast near Lynn

salinella, Stn. (?) Salsola kali

tripoliella, Hm. marshes at Lynn

artemisiella, Scott. juncicolella, Stn. heaths

gryphipennella, Bouché. Merton, Denton,
Lynn ; among rose

olivaceella, Stn. Merton ; taken by Mr.
Durrant

chalcogrammella, Z. Merton formerly ;
Brandon, Croxton, near Lynn

Stathmopoda pedella, Linn. Lynn ; local

Cosmopteryx orichalcea, Stn. Merton, Ran-

worth, Barton Turf, Lynn. Lynn, Ranworth ;

Wood. — Lynn;

among

Merton ;

Hunstanton; among
Most abundant in salt

Norwich ; scarce
St. Faiths, Lynn; on

— druryella, Z. Lynn; taken by Mr.
Atmore
— lienigiella, Z. | Ranworth, Horning,

Wormegay ; among reed and reed-grass

Batrachedra pinicolella, Z. Norwich, St.
Faiths, Merton, Brandon, Wootton ;
among Scotch fir

Oinophila v-flava, Haw. Norwich, Merton ;
in cellars

Chauliodus illigerellus, Hb. Merton, Ran-
worth, Brundall, Lynn ; in fens

— charophyllellus, Goed. Norwich, Merton ;
scarce

I 161

Laverna propinquella, Stn. Norwich, Sur-
lingham ; in fens
lacteella, Stn. Denton
— miscella,Sch. Ringstead
ochraceella, Curt. Merton, Denton
phragmitella, Bent. Brundall, Merton,
Ranworth, Horning; always about
Typha latifolia
epilobiella, Roem. (langiella, Hb.). ton ; scarce
decorella, Steph. AZerton, Denton
subbistrigella, Haw. Merton, Denton
vinolentella, H.S. Norwich, Lynn 5 among
apple and Siberian crab
— rhamniella, Z. Ranworth, Merton, Lynn
Chrysoclista schrankella, Hb. "Merton ; 3 taken
by Lord Walsingham
Asychna zratella, Z. Swaffham ; rare
Antispila pfeifferella, Fab. AZerton ; among
Cornus sanguinea
Stephensia brunnichella, Linn. among Clinopodium vulgare
Elachista gleichenella, Fab. Merton, Denton,
Ranworth
magnificella, Tengs. Merton ; a beautiful
buff variety of this handsome little
species has also been taken here by
Mr. Durrant
apicipunctella, Stn. Bawsey ; scarce
pox, Dgl. Merton; among Poa aquatica
bedellella, Sirc. Taken at Ringstead by
Mr. Atmore
kilmunella, Stn. Norwich, St. Faiths,
Ranworth, Merton ; in fens
cinereopunctella, Stn. Merton
subnigrella, Dgl. Merton, Denton
cerussella, Hb. Common in the fens
paludum, Frey. Surlingham, Ranworth,
Denton, Lynn ; among Carex
megerlella, Z. Denton
triatomea, Haw. Norwich, Plumstead,
Merton; in chalk-pits

Den-

Norwich ;

Wormegay, Denton,

— ochreella, Stn. Wormegay, Lynn; in
marshes

Lithocolletis hortella, Fab. Merton, Denton,
Middleton

quinqueguttella, Stn. AZerton, Ranworth ;
among dwarf sallow

lautella, Z. Norwich, Horstead, Merton ;
the pretty var. irradiella has also been
found by Lord Walsingham at Merton

carpinicolella, Stn. Merton, Horstead ;
among hornbeam

sorbi, Frey. Denton; probably widely
distributed. oxyacantha, Frey. Merton

concomitella, Bankes. AZerton

spinolella, Dup. Merton, Denton

viminetorum, Stn. Lynn

M

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Lithocolletis scopariella, Fisch. St. Faiths, Lynn
ulicicolella, Vaugh. Lynn; abundant at
Norwich among furze
heegeriella, Z. Merton, Denton
sylvella, Haw. Norwich, Merton, Denton ;
among maple
emberizepennella, Bou. Wormegay,
Mintlyn, Denton; among honeysuckle
frolichiella, Z. Merton, Lynn ; common
among alder
kleemannella, Fab. Lynn; taken by Mr.
Atmore
stettinensis, Nic. Merton,
Lynn ; among alder
schreberella, Fab. Norwich, Merton,
Denton ; among elm
tristrigella, Haw. Merton, Lynn ; among
elm
Lyonetia clerckella, Linn. Norwich, Merton,
Denton, St. Faiths ; not scarce
Phyllocnistis suffusella, Z. Norwich, Merton,
Lynn; among poplar
— saligna, Z. Merton; among sallow
Cemiostoma spartifoliella, Hb. Among broom ;
C. laburnella, Heyd., among laburnum ;
C. scitella, Z., among hawthorn ; all
generally distributed
— lotella, Stn. Merton ; among Lotus major
Opostega salaciella, Tr. Norwich, Brandon,
scarce ; abundant at Roydon, near Lynn,
and at Merton. Its probable variety,
reliquella, found with it at Merton by
Lord Walsingham
— auritella, Hb. Ranworth Fen ; rare
— crepusculella, Fisch. Common in all the
fens ; also in marshes
Bucculatrix aurimaculella, Stn. Norwich,
Lynn, Merton ; common among ox-eye
daisy
cidarella, Fisch. ; B. ulmella, Mann. ;
B. crategi, Dup. ; all three generally
distributed ; among alder, oak and haw-
thorn respectively
maritima, Stn. In the salt marshes of the
coast among Aster tripolium
demaryella, Dup. Near Lynn; among
birch
boyerella, Dup. ‘among elm
frangulella, Gn. Ranworth Fen, and
marshy heaths near Lynn; among
Rhamnus frangula

Merton,

Ranworth,

Norwich, Lynn, Denton ;

Bucculatrix cristatella, Fisch. Merton ; among yarrow

Nepticula atricapitella, Haw. ; N. ruficapi-
tella, Haw. ; N. pygmaella, Haw. ; all
near Norwich and Merton, among oak
and hawthorn

septembrella, Stn. Among Hypericum ;
N. oxyacanthella, Stn. ; N. alnetella,
Stn., among alder ;_N. basalella, H.S. ;
N. turicella, H.S. ; N. confusella,
Wism. ; N. fletcheri, Tt. ; and N.
acetosa#, Stn. ; all found at Merton
by Lord Walsingham and Mr. Dur-
rant

cryptella, Frey. ; N. gratiosella, Stn. ; N
plagicolella, Stn. ; N.  prunetorum,
Stn. ; N. continuella, Stn. ; N. lap-
ponica, Wk. ; N. sorbiella, Stn. ; N.
aucuparie, Stn. ; N.  desperatella,
Frey. ; N. ulmivora, Stn. ; and N.
sertella, Stn. ; all taken in the Lynn
district by Mr. Atmore

catharticella, Stn. Taken at Croxton by
the Rev. H. Williams, and at Merton
by Mr. Durrant

Norwich,

— trimaculella, Haw. Denton; among
poplar

— microtheriella, Stn. Horstead ; among
hazel

ignobilella Stn. ; N. malella, Stn. ; and

N. atricollis, Stn. ; all found near
Norwich

Trifurcula pulverosella, Stn. Norwich ; among
wild apple

Bohemannia quadrimaculella, Boh. Ranworth,
and near Lynn ; not rare

Eriocephala calthella, Linn. Merton

—aruncella, Scop. Brooke woods; not
scarce

— seppella, Fab. Norwich, Merton; on
Veronica chamedrys

— mansvetella, Z. Merton, common ;

Ranworth, scarce
— thunbergella, Steph. Merton
Micropteryx purpurella, Steph. ; M. semi-
purpurella, Steph. ; M. unimaculella,
Z.; all abundant among birch at Merton
and near Lynn

— sangii, Stn. Found by Mr. Atmore near
Lynn

— sparmannella, Bosc. Merten, among
birch ; also not uncommonly near
Lynn

HEMIPTERA

The order Hemiptera or Bugs consists of insects of small or medium
size which are for the most part readily recognizable by the possession of
162

INSECTS

a more or less long and pointed beak. The latter is carried on the
under side of the fore part of the body and in some species reaches as
far as the base of the hind legs. The order is divided by systematists
into two main sections: the Heteroptera, in which the front of the head
is quite free from the base of the forelegs, and the Homoptera, in which
that part which should be the front of the head is closely applied to the
base of the forelegs so that the beak appears to rise from the middle of
the breast. The Heteroptera, which may be termed ‘running-bugs,’ in
contradistinction to the Cicadina and Psyllina, which are essentially
‘jumping-bugs,’ comprises a number of species exhibiting considerable
diversity of form and habits. Few, if any, of them are likely to attract
the notice of the casual observer, though the habits of many species are
very interesting. The female of Acanthosoma interstinctum, a species com-
mon on birch trees in the autumn, has been observed to take charge of
its eggs and young in a fashion very unusual among insects. The Rev. John Hellins observed that the female Acanthosoma laid her eggs on the
underside of a birch leaf, in number between thirty and forty ; they were
laid close together, the outer on their side and the inner ones stood up
on end in a somewhat diamond-shaped patch, about the size of the body
of the parent insect. The latter then stood brooding over the patch of
eggs, and after about three weeks the young bugs were found clustered
beneath their mother amongst the empty egg-shells. At first the mother
showed no fear and barely moved when touched, only altering her
position so as to protect the side on which the danger threatened. In a
few days, however, when the young ones had accomplished their first
moult and commenced to run about on the leaf, she moved about
amongst them in a state of apparent anxiety, and fluttered her wings
rapidly if they were disturbed. Ifthe sun shone out and the leaf was
still there was a great deal of running to and fro, but at night and when
the wind blew roughly, the mother contrived to get the young ones
under her, and sat covering them as at first. This state of things con-
tinued for about a couple of days, when the young dispersed in small
parties, but even at this point the mother seemed desirous to continue her
ministrations. A few species associate with ants to which they bear con-
siderable resemblance, especially when in motion ; Syste/lonotus triguttatus
furnishes a good example of these. This species is found not uncommonly
on the celebrated Mousehold Heath running on the ground in company
with a blackish ant ; its male is a bug-like insect about three-sixteenths
of an inch long, with reddish brown upper wings traversed by two broad
snow-white bands, whilst the female has the merest rudiments of wings,
and the body is pinched in at the waist and widened behind so as to give
the creature a very ant-like appearance. Passing over the water-boatmen
(Notonecta), which are too well-known to call for remark, we have in
Ranatra linearis a very curious and interesting form. This is a narrow
pale-brown insect with a body about 14 inch long, and two thread-like
tails almost as long as the body, and which when brought together form
a tube along which air passes to the breathing organs situate at the tip
163

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

of the body ; its antenne are very short and inconspicuous, but its mode
of carrying its forelegs is such that the latter have much the appearance of
antenne. It may be dredged from the bottom of the water at Hickling
Broad and elsewhere, but it is by no means easy to see when mixed up
in the water-net with broken and decayed pieces of sedge and other
rubbish, as it is very deliberate in its movements. The Homoptera are divided into three sections. The Trimera, the
first of these, has three joints to the feet, and comprises the various
families of jumping-bugs proper (Cicadina). The members of the second
section, the Dimera, have but two joints to the feet: this section contains
the Psylide, small insects having somewhat the facies of a Cicada in
miniature ; the plant-lice (4phide) ; and the Aleurcdide. The latter are
very minute insects with four milk-white wings, and are excessively abun-
dant on cabbage. The third section, the Monomera, in which the feet
are formed of a single joint, contains only the scale-insects (Coccide). The Cicadina are particularly well represented in Norfolk, the propor-
tion occurring in the county being 78 per cent. of the number known
to occur in the British Islands. These insects are for the most part
small, and with the exception of the cuckoo-spit frog hopper (PAi/enus
spumarius), and some of the yellow species of Typhlocyba, small, delicate,
cylindrical insects which frequently get blown on to one’s clothing from
trees and fences in the fall of the year, none of them are very likely to
be seen unless searched for. The patches of froth in which the nymph
of P. spumarius lives are conspicuous objects on various low plants, and
the perfect insects are remarkable for the variety of colour patterns which
they exhibit ; some of these varieties show simply variation in degree,
but others, such as the entirely black and the entirely pale forms, those
black with a pale head, black with a pale border to the upper wings,
etc., are perfectly distinct in appearance and might well be considered by
a non-entomological observer to belong to different species. Tettigonia
viridis is a strikingly beautiful insect which occurs in profusion amongst
low plants growing in damp places; the male is about one-third of an
inch long, and has the upper wings of a rich deep blue ; the female is a
little larger and of a delicate pale green colour closely resembling that of
the lower part of the stems of the grasses and rushes amongst which the
insect lives. The capture of jumping-bugs uninjured for the collection
is really quite a sporting business, the chances of escape being at least, ten
to one in favour of the insect ; this is more especially the case with those
species which live near the roots of herbage in marshes and by the sides
of ditches, as these tiny animals have a provoking habit, even when
they do not at first jump quite away, of retiring to the opposite side of
the stem on which they are perched on the approach of the would-be
captor’s hand ; and of the species that can be got into the sweeping or
beating-net only a comparatively small portion find their way into the
collector’s killing bottle, owing to the extreme activity of his temporary
captives,

164

INSECTS

In the following list the names of the captors or recorders of species
when other than the author are given after each entry. No particulars
are appended to species generally distributed or of frequent occurrence
in the county. The entomologists referred to in this list are : the late
W. G. Blatch, F.E.S. (1840-1900) ; the late J. A. Brewer of Reigate ;
the late J. B. Bridgman, F.L.S., F.E.S., of Norwich (1837-99) ; the
Rev, J. Landy Brown of Norwich ; E. A. Butler, F.E.S. ; G. C. Cham-
pion, F.Z.S., F.E.S. ; John Curtis (British Entomology, 1838) ; the late
T. P. Dossetor who lived in Norwich, 1876-87; the Rev. Canon Fowler
of Lincoln ; Frank Norgate formerly of Sparham ; C. J. and J. Paget
(Sketch of the Natural History of Great Yarmouth and its Neighbourhood,
1834); the late Dr. J. A. Power of London (1810-86) ; Edward
Saunders, F.L.S. (Hemiptera Heteroptera of the British Islands, 1892) ;
the Rev. T. Skrimshire of Syderstone (circ. 1825) ; H. J. Thouless of
Norwich ; J. J. Walker, R.N., F.E.S. HETEROPTERA

SCUTELLERIDE
Corimelena scarabeoides, Linn, Eaton,
near Norwich, April, 1874; Howe
Grove, July, 1888, Thouless ; Nor-
wich, Dossetor
Odontoscelis fuliginosa, Linn,
Burnham, Skrimshire
Podops inuncta, Fab. Eaton, July, 1874 ;
Mousebold Heath, Thouless
Cypnip&
Sehirus bicolor, Linn. Gnathoconus albomarginatus, Fab. 4Arm-
inghall
— picipes, Fall. PENTATOMIDA
Zilia acuminata, Linn. Curtis
Neottiglossa inflexa, Wolff. Howe Grove,
Thouless
Pentatoma baccarum, Linn, Foxley Wood,
Norgate ; Drayton Drewray, Thouless
— prasina, Linn. Yarmouth ; ‘on firs, very
common,’ Paget
Strachia festiva, Linn. Norwich, Saunders
Piezodorus lituratus, Fab. Tropicoris rufipes, Linn. Asopip&
Picromerus bidens, Linn. Asopus punctatus, Linn, Mousehold Heath
Podisus luridus, Fab. Sparham, Norgate ;
Drayton Drewray, Thouless
Zicrona coerulea, Linn. Coxford, August
oth, 1887 ; one example
ACANTHOSOMIDA
Acanthosoma hemorrhoidale, Linn. — dentatum, De G.
— interstinctum, Linn. Sand-hills,

Yarmouth, Norwich

Caister Marrams,

CoreiDz
Pseudophleus falleni, Schill. Walker
Bathysolen nubilus, Fall. Sparham district,
Norgate ; Norwich
Coreus denticulatus, Scop. Heath, Dossetor
ALyDIDE
Alydus calcaratus, Linn. Mousehold Heath,
Dunston Common; Southrepps, Butler
Corizip&
Therapha hyoscyami, Linn. Caistor Mar-
rams, Paget
Corizus parumpunctatus, Schill. Drayton
Drewray, September 5th, 1884 ; one
example
Myrmus myriformis, Fall. Chorosoma schillingi, Schml. Caistor Mar-
rams, Paget
BeRyYTIDA
Neides tipularius, Linn. Hunstanton, July
zoth, 1885 ; one example
Berytus clavipes, Fab. Norfolk, Curtis

eau oY } Mousehold Heath

— signoreti, Fieb. — montivagus, Ficb. Thetford ; Mouse-
hold Heath, Thouless
MeracanTHDz
Metacanthus punctipes, Germ. Yarmouth,
Thouless ; Gimingham, Butler
Lycaipz
Nysius thymi, Wolff. Cymipz
Cymus glandicolor, Hahn. — melanocephalus, Fieb. — claviculus, Fall. Ischnorhynchus reseda, Panz. Strawless, Ringland
— geminatus, Fieb. Brandon,

Mousehold

Stratton

165

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

ARTHENEIDE
Chilacis typh, Perr. HETEROGASTRIDE

Heterogaster urticz, Fab. Lynn, Bridgman ;

Holkham
PACHYMERIDA

Plociomerus fracticollis, Schill. etc. Rhyparochromus pratextatus, H.S. Mouse-
hold Heath, Thetford Warren, Cur-
tis; Earlham

— dilatatus, H.S. Dossetor

— chiragra, Fab. — sabulicola, Thoms. less

Ischnocoris angustulus, Boh,

Macrodema micropterum, Curt. Plinthisus brevipennis, Latr. Acompus rufipes, Wolff, Eaton, Horning ;
Thouless found a macropterous ex-
ample at the latter place

Stygnus rusticus, Fall, A macropterous
example, Stoke Holy Cross, Septem-
ber, 1884, Thouless; Gimingham,
Butler

— pedestris, Fall. — arenarius, Hahn. Peritrechus geniculatus, Hahn,
Heath, Yarmouth
— nubilus, Fall. Foxley Wood, Thouless

— luniger, Schill. Trapezonotus agrestis, Panz. Heath

Aphanus pedestris, Panz. Common under
bark throughout the Norwich district

— lynceus, Fab. Hunstanton, Fowler

— pini, Linn. Mousehold Heath

Eremocoris fenestratus, H.S. Hunstanton,
Blatch

Drymus sylvaticus, Fab. — brunneus, Sahl. Notochilus contractus, H.S. Ringland

Swanton Morley

Horning,

Mousebold Heath,

Yarmouth, Thou-

Mousehold

Meusehold

Scolopostethus pictus, Schill. Horning,
Brewer

— puberulus, Horv. Horning

— affinis, Schill. — neglectus, Edw. — decoratus, Hahn. Gastrodes abietis, Linn. In cones of spruce
fir, Merton Park, Lord Walsingham

— ferrugineus, Linn. PigsMIDz
Piesma quadrata, Fieb. — capitata, Wolff. Tinciwiwpz
Serenthia lata, Fall. Dunston Common,
Weybourne
Orthostira cervina, Germ. Swanton Mor-
ley

Tinciwe: (continued)

Orthostira parvula, Fall. Dictyonota crassicornis, Fall. Hellesdon,
Mousehold Heath, Chey ; Gimingham,
Butler

— strichnocera, Fieb. Derephysia foliacea, Fall. Norwich
Monanthia ampliata, Fieb. Ketteringham
Common ; Wretham, Thouless

— cardui, Linn. — dumetorum, H.S. Stratton Strawless

— humuli, Fab. Arminghall, Eaton
HEBRIDA

Hebrus pusillus, Fall. Arminghall
HypRoMETRIDE

Hydrometra stagnorum, Linn. VeLupz

Microvelia pygmaa, Duf. A macropterous
example, Hickling Broad, Thouless

Velia currens, Fab. GERRIDE

Gerris rufoscutellata, Latr. Mousehold

Heath, Drayton Drewray, Thouless 5
Horning
— thoracica, Schum. — gibbifera, Schum. — lacustris, Linn. — odontogaster, Zett. — argentata, Schum. Emesip&

Ploiaria vagabunda, Linn. — culiciformis, De G. Norwich
Repuvupa

Reduvius personatus, Linn. Paget ; Norwich

Coranus subapterus, De G.

NaBipé

Nabis lativentris, Boh. — major, Costa

— boops, Schiddte. Mousehold Heath

— flavomarginatus, Scholtz

— limbatus, Dahl. — lineatus, Dahl. Cley

— ferus, Linn. — rugosus, Linn. — ericetorum, Scholtz

SaLDIDzE

Salda pilosa, Fall. — saltatoria, Linn. — pallipes, Fab. — pilosella, Thoms. Salthouse, Cley

— opacula, Zett. Salthouse

— orthochila, Fieb. — muelleri, Gmel. Brumstead Common,
July 21st, 1887, one male; Ran-
worth, Champion

— littoralis, Linn. Postwick, Lakenham

— lateralis, Fall. — cincta, HS. Arminghall

Yarmouth,

Horning, Surlingham,

166

INSECTS

Savpipae (continued)

Salder cocksii, Curt. CERATOCOMBIDA

Ceratocombus coleoptratus, Zett. Stratton

Strawless ; Ditchingham, Power
Cimicip&

Cimex lectularius, Linn. — columbarius, Jen. Norwich

— pipistrelli, Jen. Merton Hall, Lord
Walsingham

— hirundinis, Jen. Norwich

ANTHOCORIDA

Lyctocoris campestris, Fall. Piezostethus cursitans, Fall. Temnostethus pusillus, H.S. Anthocoris confusus, Reut. — nemoralis, Fab. — sarothamni, D. & S. Hellesdon, Eaton

— visci, Dougl. East Carlton

— sylvestris, Linn. Tetraphleps vittata, Fieb. Arminghall

Acompocoris pygmaeus, Fall. — alpinus, Reut. One example on fir in
a plantation beyond Mousehold Heath,
Dossctor

Triphleps nigra, Wolff

— majuscula, Reut. — minuta, Linn. Mousehold Heath

Xylocoris ater, Duf. Norwich

MIcropuysipé

Microphysa_pselaphiformis, Curt. Swanton Morley

— elegantula, Baer. Norwich, in several
localities, Thouless,  Gimingham,
Butler

Myrmedobia distinguenda, Reut. ham ; Southrepps, Butler

Capsip&

Pithanus maerkeli, H.S. Acetropis gimmerthalii, Flor. Strawless,  Bawdeswell,
Drewray

Miris calcaratus, Fall. — levigatus, Linn. Megalocerza erratica, Linn. — longicornis, Fail. — nuficornis, Foure. Teratocoris antennatus, Boh. Weybourne, Ranworth

— saundersi, D. & S. With the last ;
also at Brundall and Surlingham

Leptopterna ferrugata, Fall. — dolobrata, Linn. Monalocoris filicis, Linn. Bryocoris pteridis, Fall. Pantilius tunicatus, Fab. Lopus gothicus, Linn. = var. superciliosus,
Horsford, Thouless

Heigham ‘ Canser”

Stoke Holy Cress,

Honing

Cossey,

Giming-

Stratton
Drayton

Hunstanton,

Dunston Common

D.& S.

Capsipe (continued)

Phytocoris distinctus, D. & S.

— intermedius, Reut. ~= populi, Linn. ~~ tilie, Fab. — longipennis, Flor. — dimidiatus, Kbm. — reuteri, Saund. — varipes, Boh. — ulmi, Linn. Calocoris striatellus, Fab. Ringland

— fulvomaculatus, De G.  Foxley Wood

— bipunctatus, Fab. — chenopodii, Fall. — ticinensis, Mey. Honing, Ranworth

— roseomaculatus, De G. Swanton
Morley, Postwick

— infusus, H.S. Beeston near Norwich ;
Earlham, Thouless ; Southrepps, Butler

— striatus, Linn. Stratton Strawless,
Thouless

Oncognathus binotatus, Fab. Dichrooscytus rufipennis, Fall. Norwich

Lygus pratensis, Fab. — atomarius, Mey. Stratton Strawless, on
silver fir; not recorded as occurring
elsewhere in England

— rubricatus, Fall. — contaminatus, Fall. — viridis, Fall. — lucorum, Mey. — spinole, Mey. — pabulinus, Linn. — viscicola, Put. — pastinace, Fall. — cervinus, H.S. East Carlton

 

— kalmii, Lin
Zygimus pinastri, Fall. Sprowston, Attle-
bridge
Reece gyllenhali, Fall. Cossey
— unifasciatus, Fab. Cossey
— vulneratus, Wolff. Yarmouth; dis-

covered by Thouless, September,
1897; not recorded as occurring
elsewhere in Britain
Camptobrochis lutescens, Schill. Liocoris tripustulatus, Fab. Capsus laniarius, Linn. — scutellaris, Fab. Hindolveston, Power
Bothynotus pilosus, Boh. A macropterous
male, Bzoton Common, July 8th, 1886
Rhopalotomus ater, Linn. Pilophorus cinnamopterus, Kbm. Scotch
fir, Trowse, August 24th, 1877;
Sprowston, Dossetor
— clavatus, Linn. Latenham, Thetford
Systellonotus triguttatus, Linn. AZousehold
Heath
Eroticoris rufescens, Burm. Stratton Straw-
tess, St. Faiths, Drayton Drewray

Ringland

167

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

Capsiva (continued)
Halticus apterus, Linn. Bramerton,Thouless
Strongylocoris leucocephalus, Linn, Dun-
ston Common, Hethersett

Labops saltator, Hahn. Yarmouth, Mouse-
hold Heath

— mutabilis, Fall. Bix/ey, Thouless

Macrolophus nubilus, H.S. Swwardeston,
May 15th, 1880

Dicyphus epilobii, Reut. errans, Wolff. Mousehold Heath, Thou-
less

stachydis, Reut. — pallidicornis, Fieb. — globulifer, Fall. — annulatus, Wolff. Campyloneura virgula, H.S. Cyllocoris histrionicus, Linn. — flavonotatus, Boh. Etorhinus angulatus, Fab. Globiceps selectus, Fieb. Stanton Morley

— dispar, Boh. Mecomma ambulans, Fall. Ringland

Cyrtorrhinus caricis, Fall. Stoke Holy Cross

— pygmaeus, Zett. Coxford, Hellesdon

— flaveolus, Reut. With the last ; also

at Ranworth ; Weybourne, Butler

Orthotylus — bilineatus, Fall. Stratton

Strawless, Thouless

— flavinervis, Kbm. — marginalis Reut. — tenellus, Fall. — nassatus, Fab. Cossey, Heigham

— viridinervis, Kbm. Ringland

prasinus, Fall. Trowse
scotti, Reut. diaphanus, Kbm. Cringleford
flavosparsus, Sahl. Hunstanton, Bran-
caster
— chloropterus, Kbm. — concolor, Kbm. — adenocarpi, Perr. — tubidus, Fieb. Yarmouth, Wells
ericetorum, Fall. Loxops coccinea, Mey. Cossey, Ringland
Heterotoma merioptera, Scop. Heterocordylus geniste, Scop. Wacton
Common, on Genista tinctoria

— tibialis, Holm. Malacocoris chlorizans, Fall. Onychumenus decolor, Fall. Hunstanton

Macrotylus paykulli, Fall. Conostethus salinus, J. Sahl. Hunstanton

— roseus, Fall. Mousebold Heath, Dray
ton Drewray, Horning

Macrocoleus molliculus, Fall. — tanaceti, Fall. Mundesley ; Gimingham,
Butler

Amblytylus affinis, Fieb. Harpocera thoracica, Fall. Dunston Common

Capsip& (continued)
Byrsoptera rufifrons, Fall. Dunston
Phylus palliceps, Fieb. — melanocephalus, Linn. — coryli, Linn. Atractotomus mali, Mey. Norwich
— magnicornis, Fall. Psallus ambiguus, Fall. — betuleti, Fall. obscurellus, Fall. variabilis, Fall. lepidus, Fieb. » _ var. roseus, D, & S.
alnicola, D. & S.
varians, H.S. diminutus, Kbm. — sanguineus, Fab. — salicellus, Mey. Foxley Wood
— rotermundi, Scholtz
Plagiognathus albipennis, Fall. — viridulus, Fall. — arbustorum, Fab. — roseri, H.S. Eaton
— pulicarius, Fall. — saltitans, Fall. Asciodema obsoletum, D. & S.
NavcoripD&
Naucoris cimicoides, Linn. Aphelochirus zstivalis, Fab. Cossey ; Earl-
ham, Brown

Hellesdon,

bltdtdl

NeEPipaé

Nepa cinerea, Linn. Ranatra linearis, Linn. Near Sparham,

Norgate ; Hickling Broad

NotonecTip&

Notonecta glauca, Linn. — maculata, Fab. Plea minutissima, Fab. Corixipz

Corixa geoffroyi, Leach

— atomaria, Ill. Horsford Heath, Wretham

Heath
lugubris, Fish.) Weybourne, Salthouse,
selecta, Fieb. Cley

hieroglyphica, Duf. sahlbergi, Fieb. linnzi, Fieb. limitata, Fieb. Ditchingham, Power

semistriata, Fieb. Honing, August,
1888 ; Horning, April, 1899

— striata, Linn,

— falleni, Fieb. — distincta, Fieb. — fossarum, Leach

— meesta, Fieb. fabricii, Fieb. preusta, Fieb. concinna, Fieb. bonsdorffi, Sahl. Hunstanton, Fowler

168

INSECTS

Corixip# (continued)
Corixa coleoptrata, Fab. Sigara minutissima, Linn, /bitwell Com-
mon, Brundall, Horning
— scholtzii, Fieb, Dilham Canal

HOMOPTERA

CICADINA
Mempracip&
Centrotus cornutus, Linn,
Ketteringham
Gargara geniste, Fab. Santon Downham,
Norgate

Foxley Wood,

Issipz
Issus coleoptratus, Geoff. Norwich, Cossey,
Swanton Morley
Cixupz
Cixius pilosus, Ol. — cunicularius, Linn. — nervosus, Linn. — brachycranus, Fieb. — similis, Kbm. Drayton Drewray, St.
Faiths
De.pHacipz
Asiraca clavicornis, Fab. Earlham ; Laken-
ham, Thouless. Delphax pulchella, Curt. Chloriona glaucescens, Fieb. Ranworth,
Cley

— prasinula, Fieb. Dersingham, Cley,
Whitwell Common

— smaragdula, Stal. Ranworth
Liburnia notula, Germ. quadrimaculata, Sign. Boston Common,
Ranworth, Flordon Common
— thoulessi, Edw. Ranworth, August,
1866, Thouless; not recorded as
occurring elsewhere in Britain
— lincola, Germ. — fuscovittata, Stal. vittipennis, J. Sahl
— guttula, Germ. — pallidula, Boh. St.
Strawless
punctulum, Kbm,
— scotti, Fieb. — collina, Boh. clegantula, Boh. — boldi, Scott. Yarmouth, Holkham
— signoreti, Scott. Brundall, Surlingham
reyi, Fieb. MWeybourne, August, 1887 ;
not recorded as occurring elsewhere
in Britain
lepida, Boh. Surlingham
— fieberi, Scott
leptosoma, Flor. niveimarginata, Scott. Swardeston Common

Roydon Fen

Faiths, Stratton

Weybourne, Ranworth,

Booton Common,

DELPHACID# (continued)

Liburnia pellucida, Fab. — difficilis, Edw. — discreta, Edw. — discolor, Boh. — forcipata, Boh. denticauda, Boh. Foxley Wood, Ketter-

ingham Common
— exigua, Boh. Cley, Ringstead Downs
— venosa, Germ. Dunston Common,

Booton Common
aubei, Perr. striatella, Fall. fairmairei, Perr. brevipennis, Boh. straminea, Stal. Stratton Strawless
limbata, Fab. — lineata, Perr. Weybourne, Arminghall

— mesomela, Boh. Dicranotropis hamata, Boh,

Stiroma albomarginata, Curt. — pteridis, Boh. — affinis, Fieb. — bicarinata, H.S. Booton Common

— nigrolineata, Scott. AZorston
Cercoripz

Aphrophora alni, Fall. — salicis, De G. Horning, Foxley Wood

Philenus spumarius, Linn. — campestris, Fall. — exclamationis, Thunb. — lineatus, Linn. Lepripz

Ledraaurita, Linn. Ringland ; Fulmodeston

Several, Foxley Wood, Norgate

ULoripa

Ulopa reticulata, Fab. Paroplip®

Megophthalmus scanicus, Fall. ByrHoscopipz&

Macropsis lanio, Linn. Bythoscopus alni, Schr. — rufusculus, Fieb. — flavicollis, Linn. Pediopsis scutellatus, Boh. — tibialis, Scott. Mousehold Heath,

— fuscinervis, Boh. Howe
— impurus, Boh. — ulmi, Scott. Eaton

cereus, Germ. virescens, Fab. Tdiocerus adustus, H.S. — varius, Fab. /Whitlingham

— herrichii, Kbm. Stratton Strawless,
Caistor near Norwich; not recorded
as occurring elsewhere in Britain

— tremule, Estl. Howe

— cupreus, Kbm. Brandon, May, 1896,

one female, Thouless; the insect

169

A HISTORY OF NORFOLK

ByrHoscopip& (continued)

here recorded and the type appear to
be the only specimens known

Idiocerus viduatus, Edw. Foxley Wood,
September roth, 1885 ; the type of
this species still remains unique

— laminatus, Flor. — lituratus, Fall. — peecilus, H.S. Cossey, Wacton

— vitreus, Fab. With the last and at
Trowse

— aurulentus, Kbm. Cossey

— fulgidus, Fab. — populi, Linn. — confusus, Flor. albicans, Kbm. Agallia puncticeps, Germ. — venosa, Fall. ‘TErticonipz
Evacanthus interruptus, Linn. — acuminatus, Fab. Tettigonia viridis, Linn. ACOCEPHALIDA,
Strongylocephalus agrestis, Fall. — megerlei, Scott. Horning, Ranworth,
Surlingham
Acocephalus nervosus, Schr. — bifasciatus, Linn, Hellesdon
— albifrons, Linn. »» Var. interruptus, Scott:
» var. polystolus, Scott
brunneo-bifasciatus, Geoff. — histrionicus, Fab. Mousehold Heath
— flavostriatus, Don. Eupelix cuspidata, Fab. Doratura stylata, Boh. — impudica, Horv. Hunstanton, Holkham
Paramesus nervosus, Fall. — phragmitis, Boh. Ranworth, Cley
Glyptocephalus proceps, Kbm. Jassipa
Athysanus sordidus, Zett. — sahlbergi, Reut. grisescens, Zett. — communis, J. Sah! obscurellus, Kbm. — obsoletus, Kbm. melanopsis, Hardy. Coxford Heath
Deltocephalus abdominalis, Fab. pascuellus, Fall. citrinellus, Kbm. — Cringleford
— ocellaris, Fall. Hellesdon
— repletus, Fieb. Stratton Strawless, and
Brumstead, Whitwell and Dunston
Commons
picturatus,
Ringland
flori, Fieb. — distinguendus, Flor. — falleni, Fieb. In salt
marshes

Fieb. Dunston Common,

Jassipa (continued)
Deltocephalus paleaceus, J. Sahl. Brooke
Weed not recorded as occurring
elsewhere in Britain
socialis, Flor. Barton Bendish
sabulicola, Curt. striatus, Linn,
normani, Scott. punctum, Flor. argus, Marsh. Mousehold Heath
costalis, Fall. Ranworth, September
3oth, 1886; not recorded as occur-
ring elsewhere in Britain
— coroniceps, Kbm. Coxford Heath,
August roth, 1887, one example ;
not otherwise known as a British
insect
maculiceps, Boh. — pulicaris, Fall. Allygus commutatus, Fieb. Trowse, Arminghall

Norwich

St. Faiths

Brooke Woed,

— modestus, Fieb. — mixtus, Fab. ‘Thamnotellix prasina, Ea Stratton
— dilutior, Kbm. Strawless

— subfuscula, Fall. — variegata, Kbm. — plebeja, Fall. Norwich

— striatulella, Edw. Roudham Heath;
not recorded as occurring elsewhere
in Britain

— splendidula, Fab. — crocea, H.S. — attenuata, Germ. Mousehold Heath

Limotellix striola, Fall. — antennata, Boh. — 5-notata, Boh. Ranworth; not re-
corded as occurring elsewhere in
Britain

— 4-notata, Fab. — sulphurella, Zett. Cicadula metria, Flor. — opacipennis, Leth. Ranworth; not
recorded as occurring elsewhere in
Britain. — septemnotata, Fall. variata, Fall. fasciifrons, Stal. Chey, Brooke
— sexnotata, Fall. — fieberi, Edw. Weybourne, Cley, Brooke
— livida, Edw. Weybourne, October,
1888 ; not recorded as occurring
elsewhere in Britain
Gnathodus punctatus, Thunb. Earlham
‘TYPHLocyBIDA
Alebra albostriella, Fall. Dicraneura flavipennis, Zett. — citrinella, Zett. Drayton Drewray,

Ringland,

170

MYRIAPODA

TyPHLocyBID# (continued)
Dicraneura similis, Edw. less, St. Faiths
— mollicula, Boh. — variata, Hardy
Kybos smaragdulus, Fall. Chlorita flavescens, Fab. — viridula, Fall. Eupteryx vittatus, Linn. notatus, Curt. urtice, Fab. stachydearum, Hardy
collinus, Flor. Lakenham
melisse, Curt. auratus, Linn. atropunctata, Goeze
signatipennis, Boh. tenellus, Fall. Unthanks Road, Nor-
wich ; Earlham
abrotani, Dougl. germari, Zett. pulchellus, Fall,
— concinna, Germ. Typhlocyba jucunda, H.S. Cross, Cossey
sexpunctata, Fall. debilis, Doug]. ulmi, Linn. tenerrima, H.S. aurovittata, Dougl. douglasi, Edw. gratiosa, Boh. crategi, Dougl. lethierryi, Edw. rose, Linn. salicicola, Edw. pruni, Edw. Arminghall; the type of
this species remains unique
quercus, Fab. nitidula, Fab. » Var. norgueti, Leth. — geometrica, Schr. Zygina alneti, Dahl. — coryli, Tollin
— flammigera, Geoff. — tiliz, Geoff. By beating firs and ivy
in spring; Ringland, Drayton

Stratton Straw-

Prtbttidd

Stoke Healy

Ringland, Bixley
Norwich

Porland, Felthorpe

PTET ttbibttdt

TypHtocysip# (continued)
Zygina hyperici, HS. Swansington
— parvula, Boh. Eaton, Bramerton
— scutellaris, H.S. PSYLLINA

Liviwz

Livia juncorum, Latr. APHALARIDA

Rhinocola erice, Curt. Mousehold Heath

— aceris, Linn. Ringland

Aphalara exilis, Web. & Mohr. — calthe, Linn. WWretham Heath

— artemisiz, Furst. — nervosa, Fall. Psytuipz

Psyllopsis fraxinicola, Férst. — fraxini, Linn. Psylla pruni, Scop. — crategi, Schr. costalis, Flor. — simulans, Forst. pyricola, Férst. salicicola, Férst. venata, Edw. Stratton Strawless ;

the type of this species remains

unique
visci, Curt. hippophaes, Férst. hartigii, Flor. pineti, Flor. betula, Linn. costalis, Flor. peregrina, Forst. — mali, Schmdbg. alni, Linn. férsteri, Flor. buxi, Linn. spartii, Guér. Arytena geniste, Latr. Triozipz

Trioza albiventris, Férst. rhamni, Schrk. urtice, Linn. remota, Férst. galii, Forst. East Carlton
Winterton

Hellesdon
Hellesdon, Eaton

MYRIAPODA

Systematic collecting of Myriapoda has never been carried on in

Norfolk. occurring in the county are most inadequate. Hence the materials available for forming a list of the species

The species enumerated

below were casually picked up by Mr. F. Pickard-Cambridge and Mr.
Oldfield Thomas on or near the broads, and by the former at West

Runton, a small sea-coast village lying to the north of Cromer. All the

species are forms widely distributed throughout the south of England. 171