ENTOMOLOGICAL
JOURNAL

PUBLISHED

ENTOMOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION | STOCKHOLM

JOURNAL OF ENTOMOLOGY
PUBLIC BY LA
SOCIETE ENTOMOLOGIQUE A STOCKHOLM

 

TWENTY-THIRD ARGANGEN

1902

WITH 6 ‘TABLES

STOCKHOLM
IDUNS KUNGL, HOFHOKTRYCKERL
1902

CONTENTS:

Apierz, G ,, laktiagelser diver Hoplomerus reniformis WesM ,. AvRIVILLIUS, Cuk., New or little known Coleoptera Longicornia
__, Contributions to the knowledge of insect fauna in Cameroon,
11, Lepidoptera Heterocera. v ...
SGTSSON, S., Biological Investigations of the Nun (Lymantria
Monacha L1x. ), its parasites and diseases
H., pide from Cameroon, West Africa, which Prof. Y:
Syisvepr observed on his voyage 1890—1892
Hansson, C.
Kongl, Dominstyrelsen's letter to Kongl, Maj: t angflende Nunnans
bekiimpande under fr 1902
Lama, S., Notis om fynd at Coleoptera
, Story to Kongl. The Swedish Board of Agriculture
activities at the Swedish Entomological Institute during 1901
, Vira within house most harmful malfiririls, With 1 tablet
$ 3, A, Entomological Society Meeting & Grand
Restanrant National, February 22, 1902. LONNBERG, E ,, On some Scorpions collected in northwestern Argen-
tine and Bolivia by Baron ExtaNp NoRDENSKIOLD. Mevas, J ,, Investigations concerning the Nun (Lymaniria Monacka
Lix,) occurrence at Fiholm
MjSpeRG, E., Herringbone Coleoptera, 2, Frin Göteborgstrakten
q>> »3, Frlin Stockholmstrakten. Mucuarpr, H., Sallsynt insektiynd. Leptwra fulca DEG. , Find of Anchomenus consimilis GYLL,
Norvexstrim, H., - C, H. Neréx, Obituary. With portrait. , Some contributions to the knowledge of Swedish Hymenopterers
geographical distribution

 

   

Bi

 

  

Fries! , Scattered notes on Scandinavian drawing wings

 

 

   

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

   

Recimpart, M, Dytiscide and Gyrinide recueillis in Cameroon par
“Je Dir Yxeve Sjésrepr. Sanpin, E., Nagra for Sveriges fauna nya Coleoptera
Scuneier, J. SPaRRE, Lepidopterological messages from the late
denfjeldske Norge ..
Sjéstept, Y., Swedish Insect Fauna, 3. Pseudoneuroptera, 1 omen

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sstepr, Y., Termites novos ex Africa reportatos, deseripsit ...... Sid,
- .. C.J. Eat Hacienp, Obituary, Med portrait. Examination of the types of Agrion clegantulum THIS. 0. »

. A new termite from Cameroon »

.. New African Termites>

 

 

STRAND, E., -Wesotrpe virgata Rorr., En for Norges fauna ny Geometer>
—__, Chlorselystis. chlocrata Maw. was, hadenata Fwens, one for Skan-

dinavien ny Geometer ..

 

     

   

 

 

      

  

 

  

Plutella hyperborcella SERAND 0. sp. >
‘Tits about some Odonates c
‘Orske finds of Hemiptera. >
Trynom, F., Entomologiska Féreningenens higtidssammantriide & Grand
Restaurant National December 14, 1901>
. Entomological Association Meeting & Grand Restan-
rant National on April 26, 1902 ..>
LLGREN, A., Ueber Mnesithens asper ‘To>
-, A couple of spider finds ...... =>
Vanesies, B ,, Find of Bembidium concinnum THoms. ,
Winmark, GW. & E ,, Find of Parnus luridus Ex, and tuthaxia
morio Fav »

  

Fairy

Second — Third Issues Issued September 20, 1902.

 

take the booklet issued March 21, 1902. The fourth issue was published on December 12, 1902. 35

300
289
204
194

194

25

NORWEGIAN FINDINGS OF HEMIPTERA
AY

FMB. BEACH. Since ScuOyen in Videnskabsselskabet's negotiations for
1889 published his »Contribution to the knowledge of Norway's
mipter and Orthopter fauna »not much has been done
forégelse of our knowledge of Norway's Hemipterfauna. Some
minor messages by WarLoe, Srarré SCHNEIDER and myself4
is as far as is known it all. There is therefore still a lot left to do
do in this area, and in view of that I have on
my many entomological-arachnological journeys in recent years
always occasionally also included Hemiptera, whereby I
the hand has put together some material that enables me
to be able to bring some new information about this part
ay vor fauna. For proper determination of all the species listed below
there is a sufficient guarantee that all my material has been recycled
nemgaaet by the well-known hemipterologist Dr. G. Horvarn i

! Wartor: Some for Norway's fauna new // emiftera Ieteroptera (Ent. Tidskr. 1896). - »-: New Scandinavian Jemiptera Heteroptera (ibid. 1901). Coleoptera and Lepidoptera near Bergen and in
(Bergen Museum Yearbook, 1901). - In the introduction, some at Ber-
gene observed / Jemiptera. SrraNp: Contribution to Hallingdal and Lyngiirs insektfanna (New
for the natural sciences VI). - + -: A small contribution to Norway's entomological fauna

 

rmeste area

 

 

 

   

 

. Tidskr. 1899). ver. Angry. 23, He 4 (1902). "7

 

Entomol. 258 ENTOMOLOGICAL ‘IDSKRIFY 1902. Budapest; for the great service mr. Dr. Horvarn thereby has
shown me, I hereby express my most obliging thanks. Heteroptera. Fam. Pentatomide,

1. <d £ lia acuminata 1. Available only from Ulefos (Bratsberg county). 2. Neottiglossa pusilla Guew. This for Norway and probably also for Skandi-
navia's fauna new species has been found at Kristiania and Ulefos. Dolycoris baccarum 1. This apparently everywhere in the southern frequent species is taken
at Kristiania, Skien, Aal (Hall.) and Leerdal (Parish). Des-
outside at Lillehammer (WOLLEB-EK leg.). 4. Chlorochroa juniperina L.

Is gathered at Bergen, in Lerdal, Aal and on Hvalderne. Less frequent than previous species. Eurydema oleraceum \ ..

Available only from Kristiania and Skien, as well as that of Wot-
LEB.EK is taken at Lillehammer. 6. Picromerus bidens L.
This supposedly sparsely occurring species is only available from
Lerdal, New for western Norway. 7. Acanthosoma interstinctum 1. (dentatus De G.). In Lerdal and Lavik (Parish), and at Porsgrund, too
new to the west country. 8. LElasmostethus griseus 1. (Fies.). Unicum from Lavik. yphostethus tristriatus Fave. A single copy from Kirkeden (Hvalderne). srER gives up in »Finland and the Scandinavian half
cens Hemiptera heteroptera »as find place only Skaane,
though it had long been published by SiepKe
as found in Norway. BEACH: NORWEGIAN FINDINGS OF HEMIPTERA. 259

Fam. Coreide. Syromastes marginatus 1,

Collected at Skien and in Onsé (Smaalenene) in a few examples
plarer. Alydus calcaratus 1. This species, which in this country first existed by Boneman
(at Dovre) and which was later only found at Drébak (av
Wartoe) and by Lyngér (by myself), I now have too
from Aal. Therapha hyoscyami \ ..

Unica from Lillehammar (W.) and Ulefos. Widespread about
than sparsely over the séndenfjeldske. Corisus crassicornis L.

By Skien and Kristiania. Corisus subrufus Gen.

Unicum from Ulefos. Admittedly new not only for Norway, but for the whole
Scandinavian fauna. Myrmus miriformis Pau. Only from Aal. Fam. Berytide. Berytus minor 4. S.

Available only from Aal. - Was previously proven from Kristia-
nia, Kongsberg, Ringerike (Scudven), Skibvik pr. Lyngér
(Srranp). Fam. Lygeide. Nysius thymi Wourr. Ay this common species haves expl. from Lavik, Lar-
dal, Trondhjem, Djéberg paa Hemsedalsfjeldet, Hemsedal og
Aal. It has also been proven in northern Norway, namely
at Bosekop (SravpiNcer and Wocke) and in Hatfjelddalen
(Stranp). 260

an

23

24. 26,

ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1902. Nysius jacobeae Scut ..

This uncommon species is found only from eel and
Hemsedal. Cymus glandicolor Hann. Copies are available from Onsé and Skien. The species is rare;
I have previously stated it from Lier and Odemark. Cymus claviculus Faru, (Hany). Unicum from $
Ischnorhynchus resedae Pz. I only have this species for the fauna from Botne
(Jarlsberg and Larvik counties). Geocoris megacephalus Rossi. ‘Taken at Fauske in Hemsedal and at Bj
sedalsfjeldet. The species was only known from Central and Southern Europe. who. erg paa Hem-

Ligyrocoris sylvestris \. Collected at Bergen, in Lerdal, Lavik, Aal and Hemsedal. The species is common and has been previously reported both
from Western Norway (Smélen [Stexe}) and the Nordenfjeldske (Hat-
fjelddalen [Srranv]). Drymus sylvaticus Far. Available from Kristiania, Bergen, Botne and Onsé. - New for
Western Norway. Drymus brunneus Save. This species new to the fauna is available in unica from Langéen
in Vesteraalen and from Wed, So has a wide distribution,
but inaa probably appear very sparse. Evemocoris plebejus Faw. Unicum from the Whales of this also widespread (among others. a. found at Bosekop), but infrequent species. ie raticus FABR. Seems to be frequent in the Arctic region, as I have

 

mocorts 1

 

from Hadsel, Ostvaagéen, Lédingen, Hammeré and Tys-
the fjord. In the séndenfjeldske I have taken it in Aal and
in Western Norway in Lavik. ‘Furthermore, I have published it
from Stensden (Lyngér), and by SraupinceR and Wocke it is
taken in Alten. Scolopostethus affinis Scut ...

4

 

 

29. 35. 36. 37-

BEACH: NORWEGIAN FINDINGS OF HEMIPTERA, 261

Of this widespread but not frequent species I have
with expl. from Tune in Smaalenene. Scolopostethus Thomsoni Revr. This for Norway's fauna does not appear before listed species
to be quite widespread in the Arctic region, as I have
found it on Ostvaagéen, by Lédingen and in Tysfjorden. Scolopostethus decoratus Haun. Only one copy (Skien). Rhyparochromus chiragra ¥ vx. (House). Like the previous one only at Skien. New to the fauna. Strgnocoris pedestris Faun. Probably most common in the Westfjords, as I have there
the one from Bergen, Lavik and Lerdal, but by the way only has
found it in Aal. Sphragisticus nebulosus Var

Only in Aal and near Kristiania. Trapesonotus arenarius L. (agrestis Fat1.). Common in the séndenfjeldske, where I have collected it
in Aal, Hemsedal, by Bjéberg on Hemsedalsfjeldet, in Onsd,
by the ski and on the whales. In Western Norway, I have
det den ved Bergen og i det nordenfjeldske paa Langéen i
Vesteraalen. In Nordland, by the way, it already existed
ZETTERSTEDT. Aphanus pini 1. Frequent in the Sændenfjeld region: Kristiania, Skien, Onsd,
The whales, eel, perhaps rare in western Norway: Lerdal and
in the Arctic region: Tysfjorden. In the nordenfjeldske has
by the way, I found it on Lékta and Sandnessjéen before
(Helgeland), in Vefsen and Hatfjelddalen. Fam. Aradide. Aradus corticalis L.
Available only from Aal. Fam. Tingidide. Piesma maculata Lar. a

40. 4t. 44. 45. ENTOMOLOGICAL

 

WRITING 1902,

In the Eastfjords several widespread: Aal, Kristiania,
Onsé, Skien and also occurs in Western Norway: Lerdal,
Dictyonota tricornis ScurK. Unicum from Aal of this for Scandinavia new species (). Phyllontocheila cardui L.

This in the south is probably a fairly common species
only taken at Skien. Fam. Gerride. Gerris asper Fier. Ay this species, where by SParRE SCHNEIDER stated from
Bergen and already earlier by SaHLeeRG were found in it
Nordenfjeldske, I have expl. from Aal, Lavik and Langéen
(Vesteraalen). Fam, Reduviide. Coranus subapterus De G.
This hitherto only on Dovre (Stepke) taken species, I have
from Aal. Nabis flavomarginatus Sco
This widespread species is taken in Lerdal, Aal, Hemse-
dal, by ‘Trondhjem and in‘ Tysfjorden. ‘I used to
found it among others. a. in Hatfjelddalen and Scunesper erects it
from Bergen. Nabis brevis Scno.tz. Apparently not previously stated from Norway, though
it seems to be widespread over a large part of the
mountainous: Kristiania, Porsgrund, Ulefos, Skien, Lrerdal. Alt-
so far only from the coastal districts. Nabis rugosus 1. Is in the southern part of the country probably just as common
as flavomarginatus, but has so far not been detected before
Arctic region. The new sites are Lirdal, Skien, Pors-
land, Ulefos, Kristiania, Onsé and Hvalderne. Nabis ferus L.

Unicum from Skien

 

46. 47 °

48. 49. 50,

53-

54. 55-

553. 55b. BEACH: NORWEGIAN FINDINGS OF HEMIPTERA, 263

Nabis limbatus Daur. Ogsaa et unicum (Trondhjem). Was so far only found in
Akershus county. Fam. Capside

Miris calcaratus Pau. Gathered at Skien, Porsgrund, Ulefos and Kristiania. Miris laevigatus \ ..

Together with the previous ones at Porsgrund, Ulefos and Kri-
stiania. Hardly found in that sheet. reg. ; in Finland it is
not found (RevreR). Airis holsatus Fasr. Reasonably our only Arctic // r7s species, it haves from
Lédingen and ‘Tysfjorden (because I have stated it from Vefsen
and Hatfjelddalen). Also from Skien, Porsgrund, Bergen,
Lavik, Lerdal and Aal. Leptopterna dolabrata \ ..

Only from ‘Trondhjem. Calocoris fulvomaculatus Dr G.

As before only from Trondheim. Also goes north
to the Arctic region: Hatfjelddalen (Srranp). Pycnopterna striata 1. Unicum from Tysfjorden. Proven in several places in the late
denfjeldske (Steskr) and in Hatfjelddalen (Straw). Phytocoris populi 1. Only found in Leerdal. Pilophorus clavatus \ ..

Copies are available from Aal, L:

 

vik and Lardal of this
uncommon species. Phylus coryli L.

Only from ‘Trondbjem. Lygus pratensis \. Found numerous by Ki
Ulefos, in Aal and Lavik and near Bergen. - Northern border:
Sandnessjéen (Srxanp). Lygus pratensis 1. v. Campestris V ..

In the same places as the main shape, as well as in addition

7

  

stiania, Hvaléerne, Skien, Porsgrund,

264

Boe

60. 6r. 62. 64. 65. 66. 67. 68. 69. ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1902.

at ‘Trondhjem, in Lrerdal and Hemsedal. After the storage
ready individuals to dam more numerous than the main form. Lygus rubicundus Fawr. Found in Lierdal and near Skien. New for western Norway. Lygus rubricatus Fatt. ‘Aget at Bergen and in Aal. New for western Norway. Lygus contaminatus Fa. Only found at ‘Trondhjem; previously noted from Hat-
fjelddalen. - In Saltdalen sec. SAHLBERG. Lygus pabulinus L,

‘Of this already stated by ScuNewer from Western Norway
art haves expl. from Bergen, Lavik, Lerdal and Aal, as well
Tysfjorden. So far, 3 Zygus species have been found in ours
Arctic region. Lygus sp. Mal (unic.). Macrolophus nubilus H. S.

Unicum at Kristiania of this for the fauna new species. Charagochilus Gyllenhali Faun. Only found at Kirkeden (Hvalderne). Plesiocoris rugicollis Faun. Available from Tysfjorden, Has in Arctic Norway probably
quite widespread, as I also found it in several places
in Hatfjelddalen. Liocoris tripustulatus Favr. Collected at Kristiania and Porsgrund. Monatocoris filicis L.

Unicum from Porsgrund. Bryocoris pteridis Fawr. Is only encountered in Lavik. New for Western Norway. Globiceps selectus Fire. This species new to Scandinavia has been found in Aal. AStorhinus angulatus Fav. Has only been found in western Norway: Bergen, Lavik and Lerdal;
already by SiepKe it is stated from the west mountain (Molde). Chlamydatus pullus Revr. Unicum from Aal of this for the fauna new species. Mecomma Ambulance Faw,

Available from Tysfjorden, Aal and Lerdal. The species is in it

8

 

wae

73. 14. 75-

76. Us

78. 79-

80. 83. SPRAND: NORWEGIAN FINDINGS OF HEMIPTERA. 265

is found by
rerstept), Hatfjelddalen (Srranp). arctic streaks widespread, taking the early
Gjebostad and Alteidet (Ze:
Dierphus globulifer Farr

This species found so far only at Kristiania is from Aal. Orthotylus marginalis Revs. Found at Bergen, Trondhjem, in Lerdal and Tysfjorden. New to the fauna. Orthotylus ericetorum Faw. The find at Bergen. - New for western Norway. Halticus apterus 1.,

Only from Aal. Atractotomus magnicornis Faun. This very rare species is only found near Bergen. New
for the west country. Psallus roseus Fapr. Like the previous one only at Bergen and new to Western Norway. Psallus Falleni Rev. This species already noted by Scuyetper for Western Norway
taken in Lzerdal, Aal, near Trondhjem and Sandnessjéen (Helge-
land) and thus also belongs to the Arctic region. Psallus ambiguus Fav. Also an Arctic species found from ‘Tysfjorden. Is otherwise
found at Trondhjem and in Hatfjelddalen. Psallus betuleti Fars. Also occurs in the regio arctica (‘I’ysfjorden). Plagiognathus arbustorum ¥ avr. The find in Aal, Lierdal, near ‘Trondhjem and Bergen. Plagiognathus albipennis Faun. Unicum from Aal. Fam. Cimicide. Anthocoris nemorum \ ..
Frequent everywhere. Triphleps nigra Wor

Unicum from Onsé of this for the fauna new species. 266 ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1902,

Fam. Saldide. 84. Salda saltatoria L.
Found on Ostvaagden (Lofoten), in ‘Tysfjorden, Aal,
Onsé and on the Whales. In the Arctic region it became
already found by SraupiNceR and Wocke and I have time-
rather taken it on Rdsvandsholmen. 85. Salda orthochila ¥
Also an Arctic species: Langéen, Lodingen and ‘Tysfjorden,
which by the way is taken in Aal, Lavik, Lardal, Onsé and by
Trondhjem and thus is very common. 86. Salda riparia Fat. This rare species was only found in ‘Tysfjorden. 87. Salda littoralis 1 ..
Besides in ‘Tysfjorden I have found it at Lédingen

 

and Svolveer. 88. Salda scotica Curr. Unicum from ‘Tysfjorden,

Fam. Corixide. 89. Coriva pracusta Firs. 90. Coriva carinata Sauin. 91. Corix cavifrons Tus. All three species gathered in Aal. - C. carinata is former
found at Kristiania (SreBkE) and Bod6 ’(SAHLBERG). cav? -
Jrons only at Kristiania (S1evKE). Homoptera. Fam. Cercopide. 92. Aphrophora alni Faun. Has only been found in western Norway: Lavik and Lerdal. 92. Ptyelus spumarius 1. The main form is collected in Aal, Lerdal, near Bergen and
10

93-

94. 95. 96. 97-
98. 99. Too. 104. BEACH: NORWEGIAN FINDINGS OF HEMIPTERA. 267

Trondhjem, as well as in ‘Tysfjorden and the same is the case
with wv. fasciatus Fase. On the other hand, v / neatus is Tab. kun
taken at Trondhjem, 7. Jewcophthalmus 1 .. only in Aal, mens
v. lateralis L. and
terede with unica from resp. Aal and Lardal. Piyelus lincatus L.

Unicum from Lzrdal. marginellus Fs

   

. only is represented

Fam. Membracide. Centrotus cornutus Farr,
Collected at Ulefos and Porsgrund. Fam, Jasside. Euacanthus interruptus 1. Has been found near Bergen and in the ‘light fjord,
Euacanthis acaminatus Favr. This rare species is found in unicum from Bergen and Lavik. New for Western Norway. Bythoscopus flavicollis 1. Available from Tysfjorden, Sandnessjéen, Lavik, Lerdal and Aal. Ldeocerus populi 1. Gathered at Trondhjem, Bergen, in Lardal and Aal. Idiocerus confusus ¥ ior. This rare species is only found in Lerdal; new for Vest-
the country. Idiocerus sp.2 (9). From Aal and Bergen. Agallia venosa Far. Only from Aal. Cicadula sexnotata Faw. Unicum from Hatfjelddalen of this species new to the fauna. Empoasca emerald fans. Available from Hatfjelddalen, Résvand, Lerdal, ‘Trondhjem
and Aal. Chlorita flavescens Fawr. Only found at Porsgrund,

un

268

105. 106,

107. 108. 119. ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1902. Typhlocyba sexpunctata Fa. This species new to the fauna I have from Aal and Lerdal. Typhlocyba geometric SCuRK. Unicum from Lerdal. New for Western Norway. D B yphlocyba ulmi L.

Is only found near Bergen. New for Western Norway. Typhlocyba rosae L.

‘Taken both in Leerdal and Aal. Eupteryx Germari Lert. Only gathered near Bergen. Guathodus punctatus Ture. Copies are available from Kristiania, Skien, Hvaléerne, Onsé,
Lavik and Lerdal. New for Western Norway. Thamnotettix simplex A. 8. Is widespread in northern Norway, as it is fun-
the one in Tysfjorden, Lédingen, Hammeré, Hatfjelddalen, Skar-
modal and Résvand. Also available from Lavik. ‘Tysfjorden and Hatfjelddalen have some expl., As
forms a separate variety. Thamnotettix sulphurellus Levy. Found at Trondhjem, Bergen and in Lavik. Thamnotettix subfusculus Fav. A widespread species: Tysfjorden, Hadsel, Lédingen, Ham-
meré, Hatfjelddalen, Résvand, Vefsen, Botne, Aal, Porsgrund
and Kristiania. From

Thamnotettix quadrinotatus Fawr. Found in Aal, Lerdal and near Bergen. New for Vest-
the country. Thanmotettix cruentatus Pz,

Only taken in Aal,

Fassus mixtus Fawr. This new species for Western Norway was taken in Lerdal. Athysanus pallens Levy. Gathered in ‘Tysforden. Athysanus brevipennis Krescus,
1, by Bjéberg and on Dénna (Helgeland). Athysanus grisescens Lerr. Is found in

 

Only found in ‘Tysfjorden. 12

120. 125. 126. 128. 129. 130,

131. 132. BEACH: NORWEGIAN FINDINGS OF HEMIPTERA. 269

Deltocephalus abdominalis Farr. In the sheet. reg. is it found in Tysfjorden, Hatfjeldda-
len, Skarmodalen and by Résvandet; in the south at Bjs-
berg and in Aal. Deltocephalus pulicaris Fain. Available only from Aal. Deltocephalus striatus 1. Is gathered in ‘Tysfjorden, by‘ lrondhjem and in A

Deltocephalus Flori Fen. This new species for the fauna is found from Tysfjorden and
Hatfjelddalen. Acocephalus bifasciatus \ ..

Available from ‘lysfjorden, Lillehammer and Hemsedal. Acocephalus albifrons LU. (Sauin.). Seems to be a ky

   

form, as my copies are from

 

Bergen, ‘Trondhjem, Lavik and Lerdal. Acocephalus nervosus ScrrK. Found in Aal, Lavik, Leerdal and near Bergen. New for
fauna. Fam. Fulgoride. Zygina flammigera Fourcr. Of this probably for the fauna new species has a uni-
cum from Kristiania. Zygina sp. Indeterminate expl. from Aal. Cixius cunicularius \ ..

Available from Lédingen and ‘Tysfjorden. ius nervosus L.

Is only taken in Lavik. Delphax discolor Bou. Sparsely distributed in the Arctic region, as unica haves
from ‘ysfjorden, Hadsel and Résvand. am, Psylide. Psylla prani Sc. This species new to the fauna is widespread in

13

a
a

136. 137. 138. 139. ENTOMOLOGICAL JOURNAL 1902.

us, as it is taken on the whales and in the Hatfjeld valley. -
In Sweden only found in the southernmost (THomson, ReuTer). Psylla betulae VL. Available from Aal, Hatfjelddalen, Résvand. Psylla ledi Fror. Ay this with us so far only from Ringerike known species
haves et st. from Tysfjorden. In Sweden it has only been found
at a few localities (Bohuslin and Dalaré [Reurer], Sma-
land [THomsoy)). Psylla Forces Away. Also this is only available in an expl. (Lerdal). Psylla fusca Lever. Found at Trondhjem, in Lavik and Lerdal. New for
fauna. Psylla alni 1. Occurs in Aal, Lavik, Leerdal, Hatfjelddalen, Skar-
the modal and the Tysfjord. Psylla nigrita Lexy. Unicum from Botne. Triosa acutipennis

Unicum from Résvand. Triosa urticae L.

 

 

Unicum from Kristiania. Aphalara cxilis Wen, & Mour. Available from Aal. Livia juncorum Lave. Caught at Skien.