ame BL

Biodiversity Heritage Library

https://www. biodiversitylibrary.org/

The Victoria history of the county of Suffolk /
Folkestone [Kent] :Dawson for the University of London, Institute of
Historical Research,1907-1975. https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/1 7548

1: https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/57336
Page(s): Text, Text, Text, Text, Text, Text, Text, Text, Title Page, Text,

Text, Text, Text, Text, Text, Text, Text, Text, Text, Text, Page 144, Page
145, Page 146, Page 147, Page 148, Page 149

Holding Institution: University of California Libraries (archive.org)
Sponsored by: Internet Archive

Generated 28 August 2020 10:27 AM
https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/pdf4/117342600057336.pdft

This page intentionally left blank. The Wictoria thistory of the
Counties of England

EDITED BY WILLIAM PAGE, F-.S.A. A HISTORY OF
SUFFOLK

IN SIX VOLUMES

VOLUME. I

THE

VICTORIA HISTORY

OF THE COUNTIES
OF ENGLAND

SUFFOLK

 

DAWSON
FOR

THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
INSTITUTE OF HISTORICAL RESEARCH

Published by
Archibald Constable & Company Limited
in 1911

Reprinted for the University of London
Institute of Historical Research
by
William Dawson & Sons Ltd
Cannon House
Folkestone, Kent, England
1975

ISBN: 0 7129 0647 9

Originally printed in Great Britain by
Eyre & Spottiswoode, H.M. Printers, London
Reprinted in Belgium by Jos Adam, Brussels

 

INSCRIBED
TO THE MEMORY OF
HER LATE MAJESTY

QUEEN VICTORIA
WHO GRACIOUSLY GAVE
HE TITLE TO AND
ACCEPTED THE
DEDICATION OF
THIS HISTORY

THE ADVISORY COUNCIL
OF THE VICTORIA HISTORY

His Grace Tue Lorp Arcu-
BISHOP OF CANTERBURY

His Grace Tue Duke or

Beprorp, K.G. President of the Zoolegical Society

His Grace Tue Duke or
Porttanp, K.G. His Grace Tue Duke or
Arcyit, K.G., K.T. Tue Rr. Hon. Tue Eart oF

Rosesery anpd Mip.oruian,
KG, Kor. Tue Rr. Hon. CovenTRY

Late President of the Royal Agri-
cultural Society

Tue Eart oF

Tue Rr. Hon. Tue Viscount
Ditton
Late President of the Society of
Antiquaries
Tue Rr. Hon. Tue Lorp Lister
Late President of the Royal Society

Tue Rr. Hon. Tue Lorn
Atverstone, G.C.M.G. Lord Chief Justice

Tue Hon. Watrer Roruscuitp,
M.P. Tue Rr. Hon. Sir Freperick
Pottock, Bart., LL.D., F.S.A.,
ETC,

Sir Epwarp Maunne Tuomeson,
K.C.B.,D.C.L., LL.D.,F.S.A.,
ETC. Late Director of the British Museum

Sir Crements R. Markuam,
K.C.B., F.R.S., F.S.A. Lare President of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society

Sirk Henry C. Maxweti-Lyte,
K.C.B., M.A., F.S.A., erc. Keeper of the Public Records

Sir E. Ray Lanxester, K.C.B.,
LL.D., M.A., F.R.S., ere. Late Director of the Nat. Hist,
Museum, South Kensington
Sir Jos. Hooxer, G.C.S.1.,M.D.,
D.C.L,, F.R.S., ETC:

Cot. Sir Duncan A. Jounston,
K.C.M.G., C.B., R.E. Late Director General of the Ord. nance Survey
Sir Arcuipatp Geixiz, LL.D.,
F.R.S., ere. Rev. J. Cuartes Cox, LL.D.,
F.5.A., ETc. Lionet Cust, M.V.O., M.A.,
F.S.A., ETc. Late Director of the National Por-
trait Gallery
Cuartes H. Firtu, M.A., LL.D. Regius Professor of Modern History,
Oxford

Aueert C, L.G. Ginruer, M.A.,
M.D., F.R.S., Pu.D. Late President of the Linnean Society

F. Haverriztp, M.A., LL.D.,

F.S.A. Camden Professor of Ancient History

Recinatp L, Poorz, M.A., Pu.D. University Lecturer in Diplomatic,
Oxford

J. Horace Rounp, M.A., LL.D. Water Rre

W. H. Sr. Joun Hope, M.A. Among the original members of
the Council were
Tue Late Duke or Devonsuire
Tue Lare Duke or Rurtanp
Tue Larz Marquess or Satispury
Tue Lare Dr. Manvecr
Creicuton, Bishop or Lonpon

Tue Lare Dr. Srusss, Bisnor
or Oxrorp

Tue Lare Lory Acton
Tue Late Sir Wituiam Frower
Tue Lare Cor, Sir J. Farqu-

HARSON
Tue Late Sir Joun Evans

Tue Late Prorgssor F. York
PowELL

General Editor—Wittiam Pace, F.S.A. GENERAL ADVERTISEMENT

The Vicrorta Hisrory of the Counties of England is a National Historic Survey
which, under the direction of a large staff comprising the foremost students in science, history,

and archaeology, is designed to record the history of every county of England in detail. This

work was, by gracious permission, dedicated to Her late Majesty Queen Victoria, who gave it

her own name. a worthy and permanent monument to her memory. It is the endeavour of all who are associated with the undertaking to make it

Rich as every county of England is in materials for local history, there has hitherto been
no attempt made to bring all these materials together into a coherent form,

Although from the seventeenth century down to quite recent times numerous county

histories have been issued, they are very unequal in rherit; the best of them are very rare
and costly ; most of them are imperfect and many are now out of date. Moreover, they were
the work of one or two isolated scholars, who, however scholarly, could not possibly deal
adequately with all the varied subjects which go to the making of a county history. Vil

In the Victorta History each county is not the labour of one or two men, but of many,
for the work is treated scientifically, and in order to embody in it all that modern scholarship
can contribute, a system of co-operation between experts and local students is applied, whereby
the history acquires a completeness and definite authority hitherto lacking in similar
undertakings. The names of the distinguished men who have joined the Advisory Council are a
guarantee that the work represents the results of the latest discoveries in every department
of research, for the trend of modern thought insists upon the intelligent study of the past
and of the social, institutional, and political developments of national life. As these histories
are the first in which this object has been kept in view, and modern principles applied, it is
hoped that they will form a work of reference no less indispensable to the student than
welcome to the man of culture. THE SCOPE OF THE WORK

The history of each county is complete in itself, and in each case its story is told from the
earliest times, commencing with the natural features and the flora and fauna. ‘Thereafter
follow the antiquities, pre-Roman, Roman, and post-Roman ; ancient earthworks; a new
translation and critical study of the Domesday Survey ; articles on political, ecclesiastical, social,
and economic history , architecture, arts, industries, sport, etc. ; and topography. ‘The greater
part of each history is devoted to a detailed description and history of each parish, containing
an account of the land and its owners from the Conquest to the present day. “These manorial
histories are compiled from original documents in the national collections and from private
papers. A special feature is the wealth of illustrations afforded, for not only are buildings of
interest pictured, but the coats of arms of past and present landowners are given. HISTORICAL RESEARCH

It has always been, and still is, a reproach that England, with a collection of public
records greatly exceeding in extent and interest those of any other country in Europe, is yet
far behind her neighbours in the study of the genesis and growth of her national and local
institutions. Few Englishmen are probably aware that the national and local archives contain
for a period of 800 years in an almost unbroken chain of evidence, not only the political,
ecclesiastical, and constitutional history of the kingdom, but every detail of its financial and
social progress and the history of the land and its successive owners from generation to
generation. The neglect of our public and local records is no doubt largely due to the fact
that their interest and value is known to but a small number of people, and this again is
directly attributable to the absence in this country of any endowment for historical research. The government of this country has too often left to private enterprise work which our con-
tinental neighbours entrust to a government department. It is not surprising, therefore, to find
that although an immense amount of work has been done by individual effort, the entire
absence of organization among the workers and the lack of intelligent direction has hitherto
robbed the results of much of their value. In the Vicroria History, for the first time, a serious attempt is made to utilize our
national and local muniments to the best advantage by carefully organizing and supervising
the researches required. Under the direction of the Records Committee a large staff of experts
has been engaged at the Public Record Office in calendaring those classes of records which are
fruitful in material for local history, and by a system of interchange of communication among
workers under the direct supervision of the general editor and sub-editors a mass of information
is sorted and assigned to its correct place, which would otherwise be impossible. THE RECORDS COMMITTEE
Str Epwarp Maunpe Tompson, K.C.B. C. T. Martin, B.A., F.S.A. Sir Henry Maxweti-Lyte, K.C.B. J. Horace Rounp, M.A., LL.D. W. J. Harpy, M.A., F.S.A. S. R. Scarcii-Birp, F.S.A. F. Mapan, M.A. W..H. Srevenson, M.A,

G. F. Warner, M.A., D.Liit., F.S.A. Vili

CARTOGRAPHY

In addition to a general map in several sections, each History contains Geological, Oro-
graphical, Botanical, Archaeological, and Domesday maps; also maps illustrating the articles on
Ecclesiastical and Political Histories, and the sections dealing with Topography. ‘The Series
contains many hundreds of maps in all. ARCHITECTURE

A special feature in connexion with the Architecture is a series of ground plans, many
of them coloured, showing the architectural history of castles, cathedrals, abbeys, and other
monastic foundations. In order to secure the greatest possible accuracy, the descriptions of the Architecture,
ecclesiastical, military, and domestic, are under the supervision of Mr. C. R. Peers, M.A.,
F.S.A., and a committee has been formed of the following students of architectural history
who are referred to as may be required concerning this department of the work :—

ARCHITECTURAL COMMITTEE

J. Buson, F.S.A., F.R.I.B.A. W. H. Sr. Joun Hopr, M.A. R. Bromrizetp, M.A., F.S.A., A.R.A. W. H. Knows, F.S.A., F.R.I.B.A. Harotp Braxspear, F.S.A., A.R.LB.A. Roranp Paut, F.S.A. Pror. G. Batpwin Brown, M.A. J. Horace Rounp, M.A., LL.D. Arruur §. Frower, M.A. Percy G. Srong, F.S.A., F.R.I.B.A,
J. A. Gorcu, F.S.A., F.R.I.B.A, H. Tuackeray Turner, F.S.A. The general plan of Contents and the names among others of those
who are contributing articles and giving assistance are as follows :—

Natural History

Geology. Crement Rerp, F.R.S., Horace B. Woopwarp, F.R.S., G. A. Lesour, M.A., J. E. Marr,
D.Sc., F.R.S., and others

Palzontology. R. Lypexxer, F.R.S., F.L.S., F.G.S. Contributions by G. A. Boutencer, F.R.S., J. G. Baxer, F.R.S., F.LS., ete, G. C. Druce,

Flora M.A., F.L.S., Watrer Garstanc, M.A., D.Sc., F.L.S., Rev. Canon A. M. Norman,

Reuna D.C.L., LL.D., F.R.S., Rev. Canon W. W. Fowzer, M.A,, D.Sc., F.L.S., F.E.S., Rev. O.

Pickarp-Camaripce, M.A., F.R.S., Rev. T. R. R. Srespinc, M.A., F.R.S., etc. B. B.
Woopwarp, F.G.5., F.R.M.S., etc. and other Specialists

Prehistoric Remains. W. Boyp Dawkins, D.Sc., LL.D., F.R.S., F.S.A., Geo. Crincu, F.S.A. Scot., F.G.S.,
Joun Garsranc, M.A., B.Litr., F.S.A., and others

Roman Remains. F. Haverrizeip, M.A., LL.D., F.5.A., and others
Anglo-Saxon Remains. C. Hercures Reap, LL.D., F.S.A., Recrvaco A. Smrru, B.A., F.S.A., and others
Domesday Book and other kindred Records. J. Horace Rounv, M.A., LL.D., and other Specialists

Architecture. C. R. Peers, M.A., F.S.A.. W. H. Sr. Joun Hopz, M.A., Harotp Braxspear, F.S.A.,
A.R.I.B.A., and others

Ecclesiastical History. R. L. Poorz, M.A., Rev. H. Geez, D.D., F.S.A.,. Rav. J. C. Cox, LL.D., F.S.A.,
A. G. Litriz, M.A., and others

Political History. Pror. C. H. Firru, M.A., LL.D., D.Litr., F.S.A., W. H. Srevenson, M.A., J. Horace
Rounp, M.A., LL.D., Pror. T. F. Tour, M.A., Pror. James Tarr, M.A., and A. F. Potzarn,
M.A., F.R.Hist.Soc. History of Schools. A. F. Lzacu, M.A., F.S.A. Maritime History of Coast Counties. Sir Joun K. Laucuton, M.A., M. Oppenneim, and others

Topographical Accounts of Parishes and Manors. By Various Authorities

Agriculture. Sir Ernest Crarge, M.A., Late Sec. to the Royal Agricultural Society, and others

Forestry. Joun Nisget, D.CEc., and others

Industries, Arts and Manufactures ;
d } By Various Authorities

Secial and Economic History

Ancient and Modern Sport. E, D. Cuminc, the Rav. E, E. Dortinc, M.A., and others
Cricket. Sir Home Gorpon, Bart. THE

VICTORIA HISTORY
OF THE COUNTY OF

SUFFOLK

EDITED BY

WILLIAM PAGE, FS.A. VOLUME ONE

DAWSON

FOR
THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON
INSTITUTE OF HISTORICAL RESEARCH

County Coiinittee for Suffolk

FoRMED IN 1907

THE MOST HON. THE MARQUESS OF BRISTOL

Lord Lieutenant, Chairman

His Grace THe Duke oF Grarron,
K.G. Tue Rr. Hon. THe Eart Capocan, K.G. THe Rr. Hon. THe Eart Howe,
G.C.V.O. Tue Rr. Hon. THe Eart oF STRADBROKE

Tue Rr. Hon. Tue Viscount Iveacu,

ie,

Rr. HERVEY

Tue Rr. Rev. THe Lorp BisHop or ELy

Tue Rr. Rev. Tue Lorp BisHor oF
NorwicH

Ture Rr. Rev. Tue Bishop or THETFORD

Tue Rt. Hon. THe Lorp DE SAUMAREZ

THe Rr. Hon. THe Lorp BaTEeMan

Cot. THe Hon. H. W. Lowry-Corry

Tue Rr. How. Sirk Wittram Brampton
Gurpon, K.C.M.G., C.B. Tue Hon. STANHOPE TOLLEMACHE

Tue Rev. Sir Wittiam Hype-Parker,
Barr. Sir Rateu Bois, Barr. Sir —THomas Goocn, Bart. 51k CoLttincwoop HucGues, Barr. Sir CHarves Darrympce, Barr. Sir Wititram Dunn, Bart. Sir CuTHBerT Quitrer, Barr. Sir E. Watrer GREENE, Barr. Sir Ernest CrarKke, M.A., F.S.A., F.L.S. Sir THomas H. Tacon, D.L. THe WorsHipFuUL THE Mayor or ALDE-
BURGH

THe WorsHiprFuL THE Mayor or Bury
St. EpmMunps

Tue WorsHipFuL THe Mayor oF Ipswicu

THe WorsHipFuL THE Mayor oF Soutu-
WGLD

Tue WorsHipFuL THE Mayor oF Sup-
BURY

W. C. Heaton Armstronc, Esa., M.P. Cor. N. Barnarpisron, J.P., D.L. Epwarp Braucuamp, Eso., M.P. THE Hon. Tue Lorp Francis

lil

E. F. Bissnopr, Esa. Epwarp Brooxg, Eso. Henry C. Casey, Esa. Tue Ven. ArcHDEACON CHapman, M.A. T. B. Cuevauier, Esa. A. TownsHenp Cossorp, Esa. Joun D, Coxzorp, Esa. J.P., D.L. Russett Cotman, Eso. W. A. Copincer, Ese., LL.D., F.S.A.,
F.R.S.A. T. W. Corman, Eso. G. Mitner-Gipson-Cuttum, Eso., M.A.,
F.S.A,

Tue Rev. Francis J. Erp, M.A.,, F.S.A. Tue Rev. E. Farrer, F.S.A. Harry §. Foster, Esa., J.P., D.L. H. Riper Haccarp, Esa., J.P.

G. A. Harpy, Eso., M.P. Tue Rev. D. P. Harrison, M.A. Tue Rey. J. F. A. Hervey, M.A. Tue Rev. E. Hirt, M.A. Tue Rey. J. Horpen, M.A. J. Sancrort Hormgs, Esq., J.P., D.L. Otiver D. Jounson, Esa., J.P.

Rocer Kerrison, Esq., J.P.

Cot. H. Mussenpen LeatHes

Joun Seymour Lucas, Esa., R.A.

Georce Manners, Esq., J.P., D.L. T. Tinpat Metuorp, Esa., J.P.

Cxiaupe Mortey, Ese, F.E.S. Cot. O. H. Oakes

R. H. Incus Patcraye, Esa.,
JP. Capt. E. G. Pretryman, J.P., D.L. F. H. Pretyman, Esa. Capt. W. G. Progerr

Vincent B. Repstong, Esa., F.R.Hist.S. F. S. Srevenson, Esq., B.A., J.P., D.L. Tue Rev. Juttan G. Tuck, M.A. Tue Rev. Canon Warren, B.D., F.S.A. B. Eaton Wuire, Esa., J.P.

Joun Woop, Esa. F.R.S.,

CONTENTS OF VOLUME ONE

Dedication

The Advisory Council of rhe Victoria Histosy

General Advertisement ;
The Suffolk County Committee . Contents :
List of Illustrations ai Maps
Preface . Table of Ab wecvtons
Natural History
Geology
Palaeontology
Botany
Introduction
Botanical Districts
List of Phanerogamia
Characeae (Stoneworts)
Musci (Mosses) . Hepaticae (Liverworts)
Freshwater Algae and Diatoms
Marine Algae . Lichenes (Lichens)
Fungi
Zoology
Marine . Molluscs (Non-Marine)

Insects ; ,

Orthoptera awin, Grass-
hoppers, Crickets, etc.) . Neuroptera (Dragon-/fies, Stone-
ties, Lacewings, etc.) . Hymenoptera (Ants, Bees,
Wasps, Saw-flies, Gall-flies,
ete.) Coleoptera (Beetles

Lepidoptera (Butterflies and
Moths)

Diptera (Flies)
Hemiptera (Bugs) . Spiders

By H. B. Woopwarp, F.R.S., F.G.S. By R. Lypexxer, F.R.S., F.L.S., F.GS,_ :
Edited by the Rev. E. N. Broomriztp, M.A., F.E.S. By C. E. Satmon

Ltd ”

ED ”

By the Rev. G. R. Buttocx-Wensrer, M.A. By the Rev. E. N. Bioomriztp, M.A., F.E.S. By the late H. C, Soray, LL.D., F.R.S., F.S.A. By B. B. Woopwarp, F.L.S., F.G.S., F.R.M.S., and
A. Mayfield : ;

By Craupe Mortey, F.E.S. .

By Craupz Mortey, F.E.S., and the Rev. E. N.
BuoomrizLp, M.A., F.E.S. By Craupe Mortey, F.E.S. . PAGE

47
51
60
69
Fi
73
74
Tf

79
81

85

96
101

104

107
122

128
135
141
150

CONTENTS OF VOLUME ONE

PAGE
Natural History—( continued )
Zoology — (continued )
Crustaceans. : : : By the Rev. T. R. R. Srzssinc, M.A., F.R.S., F.Z.S. 153
Fishes . : ; : . By J. T. Cunnincuam, M.A. 7 3 : + 6%
Reptiles and Batrachians . 3 By G. T. Rope . ; : . . » 173
Birds. . . : : By the Rev. Jutian Tuck, M.A. . 3 : « 177
Mammals : . . ‘ By G.T. Rope . . ‘ : ; z . 215
Early Man. fs : j : 5 3 : 5 ; ; i si « 235
Palaeolithic Age . , . ; By W. Auten Sturce, M.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P. . 235
Neolithic Age 5 5 : . : » 2s
Topographical List of Palaeolithic
and Neolithic Localities. : By W. A. Durr . : : « 256
Bronze Age : . , : By Georcg Cuincu, F.G.5., F. S.A. Gx) ‘ . 2643
Early Iron Age oe 5 is ; + 270
Topographical List of Bronze aan
and Early Iron Age Antiquities . ” ” ” . » 275
Romano-British Suffolk. : By the late Grorcr E. Fox, M.A., F.S.A. . - 279
Appendix on Santon Downham baad By Recinatp A. Smit, B.A., F.S.A. . ‘ ~ 924
Anglo-Saxon Remains : : a ss » : z « $25
Introduction to the Suffolk Domesday . By Bearrice A. Legs, Oxford Honours School of
Modern History . . 357
Translation of the Suffolk Domesday . Adapted from the Translation by ee late Lond Hisvar 418
Ancient Earthworks g , ; By J.C. Wau. ; : ; : : |
Social and Economic History . ; , : ; 3 ; : ; , : . 633
Part I. : : : : : By Professor Georce Unwin, B.A. . : 5 = O34

PartII. . ‘ ; ; j By Dororny Kemp, Oxford Honours School of
Modern History . ’ : : : . 660
Table of Population 1801-1go1 . By Georce S. Mincuin : : : : - 683

XVI

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE
* Anglo-Saxon Antiquities from Suffolk : : ‘ ‘ : : coloured plate, frontispiece
Early Man:

Plan of Mildenhall District : 5 : : : ‘ : : ; : 7 aay

Sections of the Warren Hill Ridge _ : 7 ; ; - 242

Flint Implements. Plate I : : . : : : . full-page plate, facing 248

ty $9 Flate i. : : ; : ; : 9 ” 252

: = Plate III. ‘ : i : ‘ : = “ 254

‘ +s Patelv & s 4 « «= % : » 256
Boyton: Gold Torque. Lakenheath : Bronze-Age dubs up} a » ze

Snape: Cinerary urn ; ; ; ; 3 : : z ; ; ; . 267

Fornham : Celt . . : : ‘ ; ; : ; : 2 F - 267

Lakenheath: Celt. 2 ‘ . ; : ; : : : : : . 268

Maer oe Gf ow we heel NO OM ee oe

Honington : Palstave ; . : : : ; : ; ; : : - 268

Mildenhall : Bronze finger-ring . ; : ‘ ; : ; : ‘ < a

Ornament on lid of bronze box . : : : Z ; ; : ; . i 29z

Westhall : Enamelled bronze harness-ring

Lakenheath : §-shaped brooch with typical late Celtic ornament filjesepine fae 292

5 Small socketed bronze axe ; ;
Mildenhall : Iron bill-hook of the Early Iron Ae. : :
Westhall : Bronze cylinders : : . : : : ; : : ; See
Romano-British Suffolk :
Burgh Castle: Plan showing position . . 4 . : : " : 2 | 283
5 FA Plan of Gariannonum . : : : : : : ' : . 284
Walton Castle : Plan showing position ‘ , ; ; : ; ; : . 287
Chart of entrance to Harwich Harbour in 1686 . : : : : ‘ ; . 288
Walton Castle: Ground plan and ruins : : : : . full-pave plate, facing 288
a 5 Vase from cemetery . i aa6
Whitton : Fragment of mosaic pavement 2 i
Rougham : Contents of barrow . ; , : : : ; " - 294
Barking Hall: Bronze figure. i : ‘ j i : : ; ‘ , 207
Icklingham : Pewter from the Acton Collection . : . . full-page plate, facing 298
Coddenham : Mirror case . s ‘ ‘ e nl 302
Cowlinge : Bronze jar or hontchel d god (excite) i 7: P ane
‘a “f + » (Mercury)
Herringfleet : Bronze vessel ; : z : : : : ; ' 308
Icklingham : Plan of Roman house, Horselands . : : : 7 é : . 309
Kesgrave : Medallion in terra cotta. :
Icklingham : Square pewter dish and other pieces . | full-page piate, facing 312
Martlesham : Base of bronze figure. : aug
Melton: Plan of tile kiln ; ‘ : . ; ; ‘ ; cane s aia
xVil e

* Reproduced in black and white in this edition. LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Anglo-Saxon Remains :
Snape: Cinerary urn 5
» Gold ring with Roman intaglio
rs Boat in grave-mound

” Led ” ”

Sutton near Woodbridge : Gold front of jewelled brooch

Ipswich : Bronze square-headed brooches . : i

Cinerary urns found in Suffolk. Plate III
Ixworth : Bronze brooch . Cinerary urns found in Suffolk. Plate IV . Ixworth : Bronze-gilt disk-head of pin. Two bronze mounts of sword-scabbard (2)
Akenhaia Hall, Ipswich : Pair of long brooches
West Stow Heath: Bronze brooch }
Warren Hill, Mildenhall: Bronze badge (?) of fish form
Mitchell’s Hill, Icklingham ; Gilt-bronze buckle
Ipswich : Iron axe-head : :
Mildenhall : Lead weight with bronze-gilt top

a Bronze-gilt brooch with silver mounts
AA Part of bracelet-clasp
+ Bronze brooch, once enamelled

Felixstowe : Lion brooch of bronze

Bronze brooch in form of bee :

Blythburgh : Whale’s bone tablet for writing
Ancient Earthworks :

Burgh (near Woodbridge) : Castle Field

Clare : Camp . Burgh Castle

Chevington Hall Farm

Great Ashfield : Castle Hill

Orford Castle . Bungay Castle . Clare Castle

Eye Castle

Framlingham Castle . Denham Castle

Haughley Castle = i

Ilketshall St. John: The Mount

Lidgate Castle

Lindsey Castle

Milden Castle

Otley : Site of Castle ; . Gisleham Manor House: Moat round Site . Mettinghain Castle . Wingfield Castle <

Lawshall ; The Warbanks

XVill

Square-headed and circular brooches and buckle oe

SJull-page plate, facing

full-page plate, facing

full-page plate, facing

PAGE

326
327
327
328
33°

334
336
336
337
338

338
342

343
345
345
346
346
348
349
351

587
588
589
589
591
592
593
594
596
597
598
599
600
601
602
603
603
610
621
622
624

LIST OF ~MAPS

 

ish Map

ap . is i 5 7 F .
meMarthworks Map. 6 8s tlw

   

t reproduced in this edition owing to technical difficulties. lin black and white with red over print. XIX

Jacing

”

”

”

”

PAGE

=

47
235
279
325
357
583

PREFACE

Bb ANGLIA exhibits a_ peculiar difficulty to the county

historian on account of the small size, and consequently the

large number, of its parishes and manors. This is probably

the cause of various unsuccessful attempts to write the
history of Suffolk. Some of these efforts have so far matured as
to reach the stage of the publication of one or two volumes, while
others have not got beyond the stage of preliminary manuscript
collections. The first to attempt a county history of Suffolk was
John Gage, F.R.S., F.S.A., who, in 1838, took the name of Rokewode. He published, in 1822, The History and Antiquities of Hengrave, in which
parish was the family seat of his father and afterwards of his elder
brother. In 1838 he issued the first volume of his proposed larger work,
The History and Antiquities of Suffolk, containing the history of the hundred
of Thingoe, the only part of his history which reached publication. His
work is careful and exhaustive, and it is much to be regretted that it was
not completed. His valuable collections for the continuation of the
work are now preserved at Hengrave Hall. The next to take up the
history of the county was Alfred Inigo Fox, LL.B., who, in 1820, took
the name of Suckling. He began the publication of his History and
Antiquities of Suffolk in 1846, but, like Gage, he only completed the
history of one hundred, that of Lothingland. Kirkby’s Suffolk Traveller,
published in 1848, and its later edition, with supplement by Augustine
Page, published in 1844, cannot be strictly called county histories,
although they contain much useful information. An admirable history
of the county was undertaken by the late Mr. W. A. Coppinger, M.A.,
LL.D., F.S.A., who, in 1905, published The Manors of Suffolk, with
Notes on their History and Devolution. This volume contains the history
of the hundreds of Babergh and Blackburn. In 1908 the second
volume, including the hundreds of Blything, Bosmere, and Claydon,
appeared. Dr. Coppinger’s Materials for the History of Suffo/k, containing
references to sources for a history of the county, is of great value to all
those interested in the topography of Suffolk. Besides the printed
histories of the county, there are several manuscript collections for histories,
principal among which are those of David Elisha Davy, B.A., which were
purchased by the British Museum in 1852 (Add. MSS. 19077-19207) ;
of Davy’s friend, H. Jermyn, which were presented to the British
Museum by Herbert Gurney in 1830 (Add. MSS. 8168-96) ; and of
Craven Ord, F.R.S., F.S.A., most of whose collections are also now in
the British Museum (Add. MSS. 7101-2, 8986-7). XXi1

PREFACE

During the preparation of this volume the Editor has had to deplore
the death of Mr. H. C. Sorby, LL.D., F.R.S., F.S.A., who left the
rough draft of his article on the Marine Zoology of the county, the re-
vision of the proofs of which was generously undertaken by the Rev. Canon Norman, D.C.L. The Editor also greatly regrets the loss of his
old and much esteemed friend, Mr. George E. Fox, Hon. M.A., F.S.A.,
whose profound knowledge of Roman archaeology and kindly sympathy
endeared him to a large circle of friends. Mr. Fox died before finally
revising the proofs of his article on the Roman Remains of the county,
for the correction of which the Editor is responsible. The late Canon
Raven was to have written the articles on Early Man and the Anglo-
Saxon Remains of the county, but died before commencing the work. The Editor has to express his thanks to Lord Francis Hervey for
advice and assistance ; to the Society of Antiquaries, the Suffolk Institute
of Archaeology and Natural History, the British Archaeological Associa-
tion, the Royal Archaeological Institute, the Prehistoric Society of East
Anglia, Mr. C. D. Pridden, M.A., Mr. Frank Woolnough, Mr. W.
Allen Sturge, M.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P., and Miss Nina Layard, for
illustrations and information; and to Mr. Vincent Redstone for his
ready help in many ways while passing the sheets through the press. Owing to unforeseen circumstances there has been a delay in the
publication of this volume ; hence it is possible that works issued during
the past year, touching upon the subjects with which it deals, may not
have been consulted. XXil

Abbrev. Plac. (Rec. Com.) Acts of P.C. dasa. 5. te

Add. Chart. Admir. .

Agarde . Anct. Corresp. .

Anct. D. (P.R.O.) A 2420

Ann. Mon...

Antiq. App. Arch. .

Arch. Cant. Archd. Rec. Archit. .

Assize R.

Aud. Off. Aug. Off. Ayloffe

Bed. . Beds . Berks
Bdle. VEL ce se
Bod]. Lib. .
Boro. ;
Brey. Reg. .
Brit. .
Buck. Bucks

Gal. .
Camb. Cambr. .

Campb, Chart..
Cant i
Cap. .

Carl. :
Cart. Anti. R.
E.C.C. Camb. .

Certiorari Bales. (Rolls Chap.) Chan. Enr. Decree

R

Chan. Proc. Chant. Cert. Chap. Ho. .

Charity Ing. . Chart. R. 20 Hen. III. pt. i. No. 10

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Abbreviatio Placitorum (Re-
cord Commission)

Acts of Privy Council

Additional

Additional Charters

Admiralty

Agarde’s Indices

Ancient Correspondence

Ancient Deeds(Public Record
Office) A 2420

Annales Monastici

Antiquarian or Antiquaries

Appendix

Archzologia or Archeological

Archzologia Cantiana

Archdeacons’ Records

Architectural

Assize Rolls

Audit Office

Augmentation Office

Ayloffe’s Calendars

Bedford
Bedfordshire
Berkshire

Bundle

British Museum
Bodley’s Library
Borough

Brevia Regia
Britain, British, Britannia, etc. Buckingham
Buckinghamshire

Calendar

Cambridgeshire or Cambridge

Cambria, Cambrian, Cam-
brensis, etc. Campbell Charters

Canterbury

Chapter

Carlisle

Carte Antique Rolls

Corpus Christi College, Cam-
bridge

Certiorari
Chapel)

Chancery Enrolled Decree
Rolls

Chancery Proceedings

Chantry Certificates (or Cer-
tificates of Colleges and
Chantries)

Chapter House

Charity Inquisitions

Charter Roll, 20 Henry III. part i. Number 10

Bundles (Rolls

Chartul. .
Chas. Ches. Chest. Ch. Gds. K.R.) Chich. Chron. .
Close
Ca. &
Colch. Coll. Com...
Com. Pleas’. Conf. R.
Co. Plac. Cornw. .
Corp.
Cott. ihe, a
Ct. of Wards
Cumb. .
Cur. Reg. Pe ne. Di and C.. .
De Banc. R.
Dec. and Ord . Dep. Keeper's ay)

Derb. Devon

Dioc. Doc. :
Deds. MSS. Dom. Bk. Dors..
Duchy of Lane. Dur. East. Eccl. :
Eccl. Com. Edw. Eliz. Engl « -
Engl. Hist. Bay. Enr. :
Epis. Reg. .

Esch. Enr. —
Excerptae Rot. Fin. (Rec. Com.) Exch. Dep. Exch. K.B. Exch. K.R. ExchoL. E.R. ;

XXili

(Exch,

Chartulary

Charles

Cheshire

Chester

Church Goods (Exchequer
King’s Remembrancer)

Chichester

Chronicle, Chronica, etc,

Close Roll

County

Colchester

Collections

Commission

Common Pleas

Confirmation Rolls

County Placita

Cornwall

Corporation

Cotton or Cottonian

Court Rolls

Court of Wards

Cumberland

Curia Regis

Deed or Deeds
Dean and Chapter
De Banco Rolls
Decrees and Orders
Deputy Keeper’s Reports
Derbyshire or Derby
Devonshire

Diocese

Documents
Dodsworth MSS. Domesday Book
Dorsetshire

Duchy of Lancaster
Durham

Easter Term

Ecclesiastical

Ecclesiastical Commission

Edward

Elizabeth

England or English

English Historical Review

Enrolled or Enrolment

Episcopal Registers

Escheators Enrolled Accounts

Excerpta e Rotulis Finium
(Record Commission)

Exchequer Depositions

Exchequer King’s Bench

Exchequer King’s Remem-
brancer

Exchequer Lord Treasurer’s
Remembrancer

Exch. of Pleas, Plea
R.

Exch. of Receipt . Exch. Spec. Com. .

Veetor Fou ss
eod. Accts. (Ct. of
Wards)

Feod. Surv. (Ct. of
Wards)

Feud. Aids . fol. :

Foreign R. .

Forest Proc. Gaz Fs fo
Gen.

Geo. Glouc, . . =
Guild Certif.(Chan.) Ric. II. Hants
Harl. Hen. Heref. Hertf. Herts
Hil. .
Hist. Hist. MSS. Com. .
Hosp. Hund. R.

Hunt. Hunts

Ing. a.g.d. .
Ing. p.m.
Inst. . Invent. .
Ips. .

Ttin. <

Jas. Journ. Lamb. Lib. lane, fale a &

L. and P. Hen. VII. Lansd. Sgt

Ld. Rev. Rec. .

ee: | 2) a

Le Neve’s Ind. Lib. .

Lich. Linc. Lond. Mme
Mem. TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Exchequer of Pleas, Plea Roll

Exchequer of Receipt
Exchequer Special Commis-
sions

Feet of Fines

Feodaries Accounts (Court of
Wards)

Feodaries Surveys (Court of
Wards)

Feudal Aids

Folio

Foreign Rolls

Forest Proceedings

Gazette or Gazetteer

Genealogical, Genealogica,
etc. George

Gloucestershire or Gloucester

Guild Certificates (Chancery)
Richard II. Hampshire

Harley or Harleian

Henry

Herefordshire or Hereford

Hertford

Hertfordshire

Hilary Term

History, Historical, Historian,
Historia, etc. Historical MSS. Commission

Hospital

Hundred Rolls

Huntingdon

Huntingdonshire

Inquisitionsad quod damnum
Inguisitions post mortem
Institute or Institution
Inventory or Inventories
Ipswich

Itinerary

James
Journal

Lambeth Library

Lancashire or Lancaster

Letters and Papers, Hen. VII. Lansdowne

Land Revenue Records

Leicestershire or Leicester

Le Neve’s Indices

Library

Lichfield

Lincolnshire or Lincoln

London

Membrane
Memorials

Memo. R. .

Mich.

Midd. ..

Mins. Accts. . .

Misc. Bks. (Exch. KR, Exch. T.R. or Aug. Off.) Vion. = os oe
Noam: 0 tt es
Wins: i oak sare

Wis: es

N. and Q. .

Norf. .
Northampt. Northants
Northumb. .
Norw. .

Nott. . .

INS

OPE Ds cen ane
liar. ie
SL) | ee eee
Oxf. Palmer’s Ind. Pal. of Chest. Pal. of Dur. Pal. of Lanc. Par. .

Park. Parl. Bez 3
Parl. ‘Surv. .
Partic. for Gts. Pat. <
EOS:

Pet. s

Peterb. .

Pi:

Pipe R. .

Plea R. .
Pop.Ret . ss
Pope Nich. Tax. (Rec. Com.) ERO. Proc. Proc. Soc. Antiq. Seo
Pub. .

Bo x

Rec. :

Recov. R. i:
Rentals and Surv. .
Rep. .

Rev. .

Ric. .

XXIV

Memoranda Rolls

Michaelmas Term

Middlesex

Ministers’ Accounts

Miscellaneous Books (Ex-
chequer King’s Remem-
brancer, Exchequer Trea-
sury of Receipt or Aug-
mentation Office)

Monastery, Monasticon

Monmouth

Muniments or Munimenta

Museum

Notes and Queries

Norfolk

Northampton

Northamptonshire

Northumberland

Norwich

Nottinghamshire or Notting-
ham

New Style

Office

Originalia Rolls
Ordnance Survey
Oxfordshire or Oxford

Page

Palmer’s Indices

Palatinate of Chester

Palatinate of Durham

Palatinate of Lancaster

Parish, parochial, ete. Parliament or Parliamentary

Parliament Rolls

Parliamentary Surveys

Particulars for Grants

Patent Roll or Letters Patent

Prerogative Court of Canter-
bury

Petition

Peterborough

Philip

Pipe Roll

Plea Rolls

Population Returns

Pope Nicholas’ Taxation (Re-
cord Commission)

Public Record Office

Proceedings

Proceedings of the Society of
Antiquaries

Part

Publications

Roll

Records

Recovery Rolls
Rentals and Surveys
Report

Review

Richard

Roh . ..
Rot. Cur. Reg. RG, ce ss

Sarum

Ser: «°

Sess. R. .

Shrews. .

Shrops

MOGI ys i. :

Soc. Antiq. .

Somers. .

Somers. Ho. S.P. Dom. .

Bitte os we

Star Chamb. Proc. Stat. . mes

Steph. Subs. R.

Suff. .

Surr. Sie 6

Surv. of Ch. Liv-
ings (Lamb.) or
(Chan.) TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Rochester diocese
Rotuli Curie Regis
Rutland

Salisbury diocese

Series

Sessions Rolls

Shrewsbury

Shropshire

Society

Society of Antiquaries

Somerset

Somerset House

State Papers Domestic

Staffordshire

Star Chamber Proceedings

Statute

Stephen

Subsidy Rolls

Suffolk

Surrey

Sussex

Surveys of Church Livings
(Lambeth) or (Chancery)

XKV

Topog. .

Trans. Transl. .
Treas. Trin. Univ. Valor Eccl. (Rec. Com.) Vet. Mon. .
Vico. Vie:
vol. .

Warw. Westm. .
Westmld. Will. Wilts
Winton. Worc. Yorks

Topography or Topographi-
cal

Transactions
Translation

Treasury or Treasurer
Trinity Term

University

Valor Ecclesiasticus (Record
Commission)

Vetusta Monumenta

Victoria County History

Victoria

Volume

Warwickshire or Warwick
Westminster

Westmorland

William

Wiltshire

Winchester diocese
Worcestershire or Worcester

Yorkshire

A HISTORY OF SUFFOLK

Orthocephalus saltator, and, at Lowestoft, O. mutadilis have been noticed here. Six kinds of Dicyphus
(of which D. pallidicornis is confined to Digitalis purpurea at Freston), Campyloneura virgula, and
the two species of Cy/locoris are all common on their respective food-plants. Aetorhinus angulatus is
often attracted to light at night; and I have captured Glebiceps flavomaculatus, G. dispar, and Me-
comma ambulans. Butler has taken a macropterous specimen of Cyrtorrhinus flaveolus at Fritton,5
I have found C. caricis at Wherstead, and C. pygmaeus has occurred to Thouless at Fritton. Eleven
species of the genus Orthoty/lus have been found in Suffolk, of which O. prasinus, taken by Saunders
at Southwold in 1877, O. tenellus at Freston, and O. rubidus on Artemisia maritima are the only un-
common ones. Hypsitylus bicolor, Heteracordylus tibialis, Onychumenus decolor, and Oncotylus viridiflavus
are uncommon, and Heterotoma merioptera abundant on nettles. Loxops coccineus has only been seen
at Kentford, with Malacoris chlorizans in the Bentley and Dodnash Woods. The two common
Macrocolei and both the Macrotyli are met with ; Conostethus roseus is abundant upon Foxhall Plateau
and Harpocera thoracica on oaks everywhere, Amblytylus affinis, Byrsoptera rufifrons, the three Phyli
and Atractotomus magnicornis occur sparingly, though 4. mali has only been found at Bungay upon one
occasion in 1903. Eleven species of Psa//us, among which P. a/nicola at Freston and P. Roter-
mundi at Brandon are very local, and six of Plagiognathus, of which P. albipennis is found on Artemisia
maritima all along the coast, have been noticed. Butler took Asciodema obsoletum at Lowestoft in
1891; I have recently also turned it up about Ipswich. Many of the interesting aquatic Cryptocerata await discovery, and few unusual kinds have been
noticed. Naucoris cimicoides is said by Paget to have been very common in ditches about Yarmouth
in 1825 ; it occurs at Oulton Broad, Ipswich, in brackish water at Bawdsey, and swarms in the
Tostock ponds. Nepa cinerea, the water-scorpion, is generally common; but the handsome
Ranatra linearis stood on the authority of a single specimen taken many years ago at Battisford
by Baker, till Tuck took several in one pond in the middle of a field at Drinkstone in October
1901.° Notonecta glauca is abundant, and its variety furcata is referred to by Paget ; Plea minutissima
occurs in all the ponds about Ipswich. Of the extensive genus Corixa, comprising the lesser
waterboatmen, we have only fifteen kinds as far as is at present ascertained ; all these are fairly
widely distributed, though C. fallenii is represented by only two individuals taken respectively in
1893 and 1904, C. coleoptrata and C. venusta are restricted to Bixley Decoy and Oulton Broad,
and C, Jimitata is very rare and local. C. /ugubris often occurs, mixed with C. praeusta, in the
utmost abundance among shrimps, in the brackish ditches at Bawdsey, the net becoming weighed
down with a dark mass of them. From this short résumé of the Heteroptera it will be seen that some two hundred and eighty-
four species have been noticed in Suffolk. Considering that I captured over a hundred in 1897
alone, and that less than that number have been added during the following eight years, it is
sufficiently obvious that collecting of late has fallen into neglect, and that assiduous working might
show up many new kinds,

HOMOPTERA
CICADIDAE

In this group we have had even less observations to draw from than was the case in the
Heteroptera. Mr. Butler noted a few about Lowestoft in 1891, Mr. Edwards mentions one or
two kinds from Southwold and Brandon, and Curtis records, I think, two from the county. It
cannot, therefore, be wondered at that I have been able to include little more than exactly half the
British kinds; but, with our extensive marsh country, to which many of those insects are restricted,
quite another fifty or sixty kinds should turn up if systematically sought in favourable situations
and upon their particular food plants, for these, like the last group, are entirely phytophagous in their
economy. The curious Centrotus cornutus is a common species on bushes in the woods about Ipswich,
Bury St. Edmunds, and Lowestoft in June; but Gargara genistae is very local at Tostock and
Ipswich, though Mr. Norgate has taken it commonly on broom at Barnham and Downham in the
north-west. ssus coleoptratus has only occurred singly at Ipswich in 1894 and 1904, and in a wasps’
nest in a holly bush near Bury ; Cixius pilosus and C. mervosus are common, though C, cunicularis is
decidedly local at Tostock and. Assington Thicks in July. The thick-horned Astraca clavicornis
was first found by Curtis at Henstead near Wangford, and more recently by myself among coniferae
in Bentley Woods, it is not uncommon about Brandon ; I have also found De/phax pulchella to be
somewhat common on reeds in Benacre and Herringfleet Broads in the middle of August. The
extensive genus Liburnia requires much more full investigation than it has hitherto received ; of the

5 Ent. Mo. Mag. 1891, p. 277- *Cf. Trans. Norf: Nat. Soc. 1902, p. 333+
144

INSECTS

fifty British species only eighteen have been observed, amongst which L. notu/a occurs on reeds in
Oulton Broad, L. /ineola in Dodnash Woods, and on the banks of the Orwell, L. dongipennis in tufts
of Carex paniculata at Foxhall in the winter ; L. wittipennis is abundant in Tuddenham Fen, where
Elliott has taken L. fuscovittata in some numbers; and L. punctulum with L. pellucida and L. scotti
about Lowestoft, where it was found by Butler, as well as at Claydon Bridge and Foxhall. Mr. Edwards tells us’ that L., or Chloriona, glaucescens, Fieb.—formerly thought to be C. unicolor,
H. §.—has been found by him commonly on reeds in the coast marshes at Southwold in August. L. leptosoma and L. limbata are common, and L. elegantula local at Foxhall, Kentford, and ‘Tudden-
ham ; but L, speciosa, which does not appear to have been taken in Britain for many years, has been
but sparingly met with by Mr. Elliott and myself in marshes at Ipswich, Barton Mills, Brandon
and Tuddenham Fen. ‘The remaining species are Liburnia difficilis, discolor, exigua, Fairmairei, and
lineata, whose distribution is not yet fully known. Of the rest of the Delphacidae, I have seen Dicranotropus hamata from Foxhall to Tuddenham,
and Stiroma pteridis common on bracken, P. albomarginata at Bentley and Tuddenham, P. affinis
once swept at Freston in 1904. The extremely handsome Triecphora vulnerata is by no means
uncommon upon young poplars and flying in the sunshine in the Bentley Woods, Assington Thicks,
and Holbrook Park in June; both species of Aphrophora live about Ipswich and Bury ; and all the
British Philaeni, or ‘ Cuckoo-spits,’ are common, though P. /ineatus appears somewhat local, and
several forms of P. spumarius have not been met with. Ledra aurita is uncommon on oaks in the
Bentley Woods, at Tostock and Battisford ; Ulopa reticulata often swarms beneath heather; and
Megophthalmus scanicus is very common. Among the pretty family Bythoscopidae, we have a much
better percentage of representatives. 4acropsis Janio is often beaten from oak trees; Bythoscopus
alni rarely met with on the banks of the Gipping and in Bentley Woods, where as elsewhere
B. flavicollis abounds ; the rare B. rufusculus has occurred singly in Tuddenham Fen and the Bentley
Woods in 1904. Pediopsis scutellatus, P. tibialis, P. impurus, and P. ulmi all occur with fair fre-
quency, and last year I discovered P. cereus in Tuddenham Fen and P. fuscinervis at Foxhall, both
in August; C. virescens, too, has lately turned up at Tostock, Kentford, and Barham,  Idiocerus
adustus, I. populi and I. confusus are not infrequent upon poplars and willows; an example from
Farnham appears referable to J. fulgidus ; and I have also recently found here J. /ituratus in Tud-
denham Fen and J. distinguendus in Assington Thicks, which latter Mr. Tuck took at Aldeburgh ; ®
I. albicans is local at Freston, Tuddenham, and Brandon, and a single J. tremulae has occurred in
Bentley Woods. Agallia puncticeps and A. venosa both occur, the latter being widely distributed at
Claydon, Southwold, and Brandon. vacanthus interruptus, upon ragwort, and E, acuminatus are
both found in the Bramford chalk pits; and Tettigonia viridis is often a pest in marshes throughout
the county. We possess all the British 4cocephali, the only uncommon one being 4. flavostriatus,
which Butler has turned up in Fritton Decoy and I have seen at Kessingland, Eupelix cuspidata
has only been noticed on the Breck sands and Foxhall Plateau; but Doratura stylata and Paramesus
nervosus, of the former of which I captured a specimen of the macropterous form at Ipswich in
1896, are common. I also beat a single Glyptocephalus proceps at Barren Heath near Ipswich in
July 1904. The Jassidae leave much to be desired ; the only common Athysani being A. brevipennis,
communis, sordidus, obsoletus, and obscurellus; Butler has found 4. grisescens at Lowestoft. “Twelve
kinds of Deltocephalus are enumerated, of which five—D. pascuellus, coronifer, distinguendus, sabulicola,
and punctum—were first taken by Butler about Lowestoft ; Edwards records D. Normani from
Fritton, and I have seen D. argus in the Westleton lamb-pits and at Foxhall, where D, citrine/lus,
ocellaris, and striatus also occur. D. Flori and D. pulicaris appear to be rare at Freston.? //ygus
mixtus, Limotettix antennata, and L. quadrinotata are common, as also probably is L. su/phurella,
though I had not met with it till last August, when the rare L. aurantipes occurred to me at
Foxhall and Bramford marshes. Of our six species of TAamnotettix, Tuck met with T. splendidula
at Tostock in October 1899 ; and I beat a couple of J. Torneella from birch in the Bentley Woods
in May and June 1902, from bushes through which I have beaten with no sign of this insect for
ten consecutive years ; it is rare in Britain, but has a wide range from Rannoch to the New Forest. T. attenuata first turned up, and then commonly, at Foxhall late in September 1904. Edwards
has found the rare Cicadula fasctifrons at Southwold; and I have once or twice met with C. sep-
temnotata, which is much rarer here than C. sexnotata ; Gnathodes punctatus is local at Bentley Woods
and Foxhall. Alebra albostriella has been observed, and, in Tuddenham Fen, in June r1gor, I
took three examples of an allied insect, which was common there on birch, though apparently
hitherto unrecognized in Britain. Dicraneura variata is abundant and D. flavipennis common. ‘The

7 Ent. Mo. Mag. 1898, p. 60. ® Cf. Trans. Norf. Nat. Soc. 1902, p. 332-

* Since the above was written I have been so fortunate as to capture somewhat commonly De/tocephalus
formosus, a species not hitherto noticed jn Britain, in a marshy wood at Brandon, on the banks of the Little
Ouse, which forms the north-west boundary of the county (Cf. Ent. Mo. Mag. 1908, p. 59).—C. M.

i 145 19

A HISTORY OF SUFFOLK

pretty green Kybos smaragdulus lives not uncommonly in all our marshes ; Chlorita flavescens occurs at
Southwold, where it is attracted to lamplight in July ; and C. viridula is always abundant in the
spring at Bentley and in Ipswich gardens. Of the slender and fragile genus Eupteryx, we have twelve
kinds, all common and widely distributed except E. melissae from Foxhall, £. abrotani in salt marshes
at Southwold, and E. signatipennis, which occurs abundantly, but solely, on Spiraea ulmaria in the
Freston Woods. Only ten species of Typhlocyba have at present been noted, amongst which
T. sexpunctata, ulmi, Douglasi, rosae, and quercus are common; T, tenerrima occurs at Ipswich and
Carlton Colville, gratiosa at Southwold, geometrica sparingly on alder and nitidula once only on
beech at Foxhall. Zygina fammigera has been found at Wherstead, Z. parvula at Bramford and
Foxhall, where also Z. scutellaris has occurred, and I have once swept the rare Z. Ayperici from a
mass of Hypericum hirsutum in the Bentley Woods in the middle of September. PsYLLIDAE

The difficulty of determining the Psyllina has greatly contributed to their being passed over
in the field, consequently there are comparatively few records, Livia juncorum is certainly rare at
Bramford and Foxhall in the autumn, though it is said to be universally abundant at the roots of
rushes; on 19 August 1904 I swept the two first British specimens of L. /imbata, in Tuddenham
Fen. Psyllopsis fraxinicola is abundant on ash trees everywhere, but P. fraxini has only been seen
at Assington and Barham. Aphalara calthae is not rare, but A. exilis has only occurred at Foxhall
once. Of the clear-winged genus Psy//a, we have twelve species, few of which claim especial
attention excepting to point out that many may be beaten from coniferae in the winter: thus
P. pruni has been found in the Bentley Woods, with P. pineti, in March ; P. melanoneura has been
taken by Chitty at Foxhall in the same month, and P. duxi lives in my garden here at Monk Soham
till quite late in the autumn on box-trees, P, visci Curtis described from specimens found at
Rougham, near Bury St. Edmunds, but it has not since been reported from the county. Trioza
urticae, galit, and remota are probably, like Arytaena genistae, all abundant; but T. crithmi has only
once occurred to me, in some numbers in August in the coast salt marshes at Southwold. APHIDIDAE

For the purpose of adding some account of the green flies of the county to this History, I
began to collect them last May, and succeeded so well in their identification, with the aid of
Buckton’s Monograph of the British Aphides, published by the Ray Society, 1876-83, that I am able
to present a very representative account of them. By slavishly following this work I have been
enabled to name nearly every specimen taken upon its own food-plant, and can only regret that so
little interest is shown in this most interesting family in Britain, where I know of no one who
pretends to any knowledge of the subject since the author’s death. Except where stated the
following species were taken in the garden of Monk Soham House during 1907. The first species of the Aphidinae, and one of the most prevalent, was Siphonophora rosae, which
was seen upon the young shoots of both wild and cultivated roses throughout the summer, as well
as upon the leaves of adjacent Aguilegia vulgaris at the end of July. I did not look for S. granaria
till the middle of August, but harvest had hardly begun, and I at once found both the imaginal
forms commonly on some adventitious ears of wheat in my garden and a few females on barley in
neighbouring fields. §. bieracii were very rare beneath flower-heads of Hieracium early in August,
associating with a few females of Aphis rumicis, As early as 1 June larvae of 8. millefolit appeared
on the flower-stalks of Chrysanthemum segetum, and in early August both winged and apterous
imagines were fairly common on the stems of both that plant and Achillea millifolium, becoming
abundant by the middle of the month; it also occurs at Brandon. At the end of July I found
5, pisi not very commonly on my garden peas and its larvae on Bursa bursa-pastoris; in 1903 I
took it near Ipswich in October. $. rwbi was not observed till the first week in August, when both
imaginal forms were seen on the leaves of Rubus fruticosus with Aphis urticariae. 8. urticae has
been scarce ; I took only one apterous female, still attached to her pupal skin, on nettle early in
August. The distinct 4. avellanae also appears rare, since of this I have also found but one apte-
rous female on Cory/us avellanae in early June. Larvae, pupae, and apterous forms of S. tanaceti
abounded in a dandelion in the middle of August. On Tusilago farfara numerous dead S. tusstlaginis
were found early in the same month; and a diligent search revealed but two winged forms. §. sonchi, in its apterous forms, is one of our commonest species on Centurea nigra at Monk Soham,
Southwold, and Brandon. Larvae, pupae, and apterous imagines of S. cichorit occurred upon a plant
of chicory near Easton Park on 17 August; and I saw it also at Dunwich in the middle of
September. Five S$. o/tvata were taken on Cnicus palustris in the Bentley Woods in August
1904. 146

INSECTS

The small Phorodon bumuli was abundant on the underside of hop leaves near Easton Park in
August ; and a protracted examination of Lamium album in my garden revealed a solitary winged
P. galeopsidis, on the under side of the leaf, in the same month. On 7 June a score of Myzus cerasi
in all their stages, though only two winged, were found on cherry; and in early August I took
M., ribis rarely on Ribes rubrum. Quite suddenly on 4 August, Drepanosiphum acerina appeared
commonly beneath maple leaves and those of adjacent hazel and dogwood. Apterous females, larvae,
and pupae of the distinct and presumably rare A/egoura viciae were found very commonly feeding
upon the pods and stems of Lathyrus pratensis in a damp meadow near Easton Park on 17 August. Early in June Rhopalosiphum ribis was found in hundreds in all its stages in rolled leaves of Ribes
nigrum ; and it is certainly the same species that Kirby referred to nearly a century ago when he
wrote :”” ‘Last week I observed the top of every young shoot of the currant trees in my garden (at
Barham) curled up by myriads of these insects.” R. nymphae was abundant on the stalks of A/isma
plantago in July and Nymphaea alba in August, in the moat which surrounds my house, but among
thousands of the apterous form I could detect but one winged specimen. A very few winged females
and pupae only of R. /igustri were taken early in August on privet leaves. Exclusively winged forms
of Siphocoryne pastinaceae were found on wild carrot both here and in the adjacent parish of Bedfield
in August. . xy/ostei is a great pest on honeysuckle over the house-windows. S. cafreae occurs
commonly on the leaves of willow and, like S. xy/ostei, extends throughout thesummer. S. foeniculi
has only been seen on fennel at Dunwich in the middle of September. The genus Aphis is an extensive one, and many of its species are common. 4, brassicae was
forming large powdery masses on the flowers of cabbages on g June, and was still abundant up to
the end of August; butI have seen no winged forms. About the same time I found a little
cluster of four apterous 4. crataegi on a leaf of whitethorn in Framlingham Castle moat ; and
A. subterranea was very common on a carrot, just below the ground, at the end of August. On
whitethorn at Bedfield early in the same month 4. edentula was not uncommon in all its forms on
terminal shoots. Mallow failed to produce 4, ma/vae, but it occurred abundantly beneath the
flower-heads of yarrow in early August. On 1 June winged 4. mali were somewhat common, with
a few scattered pupal skins on the leaves of the apple trees; and on the 3rd the apterous females
and larvae were found to be abundant in their curled leaves; the whole pest had, however, quite
vanished by the end of July. 4. urticaria was very common on the stems of nettle early in June ;
and in curled leaves of Prunus spinosa, A. pruni was prevalent at the same time, with a proportion
of one winged to every score of apterous forms. 4. atrip/icis occurred on the sea lavender and
Aster tripelium in the salt marshes about Southwold early in September. 4. Aieracii was first seen
very rarely on leaves of Heracleum sphondylium on g June, by the middle of July it was common,
and at the beginning of August extremely abundant on the stems of hogweed ; it also appeared at
Southwold. A single plant of the hairy willow herb, among many, produced a dozen larvae and
one of both forms of the female of 4. epi/obii in the middle of August. 4. bederae is only too common
on the ivy around the house. 4. rumicis is one of the commonest kinds here, and bewilderingly
omnivorous; I first took the winged form singly on the young leaves of Rumex acetosa ; it
abounded on broad beans throughout the summer, also attacking Cricus arvensis, Petasitis officinalis,
beet, and Hieraceum. ‘Thirteen of the very distinct larvae of 4. papaveris were clustered together
on a leaf of scarlet poppy on 30 July; and all the forms of 4. pyri were abundant in curled leaves
of pear early in June. Hyalopterus arundinis was so numerous on reeds in the salt-marshes about
Southwold in September as to appreciably weigh down the sweep-net ; and Bucton records H.. melano-
cephalus from Brandon,

At the end of May, Chaitophorus aceris was very numerous beneath the leaves of maple, ming-
ling later with Drepanosiphum. Early in August I succeeded in securing three examples of the
winged form of C. sa/icivorus, among myriads of the apterous one, which were scattered all over the
leaves of sallow ; later I also saw the species at Southwold. In the middle of August C. /eucomelas
was not uncommon in its curious blisters on aspen leaves at Monk Soham, Debenham, and Easton
Park. Buckton also records Cryptosiphum artemisiae from Brandon. Callipterus betuleticola is exces-
sively abundant on birch in Tuddenham Fen and at Mildenhall; C. cory occurred commonly,
though singly and sparsely, here on hazel leaves in August. It was common in Easton Park in the
middle of the month, together with C. guercus, which I first found on oak leaves in my garden on
4 June. On 27 August 1906 C. casteneae was swept from rough heath grass in Tuddenham
Fen ; and this year I also found it at Brandon. Prterocallis juglandicola turned up ona walnut tree
at Sibton Abbey in the middle of September ; and, on the leaves of alder near Easton Park, winged
P. aini were not rare, though only one apterous imago and but a few larvae were present in the
middle of August. I have twice captured P, tiliae flying in July at Ipswich and Kessingland ;
here the winged form is solitarily abundant on the under side of lime leaves. Phyllaphis fagi was

© Introd. to Entom. (7th ed. ), 152. 147

A HISTORY OF SUFFOLK

abundant in all stages on the leaves of both old and young beeches at the beginning of June, but
soon disappeared. Of Lachnus, the presumably rare ZL. agi/is was commonly beaten from pines in the middle of
August, though but three winged forms were seen. Many winged L. macrocephalus were beaten
from spruce at Foxhall on 4 July 1904 ; and Kirby and Spence say"! that L. pini used to be common
in the garden of Mr. Sheppard, who was curate of Nacton, 1804-7. I have captured winged
L. pinicolus in the Bentley Woods in July and at Easton Broad in June; and in the middle of
August beaten the apterous form abundantly in my garden here, where were no winged individuals,
Three hibernating winged females of the large ZL. viminalis were found beneath willow bark by the
Gipping at Ipswich during the winter of 1894-5. Kirby says“ that he has taken Aphis radicum
(= Trama troglodytes) in the nest of Lasius flavus—most probably in this county. Of the
Schizoneurinae, Schizoneura /anigera is only too common here and at Brandon on apple bark; I
have, however, seen none winged ; they were still on the trees 22 October 1907. Apterous
S, fuliginosa are equally abundant in downy masses, one behind the other, on the pinnules of Scots
fir in August ; the earliest winged ones appeared last year on 22 October. Perhaps the ubiquitous
5. corni, more appropriately called wvagans, was the species said by Kirby to have occurred in
incredible numbers in Ipswich in 1814 ; it is, at all events, often abundant there, at Wherstead, and
Barren Heath, as well as at Monk Soham, Reydon, Tuddenham, Eriswell, and Brandon, first
appearing on 22 August in 1907. Of the remaining small families I can at present only mention
Chermes laricis, of which I found eggs, larvae, and winged females abundantly on larches at Foxhall
at the end of May, and a big oviparous female here in June; and Forda formicaria, which
Mr. Chitty took near Brandon in the nest of Tetramorium caespitum early in May. ABERRANT HEMIPTERA

Under this heading I shall notice the extremely few species of all those various families which
have at different times been thought to possibly belong to this Order, because little or nothing has
been ascertained respecting them in Suffolk, and they appear to have appealed very little to the
collecting instincts of our entomologists. I have, for instance, very often seen Coccidae, or Scale
Insects, on bushes and have passed them by on the other side ; once I did send what I thought to be
a Coccid to Mr. Newstead, but he returned it as the pupa of a Psyllid! Mr. Tomlin has found
fluffy Coccids on bushes in the Bentley Woods, and I have no doubt Mytilaspis, Aspidiotus, and the
rest of the pests are only too common with us, but I wot not of them. The only three species of
the family I can refer to are the currant scale, Pu/vinaria ribesiae, Sign., which I saw on my
currant bushes this year, Aspidiotes crataegi on hawthorn, and a white coccid, which simply covered
the bark of a tall beech in my garden last August, but its name I do not know. Only two kinds
of Aleurodidae have been mentioned by Mr. Douglas,’ both taken that year by Mr. Bonnewell ;
Aleurodes proletella, Linn., on celandine at Coddenham on 7 November, and 4. brassicae, Walk., on
savoys in an Ipswich garden on the 14th of the same month ; the latter species occurred in my
garden at Monk Soham on 3 June and again in October 1906, Of the Mallophaga, too, those
apterous parasites of birds which have no suction-tube with its circle of hooks at the base, but
a biting mouth, only three kinds can be instanced, though a very great many certainly occur, since
each bird is supposed to possess a peculiar one. ‘The first appears to be Laemobothrum Jaticolle,
Denny, who says it is found on the genus Fa/co ; this was certainly taken, with many more of the
same species, upon a hawk which a fowler had caught in his net near Ipswich in November 1900;
and in October 1903 Mr. W. A. Dutt sent me apparently the same kind, found on a hobby
hawk (F. subbuteo) at Lowestoft. Two domestic fowl lice, Goniacotes holagaster and Afenopon
pallidium, have been found in my hen-house at Monk Soham. ‘The Pediculidae raise more aver-
sion than interest, and the only three kinds at present under notice are Pediculus capitis, Nitz ;
that so often found on pigs, Haematopinus suis, Leach, and the dog louse, H. piliferus, Burm. Nor can we claim any authentic Thripsidae, though abundant everywhere and in July often
sweeping over the neighbourhood in myriads, entering picture-frames in such numbers as to neces-
sitate remounting, and tickling everyone’s flesh ; the commonest kind here is probably Limothrips
cerealium, Hal., so destructive to corn. A second species, Cofeothrips fasciata, Linn., has been some-
what doubtfully recorded from Monk Soham by Prof. Poulton.’

In 1905 I published The Hemiptera of Suffolk, which brings the total of Heteroptera noted
here up to 281 species, and the Homoptera, of the families Cicadidae and Psyllidae, to 162 species,

" Introd. to Entom. (7th ed. ), 185. ” Ibid. 336. 3 Ent. Mo. Mag. 1895, p. 68. ™ Cf. my notes in E. Anglian Daily Times, 7 Aug. 1906. 8 Trans. Ent. Soc. 1906, p. 409. 148

INSECTS

which numbers may be taken to very fairly represent the fauna of the county, though especial
attention to these groups would doubtless reveal many more; and indeed I am already able to

add :-—

Asopus punctatus. Beaten from rose, Tuddenham Fen,
Aug. 1905, by E. A. Elliott, F.Z.S,
Sehirus morio. Found in sand at Brandon, May and
June, by A. J. Chitty, M.A., and myself
Gerris argentata. Oulton and Barnby Broads, early
Apr. 1903, by E. C. Bedwell, F.E.S

Phytocoris Reuteri. I beat one from white poplar at
Brandon, in Aug. 1906

Systellonotus triguttatus. At Brandon, in Aug. 1906,
by E. A. Elliott and myself

Corixa venusta. Four specimens in a “swamp at
Bixley Decoy, Foxha/l, in Mar. 1897

Liburnia forcipata. I swept this in an alder carr at
Reydon early in June 1905

Idiocerus varius. Beaten from trees at Brandon, in
the middle of Aug. 1906

Allygus modestus. One swept from marsh plants in
Tuddenbam Fen, in autumn of 1906

Deltocephalus socialis. Captured at Brandon and
Tuddenbam Fen, in Aug. 1905

Deltocephalus formosus. A new British species, which
I swept at Brandon, Aug. 1906

Limotettix stactogala. Found commonly on tamarisk
at Southwold, Sept. 1907

Cicadula metria. Swept from reeds near Brandon
Stanch in the early autumn of 1906

Dicraneura similis. "Two specimens were swept in
Tuddenham Fen, in Aug. 1905

Aphalara nervosa. One only, taken on ragwort in my
garden, Monk Soham House, 1907

A Summary oF THE INsEcts oF SuFFoLK, OCTOBER 1907

 

 

CoLEorTEeRa :— Suffolk Britain
Adephaga se sis 277 444
Palpicomia. < : » = « 74 95
Brichelytra. . . . « 441 777
iscomia. 6 <3 =. . 86343 681
Lamellicomia. . . 2 58 go
Mmorncalie een fr, 35 76
Malacoderma . . . « « 56 gl
Pereditial vera ss | ails 34 57
ongicormiz + . s = « 32 57
Phytophaez 2 4s 1s) ws «6 E87 256
Heteromera . . - « « 73 118
Rhynchophora 320 526

ToraL 1,930 3,268

Hemiprera :—

Heteroptera ee ae 431

Hiamoptera, «4 « 1 + «@ 171 321

PUBAGIOAC 6 5 ce 8) 66 182
Other Groups. . . . . 1s << 29g"

ToraL 537 1253

(ORTHOPTERA. 5 6 5 3 4 4 22 53

Granp Torat

Suffolk, 6,355. Nevuroprera :—

 

Suffolk Britain
DP hysangha wes we eo be 10 60
Pseudo-neuroptera . 40 IIL
Odonata: 5 5 2 6 wi fa 20 42
Subnecromorphotica. . . 32 56
‘Trichoptera (7) 2, 62 174
Sa ee
Toran 164 443
Lepiporrera ss ss 1,290 Cc, 2,100
Hymenoprera :—
Chreyididae 2 4. 32) 7. 1z 21
Aculeata ; 295 380
Eyaniida® = « « « “ 3 8
Ichneumonidae 455 1,688
Braconidae . cs 137 596
Proctotrypidae . . . «= 74 373
Chalcididaeé 4 4 i 5) & 36 1,408"
Cynipidae 5 0. ee 38 180"
Tenthredinidae I9t c¢.350"
Torat 1,241 5,004
ee ie
DirverA . + 0 1,171 2,577"
Britain 14,678

© This is Dale’s computation, and is probably much too low; he says, Thripsidae, 46 ; Coccidae, 18
(cf. Newstead) ; Aleyrodidae, 10 ; Pediculidae, 14 ; and Philopteridae, 211. ™ Walker, Haliday, and Westwood are stated to have described 1,274 by Kirchner (Cat. Hym, Europ.) ;
I have found the above total to be correct by the closest scrutiny. ™ Marshall says (Ent. Ann. 1874) that he has trebled Curtis’s number—s6 ; there is no British list, and
the above total is that of the species described by Cameron, 1893. ® We cannot tell the total till Rev. F. D. Morice has completed his present work on this family (Enz. Mo. Mag. 1903 et seq.). * Excluding all the doubtfully British species in Mr, Verrall’s List.—C. M

149

The following text is generated from uncorrected OCR or manual transcriptions. [Begin Page: Text]

XTbe IDictoria Ibistov’ of the

Counties of IEnolanb

EDITED BY WILLIAM PAGE, F.S.A. A HISTORY OF

SUFFOLK

IN SIX VOLUMES

VOLUME |

[Begin Page: Text]

THE

VICTORIA HISTORY

OF THE COUNTIES

OF ENGLAND

SUFFOLK

DAWSON

FOR

THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON

INSTITUTE OF HISTORICAL RESEARCH

[Begin Page: Text]

Published by

Archibald Constable & Company Limited

in 1911

Reprinted for the University of London

Institute of Historical Research

by

William Dawson & Sons Ltd

Cannon House

Folkestone. Kent, England

1975

ISBN: 7129 0647 9

Originally printed in Great Britain by
Eyre & Spottiswoode, H.M. Printers, London

Reprinted in Belgium by Jos Adam, Brussels

[Begin Page: Text]

INSCRIBED

TO THE MEMORY OF

HER LATE MAJESTY

QUEEN VICTORIA

WHO GRACIOUSLY GAVE

THE TITLE TO AND

ACCEPTED THE

DEDICATION OF

THIS HISTORY

[Begin Page: Text]

THE ADVISORY COUNCIL

OF THE VICTORIA HISTORY

His Grace The Lord Arch-

bishop OF Canterbury

His Grace The Duke of
Bedford, K.G. Fretident of the ZooUpcal Society

His Grace The Duke of

Portland, K.G. His Grace The Duke of

Argyll, K.G., K.T. The Rt. Hon. The Earl of
rosebery and midlothian,

K.G., K.T. The Rt. Hon. The Earl of
Coventry
Late Preiident of the Royal Agri-

cultural Society

The Rt. Hon. The Viscount

Dillon

Late President of the Society of

Antiquariei

The Rt. Hon. The Lord Lister

Late President of the Royal Society

Thb Rt. Hon. The Lord

Alverstone, G.C.M.G. Lord Chief Justice

The Hon. Walter Rothschild,

M.P. The Rt. Hon. Sir Frederick

Pollock, Bart.,LL.D., F.S.A.,

era

Sir Edward Maunde Thompson,

K.C.B.,D.C.L.,LL.D.,F.S.A.,

etc. Late Director of the British Museum

Sir Clements R. Markka m,

K.C.B., F.R.S., F.S.A. Late President of the Royal Geo-

graphical Society

Sir Henry C. Maxwell-Lyte,

K.C.B., M.A., F.S.A., etc. Keeper of the Public Records

Sir E. Ray Lankester, K.C.B.,

LL.D., M.A., F.R.S., etc. Late Director of the Nat. Hist. Museum? South Kensington

Sir Jos. Hooker, G.C.S.1.,M.D.,

D.C.L., F.R.S., ETC. Col. Sir Duncan A. Johnston,

K.C.M.G., C.B., R.E. Late Director General of the Ord-

nance Survey

Sir Archibald Geikie, LL.D.,

F.R.S., etc. Rev. J. Charles Cox, LL.D.,

F.S.A., etc. Lionel Cust, M.V.O., M.A.,

F.S.A., ETC. Late Directi r of the National Por-

trait Gallery

Charles H. Firth, M.A., LL.D. Regius Professor of Modern Hiitory,

Oxford

Albert C. L. G. Gunther, M. A.,

M.D., F.R.S., Ph.D.

Late President of the Linnean Society

F. Haverfield, M.A., LL.D.,

F.S.A. Camden Professor of Ancient History

Reginald L. Poole, M.A., Ph.D.

University Lecturer in Diplomatic”

Oxford

J. Horace Round, M.A., LL.D. Walter Rye

W. H. St. John Hope, M.A. Among the original members of

the Council were

The Late Duke of Devonshire
The Late Duke of Rutland

The Late Marquess of Salisbury

The Late Dr. Mandell

Creighton, Bishop of London

The Late Dr. Stubbs, Bishop

of Oxford

The Late Lord Acton

The Late Sir William Flower

The Late Col. Sir J. Farqu-

HARSON

The Late Sir John Evans

The Late Professor F. York

Powell

General Editor — William Page, F.S.A. GENERAL ADVERTISEMENT

The Victoria History of the Counties of England is a National Historic Survey

which, under the direction of a large staff comprising the foremost students in science, history,
and archaeology, is designed to record the history of every county of England in detail. This
work was, by gracious permission, dedicated to Her late Majesty Queen Victoria, who gave it
her own name. It is the endeavour of all who are associated with the undertaking to make it

a worthy and permanent monument to her memory. Rich as every county of England is in materials for local history, there has hitherto been

no attempt made to bring all these materials together into a coherent form. Although from the seventeenth century down to quite recent times numerous county
histories have been issued, they are very unequal in ifierit ; the best of them are very rare
and costly ; most of them are imperfect and many are now out of date. Moreover, they were
the work of one or two isolated scholars, who, however scholarly, could not possibly deal

adequately with all the varied subjects which go to the making of a county history. Vil

[Begin Page: Text]

In the Victoria History each county is not the labour of one or two men, but of man} ,

for the work is treated scientifically, and in order to embody in it all that modern scholarship

can contribute, a system of co-operation between experts and local students is applied, whereby
the history acquires a completeness and definite authority hitherto lacking in similar

undertakings. The names of the distinguished men who have joined the Advisory Council are a
guarantee that the work represents the results of the latest discoveries in every department
of research, for the trend of modern thought insists upon the intelligent study of the past
and of the social, institutional, and political developments of national life. As these histories
are the first in which this object has been kept in view, and modern principles applied, it is
hoped that they will form a work of reference no less indispensable to the student than

welcome to the man of culture. THE SCOPE OF THE WORK

The history of each county is complete in itself, and in each case its story is told from the
earliest times, commencing with the natural features and the flora and fauna. Thereafter

follow the antiquities, pre-Roman, Roman, and post-Roman ; ancient earthworks ; a new
translation and critical study of the Domesday Survey ; articles on political, ecclesiastical, social,
and economic history , architecture, arts, industries, sport, etc. ; and topography. The greater
part of each history is devoted to a detailed description and history of each parish, containing
an account of the land and its owners from the Conquest to the present day. These manorial
histories are compiled from original documents in the national collections and from private
papeib. A special feature is the wealth of illustrations afforded, for not only are buildings of

interest pictured, but the coats of arms of past and present landowners are given. HISTORICAL RESEARCH

It has always been, and still is, a reproach that England, with a collection of public
records greatly exceeding in extent and interest those of any other country in Europe, is yet
far behind her neighbours in the study of the genesis and growth of her national and local

institutions. Few Englishmen are probably aware that the national and local archives contain

for a period of 800 years in an almost unbroken chain of evidence, not only the political,
ecclesiastical, and constitutional history of the kingdom, but every detail of its financial and
social progress and the history of the land and its successive owners from generation to
generation. The neglect of our public and local records is no doubt largely due to the fact
that their interest and value is known to but a small number of people, and this again is
directly attributable to the absence in this country of any endowment for historical research. The government of this country has too often left to private enterprise work which our con-
tinental neighbours entrust to a government department. It is not surprising, therefore, to find
that although an immense amovmt of work has been done by individual effort, the entire
absence of organization among the workers and the lack of intelligent direction has hitherto

robbed the results of much of their value. In the Victoria History, for the first time, a serious attempt is made to utilize our

national and local muniments to the best advantage by carefully organizing and supervising

the researches required. Under the direction of the Records Committee a large staff of experts
has been engaged at the Public Record Office in calendaring those classes of records which are
fruitful in material for local history, and by a system of interchange of communication among
workers under the direct supervision of the general editor and sub-editors a mass of information

is sorted and assigned to its correct place, which would otherwise be impossible. THE RECORDS COMMITTEE

Sir EnwARD Maunde Thompson, K.C.B. C. T. Martin, B.A., F.S.A. Sir Henry Maxwell-Lyte, K.C.B. J. Horace Round, M.A., LL.D,

W. J. Hardy, M.A., F.S.A. S. R. Scargill-Bird, F.S.A. F. MaDAN, M.A. W. H. SIEVENSON, M.A. G. F. Warner, M.A., D.Litt., F.S.A. [Begin Page: Text]

CARTOGRAPHY

In addition to a general map in several sections, each History contains Geological, Oro-

graphical, Botanical, Archaeological, and Domesday maps; also maps illustrating the articles on

Ecclesiastical and Political Histories, and the sections dealing with Topography. The Series

contains many hundreds of maps in all. ARCHITECTURE

A special feature in connexion with the Architecture is a series of ground plans, many

of them coloured, showing the architectural history of castles, cathedrals, abbeys, and other

monastic foundations. In order to secure the greatest possible accuracy, the descriptions of the Architecture,

ecclesiastical, military, and domestic, are under the supervision of Mr. C. R. Peers, M.A.,

F.S.A., and a committee has been formed of the following students of architectural history

who are referred to as may be required concerning this department of the work : —

ARCHITECTURAL COMMITTEE

J. BILSON, F.S.A., F.R.I.B.A. W. H. St. John Hope, M.A. R. Blomfield, M.A., F.S.A., A.R.A. W. H. Knowles, F.S.A., F.R.1.B.A. Harold Brakspear, F.S.A., A.R.I.B.A. Roland Paul, F.S.A. Prof. G. Baldwin Brown, M.A. J. Horace Round, M.A., LL.D. Arthur S. Flower, M.A. Percy G. Stone, F.S.A., F.R.1.B.A. J. A. Gotch, F.S.A., F.R.I.B.A. H. Thaciceray Turner, F.S.A. [Begin Page: Text]

Flora

Fauna

The general plan of Contents and the names among others of those

who are contributing articles and giving assistance are as follows : —

Natural History

Geology. Climent Reid, F.R.S., Horace B. Woodward, F.R.S., G. A. Lebour, M.A., J. E. Marr,

D.Sc, F.R.S., and others

Palaeontology. R. Lydekker, F.R.S., F.L.S., F.G.S. /Contributions by G. A. Boulenger, F.R.S., J. G. Baker, F.R.S., F.L.S., etc., G. C. Druce,

M.A., F.L.S., Walter Garstanc, M.A., D.Sc, F.L.S., Rev. Canon A. M. Normak,

D.C.L., LL.D., F.R.S., Rev. Canon W. W. Fowler, M.A., D.Sc, F.L.S., F.E.S., Rev. O.

Pickard-Cambridge, M.A., F.R.S., Rev. T. R. R. Stebbing, M.A., F.R.S., etc., B. B.

Woodward, F.G.S., F.R.M.S., etc and other Specialists

Prehistoric Remains. W. Boyd Dawkins, D.Sc, LL.D., F.R.S., F.S.A., Geo. Clinch, F.S.A. Scot., F.G.S.,

John Garstang, M.A., B.Litt., F.S.A., and others

Roman Remains. F. Haverfield, M.A., LL.D., F.S.A., and others

Anglo-Saxon Remains. C. Hercules Read, LL.D., F.S.A., Reginald A. Smith, B.A., F.S.A., and others

Domesday Book and other kindred Records. J. Horace Round, M.A., LL.D., and other Specialists

Architecture. C. R. Peers, M.A., F.S.A., W. H. St. John Hope, M.A., Harold BRAioiPEAR, F.S.A.,

A.R.LB.A., and others

Ecclesiastical History. R. L. Poole, M.A., Rev. H. Gee, D.D., F.S.A., Rgv. J. C. Cox, LL.D., F.S.A.,

A. G. Little, M.A., and others

Political History. Prof. C. H. Firth, M.A., LL.D., D.Litt., F.S.A., W. H. Stevenson, M.A., J. Horace

Round, M.A., LL.D., Prof. T. F. Tout, M.A., Prof. James Tait, M.A., and A. F. Pollarp,

M.A., F.R.Hist.Soc. History of Schools. A. F. Leach, M.A., F.S.A. Maritime History of Coast Counties. Sir John K. Laughton, M.A., M. Oppenheim, and others

Topographical Accounts of Parishes and Manors. By Various Authorities

Agriculture. Sir Ernest Clarke, M.A., Late Sec. to the Royal Agricultural Society, and others

Forestry. John Nisbet, D.CEc, and others

Industries, Arts and Manufactures

Social and Economic History

Ancient and Modern Sport. E. D. Cuming, the Rev. E. E. Dorling, M.A., and others

Cricket. Sir Home Gordon, Bart. [ By Various Authorities

[Begin Page: Title Page]

THE

VICTORIA HISTORY

OF THE COUNTY OF

SUFFOLK

EDITED BY

WILLIAM PAGE, F.S.A. VOLUME ONE

DAWSON

FOR

THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON

INSTITUTE OF HISTORICAL RESEARCH

[Begin Page: Text]

County Ceminittce for Suffoll? Formed in 1907

THE MOST HON. THE MARQUESS OF BRISTOL

Lord Lieutenant* Chairman

His Grace The Duke of Grafton,

K.G. The Rt. Hon. The Earl Cadogan, K.G. The Rt. Hon. The Earl Howe,

G.C.V.O. The Rt. Hon. The Earl of Stradbroke

The Rt. Hon. The Viscount lveagh,

K.P. The Rt. Hon. The Lord Francis

Hervey
The Rt. Rev. The Lord Bishop of Ely

The Rt. Rev. The Lord Bishop of

Norwich

The Rt. Rev. The Bishop of Thetford
The Rt. Hon. The Lord de Saumarez
The Rt. Hon. The Lord Bateman
Col. The Hon. H. W. Lowry-Corry

The Rt. Hon. Sir William Brampton

Gurdon, K.C.M.G., C.B. The Hon. Stanhope Tollemache

The Rev. Sir William Hyde-Parker,

Bart. Sir Ralph Blois, Bart. Sir Thomas Gooch, Bart. Sir Collingwood Hughes, Bart. Sir Charles Dalrymple, Bart. Sir William Dunn, Bart. Sir Cuthbert Quilter, Bart. Sir E. Walter Greene, Bart. Sir Ernest Clarke, M.A., F.S.A., F.L.S. Sir Thomas H. Tacon, D.L. The Worshipful The Mayor of Alde-

BURGH

The Worshipful The Mayor of Bury

St. Edmunds
The Worshipful The Mayor of Ipswich

The Worshipful The Mayor of South-

WCLD. The Worshipful The Mayor of Sud-
bury

W. C. Heaton Armstrong, Esq., M.P. Col. N. Barnardiston, J. P., D.L. Edward Beauchamp, Esq., M.P. E. F. Bisshopp, Esq. Edward Brooke, Esq. Henry C. Casley, Esq. The Ven. Archdeacon Chapman, M.A. T. B. Chevalier, Esq. A. TOWNSHEND CoBBOLD, EsQ. John D. Cobbold, Esq. J.P., D.L. Russell Colman, Esq. W. A. CoPiNGER, Esq., LL.D., F.S.A.,

F.R.S.A. T. W. Cotman, Esq. G. MiLNER-GIBSON-CuLLUM, EsQ., M.A.,

F.S.A. The Rev. Francis J. Eld, M.A., F.S.A. The Rev. E. Farrer, F.S.A. Harry S. Foster, Esq., J. P., D.L. H. Rider Haggard, Esq., J. P.

G. A. Hardy, Esq., M.P. The Rev. D. P. Harrison, M.A. The Rev. J. F. A. Hervey, M.A. The Rev. E. Hill, M.A. The Rev. J. Holden, M.A. J. Sancroft Holmes, Esq., J. P., D.L. Oliver D. Johnson, Esq, J. P.
Roger Kerrison, Esq., J.P.

Col. H. Mussenden Leathes

John Seymour Lucas, Esq., R.A.
George Manners, Esgq., J.P., D.L. T. TINDAL Methold, Esq., J.P.
Claude Morley, Esq., F.E.S. Col. O. H. Oakes

R. H. Inglis Palgrave, Esq., F.R.S.,

JP-

Capt. E. G. Pretyman, J.P., D.L. F. H. Pretyman, Esq. Capt. W. G. Probert

Vincent B. Redstone, Esq., F.R.Hist.S. F. S. Stevenson, Esq., B.A., J.P., D.L. The Rev. Julian G. Tuck, M.A. The Rev. Canon Warren, B.D., F.S.A. B. Eaton White, Esq., J.P.

John Wood, Esq. xIill

[Begin Page: Text]

CONTENTS OF VOLUME ONE

Dedication ...... The Advisory Council of the Victoria History

General Advertisement

The Suffolk County Committee . Contents .... List of Illustrations and Maps ,

Preface .....

Table of Abbreviations

Natural History

Geology ....

Palaeontology

Botany ....

Introduction

Botanical Districts

List of Phanerogamia

Characeae {Stonetuorts)

Musci (Mosses) . Hepaticae {Liverworts)

Freshwater Algae and Diatoms

Marine Algae . Lichenes {Lichens)

Fungi ....

Zoology

Marine ....

Molluscs (Non-Marine)

ByH

ByR

Edi

ByCc

ted

B. Woodward, F.R.S., F.G.S. LvDEKKER, F.R.S., F.L.S., F.G.S. by the Rev. E. N. Bloomfield, M

E. Salmon

By the Rev,

By the Rev

G. R. Bullock-Webster, M

E. N. Bloomfield, M.A., F

ES. ES. By the late H. C. Sorby, LL.D., F.R.S., F.S.A. By B. B. Woodward, F.L.S., F.G.S., F.R.M.S., and

A. Mayfield

Insects ....

Orthoptera {Earwigs, Grass

hoppers, Crickets, etc.) . Neuroptera {Dragpn-Jlies, Stone-

flies, Lacezvings, etc.) . Hymenoptera {Ants, Bees,

tVasps, Saw-flies, Gall-flies,

ete.) ....

Coleoptera {Beetles)

Lepidoptera {Butter/lies and

Moths) ....

Diptera {Flies)

Hemiptera {Bugs) . Spiders .....

By Claude Morley, F.E.S. PACE

vii

vii

xiii

XV

xvii

xxi

xxiii

By Claude Morley, F.E.S., and the Rev. E. N.

Bloomfield, M.A., F.E.S.....

By Claude Morley, F.E.S

47

51

60

69

73

74

77

79

81

85

96

lol

104

107

122

128

"35

141

150

XV

[Begin Page: Text]

CONTENTS OF VOLUME ONE

Natural History — {continue’/)
Zoology — [continued )

Crustaceans

Fishes .... Reptiles and Batrachians . Birds ....

Mammals

Early Man ....

Palaeolithic Age . Neolithic Age

Topographical List of Palaeolithic

and Neolithic Localities

Bronze Age

Early Iron Age . Topographical List of Bronze Age
and Early Iron Age Antiquities

Romano-British Suffolk

Appendix on Santon Downham hoard

Anglo-Saxon Remains

Introduction to the Suffolk Domesday

Translation of the Suffolk Domesday

Ancient Earthworks

Social and Economic History

Part |

Part Il

Table of Population 1801-1901

By the Rev. T. R. R. Stebbinc, M.A., F.R.S., F.Z.S

By J. T. CUNNILNGHAM, M.A. By G. T. Rope

By the Rev. Julian Tuck, M.A. .

By G. T. Rope

By W. Allen Sturce, M.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P. By W. A. DuTT

By George Clinch, F.G.S., F.S.A. (Scot.) By the late George E. Fox, M.A., F.S.A. By Reginald A. Smith, B.A., F.S.A. jtjn Pee

By Beatrice A. Lees, Oxford Honours School of

Modern History ..... Adapted from the Translation by the late Lord Hervey

By J.C. Wall

By Professor George Unwin, B.A. .

By Dorothy Kemp, Oxford Honours School of

Modern History .....

By George S. Minchin ....

«53

163

173

‘77

235

235

248

256

263

270

275

279

321

325

357

418

583

633

633

660

683

XVI

[Begin Page: Text]

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

* Anglo-Saxon Antiquities from Suffolk

Early Man:

Plan of Mildenhall District
Sections of the Warren Hill Ridge

Flint Implements. Plate |

Plate Il. Plate Ill. Plate IV ,

Boyton : Gold Torque

Lakenheath : Bronze-Age drinking cup
Saape : Cinerary urn

Fornham : Celt

Lakenheath : Celt

Mildenhall : Celt . Honington : Palstave

Mildenhall : Bronze finger-ring . Ornament on lid of bronze box . Westhall : Enamelled bronze harness-ring

Lakenheath : S-shaped brooch with typical late Ce

» Small socketed bronze axe

Mildenhall : Iron bill-hook of the Early Iron Age
Westhall : Bronze cylinders

Romano-British Suffolk :

Burgh Castle : Plan showing position . »» Plan of Gariannonum . Walton Castle : Plan showing position
Chart of entrance to Harwich Harbour in 1686
Walton Castle : Ground plan and ruins

» » Vase from cemetery . Whitton : Fragment of mosaic pavement
Rougham : Contents of barrow . Barking Hall : Bronze figure

Icklingham : Pewter from the Acton Collection
Coddenham : Mirror case ....

Cowlinge : Bronze jar or household god (Hercules)

,- (Mercury)

Herringfleet : Bronze vessel ....

Icklingham : Plan of Roman house, Horselands . Kesgrave : Medallion in terra cotta

Icklingham : Square pewter dish and other pieces . M.irtlesham : Base of bronze figure

Melton : Plan of tile kiln...

xvii

Itic ornament

PAGE

colowcd plate, frontispiece

- 237

- 242

full-page plate, facing 248

» 252

» 254

ss +» 256

» , 266

267

267

268

268

268

271

272

full-page plate, facing 272

273

283

284

287

288

288

full-page plate, facing

1177

full-page plate, facing

290

294

297

298

302

304

308

309

full-page piate, facing 3 1 2

3'3

* Reproduced in black and while in this edition. [Begin Page: Text]

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

Anglo-Saxon Remains :

Snape : Cinerary urn

 

» Gold ring with Roman int.iglio

» Boat in grave-mound .....

Sutton near Woodbridge : Gold front of jewelled brooch

Ipswich : Bronze square-headed brooches .. . 1

» Square-headed and circular brooches and buckle )

Cinerary urns found in Suffolk. Plate III . Ixworth : Bronze brooch ......

Cinerary urns found in Suffolk. Plate IV . Ixworth : Bronze-gilt disk-head of pin . Two bronze mounts of sword-scabbard (.') +

Akenhain H.dl, Ipswich : Pair of long brooches )

West Stow Heath : Bronze brooch . . J

Warren Hill, Mildcnhall : Bronze badge (?) offish form

Mitchell's Hill, Icklingham : Gilt-bronze buckle

Ipswich : lron axe-head ....

Mildenhall : Lead weight with bronze-gilt top

» Bronze-gilt brooch with silver mounts

» Part of bracelet-clasp

, Bronze brooch, once enamelled

Felixstowe : Lion brooch of bronze

Bronze brooch in form of bee

Blythburgh : Whale's bone tablet for writing

Ancient Earthworks :

Burgh (near Woodbridge) : Castle Field

Clare : Camp . Burgh Castle . Chevington Hall Farm

Great Ashfield : Castle Hill

Orford Castle . Bungay Castle . Clare Castle . Eye Castle

Framlingham Castle . Denham Castle

Haughley Castle

lketshall St. John : The Moun

Lidgate Castle

Lindsey Castle

Milden Castle

Otley : Site of Castle

Gisleham Manor House : Moat round Site

Mettingham Castle . Wingfield Castle

Lawshall : The Warbanks

PAGB

327

347

3*8

330

fu. '-p.ige plate, facing 332

334

- . 336

fu 'I-p.ige plate, facing 336

° 337

- *338

full-page plate, facing 338

34*

343

343

345

345

346

346

348

349

35«

587

588

589

589
591
592
593
594

596

597

598

599
600
601
602
603
603
610
621
622

624

XVill

[Begin Page: Text]

LIST OF MAPS

PACE

t Geological Map facing |

* Orographiciil Map ............ 5 17

+ Botanical Map ............ ,.47

Prehistoric Map ............ 235

Romano-British Map ........... 2279

Anglo-Saxon Map............ 325

Domesday Map............ » 357

Ancient Earthworks Map....... pee ee BAD

t Not reproduced in this edition owing to technical difficulties. + Reproduced in black and white with red over print. [Begin Page: Text]

PREFACE

EAST ANGLIA exhibits a peculiar difficulty to the county

historian on account of the small size, and consequently the

large number, of its parishes and manors. This is probably

the cause of various unsuccessful attempts to’ write the

history of Suffolk. Some of these efforts have so far matured as

to reach the stage of the publication of one or two volumes, while
others have not got beyond the stage of preliminary manuscript
collections. The first to attempt a county history of Suffolk was

John Gage, F.R.S., F.S.A., who, in 1838, took the name of Rokewode. He published, in 1822, The History and Antiquities of Hengrave, in which
parish was the family seat of his father and afterwards of his elder
brother. In 1838 he issued the first volume of his proposed larger work,
The History and Antiquities of Su*olk, containing the history of the hundred
of Thingoe, the only part of his history which reached publication. His
work is careful and exhaustive, and it is much to be regretted that it was
not completed. His valuable collections for the continuation of the

work are now preserved at Hengrave Hall. The next to take up the
history of the county was Alfred Inigo Fox, LL.B., who, in 1820, took
the name of Suckling. He began the publication of his History and
Antiquities of Suffolk in 1846, but, like Gage, he only completed the
history of one hundred, that of Lothingland. Kirkby's Suffolk Traveller,
published in 1848, and its later edition, with supplement by Augustine
Page, published in 1844, cannot be strictly called county histories,
although they contain much useful information. An admirable history

of the county was undertaken by the late Mr. W. A. Coppinger, M.A.,
LL.D., F.S.A., who, in 1905, published The Manors of Suffolk, with
Notes on their History and Devolution. This volume contains the history
of the hundreds of Babergh and Blackburn. In 1908 the second
volume, including the hundreds of Blything, Bosmere, and Claydon,

appeared. Dr. Coppinger's Materials for the History of Suffolk, containing

references to sources for a history of the county, is of great value to all
those interested in the topography of Suffolk. Besides the printed

histories of the county, there are several manuscript collections for histories,
principal among which are those of David Ehsha Davy, B.A., which were
purchased by the British Museum in 1852 (Add. MSS. 1 9077-1 9207) ;

of Davy's friend, H. Jermyn, which were presented to the British

Museum by Herbert Gurney in 1830 (Add. MSS. 8168-96) ; and of

Craven Ord, F.R.S., F.S.A., most of whose collections are also now in

the British Museum (Add. MSS. 71 01-2, 8986-7),

XXI

[Begin Page: Text]

PREFACE

During the preparation of this volume the Editor has had to deplore
the death of Mr. H. C. Sorby, LL.D., F.R.S., F.S.A., who left the

rough draft of his article on the Marine Zoology of the county, the re-
vision of the proofs of which was generously undertaken by the Rev. Canon Norma/i, D.C.L. The Editor also greatly regrets the loss of his
old and much esteemed friend, Mr. George E. Fox, Hon. M.A., F.S.A.,
whose profound knowledge of Roman archaeology and kindly sympathy
endeared him to a large circle of friends. Mr. Fox died before finally
revising the proofs of his article on the Roman Remains of the county,
for the correction of which the Editor is responsible. The late Canon
Raven was to have written the articles on Early Man and the Anglo-

Saxon Remains of the county, but died before commencing the work. The Editor has to express his thanks to Lord Francis Hervey for

advice and assistance ; to the Society of Antiquaries, the Suffolk Institute
of Archaeology and Natural History, the British Archaeological Associa-
tion, the Royal Archaeological Institute, the Prehistoric Society of East
Anglia, Mr. C. D. Pridden, M.A., Mr. Frank Woolnough, Mr. W.

Allen Sturge, M.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P., and Miss Nina Layard, for
illustrations and information ; and to Mr. Vincent Redstone for his

ready help in many ways while passing the sheets through the press. Owing to unforeseen circumstances there has been a delay in the
publication of this volume ; hence it is possible that works issued during
the past year, touching upon the subjects with which it deals, may not

have been consulted. XxXiIl

[Begin Page: Text]

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Abbrev. Plac. (Rec

Com.) Acts of P.C. Add. ...

Add. Chart. Admir. .
Agarde . Anct. Corresp. Atict. D. (P.R

A 2420
Ann. Mon. Anti. .
App. .
Arch. Arch. Cant
Archd. Rec
Archit. .
Assize R.
Aud. Off. Aug. Off

Ayloffe

Bed... Beds ..
Berks . Bdle. .
B.M. .
Bodl. Lib. Bore. Brev. Reg. Brit...

Buck. . Bucks

Cal...

Camb. Cambr. Campb. Chart

Cant. Cap....

Carl...

Cart. Antiq. R.

C.C.C. Camb. ,

Certiorari Bdles. (Rolls Chap.) Chan. Enr. Decree

R.
Chan. Proc. Chant. Cert. Chap. Ho. .
Charity Ing. Chart. R. 20 Hen. IIL pt. i. No. 10

Abbreviatio Placitorum (Re-

cord Commission)

Acts of Privy Council

Additional

Additional Charters

Admiralty

Agarde's Indices

Ancient Correspondence

Ancient Deeds(Public Record

Office) A 2420

Annates Monastici

Antiquarian or Antiquaries

Appendix

Archa;ologia or Archaeological

Archaeologia Cantiana

Archdeacons' Records

Architectural

Assize Rolls

Audit Office

Augmentation Office

Ayloffe's Calendars

Bedford

Bedfordshire

Berkshire

Bundle

British Museum

Bodley's Library

Borough

Brevia Regia

Britain, British, Britannia, etc. Buckingham

Buckinghamshire

Calendar

Cambridgeshire or Cambridge

Cambria, Cambrian, Cam-

brensis, etc. Campbell Charters

Canterbury

Chapter

Carlisle

Cartx Antiqua; Rolls

Corpus Christi College, Cam-

bridge

Certiorari Bundles (Rolls

Chapel)

Chancery Enrolled Decree

Rolls

Chancery Proceedings

Chantry Certificates (or Cer-
tificates of Colleges and

Chantries)

Chapter House

Charity Inquisitions

Charter Roll, 20 Henry Ill.

part i. Number 10

Chartul. .
Chas. Ches. Chest. .

Ch. Gds. KR)

Chich. .

Chron. .
Close
Co...
Colch. .
Coll. Com. Com. Pleas
Conf. R.
Co. Plac. Cornw. .
Corp.

Cott. .

Ct. R. .

Ct. of Ward
Cumb. .

Cur. Reg. D...

D. and C.

Dc Banc. R
Dec. and Ord
Dep. Keeper's
Derb. . .
Devon . Dioc. ..

Doc. . .

Dods. MSS. Dom. Bk. .

Dors. Duchy of Lane

Dur. .

(Exch

Re

East. Eccl. .

Eccl. Com. Edw. .

Eliz. Engl. .

Engl. Hist. Enr. Epis. Reg. Esch. Enr. Accts. Excerpta e Rot. Fin

(Rec. Com.) Exch. Dep. Exch. K.B. Exch. K.R. .

Exch. L.T.R. .

Rep,

Chartulary

Charles

Cheshire

Chester

Church Goods (Exchequer

King's Remembrancer)

Chichester

Chronicle, Chronica, etc. Close Roll
County

Colchester

Collections
Commission
Common Pleas
Confirmation Rolls
County Placita
Cornwall
Corporation
Cotton or Cottonian
Court Rolls

Court of Wards
Cumberland

Curia Regis

Deed or Deeds

Dean and Chapter

De Banco Rolls

Decrees and Orders

Deputy Keeper's Reports

Derbyshire or Derby

Devonshire

Diocese

Documents

Dodsworth MSS. Domesday Book

Dorsetshire

Duchy of Lancaster

Durham

Easter Term

Ecclesiastical

Ecclesiastical Commission
Edward

Elizabeth

England or English

English Historical Review
Enrolled or Enrolment
Episcopal Registers
Escheators Enrolled Accounts

Excerpta e Rotulis Finium

(Record Commission)

Exchequer Depositions

Exchequer King's Bench
Exchequer King's Remem-
brancer

Exchequer Lord Treasurer's

Remembrancer

xxni

[Begin Page: Text]

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Eich. of Pleas, Plea

R.

Exch. of Receipt . Exch. Spec. Com. . Feet of F....

jod. Accts. (Ct. of

Wards)

Feod. Surv. (Ct. of

Wards)

Feud. Aids . fol

Foreign R....

Forest Proc. Exchequer of Pleas, Plea Roll

Exchequer of Receipt

Exchequer Special Commis-

sions

Feet of Fines

Feodaries Accounts (Court of

Wards)

Feodaries Surveys (Court of

Wards)

Feudal Aids

Folio

Foreign Rolls

Forest Proceedings

Gaz Gazette or Gazetteer

Gen Genealogical, Genealogica,

etc. Geo George

Glouc Gloucestershire or Gloucester

Guild Certif (Chan.) Guild Certificates (Chancery)

Ric. Il. Richard Il. Hants

Harl. Hen. Heref

Hertf

Herts

Hil. .

Hist. Hist. MSS. Com. Hosp. Hund. R. . .

Hunt... .

Hunts . Ing. a.q.d. Ing. p.m.

Inst... Invent. .
Ips. .

Itin. . .

Jas. .

Journ. Lamb. Lib. Lane

L. and P. Hen. VIL. Lansd. Ld. Rev. Rec. . .

Leic

Le Neve's Ind. Lib

Lich

Line

Lond

Mem

Hampshire

Harley or Harleian

Henry

Herefordshire or Hereford

Hertford

Hertfordshire

Hilary Term

History, Historical, Historian,

Historia, etc. Historical MSS. Commission
Hospital

Hundred Rolls

Huntingdon

Huntingdonshire

Inquisitionsad quod damnum
Inquisitions post mortem
Institute or Institution
Inventory or Inventories
Ipswich

Itinerary

James

Journal

Lambeth Library
Lancashire or Lancaster

Letters and Papers, Hen. VIL. Lansdowne

Land Revenue Records
Leicestershire or Leicester

Le Neve's Indices

Library

Lichfield

Lincolnshire or Lincoln

London

Membrane

Memorials

N.S...

Off. .
Orig. R.
Os...

Oxf. .

Palmer's Ind. Pal. of Chest. Pal. of Dur. Pal. of Lane. Par....
Pari....

Pari. R... Parl.*rv. . Partic. for Gt;. Pat....

P.C.C...

Pet

Peterb

Phil

Pipe R

Plea R

Pop. Ret....

Pope Nich. Tax. (Rec. Com.) P.R.O

Proc....

Proc. See. Antiq. pt. Pub. Rec. ...
Recov. R... Rentals and Surv. Rep

Rev

Ric

ham

New Style

Office

Originalia Rolls

Ordnance Survey

Oxfordshire or Oxford

Page

Palmer's Indices

Palatinate of Chester

Palatinate of Durham

Palatinate of Lancaster

Parish, parochial, etc. Parliament or Parliamentary

Parliament Rolls

Parliamentary Surveys

Particulars for Grants

Patent Roll or Letters Patent

Prerogative Court of Canter-

bury

Petition

Peterborough

Philip

Pipe Roll

Plea Rolls

Population Returns

Pope Nicholas’ Taxation (Re-

cord Commission)

Public Record Office

Proceedings

Proceedings of the Society of

Antiquaries

Part

Publications

Roll

Records

Recovery Rolls

Rentals and Surveys

Report

Review

Richard

XXIV

[Begin Page: Text]

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Roff. .... Rochester diocese

Rot. Cur. Reg. . Rotuli Curijc Regis

Rut Rutland

Topog. Sarum ....

Ser

Sess. R

Shrews

Shrops ....

Soc

Soc. Anti. .

Somers

Somers. Ho. S.P.Dom....

StaiF. ....

Star Chamb. Proc. Stat

Steph

Subs. R....

SufF. Surr

Suss

Surv. of Ch. Liv-

ings (Lamb.) or

(Chan.) Salisbury diocese

Series

Sessions Rolls
Shrewsbury
Shropshire

Society

Society of Antiquaries
Somerset

Somerset House

State Papers Domestic

Staffordshire

Star Chamber Proceedings
Statute

Stephen

Subsidy Rolls

Suffolk

Surrey

Sussex

Survey's of Church Livings

(Lambeth) or (Chancery)

Trans. Transl. Treas. Trin. Univ. Valor Eccl. Com.) Vet. Mon. .

V.C.H. ..

Vic....

vol... .

(Rec. Warm. .
Westm. .
Westmld. Will. .
Wilts . Winton. Wore. Yorb

Topography or Topograph!. cal

Transactions

Translation

Treasury or Treasurer

Trinity Term

University

Valor Ecclesiasticus (Record

Commission)

Vetusta Monumenta

Victoria County History

Victoria

Volume

Warwickshire or Warwick

Westminster

Westmorland

William

Wiltshire

Winchester diocese

Worcestershire or Worcester

Yorkshire

[Begin Page: Page 144]

A HISTORY OF SUFFOLK

Orihocephalus saltatory and, at Lowestoft, 0. mutabilis have been noticed here. Six kinds of Dicyphus
(of which D. pallidkornis is confined to Digitalis purpurea at Freston), Campyloneura virgula” and
the two species of Cyllocoris are all common on their respective food-plants. Aetorhinus angulatus is

often attracted to light at night ; and | have captured Glohiceps Jlavomaculatus, G. dispar, and Me-

comma ambulans. Butler has taken a macropterous specimen of Cyrtorrhinus flaveolus at Fritton,'

| have found C. caricis at Wherstead, and C. pygmaeus has occurred to Thouless at Fritton. Eleven
species of the genus Orthoty/us have been found in Suffolk, of which O. prasinus, taken by Saunders

at Southwold in 1877, 0. tenellus at Freston, and O. rubidus on Artemisia maritima are the only un-
common ones. Hypsitylus bicolor, Heterocordylus tibialis, Onychumenus decolor, and Oncotylus viridiflavus
are uncommon, and Heterotoina merioptera abundant on nettles. Loxops coccineus has only been seen
at Kentford, with Malacoris chlorixans in the Bentley and Dodnash Woods. The two common

Macrocolei and both the Macrotyli are met with ; Conostethus roseus is abundant upon Foxhall Plateau
and Harpocera tboracica on oaks everywhere. Amblytylus affinis, Byrsoptera rufifrons, the three Phyli
and Atractotomus magnicornis occur sparingly, though A. mali has only been found at Bungay upon one
occasion in 1903. Eleven species of Psallus, among which P. alnicola at Freston and P. Roter-

mundi at Brandon are very local, and six of Plagiognathus, of which P. albipennis is found on Artemisia
maritima all along the coast, have been noticed. Butler took Asciodema obsoletum at Lowestoft in

1891 ; | have recently also turned it up about Ipswich. Many of the interesting aquatic Cryptocerata await discovery, and few unusual kinds have been
noticed. Naucoris cimicoides is said by Paget to have been very common in ditches about Yarmouth
in 1825 ; it occurs at Oulton Broad, Ipswich, in brackish water at Bawdsey, and swarms in the
Tostocic ponds. Nepa cinerea, the water-scorpion, is generally common ; but the handsome
Ranatra linearis stood on the authority of a single specimen taken many years ago at Battisford

by Baker, till Tuck took several in one pond in the middle of a field at Drinkstone in October

1 901. * Notonecta glauca is abundant, and its vanety furcaia is referred to by Paget ; Plea minutissima
occurs in all the ponds about Ipswich. Of the extensive genus Corixa, comprising the lesser
waterboatmen, we have only fifteen kinds as far as is at present ascertained ; all these are fairly
widely distributed, though C.fallenii is represented by only two individuals taken respectively in

1893 and 1904, C. cohoptrata and C. venusta are restricted to Bixley Decoy and Oulton Broad,

and C. limitata is very rare and local. C. lugubris often occurs, mixed with C. praeusta, in the

utmost abundance among shrimps, in the brackish ditches at Bawdsey, the net becoming weighed

down with a dark mass of them. From this short resume of the Heteroptera it will be seen that some two hundred and eighty-

four species have been noticed in Suffolk. Considering that | captured over a hundred in 1897
alone, and that less than that number have been added during the following eight years, it is
sufficiently obvious that collecting of late has fallen into neglect, and that assiduous working might

show up many new kinds. HOMOPTERa

CiCADIDAE

In this group we have had even less observations to draw from than was the case in the
Heteroptera. Mr. Butler noted a few about Lowestoft in 1891, Mr. Edwards mentions one or

two kinds from Southwold and Brandon, and Curtis records, | think, two from the county. It

cannot, therefore, be wondered at that | have been able to include little more than exactly half the
British kinds ; but, with our extensive marsh country, to which many of those insects are restricted,
quite another fifty or sixty kinds should turn up if systematically sought in favourable situations

and upon their particular food plants, for these, like the last group, are entirely phytophagous in their

economy. The curious Centrotus cornutus is a common species on bushes in the woods about Ipswich,

Bury St. Edmunds, and Lowestoft in June ; but Gargara genistae is very local at Tostock and
Ipswich, though Mr. Norgate has taken it commonly on broom at Barnham and Downham in the
north-west. Issus coleoptratus has only occurred singly at Ipswich in 1894 and 1904, and in a wasps’
nest in a holly bush near Bury ; Cixius pilosus and C. nervosus are common, though C. cunicularis is
decidedly local at Tostock and Assington Thicks in July. The thick-horned Asiraca clavicornis

was first found by Curtis at Henstead near Wangford, and more recently by myself among coniferae

in Bentley Woods, it is not uncommon about Brandon ; | have also found Delphax pulchella to be

somewhat common on reeds in Benacre and Herringfleet Broads in the middle of August. The

extensive genus Liburnia requires much more full investigation than it has hitherto received ; of the

+ Ent. Mo. Mag. 1891, p. 277. 'Cf. Tram. Norf. Nat. Soc. 1902, p. 333. 144

[Begin Page: Page 145]

INSECTS

fifty British species only eighteen have been observed, amongst which L. notula occurs on reeds in
Oulton Broad, L. lineola in Dodnash Woods, and on the banks of the Orwell, L. longipennh in tufts
of Carex pankulata at Foxhall in the winter ; L. vitttpennis is abundant in Tuddenham Fen, where
Elliott has taken L. fuscovittata in some numbers ; and L. punctulum with L. pelludda and L. scotti
about Lowestoft, where it was found by Butler, as well as at Claydon Bridge and Foxhall. Mr. Edwards tells us' that L., or Chloriona, glaucescens, Fieb. — formerly thought to be C. unicolor,
H. S. — has been found by him commonly on reeds in the coast marshes at Southwold in August. L. leptosoma and L. limbata are common, and L. eUgantula local at Foxhall, Kentford, and Tudden-
ham ; but L. speciosa, which does not appear to have been taken in Britain for many years, has been
but sparingly met with by Mr. Elliott and myself in marshes at Ipswich, Barton Mills, Brandon

and Tuddenham Fen. The remaining species are Liburnia difficUis’ discolor, exigua, Fairmairei, and

lineata, whose distribution is not yet fully known. Of the rest of the Delphacidae, | have seen Dicranotropus hamata from Foxhall to Tuddenham,
and Stiroma pteridis common on bracken, P. albomarginata at Bentley and Tuddenhan, P. affinh
once swept at Freston in 1904. The extremely handsome Triecphora vulnerata is by no means

uncommon upon young poplars and flying in the sunshine in the Bentley Woods, Assington Thicks,

and Holbrook Park in June ; both species of Aphrophora live about Ipswich and Bury ; and all the
British Philaeni, or ' Cuckoo-spits,' are common, though P. lineatus appears somewhat local, and
several forms of P. spumarius have not been met with. Ledra aurita is uncommon on oaks in the
Bentley Woods, at Tostock and Battisford ; Ulopa reticulata often swarms beneath heather ; and
Megophthalmus scanicus is very common. Among the pretty family Bythoscopidae, we have a much
better percentage of representatives. Afacropsis lanio is often beaten from oak trees ; Bythoscopus
atni rarely met with on the banks of the Gipping and in Bentley Woods, where as elsewhere

B. flavicollis abounds ; the rare B. rufusculus has occurred singly in Tuddenham Fen and the Bentley
Woods in 1904. Pediopsis scutellatus, P. tibialis, P. impurus, and P. ulmi all occur with fair fre-
quency, and last year | discovered P. cereus in Tuddenham Fen and P. fuscinervis at Foxhall, both
in August ; C. virescens, too, has lately turned up at Tostock, Kentford, and Barham. Idiocerus
adustus, |. populi and /. confusus are not infrequent upon poplars and willows ; an example from
Farnham appears referable to I.fulgidus ; and | have also recently found here /. lituratus in Tud-
denham Fen and /. distinguer.dus in Assington Thicks, which latter Mr. Tuck took at Aldeburgh ;*

/. albicans is local at Freston, Tuddenham, and Brandon, and a single /. tremulae has occurred in
Bentley Woods. Agallia puncticeps and A. venosa both occur, the latter being widely distributed at
Claydon, Southwold, and Brandon. Evacanthus interruptus, upon ragwort, and E. acuminatus are
both found in the Bramford chalk pits ; and Tettigonia viridis is often a pest in marshes throughout
the county. We possess all the British Acoctphali, the only uncommon one being A. flavostriatus,
which Butler has turned up in Fritton Decoy and | have seen at Kessingland. Eupelix cuspidata

has only been noticed on the Breck sands and Foxhall Plateau ; but Doratura stylata and Paramesus
nervosus, of the former of which | captured a specimen of the macropterous form at Ipswich in

1896, are common. | also beat a single Glyptocephalus proceps at Barren Heath near Ipswich in

July 1904. The Jassidae leave much to be desired ; the only common Athysani being A. hrevipennis,
communis, sordidus, obsoletus, and obscurellus ; Butler has found A. grisescens at Lowestoft. Twelve
kinds of Deltocephalus are enumerated, of which five — D. pascuellus, coronifer, distinguendus, sabulicola,

and punctum — were first taken by Butler about Lowestoft ; Edwards records D. Normani from

Fritton, and | have seen D. argus in the Westleton lamb-pits and at Foxhall, where D. citrinellus,
ocellaris, and striatus also occur. D. Flori and D. pulicaris appear to be rare at Freston.' Allygus
mixtus, Limotettix antennata, and L. quadrinotata are common, as also probably is L. sulphurella,
though | had not met with it till last August, when the rare L. aurantipes occurred to me at

Foxhall and Bramford marshes. Of our six species of Thamnotettix, Tuck met with T. splendidula
at Tostock in October 1899 ; and | beat a couple of T. Torneella from birch in the Bentley Woods
in May and June 1902, from bushes through which | have beaten with no sign of this insect for
ten consecutive years ; it is rare in Britain, but has a wide range from Rannoch to the New Forest. T. attenuata first turned up, and then commonly, at Foxhall late in September 1 904. Edwards
has found the rare Cicadula jasciifrons at Southwold; and | have once or twice met with C. sep-
temnotata, which is much rarer here than C. sexnotata ; Gnathodes punctatus is local at Bentley Woods
and Foxhall. Alebra albostriella has been observed, and, in Tuddenham Fen, in June 1901, |

took three examples of an allied insect, which was common there on birch, though apparently

hitherto unrecognized in Britain. Dicraneura variata is abundant and D. flavipennis common. The

" Ent. Mo. Mag. 1898, p. 60. ' Cf. Trans. Norf. Nat. Soc. 1902, p. 332.

" Since the above was written | have been so tortunate as to capture somewhat commonly Deltocephalus

formosus, a species not hitherto noticed jn Britain, in a marshy wood at Brandon, on the banks of the Little

Ouse, which forms the north-west boundary of the county (Cf. Ent. Mo. Mag. 1908, p. 59). — C. M.

114519

[Begin Page: Page 146]

A HISTORY OF SUFFOLK

pretty green Kybos smaragdulus lives not uncommonly in all our marshes ; Chlor'ita flavetcem occurs at

South wold, where it is attracted to lamplight in July ; and C. viridula is always abundant in the

spring at Bentley and in Ipswich gardens. Of the slender and fragile genus Eupteryx, we have twelve
kinds, all common and widely distributed except E. melissae from Foxhall, E. abrotani in salt marshes
at Southwold, and E. signatipennis, which occurs abundantly, but solely, on Spiraea ulmarla in the
Freston Woods. Only ten species of Typhlocyba have at present been noted, amongst which

T. sexpunctata, ulmi, Douglasi, rosae, and quercus are common ; T. tenerrima occurs at Ipswich and
Carlton Colville, gratiosa at Southwold, geometrica sparingly on alder and mtidula once only on
beech at Foxhall. Xygina flammigera has been found at Wherstead, Z. parvula at Bramford and
Foxhall, where also Z. scutellaris has occurred, and | have once swept the rare Z. hyperici from a

mass of Hypericum hirsutum in the Bentley Woods in the middle of September. PSYLLIDAK

The difficulty of determining the Psyllina has greatly contributed to their being passed over

in the field, consequently there are comparatively few records. Livia juncorum is certainly rare at
Bramford and Foxhall in the autumn, though it is said to be universally abundant at the roots of
rushes; on 19 August 1904 | swept the two first British specimens of L. limbata, in Tuddenham
Fen. Psyllopsis fraxinicola is abundant on ash trees everywhere, but P.fraxini has only been seen
at Assington and Barham. Aphalara calthae is not rare, but A. exi/is has only occurred at Foxhall
once. Of the clear-winged genus Psylla, we have twelve species, few of which claim especial
attention excepting to point out that many may be beaten from coniferae in the winter : thus

P. pruni has been found in the Bentley Woods, with P. pineti, in March ; P. melanoneura has been
taken by Chitty at Foxhall in the same month, and P. buxi lives in my garden here at Monk Soham
till quite late in the autumn on box-trees. P. visci Curtis described from specimens found at
Rougham, near Bury St. Edmunds, but it has not since been reported from the county. Trioza
urticae, g'tlii, and remota are probably, like Arytaena geniitae’ all abundant ; but T. crithmi has only

once occurred to me, in some numbers in August in the coast salt marshes at Southwold. Aphididae

For the purpose of adding some account of the green flies of the county to this History, |

began to collect them last May, and succeeded so well in their identification, with the aid of
Buckton's Monograph of the British Aphides, published by the Ray Society, 1876-83, that | am able
to present a very representative account of them. By slavishly following this work | have been
enabled to name nearly every specimen taken upon its own food-plant, and can only regret that so
little interest is shown in this most interesting family in Britain, where | know of no one who
pretends to any knowledge of the subject since the author's death. Except where stated the

following species were taken in the garden of Monk Soham House during 1907. The first species of the Aphidinae, and one of the most prevalent, was Siphonophora rosae, which
was seen upon the young shoots of both wild and cultivated roses throughout the summer, as well
as upon the leaves of adjacent Aquilegia vulgaris at the end of July. | did not look for S. granaria
till the middle of August, but harvest had hardly begun, and | at once found both the imaginal
forms commonly on some adventitious ears of wheat in my garden and a few females on barley in
neighbouring fields. S. hieracii were very rare beneath flower-heads of Hieracium early in August,
associating with a few females of Aphis rumicis. As early as | June larvae of S. millefoUi appeared
on the flower-stalks of Chrysanthemum segetum, and in early August both winged and apterous
imagines were fairly common on the stems of both that plant and Achillea millifolium, becoming
abundant by the middle of the month ; it also occurs at Brandon. At the end of July | found

S. pisi not very commonly on my garden peas and its larvae on Bursa bursa-pastoris ; in 1 903 |
took it near Ipswich in October. S. ruhi was not observed till the first week in August, when both
imaginal forms were seen on the leaves of Rubus fruticosus with Aphis urticariae. S. urticae has
been scarce ; | took only one apterous female, still attached to her pupal skin, on nettle early in
August. The distinct A. avellanae also appears rare, since of this | have also found but one apte-
rous female on Corylus avellanae in early June. Larvae, pupae, and apterous forms of 5. tanaceti
abounded in a dandelion in the middle of August. On Tusilago farfara numerous dead 5. tussilaginis

were found early in the same month ; and a diligent search revealed but two winged forms. S. sonchi, in its apterous forms, is one of our commonest species on Centurea nigra at Monk Soham,
Southwold, and Brandon. Larvae, pupae, and apterous imagines of S. cichorii occurred upon a plant
of chicory near Easton Park on 17 August; and | saw it also at Dunwich in the middle of

September. Five S. olivata were taken on Cnicus palustris in the Bentley Woods in August

1904. 146

[Begin Page: Page 147]

INSECTS

The small Phorodon humuli was abundant on the underside of hop leaves near Easton Park in
August ; and a protracted examination of Lamium album in my garden revealed a solitary winged

P. ga/eopsidis, on the under side of the leaf, in the same month. On 7 June a score of Myzus cerasi
in all their stages, though only two winged, were found on cherry ; and in early August | took

M. ribis rarely on Ribes rubrum. Quite suddenly on 4 August, Drepanoslphum acertna appeared
commonly beneath maple leaves and those of adjacent hazel and dogwood. Apterous females, larvae,
and pupae of the distinct and presumably rare Megoura vic'iae were found very commonly feeding
upon the pods and stems of Lathyrus pralensis in a damp meadow near Easton Park on | 7 August. Early in June Rhopalosiphum ribis was found in hundreds in all its stages in rolled leaves of Ribes
nigrum ; and it is certainly the same species that Kirby referred to nearly a century ago when he
wrote :*° ' Last week | observed the top of every young shoot of the currant trees in my garden (at
Barham) curled up by myriads of these insects.’ R. nymphae was abundant on the stalks of yilisma
plantago in July and Nymphaea alba in August, in the moat which surrounds my house, but among
thousands of the apterous form | could detect but one winged specimen. A very few winged females
and pupae only of R. Itgustri were taken early in August on privet leaves. Exclusively winged forms

of Siphocoryne pastinaceae were found on wild carrot both here and in the adjacent parish of Bedfield

in August. S. xylostei is a great pest on honeysuckle over the house-windows. S. capreae occurs
commonly on the leaves of willow and, like 5. xylostei, extends throughout the summer. 5. foeniculi

has only been seen on fennel at Dunwich in the middle of September. The genus Aphis is an extensive one, and many of its species are common. A. brassicae was
forming large powdery masses on the flowers of cabbages on 9 June, and was still abundant up to
the end of August ; but | have seen no winged forms. About the same time | found a little

cluster of four apterous A. crataegi on a leaf of whitethorn in Framlingham Castle moat ; and

A. subterranea was very common on a carrot, just below the ground, at the end of August. On
whitethorn at Bedfield early in the same month A. edentula was not uncommon in all its forms on
terminal shoots. Mallow failed to produce A. malvae, but it occurred abundantly beneath the
flower-heads of yarrow in early August. On i June winged A. mali were somewhat common, with

a few scattered pupal skins on the leaves of the apple trees ; and on the 3rd the apterous females
and larvae were found to be abundant in their curled leaves ; the whole pest had, however, quite
vanished by the end of July. A. urticaria was very common on the stems of nettle early in June ;
and in curled leaves of Prunus spinosa, A. pruni was prevalent at the same time, with a proportion
of one winged to every score of apterous forms. A. atriplicis occurred on the sea lavender and
Aster iripelium in the salt marshes about Southwold early in September. A, hieracii was first seen
very rarely on leaves of Heracleum sphondylium on 9 June, by the middle of July it was common,
and at the beginning of August extremely abundant on the stems of hogweed ; it also appeared at
Southwold. A single plant of the hairy willow herb, among many, produced a dozen larvae and
one of both forms of the female of A. epilohii in the middle of August. A. hederae is only too common
on the ivy around the house. A. rumicis is one of the commonest kinds here, and bewilderingly
omnivorous ; | first took the winged form singly on the young leaves of Rumex acetosa ; it
abounded on broad beans throughout the summer, also attacking Cnicus arvensis, Petasitis officinalis,
beet, and Hieraceum. Thirteen of the very distinct larvae of A. papaveris were clustered together
on a leaf of scarlet poppy on 30 July ; and all the forms of A. pyri were abundant in curled leaves

of pear early in June. Hyalopterus arundinis was so numerous on reeds in the salt-marshes about

Southwold in September as to appreciably weigh down the sweep-net ; and Bucton records H. melano-

cephalus from Brandon. At the end of May, Chaitophorus aceris was very numerous beneath the leaves of maple, ming-

ling later with Drepanosiphum. Early in August | succeeded in securing three examples of the
winged form of C. salicivorus, among myriads of the apterous one, which were scattered all over the
leaves of sallow ; later | also saw the species at Southwold. In the middle of August C. leucomelas
was not uncommon in its curious blisters on aspen leaves at Monk Soham, Debenham, and Easton
Park. Buckton also records Cryptosiphum artemisiae from Brandon. Callipterus betuleticola is exces-
sively abundant on birch in Tuddenham Fen and at Mildenhall ; C. coryli occurred commonly,
though singly and sparsely, here on hazel leaves in August. It was common in Easton Park in the
middle of the month, together with C. quercus, which | first found on oak leaves in my garden on

4 June. On 27 August 1906 C. casteneae was swept from rough heath grass in Tuddenham

Fen ; and this year | also found it at Brandon. Pterocallis juglandicola turned up on a walnut tree

at Sibton Abbey in the middle of September ; and, on the leaves of alder near Easton Park, winged
P. alni were not rare, though only one apterous imago and but a few larvae were present in the
middle of August. | have twice captured P. tiliae flying in July at Ipswich and Kessingland ;

here the winged form is solitarily abundant on the under side of lime leaves. Phyllaphis fagi was

"s Introd. to Entom. (7th ed. ), 152. 147

[Begin Page: Page 148]

A HISTORY OF SUFFOLK

abundant in all stages on the leaves of both old and young beeches at the beginning of June, but

soon disappeared. Of LachnuSy the presumably rare L. agilis was commonly beaten from pines in the middle of
August, though but three winged forms were seen. Many winged L. macrocephalui were beaten
from spruce at Foxhall on 4 July 1904 ; and Kirby and Spence say "* that L. pIni used to be common
in the garden of Mr. Sheppard, who was curate of Nacton, 1804-7. | have captured winged

L. p'tnicolus in the Bentley Woods in July and at Easton Broad in June ; and in the middle of
August beaten the apterous form abundantly in my garden here, where were no winged individuals. Three hibernating winged females of the large L. vimina/is were found beneath willow bark by the
Gipping at Ipswich during the winter of 1894-5. Kirby says *” that he has taken Aphis radicum

(= Trama troglodytes) in the nest of Lasius flavus — most probably in this county. Of the
Schizoneurinae, Schizoneura lanigera is only too common here and at Brandon on apple bark ; |
have, however, seen none winged ; they were still on the trees 22 October 1907. Apterous

S. fuliginosa are equally abundant in downy masses, one behind the other, on the pinnules of Scots
fir in August ; the earliest winged ones appeared last year on 22 October. Perhaps the ubiquitous
S. corni, more appropriately called vagans, was the species said by Kirby to have occurred in
incredible numbers in Ipswich in 1814 ; it is, at all events, often abundant there, at Wherstead, and
Barren Heath, as well as at Monk Soham, Reydon, Tuddenham, Eriswell, and Brandon, first
appearing on 22 August in 1907. Of the remaining small families | can at present only mention
Cherma laricis, of which | found eggs, larvae, and winged females abundantly on larches at Foxhall
at the end of May, and a big oviparous female here in June ; and Forda formkaria, which

Mr. Chitty took near Brandon in the nest of Tetramorium caespitum early in May. Aberrant Hemiptera

Under this heading | shall notice the extremely few species of all those various families which
have at different times been thought to possibly belong to this Order, because little or nothing has
been ascertained respecting them in Suffolk, and they appear to have appealed very little to the
collecting instincts of our entomologists. | have, for instance, very often seen Coccidae, or Scale

Insects, on bushes and have passed them by on the other side ; once | did send what | thought to be

a Coccid to Mr. Newstead, but he returned it as the pupa of a Psyllid 1 Mr. Tomlin has found

fluffy Coccids on bushes in the Bentley Woods, and | have no doubt Mytilaspis, Aspidiotus, and the
rest of the pests are only too common with us, but | wot not of them. The only three species of

the family | can refer to are the currant scale, Pulvinaria riiesiaf. Sign., which | saw on my

currant bushes this year, Aspidiotes crataegi on hawthorn, and a white coccid, which simply covered
the bark of a tall beech in my garden last August, but its name | do not know. Only two kinds

of Aleurodidae have been mentioned by Mr. Douglas," both taken that year by Mr. Bonnewell ;
Aleurodes proUtella, Linn., on celandine at Coddenham on 7 November, and A. hrassicae. Walk., on
savoys in an Ipswich garden on the 14th of the same month ; the latter species occurred in my
garden at Monk Soham on 3 June and again in October 1906. Of the Mallophaga, too, those
apterous parasites of birds which have no suction-tube with its circle of hooks at the base, but

a biting mouth, only three kinds can be instanced, though a very great many certainly occur, since
each bird is supposed to possess a peculiar one. The first appears to be Laemobothrum laticolle,
Denny, who says it is found on the genus Falco ; this was certainly taken, with many more of the
same species, upon a hawk which a fowler had caught in his net near Ipswich in November 1900;
and in October 1903 Mr. W. A. Dutt sent me apparently the same kind, found on a hobby

hawk {F. subhuteo) at Lowestoft. Two domestic fowl lice, Goniocotes hologaster and Menopon
pallidium, have been found in my hen-house at Monk Soham. The Pediculidae raise more aver-

sion than interest, and the only three kinds at present under notice are Pediculus capitis, Nitz ;. that so often found on pigs, Haematopinus suis, Leach, and the dog louse, H. pi/ifirus, Burm. Nor can we claim any authentic Thripsidae, though abundant everywhere and in July often
sweeping over the neighbourhood in myriads, entering picture-frames in such numbers as to neces-
sitate remounting, and tickling everyone's flesh ; the commonest kind here is probably Limothrips
cerealium, Hal., so destructive to corn." A second species, Coleothrips fasciata, Linn., has been some-

what doubtfully recorded from Monk Soham by Prof. Poulton." In 1905 | published The Hemiptera of Suffolk, which brings the total of Heteroptera noted

here up to 281 species, and the Homoptera, of the families Cicadidae and Psyllidae, to 162 species,

"Introd. to Entom. (7th ed. ), 185. " Ibid. 336. " Ent. Mo. Mag. 1895, p. 68.

" Cf. my notes in E. Anglian Daily Timet, 7 Aug. 1906. "Tram. Ent. Soc. 1906, p. 409. 148

[Begin Page: Page 149]

INSECTS

which numbers may be taken to very fairly represent the fauna of the county, though especial

attention to these groups would doubtless reveal many more ; and indeed | am already able to

add:—

Asopus punctatus. Beaten from rose, Tuddenham Fen,

Aug. 1905, by E. A. Elliott, F.Z.S. Sehirus morio Found in sand at Brandon, May and

June, by A. J. Chitty, M.A., and myself

Gerris argentata. Oulton and Bantby Broads, early

Apr. 1903, by E. C. Bedwell, F.E.S

Phytocoris Reuteri. | beat one from white poplar at

Brandon, in Aug. 1906

Systellonotus triguttatus. At Brandon, in Aug. 1 906,

by E. A. Elliott and myself

Corixa venusta. Four specimens in a 'swamp at

Bix/ej Decoy, Foxha/l, in Mar. 1897

Ebumia forcipata. | swept this in an alder carr at

Reydon early in June 1905

Idiocerus varius. Beaten from trees at Brandon, in

the middle of Aug. 1906

Allygus modestus. One swept from manh plants in

Tuddenham Fen, in autumn of 1906

Deltocephalus socialis. Captured at Brandon and

Tuddenham Fen, in Aug. 1905

Deltocephalus formosus. A new British species, which

| swept at Brandon, Aug. 1906

Limotettix stactogala. Found commonly on tamarisk

at Southwold, Sept. 1907

Cicadula metria. Swept from reeds near Brandon

Stanch in the early autumn of 1906

Dicraneura similis. Two specimens were swept in

Tuddenham Fen, in Aug. 1905

Aphalara nervosa . One only, taken on ragwort in my

garden. Monk Soham House, 1907

A Summary of the Insects of Suffolk, October 1907

CoLEOPTERA : —

Suffolk

Adephaga 277

Palpicomia 74

Brachelytra 441

Clavicomia 34.3

S8

35

56

34

32

Lamellicomia

Stemoxi

Malacoderma

Teredilia

Longicomia

Phytophaga 187

Heteromera 73

Rhynchophora . . . . 320

Total . . 1,930

Hemiptira : —

Heteroptera 287

Homoptera 171

Aphididae 66

Other Groups 13

Total . . 537

Orthoptera

Grand Total

Britain

444

95

777

681

90

76

57

57

256

118

526

3TI68

43«

3z«

182

c. 299"

1.233

Neuroptera : —

Thysanura ....

Pseudo-neuroptera

Odonata ....

Subnecromorphotica . Trichoptera . .

Total

Lepidoptera

Hymenoptera : —

Chrsyididae

Aculeata

Evaniidae . Ichneumonidae

Braconidae . Proctotrypidae

Chalcididae

Cynipidae . Tenthredinidae

Total

53 DIPTERA ..*+

Suffolk, 6,355. Britain

1,171 2,577"

14,678

" This is Dale's computation, and is probably much too low ; he says, Thripsidae, 46 ; Coccidae, 18

(cf Newstead) ; Aleyrodidae, i o ; Pediculidae, 1 4 ; and Philopteridae, 211. "Wallter, Haliday, and Westwood are stated to have described 1,274 “Y Kirchner {Cat. Hym. Eurofi.) ;

| have found the above total to be correct by the closest scrutiny.

" Marshall says (Ent. Ann. 1874) that he has trebled Curtis's number — 56 ; there is no British list, and

the above total is that of the species described by Cameron, 1893. "We cannot tell the total till Rev. F. D. Morice has completed his present work on this family {Ent. Mo. Mag. 1903 et seq.). ™ Excluding all the doubtfully British species in Mr. Verrall's List. — C. M

149