Historic, Archive Document

Do not assume content reflects current
scientific knowledge, policies, or practices. shel) dd ie ind dae STL hd hed é be Vv /w hd IN asi) hae Did paees 4 390
{ 4 | a v
; Se. Te, wv Pails POLINA
AA SNe " i aetna tania, Tey
oh ae ; :
ree Heinle ih we aah A I i, RRA 1
J a - f aN 2 PATER 7 a. by ; P PY. yall Sr hd wa mae | ¥ eee: WeAwy He RATAN af ‘ ae
Ie st PtSi LY
Ju VY a 1 r J Sian Py AG o Pi fy PY :
EL ania t ; Ns ern iy a hh a SER 8
Tow s v . TA TPT Ug S ree
PEN ATEN iy ap PPL ee Ween ee 5
wwe w.P] aa | , wy
Uy 2 iW ie) CU
LN > E = wv Veer eee Wy AA Odde
nN OCU ear a < ' Ho yh ww oh S Was E:
EAR ee 8 Wee" ) ODT dae
baal eh meas AES TET aM okies pele cant
Wah a°2: 3° Re aati
wy Nan re eee gi] Zz Zs SN aN je oe ETO) Bd Vegpulseeeres
Serine | ! 5 3 « yi ele at hae
aA nae Es aD ha vi) eA Ae ae
RIO) hs nn / vr L VW
A OE HO) a » { ) 0 Dipti
ee el yy" WTP aaah
jae ce 7 NEN eeu tteld thai Hata th

  

wel OVadigy? wey We i. ad yd ad 7 aay

PP D Tele ahs Ana) OAS AL ROS Ltd o} peo Oh - te
vege A hd bene ye > telat

Det he WVU PLULU) ba od eA we, a he,

POO RCS deh 44 th ad ie ent AT a TOV

hdd | OCC OOO Ser a 4 has wot joe” ou PT Le

NII els las kdb VSO Cc ch ONO I ih

a we 4 >. -« oe £. rt ad an 7a ba
ade we * hd a 7 aay, Fake
ae Jdvy jis Ji chad tah) el ee ul wey
yediv agin hd Maa a Ny Teeny :
ea A244 § ad P) eae) We
yeni” \ Y ERO aad jou. wu wae tee wren Meron
Pd me aa ed] rAd y Tae Joa jad uy es w iS
WpAck ted

PPP
vy oP aaa Yd) eae \
bd Aa tecadiaceatatgs Ace note 4 Lad ¥ 4

                                

CY

Tee, v ak
Sean nea Mit, wae wer y Webb id nec

 

jee bite. : Si Lane,
hd be syewer’ { A Terk hdd % '
RAM hd ve dvyy? VW
TA Ada alt OTL hal '
fi OPA v Ore Ay wv Jvvyy~ Y
iy 5 or: t “ws ; E
54 aWN NY as ee aaa TG, vue
vey aN ) we vv aN
ee Ae 4 Pee, rp,
Aharon he) y
Nid Hye

One Ts

Been
Mahi hid AL hd hi

UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
LIBRARY

        

BOOK NUMBER

, v pA ian, ae ate yg
AA | ‘d \ Wiley hd Here ERD; 4 Ae
LL Ls Ro aaaateas were” Fav reer
A RAL ina. Le Deed ,
P WW IS GIL IIIS 7 Ta) ; AMIS . ye) NY
wee tami. Oh Ad ond r A} wh i has uwyyy mE oe
WT ov naa AY CO EOS e ¥ wwiggadies
wy OE ve) ow WwW OI Ad
ce ot MAI | 2} tel RA a haa baddiled
1 5a lie wy
TAPS AT Mega. na i - Fe
f/bV | Et Pt ed A | S ’ w/w vt i) Pheu
SSG] TPN MT) hhh PEP, TA 4 a ht
7 Yur | aA AL Te FM y ae

 

Su r. Fi =e * aaron A ha fe! Dh RN had 3 a bade Bree” Bad bat © WT”)

 

   

USDA, National Agricultural Library
NAL Bldg

10301 Baltimore Blvd
Beltsville, MD 20705-2354

 

i a bo f
2 = f 7
Gu $ Ma i Issued Aug. 15, 1917. U. 8. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, t
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY. CONTRIBUTION FROM THE BUREAU OF ENTOMOLOGY, L. 0. HOWARD, CHIEF,
IN COLLABORATION WITH THE FEDERAL HORTICULTURAL
BOARD, C. L. MARLATT, CHAIRMAN. a

,

 

 

JA MANUAL

DANGEROUS INSECTS

LIKELY TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE
UNITED STATES THROUGH
-IMPORTATIONS. EDITED BY

W. DWIGHT PIERCE,

Entomologist, Southern Field Crop Insect Investigations. WASHINGTON:
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFIOE. fs 1917

 

 

U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. FRONTISPIECE. DIFFERENT STAGES OF THE GIPSY MOTH (PORTHETRIA DISPAR). Egg mass on center of twig; female moth ovipositing just below: female moth below, at. left,
enlarged: male moth, somewhat reduced, immediately above: female moth immediately above,
somewhat reduced: male moth with wings folded in upper left: male chrysalis at right of this:
female chrysalis again at right; larva at center. (Howard and Fiske.) Issued. Aug. 15, 1917. U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY. CONTRIBUTION FROM THE BUREAU OF ENTOMOLOGY, L. 0. HOWARD, CHIEF,

IN COLLABORATION WITH THE FEDERAL HORTICULTURAL
BOARD, C. L. MARLATT, CHAIRMAN,

 

A MANUAL

DANGEROUS INSECTS

LIKELY TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE
UNITED STATES THROUGH
IMPORTATIONS. EDITED BY

W. DWIGHT PIERCE,

Entomologist, Southern Field Crop Insect Investigations. WASHINGTON:
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFIOE,
1917

 

 

A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS LIKELY TO BE INTRO-
DUCED IN THE UNITED STATES THROUGH IMPORTATIONS,

This publication has been prepared in the Bureau of Entomology
at the request of and in cooperation with the Federal Horticultural
Board to supply such information as is required by its officers
and others in the enforcement of quarantines and the safe-
guarding of this country against foreign insect pests. It should
assist materially in preventing the introduction of additional pests
like the gipsy moth, boll weevil, and alfalfa weevil. Only a brief
sketch can be given of each of the more important species. The
plants making up the commerce in vegetable products are arranged
alphabetically by the American common name, with the scientific
name following. It is believed that this arrangement is most con-
venient for inspectors. A brief sketch of certain important facts
concerning each plant is also given. The arrangement under each plant of the insects in two or more
categories, A, B, etc., is merely one of convenience. Under A are
grouped the better known insects, or those concerning which there
is available literature. This category especially contains pests
which are easily imported. Under B are listed many important
pests, possibly sometimes more important than those listed in A and
often just as readily introduced. They are merely listed because
full descriptive matter was not available and for other similar reasons. In later editions probably many of these pests will merit fuller
discussion. It is not to be expected that inspectors will attempt to make final
determinations with the aid of this.work. In fact, it would be very
unwise to do so. The book is merely to indicate to inspectors and
entomologists the insects likely to be found associated with impor-
tations. The references to foreign literature under the species give the best
or most easily available source of additional information. Tables —
and keys to species could not possibly be included in a work of this
kind. It is expected that the inspector, on finding important insects
not already familiar to him, will immediately transmit specimens to
the Bureau of Entomology at Washington, D. C., for reference to the
proper authorities or to other competent specialists in the groups to

which the insects belong. 3

4 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. This compilation was only possible by the cooperation of all the
divisions of the Bureau of Entomology, some of which prepared the
matter in the form in which it now appears. The editor therefore
wishes to acknowledge the assistance of Messrs. C. L. Marlatt, W. D.
Hunter, A. D. Hopkins, the late F. M. Webster, F. H. Chittenden,
A. L. Quaintance, W. R. Walton, E. R. Sasscer, Jacob Kotinsky,
Dwight Isely, H. L. Sanford, and R. W. Rust for the collection of the
notes on the insect enemies of the crops investigated by them,
and of Messrs. W. R. Walton, Harry B. Bradford, and the late J. F.
Strauss in the preparation of the illustrations. The lists of insects included in this manual are necessarily incom-
plete, and no doubt important species have been omitted. Fre-
quently the literature on dangerous species is so meager as to make
it impossible to conclude as to the importance of the species. Regarding the nomenclature, it should be remembered that this
work is strictly a compilation. Many of the names will undoubtedly
be changed as the result of future studies. The ones used, however,
are the ones current in European literature. To have attempted to
make the nomenclature more exact would have involved practically
the revision of many large groups of insects. This would have been
entirely impracticable and would have delayed publication of the
manual for years. Moreover it would have resulted in a publication
which inspectors would have had difficulty in using on account of the
fact that the literature accessible to them would have, in many
cases, used other names. In order to make future editions of this
handbook more useful, the bureau will be greatly obliged for criticism,
additions, and recommendations as to treatment. The majority of the insect pests in the United States which now
occasion the greatest damage to orchard, field, and garden crops and
to stored products and in homes, etc., are of foreign origin, and were
introduced with the host plants or accidentally in the course of com-
merce. Such introductions of new pests are going on all the time,
as illustrated by such recent arrivals as the Argentine ant in New
Orleans and the alfalfa leaf weevil in Utah. .The list of over 100
introduced insect pests given below illustrates the nature of the
most important of these introductions in the past. This handbook
contains the names of hundreds of other insects which now occur in
different parts of the world and which are liable to be introduced at
any time with nursery stock or in merchandise or as accidental guests
or stowaways on ships or in baggage. It also includes a considerable
number of introduced pests which are not now generally distributed
and which therefore should be guarded against both as to further
entry and to further distribution within the United States. Throughout the work species which have been introduced into the
United States are marked with an asterisk (+) and the fact of the

LIST OF INTRODUCED FOREIGN INSECTS. 5

introduction is mentioned. Many of the most important introduced
insects are omitted because they are now so generally distributed
that the importation of a few additional individuals will have no
effect upon the existing economic conditions. LIST OF IMPORTANT FOREIGN INSECTS WHICH HAVE BEEN
INTRODUCED INTO THE UNITED STATES. MITES (ACARINA). Orange rust mite or lemon mite. Eriophyes oleivorus Ashmead. (See Citrus.) Grape blister mite. Eriophyes vitis Landois. (See Grape.) Pear leaf blister mite. Eriophyes pyri Pagenstaecker. (See Pear.) Plum blister mites. Eriophyes phla@ocoptes Nalepa and E. padi Nalepa. (See Plum.) Potato root mite. Rhizoglyphus ( Ccepophagus) echinopus Fumouze and Robin. (See Potato.) THRIPS (THYSANOPTERA). Onion thrips. Thrips tabaci Lind. Pear thrips. Tzniothrips pyri Daniel. Red-banded thrips. Heliothrips rubrocinctus Giard. (See Fruits.) SCALES, BUGS, APHIDS (HEMIPTERA). San José scale. Aspidiotus perniciosus Comstock. Apricot scale. Epidiaspis piricola Del Guercio. (See Apricot.) Greedy scale. Aspidiotus camellix Signoret (rapax Comstock). (See Asparagus.) Box seales. Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) dictyospermi Morgan, A spidiotus britannicus Newstead, and Pin-
naspis buzi Bouché. (See Box.) Catalpa scale. Diaspis pentagona Targioni. (See Catalpa.) Citrus scales. Aspidiotus orientalis Newstead and Parlatoria zizyphus Lucas. (See Citrus.) Coconut palm seale. Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) persee Comstock. (See Coconut palm.) Fig scales. Conchaspis angrxci Cockerell and Lepidosaphes ficus Signoret. (See Ficus.) Hawthorn scales. Lecanium bituberculatum Targioni. (See Hawthorn.) Mango scales. Coccus mangifere Green and Leucaspis indica Marlatt. (See pl. 1, fig. 1.) (See Mango.) Oak scales. Asterolecanium variolosum Ratzeburg. (See Oak.) Orchid scales. Aspidiotus ( Targionia) biformis Cockerell, Parlatoria proteus Curtis, and P. pseudaspidiotus
Lindinger. (See Orchid.) Pear scale. Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) ostrexformis Curtis. (Sec Pear.) Rosescale. Leucaspis japonica Cockerell. (See Rose.) Sago palm scale. Diaspis zamiae Morgan. (See Sago Palm.) Sugar-cane mealy-bug. Pseudococcus terensis Tinsley. (See Sugar cane.) Black scale. Saissetia olee Barnard. Fluted scale. Jcerya purchasi Maskell. (See pl. 01, fig. 2.) Oystershell scale. Lepidosaphes ulmi Linneeus. Purple scale of the orange. Lepidosaphes beckii Newman. Hop aphis. Phorodon humuli Schrank. Spinach aphis, Myzus persicz Sulzer. Cabbage aphis, A phis brassice Linnzus. Melon aphis, A phis gossypii Glover. Pea aphis, Macrosiphum pisi Kaltenbach. Bean aphis, Aphis rumicis Linnzus. Wheat plant louse. A phis avenz Fabricius. Pear-tree psylla. Psylla pyricola Forster. Tarnished plant-bug. Lygus pratensis Linnus. Cotton stainer. Dysdercus suturellus Herrich-Schaeffer. (See Cotton.) /

BEETLES (COLEOPTERA). Beet carrion beetle. Blitophaga opaca Linneus. (Sce Beet.) Red-legged ham beetle. Necrobia rufipes De Gecr. Leather beetles. Dermestes vulpinus Fabricius and D. frischi Kugelann. Pear borer. Agrilus sinuatus Olivier. (See Pear.) Confused flour beetle. Tribolium confusum Duv. Saw-toothed grain beetle. Silvanus surinamensis Linneeus. Cadelle or bolting-cloth beetle, Tenebrioides mauritanicus Linneus. 6 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Lesser grain-borer, Rhizopertha dominica Fabricius. Drug-store beetle, Sitodrepa panicea Linnzus. Cigarette beetle, Lasiodermz serricorne Fabricius. Rust-red flour beetle, Tribolium ferrugineum Fabrieius. Poplar borer. Saperda carcharias Linnzeus. (See Poplar.) Willow leaf-beetle. Phyllodecta vitellinae Linneus. (See Willow.) Elm leaf-beetle. Galerucella luteola Miiller. -

Crucifer leaf-beetles. Phyllotreta vittata Fabrieius and P. armoraciz Koeh. (See Crucifer.) California grape rootworm. Adorus obscurus Linneeus. (See Grape.) Beet tortoise beetle. Cassida nebulosa Linnzeus. (See Beet.) Asparagus beetle. Crioceris asparagi Linneeus. (See Asparagus.) Asparagus beetle. Crioceris 12-punctata Linneeus. (See Asparagus.) Bean weevils. Mylabris! rufimanus Boheman, M. pisorwm Linneus, M. lentis Frolichs, A canthoscelides
obtectus Say, Pachymerus chinensis Linnzeus, P. quadrimaculatus Fabricius. (Sce Beans.) The poplar and willow eurculio. Cryptorhynchus lapathi Linneeus. (See Alder, Birch, Poplar.) Austrian alfalfa leaf weevil. Hypera meles Fabricius. (See Alfalfa.) The clover leaf weevil. Hypera punctata Fabricius. (See Alfalfa.) The alfalfa weevil. Hypera postica Gyllenhal. (See Alfalfa.) Clover leaf weevils. Hypera meles Fabricius and Hypera nigrirostris Fabricius. (See Clover.) Broad-nosed grain weevil. Caulophilus latinasus Say. (Sec Avoeado.) Root weevils. Polydrusus sericeus Sehaller and P. viridicollis Baudi. (See Beech.) Coffee-bean weevil. <Arexcerus fasciculatus De Geer. (See Corn.) Sweet-potato weevil. Cylas formicarius Fabricius. Clover root weevils. Sitona flavescens Marsh and Sitona hispidula Fabrieius. (See Clover.) Strawberry root weevil. Brachyrhinus ovatus Linneus (Otiorhynchus). (See Oonifers.) Grain weevils. Calendra granaria Linneeus and C. oryza Linneeus. (See Corn.) Grape root weevil. Brachyrhinus sulcatus Fabricius. (See Grape.) Fruit-tree bark bectle. Scolytus rugulosus Ratzeburg. MOTHS (LEPIDOPTERA). The gipsy moth. Porthetria dispar Linneeus. (See Forests.) The eotton bollworm. Chloridea obsoleta Fabricius. The beet army worm. Laphygma exigua Hiibner (Caradrina). Theapple moth. Argyresthia conjugella Zeller. (See Apple.) Horse-chestnut borer. Zeuzera pyrine Linneus. (See Horse-chestnut.) Beech tortrieid. Peronea ferrugana Treitsehke. (Sec Becch, Birch.) Hawaiian beet webworm. Hymenia fascialis Cramer. (Sce Beet.) Beet worm. Plusia gamma Linneus. (Sec Bect.) Diamond-back moth. Plutella maculipennis Curtis. (Attacks turnip, eabbage, eauliflower.) Cabbage webworm. Hellula wndalis Fabricius. Celery leaf-tyer. Phlyctznia ferrugalis Hiibner. European pine-shoot moth. vetria buoliana Schiffermiller. (See Conifers, C.)

Pine bud and gall moths. vetria turionana Hiibner; LZ. pinivorana Zeller; E.duplana Hiibner. (See
Conifers, C.) . Brown-tail moth. Ewproctis chrysorrhea Linneus. (See Forests.) Pea moth. Laspeyresia nigricana Stephens. (See Pea.) Sugar-cane borer. Diatrza saccharalis Fabricius. (See Sugar cane.) Mediterranean flour moth. Ephestia kuehniella Zeller. Imported cabbage butterfly. Pontia rapz Linneus. Angoumois grain moth. Sitotroga cerealella Olivier. Codling moth. Laspeyresia pomonella Linneus. ’

European grain moth, Tinea granella Linnzeus. Indian-meal moth, Plodia interpunctella Hiibner. Fig moth, Ephestia cautella Walker. Pa

Cutworms, Peridroma, Agrotis, Feltia, etc. SAWFLIES (HYMENOPTERA). Coniferous sawfly. Diprion simile Hartig. (See Conifers, B.) Currant worm. Pteronidea ribesii Scopoli. Rose sawfly, Cladius pectinicornis Fouc. Larch sawfly, Nematus erichsoni Hartig. Rose sawfly Caliroa aethiops Fabricius. Plum sawfly, Eriocampoides limacina Retzius. Elm sawfly, Fenusa dohrnii Tischbein. 1The generie name Mylabris Geoffroy 1762 has precedenee over Laria Scopoli and Bruchus Linnzeus
as used for the bean weevils and is the name which should be followed in future literature.—W. D.
Pierce. INSECTS SPECIALLY LIABLE TO IMPORTATION. 7

FLIES (DIPTERA). Imported cabbage maggot. Chortophila (Pegomya) brassice Bouché. Seed-corn maggot. Chortophila (Pegomya) fusciceps Zetterstedt. Grain gall midge. Contarinia tritici Kirby. (See Grains.) Hessian fiy. Phytophaga destructor Say (Mayetiola). (See Grains.) Pear gall midge. Contarinia pyrivora Riley. (See Pear.) Imported onion maggot. Chortophila (Pegomya) cepetorum Medde. Spinach leaf miner. Chortophila (Pegomya) hyoscyami Linnzeus (vicina Lintner). INSECTS SPECIALLY LIABLE TO IMPORTATION AT ANY
TIME. There are certain groups of insects which are uniformly injurious
and can not therefore be given full justice in a bulletin of this type. These insects should be especially guarded against and excluded on
general principles, whether incriminating evidence is found or not. TERMITES (TERMITID®). There have been several cases of introduction of termites into the United States,
notable among which was the importation of Leucotermes lucifugus Rossi in packing
boxes from Germany. The termites are uniformly injurious to wood and plant
growth and may be imported in any type of wood, whether in the form of nursery
stock, lumber, or manufactured product. A list of species is to be found in Wyts-
man’s Genera Insectorum by Desneux (1903). THRIPS (THYSANOPTERA). The tiny fringe-winged thrips are very destructive to many crops, and should
always be guarded against. SCALE INSECTS (COCCID). These tiny insects are inconspicuous and the greatest of care is necessary on the
part of inspectors to prevent their introduction. This family may be considered, as
a whole, a most undesirable group of insects. Many species have already been in-
troduced and become serious pests. Reference to Mrs. Fernald’s Catalogue of Coc-
cide as well as Technical Bulletins 12 and 16 of the Bureau of Entomology will
give full data as to literature. L. Lindinger, in his ‘‘Die Schildliuse (Coccide),’’
gives tables to the species of European scale insects attacking each plant. All names
of scale insects used in this bulletin have been verified by Mr. E. R. Sasscer. Several
genera of scales are illustrated on plates 1-v to assist in determination. Some of the
species illustrated are not treated in the text, although congeneric species are. WHITE FLIES (ALEYRODID 4). The tiny white flies are very apt to slip in past even a zealous inspector. The
flattened scalelike larvee of some species look so much like the plant tissue that they are
easily overlooked. The active little white-winged adults fly so quickly that rough
handling would tend merely to disperse them and increase the dangers of introduction. Kirkaldy in 1907 issued a world checklist in Bulletin 2, Hawaii Board of Commis-
sioners Agriculture and Forestry. (See Technical Bull. 27, of the Bureau of Ento-
mology and Proc. U. 8. Nat. Mus., No. 2156.) RED SPIDERS; MITES (ACARINA). These tiny eight-legged creatures are not insects, but so closely related that they
are generally treated as such. The red spiders are exceedingly minute and occur
on almost every type of vegetation. As their rate of multiplication is very rapid

8 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. they have become serious pests to agriculture. There are a number of four-legged
blister mites of great importance and yet so small that they can only be seen with a
very high power lens. BARKBEETLES (SUPERFAMILY SCOLYTOIDEA: FAMILIES IPID,
SCOLYTOPLATYPODID®, SCOLYTIDEH, AND PLATYPODID). °

All of the bark beetles, ambrosia bettles and other members of this family are
more or less injurious to tree growth, forest products, tree seeds, fruits, etc., and
species known to be injurious must be carefully guarded against. These beetles
are small, cylindrical with elbowed and clubbed antenne. The head is without
or with very short beak and the submentum is without a gular peduncle. In Ipide
and Scolytide (Hopkins’s classification) the first joint of the tarsus is shorter than the
others combined, while in Platypodide the first joint is as long or longer than the
others. They all bore in the plant tissue to deposit their eggs and their burrows
or galleries are characteristic of groups, genera, and species. The food consists of
plant tissue except in the ambrosia beetles where it consists of so-called ambrosia
fungi. Genera Insectorum has issued a fascicle on Ipide=Superfamily Scolytoidea
of Hopkins,! with catalogue of species of the world. BEAN WEEVILS (MYLABRIDA—BRUCHID®, LARIID®). |

The seed weevils or bruchids breed almost entirely in the seeds of plants, especially
of the bean and pea family. They are uniformly injurious and should be excluded. These beetles are usually small and either oval or elongate, with the head carried in a
downward position and with the antennee often pectinate or plumose. The elytra do
not completely cover the abdomen. A catalogue of the Mylabride (Bruchide) has
been issued by Junk. CUTWORMS; ARMY WORMS (NOCTUID). Several species of cutworms and army worms have already become world wide in
their distribution through their strong flying ability and by commerce. As the larvee
are very. generally destructive and not at all exclusive in food habits, they need to be
carefully guarded against. Larvee may be transported anywhere on theships. Cirphis
unipuncta Haworth, the army worm; Spodoptera mauritia Boisduval, the grass army
worm, and Agrotis ypsilon Rottenburg, the greasy cutworm, are practically cos-
mopolitan. A discussion of most of the injurious species will be found in Sorauer’s
Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 348-374. WEEVILS. RHYNCHOPHORA—COLEOPTERA. The experience of the last few years in the quarantine of horticul-
tural products has shown that one of the groups most likely to intro-
duction is the group of weevils which comprise a large section of the
order Coleoptera. Owing to the development of many species of weevils in the roots,
stems, and fruit of almost every type of plant known, it is very easy
to introduce them in immature stages in such a manner that they may
take hold and attack the introduced plant. Owing to the necessity
of determining practically all of the weevils introduced by a search
through foreign literature a majority of the species so far introduced

‘Tech. Series 17, part II, Bureau of Entomology, U. S. Dept. of Agric., 1915. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects

 

 

 

The mango scale (*Leucaspis indica), upper figure
lower figures. (O

 

U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE II. DANGEROUS SCALE INSECTS. fhe bamboo scale (Chionaspis graminis). Fic. 2.—The fluted scale (*Icerya purchasi). 3.—The citru: ie (*Pseudococcus citri). Fic. 4.—* Coccus hesperidum, a scale of citrus,
tea, and palms. ( inal, Sasscer. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PuaTe Ill.

 

il
ail me . .

 

 

AUSTRALIAN SCALE INSECTS. Fic, 1.—The cordyli
of athorrh:
Sasscer.) le (Leucaspis cordylinidis). F1¢
4.—A scale (Chionaspis nitida

    

   

2, 3.—A scale (Lepidosaplies pallens),
of Daviesia corymbosa. (Original

U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLaTe IV. 3
DANGEROUS SCALE INSECTS. Fig. 1.—The Atriplex scale (Pulvinaria maskelli). Fic. 2.—A scale (*Orthezia insi

gnis) of citrus,
tea, etc. FIG. 3.—The plum and peach scale (J ecanium prunastri). (Original,

Sasscer.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PuaTe V.

 

 

 

DANGEROUS SCALE INSECTS. Fic. 1.—The cosmopolitan tea and olive scale (* Fiorinia theae). Fic. 2.—The Mexican agave scale
(Chrysomphalus agavis). Fic. 3.—The date palm scale (Parlatoria blanchardi). (Original, Sasscer.) ACACIA INSECTS. 9

have not been determined or described. For this reason many im
portant species are not included in the present edition. The larve of weevils are white or yellowish with a dark head
shield and are usually found in a more or less curved position. Most of
them are rather robust and with a very few exceptions have no legs
or rudiments thereof. The pupa can always be distinguished by the presencs of the beak
lying flattened between the legs. The adult weevils are distinguished by the prolongation of the head
into a beak. This may be very short and broad or very long and
slender. They are furthermore characterized by having the tarsi
four-jointed. Inspectors are urged to take every possible precaution
against the introduction of any species of weevils and where imma-
ture or adult stages are found they should immediately place them in
alcohol and send them to Washington for determination. DANGEROUS FOREIGN INSECTS LIKELY TO BE INTRO-
DUCED IN THE UNITED STATES THROUGH IMPORTA-
TIONS, ARRANGED BY HOST PLANTS. ACACIA; WATTLES. (Acacia spp. Family Leguminose.) This genus contains several hundred species distributed throughout the world in
semitropical and temperate climates. The gum arabic of commerce is derived from
Acacia senegal; a drug of commerce is obtained from the wood of A. catechu, a soap
or hair wash from A. concinna; others furnish dyes, fiber, scented wood, or valuable
timber. A number of species of this genus or very nearly related to it grow in our

Southern States. IMPORTANT ACACIA PESTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccide. Armored—
Aspidiotus (Targionia) acaciz Morgan; New South Wales, Tasmania; Acacia pycnantha. Aspidiotus tasmaniz Green; Australia. Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) quadriareolata Malenotti; Africa; A. asak. Fiorinia acaciz Maskell; Australia, New Zealand; A. pycnantha, A. pulchella, A. longifolia. Lepidosaphes acaciz Maskell; Australia; A. linifolia. Lepidosaphes spinifera Maskell; Australia; A. pendula. Lepidosaphes somalensis Malenotti; East Africa; A. asak. Protodiaspis anomala Green; Australia,
Pseudotargionia glandulosa Newstead;. Egypt; A. arabica. Unarmored—
Akermes scrobiculatus Maskell; Australia. Akermes levis Maskell; Australia; A. longifolia. Asterolecanium ventruosum Maskell; Australia. Ceroplastes erithreus Leonardi; Africa. Ceroplastes mimoszx Signoret; Egypt; A. arabica. Cryptes baccatus Maskell; Australia; A.armata, A.calamifolia, A. linearis. A. longifolia, A. melanozylon
Epicoccus acaciz Maskell; West Australia; A. pulchella,
Kermes acaciz Maskell; Australia. Lecaniodiaspis acaciz Maskell; West Australia; attacks A. calamifolia, A. cyanophylla, A. micro-
botrya, and A, longifolia. Lecaniodiaspis africana Newstead; Egypt; A. arabica,
Lecaniodiaspis dilatata Froggatt; Australia; A. discolor. Pseudococcus acaciz Maskell; Australia; A. linearis, Albizzia lophanta. 10 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Coccide—Continued. Unarmored—Continued. Pseudococcus albizziz Maskell; Australia, Hawaii; A. dealbata, A. discolor, A. baileyana. Pseudococcus farnesiane Targioni-Tozzetti; Italy; A. farnesiana, ‘This is the huisache of the United
States and is here known as Vachellia farnesiana. Pseudococcus swezeyi Ehrhorn; Hawaii; A. koa. Pseudococcus nitidus Brain; South Africa; A. caffra. Pseudococcus quaesitus Brain; South Africa; A. caffra, A. robusta, A. horrida. Pseudococcus solitarius Brain; South Africa. Pseudococcus filamentosus Cockerell; Jamaica, Mauritius, Hawaii, Japan; attacks A. arabica in Egypt. Rhizococcus lobatulatus; Australia; A. pendula. Saissetia mirifica Maskell; Australia; A. pendula. Spherococcus acaciz Maskell; Australia. Tachardia acaciz Maskell; Australia; A. greggii. COLEOPTERA. Buprestide. Melobasis splendida Donovan; Australia; breeds in dead branches of A cacia longifolia. Scarabeide. Diphucephala aurulenta Kirby; Australia; attacks foliage of black wattle. Heterorhina hookeri White; India; attacks foliage of Acacia catechu. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and M. melolontha Linneus; Europe; larve attack roots of seed
lings. Polyphylla fullo Linneeus; Europe; larve attack roots of seedlings and adults attack foliage. Cerambycide. Celosterna spinator Fabricius; India; bores in shoots of A. arabica,
Lygesis mendica Pascoe; Australia; bores in twigs of black wattle. Pachydissus sericus Newman; Australia; breeds in trunks and branches of A. longifolia, A. decurrens. Piesarthrius marginellus Hope; Australia; breeds in wood of A. longifolia. Sternotomis bohemani Chevrolat; German East Africa. Symphyletes neglectus; Australia; girdles branches of A. longifolia. Symphyletes nigrovirens; Australia; A. jwniperina,
Symphyletes vestigialis; Australia. Uracanthus triangularis Hope; Australia; attacks branches of black wattle. Uracanthus strigosus, U. bivittata and U. simulans; Australia; attack A. longifolia. Chrysomelidz. Elaphodes tigrinus; Australia; defoliator. Paropsis picez Oliver; Australia; attack foliage of black wattle. Curculionide (seus. lat.). Chrysolophus spectabilis Fabricius; Australia; black wattle. Leptops tribulus Fabricius; Australia; black wattle. Rhinotia hemoptera Kirby; Australia; breeds in stems of Acacia suaveolens. Myllocerus acaciz; India. LEPIDOPTERA. Cossidzx. Zeuzera eucalypti Boisduval, a goat moth; Australia; bores in the thicker branches and trunk of living
trees of Acacia decurrens. Geometridz. Biston suppressarius Gn., a defoliator; India; attacks Acacia catechu, and A.modesta, as well as other
trees,
Euchloris submissaria Walker, Lophodes sinistraria Guer. and Selidosema lyciaria Gn. attacks the foliage
of black wattle in Australia. Selidosema excursaria and Thalaina clara Walker attack the foliage of wattles in Australia. Hepialidz. Pileus hyalinatus breeds at the roots of wattles in Australia. Charagia lignivora Lewin; Australia, (See Apple.) Lymantriidz. Teia anartoides Walker, the wattle moth; Australia; skeletonizes foliage. (See Fruit.) Teara contraria Walker; Australia; defoliates. INSECTS OF ACACIA AND ALDER. 11

Xyloryctida. Cryptophaga rubriginosa; Australia; bores in twigs. Tortricidz. Argyroploce illepida Buhl. ; Australia; India; Ceylon; Africa; attacks seed pods of Acacia farnesiana. HYMENOPTERA. Formicldz (seus. lat.). Camponotus ligniperda Latreille; an ant; Europe; attacks living wood. LITERATURE,

Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3:
Froeeatr. Australian Insects. LINDINGER. L. Die Schildliiuse (Coccide), 1912. FERNALD, MARIA E. Mass. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 88, 1903. ALDER. (Alnus spp. Family Betulacez.) Hardy ornamental trees and shrubs grown in Asia, Europe, North America, and
South America. Alnus rubra is the most important timber tree. The genus is not
attacked by many very serious pests, but any of the wood borers, especially, might
become serious when transported to another country in nursery stock. Several
pests have gained admission to the United States in some manner. These are indicated
by an asterisk. A. AN ALDER PEST LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Coleophora fuscedinella Zell. {Alder Bud Moth. Elachistide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Alder. Injury: Attacks buds and foliage. Description and biology: Adult moth with wing expanse 10-13 mm., forewings dark
brownish gray, in the male with a little yellowish; hind wings dark gray. Egg over-
winters in buds. Larva chocolate brown, head and thoracic shield black; third and
fourth pairs of prolegs rudimentary. Feeds in buds and on foliage. Pupates in case. Distribution: Germany. Nusstry, Otto. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. p. 433. B. OTHER IMPORTANT ALDER PESTS. ACARINA. Eriophyidz. Eriophyes laevis Nalepa, a blister gall mite; England; on leaves of Alnus glutinosa. ORTHOPTERA. Acridiidz. Podisma alpina Koll., a green grasshopper of the mountain sections of Europe, Amur, and Japan;
very destructive at times. HEMIPTERA. Psyllidz. Psylia alni Linneus, a sucking bug; Germany; breeds on the leaves. Coccide. Phenacoccus aceris Signoret; Europe; attacks Alnus glutinosa, and A. incana. Pulvinaria betulae alni Douglas; England; attacks Alnus glutinosa. Lecanium capree Linneeus; England. Lecanium corni Bouché; Europe; attacks Alnus incana. Lecanium coryli Linneus; Europe; attacks A. glutinosa and A. incana. Chionaspis salicis Linnzus; Europe, Egypt; attacks Alnus glutinosa, A. incana, and A. viridis. Hemichionaspis sp. ; Japan. Aspidiotis ( Targionia) alni Marchal; France; attacks Alnus glutinosa. 12 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Anobiidz. Xestobium rufovillocum De Geer, a brown wood-boring bectle; Europe; injures the wood for technica
purposes. Me
Ptilinus pectinicornis Linneus, a shining dark-brown wood-boring beetle; Europe; injures the-wood
for technical purposes. i
Buprestidae. *Agrilus viridis Linneus, a greenish wood-boring beetle; Europe; bores in the wood of stems and
branches. (Sce Oak.) Lampra rutilans Fabricius (Pecilonota), a yellowish-red wood-boring bectle with greenish or bluish
shimmer; Europe; bores in the bast and sapwood of branches. Scarabaeidz. Anomala grandis Hope, a large bright-grecn bectle; India; adult strips leaves, larvee at roots of
Alnus nepalensis. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius, a large May beetle; Europe; gnaws roots. Melolontha melolontha Linnzeus, a large May beetle; Europe; gnaws roots. Cerambycidz. Oberea linearis Linnzus, a long-horned wood-borer; Europe; attacks nursery stock especially. Chrysomelidz. Agelastica alni Linnzus, a blue leaf beetle; Europe; larvee and adults skeletonize foliage. Haltica quercetorum Foudr., a metallic blue or green leaf beetle; Europe; larva and adults skeletonize
foliage. (See Oak.) Melasoma nea Linneus, a leaf beetle; Europe; larvee and adults skeletonize leaves. Attelabide. A poderus coryli Linnzus, a long-necked weevil; Europe; adults roll leaves into nests for young. Rhynchitida. Byctiscus betulz Linneus, a metallic blue or green leaf-rolling weevil; Europe. Rhynchites betule Linnzeus, a brown or black leaf-rolling weevil; Europe. Curculionidae. * Cryptorhynchus lapathi Linnzeus, a weevil; Europe, and introduced into the United States; bores in
young shoots, branches, bark, and wood. It attacks also poplars and willows in the Eastern United
States and is an important pest. Hylobius abietis Linneus, an elongate weevil; Europe; bores in bark of seedlings. Orchestes alni Linneus, a jumping weevil; Europe; mines the leaves. Orchestes testaceus scutellaris Zetterstedt, a jumping weevil; Europe; mines the leaves. Scolytidz. Anisandrus dispar Fabricius, a small wood-boring beetle; Germany; brecds in galleries in wood. Dryocetes alni Georg, a bark beetle; Germany; breeds in galleries in bark and sapwood. Trypophieus alni Lindemann,a bark beetle; Europe; breeds in galleries in bark and sapwood of
Alnus incana. Xyloterus domesticus Linnzeus, an ambrosia beetle; Germany; breeds in galleries in wood and
sapwood,
LEPIDOPTERA. Tortricidz. Peronea ferrugana S. V.,a greenish leaf-feeding larva; Europe, North America. Cosside. Cossus cossus Linneeus, a goat Moth; Europe; bores in the wood. (See Willow.) *Zeuzera pyrina Linneus,a white moth; Europe, Africa, North America; bores in the wood. This is
an important pest. (See Horse chestnut.) Sesiidz. Sesia culiciformis Linneus, a clear-winged moth; Europe; bores in bark and stumps of branches. Sesia spheciformis Gerning, a clear-winged moth; Europe; bores in wood. Geometridx. Anisopteryx zscularia Schiffermiller, a greenish measuring-worm; Europe; feeds on foliage. Larentia dilutata Borckh., a measuring-worm; Central Europe; feeds on foliage. Lymantriidz. Dasychira pudibunda Linneus, the red-tail moth. (See Forest defoliators.) *Porthetria dispar Linneus, the gipsy moth. An important pest in New England. (See Forest
defoliators.) Notodontidz. Phalera bucephala Linnzeus, the moon-flecked moth. (See Forest defoliators.) INSECTS OF ALDER AND ALFALFA. 13

HYMENOPTERA. Cimbicide. Cimbex variabilis Klg., a sawfly; Europe; breeds on the foliage. Trichiosoma lucorum Linnzus, a sawfly; Europe; breeds on the foliage. Tenthredinidez. Nematus ( Cresus) septentrionalis Linnzus, a sawfly; Europe; breeds on the foliage. Phyllotoma vagans Fallén, a sawfly; Europe; breeds on foliage. Xiphydridz. Xiphydrya camelus Linneus, a wood wasp; Europe; breeds in the wood. LITERATURE. SoRAVER, P.: Handbuch, der Pflanzenkrankheiten 3d ed., vol. 3, by Lindau and Reh, 1913. NUssLIN, OTTo. : Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. BARGAGLI, P.: Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. LINDINGER, L.: Die Schildliuse (Coccidze), 1912. ALFALFA; LUCERNE. (Medicago sativa Linneus. Family Leguminose.) Alfalfa is a staple forage plant in many parts of the world, being grown extensively
in Europe, Asia, and South America, as well asin this country. Except in shipments
of hay, the only danger of introducing pests is with the seed. Some very important
European pests of alfalfa have in some manner already reached this country and are
doing serious damage. Most insects attacking clover are potential alfalfa pests and it is therefore advisable
to consult the list of clover pests when dealing with alfalfa. A. BETTER KNOWN ALFALFA PESTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Colaspidema atrum Olivier. (Black Alfalfa Leaf Beetle. Chrysomelide; Coleoptera.) Host: Alfalfa. Injury: Very serious. Description and biology: A small shining black beetle with brownish tint on sides. Larva about 6 mm. long, blackish. Oviposits on leaves and tender shoots. The
larvee feed on the foliage and move from field to field in armies. Pupates in the soil. Distribution: Spain, Southern France. CLAaRIO-Sou.An, I. V., and Comas, J. N.: Dos plagas que atacan 4 los Alcornocales y

'~Alfalfares. Servicio Agron. Nacional Prov. Barcelona, 1911, pp. 9-11. Hypera murina Fabricius (Phytonomus). (Alfalfa Leaf Weevil. Curculionids; Coleoptera.) °

Hosts: Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L. and M. s. falcata L.)

Injury: Defoliates, very injurious. Description: Weevil dull brown, oval, about 4 mm., covered with fine gray and
brown hairs. Oviposits in stems long rows of eggs. Larve feed on the foliage. Pupates in silken cocoon on plant. Distribution: Europe. Bareacu, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887, pp. 94, 95. 14 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. * Hypera meles Fabricius (Phytonomus). (Austrian Alfalfa Leaf Weevil. Curculionids; Coleoptera). Hosts: Alfalfa, Grami-
nacez. Injury: Defoliates. Biology: The larvee feed on
the foliage and spin silken
cocoons. Distribution: Europe, and
has been recently collected
in the United States. B. OTHER IMPORTANT
ALFALFA PESTS. Fic. 1.—Chrotogonus trachypterus. An Indian pest of alfalfa. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) COLLEMBOTS
Smynthuride. Smynthurus sp., a springtail, is
very injurious to alfalfa in New
South Wales, when abundant
skeletonizing the fields in moist

seasons,

(A, Molineux, Agric. Gaz. N. S.
Wales, Nov., 1896, pp. 807-809. ) ORTHOPTERA. Acridiidz. Fic. 2.—Brachytrypes achatinus. An Indian pest of alfalfa. Chrotogonus trachypterus Blan-
(Maxwell-Lefroy.) chard, a destructive grasshop-

per of India. (See text fig. 1.) Gryllidex. Brachytrypes achatinus Stoll., a brown cricket of India. (See text fig. 2.) LEPIDOPTERA. Noctuidae. Prodenia litura Fabricius, also known as the Egyptian cotton worm, attacks alfalfa in India. Plusia nigrisigna Walker, attacks fruit in India. * Chloridea obsoleta Hiibner, the cotton bollworm; > Agrotis ypsilon Rott., the greasy cutworm; and
> Laphygma exigua Hiibner, serious pests already in the United States, attack alfalfa in India. Tortricidz. Tortrit divulsana Walker, the lucerne moth of New
South Wales; spins the heads together and feeds on

them. COLEOPTERA. Coccinellidz. Subcoceinella 24-punctata Linnzeus; Europe; larvee and
adults injure the foliage. Cerambycide. > Clytus floralis Pall. ; Russia, imported to United States
in roots; root borer. (See text fig. 3.) Curculionidae. * Hypera punctata Fabricius, the clover-leaf weevil of
Europe, now common in the United States; also at-
tacks alfalfa. > Hypera postica Gyllenhal, the alfalfa weevil of Europe,
introduced into western United States, and very in- A
jurious. (See text fig. 4, a-f.)

Apion meliloti Kirby, a tiny weevil; Europe; breeds in the pith of the stems. Apion tenue Kirby, a tiny weevil; Europe; breeds in stems. Fia. 3.— Clytus floralis. A Russian alfalfa

root borer. (Original, Walton.) INSECTS OF ALFALFA AND APPLE, 15

Itonidida. x Asphondylia miki Wachtl; gall midge; Europe, Arizona; forms galls in sced pods. (See text fig. 5.) LITERATURE. MAXwELL-Lerroy, H. Mem. Dept. Agr. India, Entom. ser. vol. 1, No. 2, June, 1907, pp. 113-252. SorAvER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed. vol. 3, 1913. BARGAGLI, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. WessteER, F.M. U.S. Dept. Agric., Bur. Entomology, Bul. 112, 1912. Wesster, F. M. U.S. Dept. Agric., Bur. Entomology, Cire. 147, 1912. DIPTERA,

 

Fig. 4.—Alfalfa weevil (Hypera postica): a, Adults clustering on sprig of alfalfa; b, adult weevil; c, eggs; d,
larva; €, cocoon; f, pupa. @, Natural size; 6, d, e, f, much enlarged; c, greatly enlarged. (Webster.) APPLE. (Malus malus, etc. Family Rosacez.) Fruit trees of America, Europe, and Asia, much cultivated in this country. A. BETTER KNOWN APPLE INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Termes australis Hagen. (The Victorian White Ant. Termitide; Isoptera.) Hosts: Apples and other deciduous fruits, orange, Eucalyptus, vines, geraniums,
timbers, furniture, books, etc. 16 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Injury: Makes galleries in above plants and is also injurious to timbers in houses,
furniture, etc. Distribution: Australia. Frencu, C. Handbook of Destruc-
tive Insects of Victoria, 1893, pt. 2, pp. 136-144, plate 32. Psylla mali Schmidhbg. (The Apple Psylla. Psyllide; Hemiptera.) Hosts: Apple. Injury: Very injurious in Eng-
land. Description and biology: Adult
2.5-3 mm. long; color variable
from greenish to brownish yellow
(some show dark markings, with
even red or yellow); wing veins
greenish or greenish yellow. Nymphs flat, at first yellow or dirty
yellow, with brown markings and
red eyes, later becoming green all
over; body partly covered with
white or pale-blue curly waxen
threads, and there is a long thread
with a waxy globule. £ggs
creamy yellow, but before hatch-
Fig. 5.—The alfalfa gall midge (Asphondylia miki): Adult ing are faintly dusty red in color. onelt ee an, Ware above, at left. Greatly en- The winter is passed in the egg

stage, the eggs being placed on
the spurs, around leaf scars, in cracks, among fine hairs, on the new wood, and else-
where. The nymphs hatch in spring as the buds begin to open and {attack the
blossom and leaf buds, often destroying the blossoms and greatly stunting the shoots. (See text fig. 6.) a b c) d
Fig. 6.—Apple psylla (Psylia mali): a, Adult; b, injured twig; c, nymph; d, eggs on shoot. (Theobald)

Distribution: Europe, Central Russia,
THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 153. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLaTe VI. THE HaRLeQuin FRuIt Bua

The harlequin fruit bug (Dindymus versicolor): Adults, nymphs, and injury to apple. (French.) U. S, Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of,Dangerous Insects. PLATE VII. APPLE MOTHS. Fic. 1.—The apple pith moth (Blastodacna hellerella) and injury to twig and adult. Fig. 2.—The
“figure-of-8 moth” (Diloba cwruleocephala.) Dorsal and lateral views of adult, and eggs (Theobald). Fig. 3.—The apple moth (Argyresthia conjugella). Adult, and injury to apple. (Berettning.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PiaTe VIII. THE GREEN HANGING MOTH OF THE APPLE. ‘The green hanging moth of the apple ( Charagia lignivora): Adults, pupa, and larva in twig showing

sawdust swelling. (French.) APPLE INSECTS. 17

Dindymus versicolor H.-S.
(Harlequin Fruit Bug. Pyrrhocoride; Hemiptera.) Hosts: Apple. °

Injury: Disfigures apples by puncturing the skin in feeding. Description and biology: Adult about 12 mm. long, orange red, black, and yellow in
color, ~ ymphs of both sexes, when about half grown, are more highly colored than
when mature. Zggs are deposited in late summer among rubbish, crevices of old
posts, etc., or even in stubble. The newly hatched nymphs on hot days occur in
svarms on many kinds of plants, on fences, and among rubbish. (See plate v1.) Distribution: Australia. Frencu, ©. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1891, pt. 1, p. 89. ’ Rhizopertha collaris Erichson. (Apple-tree Borer. Bostrychide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Apple. :

Injury: Regarded as serious pest. Description and biology: Adult length 4 to6 mm. Adults bore into wood. Larva
bores horizontal burrows into wood of trees; remains in tree after it is dead. Eggs
are depc ed in the holes bored in trees. Distribution: Australia, Tasmania,

Frencu, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1891, pt. 1, p. 61. Phyllobius maculicornis Germar. (Green Leaf Weevil. Brachyrhinide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Apple, pear, cherry, plum, nuts, oak, hawthorn, sloe, maple. Injury: Injury frequent. Attack young buds and leaves. Dese~itio. and biology: Adult length 12 mm. ; brown; clothed with green or
greenish scales; slightly hairy; antenne reddish, with black, clublike apices; legs
blac. a¥d brown. Occurs throughout May and June. Pupates in spring. Larva
white, footless, curved, slightly hairy, with brown hairy head. Feeds on roots of
various plants. Winters as larva. Eggs deposited in ground.

' Distribution: Europe. TuEopatp, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 119. Leptops hopei Schénherr. (Apple-roét Borer. Curculionids; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Apple, pear, cherry. Injury: Very serious injury. Attacks roots. Description and biology: Adult length 25 mm. ; light grayish brown. Occurs just
before buds begin to swell. Disappears in December (Victoria). Pwpates in ground. Larva length 25 mm. ; whitish; tunnels roots of trees. Eggs deposited on upper
sides of leaves, which have their edges glued together, hiding the eggs. Deposited
in masses of 40 to 50. (See text fig. 7b.) Distribution: Victoria. .

Frencu, 0. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1891, pt. 1, p. 71. Magdalis barbicornis Latreille. (Apple-stem Piercer. Cur¢ulionide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Apple, quince, and medlar trees. Injury: To twigs. Description and biology: Adult length 2-2.5 mm. ; black; neck-shield without
knobs on sides; very thickly punctate, elytra strigose-punctate, the space between
punctations ridged. Occurs in June. Pupates in gallery in twig under bark. Larva burrows in twig, by preference in bark, to the sapwood which is only slightly

ttacked; the bark becomes reddish-brown and sinks away. 55266—17, 2

 

18 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Distribution: Europe. Henscuer, G.A.O. Die.Schidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 94. FIG. 7.—Work of apple weevils: a, Apple buds injured by Anthonomus pomorum (Henschel);;6, ‘apple
root tunneled by Leptops hopei (French). Anthonomus pomorum Linneus. (Apple-blossom Weevil. Curculjonide; Coleoptera.) Host: Apple, pear. Injury: Often very destructive to apple. Larva injurious to buds and blossoms; adult
feeds on leaves. Description and biology: Adult length 3 to
4 mm. ; pitch black or fuscous black, with
ashy pubescence; most easily recognized by
pale V-shaped mark on elytra. Appear in
late spring and live until next spring, when
they copulate and oviposit. Hibernate in
rubbish. Pupa yellowish brown. Pupates
in withered flower bud. Pupation lasts 7 to
10 days. Larva length 4-5 mm. ; white,
footless, head brown; feeds in flower bud. Larval stage 8 days to 3 weeks. Eggs de-
posited in blossom buds. A single female

deposits 50 or 60 during a period of 2 weeks, #16-8-—~Apple bud weevil (Anthonomus
(See text figs. 7a, 8.) CO ae

 

Distribution: Europe. TueoBaLp, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 104. APPLE INSECTS. 19
Cossus tristis Drury. (Apple and Quince Borer. Cossidz; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Apple, quince, pear. Injury: Bores,in sapwood. Description and biology: Adult occurs from September to Bl oscamaler (South Africa). Broods may overlap. Pupa may be found in July and September. Larva length 50
mm. ; wholly flesh-colored or mottled with red. Young larve feed first beneath the
bark, older larvae burrow in middle wood. Eggs de-
posited on bark, singly or in groups; especially in the ,
fork of branches. Distribution: South Africa. Lounssury, ©. P. Rept. Gov. Entomologist for 1898. Cape of Good Hope, Cape Town, 1899. Blastodacna putripennella Zeller. (Apple Pith Moth. Elachistidze; Lepidoptera.) Host; Apple. Injury: Not seriously destructive. _ Description and biology: Adult forewing brownish gray
with golden and whitish spots and stripes, head gray;
eyes white; antenne, gray ringed with white. Occurs
in July and August (Germany). Pupates about end of
June between dry leaveson dead twigs. Larva yellowish,
with broad reddish segmental divisions; head, neck, anal
shield, and feet dark brown; prolegs and a side stripe
above the feet yellow. Hatches in autumn and feeds on
leaves; on approach of winter bores,into buds of 1-year-
old twigs; in spring bores into pith of twig. Eggs are
placed on leaves. (See text fig. 9.) Sorauver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d
ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 255, figs. 186, 187. Blastodacna vinolentella H.-S.

(Pith Moth. Elachistide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Apple. Injury: Considerable injury. Larva burrows into buds,
shoots, and spurs. Fic. 9.—Apple pith moth (Blastodac-

Description and biology: Adult wing expanse a little ™ Puéripennella): Adult and in-
less than 12 mm. Forewings may be almost black or eames “Sor eer.) may be marked with dark brown and rusty brown; inner margin white to beyond
middle, where an irregular faint white oblique bar proceeds to tip of wing; two
branches from which intersect black apical portion; hind wings gray and fringed;
head black. Occurs in July and August. Pupa ochraceous; head, front of thorax,
and tip of body, mahogany red; cylindrical in form; length 6 mm. Larva length
8 mm. Dull reddish brown with deep brown head and first thoracic segment. Larvee hatch in late summer, feed on leaves, bore into bud, pass the winter there, and
mature inJune. Eggs are unknown. Distribution: England, Europe. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 92. 20 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Blastodacna hellerella Dup. (Pth Moth. Elachistidee; Lepidoptera.) This moth is similar to B. vinolentella in habits and description, except that head of
adult is white. (See plate vu, fig. 1.) Tueosatp, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 92. Chloroclystis rectangulata Linnus. (Green Pug Moth. Geometride;. Lepidoptera.) Host: Apple. Injury: Feeds on blossoms and young leaves. Not serious. Description and biology: Adult wing expanse 18 mm. ; forewings deep green with
dark brown and gray bands; hind wings with similar greenish tinge. Flies in May,
June, and July. Pupa thorax and wing cases yellow; caudal end deep red, tinged
with olive. Sarva pale yellowish green, with rusty red line down back; division
between segments reddish; a line at sides yellowish green. Larvee appear in early
spring. Pupate in earthen cocoon on ground. ggs deposited on trees in early sum-
mer, where they remain over winter. Distribution: Europe, England. TueEoBALp, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 68. Charagia lignivora Lewin. (Green Hanging Moth of the Apple. Hepialidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Apple, acacia, aster, eucalyptus, etc. Injury: Injuries confined largely to native trees; sometimes destructive to apple. Bores in wood. Description and biology: Adult male forewings pea-green, with silvery white mark-
ings; hind winds pale green; female forewings darker green than those of male, with
purplish bands; hind wings orange pink. JLurva pale pink, yellow or purplish yellow,
head dark-brown. A ‘‘swelling” sawdust covering covers burrow of larva. Eggs
deposited on bark of tree. , (See plate vm.) Distribution: Victoria. Frencu, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1909, pt. 4, p. 77. * Argyresthia conjugella Zeller. (Apple Moth. Hyponomeutide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Apple, cherry, plum, whortleberry, mountain ash, service berry. Injury: Serious to irnit. Description and biology: Moth with tront wings violet gray, sprinkled with lighter,
with yellowish white stripe on the inner margin. and a whitish spot near apex. Larva
with black head, body at first whitish, later fleshy red with many dark brown setiger-
ous spots;7 mm. long. Breedsin fruits. Pupates outside of the fruit in cocoons. (See
plate vir, fig. 3.) Distribution: Europe, British Columbia, Japan. Soraver. P. Handbuch der PAanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 269-270,
figs. 196- ie

Tueosatp, I. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 193. Report No. 6, Ae Agric. oa Sta., Sapporo, Japan, March, 1916. Plates 1, 3. APPLE INSECTS. 21

*Hyponomeuta malinellus Zeller. H. padellus Linneus. (Apple and Cherry Ermine Moths. Hyponomeutidee; Lepidoptera.) These two ermine moths, which are destructive fruit-tree pests, have recently
been introduced into the United States, the one well treated in Technical Bulletin{24,
of the Geneva, N. Y., Agricultural Experiment Station (1912), to which the reader is
referred. (See text fig. 10.) Diloba czruleocephala Linnzus. (Figure-oi-8 Moth. Blue-head. Noctuide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Apple, plum, cherry. Injury: Seldom serious; defoliation. . Description and biology: Adult wing expanse of male less than 25 mm., female 30 mm. ;
forewing grayish brown and brown, witha pale spot shaped like a figure 8 on each wing;
hind wing grayish brown with darker ray-like lines and a dark wedge-shaped patch at
the hinder angle. Occurs in September and October (England). Larva over 25 mm. long; head blue with two small
black dots; body color varied,
yellowish green or bluish gray,
with broken yellow line along:
side below spiracles; small black
spots on segments. Larve appear |
when leaves expand and are ready
tospin up in June; pupate in crev-
vices in bark and on limbs of trees. Eqgs usually laid singly on shoots
and spurs of fruit trees; they are
round, flattened below, gray or
grayish brown in color. (See plate
vit, fig. 2.) Distribution: England, Europe,
and Asia Minor. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of

Fruit, 1909, p. 35. Sesia myopzformis Bosk. (The Apple Clearwing. Sesiidie;
Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Apple, apricot. Injury: Larvee work under bark. Description and biology: Adult
wing expanse 22 to 25 mm. ; head,
thorax, and abdomen black; male
abdomen has red band above and white beneath; female has only a white edge under-
neath, with tail-like fan of black scales; wings transparent with dark scaled areas. Day-flying moths; occur in May, June, and July. (England). Pupa pale brown,
protected by silken cases covered with chips. Larva length 15 mm. ; dull yellowish
white, head reddish brown; second thoracic segment with brown dorsal shield. Zggs
laid on tree trunk. (See text fig. 12.) Distribution: Europe. TuHeoBaLD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 17. Fic. 10.—Apple ermine moth (Hyponomeuta malinellus) Eggs,
Jarva, pupa, adult, and nest. . (Henschel.) Do A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Tortrix ashworthana Newman. (Light Brown Apple Moth. Tortricids; Lepidoptera.) Hos: Apple. (A. Busck states that this species feeds on Acacia only.) Injury: Very serious; attacks fruit in manner similar to codling moth. Description and biology: Adult female wing expanse, 18 mm. ; forewings light brown, |
slightly barred. Larva light green in color, seldom penetrates apple as far as seeds. Eggs deposited in calyx. Distribution: Australia. Frenca, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1891, pt. I, p. 66. Fic. 11.—-The apple sawfly (Hoplocampa testudinea). Adult and injured apples. (Theobald.) ’ APPLE INSECTS. 23

Hoplocampa testudinea Klug. (Appie Sawfly. Tenthredinide; Hymenoptera.) Host: Apple. Injury: Local. Damages fruit. Description and biology: Adult, female, length 6-8 mm. ; reddish yellow, with a
black patch on the head, another on thorax and on dorsum of abdomen; head and
mesothorax punctured; antennz dusky in middle: male, slightly smaller. First
brood occurs about apple-blossom time; second brood occurs in July. Pupate in soil. Larva, length 12 mm., creamy white; grub-like with brown head and a double,
black chitinous plate on dorsum of anal segment; eats out cavities in interior of
fruit. Many larve migrate from one apple to another. Larval period in first brood
4 or 5 weeks. Winters as larva in second brood. Eggs are deposited in blossom. This stage varies from 8 to 14 days. (See text fig. 11.) Distribution: Europe. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 122. B. IMPORTANT APPLE INSECTS. Coccide: HEMIPTERA. Armored—

Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) africanus Marlatt; South Africa. Diaspis pyri Colvée; Spain, Belgium, Denmark, France, Italy, Croatia, Austria, Switzerland, Tyrol. *Epidiaspis piricola Del Guercio,
France, Russia, Italy. (See Pear.) *Leucaspis japonica Cockerell; Japan. Parlatoria affinis Newstead; Algeria,
Egypt. Parlatoria calianthina Berlese and
Leonardi; Italy, Spain, Victoria,
and New South Wales. *Parlatoria pyri Marlatt; China; scale
of female 1-1.25 mm. in length,
oval; larval exuvia, purplish green,
second exuvium dark olive, almost
black. Apparently a dangerous
pest. Unarmored—

Coccus hoferi King; Switzerland. * Lecanium bituberculatum T ar gioni-
Tozzetti; England, France, Swe-
den, Italy, Germany. Lecanium capree Linneus; Europe,
Nova Scotia. Lecanium glandi Kuwana; Japan. * Lecanium persice Fabricius; Europe,
Australia, Canada. Lecanium pyri Schrank; Europe,
Prince Edwards Island. Lecanium rugosum Signoret; France,
Germany. Lecanium variegatumG oethe; Europe. Lecanium vini Bouché; Europe. Pseudococcus glaucus Maskell; New

 

Fic. 12.—The apple clearwing (Sesia myopxformis). Moth,
cocoon, larva, and borings. (Reichelt.) Zealand. Tingitide. Stephanitis pyri Fabricius; Europe. (See Pear.) COLEOPTERA. Cerambycide. Cerambyz scopolii Fuessly; Europe; borer. Saperda scalaris Linneeus; Europe; borer. Liopus nebulosus Linneeus; Europe; borer. Curculionide. .
Magdalis cerasi Linnaeus and M. pruni Linnzeus; Europe; breed under bark. Anthonomus incurous Panzer, A. pedicularius Linneus, and A. pyri Boheman; bud weevils; Europe. 24 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Anthribidz. Doticus pestilans Oliff; Victoria; a pest of dried apples. Scolytidz. 5
Scolytus pruni Ratzeburg; Europe. (See Plum.) Scolytus mali Bechst. ; Europe; galleries in bark. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. .
Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée; Queensland. (See Corn.) Lymantriide. Teia anartoides Walker; Australia. (See Fruit.) Lasiocampide. s
Gastropacha quercifolia Linneeus; Europe. (See Fruit.) Odonestis australasiz Fabricius; Australia; defoliator. Geometrida. Hibernia defoliaria Clerck; Europe. (See Forests.) Anisopteryx xscularia Schiflermiller; Europe. (See Forests.) Cheimatobia brumata Linneus. Elachistidz. Coleophora anatipennella Hiibner; Europe. (See Plum.) HYMENOPTERA. Tenthredinide. Hoplocampa fulvicornis Klug, sawfly; Europe; mines in fruit. DIPTERA. Trypetide. .Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Bactrocera tryoni Froggatt; Orient. (See Fruit.) Bactrocera cucurbitz.
" APRICOT. (Prunus armeniaca, etc.) Fruit trees of the Orient, now widely cultivated. A. AN APRICOT PEST LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Capua angustiorana Haworth. ;

(Small Apricot and Vine Moth. Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Apricot, vine, pear and a great variety of other trees. Attacks foliage and
fruit clusters. Injury: Does much harm to foliage of wall fruit. Description and Biology: Adult wing expanse 12-18 mm. ; female forewing reddish-
ochreous, with a reddish brown basal patch forming an oblique streak and a reddish

‘central spot; a costal spot is pale yellow; male wing grayish-ochreous with brown

and black markings. Occurs from June until August. Pupation takes place among
leaves. Larva length more than 12 mm. ; color yellowish, or grayish green with pale
spots from which arise hairs; occurs in greatest numbers in April and May; rolls leaf. Eggs deposited on twigs, hatching in spring. Distribution: Europe, Asia Minor, Africa. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruits, 1909, p. 181. B. IMPORTANT APRICOT INSECTS. HEMIPTERA,
Coccidze:

Armored—

Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) africanus Marlatt; South Africa. * Epidiaspis piricola Del Guercio; Germany, Italy, France, established in California. Parlatoria calianthina Berlese and Leonardi; Italy. Unarmored—

Lecanium coryli Linneus; Europe. Lecanium kunoensis Kuwana; China. 7
*Lecanium prunastri Fonscolombe; Europe, Japan. Lecanium vini Bouché; Europe. INSECTS OF APRICOT, ARAUCARIA, ARBORVITH, ASH. 25

COLEOPTERA. Cerambycidz. Liopus nebulosus Linnzeus; Europe; borer. Uracanthus acutus Blackburn; Australia. (See Peach.) Scolytidee. Scolytus amygdali Guérin; Europe. (See Almond.) LEPIDOPTERA. .
Sesiidz. Sesia myopaeformis Bosk. ; Europe. (See Apple.) COLEOPTERA. Geometride. Lophodes sinistraria Guérin; Australia; defoliator. DIPTERA. Trypetidz. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks Prunus armeniaca. (See Fruit.) Bactrocera tryoni Froggatt; Orient. (See Fruit.) Bactrocera cucurbitz. ARAUCARIA. (Family Conifere.) Small evergreen plants much used in horticulture. IMPORTANT ARAUCARIA INSECTS. : HEMIPTERA. Coccidz:
Unarmored—
Ctenochiton araucariz Green; Australia. Eriococcus araucariz Maskell; Europe, Canary Islands, Brazil; Araucaria excelsa, A. bidwiliii. Eriococcus angulatus Froggatt; Australia; Araucaria excelsa. Pseudococcus aurilanatus Maskell; New Zealand, Australia, Auckland, Natal, Hawaiian Islands;
Araucaria exrcelsa. ARBORVIT2. (Thuya spp. Family Juniperacez.) Ornamental evergreen trees of North America, East and Central Asia. The wood is
light and soft, brittle, and rather coarse grained, durable in the soil; much used for
construction, cabinet making, and in cooperage. T'. occidentalis contains a volatile
oil used in medicine. INSECTS INJURIOUS TO ARBORVIT. HEMIPTERA. Coccidz:

Armored—
> Chionaspis striata Newstead; Egypt, Algeria, Arizona, California; attacks Thuya africana. Diaspis visci Schrank; Europe; Thuya occidentalis. Unarmored—
Lecanium arion Lindinger; Europe; Thuya occidentalis. COLEOPTERA,
Scolytidz. 2

Phleosinus thujae Perris; Europe. BIBLIOGRAPHY

LINDINGER, L. Die Schildléuse (Coccide), 1912. EIcHHOFF ,W., Europ. Borkenkafer, 1881. ASH. (Fraxinus spp. Family Oleacez.) Hardy ornamental trees growing in Europe, Asia, and America. These trees are
important also for their timber. F. ornus exudes a manna. Certain Chinese species
yield the Chinese white wax. The various species are generally readily transplanted

26 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. and hence will be found in nursery stock shipments. They are usually propagated
from seed. As several species of insects breed in the seed, care must be taken about
introducing seed for planting. A. AN ASH PEST LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Erliophyes fraxini Nalepa. (Ash Gall Mite. Eriophyiide; Acarina.) Host: Fraxinus excelsior, F. viridis. Injury: Forms galls in flowers, fruit, and leaves. (See text fig. 13.) Description and biology: Four-legged blister mite which causes galls by its feeding. Liable to introduction on
nursery stock. Distribution: Europe,

* Mexico. Soraver, P.: Handbuch
der Pflanzenkrankhei-
ten, 3d ed., vol. 3, 1913,
pp. 127, 128. B. OTHER IMPORTANT
ASH INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Aphididae. Prociphilus bumeliz
Schranck, a gall-making
louse of Europe, which at-
tacks the tender leaves and
petioles of ash and on its
intermediate host, the fir,
breeds at the roots. The
form on fir roots has been
known as Holzneria posch-
ingeri Holzner. Coccidzx. Armored—

Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus)
nigropunctatus Cockerell;
Mexico. Chionaspis salicis Linnaeus, the willow scale; Europe; attacks Frazinus excelsior and many other trees. Parlatoria affinis Newstead; Algeria; attacks Frazinus oryphylla and olive. Unarmored—
Fonscolombia frazini Kaltenbach; Europe; attacks Frazinus excelsior. Fic. 13.—Ash gall mite (Zriophyes frarint): Gall formations on twigs
of Frazinus ercelsior. (Gillanders.) ORTHOPTERA. Oedipodide. Pachytylus migratorius Linnaeus, the migratory locust; Europe; injures many plants. COLEOPTERA. Cantharidz (Meloide). Lytta vesicatoria Linnaeus, the Spanish fly; all Europe; very injurious as adult. Cerambycide. Cerambyz cerdo Linnaeus, the great oak borer; Europe; bores in wood. (See Oak.) Scarabeide. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius, a May beetle; Europe; injures the roots of seedlings of various
, trees. Melolontha melolontha Linnaeus, a May beetle; Europe; injures the roots of seedlings, and the adults
attack the foliage. .

INSECTS OF ASH AND ASPARAGUS. 27

Curculionide. Cionus frazini De Geer, a small oval weevil; Europe; breeds externally on the leaves of ash and olivs,
pupates in cocoons on the leaf. Scolytoidea. Hylesinus crenatus Fabricius, a bark beetle; Russia, Germany; bores the bark of ash and oak. Hylesinus fraxini Panzer, a bark beetle; Europe; bores the branches and tops, attacking bark of
ash, olive, and acacia. .
Hylesinus oleiperda Fabricius, a bark beetle; Europe; attacks ash and olive. Phieotribus caucasicus Reitter; a bark beetle; Russia; attacks young portions of the trees. * Scolytochelus multistriatus Marsh., a bark beetle; Europe; attacks bast and sapwood of trees. Scolytus scolytus Fabricius, a bark beetle; Europe; attacks bark, bast, and sapwood. LEPIDOPTERA. Cosside. Cossus cossus Linnaeus, a goat moth; Europe; bores in the wood. (See Willow.) > Zeuzera pyrina Linnaeus, a wood borer of Europe, Africa, North America. (See Horse-chestnut.) Sesiidz. Sesia spheciformis Grng., a clear-winged moth; Europe; bores in the wood. Tortricidz. Tortrix podana Sc., a
grassgreen larva,
which occasionally
attacks ash; Europe. Hyponomeutide. Prays curtisellus Don.,
asmall moth; Europe;
larva mines leaves,
skeletonizes, webs
leaves, or mines buds,
inits different genera-
tions. Gracillariidae. Gracillaria syringella
Fabricius, a yellowish
olive-brown moth;
Europe (Sweden);
larve first mine the
leaves and then roll

 

Fig. 14.—Asparagus beetle (Crioceris asparagi): a, Adult; b, egg; c,

them; attack also young larva; d, full grown larva; e, pupa. (Chittenden.) ;

Syringa. HYMENOPTERA. Tenthredinidz. Macrophya punctum-album Linnzeus, a saw-fly; England; very injurious. LITERATURE,

SoraveR, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., vol. 3, 1913. NUsstrn, Oto. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde 2d ed., 1913. ASPARAGUS. (Asparagus officinalis Linnzeus. Family Liliacez.) | Various other species of asparagus are cultivated for decorative purposes. The
above-mentioned species is useful both for its delicious edible shoots and its graceful
foliage. Pests introduced on any type of asparagus are likely to attack the culti-
vated crop. , A. BETTER KNOWN ASPARAGUS INSECTS LUKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Crioceris spp. (Asparagus Leaf Beetles. Chrysomelide; Coleoptera.) | Species: > C. asparagi Linnzeus; Europe, introduced into North America and widely
_ distributed; asparagus. (See text fig. 14) A very important pest. >KC. 12-pune-
tata Linneus; Europe, introduced into North America and widely distributed; aspara-

28 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. gus. (See text fig. 15.) A very important pest. C. merdigera Linneus; Europe;
onion, leek, garlic, lily of the valley, asparagus. Injury: Feed on the stems of the asparagus and cause much injury, amounting
often to thousands of dollars. . FIG, 15.—Asparagus beetle ( Crioceris duodecim punctata): a, Adult; b, larva; c, d, details of larval structure. (Chittenden.) Biology: Eggs laid on plant. Larva feeds on stems and foliage. Pupates in soil. Two broods per annum. i
Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., vol. 3, 1913, p. 510. CmrrenveN, F. H. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Entomology, circ. 102, 1908, 12 pp., 6 figs. Fic. 16.—Asparagus miner (Agromyza simpler): Aduits. (Chittenden.) Agromyza maura Meigen, * Agromyza simplex Loew. (Asparagus Miners. Agromyzide; Diptera.) Hosts; Asparagus. Injury: Mine immediately under the bark of the asparagus stem. The latter
species has been introduced into the United States. Description and biology: Adult fly very small. Larva white, legless. Pwpates in
mine. (See text figs. 16, 17.) INSECTS OF ASPARAGUS, ASSAM RUBBER, ASPEN, AVOCADO. 29

Distribution: A. maura; Hungary. A. simplex; Europe, North America. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, p. 406, 407, fig. 252. CuirrenvEN, F.H. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Ent., bull. 66, pt. I, 1907, pp. 1-5, 2 figs. Platyparza peeciloptera Schrank. (Asparagus Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: ‘Asparagus. Injury: Mines the stems. Description and biology: Fly dark brown, abdominal segments banded whitish;
face#legs,fand antennegreddish yellow;
wings clear with a dark zigzag longitudinal
band; length 6-8 mm. Maggot whitish,
apical stigmatal plates shining black with
two forward turned hooks; length 10 mm._

Distribution: Europe. : a
Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanze. krankheiten, 3d ed., vol. 3, 1918, p. 421

 

422. B. OTHER IMPORTANT ASPARAGUS
PESTS. HEMIPTERA. ‘
neal Fue. 17.—Asparagus miner (Agromyza simpler):

F 7 - 7 7 a, Larva; b,c, larval details; d, e, puparium;
Chionaspis berlesei Leonardi; Europe; attacks As- f, injury. (Chittenden.)
? ; '

paragus acutifolius and A. umbellatus. COLEOPTERA. Brachyrhinide. Cneorhinus plagiatus Schall. ; a weevil, causes serious injury in England. LEPIDOPTERA. Noctuidez. Mamestra oleracea Linnzeus; Europe; larve feed on plants. (See Cabbage.) DIPTERA. Anthomylide. Chortophila cilicrura Rondani; Europe; breeds in stems. (See Onion.) ASSAM RUBBER. (Ficus elastica. Family Urticacee.) Assam or India rubber is a native of Assam and the Malay region. It can be grown
from cuttings or seed. As it belongs to the same genus of plants as the fig, its insects
are treated under the discussion of that plant. (See Fig.) e ASPEN. (Populus tremula. Family Salicacezx.) See Poplar. AVOCADO; ALLIGATOR PEAR. (Persea gratissima, etc. Family Lauracee.) This tropical American species is much prized for its large edible fruit, and is now
cultivated extensively in Florida and southern California. Several other species of
the genus are prized by the American trade for their evergreen foliage. 30 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. A. AN AVOCADO PEST LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED
Heilipus laurl Boheman. (Avocado Weevil. Curculionids; Coleoptera.) |

Host: Fruit of Persea persea L. (Laurus drymifolia) and Persea pittieri Mez. Injury: Larvee make galleries in the seed. Lia le to’ e introduced in seed and fruit. Live specimens have been received in the United States. Description: Adult weevil of a red ground color, with red femora, or dark ' rown
with unicolorous legs and prominent patches of white scales; rostrum long, prothorax
conical. The larvee breed in the seed and their presence is not easily detected. In
the case of the recent introductions the seeds were planted and the injury was not
noticed until faulty germination caused an examination. Distribution: Mexico, Costa Rica. (See plate xix.) Barser, H.S8. Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash., vol. 14, 1912, pp. 181-183, plate 9. B. OTHER IMPORTANT AVOCADO INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidze:
Armored—

Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) articulatus Morgan; Mexico (See Coffee). Scale of adult female 1 mm. in

diameter, circular, reddish brown with central portion blackish, exuvia covered. Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) perseze Comstock; Mexico. Aspidiotus persearum Cockerell; Hawaii; on Persea gratissima. Scale of female 1.25 mm. long, 1 mm. broad brownish cream color, exuvia sublateral. . .

Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) personatus Comstock; West Indies, Mexico; Persea americana. (See Olive.) Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) scutiformis Cockerell; Mexico, Central America. (See Citrus.) Lepidosaphes longula Leonardi; Java; scale of female about 2.35 mm. long, elongate, curved, narrow,
coffee colored. Pinnaspis rhombica Leonardi; Java; scale of adult female 1 mm. long, rhomboid, castaneous brown. Pseudoparlatoria parlatorioides Comstock; Brazil, Mexico; on Persea carolinensis. Scale of adult
female about 1.4 mm. in diameter, light yellow, exuvia very large, extending from center of scale to
margin, having the appearance of a Parlatoria. Unarmored— ,

Ceroplastes cistudiformis Townsend and Cockerell; Mexico; wax scale. Adult female covered with
dirty gray wax which is marked into plates; 6-8 mm. in length and 4.5 to 5.5 mm. in width. Ceroplastes rubens Maskell; Australia, India, Ceylon, Hawaii. Adult female 2.2-6 mm. in length,
covered with wax which is rather thick and dull red or pinkish throughout. Icerya montserratensis Riley and Howard; Mexico. (See Citrus.) Pseudococcus virgatus Cockerell; Isle of Pines. Pulvinaria mammex Maskell; Hawaii, Natal; on Persea persea. Adult female reddish brown covers
with a thin grayish meal, ovisac large, snow white, irregular, forming a mass of loose cotton. Pulvinaria simulans Cockerell; Mexico. LEPIDOPTERA. Lasiocampide. Suana concolor Walker; Java, defoliator. Cosside. Zeuzera coffex Nietner; India, Ceylon, Java, East Africa, Kamerun. (See Coffee.) COLEOPTERA. . ,

Bostrychidz. Apate monachus Fabricius; Africa, West Indies. (See Citrus.) Brachyrhinidea. Diaprepes abbreviatus Linnzeus; West Indies. (See Sugar cane.) Calandridz. > Caulophilus latinasus Say; Florida, probably imported; bores in seed. DIPTERA. Trypetidz. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann; attacks Persea persea. (See Fruit.) BAMBOO INSECTS. 31

BAMBOO. (Bambusa spp. ; Dendrocalamus strictus, etc. ; Arundinaria spp. ; Cephalostachyum
pergracile; Melocanna bambusioides; Phyllostachys spp. Family Bambusee.) Treelike grasses much used in cultivation. A. BETTER KNOWN BAMBOO INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Dinoderus minutus Fabr. (Smaller Bamboo Shot-hole Borer. Bostrychide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Bamboo (Dendrocalamus strictus and Bambusa). Injury: Commonly found attacking bamboos and is also found in cut sugar cane.. Description and biology: Beetle brown, shining, 2.5 mm. long, with black head and
thorax, the bases of elytra lighter colored, occasionally almost reddish. Larva pale

 

 

 

Fig. 18.—Smaller bamboo shot-hole borer (Dinoderus minutus): a, Larva; b, pupa;
c,adults. (Stebbing.) canary yellow, opaque, curved; head small orange brown with black mandi sles; legs
three-jointed. Length 3 mm. Boresin the bamboos. (See text figs. 18, 19.) Distribution: India. ,
Srepnine, E.P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914, pp. 133-143,"pl. 9. Dinoderus pilifrons Lesne. " (Bamboo Shot-hole Borer. Bostrychide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Bamboo (Dendrocalamus strictus), various kinds of wood. Injury: Bores in bamboos. 32

 

 

Fi@. 19.—Dinoderus mi-

nutus. Injury to bam-
boostalks. (Stebbing.) A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Description and biology: Adult reddish brown, 3.3 mm. long,
appendages and lateral edges of abdomen lighter colored. Larva yellowish white, mouth parts brownish, mandibles black;
length 3.2 mm. Pupa with yellow abdomen, wings white, head
and prothorax dirty white. Distribution: India. Srrppinc, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914,
pp. 180-133, fig. 89, pl. 131. Eucosoma paragramma Meyrick. (Bamboo Borer. Tortricidae; Lepidoptera.) Host: Bamboo. Biology: Caterpillar bores in the stem of green bamboo,
pupates in tunnel. /
Distribution: India. Maxwe.t-Lerroy, H. Indian Insect Life, 1909, p. 530. Ceratitis striata Froggatt. (Bamboo Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Host: Bamboo shoots,

Injury: Larve feed in decayed shoots of bamboo. Description: Adult length 5-6 mm., color pale yellow to
grayish with upper surface of thorax variegated with black. (See plate xxv1, fig. a.) Distribution: Ceylon. Froceatr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Farmers’
Bull. 24, 1909, p. 51. B. IMPORTANT BAMBOO INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidze:

Armored—
Aspidiotus (Odonaspis) bambusarum Cockerell; Japan. Aspidiotus (Odonaspis) canaliculata Green; Ceylon. Aspidiotus (Odonaspis) inusitata Green; Japan, Ceylon; Arundinaria, Phyl-

lostachys bambusoides. *Aspidiotus (Odonaspis) secreta Cockerell; Hawaii, Japan; Bambusa and
Arundinaria. Has been taken in quarantine at San Francisco. Aspidiotus (Odonaspis) secreta saccharicaulis Zehntner; Java. Aulacaspis javanensis Newstead; East Java. Chionaspis arundinariz Green; Ceylon; Arundinaria. Chionaspis bambusx Cockerell; Japan. Chionaspis colemani Kuwana; Japan; Phyllostachys bambusoides. Chionaspis elongata Green; Ceylon. Chionaspis graminis Green; Ceylon, Japan. (See Pl. 11, fig. 1.) Chionaspis hikosani Kuwana; Japan; Phyllostachys bambusoides. Chionaspis simplex Green; Ceylon. Fiorinia bambusez Maskell; Hongkong, China; Bambusa fortwnei. Fiorinia diaspiformis Newstead; Java. Fiorinia signata Maskell; Japan; Bambusa tessellata. Fiorinia tenuis Maskell; Japan; Bambusa. .
Hemichionaspis scrobicularum Green; Ceylon. Lepidosaphes bambusicola Cockerell; Brazil. Leucaspis bambuse Kuwana; Japan; Phyllostachys. > Leucaspis japonica Cockerell; Japan. Pinnaspis bambusz Cockerell; Jamaica. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE IX.

. THE BAMBOO BorRER. The bamboo borer ( Cyrtotrachelus longipes): Adults ,eggs, larva, cocoon, injury. (Stebbing.) INSECTS OF BAMBOO AND BANANA. 33

Coccidz—Continued. Unarmored—
Aclerda distorta Green; Ceylon. Aclerda japonica Cockerell; England (in greenhouses); Arundinaria japonica. Aclerda tokionis Cockerell; Japan; Bambusa,
Antonina socialis Newstead; England (in greenhouses); Arwndinaria japonica,
Antonina crawii Cockerell; Japan; California; New Jersey. *Asterolecanium bambusxe Boisduval; Guatemala; Florida; Bambusa viridis, Bambusa viridi-striata. Asterolecanium coronatum Green; Ceylon; Dendrocalamus giganteus. Asterolecanium solenophoroides Green; Ceylon. Asterolecanium exiguum Green; Ceylon, Hawaiian Islands. Asterolecanium flavociliatum Green; Ceylon; Arundinaria. Asterolecanium lanceolatum Green; Ceylon; Arundinaria,
Asterolecanium miliaris Boisduval; Ceylon, Cuba, Algeria, Mauritius, Brazil, Jamaica, Trinidad;
Bambusa vulgaris, B. distorta, B. oliveriana. Asterolecanium pudibundum Green; Ceylon. Asterolecanium rubrocomatum Green; Ceylon. Asterolecanium tenuissimum Green; Ceylon. Asterolecanium tumidum Green; Ceylon. Asterolecanium udagamz Green; Ceylon. Asterolecanium bambusicola Kuwana; Japan. Asterolecanium hemisphaericum Kuwana; Japan. Asterolecanium masuii Kuwana; Japan. Ceroplastes theobromz Newstead; Cameroon. >« Chetococcus bambusx Maskell; Hawaii, Ceylon, India, Mauritius, Brazil; Bambusa tulda. Coccus arundinariz Green; Ceylon: Arundinaria. Eriococcus graminis Maskell; China, Japan. Eriococeus onukii Kuwana; China, Japan; Arundinaria hindsii var. graminz. Pentatomide. Ocrophara montana, a sucking bug; India; feeds in all stages on the seeds of bamboo (Dendrocalamus
strictus). COLEOPTERA. Bostrychide. i’

Bostrychopsis paraliela; India; bores in wood of Dendrocalamus strictus. %*Dinoderus brevis Horn, India; United States; very important borers in the stalks of Dendrocalamus
strictus. Heterobostrychus unicornis Waterhouse; Sinorylon anale Lesne; bores in bamboos of Dendrocalamus
strictus. Dinoderus distinctus Lesne; India; bores bamboos. (See Mango.) Lyctide. Lyctus spinifrons Lesne; India; bores in bamboos of Dendrocalamus strictus. Cucujide. Psammecus trimaculatus Motschulsky; India; bores in wood of Dendrocalamus strictus. Tenebrionidz. *Tribolium confusum Duval, and T. castaneum Herbst; India; bore in wood of Dendrocalamus strictus,

Chrysomelidez. Estigmena chinensis Hope; India; bores in young stems of Dendrocalamus strictus and Cephalostachyum. pergracile,

Cerambycide. :
Stromatium barbatum Fabricius; India; bores in Dendrocalamus strictus. Curculionidz. Cyrtotrachelus duz Boheman; India; bores in tops and shoots of Dendrocalamus hamiltoni. Cyrtotrachelus longipes Fabricius; India; bores in Melocanna bambusioides. (See plate 1x.) Cossonidz. Conarthrus affinis Wollaston; India; bores in bamboos of Dendrocalamus strictus. LITERATURE,

STEBBING, E. P, A Manual of Forest Zoology for India, 1908. STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, 1914. BANANA; PLANTAIN. (Musa spp. (especially paradisiaca), Family Musacez.) Bananas and plantain have become a very important article of commerce, being
mainly imported from the West Indies and Central America. Since the plant can

55266—17——3

34 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. only be propagated from suckers or sprouts there is danger of introducing pests into
the country in this manner. The banana is grown very extensively in the Southern
States asa hedge plant. The compact nature of the fruit bunches makes it possible for
many insects of considerable size to find entrance into the country in the bunches as
well as in the fruit itself. A. BETTER KNOWN BANANA PESTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Cosmopolites sordidus Germar (Sphenophorus.) (Banana Root Borer. Calandride; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Banana (all varieties), sugar cane. Injury: Serious pest to young banana plants in Fiji. Description and biology: Adult 14 mm. in length, 4 mm. in breadth, color dark brown
to black, head with prominent rostrum, antenne elbowed. Pupa soft and white
when newly formed. Pupal stage lasts from 6 to 8 days in the bulb. Larva 20 mm. in length, 8 mm. in hreadth, cream colored, footless, and requires about 20 days to
reach pupal stage. Eggs presumably deposited singly on base of stem near the crown. The larvee, upon hatching, work their way inward and down toward the bulb. Distribution: Fiji, British New Guinea. [In eastern hemisphere South Pacific
Ocean to Indian Archipelago.] Jamaica, India, Brazil. Jepson, Frank P. Dept. Agric. Fiji, Rept. Econ. Entom., Council Paper No. 25,
1911, p. 48, fig. Dacus curvipennis Froggatt. (Banana Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Host: Banana, ,

Injury: Breeds in fruit. Description: Adult about 6 mm. long; head yellow; thorax with elongate bar of
silvery white; legs yellow; tarsi and hind femora darker; abdomen elongate with
base and two narrow transverse black hands below, sheath and ovipositor elongate. (See plate xxv, figs. b, d.)

Distribution: Fiji. Froeeatt, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Farmers’ Bul. 24, 1909, p. 28. B. OTHER IMPORTANT BANANA INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Aleyrodidze. Aleurodicus cocois Curtis; West Indies, Mexico, Central and South America. (See Cocoanut.) Coccidez. Pseudococcus grassi Leonardi; Italy,
COLEOPTERA. CalanGridz. Rhabdocnemis obscurus Boisduval. (See Sugar cane.) LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée; Queensland. (See Corn.) Castniide. Castnia licus Drury; South America. (See Sugar cane.) Tineide. Ereunetis flavistriata Walsingham; Hawaii. (See Sugar cane.) DIPTERA,
Trypetide. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Riora musae Froggatt; Australia. (See Fruit.) Bactrocera tryoni Froggatt; Orient. (See Fruit.) INSECTS OF BARLEY, BAY, AND BEAN. 85

BARLEY. (Hordeum vulgare. Family Graminez.) Barley is a grain with many varieties grown in various parts of the world, especially
Europe and Asia. There is danger of importing pests of the grain only, unless the
straw should be used for packing. Its pests are discussed under Grains and Grasses. BAY. (Laurus spp. Family Lauracee.) Evergreen plants much cultivated for their shrubbery. INSECTS ATTACKING BAY TREES. HEMIPTERA. Coccidz:

Armored—
*Aspidiotus britannicus Newstead; Europe. Aspidiotus (Aonidia) lauri Bouché; Germany, Australia, Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal; Laurus

canariensis,

Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) paulistus Hempel; Brazil. Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) scutiformis Cockerell; Mexico, Central America. Cryptaspidiotus aonidioides Lindinger; Canary Islands; Laurus canariensis. Parlatoria calianthina Berlese & Leonardi; Italy. Unarmored—
Coccus acuminatus Signoret; Hawaii, Ceylon, France. Eucalymnatus brunfelsiz Hempel; Brazil; Laurus camphora. Icerya montserratensis Riley & Howard; West Indies, Mexico; Laurus camphora. Paralecanium geometricum Green; Ceylon, China; Laurus canariensis. Platinglisia noacki Cockerell; Brazil. Pseudococcus indicus Signoret; France; Laurus indicus. Pseudococcus laurinus Boisduval; France; Laurus nobilis. Pulvinaria plana Lindinger; Canary Islands; Laurus canariensis. BEAN. (Phaseolus vulgaris. Family Leguminosz.) This species includes the kidney, common field, garden, snap, and string beans. It is probably of tropical American origin. The beans are an article of commerce and

very likely to introduce pests. BROAD BEAN. .

(Vicia faba. Family Leguminose.) The broad bean is a native of Asia, but is grown extensively in Europe and North
America, especially as a food for domestic animals and for human consumption. The beans are an article of commerce and quite likely to introduce pests. LIMA BEAN. (Phaseolus lunatus. Family Leguminose.) The lima or sugar beans are native to South America. They are articles of com-
merce and quite likely to introduce pests. A. BETTER KNOWN BEAN INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Mylabris (Bruchus) spp., efc. (Bean and Pea Weevils. Mylabride [Bruchide]. Coleoptera.) Many of the weevils attacking beans are cosmopolitan and have been introduced
into the United States. The fact that they breed in perfectly dry stored beans makes
their distribution very easy. 36 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Speces: M. loti Paykull; seed of Lotus and Lathyrus. M. atomarius Linnaeus; very
common; Vicia faba, Lathyrus, Vicia sepum, etc. + M. rufimanus Boheman; Europe,
North Africa, Egypt, Persia, Syria, introduced into California; beams, peas. An important pest. MM. affinis Fré-
lichs; France, imported into Ireland
and East Indies; beans. > M. piso-
vum Linneeus; distributed from
Orient until now cosmopolitan; a
very serious pest; peas. Vicia,
Cytisus laburnum. (See text fig. 20.) M. lentis Frélichs; Europe,
Egypt, Syria, lentils. Jf. pallid-
cornis Boheman; lentils. > Acan-
thoscelides obtectus Say; now cosmo-
Fic. 20.—The pea weevil ( Mylabris pisorum): a, Beetle; b, politan; peas, cowpeas, lentils,

larva;c,pupa. Enlarged. (Chittenden.) beans. (See text fig. 21.) + Pachy-
merus chinensis Linneeus; now almost cosmopolitan; cowpeas, Phaseolus radiatus, Caja-
nus indicus, peas, lentils, beans, Dolichos, sorghum. (See text fig. 22.) +P. quadri-
maculatus Fabricius; now almost cosmopolitan: cowpeas, peas, beans. (See text
fig. 23.) Description: These weevils are small, somewhat flattened, rounded or oblong, with
head concealed beneath. The larvee breed in the seed of beans and peas and pupate
there. Sorauer, P.: Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 535-537. CHITTENDEN, F. H.: U.S. Dept. Agric., Yearbook 1898, pp. 233-260. Spermophagus pectoralis Sharp. (Mexican bean weevil. Mylabride; Coleoptera.) Host: Beans. Injury: To dried beans, which it destroys for successive generations like the common
bean weevil. Fig. 21.—Bean weevil (A canthoscelides obtectus): a, Adult; b, larva; c,pupa. (Chittenden.) Description: A small black rounded beetle with white marks on the elytra or wing-
covers. Distribution: Mexico, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama, Brazil, Texas. CuirrEeNDEN, F. H.: U. S., Dept. Agric., Yearbook 1898, pp. 233-260. BEAN INSECTS. 37

Agromyza phaseoli. (Bean Fly. Agromyzidae; Diptera.) Hosts: Lima, Tonga, French, and Madagascar beans. Injury: Larvae bore in stalks. Distribution: Australia. Frogeatr, W. W. Agricultural Gazette. N.S. W. Feb., 1911. Jarvis, E. Queensland Agricultural Journal, March, 1913, pp. 192-195, Plates 30, 31. Lycena betica. (Blue or Hairstreak Butterfly. Ly-
caenidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Beans, garden peas, cow-
peas, Jack beans, crotalarias, and
pigeon peas. Injury: Larve attack pods, devour-
ing growing seeds. Distribution: Hawaii. Fuitaway, D. T. Annual Report,
Hawaii Agri. Exp. Sta. 1911 (1912),
p. 21. A bt

(S

  

=

anh
{ ied

iN

pS
(

SI
“ys

   
 

ns

  

FiG. 22.—Bean weevil (Pachymerus chinensis): a, Adult;
b, egg; c-e, larva and’details. (Chittenden.) Hyalopeplus pellucidus. (Hawaiian leaf-bug. Capsidae; Heteroptera.) Host: Pigeon peas. Injury: By sucking juices from plants. Distribution: Hawaii. Fuittaway, D. T. Annual Report, Hawaii Agri. Exp. Sta. 1911 (1912), p. 23. Zizera labradus Godt. (Victoria Bean Butterfly. Lycaenide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Beans, peas. Injury: Feeds in the pods, a serious pest in Victoria. Description: Butterfly one of the group known as “Blues.”? Larva flattened,

 

green, very hairy. Egg
circular, pitted. Distribution: Australia. ¥renou, C.: Handbook of
Destructive Insects of
Victoria, pt. 4, 1909, pp. 62-66, pl. 49. Maruca testulalis Geyer. (Bean Pod Borer. Pyrali-
da: Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Mung (Phaseolus

mungo), moth (Phaseolus

Fig. 23.—Bean weevil (Pachymerus quadrimaculatus): a, Adult; b, aconitifolius) tur (Cajanus
Mp

larva; c, pupa. (Chittenden.) Injury: Breeds in the pods of legumes. indicus). Description and biology: Adult wing expanse 26-30 mm., fuscous brown, forewing
with conspicuous black edged white spot, hind wing white, with a marginal fuscous
band. Larva 12 mm. long, green; sometimes with a pink tinge, hairs on small black
tubercles. Bores inside of the pods and pupates in its borings. Distribution: Australia and Asia. Maxwett-Lerroy, H.M. Mem. Dept. Agric. India, vol. 1, 1907, p. 216, fig. 66. 388 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. B. OTHER IMPORTANT BEAN INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Chrysomelida. _
Cerotoma denticornis Olivier, leaf beetle; Porto Rico (see text fig. 24). Curculionidz:

Sitona lineata Linneeus,>k S. flavescens Marsh. ; Europe. (See Clover.) Hypera variabilis Herbst; Europe. (See Clover.) DIPTERA. Trypetide. Dacus cucurbitae Coquillett; India, Ceylon, Hawaii; attacks fruit. (See Cucurbits). Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks Phaseolus vulgaris. (See Fruit.) Bactrocera cucurbitx. Bactrocera tryoni. Anthomyiide. > Chortophila (Pegomya) fusciceps Zetterstedt. (See Corn.) Agromyzide. Agromyza fabalis Jack; bean stem maggot, Rhodesia, mines stems of cowpeas, French beans, kidney
and haricot beans. LEPIDOPTERA. Hesperida. > Eudamus proteus Linnzeus, bean leaf roller; Porto Rico; Southern States. Fic. 24.—Beun leaf-beetle (Cerotoma denticornis): Adults, two_varieties. (Chittenden.) BEECH. (Fagus spp. Family Fagacez.) This genus contains tall, hardy, deciduous trees favored for parks. The wood is
valuable and the nuts edible. The nuts also yield an oil used for cooking. Propa-
gated from seed. Valuable for nursery stock. A. BEECH PESTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Laspeyresia grossana Haworth. (Carpocapsa.) , (Beech Tortrix. Tortricids; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Hazelnut, walnut, oak, beech, chestnut. Injury: Seldom serious. Attacks fruits of its hosts. Description and biology: Adult, forewing bluish ash-gray; translucent spot brownish
gold streaked with black, brown at base, bounded by triangular spots. Flies in
June and July (Germany). Pupates in spring in the earth. Larva attacks nuts in
late summer, winters in earth. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 276. BEECH INSECTS. 39

B. OTHER IMPORTANT BEECH PESTS. HEMIPTERA. Aphidide. Pterochlorus exsiccator Altum, anonmigratory plant louse; middle Europe; very injurious to the twigs
and stems of young trees. * Phyllaphis fagi Linneeus, nonmigratory plant louse; Europe; feeds on foliage. Coccide:
Unarmored—

Ceelostomidia assimilis Maskell; New Zealand; attacks Fagus menziesii and F. fusca. Celostomidia pilosa Maskell; New Zealand. Cryptococcus fagi Baerensprung: Europe; Fagus sylvatica. Eriococcus aceris Signoret; Europe; Fagus silvatica. Eriococcus fagicorticus Maskell; New Zealand; Fagus fusca. Eriococcus pallidus Maskell; New Zealand; Fagus fusca. Eriococcus raithbyi Maskell; New Zealand; Fagus menziesii. Gossyparia cavellii Maskell; New Zealand; Fagus menziesii. Inglisia fagi Maskell; New Zealand. Phenacoleachia zealandica Maskell; New Zealand. Pulvinaria betule Linneus; Europe; Fagus sylvatica,
Rhizococcus intermedius Maskell; New Zealand; Fagus menziesii. Rhizococcus pulchellus Maskell; New Zealand; Fagus fusca, F. menziesii, F. cliffortioides. Rhizococcus totare Maskell; New Zealand; Fagus menziesii. Ripersia fagi Maskell; New Zealand; Fagus menziesii. Solenococcus fagi Maskell; New Zealand. COLEOPTERA. Anobiide. Xestobium plumbeum Illiger; Europe; injures wood for technical purposes. Xestobium rufovillosum De Geer; Europe; injures wood for technical purposes. Ptilinus pectinicornis Linnzus; Europe; bores in wood. Elateridz. Athous subfuscus Miiller, a snapping beetle; Europe; larve destroy germinating beech. Lymexylonide. Hyleceetus dermestoides Linneeus; Europe; breeds in bark and wood. Scarabeeide. Amphimallon solstitialis Linneeus; Europe; develops like the June beetle at the roots of trees. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius, and Jf. melolontha Linnzeus; Europe; also breed at the roots of

seedlings and as adults feed on the foliage. Polyphylla fullo Linneus; Europe; breeds at the roots of trees and the adults feed on the foliage. Buprestide. Agrilus angustulus Iliger, A. biguttatus Fabricius, A. elongatus Herbst, and +A. viridis Linneus (see

Oak); wood borers; Europe; attack bast and sapwood, especially of young trees. Cerambycide. Callidium xneum DeGeer; and C. violacewm Linnzus; long-horned wood borers; Germany; attack
wood of felled trees and lumber. Saperda scalaris Linneus; Europe; bores in wood. (See Poplar.) Chrysomelidz. Haltica quercetorwm Foudr. ; a leaf beetle; Germany. (See Oak. ) Brachyrhinidz. Strophosoma capitata De Geer, and S. melanogramma Forster, weevils; Europe; adults feed on the

leaves and buds of seedlings. Polydrusus cervinus Linnzeus, P. chrysomela Olivier, P. griseo maculatus Desbrochers, P. lateralis Gyl-
lenhal, P. micans Schénherr, P. mollis Stroem, P. picus Fabricius, P. sericeus Schall., and + P.
viridicollis Baudi, weevils; Europe; as adults feed on buds and foliage; probably breed at the roots,
The two latter species have been introduced into the United States. Phyllobius argentatus Linneeus, P. urtice De Geer and P. viridicollis Fabricius; weevils; Europe;
adults injure buds and leaves. Attelabidz. Apoderus coryli Linnzeus, a leaf rolling weevil, Europe; larva breeds in the leaf rolls. Rhynchites alni Miiller and Rhynchites betulae Linneeus, leaf rolling weevils; Europe; larve breed in

the leaf rolls. Byctiscus betulz Linnzus, a leaf rolling weevil; Europe. 40 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Curculionide. Orchestes fagi Linnzus, a small jumping weevil; Europe; mines the leaves. Hylobius abietis Linnzus, a large weevil; Europe; bores in the bark of seedlings. Cossonide. Rhyncolus lignyarius Marsh., a small elongate weevil; Europe; bores in the trunks. Rhyncolus truncorum Germar, a small weevil; Europe; bores in timber. Scolytidz, Ipide. Scolytus intricatus Ratzeburg; Russia, Germany; makes galleries in bast. Anisandrus dispar Fabricius; Germany; makes galleries in wood, causing great damage. Ernoporus fagi Fabricius; Europe; makes galleries in bark of Fagus sylvatica. Taphrorychus bicolor Herbst, and J. villifrons Dufour; Europe; make galleries in bark. Xyleborus dryographus Ratzeburg, and X. monographus Fabricius, Europe; makes galleries in the
wood of living trees. Xyloterus domesticus Linneus, and X. signatus Fabricius; Europe; makes galleries in sapwood of
branches and in the wood of the trees. LEPIDOPTERA. Cossidz. *Zeuzera pyrina Linneus; Europe, Africa, North America; breeds in the wood. (See Horse-chest-

nut.) Cossus cossus Linnieus; the goat moth; Europe; breeds in the wood. (See Willow.) Drepanidz. Drepana cultraria Fabricius; Europe; defoliator. Notodontidzx. Phalera bucephala Linnzeus; Urone’ (See Forests.) Geometridz. Cheimatobia boreata Hiibner; Germany; feeds on young growth. Hibernia aurantiaria Esp., H. defoliaria Linnzeus and I. marginaria Borckh. ; EUrorel feed on foliage. Larentia dilutata Borckh. ; Europe; feeds on foliage. Lasiocampide. Malacosoma neustria Linneus; Europe; feeds on buds and leaves (see Forests). Lymantriidz. Dasychira pudibunda Linneus, + Euproctis chrysorrhea Linneus, + Lymantria monacha Linneus,
> Porthetria dispar Linnzus, Porthesia similis Fuessly (see Forests). Noctuidz. Acronycta aceris Linneus; Europe; defoliator. Scopelosoma satellitia Linnzeus; Germany; injurious to young growth. Pluteliidz. Cerostoma parenthesella Linneeus; Europe; attacks leaves of seedlings. Tortricidz. > Peronea ferrugana Treitschke; Europe; North America; attacks leaves. Tortriz podana Sc. ; Europe; attacks leaves of seedlings. HYMENOPTERA. Cimbicidz. Cimber fagi Zadd. ; sawfly; Europe; feeds on foliage. Xiphydride. Xiphydrya camelus Linneus; wood wasp; Europe; bores in wood. DIPTERA. Itonidide. Hormomyia annulipes Htg. and H. jagi Hig., gall midges, Europe; from galls on leaves. LITERATURE. SoRAUER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildliuse (Coccide), 1912. BaRGacui, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. FERNALD, Marta E. Catalogue of Coccide of the World, Mass. Agr. Coll., Bul. $8, 1903. BEET INSECTS. 41

BEET; MANGELWURZEL OR MANGOLD; SUGAR BEET; CHARD. (Beta vulgaris Linneeus. Family Chenopodiacez.) The beet and its varieties are grown from seed. The varieties have been developed
either for their roots or their foliage, which are edible. A race of showy foliage beets
has been developed which make excellent flower-garden borders. The species occurs
in America, Europe, and as far east as Persia, and the Caspian Sea. Insects are most
likely to be introduced in shipments of beet roots. A. BETTER KNOWN BEET INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Atomaria linearis Stephens. (Pigmy Mangold Beetle. Cryptophagidex; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Mangolds, beets, sugar beets. Injury: Very destructive by destroying sprouts at time of germination and later
attacking both roots and leaves. Description: Bectle 1-1.5 mm, long, dark brown, with fine pubescence. The life
history has not been worked out. Distribution: Europe (England). Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 475, fig. 290. THEoBALp, Frep. V. First Rept. Econ. Zool., Brit. Mus. Nat. Hist., 1903, pp. 8, 9,
figs. ;
JaBLonowskI, Jozser. Die Tierischen Feinde der Zuckerriibe (translation by Julius
Reitzer), 1909, pp. 136-142, fig. 31. > Cassida nebulosa Linneus. (Beet Tortoise Beetle. Cassididx; Coleoptera.) Host: Beets, sugar beet, orache, lambsquarter, Atripler, etc. Injury: Both larva and adult feed on the foliage. Description: Beetle dorsally flattened in the shape of a tortoise shell, about 6 mm. long, yellowish gray or pale green. Distribution: Europe, Asia (Persia to Siberia), and recorded from California in 1894. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. p. 533. CHITTENDEN, F.H. U.S. Dept. Agr., Div. Entom., 1903, bul. 43, p. 14, fig. 6. JABLONOWSKI, Jozser. Die Tierschen Feinde der Zuckerriibe translation by Julius

Reitzer), 1909, pp. 261-263, fig. 55. Cleonus punctiventris Germar. (Beet Root Weevil. Curculionidx; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Beet, Polygonum, thistle, goosefoot, tobacco, Salsola. Injury: Adults feed on young plants; larve feed at the roots of beets. Very
destructive in east Europe. Description and biology: An elongate subcylindrical weevil with stout beak. The
larve feed at roots as low as 60 cm. below the surface. Pupate in the larval feeding
places. .

Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 546, 547. Gelechia ocellatella Boyd; Gelechia atriplicella F. R,; Gelechia instabilella Douglas. (Lita.) (Beet leaf miners. Gelechiide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Beets, sugar beets, mangolds. Injury: Mine the leaves, and sometimes G. ocellatella bores in the crown and a short
distance into the roots. 42 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Description and biology: G. ocellatella is a small yellowish gray moth with dark ribs
and an apical spot on the front wings; hind wings as large as front and whitish gray;
pupates in leaf rolls, in the roots or outside. Larva 10 to 12 mm. long, pale greenish
with a transverse row of reddish spots on each segment and two or three longitudinal
rose colored stripes. Feeds on leaves and for a short distance into the roots. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 263,

f, 192. JABLONOWSKI, Jozser. Die Tierischen Feinde der Zuckerriibe (translation by

Julius Reitzer), 1909, pp. 136-142. %* Hymenia fascialis Cramer. (Hawaiian Beet Webworm, Pyra-
lide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Sugar beet, Swiss chard,
mangel-wurzel, Amarantus, Euxo-
lus, purslane (Portulaca oleracea),
cucumber, Chenopodiaceae. Injury: Capable of doing consider-
able damage to truck by feeding on
foliage. Has been widely distrib-
uted. (See text figs. 25, 26.) Distribution: Japan, Hawaii, Trop-
ical America, Porto Rico, Europe,
South Africa, Australia, Madagascar,
Reunion, Mauritius, Florida, Ala-
bama, California, District of Colum-
bia. j
Marsu, H. O. U. 8. Dept. Agr.,

Bur. Entom., Bul. 109, pt. 1, 1911,

pp. 1-15, pl. 1, figs. 1, 2. *Chortophila (Pegomya) hyoscyami

Panzer. (Phorbia vicina Lintn.) (Beet fly or spinach leafminer. An-
thomyide; Diptera.) Fig. 25.—Hawaiian beet webworm (Hymenia fascialis): Hosts: Spinach, beets, sugar beets,
a, Egg on leaf; b, larva, dorsal view; c,larva,headand mangolds, orache, henbane, goose-
first thoracic segment; d, abdominal segment, lateral foot,

view; ¢, anal segment; f, pupa, lateral view; g,cremas-  . 5 : Min a The mines
ter; h,cocoon. Allenlarged. (Marsh.) Inj uiry: iat ea leaves,
are blisterlike. Description and biology. Fly thorax lead gray, with five faint dorsal stripes, abdo-

men yellow gray with a faint brownish stripe; entire body with black bristles; head’

silver white, with reddish shimmer; front and scutellum with orange, silver gray

streaks; eyes red; palpi yellow with dark apex; femora yellowish, tibize brown;

length, 6mm. The species varies in color and has received a number of names,
Distribution: Europe. Introduced into the United States and quite injurious to

spinach. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 428, 429,
fig. 261. CuirrenpeN, F.H. U.S. Dept. Agr. Div. Ent., bul. 43, 1903, pp. 50-52, fig. 50 (P.
vicina Lintner). Ormerop, Miss E. Manual Injurious Insects, 1890, pt. 1, pp. 144-147, fig. (P. betae
Curt.). . :

JABLONOWSKI, JozsEF. Die Tierischen Feinde der Zuckerriibe (translation by Julius
Reitzer), 1909, pp. 303-315, figs. 61-63. BEET INSECTS. 43

B. OTHER IMPORTANT BEET INSECTS. ACARINA. Tetranychidez. ' Tetranychus telarius Linnzus, the red spider; Europe; very injurious to sugar-beet foliage. HEMIPTERA. Aphididz. Aphis rumicis Linneus; Europe; sugar-beet foliage. ORTHOPTERA. Gryllotalpide. *Gryllotalpa gryllotalpa Linneeus (vulgaris Latreille); Europe, introduced into New Jersey; injures

roots. Gryllidz. Gryllus melas Charp. ; Europe; seriously injures the roots. COLEOPTERA. Silphidz. *Blitophaga opaca Linneus; Europe, North America; feeds as larva on foliage of beets, an unusua
habit for this family. It is harmless in America at present. Blitophaga undata Miller; Silpha obscura Linneeus; and Phosphuga atrata Linneeus; Europe; larvae
feed on foliage of beets. Fic. 26.—The Hawaiian beet webworm ( Hymenia fascialis): Female moth. Enlarged. (Marsh.) Tenebrionidz. Pedinus femoralis Linnzeus, and Gonocephalum (Opatrum) sabulosum Linneus; Hungary; larve in-
jurious to roots of sugar beet; adults injure the foliage. Coccinellidz. Subcoccinella 24-punctata Linneeus; Europe; larvae and adults injure vegetation. Elateride. Lacon murinus Linneeus and Corymbites aeneus Linneus, wireworms; Europe; attack the roots of
seedlings. Athous niger Linneeus. (See Tobacco.) Agriotes lineatus Linnzus. (See Tobacco.) Meloidz. Epicauta rufidorsum Goeze, blister beetle; Europe; defoliates and sometimes destroys entire plants. Scarabaide. Melolontha vulgaris Linneus, June beetle, Europe; larvee feed at roots. Rhizotrogus xquinoctialis Herbst; Europe; the larve feed at the crown and roots killing many plants. 44 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS,

Chrysomelide. Cassida vittata Vill; Europe; larva and adult feed on foliage. Chalcoides chloris Foudr., Chetocnema tibialis Iiger, Psylliodgs attenuata Koch, P. chrysocephala Lin-
neeus, Phyllotreta vittula Redtenbacher, P. nemorum Linneeus, P. nigripes Fabricius, P. atra Fabri-
cius, P. crucifere Goeze, flea beetles; Europe; injure the foliage. Brachyrhinidz (Otiorhynchidz). Brachyrhinus raucus Fabricius (Otiorhynchus), B. ligustici Linneeus, B. orbicularis Herbst; Europe;
adults injure the foliage and young plants. Psallidium mazillosum Fabricius; Europe; adult injures plants. Curculionidz. Liparus coronatus Goeze; Europe; breeds in the roots. Bothynoderes punctiventris Germar; and B. farinosus Fahraeus; Europe; adults injure foliage, larve
breed in roots. Cleonus piger Scopoli, C. fasciatus Miller, C. mendicus Gyllenhal, C. tigrinus Panzer, C. ucrainiensis
Gawr., C. pedestris Podg., C. cinereus Schr. ; Europe; breed in roots of beets or adults attack seedlings
and foliage. Litus ascanii Linnzeus; Europe; breeds in the stems. Cionus scraphulariz Linneeus; Europe; adults feed on foliage of beets and mangolds. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidx. * Philyctzxnia ferrugalis Hiibner; Europe, Asia, North America (see Cabbage). Noctuidz. Agrotis segetum Schiffermiller, A. plecta Linneus, A. exclamationis Linnzeus, cutworms; Europe;
injure young plants and roots. Mamestra brassice Linneeus, M. dissimilis Kn., M. oleracea Linneeus; Europe; feed on foliage. Calocampa ezoleta Linnzeus; Europe; attacks beets. *Plusia gamma Linneus; Europe; Asia, North America; in Europe injurious to beets. HYMENOPTERA. Tenthredinidz. Athalia spinarum Fabricius, a saw fly; Europe; South Africa; attacks foliage of beets (see Turnip). DIPTERA. Tipulide. Pachyrhina maculata Meigen, a crane fly; Europe; larva attacks the roots of beets. Tipula oleracea Linneus and Tipula paludosa Meigen; Europe; also occasionally attack beet roots. LITERATURE,

TABLONOWSKI, J. Die Tierischen Feinde der Zuckerriibe (translation by J. Reitzer), Budapest, 1909. SoraveER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d edit., 1913, vol. 3. BARGAGLI, P. Rassegna Biologica di Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. BERSEEM; EGYPTIAN CLOVER. (Trifolium alecandrinum Linneeus. Family Leguminose.) This forage plant has been introduced in a small measure into the United States
from Egypt. It has a number of important enemies in Egypt which attackYother
crops also grown in this country. (See Clover.) BETEL NUT. (Areca catechu, etc. Family, Palmacez.) A tropical palm yielding the betel nut of commerce. IMPORTANT ARECA INSECTS. ,
HEMIPTERA. Coccidz:
Armored—

Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) alienus Newstead; Areca lutescens. *Pinnaspis buzi Bouché; Trinidad, Brazil, New York, District of Columbia; Areca catechu, A. lutes-
cens. Female scale 1—1.5 mm. long, narrow, reddish-brown or orange-brown with extremity lighter. Second exuvium comparatively large, occupying a trifle over one-third the puparium, which bears
a strong resemblance to that of Lepidosaphes. Sides nearly parallel. Unarmored—
Coccus acutissimus Green; Ceylon; Areca catechu. (See Mango.) Coccus minimus Newstead; England; Mexico; Areca catechu. Leucodiaspis cockerelli de Charmoy; Brazil; Areca lutescens,

BIRCH INSECTS. 45

BIRCH. (Betula spp. Family Betulacez. ) Ornamental deciduous trees or shrubs grown chiefly for their bright green handsome
foliage. There are many species occurring in North America, Europe, north and
central Asia. Propagated from seed and readily transplanted. The bark and wood
are of value in the arts and crafts, and some species yield a sap used as a beverage. The bark of B. papyrifera is used in making canoes and for tanning leather. A. BETTER KNOWN BIRCH PESTS LIKELY TO
BE IMPORTED. Eriophyes rudis Can. (Birch Blister Mite. Eriophyide; Acarina.) Hosts: Betula alba, B. pubescens, B. odorata. Injury: Causes gall-like swellings of the buds. Ulti-
mately kills a tree. Description and biology: A four-legged blister mite
which forms gall-like swellings of the buds. Very easy
to introduce on nursery stock. Distribution: Europe, England (especially severe
around London). Soraugr, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d
edit. vol. 3, 1913, p. 117, 118. fig. 93. Magdalis carbonaria Linnzus. (Birch Twig Weevil. Curculionide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Corylus avellana L., Prunus domestica L.,
Betula alba L., Juglans regia L., Pinus. Injury: Breeds in young twigs. Fig. 27.—Mole cricket, Gryllo-

Description and biology: Weevil similar to the com- talpa, (Kurdjumov.) mon Magdalis species of this country. The eggs are laid in small dead or injured
twigs. Larva feeds in medullary canalfof twigs. Pupates in tunnel. Adults
feed on foliage. Distribution: Europe. Bareacut, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887, p. 194. B. OTHER IMPORTANT BIRCH PESTS. HEMIPTERA.»®
Aphidide. Glyphina betulz Kaltenbach, a plant louse; Germany; attacks leaves and twigs. Coccidz:
Armored—
Chionaspis salicis Linneeus; Europe. Unarmored—
Lecanium ciliatum Douglas; Europe. Lecanium coryli Linnzeus; Europe. Lecanium pulchrum Marchal; Europe; Betula verrucosa. Pulvinaria betule Linneus; Europe; Betula alba. ORTHOPTERA. Gryllotalpida. »*Gryllotalpa gryllotalpa Linneus; Europe, New Jersey; injures roots, young shoots, and germinating
seed. (See text, fig. 27.) . 46 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Buprestidz. Agrilus viridis Linnzeus; a wood borer; Europe; bores in bast and sapwood of seedlings and young
stems and branches of older trees. Lymexylonide. Hylecetus dermestoides Linnzeus; a wood borer; Germany, Sweden. Passalide. Basilianus cantori Perch. ; a large black beetle; India; breeds in rotting wood. Scarabaide. Anomala znea De Geer, Europe, adults attack foliage. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius, and M. melolontha Linnzeus, June beetles; breed at the roots of
seedlings, and adults feed on foliage. Polyphyllafulic Linnzeus; Europe; also attacks roots and foliage in the same manner. Chrysomelidz. Agelastica alni Linneeus; a leaf beetle; Europe; larvee and adults feed on foliage. Lochmzxa capree Linneus; Europe; larve and adults feed on foliage. Melasoma znea Linnzeus; Europe; larve and adults feed on foliage. Haltica quercetorum Foudr. ; Europe; defoliates. (See Oak.) Cerambycide. Rhagium mordat De Geer, Sweden; bores in stems and branches. Attelabidze. Rhynchites betule Linnzeus, Apoderus coryli Linneus, and Byctiscus betule Linnzeus; leaf-rolling
weevils; Europe; the larve breed in the rolls. Brachyrhinide (Otiorhynchidz). Strophosoma capitata De Geer, and S. melanogramma
Forster; weevils; Europe; adults feed on foliage, and
larve at the roots. Brachyderes incanus Linneeus,a weevil; Europe; adults
feed on foliage. AMetallites iris Olivier; Europe; breeds at roots, adults
attack buds and leaves. Polydrusus cervinus Linneus, P. intermedius Zetter-
stedt, P. planifrons Gyllenhal, and P. undatus
Fabricius; Europe; feed as adults on foliage of Betula
alba, and probably some of them breed on the plant. This is a dangerous genus. Phyllobius argentatus Linneeus, P. betulz Fabricius,
P. maculicornis Germar, P. pyri Linneeus, and P.
sinuatus Fabricius; Europe; feed as adults on foliage
and probably some of them breed on the plant. Fig. 28.—Scolytus ratzeburgi: Male much en-
larged. (Niisslin.) Curculionidae. Anoplus plantaris Schénherr; Europe; adults feed on buds and young leaves. Hylobius abietis Linnzeus; Europe; bores in the bark. * Cryptorhynchus lapathi Linneus; Europe; breeds in young shoots, branches, bark, and wood. An
important pest introduced into the United States. Scolytide, Ipidae. Scolytus ratzeburgi Janson,and S.rugulosws Ratzeburg; Europe; make galleriesin bark. (See text fig. 28.) Anisandrus dispar Fabricius; Germany; makes galleries in wood. Xyloterus domesticus Linnzeus, and X. signatus Fabricius; Germany; galleries in sapwood. LEPIDOPTERA. Cosside. Cossus cossus Linnzeus; goat moth; Europe; bores in wood. (See Willow.) kZeuzera pyrina Linneeus; Europe, Africa, North America; bores in wood. (See Horse chestnut.) Geometridz. Anisopteryx zscularia Schiffermiller; a looper; Europe; feeds on foliage. Cheimatobia boreata Hiibner; Europe; feeds on buds, leaves, and new growth. Hibernia aurantiaria Esp., H. defoliaria Linneeus, and H. marginaria Borckh. ; Germany; feed on buds
and leaves. Larentia dilutata Borckh. ; Europe; feeds on foliage of Betula odorata. Larentia nebulata Tnbg. ; Sweden; feeds on foliage. Lasiocampide. .
Eriogaster lanestris Linneeus; Germany; feeds on foliage. Malacosoma neustria Linneeus; Europe; defoliator. (See Forests.) INSECTS OF BIRCH AND BLACKBERRY. 47

Lymantriide. Dasychira pudibunda Linneeus, + Lymantria monacha Linneus, * Porthetria dispar Linnzeus, Porthesia
similis Fuessly, forest defoliators; Europe. (See Forests.) Sesiidz. Sesia spheciformis Grng. ; Europe; bores in trunk. Sesia scolizformis Borckh. ; Sweden; bores in trunk. Tortricide. Peronea ferrugana Treitschke; Europe, North America; attacks foliage. Notodontidz. Phalera bucephala Linnzeus; Europe. (See Forests.) HYMENOPTERA. Cimbicide. Cimber variabilis Klg., a saw fly; Europe; feeds on foliage. Trichiosoma lucorum Linneus; Europe; defoliates. Tenthredinidz. Nematus ( Croesus) septentrionalis Linnzeus; Europe; defoliates. Priophorus padi Linneeus; Europe (see Plum). Xiphydride. Xiphydrya prolongata Linnzeus, wood wasp; Europe; bores in the wood. ,

BIBLIOGRAPHY. SORAUER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3rd edit., 1913, vol. 3. NUsstin, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2nd edit., 1913. BARGAGLI, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. TRAGARDH, I. Sveriges Skogsinsekter, 1914. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildlause (Coccide), 1912. BLACKBERRY; RASPBERRY; LOGANBERRY. (Rubus spp. Family Rosacez.) A large genus of shrubs bearing many different kinds of delicious small fruits
natives of America, Europe, and Asia. IMPORTANT BLACKBERRY INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Byturide. Byturus tomentosus Fabricius; Europe; larva feeds in fruit of raspberries and blackberries. Brachyrhinide. ‘

Brachyrhinus tenebricosus Herbst; Europe; larve attack roots, adults attack foliage. Curculionide. Rhinaria perdiz Pascoe; Australia. Hypera variabilis Herbst; Europe; raspberry. (See Clover.) Anthonomus rubi Herbst; Europe; larva at roots, adult attacks foliage. LEPIDOPTERA. Tortricidz. Notocelia roborana Treitschke; Europe. (See Currant.) Seslidz. Bembecia hylziformis Lasp. ; Europe; bores canes. Lasiocampidz. .
Macrothylacia rubi Linneeus; Europe; defoliator. HYMENOPTERA,

- Tenthredinidz. Entodecta pumila Klug, a sawfly; Europe; mines in leaves. Cephididz. Janus fumipennis Ever. ; Europe; mines in stems,

48 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. BOX. (Buxus spp. Family Euphorbiacez.) Evergreen shrubs or small trees commonly used for hedges, occurring natively in
Central and Eastern Asia, North Africa, Europe, and Central America, and much
used in this country. IMPORTANT INSECT ENEMIES OF BOX. HEMIPTERA. Coccide:
Unarmored—
Eriococcus buzi Fonscolombe; Europe. DIPTERA. Itonididz (Cecidomyiidz). > Monarthropalpus buri Laboulbene; Europe, eastern United States; leaf miner. BROOM CORN. (See Sorghum.) BRUSSELS SPROUTS. (See Cabbage.) BUCKTHORN. (Rhamnus spp. Family Rhamnacee.) Ornamental deciduous or evergreen shrubs or trees propagated from seed or cut-
tings. The genus occurs chiefly in the northern temperate regions, but some
species are found in Brazil and South Africa. The wood of R. frangula is made into
charcoal valued for the manufacture of gunpowder. IMPORTANT INSECTS ATTACKING BUCKTHORN. HEMIPTERA. Coccidx. Lecanium ciliatum Douglas; Germany, Tyrol; attacks Rhamnus alaternus, and R. frangula. Chionaspis salicis Linnzeus; Austria; attacks R. frangula. A number ofscales already in the United States also attack Rhamnus. LEPIDOPTERA. Cossidz. *kZeuzera pyrina Linneus; Europe, Africa, N. America, bores in wood. (See Horse-chestnut.) Lymantriidz. Dasychira pudibunda Linneus, a defoliator; Europe. (See Forests.) > Lymantria monacha Linneus, the nun moth; Europe; defoliator. (See Forests.) Hyponomeutide. Hyponomeuta padi Zeller, a web worm; Europe; attacks R. frangula. Hyponomeuta evonymella, a web worm; Europe. LITERATURE. SoraveER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. Hess, R. Der Forstschutz, 1900, vol. 2. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildliuse (Coccide), 1912. CABBAGE; KALE; COLLARD; BRUSSELS SPROUTS; CAULIFLOWER;
KOHLRABI. (Brassica oleracea Linnzeus, varieties. Family Crucifers.) The many varieties of this species especially in Europe, have very important
pests, which it is not desirable to have imported into this country. Since the flower-
head is used in some varieties, the foliage in others, and the roots in others, there is
danger of importing almost any pest of the species. U, S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE X. THE RED-BANDED THRIPS. The red-banded thrips (Heliothrips eg eee 1.—Adult. Fias, 2-4-—Nymphal stages
ussell. CABBAGE INSECTS. 49

A. BETTER KNOWN CABBAGE PESTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Contarinia torquens Meijere. (Cabbage Midge. Itonididee [Cecidomyide]; Diptera.) Hosts: Cabbage. Injury: Attacks young cabbage plants, especially, breeding in the leaf axil and
hindering growth. Has several generations. Pupates in soil. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 447.

i Dasyneura brassicz Winner. (Cabbage Gall Midge. Itonididee [Cecidomyidee]; Diptera.) Hosts: Cabbage, rape. Injury: Breeds in fruit. Description and biology: Fly blackish brown, thorax covered with pubescence giving
a silvery sheen, abdomen flesh red, with black bands; length 1.2-1.5 mm. long, milk
white. Forms a gall in the fruit, feeds on the seed. Distribution: Europe. SoraverR, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 454. Phaonia trimaculata Bouché. (Cabbage Maggot. Anthomyiide; Diptera.) Hosts: Cabbage. Injury: Breeds in the roots. Description and biology: Fly light gray, four black interrupted streaks and three
brown spots on thorax; eyes hairy; length 8 mm. Maggot 11 mm. long. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 482. B. IMPORTANT CABBAGE PESTS. ORTHOPTERA. Gryllotalpide. * Scapteriscus didactylus Latreille; Porto Rico, Georgia; quite injurious, cuts below surface of soil. COLEOPTERA. Elateridz. Agriotes lineatus Linneeus. (See Tobacco.) Chrysomelidz. .
Psylliodes chrysocephala Linnzus and P. napi Fabricius. (See Rape.) Brachyrhinidz. *Barynotus squamosus Germar; Europe, Canada; adults strip plants to ground. Curculionide. Baris glabra Herbst, B. chlorizans Germar, B. opiparis Duval; Europe; breed in root and stem. Baris ceerulescens Scopoli; Europe; breeds in stem. Baris lepidii Germar, and B. viridisericea Goeze; Europe; breeds in root and crown. Ceutorhynchus cyanipennis Germar, and C. sulcicollis Paykull; Europe; breeds in crown. Ceutorhynchus quadridens Panzer; Europe; breeds in roots. LEPIDOPTERA. Pieridz. Pieris monuste Linneus, Porto Rico, southern United States; cabbage worm. Pyralidz. .

Evergestis extimalis Se. (See Rape.) Plutellida. Plutella maculipennis Curtis; cosmopolitan; destructive to leaves. 55266—17, 4

50 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Noctuidz..
Mamestra oleracea Linnzeus and M. brassice Linneeus; Europe; very destructive to cabbage. (See

text fig. 29.) DIPTERA. Anthomyiide. > Chortophilafusciceps Zetterstedt. (See Corn.) Anthomyia radicum Meigen; Europe. (See Radish.) CACAO; CHOCOLATE. (Theobroma spp. Family Sterculiacez.) Cacao is a very important article of commerce entering the United States. It is
not grown in the United States proper, but is to a small extent produced in Porto
Rico, Hawaii, and the Philip-
pines. A. AN IMPORTANT CACAO

PEST LIKELY TO BE IM-
PORTED. Zaratha cramerella Sn. (Cacao moth. Gelechiide;
Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Cacao, Nephelium
lappaceum. Injury: Very destructive to
the fruit. Description and biology:
Fig. 29.—The cabbage moth (_Mamestra brassicz): a, Moth; b, larva; Mothsmall. Larva10-12mm

c, pupa. About natural size. (Curtis.) , . a
long, whitish, with greenish
shimmer. Pupa in oval flattened woolly cocoon on outside of fruit, leaves, and twigs. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 266. B. OTHER IMPORTANT CACAO PESTS. THYSANOPTERA. > Heliothrips rubrocinctus Giard; West Indies, Ceylon, Uganda, Florida (see pl. X). HEMIPTERA. Coccide. Philephedra theobrome Green; Trinidad, Theobroma cacao. Miridz. Helopeltis theivora and H. antonii; Ceylon and Java: Sahlbergella singularis; Kamerun. COLEOPTERA. Scarabeide. Adoretus umbrosus Fabricius, and var. tenuimaculatus Waterhouse; Hawaii, Japan, Philippine Islands,
-Java. (See Rose.) Buprestide. Chrysochroa bicolor Fabricius, and C. fulminans Fabricius; Java; borers. Cerambycide. Epepeotes luscus Fabricius; Java; caoutchouc, cacao, mango. Monohammus fistulator Germar; Java, Sumatra, Borneo; coffee, cacao (bores in bark, wood, and fruit). Monohammus ruspator Fabricius; Kamerun; cacao. Tragocephala senatoria Th. ; Kamerun; cacao
Moecha adusta Har. ; West Africa, East Africa; cacao, Kickzia. Praonetha melanura Pascoe; Java; cacao, coffee. Ecthea quadricornis Olivier; Trinidad; cacao. Steirastoma depressum Linnaeus; West Indies, South America; cacao, silk cotton tree ( Ceiba), okra, etc. Glenea novemguttata Castelnau, Java; cacao

  

Chrysomelidz. Crepidodera costatipennis Jacoby; Kamerun; defoliator. INSECTS OF CACAO, CANTELOUPE, CARROT, CASSAVA, CATALPA. 51

LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralide. Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée; Orient. (See Corn.) Notodontidz. Stauropus alternus Walker; India, Ceylon, Java; defoliator. Cossidz. .

Zeuzera coffee Nietner; Asia, Africa. (See Coffee )

DIPTERA, 0

Trypetidez. ) Ceratitis punctata Wiedemann; Africa; fruit fy. (See Fruit )
Ceratitis anone Graham; Africa. (See Fruit.) 7 LITERATURE. Gurry, P, L. West Indian Bulletin, 1912, vol. 12, pp. 310-320. AGRICULTURAL NEWS, Barbados, 1915, vol. 14, pp. 58, 59. CANTELOUPE,
CARROT. See Cucurbits. (Daucus carota Linneeus. Family Umbelliferee.) The carrot is grown throughout the world. As it is a root crop there is always danger
of introducing root pests. - IMPORTANT CARROT INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Elateridz. -
Agriotes lineatus Linneeus. (See Tobacco.) Brachyrhinide. Cneorhinus plagiatus Schall. ; England. Curculionide. Liparus coronatus Goeze; Europe; breeds at roots
Hypera pastinace Rossi var. tigrina Boheman, H. fasciculata Herbst, and H. rogenhoferi Fairmaire;
Europe; breed on the leaves like the clover weevil, Hypera punctata. LEPIDOPTERA
cophoridz. Depressariz nervost Hw. ; Europ2; very injurious to flower heads. DIPTERA,
Agromyzidz. Phytomyza affinis Fallen. (See Tobacco.) CASSAVA; TAPIOCA; CEARA RUBBER. (Manihot qitilissima Pohl., etc. Family Euphorbiacez.) Cassava (MM. utilissima) is a tropical plant, grown to a limited extent in the southern
United States. As it is propagated from cuttings, there is always danger of introduc-
ing serious pests when cuttings are imported. A recent shipment of cuttings from
Brazil for propagation in this country was badly infested by a stalk-boring weevil
Leiomerus granicollis Pierce (see Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 51, No. 2159, pp. 469-471). Ceara rubber (M. glaziovz) is also an important plant. CATALPA. (Catalpa spp. Family Bignoniacez.) Deciduous ornamental trees of North America, and East Asia; much cultivated
in this country. The wood is valued for railway ties and fence posts. 52 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. IMPORTANT CATALPA INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidze:
Armored—
* Diaspis pentagona Targioni-Tozzetti; Europe, Asia, Australia, Pacific Islands, Africa, South America
eastern United States; attacks fruits and many other plants. LITERATORE,
LINDINGER, LL, Die Schildliuse (Coccidze), 1912. CAULIFLOWER. CEDAR. (See Cabbage.) (Cedrus spp. Family Juniperaceze.) Large evergreen trees of North America, North Africa, Asia Minor, and the Hima-
layas, highly valued for their durable and fragrant wood. INSECTS INJURIOUS TO CEDAR (CEDRUS). COLEOPTERA. Buprestidz. Sphenoptera aterrima Kerreimans; India; bores in bast and sapwood of deodar (Cedrus deodara). Sphenoptera lafertei Thomson; India; deodar. Tenebrionidz. -
Camarimena rugosistriatus Blair; India; deodar
Cerambycidz. Teledapus dorcadioides Pascoe; India; bores in trunk of deodar. Strongylurus thoracicus Pascoe; Australia; white cedar. Tetropium oreinum Gahan; India; deodar. Trinophylum cribratum Bates; India; deodar. Brachyrhinide. Brachyzystus subsignatus Faust; India; defoliates deodar. Cossonidz. Rhyncholus himalayensis Stebbing; India; bores in wood of deodar

Scolytidz. Polygraphus major Stebbing; India; bores in deodar. Polygraphus aterrimus Strohmeyer; India; deodar. Cryphalus deodara Stebbing; India; deodar stems. Cryphalus himalayensis Stebbing; India; deodar stems. Ips stebbingi Strohmeyer; India; deodar stems. Pityogenes conifere Stebbing; India; deodar. Scolytus major Stebbing, S. minor Stebbing and S. deodara Stebbing; India; deodar. Platypodidz. Crossotarsus conifere Stebbing; India; deodar. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. Euzophera cedrella; India; infests cones of deodar. Phycita abietella; India; infests cones of deodar. , CELERY. (Apium graveolens. Family Umbelliferz.) A garden vegetable much cultivated for its edible stems. A. A CELERY PEST LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. wy Acidia heraclei Linnzus. (Celery Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: Celery, parsnip, Heracleum, Angelica, Ligusticum, Arctium, Artemisia,
Rumex. Injury: Mines leaves and stems, causing considerable injury. INSECTS OF CELERY, CHERRY, AND CHESTNUT. 53

Description and biology: Fly brownish yellow, scutellum dark, hind part of thorax
and abdomen shining black; head and antenne reddish yellow; length 5-6.5 mm. Maggot whitish. Pupates either in the leaf or in the soil (winter). Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 420, 421. B. OTHER IMPORTANT CELERY PESTS. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. 7
* Pionea forficalis Linneeus and *P. ferrugalis Hiibner; Europe. (See Cabbage.) DIPTERA. Agromyzide. + Phytomyza affinis Fallen. (See Tobacco.) CHERRY. (See Plum.) CHESTNUT. (Castanea spp. Family Cupuliferee.) Deciduous trees and shrubs of America, Europe, Asia, and North Africa, producing
edible nuts. The coarse-grained wood is much used for furniture, railway ties, and
fence posts, as it is very durable in the soil. A. BETTER KNOWN CHESTNUT INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Curculio elephas Gyll. (Balaninus). (Chestnut Weevil. Curculionids; Coleoptera.) Host: Chestnut. Injury: To chestnut fruit. Not easy to introduce. Description and biology.—Adult length 6-7.5 mm. A long egg-shaped beetle, red-
dish yellow brown and covered with whitish scales. Pupates in ground. Larva feeds
in fruit of chestnut. Eggs placed by female in nut. Distribution: Europe. Henscuet, G. A. O. Die Schiidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 91. Laspeyresia splendana Hiibner. (Carpocapsa.) (Nut Fruit Tortrix. Tortricidse; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Chestnut; walnut; acorns. Injury: Attacks the nuts, often quite destructive. Description and biology.—Adult wing expanse 12-18 mm. ; forewings whitish gray;
basal patch gray, streaks of gray along costa; a large blackish brown area inclosing a
silver-edged ocellated patch, in which are three or four black, longitudinal lines. Occurs in June and July. Pupation similar to that of codling moth. Larva, pinkish
white; leaves fruit late in iall. Hggs deposited on young fruit, hatching in 10 days. (See text fig. 30.) Distribution: Europe. THEOBALD, F, V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 309. B. IMPORTANT CHESTNUT INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. 7
Coccide. Unarmored. Lecanium pulchrum King; Germany, France. COLEOPTERA. Anobiidz. Xestobium rufovillosum DeGeer; Europe; bores in wood. Bostrychide. Bostrychus capucinus Linnwus; Europe; bores in lumber and barrel staves. 54 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. +

Scarabeide. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and MM. melolontha Linneeus; Europe; larvee injure roots of seed-
lings. Cerambycide. Callidium ezncum DeGeer; Germany; bores in wood of felled trees and lumber. Chrysomelidz. Psecudocolaspis indica Baly; India; adults destructive to inflorescence of Castanea vesca. Scolytidz, Ipidz. Anisandrus dispar Fabricius; Germany; galleries in wood. Dryocetes villosus Fabricius; Germany; galleries in bark. Scolytus mali Bechst. ; Europe; galleries in cambium,

LEPIDOPTERA. Tineidx. Tischeria complanella Hiibner; Europe; leaf miner on Castanca vesca,

Tortricidz. Tortriz viridana Linnzeus; Europe; feeds on buds and leaves of Castanea vulgaris. Laspeyresia grossana Haworth; Europe. (See Beech.) Fic. 30.—Nut fruit tortrix (Laspeyresia splendana): 1. Position of egg in chestnut stem; 2, larva in
nut; 3, eggs; 4, larva; 5, larva in cocoon; 6, pupa in cocoon; 7, pupa; 8, adult. (Costa.) LITERATURE. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildliiuse (Coccidee), 1912. Hess, R. Der Forstschutz, 1898, 1900. SoravER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. CHICORY; SUCCORY. (Cichorium intybus Linneeus. Family Composite.) The greater part of the chicory root used in this country is imported from Europe,
although a small quantity is raised in the United States. Importations of roots might
very easily introduce pests. CHINABERRY; UMBRELLA TREE. (Melia azedarach. Family Meliacee )

The common chinaberry tree of the South originated in India. It has been intro-
duced into the Imperial Valley, California. .

INSECTS OF CHINABERRY, CHOCOLATE, CINCHONA, CITRUS. 55

COLEOPTERA. Platystomidz (Anthribide). *Arzxcerus fasciculatus DeGeer; a cosmopolitan insect, breeds commonly in the berries. This is a pest
of many dried vegetable products and is very injurious in the Southern States. CHOCOLATE. (See Cacao.) CINCHONA; QUININE. (Cinchona, Family Rubiace.) South American trees whose bark rote the quinine of medicine. A. AN IMPORTANT CINCHONA PEST. Boarmia crepuscularia Hiibner. (Javan Cinchona Geometrid. Geometride; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Cinchona ledgeriana; elm. Injury: Very injurious to cinchona in Java; attacks elm in Russia. Description and biology: The larva attacks not only the foliage, but the bark of twigs
and young branches, absolutely defoliating a tree when serious. Distribution: Java, Europe, Asia. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 338. B. OTHER CINCHONA INSECTS. LEPIDOPTERA. Cosside. Zeuzera coffex Nietner; Orient. (See Coffee.) Psychide. Clania variegata Snellenhoeven, and C. crameri Westwood; Orient. (See Tea.) Lasiocampidz. Odonestis plagifera Walker; Java; defoliator. Metanastria hyrtaca Cresson; Java, very important defoliator. Lymantriide.
. Euproctis fleruosa Snellenhoeven; Orient; defoliator. CITRUS; ORANGE; LEMON; KUMQUAT; LIME; TANGERINE;
GRAPEFRUIT. (Citrus spp. Family Rutacez.) Aromatic, glandular shrubs and trees cultivated in semitropical and tropical coun-
tries for their delicious fruits. A. CITRUS PESTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. > Eriophyes oleivorus Ashmead. (Orange Rust Mite; Lemon Silver Mite. Eriophyide; Acarina.) Hosis: Orange, lemon. Injury: Blisters the leaves and fruit. Description and biology: Four-legged blister mite which attacks citrus trees and
causes rusts on the fruit. Distribution: North America, South America, Bermudas, Australia,
Maruart, C.L. U.S. Dept. Agr., Yearbook, 1900, pp. 285-289. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 121,

56 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Bemisia giffardi Kotinsky (Aleyrodes). (Giffard White Fly. Family Aleyrodidze; Hemiptera.) Host: Citrus. Injury: Frequently abundant on citrus leaves, exuding hdneydew copiously,
which forms a medium for the development of sooty fungus,

Description and biology: Adult female about 0.69 mm. long. Pupa case greenish
with purplish red eyes, about 1.26 mm, long and 0.63 mm. wide, Eggs uniformly
dark brown in color, with apparently no pedicel. Distribution: Hawaii. (Supposedly an introduced species.) . Korinsky, J. Bd. Agric. and Forestry, Hawaii, Div. Entom., Bul. 2, 1907, p. 94. QUAINTANCE AND Baker. Journ, Agric. Research, Vol. VI, p. 459 (1916). Aleurocanthus woglumi Ashby. (Spiny citrus white fly. Family Aleyrodide; Hemiptera.) Hosts: Orange, Capparis roxburghi, Capparis pedunculosus, Citrus sp., Morus sp.,
Salacia reticulata, Kurrimia zeylanica, Guaiacum officinale, and Cestrum nocturnum. Injury: Infests the lower surface of the leaves. Description and biology: Immature stages black, spiny. Pupa case about 1.4 by .89
mm., elliptical; dorsum attached; eggs very small yellowish, sometimes reticulated. Distribution: India, Ceylon, Philippine Islands, Jamaica, Bahama and Cuba. Aleurothrixus porteri Quaintance and Baker. (Porter’s white fly. Family Aleyrodidz; Hemiptera.) Hosts: Orange, Solanaceous plants, Schinus dependens, Schinus molle, Jaboticaba,
Lippia citriodora, and Myrtus. Injury: Infests the lower surface of foliage. - Description and biology: Pupa case .88 by .50 mm., elliptical; dorsum somewhat
elevated, covered with cottony wax; the abdomen with a distinct keel; margin
incised. Adults yellow with dark brown eyes. Length, .88 mm., forewing 1.04
mm. long, without markings, but often uniformly clouded with dusky. Distribution: Chile and Brazil. Apate monachus Fabricius. (Bostrychide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Orange, plum, almond, coffee, avocado. Injury: Very injurious. Bores in wood. Description and biology: Larva bores in bark and heartwood; sap and twigs in
neighborhood of galleries blackened. Distribution: East and West Airica, Antilles, Europe. Sorauer, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 490. Leptostylus premorsus. (Bark-borer, Cerambycids; Coleoptera.) Host: Citrus trees. Injury: Attacks the stems near the ground or at the point of pruning, resulting in the
ultimate death of the tree. May be introduced in nursery stock. Description and biology: Adult brownish with long slender antenne, Eggs are quite
likely laid in dead or dying portions of tree after pruning. Distribution: Lesser Antilles,
Batiou, H. A. Insect Pests of the Lesser Antilles, 1912, p. 81. “aI

ou

CITRUS INSECTS. Prays citri Miller. (Philippine Orange Moth. Hyponomeutidee; Lepidoptera.) Host: Orange, lemon, lime, mandarin, and cabuyao,. Injury: Injures the blossoms of orange and lemon. Biology: Eggs deposited in the calices or peduncle of the flower; larve upon hatch-
ing bore through the inclosing parts, often destroying the calyx, pistil, and ovules;
pupate within the flower and also in leaves or forks of twigs or branches. ©. F. Baker
states that in the Philippine Islands “the larva of this moth lives just beneath the rind
next to, but not in, the pulp. They produce the gall-like tumors which remain open
at the tips. The adult moths are of two sizes,”’

Distribution: Sicily, Italy, Corsica, Ceylon, Australia, Philippines. Essic, E. O. California State Board of Horticulture, Monthly Bul., vol. 2, 1913,

No. 11, p. 722. Sirvestri, F. Dispense di Entomologia Agraria, 1911, p. 287. Quayie, H.J. U.S. Dept. Agric., Bul. 134, 1914, p. 22. Fic. 31.—Lemon butterfly (Papilio demolews), (Maxwell-Lefroy.) Wester, P. J. Dept. Public Instruction, Bur. Agric., Manila, P. I., 1918, Bul. 27,
p. 60. Papilio demoleus Linneus. (Lemon caterpillar, Papilionidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Orange, lime, lemon, and other citrus trees. Injury: Deioliates citrus trees and is one of the commonest butterflies in India. Biology: Eggs yellow and deposited on topmost shoots of the plant. On hatching
the larve are brown with white markings; when fully grown the color changes to a
vivid green with lateral brown markings. Pupate on the plant. Adults large and
conspicuous. (See text fig. 31.) Distribution: India and South Africa. Maxwe.t-Lerroy, H. The Agric. Journ. of India, 1908, vol. 3, p. 239. Maxwe.i-Lerroy, H. Indian Insect Pests, 1906, p. 174. Nephopteryx sagittiferella Moore. (Perak Pomelo Moth. Phycitide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Pomelo, lime, lemon. Injury: Reported to be very destructive to pomeloes in the residency gardens at
Kwala Kangsa. May be introduced in the soil. 58 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Biology: Eggs laid singly on underside of fruit; caterpillars, on hatching, penetrate
fruit, increasing size and number of galleries as each successive stage is passed; pupate
in ground and emerge as adults in about 12 days. Distribution: India, Europe (?). Cores, E. ©, Indian Museum Notes, 1891, vol. 2, No. 1, p. 21. Phyllocnistis citrella Stainton. (Citrus Leafminer. Tineidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts; Citrus. Injury: Injurious to citrus nursery stock in India, attacking the buds and young
foliage. May be introduced in nursery stock in Wardian cases. Description and biology: Adult, head, face, palpi, and legs white, antenne whitish,
anterior wings white with two slender gray streaks, posterior wings whitish with pale
gray cilia, Larvee mine the leaves of young nursery stock, the cocoon is usually placed
at the edge of the leaf, which is rolled up. Distribution: India, Philippine Islands,

Woeium. R. 8. U.S. Dept. of Agric., Bur. Entom., Bul. 120, 1913, pp. 27, 28,
and 40. Ceratitis catoirei Guérin. (Mauritius Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Host: Tangerine. Injury: Attacks fruit. Description: Adult female fly 6-7 mm. long; male 5-6 mm. Distribution: Seychelles Islands, Mauritius; Isles of Bourbon. Froacarr, W. W. Proc. Linn. Soc., New South Wales, 1910, vol. 35, pt. 4, p. 864.

. - Dacus xqualis Coquillett. .
(Large Australian Fruit Fly. Trypetidee; Diptera.) Host: Orange. Injury: Larvee feed on oranges. Description: Adult female length 8-9 mm. (excluding ovipositor). Front margin
of wings with broad ferruginous stripe. Antennz long, and body wasp-shaped. Distribution: New South Wales. Froceatrr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Farmers’ Bul. 24, 1909, p. 26. Dacus ornatissimus Froggatt. (Mandarin Fruit Fly. Trypetidee; Diptera.) Host; Mandarin. Injury: Breeds in fruit. Description: Adult female 6 mm. in length, general color chestnut brown to ocher-
ous, dorsal surface of thorax black, abdomen ocherous with narrow dark indistinct
transverse lines. (See plate xxviu1, figs. a, c.)

Distribution: New Caledonia. Frocearr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Farmers’ Bul. 24, 1909, p. 28. IMPORTANT CITRUS INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidz:
Armored—

Aspidiotus (Aonidiella) subrubescens Maskell; New South Wales. Scale of female reddish brown,
flat, subcircular, exuvia central forming a slightly elevated boss. Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) albopictus Cockerell; Mexico. Scale of female 2-2.25 mm. in diameter,
dark brown and often covered with a white secretion, exuvia central and free of secretion. Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) koebelei Townsend and Cockerell; Mexico. Scale of female 1.5-2 mm. in
diameter, circular to suboval, light brown to grayish, exuvia to one side. A spidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) personatus Comstock; Bermuda. (See Olive.) CITRUS INSECTS. 59

Coccidz—Continued. Armored—Continued. Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) scutiformis Cockerell; Central America, Mexico. Scale of female large,
flat, occasionally nearly white, exuvia orange colored and not nipplelike. A spidiotus (Diaspidiotus) orientalis Newstead; Cuba, Poncirus trifoliata ( Citrus). Scale of female 1.6-2
mm. in diameter, subcircular, light yellowish brown, exuvia central. * Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) articulatus Morgan; Barbados (Windward Islands), British Guiana, Costa
Rica, Porto Rico, Panama, Ecuador, Venezuela, Nicaragua, Isle of Pines, Trinidad, Cuba, Sicily,
Mexico, St. Vincent, Dominica. (See Coffee.) A spidiotus (Pseudaonidia) clavigera Cockerell: Hawaii. Scale of female 2.5 mm. in diameter, blackish
and usually covered by epidermis of the twigs. Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) duplex Cockerell. Scale of female 2.66 mm. in diameter, subcircular, dark
blackish brown, exuvia orange colored and to one side. Aspidiotus (Pscudaonidia) fimbriatus Maskell; New South Wales. Scale of female 1.5 mm., flat, thin
and circular. 7

Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) trilobitiformis Green; East Africa, Japan, Brazil. Scale of female 3-4.5 mm. in diameter, semicircular, reddish brown. (See text fig. 32.) Lepidosaphes pinnxformis Bouché; German East Africa, Canary Islands, Sicily. Scale of female 1.75-2
mm. long, yellowish brown to dusky brown, curved or mytiliform. Parlatoria calianthina Berlese and Leonardi; Italy, Sicily. (See Olive.) Parlatoria cinerea Doane and Hadden; Society Islands on orange. Scale of female circular, slightly
convex, pale brownish gray. Parlatoria sinensis Maskell; China on orange. Scale of fe-
male usually encrusting twigs. *Parlatoria zizyphus Lucas; Italy, Sicily, Philippines. Often received on imported lemons. Scale of female
black. Unarmored—

Akermes punctatus Cockerell; Grenada; Citrus medica
acida. Female scale about 3.5 mm. long, hemispheri-
eal, pale ochreous. Coccus viridis Green; West Indies, Ceylon, Montserrat. (See Coffee.) Vie. 32.—Citrus scale (A spidiotus [Pseud-

Coccus hesperidum Linnaeus; cosmopolitan; citrus, tea, aonidia] trilobitiformis). palm. (See pl. 11, fig. 4.) Icerya montserratensis Riley and Howard; Ecuador, Montserrat, Porto Rico. Female reddish yellow,
antenne and legs black, waxy secretion white, corrugated long wax tufts protrude from the body. Icerya seychellarum Westwood; Seychelles Islands, Mauritius, Madeira, Japan, Madagascar. Female
about 5 mm. in length, egg sac snow white, many long silvery hairs on dorsal aspect. Orthezia prelonga Douglas; Jamaica, Trinidad, Brazil, British Guiana. Female long, narrow, pitchy
black and covered with snow-white waxy laminations. Orthezia insignis Douglas; cosmopolitan; citrus, tea, etc. (See pl. Iv, fig. 2.) Pseudococcus filamentosus Cockerell; Jamaica, Japan, Mauritius, Hawaii. Female about 3 mm. long,
gray, covered with white secretions, antennze 7-jointed. * Pseudococcus citri Risso; citrus, coffee, tobacco, cotton. (Sec pl. 1, fig. 3.) Pulvinaria aurantii Cockerell; Japan. Female usually on underside of leaf, with white ovisac about
5mm. long, suboval. Pulvinaria cellulosa Green; Ceylon. Female including ovisac 4.5 to 5 mm. in length, ovisac snow white;
female shrivels after gestation. Takahashia citricola Kuwana; Japan. Female freefrom the plant and resting upon the ovisac. Similar
to T. japonica. ISOPTERA,
Termitide. Termes australis Hagen; Australia. (See Apple.) COLEOPTERA. Scarabeidez. Adoretus umbrosus Fabricius, and var. tenuimaculatus Waterhouse; Hawaii, Philippines, Japan, Java. Bostrychidz. Bostrychopsis jesuita Fabricius; Australia; bores in trees. Cerambycidz. Uracanthus cryptophagus Olivier; Australia; bores in trunks. Acrocinus accentifer Olivier; Brazil; bores in trunks of orange, tangerine, limes, lemons. (Boletim
Agricultura, ser. 15, pp. 1066-1072.) Diploschema rotundicolle Serville; Brazil; girdles and bores in twigs (Bol. Agric., ser. 15, pp. 1073-1081). 60 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Curculionidae. Orthorrhinus cylindrirostris Fabricius; Australia; bores in wood (French, Handbook Destr. Ins. Vie-

toria, pt. 4, p. 82). Cratosomus reidi Kirby; Brazil; bores long tunnels in stems and trunks of orange. (Bol. Agric., ser. 15,

pp. 1081-1092.) Diaprepes abbreviatus Linneeus; West Indies. (See Sugar cane.) LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidex. Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée; Quecnsland. (See Corn.) Papilionida. Papilio idus Fabricius; Brazil; feeds on foliage. DIPTERA. Trypetide. Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann, attacks oranges. (See Fruit.) Anastrepha ludens Loew; Mexico; attacks orange and sweet lime. (See Fruit.) Bactrocera tryoni Froggatt; Orient. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks Citrus aurantium, C. grandis (decwmana), C. japonica, C. limonia
and C. nobilis. (See Fruit.) Dacus ferrugineus Fabricius; India, ete. (See Fruit.) Dacus diversus Coquillett; India. (See Fruit.) Dacus passiflore Froggatt; Fiji; attacks orange, lemon, and lime. (See Fruit.) Fig. 33.—The clover-root curculio (Sitona hispidula): Adult, larva and pupa. Greatly enlarged
(Wildermuth.) CLOVER. (Trifolium spp. Family Leguminosz.) There are many species of clovers used as forage crops in various parts of the world. Although clover is usually only imported as seed, several very serious foliage pests
have been introduced from Europe. The lasiocampid moth, Lasiocampa trifolii Ep., of Europe and Asia Minor, is in-
jurious to clover. Many weevils of the genus Sitona not mentioned below are in-
jurious to clover in Europe. They breed at the roots, but several have been imported
into the United States. The weevils of the genus Hypera (Phytonomus) are equally
dangerous to clovers. They breed externally on the foliage. Several European
species have established strong colonies in this country. The weevils of the genus
Apion (e. g. A. apricans Herbst) often breed in the heads of clovers and many of
them are very dangerous. (lor Agriotes lineatus Linneeus see Tobacco.) Sitona spp. (Clover root weevils. Curculionide; Coleoptera.) Species. S. lineata Linnzeus; Europe (England); adults feed on peas, beans, etc.,

larve feed at roots of these and clover and lucerne. >S. flavescens
Marsh. ; Europe, introduced into America; clover, beans, peas, Galega
officinalis. >S. hispidula Fabricius; Europe, introduced into America;
clover, peas, Galega officinalis. (See text fig. 33.) S. linneellus Gyllen-

INSECTS OF CLOVER, COCONUT, COFFEE. 61

hal; Europe; lucerne. S. meliloti Walton; Europe, Melilotus officinalis
Derr. 8S. sulcifrons Thunberg; Europe; clover, Atriplex hastata L.
Description: Elongate grayish or brownish weevils with short blunt beak. The
larvee breed at the roots of plants and in nodules. Important pests. BarGaaut, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. * Miccotrogus picirostris Fabricius. (Imported clover weevil. Curculionids; Coleoptera.) This is a recently imported weevil which attacks clover in New England. (See

text fig. 34. & ) Hypera (Phytonomus) spp. (Clover-leaf weevils. Curculionide; Coleoptera.) Species: *H. punctata Fabricius; Europe, introduced into America; clover, and
alfalfa. >kH. meles Fabricius; Europe, introduced into America; clover,
alfalfa, grasses. >H. nigri-
rostris Fabricius; Europe; in-
troduced into United States;
clover, alfalfa, Ononis, etc. H. miles Paykull, Europe;
clover. H. murina Linneus;
Europe; alfalfa, clover. J.
variabilis Herbst; Europe;
clover, beans, cabbage, rasp-
berry, potato. H.ononidis
Chevrolat; Europe; clover,
Ononis viscosa. Injury: These are all serious or potential

pests and easily distributed. (See Alfalfa.) Description and biology: The clover-leaf

beetle, H. punctata, is very familiar to
most entomologists in this country. The
other species are of similar form but dif-
ferent colors of brown, gray, or green. The larve feed externally on the leaves and
pupate in silken cocoons. Barcacu, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. Fig. 34.—Imported clover weevil ( Miccotrogus pici-
rostris): Adult, enlarged. (Original, Walton.) COCONUT PALM. (Cocos nucifera. Family Palmacez.) A large palm cultivated for ornament and for its edible fruit. It is grown in Florida
and California as an ornamental tree. (See Palms.) COFFEE. (Coffea arabica Linnteus; Coffea liberica Hiern. Family Rubiaceze.) Coffee is grown in Africa, Asia, Central America, South America, and many of the
islands of the Pacific and Atlantic. Although not grown in the United States proper,
it is an important product of Porto Rico, Hawaii, and the Philippines. The importa-
tions of the beans into this country are enormous. Where beans or seedlings are
imported into the Territories above mentioned, there is danger of introducing noxious
insects. 62 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. A. BETTER KNOWN COFFEE INSECTS. Tetranychus bioculatus Wood-Mason. (Coffee Red Spider. Tetranychide; Acarina.) Host: Coffee, tea, tomato, Firmiana colorata, Anthocephalus cadamba. Injury: Injures plant by sucking juices. May be easily imported on nursery stock
and might attack other crops if introduced. Description and biology: A tiny red spider very like the common red spider of this
country and likely to be as dangerous. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913. vol. 3, p. 97. Cores, E. C. Indian Museum Notes, 1896, vol. 3, pp. 48-56, 2 figs. Xyleborus coffez Wurth. (Cofiee Beetle. Scolytidae; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Coffea arabica, C. robusta, and C. liberica, Erythrina lithosperma, Melia azeda-
rach, Cacao, Cinchona ledgeriana. Occasionally feeds on Hevea brasiliensis, although
the sticky excretion of the plant catches and holds the beetles, resulting in their
death. Injury: Considered injurious to Coffea robusta, and it is recommended that this plant
be discontinued in order to drive the insects to bruised or injured Hevea brasiliensis. Description and biology: Adult male beetle 1.1 mm. long and 0.55 mm. broad; adult
female 1.6 mm. long and 0.8 mm. broad; color shining brown. Bores in galleries in
the wood. Distribution: Dutch East Africa, Java, Tonkin. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 574. Zeuzera coflez Nietner. (Red Coffee Borer. Cossidse; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Coffee, tea, cacao, cinchona, Acalypha marginata, Anona muricata, Durantha,
Grevillea, Persea gratissima, Photinia, Santalum album, Swietenia mahagoni, cotton. Injury: Bores in the wood or stalks. Description and biology: Moth wing expanse 40-46 mm., head and thorax gray, with
black spots; wings white with blue black spots, abdomen black with white hair. Boresin the wood. Pupates in larval bore near exterior. The pupa emerges partially
before escape of moth. Distribution: India, Ceylon, Java, Kamerun (German East Africa). Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, ed. 3, vol. 3, 1913, p. 321. Maxwe tt-Lerroy, H. M. Mem. Dept. Agric. India, vol. 1, 1907, p. 156, fig. 41. Leucoptera coffeella Stainton. (Coffee Leaf Miner. Lyonetiidee; Lepidoptera.) Host: Coffee. Injury: Is said to have caused a loss of about 20 per cent of the crop in Brazil, 20 to
30 per cent of the leaves infested in Porto Rico, and a serious enemy in Cuba. Con-
sidered the worst of all coffee pests. Likely to be introduced on plants. Description and biology: Adult moth 2.5 mm. long, silver gray color, tipped with
black on posterior end. Eggs deposited in small slits made in the leaves; the larvee
hatch within 4 to 6 days, live within the leaf about 3 weeks, and then leave the inte-
rior of the leaf through the upper epidermis and form a web, pupating on under sur-
face of the leaf. The adult hatches in from 3 to 7 days. Distribution: Porto Rico, Brazil, Cuba. Coox, M. T. Est. Centr. Agron. de Cuba, Bul. 3, 1905. COFFEE INSECTS. 63

B. OTHER IMPORTANT COFFEE INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccide:
Armored—

*Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) articulatus Morgan; Venezuela, Jamaica, British Guiana. Adult female
2-2,25 mm. in diameter, semitransparent, pale brown or yellowish. Lepidosaphes corrugata Green; Java, Adult female, scale 3-4.5 mm. in length, 1 mm. broad, dull black,
thick, opaque, with many curved transverse corrugations. Unarmored—

Asterolecanium coffee Newstead; German East Africa. Liable to be introduced on leaves and twigs. Adult female, test golden yellow, margin fringed with golden yellow glassy filaments; test of old
specimen opaque grayish with bottle-green markings. Cerococcus ornatus Green; Ceylon. Liable to be introduced on twigs. Adult female enclosed in test
of wax which is purplish brown, on each of the sloping sides are two wax ridges; length 2-2.5 mm. Ceroplastes ceriferus Anderson; German East Africa. On Coffea arabica. (See Citrus.) Ceroplastes vinsonioides Newstead; Uganda, Liable to be introduced on leaves and twigs. Adult fe-
male, covered with wax, test dark cinnamon to brownish, yong female star shaped. Coccus viridis Green; Brazil, Ceylon, India, Mauritius. Liable to be introduced on cuttings and
foliage. Adult female 2.5 to3.25 mm. inlength, breadth 1.5 to 2mm. ; pale green with loop of blackish
spots on dorsum. Lecanium caudatus Green; Ceylon. Liable to be introduced on cuttings and foliage. Adult female
3-4 mm. in length, 2-3 mm. in breadth; oval, narrowed in front broadly rounded behind, bright,
castaneous. zs

Ortheziola fodiens Giard; Guadaloupe. Liable to be introduced on roots. Adult female 2 mm, long,
1.5 mm. broad, tawny red provided with laminations. Pseudococcus coffee Newstead; Java; Liberian coffee. Adultfemale covered with densely felted plates
of white secretion. ,

Pseudococcus virgatus Cockerell; Jamaica, Mexico, Hawaii. Liable to be introduced on foliage,
branches, or roots. Adult female 4-5 mm. long, white mealy brown above with caudal filaments
about half the length of the body; antennz 8-jointed. Pulvinaria camelicola Signoret; Hawaii. Adult female 2-3 mm. in length, ovisac from four to eight
times length of insect. Pulvinaria ficus Hempel; Montserrat, Antigua, St. Kitts. Adult female length 5 mm., width 2.25
mm. ; ovisac white and fluffy; antennz 8-jointed. Pulvinaria mammex Maskell. Adult female before gestation about 8 mm. long. Ovisac large, snow
white, forming a mass of loose cotton. Rhizoecus cloti Giard; Guadaloupe, Liable to be introduced on roots. Adult female elongate, anal
tubercles prominent; antenne 5-jointed. > Saissetia nigra Nietner; Costa Rica, Ceylon, India. Liable to be introduced on cuttings and plants. Adult female length 3-5 mm., breadth 2-3 mm. ; black, oval, convex with dorsum occasionally form-
ing a pronounced hump; a longitudinal carina is often present. THYSANOPTERA. * Heliothrips rubrocinctus Giard; West Indies, Ceylon, Uganda, Florida; attacks Coffea liberica. (See
plate X.) COLEOPTERA. Bostrychidz. Apate monachus Fabricius; Africa, West Indies. (See Citrus.) Cerambycide. Monohammus fistulator Germar; Java, Sumatra, Borneo; bores in wood. Bixadus sierricola White; Sierra Leone to Kamerun; very serious borer. Coptops fusca Olivier, C. bidens Fabricius, Barzus sordidus Olivier, Sternotomis imperialis Fabricius,
S. regalis Fabricius, Moecha biittneri Kolbe, M. molator Fabricius, and Frea maculicornis Thomson ;
West Africa; bore in wood. Anthores asperula White; East and South Africa; a very serious borer. Frea marmorata Gerstaecker; East Africa,

Praonetha melanura Pascoe; Java. Nitocris usambica Kolbe; East Africa; a very injurious borer. Xylotrechus javanicus Lap. et Gory; Java; bores in bark and wood. Xylotrechus quadripes Chevrolat; India, Ceylon, Burma, Siam, Tonkin, Philippines; bores in bark and
wood. (See text fig. 35.) cs

Brachyrhinide (Otiorhynchidz). Hypomeces curtus Schénherr; eats the foliage of young plants in Java. Pachnzus litus Germar; breeds at the roots, the larvee gnawing the bark, in Cuba. Pachnzxus azurescens Gyllenhal; breeds at the roots, the larvee gnawing the bark in Cuba. 64 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Brachyrhinidz (Otiorhynchidz)—Continued. Diaprepes abbreviatus Linnzeus; attacks the foliage and possibly the larvae attack the roots in the West
Indies. (See Sugar cane.) Cratopus punctum Fabricius; feeds on the foliage in Mauritius and Reunion. Geono mus quadrinodosus Chevrolat; feeds as larva on the leaves in Venezuela. =
Rhadinoscopus nociturnus Kolbe; feeds on the leaves in German East Africa. Scolytidz. Xyleborus morstatti Hagedorn; German East Africa; bores in Bukoba coffee and Coffea stenophylla. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralide. Thliptoceras octoguttata Fld. ; German East Africa; attacks beans. Cochlidiidz. Parasa lepida Cr. ; Java; serious. Psychide. Clania crameri Westwood and C. variegata Snellenhoeven; Orient. (See Tea.) Lymantriidx. Dasychira mendosa Hiibner, D. misana Moore, D.
thwaitesi Moore and Orgyia postica Walker; India,
Ceylon, Java; defoliators. Notodontide. Stauropus alternus Walker; India, Ceylon, Java;
defoliates. DIPTERA. Trypetida. Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann; attacks Coffea arabica. (See Fruit.) COLLARD. See Cabbage. CONIFERS. (Family Pinacee.) Fic. 35.—Pine bark beetle (Xylotrechus quad-

J is heading are treated the insect
ripes): Adult. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) Under this headi SI

pests of Douglas spruce (Pseudotsuga), fir
(Abies), hemlock spruce (Tsuga), larch (Larix), pine (Pinus), and spruce (Picea). This grouping is due to the fact that these trees have so many pests in common
and also because of a confusion in foreign and home literature of the names pine,
spruce, and fir. A. IMPORTANT INSECTS ATTACKING VARIOUS CONIFERS. Diadoxus scalaris Laporte et Gory; Diadoxus erythrurus White. (Cypress Borers. Buprestidee; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Murray pine (Pinus frenela), Lambert’s cypress (Cupressus lambertiana). Injury: Very destructive to the wood, boring under the bark and into the wood. Description: D. scalaris is the larger species. Both are greenish in color, with the
elytra largely reddish brown except for green basal stripes and yellow discal spots. The median line of the thorax is yellow between two black or brown fasciz. Larvee
yellowish white. Distribution: Victoria, Australia. Frenon, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, pt. 5, 1911, pp. 44-50,
pls. 106, 107. CONIFER INSECTS. 65

Tetropium castaneum Linneus. (Spruce Borer. Cerambycidee; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Larch, spruce, pine, fir. Injury: Bores in the wood. Distribution: Europe, Siberia. Nussuin, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 136-139,
figs. 108, 109 (7. fuscus, 7’. luridus). Sorauer, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 495. Brachyrhinus (Otiorhynchus spp.). (Coniferous Root Weevils. Brachyrhinidee (Otiorhynchidee); Coleoptera.) Species: B. niger Fabricius; Europe; pine, larch, spruce, maple, alder, ash, service
berry; breeds at the roots and the adults attack the foliage. B. fuscipes Olivier;
Europe; spruce. B. perdix Olivier; Europe; spruce. >kB. ovatus Linnwus; Europe,
United States; spruce. A very important pest of strawberries, conifers, and green-
house plants. 8B. singularis Linnzeus; Europe; spruce, fir, and many other plants
(see Grape). B. sensitivus Scopoli; Europe; spruce, Weymouth pine, Douglas
fir. B. irritans Herbst; Europe; pine, beech. B. armadillo Rossi, B. aurifer Boheman,
B. egregius Miller, B. fullo Schrank, B. inflatus Gyllenhal, B. jovis Miller, B. lepidop-
terus Fabricius, B. kratterii Boheman, B. morio Fabricius, B. multipunctatus Fabri-
cius, and B. septentrionis Herbst, are reported on conifers in Europe. Description: Black, oval weevils, with broad blunt. beaks. Breed at the roots
of plants and are very destructive. Sorauer, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, ed. 3, vol. 3, 1913, p. 54. Barcaaut, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. Magdalis spp. (Coniferous Weevils. Curculionide; Coleoptera.) Species: The weevils of this familiar genus are very destructive to forest trees, breca-
ing under the bark but entering the wood. They are very easily distributed in logs. M. violacea Linnzeus; Europe; attacks 3 to 10 year old pines, larch, and fir. .M. phlegm-
atica Herbst; Europe; spruce and pines. M. duplicata Germar; Europe: spruce, Pinus
silvestris. M. memnonia Gyllenhal; Europe: pine. M. rufa Germar; Europe; pines
and other conifers. Barcaatt, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. Dendroctonus micans Kugelann. (The Large Bast Beetle. Ipide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Principally spruce (Picea). Occasionally pine. Injury: Quite destructive to trees from breast height down to and including roots. Description: Beetle elongate, nearly dull black, with long gray-yellowish hair not
densely set. Wing covers punctate striate, antenne and legs yellowish red; 8-9 mm. long. Evidence of infestation: Free resin flow out of holes about 3 mm. in diameter. Mixed
with boring dust, it hardens in the air in white lumps. Distribution: Germany, France. Nissurx, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde. 1913, pp. 246-249, fig. 211. Jupercu, J. F., and Nrrscuz, H. Lehrbuch der Mitteleuropiischen Forstinsekten-

kunde. I, pp. 458-462, 1895. 55266—17—5

66 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Ips typographus Linneus. (Eight-toothed large spruce barkbeetle or “‘typographer.’’ Ipidae; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Spruce; rarely larch and Scotch fir (Pinus silvestris.) Injury: Bores in bark and sapwood: while usually secondary, it also attacks
healthy trees when very numerous. Recognized as the most.dangerous bark-beetle
in Europe. Description: Beetle black or brown, cylindrical, 4.5-5.5 mm. long, 8 teeth on mar-
gins of elytral declivity, of which.the 3d on each side is the largest and with rounded
apex. Evidence of infestation: Shows only when the tree begins to react by changing
color of foliage. Distribution: Lapland to Alps, wherever spruce grows. Nissuin, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde. 1913, pp. 269-272, fig. 238. Jupeicn, J. F., und Nirscne, H. Lehrbuch der Mitteleuropiischen Forstinsekten-
kunde. I, pp. 506-516, figs. 167-169. 1895. *Tomicus (Myelophilus) piniperda Linneus. (The large or black pine pith borer or ‘‘forest gardener.” Scolytidee; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Pine. Injury: Tunnels under bark of trunk and branches. Young adults feed on pith of
1 to 2-year old shoots. Attack sickly and quite healthy trees and invariably cause
their death from above downward. Attacks thin, smooth bark of trunk and branches
and heavy barked portion of lower trunk of living felled or sickly trees. Description: Beetle elongate, 3.5-4.5 mm. long: proboscis finely and not densely
punctate; elytra finely punctate-striate, posteriorly with a row of brush-bearing small
tubercles. Evidence of infestation: Fading and dying tops; long vertical galleries in bark. Twigs hollow at tip with pitch tubes at base. Distribution: Europe. Nissuin, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde. 1913, pp. 243-246, figs. 207-210. Jupeicn, J. F., und Nirrscue, H. Lehrbuch der Mitteleuropiiischen Forstinsekten-
kunde. pp. 462-472, figs. 145 and 146, 1895. Bupalus piniarius Linneeus. (Pine Geometrid. Geometride; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Pine, spruce, fir. Injury: Feeds on foliage and young shoots. Description and biology: Male moth bright yellow, female bright reddish brown,
both marked with dark brown. Larva green, with three white dorsal lines and two
yellow lateral lines. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 337. Nissin, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde 2d ed., 1913, pp. 385-390, figs. 315-317. Dasychira selenitica Esp. (Larch Tussock Moth. Lymantriidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Larch, pine, sainioin, herbs, hardwoods. Injury: Detoliator, especially injurious to young trees. Description and biology: Moth brown; male olive brown; female brownish black, with
white crescent and wavy line on wings. Larva black, with dark-gray hairs on black

CONIFER INSECTS. 67

warts, and the fourth to eighth segments each with a yellowish gray brush of hairs
tipped with black; first segment with black hair pencil, eleventh segment with two. Pupates on surface of ground in a cocoon. Distribution: Germany. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 384. Nussury, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 1913, 2d ed., p. 376. Laspeyresia duplicana Zetterstedt. (Fir Bark Tortricid. Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: White fir (Abies pectinata), juniper (Juniperus), spruce (Picea excelsa). Injury: Breeds in the bark and possibly sometimes the twigs. Description and biology: Moth 15-16 mm. in wing expanse; forewings dark brown,
with a white crescentiform spot at middle and finer markings beyond. The larva
breeds from fall to spring under bark. Its life history is not definitely worked out. Distribution: Europe (Germany). Niisstin, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 411, 412, fig. 348. : :
Soravger, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 281. Hess, Ricuarp. Der Forstschutz, 1898, vol. 1, pp. 485, 486, fig. 173. *Enarmonia pinicolana Zell. (Gray Larch Moth. Tortricide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Larix, Abies, Siberian stone pine (Pinus cembra L.). Injury: Attacks the needles. Description and biology: Moth, wing expanse 18-22 mm., forewings shining light
gray with brown markings. Larva dark green with darker stripes, head and thoracic
shield black. Feeds under webs on the needles. Distribution: Europe, Siberia, North America, but serious only in Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, v. 3, p. 286. Niisstry, Otto. Leitiaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 419-422, figs. 354-355. B. OTHER GENERAL CONIFEROUS PESTS. HEMIPTERA. Aphidide. > Mindarus abietinus Koch, a plant louse; Europe; attacks young shoots of Abies pectinata and bark
of Picea. Phylloxeridz. Pineus sibiricus Cholodkovsky; a gall louse; Russia; attacks Pinus cembra and Picea in alternating
generations. Pineus orientalis Dreyfus and P. pini Koch; Europe; attack Picea orientalis, P. excelsa, Pinus mon-
tana, P. silvestris, and P. strobus, its generations alternating on pine and fir. Pineus strobi Hartiz, gall louse; Europe; attacks Pinus strobus. Aphrastasia pectinate Cholodkovsky; gall louse; northeast Europe; attacks Abies and Picea. Dreyfusia nuesslini C. B.; galllouse; Europe; attacks Abies nordmanniana and Picea. * Dreyfusia picee Peientey gall louse; Europe; attacks stems of Abies pectinata. Chermes viridis Ratzeburg, a galllouse; Europe; attacks Larix and Picea. >: Chermes abietis Kaltenbach, a gall louse; Europe; attacks Larix, Abies pectinata, Pinus cembra, P. sil-
vestris. Cnaphalodes strobilobius Kaltenbach; gall louse; Europe; attacks Larix and Abies. Cnaphalodes lapponicus Cholodkovsky; Europe; attacks Picea and Larix. COLEOPTERA. Melandryidx. +*Serropalpus barbatus Schall. ; Europe; bores in the bark and wood of Abies pectinata and Picea. Bostrychide. Apate molle Linnzeus; Europe; bores in bark-stripped wood of conifers. 68 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS,

Buprestida. Anthazia quadripunctata Linneeus; Germany; bores in stems of young trees and branches of older trees
of spruce (Picea). Elateridz. Agriotes aterrimus Linnzeus, A. lineatus Linnzeus, and A. obscurus Linneeus; Europe; attack the seed-
lings and roots of pine,
fir, and spruce, while
some species attack
larch,

Dolopius marginatus Lin-
neeus; Europe; attacks
the roots of seedling and
yearling fir, pine, and
spruce. Selatosomus zneus Lin-
neeus; Europe: attacks
roots of pine, fir, and
spruce. Tenebrionida. Setenis semiopaca Blair;
India; breeds in the
trunks of Picea morinda
and Pinus excelsa. Cerambycide. Hylotrupes bajulus Lin-
meus; Europe; bores in
the finished lumber, es-
pecially building tim-
bers and furniture of
conifer,

Monokammus sartor Fab-
riciusand sutor Linnzeus;
Europe; attack batk and
wood of fir and spruce. Pogonocherus fasciculatus
De Geer: Murope (Ger-
many); bores in the
wood of spruce, pine,
and fir

Tetropium castaneum Lin-
nus; Europe; bores in
the wood oflarch, spruce,
pine, and fir. Brachyrhinidx (Otiorhyn-
chidz). Metallites atomarius
Olivier, M. laricis Chev-
rolat, MJ. mollis Germar;
weevils; Europe; as
adults injure the buds of
conifers; thé larvee breed
at the roots of trees. Brachyxystus subsignatus
Faust: a weevil; India;

 

 

 

 

Fic. 36.—Coniferous bark weevil (Pissodes notatus): Adult, larva, pupa, adult causes very selious
injury. (Henschel.) defoliation of Abies web-
bianaand Picea morinda. Curculionidz. Hylobius abietis Linneeus, H. fatuus Rossi, and H. piceus De Geer; Europe; breed in the bark and
wood of conifers. These are very important weevils. Pissodes harcynix Herbst, P. notatus Fabricius, P. picex Mliger, P. pini Linneeus, and P. piniphilus
Herbst; weevils; Europe; breed under bark of pines, spru and fir. (See text fig. 36.) Cossonida. Rhyncolus ater Linneeus, FR. elongatus, R. porcatus Germar, R. lignyarius Marsh., R. sirangulatus Per-
ris, R. truncorum Germar, and R. cylindricus Boheman; Europe; bore in the trunks and rotten
wood of pines, spruce, and fir. Rhyncolus himalayensis Stebbing; India: bores in the wood of Pinus excelsa and Picea morinda. CONIFER INSECTS. 69

Ipide. Cryphalus abictis Ratzeburg; Europe; attacks fir (Abies pectinata), spruce (Picea excelsa), and pine. Cryphalus saltuarius Weiss; Europe; attacks young fir, spruce, and pine. q
Cryphalus boswellix Stebbing; India; attacks spruce and Pinus longifolia. Cryphalus picex Ratzeburg; Europe; attacks Abies pectinata and larch. Crypturgus pusillus Gylenhal; Germany; attacks spruce, fir, pine (Pinus strobus and P. pinaster). and larch. In the Himalayas this species attacks Pinus excelsa and Picea morinda. Dryocoetes autographus Ratzeburg; Germany; attacks spruce, fir, and pine (Pinus strobus). Hylastes altenuatus chson; Germany; attacks pine and spruce. Hylastes decumanus Erichson; Europe; attacks spruce and Pinus cembra. Hylastes himalayensis Stebbing; India; attacks Picea excelsa. Hylurgops palliatus Gylenhal; Europe; attacks Pinus silvestris, P. strobus, P. pinea, P. austriaca
P. maritima, larch, and spruce. Ips amitinus Eichoff; Hutope; attacks spruce, pine, fir, and larch,
Ips cembrx Weer; Europe; attacks larch and Pinus cembra. Ips duplicatus Sahlberg; Finland and Ural; spruce and pine. Ips sexdentatus Boerner; Europe; spruce and pine (Pinus ausiriaca and P. pinaster). Ips ribbentropi Stebbing; India; Pinus excelsa and Picea morinda. Ips typographus Linnseus; Europe; attacks spruce, larch, Scotch fir (Pinus silvestris). Tomicus ( Myelophilus) minor Hartig; Europe; attacks pine and spruce. Fig. 37.—Barkbeetle (Pityogencs chalcographus). (E.ckstein.) * Tomicus (Myclophilus) piniperda Linneeus; Furope to Japan; pines, larch, spruce. Orthotomicus suturalis Gyllenhal; Europe; spruce, fir (Picea ercelsa), piue (Pinus austriaca and P.
silvestris)

Orthotomicus laricis Fabricius; Europe; attacks fir (Abies pectinata), larch, spruce, pine (Pinus sil-
vestris). Orthotomicus prozimus Richofl: Europe; thin bark of upper stems of pine and spruce. Pityogenes bidentatus Herbst; Europe; larch, spruce, and pine (Pinus austriaca, P. strobus, P. pinaster,
P. silvestris). Pityogenes bistridentatus Eichoft; Germany, France; pine, fir. Pityogenes chalcographus Linnnus; fir (Abies pectinata), spruce (Picea ercelsa), pine (Pinus strobus),
larch. (Soe text fig. 37.) Pityogenes conifere Stebbing: India; blue pine (Pinus excelsa), Chilgoza pine (P. gerardiana), fir
(Picea morinda). (Seo plate XT, fig. 3a-c.)

Pityogenes pilidens Reitter; Europe and Asia Minor; Pinus austriaca and fir. Pityogenes quadridens Hartig: Europe; Pinus silvestris and Siberian spruce. "i

Pityokteines curvidens Germar; Europe; spruce (Picca excelsa), larch, balsam fir (A bies balsamea), pine
(Pinus silvestris). Pityophthorus micrographus Linnwus; Europe; attacks Abies pectinata, Pseudotsuga mucronata, Picea
excelsa, Pinus strobus. Polygraphus major Stebbing; India; Pinus excelsa, Picea morinda

Polygraphus pini Stebbing; India; Pinus excelsa, Picea morinda

Polygraphus polygraphus Linneeus; Europe; spruce, fir, pine (Pinus silvestris, P. strobus). 70

A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS
Ipida—Continued
Polygraphus subopacus Thomson; Europe; spruce, pine. Xylechinus pilosus Knoech; Europe; pine, spruce, larch
Nyloterus lincatus Olivier; Europe; fir, spruce, pine, lareh
Lymantriidz. LEPIDOPTERA. * Lymantria monacha Linneeus; Europe; defoliator on pine, spruee, lareh
Orgyia antiqua Linneus; Europe; spruec, pine; defoliator. Noctuidz. (See Forests.) pine. Agrotis segetum Schiffermiller; Europe; injures roots of seedlings and nursery stock of spruce, lareh
Agrotis vestigialis Rott. ;
Pyralide. Europe; injures roots of seedlings and nursery stoek of pine and lareh

Euzophera cedrella and Phycita abietclla; India; infest cones of blue pine (Pinus ercelsa), fir (Picea
morinda), and silver fir (Abies webbiana)
Tortricidz. Asthenia pygmxana Hiibner; Europe; spruee, fir; attaeks needles on young shoots. Tortriz piceana Linnzeus; Europe; attacks foliage of pine and other conifers. Enarmonia pinicolana Zell; Europe; attacks foliage of larch, pine, and spruce. Tortriz viburniana Fabricius; Norway; attaeks Picea erecls1, Pinus silvestris, P. montina, Larix decidua. Hyponomeutide. 8,
Argyresthia fundella F, R.; Europe; attacks needles of fir, spruce, and pine. Callimonidz. HYMENOPTERA
pectinata). Mcgastigmus strodilobius Ratzeburg; a chaleid; Europe; breeds in seed of hemloek and fir (Abies
Diprionide. >k Diprion simile; Euro:

 

Diprion pini Linneeus; D. rufus Klug, and D. pallidus Klug; Europe; attack bark and needles
Connectieut. An important sawfly, recently imported. -
Megalodontida. Acantholyda crythrocephala Linnzeus; sawfly; Germany; attacks foliage of pine, lareh, spruee, fir. Cephalcia hypotrophica Hartig, and C. signata Fabricius: Europe; attack foliage of pine, spruee, fir. Itycorsia stellata Christ. ; sawfly; Europe; pine and fir. Siricidze. Sirex juvencus Linneus, S. spectrum Linnzus, and S. gigas Linnzeus; wood wasps; Europe; bore in
wood of spruee, fir, pine, and lareh
Xeris spectrum Linneeus; wood wasp; Europe; bores in spruce and fir wood. DIPTERA,
Tipulidz. bilsamea) and lareh

Pachyrhina crocata Linneeus; crane fly; Germany; breeds in bark of young seedling balsam fir (Abies

C. BETTER KNOWN IMPORTANT PESTS OF PINE

 

Eriophyes pini Nalepa
(Pine Gall Mite

NUS). Eriophyide; Acarina.) Hosts: Pinus silvestris, P. montana, P. mughus

twigs of pines. Injury: Causes galls in the twigs resulting in deformed growth. Description and biology: A tiny elongate four-legged mite pict breeds in the young
Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 116, 117,
figs. 90-92. .

Gelechia dodecella Linnzus. Injury; Breeds in buds,

(Pine Bud Moth. Gelechiide; Lepidoptera. ) Hosts: Pines (Pinus spp.). buoliana, the pine-shoot moth

needles, and young shoots, and is as injurious as Hvetria

INSECTS OF CONIFERS (PINE). 71

Description and biology: Adult moth with wing spread 10-12 mm., forewings dark
gray or gray brown, with two obscure light gray transverse fasciv, and six pairs of
black flecks. Larva reddish brown with black head and thoracic shield. The larva
bores in buds, needles, and young shoots. Distribution: Germany. Nissuix, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, p. 430, fig. 365. Cnethocampa pinivora Treitschke; Cnethocampa pityocampa Schiffermiller. (Pine Procession Moths. Cnethocampide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Pines. Injury: Defoliate; sometimes serious. Description and biology: Moth of pinivora with forewings yellowish gray, hind
wings with a sharply toothed crossline. Moth of pityocampa with forewings whitish
gray; hind wings with a scarcely toothed crossline. Larva of pinivora greenish gray,

-with velvety black dorsal stripe and black head, and with reddish yellow warts on
the fourth to eleventh segments. Larva of pityocampa similar but slate blue to black. The larvee feed on the foliage and live gregariously, wandering in the daytime in pro-
cessions of a single or double row. Pupate in cocoons in the ground. The larve of
pityocampa hibernate in nests in the crowns. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 386. Hess, Ricnarp. Der Forstschutz, 1900, vol. 2, pp. 452-455. Nissin, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. Dendrolimus pini Linnzeus. (Pine Spinner. Lasiocampide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Pine. Injury: Very serious defoliator. Description and biology: Moth variable in color, from brown red to slate gray, uni-
colorous or mottled; middle of forewings with white crescent. Larva 8 cm. long,
with steel-blue stripes on meso- and metathorax, general color varying trom reddish
to slaty gray; pubescence very long and clustered. The larva feeds on the foliage
and spins a neat oval silken cocoon. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheifen, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 376. Nusstiiy, Orro. Leitiaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 331-342, figs. 284, 285. Panolis griseovariegata Goeze. (Pine Noctuid. Noctuidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Pine. Injury: Attacks foliage, buds, and tender shoots. Description and biology: Moth with forewings variegated cinnamon red and yellowish
gray with white marks; hind wings brownish black. Larva green, with three broad
white dorsal stripes, a yellowish orange lateral stripe, head shining yellowish, 35 mm. long. Eggs greenish, laid in a row on the underside of needles. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 357. Nissuiy, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 378-380,
figs. 308, 309. 72 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. * Evetria buoliana Schiffermiller. (European Pine-Shoot Moth. Tortricidae; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Pinus silvestris, P. laricio, P. montana, P. strobus, P. resinosa. Injury: Causes deformation of tree. Has been introduced into the United States
in nursery shipments. Description and biology: Adult moth 12 mm. long, small, gayly colored; the head
and its appendages and thorax light orange yellow, abdomen dark gray; forewings
bright ferruginous orange, suffused with dark red, especially toward the tips, and
with several irregular forked anastomizing, silvery crosslines and costal strigule;
hind wings dark blackish brown; legs whitish, the anterior ones reddish in front. Pupa stout, robust, chestnut brown; abdominal segments with rings of short dark
spines. Larva 16 mm. long, brown with black head and thoracic shield; feeds in the
young buds and sheets. gg small, flat. white, laid at base of bud. (See plates
XII. XII.) Distribution: Europe, introduced into United States in 32 nurseries. Busex, A. U.S. Dept, Agric., Bul. 170, Feb., 1915. * Evetria spp. (Pine Bud and Gall Moths. Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Species: In addition to ¥ 2. buoliana Schiffermiller which is separately treated, the
following species injure pines. £2. resinella Linneeus; Europe; makes large galls in
twigs of pines. »* £. turionana Utibner; Europe, North America; attacks buds of
pines, especially the terminal bud. + £. pinivorana Zeller; Europe, North America;
attacks the axillary buds. + #. duplana Hiibner, Europe, Japau, North America;
attacks young shoots. »* /. frustrana Comstock, the Nantucket pine moth, * £. rigidana Fernald, and * F. comstockiana Fernald are among our most serious pests in
this country. Distribution: The distribution cited above shows clearly that iHiese species are
readily distributed in nursery stock. Soraver, B. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten. 3d ed., 1913. vol. 3. pp. 290-292.
i Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1918, pp. 415-419,
47-351

 
 

Thecodiplosis brachyntera Schwiiger. (Pine Needle Midge. Itonidide [Cecidomyide]; Diptera.) Hosts: Pinus silvestris, P. laricio, P. montana. Injury: Breeds in the needles, forming a small gall-like swelling. Description and injury: Fly very small. Larva yellowish. Egg laid between the
bases of two needles. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913. vol. 3, p. 444. D. OTHER INSECTS ATTACKING PINE (PINUS). HEMIPTERA,
Aphididz;
Lachnus pini Linneeus L. tomentosus DeGeer, L. teniatus Koch, L. nudus DeGeer, and L. agilis
Kaltenbach, plant lice; Europe; attack needles, tender growth and twigs. Coccidze:
Armored — -
Aspidiotus (Aonidia) lauri Bouché; Italy; Pinus. Aspidiotus (Aonidia) pinicola Leonardi; Cyprus, Spain; Pinus halepensis, P. silvestris. Chionaspis austriaca Lindinger; Australia; Pinus laricio nigricans. PiaTe Xl. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual! of Dangerous Insects. ConIFEROUS BARK BEETLES. Fic. 1.—Polygraphus trenchi: Larva; la, pupa; 1b, adult female, d rsal view (atv ve) and lateral
view (below): 1c, head of female; 1d, antenna; le, adult male, dcrsal view (al ) and lateral v
(belew). Fic. 2.—Phlocosinus zhobi: Egg; 2a, adult female, dorsal view and lateral view
(below); 2b, antenna: 2c, leg; 2d, adult male, dorsal v‘ew (abc ve) and laters ew (I'clow). 3.—Pityogenes coniferae: Adult female, dorsal view (left) and lateral view (réght. above figure);
antenna; 3b, leg; 3c, adult male, lateral view (left) and dorsal view (right). (Stebbing.) U.S, Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects PLaTE XIl. EUROPEAN PINE SHOOT MOTH, EVETRIA BUOLIANA, MOTH, Larva. (BUSCK.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XIII. WorK OF EVETRIA BUOLIANA ON PINE SHOOTS. (BUSCK.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects PLATE XIV. Pine Borers. Fig. 1.—Capnodis indica: Larva; la, adults. Fic. 2.—Antharia osmastoni: Larva; 2a, adults. Fig. 1b.—Stem of Pinus longifolia showing work of both beetles. (Stebbing.) PLATE XV. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. THE Pine BARK BEETLE. The pine bark beetle (Platypus biformis): Males and females and injury to P

(Stebbing.) inus longifolia,

 

INSECTS OF CONIFERS (PINE). 73

Coceidaz—Continued,
Armored—Continued. Diaspis visci Schrank; Germany, Italy; Pinus filifolia, P. silvestris. + Lepidosaphes newsteadi Sule; urope; Pinus austriaca, P. pumilio, P. silvestris. Leucaspis lewi Colvée; Europe; Pinus spp. Leucaspis pini Hartig; Europe; Pinus austriaca. Leucaspis pusilla Loew; Europe; Pinus cembra, P. silvestris. Leucaspis signoreti Targioni-Tozzctti; Italy, Corsica, Cyprus; Pinus halepensis, P. laricio; P. silvestris. Poliaspis pini Maskell; Japan; Pinus densiflora, P. austriaca, P. thunbergii. Unarmored—
Gueriniella serratule Fabricius; Algeria; southern Franee; Pinus. Palxococcus fuscipennis Burmeister; Germany, France; Pinus silvestris. Pseudococcus pini Kuwana; Japan; Pinus. Puto antennata Signoret; France, Switzerland; Pinus cembra, P. silvestris. Aradidx;
Aradus cinnamomeus Panzer; Europe; occurs under bark scales; causes needles to become yellow and
remain small. Anobiida;
Ernobius abietinus Gyllenhal; Europe; attacks cones. Ernobius nigrinus Sturm, and £. pini Sturm; Europe; attacks pith of young shoots. NXestobium plumbeum Iliger; Europe; breeds in the dead wood. COLEOPTERA. Meloidx;
Cantharis fusca Linneeus; a blister beetle; Europe; attacks shoots. Buprestidz. Agrilus betuleti Ratzeburg; and * A. viridis Linneus; Germany; bore stems of young trees and branches
of older trees. Chrysobothris solieri Laporte et Gory; Europe; bores in bast and sapwood of seedlings of P. silvestris
and P. pinaster. >

Capnodis indica Thomson; India; bores in bast and sapwood of Pinus longifolia. (See. pl. XIV, figs. la, 1b. Buprestis geometrica Laporte et Gory; India;bores in Pinus longifolia. Antharia osmastoni Stebbing; India; bores in the bark and bast of Pinus longifolia. (See pl. XIV,
fig. 2.) -

Phznops cyanea Fabricius; Europe; bores in bark. Tenebrionida. Melinimon tibiale Fabricius, Gonocephalum (Opatrum) sabulosum Linnwus, and Phylan gibbus Fabri-
cius attack tender roots, bark, and tops of seedlings and nursery stock. Setenis indosinica Vairmaire; India; bores in wood of Pinus excelsa. Blaps armata Blair; India; bores in the trunks of Pinus gerardiana. Scarabwida. Amphimallon solstitialis Linnwus; England; injures the roots of Pinus silvestris. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius; M. melolontha Linneus; Europe; injure roots of seedling and
needles. Polyphylla fullo Linnzeus; Europe; attacks the roots of seedlings, and the adults feed on the needles. Cerambycidz. Acanthocinus xdilis Linnseus; Germany; bores in the sapwood of felled or prepared lumber. Monohammus gallo provincialis Olivier; Germany; attacks Pinus silvestris and P. pinaster. Nothorhina muricata Dalman, India; bores in trunks of Pinus longifolia. Criocephalus tibetanus (?) Sharp; India; bores in bast and sapwood of Pinus gerardiana. Chrysomelidz. Cryptocephalus pini Linnwus; Germany; attacks the foliage and bark of young shoots. Luperus pinicola Duftschmidt; Germany; attack the foliage and bark of young shoots. Brentida. G
Eubactrus sp. ; India; bores in trunks of Pinus longifolia. Rhinomaceride. Rhinomacer attelaboides Fabricius; a weevil; Germany; breeds in the catkins. Brachyrhinidie. .
Polydrusus chvrodrysius Gredler, P. intermedius Zetterstedt, P. undatus Fabricius, P. villosulus
Chevrolat; Europe; attack the buds and needles of conifers: the larvie breed at the roots of trees. 74 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Curculionidae. Brachonyz pineti Paykull; weevil; Europe; mines the needles of Pinus silvestris. folia. (Stebbing.) Pityogenes lipperti Henschel; Dalmatia; Aleppo pine. Pityophthorus sampsoni Stebbing; India; Pinus excelsa. Cruptorhynchus brandisi
Stebbing, the chir pine
weevil; India; breeds in
wood of Pinus longifolia
and P. khasya. (See
text fig. 38.) Cryptorhynchus raja Steb-
bing; India; breeds in
bark and sapwood of
Pinus excelsa. Cossonidz. Mesites aquitanus Fair-
maire; Europe; bores in
pine wood standing in
sea water. Ipide. Carphoborus minimus
Fabricius; Germany;
makes galleries in
branches and tops of
Pinus austriaca, P. mon-
tana, and P. silvestris. Cryphalus longifolia Steb-
bing; India; Pinus longi-
folia. Cryphdlus major Steb-
bing; India; Pinus longi-
folia. Crypturgus cinereus
Herbst; Germany. Hulastes angustatus
Herbst, H. ater,and H.
opacus Erichson, attack
taproots. Hylastes longifolia Steb-
bing; India; Pinus longi-
Solia. ;

Hylurgus liyniperda Fabri-
cius; Germany; attacks
taproots. Ips blandfordi Stebbing;
India; Pinus gerardiana. Tps acuminatus Gyllenhal;
Lapland to Sicily; bark
and sapwood. Ips longifolia Stebbing;
India, Pinus longifolia
and P. gerardiana. Ips mannsfeldi Wachtl. ;
Europe; Pinus austri-
aca. Orthotomicus erosus Wol-
laston and O. longicollis
Gylenhal; Europe. Phleosinus zhobi Steb-
bing; India; Pinus gerar-
diana. (See pl. XI,
figs. 2a-2d.) Pityogenes trepanatus
Nordl. ; Europe; Pinus
austriaca. INSECTS OF CONIFERS (PINE). Ipidz—Continued. Pityophthorus glabratus Eichhofl; Europe; Pinus silvestris. Pityophthorus lichtensteini Ratzeburg; Europe; Pinus silvestris, P. strobus, P. pinaster. Polygraphus grandiclava Thomson; Europe; Pinus strobus. Polygraphus trenchi Stebbing; India; Pinus gerardiana. (See text fig. 39, and pl. XI, figs. la-le.) Polygraphus nigra Stebbing; India; Pinus ercelsa. Polygraphus himalayensis Stebbing; India; Pinus longifolia. Polygraphus longifolia Stebbing; India; Pinus longifolia. X yleborus eurygraphus Ratzeburg; Europe. nl

1
| wo

meta |

a

a

=

 

F1a. 39.—Pine bark beetle (Polygraphus trenchi): Galleries in Pinus gerardiana. (Stebbing.) Platypodidz. Crossotarsus fairmairei Chapuis; India; bores in wood of Pinus excelsa. Platypus biformis Chapuis; India; infests Pinus longifolia. (See pl. XV.) LEPIDOPTERA,

Geometridzx. a

Semiothisa liturata Clm. ; Europe; attacks the needles. Lasiocampide. Lasiocampa quercus Linneus; Germany; attacks needles. Noctuidz. :

Agrotis tritici Linneeus; Europe; injures roots of seedlings. “I

 

76 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Pyralidx. Dioryctria splendidelia H. Sch. ; Germany; attacks cones, shoots, and sapwood. Ephes ia elutella Hiibner; Germany; attacks seeds and cones . Psychide. Clania crameri Westwood; India; attacks needles of Pinus longifolia. Fig. 10.—Pine web-worm (Cncthocumpe pityocampa): Nests. (Barbey.) Hyponomeutide. Ocnerostoma piniariella Zell. ; Germany; attacks needles. Cnethocampide. Cnethocampa pinivora Treitschke; Europe; attacks foliage
Cnethocam pa pityocampa Schitlermiller; Europe; attacks foliage of Pinus pimea, P. pinaster, P. laricio,
P.halepensis. (See teXt fig. 40.) INSECTS OF CONIFERS (FIR). Megalodontida. Itycorsia cumpestris Linn-eus, a sawfly; Europe; attacks needles. E. BETTER KNOWN IMPORTANT PESTS OF FIR (ABIES). HYMENOPTERA. Eucosoma nigricana H. Sch. (Epiblema). (Fir Bud Worm. Host: Silver tir (Abics pectinata D. ©.) Injury: Feeds in the buds. during winter. Tortricidae; Lepidoptera.) (See text fig. 41.) Very likely to be introduced in buds on nursery stock

Description and biology: Moth wing expanse 11-13 mm., forewings dark brown with

violet red shimmer and lead
gray lines. Larva yellow-
ish to reddish brown, with
black head and_ thoracic
shield. Feeds in the buds,
hibernating asalarva. In
the spring it goes from bud
to bud, often under a
silken web. Pupates in
the ground. Distribution: Europe
(Germany). Nissin, Orro. Leitfaden
der Forstinsektenkunde,
2d ed., pp. 408-409, fig. 340. Soraver, P. Handbuch
der Pflanzenkrankheiten
3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p.
285. Enarmonia rufimitrana [.-
Schf. (Steganoptycha). (Redheaded Fir Worm. Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Silver fir (Abies
pectinata D. C.). Injury: Feeds on the
needles and young shoots. Description and biology:
Moth, wing expanse 12-16
mm., head and thorax rust
yellow, forewings yellowish
gray with many lead-col-
ored lines. Larva dirty
yellow green, with rust-red
head. (See text fig. 42.) Distribution: Europe. Hess, Ricnarp. Der Forstse

 

 

 

 

 

 

Tig. 41.—Pine sawfly (/tycorsia campestris): Injury. 1utz, 1898, vol. 1, p. 490, 491. (Barbey.) Nussuin, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, p. 408, figs. 338,

78 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Plemeliella abietina Seitner. (Spruce Seed Midge. Itonididee [Cecidomyiide]; Diptera.) Host: Vir (Abies). Injury: Breeds in the seed, which become shrunken and worthless. Description: Larvie red. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 444. Fig. 42.—Red-headed firworm (Hnarmonia rufimitrana): Injury, (Barbey.) F. OTHER INSECTS ATTACKING FIR (ABIES). HEMIPTERA. Aphidide. .
Lachnus grossus Kaltenbach and L. picex Walker, plant lice; Europe (Germany); live on the bark. Lachnus pichte Mordwilko; Europe; lives on the under side of the needles. Prociphilus bumeliz Schrank, a root louse; Europe; attacks roots of Abies pectinata, A. balsamea,
and A. fraseri. (See Ash.) INSECTS OF CONIFERS (FIR, SPRUCE). 79

Coccidx:
Armored—
Lepidosaphes abietis Signoret; Europe; Abies. Poliaspis pini Maskell; Japan; Abies firma. Unarmored—
Lecanium sericeum Lindinger; Bavaria; Abies pectinata. COLEOPTERA. Anobiide. Dryophilus pusillus Gyllenhal; Europe; attacks buds. Ernobius abietis Fabricius, E. angusticollis Ratzeburg, and E. longicornis Sturm; Europe; attacks the
cones. Lymexylonidz. Hylecetus dermestoides Linneeus; Germany; bores in white fir wood. ‘Elateride. Athous hirtus Herbst; Europe; attacks seedlings of fir. Cerambycidz. Molorchus minor Linngeus; Germany; attacks the sapwood of felled trees and lumber. Tetropium fuscum Fabricius; Germany; bores in trunks of old and dead trees. Ipide. Cryphalus strohmeyeri Stebbing; India; Abies webbiana. Pityokteines spinidens Reitter, and P. vorontzowi Jacobson; Europe. Xyloterus intermedius Sampson; India; Abies webbiana. Scolytoplatypodide. Scolytoplatypus himalayensis Stebbing; India; Abies webbiana. LEPIDOPTERA. Tortricidz. Tortrit murinana Hiibner; Europe; attacks needles and young shoots of Abies pectinata. Laspeyresia prozimana H. Sch. ; Europe; mines the needles. Laspeyresia coniferana Ratzeburg; Germany; bores in the bark of Abies pectinata. Olethreutes hercyniana Treitszhke; Europe; attacks needles of Abies pectinata. HYMENOPTERA. Callimonidz. Megastigmus borriesi Crosby; a chalcid; Japan; breeds in seed of Abies mariesii. G. BETTER KNOWN IMPORTANT PESTS OF SPRUCE (PICEA). Laspeyresia pactolana Zetterstedt (Grapholitha)
(Spruce Bark Tortricid. Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Host: Spruce (Picea excelsa). Injury: Breeds in twigs, causing a swelling and deformation, or the death of the
outer parts. Description and biology: Moth, wing expanse 12-16 mm., forewing fringed, olive
brown with double white angled fascia at the middle and several white marks beyond
this; hind wings gray-brown, fringed. Zarva, 10-12 mm. long, five pairs of abdominal
legs, whitish to reddish in color, head and thoracic shield yellowish brown. (See
text fig. 43.) Distribution: Germany. Hess, Ricnarp. Der Forstschutz, 1898, vol. 1, pp. 488, 485, fig. 172. Nissuin, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1918, pp. 409-411,

figs. 341, 342. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 281. 80 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Laspeyresia strobilella Linnzus (Grapholitha). (Spruce Cone Moth. Tortricidee, Lepidoptera.) Host.—Spruce (Picea excelsa). Injury.— Breeds in the cones. Description and biology.— Moth, wing expanse 10-14 mm., forewings dark gray
brown, fringed, with fine whitish lines, hind wi gray brown. with white fringe. Larva 11 mm, long. yellowish white with light brown head

 

Pupates in the cones. and thoracic shield. The larva breeds in the cones. /ggs laid on the young green
cones. Distribution: Germany. Hess, RicHarp. Der Forstschutz, 1898, vol. 1, pp. 486, 487. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed.. 1913, vol. 3, p. 281. B «

 

 

FG. 43.—Spruce bark tortricid (Las peyresia pactolana): Injury. (Niisslin.) Laspeyresia tedella Clerck (Epiblema). (Spruce Nest-Worm, Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Host: Spruce (Picea excelsa, Picea sitchensis). Injury: Injures the needles. Description and biology: Moth, wing expanse, 12 mm. ; forewings golden brown, with

brown silvery transverse fascia and finer markings. Larva light yellowish brown or
greenish with two dorsal lines, Head and thoracic shield brownish black. flecked;

INSECTS OF CONIFERS (SPRUCE). 81

9mm.long. The larve spin nests among the needles. Pupate in the ground, where
the larve hibernate. .
Distribution: Europe (Germany). Soraver, P. Handbuch der PAlanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 285. Nissury, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., pp. 412, 413, figs. 344,
345. ;
Dasyneura abietiperda Henschel; Dasyneura picez Hartig. (Spruce Gall Midges. Itonidide [Cecidomyiide]; Diptera.) Host: Spruce. Injury: Attack twigs at the base of needle clusters, injuring dormant buds and
sometimes killing entire twig. Description: Europe (Germany). Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 454, 455. Reseliella picez Seitner. (Spruce Seed Midge, Itonidide [Cecidomyide]; Diptera.) Host: Spruce. Injury: Breeds in the seed. Description and injury: Fly, yellowish red with dark bands, 2-4 mm. long. Larva,
4mm. long, rose-red. ggs laid in young green cones. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten ed. 3, vol. 3, 1913, pp. 448, 449. H. OTHER INSECTS ATTACKING SPRUCE (PICEA). HEMIPTERA. Aphididz. Lachnus grossus Kaltenbach, L. fasciatus Kaltenbach, L. picex Walker, and L. pinicola Kaltenbach
plant lice; Europe; attack stems, twigs, and tender growth. Coccidz:
Unarmored—
Phenacoccus picex Léw; Europe; Picea excelsa. Physokermes picez Schrank; Europe; Picea alba, P. excelsa, P. pungens, P. sitchensis. Armored—
Syngenaspis parlatorez Sulc. ; Bohemia, Bosnia; Picea ercelsa, P. omorica. COLEOPTERA. Carabide. Calathus fuscipes Goeze, Ophonus pubescens Miiller, Harpalus eneus Fabricius, and Pterostichus lepidus
Leske, ground beetles, are destructive to the seed in Europe. Elateride. °
Lacon sp. near davidi Fairmaire; India; breeds in trunks of Picea morinda. Cerambycide. Teledapus dorcadioides Pascoe; a wingless longicorn; India; breeds in trunks of Picea morinda. Leptura rubriola Bates; India; breeds in the trunks of Picea morinda. Ipide. Cryphalus morinda Stebbing; India; attacks Picea morinda. Hylastes cunicularius Erichson; Germany; attacks bark and roots. Hylurgops glabratus Zetterstedt; Germany, Siberia. Phleophthorus rhododactylus Mannerheim; Europe; Picea creelsa. Phleophthorus spinulosus Rey; Europe; attacks branches. Pityophthorus exculptus Ratzeburg; Europe. Dryocetes indicus Stebbing; India; attacks Picea morinda. Platypodidz. Crossotarsus conifers Stebbing; India; bores in wood of Picea morinda. 55266—17. 6

 

82 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. LEPIDOPTERA. Tortricidz. -
Tortriz histrionana Froelichs; Germany; attacks shoots. Hyponomeutide. Arjyresthia illuminatella Zell. ; Germany; attacks buds and young shoots. HYMENOPTERA. Tenthredinidz. Lygeomematus pini Ratzeburg; the small spruce sawfly; Europe; defoliates and injures buds and
young shoots. Lygxonematus ambiguus Fallen and L. saxeseni Hartig; Europe; defoliators. Siricide. Sirer imperialis Kirby, the spruce wood wasp; India; bores in wood of Picea morinda Lind. Sirer spectrum Linnaeus; Europe. (Sec text fig. 44.) I. BETTER KNOWN IMPORTANT PESTS OF LARCH (LARIX). ' Eriophyes laricis yon Tubeul. (Larch Blister Mite. Eriophyide; Acarina.) Host: Larch [Larix decidua (europxa)]. Injury: Forms gall-like deformations of the terminal bud. Fia. 44.—Spruce wood wasp (Sirez spectrum): Adult attacking Picea. (Barbey). Description and biology: A four-legged ! lister mite which forms gall-like swellings of
the terminal or axilary Luds. Very easy to introduce on nursery stock. Distribution: Europe. von Tuseur. Forst. naturw. Zeitschr., 1897, Bd. 6, pp. 120-124, 3 figs. Coleophora laricella Hiibner. (Larch Needle Miner. Elachistide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Larch [Larix decidua (europxa)]. Injury: Attacks early | uds and mines the needles. The injury is great. Easily
introduced in nursery stock. ,

Description and biology: Adult moth 3 mm. long, with wing expanse 9 mm., fore-
wing brownish gray. faintly shining, wings fringed with long hairs. Larva dark
reddish brown, the little head, thoracic shield, and anal portion dark, 5 mm, long. |
The larva mines needles and uds. Pupates in a sack or case. Distribution: Europe. ,

Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 253. Nusstin, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., pp. 431-433, figs. 366, 367. :

INSECTS OF CONIFERS (LARCH). ey
Argyresthia levigatella H. S.
(Larch Shoot Moth. Hyponomeutidee; Lepidoptera.) Host: Larch (Larix europexa). Injury: Very injurious to young shoots. Description and biology: Larva 6-7 mm. long, bright yellow, with black head, feeds
under the bark of young larch shoots. After hibernating the larva is somewhat
reddish with dark :
lines. Eggs laid singly
at | ases of needles. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Hand-
J}uch der Pflanzen-
krankheiten, 3d ed.,
1918, vol. 3, p. 269. Dendrolimus sibiricus
Tschetwerikoff. (Larch Spinner. Lasi-
ocampidee; Lepidop-
tera.) Host: Larch. Injury: Considera-
> le. Description: Similar
to D. pint L.

Distribution: Ural. TSCHETWERIKOFF. Rey. Russ. Ent., vol. 8, 1908, pp. 1-7, 3
figs. Laspeyresia zebeana Rat-
zeburg (Grapholitha). (Larch Gall Moth. Tor-
tricidm; Lepidop-
tera.) Host: Larch (Larix
europea). Injury: Forms galls
on twigs, giving ad-
mission to disease or
causing deformity. ;
Lia le to introduction LX
in nursery stock during
the winter. Description and biology: Moth, wing expanse 17 mm., forewings grayish black
with whitish transverse lines on the costal margin. Larva dirty yellow green with
lrown thoracic shield, 10 mm. long. The larva attacks the. twigs at the axils of
Lranches forming a gall-like swelling. (See text fig. 45.) Distribution: Germany. Fic. 45.—Larch gall moth (Laspeyresia zebeana): Injury. (Barbey.) 84 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 282. Nissin, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., pp. 422-424, figs. 356, 357. Dasyneura laricis F. Lw. (Larch Bud Gall Midge. Itonididee [Cecidomyidse]; Diptera.) Host: Larch. Injury: Attacks buds, forming galls. . Description and biology: Eggs laid at base of needle clusters. The larve enter
the dormant buds forming a gall-like swelling, and overwinter as very small larvae. They develop in the buds through the year. Pupate in cocoon in autumn. The
attacked buds die. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, pp. 454, 455. J. OTHER INSECTS ATTACKING LARCH (LARIX). HEMIPTERA. Aphidida. Lachnus laricis Koch, a plant louse; Europe; attacks needles and young shoots. COLEOPTERA. Anobiidz. Dryophilus pusillus Gyllenhal; Europe; attacks buds,
Ipide. Cryphalus intermedius Ferrari; Germany. LEPIDOPTERA. Hyponomeutide. Argyresthia levigatella H. Sch. ; Germany; attacks young shoots. L. BIBLIOGRAPHY OF PRINCIPAL WORKS CONSULTED. BarGAGLI, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. FERNALD, M.E. Catalogue Coccidee of the World, Mass. Exp. Sta., bull. 88, 1903. GILLANDERS, A. T. Forest Entomology, 1908. Hess, R. Der Forstschutz, vols. 1,2, 1898. LinDINGER, L. Die Schildliiuse (Coccide), 1912. NUssuiy, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. SoraveR, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., vol. 3, 1913. STEBBING, E. P. A Manual of Elementary Forest Zoology for India, 1908. STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects. Coleoptera., 1914. TRAGARDH, IvAR. Sveriges skogsinsekter, 1914. CORN; MAIZE. (Zea mays Linneus. Family Graminez.) Although the greater part of our commerce in corn is in the nature of exports, there
are always likely to be imports of seed corn from various parts of the world. Corn
is probably American in origin, and consequently there are few foreign pests not
already widely distributed in the country. A. CORN INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. > Arzcerus fasciculatus De Geer. (Coffee-bean Weevil. Family Anthribidz; Coleoptera.) Hosts: This weevil is polyphagous, feeding in dry food products and drugs, china-
berries (Melia azedarach), dead cotton bolls, cornstalks, etc. Injury: Very injurious to food products and also to live corn,

CORN INSECTS. 85

Description: A mottled grayish weevil with short, blunt snout. Larva hairy. Distribution: Cosmopolitan. Tuoxer, E.S. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Entomology, Bul. 64, pt. 7, 1909, pp. 60-64,
pl. 3, fig. 18. :

-CuirrENDEN, F. H. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Entomology, Bul. 8, n. s., 1897. Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée. (Pyralide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Maize, peach, pawpaw, apple, orange, loquat, guava, cassia, custard apple,
granadilla, banana, millet, Canavalia indica, senna bean, Dahlia, castor bean, cacao,
sunflower. 5

Injury: Although primarily a maize pest, it is becoming quite a serious enemy of
fruit trees in Cleveland District, Queensland. Breeds in pods of castor bean and
cacao, and heads of sunflower in India. Description and biology: Adult measures about 24 mm. in wing expanse; color pale
orange yellow, marked with numerous black dots on wings and body. Egg presum-
ably deposited on leaf stalk near or at point of junction with main stem or young fruit;
larva on hatching penetrates into the hollow stalk or fruit, and after feeding for a time
bores into the crown, in which it remains until ready to pupate. On leaving the
crown of the fruit it crawls to some convenient crevice and constructs a loose silken
web under which it transforms to a reddish brown pupa. 5

Distribution: Australia, Japan, China, India, Burma, Ceylon. Ce
Jarvis, E. Queensland Agricultural Journal, 1913, p. 33, July. Maxwett-Lerroy, H. Mem. Dept. Agric. India, vol. 1, 1907, p. 211. Siphonella pumilionis Bjerk. (Corn Fly. Oscinidee; Diptera.) Host: Corn. “:

Injury: Mines stem and young ears. Description and biology: Fly yellow, thorax with three broad black stripes, abdomen
with brown median line and four broad brown cross bands; beak very long and thin;
appendages yellow; length 3-4 mm. Larva 6-7 mm. long, shining yellowish white. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 411. B. IMPORTANT CORN PESTS. HEMIPTERA. Cercopidz. Tomaspis varia Fabriciws, T. postica Walker, 7. lepidior Font. ; South America, (See Sugar cane.) COLEOPTERA. Elateridz. Agriotes lineatus Linnzeus. (See Tobacco.) Chrysomelidz. Diabrotica graminea Ballou; Porto Rico; adults very injurious to flowers. Brachyrhinidz. ;
Diaprepes abbreviatus Linnzus; West Indies. (See Sugar cane.) LEPIDOPTERA. Noctuidz. Sesamia cretica Led. ; Europe, Asia Minor, Egypt, Sudan; boresimears. (See Sugar cane.) Calamistis fusca Hampson; South Africa; a serious pest. Cirphis leucosticha Hampson; East Africa; cobworm. Pyralidz. Pyrausta nubilalis Hiibner; Europe; bores in stalks. (See Grains.) Chilo simplex Butler; India, Formosa. (See Sugar cane.) * 7 7
Chilo auricilia Dudgeon; India. (See Rice.) ~
Hepialidz. —
Hepialus humuli Linnzeus; Europe. (See Hops.) 86 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. COTTON. (Gossypium spp. Malvacer.) Many species of fiber yielding cotton are cultivated in various parts of the world,
and the fiber is a very important article of world commerce. The great impetus given ~
to seed selection in recent years has also caused considerable commerce in the various
varieties of seed for planting. Practically the only serious possibility of importing
cotton insects is connected with the seed and with lint when not thoroughly cleaned
of seed. There is also some danger of injurious insects finding refuge behind the
bagging of the bales. Owing to these dangers the Federal Horticultural Board has
forbidden the importation of cotton seed except through the Department of Agricul-
ture, and has placed restrictions on the importation of foreign baled cotton. The cotton plant is one of the most severely attacked cultivated plants, having a
very long list of injurious insects. Although the majority
of these insects are not liable to introduction, there is
always a possibility that thty may find entrance into the
country in the folds of the bagging of bales or on some
food plant. ‘

A. BETTER KNOWN COTTON INSECTS LIKELY TO BE
IMPORTED. Eriophyes gossypii Banks. (Cotton Blister Mite. Eriophyidee; Acarina.,

 

Host: Cotton. FiG. 46.—Cotton stainer (Dys- Injury: Tnjures the foliage, causing death to plants
dercus  cingulatus): Adult. when very numerous. May be distributed on lint or
(Maxwell-Lefroy.) 1 7 ~

seed. Description and biology: A tiny four-legged mite which forms blisters on the leaves
of cotton when very young, developing therein. This is a very serious pest. Distribution: West Indies. Smiru, Lonerrenp. Rept. Agric. Exp. Sta. St. Croix for 1912-13, Copenhagen, 1914,
pp. 56-58. Dysdercus spp. (Cotton stainers. Pyrrhocoridee; Hemiptera.) Important species: This genus contains the following species, which are very injuri-
ous to cotton | ecause of their ha its of sucking the juices and staining the fi er:
D. andree Linneus, West Indies. D. annuliger Uhler, West Indies. D. cardinalis
Gerstiicker, of East Africa. D. cingulatus Fabricius, India, Ceylon, Burma, Malay
Peninsula, Australia, and Egypt (see text, fig. 46). D. delauneyi Lethierry, Egypt,
India, and the West Indies. D. fasciatus Signoret, Africa. D. fernaldi Ballou, West
Indies. D. howardi Ballou, West Indies. D. insularis, Fiji. D. nigrofasciatus Stal,
West Africa. D. pacificus, Fiji. D. ruficollis Linneus, Brazil, Peru, and Mexico. D. sanguinarius, Cuba. D. side Montrousier, New South Wales. D. swperstitiosus
Fabricius, Africa. >D. suturellus H. 8., North America, West Indies. Hosts: Cotton, okra, eggplant, and various other plants. Injury: Serious. Description and biology: Adult active sucking !.ugs, usually reddish or yellowish in
color. The developmental stages are gradual, each nymphal molt showing a little
more of the wings. The eggs are small, oval, yellowish, laid in clusters on the ground. The insect in all stages lives by sucking the juices of the cotton plant, especially the
bolls. COTTON INSECTS. 87

Batiou, H. A. Cotton Stainers, West India Bul., 1906, vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 64-85. Basu, 8. K., and Hurr, H. L. Dysdereus cingulatus Fabr. : Crop Pest Handbook for
Behar and Orissa, 1913, Dept. Agr. Behar and Orissa, Calcutta, Leaflet 45, pl. 32. Apion xanthostylum Wagner. (East African Cotton Weevil. Apionide; Coleoptera.) Host: Cotton. Injury: Bores in the stem and | olls. Description and biology: A very small ; lack weevil. The larva is yellowish white,
2 mm. long, curved and legless. It ores in the stem and roots as well as in the * olls
of cotton and is a very serious
pest. Distribution: German East
Africa. ad }

ZacHER, Friepricw. Arteit. Kaiserlich, Biol. Anst. f. Land-
und Forstwirtschaft, band 9,
heft 1, 1913, pp. 157-163, figs. 21-27. Apion armipes Wagner. This species. is similar to the
“a ove mentioned and attacks cot-
ton in a similar manner in Nyas-
saland. (Zacher., 1. c., p. 156,
fig. 21.) Anthonomus vestitus Boheman. (Peruvian Cotton-Square Weevil. Curculionidee; Coleoptera.) Host: Cotton. Injury: Very injurious pest to Fic. 47.—Peruvian cotton square weevil, Anthonomus vestitus,
squares in Peru. pie eg alorcab)

Description and biology: Adult weevil resem les the Mexican cotton boll weevil
(A. grandis); length 2.5-4 mm. ; 0 :long-ovate, convex, blackish piceous, rather closely
clothed with elongate whitish scales, with indistinct oblique lighter band on each
elytron, the two forming a basal triangle. Pwpa white, formed in fallen squares. Larva white, curved, legless; feeds in the interior of cotton squares which fall to the
ground soon after the larva commences to feed. Egg oval, white, laid in square (see
text fig. 47). Distribution: Peru. Townsenp, C. HH. T. Journ. Econ. Ent. 1911, vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 241-248. Pierce, W. Dwicutr. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus. 1912, vol. 42, No. 1889, pp. 155-156. Pierce, W. Dwicur. U. S. Dept. Agric., 1915, Report 102, p. 12, pl. 2, fig. 3. Earias insulana Boisduval. -
(Egyptian Cotton Bollworm. Cymbidse; Lepidoptera.) Host: Cotton. Injury: Very injurious; the larve feed in the bolls and squares. Adults have been
captured in quarantine in a few bolls of cotton from the island of Cyprus shipped for
propagati nu and botanieal purposes. 88 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Description and biology: Adult moth green, front wings with two indistinct lines,
hind wings whitish. Larva brownish to greenislr with yellow flecks 15 mm. long
(see plate xvi, figs. a, b, ¢, e, g, h). Distribution: India, Siam, Burma, Australia, Africa, Cyprus. ZacuErR, Frrepricu. Arbeit. Kaiserlich. Biolog. Anst. f. Land- u. Forstwirtschaft,

band 9, heft 1, 1918, pp. 175-179, figs. 35-39. Pectinophora gossypiella Saunders (Gelechia). (The Pink Bollworm. Gelechiidee; Lepidoptera.) Host: Cotton. Injury: Breeds in the bolls, especially in the seed. Liable to be imported in cotton
seed. Live specimens have been taken in quarantine in the United States. Some
of these were in stray seeds in
baled cotton. Description and biology:
Joth—small, gray colored, less
than half an inch long, with
long brown fringes on the
wings. Pupa brown, less than
half an inch in length. Larva
white when very young, but
becoming pink; feeds in green
or ripe bolls, first attacking
the leaves or outside of bolls;
later it bores inside of the boll,
feeding on the seed. The lar-
val period is sometimes very
greatly retarded. Eggs de-
; posited singly on leaves,
Fic. 48.—Cotton pink bollworm (Pectinophora gossypiella): a, stalks,-and bolls hatch in a

Adult; 6, c, larvee; d, pupa; e, cocoon. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) few days. (See text fig. 48.) Distribution: India, Africa, Hawaii, New Caledonia. Has become established in
the Laguna District, State of Coahuila, Mexico. Maxwett-Lerroy, H. F. Indian Insect Pests, pp. 93-96. Maxwew.-Lerroy, H. F. The Insect Pests of Cotton in India, Agricultural Journal
of India, vol. 1, pp. 49-62. Basu, 8. K., and Durr, H. L. Crop Pest Handbook for Behar and Orissa, 1918,
Dept. Agr. Behar and Orissa, Calcutta, Leaflet 44, pl. 31. Pyroderces simplex Walsingham. (The Little Bollworm. Gelechiidse; Lepidoptera.) . Host: Cotton.. Injury: Breeds in the bolls, especially in the seed. Description and biology: Adult moth light brown, with black and white markings,
length6mm. Larva pink; 8mm.long. Pupa light brown, 5mm. long. The species
greatly resembles Pectinophora gossypiella but is smaller and differently marked. It
breeds in the same manner. Distribution: East Africa. Morstarr, H. Der Pflanzer, Jahrg. 10, beiheft 1, 1914, pp. 29-31. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XVI. CoTTON BOLLWorMs. Cotton bollworms: Earias insulana. F1Gs. a, h, Larva: 6, injured cotton boll; ¢, injured twig; ¢, g,
adult moths. Farias chromataria Fic. f, Adult. Farias fabia Stoll. Fic. d, Adult. (Maxwell-
Lefroy.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLaTe XVII. _. —

 

 

 

THE COTTON SPITTLE-TUBE INSECT. The cotton spittle-tube insect ( Machzroza planit Fic. a.—Eggs on cotton stem; b, egg imbedded in
tissue of stem; c, egg; d, nymph, 19 days old; e, caleareo ase of nymph, 20 days old; f, case with
molted skin attached; g, male; h, female; i, side view of adult. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XVIII. THE COTTON STEM-BORER. The cotton stem-borer (Sphenoptera gossypii): a, Larva in stalk; b, larva; c, pupa in stalk; d, pupa;
¢, adult; f, adult on plant; g, parasite. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects PLATE XIX. CoTTON WEEVILS. Fia. 1.—Cottonseed weevil (Arecerus sp. ): Adult, pups, larva. Figs. 2, 3.—Cotton-stem weevil
(Phylaitis sp. ): Adults, pupe, larva. (Maxwell-Lefroy. “IG. 4.—Peruvian cotton-stem weevil
(Gasterocercodes gossypii), adult. (Pierce.) COTTON INSECTS. 89

Contarinia gossypii Felt. (Cotton Flower Bud Maggot. Itonidide, Cecidomyiide; Diptera.) Hosts: Cotton, wild cotton, privet. Injury: Very serious pest of the flower buds in Antigua. Description and biology: Adult fly 1 to 1.5 mm. long; face fuscous, yellowish, eyes
large, black; mesonotum dark brown, the submedian lines yellowish; scutellum and

postscutellum yellowish;
abdomen greenish yel-
low. Pupa formed in
ground. Larva 2 mm. long, changing from
white to yellow or orange
as it grows; infests the
flower buds of cotton,
causing the bracts to flare
and squares to drop (see
text fig. 49). Distribution: Antigua,
St. Croix. Battov, H. A. The
Flower-Bud Maggot of
Cotton, West Indian
Bull., vol. 10, No. 1,
pp. 1-28, figs. 1-9. Porricondyla gossypii
Cojuillett. (Red Maggot of Cotton. Itonidide [Cecidomy-
lide]; Diptera.) Host: Cotton. Injury: Kills growing
part of plant by girdling
stem. —
FG. 49.—Cotton flower bud-maggot ( Contarinia gossypii): Aduit. (Ballou.) Description and injury: Adult fly very small. Larve, red maggots, feed under the
bark of the stems of the cotton plant, which they may completely girdle, causing the

 

death of the parts above. Distribution: Barbados, Mont-
serrat. B. IMPORTANT COTTON
INSECTS. ORTHOPTERA. Fic. 50.—Mole cricket (Gryllotalpa africana). (Maxwell- Acridiidz and Locustide. \
Lefroy.) Chrotogonus trachypterus Blanchard;

India. Acridium yeregrinum Olivier and A. hieroglyphicum; Egypt and Sudan. Acheta bimaculata De Geer; Formosa. Gryloide. Gryllotalpa africana Pallas; India, Africa, New Holland, Tropical Asia. (Sce text fig. 50.) Schizodactylus monstrosus Drury; Egypt, Sudan, India. (See text fig. 51.) 90 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. ILEMIPTERA,

Cercopide. . 7
Machzrota planitizx Distant; India; makes tubes on stems, sucks juices. (See pl. XVII.) Lygeide. :
Oxycarenus gossipinus Distant; of West Africa; O. dudgeoni Distant of West Africa; 0. hyalinipcnnis
Costa of Egypt; O. lztus Kirby of Ceylon, India, Burma; attack cotton seed. Oncopeltus quadriguttatus Fabricius; Australia; oviposits in stems. Fi. 51.—Mole cricket (Schizodactylus monstrosus). (Maxwell-Lefroy.) COLEOPTERA. Scarabeide. Adoretus umbrosus Fabricius, and var. tenuiinaculatus Waterhouse; ITawaii, Philippines, Japan, Java. (See Ro e.)

 

 

Fig. 52.—Cotton stem-borer (Sphenoptera neglecta): a, Egg; 6, pupa, c, adult; d, f, g, injury; e, larva. (Zacher.) Buprestidae. Sphenoptera neglecta Klug (sce text fig. 52), Egypt, and S. gossypii Kerr, India; bore in stalks. (See
plate XVIII.) INSECTS OF COTTON, COWPEA, CRUCIFERS. 91

Curculionidae. Phylaitis sp. ; India; and Gasterocercodes gossypii Pieree, Peru; bores in stalks. (See pl. XIX, figs. 2, 3,
4.) (Pierce. W. D., U.S. Dept. Agr., Off. Seey., Report 162, 1915, plate I.) Anthribide. *Araccerus fasciculatus DeGeer;, India; breeds in seed (sce pl. XIX, fig. 1.) (See Corn.) LEPIDOPTERA. Phycitidz. Phycita infusella Meyrick; India; attacks buds. Pyralidz. Cryptoblabes gnidiella Miller; Egypt, Europe; breeds in bolls. Sylepta derogata Fabricius; India; rolls leaves. Cossidz. Zeuzera coffe Nietner; Orient; bores in stalks. (See Coffee.) Cymbidz. .
Farias fabia Stoll. (see pl. XVI, fig. d) of India, Ceylon, and Australia; E. chromataria Walker (sce pl. XVI, fig. f) of India and Togo; FE. plaga Feld. of East Africa; E. chlorana Hiibner of Egypt and Java;

E. gossypii of Egypt; boll worms. Noctuidz. Luxor segetis Schifermiller; Europe, Asia, East Afriea, Canary Islands, Madeira, South Africa; cut-
worm. Prodenia litura Fabricius; Egypt, Uganda, India, Philippines; defoliator. Dinvarovsis castanea Hampson; Afriea; boll worm. Sacadodes pyralis Dyar; South America, Trinidad; boll worm. Tarache catena Sow. ; India; defoliator. Arctiidz. Diacrisia obliqua Waiker; India, Japan, Chia; defoliator. Lymantriidz. Porthesia virguncula Walker; India, Uganda; defoliator. COWPEA. (Vigna unguiculata Walp. Family Leguminose.) The cowpea is extensively raised in the country as well as many other parts of the
world. Shipments of the peas might easily introduce pests. (See Beans, Peas.) CRUCIFERS. (Family Cruciferze.) Various insects attack several species of crucifers and for convenience are grouped
under a general heading. Phyllotreta spp. (Crucifer Leaf Beetles. Chrysomelide; Coleoptera.) Species: Ph. wndulata Kutsch; Europe; cultivated crucifers. Ph. nemorum Lin-
neus; Russia; rhubarb, hops, cabbage. Ph. atra Fabricius; Europe; crucifers. Ph. crucifere Goeze; Europe; crucifers. Ph. nigripes Fabricius; Europe; cabbage, rad
ish, horseradish, rape, Reseda. >KPh. armoracie Koch; Europe, introduced into
North America; crucifers, horseradish. i

Injury: The adults of all of these species feed on the foliage of cruciferous plants
The larve are not all known but they usually attack the stem or roots. The fact that
two of the species have been introduced into this country indicates the possibility of
the others also gaining admission. Description: The first two species are yellow striped, the others unicolorous. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 525. CHITTENDEN, F.H. U.S. Dept. Agr., Div. Entomology, bul. 9, n. s., 1897, pp. 21-28. 92 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Ceutorhynchus contractus Marsh. (The Charlock Weevil. Curculionide; Coleoptera.) Injury: This minute weevil sometimes does great harm early in the season to young
sprouting mustard plants by devouring the germinating seed or the young plant just
below the surface of the ground. Host; Charlock, (Brassica arvensis Linn.) OrMEROD, E. A. 17th Report, Injurious Insects, p. 74. CUCURBITS; MELONS; CUCUMBER. (Family Cucurbitacez.) There are many species of melons grown in various parts of the world, but the only -
danger of importation comes from pests of the seed and fruit. A. BETTER KNOWN CUCURBIT INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Epilachna spp. (Cucurbit Ladybird Beetles. Coccinellide; Coleopfera.) Species: Epilachna chrysomelina Fabricius; Mediterranean region, Sudan, German
East Africa; cucurbits, Sesamia. E. 28-punctata Fabricius; Asia, Malaysia, Australia;
Solanacew, Cucurbitacee. E. dodecastigma Mulsant; Asia, Malaysia, Australia;
Solanaceee, Cucurbitacee. £. argus Fourcroy; Southern Europe; Bryonia dioica and
other cucurbits. Injury: Defoliate. Description: Beetle of E. chrysomelina round, very convex, yellowish red with six
round black spots on each elytron; length 7-9 mm. The larvee as well as the adults
feed on the foliage. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 477. Aulacophora olivierei Guérin. (Banded Pumpkin Beetle. Chrysomelids; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Cucurbitacee, pumpkin, marrow, cucumber, gourd, peach, nectarine. Injury: Very serious. The adults skeletonize the leaves, and eat the flowers; the
larvee feed in the roots and lower parts of the stem. Description: Beetle about 8 mm. long; orange yellow with large black spots at
humeri and beyond middle on each elytron. The adults are rather gregarious in
habits. Distribution: Australia. Frenou, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, pt. 4, 1909; pp. 123-127,

pl. 81. Baris tregardhi Aurivillius. (Melon Weevil. Curculionids; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Sweet melons. Injury: Breeds in the fruit among the seed. Description and biology: Adult weevil 4 to 6 mm. long, black, with a long slender,
curved beak, antennz elbowed and clubbed. Pupa white, with appendages folded
beneath. Larva white, legless, with light brownish head. Distribution: Sudan. |
Kine, H. H. Fourth Rept. Wellcome Tropical Research Laboratories, 1911, vol. B,

Genl. Science, p. 137, pl. 8, figs. 1, 3, 4, 6. INSECTS OF CUCURBITS, CURRANT, CUSTARD APPLE. 93
Carpomyia pardalina Bigot. (Melon Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: Melons. Injury: Serious. Description and biology: Adult fly, wing expanse 11 mm., wings with three yellowish
bands, color light brown, thorax with black and white spots. Larva feeds in fleshy
fruits, pupates in the soil. gg laid in skin of fruit. Distribution: India. Maxwe.t-Lerroy, H. M. Mem. Dept. Agric., India, 1907, vol. 1, No. 2, p. 229,
fig. 72. - Dacus eucurbitz Coquillett. (Cucurbit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: Cucurbitacee (melons, gherkins, etc. ), tomatoes, beans. Injury: Breeds in fruits and stems. Description and biology: Fly marked with red, brown, yellow, black, and white;
wing with brown band and apical spot. £ggs laid on skin of fruit. Distribution: India, Ceylon, Hawaii. Sorauer, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 415, 416. B. OTHER IMPORTANT CUCURBIT INSECTS. DIPTERA. Trypetidz. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks squash. (See Fruit.) Dacus ferrugineus Fabricius; India, etc. (See Fruit.) Bactrocera tryoni Froggatt; Orient. (See Fruit.) Rhagoletis pardalina Bigot; India; attacks fruit. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. > Pionea ferrugalis Hiibner; Europe, Asia, North America. (See Cabbage.) CURRANT. See Gooseberry,
CUSTARD APPLE; SOUR SOP. (Annona spp. Family Anonacez.) Tropical trees cultivated for their large fruits. Some of the species have been
introduced into Florida. :

A. A BETTER KNOWN SPECIES LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Anonepestis bengalella Ragonot. (Custard-apple Caterpillar. Phycitide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Custard apple (Annona squamosa). Injury: Injures fruit by tunneling. Description: Adult female length 22 mm. ; fore wings dark green, hind wings brownish-
gray with purplish tint, head and thorax brownish-ochreous, abdomen ochreous. Distribution: India. Moorg, F. Indian Museum Notes, 1896, vol. 3, No. 3, p. 106. B. OTHER IMPORTANT ANNONA INSECTS. HEMIPTERA,
Coccidz:

Armored—
Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) personatus Comstock; Porto Rico; Annona reticulata, A. muricata. Aulacaspis miranda Cockerell; Mexico; Annona cherimola. 94 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Coecidz—Continued. Unarmored—
Ceroplastes denudatus Cockerell; Grenada, Antigua, Demerara; Annona muricata. Ceroplastes quadrilineatus Newstead; British East Africa, Uganda; Annona muricata. * Ceroputo yuccze Coquillett; Mexico, California; Annona cherimola. Coccus marsupialis Green; Ceylon. Icerya albolutea Cockerell; West Africa; Annona squamosa. Lagosinia strachani Cockerell; W. Africa; Annona squamosa. + Pseudococeus bromelix Bouché; Hawaii; Annona muricata. >. Saissetia nigra Nietner; West Indies; Ceylon. 7 LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée; Queensland. (See Corn.) DIPTERA. Trypetide. Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann, attacks Annona humboldtiana. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann; attacks Annona muricata. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis anone Graham; Africa; attacks Annona muricata. (See Fruit.) CYPRESS. (Cupressus spp. Family Juniperace:.) Trees or shrubs with aromatic evergreen foliage in Central America.. California,
Arizona, Southern Europe to Southeast Asia, valuable for timber and ornament. INSECTS INJURIOUS TO CYPRESS (CUPRESSUS). HEMIPTERA. Coccidee:
Armored—
+ Chionaspis striata Newstead; Algeria, Egypt, California, Arizona. Diaspis visci Schrank; Europe; Cupressus funebris, C. glauca, C. macrocarpa, C. pyramidalis, C.
sempervirens. Unarmored— 5
Gueriniella serratule Fabricius; Algeria, Southern France. COLEOPTERA. Buprestida. 6
Diadorus scalaris L. & G.,and D. erythrurus White; Australia; bore in Cupressus lambertiana. BIBLIOGRAPHY. LINDINGER, L., Die Schildliiuse (Coccidee), 1912. Froae@att, W. W., Australian Insects, 1907. CYPRESS; CEDAR. (Chamecyparis spp. Family Juniperacez.) Evergreen trees of North America and Japan, highly valued for timber and useful
ornamental trees. :

INSECTS INJURIOUS TO CHAM4CYPARIS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidze:
Armored—
Diaspis visci Schrank; Europe; Chamecyparis nutkaensis, C. obtusa, C. pisifera. BIBLIOGRAPHY. Lixprncer, L, Die Schildliiuse (Coccidw), 1912. DATE PALM. (Phoenix dactylifera. Family Palmacez.) A palm cultivated for its fruit, the date of commerce. (See Palms.) INSECTS OF DOGWOOD, DURRA, EGGPLANT, ELM. 95

DOGWOOD. (Cornus spp. Family Cornacez.) Hardy ornamental shrubs or trees of the northern hemisphere and Peru. The bark
of some species is used in obtaining a substitute for quinine, for tooth powder. black
ink, etc. ; the bark of the roots yields a scarlet dye, the wood is hard and good for tool

handles. IMPORTANT DOGWOOD INSECTS. EMIPTERA. Coccidz:
~ Armored—
Chionaspis salicis Linneeus; Europe; Cornus sanguinea. * Unarmored—
Lecanium coryli Linneeus; Europe; Cornus sanguinea, C. sericea. DURRA. EGGPLANT. See Sorghum. » (Solanum melongena. Family Solanacez.) A tropical vegetable now extensively cultivated in this country for its fruit. A. EGGPLANT INSECT LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Leucinodes orbonalis Guénée. (Eggplant Fruit Borer. Pyralide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Eggplant. Injury: Bores in’ the fruit. Description and biology: Adult wing expanse 24 mm., white, forewing with fulvous,
black and ferruginous markings; hind wing white, with black lines and specks. Larva about 15 mm. long, flesh color, with brown head and shield; a few short hairs
on round dark spots. Distribution: India, Java, Burma, Ceylon, South Africa. Maxwe.i-Lerroy, H.M. Mem. Dept. Agric. India, vol. 1, 1907, p. 214, fig. 65. B. IMPORTANT EGGPLANT INSECTS. DIPTERA. Trypetidz. Lonchxa splendida; New Zealand, Australia, Oceanica; attacks fruit. (See Tomato.) LEPIDOPTERA. Noctuidz. Micromima olivia; Cuba; leaf roller on tomato, tobacco and eggplant. ELM. (Ulmus spp. Family Urticacee.)

. °

Ornamental deciduous trees distributed throughout the colder and temperate
regions of the northern hemisphere, some of them much valued as avenue trees. The wood is very hard and valuable in the manufacture of implements. IMPORTANT ELM INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Aphidide. Colopha compressa Koch, Eriosoma lanuginosa Wartig, Tetraneura pallida Haliday, Eriosoma ulmi
Linneeus, Tetraneura ulmi DeGeer; Europe; attack foliage of elms. Coccide. Armored—
Chionaspis salicis Linnzeus; Europe; Ulmus campestris. 96 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Coccida—Continued. Unarmored—
* Gossyparia spuria Modeer; Europe. Gueriniella serratul Fabricius; Italy. Lecanium coryli Linneeus; Europe; Ulmus campestris, U. montana. COLEOPTERA. Bostrychidz. Sinozylon perforans Schr. ; Europe; bores in branches. Xylonites rctusus Olivier; Europe; bores in branches and trunks. Buprestidz. .
Lampra decipiens Mannerheim and L. rutilans Fabricius; Europe; bore in the bark, bast and sap-
wood. Scarabeeide. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and M. melolontha Linneeus; Europe; larve injure roots of seedlings. Cerambycida. Acolesthes sarta Solsky; India; bores in trunks. Oberea lincaris Linneus; Europe; bores in pith of nursery
stock of cork elm. Curculionidz. Magdalis aterrima Linneeus; Europe; makes galleries under
the bark and in injured branches. Orchestes alni Linneeus; Europe; mines the leaves of Ulmus
campestris. i
Orchestes ferrugineus Marsham and O. rufus Olivier; Europe
mine the leaves. Scolytidx. Pteleobius kraatzi Eichhofl; Russia; galleries in bark. Ptelcobius vittatus Fabricius; Germany, Russia; galleries in

 

bark. Scolytochelus ensifer Eichhoff; Russia; galleries in bark of
branches. .
Scolytochelus kirschi Skal. ; Russia; galleries in bark of smooth
Fic. 53.—Elm barkbeetle (Scolytus bark elms. a
multistriatus): Adult. (Niisslin.) Scolytus levis Chapuis and S. pygmxus Fabricius; Europe;

galleries in bark of tops and branches. Scolytus mali Bechst. ; Europe. Scolytus multistriatus Marsham; Europe (see text fig. 53). Scolytus scolytus Fabricius; Europe; attacks all parts of trunk and branches. Xyleborus dryographus Ratzeburg and X. monographus Fabricius; Europe; galleries in wood. LEPIDOPTERA. Cossidz. Cossus cossus Linneeus; goat moth; Europe; bores in wood. (See Willow.) *Zeuzera pyrina Linneeus; Europe; bores in wood. (See Horse chestnut.) Notodontidz. Phalera bucephala Linnaeus; Europe. (See Forests.) Noctuide. ,

Xzylina socia Rott. ; Europe. (See Plum.) Geometridz. . ™
Boarmia crepuscularia Hiibner; Europe, Asia. (See Cinchona.) Hiberniadefoliaria Linneeus; Europe; defoliator. Larentia dilutata Borekh. ; Europe; defoliator. LITERATURE. SorAvER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. NUssLIN, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. Hess, R. Der Forstschutz, 1898, 1900. STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. BARGAGLI, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-87. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildliuse (Coecid@), 1912. INSECTS OF EUCALYPTUS. 97

EUCALYPTUS; GUM. (Eucalyptus spp.) Valuable Australian trees recently introduced into California. A. BETTER KNOWN EUCALYPTUS INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Mictis profana Fabricius. (Gum-tree Bug. Coreidee; Hemiptera.) Hosts: Eucalyptus viminalis, Acacia decurrens, A. mollissima, orange. other citrus
fruits. Injury: Sucks the juices from tender twigs, causing death of the new parts. Description: A large brown bug about an inch long, with long sucking proboscis,
with acute teeth at posterior corners of thorax. Greatly resembles Leptoglossus. The immature stages are soft and marked with yellow. Distribution: Australia,
Frencu, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, pt. 4, 1909, pp. 68-71,
Pl. me Stigmodera heros Gehin. (She-Oak Root Borer. Buprestide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: She-oak and Bull-oak (Casuarina); also Eucalyptus. Adults frequent
flowers of Melaleuca, etc. Injury: Tunnels in the lower portions of the trunk of trees. Description and biology: Beetles large yellowish brown with dark blackish legs. Larvee large yellowish white with powerful jaws. The eggs are laid in areas cleared
by the female in the butts of the trees. The larve bore in and down through the
wood for several feet. Distribution: Australia. FrENcH, 0. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, pt’ 5, 1911, pp. 114-116,
pl. 121. \

Phoracantha tricuspis Newman; Phoracantha recurva Newman. (Yellow-box Borers. Cerambycidz; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Eucalyptus viminalis. Injury: Very destructive borers. Description: Beetles light brown with darker markings on the elytra. The head
and thorax are very dark brown. Pup yellowish white. Larve bore in the wood. Eggs are deposited in crevices in the bark. Distribution: Victoria. ;
Frencu, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, pt. 5, 1911, pp. 70-73,

1. 112.
y Distichocera macleayi Newman. (Feathery-horned Yellow-box Borer. Cerambycide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Eucalyptus stuartiana, E. viminalis. Injury: Bores in the wood. Description: Female beetle reddish brown in color, larger than the male, which is
black with beautiful featherlike antenne. Pupa yellowish white. Larva dull,
yellowish white, unusually tapering at apex. The adults frequent the flowers of the
Leptospermum bushes. Distribution: Australia. Frencn, 0. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, pt. 5, 1911, pp. 96998,

pl. 107. 55266—17——7

98 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Tryphocharia mastersi Pascoe. (Masters’ Gum Borer. Cerambycids. Coleoptera.) Hosts: Eucalyptus amygdalina, E. globulus. Injury: Bores in the wood, the larve taking several years for development. Description: Adult over an inch long, with long antennx, brown, with broad yellow
elytral band; thorax laterally dentate. Pupa elongate white. Larva cylindrical
yellowish, with small head and broader prothorax, chitinous. Distribution: Australia. Frencu, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, pt. 4, 1909, pp. 98-101,
pl. 76. Bimia femoralis Saunders. (Apple-gum Borer. Cerambycide; Coleoptera.) Host: Eucalyptus stuartiana. Injury: Bores in the trunk, causing much damage. A severe scar appears on the
surface of the bark where the burrow commences,

Description: The sexes are different in appearance, the male having antenne much
larger than the body; the female antenne considerably shorter than the body. Elytra
with yellow band at base, remainder of elytra brown. Head, thorax and tip of ab-
domen yellow in female; head and center of prothorax brown in male. Larva of
female much broader, less attenuate, and with larger prothorax than in adult female. Distribution: Australia. Frencu, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, pt. 4, 1909, pp. 110-113,
pl. 78. Strongylorhinus ochraceus Schaum. (Red Gum-tree Weevil. Curculionids; Coleoptera.) Host: Eucalyptus melliodora. Injury: Larvee bore in twigs causing gall-like deformation. Very injurious. Description: A reddish-brown weevil about 12 mm. long with short, stout beak. Larva curved, legless, white, makes a cone shaped burrow in the wood. Distribution: Australia. Frenou, C. Handbook of Injurious Insects of Victoria, pt. 4, 1909, pp. 128-130,

1. 82.

w B. OTHER IMPORTANT EUCALYPTUS INSECTS. MEMIPTERA,
Coccidze:

Armored—
Aspidiotus (Aonidiella) miniat# Green; Australia; Eucalyptus miniata. Aspidiotus alatus Froggatt; Australia; Eucalyptus rostrata. Aspidiotus confusus Froggatt; Australia. Aspidiotus tasmaniz Green; Australia. Chionaspis frenchi Green; Australia. Lecaniodiaspis converus Froggatt; Australia. Lecaniodiaspis frenchi Froggatt; Australia. Lecaniodiaspis newmanni Froggatt; Australia. Unarmored—
A piomor pha attenuata Froggatt; Australia. Apiomorpha bduerleni Froggatt; Australia,
A piomor pha calycina Tepper; South Australia; Eucalyptus dumosa, E. oleosa. Apiomor pha conica Froggatt; Australia; Eucalyptus viminalis, E. uncinata,
Apiomorpha dupler Schrader; Australia. Apiomorpha ellipsoidalis Tepper; Australia. Apiomorpha floralis Froggatt; Australia. A piomorpha helmsii Fuller; Australia. Apiomorpha karschi Riibsaamen; Australia. A piomor pha maliformis Fuller; Australia; Eucalyptus patens. Apiomorpha minor Froggatt; New South Wales; Eucalyptus hemastoma. INSECTS OF EUCALYPTUS. 99

Coccidwe—Continued. Unarmored—Continued. Apiomorpha munita Schrader; Australia; Eucalyptus robusta, E. siderophloia. A piomor pha ovicola Schrader; Australia; Eucalyptus hemastoma, E. gracilis, E. leucozylon, E. rostrata. Apiomor pha ovicoloides Tepper; Australia; Eucalyptus incrassata. Apiomorpha pedunculata Fuller; Australia. A piomor pha pharetrata Schrader; New South Wales; Eucalyptus sieberiana, E. corymbosa, E. Raieiaial
Apiomorpha pileata Schrader; New South Wales. Apiomorpha pomiformis Froggatt; Australia; Eucalyptus rostrata. Apiomorpha rugosa Froggatt; Australia. Apiomorpha sessilis Froggatt; Australia. Apiomorpha sloanei Froggatt; Australia. Apiomorpha strombylosa Tepper; Australia; Eucalyptus incrassata. Apiomor pha thorntoni Froggatt; Australia. Apiomor pha umbellata Froggatt; Australia. A piomorpha urnalis Tepper; New South Wales; Eucalyptus uncinata, E. gracilis, E. melliodora, E. poly-
anthemos. Apiomorpha variabilis Froggatt; Australia; Eucalyptus piperita. Ascelis attenuata Froggatt; Australia; Eucalyptus piperita. Ascelis echiniformis Fuller; West Australia; Eucalyptus tessellaris. Ascelis premollis Schrader; Australia; Eucalyptus corymbosa. Ascelis schraderi Froggatt; Australia; Eucalyptus corymbosa. Ceronema caudata Froggatt; Australia; Eucalyptus robusta. Ctenochiton eucalypti Maskell; Australia; Eucalyptus siderophloia. Eriococcus confusus Maskell; Australia; Eucalyptus viminalis. Eriococcus coriaceus Maskell; Australia. Eriococcus eucalypti Maskell; Australia, Tasmania; Eucalyptus diversicolor. Eriococcus simplex Maskell; Australia. Eriococcus crofti Froggatt; Australia; Eucalyptus piperita. Eriococcus gregarius Froggatt; Australia, New Zealand. Eriococcus irregularis Froggatt; Australia; Eucalyptus piperita. Eriococcus serratilobis Green; Australia; Eucalyptus gracilis. Eriococcus picta Froggatt; Australia. Eriococcus tesselatus Froggatt; Australia. Eriococcus spiniger Maskell; Australia. Eriococcus tepperi Maskell; Australia, Tasmania; Eucalyptus globulus. Opisthoscelis conica Fuller; Australia. Opisthoscelis fibularis Froggatt; Australia. Opisthoscelis globosa Riibsaamen; New South Wales; Eucalyptus capitellata. Opisthoscelis maculata Froggatt; New South Wales; Eucalyptus gracilis, E. leucorylon. Opisthoscelis mammularis Froggatt; Australia. Opisthoscelis maskelli Froggatt; Australia. Opisthoscelis nigra Froggatt; Australia. Opisthoscelis pisiformis Froggatt; New South Wales, Australia; Eucalyptus melliodora, E. robusta, E.
resinifera, E. piperita. Opisthoscelis serrata Froggatt; Australia. Opisthoscelis spinosa Froggatt; Australia; Eucalyptus siderophloia. Opisthoscelis subrotunda Schrader; Australia; Eucalyptus capitellata. Opisthoscelis verrucula Froggatt; Australia. Pseudococcus lobulatus Maskell; Australia; Eucalyptus globulus. ISOPTERA. Termitidz. Termes australis Hagen; Australia. (See Apple.) + LEPIDOPTERA. Arctiidae. Nola metallopa and Spilosoma fuscinula; Australia; attacks the foliage. Termissa nivosa; Australia; larvee found under the bark in August. Bombycide. Ocinara lewinii Lewin; Australia; attacks folia gC. Geometridz. Crypsiphona occultaria and Gastrophora henricaria; Australia; defoliate. Mnesampela privata Gn. ; Australia; defoliator. 100 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Laslocampide. Odonestis australasiz Fabricius; Australia; defoliator. Lymantriidx. Teara contraria Walker; and Trichetra marginalis, Australia; defoliators

Hepiolidz. Charagia lignivora Lewin; Australia. (See Apple.) DIPTERA. Itonididz (Cecidomylidz). Diplosis ewcalypti Skuse, D. paralis Skuse, and Lasioptera miscella Skuse; Australia; breed in twigs. LITERATURE. SoraverR, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. Froaeatt, W. W. Australian Insects. EUGENIA spp. (Family Myrtacez.) Fruit-bearing trees of South America, etc., cultivated in the Southern States and

California. DIPTERA. Trypetide. .
Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks Eugenia braziliensis, FE. jambos, E. malaccensis, E. uniflora. (See Fruit.) Dacus ferrugineus Fabricius; India, etc., attacks fruit of Eugenia malaccensis. (See Fruit.) FIG; ASSAM RUBBER; BANYAN. (Ficus spp. Family Urticacez.) This is a very large genus of valuable plants, including the fig (Ficus carica), the
India or Assam rubber plant (F. elastica), and the banyan (fF. benghalensis). Many
varieties of the fig are prized for their fruit. The India rubber of commerce is derived
from F. elastica. Other varieties are popular in conservatories. A. BETTER KNOWN FIG INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Sinoxylon sudanicum Lesne. (Fig stem-boring beetle. Bostrychide; Coleoptera.) Host: Fig. Injury: Bores in the twigs of young trees. Description and biology: Adult beetle, brown with basal half of elytra tinged with
yellow, about one-quarter inch long. The apex of the elytra is concave bitubercu-
late. The adult bores in twigs near the buds and girdles the twig under the bark,
laying its eggs in the outer portion which soon falls to the ground. The species is
especially dangerous to nursery stock just planted, as it does not usually attack strong
healthy trees. Distribution: Sudan. Kine, Harotp H. Fourth report. Wellcome Tropical Research Lab. Khartoum,

vol. B, Gen’l Science, p. 140, pl. 9, fig. 1. Colobogaster quadridentata Fabricius. (Family Buprestide; Coleoptera.) Host: Cultivated fig (Ficus carica). Injury: Injury occasioned by galleries made by larve in trunk and twigs. Liable
to be introduced in cuttings or plants. FIG INSECTS. 101

Description and biology: Adult beetle 25-30 mm. long, 11-12 mm. broad; blue black,
with small points of metallic green. Practically entire life spent in plant. Distribution: Brazil. Bonpar, GrEGorIO: Os insectos damninhos no Agricultura, 1913, p. 4. Batocera boisduvali Hope. (Fig-tree borer. Family Cerambycide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Ficus macrophylla, F. australis. Injury: Bores in stems and branches of damaged and freshly fallen trees. Adult: A beautiful grayish-green beetle, about 2 inches long, with a row of white
marks on the elytra; very strong, heavy antenne; prothorax laterally armed with
very strong spine on each side. Pupa light brown. Larva about 3 inches long, very
robust, head black. Distribution: Queensland. Frencg, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1911, pt. 5, pp. 134-137,
gl. 126, Teniotes scalarts Fabricius. (Family Cerambycide; Coleoptera.) Host: Cultivated fig (Ficus carica). Injury: Injury due to galleries made by larve. Description and biology: Adult beetle 15-30 mm. in length; general color obscure,
nearly black, with spots and streaks of yellow; triangular spot between the eyes,
and behind the eyes is situated a halfi-moon-like spot. Practically entire life is spent
in the plant. Distribution: Brazil. Bonpar, GREGORIO: Os insectos damninhos no Agricultura, 1913, p. 9, figure. Heilipus bonelli Boheman. (Brazil Fig Borer. Curculionide; Coleoptera.) Host: Cultivated fig (Ficus carica). Injury: Larve make galleries in trunks and branches of fig. Liable to be intro-
duced on plants or cuttings. Description and biology: Adult weevil 12 mm. long, with characteristic designs on
thorax and elytra, color light coffee brown, with symmetrical yellow spots. Larvee
and pupe white. Practically the whole life cycle is spent in the tree. Distribution: Brazil. Bonpar, GrREG@orIO. Os insectos damninhos no Agricultura, 1913, p. 11. Figures
injury, larve, pupa, and adult. Hylesinus porcatus Chapuis. (The Fig-Branch Borer. Scolytide; Coleoptera.) Fost: Fig. Injury: Occasioned by tunneling of insect. Liable to be imported in cuttings or
plants. Description and biology: Adult beetle short, thickset, rounded, general color black,
varying to reddish brown in immature specimens; head and thorax slightly rugose
and lightly covered with fine hairs. Breeds in galleries in twigs, entering just above
abud. (See plate xx.) Distribution: New South Wales. Froeearr, W. W. Agric, Gaz. New South Wales, 1899, vol. 10, pt. 4, p. 268. 102 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. B. OTHER IMPORTANT FICUS INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccide:
Armored—
Aspidiotus (Aonidia) planchonioides Green; Ceylon (Botanic Gardens). * Aspidiotus (Aonidiella) cocotiphagus Marlatt; Cuba. Aspidiotus (Aonidiella) subcuticularis Green; Australia; Ficus orbicularis. Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) personatus Comstock; West Indies; Mexico; British Guiana; England
(in greenhouses). Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) africanus Marlatt; South Africa. Aspidiotus ( Morganella) maskelli Cockerell; Bermuda. *Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) articulatus Morgan; Jamaica. Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) clavigera Cockerell; Honolulu. Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) silvatica Lindinger; German East Africa ,Kamerun; Ficus indica. Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) trilobitiformis Green; East India, Ceylon, Mauritius, Japan, Brazil; Ficus
scandens (see text fig. 32.) Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) obsita Cockerell and Robinson; Philippines; Ficus caudatifolia. Schizaspis lobata Cockerell and Robinson; Ficus nota. Chionaspis manni Green; India. * Conchaspis angreci Cockerell; established in Florida, and has doubtless been imported from Mexico
and Jamaica on numerous occasions. Scale of female approximately circular, conical, apex bluntly
pointed, radiating from apex are six to eight strong ridges or carine. Diaspis bromelix (Kern); Mexico. Hemichionaspis fici Green; Bengal; Ficus glomerata, F. carica. Hemichionaspis minima Green; India. Lepidosaphes ficifolii Berlese; Algeria, Italy; Ficus carica. Lepidosaphes mexicana Cockerell; Mexico. Lepidosaphes minima Newstead; Algeria; Ficus carica. Unarmored—

Anomalococcus cremastogastri Green; Ceylon; Ficus religiosa. Asterolecanium pustulans Cockerell; Jamaica, Porto Rico, Antigua, Brazil, British Guiana, Grenada,
Montserrat; fig. Ceroplastes ceriferus Anderson; Ceylon, Ficus walkeriana. P

Ceroplastes ficus Newstead; German East Africa; test of adult female hemispherical, thin, semitrans
parent shaded with gray and brown. Ceroplastes gowdeyi Newstead; Uganda Protectorate. .

Ceroplastes myrice Linnieus; Greece; fig. Ceroplastes quadrilineatus Newstead; British East Africa; test of adult provided with a pair of large
divergent pyriform bodies, four white lines across dorsum. Ceroplastes rubens Maskell; Australia, Hawaii, Japan; Ficus macrophylla. Ceroplastes rusci Linnaeus; Europe, British Guiana, Algeria, Australia, Japan; adult female covered
with wax in the form of plates; attacks Ficus elastica and F. carica. Ceroplastes townsendi percrassus Cockerell; Mexico; adult female covered with wax of a faint yel-
lowish tint without division into plates. Ceroputo yucce Coquillett; Mexico. Drosicha maskelli Cockerell; Japan, China, Java. Eriococcus crispus Fonscolombe; France. Eriococcus lagerstremiz Kuwana; Japan. Icerya xgyptiaca Douglas; Egypt; adult female forms a white waxy secretion; along the margin of
the body are fragile white processes. Icerya palmeri Riley & Howard; Guatemala. Icerya maxima Newstead; Africa. Icerya seychellarum Westwood; Natal, Africa. (See Citrus.) Lecaniodiaspis africana Newstead; Egypt. Lichtensia lutea Cockerell; Mexico; fig. Monophlebus stebbingi octocaudata Green; India; Ficus carica, F. benghalensis, F. infectoria, F. rédigiosa,
F. glomerata; adult male provided with four fleshy tassels on each side of the abdomen. Neolecanium plebeium Cockerell; Mexico. Paralecanium expansum Green; India, Australia; Ficus retusa. Pseudococcus ficus Signoret; France, Calabria. Pseudococcus setosus Hempel; Brazil. Pseudococcus virgatus Cockerell; Africa. Pulvinaria ficus Hempel; Brazil. Pulvinaria jacksoni Newstead; W. Africa. Pulvinaria mammez Maskell, Natal; fig. *Saissetia nigra Nietner; Hawaii, Ceylon, West Indies, India, Ficus glomerata. INSECTS OF FIG, FIR, FLAX. 103

Coccidz—Continued. Unarmored—Continued. Tachardia fici Green; India; Ficus religiosa. Tachardia lacca Kerr; British Guiana, India, Ceylon; Ficus elastica, F. carica, F. glomerata, F. indica,
F. infectoria, F. laccifera, F. nervosa, F. obtusifolia, F. rcligiosa, F. rumphii, F. tjakela, F. comosa,
F. cordifolia, F. cunia, F. palmata. Vinsonia stellifera Walker; British Guiana; Ficus altissima. (See Coffee.) Pentatomide. Peltophora pedicillata Kirby; Australia. (See Plum.) COLEOPTERA. Buprestidz. Lampra assamensis Stebbing; India; on Ficus elastica. Chrysomelidz. Crioceris impressa Fabricius; India; feeds on foliage of Ficus elastica. Podontia 14-punctata Linnzeus; India; a defoliating leaf beetle on Ficus elastica. Cerambycide. Xoanodera regularis Gahan; India; bores between the bast and sapwood of Ficus clastica. Xylotrechus gahani Stebbing; India; bores in the branches of Ficus elastica. Batoccra rubra Linnzeus; India; bores in the trunk of fig trees (Ficus carica), causing much injury. (See pl. X XI.) . Batocera albofasciata DeGeer; India, Java, Kamerun; an important borer in Ficus elastica. Batocera frenchi; Australia; bores in native fig trees. Olenecamptus bilobus Fabricius; India; bores in Ficus rumphii, F. glomerata, and F. roxburghii. Phryneta spinator Fabricius; East Africa; bores in Ficus elastica. Phryneta conradti Kolbe, East Africa; bores in Ficus clastica. Petrognatha gigas Fabricius var. spinosa; West and East Africa; attacks Ficus spp. Rosenbergia megacephala; Australia; bores in fig trees. \

Curculionidze . Curculio amenus Fabricius (Balaninus); Australia; breeds in the fruit of Ficus rubiginosa. Alcides scenicus Faust; India; in Ficus elastica. Scolytidz. Diamerus fici Blandford; India; attacks nursery stock of Ficus clastica. Hypoborus ficus Erichson; Europe; galleries in bark of figs. : DIPTERA. Trypetide. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks fruit of Ficus carica. (See Fruit.) LEPIDOPTERA. Bombycide. Gunda sikkima; India; attacks foliage of Ficus elastica. Ocinara dilectula Walker and 0. signifera Walker; Java; attack foliage of Ficus bergmanniana and

F, elastica. LITERATURE. STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. STEBBING, E. P. A Manual of Forest Zoology for India, 1908. SORAUVER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. FIR. (Picea spp:, Abies spp. Family Pinacez.) Tall, pyramidal, evergreen trees growing in the northern and mountainous regions
of the northern hemisphere. The wood is soft and perishable, but valuable products,
such as balsam, are obtained from the exudations. For convenience the insect
pests are arranged under Conifers. FLAX. (Linum usitatissimum. Family Linacee.) A plant of Europe and America cultivated for its oil-bearing seed and fibrous
stem. ,

104 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Phalonia epilinana Zell. (Conchylis.) (Flax Capsule Worm. Family Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Flax (Linum), Solidago, etc. Injury: Eats out the green capsules of flax. Description and biology: Moth with forewings clay yellow with darker band and
margin. Larva whitish yellow, sparsely pubescent, head and thoracic shield black-
ish; 6.5 mm. long. Pupates in the larval burrow. Distribution: South Russia. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 292. FORESTS. BETTER KNOWN GENERAL DEFOLIATORS. Under this heading are grouped a number of important insects known as forest
defoliators. Several of these have been imported into the United States. Fia, 54.—Cockchafer ( Melolontha vulgaris); Adult, pupa, larva and its attack on root crop. (Lorenz.) Melolontha vulgaris Linn. (Cockchafer. Family Scarabeeide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Adults feed on leaves of various trees; grubs on roots. Injury: Often serious. Description and biology: Adult, length often 25 mm. ; head and thorax black;
elytra brown, each with four raised, longitudinal lines; hairy; sides of body with
alternate black and white patches; occurs in May and June. Pupa pale brown. This stage is passed deep in ground. Larva, length 37 mm., white, fleshy; caudal
end swollen; head and legs brown. This stage lasts three years. Zggs, large, shape
of hemp seed, creamy white (see text fig. 54). Distribution: Europe. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 431. “

U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XX. A Fic).Borer. Fig-borer (Hylesinus porcatus): Adult and injury. (Frcggatt.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. . ‘ PLATE XX,

 

 

A Fia Borer. Fig-borer (Batocera rubra): Adults and larva. (Stebbing.) FOREST DEFOLIATORS. 105

Anjsopteryx zscularia Schiffermiller. (March Moth. Geometrids; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Whitethorn, blackthorn, apple, plum, pear, oak, linden, elm, maple, walnut’
and chestnut. Injury: Occasionally serious pest. Defoliation. Description and biology: Adult male, wing expanse 30-37 mm. ; forewings grayish
brown, with dark and pale transverse lines, small brown spot near upper border of
each wing; hind wings pale gray, dark line more or less continued from outer line on each
forewing; female, wingless, grayish to
grayish brown, with fan-like tail of hairs. Appears from February to April (Eng- _
land). Pupatesin ground. Larva, length
25mm. ; bright green, or green tinged with
yellow; on back, a narrow dark-green line
edged with creamy white or gray; on each
side three pale lines; head uniformly
green; matures by end of June. Eggs de-
posited in a partial band of 50 to 200
around twig; covered with hairs; hatch
in April. (See text fig. 55.) Distribution: Europe. THEoBatp, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit,

1909, p. 61. Cheimatobia brumata Linnzus. (Winter Moth. Geometridee; Lepi-
doptera.) Hosts: Fruit and forest trees (except
conifers) and shrubs. Injury: One of the most harmful and
widespread of fruit-tree pests. Defolia-
tion. Also attacks fruit and flowers. Fig. 55.—The March moth (A nisopteryr aescularia):

Description and biology: Adult male, peg male; b, eggs on twig; c, d, female moths. wing expanse 30 mm. ; forewings grayish ec)
brown to brown, marked with darker transverse wavy lines; hind wings of paler
uniform color; female practically wingless, having very short, useless, vestigial
wings, gray to grayish brown in color. Moths appear from October to middle of

 

 

 

 

Fig. 56.—The winter moth ( Cheimatobia brumata): Adult, larva, pupa, egg. (Lorenz.) January (England). Larva, length 30 mm. ; pale, yellowish or dark green, with pale
lines along the sides of body; in June drops to ground to form pupal cell. Eggs
deposited on twigs, small branches, etc. ; slightly elongate and truncated at ends;
at first yellowish green, later brick red. (See text fig. 56.) Distribution: Europe, Greenland. THEOBALD, F. V. Insects Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 50. 106 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Hibernia defoliaria Clerck. (Mottled Umber Moth. Geometridee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Apple and other fruits; forest trees. Injury: Great damage done occasionally by defoliation; sometimes attacks fruit
Description and biology: Adult male, wing expanse 44 mm. ; forewings normally
pale dull yellowish, mottled with
yellowish brown and dusted with
brown; hind wings more uniform
yellowish gray, with minute darker
specks and a dark spot on each
(color variable; many melanistic
forms); female, wingless, plump, of
various shades of yellowish gray
and speckled with dark brown or
black. Appears from October to
February (England). Pupates in
soil. Larva length 37 mm. ; chest-
nut brown above; sides pale
creamy yellow to bright yellow;
venter pale yellow; spiracles
pale with dark rims. Eggs de-
posited on buds and twigs, in dark
crevices and on pruned surfaces,
hatching in April. (See text
fig. 57.) Distribution: Europe. Fic. 57.—Mottled umber moth (Hibernaria defoliaria): TueEopatp, F. V. Insect Pests of
Adult, larva, egg masses. (Sorauer.) Fruit, 1909, p. 58. Malacosoma neustria Linnzus. (Lackey Moth. Lasiocampide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Fruit trees, oak, elm, hawthorn, rose, poplar, hornbeam. Injury: Strips trees of foliage. Description and biology: Adult male, wing expanse 25 mm., female 30-35mm. Front
wings reddish brown, ochreous
or brick red with two trans-
verse lines, pale or dusky;
hind wings paler than front
wings. Moth fliesinJuly and
August. (England.) Cocoon
pale white or yellow, loose, of
silk mixed with hairs. Pupa
dark brown, stage lasting 2 or 3
weeks. Larva about 37 mm. long, bluish-gray in color with
a pure white dorsal stripe;
three orange red stripes along
each side and between the
two lowest of these a broad
blue stripe with little black Fig. 58.—Lackey moth (Malacocoma neustria): Adults, larva,
specks on it. These linesare eggs. (Lorenz.) separated by black, and black
spotted with blue; a narrow dark line is on each side of the dorsal white stripe and
two black spots on head and on first thoracic segment. The whole larva bears rusty
hairs. Larvee feed under tents in early stages; later they retire to tents only at
nights and during dull weather. Eggs are deposited in rings containing from 40 to
200 each, around twigs, and hatch about end of April. (See text fig. 58.) U.S Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXII

 

Jovegers pins

Alte: Brine

DIFFERENT STAGES OF THE BROWN-TAIL MOTH (EUPROCTIS CHRYSORRHOEA). Winter nest at upper left: male and female adults, lower right; cocoon in leaves, upper right;
male and female chrysalides above, male at left; full grown larva in center, somewhat reduced:
young larve at its left; egg mass removed from leaf, showing single ezgs at lower le‘t; femaie
ovipositing on leaf; egg mass also on same leaf. (Howard and Fiske.) FOREST DEFOLIATORS. 107

Distribution: Europe, except polar region; present also in western Asia, Siberia,
China, and Japan. THeopatp, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 30. Monvittot, L. Les Insectes Nuisibles, 1891, p. 22. Nissi, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, p. 342. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. p. 378. Dasychira pudibunda Linnezus. (Redtail Moth. Lymantriide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Beech, hornbeam, oak, alder, buckthorn, hawthorn, blackthorn, hazel, rose,
birch, elm, linden, maple. Injury: General defoliator. Description and biology: Moth wing expanse 38-60 mm. ; iemale larger than male;
forewings whitish-gray, with two dark cross lines and dark flecked fringe; hind wings
dirty gray with washed-out bar; body reddish white or grayish in front, whiter behind. Larva 40-45 mm. long, greenish yellow with black cross bars; yellow brushes on fourth
to seventh segments; eleventh segment with a red hair pencil. Larvee feed on foliage
June to October. Pupate on ground or in brush. Pupa brownish black, abdomen
reddish brown, clothed with yellow hairs, in silken cocoon. Hibernates as pupa. gs in clusters of 50 or more on twigs. Distribution: Europe, China, Japan. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 384. Hess, Ricuarp. Der Forstschutz, vol. 2, 1900, p. 91-97, fig. 57. Gutnaux, G. Entomologie et Parasitologie Agricoles, 1904, p. 392. HeEwnscHet, G. A.O. Die schidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 329. * Euproctis chrysorrhoea Linneus. (Brown-tail Moth. Lymantriide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Beech, elm, hornbeam, maple, oak, poplar, blackthorn, hawthorn, rose,
willow. Injury: General defoliator; very serious. Description and injury: Moth, white, posterior part of body reddish brown; wing ex-
panse 30-35 mm. Larve 30-38 mm. long, brownish gray, with light brown hairs. The larve feed on foliage under heavy white webs. (See plate xx1r.) Distribution: Palearctic regions (Europe, Asia). Has been introduced into the
northeastern United States. AnNnuAL Reports State ForEsTER OF MASSACHUSETTS. * Porthetria dispar Linneus (Lymantria). (Gipsy Moth. Lymantriide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Beech, elm, hornbeam, linden, maple, oak, poplar, willow, alder, birch. Injury: General defoliator. Easily transported in egg stage on bark of nursery
stock. A very serious pest. Description and biology: Male, moth 35-50 mm. ; forewings gray brown with dark
brown, strongly notched transverse stripes and dark flecks on fringe; hind wings
brown, with dark border and light fringe. Female, moth 37-62 mm., wings white
with dark fringe spots; the dark transverse stripes in outer part of forewings often
disappearing. Larva with large head; brown, hairy; three fine yellow longitudinal
lines; the first five segments with two blue warts each and on the remaining segments
two red warts each; length 7 cm. (See Frontispiece.) Distribution: Europe, Asia, New England States. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 380-382. Forsusu, E. H., and Fernatp, C.H. The Gypsy Moth, Mass., St. Bd. Agric., 1896,
495 pp. 108 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. > Lymantria monacha Linnzus. (Nun Moth. Lymantriide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Beech, birch, elm, poplar, oak, maple, linden, hazel, willow, pine, spruce,
mountain ash, buckthorn, bunch cherry, spindle tree, hornbeam, larch, white spruce. Injury: Attacks the foliage of many trees and is sometimes very serious. As the
eggs are said to be laid under the bark, it is very likely to be shipped in nursery stock. Description and biology: Moth, with forewings white, with strong notched black
lines; hind wings grayish white; fringe flecked with black; abdomen reddish with
black bands. Zarve brown with six blue and red warts on dorsum; on second seg-
ment a black, blue, and white spot; three last segments flecked with black; 4-5 cm. long. The species is quite variable in color. The larva is polyphagous, attacking
foliage; the larve are gregarious and feed within a web. Distribution: Europe. Specimens were collected at Brooklyn, N. Y., in 1902. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, pp. 379-380. Nissin, Otro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 346-368, figs. 291-298. Porthesia similis Fuessly. (The Swan Moth. Lymantriide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Beech, birch, elm, hornbeam, linden, mountain ash, maple, oak, willow, rose. Injury: General defoliator. Liahle to importation in the larval stage on the bark
of nursery stock. Description and biology: Moth, white with a few black spots on inner margin of fore-
wing; abdomen clad with golden yellow hairs. Larva black, clothed with grayish-
black hairs. The larvee feed singly on foliage and hibernate singly under bark, etc. The eggs are laid in a mass on undersides of leaves and covered with yellow hairs
from the moth. Pupation occurs in a thin white silken cocoon. Hess, Ricnarp. Der Forstschutz, vol. 2, 1900, pp. 102, 103. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 382. Phalera bucephala Linnzus. (Buff Tip Moth; Moon Spot Moth.» Notodontide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Deciduous fruits; cobs, filberts, nuts, birch, beech, elm, rose, poplar, willow,
linden, oak, alder. Injury: Defoliates plants when abundant. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 62-70 mm. ; forewings ash gray with
a transverse streak of reddish brown near base and another of dark brown near apex
of wing, marked at tip with a large pale buff or ochraceous lunular spot. Larva about
50 mm. long when grown; the ground color dark yellow, with a broad dark stripe
down the back; along each side are three black lines interrupted with yellow or
orange rings. Eggs very convex, flat beneath, pearly white, with a basal green band
and dark spot on apex. The insect spends the winter as a pupa in the soil, moths
appearing in spring, ovipositing on undersurface of twigs or on foliage. Distribution: Europe, except Polar region, Siberia, etc. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 292. Soraver,P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 8, p. 387, fig. 245. Nussum, Otto. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 1913, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 828, 324,

fig. 276. ’

FRUITS. BETTER KNOWN GENERAL FRUIT-TREE INSECTS. Under this heading are grouped a number of very important insects which attack
many different kinds of fruits, especially the fruit flies. FRUIT INSECTS. 109

Aleurodicus cocois Curtis. (Coconut White Fly. Aleyrodide; Hemiptera.) Host: Coconut, banana, guava, “‘jicaco,’’ Coccoloba uvifera. Injury: Serious pest in many parts of tropical America. Description and biology: Adult varying in size and wing markings, wings marked
with two dusky patches; pupal case varies in size and is surrounded by a double row
of bristlelike hairs usually 13 to a side, also has one pair of long caudal hairs. Egg
about 0.29 mm. long and 0.11 mm. wide, with pedicel arising from side. -

Distribution: Barbados, Trinidad, Venezuela, Brazil, Mexico, Isthmian Canal
Zone, Yucatan. Bautou, H. A. Insect Pests of the Lesser Antilles, 1912, p. 105.
: Nysius vinitor Bergroth. (The Rutherglen Bug. Lygzeeidee; Hemiptera.) Hosts: Grapes, cherries, plums, peach, grasses, etc.-

Injury: Stated to be one of the most destructive plant bugs in Australia. «

Description and biology: Adult 4-5 mm. long; dull browr to gray in color, with
silvery-gray wings; antenne barely two-thirds length of body and covered with hairs. Breeds in grass lands and swarms over field crops and fruit trees in countless millious. Distribution: Australia. (See plate xxm1.) Freneu, 0. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1891, pt. 1, p. 105. Froeaatt, W. W. Australian Insects, 1907, p. 334. > Heliothrips rubrocinctus Giard. (The Red-Banded Thrips. Thysanoptera.) Hosts: Avocado (Persea gratissima), mango (Mangifera indica), cashew, guava
(Psidium guajava), cacao (Theobroma cacao), Liberian coffee (Coffea liberica), wild
guava (Anacardium occidentale), roses, Mexican almond or umbrella tree (Terminalia
catappa), kola (Sterculia acuminata). Injury: Larvee and adults feed on both surfaces of foliage. May be introduced on
living plants. Description and biology: Egg stage varies from 6 to 17 days, larval stage from 6 to 20
days. Adult female about 1.11 mm. long and quite stout, color dark brown or black. A red band is evident in the first and second larval stages, pupa and prepupa. (See
pl. x.) Distribution: Guadeloupe, French West Indies; Grenada, St. Vincent, St. Lucia,
British West Indies; Trinidad, Tobago, Virgin Islands, Mauritius, Ceylon, Uganda. In addition to the above it is reported from Florida and was doubtless introduced. Russe, H.M. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Entom. Bull. 99, pt. 2, 1912. Phyliopertha borticoia Linnzus. (Scaraheide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Fruit trees and herbaceous plants. Injury: Destroys foliage and roots. Description and biology: Adult length 8-11 mm. ; body depressed, hairy; head and
prothorax shining green; elytra golden brown or chestnut; ventral parts black. Ap-
pears in May and June (Italy). Feeds on leaves. The larva is a root feeder. Sil-
vestri states that the adults and larve of this insect feed on leaves and roots of fruit
trees and herbaceous plants. Distribution: Europe. Sivestri, F. Dispense di Entomologie Agraria, 1911, p. 311. 110 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Capnodis tenebrionis Linnzus. (Buprestidz; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Various fruit trees. Injury: To leaves and roots. Description and biology: Adult length 15-22 mm. ; color opaque black, with pro-
thorax sparsely dusted with cinereous; feeds on leaves. Larva elongate, whitish,
covered with a fine pubesence; feeds in
roots and trunk beneath cortex. Eggs de-
posited during August and September on
crown of trees. (See text fig. 59.) Distribution: Southern Europe. Sitvesre1, F. Dispense di Entomologie

Agraria, 1911, p. 335. Phylloblus oblongus Linneus. (Oblong Leaf Weevil. Brachyrhinide;
Coleoptera.) Hosts: Fruit trees, bushes. Injury: Frequent. Adults attack young
buds and leaves. Larvee feed on roots of
various plants. Description and biology: Adult length 4-5
mm. ; black; elytra covered with brown
scales with reddish tinge or pale gray, bor-
ders dark; head, thorax, and elytra covered
with gray pubescence; legs brown or yel-
lowish. Occurs throughout May and June. Pupates in spring in earth. Larva‘a
white footless grub, slightly hairy; head brown. Winters as larva. Eggs are depos-
ited in ground. Distribution: Europe. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruits, 1909, p. 119. Fig. 59.—Fruit tree borer ( Capnodis tenebrionis):
Adult, larva. (Silvestri.) Biston hirtarius Clerck. (Cherry Spinner. Geometride; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Stone fruits, orchard trees. Injury: Defoliation. Description and biology: Adult in both sexes winged; whitish, dusted with black-
ish gray and obliquely marked with blackish brown. .Occurs in March and April
(Germany). Pupates in the earth. Larva, length 35 mm. ; ash gray or brown in
color, with longitudinal dark lines; prothorax, tubercles and two spots on each seg-
ment yellow; occurs irom May until September. (See text fig. 60.) Distribution: Germany, northern Europe. Sorauer, P. Handbuch der PAlanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 339. Biston pomonarius Htibner. (Geometride; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Fruit trees and oaks. Injury: Defoliation. Description and biology: Adult, male wings grayish Pee on border blackish, dusted
with gold, with dark oblique lines; female, with wing stumps, black, sprinkled with

FRUIT INSECTS. 111

red and with gray and white hairs. Occurs in April and May (Germany). Pupates
in the earth. Larva, length 40 mm. ; gray, with golden, longitudinal lines; oceurs
May to July. Distribution: Northern Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 339. Hibernia rupicapraria Hiibner. (Early Moth. Geometride; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Plum, thorns, fruit trees. Injury: “No record of serious damage.’”’ (Theobald.) Description and biology: Adult male wing expanse 30 mm. ; forewings gray brown,
with broad dark area across middle, edges dark and notched; hind wings whitish
gray, with a dark central spot above middle and crossed by an indistinct gray streak;
female, almost wingless, stumps of wings grayish; occurs in January and February

 

Fic. 60.—Cherry spinner (Biston hirtarius): a, Adult; female; b, adult male; c, larva; d, pupa. (Sorauer.) (England). Larva bluish green with pale green back, front of each segment darkened,
and a white line on each side; pupates in soil. Distribution; England, Europe (except Russia), Asia Minor. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruits. 1909, p. 362.
; Gastropacha quercifolia Linnezus. (Lappet Moth. Lasiocampide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Apple, plum, pear, hawthorn, blackthorn, willow, sallow. Injury: Can not be looked upon as a pest. Sometimes aan branches and shoots. Description and biology: Adult male wing expanse 56 mm. ; female, 80 mm. ; color
rich brown, with dark irregular, transverse, scalloped lines on both pairs of wings,
edges of wings scalloped. Moths’ appear in June and July (England). . Pupa large
brown motile; cocoon Spun among, twigs of trees, ‘crevices, in bark and rubbish on
ground; oval, pointed at one’end and mouse-colored. Larva 100 mm. long; gray and
gray brown, with faint V-shaped dark marks dorsally; two deep blue or purple hands

112 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. across first thoracic segment; above legs on each side is a row of fleshy pad-like append-
ages with long gray hairs like ‘‘lappets”; body finely hairy: Larvee appear in autumn
and hibernate, extended on twigs. Distribution: Europe. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruits, 1909, p. 19. 4
Odonestis pruni Linnzus. (Lasiocampide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Various fruit trees. Injury: Defoliation. Description and bislogy: A tult length of wing 20-30 mm. ; forewing orange, strongly
dusted with red, with sharp points and a notched margin; a single white spot in the
middle; front diagonal
lines arched, hind di-
agonal line straight,
body and hindwing
brick red. Occurs
June and July (Ger-
many); pupates in
May (Germany) in
grayish-white cocoon. Larva: length 65-70
mm. ; blue gray, with
golden longitudinal
lines, and dull golden-
gray spots; head
brownish gray;
hatches in August;
overwinters and feeds
in spring until May
(Germany). Eggs de-
posited singly. Distribution:
Europe. Henscuet, G. A. O. Die Schidlichen Forst und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 315. Virachola insocrates Fabricius. Fic. 61—The Amar caterpillar ( Virachola insocrates): Adult and larva. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) (The Amar Caterpillar. Lycenide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Pomegranate, guava, loquat, and wild fruit. Injury: Larvee occasion considerable injury by feeding in the fruit. Biology: Eggs deposited singly on flowers; caterpillar on hatching bores into the
fruit, feeding on the hard seed; pupates over the base of fruit. (See text fig. 61.) Distribution: India. Maxwe.t-Lerroy, H. Indian Insect Pests, 1906, p. 179. Orgyia gonostigma Fabricius. (Brush Spinner; Corner spot. Lymantriide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Orchard and other trees. Injury: Defoliation. Description and biology: Adult male, forewing 13-15 mm. ; olive brown with white
spots, on the front and inner margins toward the base long orange wavy lines, basal
portion, and a spot on the oblique vein, purple brown, fringe between veins black
spotted; hind wing brownish black. First generation June and July, second, Septem-
ber (Germany). Pupates between leaves and in crevices. Larva of male, 52 mm. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXIII. A CHERRY PEST. The Rutherglen bug ( Nysius vinitor): Adults and injuries to cherries. (French.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXIV. es —-

 

 

THE PAINTED APPLE MOTH. The painted apple moth (Teia anartoides): Adults, larvee, pup, eggs. (French.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXV. THE QUEENSLAND Fruit FLy. The Queensland fruit fly (Bactrocera tryoni): Adults, larva, puparium. (Froggatt.) U. S, Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects PLATE XXVI. WINGS OF FRUIT FLIES. Fig. a.—Ceratitis striata. FIG. b.—Ceratitis capitata. F1G.c.—Ceratitis rubivora. (Froggatt.) FRUIT INSECTS. 113

long, of female 30 mm. ; black striped with reddish gold; four pair of dorsal brushes,
golden brown; pencils black, adorned with long variable hairs; warts white covered
with golden hair; head grayish black with red collar; spring and summer broods. Eggs deposited in mass near pupal exuvium; overwinter. Distribution: Europe. Hensouer, G. A. O. Die Schidlichen Forst und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 326.

. Teia anartoides Walker. (Painted Apple Moth. Lymantriide; Lepidoptera.) 8

Hosts: Fruits, particularly apple, cherry, rose, acacia. Almost omnivorous. Injury: One of most injurious caterpillars of New South Wales. Eats upper surface
of leaves. ‘‘Strips trees.’’ (French.) Description and biology: Adult female, short, rounded, wingless; male, wing expanse
25 mm. ; fore wings dark brown marbled with slender lines and black spots; hind wings
yellow surrounded with black outer margin; antenne featherlike. Two broods. Pupa in loose brown silken cocoon of flimsy character. Winters as pupa. Larva,
44 mm. long, brown, hairy, with tufts of hairs standing out at front and sides of head
and stiff brushes of gray hairs along center of back. gg, dull white, hemispherical. Females average 700 eggs, deposited in the cocoon. (See plate xxiv.) Distribution: New South Wales, Victoria. Frencu, C. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1900, pt. 3, p. 94. Olethreutes cynobatella Linnzus. (Gray Fruit Tree Bud Moth. Tortricide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Various fruit trees. Injury: Attacks leaf and blossom buds. Description and biology: Adult, fore wing 7.5-10.5mm. ; from the middle of the front
margin to the inner angle dark bluish-gray mixed with brown; behind the middle, two
variable, distinct dark spots on an entirely white background; the large apical third
white, clouded with gray. On wing, June until August (Germany). Pupates in
grass or in crumpled leaves, drawn together, during May and June. Larva, brownish
green; bores in the opening leaf and flower buds, the points of which it spins together;
occurs in spring from time of swelling of buds until May (Germany). Eggs are depos-
ited singly on buds; overwinter. Distribution: Germany, Europe. Henscnet, G. A. O. Die Schidlichen Forst und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 417.”
Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann (acidusa Walker). (Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: Guava, (Psidium guajava), coffee berries, pear, peach, mango, orange, Hugenia
spp-, Phylocalyx, Japanese plum, Japanese persimmon, Para plum (Spondias spp.? ),
Annona humboldtiana, jobo amarillo, jobo de la India. Injury: A very destructive species and likely to be introduced. Description and biology: Adult fly, about 12 mm. in length (the female exclusive of
the ovipositor), with a wing expanse slightly over 25 mm. Color of body rust-yellow
or brownish yellow, with three sulphur-yellow longitudinal stripes on the thorax in
well preserved mature specimens. Wings clear tinted in part with a characteristic
pattern of yellow brown, the brown predominating on the basal half and extending
obliquely forward, being continued along the anterior margin in a broad streak to the
extreme tip of the wing; a clear sinuate basal zone involves the second basal cell,
the base of the discal and part of the first basal cell, and is followed by a detached spot

55266—17—_8

114 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. at the costa just beyond the tip of the first vein; on the discal half of the wing there
is a brown band in the shape of an inverted V, resting on the posterior margin and
extending through the first and second posterior cells; this V-shaped mark may be
independent, or its apex may be joined to the other brown zone. There is considerable
variation in the wing pattern, both as to intensity of coloring and detail of the pattern. Immature specimens have the brown wing pattern much weaker; newly emerged ones
show hardly a trace of it. Female ovipositor stout, shorter than abdomen, tapered
regularly toward tip and covered with coarse black hairs; in mature specimens it is
subcylindrical, but in specimens not fully hardened it is flattened. “Distribution: Mexico, Central and South America, West Indies. Von Inerine, H. Revista Agric. (Sao Paulo), 1901, vol. 6, No. 70, p. 180. Howarp, L.O. U.S. Dept. Agric., Yearbook 1897, p. 546. » ,
Hooker, C. W. Ann. Rept. Porto Rico Agric. Exp. Sta., 1912, p. 36.

v

¥

Anastrepha ludens Loew. (Mexican Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Host: Orange, sweet lime, mango, Sideroxylon (Achras) sapota, peach, guava, plum. Injury: Considered a serious pest in Mexico. Quarantine issued January 15, 1913. Description and biology: Adult female, length 9 mm. ; of dull ochreous yellow color;
wings hyaline, mottled and striped with brownish yellow bands; anal segment of
abdomen longer than remainder of abdominal segments combined. ggs deposited
under skin of ripening fruit, larvee on hatching out tunnel into the fruit; pupate in
soil. Average life cycle about 3 months, making about four generations a year in
Mexico. Distribution: Mexico. Froaearr, W. W. Department of Agric., New South Wales, Farmers’ Bull. 24, 1909,
. 53. S
uy Anastrepha peruviana Townsend. Peruvian Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts; Peach, guava, cherimoya, many other deciduous and citrous fruits. Injury: Very serious in Peru. Description: Female fly, to tip of ovipositor, 7-8 mm. long; male 6.5-7 mm. long;
wing expanse 6-6.5 mm. Color of head, pleure, anterior half of venter, and legs
watery lemon yellow; antennz and proboscis buff yellow; tibise and tarsi slightly
dusky; mesopleural and sternopleural plates largely rufous-yellow tinged; eyes bright
green to lilac purple; other parts obscure tawny or yellow. Distribution: Peru. Townsenp, ©. H. T. Journ. Econ. Entom., 1913, vol. 6, No. 4, p. 345. Bactrocera tryoni Froggat. (Queensland Fruit Fly. Trypetidee; Diptera.) Host: Banana, mango, peach, apricot, nectarine, orange, apple, quince, black
apple (Sideroxylon [Achras] australe), cheesewood (Acronychia levis), white ash
(Schizomeria ovata), cucumbers, loquats. Description and biology: Adult female, 6 mm. long with wing expanse 10-12 mm.,
wings transparent, abdomen constricted at the base and broadly rounded at the tip,
thorax with a broad creamy often pale dorsal band running down the scutellum
with short, well-defined narrow pale yellow stripe on each side. (See plate xxv.) Distribution: India, Ceylon, Java, Amboina, Australia (Queensland, New South
Wales). Froeeatr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Miscl. Pub. No. 303, 1899, p. 2, Jv

figures. .

Froeaatr, W. W. Dept. of Agric. New South Wales, Farmers’ Bul. 24, 1909, p. 11. FRUIT FLIES. 115
Ceratitis anonz Graham,
(Annona Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: Sour sop (Annona muricata), guava (Psidium cattleianum), and cacao pods. Injury: Attacks fruit. Description: Adult female, head alutaceous, wings with black spots at the base,
abdomen nut brown in color on-dorsum, antennz almost twice as long as wide;

' length of body 6 mm. Distribution: West Africa (Nigeria, Kongo, Ashanti, Armani, German East Africa). Suvestri, F. Boll. Lab. Zool. R. Sc. Agric., Portici, 1913, vol. 8, p. 61. Suivestri, F. Bd. Agric. and Forestry, Terr. Hawaii, Div. Ent., Bul. 3, 1914, p. 66. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. :
(The Mediterranean Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: Aberia caffra(kei apple), Sideroxylon sapota (sapodilla), Annona muricata (sour
sop), Atropa belladonna, Averrhoa carambola, Calophyllum ‘inophyllum (round
kamani), Capsicum sp., Carica papaya, C. quercifolia, Carissa arduina (Natal plum),
Cestrum sp. (Chinese inkberry), Chrysobalanus ellipticus, C. icaco (cocoa plum),
Chrysophyllum cainito (star apple), Citrus aurantium (orange and varieties), C.
grandis (grapefruit), C. japonica (kumquat and Chinese orange), C. limonia (lemon),
C. nobilis (mandarin orange), Coffea arabica (coffee), Diospyros kaki (Japanese per-
simmon), Eriobotrya japonica (loquat), Eugenia braziliensis (Brazil cherry), Eugenia
jambos (rose apple), #. malaccensis (mountain or Malay apple), £. wniflora (Cayenne
or Surinam cherry), Ficus carica (fig), Herpephyllum caffrum (Kaffir plum), Lycopersi-
cum esculentum (tomato), Mammea americana (mammee apple), Mangifera indica
(mango), Mimusops elengi (elengi tree), Murraya exotica (mock orange), Musa spp. (banana), Noronhia emarginata (Chinese plum), Opuntia tuna (prickly pear), O. vulgaris
(Barbary fig), Passiflora quadrangularis (granadilla), Persea gratissima (avocado), Pha-
seolus vulgaris (string beans), Prunus armeniaca (apricot), P. cerasus (sour cherry),
Amygdalus persicc (peach), Psidium cattleianum (strawberry guava) P. guajava (guava),
Pyrus communis (pear), Cydonia oblonga (quince), Mespilus germanica (medlar)
Malus malus (apple), Solanum capsicastrum (Jerusalem cherry), Terminalia catappa
(winged kama‘ii), 7. chebula, Thevetia nertifolia, Vitis vinifera (grapes). Injury: Vey injurious wherever it becomes established. Descriptio: and biology: Egg deposited inside of fruit by female, and requires from
2 to 3 days to hatch; the larva upon hatching feeds on the pulp or inside of the fruit
until full grown, requiring from 9 to 12 days, whereupon it leaves the fruit and enters
the ground to pupate, which stage ranges from 12 to 20 days. The period required
for the various stages is influenced by the season, as indicated by Silvestri, requiring
from 21 to 23 days to complete the life cycle in August and from 32 to 35 in October. At Honolulu adults have been kept alive for 10 months and certain individuals have
required 90 days for development. (See pl. xxvi, fig. b.) Distribution: Southern Europe (southern Italy, Sicily, Malta, France, Spain),
Azores, Cape Verde Islands, Madeira, Africa (northern Uganda, Delagoa, Transvaal,
Cape Colony, Kongo, Nigeria, Dahomey), Brazil, Argentina, Bermuda, Australia,
(West Australia, New South Wales, northern Victoria, and Queensland), northern New
Zealand, Hawaiian Islands, Jamaica, Cape of Good Hope. Quaintance, A. L. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Entom. Circ. 160, 1912. Suvpsra, F. Bd. Agric. and Forestry, Terr. Hawaii, Div. Entom. Bull. 3.

ht

116 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS,

Ceratitis nigerrima Bezzi. (Nigeria Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: Coffee berries, fruit of wild plant (? ), Eugenia uniflora. Injury: Breeds in fruit. Description: Adult female with black polished body, head umber, wings colored
with brown, tibie and tarsi dirty yellowish white, ovipositor slightly recurved. Distribution: Southern Nigeria, Kamerun. Suvestri, F. Bd. Agric. and Forestry, Terr. Hawaii, Div. Entom., Bul. 3, 1914,

maze
2 Ceratitis giffardi Bezzi. (Giffard Fruit Fly. Trypetidee; Diptera.) Hosts: Chrysobalanus ellipticus, Sarcocephalus esculentus. Injury: Larvee feed in fruit of Sarcocephalus and less so in Chrysobalanus. Description and biology: Adult female, body ochraceous, thorax marked with
black, wings with black lines and markings at base, bearing also yellowish and
brown bands. Transformation to the pupa takes place in the soil, requiring from 10
to 12 days before emerging as adult. Distribution: Senegal, Dahomey, southern Nigeria. J
Brzzt, M. Boll. Lab. Zool. R. Sc. Agr., Portici, vol. 7, 1912, p. 2, fig. 1. Stuvestri, F. Bd. Agric. and Forestry, Terr. Hawaii, Div. Entom., Bul. 3, 1914,

. 61. E Ceratitis punctata Wiedemann. - (The Cacao Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: Cacao-pods, mango, guava, passion fruit. Injury: Breeds in fruit. Biology: Eggs deposited under peel of ripening pods. Pupates in soil. Life
cycle requires from 77 to 92 days for completion. Distribution: Ashanti, West Africa and Uganda, ast Africa. J

Froeaatr, W. W. Proc. Linn. Soc. New South Wales. 1910, vol} 35, pt. 4, p. 863. Ceratitis rubivora Coquillett. (Natal Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) ? Host: Various cultivated and wild fruits. Injury: Considered one of the most important pests in Natal, infesting both native
and cultivated fruits. Description: Adult female 4-5 mm. long, head yellowish, thorax yellowish brown,
abdomen yellowish, ovipositor flattened. Biology similar to that of C. capitata. (See
plate xxv1, fig. c.)

Danian Natal, Cape Town, South Africa. Froeaatr, W. W. Dept. Agric. New South Wales, Farmers’ Bul. 24, 1909, p. 48. Ceratitis silvestrli Bezzi. (Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: Chrysobalanus, Butyrospermum parkit. Injury: Breeds in fruit. Description and biology: Adult, body clay or leather color, face and occiput whitened,

thorax with a few black markings. Biology similar to C. capitata. Distribution: Senegal, French Sudan. Bezzi,M. Boll. Lab. Zool. R. Sc. Agr., Portici, vol. 7, 1912, v
Suivestri, F. Bd. Agric. and Forestry, Terr. Hawaii, Div. Entom, Bul. 3.

t

   

FRUIT FLIES. Ti

Dacus diversus Coquillett. (Three-striped Fruit Fly. Trypetida:; Diptera.) Host: Mango, orange, guava, peach. Injury: Breeds in fruit. Description: Adult, 4-5 mm. long; center of thorax marked with a pale yellow line,
with darker regular coloration of the abdomen. :

Distribution: Ceylon, India. Frogeatr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Farmers’ Bul. 24, 1909, p. 16. ’ Dacus ferrugineus Fabricius. (Mango Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Host: Fruit of mango (Mangifera indica), cucurbitaceous fruits?, ak (Calotropis
sp. ), citrus fruit, Eugenia malaccensis (‘‘cabuyao’’). Injury: Tnjurious to over-ripe fruit and commonest species in India and Ceylon. Description and biology: Adult, medium size, measuring about 5 mm. ; color rusty
red, with dorsal surface of thorax varying from black to a rusty red; sometimes the
abdomen is marked with almost black bands. Larvee when in fruit small, yellowish,
with pointed head and truncate abdomen; pupate in the soil and emerge as adults in
about nine days. Distribution: India, Java, Ceylon, Amboina, Philippine Islands. Cores, E. C. Indian Museum Notes, 1896, p. 17. Maxwett-Lrerroy, H. Mem. Dept. Agric. India, Entom. Ser., vol. 1, 1907, p. 227. Maxwett-Lerroy, H. Indian Insect Pests, 1906, p. 170. Y

Froaeeatr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Farmers’ Bul. 24, 1909, p. 18. Dacus frenchii Froggatt. (Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Host: Fruit of Artocarpus integrifolia. Injury: Bred from oranges entering Victoria from New Caledonia. Description: Adult, female about 10 mm. long, with long, rounded body: large hya-
line wings with broad costal stripe of light reddish brown; head with large black spot
on each side of face and below the base of the antenne; thorax dull yellowish brown;
legs yellow, with tarsi darkest. Distribution: New Caledonia, Java. Frogeatt, W. W. Dept. Agric. New South Wales, Farmers’ Bull. 24, 1909, p. 27. Froaeartr, W. W. Proc. Linn. Soc. New South Wales, 1910, vol. 35, pt. 4. p. 866. “
Dacus passifiorz Froggatt. (The Fiji Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Host: Granadilla, mango, shaddock; the orange, lemon, and lime are slightly
infested. Injury: One of the most abundant fruit flies in Fiji. Distribution: Fiji. Froaeart, W. W. Proc. Linn. Soc. New South Wales, 1910, vol. 35, pt. 4, p. 870. Dacus persicx Rig. (Peach Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Hosts: Mango and peach. Injury: Larve injure ripe fruit. Description and biology: Adult, red brown with black and yellow markings on the
body. ggs usually deposited in wound on skin of fruit; egg stage about 2 or 3 days;

118 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. larval stage 10 to 15 days inside fruit, after which it leaves the fruit and enters the
ground to pupate; pupal stage about a week. Distribution: Bhagalpur and Lower Bengal, India. Basu and Durr. Crop Pest Handbook for Behar and Orissa, including also Western

Bengal, 1913, p. 74. v
Dacus psidii Froggatt. (South Sea Guava Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Host: Guava, granadilla. Injury: Larvee feed in fruits. Description: Adult female, 6 mm. long, wing expanse 10 mm. ; head light brown
with rich metallic purple eyes, antennz brownish black, with last joint black; thorax
black; abdomen black, elongate, and narrow at base. (See plate xxvu1, figs. la, 2a,
3a, 4a.) Distribution: Fiji, New Caledonia. Froacatrr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Misc. Pub. 303, 1899. Vv
Froeeatr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Farmers’ Bul. 24, 1909, p. 19. Dacus (Tephrites) xanthodes Broun. (Broun’s Fruit Fly. Trypetidee; Diptera.) Host: Pineapple, granadilla, guava, mammee apple, shaddock. Injury: Breeds in fruits. Description: Adult female, 9 mm. long, wing expanse 15 mm., general color pale
ochreous yellow; thorax with faint yellow dorsal stripe, and pale yellowish white
stripe margining each side and marking the sides of the scutellum; abdomen elongate
and truncate at apex. Distribution: Fiji. (Bred in New Zealand from fruit imported from Fiji.) Froceatr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Farmers’ Bul. 24, 1909, p. 25. Rioxa muse Froggatt. (The Island Fruit Fly. Trypetidee; Diptera.) Host: Banana, Sideroxylon (Achras) australe (black apple). Injury: Larve feed in bruised or blemished fruit. Description: Adult female, 6 mm. long, wing expanse 12 mm., head small, ochreous,
antenne yellow with long bristle at apex of second joint, thorax brownish yellow,
abdomen small, light brown at base, black on apical half, and covered with coarse
hairs. (See plate xxviu1, figs. 1, 2.) Distribution: New Hebrides, Queensland, New South W ales. Froceattr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Misc. Pub. 303, 1899. ©
Froceatr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales, Farmers’ Bul. 24, 1909, p. 54. GOOSEBERRY; CURRANT. (Ribes spp. Family Saxifragaceze.) Shrubs bearing small edible fruits; native to Europe, Asia, North America, and
South America. A. BETTER KNOWN GOOSEBERRY AND CURRANT INSECTS LIKELY TO BE
IMPORTED. Erlophyes ribis Nalepa. (Currant Gall Mite. Eriophyide; Acarina.) Host: Infests especially the black currant (Ribes nigrum), but also R. rubrum, and
R. alpinum. Certain varieties of black currant are preferred, as Baldwin, Black
Naples, Black Dutch, and Lee’s Prolific. GOOSEBERRY AND CURRANT INSECTS. 119

Injury: Seriously injurious; can be introduced in nursery stock. Description and biology: Microscopic. , Adult about 230 microns long by 40 microns
wide. Male smaller; color whitish or pale green, semitransparent and shiny. Sub-
cylindrical in shape; 60-70 transverse rings furnished with regular series of short pro-
jections, best seen on sides. Infests the buds which may contain thousands of mites,
causing them to swell, producing so-called ‘‘big buds.’”’ Such buds, if they open,
usually fail to produce fruit of value. (See text fig. 62.) Distribution: Middle Europe; England. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 280. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d. ed., 1918, vol. 3, pp. 121-123,

figs. 96, 97. Bryobia ribis Thomas. (Red Gooseberry Mite. Tetranychide; Acarina.) Hosts: Gooseberries and currants. Injury: Very serious injury caused by sucking the juices of the plant. Very easy to
introduce on nursery stock. Fic. 62.—Currant gall mite (Hriophyes ribis): Mite and galls. (Sorauer.) Description and biology: This is one of the minute red spiders, having eight legs,
which breed on the foliage of plants, causing a rusty appearance. Theeggsarespherical
and microscopic in size. Distribution: Germany, England. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 89-91,
figs. 67, 68. Abraxas grossulariata Linneus,
(Magpie or Currant Moth. Geometride; Lepidoptera.) F

Host: Currant, gooseberry, and fruit trees. Injury: Defoliation; seldom seriously injurious. Description and biology: Adult wing expanse 37 mm. (variable); color creamy white,
spotted with black, with orange yellow between black spots at base of forewings;
hind wings like front, but with no yellow; thorax and abdomen yellow and black. On wing in July and August (England). Pupa black, with three golden yellow
rings to the body, Cocoon delicate, attached to leaf of twig. Larva length 37 mm. ;

120 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. color creamy white, spotted, and marked with black and orange yellow at sides. Appear in fall; winter as very small larvee, ready to pupate in June. Eggs, cream-

colored, laid singly or in groups; hatch in from 6 to 15 days. (See text fig. 63.) Distribution: England, Europe, Siberia, China. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 206. Thamnonoma wauaria Linnzus. (Currant Webworm. Geometride; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Ribes spp. Injury: Attacks leaves, buds, flowers, and often fruit. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 25 mm. ; front wing pure gray with
brown and black crosslines; hind wing ashen gray dusted with black. Occurs June
and July. Pupates in or on ground. Larva, length 25 mm. ; blue green with darker,

nr

  

Fic. 63.—Currant moth (A braras grossulariata): Adult, larva, pupa. (Entom. Parasit. Agric. 1904.) white bordered median line, and a yellow side stripe; on each segment a black tubercle . bearing bristles. Shortly before pupation mostly violet or reddish brown. Distribution: Northern Europe. .

Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 336. > Zophodia convoiutella Hiibner. (Pyralide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Gooseberry and currant. Injury: To fruit and leaves. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 30 mm. ; forewing brownish gray
with whitish and dark brown lines; occurs during end of April and beginning of May. (Germany.) Pupa overwinters in shallow earth. Larva, length 10 mm. ; color grass
green; head and thoracic shield black; occurs from May until July; draws berries and
adjoining leaves together by a web; feeds on fruit. gg deposited singly on twigs (see
text fig. 64). sid

Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d., 1913, vol. 3, p. 336:

PLaTe XXVII. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. (-4983301q)

“npisd snovq@— vg ‘nz ‘DI *SOIG ‘avsnw vIOLY—Z ‘T “SOIT

‘GaLYOdW| 3Q OL ATAaMIT Sag LINYSA

 

 

U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXVIII. Fruit FLies. Fies. a, c.—The Mandarin fruit fly (Dacus ornatissimus) and wing. Fics. b, d—The banana
fruit fly (Dacus curvipennis) and wing. (Froggatt.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXIX. INJURIOUS GRAIN INSECTS. Fics. a, b.—Iaplothrips aculeata; c, Limothrips denticornis; d, Haplothrips tritici; e, g, Oria musculosa; f, h,
Trachea basilinea;i,n, Hylemyia coarctata; k, Isosoma noriale;1,m, Trachelus tabidus. (Kurdjumov.) GOOSEBERRY AND CURRANT INSECTS. 121
Incurvaria capitella Clerck. (Currant Shoot Borer. Tineidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Currants; especially red currants. Injury: Seldom serious; tunnels the shoots. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 4 inch. Forewings dark brown with
purplish iridescence; near base a transverse yellow band and two yellow spots near
tip; head deep yellow. Occurs from mid May into June. Pupa, brown, in loose
cocoons in tunneled shoots. Larva, dull greenish, with red patch on ninth segment;
head and first thoracic segment black. Hatch in summer, feed on seeds in fruit,
then spin hibernaculum on bark; attack buds and shoots in spring causing the tips to
wilt; mature in April and May. Eggs are colorless, lemon-shaped, 0.67 mm. long. Distribution: Europe. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 213. R Notocelia roborana Treitschke. (Currant Fruit Moth. Tortricide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Currant, rose, Rubus sp., whitethorn, oak. Injury: Hollows out ripening currants. Description and biology: Adult, forewing white, mixed with dull gray before the
border; rusty red at
point; base gray brown;
speculum dotted black;
palpi reddish brown. «
On wing June and July
(Germany). Pupatesin
currant leaves and the
stage lasts 3 weeks. Larva, length 17 mm. ;
plump, brown, head
yellowish brown, neck
and anal shield black;
oneachsegmenta brown
wart, each with a light
bristle; webs up leaves and fruit; occurs in early spring. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 286. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 212. CouuieNe, W. A Manual of Injurious Fruit Insects, 1912, p. 163. Fic. 64.—Gooseburry moth (Zophodia convolutelia): Adult larva, injury. B. OTHER IMPORTANT CURRANT AND GOOSEBERRY INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidex:

Armored—
Chionaspis salicis Linnzeus; Europe; Ribes sanguineum. > Epidiaspis piricola Del Guercio; Italy, France, Portugal, Germany, England. Fiorinia grossulariz Maskell; New Zealand. Unarmored—
Lecanium coryli Linnzus; Great Britain. Lecanium rehi King; Europe. Lecanium rubi Schrank; /.urope. Phenacoccus socius Newstead; British Isles. Pseudococcus arece Maskell; New Zealand. 122 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. GRAINS AND GRASSES. (Family Graminez.) Under this heading are treated the insects.attacking the grains and grasses, except
corn, sorghum, and sugar cane, which are treated separately. This section relates
especially to barley (Hordeum vulgare Linnzeus), millet (Panicwm spp. ), oats (Avena
sativa Linneeus), rye (Secale cereale Linneeus), timothy (Phleum pratense Linneeus),
and wheat, emmer, and spelt (Triticum sativum Lam.). Descriptions of these various
crops are given in their proper alphabetic order. A. BETTER KNOWN GRAIN INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Lema cyanella Linneus; Lema melanopus Linneus. (Grain Leaf Beetles. Chrysomelidz; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Grasses, grains, especially oats. Injury: Feed on the leaves, stem and seed. Causes millions of dollars damage in

some years. Biology: Eggs shining yellow laid in rows gf 10-20 near the midvein, and 40-50

on a leaf. The larvee feed on the leaves. L. cyanella pupates in a cocoon on the

plant; L. melanopus pupates in the ground. The adults also feed on the foliage. Distribution: Europe, Southwest Asia. Serious only in South Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 509. *Pharaxonotha kirschi Reitt. (Mexican Grain Beetle. Cryptophagidee; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Corn, yams. Injury: Larvee and beetles destructive to stored corn and other products. Description: Small, shining, deep brown beetles, about three-sixteenth inch long. Larva elongate gray, each segment darker at middle with darker spaces each side
bearing rather well-developed tubercles. Distribution: Brazil, Guatemala, Mexico, Texas, and South Carolina. CuirtENDEN, F. H. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Entom., Bul. 96, pp. 8-13, fig. 1, 1911. >kLophocateres (Ostoma) pusillus Klug. (Siamese Grain Beetle. Trogositide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Corn, rice, seeds of eggplant and gourd, rye, flour. Injury: Larvee and beetles destructive to stored corn and other seeds. Description: Flat, brown, with thorax prolonged into acute angles at sides, anten-
ne clubbed at ends, minute. Larva white with blackish head and last segment

elongate. Distribution: Liberia, Siam, Ceylon, Java, India, Cochin China, Peru, Guatemala,

France, South Carolina, Texas. CuITTENDEN, F. H. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Entom., Bul. 96, pp. 14-18, fig. 2. 1911. *Latheticus oryzz Waterh. (Long-Headed Flour Beetle. Tenebrionide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Wheat, corn, barley, rice. Injury: Larva and beetle injure stored grain and flour. Description: Pale yellow, somewhat flattened beetle; the slenderest of the flour
beetles, measuring one-eighth inch. Distribution: India, Arabia, Persia, Norway, England, Russia, Texas. CuitrENDEN, F. H. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Entom., Bul. 96, pp. 25-28, fig. 5. 1911. GRAIN INSECTS. 123

Nonagria uniformis Dudgeon. (Wheat Stem Borer. Noctuide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Rice, wheat, sugar cane, millet. Injury: Larva bores in stems and pupates in its borings. Description and biology: Larva flesh colored with black head. Bores in grass stems. Distribution: India, Ceylon, Burma, Celebes. Maxwett-Lerroy, H. F. Mem. Dept. Agric. India, Ent. Ser., vol. 1, pt. 2, p. 176. Pyrausta nubilalis Hiibner. (Millet Stalk Worm. Pyralide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Millet, corn, hops, hemp, Panicum sanguinale, Artemisia vulgaris, Conyza
squarrosa, and Arundo. Injury: Bores in the stems. Description and biology: Moth, wing expanse 28-30 mm., yellow ochre in color with
rust colored marks on forewings. Larva dirty gray brown with dark dorsal line, and
two black spots on each segment, underside whitish, head dark brown, thoracic shield
yellowish, 30 mm. long. Bores in the stems and sometimes attacks the ears of corn. In grasses the larva overwinters in the roots. Distribution: Europe (Hungary). Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 304, 305,

fig. 206. Ochsenheimeria taurelia Schiffermiller. (Rye Stem Borer. Tineide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Rye, grasses. Injury: Quite injurious to winter rye. Description and biology: Moth, 7 mm. long, with 13 mm. wing expanse, forewings
yellowish brown with darker bands, hindwings white in basal part and brown be-
yond. Pupates in the stalk. Larva when young greenish or yellow, later yellow
with dark head; bores in stems. Eggs laid singly. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 242, fig. 175. Tinea graneiia Linneus. (The Wheat Moth. Tineidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Wheat, barley. Injury: Very serious injury to the seed heads. Description and biology: Adult, a tiny moth colored a rich brownish yellow with the
hindwings larger than the front and greenish yellow. Pupa asmall brown chrysalid. Larva not over one-half inch long, yellowish; bores in the seed head, eating all but the
husks. Distribution: Victoria, Australia, Europe, North America,

Frenow, C. Handbook of the Destructive Insects of Victoria, pt. 3, pp. 128-132,

pl. 55. Clinodiplosis moseilana Géhin; Ciinodipiosis equestris Wagner; + Contarinia tritici Kirby. (Grain Gall Midges. Itonidide [Cecidomyiide]; Diptera.) Species: Cl. mosellana; France; wheat, rye. Cl. equestris; Europe; wheat. >xC. tritici; Europe, introduced into United States; wheat, rye, barley. Injury: Very serious injury to grain, especially in United States. 124 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Description: Fly of equestris red, of the other two orange yellow. Maggot of eques-
tris blood red, of the other two orange or yellow. Breed in the stems and cause gall
formation. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 442,

447, 448. ‘ Lasloptera cerealis Lindeman. (Rye Midge. Itonidide [Cecidomyiide]; Diptera.) Hosts: Rye, Triticum repens, Calamagrostis lanceolata. Injury: Attacks the stems. ;

Description and biology: Fly black, abdomen white banded; 3 mm. long. Larva
brick red, 5mm. long. Distribution: Russia. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 457. Mayetiola avenz Marchal. (Oats Gall Midge. Itonidide [Cecidomyiidex]: Diptera.) Host: Oats. Injury: Forms galls in the stems. Description and biology: Fly black, marked with red, with a band of silver-gray
hairs on each side; length 3.2 mm. Has two generations. Distribution: France. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 449, fig. 272. *Phytophaga (Mayetiola) destructor Say. (Hessian Fly. Itonididee [Cecidomyiida]; Diptera.) The well-known Hessian fly is a conspicuous example among our imported pests. It is now distributed over Asia, Europe, and North America. Porricondyla cerealis Sauter. (Grain Maggot. Itonididee [Cecidomyiide:]; Diptera.) Hosts: Barley, oats, rye, spelt. Injury: Occasionally injurious. Breeds behind the leaf sheath. Description and biology: Fly, antenne 13-jointed, thorax black, abdomen red,
length 2.2mm. Maggot, 3 mm. long, chrome red. Distribution: Germany. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 441. Hylemyia coarctata Fallen. (Wheat Bulb Fly. Anthomyida; Diptera.) Hosts: Rye, wheat, barley. Injury: Feeds in the stems; very destructive. Description and biology: Fly yellowish. gray, strongly bristled; thorax without
stripes; abdomen with dark median stripe; antennz black; length 7 mm. Maggot
yellowish, 6 mm. long. (See plate xx1x figs. i, n.)

Distribution: Middle and north Europe. One specimen is recorded from Colorado. Soraver, P. Handbuch der. Pibeten ree 8d ed., 1913, vol. 3, PRA 431, 432,

fig. 263. GRAIN INSECTS. 125

Hydrellia griseola Fallen. (Grain Leaf Miner. Ephydride; Diptera.) Hosts; Barley, oats, grasses. Injury: Mines the leaves. Description and biology: Adult fly metallic brown, thickly dusted with gray; under-
sides and palpi yellow; antenne black, face and beak brown; 2.75 mm. long. Larva ~
2mm. long. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 408, 409,

fig. 254.

a Camarota flavitarsis Meigen. (Grain Fly. Oscinide; Diptera.) Hosts: Wheat, grasses. Injury: Bores in stems. Description and biology: Fly, blue black, undersides white, length 2.5 mm. Larva
and pupa with two large stigmal hooks at apex. Distribution: France. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, pp. 412, 418. Chlorops tzniopus Meigen. (Straw Fly. Oscinidee; Diptera.) Hosts: Wheat, rye, barley, grasses. Injury: Bores in the stems of grains. Description and biology: Fly, yellow, with three black lines on thorax, four black
cross bands on abdomen and black antenne; length, 34 mm. Maggot, yellowish
white, 5-7 mm. long. Winters in stem near roots. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 412, 413. *Oscinis frit Linnzus (Oscinis pusilla Meigen). (Frit Flies. Oscinidee; Diptera.) Hosts: Oats, barley, wheat, rye. Injury: Mines the stems of grains. Serious pests. Description and Biology: Adult fly, shining black, metallic. Larva, white, legless. Mines the stems and roots. Distribution: Europe, America. SorAvER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 410, 411. B. OTHER IMPORTANT GRAIN INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Lygeide. Nysius vinitor Bergroth; Australia. (See Fruit.) Jasside. Jassus sexnotatus Fallen of Germany is a very injurious insect to wheat, barley, oats, and grasses. The eggs might be imported with straw during the winter. This is a bright-yellow leaf hopper with
black markings, measuring about 3.75 mm. in length. THYSANOPTERA. Haplothrips tritici Kurdjumov, the Europe grain thrips; Europe; often winters in wheat stubbles. (See pl. XXX, fig. d.)

Haplothrips aculeata Fabricius (see pl. X XIX, figs. a,b) and Limothrips denticornis Haliday; Europe;
attack grain. (See pl. XXIX, fig. c.)

126 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Carabide. Zabrus gibbus Fabricius of Europe attacks wheat, oats, rye, and barley, in both its adult and larval
stages. It is a shining blaek beetle with pieeous antenne and legs, measuring 15 mm. in length
and 6mm. in breadth. The adults hide during the day and feed at night on the grain. They might
easily be imported. Elateridz. Agriotes lineatus Linnzeus. (See Tobaeeo.) Cerambycide. Calamobius marginellus Fabricius; Europe; bores in stems of wheat. Chrysomelidz. Phyllotreta vittula Redtenbacher. (See Rape.) Brachyrhinide. Diaprepes abbreviatus Linneus; West Indies. (See Sugar cane.) LEPIDOPTERA,

Noctuide. .
Oria musculosa Miibner; Russia; very destructive, winters in egg stage in stubble. (See pl. X XIX,
figs. e, 9.) Hadena secalis Bjerk; Europe; bores in stalks. Trachea basilinea W. V.; Europe; injures wheat, rye, and other grains. (See pl. XXIX, figs. f, h.)

Pyralide. Chilo simpler Butler; India, Formosa; attaeks millet. (See Sugar Cane.) Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée; Queensland; attacks millet. (See Corn.) Phycitide. .
Anerastia botella Zuk. ; Europe; injurious to rye, wheat, and other cereals

DIPTERA. Oscinide. Chlorops lineata Fabrieius; a tiny reddish frit fly of Europe whieh breeds in stems of wheat. Opomysa florum Fabricius, a small fly of Europe whieh breeds during the winter in the lower parts of
the stems of wheat. It is 4.5 mm. long, pale yellow or reddish yellow in color. Itonididz (Cecidomyidz). Clinodiplosis mosellana Géhin; Europe; breeds in stems of wheat and rye. HYMENOPTERA,
Cephididz. > Cephus pygmaeus Linnzeus of Europe bores in the stems of wheat, rye, timothy, and other eereals and
grasses hibernating as a larva in the lower part of the stem or root. It eould easily be imported in
straw. The larva is legless. The adult is a black wasplike inseet with yellow markings, measuring
7mm. in length. .

Trachelus tabidus Linnzeus; Europe; bores in stems. (See pl. X XIX, figs. 1, m.)

Chalcididae. Isosoma noriale Portschinski is a very injurious chalcid pest of grain in Russia. The larvae pass the
winter in the stems. (See pl. XXIX, fig. k.)

GRANADILLA. (Passiflora quadrangularis. Passifloracez.) A tropical American vine valuable as a climber and also for its fruit. DIPTERA. Trypetide. Dacus passiflore Froggatt; Fiji. (See Fruit.) Dacus psidii Froggatt; Fiji. (See Fruit.) Dacus ranthodes Broun; Fiji. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis punctata Wiedemann; Africa. (See Fruit.) LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidx. Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée; Queensland. (See Corn.) GRAPE INSECTS. 127

x

GRAPE. (Vitis spp. Family Vitacez.) 'ruit-bearing vines valued both for the fruit itself and for the wines derived there-
_ A. BETTER KNOWN GRAPE INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. * Eriophyes vitis Landois. (Grape Blister Mite. Eriophyide; Acarina.) Hosts: Vitis vinifera, V. vesuviana, V. carinthiaca, V. arizonica, V. xstivalis. Injury: Causes much damage to the vine. Description and biology: Four-legged blister mite which Bini the leaves, buds,
flowers, and berries of the grape. Distribution: Europe, Armenia, North America. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 119,
120, figs. 94, 95. Anomala vitis Fabricius. (Grape Anomala. Scarabseidee; Coleoptera.) Host: Grape. Injury: May be serious. Description and biology: Adult, length 12-17 mm. ; green, violet or azure; body oval;
head, prothorax, and scutellum punctate; elytra convex with distinct longitudinal
strie. Occurs in June and July; crepuscular; feeds on foliage of the vine. Pupates
in soil in May; stage requires about a month. Larva feeds on roots of grass and the
vine. Feeds about a year and a half. Egg oblong, hatches in about 15 to 20 days. Distribution: Middle and eastern Europe. Sitvestri, F. Dispense di Entomologia Agraria, 1911, p. 310. Sinoxylon perforans Schrk. ; Sinoxylon sexdentatum Olivier. (Grape-vine Flat-headed Borers. Bostrychide; Coleoptera.) Species: S. perforans; Tirol, Italy, grape; Europe, oak, elm, horse chestnut. S.
sexdentatum; Spain, grape; South France, Quercus sessiliflora. Injury: Bore in the stems, branches, and trunk; sometimes causing very serious
injury. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 489. Vesperus spp. (Grape Borers. Cerambycid; Coleoptera.) Species: V. xatarti Dufour; France; grape. V. luridus Rossi; Italy; grape. V.
strepens Fabricius; France; grape, rose, forest trees. V. mauretanicus Dry; Algeria,
Spain; grape, olive. Injury: Bore in stems. Soraurr, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 498. > Bromius obscurus Linnzus. (Grape Root Worm. Chrysomelids; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Grape, Epilobium, etc. Injury: Sometimes serious. Attacks both the roots and the growing parts of the
vine,

Description and biology: The species has two varieties, obscurus, which is black, and
vitis Fabricius, which is brown. The eggs are laid in crevices beneath the inner

128 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. layers of bark on old wood, and also on leaves, in clusters of 4 to 30. Eggs yellowish
white, elongate cylindrical. Larva white, with yellowish-brown head, short legs. Pupa white, formed in earthen cell. The larva feeds on the roots several feet under
ground, doing much damage. The adults feed on the foliage and fruit. Distribution: Europe, Asia, North Africa, and introduced into California. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 512, 518. Quaytez, H.J. California Agr. Exp., Sta. Bul. 195, 25 pp., 18 figs. Haltica ampelophaga Leesb. (Vine Flea-beetle. Chrysomelide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Grape, willow. Injury: Serious. Defoliation. Description and biology: Adult, length 4 mm. ; brilliant green, sometimes deep blue-
green. Two generations, first appears in April (France), feeds on leaves. Pass winter
as adults at bases of vines, in bark, ete. Pupatein soil. Larva, length 6 mm., black;

 

Fic. 65.—Vine flea-beetle ( Haltica ampelophaga): Adult, larva, and injury. (v. Rendu.) feeds on leaves, flowers, and shoots. Larval period of first generation about a month. Eggs clear yellow, oblong; placed on under surface of leaves in clusters of about 30. (See text fig. 65.) Distribution: France, Italy, Spain, Algiers. Montituot, L. Les Insectes Nuisibles, 1891, p. 116. GuENnauX, G. Entomologie et Parasitologie Agricoles, 1904, p. 340. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 523, 524. Scelodnota strigicollis Motschulsky. (Chrysomelids; Coleoptera.) Host: Grape. Injury: Serious pest. Description and biology: Probably similar to grape rootworm. Distribution: India. Maxwe..-Lerroy, H. F. Indian Insect Life, 1909, p. 359. Brachyrhinus (Otiorhynchus) spp. (Grape Root Weevils. Brachyrhinide (Otiorhynchide); Coleoptera.) The weevils of this genus breed at the roots of plants and are very destructive as
adults, often defoliating vineyards. GRAPE INSECTS. 129

Species: B. raucus Fabricius; Germany, France; adults attack foliage of apple, pear
cherry, grape. B. singularis Linnzeus; Europe (England); adults attack grape,
grafted fruit trees, oak, rose, hops, Rhododendron, pines, gherkins, spruce, and straw-
berries. B. turca Boheman; Russia; breeds at the roots of grape. >B. sulcatus
Fabricius; Europe, introduced into America and Australia; breeds at the roots of
grape, strawberry, and many other plants and isa very destructive pest. B. populeti
Boheman; Hungary; adults injurious to grape. B. ligustici Linnzeus; Europe; attacks
grape, peach, hops, beans, beets, asparagus, lucerne. Breeds at the roots and is very
destructive. B. armatus Boheman, B. asphaltinus Germar, B. corruptor Host., B.
globus Boheman, B. teretirostris Stierlin and B. tristis Scopoli are also recorded from
grape. Description: These weevils are practically all black, oval, fairly large, with broad
blunt beaks. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 541-543. Bareacu, P. Rassegna Biologia Rincofori Europei, 1883~1887. Boarmia gemmaria Brahm. (Geometride; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Grape, wild honeysuckle, rose. Injury: Very injurious. Defoliation. Description and biology: Adult, wings 19-20 mm. ; brownish gray with white mark-
ings. Larva, grayish brown in color, with dark yellow and black spots and dark
wavy side lines; occurs in July; winters in sheltered places. Pupates during spring
in ground. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 338. Cryptoblabes gnidiella Mill. (Pyralidze; Lepidoptera.) Host: Grape. Injury: To fruit. Description: Adult, wings lead gray, two diagonal whitish stripes between which
are blackish spots. Larva, length 14 mm., dirty brown with broad, dark side stripes. Feeds on unripe grape berries. Distribution: Southern Europe, Egypt. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 311. Sciopteron regale But. (Grape Gun Worm. Sesiide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Grape. . Injury: Bore in canes of the grape; very destructive in Japan. Description and biology: Adult moth, about 18 mm. long and with wing expanse of
37 mm. ; general color orange and black. Larva, 18 to 25 mm. long, yellow, feet and
head darkish brown. Pupa, about 18 mm. long, rich amber brown in color. Distribution: Japan. Maskew, F. Cal. State Hort. Com. Monthly Bulletin, vol. 2, No. 10, 1913, p. 677. Clysia ambiguella Hiibner. (The Cochylis. Tortricide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Grape. Injury: Very serious to blossom clusters and fruit. One of the worst grape pests of
Europe. 55266—17——_9

130 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 14-15 mm. ; forewing yellow, with a
large dark brown transverse band; hindwing gray. Two generations. First occurs at
time of flowering of grape; second generation in early August (France). Pupates in
early winter under bark scales, in crevices of grape stakes, ete. Larva, length 12mm.,
at first whitish, later taking on a rose color. gg placed singly on blossom clusters
and on grapes. (See text fig. 66.) Distribution: Europe, Asia Minor, Japan, India. Montitiot, L. Entomologie et Parisitologie Agricoles, 1904, p. 335. Polychrosis botrana Schiffermiller. (The Pyralid of the Vine. Tortricide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Grape. Injury: Very injurious. Attacks grape blossoms and fruit. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 12 mm. ; forewings pale yellow with
three transverse brown lines; hind wings grayish brown. ‘Three annual generations. Pupa brown. Larva, length
lem. ; green in color. Eggs
deposited on berries and on
blossom clusters. (See text
fig. 67.) Distribution: Germany,
Austria-Hungary, Switzer-
land, France, Italy, Asia
Minor. Montitiot, L. Les Insectes
Nuisibles, 1891, p. 120. GuENAuX, G. Entomologie
et Parasitologie Agricoles,

1904, p. 340. IMPORTANT GRAPE
INSECTS. HEMIPTERA,

Coccidee:
Armored—
Aspidiotus (Evaspidiotus) labia-
tarum Marehal; Corsiea, Italy. Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) arti-
culatus Morgan; West Indies. Fia. 66.—Grape worm (Clysia ambiguella): Adult, pupe, larve, Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) tes-

egg, and injured grapes. (Silvestri, Sorauer.) serata Le Charmoy; Mauri-
tius, Mexieo, Antigua. Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) pedroniformis Cockerelland Robinson; Philippines; Vitis vinifera. Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) fossor Newstead; Barbados. .
Aspidiotus ( Targionia) vitis Signoret; Franee, Algiers, Germany, Italy, Sicily. Chionaspis vitis Green; Ceylon, Japan. Unarmored—
Cryptinglisia lounsburyi Cockerell; on roots; Cape Colony. Gueriniella serratulz Fabricius; Algeria; Europe. Teerya palmeri Riley & Howard; Mexieo. * Lecanium persice Fabrieius; Australia, France, Italy, Caueasus, California. Lecanium vini Bouché; France. Neolecanium silveirai Hempel; on roots; Brazil. + Palxococcus rose Riley & Howard; Jamaica. Pseudococcus filamentosus Cockerell; Japan, Hawaii. Pseudococcus subterrancus Hempel; on roots; Argentina. Pseudococcus vitis Niedielski; North Africa, France, Europe, Palestine. Pulvinaria vinifera King. Rhizecus falcifer Kiincekel; France, Algeria. Solenococeus muratz Kuwana; Japan. Lygeide. Nysius vinitor Bergroth; Australia. (See Fruit.) INSECTS OF GRAPE AND GUAVA. 131

COLEOPTERA. Buprestidae. * Agrilus viridis Linneus; Europe. (See Oak.) Scarabeide. Adoretus umbrosus Fabricius; Pacific Islands. (See Rose.) Cerambycide. Cerambyx miles Bon. ; Austria; bores stems of Vitis vinifera. Heterachthes zneolus Bates; Mexico; bores stems of Vitis vinifera. Curculionidae. Orthorrhinus kluggi Schénherr; Victoria; bores in canes. LEPIDOPTERA. Tortricidz. Capua angustiorana Haworth; Europe, Asia, Africa. (See Apricot.) Zygenide. Ina ampelophaga Boyle; Europe, Caucasus, Pales-
tine; attacks buds and leaves. DIPTERA. Trypetide. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks Vitis vinifera. (See Fruit.) Itonidide. Contarinia viticola Riibsaamen; Europe; breeds in
buds and flowers. GUAVA. (Psidium guajava, etc. Family Myrtacez.) Evergreen trees and shrubs of tropical
and subtropical America, yielding delicious
fruits. Several species are grown‘in Florida
and California. IMPORTANT GUAVA INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coceide. _
Armored—
> Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) articulatus Green; Ja-
maica. Aspidiotus (P seudaonidia) trilobitiformis Green; Cey-
lon. (See citrous.) + Parlatoria ziziphus Lucas; Philippine Islands. Chionaspis (Phenacaspis) megaloba Green; Ceylon. Unarmored—
Cardiococcus umbonatus Cockerell; Mexico. Ceroplastes campinensis Hempel; Brazil. Ceroplastes grandis Hempel; Brazil. Ceroplastes psidii Chavannes; Brazil, Europe. Ceroplastes singularis Newstead; British East Africa, Uganda. Ceroplastes vinsonii Signoret; Mauritius. Coccus acuminatus Signoret; Hawaii, Ceylon. Coccus viridis Green; Uganda, India, Mauritius, Ceylon, Brazil. Eriscoccus coriaceus Maskell; Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland. Icerya monts2rratensis Riley & Howard; New South Wales; Psidium pomiferum. Icerya seychellarum Westwood; Mauritius. Inglisia conchiformis Newstead; Uganda. Pseudococcus grandis Hempel; Brazil. Pseudococcus virgatus Cockerell; China, yeDen) Jamaica. Pseudokermes nitens Hempel; Brazil. Pulvinaria cupaniz Cockerell; Jamaica,
Pulvinaria ficus Hempel; Brazil, Barbados, Montserrat, Antigua, St. Kitts. Saissetia discoides Hempel; Brazil. Saissetia psidii Green; Ceylon. FG. 67.—Grape pyralid (Polychrosis botrana):
Adult, larvee, pupa, egg, and injured grape. (Silvestri.) 132 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Aleyrodidz. Aleurodicus cocois Curtis; West Indies, Mexico, Central and South America, attacks Psidium guajava. (See Coconut.) THYSANOPTERA. > Heliothrips rubrocinctus Giard; West Indies, Ceylon, Uganda, Florida, attacks Psidium guajava. (See
Fruits.) COLEOPTERA. Brachyrhinidz. Diaprepes abbreviatus Linneeus; West Indies. (See Sugar cane.) LEPIDOPTERA. Lycenide. Virachola insocrates Fabricius; India; bores in fruit. (See Fruit.) Pyralide. Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée; Queensland. (See Corn.) Lasiocampide. Suana concolor Walker; Java. DIPTERA. Trypetida. Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann, attacks Psidium guajava. (See Fruit.) Anastrepha serpentina Wiedemann, fruit fly; Lesser Antilles; attacks Psidium guajava. | an
Anastrepha ludens Loew; Mexico. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks Psidium cattleianum and P. guajava. (See Fruit.) Cerat punctata Wiedemann; Africa. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis anonae Graham; Africa. (See Fruit.) Dacus psidii Froggatt; F (See Fruit.) Dacus ranthodes Broun; Fiji. (See Fruit.) Dacus diversus Coquillett; India. (See Fruit.) HAWTHORN; MEDLAR. (Mespilus spp. [Crataegus]. Family Rosaceze.) Small fruit-bearing trees and shrubs of the northern hemisphere, grown mainly as
ornamental’shrubbery. IMPORTANT HAWTHORN INSECTS. ACARINA. Eriophyidz. Eriophyes goniothorar Nalepa, blister mite; England; attacks leaves of Mespilus oxyacantha. HEMIPTERA. Coccidze:
Armored— . Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) pyri Lichtenstein; Europe; Mespilus heterophylla, *. oxyacantha. Diaspis lepérii Signoret; Europe; Mespilus monogyna. Unarmored—
Ceroplastes rusci Linneeus; Europe. * Lecanium bituberculatum Targioni-Tozzetti; Europe; Oregon; Mespilus monogyna, M. oxyacantha. Lecanium coryli Linngus; Europe; Mespilus coccinea, M. germanica, M. monogyna, M. oryacantha,
M. pyracantha. Pulvinaria betulae; Europe; Mespilus germanica, M. monogyna, M. oryacantha. COLEOPTERA. Curculionidze. Magdalis cerasi Linneus and M. pruni Linneeus; Europe; breed under bark. Magdalis barbicornis Latreille; Europe. (See Apple.) ’ LEPIDOPTERA. Geometridz. Hibernia aurantiaria Esp., H. defoliaria Linnzeus and H. marginaria Borekh; Germany; defoliators. Lymantriide. Dasychira pudibunda Linneus and * Ewproctis chrysorrhea Linneus; Europe; defoliators. (See Forest
defoliators.) Lasiocampide. Gas‘ropacha quercifolia Linnwus; Europe. (See Fruit.) Hyponomeutida. Argyresthia nitidella Fabricius; England. (See Plum )

 

INSECTS OF HAWTHORN AND HAZEL. 133

DIPTERA. Trypetide. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) HYMENOPTERA. Tenthredinidz. Macrophya punctum-album Linneus; Russia; sawfly. Priophorus padi Linneeus; Europe (See Plum.) LITERATURE. SoORAUVER. P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildliiuse (Coccide), 1912

HAZEL; FILBERT; COBNUT. (Corylus spp. Family Corylacez.) Valuable nut-bearing shrubs or rarely trees of America, Europe, and Asia, some-
times used for shrubbery. A. HAZEL INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Eriophyes avellanz Nalepa; Eriophyes vermiformis Nalepa. (Hazelnut Blister Mites. Family Eriophyidie; Acarina.) Hosts: Corylus avellana, C. tubulosa. Injury: Cause galls on buds. Serious in England. Description and biology: Four-legged blister mites which form galls in the spring
and summer buds. Very easy to introduce on nursery stock,
Distribution: England, Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 1913, 3d ed., vol. 3, p. 118,
fig. 93. Oberea linearis Linneus. (Cerambycidse; Coleoptera. ) Hosts: Hazelnut, walnut. Description and biology: Adult, beetle occurs from May on. A generation in two
years. The larva eats pith and wood and pupates in earth. Hggs are placed singly
under young bark. After oviposition the female rings the twig. Distribution: Europe. ©

Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 1913, 3d ed., vol. 3, p. 507. Curculio nucum Linnzus (Balaninus). (Nut Weevil. Curculionide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Hazelnut, filbert, cob, oak. Injury: Causes nuts to fall prematurely. Description and biology: Adult, length 8 mm. ; color tawny brown to chocolate
brown, densely clothed with golden-brown pubescence; has unusually long snout;
occurs in June and July (England). Flies in bright weather. Pupa creamy white,
pupates in soil. Larva length rather more than 8 mm. ; creamy white; passes winter
in cellin ground. Zggs are deposited singly, deep in nut. Incubation requires 8 or
10 days. (See text fig. 68.) Distribution: Europe. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 299. 134 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Laspeyresia amplana Hiibner (Carpocapsa.) (Nut Tortrix. Tortricide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Hazelnut, walnut. Injury: To fruit. ,
Description and biology: Forewing cinnamon colored, with large light spots on both
sides darkened by brown spots on the inner margin. Flies in July (Germany). Larva,
dirty white; head and back darker; bores into the nuts; overwinters in soil, pupating

in spring. /ggs deposited on unripe nuts. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 276. Henscuet, G. A. O. Die Schiidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 432. B. IMPORTANT HAZEL IN-

     
 

SECTS. TY HEMIPTERA. OS \ . Coccidee. S\N Unarmored—
\ A an . YWX{K Lecanium coryli Linnzeus;
Wa Europe; Corylus avellana, C.

colurna. Lecanium pulchrum Marchal;
Europe; Corylus avellana. Phenacoccus aceris Signoret;
Europe; Corylus avellana. Pulvinaria betule Linneus;
Europe; Corylus avellana. COLEOPTERA. Buprestidz. Agrilus angustulus Illiger; A.
fi subauratus Gebler; Europe;

“ Aut

TA \

\ y AN

: WN
be H

g

fi bore in bast and sapwood,
I especially of saplings. i Elateridz. Fic. 68.—The nut weevil (Curculio nucum): Adult puncturing Athous subfuscus Miiller, wire-
nut. (Guenaux.) worm; Europe; injures nuts

and seedlings. Cerainbycide. Oberea linearis Linnzeus; Europe; bores in pith of nursery stock. Chrysomelide. Haltica quercetorwm Foudr. ; Europe; leaf beetle. (See Oak.) Curculionide. 7
Magdalis carbonaria Linnzeus; Europe; bores in trunks. (See Birch.) LEPIDOPTERA. Geometridz. Anisopteryx xscularia Schiffermiller; Europe; feeds on foliage. Lymantriide. Dasychira pudibunda Linnzeus, and + Lymantria monacha Linneus; Europe; defoliators. (See Forest
defoliators.) i

Notodontide. Phalera jucephala Linneeus,; Europe. (See Forests.) Tortricidx. Laspeyresia grossana Haworth (Carpocapsa); Europe. (See Beech.) Hyponomeutide. Argyresthia ephippella Fabricius; Europe. (See Plum.) HYMENOPTERA. Tenthredinidez. Monoctenus juniperi Linneus; Europe; sawfly feeds on foliage. INSECTS OF HAZEL, HEMLOCK, HEMP, HOPS. 135

LITERATURE. SoRAvER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. NUssLin, Otto. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. Hess, R. Der Forstschutz, 1900, vol. 2. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildliuse (Coccide), 1912. HEMLOCK SPRUCE. (Tsuga spp. Family Pinacez.) Ornamental evergreen trees, very useful for parking, native of North America,

East Asia, and the Himalayas. For convenience the insect pests are arranged under
Coniiers. HEMP. (Cannabis sativa Linneeus. Family Urticacez.) A native of Asia cultivated for the fiber obtained from its stems. Also used as an

ornamental plant. IMPORTANT HEMP INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Chrysomelidz. Psylliodes attenuata Koch; Europe. (See Hops.) LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. Pyrausta nubilalis Hiibner; Europe. (See Grain.) HOPS. (Humulus lupulus Linneeus. Family Urticacez.) Vines cultivated in Europe and America for the hops, which are used in the brew
ing of beer. A. BETTER KNOWN HOPS INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Psylliodes attenuata Koch. (European Hop Flea-Beetle. Family Chrysomelids; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Hops, hemp, stinging nettle. Injury: Feeds on foliage. The larva is supposed to breed in the cones of the hops. Distribution: Europe (Russia, England). Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 522. Hepialus humuli Linneus. (Hop Root Borer. Hepialide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Hops, potato, rape, corn, sorrel, dandelion. Injury: Bores in the roots. Description and biology: Moth, wing expanse 43-68 mm. ; male above silvery white,
beneath brownish gray, female clay yellow, with pale brick-red marks on forewings. Larva yellowish, spotted with black, with dark head; thoracic shield and spots on
second and third segments yellowish brown; 50-55 mm. The larva breeds in the
roots. .

Distribution: Europe. Sorauer, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 8, p. 320. Cecidomyia humuli Theobald. (Hop Midge. Itonidide [Cecidomyidee]; Diptera.) Host: Hops. Injury; Attack the catkins. 136 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Description and biology: Fly very small; larvee white. Distribution: England. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 443. Agromyza frontalis Meigen. (Hop Leaf Miner. Agromyzidee; Diptera.) Host: Hops. 7
Injury: Mines the leaves. Fig. 69.—Needle-nose hop-bug ( Calocoris fulvomaculatus): a, Adult; b, early stage ofnymph; c, 4th inst ar
nymph; d, 5thinstarnymph. (Theobald.) Description and biology: Pupates in the soil. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 406. B. OTHER IMPORTANT HOPS INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. M iridae (Capsidz). .a.ocor sfulvomaculatus: Needle-nosed hop bug; Europe; sucks juices. (See text, fig. 69.) INSECTS OF HOPS, HORNBEAM, HORSE-CHESTNUT. 187

COLEOPTERA. Chrysomelidz. Phyllotreta nemorum Linneeus; Europe. (See Crucifers.) Elateridze. Agriotes lincatus Linneus. (See Tobacco.) LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. Pyrausta nubilalis Hiibner; Europe; bores in stems. (See Grain.) Noctuide. Hypena rostralis Linnzeus; Europe; feeds on foliage. LITERATURE. THEOBALD, F. V. Text Book of Agric. Zoology, pp. 260-262, figs. 150, 159. 1913. REMISCH, Fr. YON. Zeitschr. f. Wiss. Insekten biol., band. 13, heft 9, pp. 331-333; heft 10, pp. 363-368. 1908. HORNBEAM. (Carpinus betulus L., etc. Family Betulacee.) Hard-wooded trees much used in tool making. Occur in Europe, Asia, and
America. IMPORTANT HORNBEAM INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. .
Coccidzx:

Unarmored—
Pulvinaria betule Linneeus; Lecanium coryli Linneus, and Lecanium pulchrum Marchal; Europe. COLEOPTERA. Anobiide. Xestobium rufovillosum DeGeer; Europe; bores in the wood. Ptilinus pectinicornis Linnzeus; Europe; bores in the wood. Elateridz. Athous subfuscus Miiller; wireworm; Europe; injures fruit and seedlings. Scarabeide. Amphimallon solstitialis Linnzeus; Europe; the larve injure the roots of small plants while the adults
injure the shoots. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius, and M. melolontha Linneeus; Europe; larvee injure roots of seed-
lings. Scolytidz. Anisandrus dispar Fabricius; Europe; galleries wood. Scolytus carpini Ratzeburg; Germany; galleries in bark, bast, and sapwood. Xyloterus domesticus Linneus; Germany; galleries in bark and sapwood. LEPIDOPTERA. Geometridz. Hibernia defoliaria Linneus and H. marginaria Borckh. ; Europe; defoliators. Lymantriidz. Dasychira pudibunda Linneus; * Euproctis chrysorrhoca Linneus, *Lymantria monacha Linneus,
>Porthetria dispar Linnzeus, Porthesia similis Fuessly; Europe; defoliators. (See Forest defoliators.) LITERATURE. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildliiuse (Coccide). 1912. Hess, R. Der Forstschutz, 1900, vol. 2. Nossurn, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed. 1913. HORSE-CHESTNUT; BUCKEYE. (Aesculus spp. Family Sapindacez.) Ornamental trees and shrubs, desirable for shade trees, occurring in North America,
Asia, Europe. 138 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. A, HORSE-CHESTNUT INSECT LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. * Zeuzera pyrina Linneus. (Horse-chestnut Borer. Cossidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Elm, alder, ash, beech, birch, horse-chestnut, linden, maple, oak, willow,
poplar, buckthorn, spindle tree, mountain ash. Injury: Bores in bark and wood of trees. Description and biology: Moth white, with steel-blue round spots; wing expanse
50-70 mm. Larva yellowish, more flesh-colored when younger, with shining black,
warts; head, thoracic shields and legs black. The larva bores in the wood and pupates
in a cell of frass near the outside. Distribution: Europe, North Africa, and introduced into North America,

Soraugr, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 1913, 3d ed., vol. 3, p. 321. Hess, Ricnarp. Der Forstschutz, 1900, vol. 2, pp. 84, 85. Nussuiy, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 321, 322, figs. 273-275. B. IMPORTANT HORSE-CHESTNUT INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coceidx. Unarmored—
Lecanium coryli Linneus; Europe; Aesculus hippocastanum, A. pavia. COLEOPTERA. Anobiida. 5
Xestobium rufovillosum De Geer; Europe; bores in dead wood of standing and living trees. Bostrychidx. Sinozylon perforans Schr. ; Europe; bores in branches. Scarabeida. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and MM. melolontha Linnzeus; Europe; larvee injure roots ofscedlings. Cerambycidze. Phymatodes lividus Rossi; Germany; bores in wood of felled trees and lumber. Ipidez. Anisandrus dispar Fabricius; Germany; galleries in wood. LEPIDOPTERA. Geometridz. Anisopteryr xscularia Schitfermiller; Europe; feeds on foliage. LITERATURE. NUsstin, Orto. Leitfaden der Forstinscktenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. HORSE-RADISH. (Radicula armoracia. Family Cruciferse.) An herb cultivated for its roots. IMPORTANT HORSE-RADISH INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Chrysomelidz. Phyllotreta nigripes Fabricius, and P. armoraciz Koch; Europe, North America. (See Crucifers.) Phyllotreta atra Fabricius; Europe; flea beetle. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. Pionea forficalis Linnzeus; Europe. (See Cabbage.) INSECTS OF IRIS, JICACO, AND JUNIPER 139

IRIS,
(Iris spp. Family Iridacee.) Flowering herbs, propagated from rocts. IRIS INSECTS. DIPTERA. Syrphide. > Eumerus strigatus Fallen, Europe, New York; attacks tubers. (See Onion.) JICACO; COCOA PLUM. (Chrysobalanus icaco. Family Rosaceze.) Atropical plant introduced into Florida. JICACO INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Aleyrodida. Aleurodicus cocois Curtis; West Indies, Mexico, Central and South America. (See Coconut.) DIPTERA. Trypetidz. Ceratitis giffardi Bezzi; Africa; attacks fruit of Chrysobalanus ellipticus. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis silvestrii Bezzi; Africa. (See Fruit.) JUNIPER; RED CEDAR. (Juniperus spp. Family Juniperaceze.) Ornamental evergreen trees or shrubs distributed throughout the extratropical
regions of the northern hemisphere. The wood is used in finishing interiors of houses,
for posts, and the manufacture of small articles, especially pencils. The fruit of
J. drupacea is edible. Aromatic oils used in medicine are obtained from the fruit
and branches of some species. Eriophyes quadrisetus F. Thoms. (Juniper blister mite. Eriophyide; Acarina.) Host: Juniperus communis. Injury: Causes deformations. Description and biology: A four-legged blister mite which forms gall-like swellings
of the fruit and needle. Very easy to introduce on nursery stock. Distribution: Europe. INSECTS INJURIOUS TO JUNIPER. HEMIPTERA. Coccidz. Armored—
Aspidiotus madcrensis Lindinger; Madeira; Juniperus cedrus. > Chionaspis striata Newstead; South Europe; Juniperus drupacea, J. fatidissima, J. macrocarpa,
J. oxycedrus, J. phenicea. Cryptaspidiotus mediterraneus Lindinger; Algeria, Greece; Juniperus macrocarpa, J. phenicea. Diaspis atlantica Lindinger; Canary Islands; Juniperus pheenicea. Diaspis visci Schrank; Europe; Juniperus canadensis, J. cedrus, J. chinensis, J. communis, J. drupacea,
. J. excelsa, J. macrocarpa, J. oxycedrus, J. phenicea, J. recurva, J. sabina, J. sphxrica, J. torulosa,
J. virginiana,
Lepidosaphes juniperi Lindinger; Anatolia; Juniperus excelsa. Unarmored—
Pseudococcus vove Nassonow; Russia; Austria; Juniperus communis. 140 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. COLEOPTERA,
Ipide. Phieosinus thujz Perris; Europe; Juniperus communis. LEPIDOPTERA. Tortricidz. Laspeyresia duplicana Zetterstedt; Europe. (See Conifers.) BIBLIOGRAPHY. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildliiuse (Coccide). 1912. Etcnuorr, W. Europ. Borkenkiifer. 1881. KAFIR CORN. See Sorghum. KALE. See Cabbage. KEI APPLE. (Aberia caffra.) A tree of Cape of Good Hope, introduced into California and Florida and quite
hardy in southern California. A spring plant grown for hedges. The fruit is used

as pickles or conserves. A KEI APPLE INSECT. DIPTERA. Trypetide. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) KOHL-RABI. See Cabbage. KOLA; COLA. (Sterculia acuminata, Family Sterculiacez.) Tropical African trees cultivated for the nuts. |
A. KOLA INSECTS. THYSANOPTERA. > Heliothrips rubrocinctus Giard; West Indies, Ceylon, Uganda, Florida. (See Fruits.) HEMIPTERA. Coccide. Lecanium catori Green; Algeria; on pods. LARCH. (Larix spp. Family Pinaceze.) Valuable ornamental and forest trees grown in the colder regions of Europe, Asia,
and North America. J. decidua (europea), the European larch, yields turpentine
and the bark contains tannin, used for tanning leather. For convenience the insect
pests are arranged under Conifers. LETTUCE. (Lactuca spp. Family Composite.) A well-known genus of herbs grown for their edible foliage. IMPORTANT LETTUCE INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Elateridz. i

Agriotes lineatus Linneus. (See Tobacco.) INSECTS OF LETTUCE AND LINDEN. 141

LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. > Pionea ferrugalis Hiibner; Europe, Asia, North America. (See Cabbage.) Noctuidz. Mamestra brassice Linnzeus; Europe; feeds on leaves. LINDEN; BASSWOOD; LIME. (Tilia spp. Family Tiliaceze.) Trees distributed generally throughout the northern temperate zone. The wood
of several species is easily cut into veneers and is hence in much demand for light
boxes for packing fruits, etc. They are valuable honey trees. A. LINDEN INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Eriophyes tiliarius Connold; Eriophyes tiliz Nalepa. (Linden Gall Mites. Eriophyide; Acarina.) Host: Tilia europaea. Injury: The first-mentioned mite forms galls on the flower bracts, and the second
on the leaves, but neither is of vital importance. Distribution: England. GittanpeERs, A. T. Forest Entomology, 1908, pp. 27, 28, 30, 31, fig. 26. B. IMPORTANT LINDEN INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccide. Armored—
Chionaspis salicis Linneeus; Europe. Unarmored—
Lecanium coryli Linnzeus; Europe. Xylococcus filifer Loew; Europe; Tilia cordata, T. grandiflora. Pyrrhocoridz. Pyrrhocoris apterus Linnzeus; Germany; in all stages sucks the juices from the leaves, fruit, and stems. COLEOPTERA. Buprestidez. Agrilus viridis Linneeus; Europe; bores in stems and branches. (See Oak). Lampra rutilans Fabricius, and L. undatus Fabricius; Europe; bore in bark and wood. Scarabeide. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and M. melolontha Linnzeus; Europe; larve injure roots of seedlings

Ipidze. Ernoporus caucasicus Lind. ; bark beetle; Europe. Ernoporus tiliz Panzer; bark beetle; Europe; Tilia parvifolia. Xyloterus domesticus Linnzeus, and X. signatus Fabricius; ambrosia beetles. LEPIDOPTERA. Cosside. Cossus cossus Linneeus, goat moth; Europe; boresin wood. (See Willow.) > Zeuzera pyrina Linneeus; Europe; boresin wood. (See Horse-chestnut.) Noctuidae. Xylina socia Rott. ; Europe. (See Plum.) Geometridz. Hibernia aurantiaria Esp., H. defoliaria Linneeus, and H. marginaria Borckh. ; Europe; defoliators. Lasiocampide. Eriogaster lanestris Linnzeus; Germany; defoliator. Lymantriidz. Dasychira pudibunda Linneus, *Lymantria monacha Linneeus, * Porthetria dispar Linneus, and
Porthesia similis Fuessly; Europe; defoliators. (See Forest defoliators.) 142 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. LITERATURE. NUsstin, OrtTo. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. HEss, R. Der Forstschutz, 1898, 1900. LinDINGER, L. Die Schildliuse (Coccide), 1912. LOQUAT. (Erobotrya japonica. Family Rosacez.) A fruit tree native of China and Japan, much planted in the Guli States. The
fruit occasionally reaches the northern markets. IMPORTANT LOQUAT INSECTS. HEMIPTERA,
Coccidez. Unarmored—
Ceroplastes vinsonii Signoret; Mauritius; Reunion Island. LEPIDOPTERA. Lycenide. Virachola insocrates Fabricius; India; bores in fruit. (See Fruit.) Pyralidz. Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée; Queensland. (See Corn.) DIPTERA. Trypetide. Ceratizis capitata Wiedemann, fruit fly. (See Fruit.) Bactrocera tryoni Froggatt; Orient. (See Fruit.) MAHOGANY. (Swietenia mahogoni. Family Meliaceze.) A tropical tree of great importance in the furniture trade, offered by nurserymen of
Florida and California. IMPORTANT MAHOGANY INSECTS. LEPIDOPTERA. Cosside. Zeuzera coffee Nietner; Orient. (See Coffee.) Pyralide. Hypsipyla robusta Moore; India; twig borer. r MAIZE. See Corn. MAMMEE APPLE. (Mammea americana, Family Guttiferse.) Tropical iruit tree now cultivated in Florida and California. MAMMEE APPLE INSECTS. DIPTERA. Try petide. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Dacus tanthodes Broun; Fiji. (See Fruit?) MANGEL. MANGO. See Beet. ( Mangifera indica, Family Anacardiaceze.) A much-cultivated fruit tree originating in the Orient and now extensively culti-
vated in the West Indies and also in Florida and California,

MANGO INSECTS. 143

A. BETTER KNOWN MANGO INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Psylla cistellata Buckton. (The Mango Shoot Psylla, Psyllidee; Hemiptera.) Host: Mango ( Mangifera indica). Injury: Injures terminal shoots by producing imbricated pseudo-cones of a bright
green or yellow color in which the larval
and pupal stages are passed. Description: Adult head small, eyes
globose and prominent; abdomen deeply
corrugated and ringed; general color of
body shining pitchy black. Distribution: India. Bucxton,G. B. Indian Museum Notes,

1896, vol. 3, No. 2, p. 91. Dinoderus distinetus Lesne. (Bostrychide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Mango, bamboo,

Injury: Infests branches,

Description: Adult brown, with red-
dish tinge at base of elytra, Marginal
teeth of prothorax very small, the two
middle ones longest, Length 3.5 mm. (See text fig. 70.) Distribution: India. Maxweit-Lerroy, H. Indian Insect

Life, 1909, p. 316. =

STEBBING, E.P. Indian Forest Insects, Fig. 70.—Mango and bamboo borer (Dinodcrus dis-
i Bi . (Maxwell-L: ip
1914, pp. 129, 130. tinctus): Adults. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) Ploczderus ruficornis Newman. (The Mango Bark Borer. Cerambycide; Coleoptera.) Host: Mango. Injury: Considered one of the most formidable pests of the Philippine Islands. Description and biology: Adult beetle 23 to 45 mm. in length with antennz longer
than body; body dull blackish in color, antennz reddish brown, thorax with sharp
spine on each side, legs of same rufous color as antenne, Eggs deposited singly on
the bark or in crevices of wounds near lower part of the trunk. Larvz on hatching
bore into the inner part of bark, where the entire grub stage is passed; pupate in a
cavity made of grass, (See plate xxx.) Distribution: Philippine Islands. Jones, C.R. The Philippine Agric. Review, 1913, vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 118-124, pls. 24,
Sternochetus gravis Fabricius. (Cryptorhynchus). (Northern Mango Weevil. Curculionids; Coleoptera.) Host: Mango. Injury: This is the common mango weevil of Northern India, and is liable to be
introduced in seed. 144 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Description and biology: Adult weevil rusty brown to blackish brown, mottled with
grayish patches; length 9 mm, Beak long. The entire development takes place in
the fruit, the larvee first feeding in the pulp,
then entering the seed. (Sce text fig. 71.) Distribution: India (Bengal, Assam, United
Provinces). SteBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Cole-

optera, p. 436, fig. 289. Sternochetus mangiferz Fabricius. (Cryptorhynchus.) (Mango Weevil. Curculionidee; Coleoptera.) Host: Mango. Injury: Serious enemy of mango, especially
in Hawaii, where it is reported to have infested
from 60 to 90 per cent of the crop. Liable to
be introduced in seed. Description and biology: Adult weevil, varies
from 6 to 8 mm, in length; when nearly de-
Fig. 71.—Northern mango weevil (Sterno- veloped whitish pink in color, later changing

Heed sl Lois Bel ag nO) to a dark brown with yellow markings; beak

short, thick, and when at rest turned back
beneath the thorax in a groove terminating between the first pair of legs. The egg is
deposited in the fleshy part of the fruit, and on hatching the larva enters the seed,
where it undergoes its entire development, vacating as an adult. a b

Fic. 72.—The mango weevil (Sternochetus mangiferx): a, Adult weevil, from above; b, same, from
below. Much enlarged. (Marlatt.) Distribution: Inhabits all mango regions bordering Indian Ocean, East Indies
including Philippines, Madagascar, Hawaii, Labuan, Straits Settlements, and South
Africa. (Text figs. 72, 73.) Van Dine, D.L. Agr. Exper. Sta. Hawaii, Press Bul. 17, 1906. Maruatr, C.L. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Entom., Cire. 141, 1911. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual_of Dangerous Insects. PLATELXXX. A DesTRUCTIVE MANGO INSECT. Mango bark borer (Plocxderus ruficornis): a, b, Larvee; ¢ ,cocoon; d, pupa; e, male; , female,
(Jones. ) MANGO INSECTS. 145

Dacus rarotonge Froggatt. (Raratonga Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Host: Mango. Injury: Larve feed in fruit. Description: Adult female length 9 mm., thorax shining black; wings hyaline;
abdomen diamond shaped; anal segment and ovipositor yellow. Distribution: Raratonga, Cook Islands. Froaeart, W.W. Proc. Linn. Soc. New South Wales, 1910, vol. 35, pt. 4, p. 872. Dacus tongensis Froggatt. (Tonga Fruit Fly. Trypetide; Diptera.) Host: Mango. Injury: Bred from mangos imported into New Zealand. Description: Adult female length 9 mm. ; head dull yellow; thorax black, no yellow

 

 

a b

Fic. 73.—The mango weevil (Sternochetus mangiferx): a, Larva; b, pupa. Much enlarged. (Marlatt.) on shoulders; wings hyaline, nervures chocolate brown; abdomen black, elongate,
oval; legs light yellow, sometimes clouded at apex of femora. Distribution: Tonga. Froceatt, W. W. Proc. Linn. Soc. New South Wales, 1910, vol. 35, pt. 4, p. 870. B. IMPORTANT MANGO INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccide:
Armored—
Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) personatus Comstock; West Indies, Mexico. (See Olive.) Aspidiotus ( Morganella) longispina Morgan; Hawaii, Mauritius; scale of adult female less than 1 mm. wide, circular, flattencd with reddish nipple-like exuvium,

  

55266—17——10

146 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Coccidz--Continued. Armored—Continned. Aspidiotus ( Morganella) maskelli Cockerell; Hawaii, Mauritius, Brazil; scale of female about 1 mm. in
diameter, pitch black exuvia concolorous and to one side. > Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) articulatus Morgan; British West Indies. (See Coffee.) Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) clavigera Cockerell; Hawaii. (See Citrus.) A spidiotus (Pseudaonidia) trilobitiformis Green; German East Africa, Java. (See Citrus.) (See text

fig. 32.) Aspidiotus (Pseudischnaspis) longissima Cockerell; Mexico; scale of female 2.5 mm. long by 0.66 mm,
broad, black marked with brown, ventral scale thin, white, exuvia to one side. Aulacaspis cinnamomi Newstead; Java, Ceylon; scale of adult female 1.25 mm. long, 1.75 mm. broad
circular, flat, thin, opaque, white. Chionaspis vitis Green; India; scale ofadult female 2.5 mm. long, 2.5 mm. wide, white, thin, transparent . * Leucaspis indica Marlatt; has been imported from India and is now established in certain sections of
Florida. Scale of female whitc, elongate narrow, convex, flattened at tip; adult inelosed within
swollen strongly chitinized second stages. (See plate I, fig. 1.) * Parlatoria pseudaspidiotus Newstead; has been found on mangos imported from India, also reported
from ‘Singapore. Scale of female 1.5 mm. long, 1.25 mm. broad, dark brown, usually with slight
apical extension. Chionaspis (Phenacaspis) dilatata Green; Ceylon; scale of female 2 mm. in length, 1.5 mm. in breadth,
snow white, opaque, with irregular raised lincs on dorsal surface. Chionapsis eugeni# Maskell; Orient; scale of female 2.5 mm. long, white, elongate pyriform and flat. Chionaspis (Phenacaspis) natalensis Cockerell, Natal; scale of female pyriform, about 3mm. long, white
with exuvic pale orange brown, scale of male feebly tricarinate. Unarmored—

Ceroplastes rubens Maskell; Australia, Hawaii, Japan. (See Avocado.) Ceroplastes vinsonii Signoret; Mauritius; female covered with wax and resembles C. rusci. Coccus acuminatus Signoret; Hawaii, Ceylon; adult female 3-3.25 mm. in length, flat pale green, acumi-
nate at cephalic extremity and broadly rounded posteriorly. Coccus acutissimus Green; Ceylon; adult female 5-6 mm. long, 1-1.5 mm. broad, long and narrow;
acutely pointed at each end; color varying from creamy white to deep chocolate brown in older
specimens. * Coccus mangiferex Green; West Indies, Ceylon; adult female 3-4 mm. in length, 2.5-3.5 mm. in breadth
deltoid, pale yellowish green. Has been introduced into Florida and gives promise of being a serious
pest. .

Geococcus radicum Green; Ceylon, Hawaii; liable to be introduced on roots. Adult female inclosed in
a brittle white sac, broadly fusiform, narrow at both extremities; antenne 6-jointed. ©

Icerya minor Green; Bengal; adult female 4-6 mm. in length, yellow, with 22 or 23 waxy patches around
body and a dorsal patch of about 16. Icerya seychellarum Westwood; Seychelles. (Sec Citrus.) Phenacoccus iceryoides Green; India, Philippines; adult female usually to be found at anterior extremity
ofa globose ovisac, margin with conspicuous fringe of white waxy tissues. Phenacoccus mangiferx Green; Ceylon, India; femalc pale yellow, dorsal area covered with white mealy
powder, with stout white processes on margin. Pulvinaria ficus Hempel; Brazil. Pulvinaria mammex, Maskell, Hawaii; adult female reddish brown covered with thin grayish meal,
ovisac large, snow white, forming a mass of loose cotton. Saissetia psidii Green; Ceylon; adult female bright red to deep brown, length 2.5-3.75 mm. Saissetia punctilifera Green; Ceylon; adult female 3-3.75 mm. long, 2-2.5 mm. broad, irregularly oval,
narrowed in front, varying from reddish green to reddish ochreous. Vinsonia stellifera Westwood; Ceylon. (See Coffee.) THYSANOPTERA. * Heliothrips rubrocinctus Giard; West Indies, Ceylon, Uganda, Florida. (See Fruit.) COLEOPTERA. Cerambycide. hs
Epepeotes luscus Fabricius; Java; bark borer. Batocera titana Thomson; India; boresin sapwood. (See text fig. 74.) Brachyrhinide. Diaprepes abbreviatus Linnaeus; West Indies. (See Sugar cane.) Curculionidae. Cytorhynchus frigidus Fabricius; India; breeds in fruit. LEPIDOPTERA. Notodontide. Stauropus alternus Walker; India, Ceylon, Java; defoliator. INSECTS OF MANGO AND MAPLE. 147

DIPTERA. Trypetidie. Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Dacus passiflore Froggatt; Fiji. (See Fruit.) Dacus persice Rig; India. (See Fruit.) Dacus ferrugineus Fabricius; India. (See
Fruit.) (See fig. 75.) Dacus diversus Coquillett; India. (See
Fruit.) Bactrocera tryoni Froggatt; Orient. (Sce
Fruit.) Bactrocera zonatus Saunders; fruit fly;
Solomon Islands, Ceylon, India. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis punctata Wiedemann; Africa. (See Fruit.) LITERATURE. Froeeatt, W. W. Proe. Linn. Soc. New
South Wales, 1910, vol. 35, pt. 4, pp. 868-870. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrank-
heiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. MAPLE. (Acer spp. Family Aceracez.) A large genus of trees and shrubs
occurring in Europe, Asia, and Amer-
ica, much prized for cultivation as

¢ shade trees and valuable for lum-
ber. IMPORTANT MAPLE INSECTS. ACARINA. Eriophyidz. Eriophyes macrochelus Nalepa; blister
mite; England; attacks leaves of Acer F1G.74.—Mango borer (Batocera titana): Male. (Stebbing.) 7

 

campestre. HEMIPTERA,
Coccide. Armored—
Chionaspis salicis Linnzeus; Europe; Acer campestre and A. pseudoplatanus. Unarmored—

Eriococcus aceris Signoret; Europe; Acer,campestre, A. pseudoplatanus. Lecanium aceris Curtis; Europe. Lecanium coryli Linneeus; Europe; Acer campestre, A. negundo, A. platanoides, A. pseudoplatanus. Palzococcus fuscipennis Burmeister; Europe. Fic. 75,—Mango fruit fly (Dacus ferrugineus): a, Injured mango; b, adult,ande, larva, (Maxwell-Lefroy.) 148 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Anobiida. Xestobium rufovillosum DeGeer; Europe; bores in trunks. Ptilinus pectinicornis Linneeus; Europe; bores in trunks. Lymexylonidz. Hylecetus dermestoides Linnzeus; Germany; bores in wood. Buprestidz. * Agrilus viridis Linneeus; Europe; bores in stems and branches. (See Oak.) Scarabeeide. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and M. melolontha Linnzeus; Europe; injure roots of seedlings,

Cerambycide. Rhopalopus insubricus Germar; Europe; bores in bark and wood. Scolytida, Ipidae. Scolytus aceris Knotek; Bosnia; galleries in bark and sapwood. Anisandrus dispar Fabricius; Germany; ambrosia beetle in wood. Xyloterus domesticus Linnweus and X. signatus Fabricius; ambrosia beetle Germany. LEPIDOPTERA. Cossidz. Cossus cossus Linnzeus; Europe; bores in wood. (See Willow.) %* Zeuzera pyrina Linneeus; Europe; bores in wood. (See Horse-chestnut.) Geometrida. Cheimatobia brumata Linnaeus; Europe; defoliator. Lymantriide. Dasychira pudibunda Linnus, * Euproctis chrysorrhea Linneeus, * Lymantria monacha Linnzus,
% Porthetria dispar Linnzeus, and Porthesia similis Fuessty; Europe; defoliators. (See Forest
defoliators.) Nepticulidz. Nepticula scricopeza Zeller; Germany; attacks leaves and seed. LITERATURE. SoRAvVER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. NUss.In, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. HEss, R. Der Forstschutz, 1898, 1900. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildliiuse (Coecide), 1912. MELON. (See Cucurbits.) MESQUITE; ALGAROBA. (Prosopis spp. Family Leguminosz.) Tender trees and shrubs growing in arid regions. Several species are native in the
Southwestern United States. The pods are eaten by cattle. IMPORTANT MESQUITE INSECTS. HEMIPTERA,
Coreidz. Ceratopachys variabilis Dall., a sucking bug; India; sucks juices of jhand (Prosopis spicigera). COLEOPTERA. Bostrychidz. Sinorylon crassum Lesne and S. anale Lesne; India; bores in Prosopis spicigera. LITERATURE. STEBBING, E, P, A Manual of Forest Zoology for India, 1908. STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. INSECTS OF MILLET, MOUNTAIN ASH, AND MOUNTAIN EBONY. 149

MILLET. (Panicum miliaceum Linneus. Family Graminez.) These are numerous varieties and species of millets grown throughout the world. This species is cultivated extensively in China, Japan, and Russia. The main danger
of importing pests in shipments of seed. Its pests are discussed under Grains and

Grasses. MOUNTAIN ASH; ROWAN TREE. (Sorbus spp.) Ornamental deciduous trees of the Northern Hemisphere, with small red berries,
The berries of some species are edible, and the wood is used for tool handles and
similar small articles. IMPORTANT MOUNTAIN-ASH INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Scarabaeidae. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and M. melolontha Linnzeus; Europe; larvee injure roots of seedlings,

Curculionidae. Magdalis barbicornis Latreille; Europe; breeds under bark. Scolytidz, Ipidez. Scolytus mali Bechst. and S. rugulosus Ratzeburg Europe; bark beetles. Xyloterus domesticus Linneeus; Germany; Ambrosia beetle. LEPIDOPTERA. Cossidz. * Zeuzera pyrina Linneus; Europe: bores in wood. (See Horse-chestnut.) Geometridae. Hibernia defoliaria Linnzeus; Europe; defoliator. Lymantriidz. * Lymantria monacha Linnzeus, *Orgyia antiqua Linneus, and Porthesia similis
defoliators. (See Forest defoliators.) uessly; Europe

 

Hyponomeutidz. * Argyresthia conjugella Zeller; Europe, Japan, British Columbia; bores in fruit. (See Apple.) HYMENOPTERA. Tenthredinidax. Nematus septentrionalis Linnzeus; Europe; sawfly. Priophorus padi Linnzeus; Europe. (See Plum.) Collimonidz. -
Megastigmus brevicaudus Ratzeburg, a chalcid; Europe; breeds in seed. LITERATURE,
Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. MOUNTAIN EBONY. (Bauhinia racemosa, etc. Family Leguminosz.) Very showy plants of the Tropics. Many species are imported into Florida and
California. ;
IMPORTANT BAUHINIA INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Mylabridce (Bruchide). Caryoborus gonagra Fabricius; India; Breeds in the pods of Bauhinia racemosa. LITERATURE. Steppine, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. 150 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. MULBERRY. (Morus spp. Family Moraceze.) Trees of the temperate regions of the Old and New World. Some species produce
delicious fruit, while others are cultivated for hedges or as food for silk worms. IMPORTANT MULBERRY INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidx:
Unarmored— :
Ceroplastes rusci Linneus; Italy. Guériniella serratulz Fabricius; Italy. COLEOPTERA. Cerambycide. Apriona germari Hope and A. cinerea Chevrolat; India; bore instems of Morus indica. LEPIDOPTERA. Geometride. Hemirhopala atrilineata Butler; Japan; defoliator. Zamacra albofasciaria Leech; Japan; defoliator. LITERATURE. SoRAUER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol.3. StespineG, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. MUSKMELON. NARCISSUS; DAFFODIL. (See Cucurbits.)

. (Narcissus spp. Family Amaryllidacee.) Flowering plants propagated from the bulbs. NARCISSUS INSECTS. Merodon clavipes Fabricius; > Merodon equestris Fabricius,
(Narcissus Flies. Syrphide; Diptera.) Hosts: Narcissus, daffodil. ’

Injury: Breeds in the bulbs. . Description and biology: M. clavipes black, clothed with white, yellow, red, or black
hairs. > JL. equestris black or dark metallic green, similarly clad; 13mm. long. Mag-
got grayish ‘yellow, 12 mm. long? Distribution: Europe. Have been introduced into Canada, California and New
Zealand. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 435. OAK. (Quercus spp. Family Cupulifere.) Valuable timber trees of the northern hemisphere. The bark of certain species
yields cork, while of other species it is valuable for medicinal or tanning purposes. A. BETTER KNOWN OAK INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. >Agrilus viridis Linnzeus. (Flat-Headed Wood Borer. Buprestidee; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Oak, beech, alder, aspen, linden, birch, rose, grape, maple, pine. Injury: Bores in stems and branches of trees. OAK INSECTS. 151

Description and biology: Beetle 5-8 mm. long, of variable color (olive green, blue
green, blue, coppery, etc. ), undersides black. Prothorax much broader than long,
with median impression. Larva with first thoracic segment strongly broadened, body
white. A generation requires two years. Distribution: Europe (Austria, Germany). : Introduced into eastern United States
in roses. Hess, RicHarp. Der Forstschutz, 1900, vol. 2, pp. 7, 8, figs. 2, 3. Fic. 76,—Great oak-borer ( Cerambyz cerdo); Adult and larva, (Niisslin.) Cerambyx cerdo Linnus. (Great Oak Borer. Cerambycide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Oak, cork oak, ash, walnut. Injury: Bores in wood. (See text fig. 76.) Distribution: Europe, Sudan, Tunis. Nissuin, Orro: Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 145-148, figs. 115, 116. Sorauver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 495-496. Haltica quercetorum Foudr. (Oak Flea Beetle. Chrysomelide. Coleoptera.) Hosts: Oak, hazel, willow, birch, tea rose, beech, alder. 152 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Injury: Feed on foliage and buds in adult and larval stage. Distribution: Europe (Russia, Germany). Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 523. Cnethocampa processiona Linneus. (Oak Procession Moth. Cnethocampide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Oak. Injury: Deioliator; serious. Description and biology: Moth, body clad with long hairs; forewings yellow gray
with dark gray cross band; hindwings yellowish white with brown gray cross band. Larva gray blue with dark dorsal stripe and reddish-brown smooth spots; undersides
light greenish gray. Feedsat night. In the daytime the larvee wander in processions
of a few files. Pupation takes place in thick oval brown cocoon. Eggs are laid in
clusters of 100 to 200, covered with scales from the parent, and placed on smooth spots
of the bark. Distribution: Europe. Nissuin, Orto. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 326-328, figs. 280, 281. °
Coleophora lutipennella Zell. (Oak Bud Moth. Elachistidze; Lepidoptera.) Host: Oaks and possibly birch. Injury: Attacks the buds. ,

Description and biology: Adult, moth, wing expanse 15 mm., with front wings yellow,
hind wings gray, all fringed. Larva, gray with black head. Attacks especially the
axillary buds. Pupates in a sack or case. Distribution: Germany. Nissury, Orro. Leitiaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, p. 433. Tortrix viridana Linnzus. (Green Oak Tortrix. Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Quercus pedunculata, Q. sessiliflora, Castanea vulgaris. Injury: Feeds on the buds, foliage, and inflorescence. Description and biology: Moth, wing expanse 18-22 mm., forewings brilliant green
with yellowish border, hind wings gray. Larva, dirty green, punctured with black,
with black head, 15 mm.long. Eggs are laid onthe buds. ‘The larva rolls the leaves,
in which it feeds. Distribution: Europe. Hess, Ricuarp. Der Forstschutz, 1900, vol. 2, pp. 128-180, figs. 66, 67. Nissin, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1918, pp. 403, 404,
fig. 332. B. IMPORTANT OAK INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Aphidide. Pterochlorus exsiccator Altum, Stomaphis longirostris Altum, and S. quercus Linneeus, plant lice;
Europe; attack the bark, especially of the roots. Coccidez. Armored—
Aspidiotus ( Targionia) alni Marchal; Austria; Quercus cerris. Aspidiotus ( Targionia) distincta Leonardi; Italy; Quercus robur, Q. suber. Aspidiotus ( Targionia) vitis Signoret; Italy, Sardinia; Quercus macedonica, Q. suber. Aspidiotus minimus Leonardi; Europe; Quercus coccifera, Q. iler, Q. suber. Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) zonatus Frauenfeld; Europe; Quercus cerris, Q. lusitanica, Q. montana, Q.
nigra, Q. pilustris, Q. pubescens, Q. robur, Q. sessiliflora. Chionaspis sticis Linneeus; Europe; Quercus ilex, Q. robur. OAK INSECTS. 153

Coccidze—Continued. Unarmored— ;

* Asterolecrnium viriolosum Ratzeburg; Eastern United States, Europe; Quercus branti, Q. cerris, Q.
iler, Q. miccdonica, Q. prustris, Q. prinws, Q. pubescens, Q.robur, Q. sessiliflora, Q. toza, Q. castanei-
folia, Q. coccifera. o

Eriscozcus aceris Signoret; Austria; Quercus sessiliflora. Kermes bacciformis Leonardi; Europe; Quercus cerris, Q. suber. Kermes ballot Signoret; Algeria, France; Quercus ilex ballota. Kermes cordiformis Lindinger; Austria; Quercus robur. Kermes gibbosus Signoret, Austria; Quercus cerris. Kermzs ilicis Linneus; Europe; Quercus coccifera, Q. ilex. Kermes pallidus Signoret; Europe. Kermes roboris Fourcroy; Europe; Quercus cerris, Q. ilex, Q. pedunculata, Q. robur, Q. sessiliflora. Kermes vermilio Planchon; Europe; Quercus coccifera. Lecinium ziliatum Douglas; Europe; Quercus robur. Lecanium coryli Linneeus; Europe; Quercus coccifera, Q. iler, Q. robur, Q. sessiliflora, Q. suber. Lecanium pulchrum King; Europe. Nidularia pulvinita Planchon; France, Algeria; Quercus coccifera, Q. iler. Palzeococcus fuscipennis Burmeister; Denmark; Quercus robur. Pulviniria sericea Fourcroy; Europe; Quercus pubescens. COLEOPTERA. Anobiide. Xestobium rufovillosum De Geer; Europe; bores in dead wood. Ptilinus pectinicornis Linneeus; Europe; bores in the wood, injuring it for technical purposes. Lyctidz. Lyctus linearis Goeze; Europe, South America; bores in seasoned lumber, especially in sapwood,
also in barrel staves. Bostrychidz. Bostrychus capucinus Linneus; Europe; boresin lumber and barrel staves. Sinozylon perforans Schr. ; Europe; boresin the branches. Lymexylonidz. Hylecetus dermestoides Linnzeus; Europe; bores in wood. Lymexylon nivale Linnzeus; Europe; boresin the bark and wood. ‘

Tenebrionidz. Piylan 7ibyus Fabricius, Russia; injures the roots of seedlings. Scarabeide. Buchirus macleayi Ho. ; India; bred from oak stem. Buprestide. Ajrilus anjustulus Iliger, A.elonjatus Herbst, A. subauratus Gebler, A. biguttatus Fabricius; Europe;
bore in bark, bast, and sapwood. a
Cirysoothris affinis Fabricius; Europe; bores in bast and sapwood of branches and in trunks of seed-
lings. Crexbus elttus Fabricius, C. fasciatus Villers, C. wndatus Fabricius; Europe; attack the stems and
branches, especially of cork oaks. Elateridz. Agriotes wterrimus Linneeus, A. lineatus Linneeus,and A. obscurus Linneeus, Athous subfuscus Miiller;
Dolopius mirjinatus Linneus; L1con murinus Linnzus; Limonius zruginosus Olivier; Prosternon
holosericeus Olivier; Selatosomus z#neus Linneeus; wireworms; Europe; injurious to acorns and
seedlings. Scarabeide. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and M. melolontha Linneus; Europe; larve injures roots of seed-
lings. Cerambycide. Callidium zneum DeGeer; Germany; bores in wood of felled trees and lumber. Cerambyz cerdo Linneeus; Europe; bores in bark and wood. Clytus tropicus Panzer; Germany; bores in wood. Pyrrhilium singuineum Linneus, and Phymatodes testaceus Linneeus; Germany; bore in wood of
felled trees and lumber. Piy nuztodes lividus Rossi; Germany; particularly injurious to barrel hoops and lumber. Lophosternus hugeli Redtenbacher; India; bores in trunks of Quercus incana. Paraphrus granulosus Thomson; India; bores in Quercus ilex. Prionus corpulentus Bates; India; probably bores in Quercus semicarpifolia. Massicus unicolor Gahan; India; bores in heartwood of Quercus griffithii. Xylotrechus stebbingi Gahan; India; bores in bast and outer sapwood of Quercus dilatata. Mcges marmoratus Westwood; India; on Quercus yriffithii. 154 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Brachyrhinidz. Brachyderes lusitanicus Fabricius; Europe; attacks roots of Quercus rohur, etc. Metallites iris Olivier; Europe; breeds at the roots. Curculionidae. g
Curculio nucum Linnzeus (Balaninus); Europe (see Hazel). Many other spp. Curculio (Balaninus)

Calendridz. Calendra sculpturata Gyllenhal; India, breeds in the acorns. Scolytidz, Ipide. Anisandrus dispar Fabricius; Europe; galleries in wood. Dryocoetes hewetti Stebbing; India; bores in Quercus dilatata and Q. incana. Dryocoetes villosus Fabricius; Germany; galleries in bark. Hylesinus crenatus Fabricius; Germany; galleries in bark. Chramesus globulus Stebbing; India; bark and wood of Quercus incana. Scolytus intricatus Ratzeburg; Europe; galleries in bark. Xyleborus dryographus Ratzeburg and X. monographus Fabricius; Europe; galleries in wood. Xyleborus improbus Sampson; India; tunnels Quercus lamellosa. Xyloterus domesticus Linneus, and X. signatus Fabricius; Europe; galleries in sapwood. c

Platypodidz. Diapus capillatus Sampson; India; bores in Quercus lameliosa. Diapus impressus Janson; India; bores in Quercus incana. Crossotarsus fairmairei Chapuis; India, bores in Quercus incana. Platypus cylindrus Fabricius; Europe; bores in staves. Scolytoplatypidz. Scolytoplatypus darjeelingi Stebbing; India; tunnels timber of Quercus lamellosa. LEPIDOPTERA. Cossidx. Cossus cossus Linneeus, goat moth, Europe; bores in wood. (See Willow.) Zeuzera pyrina Linneeus; Europe; bores in wood. (See Horse-chestnut.) Geometridz. Anisopteryx xscularia Schiffermiller; Europe; feeds on foliage. Cheimatobia brumata Linneeus; Europe; defoliator. Hibernia aurantaria Esp. ; H. dcfoliaria Linneeus, and H. marginaria Borckh. ; Germany; defoliators. Larentia dilutata Boreckh. ; Europe; defoliator. Biston pomonarius Hiibner; Europe. (See Fruit.) ’

Tineidae. Tischeria complanella Hiibner and T. simploniella F. R.; Germany; leaf miners. Lasiocampidz. Eriogaster lanestris Linnzeus, Lasiocampa quercus Linnzeus, and Malacosoma neustria Linnzeus; Eu-

rope; defoliators. Lymantriidz. Dasychira pudibunda Linnseas, * Euproctis chrysorrhea Linneeus, *Lymaniria monacha Linneus,
Ocneria detrita Esp., > Porthetria dispar Linnzeus, Porthesia similis Fuessly; Europe; defoliators. (See
Forest defoliators.) Gazalina apsara; India; defoliates Quercus lamellosa. Sesiidz. Sesia conopiformis Esp. and S. vespiformis Linneeus; Europe; bore in trunk. Tortricidz. Laspeyresia splendana VWtibner ( Carpocapsa); Europe; breeds in acorns. (See Chestnut.) y

Laspeyresia grossana Haworth (Carpocapsa). (See Beech.) Notocelia roborana Treitschke; Europe. (See Gooseberry.) HYMENOPTERA. Cephidide. Janus cynosbati Linneeus, a wood wasp mining in shoots; Europe. Tenthredinide. Macrophya punctum-album Linneeus; Russia; sawfly on foliage. LITERATURE,

SoRAVER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. NUssuin, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. Hess, R. Der Forstschutz, 1898, 1900. INSECTS OF OAK, OATS, OKRA, OLIVE. 155

BareaGli, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. LInvINGER, L. Die Schildliiuse (Coccide), 1912. STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects. Coleoptera, 1914. Stessinc, FE. P. A Manual of Forest Zoology for India, 1908. OATS. (Avena sativa Linneus. Family Graminez.) This crop is grown in all temperate regions and also in Australia, Africa, and
South America, the greater part of the world’s crop being raised in Europe. While
the United States exports more oats than it imports, the latter trade is of considerable
importance and there is always danger of importing pests with the grain. A full
discussion of its insect pests will be found under the heading Grains and Grasses. OKRA. (Hibiscus esculentus. Family Malvacez.) A cultivated plant introduced into the United States from Africa; cultivated for
its fruit pods. IMPORTANT OKRA INSECTS. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. .

Sylepta derogata Fabricius; Africa, Asia. Noctuidz. Cosmophila sabulifera Guénée; Africa, Asia, Hawaii. COLEOPTERA. Chrysomelidz. Diabrotica graminea Ballou; Porto Rico. OLIVE. (Olea spp. Family Oleacez.) Fruit bearing trees or shrubs of the tropical and warm temperate parts of the old
world to New Zealand. Olea europxa produces the olive prized as a fruit and for its
oil. It is cultivated in California and New Mexico. A. BETTER KNOWN OLIVE INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Aleurolobus olivinus Silvestri. (Olive White Fly. Aleyrodide; Hemiptera.) Host: Olive. Injury: Feeds on foliage, ordinarily not serious. Description and biology: Adult, male body cream-colored or whitish ocher; body
and wings sprinkled with a white waxy powder, forewings exhibit fulvous spots. Pupa case, length somewhat exceeding width; dorsum black, margin marked with
a fringe of wax. Zgg reticulated subelliptical, attached by a short pedicel; pale
straw in color when first deposited, subsequently turning to brown. One generation
a year. Distribution: Italy. Sitvesrrt, F, Dispense di Entomologia Agraria, 1911, p. 128. Prays oleellus Fabricius. (Olive Moth. Hyponomeutide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Olives. Injury: Serious. Description and biology: Adult, moth 6-6.5 mm, long, gray with silvery reflection,
a black spot on the apex of the scutellum; front wings gray with silvery réflection,

156 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. and with several black or dark spots; hind wings uniformly gray. Pupa obconical
5 mm. long in elongate silken cocoon, Larva when full grown, dusky color with
two olivaceous stripes on the dorsum, In the first generation feeds on the leaves;
in the next among the buds and blooms; and in the last in the fruit. Distribution: France, Italy, Spain. Sirvestri, F. Bull. Lab. Zool. R. Sc. Agr. Portici, 1907, vol. 2, pp, 88-184, figs.1-68 . Dacus olez Rossi. (The Olive Fly. Trypetidee; Diptera.) Host: Olive (Olea europaea, O. verrucosa, O. chrysophylla.) Injury: Serious pest of olive in Mediterranean regions. Description and biology: Adult, female small, about 5 mm. in length; head dull
yellow, eyes black, thorax black with silvery pubescence on dorsal surface forming
three parallel black lines; abdomen black, covered with a scattered gray pubescence,
The egg, larval, and usually the pupal stages are passed in the fruit, Occasionally
pupation takes place in the soil. Larvee hatch in from 2 to 4 days after deposition
of the eggs; larval stage lasts approximately 10 to 13 days; pupal stage 13 to 49 days,
depending upon the season. Distribution: Sicily, Italy, north, east, and south Africa, Canary Islands, Medi-
terranean region, northern and western Asia, Himalayas, India. Sirvestri, F. Bull. Lab. Zool. R. Sc. Agr., Portici, 1913, vol. 8, p. 70. B. IMPORTANT OLIVE INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidx. Armored—

Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) nigropunctatus Cockerell; Chili, Mexico; adult female scale 3 mm. in diam-
eter, dirty grav; exuvice pitch black with narrow reddish margin. Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) personatus Cockerell; Jamaica; adult female scale very small, convex,
circular, dark grav or black. *Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) articulatus Morgan; Jamaica. (See Coffee.) Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) duplex Cockerell; Italy; on Olea fragrans; adult female scale 2.66 mm, in
diameter, subcircular, moderately convex, dark, blackish brown, exuvia to one side and of orange
color. Aspidiotus (Aonidia) olex Leonardi; Africa. Lepidosaphes olivina Leonardi; Africa. Chionaspis (Phenacaspis) bupleuri Marchal; Tunis. Chionaspis nerii Newstead; Algeria. Diaspis ole Colvée; Spain. *Fiorinia thee Green; India; adult female seale elongate, narrow, dark brown with distinct dark median
marking. Male scale snow white indistinelty tricarinate (see pl. V, fig. 1). Leucaspis ricce Targioni-Tozzetti; France, Greece, Algeria, Italy; adult female scale 2.25 mm, long,
0.5 mm. broad, narrow, white, with sides parallel. Parlatoria affinis Newstead; Algeria; adult female scale 1-1.25 mm. in diameter, when isolated circular. dusky white or pale ocherous. Parlatoria calianthina Berlese and Leonardi; Italy and Algeria; adult female scale 2.3 mm. loag, 2.6
mm, broad, white, dorsal exuvia subcentral. Unarmored—

Ceroplastes rusci Linneeus; Italy; adult female covered with wax, antenne 6-jointed. Euphilippia olivina Berlese and Silvestri; Italy. Filippi ole Costa ; Italy, Algeria; adult female forms a white sae in the foliage. Lichtensia eitoni Newstead; Alger.a; adult femaleinelosed in a felted sac; adult male seale glossy white
with strong central keel. Polliniz pollini Costa; Italy; adult female seale pale yellow to brown, smooth head, eonvex, with
median curled flossy like filaments on the dorsum. THYSANOPTERA,

Phil eothripide. Phleothrips olexCosta; Algiers, Italy, South America; attacks leaves, bloom and fruit and is an impor -

tant pest in Italy aeeording to Trabut. INSECTS OF OLIVE AND ONION. 157

COLEOPTERA. Cerambycidz. Vesperus mauretanicus Dry. ; Algeria, Spain. (See Grape.) Curculionidz. Cionus, ratini De Geer; Europe; breeds on leaves. Ipide. Phieotribus olex Fabricius; barkbeetle; Southern Europe; Tunis; in nursery stock. Aylesinus frazini Fabricius and H. ole Fabricius; Europe; breed in bark and wood. Hylesinus vestitus M.and R.; barkbeetle; Tunis, Corsica, Italy, Southern France; in Pistacia and olive. LEPIDOPTERA. Ccophoridz. Ccophora oliviella Fabricius; Europe; infests fruit. LITERATURE. TRaBuT, L. La Defense Contre les Cochenilles, 1910, p. 88. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. ONION; SHALLOT; LEEK; GARLIC. (Allium spp. Liliaceze.) Bulbous root plants native of Asia domesticated for centuries and developed into
many valuable varieties. A. BETTER KNOWN ONION INSECTS LIKELY TO BF IMPORTED. Chortophila cllicrura Rondani. (Shallot Fly. Anthomyide; Diptera.) Hosts: Allium spp. (including shallot), asparagus, human excrement. Injury: Breeds in the plant stems. Description and biology: Male fly gray, with three brown stripes on scutellum,
abdomen with deep black median stripe and brown segments; appendages black. Female lighter; length 4.5 mm. Maggot dirty white, with 14 teeth on apical margin
of stigmal plate. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 427.
: * Hylemyia antiqua Meigen. (Onion Maggot. Anthomyide; Diptera.) Host: Onions. Injury: Serious injury to the roots. Descrvption and biology: Fly black, thickly dusted with gray, with dark flecks and
stripes; legs piceous black; length 6.5 mm. Maggot yellowish, 5-6 mm. long. Distribution: Europe. Introduced into United States. Sorausr, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 480, fig. 262. Smirn, J. B. New Jersey Exp. Sta. 1907, Bul. 200, pp. 10-15, figs. 1, 8, 11. >* Eumerus strigatus Fabricius. (Onion Fly. Syrphide; Diptera.) Host: Onions, Iris. Injury: Breeds in the stems and bulbs. Description and biology: Fly green; abdomen with gray hairy lunules at apex and at
sides of the first three segments; antenne dark; length 6-7.5 mm. Maggot grayish
yellow. Pupa sometimes in soil, sometimes in flower shaft. Distribution: Europe. Reported present in this country, by Felt, from Iris roots
at Saratoga Springs, N. Y.

Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 484. 158 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. B. IMPORTANT ONION INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Curculionida. Hypera nigrirostris Fabricius, H. ononidis Chevrolat; Europe. (Sec Clover.) Brachyceridz. Brachycerus albidentatus Gyllenhal; Europe; breeds in roots of Allium sativum and A. ascalonicum. Brachycer zs corrosus Gyllenhal; Europe; breeds in roots of Allium rosewm. Brachycerus pradieri Fairmaire; Europe; breeds in roots of Allium sphxrocephalum. Brachycerus undatus Fabricius, breeds in roots of Allium roseum. ORACHE. (Atriplex hortensis. Family Chenopodiacere.) Plants cultivated for their succulent vegetation. IMPORTANT ORACHE INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Chrysomelidz. Cassida nebulosa Linneus. (Sce Beet.) DIPTERA. Anthomyide,

* Chortophila (Pegomya) hyoscyami Panzcr. (See Beet.) ORCHIDS. (Family Orchidacez.) Many species of orchids are imported by florists from all parts of the tropical
and semitropical regions. Several important pests have been taken in quarantine. IMPORTANT ORCHID INSECTS. ACARINA. Tyroglyphide. Rhizoglyphus (Coepophagus) echinopus F. & R. (See Potato.) HEMIPTERA. Coccidee. Arinored—

Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) alienus Newstead; London, England. A spidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) persez Comstock; Central America. Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) portoricensis Lindinger; Venezuela. Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) coloratus Cockerell; Guatemala. * Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) articulatus Morgan; Mexico. Aspidiotus ( Targionia) biformis Cockerell; Trinidad, Venezuela, Grenada, Central America, Jamaica,
Antigua, Colombia. * A spidiotus ( Targionia) biformis var. catileyz Cockerell; Jamaica. Diaspis cattleyze Cockerell; Mexico, England. Fiorinia stricta Maskell; New Zealand. Furcaspis oceanica Lindinger; Venezuela. Lepidosaphes cocculi Green; Philippine Islands. Lepidosaphes pallida Green; Java. Parlatoria mytilaspiformis Green; Hawaii. *Parlatoria proteus Curtis; India, Brazil, Japan, Philippine Islands, Burma, United States. * Parlatoria pseudaspidiotus Lindinger; India, Philippine Islands, Singapore. Has been introduced into
the United States on mangos. Pinnaspis longula Leonardi; Straits Settlements. Unarmored—
Asterolecanium aureum Boisduval; Ceylon, West Indies. Asterolecanium epidendri Bouché; Central America, South America, Samoa. Coccus acuminatus Signoret; Hawaii. Coccus minimus Newstead; Straits Settlements. Pseudococcus glaucus Maskell; New Zealand. * Pulvinaria floccifera Westwood; Venezuela, British Isles, Massachusetts, Indiana, California,

INSECTS OF ORCHIDS AND PALMS. 159

Castniide. LEPIDOPTERA. Castnia licus Drury; South America. (See Sugar cane.) Curculionidz. COLEOPTERA. > Cholus forbesi Pascoe, and > Cholus cattleyz Champion have been introduced on orchids. PALMS. The palms yield some very important articles of commerce, such as coconuts

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 77.—Coconut white fly
(Aleurodicus destructor):
Adult white fly, enlarged,
at bottom. (Mackie.) 7 days. Distribution: Fiji. and dates, and are also considered very valuable as orma-
mental plants. For convenience the pests of the coconut palm (Cocos
nucifera), the date palm (Phonix dactylifera), the royal
palm (Oreodoxa regia), the sago palm (Cycas revoluta), and
the toddy palm (Phenix sylvestris) are treated under this
heading,

A. BETTER KNOWN PALM INSECTS LIKELY TO BE
IMPORTED. Aleurodicus destructor Mackie. (Coconut White Fly. Aleyrodide; Hemiptera.) Host: Coconut palms. Injury: Has the appearance of being a serious coconut
enemy. Biology: Eggs are laid on undersurface of the leaflets,
where the young larve locate. Life history much the
same as Dialewrodes citri R. and H. (See Citrus.) (See
text fig. 77.) Distribution: Philippines. Macxiz, D. B.: Philippine Agricultural Review, vol. 5,
No. 3, 1912. Levyuana iridescens Bethune-Baker. (The Coconut Leaf Moth. Zygeenidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Coconut palm and royal palm (Oreodoza
regia). Injury: Larve injurious to foliage, giving the trees a
sickly appearance. Description and biology: Adult female, head and thorax
steel-blue; abdomen and legs ocherous, primary veins
deep unicolorous steel-blue, secondaries iridescent steel-
blue; wing expanse about 16 mm. Zggs deposited on
under surface of leaflets, usually near the base. Upon
hatching, which requires about 4 or 5 days, the larvee
begin feeding around the egg shell, gradually proceeding in
a longitudinal line up the leaf, nibbling on the epidermal
cells on the under surface of the leaflet; are full grown in
3 or 4 weeks, when they return to the base of the leaves

and construct a white cocoon within which to pupate; the adults appear in about

Jepson, Frank P. Dept. Agric. Fiji, Council Paper No. 25, 1911, p. 35. 160 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Oryctes rhinoceros Linnzus. (Rhinoceros Beetle. Scarabzeide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Palm, aloes, sugar cane (occasionally). Injury: Destructive to coconut palm in Malacca, Singapore, and Madras. May be
introduced in plants. . Description and biology: Adult beetle large thickset, about 5 cm. long; and 25 mm. broad; color dark brown to black. The adults feed upon the soft tissues and unopened
leaves of palms. Larve are found in decomposed vegetable matter and soil rich in
humus about plant roots. Pupa is inclosed in hard case. The eggs are white but
become dull with age; measure 3.5 mm. by 2 mm. ; oval. Distribution: Ceylon, India, Siam, Annam, Pahang, Sumatra, Java, Celebes. Ceram, Amboina, Philippine Islands, Formosa, Korea, China, Straits Settlements,
Tahiti, Madras, Malabar. Maxwett-Lerroy, H. Indian Insect Pests, 1906, p. 207. Maxwett-Lerroy, H. Indian Insect Life, 1909, p. 255. Guosu, ©.C. Memoirs Dept. Agric. India, Entom. Ser., 1911, vol. 2, No. 10, p. 193. Promecotheca cumingii Baly. (The Coconut Leaf Miner Beetle. Hispidse; Coleoptera.) Host: Coconut (Cocos nucifera). : . Injury: Mines the leaves in larval stage; adults also feed on leaves. May be intro-
duced in leaves of nursery stock. Description and biology: Adult beetle 7.5-10 mm. long and 1.6-2 mm. wide, general
color, brown ocher; head small, elytral strie finely punctate. Eggs deposited singly
on underside of leaflets in a small hole made by the adult; entire larval and pupal
periods spent in the leaf between the lower and upper epidermis. More injury is
occasioned by the larva than by the adult. Tissues which have been attacked soon
become brown and die. Egg stage about 32 days, and pupal stage about 7.5 days. Distribution: Philippine Islands. Jongs, Cuas. R. The Philippine Agric. Review, 1913, vol. 6, No. 5, p. 228%
Promecotheca reichei. (Coconut Leaf Miner. Hispidee; Coleoptera.) Host: Coconut palm. Injury: Damage occasioned by the pest is usually local, but affected trees appear
brown and unhealthy when viewed from a distance. Description and biology: Adult beetle length 8 mm., breadth 2 mm. ; general color
golden; head quadrangular in shape and provided with powerful mandibles; thorax
golden, basal third of elytra golden and remainder metallic blue. Eggs are deposited
singly on under surface of leaflets; larvee on hatching make their way into the leaf and
tunnel between the upper and lower surfaces, feeding on the fleshy cells; pupate
usually at extreme end of tunnel passage; pupal stage lasts from 18 to 20 days. Distribution: Fiji. Jerson, Frank B. Dept. Agric. Fiji, Council Paper No. 25, 1911, p. 39. Brontispa froggatti Sharp. (The Leaf Hispa. Hispidee; Coleoptera.) Host: Coconut palm. Injury: Very injurious to young coconut groves in Solomon Islands. Liable to be
imported on growing plants. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXX]. A PALM WEEVIL. The palm weevil (Rhynchophorus palmarum): 1 a-d, Adult; 2 a-e, larva; 3 a, b, pupa; 4, cocoon. (Blandford.) U, S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXXII. THE PALM SCALE. *The palm scale (Phenicococcus marlatti). (Original, Sasscer.) _ BANKs, CHARLES S. The

PALM INSECTS. 161

Description and biology: Adult beetle about 12 mm. long from tip of antennee to tip
of abdomen, shining black, head small, antennze 11-jointed, thorax almost square,
slightly hollowed on sides. Eggs deposited in the folds of the opening fronds. Larve
feed on surface of leaf and the adult also injures the foliage. Distribution: New Britain and Solomon Islands. Froeearr, W. W. Dept. Agric. New South Wales, Science Bul. 2, 1912, p. 24. Rhynchophorus ferrugineus Fabricius (signaticollis Chevrolat). (Red Palm Weevil. Calendride; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Coconut palm (Cocos nucifera), toddy palm (Phoenix sylvestris), and date
palm (Phoenix dactylifera). Injury: Destructive to palms in India, Straits Settlements, and Ceylon. Liable to
be introduced in plants. Description and biology: Adult weevil, brown with conspicuous curved beak; about
37 mm. long. gs laid singly in tissues of palm tree. Jarve on hatching tunnel
in the soft tissues, gradually
working into the stem; pu-
pate in a cocoon of twisted
fibers within the plant. (See
text fig. 78.) Distribution: India, Cey-
lon, Straits Settlements,
Andaman Islands, Persian
Gulf, Philippine Islands. Maxwetu-Lerroy, H. In-
dian Insect Pests, 1906,
p. 208. Sreppine, E. P. Indian
Forest Pests, Coleoptera,
1914, pp. 444, 445; figs. 292, 293. ;

Froeearr, W. W. Dept. Agric., New South Wales,
Science Bul., 2, p. 19,
August, 1912. Principal Insects Attack-

ing the Coconut Palm, ,
1906, Pts. I and II, p. Fig. 78.—Red palm weevil (Rhynchophorus ferrugineus): Adults,
154 cocoon. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) Guosu, C.C. Mem. Dept. Agric. India, Entom. Ser., 1911, vol. 2, No. 10, p. 205. Rhynchophorus palmarum Linnzus. (The Palm Weevil. Calendridze; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Palm and sugar cane. Injury: Reported to be very serious in British Honduras. Description and biology: A very large reddish weevil. Eggs are deposited in tissues
of food plant: larva spends entire existence as a borer, and when full grown pupates
in‘a rough cocoon constructed of fibers without leaving the plant. (See plate xxx1.) Distribution: British Honduras, Trinidad, Lesser Antilles, Brazil, Cayenne, Suri-
nam, and possibly generally distributed over tropical coast of South America and
Central America. 55266—17——l1

162 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. CHITTENDEN, F. H., U. 8. Dept. Agr., Bur. Entom., Bul. 38, 1902, pp. 23-25. Uricu, F. W. Bull. Dept. Agric. Trinidad and Tobago, 1912, vol. 11, p. 70. Bauiovu, H. A. Insect Pests of the Lesser Antilles, 1912, p. 107. Buianprorp, Watrer F. H. Kew Bulletin, February-March, 1893, pp. 27-60. B. OTHER IMPORTANT PALM INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccide. Armored—
Aspidiotus pangoensis D. & F.; Samoa; coconut husks. Aspidiotus (Pscudaonidia) articulatus Morgan; Brazil, West Africa, Venezuela, Mexico; coconut. (See Coffee.) Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) trilobitiformis Green; West Africa, German East Africa, Japan, Venezuela,

Brazil; coconut, sago palm. (See text fig. 32.) Aspidiotus (Pseudischnaspis) linearis Hempel; Brazil. Aspidiotus (Hemiberlesia) palmx Morgan and Cockerell; East and West Africa, West Indies,

Azores, Brazil; coconut. Aspidiotus ( Hemiberlesia) simillimus Cockerell; Australia. *Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) perseze Comstock; Florida, Mexico, Brazil; coconut. (See Avocado.) Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) personatus Comstock; British Guiana, Porto Rico, Mexico; coconut. (See Olive.) Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) propsimus Banks; Philippines. Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) scutiformis Cockerell; Central America. Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) ansei Green; Seychelles; Cocos nucifera. Aspidiotus fissidens var. pluridentatus Lindinger; German East Africa. Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) orientalis Newstead; German East Africa. Aspidiotus spinosus Comstock; Italy, German East Africa, Brazil. Aspidiotus varians Lindinger: German East Africa, Madagascar. Chionaspis inday Banks; Philippines. Chionaspis substriata Newstead; Uganda, British East Africa. Chionaspis samoana D. & F.; Samoa. Cryptaspidus nucum Lindinger; Madagascar. * Diaspis zamiex Morgan; Germany, Colorado, Wisconsin (in greenhouses), Italy. Furcaspis oceanica Lindinger; Caroline Islands. Lepidosaphes mcegregori Banks; Philippines. Lepidosaphes unicolor Banks; Philippines. Lepidosaphes duponti Green; Seychelles; Cocos nucifera. Leucodiaspis cockerelli de Charmoy; German East Africa, Brazil, Venezuela. Parlatoria blanchardii Targioni-Tozzetti; Australia, Algeria, Sahara, Egypt, Arabia; date iin. (See pl. 5, fig. 3.) Parlatoria areeni Banks; Philippines. * Parlatoria proteus Curtis: Brazil, Jamaica, Australia. Parlatoria mytilaspijormis Green. Chionaspis (Phenacaspis) cockerelli Cooley; China; sago palm. Chionaspis (Phenacaspis) dilatata Green; India. _ (See Mango.) Pinnaspis buxi Bouché; British Guiana, Trinidad, West Indies, Togoland, German Eat .\. coconut. (See Betel nut.) * Poliaspis cycadis Comstock. Unariored—
Asterolecanium ceriferum Green; Ceylon. Asterolecanium lineare Lindinger; Brazil. Asterolecanium palmz Cockerell. Asterolecanium urichi Cockerell. Asterolecanium hilli Green; Australia; Livistona humulis. Ceroplastes actiniformis Green: Ceylon. Ceroplastes myrice Linnzeus; South Africa, India, Europe (in greenhouses). Ceroplastes rubens Maskell; Australia, Hawaii, Japan. Coccus hespcridum Linnaeus; cosmopolitan; tea, citrus, palms (see pl. II, fig. 4). Coccus acutissimus Green; Ceylon; coconut, sago. Dactylopius coceus Costa; Canary Islands. Halimococcus lampas Cockerell. Icerya montserratensis Riley and Howard: West Indies, Grenada, Mexico. (See Citrus.) Icerya seychellarum Westwood. (See Citrus.) Lecanium psexterpansy:n Green; Australia; Pandanus odoratissimus. Paralecanium cocophyll Banks; Philippines. * Phenicococcus marlatti Cocserell; Algeria, Egypt, Sahara; date palm. (See pl. XXXII.) lee

 

INSECTS OF PALM, PANAMA RUBBER, PAPAYA. 163

Csecide—Continued. Unarmored—Continued. Pseudococcus cocotis Maskell; Guam. Pseudococcus dubia Newstead; Barbados, Grenada. Pseudococcus pandani Cockerell; Fiji; coconut. Pseudococcus virgatus Cockerell; Jamaica, Mexico; coconut. Rhizecus faleifer Kiinckel; Algeria, Sicily. Rhizercus (?) terrestris Newstead; London (greenhouse). Ripersia palmarum Ehrhorn; Hawaii; Cocos nucifera, Areca lutescens. COLEOPTERA. Calendridz. ~ Rhabdocnemis obscurus Boisduval; Hawaii, ete. (See Sugar Cane.) LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. > Ephestia cautella Walker; Egypt; breeds in half ripe dates. (Gough, L. H.: The Agric. Journ. Egypt, vol. 3, 1914, pp. 104-105.) Lyceenide. ' Virachola livia Klug; Egypt; breeds in dates (Gough, 1. c., p. 105). Tineide. Ereuncetis flavistriata Walsingham; Hawaii. (See Sugar Cane.) Zygenide. Levuana iridescens Bethune-Baker: Fiji. (See Royal palm.) PANAMA RUBBER. (Castilloa elastica. Family Moracez.) ‘

African, Mexican, and Central American trees yielding rubber. A PANAMA-RUBBER INSECT LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Inesida leprosa Fabricius. (Castilloa Borer. Cerambycidse; Coleoptera.) Host: Panama rubber (Castilloa elastica). Injury: Very serious borer. In West Africa it has almost ruined Castilloa culture. Description and biology: Beetle brown, venter and greater part of elytra covered with
yellowish brown scales; a black triangle on lateral margin of each elytron beyond
middle; humeri of elytra strong and coarsely punctured; length 25-35 mm. Larva
5 cm. long, with large clypeus. ggs laid at base of trunk. Pupates in larval tunnel. Distribution: West and East Africa. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 502, 503. PAPAYA. (Carica papaya. Family Passifloraceze.) A tropical fruit-bearing tree grown in Florida. IMPORTANT PAPAYA INSECTS. FIEMIPTERA. Coccide. Aspidiotus destructor Signoret; Amani, Africa. Pseudoparlaioria ostriata Cockerell; Cuba. COLEOPTERA. Calendridz. Rhabdoene mis ohscurus Boisduval. (See Sugar cane.) DIPTERA. Trypetidx. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann; attacks Carica papaya and C. quercifolia. (See Fruit.) * Toxotrypana curvicauda Gerstaecker; papaya fruit fly; West Indies, Florida (F, Knab and W. W,
Yothers, Journ. Agr. Res., vol. 2, pp. 447-453, 2 plates. 164 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. PARA PLUM. (Spondias spp. Family Anacardiacez.) AN IMPORTANT PARA-PLUM INSECT. DIPTERA. Trypetide. Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) PARA RUBBER. (Hevea brasiliensis Muell. Family Euphorbiacez.) This tree produces the Para rubber of commerce, or caoutchouc. It grows in
Brazil and Guiana, and attempts have been made to grow it in Florida. IMPORTANT PARA-RUBBER INSECT. ISOPTERA.,
Termitide. Coptotermes gestroi Wasmann, white ant; India; destroys the roots. PARSLEY. (Carum petroselinum. Family Umbellifere.) An herb cultivated for its foliage, much used as a garnish. AN IMPORTANT PARSLEY INSECT. LEPIDOPTERA,
Pyralidie. * Pionea ferrugalis Wiibner; Europe, Asia, North America. (See Cabbage.) PARSNIP. (Pastinaca sativa Linneus. Family Umbelliferee.) The parsnip is grown in Europe and America, and, being a root crop, is liable at
any time to introduce root pests. IMPORTANT PARSNIP INSECTS. ACARINA. Tyroglyphide. * Rhizoglyphus ( Coepophagus) echinopus F. and R, (See Potato.) LEPIDOPTERA. Gelechiide. Depressaria nervosa Uw. and D. depressella Wiibner; Europe; attack buds and fiower heads. DIPTERA. Agromyzidx. Phutomyza affinis Fallen. (See Tobacco.) Trypetide. Acidia heraclei Linneeus; Europe. (See Celery.) , PEA. (Pisum sativum. Family Leguminosee.) The various varieties of peas are grown extensively in Europe and America. Some
of the pests of the peas, such as the weevils, have been very widely distributed by
commerce. (See Bean.) PEA INSECTS. 165

A. BETTER KNOWN PEA INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. > Etiella zinckenella Treitschke. (Pea Pod Borer. Pyralide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts; Peas, bean, Sann hemp (Crotalaria). Injury: Breeds in the pods. Description and biology: Adult, moth with wing expanse 18-30 mm., pale rufous;
forewings gray brown, with white marginal fascia and a transverse rufous bar, hind-
wing with brown suffusions and lines. Pupa in spindleform cocoon. Larva bores
in the pods of legumes. Distribution: Europe, Africa, Asia, West Indies, California, Colorado, Texas, Florida,
Oklahoma, nearly cosmopolitan. Maxwe.t-Lerroy, H. M. Mem. Dept. Agric. India, vol. 1, 1907, p. 204. CuirrenpeNn, F. H. U.S. Dept. Agr. Bur. Entom., bul. 82, pp. 25-28, 1909. Laspeyresia (Grapholitha) spp. (Pea Moths. Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Species: L. dorsana Fabricius; Europe; peas, beans, Orobus tuberosus, and Trifolium
pratense. L. nebritana Treitschke; Sudan; lentils, field peas, wild legumes. >L. nigricana Stephens; Europe and Canada since 1893; peas. Injury: Bore in the pods. Description and biology: Moths, brownish; dorsana with crescentiform white spots
on forewings; nigricana a little smaller than nebritana, the latter with two curved lines
near tip on each forewing. Larvee bore in pods. Soraugr, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed:, 1913, vol. 3, pp. 281, 282,

283, figs. 205-206. Contarinia pisi Winn. (Pea Midge. Itonididee [Cecidomyiidee]; Diptera.) Hosts: Pea. Injury: Breeds in the hulls of peas, impairing or destroying the yield. Description: Midge, yellow, thorax banded with brown, antenne black; length
2mm. Maggot white, 3 mm. long. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 446, 447. B. OTHER IMPORTANT PEA INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Aphidide. > Macrosiphum pisi Kaltenbach. COLEOPTERA. Elateridz. Agriotes lineatus Linneeus. (See Tobacco.) Mylabridz (Bruchidz). * Mylabris rufimanus Boheman, California, > M. pisorum Linnzus, M, lentis Frélichs, M. pallidicornis
Boheman, > Acanthoscelides obtectus Say, * Pachymerus chinensis Linneus, * P. quadrimaculatus
Fabricius; attack seed. (See Beans.) Curculionidae. ,
Sitona lineata Linneeus, S. flavescens Marsh, and 8S. hispidula Fabricius; Europe. (See Clover.) LEPIDOPTERA. Lycenide. Zizera labradus Godt. ; Australia; attacks pods. (See Beans.) DIPTERA. Agromyzidz. Phytomyza affinis Fallen. (See Tobacco.) 166 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. PEACH; ALMOND. (Amygdalus spp. Family Rosacee.) Delicious fruit-bearing trees of temperate and warm climates. The almond pit is
much sold as a nut. A. BETTER KNOWN PEACH INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Uracanthus acutus Blackburn. (Cerambycide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Peach, apricot, plum. Description and biology: Adult, length about 14 mm. ; color obscure ferruginous;
covered with short pubesence. Distribution: Australia. Buacksurn, T. Proc. Linn. Soc. New South Wales, ser. 2, 1889, vol. 4, p. 451. Conogethes punctiferalis Guérin. (Northern Peach Moth. Pyralide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Peach. Injury: Infests the fruit. Description: Adult, wing expanse 21-25 mm., bright yellow, thickly mottled with
black spots. Pupa dark reddish brown. Pupates on side of peach stone. Larva,
length 20 mm., cylindrical. with a few erect hairs; color dirty white, almost hidden
by pinkish markings. Attacks ripening fruit, eating and webbing surface. Eggs
deposited on half-grown peaches. Distribution: Australia. Froacearr, W. W. Australian Insects, 1907, p. 273. Tryon, Henry. Ann. Rept. Dept. Agri. for years 1889-90, p. 75. Brisbane, Queens-

land, 1890. B. OTHER IMPORTANT PEACH INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccide. Armored—
Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) clavigera Cockerell; Hawaii. KA spidiotus (Dias pidiotus) ostrexformis Curtis; British Isles. Dias pis leperii Signoret; Europe. Diaspis squamosus Newstead and Theobald; Egypt. > Epidias pis piricola Del Guercio; Europe. Parlatoria affinis Newstead; Algeria. Parlatoria calianthina Berlese and Leonardi; Algeria, Italy. x Pseudoparlatoria parlatorioides (Comstock); Brazil, Mexico. Unarmored—
Lecanium kunoensis Kuwana; China. > Lecanium persice (Fabricius); Europe. Lecanium rujosum Signoret; France, Germany. Lecanium vini Bouché; Europe. Lygvide. Nysius vinitor Bergroth; Australia. (See Fruit.) COLEOPTERA. Elateridz. Agriotes lineatus Linneeus. (See Tobacco.) Bostrychidz. Apate mmachus Fabricius; Africa, West Indies, attacks almond. (See Citrus.) Chrysomelidz. Aulacophora olivierei Guérin, leaf beetle; Australia. (See Cucurbits.) INSECTS OF PEACH AND PEAR. 167

-tachyrhinidz. Brachyrhinus ligustici Linnzeus; Europe. (See Grape.) ;
Brachyrhinus corruptor Host; Italy; attacks almond. (See Grape.) Scolytidz. Scolytus amygdali Guérin; Mediterranean region; bark beetle in almond and apricot trees. \ery in-
jurious. LEPIDOPTERA. .
Xyloryctidz. Cryptophaga unipunctata Donovan; Australia. (See Plum, Cherry.) Pyralidz. Dichocrocis punctiferalis Guénée; Queensland. (See Corn.) DIPTERA. Trypetidz. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks peach and almond. (See Fruit.) Anastrepha ludens Loew; Mexico. (See Fruit.) Dacus diversus Coquillett; India. (See Fruit.) Dacus persice Rig. ; India. (See Fruit.) Bictrocera tryoni Froggatt; Orient. (See Fruit.) PEAR. (Pyrus communis, etc. Family Rosacee.) Fruit trees native of south-central Europe and Asia and much cultivated in this
country for their delicious fruits. A. BETTER KNOWN PEAR INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Psylla pyrisuga Forster. (The Large Pear Psylla. Psyllidee; Hemiptera.) Host: Pear. Injury: Quite injurious in middle Europe and Japan. Description and biology: Adult marked with black and red, wings yellow. Female
about 3.5 mm. and male 2.5 mm. in length. Winters in adult condition under bark
scales of the trees. ggs are laid singly or in small groups in hairs of leaf and flower
stems or on leaves. Nymph is dark yellow in color, with waxy secretion. The foliage
is distorted and leaves rolled up; also the young branches are killed and young fruit
destroyed. Distribution: Europe, Japan. Hencuet, G. A.O. Die Schidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 490. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 8, p. 647. Stephanitis pyri Fabricius. (The Pear Tingis. Tingitidee; Hemiptera.) Hosts: Pear, apple. Injury: Serious pest to pear and apple in Europe. Description and biology: Adult, about 3 mm. long; body flat and covered with rela-
tively large wings of a beautiful lace network; lobes of same pattern extend from
each side of prothorax; general color brownish, with dark bands across wings. Nymph oval in outline, pale greenish in color and abdominal segments each with a
spine on each side; two transverse dusky bands on bodies of older individuals. Eggs
ovate, oblong, greenish white in color, 0.6 mm. long. Adults winter around base of

g, 8
host plants, reproducing in spring on under surface of leaves, where all stages may

168 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. be found at same time during summer. Badly infested leaves become yellow, then
brown, and die. (See text fig. 79.) Distribution: Europe. Costa, AcHittE. Insetti nocivi all’ Agricoltura, 1879, p. 166. Sitvestri, F. Dispense di Entomologie Agraria, 1911, p. 82. Nephopteryx rubrizonella Ragonot. (Pear Fruit Borer. Pyralids; Lepidoptera.) Host: Pear. Injury: Destroys yearly 30 to 40 per cent of fruit. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 25 mm. Forewing grayish brown to
grayish black, crossed by two equidistant irregularly pinnated grayish-bordered
black lines; outer margin and basal half much deeper in color; hindwing dark gray;
thorax colored like forewing, abdomen paler. Two brooded; first occurs in July,
second in September and October. Pupa, deep reddish brown. Pupates in core of

 

 

Fic. 79.—The pear tingis (Stephanitis pyri): a, Injured leaf; b, d, nymphal stages; e, much enlarged hair;
f,adult. (Costa.) fruit. Larva, length 20 mm. ; spindle-shaped, color pinkish brown; attacks core of
fruit. Stage lasts three weeks or more. Eggs, deposited on lower surface of twigs,
about 20 in a mass, covered by a white silk web. Distribution: Japan. Matsumura, M. U.S. Dept. Agric., Div. Ent., Bul. 10, 1898, p. 38. |
Dasyneura pyri Bouché. (Pear Leaf-Curling Midge. Itonididee [Cecidomyiide]; Diptera.) Host: Pear. Injury: Rolls edges of leaves. Description and biology: Adult, length 2mm. Brown, with limpid wings and tawny
palpi. Occursin spring. Pupates in the soil. Whitish maggots. Distribution: Europe. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 350. PEAR INSECTS. 169

Janus compressus Fabricius. (The Bud-stinger. Tenthredinidee; Hymenoptera. ) Host: Pear. Injury: Hollows out medullary canal in twigs. Description and biology: Adult male, length 7 mm. ; color black, with a transverse
yellow band on thorax; abdomen entirely yellow; female § mm. ; blackish, with three
yellow spots on thorax and circle of red on abdomen. Occurs in May. One genera-
tion. Pupates in spring in gallery in shoot. Larva, length 6 mm. ; white; makes
gallery in twig. Winters in this stage in lower part of gallery. Eggs placed in buds. Distribution: Europe. GrENaux, G. Entomologie et Parasitologie Agricoles, 1904, p. 304. Moutittot, L. Les Insectes Nuisibles, 1891, p. 189. Pamphilius flaviventris Retz. (Social Pear Sawfly. Tenthredinide; Hymenoptera.) Hosts: Pear, plum, cherry, white thorn, and other rosaceous plants. Injury: Considerable damage. Strips foliage from trees. Description and biology: Adult, female, black; antennz and legs yellowish; abdo-
men tawny at apex, with yellow triangular mark on sides of segments; ventrally
bands of yellow; male, abdomen reddish yellow from second segment to apex; lower
part of head yellow; wing expanse 8-12 mm. Pupates in cocoon in soil. Larva,
length 25 mm. ; orange yellow; head black; two black spots on second segment; has
no prolegs; spins tent over leaves on which it feeds; winters in cocoon; may suspend
development and remain in soil over a second winter. Eggs are deposited on under
surface of leaves in groups of 30 to 60. Incubation requires 6 or 7 days. Distribution: Europe. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 338. IMPORTANT PEAR INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidz. Armored—
Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) africanus Marlatt; Africa. * Aspidiotus (Aonidia) lauri Bouché; Germany. * Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) ostrexformis Curtis; Europe, Canada. Aspidiotus pectinatus Lindinger; South Africa. Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) pyri Lichtenstein; France, Switzerland. *Diaspis pentagona Targioni-Tozzetti; South Africa, Australia, Italy. Diaspis pyri Colvée; Spain, Germany. Diaspis santali Maskell; New Zealand. Diaspis squamosus Newstead and Theobald; Great Britain. * Epidiaspis piricola Del Guercio; Germany, Italy, France, Russia. Parlatoria calianthina Berlese and Leonardi; Spain, Victoria, New South Wales. Parlatoria pyri Marlatt; China. Unarmored—

Ceroplastes rubens Maskell; Australia, Hawaii, Japan. * Lecanium bituberculatum Targioni-Tozzetti; England, France, Sweden, Italy, Germany. Lecanium caprex Linneus; Europe, Nova Scotia. Lecanium coryli Linnzus; Europe, Algeria. Lecanium glandi Kuwana; Japan. Lecanium kunoensis Kuwana; China. Lecanium rugosum Signoret; France, Germany. Lecanium tiliz Linneus; Europe. Lecanium vini Bouché; Europe. COLEOPTERA. Buprestidz. > Agrilus sinuatus Olivier; Europe; introduced into United States; borer. Cerambycidz. Cerambyz scopolii Fuessly; Europe; borer. Liopus nebulosus Linneus; Europe; borer. 170 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Curculionidz. Magdalis cerasi Linnzeus; Europe; bores in branches. Anthonomus pomorum Linneus; Europe; bud weevil. (See Apple.) Anthonomus pedicularius Linneus, A. pyri Boheman, and A. spinotus Redtenbacaer’ Europes - 11
weevils. .
Leptops hopei Schonherr; Victoria. (See Apple.) Scolytida. Scolytus pruni Ratzeburg; Europe. (See Plum.) Taphrorychus bicolor Herbst; Europe; galleries in trees. LEPIDOPTERA. Lasiocampide. Gastropacha quercifolia Linnseus. (See Fruit.) Geometridz. Anisopteryx xscularia Schiffermiller. (See Forests.) Cossidzx. Cossus tristis Dru. ; Africa. (See Apple.) Tortricidx. Capua angustiorana Haworth; Europe, Asia, Africa. (See Apricot.) HYMENOPTERA. Tenthredinidz. Priophorus padi Linnzeus; Europe. (See Plum.) DIPTERA. Trypetide. Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Itonidide. * Contarinia pyrivora Riley; Europe, North America; gall midge. PERSIMMON. (Diospyros spp. Family Ebenacez.) Fruit trees of the tropics, of which several species are cultivated in this country. IMPORTANT PERSIMMON INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccide. Armored—
Aspidiotus (Aonidia) ebeni Leonardi; Ceylon. Unarmored—
Ceroplastes rubens Maskell; Japan; Diospyros kaki. Coccus bicruciatus Green; Ceylon: Diospyros ebenum. Phenacoccus pergandei Cockerell; Japan; Diospyros kaki. DIPTERA,

Trypetida. Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann, attacks Diospyros kaki, the Japanese persimmon. (See Fruit.) Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks Diospyros kaki. (See Fruit.) LEPIDOPTERA. Cosmopterygidz. Kakivoria flavofasciata Nagano; Japan; injures fruit. PINE. (Pinus spp. Family Pinacez.) Evergreen resiniferous trees distributed throughout the northern hemisphere; in
the tropical and subtropical regions they are confined to the mountains. They are
very valuable timber trees and many of them yield turpentine, tar, pitch from the
trunk, and medicinal oils from the leaves and young shoots. Edible seeds are pro-
duced by some. Tor convenience the insect pests are arranged under Conifers. INSECTS OF PINEAPPLE, PISTACHIO, AND PLANE TREE. 171

PINEAPPLE. (Ananas sativus. Family Bromeliacez.) A plant indigenous to America but now cultivated in Hawaii and other parts of

the world. IMPORTANT PINEAPPLE INSECTS. NEMIPTERA. Coccide. Armored—
Aspidiotus ( Targionia) bromclix Leonardi; ‘England, Seychelles. Unarmored—

Pseudococcus ananasse Kuwana; Japan. Pseudococcus brevipes Cockerell; Jamaica, Antigua, Dominica. Pseudococcus bromeliz Bouché; Hawaii. LEPIDOPTERA. Tineidz. Ereunetis flavistriata Walsingham; Hawaii. (See Sugar cane.) DIPTERA,
Trypetide. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Dacus ranthodes Broun. (See Fruit.) COLEOPTERA. Calandridz. Metamasius ritchiei Marshall; Jamaica. (Bull. Ent. Res., vol. 7, p. 197.) PISTACHIO. (Pistacia vera, etc. Family Anacardiacez.) A nut-bearing tree of Asia and Europe, cultivated in California. IMPORTANT PISTACHIO INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidze. Armored— ’
Diaspis gennadii Leonardi; Greece, Italy. Leucaspis pistaciz Lindinger; Cyprus; Pistacia lentiscus. Unarmored—
Ceroplastes rusci Linneeus; Pistacia lentiscus, P. terebinthus. PLANE TREE; BUTTONWOOD; SYCAMORE. (Platanus spp. Family Platanacez.) Ornamental deciduous trees of America, Europe, and Asia, valued for their dense

shade. IMPORTANT SYCAMORE INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Anobiidz. Xestobium rufovillosum NeGeer; England; bores in wood of old-standing trees. Scarabeide. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and M. melolontha Linneus, Europe; larvee injure roots of seedlings. Cerambycide. Bolesthes sarta Solsky; India; bores in trunks of Platanus orientalis. Ipidz. Anisandrus dispar Fabricius; Germany; ambrosia beetle. LITERATURE,

Linpincer, L. Die Schildliiuse (Coccide), 1912. NUss.in, 0. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. Tiess, R. Der Forstschutz, 1900, vol. 2. Stespine, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. 172 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. PLANTAIN. (See Banana.) PLUM; CHERRY; PRUNE. (Prunus spp. Family Rosaceze.) Deciduous trees of the northern hemisphere, with showy flowers and delicious
fruits, of which many horticultural varieties are cultivated in this country. A. BETTER KNOWN PLUM INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. > Emophyes spp. (Plum Blister Mites. Eriophyide; Acarina.) Species: EL. phlococoptes Nalepa; Europe, North America; Prunus domestica, P.
insititia, P. spinosa. LE. similis Nalepa; Europe; Prunus armeniaca, P. chamexcerasus, P.
domestica, P.insititia, P. spinosa. >E. padi Nalepa; Europe, North America; Prunus
padus. P. domestica, P. spinosa. Injury: Form different kinds of blister galls on plum trees and are quite injurious. These four-legged blister mites are so small that they are easily transported on nursery
stock, hence the wide distribution. Soravuer, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 125-127. Psylla pruni Scopoli. (The Plum Psylla. Psyllidee; Hemiptera.) Hosts: Plum, Prunus spinosa; P. insititia. Injury: Not at present an important pest. Description and biology: Adult, thorax marked with red and brown; abdomen with
broad brown bands on sides and back; wings dark brown. Development and gen-
erations similar to P. pyrisuga. (See Pear.) Distribution: Europe, Siberia. Hencuer, G. A. O. Die Schidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 490. Peltophora pedicillata Kirby. (The Cherry Bug. Pentatomide; Hemiptera.) Hosts: Cherry; strong-scented flowering shrubs; wild fig. Injury: Probably not at present important. Description and biology: Adult, about 12 mm. long; bright metallic green in color
with black spots on dorsum. The greater part of ventral surface, edges of thorax,
and two blotches at base of scutellum bright coral red. Distribution: Australia (New South Wales to North Queensland). Froeeatt, W. W. Australian Insects, 1907, p. 327. Diphucephala colaspidoides Gyllenhal. (The Cherry Green Beetle. Scarabeeidse; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Cherry and other fruit trees; shrubs. Injury: Very serious at times. Defoliation by adults. Description and biology: Adult, length 8 mm. ; metallic green; smooth; elytra
deeply marked with punctured striae. Damage done in this stage. Larva feeds on
roots of various plants. Not of economic importance. (See plate xxxtt.) Distribution: Southern Australia. Frenca, 0. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1893, pt. 2, p. 27. INSECTS OF PLUM AND CHERRY. 173

Rhynchites coeruleus De Geer. (Twig Cutter. Rhynchitide; Coleoptera.) Host: Apple. Injury: Cuts off apple shoots. Only nursery stock and bush trees attacked. Description and biology: Adult, length 3-4 mm. ; deep blue, shiny, clothed with
long, upright fuscous pubescence; antennz, legs, and rostrum black; elytra, with
deep punctured striz. Appear in spring and feed on leaves. Pupateinsoil. Larvx
white, feed about a month, then enter
soil. Eggs placed singly in soft shoots
2 to 4 inches from tips. Shoots.cut off
below place of oviposition. (See text
fig. 80.) Distribution: Europe. TuEosap, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit,

1909, p. 117. Rhynchites cupreus Linnzus. (Plum Borer. Rhynchitide;
Coleoptera.) Hosts: Plum, prune, cherry. Injury: Attacks young fruit. Description and biology: Adult, length
3-4 mm., color bronze-copper. Occurs
in autumn, hibernates in this stage and
reappears in early spring. Pupates in
ground. Larva develops in fruit, causing
it to fall. Hggs are placed singly in
young fruit at base of peduncle. (See
text fig. 81.) Distribution: Europe. Henscuer, G. A. O. Die Schiidlichen

Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekteh, 1895,

p. 81. Fig. 80,—Plum twig-cutter (Rhynchites carvicus):
Adult andinjury. (Theobald.) Brachyrhinus levigatus Fabricius (Otiorhynchus). (Brachyrhinide; Coleoptera.) Host: Plum. Injury: To buds and young twigs. Description and biology: Adult, length 6-6.5 mm. ; black, shining, without hairs;
neck-shield rather flat, disk punctured; wing covers finely furrowed. Distribution: Middle Europe. Henscue., G.A.O. Die Schiidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 109. Magdalis armigera Geoflroy. (Plum Stem Piercer. Curculionids; Coleoptera.) Host: Plum. Injury: To twigs and foliage. Description and biology: Adult, length 3.5-4.5 mm. ; color, dull black; neck shield
with thorn-like projections near fore margin, 4-cornered, hardly as wide as long,
finely punctate; elytra strigose punctate, space between punctations flat; beak shorter
than neck shield. Adult attacks leaves. Larva develops in twig. Pupates in
burrow. Distribution: Europe. Henscuer, G. A. O. Die Schiidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten. 1895, p. 94. 174 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Curculio cerasorum Herbst (Balaninus). (Cherry Weevil. Curculionidee; Coleoptera.) Host: Cherry. Injury: To fruit. Description and biology: Adult, length 3-3.5 mm. ; color clear brownish red; eyes
black; prothorax and ventral surface covered with golden hairlike scales. Larva
eats out cherry pit. Pwpation takes place in pit. Distribution: Germany. j
HeNscHEL, G. A. O. Die Schiidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 91. Anthonomus rectirostris Linneus. (Curculionidee; Coleoptera.) Ho:ts: Cherry and other fruits. Injury: Attacks the fruit. Fic, $1.—Plum borer (Rhynchites cupreus); Adult andinjury. (Henschel.) Description and biology: Larva feeds on seeds, preventing fruit from ripening. Eggs are deposited in young fruit. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d. ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 556. Scolytus assimilis Boheman. (Scolytidze; Coleoptera.) Host: Plum. Injury: Attacks bark and sapwood. Very destructive. Description: Habits similar to S. rugulosus. Distribution: Argentina. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 572. Scolytus pruni Ratzeburg. S (Scolytidee; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Plum, pear, apple. Injury: Destroys many trees, makes galleries under bark. INSECTS OF PLUM AND CHERRY. 5

Description and biology: Adult, length 4 mm. ; head and thorax black, elytra chest-
nut. Appears in June (France). Pupates in spring. Larval galleries perpendicular
to maternal gallery. Eggs deposited in gallery under bark of weakened trees. Distribution: Europe. :

Montittor, L. Les Insectes Nuisibles, 1891, p. 168. Guenaux, G. Entomologie et Parasitologie Agricoles, 1904, p. 340. Coleophora anatipennella Hiibner. (Cherry Tree Case-Bearer. Elachistidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Cherry, apple, sloe. Injury: Serious attacks at intervals of a few years; feeds on buds and early foliage. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 12 mm. ; forewings creamy white with
scattered fuscous scales
noticeable toward tips,
fringe white; hind wings
dusky, with long gray
fringes. Occurs July to
August. Pupa pale
brownin color; pupation
takes place in its case;
period 3 or 4 weeks. Larva, length 12 mm. ;
reddish brown to orange
with dark-brown shiny
head. Larval case pis-
tol-shaped, dark brown
to black, with white
border around mouth. Larve may be found

from August through the winter until June. gs are deposited on under side of leaf,
hatching in 2 or 3 weeks. Fig. 82.—Cherry fruit moth (Argyresthia nitidella): Adult moth. (Theobald. ) Distribution: Europe. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 195.
; Argyresthia ephippella Fabricius. (Hyponomeutid; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Cherry, plum, hazel. Injury: Not seriously destructive. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 12 mm. ; forewings ocherous brown,
inner margin white, interrupted beyond middle by dark-brown spot, which can be
traced across the wings as an oblique fascia terminating in the costa. Larva feeds
on shoots, leaf, and blossom buds. Distribution: Europe. Tweopatp, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 193. Argyresthia nitidella Fabricius. (Cherry Fruit Moth. Hyponomeutide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Cherry, hawthorn. Injury: Seldom serious. Attack fruit just after it has set. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 11 mm. ; forewings light brown, with
white or cream colored inner margins; in middle there is a fascia of deeper brown color
which terminates in tip of wings. Occurs in May (Stainton). Cocoon dense and white;
pupal period about 15 days. Larva light green; head, first thoracic segment and legs
brown. ygs placed on shoots near flower bud. Overwinjers in egg stage. (See
text fig. 82.) Distribution: England. THeosap, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 192. 176 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Xylina ornithopus Rott. (Gray Plum Owlet Moth. Noctuids; Lepidoptera.) Host: Plum. Injury: Defoliation. Description and biology: Adult, forewing 15-17 mm. long; grayish white mixed
with weak brownish. Occurs August and September (Germany). Pupates in July
in earth. Larva 33 mm. long; blue-green in color, marked with white spots; three
white dorsal lines; head whitish green. Overwinters as egg. Distribution: Europe. Henscuet, G. A. O. Die Schiidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 361. Xylina socia Rott. (Brown Plum Owlet Moth. Noctuids; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Plum, elm, linden. Injury: Defoliation. Description and biology: Adult, forewing 17-20 mm. long; brown with a mixture of
gray or rose color. Occurs August and September (Germany). Pwpates in earth. Larva length 33 mm. ; color apple-green; marked with
white spots and a broad white dorsal stripe; head shining
green. Overwinters as egg. Distribution: Europe. Henscuer, G. A. O. Die Schidlichen. Forst- und

Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 361. Laspeyresia funebrana Treitschke. (Red Plum Maggot. Tortricidae; Lepidoptera.) Host: Plum. Injury: Attacks fruit; damage not easy to detect. “Caterpillar plentiful in plum pies.”’ (Stainton.) Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse about 12
mm. ; forewings purplish gray, clouded with smoky gray;
at anal angle is an indistinct, ocellated patch, edged with
pale gray and inclosing four black dots. Pupates in
whitish cocoon under rough bark or débrisin spring. Pupa
amber color. Larva, length 15 mm., chestnutred in color,
with sides yellowish or entirely deep red. Zggs, placed at
base of fruit stalk, hatching in 10 days. (See text fig. 83.) Distribution: Europe, Asia Minor. THEOBALD, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 363. Fig. 83.—Red plum maggot (Las-
peyresia funcbrana): Moth and
larva in fruit. (Ilenschel.) Laspeyresia woeberiana Schiffermiller. (Bark Tortrix. Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Host: Prunus sp. and other fruits. Injury: Injury to bark. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 16 mm., forewing dark brown, with
rusty-yellow and lead-gray oblique lines; five white notches on fore margin, and a
twisted lead line from the notches to the eye spot; speculum on a rusty-yellow ground,
marked with black. Two broods, first May and June; second August and September
(Germany). Pupa chestnut brown, pupates in larval gallery. Larva length 9 mm. ;
dirty green, red-headed, sparsely hairy. Feeds in galleries in bark; betrayed by
masses of frass hanging out of air holes. Eggs placed in crevices in bark. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 283. U. S. Dept, of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects PLATE XXXIII. A DESTRUCTIVE CHERRY INSECT. The cherry green beetle (Diphucephala colaspidoides): Adult, larva and injury (French.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXXIV. THE CHERRY BORER. The cherry borer ( Cryptophaga unipuncia): Moth, larva, pupa, and injury. (French. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXXV. AZPOPLAR BORER. Poplar borer (Molesthes sarta): Fic. 1.—Eggs. FG. 2.—E mpty egg. Fias. 3, 4,5.—Larval stages. Fies. 6,7.—Pupa. Fic. 8.—Male. Fic. 9.—Females. (SteDbing. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. Manual of Dangerous Insects PLATE XXXVI. PoTATO WEEVIL. RHIGOPSIDIUS TUCUMANUS HELLER. (PIERCE.) INSECTS OF PLUM AND CHERRY. 177

Cryptophaga unipunctata Donovan. (The Cherry Borer. Xyloryctide; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Cherry, peach, honeysuckle. Injury: Very serious. Makes shallow tunnels in branches of trees. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse 37 mm. ; a white satiny moth; front
of head, antennee, and a dot on forewings, black. Larva, length, 50 mm. ; pinkish
white, hairy; covers entrance to burrow with silken web in which collects the sawdust-
like excrement. (See plate xxxIv.) Distribution: Australia. Frencu, ©. Handbook of Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1891, pt. 1, p. 113. Froaeatr, W. W. Australian Insects, 1907, p. 277. Olethreutes pruniana Hiibner. (Plum Bud-moth. Tortricide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Prunus sp. Injury: To buds and shoots. Description and biology: Adult, forewing 7-8 mm. ; from middle of fore margin to
inner angle, bluish black, mixed with brownish black; border third golden white
clouded with brownish gray; apical point deep black; palpi grayish black; occurs
June and July (Germany). Pupates in grass, or between leaves sewed together,
during latter part of May. Larva, length 20 mm. ; greenish yellow, head white,
divided thoracic shield and anal lobes shining black; feeds in shoots and developing
leaves drawn together; occurs in spring until middle of aye Eggs placed singly on
buds. Overwinters in egg stage. Distribution: Europe. HENSCHEL, G. A. O. Die Schiidlichen Forst- und Obstbaum-Insekten, 1895, p. 418. Monrtittor, L. Les Insectes Nuisibles, 1891, p. 176. Hoplocampa fulvicornis Panzer. (Plum Fruit Sawfly. Tenthredinidee; Hymenoptera.) Host: Plum. Injury: Frequently causes considerable damage. Attacks fruit and eats out
interior. Causes fruit to fall. Description and biology: Adult, wing expanse less than 8 mm. ; color black, with
yellow, yellowish-red or reddish-brown legs. Pupates in soil in brownish cocoon. Larva, length 12 mm. ; creamy-white, sometimes slightly pinkish; head brown;
caudal end somewhat attenuated and slightly curved. Eggs minute, greenish white
and transparent; placed in unopened blossom; hatch in a few days. (See text,
fig. 84.) Distribution: ~ngland, Europe. TuEoBatp, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 376. Prophorus padi Linneus. (Plum Leaf Sawfly. Tenthredinidee; Hymenoptera.) Hosts: Plum, pear, hawthorn,. bramble, mountain ash, birch. Injury: Important. Defoliation. Description and bioloay: Adult, female, color mainly black; thorax shiny, covered
with grayish brown and two dull white spots; abdomen with scattered, pale, very
fine hairs; legs white, except middle of femora, apex of tibia and posterior tarsus,

55266—17—12

 

178 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. which are black. Two broods, frequently three.’ First brood occurs in May, second
®bout middle of June. (England.) Active during warmest part of day. Pupa
jale gray. Pupates in ground; period 9 to 12 days. Larva, green or grayish green,
with almost white sides; head usually pale dull orange brown. Larval stage of first
brood lasts 3 weeks; second brood overwinters in soil. Eggs are placed on under
surface of leaves. Incubation requires 8 days. (See text fig. 85.) Distribution: England, Europe. Tueosaip, I. V. Insect Fests of Fruit, 1909, p. 372. Fig. 84.—The plum fruit sawfly ( Hoplocampafulvicornis): Adult, larva, andinjury, (Ent. Tidsk.) B. OTHER IMPORTANT PLUM AND CHERRY INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidee. Armored—
A spitiotus (Diaspidiotus) patavinus Berlese; Italy; Prunus cerasus. *Diaspis pentagona Targioni-Tozzetti; Italy, Japan, Cape Colony; Prunus cerasus, P. pseudocerasus,
P. armeniaca, P. laurocerasus. Unarmored—
Kuwania parva Maskell; Japan; Prunus cerasus. Lecanium cerasi Goethe; Germany, England; Prunus cerasus. Lecanium cerasorum Cockerell: Japan; Prunus cerasus. Lecinium coryli Linnaeus; Europe; Prunus cerasus, P. armeniaca, P. avium, P. domestica, P. insititia,
P. laurocerasus, P. padus, P. spinosa. INSECTS OF PLUM AND CHERRY. 179

Coccida—Continued. Unarmored—Continued. Lecanium rugosum Signoret; France, Germany; Prunus cerasus. Lecanium prunastri Fonscolombe; plum, peach (see pl. Iv, fig. 3). Pulvinaria betule Linneus; Denmark, England, Switzerland; Prunus cerasus, P. armeniaca, P.

domestica. Lygeide. Nysius vinitor Bargroth; Australia; plum and cherry. (See Fruit.) COLEOPTERA. Bostrychidz. Apute monachus Fabricius; Africa, West Indies. (See Citrus.) Buprestidz. Cxrpnoidis tenebrionis Linneeus; Europe; bores in Prunus spinosa. Cerambycide. Saperda scalaris Linneus;
Europe; borer in cherry
trees. Liopus nebulosus Linnxus;
Europe; borer in cherry
trees. Uracanthus acutus Blackburn;
Europe. (See Peach.) Curculionidae. Leptops hopei Schonherr; Vic-
toria. (See Apple.) Magdalis carbonaria Linnzeus;
Europe; plum. (See Birch.) Magdalis cerasi Linnzeus, and
JM. pruni Linneeus; Europe;
bore under bark of cherry
and plum. Curculio herbsti Gemminger
(Balaninus); Europe;
breeds in fruit of cherry
and plum. Curculio rubidus Gyllenhal
(Balaninus); Europe; breeds
in fruit of plum. Anthonomus druparum Lin-
neus; Europe; breeds in
buds of plum and cherry. Scolytidz. Scolytus mali Bechst; Europe;
bores in trunk and branches
of plum. LEPIDOPTERA. Noctuidae. Diloba cxruleocephala Lin-
neus; Europe; plum,
cherry. (See Apple.) Xyloryctile. Cryptophaga unipunctata
Donovan; Australia; bores
in cherry trees. Fic. 85.—Plum leaf sawfly (Priophorus padi): Adult and injured leaf. (Theobald.) Tortricidz. Laspeyresia prunivorana Ragonot; Europe; breeds in fruit. Olethreutes variegana Hiibner, Europe; feeds on buds and shoots. Geometridz. Hibernia rupicapraria Hiibner; Europe. (See Fruit.) Anisopteryz zscularia Schiffermiller; Europe. (See Forests.) Biston hirtarius Cl. ; Europe; defoliator. Cei matodia boreata Hiibner, and C. brumata Linnzus; Europe; defoliators

Lasiocampidz. 7
Gastropacha quercifolia Linneeus; Europe. (See Fruit.) Lymantriide. Teia anartoides Walker; Australia; cherry. (See Fruit.) 180 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Hyponomeutida. > Hyponomeuta malinellus Zeller and »* H. padellus Linnzus; Europe; introduced in United States;
cherry. (See Apple.) kArgyresthia conjugella Zeller; Europe, British Columbia, Japan; attacks fruit of cherry and plum. (See Apple.) Tenthredinidz. Pamphilius flaviventris Retz. ; Europe. (See Pear.) Hoplocampa rutilicornis Panzer, sawfly; mines in fruit; Europe. HYMENOPTERA. DIPTERA. Trypetidz. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks fruit of Prunus cerasus. (See Fruit.) Anastrepha fraterculus Wiedemann, attacks Japanese plum. (See Fruit.) Anastrepha ludens Loew. ; Mexico. (See Fruit.) POMEGRANATE. (Punica granatum. Family Lythracee.) A fruit-bearing tree of Asia, extensively cultivated throughout the world. Propa-
gated by cuttings and seed. IMPORTANT POMEGRANATE INSECTS. LEPIDOPTERA. Lycenide. Virachola insocrates Fabricius; India; bores in fruit. (See Fruit.) Virachola livia Klug, the pomegranate butterfly; Egypt; larve attacks fruit (Gough, L. H.; The
Agric. Journ. Egypt, vol. 3, 1914, p. 105, pl. 8, figs. 5-7.) Pyralidz. Cryptoblabes gnidiella Miller; Egypt; breeds in fruit (Gough, 1. c., p. 104). POPLAR; ASPEN; COTTONWOOD. (Populus spp. Family Salicacez.) Soft-wooded trees of the Northern Hemisphere, often used in landscape gardening. A. BETTER KNOWN POPLAR INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Saperda spp. (Poplar Borers. Cerambycide; Coleoptera.) Species: S. carcharias Vinnaeus, poplar borer; Europe; poplar, willow, aspen. S.
populnea Linnzeus, aspen borer; Europe, Siberia, United States Pacific coast; aspen,
poplar, willow. i. scalaris Linnzeus; Europe; aspen, walnut, cherry, apple, beech. Injury: The first two are very injurious species. Biology: The egg is laid in the bark and the larva first bores in the bark but later
goes into the wood. It pupates in the larval tunnel. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 505, 506. Trochilium spp. (Hornet Moths. Sesiidse; Lepidoptera.) Species: T. apiformis Clerck; Europe; poplar (Populus nigra, P. canadensis}; aspen
(Populus tremula L.); ash. T. amnatizforme; India; Populus ewphratica. Injury: Bore in wood. Description and biology: Moths clear winged, wasplike in appearance. Larva bores
in wood. -Pupates in cell of frass near exterior. SoraveR, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 327. Nisstin, Orro, Leitfaden der Forstinsectenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, pp. 317, 318, fig. 269, a.

Srespine, E. P. Manual Forest Zoology India, 1908, pp. 124, 125, fig. 255.

; POPLAR INSECTS. 181

B. OTHER IMPORTANT POPLAR INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Aphididz. Pemphigus bursarius Linnzus; Europe; foliage. Pemphigus immunis and P.napeus; India; attacks the twigs of Populus euphratica and P. tremula. Pemphigus filaginis Fonsc. (marsupialis Koch); Europe; forms pocket-shaped galls on the midrib of
leaves of poplar. Pemphigus vesicalis Koch; Europe; foliage of Populus alba. Asiphum tremulz De Geer; Europe; attacks young shoots, leaves and petioles of aspen (Populus
tremula). "eat
Coceidee. } Armored—
Chionaspis saticis Trcnesus} Europe; Populus balsamifera, P. monilifera, P. nigra, P. tremula,
Crypthemichionaspis africana Newstead; Egypt. Unarmored—, > ~
Ceroplastes rusct Linnzus; Italy. Pulvinaria betule Linneus; Europe; Populus alba, P. nigra, P. tremula. Lecanium coryli Linneus; Eurepe; Populus alba, P. tremula, P. virginiana. Lecanium ciliatum Douglas; Europe; Populus alba, P, tremula. COLEOPTERA. Anobiidz. ,

Ptilinus fuscus Geoflroy; Europe; bores in dead wood of standing living trees. Buprestida. *Agrilus viridis Linneous (see Oak) and A. sexguttatus Brahm. ; Europe, bore in bark and branches of
poplars and aspens. Capnodis miliaris Klug; India; bores in Populus euwphratica. Pacilonota variolosa Paykull; Europe; bores in bark of poplar and aspen. Melanophila picta Pallas; South Europe, Algeria; bores in wood of young poplars. Scarabeide. Amphimalion solstitialis Linnaeus; Europe; larve attack roots of small plants. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and Jf. melolontha Linnzeus; Europe; larve attack roots of seedlings. Cerambycide. £olesthes sarta Solsky; India; bores in Populus alba and P. ewphratica. (See pl. XXXV.) Lamia tertor Linneus; Europe; bores in bark and larger cuttings of poplar and aspen. Saperda carcharias Linnzus, S. scalaris Linnzeus and * S. populnea, Linnzeus; Europe; bore in branches
and trunk. The latter occurs on our Pacific Coast. (See text fig. 86.) Xylotrechus rusticus Linnseus; Russia; bores in bark and sapwood. Purpuriiscenus wachanrui Levrat; Baluchistan; bores in Populus ciliata. Chrysomelidz. * Phyllodecta vitellinx Linneus; Europe, America; leaf beetle. (See Willow.) Crepidodera aurata Marsham, Europe; leaf beetle on Populus laurifolia and P. alba. (See Willow.) Curculionide. Orchestes salicis Linneeus; Europe; mines the leaves. Orchestes populi Fabricius; Europe; mines the leaves of Populus nigra and P. dilatata. * Cryptorhynchus lapathi Linneeus; Europe, Eastern United States; breeds in the stems and twigs. Ipide. Xyleborus cryptophagus Ratzeburg; Germany; ambrosia beetle of poplar and aspen. LEPIDOPTERA. Cossidx. Cossus cossus Linnseus, goat moth; Europe; bores in wood. (See Willow.) *Zeuzera pyrina Linnus; Europe; bores in wood. (See Horse-chestnut.) Geometridz. Hibernia aurantiaria Esp., H. defoliaria Linneus and H. marginaria Borckh. ; Europe; defoliators. Lasiocam pide. Eriogaster lanestris Linneeus, and AMfalacosoma neustria Linnzeus;, Europe; defoliaters. Lymantriidx. * Euproctis chrysorrhea Linneeus, * Lymantria monacha Linneeus, > Porthetria dispar Linnzeus, Porthesia
similis Fuessly, Stilpnotia salicis Linnwxus; Europe; defoliators. (See Forest defoliators.) Sesiidz. Sciopteron tabaniformis Rott. ; Europe; bores in base of trunk. 182 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. HYMENOPTERA. Cimbicide. Cimber variabilis Klug, sawfly; Europe; attacks leaves, and adults girdle twigs. Pseudoclavellaria amerine Linneeus, a sawfly; Europe; attacks foliage. Tenthredinidz. Nematus ( Creesus) septentrionalis Linneeus and Trichiocampus viminalis Fallen; Europe; sawflies. Fic, 86.—Poplar borer (Saperda populnea): Branch ofaspen vith ¢
adult. (Barbey.) ls containing terva, puy a, and

DIPTERA. Itonididz (Cecidomyiidz). Rhabdophaga saliciperda Dufour; Europe; attacks Populus alba, (See Willow.) INSECTS OF POLAR AND POTATO. 183

LITERATURE,

SorAvER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. Nussin, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. Hess, R. Der Forstschutz, 1898, 1900. ,

STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects. Coleoptera, 1914. BARGAGLI, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-1887. LINDINGER, L. Die Schildliiuse (Coccide), 1912. POTATO. (Solanum tuberosum Linneeus. Family Solanacez.) Although we grow many potatoes in the United States there has been a very large
importation trade with other countries. Owing to the danger of introducing certain
diseases especially, the Federal Horticultural Board has placed restrictions on the im-
portation of potatoes. There are a number of important insect pests which need to
be guarded against almost as closely as the diseases. A. BETTER KNOWN POTATO INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. >» Rhizoglyphus (Coepophagus) echinopus F. and R.
(Potato Root Mite. Tyroglyphide; Acarina.) Hosts: Potato, parsnip, tulips, lilies, orchids, and many weeds. Injury: Very destructive to roots and tubers. Description and biology: A very tiny mite which breeds in roots and is quite destruc-
tive. It may readily be transported with root crops. Distribution: France, Italy, Portugal, Palestine, Chile, Australia, California. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 109-111,

figs. 82-86. Epilachna spp. (Potato Ladybird Beetles. Coccinellide; Coleoptera.) Species: E. 28-maculata Motschulsky; China; potatoes, Solanwm spp. E. 28-
punctata Fabricius; Asia, Malaysia, Australia; Solanaceze, Cucurbitacee. E. dode-
castigma Mulsant; Asia, Malaysia, Australia; Solanacese Cucurbitacee. . territa
Mulsant; Java; Spanish peppers, Solanacee. £. pusillanina Mulsant; Java, Sola-
naceee. LE. phyto Mulsant; Java; Solanacese. £. guttato-pustulata Fabricius; Aus-
tralia; potato. Injury: Attack foliage in larval and adult stage. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 2d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 477. Rhigopsidius tucumanus Heller. (Argentine Potato Weevil; Psaliduride [Byrsopidee]; Coleoptera.) Host: Potato. Injury: Bores in potato, making it unfit for use. Has been received alive in the
United States in South American potatoes. Description and biology: Adult weevil, light brown or grayish, with roughened elytra
and short broad beak which rests in a deep groove in front of the anterior legs. Length
9mm. Pupa white with rudiments of all appendages folded on the underside. Found in the potato. Larva white legless with chitinized brownish yellow head. Bores in the tubers. (See plate xxxvi.) Distribution; Argentina, Peru, Bolivia, Chile. Pierce, W. Dwicur. Journ. Agr. Research, vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 350, 351, pls. 39-40. 184 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Premnotrypes solani Pierce. (Peruvian Potato Weevil. Brachyrhinidse [Otiorhynchide]; Coleoptera.) Host: Potato. . Injury: Bores in the tubers. Has been received alive in the United States in
potatoes from Peru. Description and biology: Adult weevil bronzy brown somewhat tuberculate with the
thorax narrower than the elytra; beak moderately long. Length7 mm. Pupa white
with rudiments of all appendages folded on the underside. Found in the potato. Larva white, legless, with chitinized brownish yellow head. Bores in the tubers. (See plate xxxvui, figs. 1, 2.) Distribution: Peru. Pierce, W. Dwicur. Journ. Agr. Research, vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 346, 349, text figs. 1, 2;

pl. 41, figs. 1, 2. Trypopremnon latithorax Pierce. (Peruvian Potato Weevil. Brachyrhinide [Otiorhynchide]; Coleoptera.) Host: Potato. Injury: Bores in the tubers. Has been received alive in the United States in
potatoes from Peru. Description and biology: Adult weevil brown, tuberculate, with a very broad pro-
thorax, scrobes abruptly terminated behind, mandibles with a tooth beneath. Length
6mm. Pupa white with rudiments of all appendages folded on the underside. Found in the potato. Larva white, legless, with chitinized brownish yellow head. Bores in the tubers, (See plate xxxvu, fig. 3.) Distribution: Peru. Pierce, W. Dwicur. Journ. Agr. Research, vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 349-350, text fig. 3;

pl. 41, fig. 3

Hypera (Phytonomus) spp. (Potato Leaf Weevils. Curculionidze; Coleoptera.) Species: H. variabilis Herbst; breeds on the leaves of potato, clover, ete., and
attacks bean, cabbage, service -berries, Plantago lanceolata, Atriples patula. H.
crinita Boheman; Algeria and Tunis; breeds on potato. Injury: These are potentially important-pests. Judging from the ease with which
the clover pests of this genus have been imported it is important to guard against these
weevils. Description and biology: Similar in form to the well-known clover-leaf weevil,
Hypera punctata. The larvee feed externally on the leaves and pupate in silken
cocoons. B. OTHER IMPORTANT POTATO INSECTS. HEMIPTERA,
Miride (Capsidz). Phytocoris pabulinus Linneeus; Europe; sucks juices of stems. Jassidx. Eupteryz solani Curtis; Europe; injures leaf. COLEOPTERA. Bathyscia wollastoni Janson, the pigmy potato beetie; Europe, often a serious pest. Elateridz. Agriotes lineatus Linnzeus. (See Tobacco.) Lacon murinus Linneeus; Kurope; wireworm. Meloide. Zonabris floralis Pallas, Z. 14-punctata Pallas, Epicauta rufidorsum Goeze and E, sibirica Pallas, blister
beetles; Europe; very destructive. INSECTS OF POTATO AND PRICKLY PEAR. 185

Curculionidz. Hypera variabilis Herbst; Europe. (See Clover.) Desiantha nociva Lea; Australia; larvee and adults destroy young plants. (See Tomato.) LEPIDOPTERA,

Euchelia jacobex, the cinnabar moth; Europe, injurious. Sphingidz. Acherontia atropos Linnzus; death’s head moth; Europe; larve feed on potato. Hepialidz. Hepialus lupulinus Linnzeus; Europe; breeds at roots. Hepialus humuli Linnzus; Europe. (See Hops.) (See texi figs. 87, 88.) Fig. 87.—Death’s-head hawk-moth (A cherontia atropos): Adult somewhat reduced. (Kirby.) ty

Noctuidz. A
> Hydrecia micacea Esp. ; the rosy rustic; Europe, Canada; potato-stalk borer. Gortyna ochracea Hiibner;. Europe; stalk borer. Gortyna flavago Newman; Europe; stalk borer. Persectania evengi, Australia; climbing eutworm. Agrotis spina, Bugong moth; Australia; cutworm. Euzoa radians, Australia; cutworm. Euplezis nigerrima, Australia; cutworm. Pyralide. |
Lineodes ochracea. -
Pachyzancla phxopteralis, Bermuda. DIPTERA. Sapromyzide. Lonchza splendida Loew, New Zealand, Australia, Oceanica. (See Tomato.) PRICKLY PEAR; TUNA; BARBARY FIG. (Opuntia spp. Family Cactaceze.) The common broad-leafed cacti or prickly pears often yields edible fruit. 186 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. IMPORTANT PRICKLY-PEAR INSECT. DIPTERA,
Trypetide. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann; attacks Opuntia tuna, and O. vulgaris. (See Fruit.) PURSLANE. (Portulaca oleracea. Family Portulacacee.) LEPIDOPTERA. Low, fleshy, perennial or annual herbs mostly American. The purslane is culti-
vated for its edible foliage. Other species are cultivated for their flowers. IMPORTANT PURSLANE INSECT. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralide. > Hellula undalis Fabricius; Europe, Australia, parts of United States. (See Cabbage.) Fic. 88.—Death’s-head hawk-moth (Acherontia atropos): Larva. (Wirby.) QUINCE. (Cydonia oblonga, etc. Family Rosacez.) Ornamental shrubs and trees from Asia now widely cultivated. C. oblonga, the
quince, yields a fruit used in preserves. shrub. C. japonica is much prized as an ornamental
IMPORTANT QUINCE INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccide. Lecanium rugosum Signoret; Europe. * Lecanium persice Fabrici

Lecanium coryli Linnzeus

 
  

Europe, Australia, California. 1rope. Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) africanus Marlatt; South Africa. INSECTS OF QUINCE, RADISH, AND RAPE. 187

COLEOPTERA. Curculionide. Magdalis barbicornis Latreille; Europe. (See Apple.) Magdalis pruni Linneus; Europe; bores under bark,

LEPIDOPTERA,
Cossidz. Cossus tristis Dru. ; Africa. (See Apple.) DIPTERA. Trypetidz. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, (See Fruit.) Bactrocera tryoni Froggatt: Orient. (See Fruit.) RADISH. (Raphanus spp. Family Cruciferze.) Cultivated root crops native of Europe and Asia. Grown from seed. (See Cru-
cifers.) A. A RADISH INSECT LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. > Anthomyia radicum Meigen. (Radish Fly. Anthomyidse; Diptera.) Hosts: Raphanus spp. (including radish), Brassica spp. (cabbage, etc.). Injury: Breeds in the roots. Description and biology: Male fly blackish, female ash gray; scutellum blackish
with three black streaks; abdomen light gray, with black medium streak; undersides
and face white in male, front triangle and all appendages black; wings clear; length
4.5-5.5mm. Maggot whitish, 6mm. long. Pupates in soil. Distribution: Europe, 21d has been introduced into North America. SoraveEr, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 425. B. OTHER IMPORTANT RADISH INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Curculionidz. Ceutorhynchus assimi.is Payxull; Europe; breeds in sed pod. Ceutorhynchus raphini Fabricius; Europe; breeds in stem. Ceutorhynchus rovertii Gyllenhal; Europe; breeds in crown gall on Raphanus raphanistrum. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. Evergestis extimalis Sc. (See Rape.) RAPE. (Brassica napus Linneeus. Family Cruciferee.) An important forage and cover crop; also valuable for the oil compressed from
the seed. A. BETTER KNOWN RAPE INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Phyllotreta vittula Redtenbacher. (Rape and Grain Beetle. Chrysomelide; Coleoptera.) Hosts and injury: Mi cs leaves of Setaria; adults feed on beets and rape (Hurgary);
larva in base of stems of barley, rye, ad wheat, causing much damage (Scandinavia;
Russia). Description: Beetle striped with yellow. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkra’ kheite>, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 525. 188 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Psylliodes chrysocephala Linneus; Psylliodes napi Fabricius. (Rape Flea Beetles. Chrysomelide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Crucifers, rape, cabbage, etc. Injury: Adults feed on foliage, flowers, and fruit. Biology: Eggs are laid in the leaf axils. Larve bore into stem and roots. Breed
continuously through season. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 523. Evergestis extimalis Sc. (Rape Seed Worm. Pyralidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Rape, radish, cabbage. Injury: Feeds on the seed, spinning a web among the
fruiting heads. ;

Description and biology: Moth, wing expanse 26 mm.,
forewings light yellow ochraceous, with two rusty-brown
transverse lines, violet-gray fringe. Larva yellowish
green, with lateral gray stripe and four dorsal rows of
dark-brown spots; head and thoracic shield black;
18 mm. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d

ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 308. B. OTHER IMPORTANT RAPE INSECTS...

x
COLEOPTERA. ss

 

Nitidulidz. ‘
Meligethes eneus Fabricius; Europe; larvee feed on young’Shoots. Curculionide. Ceutorhynchus assimilis Paykull; Europe; breeds in fruit
ok Ceutorhynchus quadridens Panzer; Europe; Long Island, N. Y.
breeds in roots. a
Ceutorhynchus sulcicollis; Europe; forms galls on roots. (See
text fig. 89.) LEPIDOPTERA. Heplalidz. Hepialus humuli Linneeus; Europe. (See Hops.) DIPTERA. Fig. 89.—Galls of Ceulorhynchus Itonidide. sulcicollis on rape. (Ritzema Dasyneura brassice Winner; Europe: attacks fruit. (See
Bos.) Oabbage.) RASPBERRY. See Blackberry. RATTAN

(Calamus spp. Family Palmaceze.) Palms of tropical Asia, some of which are used to furnish rattan canes. They make
excellent conservatory plants. IMPORTANT RATTAN INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Lyctide. Lyctus brunneus Stephens; Europe, Australia; bores in furniture and sapwood on unseasoned timber
LITERATURE,

/
Froaceatr, W. W. Australian Insects, 1907. INSECTS OF RHUBARB AND RICE. 189

RHUBARB. (Rheum rhaponticum, etc. Family Polygonacee.) Robust perennial herbs originating in Asia and Russia, The rhubarb plant has
been developed into several garden varieties. Propagated by root division or from
seed. IMPORTANT RHUBARB INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Chrysomelidz. Chztocnema concinna Marsh; flea-beetle; Europe. Phyllotreta nemorum Linneus; Europe. (See
Crucifers.) Curculionide. Hypera rumicis Linneeus; Europe; breeds on leaves. RICE. (Oryza sativa Linnzeus. Graminez.) Rice is still an important product for importation in spite of the steadily increasing
production in our own country. The principal sources of importation are Japan,
China, India, Mexico, and Honduras. The danger of importing rice insects is two-
fold, through the grain itself, husked or unhusked, and its original containers, and
through rice stalks used in packing fragile articles of commerce. The similarity of rice
and grain insects lends importance to any rice pest introduced into the United States. A. RICE INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Schoenobius bipunctifer Walker. j (Rice Stem Borer. Lepidoptera.) Host: Rice. . Injury: Bores in stalks, causing infertility. Description and biology: Adult moth, straw-yellow color, the forewings having one
black dot on each. Body about one-half inch in length, wing expanse about 1 inch. Pupa in silken casein straw. Larva bores in the stalk and remains in the stubble from
November to June. ags laid in clusters on the leaves, covered with hairs; hatch in a
week,

Distribution: India. S.K. Basu and H.L. Durr. Crop Pest Handbook for Behar and Orissa, 1913. Dept. Agr. Behar and Orissa, Calcutta, leaflet 6, pl. 6. Chilo auricilia Dudgeon. (Rice Stem Borer, Pyralidee; Lepidoptera.) Host: Rice, sorghum; corn, sugar cane, Pennisetum. Injury: Bores in stems of grasses. Description and biology: Adult moth with metallic spots on fore wings. Larva
whitish with black head, thoracic shield and setigerous spots, and with purplish
brown stripes. Distribution: India. Maxwett-Lerroy, H. F. Mem. Dept. Agric. India, Ent. Ser., vol. 1, pt. 2. p. 197. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 1913, 3d ed., vol. 3, p. 316. B. OTHER IMPORTANT RICE INSECTS. The rice plant has many pests which attack the leaves, stalks, and roots, but which
are not very likely to be imported. It is, however, of importance to briefly mention
these in view of unforeseen possibilities of importation. 190 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. ORTHOPTERA,
Acridiidz and Locustidz. Hieroglyphus banian Fabricius; India. (See P1]. XX XVIII.) Xiphidium varipenne; Hawaii. Oxya velox Fabricius; Hawaii, Formosa,
Oxya intricata Stal, and Racilia okinawensis Matsumura; Formosa and
Orient. Gryllotalpide. Gryllotalpa africana Beauvais; Hawaii, Africa, Formosa, Asia, Aus-
tralia, New Zealand. HEMIPTERA. Jassidz, Cercopide and Fulgoride. Deltocephalus dorsalis Motschulsky; Formosa,
Tettigoniella spectra Distant; India. (See text fig. 90.) Zygina subrufa Motschulsky and Ptyelus costalis Walker; Formosa. Dictyophora sinica Walker, Diostrombus politus Uhler, Nisia atrovenosa
Lethierry, Delphax furcifera Horvath, Zygina maculifrons Mot-
schulsky, Cicadula fasciifrons Stal, C. 6-notata Fallen, Nephotettiz
apicalis Motschulsky, and Tetigonia viridis Linnzeus; Formosa and

   

Orient. Capside. FIG, 90.—Rice leafhopper Lygus oryze Matsumura; Formosa, Orient. (Tcttigonicila spectra): Coreidee. Adult. (Maxwell-Le- Leptocorisa varicornis Fabricius; Japan, China, India, Philippines,
froy.) Ceylon. (See text fig. 91.) Pentatomide. Aenaria lewisi; Japan. Plantia affinis Dallas; New South Wales. COLEOPTERA,
Cucujide. Lxmotmetus rhizophagoides Walker; Ceylon, Germany; injures dry rice and grain. Fig. 91.—Rice bug (Leptocorisa vuricornis): Adult. Fig. 92.—Rice leaf-beetle) Hispa aenes-
(Maxwell-Lefroy.) cens): Adult. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) Scarabeeide. Anomala vitis Fabricius; India; root borer. Phyllognathus dionysius Fabricius; India; root destroyer. (See Pl. XX XIX.) Chrysomelidz. Hispa enescens Baly; Assam, Burma, Bengal, Malabar. (See text fig. 92.) Hispa callicantha; Japan. INSECTS OF RICE AND ROSE. 191

Chrysomelidz —Continued,. Chetocnema basalis Baly; India; flea-beetle. (See text fig. 93.) Lema flavipes Suffrian; Japan. Curculionidae. Echinocnemis squameus Billberg; Formosa; root weevil. Hypomeces wnicolor Fabricius; Java. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidz. Chilo simpler Butler; India,
Formosa. (See Sugar cane.) Nymphula depunctalis Guénée;
rice case bearer; India, Burma,
Ceylon, Java, Australia; feeds

on leaves. (See pl. XL.) Nymphula fluctuosalis Zeller;
India. Melissoblaptes gularis Zeller;
Japanese grain moth; Japan,
England; larve injure stored
rice. _Noctuidz. Prodenia litura Fabricius; India,
Egypt; the cotton worm. Spodoptera mauritia Boisduval; I
Africa, Asia, Australia; army
worm. Nonagria inferens Walker;
Formosa, Orient,
Hesperide. Parnara mathias Fabricius; In-
dia; the rice skipper. (See

 

 

 

 

pl. XLI.) Gallerlidz. Paralipsa modesta Butler; Japan, FG. 93.—Rice flea-heetle ( Chaetocnema bisalis): a, Adult, b, head,
Hawaii; larver injure stored rice. enlarged; c, hind leg, enlarged. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) ROSE. (Rosa spp. Family Rosacez.) Ornamental deciduous shrubs bearing beautiful flowers, much imported in
nursery stock. A. AN IMPORTANT ROSE INSECT LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Adoretus umbrosus Fabricius and its var. tenuimaculatus Waterhouse. (The Japanese Rose Beetle. Scarabeide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Rose trees, citrus, grape, cotton, sugarcane. Injury: Injurious to citrus, rose, grape, etc., in Hawaii, Rose trees in Fiji, and sugar
cane in Java, devouring the foliage. The larve feed at the roots. May be introduced
in the soil. Biology: The adult is nocturnal in habit, hiding beneath the soil in the day and
emerging in swarms at night. Larval stage, 17 days, pupal stage about 10 days, and
egg stage from 6 to 8 days. Distribution: Hawaii, Fiji, Japan, Java. Furtoway, D. T. HawaiiAgr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 18, p. 11. B. OTHER IMPORTANT ROSE INSECTS. HEMIPTERA,. Coccid. Unarmored—
Lecanium pulchrum Marchal; Germany, Rosa arvensis,
Lecanium perornatum Cockerell and Parr. ; Austria; Rosa canina. 192 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Coccidze—Continued. Unarmored—Continued. Icerya montserratensis Riley and Howard; Trinidad, Jamaica, Panama, Colombia, Nicaragua, Porto
Rico,
Icerya seycheliarum Westwood; China, Mauritius, Natal, England. Lecaniodiaspis sardoa Targioni; Algeria. Rhizecus faleifer Kiinckel; Algeria, Sicily. Armored—
> Leucaspis japoniea Cockerell; Rosa levigata. Has been introduced and is established in the United |
States. Aspidiotus (Pseudaonidia) articulatus Morgan; Peru. Aspidiotus (Chrysomphalus) dictyospermi pinnulifera Maskell; Sicily, Italy, etc. Parlatoria calianthina Berlese and Leonardi; Italy. Parlatoria proteus virescens Maskell; China, Japan, Formosa. Aspidictus (Pseudischnaspis) bowreyi Cockerell; St. Thomas. Aspidiotus tayabanus Cockerell; Philippine Islands. THYSANOPTERA. + Heliothrips rubrocinctus Giard; West Indies, Ceylon, Uganda, Florida. (See Fruit.) COLEOPTERA. Buprestide. Agrilus viridis Linnzeus; Europe; breeds in stalks. (See Oak.) Chrysomelidz. Haltica quercetorum Foudr. ; Europe; attacks tea rose. (See Oak.) Cerambycidz. Vesperus strepens Fabricius; France. (See Grape.) Brachyrhinide. -
Diaprepes abbreviatus Linnzeus; West Indies. (See Sugar cane.) LEPIDOPTERA. Geometridz. Anisopteryz zscularia Schitlermiller; Europe; feeds on foliage. Hibernia defoliaria Linneeus; Europe; defoliator. Boarmia gemmaria Brahm. ; Europe. (See Grape.) Lasiocampidx. Malocosoma neustria Linnteus; Europe; defoliator. Lymantriidz. Dasychira pudibunda Linnzeus and Euproctis chrysorrhea Linneus; Europe; defoliators. (See Forest
defoliators.) Notodontidz. Phalera bucephala Linnzeus; Europe. (See Forest.) Tortricidx. .
Notocelia roborana Treitschke; Europe. (See Gooseberry.) Pyralide. *Pionea ferrugalis Hiibner; Europe, Asia, North America. (See Cabbage.) HYMENOPTERA. Cephidida. Janus luteipes Lep., sawfly, boring in stems; Europe. Argida. Arge rosz Linn., sawfly feeds on foliage; Europe. LITERATURE. SorAvER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. ROYAL PALM. (Oreodoxa regia. Family Palmacez.) An American palm of magnificent growth. (See Palms.) RUBBER. See Balota gutta percha; Fig (Ficus spp. ); Ceararubber; Panama rubber; Para rub-
ber; Silk rubber; West African rubber. -

PLATE XXXVI. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects

(90.0 g

“rp10yjijo) uouwasdodhiy, ‘g*pIg ‘“tuvjos sadhyouwasg % “TSdId
“STIABAM OLVLOd

 

U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual ot Dangerous Insects. PLATE XXXVIII. A DESTRUCTIVE RICE GRASSHOPPER. The rice grasshopper (Hieroglyphus banian): a, Eggs; b-q, immature stages; h, adults; j, female laying
eggs. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) U.S Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangeious Insects. PLATE XXXIX. THE Rice Root GRus. Rice root grub (Phyllognathus dionysius): a, Eggs; b,c, c’, larvee; d,d’,d’” pup; e, e’, adults. (Max-
well-Lefroy.) U.S, Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XL. THE RICE CaSe-BEARER. The rice case-bearer (Nymphula depunctalis): a, Larva; b, pupa; c, pupa in cocoon; d, adult; e, e
larvee feeding, in cases; f,/’, cocoon stems; g, g’, larval cases. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects, PLATE XLI. THE RICE SKIPPER. The rice skipper (Parnara mathias): a, Eggs; b, larva webbing leaf; c, full grown larva; ¢’, pupa;
, d’, d’’, adults; e, e’, puparia of Tachinid flies; f, Ichneumonid parasite; g, g’”, Tachinid parasite. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) INSECTS OF RUTABAGA, RYE, SAGO PALM, SAL. 1938

RUTABAGA. See Turnip. RYE. (Secale cereale Linneus. Family Graminez.) This species as well as its near relatives is cultivated in Europe and Asia. For full
treatment of its insect pests, see Grains and grasses. SAGO PALM. (Cycas revoluta. Family Cycadacez.) A palm-like plant of the Orient, much used in this country at funerals. (See Palms.) SAL. (Shorea spp. Family Dipterocarpacez.) Valuable timber trees of India. IMPORTANT SAL INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Scarabeeide. Serica assamensis Brenske; India; adults defoliate and larvee attack the roots of Shorea robusta. Lepidiota bimaculata Saunders; India; adults feed on foliage of Shorea robusta. Phyllophaga problematica Brenske (Lachnosterna), and P. clypealis Brenske; India; adults defoliate and
larvee attack the roots of Shorea robusta. Heteroplia varians Olivier; India; breeds at roots of Shorea robusta. Cucujide. Lxmophleus testaceus Fabricius; India; breeds under the bark of felled trees of Shorea robusta. Bostrychide. Schistoceros anobioides Waterhouse; India; bores in trees of Shorea robusta. Heterobostrychus pileatus Lesne, and H. xqualis Waterhouse; India; bore in timber of Shorea robusta. Sinorylon crassum Lesne; India; a serious borer in the wood Shorea robusta. Sinorylon anale Lesne; India; bores in Shorea robusta. Buprestide. Acmexodera stictipennis Laporte et Gory; India; bores in Shorea robusta. Chysobothris sernotata Gory; India; bores in the bark, bast, and sapwood of branches of Shorea robusta. Psiloptera viridans Kerremans; India; bores in Shorea robusta. Elateridz. Alaus sculptus Westwood; India; bores in logs of Shorea robusta. Tenebrionidz. Setenis levis Fairmaire, and S. semivalga Blair; India; bore in Shorea robusta. Cerambycide. Acanthophorus serraticornis Olivier; India; tunnels bast and sapwood of Shorea robusta. Celosterna scabrata Fabricius; India; bores in sapwood of Shorea robusta. Plocederus obesus Gahan; India; bores in Shorea robusta. olesthes holosericea Fabricius; India; bores in Shorea robusta. Dialeges pauper Pascoe; India; bores in bast and sapwood felled and sickly trees of Shorea robusta. Hypoeschrus indicus Gahan, India; bores in sapwood of Shorea robusta. Hoplocerambyz spinicornis Newman; India; bores in wood of sickly or felled trees of Shorea robusta. Xylotrechus smei Lap. et Gory; India; bores in Shorea robusta. Cossonide. .
Conarthrus jansoni Wollaston; India; bores in timber of Shorea robusta. Himatiwm asperum Marshall; India; bores in Shorea robusta. Ipide. Sphezrotrypes assamensis Stebbing, S. globulus Blandford, S. siwalikensis Stebbing, Coccotrypes integer
Eichhoff, and Dryoccetes minor Stebbing; India; make galleries in wood and bark of Shorea robusta. Xyleborus fallax Eichhofl, X. perforans Wollaston, X. bengalensis Stebbing, X. major Stebbing,
X. schlichii Stebbing; India; bore in Shorea robusta. Xyleborus andrewesi Blandford; India; bores in Shorea talura. 55266—17 13

 

194 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Platypodide. Crossotarsus sawndersi Chapuis; India; bores in Shorea robusta. Platypus curtus Chapuis; India; bores in Shorea robusta. Platypus talurz Stebbing; India; bores in Shorea talura. Diapusfurtivus Sampson, D. quinquespinatus Chapuis, and D. mirus Sampson; India; bores in shorea

robusta. LEPIDOPTERA. Geometridz. Boarmia selanaria; India; feeds ou young growth, leaves, and flowers. Lasiocampide. Suana concolor; India; defoliator. Trabala vishnu; India; defoliator. Dasychira horsfeldi; India; defoliater. Leucoma diaphana: India; defoliator. Lymantriidz. Lymantria grandis, L.lipcha, and L. brittata; India; defoliators. LITERATURE. STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. STEBBING, E. P. A Manual of Forest Zoology for India, 1908. SAPODILLA. (Siderorylon [ Achras] sapota, Family Sapotacez.) A fruit-bearing tree of the West Indies, central America, and northern South America,
cultivated in southern Florida. IMPORTANT SAPODILLA INSECTS. DIPTERA. Trypetide. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann. (See Fruit.) Anastrepha ludens Loew; Mexico. (See Fruit.) SILK COTTON. (Bombax malabaricum. Family Malvacez.) Tropical trees. The bark of some species produces commercial fiber. IMPORTANT SILK COTTON INSECTS

HEMIPTERA. Coccide. Aspidoproctus giganteus Newstead; Africa; Ceiba bombari. COLEOPTERA. EBostrychide. Heterobostrichus xqualis Waterhouse; India; bores in the wood. LEPIDOPTERA. Lymantriide. Dasychira horsfeldi; India; defoliator. s
Noctuide. Mudaria cornifrons; India; breeds in the pods. LITERATURE,

STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. STEBBING, E. P. Manual of Forest Zoolcgy for India, 1908. 2

SILKY OAK. (Grevillea robusta, Family Proteaceze.) A valuable lawn tree with fine fern-leaved foliage, indigenous to Australia, but
now cultivated in Florida and California. INSECTS OF SILKY OAK, SILK RUBBER, SISSU, SORGHUM. 195

IMPORTANT SILKY OAK INSECTS. Esiotes notabilis Pascoe. (Silky Oak Weevil Borer. Curculionide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Silky oak (Grevillea robusta), and kauri (Agathis australis). Injury: Bores in wood and is easily transported in logs. Description: A beautiful grayish weevil about 0.75 inch long, with brown and pinkish

markings, humeri and apical declivities of elytra acute angulate or toothed, thorax and
elytra tuberculate. Distribution: Queensland, Victoria. ‘

Frenen, C. Handbook of the Destructive Insects of Victoria, pt. 5, pp. 106-108,
pl. 119. Xenocnema spinipes (Wallach) australiz Lea. (Spined Log Beetle. Cossonide, Coleoptera.) Hosts: Grevillea robusta and Agathis australis (Dammara). Injury: Riddles the wood of logs. Description: A small brownish black elongate beetle. Found in large numbers
under the bark and when the bark is removed they bore rapidly into the wood. Distribution: Queensland, introduced into Victoria. FrencuH, ©. Handbook of the Destructive Insects of Victoria, 1911, pt. 5, pp. 126-
128, pl. 124. SILK RUBBER; IRE. (Funtumia elastica [Kickzia]. Family Apocynacee.) IMPORTANT SILK RUBBER INSECTS. (Silk Rubber Longicorns. Cerambycids; Lamiinz; Coleoptera.) Species: Acridocephala bistriata Chevrolat; East and West Africa; Funtumia elastica. Moecha adusta Har. ; West and East Africa; cacao, Funtumia. Phruneta hecphora
Thoms. ; Kamerun, East Africa; Funtumia elastica. Phryneta ceca Chevrolat; Kame-
run; Funtumia elastica. Injury: Bore in the wood. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 501, 502. SISSU. (Dalbergia sissoo. Family Leguminosz.) A tree of India, furnishing a very desirable timber. It is cultivated in California. IMPORTANT SISSU INSECT. LEPIDOPTERA. Noctuidz. Plecoptera reflera Guénée; India; defoliator. SORGHUM; KAFIR; DURRA; BROOM CORN. (Holcus sorghum Linneus. Family Graminez.) Owing to the large number of useful varieties of this species throughout the world
there is more or less commerce in the seed for propagation purposes at least. The
dangers of importing injurious insects would consist mainly in the shipments of seed,
although it is conceivable that boring insects might be introduced in brooms. 196 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. IMPORTANT SORGHUM INSECTS. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralidx. Chilo simplex Butler; India, Formosa. (See Sugar cane.) Chilo auricilia Dudgeon; India. (See Rice.) Noctuide. Sesamia cretica Led. ; Sudan; attacks durra. (See Sugar cane.) SOY BEAN. (Glycine hispida Maxim. Family Leguminose.) The soy bean was introduced into this country from the Orient. Care should be
taken to see that seed pests are not introduced. AN IMPORTANT SOY-BEAN PEST. Laspeyresia glycinivorella Matsumura (Grapholitha). (Soy Bean Moth. Tortricidee; Lepidoptera.) Host: Soy bean. Injury: Breeds in the pods; very injurious. Description and biology: Similar to that of L. nebritana on peas. Distribution: Japan. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 284. SPINACH. (Spinacia oleracea. Family Chenopodiacee.) An annual herb originating in Asia, now much cultivated for its edible foliage. AN IMPORTANT SPINACH INSECT. DIPTERA,
Anthomyide. * Chortophila (Pegomya) hyoscyami Panzer (spinach leafminer). (See Beets.) SPRUCE. (Abies spp., Picea spp. Family Pinaceze.) Ornamental evergreen trees of the cold and temperate zones of the northern hemi-
sphere, highly valued for shade, parking, wind breaks, and hedges, and valuable for
timber. For convenience the insect pests are arranged under Conifers. STRAWBERRY. (Fragaria spp. Family Rosaceee.) Low vines bearing delicious fruit, cultivated in Europe, and America especially. IMPORTANT STRAWBERRY INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Aphidide. Macrosiphum fragariz Koch; Europe; sucks juices. Macrosiphum fragariellum Theobald; Europe. Macrosiphum rogersii Theobald; England. Pentatomide. Dindymus versicolor; Australia; injurious. COLEOPTERA. Carabidz. Harpalus ruficornis Fabricius; Europe; attacks fruit. Pterostichus vulgaris Linneus; Europe; a wingless beetle, attacks fruit and also feeds on angleworms. INSECTS OF STRAWBERRY, SUGAR BEET, SUGAR CANE. 197

Chrysomelide. Galerucelia tenella Linnzeus; leaf beetle; Europe; sometimes causes serious damage, larvee and adults
feed on leaves. .

Brachyrhinidz. Brachyrhinus tenebricosus Herbst; Europe; larva feeds at roots, adults destroy buds and leaves. Several
species of this genus have been introduced into the United States. Brachyrhinus picipes Fabricius; pitchy-legged weevil; Europe; injures strawberry, raspberry, pea,
turnip, kale, ferns, potted plants. Curculionidz. Anthonomus rubi Herbst; Europe; larva attacks roots and runners, and adults destroy blossoms, buds
and leaves. Rhinaria perdix Pascoe; Australia. Psychide. Psyche viciella Schiffermiller; Europe. LEPIDOPTERA. LITERATURE. ORMEROD, E. A. Injurious Insects during 1897, pp. 111-112, 1898. ORMEROD, E. A. 16th Rept., Injurious Insects, pp. 124-126. Curtis, JouHN. Farm Insects, p. 383. SUGAR BEET. (See Beet.) SUGAR CANE. (Saccharum officinarum Linneus. Family Gramineze.) Sugar cane is an important product of the Southern States, Hawaii, Porto Rico, and
the Philippines. It is grown in many parts of the world. Owing, however, to the
great danger of transporting insect enemies in the seed cane, its importation into
the United States, except through the Department of Agriculture, has been forbidden. There is still a great possibility of the spread of its enemies from outside into the
islands. Some very important cane insects also attack corn. The sugar cane is host
to a multitude of insects which feed on its foliage, suck its juices, or bore in its stems or
roots. Many of these insects are not very likely to be imported, but in view of such a
possibility are briefly mentioned. A. SUGAR-CANE INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Tetranychus exsiccator Zehntner. (Sugar-Cane Red Spider. Tetranychide; Acarina.) Host: Sugar cane. Injury: Sucks juices from the plant. Description and biology: A tiny red mite similar in structure and habits to our
common red spider, Tetranychus bimaculatus. Distribution: Java. Van Deventer, W. Handboek voor de Suikerriet-eultuur, Java, 1906, vol. 2, pp. 282-287, pl. 39. Tomaspis varia Fabricius; Tomaspis postica Walker; Tomaspis lepidior Font. (Sugar-Cane Frog Hoppers. Cercopidie; Hemiptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane, corn, grasses. Injury: Tomaspis varia is a serious pest in Trinidad; damage called “blight” con-
sists of withering of leaves and stunting of stem. Description and biology: Adult Tomaspis varia, leathopper 6-9 mm. long, with
broad front wings; head and prothorax greenish, front wings brown with two yellow
bands; undersides dark with sutures pinkish. The adults are not active in the day-
time. They fly or hop when disturbed. Nymphal stages whitish with pink tinge;

198 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. completely covered by spittle within which they suck on the juices of the plant. Eggs elongate, oval, laid separately in incisions in dead or withering cane leaves. The
other two species are similar to T. varia. (See plate xu.) Distribution: T. varia, Trinidad; 1. postica, Mexico; T. lepidior, Panama. Unicu, F. W. Board: of Agriculture, Trinidad and Tobago. Cir. 9, 1913, 45 pp.,
9 pls., 7 text figs. Perkinsiella saccharicida Kirkaldy. (Sugar-Cane Leathopper. Fulgoridee; Hemiptera.) Host: Sugar cane. Injury: Very serious drain on the vitality of the plant due to sucking of the juices. Liable to transportation on seed cane. Description and biology: A small yellowish leat hopper differing in the various
stages mainly in the development of
the wing pads. Eggs laid in slits
in the epidermis of the leaves and
stalks of cane. The insect in all stages
sucks the juices of the plant. (See plate
XLII.) Distribution: Hawaii, Australia. A
large number of this species were cap-

 

Fic. 94.—West Indian Cane Fly (Stenocranus sac- ode . a na
charivora): Adult, (Ballou.) tured in quarantine in shipments re-

ceived at Washington from Hawaii. Van Dine, D. L. Hawaii Agric. Exp. Sta., Bul. 5, 1904, 29 pp., § figs. Stenocranus saccharivora Westwood. (West Indian Cane Fly. Fulgoridie; Hemiptera.) Host: Sugar cane. Injury: Very serious drain on vitality of plant due to sucking juices. Liable to
transportation on seed cane. Description and biology: A little yellow leafhopper differing but little in the various
stages. Itis not often a serious pest but at times does much damage. (See text fig. 94.) Distribution: West Indies. Basstzres, Eugene. La Sucrerie Indigéne et Coloniale, Paris, 1912, vol. 79, pp. 27-32. Entochira lateralis Boheman. (Holaniara picescens Fairmaire). (The Bibitkever. Tenebrionide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane, tobacco. Injury: Bores in the stalks, causing much damage. It can easily be transported in
seed cane. Description and biology: Adult beetle about 6 mm. long, black, with a brown metallic
luster on the elytra. Pupa white, oval, acute at apex with many spiny tubercles on
sides ofabdomen. Larva an elongate brown wireworm with pointed apex, 10-11 mm. long. Bores in the stalks of cane near the nodes, and also bores in tobacco So
Eggs \ess than 1 mm. long, oval, almost spherical. Distribution: Java. Van Deventer, W. Handboek voor de Suikerriet-cultuur, Java, 1906, vol. 2, pp. 53-58, pl. 7. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 494. SUGAR-CANE INSECTS. 199

Apogonia destructor Ritsema Bos. (Javan Sugar-Cane Grub Beetle. Scarabividie; Coleoptera.) Hosts; Sugar cane, grasses, and various plants. Injury: Destructive in Java. Attacks the roots. Description and biology: Adult about 0.5 inch long, greenish black, of the general
form of a June beetle. Pwpa white, broad in front, tapering behind, with all appen-
dages beneath. Larva white, usually in a curved position, with large yellow head
and long legs. Lives at roots of plants, causing much damage. Distribution: Java. Van Deventer, W. Handboek voor de Suikerriet-cultuur Java, 1906, vol. 2, pp. 282-287, plate 4. Apogonia ritsemze Sharp. (Javan Sugar-Cane Grub Beetle. Scarabzeidee; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane, and other plants. Injury: Destructive to the roots. Description and biology: Adult reddish brown to blue-black. Somewhat smaller
than A. destructor. Length 5-7 mm. Immature stages also similar. The larvee are
very destructive to the roots. ;

Distribution: Java. Van Deventer, W. Handboek voor de Suikerriet-cultuur, Java, 1906, pp. 32, 33,

pl. 5. Phytalus smithi Arrow. (The Brown Hard-Back Beetle. Scarabzeidee; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane. Injury: Larva trims the small roots and is liable to transportation in the soil around
cane plants. Description and biology: Adult beetle tawny red of the shape and appearance of a
June beetle, 14-18 mm. long. Pupation occurs in a cell in the ground. Larva a
white grub. usually curved, with large brownish head, and long legs; bores in the
sugar-cane stumps. Hgqs laid in the soil. Distribution: Mauritius, Barbados, Trinidad. Has been distributed in cane ship-
ments. Arrow, G. J. Annals and Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 8, vol. 9, 1912, pp. 455-459. Aphanistichus consanguineus Ritsema Bos. (The Flat-Headed Leaf-Miner Beetle. Buprestids; Coleoptera.) °

Host: Sugar cane. Injury: Mines the leaves. Description and biology: Adult beetle, 3.5 mm. long, black, head and prothorax
with a bronzy tint. Pupa 3-5 mm. long, orange color, elongate elliptical, with all
appendages beneath. Larva when full grown about 6 mm. long, orange colored,
elongate, flattened, with sides crenulate. Zggs laid singly in the leaf. Distribution: Java. Van Deventer, W. Handboek voor de Suikerriet-cultuur, Java, 1906, vol. 2, pp. 46-53, pl. 6. Hispa wakkeri Zehntner. (Sugar-Cane Hispid Miner. Chrysomelide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane. :
Injury: Mines the leaves of sugar cane. Description and biology: Adult beetle 5-6 mm. long, black, bristling with strong

spines. Pupa cylindrical, yellow or rel brown in color, 6-7 mm. long, formed in

200 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. the leaf mine. Larva yellowish white, flattened, legless, with small brown head,
brown prothoracic shields, and two apical teeth. Mines the leaves. Distribution: Java. Van Deventer, W. Handboek voor de Suikerriet-cultuur, Java, 1906, pp. 66-70,

1.9. P Diaprepes abbreviatus Linnzeus (spengleri Linnzus). (West Indian Sugar-Cane Root Borer. Brachyrhinide [Otiorhynchide];
Coleoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane, orange, guava, avocado, mango, rose, Indian corn, Guinea corn,
sweet potatoes, Bahama grass (Cynodon dactylon), limes, and other plants. Injury: The larva does serious injury to the roots and the adult to the foliage. Liable to transmission in seed-cane shipment. Description and biology: Adult 8-18 mm. in length; variable in color from white to
green and ochraceous, with from four to many denuded elytral strize beak thick,
tricarinate, antennze elbowed. Pupa 19 mm. long, soft and white with a long thick beak. Larva long, white, curved, footless. Eggs ob-
long, oval, smooth, white, laid in clusters on
leaves and glued between two leaf surfaces. The larvee feed at the root system and tunnel
the stalk of the plants above named. Distribution: Porto Rico to Barbados. (See
plate xivut.) Prerce, W. D. On Some West Indian Sugar-
Cane Root-Boring Weevils. Journ. Agr. Re-
search, U.S. Dept. Agr., vol. 4, pp. 255-263,
1915 (Plates XXXV to XXXVIII). Metamasius hemipterus Linneus. (West Indian Sugar-Cane Borer. Calandride;
Coleoptera.) Host: Sugar cane. Injury: Serious pest to the stalks of cane. Liable to importation in seed cane. Description and biology: Adult weevil about
half an inch long, brown with dark markings
Fig. 95.—Sugar-cane borer (Metamasius ON the thorax and elytra. The head is pro-

sericcus): a, Adult; b, larva; c, injury. « longed into a long beak. Pupa white with ap-

Galiou.) pendages folded beneath. It is formed inside a
cocoon of fiber. Larva pale yellow, with brownish head, legless, wrinkled in appear-
ance with the hind part of the body swollen; bores downward in the cane stalk. Eggs laid singly beneath the rind of the stalk or in the leaf sheaths. Distribution: West Indies, Trinidad. Van Dine, D.L. Porto Rico Sugar Growers’ Association, 1911, Year Book, pp. 55-56. Metamasius sericeus Olivier. (Sugar-Cane Borer. Calandridx; Coleoptera.) Host: Sugar cane. Injury: Serious pest to cane stalks. Liable to importation in seed cane. Description and biology: Very similar in general appearance and habits to Metamasius
hemipterus Linnaeus. (Sce text fig. 95.) Distribution: West Indies. °

U. S, Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. Plate XLII. THE SUGAR-CANE FROGHOPPER. The sugar-cane froghopper Tomaspis varia): Eggs, and egg punctures. (Urich.) U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XLIII. THe SUGAR-CANE LEAFHOPPER (PERKINSIELLA SACCHARICIDA). (KIRKALDY.) U. S. Dept. of Ayriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. Pate XLIV. CANE Borers. larva, pupa, adult. Figs.b,h,l, 2 r.—Scirpophaga
auriflua: Egg, ay pupa, adults. Fig. cirpophaga monostigma, Adult. 9
Nonagria uniformis: Larva, pup idults. Fi, yj, P-—Polyocha saccharella: Larva, pupa a, 2 adult. Figs. e, k.—Anerastia ablutella: Larva, adult. nese ell-Lefroy.) Cane borers. g, m, 8.—Chilo simplex: Eggs. U.SS, Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLATE XLV. THe SuGaR-CANE LEAF-ROLLER. The sugar-cane leaf-roller (Omuodes accepta): Fic. 1.—Adult. Fias. 2, 3, 4, 5.—Larva. Fies. 6, 7.—
Pupa. Fries. 8, 9.—Eggs. Figs. 10, 11.—Injury. (Swezey.) SUGAR-CANE INSECTS. 201
Rhabdocnemis obscurus Boisduval. (Hawaiian Sugar-Cane Borer. Calandride; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Banana, sugar cane, coconut, sago palm, royal palm, wine palm (Caryota
urens), papaya (Carica papaya). Injury: Very injurious to the stalk. Liable to importation in seed cane. Description and biology: Adult weevil reddish brown with darker brown markings,

 

Fig. 96.—The Hawaiian sugar-cane borer (Rhabdocnemis obscurus [Sphenophorus]): 1, Eggs, natural size. 2, Eggs in situ, much enlarged: a, Section of egg passage with egg, c; b, egg placed unusually near the rind,
d. 8, Larvee, just hatched and older, natural size. 4, Full-grown larva, natural size. 5, Larva, side
view, enlarged: a, Spiracles; b, cervical shield. 6, Larva, front view, enlarged. 7, Pupa, enlarged :
a, Rostrum or beak; b, antenna; c, elytron or wing cover; d, folded wing. 8, Pupal case or cocoon,
enlarged. 9, Adult, enlarged. (Terry.) long beak, elbowed antenne, over 0.5 inch long. Pupa white, in cocoon of fiber. Larva white, curved, legless. Bores in the stalks and roots. (See text fig. 96.) . Distribution: Hawaii, Jamaica, Barbados, St. Kitts, Antigua, St. Lucia, British

Guiana, Fiji, New Guinea, New Ireland, Tahiti, Queensland, Malay Archipelago. Van Dine, D.L. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bul. 93, 1911, pp. 35-40. Figs. 4, 5. 202 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSEOTS. Xyleborus perforans Wollaston. (Sugar-Cane Ambrosia Beetle. Scolytidae; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane, a polyphagous insect breeding in many kinds of wood. Injury: Is very injurious to sugar cane in Java. As it bores in the stalks it can easily
be transported in shipments of seed cane. Description and biology: Adult weevils about 2 mm. lohg, cylindrical, without snout,
the head completely concealed from above. Pupa white, about 2mm. long with head
and all appendages on the underside. Larva cylindrical, white, legless, with chiti-
nized head. Bores in the pith of the stalk. gqs elliptical. About 70 to 100 eggs are
laid by the parent, each at the end of a separate chamber

Distribution; Java, cosmopolitan in the tropics and subtropi

 
  

 

Van Deventer, W. Handboek, voor de Suikerriet-cultuur, Java, 1906, vol. 2, pp. 60-66, pl. 8. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 573-574. Fig. 97.—Cane-sucker moth ( Castnia licus). (Ballou.) Castnialicus Drury. (Cane-Sucker Moth: Giant Sugar Cane Borer. Castniidee: Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane, banana, coconut, orchids, and Bromeliacez. Injury: Very serious borer in cane stalks. When cane is to be imported from sec-
tions where this species occurs great care should be used to eliminate trash. Only the
tops should be shipped, and these should be carefully examined for eggs or larvee at the
base of the leaves. Description and biology: Moth measuring over 3 inches in wing expanse, brown with
a white band crossing each wing and a few yellow spots beyond. Pupa reddish brown,
over an inch in length. Larva whitish, about 2 inches long, with reddish brown head. Bores in the stalks of its food plants. £ggs laid singly, pinkish, elongate, pointed at
each end, ribbed, in cross section formed like a five-pointed star. Over 50 eggs are
laid by each moth. (See text fig. 97.) Distribution: British Guiana, Dutch Guiana, Trinidad, and other parts of northern
South America. Unicu, F.W. The Cane Sucker. 2 pp., with colored plate. :
Martarr, C.L. Bureau of Entomology, U. 8. Dept. Agr., Bul. 54, 1905, pp. 71-75,
pl. 4. SUGAR-CANE INSECTS. 203

Sesamia cretica Led. (Durra Stem Borer. Noctuidz; Lepidoptera.) Host: Sugar cane, corn, durra. Injury: Very serious pest in Khartoum. Is liable to importation in seed cane. Description and biology: Adult, a stout bodied, creamy colored moth, with wing
expanse of about 30 mm. ; hind wings silvery white; forewings creamy with faint
brownish markings. Pupa 15-18 mm. long, chestnut colored. Larva 25-30 mm. long,
varying from pinkish or yellowish to dead white; head brown, spiracles black. Egg
white, 6 mm. in diameter. While this pest is more important as an enemy of durra
and maize in Khartoum it is more likely to transportation in sugar cane. Distribution: Khartoum, Sudan. Kine, H. H. Third Report Wellcome Research Laboratory Khartoum, 1904, pp
222-224; pl. 27, figs. 1, 3, 6, in color. Diatrzea spp. (Sugar-Cane Borer Moths. Pyralidee; Lepidoptera.) Species: *Diatrea saccharalis Fabricius; Mexico, West Indies, United States. D. striatalis Sn. ; West Indies, Java. D. canella Hampson; Trinidad, Grenada,
Guiana. D. lineolata Walker; Trinidad, West Indies, Central America, South
America. :

Hosts: Sugar cane and grasses. Injury: Very serious injury by boring in the stalk. Easy to transport in seed-cane
shipments. Description and biology: Gray moths with whitish-spotted larvee. Pupate in the
stalks in the larval tunnels. Eggs are laid in clusters. Diatrwa saccharalis has been
fully treated in American literature. The others behave in a similar manner. Barer, T.C. U.S. Dept. Agr., Bur. Ent., 1911, Cire. 139. Srusss, W. C., and Morgan, H. A. Loutsiana Exp. Sta., ser. 2, 1902, Bull. 70. Van Deventer, W. Handboek voor de Suikerrietcultuur, Java, 1906, pp. 131-139,
pl. 20. Chilo simplex Butler. (Sugar-Cane Moth Borer of India. Pyralidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane, corn, sorghum, rice, millet. Injury: Very serious pest, boring in the stalks. It is liable to importation in
seed cane. Description and biology: Moth yellowish gray, the male a little smaller and
darker. Pupation occurs in the larval tunnel. Larva about an inch long, with a
dirty white body and black head, a dark patch behind head and two dark longitudinal
lines on body. The small hairs of the body are set on black dots. The larva burrows
in the stalks of cane, corn, sorghum, rice, and millet. Zggs laid in rows, side by side
on the leaves. (See plate xiv, figs. a, g, m, s.)

Distribution: India, Formosa,

Maxwett-Lerroy, H.F. Moth Borer in Sugar Cane. Agr. Journ. India, vol. 1, pp. 97-115. Basu, §. K., and Durr, H. L. Crop Pest Handbook for Behar and Orissa. Calcutta

Leaflet 56, pl. 38. Omiodes accepta Butler. (Hawaiian Sugar-Cane Leafroller. Pyralidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane, grasses, sedges. Injury: Feeds on the leaves. which it rolls for its protection. The damage is some-
times serious. Is liable to importation in seed cane. 204 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Description and biology: Adult, brownish with white-lined veins and margins of
segments; wings with two darker bands; antennee long. Wing expanse 20-30 mm,
Pupa 12-14 mm. long, light brown. Larva 27 mm. long, green with a few scattered
hairs; head pale yellowish. The larva feeds on the leaf, folding it into a tube to
protect itself while feeding, changing to a new leaf when it has eaten all it can» When
disturbed it drops to the ground. £ggs laid in small clusters arranged in rows on the
surface of leaves. (See plate xv.) Distribution: Hawaii, Peru. Swezey, Orro H. Hawaiian Sugar Planters’ Assn., Bull. 5, pp. 6-10, pl. 1. Polyocha saccharella Dudgeon. (Cane Root Borer. Pyralidee; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane. Injury: Causes stunted growth and shriveling of plants by boring in stalks and roots. Description and biology: Moth small, brown, with hind wings white. Pupates in
stalk. Larva about 0.75 inch in length, of white color; bores in stalk and root; hiber-
nates in root; before pupating it eats an opening in the stem and covers it with silk. (See plate xurv, figs. d, j, p.)

Distribution: India. Basu, S. K., and Durr, H. L. Crop Pest Handbook for Behar and Orissa, Calcutta,

Leaflet 58, pl. 38. Ereunetis flavistriata Walsingham. (Sugar-Cane Bud Moth. Tineidse; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane, palms, banana, pineapple, Pandanus. Injury: While this species mainly lives in the dead tissues of the above food plants,
it breeds in cane stalks among the dry leaves, but often eats out the eyes or buds,
thus destroying the propagating value of the cane. It may easily be transported in
seed cane. Description and biology: A small moth, measuring 14 mm. in wing expanse, head
and thorax yellowish white, forewings yellowish white, with indistinct yellow streaks,
hind wings shining pale golden yellow, becoming white at apex. Pipa 5 to 6 mm. long, pale yellowish brown. Larva 12 to 15 mm. long, whitish, head reddish brown,
hairs on darker tubercles. The larva usually feeds in the dried leaf sheaths, but
sometimes attacks the rind, giving entrance to fungi, and does the greatest damage
by eating out the eyes. Distribution: Hawaii. Swezey, Orro H. Hawaiian Sugar Planters’ Association, bul. 6, pp. 9-12, pl. 2,

figs. 1-6. Laspeyresia schistaceana Sn. (Grapholitha). (Gray Borer of the Sugar Cane. Tortricidse; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Sugar cane. Injury: Very important in Java. Is liable to importation in seed cane. Description and biology: Moth about 12 mm. long, grayish brown. Pupa reddish
brown, 8-13 min. long. Larva yellowish, with head and collar on prothorax as well
as two apical segments chitinized reddish brown. Hairs sparse on brownish spots. The larva bores in stalks of the cane. Eggs oval; about 120 to 170 are laid in a row
under the leaf or behind the sheath of the cane. Distribution: Java. Van Deventer, W. Handboek voor de Suikerriet-cultuur, Java, 1906, vol. 2, pp. 142-159, pl. 21, text figs. 46-49. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Fflanzenkrankheiten, 8d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 284. SUGAR-CANE INSECTS. 205

B. OTHER IMPORTANT SUGAR-CANE INSECTS. ORTHOPTERA. Acridlidz and Locustidz. Oxya intricata Stil of Formosa and Japan; O. velox Fabricius of China, Japan, India, and Islands o
the Pacific Ocean; O. annulicornis Matsumura of Formosa; attack foliage. Epacromia tamulus Fabricius and Yrilophidia annulata Thunberg; Java; attack foliage. Racilia okinawensis Matsumura of Formosa,

Gelastorhinus esox Burr of Japan and Formosa,

Acridium succinctum Linneus and A. flavicorne Fabricius of Japan, China, India, Formosa, and the
Malay Archipelago; A. rosewm De Geer, A. zehntneri Krauss, A. luteicorne Serville, and A. zrugi-
nosum Linnzeus of Java. Pachytylus migratorioides Reicharting; an especially serious pest in Formosa, Asia, Africa, and Aus-
tralia; @daleus infernalis Saussure of Japan, China, Formosa, India, and Malaysia; O. nigrofas-
ciatus Latreille of Asia, Europe, and Africa. Fig. 98.—Cane grasshopper (Atractomorpha crenulata). (Maxwell-Lefroy.) Atractomorpha crenulata Fabricius (See text, fig. 98) and A. psittacina De Haan of Java; A. bedeli
Bolivar of Japan, China, and Formosa. Elimza chloris De Haan, Mecopoda elongata Linneus; Java. Tryzalis nasuta Linneeus of Formosa, Asia, Africa, and Europe; Phizoba infumaia Brun, of Formosa»
China, and Malaysia; Stenobothurus formosanus Matsumura of Formosa; Trilophidia annulata Thun. berg and Epacromia tamulus Fabricius of Asia and the islands of the Pacific; Paratettix gracilis
Shiraki, P. singularis Shiraki, Wedotettix arcuatus Shiraki, and Tettix formosanus Shiraki of Formosa. Gryllidz, Gryllotalpidze. Liogryllus bimaculatus De Geer, L. formosanus Matsumura, Gryllus mitratus Burmeister, Tridactylus
flavomaculatus Matsumura, Gryllotalpa africana Pallas; G2canthus indicus Saussure, A naziphus
pallidulus Matsumura, and Trigonidium haani Saussure; Oriental Regions,

 

206 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccide. Armored—

Aspidiotus (Odonaspsis) secreta saccharicaulis Zelintner; Java. Aspidiotus ( Targionia) glomerata Green; India. A spidiotus ( Targionia) sacchari Cockerell; West Indies, Java, British Guiana. Chionaspis depress1 Zehntner; Java, India. Chionaspis madiunensis Zehntner; Java,
Chionaspis saccharifolii Zehntner; Java. Chionaspis tegalensis Zehntner; Java, Mauritius. Unarmored—
Aclerda japonica Newstead; India. Asterolecanium bambusx Boisduval; Madeira. Icery2z seychellarum Westwood; Seychelles, Madeira, Formosa. Lecanium guerinii Signoret; Mauritius. Lecanium krugeri Zehntner; Java. Margarodes formicarum Guild; Barbados. Pseudococcus boninsis Kuwana; Japan. > Pseudococcus bromeliz Bouché; Hawaii. Pseudococcus calceolariz Maskell; Hawaii, St. Croix, Porto Rico, Barbados. (See pl. XLVI.) Pseudococcus sacchari Cockerell; Costa Rica, Hawaii, Porto Rico, Barbados, Cuba. Pseudococcus saccharifolii Green; Hawaii. * Pseudococcus terensis Tinsley; Texas, Mauritius. Pulvinaria icerji Guérin; Mauritius, Formosa. Ripersia sacchari Guénée; India. Fig. 99.—Cane leafhopper (Pyrilla aberrans). Jassoidea, Fulgoroidea. Dictyophora sinica Walker, Anagnia splendens Germar, Ricania tzxniata Stal., Diastrombus politus. Uhler, Phenice moesta Westwood, Nicertoides saccharivora Matsumura, Nisia atrovenosa Lethierry,
Oliarus oryze Matsumura, Delphacodes vastatrix Breddin, which is very injurious in Java; Kirbya
pagana Melichar, Tropidocephala brunneipennis Signoret, T. saccharivorella Matsumura, T. formosana
Matsumura, Stenocranus sacchari Matsumura, Delphax propinqua Fieber, D. furcifera Horvath, D.
graminicola Matsumura, D. fwmosa Matsumura, Zygina circumscripta Matsumura, Z. maculifrons
Motschulsky, Z. subrufa Melichar, Gnathodus viridis Matsumura, G. pallidulus Matsumura, Cicadula
fasciifrons, C. 6-notata Fallen, Nirvana pallida Melichar, N. suturalis Melichar, Deltocephalus dorsalis
Motschulsky, Nephotettiz apicalis Motschulsky, Eucanthus semiglauca Lethierry, Tetigonia viridis
Linneeus, 7’. albida Walker, T. ferruginea Fabricius, Strongylocephalus agrestis Fallen, and Ptyclus
costalis Walker; Formosa and oriental regions; Pyrilla aberrans Distant, India. -(See text, fig. 99.) Phenice maculosa Westwood, Dicranotropis vastatrit Breddin, and Eumetopina krugeri Breddin; Java. The leafhoppers of the genus Perkinsiella seem to be partial to sugar cane, sometimes attacking
grasses. Aside from P. saccharicida Kirkaldy, treated above, the following species are recorded by
Muir: P. vitiensis Kirkaldy, Fiji; P. graminicola Kirkaldy, Hawaii; P. sinensis Kirkaldy, Borneo;
P, pallidula Muir, Borneo; P. ratilei Muir, British New Guinea; P. bicoloris Muir, British New
Guinea; P. variegata Muir, British New Guinea; P. papuensis Muir, British New Guinea; P. vasia-
trix Breddin, Java, Borneo, British New Guinea; P. lalokensis, Muir, British New Guinea; P.
amboinensis Muir, Amboina. Owing to the habit of laying eggs in the cane stalks any of these species
ean be transported in cane shipments. SUGAR-CANE INSECTS. 207

Cicadidz. Mogannia hebes Walker; Java. Aleyrodidz. Neomaskellia bergii Signoret; Formosa, oriental regions. Aleurolobus longicornis Zehntner, and Aleyrodes lactea Zehntner; Java. Aphididz. Oregma lanigera Zehntner; Formosa; very injurious. Geoicalucifuga Zehntner; Formosa. Miridz (Capsidz). Lygus oryzx Matsumura and L. sacchari Matsumura; Formosa,
Periscopus mundulus Breddin; Java. Tingitide. Serenthia formosana Matsumura; Formosa. Leptodictya tabida H. Schaeffer; Mexico. Lygeide. Cymnus tabaci Matsumura; Formosa. Colabathristes saccharicida Karsch; Java. Coreidz. Cletus trigonus Thunberg, C. bipunctatus H. S., Riptortus fuscus Fabricius, and Leptocorisa varicornis
Fabricius; Formosa. Pentatomide. Scotinophora tarsalis Voll., Menida histrio Fabricius, Nezara viridula Linneeus, and Coptosoma cribraria

Fabricius; Formosa. THYSANOPTERA. Heliothrips striatoptera Kobus, Physopus sexnotatus Zehntner, Oxrythrips binervis Kobus, Parthenothrips
(?) kobusi Van Deventer, Stenothrips (?) zehntneri Van Deventer, Thrips sacchari Kriiger, T. serrata
Kobus, T. minuta Van Deventer, and Phigothrips lucasseni Kriiger; Java. Phleothrips pallidicornis Matsumura; Formosa. COLEOPTERA. Bostrychide. P
Dinoderus minutus Fabricius; India. (See Bamboo.) Scarabeide. Oryctes rhinocerus Linneeus (see Palms), Xylotrupes dichotomus Linneus, and Ligyrus rugiceps Le
Conte; the destructive searabzeids, whose larve feed at the cane roots; oriental regions. Xylotrupes gideon Linnseus, Anomala xnea Perty, Adoretus wmbrosus Fabricius (see Rose), and Holo-
trichia leucophthalma Wiedemann; the very destructive scarabeids, whose larve feed at the roots of
cane; Java; oriental regions. Holotrichia vidua; attacks cane in the Philippines. Tenebrionidz. Gonocephalum (Opatrum) acutangulum Fairmaire, which bores in sugar cane and tobacco stalks.
.
Elateridz. Agriotes formosanus, A. taichwensis, A. sacchari, Hoius vittatus, Cardiophorus devastans, C. formosanus,
Ludius suturalis, and Lacon shirakii, all described by Matsumura; Formosa and oriental regious. Chrysomelide. Monolepta nigrobilincata Motschulsky; Colaspidea metallica Rossi, a very injurious species; Nodostoma
lateralis Matsumura and Hispa callicantha Baly; Formosa and oriental regions. Brachyrhinide. Echinocnemus squameus Billberg, Myllocerus brunneus Matsumura, M. guttulus Matsumura, Episomus
albinus Matsumura, Cneorhinus albiguttatus Matsumura, Phytoscaphus formosanus Matsumura,
Tanymecus rusticus Fabricius (a very injurious species); Formosa. Hypomeces unicolor Fabricius, which breeds at the roots of young cane and also attacks rice; Java. Curculionide. Lirus vetula Fabricius; Formosa. Baris saccharivora Matsumura; Formosa. Calandridz. Rhynchophorus palmarum Linneus; Trinidad. (See Coconut palm.) Cosmpolites sordidus Germar; Pacific Islands. (See Banana.) 208 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. LEPIDOPTERA. Rhopalocera. Cyllo leda Linneeus, Discophora celinde Stoll, Pamphila dara Kollar, Hesperia philino Méschler, H.
conjuncta H. 8.; Java. Parnara mathias Fabricius and Telicota augias Linneus; Mycalesis mineus Linneeus and Melanitis
leda Linnzeus; Formosa and oriental regions. Sphingidz. Leucophlebia lineata Westwood; Formosa, Java. Notodontidz. Anticyra combusta Moore (Phalera); Java. Cnethocampidzx. Dreata petola Moore; Java. Arctiidze. Phissama interrupta Linnzeus; Java. Lymantriidz. Psalis securis Hiibner, Euproctis minor Snellenhoeven, Lelia subrufa Snellenhoeven, Procodeca adara
Moore, and Aroa socrus Hiibner; Java. Laelia costalis Matsumura; Formosa. Euproctis flavata Cramer; oriental regions. Noctuidz. Sesamia nonagrioides Lef., Spodoptera pecten Guénée, Agrotis interjectionis Guénée, Remigia frugalis
Fabricius (see text fig. 100); Java. Nonagria exitiosa Oliff is destructive to cane in New South Wales. Nonagria inferens Walker, which is very injurious to cane in Formosa; Cirphis wnipuncta Haworth, a
cosmopolitan pest; and L. loreyi Dup; Formosa. Nonagria uniformis; India. (See pl. XLIV, figs. ¢,
f, i, 0.) Pyralidz. Botys coelesalis Walker, Cnaphalocrocis bifurcalis
Snellenhoeven, Scirpophaga intacta Snellenhoe-
ven, and Chactosticha nana Zehntner; Java. Chilo infuscatella Snellenhoeven, Scirpophaga auri-
flua Zeller, a serious borer (see pl. XLIV, figs. b,
h, 1, n, r), and Diatrzxa striatalis Snellenhoeven;
Formosa and oriental regions:

Anerastia ablutella Zeller; India; borer. (See pl. XLIV, figs. e, k.)

Chilo auricilia Dudgeon; India. (See Rice.) Scirpophaga chrysorrhea Zeller and S. monostigma

Fig. 100.—Cane moth (Remigia frugalis) (Max- Zeller (see pl. XLIV, fig. g); India; very inju-
well-Lefroy). rious borers. Elachistidz. Cosmopteryx pallifasciella Snellenhoeven; Java. Autosticha pelodes Meyrick breeds in dead cane leaves and other plants in Hawaii. Tortricidz. Eucosoma schistacea Snellenhoeven; causes much injury by boring in the stems; Formosa. Phycitide. Cryptoblabes aliena Swezey attacks green cane leaves, corn, and sorghum, as well as other plants. Tineidz. Ercunetis pilosata Swezey and E. muiriella Swezey of British New Guinea attack the cane exactly as
E. flavistriata; Opogonia aurisquamosa Butler of Hawaii, Marquesas, and Society Islands; O. apicalis
Swezey of Hawaii; O. dimidiatella Zeller of Java; O. saccharella Swezey, and O. Fumiceny Felder of
British New Guinea attack the wet dead leaves and lower buds of cane. LITERATURE. MatsumMuRA, S. Die Schiidlichen und Niitzlichen Insekten vom Zuckerrohr Formosas, The Keiseisha,
Tokyo, 1910. Also in Zeit, f. wiss. Ins. biol., band. 6, pp. 101-104; 136-139. VAN DEVENTER, W. Handboek voor de Suikerriet-cultuur, Java, vol. 2, 1906. Murr, F. Hawaiian Sugar Planters’ Assn., Entom. bul. 9, 1910, 11 pp., 5 figs. HEIDEMANN, O. Journ. Econ. Entom. 1913, vol. 6, pp. 249-251, fig. 1. SoRAvVER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. Swezey, E. P. Hawaiian Sugar Planters’ Assn. Bul. 6, 1909. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects PLaTe XLVI. THE SuGAR-CANE MEALY-Buc. The sugar-cane mealy-bug *(Pseudococcus calceolariae): F1G
i) ung cane. Fic. 2.—Adult females, enlarged. F:
F'g. 4.—Cocoons. (Van Dine.) Adult mealy-bugs clustered about base
—Single adult with mealylike covering. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual! of Dangerous Insects PLaTe XLVII. [! THE TosBacco STEM-BorRER. The tobacco stem-borer| Gnorimoschema heliopa): Figs. a, 6.—Eggs. Fies.c, e.—Injury. Fic. d.—
Pupa. Fie.f.—Larva. Fis. g,h.—Adults. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) SWEET-POTATO INSECTS. 209

SWEET POTATO. (Ipomea batatas Poir. Family Convolvulacee.) The sweet potato is now grown in many parts of the world, and, while not often
shipped into the United States because of our own bountiful crops, there is always
likelihood of danger in shipment of tubers for propagation purposes. ‘he, only
enemies of the vine which are dangerous are those which attack the tubers. A. BETTER KNOWN SWEET-POTATO INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Cylas brunneus Fabricius. (Liberian Sweet-Potato Borer. Curculionoidea: Coleoptera.) Host: Sweet potato. Injury: Attacks tubers in a manner similar to C. formicarius. Liable to introduction
in the tubers. Description: A wingless elongate weevil with body constricted in front of elytra;
unicolorous, brown, bronzy or black, of the same form as C. formicarius. Distribution: Liberia. .
>« Cylas formicarius Fabricius. (Sweet-Potato Weevil. Curculionoidea: Coleoptera.) Host: Sweet potato. Injury: Very serious pest of sweet-potato tubers. Description and biology: Adult an elongate weevil, with steel-blue elytra, reddish
prothorax and legs and darker head; about 0.33 inch in length. Pupa white, elongate
with all appendages folded underneath. Larva a white footless grub with dark-brown
head; bores in the tubers of the sweet potatoes and pupates in its burrows. It attacks
the tubers both in the field and in storage. Distribution: Nearly cosmopolitan; Florida to Texas, but not present in all sweet-
potato sections of the United States. Basu, 8. K., and Durr, H. L. Crop Pest Handbook for Behar and Orissa, 1913,
Calcutta, Leaflet 71, pl. 47. , i

Euscepes batatze Waterhouse. (Cryptorhynchus.) (West Indian Sweet-Potato Weevil. Curculionidé; Coleoptera.) Host: Sweet potato. . Injury: Bores in the tuber. Very easily distributed. This weevil is caught in
quarantine in almost every shipment of sweet potatoes from Hawaii to California but
has not yet become established. Description and biology: Weevil elliptical, brown, covered with flat scales and
bristling with stiff erect scales; beak short, concealed on breast when at rest. Pupa
white, oval with two apical spines. Larva curved, white, legless with chitinous head. Distribution: West Indies (Barbados, Antigua), Hawaii. Fuuaway, D. T. Hawaii Agr. Exp. Sta., 1911, Bul. 22, pp. 27-29, fig. 9
Wuirney, L. A. Monthly Bulletin California St. Comm. Horticulture, 1915, vol. 4,
pp. 162-164, figs. 24-28. Omphisa anastomosalis Guénée. (Sweet-Potato Stem Borer. Pyralide; Lepidoptera.) Host: Sweet potato, other garden crops. Injury: Bores in the stem and sometimes into the tuber, in which case it can easily
be disseminated. 55266—17——14

210 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Description and biology: Moth white, with the body suffused with ocherous and
rufous, leaving some pale spots on the dorsum; forewings with rufous suffusion on
basal area extending below median nervure to middle of wing, hyaline patches at
middle and end of cell, rufous edged ocherous spot between them, and another beyond
cell, curved postmedial rufous line with irregularly dentate line beyond it inclosing
series of hyaline patches; hind wings with base rufous, two irregularly waved rufous
post-medial lines; expanse 32-36 mm. Larva 30 mm. long, pale yellowish white, with
conspicuous brown tubercies. Zggs elliptical, flat or moderately rounded, laid on
leaves. Distribution: China, India, Ceylon, Java. Introduced into Hawaii about 1900 and
has become quite a pest. Fuuraway, D. T. Hawaii Agr. Exp. Sta., 1911, Bul. 22, pp. 16-19, fig. 6. B. IMPORTANT SWEET-POTATO INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Jassidz and Fulgoride. Nesosydne ipomeicola and Aloha ipomex; Hawaii. COLEOPTERA. Conchyloctenia punctata Fabricius; Africa; sometimes serious. Scarabeide. Adoretus umbrosus tenuimaculatus Waterhouse; Hawaii, Japan. Chrysomelidx. Aspidomorpha militaris Fabricius; India, Java; leaf beetle. LEPIDOPTERA. Noctuide. Agrotis crinigera, A. dislocata, A. saucia Hiibuer, Spodoptera mauritia Boisduval, Laphygma erigui
Hiibner, L. reclusa and Plusia chalcites Esp. ; Hawaii; cutworms. Sphingide. Herse convolvuli Linneus; Hawaii, United States. Tineidx. * Beddlia minor Busk; Hawaii, Florida; leaf miner. Bedellia somnulentella Zeller; Cosinopolitan. Bedelia orchilella Walsingham, Hawaii; an important leaf miner. Pyralidz. Phiyctenia despecta Butler; Hawaii; leaf roller. Tortricidz. Amorbia emigratella Busck; South America, Hawaii; leaf roller. TAMARACK. See Conifers. TAMARIND. (Tamarindus indicus L. Family Leguminosee.) An ornamental shade tree grown everywhere in the Tropics. It is grown in southern
Florida and California and is used in conservatories in more northern countries. The
pods contain a pleasant pulp used in the Tropics as a basis for a cooling drink. This
pulp is also used in medicine. The wood is valuable for furniture. IMPORTANT TAMARIND INSECTS;
COLEOPTERA,
Mylabridx. Caryoborus gonagra Fabricius; India, breeds in seed. Calendridz. Calendra lincaris Herbst; Brazil, West Indies. * Calendra rugicollis Casey, Key West, Fla.; breeds in seed in pod. Tenebrionide. « Palembus ocularis Casey; Key West, Fla. SteppinG, E. P. Indian Forest Insects. Coleoptera, 1914. INSECTS OF TAMARISK AND TEA. 211

TAMARISK. (Tamarix spp. Family Tamariscacezx.) Ornamental trees or shrubs occurring from Mediterranean regions to East Indies
and Japan. Tamarix gallica is planted in many places on our Gulf coast. Several
species have medicinal properties and yield dyestuffs. The punctures of Coccus
manniparus cause Tamarix mannifera to produce “‘ manna.”

IMPORTANT TAMARISK INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Curculionidz. Coniatus letus Miller, and (. swavis Gylenhal, Europe; breed on the leaves. Nanophyes tamaricis Gyllenhal; Europe; breeds in the ovaries of Tamarir gallica. BARGAGLI, P. Rassegna Biologica Rincofori Europei, 1883-87. TEA. (Thea sinensis. Family Ternstrcemiaceze.) The tea plant is a flowering shrub much valued for its leaves, which yield the uni-
versally used beverage. It occurs in China and India and is also propagated in this
country. Other species of the genus are much prized as flowering shrubs. A. BETTER KNOWN TEA INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Xyleborus fornicatus Eichhoff. 2
(Shot-hole borer of tea. Ipidee; Coleoptera.) Host: Tea, coffee, cacao. Injury: Tunnels in pith of young twigs and in wood of old trunks. Very injurious. Description and bioloyy.—Beetle oblong, shining, fuscous, 1-4 mm. long; larva devel-
ops into beetles in fallen twigs. Distribution: Ceylon, Java, India. Sorauer, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 575. Biston suppressarius Gn. (Indian Tea Geometrid. Geometride; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Tea, Dodonea viscosa, Carissa diffusa, Bauhinia variegata, Acacia catechu,
Acacia modesta, Rothra tinctoria, Cassia auriculata, Albizzia. Injury: Serious as defoliator of tea and forest trees. Description and biology: Moth, gray with black markings. Larva green. Has three
broods a year. Distribution: India. Srespine, E. P. Manual Forest Zoology, India, 1908, p. 133, fig. 267.
' Psyche spp., ete. (Tea Bagworms. Psychidee; Lepidoptera.) Species: Psyche albipes Moore; Ceylon; tea. Psyche assamica Watt; India; tea. Acanthopsyche reidi Watt; India; tea. Acanthopsyche snelleni Heyl; India; tea. Amatissa consorta Templeton; India, Ceylon; tea. Clania variegata Snell. ; India,
Ceylon, Java; tea, cinchona, coffee. Clania crameri Westwood; India; tea, cinchona,
coffee, Pinus longifolia. Clania holmesi Wall; India: tea. Injury: Feed on foliage, twigs, and bark. Biology: The larvee feed in bags made from scraps of bark, etc. Warr and Mann. Pests and Blights of the Tea Plant, Calcutta, 2d ed., 1903, pp. 188-200, figs. 13-15, portions of pls. 7, 8. Sorauer, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, pp. 328, 329. 212 , A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. B. OTHER IMPORTANT TEA INSECTS. ACARINA,
Tetranychide. Tetranychus bioculatus Wood-Mason. (See Coffee.) HEMIPTERA. Coccide. + Fiorinia thee Green; cosmopolitan; tea, olive, ete. (See pl. V, fig. 1.) > Orthezia insignis Douglas; cosmopolitan; tea, citrus (See pl. IV, fig. 2.) * Coccus hesperidum Linneus; cosmopolitan; tea, citrus, palms. (See pl. II, fig. 2.) Pulvinaria thee Froggat; Australia; Thea viridis. Coccus viridis Green; Ceylon, Hawaii. LEPIDOPTERA,
Cosside. Zeuzera coffee Nietner; borer. (See Coffee.) Cochlidiidz. Belippe albiguttata Linnzeus, serious injury in Java. Zygenide. Heterusia cingala Moore; serious in Ceylon, India. Geometridx. Ophthalmodes cretacea Butler; Japan. Lymantriide. Euproctis divisa Walker and FE. latifascia Walker; Orient. Dasychira mendosa Hiibner, D. misana
Moore, D. thwaitesi Moore; India, Ceylon, Java. Orgyia postica Walker; Java, Ceylon. Andraca
bipunctata Walker; India. Notodontidz. Stauropus alternus Walker; India, Ceylon, Java. TEAK. (Tectona grandis. Family Verbenacez.) A valuable timber tree of the Orient. IMPORTANT TEAK INSECTS. COLEOPTERA. Cucujide. Silvanus advena Walth. ; India; breeds in leaves, forming galls, eausing leaves to drop. Malacodermide. Plateros dispallens Walker; India; oviposits in clusters on twigs; defoliates trees. Buprestide. Psiloptera fastuosa Fabricius; India; bores in wood. Elateride. Adelocera modesta Boisduval; India; bores in bast and sapwood. Chrysomelida. Aspidomor pha sanctzxcrucis Fabricius; India; a tortoise-shell beetle; defoliates. Cerambycide. Stromatium barbatum Fabricius; India; bores in wood of saplings. Stromatium longicorne Newman;
India; a very serious borer. Gelonztha hirta Fairmaire and Xylotrechus smei Lap. et Gory; India;
bore in bast aad sapwood. Brachyrhinide. Astycus lateralis Fabricius; India. Myllocerus viridanus Fabricius; India; a serious defoliator. Myllo-
cerus carinirostris Marshall and M. discolor variegatus Boheman; India. Cyrtepistomus pannosus
Marshall; India; a defoliator as an adult. LEPIDOPTERA. Cosside. Cossus cadambe; India; bores in wood of lopped trees. Duomitus ceramicus; India; bores in wood and
is very destructive. STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. STEBBING, E. P. A Manual of Forest Zoology for India, 1908. INSECTS OF TIMBER, TIMOTHY, AND TOBACCO. 213

TIMBER. > Nacerdes melanura Linnaeus. (Timber Beetle. Cdemeride; Coleoptera.) Host: Bores in whari timber, creosoted and untreated piling, paving blocks, and
pine flooring. Injury: Reported as doing considerable damage at Auckland, New Zealand. Description: Beetle 12 mm. long, elongate, subdepressed, brownish yellow or red-
dish, with yellowish pubescence; dilated sides of thorax, femora, tibie, and tips of
elytra blue or blackish. Pupa 16 mm. long, creamy colored, with two median and
two lateral protuberances on apical segment. Larva 24mm. long, cylindrical, tapering
toward apex; creamy colored, front of head light brown; mandibles black; legs short;
third and fourth abdominal segments swollen beneath and with two protuberances
each; ninth abdomi-
nal segment some-
what bent, with
transverse fissure at
apex. Distribution: Eu-
rope, introduced
into New Zealand,
Eastern United
States. Brown, T. Tenth
Rept. New Zea-
land Dept. Agric.,
1902, pp. 460-463,
figs. 1-7. TIMOTHY. (Phleum pratense
Fig. 101.—Tobacco white fly (Aleyrodes tabaci): 1, pupa case, dorsal view; 2, Linnzeus. Family

 

pupa case, ventral view; 2a, larval leg; 3, more mature pupa case, dorsal Graminee.) view; 4, adult male; 4a, male antenna and eye; 4b, tip of tarsus; 4c, tip of ; ;
male abdomen. (Targioni-Tozzetti.) This grass is a na-

tive of Europe now
extensively cultivated in America for hay. A discussion of its insect pests will be
found under Grains and Grasses. TOBACCO. (Nicotiana tabacum Linneeus. Family Solanacez.) Tobacco is grown in many parts of the world and is a very important article of
commerce in various forms. Commercial importations generally consist of manufac-
tured products, loose leaf, stem, and seed. The greatest dangers lie in the manu-
factured products and loose-leaf tobacco. There are at present no quarantine re-
strictions on tobacco. The tobacco plant has many very important enemies in for-
eign countries, which are not extremely likely to enter the country in connection

with tobacco shipments, but which should be guarded against. Many of these
important insects are listed to assist in the work of identification. A. BETTER KNOWN TOBACCO INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Aleyrodes spp. (Tobacco White Flies. Aleyrodidee; Hemiptera.) Species: A. tabaci Gennadios; Greece; tobacco. (See text fig. 101.) > Trialeurodes
vaporariorum Westwood, cosmopolitan; many hosts. 214 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Injury: Suck juices from foliage; injure value of tobacco leaf. Description: Adults tiny white flies. Kirkarpy, G. W. Hawaii Bd. Comm. Agr. and Forestry, Bull. 2. TarRGIONI-Tozzert1, Ap. Animali ed Insetti del Tabacco, 1891, pp. 246-249, fig. 86. Catorama tabaci Guérin-Meneville. (Tobacco Beetles. Anobiide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Stored products. Injury: Attacks dried tobacco. Description and biology: Adult beetle ovate-discoidal, convex, brown, covered with
whitish pubescence, about 5 mm. long. Larva similar to that of Lasioderma. Distribution: Europe. Taraioni-Tozzert, Ap. Animali ed Insetti del Tabacco, 1891, pp. 92, 93. Agriotes lineatus Linneus. (Tobacco Wireworm. Elateride; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Tobacco, grain, potatoes, beets, peas, clover, cabbage, hops, corn, carrots,
lettuce, peach, etc. Injury: Larvee tunnel the roots and sometimes stems,

Description and biology: Adult a snapping beetle 7-8 mm. long, brown with griseous
pubescence; second and fourth elytral intervals blackish; antenne, anterior margin,
and posterior angles of prothorax reddish brown. Larvx elongate, chitinous wire-
worms; feed in the roots and stems of plants and cause much damage. Distribution: Europe, Asia, Africa. TarGIoni-Tozzert!1, Ap. Animali ed Insetti del Tabacco, 1891, p. 81, figs. 30, 31. Soraver. P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 482, fig. 295¢. Agriotes pilosus Lacordaire. (Tobacco Wireworm. Elateride; Coleoptera.) Host: Tobacco. Injury: Larve tunnel the plants. Description and biology: Adult a snapping beetle, black, 12-14 mm. long. Larva 25
min. long, chitinous, wireworm, feeds in the roots and stems,
Distribution: Bessarabia, Portugal. Linpeman, K. von. Die Schiidlichsten Insekten des Tabak in Bessarabia, 1888,
Moscou. Taroioni-TozzErti, Ap. Animali ed Insetti del Tabacco, 1891, p. 82. Athous niger Linneus. (Tobacco Wireworm. Elateridee; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Tobacco, beets. Injury: Larvee tunnel the plants. Description and biology: Adult, snapping beetle, shining black with cinereous
pubescence; length 11-12 mm. Larva 18-20 mm. long; a wireworm which feeds in
the roots of tobacco and other plants. Distribution: Europe. Linpeman, K. von. Die Schiidlichsten Insekten des Tabak in Bessarabia, 1888,
Moscou. Tarcioni-Tozzett1, Ap. Animali ed Insetti del Tabacco, p. 79. TOBACCO INSECTS. 215

Gnorimoschema heliopa Low. (Tobacco Stem Borer. Gelechiidee; Lepidoptera.) Host: Tobacco. Injury: Very injurious asastem borer. Stems having swellings should be destroyed. Description and biology: Adult moth small and brown with narrow fringed wings. Pupa stage is spent in stem. Larva, caterpillar bores into the leaf stem and bores
downward in the stalk, causing a swelling to appear in two cr three weeks. In cold
weather this stage lasts 6 to 10 weeks. Eggs deposited singly upon leaves, stems, and
stalks, usually upon the lower side of leaves or stems. In cold weather this stage
lasts 2 or 3 weeks. Warm weather reduces the development from about a third to a
half. (See plate xiv1.) Distribution: Australia, Ceylon, India. Maxwett-Lerroy, H. F. Indian Insect Pests, 1906, Calcutta. Basu, S. K., and Durr, H. L. _ Crop Pest Handbook for Behar and Orissa, 1913. Dept. Agr. Behar and Orissa, Calcutta. Leaflet 53, Pl. 36. *Phytomyza affinis Fallen (nigricornis Macquart). (Marguerite fly. Agromyzide; Diptera.) Hosis: Tobacco, Cineraria, Cosmos, Helianthus, Geranium, Dahlia, Chrysanthemum,
marigold, nasturtium, lettuce, celery, carrot, parsnip, pea, cape weed, dandelion, etc. Injury: Mines the leaves, destroying their value for high-grade products. Might
be distributed in celery or tobacco. Description and biology: Adult fly very tiny. Pupa is formed in leaf mine Larva
tunnels the leaf. gg laid on under surface. Distribution: Tasmania, New Zealand, Australia, Europe, United States. Lea, A. M. Insect and Fungous Pests of the Orchard and Farm, Hobart, Tasmania,
pp. 81-84. B. OTHER IMPORTANT TOBACCO INSECTS. ORTHOPTERA,
Gryllidz and Locustide. Acridium migratorium Fieber, and A nisolabris maritima Fieber; Europe. Atractomorpha crenulata Fabricius; India. Brachyirypes achatinus Stoll; Asia. Caloptenus italicus Burmeister; Mediterranean Regions. Chrotogonus trachypterus Blanchard; India. Locusta viridissima Fabricius; Europe, Asia, Africa. Pachytus sulcicollis; Transvaal. Gryllotalpida. Gryllotalpa grylltalpa L. (vulgaris Latreille); Europe. Gryllot ups africana Pal. B.: widely distributed. Schizodactulus monstrosus Drury: Asia. HEMIPTERA. Miride (C: Lee). Gallobeilicus crassicornis Distant; India. Lygwide. Cymnus tabaci Matsumura; Formosa,
Nysius minor Distant; India. Pentatomide. Nezara viridula Linn eus: Transvaal. COLEOPTERA,
Scarabwide. Adoretus umbrosus Fabricius; Hawati; feeds on leaves. ' Melolontha vulgaris Fabricius of Europe; M. rufipes Herbst of Europe, Asia, Africa; M. tenebrosus
Kiesenwetter, M. niger Fabricius; and MM. castaniptes Paykull; breed at roots of tobacco. 216 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Scarabeide—Continued. Cetonia lugubris Voet; Europe; breeds in tender bark above the ground, causing reddening of plant. (See text fig. 102.) Pentodon punctatus Kirby; Europe; Africa; larva destructive to roots. Oxythyrea funesta Poda; Italy; damages leaves. Tenebrionidz. Blaps mucronata Latreille; Italy. Entochira lateralis Boheman; Java. (See Sugar cane.) Gonocephalum intermedium Fischer; Bessarabia; causes stunted growth by boring. Gonocephalum acutangulum Fairmaire; Java;
bores in stalks: G. (Opatrum) pusillum Fab-
ricius; Europe; borer. Pedinus femoralis Mulsant; Bessarabia. Curculionidz. Cleonus punctiventris Germar; Europe. (See
Beet.) LEPIDOPTERA. Noctuide. Agrotis truz Hiibner of Europe, A. segetum Schif-
fermiller (see text fig. 103) of Europe, A msacta
lactinea Cr. of Asia (see text fig. 104), A. moorei
of Asia, A. lineola Fabricius of India and Cey-
lon; cutworms. Laphygma reclusa; Orient. Chloridea peltigera Schiflermiller, and C. assulta
Guénée; India. Fig. 102.—Tobaceo beetle ( Cetonia lugubris). (Tar- Euzoa spinifera Hiibner; Europe, Asia, Africa. gioni-Tozzetti.) Mamestra brassice Linneeus and J. albicolor
Hiibner; Italy. Micromima olivia; Cuba, leaf roller on tomato, tobacco, and eggplant. Plusia gamma Linneus; Europe, and P. argentifera; Tasmania. Prodenia litura Fabrieius; Asia, Afriea, Australia. (See text fig. 105.) Spodoptera mauritia Boisduval, and Triphena pronuba Linneus; very widely distributed. (See text
fig. 106.) Gelechiidz. > Phthorimza operculella Zeller. (See Potato.) Fig. 103.—Tobacco cutworm (Agrotis segetum): Adult. (Targioni-Tozzetti.) LITERATURE,

TarGioni-Tozetri, Ap, Animali ed Insetti del Tabaceo en Erba e del Tabacco Secco, 1891. Firenze-
Roma. ;

MAXWELL-LeEFrRoy, H. F. Indian Inseet Pests. 1906. Calcutta. LINDEMAN, K. von. Die Sehiidliehsten Insekten des Tabakin Bessarabia. 1888. Moscow. MAXWELL-LEFROY, H. F, Indian Museum Notes, Vol. 3. Various AUTHORS in Memoires Dept. Agr. India, Entomological Series. Howarp, C, W.,in Transvaal Agricultural Journal during 1907 and 1908. Futtaway, D. T, Hawaii Agr. Expt. Sta., 1914, Bul. 34. Jones,C. R. Philippine Agr. Rev., 1913, v. 6, no. 9. INSECTS OF TODDY PALM AND TOMATO. alee

' TODDY PALM. (Phenia sylvestris. Family Palmacez.) A palm much cultivated in India for its sap, which yields sugar and ‘‘toddy.”’

(See Palms.) TOMATO. (Lycopersicum esculentum. Family Solanacez.) The much-prized garden fruit grown very extensively in this country. A. BETTER KNOWN TOMATO INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Desiantha nociva Lea. (Tomato Weevil. Curculionide; Coleoptera.) Host; Tomato, potato, and other vegetable plants. Injury: Larvee and adults feed on
and destroy the plants. They are
nocturnal feeders, hiding in the soil
by day. Description: Weevil elongate, about
12 mm. long, brown with black
dots. Larva pea green in color. Pupates in cell in soil. Distribution: Australia. Frencu, C. Handbook Destructive

Insects Victoria, pt. 5, 1911, pp. 40-43, pl. 105.

ar , / I;
FRENCH, C. Journ. Dep. Agr. Vic- Fig. 104.—Tobacco cutworm (A msacta lactinea): Adult. toria, pp. 12, 13, Dec., 1913. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) Lonchea splendida. (Metallic Tomato Fly. Trypetidee; Diptera.) Hosts: Tomato, potato, eggplant, other Solanacez. Injury: Breeds in fruit, attacking perfectly healthy tomatoes. Description: Fly, metallic blu
ish green or dark bronze green,
wings smoky pink, head and legs
black, body tapering, eyes large
and prominent. Distribution: New Zealand,
Australia, Pacific Islands. B. OTHER IMPORTANT TOMATO

 

INSECTS. LEPIDOPTERA. Fig. 105.—Tobacco eutworm (Prodenia litura): Larva, pupa, Gelechiidz. adult. (Maxwell-Lefroy.) *Phthorimza operculella Zeller. (See
Potato.) Noctuidae. Micromima olivia; Cuba; leaf roller on tomato, tobacco, and eggplant. DIPTERA. Trypetide. Dacus cucurbitz Coquillett; India, Ceylon, Hawaii; attacks fruit. (See Cucurbits.) Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann; attacks fruit. (See Fruit.) 918 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. TOON. (Cedrela toona, etc. Family Meliacex.) Tall ornamental trees of the Tropics; some species cultivated in California and the

Gulf States. ’
AN INSECT INJURIOUS TO TOON. LEPIDOPTERA. Pyralide. Hypsipyla robusta Moore; India; bores in flowers, buds, fruit, and twigs of toon ( Cedrela toona),

STEBBING, E. P. A Manual of Forest Zoology for India, 1908. TROPICAL ALMOND. (Terminalia spp. Family Combretacez.) Tropical plants, chiefly of the Old World, some of them with edible seed. T.
catappa is cultivated in Florida and Porto Rico. IMPORTANT TERMINALIA INSECTS. THYSANOPTERA,

> Heliothrips rubrocinctus Giard; West Indies, Ceylon, Uganda, Florida. (See Avocado.) COLEOPTERA. Bostrychidz. Sinoxylon crassum Lesne; India; bores in wood of Terminali1 tomentosa, T. chebula. Sinorylon anale Lesne; India; beres;
in wood of Terminalia bellerica. Lyctus spinifrons Lesne; India; bores
in posts of Terminalia tomentosa. Buprestidie. Psilopt:ra viridans Kerremans; India;
bores in wood of Terminalia to-
nrentosa,

Chrysobothris indica Cast. et Gory;
India: boresin wood of Terminalia

 

 

tomentosa. Cerambycidz. olesthes holosericea Fabricius; India;
Fig. 106.—Tobaceo cutworm (Triphaena pronuba): Adult. bores in wood of Yerminalia to
(Targioni-Tozzetti.) mentosa,

Brentid. Ccocephalus carus Walker; India; bores in wood of Terminalia tomentosa. Platypodidz. Plitypus cupulatus Chapuis; India; bores in wood. DIPTERA,
Trypetidz. Ceratitis capitata Wiedemann, attacks Terminalia catappa. (See Fruit.) STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. TURNIP; RUTABAGA. : (Brassica rapa, Brassica campestris. Family Cruciferse.) ~
These root crops will bear watching for root pests. IMPORTANT TURNIP INSECTS. Meiigethes zneus Fabricius. (Turnip Flower Beetle. Nitidulids; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Turnip, rape, cabbage, and other crucifers. Injury: Does considerable damage to the buds and flowers, causing stunted and
shriveled appearance. INSECTS OF TURNIP, VIBURNUM, AND WALNUT. 219

Description and biology: Adult metallic green, sometimes with a bluish shimmer;
sides parallel, head and apex rounded, legs dark brown; fore tibie lighter, small
externally saw-toothed; body 2-2.5 mm. long, 1.5-2 mm. broad. Larva yellowish
white, head dark; mandibles with darker apex and a double row of short teeth; length
4.5 mm. During the first week in June the beetles may be found in numbers in
blossoms, apparently feeding on the pollen. The eggs are deposited within the
unopened buds. The larvee feed in the buds and flowers and cause stunting and
shriveling. Pupation takes place in earthen cells. Distribution: Europe. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 474, figs. 288-289. Ormerop, E. A. Fifteenth Report Injurious Insects, London 1892, p. 96, fig. (adult). Trichocera hiemalis. (Winter Turnip Gnat. Mycetophilide; Diptera.) _ Hosts: Turnip, cabbage. Injury: Is found in connection with injury to roots of these crops, especially where
a fungus disease known as ‘“‘club,” “anbury,”’ etc., is present. There is a possibility
that the gnat might be concerned in the spread of the fungus. Distribution: England. Ormerop, E. A. Sixteenth Rept. Injurious Insects, 1892, pp. 147, 148. Athalia spinarum Fabricius. (Turnip Sawfly. Tenthredinidee; Hymenoptera.) Hosts Crucifers, turnips, beets, etc. Injury: Defoliates. Biology: Eggs laid in the leaves. Larvx feed on the leaves. Pupates in earthen
cocoon. JasLonowski. Tier. Feinde d. Zuckerriibe, pp. 298-303, fig. 60. VIBURNUM. (Viburnum spp. Family Capvrifoliaceze.) “Ornamental shrubs, including the black haw, the snowball, laurustinus, and many
other desirable garden plants. They occur in America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and
Java. . IMPORTANT VIBURNUM INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccid:
Armored—
+ A spidiotus (Chrysomphalus) persee Comstock; Mexico, England (Kew Gardens), Florida. Aspidiotus spinosus Comstock; Italy; Viburnum tinus. Chionaspis salicis Linnweus; Europe. Parlatoria myrtus Maskell; South Australia. Chiona psis (Phenacaspis) eugeni# Maskell; Australia, China, Japan, Ceylon, Hawaii. Unarmored—
* Lichtensiz viburni Siguoret; France, England, Wales, Massachusetts. Pseudococcus riburni Signoret: France, Maritime Alps. Solenococcus murat Kuwana; Japan. WALNUT AND BUTTERNUT. (Juglans spp. Family Juglandaceze. ) Hardy nut-bearing trees of Europe, Asia, and America, The nuts are all edible. The trees are valuable for shade and the wood is very valuable for furniture. The
husks of the nuts are sometimes used for medicinal purposes or for tanning. 22.0 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. IMPORTANT WALNUT INSECTS. HEMIPTERA. Coccidze. Armored—
Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) juglandis Colvée; Spain; Juglans regia. Diaspis leperii Signoret; Europe; Juglans cinerea, J. regia. Unarmored—
Lecanium coryli Linneus; Juglans nigra, J. regia. COLEOPTERA. Cerambycidez. Cerambyz cerdo Linnweus; Europe; bores in wood. (See Oak.) Oberea linearis Linnzeus; Europe; bores in pith of nursery stock. (See Hazel.) Saperda scalaris Linnus; Europe; bores in wood and bark. Curculionidx. Magdalis carbonaria Linneeus; Europe; bores in trunks. (See Birch.) Aleides porrectirostris Marshall; India; breeds in nuts of Juglans regia. LEPIDOPTERA. Cossidz. Cossus cossus Linneus; goat moth; Europe; bores in wood. (See Willow.) Tortricidz. Luspeyresia splendana Hiibner; Europe. (See Chestnut.) Laspeyresia grossana Haworth; Europe. (See Beech.) Laspeyresia amplana Hiibner; Europe. (See Hazel.) SorAvER, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. NUssiin, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. WATERCRESS. (Roripa nasturtium.) A hardy market crop grown in moist soil, ditches, and water courses. AN IMPORTANT WATERCRESS INSECT. Limnophiius flavicornis Fabricius. (Watercress Caddis Worm. Limnophilidz; Trichoptera). Hosts: Water cress, Lemna. Ivjury: The larvee feed on the leaves. Biology: The larvie are concealed in cases and live under water. The eggs are laid
in gelatinous masses and are sometimes retained for a while at the extremity of the’
female’s body, but are finally attached to some aquatic plant. Distribution: England. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 236. WATERMELON. See Cucurbits. WHEAT; EMMER; SPELT. (Triticwm sativum Lam. and Triticum spp. Family Graminez.) Wheat is grown in many parts of the world and is a standard article of commerce. The principal manner in which its insect enemies may be transported is in shipments
of the grain, although the occasional use of straw in packing would be liable to intro-
duce stem-infesting insects. The greater part of the world’s wheat crop is grown in
Europe. For full treatment of its insect pests see Grains and grasses. WILLOW INSECTS. 221

WILLOW. (Saliz spp. Family Salicacez.) Important trees along waterways in Europe and America. The wood is used in
the manufacture of gunpowder and for many other purposes. Certain species are
cultivated for materials with which to manufacture baskets. A. BETTER KNOWN WILLOW INSECTS LIKELY TO BE IMPORTED. Crepidodera aurata Marsh. (Willow Leaf Beetle. Chrysomelide; Coleoptera.) Hosts: Willow, Populus laurifolia, P. alba. Injury: Feeds on foliage. Distribution: Throughout Europe. Phyllodecta spp. (Willow Leaf Beetles. Chrysomelidee; Coleoptera.) Species: P. vitellinae Linneeus; Europe, Connecticut (introduced); willows (Salix
purpurea, etc. ), poplar. P. vulgatissima Linneeus; Europe; willows (Salix vimi-
nalis, etc.). P. tibialis Suffrian. ;
Europe; willow. Injury: Feed on foliage in adult
and larval stages. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflan-
zenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, p. 518. Cossus cossus Linnzus. (Goat Moth. Cosside; Lepidoptera.) Hosts: Willow, poplar, alder, elm,
oak, birch, linden, walnut, scotch
pine, ash, beech, maple. Injury: Bores in trees to the heart-
wood. Very serious, kills many
trees. Description and biology.—Adult,
male wing expanse 68-75 mm., fe-
male 75-90 mm. ; stout and clumsy,
clothed with dense gray hairs, fore-
wings dark gray and brown, with
dusky transverse streaks; hind
wings ashy gray to grayish brown
with some indistinct brown marks;
antenne fringed with gray. Occurs
June and July and flies at dusk. Pupa, rich brown in color, with three rings of spines around abdomen. Pupation
occurs in larval galleries; requires about a month. Larva, length 75-100 mm.,
dirty ocher-yellow, with broad, median dorsal, mahogany-red stripe; head blackish
brown two deep-brown spots on first thoracic segment. Larval period about 3
years; tunnel in wood, occasionally leave trees. Eggs, brown, round, convex above,
flattened below, ribbed; deposited in groups of 15 to 50 in crevices of bark; each
female deposits 200 to 300 eggs, which hatch in about 10 days. (See text fig. 107.) Distribution: Europe, Syria, Korea, North Africa. TuEoBALp, F. V. Insect Pests of Fruit, 1909, p. 42. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1918, vol. 3, p. 322. Nussuw, Orro. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913, p. 321, fig. 272. Fig. 107.—The goat moth (Cossus cossus): Larva, pupa
and adult. (Henschel.)

. 222 A MANUAL OF DANGEROUS INSECTS. Rhabdophaga spp. (Willow Gall Midge. Itonidide [Cecidomyiide]; Diptera.) Species: R. nielsonii Kieffer; Denmark; willow. R. saliciperda Dufour; Europe;
willow; Populus alba. R. salicis Schrk. ; Europe; Salix purpurea. Injury: Bore in wood and form gall-like formations. Description and biology: R. nielsonii with head and thorax beneath yellowish red,
thorax dark brown above; abdomen red; length 3 mm. Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3, pp. 456, 457,

fig. 277. ° B. OTHER IMPORTANT WILLOW INSECTS. ACARINA. Eriophyide. Eriophyes tetanothriz Nalepa, blister mite; England; attacks leaves of Salix caprea. HEMIPTERA. Aphididz. Lachnus viminalis Fonsc., plant louse; Germany; attacks shoots of Salix viminalis. Coccidz. Armored—

Aspidiotus ( Targionia) distincta Leonardi; Europe. Chionaspis salicis Linnwus; Europe. Unarmored—
Lecrnium ciliatum Douglas: Europe. Lecanium coryli Linneus; Europe. Phenacoccus aceris Signoret; Europe. Pulvinaria betulae Linnweus; Europe. COLEOPTERA. Anobiida. Ptilinus fuscus Geoffroy; Europe; bores in dead wood of standing living trees. Ptilinus pectinicornis Linnzeus; Europe; bores in wood. Buprestide. Agrilus serguttitus Brahm., Europe: bores in bark. Poecilonota variolosa Paykull; Europe; bores in bark. Scarabieidie. Amphimallon solstitialis Linnzeus; Europe; larvee attack roots of shoots. Melolontha hippocastani Fabricius and M. melolontha Linneeus: Europe; larvee attack 1oots of seed-
lings. Cerambycide. Eolesthes sarta Sols’ India; bores in trunks of Salix alba and S. babylonica. Aromia moschati Linnweus; Germany; bores in stems and old cuttings. Lamia textor Linnveus; Europe; bores in larger cuttings and shoots. Oberea oculata Linnweus; Europe; bores in pith of twigs and stems. Phymatodes lividus Rossi; Germany; particularly injurious to baskets; also, attacks felled trees and
lumber. Saperda carchirias Linnzeus, *S. populnea Linneus; Europe: bore in bark and wood. The latter spe-
cies occurs on the Pacific coast of the United States. Chrysomelidze. Haltica quercetorum Foudr. ; Europe; leaf beetle (see Oak); H. ampelophaga Guérin; Europe, Africa
(see Grape). Melasoma populi Linnseus; India; defoliator on Salix elegans and S. babylonica. Curculionidae. Dorytomus affinis Paykull, D. agnathus Boheman, D. dorsalis Herbst, D. maculatus Marsham, D.
majalis Paykull; Europe; the eggs are laid in the buds in the fall, and the larvee develop in the
flowers in the spring. ,

Orchestes decoratus Germar; Europe; mines the leaves of Salir triandra, S. viridis, S. fragilis, and S.
purpurea,

Orchestes populi Fabricius; Europe; mines the leaves of Salix viminalis, and S. triandra. * Cryptorhynchus lapathi Linneus; Europe, eastern United States; breeds in the stems and twigs. INSECTS OF WILLOW AND YEW. 223

LEPIDOPTERA,
Cossidz. *Zeuzera pyrina Linneeus; Europe; bores in wood of basket willow. (See Horse-chestnut.) Cymbide. Earias chlorana Hiibner; Europe; attacks foliage, buds, and shoots of long-leaf willows. Geometridz. Anisopteryx xscularia Schiffermiller; Europe; feeds on foliage. Larentia dilutata Borckh. ; Europe; defoliator. Lasiocampidz. Eriogaster lanestris Linneeus and Malacosoma neustria Linnseus; Europe; defoliators. Gastropacha quercifolia Linneeus; Europe. (See Fruit.) Lymantriide. > Euproctis chrysorrhea Linneus, * Lymantria monacha Linneus, + Porthetria dispar Linnzeus, * Orgyia
antiqua Linnzeus, Porthesia similis Fuessly, and Stilpnotia salicis Linneeus; Europe; defoliators. (See
Forest defoliators.) Sesiide. Sesiz formicaeformis Esp. ; Europe; bores in stems and shoots. HYMENOPTERA. Cimbicide. Cimber variabilis Klug; Europe; sawfly, attacks leaves. Pseudoclavellaria amerine V.innneus; a sawfly; Europe; defoliator. Trichiosoma lucorum Linnzus; Europe; defoliator. Tenthredinidz. ELuura ater Jurine. Pontznia silicis Christ, and Pteronidea salicis Linneeus; Europe; sawflies. DIPTERA. Itonididz (Cecidomyidz). Cecidomyia siliciperda Dufour; Europe; breeds in branches of Salix triandra, S. alba, S. fragilis, S.
capre1, and S. purpurea. Cecidomyia salicis Schrank; Europe; breeds in shoots. LITERATURE,
Soraver, P. Handbuch der Pflanzenkrankheiten, 3d ed., 1913, vol. 3. NUssuiy, O. Leitfaden der Forstinsektenkunde, 2d ed., 1913. Hess, R. Der Forstschutz, 1900, vol. 2. k
STEBBING, E. P. Indian Forest Insects, Coleoptera, 1914. BArGAGLI, P. Rassegna Biolozica Rincofori Europei, 1883-87. LINDINGER, B. Die Schildliiuse (Coccidze), 1912. YEW. (Taxus spp. Family Taxacez.) Ornamental evergreen trees or shrubs distributed throughout the northern hemi-
sphere. The wood is valued for cabinetmaking. In studying the pests of this genus
reference should also be made to Conifers. Eriophyes psilaspis Nalepa. (Yew Gall Mite. Eriophyide. Acarina.) Host: Yew. Injury: Forms gall-like swellings of the buds. Serious injury to hedges. Description and biology: Four-legged blister mite, which causes galls by its feeding. Especially liable to introduction on nursery stock. Distribution: England. Gutanpers, A. T. Forest Entomology,.Edinburgh and London, 1908, p. 26, fig. 25. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual of Dangerous Insects. PLaTe XLVII

(Pierce.) THE WEST INDIAN SuGAR-CANE ROOT WEEVILS. Figs. 1, 2,3.—Varieties of Diaprepes abbreviatus. U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Manual ot Dangerous Insects. PLATESXLIX,

THE AvocaDo WEEVIL (HEILIPUS LAURI). (BARBER, Proc. ENT. Soc. WASHINGTON.) INSECT INDEX. Page. Abraras grossulariata ............22.22.- aerate) 119
Acanthocinus zdilis 73
Acantholyda erythrocephala - 70
Acanthophorus serraticornis . 193
Acanthopsyche reidi..... 211

snelleni.. 211
Acanthoscelides obtectus . 6, 36, 165
PA\GACITEME IEEE... 25. 7

 

Acherontia atropos
Acheta bimaculata. Acidia heraclei....
Aclerda distorta...

japonica

tokionis
Acmezxodera stictipennis . Acridium zxruginosum 205
flavicorne... 205
hieroglyphicum... 89
luteicorne 205
migratorium 215
peregrinum. 89
roseum... 205
succinectum . 205
zehnineri..... 205

Acridocephala bistriata 195

Acrocinus accentifer . 59

Acronycta aceris... 40

Adelocera modesta... -- 212

Adoretus wmbrosus....... 50, 59, 90, 131,191) 207, 215

tenuimaculatus 50, 59,90, 191.210

Adorus obscurus. 6

Anaria lewisi... 190

Aolesthes holosericea 193,218
sarta.. - 96, 171, 181,222

Zolus vittatus . 207

ZEsiotes notabilis . -- 195

Agelastica alni. -- 12,46

Agrilus angustulus - 39,134, 153

betuleti.. eS
biguttatus. --- 39,153
elongatus... «+. 39,153
sexguttatus 181, 222
sinuatus 5,169
subauratus . . 134, 153

 

viridis . 12,39, 46, 73, 131, 141, 148, 150, 181, 192
Agriotes aterrimus. . - 68, 183

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

formosanus . -- 207
lineatus 43,49, 51,68,

5, 126, 137, 140, 153, 165, 166, 184, 214,

obscurus . 68, 153

pilosus 214
sacchari. 207
taichuensis... 207
Agromyza fabalis . . 38
frontal 136

 

55266—17——15

 

AGTOMYZA MAUTA... 2.2.2.2. 42 eee ee eee eee eee
phaseoli
simplez. Agrotis sp. 6
crinigera 210
dislocata . 210
exclamationis.. 44
interjectionis 208

44

210

- 44, 70, 216

185

75

216

70

ypsilon.. 8,14
Akermes levis .. 9
punctatus 59
scrobiculatus... 9

Alaus sculptus..... 193

Alcides porrectirostris . 220
scenicus - 103

Alder bud moth (see Coleophora fuscedinella). Aleurocanthus 4 oglumi. 56
Aleurodicus cocois..... 34, 109, 132, 139
destructor . : 159
Aleurolobus longicornis 207
olivinus.... 155
Aleurothrirus porteri 56

Aleyrodes spp

lactea..

tabaci. Aleyrodide. Alfalfa gall midge (see Asphondylia miki). leaf weevil (see Hypera murina). weevil of Europe (see Hypera postica). PALORGIUDOMEE =.= —- selene 2s sennsnna=> 210
Amar caterpillar (see Virachola insocrates). A matissa consorta - 211
Ambrosia beetles (see Anisandrus spp. oterus spp.). Amorbia emigratella.... 210
Amphimallon solstitiali 39, 73, 137, 181,222
Amsacta lactinea -- 216,217
lineola.. ---- 216
moorei.... -- 216
Anagnia splendens - 206
Anastrepha acidusa (see Anastrepha fratercu-
lus). JRE eben soocecc ->0-cans0560 60,
64, 94, 100,112, 132, 147, 164, 170, 180
ludens.....-.--- 60, 114, 132, 167, 180, 194
peruviana... 14
serpentina 132
Anaziphus pallidulus. 205

 

ey

 
 
 

226 INSECT
Page. Andraca bipunctata 212
Anerastia ablutella 208
botella 126

Angoumois grain moth (see Sitotroga cereal-
lla). Anisandrus dispar. 12,40, 46, 54, 137, 138, 148, 154,171

Anisolabris maritima .......-...------.---+-- 215

Anisopteryz zscularia 12,
24, 46, 105, 134, 138, 154, 170, 179, 192, 223,

Annona fruit fly (see Ceratitis anonz). ANOMAIG BNEG...... 4... cnc sercce-vereenesee

grandis...

 

 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  

Anomalococeus eremastogastri . Anonepestis bengalella
Anoplus plantaris
Antharia osmastoni. ..
quadripunctata
Anthomyia radicum..
Anthonomus druparum. .

 

 

  

 

grandis. 87
incurou: 23
pediculariv, 23,170

pomorum . pyri...
rectirostri

 

 

 

 

 

spinotus .. 170

vestitus... 87

Anthores asperula 63
Anticyra combusta. . 208
Antonina crawii 33
socialis 33

 

Aonidia (see Aspidiotus [Aonidia)). Aonidiella (see ee a eae

A pate molle. . Be caca
monachus. A phanistichus consanguincus “19
Aphrastasia pectinate. . 67
Aphis avenx 5
brassice 5
gossypii 5
rumicis 5,43

A piomorpha attenuata 98
bduerieni. 98

catycina. . 98
conica...... 98

duplez.... 98
ellipsoidalis 98

fioralis 98

helmsii 98

karschi. 9S

maliform 98

minor....- of

munita... 99

ovicola.. 99

ovicoloide: 99
pedunculata 99

pharetrata . 99

pileata. - 99

pomiformis . 99

rugosa 99

sessil 99

sloanei 99

strombulosa . 99

thorntoni. o 99

RU UOT ee eee 99

 

  
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INDEX. Page. Apiomorpha urnalis . 99
variabilis. 99
Apion armipcs 87
meliloti 4
tenue.. 4
zanthostylum . as 87
A poderus coryli 12, 39,46
A pogonia destructor .. 199
Titscme.. 199
Apple blossom weevil (see A nthonomus pomo-
rum). borer (see Cossus tristis). clearwing (see Sesia myopxformis). ermine moth (see Hyponomeuta ma-
linellus). gum borer (see Bimia femoralis). moth (see Argyresthia conjugella). pith moth (see Blastodacna putripen-
nella). psylla (see Psylla mali). root borer (see Leptops hopet). sawfly (see Hoplocampa testudinea). stem piercer (see Magdalis barbicornis). tree borer (see Rhizopertha collaris). Apricot scale (see Epidiaspis pyricola). A priona cinerea. . 150
germari. 150
Aradus cinnamomeus - 73
Arzecerus fasciculatus , 55S, 91
Arge rose - 192
Argentine potato weevil (see Rhigopsidius
tucumanus). Argyresthia conjugella. . 6, 20, 149, 180
ephippella. . 134,175
fundella 7
illuminatella. . . 82
levigatella. nitidella. ..
Arguroploce illepida..
Army worm (see Cirphis unipuncta). Army worms. 8

Aroa socrus. 208

Aromia moschata . 222

Ascclis attenuata. - 8
echiniformis ai
premollis . 99
schraderi... 99

Ash gall mite (see Eriophyes fraxini). Asiphum tremulz.......-+-+.ssee 181

Asparagus fly (see Platyparsa peeiloptera). leaf beetles (see Crioceris spp.). miners (see Agromyza spp.). Asphondylia miki

A spidiotus alatus......
britannicus . camelliz. .

   
  
   
  

confusus . destructor...

Sassidens pluridentatus . 162
maderensis . 139
minimus . 152
pangocnsis . - 162
pectinatus 169
perniciosus . 5
persearum. . 30
rapax (see A. camellizx). Spinosus...............5———n 162, 219

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INSECT
Pare. Aspidiotus lasmaniz ... 9,98
tayabanus. . 192
varions o20 ~ 162
A spidiolus (A onidia) chen: 170
lauri. 35, 72,169
olez 156
planchonioides. 102
pinicola 72
Aspidiotus (Aoniticlia) cocotiphagus. . 102
miniate 98
subcuticularis . 102
subrubescens. . 58
Aspidiotus ( Chrysomphalus) albopictus 58

 

alienus...

  

 

 

 

5

58

Kocbeletmen). 2. 58
nigropunctatus. 26,156
paulistus........ 35
pedroniformis . 130
persex 5, 30, 158, 162, 219
personatus . 30,
58, 93, 102, 145, 156, 162
portoricensis. 158
propsimus. . 162

 

Sscutiformis 30,35, 59, 162

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Aspidiotus (Diaspidiotus) africanus........-. 23,24,
102, 169, 186

coloratus . 158

juglandis. 220

orientalis. - 5,59, 162

ostrexform 5, 166, 169

patavinus . . 178

pyri.... -- 132,169

zonatus... 152

Aspidiotus ( Evaspidiotus) labiatarum 130
Aspidiotus (Hemiberlesia) palme.... 162
simillimus 162

A spidiotus ( Morganelia) longis pina. or 145,
maskelli... . - 102,146

Aspidiotus (Odonaspis) bambusarum. . 32
cantliculata.. 32

inusitata . . 32

Secreta... 32

saccharicaulis. 32, 206
Aspidiotus ( Pseudaonidia) articulatus 30,
59, 63, 102, 130,131,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

146, 156, 158, 162, 192
clavigera.. 59, 102, 146, 166
duplex... - 59,156
fimbriatus 59
fossor... 130
obsita. 102
quadriareolata 9
silvatica . . 102
tesserata 130
trilobitifor mis . 59,

102, 131, 146, 162 |
Aspidiotus (Pseudischnaspis) bowrey 192
linearis 162

      
 

 

A spidioius ( Targionia) acacize
alni. INDEX. 227
Page. Aspidiotus (Targionia) bromeliz. . 171
distincta. . . 152,222

glomerata. 206

sacchari... - 206

vitis. - 130, 152

Aspidomor pha militaris ... 210
sanetiecrucis . 212

Aspidoproctus giganteus. .... 194
Asterolecaniuim aureum... . 158
bambusxe 33, 206

bambusicola . 33

ceriferum.... 162

63

coronatum. 33

epidendri.. 158

exiguum... 33,

flavociliatum . .. 33,
hemisphzricum. 33

hilli. ee +162

lanceolatum . 33

lineare 162

masuii. 33

miliaris 33,

palme.. 162

pudibundum 33

pustulans... 102

rubrocomatum 33

solenophoroides . 33
tenuissimum... 33

tumidum.. 33

udagame 33

urichi... 162

variolosum 153

ventruosum . g

Asthenia pygmexana. 70
Astycus lateralis... 212
Athalia spinarum.. 44,219
A thous hirtus. zs 79
niger . 43, 214
subfuscus. - 39, 134, 137, 153
Atomaria linearis 41

 

Atractomor pha bedeli....

 
 

 

crenulata. psittacina.. 205
Aulacaspis cinnamomi.... 146
javanensis . miranda . .
Aulacophora olivierei..
Austrian alfalfa leaf we:
Autosticha pelodes....
Avocado wee il (see Heilipus lauri). Bactrocera cucurbitz . 24,25, 38

 

 

tryoni. 24, 25,
34, 38, 60, 93, 114, 142, 147, 167, 187
zonatus ... 147

 

Balaninus (See Curculio). Bamboo borer (see Dinoderus distincius; Euco-
soma paragramma, )
fruit fly (see Ceratitis striata). shot-hole borer (see Dinoderus pili-
rons). Banana fruit fly (see Dacuscurvipcnnis). root borer (see Cosnopolites sordidus). Banded pumpkin beetle (see Avlacophora
olivierei). Barzus sordidus
Baris chlorizans............--.-------------+-

 

 
 
  

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

228 INSECT
Page. Baris cerulescens.. . 49
49
49
49

saccharivora. 207

tregardhi. 92

viridisericea. 49
Bark beetles. 8

borer (see Leptostylus premorsus). Tortrix (see Laspeyresia waberiana). Barynotus squamosus . 49
Basilianus cantori.. 46
Batocera albofasciata . . 103

boisduvali. 101

103

-- 103

titana.. 146, 147
Bathyscia wollastoni 184

 

Bean aphis (see A phis rumicis). fly (see Agromyza phaseoli). leaf beetle (see Cerotoma denticornis). roller (see Eudamus proteus). pod borer (see Maruca testulalis). stem maggot (see Agromyza fabalis). SWG6\VilS Soames =. = “eee eee area 8
weevil (see Acanthoscelides spp. ; Mylab-
ris spp. ; Pachymerus spp.) TCT TTA se cococcoa0  20e 000050000
orchilella......
somnulentella

Beech tortrieid (see Peronea ferrugana). tortrix (see Laspeyresia grossana). Beet army worm (see Laphygma erigua). carrion beetle (see Blitophaga opaca). fly or Spinach leaf miner (see Pegomya
hyoscyami). root weevil (see Cleonus punctiventris). tortoise beetle (see Cassida nebulosa). worm (see Plusia gamma). Belippe albiguttata

Bemisia giffardi. Bembecir hylxiformis . Bibitkever (see Entochira lateralis). Bimia femoralis... 2.2.0.0... 000 e cece cece e eens

Birch blister mite (see Eriophyes rudis). twig weevil (see Magdalis carbonaria). Biston hirtarius... 110,111, 179

 

 

 

212

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

pomonarius. --- 110,154
suppressarius -- 10,211
Bizadus sierricola. .. 63

Black alfalfa leaf beetle (see Colaspidema
atrum). scale (see Saissetia oleae). Blaps armata... 73
mucronatt 216
Blastodacna hellerella. - 2
putripenella. 19
vinolentella.... 19
Blister beetle (see Epicauta rufidorsum). Blitophaga opaca... --- 5,43
undata a 43

Blue or hairstreak butterfly (see Lycena

betica). Boarmia crepuscularia . - 53,96
gemmaria. 129, 192
selanaria.... T~ 194

 

 

INDEX. Page. Boll worms (see Diparopsis castanea; Earias
spp. ; Sacadodes pyralis). Bostrychopsis jesuita..........2+22--2.22----++
parallela
Bostrychus capucinus
Bothynoderes farinosus . punctiventris. 44
Botys celesalis 208
Brachonyz pineti 74
Brachycerus albidentatus 158
corrosus 158
pradieri. 158
undatus.. 158
Brachyderes incanus.... 46
lusitanicus . 154
Brachyrhinus (Otiorhynchus spp. - 65,128
armadillo. —S
armatus. . 129
asphaltinus ... 129
aurifer.... as 65
corruptor 129, 167
egregius. a 65
ae 65
fuscipes. 65
globus . 129
inflatus. 65
irritans . 65
jovis.. 65
kratterii. .. 65
levigatus.. 173
lepidopterus. 65

ligustici. orbicularis
ovatus...
perdiz..
picipes..
populeti
raucus..
sensitivus . septentrionis
singularis . sulcatus. tenebricosus . teretirostris
tristis

 

 

Brachytrypes achatinus. Brachyzystus subsignatus
Brazil fig borer (see Heilipus bonelli). Broad-nosed grain weevil (see Caulophilus
latinasus). Bromius obscurus

   

 

127
127
160

  
 

Brontispa froggatti
Broun’s fruit fly (see Dacus [ Tephrites] xan-
thodes). Brown hard-back beetle (see Phytalus smithi). plum owlet moth (see Xylina socia). Brown-tail moth (see Euproctis chrysorrhaa). Bruchus (see Mylabris spp.). Brush spinner (see Orgyia gonostigma). Bryobia ribis........22.2.0022 22 cee seen eee eee

Bud stinger (see Janus compressus). INSECT INDEX. Page. Buff tip moth (see Phalera bucephala). Bupalus piniarius. 66
Buprestis geometrica . 73
Byetiscus betulz 12, 39, 46

Byturus tomentosus.......2.22+-2222222022 22+ 47
Cabbage aphis (see Aphis brassicz). gall midge (see Dasyneura brassicz). maggot (see Phaonia trimaculata). midge (see Contarinia torquens). webworm (sce Hellula wndalis). worm (see Pieris monusté). Cacao fruit fly (see Ceratitis punctata). moth (see Zaratha cramerella). Cadelle (see Tenebrioides mauritanicus). Calamistis fusca 85
Calamobius marginellus... 126
Calathus fuscipes. 81
Calendra granaria 6
linearis 210
oryza. 6
rugicolli 210°
sculpturata 154
California grape rootworm (see Adozus ob-
scurus). Caliroa xthiops.... 6
Callidium zneum. 39, 54, 153
violaceum. 39
Calocam pa exoleta..... 44
Calocoris fulvomaculatus 136
Caloptcnus italicus........ 215
Camarimena rugosistriatus 52
Camarota flavitarsis 125
Camponotus ligniperda.. sat
Cane grasshopper (see Atractomorpha crenu-
lata). leafhopper (see Pyrilla aberrans). root borer (sce Polyocha saccharella). sucker moth (see Castnia licus). Cantharis fusca. 73
Capnodis indica. 73
miliaris . 181
tenebrionis 110, 179

 

Capua angustiorana. Caradrina exigua (see Laphygma). oer 24,131, 170

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
  

 

 
 
 
  
 

Cardiococcus umbonatus 131
Cardiophorus devastan 207
Sormosanus. 207
Carphoborus minimus... 74
Carpocapsa (sce Laspeyresia). Carpomyia pardalin --- 93
Caryoborus gonagra. . 149, 210
Cassida nebulosa 6, 41, 158
vittata.... ae 44
Castilloa borer (see Inesida leprosa). (GUSPIULICUS === ~~ 2-2 - ooo eeee ene nese 34, 159, 202
Catalpa scale (see Diaspis pentagona). Catorama tabaci. --. 214
Caulophilus latinasus. -- 6,30
Cecidomyia humuli....- 135
saliciperda.. 223
salicis. a 223
Celery fly (see Acidia heraclei). leaf tyer (see Phlyctenia ferrugalis). Ceocephalus carus. --- 218
Cephalcia hypotrophica. .. aC
signata... 70
Cephus pygmxus. 126
Cerambyz cerdo. . 26, 151, 153, 220

 

 

229
Page. Cerambyt Miles... 2.22.00. 2222 ee cee cee ec ee ee 131
scopolii 23,169
Ceratitis anonz..

- 51, 94, 115, 132
capitata... 24, 25,30, 34, 38, 60, 64, 93, 94, 100,
103, 115, 116, 126, 131, 132, 133, 140, 142, 147,
163, 167, 170, 171, 180, 186, 187, 194, 217, 218

 

 

 
  
  
 

 

 

catoirei. 58
gi. fardi 116, 139
nigerrima. 116
punctata 116, 126, 132, 147
rubivora. 116
silvestrii. 116, 139
striata. -. 32

 

Ceratopachys variabilis -
Cerococcus ornatus . Ceronema caudata. Ceroplastes actiniformis . ..
campinensis. ..
ceriferus. cistudiformis. denudatus . erithreus

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
    
  

 

grandis. mimose

myrice. 102, 162
psidii v.11
quadrilineatus........222-2222--- 94, 102

rubens. rusci. 30, 102, 146, 162, 169, 170
= 102, 132, 150, 156, 171, 181

   
  
 

 

 

singularis 131
theobrome, . 33
townsendi percrassus 102
vinsonii

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

vinsonioides..
Ceroputo yucce
Cerostoma parenthesella. Cerotoma denticornis. .
Cetonia lugubris.....
Ceutorhynchus assimilis . cyanipennis 49

quadridens . . 49,188

. raphani. .. 187

robertii... b 187

sulcicollis 49, 188

Chetocnema basalis.. - - 191

concinna . 189

tibialis... 44

Chetococcus bambuse . 33

Chzetosticha nana...... 208

Chalcoides chloris.. ss 44

Charagia lignivora. -- 10, 20,100
Charlock weevil (see Ceutorhynchus con-

tractus). Cheimatobia boreata. 40, 46,179

brumata -++ 24,105,148, 154, 179

Chermes abietis 5 67

viridis. 67

 

Cherry borer (see Cryptophaga unipunctata). bug (see Peltophora pedicillata). ermine moth (see Hyponomeuta padel-

lus). fruit moth (see Argyresthia nitidella). green beetle (see Diphucephala col-
aspidoides). spinner (see Biston hirtarius). 230 INSECT
Page. Cherry tree case-bearer (see Coleophora ana-
tipennella). weevil (see Curculio cerasorum). Chestnut weevil (see Curculio elephas). ‘Chilo auricilia - 85,189, 196, 208
infuscatella. 208
simplex = 85,126, 191, 196, 203

Chionas pis arundinai ae,

austriaca. . od 7
bambuszx. . 32
berlesei 29
colemani. 32
depressa. 206
elongata... 32
Frenchi. 9S
gramini 32
hikosani . 32
inday.... 162
madiunensi 206
manni. “162

32

25,94, 139

162

206

130, 146

Chionaspis (Phenacaspis) bupleuri 156

cockerehi. 162

dilatata 146, 162

cugenizx. . - 146,219

megaloba... 131

- natalensis 146

Chloridca assulta 216

obsoleta. 6,14

peltigera.. 216

Chloroclystis rectangulata... 20

Chlorops lineata 126

terniopu 125

Cholus cattleyz. 159

Sorbesi. 7 159

Chortophila cilicrura - 29, 15e

Chortophila ( Pegomya) brassicae. 7

cepetorum . 7

Jusciceps.. . 7,38,50

hyoscyami 158, 196

Chramesus globulus 5 154

Chrotogonus trachypterus. - 4, 89, 215

Chrysobothris affinis. 153

indica. . 218

sernotata... = lS,

solicri.. 73

Chrysochroa bicolor... 50

Sulminans . 50

Chrysolophus spectabilis 10
Chrysomphalus [see Aspidiotus (Chrysompha-

lus)). Cicadula fasciifrons . ... 190, 206
6-notata. . 190, 206
Cigarette beetle (see Lasioderma serricorne). Cimber fagi. 40

 

variabilis....--.. 20.) eee
Cinnabar moth (see Euchelia jacobex). 13, 47, 182, 223

 

Clinodiplosis equestris. ..

 

INDEX. Page. Cionus fraxini - 27,157
scrophulariz . 44
Cirphis leucosticha. . . 85

 

unipuncta ( Heliophila, Leucanit)....
Citrus leaf miner (see Phyllocnistis citrell2). Cladius pectinicorn:
Clania crameri.

. 8,208

 

 

s(t
55, 64,76, 211

  
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  
  
 

 

holmesi. ean
varicgata.. ‘35, 64, a
Cleonus cinercus . fasciatus. 2
mendicus 44
pedestris. 44
piger .. . 44
punctiventris - Al, 216
tigrinus...

ucrainicnsis . Cletus bipunctatus . trigonus...

mosellana..
Clover leaf weevils (see Hypera spp.). root weevils (see Sitona spp.). Clysia aMbIgUETIA. .. 0... ee cece eee eee eee 129, 130
Clytus floralis. 4
tropicu. 153
Cnaphalocrocis bifurcalis 208
Cnaphalodes lap ponicus. oF
strobilobius... 67

Cneorhinus albiguttatus. .. - 207
plagiatus.. 29,51
Cnethocam pa pinivora. 76
pityocampa. i766

processiona.. 152

Coecidae 7
Coccotry pes integer - 193
Coccus acuminatis. 35,131, 146, 158
acutissimus - 44,146, 162
arundinarix... 33
bicruciatus... 170
hesperidum - 59, 162, 212

hoferi. 23
mangifere . 5,146
manniparus... -- 211
marsupialis. . 94
minimus. : 44, 158

  
 

viridis
Cochylis (see Clysia ambiguclia). Coekchafer (see AMelolontha. mclolontha). Cozonut leaf-miner beetles (see Promecotheca
spp. )-
leaf moth (see Levuana iridescens). palm seale [see A spidiotus ( Chrysom-
phalus) persc#]. white fly (see Aleurodicus spp.). Codling moth (see Laspeyresia pomonella). - 59, 63, 131, 212

  

 

Celosterna scabrata. .. 193
spinator . 10
Celostomidia assimilis. 39
pilosa.........., eee 29

Cocpophagus |see Rhizoglyphus (Cocpopha-
gus). Coffee beetle (see Nylcborus coffe). bean weevil (see Aracerus fasciculatus). °
leaf miner (see Leucoptera coffcella). red spider (see Tctranychus bioculatus). INSECT INDEX. Page. Colabathristes saccharicida 207
Colaspidea metallica 207
Colaspidema atrum.... oe 13
Coleophora anatipennelia. - 24,175
Suseedinella. il
laricella. . 82
lutipennella. . 152
Colobogaster quadridentata 100
Colopha compressa. 95
Conarthrus affinis.. 33
jansoni. 193
Conchas pis angreci -- 5,102
Conchylis epilinana (see Phalonia). Conchyloctenia punctata...........22-.2222-- 210
Confused flour beetle (see Tribolium eon-
fusum). OEIC ELUG. .....-.-----0-0-0-0-nnnaneeess 211
suavis.... 211
Coniferous root weevils (see Brachyrhinus). sawfly (see Diprion simile). weevils (see Magdalis spp.). Conogethes punctiferalis............200000005 166
Contarinia gossypii. 89
pisi.... 165
pyrivora.. - 7,170
torquens
tritici...

viticola. Coptosoma cribraria 207
Coptoter mes gestroi. 164
Corzbus elatus... 153
Saseiatus -- 153
RES ee eieia=)=(- = =)=- =. «ee. eee 153

Corn fly (see Siphonella pumilionis). Corner spot (see Orgyia gonostigma). Corymbites eneus......- 43
Cosmophila sabulifera... 155
Cosmopolites sorlidus - 34 207
Cosmopteryx pallifasciella. 208
Cossus eadambe - 212
€08SUS .. 12,

27, 40, 46, 96, 141, 148, 154, 181, 220, 221

tristis...
Cotton blister mite (see Eriophyes gossypii). boll worm (see Chloridea obsoleta). flower bud maggot (see Contarinia gos-
sypii). stainers (see Dysdercus spp.). stem borer (see Sphenoptera neglecta). worm (Prodenia litura). Cratopus punetum. 64
Cratosomus reidi. 60
Crepidodera costatipennis a 50
aurata...... 181, 221
Criocephalus tibetanus (2)... 73
Crioceris spp. - 27
asparag: 6,27
duodeeimpunctata 6, 27. 28
impressa... 103
merdigera.. 28

Crasus septentrionalis (see Nematus). Crossotarsus conifers... - 52,81

 

fairmairei
saundersi

 

 

19, 170, 187

 

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

  

 

  

 

 

 
  
  
 
  

Page. Crucifer leaf beetles (see Phyllotreta spp.). Cryphalus abietis...........220022002022e eee 69
. boswellize. 69
deodara. 52
himalavensis 52
intermedius . 84
longifolia... . 74
74
morinda. . a 81
picex..... . 69
saltuarius. 69
strohmeyer! 79
Crypsiphona oecultari 99
Cryptaspidiotus aonidioides. 35
mediterraneus... 139
Cryptaspidus nucum. 162
Cryptes baccatus... 9
Crypthemichionaspis africana. . 181
Cryptinglisia lounsburyi. 130
Cryptoblabes aliena... 208
gnidiella 91, 129, 180
Cryptoeephalus pini........-.-.-.--+---+-+--- 73
Cryptoeoecus fagi. 39
Cryptophaga rubriginosa. Ba 11
unipunetata......------+- 167, 177, 179
Cryptorhynchus batatx (see Euscepes). brandisi. 74
gravis (see Sternochetus). lapathi.....-...-.-- 6, 12, 46, 181, 222
mangifere (see Sternochetus). raja. 74
Crypturgus cinereus. 74
pusillu 69
Ctenochiton araucariz 25
eucaly pti. 99
Curculio spp... 154
amoenus. 103
ecrasorum 174
53
herbsti.... Peel
nueum... 33,134, 154
rubidus....... 179
Cucurbit fly (see Dacus cucurbitz). ladybird beetles (see pilachna
spp.). Currant fruit moth (see Notocelia roborana). gall mite (see Eriophyes ribis). moth (see Abraxas grossulariata). shoot borer (see Incurvaria capitella). webworm (see Thamnonoma wau-
aria). worm (see Pteronidea ribesii). Custard-apple caterpillar (see Anonzpestis
bengalella). Cutworms.............--------2----2s22 econ
Cutworms (see Agrotis spp. ; Euroa spp. ;
Feltia spp. ; Peridroma spp.). Cylas brunneus . .
formiearius
Cyllo leda ae
(Gaiman STO. 0 eee ee eel ese eet
Cypress borers (see Diadorus spp.). o

 
 

 

 

CyrtepistomUus PANNOSUS .....-- +--+ +22 eee ee 212
Cyrtotrachelus dux... ain 33

longipes 33
Cytorhynchus frigidus .. -. 146
Daetylopius coceus........-.200eeseceecerenes 162

232

Dacus xqualis. cucurbite . curvipennis... <
diversus..... -- 60, 117, 132, 147, 167
Serrugineus. - 60,93, 100, 117, 147
Srenchii. oli
olex.. 156
ornatissimus .. - 58
passiflore... -- 60, 117, 126, 147
persicz. ~ 117,147, 167
psidii. - 118, 126, 132
rarotonge . Te. M5
tongensis.... 145

 

( Tephrites) canthodes.... 118, 126, 132, 142, 171

   
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

Dasychira horsfeldi. 194
mendosa. 64,212

64,212

- 12,40,

47, 48, 107, 132, 134, 137, 141, 148, 154, 192

selenitica Bey 66

thwaite:
Dasyneura abietiperd
brassicz..

laricis ..

picez. pyri..
Death’s-head moth (see Acherontia atropos). Delphacodes vastatriz. Deiphaz fumosa..
Surcifera. graminicola . propingua
Deltocephalus dorsalis
Dendroctonus micans
Dendrolimus pini..
, sibiricus
Depressaria depressella. nervosa...

Dermestes frischi...
vulpinus
Desiantha nociva...
Diabrotica graminea
Diacrisia obliqua...
Diadorus erythruru:

 

 

scalaris 64, 94
Dialeges pauper... C 193
Diamerus fici.........2+222222022222202022 22 103
Diamond-back moth (see Plutella maculipen-
nis). Diaprepes abbreviatus.......--+2--2-+220ee0ee 30,

60, 64, 85, 126, 132, 146, 192, 200_
spengleri (see Diaprepes abbrevia-

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

tus). Diapus capillatus 154
Sfurtivus.. 194
i 154

194
quinquespinatus . -- 10%

Diaspidiotus (see A spidiotus | Diaspidiotus]). Diaspis atlantica. 139
bromeliz. 102
cattleyx.. 158
gennadii. 171
leperii. ~ 132, 166,220
olex... see 156
pentagona. 5, 52, 169, 178

 

 

INSECT INDEX. Page. .. B,169

- 169
- 166,169
25,73, 44, 139
.-» 5,162
- 206

Diaspis pyri

 
  
    
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
    
 
  
 
 

Diatrza spp...-
canella. lineolata..

Dichocrocis punctiferalis

Dicranotropis vastatriz...

Dictyophora sinica...

Diloba czruleocephala

Dindymus versicolor. Dinoderus brevis

distinetus . .

minutus . pilifrons. Dioryctria splendidella

Diostrombus politus....

Diparopsis castanea

Diphucephala aurulenta. colaspidoides . Diploschema rotundicolle. Diplosis eucalypti

paralis..

Diprion pallidus . Pi

- (172

Discophora celinde...
Distichocera macleayi. Dolopius marginatus...
Dorytomus affinis....
agnathus
dorsalis...
maculatus

Doticus pestilans. Dreata petola..
Drepana cultrar:
Dreyfusia nuesslini

Drugstore beetle (see Sitodrepa panicea). Dryoceetes alni. autocraphus . hewetti

indicus ..

minor . villosus. Dryophilus pusillus
Duomitus ceramicus . Durra stem borer (see Sesamia cretica). Dysdercus spp...
andrex
annuliger
cardinalis . cingulatus. delauneyi
fasciatus....

 

  

   
 

 

 

    
 

SESSSZS2SE

howardi. INSECT INDEX. Dysdercus insularis......
nigrofasciatus...
pacificus
ruficollis....
Ssanguinarius..
Sid®......-. suturellus . Earias chlorana....
chromataria. Early moth (see Hibernia rupicapraria). East African cotton weevil (see Apion ran-
thostylum). Echinocnemis squameus

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Page. 86
86
86

191, 207

Ecthea quadricornis. . 5 50
Eggplant fruit borer (see Leucinodes orbo-
nalis). Egyptian cotton boll worm (see Earias insu-
lana). cotton worm (see Prodenia litura). Eight-toothed large spruce bark beetle (see
Ips typographus). Elaphodes tigrinus... 10
Elimza chloris 205
Elm bark beetle (see Scolytus multistriatus). leaf beetle (see Galerucella luteola). sawfly (see Fenusa dohrnii). Enarmonia pinicolana... -- 67,70
rufimitrana.. - 7,78
Entochira lateralis..... 198, 216
Entodecta pumila. . 47
Epacromia tamulus 205
Epepeotes luscus. . 50,146

 
 

Ephestia cautella...
elutella.....
kuehnietla....

Epiblema nigricana (see Eucosoma). tedella (see Laspeyresia). Epicauta rufidorsum .......2.- 220200 eens

sibirica....

Epicoccus acacix. Epidiaspis piricola. Epilachna spp...

argus. chrysomelina...
dodecastigma..
guttato-pustulata
28-maculata. 28-punctata. phyto...
pusillanina. territa...

Episomus albinus

Ereunetis flavistriata...
muiriella

pilosata..

Eriocampoides limacina

Eriococcus aceris...

angulatus . araucariz. CONFUSUS. 2... ------ eee eeeeeeenenee

 

  
 
 
    
 
 
  
     
 
  

 

  

 

 
  
 

 

  

  
 

 

 

Eriococcus coriaceus. .

 

fagicorticus. .
graminis..
gregarius
irregulari
lagerstremix

raithbyi...
serratilobis

simplex. spinige:

tepperi..
tesselatus...

Eriogaster lanestris. Eriophyes spp..
avellane. Sraxini..
goniothoraz. .

gossypii

levis. laricis...
macrochelus . oleivorus..

quadrisetus
ribis...

 

tetanothrix. tiliz. tiliarius
vermiformis . vitis...
Eriosoma lanuginosa. Ernobius abietinus . abietis....
angusticollis
longicornis. nigrinus...

Etiella zinckenella..
Eubactrus sp...---
Eucalymnatus brunfelsiz. Eucanthus semiglauca. Euchelia jacobex
Euchirus mactleayi. . .
Euchloris submissaria
Eucosoma nigricana....

paragramma

Schistacea . Eudamus proteus ..
Eumerus strigatus. 233

Page.
. 99,131
102

102

99
46, 141, 154, 181, 223
172
133
26
132
86
11
82
M7

- 5,55. 5,172
5,172
70

228
5

. 139
118, 119
45
172
222
M41
M1
133
127,
95
95
73
79
79

 

 

  
   

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

934 INSECT
Page. Eumetopina krugeri.......-.....0.0-0 22222 e ee 206
Euphilippia olivina... 156
Euplezis nigerrima.. 185
Euproctis chrysorrhea, a 6,
4 , 181, 192, 223
C101 Se oe = - ote =e 212
flavata.... 208
flexuosa. 55
latifascia 212
minor. 208
Eupteryx solani S 184
European grain moth (see Tinea granella). thrips (see Haplothrips tri-
tici). hop flea-beetle (see Psylliodes at-
tenuata). pine-shoot moth (see Lvetria buo-
liana). Euscepes bat 209
Euura ater. . 223
Euxoa radians . 185
segetis.. 91
spinifera. .. 216
Euzophera cedrella -- 52,70

Evaspidiotus (see Aspidiotus ( Evaspidiotus)}. Evergestis extimalis. - 49,87, 18S

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
  

  

  
  
 
 
 

 

 

 

Evetriaspp
buoliana. 2
comstockiana. 72
duplana -- 6,72
frustrana.... a 72
pinivorana... 6,72
resinella... 72
rigidana. Pr
turionana. -- 6,72
Feathery-horned yellow-box borer (see Dis- =
tichocera macleayi). Feltia sp... ... 6
Fenusa dolrnii. oe 6
Fig braneh borer (see Hylesinus porcatus). moth (see Ephestia cautella). stem-boring beetle (see Sinorylon suda-
nicum). tree borer (see Batocera boisduvali). Figure-of-8-moth (see Diloba cxruleocephala). Fiji fly (see Dascus passiflore). Filippia olex 156
Fiorinia acacizx... 9
bambus3 32
diaspiforiis... 32
grossulari. 121
signata. 32
stricta 158
tenuis. . Rf 32
thER. 0. ee cee cece cee eens eee 156, 212
Fir bark tortricid (see Laspeyresia duplicana). bud worm (see Lucosoma nigricana). Flatheaded leaf-miner beetle (see A planis-
tichus consanguineus). wood borer (see Agrilus viridis). Flax capsule worm (see Phalonia epilinana). Flea beetle (see Pliyllotreta atra). Flour heeties.......2.....220-20eceeeee ee eee 122
Fluted scale (see Icerya purchasi). Fonscolombia frarini...........-.-22.-22222-+ 26

 
  
 

 
 

INDEX. Page. Forest defoliators (see Melolontha melolontha). Frea maculicornis. - 63
marmorata... : 63
Frit fly (see Chlorops lineata; Oscinis frit). Fruit tree bark beetle (see Scolytus rugulosus). borer (see Capnodis tenebrionis). Furcaspis oceanica. 158, 162
Galerucella luteola . 6
tenella... 197

 

Gallobellicus crassicornis . Gasterocercodes gossypii
Gastropacha quercifolia. Gastrophora henricaria. Gazalina apsara
Gelastorhinus esor..
Gelechia atriplicella. dodecella...
gossypiella (see Pectinophora). instabilella.........2.. 222
ocellatella. .
Gelonxtha hirta. .
Geococcus radicum . Geoica lucifuga.......

 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

Geonomus quadrinodosus. 64
Giant sugar cane borer (see Castnia licus). Giffard fruit fly (see Ceratitis giffardi). white fly (see Bemisia giffardi). Gipsy moth (see Porthetria dispar). Glenea novemguttata......---.---------222-25- 50
Glyphina betulz 45
Gnathodus pallidulus 206
viridis... . 206
Gnorimoschema heliopa... 215
Goat moth (see Cossus cossus). Gonocephalum intermedium ........-.- 216
Gonocephalum (Opatrum) acutangulum . 207, 216
pusillum a 216
sabulosum......-.+ 43,73
yooseberry moth (see Zophodia convolutella). Gortyna flavago. ... 185
ochracea. 185
Gossyparia cavelli 29
Spuria.... 96
Gracillaria syringella . 27

 

Grain fly (see Camarota flavitarsis). Grape anomala (see A nomatla vitis). blister mite (see Eriophyes vitis). borers (see Vesperus spp.). gun worm (see Scispteron regale). pyralid (see Polyclrosis botrana). root weevils (see Brachyrhinus spp.). worm (see Bromius spp.). vine flatheaded borer (see Sinoxylon
spp.). 6
worm (see Clysia ambiguella). Grapholitha (see Laspeyresia spp.). Grass army worm (see Spodoptera mauritia). Gray borer of the sugar cane (see Laspeyresia
Schistaceana). a
fruit tree bud moth (see Olethreutes
cynobatella). larch moth (see Enarmonia pinicolana). plum owlet moth (see Xylina orni-
thopus). Greasy eutworm (see Agrotis ypsilon). « Greit oak borer (see Cerambyz cerdo). INSECT INDEX,

Page. Greedy scale (see Aspidiotus camellize). Green hanging moth of the apple (see Charagia
lignivora). leaf weevil (see Phyllobius maculi-
cornis). pug moth (see Chloroclystis rectangu-
lata). oak tortrix (see Tortrix viridana). Gryllotalpa africana... --- 89,190, 205, 215
gryllotalpa. -- 48, 45, 215
vulgaris (see Gryllotalpa gryllo-

talpa). Gryllus melas 43

mitratus .. - 205

Gueriniella serratule - 73, 94,96, 130, 150

Gum tree bug (see Mictis profana). DUMMMMETIMlea.s-.-..-20-ccs7+-ooesscs ose 103
Gypsy moth (see Porthetria dispar). Hadena secalis 123
Halimococcus lam pas. - 162
Haltica ampelophaga. 128, 222
quercetorum. 9, 46, 134, 151, 192, 222
Haplothrips aculeata e. 125
tritici, 125
Harlequin fruit bug (sec Dindymus versicolor). Harpalus xneus. . 81
ruficornis - 196
Hawaiiin beet webworm (see Hymenia fas-
cialis). leaf bug (see Hyalopeplus pelluci-
dus). sugar-cane borer (see Rhabdocnemis
obscurus). suzar-cane levroller (see Omiodes
aecepta). Hawtuorne scale (see Lecanium bitubercula-
tum). Hazelnut blister mites (see Eriophyes avella-
ne; Eriophyes vermiformis). Hedotettix arcuatus. 205
Heilipus bonelli... 191
i 30
--. 5,50,
, 140, 146, 192, 218
striatoptera --- 207
Hellula undalis --- 6,186
Helopeltis antonii . 50

 

theivora. . 50
Hemiberlesia (see Aspidiotus [Hemiberlesia)). Hemichionaspis sp .. se
fic. 102
minima. 102
serobicularum. 32
Hemirhopata atrilineata = 150
Hepialus humuli... 135, 185, 188
lupulinus 185
Herse convolvuli.. 210
Hesperia conjuncta. - 208
philino..........- --- 208

Hessian fly (see Phytophaga destructor). Heterachihes ceneolus.........0-2--e-eeceecees 181
Heterobostrichus xqualis. - - 193,194
pileatus . - 198
unicornis a 33
Heteroplia varians.. 193
10

 

Heterorhina hookeri. 235

Page. Heterusia cingala...... 212

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
  

 

 

Hibernia aurantiaria .. 40, 46, 132, 141, 154, 1S1
(EF GLON Eh aelntateys=la'e'elelels see eee 24,40,
46,96, 108, 132, 137, 141, 149, 154, 181, 192
marginaria - 40,46, 132,137, 141,154, 181
rupicapraria. (111,179
Hieroglyphus banian. . --- 190
Himatium asperum . 193
Hispa znescens... 190
callicantha 190, 207
wakkeri.... 199
Holaniara picescens (see Entochira latera
Holotrichia leucophthalma. 207
207

 

Holzneria poschingeri (see Prociphilus bu-
meliz). Hop aphis (see Phorodon humuli). leaf miner (see Agromyza frontalis). midge (see Cecidomyia humuli). root borer (see Hepialus humuli). H)plocampa fulvicorni:

 

24,177,178

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

 

  

 

 

  
 
  
 

 

  

 
 

 

 

 

  
   
 
 
  

rutilicorn: 180
testudinea - 22,23
Hoplocerambyz spinicorn 193
Hormomyia annulipes. 40
40
Hornet moths (see T'rochilium spp-)-
Horse-chestnut borer (see Zeuzera pyrina). Hyalopeplus pellucidus..........-.-.--++-++++ 37
Hydrellia griseola.. . 125
Hydrecia micacea. 185,
Hylastes angustatus . 74
74
69
cunicularius . Pa 81
decumanus. ' 69
himalayensis . 69
longifolia. 74
opicus. .. ar 74
Hylecetus dermestoides. .. - 39,46, 79, 148, 153
Hylemyia antiqua 5 157
coarctata. . - 124
Hylesinus crenatus. 27, 154
fraxini.. -- 27,157
157
27
101
- 157
Hylobius abictis . . 12,40, 46, 68
fatuus. a 68
piceus. 68
Hylotrupes bajulus..- 68
Hylurgops glabratus. 81
pulliatus . 69
Hylurgus ligniperda. 74
Hymenia fascialis . - 6, 42,43
Hypena rostralis 137
Hypera spp..- 61,184
crini - 184
fOSCICULLI.. Jem. - aan = nn + « «1 51

-murina. nigrirostri:
ononidis . .
prstinace tigrina. ..

 

 

 

 

 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
    
 

236 INSECT
Page. Hy pera postiea.... .-. 6,14,15
punctata 6,14, 51,61.
rogenhoferi 51
rumicis . 189
variabilis . 38, 47, 61, 184, 185
Hypoborus ficus. . . 103
Hypeschrus indieus - 198
Hypomeces curtus... ao 63
unicolor. . 191,207
Hyponomeuta evonymeila. 48
malinellu
padellus...
padi..

Hysipyla robusta

Teerya xgyptiaea. 102

 

 

  
  
 

albolutea. 94
maxima. ... 102
minor 145
montserratensis. 30, 35, 59, 131, 162, 192
palmeri. 102, 130
purchasi.. -- 5
seychellarum.. 102, 131, 146, 162, 192, 206

 

Imported cabbage butterfly (see Pontia rapx)
maggot {see Chortophila

(Pegomyz) brassicx). clover weevil (see Miceotrogus pici-

 

 

 
  

 

 

 

 
  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

rostris). onion maggot (see Pegomya cepe-
torum). Ina ampelophaga.......-..-..-.-+--0--+ 131
Incurvaria eapitella 121
Indian meal moth (see Plodia interpunctella). tea geometrid (see Biston suppres-
sarius). Inesida leprosa..........+-22-0020 eee eee eee 163
Inglisia conchiformis . 131
39
Ips acuminatus 74
amitinus. 69
blandfordi. 74
eembrx.... 69
duplicatus. 69
longifolia. 74
mannsfeldi 74
ribbentropi.. 69
~serdentatus.. 69
stebbingi... 52
typographus. -- 66,69
Island fruit fly (see Rioza musz). Tsosoma noriale. .... 22... .0222- 000 eee eee eee ee 126
Itycorsia campestris. . . 77
stellata... 70
Janus compressus. 169
cynosbati. 154
Sumipenni: Bo 47
Wuteipes. ......-.-0-.00..000.28ee 192
Japanese grain moth (see  Melissoblaptes
gularis). rose beetle (see Adoretus umbrosus). SJASSUS SCXLNOLALUS . 2.222 e eee cece cece eee 125
Java cinchona geometrid (see Boarmia
crepuscularia). sugarcane ‘grub beetle (see A pogonia
spp-)-

June beetle (see Melolontha spp.). INDEX. Page. Juniper blister mite (see Eriophyes quadri-
setus). Kakivoria flavofasciata. 170
Kermes acaciz.... 9
7 bacciformis. 153
ballote.. 153
cordiformis.. 153
gibbosus . 153
ilicis... 153
pallidus. 153
roboris. 153
vermilio. 153
Kirbya pagana. 206
Kuwania parva 178

 

Laehnosterna (see Phyllophaga). Laehnus agilis....
fasciatus . GTOSSsUs. txniatus. . 72
tomentosus. cs 72
viminalis. .. 222

Lackey moth (see Malacosoma neustria). Lacon sp. near davidi 81
murinus - 43,153, 184
-  shiraki -- 207
L2lia eostalis 208
subrufa.. 208
Lxemophleus testaceus . 193
Lemotmetus rhizophagoides .. 190
Lagosinia strachani a 94
Lamia textor..... 181, 222
Lampra assamensis . 103
decipiens. = 96
ruiilans. 12, 96, 141
undatus. ---- 14
Laphygma exigua ( Caradrina). - 6,14, 210
reclusa. -- 210, 216

Lappet moth (see Gastropacha quercifolia). Larch blister mite (see Eriophyes larieis). bud-gall midge (see Dasyneura laricis). gall moth (see Laspeyresia zebeana). needle miner (see Coleophora larieella). sawfly (see Nematus erichsoni). shoot moth (see Argyresthia lzviga-
tella). spinner (see Dendrolinus sibiriews). tussock moth (see Dasychira selenitiea). Larentia dilutata... . +. 12,40, 46, 96, 154, 223

 

 

 

  

nebulata.. 46
Large Australian fruit fly (see Daeus equalis). bast beetle (see Dendroetonus micans). pith borer [see Jomicus ( Myelophilus)
piniperda]. pear psylla (see Psylla pyrisuga). Lasiocampa quercus. 75, 154
trifolii. 60
Lasioderma serricorne 6
Lasioptera cerealis.. 124
miscella. 100

 

 

- INSECT

Page. seco HH
134,220

Laspeyresia spp
amplana. coniferana 79
dorsana. 165
duplicana... - 67,140
Sunebrana 176
glycinivorella - 196
grossana.. - 38, 54, 134,154, ,196, 220
nebritana . 165, 196
nigricana. ae ~ 6, 165_
pactolana. - 79,80
pomonella. . 6
proximana.... 79
prunivorana 179
schistaceana. -- 204
splendana . 53, 54, 154, 220
strobilella...

tedella

weeberiana

zebeana. Latheticus oryzx.... Leaf hispa (see Brontispa froggatti). Leather beetle (see Dermestes spp). Lecaniodias pis acaciz
africana...

converus . dilatata

Srenchi. newmannt. sardoa... 192
Lecanium aceris. 147
arion. ee 25
Paiiercatetin - 5, 23,132, 169
capree «+--+ 11, 23,169
catori..... -- 140
caudatus 63
cerasi... 178
cerasorum 178
ciliatum.... 45, 48, 153, 181, 222
pee eet eer 11

 
 
 
 
  

95, 96, 121, 132, 134, 137,
138, 141, 147, 153, 169, 178, 181, 186, 220, 222
= 23,169

 

 

 

   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 

 

206
krugeri. - 206
kunoensis . . 24, 166, 169
perornatum. 191
persicz... - 23,130, 166, 186
prunastri... - 24,179
pseudexpansum. 162
pulechrum 53,191
23
121
121

sericewm..
tiliz........
variegatum...

Leiomerus granicollis
Lema cyanella. flavipes...
melanopus.. Lemon caterpillar (see Papilio demoleus). silver mite (sce Eriophyes oleivorus). | Liopus nebulosus - ..

 

INDEX. Lepidiota bimaculata . .

Lepidosaphes abieti:
acaciz...
bambusicola . beckii. cocculi....
corrugata
duponti
ficifolii. ficus
juniperi. longula..
megregori..
mexicana
minima. newsteadi
olivina....

 

     

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
  

 

 

 
 
   
 
 
 
 

somalensis. spinifera

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

237

Page. 193

wnicolor...
Leptocorisa varicornis . . .
Leptodictya tabida.. .
Leptoglossus spp --
Leptops hopei - 17,18, 170,179
tribulus 10
Leptostylus premorsus. - 56
Leptura rubriola 81
Lesser grain borer (see Rhizopertha manna
Leucania loreyi 208
unipuncta (see Cirphis). SIREN COS ISO TLOILC eee: =12) eee eel) 32
indica... 5,146
5, 23, 32, 192
Es 73

   
 
   
  
  

Leucinodes orbonali. Leucodiaspis cockerell
Leucoma diaphana....
Leucophlebia lineata...
Leucoptera coffeella
Leucotermes lucifugus . Levuana iridescens a
Liberian sweet-potato borer (see Cylas brun-

  

 

neus). Lichtensia eatoni
lutea. viburni. Light-brown apple moth (see Tortriz ash-
worthana). Ligyrus rugiceps . .
Limnophilus fiavicornis . Limothrips denticornis . Limonius zruginosus . Lincodes ochracea
Liogryllus bimaculatus . .

formosanus.. -

 

 
 
  
 

 

 

Liparus coronatus . - -

156
102
219

207
220
125
153
185
205
205

23, 25, 168, 179

44,51

 

 

238 INSECT
Page. Lita (see Gelechia). Little bollworm (see Pyroderces simplex). 44
207
Lochmzxa capree 46

 
  

 

Locusta viridissima

Loncher splendida..

Longheaded flour beetle (sec Latheticus ory-
22). Lophocateres (Ostoma) pusillus . . - 122
Lophodes sinistraria . - 10,25
Lophosternus hugeli. 153
Lucern moth of New South Wales (see Tortriz
divulsana). Ludius suturalis.. 207
Luperus pinicola 7
Lyczena beetica.. 37
Lyctus brunneus .. 188
linearis. ... 153
spinifrons . 33, 218
Lygxonemiius ambiguus. $2
pini... 82
saresen 82
Lygesis mendica.. oe 10
Lygus oryze.. 190, 207
pratensis. _ 5
sacchari... 207
Lymantria brittata 194
grandis 194
lipcha . 194

 
 

monacha. . - 40,47, 48,70,
108, 134, 137, 141, 148, 149, 154, 181, 223

 

  
  
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

TAaCOYLON IR ZURLC. .. . anal aes 153
Lytta vesicatoriz. 26
Machexrota planitizx . s 90
Macrophya punctum-album . = 27,133, 154
Macrosiphum fragarix.... 196
Sragaricllum. 196,

pisi.. - 5,165

rogersii. 196
Macrothylacia rubi 47
Magdalis spp...-- 65
armigera 173
aterrima.. 96
barbicornis 132, 149, 187
carbonaria 45, 134, 179, 220

cerasi... - 23, 132,170,179
duplicata 65
memnonia 65
phlegmatict a 65

pruni - 23,132,179, 187

rufa. 65

violacez. 65

 

Magpie moth (see Abraxas grossulariata). Malacosoma neustri 40, 46, 106, 154, 181, 192, 223

 

  
  
  

Mamestra acbicolor . a 216
brassica 44, 50, 141, 216
dissimil: 44
OICTACEH.. 2-2 eee eee eee ee eee 29, 44, 50

Mandarin fruit fly (see Dacus ornatissimus). Mango bark borer (see Plocedcrus ruficornis). borer (see Batocera titana; Dinoderus
distinctus). fruit fly (see Dacus ferrugineus). scale (see Coccus mangiferac; Leucaspis
indica). INDEX. Page. Mango shoot psylla (see Psylla cistellat1). weevil (see Sternochetus mangifcre). March moth (see A nisopteryx escularia). Margurodes formictrum........----+++-+++--- 206

 

Marguerite fly (see Phytomyz1 affinis). Maruca testulalis . . 37
Massicus unicolor.. 153
Masters’ gum borer (see Trypocharia mas-
tersi). Mauritius fruit fly (see Ceratitis catoirei). Mayetiola avenie.. 124
destructor (see Phytophaga). Mecopoda elongati.......-...-.+.+2-2+eeeeeee 205
Mediterranean flour moth (see Ephestia kuch-
niella). fruit fly (see Ceratitis capitata). Megastignus brevicaudus.. -- 149
borriesi...... 79
strobilobius . . 70

 

Meges marmoratus
Melanimon tibiale . Melanitis leda. . .
Mcelanophila picta . Melasoma xnev. populi
Meligethes zeneus..

 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

 

Melissoblaptes gularis . 191
Melobasis splendida 10
Melolontha castanipes ... 215

 

hippocastani. 10, 12, 26, 39, 46, 54, 73
96, 137, 138, 141, 148, 149, 153, 171, 181, 222

 

  
 
  
 

 

  

melolontha..... 10, 12, 26,39, 46, 54,73 ,96,
104, 137, 138, 141, 148, 149, 153, 171, 181, 222
niger .. -- 215
rufipes 215
tenebrosus - 215
vulgaris... - 43, 104, 215
Melon aphis (see A phis gossypii). fruit fly (see Carpomyia pardalina). weevil (see Baris traegardhi). Menida histri 207
Merodon clavipes 150
equestris.. 150
Mesites aquitanus 74

 

Metallic tomato fly (see Lonchxa splendida). Metallites atomarius. 68

. 46, 154

  
  
  

 

Boome, (3

mollis 68
Metamasius hemipterus. 200
ritchiei . 171

sericeus. 200
Metanastria hyrtaca . 55

 

Mexican bean weevil (see Spermophagus nee
toralis). fruit fly (see Anastrepha ludens). grain beetle (see Pharaxontha kir-
schi). Miccotrogus picirostris. Micromima olivia. Mictis profana......
Millet stalk worm (see Pyraz

 
 
 

 

Mindarus abietinus 67
Mites (see Acarina). Mnesampela privata 99

 

Moecha adusta -- 50,195

 

 

INSECT

Page. ae 63
63

Moecha biittneri. molator...

 

 

 

 

  
  

 

 

 

 

   
 
 
  

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Mogannia hebes oer 207
Mole crickets (see Gryllotalpa spp. ; Spiieeraiar
tylus spp.). Molorchus minor... . 79
Monarthropal pus burt 48
Monoctenus juniperi. ate
Monohammus fistulator
galloprovincialis . 73
ruspator... 50
sartor.. . 6S
Monolepta nigrobilineata. - 207
Monophiebus stebbingi octocaudata . 102
Moon-fleeked moth (see Phalera enneye
spot moth (see Phalera bucephala). Morganella [see Aspidiotus ( Morganelia)]. Mottled umber moth (see Hibernia defoliaria). Mudaria cornifrons............22.22222-+-- 05+ 194
Mycalesis mineus...........22+-02022-22 2000 208
Myelophilus (see Tomicus ( Myelophilus)}. Myllocerus acaciz.. _ 10
brunneus. - 207
carinirostri: 212
discolor variegatus. 212
guttulus --- 207
viridanus cee 212,
Mylabris sp..... - 6,35.
affinis. a 36
atomarius . 5 36
lentis.... 6,36, 165
: ame 36
pallidicorn 36,165
pisorum. 6,36, 165
rufimanus. 6,36, 165
Myzus persice .... 5
Nacerdes melanura.. 213
Nanophyes tamaricis. . 211
Narcissus fly (see Merodon spp.). Natal fruit fly (see Ceratitis rubivora). Necrobia rufipes..........2222.00222002eee eee 5
Needle-nose hopbug (see Calocoris fulvomacu-
latus). Nematus erichsoni 6
(Croesus) septentrionalis..... 13,47, 149,182
Neolecanium plebeium. 102
silveirai. 130
Neomaskellia bergii... 207
Nephopteryx rubrizonella. 168
sagittiferella. . 57
Nephotettix apicalis. - 190,206
Nepticula sericopeza 148
Nesosydne ipomeicola 210

 

Nezara viridula

 

 

Nicertoides saccharivora... 206
Nidularia pulvinata..........2...22-2-2222--- 153
Nigeria fruit fly (see Ceratitis nigerrima). Nirvana pallida.........2..-2222-2002.0000 05 206

suturalis. Nisia atrovenosa..

 
 
  
 
 
  

 

Nitocris usambica . 63
Nodostoma laterali: 207
Nola metallopa. a
Nonagria exitiosa - 208
inferens. - 191, 208
UNIPOTMIS.. 22.2... ee eee eee eee eee 123, 208

 

 

 

 
 
  
     

INDEX. 239
Page. Northern mango weevil (see Sternochetus gra-
vis). peach moth (see Conogethes puneti-
feralis). Nothorhina muricata 73
Notocelia roborana. . 47,121, 154, 192
Nun moth (see Lymantriz monacha). Nut fruit tortrix (see Laspeyresia splendana). tortrix (see Laspeyresia amplana). weevil (see Curculio nucum). Nymphula depunctalis . . 191
ee 191
Nysius minor .. -- 215
vinitor . 109,125, 130, 166,179

Oak bud moth (see Coleophora Tutipennetla). flea beetle (see Haltica quercctorum). procession moth (see Cnethocampa pro-
cessiona). seales (see Asterolecanium variolosum). Oat gall midge (see Mayctiola avenz). Oberea linearis .. - 12,96, 133, 134, 220

   
  

 

   
  

 

  
  

 

  

 

 

 

  

  

 

 

   
  

oculata - 222
Oblong leaf weevil (see Phyllobius oblongus
Ochsenheimeria taurella.........--.--222-2205 123
Ocinara dilectula.. 103

lew ini 99
signifera 103
Ocneria detrita.. 154
Ocnerostoma piniariclla . 76
Ocrophara montana 33
Odonaspis [see Aspidiotus (Odonaspis)}. Odonestis australasix - 24,100
plagifera 55
pruni. 112
Gcanthus indicus 205
Ccophora oliviella . . 157
Gdaleus infernalis.. 205
nigrofasciatus 205
Olenecamptus bilobus . 103
Olethreutes cynobatella 113
hereyniana... 79
pruniana.. 7
variegana.. 179
OTE ALAN OT ff zeta erereiate =e oroiai aetna EEE - 0 2 206
Olive fly (see Dacus olex). moth (see Prays oleellus). white fly (see Aleurolobus olivinus). Oi.0d 68) ACCe p=. - = eer a ee 203
Omphisa anastomosalis..... 209
Oncopeltus quadriguttatus . . 90
Onion fly (see Eumerus strigatus). maggot (see Hylemyia antigua). thrips (see Thrips tabaci). Opatrum [see Gonocephatum (Opatrum))}. Ophonus pubescens. - . eect
Ophthalmodes cretacea. - 212
Opisthoscelis conica. 39
fibularis . 99
globosa... 99
maculata 99
mammular 99
maskelli. 99
99
99
od)
99

 

 

 

 

240 INSECT

Page. Opisthoscelis subrotunda.. 99
verrucula 99

Opogonia apicalis . .. 208
aurisquamosa . 208
dimidiatella. 208
fumiceps.. 208
saccharella 208

Opomysa florum.... 126

Orange rust mite (see Eriophyes oleivorus). Orchestes alni - 12,96
decoratus 222

fagi. 40
Serrugineus S 96
populi.... - 181,222

Ps 96
salici. 181

testaceus scutellaris . 12

Oregma lanigera a 207
Orgyia antiqua.. 70, 149, 223
112

64,212

Oria musculosa . 126
Orthezia insignis 59, 212
prelonga. 59
Ortheziola fodiens 63
Orthorrhinus cylindrirostris. 60
kluggi. 131
Orthotomicus erosus 74
laricis 69

longicollis... 74

proximus. 69

suturalis. . Ee 69

Oryctes rhinoceros . 160, 207
Oscinis frit.....- 125

pusilla (see Oscinis frit). Ostoma {see Lophocateres (Ostoma)}. Otiorhynchus (see Brachyrhinus). Oxya annulicornis
intricata.. .

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
   
  

 

 
 
 

Oxycarenus dudgeoni . gossipinus. . 90
hyalinipennis. 90
lztus......... 90
Oxythrips binervis.. 207
Oxythyrea funesta . . 216
Oyster-shell scale (see Lepidosaphes ulmi). Pachnzus azurescens.. . 63
litus.... 63
Pachydissus sericus . 10
Pachymerus chinensis . . 6,36, 37,165
quadrimaculatus. - 6,36, 37,165
Pachyrhina crocata 70
maculata. 44
Pachytus sulcicollis . 215
Pachtylus migratoriodes 205
migratorius .. 26
Pachyzancla phxopteralis 185
Painted apple moth (see T'eia anartoides). Palzococcus FRG 73,147,153
TOS® . 130
Palembus ao 210

Palm weevil (see Rhynchophorus ee
Pamphila dara
Pamphilius flaviventris.. .

 

 

 

 

INDEX. Panolis griseovariegata ...........22++.+22-+-- 71
Papaya fruit fly (see Toxotrypana curvicauda). Papilio demoleus.. 57
60
Paralecanium cocophyll2. . 162
expansum 102
geometricum 35
Paralipsa modesta.... 191
Paraphrus granulosus. 153
Parasa lepida. 64
Paratettiz gracilis . - 205
singularis. a 205
Parlatoria affinis. . 23, 26, 156, 166
blanchardi 162
calianthina.. 23,24,35,59, 156, 166, 169, 192
cinerea... 59
greeni.. 162
myrtus . 219
158, 162
5,158, 162
s 192
5,146, 158
. 23,169
sinensis .. - «659
ziziphus.. - 5,59, 131
Parnara mathias 191, 208
Paropsis picea. . : 10
Parthenothrips (?) kobus: - 207
Pea aphis (see Macrosiphum pisi.). midge (see Contarinia pisi). moths (see Laspeyresia spp.). pod borer (see Etiella zinckenella). weevils [see Mylabris (Bruchus) spp.]. Peach fruit fly (see Dacus persicx). Pear borer (see Agrilus sinwatus). fruit borer (see Nephopteryx rubrizonella). gall midge (see Contarinia pyrivora). leaf blister mite (see Eriophyes pyri). curling midge (see Dasyneura pyri). scale (see Aspidiotus ostrexformis). thrips (see Txniothrips pyri). tingis (see Stephanitis pyri). tree psylla (see Psylla pyricola). Pectinophora gossypiella.........-.-.-+--++++- 88
Pedinus femoralis..........-.-.222-2-+++++++ 43, 216

Pegomya {see Chortophila (Pegomya) spp.). Peltophora pedicillata. Pemphigus bursarius. vesicalis. Pentodon punctatus. Perak pomelo moth (see Nephopteryz ene
ferella). Peridroma sp........20-.00++++ see 6
Periscopus mundulus . Perkinsiella spp... -. amboinensis
bicoloris. .
graminicola. lalokensis. pallidula. papuensis . .

 

 

 

 

  

a a

INSECT INDEX. Page. Perkinsiella rattlei.........22.200..222200000e “206
saccharicida.. - 198, 206
sinensis. . - 206
variegata. - 206
vastatriz. - 206
vitiensis... --- 206
Peronea ferrugana. -- 12,40, 47
Persectania evengi 185
Peruvian cotton-square weevil (see Antho-
nomus vestitus). fruit fly (see Anastrepha peruviana). potato weevil (see T'rypopremnon
latithoraz; Premnotrypes solani). Petrognatha gigas spinosa. 103
PRENOPS CYANEA... 2... cece ee ee cece eee eens 23
Phalera bucephala. 12, 40, 47, 96, 108, 134, 192
combusta (see Anticyra). Phalonia epilinana.........2...2022-222000005 104
Phaonia trimaculata.. - 49
Pharazonotha kirschi. 122
Phenacaspis {see Chinaspis (Phenacaspis)). Phenacoccus aceris - 11,134,222
iceryoides.. 146
mangiferz. eee 46)
pergandei . 170
pice 81
socius. - 121
Phenacoleachia zealandica. . 39
Phenice maculosa. . 206
moesta..... --- 206
Philephedra theobrome..........2.+222+2++2++ 50
Philippine orange moth (see Prays citri). Phissamainterrupta..... 208
Phizobainfumata...... 205
Phieophthorus spinulosus 81

 

rhododactylus . Phleosinus thujz. .
zhobi. pallidicornis. Phicotribus caucasicus . olex . 157
Phiyctznia despecta 210
Serrugalis. 6,44
Pheenicococcus marlatti . 162
Phoracantha recurva. . 97
tricuspis.. 97
Phorbia vicina [see Chortophila (Pegomya)
hyoscyami). Phorodon humuli. . es 5
Phosphuga atrata
Phryneta coca...

conradti

Phthorimza operculelia. Phycita abietelia....
infusella. Phylaitis sp..
Phylan gibbus. Phyllaphis fagi. Phyllobius argentatus. betule ..
maculicornis

55266—17—__16

17,46

 

 

  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 

 

  
   
 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

viridicolli 39
Phyllocnistis citrella. Phyllodecta spp. tibialis. vitelline. vulgatissima 221
Phyllognathus dionysius. 190
Phyllopertha horticola. 109
Phyllophaga clypeali. 193
problematica. . 193
Phyllotoma vagans 13
Phyllotreta spp... a 91
armoraciz . 6,91, 138
- 44,91, 138
cruciferz. . 44,91
nemorum. - 44,91, 137, 189
nigripes . - 44,91, 138
undulata - Ol
vittata.... oe 6
vittula.. -- 44, 126, 187
Phymatodes lividus. testaceu:
Physokermes picex. Physopus sexnotatus . 207
Phytalus smithi... 199
Phytocoris pabulinus . 184
Phytomyza affinis.........--- , 53, 164, 165, 215,

nigricornis (see P. affinis)._
Phytonomus (see Hypera). Phytophaga destructor
Phytoscaphus formosanus . .
Piesarthrius marginellus. .. Asc
Pieris monuste. b 49
Pigmy mangold beetle (see A tomaria linearis). PPaletes nV LOLS tee eee eee a eee = 10
Pine bark beetle (see Xylotrechus quadripes). bud and gall moths (see Evetria spp.). moth (see Gelechia dodecella). gall mite (see Eriophyes pini). geometrid (see Bupalus piniarius). needle midge (see Thecodiplosis brachyn-

 

 

tera). noctuid (see Panolis griseovariegata). procession moths (see Cnethocampa
spp-). shoot moth (see Evetria buoliana). spinner (see Dendrolinus pini). Pineus orientalis 67
67

: 67

strobi... 67

Pink bollworm (see Pectinophora gossypiella). Pinnaspis bambusz....

 
 
   

 

 
 

buti....
longula

rhombica. . - 30
- 53,93, 141, 164, 192
53, 138
Pissodes harcyniz. . 68
notatus 68
picex 68

242

   

    
 
 
 
  
 
  
 

Page. Pissodes pini.. 6S

piniphilus Be 68
Pitchy-legged weevil (see Brachyrhinus

picipes). Pith moths (see Blastodacna spp.). Pityogenes bidentatus. . 69
bistridentatus . » 69

chalcographus..
coniferze
lipperti. pilidens
quadriden. trepanatus . 7
Pityokteines curvidens... 69
spinidens. i
vorontzowi. 79
Pityophthorus exculptus . 81
glabratus . 75
lichtensteini. 75
micrographu 69
sampsoni. 74

Plantia affinis...... 190

Plateros dispallens 212

Platinglisia noacki 35

Platypara peciloptera . 29

Platypus biformis... 75

cupulatus . 218
curtus. 194
cylindrus. . 154
taluree. 194

Plecoptcra reflera 195,

Plemeliclla abietina. 78

Ploceederus obesus. . . 193

ruficornis. 143

Plodia inter punctella. . 6

Plum blister mites (see Eriophycs spp.). borer (see (Rhynchites cupreus). bud moth (see Olethreutes pruniana). fruit sawfly (see Hoplocampa fulvi-
cornis). leaf sawfly (see Priophorus padi). stem piercer (see Magdalis armigera). psylla (see Psylla pruni). sawfly (see Eriocampoides limacina). Plusia argentifera. 216
chalcites... - 210
gamma.... 6, 44, 216
nigrisigna . a 14

Plutella maculipennis. 6,49

Podisma alpina..... 1

Podontia 14-punctata. 103

Pecilonota rutilans (see Lampra). variolosa
Pogonochzxrus fasciculatus. Poliaspis cycadis
pini..

Pollinia pollini
Polychrosis botrana. Polydrusus cervinus. cherodrysius
chrysomela...
griseomaculatus . .
intermedius . lateralis . micans

mollis. INSECT INDEX. Polydrusus picus. .
planifrons. Sericeus . .
undatus....
villosulus
viridicollis. Polygraphus aterrimus . grandiclava . . 75
himalayensis 75
longifolia. 75
major. 52, 69
nigra. 75
pini.. 69
polygraphus . . 69
subopacus 70
trenchi 75
Polyocha saccharella . - 204
Polyphylla fullo -- 10,39, 46, 73
Pontania salicis . - ~ 223
Pontia rapx 6
Poplar borers (see Saperda spp.). curculio (see Cryptorhynchus lapathi). Porricondyla cereatis....2.....ss00ss0ss05smee 124
GOS8Y pli... 222.2222 ee eee ee ee eee 89
Porter’s white fly (see Aleurothrizus porteri). Porthesia similis . - 40, 47, 108,
141, 148, 149, 154, 181, 223
virguncila..........---sssseae 91
Porthetria dispar 6, 12, 40, 47,

 

137, 141, 148, 154, 181, 223
Potato lady-bird beetle (see Epilachna spp.). root mite (see Rhizogly phus echinopus). Praonetha melanura.......-..-.--22+++2+020+ 50, 63
Prays citri 57

curtiscllus . 27

oleellus . . 155
Premnotrypes solani . 184
Prionus corpulentus . -- 153
Priophorus padi 47, 133, 149, 170, 127, 179
Prociphilus bumeliz. -- 26,78
Procodeca adara ... - 208
Prodenia litura.... - 14, 91,191, 216, 217
Promecotheca cuming: 160

 

reichei... - 160

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
  

 

 

Prosternon holosericeus. 153

Protodiaspis anomala.. 9

Psalis securis a 208

Psallidium marxillosum 44

Psammecus trimaculatus . 5 33
Pseudaonidia {see Aspidiotus (Pscudaonidia)}. Pseudischnas pis [see A spidiotus ( Pseudischnas-

pis). Pseudoclavellaria amerine.. . 182, 223

Pseudococcus acaciz. 9

albizzize 10

ananassx 171

5 121

aurilanatus 25

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

boninsus . brevipes. bromeliz. calceolariz. 206
citri.. 59
cocotis . 163
coffe 63
dubia... 163

 

INSECT INDEX. Page. Pseudococcus farnesiane 3 10
fieus....-. - 102
filamentosus 10, 59, 130
glaucus... 23,158
grandis... 131
grassi... 34
glaucus . 158
indicus... 2 35
laurinus 2 35
lobulatus 99
nitidus .. 10
pandani 163
73
10
206
saccharifolii. 206
setosus... 102
solitarius..... S 10
subterraneus . 10
swezcyi. terensis . viburni. virgatus . vitis....
VOvE....

Pseudocolas pis indica . Pseudokermes nitens

Pseudoparlatoria ostriata

parlatorioides .. .

Pseudotargionia glandulosa...

Psiloptera fastuosa..

viridans

Psyche spp.....

albipes..

assamica. .

viciella

Psylla alni. cistellata . pyricola. pyrisuga ..
Psylliodes attenuata. chrysocephala . .
napi...
Pteleobius kraatzi . vittatus oe 96
Ptcrochlorus exsiccator 39, 152
Pteronidea salicis . - 223
ribesii. s 6
Pterostichus lepidus . 81
vulgaris 196
Ptilinus fuscus... --- 181,222
pectinicornis . 12, 39, 137, 148, 153, 222
Ptyelus costalis... -.- 190, 206
Pulvinaria auranti 59

 

betule.... 39,45, 132, 134, 137, 179, 181, 222

  
  
 
    
 
 

 

alni Ba 11
camelicola . 63
cellulosa 59
cupanix. ceric! 63, 102, 131, 146
floccifera..........22--222-- 2220s 158
iceryi.. 206
jacksoni --- 102
mammex - 30, 63, 102, 146

 

Pulvinaria plana...

 

  
 

 

sericea...
simulans . . 30
thez... 212
vinifera. 130
Purple scale of the orange (see Lepidosaphes
beckii). Purpuriscenus wachanrui. 181
Puto antennata 73

 

Pyralid of the vine (see Polychrosis botrana). Pyrausta nubilalis . . --- 35, 123, 135, 137

 

 

 

  

Pyrilla aberrans.. .. 206
Pyroderces simplex 88
Pyrrhidium sanguineum 153
Pyrrhocoris apterus . 141

Queensland fruit fly (see Batrocera tryoni). Quince borer (see Cossus tristis). Racilia okinawensis................++-+--- 190, 205
Radish fly (see Anthomyia radicum). Rape flea-beetle (see Psylliodes spp). seed worm (see Evergestis extimalis). Rarotonga fruit fly (see Dacus rarotongz). Red-banded thrips (see Heliothrips rubro-
cinctus). coffee borer (see Zeuzera coffex). gooseberry mite (see Bryobia ribis). gum-tree weevil (see Strongylorhinus och-
raceus). -headed fir worm (see Enarmonia rufimi-
trana). -legged ham beetle (see Necrobia rufipes). maggot of cotton (see Porricondyla gos-
sypii). :
palm weevil (see Rhynchophorus ferru-
gineus). plum maggot (see Laspeyresia func-
brana). spider (see Tetranychus spp.). tail moth (see Dasychira pudibunda). Remigia frugalis . . 208

Rescliclla piccz... ae 81

Rhabdoenemis obscurus. . 34, 163, 201

Rhabdophaga spp. . . --- 222

nielsoni --. 222

saliciperda - 182, 222

salicis 222

Rhadinoscopus nociturnus. . 64

Rhagiwm mordaz.... 46

Rhagoletis pardalina 93

Rhigopsidius tucumanus.. . . --- 183

Rhinaria perdix -- 47,197
Rhinoceros beetle (see Oryctes rhinoceros). Rhinomacer attelaboides . 73

Rhinotia hemoptera. 10

Rhizococcus intermediu 39

lobatulatus. .. 10

pulchellus . . 39

totare. 39

Rhizecus eloti. a 63

falcifer . 130, 163, 192

(2) terrestri: 163

Rhizoglyphus ( Cocpophagus) echinopus......- 5,

Rhizoperiha\cotlaris. ...-.........seseanaeee es
dominica. Rhizotrogus zquinoctialis . 244 INSECT
Page. Rhopalopus insubricus . 148
Rhynchites alni...- ca 39
betule 12,39, 46
corruleu. B 173
cupreus . .

 

 

Rhyncolus ater 68

Rhyncolus cylindricus 68
elongatus. 68
himalayensi

lignyaritus. ...
porcatus.....
strangulatus
truncorum...
Rhynchophorus ferrugineus..
palmarum. .

signaticollis

  

(see Rhyncho-

phorus ferrugineus). Ricawia teniata..--_....- laese- ---elee- ~~~ 206
Rice bug (see Lepocorisa varicornis). flea-heetle (see Chetocnema basalis). leaf-beetle (see Hispa xnescens). hopper (see Tettigoniella spectra). skipper (see Parnara mathias). stem borer (see Chilo auricilia; Schoeno-
bius bipunctifer). Riora MuUsz.....-....- 222222222 eee eee eee eee 34, 118
Ripersia fagi 39
palmarum 163
sacchari. 206
Riptortus fuscus . 207
Rose sawfly (see Caliroaacthiops; Cladius pecti-
nicornis). scale (see Leucaspis japonica). Rosenbergia megacephala.........----+---+-+- 103
Rosy rustie (see Hydracia micxa). Rust-red flour beetle (see Tribolium ferrugi-
neum). Rutherglen bug (see NVysius vinitor). Rye midge (see Lasioptera cerealis). stem borer (see Ochsenheimeria taurella). Sacadodes pyralis....-...-...------++-------+ 91
Sago palm scale (see Diaspis zamix). Sahlbergella singularis. 50
Saissetia discoides ....- 131
mirifica.. 10
nigra. olex . psidii

punctilifera .. oo
San José scale (see Aspidiotes perniciosus). Saperda spp

carcharias

populnea. scalaris...
Sawfly (see Macrophya punctum-album). Saw-toothed grain beetle (see Silvanus surina-

jmensis). Scale insects (see Coccidee). 7
Scapteriscus didactylus ... 49
Scelodnota strigicollis . . 128
Schistoceros anobioides. - 1983
Schizaspis lobata.. 102
Schizodactylus monstrosus . 89,90, 215
Schanobdius bipunctifer . . 189
Sciopteron regale.... - 12
tabaniformi 181
Scirpophaga auriflua.. 208
chysorrh@a .....---.--2++-++2--+- 208

 

 

 

  
 
  
 
 
   
  

 

INDEX. Page. Scirpophaga intacta ............. Jesse 208
monostigma . 208
Scolytochelus ensifer 96
Scolytochelus kirschi 96
multistriatus 27
Scolytoplatypus darjeeling: . 4
himalayensis . 79
Scolytus accris ..W...-.---- 148
amygdali.. 25, 167
assimilis 174
-- 137
52

intricatus..

lxvis.. 96
major . 3 52
mali.... - 24.54, 96, 149, 179

 

 

 

 

 
 
  

e 52
multistriatus - 96
pruni. 24,170,174,
PYGMEUS. 5 96
ratzeburgi . 46
rugulosus . 6,46, 149
scolytus ... 27,96
Scopelosoma satellitia 40
Scotinophora tarsalis... 207

 

Seed-corn maggot [see Chortophila (Pegomya)
fusciceps). Selatosomus zxneus...
Selidosema excursaria
lyciaria. Semiothisa liturata...
Serenthia formosana
Serica assamensis . .
Serropalpus barbatus. Sesamia cretica
nonagrioides. Sesia conopiformis . culicifor mis. formiczform
myopeformis. scolizefor mis
spheciformis. vespiformis. Setenis indosinica. .

 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

semiopaca
semivalga...
Shallot fly (see Chortophila cilicrura). She-oak root-borer (see Stigmodera heros). Shot-hole borer of tea (see Xyleborus fornica-
tus). Siamese grain beetle [see Lophocateres (Osto-
ma) pusillus). Silky oak weevil borer (see Zsiotes notabilis). Silpha obscura... 43
Silvanus advena.. 212
suriname’ 5
Sinozylon anale.. 33, 148, 193, 218
crassum . . 148, 193, 218
perforans... 96, 127, 138, 153
sexdentatum -- 127
sudanicum 100
Siphonella pumilionis. 85
Sirex gigas 70
imperialis 82
juvencus . spectrum. Sitodrepa panicea

 

 

 

INSECT
Sitona spp
flavescens . - 6,38, 60, 165

    

 

 

 

 

 
 
  

 

 
 

 

 

 

   
  
 
   

 

 

 

 

  

 

hispidula. -- 6, 60, 165
lineata... . 38, 60, 165
linneellus aoe 60
meliloti... 61
sulcifrons . . - 61
Sitotroga cercalella..... 2.2... 2.2.0.2 0 22 eee eee 6
Smaller bamboo shot-hole borer (see Dino-
derus minutus). Smynthurus sp... ....--.-02--0e0e ee ee eee eee “14
Social pear sawfly (see Pamphilius flaviven-
tris). Solenococcus fagi.... Bere 39°
murate - 130,219
South Sea guava fruit fly (see Dacus psidii). Soy bean moth (see Laspeyresia glycinivorella). Spermophagus pectoralis . . 36
Sphzrococeus acaciz ... ; 10
Sphezrotrypes assamensis . - 198
globulus... - 193
siwalikens. peed
Sphenophorus sordidus (see Cosmopolites). Sphenoptera aterrima....-.....+----.2---++-++ 52
gossypii 90
lafertei. 52
neglecta ae 90
Spilosoma fuscinula...............cseceee- vee 99
Spinach aphis ( Myzus persicz). leaf miner (see Pegomya hyoscyami). Spined log beetle (see Xenocnema spinipes
australix). Spiny citrus white fly (see Alcurocanthus,
woglumi). Spodoptera mauritia. 8,191, 210, 216
pecten. 208
Spruce bark tortricid (see Laspeyresia pac-
tolana). borer (see T'etropinum castancum). cone moth (see Laspeyresia strobilella). gall midge (see Dasyneura piccx). nest worm (see Las peyresia tedella). wood wasp (see Sirex spectrum). Stauropus altcrnus ...........-+++000+ 51,64, 146, 212
Steganoptycha (see Enarmonia rufimitrana). Steirastoma depresswm......--.++- 02022220022 50
Stenobothurus formosanus. 205
Stenocranus saccharivora 198
sacchari... 206
Stenothrips (?) zehntneri. -- 207
Stephanitis pyri 167, 168
Sternochctus gravis .... 143,144
mangifere - 144,145
Sternotomis boheman - 10
imperialis 63
regalis.. 63
Stigmodera heros 7
Stilpnotia salicis. . 181,223
Stomaphis longirostris. 152
quercus.. 152
Straw fly (see Chlorops txniopus). . Strawberry root weevil (see Brachyrhinus
ovatus). Stromatium barbatum . -- 33,212
longicorne we. 212

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
  

 

  

 

 

 

 

INDEX. 245
Page. Strongylocephalus agrestis . . 206
Strongylorhinus ochraceus . 98
Strongylurus thoracicus aon 52
Strophosoma capitata. . - 39,46
melanogramma - 39,46
Suana concolor.......... 30, 132,194
Subcoccinella 24-punctat 14,43
Sucking bug (see Ceratopachys variabilis). Sugar-cane ambrosia beetle (Xyleborus per-
forans). borer (see Metamasius scriceus). moths (see Diatraxa spp.). bud moth (see Erewnctis flavistriata). frog hopper (see Tomaspis spp.). hispid miner (see Hispid wakkeri). leafhopper (see Perkinsiella sac-
charicida). mealy bug (see Pseudococcus
terensis). moth borer of India (see Chilo
simplex). red spider (see Tetranychus exsic-
cator). Swete-potato stem borer (see Omphisa anas-
tomosalis). weevil (see Cylas formicarius). Swan moth (see Porthesia similis). Sylepta derogata..... -- 91,155
Symphyletes neglectus 10
nigrovirens .. 10
vestigialis.. sy 10
Syngenaspis parlatorex. . 81
Tachardia acacix 10
fici... 103
lacca... 103
Teeniotes scalaris 101
Teniothrips pyr 5
Takahashia citricola 59
japonica. . 59
Tanymecus rusticus.... 207
Taphrorychus bicolor . 40,170
villifrons......2.2..22-20 2-020 ee eee 40
Tapinostola musculosa (see Oria). Tarache catend.............222-2 222222022020 91
Targionia (see Aspidiotus (Targionia)}. Tarnished plant bug (see Lygus pratensis). Tea bag worms (see Psyche spp.). Tara contraria. Beers Ge (U1)
Teia anartoides.. 10, 24, 113,49 9
Teledapus dorcadioides . . . --- 52,87
Telicota augias 20

 

Tenebrioides mauritanicus.......-...-------+-
Tephrites [see Dacus ( Tephrites)}. ERGR77LES) (24S LRCAS = ayo = = -ole ete
Termissa nivosa...
Termites (sce Termitide)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Termitide..... - _ 7
Tetigonia albida. 206
Serruginea. --- 206

viridis. - 190,206
Letrancura pallida 95
95

Tetranychus bimaculatus . 197
bioculatus... 212

81 COLO) eee ee eee 197

246

Page. |

    
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

Tetranychus telarius. 43,
Tetropium castaneum. 85,68
79

oreinum. .. 52

Tettigoniella spectra. 190

Tettiz formosanus. 205

Thalaina clara.... 10

Thamnonoma wauaria 120

Thecodiplosis brachyntera 72

Thliptoceras octoguttata.. 64

Three-striped fruit fly (see Dacus diversus). Thrips (sec Thysanoptera.) Thrips Minuld.........-2..222222222 22 eee ee 207
sacchari. 207
serrata. 207
tabaci 5

 

 

  
 
 
 
 

 

 

Thysanoptera . . 7
Timber beetle (see Nacerdes melanura). Tinea granella....
Tipula oleracea . 44
paludosa.. 44
Tischeria complanelia . . 54,154
simploniella. 5 154
Tobacco stem borer (see Gnorimoschema heli-
opa). white flics (see Aleyrodes spp.). Tomaspis lepidior.. . - 85,197, 198
postica... - 85,197, 198
BND. - reie oo en oo 85, 197, 198

Tomato weevil (see Desiantha nociva)
Tomicus ( Myelophilus) minor. .

piniperda. Tonga fruit fly (see Dacus tongensis). Tortriz ashworthana. 22
divulsana . 14
histrionana 82
murinana. 79
piceana... 70

 

 

viridana. Toxotrypana curvicauda. 163
Trabala vishnu . 194
Trachea brasilinea. . 126
Tragocephala senatoria 50
Trialeurodes vaporariorum . . 213
Tribolium castaneum... 33

confusum.. 5,33

Serrugineum 6
Trichetra marginalis.. 100
Trichiocampus viminalis 182

 

Trichiosoma lucorum..
Trichocera hiemalis. Tridactylus flavomaculatus 205
Trigonidium haani 205
Trilophidia annulata.... 205
Trinophylum cribratum . . 52
Triphena pronuba . 216,218
Trochilium spp... oe 180
amnatixforme 180
apiformis... 180
Tropidocephala brunneipennis 206
Sormosana 206
saccharivorella.. 206

Tryphocharia masters. 98

 

INSECT INDEX. Page. Trypophleus alni 12

Trypopremnon latithorar 184

Tryzalis nasuta -- 205

Turnip flower bectle (see Meiigethes zneus). sawfly (see A thalia spinarum). Twig cutter (see Rhynchites ceruleus). Uracanthus acutus.. - 24, 166, 179
bivittata. ae 10
cryptophagus.. 59
simulans... 10
strigosus... 10
triangularis. 10

Vesperus spp 127

luridis........ Bs © 1%
mauretanicus 127, 157
strepens... 27,192
ratarti...... eed
Viburnum scale (see Chrysomphalus persex). Victoria bean beetle fly (see Zizera labradus). white ant (see Termes australis). Vine flea-bectle (see Haltica ampelophaga). Vinsonia stellifera... 103, 146
Virachola insocrates. 112, 132, 142, 180
YiviG.. 2.5050. 00 occ 163, 180
Watercress caddis worm (see Limnophilus
flavicornis). Weevils................2002:- 01 ae 8
West Indian cane fly (see Stenocranus sac-

charivora). sugar-cane borer (see Metama-
sius hemipterus). sugar-cane root borer (see Dia-
prepes abbreviatus). sweet-potato weevil (see Eusce-
pes batatz). Wheat bulb fly (see Hylemyia coarctaia). moth (see Tinea granella). plant louse (see A phis avenz). stem borer (see Nonagria uniformis). White ant (see Coptotermes gestroi). Willow curculio (see Cryptorhynchus lapathi). gall midge (see Rhabdophaga spp.). leaf beetles (see Crepidodera aurata;

Phyllodecta spp.). Winter moth (see Cheimatobia brumata). turnip gnat (see T’richocera hiemalis). Xenocnema spinipes australiz

Xeris spectrum

Xestobium plumbeum..

  
   
  

5 12,

 

   
 

 

 

 

 

  
 

rufovillosum. x
39, 53, 137, 138, 148, 153, 171
Niphidium varipenne... -. 190
Xiphydrya camelus... -- 13,40
prolongata. 47
Xoanodera regularis 103
Xyleborus andrewesi - 198
bengalensis.... -- 198
62
cryptophagus. .. 181
dryographus . 40,95, 154
eurygraphus . 75
fallax. 193
fornicatus. 211
improbus 154
major. 193

 

PLANT

Page. Xyleborus monographus... . 40,96, 154

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
  

 

  
  
 
 

 

morstatti. 64

perforans. 193, 202

schlichii. . 193
Xylechinus pilosus. 70
Xylina ornithopus -. 1%
socia.. . 96,141,176
Xylococeus filife Tai
Xylonites retusus. 96
Xyloterus domesticus. .....0.....seeeeeeee eee 12,
40, 46, 137, 141, 148, 149, 154

intermedius... 79

lineatus.. aes 70

signatus.. 40, 46, 141, 148, 154
Xylotrechus gahani... .- 103
javanicus. 63

quadripe. 63, 64

rusticus 181

-. 193, 212

 

  

 

 
   
  

 

  
 
 
 

 

 

 

PLANT INDEX. Page. Aberia caffra (Keiapple)............-.-.-. 115, 140,
Abiesspp.(fir). 26, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69,70, 77-79, 103, 196
balsamea (balsam fir)............--. 69, 70,78

excelsa (see Picea excelsa). 79

78

79

nordmanniana 67
pectinata (silver fir) 67, 69, 70, 77, 78, 79
webbiana.. - 68,70, 79
Acacia spp..... GV), 20, 22, 27, 113
arabica (gum arabic).. 9,10
armata (kangaroo thorn)... 9

 

calamifolia (broom wattle). catechu

 

cyanophylla (blue-leaved wattle 9
dealbata (silver wattle). 10
decurrens (green wattle) 10,97
discolor 9,10

farnesiana (huisache)

 

 

 

 

 

 

greggii (Texas mimosa)... 10
horrida. . 10
juniperina. 10
koa (koa)... 10
linearis 9
linifolia 5 9
longifolia (Sydney golden wattle)... .. 9,10
lophanta (see A lbizzia). melanozylon (blaekwood aeaeia).....- 9
Microbotrya

 
 

modesta....
mollissima (black wattle). pendula (weeping myall). pulchella eee
pycnantha (golden wattle)
robusta 3
ISUQUEOLENG weaene ss -22------------2-2~-

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INDEX. 247
e Page. Xylotrechus stebbingi.... 153
Xylotrupes dichotomus 207
-. 207

Yellow box borers (see Phoracantha spp.). Zabrus gibbus 126
Zamacra albofasciaria. 150
Zaratha cramerella = 50
Zeuzera coffer... 30, 51, 55, 62, 91, 142, 212
eucalypti 10
PYTING....... 22022-20222 e eee 6, 12, 27, 40, 46,
48, 96, 138, 141, 148, 149, 154, 181, 223
37, 165
7 184
14-punctata.. -. 184
Zophodia convolutella... - 120,121
Zygina circumscripta = «R20
maculifrons . .. 190, 206
subrufa - 190, 206
Page. Acalypha marginata. 62
Acer spp. (maple). . 5 kt,
65, 105, 107, 108, 138, 147, 148, 150, 221
campestre. 147
negundo (box elder) . 147
platanoides (Norway maple) 147
pseudoplatanus (syeamore maple) 147

Achras [see Siderorylon (Achras)}. Acronychia levis (eheesewood)....--........- 114

Zsculus spp. (horse-chestnut). .. . 6,12, 126, 137, 138

 

 

  

 

 

  
   

 

 

 

hippocastanum (horse-ehestnut ) 138
pavia (red buekeye) . 138

Agathis australis (kauri).............2..----- 195

Ak (see Calotropis sp.). . Albizzia sp. 211
lophanta (Acacia) 9

Alder (see Alnus spp. )-

Alfalfa (see Medicago sativa). Algaroba (see Prosopis spp.). Alligator pear (see Persea gratissima). Allium ascalonicum (shalot)... .- 157,158
cepa (onions) 28, 157, 158
porrum (leek). 28,157
roseum...... - 158
sativum (garliey. . 28, 157, 158
Sphzrocephalum 158

Almond (see Amygdalis communis). Mexiean (see Terminalia catappa). Tropical (see Terminalia spp.). Alnus spp. (alder)... -- 11-13

   
   
  
 
    

 

65, 107,
glutinosa (blaek alder) -...........-.--
incana...
nepalensis
rubra. .
viridis (European green alder). Aloe spp
Amarantus sp
Amelanchier spp. (service berry
Amygdalus spp. (peach)...

 

a 42
20, 65, 184
6, 167

248

e Page. Amygdalus communis (almond)......... 56,166,167
persica (peach)..-......- 85, 92,109, 113,

114, 115, 117, 129, 166, 167, 177,179, 214

persica nucipersica (nectarine)... 92,114

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

    

 

 

Anacardium occidentale (cashew, wild guava). 109
Ananas sativus (pineapple) . - 118, 171, 204
Angelica sp.........-....-- . 52
Annona spp. (custard apple) -- 85,93, 94
cherimola (cherimoya) . -- 93, 94,114
humboldtiana...... ee. - 045113)
muricata (soursop) . - 62, 93, 94,115
reticulata (custard apple 93
squamosa (sugar apple)... 94
Anthocephalus cadamba.... 62
Apium graveolcns (celery) - 52, 53, 215
Apple (see Mulus malus). black (see Siderorylon [Achras] aus-
trale). custard (see Annona squamosa). Kei (see Aberia caffra). Malay (see Eugenia malaccensis). mamunee (see Mammea americana). mountain (see Eugenia malaccensis). rose (see Eugenia jambos). star (see Chrysophyllum cainito). Apricot (see Prunus armeniaca). Araucaria spp-- 25
bidwillii “- 25
execlsa (Norfolk Island pine) ...... 25
Arborvitae (see Thuya spp.) PA CPHL SP: o~ --ccceie = o- - meee oe = = ae 52
Areca catechu (betel nut)...

 

Areca lutescens
Artemisia spp
vulgaris (mugwort)
Artocarpus integrifolia (jack fruit) . Arundinaria spp. (bamboo)...

 
 
  
 

 

 

  

hindsii gramine 33
Japonica 33
Arundo sp. (reed)... - 123
Ash (see Frarinus spp.). mountain (see Sorbus spp.). white (Schizomeria ovata). Asparagus (see Asparagus officinalis). Asparagus acutifolius.......0.--- 20-0 ee eeeee 29
officinalis (asparag' 5, 6, 27-29, 129, 157
wmbellatus......----.++-+ 222 eee eee 29

Aspen (see Populus tremula). Aster spp... - 20

    

 

 

 

 

  

 

41
“ 61
hortensis (orache)..+ - 41,42, 158
patula ae (Se:
Atropa belladonna (belladonna). . - 115
Avena sativa (oats).-..-..----- 122, 124, 125, 126, 155
Averrhoa carambola (carambola). 115
Avocado (see Persea gratissima). Bahama grass (see Cynodon dactylon). Balsam fir (see A bics balsamea). Bamboo (see also Arundinaria, Bambusa,
* Cephalostachyum, Dendrocalamus, Melocan-
na, Phyllostachys). - 31-33, 143
Bambusa spp. (bamboo). 31,32, 33
distorta --- 88
Jortunei. 32
oliveriana . 33
tesscllata.. 32

 

 

PLANT INDEX. Page. Bambusa tulda.. - 33
virid . 33
viridi-striata. 33

vulgaris (feathery bamboo) 33

 

Banana (see Musa sapientium). Banyan (see Ficus benghalensis). Barbary fig (see Opuntia vulgaris). Barley (see Hordeum sativum). Basswood (see Tilia spp.). Bauhinia racemosa (mountain ebony)........ 149
‘WETiegdla... 2.00... ..0 02-0 211

Bay (see Laurus spp.). Beans (see also Phaseolus, Vicia, Glycine). . 5,

6, 35-38, 60, 61, 64, 93, 129, 165,184
Bean, broad (see Vicia jaba). castor (see Ricinus spp.). French... -. 202... . 02: ssa 38
haricot (see Phaseolus vulgaris). jack (see Canavalia spp.). kidney (see Phaseolus vulgaris). lima (see Phaseolus lunatus). Madagasear......-......2.-2.222-00-0 37
senna (see Cassia spp.). soy (see Glycine hispida). string (see Phaseolus vulgaris). Beech (see Fagus spp.). Beet (see Beta vulgaris). sugar (see Beta vulgaris crassa). Berseem (see Trifolium alcrandrinum). Beta vulgaris (bect).. 5,6, 41-44, 129, 187, 197,214, 219

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

  
   
 
 

 

 

  

 

(inangel-wurzel) 41,42
(mangolds). 41,42
crassa (sugar beets)...... 41,42, 43,197
cicla (Swiss chard)...........-. 42
Betel nut (see Areca catechu). Betula spp. (birch)... 2.2.0.2. .....2eseeeee eee 6, 45-
47, 107, 108, 138, 150, 151, 152, 177, 221
45, 46
45, 46
papyrifera... 45
pubescens... 45
veTTUCOSA. . 45
Bireh (see Betula spp.). Black apple (see Siderorylon [A chras) australe). sorrel (see Rubus spp.). Blackthorn. 105, 107, 111
Bombar malabaricum (silk eotton) -. 194
15
Box (see Burus spp.). Bramble... W777
Brassica spp. 45-50, 187
arvensis (charlock). we 92
campestris (rutabaga) -. 193, 218
napus (rape)....---. 49, 91, 135, 187, 188, 218
oleracea acephala (collard) 48
(Kale) ~ 48, 140, 197
botrytis (cauliflower) -- 6,48, 52
capitata (eabbage)....---.-. 5,6,

 

48, 49, 50, 61,64, 91, 184,
187, 188, 214, 218, 219
caulo-rapa (kohl-rabi)....... 140
rapa (turnip).......-...-.-- 6, 197, 218, 219
Brazil cherry (see Eugenia brazilicnsis). Bromelincess........ 2) 22ne =e
Broom eorn (Holcus sorghum). Brussels sprouts (see Brassica oleracca). PLANT INDEX. Bryobia dioica (bryony)............200020202e 92
Buckeye (see Aesculus spp.). Buekthorn (see Rhamnus spp.). Bull-oak (see Casuarina spp.). Buneh cherry . 108
Bushes........- 110
Butternut (see Juglans cinerea). Buttonwood (see Platanus spp.). Butyrospermum parkii..... 2.200.020.2202 eens 116
BEPEMUEISTIDA(DOX). -.-. 0.20 ccccc nce eee wine ecg 5, 48
Cabbage (see Brassicae oleracea capitata). Cabuyao (see Eugenia malaccensis). Cacao (see Theobroma cacao). Cajanus indicus (pigeon pea, tur) .. 36, 37
Calamagrotis lanceolata. 124
Calamus spp. (rattan) .. 188
Calophyllum inophyllum (round kamani).... 115

 

IGEUMRO DIE SP... .------ 2-22 eencwccccescecce 117
Camellia thea (sec Thea sinensis). Canavalia spp. (Jack bean). . 37
indica 85
SRT Eerie) ~ «~~ clalflaj= cian) «\ncie- oinjeio oo = 131

sugar (see Saccharum officinale). Cannabis sativa (hemp). .
Canteloupe (see Cucumis melo). Caoutehoue (see also rubber)..-....------.-- 50
Cape weed ....-.....- 215
Capparis pedunculosus. . 5
roxburghi... 56
Capsicum sp. (pepper, . 115
Carica papaya (papaya, pawpaw)... 85, 115, 163, 201
quercifolia. - 15, 163
Carissa arduina (Natal plum) 115
diffusa. . 211
Carpinus betulu: 106, 107, 108, 137_|
Carrots (see Daucus carota). Carum petroselinum (parsley, 164
Caryota urens (wine palm)... 201
Cashew (see Anacardium occidentale). Cassava (see Manihot utilissima). Cassia spp. (senna bean). - 835
auriculata....... - il
Castanea spp. (chestnut) .. 8, 53, 54, Ms
vesca.. es

vulgaris . Castilloa elastica (Panama rubber)........... 163
Castor bean (see Ricinus spp.). Casuarina spp. (She-oak).... 97
Catalpa (see Catalpa spp.). Catalpa spp. (Catalpa)..................2-2 0s 5,51. Cauliflower (see Brassica oleracea botrytis). Cayenne cherry (see Eugenia uniflora). Ceara rubber (see Manihot glaziovii). Cedar (see Cedrus spp., Chamaecyparis spp.). red (see Juniperus spp.). white (see Cedrus spp.). Cedrela toona. 218
Cedrus spp. 52
52
CD 52
Ceiba spp. (silk eotton).. 50
bombazi (kapok)... 194

 

Celery (see Apium graveolens). Cephalostachyum pergracile (bamboo) ........ 31, 33

 

 

249

Cestrum sp. (Chinese inkberry)..........-...
nocturnum (night-blooming jessa-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

56
Chamezcy paris spp. (cedar). 94
nutkaensis . 94
obtusa... 94
pisifera.. 94
Chard (see Beta vulgaris cicla). Swiss (see Beta vulgaris cicla). Charloek (see Brassica arvensis). Cheesew ood (see Acronychia laevis). Chenopodiaces............-.-- i 42
Chenopodium spp. (goosefoot). . - 41,42
Cherimoya (see Annona cherimola). Cherry (see Prunus spp.) Jerusalem (see Solanum capsicastrum). sour (se@ Prunus cerasus). Surinam (see Eugenia uniflora). Chestnut (see Castanea spp.) Chicory (see Cichorium intybus). China berry (see Melia azedarach). Chinese inkberry (see Cestrum sp.) orange (see Citrus japonica). plum (see Noronhia emarginata). Chocolate ((see Theobroma spp.). Chrysanthemum spp......-+.-.-++-++-+--2- ++ 215
Chrysobalanus spp. - 116
ellipticus. . 115, 116, 189
icaco (Coeoa plum, jieaeo)..... 109,
115, 139
Chrysophyllum cainito (Star apple). 115
Cichorium intybus (chieory).. ‘ 54
Cinchona spp. (quinine) 55, 62, 211
Cinchona ledgeriana. - 55,62
Cineraria spp....- 215
Citrullus citrullus (watermelon). . 220

Citrus spp-.-..+.+.- 5, 55-60, 97, 114, 117, 162, 191, 212
aurantium or sinensis (orange).....-.. 5,15,
55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 85,
97, 113,114, 115, 117, 200
decumana (see Citrus grandis). grandis (grapefruit)... - 55,60, 115

 

 

 

  
  
 

(pomelo) 57

(shaddoek)...- meeee Li 7pltls)
japonica (kumquat). - 55,60, 115
aurantifolia (lime). , 59, 60, 114, 117, 200
limonia (lemon). ), 60, 115, 117
medica acida... 5
nobilis deliciosa nner orange). (tangerine)
trifoliata (see Poncirus). Clover (see Trifolium spp.). Egyptian (see T'rifolium alexandrinum). “Cobnut (see Corylus spp.). 108

Coccoloba uvifera (sea-grape) . 109
Coeoa plum (see Chrysobalanus icaco). Coconut palm (see Cocos nucifera). Cocos nucifera (coconut palm)............ 5, 61, 109,

159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 201, 202

Coffea sp....-2+-2-2+-5+ “50, 56 b1-G4, 113, 116, 211

arabica (Arabian coffee)..... 61, 62, 63,64, 115

liberica (Liberian coffee).......- 61, 62, 63, 109

250

Page. 62
64

Coffea robusta. stenophylla. Coffee (see Coffea spp. )-

Cola (see Sterculia acuminata). Collard (see Brassica oleracea acephala). Conilorsieeereens: << seer mercies 6, 64-84, 170, 210

 

 

    

 

 

 

   

 

Convallaria majalis (Lily-of-the-Valley) 28
Conyza squarrosa... 123
Corn (see Zea mays). broom (see Holcus sorghum). Guinea (see Holcus sorghum). Indian (see Zea mays). Kafir (see Holcus sorghum). Cornus spp. (dogwoods) 95
sanguinea 95
sericea 208g 95

Corylus spp. (filberts) 108, 133

(hazelnut). 38, 107, 108, 133-135, 151,175

 

 

 

avellana .. - 45, 133, 134

- colurna... 134
tubulosa. . 133

Cosmos spp 215

 

Cowpea (see Vigna unguiculata). Cotton (see Gossypium spp.). silk (see Bombaz malabaricum). (see Ceiba spp.). Cottonwood (see Populus spp.). Cratzgus spp. (see Mespilus spp.). Crotalaria spp. Crucifers........
Cucumber (see Cucumis sativus). Cucumis spp. (melons)
(sweet melons). melo (canteloupe, muskmelon. 51, 150
Sativus (cucumber) .........-... 42,92, 114
(gherkins) . Cucurbita spp. (gourds)...
maxima (squash). pepo (pumpkin)...
ovifera (Marrow)

   
 
  
 

 

 

 

  
 
    

Cucurbitacex
Cupressus spp. (cypress 94
funebris...-.. 94

lambertiana. .
macrocarpa (Monterey cypress)... 91
pyramidalis . .
sempervirens . Currant (see Ribes spp.). Custard apple (see Annona spp.). Cycas revoluta (sago palm)
Cydonia japonica sss. -2 sees 186
oblonga (quince).... 17, 19,114,115, 186, 187
Cynodon dactylon (Bermuda grass).....--.--- 200
Cypress (see Chamecyparis spp., Cupressus spp.). Lambert’s (see Cupressus lambert-
iana). Oytisus laburntwimnes.---.---=- eee eee 36
Daffodil (see Narcissus spp. )-
Dahlia spp. Dalbergia sissoo (sissu). -
Dammara spp. (see Agathis australis). Dandelion (see Tararacum officinale). Date (see Phenix dactylifera). Daucus carota (carrot)........-.--+-+--+ 51, 214, 215

 

5, 159, 162, 193, 201

 

   

 

 

 

 

| Excrement, human. PLANT INDEX. Dendrocalamus giganteus (bamboo) . hamiltoni. strictus..

Deodar (see Cedrus deodara). o
Diospyros spp. (persimmon)...........-----+ 170

ebenum eos 170)

kaki (Japanese persimmon).. 113,115,170
Dodonea viscosa. . - 211
Dogwood (see Cornus spp.). Dolichosispp....4......-2-.-. -¢-- en 36
Drugs 84
Dry food products. 84
Durantha spp.. 62

Durra (see Holcus sorghum). Ebony, mountain (see Bauhinia racemosa). Eggplant (see Solanum melongena). Elengi tree (see Mimusops elengi). Elm (see Ulmus spp.). cork (see Ulmus sp.). Emmer (see Triticum spp.). Epilobium spp............-..22-+25eeeeeee 127
Eriobotrya japonica (loquat)......85, 112, 114, 115, 142

 

  

 

Erythrina lithosperma (coral tree) . a 62
Eucalyptus spp 5, 20, 97-100
amygdalina (peppermint gum)... 98
capitellata a 99
corymbosa (bloodwood). 99

   
  
 
 
  

diversicolor (karri). globulus (blue gum)...
gracilis...
hemastoma

 

 
 
    
 

 

incrassata. leucorylon. a 99
melliodora (honey-scented gum). 98,99
miniata . 98
oleosa . 98
patens. 98
piperita (peppermint

bark)... -2 5) 99
polyanthemos... 99
resinifera....... 99
robusta (swamp mahogany) 99

rostrata (red gum) . siderophloia (broad-leaved iron-

 

 

 
  
  
  

bark)... . 99
sieberiana. 99
Stuartiana (apple-scented gum).. 97,98
tessellaris...
uncinata...

viminalis (manna gum)

Eugenia spp

braziliensi °

jambos (rose-apple)..........----- 100,115
malaccensis (Cabuyao, Malay apple,

mountain apple).. 57, 100, 115, 117

uniflora( Surinam cherry 100, 115, 116

Euxolus sp

Evergrecn trees (sec also Conifers). .

Evonymus europaeus (spindle tree)

 

 

  
 
 

Fagus spp. (beech). -
46, 65, 107, 108, 138, 150, 151, 180, 221

cliffortioides . - 39
fusca......

 

PLANT INDEX. Page. Fagus menziesii. - 39
sylvatica (European beeeh). 39, 40
Ferns. . 197
Ficus spp. (fig, rubber). - 100-103, 172,192
altissima 103
australis... 101
benghalensis (bar 100, 102
bergmanniana. Seer. . 103
carica (fig.) . 5,100, 1 102, 103, 115
caudatifolia 102
comosa.. 103
cordifolia 103
103
elastica (Assam rubber). - 29,100, 102,103
glomerata (cluster fig). -- 102,103
indica... - 102,103
infectoria - 102,103
laccifera ---- 108
macrophylla (Moreton Bay fig) 101, 102
nervosa 103
nota... 102
obtusifolia . 103
orbicularis . 102
palmata... 103
religiosa (peepul tree). "102, 103
retusa... 102
roxburghi 103
rubiginosa. 103
rumphii. 103
scandens. 102
tjakela. 103
walkeriana 102
Fig (see Ficus carica). Barbary (see Opuntia vulgaris).......-.- 185
Filbert (see Corylus spp.). Firmiana colorata...........---.20++++-2000+ 62
Fir (see Abies spp.). balsam (sce A bies balsamea). Douglas (see Pseudotsug2 tazifolia). silver( see Abies pectinata). white (see Abies pectinata). Flax (see Linum usitatissimum). Flour... 122
Forests -- 104-108, 127
Fragaria spp. (strawberry) - ..- 65,129,196, 197
Frazinus spp. (ash) 7, 65, 138, 151, 180, 221

   

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

excelsior. .. 26
ornus... 25
oryphylla . 26
viridis... 26
French beans..... 37
Fruits.......... 93, 105, 106, 108-118, 119, 129,172,174
cultivated... 116,172
deciduous. . 108,114
stone.... 110
Funtumia spp.. 50,195.
elastica (silk rubber, ire) .. - 195
Furniture 15
Galega officinalis (Goat’s rue). . 60
Garlic (see Allium sativum). SRRGINAMETEIS P= sa) siel-fs= ==. -020c-+es+---- 15, 215
Gherkins (see Cucumis sativus). Glycine hispida. .......-.....00s.sseeeeeeeeee 196

 

Gooseberry (see Ribes spp.). Goosefoot(see Chenopodium spp.). Gossypium spp. (eotton)......--

59, 62, $4, 86-91, 191

 

251

Page. Gourd (see Cucurbita spp.). Grains .............. 7, 122-126, 189, 190, 193, 213,214
Granadilla (see Passiflora quadrangularis). Graminacez (see “Grains” and *‘Grasses’’). Grape (see Vitis spp.). Grapefruit (see Citrus grandis). Grass 61, 109, 122-126, 193, 197, 199, 203, 206, 213

Bahama (see Cynodon dactylon). Greenhouse plants. 65
Grevillea sp...... 62
robusta (si 94, 195
Guava (see Psidiwm spp.). strawberry (see Psidium catileianum). wild (see A nacardium occidentale). Guaiacum officinale. . 56
Guinea corn (see Holcus sorghum). Gum (see Eucalyptus spp.). Hard woods. ..........2...200.20002eeeceee ee 66
Hawthorn (see Mespilus spp.). Hazel (see Corylus spp.). Helianthus spp. (sunflower)..............-.- 85, 215
Hemp (see Cannabis sativa). sann (see Crotalaria sp.). Hemlock spruee (see 7’suga spp.). Henbane (see Hyoscyamus niger). Heracleum spp. . . 52
66, 109
Herpephyllum caffrum (Kaffir plum). 115
Hevea brasiliensis (Para rubber)... . - 62, 164,192
rr soma? Hibiscus esculentus (okra)... mee OURSEN 155
Holcus sorghum (durra)..... 95, 15, 196, 208°
(Guinea corn) - 200
140,195
(sorghum, broom corn)...... 36,

; 48, 95, 189, 195, 196, 203, 208

Honeysuckle (see Lonicera spp.). Hops (see Humulus lupulus). Hordeum vulgare (barley) 35
122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 187

Hornbeam (see Carpinus betulus). Horse-chestnut (see 4sculus spp.). Horse-radish (see Radicula armoracia). Humulus lupulus (hops)...........-..------ 5,
91, 123, 129, 135-137, 214
Hyoscyamus niger (henbane) 42
Ipomea batatas (sweet potato) 7 200, 209, 210
Tre (see Funtumia elastica). Tris spp 139, 157
Jaboticaba (see Myrciaria spp.). Japanese plum (see Prunus salicina). Jerusalem cherry (see Solanum capsicastrum). Jicaco (see Chrysobalanus icaco). Jobo amarillo (Spondias sp.).. ae 113
Jobo de la India (Spondias mangifert ). 113
Jugians spp. (walnuts) . 38,
53, 105, 133, 134, 151, 180, 219, 220, 221
cinerea (butternut)... 219, 220
nigra (black walnut)... ---- 220
regia (English walnut) . - 45, 220
Juniper (see Juniperus spp.). Juniperus spp. ° 67, 139, 140
canadensis... 139
cedrus.. 139
chinensi. -- 1839
communis 139, 140
drupacea... 139

 

252

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page. Juniperus excclsa. . 139
Setidissima 139
macrocarpa. . 139
oxycedrus. . 139
phenicea.. 139
recurva. . 139
sabina... 139
spherica. 139
torulosa - 139
virginiana - log
Kafir (see Holcus sorghum). Kaffir plum (see Herpephyllum caffrum). Kale (see Brassica olcracca acephala). Kamani, round (see Calophyllum inophyl-
lum). winged (see Terminalia catappa). Kauri (see A gathis australis). Kei, apple (see A beria caffra). Kickxia spp. (see Funtumia spp.). Kohl-rabi (see Brassica oleracea caulorapa). Kola (see Sterculia acuminata). Kumquat (see Citrus japonica). Kurrimia zeylanica 56
Lactuca spp. (lettuce) 140, 141, 214, 215
Lambsquarter ( Chenopodium or Afripler) 41
Larch (see Larix spp.). UatTZ |S) DaGLALCD) soos. seem -- oa 64,
_ 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70,83, $4, 108, 140
decidua (europaea) .-. 70,82,83, 140
europea (see Larir decidua). Lathyrus spp 36
Laurus spp. (bay). - 35
camphora (camphor) 35
canariensis 35
drymifotia (see Persea persca). indicus 35
nobilis (sweet bay).- a 35
IL SEAM IEE 5 cc odgpececocce << dumecseoeesese =< 8 5
Leek (see Allium porrum). Legumes. . - 165
Lemna spp 220
Lemon (sce Citrus limonia). Lens esculenta (lentil)..........2..2.2.2200- 36, 165
Lentil (see Lens esculenta). 97

Leptospermum spp....
Lettuce (see Lactuca spp. a
Ligusticum spp....--.---22+-02-20 eee eee ee ee 52. Ligustrum vulgare (privet)...
Lilies
Lily of the Valley (see Convallaria Pe
Lime (see Citrus aurantifolia; Tilia spp.). sweet (see Citrus aurantifolia). Linden (see Tilia spp.). Linum spp
usitatissimum (fax). Lippia citriodora (lemon verbena). Livistona humulis (palm)
Loganberry (see Rubus spp.). Lonicera spp. (honeysuckle)...........-..- 129,177

Loquat (see Eriobotrya japonica). Dotuesp Peo. --.------ + +0 eee eee 36

Lueerne (see Medicago sativa). Lycopersicum esculentum (tomato)........... 62,
, 95, 115, 216, 217

Madagascar beans..........---...+-++-020--+ 37

Mahogany (sce Swietenia mahogani). PLANT INDEX. Page. Maize (see Zea mays). Malay apple (see Eugenia malaccensis). Malus malus (apple)........--++-+-+-+ 6, 15-24, 85,
105, 106, 111, 113, 114, 115, 129, 167, 173, 174, 175, 180
Mammea americana (mammee apple)......-. 115,
118, 142
a

 

Mammee apple (see Mammea americana),

Mandarin (see Citrus nobilis). Mangel-wurzel (see Beta vulgaris). Mango (see Mangifcra indica). Mangifera indica (mango)

50, 109, 113, 114, 115,1

Mangold (see Beta vulgaris). Manihot glaziovii (Ceara rubber)
utilissima (cassava, tapioca) . Maple (see Acer spp.). Marigold... .......2.2. 02.2.2 e eee ec eee e eee 215

Marrow (see Cucurbita pepo ovifera). Medicago sativa (alfalfa)... «++ 6,13-15, 61
(lucerne) . - 14,60, 61, 129
falcata... 13

Medlar (see Mespilus spp.). Melaleuca sp 97

Melia azedarach (Chinaberry) . 54, 55, 62, 84

 
  

Melilotus officinalis (melilotus A 61

Melocanna bambusioides (bainboo ~ 31,33
Melons (see Cucumis spp.). Mespilus spp. (hawthorn)...-.......s+.eee0e 5;

17, 106, 107, 111, 132, 138, 175,177

(white thorn)... - 105,121,169

  
  
 

 

 

  

coccinea.........-- a 132
germanica (medlar) . . . “1, 115, 132
heterophylla 132
monogyna.. 132
oryacantha. 132
pyracantha - 132

Mesquite (see Prosopis spp.). Mexican almond (see Z'erminalia catappa). umbrella tree (see  ‘Z'erminalia

catappa). Millet (see Panicum miliaceum). Mimusops elengi (elengi)..........------+---- 115

Mock orange (see Murraya erotica). Morus sp. (mulberry) . indica.........

Moth (see Phaseolus aconitifolius) .. - 37
Mountain apple (see Eugenia malaccensis). ash (see Sorbus spp.). ebony (see Bauhinia racemosa). Mulberry (sce Morus spp.). Mung (see Phaseolus mung). Murraya exotica (mock orange). . 115
Musa spp. (banana, plantain)... 33,115,172
paradisiaca a 33,
sapientium (banana) 33,

 

34, 85, 109, 114, 118, 201, 202, 204
Muskmelon (sce Cucumis melo). Mustard (sce Sinapis spp.). Myrciaria spp. (jaboticaba)..............-.-. 56
Myrtus spp... 56

 

Narcissus spp

Nasturtium (see 7'ropxolum spp.). Natal plum (see Carissa arduina). Nectarine (see Amygdalis persica nusipersica). Nephelium lappaceum. .......-..2222+-0200-- 50

Nicotiana tabacum (tobaceo). . 4,
59, 95, 198, 207, 213-216, 217

 

 

PLANT INDEX. Page. Noronhia emarginata (Chinese plum)... 115

Nettle, stinging. 135

Nursery stoek. .. 119

- 17,108,219

Oak (see Quercus spp. )...- = 5
cork... eee 151
silky (see Grevillea robusta). Oats (see Avena sativa). Okra (see Hibiscus esculentus). Olea spp...------2-2--2220005 26, 27,127, 1. camel 212
chrysophylla. .... 156
europxa (olive) ~ 155, 156

. fragrans (see Osmanthus). eee eteletolete eet oleic) <|- 156

Olive (see Olea spp.). Onion, (see Allium cepa). Onobrychis sativa (sainfoin). . 66

Ononis spp. . 61

viscosa . 61
Opuntia spp. (priekly pear 185, 186
tuna. . -- 115,185,186
gaunt aes tig). -- 115,185,186
Orache (see Atriplex hortensis). Orange (see Citrus aurantium). mandarin (see Citrus nobilis). mock (see Murraya erotica). Orehard trees (see also fruits)...... scoo0o 110, 112

MUREEMERSEEE eels occ cco soos sees 5, 158, 159, 183, 202 |

Oreodoxa regia (royal palm). 159, 192, 201

Orobus tuberosus. 165

Oryza sativa (rice) 91, 203, 207

Osmanthus fragans. - 156

Palm..............-..-- d 3, 188, 204, 212,217

eoconut (see Cocos nucifera). date (see Pheniz dactylifera). royal (see Orcodoxa regia). sago (see Cycas revoluta). toddy (see Phaniz sylvestris). wine (see Caryota urens). Pandanus sp « 115, 204
odoratissimus (screw 163
Panicum sp. -- 122
miliaccum (millet). 85, 122,123, 126, 149, 203
sanguinale........-.22---2222-222. 128

Papaya (see Carica papaya). Para plum (see Spondias spp.). rubber (see Hevea brasiliensis). Parsley (see Carum petrosclinum). Parsnips (see Pastinaca sativa). Passiflora sp. (passion fruit) -- 116

quadrangularis (granadilla). Bo GEL
115, 117, 118, 126

Passion fruit (sce Passifiora sp.). Pastinaca sativa (parsnips).......... 52, 164, 183, 215
Pawpaw (see Carica papaya). Pea (see Piswm sativum). le aE CE CECE Ys cleleieiclece coe 165
pigeon (see Cajanus indicus). Peach (see Amygdalis persica). Pear (see Pyrus communis). alligator (see Avocado spp.). prickly (see Opuntia tuna). Pennisetum spp. -- 189
Peppers, Spanish 183
Persea americana. . 30
carolinensis (red bay). 30

 

 

Persea gratissima (avocado). pittieri.... 222222222222 eee eee eee eee eee
Persimmon (see Diospyros spp.). Japanese (see Diospyros kaki). Phaseolus aconitifolius (moth)...
lunatus (lima bean). .
mungo (mung)...

 
 
 
 
  
  
 

 

 

  

 

radiatus.........- 50 ©
vulgaris (bean)... 5-38, 60,61, 115
(haricot). a 38
(kidney bean). 7 38
Phleum pratense (timothy) 12, 126, 213
Phenix dactylifera (date palm).. 94,159, 161, 162, 163
sylvestris (toddy palm). By 159, 161, 217
Photinia spp........-..-.-++ © 62
Phyllostachys spp. (bamboo 31,32
bambusoides. ~ 32
Phylocalyz sp - i113
Picea spp. (spruce) 64, 65, 66,

 

67, 68, 69, 70, 7 79-82, 103, 108, 129, 196

(Siberian spruce) 69
alba. (white spruee)... 81, 108
excelsa (Norway spruee). 67, 68,69, 70, 79, 80, 81

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

morinda . - 68, 69, 70, 81, 82
omorica. . 81
orientalis. 67
pungens (Colorado spruce). 81
sitchensis (Sitka spruce). - 80,81

Pine (see Pinus spp.). Aleppo (see Pinus halepensis). Murray (see Pinus frenela). Siberian stone (see Pinus cembra). Scotch (see Pinus silvestris). Weymouth (see Pinus strobus). Pineapple (See Ananas sativus). Pinus spp. (pine)
64, 65, 66, 68, 69,

austriaca (Austrian pine). cembra (Swiss stone pine) - 67,69, 73
densiflora (Japanese red Bee aS 73
excelsa . \ - 68,69, 70, 73,74, ao)
filifolia. frenela (Murray pine)
gerardiana. halepensis (Aleppo pine). -. laricio (Austrian pine)...
laricio nigricans. longifolia. maritima (cluster pine)...........----- 69
montana (Swiss mountain pine). 67,70, 72,74
MUGHUS . 2.222222 22sec ee eee ee eee eee eee 70
pinea (stone pine) 69, 7
pinaster (cluster pine) 75,76
pumilio 73
resinosa (red pine) 72
silvestris (Scoteh pine) 65,

66, 67, 69, 70, 72, 73, 74, 75, 221

strobus (white pine, Weymouth pine). 65,

67, 69, 72, 75

thunbergii (Japanese black pine)....... 73
Pistachio (see Pistacia spp.). Pistacia spp. (pistachio)

Tentiscus.......

157, 17
- i

 

 

 

254 PLANT
Page. Pistacia terebinthus... 171
vera (pistachio. 171

 

Pisum sativum (pea)......----+-+-22-e- eee eee &,
6, 36,37, 60, 164, 165, 196, 197, 214, 215
Plane tree (see Platanus spp.). Plantago lanceolata. .
Plantain (see Musa spp. ; Plantago spp.). Platanus spp. (buttonwood, sycamore) . orientalis (oriental plane). Plum (see Prunus spp.). Japanese (see Prunus salicina). Kafir (see Herpephyllum caffrum). Natal (see Carissa arduina). Para (see Spondias spp.). Polygonum spp
Pomegranate (see Punica granatum). Pomelo (see Citrus grandis). Poncirus trifoliata (trifoliate orange)...
Poplar (see Populus spp.). 184

 

171
171

 

 

41

 

 

Populus spp. (poplar). ......-...-....-mes-- 12, |

106, 107, 108, 138, 180-183, 221

 

 
 

 

   
     
     
  

alba (white poplar)....... 181, 182, 221, 222
balsamifera (balsam poplar) 181
canadensis 180
ciliata... 181
dilatata... a lst
euphratica 180, 181
laurifolia. 181, 221
181
poplar). . - 180, 181

tremula (aspen)...

virginiana........
Portulaca oleracea (purslane)... Potato (see Solanum tuberosum). sweet (see Ipomea batatas). *
Prickly pear (see Opuntia spp.). Privet (see Ligustrum vulgare). Prosopis spp. (mesquite, algaroba) - 148

 

 

 

Spicigera. 14S

Prune (See Prunus spp.). Prunus spp. 172-189
(cherry) .-. 17,

 

20, 21,53, 109, 113, 129, 169,

172, 173, 174, 175, 177, 179, 180

(DUT) eee oe ee 5,17, 20, 21,
56, 105, 109, 111,114, 166, 169, 172,
173,174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 190

 
 
 

 

 

(prune) -- W173
(sloe)...- - 17,175
armeniaca (apricot). p. 5. 21, 24, 25,114, 115, 166, 167, 172, 178, 179
avium (sweet cherry)... 178
cerasus (sour cherry)... 115, 178, 179, 180
chamecerasus (ground cherry) .-.-.--- 172
domestica (plum) . 45,172,178, 179
insititia (damson plum) -- 172,178
laurocerasus (cherry laurel). -- 178
padus (European bird cherry). 172,178

 

 

 

   
 
   
    
  
 
 
 
   

 

 

pseudocerasus. eels
salicina (Japanese plum) . 113, 180

spinosa (blackthorn). 172,178,179
Pseudotsuga spp -. 64
mucronata. 69

taxifolia (Douglas fir) 64,65

PSidiwm spp. (guava). 0 85,
109, 112, 113, 114, 116, 117, 118, 131, 132, 200

 

 

INDEX. Page. Psidium cattleianum (steawberry.guava)... 115,132

guajava (guava)....-.. 109,113, 115, 131, 132

pomiferum.............--..-sn 131

Pumpkin (see Cucurbita pepo). Punica granatum (pomegranate). .....-.-.-

Purslane (see Portulaca oleracea). Pyrus communis (pear) - 5,7,17,

18, 19, 24, 105, 111, 113, 115, 129, 167-170, 174,177

Quercus spp. (oak)......-..--.-.-+ 5, 12, 17, 27, 38,53,

105, 106,107, 108, 110, 121, 126,

127,129, 133, 138, 150-155, 221

(cork oak). -.......2..--2-22 22s 151

branti.......

castaneifolia . cerris. griffithii
ilex (holly oak)
ilex ballota
incana. .
lamellosa. lusitanica.. .
macedonica. .
montana (chestuut oak
nigra...
palustris. pedunculata...
prinus ....
pubescens
robur (English oak). semicar pifolia
sessiliflora. suber (cork

  

  
 
 

--. 152,153
= 152, 153, 154
153

 

 

 
   

Quince (see Cydonia oblonga). Quinine (see Cinchona spp.). Radicula armoracia (horseradish). ......-... 91,138
Radish (see Raphanus sativus). _
Rape (see Brassica napus). Raphanus raphanistrum (white charlock).... 187

 

 

 

   
 
 

 

     

sativus (radish). 19, 187, 188
Raspberry (see Rubus spp.). Rattan (see Calamus spp.). Reseda spp 91
Rhamnus spp. (buckthorn) 48, 107, 108, 138
alaternus.. a 48
frangula...
Rheum rhaponticum (rhubarb). =
Rhodondendron spp....-----++2+e++2eeeee eee
Rhubarb (see Rheum rhaponticum). Ribes spp. --- 118-121
93, 118, 119, 120, 121
93, 118,119, 120
(red currant) - +121
alpinum (Alpine currant). 118

 

 

nigrum (black currant, var. Baldwin)... 118
Black
Dutch)... 118
Black Na-
ples).... 118
Lee’s Pro-
118
rubrum (red currant) - Us
SANGUINEUM......2.s0ee 02+ +o eee 121

PLANT INDEX. Page. Rice (see Oryza sativa) 189
Ricinus spp. (castor bean)... 85
Roripa nasturtium (watercress). 220
Rosa spp. (rose) . 5, 106, 107,

 

109, 113, 121, 127, 129,
150, 169,191, 192, 200
(tea rose)........2-22-2- eee eee eee 151, 192

 
  
 

 

     
    

arvensis... cae Lo

canina (dog rose - 191

levigata (Cherokee rose)- 192
Rose (see Rosa spp.). apple (see Eugenia jambos). Rothra tinctoria..........-2 2220000. ee ee eeeee 211

Rowan tree (see Sorbus spp.). UIs... oe ecco e ee ce ec necesees 192

Assam (see Ficus elastica). Ceara (see Manihot glaziovii). India (see Ficus elastica),

Panama (see Castilloa elastica). Para rubber (see Hevea brasiliensis). silk (see Funtumia elastica). Rubus spp.....-..---- ++ 47,121
(blackberry). 47,188
(loganberry ). ---- 47
(raspberry). - 47,61, 188, 197

Rumez spp. (sorrel).. -- 52,135

Rutabaga (see Brassica campestris). Rye (see Secale cereale). Saccharum officinarui (sugar cane).. 5, 6,

 

34, 123, 160, 161, 189, 191, 197-208
Sago palm (see Cycas revoluta). Sainfoin (see Onobrychis sativa). ... 66

Sal (see Shorea spp.). Salacia reticulata.............-.222222222002-- 56

Saliz spp. (sallow). . lll
(willow). Ba Oyl zl Or,

108, 111, 128, 138, 151, 180, 221-223
221-223

alba (white willow

 
 

 

 

   
 

 

babylonica
caprea (goat willow)
elegans
fragilis (brittle willow)... 222, 223
purpurea (purple osier) = 221, 222, 223
triandra. - 222, 223
viminalis (osier willow). = 221, 222
viridis. 222
Sallow (see Salix spp.). Salsola spp-...-..- 2.02. ce cece cece ee eee e cence 41

Sann hemp (see Crotalaria). Sapodilla [see Siderorylon (Achras) sapota]. Sarcocephalus esculentus.........22+-22++20++ 116
Santalum album (sandalwood). Schinus dependens............. 56
moille (California pepper tree). a 56
Schizomeria ovata (white ash) 14

 

Secale cereale (rye)..... 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 187, 193

 

 

 

-- 208
Senna bean. 85
Service berry (see Amelanchier sp.). Sesamia spp.- 92
Setaria spp. - - 187
Shaddock (see Citrus grandis). Shallot (see Allium spp.). She-oak (see Casuarina spp.). Shorea spp --- 193,194

  

Tobusta . -_193, 194

 

255

Page. Shorca talura... --- 193,194
Shrubs 105, 131,172,211
Sideroxylon (Achras) australe (bla pple). 114, 118

sapota (sapodilla). 114, 115, 194
Silk cotton (see Bombar malabaricum; Ceiba

spp.). rubber (see Funtumia elastica). Silky oak (see Grevillec robusta). Sinapis 92
Sissu (see Dalbergia sissoo). Sloe (see Prunus spp.). Solanacer........-.-..222-2222222005 56, 92, 183, 217
Solanum spp 183
capsicastrum (Jerusalem cherry).... 115
melongena (eggplant)... $6, 95, 122, 216, 217
tuberosum (potato)..... --- 5,61,
1 214, 217
Solidago spp. (goldenrod) 104
Sorbus spp. (Mountain ash). ... 149,177

 

Sorghuin (see Holcus sorghum). Sorrel (see Rumez spp.). Sour cherry (see Prunus cerasus). Sour sop (see Annona spp.). Soy bean (see Glycine hispida). Spelt (see T'riticum sativum). Spinach (see Spinacia oleracea). Spinacia oleracea (spinach).........-....- 5, 42, 196

Spindle tree (see Evonymus europxus). Spondias spp. (Para plum)....
sp. (jobo amarillo)...
mangifera (2?) (jobo de la India)

Spruce (see Picea spp.). Douglas (see Pseudotsuga taxifolia). hemlock (see T'suga spp.). Siberian (see Picea spp.). white (see Picea alba). Squash (see Cucurbita maxima). Star apple (see Cirysophyllum cainito). Sterculia acuminata (kola)

Straw... ee

Strawberry (see Fragaria spp.). Suceory (see Cichorium intybus). Sugar beet (see Beta vulgaris crassa). Sugar cane (see Saccharum officinarum). Sunflower (see Helianthus spp.). Surinam cherry (see Eugenia uniflora). Sweet potato (see Ipomea batatas). Swietenia mahajani (mahogany). .....--.--- 62,142

Sycamore (see Piatanus spp.). Syringa spp...--

Tamarack (see C

Tamarind (see Tamarindus indicus). Tamarindus indicus (tamarind)........--.--- 210

Tamarisk (see Tamarix spp.). - 113, 164
113
113

  

 
 

- 109,149.
. 126

  

 

 
 

 

 

 

Tamarix spp. (tamarisk). . 21
gallica... 211
mannifera. 211

Tangerine (see Citrus nobilis deliciosa). Tapioca (see Manihot utilissima). Tararacum officinale (dande.ion) - - 135, 215

Tarus spp. (yew) 223

Tea (see Thea sinensis). rose (see Rosa sp.). Teak (see Tectona grandis). Tectona grandis (teak)....-.--22.-+--02e--e ee 212

 
 
 
 
   

 

 

 

 
  

 

 
  
 

 

 

Page. Terminalia spp... 218
bellerica . - 218

catappa (winged kamani, tropical
almond).. 109, 115, 218
chebula. 115, 218
tomentosa. 218
Thea sinensis (tea)... - 59, 62, 162, 211, 212
viridis..... - 212
Theobroma spp. - 50,55
cacao (cacao). -- 50,62,
$5, 109, 115, 116, 195, 211
Thevetagtycrrityolta ......... seen =~ cee © 115
Thistle... 41
Thorns. 1
Thorn, white 169
Thuya spp. (arborvite 25
africana 25,
occidentalis 25
Tilia spp. (linden, lime, basswood) . 105,

 

107, 108, 138, LAL, 142, 150, 176, 221

   

 

 

 
 
 

cordata (small-leaved linden). . 141
europza 141
grandiflora... - Wt
parvifolia. 14,141

Timbers. ..... 15,193, 213

Timothy (see Phleum pratense). Tobacco (see Nicotiana tabacum). Tomato (see Lycopersicum esculentum). Tonga beans 37

 

Toon (see Cedrela toona). Trifolium spp. (clover) 6, G0, 61, 184, 214, 220

   

 

 

 

 

alerandrinum (Egyptian clover,
berseem) . 44
pratense .. 165
Triticum spp. (emmer - 122, 220
wan! repens 124
sativum (spelt)...

122, 124, 220 |

  
 

sativum (Wheat)......-- ae
122, 123, 1 126, 187
Tropxolum spp. (nasturtium)........--..--. Tropical almond (see Terminalia catappa). Tsuga spp. (hemlock).......-.....---..+2-+ 64, 135, |

  

 

NAG ce 7

PLANT INDEX. Tulipa spp. (tulip)

Tuna (see Opuntia spp.).. . Tur (see Cajanus indicus)..............222-2+

Turnip (see Brassica rapa). Uimus spp. (elm)... 55,
95, 96, 105, 106, 107, 108, 127, 138, 176, 221

sp. (cork elm)......22--. 2)
campestris (English elm)

 

 

 
   

Umbrella tree (see Melia azedarach). Mexican (see Terminalia cat-
appa). Vaccinium spp. (whortleberry)....--.---..--

Vachellia farnesiana (see Acacia farnesiana). Viburnum spp..

Viburnum tinus . Vicia spp. faba (broad bean)... S€puUMm.......2-.--

Vigna unguiculata (cowpeas. Vines (see Vitis spp.). Vitis spp. (grape, vine).....

  
 
 
 
  

-. 36
- 36, 37, 38, 91

5, 6,15, 24,109, 127-131,

 

 
 

 

  

"750, 191

zstivalis (bunch grape). ms 127
arizonica (caiion grape)... 127
carinthiaca . 127
vesuviana -- 127

“ vinifera (grape)..........-.--- 115, 127, 130, 131

Walnut (see Juglans spp.). Watercress (see Roripa nasturtium). Watermelon (see Citrullus citrullus). Wattle, black (see Acacia mollissima). Wheat (see Triticum sativum). White ash (see Schizomeria ovata). Whitethorn (see Mespilus spp.). Whortleberry ( Vaccinium spp. cairn 20

Wild fruits - 112,116

Willow (see Salix spp.). Yams... .. cee. -peeehl- see 122

Yew (see: Taxus spp. Zea mays (corn, maize)..............+..2+2.-- 6, 4,

85, 122, 123, 135, 142, 189, 197, 200, 203, 208, 214

 

 

   

a YY. too Stal Sieh aA vane a
a le “tt - ve Sea iV tall tel ie)
in Pa
ry SL Lae Te Mihi
ot q PL ITRAAAR SAAR at UATE AN an NE
tr ~ABAAB D> PML Me anne Ff
VME re 4 re varae 4 s PY arava! Ne a A
. Lv val ae aaa Ca ae man ane
ph liga es ; A Wiggs TAT BIN fpr ae ahs y
vf Kaas Sonn Ca a SAT aa Aan aaa Ag CUM RO Tea oS oi Was
atl ae | eg ee Pi el ‘fF
APA, Levee at MT CAAAAL ALAA NAA aa Para
AAA RAR Wee caame ne hi ORL DEB RAanna panniers iene
tenn te De Din
naa'a alata

 

an Tat “4
Pe Mslnsnavapavsineiiagescaain
‘A AAA AAA ARS es VL ein
vaiihnlancy an al aa RdAR CARR a Aaa te

| aalal ny My a 9° VA45'5 9" A |
PWT Tana eiitiiata,’‘aAemenhe EAT senegal an Neg

PA tal ole omnes

 

  

SPOLETO B, aT area dna es
SE OTe PE Nanas LIOR a ky aes Sips aoenentc Lay alae Mc
ada ayY tyne) ~ ane of eke “Ue AT: een eb OCLL yy r
bah iol Dene Waa j rm S A,
DEERE TELAT. [ui bide aati fi DAA ROCCE LOLA,
ante bo] ura Barca vA on an: aR AAA anaes dee ay
eer Cr Pe ry ACR ACA A aia)
alae y eae a“ Ae oA hs a ae am hoy a Ce bieMiana) A I
IV Yo Ce a 4 Pa aawa Pr r AA’ lal
ale ef) ro! ANA AMS ‘ POW alas

OT aan aa at Le Meee Ree cali. see vere ee eye SI dairies r pare

ean an a Aetna a) wari Parr ‘etal t a aad adal Pr f P i ea, wn AP
Man TTT Re a acaatC Sun WR ott ag Sal eet \
RELY ase afal,, dag a nn f bbt LLL

thd ay mn
a “

Fee

®hne
pee 2. PPP Baas em nee AT ab Pye) ana
ya Ohi a Y \ are a natn FEUER HS sa7354-
r+ pat cate re wnt Ah * Aes AUIS AT Ser AA

Ait

TS

 

WT a aan aka Aa Aaa aaa lYyy YN" VY tae
a re wren . Wdddsaa aa aly

             

ll

iii LIBRARY
Pp
—— . I

PT ee
AA» i

ee *44 ay

i ;

rad

              

 

Se A ou ees
roa PY tel ey AY, +4 Va. Sy
meyer Pl | Ww oh ran A nrPan, Pop
VAT AA ARS ee a 2
rm Lae e
Mm LV Vary or al) ary. & f On Ae
ren A aaad SE Acie i

mem naa, pahine aha oa é PT yrrr OTe Lire Tg

NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL LIBRARY

WOM AQIMLTIA

 

1022431053