ENTOMOLOGICAL MESSAGES

PUBLISHED BY

ENTOMOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION. TWELVE VOLUME. (SECOND RAZKKE. SEVENTH VOLUME.) MIED 10 BOARDS TRUE 58 FIGURES 1 THE TEXT,

       

ae ~
(goose Insta
324879
Mirionc muse ’,
KJOBENHAVN. ENTOMOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION PUBLISHER. MAIN COMMISSIONS: H. HAGERUPS BOGHANDEL. PRESSED. T, KROYERS BOGTRYKKERI. LYNGBY,
1918-19,

   
 

Redaktioueu of this Volume is provided by Dr. phil. 1. C. Nic
and Mag. scient. Kai L. Henriksen. CONTENTS. First Issue (February 1918). Chr. Engelhart: Overview of the History of the Entomological Society
1868-1918. .
Kai L. Henriksen: Overview of the Contents of Entomological
Announcements 1887-1917 ... 2.20.0 ee
J. P. Kryger: On Entomological Excursions. 45
65

 

Second Booklet (February 1919). P, Esben-Petersen: Help-notes towards the determination and
\\ the classification of the European Myrmeleonidae. Tvl. 1-X 97
OUCH. S, Norgaard: Om Prin dulcamare (Scop.) and its

     

      

 

Levevis 128
Kai L. Henriksen: The Enropaisk Vandsnylieh wasps and theirs

Biologi (The aquatic Hymenoptera of Europe and their bi-

ology) .. occ ser eee. 187
Ernst Gram: Entomology and Plant Pathology. Pure Entomology

and applied Entomology ...........- 252
J. P. Kryger: The European Trichogramminae. . 257

 

Oluf Jacobsen: List of the hitherto known Danish Psy! -
sufferer 2 ...

Chr. Engelhart: Chronological List of Entomological
Members of the Association from the Foundation to now .... 361

 

 

BS Ae:
pLfn Sect
ENTOMOLOGICAL MESSAGES

PUBLISHED BY

ENTOMOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION. ee,
. TWELVE VOLUME. FIRST BOOKLET. No
be, Moo

Contents. Chr. Engelhart: Overview of the Entomological Society's Hi-pag. 1

 

 

KJOBENHAVN. ENTOMOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION PUBLISHER. MAIN COMMISSIONS: H. HAGERUPS BOGHANDEL. 1918,

LIST
the hitherto known Danish Psyilids. Oluf peeinen,

Livia Latr. 1. Livia juncorum Latr. Paa Juncus lampocarpus \ wor Lar-
verne produces Outgrowths in the Inflorescence. The
overwinters as Imago, being taken already
in March and as late as iSeptbr. More Places in the North
sjelland, Nykobing F., Horsens and Aarhus. 2. Livia crefeldensis Mink. I've seen it from Lersoen by
Copenhagen, where Schilick in his time took some Ranks
by Sighting Spring and Autumn, and a single Expl. from Langenes near Aarhus in September (Lerer Findal). It lives well on reeds like the preceding species. About
it also makes gall in the inflorescences, you know
probably not. Rhinocola Frst. 3. Rhinocola Aceris L. Flor. Lever at Acer campe
platanoides and overwinters as a Larva. I have
the one at Vordingborg and Nykobing F. June to August. 4. Rhinocola Eric Curt. Our smallest Psyllide. it's alive
on Calluna vulgaris and most often overwinters as a larva. Schlick has taken the single Ruderhegn in June and
I found it in abundance in Tisvilde, also in June. 10. 356

Aphalara Frsi.

. Aphalara Artemisie Frst. Schlick has taken it easy

Gels Skov and I have found it in Strib, Boto Strand,
Donse, Gels Skov and Tisvilde at Artemisia campe-
stris. June — August.

. Aphalara nebulosa Zett. (radiata Scott). I've taken it

in Vejle and in Gels Skov at Chamenerium angustifo-
lium in May and June. the paths are laid along the leaf edges,
which thereby bends upwards and forms a Shelter for Lar-
verne.

. Aphalara nervosa Frst. I went there individually in Strib and

in Tisvilde in July. Its fodder plant must be Achilles
millefolium.

. Aphalara Calthe L. Schlick has taken it in Octbr. on

Orholms Felled and in Lersoen and I found it by
Hillerod in July and in Tisvilde in September, both places
Rumex acetosella. It overwinters as Imago. None Aphalara exilis WW. & M. It is found in Bollemosen in

July and Septbr. by Schiadte and Schlick. Lever paa Rumex-
Species and overwinter as Imago. Aphalara picta Zett. Schlick has found it in Gels Skov
in July and August and I took it in Vejle, Nykobing F.,
Tisvilde and Hillerod on Leontodon and Achillea in June
and August. Wiistnei found it at Sonderborg
Rumex acetosella. It overwinters as an adult
Larva and Imago appear in June. Psyllopsis F Low.

. Psyllopsis fraxinicola Frst. (unicolor Flor.). Ordinary

on Fraxinus exgelsior in July and Aug. The larvae are sitting
in a white woolly secret on the underside of the leaves.

. Psyllopsis Fraxini L. Quite common on Fraxinus in July

-August. The larvae cause a coagulation of
The leaves downward, and in them they live, enveloped in one
white Secret.

. Psylla Betule L. It is taken in Number i \

357

Psylla Geoff.

. Psylla parvipennis F Low. (saliceti Flor.) Skagen (Schiodte)

and Leso (H. J. Hansen). I myself have it from Skagen
and Silkeborg in July. It must live on Salix rosemary
nifolia and overwinter as Imago.

. Psylla albipes Flor. Dyrehaven (Schlick) and Skovroddam

in April and May at Gran (Forf.). Its Real Nutrition
plant is unknown.

. Psylla peregrina Frst. (crategicola Flor nec Frst.). Almin-

delig everywhere on Crategus Oxyacantha. The over-
winters as A2g. In June you meet the first grooners
or yellow Imagines and as late as in Oct., finds
them on the white hawthorn in their root-brown autumn
suit. None Psylla Mali Schmdbg. Common on Pyrus Malus and

on cultivated A2blets, as well as on Sorbus. | mago over-
does not winter.

. Psylla alpina Frst. I have 2 females and 1 male from Blok-

house in July and at Zool. Mouse. stands a small Row of Huns
and 1 Han from Skagen (Schiodte). The male of this Art
is, as far as I know, not described, so the provision
is not absolutely safe. Its genital parts are similar to them
in the Male of Alni and Betula, but the "Pliers" are
slightly shorter and not so thick at the tip. It must live
paa Alnus viridis.

. Psylla fusca Zett. (perspicillata Flor.) Tisvilde and GelsSkov

in June — July (Schlick). It lives on Alnus and over-
does not winter like Imago.

. Psylla Alni L. Common everywhere on Alnus, from June to

Septbr. The larvae wrap themselves in a white woolly Secret. Imago does not overwinter.

. Psylla Forsteri Flor. Common everywhere on Alaus. Thigh-

verne ere nogne and Imago does not overwinter. ‘Gronland i

July and August (Inspector Lundbeck). The copies

 

358

ere alle i Efteraarsdragt. A Nordic Art that is known
from Lapland and Livonia (Boheman and Reuter). 22. Psylla Buxi L. I found it on 7huja in a garden iSvend-
castle in July 1916 and, in July 1917, I met it, in immense
Number, in Frederiksborg Castle Gardens, on the large cliffs
pede Haekke of Buxus sempervirens, which is its remedy
Nutrient plants. It is known from southern Germany, however
also from Skaane (Reuter). 23. Psylla Hartigi Flor. Common on Betula alba. June-
August. Reuter has taken it in Finland on meadows. 24. Psylla Pruni Scop. Common on Prunus spinosus from
April to Octbr. Imago overwinters and these, very dark
Individuals are met in the early spring on shrubs. It must also live on Prunus Padus and on expensive
chain Flowering. 25. Psylla melanoneura Frst. (pityophila Flor.) Common on
Crategus Oxyacanthus. The dark overwintered Ima-
gines meet from April and the new bright ones emerge in
in June. The larvae are narrow and greenish. 26. Psylla nigrita Zett. (Pineti Flor). Ordinary. It Must
live on Salix purpurea and the dark overwintered
Individuals I have also most often taken on willow in April and
May. The bright Summer individuals that are advancing from June
til Septbr., I have, on the other hand, only found on Fyr, Lark,
and Gran. Flors name Pineti could indicate that he has
made the sainme lay. 27. Psylla salicicola Frst. Quite common on Salix species from
June to Septbr. Must overwinter as Imago. Even have
I have not yet taken overwintered specimens in it
early Spring. 28. Psylla ambigua Frst. (stenolabis F Low). Common on
Salix species. I have taken it on many different
Locations in June and July. Several Rows in Autumn Outfit
was found in West Greenland in July and August by Inspector
Lundbeck. 20. Psylla Spartii Guér. I have taken 5 Pieces in Strip on
Sarothamnus. June — August,

Sah

3

32. 33. 34. 35)

30. 37. 359

Arytaina Frst. Arytaina Geniste Latr. Common on Sarothamnus sco-
parius from May to Septbr. It probably overwinters as
Imago, as I have found very dark Individuals all-
prepared the first Days of May.

Trichopsylla Thoms.

. Trichopsylla Walkeri Frst. Ho Skov near Aarhus (Lerer

Findal). It lives on Rhamnus cathartica and promotes
brings a Bending and Thickening of the Leaf Edges. Trioza Frst. Trioza Galii Frst. Traneker (Langeland), Gels Skov and
Ruderhegn in June — August, and at Lersgen in Octbr. (Schlick). It was taken on Galium palustre in southern Sweden.
rich of Reuter and Wiistnei know it from Sonderborg. Trioza albiventris Frst. A single Female from Nykjobing F.
in June (Forf.). It has been found individually in Sweden
Salix of Reuter and at Vienna in Number, likewise on
Salix, by F Low. It must overwinter as Imago. Trioza remota Frst. (dryobia Flor.). A single She from Sig
April 1916 (Kryger) and a male from the Copenhagen area
in August (Forf.). As usual with the Psyllids is
the overwintered Expl. much darker than that from
August. It is said to live on the Quercus. Trioza Urtice L. Common everywhere on Urtica, where
it produces malformations of the leaves. May — Septbr. Trioza Saundersi M-Diir. (acutipennis Flor. nec Zett. nec
Frst.). Some from Lyngby Mose in March, Gels Skov in
May and Ruderhegn in Octbr. (Schlick). A few
from Jyderup in May (Kryger). It was taken in Sweden and
Finland on Carex by Reuter. Overwinters as Imago. Trioza Egopodi F Low. A Few Pieces from Amager and
a Han from Traneker (Langeland) gust (Schlick). It lives on the 4th gopodium podagraria, whose leaves
propagated by the larvae, and it overwinters as Imago. 360

38. Trioza viridula Zett. 2 Expl. from Jyderup in May (Kryger). It lives on Daucus carota and Anthriscus silvestris
and produces malformations on the leaves. F Low has
taken it on cultivated carrot. Imago overwinters and
can be met in the spring at Naaletra (Reuter). 39. Trioza Horvathi F Low. Some Rows on Amagerfelled
og ved Lersoen Septbr. — Oktbr. (Schlick). At Horsens
i Oktbr. (Otto G. Jensen), Vesterfalled in April and Aar-
house in Septbr. (Forf.). It lives on Atriplex and over-
winters like Imago. In the preparation I have used in particular:

Dr. Gustav Flor: »Die Rhynchoten Livlands« B. I. Dorpat 1861, og
same author »Zur Kenntnis der Rhynchoten«. Bull. Soc. Imp. Night. Moscow 1861, P. 331 422. Dr. Franz Low's Various Publications in »Verhandl. der zool, bo-
tan, Gesellsch. in Vienna from 1862 to 1886. Dr. Th. Hiteber:, System. Directory of deutsch —osterr. Psylliden
according to Dr. Putons Ki g 1890 ". Ulm 1904,

Prof: O. M. Reuter: »Ti nedom af Sv. Psyllider «Sv. ent. Tidskr. 1. Aarg. 1880, P. 150,

 

 

 

Copenhagen, November 1917.