THE

ENTOMOLOGIST

An @llustrated Journal

 

oF

GENERAL ENTOMOLOGY. EDITED BY RICHARD SOUTH,

WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF

 

©. J. GAHAN, D.Sc., MA. H. ROWLAND-BROWN " i W. J. LUCAS, B.A., F
W. LUCAS DISTA! » ke. CLAUDE MORLEY
F, W. FROHAWK, F.E.S., M.B.O.U. Dr. D. SHARP, F.R.S. ROBERYL ADKIN, F

  
 
 

 

 

   

“ By mutual confidence and mutual aid
Great deeds are done and great discoveries made.”

533362

VOLUME THE FIFTY-SECOND. LONDON:
ADLARD & SON & WEST NEWMAN, LTD.
BARTHOLOMEW CLOSE, E.C. 1919. Eb

PRINTED BY ADLAKD AND SON AND WEST NEWMAN, LD. LONVON AND DORKING

 

[05 31 le 1s

 

LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS. Avaus, B. G., FE,
Abst, Rosi
ANDERSON, Jos
Ayourrin, E. T.,

  
  
 

 

41, 70, 188,
279

  

Argeiu, W. J.
Asnpowy, W. J
Bazcoms, L. C.

 

Besseaen, H. Dovaras, 189
Bracni, Jony E., 234
Buss, Lieut. Antnor, $2, 262
Bovnxe, Monnis, 26
Branwert, F. G. 8
Bernas, A. E., 277
Hennenr, 115, 202, 237, 246
W. G., 256
BUCK, C, GRANVILL
Cockenest, Prof. 'T. D. A.,
193, 241

 

 

16, 257

  

S., 144

 

 

Dovctas, James,
Dowean, Janes, 23

 

Fob, The Rev. Hanon» D.,

Fovis, Lieut. W. H., 44

Fronaws, F. \\
236

90, 167, 236

 

   

1213,

 

 

 

. S., 69, 138
Ganpyen, Major F. W., B.
Garvern, D. G., 25
Greneten, A., 278

Guxerr, Major Freventcr, 216

 

, Lient. J. A. RB, 131. FH. MRS,
Hann, Anrnur, FES. Harrisoy, J. W. Heszor,

    

  

 

 

Hawxsmaw,
Haxwarp, H.
Hewer, T. F.
Honce, Harore,
Hotronn, H. 0., F.E,
Hoxr, Corpl., 43

   

| BE.S., 260

 

   
  

 
  

Hae aa Neo eG
Kixo, E. Boros,
Lisimn, J. J., F.RS., F.E.S., 77, 88, 106

Loxa, W, Anracn, 2b
ql,

ier Fiusdiesaio
McLrop, M. G., 189,
Mass, Capt. E
Maxapervor, Wa, F-E.S., 24, 95, 144
ev, Henvenr, FES, 137

ww, Gervase. (Paymaster-in-Chief,
38, 260

   

 
  

 

  

166

s, Cuantrs E., 15, 20, 34, 231, 233,
Gornox, 189

 
 
  
 
 
 

Nicnouse
Nrcno1so! Noo,
Nontox, B..
Onpawer, F. A., M.A, F.E.S., 164
Perk
ete.,
Pierce, Lieut. Wanrer,
Pourrrr, Gro. Pxour, Lovis B., F.E. Rarrnay, Col. R. H., 168

 

 

 

  
 

 

Rayon, The Rev. Ginger H., 235
Repmayse, R.A. S., MB, 141
Rew, Percy C., 189, 235

Rucnarps, T. W., 190. Riney, Capt. N. D., F.E.S., 181, 200

 

Rosgursox, Major R. B., 59

 

iv LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS. Rowzanp-Buows, H., M.A., F.E.S., 21, | Srooyer, G. M., 117

25, 68, 72, 96, 119, 187, 189, 174, 212,
217, 229, 231, 232

Saxpy, Ina Furntss M.. 22

Scnwnex, C. A., F.E.S., 188

Scorr, Major F. B., 1.A., 92, 167,168, 262

Sevasroruro, D. 3

Suetpon, W.G., F.E.S., 97. 116,
117, 122, 214, 252, 271

Sinuan. H. M , 258

Sunrsoy-Haywarp, G. H., 190

Stapen, The Rev. C. A., 22

Smarr, Major H. Dovoxas, R.A.M.C.,

E.S., 21, 278

Surri, Gorvon, 226

Suir, Tuomas, 216

Sourn, Ricnaup, 11, 48, 118, 191, 237,
267, 268

 

 

  

  

4, 265, 277, 278

Srowris, B.A C., 259

‘Tanwar, The Rev. J. B., 90

‘Tatenets, Leoxann, F.E.S., 1

‘Turonauy, Prof. Frep V., MA., F.E.S.,
ete., 157. 16)

‘THompsos, A. H., 189, 256

‘Tuunnant, A. 9

Tonxen, Hy. J., F.E.S., 71, 94, 143,
168, 192, 264

Wants, Eusrace F., 14

Warner, G. W., 260

Winrnex, E., 216, 238

Wirrraxen, D., 239

Wanrtie, F. G., 54, 68, 69

Winraay, A. B., F.E.S., 49, 267, 268

Wins, J. W., MLR.CS., 278

Warsox, H. V., 166

 

  

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

PLATE. 1. Aberrations of Sarrothripus vevayana

ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEX

FACING
PAGE
. OT

 

Right forewing of Panorpa communis, g

Right forewing of Panorpa unifasciata, g

Pimpla eoceniea, n. sp. Mos
Sea Buckthorn defoliated by the Brown-tail Moth . Boarmia biundularia yenosa, form. nov. .
Crocallis elinguaria signatipennis, form, nov.
Alenrodiens burmitiens, Ckll. .

Psylloneura perantiqua, Ckll. .
Johannsenomyia swinhoei, Ckil,

Idioenemis inornata, Selys, 3

 

 

Subscriptions for 1919 (12s.) should be sent to R. South (Editor),
4, Mapesbury Court, Shoot-u, Hill, London, N.W, 2. ENTOMOLOGIST

aN

Illustrated Monthly Journal |

oF

GENERAL ENTOMOLOGY. t EDITED BY RIGHARD SOUTH, F.E.S. WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF

ROBERT ADKIN, ¥.E.8. C. J. GAHAN, D.Sc., M.A., F.E.S. H. ROWLAND-BROWN, M.A.,F.E.S.) W. J. LUCAS, B.A., F.E.S. W. L. DISTANT, I.E. CLAUDE MORLEY, F.E.S. F. W. FROHAWE, F.E.S., M.B.0.U. | Dr. D, SHARP, F.K.S., F.I

 

   

“By mutual confidence and mutual aid |

ae Pea

Great deeds are done and great discoveries made." ary

P LONDON: a
ADLARD & SON & WEST NEWMAN, LTD., {
BARTHOLOMEW CLOSE, E.C. 1. Price One Shilling Net. WATKINS & DONCASTER,
NATURALISTS,

Keep in Stock—
Apparatus and Cabinets

Required by Collectors of Insects, Birds’ Eggs, Plants, ete. A Large Stock of
British, Continental & Exotic Lepidoptera,
and also
Birds’ Eggs
(Singles as well as in Clutches). OUR CATALOGUE WILL BE SENT POST FREE ON APPLICATION,
36, Strand, London, W.C. 2. Bex.ey, L, W. NEWMAN, F.E.S., ken. Finest Stock of Set Insects, Ova, Larve and Pupxe
of British Macro-Lepidoptera in the Kingdom. _ Price Lists on application. L. G. ESSON,
ENTOMOLOGIST,

Is open to collect in Rannoch, Oban, Forres, and Shetland,
on commission. 6, ESSLEMONT AVENUE, ABERDEEN. SEVERAL THOUSAND British Micro-Lepidoptera to clear at

following low rates: 100 species, named, 8/6; 200, 20/-; 800, 35/-;
5 /-. British Coleoptera, neatly “carded,” 500 species, named, 50/- ;
1000 species, £6. Selections on approval. 4 FORD, 36, IRVING ROAD, BOURNEMOUTH. THE ENTOMOLOG

Vou. LIL]

 

JANUARY, 1919. [No. 668

“THE HETEROPTERA OF INDO-CHINA.”
By W. L. Disranr. Fam. Pyrruocoripa:. List oF SPECIES ALREADY RECEIVED. Lohita grandis, Gray. Melamphaus rubrocinctus, Stal. Physopelta yutta, Burm, Rava collaris, gon. n., sp. n.
Physopelta schlanbuschi, Fabr. Odontopus binotatus, Stal. Antilochus coqueberti, Fabr. Odontopus nigricornis, Stil. Antilochus russus, Stil. Dindymus rubriginosus, Fabr. Ectatops indignus, Walk. Dindynwus lanius, Stil. Buscopus rufipes, Stil. Dysdereus evanescens, Dist. Buscopus indecorus, Walk. |

Exact localities will be given in a subsequent complete work. Raza, gen. nov. Body oblong, elongate; head with eyes about equal to or very
slightly wider than anterior margin of pronotum and in length about
equal to breadth at base including eyes; rostrum robust, first joint
about or almost reaching anterior coxw; antennie long, somewhat
slender; pronotum with a broad, convex, anterior collar, the anterior
margins of which project slightly beyond the lateral angles of the
anterior lobe, which is only about half the length of the posterior
lobe, the lateral margins moderately laminate; the basal angles
broadly subrotundate; scutellum about as long as broad, its base
broadly depressed, its apex acute; corium with the lateral margin a
little convex, membrane passing the abdominal apex; femora mode-
rately robust; tibie: almost as long as femora, anterior femora with a
prominent spine near apex; basal joint of the posterior tarsi longer
than the other two joints together. Allied to Melamphuus, from which it can be at once differen-
tiated by the broad. convex, anterior collar. Raza collaris, sp. n.

Head testaceous; pronotum and corium ochraceous; anterior
pronotal collar, lateral and posterior margins sometimes testaceous ;
central area of pronotum narrowing anteriorly; scutellum, clavus, a
large central spot to corium, and membrane, excluding apex, black;
ENTOM.—JANUARY, 1919. a

2 THE ENTOMOLOGISY. body beneath testaceous; sternum with black suffusions, and the
abdominal segmental incisures also black ; legs black, beneath longi-
tudinally ochraceous ; antennie black, basal joint testaceous; rostrum
black, the basal joint beneath sometimes testaceous; antenna with
the first and second joints longest and subequal in length, third
shortest; pronotum with the basal area sparingly coarsely punctate,
and the margin between the anterior and posterior lobes also more
closely coarsely punctate; basal area of scutellum and corium in-
cluding clayus coarsely punctate; rostrum reaching the intermediate
coxie, first joint about or almost reaching the anterior cox; anterior
femora beneath with a strong subapical spine. Long, 19-23 mm. Habitat—Tonkin and Xieng Khouang, Ban Sai (R. Vitalis de
Salvaza). RHOPALOCERA OF THE UPPER LYS VALLEY,
NORTHERN FRANCE. By Capr. E. H. Mann, M.C., anv Carr. Eveneicn, R.F.A. ‘tur following results obtained by two very amateur ento-
mologists during the past few months may possibly prove of
interest. The list of captures must, ] fear, seem very meagre ;
but to a certain extent this can be explained by the fact that the
weather was not of the best—a very large number of days being
very windy—and also to the fact that ‘the best collecting hours
usually found both of us employed on our military duties, with
the result that expeditions were spasmodic, and, as a rule, late in
the afternoon. No specimens of Papilio machaon were observed until August,
although several areas of reedy, marshy country were watched. During the first week of August two were taken, followed by
several more the succeeding week. Wheat and clover fields
situated on high ground seemed the favourite settling-place,
though two were observed settling on the warm stones of a
railway- track. Iphiclides podalirius was not seen, nor has it
ever been seen by M. de Wailly, a local entomologist. I would like to say here that comparison with M. de Wailly’s
cabinet, the result of forty years’ collection, proved interesting
and instructive, and the information obtained from him as to
the likely places for different species assisted us to a very large
extent. Pieris brassice and P. rape appeared in their usual numbers. Euchloé cardamines were plentitul up to the end of June, but
their disappearance was practically instantaneous. Leptosia
sinapis was not observed, and as only one specimen figures in M.
de Wailly’s cabinet it is presumably infrequent in this locality. One specimen of Colias hyule was taken early in June after
a long chase. During August they were observed in large

 

 

 

RHOPALCCERA OF THE UPPER LYS VALLEY, NORTHERN FRANCE. 3

nitubers, and could easily be taken when settled on clover or
Incerne fields, thongh a long run was always experienced if the
insect had been alarmed. The anpearance of Gonepteryx rhamni was normal, sever:
good specimens being taken. Brenthis euphrosyne were taken on the borders of woods, but
were not at all frequent. One specimen of Issoria lithonia was observed, but effected
its escape, as no net was to hand. M. de Wailly has one good
specimen of this species, but states that it is uncommon. A large colony of Dryas paphia established itself ina glade
in a wood. Ab. ralesina appeared in this colony with some
frequency. ‘The grownd-colour of some of these specimens
wa> of avery much greener lustre than the normal, so much,
in fact, that a sub-variation of ralesina was suspected. Any
further information concerning this suspicion would be mucli
appreciated. Argynuis cydippe and A. aglaia were not observed at all—an
absence which would seem rather remarkable in a locality so
well suited to these species. The Vanessa yroup were plentiful, all species being taken with
the exeention of Enrancssa antiopa, of which M. de Wailly has
only seen two specimens in forty years. ygonia polychloros was very mach more plentiful than in
the British Isles, being observed in comparative frequency. Its
favourite settling-place appeared 10 be the barks of the
darker-coloured trees, its sombre underside rendering it ver:
inconspicuous when settled. Aglais urtice were present in their usual hordes. M. de
Wailly has a very interesting specimen of ab. ichnusoides in his
cabinet, taken some years ago. Pyrameis atalanta were scarce during the earlier months, but
became very much more common during the second half of
September. Limenitis sibylla was observed and taken. Several specimens
of abnormal size are reported in a large wood some miles distant. ‘Two specimens of Apatura iris were observed, and one was
taken. This pleasing capture was effected on a very windy day,
the insect being driven down from the tree-tops and settling
on some lower branches. Epinephele jurtina and Cenonympha pamphilus were of great
frequency. Pararge egeria and P. megera were taken, the latter species
being present in numbers that almost rivalled tie commoner
species of Pieris. The specimens had, however, to be carefully
selected, as the fighting tendencies of this species cansed the
vast majority to be badly damaged. Thecla w-album and Zephyrus quercus were the only two

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

* THE ENTOMOLOGIST. representatives of the hecla group to be taken. The lack of a
long-handled net was badly felt when dealing with this genus,
although the w-aliun were present in abnormal quantity and at
low elevations. Chrusophanus phleas were in plenty, being found most
plentifully in standing wheat and oat-fields. Polyommatus icarus, Celastrina argiolus and Cupido minimus
represented the Lycena group, the first in great numbers, but
the last two named were uncommon, only one specimen of each
being obtained. Hesperia malve, Adopea flava (thaumas) and Angiades
sylvanus represented that interesting family the Iesperiide,
being frequent in all lucerne. clover and wheat-fields. It is hardly to be doubted that more experienced ento-
mologists, with more time at their disposal than we had, would
have succeeded in deriving considerable information as to the
differences of habit and frequency of Continental Rhopalocera
of Northern France from our own. Any information that we
can give will be gladly put at the disposal of any inquirers. ORTHOPTERA, ODONATA AND NEUROPTERA FROM
SALONICA. By W. J. Lucas, B.A., F.E.S. In vol. xlix (1916) of the * Entomologist,’ p. 248, I placed on
yecord a few Neuroptera and Odonata sent me by Mr. P. J.
Barraud, I.E.S., from the Salonica front. I have since received
three other small consignments made by the same entomoiogist
in the same interesting district. They are as follows:

 

Ontuoprera. Labidura riparia, Pall.—One male of the large earwig, which,
though now British, is, it is to be feared, disappearing from its
one known locality on the Hampshire coast. The insect sent
was taken at Salt Lake. near Naresh, Salonica-Janes Road, on
August 4th, 1918. It is a dark example, but the colour may be
partly due to drying. though one would think it could never have
had the dirty white tint of British examples. Forficula auricularia, Linn., var. conspicua.—One teneral male
(1917, but otherwise undated), apparently having but recently
become an imago. One male, May 8th, 1917, and one female, May
14th, 1917, from Saracli, fairly common at an elevation of 1000 ft.
‘They were also found in winter at Basanli hibernating in a rotten
cherry-log. Four males and two females from Paprat, common
at an elevation of 2200 ft., in May and June, 1918. These ear-

 

 

ORTHOPTERA, ODONATA AND NEUROPTERA FROM SALONICA. 5

wigs are in general dark insects, even the callipers being fairly
so; the legs, however, are pale russet. ‘The lateral margins of
the pronotum are pale, the elytra and wing-tips are large, and
the latter are nearly white with a dark margin. his gives the
insect a distinctive and conspicuons appearance, and suggests
the varietal name conspicua, which I have given it. This white
spot is often indicated in British examples, but in the present
specimens it is very strongly developed. All the males sent have
“high” calipers, the longest measuring 9 mm. from the tip to
the outer shoulder at the base. Whether ‘‘low” males were
present I cannot say. * Empusa fusciata, Brullé.—One male imago, Saracli, June 4th, -
1917. Gryllotalpa gryllotalpa, Linu.—One female imago, Kopriva,
Struma Valley. Tt was common at low elevations in April, May
and June, 1918. Oponata (= ParaneuRoprera). Sympetrum striolatun, Charp.—One female, Saracli, 2000 ft.,
very common, June 6th, 1917. One somewhat teneral female,
Paprat, June 12th, 1918

S. vulgatun, Linn. Paprat, June 15th, 1918. Orthetrum cerulescens, Fabr.—Nine males and one female,
near Paprat, June 15th, 1918. The female is very teneral; of
the males five are mature and powdered with blue; the other
three have no blne colouring and are more or less teneral. In
connection with some of these insects, Mr. Barraud remarks :
“They take up rather a curious position at rest when watching
for prev—usually on the*highest point of a dead flower-stem or
stick. ‘lhe wings are held downwards and forwards. while the
insect always faces away from the sun. By moving slowly I was
on one occasion able to approach my face to within about one
foot of the insect and could watch every movement. I judged
that it was able to see fast-moving objects at a distance of 3 ft.,
as, when flies went by at about that distance, the dragonfly
moved its head from side to side as if watching them. It
appeared also to exercise some choice as to the kind of fly preyed
upon. No notice was taken of some kinds, but a quick dash was
made after others. What these were I was unable to determine,
the movements being so rapid. ‘The insect returned again and
again to the same post of vantage after an excursion.” Mr.
Barraud may have intended this note to refer to S. striolatum,
for he apparently took both for the same species.t

*Onychogomphus uncatus. Charp.—One male, near Paprat, at
an altitude of 2000 ft., June 15th, 1918. * The species marked with a star are not British. + S. striolatum has similar habits in England. wo females, somewhat teneral, near

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 THE ENTOMOLOGIST. Cordulegaster_ annulatus, Latr.—One female, from Paprat,
Krusha, Balkan Hills, abont 2500 ft., May 29th, 1918. Calopterya splendens, Har., var. cantho-toma, Charp.—A male,
June 10th, 1918, and a female, June 12th, 1918, Paprat, 2000 ft.

*Lestes barbara, Fabr.—One female, near Paprat, 2000 ft.,
June 13th, 1918. Pyrrhosoma nymphula, Suiz.—One male, Paprat, June 6th,
1918. .

Ischnura jumilio, Charp.—A male and a female, Paprat,
Krusha, Balkan Hills, about 2500 ft., June 6th, 1918. Platycnemis pennipes, Pall.—Eigit—four males, Paprat, June
6th, 1918; one male, Paprat, Krasha, Balkan Hills 2300 ft.,
June 10th, 1918; one male and two females, Paprat, June 12th,
1918. Some of those taken on June 6th are not quite mature,
one female being in fact very teneral. Although some are dis-
coloured, they appear to belong chiefly to the whitish form. * Agrion ornatum, Heyer.—One male, Paprat, June 12th, 1918. Nevroprrna. *Formicaleo tetragrammicus, Fabr.—An ant-lion, one, Saracii,
June 4th, 1917. *Mynmecelurus trigranmus, Pall—An ant-lion, one, Paprat,
July Ist, 1918. *Palpares libelinloides, Linn.—:
fine ant-lion, Salt Lake, near N
August 4th, 1918. *Nemoptera sinuata, Oliv.—Lwo, Saracli, 2000 ft., common,
June 6th, 1917. Osmylus chrysops, Linn.—Two, Baprat, 2200 ft., July Ist,
1918. Kingston-on-Thames,

December, 1918. A male and a female of this
aresh, Salonica-Janes Road,

HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA TAKEN IN THE NEW
FORES?Y. By G. T. Lynx, F.E.S. Locat records of Hemiptera being so few, I have been urged
to publish the following list, in spite of its very incomplete char-
acter. The species mentioned have been met with during the
past nine years, mostly while collecting insects of other orders,
and the number recorded could probably be doubled in a single
season by serious work. I am greatly indebted to Mr. James
Edwards and Mr. E. A. Butler, B.A., B.Se., for most kindly and
willingly naming those specimens of which I was uncertain. HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA TAKEN IN THE NEW FOREST. 7

Cicadetta, Am. Montana, Scop. Very local. I have nothing to add to my
notes already published in the ‘ Entomologist’ (xliii, p. 1, xliv,
p. 332, and xlvi, p. 301), excepting that Mr. Charles Gulliver tells
me that in 1916 he discovered « second breeding-place of the
species, some two miles distant from that described by me. Centrotus, Fab. Cornutus, Linn. Fairly common in Ma:
be beaten in September from various trees. the nymph may

 

Issus, Fab. Coleoptratus, Geoffr. More plentiful in the old woods than in
the more recent enclosures, June to September. The insect
usually assumes the perfect state in the early part of the former
month. Cizius, Latr. Pilosus, Ol. Very common in May. Var. infumatns occurs
plentifully, and I have also several times taken var. albicinctus. Nervosus, Linn. Common, though not so plentiful as the
last (August and September). Brachycranus, Fieb. Taken occasionally in late autumn. Liburnia, Stal. Pelucida, Fab. Common. Fairmairei, Perris. One on September 18th, 1910. Strioma, Fieb. Pteridis, Boh. Very abundant. Triecphora, Am. et Serv. Vulnerata, leg. Somewhat scarce and local; a few speci-
mens may usually be beaten in May from hawthorn bushes in
Stubby Copse. I am told that the species was formerly much
more plentiful. Aphrophora, Germ. Alni, Fall Abundant on various trees and shrubs, particu-
larly Myrica gale. Salicis, De G. Common, though far less so than the last. Philenus, Stal. Spumarius, Linn. This very abundant insect does not appear
to vary so much as in other districts. On August 31st, 1910, I
swept a very pretty form from blossoming ling. In this speci-
men the head and prothorax are pink, the elytra being of the
same colour with two black blotches on the costa. Mr. E. A.
Butler, who has seen the insect, tells me the form is new to him. Lineatus, Linn. Very plentiful in the bogs. 8 THE ENTOMOLOGIST. Ledra, Fab. Aurita, Linn. Usually, though not always, on oak; the
imago is fairly common in July, August and September, while
the nymph I have found in every month from April to October,
with the exception of July. The nymphs are quite small at the
end of August, but attain a length of 8 mm. or so before going
into hibernation. Ulopa, Fall. Reticulata, Fab. Very abundant. Macropsis, Lewis. Lanio, Linn. Common on oak in September and October. Bythoscopus, Germ. Rufusculus, Fieb. Usually plentiful on vireh ; was partieu-

larly common in September, 1910. Flavicollis, Linn. Very common on bireh in May. Pediopsis, Burm. Rubi. One on August 24th, 1910; the specimen was iden-
tified by Mr. E. A. Butler. Idiocerus, Lewis. Lituratus, Fail. Common on sallows in September and
October. Tibialis, Fieb. 1 took an example of this rare species from
honeysuckle on March 23rd. 1913. Confusus, Flor. Very common on sallow August to November. Evacanthus, Lep. et Sev. Interruptus. Linn. Appears to be somewhat scarce. Acuminatus, Fab. More common than the last. I have
swept several from bilberry growing under trees in August. Tettiyonia, Geoff. Veridis, Linn, Not common. Eupelix, Germ. Cuspidata, Fab. Occasionally swept from low plants in
Stubby Copse, May. Athysanus, Burm. Grisescens, Lett. Swept from rough grass, heather, etc., in
May. “Obsoletus, Kbm. Common in the bogs. Subjugendus, Kb. In great numbers on grass (Spartina
stricta), growing on muddy shore of Solent at Park and also
near the mouth of the Beaulieu river. First taken in Britain

HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA TAKEN IN THE NEW FOREST. 9

by Mr. Butler, who discovered it on the opposite shore of the
Solent and also found it plentifully at Lymington (E.M.M. xlviii,
p. 18). In 1898 very little of the grass was growing on the
Solent wud flats. a few isolated clamps only suewing. but now
the whole of the flats have the appearance of verdant fields. Longshoremen have told me that the plant was introduced
during the hard winter of 1895, when roots were transported
from Southampton water frozen in ice floes which grounded on
the flats. I was myself a witness to its marvellously rapid
spread. Deltocephalus, Burm. Socialis, Flar. Very plentiful on heather. Allygus, Fieb. _ Mixtus, Fab. Abundant on oak and oceasionally taken on
birch, July to October. Thamnotettixz, Lett. Dilutior, Kom. On oak ; also swept from bracken. Subfuscula, Fall. Fairly plentiful on oak in May. On blossom
of wood spurge, April 24th, 1912. Cruentata, Panz. Common in the bogs and in damp places
on heaths. Ihave very many times swept it from leather and
beaten it from young birch trees. Spieniidula, Fab. Common. Limuotettix, Sahl. Striola, Fall. Usually to be found in damp places on heaths. Cicadula, Fieb. Septemnotata, Fall. Plentiful amongst herbage in ditches. , Stal. Mr. Butler so named a female which I
took on broom, September 18th, 1910. Seanotata, Fall. Very common. Alebra, Fieb. Albostrielia, Fall. This handsome and variable insect is
common on oak and beech. Dicraneura, Hardy. Mollicula, Boh. A few on hazel in a lane at Brockenhurst. Kybos, Fieb. Smaragdula, Fall. Common on sallow and bireh. Chlorita, Fieb. Flavescens, Fab. Beaten from holly in November. Viriduia, Fall. Common; passes the winter in thick
conifers, holly or ivy. 10 THE ENTOMOLOGIST. Eupteryx, Curt. Vittatus, Linn. Common on ranunculus in damp woods near
streams. Strachydearum, Hardy. Often swept from wood sage. Auratus, Liv. On low plants ; once on garden parsnip. Atropuuctata, Goeze. Ou low plants in damp places. Germari, Lett. On Pinus sylvestris; also common on Douglas
fir in the winter
Pulchellus, F
on sallow. Concinna, Germ, Also common on oak. I have noticed
that this species is particularly liable to the attacks of a parasite
(Gonotopus sp.? ), the brownish, globular larve of which is firm,
attached to the abdomen of its host. KH. pulchellus and E
Germari are also preyed upon by the parasite. Unfortunately I
have never succeeded in rearing it. ‘ali. Common, usually on oak, but occasionally

 

    

 

Typhlocyba, Germ. Jacunda, H. On alder. Sexpunctata, Fail. Common on sallow and oceasionally on
birch. Ulni, Linn. Very abundant in hedges near elm trees at
Brockenhurst. In the forest itself elm does not grow. Aurovittata, Dougl. Swarms on bramble in October. Douglasi, Raw. Cowmon. Gratiosa, Boh. One beaten from beech, October 30th, 1910. Quercus, Fab. Common on oak. Geometrica, Schr. Fairly abundant on alder. Carri, Bd. Mr. J. Edwards has so named a specimen I took
on September 9th, 1910. Zugina, Fieb. Alueti, Dahl. Fairly common. Flammigera, Geoff. Beaten from yew and Douglas fir in
winter. Tilie, Fail. I have two specimens named by Mr. Edwards,
one from oak, August 31st, 1910, the other from Douglas fir,
December 17th, 1910. Parvula, Boh. From oak and holly in November. Neglecta. Common on Douglas fir in winter. I have two
which Mr. Edwards names var. rubrinerris. Rose. Four, so named by Mr. Edwards with a “?,” were
beaten from conifers in the winter. Psybuina. Aphalara, For

Calthe, Linn. Several beaten from Douglas fir in December
and January. THE NOCTUIDE OF GREAT BRITAIN. 11

Pxyliopsis, F. Low. Frazini, Linn. Plentiful on ash in September. Psylla, F. Low. Pruni, Scop. I have a specimen taken on Douglas fir on
January 29th, 1911. Crategi, Schr. Not common. It would seem that this species
usually passes the winter in furze-busies, and I have beaten it
from Pinus sylvestris in February. Rhamnicola, Scott. Fairly mB eneralh in conifers in winter. Melanoneura, Forst. Countless numbers may be beaten from
Douglas fir and other thick conifers in the winter. I have also
taken it on oak in late August, hawthorn and sallow in early
October, and found it very commonly on hawthorn and blossom-
ing sallow in Mareh. Ferraginea, Edw. Common on Pinus sylvestris in January. Betule, Linn. Ou oak and birch in September and October. Nigrita, Zett. Myr. Edwards has detected one specimen
among a number of P. melanonewra beaten from sallow on
March 8rd, 1912. Peregrina, Forst. Several on hawthorn in August, September
and October. Mali, Schmabg. On crab apple in October. Forsteri, Flor. Plentiful on alder. Arytena, Scott. Geniste, Latr. Common on broom. Tri

Albiventris, Forst. Plentiful on conifers in the winter, though
not nearly so abundant as the next. Remota, Forst. Exceedingly common on Douglas fir, ete. I
have also beaten it from holly in November and December. a, Borst. THE NOCTUIDA OF GREAT BRITAIN AS ARRANGED
IN THE GENERAL COLLECTION AT THE NATURAL
HISTORY MUSEUM. By Ricuarp Sours. (Continued from Vol. LI, p.

Subfam. ERASTRIANAE. [Vol. x (1910).] 5147. EvstemMa osrrina, Hiibn. Thalpochares ostrina, E.S.L., p. 10; T. iv, p. 8; M.B.L., ii,

 

p. 55. Bublemma ostrina, M., p. 168.