Overview of the Dutch

Psyllid species
by means of
FH, ©C. BARE. Below are some analytical tables, which can be
serve to identify our psyllids. The literature so far required for this purpose is
spread out, and often so hard to come by that I don't
seemed unhelpful, this one, insofar as this is for the Dutch
fauna was needed to be processed into a whole. Although I have tried as much as possible, to a uniform
ce whole, not all tables as a whole can be equal.
be considered worthy, as some genera are very
hadn't been edited for a long time, and I didn't always have it all
had the necessary material at my disposal for this purpose; I hope
however in the future these lists by being able to better
to replace. Since very little has been collected in our country,
it seemed advisable to me a large number of probably-in-
to also include terrestrial species, and moreover to
point to species that might be present here
come, these include also species that grow on garden and greenhouse plants
can be found. A brief bibliography follows at the end. 58

H. C. BLOTE, OVERVIEW DER

CLASSIFICATION IN SUBFAMILY'). 1. Forehead not covered by the cheeks, but in between,

sometimes only on the underside of the head, clear
observable. The frontal cell is located at the top
end of it. — only with ee are cheek cones
present . † 2
Forehead cell bell Had my cheeks pedeke stone de
ocelle is between the cheeks and the skull
accessible . Aiae hla. † so eee
Skull flat and horizontal, the vourhioutd lies beneath,
and is usually a narrow, elongated chitin patch between
schen clypeus and frontal socelle. — Front wings
mostly leathery thickened . † : = (ee
Skull sloping forward, with fer wanth and the
cheeks lying approximately in the same plane. - For-
wings mostly membranous. † sub family. 3. Pauropsyllinae. Eyes flat, not protruding; skull longer than wide,
extended plate-like anteriorly. Pronotum on the sides
reaching far below. Forewings leathery. sub family. 1. Leveznae. Eyes hemispherical bulging; skull no longer
then wide... « « «. » 4», Subfamily. 2. aphalerenae,
First member of the hind tars without claw-shaped thorns
at the top. Radius, Media and Cubitus originate
usually in the same point from the root vein. For-
wings often with pointed top. sub family. 4. 7rzoszenae. 1) A brief overview of the Dutch genera could thus be
chime:

I,

†

Radius, Media and Cubitus in the same im from the root vein
springing . † 0 2 3 (dpeoee
Media and Cubitus a Sneeees: vereetied. from the root vein
jumping so only two veins (Radius and Media + Cubitus) 2
The stem, which is formed by the fusion of Media and
Cubitus is at least as long as the stipe of the Radius. † 3
The stem of Media + Cubitus is clearly shorter than the stem of
the Radius. — see Psylla and Arytaena (subfam. Psyllinae, under 6).

† Skull flat, horizontal, protruding forward plate-like; eyes

flat, not protruding ... . † oh sera
Skull normal, little or not extended forward; eyes half
spherical ; eo ee ew a eae ee 4
Cheek cones present. † ie Oe Psyllopsis. Cheek cones missing. — see ‘subfamily. aphalarinae. DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES. 59

— First member of the hind tars with two black, claw-
shaped thorns at the top. Radius, Media and Cubitus
do not originate in the same point from the root vein,
but Media and Cubitus are a long way from each other
united. — Forewings rarely pointed. sub family. 5. psyllinae. TABLES OF THE GENERA. I. Livinae. With us only the genus . † † † = I. Livia, LATR. II. aphalarinae. 1. Forewings thin, membranous, finely dotted, not transverse
wrinkly, simply rounded at the end, oval. ptero-
stigma usually missing, otherwise the radius is short,
and bent strongly forward at the end. almost always
the Radius ends well in front of the wing tip, at least
as far as the mouth of the foremost Mediatak
behind it. Usually, however, the latter is most in
the wing tip. † † † † † † 2. Aphalara, FOREST. — Forewings rather leathery, more or less transverse
wrinkly, diamond or ovoid (widest at the base),
rarely more membranous and widest in the end half (e.g. bi 2. sfeczosa), but the top is also more pointed than bi
Aphalara, and the portion of the den . beyond
terminal edge almost straight, so that the terminal edge is not even
moderately rounded. Pterostigma always present, usually
fairly long. Radius leading into the wing tip, or
very close to it, less and less far from it than the front one
Media branch behind it. Radius usually straight, or: the
pointed backwards. † 3. Rhinocola FOREST. III. Pauropsyllinae. Only one European genus. † † † Calophya Low). 1) C, rhois Low is easily identified by its very large fork
cell of the Cubitus. 60 H. C. BARE, OVERVIEW DER

IV. triozinae. 1.1) Hairy top of head and thorax
Trichochermes KIRK. †
— Top of head and thorax bare. 4. Trioza FOREST. V. Psyllinae. 1.°) Blades at most as long as the breadth of the
head. The fork-cell of the Cubitus barely half so
large (in area) as that of the Media
Diaphorina Low 4). — Blades longer than the width of the head. The fork-
cells of Media and Cubitus little in surface area
schWend)ilscuipza! .o[ us re wal ae Lele oles 2
2. Forewings at least twice as long as broad,
widest in or beyond the center. Head and thorax
not dotted. : sevizvestead site 120k 3
= Forewings slightly leathery, slightly convex, transversely wrinkled,
less than twice as long as wide. The biggest
width is about the middle. Head and thorax finely
dotted adi 4 « « « « » » » Jdmblyreinatios. — Forewings very thick, leathery, strongly domed and
transversely wrinkled, a little more than twice as long as
wide, the greatest width is in the middle. To buy
thorax unspecified. » deville CORT)
3. The front Media branch opens out from the wing tip. 1) The genus Bactericera PUT. distinguishes itself from the rest by
the absence of the cheek cones, and because the third limb
thicker than the next members, about the same thickness as the first two. 2) 7. Walkeri Forrs T. A large (£5mM.) beautiful species, with on
base and top brown sprinkled forewings. 3) The genus Euphyllura FOERST. stands out from the rest,
because the forewings are clearly diamond-shaped and usually leathery and
be opaque. Skull flat, cheeks in the same plane as the
skull lying, flat extended anteriorly, contiguous in the middle. The genus Homotoma GUER. distinguishes itself from the rest in that
that the last limbs are broadened and hairy, — The front
wings pointed at the end, with hairy veins. 4) D, putoni Low a small (+ 2 mM.) species with brown spotted
front wings. 5) LZ. ulicis CURT, A very recognizable animal, dark leather brown, + 21/. mm,

DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES. 61

Pterostigma completely absent. Barely any leading edge cell
3 times as long as it is wide. † † Alloeoneura Low. † — The front Media branch usually opens behind, rarely in
or something in front of the wing tip. Pterostigma mostly
clear, leading edge cell more than 3 times as long as
wide: 2. . « ' ' ey ere |
4. Front wings' very coi, ds Radius miondé in the rush
ie ses oe « wk ' Spamoneura FOERST. †
— Forewings aiscrontd: the Radius rarely ends in 4),
bya always ahead of the striker from vou. † 4 bole & 5
5. The stem, which is formed by the union of
Media and Cubitus is at least as long as the stem of
the Radius. The Media is almost straight. side seam of the
Prothorax as in Arytaena. † † † 5. Psyllopsis Low. — The stem of Media + Cubitus is shorter than the stem
van den Radius. Media clearly bent. † † † 6
6. The side seam of the Prothorax (i.e. the seam in between
Episternum and Epimerum) ends from above at the
center of the lateral margin of the Pronotum. Back fairly
flat, skull almost horizontal, as are the cheek cones. Dorsulum at most as long as the skull, in front
less bent than from behind. The front Media branch
ends in the wing tip *). † 6. Arytaena Scott. — The side seam of the Prothorax ends behind the center
from the lateral edge of the Pronotum, sometimes it touches
Epimerum does not even touch the Pronotum at all. Back arched; Dorsulum at least as long as the
skull, bent forward at least as far as
Mdab back .«. « « +» « « « Y, Psylla Greorrr. 1) A, radiata FOERST. has black seams along the veins on the
terminal edge of wings. 2) S. fonscolombi YOERST, is best recognized by its wing shape. In the end cells there are groups of peripheral spines, like e.g. at 7roza,

3) However, with the Psylla buxi ., also common on Buxus
L. This is distinguished from Spanioneura, except for the rounded
Ear wings, among other things, because the cheek cones are no longer than the skull. 4) The genus //oria Low differs from Arytaena in that the
head with eyes no wider than thorax, — skull hairy;
cheek cones very hairy and longer than the skull, — Pterostigma
small, but present. H. C. BLOTE, OVERVIEW DER

TABLES OF SPECIES. I. Livia. Second limb more than twice as long as it
first. Skull as wide at the front as between the
eyes. Upper side brownish, often reddish
sprinkled, irregularly speckled. Forewings yellow-
brown. — o&: Genital plate longer than the forceps, this
are simple in shape, short, even to the point
narrowed, bent towards each other at the top. †
2: Genital segment slightly longer than the previous two
sternites together. — 2!/,—2?/, m.M. L. juncorum LATR. Second limb only 1'/, X as long as the first;
skull wider in front than between eyes. Upperside and forewings brownish yellow. 2 Genitals as
in the previous type. — slightly bigger. (3-4 m.M.) . L. crefeldensis MINK. 2. Aphalara. 1.*). Clypeus conical, bulging anteriorly, almost to

1) L. limbata WAGA differs from ZL, crefeddensis in that the

reaching the front edge of the skull. † † † † 2. Clypeus rather flat, not clearly above the level
van*Ge wampen lofty -+,24) >. 2%, 1) ee
Forewings twice as long as broad, behind the
widest in the middle, covered with black dots or flecks
sprinkled, and with a black or brown cross band
before the rush. — o& Genital plate on both sides with
a hook-shaped curved, rearward facing
sting. Copulation forceps approximately as long as the gen-
language plate, widened towards the end, and skewed forward
truncated sloping. — 2 Genital segment short, only
slightly longer than the preceding sternit -- + 2 m.M. A. extlis WEB. & MORR. Forewings over 2'/, times as long as broad; ah-
third cubitus branch ending in a black dot. Sometimes

forewings less than twice as long as broad, and on the
end edge show a black seam. 1) A. tamaricis PUT. has a clear Pterostigma. DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES, 63

the terminal half of the forewings is smoked'). Head and thorax
reddish or brownish yellow, at least from above. The
blades do not extend beyond the forewing root. Length
of the hind tars about half that of the shins. Forewings widest behind center. — & Copu-
pliers truncated straight, otherwise as with the previous one
kind. — @ genital segment as with the previous species. †
Empty eee Ve ay Sk and A CahaeRL.. *)
3. Forewings covered with very fine black dots
sprinkled; — o& Copulation forceps about 3 X as long
broad as at the top, slightly thickened here by a
breeding at the front. Top straight truncated; — the
forceps are about as high as the genital plate, these
has, as in the previous species, two hook-shaped
protrusions. — 2—-2'/, m.M.. A. artemisiae FOERST. †
Forewings with a brown spot in the center of the
posterior root cell, and additionally with some spots
on the end half. — 2'/,—3°/,m.M. † A. nebulosa ZETT. = Forewings translucent, often with at the end

Il

brown laced veins, transversely wrinkled. — ¢ genitalia
as with A. artemiszae, only the pincers are shorter, about
Twice as long as wide, and narrowed more evenly. — slightly smaller than the next species, color mostly
green. — 2-2'), m.M. † † † A. nervosa FOERST. †
—- Forewings mostly yellowish tinged, not cross-rimmed-
pelig. — yg Copulation forceps about three times as long
broad as at the top, rather strong from the middle
broadened, rounded at the apex. — 2 Genital Segment

1) A. affinis ZeYY. has a black head and thorax. The antennas
extend beyond the forewing base. Length of the rear tars 2?/, of those
of shins. — Forewings widest in the middle. 2) This may also include: A. subpunctata FOERST., where
all veins end in a black dot (in Germany, e.g. at Aachen). 3) 4. pilosa OSH. differs from A. artemisiae in that it
whole body, except for the forewings, is densely haired. — 3 mm A. maculosa LOW is slightly larger than A. arfemisiae, the black drawing
the forewings merge more; the stem of the Radius is not
longer than the stem of Media + Cubitus. ') This may include: A. zanoxia FOERSY. where the black
zooms along the forewing veins are missing (0.a. in Germany bi
Boppard). 5

64 H. C. BLOTE, OVERVIEW DER

long, almost as long as the four preceding sternites
together. — Color most yellowish. — 2'/-4 m.M. A. picta ZETT. 3. Rhinocola. 1.1) The anterior Cubitus branch strongly bent (+ 90°) . 2. — Anterior Cubitus branch slightly curved, anterior cranial margin
obtuse, rounded Not nie re dted) OL Se as
2. Forewings unicoloured, yellowish or greenish. Skull through a sharp edge of the forehead
divorced. — o& Copulation forceps shorter than the genital
plate, equally wide everywhere, about three times as long
as wide. — 2 Genital segment exceedingly long, the
sternite about the same length as the rest of the body,
Length 2mm... . 05 «) s.> |s Ae eee
— Forewings with ring-shaped spots on the outer sides
edge, inside a black zig-zag line and a few more
spots. — Length 1—1!/; mM. † † succincta HEEG *). 3. Anterior Cubitus branch about 4 times as long as the
rear. Forewings widest behind the middle,
sprinkled with black dots and flecks. trailing edge
of the skull concave. — & Copulation forceps narrow, un-
about 4 times as long as broad at the base, slightly shorter
then the genital plate, evenly narrowed towards the top,

bent back slightly. — 2 Genital segment short,
hardly longer than the preceding sternite. - Length
4f,--24, mM. 2 . ne + os) Ke speciosa KLOR,

— Anterior Cubitus branch about twice as long as the
rear. Forewings widest in the middle, one-
colored yellowish brownish. Posterior border of the skull
straight. — o& Copulation forceps as with R. aceris, only to
pointed at the top. — 2 Genital segment long, the sternite
as long as the other sternites of the abdomen
together. — Length + 144, mM.. . † AR. ericae CURT. 1) R. bicolor SCOTT differs from the rest by its very
short Pterostigma that does not reach the level of the Media split. 2) Probably synonymous with &. ¢argionze LIGHT. DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES. 65

4. trioza. 1. Radius reaching beyond the level of Media split,
the outlet is approximately in line with the Media
bifurcation and mouth of the anterior Cubitus branch 2

— Radius not extending beyond the level of Media split,
the estuary clearly falls for the line passing through the
Media split and the mouth of the _ voorvoorten
Cubitos branch goes, = << = 4 a ends ne a ape Te

2. At the height of the Cubitus splieny, the leading edge cell
at least as wide as the Radial cell. † † † † 3

— At the level of the Cubitus junction is the leading edge cell

narrower than the Kadiaaleel. « «2°92 2 « ao £ 98

Radius strongly bent backwards; the connecting line

falls from the ends of the anterior and posterior branches

therefore partly in the Radial cell, the Radius (i.e. the
rear branch) is thus cut twice. Thorn fields well developed, along the veins thorn-free

strips. — o& Corpulation pliers simple, inward
curved. — 2 Genital segment very pointed. 7. rkhamnz SCHRK. — Radius (back branch) almost straight, the connecting line
from the ends of the anterior and posterior branches
lot entirely in the leading edge cell,. † † † † aw 7a? 4. Forewing surface clearly bedootad, at least in
most cells have a thorn field. † ..... 5

— Forewing surface not spiny, at most a
thorn field in the posterior root cell near the wing
root, and a few groups of fairly thick thorns on the pine
EWAN bee! ask there a. At) ai, see ce poy Go ae NS

i) O Geet wes ca Sn eI Bw ee a os ge et |

6. Forewings regularly thorned, the fields have
the same shape as the cells, leaving only a strip
free along the veins *). Copulation forceps from the side
seen round, disc-shaped, with an inward facing
protrusion at the top. † TZ. virzdula ZETT. oC. us

1) 7. mesomela FLOR has pine Clavus completely deep black. 2) 7. agrophila Low or: Copulation forceps, seen from the side, four-
side, with a long, cylindrical projection on the back of the top. †
Q Last tergite, seen from above, about three times as long as broad. 66

LE. At

£3. Hi °C. BARE, OVERVIEW DER

Forewings with irregularly shaped spines. Copulation forceps, side view, bottle-shaped
T. dispar Low @. Forewings clear, along the veins with thornless
strips'), — last tergite (of the genital segment)
seen from above, about twice as long as
Wide 2% 0 .% . † Li wirtdula Tera?! Tinted front wings: whole, so close to
the veins thorned. † † † † J. dispar Low @
3s Pointing the Copulation Forceps inwards (i.e. towards
towards each other). 2 Genital segment pointedly wedge-shaped, rather long. I. urticae L.
& Points of the Copulation Forceps facing outward. 2 Genital segment short and obtuse, seen from above

more or less rounded .-. «,., .-.,, 7: scot owe
The 4° and) §°'sprit member; white. ef yellow . 022 ee
The 4° and 5° spritlid gwart of brain < . <7 2] aqeeee
The: 1* and 2nd member red or brown...) <¥acuare

Only the first limb brown. (See: 7. chrysanthemi
and 7. proxima). The 1* and 2¢* whip member white or yellow. — ae mostly
yellow/tinted .. ..'ive by) See
The 6° and 7© sanenia matt or ae 8), ‘Advantageous
without surface thorns. — gy Copulation forceps with
inward curved top, and with a tooth in it
middle. Forewings almost crystal clear. — 2 End
of the abdomen short wedge-shaped. Forewings yellow-
like =". 9. . » »« « J, modesia PORRSE
Hetv6* and 17° sprietiid Wit wee eae ea
Forewings little or not, sometimes afib at the root,
yellowish tint . † † sj om ean Lege
Forewings whole and clear eel ootint 'nee ee
The 4° and 6° spine members widened at the top. For-

1) See note 2) previous page. 2) 7. binotata Low has a black spot in the posterior root cell,
at the peak of the Clavus,

3) 7. cirsta Low: Wings spiny, crystal clear. o: without tooth in
the center of the copulation forceps. DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES. 67

wings completely thorny, tanned at the root. †

Last tergite at the y on either side with a crochet

shaped, inward curved, projection. — Genital-

segment of the @ short wedge-shaped . 7. acutipennis ZETT. — Just the 4° and 6° member of the spine. -- Last tergite at

the g¢ without projections. Forewings crystal clear or

evenly tinged slightly yellowish. † † † † † † I4. 14. Skull truncated straight from behind. — g: Copulation

pliers without a forward projection in the

middle. — @ Last tergite from above with one in it

eye-catching indentation. † † TZ. chrysanthemi Low. — Skull edge bent in from behind. — gy Copulation-

pliers with a protrusion in the front facing forward

middle. — @ Last tergite from above bina not

dented 1) . † † I. munda FOERST. 15. Fork of the Media Spvallend 'ein, the distance from the

split to the end of the Radius is about twice

as long as the length of the posterior Media branch. †

Forewings completely thorny. ¢ Ter-

side seen approximately bottle-shaped. Q Last tergite

very blunt, almost rounded. † † 7. aegopodi Low. — Fork of the Media just, the distance of the split

to the end of the Radius is about the same size as the

length of the posterior Media branch *). Forewings whole

thorny. — gy Copulation forceps triangular, quite long and
narrow. — @ Last tergite short, but pointed

T. saundersi M.-D.

16. *) The 8¢ member black. — Along the forewing veins

undisturbed strips. — gy Copulation forceps, from ter-

side seen, oval, with a rounded, short, upwards

pointed appendage in the center of the front. †

@ Genital segment long and pointed. -- Length over 2 m.M. T. cerastie Low. 1) 7. abdominalis FLOR differs from 7. munda in that the
cheek cones do not diverge strongly. At the ¢ is the peak of the copulation
pliers sharp hooked bent forward. The last tergite of
the 2 at the end more pointed than at 7. meunda.,

2) 7. bohemica SuLc has thorn-free strips along the veins. 3) 7, senectonts Scop. has the 5¢ to 8th limb light — the 9° and roe
dark brown. Forewings with thorn-free strips along the veins. 5°

68

i;

18,

19. 20. ZT

 

H. Co BARE, OVERVIEW DER

The 8¢ member of the spine is yellowish white. Forewing veins without thorn
free strips along it. -- g Copulation pliers with hook
shaped forward curved spire. — 2 Genital Segment
short wedge-shaped. Length barely 2 mm. T. proxima FLOR. The 1° to 3° spine member white, or only at the base
tanned. † ioe
Only the detde apuetlia no n Wieusele clear, with
some thorn fields. — yg Copulation forceps long and narrow,
with forward curved spire. — ¢: Genital Segment
very short wedge-shaped . † † † † JZ. maura FOREST. Blades completely black *). Wings clear, without thorn
fields. — g Copulation forceps long and narrow, forward
curved. — 9? Genital segment short wedge-shaped
T. nigricornis FOERST. Radius fairly straight, the connecting line of the ends
of the anterior branch and the Radius (posterior branch) not
exceeding. Forewing surface with fields of thorns. — g Copulation forceps very long pointed, with towards
outwardly curved tops. —- @ Last tergite very short
wedge-shaped. † † e «so DZ. albiventeis PORREI. Radius curved, the connecting line of the ends of
crossing the anterior and posterior branches well.— None
surface thorns. — ¢ Copulating forceps, from the side
seen, blade-shaped, with forward-curved spire. †
@ Genital segment quite long, pointed wedge-shaped
LT. curvatinervis FOERST. By pt bre brush! ees something oe The ball eas a eee ee

Dy al My OI Re eye en en eorea! Paae ge) Rs SESt Wa ere
Copulation forceps with rearward pointed tip. Wings quite broad, very variable in color and appearance
thorn. — Only the third member white, other members
dark brown. — Length 2—2*/mM. 7. galzz FOERST.¢. Copulation forceps not with a 21 . rear pointing point
Only the 3°, sometimes additionally the base of the 4° whip-

1) T. striola FLOR has no surface spines. 2) 7. salicivora REUY. does have surface thorn fields. 3) 7. crithmi LOw has the two first members white, the rest
brown, darkening towards the apex.,

24. 25. 206. DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES. 69

member yellow white. — Larger species, (over 3 mM.). † 22
The 4® to 7° whip member also white. -- A big and
a small species. † † Coss 22

Copulation Forceps Precloubia, a outer Tab rounded,
the inner spire and curved inward. front wings
with regular fields of thorns, sometimes, however, the
thorn strongly reduced, especially in the anterior rhizomes
cell, where the thorn field may be missing

T. centhrante VALLOT. . Copulation forceps only with one, bent inwards
rush hour. Wing spin variable, posterior only
root cell always thorny. † 7. remota FOERST. . The 1© and 2° whiplid brown. Front wings completely
thorny, without bare strips along the veins. — o& The Copulation Forceps have seen, from the side,
the shape of a segment of a circle, the curved side to
forward. — § Genital segment moderately long, but strong
focused. — Lengtht+2mM. † 7. chenopodit REUT. Only the end of the Antennae is brown. Forewings almost
entirely without surface thorns. .— & Copulation forceps,
seen from behind, pruning knife-shaped, with inward
curved spire, from the side about the same width. — 9: Genital segment very long, and gradually narrowed. —.Length 3–4 mM.. . † † † TZ. alacris FLOR. End of abdomen broad wedge-shaped, from above
seen the angle that the sides make to each other is t 60° 25
End of the abdomen narrower, more pointed. † † † 26
Radius quite long, ending almost above the media split. Wings perfectly clear, spinous variable. †
Larger species (£3 mM.). † TZ. centhranti VALLOT. †
Radius short. Forewings mostly yellow tinged, sometimes very
strong. Variable forewing spines. —- Smaller
species (2-27, mM...) | yoga? : FOREST. 2. Only the 3°, sometimes the base of the 4° spine member yellow-
white. Wing spin variable, posterior only

root cell still thorny. — Fairly large species (spacious
SM) seo = .t ve 3 £5 vemota FOERSTY 9. Fict 4° to 7° whip member also white. — A big and

GSavklemieSOoOre «a ust Woo eerie ek oe ne: Pad

7O H. C. BARE, OVERVIEW DER

5. Psyllopsis. 1. Body entirely light green or yellowish. front wings
crystal clear, with whitish veins, or slightly yellowish,
without black spots. Antennae yellow, members from
the fourth with black top, the last two completely
black. — o: Ax-shaped copulation forceps (from terzyde
see); black at the top. † † fvraxtnicola FOERST. — Pale yellow or green, with clear black stripes, which
often completely displace the ground color. — Wings
peak + . 2044 "a°\s 3 ee 4 ON Ss ee ee

2. Copulation forceps of the o, seen from the side, three-
angular, narrow from below, angular towards the rear
curved '). Forewings clear, usually with a
black, or brown, sharply defined band at the
terminal edge, from the tip of the Pterostigma to the
center of the fork cell of the Cubitus. — Length 2'/, mM. P. fraximi (..

— Copulation forceps of the , seen from the side, hammer-
shaped. The bottom half is narrow, it has a
the same high piece that is suddenly + 4 times as wide. — The dark wing drawing is less sharp
erensd'./2. 5 es) 4 oe 2S) PL aserepoms ee,

6. arytaena. Head and thorax green or yellow, on the back with red-
like or brown spots. Wings with long brown
stripes in the radial and mostly in the rear

wm
†

root cell, in addition to shorter, triangular spots in the
Media cell and the Fork cells. † † A. genistae LATR. 7. psylla. There are three species in this genus, by J. EDWARDS in
"Hemiptera Homoptera of the British Islands" 1896 be-

 

1) P. distinguenda Epw. differs from P. /raxini in that the
inner sides of the copulation forceps in the middle a membranous tooth
show. The band-shaped drawing on the forewings is wider and
sharply defined. 2) A. adenocarpfi 'Ow is lighter in colour, the dorsal spots are yellowish. On the forewings only at the end brownish shadow spots
between the veins. DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES, vl

which I, because of the incompleteness of the descriptions
could not be included in this table, which was mainly derived from SULC
accommodate. An abbreviated description, with the main ones
characteristics, therefore follows below. P. brunnetpennis Epw. : Cheek cones as long as the
skull in the middle, the inside straight, the outside
side bent, very little divergent. antennas un-
about half as long as the costa. Forewings dark
smoke-translucent, in and near the anterior root cell
completely translucent; veins yellow-brown, towards the end
black. Trailing edge with a black stripe in front of the pine
top of the clavus. y Genital plate about twice
as high as the copulation forceps, these about two-
times as high as their base widths, the front half
extended from the apex to a broad, blunt tooth. Q Last tergite'), longer than the last sternite. Length 2'/-3 m.M. (Similar to P) A772) but is at least
half bigger. P. concinna Epw. Cheek cones hairy, moderately long. For-
wings translucent. the posterior cubitus branch is in
a large, irregular, sharply defined, black
fleck; it forms with two other, oval, irregular
black spots an oblique, broken, blotchy
band, which ends at the top of the radius. - Further
a black spot at the top of the stigma, and a
short section of the tops of the anterior Cubitus branch and
der Mediabranches black laced. — Length 2 m.M. (probably P. pulchella LOw.). P. venata Epw. † Elytra milky white translucent, de
veins broad dirty rust yellow laced. — Genital valves
elongated triangular, as long as the rest of the abdomen. —- Length 2'/, m.M. (probably described on a
uncolored specimen of P. hartzgz FLOR.). 1. Wing membrane along the posterior Cubitus branch with
smoked a black vic or filthy smoke. † † † † † 2

— Wing membrane along the posterior Cubitus branch entirely
gouderl View Of DerOOKING {7 5. nel =| <) dsisie =. 3s

j2 H. C. BARE, OVERVIEW DER

bo

1) Wing diaphragm only in the Radial and Mediancel
and in the fork cells of Media and Cubitus with thorns
near the edge. smoked; the smoked spot along the
posterior Cubitus branch not very sharply defined. — ¢ Copu-
forceps short and thick, pointed short towards the end
and bent backwards; truncated teeth
broadened in shape, sharp-edged from the front, towards the rear
angular. — 2 Genital segment short; beaked toe
pointed. — Blades 1.3 m.M. Length 2.5 m.M. P. crataegt SCHRK. — Forewing membrane along the margin completely thorned. †
The spot along the posterior Cubitus branch on the edge
the widest; triangular. Forewings with little surface
plain thorns, broad thornless strips everywhere
present. Underside completely unpierced. yg: Copulation-
pliers straight and fairly wide, skewered above, with
a long, inward-turned tooth. @ Anus very
long. Last tergite very long, without humps, beak-
shaped, slim. — Blades 1 m.M. Length 2!/, m.M. P. albipes FLOR. 3. The spire of the forewings coincides with the out-
mouth of the Radius. — Wing membrane slightly leather-
like, greenish yellow. y Copulation forceps straight, the tips
bent towards each other, almost as long as the genital
plate. — @ Last Sternit about as long as the
other sternites together, the tergite about '/, longer. --— Blades 1.3 m.M. Length 4 m.M.. .. #. dvz72 1
= The point of the forewings is in or behind the end
van den voorsten Mediatak.— *) No Pterostigma. Front

1) In this group belong three more species with black spots in the
terminal half of the wings, especially along the veins. These types are:

P. breviantennata FLOR has no thornless strips along the
blood vessels. The thorns are very close together, blades shorter than 1 m.M. P. limbata M. D. does have thornless strips. Forewings with
a broad, continuous band. — Blades 1.3 m.M. P. pulchella Low also has thornless bands. front wings
with a narrow band, often dissolved in spots. — Blades 1 m.M. 2) P. dudat Sutc has the vik along the nightest Cubitus branch everywhere
equally wide. — Point of the clavus unsmoked. Thornfields out-
more knitted than in P. adtfes, also thorns on the underside. 3) P. viburni Low has a clear Pterostigma; the end edge of the
wings clearly truncated. DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES. i3

Radius branch not extended along the leading edge, neither
the leading edge is thickened. — Wings at the basal
third part clearly narrowed, widened towards the end. Veins pale, blackish towards the apex. gy: Copulation-
forceps thin and quite long, but shorter than the genital
plate, the spires bent inwards. 2 Genital
segment awl-shaped, serrately serrated at the end. — Blades 1'/, m.M. Length 3--4m.M. † P. fusca ZETT. — The tip of the forewings lies in the terminal margin of the
Radial cell, usually about the center. † 4. 4. No surface thorns in the Leading Edge, Radial and
Mediancel, but in the Root cells'). Between the veins
are brown, elongated spots, approximately equally brown
like the spire of the clavus. Cheek cones 1/, shorter
then the skull. & Copulation forceps strong sickle-shaped
curved forward, with a, facing forward
tooth at the base. — ¥ Genital segment at the root
suddenly narrowed. The upper genital valve is very long. — Sprites 1 mM. Length 2'/, mM. † † P. pyri L.
— However, surface thorns in the Leading Edge, Radial and
median cell. As e &. 5. No bare strips along the veins, at least
not along the outer two-thirds of Radius and
Media. So the thorns are close to deaden 6. — Along the veins, at least along Radius and Media,
narrower or wider, bare strips. † † 8. 6. ®) Cones of cheeks as long as forehead, wings short,
only about 1 mM. long, even towards the end
narrowed. The dark smoke completely fills the cells
on. The surface thorns are very close. — o: Copulation forceps bent back, on the
base with a rounded, rearward facing
bump. — @: Genital segment short, the sternit approximately
1'/, times as long as the preceding, the tergite

to

 

 

1) P, bidens Sutc clearly has the shadow spots lighter than the
dark clavus spire, cones of cheeks about as long as the skull. Sprouts 1 m.M. Length 4 m, M. 2) P. spartiicola Suuc, unlike the following species, has
a tiny Pterostigma. 74

H.C. BARE, OVERVIEW DER

about twice as long as the sternite, but not

far beyond it. — Blades 0.8 mM. Length
13/-2 mM. — Color very variable, green-yellow to
black-with-red . † † † P. parvipennis Low. Cheek Cones Clearly Loner Than Into Forehead
dei tniddelglue 2i02> 1° \ U.) Hie & pon “Ce

The surface thorns are very close together (on
about 2 mw distance). The front Radius branch unites
more or less with the leathery Pterostigma. †
&: Copulation forceps small and thin, only half as long
like the genital plate, the tips gradually towards each other
bent towards. — 9: Genital segment very long, the star-
not about as long as the three preceding sternites
together, the tergite still 1'/, times as long. - Color
mostly orange-yellow. — Sprites 1 mM. Length 2!/, mM. P. hartgt FLOR. The surface thorns are at distances of 10–20 wu
The front Radius branch is pretty good from the rest of it
distinguish pterostigma. — The Dark Smoke
the wing membrane often does not reach the innermost part
of the cells, the veins don't get much darker than
the membrane along it. — &: Copulation forceps fairly
short and thick, conical, slightly bent inward,
about !/, shorter than the genital plate. — 9: Last
sternite about as long as the two preceding ones
together, the tergite about twice as long as the

sternite. — Color mostly dark red-brown. front wings
lighter at the base. — Blades 0.8 mM. Length
2mM .......... .@zp

The apretviaiéedoot ce are very close together (on
about 2 mw distance), the thorn free strips are here
and there, especially along the Cubitus, it is not clear where
accessible, and in some places completely missing. — o&: Copulation forceps narrow, 5–6 times as long as on
the base broad, almost as long as the genital plate; the
tops sharply pointed. — (: Last sternit un-
spring as long as the two preceding ones together, it
tergite little longer, only '/, further from its length
reaching back. — Color mostly mostly

ney:

IT. 12

DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES. 75

orange-yellow with green abdomen. — Sprites 1 mM. Length 20a mm. wh. 2 4 . = & Ombigua FOERST. The surface thorns are, at least in the middle
der Radial cell, about 204 apart. † † † Q. The whole wing membrane, except the stigma,
that can be smoked, completely transparent, rarely anything
clear, cetint, but never cloudy ~~ » 2 . (srs*.) 10,
The entire wing membrane is more or less milky white to
dark brown smoked, or: only brown spots on
the terminal edge or at the Clavus seam. † † † † I8. The leading edge of the Pterostigma and the anterior Radius
branch perfectly united with the leathery surface ;
only at P. alnz a small, membranous piece remains. — Stigma small... i: ie ae tl tds
The leading edge of the Bitrastietia and the anterior Radius,
branch are clearly discernible separately; a pale
membranous stigma lies between them, the end of which has passed,
seldom lies just above the center of the radius. 12. † The forewing veins are mostly black; for-
wings 4!/, mM. long, the anterior half of the anterior margin cell
covered with surface thorns, the inner third
der Radial cell without thorns. — &: Copulation forceps long,
moderately thick, straight, only the upper part inward
curved; apex obtuse, little shorter than genital plate. — § Last sternit about as long as the two pre-
going together, the tergite very long, about two-
times as long as the sternite, strongly pointed. †
Color mostly green or yellowish. Sprites 3 mM. bengie, 4c wrong. io se law. «1s = Fe alae
The forewing veins are completely pale yellow. front wings
3mM. long. The outer half of the leading edge cell with
surface thorns, the inner third of the radial cell

also. — Genitals similar to the previous species. — Sprites 1.2 mM. length 3.5 mm. Color mostly brown-
Seelilar kaa A Alte! oo ee Bere

† *) Front swivel] unintended. only in the outer corner

†

P. alpina FLOR has the entire anterior root cell with thorns

filled, the other cells also almost completely thorned. 2) P. picta FOERST. : The thorns in the leading edge cell do not reach to
the end, but leave here a thorn-free strip,

76 H. C. BLOTE, OVERVIEW DER

with a small group of thin thorns. — Veins white-

like, never completely tanned. † † Os

— Anterior root cell clearly spiny; aden 'in always

dark colored. (See also: P. hippophacs) ns Sa

13. The surface thorn fields in the Leading Edge and Radial

cell in the inner half narrowed to a single

thorn row. — & Copulation forceps everywhere equally wide, narrow,

curved at the top, rather long pointed. Within-

side at the apex with an inwardly directed tooth. — 9 Tergite of the genital segment short wedge-shaped,

rounded at the top; sternite pointed cone-shaped, in a

pointed point pulled out. — Color usually green. spiel-

at 1.9 mM. Length 47), mM.. ... VF. ulmi POErERST-

— The boundaries of the fields of thorns are all about the same

devoted to the veins, only to the spire of the Media

the thorn field is slightly widened. — co copulation forceps

almost straight, equally thick everywhere, little shorter than the genital

plate. — 2 Genital segment similar to the previous one

kind. — Color green, yellow] or brown-red; blades 1.2 mM. Length 4 mMi tse 2 th 3 Os aeale SCRE:

14. The anterior root cell and the anterior margin cell completely spiny,

especially close to the base. The fields of thorns everywhere

tet close to the terminal edge. † <.. tha” Sat ees

— The anterior root cell is not completely pedsorad (only in

P. melanoneura also thorny in the outer corner. The

fields of thorns leave an unthorned strip at the end

OPER LO tak ALE ha eh Ao a

15. End of the anal vein not noticeably dark. Veins in the outer half of the wings clear

brown, with faint, blackish stripes. — o& Copulation-

tang short and wide, more than the lower half of the pine

rear edge widened to the rear, as well as the front

of the upper part. Top short, angular, obtuse

rounded. — @ Last tergite cone-shaped, elongated

pointed, beaked; top edge straight. — Color yellow to
blackish. Antennas 1 mM. Length 2.3mm. P. nigrita ZETT. — Ejinde of the Anaalader black on lighter ground, clear

very prominent, also the other veins, in the case of discolored

16.

ouch

DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES. At

specimens blackish at the end, so that they have something
light off. — o Copulation forceps, on the underside, towards
extended posteriorly, at the apex with a posterior
focused tooth. — @ Genital segment as with the previous one
kind. — Sprites 1.2 mM. Length 2'/— 3 mm. P. salicett FOERST. The surface of the leading edge cell is completely covered with
nen, up to the (very short) basal part of the anterior
Radius branch, especially above the outer third of den
Radius. — Groups of peripheral mandrels narrower than the upper
plain thorn fields. Forewings about equally everywhere
wide. Pterostigma carmine red. — co copulation forceps
straight, with truncated top, little shorter than the genital
plate. — 2 Last tergite strongly acuminate, upper edge
concave, rather short, not extending beyond the stern. This is about the same length as the previous two
together. Color usually dark brown-red. Sprouts 1 mM. One 4 mM. 2 fu. +s 4° Ps pyrisuga COURSE. The surface of the leading edge cell is not wholly thorned,
only with a small group of thorns near the outer
Eee etna ie Me) As MORE fe Tea ee I el ate We
The groups of peripheral spines are clearly wider than the upper
plain thorn fields. Front wings in the first third part
narrowed, likewise in the outer. — o& Copulation Forceps
thick, slightly widened in the middle, split at the top,
the rear striker sharp and bent inward, the
anterior rounded and erect; slightly shorter than the
genital plate. — @ Last tergite wedge-shaped, from the
base to the top strongly narrowed, the top slightly thickened
and rounded, no bulge on the top edge, nor of
base to apex curved convex, at the point with sharp
thorns. Last tergite little or no longer than it
previous. First color green, later brown with black
and red ticks. Sprouts 1 mM. Length 2.5mm. P. costalis FLOR. The groups of peripheral thorns are as wide as the fields of thorns. Front wings to base in the first third strong
narrowed, only slightly towards the spire, in the outermost
third part. In the leading edge cell, except for the group of thorns

78 H, C. BARE, OVERVIEW DER

near the edge, besides a group of thin thorns
at the base. — yg: Genital plate over 11), X so long
as the copulation forceps. Copulation forceps fairly straight, short
tapered, the front straight, the trailing edge in the
slightly bent in the middle, evenly
bows. — 9: Last tergite long wedge-shaped, towards the
gradually pulled out. Spire of the tergite
curved upwards, sharp, top edge with a, little
pronounced, but clear bulge. — Color very
changeable. — Sprites 1 mM. Length 3.5mm. P. melanoneura FOERST. 18. Pterostigma entirely leathery, not very large, but on
the base three times as wide as the Radius. the pre-
edge and the front Radius branch are not clear of it
to distinguish. —- Anterior longitudinal half of the anterior margin cell
covered with surface thorns. The group of thorns
in the Radial cell extends far inward, almost to the
Media split. Veins in the outer third of the
forewings clearly smoked. — o: Copulation forceps
straight, quite thin, only towards each other at the top
arches, about ?/, as long as the narrow, almost cylindrical
shaped genital plate. — 9: Last Sternit very long
and pointed, about as long as the rest of the sternites
together, the tergite only a little longer. the whole
genital segment slightly curved upwards, pointed

conical. — Color almost always green. — Sprites
3.mM. Length 4.mM.. 4... ~ . £..for decorates BLOB:
— Pterostigma, at least in part, filthy. † † † 9.) 10:

19. The membranous part of the Pterostigma is very small; further
is the radius fused with the leading edge'). the front
root cell with surface thorns, the group of peripheral thorns
in the Radial cell briefly, barely to the level of the
reaching the mouth of the front Media branch, —¢&: Copu-
forceps long and thin, almost as long as the genital
plate, slightly bent back and inward, top
rather pointed. — 9: Genital segment high and pointed, from

1) P. deiarbrei PUT, has no surface thorns in the _ anterior
root cell. The group of fringe spines in the Radial cell extends almost to the
Media split. Length 3.5mm. 20. THEY. DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES 79

side view triangular. The tergite in the cerste */,
part equally high everywhere, the last third sharp
tapered, top turned up, top edge
even slightly concave. — The sternite '/, shorter, three-
angular, adjacent to the tergite. — Cheek Cones
short, only about half as long as the skull. †
Sprites 1.4 mM. — Length 2 mm. Color dirty yellow with
eurare tiga ile wl lkc~ a sa vl eda UPS epatir GUER:
The membranous Pterostigma long, rather broad, the spire
falls before the beginning of the last third of the
Radius. The front Radius branch in its entire course
observable, not fused with the Pterostigma. 20
The shadow spots are only in the center of the
cells, at least in the Radial and Mediaance! do they touch
not by the veins, but keep at or within the limit
of the throughfields qp “5 . 6s. « loop 3 LA ae 28
The dark smoke or bébelinp reaches to the
veins, so there are no lighter streaks along the veins,
at least not everywhere. † † 5 SHEA eee 8th
Only in the vicinity of £ adadingvaenen is the
wing membrane smokes, also at the clavus spire a
brown spot. — o& Copulation forceps short and thick, scaled
shaped, narrowed towards the top, rounded; from behind
at the bottom broadened in a lap-like shape, flared in honour. pair of short teeth, between which a shallow incision. — @ Last tergite long wedge-shaped, pointed,
with a long, unpronounced booty. Top of
rounded above and below, but short at the end
and sharply focused. — Color yellow-white with red or
brown drawing. — Sprites 1 mM. — Length 4 mm. P. rhamnicola SCOTT. The smoked spots extend further in than
the groups of thorns. † † † † 22
The smoked spots are narrower than ide dootielaen
This species resembles P. pyrz, but in that species there are
no groups of fringe mandrels in the leading edge-radial- and
median cell. & Copulation forceps bottle-shaped, upwards
gradually narrowed, narrowed at the end,
with a thin, sharp, forward-facing tooth. †

8O H.. C, BARE, OVERVIEW DER

2 Genital segment wedge-shaped, extended at the tip ;
anus very long. -- Color most! red with brown tick
ning. — Sprites 1 mM. Length 3mm. P. simulans FOERST. — The smoked spots are as wide as the thorn-
weld; sy Sie js4*. L bag Souk ee
23. Center of the Radial cell contiguous, neither through
just before the top of the foremost Cubitus branch. — o: Copu-
forceps the same width everywhere, the top rounded short,
first forward, then curved back, little
shorter than the genital plate. — 2: Anal Segment Wedge
shaped, gradually narrowing towards the point, outer
sheath truncated at the top, anus short. Color mostly
green, with red spots. — Sprites 2 mM. - Length
3 tM) al ae (eee Oe Tendon eoRg,
— Thorns in the center with radial cell clearly visible
present!). Abdomen in colored animals black, de
shadow spots do not reach to the wing tip, but
are bounded at the end by a colorless fringe,
— do: copulation forceps, seen from the side quite wide,
the last quarter, however, narrow, with rounded spire,
below a semi-circular widening. — 9 Geni-
language segment long conical. — Length 4 mm. P.klapaleki SULC
24. The point of the Clavus is smoked or black *). the thorns
in the Leading edge cell do not reach to the end and to the
front Radius branch. — In the Radial and Median cell and
in the Fork cells, the thorns are not closely spaced. Above the end of the Media is the field of thorns up to
one row of thorns narrowed, in the innermost part of the radial
cell it does not reach to the Radius. — &: Copulation forceps
straight, very short, bottle-shaped, bellied below, towards

1) P. abdominalis M, D, differs from P,klapaleki in that
the abdomen, even in colored animals, remains yellow or green. — The
shadow spots on the wings reach to the point, and the copulation
pliers are simple, thin and almost straight. 2) P. pyrarbosis Sutc: the thorns in the leading edge cell reach as far as
the top. In the Radial cell and the fork cell of the Cubitus, the
thorns close together. — Blades 1 m.M. The smoked spots indicate-
liiker than in P. pyricola. — Genitals similar to this species. 26. 20. DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES. 8I

narrowed at the top, completely rounded at the top, un-

tooth. — & Genital segment wedge-shaped, short acuminate. Anus very long, length about '/, from that of the last
tergite. — Cheek cones about '/, shorter than the
skull. — Color mostly orange with brown markings. Blades 0.8 mM. — Length 2 mm. P. pyricola FUERST. Spit of and. Clavius ​​not smoked 4 <.«. oo a 5) 5

1) Thorns missing in the center of the Radial cell. The thorn field in the anterior root cell takes only
half the length. The smoked spots are standing
usually near the veins, in the outer half of the anterior
wings. The centers of the cells often remain transparent. —- Veins not colored. The groups of thorns
narrower than the fields of thorns. Thorns close at the top
instant. — o& Copulation forceps straight, quite long, towards
the end slightly narrowed, top blunt rounded, almost
as long as the genital plate. — (2 Genital Segment
tall and long, the tergite little longer than the sternite,
blunt, the sternit pointed. Anus long. The whole segment

black at the top. — Color mostly yellowish
with green abdomen. —- Sprites 1.3 mM. - Length
BN a ew | Raphecogiera Law,

Thorns in the center of the radial cell evident. The
thorns in the anterior root cell take up more than the
elite cer lenote in. — 2+, ‘26
*) Vieugels in the end half Mere black eeieags slethts
translucent in the inner third. — Wings
long and narrow. — ¢ Copulation forceps quite long, and narrow,
equally wide everywhere, the spire inwards and backwards
curved; at the base with a, posteriorly,
lap-shaped appendage. — 9: Genital segment long cone
shaped, upper edge straight, without hump. --- Blades 1
mM. — Length 3.5 mM. Color mostly reddish brown
P. elegantula ZETT. 1) P. alaternit FOERST. differs from the following in that
the thorns in the leading edge cell do not extend to the end. — Cheeks-
cones shorter than the skull. 2) P. corcontum SuLC has colorless zooms along Radius and Media. — Thornless strips uniformly everywhere, narrow. — Anterior root cell whole
spiny, cones of cheeks shorter than skull. 82 H. C. BLOTE, OVERVIEW DER

— Wings only faintly tinted, not dark gray smoked'). The surface thorns are close together everywhere; the
groups of thorns are as wide as the fields of thorns *). Plain strips of the same width everywhere, only along
den Radius a narrow strip, which runs along the outermost
fourth part is slightly widened. In the inner third
the anterior root cell lacks thorns. — @ : Copu-
forceps long, slightly narrowed, evenly curved,
top stump; little shorter than the genital plate.—Q:
Genital segment long, the sternit about this long
if the other sternites together, the tergite a little further
reaching, drawn out into a long blunt point. †

Color green to orange brown. — Blades 1.7 mM. — Length 33/, mM... . † P. hippophaes FOERST. LITERATURE. The following list is only intended as a
list of those works which are necessary for the speciology and systems
matics of the Native Psyllids are of great importance. A fairly complete list of literature, which also includes anatomy
mic, ecological and other writings are mentioned,
gave: Dr. F. ZACHER; Die Literatur tiber die Blattflohe und die
von ihnen verursachten Gallen', in the Centralblatt fur
Bacteriology, Parasites und Infektionskrankheiten”
Zweite Abteilung, Bd. 46, 1916, Heft °/,,. AULMANN, Dr. G. — Psyllidarum Catalogue. Berlin. (junk)
1913. — A list of names known at that time. See
"Book Announcement" by Dr. D. MAC GILLAvVRY in
entomole. messages, part III, no. 71. CRAWFORD, D. L. — A Monograph of the jumping Plant-
lice or Psyllidae of the New World. — Smithsonian
institution. U.S. Nat. Museum. bull. 85. Washington

1) P. rhododendri Pur. The thorns are at the end of the wings
not close to one, Cheek cones shorter than skull (+3:4). Thornless strips quite broad, uniform everywhere. — Blades 1.1 m.M. 2) P. loewii ScoTT has narrower bare strips than /,
hippophaes ; the strip along the Radius is not widened at the end. †
In the Radial Cell, the thorns extend close to the Radius. †
Blades 0.9 m.M. DUTCH PSYLLIDS SPECIES. 83

1914. — a.m. an excellent reform of the system
matic. EDWARDS, J. — Hemiptera Homoptera of the British Islands,
FLor, G. — Die Rhynchoten Livlands, in Syst. Follow
to write. — Dorpat. 1860. — For a few generations yet

always the best editing. Zur knowledge of the Rhyuchotes. (Describe, neuer Arten
d. family der Psyllodea), — ​​Bull. natural. Moscow 34. 1861. FORSTER, A. —- Ubersicht der Gattungen und Arten in
der Familie der Psy/déden. — Trade. d. Wet. Verein. d. preuss. Rhinelands. 1848. — The first more out-
knitted species description, but at present quite
old. Low, F. -- Biologie und Charakteristik der Psylloden. †
Verb. Zodl. Bone. Gesellsch. Vienna 26-1876. Beitrage zur Knowledge of the Psylloden. — Ver. Sole. Bone. Ges. Vienna 27-1877. ———— Zur Systematik der Psylloden. — Ver. Sole. Bone. Ges. Vienna 28-1878. Beitrage zur Biologie u. Synonymy of the Psy/-
lead, and
Description of 10 new Psyd/a-arten. Verb. Sole. Bone. Ges. Vienna 31-1881. Revision of the Palaearctic Psyllodes. — Ver. Sole. Bone. Ges. Vienna 32-1882. Zur Charakteristik der Psylloden genera Aphalara
you. ARhznocola. - On. cit. Neue Beitrage z. Knowledge of the Psylloden. — Ver. Sole. Bone. Ges. Vienna 36-1886. The above-mentioned treatises by F. Léw belong
still among the most important for identification
literature. MEYER—Diirk. — Die Psylloden — Mittheilungen d. Switzerland. entom. Gesellsch. bd. 3. no. 8. 1871. ScoTT, J. — Monograph of British Psyldae. — Transaction. entom. social. London. 1876. Supe, K. — Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Psylloden. — Bull. int. academy. d. Science de Boheme 12-1907. Zur Kenntnis und Synonymie einiger Weiden-

84 H.C. BARE, OVERZ. DER NED, PSYLLIDS SPECIES. resident Psyl/a-Arten. - Wiener Entom. Zeitung
28-1909. SULC, K. — Uvod do studia, synopticka tabulka a synony-

micky katalog druhu rodu Psylla, palaearkticke oblasti. — Sitzungsberichte d. konigl. bohm. Gesellsch. v.
Delete Prague. 1909. — An outstanding analytical
table of the genus Psydla. Monographia generis Z7zoza FOERST I—IV. †
Sitzungsber. d. Could. bohm. Ges. v. Wissensch. Prague
I910—1913. —- An excellent (German!) edit
of the genus 77zoza. Thomson, C. G. — Ofversigt af Skandinaviens CHERMES-
arter. — Opuscula Entomole. 8-1877. — single descrip-
caught from Psyllids. ZETTERSTEDT, F. W. — Insecta lapponica descr. 1840. MAGAZINE FOR ENTOMOLOGY

PUBLISHED BY

THE DUTCH ENTOMOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION

EDITED BY

dr. J.TH. OUDMANS, Pror. dr. J.C.H. DE MEIJERE
AND

dr. A.C. OUDMANS. NITH AND SIXIXTH PART. YEAR 1920. WITH SEVEN BLACK PLATES. ’5-GRAVENHAGE,
MARTINUS NIJHOFF. 1926.