A. ¥

GF. Extn
vil as ankors Gen homers

Contributions to the Knowledge of Swedish
Psyllids (Hem. Psylloidea) 1-4

By FREJ OSSIANNILSSON
Dept. of Plant Pathology and Entomology, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden

Ent. scand. 1. 1970. 135-144

 

Abstract

In the first contribution a new Psylla species is
described, viz. P. betulaenanae, n.sp. On the basis
of larval characters this species is stated to be
closely related to Psylla betulue (L.), P. alni (L.),
P. fusca (Zett.} and the American P. carpinicola
(Crawford), these species together constituting
Psylla str. (type Psylla alni). In the second cen-
tribution the larval instars of Psylla foersteri Flor
are described and this species is made the type of
subgenus Labyrinthopsylla, n.subg. The third ccn-

tribution deals with our remaining Psylla species
which are arranged into three new subgenera, viz. Cacopsylla (type mali (Schmiedb. )), Chamae-
psylla (type hartigi Flor), and Heparopsylla (type
nigrita (Zett.)). Also this subdivision is based on
larval characters. The fourth contribution is a
tentative key to the Swedish Psylla species in the
sth larval instar. No tenable characters for the
separation of nigrita (Zett. ), elegantula (Zett. ),
and klapaleki Sulc were discovered, however. 1. Psylla betulaenanae, n.sp

Synonym: Psylla betulae-nanae Heslop-Her-
rison 19st, nom.nud.—Ossiannilsson 1952,
nom.nud.—Lindberg & Ossiannilsson 1960,
nom.nud. Description. Adult male and female. Very
like Psylla betulae (L.), body smaller and
generally darker pigmented. Length in mm
without wings: male 1.81+0.03 (1.5-2.5),
female 2.37 + 0.02 (2.0-3.0), with wings: male
3.22+ 0.09 (2.7-3.5), female 3.48 + 0.02 (3.0-
3.7). (These measurements were made on
dried material.) Head (Fig. 1) with facial
cones moderately developed. Antennae much
longer than half body length and nearly helf
as long as length with wings, segments I-VIII
more or less light, III-VIII with dark apices,
IX and X fuscous. Body orange or sordid yel-
low with diffuse fuscous markings, males
generally stronger pigmented than females. Fore wings hyaline, more or less amber-col-
oured; microtrichiae of fore wing membrane
arranged as in Figs. 2-3. Male genitalia as in
Figs. 4-6; forceps less hairy than in betulae
(Fig. 7). Female genitalia (Fig. 8) long and
slender but less so than in betulae (Fig. 9). rst instar larva: so far unknown. and instar larva (Fig. 10). Body flat, com-

Ent. scand. 1:2. 1970

paratively broad. Sclerites with fuscous pig-
mentation. Antennae 3-segmented, third seg-
ment with one rhinarium situated distally of
middle. Dorsal hairs generally pointed, ventral
hairs with fine apices, marginal hairs of ab-
domen indistinctly capitate. Sectasetae absent. Anus terminal. Perianal pore field reniform
(Fig. 10 A), comparatively large, consisting of
one outer belt with 2-5 irregular more or less
concentric rows of pores and an inner field
with a transverse ring of about 70 less distinct
pores. 3rd instar larva (Fig. 11). Body flat and
broad. Pigmentation as in 2nd instar larva. Antennae 4-segmented, 3rd and 4th segments
each with one sensorium. Dorsal, ventral and
marginal hairs pointed or with fine apices,
only the longest hairs of middle and hind
tibiae indistinctly capitate. Sectasetae absent. Anus terminal or nearly so, surrounded by a
large perianal pore field consisting of one
outer and one inner zone. Outer zene of peri-
anal field with numerous distinct pores ar-
ranged as in Fig. rz and extending to the dor-
sal side of abdomen. The outline of the ventral
part of this reminds of two bird-heads facing
each other. Inner zone with numerous less
distinct pores. 136 Frej Ossiannilsson

 

SSF oy
Timm

 

Contributions to the Knowledge of Swedish Psyllids (Hem. Psylloidea) 1-4 137

4th instar larva (Fig, 12). Body broad and
flat. Shape of hairs and pigmentation much as
in 3rd instar. Sectasetae absent, Antennae 6-
segmented, segments III], V and VI each with
one sensorium, Anus terminal, perianal pore
field as in the previous instar, only better de-
veloped. 5th instar larva (Fig. 13) Body very broad. Hairs with fine apices, pigmentation as in the
previous instars. Antennae 8-segmented, seg-
ments III, V, VII and VIII each with one sen-
sorium, 3rd antennal segment near middle
slightly swollen, with 3 short hairs around the
swelling, reminding of the hairs present on the
apices of segments III-VII. Anus terminal,
perianal pore field still better developed than
in the fourth instar. Sectasetae absent. The colour of the younger instars is brown-
ish yellow or more rarely olive green, with
black sclerites. The older larvae are light green
or yellowish green with fuscous or black scle-
rites. Host plant: Betula nana L.

Biology. Hibernation probably takes place
in the egg stage on Betula nana. In Harjeda-
len, Hede, the larval instars II-IV were found
on July 18th, 1962, but in 1963 one specimen
belonging to the last instar was collected on
July 2nd. Specimens of instar V were collected
in Jmt, Sunne on July 7, 1966, and in Vb.,
Umeéd as early as on 29.VI.1964. In Pite Lapp-
mark, Arvidsjaur, instars IV and V_ were
available on 23.VII.1955. In Abisko I collected
instars I-IV on 4. and 5.VIL.1964, instars
MI-V on 1o.VII.1964. Adults were found in
July and August, see Types. Like the larvae
of Psylla betulae, those of betulaenanae devel-
op on the shoots or young leaves of its host-
plant surrounded by copious white wax. Types: holotype, one male from Dalarne,
Malung, Backsalen collected on 13.VII.1963. Paratypes: 3 O’C" and one @ from the same
locality and date; 20°o" 6 2 2 from Dir.,
Venjan, St. Knubbflyten 17.VII.1963 (author
leg. ); Dir, Lima, Bullberget 26.VIII.1931, 1
(Bo Tjeder leg}; 6 AG", 6 2 Q from Vstm.,
Norberg, Gavelmossen 3.VII.1954 (author);

 

Figs. 8-9. (8) Psylla betulacnanae, n.sp., specimen
from Abisko, female genitalia from the left. (9)
Psylla betulae (L.), specimen from Dir., Venjan,
female genitalia from the left. 3100’, 41 QQ from His., Gnarp, Leska
11.VIL.1g60 (author); one male from Vb.,
Jérn 21.VIl.1933 (author leg. ), and another
from Vb., Jérn, Ullbergstrisk 24.VII.1936 (G.
Notini leg. ); one male from P. Lpm., Arvids-
jaur 22.VI.1936 (Notini); one male from
Torne Lpm., Torne Tr(ask) 9.VIl.1918 (R.
Malaise leg. ); one male from T. Lpm., Abisko
1918 (F. Nordstrém); one male and one
female (pinned) and 8 males (in slide No. 17085) from T. Lpm., Abisko 1948 (G. Hes-
lop-Harrison leg. ); 3 males and 2 females from
T. Lpm., Abisko ro.VIII.1965 (author, in slide
No. 16171). Holotype and ro paratypes from
Hls,, Gnarp, Leska in the Entomological Mu-
seum of Lund; slides Nos. 16171 and 17085
and 2 males and 2 females (pinned) in the
collection of the Department of Plant Pathol-
ogy and Entomology, Uppsala 7. Remaining
paratypes in the author's collection. Diagnosis. The species just described is
closely related to Psylla betulae (L.), from
which it differs e.g. by its smaller body and
darker colour, The fore wings are also darker
in betulaenanae than in betulae. The male for-

 

Figs. 1-7. (1) Psylla betulaenanac, nsp., head of male from Abisko. (2) same, fore
wing of male with microtrichiae of upper surface. (3) same with microtrichiae of lower
surface. (4) same, male genitalia from the left. (5) same, subgenital plate and forceps
from behind, (6) same, apices of male forceps from above. (7) Psylla betulae (L.),
specimen from Dlr,, Venjan, male forceps from the left. Ent. seand, 1:2. 1970

 

138 Fre} Ossiannilsson

ceps is less pilose in betulaenanae (cf. Figs. 4
and 7) than in betulae, and in the female the
ventral genital plate is less slender in betu-
laenanae (see Fig, 8) than in betulae (Fig. 9). In the larvae, pigmentation is weaker in be-
tulaenanae than in betulae. In the 5th larval
instar the antennae are on an average relatively
shorter in betulaenanae (index II-VI: width
of head=1.0-1.28) than in betulae (same in-
dex=r1.18-1.36). Generally the dorsal and
marginal hairs and the antennal hairs are
longer and more fine-pointed in betulae than
in betulaenanae. Psylla betulae (L.) is as-
sociated with Betula verrucosa and B. pubes-
cens. Note. This species was mentioned by Reuter
(1881, p. 159-160) as a smaller form of Psylla
betulae, He stated that Dr. Léw considered it
to be fully identical with the latter. In 1948,
the late Dr. G. Heslop-Harrison visited Sweden
and collected a large material of our species
on Betula nana in Abisko and possibly more
localities in northern Scandinavia. He told me
that he was convinced that the present insect
was a distinct species which he intended to
describe as a new one. He mentioned the
species in a paper (1951, p. 658, footnote)
under the name of Psylla betulae-nanae. But
no description ever appeared. Systematic position. The closest Swedish
relatives of betulaenanae within the genus
Psylla are the following species: betulae (L.),
alni (L.), and fusca (Zett.). Common to these
species are the following morphological char-
acters in the larval instars: anal opening termi-
nal, anal wax pore field very large and ex-
tending also to the dorsal surface and shaped
more or less exactly as in betulaenanae (cf. Figs. roA, 11, 12, 13); antennae in 3rd instar
4-jointed (fusca not examined), in instar IV
6-jointed, and in instar V 8-jointed. (In the
last larval instar of Psylla fusca there is a
tendency of the 8th antennal joint being sub-
divided into two “secondary” joints.) Last (8th)
antennal segment in the 5th instar with only
one sensorium. Abdominal sectasetae absent
in all stages. Especially the position of the
anus and the very characteristic shape of the
perianal pore field strongly support the idea

 

 

that these species do represent a separate sub-
genus. Since Psylla alni (L.) is the genotype
of Psylla, this subgenus becomes Psylla sensu
stricto.—Judging from the description of the
fifth stage nymph of Psylla carpinicola (Craw-
ford) by Caldwell (1938), also this species
does belong to Psylla s.str. 2. On the larval instars and systematic posi-
tion of Psylla (Labyrinthopsylla, n.subgen.) foersteri Flor

Description of the larval instars. rst instar
larva (Fig. 14). Body oblong, not very de-
pressed. Colour yellowish, sclerotized parts
fuscous. Antennae 3-jointed, 3rd joint with
one sensorium situated on the middle. Dorsal
hairs short, pointed or stump, marginal hairs
on abdomen longer, capitate. Sectasetae ab-
sent. Anus ventral, not surrounded by a dis-
tinct pore ring (Fig. 14A). and instar larva (Fig. 15). Body broad, de-
pressed. Colour pale yellow. Antennae 3-
jointed, 3rd segment with one sensorium sit-
uated distally of middle. Hairs on head point-
ed or with fine apices. Dorsal hairs of thorax
short, stump, those of abdomen gradually
longer against caudal end, stump or capitate. ‘ginal hairs of abdomen long, capitate. Two pairs of sectasetae (Fig. 15, sect) present. Anus ventral, surrounded by a_ transversely
oval or somewhat irregular single-lined ring of
wax pores (Figs. 16a-b). 3rd instar larva. Body broad, depressed. Colour pale yellow, Antennae 4-jointed, seg-
ments II and IV each with one sensorium,
that of III situated apically, that of IV prox-
imally of middle, Hairs on head pointed or
with fine apices, dorsal thoracal hairs short,
stump, those on margins of wing buds com-
paratively long, capitate; abdomen dorsally
with 4 longitudinal rows of comparatively
long, capitate hairs and between these some
shorter hairs. Margin of abdomen with 4 pairs
of long and a few shorter capitate hairs and 2
pairs of sectasetae. Venter of abdomen with
a submarginal row of long or moderately long
capitate hairs gradually longer towards the
caudal end of the body. Anus ventral, perianal

 
  

 

Figs, 10-13. Psylla betulaenanae, n.sp. (10) 2nd instar larva from Abisko. A=perianal
pore field. (11) grd instar larva from Abisko. (12) 4th instar larva from Abisko. (13) sth instar larva from Arvidsjaur,

Ent. scand. 1:2. 1970

 

Contributions to the Knowledge of Swedish Psyllid (Hem. Psylloidea) 1-4

Vig
Lpftittd tory
mn ray! Paya

pret ©]
Weed

 

 

stn
FEN NV Ze

 

    
  
 

  
 
 
 
 
  

   
  

 

140 Frej Ossiannilsson

pore field transverse, with one outer single-
lined or partly double-lined fringed ovoid ring
of large pores and one inner ring of small,
irregularly arranged pores. 4th instar larva. Body depressed, oblong,
yellowish, sclerotized parts more or less dis-
tinctly darker, Antennae (Fig. 17) 6-segment-
ed, 3rd and sth segments apically with one
sensorium each, segment VI with one sen-
sorium situated near middle. Dorsal hairs of
head more or less distinctly stump. Fore wing
buds each with 4 moderately long and some
shorter setae, hind wing buds apically with 2
moderately long setae. Abdomen dorsally with
4 longitudinal rows of setae which are com-
paratively short on the anterior segments,
much longer on the caudal sclerotized plate. Long or moderately long setae are also present
on or near the abdominal margin and on the
outside of the 2nd and 3rd tibiotarsi. These
more or less long setae are quite unlike any
setae present in our remaining Psylla species
Arising from a basal ring they gradually first
increase and then decrease in thickness but
their apices are again distinctly broader; they
are also conspicuously pigmented. 2 pairs of
sectasetae present. Anus ventral, anal pore
field as in Fig. 18

5th instar larva. Shape of body, chaetotaxy
&c. as in Fig. rg, Antennae 8-segmented but
the 8th segment is more or less distinctly sub-
divided into 2 secondary joints. Sensoria pres-
ent on apices of segments III, V, and VII and
on the apex of the basal secondary part of
segment VIII. Sclerotized parts fuscous (pig-
mentation not reproduced in Fig. 19), pig-
mentation of antennae as in Fig. rgA. Most
dorsal and marginal and some ventral setae
are pigmented and shaped as described in the
foregoing instar (Fig. 19,8). Two pairs of
sectasetae present (Fig. 19, sect). Anus ventral,
perianal pore field (Fig. 20) moderately large. Biology. In Sweden, hibernation of this
species takes place in the egg stage in the buds
of its hostplants, Alnus glutinosa and incana. Eggs and young larvae were found e.g. in Upl.,
Vittinge on May 16, 1965. sth instar larvae
were collected on the same locality on June
21, 1959, and on Gotland, Faré as late as July
19, 1965. In Upland, adults normally appear
in July, but in the southern provinces of Swe-
den they have been found as early as on June
12 (BI, Férkérla 1952, Gyllensvard leg.). Systematic position. In an earlier paper (Os-

  

 

 

siannilsson. 1965, p. 218) I stated that “die
Psylla-Arten alni (Linné), foersteri Flor, betu-
lac (Linné), berulae-nanae Heslop-Harrison
(nom. nud. ), fusca (Zetterstedt) und buxi
(Linné) bilden eine wohldefinierte Gruppe
...". This is quite wrong. On the basis of
imaginal characters, Loginova (1964) trans-
ferred Psylla buxi to Spanioneura Foerster. The larval perianal pore field of buxi reminds
strongly of that of Psylla s.str., but the anten-
nae are 3-segmented in the 3rd instar, 5-
segmented in the 4th instar and 7-segmented
in the sth instar. Therefore I agree that buxi
should at least not be reckoned as a Psylla
s.str, On the other hand Psylla foersteri is
apparently unique among our Psylla species by
the absence of perianal wax pores in the first
larval instar and by the very peculiar laciniate
shape of its perianal pore field in instars
II-V. In the number of antennal joints in
instars III-V our species agrees with Psylla
s.str., especially with fusca (Zett. ), where seg-
ment VIII is often secondarily subdivided into
two parts. Also the shape of the setae of
instars IV-V is a quite characteristic feature. I therefore designate Psylla foersteri Flor to be
the type of a distinct subgenus, Labyrintho-
psylla n.subgen., with the characters just men-
tioned. 3. Taxonomic relations within the genus Psylla
s. lat. (excluding Psylla s.str. and Laby-
rinthopsylla Oss.) In the fifth larval instar of five Swedish
species, viz. mali (Schmdbg. ), sorbi (L.}, pere-
grina Foerster, hartigi Flor, and ulmi Foerster,
the outer ring of the perianal pore field con-
sists of two or several rows of pores. In har-
tigi, the antennae are 8-jointed, the terminal
joint carrying only one sensorium. I regard
this species as the type of a distinct subgenus
with these characters, Chamaepsylla, n.subg. In mali, sorbi, peregrina and ulmi, the anten-
nae of the fifth instar are 7- or 8-jointed, the
larger number of segments being the result of
a secondary division of the 3rd segment, and
the terminal joint carries two sensoria. For
these four species I erect the subgenus
Cacopsylla, n.subgen., (type Psylla mali
(Schmdbg.)). In our remaining Psylla species, the outer
pore ring of the perianal field in instar V con-
sists of a single row of pores and the antennae
are 7-segmented with 2 sensoria on their ter-

Ent. seand. 1:2, 1978

 

Contributions to the Knowledge of Swedish Psyllids (Hem. Psylloidea) 1-4

 

Figs. 14-20, Psylla foersteri Flor. (14) rst instar larva from Gstr., Valbo, A=anus with
surrounding ventral integument. (15) 2nd instar from Valbo, se ectaseta. (16a) and
(16b) 2nd instar, perianal field of two individuals from Upl., Vittinge. (17) ath instar,
antenna of specimen from Upl., Upsala-Nas. (18) 4th instar, perianal pore field, same
locality. (1g) 5th instar, specimen from Upsala-Nas, A=antenna with pigmentation,
s=marginal abdominal seta, sect==sectaseta. (20) 5th instar, perianal pore field (hind
margin incomplete) of another specimen from the same locality. 141

 

142

minal joint. Though this group is doubtless
heterogenous I refrain from trying to subdivide
it, provisionally placing all these species in one
new subgenus, Hepatopsylla n.subg. (Typus
subgeneris Psylla nigrita (Zetterstedt).) 4. A preliminary key to sth instar larvae of
Swedish Psylla species
x, Anus terminal, circumanal pore field very
large, extending to the dorsal surface of ab-
domen (Fig. 13). Antennae with 8 or 9 joints,
eighth segment with one sensorium (Psylla
sstr.) 2
~ Anus ventral, perianal pore field smaller, not
extending to dorsum .... 5
Large species, r.85-3.15 mm, On Alnus 3
Smaller species, length rarely exceeding 2.40
mm. On Betula ... 4
Antennae long, 3rd joint >2x terminal joint
of rostrum, Practically all setae on dorsal sur-
face of anterior wing pads very short alni (L.)
Antennae shorter, 3rd joint <2xterminal
rostral joint. Anterior wing pads dorsally with
a few longer setae . ssa fusca (Zett.) Body larger, length 1.80-2.40 mm. Antennae
longer, index flagellum (segments Il—termi-
nal): width of head including eyes=1.18-1.36. Length of anterior wing pads 750-825 1,
Dorsal pilosity of thorax thinner and finer,
On Betula verrucosa and pubescens ... 4
+ betulae (L.)
Body smaller, length 1.50-2.10 mm. Antennae
shorter, index flagellum: width of head 1.0-
1.28, Length of anterior wing pad about 675 1. Dorsal pilosity of thorax coarser and denser,
On Betula nana .... betulaenanae Oss. - Perianal pore field as in Fig. 20. Antennae
with 8 or 9 segments. Abdomen with 2 pairs
of sectasetae (Fig. 19, sect). (Subgenus Laby-
rinthopsylla Oss.) ... foersteri Flor
- Perianal pore field not as in Fig, 20, much
simpler. Antennae never with more than 8
segments. Sectasetae present or absent .... 6
6. Outer ring of perianal pore field consisting of
one single row of pores (Subgenus Hepato-

 

 

 

 

»

1

 

+

 

 

w

 

Palle Ost.) 2 rersennexneosanaen naa, SE
- Outer'ring of anal pore field consisting of 2
or more rows of pores ............0.0005 7
7. Sectasetae present on margin of abdomen .. 8

 

- Sectasetae absent .... eas my
8. Outer margin of fore wing pads with several
setae approximately as long as those of hind
wing pads .. . P. (Cacopsylla Oss.) sorbi (L.)
~ Most marginal setae of fore wings short, only

Frej Ossiannilsson

1-3 of them being nearly as long as those of
hind wing pads .... P. (C.) mali (Schmdbg.) 9. Abdominal dorsum with numerous tubercles
arranged in irregular transverse rows .... 10
- Abdominal dorsum without tubercles, Termi-
nal antennal joint with one sensorium only ..
seserssse+ P. (Chamaepsylla Oss.) hartigi Fl,
10. Abdominal dorsum between the tubercles with
numerous short setae, the length of these
being up to 1/3 of longest marginal setae ....
7 P. (Cacopsylla) ulmi Foerster
No distinct setae between dorsal abdominal
tubercles .. P. (Cacopsylla) peregrina Foerster
11. Sectasetae present on margin of abdomen . 12
- Sectasetae absent . 12. Margin of fore wing pads with at most one
long or half-long seta ..., oe 33
Fore wing pads each with more than one
longer marginal seta 14
13. Body strongly pigmented. Perianal pore field
comparatively small, its width being below
length of longest marginal setae

 

 

 

 

 

 

sae pyrisuga Foerster
Pigmentation weak. Perianal pore field large,
its width exceeding length of longest marginal
hairs thamnicola Scott
14. Hairs on antennal flagellum shorter than dia-
meter of 3rd antennal joint at its middle, little
conspicuous. Abdomen with 5 pairs of long
marginal setae . - At least one hair on antennal flagellum
distinctly longer than the diameter of 3rd
antennal joint
15. Longest marginal abdominal setae shorter than
width of perianal pore field. Dorsal hairs on
abdomen minute. Pigmentation of body weak
* melanoneura Foerster
- Longest marginal abdominal setae longer than
width of perianal pore field. Dorsum of ab-
domen often with one, two or three half-long
setae, Body normally distinctly pigmented ....
subferruginea Edwards
16. Caudal abdominal tergal plate broad, its width
twice its length. Pigmentation strong. 3rd an-
tennal joint with one capitate hair being
longer than the diameter of this joint, remain-
ing hairs on flagellum short ..,
. i crataegi (Schrank)
~ Caudal abdominal tergal plate narrower .. 17
17. Antennae short, their length approximately=
width of head, segments III and V each with
one capitate hair being considerably longer
than the diameter of these segments; remain-
ing hairs on flagellum shorter than this dia-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ent. scand. 1:2. 1970

Contributions to the Knowledge of Swedish Psyllids (Hem. Psylloidea) 1-4

meter. Abdomen normally with 6 pairs of
long marginal setae, Body brownish pigmented
a6 see pruni (Scop.) = Antennae longer than width of head, 3rd an-
tennal joint with one longer capitate hair, a
few additional hairs on segments III, IV, and
V being approximately as long as the diameter
of II, Abdomen with 5 pairs of long marginal
GONE oe rreccrreeveccescceceee costalis Flor
18, Longest setae of abdominal dorsum less than
half as long as longest marginal setae. Not on
Salix, nor on Ledum . .
= Longest setae of abdominal dorsum at least
half as long as longest marginal setae. On
Ledum (ledi Flor) or Salix
19 Margin of fore wing buds with 1-3 long or

 

   

 

 

 

    

half-lonig: sta@ ie. cssvievervesnersasee 20
~ Margin of fore wing with more long or half-
HE: MARAE, saci 0:16 Gemincieea nomena 21

20, Fore wing buds each with only one half-long

marginal seta, no long setae present
see ve. pyri (L)
Fore wing buds each with 3 half-long marginal
hairs... pyricola Foerster
Abdomen above with a few half-long setae,
the longest ones about 1/3 of the length of the
longest marginal hairs .. hippophaes Foerster
Longest hairs on abdominal dorsum at most
1/4 of length of longest marginal setae .. 22
Longest hairs on abdominal dorsum about 1/4
cof length of longest marginal hairs. Strongly
pigmented . zetterstedti (Thomson)
Dorsal abdominal hairs very short, often little
longer than the width of their own basal rings. Pigmentation weaker ...........0.00se08 23
Dorsal hairs few, their number on each of the
hind wing buds about rs. Medial thoracal
tergites each with one seta considerably longer
than the dorsal abdominal setae, about 1/4 of
the length of longest marginal hairs on fore
wing buds, Seta on complex eye about 1/3 of
longest fore wing hair ,. myrtilli W. Wagner
Dorsal setae numerous, their number on each
of the hind wing buds about 25. Setae on
thoracal tergites shorter than longest setae on
abdominal dorsum. Seta on eye shorter, about
1/5 of longest marginal seta of fore wing buds
de piadieeian sled oSadals evia aids corcontum Sule
24. Perianal pore field small, its length (in longi-

tudinal direction of body) about equal to its

distance to caudal margin of body or smaller
25
Perianal pore field larger, its length exceeding
its distance to caudal margin of body .... 29

 

 

 

a,

 

PY

 

23. Ent. sear

143

25. Long hairs on abdominal dorsum few in num-
ber, in all 18-20 pairs present (including marg-

inal setae) ....000scceceseseneseeeeeee 26
~ Long dorsal and marginal setae more numerous
37

26. Dorsal hairs on fore wing pads normally very
short, inconspicuous, rarely one or a few of
them being a little longer, Hairs on antennal
flagellum short, at most as long as diameter
of segment III zaicevi Sulc

- Fore wing buds with several short and half-
long setae. At least one or two hairs on flagel-
lum longer than diameter of segment III ....

parvipennis Low

27. Outer ring of perianal pore field anteriorly

more or less open, broadly horseshoe-shaped. Longest hairs on abdominal margin approxi-

mately as long as antennal segment VII. Most

dorsal hairs on wing pads short, only few
longer hairs present. Body often strongly pig-
mented palmeni Low

Outer ring of perianal field normally complete

or almost complete. Longest hairs on abdomi-

nal margin approximately as long as antennal
segments VI and VII together. Dorsum of wing
pads often with some comparatively long hairs. Body faintly pigmented . . 28

 

 

 

 

  

28. Antennal joints IV-VI together at most as
long as VII (excluding terminal setae) ......

«+ propinqua Schaefer

- Antennal joints IV-VI together distinctly
longer than VII (excluding terminal setae) ..
Perree reer reece etty moscovita Andrianova

29. Long hairs on abdominal dorsum few in num-

ber, in all 17-20 pairs (including marginal
setae)
Abdominal dorsum with at least 22 pairs of
long setae luding marginal setae) .... 31
30. Length of perianal field little greater than its
distance to hind margin of body .. zaicevi Sule

- Length of perianal field at least twice its
distance to hind margin of body .... ledi Flor

31. Hairs on antennal flagellum short, at most as
long as diameter of antennal segment III. Long
dorsal and marginal hairs capitate but apices
very delicate so that they do not appear to be
distinctly capitate in preparations
#Gen SUSAN T Nias eNetweney ambigua Foerster

= Antennal flagellum with some hairs longer
than diameter of ant. segment III. Long dorsal

and marginal hairs distinctly capitate .... 32

32. Perianal pore field comparatively small, its
width less than half length of longest marginal
abdominal hairs, its anterior incision shallow. 144 Frej Ossiannilsson

Normally weakly pigmented .. pulchra (Zett.) - Perianal pore field a little larger, its width
exceeding half length of longest marginal hairs
of abdomen. Anterior incision of perianal field
often deep and angular nigrita (Zett. ),
elegantula (Zett. ), and klapaleki Sulc,

 

Note. I failed to find tenable larval characters
separating the last-mentioned three species. Kla-
paleki is often, but not always, strongly pigmented. In my material of nigrita and elegantula all spec-
imens are pale, but then the elegantula material
is insufficient for generalizations. Second note, Ball & Jensen (1966) found a
character useful for sexing 5th instar larvae of
Psylla pyricola. This character, a roughly Y-shaped
suture visible in front of the perianal pore field
in female larvae only, can also be used for deter-
mining the sex of at least instar V in all Swedish
Psylla species. References

Bau, J. C. & Jensen, D. D., 1966. Sexual di-
morphism in nymphs of Psylla pyricola (Hemi-

Manuscript received September 17, 1969.

ptera: Psyllidae). - Ann. Soc. Ent. America 59. Baltimore. 1292-1294. Catpwett, J. $., 1938. The jumping plant-lice of
Ohio (Homoptera: Chermidae). - Bull. Ohio Biol. Survey No. 34, 6: 5. Columbus, Ohio, 227-281. Hestor-Harrison, G., 1951. Notes on Scandinavian
Psyllidae. - Part I. - Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. (12)
4, London. 657-672, Pl. XIV. Linpserc, H., & Osstannitsson, F., 1960. Ver-
zeichnis der Ostfennoskandischen Homoptera
Psyllina. - Fauna Fennica 8. Helsingfors. 1-23. Locinova, M. M., 1964. 2. podotrjad Psyllinea—
psillidi ili listobloschki. - In Bry-Brenxo & al. :
Opred. nasekomych evrop, tjasti SSSR 1. Lenin-
grad. 437-482. Ossiannitsson, F., 1952. Hemiptera Homoptera
Psylloidea. Catalogus insectorum Sueciae 12. -
Opusc. ent. 17. Lund. 193-200. = 1965. Uber die Larvenstadien von Psylla myr-
tilli W. Wagner 1947 (Homoptera, Psylloidea). ~ Zool. Beitr, NF. 11. Berlin, 209-219. Reuter, O. M., 1881. Till kannedomen om Skandi-
naviens Psylloder. - Ent. Tidskr. 2. Stockholm. 145-172. Ent. seand, 1:2, 1970