PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN
SUBCONTINENT

R. N. Marion

Retired Chief Research Officer, Division of Forest Protection,
Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun

INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
NEW DELHI

FIST PRINTRD FOBRUARY 1975

      

7 UBRaRY
Accession No DO

  

Chief Editor: P. 1. Jaiswal
Editor: Dr (Mrs) A. M. Wadbwani
Assistant Editor; Rajinder Singh

© 1975 by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi

Printed in India by V. Sethuram at Hoe & Co., 31, Stringers Street, Madras and published by U. S. Jain,
‘Under Secretary, for the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi,

TO

THE MEMORY OF MY
MOTHER AND FATHER

PREFACE

‘Tue necd for a comprehensive treatise on the systematics of Indian Psyllidae has been
long apparent. These homopterous insects are not seen so frequently because of their
secretive habits, Hence this group has been neglected in many parts of the world,
especially with reference to India,

My interest in this group arose when under the research programmes in the Forest
Entomology, Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun, an investigation on the gall insects
of Populus euphraticu in the popiar forests of the Muzaffargarh and Multan, Punjab
(now in Pakistan) was assigned to me in 1928, Repeated attempts io study the
life-cycles of these insects in the forest and in the insectary at Dehra Dun, failed to give
any successful results, Attention was, therefore, turned to the local species of Psyllidac
occurring on trees, in the expectation that a general study of psyllid ecology would
assist the poplar gall investigation as well as the role played by the homopterous insects
in the transmission of the spike disease of sandal. This study has revealed the existence
of considerable diversity in the habits of psyllids frequenting trees and has cleared up
many obscure features in the ecology of the group (Mathur, 1935). The Indian species
appear to be very definitely seasonal and, therefore, the collection data are quite important. OF 101 species which were studied by me, 46 species are new to science. They are
distributed in 27 gencra. 1 have also repeated thé descriptions and figured those species
which have already been described or figured previously by Crawford, Laing, Heslop-
Harrison and others, for bringing ‘together all available information on the Psyllidae
of India. In some cases, the descriptions have been further augmented with my notes
and observations. The descriptions of the immature stages of 45 species have also
jbeen included, in order to establish a correlation between the existing adult classification
with the facts gained by the knowledge of the nymphal stages. Unless otherwise stated,
all the specimens were collected by me, and the names of collectors are given in brackets. ‘The terminology used is that in general use by workers on the Psyllidac. All of the holotype, allotype and paratype specimens of the new species, together with
the nymphal stages if represented, and all slides, are deposited at the Forest Research
Institute, Dehra Dun. The paratypes of some species are also donated to the Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, as desired by the Indian Council of Agri-
cultural Research, New Delhi. It is strongly emphasised that type’ material should
always be deposited in any of the threc National Institutes in India, viz, Forest Research. Institute, Dehra Dun, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, and Zoological
Survey of India, Caleutta, and nowhere else. In these institutes, proper care and
handlirig of such material is assured. Unfortunately this has been seldom done in the
past,

Tam highly indebted to the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, with-
out whose financial assistance and encouragement this work would not have been accom-
plished. This financial grant for study and travel was given to me under the Retired
Scientists Scheme of the Council. I also wish to express my gratitude to the President,

x PSYLIIDAR OF ‘THE INDIAN SURCONTT

P. purpurescens, sp.n.and nymphs
P. reticulata, spon. P. spondiasae Craveford ane nymph,

P. stevens? Laing
P. tuberculata Crawfor a
P. verrucosa, sp.n. and nymph
Genus Phacopteron Buckton
P. lentiginosum Buckton
Sub-family Ciriacreminae
Genus Cecidopsylla Kieffer . (. schimae Kieffer and nymphs
Genus Diceraapytla Crawford
D. brunettii Crawford
Genus Dynopglla Crawford
D. grandis Crawford
Genus Afacrohomotoma Kuwayama
AM. geniculata, sp.n. and nymphs
AM. maculata, sp.n. A. striata Crawford
Genus Mesohomotoma Kuwayama
aM. lutheri Enderlein and nymphs
Genus Mycopsplla Froggatt ..
M. indica, sp.n. Genus Psausia Enderlein
P. distincta (Crawford) a
P. indica, spn. and nymph
Genus Rhinopsylla Riley
R. stylata Crawford
Genus Tenaphalara Kuwayama a
T. acutiponnis suwayara . Sub-family Pyllinae
Genus Acizzia Heslop-Harrison
A. indica Heslop-Harrison
Genus Arylaina Foerster
A. fasciata Laing
4. obscura Crawford
A. punctipennis Crawford. A, ramakrishni Crawford
shinosa, sp.n. and nymph
Yenus Diaphorina Loew
D. bikanerensis, sp.n. D. cardiae Crawford and nymphs’

   

Pace

98
102

155
156
158
162
163
165
166
169
171
172
176
477
178
179
182
185
189
19)
194

CONTENTS

citri Kuwayama .
. communis, sp.n. and nymphs
dunensis, sp.n. .
enderleini Klimaszewski
gymnosporiae, Ssp.n. and nymphs
truncata Crawlord and nymphs
venata, sp.n. i .
Genus Euphalerus Schwarz. E, viltatus Crawford
Genus Euphyllura Yoerster +
E. caudata, spn. and nymphs...
E. concolor, sp.n. and nymphs
E, obsoleta, sp. a
E. olivina Costa
Gemus Pylla Geoffroy . .
P. bengalensis, spn. and nymphs. P. codrelae Kieffer. and nymphs
P. crataegi (Schrank)
P. eastopi,

 

BESS SES

 

 

  

 

P. hyalina, sp.n. and nymphs we ve
P. longigena, spn. and nymph .. os . P. murrayi, spn. and nymphs... ae -

P. oblonga, spn. and nymphs. , . P, quadrimaculata, sp.n. .
P. santali, sp.v, +
P. near simlae Crawlord on
Pyylla sp. 1
P. viburni Loew and nymphs
P. zaicevi Sule and nymphs
Genus Psyllopsis Loew :
P. fraxini (Linneaus)
Sub-family Triozinae
Genus Ceropsylla Riley ae on
GC. ferruginea, sp.n. and nymphs
C. fulvida, sp.n. C. minuta, sp.n. and nymphs
Genus Leuronota Crawford
L. corniculata, sp.n. and nymphs
L. minuta (Crawford) o .
Genus Petalolyma Scott
P. basalis (Walker)
Genus Trioza Foerster

xi
Pace

202

218

224
225
228
230,
234
238
241
24:
246
250
254
256
259
263
268
272
276
279
282
285
288
293
297
298
299
301
302
306
309
313
314
319
322,
323
326

xii

PSYLLIDAE OF [HE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

(A) Phylloplecta group

T. eugenioides Crawford

T. hirsuta Crawford :
T. lobata, sp.n. and nymphs
T. malloticola Crawford

T. pitformis, spn. and pymphs
T. serrata, sp.n...

T. vitiensis Kirkaldy

(B) Trioza group

T. analis Crawfore a . . +e
T. bifuecata, spn. and nymphs Me o
T. ceardi Bergevin and nymph
T. fletcheri Crawford :
T. fletcheri minor Crawford and nymphs
T. fusca, sp.n. and nymphs o
T. gigantea, Crawford. .
T. gigantea curia, ssp.n. and nymph
T. hyalina Crawford
T. jambolanae Crawford... ve a
T. longiantennata, sp.n. and nymphs . T. obliqua Thomson and nymphs
T. obsoleta (Buckton) and nymphs
simplifica, sp.»
T. shinulata, spn. and aymphe
T. urticae Linnacus :

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Inpex

Pace
327
328
329
332
337
340
345
348
350
351
352
356
360
363
368
373
375
379
382

390
394
399
401
406
416
423

I. INTRODUCTION

Previous work on the psyllids of India is limited and very litde has been published. As early as 1890, Lethierry first described Diaphorina guttulata from Poona. Bucktan
(1893, 1894) described the mango shoot psylla, Apsplla cistellata damaging mango trees
by aborting the young shoots at Dehra Dun, and Phacopteron lentiginosum recorded ex
leaf galls on Garuga pinnata from Poona, Again in 1900, he described Trioza obsoleta
ex galls Diospyris melanoxylon. Kieffer (1905) described seven species from Bengal,
viz. Pauropsylla ficicola and P. globuli in galls of Ficus spp., Cevidopsplla schimae ex leaf galls
on Schima wallichii, Psylla cedrelae on Cedrela toona, Neotrioza machili on Machilus gamblei,
(wo species of Ozotrioza, O. styracearum and O. laurinearum; and again in 1909, Cecidotrioga
baccarum ex. galls on Symplocos sp., from Kurseong, Bengal. A brief account on Indian
Psyllidae, with illustrations of galls on mango, Alstonia scholaris and Ficus glomerata;
and adults and nymphal stages of A. cistellata (Buckt. ), P. tuberculata Crawl, P. depressa
Grawf., and T. obsoleta (Buckt.) is given by Lefroy (1909). In fact, the real systematic
papers on several new genera and species appeared in 1912 and 1924, by Crawford,
when he studied the collections of the Indian Museum, Calcutta, the Indian Agricultural
Rescarch Institute and Ramakrishna Ayyar’s material. A list of Psyilidae recorded
from India and Ceylon was presented in 1924, by Ramakrishna Ayyar. Brief notes
on A, cistellata (Buckt. ), P. lentiginosum Buckt. and T. obsoleta (Buckt.) appeared in the
Reports of the Proceedings of the Entomological Meetings, Pusa. Detailed biological
account of Diaphorina citri Kuwayama, with description of the adult and nymphal stages
and their control, was published by M. Afzal Husain and Dina Nath (1927). Rahman (1932) was the first to describe the nymphal stages of five species of Psyllidae. ‘The biology of some 24 psyllid species recorded on forest trees was contributed by
Mathur (1935). Laing (1930) gave the descriptions of some 5 species of Psyllidae. In his book on Forest Insects, Beeson (1941) gave brief biological notes on the psyllid
species recorded on forest trees. Again Mathur described the immature stages of 10
species during 1949, 1950, 1952 and 1954, In the following 15 to 20 years, no work
was done on this group of insects in India, except the description of galls made by. therit
(Mani, 1935, 1953, 1959, 1964),

METHODS AND MATERIALS

The psyllid material available for study at the Forest Research Institute, was collected
at Dehra Dun or New Forest (Dehra Dun) by myself during 34 years of my service and
during tours in the various parts of India, except where otherwise stated. In making
the collections, a sweeping net and a sucking tube (aspirator) were used for capturing
the adults, Once an infestation of free-living or gall-making species was located, an
attempt was made to secure nymphs and to rear some of them to the adult stage, on
potted plants, Galls are not easy to rear in “ captivity *, because the removal of the
gall from the infested plant interferes with the nutrition of the insects, Gall insects
are also not quick in development. Success was, however, achieved through patient

2 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

observations on the times of emergence of adults of such species, For colouration notes,
it was necessary to collect live specimens of both adult and nymphal stages. A part of
each collection was mounted on card points or pinned with micropins on polyporus
pith, and the rest was preserved in alcohol in small vials. Recording of field data is of vital importance. Each field collection was, therefore,
duly labelled with temporary labels, and later each mounted or pinned specimen was
labelled with printed data of reference number if any, locality, date of collection, name
of collector and host plant. Similarly, the wet collection was labelled. The presence
of nymphs gave the positive specific host, and in almost all cases, specimens of the host
plants were also simultaneously collected and submitted to the Forest Botanist for
identification. In order to study the finer details of each part of both sexes and nymphal stages
of each species, the following method has been found satisfactory. Soak the material
in caustic potash for 8 to 10 hours, then boil in water-bath for some time till the specimen
becomes clear from internal tissues. Afier boiling, wash in distilled water, transfer
in glacial acetic acid to dissolve organic matter if any. Wash again in distilled water,
dehydrate in different grades of alcohol and stain it in eosin soluble in alcohol. Clear
and dissect the specimen in clove-oil. The dissected parts were thus mounted in balsam
on slides and examined under the compound microscope. The figures were drawn
with the desired magnification, with the help of the camera lucida and inked by the
professional artist, under my direction, The coloured drawings were also made by
the artist. The author has also examined and studied the psyllid collections present at the
Indian Agticultural Research Institute, New Delhi, and at the Zoological Survey of
India, Calcutta. A few types present at the latter institution were also studied. Un-
fortunately, Ramakrishna Ayyar’s collection at Coimbatore could not be secn personally
there, but through the kindness of the Entomologists at Coimbatore, I was able to study
some of the species sent to me, and the result of examination is mentioned under the
respective species. The psyllid materials received from the Units of the Commonwealth
Biological Control at Kalimpong (Bengal) and Srinagar (Kashmir), and the Agricultural
Entomologists, Ludhiana (Punjab), from time to time were very interesting and some
of the species, new to science, are described here. Il, ECOLOGY AND ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE
HABITS AND DAMAGE

‘Tue collections studied reveal that the Indian fauna is very rich in species of Psyllidae,
but because of their small size and active habits they have been overlooked and our
knowledge of their distribution is far from sufficient. They are relatively very specific
in their selection of host plants, and exhibit considerable diversity in habits, as some
are free living while others are gall makers. The insects are phytophagous in both
nymphal and adult stages, Sometimes their infestations are localised and it is difficult
to say why it is so. ‘The adults are generally very active and capable of jumping and flying, and some
species are sluggish like Apsylla cistellata (Buckt. ), The free-living species (Plate 2) move
about on the host plant and feed on the younger leaves and shoots suitable for inserting
their stylets through which the sap is sucked. They breed continuously during the
growing season so long as new buds or foliage are available. The nymphal stages are
often covered in a small mass of flocculent matter (Plate 2), produced usually from
the caudal end of the abdomen, They also secrete an abundance of a sweet, sticky
substance known as honey dew which on falling on the lower branches and leaves
causes a disagreeable condition, especially when a black, sooty mould develops and thus
seriously injuring the tree. . Many species cause plant deformities in the form of regular galls, blisters or pits
(Plates 1, 3, 4, 5,6) on leaves and stems. Gall-makers usually produce the same
type of gall on the host plants and such galls are abundant, colourful and ofien grotesque
upon individual trees or plants. The physiology of gall-formation is still obscure
(Mani, 1964) and it is generally believed ‘that a secretion from the nymph stimulates
gall formation. The galls are usually formed on meristematic tissue and are the result
of abnormal cell multiplication. The pit galls generally occur on the under surface
of the leaf and appear as roughened elevations on the upper side. The nymphs of
some species cause a distortion and folding of the leaves. One or both margins of the
leaves are rolled into the mid-rib on the upper surface and the rolled margins gradually
become thickened and hard like a gall. The nymphs remain sheltered in these rolled
leaves and are often covered with a copious secretion of white wax. Large round drops
of liquid excrement with their surface coated with powdered wax and fragments of wax
threads, are also present in these rolled leaves. Several kinds of ants, honey bees and
wasps frequently visit these leaves and feed on the honey dew for their food. The nature
nymphs crawl out of the gall when it dehisces or leave the shelter of the roll, and shed
their last skin and this moulting is more commonly performed on the surface of an older
leaf. Evidently, there are five moults and the earlier shedding of skins is done inside
the gall or roll. Adults are translucent white at emergence and their colouration
develops fully after feeding for some time. The renewal of vegetative activity of the
host plant determines the emergence of adult psyllids of the gall-forming species. 3

4 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

In the forest, a natural control is brought about by certain biotic agencies, e.g. parasites, mostly by chalcids and few braconids; by predatory insects like Coccinellids,
Syrphids, Chrysopids and predatory mites and spiders. ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE

Comparati¢ely little injury is caused to the forest vegetation by these sap-sucking insects. In natural forest the general incidence of psyllids is low, but heavy infestation by free-
living and gall-making psyllids is fairly common on individual trees or on small groups
that are subnormal in health. In seedbeds and in artificial regeneration areas, on the
other hand, the damage done by psyllids can be serious. Their feeding is detrimental
to the plant as they drain away the vital food and water or disseminate plant diseases. ‘The leaves become chlorotic and smaller than normal and ultimately fall off. Yhe
gall-forming species appear to be more injurious than the free-living types in that the
affected buds, shoots and leaves are put out of action and are not replaced by later
growth. The free-living species with short life-cycles are more characteristic of trees
with a prolonged vegetative period and are capable of infesting the successive flushes
of foliage under favourable weather conditions. Psyllid species are more common in forestsand over 100 species have been taken on
95 species of trees and other vegetation growing in the forest, A few species attack fruit
trees such as apple, Citrus spp., Cordia spp., Grewia asiatica (phalsa), jaman, mango, pear
and Zizyphus jujuba (ber). Arytaina punctipennis Crawford is destructive to indigo (Indigofera
spp.) seriously in some seasons, On pumpkin, Pauropsylla luberculala Crawford has been
recorded at Pusa, Bihar. From the available records a host-psyllid list and a psyllid-host list are given below
for the sake of ready reference. ‘Taste 1. Hosr-Psyium Lisr

List showing the host plants attacked by the epecis of Papllidae

 

  

  

Host plants Species of Psyllidac
Atriplex sp. a Trioza obliqua ‘Thom,
Albizia chinensis (=A. sila oe Arytaina spinosa, sp. n.

A. odoratissima a ve Paylla oblonga, sp. n.
(Aciezia indica Hes, Harr. n

A, procera we we ow on wed Apptaina spinosa,
Pylla hyalina, sp. n.

   

Alstonia scholaris ., we a vs Pauropyjila tubercilata Crawl,
Anthotephalus indices (=A. cadamba) ... ve P. reticulata, sp. n,
Beuhinia variegata ..: oe ve a ws Pyllé simlae Crawl. Bombax ceiba (=B. malabaricum)

© Tenaphalara’ acutipennis Kuw. Buchanania lanzan (==B.. latifolia)

Pauropsylla Longispiculata, sp. 2. ECOLOGY AND EGONOMIG IMPORTANCE

Host plants

Bucklandia populnea (=Symingtonia populnca)

Cassia fistula
©. siamea

    

Godrela toona on ue

Chenopodium albu
Chloroxylon swietenia
Chukrasia velutina ...
Ginnamomum sp. Gitras spp. oe os
Cordia grandis (=C. cordata) |

C. myxa > es
C. obliqua J

Grataegus sp. ve wee
Dalbergia sissoo
Diospyros melanoxylon
D. tomentosa
Duabanga grandifiora
Bhretia acuminata
Eugenia malaccensis

    

  

   

Ficus asperrima

Fr hispida

FF. hookeri see

F. lucescens (=F. infectoria)

   

F. microcarpa (=F. retusa)

F, neroosa oe we
F, racemosa (=F, glomerata) ...
F, religiosa
F. roxburghii . F. rumphit oy one
Ficus sp...

F. ulmifolia a ve
Fraxinus ornus a oe
Gartiga pinnata

Gmelina arborea

Gymnosporia spinosa (=G. montana)

    

 

Species of Psyllidac

 

Paylla longigena, sp. nr. Euphaleras vittatus Crawl. w. Palla hyalina, sp. 2.
fr bongalensis, sp. n.

 

P. cedrelae Kiet. P. eastopi, sp. n.

Trioza obliqua Thoms. Arytaina ramakrishni Crawt. Palla cedrelae Kieft. Pauropsylia depressa Crawt. S Diaphorina citi Kuw. “LD. communis, sp. 1. D. cardige Crawf. Poylla crateegi Schrank. Arytaina obscura Crawl. Trioga obsoleta (Buckt.) T. lobata, sp. n.

 

 

Diaphorina dunensis, sp. n,
Trioga vitiensis Craw. Paurocephala psylloptera Craw. P. poylloptera Craw. Pouropsylia ficicola Kiet. Psausia indica, sp. n.

“ {sn (fulvida, sp. 2. Macrohomotoma geniculata, sp. n.
Peausia indica, sp, n.
‘Dynopsylla grandis Crawf,
‘Pauropsylia depressa Craw? LP. purpurescens, sp. 0. ‘Psausia distincta (Crawf)

Pauropsylla ficicola Kieft,

Ceropsylla fulvida, sp. Paurocephala psylloptera Craw? “| Macrohomotoma striata Crawé,

vu Paurocephala psylloptera Craw! Payllopsis fraxini L,

Phacopteron lentiginosum Buckt,

Trioga fletcheri Craw8. Paurocephala menoni, sp. 0. Diaphorina gymnosporiae, sp. n.

 

6 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Host plants Species of Psyllidae

Indigofera anit)

L. ervcta

1. hebepetala

1. oligosperma os a 7 oe ve Arjtaina punctipennis Crawf. 1. paucifolia

1. pulehella

1. swnatrana

S Livia juncorum (Late.) James spp “UL. Khaziensis Hes, -Harv. i ri Paurocephala near minuta Crawi,
Kydia calycina “ ces wo we LP muasillae sp. me

.. . Diaphorina bikanerensis, sp. n.
Pauropsylla beesoni Laing. Trioza malloticola Crawt. T. pitformis, sp. n.
‘Apsylla cistellata Buckt. Arytaina obscura Crawf. Leuronota minuta Crawf. Pauropsylla brevicornis Crawf. P. maculata, sp. n.
P, nigra Crawl,
a Coropsylla ferruginea, sp. n.
Diaphorina citri Kuw. Murraya koenigii we te a we D. communis, sp. n,
Palla murrayi, sp. 1. ‘Diaphorina citri Kuw. “\D. communis, sp. n.
‘Euphyllura olivina Costa. Aphalara maculipennis Loew
A. ossiannilssoni, sp. 1,

{Pe bifurcata, sp. n,

Leptedenia spartium ... a
Litsea monopetala (=. polyantha)

    

Mallotus philippensis

 

Mangifera indica

Miliusa velutina

   

 

M. paniculata be

Olive * oo
Polygonum hydropiper
P. microcephalwn

     

Populus euphratica T. ceardi Berg. T. longiantennata, sp. n,
Pumpkin ... we on os ws s Pauropsylla tuberculata Crawf. Pyrus communis
P. pashia ve se tes ves ws Paylla sp. 1
P. vistata
Quercus dilatata —... see we te s+ Petalolyma basalis (Wik.) Sabia paniculata Trioxa serrata, sp. n.
Salix sp. Psylla zaicevi Sule. Saloadora oleoides — ... . ve be + Buphyllura obsoleta, sp. n.
( Diaphorina venata, sp. n.
g Macrohomotoma maculata, sp. n.
“", Mycopsylla indica, sp. n.
[Pola santali, sp. n,

Santalum album a on on oe

 

HGOLOGY AND FCONOMIC IMPORTANCE,

Host plants Species of Psyllidae

 

Schima wallichii
Schleichera trijuga

Cecidopsylla schimae Kieff,
Phacopteron lentiginosum Buckt. Semecarpus anacardiun ses ce we vu Pawopsylla verrucasa, sp. 0. Stoves reburte . . . 7 of Geropsylla minuta, sp. .
Leuronota corniculata, sp. 0. Spondias pirmata (=S. mans) tes ves v» Pawwopsylte spondiasae Crawf. Stercutia foctida . Tenaphalara acutipennis Ku. Stranvaesia glaucescens Pylla sp. 1. Snyyclnos nux-vomica vee se ve ss Diaphorina truncata Craw. (Euphyllura caudate, sp. n.
E. concolor, sp. 0. Trioza vitiensis Kirk. Spepgium cumini (—=Hugenia jambolana) ... ve vod T. eugenioides CrawS. T. fusca, sp. n.
T. jambolanae Craw. T. spinnlata, sp. n.

Tamarix sp. we on os ws w+ Colposcenia constricta, sp. n.
Terminalia alata (= T. tomentosa)

T. agjuna S Trioza hirsuta Crawt. T. catappa “LT. fletcheri minor Crawf. T. paniculata

Troma orientalis
Trewia nudiflore

Urena lobata . on we wae + Mesohomowma lutheri Endl,
Urtica spp. Trioza urticae (Linn)

Paurocephala psylloptera Grawf. Trioza fletcheri Craw. Viburnum sp. ve . te to . Pglla vibtoni Loew
Walnut Arytaina fasciata Laing
Zizyphus jujuba a oe we we a» Pawocephala trimaculata, sp. 0

 

 

 

On unknown hosts

1, Diaphorina enderleini Klimaszewski, from Poona, in September, 1911

2. Diceropsylia brunetti Crawford, from Darjeeling, in May, 1910

3. Paurocephala phalaki, sp. n., from Tista, W, Bengal, in October, 1965
4. Pauropsylla stevensi Laing, from Darjeeling, Gopaldhara

5, Poylla quadrimaculata, sp. n., from Jorhat, in February-March and from Darjeeling, in November, 1965
6, Rhynopsylla stylata Crawford, from R. Sutlej, below Simla, May, 1910
7. Trioza analis Crawford, from Simla, West Himalayas

8, T. eugenoides Crawford, from Pusa, in January, 1918

9, T. gigantea Crawford, from Darjeeling, in March, 1967

10. 7, gigantea curta, ssp. n., from Darjeeling, in March, 1967
Ll. T. Ayalina Crawford, from Simla, in May, 1908

12, 7, simplifica, sp. n,, fom Devithan, C. Nepal, in April, 196}

Sub-family

Liviinae

Aphalarinae

Pauropsyllinae

Giriacreminae

PSYLLIDAL OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Species

Livia juncorum (Late:)
L, Bhaziensis Hes. “Harr. Aphalara maclipennis Loew
A, ossiannilssoni, sp. n.
Colposcenia constricta, sp. n.
Apsylla cistellata (Buckt.) Paunocephala menoni, sp. n.
P, near minuta Crawl. P. phalaki, sp. 0. P. poylloptera Craw,

 

P. russellae, sp. n.

P. trimaculata, sp. n..
Pauropsylla beesoni Laing
P, brevicornis Crawl. P. depressa Craw! P. fiticola Kicf. P. longispiculata, sp. n.
P. maculata, sp. n.

P nigra Craw,

P. purpurescens, sp. 1.
b. reticulata, sp. n.

P. spodiasae Craw. Pz stevensi Laing

P. tuberculata Craw. P. verrucosa, sp. 0. bee
Phacopteron lentiginosun Buckt. Cocidopsylla sclimae Kiet. Diceraopsylia bruneitii CrawS. Dynopsylla grandis Crawé. Macrokomotoma geniculate, sp. n.

 

 

M, maculata, sp. 0,

M, striata Crawt, . Mesohomatomna lutkeri Endl. Mycopsylia indica, sp. n.
Prausia distineta (Crawf,)

P. indica, sp. a. te

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘Tarte 2. Psyiitp-Hosr Lis

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Plant hosts

Junus sp. 7. sp. Polygonum hychopiper
P. microcephalum
Tamarix sp. Mangifera indica
Grewia asiatica
Kydia calycina
Unknown

Ficus asperrima

F, hispida

F, ulmifolia

Ficus sp. Trema orientalis
Kpdia calycina
Zizyphus jujuba
Litsaea monopetata
Mangifera indica
Ginamomum sp. Ficus racemosa

F. hookert

F, roxburghit
Buchanania lanzan
Mangifera indica
M. indica . Ficus racemosa
Anthocephalus indicus
Spondias pinnata
Unknown

Alstonia scholaris, Pumpkin
Semecarpus anacardium
Garuga pinnata, Schleichera trijuga
Schima wallichii
Unknown

Ficus nervosa

F. microcarpa

Carica papaya
Santalum album
Ficus sp. Urena lobata
Santalum album
Ficus religiosa

Fr, lucescens

F, microcarpa

 

 

Sub-family

PsyHlinae

ECOLOGY AND EGONOMIC IMPORTANCE,

Species

 

 

Rhinopsylla stylata CrawE. ...
Tenaphatara aculipenis Kuw. Acizzia indica Hes, -Ha
Arytuina fasrieia Vain
AL obscwa Crawl,

al, prnetipeuns Crawl. Y. A. ramakrishni: Crawi. Ay spinosa, sp. 1. Diaphorina bikanerensis, sp. 1,
D. cardiae Crawl. D. citri Kuw,

D

. communis, sp. 0. Dz dunensis, sp. n.

D, enderleini Klimas. D. gymnosporiae, sp. n.
D. truncata Crawl. D. venata, sp. n,
Euphalerus vittatus Crawt. Euphyltura caudata, sp. n.
E. concolor, sp. 0. E, obsoleta, sp. n.

E, olivina Costa

Paylla bengalensis, sp. n.
P. cedrelae Kieff. P. crataegi Schrank

 

  

 

  

   

 

 

Unknown

Bombax ceiba, Sterculia foetida
Albizia procera
Walnut

Mangifera indica, Dalbergia sissoo
Indigofera anil
carrecta

hebepetata
oligosperma
paucifolia
ipulchellee
sumatrana
Chloroxylon swietenia
Chloroxylon sp. Albizia procera

A chinensis
Leptadenia spartium
Cordia grandis

C. myxa

G. obliqua

Citrus aurantinn

G. medica Limonium
". medica tunetia
medica acida
medica medica

©. decwnana
Murraya. koenigii
M. paniculata

  

 

M, paniculata
Gitrus sp. Bhetia acuminata
Unknown:
Gymnasporia spinosa
Strychnos nuce-vomica
Santalum album
Cassia fistula
Syzygium cumini

Se cumin’

Salvadora oleoides . Olive

Gedrela toona

C. toona

Chukvasia velutina
Crataegus sp. 10

Sub-family

 

Triozinae

Plylloplecta-Group

Trieza-Group

 

PSYLLIDAK OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Palla eastepi, sp. n.
P. hyalina, sp. n.

P. longigena, sp. n.

P, murayi, sp. n.

P. oblonga, sp. n.

P. quadrimacilata, sp. 2. P. santali, sp. n.

P, near sinlae

Pylla sp. 1

  

awl. P, viburni Loew ...
P, zaicevi Sule...
Payllopsis fasini (Linn,)
Geropsylla ferruginea, sp. n.
G. fulrida, sp. 0,

   

G. minuta, sp. n, . Lauronota cornisulaia, sp. n.
ZL, minwta (Crawt.) Petalolyma basalis (Walk.)... Trioza eugenioides Crawl. ...
T, hirsuta Crawl, a

 

  

 

T, lobata sp. n.

T, malloticola Crawl. T. pitformis, sp, n.
T. serrata, sp. 0. T. vitiensis Kirk. Trioza anatis Crawf. T. bifurcata, sp, n.
T. ceardi Bevg. T fletcheri Crxawt. T, fletcheri minor Craw,

T. fusca, sp. 2,
T. gigantea Orawf. Plant hosis

Cedrela toona

Albizia procera

Cassia siamea
Bucklandia populnea
Murraya koenigit
Albizia odoratissima
Unknown

Santalion album
Baxthinia variegata
Stranvaesia glancescens
Pyrus communis

P. paskia

P. vistata

Viburnum sp. Salix sp. Fraxinus ornus

Miliusa velutina

Ficus microcarpa

P. rumphii

Shorea robusta

S. robusta

Mangifera indica
Quercus dilatata; “ khandiara ”
‘Unknown

Terminalia alaia var. tomentosa
T. arjuna

T. catappa

T. paniculata
Duabanga grandiflora
Mallotus philippinensis
M, philippinensis
Sabia paniculata
Bugenia (Spzygitan) malaccensis
Speyginm. cumini
Unknown

Populus euphratica

P. euphratica

Gmelina arborea

Trewia nudifiora
Terminalia alata var. tomentosa
T. agjuna

T. catappa

T. paniculata

Syzygium cumini -

© Uttis " (local name)

EGOLOGY AND EGONOMIC IMPORTANGH u

 

 

Sub-family

 

Trioza gigantea curta, ssp. n.
T. hyalina Crawt. os
T. jambolanae Crvawe. T. longiantennata, sp. 1,
T. obliqua "Thomson

   

T. absoleta (Buck!) T. simplifica, sp. n.
T, spinulata, sp. n.
T. wrticae (Linn.) Plant hosts

 

Unknown
Unknown
Syapgium cumini
Populus euphratica
Atriple. sp. Chenopodivon album
Diospyros melanoxyton
D. tomentosa

Wild shrub
Syzygium cumini
Urtica spp. Some of the psyllid species are said to be very destructive pests in other countries, as
mentioned below. 1, Pyylla pyricola Foerster (the pear psylla) :—Pest in Europe. Common in U.S A., in
the pear orchards of the Pacific north-west. It has been identified as the vector
of pear decline virus and leaf curl, a related disease of pear trees (Madsen and
Morgan, 1970). 2, P. mali Schmidberger (the apple sucker) :—Somewhat of limited distribution. Causes appreciable injury. 3. Paratrioga cockerelli Sulc:—Native of North America. western U.S.A,

4. Trioza alacris Flor :—Causes curling and thickening of the leaves of laurel trees and
thus does some injury. 5. Pachypsylla celtidis-mamma Riley forms galls on the underside of leaves of hackberry. 6. Psylla buxi L. is responsible for deforming the apical shoots of Buxus sempervirens into
miniature cabbage-like growths, in Great Britain,

7. Livia juncorum Laty. forms tassel-like galls on several species of Juncus. 8. Trioza erythreae (Del Guercio) is a very serious pest of Citrus trees in Africa, and
is said to cause the “ Greening Disease”. 9, T. perseae Tuthill attacks ayocado

(0, Jenseniella psidii Tuthill attacks guava
11. Russelliana solanicala ‘Tuthill attacks potato
12. One species attacks avocado in Mexico... .
Great precautions are necessary to prevent the introduction of these psyllid pests
into India,

Major pest of potatoes in

in Peru (Tuthill, 1959). wm. TAXONOMIC TREATMENT
EXTERNAL MORPHOLOGY OF ADULTS

‘Tue external morphology of this family has been fully studied in details by Crawford
(1914), and his studies because of their completencss and simplicity are useful and
generally followed by taxonomists. Some modifications and relationships of the various
parts are discussed by Heslop-Harrison (1951), Pesson (1951), Klimaszewski (1964),
Dobreanu and Manolache (1962) and Loginova (1964) and others. The characters
given by Crawford have been used in this contribution, Miss Patch (1909) has discussed
the wing venation and its homology with the veins of Aphididae, Cloccidae and Aley-
rodidae, and the author has followed the same system of nomenclature. In respect
of the genital structures, the features outlined by Ossiannilsson, Russell and Weber
(1956, in Tuxen) have been adopted here. Emmanuel Witlaczil (1885, Die Anatomic
der Psylliden) and Johannes Wilcke (1941) have discussed extensively the internal
anatomy and the biology and morphology of Psylla buxi L., respectively and these may
be consulted. ‘The various morphological parts of taxonomic value are briefly presented below. Head. The head shows considerable variation in form and shape. It may be
spherical or globular (Paurocephala, Pauropsylla) or greatly elongated horizontally (in
Liviinae), horizontal, quadrate' or flattened (in Aphalarinae), deflexed or variously
modified by the genae (Psplla, Trioga). It comprises the vertex, occiput, frons, genac,
compound cyes, antennae, clypeus and beak or rostrum, The vertex is divided by a
median suture which is absent in some species of Pauropsylla, may be flat, or often with
irregular depression or foveae, or sometimes rounded forward or downward. Its shape
is variable from quadrate to triangular or semi-cricular or each lobe may be rhomboidal,
Behind the head the occipital regions are normally developed and they cover over the
posterior margins of the compound eyes. The frons appears as a small or large sclerite,
variously shaped, and bearing the anterior ocellus at its base or the end nearest the
vertex. There are two genae, one on each side of the clongate frons and between the vertex
in front and the clypeus behind. ‘They are inferior in position, not well marked,
obsolete or weakly swollen beneath, or may form two spherical lobes or two conical
processes projecting downward or forward. In some species of Ciriacreminae, part
of the vertex is formed by the genae, and the former appears as a pair of narrow oblique
lobes with the anterior ocellus far from the front margin while the antennae are attached
on the front margin,

The clypeus is very prominent but inferior in position, usually pyriform or cordate
in shape. It usually covers the frons and in front view it is obscured by the genal cones. The beak or rostrum is sharply flexed between the fore coxae and passes out between
the legs. It is moveable and may be exserted. The compound eyes are large, usually more or less hemispherical and cach eye is

12

VAXONOMIC TREATMENT 13

constituted of large facets. There are three ocelli, two located on the postero-lateral
corners of the vertex, quite close to the compound eyes, and one on the frons. ‘The antennae are eithcr attached in front near the junction of the anterior margin
of the vertex and genae or near the lateral margin of the genac. ‘They show consi-
derable variation and are normally ten-segmented, and this number is reduced in some
species. The two basal segments are always large and stout, while the remaining seg-
ments are slender and filiform. They are sparsely pubescent, sometimes profiyely
hirsute and also bear sensory structures; terminal segment usually hear two unequal
apical spines, sometimes these spines are as long as or longer than the antennae (Paurop-
gylla spp.). . Thorax. Vhe thorax is large, strongly developed and is quite a complex structure
both internally and externally. ‘The prothorax is short, may be arched or roof-shaped,
flat or deflexed anteriorly, lateral extremities with prominent foveal impressions and
may be uniform or more or Jess swollen and knob-like. This structure is very useful in
classification in respect to the relation borne by the pronotum to the propleurites. In
Aphalara and Arytaina, the pleural suture extends to the middle of the knob-like lateral
extremity of the pronotum, while in Pspila it is oblique and extends to the posterior edge
of the lateral extremity of the pronotum, and the latter is not knob-like. The pleural
suture separates the episternum and epimeron vertically, diagonally or horizontally. ‘The epistcrnum may be equal in size to the epimeron, or it may be larger but it is seldom
smaller. ‘The mesothovax is the largest part of the thorax and is divided into a series of promi-
nent, sub-equal and variously flattened or arched plates consisting of prescutum (or
dorsujum), scutum and scutellum, with an inferior and smaller post-scutellum (postnotum). ‘The metathorax is largely concealed by the folded wings, weakly developed and is
differentiated into a series of smaller notal plates but its post-scutellum or pseudonotum
is quite large and is often produced into a backwardly directed pair of horn-like processes
or epiphyses or very prominent ridges. ‘The internal metathoracic skeletal structures
are unique to the Psyllidae and undergo greatest modification. Legs. Three pairs of legs are present, the fore and middle pairs are normally developed
and more or less uniform throughout. The middle pair is generally smaller. The
hind pair of legs undergoes greatest modification. Each leg comprises coxa, trochanter,
femur, tibia, two tarsal segments and claws with pulvillus. The coxae are large and
sub-globose, ovoid, the metacoxae being much large and more complicated in structure. Externally, these meta-coxae present a simple undivided structure with backwardly
directed processes or meracanthae, and a long curved arm extending Jaterally round
the junction of the base of the thorax and the constricted abdomen. Some of the
species of Trioza (Phylloplecta group) may possess an anteriorly directed process in
addition to the posteriorly directed meracanthus. The trochanter is freely movable. The femur is long and large while the hind femur
is thickened and stout. The tibia is as long as or longer than the femur and relatively
slender and with a slightly dilated apex. In many genera, there is a spur or a series
of irregular notches at the base, and in all the genera there is a variable number of black

 

 

 

 

 

 

I4 PSYLLIDAE OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT’

movable spines at the apex, arranged in a circle or semicircle or divided into two groups
of “inner” and © outer’? spines, Some Giriacreminae and Triozinae may possess a
greatly enlarged spur like a cockspur arising subapically. ‘The tarsi are two-segmented. The apical segment bears two large sharp claws with
a long seta between them. The basal tarsal segment of hind legs in most genera, except
Triozinae bears a pair of claw-like spines at the apex (in most Psyllinae), one extending
out op each side of the distal segment, while some Ciriacreminae may possess only once
claw-like spine at apex. Crawford (1914) has described the wings and venation in simple terms, as reproduced
below:

Wings. “Vhe wings, four in number, are membranous, though sometimes the anterior
pair is thickened and leathery. The shape is variable [rom elongate-ovate to rhomboidal. The venation is simple, and presents relatively few striking differences throughout the
family.”

“ The media and cubitus have fused at the base with the radius, and only one principal
basal vein is present (R+M-+ Cu). ‘This divides near the base into either three (Trio-
zinae) or two veins. In the latter case the posterior of the two veins (M+ Cu, or the
cubital petiole) divides again into the media and cubitus, The upper fork, radius
(R), gives off the radial sector (Rs) about midway in its course to the costa (C). ‘The
radius may unite with the costa directly or it may turn near the costa and follow parallel
with it for a distance before uniting with it, The space between the costa and radius,
in the latter case, is called the pterostigma. ‘The radial sector passes to the apical portion
of the wing and is branched only in exceptional cases.”

“The medial vein is branched once near its apex, forming My, and My,, and the
cell thus formed is called the second marginal cell, The cubitus, also, forks once into
Cu, and Cug, forming the first marginal cell. The claval suture dividing the clavus
and corium is near the base, extending from the base to near the tip of Guy. Only one
anal vein is present, and that is very short and near the base. The veins, and sometimes
the membrane, are beset with fine or coarse hairs.”

“ The venation of the posterior wings is even more simple, the wings themselves being
much smaller and more delicate in texture. R, is wanting, the first behind the costa
being the radial sector. The media is unforked at the end. The cubitus divides, as
in the primary wing, into Cu, and Guy. A short anal vein is sometimes present.” In
one of the Indian species, Trioga obsoleta, these wings are greatly reduced like small
stubs, :

Abdomen. Heslop-Harrison (1951) writes: ‘“ Considerable differences of opinion
have been expressed by various authors as to the interpretation of the abdominal seg-
mentation and the associated genital structures.” Ten segments are normal and
generally accepted in Psyllidae. The first two segments are greatly reduced and
suppressed, while the posterior segments are modified and represented by the genital
structures, Thus, six segments—third to eighth—are easily visible in the abdomen,
each with a spiracle on the lateral side. These segments are more often telescoped,
and pubescence is usually prominent.on sternites. TAXONOMIG TREATMENT 15

Genitalia, The male genitalia varies considerably in form and shape in different
genera and species, and consists of the anal valve (proctiger), forceps or claspers
(parameres), subgenital valve (hypandrium) and the aedeagus. A bobbin-shaped
sperm pump is located in the abdomen and is connected with the aedeagus by a fine
delicate tube. Similarly, the female genital structures are also greatly variable, and comprise the
dorsal plate bearing the anus, the ventral plate, and in between the ovipositor carrying
the gonopophyses (valvulae). ‘The homology of the genital structures are discussed by
Heslop-Harrison (1951) and others. IMMATURE STAGES AND THEIR CLASSIFICATION

The nymphs are generally flat creatures, oval in shape, yellowish in early instars and
hecome blackish with reddish marks in later instars, with bright red eyes. They have
a long beak enclosing fine stylets, on the ventral surface near the centre. The wing-
pads afier the first moult appear as small buds on the anterior half of the dorsal side. Their body is often covered or fringed with different types of setae, and in life it is enve-
loped in masses of flocculent secretion. I have attempted to describe and figure
as many as possible the nymphs available in the collections (totalling 45 species)
and I have followed the nomenclature of Ferris (1925, 1926, 1928) in nymphal
descriptions. The system of classification based on nymphs only could not be attempted, as the
scope of the present work was so limited, and research staff was not provided in the
scheme. However, Ferris (1925) recognises two distinct types of nymphs, (1) the
tiozine type, in which the wing-pads are produced cephalad at the humeral angle
and otherwise so arranged that their margin is more or less continuous with the margins
of head and abdomen and (2) the psylline type, in which the wing-pads are not
produced cephalad at the humeral angle and they,project prominently from the contour
of the body. Rahman (1932) has added another, pauropsylline type, in which the
front wing-pads are not produced cephalad at the humeral angle but show a tendency
in that direction, their outer margins are, however, in line with the general contour
of the body. ‘The nymphs of the pauropsylline species reported here, do show the
tendency as mentioned by Rehman, but:the nymphs of Pauropsylla purpurescens, sp.n. resemble closely with the triozine forms. Similarly, the nymphs of several species of
the sub-family Ciriacreminae resemble the nymphs of the psylline forms (sub-family
Psyllinae). The nymphs of the genus Diaphorina (sub-family Psyllinae) resemble the
triozine forms. The nymphs of Leuronota corniculata, sp.n. (sub-family Triozinae) resemble
the pauropsylline form of Rahman. In order to establish a firm taxonomic basis, more
knowledge about the immature stages is necessary. The nymphal stages of several
species possess the conspicuous bands of pores in addition to the usual circum-anal. pore
ring. This expanded zone of pores is partially on the dorsum and partially on the
venter. This structure may prove of some systematic importance. The homologies
of the anal pore ring are discussed by Ferris (1928) and I agree with him that “ care
must be taken in its use to establish the actual homologies. . . .”

  

16 PSYLLIDAE OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

DISCUSSION

In the course of this work much difficulty was faced due to the non-availability of
the types of Indian species described by Lethierry, Kieffer, Crawlord, Laing and othe
The descriptions and figures given by these authors omit certain details of value and
are very flimsy. However, I have been able to identify with reasonable certainty all
species, with the exception of a few, ‘These doubtful species were referred to Dr Louise
M. Russell, Dr 1, D, Tuthill, Dr F, Ossiannilsson, Dr V, I’, Eastop and Dr Y. Miyatake
and their valuable ‘assistance was secured, The external morphology, wing venation
and genital characters are extensively explained and their homologies are discussed
by Crawford (1914), Patch (1909), Pruthi (1925) and Ossiannilsson ef al, (in ‘Tuxen,
Copenhagen, 1956). Some changes in the taxonomy of these insects are critically
discussed hy Heslop-Harrison (1948, 1949, 1951, 1952, 1958, 1959, 1960), but L note
that confusion still persisis in several gencra, because of the inconsistency of certain
characters like shape of head, vertex, presence or absence of genae, wing-venation, basal
spur-and apical spines on hind tibia. 11 is not my intention to comment at length or
with any pretence of authority upon the status of such genera. ‘The characters used
in the generic descriptions and keys here are, thevefore, merely for convenience in sepa-
rating the genera found in the Indian subcontinent and are subject to alterations anc
modifications when further knowledge of other genera and species is available. The dominant groups present are the genera Trioza, Psylla and Diaphorina showing
fairly consistent characters, but another dominant group Pauropsplla exhibits inconsistent
characters. Male genital structures are useful in specific determination, bul not in
generic classification, ‘The structural reserublance and relationship of generic and
specific characters are discussed hy me under the respective genera and species, PAyllo~
blecta Ferris is not considered as a valid genus and has been synonymised with (he genus
Trioza Foerster. For convenience, however, | have divided Trioza into Phylloplecta-
group and Trioza-group, the former having an anteriorly directed spur of the metacoxac
and the latter without it. Another genus Pelalolyma Scott appears to resemble closely
with the typical Trivkza; however it is considered net on the basis of some
character combinations. Ramakrishna Ayyar (1924) placed AUlotrioza minuta Crawford
(1912) under the genus Leuronota Crawford. In the abscuce of more material for
study, no change is proposed in these two gencra at this time. The sub-family Giriacreminae includes a heterogeneous group of genera showing
considerable variation in generic chavacters. On the basis of such variations, Heslop-
Harrison. (1958) has. regrouped the genera into 7 tribes of this sub-family and has also
made Pauropspllini as one of the wibes, To avoid further confusion in the taxonomy
of these groups, I have retained Pauropsyllinae as a separate sub-family and have included
Phacopteron lentiginosum Buckton and Pauropsylla tuberculata Ovawford in this sub-family,
as they show closer relationship with Pauropsylla than with others. This study has also brought to light the relationship of the psyllid fauna of the Indian
sub-continent to that of other areas, Some of the genera, Psausia Endl., Mesohomotoma
Kuw., Macrohomotoma Kuw., Tenaplalara Kuw., and Mycopsylla Frog. of the sub-family
Ciriacreminae, and Pauropsylla Rubs. of the sub-family Pauropsyllinae of the Old World

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

    

 

 

‘VAXONOMIG TREATMENT 17

Tropics and the Australian region, are fairly represented in India as well. Elements
of the palaearctic fauna, e.g. Psylla zaicevi Sule, Psylla viburni Loew, Aphalara maculipennis
Loew, Trioza ceardi Berg., and T. urticae L., are also met with. Heslop-Harrison (1946)
has recorded Psplla crataegi Schr., Pspllopsis fraxini L., and Trioza scotti Loew also
palaearctic species from Naini Tal (U.P.). T feel that the present taxonomic work will not only serve as a means of identifying
the species of the Indian sub-continent but will perhaps also stimulate more widespread
interest in the psyllid fauna, It is expected that a more thorough taxonomic revision
may ultimately be made when more species have been collected, particularly from the
Southern Peninsula and the Eastern States of Bengal and Assam,

Heslop-Harrison (1951) in his discussion on the ancestry, family relations, evolution
and speciation of the Psyllidae, has correctly said that ‘it is the balance of all characters
on which final judgement must rest in elucidating matters of classification, systematics
and phylogeny.”

 

IV. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE

Some recent workers in Europe have given the rank of Sub-order under the name
Psylloidea or Psyllinea to this group of insects. The psyllid fauna of the Indian region is
generally more restricted to the forest plant species, and, therefore, has great limitations. Further, the collections studied by me were not adequate cnough to contain very large
series of specimens of many species and considerable variation was thus not noticeable. They are, therefore, confined to the [amily rank of Pyyllidae. Heslop-Harrison. (1951),
in his critical discussion of these homopterous insects, has also maintained the family
rank Psyllidae. 1798, Pyyllidee (fam), Latveille, P, A. Gen. Crust. Jns. 3, p. 168. 1876, —— ~~. Scott, J. Trans. ent. Soc, London p. 526. 1896, ——-——~, Edwards, J. Haw, Hom, Br. Isl, p. 293. 1900, -—, Froggatt, W. W. Proc, Linn. Soc. N.S. W. 25: 250-258,
1911, ——-——, Crawford, D. L, Pomona Goll, 7. Ent, 3: 480-481. 1914, -—--—~, Crawford, D. L, Bull. U. S, Nat, Mus. 85: 1-18. 1919, . Crawford, D. L. Philipp. J. Soi. 15: 140,

1913, ——-—-, Aulmann, G. Pryllidarum Catalogus, p. 5. 1924, — , Ramakrishna Ayyar, ‘T. V. Ree. Jndian Mus, 26: 621-62
1951, Heslop-Harrison, G. dn. Mag. nat. Hist, (12) 42 1-35,

 
 
   
 

 

1952,  Heslop-Harrison, G,

1958, —_—-—, Heslop-Harrison, G. ibid. (13) 11 561-579. 1959, ———, Heslop-Harrison, G, ibid. (13) 2: 157-168,

1960, —--—, Heslop-Havrison, G. ibid. (13) 3: 497-504. 1963, —--~~, Klimaszewski, 8. M. alnnis. Zool., Warsz, 20 (20): 963-370. 1903, Psylloidea, Handlirsch, A. Sher. atkad. Wiss. Wien, pp. 716-738,

1950, —-——, Borhsenius, N, S. Akad. Nauk, Opredelitli po faune .8.S.R., no. 32. 1957, ————, Vondracek, K, Fauna, C.8.R. Praha, Ges. akad. Ved. t, 9% 1-431,

1962, —~—~. Dobreanu, EB. and Manolache, 1. Fauna Repub. pop. rom. Insecta, 8, fase, 3, Hom. Psylloidea,
pp. 61-63,

1964, ——~ —, Loginova, M. M. Proc. Inst. Zool. Acad. Sci. U.S.S.R. pp. 52-58,

1964, ————,, Loginova, M. M. Inst. Biol. Acad. Sci, U.S.S.R. pp. 437-442. 1964, ——-——, Klimaszewski, $. M. Ams. Zool, Warsz. 22 1-138,

1861, Psyllodea (fam. ), Flor, G. Riynch, Lil. 2: 483. 1914, ——~, Mordvilko, K. A. Faun. Ro: 2-73,

1948, , Tarbi P, and Plavilscikov, N,N, Opredeliteli nasekomih evropeiskoi ciasti S.8.S.R.,
Moscova Leningrad, p. 182,

1904, Chermidae (fam. ), Kirkaldy, G. W. Entomologist, 38: 258, 280,

1917, , Van Duzee, E. P. Gat. Hemip, N. Amer., p. 782. 1908, Psyllina (superfam. ), Boerner, G, Arb. Kais. Biol. Aust. Bd. 6: 81-320,

1935, ———, Haupt, H. Tierwelt Mitileleur, 4, 3: 221, 222,

1954, —--—, Dlabola, J. Fauna C.S.R., p. 54. 1951, Psyltinea (subord,), Pesson, P, (in Grasse, P.), T. 10, fasc. 2, p. 1531,

1964, -———, Loginova, M, M. Proc. Inst. Zool. Acad. Sci, U.S.S.R., pp. 52-56. 1964,--—-——, Loginova, M. M. Inst. Biol. Acad. Sci. U.S.S.R., pp. 437-442.

 

. (12) 5: 679-696,

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

Loew (1878) classified these insects in four sub-families—Trioginae, Psyllinae, Aphalarinae,
18

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 19

and Liviinae. Crawford (1914) classified them into six sub-families—Liviinae, Paurop-
syllinae, Carsidarinae, Ciriacreminae, Triozinae, and Psyllinae, Pesson (1951) also recognised
these six subfamilies, but in the sub-order Psyllinea, Heslop-Harrison has merged two
sub-families Pauropsyllinae and Carsidarinae in the sub-family Ciriacreminae and grouped
them into Liviinae, Aphalarinae, Triozinae, Ciriacreminae, Psyllinae, and Spondylaspinae. These divisions made on the basis of fundamental morphological characters and consti-
tuted more for nomenclatorial convenience, are now classed as basic or ancestral, and
regarded as of great phylogenetic significance. Dobreanu and Manolache (1962)
and Loginova (1964) have differentiated five major families, e.g., Liviidae, Aphalaridae,
Psyllidae, Prionocnemidae (==Garsideridae) and Triogidae wnder Psylioidea. For the classi-
fication of Indian species, I have followed Crawford’s system of tabulation and have
retained Aphalarinae and Pauropsyllinae together with Liviinae, Giriacreminae, Psyllinae
and Triozinae as sub-families. “These subfamilies are separated by the characters as
given in the following key. KEY 10 THE SUB-FAMILIES OF PSYLLIDAE

. Frons not covered by genae, usually visible as a small sclerite; front ocellus at
extremity of frons; genae seldom produced into conical processes or swellings . . - . « peed
—. Frons covered by genae and not visible except a very narrow border around front
ocellus; genac flat, rounded or produced into conical or tubular processes of
variable extent and length « . . -
2. Vertex flat and horizontal; wings often more or less thickened
—. Vertex rounded downward in front, not horizontal; head strongly deflexed ; thorax
strongly arched; wings usually membranous ss sees et eee eee Pauropsyllinae
3, Eyes greatly flattened, not hemispherical; vertex longer than broad; antennae with
greatly enlarged basal segments; eyes with distinct Preocular tubercles; pronotum
extending far down laterad toward coxae- +--+ +++ ee eee ee ee eet 6 Liviinae
—. Byes more or less spherical; veriex not longer than broad; antennae not as above;
eyes without preocular tubercles; pronotum shorter, with a knoblike lateral
lcrmination sss eee ees See e eee wae t ener aseeee Apkalarinae
|. Head decply cleft in front between the antennae; forewing with more than ‘he ‘usual
marginal cells; if head is not cleft, forewing elongate and often with pseudo-veins;
basal tarsus of hind legs usually with only one claw-like spine at apex - . —. Head not as above, the divergent genal cones may give the appearance of a cleft;
forewing with only the usual two marginal cells, never with pscudoveins « see
. Forewing rarely angulate at apex, with a cubital stem, i.e., media and cubitus: with a
common stem; genae developed into conical processes or rounded lobes; basal
tarsal segment of hind legs usually with two claw-like spines at apex - - + +
—. Forewing usually angulate at apex, radius, media and cubitus usually diverging at
the same point from basal vein or nearly 303 genae usually developed into cones,
sometimes slightly swollen beneath the antennal bases; claw-like spine 0 of basal
tarsal segment absent. 5+ +e e ee ee tee ree ee ee te ete s Trioginae

 

   

 

   

o

 

Sub-family LIVIINAE Loew 1878

1878, Liviinae, Loew, F. Verh. zool, -bot. Ges. Wien. 28: 605-606. 1900, -, Froggatt, W. W., Proc. Linn, Soc. N.S.W. 25: 258-59,
1907, » Oshanin, B., Verz. Palaarkt. Hem. 2: 338,

 

 

 

20 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

1913,-———, Aulmann, G., Pypllidarum Catalogus, p. 75. 1914, ——, Crawford, D. L. Bull. U.S. nain, Mus 85: 19. 1949, ———, Schaefer, H. A. Miti. scleveiz. ent. Ges, 5 18,

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

1948, , Heslop-Hasrison, G. Ann. Mag. nat, Hist, (12), 1+ 264-93. 1949, ———, Heslop-Harrison, G. Ann., Mag. nat. Hist, (12), 21 241-270,

1960, ———, Heslop-Harrison, G. ibid. (13), 3(32) + 503. 1963, , Klimaszewski, S, M. Frag. Faun. Wer z, 10(18) : 257-258. 1963, , Klimaszewski, 8. M. Anuls, Zool., Warsz. 20(20) : 263-270. 1896, Liviidae, Edwards, J. Hent, Hom. Br. Isl., p, 227. 1935, ———~, Haupt, H Tierwelt Mitteleur., 4, p. X, 224-225,

1954, -——~, Smrecaynski, St. sen. Pylloidea, Magmenta Faunistica 7: 135,

1957, ——-——, Vondracck, K. Hemiptera ILL, Hom, Payllinea, .lota. ent, Mus, Nat. Praga, t, 28+ 118-115,

1964, ——, Klimaszewski, §, M, Anils. Zool. Warsz, 22(5), pp. 81-135,

1962, -_~—, Dobreanu, E. and Manolache, . Fauna Repub. pop. rom., Insecta, 8, fase. 8, Homoptera,
pp. 62-64. :

1964, --, Loginova, M. M. Just. Biol, Acad. Sci. U.S.8.R., pp. 442-44; Proc. Inst. Zool, Acad, Sci, 34,
pp. 52-55,

1886, Liviaria (subfara,) Paton, A. Cat, des, Flam, p. 90. 1907, -——, (Div.) Oshanin, B. Verg. palaarkt, Hem, 2: 338. 1862, Livillinae (Txibe) (partim), Scott, J. Trans. ent. Soc, Lond, p. 462. Head not defiexed, as broad as prothorax and closely joined to it. Vertex flat, usually
longer than broad, more or less rectangular in outline, apical portion thin, emarginate
(sometimes deeply) in front at median line. Genace more or less swollen bencath
vertex, never conical, Frons beneath vertex, not covered by genae, visible as a narrow
(usually elongate) sclerite from clypeus to front ocellus. Anterior ocellus beneath,
not visible from above. Eyes not prominent, greatly flattened (compressed), not
hemispherical, with a small preocular tubercle in front of each. Antennae usually
short, rather thick, basal segments unusually large and thick. Thorax flat, scarcely
arched; sutures not deeply impressed. Pronotum collar-like, extending far down laterad
towards coxae. Propleurites very short, subequal. Legs short. Hind tibiae without basal
spur. Basal metatarsus without spines. Forewings rather large, more or less thickened,
coriaceous, variable in shape and venation; often maculate; basal vein short; cubital
petiole (M-+Cu) shorter, as long as or longer than cubitus; upper fork Cu, very long,
more than twice as long as lower fork Cu,. The preocular tubercles said to be sensory
in function and, therefore, of great phylogenetic significance,

The chief features of this sub-family are the flattened head, the inferior position and _
the shape of frons beneath vertex and not covered by genae, the more or less swollen
genae bencath vertex, the short antennae and more or less thickened forewings. All Liviinae are restricted to’ Juncus (Funcaceae) and Carex (Cyperaceae) hosts and
their gall-formation is uniform and characteristic. Genus LIVIA Latreille 1804
Livia
Latceille, P. A, 1804. Hist. nat, Jns. 12: 374; 1807. Genera Crust. et. Ins. 3: 170. Flor, G. 1861. Rlynch, Livl. 2, p, 540; Bull. Soo. Nat, Moscou, p. 337. Meyer-Dur, R. 1871. Mite. schweéz. ent. Ges. 3: 980,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAZ 21

Scott, J. 1876. Trans. ent. Soc. Lond. p. 565. Loew, F. 1878. Verh. zool.-bot. Ges, Wien. 28: 698,

Edwards, J. 1896. Hem. Hom. Br. Isl., p. 227. Oshanin, B, 1907. Verz, palacarkt. Hem. 2+ 338. Aulmann, G. 1918. Psyllidarun Catalogus, p. 76,

Crawford, D, L. 1914, Bull, U.S. Nat, Mus, 851 19,

Haupt, H. 1935, Tierwelt Mitt. 4, p. X, 225. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1949. Ann, Mag. nat. Hist, (12) 2: 244, 248-253. Vondracek, K, 1954. Fauna C.8.R. Praha, Ces. akad. ved. t. IX, p. 115,
Dobreanu, E, and Manolache, C. 1962. Fauna Repub, pop. rom., Insecta, 8, fase. 3, pp. 64. Loginova, M, M. 1964. Inst. "Biol, Ahad. Sci, US.S.R. p. 444,

 

  

Type species: Livia juncorum (Latreille) (==Pyylla juncorum Latreille, 1798) (original
designation). The generic characters are already covered by those of the sub-family, since this is
the only genus so far known under it. The genus Livia is widely distributed throughout Europe, Britain to the Hibrides,
North Africa (Algeria), and also in North America, and Japan. From India, one
species Livia khaziensis Hes-Harr. has been recorded from Shillong Peak in the Khasi
Hills (1,525 m), Assam. This species is described from a single male and its descrip-
tion is reproduced from Heslop-Harrison (1949). Of all the Liviine species, Livia
juncorum (Latr.) has the widest distribution, and is already reported from the following
countries of the Palaearctic area: Norway, Sweden, Lapland, Finland, Russia, Denmark,
Holland, Belgium, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Rumania, France, Spain, Portugal,
Italy, Turkestan and Algeria; also in Great Britain, Hebrides, Cyprus, Kurdistan and
Persia. In Northern India, it was found at Naini Tal (1,830 m) in the Himalayas,
U.P., producing characteristic galls on Juncus spp. (Heslop-Harrison, 1949), I have
not seen both these species, L. juncorum(Latr.) and L. khaziensis Hes.-Harr. Livia juncorum (Latreille) 1798

Paylla juncorum
° Latreille, P, A, 1798. Bull. Soc. Phylom. 1 (15): 113,

Livia juncorter
Latreille, P. A. 1802. Gen. Insect. 3: 170. pl. XII, fig. 1. Foerster, A. 1848, Verh, nature. Ver, preuss. Rheinl. 3: 91. Flor, G. 1861. Rhynch, Livl. 2: 542,
Meyer-Dur, R. 1871. Mitt. schweiz, ent. Ges, 3: 404,
Loew, F., 1882. Verh, zool. -bot. Ges. Wien, 31; 157-160,
Scott, J. 1876. Trans. ent. Soc. Lond, p. 565. Edwards, J. 1896, Ham. Hom, Br, Isl, p. 227, pl. XXVI, fig. 1. Oshanin, B, 1907, Verz. palaearkt, Hem. 2: 339,
Aulmann, G. 1913, Psyllidarum Catalogus, pp. 76-78. Horvath, G. 1918, Fauna Regni. Hung. H1. 8: 57. Haupt, H, 1935. Psylloidea, Tierwelt Mitteleur, 4p. X. 225,
Heslop-Harrison, G. 1946. Entomologists’ mon. Mag. 82: 36. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1948, Ann, Mag. nat. Hist. (12) 1: 284-293. fig, 7,
Heslop-Harrison, G, 1949, ibid. (12) 2: 244-245, 248-253,

22 PSYLLIDAR OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Schaefer, H, A. 1949, Mit. sclaveiz, ant, Ges. 221 11. Ossiannilsson, F. 1952. Opuse, ent, Lund. 173 196,
Smreczynski, St. sen. 1954. Fragmenta Fawistica, 7: 135. Vondracek, K. 1957. Fauna. C.S.R. Praha, Ges, akad, ved. t, 91 115-119. Lindberg, H. and Ossiannilsson, F,, 1960, Soc. pro. F, et. Fl, Fennica, Fauna Fenn, 8, p. 4. Klimaszewski, 8. M. 1963, Frag. Faun, Warsawa 10 (18): 258. Loginova, M.M. 1962, Proc, Iast, Zool. Acad, Sci. U.S.SR. 31: 34. Loginova, M, M, 1964. Inst. Biol. Acad. Sci. US.S.R. p. 444. Dobreanu, E. and Manolache, C. 1962. Fama, Repub. pop. rom., Insecta, 8, fase. 3, pp. 64-68, figs, $1, 92. =Clarmes graminis: Hoy, 1794. Tvans. Linn, Soc. Lond. 22 354. ==Chermes junci + Schrank, 1810. Fauna boica 2: 142. Heslop-Harrison (1949) has discussed its distribution, host alfinities, details of biology
and ecology. Dobreanu ef al. (1962) have redescribed it with excellent figures. This
species is not seen by the author, however, its bricf features are outlined below. -

Colouration brownish or reddish pink; antennae red or reddish pink, 4th to 8th
joints white, two apical segments black; forewings thickened, coriaceous, somewhat
rhomboidal, pale fuscous-testaccous, very finely wrinkled transversely; legs pale yellow;
abdomen fuscous-yellowish or brownish dorsally and yellow ventrally, Head hori-
zontal and closely attached to prothorax. Vertex flat, longer than broad. Frons not
visible from above and represent as a long narrow sclerite beneath the vertex. Eyes
flattened, with a prominent preocular tubercle. Antennae short, stout, with two basal
segments very greatly enlarged. Thorax flattened and pronotum collar-like. Genitalia
characteristic. Distribution. This species has a very wide distribution all over Europe and England
of the Palaearctic region, Also occurs in Cyprus, Kurdistan, Persia and Northern
India (at Naini Tal, 1,830 m). It produces its characteristic gall on several species of
Juncus. Livia khaziensis Heslop-Harrison 1949
Heslop-Harrison, G, 1949, Ann, Mog, nat, Hist (12) 2, pp. 256-261, fig. 2. The description is reproduced from Heslop-Harrison (1949). “Colour, Generally, dark brownish-horn colour, with darker longitudinal striae and
a median lighter line down the thorax.”

“ Head. Vertex dirty brown with darkly filled coarse punctures. Preocular tubercles
very deeply reddish-brown, lateral ocelli deep reddish-brown, compound eyes almost
black, Antennal insertions dark, genae black; frons, clypeus and labrum also black. Antennae dark generally, but the apical segments become pitchy,”

“ Thorax, Pronotum dirty brown with darkly filled coarse punctures, propleurites
concolorous with the latter.”

“Scutum and prescutum darker than the pronotum, with two darker lateral
longitudinal striae and a median lighter line. Coarsely punctured, glabrous. Meta-

otal sclerites lighter in colour, Sternites uniformly very black, legs smoky, meracantha¢
black,”

FAMILY PSYLLIDAR, 23

« Abdomen. Uniformly black, without banding, genitalia of the male also very dark.”

* Wings. Dark mottled, horn colour, veins yellowish; claval suture pale, almost
transparent.”

“ Structure. General body surface coarsely rugose or punctured and wrinkled. Metanotal and metapleural regions folded laterally into deep grooves into which the
wing bases fit.”

« Head. From the side, appearing bluntly wedge-shaped; from above, the Iateral
margins of the lobes of the vertex, the compound eyes and the lateral margins of the
occipital regions are smoothly rounded into two sectors of an almost perfect circle.”*

“The vertex is strongly notched in front and produced into two bluntly pointed
lobes. Median suture weak, disc only slightly excavated. Lateral ocelli not at all
prominent, compound eyes almost spherical, but not prominently projecting from the
sides of the head, since they merge smoothly with the rounded sides of the vertex,
genae and occipital regions, Preocular tubercles obscure, but present. Genae bulging
slightly, giving considerable and nearly uniform depth to the héad capsule, but hollowed. in the middle. Frons obscure, although not covered by the genae. Anterior occllus
obscure. Clypeus poorly defined, with the small black labrum projecting backwards
to form a small tubercle lying between the first pair of legs.”

“ Antennae inserted into the bulging genae, just under the lateral margins of the
projecting lobes of the frons. Basal segments large, second segments more than twice
their size, each forming a subcylindrical, truncated cone. The surfaces of the basal
segments are very heavily wrinkled, almost warty, and together they nearly equal the
rest of the antenna in length. The distal segments are rugose, with sensoria on segments
6, 8 and 10, and two long subapical sensory spines or pegs on the darker terminal
segment.”

“ Thorax. Pronotum flat and ribbon-like, not quite so long as the head, nor nearly
so wide. Strongly rugose, and turned down somewhat abruptly at the sides. Pro-
pleurites very small and recessed into square notches cut out of the forward lateral
margins.”

“The axillary sclerites are large, polygonal plates, with the inner two sides merging
in with the prescutum and scutum. The latter are somewhat shining and glabrous,
although very strongly rugose or pitted, slightly arched and smoothly rounded down
atthe sides. Thoracic region generally flat and in a continuous plane with the horizontal
vertex.”

« The sternites are wrinkled and grooved in such a way that the grooves alinost form
recesses for the femora of the legs. The legs are stout and somewhat coarsely hairy. Meracanthae straight, bluntly pointed and slightly divergent. Metatibial spines six
in number, arranged into one prominent and larger inner spine and five smaller, closely-set
outer spines. Claws dark, and not well developed. Basal metatibiae without spurs.”

“ Forewing. Extending beyond the apex of the abdomen, broadest about halfway
along its length and rounded at the apex in almost the same way as in L. juncorum, but
differing from the wing of the latter in being very slightly bean-shaped, i.e., with the
apex slightly tilted upwards from the median axis, Yenation similar to L. Juncorum,

24 VSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

but with the junction of the R, and the costa very slightly expanded into an incipient
ptcrostigma.””

“ Veins yellowish, becoming dark and very strong at the base. General wing surface
very strongly coriaceous, and mottled with dark fumose-brown pigment. Claval suture
clear and, therefore, prominent against the darker back-ground. Micro-sculpturing in
the vicinity of the claval suture characteristic and dividing the wing surface up into
blotchy, irregular, hexagonal cells.” :

« Abdomen. The segments are tapering and, together, equal in length to the genital
segment of the male.”

“ Male genitalia, Proctiger stout and cylindrical, finely etched with annular broken
striae; coarsely hairy, withthe hair thickening and darkening towards the posterior
edge of the anal opening. *

“ Parameres about two-thirds the height of the proctiger, with the forward margin
gently bulging out before narrowing down to the bluntly rounded apex. The hind
margin is smoothly excavated, making the whole paramere somewhat sickle-shaped.”

“From behind, the parameres are seen to curve, bow-like, towards each other. ‘he
outer edge of the base is hollowed slightly, and the inner edge is coarsely haired with
medium long hair. Tips approximating each other and dark,”

“ Genital segment (i.e., ninth segment) scoop-shaped, and uniformly, if sparsely, hairy. Dark coloured.”

DIMENSIONS OF THE MALE
“ Length from vertex to the tip of folded wings

2.9 mm
Length of antennae 0.7 mm
Width of head, including the compound eyes 0.42 mm
Length of forewing 1.9 mm
Width of forewing 1.0 mm
Length of abdomen, including the genitalia 0.6 mm”
DIMENSIONS OF THE MALE GENITALIA
“* Length of proctiger 0.3 mm
Width of proctiger at the base 0.15 mm
Length of parameres 0.2 mm
Width of parameres at the base 0.08 mm
Length of ninth segment 0.3 mm
Depth of ninth segment 0.3 mm

Antennal Ratio 0.6"

NOTES ON THE SPECIES

“Discovering that Livia juncorum was apparently a normal element of the psyllid
fauna of Northern India, and to be found in the foothills of the Himalayas at altitudes
of approximately 1830 m, suggested that it may have an even wider distribution, and
4 continuous search was initiated for it wherever Juncus spp. grew naturally throughout

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 25

the Indo-Malayan region. It was whilst searching for this insect in Assam that the
present new species was found.”

“In March 1946 one, apparently belated anale, was swept out of Juncus growing in
a damp hollow on Shillong Peak in the Khasi Hills at an altitude of approximately
5,000 ft. Further extensive search failed to bring to light others by that method, and
it was realized that it was probably about a month too late in the season. At that
latitude, even considering the altitude, spring comes very much earlier than in Europe,
and most of the spring insects were already beginning to hecome very scarce or absent.”

“ As the single insect already collected was at least a new form, if not a new species
of Livia, it was considered to be highly desirous that other representatives of it should
be obtained. Other methods previously known to produce psyllids under similar
circumstances were therefore adopted. This resulted in the discovery of one further,
somewhat lragmented, male in the debris taken from a spider’s web. The web was
located in the cleft of a small pine-tree grewing within hundred yards of the site of
the original discovery. No others were obtained either then or later.””

“In gerieral appearance these insects superficially resemble dark forms of L..juncorum,
but closer examination revealed many points of difference between them and several
characters in which they approximate species of the genus Diraphia.”

“Thus, for example, the slight thickening of the juncture of R, and the costa into
an incipient pterostigma is decidedly of a Diraphiine character, whilst the basal seg-
ments of the antennae are more cylindrical than conical, and not quite so well developed
asin L, juncorum,”

“ On the other hand, the general arrangement of the venation is of the genus Livia,
and the head is strongly cleft and shaped as in the latter.”

“ The antennal ratio is 0-6, In other species of Livia it is from (+5-0-6:£0-025, whilst
for species of Diraphia it is 1-1-3.”

“TL. khaziensis is not regarded as a transitional species between these two genera, but
rather as an archaic type which probably approximates the ancestral form from which
both Livia and Diraphia sprang. As it is obviously to be referred to the genus Livia,
in it is seen evidence furthering the belief that the present-day species of Livia are older
and nearer to the ancestral type than are the existing species of Diraphia,”

“I. khagiensis, I believe, should prove to have a wide distribution om high ground
throughout the Indo-Malayan Archipelago, and it may be only one of a series of new
Liviine forms yet to be discovered in that region.”

Sub-family APHALARINAE Loew 1878

1878, Aphalarinae, Loew, F, Verh, zool, -bot. Ges. Wien, 28: 605-606. 1881, —_—-—, Reuter, O. M. Ent. Tidskr. 2: 148,

 

 

 

1882, . Scott, J. Trans, ent . Soc. Lond. p. 450. 1900, , Froggatt, W. W. Proc, Linn. Soc. N.S. W. 25+ 266,
1907, , Kuwayama, S. Trans, Sapporo. Nat, Hist. Soc. 2: 151. 1913, , Aulmann, G. Psyllidarum Catalogus, p. 61. 1914, ———, Crawford, D. L. Pomona Coll. J, Ent, 3(2)+ 480. 1914, ———, Crawford, D, L. Bull. U.S. natn, Mus, 85) 19,

26 PSYLLIDAR OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

 

   

 

 

 

1935, —-———, Haupt, H, Tierwelt Mittcleur. 42 X. 226,

1941, ————, Pugfalder, O. Piyllina, Brown's Klassen und Ordrungen des Tierreichs, 5, abt. 3, Leipzig, p. 74. 1947, —, Wagner, W. Verk, Ver. nat. Heimalforsch. Hamburg 29: 55. 1949, ————-, Schaefer, H. A. Mitt, schweiz. ent. Ges. v. 222 11. 1949, ————, Heslop-Harrison, G, Am. Mag. nat. Hist, (12), 2: 782-B01,

1960, ——-—, Heslop-Harrison, G. ibid. (13), 3(82) : 503. 1963, -, Klimaszewski, 8, M. Frag. Faun, 10(18): 257-270. 1996, Aphlaridac, Eclwards, J. Hem. Hom. Br. Isl., p. 228,

1957, —-——, Vondracek, K. Hemiptera U1, Homoptera, Pryllinea, seta ent. Mus. Nat. Praga, t, 28, pp. 123-24,

1962, —-----, Dobreanut, E. and Manolache, C. Fauna Repub, pop. rom. Insecta, 8, fase, 3, Homoptera,

pp. 62-63, 70, 84,

 

   

 

 

 

1963, , Klimaszewski, $.M, Bull. dead, pal. Sci. (2), 1L(4): 187 (Aphalarini). 1953, --———, Klimaszewski, S, M. Frag. Faun, 10(18) : 257-258,

1963, ————, Klimaszewski, S, M. Annis, Zool., Warsz. 20(20) : 363-370. 1964, ————, Klimaszewski, 8. M. ibid. 22(5): 81-138,

1964, ——— , Loginova, M. M. Proc, Inst, Zool. Acad. Sci, U.S.S.R. 34: 52-56,

1964, ———, Loginova, M. M. Inst, Bial. Acad, Sci. U.S.8.R. pp. 42-44. 1886, Aphalarmia, (Div. ), Paton, A. Cat, des. Hem. p. 90. 1907, ————-, Oshanin, B. Ann. Mus. Zool. 12: 339. Loew in 1878 made the genus Aphalara erected by Foerster in 1848, the typical genus
of this sub-family. Body small. Head flat, scarcely deflexed. Vertex rather broader than long, more
or less quadrate, slightly excavated on either side of median suture. Front of head
either swollen or produced into two rounded lobes, roughly rugged. Genae only
slightly swollen, never conical, projecting forward into two rounded lobes under the
antennal sockets. Frons clongated, pyriform, with the anterior ocellus located dorsally. Antennae inserted under the vertex, short and stout. Eyes prominent, more or less
hemispherical, projecting from the sides of the head. Thorax more or less flattened,
or only very slightly arched. Pronotum ribbon-like, extending downwards laterally
and terminating in knob-like swellings. Forewings usually obovate, hyaline, often
maculated or spotted with dark maculae; cubital petiole (M+Cu) as fong as or shorter
than cubitus; radius as Jong as or longer than cubital petiole, Male anal valve with a
long posterior horizontal lobe, extending back to forceps. The members of this sub-family ave recognised by the flattened, scarcely deflexed
head, vertex broader than long or somewhat quadrate, eyes more or less hemispherical,
genae only slightly swollen, forewings usually clongate-ovate, hyaline, often maculated,
rounded at apex, and male anal valve with a long, posterior horizontal lobe (Trioza
matloticala Crrawf., also possesses such posterior lobes). In this sub-family, two genera, viz. Aphalara Foerster and Colposcenia Enderlein, are
represented in India, The former is restricted to Polygonum (Polygonaceae) and the
latter on Tamarix (Tamariscineae) hosts. Considerable variation in certain characters,
e.g. size and colour of body, shape of forewing, presence, absence or degree of maculation
and colouration and size of genital appendages in both sexes is said to be present in the
species of Aphalara (Crawford, 1914a). FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 27

KEY TO THE GENERA OF APHALARINAE

1, Forewing with a prominent nodus on costal margin; rudiment of subcosta visible
in anterior basal cell... 0.2000.

tee bene Colposcenia
=. Forewing without nodus on costal margin rudiment of subcosta. not visible . .

« Aphalara

  

Genus APHALARA Foerster 18418.
hermes
Linnaeus, C. 1761. Fauna Suecica, 2nd ed, p. 263. Aphatara
Foerster, A. 1848. Verh. natirw. ver. press, Rheinl. 32.67. Flor, G, 1861. Rlynch, Livi, 2: 530,
Loew, F, 1878. Verh. Zool, -bot. Ges, Wien, 28: 607. Oshanin, B. 1907. Ann. d. Mus. z0l. de U Ac, imp. des. Sc. Petershing, Bd. 12: 343. Aulmann, G. 1913. Pyyllidarim Catalogus, Bevlin, p. 61. Crawford, D, L. 1911. Pomona Goll. F. Ent, 3(2): 492. Grawford, D.L. 1914. Bull, U.S. nain, Mus, 85% 24-25,
Klyver, F, D. 1980, Can. Ent, 62(8): 172. Haupt, H, 1935. Paylloided, Tierwelt Mitteleur. 4, p. x, 227. Caldwell, J. 8. 1937. inn. ent. Soc. Am. 302 563-564. Wagner, W. 1947. Verh. d. Ver. f. naturtw. Heimalforschung, Hambug 29: 57. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1949, Ann. Mag. nat. Hist, (12), 2: 782-801. Vondracek, K. 1957. Fauna C.S.R. Praka, pp. 141-142. Loginova, M. M, 1961, Entomological Rev. U.S.S.R, 401 602-618. Loginova, M. M, 1962, Proc. Inst. Zoal., Acad. Sci, U.S,S.R. 30: 185-86. Loginova, M. M. 1963, Entomological Rev. U.S.S.R. 42: 621-22. Dobreanu, B, and Manolache, C. 1962, Fauna Reh. Pop. rom., Insect, Homoptera, Psylloidea, Vol. 8,
Fase. 3, p. 85. Ossiannilsson, F. 1963. Entomologist 96 (1206): 250-251. Klimaszewski, S, M, 1963. Fragmenta Faunistica 10(18): 261-262.

 

b

 

Type species: Aphalara calthae (Linnaeus) =Chermes calthae Linn. (original designation). The distinctive characters outlined hy Crawford (1914) and others are expanded with
notes as given below. Body small and slender. Head usually scarcely deflexed; vertex flat, more than half
as long as broad, disc somewhat rectangular or quadrate, but rounded in front, making
an emargination at point of excision. Frons not covered by genae, but narrow and
elongate as in Jivia, with front ocellus at its anterior end, anterior ocellus visible from
above. Genae not swollen into cones, but often roundly swollen on each side of frons
and projecting forwards into two lobes under the antennal insertions. Clypeus pyri-
form, rather large. Eyes hemispherical. Antennae short, stout, never more than twice
as long as, often not longer than, width of head, ten or nine segmented (usually the former),
strongly imbricate, with deep transverse irregular serrations. Notum not strongly arched,
often almost flat, Pronotum rather long, ribbon-like, with two foveal impressions on
cach side, and a knob-like lateral termination, Pleurites very short, quadrate, pleural
suture straight, extending to middle of lateral termination of pronotum. Prescutum
rather short; scutum large. Hind tibiae without spur at base, with six to nine black
spines at apex; basal tarsus of hind legs with two black, claw-like spines at end, as in
Psylla and many other genera, Wings elongate-ovate, never acute at apex, often more

28 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

or less thickened and subopaque or hyaline, often maculated or spotted; cubital petiole
nearly always as Jong as radius; pterostigma always wanting. Venation typical Apha-
larine. Male anal valve always with a long, horizontal, posterior lobe, extending back
to forceps; forceps club-lilce, dilated somewhat at tips, cach bearing a single well-developed,
sub-apical, thumb-like projection on the anterior side, inclined inwards, Absence of
the apron-like posterior expansion of the circum-anal pore ring of the dorsal valve of
female genitalia is characteristic in the Indian species, unlike those of the North American
and European species. Foerster erected this genus in 1848, and named in it several species but indicated no
type species. It was redefined in 1878 by Loew, who then made it the typical genus
of his sub-family Aphalarinae. This genus is included in the Liviinae by Crawford. By some authors it is placed in a separate sub-family Aphalarinae,

Two species are represented in this genus from India, and hoth are recorded on species
of Polygonum. KEY TO THE SPECIES OF APHALARA

\. Forewings clongate-ovate, maculated apically, with darker spots... ... 2... - -1.  maculipennis

Loew
—. Forewings ovate, maculated with bands apically and basally, with darker spots
scattered all over the membrane... eee ee ee ee che assiannilssoni,
spn,
Aphalara maculipennis Loew 1886
(Figs. 1,2)
Loew, F. 1086, Verh. zool-bot, Ges. Wien, 36:150, pl. LV., Fig. |. Aulmamn, G, 1913, Psyllidarum Catalogus, Berin, p. 63. Heslop-Hactison, G. 1946, Enlomologist's mon. Mog. 82:36,
Heslop-Harrison, G, 1949, Ann. Mag. nat,. Hist, (12) 2: 798-800,

Length of body, in male, 1-45 mm; in female, 1-7 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-95 mm; in female, 2.21 mm
‘Width of head with eyes, 0-51 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0:32 mm

Length of antennae, 0-62 mm

Colouration, General colour light brown to chocolate brown with reddish tinge; vertex
lighter, greyish on either side of median line and bordered with light orange; post-ocellar
region also greyish; antennae yellowish-brown, black at tip; eyes greyish ; prothorax
with two submedian, greyish pads, lateral marginsalso greyish, prescutum with a greyish
median line, scutum with four dark-brown longitudinal bands, with greyish lines in
between, pleural region dark-brown; legs yellowish-brown; abdomen dark-brown
dorsad, variegated with greyish tinge ventrad; wings slightly fumate, with light
maculation in the apical region, veins dark and prominent. Structure. Body long and slender. Head (Fig. 1a) not quite as broad as thorax,
scarcely deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, strongly rugulose; vertex large, about

FAMILY psyLiIpAt. 29

 

Fig, 1, Aphalara maculipennis Loew—a: head, front view; br antennas e: hind leg; ds forewing; et hind
wing; f male genitalia, lateral view; g: anal valve and aedeagus; ht parameres, caudal view;
in sperm pump; j: female genitalia; kt dorsal plate; I: apex of ventral plate. one and a half times as broad as long, slightly depressed discally on either side of median
line, bearing two foveal impressions, posterior to centre, post-ocellar region swollen,
posterior margin strongly emarginate, disc rounded and gradually sloping downward
in front, rather deeply emarginate in front at median line, anterior ocellus visible from
above; frons not covered by genae, bearing front ocellus; genae small, swollen on each
side of frons, Clypeus mich elongated, somewhat pyriform, rounded at apex. Eyes
large and prominent. Antennal sockets lateral. 30 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Antennae (Fig. Ib) small, thick, ten-segmented, finely and sparsely pubescent, two
basal segments robust, first segment subquadrale, second narrower and as long as first,
slightly longer than broad, remaining segments imbricate, third segment longest, fourth
and sixth equal and each smaller than third, fifth, seventh to tenth segments equal to
one another and smaller than fourth, terminal segment with two long apical spines,
six sensoria present on segments 4 to 9. Thorax long, scarcely arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, rugulose. Prothorax
large, somewhat roof-shaped, narrower in middle and broader laterally, with two dark,
deep foveal impressions on each side and a knob-like lateral termination, disc swollen in
middle, posterior margin strongly arcuate; pleurites very short, somewhat quadrate,
pleural suture straight extending to middle of lateral termination of pronotum; prescutum
small, about twice as broad as long, broadest beyond middie, gradually narrowed ant-
teriorly, angulate laterally, posterior margin also angulate submedianally; scutwm large,
about half as long as broad, broadest in middle, disc flat dorso-medianally and graclually
sloping laterally; scutellum broadly transverse, slightly broader than long, broad anteriorly
and narrow posteriorly, postcrior margin slightly invaginated medianally. Legs (Fig. Le) modcrately large, sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute points
arranged in rows, femora smaller than tibiac, hind femur armed dorsally with two pairs
of thick apical sctac, hind tibiae without basal spurs and with 8 to 9 stout, black
tooth-like spines at apex, hind basal tarsus with two black, claw-like spines at apex,
apical tarsal segments of legs longer than basal segments; meracanthus long and
slender. Forewings (Fig. 1d) narrow, clongate-ovate, subopaque, without plerostigma, rounded
at apex, slightly less thau three times as long as broad, cubital petiole (M-|-Cu) nearly
as long as radius (R), basal vein longer than radius, veins more or less running parallel;
first marginal cell as long as second, but broader than the latter, maculated apically,
leaving clear spaces haphazardly, darker spots present in maculac, membrane beset
with thick minute points. Hind wings (Fig. le) slightly smaller than forewings, costal margin armed with few
simple and hooked sctac, membrane leset with minute points. Abdomen long and slender, finely and sparsely pubescent, aud also beset with minute
points. .

Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 1f) sualicr than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 1g)
small, about 0°13 mm long, sparsely pubescent, also armed with minute points which
are thicker in the basal region of valvc, with two long, horizontal posterior lobes converging
to apex and extending back to forceps, the inferior process of the posterior lobe small,
bearing few setac; forceps (Fig. Uh) rather short, but longer than anal valve, about
0:19 mm long, bowed when seen caudad, bilobate, slightly enlarged at apex, anterior
Jobe large and prominent, but smaller than the posterior lobe, both lobes acutely pointed,
inner marginal setae long, outer surface bearing small simple setac; basal arm of aedeagus
long, with a curved loop, outer arm small, with a small spoon end having hooked point
(Fig. 1g); hypandrium simple, of usual shape, having sparse pubescence and minute
points; sperm pump as figured (Fig, li),

  

 

 

 

 

 

YAMILY bsyLLDAE 31

Female genital segment (Fig. 1j) small, sparsely pubescent, with long hairs; dorsal
plate (Fig. Ik) longer than ventral, roundly pointed at apex; anal-pore ring situated
in a clear zone and composed of a double row of pores, patch of pores at the posterior
end of the ring absent; ventral plate (Fig. 11) roundly pointed at apex, with a median
invagination; setae small and thick at the apices of both plates; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. Several adults and nymphs collected on Polygonum hydropiper. Distribution, In India, this species has been recorded from Dehra Dun (610 m),
U.P., and consists of a large series of examples present at the Forest Research Institute,
Dehra Dun, as follows: 4 examples of 20th, 30 ex. of 24th, 19ex. of 25th, 6 ex. of 28th,
4 ex, of 30th January 1950, 9 ex. of Ist, | ex. of 3rd and 6 ex. of 6th February 1950
(S.E.No, 6865); several adults, nymphs and parasites collected on 28th January 1950,
preserved in alcohol; and 3 ex. of 14th, 2 ex. of 16th December, 1933, 23 ex. of 2nd
and 10 ex. of 6th January 1934, from Dehra Dun, U.P. (A.K. Sharma) (8.E.No. 1632). Also from Naini Tal (U.P.) (Heslop-Harrison 1946). Originally recorded from Austria as a variety of Aphalara calthae L. (Loew 1886). Comparison. From the material in hand, it is found that this species was incorrectly
determined as Aphalara calthae by Heslop-Harrison (1946). It differs in several charac-
teristic features from calthae and at the suggestion of Dr Russell, two examples were
sent to Dr. Ossiannilsson, Sweden, who writes (in litt): “These are not calthae nor poly
goni. I think they are Aphalara maculipennis (Loew), or something very closely related
to that species. The pigmentation of the forewings is much paler in your specimens
than in European material but I suppose that this is duc to fading. If this is uot the case
and if the paler pigmentation is constant in your form, perhaps it is a distinct subspecies
of maculipennis? : Hence, I am retaining this material under — maculipennis. A. maculipennis differs from ossiannilssoni, sp.n. in the shape and maculation of Jorewings,
shape of head and genitalia,

Biological notes. This specics is commonly found on Polygonum hydropiper, growing
abundantly in the hilly river beds. Its nymphs feed gregariously near the apex of plants
and are described below. Nymphal stage

Fifth stage. (Fig. 2a) Length 1.85 mm of typical psylline form; eclongatc, the wing-
pads projecting from the side of the body and slightly produced cephalad; eyes rather
prominent and slightly extending beyond the contour of the head. All setae on the
dorsal side, in front of head margin, along the margin of wing-pads and abdomen, stout,
somewhat lanceolate and of various lengths. Dorsum with the derm for the most part
heavily sclerotic, the sclerotic plates arranged as follows: a pair of large head plates,
a pair of large plates in each thoracic segment, and four pairs of narrow transverse plates
‘in the first four abdominal segments; these plates are mesally separated; the posterior
half of abdomen consisting of a single continuous plate, with some traces of segmen-
tation, the lateral margins of which extend slightly to the ventral side. Wing pads
sclerotic throughout. Derm somewhat vermiculate and also bearing numerous sclerotic
ridges, sparsely beset with simple setae. 32 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig, 2, Aphalara maculipennis Loew—at fifth stage nymph; bt antenna; et hind leg; di circum-anal pore
xing. Ventral side largely membranous, with a small plate at the base of each antenna, a
small plate about’ each spiracle and two distinct transverse abdominal plates and a large
caudal plate. Derm thickly beset with minute points which are heavier in the abdominal
region, also with simple and lanceolate scattered setae. Antennae (Fig. 2b) situated
ventrally, about 0°38 mm in length, seven-segmented, each segment with a few simple
and one or more slender lanceolate setac, first two segments stout and transverse, third
segment subsquare, slightly longer than broad, 4th, 5th and 6th equal, narrowly trans-
verse, 7th longest, slightly shorter than the first six segments together, bearing two terminal
setae, 4 sensoria on 3, 5 and 7 segments. Legs (Fig. 2c) small and stout, armed with
simple and lanceolate setae, without trochanter, with distinct tibio-tarsal joint; each
tarsus with two golf-club setae; pulvillus a small circular pad; claws present, Anal
opening ventral, situated slightly away from the caudal margin, the outer ring of circum-
anal pores (Fig. 2d) consisting of two or three rows of pores, the inner ring of pores
irregular and weakly defined, and guarded by three anterior and one posterior pairs
of setae. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 33

Aphalara ossiannilssoni, sp. n.

(Figs. 3, 4)
Length of body, in male, 1°56 mm; in female, 1°88 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2-00 mm; in female, 2°35 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°56 mm . Width of vertex between eyes, 0°38 mm
Length of antennae, 0°8 mm

Golouration, General colour dark-brown, prothorax fuscous with posterior border
paler, legs and antennae pale-brown, exccpt two basal and two apical segments black,
abdomen chocolate brown to fuscous, forewings with light brown bands or patches,
intermixed with large hyaline areas, basal and subapical bands prominent, small dark-
brown spots also present, scattered all over. Structure. Body small and slender. Head (Fig. 3a) slightly broader than thorax,
scarcely deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Vertex rather flat,
broad, about twice as broad as long, roundly bent downward in front; lobes somewhat
trapezoid in shape, with two large, linear foveae, postevior to centre, one on either side
of median line; a broad, linear depression from each fovea extending forward and-reaching
up to antennal socket ; postcrior margin moderately emarginate, post-ocellar region swollen
and ocelli more lateral, anterior margin strongly invaginated; front ocellus visible from
above and located at the point of excision; frons not covered by genae but narrow and
elongate, with anterior ocellus at top; genae not swollen and visible from the ventral
side on cach side of frons. Glypeus large, tongue-like. Eyes large, somewhat
recessive. .

Antennac (Fig. 3b) small, slender, ten-segmented, bearing a few sctae, imbricate,
two hasal segments robust, Ist subquadrate, 2nd slightly longer than Ist, rather cylindrical,
3rd segment longest, about one and two-thirds longer than 4th; 4th, 5th, 6th and 8th
nearly equal to one another, and each smaller than 3rd, 7th slightly smaller than 4th,
9th and 10th equal and each slightly smaller than 7th, terminal segment having two
unequal spines at apex, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax moderately arched, finely pubescent,. prominently rugulose! Prothorax
collar-like, convexly rounded, descending, of equal length throughout, with two foveal
impressions on each side; prescutum small, broader than Jong, broadest beyond middle,
about two and a half times as broad as long, broadly rounded and narrowed both anteriorly
and posteriorly, gradually sloping anteriorly, angulate laterally, posterior margin also
angulate; scutum large, broader than long, broadest before middle, about’ twice as broad
as long, longer than prescutum, angulate laterally; scutellum broadly transverse, slightly
broad posteriorly, anterior and posterior margins somewhat straight'and parallel, abdtit
one and a half times as broad as long, with weak antero-lateral angles. Legs (Fig. 3e) small, slender, pubescent and also thickly ‘armed with minute points
arranged in lines, these points strong and thick on femora, tibiae longer than femora,
each bearing apical comb of setae, hind tibiae without basal spur, with six black, tooth-
like spines on one side and four on the other, basal tarsal segments slightly smaller than

3

84. Fig, 3. PSYLLIDAR, OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT!’

 

Aphatara ossiannilssoni, sp. n.—at head, front view; bx antemma; et hind legs dt forewing; et hind
wing; £: male genitalia, lateral view gt anal valve, partly inesal view; hy iz forceps, mesal and
anterior views; jt aedeagus; kt sperm pump, It female genitalia, lateral views mt dorsal plaice; mi
ventral plate. FAMILY. PSYLLIDAE 35

apical, hind proximal tarsus with wo black claw-like spines at apex, meracanthus small
somewhat tubular, roundly pointed at apex. Forewings (Fig. 3d) small, ovate, rather thickened, subopaque, with scattered hyaline
areas, basal arca with a broad light pale-brown patch, similar irregular patches also
resent in the apical area, and an irregular hand in the subapical area, membrane beset
with minute points and also with scattered dark-brown spots, without pterostigma,
apex round, radial sector quite long and slightly flexed apically, radius as long as cubital
petiole, cubilus as long as cubital petiole, Ry smaller than radius, basal vein slightly
longer than radius, marginal cells uncqual, first slightly longer cud broader than second,
veins armed with microscopic setac. Hind wings (Fig.3e) slightly smaller than forewings, membrane uniformly beset with
niinute points, costal vein armed with few simple and hooked setac. Abdomen longer than broad, sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute points;
pubescence longer on sternites. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig.3£) smaller than abdomen; proctiger (anal
valve) (Fig.3g) almost as long as parameres, with long, caudal projections from the
perpendicular axis, converging to apex and extending back to forceps, apical ends cocked
up, anal region small, tubular, with truncate apex, the ventral margin of each posterior
lobe produced into a large, upright, hook-like projection mesally (Fig. 3g), outer surface
armed with strong, thick points and sparsely with large setae; paramercs (Figs. 3h,i)
small, about 0°22 mm long, with sides sub-parallel, broad both basally and apically,
both cephalic and caudal margins concave, caudal margin longer than cephalic, anterior
miesal process prominently separated from apex of forceps in lateral aspect, apex rather
straight, truncate, sinuate mesally, with three strong setac directed downward, caudal
margin armed with long sctac, basal region beset with strong ridges and servations;
hypandrium simple, of usual shape, dorsal margins thickened, sparsely pubescen,
also beset with thick points; outer arm of acdeagus smaller than basal, the latter strongly
looped, spoon-end slightly hooked (Fig. 3j); sperm pump as figured (Fig. 3k). Female genitalia (Fig.31) smaller than abdomen; dorsal plate (Fig. 3m) longer than
ventral, sparsely pubescent, broad basally, gradually narrowed caudally, apex narrowly
and roundly pointed, apical region bearing small setae, 4 or 5 pairs of Jong setae present
in middle, circum-anal ring occupying almost the basal half, and composed of a double
ring of pores; ventral plate (Fig. 3n) broad basally and narrowed apically, sparsely pube-
scent, apex broadly and roundly pointed, and when viewed ventrally, weakly invagi-
nated at apex, apical end armed with a brush of small sctae; ovipositor acuicly
pointed,

Host plant. On Polygonum microcephalum Don. Type locality. Kalimpong (1220 m), W, Bengal. Types. Holotype male; Allotype female; Paratypes: 3 males and 3 females,
all from the type locality, and collected on August 29th, 1967 (V. R. Phalak). The parcel containing the. specimens was found attacked by red ants and the adults
and nymphal stages were very bedly dameged. —‘T'he remnants were preserved in alcohol. All types, preserved specimens and some slides were deposited at F.R.1., Dehra Dun,

   

 

 

 

 

36° PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig, 4, Aphalara ossiannilssoni, sp, n.—az fifth stage nymph; b: anterma; e: hind legs dt circum-anal ring. Comparison. ‘This species differs from Aphalara maculipennis Loew in wing pattern,
shape of head and wing, genital and some other characters. Biological notes, ‘This species has been recorded on Polygonum microcephalum, and nothing
is known about its bionomics, etc. Its nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Big. 4) Length 1:76 mm on slide. (Fig. 4a) Psylline form, with elon-
gate body, the wing-pads projecting from the side of the body. [yes rather prominent
and extending beyond the side of the body. Dorsum with the derm for the most part
strongly sclerotic. Wing-pads sclerotic throughout. Dorsal plates arranged as follows:
head with a pair of large plates, each segment of the thorax with a pair of large and several
smaller plates, the plates of both head and thorax separated mesally; the anterior half
of the abdomen consisting of four pairs of narrow plates, separated mesally, representing. the first four abdominal segments, while the posterior half occupied by a single conti-
nuous plate, the lateral margins of which extend to the ventral side, the single caudal

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 37

plate apparently consisting of four segments. All plates covered with minute points
or small broadly rounded knobs, these fine points becoming stronger along the peripheral
regions. Derm vermiculate, sparsely bearing scattered microscopic setae and also with
slender lanceolate setae. Margin of wing-pads armed with lanceolate setae. Such
setae variable in length. Antennae (Fig.4b) borne on the margin of the head, about 0°41 mm long, seven-seg-
mented, segments 4, 5 and 6 smallest and together about as long as 3rd segement, 7th
segment longest and about as long as the first three segments, each segment beset with
one or more slender lanceolate setae; four conspicuous sensoria present on segments
3, 5 and 7. Ventral side largely membranous, with a small plate at the base of each antenna, abdo-
men with an irregular plate surrounding the anus, two distinct abdominal plates and
a small area around each spiracle, which are weakly sclerotic. Derm entirely beset
with fine points, which become small, broadly rounded knobs in the anterior region. Legs (Fig. 4c) small, without trochanter, femora not reaching the margin of the body;
tibio-tarsal joint distinct; claws present, pulvillus like a small circular pad; setae strong
and thick, borne on small tubercles. Anal opening set a short distance away from the
apex of the abdomen, surrounded by an outer, greatly enlarged ring composed of'a large
number of minute pores (Fig. 4d). Enclosed within this band is a secondary ring con-
sisting of much more minute and much less defined pores. Both the rings are interrupted
medianally and are guarded by three anterior and two posterior pairs of setae. Fourth stage. Length 1:25 mm. What appears to be the fourth stage differs from the
fifth chiefly in the smaller size, with antennae apparently five segmented, bearing three
sensoria, and without tibio-tarsal articulation. Genus COLPOSCENIA Encerlein 1929

Colpascenia
Enderlein, G. 1929, Wien. ent. Zig. 46: 106-109. Loginova, M. M. 1960, Horae Soc, Ent. Unionis Soveticae 47: 63-65. Loginova, M. M. 1966. Proc. Inst. Zool, Acad, Sci. U.S.S.R, 37: 18-19. Loginova, M, M. 1967, Ann. Naturhist Mus, Wien, 70: 404. Type species: Colposcenia aliena (Loew) (=Aphalara aliena Loew, 1881) (original
designation). . :

Body small and slender. Head slightly broader than thorax, moderately deftexed. Vertex broader than long, somewhat flat, produced anteriorly into two separate, broadly
rounded lobes and projecting beyond median suture; genae absent or very small, swollen
beneath, Anterior ocellus scarcely visible from above. rons visible in front as a clear
sclerite. Clypeus triangular and visible from beneath. Antennae small and slender. Thorax smaller than width of head, scarcely arched. Pronotum weakly roof-shaped
and convexly rounded, posterior margin overlapping the anterior border of prescutum,
Pleurites small, pleural suture straight, extending to middle of lateral termination of
prothorax; episternum shorter than epimeron. Legs small and slender; hind tibia
without basal spur, with 5 or 6 black spines at apex; hind basal tarsal segment with two

38, PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SURCONTINENT

 

0.5 mm

Fig. 5, Colposcenia consiricta, sp. n.—at head, front view; bt antenna; e: hind leg and meracanthus (highly
magnified); d: forewing; e: hind wing; male genitalia; g, br anal valve, lateral and mesal
i forceps, mesal view; jt forcep, Interal view; let aedeagus; It sperm pump; mz female
lateral view; mz dorsal plate. claw-like spines at apex; meracanthus of characteristic shape. Forewings elongate-
ovate, with narrowly rounded apex; anterior margin interrupted or notched before
pterostigma; pterostigma small, cell-like; rudiment of subcosia visible as a pale line
or fold in the anterjor basal cell; radius generally longer or as long as basa] vein; radial

PAMILY PSYLLIDAE 39

sector undulating and flexed upward meeting the anterior margin; cubital petiole gener-
ally longer than cubitus; Cug recurrent, terminating near nodulus; posterior margin
also notched near apex of anal vein, both notches of the anterior and posterior margins
in same transverse line. Hind wings with prominent veins, Posterior arms of proc-
tiger of male genitalia horizontal like that of Aphalara, setae on these arms variable. Valves
of female genitalia gradually narrowed caudally, uniformly beset with small, simple
setae. Colposcenia constricta, sp. n.
(Figs, 5, 6)
Length of body, in male, 1.73 mm; in female, 1.92 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1.85 mm; in female, 2.12 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-62 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0.38 mm
Length of antennae, 0.92 mm

Coloration, General colour pea green or chrome lemon with bluish-green tinge and
pale-brown longitudinal stripes on mesothorax; antennae pale-yellow with apices of all
segments and (wo terminal segments black, first three segments darker ventrally; legs
pale-yellow, darker ventrally; apical tarsal segments darker; anal valve and forceps
of male genitalia black apically; caudal region of plates of female genitalia dark-brown;
forewings maculated with a light to dark-brown irregular apical band, also dotted with
scattered darker spots, a lighter macula also present before middle in the apical half. Structure. Body small and slender. Head (Fig. 5a) slightly broader than thorax,
moderately deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex broader than
long, about one and a half times as broad as long, disc flat, weakly swollen on either side
of median suture, with wo foveal impressions, posterior to centre, each in middle of
each half, produced anteriorly into two separate, rounded lobes, posterior margin slightly
emarginate, posterior ocelli lateral, anterior ocellus scarcely visible from above, located
at the excision of median suture; genae small, roundly swollen on each side of frons;
sparsely pubescent and beset with a few long setae; frons long and narrow, not covered
by genae. Antennal sockets lateral and located below the lower margin of eyes. Eyes
large. Clypeus triangular, visible from beneath. Antennae (Fig. 5b) small, ten-segmented, sparsely pubescent, two basal segments
robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd cylindrical, almost as long as 1st, remaining segments
imbricate, 3rd segment longest, segments 4 10 8 rather equal to one another in length,
each slightly more than half as long as 3rd, narrower basally and broader apically, 9th
slightly smaller than 8th and as long as 2nd, terminal segment smallest, bearing two un-
equal apical spines, apparently six sensoria present on segments 4 to 9. Thorax slightly smaller than width of head, including eyes, finely and sparsely pube-
scent, finely rugulose, scarcely arched. Prothorax weakly and convexly rounded, flat,
longer in sniddle, thinner laterally, with two foveal impressions on each side and a knob-
like lateral termination; prescutum small, much broader than long, about three times

40 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

as broad as long, broadest before middle, bluntly angled laterally, anterior margin weakly
convex and partly covered by the posterior margin of prothorax; scutum slightly arched,
longer than prescutum, about two and a half times as broad as long, broadest before
middle, anterior margin moderately concave, angled laterally, posterior margin angulate
submedianally ; scutellum small, transverse, about two and a half times as broad as long,
somewhat seven-sided, posterior margin weakly invaginated; pleurites very short, pleural
suture straight, extending to middle of lateral termination of pronotum; episternum
shorter than epimeron,

Legs (Fig. 5e) small and slender, sparsely pubescent, femora beset with rows of minute
points, tibiae longer than femora, each tibia armcd with a comb of setae at apex, hind
femur also armed with a row of stout setae towards the outside, hind tibiae without basal
spur, with five black tooth-like spines (3: 1: 1), middle and hind tibiae also armed with
thick setae near apex, apical tarsal segments thinner and longer than basal segments,
basal tarsal segment of hind leg with two black claw-like spines at apex, meracanthus
small and of characteristic shape, claws quite long. Forewings (Fig. 5d) small, elongate-ovate, about two and a half times as long as broad,

apex narrowly rounded, both anterior and posterior margins notched before middle
and in same transverse line; pterostigma very small, cell-like; radius longer than basal
vein, basal vein almost as Jong as cubital petiole, rudiment of subcosta visible as a pale
line or fold in basal cell, cubitus smaller than cubital petiole, radius and media
equal in length, Rs with loops and flexed upward meeting the anterior margin, Cu,
recurrent, terminating near nodulus; marginal cells unequal, first cell, smaller than
second in length; veins armed with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig.5e) slightly smaller than forewings, veins prominent, membrane
beset with minute points, costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae. ., Abdomen longer than, broad, finely and sparsely pubescent and beset with minute
points, setae longer on sternites,

Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig.5£) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent. Anal valve (Figs. 5g,h) small, about 0.15 mm long, with long, horizontal posterior lobes,
converging to apex and extending back to forceps, the posterior one-third of each lobe
cocked upward, outer surface of each lobe beset sparsely with small simple setae, the
inner dorsal surface armed with 2 or 3 thick, stout, black spines near base and similarly
2 spines in middle, the upturned inner margin bearing a row of long setae, anal region
small, tubular, beset sparsely with minute setae, the posterior margin beset with a group
of black, long spines directed caudally; parameres (Figs. 5i,j) very small, about 0,12 mm
long, narrow both basally and apically and thick in middle, both forceps curved inside,
meeting at apices, each forcep divided into two lobes, the anterior lobe very small, black
and rounded at apex, the posterior Jobe large, sinuate mesally, broadly rounded and
black at apex, outer surface bearing small, simple setae, basal mesal surface beset with
small setae, outer marginal setae slightly longer; outer arm of aedeagus small, with a
thick spoon end, basal artn long, curved and black (Fig.5k); hypandrium simple, of
usual shape, sparsely beset with small setae, basal region black, apex armed with a few
thick setae; sperm pump small, as figured (Fig. 5 1). FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 41

       

ped

0.5 mm

83 i
ae

Fig. 6. Colposcenia constricta, sp. n.—ar fifth stage nymph: be antenna; ot hind leg; dz circnm-anal
pore ring. Female genital segment longer than abdomen, and flexed downward, sparsely pube-
scent (Fig.5m). Dorsal plate (Fig.5n) longer than ventral, both plates broad basally
and gradually narrowed caudally, apex of dorsal plate rounded and flexed upward,
posterior one-third armed with a band of thick and heavy setae, setae in the apical dorsal
region longer, circum-anal pore ring somewhat oval, composed of a double ring of pores
and guarded by small setae; ventral plate acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor acutely
poinicd. Host plant. On Tamarix sp. Type locality, New Delhi. Types. Described from a small series of specimens. Holotype male; Allotype
female, both from the type locality, collected on February 21, 1968 (M.G.R. Menon). Paratypes: 2 males and 2 females, from New Delhi and collected on February
21, 1968 (M.G.R. Menon); and 10 males and 12 females, from New Delhi and collected
on September 21, 1968 (S.I. Farooqi). Few adults collected on February 21, 1968
(M.G.R. Menon), and some adults with nymphs (mostly parasitised), coJlected on. September 21, 1968 (S.I. Farooqi) were also preserved in alcohol. All types deposited
at F.R.L, Dehra Dun, except 4 males and. 8 females paratypes, with a few specimens
preserved in alcohol, deposited at 1.A.R.I., New Delhi. Biological notes. This species was collected from a solitary plant growing in the campus
of the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, on February 21, 1968, and
the adults were present in fairly good numbers, Again, a small collection was made

42 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

on 12th and 13th March 1968, adults were present, but nymphal stages were not seen. This collection had some gravid females. The adults are quite active and Hy about with
the slight disturbance. Attempts were made to collect nymphs in September 1968, and
some were collected feeding between the axils of buds and young twigs. Mummified
and parasitised nymphal stages, with head facing down were present in plenty on twigs,
majority of them were with large holes, indicating the emergence of parasites. Tts
nymphal stage is described below. Nymphal stage

Fifth stage. (Fig. 6a). Length on slide, 1.63 mm. Body broad; head nearly as
broad as abdomen; the wing-pads projecting from the side of the body and also produce
cephalad almost to the level of the lower margin of eyes. Dorsum with derm for the
most part strongly sclerotic and the sclerotic areas represented by a pair-of large head
plates, each segment of the thorax with a pair of large and several smaller plates; abdomen
with a pair of narrow plates on each of the first four segments and somewhat more than
the caudal half of the abdomen covered by a single continuous plate, the lateral margins
of which partly extend to the ventral side, Derm vermiculate, bearing a number of
scattered, minute setae visible under high magnification. All sclerotic plates except
the caudal plate, separated mesally. Wing-pads sclerotic throughout, the margin of
the anterior pads with a characteristic, large, prominent cleft before middle. Marginal
zone strongly rugulose, the marginal setae minute and microscopic. Ventral side largely membranous, with an irregular caudal area, one pair of distinct
submedian abdominal plate, and a small plate about each spiracle, the anterior abdominal
segments represented by weak transverse strips. Derm thickly beset with fine points,
which become stronger and heavier along the margins, and wing-pads, Few scattered
simple setae present on abdominal segments. Caudal plate armed with a pair of lanceo-
late setae along the margin, Antennae (Fig, 6b) borne slightly on the ventral side of the
head, apparently three-segmented, the first two basal segments transverse, the third
segment longest bearing minute points, having weak segmentation and six sensoria,
also armed with slender lanceolate setae and two thick apical setae. Legs (Fig. 6e)
small, bearing a few setae, without trochanters, femora not reaching the margin of body,
thickly armed with strong points, tibio-tarsal articulation distinct, tibiae armed with
three or four lanceolate setae,.with one golf-club seta at apex, claws present, pulvillus
a small, subcircular pad. Anal opening set well away from the apex of the abdomen,
surrounded by the outer ring of slit-like pores (Fig. 6d), the inner ring irregular and poorly
defined, the rings guarded by two anterior and two posterior paiis of long setae,

. Sub-family PAUROPSYLLINAE Crawford 1914
1914, Pauropsyltinae, Crawford, D. 1, Bull. U8. natn, Mus, 851 18, 42. 1915, — , Crawford, 1D, L. Philipp. 15: 140-41,

1941, ——, Pflugielder, O. Psyllina, Bronn’s Klassen ind Ordnungen des ‘Tierveichs, vol, 5, Abt, 3
Insecta, Leipzig, p. 75. 1957, —-—, Vondracek, K, Fauna (.S.R. Praha, Geskoslovenska akademie veil; t, IX, pp. 124-125,

1954, « , Heslop-Harrison, G. Ann, Mag. nat, Hist, (13), 2(15)s 157-162,

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 43

1962, —--——, Dobreanu, E and, Manolache, C. Fauna Repub. pop. rom.. Tnsecta, 8, faye. 3, Homoptera,
Psylloidea, pp. 70-71,

Klimaszewski, 8. M. Ann, Zool. 20(20) : 363-370,

 

1964, ———. Klimaszewshi, 8. M. ibid, 22(5): 81-138. 1964, Loginova, M. M. Proc, Inst. Zool. Acad. Sci. U. 1964, -—---—, Loginova, M. M. Inst, Biol, Acad. Sci. U.S.5

  

Body robust. Head short, much deflexed, uniformly rounded forward and
downward, Median suture present or absent. Frons usually visible, not concealed
by the genae, bearing the anterior ocellus at upper end. Genae usually wanting or
small, variously swollen, Eyes prominent. Antennae usually short, often with long
setae al apex, ‘Thorax strongly arched, broad. Legs slender and usually not large. Forewings large, hyaline sometimes maculated or spotted ; ovate, usually broadly rounded
at apex; venation various; pterostigma usually large and long, sometimes absent; first
marginal cell often enlarged, or long and narrow. The chief characters of this sul-family are the rounded head, with or without median
suture; usually visible trons; genae absent or small and swollen; antennae sometimes with
long terminal setae; thorax broad and strongly archcd, and forewings large and ovate,
usually broadly rounded at apex. Body generally robust. Heslop-Harrison (1959) included this sub-family as a tribe under the Ciriacreminae. He placed Phacopteron Buckton, 1894, and Pseudophacopteron Enderlin, 1921, under
the tribe Phacopterini (=Phacosomini), though the wing venation shows great similarity
with that of Paeuropsylla tuberculata Cvawford (1912). However, he placed Pauropsylla
along with Apsylla and Microceropsylla under another tribe, the Pauropsyllini. Some
members of Pauropsylla Rubsazmen do possess long terminal setae, quite different from
Liviinae, which is a significant feature. The author feels it necessary to examine all
Pauropsyllini species of the Old World Tropics on the besis of modern requirements
and then reconstitute the taxonomic characters of this sub-family, Till such time the
independent rank of this sub-family may be maintained,

Four Indian genera, Apsylla Crawford, Pauropsylla Rubsaamen, Paurocephala Crawford,
and Phacopteron Buckt. are here included under this sub-family. Many species are gall
makers, The nymphal stages of some of the species show characteristic triozine
features. KEY TO THE GENERA OF PAUROPSYLLINAE
1, Hind legs not larger than middle pair, apparently not saltatory; hind coxae small,

and coxal spur nearly wanting; antennae with specialised type of thick joints. Apylla
—, Hind legs longer than middle pair, apparently saltatory; metacoxae much larger
than mesocoxae and metacoxal spur well developed; antennae not as above 2
2, First marginal cell of forewing narrow and long,. paralleling posterior margin;
cubital petiole as long or nearly as long as radius os ve Paurocephala
—, First marginal cell not narrow and long; cubital petiole usually shorter than radius :
or wanting te ws Pauropsytla

 

—, First marginal cell small, much smaller than second; radial sector and media
connected by a cross vein; body of insects large os os tye ase Phacopteron

44 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Genus APSYLLA Crawford 1912

Apsylia
Crawford, D.L, 1912, Rec, Indian Mus, 72421,

Type species: Apsylla cistellata (Buckton) (=Pyylla cistellata Buckton, 1883) (original
designation). The distinctive characters outlined by Grawford (1912) are expanded with the following
notes. Body robust, strongly arched, surface shagreened. Head small, shori, much narrower
than thorax, more or less retracted; vertex rounded forward, shagreened ; posterior margin
strongly emarginate; post-ocellar region raised ; anterior ocellus large, in front or inferior,
barely visible from above. Genal cones entirely wanting. Eyes moderately large,
hemispherical. Antennal sockets large. Antennae short, thick, ten-segmented, de-
creasing in length to tip, with three terminal setae, almost as long as three distal segments;
segments beset with peculiar type of biramous setae, visible under high magnification. Thorax broad, strongly arched. Pronotum almost, or quite vertical, convex. Pro-
epimeron short, Proepisternum longer. Legs short, all similar and of equal size and
length, apparently not saltatory; hind tibiae without basal spur and apical spines; hind
coxae unusually smail, not larger than mesocoxae and very similar in shape, with coxal
spurs lateral, small and almost obsolete, Wings hyaline, both pairs more nearly similar
than usual; forewings weakly veined, especially on margin apically, broadest across
first marginal cell, narrowly rounded at apex, first furcal very short, radial sector also
quite short, flexed upward to costal margin. Male and female genitalia of characteristic
shape. Crawford (1912) writes: “This genus is very distinct from all others in several respects. The principal difference lies in the metacoxae and antennae. It is possible that Pauro-
psylla udei Rubsaamen, a species which I have not seen, is ralated to this species.”

Apsylla cistellata (Buckton) 1893
(Pig. 7) (Plate 1)

Cotes, C. C, 1893. Indian Mus. Notes, 3: 13-14 (From blighted shoots of Mangiféra indica, Delwa Dun). Buckton, C, B. 1893, Indian Mus. Notes 3: 91-92 (Psylla cistellata), (Damaging mango trees at Debra
Dua). Vosseler, J. 1906. . wiss. Insekt, 2: 315. Lefroy, H. M, 1909. Indian Insect Life, p. 743, figs. Slt, 515,

Grawford, D, L, 1912, Rec. Indian Mus. 7: 421-422, 429 (From galls on mango shoots, Dehra
Dun; Bettiah, Champaran, Bihar; on mango trees, Pusa, Bihar). Crawford, D. L. 1914, Bull. U.S. natn, Mus. (Smithsonian Institution) 85: 4. Fletcher, T. B, 1917. Rep. Proc. Second, ent, Meet, Pusa 221. Fletcher, T, B. 1919. Rep. Proc. Third. ent. Meat, Pusa 1: 277,

Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec, Indian Afus, 26: 621. Mathur, R. N, 1935. Indian Forest Rec, 1(2)+ 38--89 (Biology). Beeson, C.F. C. 1941. Forest Insects: 776 (Biological notes). Mani, M. 8. 1948. J. R. Asiat, Soc. Beng. 14. .

Mathur, RN. 1949. Indian 7. Ent, 8(2): 224-226, Fig, 1, (Nymphal stages and hiological notes),

FAMILY PSYLLIDAL

 

Fig. 7. Apgylla cistellata (Buckton)—az head, front view; bb: antenna; e: hind leg; dz forewing; e: apical
portion of wing (male); # hind wing; g: male genitalia, Iateral view; hi: forceps; 4: outer and

mesal views of forceps; $2 sperm pump; Jk: female genitalia, lateral view; Js dorsal plate; mat anal
valve of male genitalia. Gupta, R. L, 1958, Indian F, Ent. 18(4): 378-879 (Distribution),
Ghattesjee, P, N. and Sebastian, V. O. 1965. Indian Forester 91(4) + 228-280. figs. 1, 2. Length of body, in male, 1°72 mm; in female, 2°50 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2°25 mm; in female, 3°4 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°80 mm

46 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Width of vertex between cyes, 0°50 mun
Length of antennae, 0:76 mm

Colouration. General colour black, venter of abdomen brownish, antennac light brown
with apical segments black, legs light brown, apical tarsal segments black, labrum black
apically; male sometimes brown; female genital segment blackish-brown,

Structure. Body short, 1clatively robust, surface shagreencd, Head (Fig. 7a) small,
short, deliexed, much narrower than thorax, beset spaiscly with simple setae; vertex about
one and one-fourth as broad as long, transversely rathcr flat, rounded down strongly
forward, with a fovea on cach side of median suture, postcrior to centre, posterior margin
deeply arcuate. Anterior ocellus large, in front, barely visible from above. Antennal
sockets very laige. Eyes latge, hemispherical. Labrum small. Antennae (Fig.7b) smail, thick, ten-segmented, bearing sparse simple setac, all seg-
ments from third onwards armed with small biramous setac; Ist segment transverse,
about twice as broad as long, 2nd sul-quadrate, as long as Ist, 3rd longest, slightly broad
apically, 4th slightly shorter than 3rd, 5th and 7th equal and a little shorter than 4th,
6th and 8th cqual and slightly longer than Sth, apical two segments smallest, penultimate
segment slightly longer than terminal, Jast segment bearing three unequal apical setae;
these setac about as long as three distal segments; sensoria not discernible. Thorax strongly arched, broad, sparsely beset with small setae, surface shagreencd. Pronotum long, somewhat overhanging vertex, convex, deflexcd rather vertically, with
two foveal impressions on each side; propleuiites indistinct; prescutum broader than
long, about twice as broad as long, broadest posterior to centre, gradually narrowed an-
teriorly, posterior margin convex, angulate laterally; scutum very large, about two and
a half times as broad as Jong, almost as long as prescutum, somewhat flat dorsally, angu-
late laterally; mesopleuron large; scutellum large, transverse, convex dorsally, about
twice as broad as long, antero~ and postero-lateral angles prominent; post-scutellum of
the metathorax narrower and slightly smaller than scutcllum, of similar shape; meso-
sternum large and broad. Legs (Fig.7e) long somewhat thick, pubescent, femora sfiorter than tibiae, not enlay ged,
with a long and deep tibial groove, all tibiae with apical comb of setae, hind tibiac unarmed,
without basal spur and apical spines, some of the apical setae black, basal tarsal segment
smaller than apical, apical joint with two prominent dorsal setae; meracanthus very small
and lateral; meso- and metacoxac somewhat similar in shape, but latter longer than former. Forewings (Fig. 7d) hyaline, wransparent, a little more than two and a half times as
Jong as broad, broadest across first marginal cell, weakly veined, narrowly rounded
at apex, cubital petiole almost twice as long as radius, basal vein slightly shorter than
cubital petiole (M-+Cu), first farcel very short, almost obsolete, second arched, first
marginal cell slightly smaller than second, second marginal ceil large and triangular,
marginal veins very weak apically, radial cell short, clavus long and large. In one
male specimen, fork M,-+-4 is again divided into two small forks (Fig. 7e). Hind wings (Fig. 7£) small, veins indistinct in the apical half, costal margin with few
simple and hooked setae. FAMILY PSYLLIbAt 47

Abdomen short, thick, longer than broad, sparsely pubescent, sctae longer on sternites,
finely shagreened. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 7g) smalicr than abdomen. Anal valve about
0.40 mm long (Fig. 7m), longer than forceps, erect; in lateral aspect, anterior margin
almost straight, with a weak basal concavity, posterior margin a little above middle,
projecting into promincat rounded fobes and then converging to apex, apex truncate
having distinct anal opening, upper surface of the lateral lobes and apical region armed
with Jongs imple setae and with minule points; parameres (Figs. 7h,i) enclosed within
the lateral lobes of anal valve, small, about 0.25 mm long, forming an ellipse when
seen in caudal view, with sub-parallel sides, curved forward and inward, broad and sub-
acute al apex, anterior and apical margins beset with simple setae, mesal surface invagi-
nated at base and (hen produced into a flange bearing marginal setae, a group of setae
present in the basal concavity, apical upper surface beset with small simple sctae; hy-
pandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely beset with setae, caudal margin slightly
invaginated at apex; outer arm of aedeagus much smaller than basal; sperm pump as
figured (Fig. 7j). Female genital segment (Fig. 7k) smaller than abdomen, short, sub-globose at base,
dorsal plate (Fig. 71) longer than ventral, gradually sloping caudally and then produced
into a long, slender styliform process, with rows of saw-like teeth directed anteriorly,
basal region beset with long, simple sctac, circum-anal ring clearly demarcated, composed
of a band of pores; ventral plate small, sparscly bearing simple setac, weakly invaginated
apically ; ovipositor bivalved and exserted. Host plant, Bred ex bud galls on twigs of Mangifera indica Linn,

Distribution, Dehra Dun, Hardwar, Gorakhpur, Naini Tal district, and Pilibhit (U.P.) ;
Bettiah, Champaran, Pusa, Chotanagpur division, Ranchi, Hazaribagh, Singbhum,
Bhagalpur, Darbhanga, and Muzzaffarpur (Bihar); occurs throughout the terai arca
of northern India,

Material examined. ‘The collection at the Zoological Survey of India, Calcutta,
contains few adults (in poor condition) preserved in alcohol, collected from Dehra Dun,
on 24-9-1891 (J.S. Gamble), and few adults on cards (in poor condition), on 20-4-91,
from Dehra Dun (J.8. Gamble); I male from Bettiah, Ghamparan, Bihar, 4-3-1908
(others in very poor condition). The Indian Agricultural Research Institutc, New Delhi, contains 2 examples, 27~2-09,
from Pusa (C.S.M. ), | ex. of January, 1912, Pusa, 2 ex, from Champaran (Bihar) (Ma-
ckenzic), and 8 ex. from New Forest, Dehra Dun, 144-33 (R.N.Mathur). All these
specimens arc from mango trees. The collection at the Forest Research Institute, consists of 39 specimens, New Forest
collected during 1933, 1934 and 1936 (Exp. No. 439, 495A, 602); 5 ex. of 13-+-60 and
2 females of 31-3-63, from New Forest, Dehra Dun (R.N.Mathur) ; 5 males and 4 females
Dehra Dun, collected on 29~4-33 (G.D, Bhasin), ex Mangifera indica buds. Some adults
and numerous nymphal stages, preserved in alcohol, and collected on 11-433, New
Forest, Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur); and of 2-4-51, collected from Jeolikote, Naini Tal,
U.P. (Z.A, Siddiqui), ex galls on mango. 4B PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

“Comparison, ‘Uhis species is characterised by having metacoxac similar to mesocoxac
and both nearly of equal size, peculiar type of thick antennac and venation’ of forewings
and some other minor features. Biological notes. Brief notes are given by Mathur (1935, 1945), Beeson (1941) and
Chatterjee and Sebastian (1965). Chatterjee ef al. have overlooked the observations
on egg-laying habits made by Mathur (1946). Its nymphal stages are described by
Mathur (1946). This species is responsible for heavy destruction of buds (Plate 1) of
certain varieties of rango trees, growing in the terai area of north India. G.mu PAUROCEPHALA Crawford 1913
Paurocephata
Crawford, D. L, 113. Philipp. J. Sci. (4): 293-294. Crawford, D.L. 1914. Bull. US. natu, Mus, 85: 42. Klyver, F, D. and Ferris, G. F, 1930. Gan, Fnt. 62(8):
Vondracek, K, 1957, Faia GSR. Pragae, pp. 125-12
Dobreanu, E, and Manolache, C. 1962, Fauna Repub. pop. rom. Insecla., Vol. 8, Fase, 3, p. 72. Klimaszewski, 8. M. 1963, Fragmenta Faunistica 10(18) : 261-264. Camaratoscena
Haupt, H. 1935. Paylloides, Tierwelt Mittlour. Vol. 4, p. X, 227. ‘Type species: Paurocephala psylloptera Crawford, 1913 (original designation), from
Los Banos, Philippine Islands. Body small and robust, surface shagreened or reticulately marked; thorax strongly
arched. Head strongly deflexed, not quite as broad as thorax. Vertex rounded forward
and downward; ocelli large, prominent, posterior pair elevated; frons large, prominent,
not covered by genae, visible as a small sclerite; genae not conical, though often swollen
beneath antennal bases, or wanting. Eyes large, globose. Clypeus large, rostrum very
long, prominent. Antennae longer or shortcr than or as long as width of head. Thorax
broad and strongly arched; propleurites similar to those of Pauropsylla; metascutellum
with a prominent, erect, conical epiphysis dorsad. Legs long and slender; metacoxal
spur usually long. Wings hyaline or maculated, more or less oval in shape, narrowly
or broadly rounded at apex; pterostigma present or absent; radius usually as long as
cubital petiole; first marginal cell narrow and Jong, paralleling posterior margin. Geni-
talia of male simple, anal valve and forceps without processes. Female genital segment
usually deflexed at right angles to abdomen or typically horizontal; apices of plates straight
or curved outwards,

Crawford placed this genus in the Paurapsyllinae, because of its rounded head and the
usually visible trons, The few species studied here apparently closely agree with the
significant characters referred 10 Pauropsylla. From India, six species are recorded, out
of which four are new to science, They ave P. menoni, P. phalaki, P. russellae and P. tri-

_ maculata. Paurocephala psylloptera Crawford is not seen by me. One of the species collected
on Kydia calycina resembles closely with minuta Crawford (1919), except in having dark
spots at tips of media and cubitus, in addition to three spots on costal margin (one at
base and another at tip of pterostigma, and the third at tip of radial sector), The dis-
tinguishing characters are given in the key. FAMILY PSYLLIDAF. 49

 

Fig. 8. Pawocephala menoni, sp. n.—at head, front view; br antennas e: hind leg; ds forewing; et hind
wing; ft anal valve and aedeagus, lateral view; g, ht parameres, caudal, dorgal ane mesal viewss
is sperm pumps fr female genitalia. lateral view. KEY TO THE SPECIES OF PAUROCEPHALA

1, Forewings hyaline, not maculated on
~. Forewings maculated
2, Antennae about twice aa long as width of heady first ‘arin cell longer than . plerostignia, . Pi pyylloptera Crawford
-~. Antennae short, a little longer or as long as width of heads Gent 2 amar Binal ec ‘coll nearly
as long as pterostigma wo 1

    

    

“ 3

3, Antennae ten-segmented; pterostigma of forewings tong russellae, sp. 2,

—. Antennae eight-segmented; pterostigma short, minuta Crawford. 4, Forewings speckled with small, scattered spots all over 5

 

—: Forewings not speckled with spots, but maculated with transverse bands
5. Forewings speckled with numerous spots; pterostigma small but broad
—. Specks not numerous, maculated bands faint; pterostigma long and narrow

4

-P. phalaki, sp. n.
‘menonl, sp. n.
trimaculata, sp. n.

 

50 PSYLLIDAE OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Paurocephala menoni, sp. n.
(Figs. 8, 9)
Length of body, in male, 1-43 mm; in female, 1-72 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-30 mm; in female, 150 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-60 mm. Width of vertex between eyes, 0-4 mm
Length of antennae, 0:82 mm

Colouration. General colour of live specimens pale-brown, with greenish tinge; antennae
(except apical segments) and legs (except femora) pale-yellow; apical antennal segments
fuscous; head, genae, thorax, femora of legs, and wings speckled with brownish spots. Colour of preserved specimens (in alcohol) pale yellowish-brown, speckled with brownish
spots on head, genae, femora of legs, thorax and wings; femora of legs pale-brown; apical
antennal segments fuscous; wings partly opaque due to the presence of light fumate
bands in the apical region and in middle; ten or more dark brown spots present along the
anterior and posterior margins and at termination of all veins; eyes pinkish red. Structure. Body small but robust. Head (Fig. 8a), including eyes, slightly smaller
than thorax, moderately deflexed, shagreened, finely and sparsely pubescent; vertex
large, about twice as broad as long, rounded downward in front, swollen on either side
of median suture, converging anteriorly, with two deep foveal impressions, one on either
side of median line and posterior to centre; another small, circular fovea present posteriorly
and near to posterior ocelli; posterior margin moderately arcuate; anterior margin
strongly invaginated medianally, bordering the frons dorsally; post-ocellar region slightly
swollen; frons depressed below the general level of the vertex, and not covered by genac,
well defined in front view as a small sclerite, bearing anterior ocellus at apex; anterior
ocellus not visible from above; genae small, swollen beneath antennal bases, finely and
sparsely pubescent, with a pair of long subapical setae. Clypeus large, pyriform, visible
in front; eyes rather large, somewhat recessive. Antennal sockets large, lateral, and
margined black. Antennae (Fig. 8b) ten-segmented, slender, longer than the width of head including
eyes, imbricate, finely and sparsely pubescent, two basal segments robust, Ist broadly
transverse, 2nd cylindrical and slightly longer than Ist, 3rd segment longest, about
twice as long as 4th, Sth, 6th and 9th, each equal to one another, 7th and 8th equal
and slightly longer than 4th, terminal segment small, with two unequal spines at apex,
sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9,

‘Thorax large, arched, shagreened, finely and sparsely pubescent. Prothorax convexly
rounded; descending, with a median line, thicker in middle and narrower at sides, with
two foveal impressions on each side; propleurites largely covered by eyes; prescutum
broader than long, about twice as broad as long, broadest in middle, gradually narrowed
anteriorly, bluntly angled at the sides, posterior margin weakly angled submedianally;
scutum large, strongly arched, slightly more than two and a half times broader than long,
broadest before middle, gradually sloping and angled laterally, slightly longer than
prescutum; scutellum transverse, about twice ag broad as long, anterior margin weakly

FAMILY PSYLLIDAR 31

concave, with prominent antero-lateral angles; metascutellum broadly transverse, bearing
a small tubercle, roundly pointed dorsad. Legs (Fig. 8c) long and slender, finely and sparsely pubescent, femora. shorter than
tibiae, all tibiae with apical comb of setae, hind tibiae without hasal spur but armed with
two groups of nine stout, black tooth-like spines (5 outside and 4 inside) at apex; apical
tarsal segment longer than basal segment of all legs; meracanthus very large and sub-
conical. Forewings (Fig. 8d) somewhat ovate, about twice as long as broad, round at apex,
ptcrostigma large, broader at apex, radius as long as cubital petiole; radial sector curved
and flexed upwards and meeting the anterior margin; basal vein about one and a half
times fonger than cubital petiole, cubitus slightly shorter than cubital petiole; first marginal
cell elongate and longer than second; veins armed biseriatcly with microscopic setae;
membrane speckled with small brownish, lighter and darker spots, with a light fumate
band in the apical region and another transverse band in middle, apices of veins and both
anterior and posterior margins dotted with dark-brown spots. Hind wings (Fig. 8e) slightly smaller than forewings, membrane thickly beset with
minute points, costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae in the basal
half. Abdomen large, sparsely pubescent, pubescence longer on sternites. .

Genitalia. Male genital segment smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 8£) -23
nym long, longer than forceps, anterior margin slightly concave basally and almost straight
distally, posterior margin convex, tapering gradully to apex (when viewed. laterally),
oblique and truncate at top, outer surface sparsely covered with simple setae; parameres
(forceps) (Figs.8g,h) about (I-18 mm long, broad basally and gradually narrowed apically,
howed inwards, sides subparallel, anterior margin conspicuously constricted distally and
ending in a minute point, posterior margin strongly concave, acuminate distally, forming
a small, slender process, outer surface beset with small simple setae, mesal surface and
inner margin bearing thick setae and also 4 or 5 stout setae in middie; aedeagus (Fig. 8£)
with the outer arm short and deeply invaginated dorsally, with a thick spoon end; hypan-
drium simple, of usual shape, bearing sparse pubescence; sperm pump as figured
(Fig. 8i). Female genitalia (Fig. 8j) smaller than abdomen, pubescent, dorsal plate slightly
longer than vantral, roundly pointed at apex and armed with small setae; circum-anal
ring composed of a regular double row of simple pores; apex of the ventral plate slightly
upturned and acutely pointed; both plates broad basally and gradually narrowed
posteriorly and beset with very long hairs in middle; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. On young shoots and buds of Grewia asiatica Linn. Type locality. New Delhi. Types. Holotype male, October 6, 1956; Allotype female, May 20, 1963;
Paratypes: 2 females, May 20, 1963; all from the type locality (M. G. R. Menon). Additional paratype material ineludes 4 females and few nymphs, preserved. in alcohol,
and collected on May 20, eran d gm and 9 females collected on January 16, 1966,
New Delhi (M. G. R.A ens (2 mounted on cards) have also been

 

 

   

   

LIBRARY %

ttew ano F

52 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

 

Fig. 9. Pawocephala menoni, spa—az fifth stage nymph; br antenna; et foreleg; dt portion of circum
anal ring; et fourth or thied stage nymphs ft foreleg. received from Ludhiana, Punjab collected on phalsa, on November 22, 1966 (0. S.
Bindra). Alf types and preserved material, and slides deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Five males and 7 females (paratypes) are also deposited at LA.R.I, New Delhi. Four
males and 4 females of 22 November, 1966 (from Ludhiana) are deposited at the Agricul-
tural University, Ludhiana, Punjab. Comparison. Paurocephala menoni, sp. n. has been described from a small series of speci-
mens, and I have great pleasure in naming it after its collector. This species is
characterised by its shape of head, shape of wings, presence of light fumate bands and
speckled with small, brown spots in forewings, venation and other genital characters,

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAR 53

Biological notes. ‘This species is reported to infest fresh young buds and shoots, which
become bushy, shrivel up and ultimately die due to sucking up of sap. Serious damage
is caused in heavy attacks. Mature nymphs are pale yellow with greenish tinge, dorsum
with dusky plates, with eyes pinkish red, tip of antennae blackish and abdomen orange. They secrete waxy threads of cottony mass from their body. Nymphal stages are described
below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig. 9a). Length 1-35 mm, on slide. OF psylline type, somewhat ovate
in form, wing-pads not extending at humeral angle but project prominently beyond the
contour of the body; head large, nearly as broad as abdomen, Eyes small. Derm mem-
branous, except the large sclerotic head plates, very small plates in the thorax, wing-pads,
and five transverse, thin, strip-like plates and a large plate in the posterior half ofabdomen,
as illustrated. Derm sparsely beset with simple setae and scattered dagger-shaped setae,
each anterior wing-pad bearing a marginal row of short, stout, dagger-like setae; similarly
the abdominal margin also armed with the same type ofsetae. Each hind wing-pad with
three dagger-like setac on the distal margin. The pores of the caudal sclerotic area
composed of a pair of large patches, being continuous from the dorsal to the ventral side
of the abdomen, but mainly dorsal in position. Each patch contains an outer series of
conspicuous pore areas consisting of large pores and an inner series of weakly defined pore
areas. Posterior margin of abdomen slightly angulated laterally. Ventral side membranous throughout, except for the weakly sclerotic areas at the base of
the antennae, small submedian strip-like areas, small area around each posterior spiracle,
and the one-fourth caudal area in the abdomen, Derm sparsely beset with minute
simple and small thick setae. Antennae (Fig. 9h) situated ventrally, of moderate length,
about 0-55 mm long, ten-segmented, imbricate, segments 2 to 8 inclusive bearing short,
stout, dagger-shaped setae, 3rd segment longest, 4th and 7th equal and each half as
long as 3rd, 5th smallest and half as long as 6th, 8th, 9th and 10th equal and each longer
than 6th, sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9, terminal segment with two apical
setae. Legs (Fig. 9c) long, bearing simple setae, without trochanters; the tibiae of middle
and hind legs armed with few dagger-like setae; tibio-tarsal articulation distinct; each
pretarsus with two lanceolate setae located ventrally at apex, each tarsus with two golf-
club setae near apex; claws present, empodium large, tubular-like. Anal opening at the
extreme tip of the abdomen, surrounded by a ring of simple pores (Fig. 9d). Fourth or third stage. (Figs. 9e,£). Length about 0:63 mm (on slide), Resembles the
fifth stage, except in size, wing-pads smaller, thoracic plates slightly bigger, antennae
apparently seven-segmented, with three sensoria, tibio-tarsal articulation absent, caudal
margin of abdomen angulated laterally. Paurocephala near minuta Crawford
(Figs. 10, 11)

Crawford, D. L, 1919. Philipp. J. Sei. 15t 150-151, pl. 1, fig. 8

Mathur, R.N, 1935. Indian Forest Rec, 1 (2) 44-45 (Biology),

Beeson, C, F.C, 1941. Forest Insects, p. 777,

54 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

0.25 mm

IS
lie
a
2
3

 

Fig. 10, Pauracephala minuta Crawford—a: head, front views bt antenna; et hind leg; d, e: forewings;
f; hind wing; g: male genitalia, lateral views ht paramercs; is sperm pump; j: female genitalia,
Jateval view; kk: dorsal plate; l: ventral plate. Length of body, in male, 1-12 mm; in female, 1-65 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1:35 mm; in female, 1-60 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-60 mm

Width of vertex between. eyes, 0-39 mm

Length of antennae, 0-48 mm. Colouration. General colour brown to dark chocolate brown, with greenish tinge;
antennae, legs and venter lighter or pale; colour of the male uniformly darker than that
of the female; vertex dark-brown posteriorly and pale clay yellow anteriorly; distal antennal
segments black; dark longitudinal bands present on scutum in mature specimens; a pale
spot on thorax at base of each forewing; scutellum yellowish antero-laterally, rest chocolate
brown; metascutellum with a large, blunt, pale-yellow epiphysis; meso-sternum dark

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 55

brown; eyes violet carmine; third and fourth abdominal sternites dark-brown laterally;
forewings hyaline, veins pale-yellow, with dark spots on margin, at tips of veins, at base
and tip of pterostigma, on radius and before clavus. Structure, Body small and shining. Head (Fig, 10a) strongly deflexed, almost perpen-
dicular, slightly broader than thorax, fincly and sparsely pubescent, finely reticulate;
vertex slightly more than twice as broad as long, bent roundly forward and downward,
with a foveal impression on either side of median linc and posterior to centre, strongly
emarginate on occipital margin; post-ocellar region swollen; front ocellus large, not
visible from above; frons well defined, visible from bencath, bearing anterior ocellus at
its upper end; genae weakly swollen beneath, bearing few long setae. Clypeus large
and triangular, rostrum projecting forward beneath head. Eyes rather small, roundly
cone-shaped,

Antennae (Fig. 10b) shorter than width of head including eyes, eight-segmented,
finely and sparsely pubescent, two basal segments robust, finely rugulose, 1st broadly
transverse, 2nd cylindrical, remaining segments imbricatc, 3rd longest, 4th two-thirds
longer than 3rd, 5th, 7th and 8th smallest and equal to one another, 6th smaller than
4th and half as long as 3rd, terminal segment with two long, unequal apical spines, four
sensoria present on segments 3, 4, 6 and 7. Thorax broad, strongly arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely reticulate. Pro-
notum somewhat triangular in shape when seen in front, deflexed perpendicularly, longest
in centre, with a small, swollen epiphysis and two foveal impressions at each lateral side;
prescutum about twice as broad as long, narrowly rounded anteriorly, anterior border
partly covered over by pronotum, and steeply inclined anteriorly, broadest in middle,
angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutum slightly longer than prescutum, slightly
more than twice as broad as long, broadest in middle and gradually sloping both anteriorly
and posteriorly, angulate laterally; scutellum broadly transverse, about twice as broad as
Jong, anterior margin almost straight, with prominent antero-lateral angles; metascutellum
with a large, conical, acute epiphysis dorsad; meso-sternum very large, extending far
ventrad,

Legs (Fig. 10c) moderately large, slender, pubescent and aiso beset with minute points
arranged in lines, femora shorter thah tibiae, hind femur with three dorsal setae near
apex, slightly swollen ventrally before middlc, bearing three sensoria-like structures
ventrally, femora of fore and middle legs comparatively much smaller than hind femora;
hind tibiae without basal spur, with a longitudinal row of few thick setae, with seven
slender sharp spines at apex; basal tarsal segment slightly longer than apical; meracanthus
small, bluntly conical. Forewings (Fig. 10d) transparent, ovate, narrowed basally, broadest subapically,
slightly more than twice as long as broad, with a prominent pterostigma, rounded at
apical margin, radius as long as cubital petiole, radial sector with a prominent bend and
flexed upward near apex; first marginal cell elongate, narrow, longer and broader than
second, and nearly as long as pterostigma, fork M,+, longer than My-+4, veins armed
with microscopic setae. In one example, radial sector and media are deformed as illus-
trated (Fig. 10e). 56 PSYLLIDAE OF ‘HIE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Hind wings (Fig. 10£) also quite long, membrane beset with minute points, costal
margin armed with a number of simple and hooked setae in basal half. Abdomen short, longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent and also beset with
minute points arranged in fines. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 10g) smaller than abdomen, Anal yaive
(proctiger) simple, about 0:15 mm long, in lateral aspect, anterior margin almost straight,
posterior margin convex, broad basally and gradually narrowed apically, outer surface
heset with simple setae; claspers (parameres) (Fig. 10h) almost as long as proctiger,
slightly broad basally, sides almost parallel, apex narrow terminating in a thick point,
in caudal view, outer margin convex, inner margin concave, bowed inwards, outer
surface beset with small, simple setae, mesal surface armed with long setae divected down-
ward; outer arm of aedeagus smaller than basal, scarcely thicker at spoon end (Fig. 10g) ;
hypandrium simple, of usual shape, bearing sparse setae; sperm pump as figured
(Fig. 103). Female genital segment (Fig. 10j) longer than abdomen, deflexed vertically downward,
apices of both plates subacute and Aexed outwards; dorsal plate (Fig. 10k) longer than
ventral, gradually narrowed from base to apex, differentiated into a large anterior region,
having an elongate anal ring, and a small, dark posterior region, a tuft of long setae
present near their junction, anal-pore ring consisting of a single row of slit-like pores;
ventral plate (Fig. 101) bearing short, simple setae in the apical third, apical area pointed
like a spike; thick sclerotic scale-like structures of inferior inter-valvulae project out
laterally between the two plates; ovipastor sharply pointed. Host plant, Bred ex pit-galls on leaves of Kydia calycina Roxb. Distribution. Originally recorded fiom Luzon, Laguna Province, Los Banos, and
described from 1 female (Crawford, 1919). Mathur (1935) has recorded this species from
New Forest, Dehra Dun, U. P., bred er pit-galls on Kpdia calyeina. Material examined. ‘The collection at the Forest Research institute, contains 1 female,
5.6.33; 1 male, 9.6.33; 1 female, 5.5.34; 2 males and 8 females, 14.4.50; 3 males and
2 females, 3.3.53; 3 females, 15.4.60; and two phials containing some adults and nymphal
stages in alcohol, collected on 114.50 and March 1951 from New Forest (R. N. Mathur). One male of 3.3.53 and one female of 15.4,60, collected from Dehra Dun and New
Forest respectively (R. N, Mathur), are donated to LA.R.L, New Delhi,

Comparison. Paurocephala minuta has been described by Crawford (1919) from a-single
female and is redescrihed from a munber of specinens of both sexes bred ex pit-galls on
leaves of Kydia calycina, This species could not be confirmed by Dr. (Miss) Russell, for
the following reasons communicated! by her: “ Paurocephala sp. near minula Cwawf-~The
holotype , the only specimen available, is fragmentary. The antennae, wings, most
of legs, epiphysis of the metascuium, and tips of the genital segment are absent. The
genital segment in the type appears to have been considerably shorter than in your speci-
mens. In his description Crawford. did not mention the black spots al the euds of media
and cubitus. ** However, T have placed these specimens near minuia, as the chavacters
resemble closely with this species. Several features, with figures, have heen, supplemented
from my specimens i the description, Tts distinguishing characters are given in the key,

 

 

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLMIDAE 57

ie
oF

a

 

Fig. U1, Paurocephala minuta Crawwford—at fifth stage nymph; be antenna; et part of hind leg; ds circum-
anal ring and anus,

‘This species is easily separated by the shape of head, wings, venation and other characters. ‘The prominently looped radial sector and media and the eight-segmented antennae are
characteristic features, by which this species differs from P. russellae. Biological notes. ‘his species is commonly found making pit-galls on Aydia calycina
leaves. Mathur (1935) has given its bionomics, etc. [ts nymphal stages are described
below. ‘The nymphs are pale yellow, with dorsum of thorax and abdomen darker,

Nymphal stages

Hifi stage. “Length 1:25 mm, Form elongate (Fig, Ula); the wing-pads project from
the side of the hody and not produced cephalad. Eyes prominent, extending beyond
the side of the head. Dorsum with the derm for the most part sclerotic, representing
as several plates which are arranged as lollows; head with a pair of large mesally separated
plates ; thorax with two pairs of large and several small plates, and abdomen with three
pairs of mesally separated, narrow plates in the basal half and a single caudal plate,
showing traces of segmentation. All the plates and wing-pads armed with short, stout
laiiceolate setae, borne on small papillae. Marginal area of wing-pads beset with minute
points and the caudal plate-with minuie comb-like structures, Derm weakly vermiculate,

58 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Ventral side membranous throughout, except for a small area around each spiracle
and an irregular zone below the anal ring. Minute fringe-like processes present both
anteriorly and posteriorly of the circum-anal ring. Derm beset with minute points
and simple scattered setae, which are arranged segmentally in the abdomen, Antennae
(Fig. 11b) situated ventrally, about 0°42 mm long, apparently four segmented, two basal
segments broad, 3rd long and slender and indistinctly three-segmented, apical segment
also long, imbricate, bearing two terminal setae, few lanceolate setae and four sensoria
also present on segments. Legs (Fig. 11c) long and slender, bearing simple setae; without
trochanters; femora reaching the margin of wing-pads; with distinct tibio-tarsal division;
each tarsus with two golf-club setae near apex; claws present, the pulvillus petiolate and
fish-tail like. Anal opening ventral, set well away from caudal end, surrounded by au
outer ring (Fig, 11d) of sht-like pores and an inner ring of small, circular pores, both
rings interrupted anteriorly and posteriorly, and also guarded by two anterior and two
posterior pairs of simple setae and one posterior pair of long, slender bristle-like setae,

Fourth stage. Length 0°85 mm. Resembles the fifth stage, except in the absence of
several small plates on the thorax, absence of tibio-tarsal articulation, and the presence
of three sensoria on antennae. Third stage. Length 0°52 mm. Identical with the fourth stage, but with smaller
wing-pads, abdomen with a large caudal plate and narrow plates; antennae with two
sensoria,

Paurocephala phalaki, sp. n,
(Figs. 12, 13)

Length of body, in male, 1-6 mm; in female, 1:82 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1°82 mm; in female, 2°0 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°60 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0°38 mm

Length of antennae, 0°98 mm

Colouration. General colour black dorsally and pale-yellow ventrally; vertex pale-
yellow, with blackish foveal impressions; clypeus and tip of labrum black; antennae pale-
yellow with apices of segments 4,6, and 8 and the two terminal segments black; legs
pale-yellow with black apical tarsal segments; posterior margin of prothorax greyish;
mesothorax with two submedian brownish lines; sides of scutellum greyish white; fore:
wings transparent, and maculated with two brown bands, one in the apical region,
E-shaped, enclosing radial sector apically, forks M,,, and M,,, and Cu, apically,
while the other running across the centre transversely. Structure. Body of medium size, Head (Fig. 12a) large, broader than thorax, strongly
deflexed, sparsely hirsute with white hairs, finely reticulate; vertexb roader than long,
about one and a half times as broad as long, rounded downward in front, with two foveal
impressions, one on either side of median suture and posterior to centre; post-ocellar
region strongly elevated; posterior margin moderately emarginate; anterior ocellus
Jarge, visible in front; frons visible from in front and below as a distinct small, narrow

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 59

   

   

uw Zz"

ae CED

  

1

  

FS
0.25 mm J 0.25 mm

 

Fig. 12. Paurocephala phalaki, sp. n.—a: head, front views bx antenna; e: hind leg; di forewings e: hind
wing; £: epiphysis of metascutellum; gt male genitalia, lateral view; hz anal valve; 4 parameres
and aedeagus; jt sperm pump; kt female genitalia, lateral view. sclerite from ocellus to clypeus, and depressed. below the general level of the vertex and
genae; genae very small and rounded, bearing two rather long subapical setae and scatte-
red small setae. Clypeus very large, globose and visible from beneath. Rostrum projec-
ting forward beneath head,

Antennae (Fig.12b) small, ten-segmented, imbricate and finely and sparsely pubescent,
two basal segments robust, Ist subsquare, 2nd elongate, cylindrical, remaining segments
slender, 3rd segment longest, one and three-fourths times as long as 4th, 4th slightly longer

60 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

than 5th, 6th to 9th segments equal to one another and each slightly longer than 5th
and slightly smaller than 4th, terminal segment smallest, about one-third as long as
3rd, bearing two unequal, apical spines, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax broad, strongly arched, sparsely pubescent with white hairs, surface -finely
reticulate. Prothorax long, ascending, convex, with two foveal impressions on each
lateral side, posterior margin invaginated medianally; prescutum small, broader than
long, broadest beyond middle, about twice as broad as long, narrowly rounded anteriorly,
angulate laterally and also posteriorly; scutum large, broad, broadest before middle,
slightly longer than prescutum, about two and one-fourth times broader than Jong,
depressed mid-dorsally and raised subdorsally on cither side, angulate both laterally and
posteriorly; scutellum broadly transverse, vase-shaped, broad anterriorly and narrow
posteriorly, with prominent antero-lateral angles, gradually sloping posteriorly; metascu-
tellum with a prominent, acute, erect, conical process dorsad (Fig. 12f); mesosternum
very large, extending far ventrad. Legs (Fig. 12c) quite long and slender, pubescent and also beset with linear series
of minute points, tibiae longer than femora, bearing apical comb of thick setae, hind
femora slightly arched ventrally, with a group of five dorsal setae near apex, with three
sensoria-like structures ventrally near base, hind tibiae without basal spur, with two
longitudinal rows of thick setae, and 4 or 5 thick spines at apex, tarsal segments of fore
and middle legs of equal length, while in hind leg, the basal tarsal segment slightly longer
than apical, fore and middle coxae also quite large, meracanthus quite long and tubular. Forewings (Fig. 12d) long, hyaline, wansparent, about two and a quarter times as
long as broad, oblong, broadly rounded at apex, maculated with a central and apical
bands, central macula extending from base of pterostigma to Cug, apical macula like
the letter E, enclosing apical part of radial sector, forks M,,,and M,,,, while a small
macula present enclosing apical part of Cu,, 8 black spots present near base of clavus,
base and apex of pterostigma and at apices of veins, pterostigma small but broad, radius
almost as long as cubital petiole, basal vein longer than radius, marginal cells nearly
equal in length, first marginal cell elongate, narrow, longer than pterostigma, membrane
beset with minute points and veins armed with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 12e) also quite long, slightly shorter than forewings, membrane
uniformly beset with minute points, costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked
setae in the basal half. .

Abdomen longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute
points arranged in lines. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 12g) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 12h) longer than forceps, about (0-25 mm long; in lateral view, anterior margin straight,
deflected posteriorly near top, lateral lobes prominently differentiated, broad and strongly
convex, apical half and lateral lobes bearing sparse simple setae; forceps (Fig. 12i) long
and slender, about 0°18 mm fong, from behind, bowed strongly laterally and appearing
subacute at tip, terminating in a single, small, black point on the inner side, broad at
base, sides sub-parallel, outer surface bearing simple setae, minute setae at top like a
@ brush, mesal surface armed with small setae directed downward; hypandrium simple,

YAMILY PSYLLIDAR bl

of usual shape, having sparse simple setae; aedeagus (Fig, 12i) with the outer arn much
smaller than basal, ending in a thick spoon-like structure; sperm pump as figured
(Fig. 12)). Female genital segment (Fig. 12k) slightly smaller and deflexed downward at right
angle to abdomen; dorsal plate longer than ventral, tip of both plates Hexed outwards,
dorsal plate sub-acutely pointed at apex, the apical third bearing a tufi of long setac
and numerous peg-like setae; circum-anal ring composed of a double row of pores; ven-
tral plate acutely pointed, bearing sparse simple setae; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. Both adults and uymphs collected on an unknown plant species, local
name of which is khasare,

Type locality, ‘Tista village, Bengal. Types. Holotype male; Allotype female; from the type locality, and collected
on October 27, 1965 (V.R, Phalak); Paratypes: 5 males and 5 females, also from
the type locality and same data (V.R. Phalak). A few damaged specimens and nymphal
stages were mounted on slides. The types, slides and preserved material deposited
at F.R.I. Dehra Dun. Comparison, This new species is described from a very small series of specimens and
I have great pleasure in naming it after its collector, P. phalaki is readily recognised
by its banded forewings, shape of head, presence of pterostigma, metascutellum with
a conical epiphysis, dorsad and genital characters. Biological notes. P. phalaki has been recorded on a plant, locally known as khasare,
on October 27, 1965, by V.R. Phalak. Nothing is known about its life-history, etc. Its nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stage

Fifth stage. (Figs. 13a,b,c,d). Length about 1:35 mm (on slide). Pauropsylline
type, rather elongate. Head broad but smaller than abdomen, and the wing-pads
extending prominently beyond the general margin of the body and backward. Eyes
bulging slightly beyond margin of head and thorax. Derm membranous except for
the sclerotic head plates, wing-pads, small thoracic plates, and three transverse plates
in the anterior half and a single large plate in the posterior half of abdomen. Dorsum
with the derm armed with stout, scattered, dagger-shaped setae of varying length,
the anterior pair of wing-pads each bearing a marginal row of similar setac, equally
spaced, with a larger one usually alternating with a smaller one; the posterior pair having
two similar setac on the distal margin, ‘These dagger-shaped setae are borne on $mall
tuberclelike prominences, and are arranged approximately as follows, on cach half
of body: head, 7;,prothorax, 5; meso- and meta-thorax, 4 on cach; three anterior, trans-
verse abdominal plates, 5 on cach, caudal plate with 1 submedian and 4 lateral setac
in cach weakly differentiated segment; forewing pads with 9 or 10 dorsal and 8 or 9
around margin; hind-wing pads with 2 dorsal and 2 marginal at apex. Ventral side membranous throughout and beset with simple setae of different length;
spivacles surrounded by minute sclerotic areas. Antennae (Fig. 13b) small, 0.75 mm
long, apparently five-segmented, bearing few simple setae, two basal segments robust,

62 PSYLLIDAE OF THR INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 13. Paurocephala phalaki, sp. n.—at fifth stage nymph; br antenna; et part of leg; de anus and ciecum-
anal pore rings. Ist transverse, 2nd subquadrate, 3rd segment longest, with a weak trace of segmentation
and weakly imbricate, 4th small, 5th again long but smaller than 3rd, 4th and 5th imbri-
cate, four sensoria present, two on third and two on fifth, dagger-shaped setae present
on each segment except the first. Legs (Fig. 13c) long, hearing simple setae of various
sizes; with weak scatcely distinguishable trochanter; tibio-tarsal articulation present,
each tarsal joint armed with two golf-club setae; claws present, each tarsus with a
relatively large empodium. Anal opening (Fig.13d) ventral, a short distance away
from the apex of abdomen, the circumanal ring consists of a single ring of slit-like
pores with an expanded band for pores on each side, while the inner ring with Jess
defined pores, these rings are enclosed in a weak sclerotic area, and are guarded by
three anterior, one lateral and three posterior pairs of setae of different lengths. Paurocephala psylloptera Crawford 1913
(Fig. 38)
Grawiord. D. L. 1913, Philipp. J. Sci. 8: 294, fig. 1. Crawford, D. L. 1915, ibid. 10: 260-261. Crawford, D, L, 1917. ibid. 12: 163. Crawford, D. L. 1919. fbid. 15: 149,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 63

Crawford, D. L. 1924, Ree. Indian Mus, 26(6): 615. Ramakrishna Ayyar. T. V. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus. 26(6
Boselli, F. B. 1930. Boll. Lab, Zool. agr., Portici, 242 185. Kuwayama, 8, 1931. Ins. Mats. 5: 120,

Kuwayama, S. 1943, Trans. Nat. Hist. Soc, Formosa 33: 504-505,

Mathur, R. N, 1935, Indian Fovest Rec. 1(2)+ 44

‘Takahashi, R. 1936, Koniyu, 10: 291. Shiraki and Takahashi, R. 1937. Plant Jndust. Publ. No. 787, Govt. Formosa, $2, fig. 10. Miyatake, Y. 1964, Rept. Gomm. Foreign Sci. Res. Kyushu Univ. No. 2, p. 122. Miyatake, Y, 1971. Bull. Osaka Mus, nat, Hist. 252 55-56,

 

 

The description of this species is reproduced from Crawford (1913-1924). “Length of body, 1.7 mm; length of forewing, 2.1 mm, Male much darker than female,
almcst uniformly dark reddish-brown, with anterior femora and a spot above forewings
yellowish; abdomen lighter; female orange to light reddish-brown; antennae, tibiae,
and eyes brown. Body sparsely and briefly pubescent’. “Head greatly deflexed, almost perpendicular; vertex broader than long, surface
irregular, deeply concave on occipital margin, with posterior ocelli greatly elevated,
roundly convex in front; anterior ocellus large, between antennal bases; frons swollen
beneath antennal insertions; labrum very large, globose from in front. Antennae nearly
twice as long as width of head, slender.”

“Thorax broad, strongly arched; pronotum long, ascending, longest at centre; dorsulum
long. Metascutum with a prominent, acute, erect, conical process dorsad. Mesosternum
very large, extending far ventrad, rostrum projecting forward beneath head. Legs slender;
hind legs very long; hind tibiae very spinose. Forewings hyaline, narrowed basally,
broadest subapically, broadly rounded or slightly angular on apical margin, more than
two and a half times as long as broad; cubital petiole and discoidal subcosta equal in
length; first marginal cell elongate, narrow, a little longer than pterostigma; second
broad and large.””

‘Abdomen long. Male: fifth tergite produced caudad over genital plate; anal valve
simple, longer than claspers which are slender, arched, pubescent within. Female
genitalia flexed sharply downward, rather Jong; both plates acute at tip, dorsal longer
than ventral.”

‘Described from 3 males and 3 females from Los Banos, Philippine Islands (Baker,
August, 1912). Collected on Ficus ulmifolia” (Crawford, 1913). “One female from Los Banos, Philippine Islands (Baker), and 23 males and females
collected in Peradeniya, Ceylon, May 24, 1914, on young shoots of Ficus hispida and
Ficus asperrima (Rutherford). An accompanying note states that “these insects are
attended by ants. ‘The nymphs excrete a long filament of white wax”? (Crawford,
1915),

“This appears to be a common species, widely distributed in the South Pacific regions. Since additional material has come to hand it seems necessary to supple-
ment the original description which was drawn up from six specimens. The colour of
the male is not uniformly darker than the female; both sexes are usually very dark choco-
late brown to dull black; lighter forms seem to be less matured, the colourdeepening with

6t PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

   

‘sum sometinies with orange yellow streaks but more commonly
uniformly dark, an ally as dark as vertex; legs often lighter in colour ov even
yellowish. Body surface often not hai vertex and thoracic de lately
inarked. ‘he beak is moderately long and the mandibular’ se rted
to alength of | millimetre or Less. The hind tibiae have a row of about seven bla
on outside, several spines at apes and are more or less hirsute. ‘Mhe metacoxal
spurs are long and slender. Pterostigma of forewings usually dark coloured, veins
black.”

“Iu the Philippine Islands this spe as been collected in Luzon, Los Banos (Baker),
on Ficus ulmifolia; and on Mount Maquiling (Baker). Ln Geylon, Peradeniya (Ruther=
ford), Hicus hispida and Ficus asperrima, Additional specimens are now before me from
‘Tenimber Islands, Larat (Muir), December, 1907, 18 males and 18 [eimales”,
(Crawford, 1919),

“This species was first described fron: the Philippines but subsequently has been found
ty occur in Formosa, Moluccas, Borneo, Ceylon and probably throughout the old world
wopics, Enderlein described the same species from Formosa under the name of Ago-
noscena which is a synonym of Paurocephala. The Ramakrishna collection has several
specimens of this species, taken on Ficus shoots at Tenmalai, Travancore, S. India, October
1923” (Crawford, 1924). Host plants. On Ficus ulmifolia, F, hispida, F. asperrima, Ficus sp. ; Miyatake (1964)
has recorded it on Trema orieniatis Blume. Distribution. Los Banos, Luzon, Palawan Philippine Islands; Mount Maquilin,
Larat, Tenimber Islands; Borneo; Formosa; Moluccas; Singapore; Fiji; Peradeniya,
Ceylon; Tenmalai, Travancore, §. India. Probably distributed throughout the Old
World Tropics. Comparison. This species is not seen by me in the collections of the various institutions
studied by me. However, by the characters described by Crawford, it resembles closcly
with Paurocephala brevicephala Crawf., and P. russellae, sp. n. in venation. It is readily
recognised from other species, by the first marginal cell longer than pterostigma and
antennae about twice as long as the width of head. m finely, retic
sometimes ¢

      

   

k spines

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

Paurocephala russellae, sp. n.
(Figs. 14, 15)
Grawford, D, L, 1917. Philipp. J. Sci, 12(8) + 163, pl. 1, fig. 11 (Pauropsylde brevicephala Crawl, Mindanao,
Davao),
Crawford, D. L. 1919. Philipp. J. Sci, 15(2)+ 150,
Mathur, R, N. 1935. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2)3 44-45,
Beeson, C.F. CG. 1941, Forest Anvects, p. 777. Length of body, in malé, 0.75 mm; in female, 1.38 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1.24 mm; in’ female, 1.39 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.50 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0.30 mm

» Length of antennae, 0.35 mm

FAMILY PSYLLIDA:

 
  
   

g 0.5 mm. e
E
a
4
3

 

{eet 0,25 mm, J

 

0.25 mm

Fig. H. Paurocephala russellae, sp. n.—as head, front view; bs antenna; et hind leg; dt forewing; e: hind
wing; £ abdominal tergites, lateral view; ge male genitalia, lateral view; fat anal valve and
aedeagus, lateral view; i parameres, caudal and mesal views; j: sperm pump; Ix female geni-
talia, Jateral view; I: dorsal plate. Colouration. General colour brown, with orange or yellow markings on dorsum and
pleuron of thorax; antennae light brown, with apical segments black; ebdominal seg-
ments with black spots laterally, forewings hyaline, with five black marginal spots, one
at cach end of veins and at apex of ptcrostigma,

Structure. Body small and robust.’ Head (Fig, 14a) small, narrower than thorax,
strongly declivous, almost perpendiculer and conceeled beneath the prothorax, finely
and sparsely pubescent, fincly reticulate; vertex much broader than long, about twice

66 YSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

as broad as long, uniformly rounded forward and downward, with foveal impressions
posterior to centre, one on cach side of median suture; posterior margin angulatcly in-
vaginated; post-ccellar region prominently elevated, bearing ocelli; front ocellus visible
from beneath; frons well-defined, visible in front, bearing anterior ocellus at top; genac
scarcely swollen beneath, bearing few long setac. Antennal sockets quite large. Eyes
rather large. Labrum small, rostrum projecting forward bencath head. Antennae (Fig. 14b) very short, almost as long as width of vertex between cyes, ten-
segmented, bearing few setae, two basal scgiments robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd
cylindrical, about twice as long as Ist, other segnients slender and imbricate, 3rd longest,
4th and 6th equal and each about one-third smaller than 3rd, 5th smallest and about
half as long as 3rd, 7th slighily longer than 5th and slightly smaller than 6th, 8th and
9th equal and cach slightly smaller than 3rd and slightly longer than 4th, terminal seg-
ment slightly smaller than 4th, bearing two unequal, long spines at apex, four sensoria
persent on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9,

Thorax strongly arched, broad, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely reticulately marked. Prothorax small, somewhat triangular in shape in front view, almost perpendicular,
jongest in middle, with small, swollen, submedian epiphysis, with foveal impressions
‘on cach lateral side; prescutum broader than long, aLout two and a half times as broad
as long, narrowly rounded and steeply inclined anteriorly, anterior border partly covered
over by pronotum, broadest in middle, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutum
much broader than long, about two and a half times as broad as long, broadest near
about middle, slightly longer in length than prescutum, sloping both anteriotly and
posteriorly, angulate laterally; scutellum small, narrowly transverse, about twice as broad
as long, anterior margin rather straight, with promincnt antcro-lateral angles, posterior
margin somewhat convexly rounded; metascutellum with a prominently thick conical
process ending in an acute point dorsad; mesosternum very large, extending far
ventrad,

Legs (Fig. 14c) short and slender, but hind leg comparatively longer than others,
pubescent and also beset with minute points arranged in lines; both fore and middle
coxae quite large; hind femur slightly swollen near middle ventrally, bearing three sen-
soria-like structures; hind tibiae without basal spur, with seven spines (4 on one side and
3 on the other) at apex, and also armed with a longitudinal row of thick setae, basal
tarsal segment slightly longer than apical; merecanthus long and slender, sub-cylindrical
and subacute at apex. Forewings (Fig. 14d) hyaline and transparent, a little more than twice as long as broad,
broadly rounded at apex, narrow basally, broadest subapically, pterostigma long and
broad, slightly longer than first marginal cell, basal vein slightly less than twice as long’
as radius, cubital petiole a little longer than radius, first marginal cell elongate and narrow,
longer and broader than second cell, radial sector weakly curved and flexed upward
near apical margin, veins armed with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 14e) also quite long, costal margin with a few simple and hooked
etae in basal half, membrane uniformly beset with minute points. Abdomen short (Fig. 14f), each tergite with a dorsal median hump, which are quite

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 67

strong and prominent in female, while in male these humps are absent on the anterior
tergites; fifth tergite produced caudad over genital plate; pubescence sparse. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 14g) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 14h) about 0.2 mm long, longer than parameres, in profile, anterior margin almost
straight, lateral lobes large and clearly demarcated, bearing sparse, simple setae, posterior
margin invaginated below apex, apex broad and truncate, apical half of outer surface
sparsely beset with small setae; parameres (forceps) (Fig. 14i) simple, slender, about
0.15 mm long, bowed strongly inwards, slightly broad basally, sides sub-parallel, termi-
nating apically in a round point, outer surface bearing small, simple setae, mesal surface
armed with some thick sctae directed downward, marginal setae slightly longer; hypan-
drium simple, of usual shape, sparsely pubescent with simple setae; outcr arm of aedeagus
(Fig. 14h) smaller than basal, spoon end large ancl broad; sperm pump as figured
(Fig. 149). Female genital segment smaller than abdomen, deflexed vertically clownward, sparsely
pubescent; dorsal plate longer than ventral, broader in the basal region, caudal region
elongate, narrow, curved outward, roundly pointed apically, and armed with minute
peg-like setae (Fig. 141), central region bearing some long hairs, circum-anal ring
composed of a single row of slit-like pores; ventral plate acutely pointed at apex;
ovipositor long, exserted and acutely pointed; strongly sclerotic valvulae projecting
outward laterally. Host plant. Bred ex pit-galls on Kydia calycina Roxb. Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Holotype male; Allotype female, June 17, 1932, from the type locality
(R.N. Mathur); Paratypes: 1! male of 17.6.32, 1 female of 5.6.33, 1 female of
16.12.33; 1 female of 13.1.34; 1 female of 6.4.34; some males and females of 5.5.34;
3 females of 11.5.50, all from the type locality and e pit-galls on Kiydia calycina (R.N. Mathur). Some adults and nymphal stages, preserved in alcohol, and collected from
New Forest, on 17.6.32 (R.N. Mathur), (Expt. No. 405) are deposited along with all
types and slides with mounted parts and nymphs at F.R.L, Dehra Dun. Comparison. Paurocephala russellae, sp. n. resembles very closely P..brevicephala Crawford
(1917), and was provisionally labelled as such. Crawford (1917) has described brevicephala
from 2 females from Mindanao, Davao. Specimens of this new species were sent to Dr
(Miss) Russell for comparison with the types and she has communicated as follows:
“Your specimens labelled P. brevicephala Crawford are not this species. The most con-
spicuous differences are the antennae which are shorter than the width between the eyes,
the wings which have conspicuous dark spots at tips of radius, media and cubitus and
the shape.of the female genitalia in brevicephala. In the latter species the dorsal valve
has a transverse seta bearing ridgé near the distal third, the valve. is strongly narrowed
distad of the ridge, is upturned and the apex is acute.”

The collection at the Forest Research Institute is represented bya small series of both
sexes, but females predominate. This species differs from another allied species recorded
ex pit-galls on Kydia calycina, in having the radial sector and media almost straight and
not looped, and by the shape of second marginal cell, shape of head, ten-segmented

68 PSYLLIDAF, OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINEN'T

 

Puy. 15. Paurocephala russellae, sp. 2.--a4 fifth stage nymph; be antenna; et claws and pulyillusy ds circum-
anal pore ring. antennee and genital characters. The characters given in the key, separate it fom
other Indian species. Biological notes. This species is less common on Kytlia calycina, forming pit-galls on
the new leaves. Nymphal stage

Fifth stage. (Big. 15a) Length 1.05 mm (on slide). Form clongate. Wing-pads
projecting from the side of the body end not produccd cephalad. Head almost as broad
asabdomen. Eyes prominent and in contour with the head margin, Dorsum with the
derm for the most part sclerotic, having a large mesally separated head plate, large
thoracic plates, wing pads, and thice transverse anterior plates end a single caudal plate
in the abdomen; the caudal plete showing traces of segmentation, Head thoracic plates
and wing-pads armcd with short, stout lanceolate setae, borne on small tubercles. Derm beset with few scattered minute, simple setae. Each abdominal plate armed with
one or two submedian and a group of three to four lanceolate setae laterally. Ventral side membranous throughout, except fora small area around each spiracle, Derm

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 69

beset with small, simple, scattered setae, which are arranged segmentally in the abdomen;
caudal region bearing small, comb-like structures. Antennae (Fig. 15b) about 0.35 mm
Jong, located ventrally, apparently five-scgmented, two basal segments broad and robust,
3rd long and slender, 4th smaller than 3rd, 5th longest, imbricate, and as long as 2nd,
3rd and 4th combined together, and bearing two sensoria and two small apical spines. 3rd and 4th segments possess one sensorium and two stout lanceolate setae cach, while
one lanceolate scta present on 2nd and 5th segment. Legs (Fig, 15c) long and slender,
bearing few simple scattered setae; without trochanters; femora reaching the margin
of wing-pads; Ubio-tarsel articulation distinct; each tarsus with (wo curved long seiac
near apex; claws present, the pulvillus petiolate and fish-tail like, Anal opening ventral,
located far away from the caudal end, surrounded by a double ring of pores (Fig. 15d),
the outer ring prominent and consisting of slit-like pores, while the inncr-ring is
very poorly defined, both rings are intcrrupted anteriorly and posteriorly and are guarded
by one anterior, one lateral and two posterior pairs of simple setac, the outer posterior
pair of setae very long. Paurocephala trimaculata, sp, n.
(Big. 16)
Length of body, in male, 1.22 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1.25 mm
Width of head with cyes, 0.51 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0.32 mm
Length of antennae, 0,65 mm

Golouration. General colour pale clay yellow, with irregular brownish specks on head,
thorax, legs and forewings, specks darker on thorax; venter of abdomen darker, with
dark-brown specks on lateral sides; antennae pale-yellow, with apical segments and apices
of segments 4, 6 and 8 black; legs pale-yellow, with dark-brown specks on femora; fore-
wings transparent, partly maculated with two! transverse and one apical, light brown
maculac and small fuscous spats scattered on the membrane; male genitalia slightly
darker. Structure. Body small. Head (Fig. 16a) strongly deflexed, rather as broad as thorax,
finely and sparsely pubescent; vertex broader than long, about twice as broad as long,
slightly rounded downward in front, with two deep foveal impressions, posterior to centre,
one on each side of median suture, with a sulcus extending from cach fovea to base of
antennal sockets; posterior margin strongly arcuate; post-ocellar region slightly swollen;
anicrior ocellus scarcely visible from above; frons visible in front, bearing anterior ocellus
at top; gevlae not conical, weakly swollen bencath antennal sockets, hearing 3 or 4
pairs of long setac. Antennal sockets large, lateral. Eyes large and recessive. Antennae (Fig, 16b) small, slender, ten-segmented, bearing few setac, two basal segments
robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd quadrate, almost as long as Ist, remaining segments
slender, imbricate, 3rd segment longest, about thrice as long as 2nd, 4th about half as
Jong as 3rd, 5th slightly smaller than 4th, 6th, 7th and 8th almost equal to one another

70 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

0.25 mm

0.26 mm,

Fig. 16. Paurocephala trimaculata, sp. 1.—at head and part of thorax, dorsal view; br antenna; e: hind legs
a: forewing; e: hind wing; f male ggnitalia, lateral view; gz anal valve, lateral view; hy 4
parameres, posterior, outer and mesal views; j+ aedeagus, lateral view. and each as long as 4th, 5th and 9th rather equal and each smaller than 8th, terminal
segment smallest, with two apical spines, four sensoria present on segmenis 4,6,8
and 9. :

Thorax strongly arched, almost as broad as head including cyes, finely and sparsely
pubescent, Prothorax (Fig. 16a) convexly rounded, partly descending, longer in middle
and narrower laterally, with two subinedian epiphysis and with two foveal impressions
on each lateral side; prescutum large, about twice as broad as long, broadest before
middle, somewhat anvil-shaped, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutum large
and broad, about twice as broad as long, almost as long as prescutum, anterior margin
strongly concave, angulate and gradually sloping both laterally and posteriorly, disc
weakly channelled medio-longitudinally; scutellum broadly transverse, rather rectangular
in shape, about twice as broad as long, with prominent antero-lateral angles; post-scu
tellum of metathorax large and broad, having a strong, median erect epiphysis,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 7t

Legs (Fig. 16c) small, finely and sparsely pubescent, tibiae longer than femora, all
tibiae with apical comb of setae, hind tibiae without basal spur, with 8 or 9 black tooth-
like spines at apex and almost arranged in a row, basal tarsal segments slightly smaller
than apical segments; meracanthus small, slender and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 16d) large, oval, transparent, maculated with light brownish bands
and spotted with scattcred dark brown, irregular small specks, a little more than twice
as Jong as broad, narrowly rounded at apex, broadest near about middle, basal vein longer
than radius, radius slightly smaller than cubital petiole, cubitus a little more than half
as long as cubital petiole, pterostigma present, large and broad, slightly longer than
first marginal cell, radial sector quite long and slightly Aexed upward to costal margin,
marginal cells uncqual, first cell longer and broader than second, veins armed with
small setae; about a dozen or more black spots present all along the wing margin, and
irregularly distributed black spots on the veins. Hind wings (Fig. 16a) also quite large, membrane beset uniformly with minute
points, costal margin armed with few simple and hooked setae in the basal
half. Abdomen small, finely and sparsely beset with setae; sctae longer on sternites; tergites
with humps. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 16) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 16g) large and broad, about 0.20 mm long, slightly longer than parameres; anterior
margin straight, broadest in basal half, narrower both basally and apically, posterior
margin broadly and convexly rounded, outer surface thickly armed with minute points
arranged in linear series and also sparsely beset with long, thick setae in the apical hall,
marginal setae slightly longer, apex truncate; parameres (Figs. 16h,i) small, about 0,18mm_
long, strongly bowed inwards, broad basally and gradually narrowed and bilobate apically,
the outer lobe longer than the inner, and strongly armed with minute, thick setae, pointing
downward, the inner lobe bearing few setae, both lobes sinuate, outer surface sparsely
beset with small, simple setae, mesal surface armed with small, 3 or 4 stout and thick
setac; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely pubescent, pubescene longer posté-
riorly; outer arm of aedeagus (Fig. 16j) smaller than basal, deeply notched dorsally in
the apical half, spoon end thick. Host plant. On Zizyphus jujuba Lain. Type locality, Tambaram, Madras. Types. Described from two male specimens. Type male, February 17, 1968 (B.V.
David); Paratype : 1 male (abdomen and male genitalia mounted on slide), from
the type locality, 17.268 (B.V. David), both collected on Zizyphus jujuba. One
male paratype of the same data, is deposited at the Agricultural College and Research
Institute, Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu). Comparison, This new species is described from two males and resembles closely with
Paurocephala menoni, but differs fvom it in shape of head and wings, venation, longer ptero-
stigma, marginal cells and genital characters,

Biological notes. Nothing is kuown about its biology and economic importance,
except that it has been recorded on Zizyphus jujuba at Tambaram (Tamil Nadu). 72 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Genus PAUROPSYLLA Rubsaamen 1899

Pawropyylla
Rubsaamen, E. H. 1899, Ent, Nach, Berlin 25: 262, figs, 7-13. Kieffer, J. J. 1905. Ann, Soc, Sci. Bruxelles 29: 167. Aulmann, G. 1913. Pyyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 29. Crawford, D. L. 1915. Philipp. J. Sci. 10: 258,
Mani, M.S. 1935. J. Asiat. Soc. Beng. 1(2): 100,
Heslop-Harrison, G. 1951. nn, Mag. nat, Hist. (12) 4 1-35. Hedop-Harrison, G. 1959, Ibid, (13), 2(15)+ 157-168. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1960. bid, (13), 3(86) 714. ‘Type species: Pauropsylla udei Rubsaamen, 1899 (original designation),

Body usually short and robust, smooth, strongly arched, Head short, transverse,
almost as wide as thorax or slightly smaller, much deflexed, almost vertical, usually
without genal cones or genae more or less swollen bencath, sometimes distinct and conical. Vertex usually much broader than long, rounded forward and downward; with or with-
out median suture, with fovcal impressions posterior to centre; post-ocellar region genc-
rally swollen, post-ocelli often raised; front ocellus scarcely visible from above. Frons
usually visible as a small sclerite, bearing the front ocellus at top. Antennal sockets
large, lateral, Eyes prominent, large and recessive, Antennae short, often with very
long setae at apex, or with smaller terminal setae; shorter or as long as width of vertex
between cyes. Prothorax usually descending and partly concealed beneath head. Meso-
sternum prominent, projecting forward ventrad. Legs usually not large, slender. Fore-
wings hyaline, sometimes maculated, usually large and broadly rounded or subsquarish
at the apex; with or without pterostigma; cubital petiole usually smaller than radius,
sometimes obsolete and giving the appearance of triozine venation; marginal cells usually
unequal, second marginal cell generally near apex. As some new species have been studied, it seems necessary to supplement the generic
characters as described by Rubsaamen in 1899. The already known species are P.
beesoni Laing, P. brevicornis Craw!., P. depressa Crawl., P. ficicola Kieff., P. nigra Crawf.,
P. spondiasae Crawl, P. stevensi Laing, and P. tuberculata Crawf; while the new species
recorded by me are P. longispiculata, P. maculata, P. purpurescens, P. reticulata and P. verrucosa. Pauropsylla stevensi is not scen by me and its description is reproduced from Laing
(1930). All are gull-forming species, except the three specics collected on Mangifera
indica. ‘Their distinguishing characters are tabulated in the key. KEY TO THE SPECIES OF PAUROPSYLLA*

1, Forewings with pterostigma -
—. Forewings without pterostigma . «
2. Forewings long and subacute or younded at apes «
—. Forewings broad and subsquare near apex + :
3, Forewings long and subacute at apex » +--+ Lees : P. maculata, $1 sp. n.
—. Forewings narrowly rounded at apex 06 000 ee cee ee eee eee P. stevensi Laing
4, Veins of forewings with small, tani, seatiered black spots; body weakly
verrucose

    
 

   

 

 

   

P. verrucosa, sp. 0. FAMILY PSYLLIDAL 73

—. Veins cleat, without black spots, body plane « «
5, Antennae with two or more very long setae at tip

Antennae with small setae at tip . -
Antennae with eight long setae, tassel-like
Antennae with two long seiae, not tassellike - « -
. Head with a median suture...»
Head without median suture. - «
. Second marginal cell much longer than first; fork Mys5 sagulaly

arclied and touching radial sector « - «

—, Second matginal cell not larger than first, usually subequal; fork N Mig not
touching radial sector . «

  
  
 
 

 

  

P. brevicornis Craw? P. nigra Crawt. P. longispiculata, ap. n
+P, shoniiasae Cras. + P. tuberculata Crawf,

   
 
  
  

» 9
9, Head without median suture...) « 10
Head with median suture « i

|. Forewings large and broad, more subsquar' . Forewings small, gradually and nerrowly rounded in apical halt

« Forewings broad and subsquare near apex - - + «

Forewings large and narrowly rounded at apex oe seer WD

. Cubital petiole present, small; radial sector deflexed towards apex « . Pauropsylta “iiitola Kieff. —. Cubital petiole almost obsolete; radial sector flexed towards costal margin. . +--+ P. beesoni Laing

+P. depressa Crawl. +P. purpurescens, sp. 0. + 2 raat, 29. 2,

   

       

 

* Pauropsyita globuli Kieffer not included due to lack of knowledge. Panropsylla beesoni Laing 1930
(Fig. 17) (Plate 3, c)
Laing, F, 1930. Indian Forest Ree. 14(8)+ 36-87, fig. 1. Mathur, R.N, 1935, Indian Forest Rec. 1(2): 45-47, pl. 1, fig. 1. (biology). Beeson, C, F.C. 1941. Forest Insects, pp. 777-778, (Biological notes). Mathur, R.N. 1949, Indian J. Ent. 8(2) + 226-227, fig. 2. (December, 1946), (Nymphal stages). Length of body, in male, 2-25 mm; in female, 2-52 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3-41 mm; in female, 1-16 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-75 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-42 mm

Length of antennae, 1-52 mm

Colouration. Gencral colour pale honey brown to dark-brown, with head dark casta-
neous brown to black posteriorly and pale-yellow anteriorly; antennae pale-yellowish
proximally and dark-brown to black distally, apices of segments 3, 4, 5 and 6 black;
eyes black; median arca of mesonotum darker ; mesoscutellum and pscudonotum yellowish
white; legs pale-yellowish with the apices of the tibiac and the tarsal segments partially
dark; mesosternum black, pro- and mcta-sternum pale-yellow; forewings hyaline with a
little pale brown alongside the main vein at the base; nerves pale-brown; abdomen dark-
brown with narrow, pale brown intersegmental bands between sternites,

Structure. Body very robust and covered sparscly with long hairs, Head (Fig. 17a)
shorter than thorax, clothed sparsely with long hairs, slightly deflexed; vertex broader
than long, about twice as broad as long along the median suture, median line forming a
narrow sulcus, with two large foveal impressions, posterior to centre, one on each side

74 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

eI
ny]

 

9.5 mm

Fig, 17, Pawropaylla beesoni Laing ~a: head, front view; br antenna; et forewing; dz hind wing; et hind
leg; fi anal valve and aedeagus, lateral view; g: anal valve, upper surface: ht parameres,
anterior view; iz same, lateral views {, kt same, upper and mesal surfaces; Is apical end of
forcep, highly magnified; ma spetm pump; mi female genitalia, lateral view; o: dorsol plate. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 7.

a

of median suture, post-occllar region elevated, posterior margin strongly emarginate,
anterior ocellus visible from above and nearly on level with the antennal sockets, anterior
margin deeply invaginated in middle; genae small, swollen lobes forming between them
a narrow concavity, pubescent with long hairs. Eyes large, somewhat hemispherical
when seen in front, Clypeus small, tongue-like, and projecting forward,

Antennac (Fig. 17b) long, slender, exccpt two robust basal segments, ten-segmented,
hearing few long hairs, imbricate, Ist and 2nd segments broadly transverse, equal in
length, 3rd segment longest, about twice as long as 4th, 4th longer than 5th, 5th, 7th
and 8th equal to one another and each slightly smaller than Gth, 6th slightly smaller
than 4th, 9th half as long as 8th, terminal segment slightly longer than 9th, bearing two
unequal spines apically, two apical segments broader, four sensoria present on segments
4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax large, robust, strongly arched, sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; pronotum
forming a narrow ring-like segment, convexly and narrowly rounded, descending verti-
cally, with a very small median epiphysis near posterior border, lateral sides project
below eyes; prescutum large, slightly broader than long, broadest in middle, narrowly
and convexly rounded anteriorly, angulate laterally; scutum large, about two and a
half times as broad as long, broadest before middle, slightly shorter in length than pres-
cutum, angulate laterally; scutellum broadly transverse, sub-rectangular, with prominent
antero-lateral angles; pseudonotum with the front and hind margins parallel, the front
slightly shorter than the rear, . Legs (Fig. 17e) moderately long and thick, pubescent and also armed with minute
points arranged in linear serics, femora shorter than tibiac, all tibiae with apical comb of
setae, hind femora with six dorsal spines near apex, hind tibiae without basal spur, with
seven thick spines at apex (4 on one side and 3 on the other), apical region slightly
swollen and thick; tarsal segments of nearly equal length; meracanthus large, somewhat
tubular, roundly pointed apically. Forewings (Fig. 17e) large, hyaline, transparent, about two and one-fourth times as
long as broad (2} times, according to Laing, 1930), rounded apically, the radius, media
and cubitus arising almost from the same point, radius very small and about jth as
long as Ry, Rs quite long, directed straight towards costal margin, cubitus longer than
Ry, basal vein slightly longer than cubitus, first marginal cell scarcely longer than second,
but almost equal in width near the margin, veins armed with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 17d) smaller, costal margin bearing few simple and hooked setae
near base, membrane thickly and uniformly beset with minute points. Abdomen broader than long, armed with fine minute points, sternites bearing small
hairs. Genitalia. Male genital segment smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (proctiger)
(Fig. 17f,g) longer than forceps (parameres), about 0-41 mm long, in profile, anterior
margin almost straight, posterior margin broadly convex, broadest above middle, narrower
both basally and apically, outer surface armed with minute points arranged in lines,
the apical portion beset with long, simple setac, anus small, aperture truncate; para-
meres (Figs. 17 h,i,j, k) about 0-32 mm long, sides sub-parallel, tapering to apex which

76 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

is sharply curved mesad and caudad as a black sub-acute, small, bidentate tooth, outer
surface beset with strong, thick setae, mesal margins irregular and armed with strong
thick setae in the apical region, mesal surface sinuate and also beset with small thick setac
directed downward; hypandrium of usual shape, sparsely pubescent and also armed
with minute points; outer arm of 4edeagus (Fig. 17£) smaller than basal, with a spatulate
end; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 17m). Female genitalia (Fig. 17m) longer than abdomen. Both plates sub-equal, dorsal
plate (Fig. 17 0) longer than ventral, broad basally, gradually attenuate and roundly
pointed at apex, sparsely pubescent, caudal region armed with small, thick setae; circum-
anal ring small and composed of a band of pores; ventral plate broad basally, attenuate
and acute at apex, pubescent, posterior sctae smaller; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. Bred ex galls on leaves of Litsea monopelata (Roxb.) Pers. (=L. polyantha
Juss.). Distribution, Previously recorded from Dehra Dun (U.P.). Afaterial examined. In addition to the para type material and some morc specimens of
ihe same, the collection at the Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun, consists of | ex. of
30-5-32 ; 20 ex. of 8-3-33, 6 ex. of 9-3-33; 1 ex. of 25-3-34; 12 ex. of 12-3-51; and 6 cx. of
28-3-63 ; all from New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.) and from Litsea monopetala (R.N. Mathu
and 2 males and 2 females of +.3.46, from the same host plant and collected from Dehra
Dun (U.P.) (R.N. Mathur), The preserved iaterial (in alcohol) includes many adults
and nymphal stages, in two phials

There are 8 specimens collected from New Forest, Dehra Dun, ex galls on Litsea
monopetala, (R. N. Mathur), present at LA.RJI., New Delhi. Two more specimens of
12-3-1951, collected from New Forest (R. N. Mathur), have been donated to this
institute. Comparison. Laing (1930) has described this species and writes, “..... belongs
to the same group of the genus Pauropsylla as P. trizoptera Craw. It is recleseribed with
more detailed figures. 2. beesoni is characteriscd by the shape of ils head, forewings,
venation, colouration and other genital characters, and is easily separated by these
features from other species. Biological notes. Mathur (1935) has dealt with its biology, etc., ancl brief notes are also
given by Beeson (1941). ‘I'he nymphal stages are described by Mathur (1949). P.
beesoni Laing occurs commonly at Dehra Dun, and in heavy infestations, practically all
the top leaves are badly galled (Plate 3c) which considerably hamper the growth of trecs. Pauropsylla brevicornis Crawford 1919
(ig. 18)
Crawford, D. L, 1919, Philipp. J. Sci. 15(2): 142-143, Pl. 1, figs. land 2, (Tenimber Islands, Lavat). Boselli, F. B, 1930, Boll, Lab, Zool. agr., Portici., 24, pl. 23, (Microceropsylla brevicornis)
Mathur, R. N, 1935. Indian Forest Rec, 1(2):47 (Dehra Dun, U.P). Weslop-Harrison, G. 1968, dun, Mag. nat, Hist. (12), 11 291. (Microceropsylla brevicornis Cvawf)

 
  

Length of body, in inale, 1:25 mm; in female, 1-52 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-80 mm; in female, 20 nim

FAMILY PSYLEIDAR

 

Fig, 18. Pauopsylla brevicomis Crawford—a: head, front view; bs antenna; e: hind leg; d: forewing;
e, f: apical portion of forewings; g: hind wing; hi male genitalia, lateral view; 4: anal valve;
upper surface; j: forceps; Ik: sperm pump; I: femaic genitalia, lateral view; mt dorsal plate;
nz portion of ventral plate; 01 ovipositor sheath,

Width of head with eyes, 0:70 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 40 mm
Length of antennae, 0-70 mm

Colouration. (Dry specimens) Male: Gencral colour chocolatc-brown to black, head
black with greyish tinge, thorax black both dorsally end ventrally, metathorax yellow,

78 PS¥LLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

legs pale-yellow, metacoxa with a black spot, abdomen yellow with two black lateral
bands, genitalia black, Female: General colour of head and thorax pirikish-brown with
greyish tinge laterally, scutellum pale-yellow, metathorax yellow, antennae and legs pale-
yellow, metacoxa with a broad black spot, abdomen yellow with a broad black transverse
band on segment 4, and two broad lateral black bands, genitalia pale-yellow with a fuscous
spot on each side of dorsal plate, ovipositor dark-brown. Wings hyaline with pale-yellow veins, in both sexcs. + Structure. Body small in male and robust in female, shining. Head (Fig. 18a),
including eyes, as broad as thorax, strongly declivous, fincly and sparsely pubescent;
vertex large, roundly convex on both sides of median line in front view, with weak foveal
impressions posterior to centre, anterior region beset with minute points, posterior ocelli
slightly elevated, anterior ocellus visible in front; frons not visible; genae very small,
slightly swollen beneath antennal bases, sparsely hairy and also beset with minute points. Eyes small, subiriangular. Clypeus and beak small. Antennae (Fig. 18b) very short, seven-segmented (Crawford has figured six segments),
imbricate, with 8 long, slender setac, tassel-like, first two segments robust, Ist transverse,
2nd subquadrate, segment 3rd thinner, about as long as segments 4 and 5 together,
segments 4 and 5 equal, smaller than other segments, 4th slightly broader than 5th, 6th
slightly broader than long, apical segment smallest, transverse, with two long setae, these
setae are slightly more than one and a half times longer than the antenna itself. Thorax robust and strongly arched, sparsely hairy, pro- arid mesothorax strongly
rugulose. Prothorax small, narrow, descending, strongly and narrowly convex, longer
in middle, thinner laterally, with two foveal impressions on each side; prescutum large,
broader than long, about onc and a half times broader than long, broadest before middle,
narrower both anteriorly and posteriorly, angulate laterally; scutum large, broader than
prescutum, about two and a half times as broad as long, slightly shorter than prescutum
in length, broadest in centre, disc weakly depressed forming a longitudinal median
channel; scutellum broadly transverse, about one and a half times as broad as long,
anterior margin slightly convex, having prominent antero-lateral angles, posterior margin
somewhat irregular. Legs (Fig. 18e) short and slender, sparsely pubescent and also armed with minute
points, arranged in lines, tibiae longer than femora, hind tibiae without basal spur, with
five black tooth-like spines at apex, four approximate and one separate, tarsal segments
almost equal in length, meracanthus small, papilla-like. Forewings (Fig. 18d) hyaline, veins prominent, a little more than one and a half times
longer than broad, broad and rounded at apex, basal vein slightly longer than radius,
radial sector long and straight, pterostigma long and narrow, radius about twice as
long as cubital petiole, first marginal cell twice longer than second, broad and subs-
quarish apically. In some examples of both sexes, either the stem My-+, or My+4
is branched (Figs. 18e,f). Hind wings (Fig, 18g) large, slightly smaller than forewings, membrane thickly beset
with minute points, costal margin armed with few simple setae near base and three hooked
setac,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 79

Abdomen small in male and moderately large and robust in female, sparsely pubescent
and thickly beset with rows of minute points. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 18h) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent ;
anal valve (Fig. 18i) slightly smaller than parameres, about 0-18 mm long, broader at
pase and gradually narrowed and truncate at apex, anterior margin straight, posterior
margin weakly concave, sparscly besct with simple setac and thickly with minute points ;
parameres (Fig. 18j) about 0-21 mm long, sparsely beset with setae strongly curved at
apex, broader at base and narrower at top, lerminating towards inner side in two acute
black points, the apical point stronger and thicker than the lower point, the lower point
weakly bipartite, three thick, curved setae present near apical points, basal region bearing
a group of small setae, marginal sctae slightly longer; outer arm of acdeagus (Fig. 18h)
small and robust, basal arm swollen in the apical half; hypandrium small, simple, of usual
shape, bearing sparse pubescence; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 18k). Female genital segment (Fig. 181) very short, bent downward, sparsely beset with
simple setae end rows of minute points, both plates subequal in length and emarginate
at apiccs; dorsal plate (Fig. 18m) large and longer than ventral, with two dark, lateral
patches, and a large dorsal anal opening, anal-ring composed of a double row of pores
and guarded by thick setae; apical region of ventral plate (Fig. 18n) armed with small,
thick setae; ovipositor sheath (Fig. 18 0) prominently serrated, ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. On young leaves of Mangifera indica Linn,

Distribution. Previously recorded from Tenimber Islands, Larat (Crawford, 1919);
and from Dehra Dun (U.P.) (Mathur, 1935), Ludhiana (Punjab). Material examined. ‘The collection at the Forest Research Institute, New Forest, con-
sists of 1 ex. of March, 16, 1932, 1 ex. of April 11, 1933; 1 ex. of June 5, 1933; 1 ex. of
March 27 and 3 ex. of April 1, 1936; 1, 8 and 9 examples of April 2, 7 and 8, 1937, res-
pectively; 1, 3, 2, 1, 1 and 2 examples of March 19, 20, 25, 26, 28 and 31, 1963, res-
pectively; and 4 examples of May 15, 1963; all were collected from New Forest, Dehra
Dun (U.P.) (R. N, Mathur). Some specimens collected on 15-3-1966 have also been
received from Ludhiana, Punjab (O. S. Bindra), onmango. Some adults collected during
April and May 1962, from Dehra Dun (R. N. Mathur) were preserved in alcohol. And +
examples of 8-4-45 from Dehra Dun, and 9 and 4 examples of 12-4-50 and 20-4-50 from
New Forest (R. N. Mathur), all collected on mango leaves. Two specimens from New
Forest, Dehra Dun, and collected on 25-3-63, on Mangifera indica (R. N. Mathur) are
donated to the I.A.R.1., New Delhi. Comparison. Pauropsylla brevicornis Crawford (1919) was described from 1 male and
2 females. It is redescribed here from a long series of both sexes. Its identification has
been confirmed by Dr (Miss) Russell of U. S. National Museum, with these remarks:
“Your specimens appear to be similar in structure to the types of brevicornis but they
differ conspicuously in colour. In the § types the dorsum of the abdomen is black
except for the posterior margin of the segment preceding the genitalia. The ventral
surface of the abdomen and legs are light. There is a dark spot at the base of the meta-
coxa as in your specimens. The colour of the / types is the same as that of the 9 with
the genitalia light. The forceps are more slender and in lateral view are more strongly

 

30 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

   

(ei

0.25 mm

 

    

0.25 mm

0.5 mm

 

Fig. 19. Pawropsylta depressa Grawford—a: head, front view; bt antenna; et hind leg; ds forewing; es
hind wing; # male genitalia, lateral view; gt anal valve, mesal surface; hi parameres, caudal
views fs sperm pump; j: female genitalia, lateral views kk part of ventral plate, mesal surface. curved caudad than in your specimens.” However, such differences are likely to occur
due to climatic end distributional factors, and therefore, the specimens from India are
being retained under brevicornis for the present. P, brevicornis Craw. is easily recognised by its antennac heving cight long setac, tassel-
like, presence of pterostigma, with distinct median suture and shape of head, venation,
genital characters and colouration,

Biological notes, Nothing is known regarding its life history, ctc., except that this species

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 81

appears quite commonly during March to May, at Dehra Dun, when new flush of leaves
appear on Mangifera indica. Pauropsylla depressa Crawford i912
(Fig. 19) (Plate 3, a, b)

Crawford, D. L. 1912, Rec. Indian Mus, 7(5): 429-430, pl. XXXIV figs. GH; pl. XXXV fig. N.
(In galls on leaves of Ficus glomerata, Pusa, Bihar). Crawford, D. L. 1924, Rec. Indian Mus. 26: 615 (On Ficus glomerata, Coimbatore; on cinnamon shoots,
at Mangalore (gall-forming). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus. 26: 622 (Noted also in galls of cinnamon leaves,
S, Kanara). Rahman, Khan, A, 1932. Indian J. agric. Res. 2(4) : 365-367, pl. xxcxviii, (Nymphal stages; ex galls on
leaves of Ficus glomerata, Pusa (Bihar) ; Lahore (Pakistan). Mani, M.S, 1935. J. Asiat. Soc. Beng. 1(2)+ 101-102, fig. 1. Mathur, R.N. 1935. Indian For. Rec, 1(2): 48, (Biology), pl. 11, fig. 18. Beeson, C.F.C. 1641 Fore ¢ Insects, 718 (Bio'ogi-al notes). Naidu, M. 1945. Curr. Sci, 14(2): 42-48 (Braconid parasite, life-history). Mani, M. 8, 1959, Agra Univ. 7. Res, (Sei.) 8(2): 252-253 (India). Weidner, H, 1961. Sonderdr, Abh. Verk. der naturw, Vere, Haraburg 5 (1960): 27, 28, 46. Length of body, in male, 1:72 mm; in female, 2.1 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2°80 mm; in female, 3'00 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°82 mm

Width of vertex between. eyes, 0°50 mm

Length of antennae, 1-!0 mm

Colouration. Generel colour orange-red or dark-brown with blackish tinge, tip of
labium black, legs lighter yellowish, hind femora fuscous, tarsi often more or less black,
antennae pale-yellow proximally, apical segments and apices of segments 4 and 6 black
or dark-brown; in mature specimens males are darker than females. Structure. Body robust, moderately large. Head (Fig. 19a) short, deflexed, narrower
than thorax, somewhat pubescent; vertex much broader than long, shining, no median
suture, surface smooth, finely rugulose in the post-ocellar region and ventral to front
ocellus, with two foveal impressions posterior to centre, anteriorlyroundly bulging, posterior
margin arcuate downward between eyes, post-ocelli elevated, anterior ocellus in front
visible from above; genal cones entirely wanting. Eyes rather small. Clypeus large,
globose in front. Antennal insertions beneath and slightly swollen. .

Antennae (Fig. 19b) small, ten-segmented, about one and a third times as long as
head, having few setac, two basal segments robust, remaining segments slender, imbricate,
Ist segment narrowly transverse, 2nd broadly transverse, slightly longer than Ist, 3rd
longest, slightly more than twice as long as 4th, 5th and 6th equal and slightly more than
half as long as 4th, 7th and 8th equal and slightly smaller than Sth, 9th half as long as
8th, bearing a long seta, terminal segment slightly longer than penultimate, having two
unequal, moderately long apical setac, apical segments slightly compressed; four sensoria
present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. 82 PSYLLIDAT, OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

‘Thorax strongly arched, broad, sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose when scen under
high magnification. Pronotum short, scarcely visible from above between head and
dorsulum, ascending, narrowly convex dorsally, anterior margin invaginated median-
ally, with lateral foveal impressions; prescutum rather large ascending, broader than
long, broadest in middle, narrower both anteriorly and posteriorly, angulate both laterally
and posteriorly; scutum very large, broad, slightly more than tw» and a half times as
broad as long, slightly smaller in length than prescutum, angulate laterally; scuteflum
broadly transverse, anterior margin alinost straight, with antero-lateral angles, narrowly
yvounded posteriorly; mesopleurae very large, prominent and produced forward. Legs (Fig. 19¢) long, slender. pubescent and also beset with minule points arranged
in linear scries, femora shorter than tibiae, all tibiac with apical comb of setae, hind femm
with three sensoria-like structures ventrally, and with four long, dorsal setae near apex,
hind tibiae with a serics of minute basal spurs, and three black tooth-like spines at apex
(2 on one side and | on the other); tarsal joints of equal length; meracanthus small,
stender and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 19d) large, hyaline, transparent, broadest subapically, rather square
at apex, slighdy more than twice as long as broad, basal vein (R-+-M-+Cu) very long,
cubital petiole (M+Cu) very short, marginal cells small, unequal, first longer than but
as Wide as second, radius (R) shorter than R,, radial cell broad at base; veins armed
with miicrosccpic sctac. Hind wings (Fig. 19e) small, uniformly beset with minute
points, costal vein armed with few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen in both sexes usually broad and depressed, subcircular in oudine from
above, beset with minute points, and fincly and sparsely pubescent, hairs longer
ventrally. .

Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 19£) rather small; anal valve longer than forceps,
in lateral view, anterior margin weakly concave basally and then weakly convex or somc-
what straight above, posterior margin broadest above base and arcuately produced into
broad Jateral Iobes, simple setae present on the apical and marginal regions of the lateral
lobes, outer surface beset with minute points arranged in linear series, mesal surface
(Fig. 19g) armed with two groups of thick setae; anal opening obtuse; parameres (Fig. 19h) curved cephalad and arcuate toward cach other, in profile sides somewhat curved
parallelly, terminating in a round black point, outer surface bearing small sparse setae,
marginal setae slightly longer, four thick setae pointing downwards present just below
in the apical concavity; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparscly bearing simple sctae
and also armed with minute points arranged in lines; outer arm of aedcagus
(Fig. 19£) smaller than basal, thick and curved like a sign of interrogation; sperm pump
as figured (Fig. 191). Female genital segment (Fig, 19j) smaller and about halfas long as abdomen, and usually
jbent down, and often (dried specimens) lying along ventral surface of abdomen;
dorsal plate slightly longer than ventral, broad basally and gradually sloping
caudally, subacute at apex, surface beset with simple setae and also with minute points;
anal opening rather oval and surrounded by a ring of double row of pores; ventral plate
(Fig. 19k) also broad at base and abruptly narrower posteriorly, subacute at apex, surface

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

PAMILY PsyLLIDAl, 83
armed with simple setac and also with minute points; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plants. Bred ex galls on leaves of Ficus racemosa L. (=F. glomerata Roxb. ); on
Cinnamomum shoots. Distribution, Previously recorded from Pusa (Bihar), in galls on leaves of Ficus racemosa
(=F. glomerata); Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu), from the same host plant; Mangalore
(Kerala), on Cinnamomum shoots, March 1919 (gall forming); New Forest, Dehra Dun,
(U.P. ); Nagpur (Mahavashtra), and Lahore (W. Pakistan). Widely distributed wherever
Ficus racemosa grows. Mani (1959) has mentioned India, Burma, Ceylon, Java, Hong-
kong and Philippines. Material examined. The collection at the Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun, consists
of 3 males, 2 females of 15.3.32; 5 females of 16.3.32; 3 females of 22.3.32, from New
Forest, Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur) (Expt.368); 1 female of 7.2.33; 1 female of 8.2.33;
1 female of [4,2,33; 1 female of 17,.2.33; 6 males and 2 females of 23, 2.33; 6 males
and 7 females of 8.3.33, all from New Forest, Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur) (Expt.431) ;
I female of 2: from Asan River, Dehra Dun (M. Bose); 1 male and 2 females of
6.4.34 from New Forest (R.N. Mathur) (Expt.497 Aj; and 1 male and 2 females of
13.3.35, from New Forest (R.N. Mathur) (Expt. 506 Aj; some galled leaves of
F. racemosa were also received from Forest nursery, Mt, Abu, Rajasthan (V.D, Mathur),
16.7.64; from Agra, U.P., 1.7.66, (R.D. Saksena); and from New Delhi, on Ficus sp. (B.R. Subba Rao). Some adults and nymphal stages collected from Dehra Dun,
during 1952 and 1955 (R.N. Mathur) were preserved in alcohol (2 phials). At the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi; 1 example of 17.10.07,
1 ex. of 17.xi1.07, 2 ex. of 26.1.08, | ex. of 10.3.09, from Pusa, Bihar (C.S.M); 4 ex
of 26.1.16 and 2 ex. of 28.1,16, also from Pusa, Bihar (U. Bahadur}. Some of these
specimens are in poor condition,

Six specimens are represented at the Zoological Survey of India, Calcutta, having
this data: Medical Colony, Ajni, Nagpur (V. Pawar) (Reg.No. 8728, 8733/H7, Lot
No. 68, 1964). One male specimen of 10.4.36, present at the Agricultural Research Institute,
Coimbatore (A.G.R.). Comparison, This is the most common gall-forming species on Ficus racemosa, and is
redescribed from a number of specimens. It is distinguishable by the shape of head,
absence of median suture, shape of forewings and venation, antennae and genital
characters,

Biological notes. Mathur (1935) and Beeson (1941) have given its biology and gall-
forming habits. In heavy infestations, the leaves are entirely glomerated with numerous
galls (Plate-3, a, b) and become seriously curled or grotesquely shaped. Rahman (1932)
has described its nymphal stages. The description of the gall and distribution of the
species are given by Mani (1959). Pauropsylia ficicola Kieffer 1905
(Figs. 20, 21)
Kieffer, J.J. 1905. Ann, Soo, Sei, Bruxelles 291 169-172. 84 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fg. 20. Pauropaylla ficicola Kieff.—a: front view of head; bi lateral view of head and thorax; et antenna;
d: part ofhind leg; et forewing; f forewing having an extra cell; g: hind wing; hz male genital
segment; i: anal valve, anterior aspect; j: forcep, lateral aspect; ke sperm pump; I: female
genital segment. Length of body, in male, 2.23 mm; in female, 2.42 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2.87 mm; in female, 3.21 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.72 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0.88 mm

Length of antennae, 1.42 mm

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 85

Colouration, General colour pale-brown to dark-brown, with anterior part of
prothorax, anterior broad median band on prescutum, two pairs of longitudinal, sub-
median, broad bands on scutum, vertex in front of anterior ocellus, distal two-thirds
of antennae and tarsal segments dark-brown to fuscous; wings hyaline, transparent,
veins dark-brown,

Structure. Body robust, Head (Figs. 20a,b) slightly smaller than thorax, moderately
deflexed, sparsely pubescent with long setae, finely reticulate-rugulose; vertex slightly
longer than broad, somewhat horizontal in the posterior region and then roundly bent
downward anteriorly, with two foveal impressions near posterior border and on either
side of median suture, posterior margin weakly emarginate, post-ocellar region strongly
swollen bearing ocelli; frons visible as a small sclerite and situated above the level of
antennal sockets, bearing anterior ocellus dorsally; genae small, swollen beneath ant-
ennal sockets, finely rugulose and sparsely pubescent with long hairs. Eyes large, some-
what hemispherical. Antennae (Fig. 20c) small, ten-segmented, finely and sparsely hairy, two basalsegments
robust, Ist transverse, 2nd nearly quacrate, remaining segments slender and imbricate,
3rd longest, 4th and 6th equal but smaller than 3rd, 5th, 7th and 9th equal but smaller
than 4th, 8th and 10th equal but smaller than 5th, terminal segment with two small,
unequal setae at apex, four sensoria present on scgments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax (Fig. 20d) robust, strongly archcd, shining, sparsely pubescent with thick
setae, finely rugulose. Prothorax much deflexed and thus partly concealed behind head,
differentiated into two parts, the convex anterior region and the flat posterior region
when viewcd dorsally, posterior border deeply grooved, having large foveal impressions
on each lateral side; prescutum strongly arched, almost 2s long 2s broad, broadest
in anterior half, convex and descending vertically anteriorly, much narrower posteriorly,
angulate laterally ; scutum quite broad, slightly more than twice as broad as long, broadest
before middle, grooved longitudinally, forming a shallow median channel, shorter in
length than prescutum, anterior margin deeply concave, while the posterior margin
broadly convex, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutcllum broadly transverse
about twice as broad as long, gradually narrowed and rounded posteriorly, angulate
at antero-lateral angles; mesopleurae large, prominent and produced forward in
front. Legs (Fig. 20d) moderately long, pubescent with long setae and also beset with fine
points arranged in lines, femora longer than tibiae, all tibiae with a comb of setae near
apex, hind femur with four thick, dorsal setae near apex, outer side with a row of thick
setae, hind tibiae without basal spur, with seven, thick, black tooth-like spines at apex,
basal tarsal segment slightly smaller than apical in all legs, meracanthus large, sub-
triangular, beset basally with minute points. Forcwings (Fig. 20e) large, slightly more then twiceas broad as long, broadly rounded
at apex, without pterostigma, Rs quite long and flexed downward, radius about three
times as long as cubital petiole, basal vein also long, first marginal cell slightly longer
than second, R and R, almost equal in length, veins armed with microscopic setae. In
one specimen, a small cross vein present joining media with radial sector, thus forming

86 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT,

a small cell (Fig. 20£). Hind wings also quite large, membrane thickly and uniformly
beset with minute points, costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked setac in
basal half (Fig. 20g). Abdomen robust, longer than broad, pubescent, sctae longer on sternites, also thickly
beset with minute points. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 20h) smaller than abdomen, Anal valve (Fig. 20%) scarcely smaller than forceps, about 0°25 mm long, pyriform, when viewed Iaterally,
anterior margin nearly straight, posterior margin broadly convex, outer surface beset
with long and thick setac and also with minute points; parameres (Fig. 20j) about 0°28 mm
long, subparallel, bent inwards and cnding in a strong point at apex, few thick setae
directed downward present just below apex, outer surface sparsely armed with simple
setac, mesal surface beset with thick setae pointing downward, marginal and basal setac
slightly longer than apical; outer arm of aedeagus smaller than basal, ending in a spoon-
like apex; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely pubescent and also beset with
minute points. Female genital segment smaller than abdomen, pubescent with long sctae; dorsal
plate (Fig. 20 1) slightly longer than ventral, broad basally and narrow apically, ending
in a rounded apex, surface armed with minute points which are arranged in lines in the
basal region, anal ring composed of two rows of pores, guarded by small setae; ventral
plate acutely pointed at apex, basal region quite broad; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. Bred ex galls on leaves of Ficus rexburghii Wall. On Ficus hookeri Miq. (Kieffer, 1905). Distribution. Lansdowne (1,677 m), U.P., 2 females and 1 male collected on October
3, 1934 (P.C, Kanjilal); Mussoorie (2,287 m), U.P., 6 males and 6 females bred ex galls,
on September 10, 1935 (B.M. Bhatia) (R.R.D.924.35.HI), with few adults and nymphs
preserved in elcohol. Some adults and nymphal stages collected on December 14,
1949, were also received from Ranikhef, Kumaon (U.P.) (Z.A. Siddiqi), (preserved
in alcohol), on local fig leaves (Timla), Pauropsylla ficicola Kieffer (1905) has been recorded
from Bengal, on Ficus hookeri Mig. Type. Neotype male, Mussoorie (1,525 m), 10.9.19385 (B.M. Bhatia), ex Ficus rox
burghii (leaf galls). Comparison. These psyllids very closely tallied with the description of P. ficicola Kieffer. The whereabouts of Kieffers’ type isnot known, The authorities of the Brusscls Museum,
from where the original description was published, have reported that it is not in their
collection. Further endeavours to trace it also proved futile. Under the circumstance,
it was felt desirable to select a neotype. This has been done in accordance with the
provisions of Article 75 of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature. The
neotype specimen along with others from the same series is deposited in F.R.I., Dehra
Dun. This species has been redescribed from the examples of both sexes, bred ex galls
of the host plant from the above localities. It differs from other species in the shape and
different type of venation of wings, shape of head and genital characters,

Biological notes, Brief history of this species is given by Mathur (1935) and Beeson
(1941). Its uymphal stages are described below. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 87

 

Fig. 24, Pauropsylla ficicola Kicff.—a: fifth stage nymph; bt antenna; e: part of legs ds anal pore ring;
ce: dorsal aspect of abdomen of fourth stage nymph showing dorsal plates,

Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. Length 245 mm, Form pauropsylline (Fig 21a) oval, the continuity
of the margin interrupted near the eyes and at the base of abdomen; the wing-pads pro-
tecting forward slightly beyond the hase of eyes. Derm strongly sclerotic, the abdomen
composed for the most part of a single plate, showing traces of segmentation, and the
basal region consisting of two transverse, thin, strip-like plates. Entire margin of the
body, except for the eyes, beset with a series of simple setae of various length, sctac
slightly Jonger in the marginal region of the head and abdomen. Derm weakly
vermiculate, and also besct with simple, sparsely scattered setae and thickly with minute
points, except for a series of small areas on the abdomen where these appear like minute,
fringed processes,

Ventral side membranous throughout cxcept for a weakly sclerotic marginal zone, a
small area anterior to anal aperture, a small area about each spiracle, a small plate near
the base of each antenna and a large plate near the humeral angle. Derm thickly beset
with minute points; simple setae of various Jength and arranged intcr-segmentally present
in the abdomen, few simple setac also present near the antennal bases and on the anterior

88 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

sternal region. Antennae (Fig. 21b) ventral, about 0-52 mm long, nine-segmented,
imbricate, bearing few simple setae and also beset with minute points, three basal segments
robust, first two segments transverse, 3rd subquadrate and narrow anteriorly, 4th smaller
than 3rd and slightly longer than broad, 5th smallest and transverse, 6th and 8th equal
and nearly quadrate, longer than 5th but smaller than 4th, 7th smaller than 6th but
slightly longer than 5th, 9th longest and as long as the preceding three segments, bearing
two apical setae, fowr sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Legs (Fig. 21e) mode-
rately robust, beset with simple setae and minute points; with trochanter; with tibio-
tarsal articulation distinct; each tarsus with a single scta near apex; claws weak, the
pulvillus of a peculiar shape, being in the form of a circular pad. Anal opening ventral,
situated away from the apex of abdomen and surrounded by a broken ring of single
row of pores (Fig. 21d). Fourth stage. Length 1-35 mm. Differs from the fifth stage in being smaller in size,
with smaller wing-pads and with transverse strip-like plates in the abdomen (Fig. 2le) ;
antennae 7-scgmented with three sensoria; tibio-tarsal articulation absent. Pauropsylla longispicalata, sp. n.
(Figs. 22, 23)
Length of body, in male, 1-45 mm; in female, 1-72 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1:70 mm; in female, 1:82 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-80 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-40 mm
Length of antennae, 0-45 mm

Colouration. General colour pale-yellow, darker in male, genac dark-brown to black,
anterior border of prothorax, bands on prescutum and scutum, and mesopleurae dark-
brown or chocolate, abdominal sternites dark-brown or chocolate in male, tergites of
lighter colour, wings hyaline and transparent. Structure. Body small and robust. Head (Fig. 22a) moderately large, strongly decli-
vous, almost defiexed vertical to the axis of body, slightly broader than thorax; vertex
slightly more than twice as broad as long, gradually rounded downward in front, sparsely
pubescent, finely reticulate, posterior margin deeply cmarginate, median suture promi-
nent, foveac present near posterior margin, on either side of median suture, anterior
region narrower between antennal sockets; frons small, visible in front, bearing anterior
ocellus, posterior ocelli elevated; genac small, transverse, weakly swollen beneath antennal
sockets, Eyes large, recessive, subtriangular. Beak long, protruding out between
legs. Antennae (Fig. 22b) short, scarcely longer than width of vertex between eyes, ten-
segmented, bearing few setae, imbricate, two basal segments robust, Ist transverse, 2nd
subquadrate, 3rd longest, 4th, 6th and 8th segments equal, but each smaller than 3rd,
narrow basally, broad apically, 5th and 7th smallest and equal, 9th broadly transverse
and slightly longer and broader than 10th, bearing one long seta, four sensoria present
on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9, cach sensorium guarded with two long and thick setac, appearing

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 89

 

Pig, 22. Pouropsylla Igiypiculata, sp. n.—as front view of head; bt antenna; et hind leg; di forewing; et
hind wing; £ anal valve, lateral aspect; gt forceps, lateral aspect; hr forceps, upper and mesal
aspect; i ardeagus, lateral aspect; jt aedeagus, dorsal aspect; kk: sperm pump, I: female geni-
talia, lateral aspect. like horns, terminal segment small, transverse, with two, 0-28 mm long apical spines,
setae fuscous. Thorax broad, robust, strongly arched, fincly and sparscly pubescent, finely reticulate. Prothorax convexly rounded, descending vertically downward, somewhat triangular in
shape when seen in front, having foveal impressions on each side, posterior margin with
a small, median end one submedian shallow depressions on cither side; prescutum about
twice as broad as Jong, broadest before middle, somewhat pentangular in shape, angulate
laterally, posterior margin angulate; scutum large and broad, slightly shorter in length
than prescutum, two and two-thirds as broad as long, gradually sloping and angulate
laterally, disc with a shallow medien channel and gre.dually sloping posteriorly; scutellum
broadly transverse, almost rectangular, twice as broad as long; post-scutellum narrowly

90 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

  

transverse, both anterior and posterior margins weakly invaginated; mesopleurae large
and anterior. Legs (Fig. 22c) quite long, pubescent and also thickly beset with minute points, femora
shorter than Libize, all tibiae with a comb of setac at apex, hind femur with three sensoria-
like structures on ventral side in the apical half, hind tibiae without basal spur, with seven,
black, tooth-like spines at apex (6 closely-set setae on one side and | on the other), these
spines may vary in number, hind coxac long and thick, meracanthus very small, like a
lite papilla. Forewings (Fig. 22d) large, hyaline, transparent, about one and three-fourths as long
as broad, broadest subapically, somewhat square at apex, pterostigma present, long, first
marginal cell very large and long, second cell very small, radius two and a half times as
long as cubital petiole, cubitus about one and a half times as long as cubital petiole, basal
vein slightly shorter than radius, veins M, Cry, and Cug running parallel, radular areas
present in both miarginal and medial cells, veins armed with microscopic sctae. Hind wings (Fig. 22e) also quite large, membrane beset with minute points, costal
margin in the basal half armed with few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen smali, longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent, fincly rugulose,
third and fourth tergites rather prominent and ascending, other tergites telescoped. Genitalia, Male genital segment smaller than abdomen, Anal valve (Fig. 22£) large,
about 0°30 mm long, longer than parameres, lobate, and divided into two areas, the
anal tube and the lateral lobes when seen in lateral view, anterior margin of anal tube
moderately invaginated subapically, lateral lobes large and bluntly rounded at top,
posterior margin invaginated in middle, anal and lateral apical portion of both areas
beset with long sctac; paramercs (Figs. 22g, h) about (J-22 nm long, hifobate at apex,
both lobes slender, inner lobe slightly longer than outer, only apical portion visible in
profile, apices terminating into minute points, inner lobe roundly pointed at apex, outer
lobe with two acute points at apex, just below these points, few thick setae present, pointing
downward, basal region broad and attenuate, outer surface beset sparsely with simple
setae, mesal surface with a group of small setae in middle, when scen from behind, for-
ceps arched strongly faterally; hypandrium quite robust, having few setae in middle and. at the lateral angles; acdeagus (Figs. 22i, j) smal] and robust, outer arm small with a
thick spoon end, having two Iateral projections, each projection acutely pointed
and serrated distad; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 22k). Female genital segment (Fig. 22 1) smaller than abdomen, deflexed, sparsely pubescent,
both plates broad at base and gradually narrowed posteriorly, dorsal plate a little longer
than ventral and roundly pointed at apex, anal ring composed of a single row of pores;
ventral plate acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor long and acutely pointed, and strongly
exserted in some examples. Host plant, Bred from galls on leaves of Buchanania langun Spreng. (=B. latifolia Roxb.) Type locality, Chimnapur plantation, East Asir Range, Nimar forest division (M.P.) Types. Described from a small series of specimens bred ev galls. Holotype male;
Allotype female, from the type locality, collected on March 22, 1959 (R.N. Mathur);
Paratypes: 5 males and 5 females, from the same locality and date of collection (R. Ny

  

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE a

 

Fig. 23. Pawropsyita longispiculata, sp. n.—as fifth stage nymph; bs antenna; et part of leg. Mathur), Some nymphal stages were also extracted from the galls collected on Buchanania
lanzan and preserved in alcohol, from Chandni forest, East Asir range, Nimar forest
division, M. P. on February 5, 1956 (No. 332). Some adults consisting ofboth sexes
and not designated as types, from the type locality, collected on March 22, 1959, were
also preserved in alcohol. All this matcrial, together with the types and slides with
mounted parts of adults and nymphal stages, deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Comparison. This species is casily recognised from the other specics of Pauropsylia, in
having characteristic type of antennae, head, shape of wing and venation and genital
structures,

Nymphal stage

Fifth stage. (Fig. 23a) Length 1-44 mm. Of pauropsylline form. Body broadly
oval, head nearly as broad as thorax and abdomen; wing-pads extending prominently
beyond the general margin of the body and broadly rounded at apex. Derm weakly
sclerotic throughout and strongly rugulose having minute points, also beset sparsely
with simple setae of various Iength ; wing-pads strongly armed with minute points,
Abdomen showing traces of segmentation. 92 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Ventral side weakly sclerotic throughout, thickly and strongly beset with minute points,
abdomen having weak traces of segmentation, Derm bearing small, simple, scattered
setae. Antennae (Fig. 23b) ventral, about 0-55 mm long, apparently three-segmented,
having few simple setae, two basal segments small, transverse, 3rd segment long, bearing
microscopic points arranged in rows and four sensoria and two thick, separate setae
below apex. Legs (Fig. 23e) quite robust and short, sparsely beset with small, simple
setae and thickly with minute points, femora not attaining the margin of body, smaller
than tibiae, cach leg with a distinct trochanter, and a prominent tibio-tarsal articulation,
each tarsus with a long seta near apex, claws present, pulvillus apparently fish-tail like. Anal opening terminal, like a small round aperture, surrounded by a single row of irre-
gular pores, guarded by two long, latcral setae. Pauropsylla maculata, sp. n.
(Fig. 24)
Length of body, in male, 1:0 mm; in female, 1-5] mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1:75 mm; in female, 2:05 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-55 mm . Width of vertex between eyes, 0-32 mm
Length of antennae, 0-70 mm

Colouration. (Live and dry specimens). General colour shining black dorsally and
pale-yellow or yellowish orange ventrally, thoracic venter partly black and pale-yellow,
prothorax black in male, and pale-brown with blackish tinge in fUmale, genae black in
male, pale-yellow dorsally and ycllowish-black ventrally in female, antennae ycllowish
with two light black and very long apical setae, legs pale-yellow, front tibiae and tarsal
segments darker, male genitalia black dorsad and pale-yellow ventrad, female genitalia
pale-yellow; wings hyaline, with a prominent smoky band along the posterior margin
extendirg from first marginal cell to apex of wing, two black spots near basal border,
veins polu-yellow; basal border of hind wirgs with a smoky patch. Structure. Body smell and robust, Head (Fig. 24a), including eyes, small, nearly as
broad as thorex, strongly declivous, fincly and sparscly pubescent, fincly rvgulose; vertex
slighty broader than long, roundcd forward and downward, posterior mergin slightly
emarginate, a pair of prominent, circular fovezl impressions present, postcrior to centre,
one on either side of median line, median suture visible as a thin line, anterior ocellus
visible in front, post-ocellar region slightly raiscd; genal cones present, about 0-12 mm long,
about half as long as vertex, approximate, broad at base and natrower at apex, slightly
divergent and bluntly rounded at apex, sparscly pubescent, pubescence longer than on
the vertex, genae notched latero-baszlly. Eyes small, somewhat hemispherical. Antennae (Fig. 24b) smell, seven-scgmented, having fuw setae, imbricate, basal two
segments robust, Ist transverse, 2nd sub-quadrate, longer than broad, also longer than
Ist, 3rd segment thinner, about one and one-third times as long as 2nd, 4th about half
as long as 3rd, 5th, 6th and 7th each becoming slightly smaller than other, and also smaller
than 4th, two termingl scgments transverse, apical joint with two long setae, which are

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 93

   

mat 83"0

0.25 mm
Fig. 24. Pauropsylla maculata, sp. n.—at head, front view; bt antenna; e: hind legs di forewing; e: hind

wing; f anal valve of male; g: parameres, mesal surface; ht aedeagus; i sperm pump; jr female
genitalia, lateral view,

almost as long as last five segments combined, 6th segment also bearing a Jong seta but
smaller than the apical setae. Sensoria not clearly discernible. Thorax moderately large and arched, bearing fine and sparse pubescence, finely
rugulose. Prothorax roof-shaped, narrower in middle, broader laterally, narrowly and
convexly rounded, descending, with two foveal impressions on cach side; prescutum
broader than long, about one and a half times as broad as long, broadest beyond middle,
somewhat triangular and gradually sloping anteriorly, angulate both laterally and
‘posteriorly; scutum broad, about twice as broad as Jong, broadest before middle, slightly

OL PSYLLIDAE OF THR INDIAN SURGONTINENT

smaller than prescutum in length, angulate laterally and posteriorly; scutellum broadly
transverse, antcrior margin weakly convex, with prominent antero-latcral angles, posterior
margin weakly invaginated in middle. Legs (Fig. 24c) short and slender, bearing sparse pubescence and thickly beset with
minute points, tibiac longer than femora, each tibia with an apical comb of setac, hind
tibiae without basal spur, and with five tooth-like spines at apex (4 approximate and |
separate), tarsal segments equal in Iength, meracanthus very small, like a knob, tibial
groove of fore and middle legs long. Forewings (Fig. 24d) large, about two and one-third times longer than broad, sub-acute
at apex, anterior margin strongly arched, pterostigma long and hroad, radius about twice
as long as cubital petiole (M-+-Cu), basal vein slightly longor than radius, Rs quite long,
first marginal cell twice longer than second, fork Cu, parallel with the anterior apical
margin, fork M,,, mecting ncar the apex, veins armed with small setac. Hind wings (Fig. 24e) also quite large, membrane thickly and uniformly beset with
minute points, costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked setac. Abdomen smaller in male, and moderately large and robust in female, fincly rugulose,
finely and sparsely pubescent, and also beset with minute points, setae longer on sternites. Genitalia, Male genital segment smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent. Anal
valve (Fig. 24£) slightly longer than parameres, about 0:18 mm long, broad basally,
gradually narrowed and truncate at apex, outer surface thickly beset with minute points
and sparsely with small setae borne on minute papillae, front margin almost straight;
paramercs (Fig. 24g) weakly curved, about 0:16 mm long, inverted club-shaped, broad
basally and narrow apically, terminating towards inside into two dark acute points, just
below these points two or three stout setae present, pointing downward, outer surface
bearing small, simple setae, mesal surface beset with small, thick setae direcled inward;
outer arm of acdeagus (Fig. 24h) very small, with a thick and robust spoon end; hypan-
drium simple, of usual shape and beset with minute points arranged in small lines; sperm
pump small and as figured (Fig. 24i). Female genital seginent (Fig. 24j) very short, sparsely pubescent, both plates sub-equal
in length, and armed with rows of minute points; dorsal plate longer than ventral, broad
basally and sub-acute at apex, anal porc-ring large and composed of a double ring of
pores, guarded by small, simple setac; ventral plate broad basally and acute at apex,
apices of both plates armed with a brush of minute setae; ovipositor partly exserted and
acutely pointed. Host plant. Feeding on new flush of leaves of Mangifera indica Linn,

Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Holotype male; Allotype female, from the type locality, April 8, 1937
(R.N. Mathur) ; Paratypes: 19 males and 16 females, collected from the type locality
on April 8, 1937; 6 males and 10 females, also from the type locality and collected on
March 27, 1936 (R. N. Mathur); 2 malesand 11 females, collected from the type locality
on April 22, 1936 (R. N. Mathur); 1 male from the type locality and collected on March
19, 1932 (R. N. Mathur). Specimens not designated as paratypes are: 1 male and 3
females, collected on March 26, 1 female collected on March 28, and | male collected on’

 
  

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 5

April 16, 1963, New forest, Dehra Dun (R. N. Mathur); 7 males and 3 females, March
20, 2 females of April 16 and 1 male and 1 female of May 15, 1963, all collected from
Dehra Dun (R. N. Mathur). Additional material consists of 23 examples of 10.448
and 2 examples of 9.4.67. from Dehra Dun: 5 examples of }, 11 examples of 20.450
and 14 examples of 2.4.60. collected from New Forest (R. N. Mathur), all collected on
AMangifera indica, One male and one female of 28-3-63, collected from New Forest,
Dehra Dun, on young leaves of Mangifera indica (R. N. Mathur) are donated to the LA.R.L.,
New Delhi. Some specimens were preserved in alcohol, and various parts of both sexes
were dissected and mounted on slices. All types. preverved material (in 2 phials) and
slides. are deposited at F.R,L, Dehra Dun,

Compaison. This new species has been described fiom a long serics of both sexes, and. is differentiated from the other species by the shape of wings, and a prominent brown. maculated band along the posterior border, shape of head and long genal cones, antennae
with two long sctac, and other genital characters. Biological notes. 'Vhis species appears commonly on the young flush of leaves of Afangi-
fera indica, during March-April, at Dehra Dun (U,P.). Nothing is known about its
life-history. “1

 

 

Pauropsylla nigea Crawford 1919
(Fig. 25)

Grawford, D, L. 1919. Philipp. J. Sci. 15(2)+ 148,

Ramaluishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Reo. Indian Mus. 26(6): 622. Laing, F. 1980, Indian Forest Rec. 18(8): 170. Boselli, F. B, 1930. Boll. Lab. Zool, agr. Povtici 241 yp. 23. [Microcernpuylla nigra (Crawf)]
Mathur, R. N, 1935. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2) + 48. Heslop-Harrison, G, 1948, Ann, Mag. nat. Hist. (12), 1: 291 (Microceropsylla nigra},
Miyatake, Y, 1971. Bull. Osaka Mus, Nat, Hit, 25: 51~-5?. Vig, 1 (Ny Ne). Length of body, in male, 1.12 mm; in female, 1.20 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1.10 mm; in female, 1.30 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.50 mm. Width of vertex between cyes, 0.25 mm

Length of antennae, 0.18 mm

Colouration, Redescrihed from both live and dried specimens. General colour shining
lblack, head and thorax black in both sexes, abdomen black dorsad and yellow ventrad
in male, abdomen black both dorsally and ventrally, with connective membrane orange-
yellow in female, genae yellowish-orange apically and ventrally, thoracic venter partly
black and orange, antennae yellowish with two long black setac, legs yellowish except
hind femora which are black basally, genitalia black in both sexes, wings hyaline. Structure, Body small in male and robust in female. Head, including cycs (Figs. 25a,b) as broad as thorax, strongly declivous, with a few fine hairs in middle, on cither
side of median line, about twice as broad as Jong along the median suture, roundly convex
on both sides of median line, leaving a deep sulcus on either side along the cyes (Fig. O16, PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 25. Pauropsylla nigra Crawford—a: head, front view; bt head, dorsal view; et antenna; di hind
leg; e: forewing; ft apical portion of forewing; gt hind wing; hhr male genitalia; i anal valve,
upper surface; jr forceps; x: sperm pump; 1 female genitalia, lateral view; mt dorsal plate;
mz ventral plate. 25b), posterior margin strongly arcuate, post-ocellar region slightly elevated, anterior
ocellus visible from front; genae very small, about 0.10 mm long, below the antennal
sockets, bearing few hairs. Eyes small, Antennal sockets large. Antennae (Fig. 25c) small, six-segmented, imbricate, Ist segment subquadrate, 2nd
segment robust, slightly longer than wide, longer than Ist, 3rd segment subtriangular,
broader at apex, smaller and less broader than second, 4th segment smallest, transverse,
twice as broad as long, 5th broad and subquadrate, having an imperfect segmentation
in middle, with three small setae, terminal segment smallest, transverse, nearly as large
as 4th segment, having two long, slender setae at apex, much longer than the antenna
itself,

Thorax short and strongly arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Prothorax convexly rounded, descending, narrower in middle, broader laterally, with

BAMILY PSYLLIDAK 9

two foveal impressions on each side; prescutum small, broader than jong, about one
and ahalf times as broad as long, broadest beyond middle, gradually narrowed anteriorly,
angulatc laterally, posterior margin also angulate ; scutum large, about three times broader
than long, smaller in length than prescutum, broadest before middle, angulate laterally,
posterior margin roundly concave; scutellum very small, transverse, almost rectangular. Legs (Fig. 25d) small and slender, with sparse pubescence and also beset with minute
setae, libiae longer than femora, hind tibiae without basal spur and with five black tooth-
like spines at apex, four approximate and onc separate, basal tarsal segments slightly
longer than apical, meracanthus very small, slender and almost tubular. Forewings (Fig. 25e) hyaline, transparent, veins prominent, slightly more than one
and a half times as long as broad, broadly rounded and somewhat squarish at apex,
pterostigma long and broad, radius about twice as long as cubital petiole, cubitus longer
than radius, basal vein about as long as cubital petiole, Rs weakly flexed near about
middle, first marginal cell about two and a half times longer than second; in one example
(Fig. 25£), the stem M,, , is branched. Hind wings (Fig, 25g) besct sparsely with minute
points, costal margin armed with simple and hooked setae. Abdomen smaller in male, large and robust in female, sparsely pubescent and thickly
beset with minute points,

Genitalia. Malegenital segment (Fig. 25h) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent;
anal valve (Fig, 25i) about 0.15 mm long and slightly smaller than forceps, broader
at base and gradually narrowed and truncate at apex, antcrior margin straight to weakly
convex in lateral aspect, outer surface sparscly besct with simple setae and thickly with
minute points; parameres (Fig. 25j) about 0.17 mm long, strongly curved, almost
uniformly thick except at base and apex, outer surface beset with few simple setae,
apical portion somewhat thick and globular, bearing thick setae and terminating in a
smell point towards inner side, basal region also thicker; hypandrium simple, of usual
shape, sparsely beset with simple setae; outer arm of aedeagus (Fig, 25h) small and
robust. Sperm pump as figured (Fig, 25k). Female genital segment (Fig. 251) very short, bent downward, sparsely beset with setae
and minute points arranged in linear series, both plates (Figs. 25m,n) subequal in length
and invaginated at apices; dorsal plate (Fig, 25m) largeand longer than ventral ; circum-
anal pore ring composed of a double ring of pores and guarded by minute setae; ovipositor
sheath weakly serrated and acutely pointed at apex (Fig. 25 1). Host plant. On new leaves of Mangifera indica Linn,

Distribution. Previously recorded from Pusa, Bihar (1 female found in the laboratory)
(Crawford, 1919); Malacca, ex galls on leaves of Mangifera indica (Laing, 1930); Dehra
Dun (U.P. ); Philippines (Palawan) (Miyatake, 1971). Material examined. Its new record is from Dehra Dun (U.P.) and is abundantly found
at the appearance of new leaves of Mangifera indica. A long series (over 100 specimens)
of both males and females collected on March 27, 1936, from New Forest, Dehra Dun,
U.P. (R.N. Mathur) ; 2 females collected on April 8, 1937, from the same locality (R.N. Mathur). A good series of males and females collected during 1942, 1962 and 1966
were also preserved in alcohol (in 3 phials), In addition to these, there are 22 examples

7

 

08 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

of March 19, 18 ex. of March 20, 13 ex. of March 25, Gex. of March 26, 12 ex. of March
98, and 6 ex. of March 31, 1960; and 1 ex, of April 16 and 1 ex. of April 26, 1963;
all collected from New Forest Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur). Four specimens of 27-3+1936 and collected from New Forest, on Mangifera indica (R.N. Mathur) (Expt. No. 603) are donated to LA.R.I., New Delhi. Comparison. ‘This species was described by Grawford (1919) from one female, and
it has been redescribed from a very long series of loth sexes. It is characterised by its
black colour, by the presence of a pterostigma, having two very long setac at tip of anten-
nac, vertex with a clistinct median suture, and genital features. Its identification has
been confirmed by Dr (Miss) Russell of Washington Muscum. She writes: “We have
no authentic specimens for comparison”. Biological notes. Nothing is known about its life-history, except that the adults appear
in great abundance during February and March, when the new flush of leaves of Mangifera
indica appears at Dehra Dun. The adults are very active and feed on sap from the new
young leaves,

Pauropsylla purpurescens, sp. n.
(Figs. 26, 27)

Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2)3 48-50 (Biology). Beeson, C.F, C. 1941. Forest Insects, p. 778 (Biological notes). Length of body, in male, 1.28 mm; in female, 1.56 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2.25 mm; in female, 2.50 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.63 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0.30 mm

Length of antennae, 0.85 mm. Colouration. General colour in dried specimens shining purplish-brown (with bluish
tinge in live specimens), head purplish-brown, antennae two-thirds distally light black,
basal one-third pale-yellow. legs pale clay yellow, femora of hind legs partly black, apical
tarsal segment of all legs black, mesepisternum and mesosternum purplish-brown in both
sexes, abdomen purplish-brown dorsad and pale clay yellow with purplish tinge (bluish
green in live specimens) ventrad, except third sternite which is also purplish-brown,
basal portion of the anal and subgenital valves fuscous, and the apical portion of the former
pale-yellow, wings hyaline, nerves pale-yellow. General colour in female light brown in dried specimens (with bluish tinge in live
specimens), shining, thorax with dark brown longitudinal bands, hind femora pale-
yellow, abdomen yellowish-brown with blackish tinge (bluish-green in live specimens),
genitalia light brown distally,

Structure. Head (Fig. 26a) including eyes, slightly broader than thorax, sparsely
pubescent, moderately deflexed; vertex slightly broader than long, finely rugulose, flatly
depressed in front of posterior margin and then strongly rounded down in front, covering
frons, enclosing anterior ocellus, so that the latter appears to be on vertex, a pair of

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 99

 

Fig. 26. Pauropsylla purpurescens, sp. n.—a head, front view; bt antenna; et parts of hind leg; d: forewings
e: hind wing; f: male genitalia, lateral view; g: anal valve and aedeagus, mesal surface; hr
parameres, anterior view; is female genitalia, lateral view. small foveae present near the posterior border which is margined and moderately emargi-
nate, median suture not present, anterior ocellus large and visible from above, and located
above the level of antennal sockets, post-ocellar region swollen bearing large acelli; frons
scarcely visible; genae weakly swollen below antennal sockets and beset with small setae. Antennae (Fig. 26b) short, ten-segmentcd, a little shorter than one and a half times
the width of head including the eyes, bearing few setae, imbricate, two basal segments
robust, Ist narrowly transverse, 2nd subquadrate and slightly longer than Ist, 3rd segment
longest, 4th a little longer than half the length of 3rd segment, 5th and 8th segments
equal, each one-third as Jong as 3rd segment, 6th slightly longer than Sth, 7th slightly
smaller than 5th, 9th joint small with a small seta at apex, 10th slightly longer than 9th,
terminal setae on apical joint unequal and moderately long, sensoria present on 4,6, 8
and 9 segments. Thorax moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Prothorax
much deflexed below prescutum and completely concealed behind head, vertical and
convexly rounded, narrower in middle and broader laterally, with foveal impressions
on cach side; prescutum broader than long, broadest before middle, slightly shorter

100 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

than scutum, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutum much broader than pre-
scutum, about twice as broad as long, broadest before middle, angulate laterally ; scutellum
transverse, broader than long, somewhat hexagonal in shape, broad anteriorly, anterior
margin straight, with prominent antero-latcral angles. Legs (Fig. 26c) moderately long, sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute points,
tibiae longer than femora, hind femur armed with three dorsal, subapical, blunt sctae,
hind tibiac with weak spurs at base and with three black tooth-like spines at apex, tarsal
segments almost of equal length; meracanthus small, slender and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 26d) hyaline, transparent, broadest and subsquare apically, a little
more than twice as Jong as broad, rounded at apex, basal vein quite long and almost
as long as Ks, Rs flexed upward, cubital petiole (M-++Cuj half as long as radius (R), first
marginal cell longer and broader than sccond, distance between Cu, and’ Mg,, as long
as the distance between M, 4 and M,,. along the posterior margin, veins armed with
microscopic setac. Hind wings (Fig. 26e) slightly smaller than forewings, thickly and uniformly beset
with minute points. costal vein armed with a few simple setae near base and four hooked
sclae. Abdomen slightly longer than broad, sparsely pubescent and thickly beset with minute
points, prominent on sternites. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 26f) smaller than abdomen, pubescent; anal
valve (Fig, 26g) about 0.30 mm long, longer than parameres, in profile, anterior margin
nearly straight, posterior margin with short rounded lobes slightly above base, truncate
at apex, imesal surface armed with groups of stout sctac located submedianally, and
with small, simple sctac near the truncated apex, outer surface thickly beset with minute
points and with small, simple setac in the apical region and on the lateral rounded
Yobes; parameres (forceps) (Fig. 26h) about 0.25 mm long, slightly bowed, broader
at base and narrower at top, terminating in a blunt dark point just below apex, four
strong, thick setae present in each clasper, basal mesal surface beset with long setae,
and the outer surface sparscly beset with small, simple setae; outer arm of aedeagus
(Fig. 26g) short and stout; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely bearing simple
setae and also beset with minute points,

Female genitalia (Fig. 26i) moderately large but shorter than. abdomen, slightly
deflexed downward, pubescent, pubescence longer on dorsal plate, both plates broad
basally and gradually narrowed posteriorly; anal plate longer than ventral, slightly
angulate dorsally, with an anal aperture in a horizontal plane and the distal portion
bent downward, terminating in a rounded apex, anal pore-ring composed of a double
row of pores and guarded by few minute setae; ventral plate thickly beset with minute
points, acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor pointed. Host plant. Bred from pit galls on leaves of Ficus racemosa (==

Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). ‘Types. Described from a long series of specimens. Holotype malc, March 4, 1933;
Allotype female, March 11, 1933, collected at the type locality, from pit galls on
leaves of Ficus racemosa (Expt. No. 432) (R.N, Mathur); Paratypes: 19 male, March

 

 

. glomerata). FAMILY PSYLLIDAL Jol

of)

ao

      

wi

 

Fig, 27. Pauropsylla pu purescens, sp. n.—at fith stage nymph; bt antenna; et leg; dz circum-anal pore ring,

4, 1933; 24 males, March 11, 1933; 5 female, March 4, 1933; 3 females, March 11,
1933; additional male and female paratypes are: 16 examples, March 4,21 examples
March 6, and 3 examples, Mavch 11, 1933. Additional material, not designated as
paratypes, as follows: 32 examples, March 4, 14 examples, March 6, 13 examples, March
11, 2 examples, March 18, 1933, and 1 example, August 8, 1933, at the type locality
(R.N. Mathur); 5 males and 10 females, February 27, 1950, collected at the type locality
(R.N, Mathur), Types, a good number of adults and nymphs collected during 1935,
1950 and 1952 preserved in alcohol (in 3 phials), and some slides having dissected parts
of adults and nymphal stages mounted on them, are deposited at F.R.1., Dehra Dun. Three paratypes of 4-3-1933, collected from New Forest (R.N. Mathur) (Expt. No. 432)
are donated to I.A.R.1., New Delhi. Comparison. This species is distinguishable from other species in the absence of median
suture of head, shape :of head, shape’ of wing and venation and genital characters. Biological notes. Its life-history has been studied by’ Mathur (1935), and brief notes
are also given by Beeson (1941). Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig, 27a) Length 1.5 mm. Form broadly oval but the continuity of margin
interrupted near the eyes and at the base of abdomen; humeral angle of the wing-pads

102 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT. bluntly rounded and reaches up to the posterior end of the small eyes. Dorsum heavily
sclerotic throughout except for the small area at the base of the abdomen. Derm vermi-
culate in appearance in some places and also bears scattered small, simple ring-based
setae. Margin of the body with a continuous series of moderately stout sectaseiae, inter-
spersed at places with small sectasetae, Two rows of sclerotic points facing each other
present at the base of the abdomen, the anterior row is complete and prominent, while
the posterior row is weakly marked. Abdomen shows traces of segmentation and is
beset with faint minute comb-like structures. Ventral side membranous throughout except a small sclerotic area near the inner border
of the humeral angle of wing-pad, weak sclerotic areas round the circum-anal ring and
spiracles. Derm bears simple scattered setae and thickly beset with minute points which
are heavier towards the margin, Antennae (Fig. 27b) 0.21 mm in length, borne on the
ventral side, seven-segmented with four sensoria, 3rd segment broader at base and narrower
at apex, with a faint constriction, 4th also with a faint constriction, 5th segment smallest
and transverse, terminal joint quite long, with a weak constriction and two apical spines,
Legs (Fig. 27c) short and stout bearing few simple setae, femora not reaching to the
margin of the wing-pad, without trochanter, with distinct tibio-tarsal articulation, tarsus
having a single golf-club seta and one simple seta at apex, without claws, pulvillus in
the form of a circular pad. Just below each hind coxa there is a papilla. Anal opening
(Fig. 27d) situated well in front of the apex of the abdomen, surrounded by an outer
ring of slit-like pores and the inner ring with minute, indistinct pores. Circum-anal
pore-ring is swroundcd anteriorly with two pairs of long, curved sctae and four pairs
of smal! simple setae and posteriorly with two pairs of small simple setae. Fourth stage. Length 0.91 mm, General form similar to the fifth but with antennae
five-segmented having three sensoria and tibio-tarsal division absent. Third stage. Length 0.56 mm. Resembles the fourth stage in shape, but with smaller
wing-pads and threc-jointed antennac bearing two sensoria. Second stage, Length 0.40 mm. Similar to the third stage but with two-jointed
antennae having one sensorium; wing-pads smaller but distinct. First stage. Length 0.22 mm, In this ‘stage, legs are longer, each wing-pad is
indicated by the presence of a long sectaseta; marginal sectasetae are very few, long and
slender. Pauropsylla reticulata, sp. n.
Fig. 28)
Length of body, in male, 2,03 mm; in female, 2.32 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2.56 mm; in female, 2.88 mm
‘Width of head with eyes, 0.80 ram
‘Width of vertex between eyes, 0.45 mm
Length of antennae, 1,00 mm

Colouration, General colour dark-brown to fuscous, vertex dark-hrown, distal antennal
segments fuscous, basal segments paler, legs yellowish-brown, femora and tarsal segments

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 103

 

J 0.25 mm. 05mm WF 0.25. mm

Fig. 28. Pauropsylla reticulata, sp. n.—-as front view of head; bt lateral view of head and thorax; et antenna;
dz part of hind leg; et forewing; hind wing; g: male genital segment; hs forcep, mesal
views 4: sperm pump; jt female genital segment; kx: anal valve of male, upper surface. darker, mesopleurae yellowish-brown, beak black apically, lateral sides of scutum orange,
male genitalia dark-brown, forceps paler. ‘Structure. Body large and robust. Head (Figs, 28a, b) slightly broader than thorax,
moderately deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose-reticulate; vertex
broader than long, swollen on either side of median suture, slightly excavated or émargi-
nate anteriorly and around front ocellus, roundly inclined forward vertically, with
two circular foveal impressions near the posterior border, posterior margin moderately
emarginate, frons visible dorsally and located above the level of antennal sockets, bearing
front ocellus, post-ocellar region strongly swollen, having posterior ocelli facing the eyes;

104 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

genac small, situated below the antennal sockets, slightly swollen, sparsely pubescent,
finely rugulose. Antennal sockets large. Eyes Jarge, somewhat hemispherical. Clypeus
large, rather pyriform; beak long, projecting betwcen the legs. Antennae (Fig. 28c) small, ten-segmented, bearing few setae, two basal segments
robust, rugulose, Ist segment narrowly transverse, twice as broad as long, 2nd slightly
broader than long, as long as Ist, remaining segments slender and imbricate, 3rd longest,
4th, 6th, 8th and 9th equal but each about half as long as 3rd, 5th and 7th equal and
slightly smaller than 4th, terminal segment slightly longer than 4th, clavate, bearing
two unequal apical spines, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax (Fig, 28b) large and robust, strongly arched, finely ands parscly pubescent,
finely rugulose-reticulate. Prothorax small and narrow, completely deflexed and
concealed behind the head, convexly rounded, with foveal impressions on each side;
prescutum large, moderately deflexed vertically downward anteriorly, broadest in anterior
half, narrower both anteriorly and posteriorly, nearly as long as broad; scutum also
large but smaller in length than prescutum, about twice as broad as long, broadest before
middle, flat dorsally and gradually sloping laterally, angulate both laterally and pos-
teriorly; scutellum small, vase-shaped, broader than long, broad anteriorly and narrowly
convex posteriorly, mesopleurae large and prominent, produced forward in front. Legs (Fig. 28d) quite long, beset with strong setae and also with minute points arranged
in lines, tibize longer than femora and bearing a comb of setae at apex, hind femur with
three sensoria-like structures on ventral side, with two thick dorsal sctac near apex, hind
tibiae with a series of small basal spurs and four black tooth-like spines at apex (2 on onc
side and 2 on the other), tarsal segments rather equal in length, mcracanthus small and
conical. Forewings (Fig. 28e) large, hyaline, transparent, one and three-fourths times as long
as broad, without pterostigma, broadest subapically, rather square at apex narrow at
base, basal vein (R-+M+Cu) quite long, cubital petiole (M+Cu) very short, about
half as long as radius (R), radius shorter than Rj, fork M,,5 as long as Mgys, distance
between M,,, and Mg,4 almost equal to the distance between forks M3,4 and Cu,
along the posterior margin, marginal cells small, unequal, first marginal cel] longer than
second, radial cell broad near base, veins armed with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 28£) also quite large and broad, about twice as long as broad,
membrane thickly beset with minute points, costal margin armed with a few simple and
hooked setae in the basal half. Abdomen slightly longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent and also thickly
beset with minute points, hairs long and thick on sternites. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig, 28g) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve
(Fig. 28k) slightly longer than parameres, about 0.28 mm long, in profile, anterior margin
rather straight, posterior margin moderately convex, narrower both basally and apically,
truncate at apex, thickly besct with minute points arranged in lines, and also sparsely
with simple setae, these becoming stronger along the posterior margin and borne on
minute tubercles, two pairs of small, thick setae present in basal half; parameres (Fig, 28h)
about 0.25 mm long, sides subparallel, broadest slightly above base, curved inward,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 105

gradually narrowed and rounded apically, with a small, black point directed posteriorly,
mesal surface sinuate, outer surface armed with small, simple setac, mesal surface bearing
sparsely thick scattered setae, marginal setae longer, a row of thick setae pointing down-
ward present just below apex; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, thickly beset with
minute and thick points and also with simple setae borne on minute tubercles; outer
arm of aedeagus quite long but shortcr than basal arm, having a thick spoon end; sperm
pump as figured (Fig, 283). Female genital segment (Fig. 28h) sialler than abdomen; dorsal plate smaller than
ventral, anal region rather horizontal and then the plate strongly inclined downward
caudally, apex roundly pointed, bearing small setac borne on minute tubercles; circum-
anal region swollen anteriorly into a round knob, anal ring composed of a double row of
pores; ventral plate acutely pointed; both plates broad basally and gradually tapering
posteriorly, thickly beset with minute points and also with simple setae, which ave longer
on dorsal plate; ovipositor small, acutely pointed,

Host plant. Recorded ex galls on leaves of Anthocephalus indicus A. Rich,
cadamba Miq.). Type locality, Sylhet, Assam. Types. Holotype male; Allotype female, November 1, 1930, collected from the type
locality, ex galls on unknown plant (M. Bose); Paratypes: 2 males and | female, also
from the type locality and same date of collection, ex galls on unknown plant (M. Bose);
4 males and 8 females, collected from Bagdogra range, Kurscong, WW. Bengal, on July 13,
1935, ex galls on leaves of Anthocephalus indicus (C.F.C. Beeson). Tew examples in
poor condition were dissected and their parts were mounted on slides. These slides and
the types are deposited at the Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun. The records of the Forest Research Institute show that 9 specimens from Sylhet, Assam,
were sent to Mr F, Laing of the British Museum, in February 1931, for study purposes. Comparison. Pauropsylla reticulata, sp.n. is readily recognished by the shape of head,
shape and venation of wings, genital and other characters, as outlined in the
key. Pauropsylla spondiasae Crawford 1915
(Figs, 29, 30)
Crawford, D, L, 1915. Philiyp. J. Sci. 10(4): 260, Pl. [, fig. g. (Peradeniya, Ceylon; ex galls on
- . leaves of Spondias mangiferae). Enderlein, G, 1921, Zool, Anz, 82: 115 (Pelmatobrachia spondiasat). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924, Rec. Indian Mus. 26: 622. Mani, M. 8, 1935. J. Asiat, Soc, Beng. 1(2): 102,
Mani, M.S, 1959. ‘Agra, Unio. J. Res. (Science) 8: 138. Mathur, R, N, 1985, Indian Forest, Rec, 1(2)+ 50. Beeson, C. F.C. 1941. Forest Inseets, p. 778. Length of body, in male, 1.12 mm; in female, 1.52 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1.63 mm; in female, 1.90 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.70 mm

106 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

 

Fig. 29, Panropsylla spondiasee Crawford—at head, front view; bt antenna; e: hind leg; ds forewing;
e: hind wing; ft male genitalia, lateral view; gt anal valve, dorsal surface; hs forcep, caudal
views i forcep, mesal view: kt female genitalia, lateral view. Width of vertex between eyes, 0.45 mm. Length of antennae, 0.42 mm

Colouration, General colour of head and dorsum of thorax dark-brown, with metallic
bluish tinge, venter of thorax light brown, vertex dark dorsally and lighter ventrally,
antennae except apical segments, legs and abdomen yellow or yellowish-brown with
greenish tinge, apical antennal segments light brown; forewings transparent, yellowish;
female genitalia dark-brown. Structure. Body small, Head (Fig, 29a) very short, nearly as broad as thorax, finely
and sparsely pubescent, surface finely rugulose; vertex convex, rounded down in front
uniformly, with two large foveal impressions near the posterior border and located by
the side of posterior ocelli, posterior margin slightly arcuate, median suture absent, pos-
terior ocelli slightly elevated, anterior margin deeply emarginate in middle; frons visible

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 107

in front, not wholly covered by genae, but largely so, with a large anterior ocellus located. dorsally ; genae slightly swollen beneath antennal bases. Eyes large, somewhat triangular. Clypeus visible in front, rather protruding out, somewhat triangular. Antennae (Fig, 29b) small, nine-segmented, imbricate, sparsely pubescent, two basal
segments robust, Ist subsquare, 2nd cylindrical, 3rd longest and slender, 4th a little
more than one-third as long as 3rd, 5th and 7th smallest but equal, 6th a little longer
than 4th, 8th segment large, club-shaped but smaller than 3rd, 9th smaller and broadly
transverse, bearing two long apical spines, which are longer than two terminal segments,
segments 4 and 6 broad apically, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6 and 8. Thorax robust, strongly arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Prothorax partly ascending, partly concealed behind head, with two foveal impressions
on cach lateral side; prescutum large, twice as broad as long, broadest in middle, narrower
both anteriorly and posteriorly; scutum slightly smaller in length, but much broader
than prescutum, about three and a half times as broad as long, angulate laterally;
scutellum broadly transverse, broad anteriorly and narrow posteriorly; mesopleurae
large, prominent and anterior. Legs (Fig. 29) short, pubescent and also beset with minute thick points arranged
in lines, femora shorter than tibiae, all tibiae with a comb of setae at apex, hind tibiae
without basal spur, with four black, thick spines at apex (three on one side and one on
the other), hind femur with two dorsal, thick setae near apex, tarsal segments nearly
of equal length and armed with few thick setae; meracanthus small, subacute at apex. Forewings (Fig. 29d) large and broad, broadest near apex, about one and three-fourths
times as long as broad, broadly rounded at apex, hyaline but with yellowish tinge, with
a long and broad pterostigma, first marginal cell much longer than second, cubital petiole
(M-+Cu) smaller than cubitus, branches M,,4, Cu, and Cu, running somewhat parallel,
similarly branch M, ,, running parallel to radial sector (Rs), radial sector arising slightly
beyond middle of pterostigma, radius smaller than basal vein, veins armed with micros-
copic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 29e) slightly smaller than forewings, membrane beset with minute
points, costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen short and thick, finely and sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute
points arranged in lines. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 29f) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 29g) scarcely as long as forceps, about 0.68 mm long, erect, demarcated into a broad
basal region and a small cylindrical anal region, when seen laterally, anterior margin
nearly straight, posterior margin broadly convex, bearing long slender setae, anal lobe
beset with minute, simple setae; parameres (forceps) about 0.70 mm long (Figs. 29h,i),
broad basally, narrow apically, curved forward tapering to a point, lower half of
posterior margin with a strong, thick spur directed downward, outer surface with
a few scattered setae, mesal surface beset with simple setae, setae in the apical region
rather thick and directed forward; aedeagus with both arms nearly equal in length;
hypandrium with a few thick setae arranged in a line caudally; sperm pump as figured
(Fig. 29). 108 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Female genital segment (Fig. 29k) almost as long as abdomen; dorsal plate very large,
inclined sub-perpendicularly, with a large anal opening dorsad, somewhat swollen pos-
teriorly and abruptly reduced in thickness near the tip and terminating in a short, curved,
acutely pointed spur caudad, the swollen region beset with a tuft ofslender hairs of various
length, spur armed with two pairs of setac on cither side; circum-anal ring composed
of a double row of oval and slit-like poves; ventral plate small, slightly retracted into pre-
ceding abdominal segment, produced into a short slender acute process caudally, curved
upward and ending in a round point, basal region sparsely beset with slender setae,
and the process armed with stout saw-like teeth directed downward and backward; ovi-
positor large, apparently permanently exserted, having minute saw-like tecth, directed
upward and cephalad. Host plant. On Spondias pinnata (Linn. f.) Kurz (=S. mangifera Willd.). Distribution. Previously recorded from Peradeniya, Ceylon (Crawford, 1915). Dehra
Dun (U.P.). Mani (1959) has mentioned throughout Ceylon and South India,

Material examined. Tis new record is from Dehra Dun (U.P.) and both adults and
nymphs were collected in September 1952 (R.N. Mathur); | male and | female of 9.9.52
and 2 males and 2 females of 11.9.52 and a phial containing some adults and nymphal
stages, preserved in alcohol and collected on 22.9.52 from Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur). Comparison. Pauropsylla spondiasoe Crawl. is redescribed from the material collected
from Dehra Dun, and can be readily separated from other species by the presence of
pterostigma, venation and shape of forewings, shape of head, absence of median suture
and genital characters. Biological notes. Thisspecies is commonly found during August and September forming
galls by inrolling the margins of leaves. Its nymphs are pale ycllow with light greenish
tinge and crawl about actively on the leaves. Its nymphal stage is described below. Nymphal stage

Fifth stage. (Fig. 30a) Length J.42 mm. ‘Iypical pauropsylline type, Body broader
than Jong. Wing-pads large and broad, the humerel angle projecting forward beyond
the contour of the body, and also produced cephalad beyond the eyes, and thus the con-
tinuity of margin is interrupted near the cyes and head, and near the base of abdomen. Dorsum strongly sclerotic except for a small area betwcen thorax and abdomen, the
derm presenting a slightly vermiculate appearance. Entire margin of the body beset
with a continuous series of somewhat broad, lanceolate setae, borne on low prominences;,
thick points present in between lanccolate setae. Dorsum also covered with small scattered:
papillae, each papilla bearing a small curved thick seta in centre, Near centre of caudal
margin, marginal setae become ice-chisel shaped. Abdomen at the base narrower
than the wing-pads. Abdomen composed for the most part of a single plate having faint
segmentation lines, with a narrow, medially interrupted plate at the joint between abdo-
men and thorax. Caudal plate also ornamented with minute structures near the median
line. Ventral side with the derm apparently membranous throughout, except for a faintly
chitinized marginal zone, a small area above the circum-anal ring, a small arca about

FAMILY DSYLLIDAY. doe

 

Fig. 30, Peuopsylla spondiasae Crawford—a fifth stage nymph; bt antenna; e: hind leg; ds circum-
anal ving. cach spiracle and faint sub-median lines in the abdomen; deim thickly beset with minute
points and also with minute simple scattered setae. Antennae (Fig. 30b) about 0,32 mm,
apparently six-segmented and armed with a few setac, two basal segments large, 3rd
smallest, transverse, 41h subsquare, longer than 3rd, 5th about twice as long as 3rd,
6th longest, broad basally and narrow apically, bearing two uncqual setae at apex; four
sensoria present on segments 3, 4, 5 and 6, sensorium large on segment 6. Legs (Fig, 30)
very short, beset with simple sctae, without trochanters, with the division between tibia
and tarsus distinct, each tarsal segment with a golf-club seta and a simple seta near apex;
claws present, the pulvillus quite large and pad-like. Anal opening (Fig. 30d) set
well in from the apex of the body, surrounded by an outer ring, consisting of a single
row of slit-like pores and an inner ring consisting of an irregular row of small indistinct
pores; outer ring interrupted medially both anteriorly and posteriorly, and guarded by
three pairs of setae, one anterior, onc lateral and one posterior, the lateral pair of setae
quite long and thick. Pauropsylia stevensi Laing 1930
(Fg. 31)

Laing, I, 1930. Indian Forest Rec, 14(8)+ 37-39, fig. 2,

This species is not represented in the collection studied by me and, therefore, the des-
cription given by Laing (1930) is reproduced below. 110

 

E INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

DB

Fig. 31, Pawropsylla stevensi Laing.—As tegmen; Bt head, front view; Gz saddle-shaped prominence on
meta-pseudonotum; Di female genitalia (After Laing). Colouration. “Antennae pale-yellow, the basal two segments pale-brownish, the apices
of segments 3-7, 8, except for a narrow basal area, and the whole of 9 and 10 deep black ;
head and prothorax pale-brown, the former with a median fovea on each half of the vertex,
the latter with two spots on each lateral area, dark; dorsulum and mesonotum deep casta-
neous brown, the former with a large, dark, biconvex patch, divided down the middle,
on anterior margin; mesonotum with a pale median longitudinal streak; metanotum
dark-brown; all the pleurites of thorax yellowish; tegmen hyaline, the veins pale-brown,
blackish at the forkings, and where cach joins the margin, a rather extensive pale-brownish
area alongside Cu,; abdomen above very dark-brown with a pale greenish-yellow median
longitudinal stripe, below mainly yellowish-green; legs pale yellowish-brown, the second
tarsal segment at least blackish.”

Structure. “Antennae with a little more than twice the length of head (including eyes) ;
head with posterior margin deeply arcuate; each half of vertex subquadrate, with a deep
fovea in the middle and towards posterior margin, whilst the area lying behind a line
from the median to the lateral ocellus slightly elevated ; thorax slightly arched; dorsal
surface of whole thorax finely but irregularly striated; meta-pseudonotum with a saddle-
shaped prominence; length of tegmen just over twice the breadth; front tibia with a
close fringe of setose hairs forming a half whor] on the inner side; apex of hind tibia with
a similar comb, but forming a three-quarter whorl; first tarsal segment of the hind leg

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE qt

with two apical black spines; 2 genitalia rather short, the upper valve projecting slightly
over the ventral. Length 4mm; length of tegmen 4 mm,”
Distribution. “Darjeeling; Gopaldhara, 4. 500 feet (H. Stevens).”

Pauropsylla tuberculata Crawford 1912
(Fig, 32)

Leftoy, H. M. 1909, Indian Insect Life, p. 742, pl. lax. Crawford, D, L, 1912. Rec. Indian Mus, 7: 490-431, pl. xxiv. figs. 1, J, Li pl. xxxv, fig. B, (Pasa,
Bihar; on * pumpkin” and Alstonia scholaris)..

Crawford, DL. 1919. Philipp J. Sci. 15: 146-147,

Enderlein, G, 1921. Zool, Anz. 52: 116 (Prendophacopleron tuberculata). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V, 1924. Rec, Indian Mus. 26: 622. Rahman, Khan A. 1932, Indian J. agric, Sci, 2: 361-365, pl. xxxvi. (Nyrmphal stages). Mani, M.S, 1935. J. slsiat. Soc. Beng. 1(2)+ 100-101. Mani, M. 8. 1959. Agra, Univ. J. Res. (Science) 8(2)1 208-209 (on leaf and fruit of Alstonia
scholaris, Indias W. Bengal). Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2)+ 51. Beeson, C.F, G. 1941. Fovest Insects, p. 778. Saksena, R.D. 1944. J. R. Asiat. Soc. Beng. 10: 123-124 (gall.) Heslop-Harrison, G, 1959. Ann. Mag. nat, Hist, (13), 2(15): 161,

Klimaszewski, S, M. 1964, Annl, Zool,, 22(5): 111, fig. 38 (Nymph of Pseudophacopteron tuberculatum). Length of body, in male, 1.20 mm; in female, 1.80 min
Length of forewings, in male, 1.40 mm; in female, 2.10 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.68 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0.38 mm

Length of antennae, 0.60 mm

Colouralion, General colour in dark forms, red to dark reddish-brown, vertex orange
posteriorly and dark reddish-brown anteriorly, dorsulum posteriorly orange-yellow, con-
nexivum of abdomen white; while in light forms, shades lighter; antennae black at tip;
wings hyaline, transparent, with black basal margin; legs lighter in colour, hind femora
brownish dorsally and darker than others, with tarsal segments also slightly darker. ‘Structure. Body small but robust. Head (Fig. 32a) short, as broad as thorax, deflexed,
finely and sparsely pubescent, vertex about one and a half times as broad as long, rounded
down and forward, surface rather plane, posterior margin angulately emarginate, post-
ocellar region not prominently elevated, post ocelli rather remote from eyes, anterior
ocellus visible from above, near to clypeus, median suture absent; facial cones entirely
wanting. Eyes large, recessive, somewhat triangular in shape. Clypeus large, some-
what oval, visible from front. Antennae (Fig. 32b) attached somewhat in level with anterior ocellus, nearly as long
as width of head, terminal setae very long and about half the length of antennae, ten-
segmented, bearing few setac, two basal segments robust, remaining segments slender,
imbricate, narrower basally and broader apically, 3rd segment longest, 4th, 6th and 8th. equal to one another but cach a little shorter than 3rd, 5th slightly smaller than 4th,

We PSYLLIDAR OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

    

a
0.25 mur

0.5 mm 0.5 mm

 

Fig. 82. Pauropsylla tuborculata Crawlord—a: head, front view; bt antenna; e: scutellum; d: forewing; et
hind wing; f hind leg: gs apical portion of middle tibia; hi anal valve of male; 4, §: parameres;
jt apical portion of forceps, highly magnified; kx acdeagus: It sperm pump; mnt posterior
portion of abdomen and genitalia of female, lateral view. 7th slightly smaller than 5th, 9th about half as long as 8th, terminal segment slightly
smaller than 9th, bearing two unequal apical setae, the two apical segments com-
pressed. Thorax robust, sttongly arched, finely rugulose, finely and sparsely pubescent,
Pronotum short, ascending, narrower in middle, broader laterally, each side with two
foveal impressions ; propleurites mostly concealed by eyes and occiput; prescutum arched,
broadest in middle, about one and a half times as broad as long, narrower both anteriorly
and posteriorly, angulate laterally, posterior margin angulate submcedianally; scutum
broadest in centre and about two and a half times as broad as long, slightly smaller in
length than prescutum, angulate laterally; mesopleurae large and anterior; scutellum

  

PAMILY PSYLLIDAB, Ms

(Fig. 32c) somewhat pentangular, with a sirong dorsal meclian epiphysis, having a black
acute point; post-scutellum of meta-thorax narrowly transverse. Legs (Fig. 32f) typical, pubescent, also armed with thick points arranged in linear
series, fore and middle legs comparatively smaller than hind legs, femora shorter than
tibiae, hind coxae thick and long, hind femora constricted in middle, all tibiae with apical
comb of setae, apical half of fore and middle iactib (Fig. 32g) armed with a group of
thick setae, hind tibiae beset with two rows of thick setae arranged longitudinally, and
a group of about nine apical setac, tarsal segments almost equal in length, meracanthus
small and slender. Forewings (Fig. 32d) rather small, broadest and rather square at apex, hyaline and
transparent, a little less than twice as long as broad, attenuate at base. radius quite long,
Rs angulate midway and touching arch of M,,,, cubital petiole shorter than radius,
first marginal cell very small, triangular, second cell large and rectangular; veins beset
with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig.32e) slightly shorter than forewings, costal
margin beset with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen robust, sparsely pubescent, third and fourth tergites produced upward into
two prominent humps (Fig. 32m). Genitalia, Male genital segment small. Anal valve (Fig, 32h) about 0.15 mm long,
longer than forceps, pear-shaped in anterior view, bearing sparsely thick setae borne
on small tubercles, and also armed with thick points, both anterior and posterior margins
slightly convex in profile, truncate at tip; parameres (Figs, 32i, j) about 0.12 mm long,
bowed, broad in middle, gradually narrowed apically and terminating in thick points,
outer surface armed with thick setae in the apical region, mesa! margins also beset with
thick setac, just below the apical point 2 or 3 strong and thick setae present, pointing
downward; hypandrium of usual shape, sparsely bearing thick sctae borne on minute
tubercles, and also armed with thick points; acdeagus (Fig, 32kx) small, outer arm with
a thick oval-shaped spoon end; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 32 2). Female genital segment (Fig. 32m) short, stout, pubescent with long hairs, plates
unequal, dorsal plate longer than ventral, broad at base, strongly sloping caudad,
narrowly rounded at apex; ventral plate broader at base, acute at tip. Host plants. On pumpkin and Alstonia scholaris (leaf galls).

" Distribution. Previously recorded from Pusa, Bihar (Crawford, 1912); Mani (1959)
has mentioned W. Bengal, Bombay, Tamil Nadu; probably throughout India; Burma,
Siam, Malaya, Java and Philippines. Specimens examined. Bihar: Pusa, 20.3.1919, (Dwarka Parshad) 2 females (one
specimen without head and partly in a damaged condition) at the National Collection
of the Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun. A smail series is present at the Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, as follows: Pusa, Bihar, | ex. of 12.12.10
(T.B.F. ); 6 ex. of April, 1911 (C.S.M. ); on A. scholaris, 1 ex, ‘of 124.12, (D.RS. );
3 males of 11,3.16 (T,Ram), on Alstonia leaves, 8 ex. of 20.3.19 (Dwarka Parshad). All these specimens are in very poor condition, with parts missing,

In July 1967, some galls on Alstonia scholaris were also received from Pusa, Bihar (K.
G. Phadke). 8

il4 BSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

    

  

h 0.25 mm. Y 0.25 mar

 

hind leg; d:
anal valve of male, upper surface; g, ht parameres; i, jz acceagns,
3 sperm pump; I: female genitalia, lateral view, -

Fig. 33. Pauropsylla verrucosa, sp. n.—at head and prothorax, dorsal view: br antenna;
forewing; e: hind wing;
lateral and dorsal views;

 

 
 

Comparison. This species is redescribed with some more details and figures. It is
easily recognised by its very small first marginal cell, fork M,,» angulately arched and
touching radial sector, shape of head, antenna with two long setae, humped abdomen
and genital characters. Enderlein (1921) included this species under the genus Pseudo-
phacopteron. Heslop-Harrison (1959) writes: “It is undoubtedly closely related, if not
cogeneric with Phacosema zimmermani Aulm., and both of these forms suggest some
affinity for the Brazilian Epicarsa corniculata Crawl......cessse-eee+) and forms of the tuber=
culata and zimmermani type (there are several new ones awailing description), are to be

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE Wid

referred, together with Phacopteron Buckton, to the tribe Phacopteronini.” However,
the characters resemble closely with Pauropsylia and, therefore, this species is retained
under the genus Pauropsylla at present. Biological notes. Brief description of the gall is given by Mathur (1935), and the
nymphal stages are described by Rahman (1932), Mani (1935, 1959) has briefly given
notes about its gall and distribution; while Saksena (1944) has descriloed the anatomical
structures of the gall. Pauropsylla verrucosa, sp, n.
(Figs. 33, 34)
Length of body, in male, 2.12 mm; in female, 2.32 mm
Length of forewings, in male 2.0 mm; in female, 1.19 mm
Width of head with eycs, 0.93 mm. Width of vertex between eyes, 0.51 mm
Length of antennae, 0.40 mm

Colouration, General colour dark-brown or fuscous, speckled with scattered darker
spots on head, dorsum of thorax and abdomen; fore to hind pairs of legs progressively
dark-brown with blackish tinge; antennae with two basal segments, 4th, 6th and 8th
to 10th segments fuscous, remaining segments paler; clypeus dark-brown, beak of lighter
colour; females of lighter colour, with abdomen and genitalia yellowish-brown; wings
dull, having dark-brown bands on veins and maculae along the posterior margin. Structure. Body smal] but robust. Head (Fig. 33a) quite large, slightly broader than
thorax, moderately declivous; vertex large, two and a half times as broad as long, finely
pubescent with white hairs, surface reticulate and weakly verrucose, disc strongly and
rather irregularly excavated, with deep circular foveae near posterior margin and on
either side of median suture, a broad linear depression extending forward from each
fovea but not reaching the anterior margin, lateral margin elevated, posterior margin
strongly arcuate, post-occllar region slightly clevated, median suture invaginated, roundly
bent forward and somewhat vertical anteriorly, anterior margin deeply and roundly
invaginated near point of excision, anterior ocellus visible in front, not visible from above ;
frons visible in front asa small sclerite; genae small, weakly swollen beneath antennae. Clypeus large, somewhat circular, bearing long hairs; beak quite long and slender. Eyes
large, recessive, sub-triangular. Antennae (Fig. 33b) short, shorter than the width of vertex between eycs, apparently
ten-segmented, imbricate, two basal segments robust and thick, Ist transverse, 2nd sub-
square, 3rd and 4th nearly equal, 4th broader apically, 5th and 7th smallest but equal,
6th slightly smaller than 4th, 8th, 9th and 10th jointly appearing like a club, apical
segment with two very long terminal setae, slightly more than halfas long as the antenna
itself, two or more long setae present on segments 2, 3, 6, 8 and 9, four sensoria present
on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax strongly arched, robust, broad, surface reticulate and prominently verrucose,
sparscly pubescent with white hairs, Pronotum (Fig. 33a) roof-shaped, quite broad, verti-

116 PSYLLIDAF OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTIN! cally bent downwards anteriorly with three prominent ridges, one median and two sub-
median, surface shallowly excavated near posterior border and between submedian ridges,
with deep foveal impressions on lateral sides, pleurites concealed by recessive eyes; pres-
cutum large, longitudinally and medianally invaginated or channelled, beoadest before
middle, slightly more than one and a half times as broad as long, narrowly rounded
cephalad, angulate both laterally and posteriorly, with a prominent median tubercle
near posterior border; scutum large end broad, nearly as long gs prescutum, promi-
nently ridged sub medianally, leaving » broad channel in centre; scutellum about
twice as broad as long, somewhat rectangular in shape, with a fuscous median line,
angulate at antero-latcral angles; post-scutcllum narrowly transverst

Legs (Fig. 33e) quite long, pubescent; femora shorter than tibiac, bearing minute
points, all trochanters and femora having long ventral setac, all tibiae with a comb of
setae at apex, hind tibiae without basal spur, with a longitudinal row of thick setac and
with three black tooth-like spines at apex, hind coxae thick and long; meracanthus
comparatively small, subtriangular and beset with minute points. Forewings (Fig. 33d) large, rhomboidal, rather square at apex, a litle more than half
as broad as Jong, broadest subapically; pterostigma long and narrow, Rs with a loop,
R about three times as long as cubital petiole (M-+-Ciu), Cut slightly more than twice as
long as cubital petiole, basal vein (R-+-M+ Cu) nearly as long as R, all veins covered with
dark-brown, somewhat rectangular spots, maculae present near apical margin, in radial,
first and second marginal, median and near posterior margin of cubital cells, first marginal
cell about thrice as long as second, all veins setigerous, Hind wings (Fig. 33e) quite
large, thickly beset with minute points, costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked
setac. Abdomen short and thick, nearly as long as broad, finely and sparsely pubescent,both. tergites and sternites thickly beset with minute points arranged in linear series, first four
visible tergites conspicuously humped medianally,

Genitalia. Male genital segment smaller than abdomen; anal valve (Fig. 33f) large,
robust, about 0-48 mm long, much, longer than parameres, having a broad basal area
and a small, tube-like anal area when scen laterally, the basal arca quite broad at base,
convergent distad, with two small, subapical lobes on posterior border, apical half armed
with long setac, setac along the posterior border smaller and slender, in lateral aspect,
anterior margin of basal area concave in the apical half, anal tube wrinkled, bearing an
oblique aperture facing cephalad; parameres (forceps) (Figs. 33g, h) very small, about
0-20 mm long, strongly built, bilobate, inner lobe slender and longer than outer, outer
lobe shorter and thicker, outer surface of both the lobes beset with small setae, mesal
surface gouge-shaped, with the inner lobe bearing thick sctae directed slightly downward;
aedeagus (Figs. 33i,j) robust, peculiarly shaped when seen laterally, the spoon end
appearing like a modified halbert (pole-axe) and in dorsal view this end is divided
into two broad flaps; hypandrium quite large, pubescent: sperm pump 4s figured
(Fig. 33k). Female genital segment (Fig. 33 1) smaller than abdomen, finely and sparsely pubescent;
dorsal plate slightly longer than ventral, with a moderately steep slope, subacute at apex;

 

 

 

 
    

  

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 7

 

  

Fig. 34, Pauropsylla waniucosa, sp. 1.
pore ring. ventral plate narrowly rounded at apex with a median invagination; ovipositor long and
acutely pointed; anal aperture surrounded by a double ring of pores. Host plant. Bred ex galls on leaves of Semecarpus anacardium Linn, f.

Type locality, Tittimatti, Coorg (Karnataka). Types. Holotype male; Allotype female, from the type locality, January 18,
1942 (R. N. Mathur); Paratypes: | male and | female, also from the type locality
and same date of collection (R, N. Mathur). Numerous nymphal stages and few adults
were also preserved in ‘alcohol, January 18, 1942 (R. N. Mathur). All types and the
preserved material deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Comparison, Pauropsylla verrucosa, sp. n. is characterised by its verrucose body, shape
of wings and bearing dark-brown bands on veins and maculae along the posterior magin,
shape of head, anterinae, and peculiar genital structures. Riological notes. The galls of this species are pea green in colour, single-celled, flat on
the dorsal surface and swollen ventrally, with a conical point and clothed with fine hairs. Each gall may harbour one or more (maximum three) nymphs inside, and dehisces from
the ventral side. Mature nymphs crawl out from the gall and shed their last skin,
Nymphs are of biscuit colour, with abdomen orange and eyes pinkish red. The adults”

118 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

on emergence are sluggish, and on maturity they become very active. The structure of
the adult nymph is described below. Nymphal stage

Fifth stage. Length 1-87 mm. Form pauropsylline (Fig. 34a), broadly oval; head
nearly as broad as thorax and abdomen; wing-pads projecting beyond the contour of
the body and broadly rounded at apex. Derm weakly sclerotic throughout, weakly
rugulose and thickly besct with minute points arranged in small groups which are clustered
together in the middle region. Dorsum bearing simple setae of various length, setae
smaller on wing-pads. Prothorax prominently differentiated from head and mesothorax. Abdominal segments demarcated by the presence and arrangement of simple setae,

Ventral surface also weakly sclerotic. Derm beset with simple setae and minute points,
Antennae (Fig. 34b) ventral, 0-52 mm long, thick, apparently three-segmented, sparsely
beset with simple setae, two basal segments small, transverse, 3rd longest, showing traces
of segmentation, bearing four sensoria and with two thick setae below apex. Legs (Fig. 34c) quite robust, short and thick, beset with simple setae and also with minute points;
with a distinct trochanter ; femora not reaching the margin of the body, smaller than tibiae,
tibio-tarsal articulation distinct; each tarsus with a long seta near apex; claws quite long
and strongly curved, pulvillus like a pad. Anal opening terminal, like a minute tube,
surrounded by an irregular and broken ring of pores (Fig. 34d). Genus PHACOPTERON Buckton 1894
Phacopteron
Buckton, G, B. 1894, Indian Mus. Notes 3(5)+ 18-19. Crawford, D. L, 1912. Ree, Indian Mus, 7(5) 1 419-420,
Aulmann, G. 1913, Psyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 80. Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec, Indian Mus. 26: 622. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1958, Ann, Mag. nat. Hist, (18), 1: 561-579. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1959, ibid. (13), 2 (15): 157-168,
Heslop-Harrison, G, 1960. ibid. (13), 3 (32): 497.504. Phacosema:

Kieffer, J. J. 1906. 2. Wiss. Insekt. Biol. 2: 387. Type species Phacopteron lentiginosum Buckton, 1894,
(original designation). ‘The distinctive features characterised by Buckton (1894) and Crawford (1912) are
expanded with my notes as below. :

Insect large, robust. Body strongly arched. Head small, more or less retracted under
pronotum, narrower than thorax, but almost as broad as prothorax; vertex transversely
rather flat, but rounded down forward, somewhat cleft in front, due to protruding antennal
sockets; post-ocellar region strongly elevated and posterior margin deeply emarginate in
between; anterior ocellus visible from above. Facial cones rather short, divergent,
separate at base, porrect, and subacute at apices. Eyes large, hemispherical. Antennae
Jong and slender, almost as long as head and thorax. Thorax large and broad, strongly

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 119

arched. Prothorax long, almost vertical, narrowly convex, with a median epiphysis. Propleurites at base moderately large, suture between them and pronotum not distinct. Mesopleuron large. Legs long, femora large; hind coxae very large, elongate, contiguous
along inner margin with spur short. Hind tibiae without basal spur and apical tooth-
like spines; hind basal tarsi with two small claw-like spines at apex. Forewings large,
more or less hyaline, somewhat rhomboidal in outline; radial scctor and fourth furcal
connected by a short cross vein or coalesced together, making a third marginal cell,
sub-acute at apex, cubital petiole more than halfas long as basal vein, second marginal
cell quadangular, broadest at margin. Crawford (1912) writes: “ This genus is unmistakably related to Packypylla in nearly
all its characters except the venation, in which it is lar to Giriacremum. Becaus2 of this
similarity it has hitherto been grouped with the latter genus, but this relation is only in
the wing venation, whereas all the rest of the anatomical characters, even the shape of
the wing, point to its affinity with Pachypsylla. By some unaccountable error Enderlein,
in his paper on the Pspllidae of Kilimandjaro, separated this genus from Kieffer’s Phacosema
by the absence of the cubital petiole. Buckton’s original description and accompanying
figure clearly show that this is not true. As a matter of fact, these two species, Phacopteron
lentiginosum Buckt., and Phacosema gallicola Kieffer are undoubtedly not only congeneric but
also very closcly related specifically. Until I have further evidence, however, than
Kieffer’s description, I will not merge the two genera.” Laing (1930) has however
definitely mentioned that, “ There is no doubt of Phacosema Kieff., being a synonym of
Phacopteron Buckt.”” Heslop-Harrison (1958, 1959, 1960) has also treated Phacosema
Kieffer as synonym of Phacopteron Buckton,

This genus is represented by a single species, P. lentiginosum from India. Phacopteron lentiginosum Buckton 1894
(Fig. 35) (Plate 3, £)
Buckton, C, B, 1894. Indian Mus. Notes 3(5): 18-19,
Stebbing, E. P. 1899. Iujurious Insects of Indian Forests, pp. 25-26. Kieffer, J. J. 1906. 2. wiss, Insekt. Biol. 21 387-390. figs, 1-5. Lefroy, H. M. 1909. Indian Insect Lift, p. 743,
Crawford, D.L. 1912. Ree, Indian Mus. 7: 420-421, pl, xxcxili, figs. A, B, TF; pl. xxv, fig. A (Dehra
Dun, W. Himalayas; Poona, W. India). Crawford, D. L. 1919. Philipp. 7. Sci, 18: 154-55 (Coorg). Aulmann, G. 1913. Pyyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 80. Ramakrishna Ayyar, T.V. 1919. Rept, Proc, Third Ent, Mett, Puso, p. 1080-1031 (Bred from galls on,
leaves of Garuga pinnala, North Malabar). :
Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus, 26: 622. Laing, F, 1930. Indian Forest, Reo, 16: 99 (Bred from galls on Garuga pinnata and Schleickera trijuge,
Dehra Dun; Tonkin, Hoabinb),
Mani, M. S, 1935. J. Asiat, Soc. Beng, 1(2): 102 (Biology). Mani, M.S. 1959, Agra Univ, J. Res. (Science), 8(2): 121. Mathur, R.N. 1935, Indian Forest Rec. 1(2)1 51-52 (Biology). Mathur, R, N. 1949. Indian 7. Ent, 8(2): 227-229, fig. 3 (1946), (Nymphal stages). Beeson, C, F.C. 1941, Forest Insects, p. 778-779 (Biological notes). Heslop-Harrison, G, 1959, dnn. Mag. nat. Hist. (18) 2(15): 165. 120 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

   

0.5. mm
Fig. 35. Phecopleran lextiginasurs Buckton—a: head and part of thorax, lateral view; ft head, front views
crantenna; di hind leg; e: forewing; ft hind wing; g: male genitalia, latoyal views by {2 forceps,

outer and mesal views; jz outer arm of aedeagus; kt sperm pump; I; female genitalia, lateral
views mat dorsal plate,

Heslop-Harrison, G, 1960. ibid. (18) 3 (32): 503-504. Weidner, H. 1961. Sonderdr. Abb. Verh. der naturee. Vere Hamburgh 5 (1960): 89-40, 46,

Length of body, in male, 3-45 mm; in female, 4:28 mm
Length of forewings, in naale, 3-32 mm; in female, 3-81 mm

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 121

Width of head with cycs, 0:88 mm
Width of vertex between cyes, 0-46 mm
Length of antennae, 1-52 mm

Colouration. General colour brown, vertex, pronotum and abdomen with light brown
blotches, antennae brown, with apices of segments and entire terminal segment black,legs
concolourous, forewings maculated apically with dark-brown to black bands, with a macula
on Rj, another at tip of radial sector, around the forks of media and cubitus, veins and
margins spotted closely with small black spots, hind wings blackish basally and along
costal margin. Structure. Body very large, robust, sparsely and briefly pubescent. Head (Figs. 35 a, bi
small, strongly deflexed, retracted under, pronotum, including eyes, much narrower than
thorax, about as broad as prothorax, somewhat clefi in front due to the protruding
antennal sockets, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex transv: ersely
rather flat, but rounded down forward, with a small fovea on each side of median suture
posterior to centre, posterior margin deeply emarginate between post-ocellar region, which
is strongly clevated, ocelli large, anterior ocellus visible from above, between and a little
above facial cones, anterior margin deeply emarginate at point of excision; genal cones
short, widely separated at base, divergent, porrect, subacute at tip, pubescence short
but longer than that of vertex. Eyes large, hemispherical. Labrum small,

Antennae (Fig, 35c) long, slender, almost as long as head and thorax, ten-segmented,
bearing a few setae, imbricate, two basal segments robust and subquadrate, Ist larger
than 2nd, 3rd segment longest having a dark band and weakly swollen in middle, 4th,
smaller than 3rd, 5th slightly smaller than 4th, 6th and 7th equal but smaller than 5th,
8th smaller than 7th, 9th and 10th segments very small, all segments from 3 to 8 thicker
at apices, terminal segments slightly clavate, last segment slightly longer than 9th,bearing
two apical spincs ; four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9,

Thorax very large, broad, strongly arched (Fig. 35a), pubescent with long hairs, strongly
rugulose. Pronotum long, almost over-hanging vertex, narrowly convex, with a small
median epiphysis just below posterior margin, with two large foveae on cach lateral side ;
propleurites moderately large, with suture between them and pronotum scarcely visible;
prescutum long, ascending, slightly less than one and a half times as broad as long, broadest
slightly beyond middle, narrower both anteriorly and posteriorly, angulate laterally;
scutum very large, slightly smaller in length than prescutum, about two and a half times
as broad as long, angulate laterally; scutellum broadly transverse, broad anteriorly and
narrow posteriorly, anterior margin convex, with a small dorso-median epiphysis and
prominent antero-lateral angles, posterior margin straight; mesopleurites very large,
conspicuous and produced forward. Legs (Fig. 35d) large, long, strongly beset with thick points and coarsely with simple
setae, all femora.somewhat enlarged, stout, with tibial groove deep and conspicuous, all
tibiae armed with apical comb of setae, tibiae longer than femora except hind tibia which
is equal in length to hind femur, hind tibiae without basal spur and apical tooth-like
spines; tarsi large, basal tarsal joints longer than apical, hind basal tarsi with two small,

 

 

   

122 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

claw-like spines; hind coxae very large, clongate, with meracanthus small and blunt,

Forewings (Fig. 35e) large, hyaline, maculate, somewhat rhomboidal in shape, a little
more than twice as long as broad, broadest just beyond first marginal cell, subacute at
apex, radial sector straight, not parallel to margin, connected with arch of M,+, by a
short cross vein in female, then flexed sharply toward margin, terminating slightly before
apex of wing, in some specimens, the cross vein is absent and the arch M,,» coalesces with
radial sector, cubital petiole more than half as long as radius, basal vein slightly
smaller then radius, cells unequal, first marginal cell very small, second cell quadrangular,
broadest at margin, third marginal cell formed near apex of wing; veinsarmed with setac,
minute points also present near apex and along posterior border. Hind wings (Fig. 35f)
also quite large, thickly beset with minute points, costal margin armed with few simple
and hooked setac. Abdomen large and robust, fusiform and pointed caudally in female, finely and
sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose, pubescence longer on sternites. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 35g) smaller than abdomen, rounded. Anal
valve large, about 0-50 mm long, broadest in middle, in lateral aspect, anterior margin
convex, posterior margin broadly and convexly rounded, upper surface sparsely beset
with simple setac and also with hick points; forceps (Figs. 35 h, i) slender, simple, rather
as long as anal valve, converging uniformly from base to tip, curved forward and roundly
acute at apex, forming a tooth-like process, arcuate in caudal view, mesal surface strongly
invaginated, forming sharply edged margins, both the outer and mesal surfaces armed
with simple setae, setae on the latter directed downward; hypandrium of usual shape,
simple, beset with sparse pubescence and also armed with thick points; aedeagus with the
outer arm much smaller than basal, spoon-end (Fig. 35j) divided into three processes,
posterior process rounded, two anterior processes acutely pointed and longer than the
posterior; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 35 kk). Female genital segment (Fig. 35 1) smaller than abdomen, both plates almost equal or
subequal in length, and armed with thick points; finely rugulose; dorsal plate (Fig. 35m)
thick at base, gradually sloping and narrowed caudally, subacute at apex, surface beset
with simple setae, with several long hairs in middle; circum-anal pore ring small, raised
and composed of a band of pores; ventral plate broad basally, upturned slightly beyond
middle and then narrowed caudally, acuminate, acutely pointed apically, pubescence
simple, with, some long hairs in middle; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. Bred ex galls on leaves of Garuga pinnata Roxb. and Schleichera trijuga
Willd. Distribution. Previously recorded from Poona, Bombay; Dehra Dun, Haldwani
(U.P. ); Coorg (Karnataka); North Malabar (Kerala); Pusa (Bihar); Trichinopoly
(Tamil Nadu) Tista Village, Kalimpong, W. Bengal (India); Sikkim, Tonkin,
Hoabinh,

Material examined, The collection at the Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun, includes
1 example, 6.12.1922 (without genitalia), 1 female, 4.1.1923, 1 female, 4.3,1923, all from
Thano, Dehra Dun, U.P. (R.R.D., 62.208. G. jar B), bred ex galls of Garuga pinnata
{N. C. Chatterjee); + males and 3 females, 4.5,1930, from Chakata, Haldwani, U. P.

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 123

(B. M. Bhatia); 4 examples from Bombay, 1. xii. 1901 (E.P.S. ); 6 examples of November
10 and 7 examples of November 29, 1922, from Golatappar, Dehra Dun (Students coll.) :
7 examples of November 14/15, 1922 from Golatappar (N. C. Chatterjee); 5 examples of
November 15, 1922, from Golatappar (C. F.C. Beeson) ; 1! examples of 1933, from Thano,
Dehra Dun (N.C.C. ); 17 examples of 16.8.1935 from Dehra Dun (Sher Bahadur); 23
examples from New Forest, 24.1.1936 (R. N. Mathur) ; and 39 examples from Shahapur,
Thana, Bombay, 6.2.50 (R.R.D, 862) (R.F.O. ); 6 examples from New Forest, Dehra Dun
of September, 1933 and 6 cxamples of 16.2.1950, ex galls on Garuga pinnata (R. N.
Mathur); and 13 examples from Mercara (Res. Range Officer) of 30.11.1950, ex galls,
Garuga pinnata. The collection at the Zoological Survey of India comprises 10 specimens from Dehra
Dun, U. P. ex galls on Garuga pinnata (Director of Forest School), and | male and 3 females,
from the same locality, and a small jar containing galls preserved in alcohol. Five specimens from Polibetta, Coorg, 27.5.1917 (Y. R. Rao) are present at LA.R.I.,
New Delhi. Few specimens (in poor condition) of this species are also present at the Agricultural
College and Research Institute, Coimbatore. The specimens examined by me are: 1
example from North Malabar, Taliparamba, June, 18 (P. S, Nathan), and 1 female
from Arukutty, Travancore, 25.4.1918 (Isaac), all from galls of Garuga pinnata. Comparison. This species is redescribed from a good series of both sexes, bred ex galls of
Garuga pinnata at Dehra Dun, It is easily recognised by its colouration, shape of head and
venation. The characters of Phacosema gallicola given by Kieffer (1906) show close simi-
larity with those of Phacopteron lentiginosum described by Buckton (1894) and Crawford
(1912). Both these species are recorded from India, and the former may be only a
synonym of the latter. Biological notes. Brief notes are given by Cotes (1894), Kieffer (1906), Lefroy (1909),
Ramakrishna Ayyar (1919), Mathur (1995) and Beeson (1941). ‘This species is commonly
found with its host plants, The terminal young leaves are deformed and crumpled into
the most grotesque shapes and the leaves of some plants are entirely absorbed by these
nut-like galls and resemble a large conglomeration of fruits (Plate 3f). The nymphal
stages are described by Crawford (1919) and Mathur (1949). Subfamily CIRIACREMINAE Enderlein 1910

1910, Ciriacreminae, Enderlin, G, 1910. Sjostedt’s Zoolog. Kilimandjaro-Meru Exped. 2, p. 137,1 pl., 2. fig. 1911, _——, Crawford, D. L. Pomona Coll. J. Ent. 3(2)1 481. 1914, , Crawford, D, L, Bull, U.S. natn, Mus. 85: 62-63. 1913, ———, Aulmann, G, Psyllidarum Catalogus, p. 79. 1958, , Heslop-Harrlson, G. Ann. Mag. nat, Hist, (18), 1+ 561-579. 1959, , Heslop-Harrison, G. ibid. (1), 2: 157-168, 237-247. 1960, », Heslop-Harrison, G. ibid, (13), 3: 503, 551-559. 1963, ., Klimaszewski, 8, M. Bull. Acad. pol. Sci. (2), 11(2): 91-92. 1963, , Klimaszewski, 8, M. Annls Zool, Warsz. 20(20) : 363-370. 1882, Prionocnemidae (Subf. ), Scott, J. Trans. ent. Soc. Lond. p. 466. 1886, +, Loew, F. Verh, zool. -bot. Ges, Wien, 36: 160. 1901, ----——, Froggatt, W. W. Proc, Linn, Soc. N.S. W. 26: 286,

 

124 PSYLLIDAL OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTIN! 1906, ——--—, Kieffer, J. J. 5. wiss, Insekt, Biol, 2: 387-390. 1911, ———, Crawford, D. L.. Pomona Coll. 7. Ent, 3(2): 480-181,

1949, ———-, Heslop-Hawrison, G. lnm. Mag. nat. Hist. (12), 2: 804, 808. 1951, ———-, Heslop-Harrison, , (12), 42 11, 19, 21, 26. 1962, ~, Dobreanu, E., and Manolache, C, Fauna, Repub. pop. rom, Insecta, 8, fase, 3, Hom, Psylloidea,

  

p. 62, 36:

191), Carsidarinue (Subf. ), Grawford, D, L. Pomona Coll. 7. Ent. 3(2): 481-482. 1914, , Crawford, D, L. Bull. U.S. nate, Mus. 85: 53-54,

1919, ——-——, Crawford, D. L. Philipp. J. Sei. 15: 155-156. 1950, —--——, Tuthill, L, D. J. Kans. ent. Soc. 23(2)+ 52. 19G!, Cursidaridce (Subf,), Klimaszewski, 8. M. Ann, Zool, 22(5) + 81-138,
19G!, ———, Loginova, M. M. Inst. Biol. Acad. Sci. U.S,S.R. pp. 442-472. 1964, ———, Loginova, M. M. Pioe. Inst. Zool. Sead. Sci. U.S.S.R.. p. 5. ‘Tuthill (1903) writes: “Lhe name Pyionoeneminae which has clear priority may not
be used for this group as there is no genus Prionocnemus in the family Psyllidac. ” ‘The
subfamily Ciriacreminee was created by Enderlein in 1910, The status of this subfamily
has been critically discussed by Heslop-Harrison (1959, 1960) and its retention has been
assessed. Body typically clongate, oftcn slender. Head small, deeply cleft in front at median
suture, strongly birostrate in appearance which is increased by the large basal segments
of antennae (except in Tenaphalara ‘and Cocidepylla). Vertex more or less concave on
front margin, Genae usually wanting or sometimes the anterior portion swollen into small
or Jarge conical processes beneath antennal bases. Frons usually covered by genae,
somewhat as in Psyllinae, or sometimes not covered and casily visible between genaec, as
in Pauropsyllinae. Anterior occlius move or less visible from above, usually on dorsal
surface, Antennae usually long, slender, sometimes much thickened and attached to
apex of rostrate lobes, and sometimes very hairy; two basal joints very large and long. Eyes large, hemispherical, usually not at all recessive. Labrum small, posterior. Rostrum
usually very long and slender. Thorax often quite narrow, not strongly arched; pronotum
narrow, broadest in middle. Propleurites very long. Epimeron largely visible. Hind
tibiae often with a stout angular spur at base, spur sometimes reduced; apex dilated,
bearing spines, Basal tarsus of hind legs usually with one claw-like spine (two in Psausia-
Homotoma). Forewings always membranous and hyaline, sometimes maculatcd, shining,
variously shaped, elongate, more or less acute at apex; branching of veins usually not so
typically dichotomous as in Psyllinae (branching lateral instead of terminal); cubital petiole
short; with additional cells, formed by the cross or pseudoveins between radial sector
and media. . ;

The genera of this sub-family show great variation in characters. However, the most
characteristic features are the deeply cleft head, often absence of genal cones, the peculiar
type of wing venation, presence of one or more additional cells formed by the forking of
media or by pseudo-veins, and the short cubital petiole. This sub-family is Yépresented
by a large number of species in tropical countries, . This sub-family is represented by nine genera in the Indian region, as follows: Cecidapsylla
Kieffer, 1905; Diceranpsylla Crawlord, 1912; Dynopaylla Crawford, 1913; Macrohomotuma

 

 

 

  

YAMILY PSYLLIDA) 125

Kuwayama, 1907; Mesohomoioma Kuwayama, 1907; Mycopsylla Froggatt, 1901; Psausia
Enderlein, 1914; Rhinopsydla Riley, 1883; and Tenaphatara Kuwayama, 1909. These gencra are grouped together in different tribes of the suis-family Ciriacreminae,
by Heslop-Harrison (1958), as below:

 

 

  

Rhinopsylla Riley . ‘Tribe Bactericerini Ucslop-Harrison

Tenaphalara Kuwayama Tribe Tenaphalarini Hes.-Harr. Aacrohonotoma Kuwayama ‘Tribe Phacopteronini Hes.-Havr. (=-Phacosemini Ender-
lein, 1910). Psausia Enderlein 5

Mycopglla Froggaus t ‘Vvibe Lomolomini Hes. -Havr. Dynopsylla Crawford

AMesohomotoma Kuwayama + oe tg ae
y Tribe Garsidarini Hey. -Harr. Diceraopsylla Chawford

The genus Cecidopsylla Kieffer has been listed in the sulv-family Carsidurinae, whilst the
genus Diceraopsylla Crawford in the subfamily Pauropsyllinae by Ramakrishna Ayyar (1924). ‘The former shows affinity with Pyyllinae, in having quite long genal cones, but in wing
venation it is closer to Ciriacreminae. KEY TO THE GENERA OF GIRIACREMINAE

1, Branching of veins trichotomous as in Tiiozinees fork My, 0 termi
nating at or near apex of wing; post tibial spar small se oe ve Rhinopsylla

       

   

Cubital petiole distinctly present, variable in length 2
Forewings rounded at apex, not angulate Diceraopsylia
—, Forewings somewhat sub-angulate at apex . 3
3, Fork My 49 terminating above apex of wing; apex within second
marginal cell
—. Fork Mj , 9 terminating below apex of wing 6
4, Radius and media quite or nearly contiguous for a greater or
tess length te te we wn 5
—. Radius and media separate and not contiguous, independent wee ae ae ALbeopylia

5. Head produced into a long upturned horn over cach antennal

socket; antennae very long and slender beyond third segment,

segment 1 very large and thick, segment 2 produced into a

Jong acuminate point; first marginal cell very large oe we we Dynopylla
—. Head not produced as above; antennae thick throughout and

thickly hirsute and often carinate; first marginal cell much

smaller than second or wanting tes we a Psausia
6. Radial sector large and much deflexed, terminating Below apex
of wing; genal cones very large aud vertical we be ves w— Cocidopsylta
—. Radial sector small and terminating up to costa we

=

   

Forewings with a transverse callus connecting radius and media 8

~—. Transverse callus in forewing wanting os  Macrahomotora
8, Forewings without pterostigma; head biresirate in appearance... Merahomotoua (=Tyora. Walker)

—. Forewings with pterostigma; head not Birosteate, vertex more or . less quadrate an ve . es ae a ve Tenaphalara

   

126, PSYLLIDAE OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBOONTINEN'T

Genus CECIDOPSYLLA Kieffer 1995

Cecidopsytta
Kieffer, J.J. 1905. nn. Sac. Sci, Bruseltes, pp. 160-161, figs. 5, 6, 7. Aulmann, G. 1913, Pryllidanim Catalogus, Berlin, p, 30. Ramaksishna Ayyar, T, V. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus, 26(6) : 623. "Type species: Cecidepgylla schimac Kieffer 1905 (original designation). ‘The distinctive characters outlined by Kieffer (1905) are expanded with further notes,
as helow. Body Jong and slender, finely rugulose. Head almost as broad as thorax, deflexed. Vertex inclined vertically downwardin front; posterior margin arcuate; post-ocellar region
strongly clevated; front ocellus not visible from above. Frons visible as a small sclerite. Genal cones long, slender, vertical, separate but contiguous, apices projecting forward as
small lingua. Antennae long and slender. Thorax strongly arched; prothorax quite
long, convex and vertically deflexed. Post-scutellum of metathorax with two prominent
epiphysis. Legs long and slender; hind tibiae with a prominent basal spur, and with
uo tooth-like spines at apex; hind basal tarsal segment with one claw-like spine at apex. Forewings long, narrowly rounded at apex; pterostigma long but very narrow; radius and
R, of equal length, cubital petiole about one-third as long as radius; radial sector quite
long and meeting posterior margin below apex; radial scctor and fork Mj+, almost
running parallel to the costal margin in the apical region; first marginal cell extremely
small, second quite large bordering the posterior margin. This genus was crected by Kieffer in 1905, for a single species, C. schimae from India. Cecidopsylla schimae Kieffer 1905
(Figs. 36, 37) (Plates Se, 6a)
Kieffer, J.J. 1905. Ann. Soc. Sci, Bruxelles, pp. 165-167, figs. 5, 6, 7; Pl. II. fig, 12. Aulmann, G. 1913. Psyllidarum Gatalogus, Berlin, p. 30,
Ramakrishna Ayyac, T. V. 1924, Rec. Indian Mus. 26(6)+ 623. Length of body, in male, 2-19 mm; in female, 2-52 mm. Length of forewings, in male, 2-65 mm; in female, 3-24 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0:58 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-32 mm

Length of antennac, 1-82 mm

Colouration. General colour yellowish-brown with reddish tinge, dorsum with two
pairs of dark-brown, anterior, longitudinal bands on prescutum and two pairs on
scutum; vertex of head pale-brown anteriorly and dark-brown posteriorly; post-ocellar
region with orange tinge; genal cones fuscous, paler apically; antennae fuscous in distal
half; tip of labium black; legs paler, with tibiae and tarsi progressively darker from hind
to forelegs; venter of abdomen paler; wings hyalinc, wansparent, with a very narrow
light brownish band running along the posterior margin from the apex of the wing to
the first marginal cell, veins brownish. VAMILY PSYLLpAt: 127

le
ea
3
>

 

0,25 mm. Fig. 36. Gecidapyylia schimae Kieffer—at head, front aspect: br head anc part of thorax, lateral aspect;
et antenna; di hind leg; e: hind tibia and tarsal segments; f: forewing; gt hind wing; hr
male genitalia, lateral aspect; i: forcep, mesal aspect: js stout hook of forcep, highly magnified;
Ic: sperm pump; I: female genitalia, lateral aspect. Structure. Body long and slender. Head (Figs. 36a,b) nearly as broad as thorax,
moderately deflexed; vertex somewhat horizontal posteriorly and then inclined vertically
downward in front, about twice as broad as long, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely
rugulose, with two foveal impressions near posicrior margin and on either side of median
suture, posterior margin strongly arcuate, anterior margin decply emarginate in centre,
post-ocellar region strongly elevated bearing orange-coloured ocelli; front ocellus not
visible from above; frons visible as a small sclerite, having anterior ocellus dorsally, ante-
rior ocellus visible in front; genal cones about 0-25 mm long and slender, vertical, slightly
longer than vertex, broad basally and narrow apically, ending in a small lingua projecting
forward, scparate but contiguous, sparsely beset with long setae and also with minute
points arranged in lines, Eyes large, somewhat hemispherical. Beak long, protruding
between legs,

128 PSYLLIDAE QF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Antennae (Fig. 36¢) long and chick, ten-segmented, finely and sparsely pubescent,
imbricate, two basal segments robust, quadrate, 2nd smaller than Ist, 3rd longest, 4th
smaller and halfas long as 3rd, Sth slightly smaller than 4th, 6th and 7th equal but smaller
than Sth, 8th smaller than 6th, 9th much smaller and half as long as 8th, 10th segment
smallest, bearing two apical spines. ‘Thorax (Fig. 36) strongly arched. finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose
Prothorax quite long, convex. somewhat vertically deflexed, with two pairs of foveal
impressions on cach lateral side; prescutum about twice as broad as long, broadest in
middle, narrow both anteriorly and posteriorly, angulate both posteriorly and laterally;
scutum stightly longer than prescutum, about twice as broad as long, angulate laterally;
scutellum subquadrate, slightly broader than long. broad anteriorly: post-scutellum of
metathorax with two prominent epiphysis. Legs (Figs. 36d,e) long and slender, pubescent and also beset with minute points;
tibiae longer than femora and bearing comb of setae near apex; hind tibiae with a pro-
minent basal spur and two tooth-like spines at apex; basal tarsal segments smaller than
apical, and posterior basal segment having one claw-like spine at apex; mcracanthus
lorg, slender and triangular. .

Forewings (Fig. 36f) tong, hyaline, with a very narrow brown band running along
the posterior margin from apex to base of first marginal ccll, and scattered spinules
present all along this band, about three times as long as broad, narrowly rounded at apex,
pterostigma long and very narrow, basal vein twice as long as radius (R), radius and R,
of equal length, radiusabout two and a half times as long as cubital petiole (M+Cu), first
marginal cell very small, radial sector terminating below apex of wing, veins Rs and
My 42 running parallel to costal margin in apical region. Hind wings (Fig. 36g) also
quite long and thickly beset with minute points. costal margin armecl with a few simple
and hooked setae, :

Abdomen long and slender, finely and sparsely pubescent, and also beset with minute
points arranged in series. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 36h) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (proc-
tiger) about 0-38 mm long, longer than forceps; in lateral aspect, anterior margin nearly
straight, posterior margin convex basally and concave apically, the lateral flaps bent
inwards and armed with a cluster of setae, apical anal region broad and truncate at apex,
and beset with small simple setae; parameres (Figs. 36i, j) about 0-30 mm long, narrow
at base, gradually widening to become roundly spatulate in the distal half, the outer
surface bearing a number of fine sparsely scattered setae, the inner surface of the apical
region armed with numerous, very closely set, short and stout, downwardly pointing
setae, marginal setae slightly longer, the anterior margin in the apical region thickened
into a strong sclerotic ridge and ending in a stout hook-like structure, bearing strong
ridges; outer arm of aedeagus smaller than basal and the spoon end with a hook; hypan-
drium simple, strengthened with sclerotic lines and beset with simple scattcred setae;
sperm pump as figured (Fig. 36k),

Female genital segment (Fig. 361) slightly smaller than abdomen. Dorsal plate
slightly longer than ventral, roundly pointed at apex, beset with sparsely scattered setae,

  

 

 

 

  

 

FAMILY vsYLLIbA 195

sctac smaller and in a cluster near apex, anal aperture elongate oval ; ventral plate bearing
sparse setae and acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor acutely pointedl. Host plant. Bred ex leaf-curls of Schima wallichii Chois  (Chilauni). Distribution. Bengal (Kieffer, 1903). Fresh records are from Samsing, Kalimpong (Bengal), November 18. 1934 (A. M. Pos-
ford) ; Kalimpong (Bengal), September 2, 1965 (V. R. Phalak). Material examined, 2 males and 2 females, with some nymphs collected on November
18, 1934, from Sampsing (Bengal) (A. M. Posford); and 1 male and 1 female from Kalim-
pong (Bengal), Sepicmber 2, 1965 (V. R. Phalak), and few nymphs preserved in alcoho}. Comparison. Cecidopsylla schimae Kieffer is the only species representing this genus from
India and has been redescriled from a small collection collected from Bengal. These
specimens exhibit characteristic features of the genus as outlined by Kieffer (1905). The whereabouts of the type material is not known, perhaps it is lost or destroyed
in the great wars, Dr H. Synave, Section d’Entomologic, Institut Royal des Sciences. Naturelles de Belgique, Bruxelles, in his ietter of October +, 1965, has informed me that
the types of Kieffer are not present in any scientific institutions there. The specimens
now recorded and deposited at the Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun, are therefore,
designated as neotypes. Biological notes. This species makes stiff rolled galls along the margins of leaves, and
nymphs feed inside them. The nymphs produce large amount of waxy matter and exude
honey dew copiously inside the rolled galls, Its nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage, Length 2-43mm. Of psylline form (Fig.37a). Head noticeably narrower
than the abdomen. Wing-pads large and prominent, extending beyond the general
margin of the body. Dorsum with the derm largely sclerotic, the wing-pads, a pair of
large plates occupying most of the head, the thoracic region, and a large posterior plate
and four pairs of narrow strip-like plates in the abdomen strongly sclerotic; posterior
abdominal plate showing traces of segmentation. Derm thickly beset with minute points
and with small, slender, scattered setae borne on small prominences, these setae becoming
longer near the margins of head and abdomen; wing-pads with a series of simple setae
borne on small prominences along the margin. Large plates of the head, thoracic and
the basal region of wing-pads ornamented with numerous small, strongly sclerotic areas,
and the central region of the posterior abdominal plate bearing minute comb-like
structures. Antennae (Fig. 37b) small, about 0-52 mm long, thick, apparently seven-segmented,
segments progressively becoming narrower from base to apex, each segment with a number
of long setae in a whorl near apex, basal segment small and transverse, 2nd robust, longer
than broad, showing traces of segmentation, segments 3rd to 6th broadly transverse, 7th
slightly longer than two preceding segments, bearing two setac near apex; four sensoria
present on segments 2, 4, 6 and 7; apical segment weakly imbricate. Ventral side membranous throughout, except for small areas about each spiracle and
slender strips in the abdomen, Derm faintly besct with minute points and with small

9

130 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 37, Cecidopeylla schimae Kieffer—a: fifth stage nymph; bs antenna; e: Jeg; dt circum-anal ring. simple setae arranged segmentally in the abdomen. Legs (Fig. 37¢) small, beset with few
thick setae, the femora scarcely reaching the margin of the body; without trochanter;
tibio-tarsal articulation distinct; each tarsal segment with two curved sctae near apex;
claws present, the pulvillus large and tubular. Anal area (Fig. 37d) ventral, set well
away from the apex of the abdomen; the circum-anal ring consisting of a double ring of
slit-like pores, the inner ring of pores less.well-defined. Fourth stage. Length 1-54mm, Resembling the last stage nymph but smaller in size,
having smali wing-pads, with thick antennae, apparently four-segmented, jwith three
sensoria and without tibio-tarsal articulation,

Genus DICERAOPSYLLA Crawford 1912

Grawford, D. L, 1912. Ree, Indian Mus. 72 425. Ramakrishna Ayyar, T, V. 1924 Ree, Indian Mus, 26(6): 622. Hesop-Harrison, G. 1958. Ann. Mag, nat, Hist, (18), 1: 578. The description of this genus is reproduced from Crawford (1912),
“ Body robust; thorax strongly arched; body surface conspicuously shagreened; head

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 131

with eyes not as broad as thorax; vertex more or less plane, concave transversely, slightly
cleft in front; facial cones entirely wanting, with two rounded ridges on face extending
from antennal bases to labrum; eyes not large; antennae slender, at least moderately
long. Pronotum ascending; proepisternum large, protruding above, hindmost tergite
of metanotum (post-scutellum) bifid; appearing as two blunt horns extending back;
legs normal; wings membranous, hyaline, rounded at apex, with a pterostigma.”

© Type of genus: Diceraopaylia brunettit CrawF.”

“This genus is somewhat similar to Heteropsylla Crawf. (MS.) in the absence of
facial cones, but differs not only fiom this but from all other genera in the bifid post-
scutellum, for which the genus is named. ”

Diceraopsylla brunettii Crawford 1912
(Fig. 38)

Crawford, D, L, 1912. Ree. Indian Mus. 7: 425-426, pl. xxxiii, figs. Q,R, Us pl. xxv, fig. G.
Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924, Rec. Indian Mus, 26: 622. (Darjecling, Eastern Himalayas),

The description of this species is reproduced from Crawford (1912). “ Length of body 2:5 mm; length of forewing 3-8 mm; greatest width l-7 mm; width
of vertex between eyes 6-35 mm; with eyes 0-68 mm. General colour black; face, legs,
tip of abdomen brown; antennae brown, with segment tips and terminal segment black;
wings somewhat maculate. Body rather small, very robust, surface conspicuously sha-
greened, including antennae and femora. ”

“ Head small, short, with eyes distinctly narrower than thorax; vertex with post-ocellar
regions and ocular margins elevated, with a small fovea on each side of median line
posteriorly; front margin rounded down, with anterior ocellus in front visible from above,
somewhat cleft in front, as in Rhinopylla, Antennae ten-segmented, slender, longer than
head and thorax; I moderately large; III longest; IX and X short, thickened; labrum
small,”

“ Pronotum ascending, arched; episternum large, prominent; epimeron small, mostly
concealed; dorsulum large; scutum long; post-scutellar processes fully as long as thick,
rounded at tip. Legs normal; hind tibiae unarmed. Forewings rather large, with a
macula over first furcal and several small black spots on the veins especially at the fur-
cations, broadly rounded at the apex, about two and a half times as long as broad; first
marginal cell usually large; second marginal cell smaller than first; radius short, termi-
nating far from apex of wing; pterostigma short, broad; cubital petiole almost as long as
discoidal subcosta. Hind wings hyaline, scarcely veined. “ Male—Abdomen slender; genital segment relatively large; scarcely rounded ; claspers
slender, arched, quite acute at tips; anal valve slender, rather long. ”

“Described from two males from Darjeeling, East Himalayas, altitude 7,000 ft (E.
Brunetti), May 29, 1910.”

“ Type No. 9733/18.”

Unfortunately, there is no type specimen left except pin and labels, at Z.S.L,
Calcutta. 132 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SULGONTINEN'T

 

toss

Ge SVR

Fig. 38, Diceraapsylla brunet Craw{,—as bbs head, Jateral and front views; e: male genitalia, lateral views
ds forewing (After Crawford), Trioza Iyalina Crawf—et head, lateral view: f male genitalia,
lateral view; gi forewing (After Crawford). Trioza analis Grawf—hi head, lateral views it
female genitalia; j: forewing (After Crawford). Arylaina obscura Crawf.—Ie head, front views
1; forewing (After Crawford). Psausia distincta Crawl,—anz nz head; ot forewing; Trisza jam-
bolanae Craw—p: forewing. Macrohomotoma striata Crawf.—as forewing. Paurocephala psylloptera
Crawf—st head, front views st male genitalia; t forewing (After Crawford),

 

Genus DYNOPSYLLA Crawford 1913

Crawford, D. L, 1913. Philipp. 7. Sci. 7: 295. Crawford, D. L, 1915, ibid. 10: 257, 268. Crawford, D. L. 1919. ibid. 15: 156, 158 (Tiysanogyna minor Crawl.) Crawford, D. L. 1924, Rec. Indian Mus. 26: 618-619,

Enderlein, G. 1914. Ent, Mitt. 3: 231 (under Sphingocladia). Enderlein, G. 1918. Zool, 7. 41: 482 (illustration of wings). Enderlein, 1926. Ent. Mitt, 15: 998-399 (under Craw/ordella). ‘Heslop-Harrison, G, 1958, nn. Mag. nat, Hist, (13) 11 578. Its generic description is reproduced from Crawford (1913). "Body large, robust, pubescent, Head very deeply cleft in front between antennae;

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 133

vertex very deeply depressed between posterior ocelli, with a horn-like process in front
of cach posterior ocellus directed forward and upward; genal cones wanting; frons small,
elliptical. Eyes and ocelli large. Antennae very long, longer than body or at least
as long, slender; basal segment very elongate and large, much longer than second. Thorax
broad; pronotum short, much depressed below dorsulum. Legs stout and large;
hind tibiae unarmed at base, but with several very large spines at apex. Forewings
membranous, very large, powerful, angulate at apex, veins heavy; venation atypical;
hind wings much smaller, frenulum conspicuous.”

“Type of genus: Dynopsylla cornuta sp.nov.”

“This genus belongs to the sub-family Carsidurinae, being related rather closely 10
several genera therein, including Carsidara. The absence of the basal spur on the hind
tibiae, I believe, is of minor importance.”*

Further notes published by Crawford (1924) are reproduced as below. “The genus Dynopsylla was erected in 1913 for a remarkable species collected by C.F. Baker on Ficus nervosa in the Philippine Islands. A year later Enderlein placed a very
closely similar specics in the new genus Sphingocladia which he erected probably without
knowledge of my Dynopsylla.”

“In a collection of psyllids from Brazil (South America) sent to me for identification
this same genus is represented by a species which is remarkably similar to the Philippine
species, but unfortunately no data accompanied the specimens to show the food plant. By an interesting coincidence, the Ramakrishna collection from India contains this same
species with the information that it forms galls on leaves of Ficus nervosa, which is the host
plant of the Philippine species.”

“Dynopsylla minor was doubtfully referred to this genus in 1915 and later placed in a
new genus, Thysanogyna, because it was considered on further study to be not congeneric
with the type specics of Dynopsylla. Later, it was found to be identical with Walker’s
old specics Carsidara marginalis, with which it now merged in synonymy, my names
Dynopsylla minor and Thysanogyna being now synonyms of Walker’s species.’”’

“There ave, therefore, three species known in the genus Dynopsylla, a key to which
is given below. The distinctive features of this genus are (1) the peculiar venation of
the forewing and (2) the shape of the head; the head is deeply cleft in front and genal-
cones are wholely lacking and the unusually large basal segments of the antennae are
very conspicuous, the vertex is in some species produced into a pair of horn-like processes
in front.”

“The thrée species are distributed as follows: :

1, D. cornuta Crawford—Philippine Islands, on Ficus nercosa (gall-forming). 2. D. pinnativena Enderlein—Formosa. 3, D. grandis, n. sp,—Taliparamba, North Malabar, S. India, on Ficus nervosa
(galls), and in Brazil, South America,”

KEY TO THE SPECIES

“A. 1, Veins of forewing with a double row of long hairs; media sinuous, closely
contiguous with radius and cubitus, but not confluent; segment II of antennae
not produced into a sharp point,

 

  

134 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

B. 1, Cubital veins with a basal stem; media distinctly contiguous with radius and

with Cu,., antennae nothairy beyond segment IT, segments III to VIII not

black at tip; vertex with a pair of conspicuous hornelike processes in front - . . D, cornuia Crawf,
B. 2, Cubical veins without basal stem, branching at same point as the media; media

close to but not touching radius and cubitus; antennae hairy, segments III to

‘VIII black at tip, head covered with thick pubescence, vertex without

homs, but somewhat bulging in the corresponding place. +--+ - + - +++ D. pinnativena Enderl,
A. 2. Veins of forewing without hairs; media not sinuous, but confluent with radius;

segment If of antennae produced into a shaxp point, head and dorsum

sparsely pubescent, + seeee sees + D, grandis, n. sp.”

 

Dynopsylla grandis
(Fig. 39)

“Length of body 4 mm, forewing 6 mm, length of body to lip of folded wings about
7to8mm. General colour light brown; vertex yellowish-brown, darker between posterior
ocelli; prothorax brown, mesonotum brown with yellowish stripes and bands, legs and
antennae light brown.’”

“Head about as broad as prothorax, rather large; vertex broader than long, concave
between posterior ocelli, produced into a long, upturned horn in front of each eye,
clothed with long pubescence; front ocellus visible from above. Genae protruding for-
ward around insertion of antennae making the head cleft in front between antennae,
Rostrum short. Eyes very large, constituting fully half the width of the head, Antennae
long, nearly as long as body (not including wings); segment I very large, thick, more
than twice as long as thickness, hirsute; segment IT not quite so thick as I, much shorter,
produced in a long, acuminate point, hirsute; segments ITI-X slender, filiform, not
hirsute.”

“Thorax very large, broad, roundly arched, dorsum pubescent, Legs stout, relatively
short, pubescent; hind tibiae short, without basal spur, with four large finger-like spines
at apex; basal tarsus of hind legs with one black claw. Forewings large, broad, hyaline,
acutely pointed, veined......, veins black, prominent. Hind wings about half as long as
forewings.”*

“Male forceps short, broad, truncate at apex, emarginate on posterior margin ; anal
valve about twice as long as forceps, the terminal portion cylindrical, black, nearly as
long as basal part. Female genital segment very short, acutely pointed.”

“Locality. Described from three females collected at Taliparamba (S. India) in
September, 1918, by T.V. Ramakrishna; these were found in galls on Ficus nervosa. Also 4 specimens (males and females) in a collection from South America (Brazil) sent
by Professor J.S. Tavares. These four specimens were not labélled and no information '
was given as to where they were taken and what host plant, but it is assumed that they
were collected in Brazil, These are almost exactly identical with the Indian specimens
even in minor details, suggesting that the species has probably been introduced in rather
recent times into one or the other of these two widely separated countries.”

Material examined. By the courtesy of Prof. T.S. Santhanaraman of the Agricultural
College and Research Institute, Coimbaotre, I was able to recover few parts, two wings
(fore and hind), head with basal antennal segments, and femur and tibia of a hind leg

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 135

 

Fig, 39, Dynopsplla grandis Crawford—a: head, with two basal segments of antennae, front view; bb: femur
and tibia of hind leg; e: forewing; dz hind wing; e: forewing of Phylloplecta (Megatrioza) viti-
ensis Kirk, (Aficr Crawford). of D. grandis from the material (one cxample) sent by him in March 1968. Unfortu-
nately, this material was very badly damaged in transit. The figures have been drawn
from these parts, which were retained by me. No usefull purpose would have been served
in returning these broken parts to Coimbatore. I have not seen a perfect specimen,
and therefore, the description of this has been reproduced from Crawford. Genus MACROHOMOTOMA Kuwayama 1907

Meacrohomotoma
Kuwayama, 8. 1907. Trans. Sapporo nat. Hist. Soo, 2: 179,
Aulmann, G, 1913. Psyllidarum Gatalogus, Berlin, 36. Crawford, D, L, 1919. Philipp. J. Sei. 15: 157. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1958, Ann. Mag, nat, Hist. (18), 1578,

 

Type species. Macrohomotoma gladiatum Kuwayama, 1907 (original designation), ~
Body generally large and stout, surface usually reticulately marked. Head broader
or narrower than thorax, deflexed, posterior margin moderately emarginate; post-ocellar
region weakly swollen. rons visible, bearing front ocellus at top, Genae not produced
into cones, swollen beneath antennal sockets. Clypeus large, visible below frons, Eyes
large, recessive over propleurites, Antennae usually smaller than width of head including

136 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SURGONTINENT

cyes, sometimes longer than head. ‘Thorax large and robust, reticulately marked, strongly
arched, Prothorax usually concealed, descending beneath head. Post-scutellum of
metathorax broadly transverse, with two large, erect, horn-like epiphysis. Legs moderately
large. Hind tibiae without basal spur, with black tooth-like spines at apex. Proximal
tarsal segment of hind leg with two claw-like spines at apex. Forewings usually large,
somewhat leaf-shaped, hyaline or maculated, pointed at apex; pterostigma present,
usually small but broad, elliptical or oval in shape; cubitus as long as or a fittle longer
than cubital petiole, stem of cubital vein just one-third or about half as long as Cu,;
marginal cells usually very large; fork M,,, meeting below apex of wing; basal vein
smaller than radius; radial sector small, meeting costal margin beyond middle. Posterior
lobes of anal valve (proctiger) of male genitalia having small, prominent apical processes
towards mesal surface. In wing venation and cephalic characters, the Indian species indicate close relation-
ship to Afacrohomotoma gladialum Kuwayama, a Formosan species, but they differ in several
distinctive features, However, since the limitations of this genus having been not well! clucidated, all these species are tentatively placed under one and the same genus. This
genus appears certainly to be related to the Pauropsyllinae instead of the Garsidarinae
to which it had been assigned by Crawford since 1911. Heslop-Harrison (1958) has
treated this genus under tribe Phacopteronint of the sub-family Ciriacreminae. I can add
no information as to its relationships. Three species are recorded from India, two of
which are new to science. KEY TO THE SPECIES OF MACROHOMOTOMA

 

1, Forewings hyaline and transparent, 6. 2 eee +. ML geniculate, sp. n.
—. Forewings maculated- 6s +e ee ee Peete ae . 2, Forewings with black or brown stripe extending along cubitus fiom
‘medial vein to posterior margin. 5. 6 Le Ce ee » Ad. striata Crawf,

—. Forewings with light browa band ‘along posterior margin, broad
band in basal region and small stripes along forks M,+4 and

Oye eee Se ne ee DE, maculata, sp. my

Macrohomotoma geniculata, sp, 2. (Figs, 40, 41)
Length of body, in male, 2.15 mm; in female, 2.75 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3.10 mm; in female, 3.50 mm
Width of head with eyes, 1.08 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0.53 mm
Length of antennae, 0.94 mm

Colouration, General colour light to dark-brown, males darker than females, thorax
with or without dirty brown blotches, scutum fuscous posteriorly, scutellum with or with-
out two submedian dirty white anterior spots, eyes light crimson, antennae with the basal
border of first segment, apices of segments 3 to 8 and two terminal segments blackish,
femora of legs smoky black dorsally and dirty white ventrally, apical tarsal joint of legs

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 137

0.25 mm

 

of head; br antonna; cs hind legs d: forewing;
; hs parameres, posterior view: i mesal view of

Fig. 40. Macrohomotoma geniculata, sp. e: hind wing; f: male genitalia;
forceps §2 sperm pump; kx female genitalia. partly black, metacoxa brown with a small anterior spot, abdominal sternites light black
laterally, forceps of male black apically, hypandrium light black laterally, ventral plate
of female light black posteriorly, area around anus light orange, wings hyaline, trans-
parent, forewings with four light black spots on posterior margin and one at apical end
of pterostigma. Structure. Body large and stout, with reticulately marked surface. Head (Fig. 40a),
including eyes, almost as broad as thorax, strongly declivous, finely and sparsely pubescent,
finely rugulose; vertex broad, about twice as broad as long along median suture, almost
perpendicular to axis of body, with two transverse foveal impressions, posterior to

138 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

centre, posterior margin arcuate, frons visible between genae, with a large anterior
ocellus at apex; genae small, swollen beneath antennal sockets, finely and sparsely
scent, post-ocellar region slightly clevated, having large ocelli. Clypeus large,
visible below frons, Eyes large, recessive over propleurites,

Antennae (Fig, 40b) ten-segmented, moderately thick, slightly smaller than the width
of head with eycs, two basal joints robust, sparsely pubescent, imbricate, 3rd segment
longest, 4th and 6th equal and each about two-thirds as long as 3rd, 5th and 7th equal
and slightly smaller than 4th, 8th slightly smaller than 7th, 9th about one-third as long
as 3rd, terminal segment smallest, bearing two, unequal, long, apical setae. Thorax largeand robust, strongly arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely and reti-
culately marked. Prothorax partly concealed by head, descending, longer in middle and
narrower laterally, with foveal impressions on each side; prescutum large, broader than
long, about twice as broad as long, broadest before middle, angulate laterally, posterior
margin angulate submedianally, strongly sloping anteriorly; scutum large, about two
and a half times as broad as long, slightly longer than prescutum, strongly sloping and
angulate laterally, posterior margin also angulate; scutellum small, somewhat vase-
shaped or hexagonal, broad anteriorly, anterior margin almost straight, strongly convex
posteriorly ; post-scutellum of metathorax broadly transverse, with a median line and
two large, horn-like, upright processes; mesepisternum large and produced forward. Legs short and thick, having fine, coarse pubescence and microscopic points, tibiae
longer than femora of anterior and middle pairs, hind leg (Fig. 40c) with tibia and femur
nearly of equal length, hind tibiae without basal spur and with four, thick, black spines
at apex, basal tarsal segment longer than apical of hind leg, hearing two thick, black
spines at apex, tarsal segments of fore and middle legs equal in length, meracanthus
small, somewhat tubular, tibial groove of first two pairs of legs quite long. Forewings (Fig. 40d) very large and broad, about two and one-third times as long as
broad, hyaline, clear, acutely pointed, veins thinner bearing microscopic setae, pterostigma
elliptical, about twice as long as broad, marginal cells very large and nearly cqual
in length, cubital petiole (M-+Cu) and cubital vein equal in male, equal or shorter in
female, R, very short, radius quite large, stem of cubital veins about half as long as basal
cubital branch (Cu,), distance between Cu, and M,,, equal to the distance between
Mg,4and M,49 along posterior margin, Hind wings (Fig. 40e) small, costal vein armed
with a few simple and hooked setac, membrane uniformly besel with minute points. Abdomen short and thick, finely and sparsely beset with hairs and also with minute
points. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 40f) short, pubescent; anal valve (Fig. 40g) about
0.30 mm long, slender, prominently demarcated into a broad basal portion and one-third
apical tubular region, the latter inclined posteriorly, the basal portion produced caudad
on each side into a lobe and again clbowed mesally into a slender arm bent anteriorly,
lobes beset with long, simple sctac while the arms bear marginal setae; parameres (forceps)
(Figs. 40h, i) about 0.25 mm long, slightly smaller than proctiger, in profile, broad basally
and narrow apically, apical margin truncate, the anterior apical angle terminating in
a thick black tooth and also produced as a thick ridge on mesal surface ending in a thick

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 139

black tooth posteriorly, a bunch of strong setae present just below this tooth, posterior
apical angle narrowly rounded, basal mesal surface armed with a group of long setac;
hypandrium (Fig. 40F) simple, of usual shape, sparsely beset with small setae; outer arm
of acdeagus (Fig. 40£) smallcr than basal, with a thick spoon end, basal arm quite long
and strongly curved,

Female genital segment (Fig. 40k) longer than abdomen, coarsely pubescent, setac
longer in middle; dorsal.plate longer than ventral, broad basally and much narrower
and acuminate in the postcrior half, roundly pointed at apex, with an upturned tip,
dorsal surface slightly depressed in middle, apical region thickly beset with minute peg-
like setae, circum-anal ring consisting of a double row of pores; ventral plate broad basally
and gradually narrowed posteriorly, with an acute apex, surface beset with minute points;
ovipositor scarcely exposed. Host plant. Bred from nymphs feeding near the axil of fruits of Ficus microcarpa L.f
(=F. retusa). Type locality. New Delhi. Types. Described from a long series of both sexes. Holotype male; Allotype
female, December 22, 23, 1942 (R.N. Mathur); Paratypes: 9 males, December
22, 1942; 11 males, April 3, 1963; 13 females, December 22, 1942; 10 females, April
3, 1943 (R.N. Mathur); December 1942 collection is from the type locality and April
1963 collection is from New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Additional collection: adults
and nymphal stages collected on March 15, 1952, from New Forest, Dehra Dun; April
12, 1952, from Dehra Dun (U.P. ), all preserved in alcohol (R.N. Mathur); some adults
and nymphal stages collected on December 22, 1942, from the type locality, and on April
3, 1943, from New Forest, Dehra Dun, also preserved in alcohol (R.N. Mathur). All
types deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Two specimens donated to LA.R.I., New
Delhi. In addition, there are 3 examples from Mercara, Coorg, collected on 30.11.50
(Research Range Officer), on F. retusa; 2 examples from Dehra Dun, of 17.12.40 (Bal-
want Singh), found on Carica papaya (rotten). Comparison. Two specimens (male and female) were sent to Dr Russell for comparison
with the type of Pauropsylla apsylloides Crawford (1919), and she has supplied the following
information: “ Your two specimens labelled Macrohomotoma apsylloides on Ficus retusa,
New Forest, 3-4-1963, are about one-half the size of the type female from Larat and the
other type female from Macao....I think the three type specimens of apsylloides represent
two.and perhaps three distinct species. We have no males of apsylloides so 1 cannot
compare actual specimens of this sex.,..In the characteristics of the female, your specimens
appear to be more like gladiatum Kuwayama than like apsylloides, but that species is as
large as apsplloides and the male genitalia appear to be different....” (in litt.). On receipt
of this valuable information, two specimens (male and female) were sent to Professor
S. Kuwayama, Japan, for comparison with gadiatum, and he concludes “.,,.that the
Indian specimens taken on. Ficus retusa were not M, gladiatum. The principal differences
are: size, much smaller; forewing, less acutely pointed, brownish marking at the end
of clavus small; both dorsal and ventral valves of genital segment rather short ” (in litt.). On the basis of these, the present material is considered under a distinct species. 140, PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

From India, only one species .VW. striata has been described by Crawford (1925), taken
on Ficus sp. at Kcollegal (S. India). ‘This new species differs from séréata, in being much
smaller in size, forewings also smaller and absence of the brownish stripe along the
cubitus. Biological notes. Both adults and nymphs are commonly found during March and
April on Ficus microcarpa. ‘The nymphs live within fluffy cottony mass feeding near
the axils of fruits. Mature nymphs are ycllowish-orange, with wing-pads, head, thoracic
plates, abdominal strips, tarsal joints and terminal segments of antennae smoky black. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig. 41a). Length 1-62 mm. Broadly oval; the wing-pads large and
projecting beyond the contour of the body, not produced anteriorly, bluntly rounded. Posterior margin pointed bluntly medianally, armed with a bunch of minute sctac. Head well-marked and separated from the thorax. Eyes large. Dorsum with a pair
of large sclerotic aveas, occupying most of the head, with large plates on thorax, with
+ pairs of transverse plates in the anterior half and a single large plate in the posterior
half of abdomen, as illustrated. int segmentations present in the large posterior plate. Derm slightly vermiculate and sparscly beset with simple ring-based setae of various
length. Entire margin of wing pads and the posterior half of abdomen with a con-
tinuous intermixed series of simple sctae of various length. Simple setae borne on small
papillae. Minute fringed processes also present on the large abdominal plate. Ventral side membranous, except for small areas ncar the spiracles, small abdominal
strips and an anal plate. These sclerotic areas are thickly beset with minute as well as
thick points, Derm in the abdomen sparsely beset with simple ring-based setac of various
length. Antennae (Fig. 41b) located ventrally, short and thick, about 0-60 mm long,
cight-segmented, two basal segments broad and transverse, 3rd slightly longer than 4th,
smaller and subquadrate, 5th and Gth joints longest, with imperfect segmentations,
with four sensoria and two terminal spines. Legs (Fig. 41c) moderately large and stout,
with few setae, without trochanters, the femora not reaching the margin of body, tibio-
tarsal articulation well-defined, tarsus with two golf-club setae, claws present, pulvillus
small, pad-like. Anal opening (Fig, 41d) sct well away from the apex of abdomen, sur-
rounded by a broad double band of pores, the anterior horder of the outer band is armed
with a series of simple sctac, the anterior portion of the inner band of pores faintly visible. Fourth stage. Length 1:20 mm. Similar to fifth stage, except for the large sclerotic
plates on head, thorax and abdomen, antenna seven-segmented, tibio-tarsal_articula-

tion absent, and the tip of abdomen with a shallow median cleft, bearing two setae on
either side. Macrohomotoma maculata, sp. n.
(Fig. 42)
Length of body, in male, 2-14 mm; in female, 257 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3-0 mm; in female, 3-5 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-9 mm

TAMILY PSYLL(DAE Ht

 

225mm

Ot mm

 

Fig. 41. Macrohomotoma geniculata, sp. n,
pore ring. a: fifth stage nymph; br antenna; ¢ legs di circum-anal

 

Width of vertex between cyes, 057 mm
Length of antennac. 1-53 mm

Colouration. (Dry specimens). General colour pale clay yellow, forewings transparent
with a broad light brown band at base, with a band along the posterior margin, extending
from apex to part of first marginal cell and a small band on each of forks Mj, and Cu,
and six darker spots on the margins. One male specimen from Fraserpet (9.11.30) is
without maculated bands (perhaps teneral example). Structure. Body large. Head (Fig. 42a) narrower than thorax, sparsely pubescent,
finely reticulate, moderately deflexed, vertex broader than long, about twice as broad as
long down median suture, rather flat, with two foveal impressions posterior to centre,
one on cach side of median line, with a deep sulcus extending from each fovea, posterior
margin moderately emarginate, post-ocelli lateral, weakly raised, anterior ocellus not
visible from above, frons visible as a small sclerite, bearing front ocellus at top; genae
small, swollen beneath antennal bases. Antennal sockets small. Clypeus large, visible
below frons. Eyes large, recessive over propleurites. Antennac (Fig. 42b) broken in both the specimens, except one antenna in a male
example; small, longer than the head, including eyes, ten-segmented, two basal segments
robust and subquadrate, remaining segments slender and imbricate, 3rd segment longest,

112 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 42. Macrohomotoma maculata, sp. n.—a: head, front view; bt antenna; ¢: hind leg; di forewing; et
anal valve, lateral and mesal aspects; £¢ forceps; g: aedeagus; hx sperm pump; is female genitalia,
lateral aspect. 4th slightly smaller than 3rd, 5th and 6th equal and each smaller than 4th, 7th slightly
smaller than 6th, 8th a little smaller than 7th, 9th about half as long as 8th, terminal
segment smallest, bearing two long, unequal, apical spines, sensoria present. Thorax large and broad, strongly arched, sparsely pubescent, finely reticulate. Pro-
thorax partly concealed, descending beneath head, convexly rounded, with two foveal
impressions on each side; prescutum almost as long as broad, gradually narrowed both
anteriorly and posteriorly, broadest somewhat in middle, angulate laterally, posterior
margin also angulate; scutum large and broad, about twice as broad as long, slightly
shorter in length than prescutum, bluntly angulate laterally, surface flat dorsally and
gradually sloping laterally; scutellum broadly transverse, somewhat vase-shaped, broad

YAMILY PSYLLIDAL 1435,

anteriorly and gradually narrowed posteriorly, anterior margin rather straight; post-
scutellum of metathorax with two prominent, erect, strong epiphysis. Legs (Fig. 42c) quite long, sparscly pubescent and also besct with minute points, tibiae
longer than femora, each tibia with an apical comb of setac, hind tibiae without basal
spur, with four black tooth-like spincs at apex, basal tarsal segments thicker and longer
than apical, proximal tarsal segment of hind leg with two black claw-like spines at apex;
meracanthus large and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 42d) very large and long, about two and a half times as long as broad,
leaf-like, with a pointed apex, with a small but broad, oval pterostigma, basal vein slightly
smaller than radius, radial sector almost straight to costa, slightly longer than radius,
cubital petiole small and nearly as long as cubitus, marginal cells very large, first cell
somewhiat trapezoid in shape, slightly smaller in length than second, but as broad as second
along the posterior margin, distance betwecn Cu, and My,,4 equal to the distance bet-
ween Cu, and Ci, along the margin, fork M,,» meeting posterior margin slightly below
apex, veins armed with microscopic setac. Hind wings quite small, veins obscure, mem-
brane uniformly beset with minute points. Abdomen small, dorsum with weak humps, sparsely pubescent. Genitalia. Female genital segment (Fig. 42i) longer than abdomen, sparsely pubescent,
both dorsal and ventral plates broad basally and narrow posteriorly, dorsa! plate longer
than ventral, posterior region acuminate, with a roundly pointed apex, central region
beset with long setae, acuminate region armed with minute peg-like setae; ventral plate
acutely pointed at apex. Male genital segment smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent (Parts dissected
and mounted on slides). Proctiger (anal valve) (Fig. 42e) about 0-33 mm long, differen-
tiated into two regions, the anal region like a cylindrical tube, sparsely beset with setae,
the posterior region constituting two arc-shaped lobes, each lobe having a small, erect
process mesally at apex, outer surface of each lobe bearing sparse setae and the process
armed with a bunch of small sctac at apex; paramercs (Fig, 42f) small, slender, about
0:33 mm long, each forcep curved towards inside, meeting each other at top, sides sub-
parallel, apex round, terminating into two black acute points towards inside, outer
surface beset with small setae, mesal marginal setac slightly longer, a brush of setae present
just below the acute points; aedeagus (Fig. 42g) slender, outer arm smaller than basal,
basal arm thicker distally; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely beset with setae;
sperm pump as figured (Fig. 42h),

Host plant. On Santalum album Linn. Type locality. Jawalagiri, North Salem (Madras), F.R.I. Sandal Insect Survey,

Types. Holotype female, from the type locality, March 25, 1930; Allotype male,
from the type locality, March 21, 1930 (mounted on slide). Paratype male, from
Fraserpet, Coorg, 9.2.30.”

Comparison. Described from two specimens, male and female in a partly damaged
condition, Male parts were dissccted and mounted on slides. This species differs from
the other two species recorded from India, in having a broad basal band and a long band
along the posterior margin of the forewings and the shape of the wings is exactly like a

 

TH PSYLLIDAR OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

leaf; while in siiata Crawford the black or brown stripe extends along the cubitus from
medial vein to posterior margin, and in geniculata, sp. n. the wings are hyaline. Macrohomotoma striata Crawford 1925
(Fig, 38)

Crawford, D. L. 1925. Prec, Harati ent, Sos. 6(1)s 38, Fig. 2. Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V, 1924. Rec. Indian Mus, 261 622. Length of body, in female, 1-2 mm
Length of forewing, in female. 5 mm

The description given by Crawford (1925) is presented below:

© Golouration. Gencral colour-brown, with indistinct splotches of slightly darker-brown
on thoracic dorsum. ”

“ Structure. Vertex broad, smooth, strongly deflexed downward, with a slight foveal
depression on each side of the median line, Frontal sclerite about half covered by the
anterior ocellus and about half visible below the occllus. Antennae a little longer than
width of head between the inner margins of the eyes, but not as long as width cf head,
including eyes; moderately slender beyond the second segment. ”

“Thorax large and stout, smooth, without pubescence. Metanotum with a pair of
small horn-like process. Forewings hyaline, with a conspicuous black or brown stripe
extending along cubitus from medial vein to posterior margin; stem of cubital veins just
one-third as long as Cu,”

“ Abdomen large, with genital segment of female moderately long, but only about half
as long as greatest width of forewing. ”

* Host plant. Described from one female taken on Ficus sp at Keollegal (India), May,
1916, by T. V. Ramakrishna. *

Genus MESOHOMOTOMA Kuwayama (907

Mesokomotoma

Kuwayama, §, 1907. Trans. Sapporo nat, Hist. Soc. 2: 180. Aulmann, G, 1913. Pyyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 36. Crawford, D. 1, 1925. Proc, Hawais ent, Soc. 61 92-35. Tuthill, L. D, and Taylor, K. L. 1955. Aust, J. Zool. 3(2) + 249-250,

Heslop-Harrison, G. 1959. Ann. Mag. nal. Hist. (13), 2(15): 163. Heslop-Harrison, G, 1960, Ann. Mag. nat. Hist, (13), 3(32): 503. Udemostigma
Enderlein, G., 1910, Wissensch, Ergeb. der Schewed, Zool, Wiss. Ergobn, schwed. Zool. Exped. Kalimandjaro,
Exped, nach Dem Kalimandjaro, Deuisch-Ostafrikas, 1905-1906, Hemiptera, p, 138. Type species, Mesohomotoma camphorae Kuwayama, 1907 (original designation). ‘The distinctive characters defined by Crawford (1925) and Tuthill and Taylor (1955)
are expanded below with my notes,

Body large and slender. Head large, deeply cleft anteriorly, antennae attached to
the apices on each side of the cleft and enhancing the birostrate appearance of the head,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 143

   

scarcely narrower thar mesonotun. Vertex horizontal, somewhat raised ahave eyes
laterally, with deep oblique sulcus from near base to anterior margin of each side of
medial suture, produced as small overhanging teeth at antero-lateral angle, Genal
cones generally wanting or small, contiguous, completely covering frons except for small
portion around median sulcus, with small blunt lobes at postero-ventral margin next
clypeus. Median ocellus on dorsal side of head, Byes small, rounded. — Postocular
portion of occiput well developed, Antennae long and slender, over twice as loug as
width of head, usually about half ax long as forewing or in some species longer. Thorax
slender, quite flat dorsally, slightly arched. Pronotum very long, broad, flat, with a
pair of ymall angular processes (epiphysis) on anterior margin, extending below margin
laterally, Metanotum with a pair of small sharp dorsal processes or carinae. Forewing
large, long, membranous, usually more or less pointed at apex, basal vein very short;
media and cubitus with common petiole; no pterostigma present, Ry straight to costa;
Rs very short, curved to costa; medial cell very large. not including apex of wing, cubital
cell very broad, much smaller than medial; distinct cross vein or pseudoyein present
between furcation of micdia and radial sector. Legs stout, rather long. Metacoxa long,
with well-developed meracanthus. Meta-tibia with strong basal spur and several(usually
five) large black apical spincs. Proximal segment of metatarsus with one black claw. Both male and female genitalia of characteristic shape. Crawford (1925) wrote: “ The genus Mesohomotoma was erected in 1907 by Kuwayama
for the species M. camphorae, prevalent in Formosa on the foliage of camphor trees. To this
genus there should be referred, also, several other specics previously or snbsequendy
described in other genera.......Tyora indica Crawford (1919) also belongs to Mesohomo-
toma,”

* Tyora was erected by Walker (1870) for the South Pacific species J. congrua, which is
quite distinct from the other species referred to this genus, Tyora congrua, the type species,
has a distinct pterostigma in the forewing, while Mesohomotoma species have none; Tyora
has two pseudo-cross veins (callus), while Mesohomotoma has but one. In other respects,
also, Tyora is very distinct, as in the less deeply cleft vertex. “ Udamostigna was erected by Enderlein in 1910 with Froggatt’s Tyura hibisci as type
species. ...”’Crawford (1925) has stated: “This species described by Enderlein in 1918 from
specimens collected in Ceylon seems without doubt to be the same as Tyora indica Crawford,
and as Enderlein’s name has priority, the latter is sunk in synonymy. ”

“ s.ss..Udamostigma having nothing to separate it generically from Mesohomotoma. ”

Tuthill and Taylor (1955) has mentioned that, “ Crawford (1920, p. 356; 1925, p. 32)
placed Udamostigma in synonymy with the carlier Mesohomotoma Kuwayama, We can
add no information as to its relationships. It occurs through much of the Pacific on
Hibiscus tiliaceus Linn,” Heslop-Harrison (1960) in his discussion on psyllid taxonomy,
has stated: “ The scope of Tyora Walker is quite unknown since its definition was inade-
quate and the genus is represented by a single headless type. Under the circumstances
Mesohomotoma Kuwayama cannot be considered to be an invalid synonym of it. Tyora
should, however, be compared and related to Tenaphalara Kuwayama, rather than Mesv-
homotoma.”? ‘The present author agrees with Heslop-Harrison that these genera (e.g-

10

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

146 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Carsidara Walker, Tyora Walker, Nesiope Kirkaldy, Mesohomotona Kuwayama, Tenaphalara
Kuwayama and Udanostigma Enderlein) require careful study and their relationships
should be clearly defined. However. Tyora indica Crawford is treated here under the
genus Afesohomotoma,

Mesohomotoma lutheri (Enderlein) 1918
(Figs. 43, 44)
Enderlein, G. 1918. Zool. Fb. 411 484-485 (Udamostigma luther’). Crawford, D. L. 1919, Philipp. J. Sei. 15(2): 159-160, pl. 2, fig. 1 (Lyora indica). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V, 1924. Rec. Indian Mus, 26(6) : 623 (Tyora indica Crawt.) Crawford, D. L, 1925, Proc. Hatwaii, ent, Soc. 6(1): 32-34 (Mesokomotoma lutheri). Crawford, D. L. 1935. Insects of Samoa, 1927-35: 30-31 (Tyora indica== Mesohomotoma lutheri (Endl.). Length of body, in male, 2:72 mm; in female, 3-35 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3-70 mm; in female, 4-42 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-65 mm. Width of vertex between eyes, 0-40 mm

Length of antennae, 2:12 mm

Colouration. (Specimens preserved in alcohol, some mounted on cards). General
colour dark-brown with orange tinge or yellowish-green, head, tibiae of legs and genitalia
lighter, tarsi dark-brown, lateral ridges of vertex and ridge on each side of median suture
whitish in male, antennae pale-brown with tip of each segment and two apical segments
fuscous, dorsum of thorax sometimes with paler streaks or often white stripes in male,
wings transparent but with flavus tinge, with several brown spots along margins, veins
brownish, abdomen of male darker than that of female, female genitalia dark-brown
posteriorly,

Structure. Body long and slender, and often covered with flocculent material. Head
(Fig. 43a) small, scarcely smaller than thorax, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely
rugulose, somewhat horizontal, not declivous, deeply cleft in front; vertex broader than
long, emarginate at posterior margin, with lateral borders and area along the median
line elevated into a narrow rim, with two foveae near the posterior margin and one on
either side of median suture, a linear depression extending from each fovea and becoming
slightly divergent towards anterior margin, anterior margin over each antennal base
forming two small horn-like epiphysis, the antcro-lateral angles acute and slightly covering
the cyes, anterior margin deeply emarginate at the end of mcdian suture, front ocellus
at apex of excision of the median suture, visible from above; frons very narrow, scarcely,
visible between genae; genae not swollen into cones beneath, but projecting forward at
the antennal bases, forming the frontal cleft; posterior ocelli slightly elevated. Beak
moderately long,

Antennae missing in most specimens. One complete antenna mounted on a slide. Antenna (Fig. 43b) ten-segmented, two basal segments robust, bearing few setae, Ist
segment broadly transverse, 2nd narrower and longer than broad, remaining segments
slender, imbricate, 3rd segment. longest, 4th smaller than 3rd but longer than other. PAMILY PSYLLIDAE 7

1 mm

0.35 mm

 

Fig. 43, Mesohomoloma lutheri Endl—a: head and prothorax, dorsal view; br antenna; ot hind leg; dt
forewing; e: hind wing; f proctiger and aedeagus; g: hypandrium and parameres, lateral
views hr sperm pump; i female genitalia, lateral view; jr dorsal plate; Ik: ventral plate,
lateral view. segments, 5th and 7th equal and smaller than 4th, 6th slightly smaller than 5th, 8th slightly
smaller than 6th, two apical segments smallest, 9th slightly bigger than 10th, apical segment
with two unequal spines at apex, four sensoria present on segments 4, 5, 6 and 8,

148 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Thorax not broad, very slightly arched, rugulose, finely and sparsely pubescent. Pro-
thorax (Fig. 43a) weakly arched, descending anteriorly, broadly transverse, with two sub-
median whitish epiphysis on anterior margin, and with broad, deep foveal impressions
on cach lateral side; prescutum large, arched, about one and three-fourths times as
broad as long, broadest before middle, bluntly angulate laterally, posterior margin broadly
and convexly rounded ; scutum large and braud, broadest before middle, gradually sloping
posteriorly, angulate both laterally and posteriorly, a lite longer than prescutum;
scutellum narrowly transverse, cup-shaped, anterior margin concaye; post-scutellum of
metathorax with a pair of sub-median, strong and raised ridges or carinac,

Legs (Fig. 43c) quite long, beset with fine pubescence and minute points, femora
shorter than tibiae, all tibiae with apical comb of setae, hind tibiae with an extremely
large basal spur and five black spines at apex, basal tarsal joint smaller than apical joint
of all legs, basal tarsus of hind legs with one black spine at apex, all trochanters and
pro- and meso-coxae sparsely hirsute, meracanthus long and conical. Forewings (Fig. 43d) long and large, about two and three-fourths times as long as
broad, rather acute at apex, first marginal cell much smaller than second, second cell
very large, without pterostigma, radius extending straight to margin and slightly more
than twice as long as cubital petiole (M-+-Cu), furcal vein M,, » meeting below apex of
wing and rather paralleling the anterior apical margin, with a callus or a pseudo-vein
arising from base of second marginal cell and extending to radial sector, basal vein shor-
ter than cubital petiole. Hind wings (Fig. 43e) also long, costal margin armed with a
few simple and hooked setae, membrane beset with uniformly discriluted minute points. Abdomen moderately long, longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent and
also beset with minute points. Genitalia. Male genital seginent smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent. Anal
valve (Fig. 43£) slightly smaller than forceps, divided into two areas, the basal portion
broad and produced caudad into two long clubbed lobes, the apical portion bilobate,
the caudal lobe extending between the clubbed lobes, the anal lobe hirsute, anal aperture
facing anterad; parameres (Fig. 43g) about 0.35 mm long, slender, slightly broad at
base, rest cylindrical except at apex, bent inward near top, ending in a strong acute point,
slightly notched below apex, outer and mesal surfaces sparsely beset with small setae,
marginal setac slightly longer, two setae (one curved and the other straight) present just
below acute point; hypandrium (Fig. 43£) sparsely pubescent, bearing dorsally on cach
side a sharp, recurved spur, each spur with a small inner epiphysis; aedeagus (Fig. 43£)
slender, basal arm long and curved, onter arm small, the spoon end with a minute
tongucelike process; sperm pump thick and robust (Fig, 43h). Femule genital segment (Fig. 43i) scarcely smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent,
dersal plate (Fig, 433) almost as long as ventral, bulging upward and then abruptly sloping
backward, abruptly constricted in the apical third, acutely pointed, terminating in a
recurved point, sloping area bearing long hairs, apical portion armed with numerous
thick and heavy setae, circur-aral ring composed of a double row of pores; ventral
Plate (Fig. 43h) broad Lasally, similarly constricted slightly beyond apical half, bearing
thick and heavy setac near apex; cvipositor acutely pointed. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 149

Host plant. Recorded on Uren lobata Linn. Distribution, Previously recorded from Moluweas, Amboina (Muir), January, 1908,
5 males and 6 females, India, Mercara, Coorg (Y.R. Rao), May 24, 1917, 3 females
(Crawford, 1919), Ceylon (Enderlein, 1918)

Material examined. New records are: Tittimatti, Goorg, 8 males and | female, mounted
on cards, November 15, 1941, few adults and nymphis preserved in alcohol, collected
on Urena lobata (R.N. Mathur); Nagerhole. Coorg, 2 males and 2 females mounted
on cards, and some adults and nymphs preserved in alcchol, December 18, 1941, and
collected on Urena lobata (R.N. Mathur); Tista Valley, Darjeeling, W. Bengal, 5 males
and 7 females, mounted on cards, September I, 1934 (N.C. Chatterjee); Tista village,
W. Bengal, few adults preserved in alcohol (3. specimens mounted on cards) October
1965, and collected on Orena lobata (V.R. Phalak). One male collected on 15.11.41,
from Tittimatti, 5. Coorg (R.N. Mathur), donated to LA.R.L, New Delhi. Comparison. Crawford (1919) wrote: “This species is very close to Tyora hibisei
Froggatt, diffcring in some colour characters and in the genitalia of both sexes. ALesoho-
motoma camphorae Kuwayama is very similar to this species and apparently is not generi-
cally distinct”. In 1935, the sane author has repeated: “Zyora appears to be a South
Pacific genus, somewhat related to Carsidara and Tenaphalara.........,... Other species
have heen erroneously referred to this genus: T. hibisci Froggatt should be
known as Mesohomotoma hibisci (Froggatt); T. indica Crawford should be known as Afeso-
homotoma lutheri (Enderlein) ; T. sterculiae Froggatt does not belong to the present genus
but should be referred to another, perhaps Nezocarsidera.” Provisionally, this species
was placed under Carsidara, and specimens were sent to Dr Russell, for comparison with
the type Tyora indica Crawford. She writes (in litt.). ‘Your specimens labelled Carsidara
indica, on Urena lobata, Nagerhole, 18.12.1941 apparently are the species Crawford reported
from Coorg as Tyora indica, Whether this species is actually the same as Mesohumotoma
lutheri (Endevlein), I cannot say.” However, for the present, it is advisable to retain
this species under Mesohomotoma, till such time when the relationships of the other gencra,
e.g., Carsidara and Mesohomotoma are carefully studied, and accept the specific synonymy
established by Crawford himself. Biological notes. This species has been recorded from Coorg during November and
December 1941 and during September 1934 and October 1965 from Darjecling (W. Ben-
gal). The nymphs feed gregariously and are often covered with white flocculent material. The nymphal characters are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig, 44a) Length 2.65 mm. Of the psylline type. Form broadly
oval, the wing-pads projecting from the side of the body. Derm membranous through-
out, except the head plate, the weakly: sclerotic wing-pads and about one-third caudal
area of the abdomen. Derm beset sparsely with small, simple sctac of various length. Eyes small. Ventral side membranous throughout, except the apical caudal area which is weakly
sclerotic. Derm bearing a few small, simple setae. Antennae (Fig. 44b) situated ventrally,

150 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN §UBGONTINENT

 

 

Fig. 44, Mesohomotoma tutheri Endl.—a: fifth stage nymph; b: antenna; e: foreleg; di pore area, dorsal
and ventral views. about 1.40 mm long, ten-segmented, slender, imbricate, having a few simple setae,
8rd and 7th segments longest and equal, 4th and 8th equal and smaller than 3rd, 5th
and Gth equal and smaller than 4th, the last two terminal segments smallest, bearing
two unequal setae at apex, four sensoria present on segments 4,6, 8 and 9, Legs (Fig. 44c) long and slender, having a few setae, without trochanter, tibio-tarsal articulation
distinct, tarsi with a weak empodium. Anus at the extreme tip of the abdomen, surrounded
by a thick band of pores. The pore arcas (Fig, 44d) on the caudal sclerotic area consist
of four separate, curved double bands which are composed of many small pores, the
smallest caudal band surrounding the anal aperture. These bands are situated partly
on both dorsal and ventral sides of the abdomen. The inner bands contain faint pores,

Fourth stage. Length 1.87 mm, Identical with the fifth stage, except being smaller
in size, antennae eight-segmented with three sensoria, tibio-tarsa] articulation absent,
wing-pads small. Third stage. Length 1.12 mm, Resembling the fourth stage, but with antennae of
six segments and smaller wing-pads. Genus MYCOPSYLLA Froggatt 1901

Mycoprylla
Froggatt, W. W. 1901, Proc. Linn. Soc. N. S. W. 26: 258-259, Pl, XV. fig. 7; PL. XVI, figs. 8, 17. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE . 151

Tuthill, L. D, and Taylor, K. L. 1955. Aust. J. Zool. 3(2): 248-249, fig. 17. Aulmann, G, 1913, Pyyllidarum Catalogus, W, Junk, Berlin, pp. 30-31. Type species, Mycopsylla fici (Tryon) (=Pyyllu fici Tryon 1894) (miginal designation,
Froggatt 1901). Head scarcely broader than thorax. Vertex deeply wate medially; post-ocellar
region strongly swollen, with lateral ocelli above ey: c depressed between eyes;
median suture present; genac not produced but swollen bencath; frons covered except
for a narrow sclerite below front ocellus. Eyes very large and rounded. Antennae
large, very long, slender, much longer than width of head with eyes. Thorax arched,
Pronotum large lout almost concealed and deffexcd vertically below head, laterally fused
with propleura forming large lobe which extends back nearly to mesonotum. Post-
scutellum of metathorax produced as two truncate dorsal epiphyses, Legs large, long. Hind tibia with a strong basal spur and with corona of thick black spines apically. Meta-
coxa smoothly curved, with a large meracanthus. Proximal seginent of hind leg with
two black claw-like spines at apex, large plantar vesicle, Forewing large, membranous,
angulate apically, costa narrow, basal vein short, sinuate, cubital peticle (M+ Cu) very
short, pterostigma present, large, closed, opaque, Rs short, curved to costa, medial cell
narrow, paralleling costa, including apex of wing, cubital cell very large, Cu, appro-
aching base M, fork M,,. turning upward above tip of wing, fork Mg,4 turning
down below tip of wing, about thrice the length of upper fork. Proctiger with two charac-
teristic finger-like processes directed caudally. Forceps T-shaped apically, with acutely
pointed anterior arm. Dorsal plate of female genitalia convexly rounded caudally,

This genus seems to belong to the Pauropsyllinac on the basis of head and wing vena-
tion, and is perhaps most closely related to Macrohomotoma Kuwayama, as stated by
Tuthill and Taylor (1955). Mycopsylla has so far been known only from Australia;
this is the first record from India. Mycopsylla indica, sp. n.
(Fig. 45)
Length of body, in male, 2.55 mm; in female, 3.52 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 4.21 mm; in female, 5.06 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.95 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0.55 mm
Length of antennae, 2.85 mm

Colouration. (Dried specimens) General colour brown ochre, with vertex, scutum
and abdomen chestnut brown, basal antennal segments pale-brown, distal segments
brown, femora of legs pule-brown, tibiae and tarsal joints brown, ventral valve of male
genitalia black, dorsal plate of female genitalia black. Structure. Body large and robust. Head (Fig, 45a) scarcely broader than thorax,
deflexed, shining, finely and sparscly pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex broader than
long, about onc and one-third as broad as long, in dorsal view depressed between the eyes,

152 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

and then weakly rounded or somewhat bent vertically downward in front, with two foveal
impressions near the posterior margin and one on vach side of median suture, posterior
margin emarginatcly angled in middle, post-ovellar region swollen, lateral ocelli above
eyes, anterior ocellus visible from above, deeply excavate medially in front; genae small,
and weakly swollen beneath, frons covered except for a very narrow sclerite below front
ocellus. Eyes large, somewhat hemispherical. Clypeus visible in front between fore
coxac. Antennae (Figs. 45b, ¢) large, very leng and slender, except wo basal segments which
are robust, much longer than width of head with eyes, tci-segmented, strongly pubes-
cent, Ist segment broadly transverse, 2nd subquadrate, as long as Ist, remaining segments
imbricate and filiform, 3rd segment longest, -fth smaller than 3rd, slightly lenger than
half of 3rd segnient, 5th slightly longer than 6th but slightly smaller than 4th, 7th slightly
smaller than 6th, 8th slightly more than helf as long as 7th, 9th segment smaller than
8th, terminal seginent very small, hearing two unequal apical setae, four sensoria prescut
on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax large and long, moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Prothorax almost concealed and deflexcd perpendicul: behind head, convexly
rounded, narrower in middle, broader latevally, with two foveal impressions ou each
side, laterally fused with propleura forming large lobe which extends back nearly to
mesonotum: prescutunt slightly broader than long, broadest posteriorly beyond middle,
gradually narrowed anteriorly, angulate laterally, posterior margin also angulate sub-
medianally; scucum large and broad, about twice as broad as long, broadest near about
middle. slightly smaller in length than prescutum, angulate laterally; scutellum broadly
transverse, about twice as broad as Jong, convex in dorsal vi-w, broad anteriorly and
narrow posteriorly, anterior margin almost straight, with prominent antero-lateral angles;
post-scutellum of metathorax quite large and broad, bearing two strong and thick
epiphyses, each having a strong, black acute point. Legs (Fig. 45d) quite large and jong, coarsely pubescent and also beset with minute
points arranged in lincar ser tibiae longer than femora, bearing apical comb of sctae,
tibial grooves of fore and middle legs large, hind tibia with a strong and blunt basal
spur and with corona of heavy, tooth-like, black spines apically (Fig. 45e), tarsal seg-
ments of fore and middle legs equal, but in hind Jeg, basal segment is longer than apical
and bears two black claw-like spines at apex, large plantar vesicle; metacoxa smoothly
curved, with meracanthus large and somewhat tubular. Forewings (Fig. 45f) very large and lnoad, hyaline, clear, slightly Jess than two and
a half times as long as broad, membranous, angulate apically, costa narrow, basal vein
short, strongly sinuate, pterostigma present, small, narrow, closed and opaque, slightly
longer in female (Fig. 45g), cubitus smaller than radius, but slightly longer than cubital
petiole, Ry slightly smaller than radius, Rs short, curved to costa and slightly longer than
basal vein, marginal cells very large, lirst marginal cell longer and breader than second,
the latter almost rectangular in shape, with fork My,. turning upward above tip of
wing. and fork Mg,, turning down below tip of wirg, about two and a half times
the length of upper fork, cubital petiole slightly shorter than radius, medial cell narrow,

 

   
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 153

   

 

aaa

0.5 mm 0.5 mm n’ 5 mm. Fig. 4. Mycopyila indica, sp, n.—ai front view of head; b: antenna; et segment of antenna; dz hind leg;
: apical spines of hind tibia; f: forewing of male; gr portion of forewing of female; ht hind
wing, 4: male genitalia; ji proctiger and acdeagus, lateral aspeet; k,l, mi: forceps, caudal and
mesal aspects; mi sperm pump: 0: female genitalia, lateral view; pi ventral plate, ventral view. 154 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

paralleling costa, including apex of wing, cubital cell very large, Guy approaching base
of M, membrane beset with minute points. Hind wings (Fig. 45h) also auite large and broad, membrane beset with minute points,
costal margin armed with several simple and a few hooked setae. Abdomen longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent, and also beset with minute
points, pubescence prominent on sternites. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 45i) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 45j) short, somewhat globose basally, posterior margins produced caudad into two long
finger-like processes (when secn in lateral vicw), anus situated on a slightly clev-
ated ring above caudal prolongations, aral ring armed with long setae, upper surface
of thecaudal processes also beset with long setae; paramercs (Figs, 45k, 1, m) relatively
short, narrow at base, very broad at apex, somewhat T-shaped in caudal view, outer
surface convexly rounded apically, with the anterior process of apex longer, slender
and acutely pointed, projecting upward and bent posteriorly to meet the process of the
other side, posterior process small, strong and thick and directed downward and sub-
acutely pointed, mesal surface armed with long and simple setae; hypandrium (Fig. 45i)
simple, of usual shape, with basal lateral margins produced quite upwards, surface bearing
sparse simple setae; acdcagus (Fig. 45j) of peculiar shape, basal arm long having a loop,
outer arm small, thick and shaped like a hood, with a strong posterior condyle, anterior
portion armed with minute points; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 45n). Female genitalia (Fig. 45 0) smaller than abdomen. Dorsal plate longer than ventral,
broad at base and narrow caudally, convexly rounded apically, bearing a brush of setae
near the posterior end, surface beset with simple setae and also with minute points, setac
longer in the caudal region, anal opening quite large and surrounded by a double ring
of slit-like pores, the circum-anal ring guarded by minute setae; ventral plate (Fig. 45p)
small, broad at base, narrow and subacute apically, deeply invaginated medianally near
apex, sparsely pubescent with long and simple sctac, caudal region armed with minute
rows of points; ovipositor acutcly pointed. Host plant. On Santalum album Linn. Type locality. Kottur, 1,129 m, Vellore district (Tamil Nadu), (F.R.I. Sandal Insect
Survey). Types, Holctype male, July 16, 1931 (plot 22); Allotype female, August 22, 1931 (plot
24); Paratypes are: 2 males, July 2, 1931 (plot 22), 1 male, July 16, 1931 (plot 22), 1 male,
July 31, 1931 (plot 23), 3 males, Octoler 25, 1931 (plot 24), 1 male, October 28, 1931,
(plot 27), 1 female, May 8, 1931 (plot 25), 1 female, June 20, 1931 (plot 23), 1 female,
June 21, 1931 (plot 25), 1 female, June 25 , 1931 (plot 22), 1 female, June 27, 1931
(plot 27), 1 female, June 28, 1931 (plot 25), 1 female, October 24, 1931 (plot 23),
and 1 female, December 7, 1931 ; all from the type locality (F,R.I, Sandal Insect Survey). All type material and some slides with mounted parts, deposited at F.R.I., Dehra
Dun. Comparison. Mycopsylla indica, sp.n, is the only specics of this genus recorded from
India. It differs markedly from M. fici Tryon and M. proxima Frogg., in details of
wing venation, but resembles to some extent in genitalia with the latter species,

- FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 155

Genus PSAUSIA Enderlein 151+

Psausia
Enderlein, G. 1914. Psyllidologia IL”. Ent, Mitt, 3, Nr. 7. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1949, Ana, Mag. nat, Hist, (12) 2: 375-384. The position of the genus Psausia Enderlein has been discussed in detail by Heslop-
Harrison (1949), who wrote: ‘* On the basis of wing venation alone, Enderlein (1914)
has separated the genus Psausia, naming the type to be P. radiata (Kuw. ), a species first
described in 1907”. Enderlein’s diagnosis of Psausia reads as follows:

‘ Radius und 7 cine lange Strecke dicht neben der Media hinlaufend und ziemlich
nahe der Basis von Cu-M getrennt. M, weit vor der Flugelspitze, Af, hinter der Flugel-
spitze mundend. Cubitus ungegabelt. Adern mit linger Behaarung. Fithler dicht
behaart. ””

Heslop-Harrison has shown that species placed by Crawford under Homotoma fall
under this genus and further mentioned that, “ In practice, when using Crawford’s 1919
key to the genus Homotoma, we find the whole is split into three well-defined groups of
species on characters which scem to deserve higher rank than the merely specific. “ Group One, including H. radiatum Kuw. and H. distincia Craw., whilst possessing the
reduced venation of a type parallel with the next group, has the “ medial vein contiguous
with the radius for about one half of the length of the latter, leaving an open cell between
them on the costal margin. ”

* Group Two includes H. bakeri Craw. and H, biliniata Craw, and is also characterised
by reduced venation but possesses the “‘ medial vein contiguous with the radius for nearly
or quite the entire length of the latter, leaving no cell, or only a very small one between
them—the first marginal cell present but small, ”

“ Group Three, containing only onc species, H. pacifica Craw., possesses more or less
normal venation and a ptcrostigma. ”

“ This key had obviously been drawn up without reference to the type species of Homo-
toma, H. ficus. The normal psylline venation of the latter prevents its inclusion into the
first and second groups, while the fact that it has no pterostigma prevents its entry into
the last. ”

“ Enderlein’s genus Psausia constitutes Group One, his Metapsausia Group Two, and
Labobrachia Group Three. It now seems fairly clear where he obtained the main ideas
for the separation of the latter two genera; it is most unlikely that he saw many
of the species involved. ”

“In Psausia, the medial vein approximates the path of the radius to a remarkable
degree without actually fusing with it. There is, however, a well-marked cell left open
on the costal margin, but the cubital cell, formed normally by Cu;, and Cuy, (Cu, and
Clu, of many authors) and the wing margin, is absent as the result of the fusion of these
latter two secondary veins. ”

The species present in my collection shows striking reduction in the wing venation and
agrees with the characters defined in the first and second groups and it is, therefore,
considered advisable to combine both these groups and retain them under the genus

156 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBGONTINENT

Psausia, containing radiatum, distincta, bakeri, biliniata and the new species described
hy me, ‘The characters of Prawiia expanded by Heslop-Harrison are redefined as below,

Head very strongly cleft in front; slightly broader or narrower than the thorax; genac
call, slightly swollen, divergent, aud uumistakable from the side elevation; antennae
not noticcably tapering. with nine distinct segments, termiual tenth segment small and
reduced; pronotun depresed below prescutum, partly concealed behind head, visible
only at the Jaicral margins; post-scutcllum large, with two large, thick, erect spinous
processes; hind tibia without basal spurs basal tarsal segment of hind leg with two pro-
minent or weakly developed claw-like spines at apex; venation much reduced, medial
vein contiguous with the radius for about one half of the length or nearly or quite the
entire length of the laiter, leaving an open cell or no cell, or only a very smail cell between
them on the costal margin; the first marginal cell present but small, or absent,

From Tndia, only two species ave recorded: P. distincta (Craw.) and P. indica, sp. n.

 

 

   

   

KEY TO THE SPECIES OF PSAUSIA

1, Medial vein contiguous with the radius for about one half the length of the
first marginal

latter, leaving an open cell between them on the costal margi:
cell absent. —. Medial vein contiguous with the radius for nearly or quite the enitre length of
the latter, Ieaving an open cell between them on the costal margin; first
marginal cell present but small. .P. distincta Craw,

 

P. indica, sp. n.

Psausia distincta (Crawford) 1912
(Fig. 38)
Crawford, D. L. 1912, Rec. Indian Mus, 7(5)1 433, pl. xxxiv, figs. T, Us pl. xexv, fig. P, (Homotoma
distinctd). Heslop-Harrison, G, 1949, Ann, Mag. nat, Hist, (12), 2: 375-384, figs. 1-5. Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924, Rec. Indian Mus, 26% 622 (Homotoma distincta),

Length of body, in male, 2-4 mm; in female, 1-7 mm
Length of forewings, in inale, 2-7 mm; in female, 2-8 mm
Greatest width of forewings, 1-0 to ll mm

Width of head with eyes, 0:59 to 0-6 mm

Width of vertex between cyes, 0-36 to 0-37 mm

Length of antennac, 0-8 mm

 

This species is not represented in my collection and salient features are reproduced as
defined by Crawford (1912) and Heslop-Harrison (1949). Coloration. General colour fight yellow, glossy; antennae brown to black. Structure. Body rather small. Head (Figs. 38m, n) short, somewhat deflexed, with
eyes not quite as broad as thorax, deeply cleft in front between antennae; vertex glossy,
sparsely pubescent, descending frum each side to median linc; anterior ocellus not visible
from above; lateral ocelli situated on prominent tubercles on top of head, bright
orange in colour easily distinguishable with the naked cyc; facial cones inferior, not
visible from above, short, widely jivergent, slightly pubescent. Antennae thick, more

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 157

than twice as long as width of head, strongly hirsute, and in proportion ro the rest of
the insect, extremely stout, with nine complete segments, tenth atrophied, as an in-
completely differentiated sensory region, segments becoming progressively darker
towards apex, Ist segment stout, 3rd as long as 4th to 6th combined, terminal seta
short. Eyes large, appear slightly more prominent due to the strongly cleft head. yellow
orange in live specimens but becoming bone-white on death, Labruim small,

Thorax somewhat arched in continuity with the slightly deflesed head and the down-
curved abdomen, notal region dull yellow becoming shiny on death, with slight indications
vf darker longitudinal striac; pronctum short, narrow and obscured behind the head
underneath the prescutum; propleurites oblique, extending downwards to terminate
approximetely at the cox, very indistinct in outline. Legs rather stout, short, slightly pubescent, darker in colour towards their inner sur-
faces; hind tibiae without basal spurs; postecior basal tarsi with weakly developed apical
spines; meracanthus strikingly whits, proininently situated and characteristically curved
in a downward direction,

Forewings (Fig. 38 0) hyaline, transparent, membrane becoming tinged with yellow
on death of insect, pointed, leaf-like, strongly pointed at apex, about two and a half
times as long as broad, broadest two-thirds along its length, custal margin straight up to
the junction of M,,,, then curning in an oblique curve to the pointed apex, and abruptly
round again at the other side of the wing befure reaching the junction of M, y, second
marginal cell very large, including apex of wing, first marginal cell wanting, cubital
petiole and base of second cubital very close to discoidal subcosta and lyase of radius but not
joined thercto, raclius short, black, anal margin continued ina gentle curve, alar radulae
absent, complete absence of trichia. Hind wings reduced, venation absent. or obscure. Abdomen slender and attenuated. Genitalia, Male genital segment and 8th sternite appearing to be fused into a shallow
elongated hoat-shape, equal in length to the rest of the abdomen. Anal valve small,
about 0-14 min long, lobed and somewhat sinuate in contour, inconspicuous when it
lies pressed back on the abdomen; aedeagus large, stout and casily discernible in life;
parameres about 0:12 mm long, curved backwards away {rom the anal valve, width at
base about 0-33 mm, cach with a thumb-like tooth on the iuner side aud a diagonal, more
heavily chitinized stria across the top, rather hirsute, with distincly glandular regions on
the apices of inferior faces,

Female genital segment about as long as rest of abdomen, stout, dorsal plate a litde
longer than ventral, both rather acute. Host plant, On Ficus religiosa. Distribution. Recorded from Pusa (Bihar); Kanpur (U.P.). Comparison. This species was described by Crawford from a single female, while
Heslop-Harrison has given the characters of the males, under Homotoma distincta and
Psausia distincta, respectively, and the species is rightly placed in the genus Psausia. ‘This
species differs from indica, sp. n, in the absence of first marginal cell, shape of wing, shape
of head, length of 3rd antennal segnient, and some other characters. This is very close
to Homotoma radiatum Kutwayama (Japan), which also goes in Psausia, but seems to be

 

 

    

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

158 PSYLIIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

quite distinct in several respects. The records of the Indian Agricultural Rescarch Ins-
titute, New Delhi, show that the female specimen collected on 26.4.10, on wing (C.S.M.) is with D. L. Crawford,

Biological notes. According to Heslop-Harvison (1949), this species is an extremely
active insect and its powers of flight are great, At rest the wings are held at an angle to
the plane of the horly in a triozine posture, while the stout, long, hirsute antennae are
held straight out in front of the head—almost touching cach other, Both adults and
nymphs inhabit the leaves of Ficus religiosa, occurring wildly at Kanpur. Nymphal stages

Heslop-Harrison writes: “The nymphs appear to be free-living on the leaves of Ficus
religiosa, and are capable of sluggish, but unrestricted movement. The secta-setae secrete
a silvery, halo-like fringe of wax plates that become casily detached. Honey-dew secre-

tion seems limited and the droplets are thrown clear on secretion by an upward flicking
of the abdomen, * He has described and figured the last nymphal stage. Paausia indica, sp. n.
(Figs, 46, 47)

Length of body, in male, 2-35 mm; in female, 2-50 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2-80 mm; in female, 3-30 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-63 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-40 mm

Length of antennae, 1-70 mm

Colourction. (Dried specimens). General colour brownish-yellow with greenish tinge,
head pale clay yellow, slightly darker in male, genae pale-yellow, antennae fuscous
dorsally and lighter ventrally and in proximal half, ocelli pink red, thorax with grayish
tinge, two thick spinous processes of metathorax smoky black, legs pale-yellow, apical
tarsal segments of hind to forelegs light to dark-brown, spines on hind tibiae black,
abdomen brownish-yellow, darker laterally, pale-yellow ventrally, genitalia brownish-
yellow, forewings hyaline, transparent, veins light brown, with a fuscous stripe running
along the radial sector to costal margin. ‘Structure. Head (Figs. 46a, b) slightly smaller than thorax, not declivous, deeply
cleft in front between antennae, vertex gradually sloping forward, descending from
each side to median suture, about twice as broed as long, sparsely hairy with long hairs,
with pronsinent foveal impressions on each side, near posterior margin, posterior ocelli
large and somewhat elevated, anterior ocellus not visible from above; genae not visible
from above, inferior, short, slightly swollen and not covering frons, divergent, sparsely hairy
with long hairs. Eyes large, somewhat hemispherical. Clypeus large, visible from below. Antennae (Fig. 46c) long and thick, ten-segmented, much smaller than body without
wings, conspicuously hairy, hairs borne on minute tubercles, segments from 4 to 9 pro-
gressively decreasing in length, segments with fine serrated carinae, two basal segments
large and robust, 3rd scgment longest, slightly more than twice as long as 4th, and almost

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE

159

 

 

Fig. 46, Psausia indica, sp. n.—at head, dorsal view; br head, front view; et antenna; di foreleg; ex
middle leg; ft hind leg; gt apical spines of hind leg: ht forewing; i hind wing; jt malegenitalia;

kc: anal valve, anterior view; Ik parameres, mesal view; mi aedeagus; mt sperm pump; ot
female genitalia,

160 PSYLLIDAK OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

as long as 7th to 10th combined, terminal segment smatlest with two spines at apex, four
sensoria present on segments 4, 6,8, 9. Thorax moderately arched, rob
Prothoray shert, depressed below. prescutum, partly concealed behind head, convexly
rounded, descending, with two strong, submedian cpiphyses, one on cither side, and
continued laterally as a ridge, ending ina bint angie, with two foveal impressions on
each side, lateral sides bent forward below eyes; prescutum broader than long, abeut one
and three-fourths times broader than long, broadest in middle, gradually narrowed aud
convexly rounded anteriorly, bluntly angled at the sides, posterior margin also angled;
soutum large, abortt twice as broad as long, broadest before middle, flat dorso-medianally
and gradually sloping and bluntly angled at the sides, slightly longer than prescutum;
seutellum small and transverse, about twice as broad as long, anterior margin almost
straight, with prominent antero-lateral angles, broadly rounded posteriorly; post-scutcl-
lum (pseudonotum) large, with a median line and two large, thick, horn-like, spinous
processes, directed upward. Legs (Figs. 46d, e,f,g) moderately long, stout, coarsely hairy, hairs borne en minute
tubercles, tibiae longer than femora, hind tibiae without basal spur, with 5 or 6 short,
stout black spines on the margin at apex (Fig. 46g), basal tarsal segment as long as apical
of hind leg, having two black claw-like spines at apex, basal tarsal segments shorter than
apical of fore and middle legs, meta-coxal spur (meracanthus) of medium sizc, blurtly
conical. Forewings (Fig. 64h) hyaline, wansparent, somewhat rhomboidal iu shape, subacute
at apex, about two and a haif times as long as broad, yeins conspicuously hairy, tirst
marginal cell very small, sccond marginal cell very large, including apex of wing, media
and radius quite contiguous for mcre than one half the length of latter, leaving an open
cell between them on costal margin, pterostigma wanting, cubital petiole and base of
cubitus very close to basal vein and base of radius, radius short, with a fuscous stripe
running along the radial sector, cubitus without black band, Hind wings (Fig. 463)
small, membrane thickly beset with minute points and with few thick and hooked setae
on costal margin. Abdomen short und thick, sparsely hairy ventrally, with long hairs. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 46j) small, pubescent. Anal valve (Fig. 46k)
small, about (-20 mm long, slightly smaller than forceps (parameres), demarcated into
wo regions, the basal baloon-shaped region and the apical anal region, anal region small,
cylindrical, beset with stout setac, with an opening at top, the basal region invaginated
posteriorly and mesally, forming round lobes, each lobe is produced into a slender, conical
process mesally, armed with stout setae, posterior margin of lobes also beset with thick
setae; parameres (Fig. 46 1) small, about 0-28 mm long, in lateral aspect, broad basally
and gradually narrowed and roundly pointed at apex, each forcep with a black sclerotic,
mesul ridge, running from apex to near about its middle, and a thick peg-like tooth set
in a socket, below the ridge, outer surface beset with small simple setae, mesal surface
below the ridge armed with simple setse, marginal setae longer and slightly -curved;
hypandrium simple, of vsual shape, sparsely besct with simple setae; acdeagus quite

sparsely beset with hairs, very tinely reticulated. FAMILY Ps¥LLIDAE 161

long, with a thick spoon end, outer arm smaller than basal. basal arm thicker in middle. Fomale genital segment (Fig. 46 0) smaller than abdomen, pubescent. li
ow minute tubercles, slightly defle
basally and gradually: r

 

borne
dl; dor: than ventral, broad
arrowed posterierly, apex roundly pointed. hearing a brush of
short setae, anal opening longer than wide. oval, with a ring of double row of minute
pores. long hairs arising fron: minute papillae present in the central and posterior re
of valves ventral plate gradually narrowed from centre and acute at apex, with a brush
of short setac, hairs longer in iniddle; ovipositor lang, esserted and acntely pointed. Host plants, On young shoots of Fiews macrocarp ¢ (
(=F. infectoria). Tipe lcality, New Dehra Dum (U. I

Types. Described fron a long sevies of ruales and Gemales,
female. from the type locality, Mareh 15, 1960; Paratypes 1 male and 7 females, March
15, 1960, 1 anales and 13 females, March 16, 1960, 7 males and 7 fanales, March
93, 1960 (R.N. Mathun). on Ficus infectoria. ional material, not designated as
paratypes: males and 3 females, April 23, 1963, 2 males and 1 female, April 24. 3963. | male and 3 females, April 30. 1963, all collected on Ficus iyfectaria (R.N. Mathur). All types deposited at F.R.1.. Dehra Dun. Some slides, and both adults
and nymphs, preserved in alcohol, also incorporated in the National Collection at
this Institute. Lwo paratypes (Ig, 1) also deposited at LAR-L, New Delhi. Comparison. This species vesembles closely with Homotoma distincta Crawlord (1912)
and J. radiatum Kuwayama (1908) which alse come under Psausia but is distinguishable
from them by the venation, shape of wing, preseuce of first marginal cell and a black
stripe running along the radial sector and some other characters,

Biological notes. Both adulty and uymphs are commonly found on the young shoots
of Ficw macrocarpa at New Forest, Dehra Dun (Plate 2b). Tis mature nymphal s
described below. &

   

 

 
  

pre

 

ios

 

 

 

. retuva) and F. lucescens

 

‘orest,

   

 

Holatype wale; Allotype

 

   

   

 

   
  

 

 

   

    

Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Big. 47a). Pale-yellow with abdomen brownish. eyes piukish-red,
margin of abdomen aud wing pads with long white waxy threads, Length 1:72 mm. Body broadly oval; the wing-pads large and projecting beyond the contour of the body,
not produced anteriorly, Dorsum with a pair of large sclerotic areas which eccupy most
of the head, with large plates on the thorax; with 5 pairs of large transver
the anterior half and a single large plate in the post

  

‘se plates in
ior half of abdomen as indicated
in the figure. Entire margin of wing pads and the posterior half of abdomen with a
continuous intermixcd series of both lanceolate and spearshaped sctae, borne on minute
papillae. Derm beset with minute points and also with thick setae borne on minute
tubere

 

 

Ventral side membranous, except for the posterior one-third, a small area around two
spiracles and three pairs of small submedian areas, Derm thickly beset v
points and also with small simple setae. Antennae (Fig. 47b) borne ventrally, quite large, about 0-52 mm long, sparsely armed

iW

 

h minute

162 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

‘es
‘

ey
EP eres

 

Fig. 47. Psausia indica, sp, n~ax filth stage nymph; bt antenna; et part of middle leg; di part of hind
leg; ¢1 circum-anal pore ring. with Jong simple sctac, two-segmented, basal segment large and transverse; 2nd segment
longest, having four sensoria, weakly constricted near apex, and with two unequal apical
spines. Legs (Figs. 47c, d) well-developed, without trochanters, the femora far from
attaining the margin of the body, tibio-tarsal articulation distinct, tibia of hind leg with
4 prominent ventral bulge, cach tarsus with two golf-club sctae; claws present, pulvillus
small, fish-tail like. Anal opening set well away from the apex of the abdomen. The
pore area on the caudal sclerotic area appears as a large band separated from the circum-
anal ring of porcs. This band is composed of a continuous clusters of many small round
pores. The circum-anal pore ring consists of a single row of slit-like pores and an inner
ring of less defined pores (Fig. 47e). Genus RHINOPSYLLA Riley 1883

Rhinopgylla :

Riley, G. V. 1883. Proc. biol. Soc. Wash, 2: 77. Crawford, D. L. 1911. Pomona Coll. F. Ent. 3(1): 440-441,

Crawford, D, L, 1911, iid, 32) 433,

Aulmann, G. 1913, Pyyllidarum Gatalogus, Berlin, p. 60. Crawford, D. L. 1914. Bull. U.S, natn, Mus, 85: 59,

Tuthill, L. D, 1942, 7. Kan. ent. Soe. 15(2): 45. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 163

Type species. Rhinopsylla schwarzii Riley 1883 (original designation). This genus was erected for the single species, schwarzii, in 1883, by Riley. The cha-
racters outlined by Crawford (1911, 1914) and Tuthill (1942) are expanded with my
notes, as below. Body moderately slender, slightly arched dorsally, surface punctate or conspicuously
reticulated or shagrcencd. Head often deeply cleft anteriorly at median suture, narrower,
as broad or broacler than thorax. Antericr ocellus in front, visible from above. Post
ocellar region clevated. Frons covered by genae. Facial cones wanting, sometimes
swollen under insertion of antennac. Antennal sockets large, lateral and located below
the level of lower margin of eyes. Antennae long and slender, two basal segments large
and robust, third segment longest. Thorax only slightly arched. Prothoracic episterna
strongly produced anteriorly. Legs long and slender, femora of foreleg not cnlarged;
hind tibiae with a small spur or a series of small spurs at base or often none, apex large
and expanded hearing onc outer and thvec inner apical spines. Forewings large, vena-
tion typical triozine, costal margin strongly curved, rather rounded at apex, radial sector
quite long, fork M,-F, mecting near apex, marginal cells unequal. Crawford (1914) wrote: “This is a very interesting genus, in that it grades into Auwayama
of the Trioginae on the one hand, and other species grade into the preceding genera of
Carsidarinae on the other hand, There are unmistakable relationships to both families,
but the most fundamental characters scem to indicate a closer relationship with the Carsi-
darinae.”” In 1942, Dr Tuthill has correctly remarked that: “The genus Rhinopsylla
is poorly represented in most collections of Psyllidae. Due principally to this paucity
of material, numerous errors have been made by all those who have worked with the
group.” In the collections in India, there is only one species, R. stylata, which has been
described by Crawford in 1912, This type female specimen present at the Zoological
Survey of India, is also in poor condition (one antenna, one forewing, both hind wings
and legs partly missing). Rhinopsylla stylata Crawford 1912
(Fig. 48)
Crawford, D, L. 1912, Ree. Indian Mus, 7 (5): 426-427, Pl. xxxiii, fig. W; PL. xxxiv, fig, F:
pl. xxxy, fig, H.
Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus, 26: 623. Length of body, in female, 2°5 mm
Length of forewing, in female, 2°83 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°60 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0°35 mm
Length of antenna, 1'14 mm

Colouration, General colour deep black dorsally, lighter ventrally, antenna pale-
brown, darker distally, legs pale-brown, femora darker, forewing flavus, veins darker. Structure, Body moderately large, shining, surface conspicuously reticulated or
shagreencd. Head (Figs, 48a, b) a little narrower than thorax, slightly deflexed, deeply

164 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 48, tmnopsytla stylata Crawford—as head, front views br head and thorax, lateral view; e antenna;
di: hind leg; et forewing; fr abdomen and female genitalia, lateral view. cleft anteriorly; vertex broader than long, slightly more than twice as broad as long,
excavated in cenue between median suture, foveal impressions not discernible, post-
ocellar region elevated, posterior margin moderately emarginatc, anterior margin deeply
emarginate, with front ocellus at apex of emargination, front acellus visible from above;
facial cores wanting, slightly swollen under insertion of antennac, sparsely pubcscent
with long hairs, Tabrum visible from front, Rostrum Jeng, projecting downward
between legs. Eyes large, protruding, anterior. Antennal sockets large and located
below the level of lower margin of eyes. Antenna (Fig, 48c) long, slender, ten-segmented, bearing few sctae, two basal segments
robust, broadly transverse, equal in length, remaining segments slender, imbricate, 3rd
longest, about two and a half times as long as 4th, 4th a little smaller than Sth, Sth,
6th, 7th and 8th, cach almost equal in length and slightly longer than 4th, 9th and 10th
also equal and each smaller than 4th, terminal segment bearing two unequal apical spines. FAMILY PSYLLIDAU 165

‘Uhorax (Fig. 48b) slightly arched, deeply reticulated. Prothorax moderately long,
convexly rounded, descending, having two fovcul impressions on each side; pleurites
large, prominent, strongly produced anteiiorly; prescutum scarcely longer than broad,
broadest beyond middle, gradually narrowed and sloping — anterior
laterally; scutum and scutellum obscured by the pin. Legs (Fig. 48d) long and slender, sparsely pubescent, femora shorter than tibiac, not
enlarged, tibiae bearing apical comb of sctac. hind tibiae with a series of small Wasa
spurs, apex Jarge and expanded into a strong spur bearing one black spine on one side
and three black spines on the other, basal tarsal segments longer than apical, hind coxae
very large, with Jong spur, mecracanthus rather long, slender and triangular. Forewing (Fig. 48e) large, hyaline, transparent, a little more than twice as long as
broad, greatest width about 1'2 mm, rather rounded at apex, without ptcrostigma, vena-
tion typical triozine, ic., R. M, and Cu g¢ fiom the same point, basal vein almost
as long as cubitus, radius slightly longer than Rj, radial sector quite long, cubitus a little
more than two and a half times as long as radius, fork M,-}-, meeting at apex of wing,

 

 

  

angulate

 

 

 

 

marginal cells subequal, first cell slightly longer and broader than second. Hind wings broken in the specinen. Abdomen small, but broad, suddenly narrowed before genital segment, sparsely pubes-
cent (Fig. 48£). Genitalia. Female genital segment (Fig. 48£) much longer than abdomen, sparsely
pubescent, slender, acuminate, plates subequal, dorsal plate longer than ventral, roundly
pointed at tip, hairs longer in middle, apical region armed with minute peg-like sctac;
ventral plate acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor acutely pointed. Distribution. One famale collected from valley of the River Sutlej, below Simla
(WW. Himalayas, now Himachal Pradesh) (N. Annandale}, on May 6, 1910. Comparison, Redescribed from the female type specimen (No.9708/18), incorporating
the characters outlined by Crawford (1912). This specimen present at the Zoological
Sinvey of India, Caleutta is in poor condition, us indicated above. Only a single species
is represented from India, under the genus Rhingpsylla Riley. It is easily recognisable
by the triozine venation and decply cleft head anteriorly,

 

 

 

Genus TENAPHALARA Kuwwayama 1907

Toaphalara
Kuwayama, 8. 1907, Trans, Sapporo nat. Hist, Soc. 2+ 155,
Aulmann, G, 1913. Peyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 75. Crawford, D, L. 1919, Philipp. 7. Sci, 15: 163,
Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924, Rec. Indian Mus, 26: 623. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1959. Ann, Mag. nat, Hist. (18), 2(15): 163,
Heslop-Harrison, G, 1960. ibid, (18), 3 (32): 503. Strongylocephala
Grawford, D. L. 1917, Philipp. 7. Sei. 12: 166. Type species. Tenaphatara acutipenniy Kuwayama 1908 (original designacon). The distinctive characters arc expanded as below:

166 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

    
 

 

ad short, not much deflexed, nearly or quite as broad
as thorax; vertex qua ly longer than broad, more or less uniformly rounded
forward and downward, with anterior ocellus at front end of head and anteunae inserted
at end of each side of front ocellus, Post ocelli not elevated. Posterior margin of head
almost straight. Genae net produced into cones, slightly swollen beneath antennal
sockets, usually not wholly covering frons, Frons visible bewween genac. Antennac
long and slender, longer than width of head. Eyes hemispherical, nct recessive. Thorax
long and slender, not arched. Legs slender, often rather long; hind tibiac with basal
spur and short black spines at apex; proximal tarsal joint of hind leg without claw-like
spines at apex. Forewings long and narrow, more cr less acutely pointed at apex ;
venation of Carsidarinae type, with two pseudo-veins or calluses;  pterostigma present. Abdomen long and slender. Kuwayama placed this genus at the end of his sub-family Aphalarinae, but Crawford
placed Tenaphalara without the cleft head and with the Aphalarine venation, within the
Carsidarinae, ag majority of the characters point rather to an affinity with the latter sub-
family which he considered distinct. The genus Strongylocephala Crawford is treated as
synonymous with Tenaphalara by Crawford (1917). This genus includes one species
ueutipennis Kuwayama from India, and also recorded from Formosa and Philippines. Tenaphalara acutiponnis Kuwayama 1908
(Fig. 49)
Kuwayama, $. 1908, Trans. Sapporo nat, Hist. Soc. 2: 155. Crawford, D, L. 1912. Res. Indian Afus. 7: 432-33, Pl, xxxiv, figs. M,N, P. Qs Pl. sav, fig. 0, (T
elongata),
Fletcher, T. B. 1917, Rep. Proc. Second ent. Met, Pusa, p. 131. Grawford, D, L. 1919, Philipp, J. Sci. 151 1665,
Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V, 1924, Ree. Indian Mus, 26: 623. Rahman, Khan, A. 1932. Indian J. agric. Sei, 2(4): 367-370 (Nymphal stages of T. elongata). Bhatia, H. L. and Shafi, M., 1932. Indian 7. agric. Sct. 2(6) 543-570 (Ctenaphalara elongata). Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Forest Ree, 1(2)1 63 (Biological notes). Beeson, ©. F. 1. 1941. Forest Iasecs, p, 781. Klimaszewski, S. M, 1964. Annls Zool. Wars . 22 (5): 81-138, figs. 8, 9, 34, 42, Warszawa. Length of body, in male, 2°6 mm; in female, 2°8 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2°85 mm; in female, 3°35 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°58 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0°28 mm

Length of antennae, 1°45 mm

Colouration. General colour greenish-yellow throughout, dorsum sometimes with
whitish longitudinal streaks, antennal segments 4 to 9 black at apices, and terminal
segment also black, eyes brown, veins and apical portion of forewings yellowish. Structure. Body very long and slender. Head (Fig. 49a) nearly as wide as thorax,
not deflexed, moderately long, finely and sparsely pubescent; vertex rather broad, rounded
down and forward uniformly, rather plane, long behind eyes, with a fovea on each side

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 167

   
 

   

0.25 mm. Yap—h

 

0.25 mm

Fig. 49. Tenaphalara acutipennis Kuwayama—a: head and part of thorax, dorsal view; br antenna; et
hind leg; di forewing; es hind wing; £:male genitalia, lateral view; gt forceps, caudal and mesal
views; ht sperm pump, 4: female genitalia, lateral view; jt apical region of ventral plate; x
styliform lobe of dorsal plate; I: ovipositor. of median suture, posterior to centre, posterior margin almost straight, post-ocelli not
elevated, anterior ocellus visible from above, at front end of head, at end of frons; frons
visible between genae; facial cones entirely wanting. Eyes small. Clypeus small,
protruding forward, subacute apically,

Antennae (Fig. 49b) long and slender, about two and half times as long as width
of head, ten-segmentcd, imbricate and bearing few setae, two basal segments robust,
Ist subquadrate, 2nd cylindrical slightly longer than Ist, 3rd longest, 4th about three-
fourths as long as 3rd. 5th about two-thirds as long as 3rd, 6th as long as 5th, 7th and

 

168, PSYLLIDAK OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Hele equal and as fong as Uth, $th smaller than 5th, terminal segment smatlest, hall as
long as Sth, bearing two short apical spines, five sensoria present on segments 4, 5,6,
Band 9,

"Thorax long and slender, narrow, not arched, somewhat cylindrical. finely and spa
pubescent, finely rugulose: pronotuni (Fig, 49a) rather long. arched, anterior and posterior
margins somewhat parallel, two wexkly swollen submedian areas present near auterior
border, with two kateral foveal impressions on cach side; propleurites large, sutures often
indistinct; prescutum small. finely reticulate anteriorly and rugulose posterict ly, broader
than long, broadest in middle, narrower both anteriorly and posteriorly, posterior margin
angulate; sculinn nich broader than long, slightly longer than prescucm, lat dorsally,
gradually sloping laterally. posterior margin angulatc; seutellun small, broad anteriorly,
nartow posteriorly, anterior margin iuvaginated, with prominent antero-lateral (Fig, 49b)
auigles. Legs (Big. 49e) rather short, pubescent and also beset with minute points arranged in
linear series, all tibiae with apical comb of setae, fore and middle tibiae longer than
femora. hind tibia short and almost as long as femur, having three ventral sensoria-like
tructures near base, hind tibiae with a conspicuous strong spur at base and five tooth-
like spines at apex, borne or small papillae, basal tarsal joint smaller than apical;
meracanthny small, wiangular,

Vorewings (Fig. 49d) long, slender, three and a hall times as long as broad, hyaline,
ansparent, acute at lip, pterostignia open, cubital peticle longer than radius and basal
vein, radius nearly as long ay basal vein, with a ps
of pterostigmia to tadins

   

     

  

   

   

 

 

     

   

 

  

udo-vein (callus) cxtending from tip
nd from radius to base of’second margival cll, second marginal
cell longer and Targer than lisst, fork My,» near apex of wing, veins armed with niicros-
capic setae,

   

Hind wings (Fig. 49e) also quite long, membrane thickly beset with minuce peints,
costal margin with a few simple and honked setac,

Abdomen clongate and slender, tapering io narrow
anc also armed with fine pois. Genitalia. Male genitalia (Fig. 49£% smaller than abdomen, «nel valve about 0°35 nm
long. constricted at hase, sides sebparaliel in profily, armed with minute points, pubescent
mainly in the upper region, posterior margin slighty convex basally, invaginated near
apex, anterior margin almost straight, dellexed caudally near apex; forceps (Fig. 49g)
about 0°28 mun long, slender, bent inwards, broad basally, gradually narrowed apically,
ending in a conspicuously rounded hood, with a prominent jawelike process just below
apex, the apical region appearing like an open mouth of a snake in a striking posture,
outer surface hearing few small and stilf setae pointing forward near top, a few thick
setae directed downward also present mesally below the jaw-like process, inner margins
beset with Jong setae; hypandrium of usual shape, beset with sparscly simple setae and
also with minute points, Uwo slender finger-like processes present, one on cach sides
acdeagus long and slender, outer arm much smaller than basal, spoon end small and
slender; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 49h). Female genital segment smaller than abdonien, Dorsal plate louger than ventral,

 

apex, finely and sparsely pubescent,

 

 

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAK, 169

 

irregular in outline, constricted near apex, caudal region divided into wwe lobes. dorsal
lobe narrowly rounded, beset with minute but strong points and also with simple setae,
setac in middle longer ral lobe (Fig. 49%) styliferm and armed with nuinute peg-like
setae, circum-anal pore ring long and composed of a double row of pores; ventre | plate
broad basally, narrow apically, hearing simple setar of varying length, caudal margin
divided into Uuree Iehes (Fig. 49). central lobe acute at apes and armed with rows
of strong peg-like setve; ovipositor (Fig. 49 1) acutely pointed. Host plants. On leaves and young shoots of Bombas ceiha Linn. (=Bombax mala-
haricum). Also collected on Sterculia foetida (Crawford, 1919}. Distribution. Previously recorded from Formosa, Luzon, Laguna Province. both sexes taken on Sterculia foelida (Crawford, 1919); Pusa (Bihar) on **
wiord, 1912; Rahman, 1932). h records are from Dehra Dun (U.P) and Calcutta (Bengal). Material examined. ‘he collection at the Indian Agricultural Research Lustitate,
New Delhi, contains 3 examples of November 29, 1908 (D.P.S}, 8 examples of December
1, 1908 (C.S.M. }, 6 examples of January 4. 1909 (D.P.S xample of December 12,
1915 (C.S.M. ), Le le of ry 25, 1916 (GS auiples of December
9, 1931 (HL. Bhatia), Al these specimens were recorded from Pusa (Bihar) and. collected on Bombas ceiba Linn. (=B. malabaricum DC. ), commonly known as “silk
cotton”. ‘Lhe material at the Forest Rescareh Institute, Dehra Dun, includes:
Pusa (Bihar) December 13, 1908 (C.8.M. ); + males aud 4 feniales from Dehra Dun,
collected on January 2, 1931 (B.M. Bhatia); 12 examples of January 4, 1934, from
New forest (R.N. Mathur}; 4 males and 3 females of December 12, and 4 males aud 2
females of December 13, 1949, from New Foresi, Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur), All
these specimens were recorded on Bombax ceiba leaves, Some adults and nymphs col-
lected on October 1, 1965 from New Forest (R.N. Mathur} were preserved in alcohol
from the same host plant. Few adults and nymphal stages collected on 12.10.66, from Shibpur, Botanical
garden, outta (B, Datta) are present at Z. 8.1. Comparison. ‘This species is readily recognised by the shape of head which is broadly
rounded both horizontally and dorsoventrelly, by the Jong and slender forewings, having
a pscudovein between radius and radial sector and another between radiel sector and
media, and sone other characters. Biological notes. ‘The infestation by this species begins in winter and the rapid increase
in insect population causes the leaflets to wilt and tun yellow. ‘The nymphs remain
covered with white flocculent mass of waxy matter and exude copious amount of honey
dew. [ty nymphal stages are described by Rahman (1932),

 
 

  

    
  

Los Banos,
Ik cotton’? 1 example from

   

 

 

 

 

 

Sub-family PSYLLINAE

1878, Psyllinae, Loew, F. Verh. zool. -bot, Ges. Wien, 28: 607. 1901, ——, Froggatt, W. W. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W’, 26: 242-248,
1913, ——, Aulmann, G. Ppitidarum Catalogs, p. 5. 170 PSYLLIDAE OF TIE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

~~, Crawford, D. 1, Bull. U.S. natn, Mus. 85: 167-169. 1919, —~——, Crawford, D. 1, Philipp. 7. Sei. 15: 105-106. 19 , Haupt, H. Tiereeelt Mitteleur. 4: 231. 1943, ., Tuthill, L. D. Fowa. St. Goll. F. Sci, 17(4): 443-660. 1951, —-——, Heslop-Harvison, G, Ann, Mag. nal. Hist, (12), 41 1-35, 417-454. 1960, , Heslop-Harvison, G. ibid. (13) 3: 417-439. 1963, Miyatake, Y. J. Fac. gr, Kyushu Univ, 12(4)+ 325. 1875, Psyllaria, Puton, A. Cat. des Hem. d'Europe et Med. p. 91. 1907, , Oshanin, B. Fer . palaarktischen Hen. 2: 349. 1896, Psyllidac, Edwards, J. Hem, Hom, Br, Ish, p. 233. 1957, ———, Vondracek, K. Faure C.8.R, Praha, Ceskoslovensk: akad.. Ved t. ix, pp. 171-72. 19 . Dobreanu, E. and Manolache, C, Fauna Rep. pop. rom, Insecta, 8, fase. 3, Hom, Paylloides,
pp. 124-195,

1963, -—, Klimaszewski, S, M. Annts. Zool, 20 (20)
1964, Klimaszewski, S, M, ibid, 22(5): 81-138,
1964, Loginova, M. M, Proc. Inst, Zool, Acad. Sci. USSR. 34: 52-56,

1964, , Loginov, M. M, Inst. Biol, Acad, Sci. U.S.S.R., pp, 437-443, 457-472. 1-93. Body small to large, slender. Heacl more or less deflexed, sometimes vertical. Vertex
large, flat and often quadrate, semicircular, or subtriangular. Genae always produced
into variously shaped, cither conical or flat, spatulate processes beyond end of vertex,
contiguous or divergent, Frons covered by genae, visible only as a small sclerite bearing
front ocellus. Antennae always slender, typically ten-segmented, length variable, two
basal segments robust, and broader than others, with two apical sctac. Thorax broad,
usually well arched; sclerites of thorax vaviable; mesonotum large. Legs slender or
robust; hind tibiae with or without basal spur, with variable number of black spines
apically; proximal scgment of posterior tarsi usually with a pair of claw-like spines at
apex; meracanthi present, variable in shape and length, Forewings large and broad,
variable from thick to hyaline, rhomboidal to elongate-ovatc, or opaque, sometimes
maculated, usually rounded at apex; pterostigma present; media and cubits always with
a petiole. Hind wings normally developed, usually as long as forewings, Male proctiger
simple, sometimes produced caudad or with a secondary lobe as in Acizzia. The chief distinctive characters of this sub-family are the concealed frons, the presence
of genal cones or lobate processes, the presence of the apical claw-like spines on the
proximal segment of posterior tarsi, and the presence of a cubital petiole (M+Cu.). Several genera art grouped in this sub-family and we readily see the inter-relationships
and similarities of the various genera. In India, there are seven genera represented,
viz., Acigzia Heslop-Harrison, Arylaina Foerster, Diaphorina Loew, Euphalerus Schwarz,
Euphyllura Foerster, Psylla Geoflroy, and Psyllopsis Loew. No representative of Psyllopsis
has been seen by me, though one species P, fraxini L. has been recorded from Naini
Tal, U.P. (Heslop-Harrison, 1946). I have not, therefore, included it in the key
below. Psyllid species recorded in this contribution on Pyrus spp. and Stranvaesia glaucescens
(Rosaceae) appear to be an assemblage of variable species and closely resembling Psylla
mali Schmid., and P. pyricola Forst., from which it is difficult to separate with our limited
ecological knowledge, hence it is recorded as only Psylla sp. FAMILY PSYLLIDAT. 171

KEY TO THE GENERA OF PSYLLINAE

1, Forewings strongly rhomboidal, usually thickened and opaque; vertex flat; genae
produced into two transverse, contiguous lobes, on the same plane with vertex... . » Eupiyllura

—. Forewings clongate-ovate, sometimes with a thomboidal tendency, usually hyaline
or subhyaline, rarely opaque; genal cones not as above - . « . eee ee eee eh

2, Pleural suture of prothorax extending to middle of lateral extremity of pronotum,

which is more or less swollen and knob-like; Proplesiir subequal in lengths

   

     

antennae seldom long, usually very short... + ve +3
— Pleural suture of prothorax extending obliquely to posterior part of lateral extre
mity of pronotum, not attaining to it at all; episternum longer than cpimeron;
genal cones various, usually conical; antennae at least longer than width ofhead .-... ++ Pyle
3. Vertex large, flat, with eyes strongly recessive; genal processes in same plane with
vertex, flat; wings rhomboidal, often subopaque, with closed pterostigma.. . = ++ + seeeee dt

=. Vertex smaller, less flat, with eyes less recessive; genal cones not as above; wings usually
subopaque to hyaline «
4, Genal cones lace, broad, usually unde; forewings rounded or somewhat angu-
late at apex . beet ee eee ee cotton eens Euphalerus
—. Genal cones large, thick, as long as or longer than broad, porrect, apices narrowly
rounded o truncate; forewings broed Subapically, rounded at apex, narrow in

 

 

  

 

basal half « vee + Diaphorina
5, Genal cones rounded at apex; male proctiger simple * » - tenes + Apylaina
—- Genal cones roundly swollen, widely separated; male proctiger with a secondary

process +» * see deizzia

This sub-family contains a number of small free-living species, exhibiting a number
and sequence of generations in a year. The generations vary within wide limits, and
as many as 11 generations have been recorded for Psylla simlae Crawf, (Mathur, 1935). ‘They feecl on young leaves and are able to breed continuously during the active scason
so long as new buds or foliage are available. Their numbers and intensity of attack
decrease by the heavy rainfall during the monsoon scason, Some of the species are
perfectly naked, but others are enveloped or sheltered under a flocculent or woolly exuda-
tion or surrounded with waxy filaments produced from glands along the outer margin
of the body. The oggs aré generally laid all over the tips of the young foliage and fresh
buds. In severe infestations, all stages of the species are met with. The nymphs excrete
honey dew excessively, resulting in the whole foliage and branches of the tree being
heavily smothered with the exudation. This sugary coating is attacked with a fungus
which covers it with a smutty black coat seriously injuring the trce. Genus AGIZZIA Heslop-Harrison 1960

 

Heslop-Harrison, G. 1951. Ann. Mag. nat, Hist, (12), 4(41): 417. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1960. ibid. (13), 3(31)+ 417-418,

Loginova, M. M. 1967, Ann. Natur. Mus, Wien., Bd. 70: 404-405,
Neopsylla

Heslop-Harrison, G. 1949, Enlomologist's mon, Mag. 85: 161-162. Palla

Maskell, W. M, 1894. Entomologist's mon. Mag. 30; 171. 172 VSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Tape spo ju uraciae Pyylle acuive Maskell 1894) (original designa-
tion Heslop-Harrison, 1960). Body small but rehust,  Tlead large, wider than thorax, not deflexed; vertex somewhat
e extending forward into we reunded lobes. Anterior ocellus not visible from

wly visible, Genae smell, and roundly swollen, not produced into

  

Masked s (

 

 

 

horizemta

  

 

abo Frons se:

    

conics lely separated, Eyes prominent, somewhat spherical. Antennae
long and slender, ‘Thorax small, moderately arched. Pronotum flat, descending. Propleural sutuie extending to middle of more or less swollen end of pronowum, as in
antana, Kline tibiae with ar without basal spurs, with four or five black apical

processes, W

 

 

spits, Basal tarsuy of hind legs with one or two black claw-like spines at apex. Forewings membranous, speckled with small, irregular brownish spots or bands,

   

 

rounded at apex; pterostigima prominent, closed, and opaquely white. -\nal valve of
male genitalia always expanded into uw prominent, lateral lobes. which may or may
HOt possess at secondary marginal filiform process. Fanale genitalia somewhat angulate
in profile, normally detlexed veutrally, plates widely divergent posteriorly. According to Heslop-Harrison (1960), “it has been only recently distinguished as an
independent taxonemical unit, earlier cd to genera Pylla Geoflroy
and slrytaine Bry The contents of the genus is uot established yet, but even naw
comprises 15 species, the majority of which live on Acacia, also on Albizzia, Hakea,
Dodonaea and on her gencra of Leguninosa

Loginova (1967) * “Tt is an abundant genus, widely distributed in Africa, India,
Indo-Malaya, New Zealand and .\ustralia,” Fron: the Indian region, only one species
clcizzia indica Heslop-Uarrison is represented. ty mem

   

were refer

 

   

   

 

 

it

      

 

Acizzia indica Heslop-Harrison 1949
(Fig, 50)
Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Forest Ree, (2): 36, 39 (Under Arytaina, biology). Mathur, R. N. 1952, ndian J. Ent. 14(2): 159-160, figs, 1-3 (Nymphal stages),
CG. 1941. Forest Insects, p. 776 (Notes). Heslop-Harrison, G, 1951. nn, Mag. nat, Hist. (12), 41 417,
Heslop-Harrison, G. 1960. iid. (13), 3(31): 417-418. :

 

 

 

s originally described by Heslop-Harrison (1949) and is redlescribed
here with some more notes and figures. Length of body, in male, 1°12 mm; in female, 140 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1°50 mm; in female, 1°75 mn
Width of head with eyes, 0°62 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0°38 mm. Length of antennae, 0°85 min

 

Coburation, In live specimens, general colour appie green to yellowish or brownish-
green, with dull white longitudinal lines on head and thorax; antennae yellow, with
apices of segments 3 to 8 and last two segments black or dusky; eyes hone white; legs

FAMILY PSYLLIDAR 173. 0.25 mm
wu oO

 

Fig. 50. Acizzia indica Heslop-Harrison—a: headl, front view; bs antenna; ez lind leg; ds forewing; et
hind wing; f: male genitalia, lateral view; g: anal valve, upper surface; bx forceps, caudal and
mesal views; i: aedeagus; jz sperm pump; Ik: female genitalia, lateral view; 1: apical portion
of dorsal plate; mz ventral plate,

 

 

yellow-green; meracanthus white or semi-translucent; fovewings maculated with small
irregular brownish spots which become confluent into regular bands towards the apical
margins, intermixed with clear and glassy aveas in hetween, ptevostigma always opaque
white, veins yellow-green or straw-coloured,

Structure. Body of medium size. Head (Fig. 50a) broader than thorax, finely and

V4 PSYLLIDAL OF THE INDIAN SUBGONTINENL

sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose, moderately deflexed aud in a continuous plane with
the gently descending thoray, about twice as broad as long, gently rounded down in front,
swollen on cither side of median suture, with two prominent foveal impressions, posterior
to ceutie and one on cither side of median line, post-ocellar region swollen, post-
ocelli lateral, posicrior margin moderately emarginate; anterior ocellus scarcely visible
from above; and located below the point of excision at the end of median suture; frons
smail and completely covercet by genae and anterior occllus; genae small rounded swell-
ings, about half as long as vertex along median linc, widely separated, divergent, finely
and sparsely pubescent and finely rugulose, also bearing two approximating very long
and downwardly directed sctae. Antennal sockets lateral and touching the cyes laterally. Antennae (Fig. 50b) long, ten-segmented, bearing few sctac, two basal segments robust,
Ist broadly transverse, 2nd cylinclrical, as long as Ist, remaining scgments slender, imbri
cate, 3rd longest, 4th, fth and 7th equal and cach slightly longer than half of 3rd,
Sth slightly smaller than 4th, Uth slightly longer than 5th, 9th smallest, terminal segment
a little louger than peamltimate segment, bearing two uncqual spines at apex, four sensoria
present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. ‘Thorax small, arched, narrower than width of head including eyes, finely and sparsely
pubescent, finely rugulose; prothorax descending, flat, longer in middle and thinner
laterally, with two foveal impressions on cach side; prescutum small, twice as broad as
long, broadest in middle, gradually narrowed both anteriorly and posteriorly, angulate
laterally and posteriorly; scutum large, about two and a half times as broad as long,
broadest before middle, slightly longer than prescutum, anterior maigin concave,
angulate laterally; scutellum broadly transverse, swollen, cup-shaped, broadly rounded
postericrly, antero-lateral angles prominent; metascutellum broadly transverse, with a
prominent median ridge. Legs (Fig, 50) short, somewhat stout, sparsely pubescent and also armed with minute
points which have become strong and heavier in all femora, tibiae of fore and middle
Jegs longer than femora, while hind tibia is almost as long as hind fernur; hind femur with
4 or 6 lateral setae near apex and three sensoria-like structures before middle; all tibiae
with apical comb of setae; hind tibia with a small but strong basal spur, and with five
black apical spines (4 on the inner side and | on the outer side), basal tarsal segment
of all legs smaller than the apical; basal meta-tarsal segment with a single black spine
at apex; meracanthus well-developed and prominent. Forewings (Fig. 50d) small, somewhat oval, about two and one-fourth times as long
as broad, broadly rounded at apex; pterostigma prominent, closed, white, broad and
long; basal vein almost as long as cubitus, radius about twice as long as cubital petiole;
R, almost as long as cubital petiole; radial sector long, curved and flexed upward near
apex; second marginal cell a little longer than first, first cell slightly broader than second
along the posterior margin; maculations fine towards the base, becoming small, irregular
brownish bands towards the apex; membrane punctured throughout with fine dise-like
sculplurings,

Hind wings (Fig, 50e) small, colourless, veins obscure, membrane uniformly beset with
minute points, costal margin armed with a series of simple and hooked setac in basal half. FAMILY PSYLLIDAT 173

Abdomen small, finely beset with minute points arranged in small series, and also
sparsely pubescent, pubescence longer on sternites,

Guitalia. Male genital segment (Fig, 50£) smaller than abdemien, nal valve (Fig. 50g) large, about 0-30 mm long, slightly longer than paramercs, in profile, conspicuously
differentiated into two parts, the anter‘or anal part cylindr: ge poste ric
rounded lobes, outer surface of both the parts sparsely beset apically with small s
horne on minute tubercles and finely rugulese in the basal region, each posterior lobe
having a darker, secondary, finger-like process on the outer margin, which is also armed
with few simple small seta; parancres (Fig, 50h)abont 0:24 mum long, bowed, broad
basally and gradually narrowed apically, trminating in en acute dark point, outer
margin gently curved, inner margins sinuate, outer surl.ce bearing: sr ‘imple sctae,
inner margins having an acute point in the apical third and another bluntly rounded
process in the besal third, a strong, thick sota dirccted downward and a series of small
setae present just below apex, basal marginal sctac slightly longer; hypandiium simple,
of usual shape, bearing sparse sctat; acdeagus (Fig. 50%) mederetely long, stout and
elbowed, outer arm broad basally, spoon end slender; sperm pump as figured (Fig, 50j). Female genital segment (Fig. 50k) smaller, about one-third the length of abdomen
and normally curved downward ventrally, both plates widely separated. Dorsal plate
(Fig, 501) longer than ventral, strongiy angulate, broad basally and gradually narrowed
distally, the basal half somewhat horizontal and continuous with the contour of the
abdomen, bearing the circum-anal pore ring, while the distal half bent obtusely
downwards, ending in a blunt point, basal region armed with minute points, the middle
zone hirsute with long hairs and the apical area beset with thich setae directed cephalad,
circumanal pore ring consisting cf a double ring of pores; ycntral plate (Fig.50m) broad
basally, bluntly rounded apically, beset with simple setae, setae longer in middle, while
the dorsal margin near apex armed with a regular row of thick setae; ovipositor exserted
and acutely pointed. Host plant. Qn Albizzia procera Benth. Distribution. Quite common and widely distributed throvglout India (Heslop-Har-
rison, 1949). Previously recorded from Dehra Dun, 70] m, Naini Tal, 1,830-2,440 m,
Kanpur (U.P. ), Delhi, Deolali (Bombay), Chowringi near Calcutta (Bengal), Pandu,
Khasi Hills (Assam), and Karachi (Pakistan),

Material examined. A good series of both sexcs bred on Albizeia procera, from New
Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P. ), during April-June, 1932 (R.N. Mathur); 6 cxamples of
4.5.33 and numerous specimens bred during May, August and September 1934 (Expt. No. 497/2; 499A) and | example of 6.6.50; and many adults and nymphal stages, pre-
served in alcohol (in phials) (R.N. Mathur) are present in the National Collection
of F.R.L, Dehra Dun. Three specimens of 31,5.33, from New Forest, Dehra Dun, on
Albizzia procera (R.N. Mathur) are donated to the Indian Agricultural Research Institute,
New Delhi. In the collection of LA.R.I,, New Delhi, are included few examples from New Forest,
which were donated by the Forest Research Institute. Recently some specimens collected
from New Delhi, on Albizgia procera (M.G.R. Menon), were also determined by me,

 

    

 

 
 

     

 

176, VSYLLIPAR QF TILE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 
 
    

 

Gomparivn. “Phis spec’
genus .Veopyylla, and in 1s
recognised genus of Leas (Wagner, 190

ped by Heslop-Harrison under a new
sia, as Neupyylla was preoceupied by a
His description is supplemented with some
more features anddrawings. leizsia indice is easily recngnixed by the shape of wings
and maculations, shape of head, genal cones, genitalia and other char

Binlogical moles. Tis briet biological history is given by Methur (I¢
(OH), under diytaina span. ‘Chis psyllid is found inabundance on -llbizsio procera, at
New Borest, Dehra Dun, during April-August. ‘The ravages of the pest are restricted 1
Tres shoots and buds, Both adulis and nymphs are very active, ‘Ihe nyimphal stages
are described by Mathur (1952). acters,

 

py and Beeson

   
          

   

Genns ARYTAINA Poerster Wit,
Ayla
Foemster, As L048. rut. nature, Ver. prews. Rheinl, 8: 67
Crawford, D, L191. Bull. U.S. main, Mas, 85s 122-12
wford, D. 1. 1919. Philipp. Putlill, LD. 1943, focen State
Heslop-Hanison, G, 1954. tan. Vondracek, K. 1957, Fauna G.8.R. Praha, p. 182. Dobreany, E. and Manolache, G. 1962. Fauna Repub. pop. rom. ; Insecta, Homoptera, Psylloideas
Vol. 8, Fase. 8 pp. 131-192. Arylana
Scott, J. 1876, ‘Tians. ent. Soc, Lond., p. 52. Loew, F. 1878. Verh. zool.-bot. Gies. Wien, 2
Edward, J. 1896. Hem, Hont, Br, Isl. pe
Kieffer, J.J. 1905. Aun. Soc. Sci. Bruelles 292 165,
Aulmann, G. 1913. Pyllidurum Catalogus, Berlin, p.
Haupt, H. 1935, Potlotdea, Tierwelt Mittlewr, Vol. 4, p. X, 221-X, 2
Pella
Lateeille, PA. (804, Hist, nat, Tus, 12: 877-882,

 

    

    
 

 

 

598, 0M,

 

 

 

Atecnia

‘Thomson, C. G. 1877, Opuse. ent, B: 828,
Pyyllopa

Crawford, D. L, 1913. Pomona Coll. J. Fnt. 31 628. Peripspllopsis

Enderlein, G. 1926, Ent, Afiit, 15: 399,

Type species. Arytaina genistae (Laweille) (-=Paylla genisiae Lat. 1804) (original desig-
nation Foerster, 1648). Body usually small, but robust. Head nearly or quite as broad as or broader than
thorax, moderately declivous, Vertex usually nearly or quite flat, dise sometime
pressed on each side of median line; anterior ocellus visible {rom above. Genal cones
usually short and very broadly rounded, seldom long ar produced into conical or sub-
quadrats: processes extending forward nearly in same plane with vertex but separated
from vertex by impressed line, not widely divergent. Eyes large, more or less vee
over pleurites, Antennae moderately long, slender, Thorax usually strongly arched
and broad. Pronotum large, flat, collar-shaped, ending ina knob-like swelling laterally. im-

 

 

   

    

ive

 

YAMILY PaYLLIDAD V7

Preurktes long, large, subequal in length: propleucal sutare extending to nuiddle of mote
oe Jess swollen end of pronotim. Hind tibiae with or with basal spur: basal rarstty
of hind tegs with two claw-like spines at apes. Forewings usally inore narrowly: or
broadly rounded at apes. ly

 

wine or semishyaline. or coloured or rairely subcoriaceous,
often more or lesy maculated. spouted or marked: pierestigna present. 1s
as long as or longer than cubital petiole, Hind wings small, hysline and ck

‘This genus was erected by Foerster (1848) and was spelt as trytaene by several authors. Pryrita Latveille (1804), Adcenia ‘Vhomson 1877). and Parllifa Crawtord (19tL). al refer
wo this genus, Li is closery related te the genus Potty Geoflivy (3762). but diflers from
it in having the pleural suture of prothorax extending to middle of farcral extienity of
the more or less swollen end of pronotun, the propleurites .abeqttal i lengua, the
fattened pronotaan. the shape and position of the genal cones, and the ohen more or
less coriaccous forewings. iis almost
vr

   

   

 

  

 

chivlaina includes five species fiom: India and Pakisiay. of whieh one

 

   

 

 

 

KEY ‘TO THE SPECI OF ARYTAINA
1, Forewings maculated or speekled with brown ar black dots or bands 6 se re gd
=. Forewings hyaline and transparent. ©0000 ft te ee eee
2, Forewings with two transverse brown bands and another brown subapical
area occupying from costa to radial cell + 0 so tte eee ee AL Jasciate Laing,
-—. Forewings speckled with numerous hrown ot black dots or Lands - AL faenctipennis: Crass. Radius almost as long as cubital petible 6 00 ee Ae yamahrishnd Crate
—. Radius longer than cubital petisle © 6 et ee ee te ed
4, Apex of forewings uniformly rounded; pterostignia almost as long as media
up to farcation point «++ sete tee
Apex of forewing not uniformnly rounded; plerustigma shorter than media
uptofurcation point sors rs ee tere eee eee ee ee ee ake obscura Craws,

   

 

 

spinosa, sp. 2. Arytaina fasciata Laing 1930
(Fig, 61)

Laing, F. 1930. Indian Forest Rec. 4(7) 8-44. ‘This species is not e:
ix reproduced heluw. «Antennae pale yellowish-brown, segment | slightly shaded, the apices of 3-6
black, 7-10 wholly black except the extreme base of 7 which is slightly paler, Head pale
yellowish-grey. the margin of the genal cones and a spot lying above and to the side
of the median ocellus, black; the median area on cach halfof vertex with a darker shaded
and ocelli pinkish-ved,  Pronotur: concolourons with head, two rather faint
nm spots and a well-defined black lateral one; ground colour ef dorsulum and
mesonotum the same as the head, this being in the former, covered for a narrow margin
around the fateraland posterior borders, by a dark brown area partially divided down the
niiddie, and in the lauer overlaid by che same shade of dark brown except for two well-
defined sul-median and a more ill-defined subJateral stripe: scutellim pale yellowish-
brown; tegmen semi-hyaline with two well-defined wansverse brown bands, a sub-basal

12

 

mined hy me and, therefore, its description from Laing (1930"

  

 

178 PsY¥LLIDAE OV THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 51, .tyytaina fascrata Laing.—-At tegen; Bz head from front; Gr male genitalia (after Laing). which espands and fills most of the anal cell, ancl an apical which stretches from near the
apex of Rs to the middle of the first marginal cell, with two circular clear arcas on the
margin of the second marginal cell; another brown sub-apical area stretching from the
costa into the radial cell; brown spotting in all the cells; veins more or less spotted with
black; wing hyaline; legs pale brown, the femora shaded with darker brown, both tarsal
segments with a certain amount of black; abdomen wholly dark brown. ”

“ Antennae slender, the length approximately twice the width of the head, including
the eyes; genal concs sub-conical, two-thirds the length of the ex; vertex rhomboidal
in shape, a suleus stretching diagonally from the anterior latcral angle to the median line
posteriorly, the postcrior ocelli elevated; thorax very slightly arched, the pronotum about
six times as broad as long, the dorsulum considerably smaller than the mesonotum, with
a gently arched anterior margin and the median part of the posterior straight; tegmen
alinost twice as long as broad, the veins elevated slightly above the membrane. Length
1-75 mm; tength of tegmen 2 mm, ”

“ Sind Valley, 2,287 m on walnut. ”

In its colouring this species approaches that found generally among members of
Diaphorina, but the shape of the genal cones and the much longer and more slender antennae
at once cuts it off from that genus. ‘The heavily fasciated tegmen and the darkest body
colouring distinguish it from A. punclipennis Craw.”

Host plint. On walnut. Distribution, Sind Valley, 2287 m.

   

 

 
   

 

Arytaina obscura Crawford
(Fig. 38)

Crawford, D.L. 1912, Rec. Indian Mus.71 492, Pl. xxxiv, fig, $; Pl xxxv, fig. M (Pyllopa obscura)
(From Pusa, Bihar, taken on mango leaves). Crawford, D.L. 1919, Philipp. J. Sci. 152 172, 177,

Crawford, D. L, 1924. Rec. Indian Mus, 26: 617-618,

Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V, 1924. Rec, Indian Mus. 26: 624, (Noted also on Dalbergia leaves, Coim-
hatore (Ramakrishna Coll. ), (Arplaina obscura). ‘This species was not examined by me, as no representative was available. One or two
examples were sent to me by the Entomologist and Associate Professor of Entomology,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 179

Coimbatore, but unfortunately, the specimens arrived compietely damaged to picces,
in transit, and hence could not be studied. Its description is reproduced from Crawford
(1912), as below. “Length cf body 2-1 mm; length of forewing 3-6 mm; greatest width 1-5 mm; width
of vertex between cycs 0-44 mm; with eyes 0-68 mm, General colour orange yellow
throughout; antennae black on apical hall. Body rather large, robust. ”

“Head about as broad as thorax, deflexed; vertex modeiately large, typical; facial
cones a little more than half as long as vertex, at base, roundly acute at apex, much
dellexed from plane of vertex; eyes large; antennae fully twice as lang as width of head;
slender, ”

Thorax broad, arched; pronotum rather long; legs moderately long. Forewings
hyaline, (wo and a third times as long as broad, rounded at apex; pterostigma moderately
large; cubital petiole shorter than discoidal subcosta. ”. “Female genital segment thick at base, as longas abdomen, sbacnte at apex; dorsal
valve a little longer than ventral,”

« Described from one female from Pusa, Bengal, taken on mango leaves. Host plants, On mango leaves (Crawford, 1912); noted also on Dalbergia leaves (Rama-
krishna Ayyar, 1924). Distribution. Pusa, Bihar; Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu. In the collection of the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, I noticed a
label bearing the data: Psyllopa obscura, Pusa, Bengal, 17.2.09, on mango flowers (specimen
with D, L, Crawford). In the list provided to me by Dr V. F, Eastop, it is mentioned
that the type is in the British Museum, London. Comparison. Crawford (1924) wrote: “ Under the name Psyllopa obscura this species
was described in my carlier paper on Indian Psyllidae, only one specimen was available,
which now is in the British Museum as the type of the species. In the Ramakrishna
collection there are a number of specimens which seem to belong to this species, though a
comparison with the type should be made before a positive assertion is made, These
specimens were collected on shoots of Dalbergia at Coimbatore, October, 1923,”

   

 

Arytaina punctipennis Crawford
(Fig. 52)

Cotes, E, C, 1891-93, Indian Mus. Notes 2(7): 18, 167. Crawford, D. L. 1912, Rec, Indian Mus, 7: 431-32, pl, xxxiv, figs. K, O; pl. somv, fig. U (Payllopa
punctipennis Crawf.) Aulmann, G. 1913. Payllidarum Catalogut, Berlin, p. 17 (Peylia isitis Buckt). Crawford, D.L. 1919, Philipp. J. Sci, 151 177. Grove, A. J. and Ghosh, C. G, 1914. Mem, Dep, Agric. India 4(6)s $29-57, pls. xvexx (Paylla isitis
Buckton). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924, Rec, Indian Mus. 26: 624. Rahman, K. A. 1982. Indian J. agric, Sci. 2(4)1 358-77, pls. xxxvili; xl, fig. 4 (Nymphal stages.) Length of body, in male, 1-25 mm; in female, 1:72 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-78 mm; in female, 2:12 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0:53 mm

if PoYLLIDAE OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Width of vertex between eyes, 32 mim
Length of antennae, 03 mum. Colration, General colour light brown with greenish tinge, with dark brown longi
tudinal bands on mesothorax, antennie black at tip of segments 3 to 8. terminal segments
also black, vertex with wo orange stripes. tip of beak black, anal valve in male dark-brown
cephalad, forewings speckled with numerous brown or black dots or hands, both on veins
and membrane. Shuctun, Body small, moderately robust. Head (Fig. 52a) nearly as broad as Ihorax,
moderately deflexed, finely end sparsely pubescent, finely rgulose: vertex slightly longer
than balf its width, with a romnd fovea on either side of median suture, a stellate-like
posterior margin
ion, post-ocellar

 

   

 

 

    

 

impression extending from each fovea, front ocellus visible from aboy
ec, anterior margin deeply emarginate at point of «
region slightly swollen; genal cones prominent, approximate basally and divergent distally,
about two-thirds as long as v narrowly rounded at tip, hairs longer than that of
vertex, surface finely rugulose and alse beset with minute points, with two long ventral

   

moderately at

 
 

setae, Byes large. Antennae Fig. 52b) slender, ten-seginented, imbri
basal segiients robust. Ist broadly ewansverse, 2nd rectangular, slightly longer than broad. 3rd longest, twiee as Jong as 5th, 4h, 6th and 7th equal and slightly longer than 5th,
Sth and 81h equal and half as long as 3rd, Och smallest, terminal segment slightly longer
than 9th, bearing wvo unequal apical setae: four sensoria present on segments
4, 6, Band 9,

‘Thorax moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent. finely rugulose, Prothorax
broadly tranyverse, ancerior margin slightly conven. with two dav k brown foveal impressions
on each lateral side; prescurum about twice as broad as long. lateral angles wuncate,
posterior margin angulate; scuuim slightly longer than prescutum, about twice as broad
as long, angulate laterally: scncellum broadly transverse, broad anteriorly and narrow
posteriorly; pleurites broad. Legs (Fig. 52¢) moderately long, bearing sinyple setac, femora shorter than tibiae and. beset with minure points, all tibiae with a comb of setae at apex. hind tibia without basal
spur, with four black tooth-like spines at apex, basal tarsal segment much smaller than
apical, hearing two claw-like apical spines; meracanthus small and wiangular. Forewings (Fig, 52d) rather small, hyaline, speckled with numerous brown or black dets
orbands, about two and a half times aslong asbroad, rounded at apex, pterostigma small
and narrow, R scarcely longer than M+ Cu, basal vein slightly longer than R, radial
sector flexed upward near apex, first marginal cell slightly longer than second, veins armed
with microscopic setac, membrane beset with minute points, Hind wings (Fig. 52e)
thickly beset with minite points, basal half of costal margin bearing a few simple and
hooked setae. Abdomen longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent, setae longer on sternites. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 52€) quite Jarge but smaller than abdomen,
Anai valve about 0-25 mm long, in Jateral aspect, with anterior margin nearly straight,

 

atc, bearing few fine setae, two

      

 

 

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 181

0.25 mot,

03mm. Sy,

0.25 om

 

 

Fig. 52. -Arytaine punctipennic Crawford—az head, front view; bt antenna; cz hind leg; d: forewing; e:
hind wing; f: male genitalia, Iuleral views gi parameres, outer and mesal viev
it female genitalia, Tateral

 

 

 

posterior margin broadly convex, gradually narrowed both apically and basally, truncate
al apex, upper surface thickly beset with minute points arranged in lines and with sparsely
scattered simple setae, setac slightly longer along the posterior margin; parameres
(Fig, 52g) nearly as long as proctiger, sides sulo-parallel, bent inwards apically and ending
in a sharp black spine, outer surface bearing simple setac, mesal surfece with a bunch of
thick setae just below apex and pointing downwards, setac in the lower part scattered
and less in numbers; hypandrium of usuaf shape, bearing few setae; aedeagus quite long,
outer arm shorter than basal, with a thick spoon end; sperm pump as figured

(Fig. 52h). Female genital segment (Fig. 52%} thick, smaller than abdomen, plates sub-equal,

 

182 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

sparsely pubescent, dorsal plate slightly longer than ventral, roundly pointed at tip;
yentral plate acutely pointed at tip; setae longer in the central areas of hoth plates;
circum-anal pore-ring composed of a double row of pores; ovipositor acntely pointed. Host plants. On Indigofera hebepetala Benth. and I. pulchella Roxb,, causing twisting and
curling of young leaves. Previousiy recorded on Indigofera anil, I, arrecta, I. oligosperma,
I. paucifolia and I. sumatrana (Grove and Ghosh, 1914),

Distribution. Originally recorded from Pusa (Bihar); Calcutta (Bengal); Ccylon,
Peradeniya. Material examined. In the main collection of the Forest Rescarch Institute, Dehra
Dun, are present 3 examples, 2.12.08, 4 ex. 30.6.13 (D.P.S. ), and 2 ex. 1.12.13 (R. S.),
all from Pusa, Bihar. In addition to these, there are several specimens of this species
collected during March 16-20, 1959 and March 4-7, 1960, on Indigofera hebepetala, New
Forest, Dehra Dun (R. N. Mathur). Some adults and nymphal stages from the above
collection were also preserved in alcohol. One male specimen of 16+2:59, from New
Forest, Dehra Dun, U.P. (R. N. Mathur) is donated to I.A.R.I., New Delhi. There ave some examiples of this species, present at I.A.R.I., New Delhi, collected from
Pura (Bihar) on indigo, as listed: 1 ex. 4.12.08 (D.P.S), 2 ex 104.09 (C.S.M. ), 1 ex. 23.1.09, 14 ex. 30.6.13 (D.P.S. ), and 6 ex. 9.12.13 (R.S.). Nine specimens collected from
Peradeniya, Ceylon, on indigo, of April 14-17, 1914 (T.B.E,) are also present. The collection of Z.S.1., Calcutta, contains 3 tubes (No. 4483/10, 4484/10, and 4485/10)
having few nymphs and adults, preserved in alcohol, with this data: Pusa, Bihar, 16.12.13,
18.12.13, and 19.12.13. Biological notes. It is a serious pest of indigo in Bihar and in 1890, this species was
reported as excessively destructive to indigo in Bengal (Cotes, 1891-93). ‘The nymphal
stages are described by Rahman (1932). Comparison. Cotes (1891-93) described this species as Psylla isitis. Crawford (1912)
wrote: “ This is probably the adult of Buckton’s Psplla isitis, which he described from the
aymph only. Inorder to avoid confusion, however, in case they should net be identical,
T have given it another name. The forewing of this species bears a close resemblance to
Aphalara multipunctata Kuwayama (Japanese) ;"" and he named it Psyllopa punctipennis. Psyllopa Crawford has been placed under Arytaina Forster, and therefore this species is
now considered as A. punctipennis (Ramakrishna Ayyar, 1924), This species is easily
separated from the other species ef Arytaina by the speckled forewings. Arytaina ramakrishni Crawford 192+
Gis. 53)

Crawford, D. L. 1924. Rec, Indian Mus, 26: 618, fig. 2 (wing) (In leaves of Ghloroxylon swietenia,
Coimbatore, India),
Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924, ibid. 26: 624 (On galls in leaves of Chloroxylon swietania, Coim-
batore),
Enderlein, G. 1926, Ent, Mitt, 15: 399-400 (Paripsyllopsis ramakrishni; 8, India). Mathur, R. N, 1935, Indian Forest. Rec, 1(2): 39. Mani, M, 8, 1959, Agra, Univ. 7, Res, (Science) 8(2): 118 (On leat, Chloroxylon suletenia; Cotm-
batore). +FAMILY PSYLLIDAT, 183

 
    

mu 630.

ao

   

Tau SZ"0

 

Fig. 53, Avytaina romakrishni Crawford—a: head, front view; b: antenna; e: hind leg; dt forewing: e:
hind wing (partly damaged); : female genitalia, lateral view; gt anal valve of male, lateral
views hh: parameres, caudal view, with apical end, highly magnified: i: aedeagus; 1 sperm pump,

Length of body, in male, 1:0 mm; in female, 1-20 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-3 mm; in female, 1-22 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-48 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-32 mm

Length of antennae, 0-45 mm

Colouration. General colour creamy or yellowish-white; forewings hyaline, transparent
with a whitish colour; antennae black at tip. Structure. A small whitish insect. Head (Fig. 53a) moderately deflexed, slightly
broader than thorax, finely rugulose and fincly and sparscly pubescent, and also armed
with minute points; vertex broader than long, about twice as broad as long, gradually
rounded downward in front, broad posteriorly and narrow anteriorly, with a deep and
round foveal depression on each side of median suture, posterior margin slightly emargi-
nate, anterior ocellus visible from above; genal cones small, much shorter than vertex,
deflexed from plane of vertex, bluntly rounded in front, finely rugulose, sparsely pubescent,

(84 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTI:

 

setae longer than that of vertex. and alse beaing 2 av 3 pairs af long and strong vential
setae, Eyes sinatl. Ciypeus stall and round. and visible from sential aspect,
Antennae “Fig, 53b) small. about wes long as width of head, ten-segmented, two basal
seginents robust. Isc suhquadrate. slightly broader than 2nd. 2nd cylindrical, neerly ay
Jong ay Ist. remaining segments moderately slender. imbricate. bearing sparse setae, 3rd
segment longest. about yvice as long as th. fh and Oh equal and each about half as
long as 3rd. th segment slightly thicker. Sth and [0th snvallest, cach half as long as Hh,
hth, 7th and Gth equal but cach slighty longer chan Sth. Gh segment thick and club-

 

 

    

sc

 

  

 

shaped. terminal segment bearing wo long apical setae, four senseria present on segments
1b. ad

‘Vhoras small. moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent. finely rugulose and
alo armed with minute points, Prothoras small, narrowly trunsverse. with two foveal
impressions on cach kuteral side: preseutuan small. broader than long, broadest heyond

 

 

 

 

ly andl narrowly rounded anteriorly. posterior margin angulate: sewtun
large. broader than long, about twice as broad as long, broadest in middle, slightly smaller
in length than prescutmm, gradually sloping anc angulate laterally
narrowly Wansverse, broad cephalad ‘ow caudad. seutellum small. Logs (Fig. 53¢) small. slender, pubescent and also armed with minute points, arranged
in linear ser

 

ess femora shorter than tibiae, all tibiae heaving apical comb of thic
hind tibiae without basal spur and armed with four bla

 

setae. spines on one side and two on
the other at apex. tibial groove quite long, basal tarsal joint much smaller than apical,
hearing (wo claw-like spines at apex: meracanthts small, somewhat tabular,

Forewings (Fig, 53d) small, hyaline. transparent, rather clongate-oval, about two and
a half times as long as broad, Inoadly rounded at apes, with a long elongate pterostigma,
veins fine. somewhat parallel ix middle, radiusas long as cubital petiole, basal vein slightly
longer than tadias, marginal cells unequal, first slightly longer and much broader than
second cell, Rs quite long and weakly flexed in micldle. Hind wings (Fig. 53¢ aller than forewings, membrane uniformly bes
points. costal vein armed with a few simple and hooked setae, in basal half. Abdomen sinall, longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent, and also armed with
rows of minute points: all tergites with weak humps. Genitalia, Female genital segment (Fig. 53£) not quite as long as rest of abdomen,
large at base, apical half abruptly narrowed into a slender and acutely pointed process. doysal plate a Title longer than venwal, steeply inclined caudad, sparsely pubescent and
also armed with minute points, with a tuft of long hairs midway on dorsal surface, apex
with an up-turned hook, apical region armed with few saw-like teeth facing upward;
ventral plate broad at base, flexed ventrally, acutely poiuted at apex, apical region beset
with minute pey-like setae: circum-anal pore
pores. M ied trom the material reccived from Nagpur. Male genital segment smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 53g) about 0-30 mm
Jong. slightly longer than parameres, pyriform in anterior view, broad basally and gradut-
ally nwrowed apically, anterior margin almost straight in profile, posterior margin broadly

 

    

   

 

t with minute

 

 

 

 

    

ing small and composed of a double row 01

 

le genitalia is dey

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 185

convex basal! apex truncate. outer surface sparsely beset with thick setae, apical region
also armed with ininwte points, marginal setac long and thick. a group of 5 to 7 thick
setae present in the basal mesal surface near posterior margin; parameres (Fig. 53h
about 0:20 mm long, gradually curved inward, bp lly and gradually narrowed
apically, terminating in an acute point, ce bearing few small setae, inner
marginal setae short and stout and arranged in stall groups, setae numerous in the apical
region, few longer setae also present in the basal region; hypandrium simple. of usual
shape, having small setae; outer ann of acdeagus Fig. 35i, much smaller than basal. terminating ina spoon-shaped end. basal arm long and bowed; sperm pump as fignied
(Fig. 35 j). Lost plant. On leaves of Chloroxylon sewietenia DC

Dishibution. Originally recorced trom Coimbatore. India,

Material examined. By the courtesy of Dr M. Bashir, Emomologist and Asociate
Professor of Entomology, Agricultural Colle mbatore. T have been able ta study
this species. from a female specimen received in February 1965. Unfortunately. the
Specie was badly damaged in transit, and its parts were collected together [rom the
consignment. under the binocular, and were mounted on slides. ‘This specinien has
the following data: Coimbatore, $. India, 19,636, on Chloroxylon leaves (.A.G.R. ), and
is labelled as sl. ramakrishni Crawt,

In November 1969, a few specimens of this
Ived from Chlaroxylon sp..
Department of Zoology, Ni

Comparison. his species is redescribed from fresh material in hand, ‘The shape of
the first marginal cell in forewing is slightly dillerent from the figure given by Girawlord
(1924, Fig, 2). Tt is distinguished by the small antennae, shape of head, hyaline wings,
radius almost as long as cubital petiole and in genital character

Enderlein (1926) treated this species uncer a new genus Peripyllopsis, since it depicts
close relationship with Arytaina, this cannot be fully justified,

Biological notes. ‘his species has been recorded on leaves of Chloroxylon swietenia, trom
Coimbatore, Madras, and was collected in October 1923 (Grawlord, 1924) and June
1936. Nothing is known about its lile-history and economic impor tanct

 

tba:

   
    

 

 

 

         

     

 

 

 

species front Nagpur, Maharashua, and
given to me hy Shri P.S, ‘Thakare, Research Student. Axytaina spinosa, sp. n.
(Figs. 54, 55)

Length of body, in male. 1:43 mm; in female, [+82 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-95 mm, in female 2°31 mm
Width of head, with eyes, 0°68 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-45 mm

Length of antennae, 1.42 mm

 

Coloration. General colour pale clay yellow, wi
yellow with apices of segments and apical joints Dla
veins pale-yellow. h greenish tinge, antennae pale-
legs pale-yellow; wings hyaline,

 

186 PSYLLIDAE OF THE “INDIAN SUBGONTINENT

Soueture. Body snall, Head (Fig. 54a) including eyes, broader than thorax, moder-
livons, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex broader than long,
abet oi broad as long, swollen anteriorly and also on cither side of inedian suture,
gradually rounded in front, dise depressed on cither side of swollen median region, bearing
two foveal impressions, past-oc region swollen, posterior margin strongly arcuate;
anterior ocellus visible in front; genal cones small, swollen, leclow the level of vertex,
directed vertically downward, finely rugulose, api bluntly rounded, setae slightly
longer than that of vertex, two long ventral setac also present on each gena, Eyes
bulging,

Antennae (Fig. 54b) ten-segmented. imbricate, long and slender except two basal
segments, Ist segment subsquare, 2nd somewhat cylindrical, es long as Ist, 3rd segment
longest, one and a hall tires as long as th, 4th and 7th nearly equal, Sth, 6th and 8th
equal but smaller than 4th, 9th half as long as 5th, terminal segment smallest, bearing
two unequal setae at apex. Thorax large, moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Prothorax large, convex, gradually sloping, bearing two foveal impressions on cach lateral
side; prescutum partly concealed antcro-mcedianally by prothorax, twice as broad as
long, broadest posteriorly beyond centre, gradually narrowed anteriorly, angulate both
laterally and posteriorly; scutum slightly longer than prescutuum, about one and a half
times as broad as long, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutellum transverse,
posterior margin concave, antero-lateral angles prominent; post-scutellum of meta-
thorax large, with one median and two lateral ridges, having prominent foveal depressions
in between these ridges. Legs (Fig. 54c) moderately long, sparsely pubescent, femora shorter than tibiae, all
tibiae bearing an apical comb of strong setac, hind femur with a group of five or six dorsal
sctae just before apex, hind tibiae with a small basal spur and five tooth-like setae at apex,
hind basal tarsal joint with two claw-like black spines at apex, apical tarsal joint longer
than basal; meracanthus smell, triangular,

Forewings (Fig. 54d) large, hyaline, a little less than two and a half times as long as
broad, with apex rounded, with a long pterostigma, radius about twice as long as cubital
petiole, basal vein slightly longer than radius, cubital vein slightly longer than cubital
petiole, marginal cells unequal, second longer than first. Hind wings (Fig. 54e) also
large, beset with minute points, costal margin in basal half bearing a few simple and hooked
setae. Abdoimen longer than broad, finely pubescent and also beset with fine points arranged
in lines. 4

Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 54f) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve
(proctiger) nearly as Jong as parameres, obtriangular when viewed laterally, anterior
margin nearly straight, each side produced posteriorly into a lobe, very broad at base
and sub-triangular in shape, outer surface beset with simple setae and also with minute
points arranged in lincar series; parameres (Figs. 54g, h) simple, elongate, sides sub-
parallel, broad basally and gradually narrowed apically and bent inwards, terminating
in a bidentate black end, inner margin of basal half with a strong epiphysis directed

   

 

ately d

 

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

* FAMILY PSYLLIDAT Ae7

 

Fig, 54. Arytaine spinosa, sp. n.—nz head, front views bt antenna; e: hind leg; di: forewing; et hind wing;
f male genitalia, lateral view; g, bt forceps, outer and mesal view; Jt sperm pump; jt female
genitalia, lateral view. cephalad, outer surface beset with small simple setae, mesal surface armed with strong
setae pointing downwards, two strong setae also present just below apical end; hypandrium
simple and of usual shape, bearing sparse simple setae; outer arm of aedeagus smaller
than basal; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 543). Female genital segment (Fig. 54j) smaller than abdomen, plates sub-cqual in length,
dorsal plate longer than ventral, acuminate in apical portion, rounded at apex; ventral
plate acute at tip; both plates besct with simple setae, setae longer in the central reg‘ons,
apical portions armed with minute peg-like setae ; ovipositor acutely pointed ; circum-anal
ring composed of double row of pores. 188 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

 

Host plants, On young, fresh leaves and wigs of {1b
(Osbeck M al. stipulate Boiv... Type lucality. New Forest. Dehva Dun (U.P. Tipes. Arytaina spinosa, sp.n. is described from a small series of both sexes. Holotype. male; ‘Alletype female, both from the type locality and collected
on May 9 1950. on Albizia procera {R.N. Mathur): Paratypes: 5 males and 2
females, data same but collected on June 1], 1950; 5 males and 3 females. data same
hut collected en March 31, 1959, on Albizzia chinensis (Osbeck) Merv. (=<. stipulate
Boiv) (RN. Mathur: Few adults and nymphal stages, of March 31, 1959, were also
preserved in alcohol (in a phial.. .\IE types. preserved material and some slides with
parts of adults and nymphal stages mounted on them, are deposited at F.R.L, Dehra
Dun,

Comparivon. —Arytaine spinosu, sp.n.is recognised by its byaline wings, with apex gradually
rounded, pterostigma almost ax Jong ae media up t Furcation point, divergent genal
cones and genital characters. zzia procera Benth, and A. chinensis

  

   

 

Nymphal stage

Fifth stage: (Bigs. 55a, b, ed). Length 1-34 mm, ‘Lypical psylline form. Elongate:
head scarcely as broad as the abdomen, Wing-pads large and projecting well beyond
the contour of the body, not produced anteriorly, Eyes large and prominent. ‘The
derm for the greater part sclerotic, the head and wing pads bearing large sclerotic areas,
the thorax and the antericr half of the abdomen having a lew sclerotic arcas, while the
posterior half of che abodmen being occupied by a single large plate as shown in the
figure. Derm is beset sparsely with small, slender setae. ‘The anterior pair of wing-
pads having large black setae, each seta being flattened or spatulate at the tip; each of the
posterior wing-pads having «wo large similar setae at their distal end and three setae along
the posterior margin. ‘The posterior hall of the abdomen having five large conspicuous
spatulate sciae varying in size and marginal in position, General surface of the de
in abdomen hearing small, simple, scattered setac. Ventral side fer the anost part membranous, with small areas on the anterior half of
the abdomen and the posterior halfof the abdomen almost completely sclerotic; the abdo-
minal surface beset with small, simple, scattered setae. Antennae (Fig.55b} about (°75 mun long, uine-segmented, beset with Tew simple
setac, two basal segments robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd longer than broad, sub-
cylindrical, remaining segments slender, apical three segments imbricate, 3rd segment
longest, about two and one quarter times as long as 4th, with a weak constriction in
centre, 4th slightly smaller chan Sth, 5th, 6th and 7th nearly equal to one another, 8th
slightly smalicr than 4th, slightly longer than 5th, heaving two apical spines, four sensoria
present on segments 3, 5, 7 and 8. Legs (Fig. 55e) quite long and extend heyond the contour of the body, sparsely beset
with simple setae; without trochauters; femora and tibiae bearing few black spatulate
setac of various length; tibio-tarsal articuletion distinct; all tarsi with one golf-club
seta; claws present, pulvillus petiolate, fish-tail like,

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

   

   
   

FAMILY PSYLLIDAL 189

 

Fig. 55. Arvlaina shinose, sp. n.—at fifth stage nymph; bs antenna; et hind leg: ds circumanal pare ring. ‘irctm-anal pore ring (Fig. 58d) situated well beyond the apex of abdomen, somewhat
V-shaped and coniposed of wo rings of sli-like pares, and guarded by one anterior and
two posterior pairs of setae,

 

tenus DIAPHORINA Loew 1079

Diaphora
Loew, F, 1878. Perl, zool, -bot. Ges, Wien, 28: 603.
ieffer, J. J-, 1905. Ann. Soe. Sci. Bruxelles 29: 162,
Diaphorina
Loew, F. 1879. Verh. z00l. -bot. Ges, Wien, 29% 567. Aulmann, G. 1913. Psyllidarum Gatalogus, Berlin, p. 7. Vondracek, K, 1957; Fauna C.S.R., Praha, Ceskoslovenske Akademi ved., t. IX, p. 194. Dobreanu, E, and Manolache, Ci. 1962. Fatma Repub. pop. rom. Insecta, Homoptera, Paylloidea, Vol. 8, fase. 3, p. 148. Gonanoplicus
Enderlein, G, 1910, Pyplidae, in Sjostedt Zool. Kiliman. Exped. 2: 143, Bg. 3, 5-8. Aulmann, G. 1913, Psyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 33. Klimaszewski, 8, M. 1964. Annls. Zool. 22(3) :

 

 

 

Franz loew (1878) erected the genus as Diaphora, but, as the name was preoccupied
in Lepidoptera, he changed it to Diaphorina in 1879,

190 PSYLLIDAE Of TH INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Type species. Dinphorina frtenii Loew (= Diaphora futonii Loew 1078° (original designa-
tion); recorded from Italy and Greece. The distinctive char: oudined by Loew (1878), Crawford (1924) and others are
expanded with the notes given below,

Body generally long and slender, and covered over with mealy waxy secretion. Head
narrower than thorax, usually punctate, scarcely deflexed; vertex flat, and generally
broader than long. Frony concealed by genal cones dorsally hut visible ventrally as
alarge plate, Genal cones targe, thick, as long as or longer than broad, porrect, extending
forward in the same plane with vertex or nearly so, apices narrowly rounded or truncate. Eyes large. sive. Antennal sockets scarcely visible. Antennae very short, moder
ately thick, usually ten-segmented, about as long as width of head or less. ‘Thorax moder-
ately narrow and slender, moderately arched, punctate, dorsal surface more
or less granulate (gekornel’). Legs of medium size, pubescent with strong setac, hind
tibiae with black. tooth-like spines at apex, varying in number in different specics; proximal
tarsal segment of hind leg with two stout, claw-like spines at apex. Forewings long
and large, membrane sub-hyaline and thickened, usually maculated extensively with
brown, broad sub-apically, rounded at apex, narrow in basal half, pterostigma leng and
very narrow or wanting, radial sector quite long and flexed near apex, radius as long
as or longer than basal vein, cubitus longer than radius, second marginal cell larger
than first. ‘There are 9 species including 4 new ta science, representing this genus in India. Their
distinguishing characters are presented in the key. KEY TO THE SPECIES OF DIAPHORINA

1, A cross vein present, connecting the radial sector, and the first medial
branch

—. No such cross vein . .
2 Colour smoky black or fuscous;

» Dz venata, sp. n.

 

‘ings entirely maculated with black,

 

 

 

 

   

scattered maculae, intermixed with small hyaline areas. . be eee 23
—. Colour yellowish-brown, brown or orange, with greenish tinge; wings

partly maculated 2. ee See eT
3, Genal cones narrowly rounded at apex. ee : wi
—. Genal cones truncate atapex 2. ee et oe D. ‘truncata Craw,
4, Genal cones smaller or as long as vertex along median suture. ot eee rr)
—, Genal cones longer than vertex... bee 11 1D, danensis, sp. n.
5, Maculae dense and composed of small scattere spo, fntersmixed with |

hyaling areas | we ee Detter sss ss De eomminity se. —. Maculae less dense , Stee 2.26
6, Second marginal cell longer than first D. ” anderen Kilimmasz,
—, Second marginal cell aslong as first 6. ee D. cardiat Craw,
7, Apical band in forewing continuous from apex of radial sector to

marginal cells , Pee ee beeen eee eee we 8

—,. Apical band interrupted i inmedialedl 1) | . D. gymnosporiae, sp 0.
. Dz bikanerensis, sp. vn. -D. citri Kuw. 8, Media and cubitus banded with maculae... 2...
—. Media and cubitus without bands 2... ee eee . VAMILY PSYLLIDAK 191

 

Fig. 56. Diaphorina bikonerensis, sp. n.—at bead, front view; br antenna; et hind Jeg; d: forewing; et hind
wing; fr anal valve and aedeagus of male, lateral view; gz forceps, caudal view; fit sperm purnp;
is dorsal plate of female; j: ventral plate, lateral view. Diaphorina bikanerensis, sp. n.
(Fig. 56)
Length of body, in male, 1°82 mm; in female, 2°2 mn:
Length of forewings, in male, 2°6 mm; in female, 2°6 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°83 mm
Width of vertex between cyes, 0.48 mm
Length of antennae, 0°60 mn

Colouralion. General colour yellowish-brown, dorsum and lateral sides of thorax
and lateral sides ofabdomen greyish; head yellowish-brown with posterior border margined

shed PSYLLIDAP UF ‘PE INDIAN SURGONTINENT

black; prothorax in middle. anterior area of presentum and two pairs of longitudinal
stripes on seutuin dark brown; genae greyish; antennae yellowish-brown with two apical
ively light to dark brown or blackish; metacoxal
female genitalia yellowish-brown and blackish

 
  

segments black; hind wo forelegs progr
spur dark brown; meracanthus lighte

    

posteriorly. Structure. Body tong and slender, Head Fig, 56a), inchiding eyes, almost as broad
sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose, finely punctate,
about twice as broad as long, with two pairs of loveal inipressions on each side of median
suture, posterior (a centre, from each anterior fovea a shallow depression extending
anteriorly towards the median suture, but not attaining the anterior margin, posterior
foveae minute and circular, dise slightly swollen on either side Gf median line; post-ocellar
region swollen. post-ocelli large and lateral: posterior border margined and strongly
emarginate; ante ble from above; fons visible. sumounding the front
ocetlus; genal cones large, about 0°18 mm long and as Jong as vertex. directed forward,
on the same level as the vertex but distinctly separated by the deep impressed line, sepa-
rate hut approximate, apices divergent and roundly pointed, pubescent and finely rngulese
and alo armed with minute points. Eyes lage and recesyive, Antennal sockets large
and located just below ue lower margin of eyes. Anteunae (Fig, 56b) small, tick, bearing few setac, two basal segments robust, Ist
broadly transverse, 2nd almost quadrate and as long as Ist, 3rd segment longest, about
twice as long as Sth, 4th slightly more than halfas long as 3rd and a file longer than Sth,
Sth and Gth equal, 7h. Bth and Yh equal to one another and ¢ach slightly smaller than
(ith, terminal segment smaller than 9th, bearing wo apical spines, Yuh segment thicker
than others, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and

‘Thorax strongly arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely punctate, and finely
beset with minute points, Pronetum flat. as wide in the middle as at the sides, with
two subequal, lateral foveal impressions, dise convesly rounded, descending. in
the same plane ay presentum; present gradually sloping anteriorly, broader than
Jong. a lite more than one and a half times as broad as long, bicadestin middle, narrower
both antetiorly and posteriorly, angulate laterally and posteriorly; seutum large and
broad, a litte longer than prescutmu, about two and a half times as broad as long. dise swollen submedianally, forming a shallow longitudinal

 

as thorax, moderately detlesed ; vertes

 

 

     

 

     

jor ocellas v

 

    

    

 

 

 

 

   

    

 

median chamuel, sloping and angulate laterally, posterior margin angulate sub-
medianally; scutelhan narrowly transverse, saucersshaped, with prominent antero-
lateral angles. about twice as broad as long. 4s (Fig, 56¢) long and robust, coarsely pubescent, tibiae longer than femora and

amerior margin concay

    

each having an apical comb of setae, without basal spur, with six black, toth-like spines
at apex; basal tarsal segments smaller than apical; meta-basal tarsal jointwith wo black
claw-like spines at apex; tibial grooves quite long; meracanthus large and subtriargular. Forewing, (Fig. 56d) long. narrow at base, rounded at apes, broadest subapically,
about twoand a half times as long as broad, maculated in all cells except C-+Se. the maculae
forming large bands, leaving clear areas in between and sill clear spots along the apical
margin, costal margin angulate apically, pterostigma long, narrow and pubescent, radius

     

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 193

longer than basal vein, cubital petiole about half as long as radius, cubitus slightly longer
than radius, radial sector almost running parallel to costal margin and then abruptly
flexed downwards near apex, marginal cells unequal, first cell smaller than second, veins
with two rows of microscopic setae; fork M,4_ with a weak loop. Hind wings (Fig. 56e) slightly smaller than forewings, membrane uniformly beset
with minute points, costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae in the basal
half. Abdomen long and narrow, finely and sparsely pubescent, and also armed with minute
points, pubescence longer on sternites. Genitalia. Male genitalia smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 56£) about 0°5 mm
jong, longer than parameres, in profile, anterior margin almost straight or weakly convex,
posterior margin broadly convex and slightly invaginatcd neav apex, valve narrower
both apically and basally, truncate at apes, somewhat pear-shaped when viewed anteriorly,
outer surface sparsely beset with small, thick setae; paramcres (Fig, 56g) about 0°35 mm
long, slender, bowed, narrower apically and wider near base, sides subparallel,
(erminating in an acute, thick black point, outer surface sparscly beset with minute setae,
mesal margins hearing long, numerous setac, apices armed with a group of small sctae,
directed downwards; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, having sparse sctae; aedeagus
(Fig. 56£) clbowed, outer arm smaller than basal, spoon end simple; sperm pump as
figured (Fig. 56h). Female genitalia smaller than abdomen; plates sub-cqual, broad basally and
gradually narrowed caudally; dorsal plate (Fig. 56i) a little longer than ventral,
roundly pointed apically, pubescent, with six pairs of long setae in the posterior
third and also thickly armed with minute peg-like setae on lateral sides, setae
in middle smaller ; circum-anal pore ring composed ofa narrow band of pores and guarded
by minute setac; ventral plate (Fig. 56j) acutely pointed apically, coarsely pubescent
in the posterior two-thirds, with a bunch of minute setae near apex; ovipositor acutely
pointed. Host plant. Collected on Lepladenia spartium White. Type locality. Bikaner (Rajasthan),

Types. Described from a small series of dry specimens, which were represented mostly
with females, antennae missing in all specimens and legs in few, one dislodged antenna
mounted on slide. Holotype female, of 8.11.68 from the type locality (Sawai Singh) ;
Paratypes: 4 females of 8.11.68, from the type locality (Sawai Singh). All types
deposited at F.R.I,, Dehra Dun. One male specimen from the same lot, was dissecied
and its parts were mounted on slide, Two paratypes are deposited at the Department
of Zoology-Entomology, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana. Comparison. This species is separated from other species of Diaphorina by the different
pattern of maculations in the forewings, shape of head and genal cones and second marginal
cell of forewing; genae separate but approximate, with apices divergent and rounded. Tn wing maculations, this species somewhat resembles D. gymnosporiae, but the pattern is
different. Biological notes. Nothing is known about its biology and economic importance, except

18

i194 PSYLLIDAR OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

that the species has been collected on Lepladenia spartium, trom Bikaner (Rajasthan)
on 8th November 1968 (Sawai Singh). Diaphorina cardiae Crawford 1924
(Figs. 57, 58)
Crawford, D, L. 1924, Rec. Indian Mus. 26(6) : 617. Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V.1924. Rec, Indian Mus, 26(6)+ 624. Husain, M. A, and Dina Nath, 1927. Mem. Dep. Agrie. India Ent. Ser. 10(2)+ 9. Length of body, in male, 2°15 mm; in female, 2°35 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2°05 nm; in female, 2°10 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°62 mm

Width of vertex hetween eyes, 0°35 mm

Length of antennae, 0'47 mm

Golouration. ‘his species shows considerable variation in wing pattern and colouration
and the following description has been made from the North Indian specimens. General
colour pale-orange, head orange, genae pale-yellow dorsally, slightly darker apically
and ventrally, antennae pale-yellow, two basal joints dark-brown, apex of joint 8 and
two (terminal segments black, prothorax black anteriorly; prescutum with a broad,
anterior band and scutum with two pairs of bands of dark-brown colour, legs pale-yellow
except femora, femora of fore and middle legs dark brown, and of hind leg lighter, basal
portion of tibiac and apical tarsal joints dark-brown, spines black, claws black, abdominal
tergites dark-brown, sternites pale-yellow, with two ditinct dark-brown longitudinal
stripes, genitalia dark-brown, anal ring orange, forewings with maculae numerous
and scattered, but concentrated mostly in the outer half of the wing. Structure. Body long and slender, Head (Fig. 57a) scarcely declivous, finely punctate,
including eyes, slightly smaller than thorax; vertex flat, slightly more than two and a
half times as broad as long, sparsely pubescent, deeply emarginate at the posterior margin,
weakly swollen on either side of median suture, with an oval fovea on each side of median
line, near the posterior margin, without shallow linear depression, anterior ocellus visible
from above and located at the point of excision; genal cones on the same level as the vertex,
separate, about 0,15 mm long and as long as wide and nearly as long as vertex, diverging
slightly outward, rounded at tip, more pubescent than vertex. Eyes large and recessive. Antennal sockets lateral and situated on level with the lower margin of eyes. |

Antennae (Fig. 57b) small and thick, ten-segmented, bearing a few setae, first two joints
robust, Ist slightly broader than long, 2nd quadrate, slightly smaller than Ist, remaining
segments imbricate and progressively becoming thicker from third to apex, 3rd segment
longest, 4th, 5th and 6th equal to one another, 7th and 8th equal but smaller than 6th,
penultimate joint slightly wider than the terminal, terminal segment with two unequal,
apical spines, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax somewhat arched, robust, finely punctate, sparsely pubescent. Prothorax
flat, viewed dorsally, longer in middle and narrower laterally, with two subequal foveal
impressions on each side; prescutum viewed dorsally, about twice as broad as long, bro-
adest in middle, gradually sloping anteriorly, bluntly angled laterally, and also distinctly

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 195

 

Fig. 57. Diaphorina cardiae Crawt.—a: front view of head; bt antenna; e: hind leg; dz part of hind leg,
showing number and arrangement of apical spines on tibia; et forewing; ft forewing (from S.
Indian specimen); gt lateral view of male genitalia; bs forcep, mesal view; t sperm pump; }:
lateral view of female genitalia; kt caudal end of dorsal plate, dorsal view. angled submedianally on the’ posterior margin; scutum large, broad, and convex, about
twice as broad as long, broadest before middle, slightly longer than prescutum, angled
both laterally and posteriorly; scutellum small and transverse, vase-shaped, about twice
as broad as long, broad anteriorly, with prominent antero-lateral angles; mesepisternum
large and directed forward. Legs (Fig. '57¢) of medium size, coarsely pubescent, femora shorter than tibiac, all

196 PSYLLIDAR OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

tibiae with apical comb of stout setac, hind tibiac without basal spur and with about
seven short, stout, black spines on the margin at apex. similarly basal tarsal segment
with wo black claw-like spines at apex, metacoxal spur (meracanthus) of medium size,
acutcly conical, tibial groove quite long. Forewings (Figs. 574,£) large, a little more than twice as longas wide. widest subapically,
rounded at apex, stem R abont one-third longer than basal vein (R+-M+Cu), cubital
petiole about half as long as radius, Rs slightly flexed near apex, pterostigma long and
narrow and pubescent, first marginal cell as long as second and slightly wider than
second. veins with a double row of minute setac. Hind wings also quite large. Both
Tore and hind wings beset with microscopic setae (minuce points). ‘The wing of §, Indian
specimens (Fig. 57£) ave more densely maculated with small, irregular specks than the
wings of North Indian specimens (Fig. 57e). Abdomen longer than broad, sparscly beset with simple setae and thickly with minute
points ventrally, setac longer on sternites. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 57g) smaller than abdomen, pubescent, anal
valve about 0°32 mm long, longer than parameres, in profile, anterior margin weakly
convex, lateral lobes large, broadly rounded in middle, and gradually narrowed both
basally and apically, attenuate at apex; parameres about 0.28 mm long, broadly rounded
at apex in profile, each forcep with a small, strong, black tooth at its extremity and sur-
rounded by a cluster of thick setae, setae on the mesal surface and on margins longer
and directed downward (Fig. 57h), cutcr surface beset with small simple setae;
hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely beset with simple setae; outer arm of
aedeagus small, with a thick spoon end; sperm pump as figured (Fig, 573). Female genital segment (Fig. 57j) smaller than abdomen, coarsely pubescent. Dorsal plate longer than ventral, narrowly rounded at apex, anal opening surrounded
by an oval ring of double row of pores and guarded by small setae, posterior region (Fig. 57k} armed with thick peg-like setae, setae in centre longer and arranged in two rows,
ventral plate acuminate in the pcsterior region and acutely pointed at apex, both plates
broad basally; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plants. Collected on Gordia grandis Roxb. {==Cordia cordala Steud. ), GC. myxa
Linn., and C. obliqua Willd. Distribution. Aligarh (U.P. ), Ludhiana (Punjab), Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu),
Nagpur (Maharashtra). Material examined. Numicrous adults and nymphal stages collected on February
2, 1937, from Aligarh, U.P., on Cordia myxa (R.N. Mathur); some adults with nymphal
stages, received on June 15-16, 1960, from the Professor of Zoology and Entomology
(S. Singh), Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, and from this collection, 4 males
and 7 females (R.R.D, 2504), and 6 males and 5 females were later mounted on cards;
in February 1965, few examples, in poor condition, were received from the Entomologist
and Associate Professor of Entomology, Agricultural College and Research Institute,
Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu). These specimens were collected on Cordia obliqua Willd. and
C. myxa Linn, during 1915, 1917, 1923 and 1936, from Coimbatore. They are provi-
sionally identified as Diaphorina cardiae Grawf, The writer had also examined the material

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAR 197

present at the Indian Agricultual Research Institute, New Delhi, having this data: +
examples, Coimbatore, S. India, July 22, 1912 (T.V.R. ), on Cordia, and 8 examples from
the same locality, collected on August 25, 1915 (Fletcher). They are also D. cardiae
Crawf,

Comparison. Crawford (1924) described this species from specimens collected from
Coimbatore (8. India) and his description is very meagre. It was noted that the examples
represented in S. India possess darker wings andare densely covered with brown maculac
than those collected from N, India. D, cardiae Crawf. differs from other species in wing
pattern, shape of genal cones and genital structur ‘Two pairs of D. cardiae collected
from N, India were sent to Dr Russell for comparison with the Crawford’s type matcrial
present at the U.S, National Museum, She writes (in litt. ), “Diaphorina sp., not cardiae
Grawf-—--In cardiae the 2 ventral valve of the ovipositor is turned upward at a right angle;
the # forceps are parallel sided in lateral view, and the distal portion of the proctiger
appears to be longer in relation to the basal portion than in your specimens. The cubital
and medial cells are slightly different in shape and radius is more strongly curved than
in your specimens”, Personally, I am inclined to think from the materials (north and
south India) examined by me that the differences are very minor and that the two collec-
tions should be referred to the same species, Besides, the host plants of both the collections,
are species of Cordia. ‘The major difference is in colouration and relative distribution
of brown maculae in forewings. Biological notes. This is a free living species, infesting young leaves and twigs; the
adults are quite active and fly about with a slight disturbance. ‘The nymphs are chrome
orange or pale cadmium yellow, with smoky wing-pads, and their characters are described
below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig, 58a). Length 1°65 mm, Body oval; the wing-pads moderately
large, projecting from the side of the body, the humeral angle produced cephalad, reaching
the level of the lower margin of eyes, each wing-pad with clavate setae arranged along
the margin and also with a single lanceolate seta near the posterior angle; eyes prominent. Dorsum strongly sclerotic throughout, having some thoracic and abdominal plates as
illustrated, these plates are separated mesally by a narrow strip, except the large posterior
abdominal plate, indicating traces of segmentation. Entire margin of abdomen armed
with a continuous series of lanceolate setae. Derm thickly beset with minute points
and sparsely with clavate setae. Ventral side membranous throughout, except the anal plate, with one lateral area,
a small area about each spiracle and four pairs of small submedian areas. Derm thickly
beset with minute points, Simple ring-based setae present intersegmentally in the abdo-
men, Antennae (Fig. 58b) borne at the margin of the head, about 0°35 mm long and
armed with a few simple setae, three-segmented, the first wo basal segments distinct, quite
short, 3rd segment longest, not differentiated into segments, bearing three lanceolate
setae, four sensoria and two unequal, thick terminal spines. Legs (Fig. 58c) long and
well developed, bearing a few simple setae, without trochanter, with tibio-tarsal articulation

198 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

   

0.125 ray

 

Wig. 58. Diaphorina cardiae Crawf—at fifth stage nymph; bi antenna; ot part of legs
anal ring. well-defined, tarsus with a single golf-club seta, claws present, pulvillus like a fish-tail,
Anal opening (Fig. 58d) set well away from the apex of the abdomen, the outer circum-
anal pore ring consisting of two to three rows of pores, the inner ring with faint, minute
pores, . Other younger stages similar in general characters except for smaller size, and relatively
fewer marginal setae and fewer clavate setae on the dorsum, reduced size of the wing-pads,
and absence of the tibio-tarsal articulation. Diaphorina citri Kuwayama 1907
(Fig. 59)

Kuwayama, 8.1907. Trans. Sapparo nat. Hist, Soc. 2 160, pl. ILI, fig. 16. Grawford, D. L, 1912. Rec. Indian Mus. 7: 424-425, pl. xxiii, figs, N, O, P; pl. xxv, fig. D
(Euphaterus citri Kuw,)

Crawford, D. L. 1917. Philipp. F. Sei. 12: 168. (Euphalerus citi). Fletcher, T. B. 1917. Proc. Second ent, Meet., pp. 215-216. Fletcher, T. B. 1919. Proc. Third ent. Meet., p. 276. Hussain, A.M. 1923, Rep. Proc. Fifth ent. Mect., pp. 122-128,

Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1923. Rep, Proc. Fifth ent, Meet., p. 267. Crawford, D, L. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus. 261 616. Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Ree, Indian Mus, 26: 623,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 199

Hussain, A. M, and Dina Nath, 1927, Mem. Dep. Agric. India Ent, Ser, 10(2): 5-27, ple. 1-4, figs, 1-3. Kuwayama, S. 1931. Insecta mats 5: 125,

Kuwayama, 8, 1932. Icon. Ins. Japan, 1814, fig, 3584,

Shiraki and Takahashi, R, 1933, Pl, Ind. Publ. no, 636, Govt. Formosa, 67. Kuwayama, 8, 1943, Trans, nat. Hist, Soc. Formosa 331 506,

Miyatake, ¥. 1964, Contr. Sci, Exped. Kyushu Univ, 26: 124,

Length of body, in male, 1-7 mm; in female, 24m
Length of forewings, in male, 2°! mm; in female, 2°4 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°55 mm. Width of vertex between eyes, 0°35 mm

Length of antennae, 0°58 mm

Golouration, General colour brown, vertex slightly lighter; antennae black at tip;
eyes darker, with black stripe from eye to tip of cone on side (not distinctly visible in
living specimen but quite clear in alcoholic material), this stripe varies in colour, usually
it is greyish, black only in very dark specimens; the colour of abdomen also varies, it
is usually greyish-brown, but in some specimens it is distinctly bluish, while in gravid
females, it is distinctly orange; forewings with a spotted macula of brown on the upper
margin from a little below tip of clavus to tip of radius, and another on lower margin
not quite merged into first, maculae not continuous but composed of smaller scattered
spots. ‘Structure. Body long and slender. Head (Fig. 59a) narrower than thorax, descending,
very finely pubescent, finely punctate; vertex flat, broader than long, about two and
a half times as broad as long, with a large fovea on each side, posterion to centre, posterior
margin strongly arcuate, post-ocelli large and lateral, anterior margin almost straight;
frons concealed by the genal cones dorsally, but visible ventrally as a large plate; genal
cones about 0°12 mm long and slightly smaller than vertex, broad at base, in same plane
with vertex, convergent toward and rounded at apex, almost contiguous, finely pubescent
and also beset with minute points. Eyes large and recessive. Antennal bases scarcely
visible, as in other species. Clypeus large and visible ventrally. Antennae (Fig. 59b) short, not longer than lead and pronotum combined, slender,
ten-segmented, bearing few setae, imbricate, two basal segments robust and almost sub-
quadrate, 3rd joint longest, 4th, 6th and 8th equal to one another, but each slightly smaller
than 3rd, 5th,7th and 9th equal, but each slighdy smaller than 4th, 8th and 9th segments
clavate, terminal joint smallest and armed with two unequal, hollow apical spines, four
sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax very finely pubescent, prominently punctate, scarcely arched. Pronotum
rather long, convexly rounded, sides parallel, narrower in middle, broader laterally,
with foveal impressions on each side; pleurites typical of genus; prescutum longer than
broad, broadest beyond middle, gradually narrowed anteriorly, angulate both laterally
and posteriorly; scutum large, broad, broadest beyond middle, about two and one-fourth
times as broad as long, almost as long as prescutum, angulate laterally; scutellum narrowly
transverse, with prominent antero-lateral angles, posterior margin weakly invaginated
medianally,

200 PSYLLIDAR OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Legs (Fig. 59c) long and slender, coarsely pubescent and also beset with strong points,
tibiae longer than femora, cach tibia with an apical comb of setae, hind tibiae without
basal spur, with 6 to 8 strong, black spines at apex, tarsal joints of each leg of equal length,
proximal tarsal joint of hind leg with wwo black claw-like spines at apex, in between with
a pad-like structure, meracanthus large, finger-like. orewings (Fig. 59d) large and long, subhyaline, rather thickened as in other species,
maculate with brown maculae on the upper margin from a little below tip of clavus to
tip of radius, and another on lower margin not quite merged into first, maculae not con-
tinuous but composed of small scattered spots, attenuate at hase, broadest sub-apically,
rounded at apex, about two and a third times as long as broad, basal vein shorter than
radius, first cubital Jong, second marginal cell larger than first, radius long. about twice
as long as cubital petiole, pterostigma very narrow,quite long. Hind wings (Fig. 59e) slightly smaller than forewings, membrane uniformly beset
with minute points, costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen longer than broad, sparsely pubescent and also beset with points which are
thicker and stronger on sternites. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 59f) smaller than abdomen, rather conspicuous,
sparscly pubescent. Anal valve clongate-pyriform or flask-shaped, about 0°38 mm
Jong, attenuate above, anterior margin almost straight, posterior margin broadly rounded,
broadest in basal half; parameres (Fig. 59g) long, about 0.30 mm long, slender, simple,
slightly smaller than anal valve, subacute at tip, ending in a strong tooth at its extremity,
mesal and marginal setae longer, a group of simple setae also present in the apical region;
hypandriuin sinple, of usual shape, bearing small scattered setae in the apical region;
aedeagus small, outer arm much smaller than basal, basa] arm looped and striated,
spoon end slightly flattened; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 59h). Female genital segment (Fig. 59i) short, small, pubescent; dorsal plate about 0°7 mm
long, slightly longer than ventral, wedge-shaped, broad basally and gradually narrowed
caudally, with a clear area near base and having an elliptic circum-anal ring, composed
ofa double row of pores, posterior region armed with minute peg-like setae and also
with rows of short strong bristles; ventral plate slightly shorter than dorsal valve, boat-
shaped, acutely pointed at apex, with a prominent ventral bulge in middle; ovipositor
acutely pointed. Host plants. Several species of Citrus, e.g., Citrus aurantium (orange), C. medica limonium
(lemon), G. media lunetta (sweet lime), G. medica acida (sour lime), C. medica (citron),
G, decumana (pomelo). ‘This species has heen found throughout India, on all the cultivated
varieties of Citrus, Also recorded on Murraya koenigii at Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu), and
Pusa (Bihar), and it may be considered as an alternative food plant (Afzal Husain and
Dina Nath, 1927), This species has been recorded on Munaya paniculata Jack in
Japan (Miyatake, 1964),

Distribution, D. citri Kuw. is widely distributed throughout the orient (Crawford,
1917). It is known from Formosa, Japan, the Philippine Islands, Moluccas (Amboina),
Southern China (Macao), and occurs all over India (Crawford, 1912; Afzal Husain
and Dina Nath, 1927), Actual authenticated records are from Pusa (Bihar); Adra

 

 

 

 

 

FAMILY PSYLTIDAK 201

      

gy
Fig. 59. Diaphorina citri Kwwayama~a: head, front view; b: antenna; e: hind leg; ds forewing; et hind

wing; £: male genitalia, lateral view; gt parameres, caudal view; hh: sperm pump; i: female
genitalia, lateral view. 0-5 mm . (Bengal); E. Punjab; Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu); Delhi; Dehra Dun (U,P. ); and
Pakistan. Material examined. The collection at T.A.R.I., New Dethi, contains 2 cxamples of
10.12.08, on orange (C.S.M. ), 5 examples of 12.12.08 on orange (D.P.S. ), 5 ex: of
v. 09. on orange (C.S.M. ), 7 ex. of 12.1.09 on orange (D.P.S. ), 8 ex. of 17.209 on or-
ange (C.S.M. ), 1 ex, of 27.6.1] (AHL), 1 ex of 11.8.18 on lemon (C.S.M. ), 7 ex. of
29.7.15 on Citrus (U. Bahadur), 7 ex. of 3.9.15 on lemon leaves (U. Bahadur), and
20 examples, no data. All these specimens are from Pusa, Bihar. The Zoological Survey of Tndia, Calcutta, collection consists of: Adra, Singbhum
Dist., 12.x.09. (No.9731/18) (specimen missing),'a tbe containing few males and

202 PSYLLIDAR OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

females, from Bankura (Bengal) collected on 7.4.53, on Citrus (No. 6484/H7), in alcohol,
and in another tube, 2 specimens without any data (No.8822/H7), preserved in alcohol. ‘The collection at F.R.I., Dehra Dun, includes + males and 7 females, of 16,.3.59, from
New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.) (R.N. Mathur), 3 males and 5 females of 17.3,60, also
from New Forest (R.N. Mathur) and collected on Gitrus medica; 3 examples of 9.4.67,
5 examples of 20.10.67 and 2 examples of 20.7.68, from Dehra Dun, on Gitrus (R.N. Mathur); and 18 examples of 9.7.35, collected from New Forest, Dehra Dua (RN. Mathur), on Citrus. “Two phials containing adults and nymphal stages, from New Forest,
on Citrus medica, of 16.3.59 and 17.3.60. Comparison. This species can easily be recognised by the characters given in the key. Further its head with somewhat parallel sides and longer genal cenes are distinctive
features. The wing maculations are also characteristic. Biological notes, Diaphorina citri Kuw. is commonly known as the ‘Citrus Psylla’, and
is of the greatest importance all over the country, The ravages of this insect cause very
serious losses to Citrus cultivation. A detailed account on its systematic position, distri-
bution, description of various stages, bionomics, economic importance, parasites and
predators and control measures, is given by Afzal Husain and Dina Nath (1927). This
species is also suspected to cause a serious virus disease known as the- ‘Greening disease’,
in Citrus orchards. In South Africa, Trioga erytreae (Del Guer. ), belonging to the sub-
family Triozinae, is incriminated as a vector of the Greening’ virus of Citrus, and this
species has not been recorded in India. Diaphorina citri Kuw. belongs to the sub-family
Psyllinae, Ut is said that the ‘Greening’ virus disease of Citrus is quite prevalent in India
and some research work is in progress to assess its virulence,

 

 

   

Diaphorina communis, sp. n.
(Figs. 60, 61)

Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Forest Rec, 1(2)1 40-42,
Beeson, C.F, C. 1941, Forest Insects, p. 777. Length of body, in male, 2-1 mm; in female, 2-4 mm
Length of forewing, in male, 2-5 mm; in female, 2-6 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-6 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-35 mm

Length of antennae, 0-52 mm

Cotouration. (Live and dried specimens). General colour black with greyish-brown
tinge and covered with a white mealy-like secretion; head black; genae brownish-black,
antennae pale-yellow, basal two joints brownish-black, apical two segments black, tips
of joints 4th and 6th black; prescutum with a thin greyish dorsal median line and scutum
with a broad dorsal median greyish band; femora black, tibiae and tarsal segments light
brown except anterior tibiae having blackish tinge, spines black; abdomen black dorsad
and brownish-black ventrad; genitalia brownish black; forewings sub-opaque, densely
maculated with smoky black maculae and irregular clear spaces. Structure, (Fig. 60a). Head somewhat but not greatly declivous, finely punctate;

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 208

 

Fig. 60, Diaphorina communis, sp. n—at dorsal view of head; bs: antemma; et hind leg; di tibial apical
spines on hind leg; et forewing; (Photo by late Shri K. N. Tandon) f: hind wing; gt lateral
view of male genitalia; lr upper surface of anal valve; it forceps, caudal view; jt forceps, outer
and mesal views; kx aedeagus; I: sperm pump; mt female genitalia, lateral view. including eyes, slightly smaller than thorax. Vertex flat, about twice as broad as long,
sparsely pubescent, rather deeply emarginate at the posterior margin, with a large circular
fovea on each side neav the posterior margin and located slightly inwards from the middle
ofeach half, a shallow depression extending from the fovea towards the anterior, Genae
on the same level as the vertex, contiguous near the base, a little longer than wide, about
0-15 mm long and as long as vertex, diverging slighty outwards, bluntly rounded at tip
a little more coarsely pubescent than the vertex. Eyes large and recessive,

 
 

 

204 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Antennae (Fig. 60b) small, slightly smaller than head including eyes, ten-segmented,
bearing a few setae, imbricate, two basal joints robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd slightiy
smaller than Ist, longer than broad, remaining segments slender, Srd joint longer than
others, 4th slightly smaller than 6th, 5th one-third smaller than 6th. 7th and 8th equal
but each slightly smaller than 4th, 4th, 6th and 8th clavate, the two terminal joints almost
equal in length but wider than the preceding, apical joint having two unequal spines at
apex, a small seta present near each sensorium on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax somewhat arched, robust, finely punctate, sparsely pubescent, strongly rugulose,
Pronotum flat, viewed dorsally, longer in middle and narrower laterally, convexly rounded,
sloping anteriorly, with two subequal, circular foveae, the inner ones smaller than the
outer; prescutum viewed dorsally, broader than long, broades in middle, gradually
narrowed both anteriorly and posteriorly, bluntly angled at the sides, distinctly angled
submediarally on the posterior margin; scutum large, broader than long, broadest
before middle, slightly more than twice as broad as long, almost as long as prescutum,
jlat dorsally and sloping laterally, slightly depressed medianally, forming a shzllow
longitudinal channel; scutellum small, narrowly wansverse, somewhat vase-shaped,
bread anteriorly with prominent antero-lateral angles. Legs (Fig. 60c) of moderate size, coarsely pubescent and thickly beset with minute
points, tibiae longer than femora, tibial groove quite long, middle and hind tibiae with
three and two stout, subapical setae respectively, hind tibiae without basal spur, with
seven stout lblack tooth-like spines at apex (Fig. 60d), tarsal segments of equal length,
basal tarsal segment of the hind leg with two short black clawelike spines at apex; mera-
canthus large, somewhat subtubular,

Forewings (Fig. 60e) large, two and a half times as long as wide, widest subapically,
narrowly rounded at apex, narrow at base, first marginal cell almost as long as wide but
shorter and wider than second, stem R slightly more than twice as long as cubital peticle
(M+(Cu}, pterostigma long and narrow; seven clear spaces present at the margin of the
+spots, one in each of the four cells, 2 spots between Cu, and Cu,, and | spot near
clavus; all veins armed with a double row of minute setae. Hind wings (Fig. 60f) with

the costal margin armed with 7 or 8 simple and 4 to 6 hooked setae. Both wings thickly
* beset with minute points,

Abdomen longer than broad, sparsely pubescent dorsad and coarse ventrad, sternites
also armed with minute points,

Genitalia. Male genitalia (Fig. 60g) slightly smaller than abdomen, pubescent; anal
valve (Fig. 60h) about 0-38 mm long, longer than forceps, rather pyriform in shape when
viewed anteriorly, anterior margin almost straight in profile, lateral lobes small, broadly
rounded in the basal half; parameres (Figs. 60i,j) about 0-25 mm_ long, in profile,
broadly rounded at apex and gradually narrowed down basally, each forcep with a small,
strong, black point at apex, just below this point, a cluster of stout setae present, pointing
outward, setae on the mesal surface longer and thicker than others and directed down-
wards, basal region with a strong small projection pointing anteriorly; hypandrium of
usual shape, sparsely pubescent; outer arm of aedeagus (Fig. 60k) smaller than basal,
having a thick spoon end. Sperm pump as figured (Fig.60 1). FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 2035

Kemale genitalia (Fig. 60m) smaller than abdomen, pubescent, both plates broad
basally and narrow caudally; anal plate longer than ventral, roundly peinted at apex,
apical one-third armed with short, stout peg-like setae, anal opening surrounded by an
oval ring of double row of pores and guarded by minute setac; ventral plate with the
posterior half bent upward and acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plants. Commonly found on Murraya koenigii Spreng. and M. paniculata (1.) Jack. Rarely on Citrus sp. ‘Type locality, New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Described from a long series of specimens. Holotype male; Allotype,
female, from the type locality and collected on April 24, 1950 (R.N. Mathur); Para-
types: 20 speciinens of September 29, 15 specimens of September 30, 1932, and 15
specimens of May 12, 1933; and 4 males and 7 females of April 24, 1950, all from the
type locality (R. N. Mathur); 2 males and 4 females, collected on February 16, 1953,
from Dehra Dun (U.P. ), Additional material not designated as paratypes are: 6
examples of April 5, 6, 1932; 12 examples of May 12, 1933; 3 males and 4 females from
New Forest, Dehra Dun, and collected on April 8, 20 males and 9 females, from the same
locality and collected on May 7, 1960, 14 examples collected between January and March
1963 from New Forest and 10 examples from Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur), The host of
all these specimens is Murraya kocnigii. Three males and 4 femaies, from New Forest, Dehra
Dun and collected on April 8, 1960, and 20 males and 9 females, collected on May7, 1960,
recorded from Murraya paniculata (L.) Jack. A good collection of adults of April 5, 1964,
collected on Murraya koenigii, Hardwar-Rishikesh Road (M.G. Ramdas Menon), was
examined by the author at the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi. Some
adults and nymphal stages collected on April 10, April 15, 1948 from Dehra Dun (U.P.) and April 8 and May 5, 1960 from New Forest, Dehra Dun, on Murraya koenigii,
(R. N. Mathur), were preserved in alcohol. Some aduits collected on M. paniculata,
on May 5, 1960, from New Forest, Dehra Dun (R. N. Mathur), and preserved in
alcohol. All the type material and preserved specimens, together with the slides,
deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Comparison. Diaphorina communis, sp. n. is clearly differentiated from other species of
Diaphorina by its black colouration, densely maculated wings, shape of head and genal
cones, and genital characters. It matches closely with D. dunensis, sp. n. and D. truncata
Crawf. in colouration, but differs greatly from them in shape of head, genac and genital
armature. Biological notes. ‘“Uhis species is quite common on Murraya koenigii, wherever it grows. Its bionomics and economic importance are given in detail by Mathur (1935), and the
nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig. 61a). Length 1:59 mm, Broadly oval; the wing pads large and well
developed, projecting from the side of the body, the humeral angle produced cephalad,
reaching slightly below the anterior margin of the eyes; eyes prominent. Dorsum
strongly sclerotic throughout, having numcrous plates as illustrated: head with a pair

Fig. 61.

of large plates separated from the thorax by two pairs of narrow sclerites, each thoracic
segment with a pair of large and several small plates, the large plates of both head and
Abdomen with four pairs of mesally separated
narrow plates and a large posterior plate indicating traccs of segmentation, thin sclerites

thorax separated mesally by a narrow strip. PSYLIIDAR. OF THE INDIAN SUBGONTINEN'T

    

  
 

oO
_——

wu S70

ww sch0, ona scv'o

ee

Diaphorina communis, sp. n,m: Bfth stage nymph; br antennas et part of leg; di circum-anal
ring; et antenna, fourth stage nymph; f g, hr anteana, abdominal margin, wing-pads of
third stage nymph; i:j: antenna and abdominal margin of second stage nymph, ke It m:
abdominal margin, antenna and leg of first stage nymph. also present intersegmentally between some of the anterior tergal plates. of abdomen armed with a continuous series of 45 to 50 lanceolate setac. beset with mimute points and sparsely with clavate setae on head and thorax and simple

setae on abdomen,

Entire margin

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 207

Ventral side membranous throughout except for a small plate at the base of
each antenna, one near the eye, thc anal area with two lateral areas, a small area about
each spiracle and four pairs of small submedian aveas. All these sclerotic areas are beset
with minute points and the posterior portion of anal area with fringed process Dern
of wing-pads with minute points and of abdomen with simple ring-based setae of various
length. Antennae (Fig. 61b) borne at the margin of the head, quite large, about 0-34
mm long and armed with a few simple setac, three-segmented; the first two hasal seg-
ments distinct, quite short; third segment longest, nol diffcrentiated into segments, bearing
three lanceolate sctae, the proximal seta smaller than the other two, with four sensor! and two unequal, thick terminal spines. Legs (Fig. 6le) well developed, with a few
simple setae, without trochanter, with tibio-tarsal articulation well defined, tarsus with a
single golf-club seta, claws present, pulvillus large, fish tail-like. Anal opening (Fig. 61d) situated well inside from the apex of the body, the outer
circumanal pore ring consisting of a single row of slit-like pores,
irregular row of small faint pores, and guarded by one ante:
posterior pairs of setae. :

Fourth stage. Length 0-98 mm, Resembles the fifth stage, except in having smaller
wing pads, less number of thoracic plates, antennac (Fig. 61e) with three sensoria and two
lanceolate setae, tibio-tarsal articulation absent, slight reduction in the number of lan-
ceolate sctac situated along the margin of apical plate of the abdomen, with one large and
one small seta alternating. Third stage. (Figs. 61f, g, h). Length 0-62 mm, Like the fourth stage but with
two-segmented antennac having only two sensoria and one lanceolate seta on the second
segment, marginal lanceolate setac on abdomen fewer; each wing pad with a single clavate
seta. Second stage. (Figs. 614, j). Length 0-45 mm, With two-segmented antennae and
having one sensorium, without lanceolate sela; marginal setac on abdomen still fewer;
wing-pads with a single lanceolate seta on cach,

First stage. (Figs. 61k, 1, m). Length 0-33 mm, Antennae two-segmented, with one
sensorium; dorsal plates markedly defined; cach wing-pad represented by a lanceolate
seta; with two golf-club setae on each of the middle and hind legs and a single seta on
each of the forelegs; pulvilli like flat rounded lobes; anus nearer the apex. the inner ring with ar
ior, one lateral and one

    

Diaphorina dunensis, sp. n.

(Fig. 62)
Length of body, in male, 2:16 mm; in female, 2°35 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2-7 mm; in female, 2-7 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-62 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-35 mm
Length of antennae, 0-52 mm

Colouration. General colour fuscous; head dark-brown; genae light brown; antennae
pale brown, two basal segments brown and two apical segments black; prescutum
anteriorly, two broad, longitudinal bands on scutum, scutellum and parapteron black;

208

Fig. 62. PSYLLIDAG OF TNE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Diabhorina dunensis, sp, n,—ai front view of heads br lateral view of head and part of thorax;
c: antenna; d, e: part of hind leg, showing arrangement and number of apical spines on tibia;
£: forewing; g: hind wing; hi lateral view of male genitalia; it outer surface of anal valves
$i caudal view of forceps; ks: lateral view of aedeagus; It sperm pump;
genitalia,

 

t lateral view of female

FAMILY PSYLLIDAR 209

femora fuscous, tibiae and tarsal joints pale brown, spines black; abdomen fuscous
dorsad and bluish-green or greyish-brown ventrad ; genitalia fuscous; forewings sub-
opaque, maculated entirely with fuscous patches intermixed with small irregular clear
spaces, seven clear spots present along the margin. Structure, Body long. Head (Figs. 62a, b) somewhat but not greatly deflexed, sparsely
pubescent, finely punctate; including eyes, slightly narrower than thorax, vertex flat,
about thrice as broad as the length of the median suture. deeply emarginate at the posterior
margin, with a distinct circular fovea on each side of the median suture, near the posterior
margin and near the middle of each half, with a shallow linear depression extending
anteriorly from each; genal cones on same level as the vertex, contiguous near the base,
slightly longer than wide, about 0*18 mm long and slightly longer than vertex, slightly
divergent outward, rounded at tip, a little more coarsely pubescent than the vertex. Eyes
of medium size, slightly recessive. Antennae (Fig. 62c) ten-segmented, smaller than the head including eyes, imbricate,
bearing a few setae, two basal joints robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd subquadrate. remaining segments thicker, 3rd segment longer than others, segments 4, 6 and 8 equal
and each one-third smaller than 3rd, segments 5 and 7 equal and cach smaller than 4th,
two apical segments slightly wider than the preceding, with two unequal spines at apex,
four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9,

Thorax (Fig. 62b) somewhat arched, robust, finely punctate, coarsely pubescent. Pronotum flat, viewed dorsally, longer in middle and narrower laterally, with two sub+
equal foveae on each lateral side, the inner ones smaller than the outer; prescutum viewed
dorsally, broader than long, about twice as broad as long, broadest before middle, bluntly
angled at the sides and distinctly angled submedianally on the posterior margin; scutum
broad and convex, gradually sloping laterally and posteriorly, about twice as broad as
long, broadest in middle, with a shallow longitudinal channel, angled at the sides and
on the posterior margin; scutellum small and transverse, about twice as broad
as long. Legs (Figs. 62d, e) of medium: size, coarsely pubescent; tibiae longer than femora,
tibial groove quite long; hind tibiae without basal spur and with 7 to 9 short, stout, black
spines on the apical margin, basal segment of hind tarsi with two claw-like spines at apex,
tarsal segments of equal length; meracanthus large, triangular. Forewings (Fig. 62£) large, about two and a half times as long as wide, widest sub-
apically, rounded at apex, narrow at base, pterostigma long and narrow, stem R about
twice as long as basal vein (R+-M-+-Cu) and thrice as long as cubital petiole (M-+Cu),
cubital petiole about one-third smaller than basal vein, first marginal cell almost as long
as wide, but shorter and wider than the second, veins armed with a double row of minute
setae. Hind wings (Fig. 62g) with the costal margin armed with 7 to 8 simple and 4
to 6 hooked setae. Both wings thickly beset with minute points. Abdomen longer than broad, sparsely pubescent, setae Jonger on sternites. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 62h) slightly smaller than abdomen, sparsely
pubescent, anal valve (Fig. 62i) pyriform, longer than parameres, about 0-38 mm long,
anterior margin almost straight in profile, lateral lobes large and broadly rounded;

Mu

210 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

parameeres (Fig. 62j) about 0:26 mm Jong, swollen and slightly broader at apex and then
narrowed down in the basal region when viewed laterally, cach paramere with a small,
strong, acute black tooth at apex, surroundcd by a cluster of long and stout setae, marginal
setae slightly longer and directed downward; hypandrium of usual shape and simple;
outer arm of aedeagus (Fig. 62k) sinaller than basal with a thick spoon end. Sperm
pump as figured (Fig. 62 1). Female genital segment (Fig. 62m) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent. Dorsal
plate longer than ventral, narrowly rounded at apex, apical region closely beset with
minute peg-like setae, anal opening surrounded by an oval ring of double row of pores
and guarded by small setae; ventral plate strongly cocked up from posterior half and
acutcly pointed at apex. Host plant. Commonly found on Ehretia acuminata R. Br. Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Holotype, male; Allotype, female; collected on August 5, 1957, from the
type locality (R. N. Mathur); Paratypes: 12 males and 11 females, also from the
type locality and the same date of collection (R. N. Mathur). Additional paratypes
specimens collected from the type locality, on August 5, 1957, are: 19 males and 10
females; also 6 males and 4 females collected on July 16, 1960, and 2 males and 2 females
collected on July 18, 1960, from New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.) (R. N. Mathur). To
study the characters in detail few adults from the type locality were dissected and their
parts were mounted on slides. Adults of both sexes were also preserved in alcohol,
collected on July 26, 1966, from New Forest, Dehra Dun. All this material, together
with the types,.are deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun,

Comparison. This new species is described from a long series of both sexes, and is
easily distinguishable by its colouration, wing pattern, shape of genal cones and genital
armature. In colouration, it resembles D. communis present on Murraya kocnigii,- but
differs greatly from it, in shape of genal cones, number of black apical spines in hind
tibiae, and genital structures,

Diaphorina enderleini Klimaszevaki 1890
(Fig. 63)

Lethierry, M, 1890, Proc. Asiat, Soe. Beng., p. 165 (D. guttula'a). Enderlein, G, 1910. Hemiptera, 8, Pyllidas, in Sjostedt Y. Zoologische Kilimandjaro-Meru Expe-
ion, 2, Stockholm, pp. 137-144. (Gonanoplicus guttulatus) <

_Aulmann, G. 1913, Psjllidarum cotalagus, Berlin, p. 23. “Geawtord, D. L. 1917. Philipp, J. Sei. 12; 168,

Grawford; 1924, Rec, Indian Mus, 261°616-617. Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V, 1924. Rec. Indian Mus. 26: 623, -

Klimaszewski, S. M, 1964. Ann. Zool, Warsz, 22(3): 59. (D. enderleiai, nom, nov.)

 

Length of body, in female, 1-88 mm
Length of forewings; in female, 2:00 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-55 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-35 mm
Length of antenna, 0-5! mm

PAMILY PSYLLIDAE Qui

Z|
6
a
S|

 

Fig. 63. Diaphorina enderleini Klimaszewski—at dorsal view of head and part of thorax; bi antenna; et
forewing; d: hind wing; et hind leg; ft lateral view of female genitalia and abdomen, =~

Colouration. General colour dark-brown to fuscous, prothorax and head and tibiae
of lighter colour, genae black along the margin and ventrally, apical tarsi dark-brown,
venter of abdomen light brown, apical segments and apices of segments 4, 6 and 7 of
antennae black, apical half of forewings with more or less uniformly distributed maculae,
while the basal half more nearly clear and hyaline, with less number of brown spots. Structure. Body small and slender.’ Head (Fig. 63a) almost as brozd as thorax,
moderately deflexed, sparsely pubescent, punctate, vertex, a little more than twice as
broad as the length of median suture, disc nearly flat, with a small, circular fovea in each
half near the middle and posterioyto centre, and also with a distinct, minute puncture
posterior to each fovea, shallow depression extending forward from each fovea towards
the anterior margin but not attaining it, posterior margin moderately emarginate, anterior
ocellus visible from above ; genal cones on the same level as the vertex, somewhat porrect,
contiguous at or near the base, about 2s wide as long, almost aslong as vertex, diverging
outward, subconical at tips, conspicuously pubescent, with hairs slightly longer than that

212 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

of vertex. Eyes slightly recessive, of medium size, Antennal sockets lateral, and
located somewhat below the lower margin of eyes. Antennae (Fig. 63b) small, ten-segmented, bearing few setae, two basal segments
robust, subquadrate, Ist slightly longer than 2nd, remaining segments imbricate, 3rd
segment longest, 4th, 5th, 7th and 8th equal to one another and each slightly smaller
than 6th, 6th smaller than 3rd, Sth slightly smaller than 8th and slightly longer than
apical segment, terminal segment smallest, bearing two unequal apical spines, two apical
segments rather broad and thick, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax (Fig. 63a) somewhat arched, pubescent with small hairs, finely punctate. Prothorax flat, longer in middle than at the sides, with two foveal impressions on each
side, the innermost smaller than the outermost; prescutum broader than long, about
one and a half times as broad as long, broadest beyond middle, acutely angled at the
sides, posterior margin also angled submedianally (Specimen pinned through the
scutum). .

Legs (Fig, 63e) of medium size, coarsely pubescent, femora shorter than tibiae, all
tibiae with apical comb of setae, hind tibiae without basal spur, with about five black
spines on the margin at apex, three visible on one side and two on the other, basal
tarsal segments smaller than apical segments, hind basal tarsal segment with two black
claw-like spines at apex, coxac robust, meracanthus strong, of medium size and acutely
conical. Forewings (Fig. 63c) large, having numerous and scattered maculations in the apical
half, slightly more than twice as long as broad, broadest subapically, narrowly rounded
at apex, pterostigma long, narrow, pubescent, radius about one and a half times as long
as basal vein (R-+M+C), cubital petiole (M-+Cu) about half as long as basal vein,
R, nearly as long as cubital petiole, Rs strongly flexed near apex, marginal cells unequal,
first cell much shorter but slightly broader than second. Hind wings (Fig. 63d) large
and slightly smaller than forewings, membrane uniformly beset with minute -points,
costal vein armed with few simple and hooked setae, veins quite prominent. Abdomen (Fig, 63£) longer than broad, sparsely pubescent with prominent hairs. Genitalia. Female genital segment (Fig. 63£) slightly smaller than abdomen, sparsely
pubescent, both plates broad basally and gradually narrowed posteriorly, dorsal plate
longer than ventral, attenuate and roundly pointed apically, weakly flexed ventrally
near apex, setae longer in middle, caudal region with smaller setae; circum-anal region
large, somewhat oval in shape; ventral plate with apex acutely pointed, but broad and
bluntly rounded when seen from the ventral side; the apical part of the dorsal valvula
projecting laterally as broad membranous plate and rounded posteriorly; ovipositor
slightly exserted and acutely pointed. Distribution. Poona, Bombay, September 8, 1911.(T.B. Fletcher). Material examined. In the collection of the Zoological Survey of India, Calcutta,
the writer examined 4 specimens, all females, collected ‘from Poona, December 1889
(R. Wroughton) (Reg.No.1563/12), and determined by Lethierry. At the Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, the author has also examined three specimens
in poor condition, determined by Rahman in 1926. These specimens are also labelled

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 218

by D.L. Crawford as Diaphorina citri Kuw. Due to their poor condition, it has not been
possible to determine them correctly. They bear the data: Poona, Bombay, September
8, 1911 (T.B.F.). However, from the date of collection, ic., September 8, 1911, all
these specimens obviously belong to D. enderleini Klimaszewski. Comparison. Lethierry (1890) described this species from the specimens collected
in December, 1889, from Poona, Bonibay (R.C. Wroughton). His description is very
brief, pertaining mostly to colouration of both sexes. It appears that the four females
present at the Zoological Survey of India, Calcutta, belong to this original lot. Craw-
ford (1924) observed some variation in the colour pattern of the forewing in the specimens
collected on September 8, 1911, from Poona (T.B. Fletcher). ‘These specimens show
considerable variation in the amount of maculation and the wings are more extensively
whitish and hyaline with numerous brown spots, whereas the Wroughton’s specimens
are mostly dark and opaque with numerous white spots. The description given above
is based on a single female specimen received on loan from the Smithsonian Institution,
United States National Museum, Washington, through the courtesy of Dr (Miss) Russell. This specimen is labelled as Poona, Bombay, September 8. 1911, (T.B.F. ), (Pusa coll.) (1943 coll. D. L, Crawford), and determined as Diaphorina guttulata Leth, There are
two specimens in the Smithsonian Institution. Since the author has seen both the lots,
he agrees with Crawford’s views and the species is redescribed. Klimaszewski (1964)
has proposed a new name, D. enderleini, for guttulata Leth. D. enderleini: Klimaszewski., resembles closely with D. communis, D. dunensis, and
D. truncata Crawf., in colouration, but differs from them in shape of wing, shape
of vertex and genal cones, and female genitalia. No male specimen is present in the
collections in India. Diaphorina gymnosporiae, sp. n.
(Figs. 64, 65)
Length of body, in male, 1.86 mm; in female, 1,97 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1.92 mm; in female, 2.00 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.52 mm. Width of vertex between eyes, 0.32 mm
Length of antennae, 0.45 mm

-Colouration. (Specimens prescrved in alcohol). General colour chrome-orange;
head orange, ocelli reddish, eyes pinkish-red, antennae pale-yellow, except two basal,
wo apical segments and apex of eighth segment which are black; genae smoky ventrally;
anterior border and lateral sides of prothorax, a pair of broad, anterior bands on pre-
scutum, two pairs of longitudinal, submedian bands on scutum, scutellum posteriorly,
metanotum posteriorly and lateral sclerites smoky black; anterior and middle legs, posterior
legs with femur, about one-fourth of tibia basally, and apical tarsal segment fuscous,
while the three-fourths of tibia and basal tarsal segment of hind leg pale-yellow. Fere-
wings semi-hyaline and partly maculated, the maculae forming rather large areas all
along the veins, with hyaline areas extending in all cells (Fig. 64f), junction of veins
R, Ry and Rs, base of cubital potiole and base of media dark-black, Abdominal tergites

214 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig, 64. Diaphorina eymnosporiae, sp. n.—e head, dorsal view; bs antenna; ¢, 4, et fore, middle and hind
legis f forewing; gy hind wing; fh: male genital segment, lateral view is forceps, lateral and
mesa} views: js apical portion of forcep, mesal view; kt aedeagus; I: sperm pump; mit female

genital segment, lateral views mz portion of anal rings ot caudal_end of dorsal plate, dorsal
view. :

smoky brown, Female genital segment smoky brown; anal valve of male genitalia
smoky brown,
In dried specimens, general colour light orange with smoky brown tinge, eyes grey. The specimens collected from New Delhi are slightly darker, with darker maculations. Structure. Body long and narrow. Head (Fig. 64a) scarcely deflexed, including
the eyes, narrower than thorax, pubescent and also beset with minute points (seen under

high magnification) ; vertex about twice as wide as the length of the median-line, rather
’

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE- 215

deeply emarginate at the: posterior margin, with two foveal impressions on each side,
posterior to centre and in the middle of each half, anterior foveae larger than the posterior
foveae, a shallow linear depression extending forward from the anterior fovea end nearly
reaching to the anterior border of vertex; genal cones on the same level as vertex, directed
forward, separate, subconical, longer than broad, about 0.12 mm long and slightly smaller
than the vertex, divergent and curving outwards, a little more coarsely pubescent than
the vertex and also armed with minute points. Eyes large, recessive and somewhat reni-
form, Antennal socketslateral. Antennae (Fig. 64b) thick, ten-segmented, bearing few setae, two basal segments
robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd longer than broad, remaining segments imbricate,
3rd segment narrower and slightly longer than others, segments 4, 6 and 8 slightly thicker
and each almost equal in length, 5th segment small, 7th slightly longer than 5th but
smaller than 4th 8th slightly thicker apically, segment 9 broad and about as long as
5th, apical segmen slightly smaller than the penultimate segment and provided with two
long spines at apex, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax moderately arched, robust, punctate, sparsely pubescent, the setae almost
as long as those on the head, thickly beset with minute points arranged somewhet in rows. Pronotum flat, weakly arched, viewed dorsally, slightly longer in middle than at the sides,
with two large foveal impressions of equal size on each side; prescutum partly concealed
anteriorly under pronotum, broader than long, broadest beyond middle, about one and
a half times as broad as long, gradually narrowed anteriorly, acutely angled laterally,
weakly angular on each side of the posterior margin; scutum very broad and arched,
about twice as broad as long, broadest in middle, slightly longer than prescutum, angled
laterally; scutellum small and narrowly transverse, somewhat rectangular, antero-lateral
angles prominent. Legs (Figs. 64c, d, e) of medium size, pubescent with strong setae, fore and middle
femora slightly arched, tibiae Jonger than femora and each bearing apical comb of setae,
hind tibiae with five long and slender black spines on the apical margin, basal tarsal
segment of all legs smaller than apical, basal tarsal segment of hind leg with two stout,
black spines at apex, meracanthus of medium size, acutely conical. Forewings (Fig. 64f) large, broad subapically, about two and a half times as long as
wide at the widest part, rounded at apex, narrow at bese, stem R about one and one-fourth
times as long as basal‘ vein (R-+-M+C), cubital petiole (M+ Cu) about one-third shorter
than basal vein, pterostigma long end narrow, Rs quite long and flexed downward near
apex, first marginal cell as long es wide and distinctly shorter in length and wider than
second, membrane thickly beset with minute points, veins armed with two tows of setae
(seen under high magnification). Hind wings (Fig. 64g) also quite large’and thickly
beset with minute points, | costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae,
Veins quite distinct. :

Abdomen long and slender, finely and sparscly pubescent. : Genitalia, : Male genital segment (Fig, 64h) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent;
anal'valve (proctiger) longer than forceps, about 0,28 mm long, in profile, anterior margin
aweakly convex in middle, invaginated both basally and apically, apical region attenuated,

216 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

posterior margin broadly convex in middle, converging both basally and apically; forceps
(parameres) (Fig. 641) about 0.22 mm long, with subparallel sides, viewed from behind,
each forcep bowed towards each other, bluntly pointed at tip and thickly beset with setae
(Fig. 64j) apically, inesal surface armed with thick setae pointing downward, marginal
setae slightly longer; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, and sparsely beset with smal]
setae; aedeagus (Fig. 64k) moderately long, elbowed, outer arm smaller than basal, with
thick spoon end; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 641). Female genital segment (Fig. 64ma) sinaller than abdomen, ventral plate a little shorter
than dorsal, dorsal plate sparsely pubescent with small, simplesetae, narrowly and roundly
pointed caudally, caudal region armed with small, peg-like setae (Fig. 640), anal aperture
large, somewhat elliptical, and surrounded by a double row of pores (Fig, 64m), hairs
longer in middle, ventral plate beset with small setae and acutely pointed apically;
ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. Collected on Gymnosporia spinosa (Vorsk.) Fiori (==Gymnosporia montana
Benth.). Type locality. Mandwa plantation, E. Asir range, Nimar Forest division (M.P.). Types. Described from a small series of specimens of adults, collected with nymphal
stages, on Gymnosporia spinosa, Holotype male; Allotype female, both from the type
locality and collected on March 16, 1959 (R.N. Mathur); Paratypes: | male and 2
females, from the same locality and date, 8 males and 2 females from Charkhera,
Singhaji range, M.P., collected on January 12, 1956 (F.R.I. Project), Additional speci-
mens examined are from New Delhi, 7 males and 13 females, collected (date not
recorded) by M.G, Ramdas Menon. Host also unknown. All types, some nymphal
stages and few adults preserved in alcohol, and some slides deposited at F.R.I., Dehra
Dun. The New Delhi specimens are deposited at .A.R.1., New Delhi. Comparison. Diaphorina gymnosporiae, sp.n. is distinguishable by its characteristic macu-
lated bands in the forewings, shape of vertex, separate and divergent genal cones, antennae
and genital characters, From D. bikanerensis, sp.n., it is separated by the different
pattern of bands in forewings and shape of genal cones. ,

Biological notes. The adults and nymphs are commonly found infesting young buds
and fresh leaves of Gymnosporia spinosa in Madhya Pradesh. The nymphs remain in
congregation on young buds and exude small globules of honey dew profusely, which
are covered with waxy powder. Mature nymphs crawl on the under surface of leaves
and shed their last skin there. The description of the nymphal stages is given below. Nymphal stages

Colour pale chrome orange with smoky plates as indicated (Fig. 65). Eyes pinkish-red,
antennae smoky black at apex. Fifth stage. (Fig. 65a). Length 1.35 mm; of psylline form, broadly oval. Head
slightly narrower than the abdomen. Wing-pads projecting beyond the general margin
of the body and produced cephalad at the humeral angle and bluntly rounded. Head
well marked and separated from the thorax, Eyes small, Derm membranous; except
for the sclerotic areas of the head, wing pads, the posterior two-thirds of the abdomen,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 217

 

Fig. 65. Diaphorina gymnosperiae, sp. n.—ai fifth stage nymph; br antenna; et part of leg; di civeum-anal
ring, 2

and the smaller areas of thorax and abdomen as shown in the figure. Entire
margin of the caudal plate beset with a continuous series of slender, spear-shaped setae
borne upon distinct prominences. Dorsum with the derm vermiculate and with punctate
appearance and beset with minute, scattered setae. Ventral side membranous, except for small areas near the spiracles, smal) abdominal
strips and an anal plate, These sclerotic areas are thickly beset with minute points,
Derm sparsely beset with simple ring-based setae intersegmentally in the abdomen. Antennae (Fig. 65b) located ventrally, short, about 0.25 mm long, three-segmented,
two basal segments broad and transverse; third segment long with imperfect segmenta-
tions, with four sensoria and two terminal spines.. Legs (Fig, 65c) relatively short, with
few setae, without trochanters, with the tibio-tarsal articulation well-defined, tarsus with
a single golf-club seta; claws present; pulvillus small, fish-tail like. Anal opening (Fig. 65d) set well in from the apex of the abdomen, surrounded by the outer circum-anal
pore rifig consisting of a single row of slit-like pores and the inner ring of indistinguishable
pores. Fourth’ stage, Length 0,90 mm. Resembles the fifth stage, except in having smaller
wing pads, antennae three-segmented, 0.15 mm long and with three sensoria,.and tibio. tarsal articulation absent, :

218 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Second stage. Length 0.42 mm. Body oval, with longer legs and broader abdominal
plates; antennae 0.07 mm long, two segmentcd with one sensorium; with few marginal
setae on abdomen. Diaphorina truncata Crawford 1924
(Figs. 66, 67)

Crawford, D, Ls 1924, Ree. Indian Mus. 26(6) : 617, figs. 1, 1a (India; Southern China),
Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus, 26: 624 (Walayar forests, Malabar). Mathur, R. N, 1985. Indian Forest Rec, 1(2): 42. Beeson, C.F, C. 1941. Forest Insect, p. 777. Length of body, in male, 2.25 mm; in female, 2.67 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2.15 mm; in female, 2.70 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.64 mm. Width of vertex betwecn eyes, 0.42 mm

Length of antennae, 0.47 mm

Colouration. General colour chocolate brown to black or fuscous; head dark-brown
with black foveae; genae dark-brown dorsally, black ventrally; pronotum dark-brown
with a pale median line and with two lateral black foveae on each side; prescutum and
scutum dark-brown, scutum with two submedian, longitudinal black stripes on each side
of the middle; femora of all legs fuscous, tibiae and tarsi pale brown; abdomen black,
venter with greenish or yellowish tinge; forewings dark-brown to black, mottled with
numerous maculae distributed all over the surface, with a large hyaline area near the
apex of anterior basal cell, a round area near apex of cell Rs and another large area
at the apex of cell Cu. “

Structure. Body not large, slender. Head (Fig. 66a) not deflexed, somewhat horizontal,
including eyes slightly shorter than widest part of thorax; vertex about two times wider
than the length in the middle, surface rough, slightly swollen in middle, posterior margin
deeply emarginate, with a small circular fovea in cach half near the middle, posterior
to the centre, sparsely pubescent, antero-lateral margins produced forward as. small
angles; anterior ocellus visible from above; genae about 0.12 mm long and smaller than
and on same level as vertex, directed forward, closely approximate for about half their
Jength, slightly wider than long, divergent apically, truncate at tip, coarsely and con-
spicuously pubescent, with setae a little longer than on the vertex. Eyes of medium size,
slightly recessive. Antennal sockets lateral. Antennae (Fig, 66b) small, ten-segmented, bearing few setae, two basal segments robust,
Ist and 2nd subquadrate, 2nd smaller than Ist, remaining segments slender, imbricate,
3rd and 4th longest but equal, 5th and 7th small but equal, 6th slightly smaller than 4th,
8th slightly smaller than 6th, 9th segment thick and slightly longer than 7th, termirial
segment smallest, bearing two unequal spines at apex, four sensoria present on segments ~
4, 6, 8 and 9 :

‘Thorax somewhat arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, thickly covered: with minute
points, finely punctate, Prothorax slightly narrower in middle, anterior. margin.roundly
notched medianally, with a ridge-like border on cither side ofi.the. natch, two. lateral

BAMILY PSYLLIDAE. 219

 

Fig. 66, Diaphorina truncata Crawf—az dorsal view of head and prothorax; bt antenna; et hind leg; dh
forewing; e: hind wing; fi lateral view of male genitalia; g: anal valve and aedeagus; h: caudal
view of forceps; i: lateral view of female genitalia,

circular foveae present on each side, the inner ones smaller than the outer; prescutum
twice as broad as long, widest in middle, conspicuously angled submedianally on the
posterior margin; scutum large and longer than prescutum, about twice as broad as long,
broadest before middle, with a shallow longitudinal channel medianally, disc swollen
in small, longitudinal patches having impressed areas in between; scutellum small,
transverse, bowl-shaped, about twice as broad as long, with prominent antero-lateral
angles; mesepisternum large and produced forward. Legs (Fig. 66c) of medium size, coarsely pubescent and also armed with minute points,
which are thicker on femora, femora shorter than tibiae, all tibiae with apical comb of
setae, fore and middle tibiae with a weak basal spur, but hind tibiae possess a prominent,
acutely pointed, black basal spur, and armed with six stout, black spines on the margin
At apex (2 on the outer;:2 on the inner and: 2 on the lateral sides), tarsi ofall legs of

220 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

equal length, basal tarsal segment of hind leg with two black spines at apex, tibial groove
quite long, meracanthus small and conical. Forewings (Fig. 66d) opaque, membrane covered with minute points and thick,
irregular specks, slightly more than twice as long as wide at the widest part, with an
angular apex, narrow at base, pterostigma short and narrow, stem R slightly longer than
cubital petiole, basal vein shorter than cubital petiole, vein Rs flexed before reaching
apex, first marginal cell nearly as long as second and also as wide as second, veins armed
with two rows of setae, visible under high magnification, Hind wings (Fig. 66e)
transparent, venation figured, membrane thickly covered with minute points, costal
margin beset with a few simple setae and hooked setae. Abdomen finely and sparsely pubescent, setae longer on sternites. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 66£) smaller than abdomen, anal valve about
0.45 mm long, broad basally and gradually converging towards tip, in profile, anterior
margin almost straight in middle (Fig, 66g), slightly invaginated basally and convexly
rounded apically, apical region bent caudally, posterior margin convexly rounded and
then deeply invaginated near top, ending in a truncate apex, outer surface beset sparsely
with small setae, setae numerous in the apical region; parameres (Fig. 66h) smaller than
anal valve, about 0.25 mm long, sides sub-parallel in lateral view, slightly broad apically
and beset with a cluster of small sctae, basal portion produced posteriorly into a small
thick lobe, bearing a brush of setae, apical end black, roundly pointed and margined
at top, outer surface beset sparsely with small setae, mesal surface armed with a bunch
ofsmall setae just below apex; hypandrium simple, of usual shape; outer arm of aedeagus
small and slender (Fig. 66g). Female genitalia (Fig, 661) smaller than abdomen, both plates broad basally and
narrow caudally; dorsal plate slightly longer than ventral, roundly pointed at tip, armed
with short setae which become more numerous and heavier posteriorly and arranged
in a band; ventral plate sparsely beset with simple setac, slightly invaginated ventrally
near base and acutely pointed apically. Host plant. On young. twigs and fresh Icaves of Strychnos nux-vomica Linn, . Distribution. Crawford (1924) has mentioned India (Walayar Forests), Malabar
May 1921 (Ramakrishna coll.) ; Southern China (Macao) (F. Muir). Material examined, Few specimens of both sexes, in poor condition, from Thogarapalli
near Krishnagiri, Salem District, April 18, 1963 (B.V. David) ; a large collection of adults
and nymphs, received preserved in alcohol, collected from Medical College campus,
Calicut, Kerala, between February 29 and March 3, 1968 (K.J. Joseph); from this
collection, 9 males and 11 females were mounted on cards. All this material has been
deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun.. . . Comparison. D, truncata Crawf. resembles closely D. communis, D. dunensis and D.ender-
lent Klimasz. in colouration, but is easily recognised by the angular apical margin of
forewing and the conspicuously truncate genal cones. Crawford (1924) has mentioned
that this is a very distinct species and apparently more closely related to a South African
species. Biological notes, It is reported that this species is commonly found in S. India, wherever

 
 
 

~ “FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 221

 

Fig. 67. Diaphorina truncata Crawf—at fifth stage nymph; bt antenna; et part of leg; dt circum-anal
pore ring. .

Strychnos nux-vomica grows. Mature nymphs are pale yellow with light smoky tinge,
antennae black and eyes pinkish red in colour, and are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig, 67a). Length 2.05 mm. Body quite large, broadly oval, the
continuity is broken near the head and the base of abdomen; wing-pads large, the
humeral angle extending forward up to the anterior margin of eyes, head smaller than
the width of abdomen; dorsum with the derm mostly sclerotic, consisting of large. head
plates, ‘a number of small thoracic plates, wing-pads, four pairs of small, transverse,
strip-like anterior abdominal plates and a large single posterior plate in the abdomen. Derm vermiculate, punctate, punctures strong and thick near the borders, thickly beset
with minute points and sparsely with minute, scattered, simple setae. Head and wing-
pads armed with small, simple setae along the margin, posterior abdominal plate black
near the border and armed with a marginal row of lanceolate setae. Ventral side for the most part membranous, except for a small plate beneath each
antenna, four pairs of submedian, transverse, strip-like plates, six pairs of lateral
plates enclosing the spiracles, and an irregular caudal plate bearing the anus and the

222 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

circum-anal ring of pores in the abdomen. Derm thickly beset with minute points which
becoming stronger and thicker near the borders, and sparsely beset with simple setae of
various length, these setac are also present intersegmentally in the abdomen, minute
comb-like structures also present in the caudal plate. Rostrum armed with two pairs
of simple setae near base. Antennae (Fig. 67b) small, black, about 0.36 mm long, apparently three-segmented,
basal two segments small and transverse, third segment longest, having traces of segmenta-
tion, bearing a few simple setae and four sensoria, two basal sensoria guarded by two
thick lanceolate setae, apex with two small, unequal spines. Legs (Fig. 67c) small and
thick, having a few scattered setae, femora not reaching the margin of the body, without
trochanters, tibio-tarsal articulation distinct, each tarsus with a prominent golf-club
seta, claws present, empodium with a large fish-tail like pulvillus. Anal opening (Fig. 67d) well in front of the apex of abdomen and surrounded by a double ring of pores,
the outer ring consisting of slit-like pores and the inner ring with minute, faint oval pores,
both rings are medianally interrupted and guarded by two anterior pairs of setae. Fourth stage. Length 1,2 mm. Resembles the fifth stage, except in being smaller
in size, with smaller wing-pads, less number of thoracic plates, antennae apparently
three-segmented, with three sensoria and absence of tibio-tarsal articulation. Diaphorina venata, sp. n-
(Fig. 68)

Length of body, in female, 2.35 mm. Length of forewings, in female, 2.58 mm

Width of head with eyes, 0.81 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0.48 mm. Length of antennae, (missing in specimens),

Colouration. General colour dark-brown with blackish tinge, head and genae
dark-brown, prothorax with a light black median patch, prescutum with two light black,
longitudinal bands anteriorly, scutum with two pairs of submedian, longitudinal bands,
‘legs dark-brown, hind ‘tibiae of lighter colour, forewings with numerous and scattered
dark-brown or blackish maculae intermixed with hyaline areas, maculae less in thé basal
area, venter of abdomen pale brown,

Structure. Body small but robust. Head (Fig. 68a) somewhat deflexed, almost as
broad as thorax, sparsely pubescent; vertex about thrice as broad as the length of median
suture, deeply emarginate at the posterior margin, with a distinct circular fovea on edch
side, posterior to centre and near the middle of each half, disc’swollen on either side of
median ling; front ocellus visible from above; genae on the same level as the vertex, broader
than long, about 0.12 mm Jong, shorter than vertex, contiguous at or near -the base,
slightly divergent at apex, apices bluntly rounded, a little more pubescent than the
vertex; frons covered by the genae and visible ventrally as a large plate. Eyes large
and recessive. Clypeus large, thick and tubular. Antennae missing. Thorax (Fig. 6Ba) robust, arched, sparsely pubescent, finely punctate, Pronotum

‘FAMILY ‘PSYCLIDAE 223

 

Fig. 68. Diaphorina venata, sp. n.—at head and part of thorax; br hind leg; et forewing; dt hind wing; ex
female genitalia and part of hind abdominal segments, lateral aspect; £ sculpture pattern of
forewing, highly magnified. arched, viewed dorsally, longer in middle: ‘and narrower laterally, a anterior margin convexly
rounded, with two foveal impressions on each lateral side; prescutum viewed: dorsally,
about twice as broad as long, broadest Slightly before middle, distinctly angled sub-
medianally at the posterior margin; scutum large, longer than’ prescutum, broader: than
long, about twice as broad as long, broadest before middle, anterior margin conéavely
rounded, disc shallowly depressed in middle when viewed dorsally, gradually’ sloping
laterally, acutely angled at the sides; scutellum small, narrowly transverse, about twice
as broad’ as:1ong; anterior’ margin With prominent anteio-lateral’ angles. eo

Legs (Fig. 68b) of medium size, thick, pubescent and also beset with thick minute
points, fetnora’shorter than tibiaé, all. tibiae with apical comb ‘of ‘setae, hind tibiae without
basal spur, with about nine short, stout black spines on the margin“at apex, tarsal seg-
ments‘of nearly equal length, hind basal tatsus with two black clawslike spines at apex,
tibial groove long; meracanthus strong, thick and conical. ~

Forewings (Fig. 68c) small, almost’ twice’.as long as broad, widest in apical half
and roundly angulate’ at’ apex, narrow at base, radius slightly longer than basal vein,
cubital petiole shorter than basal vein; pterostigma small, narrow, pubescent; Rs flexed
near apex, a prominent cross vein present joining the flexed portion of Rs with fork My,

 

 

224 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

first marginal cell smaller in length and width than the second, second marginal cell
somewhat trapezoid in shape; maculae (Fig. 68£) numerous and scattered inter-mixed
with hyaline areas, basal area with less maculae, five hyaline spots present along the apical
margin. Hind wings (Fig. 68d) slightly smaller than forewings, costal vein armed with
some simple and hooked setae, venation as figured. Abdomen small, sparsely pubescent. Genitalia. Female genitalia (Fig. 68e) large, longer than the rest of the abdomen,
sparsely pubescent; dorsal plate slightly longer than ventral, broader at base and gradually
narrowed posteriorly, roundly pointed at apex, circum-anal region large, occupying
nearly the basal half, anal ring somewhat oval in shape; ventral plate acutely pointed
at apex, 1. Host plant, On Senitalum album (sandal). Type locality, Aiyur, North Salem, Tamil Nadu. Types. Two female specimens from Aiyur, North Salem, 25.iv.3! (F.R.I, Sandal Insect
Survey), one specimen in very poor condition. No males available for description. Holotype female; Paratype: female, in poor condition; data same, from the type locality. Comparison. Diaphorina venata, sp.n. is easily recognised from the other Indian species,
in possessing an extra cross yein, joining the radial sector with Mj,9. This cross vein
is present on both the forewings and in both specimens, and is, therefore, not an aberration. It also differs in the shape of genal cones, These differences‘prompted the author to
consider it under a distinct genus for which he proposed the name Neodiaphorina, however,
the consensus of opinion in consultation with Dr Tuthill, Dr Russell and others, has
been that it would be better to retain it tentatively under Diaphorina. Genus EUPHALERUS Schwarz 1904

Euphalorus

Schwarz, E. A. 1904, Proc. ent, Soc. Wash, 6: 234-245. Aulmann, G. 1913. Pyyllidartun Catalogus, Berlin, p. 74. Crawford, D, L. 1914. Bull. U.S. natn. Mus. No, 85: 118-119. Crawford, D, L. 1919. Philipp. J. Sci. 15(2)+ 169. Van Duzee, E. P. 1917. Gat. Hemip, NV. Amer. p. 802. Ferris, G, F. 1928. Gan, Ent. 60(5): 113. Tuthill, L. D, 1937. 7. Kans. ent. Soc. 10: 69-70. * Tuthill, L. D. (943. Zouoa State Coll. J. Sei. 17(4): 519. Type species. Euphalerus nidifex Schwarz, 1904 (original designation) from Key West,
Florida. The distinctive characters outlined by Schwarz (1904) and Crawford (1914) are
expanded with my notes, as below. Body robust, surface rugulose or punctate. Head nearly or quite as broad as thorax,
vertical to subvertical ; vertex flat, often rugulose, broader than long, sides straight between
eyes, ‘then converging to front, truncate at front margin; antero lateral angles prominent,
posterior ocelli scarcely elevated and anterior ocellus visible from above. Genal cones
large, broad, flat, usually quadrate, rounded at apex, more or less divergent, not depressed
below level of vertex, separated therefrom by a slightly, impressed line, Eyes large,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 225

somewhat recessive over pleurites. Antennae variable in length, short, slender, Thorax
strongly arched and broad; pronotum not extending far down laterally, terminating
in a knob-like swelling; mesonotum large. Propleurites Jong and narrow; propleural
suture extending to middle of pronotum, Legs robust, hind tibiae usually with or without
basal spur, hind proximal tarsal segment with two small claw-like spines at apex. Forewings large broad, oblong-oval or somewhat rhomboidal, membranous, more or
less hyaline, sometimes subopaque, maculated or unicolourous, rounded or somewhat
angulate at apex, pterostigma present. Only one species, Euphalerus vittatus Crawford (1912), is represented from India. Euphalerus vittatus Crawford 1912
(Fig, 69)

Crawford, D, L. 1912, Ree. Indian Mus, 7: 423-424. pl. socal, figs, I, J, L, Mj pl. 200, fig. C.
Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus, 26(6): 623. Mathur, R. N, 1935. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2): 43-44. (Biology). Mathur, R. N. 1949. Indian J. Ent. 8(2): 230-231. fig. 4 (1946), (‘Nymphal stages),

Beeson, C. F.C. 1941, Forest Insects, p. 777. Length of body, in male, 1.75 mm; in female, 2.17 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1.82 mm; in female, 2.61 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.77 mm

Width of vertex between cyes, 0.48 mm

Length of antennae, 0.85 mm

Colouration. General colour whitish and fuscous, vertex and dorsum yellowish-brown
or whitish with greenish tinge, a dark-brown vitta extending from each eye over upper
portion of pleuron and thence along upper half, or slightly less, of forewing to
apex of latter, lower portion of pleura whitish with greenish tinge, venter brown ;
antennae pale yellow or whitish, with apices of segments and two terminal segments
black; legs pale-yellow with yellowish-brown femora; wings hyaline except for small
maculations along the veins and with a broad maculated band along the posterior border;
abdomen more or less variegated. Structure. Body of medium size, not robust. Head (Fig. 69a) quite long, including
eyes, narrower than thorax, descending, finely and sparsely pubescent, conspicuously
vermiculate; vertex flat, broader than long, slightly more than one and a half times as
broad as long, with a fovea on each side of median suture, posterior to centre, and with
a linear impression extending both dorsally and ventrally from each fovea, the sides
straight between the eyes, converging to front, anterior margin invaginated at point of
excision and also marked by an impressed line between vertex and genal cones, antero-
lateral angles prominent; posterior margin truncate, angulate in centre; ocelli large,
post-ocellar region somewhat swollen; genal cones short, broad, rather in the same plane
as vertex, about two-thirds as long as vertex, contiguous, slightly emarginate laterad
in front of antennae, broadly rounded at tip, finely rugulose and’ beset with short, stiff,
white setae, each cone with one Jong ventral seta, setae longer than that of vertex. Eyes

16

226 PS¥YLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

large, hemispherical. Labrum narrowly visible from side. Antennal sockets large,
situated between vertex and genal cones. Antennae (Fig. 69b) small, ten-segmented, slender except two robust basal segments, Ist
broadly transverse, 2nd subquadrate, as long as Ist, remaining segments imbricate, 3rd
Jongest, 4th smaller than 3rd, 5th slightly smaller than 4th, 6th and 7th equal and each
slightly longer than 4th, 8th slightly smaller than 3rd and longer than 6th, 9th slightly
smaller than 4th, terminal segment smallest, bearing two unequal setae at apex; four
sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9, In one example, the number of segments
vary, 9 segments on one side and 10 on the other. Thorax large, moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely reticulate;
pronotum rather long, longest medianally, convex, descending, partly vermiculate-
rugulose, sides parallel, with two foveal impressions on each side, the innermost the
smallest; propleurites narrow; prescutum ascending, partly concealed anteriorly by
pronotum, broader than long, about as long as scutum, weakly angled on each side of
posterior margin; scutum very large, much broader than long, gradually sloping pos-
teriorly, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutellum broadly transverse, with
prominent antero-lateral angles, broad anteriorly and narrow posteriorly. Legs (Fig. 69c) small, pubescent, and also beset with linear series of minute points,
femora smaller than tibiae, all tibiae with apical comb of setae, hind femur with three
thick, blunt setae near apex, and three sensoria-like structures on ventral side, hind tibiae
without basal spur, and with four black tooth-like setae at apex (2 on each apical side) ;
coxac large; basal tarsal joint a little smaller than apical, hind basal tarsal joint bearing
two black claw-like spines at apex; meracanthus small, robust and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 69d) rather thick, not coriaceous, very slightly rhomboidal in shape,
slightly more than two and two-thirds times as long as broad, broadest across middle,
narrowly rounded at apex, thickly beset with minute points, which becoming prominent
in the posterior maculated band; pterostigma present , prominent; basal vein (R-+-M-+-Cu)
slightly longer than radius and also from cubital petiole, radius shorter than cubital
petiole, radial sector (Rs) quite long, curved upward to anterior margin near apex, cubital
vein short, marginal cells unequal, first cell large, longer and wider than second; veins
armed with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 69e) comparatively large, slightly smaller than forewings, uniformly
beset with minute points, the veins, although weak, clearly defined, costal margin with
a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen small, finely and sparsely pubescent, and also beset with minute points
arranged in lines, setae longer on sternites, last sternite protruding caudally and teles-
coping the base of hypandrium. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 69f) smaller than abdomen, rounded. Anal
valve simple, about 0.30 mm long, longer than forceps, somewhat pyriform, attenuate
at tip, in lateral aspect, anterior margin rather straight, slightly deflexed apically, posterior
margin a little convexly rounded, apical upper surface and margins beset with small,
simple setae. Forceps (Figs. 69g, h) short, small but robust, about 0.18 mm long, broad
basally and gradually narrowed apically, strongly bowed inward, posterior margin

Fig. FAMILY PSYLLIDAR

“227

 

. Euphalerus vittatus Crawford—as head, dorsal aspect; i antenna; e: hind leg; di forewings er

hind wing; ft male genitalia, lateral aspect; gt parameres, caudal aspect; ht forcep, mesa as-

pect; di sperm pump; fr female genitalia, lateral aspect; ki dorsal plate of female genitalia,
dorsal aspect. 228 ‘PSYLLIDAT, OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

conspicuously sinuate, forming an apical hood and terminating in a black, acute point
directed caudally, outer surface armed with simple setae, mesal surface beset with few
thick setae, similar setae pointing downward also present just below the acute point,
marginal setae slightly longer; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, bearing sparsely
simple setac, group of setae also present on the dorso-lateral region; aedeagus long and
slender, outer arm smaller than basal, with a prominent spoon end; sperm pump as
figured (Fig. 693). Female genital segment (Fig. 69j) smaller than abdomen, both plates broad basally;
dorsal plate (Fig. 69k) slightly longer than ventral, sub-acute at apex, bearing three or
four pairs of long setae sub-medianally, and a brush of small simple setae apically; circum-
anal pore ring somewhat trapezoid in shape and composed of a double ring of pores. Ventral plate acute apically, bearing saw-like teeth near apex, surface beset with simple
setae of varying length and also with minute points; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. On young buds and fresh leaves of Cassia fistula Linn. Distribution. Previously recorded from Calcutta, on Cassia fistula (N. Annandale);
Narainganj (Bengal), on a bush. New records are from New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Material examined. One example from Naraingunj, Dacca, 2-7.vii.1911 (D.N.). A good serics of specimens collected from New Forest, during June 1930, May to August,
1931 and 1932 (R.N. Mathur); 7 males and 10 females from New Forest, June 9, 1950
(R.N. Mathur); 1 male and 2 females from New Forest, May 21, 1960, and 3 males
and 8 females also from New Forest, May 24, 1960 (R.N. Mathur); 2 males and 31
females from New Forest, June 5, 1928 (G.D. Bhasin); 6 males and 3 females from
New Forest, 1930 (S. Bahadur). This material is present at the F.R.I., Dehra Dun. In addition, vials containing adults and nymphs (preserved in alcohol) collected from
New Forest, Dehra Dun, on May 24, 1960, May 4, 1965 and June 9, 1966 (R.N. Mathur)
are also present. The collection at the Zoological Survey of India includes 1 male and 2 females (3804/
HI, 3808/HI), Ind. Mus. of June 8, 1911; and 5 examples (in poor condition) from
Calcutta (N. Annandale). The collection at the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, includes
7 examples from Narainganj, Dacca (Bangla Desh), 2-7.vii.1911 (D.N. ), “on a bush”;
and 12 examples from New Forest, Dehra Dun, June 2, 1932, on leaves of Cassia
fistula (R.N. Mathur). Comparison. According to Crawford (1912), this species is somewhat similar to an
American species, E. vermiculosus Crawford (1914). Ihave not seen this species, but
E. vittatus Crawford differs greatly from the figures (39, 434) drawn by Crawford (1914)
for vermiculosus, in the shape of head and wing. Grnus EUPHYLLURA Foerster 1848
Euphyltwra
Foerster, A, 1848. Verh. naturh. Ver. preuss. Rheinl. 3: 93. Flor, G. 1861, Bull Soc. Nat. Moscou, p. 337, 416,
Meyer-Dur, 1871. Mitt. Schweiz, ent. Ges. 31 380

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 229

Loew, F, 1878. Verh. zool, -bot. Ges. Wien, 28: 607. Osbanin, B. 1907. Verz. palaarkt. Hem. 11, Ann. Mus. Zool, Acad. Imp. Sci. St, Petersburg 12: 340,

Schwarz, E, A. 1904. Proc. ent. Soc. Wash. 6: 234. Aulmann, G. 1913. Psyllidarum Catalogus, Beilin, pp. 67-68. Crawford, D. L. 1914. Bull. U.S, natn. Mus, 852 115-116,

Ferris, G. F, 1928. Can, Ent. 60(5): 116,

Klyver, F. D. 1930, Proc, ent. Soc. Wash 32 (9)+ 154-155,

Tuthill, L. D. 1943. Zowa State Coll. J. Sci. 17(4)
Platystigna

Enderlein, G, 1921, Zool. Anz, 52: 116-117. Syntomoza

Enderlein, G. 1921. Zool. Anz. 52: 116-117,

Loginova, M. M. 1967. Reewe d'Entom. sAcad, Sci. U.S.8.R. 46(2) 1 340-945,

 

  

 

 

Type species, Euphyllura phillyrae Foerster 1848, a European species (original
designation). Body robust, strongly arched, coarsely punctate or finely rugulose, often more or less
spotted. Head large, strongly deflexed, not vertical, flat, as broad as thorax, or broader;
vertex large, usually rather flat more or less notched above, or extending over base of
antennae, a tubercle next eye; genal lobes rectangular in shape and about as broad as
vertex and not depressed from the level of vertex, either connate with the vertex or
more or less indistinctly separated therefrom, contiguous on inner margin and either
conjointly truncate or separately rounded slightly in front; anterior ocellus at base of
genal lobes, apparently remote from front margin of vertex, visible only from above. Eyes large, strongly recessive and covering propleurites. Antennae short and thick. Thorax robust and arched. Pronotum extending far down laterad to a point lower
than base of forewings; propleurites short. Legs short and stout; hind tibiae without
basal spur, with small, black spines at apex; proximal tarsal segment of hind leg with
two small, claw-like spines at apex. Forewings rhomboidal, coriaceous, not transpa-
rent, apex near anterior margin, regularly or not regularly rounded, venation
somewhat variable, pterostigma variable from large to obsolete, second marginal cell
often long and elongate, sometimes short. The distinctive characters outlined above, have been drawn up from Schwarz (1904)
and Crawford (1914) and expanded with my notes. In the collection examined by me,
four species are represented, out of which three are new to science. E. olivina Costa
has been redescribed from two female specimens, in poor condition, correctly determined
by M. Bose, and present in the collection of I.A.R.I., New Delhi. Platystigma Enderlein (1921) and Syntomoga Enderlein (1921) have been sunk in
synonymy with Euphyllura by Tuthill (1943), but Loginova (1967) has retained Syntomoxa
asa valid genus on the characters that R, gets cut off sufficiently away from costal margin
and thereby not forming pterostigma, and some other features. Further, she has created
a subgenus Syringilla of Syntomoza. On examination of my two species (sent in
exchange), Dr M. M. Loginova of U.S.S.R., has communicated in her recent cor-
respondence (20-10-1972) that “I think your two species must pick out independent
new genus if they are not Katacephala”. It is, therefore, proposed to name the new

230 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

genus Loginoviana after her, with great pleasure. The two species, C. caudata and
E. wneslor should be referred under this genus. The conclusion, however, has been
suspended till the related members are studied and the species are retained in the
present genus for the time being. KEY TO THE SPECIES OF EUPHYLLURA

1, Forewing somewhat rhomboidal, coriaceous, with apes near anterior

margin, much broader near base... tes es ar}
—. Forewing elongate, somewhat parallelogram in shape, not broader near

base... a oe oS
2, Second marginal cell very smal, Ry obsolete distally oe E, caudata, sp. 0,
—. Second marginal cell very large, Ry not obsolete distally os E, olivina Costa

 

3, Genae present, small, transverse . wes wo E. concolor, sp. n.
—. Genae obsolete... we we te we ws we E. obsoleta, sp. n.
Euphyllura candata, sp. 2. (Figs. 70, 71)

Length of body, in male, 1.55 mm; in female, 1.80 mm

Length of forewing, in male, 1.22 mm; in female, 2.0 mm

Width of head with eyes, 1.07 mm

Width of vertex, 0.50 mm

Length of antennae, 0.62 mm

Colowration. General colour light to dark-brown dorsally, yellowish-brown ventrally;
female of light colour; genae, antennae (except at tip), and legs pale-brown; eyes pinkish
red; labium black; wings light to dark-brown, with a dark macula in anterior basal
cell; hind wing with a light brown band near clavus; male genitalia yellowish-brown;
female genitalia somewhat lighter. Structure, Body small, stout; head, thorax and wings rugulose, Head (Fig. 70a) slightly
broader than thorax, strongly deflexed, rather shining, surface covered with weak sclerotic
plates, finely pubescent, setae uniformly distributed; vertex broader than long, a little
more than half as long as broad, shallowly impressed discally on each side of median
line, posterior margin nearly straight, genac about one-fourth as long as vertex, coarsely
pubescent with large setae, in the same plane as vertex, transverse, elliptical in shape
and having narrowly rounded lateral projections below insertionof antennae, distinctly
separated by darker vertex and by an impressed line, contiguous throughout except
at apex; ocelli large and prominent, anterior ocellus bigger than posterior. Eyes large,
subtriangular, prominently rimmed and narrowly rounded outwardly,

Antennae (Fig. 70b) short, ten-segmented, slightly more than half as long as width
of head, the basal two segments robust, remaining segments slender, imbricate, 4th seg-
ment slightly smaller than 3rd, 5th smallest and others increasing progressively in length,
segments 4, 6, 8 and 9 with conspicuous sensoria, apical segment with two unequal spines
at tip. Thorax very broad, moderately arched from middle of scutum, pronotum and
prescutum strongly deflexed at the head, surface coyered with numerous closely-set,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 231

Qore. GOO ©
“EDO

    
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 70, Euphyllura caudata, sp. n.—aa head, front view; bt antenna; e: hind leg; di part of tibia and basal
tarsal joint of middle leg; et forewing; fshind wing; g: male genital segment, lateral view; Bx
anal valve, mesal view; tt parameres, caudal views 4: forcep, mesal view; Jkt female genital
segment, lateral view; I: dorsal plate, dorsal view. rounded or variously-shaped small sclerotic plates and also beset with fine sparse setae;
pronotum comparatively long, flat, somewhat descending, anterior and posterior margins
nearly parallel, with two sub-median foveal impressions, covered laterad with receding
eyes; prescutum small, slightly longer than pronotum, trapezoid in shape when viewed. dorsally, anterior margin wider than posterior, nearly three times wider than long, angu-
late laterally and posteriorly; scutum and scutellum gradually descending posteriorly,
former about twice as long as prescutum, about two and a half times as broad as long,
broadest before middle, anterior margin concave, angulate laterally; scutellym small,

232 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

transverse, anterior margin straight, broad anteriorly and narrow posteriorly, about
twice as broad as long, posterior margin convexly rounded. Legs (Fig. 70c) comparatively stout, uniformly covered with minute sclerotic areas,
thickly beset with minute points and sparsely with fine setae, femora and tibiae of fore-
leg nearly of equal length, femora of middie and hind legs shorter than tibiae, femur of
middle leg thick and stout than others, middle tibiae (Fig: 70d) with a row of dorsal setae
just before apex, hind tibiae with five small black spines at apex, two small, black claw-
like spines present on proximal posterior tarsus, basal tarsal joints smaller than apical,
meracanthus extremely small. Forewings (Fig. 70e) thick, about ewice as long as broad, ovate, coriaceous, opaque,
membrane covered with small sclerotic plates, finely and sparsely pubescent and thickly
beset with minute points, both anterior and posterior margins armed with a series of
setae, which are thicker along the anterior margin, apex near anterior margin,
first marginal cell much longer than second, radial cell large, cubital petiole longer than
radius, basal vein scarcely longer than cubital petiole, R, obsolete distally, Rs, media
and Cu, running parallel in middle of wing. Hind wings (Fig: 70£) relatively large, transparent, veins prominent, costal margin
with a number of simple setae near base and a few hooked setae. Abdomen small in female and moderately large in male, both tergites and sternites
thickly beset with minute points and finely and sparsely with simple setae, which are
present near the posterior border of tergites. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig; 70g) about as long as abdomen, finely and coarsely
pubescent; proctiger (Figs. 70g,h) about 0.38 mm long and longer than parameres,
thickly beset with minute points, very narrow both basally and apically when viewed
laterally, anterior margin nearly straight, posterior margin broadly convex between basal
and apical areas, sometimes strongly inclined posteriorly, posterior margins bent deeply
inwards, cephalad, outer surface beset with simple setae; parameres (Figs; 70i, j) about
0.28 mm long, somewhat slipper-shaped, outer surface beset sparsely with scattered
fine setae, mesal surface armed with two kinds of setae, thick and long setae along the
outer margin and near apex, while short, stout, somewhat dagger-shaped setae in middle
and at base; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, having a few simple setae; outer arm
of aedeagus relatively short, with a thick spoon end. Female genitalia longer than abdomen, finely and sparsely pubescent (Fig. 70k);
dorsal plate (Fig.70 1) much longer than ventral, gently narrowed posteriorly into a
moderately long, triangularly shaped apex, the ventral margin of the dorsal plate armed
with a series of short, thick setae, circum-anal ring composed of a double ring of pores;
ventral plate small, broad basally and narrow caudally with an acute apex; ovipositor
scarcely exposed. Host plant. Adults and nymphs feed between leaf curls of Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels
(=Eugenia jambolana Lam.). ‘Type locality. Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Holotype male, Allotype female, from the type locality, June 7, 1950 (R.N. Mathur); Paratypes: 3 males, April 24, 1950; 18 females, April 28, 1950; 6 males

¥AMILY PSYLLIDAE, 333,

 

Fig. 71. Euphyllura caudate, sp. n.—at fifth stage nymph; br antenna; et leg; ds citcum-anal ring,

and 4 females, June 7, 1950; 1 male and 10 females, April 28, 1963; 9 males and
7 females, and 12 mixed sexes May 2, 1963, all from the type locality (R.N. Mathur). Additional specimens not designated as paratypes are: 38 examples, April 24, 1950,
also from the type locality (R.N. Mathur). Some adults and nymphal stages were
also preserved in alcohol. This preserved material, some slides having parts of
adults and nymphal stages mounted on them and the type material are deposited at
F.R.L, Dehra Dun, Six paratypes are also presented to LA,R.L, New Delhi. Comparison. This species has been described from a fairly good series of specimens. It differs from the other recorded species in shape of wings, having a broad dark band
in anterior basal cell, second marginal cell smaller and in genital characters. Biological notes. The adults and nymphs are commonly found on young flush
of leaves, and by their feeding the leaves are curled up, The adults are sluggish in
habits and nymphs feed in small clusters. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig: Tia). Length 2.0 mm. Of the psylline type; the wing-pads not
produced forward, and projecting beyond the contour of the body, bluntly rounded
posteriorly. Head well marked and separated from the thorax. Eyes small, bordered
with a sclerotic rim, Derm membranous except the large sclerotic head plate, large

234 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

areas on the thorax, the wing-pads, small strip-like areas and a large posterior plate in
the abdomen, as illustrated. Derm sparsely beset with simple ring-based sctae, which
are also arranged along the margin of wing-pads; the caudal sclerotic area strongly
bearing, both dorsally and ventrally, simple pores arranged in definite bands throughout
the entire border except antero-medianally, also small bands of clusters of pores sub«
medianally, and beset with minute fringed processes and dagger-shaped setae along the
posterior margin; posterior margin truncate, having the anal opening (Fig: 71d) in
between which is enclosed within a very small pore-ring, the outer ring consisting
of slit-like pores while the inner ring with small, more or less circular, indistinct pores. Ventral side membranous throughout, except the anal plate, 4 small plate around
each of the last four spiracles, and four pairs of small sub-median plates in the abdomen. Derm thickly beset with minute points and a transverse series of small, simple sctae in
the abdomen, sclerotic areas having fringed processes. Antennae (Fig. 71b) located

* partly ventrally, small and slender, about 0.54 mm long, nine-segmented, having a

few setae, two basal segments broad and thick, Ist segment broadly transverse, 2nd longer
than broad, 3rd and 9th segments longest and cqual, 4th smallest, subquadrate, slightly
longer than broad, 5th, 6th, 7th and 8th nearly equal, sensoria on 3, 5, 7 and 8 segments,
apical joint with two setae. Legs (Fig: 7c) moderately large and stout, bearing a few
setae, without trochanters, the femora not reaching the margin of body, tibio-
tarsal articulation distinct, tarsus with two simple setae at apex; claws present with a
minute empodium. Fourth stage. Length 1.2 mm. Resembles the filth stage, except in having smaller
wing-pads and larger sclerotic plates on the dorsum, seven-segmented antennae, 3rd
segment longest, with three sensoria, and tibio-tarsal articulation absent. Euphyllara concolor, sp. a. (Figs. 72, 73)
Length of body, in male, 1,32 mm; in female, 1.55 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1.41 mm; in female, 1.62 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.70 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0.50 mm
Length of antennae, 0,50 mm

Colouration, General colour yellowish-orange or yellowish-brown, forewings pale-brown,
venter dull white or pale-yellow, tip of antennae black, labium black,

Structure. Body small, moderately arched. Head (Fig; 72a) moderately deflexed,
slightly broader than thorax, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex large,
broader than long, about twice as broad as long, weakly rounded in front, emarginate
over insertion of antennae, shallowly impressed on each side of median line, moderately
emarginate on posterior margin; genal lobes small, finely and sparsely pubescent, about
less than one-third aslong as vertex, distinctly separated from vertex, tips of genae separa-
tely rounded slightly in front; anterior ocellus at base of genal lobes and at the end of
front margin of vertex, Eyes large, strongly recessive and covering propleurites,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 295

 

Fig. 72. Buphyttura concolor, sp. n.—ar head, front view; bt antenna; et part of middle tibia and tarsal,
Joints; di hind tibia and tarsal joints; e: forewing; ft hind wing; g: male genitalia, lateral views
hs parameres, caudal view; i: female genitalia, lateral view; jt dorsal plate of female genitalia
dorsal view. Antennae (Fig. 72b) short, ten-segmented, bearing a few setae, two basal segments
large and robust, rugulose, Ist broadly transverse, subquadrate, 2nd slightly longer
than broad and also longer than Ist, other segments long and slender, imbricate, 3rd
segment longest, 4th half as long as 3rd, 5th smallest, 6th and 7th equal and slightly
longer than 4th, 8th and 9th equal and cach longer than 7th, apical segment as long
as 5th, bearing two unequal terminal spines, sensoria present on 4, 6, 8 and 9 segments,

236 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Thorax very broad, moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose;
pronotum broader than prescutum, slightly convex, descending, longer in middle and
narrower laterally, with foveal impr: ns covered laterad with receding eyes; prescutum,
scutum and scutellum resembling E. caudata. Legs (Figs. 72c,d) comparatively stout, finely and sparsely pubescent, all femora
rugulose, tibiae slightly longer than femora and beset with fine points arranged in
lines (seen under high magnification), middle tibiae (Fig: 72c) with a series of dorsal
setae just before apex, hind tibiae without basal spur, with five, small, black tooth-like
spines at apex, and two small, black claw-like spines at apex on posterior basal tarsus,
apical tarsal joint longer than basal, meracanthus extremely small, like a papilla. Forewings (Fig. 72e) thick, somewhat like a parallelogram, coriaceous, opaque, slightly
less than two and a half times as long as broad, membrane without any sclerotic markings,
but rugulose in texture and thickly covered with minute points, basal and radial cells
also bear small, scattered setae, apex narrowly rounded, first marginal cell a little longer
than second, R, obsolete distally, radial sector, media, forks M,,, and Cu, almost
running parallel, cubital petiole slightly more than twice as long as radius, basal vein,
cubital petiole and cubitus equal in length, anterior margin and all veins armed with
minute setae. Hind wings (Fig. 72£) relatively large, transparent, veins prominent, membrane uni-
formly beset with minute points, costal vein armed with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen moderately large in male and smaller in female, finely and sparsely pubescent
and also beset with minute points arranged in lines. Genitatia, Male genital segment (Fig. 72g) smaller than abdomen; proctiger (anal
valve) about 0-42 mm long, slightly longer than parameres, distinctly demarcated into a
broad basal portion and a long, somewhat cylindrical anal lobe, clothed with small,
simple setae and minute points, in profile anterior margin slightly convex, posterior margin
over middle two-thirds produced into rounded lobes and strongly emarginate subapically;
parameres (Fig. 72h) about 0-27 mm long, each like a blade of knife, bearing simple
setae on the outer surface, mesal surface armed with a thick and stout seta just below
apex and a row of thick setae arranged along the mesal border and also with a few mesal
setae and minute points; outer arm of aedeagus relatively shorter with a constricted spoon
end; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, bearing a few simple scattered setae. Female genitalia (Fig. 72i) longer than abdomen, sparsely pubescent, moderately
thick at base and converging to an acute apex, dorsal plate (Fig. 72j) longer than ventral,
notched in middle, and having rows of thick setae on the ventral margin in the posterior
half, circum-anal ring composed of a double row of pores; ventral plate broad at base
and narrow posteriorly and acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor scarcely exposed. Host plant, Adults and nymphs feed between axils and flower buds of Syzygium cumini
(L.) Skeels (= Eugenia jambolana Lam.). Thpe locality. Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Described from a small series of specimens. Holotype male; Allotype
female, from the type locality and collected on February 17, 1953 (R. N. Mathur);
Paratypes: 1 male and 6 females, February 28, 1951, 1 female, February 17, 1953,

 

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 237

   

d

Fig. 73. Euphyllura concolor, sp. n.—ai fifth stage nymph; bs antenna; ot leg; di circum-anal ring. aN
05 mm

4 males and 6 females, April 26, 1963, all from the type locality (R. N. Mathur). Few
adults of both sexes and nymphal stages were also preserved in alcohol (R. N. Mathur). Parts of male and female and nymphal stages were dissected and permanent mounts
were made on slides. All types, preserved material and slides are deposited at F.R.1.,
Dehra Dun. Two paratypes (14, 19) are donated to the I.A.R.I., New Delhi. Comparison. E. concolor is easily distinguishable by the shape of forewings, venation and
genital characters. This species resembles in some characters with Eurhinocola gravelyi
Crawford (1912, Rec. Indian Mus. 7: 422-423, Pl. xxxiii, Figs. G. H.; Pl. xxxiv, Fig. E;
Pl. xxxv, Fig. T), but differs markedly in cephalic features and venation,

Biological notes. This species is generally found on the top flowering branches, feeding
in the axils and flower buds. The adults are sluggish in habits and the nymphs produce
waxy threads in small masses. The nymphal characters are described below. Nymphal stages

Nymphs pale-yellow with head, thoracic and abdominal plates dusky, eyes pinkish-red. Body covered with dirty mass of cottony filaments. Fifth stage. (Fig. 73a). Length 1-35 mm. Of the psylline type; the wing pads not
produced cephalad and slightly projecting beyond the contour of the body, bluntly
rounded posteriorly. Head clearly differentiated and separated from the thorax. Eyes

238 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

small, bounded with a sclerotic rim. Derm membranous, except the large sclerotic
head plate, large thoracic plates, the wing pads, small, transverse plates in the abdomen,
and a large posterior abdominal plate, as figured. Derm sparsely beset with simple
ring-based setae and thickly with minute points, wing pads with small marginal setae,
surface of sclerotic plates covered with weak selerotic areas, the posterior abdominal plate
bears at lateral borders clusters of oval-shaped pores, each consisting of six large loculi,
and lanceolate setae present along the entire margin. .

Ventral side membranous throughout, except the anal plate, a small plate around each
of the last four spiracles, and four pairs of small, transverse, sub-median plates in the
abdomen. Derm thickly besct with minute points and a transverse series of small, simple
setac arranged inter-segmentally in the abdomen, sclerotic areas also bear fringed processes. Antennae (Fig. 73b) located ventrally, small, slender, about 0-4 mm long, apparently
niue-segmented, having a few setae, two basal segments broad and stout, 3rd and last
segments longest and equal, 4th smallest, subquadrate, 5th and 6th nearly equal, 7th
and 8th equal, four sensoria on segments 3, 5, 7 and 8, apical segment with two setae, Legs
(Fig. 73c) of moderate size, having a few thick sctac, without trochanters, tibio-tarsal
articulation distinct, tarsus with two simple setae at apex; claws present, with a minute
empodium. Anus (Fig. 73d) ventral, surrounded by a double ring of pores, the outer
ring with slit-like pores, the inner ring faintly represented, the pore-ring guarded by one
anterior and two pairs of posterior setae. Fourth stage. Length 0-95 mm. Differs from the fifth stage in having smaller wing-
pads, large sclerotic plates, seven-segmented antennae, with three sensoria, and tibio-
tarsal articulation absent. obsoleta, sp. n.
(Fig. 74)
Length of body, in male, 2:52 mm; in female, 3412 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-12 mm; in female, 1-27 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0:55 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-38 mm
Length of antennae, 0:55 mm

Colouration, (Specimens preserved in alcohol), General colour pale-yellow to
yellowish-brown, with dark-brown bands on thorax, prescutum with a broad anterior
band, scutum with two pairs of submedian longitudinal bands; wings sub-hyaline,
speckled with pale spots in a reticulate pattern,

Structure. Body very small, robust, moderately arched. Head (Fig. 74a) large and
broad, moderately declivous, slightly broader than thorax, finely and sparsely pubescent,
tugulose, closely adpressed to thorax; vertex broader than long, about two and a half
times as broad as long, disc somewhat plane or weakly swollen on either side of median
suture with foveal impressions on each side of median line, roundly bent anteriorly,
posterior margin slightly emarginate, anterior margin deeply emarginate or excavated
over insertion ofantennae, anterior ocellus visible in front, posterior ocelli slightly elevated ;
genae obsolete; frons visible from below. Eyes large, recessive. Clypeus visible in front. FAMILY 'PSYLLIDAR, 239

 

Fig. 74. Euphyllura obsoleta, sp. n.—ps head, front view; br antenna; et hind leg; ds forewing; er part of
forewing; fi hind wing; gt anal valve and sedeagus; hs hypandrium and parameres; 4s sperm
pump; jr female genitalia, lateral view. Antennae (Fig. 74b) short, rather thick, imbricate, bearing few fine setae, ten-seg-
mented, two basal segments robust, Ist somewhat quadrate, 2nd longer than broad,
remaining segments slender, 3rd segment longest, 4th nearly half as long as 3rd, 5th,
6th and 7th equal but smaller than 4th, 8th, 9th and 10th equal to one another and cach
as long as 4th, terminal segment with two long, unequal setac at apex, four sensoria present
on segments 4, 6, 8, and 9,

Thorax quite broad, robust, moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely
rugulose. Pronotum small, strongly deflexed behind head, ascending; pleurites mostly
concealed by eyes; prescutum also deflexed and partly covered anteriorly by prothorax,

240 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

much broader than long, broadest in middle, posterior margin broadly convex, angulate
Jaterally; scntum broader than prescutum, three and a half times as broad as long,
narrower posteriorly, angulate laterally; seutellum small, transverse, broad anteriorly
and narrow posteriorly,

Legs (Fig. 74c) short, pubescent and also beset with fine points, coxae small, femora
shorter than tibiac, middle tibiae with a thick dorsal seta just below apex; hind tibiae
without basal spur. with six or seven black, tooth-like spines at apex and two thick dorsal
setae just below apex, basal tarsal segment smaller than apical, hind basal tarsal segment
with two black claw-like spines at apex; meracanthus very small, slender. Forewings (Fig. 74d) oblong, sub-hyaline, about twice as long as broad, broadly
rounded at apex, first marginal cell almost as long as but twice as broad as second along
the posterior margin, pterostigma large and quite broad, radius (R) one and a half times
as long as cubital petiole (M+Ciu), basal vein as long as radius, cubitus as long as cubital
petiole, veins somewhat running parallel and setigerous with microscopic setae. In
one example, a cross vein present joining the fork Mg,4 with Cu, (Fig. 74e). Hind wings (Fig. 74£) small, thickly and uniformly beset with minute points, costal
margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae, in basal half. Abdomen small, slightly broader than long, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely
rugulose. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 74h) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve
(proctiger) (Fig. 74g) about 0:22 mm long, longer than forceps; in lateral aspect,
narrower both basally and apically, anterior margin nearly straight or weakly convex,
posterior margin broadly convex, apical halfsparsely beset with long setae, setae on lateral
borders slightly longer ; parameres (forceps) (Fig. 74h) about 0-18 mm long, club-shaped,
narrow basally and broad apically, outer surface besct with a few simple setae, apical
mesal surface armed with a group of 16 to 20 thick setae, directed downward and basal
region bearing a group of small, simple setac, postcrior margin with a small tooth just
below apex; hypandrium (Fig. 74h) quite robust, of usual shape, sparsely beset with
simple setae; outer arm of acdeagus (Fig. 74g) small, spoon end round; sperm pump as
figured (Fig. 743). Female genital segment (Fig. 74j) smaller than or just as long as rest of abdomen,
deflexed; dorsal plate longer than ventral, slender, sparsely pubescent, dorsal surface
slightly depressed midway, tapering to a bluntly rounded apex, apical region with short
setae which become more numerous and heavier along the ventral border, setae in middle
longer, anal aperture surrounded by a double ring of pores; ventral plate sub-acute
apically, sparsely beset with simple setae, setae small and heavier along the dorsal
border; ovipositor acute, slightly bent downward. Host plant. On young shoots of Salvadora oleoides Dene. Type-locatity. Changa Manga Plantation, Punjab (Pakistan). Fresh records are:
Muktsar (Punjab); Ajmer, Pilani (Rajasthan); Delhi. Types. Described from a small series. Holotype male; Allotype female, both
from the type locality and collected on August 10, 1938, on Salvadora oleoides; Pava-
types : 1 male and 5 females, data same (R. N. Mathur), Some specimens of this

  
  

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAH 241

species, preserved in alcohol and collected on 10.11.1968 from Muktsar, Punjab, (O. S.
Bindra), were also received from the Entomologist, Punjab Agricultural University,
Punjab. Part of this material has been incorporated in the collection at F.R.I., and
two pairs (in alcohol) were returned to the Entomologist, in January 1970. All types
and some slides having mounted parts of adults are deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Comparison. Euphyllura obsoleta, sp. n. differs from other Indian species in shape and
venation of forewings, obsolete genae and genital characters. With great reluctance,
this species has been placed in the genus Zuphyllura for the present. Biological notes. This species was collected on the young and fresh bud of Salvadora

oleoides, feeding therein cluster. The young leaves were somewhat curled up. The adults
were not very active. Enphyllara olivina Costa 1839
(Fig. 75)
Thrips olivinus
Costa, O. G. 1839, Monogr. degl.’ insetti ospitanti sull olivo e nelle olive, 2. ed., Napoli, p, 23-25, pl. I, fig. A, b, ¢, x (larvae). Euphyllura oliving
Costa, O. G. 1857, Degl’ insetti che attacano U olivo etc. pp. 35-42, pl, IIB, fig. 3-4 (Larve auf Olea ewo-
paca L.) . Loew, F. 1882. Verh. zool, -bot. Ges. Wien. 32: 245,
Boyer de Fonscolombe, M, 1840, Annls, Soc. ent, Fr. p. 101, 111. (Psplla olea)..
Oshanin, B. 1907. Verz. palaarkt. Hert. IL, p. 390. Aulmann, G. 1913. Psyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 67. Hem Singh Pruthi and Batra, H.N. 1938." Bull. imp. Counc. agric, Res, No. 19, p. 14, (Biological notes). Tuthill, L. D. 1943. Zowa State Coll. J. Sci. 17(4)+ 527-528. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1946. Ent. mon. Mag. 82: 37. Loginova, M. M. 1964, Inst, Biol, Acad, Sci. U.S.S.R. p. 448, pl. 202, figs. 9-12. Ephyllura oleae :
Foerster, A. 1848. Verh. nalurh. Ver. prouss. Rheinl. 31 93. Flor, G. 1861. Bull. Soc. Nat, Moscon, p. 418, 420. (Olea europaea L.,)
Meyer-Dur, 1871. Mitt, Schweiz. ent. Ges. 32 408,
Ferrari, P. M. 1888. Ann, Mus. Gio, Genova (2) 6: 75 (Olea europaca). Length of body, in female, 1:72 mm
Length of forewing, in female, 1-7 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-78 mm
Width of vertex between cycs, 0-50 mm
Length of antenna, 0-51 mm

Colouration. General colour pale-green to apple green, apical segment of antenna black,
legs pale yellow with greenish tinge, apical tarsal segments brown, forewings pale-brown
and interspersed with small, numerous dark-brown maculae with clear spaces in between
all over the surface. Structure. Body small but robust, strongly arched. Head (Figs. 75a, b) broader than
thorax, deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely punctate; vertex large, broad,

about twice as broad as long, rather flat, with two pairs of shallow foveal impressions,
16

242 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 75. Eupiplluraolivina Costa,—ashead and a part of thorax, dorsal view; bt head and a part of thorax,
lateral view; et antenna; d: hind leg; e: forewing; f hind wing; g: female genitalia and part
of abdomen, lateral view. posterior to centre and on cach side of median suture, foveae near to median line larger,
posterior margin moderately arcuate, anterior margin roundly cmarginate above antennae,
front ocellus visible from above; genal lobes sparsely pubescent, rectangular in shape,
slightly. smaller in width than vertex, not depressed from the level of vertex, contiguous
on inner margin, separate and slightly rounded in front, antcrior margin with longer
setac. Eyes large, strongly recessive and covering propleurites. Antennae (Fig. 75c) short, thick, arising beneath lateral edge of vertex bearing a few
.Setae, ten-segmented, two basal segments robust, Ist subquadrate, 2nd cylindrical, as
long as Ist, remaining segments imbricate, 3rd and 8th longest but equal, 4th, 6th, 7th
and 9th equal to one another but smaller than 3rd, 5th smallest and about one:

 

FAMILY P8¥LLIDAt 243

smaller than 4th, terminal segment slightly smaller than 9th, bearing two unequal setae
at apes, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax (Fig. 75b) short, robust, strongly arched, fincly punctate, sparsely pubescent
with small setae. Prothorax completely concealed by the head; prescutum small, des-
cending, convexly rounded anteriorly, broad anteriorly and narrow posteriorly, about three
anda half times as broad as long, lateral angles rounded; scutum large, broad, about twice
as broad as long, broadest before middle, about twice as long as prescuttun; scutellum
somewhat vase-shaped, broad anteriorly, narrow posteriorly, anterior margin almost
straight; post-scutellum of metathorax somewhat quadrate, rounded posteriorly,

Legs (Fig. 75d) small, stout, pubescent, femora thick and robust and smallev than
tibiae, hind tibiae without basal spur, with six black teeth at apex, apex broad and thick,
hind basal tarsal segment with two small, black claw-like spines at apex, basal tarsal
segments smaller than apical; meracanthus small, thick, knob-like. Forewings (Fig. 75e) small, thick, coriaceous and wrinkled, opaque, somewhat rhom-
boidal in outline, wholly constant in colour, maculated with small, numerous maculae,
about twice as long as broad, broadest near base, narrowly rounded at apex, without
pterostigma, marginal cells unequal, first cell small, second cell large and clongate, radial
sector with Ioops and curved upward to costa, clavus large, cubital petiole nearly as long
as radius, basal vein sinuate and longer than cubital petiole, veins armed with microscopic
setae, minute setae also present in anterior basal cell. .

Hind wings (Fig. 75£) almost as long as forewings, hyaline, tansparent, membrane
uniformly beset with minute points, costal vein armed with a few simple and hooked
setac. Abdomen small, sparsely pubescent, with posterior tergites produced as strong humps,
setae longer on sternites,

Genitalia. Female genital segment (Fig. 75g) longer than abdomen; plates uncqual,
pubescent, dorsal plate longer than ventral, gradually narrowed caudally, acuminate at
apex into a short, slender, rounded process turned upward, caudal end beset with a brush

of minute setae; ventral plate broad basally and acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor acutely
pointed and slightly exserted,

Host plant. On olive. Distribution. Previously recorded from Spain, France, Italy, Austria, Yugoslavia,
U.S.S.R., practically all over clive-growing regions,

In the collection of the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, are present
two females, in poor condition, having this data: 1 female, from N.W.F.P., 18.4.35 (H.N,
Batra) (1937/173-R. 8145); 1 female, from Tarnab Farm, Peshawar, 7.4.39 (H. N.
Batra) (R. N. 205/R. 8144) (Pakistan). Both these specimens are from olive and
determined by M. Bose. Comparison. This species has been redescribed from two female specimens (in poor
condition), loaned to me by the Indian Agricultural Institute, New Delhi. Its shape of
forewing and venation are slightly different from the wing figured (257) and (9) by Tuthill
(1943, pl. xv) and Loginova (1964, pl. 202) respectively. E, olivina has radius complete,
unlike that of caudata and concolor, where radius is obsolete distally. 244 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Genus PSYLLA Geoffroy 1972
Chermes
Linnacus, C, 1758. Syst. Nat. 10: 453-455 (in part). Pata
Geoffroy, E. L. 1762. Histoire Abregea des Insectes, 1: 482,
Scott, J. 1876, Trans. ent, Soc. Lond. p. 530
Loew, F. 1878, Verh, zool. -bot. Ges. Wien. 28: 600, 608, t. 9, fig. 16-19,
Edwards, J. 1896. Hem, -Hom. fir, Isl., p. 335, t. 2, fig. 29,
Froggatt, W. W. 1901. Proc. Linn, Soc. N.S.IY, 26: 243,
Kieffer, J. J, 1905. Anz. Soc. Sci. Bruxelles 29: 164. Oshanin, B. 1907, Ver eizhnis der Palacarktischen Hemipteren, Vol. 1, Lief. 11, pp. 330-381, Ann. «
Mus. Zool, de UAc. imp. des Sc. Petersburg, Bd. 12, p. 350. Aulmann, G. 1913, Psyllidarum Catalogu, Be lin, p. 8. Crawford, D. L, 1914, Bull. U.S, natn. Mas, 853 135-137. Haupt, H. 1935. Prylloidea, Tierwelt Mittleur. Vol. 4, p. X, 231. Tuthill, L. D. 1943, Lowa State Coll. J. Sci. 17(4): 455-457. Vondracek, K, 1957. Fauna C.S.R. Praha, Ceskoslovenska Akademie Ved. t. IX, pp. 204-205. Dobreanu, E. and Manolache, Q. 1962. Fauna Repub pop. rom., Insecta, Homoptera, Psylloidea, Vol, 8,
fasc. 3, pp. 168-169. Miyatake, Y. 1963. 7. Fac. Agric. Kyushu Unio. 12(4): 331. Loginova, M. M, 1964, Inst. Biol, Acad. Sci. U.S.S.R., pp. 437-443, 457-472,
Loginova, M. M. 1964. Proc. Inst. Zool, Acad. Sci, U.S.S.R. 34: 52-56, 71-107. Loginova, M. M. 1967. Annals, Zool, Warsz. 24(7): 427-461. Klimaszewski, S, M. 1968, Annis. Zool, Warsz. 20(20): 963-455. Pyllia

Kirkaldy, G. W. 1905. Entom. Zig. Wien. 24: 268. Brachypsylla

Crawford, D. L. 1914, Bull. U.S. natn. Mus, 85: 129, 142. Labricia

Enderlein, G. 1918. Zool, Anz. 49: 318, 1921. Asphagiedelta

Enderlein, G. 1921, Zool, Anz, 52: 120,
Asphagis

Enderlein, G. 1921, Zool. Anz. 52: 120,
Bazopelma

Enderlein, G. 1926. Ent, Mitt, 15(5/6): 399. Type species. Psylla alni (Linn.) (=Chermes alni Linn. 1758). (original designation
Geoffroy 1762). Body variable in size. Head large, usually as wide as thorax or wider, triangular,
transverse, more or less deflexed; vertex varies in shape, depressed discally; post-ocellar
region usually elevated; occiput covered by pronotum, scarcely visible. Genal cones
always present, variable in shape, and produced as more or less conical processes, often
divergent, usually deflexed and depressed from plane of vertex. Frons covered by genae,
not visible. Eyes Iarge, prominent, semi-globose. Antennae typically en-segmented,
slender, always longer than width of head, often much longer, first two segments robust,
segment third longest. Thorax robust, well arched, as broad as or broader than the head
and eycs together. Pronotum narrow, collar shaped, more or less descending anteriorly,
often vertical, not flat. Propleurites not equal at juncture with pronotum; pleural suture

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 245

oblique, extending to posterior edge of pronotum, or proepimeron not extending to
pronotum at all. Prescutum long. Legs usually long and stout; hind tibiae often with
a long or small basal spur, with 5 or 6 black apical spines; hind basal tarsal segment with
a pair of black apical spines; mcracanthus usually distinct, acute, projecting ventro-
caudad or caudad. Forewings usually hyaline, transparent, sometimes maculatcd or
flavus; long and broad, often elongate-ovate, rounded at apcx; pterostigma distinct and
long; cubitus and media always with a distinct petiole (cubital petiole), which is usuaily
distinctly shorter than the basal portion of radius (discoidal subcosta) ; radial sector stout,
seldom curving downward to any distance; clavus almost reaching apex of Cv; veins
beset with minute setae, usually biseriately; nerves stout, Male proctiger usually simple,
sometimes produced caudad. Dorsal plate of female genitalia longer than ventral,
usually broad basally and narrow or attenuate apically. It is a very large genus and is widely distributed. Its members are subject to consider-
able variation, and, therefore, specific characters are difficult to outline. In the following
key an attempt has been made to include 3 described species, viz. P. cedrelae Kicff., P.
zaicevi Sule, and P. viburni Loew. The two latter species are recorded for the first time
from India, The identity of P. simlae Crawford could not be established. Eight species
are new to science. KEY TO THE SPECIES OF PSYLLA

 
 
  

    

 

1, Antennae small and thick... 2.2.2... 2
=, Antennae long and slender... 2-2... : 3
2, Cubital petiole longer than cubits... ... a. Jyalina, sp. n.
—. Cubital petiole almost as long as cubitus . . . . . « P. oblonga, sp. n.
3, Forewings maculated ..... « bene P, quadrimaculata, sp. 1. —, Forewings hyaline or with flavus tinge, transparent... 2. ee ce te te eee 4
4, Radius almost or as long as cubital petiole . . . . . see ee 5
— Radius longer than cubital petiole rr
5, Forewings oblong-ovate ... . ~ eee ee Py eastopi, sp. n.
—, Forewings oblong : P. bengalensis, sp. n.

   

        

6, Forewings longer than 3°5 mm... 7
—! Forewings smaller than 35 mm .s wees 8
7, Veins of forewings conspicuously hairy; pterostigma ong and narrow; hind

tibiae without basal spurs... . . cedrelas Kieft,

    
 
 

— Veins not hairy as above; eeronigma small;
basalspur oo...

8, Hind tibiae without basal spur

—. Hind tibiae with a basal spurs. eee

9, Genal cones thick and notched and weatly impressed in middle; pteros-

P. longigena, sp. n.

seen eee 10

   

  

 

    

tigmalong 2... ee ee ee ee eee P. murrayi, sp. a. —. Genal cones simple, not notched; pterostigma small . : P. santali, sp. ni. 10. Vertex strongly rounded; genal cones thick and approximate... = - + » . . P. near simlae Crawf. —. Vertex not rounded as above; genal cones divergent...» . bebe e eee eee ul
11, Pterostigma short and broad... . . beet eee eee ee Py zaicevi Sule,
—. Pterostigma long and narrow... . . : beeen ee eeeees DB
12, First marginal cell longer than second

see aes Py viburni Loew. —. First marginal cell as long assecond =... ce ee es Pylla sp. 1

 

246 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Poylla bengalensis, sp. n.
(Figs. 76, 77)
Length of body, in male, 2-15 mm; in female, 2.7 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-90 mm; in female, 2.15 mn. Width of head with eyes, 065 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-34 mm
Length of antennae, 1:32 mm. Colouration. (Specimens preserved in alcohol), General colour yellowish-brown
with greenish tinge; antennac pale-yellow with apices of segments 3 to 8 and two apical
segments black; wings hyaline and transparent,

Structure. Body moderately large. Head (Fig. 76a) declivous, slightly smaller than
thorax, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely reticulate; vertex large, broader than long,
gradually rounded in front, with two foveal impressions, onc on each side of median
suture, posterior to centre; posterior margin emarginate; anterior margin emarginate
at the point of excision; post-ovellar region slightly swollen; anterior ocellus visible in
front; genal cones large, about 0.22 mm long, deflexed vertically downward, separate
but approximate, divergent distally, almost as long as vertex, subacute at apices, setac
longer than that on vertex, and also beset with fine points arranged in lines, two setae
much longer near apex. Eyes small, bulging. ‘

- Antennae (Fig. 76b) lony and slender, except two basal segments which are robust,
Ist broadly trausverse, 2nd quadrate, slightly smaller than Ist, remaining segments slender,
bearing siniple setae, imbricate, 3rd longest, about one and a half times as long as 4th,
Sth smaller than 4th, 6th, 7th and 8th equal to one another, slightly longer than 5th
but slightly smaller than ‘th, 9th and 10th equal, and each about half as long as 4th,
terminal segment with two unequal spines at apex, four sensoria present on segments
4, 6, 8 and 9. -

Thorax large, moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent; prothorax large,
convexly rounded anteriorly, with two foveal impressions on each lateral side; prescutum™
broader than long, broadest beyond centre, gradually narrowed anteriorly, angulate. both laterally and posteriorly; scutum a little longer than prescutum, a little more than
twice as broad as long, angulate laterally and posteriorly; scutellum small, broadly trans-
verse; post-scutellum of metathorax with three ridges, middle ridge black at top and
stronger than lateral ridges. Legs (Fig. 76c) moderately long, pubescent and also beset with minute points arranged
in linear series; all tibiac longer than femora, each bearing an.apical comb of setae;
hind tibiac without basal spur, with five black tooth-like spines at apex; hind basal tarsus
with two claw-like spines at apex, basal tarsal joint smaller than distal joint; meracanthus
large, iangular. Forewings (Fig. 76d) large, a little more than twice as long as broad, apex narrowly
rounded; pterostigma large and broad; radial sector slightly deflexed downward in the
apical half; radius as long as cubital petiole, Ry half as long as radius, basal vein as long
as R+R,, marginal cells unequal, first longer than second, veins armed with black setae,

“RAMILY PSYLLIDAE 247

 

Fig. 76, Paylla bengalensis, sp. n.—a: head, front view; bs antenna; ¢: hind leg; ds forewing; et hind wing;
f: male genitalia, lateral view; g: anal valve and aedeagus, lateral views ht parameres, mesal
and outer surfaces; 4s sperm pump; jz female genitalia, lateral view. membrane beset with minute points. Hind wings (Fig. 76e) slightly smaller than forewings, membrane thickly beset with
minute points, the basal half of the costal margin bearing a few simple and hookcd setae. Abdomen longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent and also beset with fine
points arranged in lines. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig, 76f) smaller than abdomen. Proctiger (Fig! 76g) about 0.38 mm long, longer than parameres, pear-shaped in anterior view, bearing

248 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

scattered simple setae and also beset with minute points arranged in lines; in profile,
anterior margin nearly straight to weakly convex, postcrior margin broadly convex,
truncate at apex; parameres about 0.27 mm long (Fig. 76h) in lateral aspect, posterior
margin almost straight, emarginate below apex both anteriorly and posteriorly, apex
black, abruptly broadened out somewhat as T-shaped, posterior process broadly rounded
while the cephalad process acutely pointed, in caudal view sides sub-parallel, broader
basally and bowed at top, outer surface bearing scattered simple setac, mesal surface
thickly beset with heavier setae pointing downward, marginal setae Jonger and thicker;
hypandrium simple, of usual shape, but having an erect, long finger-like process on each
dorsal side; outer arm of aedeagus (Fig. 76g) smaller than basal, with an arc-shaped
spoon end, sperm pump as figured (Fig. 76i). Female genitalia (Fig. 76j) smaller than abdomen, pubescent, plates unequal, dorsal
plate longer than ventral, constricted beyond middle into two regions, broad basal and
acuminate apical, apex uarrowly rounded and armed with minute peg-like setae, setae
longer in centre, circum-anal ring consisting of a double row of pores; ventral plate
hroad basally and acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. On Cedrela toona Roxb. Type locality. Pashok forest, Kalimpong (W. Bengal). Types. Described from a few examples, in poor condition. The parts of male and
female are mounted on slides. Holotype male and Allotype female, from the type
locality, and collected on 9.7.1965 (V.R. Phalak) (on slides). One female specimen,
in poor condition and few nymphal stages were preserved inalcohol, data same, A few
nymphal stages were also mounted on slides. Comparison. This species (bengalensis) differs from other species, in having longer
antennae, shape of wing, radius and cubital petiole almost equal, cubitus longer than
cubital petiole, genae long and thick, and characteristic: genital structures,

Biological notes. "This species appears to be rare and nothing is known about its life-
history and economic importance, Its nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig. 77a). Length 1.38 mm (on slide). Typical psylline form, Head
narrower than abdomen. Eyes large, each bearing one seta. Wing-pads large and
extend beyond the general margin of body. Dorsum with the derm largely membranous,
except the wing-pads, a pair of large head plates, small plates in the thoracic region,
small strip-like-plates in the anterior half and a large single plate in the posterior half
ofabdomen. Derm beset with scattered, simple or thick setae, varying in length. Margin
of wing-pads and abdomen armed with a series of simple or thick and few weakly spatulate
setac, of different length; hind wing-pads also bear similar setae and one lanceolate
seta at the distal end; posterior margin of abdomen angulated, having four pairs of
lanceolate setae, one seta at cach angle; all marginal setae borne on minute tubercles. Ventral side membranous throughout, except for a small area below the antennae,
a long patch in the forewing pad, thin slender areas in the anterior part, a small caudal
plate and three small plates around spiracles in the abdomen. Derm beset with small,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 249

 

Fig. 77. Palla bengalensis, sp. n.—as fifth stage nymph; by antenna; e+ hind leg; d: anal aperture. simple setae and also with microscopic points; these points becoming prominent and
thicker in the forewing patch. Antennae (Fig. 77b) long and slender, about 0.72 mm
long, eight-segmented, bearing few simple setac, apical segment black, imbricate,
Ist segment broadly transverse, 2nd subquadrate, 3rd long but smaller than apical, 4th
small, 5th and 7th equal and each half as long as 3rd, 6th slightly smaller than 5th and
slightly longer than 4th, 8th longest bearing two unequal setaé'at apex, four sensoria
present on segments 3, 5, 7 and 8. Legs (Fig. 77¢) moderately large, bearing simple setae, without trochanters; with
tibio;tarsal articulation distinct; each middle and hind tibiae with two long slender
setae; each tarsus with one golf club and one simple seta at apex; claws present, pulvillus
petiolate, fish-tail like. Anal opening (Fig. 77d) situated at the extreme tip of the body
and surrounded by a small, broad double band of pores, outer band more sharply defined
than the inner band, aperture guarded by two anterior and two posterior pairs of setae;
circum-anal pore ring much expanded, consisting of an extremely sinuous and narrow
bands of double row of pores, and extending on both dorsal and ventral sides, outer
row, of slit-like pores clearly defined while the inner row is poorly differentiated. Fourth stage. Length about 1.07 mm (on slide). Resembling the fifth stage, except
in smaller size, smaller wing-pads, broader thoracic plates, tibio-tarsal articulation

Bo PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

absent; antennae five-segmented, with thrce sensoria; marginal setae somewhat
spatulate,

Poylla cedrelae Kicffer 1905
(Figs. 78, 79)

Kieffer, J. J. 1905. Ann, Soc. Sci, Braxelles, p. 174, fig. 11; pl. TT, fig. 20 (Bengal). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924, Rec. Indian Mus. 26(6): 623 (Bengal). Length of body, in male, 2.42 mm; in female, 2.51 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3.60 mm; in female, 3,80 mm
Width of head with cyes, 0.80 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0.45 mm,

Length of antenrae, 1.85 mm

Colouration. General colour yellowish-brown, with purplish tinge on thorax,
longitudinal bands on thorax purple, antcnnac and lebium black, Icgs partly blackish-
brown, tarsal segments darker, wings transparent, hyaline, veins dark-brown, occiput
of head black. Structure. Body robust. Head (Fig. 78a), including eycs, smaller than thorax, strongly
deflexed, sparscly pubescent with long hairs; vertex about two and a half times as broad
as long, swellen, rounded downward above level of antennze, posterior margin moderately
emarginate, post ocelli elevated, anterior magin strongly invaginated in front over
antcrior ocellus; frons visible as a small sclcrite, bearing front ocellvs, which is visible
in front; genal cones large, about 0.18 mm long, slightly shorter than vertex, broad at
base, conical, vertical, sparsely pubesccnt with long hairs, scparate and ‘rather divergent
at apex, curved outward and subacute at apex, scarcely visible directly from above,
each cone with a long hair arising ventrally near apex. Eyes not very large, somewhat
Kemispherical. Beak large, protruding out between legs. Antennae (Fig. 78h) long and slender, ten-scgmented, longer than the width of head
including the eyes, finely and sparsely pubescent, two basal segments robust, Ist broadly
transverse, 2nd subquadrate, slender, segments imbricate, 3rd segment longest, 4th;
7th and 8th equal to one another but each smaller than 3rd, 5th and 6th equal but
smaller than 4th, 9th and 10th smallest, terminal segment with two unequal spines at
apex, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. -

Thorax large, strongly arched, somewhat shining, pubescent with long hairs, weakly
rugulose (visible under high magnification), Prothorax small, strongly descending
cephalad, narrowly and convexly rounded, with two foveal impressions on each side}
prescutum somewhat subtriangular, broadest posteriorly, narrowly rounded cephalad,
about one and three-fourths times as broad as long, posterior margin invaginated
medianally; scutum large, depressed dorso-medianally, thus forming a shallow longi-
tudinal channel, about twice as broad as long, broadest in middle, slightly longer than
prescutum, angulate laterally; scutellum large, transverse, about two and a half times
as broad as long, broad anteriorly and narrow posteriorly, with prominent antero-lateral
angles; metascutellum large, transverse, with a conical epiphysis dorsad on each side. ” FAMILY “PSYLLIDAE 251

 

Fig. 78. Prylla cedvelae Kieffer—as front view of head; bt antenna; et hind leg; di forewing; e, £2 part of
forewings of male, showing formation of extra cells; gs hind wing; hh: male genital segment; fz
lateral aspect of anal valve and aedeagus; §: posterior view of anal valve; Ie: outer view of forceps;
1: mesal view of forceps; mas aedeagus; nt sperm pump; os female genital segment, lateral aspect. Legs (Fig. 78c) relatively large, pubescent, tibiae longer than femora, hind femur
armed with a bunch of long, thick, dorsal setae near apex, hind tibiae without basal
spur, with 7 to 8 black tooth-like spines at apex, all tibiae bearing an apical comb of
setac, apical tarsal segment slightly longer and thicker than basal segment of fore and
middle legs, while they are of equal length in hind leg, meracanthus large and conical,

Forewings large (Fig. 78d), clongatc-ovate, slightly more than two and a half times

252 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

as long as broad, rounded at apex, pterostigma long and narrow, stem R longer than
cubital petiole, media and radial sector running parallel, Rs slightly flexed up near apex,
cubital petiole slightly smaller than cubitus, basal vein and cubitus almost equal, first
marginal cell smaller than second in length, but broader than the latter along the posterior
margin, veins armed with long hairs. In one male specimen, the first marginal cell
in both forewings divided transversely across the middle, forming an extra cell (Figs. 78e.£). In another example, the fork Mg,4 is absent. Hind wings (Fig. 78g) also large, having a number of simple and hooked setae in the
hasal half of costal margin, membrane beset uniformly with minute points. Abdomen large, longer than broad, venter sparsely beset with long hairs. Genitalia. Malegenitalsegment smaller than abdomen (Fig.78h). Anal valve (Figs. 78i. j) longer than forceps, about 0.38 mm long, outer surface covered sparsely with simple
setae; in profile, anterior margin weakly convex, posterior margin strongly convex,
converging toward tip, in caudal view, the posterior margin is produced caudad into small
flaps on cach side in (he basal half, each flap is folded inward, posterior margin thickly
beset with stout setac; parameres about 0.18 mm long, much smaller than proctiger,
arcuate inward, broad basally, narrow apically (Figs. 78k, 1), sinuate, apex black, abruptly
narrowed and finely denticulate, both outsr and mesal surfaces armed with simple setae,
marginal setae slightly longer; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely bearing
setae; outer arm of acdeagus peculiarly shaped like an emerging nymph, having three
pairs of small limbs (Figs, 78i. m). Female genital segment much smaller than abdomen. Both plates (Fig. 78 ©) broad
at base, narrow caudally, sparsely pubescent, dorsal plate slightly longer than ventral
and roundly pointed at apex, apical region armed with a bunch of long setae, anal opening
quite large, triangular in shape when seen dorsally, surrounded by a double row of pores
and guarded by small setae: ventral plate acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor small,
acutely pointed. Host plant. On young twigs and leaves of Cedrela toona Roxb. and Chukrasia velutina
Roemer,

Distribution. Previously recorded from Bengal (Kicffer, 1905). Further records
are from Dehra Dun, Naini Tal (U.P.) and Kalimpong (W. Bengal). Material examined. ‘This species is redescribed from a small series of both sexes, collected
from New Forest, Dehra Dun; 4 males and 7 females, April 1947 (R.N. Mathur); 1
male and | female, 16.2.52, Dehra Dun, 3 males and 2 females, 2.2.53, 1 male of 6.2.53.,
all from Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur). Various parts of adults and some nymphal stages
were also mounted on slides, and some adults and nymphs of 15.2.52 and 9.2.53 were
preserved in alcohol (in two phials). All this material has been deposited at F.R.I.,
Dehra Dun. This species is also represented by 3 males and | female, from Jcolikotc, NainiTal(U.P),
collected on 2.1.51 (67/51) on toon Ieaves (Cedrela toona) (Z.A. Siddiqi); and also few
adults and nymphs collected from Kalimpong (W. Bengal) on 23.6.66 (on Cedrela toona)
(V.R. Phalak) (preserved in alcohol). Two specimens have been donated to ILA.R.I., New Delhi. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 253

Comparison. I have tried to ascertain the deposition of Kieffer’s types, from all sources,
but their whereabouts is not known, However, I have collected and examined three
species on Cedrela toona, from Dehra Dun, U.P. and Kalimpong (W. Bengal). Re-
cently, I consulted Dr V.F. Eastop of the British Museum and he has also examined the
examples of two species sent to him and collected on Cedrela tvona, He has agreed
with me that the species redescribed above is Pyylla cedrelae Kieffer. Dr Eastop writes
(in litt), “Thegt genitalia are certainly much more like Kir ffer’s figure than the previous
sample. I do not sce anything that differs scriously from the description when the varia-
tion in pigmentation with age of psyllids is considered. I think your new sample should
be called Psylla cedrelae Kieffer and your previous sample should be described as new,
otherwise they will remain confused.”

This species is distinguishable by the shape of head, wing venation and genital characters. Its long wings, antennae and genital structures are characteristic features. Biological notes, This is a free-living species and is commonly found on young leaves
and twigs of Cedrela toona, during Febrnary-April, at Dehra Dun, The nymphs move
about actively, carrying waxy filaments sticking out from their body (Plate 2a). Nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Mature nymphs pale-yellow with greenish tinge, eyes pinkish-red, tip of antennae
blackish. Fifth stage. (Fig.79a) Length 1:7 mm, Of psylline type; wing-pads extending beyond
the contour of the body, not extending at humeral angle. Head large, smaller than the
width of abdomen. Eyes small. Derm membranous, except the large sclerotic head
plates, very small thoracic areas, wing-pads, and the very large caudal area which occu-
pies nearly half the abdomen, as figured. Derm besct with simple as well as dagger-
shaped setae of various length; each anterior wing-pad with a marginal row of stout
dagger-shaped setae and also with thick points; each hind wing with the same type of
setae, about seven in number on the distal margin. The pore areas on the caudal sclerotic
plate consist of two pairs of separate, large curved bands which are composed of many
small pores. ‘Che anterior bands are mainly dorsal in position, while the posterior bands
are located both on the dorsal and ventral sides of the body. Another pair of similar
type of hands, somewhat weakly defined, is present below them. The caudal plate also
bears small, dagger-shaped sctae in small clusters. Ventral side membranous throughout, except for the weak sclerotic areas at the base
of the antennae, small areas around each spiracles and a small caudal area in the ab-
domen. Derm beset with both simple and slightly thick setae of various length. Antennae (Fig. 79b) situated ventrally, about 1-08 mm long, seven-segmented, imbricate,
sparsely pubescent, segments 2 to 7 inclusive bearing short, stout dagger-shaped setae,
3rd and apical segments longest and equal, 4th segment about half as long as 3rd, 5th
and 6th segments equal and smaller than 4th, four sensoria present on 3, 5 and 7 segments,
8rd and 7th segments show imperfect segmentations, apical segment with two terminal
setae, Legs relatively long, having simple setae, without trochanter, femora longer than

wad PSYLLWAE OF {Hk INDIAN SUBUONTINENT

 

 

Fig. 79. Pylla cedrelae Kieffer—a: fifth stage nymph; bt antenna; ¢: part of leg; di anal opening with
circum-anal ring. tibiae, tibio-tarsal articulation distinct (Fig. 79¢), cach tarsus with two dorsal setae (one
hick and the other simple) near apex, except in the foreleg in which both setae are
simple; claws present, pulvillus large, triangular, fish-tail like and petiolate. Anal open-
ing (Fig. 79d) at tip of abdomen, surrounded by circum-anal pore ring, occupying partly
dorsal and ventral sides. This pore-ring is greatly enlarged, consisting of numerous
minute circular pores, with a single row of slit-like pores along its inner margin. Enclosed
within this ring is a secondary ring composed of very minute and inconspicuous pores. Fourth stage. Length 1:00 mm, Similar to fifth stage but differs in size, smaller wing
pads, 5-segmented antennae bearing three sensoria, tibio-tarsal articulation absent, each
hind wing with 4 to 5 dagger-shaped setae on distal margin. Third stage. Length 0-77 mm, Smaller in size, having smaller wing pads, 3-segmented. antennae with two sensoria, each hind wing pad with two dagger-sheped setae and one
simple seta on distal margin. Poylla crataegi (Schrank) 1801

hermes erataegi
Schrank, F. 1801. F. boic, WI, p. 142,

WAMILY PSYLLIDAL 255

Pylla crataegi
Loew, F. 1882, Verh, zool. -bot. Ges, Wien, 32: 235,
Reuter, O. M. 1876. Medd, F. P. Fenn, 1: 63 (Biology),
Reuter, O. M. 1881. Ent. Tidskr, 2: 155. Frauenfeld, V. 1864. Verh. zoul. -bot. Ges. Wien, p, 691, Pl. XIV,
Kaltenbach, J. H. 1874. Pasflenfeinde, p, 218, No. 99. Loew, F. 1877. Verh. zool. -bot. Ges, Wien. 273 131,
Loew, F. 1879, ibid, 29: 571, pl. 15, fig. 17 (nymph). Feirari, 1888. Ann. Mus; Civ. Genova (2), 6: 75. Dalla Torer, 1892, Her. nat, med. Ver. Innsbruck t. 20, p, 118. Houard, 1908. Les. Zoacecidies des Plantes d'Europe, p, 515) No. 2951. Sule, K, 1905, Cas. est, Spol, ent. 2:2. Sitz. -Ber. 1909. Bohm. Ges, Wiss, 22: 18. Edwards, J. 1896. Hem. Hom. Br. lil. p, 239, pl. 26, fig: 9
Oshanin, B. 1907. Verz. palaarkt. Hem, 2: 353,
Aulmann, G. 1913. Pypllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 13. Horvath, G. 1918, Faw, Reg. Hung., H. 8: 58. Haupt, H. 1935. Tierwelt Mittleeur, 41 X, 239,
Heslop-Harrison, G. 1936. Trans. Narth, Nat. Union 1(#)+ 22451946, Entomologist's mon. Mog. 82: 36,
Schaefer, H, A. 1949. Mitt, schweiz, ent, Ges. 5: 28,
Osiiannilsson, F. 1952, Opux Ent. 171 198,
Smreczynski, St. sen, 1954, Psplloidea, Fragmenta Faunistica 7: 137. Vondracek, K. 1957, Hemiptera III, Homoptera, Psyllinea, Acta entomol. Musei nationatis Praga, &
28, pp. 211-214,
Dobreanu, Band Manslache, C. 1962, Fauna Repub. pop- rom. Insecta, 8, fasc. 8, Homoptera, Psylloidea,
pp. 207-209, fig. 142-43,
Klimaszewaki, 8. M. 1963. Anns. Zool., Warse. 20(20)? 449-445, figs. 380-390. ‘Loginova, M, M. 1966, Papers, Moldavia Res. Inst, Gardening, Graperfarming and wine making, Mini,
_ Agric, U.S.S.R, Matdavia, pp. 143,
‘Psylla costatopunctata
Foerster, A,.1848, Verh, naturh. Ver, preuss, Rheinl, 31 76+
Meyer-Dur, R. 1871, Mitt, Scheweiz, ont, Ges. 32 396,
Scott, J. 1876. Trans. ent. Soc. Lond., p. 547, pl. VIII, fg. 8. “Reuter, O, M. 188), Ent. Tidskr, 2: 154. “Psylla ferruginea,
Foerster, A. 1848. Ene, Tistr. p. 79. ‘Meyer-Dur, R. 1871. ibid, p. 96,
Scott, J: 1876, ibid. p. 546-47, fig, 7,

 

This species is not present in the collection studied by the author and, therefore, not
included in the key. Its brief description is outlined below. :

Its colour varies from reddish-yellow to pale brownish-red, with pale yellowish-white
to dark brown-red streaks on thorax; antennae yellow with apices of segments 4th to
8th and two apical segments black; legs yellow or cddish-brown ; wings clear, transparent,
veins pale-yellow, pterostigma yellow or clear chocolate-brown, branch Cu, and apex
of clavus brown or black, Hiad twice as broad as long, rounded downward in front;
posterior margin concave. Genal cones large, broad basally and bluntly roundcd apically,
“pubescence longer than on vertex. Venation of wings and genitalia characteristic. 2 Distribution. P. crataegi (Schr.) has a wide range of distribution throughout Europe

256 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENt

and is commonly found on Crataegus oxycantha L.. From India, it has been reported to occur
at Naini Tal (U.P. ), 2,135 m, on a species of Crataegus, in March 1945 (Heslop-Harrison,
1946). Paylla eastopi, sp. n.
(Fig. 80)

Mathm, R. N, 1950. Zntomologists’ mon. Mag. (4), 86 (128): 226-27, figs. 1-3 (Nymphal stages, under
P. cedrelae Kieff)

Length of body, in male, 1-92 mm; in female, 2:32 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2:11 mm; in female, 2-70 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°72 min

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-45 mm

Length of anteunae, 2-00 mm

Colouration. General colour yellowish to dark-brown, head pale-ycllow, disc brown in
middle; genae lighter with greenish tinge; antennae pale-yellowish proximally and
brownish distally; legs yellowish to dark-brown from hind to forelegs in male and lighter
in female; prothorax yellowish with grecnish tinge; prescutim with two anterior,
submedian brownish bands; scutum with four longitudinal brown bands; mesosternum
dark-brown; abdomen brownish dorsally and yellowish ventrally; wings hyaline, trans-
parent, veins dark-brown, ptcrostigma pale-yellow, opaque; genitalia pale to dark-brown,

Structure. Body moderately long. Head (Fig. 80a) transverse, moderately deflexed,
almost as broad as thorax, sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex broader than
long, about twice as broad as long, gradually rounded in front, disc impressed on cither
side of median line, containing two large foveae having sides swollen all-round, posterior
margin arcuate, post-ocellar region swollen, anterior margin invaginated at point of
excision, anterior ocellus visible from above; genae quite long, about 0-22 mm in length,
deflected obliquely downwards, cones as long as vertex, pubescent and also armed with
minute points, broad basally and narrow apically, subacute at apex, divergent, hairs
longer than that of vertex. Eyes large, bulging. Antennae (Fig. 80b) quite long, longer than the width of head, inserted a little below
iniddle of eyes, slender, imbricate, bearing a few setae, two basal segments robust, lst
subguadrate, 2nd cylindrical, shorter than Ist, 3rd longest, 4th and 6th equal and each
about one-fourth smaller than 3rd, 5th slightly smaller than 4th, 7th slightly smaller than
5th, 8th slightly smaller than 7th, 9th a little shorter than apical, terminal segment with
two unequal spines at apex; four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax large and broad, arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; pro-
thorax convexly rounded, descending, longer medianally and narrower towards sides,
with two foveal impressions on each lateral side; prescutum broader than long, broadest in
centre, anterior margin narrowly rounded, posterior margin angulate; scutum large and
broad, about two and a half times as broad as long, almost as long as prescutum, gradually
sloping posteriorly, angulate laterally, posterior margin also angulate; scutellum broadly

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 257

 

Fig. 80. Psylla eastopi, sp. n.—at head, front view; bt antenna; et hind leg; ds forewing; et hind wing;
fi forewing of male; gt male genitalia, lateral view; bh: forceps, mesal and lateral surfaces;
4: sperm pump; J: female genitalia, lateral views le: dorsal view of dorsal plate. transverse, about twice as broad as long, antero-lateral angles prominent, posterior margin
broadly rounded,

Legs (Fig. 80c) moderately long, pubescent and also beset with minute points arranged
in series, femora shorter than tibiae, all tibiae with apical comb of setae, hind femur with
a group of 4 to 6 dorsal setae near apex, hind tibiae without basal spur, but armed with

WW

258 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

six black spur-like spines at apex, basal tarsal joint a little thicker and smaller than apical;
hind basal tarsal joint with two black claw-like spines at apex; meracanthus small, thick
and triangular. Porewings (Fig. 80d) hyaline, transparent, elongate-oval, about two and a half times
as long as broad; pterostigma long and broad, about twice as thick as the costal nerve;
in some males, pterostigma is shorter (Fig. 80£); apex narrowly rounded, radius (R) a
little longer than cubital petiole (M+Cu), R, almost as long as or slightly shorter than
R, basal vein (R+M-+Cu) almost twice as long as cubital petiole, first marginal cell
longer and broader than second, veins armed with microscopic setae; microscopic and
almost punctiform spinules present all over the surface, except the basal upper
region. Hind wings (Fig. 80e) small, with the surface covered with microscopic spinules, costal
vein armed with some simple and hooked selae, in basal half. Abdomen long, longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent, and also beset with
ininute points arranged in linear series. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 80g) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve about
0-45 mm long, slightly longer than forceps, flask-shaped in caudal view, slightly broadened
at middle converging toward tip, truncate at apex, anterior margin almost straight in
profile, outer sur! fice sparsely beset with strong, simple setac and with minute points
arranged in small scries; forceps (Fig. 80h) about 0-38 mm long, broad basally and gradu-
ally narrowed towards apex, terminating in a black bifid tooth, sides sub-parallel in profile,
outer surface bearing small, simple setac, mesal surface and margins armed with strong,
thick setae directed downwards, basal region bearing thinner sctac; hypandrium simple
(Fig. 80g), with small finger-like processes on dorsal margin, surface beset with simple
setae; aedeagus (Fig. 80g) quite long, outer arm smaller than basal, having a hooked
spoon-like end; sperm pump as figured (Fig, 80i). Female genital segment (Fig. 80j) smaller than abdomen. Both plates subequal,
divergent caudally; dorsal plate (Fig. 80k) longer than ventral, gradually sloping poste-
riorly in profile, broad basally, narrowly rounded apically, surface beset with simple
setae of varying length, hairs longer in middle, caudal region slightly flexed upward,
apex armed with a brush of setae; circum-anal pore ring composed of a double row of
pores, outer row with oval pores and the inner row with slit-like pores; ventral plate broad
basally and acutely pointed at apex, surface bearing simple sctae and also armed with
minute points arranged in lines; ovipositor acutely pointed, slightly exserted. Host plant. On young leaves of Cidrela toona Roxb. Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Described from a long series of both sexes. Holotype male, 12.3.45 and
Allotype female, 17.3.53, both from the type locality and collected on Cedrela toona
(R. N. Mathur); Paratypes: 3 males and 4 females, of 12.3,45, 4 males and 11 females
of 15.3.45; 10 males and 3 feinales of 10.3.47, 5 females of 18.3.47, 5 females of 22.4.47;
all from the type locality (R. N. Mathur); | male and 4 females of 17.3.53 from Dehra
Dun (R. N. Mathur); a good collection of both adults and nymphs collected from New
Forest, Dehra Dun, in March 1961, 1962, 1963 and 1964 has been ‘preserved in alcohol. RAMILY PsYLLIDAL

 

Some adults and nymphal stages were also mounted on slides. All types, wer material,
and slides were deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Two paratypes, male and female are also deposited at I.\.R.I., New Delhi. Comparison. As the host plant of this species is Cedrela toona, it was provisionally placed
under Psylla cedrelae Kieffer and its nymphal stages were also wrongly described under
cedrelue (Mathur, 1950). Attempts to locate the type of cedrelae were unsuccessful, and
so no comparison could be made, However, I was later fortunate to find another species
collected on toon, resembling more closely with Kieffer’s description of cedrelae. Dr
Eastop has confirmed that these are really P. cedrelae. The present species is, therefore,
considered quite distinct and described! as a new species. ‘This species is separated from other species of Psylla by the characters of colowation. shape of wings and venation, radins almost as long as or slightly longer than Ry. shape of
head, longer genal cones, and genital features. Biological notes. This specics is commonly found during March, on young and fresh
buds and leaves of toon (Gedrela toona) in the Doon Valley. The nymphs feed gregariously
and secrete cottony waxy mass of filaments from the body. Its nymphal stages are des-
cribed by Mathur (1950), under Psylla cedrelae, and should now be considered under the
species Psylla eastopi, sp. 1. Peylla hyalina, sp, n.

(Figs, 81, 82)
Length of body, in male, 1-70 mm; in female, 2-05 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2-00 mm; in female, 232 mm
Width of head, with eyes, 0-61 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-42 mm
Length of antennae, 0°57 mm

Colouration. General colour pale-yellow with greenish tinge, antennae pale-yellow with
tip of segments 3 to 7 and apical segments black, cyes light greenish-gray, genae light
green, legs pale-yellow with greenish tinge, wings hyaline, pterostigma pale-yellow. Structure. Body relatively small, Head (Fig. 81a) with eyes, nearly as broad as thorax,
moderately deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose, vertex slightly broader
than long, with a median suture and an oval fovea on either side posterior to centre,
gradually rounded downward in front, posterior submedian region and post-ocellar region
swollen, posterior margin straight, anterior margin emarginate at point of excision, anterior
ocellus visible in front; genal cones small, below the plane of vertex, finely pubescent, with
a few long setae located ventrally, a little less than half as long as vertex, finely rugulose
dorsally and beset with fine points ventrally, separate but approximate, sub-acute at
apex. Eyes large, somewhat recessive. Antennae (Fig. 8l1b) small, ten-segmented, slightly smaller than width of head
including eyes, imbricate, bearing few simple setac, two basal segments robust, Ist
subquadrate, 2nd cylindrical, about as long as Ist, remaining segments slender, 3rd
segment longest, 4th about one-third as long as 3rd, 4th, 6th, 8th and 9th nearly equal

260 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

g
Pe
a
s

 

0.25 mm_, 0.25 nm

Fig. 81. Pylla hyalina, sp. n.—az head, front view; bt antenna; et hind leg; dt forewing; et hind wing; f
male genitalia, lateral view; g: parameres, upper and mesal surfaces; hi acdeagus; iz sperm
pump; j: female genitalia, lateral view; kx dorsal plate, under surface. to one another, 5th smallest, 7th slightly longer than 5th, slightly smaller than 4th, 9th
alittle smaller than 10th, terminal segment with two quite long, unequal spines at
apex, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax large and broad, moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, fincly
rugulose. Prothorax quite large, convex, sub-vertical, with two foveal impressions on
each lateral side, posterior margin strongly concave; prescutum broader than long, some-
what reticulate antero-medianally, narrowly rounded anteriorly, widest posteriorly beyond
centre, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutum slightly more than twice as broad
as long, nearly as long as prescutum, widest before centre, angulate laterally; scutcllum
broadly transverse, with prominent antero-lateral angles, about twice as broad as long,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 261

broadly convex posteriorly ; post-scutcllum of metathorax quite large, with a median ridge
and a foveal depression on cither side. Legs (Fig. 8c) moderately long, bearing sparse stiff sctac and also beset with fine points
arranged in linear series, all tibiae with a comb of setac at apex, tibiac of first two pairs
of legs longer than femora, while tibia and femur of hind legs alniost equal in length, hind
femur with a group of long, sub-apical setae, hind tibia without basal spur, with four
spiniform teeth at apex, hind basal tarsus with two claw-like spines at apex, basal tarsal
joint smaller than apical; meracanthus small, triangular. Forewings (Fig. 81d) hyaline, clongate-ovate, leaf-like, about three times as long as
broad, narrowly rounded at apex, pterostigma quite large and broad, radial sector quite
long and slightly flexed, radius shorter than cubital petiole, R, a litle shorter than radius,
basal vein nearly as long as cubital petiole, veins somewhat running parallel, and armed
with a double row of fine setae, membrane beset with minute points, first marginal cell
long and narrow and longer than second. Hind wings (Fig. 8le) quite long, beset with minute points, costal margin in the basal
half with a few simple and hooked sctae. Abdomen much longer than broad and rather depressed, fincly and sparsely pubescent
and also beset with fine points arranged in lincs, setac slightly longer on sternitcs. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 81£) rather small. Anal valve about 0-20 mm
long, somewhat horizontal, longer than and overlapping the forceps, broad basally and
gradually narrowed apically, bearing an anal aperture at tip, sparsely beset with simple
stiff setac and also with minute points arranged in small series; parameres (Fig. 81g)
relatively short, about 0-13 mm long, sub-globose basally, slender and narrowly rounded. apically, outer surface beset with small simple sctae, mesal surface armed with strong,
thick setae directed downwards; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, bearing scattered
simple setac and minute points arranged in series; aedeagus (Fig. 81h) of peculiar shape,
outer arm smaller than basal, thick, with an invagination on the upper side and ending
in a characteristic large spoon; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 813). Female genitalia (Fig. 81j) smaller than abdomen, short and blunt, bearing hairs of
varying size, plates divergent, thickly beset with minute points, broad basally and narrow
posteriorly, Dorsal plate (Fig. 81k) large, bent subvertically downward in the posterior
half, terminating in a narrow bifurcate end, with a median invagination; anal opening
large, caudal in position and located in a clear zone, circum-anal ring composed of a
double ring of pores, the inner ring consisting of narrow slit-like pores; ventral plate
smaller than dorsal, with the apex weakly invaginated medianally, in profile, apex acutely
pointed; ovipositor acutely pointed, having a few saw-like tecth just below apex,

Host plants. Qn young and fresh leaves of Albizzia procera Benth. and Cassia siamea
Lamk. Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Distribution, Dehra Dun (U.P. ); Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu). Types. Described from a long scries of specimens of both sexes. Holotype male;
Allotype female; both from the type locality and bred on 15.8.34. (Expt. No. 499A)
(R. N. Mathur); Paratypes: 3 ex. of 19.7.34; 18 ex. of 11.8.34; 17 ex. of 15.8.34;

202 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

s. of 4.9.34; 35 ex, of 7.9.34; 34 ex. of 8.9.34; all from the type
locality and bred on Albizzia procera (Expt. No. 499A) (R. N. Mathur) ; 3 females of 9.5.50;
2 males and 2 females of 6.6.50; 2 males and 2 females of 11,8.53, all from the same locality
\R.N, Mathwn); in addition to these mounted specimens, a good number of adults and
nymphal stages were also preserved in alcohol on 1.8.34 trom Expt. No. 499A. Some
adults and nymphal stages from the same lot were dissected and their parts were inounted
on slides. All types, preserved material and slides are deposited at F.R-I., Dehra Dun,

‘Two male and 2 female paratypes, from the type locality and belonging to lot
No, 499A, are also donated to the LAJR.L, New Delhi. In the collection received from the Agriculwre College and Research Institute, Coim-
batore (Tamil Nadu), I found 2 female specimens belonging to this species and bearing
the data: Coimbatore, 13.5.36, bred on leaves of Cassia siamea (Kylasam coll.). Both the
specimens have heen returned to the same institution. Comparison. Pglla latina, sp. u. is readily vecognised by the shape of forewings,
venation, shape of head and genal cones, characteristic genital structures and other
featur mbles closely with Psylla oblonga, sp. n. recorded on Albizzia odoratissima,
but differs from it iu having narrow ptevostigma and long first marginal cell in forewing
and long genal con

Biological notes. ‘Vhis species is quite commonly found on Albizzia procera and
the nymphs are not very active, The adults and nymphs are generally seen on young
and fresh buds and leaves. The nymphs feed between unfolded leaves and in
heavy infestations, the huds and young leaves droop duc to the draining up of sap and
ultimately drop down on the ground below. This species is sometimes found in close
association with dcizzia indica H-H. The nymphs feed gregariously aud they are pale-
Green or pale-yellow with chrome lemon tinge in the abdomen, eyes silver grey, terminal
antennal segments black, and legs and wing-pads creamy. The eggs are laid singly or
in masses in the folds of young leaves and buds. Each egg is spindle-shaped, creamy
white and smooth. The nymphs are sometimes covered with small waxy threads and
exude copiously globules of honey dew. The nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig. 82a). Length 1-56 mm (on slide). Body of psylline form; head
narrower than abdomen; wing-pads not produced cephalad beyond the prothoracic
legs, but project from the side of the body. Eyes prominent, with a distinct patch. Dorsum with the derm largely membranous, except for the weakly sclerotic head-plate
occupying most of the head, wing-pads, small thoracic plates and nearly the posterior
two-thirds of the abdomen, showing traces of segmentation; basal abodominal area
having weakly sclerotic transverse strips. Derm partly vermiculate, and also armed
with small, broad or flattened points, and with minute scattered clavate selac; anterior
region of head bearing a number of long simple setae; wing-pads sparsely beset with a
number of minute simple marginal setae; abdominal margin angulate, having six pairs
of angles, each angle bearing a long, truncate seta; caudal margin slightly concavely
arcuate; each wing pad with a long scta at the distalend. Antennae (Fig. 82b) small,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 263

 

Fig. 82. Palla hyalina, sp. n.—at fifth stage nymph; b: antenna; ct leg; d: circurn-anal pote ring. about 0°03 mm long, apparently six-segmented, two basal segments robust, terminal
segment longest, imbricatc, bearing two sensoria and two apical spines, remaining two
sensoria present on segments 3 and 5. Ventral side membranous throughout, except for the sclerotic areas of various shapes
in the abdomen, a small area around each of the last four spiracles, and three pairs of
small sub-median areas, and a small area in front of the circum-anal ring and the region
surrounding it. Derm beset with minute points and also with small, simple setae scattered
over the surface. Legs (Fig. 82c) small, bearing small, simple and few spatulate setae,
femora not reaching the margin of the body; without trochanters; tibio-tarsal articu-
lation distinct; claws present, pulvillus large, triangular and markedly petiolate. Anal-opening (Fig. 82d) well in from the caudal margin, the circum-anal ring consisting
of a single row of slit-like pores and an inner ring ofa band of minute oval pores; both
rings are interrupted medianally, and are guarded by two anterior, one lateral and
one posterior pairs of small setae. Fourth stage, Length 1:10 mm (on slide). Identical with the fifth stage, except in
being smaller in body length and wing-pads, with antennae apparently four-segmented,
having three sensoria and without tibio-tarsal articulation. Paylla longigena, sp. n.
(Figs. 83, 84)

Length of body, in male, 2-68 mm; in female, 2:24 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3-32 mm; in female, 3-94 mm

264 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Width of head with eyes, 0-92 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-61 min
Length of antennae, 3-22 mm

Colouration. {Specimens in poor condition). Gencral colour yellowish-brown, with
greenish tinge, apex of beak black, tarsal segments light brown, antennae dark-brown
distally and pale-yellow proximally, wings hyaline, transparent. Shucture. Body robust. Head (Fig. 83a) large, slightly broader than thorax,
moderately deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, rugulose-reticulate; vertex broader
than long, a little less than twice as broad as long, swollen on either side of median suture,
inclined vertically downward anteriorly, post-ocellar region also swollen, with small
foveal impressions ou cach side of median suture, from cach fovea a narrow lincar groove
continues in a stellate form, posterior margin moderately arcuate; fons visible in front
as a sinall sclerite, bearing anterior ocellus; genal cones large, about 0-35 mm long,
sparsely hairy with long hairs, finely rugulose, inclined towards sternum, broad basally
and narrow apically, contiguous near base, divergent apically, slightly smaller in length
than vertex, roundly pointed at apex. Eyes small, somewhat sub-spherical,

Antennae (Fig. 83b) Jong, ten-segmented, finely and sparsely pubescent, two basal
seginents robust, fincly rugulose, 1st segment subquadrate, 2nd cylindrical, slightly smaller
than Ist, remaining segments slender, imbricate, 3rd slightly smaller than 4th, 4th longest,
5th slightly smaller than 3rd, 6th and 8th equal, but smaller than 5th, 7th about three-
fourths as long as 4th, 9th about half as long as 5th, terminal segment slightly less than
half as long as 9th, with two unequal spines at apex, four sensoria present on segments
4, 6, 8 and 9,

Thorax moderately arched, quite large, finely and sparscly pubescent, fincly reticulate. Prothorax large, convex, moderatcly deflexed, with two large, prominent foveal impressions
on cach lateral side; prescutum somewhat Lriangular in shape, partly concealed anteriorly
in the concavity of the posterior margin of prothorax, broader than long, broadest beyond
middle, narrowly rounded anteriorly, posterior margin angulate; scutum broad, slightly
more than twice as broad as long, nearly as long as prescutum, gradually sloping and
angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutcllum small, transverse, broader than long,
broad anteriorly and narrow posteriorly, anterior margin concave with prominent antero-
lateral angles, posterior margin weakly invaginated medianally; post-scutellum of meta-
thorax quite large, having three dorsal carinac, median carina long and prominent. Legs (Fig, 83) quite long, pubescent with long hairs and also beset with minute points
arranged in lines, femora of fore and middle legs shorter than tibiae, hind femur almost
as long as hind tibia, with three sensoria-like structures on ventral side, all tibiae with
a comb of setae at apex, hind tibia with a large basal spur and cight black tooth-like
spines (arranged in groups of 4:2:1:1) at apex, basal tarsal segment of hind Ieg smaller
than apical, bearing a strong sclerotic ventral pad and two black claw-like spines at
apex; meracanthus large and conical. .

Forewings (Fig. 83d) large, hyaline, transparent, a little more than two anda half
times as long as broad, thickly beset with minute points, clongate-ovate, rounded at apex,

 
 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE . 265

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 83, Psylla fongigena, sp. n,—ai head, front view; b: antenna; e: part of hind leg; ds forewing; e: hind
wing; fr male genital segment; g: sperm pump; ht female genital segment. basal vein (R-4+M-+-Cu) slightly longer than radius (R), Rs quite long and weakly arched. R, slightly smaller than R, cubital petiole (M-+Cu) slightly smaller than R,, pterostigma
present, small and open, broad basally and narrow apically, first marginal cell longer
and broader than sccond, veins armed with microscopic setae, anterior margin thickly
beset with long setae. Hind wings (Fig. 83e) also large, membrane thickly beset with minute points, costal
margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae in the basal half. Abdomen longer than broad, finely and sparscly pubescent, also besct with minute
points, setac longer on sternites. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 83£) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve simple,

266 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

pyriform, about 0-38 mm long, longer than parameres, broad in the basal half and
gradually narrowed in the apical half, truncate at apex, anterior margin straight,
posterior margin broadly convex basally, outer surface thickly beset with minute points
and sparsely with long slender setae; patameres (forceps) about 0-30 mm long, broad
basally and gradually narrowed apically, ending in a sharp black incurved point, apical
mesal surface with a longitudinal kec], sides subparallel, outer surface sparsely armed with
simple scattered setac, mesal surface bearing long setae, pointing downward, marginal
setae alo long and slender, few strong sctae also present just below the black point;
hypandrium simple, of usual shape, bearing simple, sparse setac; aedeagus quite long,
outer arm smaller than basal, with a narrow spoon end; sperm pump as figured
(Fig. 83g). :

Female genital segment (Fig, 83h) smaller than abdomen, thickly beset with minute
points and also with simple setae of various lengths; dorsal plate longer than ventral, with
a roundly pointed apex, apical region armed with thick peg-like setae; anal ring large,
composed of a double ring of pores; ventral plate acutely pointed at apex, both plates
broad basally and narrow posteriorly; ovipasitor acutely pointed. Host plant. On Bucklandia (Symingtonia) populnea R. Br. Type locality. Kurscong (Bengal). Types. Described from 4 specimens. Holotype male; Allotype female (without
forewings) from the type locality, and collected on September 20, 1932 (D.F.O. coll.) (R.R.D. 443); Paratypes: 2 females, from Kurscong division (Bengal), collected on
July 4, 1932 (D.F.O. coll.). One male and one female dissected and their parts mounted
on slides. All types and slides deposited at F.R.J., Dehra Dun. Two dry nymphs
mounted on a card, July 4, 1932. Comparison. Psylla longigena, sp. n. is readily recognised by shape of wings, long antennae,
shape of head and quite long genac, small pterostigma, stcong basal spur on hind tibia,
and genital characters. Biological notes, In the collection sent by the Divisional Forest Officer, in 1932, from
Kurseong, few mature nymphal stages and exuviae were also present. These nymphs
are reported to feed on the leaves of Bucklandia populnea. ‘The description of the fifth
stage nymph is given below. .

Nymphal stage

Fifth stoge. (Fig. 84a). Length 2:35 mm. ‘Typical psyllinc form. Head noticeably
narrower than abdomen. Eyes large. Wing-pads large and project prominently beyond
the general margin of the body. Derm of the dorsum membranous, except for a pair of
large head plates, the wing-pads, the apical half of the abdomen, and a number of small
plates in the thoracic region and five pairs of small strip-like plates in the basal abdominal
region. Derm beset with numerous simple scattered setae of various length, some setae
are strong and thick. Wing-pads having a number of thick marginal setae; the posterior
half of abdomen bearing a number of large, conspicuous, stout setae, some of which are
long and variously curved, three pairs of small dagger-shaped setae also present at the
angles of the posterior abdominal plate. Apex of hind wing with two strong setae. PAMILY PSYLLIDAE 267

 

Fig. 84, Poylda longigena, sp. n.—aififthstage nymph; b: antenna; et legs dt circum-anal pore ring. Posterior abdominal plate also ornamented with a few comb-like siructures. Antennae (Fig. 84b) long and slender, about 2-00 mm long, seven-segmented, beset
with fine sparse setac, Ist segment broadly transverse, slightly broader than long, 2nd
cylindrical, longer than broad, 3rd longer and slightly shorter than apical, showing faint
traces of segmentation, ‘th and 6th equal and slightly less than half as long as 3rd, 5th
slightly smaller than 4th, terminal segment longest, bearing two apical spines; four
sensoria present on segments 3, 5 and 7. Ventral side membranous except for a small plate at the base of each antenna, two
broad areas on wing-pads, small areas on the anterior two-thirds of abdomen and a large
plate in the rest of abdomen. Wing-pads and abdomen thickly beset with minute points
which become sharper in the abdominal plates. Legs (Fig. 84c) relatively large, beset
with simple and dagger-shaped setae, the femora exceeding the margin of the body; with-
out trochanters; the tibiae of the middle and hind pairs of legs having one large curved
seta cach; tibio-tarsal articulation distinct; claws present, the pulvillus large, petiolate,
fish-tail like. Anal opening (Fig, 84d) set forward a short distance from the apex of
the abdomen, surrounded by an outer ring of slit-like pores and an inner ring of oval
pores; both rings interrupted medianally. 268 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Peylla murrayi, sp. n.
(Figs. 85, 86)

Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2)1 62-63 (Biological notes). Length of body, in male, 1-32 mm; in female, 1-68 mm
Length of forewings, in inale, 1-63 mm; in female, 1-97 mm
Width of head with cyes, 0-68 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, Ol] 1mm

Length of antennae, 1-05 mm

Colouration, General colow pale cadmium yellow with greenish tinge, prothorax,
posterior region of prescutum, lateral sides of scutum and scutellum greenish-grey; scutum
with dark-brown longitudinal submicdian bands; antennae pale-yellow with apices of
slender segments and two apical segments black; legs pale-yellow; post-scutellum of meta-
thorax with a black median epiphysis; wings hyaline, veins flavus. Structure. Body small. Head (Fig. 85a) including eycs broader than thorax, declivous,
finely and sparsely pubesccut, fincly rugulose; vertex about two and a half times as broad
as long, with two circular foveae on either side of median suture and posterior to centre,
each fovea with stellate impression, anterior region and post-ocellar region swollen,
posterior margin moderately arcuate, anterior margin emarginate at point of excision;
anterior ocellus visillc in front; genal cones small and thick, about 0-12 mmlong, slightly
smaller than vertex, rugulose, separate, divergent, broad basally and narrow apically,
notched and weakly impressed near about middle, with a rounded tip, hairs longer than
that of vertex. Eyes large and bulging. Antennac (Fig. 85h) small, ten-segmented, bearing a few sctac, two basal segments
robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd subquadrate and as long as Ist, remaining segments
slender and imbricate, 3rd joint longest, slightly morc than one and a half times as long
as 4th, 4th and 8th joints nearly equal, 5th, 6th and 7th cqual to one another but slightly
smaller than 4th, 9th slightly smaller than 10th and half as long as 5th, terminal
segment bearing two unequal, long sctac; four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8
and 9. Thorax moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, rugulose. Prathorax
narrow, convex, descending, with two pairs of prominent foveal depressions on each
lateral side; prescutum broader than long, about twice as broad as long, broadest in
centre, angulate both laterally and posteriorly, narrowly rounded and gradually sloping
anteriorly; scutum large, nearly as long as prescutum, about two and a half times as broad
as long, broadest before middle, anterior margin concave, disc flat dorsally, angulate
both laterally and posteriorly; scutcllum small, transverse, slightly more than twice as
broad as long, anterior margin concave, having prominent antero-lateral angles, weakly
invaginated laterally and postcriorly; post scutellum of metathorax with three small,
dorsal epiphysis, the median. one strong, erect and black at tip. Legs (Fig, 85c) moderatcly long, pubescent and also beset with minute points arranged
in lines, femora shorter than tibiae, all tibiae with an apical comb of setae, hind tibiae

FAMILY PSYLLIDAL 269

 

Fig. 85. Pyylla murrayi, sp. n.—a: head, front view; bs: antenna; e: hind leg; dt forewing; e: hind wing;
f: male genitalia, lateral view; g: parameres; hht sperm pump; & female genitalia, lateral view. without basal spur, with five, black tooth-like spines at apex, tarsal joints robust, basal
joint a little shorter than apical, proximal joint of meta-tarsus with two claw-like spines
at apex; meracanthus small, slender and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 85d) small, hyaline, elongate, slightly less than two and a half times
as long as broad, anterior margin strongly arched, rounded at apex, pterostigma quite
large and broad, radial sector slightly more than one and a half times as long as ptero-
stigma, radius longer than cubital petiole, R, slightly smaller than cubital petiole, basal
vein a little longer than radius, marginal cells unequal, first cell longer and broader than
second, veins armed with microscopic setae, membrane beset with minute points. 270 VSYLLIDAK OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Hind wings (Fig. 85e) slightly smaller than forewings, membrane uniformly beset
with minute points, basal half of costal margin bearing simple and hooked
setae. Abdomen small, finely and sparscly pubescent and also armed with minute points
arranged in small lines, sternites furnished with longer hairs. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 85£) smaller than abdomen, Anal valve about 0-25
nim long, longer than forceps, broad basally and gradually narrowed apically, elongate-
oval, in profile, anterior margin almost straight, sides subparallel, posterior margin slightly
invaginated near apex, outer surface beset sparsely with long, thick setae and also armed
with minute points; parameres (Fig. 85g) small, about (-20 mm long, slender, sides
subparallel, converging gradually towards apex, apical end sharply curved inwards as
asmall, black subacute tooth, in caudal view, forceps bowed together, forming an ellipse,
outer surface bearing sparse simple setac, marginal setae slightly longer, mesal surface
with a few thick setae just below apex and pointing downward; hypandrium simple, of
usual shape, bearing scattered simple sctac; outer arm of acdeagus smaller than basal,
with a thick spoon end; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 85h)

Female genital segment (Fig. 85i) smaller than abdomen. Dorsal plate longer than
ventral, apical one-third slender and acuminate, terminating in a round point and armed
with small, thick peg-like sctae, broad basal region beset with long scattered setae, anal
ring composed of a double row of pores; ventral plate acutely pointed, apical region
hearing thick peg-like sctae; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. On fresh and young leaves of Afurraya koenigii Spreng. Type locatity. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P...

Types. Described from a fairly large series of both male and female specimens. Holo-
type male, 24.4.50; Allotype female, 28. 7.34. both from the type locality (R. N.
Mathur), and coliected on Murraya koenigii. Pavattypes: 4 males and 2 females, of
28.7.34; 1 male of 13.1.34; 4 females of 28.3.34; 1 male of 29.3.34; 1 male of 23.8.33;
1 female of 26.9.33; 6 males and 4 females of 2.5.50; 4 males and 5 females of 2: ;
all from the type locality (R. N. Mathur); 3 females of 214.67, from Dehra Dun (R. N.
Mathur). Some adults and nympha} stages collected on 28.7. 34 and 1.4.194] from the
type locality, were preserved in alcohol. The parts of both sexes and nymphal stages
were also dissected and mounted on slides. All types, preserved material and slides are
deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Three females designated as paratypes, from the type locality and collected on 7.5.34. (R. N. Mathur}, on the same host plant, are donated to LA.R.I., New Delhi. Comparison. Psylla murrayi, sp. n. is recognised by the shape of wing and venation, shape
of head and genal cones and some other characters, as outlined in the key. Its smaller
wings, long pterostigma, small and thick genal concs which ave weakly impressed in middle,
post-scutcllum of metathorax with a thick, black median epiphysis, and genital structures
are some characteristic featurcs. Biological notes, "This psyltid was first recorded on Murraya koenigii, at Dehra Dun (U.P. ),
in early August 1933, and notes on its habits and biology are given by Mathur (1935). ‘The nymphs are active, gregarious and feed at the axils of leaflets and between unfolded

 

 

    

YAMILY PSYLLIDAE 271

 

Fig. 86, Pella murayi, sp. n.—ai fifth stage nymph; bt antenna; et part of leg; de circur-anal pore ring. buds. Youttng growths generally suffer from the psyllid attack. Its nymphal stages arc
described belaw,

Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig. 86a), Length 1-27 mm. Characteristic psylline form. Head
noticeably narrower than abdomen. Eyes and wing-pads large and prominent; the
wing-pads extending beyond the general margin of the body. Dorsum with the derm
largely membranous, except the wing-pads, a pair of large areas occupying most of the
head and the posterior two-thirds of the abdomen being strongly sclerotic. In addition
to these areas, the thorax and the anterior one-third of the abdomen having a number
of small sclerotic areas and strip-like plates respectively. Derm weakly vermiculate
and beset with scattered clavate setae varying in size, and also armed with minute points,
these becoming stronger inthe abdomen and assuming flattened structures in the posterior
plate. Margins of the anterior pair of wing-pads having a number of large spatulate
setae, ranging from 10 to 14, while two large similar setae present at the distal end of
each posterior wing-pad; margin of the posterior abdominal plates bearing a number
of longer spatulate setac. Each eye with one spatulate seta. 272 @SYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Antennae (Fig, 86b) long and slendcr, 0-60 mm long, seven-segmented, bearing few
simple and spatulate setae, two basal segments large and robust, 3rd joint long, longer
than 4th and 5th joints combined together, 4th and 6th joints nearly equal to one another,
but smaller than 5th, 7th joint longest, imbricate, bearing two apical spines, four sensoria
present on segments 3, 5 and 7. Ventral side largely membranous, except for the sclerotic areas at the base of
the antennae, areas on the under side of wing-pads, small thin areas on the anterior
half of the abdomen, while the posterior half almost strongly sclerotic. Derm  heset
with small simple setac and by numerous minute points becoming sharply pointed spines
in the abdominal plates, these plates also armed with few spatulate setae of various
length; the spiracles surrounded by concentric rings of minute points. Legs (Fig. 86c)
moderately large, hearing simple and clavate setae, varying in size; without trochanters;
tach tibia with two spatulate setae, tibio-tarsal articulation distinct, each tarsus with
une curved seta at apex; claws present, the pulvillus large, markedly petiolate, fish-
tail like, Anal area (Fig. 86d) a short distance away from the apex of the abdomen;
the circum-anal ring of pores consisting of a single row of slit-like pores, and an inner
ring of oval pores, and guarded by three pairs (one anterior and two posterior pairs)
of conspicuously thick setae,

Fourth stage. Length 0-93 mm. Resembling the fifth stage, except in having smaller
size, large thoracic and abdominal plates, with antennae five-segmented, bearing three
sensoria, and without tibio-tarsal articulation. Third stage. Length 0-62 mm, differing from the fourth stage in having smaller
wing-pads, with four-segmented antennae, bearing two sensoria; spatulate setae present
in less numbers. Psylia oblongs, sp. n.
(Figs. 87, 88)
Length of body, in male, !-85 mm
Length of forewing, in male, 1-60 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-58 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-35 mm
Length of antennae, 0.32 mm

Colouration. (Preserved male specimen, in a partly damaged condition). General
colour pale clay yellow, with pinkish-red eyes, dorsum and venter of thorax darker than
abdomen. Structure, Body longand slender, Head (Fig. 87a) smaller than thorax, deflexed,
finely and sparsely pubescent and also covered with minute sclerotic plates; vertex large,
somewhat flat, vertically deflexed, broader than long, about twice as broad as long,
slightly swollen on either side of median suture, weakly rounded in front, with two pairs
of foveal impressions on each side of median line, posterior to centre, larger pair circular,
smaller pair somewhat linear, posterior margin almost straight, anterior margin invagi-
nated at point of excision, front ocellus near base of genal cones, large, round, promi-
nent and visible in front; genal cones below the level of vertex, and about one-third

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 273

 

Fig. 87. Palla oblonga, sp. n.—: head, front view; b: antenna; et forewing; dt hind wing; e: third ab-
dominal segment with a papilla; f: male genitalia, lateral view. as long as vertex, slightly broader than long, broad basally, narrow apically, apex sub-
acute, contiguous on inncr margin, surface finely rnugulose. Eyes large, recessive. Antennae (Fig. 87b) small, thick, ten-segmented, bearing few setae, imbricate, two
basal segments robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd subquadrate, 3rd longest, broad api-
cally, narrow basally, 4th about one-third as long as 3rd, 5th slightly smaller than
4th, 6th broad slightly less than half as long as 3rd, 7th equal to 4th, 8th equal to 6th
but smaller in width, 9th and 10th broad and equal to one another, terminal segment
bearing two, long, unequal apical setae, which are about as long as the last two segments
together, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. ‘Thorax scarcely arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Prothorax
transverse, narrower in middle, anterior margin irregular, with a prominent median
point or epiphysis, posterior margin strongly invaginated mcdianally, with two foveal
impressions on each fateral side; prescutum small, broader than long, about twice as
broad as long, broadest beyond middle, narrower anteriorly, angulate laterally, posterior
margin angulate; scutum large, broadest in middle, two and a half times as broad as
long, as long as prescutum, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutellum small,
somewhat triangular in shape, broad anteriorly, gradually narrowed posteriorly; post-
scutellum of meta-thorax with a median ridge. 18

274 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINEN'T

Legs (partly in damaged condition) small and moderately thick, pubescent and armed
with minute points arranged in small lines, tibiac longer than femora, bearing apical
comb of setae, hind fernur with three sensoria-like structures on ventral side, hind tibiae
without basal spur, apicalspines not discernible, perhaps broken; apical tarsal segment
longer than basal, basal tarsal joint of hind leg with two small claw-like spines at apex,
fore and middle coxae moderately large; meracanthus small, thick and triangular. Forewing (only efi side wing present) (Fig. 87¢) somewhat dull, obovate, leaf-shaped,
about three times as long as broad, apex narrowly rounded, pterostigma long and broad
at base, cubital petiole longer than radius, radius and R, almost equal, first marginal
cell long and narrow, sccond marginal cell absent in this wing, basal vein longer than
cubital petiole, forks of veins almost running parallel to one another, veins armed with
microscopic setae; membrane sculptured with small, irregular patches. Hind wing (Fig. 87d) also quite long and narrow, costal vein armed with a few simple
and hooked setae; membrane sculptured as in forewing, patches smaller in size. Abdomen long, somewhat depressed, third abdominal segment (Fig. 87e) with a
small papilla on each side, each papilla beset with a bunch of small setae; segments fincly
and sparsely pubescent and also beset with fine points arranged in Jines. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 87£) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve longer
than forceps, broacler near base and narrower at apex; in profile, anterior margin some-
what convex, posterior margin slightly convex but invaginated in apical half,
outer surface sparsely beset with small, simple setae and with minute points arranged
in lines, anal opening clearly demarcatcd from the rest of valve; parameres small, curved
anteriorly, broad and sub-glubose basally, slender, acuminate and acute apically, basal
outer surface bearing small, simple setac, mesal surface armed with long, thick sefae
directed d'nvnward; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, finely and sparsely pubescent
and armed with minute points arranged in linear series; outer arm of acdeagus very
small, with a large and thick spoon cnd. Host plant. On Albizzia odoratissima Benth,

Type locality. Brook Bonds Tea garden, Borsala, Assam. Type. Described from one male specimen, partly in damaged condition and preserved
in alcohol, together with few nymphal stages. This specimen has been mounted on slide. Holotype male (on slide), from the type locality. Comparison, P. oblonga, sp.n. is recognised by the obovate shape of forewings, quite
broad pterostigma, short antennae, shape of head and genal cones and genital characters,
It resembles closely with P. Ayalina, sp.n. in shape of forewings and venation, but differs
from it in having cubital petiole almost as long as cubitus. Biological notes. Nothing is known about its biology and cconomic importance. Its
nymphal stages are described helow. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig, 88a). Length 1.56 mm. Body of psylline form; head narrower
than abdomen; wing-pads not produced cephalad, but projecting from the side of the
body beyond the prothoracic legs. Dorsum withthe derm largely membranous ¢

 

pt

FAMILY BsyLLpais 275

 

Fig. 88. Paplla oblonga, sp. n.-~at fifth stage nymph; br antenna; et leg; d: circum-anal pore ring. for the weakly sclerotic head plate, occupying most of the head, wing-pads, small thoracic
plates and nearly the posterior two-thirds of the abdomen, showing traces of segmenta-
tion; basal abdominal area with weakly sclerotic transverse strips. Derm partly vermi-
culate and also armed with small broad or flattened points, also beset with minute scattered
clavate setac. Anterior head region with a number of long simple setac; wing-pads
sparsely beset with a number of minute simple marginal setae; cach wing-pad with a
long seta at the distal end. Abdominal margin angulate, having six pairs of angles,
each angle bearing a long seta, caudal margin concavely arcuate, having a pair of
simple, long setae,

Antennac (Fig. 88b) small, 0,03 mm long, slender, apparently six-segmented, two
basal segments robust, terminal segment longest, bearing two sensoria and two apical
spines, remaining two sensoria present on segments 3 and 5. Ventral side membranous throughout, except for weak sclerotic areas of various forms
on the abdomen, a small area about cach of the last four spiracles, and three pairs of
small sub-median areas, and a small area in front of the circum-anal ring and the region
surrounding it, Derm beset with minute points and also minute simple setae, scattered
over the surface. Legs (Fig. 88c) small, bearing smail, simple setac, femora not reaching: the margin

276 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

of the body; without trechanters; tibio-tarsal articulation distinct, claws present, pulvillus
large, triangular end markedly petiolate. ;

Aual opening (Fig. 884) set well in from the caudal margin, the outer circum-anal
ring consisting of a single row of slit-like pores and an inner row of minute oval pores;
lly, and are guarded by two anterior, one lateral

  

both rings are interrupted media:
and one posterior pair of small sete

Fourth stage. Lenguh 1.10 mm. Identical with the fifth stage, except in smaller
body and wing-pads, with anteunae apparently four-segmented having three sensoria
and tibio-tarsal articulation absent. Psylla quadrimaculata, sp. n.
(Fig. 89)
Length of body, in male, 2.18 mm; in female, 2.52 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2.80 mm; in female, 3.12 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0.70 mm
Width of vertcx between eyes, 0.40 mm
Length of antennae, 1.82 mm

Colouration. (Specimens preserved in alcohol). General colour pale to dark-brown,

head, antennae and legs lighter, apical segments of antennae and apices of segments
3 to 7 darker or blackish; thorax with dark-brown longitudinal bands; wings flavus,
with large, broad, brown maculac iu marginal cells, median cell and on clavus; abdomen
with dark-brown scgmental bands,
* Structure, Body long and slender. Head (Fig, 89a) almost as wide as thorax, strongly
deflected, sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex broader than long, about one and
a half times as broad as long along the median suture, disc shallowly depressed, narrow
and gradually rounded anteriorly, minute points present in the anterior region, sides
Parallel along the eyes, with two pairs of foveal impressions posterior to centre, one
pair on each side of median suture, anterior pair larger than the posterior pair, pos-
terior margin weakly arcuate, post-ocellar region slightly swollen, anterior ocellus
visible from above and on level with the ventral margin of anteunal sockets; genal cones
large and robust, about 0:25 mm long, almost as long as vertex, sparsely pubescent
with long hairs, broad basally, separate and divergent, nearly in the same plane with
vertex but separated from it by impressed lines, deflexed sub-vertically, subacute at
apex, a few long hairs present on the ventral side. Antennal sockets large and located
at the sides, upper margin nearly on level with the lower margin of eyes. -Eyes larae,
somewhat recessive,

Antennae (Fig, 89b) long and slender, ten-segmented, sparsely pubescent, imbricate,
two basal segments robust, Ist broadly transverse, broader than long, 2nd cylindrical,
longer than broad, both segments equal in length, 3rd segment longest, segments 4 to
8 progressively decreasing in length, 9th as long as 2nd, terminal segment slightly longer
than 9th, bearing two unequal spines at apex; four sensoria Present on segments
4, 6,8 and 9. .

 

FAMILY -PSYLLIDAE 277

 

Fig. 89, Pella quadrimaculata, sp. n.—az head, front view; bt antenna; et hind leg; ds forewing; et hind
wing; f: anal valve and aedeagus; g: forceps and hypandrium; hs forceps, upper and mesal
surfaces; £s sperm pump; jt female genitalia, lateral view. Thorax large, well arched, sparsely pubescent and finely rugulose. Prothorax collar-
like, convexly rounded, descending and partly concealed below head, narrower medianally
and broader laterally, with two foveal impressions on cach side; propleural suture
oblique, not extending to middle of lateral termination of pronotum; prescutum broader
than long, slightly more than onc and a helf times broader than long, broadest beyond
middle, gradually sloping and narrowly rounded anteriorly, angulate laterally, posterior
margin angulate .sub-medianally; scutum large,- much broader than long, slightly
less than two and a half times broader than long, broadest before middle, about as long

 

278 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

as prescutum, angulate both haerally and posteriorly; scutellum small, vase-shaped,
broad anteriorly and narrow posteriorly, about twice as broad as long, with prominent
antero-lateral angles, posterior margin weakly invaginated; post-scutellum of meta-
thorax large, broadly transverse, with « prominent median ridge. Legs (Fig. 89c) long and slender, coarsely pubescent and also armed with minute
points arranged in linear series, tibiae of fore and middle legs longer than femora, while
of hind legs, tibia nearly as long as fernur, all tibiae with apical comb of setae, hind tibiae
with a strong basal spur, and with five black tooth-like spines at apex (three approxi-
mate and two wide apart), basal tarsal segments of fore and middle legs slightly smaller
than apical, while the tarsi of hind legs are equal in length, basal tarsal segment of
hind legs with two clawelike, black spines at apex; meracanthus large, long and
slender,

Forewings (Fig. 89d) long, transparent, flavus, with large brown maculae present
in marginal cells, median cell and on clavus, clongate-oval, about a little less than two
and a half times as long as broad, rounded at apex, pterostigma long and prominent,
basal vein slightly smaller than radius, radius about twice as long as cubital petiole. and slightly Jess than two and a half times as long as Ry, Ry half as long as basal vein,
Rs quite long and flexed upward near apex, marginal cells unequal, first cell longer and
broader than second marginal cell, costal vein armed with a prominent row of strong
setae, veins microscopically setigerous, membrane beset with minute points in the basal
and marginal regions. Hind wings (Fig. 89e) smaller than forewings, costal vein beset with a few simple and
hooked sctae, membranc bearing uniformly distributed minute points, . Abdomen long and slender, sparsely pubescent and also armed with mimute points
arranged in lines, pubescence longer on sternitcs. Genitalia. Male genital segment smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig, 89£) about
(0-32 mm long, slightly longer than forceps; in profile, broad basally and narrow apically,
anterior margin slightly convex and weakly concave basally, posterior margin broadly
convex, outer surface beset with long, simple setae and also armed with strong minute
points acranged in small lines; parameres (Figs. 89g, h) about 0-30 mm long, slender,
broad basally, almost cylindrical in the apical two-thirds, narrowed at apex and termin-
ating in a black, blunt point, bowed in caudal view, outer surface beset with small, simple
setac, mesal surface thickly armed with strong curved setae, pointing downward, marginal
setae longer than others, three or four thick setac present just below apical point and
directed forward; hypandrium (Fig, 89g) of usual shape and sparsely beset with simple
setae and also armed with strong minute points arranged in lincar series; aedeagus
(Fig. 89£) with the outcr arm smaller than the basal, spoon end simple; sperm pump. as illustrated (Rig. 89i),

Female genital segment (Fig, 89j) almost as long as abdomen; plates subequal, dorsal
plate much longer than ventral, broad basally and narrow caudally, apical region acu-
minate, slender and slightly flexed upward, and sparsely armed with small peg-like setae,
basal region beset with simple setae, setae in centre longer than others, apex roundly
pointed, circum-anal ring composed of double ring of pores: ventral plate much broader

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 279°

at base and acutely pointed at apex, seta numerous in the apical region; ovipositor
acutely pointed. Host plant. Not known. Type locality. Jorhat, Assam. Distribution. Jorhat (Assam) ; Darjeeling (W. Bengal). Types. Described from a small serics, Holotype, male; Allotype, female,
mounted on cards, from the type locality, and collected during February-March 1960
(B. Datta); Paratypes: 1 female, also mounted on card, data same (deposited at
F.R.L, Dehra Dun); 2 examples (male and female), collected during November 1959,
from Botanical Garden, 1,830 m, Darjecling (West Bengal) (preserved in alcohol)
(B. Datta), deposited at Z.S.1., Calcutta,

Comparison. This species is casily separated from the other species, in having four
large maculac in the forewing, long antennac, by the shape of head, with long and robust
genal cones and genital characters,

Paylin santali, sp. n.
(Fig. 90)
Length of body, in male, 1-25 mm; in female, 1-75 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2:38 mm; in female, 2-7 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-72 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-47 mm
Length of antennae, 1-34 mm

Colouration. (Dried, mounted specimens). General colour pale clay yellow; tip of
epiphysis on metathorax black; antennac pale-yellow, with two apical and apices of
segments 4 to 8 black; wings hyaline, transparent, veins yellowish-brown. Structure. Body moderately long. Head (Fig. 90a) large, slightly broader than
thorax, declivous, fincly and sparscly pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex broad, about
halfas long as broad along the median suture, disc becoming narrower anteriorly on cach
side ofanterior ocellus, with two pairs of foveal impressions posterior to centre, on cach side
of median line, rounded downward in front, posterior margin weakly emarginate, post-
ocellar region strongly swollen, front occllus visible in front and located at the point of
excision of median line; genal cones large, about 0-22 mm long, slightly shorter than vertex,
deflexed vertically downward, but scparated from vertex by impressed line, separate,
divergent, subacute or narrowly rounded at apex, fincly rugulose, sctac on ventral side
longer-than that of vertex, Eyes large, bulging. .

Antennac (Fig. 90b) long and slender, ten-segmented, bearing few setae, two basal
segments robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd somewhat quadrate, remaining segments
imbricate, 3rd and 7th longest but equal, 4th, 5th, 6th and 8th equal to one another and
each slightly smaller than 3rd, 9th a Jittle smaller than apical segment and about one-
third as long as 8th, terminal segment having two uncqual apical spincs, four sensoria
present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9,

Thorax large, robust, strongly arched, slightly shorter than the width of head including
eyes, finely and sparsely pubescent, strongly rugulose, Prothorax convexly rounded,

280 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 90. Pola santali, sp. n—a head, front view; br antenna; ct hind leg; dt forewing, et hind wing;
£: male genitalia, lateral view; g: anal valve, outer surface; hr parameres, outer and mesal
rurfaces; ft aedeagus; J: sperm pump; la fernale genitalia, lateral view; I: dorsal plate. descending, longer in centre than at sides, with two decp foveal impressions and two small
swollen areas on each lateral side; propleural suture extending obliquely to posterior
part of lateral extremity of pronotum; prescutum broader than long, about twice as broad,
as long, broadest near about middle, narrower both anteriorly and posteriorly, engulate
both laterally and posteriorly; scutum large, about twice as broad as long, broadest near
about centre, disc somewhat shallowly depressed mid-dorsally, giadually sloping laterally,
angulate posteriorly and laterally, slightly longer than prescutum; scutellum broadly
transverse, anterior margin concave, with prominent antero-lateral angles, about twice
as broad as long, slightly narrower posteriorly, posterior margin weakly invaginated in

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE * 281

middle; post-scutellum of metathorax also broadly transverse, somewhat rectangular in
shape, with a strong, median, subacute, black epiphysis, area near posterior angles swollen. Legs (Fig. 90c) long, pubescent, femora shorter than tibiac, all tibiac with apical comb
of setae, hind femur with 3 to 4 thick, dorsal spines near apex; hind tibiae without basal
spur, with five black tooth-like spines at apex (4 on one side and 1 on the other), basal
tarsal segments smaller than apical segments, hind proximal tarsus with two black claw-
like spines at apex; meracanthus large, triangular, having roundly pointed apex. .

Forewings (Fig. 90d) somewhat smaller, variable in size, about two and a half times as
long as broad, clear, transparent, with ycllowish tinge, veins yellowish-brown; pterostigma
rather small and long, broad at base, about half as long as radial sector; apex narrowly
rounded, basal vein longer than radius, radius slightly longer than cubital petiole, cubitus
almost as long as basal vein, radial sector quite long and slightly flexed, first marginal
cell a little longer but much broader than second, veins besct with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 90e) small, membrane beset with minute points, basa\ half of costal
margin armed with few simple and hooked sctae. Abdomen small, sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute points arranged in
scrial lines, setae on sternites slightly longer, anterior segments with humps. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 90f) smaller than abdomen, pubescent. Anal
valve (Fig. 90g) about 0-38 mm long, longer than paramcres, pear-shaped in anterior
view, sometimes deflected caudad, in profile, anterior margin weakly convex, posterior
margin convex basally and slightly invaginated in the apical half, upper surface beset
with simple setae; parameres (Fig. 90h) about 0-28 mm long, rather slender, broad
basally and gradually narrowed apically, terminating in an acute black point, sides sub-
parallel, in caudal aspect evenly bowed to nearly touching sharp apices, upper surface
beset with small simple setae, marginal sctac slightly longer, a small group of thick setae
present on the mesal surface just below apex; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, finely
and sparsely pubescent; acdeagus (Fig. 904) simple, outer arm smaller than basal; sperm
pump as figured (Fig. 90j). Female genitalia alrnost as long as abdomen, slender (Fig. 90k), pubescent. Dorsal
plate (Fig. 90 1) longer than ventral, elongate, gradually sloping and weakly wavy and
acuminate caudad, caudal end slightly upturncd and narrowly roundcd apically, apical
region beset with minute pcg-like setae, basal region armed with small simple setae, setae
in middle long; circum-anal pore ring somewhat oval and composcd of double ring
of pores; ventral plate sparsely pubescent, brozd basally and acutely pointed apically,
apical region armed with minute peg-like sctae; lateral valvulae with weakly sclerotic
ridges on sides towards apex; ovipositor eoacrted and acutely pointed,

Host plant. On Santalum album Linn. Type locality. Aiyur, North Salem (Tamil Nadu). Distribution. North Salem and Vellore District (Tamil Nadu). Types. Described from a small series of specimens, some specimens are in poor con-
dition. Holotype male, 13.3.31 (plot 20); Allotype female, 16.7.31  (plotl9),
both from the type locality (F.R.I. Sandal Survey); Paratypes: 2 males, 9.4.31 (No. 954, 955), 2 males of 12.4.31 (plot 19); 2 females of 6.3.31, 10 females of 13.3.31,.1 female

282 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

of 21.3.31, 2 females of 28.3.31 (plot 20); 2 females of 12,4.31 (plot 19), 1 female of 16.5.31
(plot 20), 1 female of 12.6.31 (plot 20); all from Aiyur, North Salem (F.R.I. Sandal
Survey) 1 female of 4.9.31, Kottur 1,128 m, Vellore Dist. All types are deposited at
F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Comparison. Psylia santali, sp. n., is distinguishable from other species by having smaller
wings, venation, radius longer than cubital petiole, pterostigma small, genac quite long,
shape of genae, hind tibia without basal spur, and genital characters. Biological notes. This species was collected during the Sandal Insect Survey, in order to
find out the vector of the spike disease of sandal and is not incriminated in the transmission
of disease. It is a rave species and has been recorded during March, April, May and
June, from Aiyur, North Salem. From Kottur, Vellore District, it has been recorded
in September also. Not much is known about this sap-sucker. Paylla sp. near simlae Crawford
(Fig. 91)
Crawford, D, L, 1912. Rec. Indian Mus, 7(8)2 426, pl. xxxiil, figs. S, T: pl, xxxv, fig, S (Simla, West
Himalayas, altitude 7,000 ft.). Mathur, R. N. 1985. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2): 60-62 (Psplla sp.) (Biology). Beeson, C.F. C, 1941, Forest Insects, p. 781 (Biological notes). Mathur, R. N. 1954. Indian J. Ent. 16(8) : 247-249, figs. 1-3 (Nymphal stages). Length of body, in male, 1-34 mm; in female, 150 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-96 mm; in female, 2-27 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-65 mm

Width of vertex between cyes, 0:37 mm

Length of antennae, 1-18 mm

Colouration, General colour brown, head, legs and antennae lighter brown, antennae
black from apex of third to terminal segments, genal cones black, wings hyaline, trans-
parent, with a black spot at tip of clavus. :

Structure. Body small. Head (Fig. 91a) rather large and almost as broad as thorax,
deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Vertex much broader than long,
descending, almost flat or weakly swollen on cither side of median suture, with a small
fovea on each side of suture, posterior to centre, lobes rather triangular. in shape, slightly
rounded in front, post-ocellar region slightly swollen, posterior margin angulately arcuate,
anterior-margin cmarginate et point of excision, front ocellus visible in front; genal cones
large, about 0-2 mm long, almost as long as vertex, slightly declinate from plane of vertex;
separated therefrom: by a deeply impressed line, slightly divergent, subacute at apex,
briefly pubescent and also armed with minute points arranged in lines, hairs slightly
longer than that of vertex, each cone with a long yentral seta. Eyes large, recessive toward. thorax, somewhat hemispherical.

. Antennae (Fig. 91b) long, slender except two robust basal segments, ten-segmented,
imbricate, having few setae, Ist segment broadly transverse, 2nd cylindrical, 3rd longest
and about twice as Jong as 4th, 4th, 6th and 7th nearly equal to one another and about
half as long as 3rd, 5th and 8th equal but slightly smaller than 4th, 9th half as long as

- FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 283

 

Fig. 91. Pyilla sp. near simlae Crawford—ai head, front view; br antenna; et hind leg; dt forewing; et
hind wing; f male genitalia, lateral view; gt parameres; ht sperm pump; i: female genitalia,
lateral view; j: dorsal plate. .

8th, terminal segment slightly longer than 9th, bearing two unequal apical setac; four
sensoria present on segments 4,6, 8 and 9. ‘Thorax small, somewhat arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, reticulate, Prothorax
rither small, descending, convex, with two foveal impressions on cach lateral side; pro-
pleurites long, epimeron small; prescutum broader than long, gradually narrowed. anteriorly, broad posteriorly beyond middle, angulate both laterally and posteriorly;
scutum nearly as long as prescutum, much broader than long, angulate laterally, posterior
margin also angulate; scutellum narrowly transverse, almost twice as broad as long,
anterior margin somewhat straight, with prominent antero-lateral angles. Legs (Fig. 91e) normal, sparsely pubescent with fine setae and also beset with minute
points arranged in lines, femora smaller than tibiae, all tibiae with a comb of apical
setae, hind femur armed with three to six thick lanceolate seiae just near apex and with
three sensoria-like structures in centre of ventral side, hind tibiae with a smalf basal spur
and four black apical spines on one side and one on the other, basal tarsal segment

284 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

smaller than apical, hind basal tarsal joint with two black claw-like spines at apex;
meracanthus small, slender and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 91d) hyaline, oblong-ovate, membranc beset with minute points, with
a long, rather broad pterostigma, radius long and slightly smallcr than basal vein, cubital
petiole smaller and a little more than half as loug as radius, radial sector longer than
media from point of forking, cubital petiole about one-third as long as cubitus, marginal
cells sul-equal, first cell as long as second but broader than the latter; veins armed with
microscopic sctae,

Hind wings (Fig. 91e) quite large, uniformly bearing minute points, costal margin
with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen small, finely and sparscly pubescent and also armed with minute points
arranged in lines, sternites with longer setae. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 91£) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve about
0:27 mm long, longer than forceps, somewhat pear-shaped in dorsal aspect, in profile,
anterior margin straight or weakly convex, posterior margin gradually narrowed from
base to apex, becoming invaginated bclow apex, upper surface sparsely beset with simple
setae and also armed with minute points arranged in lines; parameres (Fig. 91g)
about 0-19 mm long, slender, sides sub-parallel, converging gradually to apex, apex
sharply curved mesad and cephalad as a black, small, subacute point, in caudal view,
forceps bowed together forming an ellipse, upper surface bearing sparse sctac, mesal
surface and margins armed with thick setae pointing downwards, a strong, thick seta
directed downward also present just below apex; hypandrium of usual shape, bearing
sparse simple setae; outer arm of aedeagus smaller than basal, with the spoon end like
a hook; sperm pump as figured (Fig, 91h). Female genitalia (Fig. 912) smaller than abdomen, pubescent. Dorsal plate (Fig. 91j)
longer than ventral, gradually sloping caudally, acuminate and subacute. apically,
four pairs of Tong hairs present in centre, apical region armed with minute peg-like setae,
circum-anal ring longer than broad and composed of a double ring of pores; ventral
plate broad basally, acutely pointed apically, bearing minute peg-like setae; 3 ovipositor
acutely pointed. Host plant. On young and fresh leaves and inside flower buds of Bauhinia variegala
Linn,

Distribution. Previously recorded from Simla, West Himalayas, altitude 2,135 m
(N. Annandale) (Crawford, 1912). Material examined. This species was recorded from New Forcst, Dehra Dun, during
1932-33, on Bauhinia variegata and is quite common on this food-plant, In edition to
31 specinens, bred during March 14-15, 1932, there are three examples of 14,3,1932,
12 ex. of 15,3.32, 27 ex. of 22.3.32, 14 ex. of 25,.3.32, end 6 ex, of 26.3.32 (Expt. No, 367),
New Forest, Dehra Dun, bred on Bauhinia variegata (R. N. Mathur); the preserved material
consisted of many adults and numerous nympha] stages, from New Forest and collected
during 1932 (Expt. No. 367), 12.4.41, 30.4.45, 15.4.46 and 12.4.52 from Dehra Den
(R.N. Mathur) ; 20 examples from Dehra Dun U.P. and collected on 17.4.34, on Bauhinia
variegata (G. D. Bhasin). FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 285

Comparison. Crawford (1912) described Psylla simlae from one female specimen and
its type (No. 9701/18) is in very poor condition, at the Zoological Survey of India, Cal-
cutta. On examination of the type, it was found that only head without entennee is
present, sticking to the pin, No food plant data is available and Crawford’s description
is rather meagre, and therefore, the species bred on Bawhinia variegata could not be con-
firmed with the type. However, the characters show grcat resemblence to this species. Pending examination of matcrial from the type locality, I am reluctantly placing the
species only very close to simlae. This spccics is easily recognised in having black genal
cones, vertex strongly rounded, oblong-ovate forcwings, radius longer than cubital
petiole, hind tibia with a basal spur and genital structures. Biological notes. Its biology, seasonal history, etc., hes been studied by Mathur (1935),
under Psylla sp. Bricf biological notes are also given by Beeson (1941). This species
is quite common on Bauhinia variegata at Dehra Dun, and in heavy infestations, it causes
serious damzge to leaves and young buds and flowers. The leaves eppcar sickly and
eventually succumb to the attack, The flowers shrivel, fail to develop end drop to the
ground. The injury results in a reduced rate of growth and unthrifty condition of the
infested trees. Young plants are dwarf and stunted. ‘The nymphal stages are described by Mathur (1954). Poylla sp. 1
(Fig. 92)
Length of body, in male, 1-65 mm; in female, 2:20 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 25 mm; in female, 2.9 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-68 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-40 mm
Length of antennae, 1-32 mm

Colouration. Gcneral colour dark-orange to dark-brown, with greenish tinge, vertex
dark-orange and white near point of excision, along median suture and posterior border ;
genal cones ycllowish-brown basally, smoky distally; antennae dark-brown except
terminal segments and apices of other segments black; pronotum black cephalad and white
or varicgated with orange along posterior half, dorsum of thorax dark-orange, pres-
cutum bordered with white on hind margin, anterior Jateral angles of scutellum white,
post-scutellum of meta-thorax black, venter of thorax dark-brown; logs yellowish-brown,
femora partly dark-brown, last tarsal segments black; abdomen fuscous, yellowish-brown
inter-segmentally, first three abdominal segments white laterally; male and female
genitalia fuscous; wings clear, hyaline, veins darker, with a conspicuous black spot at
tip of clavus. . Structure. Body long and moderately robust, Head (Figs. 92a, b) slightly broader
than thorax, moderately declivous, fincly and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex
large and, broad, slightly more than twice as broad as long, gradually: bent forward and
downward anteriorly, with two deep circular foveae near posterior margin and on
either side of median line, anterior margin deeply emarginate at point of excision, post-
erior margin arcuate,” regions near posterior occlli and near inner margin of eyes

286 PSYLLIDAE OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 92. Pylla sp, 1—at head, front view; bt head and part of thorax, lateral view; er antenna; di hind
legs e: forewing; f: hind wing; gz male genitalia, lateral aspect; ht forceps, outer and mesal
surfaces; is sperm pump; j: female genitalia, lateral view. swollen, front ocellus scarcely visible from above; genal cones large, about 0-18 mm long,
almost as long as vertex, vertical, broad basally and subacute apically, not contiguous,
divergent distally, beset with long setae and also with minute points arranged in linear
series, Eyes large, somewhat hemispherical. Antennae (Fig. 92c) long and slender, imbricate, two basal segments robust, Ist
broadly transverse, 2nd subquadrate, 3rd longest, 4th about one-fifth smaller than 3rd,
5th, 6th and 7th cqual but smaller than 4th, 8th about half as long as 3rd, 9th and 10th
equal but smaller than other slender segments, terminal segment with two unequal,
apical setae, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax (Fig. 92b) large and robust, strongly arched, fincly and sparsely pubescent,
finely rugulose. Pronotum partly concealed by the head, convexly rounded, descending,
bearing two transverse submedian, swollen pads and one round swollen knob on cach
lateral side-and near the posterior border, with foveal impressions in between; prescutuin

FAMILY Ps¥LLIDAR 987

broader than long, about one and a half times as broad as long, broadest beyond middle,
narrowly rounded anteriorly, angulate both laterally and posteriorly, scutum large and
broad, almost as long as prescutum, about twice as broad as long, broadest before middle,
disc flat dorsally, sloping laterally, angulate laterally, posterior margin extending mcdia-
nally into the concavity of scutellum; scutellum transverse, broad anteriorly and narrow
posteriorly, anterior border concave, anterior lateral angles prominent, weakly invagi-
nated, laterally and posteriorly; post-scutellum of meta-thorax with three epiphys’

Legs (Fig. 92d) long, pubescent, hairs longer ventrally, femora shorter than tibiae, all
tibiae with a com) of setae at apex, hind tibiae with a small basal spur at base and five
black thick setae at apex, tarsi nearly cqual in length, hind basal tarsal segment with
two claw-like spines at apex; meracanthus long and slender,

Forewings (Fig. 92e) large, hyaline, clongate-ovate, slightly less than two and a half’
times as long as broad, broadly rounded at apex, ptcrostigma long and broad, radius
(R) about one and a half times as long as cubital petiole (M+Cu), basal vein slightly
Yonger than radius, first marginal cell slightly longer and broader than second; veins
setigerous, with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 92£) large, transparent, thickly and uniformly beset with minute
points, costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked sctae,

Abdomen large and robust, longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent, and also
armed with minute points arranged in rows. Genitalia. Male genital-segment (Fig. 92g) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve about
0-28 mm long and scarcely longer than forceps; when scen laterally, convex caudad,
nearly straight or weakly convex cephalad, narrow both basally and apically, broadest
in basal half, outer surface beset with long setae; paramercs (forceps) (Fig. 92h) slender,
in caudal view, strongly convex laterally, curved inside, terminating in a bhintly round
apex, outer surface armed with small simple setae, mesal surface beset with thick setae
pointing downward, a small group of thick setae also present directed downward, just
below apex; outer arm of acdcagus small, with a weak loop; hypandrium simple, of
usual shape, bearing sparse setae; sperm pump as figurecl (Fig. 92i). Female genital segment (Fig, 92j) smaller than abdomen, nearly horizontal, pubescent
with long hairs. Dorsal plate longer than ventral, broad basally, gradually sloping pos-
teriorly, roundly pointed apically; ventral plate bread basally, acutely pointed apically;
sctac longer in the posterior half, apical region of both plates armed with minute, thick
setae, anal pore ring composcd of a double row of pores. Host plants. On Stranvaesia glaucescens Lindl., Pyrus pashia Buch-Ham. and Pyrus vistata
Wall., and Pyrus communis Linn,

Material examined. On Stranvaesia glaucescens Lindl. : 1 male and 7’ females, collected
on 18.3.59 and 5 males and 15 females, collected on !1,3.1960, all from New Forest,
Dehra. Dun (U.P.) (R.N. Mathur), with nymphal stages, the latter were preserved
in.alcohol. On Pyrus vistata Wall. : 5 males and 7 funales, collected on 27.2.51, from New Forest,
Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur), and some adults and nymphal stages, preserved i in alcohol,
having the same data,

 

288 PS¥LLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

On Pyrus pashia Buch-Ham. : 2 males and 8 females, collected on 13.3.59, from New
Forest, Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur). On Pyrus communis Linn. : 33 cxamples collected during March-April, 1936; 3 examples
of March, 1937 and 7 examples of February, 1963; and some adults and nymphal stages
preserved in alcohol(4 phials), collected in February and March, 1938, 1941, 1953 and
1955. Comparison, Psylla sp. resembles closely with Pylla mali Schmbd. and P, pyricola
Forst., in most characters. Two specimens (f, $) were sent to Dr V.F. Eastop
of the British Museum, for comparison with P. mali. He writes (in litt. ): “They do
not seem to be one of the European species, and we have a few nymphs from Pyrus sent
in many years ago from the Himalayas which do not agree with the nymphs of any of
the European Rosaceae-feeding Psylla”. Heslop-Harrison (1946, Ent. mon. Mag. 82,
p.36) has mentioned: “No authentic records seem to exist for India, for the insects
to which the name has heen applied are polyvoltine, whereas P, mali is univoltine, How-
ever, the habits of the Indian insect may be different from those found in Europe.”
Its specific name is, therefore, deferred till more biological observations are known in
detail. Attempts to subdivide them yet would result in confusion only. Peylla viburni Loew 1876
Figs. 93, 94)
Loew, F. 1876, Verh. zoal.-bot, Ges. Wien, Bd, 26: 194-196,
Oshanin, B. 1907, Ann, d. Mus. Zool, de 0 Ac. imp. des Se. Petersburg, Ba, 122 355. Edwards, J. 1908, Entomologist’ mon. Mag. 45: 35. Sule, K. 1909. Sitz. Ber, Bok, Ges. wiss, No. 22:20. Aulmann, G. 1913, Ppllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 28,
Horvath, G, 1918, Faun. Reg. Hang., H. 81 58,
Haupt, H. 1935, Poylloidea, Tierwelt Mitteleur. 4, p. X, 234,
Heslop-Harrison, G. 1936. Trans. north Nat. Un. 1(4): 221. Schaefer, H, A. 1949. Mitt. schweiz. ent. Ges, 22: 49,
Shinji, O. 1949, Kontyu 17(6)+ 17. Vondricek, K. 1957. Fauna C.S.R. Praha, Cerkoslovenska akademie Ved. t, 9126-228. Miyatake, Y. 1963. 7. Fac. Agric, Kyushu Univ. 12(4) 341-42,
Dobreanu, E. and Manolache, C, 1962. Fauna Repub. pop. rom, Insecta Vol. 8, Fase, 3, pp. 210-12,
figs, 144-146. Length of body, in male, 2:12 mm; in female, 2-69 mm. Length of forewings, in male, 2:71 mm; in female, 3-12 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-80 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-47 mm

Length of antennae, 1-35 mm. Colowration. (Preserved specimens in alcohol). General colour pale clay yellow,
with a little darker thorax, apical segments of antennae and labium black, Wings
transparent with flavus tinge, veins flavus, with a small dark-brown spot near clavus,

Structure. Body moderately robust, Head (Fig. 93a), including eyes, almost as broad
as thorax, moderately deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, strongly rugulose; vertex

VAMILY PsYLLIDAR, 289

025 mm
0-5 mm
~

 

Fig. 93. Psylla vibumi Locw—~as head, front view; br antenna; et hind leg; d: forewing; e: hind wing;
fi male genitalia, lateral view; g: anal valve and aedeagus; i parameres; i: sperm pump;
jz female genitalia, lateral view. broader than long, about twice as wide as long, posterior margin arcuate, with deep
foveal impressions, posterior (o centre, one on either side of median suture, disc swollen
anteriorly and along the eyes, post-ocellar region also swollen, anterior margin deeply
emarginate, anterior ocellus visible from above; genal cones large, about 0:20 mm long,
almost as long as vertex, pubescent, pubescence longer than on vertex, broad basally,
divergent, subacute at apex, apices slightly directed outward, thickly beset with minute
points. Antennae (Fig. 93b) broken in all specimens, except the two basal segments; one antenna
without two basal segments found in alcohol, with the preserved specimens and mounted
on slide: Ist basal segment robust, quadrate, 2nd small, cylindrical, remaining segments
slender, imbricate, having few setae, 3rd segment longest, one and a half times longer
than 4th, 4th slightly longer than 5th, 6th and 7th equal to one another, 8th smaller

19

290 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

than 7th, 9th smallest, half as long as 8th, 10th slightly longer than 9th, having two,
unequal spines at apex, sensoria present on 4, 6, 8 and 9 segments. ‘Thorax large, moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Pronotum greatly deflexed, partly concealed behind head, descending, convexly rounded,
slightly longer medianally and narrower latcrally, with foveal impressions on cach side;
prescutum with a median line, slightly more than one and a half times broader than long,
broadest in middle, narrowly rounded anteriorly, acutely angled faterally, posterior
margin also angled submedianally; scutum somewhat flat dorsally, nearly as long as
preseutum, about two and a half times as broad as long, broadest in middle, gradually
sloping and angulate laterally; scutellum transverse, broad anteriorly with prominent
antero-lateral angles, narrow posteriorly, anterior margin moderatcly concave, postcrior
margin with a tendency toward angulation and with a shallow median cmargination;
pseudonotum of metathorax quite large, broadly transverse, having a pair of papilla-like
processes on the lateral sides and a prominent median ridge. Legs (Fig. 93c) partly broken in all specimens, of medium size, pubescent and also
thickly beset with rows of minute points, femora smaller than tibiae, hind tibia with a
small basal spur and with five long, stout black spines at apex, basal scgmcnt of hind tarsi
with two stout black spines at apex, apical tarsal segments slightly longer than basal
segments of legs; meracanthus quite long, slender and acutely conical. Forewings transparent (Fig. 93d), oblong-ovate, about two and a half times as long
as broad, with rounded apex, pterostigma long and narrow, Rs flexcd downward near
apex, cubital petiole (M+Cu) smaller than radius (R), R, as long zs cubital petiole,
basal vein slightly smaller than cubitus, first marginal cell as long as but broader thar. second, surface }oeset with minute points and all veins armed with minute setae (visible
under high power). Hind wings (Fig. 93e) moderately long, membrane thickly besct with minute points,
costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen longer than broad, finely and sparsely beset with minute points arranged
in small lines. Genitalia. Male genital scgment (Fig. 93£) shorter than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 93g) slightly longer than parameres, about 0-32 mm long, when viewed laterally, broad
basally, narrow apically, truncate at apex, anterior margin almost straight, posterior
margin convex in basal two-thirds, concave below apical half, outer surface sparsely
beset with long setae and rows of minute points; paramercs (Fig. 93h) about 0-28 mm
long, broad basally and gradually narrowed apically in lateral view, strongly bowed
when scen posteriorly, outer surface beset with few simple sctac, mesal surface armed
with thick and curved sctac directed downward, sctae numerous in the basal region,
apex terminating in a black acute point, a group of 4 or 5 thick setae pointing downward
present just below apex; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, bearing sparse pubescence;
outer arm of aedeagus slightly smaller than basal, with a simple spoon end (Fig. 93g);
sperm pump as figured (Fig; 93%). Female genital segment (Fig, 93j) nearly as long as abdomen, sparsely pubescent, setac
longer in middle, both plates broad basally, dorsal plate longer than ventral, dorsal

FAMILY PSYLLIDAR 291

surface slightly depressecl midway, slender and acuminate in distal half, apex roundly
pointed ; ventral plate acutely pointed, the apical portion of both plates armed with short. heavier setae; circum-anal ring quite long, occupying nearly the basal half, with a double
row of pores; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. On leaves of Viburnum sp. Distribution. This species is fairly widely distributed and has been recorded from
Central Europe; rare and very local in England. This insect feeds normally on Piburnum
lontana (Heslop-Harrison, 1936); Tokyo (Shinji, 1949); Honshu, Kyshu, Tokyo (Miya-
take, 1963); Austria, France, choslovakia, Rumania (Ddbreanu and Manolache,
1962}. From India, this is the first record from Lete, Central Nepal. and Chopal
(ELP,). Material examined. A small collection preserved in alcohol, was received from the
LA.R.I., New Delhi, having this data: Lete. C. Nepal, 4.5.61., on Viburnum sp. (No.V). (S-R. Wadhi). From this material 7 males and 2 females were mounted on cards,
and the damaged parts of few examples were mounted on slides. Few nymphal
stages were collected from Bhairog Chopal, 2,440 m (Himachal Pradesh), on 22.5.67. (Viburnum sp.). Four males and one female deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun, and the
remaining material consisting of 3 males and | female returned to the former Institute. New Delhi. Comparison. Psylla viburnt Loew is redescribed here from the Indian material and is
characterised by the shape of forewing which is oblong-ovate, radius longer than cubital
petiole, genal cones long, thick and subacute at apices, hind tibia with a basal spur,
and genital structures,

Biological notes. Its biology is not known. The nymphs are reported to have locen
collected feeding on the young leaves of Viburnum sp., growing in higher ranges of the
Himalayas. The nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig. 94a). Length 2-21 mm. Of the characteristic psylline type; head
noticeably narrower than abdomen, wing-pads large and project beyond the contour
of the body and not produced cephalad. Lyes large and prominent. Derm membranous,
except the large sclerotic head plate, the wing pads, several small sclerites on the thorax
and with four small strip-like ‘plates on each of the first two abdominal segments and two
large transverse plates on the next two, and a slightly more than half apical sclerotic
plate. Derm weakly vermiculate in the sclerotic arcas, and also beset with spatulate
setae of various length and small clavate setac. The wing-pads and the caudal plate
having a number of spatulate setae and Jong, variously curved setae along the margins,
apex of hind wing-pads with two spatulate setac and posterior margin strongly armce
with thick setae and points, Abdominal sclerotic areas also armed sparsely with thick
points. Ventral side largely membranous except for the sclerotic areas at the base of the
antennae, an apical plate surrounding the circum-anal ring, small aveas around
each spiracle which are broad and conspicuous in the thoracic and in the last three abdo-

292 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

 

Fig. 94. Poylla vibumi Loew—a: fifth stage nymph; br antenna; et part of leg dt circum-anal
pore ring,

minal spiracles, and four pairs of small submedian transverse abdominal plates. Ven-
tral surface of the wing-pads armed with two zones having numerous thick points. Derm
beset with minute points and sparsely with simple ring-bascd setae. Antennae (Figs
94b) 1:27 mm long, situated ventrally, seven-segmented, two basal segments robust,
rest all slender, penultimate and terminal segments imbricate, sparsely beset with simple
and spatulate setae, 3rd segment long, 4th, Sth and 6th small, 7th segment longer than
3rd, bearing two uncqual apical spines, four sensoria present on 3, 5 and 7 segments. Legs (Fig. 94c) small, bearing simple and spatulate setae, the femora not reaching the
margin of the body; without wochanters; tibio-tarsal articulation well-defined; claws
present; pulvillus large, fish-tail like and quite markedly petiolate. Anal opening (Fig. 94d) ventral, set forward a short distance from the end of the abdomen, surrounded by
an outer row of slit-like pores and an inner ring of well-defined oval pores, both rings are
interrupted medially, and are guarded by two anterior pairs of long sctac. Fourth stage. Length 1-25 mm. Identical with the fifth stage, except for smaller
size, thoracic and abdominal sclerites quite broad, antennae five-segmented with three
sensoria, one sensorium on 3rd and two sensoria on 5th segments; tibio-tarsal articulation
absent. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 293

Poylla znicevi Sule 1915
(Figs. 95, 96)
Sulc, K. 1915. Rozpr. ceske Akad, Trida 1, roc, XXIV. cis. 5, pp. 92-35, Tab. XXIV. Ossiannilsson, F. 1943. Tromso Mus. Arshefter Naturhistorisk Avd, Nr. 28, (Vol. 65 (1942), Nr. 1], pp. 24-25, figs, 8-7, (Pyle sootryeni). Osiiannilsson, F. 1951. Kungl. Fys. Sallsk. Hand!. NP, Bd, 61(2), Psyllina, pp. 5557, (Palla soot
zytni. Oss.). Ossiannilsson, F. 1952, Opuse. Ent. 17: 198-99 (Norway, Finland; under Psylla sootryeni). Lindberg, H. and Ossiannilsson, F. 1960. Fauna fern, 8: 16 (Psylla zaivevi Sulc). Loginova, M. M. 1964, ced. Sti. Inst. Biology, p, 472, pl. 215, figs. 9-11, U.SS.R. Loginova, M.M. 1967. Ann. Zool. Warsawa, 24(7): 234-35, figs, 15-18,

Pyylla zaicevi Sule is redescribed from the specimens collected in India, for the
first time. Length of body, in male, 2-22 mm; in female, 2-40 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2:90 mm; in female, 3:10 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0:70 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-43 mm

Length of antennae, 1:13 mm. Colouration. General colour pale-brown, with black bands on thorax; pleurae and
sternites black; tergites and sternites of abdomen partly black; vertex blackish around
foveac; antennac blackish from segments 4 to 10; genae pale-brown dorsally and blackish
ventrally; coxae and legs partly black; genital segments blackish-brown; forewings
clear, bearing a light blackish area along margin at tip of clavus; pterostigma darker. Structure. Body large and strong. Head (Figs. 95a,b) slightly smaller than thorax,
moderately declivous, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex about twice
as broad as long, swollen anteriorly and also on either side of median suture, leaving
two deep foveal impressions, post-ocellar region also swollen ; posterior margin moderately
arcuate; anterior margin deeply emarginate at the point of excision; front ocellus visible
from above; genal cones about 0-20 mm long and slender, below the level and about
as long as vertex, bearing sparse hairs, separate, divergent distally, bluntly rounded
apically, beset with microscopic points arranged in rows, hairs longer than that of yertex. Eyes large and bulging. Antennae (Fig: 95c) quite long, longer than head including eyes, ten-segmented, hairy,
two basal segments robust, Ist sub-quadrate, 2nd cylindrical, slightly longer than lst,
remaining segments slender and imbricate, 3rd joint longest, 4th, 6th and 7th equal
to one another, but smaller than 3rd, 5th slightly smaller than 4th, 8th slightly smaller
than 5th, 9th about half as long as 8th, terminal segment slightly longer than 9th, having
two long, unequal sctae at apex; four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax (Fig. 95h) quite large, moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent,
prominently rugulose, Prothorax narrow, inclined downward under the head, convex,
having two foveal impressions on each lateral side; prescuturn broader than long, narrowly
rounded anteriorly and broadly rounded posteriorly except at the weak posterior angles,

294 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 95. Paylla zaiceni Sule.—-a: head, front view; bs head and part of thorax, Jateral views ex antenna;
di hind leg; ey fi forewings; g: hind wing; hz male genitalia fateral view; 4, jt parameres, mesal
and outer views; ke: sperm pump; It female genitalia, lateral view. angulate laterally; scutum quite broad, about twice as broad as long, nearly as long as
prescutum, angulate laterally; scutellum small, broadly transverse, broad anteriorly
and narrow posteriorly, posterior margin weakly invaginatcd medianally. Legs (Fig, 95d) moderately long, coarsely pubescent with long setae, femora shorter
than tibiae, all tibiae with a comb of'setac at apex and a few thick setae just below apex,
hind femur with three sensoria-like structures ventrally, hind tibia with a small basal
spur and five black long sctae at apex, basal tarsal joint with two claw-like black spines
at apex; meracanthus small, slender and triangular. + FAMILY PSYLLIDAE - 295

Forewings (Fig. 95e) large, apex narrowly rounded, with a long pterostigma, radius
about as long as basal vein, M-+Cu smaller than radius and about as long as R,, first
marginal cell slightly smaller than second ; veins armed with microscopic setae, membrane
Lesct with minute points, In one cxample, a small vein joining the radial sector and
media present in forewing (Figs 95f). Hind wings (Fig. 95g) small, beset with minute points, costal margin with a few
simple and hooked setae, in the basal half. Abdomen longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent, sctac longer on sternites. Genitalia. Male genitalia (Fig. 95h) smaller than abdomen, Anal valve about
0-35 mm long, longer than parameres; in lateral aspect, anterior margin nearly straight,
posterior margin convex, gradually narrowed both apically and basally, upper surface
beset with long simple setac; parameres (Figs. 954, j) about 0-30 mm long, bilobate,
inner lobe stout and thick, terminating in an abrupt black broad apex, posterior angle
of apex broadly rounded while the anterior angle bluntly rounded, outer lobe slightly
longer than inner lobe; in lateral aspect, broadest in middle and narrower both apically
and basally, margins of outer lobe irregular, apical half black, outer surface sparsely
beset with simple setae of yarying size, mesal surface of inner lobe armed with somewhat
thick setae pointing downwards and a cluster of strong and thick setae in the basal region;
hypandrium of usual shape, bearing sparse, simple setae; outcr arm of aedeagus smaller
than basal; sperm pump as figured (Rig. 95lk). Female genital segment (Fig. 951) longer than abdomen; dorsal plate longer than
ventral, pubescent with small hairs, slender towards subacute apex, thickened dorsally
at extreme apex, with tip upturned, slender apical region armcd with numierous peg-
like setae; anal opening surrounded by a double ring of pores; ventral plate acute at

apex, having numerous peg-like sctac in the apical region; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. On Salix sp. Distribution. Sulc (1915) has recorded from Poland, while Ossiannilsson (1943,
1951, 1952) has recorded from Norway. Finnish Lapland; not known from Sweden
(under Psylla soot-ryeni). Material examined. Through the kindness of the Commonwealth Institute of
Biological Contro] Unit located at Kashmir, a smal] collection of this species was
received, preserved in alcohol. ‘This material includes few adults and nymphal stages,
collected on Salix sp., in May 1965 (P.R.D. Kari). Two males and two females were
mounted on cards; some slides were also prepared of the parts of adults and nymphal
stages. All the mounted specimens, some adults and nymphal stages preserved in alcohol
and some slides are deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Comparison: One pair of specimens was se1.t to Professor F. Ossiannilsson, Sweden,
for comparison and vpinion and he identified the species as P. zaiceni Sule. He writes
(in litt. ): senses vses & species described on material from Siberia but also present
in arctic Scandinavia and ‘Finland. The host plants in Sweden ave Salix anata and S
glauca.”

This species is recognised by the characters outlined in the key, and is easily separated
by the shape of head and forewing and venation, Its hyaline wings, long and divergent

 

296 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

   

i
Iv 0.5 mm. Fig. 96. Palla zaicesi Sule—as fifth stage nymph; b: antenna: ct leg; ds circum-anal pore ring. genal cones and short and broad pterostigma and genitalia are characteristic features,

Biological notes. ‘This species is quitc common on willows (Salix sp.) in Kashmir. Its
nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig. 96a), Length 1-37 mm. Typical psylline form. Head narrower
than abdomen. Eyes and wing-pads large and prominent. Wing pads extending
beyond the general margin of the body. Dorsum with the derm largely membranous,
except the wing-pads, a pair of large areas in the head, a number of small plates in the
thorax, four narrow strip-like plates in the anterior half and a single large plate in the
posterior half of abdomen, which are sclerotic. Derm sparscly beset with spatulate
setae of various length, similar setae also present along the margin of wing-pads and
the posterior abdominal plate. Hind wing-pads with two long spatulate setac. Derm
also armed with minute points, these becoming stronger in the posterior abdominal
plate. Antennae (Fig. 96b) long and slender, about 0-79 mm long, seven-segmented, bearing
fey small spatulate setae, two basal segments robust, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd sub-

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 297

quadrate, 3rd joint long and slightly longer than 4th and 5th joints combined together,
4th, 5th and 6th joints nearly equal to one another, 7th joint longest, imbricate, having
two unequal apical spincs, four sensoria present on segments 3, 5 and 7. Ventral side largely inembranous, except for the sclerotic areas at the base of antennae,
areas on the underside of wing-pads small, sub-median arcas in the anterior and one
caudal plate in the posterior region of abdomen, and two large areas around spiracles. Derm bearing scattered simple setae and beset thickly with minute points, becoming
sharply pointed in the posterior abdominal plates. Few long spatulate setac also present
on the caudal plates. Legs (Fig. 96c) moderately large, bearing scattered simple setac,
varying in 3 Without trochanters; with distinct tibio-tarsal articulation, each tibia
with two spatulate setae; cach tarsus wilh one curved seta at apex; claws present, the
pulvillus large, petiolate, fish-tail like. Anal aperture (Fig. 96d) sct forward a short
distance from the end of the abdomen, surrounded by an outer ring of slit-like pores and
an inner ring of somewhat oval pores; both rings are interrupted medianally and guarded
by one anterior and two posterior pairs of setae, varying in size. Fourth stage. Length I-14 mm. Resembling the fifth stage, except in smaller size,
having large thoracic and abdominal plates, antennae five-segmented, bearing three
sensoria, and tibio-tarsal articulation absent. Genus PSYLLOPSIS Loew 1678

Pallopsis
Loew, F. 1878. Verh, zool. -bot, Ges. Wien. 28: 587, 606. Edwards, J. 1896. Hem., Hom, Br. Ist. p. 233. Oshanin, B. 1907. Acad. Imp. Sci. St, Peters. 322 231-252. Aulmann, G. 1913, Psyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 71. Ferris, G, F. 1925. Can, Ent, 57: 46-50,
Crawford, D. L. 1914. Bull. U.S. natn. Mus, 85 132,
Lal, KB. 1985. ‘Trans. R, ent, Soc, Lond, 82: 363-385. Haupt, H. 1935. Polloidea, Tierwelt Mitteleur. 4(10): 227. Heslop-Harrison, G, 1942, Entomologist’s mon. Mag. 78: 155-160. Tuthill, L, D, 1943, Jouwa State Coll. F. Sci. 17(4)2 516,
Loginova, M. M. 1954, Trudi zool, ist, Akad. Nauk, U.SS.R. Wt 35-39. Vondracek, K. 1957. Fauna C.S.R, Praka, Ceskoslovenska Akad, Ved. t. 91 194-95,
Dobreanu, B, and Manolache, C. 1962, Fauna Repub. fop.rom., Toseeia, 8 (Fasc. 3),Homop. Pssleidea,
pp. 148-149. Typespecies. Psgllopsis frasinicala (Foerster) (~Psyltafrexinisola Foerster 1848) ; England. The characters given by Crawford (1914) are reproduced, with some notes. Head narrowar than thorax, deflexed rather strongly; vertex morc or less flattened on
cach side of median suture, not quadrate, narrowed distinctly anteriorly, not perpendi-
cularly inclined but sometimes strongly descending, not sharply defincd on anterior
margin but merged into genac; genal concs perpendicularly inclined, zcutely conical,
divergent, not continuing planc of vertex. Antennae zt least moderately long. Eyes
moderately large, hemispherical. Thorax well arched, pleura! suture of prothorax as
in Arytaina, but pronotum not knob-like at lateral termination. Hind tibia without basal

298 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

spur and with a series of small, black apical spines, hind proximal tarsus with two black
claw-like spines. Wings ovate, usually subopaque to hyaline, usually with a pterostigma,
rounded at apex,

Poyllopsis fraxini (Linnacus) 1761
Chermes fraxini
Linnaeus, C. 1761. Faun. Suec. No. 1013,
Pyylla fiaxini
Geoffroy, Saint EL. 1800. Hist. abr. ins, 11 486,
Foerster, A. 1848, Verh. naturh, Ver. preuss, Rheil. 8: 80. Flor, G. 1861. lynch. Livl, 2: 481,
Flor, G. 1861. Bell. Soc, Nat, Moscou, pp. 340, 347, 353. Meyer-Dur, R, 1871. Mitt. Schweiz. ent. Ges. 3: 395. Lethierry, L. 1874. Cat. Nord. p, 89. Scott, J. 1876. Trans. ent. Soc, Lond., p. 545,
Frauenfeldt, V. 1864. Verh, zool. -bot. Ges. Wien, 14: 690. Reuter, O.M. 1876. Medd. Soc. F. Fl, Fenn. 1: 71. Payllopsis fraxini
Loew, F. 1878. Verh. gol. bot, Ges. Wien, 28: 589, pl. IX, figs. 1-2. Loew, F. 1888, ibid. 38: 14. Reuter, O.M. 1881. Ent, Tidskr. 2: 153. Jahresber, 1890, Ges. vaterl. Cultur. Breslau, p. 72. Fockeu, 1894. Rev. biol, Nord. France Lille 6: 219. Edwards, J. 1896. Hem. Hom. Br. Isl. p. 234. Kessler, 1896, Ber. Ver, Kassel 39: 26-28,
Rubsaamen, E.H. 1899, Ent. Nachr. 25: 242. Rubsaamen, E.H, 1902. Zool. Jahrb. 16: 266. Darboux et Houard, 1901, Bull. Sci. France Belge 34: 156-58,
Gadeau de Kerville, 1901, Causeries scient. Soc. Zool, France, py. 289-290. Kieffer, JJ. 1901, Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. 70: 322,
Trotter, 1903. Nuovo Giornale bot. ital, Firenze, (2) 10: 26. Houard, C. 1908. Zoovecidies des Plantes d’ Europe, p. 804, 806, 808. Trotter et Cecconi, 1901. Cucidotheca italica 3: 65. Trotter et Cecconi, 1903. Marcellia, Avellino 2: 11. Lagerheim, 1905. Arch. Bot. Upsala 4: 21. Grevillius and Nissen, 1906. Koln, Arb, Rhein, Bauert-Vereins 1: 15,
Gatta, 1901. Bol. Soc. esp. hist, nat. Madrid. 1: 402. Tavares, 1905, Broteria, Lisboa 4: 23,
Oshanin, B. 1907. Verz. palaarkt, Hem. 21 348,
Aulmann, G. 1913. Psyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 72. Horvath, G. 1918, Fauna Regni Hung. H. 8: 58,
Haupt, H. 1935. Tierwelt Mitteleur. 4(10): 230. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1936. Trans. Nor. Nat. Union 1(4) 225,
Heslop-Harrison, G. 1936, Ent, mon. Mag. 72: 51. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1942. ibid. 78: 155-160. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1946, Ent, mon, Mag. 82: 37. Schaefer, H. A, 1949. Mitt. schweiz. ent. Ges. 5: 18. Ossiannilsson, F, 1952, Opuse, Ent, 27: 196. Loginova, M. 1953. Trudi Zool. Inst. Nauk, U.S.S.R. 15+ 39, 40. Smreczynski St. ven, 1954. Psylloidea, Fragmenta Faunistica 73 137. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 299

Vondracek, K. 1957. Hemiptera IIT, Homoptera Payllinea, Acta ent, Mus. nat. Praha, t. 27: 199-202. Dobreanu, E and Manolache, C. 1959. Acad. Repub. pop. rom. Omagin lui Tr, Savulescu, p. 207. Dobreanu, E, and Manolache, Ci, 1962. Fauna Repub, pop. rom. 8, fasc. 3, pp, 153-156, figs, 101-103. Lindberg, H. 1960, Soc, pro Fauna et. Flora Fennica, Fauna Fennica, 8, p. 10. Klimaszewski, S. M. 1961. Fragmenta Faunistica, 9(8): 79. Loginova, M. M. 1954, Proc. Inst. Zool. Acad. Sci. U.S,S.R. 151 39-40. Loginova, M. M. 1962, ibid, 311 37. Loginova, M. M. 1963. Acta Ent, Mur. Nat, Pragce 351 183-195. Loginova, M. M, 1964, Inst. Biol. dead, Sci, U.S.S.R., p. 463. Chis species is not represented in the collection studied by the author, and_ therefore. not included in the key. However, brief characters are outlincd below. Colour yellow or with orange tinge. Head and thorax with black patches and streaks;
genal cones frequently black; antennae yellow with apices of segments 4th to 6th and
the remaining distal segments black. Forewings clear, transparent, with a broad irregular
fuscous-black band round the apex and then curving upward from the apex of first
marginal cell to the furcation point of media, another short black streak present basally
along the posterior margin and extending up to clavus; part of cubitus and fork Cug
black. Genal cones shorter than vertex along the median suture. Abdomen black
with posterior segments yellowish. Genitalia characteristic. Distribution. Psyllopsis fraxini (L.) is widely distributed throughout the countries of
Europe, and has been recorded on several species of Fraxinus. From India, it has been
recorded at Naini Tal (U.P.) at 1,525 m for the first time, producing galls on the
terminal shoots of fraxinus ornus (Heslop-Harrison, 1946). Sub-family TRIOZINAE

1879, Triozinae, Loew, F Verh, zool, -bot, Ges. Wien, 28: 605-609. 1900, — , Froggatt, W. W. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W. 26: 272-73. 1908, , Kuwayama, 8. Sapporo Trans. Nat. Hist, Soc, 3: 53. 1910, Crawford, D. L. Pomona Coll. J. Ent, 2: 228. 1913, , Aulmann, G. Psyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 36. 1914, —-——, Crawford, D. L. Bull. U.S, natn, Mus. 85: 64. 1919, ., Crawford, D. L. Philipp. J. Sei, 15: 184. 1917, ., Van Duzee, B. P. Cat. Hemip. N. Amer., p. 791. 1943, —-, Tuthill, L, D, Lowa State Goll, J. Sci, 17 (4): 545. 1944, ———, Tuthill, L. D. J. Kans, ent, Soc, 17(4)+ 144-45,

1951, , Heslop-Harrison, G, Ann. Mag. nat, Hist, (12), 4: 1-35. 1958, , Heslop-Harrison, G. ibid, (13), 11 561-79. 1960, , Heslop-Harrison, G. ibid. (13), 31 497-504,

1963, -, Klimaszewski, S. M. Annls, Zool, 20(20) + 363-374. 1886, Triozaria, Puton, A, Cat. Hem, Faune Palea, p. 93. 1907, , Oshanin, B. Annls, Mus. Zodl. Ad. imp. Soc. Petersburg, Bd. XI, ii, p. 369,

1896, Triozidac, Edwards, J. Hem, -Hom. Br. Iel., pp, 227, 251. 1962, , Dobreanu, B. and Manolache, C. Faune Repub. pop. rom, Insecta, 8, fasc, 3, Homoptera. Psylloidea, Acad, Rep. Pop. Romine, pp, 9-50, 62-63, 253. 1964, ——-—, Loginova, M. M. Proc, Inst. Zool. Acad. Sci, U.S.S.R. Bt 52-56. 300 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

1964, ~—-——-, Loginova, M. M., Inst. Biol. Acad. Sci. U.S.S.R. pp. 437-443, 473-482. 1964, +, Klimmaszewski, S. M. Anals, Zool, 22(5): 81-138. Body small or large, slender. Head selcom as broad as thorax, more or less deflexed. Vertex usually sub-triangular to semi-circular in outline, not flat, usually sharply margined,
with prominent median suture, usually with two discal sulci. Genae produced into
conical or lobate processes, or sometimes merely swollen, more or less pubescent. Frons
covered by genar except small portion bearing the front ocellus, Eyes hemispherical. Antennae ten-scgmented, variable in length. Prothorax typically well arched (not in
Leuronota). Pleurites not cqual, suture not extending to middle of pronotum. Hind
tibiac usually with or without basal spur or scrrate carina, with three to fourblack spines
at apex; basal tarsus of hind legs without claw-like apical spines; meta-coxae with mera-
canthi present, often with flattened anterior processes as in Phylloplecta group of Trioza. Forewings membranous, hyaline, sometimes maculated, more or less angulate at apex,
sometimes narrowly rounded; no pterostigma; radius, media and cubitus leavingthe basal
vein at the same point or nearly so (except in Ceropsylla). Rhinopsylla Riley belonging to
the sub-family Ciriacreminge also possesses this triozine venation. Anal valve (proc-
tiger) in male usually with posterior lobes. ‘Type genus. Trioza Foerster. ‘The most distinguishing characters of this sub-family are the trichotomous branching
of the basal vein of the forewing, the shape of forewings tending to be acute apically,
the size and shape of head and the absence of claw-like spines on the basal tarsi of hind
legs. ‘This sub-family includes eight Indian genera. Five of these, viz., Ceropsylla Riley,
Leuronota Crawford, Petalolyma Scott, Phylloplecta Ferris and Triaga Foerster are represented
in the collection. Phylloplecta has not been recognised as a valid genus by recent workers,
and Tuthill (1944) has merged this genus in Trioza. However, for convenience, the
Indian species are grouped scparately, on the basis of presence or absence of the flattened
anterior processes of metacoxac. Three genera Cecidotrioza, Neotrioza and Ozotrioza,
described by Kieffer (1905), are not included in the synoptic key, as their representatives
are not seen by me. The whereabouts of his types are also not known. KEY TO THE GENERA OF TRIOZINAE
1, Cubitus, media and radius leaving the basal vein at the same point, ie.,

 

strictly trichotomous . . . . . . . . penne 2
—. Branching of basal vein variable, not quite trichotomous, R-+M of forewing

with short and prominent common bate... . 0c ee eee ee bee Ceropsylia
2. Thorax scarcely arched ; pronotum long, flat, with a prominent epiphysis

near the anterior margin; genal cones directed forward ....... 0.4 vee. Leworonota

—. Thorax well arched; pronotum shorter, descending cephalad, without
median anterior epiphysis... ....
3, Forewings maculated, elongate-ovate, narrowly rounded apically... .
~. Forewings hyaline, with anterior margin arched or strongly so, acutely or
subacutely angled at apex sees Tria

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 301

4, Metacoxac with flattened anterior process, in addition to meracanthi . +» Phylloplecta group
—. Metacoxae without anterior processes. 6... oe ee

ees Trioza group

 

 

The members of this sub-family are mostly gall-makers, spending the young stages
enclosed in fleshy galls on Icaves or branches of forest trees, In some cases, the insect
form curious pits and blisters, in which the nymphs remain until full grown in their
natural state, though firmly embedded. Few species are in the habit of curling and dis-
torting the leaves and feed within such curls. Genus CEROPSYLLA Riley 1883

Ceropsylla
Riley, C. V. 1883. Proc. biol. Soc, Wash, 21 76,
Froggatt, W. W. 1901. Proc. Linn. Soc, N.S.W", 26: 273. Aulmana, G. 1913. Payllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p.
Crawford, D.L. 1910, Pomona Goll. 7, Ent. 2: 229. Griiwford, D.L. 1911, ibid, 3: 423,
Crawford, D. L, 1914. Bull. U.S, nain, Mus, 85: 100-101,
Van Duzee, E. P. 1917. Cat, Hemip, N. Am., p. 798. ‘Tuthill, L. D. 1945. J. Kans, ent, Soe. 18(1): 19-20. Type species. Ceropsylla sideroxyli Riley 1883 (original designation). Bodly long and slender. Head narrower or almost as long as thorax, deflexed. Vertex
flat or rounded anteriorly, with decp sulci, bulging lobately in front between antennal
bases. Post-ocellar region elevated. Front ocellus not or scarcely visible from above. Genae swollen close behind antennal sockets, cones short to long, separate, but not strongly
divergent, vertical or sulvertical, sometimes porrcct. Clypeus at least moderately large. Antennae long, slender, about one and a half times or twice as long as width of head,
including eyes. Eyes very large, hemispherical. Thorax arched. Pronotum short,
sometimes strongly descending cephalad and depressed below level of vertex and pres-
cutum, usually roofshaped. Pro-episternum produced laterad, plate-like. Prescutum
strongly arched, as long as wide. Mesopleurites strongly developed. Episternum very
large, swollen, Hind tibiae with a series of basal spurs, onc or two spurs strongly developed
than others, with two or three apical spines within, and one outside. Forewings large,
membranous, hyaline, usually three or over three times as long as broad, usually acute
apically; basal vein relatively longer, distinctly more than one-fourth the length of the
wing, parallel to costa; cubitus branching separately, or media and cubitus scarcely or
distinctly petiolate at base or with a distinct tendency toward such a character; radius
short to obsolete; Ry rather long; radial sector short; first marginal cell larger than second ;
no pterostigma. Hind wings much shorter than forewings. The material studied by me includes three species from India, The characteristic
tendency of separate branching of cubitus or the type of origin of M and Cu with the
tendency toward becoming petiolate, very short base of R, short radial sector, and the
general appearance of the vertex and genal cones, and the long basal vein justify these
species to be placed in the genus Ceropylla Riley. 802 PSYLLIDAE OY THE INDIAN SUBGONTINEN')

KEY TO THE SPECIES OF GEROPSYLLA

1, Cubitus branching separately; radius and media of forewings with a promi-
nent common base
-—. Cubitus not branching separately and media and cubitus with a tendency
toward becoming petiolate
2. Body small, less than 2 mm in length; apical half of forewing strongly
arched; fork M,4, slightly longer than Mj, 43 batal vein very long,
about one-third as longaswing . 2. 2 ee C. minuta, sp. %
——. Body long, more than 2 mm in length; apical half of wing gradually arched ;
fork M,+, about twice as long as M,-+,; basal vein short, about one-
fourth aslong as wing oe ee ee ee eee eee C. ferruginea, sp. 0

 

julvida, sp. n.

 

 

Ceropsylla ferruginea, xp. u. (Figs. 97, 98)

Length of body, in male, 2-45 mm; in female, 2-92 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3-87 mm; in female, 4-21 mm
Width of head with cyes, 0-62 mm

Width of vertex between cyes, 0-32 mm

Length of antennae, 1-45 mm

Colouration. General colour dark-brown to fuscous with greenish tinge, head with a
pair of longitudinal orange-coloured bands in the form of parenthesis, extended to but
not reaching tip of genal cones, with a yellowish median spot near the posterior margin;
posterior ocelli bordered with pink; genal cones dark-brown at apices and ventrally;
antennae dark-brown; dorsum of thorax with a yellowish median stripe and also with a
lateral stripe of lighter colouration, on either side, running from prothorax to scutellum ;
pleural region partly pale-yellow; prosternum, clypeus and legs pale yellow: tarsal scg-
ments darker; last abdominal tergite of male pale-yellow medianally; parameres (clas-
pers) light yellowish-brown; venter of abdomen light yellowish-brown with greenish
tinge; wings light flavus, transparent; veins pale-yellow; hind wings with a fuscous band
near clayus. Structure. Body long and slender. Head (Figs. 97a,b) almost as broad as thorax,
sparsely hirsute with grey hairs, scarcely declivous; vertex about twice as broad as long,
swollen medianally near posterior border and also laterally, with a large foveal impression
on each side of median line, posterior to centre; posterior margin strongly arcuate ;
posterior ocelli clevated ; anterior margin deeply emarginate above front ocellus;
anterior ocellus visible from above; genal cones about 0-20 mm long, slightly
shorter than vertex, broad at base, subacute at apex, divergent, below the level of vertex,
subyertical in basal one-third and rest horizontal, pubescent with long hairs. Clypeus
somewhat circular and visible from below. Eyes quite large, semicircular. Antennae (Fig. 97c) long, ten-segmented, finely and sparsely pubescent, two basal
segments robust, Ist transverse, about twice as broad as long, 2nd subquadrate, remaining
segments slender and imbricate, 3rd segment longest, 4th about two-thirds as long as
3rd, 5th halfas long as 3rd; 6th, 7th and Bth equal and cach slightly longer than 5th; 9th

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE,

   

0.5 mm

Fig. 97. Geropsylla ferrnginea, sp. nai head, front view; br head and part of thorax, lateral views
ct antenna; d: hind leg; e: forewing; & hind wing; g male genitalia, lateral view; hh: forceps,
cauclal views is forcep, mesal view; ft sperm pump; It female genitalia, Iateral view; J: forceps,
outer surface. and 10th smallest but equal, and slightly broader than other slender segments; four
sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax (Fig. 97b) long and slender, sparsely pubescent with long grey hairs, reti-
culate-rugulose, moderately arched. Prothorax roof-shaped, longer in middle and
narrower laterally, with an anterior, dorsal, median epiphysis, with two pairs of foveal
impressions on lateral sides; pleurites large end extending forward below cyes; prescutum. almost as long as broad, broadest in middle, angulate laterally, rather angulately narrowed
cephalad, posterior margin angulated submedianally; scutum broader than prescutum,
about two and a half times as broad as Jong, angulate both laterally and posteriorly;
seutellum slightly broader than long, subtriangular, broad anteriorly. 304 PSYLLIDAK OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Legs (Fig. 97d) long, pubescent with grey hairs and also beset with minute points;
tibiae longer than femora; all tibiac with a comb of setae at apex; hind femur having
five dorsal, thick setae near apex; hind tibiae with two thick and two small spurs at base,
and with a strong apical tooth-like spine on one side and three on the other, apical
end robust and thick; tarsal segments equal in length; meracanthus large and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 97e) large and long, hyaline or light flavus, transparent, slightly more
than three times as long as wide, acute at apex, radial seclor short and flexed upward,
meeting anterior margin in middle between apex and junction of R,; R, smaller than
radius, M and Gu with a small petiole or showing a distinct tendency toward such a
character; basal vein long: cubitus about twice as long as radius; fork Mj,9 meeting near
apex; first marginal cell longer and broader than second; distance between Cug, Cu,
greater than the distance between Cu, and M,+-4; veins fincly setigerous. Hind wings (Fig. 97£) small, slightly more than half as long as forewing, membrane
thickly and uniformly beset with minute points, costal margin armed with a few simple
and hooked setae, in the basal half. Abdomen long and slender, finely and sparsely pubescent, hairs longer on sternites,
both tergites and sternites thickly armed with minute points, arranged in series,

Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 97g) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve about
0-35 mm long, slightly longer than forceps, in profile, anterior margin almost straight,
posterior margin broadly convex. broadest in middle, outer surface sparscly beset with
Jong setae and thickly with minute points; parameres (Figs. 97h, i, 1) about 0-30mm long,
simple, broad basally and gradually narrowed apically in lateral aspect, in caudal view,
strongly bowed, acute at apex and tcrminating in a sharp black point, outer surface
having few simple, small setae, mesal margins armed with long and simple sctae, while
the mesal surface beset with thick sctae directed downward; outer arm of acdeagus short,
having a curved, scythe-shaped spoon end; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely
pubescent; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 97j). Female genital segment (Fig. 97k) almost as long as abdomen, both plates broad
basally and narrow caudally, and thickly beset with minute points; dorsal plate longer
than ventral, narrowly rounded at apex, slightly depressed dorsally and distally beyond
middle, sparsely pubescent with small setae, setae longer in middle, apical region beset
with small, thick sctae, circum-anal ring with a double ring of pores; ventral plate acute
at apex; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. Bred ex curled leaves of Miliusa velutina Hook. f. & Thoms. ‘Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun, (U.P.). Distribution. Dehra Dun, Gorakhpur (U.P.). Types. Described from a fairly long series of specimens. Holotype male; Allotype
female; both from the type locality, July 31, 1957 (R. N, Mathur); Paratypes
30 males and 25 fernales, with the same data (R. N. Mathur); | female from Chanan-
chafi, Gorakhpur, U. P., 7.2.1935 (S. N. Chatterjee) ; all these were bred or collected on
Miliusa velutina. Some nymphs and adults were also preserved in alcohol. Parts of
adults and nymphal stages are mounted on slides. All types, preserved! material (collected
from New Forest and Gorakhpur) and slides deposited at FR.L, Dehra Dun. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 305

 

Fig. 98. Coropsylla ferrugonia, sp. n.—at fifth stage nymph; be antenna; et part of tibio-tarral joint of
leg; ds circum-anal pore ring} e: antenna of fourth stage nymph,

One male and one female paratypes are presented to LA.R.I., New Delhi. Comparison. Ceropsylla ferruginea, sp. n. is easily recognised by its colouration, shape of
head, genal concs, wings and venation. Biological notes. This species causes curling and crinkling of young and fresh leaves
(Plate 6 f) of Miliusa velutina, and the nymphs feed inside the curls. Due to the
drainage of sap, the leaves become distorted and ultimately turn pale-yellowish in
colouration. The nymphs are gregavious in habit, and the body margin and caudal
abdominal margin are fringed with waxy cottony threads. They exude copious amount
of honey dew and the globules are covered with cottony matter, Mature nymphs are

20

306 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

pale-yellow or yellowish-green, with antennae in the distal half black, legs creamy and
eyes pinkish-red, The nymphalstages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig. 98a). Length 1-96 mm. Of the typical triozine form, oval. Humeral angle of the wing-pads produced forward but not reaching the posterior margin
of eyes. Dorsum strongly sclerotic throughout, except for a small arca at the base of
abdomen, abdominal plate showing traces of segmentation. Derm weakly vermiculate,
bearing scattered ring-based. setae of various length. Numerous minute points also
present in the head and thorax near the median line, and appearing as comb-like structures
in the abdomen. Margin of the body with a continuous series of quite closely set spear-
shaped setae, which are arranged in a double row in the head and abdomen and in a
single row on the wing-pads,

Ventral side membranous throughout, except for a faint sclerotic marginal zone on the
wing-pads and abdomen, weak strip-like plates in the abdomen and minute plates
around spiracles. Derm bearing simple setae. Antennae (Fig. 98b) situated ventrally,
seven-segmented, having few simple sctae, two basal segments narrowly transverse, 3rd
broad at base and narrow at apex, 4th quadrate, 5th long with a weak constriction, 6th
small, narrow basally and broad apically, 7th segment longest, imbricate, bearing two
spines at apex, four sensoria present on segments 4,5 and 7, Legs with the femora not
attaining the margin of the body; without trochanters; with the tibio-tarsal (Fig. 98e)
articulation distinct, tarsal segment with a curved seta at apex; claws present, the pul-
villus triangular, not petiolate. Anal opening (Fig. 98d) set rather close to the apex,
circum-anal pore ring large, broadly V-shaped, the outer ring consisting of a single row
of slit-like pores, the inner ring with extremely faint pores. Fourth stage. Length 1-21 mm, Resembling the fifth stage, except for smaller wing-
pads, apparently with five-segmented antennae (Fig. 98e) bearing three sensoria, and
tibio-tarsal articulation absent. Geropsylla falvida, sp. n.

(Fig. 99)
Length of body, in male, 1-42 mm; in female, 1-63 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2-32 mm; in female, 2-62 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-40 mm. Width of vertex between eyes, 0-22 mm
Length of antennae, 0:52 mm

Colouration. General colour yellowish-brown, with dorsum of abdomen fuscous
and the posterior margin of segments orange, dorsum of thorax with orange tinge,
venter of abdomen pale-yellow, sternum pale-yellow, with mesosternum darker and
smoky; vertex light brown with black foveae; genae dull white or greyish; legs pale-
yellow, with apical tarsal segments blackish; antennae black distally; anal valve and
forceps of male genitalia blackish. FAMILY PSYLLIDAB 307

 

 

Fig. 99. Coropsylla fulvida, sp. 1. —ai head, front views br antenna; et hind legs d: forewing; et hind wing;
f: male genitalia, lateral view; gs anal valve and aedeagus, lateral view; ht parameres;
4 sperm pump; jt female genitalia, lateral view; ket dorsal plate; I: apical region of ventral plate. Structure. Body long and slender. Head (Fig. 99a) slightly broader than thorax,
moderately declivous, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose, vertex som what
W-shaped when viewed dorsally, with deep foveal impressions, linear in shape, on each
side of median line, posterior to centre, disc swollen around foveal impressions, gradually
rounded and converging anteriorly; posterior margin angulately emarginate; anterior
ocellus visible in front; post-ocellar region swollen; anterior margin invaginated at
point of excision ; genal cones very small, about 0-12 mm long, somewhat porrect, separate,
divergent distally, apices subacute, pubescent with long setae, finely rugulose. Eyes
large, rather recessive. Antennal sockets lateral and located near the lower margin of
eyes,

308 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Antennae (Fig. 99b) small, ten-scgmented, two basal segments robust, remaining
segnents slender and imbricate, Ist transverse, 2nd subquadrate, slightly longer than
Ist, 3rd longest, having a weak constriction near base, 4th smaller than 3rd, 5th, 6th,
7th and 8th almost equal to one another, and each slightly smaller than 4th, 9th almost
three-fourths as long as 8th, terminal segment about half as long as 8th and slightly
smaller than 9th, bearing two unequal, quite long apical spines, three apical segments
rather broad, 4th and 6th with slightly broader apices; four sensoria present on segments
4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, rugulose; prothorax short,
strongly descending cephalad, almost concealed and deflexcd below level of head and
prescutum, visible as a bow-shaped strip in dorsal aspect, with a small, median, round
proj2ction, and two foveal impressions on each side; prescutum ncarly as long as broad,
broadest posteriorly beyond middle, narrowly and uniformly rounded cephalad, posterior
margin angulate, angulate laterally; scutum broader than long, about twice as broad
as long, broadest anteriorly before middle, smaller than prescutum in length, flat dorsally,
sloping laterally, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutellum small, sub-triangular,
broad anteriorly, narrow posteriorly, anterior margin almost straight. Legs (Fig. 99c) moderately long, pubescent and also beset with minute points, arranged
in lines; femora shorter than tibiae; all tibiae with apical comb of setae and also armed
with thick, strong setae in the apical half; hind femur with three, thick dorsal setae near
apex and three sensoria-like structures on the ventral side; hind tibiae with a series of small
basal spurs, one spur stronger than others, with three, black tooth-like spines (2 on one
side and 1 on the other); basal tarsal segment slightly smaller than apical, with weak
claw-like processes at apex; meracanthus very small and slender. Forewings (Fig. 99d) long and clongate, hyaline and transparent, slightly less than
three times as long as broad, acute at apex, basal vein relatively longer, radial sector
longer than basal vein and curved to costa, R--M with a prominent common base,
radius slightly longer than R,, cubitus branching separately, media almost running
parallel to costal margin, fork M,,, mceting near apex; marginal cells unequal, first
marginal cell longer and broader than second; veins armed with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 99e) moderately long, membrane beset with minute points, basal
half of costal margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen small, longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent, and also armed
with minute points arranged in lines. Gmitalia. Male gmital segment (Fig. 99f) smaller than abdomen. Proctiger
(Fig. 99g) about 0-17 mm long, longer than parameres; in profile, anterior margin almost
straight to weakly convex, posterior margin broadly convex, truncate: at apex, outer
surface beset with minute points arranged in lines, sparsely pubescent with simple setae,
marginal setae longer and thicker; parameres short and stout, about 0-12 mm long,
bowed, broad basally and narrowed towards apex, terminating in an acute point, two
strong and thick setae directed downward present just below apex, mesal surface armed
with small, thick setae, marginal setae slightly longer than others, outer surface bearing
small, simple setae (Fig. 99h); hypandrium stout, of usual shape, armed with minute

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 309

points and simple setae; aedeagus (Fig. 99g) quite long, outer arm smaller than basal,
with a thick spoon end; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 993). Female genitalia (Fig. 99j) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent with setae
of varying length; dorsal plate longer than ventral, curved cownward, subacute at apex,
apical region bearing small, closely set setac, circum-anal pore ring composed of a single
ring of slit-like pores; ventral plate acute apically, apex with closely set setac; ovipositor
small, acutely pointed. Host plants, On Ficus macrocarpa Lf. (=F. retusa L.) and F, rumphii Blume. Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Described from a small series of specimens. Holotype male ; Allotype
female, both from the type locality, March 14, 1960 (R.N. Mathur); Paratyyes :
7 males and 10 females, March 14, 1960 (R.N. Mathur); 1 female, collected on
15.3.60, from the type locality (R.N. Mathur), all these specimens are from F. macro-
carpa. One male and one female, collected on 9.3.60, New Forest, Dehra Dun, from
Fisus rumphii (R.N. Mathur). All these types, with some preserved specimens, and
some slides, are deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. One male and one female (paratypes) are donated to I.A.R.I., New Delhi. Comparison. Ceropsylla fulvida, sp.n, is readily recogniscd by the shepe of head, genal
cones, forewings and venation. Biological nots. This species has been collected during March 19€0, from new
flush of leaves of Ficus macrocarpa (Plate Cg) and F. rumphii. It is rare on the lattcr plant
species, Much is not known about its biology and economic importance. Ceropsylla minuta, sp. n.
(Figs. 100, 101)

Mathur, R. N. 1935, Indian Forest Rec. 1(2): 58, Pi. 1, fig. 6. Beeson, C. F.C. 1941. Forest Insects, p. 780. Length of body, in male, 1-05 mm; in female, 1-19 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-55 mm; in female, 1-86 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-37 mm. Width of vertex between cyes, 0-19 mm

Length of antennae, 0-50 mm

Colouration. General colour in live specimens, dark-brown or orange to sepia, males
invariably of sepia or black colour, with legs and antennze pale-ycllow, three apicel
segments of antennae black, femora of hind legs partly black; in fumele, head dark-
brown, thorax with dark-brown dorsel bands, abdomen yellowish-brown or orange, dark=
brown dorsad. In dry specimens, general colour brown dorsally, pale-yellow
ventrally in female, dark-brown to chocolate in male. Wings hyaline, veins flavus. Structure. Heed (Fig. 100a), including eyes, somewhatbroader then thorex, modcrately
declivous, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex cmarginate on posterior
margin, broader than long, about twice as broad as long, along the median line, with

 

310 PS¥LLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

0125 wm O26 nw

Fig. 100. Ceropsylla minta, sp. nas head, front view; br antenna; ¢: bind leg, in parts; ds forewing;
exhind wing; f: male genitalia, lateral view; g: anal valve; ks parameres; it aedeagus; jx sperm
pump; ks female genitalia, lateral views It dorsal plate; mar ventral plate,

foveac on each side, posterior to centre, somewhat rounded in front, anterior margin
with a deep sulcus near median line, post-ocellar region swollen, ocelli orange, anterior
ocellus visible in front at base of cleft, not visible from above; genae small, approximate
near base and divergent distally, finely and sparsely pubescent, and also beset with minute
points arranged in linear groups, pubescence slightly longer than on vertex, vertical,
about 0:11 mm long, half as long as vertex, broader at base, slightly flexed outward,
bluntly rounded at apex, with a few long ventral setae. Antennal sockets lateral and
almost on level with the lower margin of eyes. Antennae (Fig. 100b) moderately robust, ten-segmented, about one and quarter
times as long as head including eyes, two basal segments robust and beset with few setae
and rows of minute points, 3rd joint longest, about one and a half times as long as 4th,
4th and 6th equal, Sth joint smallest, slightly more than half as long as 4th, 7th and
8th segments almost equal in length, 9th slightly smaller than terminal segment, apical

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 311

joint with two unequal spines at tip, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, &
and 9,

Thorax slightly arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; prothorax
roof-shaped, descending, with two foveal impressions on each lateral side; prescutum
broader than long, and about one and a half times as broad as long, broadest in middle,
gradually narrowed both anteriorly and posteriorly, posterior margin angulate; scutum
depressed dorsally, broad, about two and a half times as broad as long, broadest beyond
middle, slightly shorter in length than prescutum, angled laterally, surface finely reticu-
late in centre and rugulose laterally; scutellum small, vase-shaped, broad anteriorly,
gradually narrowed posteriorly, about one and a half times as broad as long. Legs (Fig: 100c) finely and sparsely pubescent, and thickly beset with rows of minute
points, tibiae Jonger than femora, hind femur with two dorsal, subapical, blunt setae,
all tibiae with a comb of small setae at apex, hind tibiae with three or four basal spurs
and three black tooth-like spines at apex, tarsal segments of fore and middle legs almost
equal in length, meracanthus small and triangular, basal tarsal segment of hind leg
slightly longer than apical and slightly constricted near about basal half. Forewings (Figs 100d) long, about two and a half times as long as broad, without
pterostigma, subacute at apex, basal vein (R-+-M+Cu) quite long, longer than cubitus,
M+Cu very slightly petiolate at base, cubitus a little more than twice as long as radius,
Rs flexed upward, meeting the anterior margin, fork M,,. meeting near apex, marginal
cells subequal, first cell longer and broader than second. Hind wings (Fig, 100e) a little
more than two-thirds as long as forewings, uniformly beset with minute points, costal
margin armed with three simple setae near base and four hooked setae. Abdomen longer than broad, fincly and sparsely pubescent, and thickly beset with
rows of minute points. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig: 100f) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent;
anal valve (Figs 100g) longer than parameres, about 0-24 mm long, pyriform, beset with
rows of minute points, truncate at apex, in lateral view, broad at base and narrow at
apex, anterior margin nearly straight, posterior margin broadly convex; paramercs
(Fig. 100h) about 0-15 mm long, with sides subparallel, bowed, outer margin curved,
pointed at tip, outer surface armed with simple setae and also with rows of minute points,
marginal setae thick and somewhat directed downward, apex ending in a thick, blunt,
black point, just below apex, two thick setae present, pointing downward; hypandrium
simple, of usual shape, bearing simple setae and minute points; outer arm of acdeagus
(Fig. 100i) smaller than basal, having a thick spoon end; sperm pump as figured
(Fig. 100 J}. Female genital segment (Fig. 100k) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent, setae
longer in the posterior half, dorsal plate (Fig. 100 1) slightly longer than ventral, narrower
and rounded at apex, anal pore ring situated in a clear area and composed of a single
row of slit-like pores; ventral plate (Fig: 100m) acute at apex, both plates broad
basally, beset with rows of minute points; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. Bred from the nymphs occupying pit galls on the leaves of Shorea robusta
Gaertn, f, (Plate 4a, b),

312 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Type locality, New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Described from a long scrics of both sexes. Holotype male; Allotype,
female, April 25, 1950 (R.N. Mathur); Paratypes : 12 females, April 21, 1933,
2 males, November 26, 1949, 10 females and 1 male, April 25, 1950. Additional speci-
mens not designated as types are; 2 males, June 29, 1933, 8 males and 10 females,
November 26, 1949, and 3 males and 9 females, April 25, 1950, all collected from the
type locality (R.N. Mathur). A large number of adults and nymphs preserved in
alcohol (in 3 phials) and some slides with mounted parts, together with the types, are
deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun (U.P.). Two paratypes (2, 4) are donated to
LA.R.I., New Delhi. Comparison. This species differs from other species as given in the key. Biological notes, This spccies is distributed throughout India, wherever Shorea robusta
grows. Bricf biological history and habits are described by Mathur (1935) and
Beeson (1941). Its nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig: 101a). Length 1:07 mm. Form triozine and oval, but the
continuity of the margin is interrupted at the sides of the head and the base of abdomen. Humeral angle of the wing-pads reaches almost to the anterior margin of the small eyes
and bluntly rounded. Dorsum sclerotic throughout except for a small area at the base
of the abdomen. Thick sclerotisation with a slightly vermiculate appearance present
in the apical region of head, on either side of the dorso-median line and near the base of
wings. Derm beset sparsely with simple setae and with numerous minute chitinous
points, Few sccta-setae also present on the doisum. Abdomen composed for the most
part of a single plate with traces of segmentation and two narrow plates at the junction
between abdomen and thorax. These plates are medially interrupted. Entire margin
of the body, except the eyes, beset with a continuous series of rather stout secta-setae. Ventral side membranous throughout except for minute areas around spiracles, weak
submedian abdominal strips, a small patch below antennae and circum-anal pore ring. Derm sparsely beset with simple ring-based setae and thickly with minute points. Antennae (Fig. 101b) ventral, stout, about 0-62 mm long, obscurely eight-segmented,
arthed with minute points, with four sensoria on 3rd, 5th, 7th and 8th joints, apical
joint weakly imbricate, having two subequal spines at apex. Legs quite short, with a
few simple setac, the femora far from attaining the margin of the body, without trochanter;
tibio-tarsal articulation distinct; tarsal joint with a single golf-club seta; without claws;
pulvillus of a peculiar shape, being in the form ofa circular pad. Anal opening set well
in from the apex of the body, surrounded by a double ring of pores (Fig. 101e) and
armed with a few simple ring-based setae, the outer circumanal ring is composed of
slit-like pores and is interrupted medianally both anteriorly and posteriorly; the
inner ring consists of minute, somewhat indistinct pores,

Fourth stage. (Fig, 101d), Length 0-73 mm. Identical with the fifth stage, except
for smaller size, and having antennae obscurely six-segmented with three sensoria, and
absence of tibio-tarsal articulation,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 313

 

Fig. 101, Ceropsylla minuta, sp. n.—as fifth stage nymph; bby antenna; et circum-anal pore ring; ds fourth
stage nymph; e; first stage nymph,

First stage. (Fig. 101e), Length 0-25 mm. This stage bears very few marginal secta-

setae, alternating with smaller and larger ones; segmentation of antennae very obscure,
with one sensorium. Genus LEURONOTA Crawford 1914
Leuronota
Qrawford, D. L. 1914, Bull. U.S, natn, Mus, 85: 67-68

314 PSYLLIDAE OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Crawford, D. L, 1920, Proc. Hawaii. ent. Soo, 4 (2): 374-375,
Ferris, G. F. 1928. Can. Ent. 60: 240

Tuthill, L. D, 1943. Iowa State Coll. J. Sci. 17 (4): 598. Tutuill, L. D. 1945, J. Kansas Ent. Soc 18 (1)+ 17. Tuthill, L. D, 1964. Revista Pewana de Entomologia 7 (1): 31. Type species. Leuronota maculata (Crawford) (== Trioza maculata Crawford 1910)
(original designation by Grawford), from San Diego, Texas. Body long and slender. Head not as broad as thorax, scarcely deflexed; vertex not
as long as broad, deeply impressed discally, with a deep foveal impression on each side
of median suture, produced into two small epiphyses close to front ocellus, posterior
margin deeply invaginated; genal cones present, smaller than vertex, conical, porrect,
divergent, bluntly rounded apically. Antennae slender, more than twice as long as
width of-head. Dorsum scarcely arched. Pronotum long, not descénding cephalad,
on same level with prescutum and vertex, roof-shaped, produced into three pairs of
small, bluntly rounded epiphyses. Prescutum somewhat hexagonal in shape with a
smal] median anterior epiphysis. Legs long and slender. Hind tibiae with small basal
spurs and with three large, black tooth-like spines apically. Forewings long and slender,
hyaline, about three times as long as broad, broadest subapically, subacute at apex,
with or without prominent maculated bands in the apical region. Venation typically
triozine. .

Crawford (1914) writes, “This genus is erected to include two of the species formerly
placed in Allotrioga, now in synonymy. The character of the pronotum is still used
somewhat as it was in Allotrioza, but it is more restricted and more sharply differentiated
from the usual type in Trioza.” From India, only two species are represented in this
genus, one is a new species and named L. corniculata, recorded on Shorea robusta, and the
second species is L. minuta (Crawford). The specimens of the latter species from
Hazaribagh determined and labelled by Crawford himself, do not show similarity with
other members of the genus, However, since these have been determined by the proge-
nitor of the genus, these are retained under Leuronota, with great hesitation. Leuronota corniculata, sp. n,
(Figs. 102, 103)

Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Forest Rec, 1(2) + 40; pl. UL, fig. 20 (Gerotrioza sp.). Beeson, (2. F, C, 1941, Forest Insects, p. 177 (Ctratrioza sp.). Length of body, in male, 1-62 mm; in female, 2:10 nm
Length of forewings, in male, 2:71 mm; in female, 3-0 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-60 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-32 mm

Length of antennae, 1:]6 mm

Colouration. (Dried specimens). General colour brown with a greyish vitta running
laterally, margin of vertex and median suture dirty white, thorax with dirty white dorsal
bands, pronotum with five greyish epiphyses, abdomen with dark-brown, transverse

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 315

segmental bands, antennae pale-yellow with apical segments and apices of segments
four and six black, eyes dull red, legs pale-yellow, femora with a smal] brown spot which
is darker in male, apical tarsal joints black, forewings partly hyaline and maculated
conspicuously with two brown transverse bands, having numerous dark-brown spots
scattered over the maculae. Structure, Head (Figs. 102a,b) scarcely declivous, sparsely and finely pubescent,
finely rugulose, as broad as thorax; vertex a little more than half as long as broad between
eyes, disc impressed deeply, having large and prominent foveae on each side of median
line, and also produced in front into two horn-like epiphyses close to front ocellus, epi-
physes porrect, bluntly pointed apically and about one-fourth as long as genal cones,
area on either side of median line slightly swollen, posterior margin deeply invaginated,
front ocellus visible from above and located at the point of excision of median line; genal
cones about two-thirds as long as vertex along the median suture, directed forward, diver-
gent, bluntly rounded apically, sparsely pubescent with setae longer than on the vertex
and also beset with fine points, cones slightly swollen near insertion of anntenae, Eyes
large, somewhat reniform. Antennae (Fig. 102c) slender, ten-segmented, a little more than twice as long as width
of head, basal segments robust, Ist segment rectangular, 2nd rather quadrate, remaining
segments imbricate, sparsely pubescent, 3rd segment longest, about two and a half times
as long as 4th, 4th, 5th and 6th equal to one another, 7th and 8th segments also equal
and slightly smaller than 6th, 9th half as long as 4th, terminal segment slightly longer
than 9th, bearing two unequal spines at apex, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8
and 9, 9th segment with a spine near sensorium. Thorax narrow, scarcely arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose and
also armed with irregular rows of minute points. Prothorax (Fig. 102d) roof-shaped,
narrow medianally and broader laterally, with three lateral and one median (incised in
centre) epiphyses; prescutum large, almost as long as broad, somewhat hexagonal in
shape, gradually sloping laterally; scutum also large, about twice as' broad as long,
broadest before middle, nearly as long as prescutum, with a median line, angled both
laterally and posteriorly; scutellum small, somewhat triangular, broad anteriorly and
narrow posteriorly, a little longer than broad, with a median longitudinal line; post-
scutelluin of metathorax transverse, swollen in middle, with a median line. Legs (Fig. 102e) long and slender, sparsely pubescent and also beset with rows of
minute points, tibiae longer than femora, hind femora with 3 or 4 dorsal, subapical blunt
setae, hind tibiae with very small basal spurs and with a comb of small setae and three
large, black stout tooth-like spines at apex, basal tarsal joints thicker and slightly longer
than apical joints, meracanthus small, slender and triangular, tibial groove quite large. Forewings (Fig. 102f) large, nearly three times as long as broad, broadest subapically,
narrower at base, subacute at apex, veins pale and armed with minute setae, the apical
band stretches from near the apex of radial sector to middle of medial cell, leaving more
or less clear spaces along the anterior margin and on the margin of the second marginal
cell, the sub-apical band runs obliquely from the costal margin to the middle of the
margin of the first marginal cell, area along the side of Cu, also maculated, Rs quite long

316 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

UIUE ¢3°0. Fig. 102. Lewronota comniculata, sp, n,—a: head, dorsal view; br head, lateral views et antenna; dt prothorax,
dorsal view; e: hind leg; f forewing; gt hind wing; bt male genitalia, lateral view; tt forceps,
caudal view; J: aedeagus; ky female genitalia, lateral view; I: dorsal plate; mt ventral plate;
mi sperm pump,

and longer than basal vein, cubitus a little more than twice as long as radius and slightly
smaller than basal vein, both marginal cells equal in length and breadth, first marginal
cell trapezoid in shape. Hind wings (Fig. 102g) slightly shorter than forewings, venation as shown in the figure,
costal margin bearing five basal stout setae and four hooked setae, the last seta strongly
hooked. Both wings thickly beset with minute points,

Abdomen long and slender, finely and sparsely pubescent and thickly beset with minute
points,

Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 102h) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent;
proctiger (anal valve) darker and smaller than parameres, about 0-21 mm long, in profile,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAR 317

broad basally, narrow apically, attenuate at tip, antcrior margin almost straight, posterior
margin broadly convex, outer surface beset with minute points; parameres (forceps)
(Fig. 102i) about 0-27 mm long, broader at base and narrower at tip, terminating in an
acute dark point, viewed from behind the outer margin of each forcep curves gently in
towards each other, the inner margins irregular, bearing long, thick setae, three distinct,
stout setae present in the apical mesal surface, just below apex, outer surface beset with
small simple setae; hypandrium of usual shape, simple, beset with minute points; aedeagus
(Fig. 102j) small and elbowed, outer arm smaller than basal, having a broad spoon end. Sperm pump as figured (Fig. 102n). Female genital segment (Figs, 102k, 1, m) smaller than abdomen, plates pubescent,
broad basally and narrow caudally, dorsal plate (Fig. 1021) darker and nearly as long as
ventral, narrowly rounded at apex and bearing a brush of setac, central region beset with
long setae, basal portion clear, containing the anal opening surrounded by a double row
of pores and armed with small setae; ventral plate (Fig. 102m) acutely pointed and with
an elaborate set of ridges at apex, central region with long setac; ovipositor strorgly
pointed. Host plant. Bred from the nymphs feeding inside leaf-folds of Shorea robusta Gaertn. f.

Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Described from a long series of specimens. Holotype male, October 30,
1930; Allotype female, October 18, 1934, both from type locality (R. N. Mathur);
Paratypes: 3 males, September 1, 1933, 2 males, September 5, 1933, 3 females, Sep-
tember 1, 1933, 3 females, September 2, 1933, 4 females, September 4, 1933; 1 male,
October 20, 1934, 2 males, November 21, 1949, 1 male and 3 females, November 23, 1949,
and 3 malcs and 1 female, November 26, 1949. Additional material not designated as
types, are: 3 males, August 31, 1933; 9 males, September 1, 7 males, September 2; 5
males, September 4, 1933; 1 female, October 20, 1934; 6 males, November 23 and 3
males, November 26, 1949; all from the type-locality (R. N. Mathur). Some nymphs
preserved in alcohol and some slides with mounted parts of adults and nymphal stages,
and all types deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun, ‘Three paratypes (1.9.33 and 27.10.33)
from New Forest donated to I.A.R.I., New Delhi,

Comparison. Leuronota corniculata, sp. n. differs from al] the known species—L.acutipennis
Crawford from Nicaragua, L,attenuata Crawford from Borneo, L.corniger Crawford from
Singapore, L.legwninicola Crawford from Brazil, L.lcngipennis Crawford from Florida,
L.maculata Crawford from Florida, L.michoacana Feris from Mexico, L.microceros Crawford
from West Borneo, L,celtidis Tuthill and Z.sulcata Tuthill, both from Peru— in having
characteristic head, prothorax and maculated forewings. It is also easily recognised
from minuta Crawford, by the above features,

Biological notes. Bricf notes on its habits and biology are given by Mathur (1935) and
Beeson (1941) under Cerotrioga sp. The description of its nymphal stages is given below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage, (Fig. 103a). Length 1-8 mm. Form triozine, somewhat broadly oval, the
humeral angle of the wing pads produced cephalad to the posterior margin of the head,

318 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

    

 

  
  

&

>
Te

 

Ky
a

 

Fig. 103, Leuronota cornicutala, sp. nat fifth stage nymph; b: antenna; e: portion of circum-anal rings,
highly magnified; ds third stage nymph; et first stage nymph. bluntly rounded, Eyes small, Dorsum strongly sclerotic throughout exceptfor a small area
at the base of the abdomen, the derm slightly vermiculate in appearance, having small
scattered simple ring-based setae but entirely devoid of minute points. Head and wing-
pads armed with a marginal series of small, slender, spear-shaped setae which are thickly
present along the abdominal margin. Minute fringed processes also present in the
abdomen. Ventral side with the derm membranous except for two small plates near the antennae,

FAMILY PSYLLIDA 3i9

areas around the spiracles, small abdominal strips and an anal platc. Derm sparsely
beset with simple ring-based setac, the wing pads thickly armed with minute points and
the anal plate with minute fringed processes. Antennae (Fig, 103b) located ventrally,
quite short, about 0°30 mm long and armed with a few setae, five segmented, two basal
scgments broad, other segments slender and darker, 5th segment nearly as long as the
other four segments together, with four sensoria on 2nd, 3rd and 5th joints; two unequal
spincs at tip. Legs relatively short and stont, with a few setac, the femora nearly reaching
the margin ofthe body; without trochanters; with the tibio-tarsal articulation well-defined,
tibiac with two or threc long setae, tarsus with a single golf club seta; claws present,
pulvillus small, pad-like. Anal opening set well away from the apex of the abdomen,
surrounded by extremely sinnous double row of circular pores (Fig. 103e), the inner row
poorly defined; the anal pore-ring is guarded by three anterior and two posterior
pairs of simple setae. Fourth stage. Length 1-35 mm. Resembles the fifth stage except in having smaller
wing pads, antennae four-segmented with three sensoria, tibio-tarsal articulation
absent. Third stage. (Fig. 103d). Length 0-75 mm. Identical with the fourth stage but differs
in having smaller wing pads and antennac three segmented with two sensoria,

Second stage. Length 0-50 mm. Differing from the third stage in possessing knob-
like wing pads; antennac two-segmented, with one sensorium,

First stage. (Fig. 103e). Length 0:30 mm. Resembles the second stage but differs
in having comparatively longer legs, antennae two-segmented with one sensorium, broader
abdominal plates and the golf club seta replaced by a long simple seta on legs. Leuronota minuta (Crawford) 1912
(Fig. 104)
Grawford, D. L. 1912. Rec. Indian Mus. 7(5): 483-434, Pl. xxxiv, fig. Rj Pl. sxxv, fig. F.
(Allotrioza minuta). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924, Réc. Indian Mus, 26(6): 625. (L. ? (Allotrioza) minuta). Length of body, in male, 0:85 mm; in female, 1-05 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1-47 mm; in female, 1-75 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-35 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-23 mm

Length of antennae, 0-45 mm

Colouration. General colour dark-brown or fuscous dorsad and pale-brown ventrad,
except in male having abdomen completely dark-brown or fuscous; genal cones pale-
brown; antennae dark-brown distally and pale-brown proximally; legs pale-brown,
with tarsal segments darker; prescutum with pale median line, scutum with dark longi-
tudinal bands. Structure. Body small, Head (Fig. 104a) broader than thorax, moderately declivous,
finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex much broader than long, with a

320 ‘PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

circular fovea on cither side of median linc and posterior to centre, disc swollen on either
side of median line and also anteriorly, post-ocellar region also swollen, posterior margin
moderately arcuate, front ocellus visible in front, anterior margin angulatcly emarginate
at point of excision; genal cones small, broad and contiguous at base, apices divergent,
porrect and bluntly rounded, finely and sparsely pubescent and also armed with fine
setae, ventral setae longer. Antennae (Fig. 104b) small, ten-segmented, bearing few setac, two basal segments
robust, Ist transverse, 2nd subquadrate, remaining segments slender and imbricate, 3rd
segment longest, one and two-thirds as long as 4th, 4th, 6th, 7th and 8th nearly equal to
one another, 5th slightly smaller than 4th, 9th slightly smaller than 10th, terminal seg-
ment about half as long as 3rd, bearing two unequal setae at apex, two apical segments
slightly broader; four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Prothorax
narrowly rounded anteriorly, with foveal impressions on each lateral side, sides extending
forward below the eyes; prescutum nearly as broad as long, narrowly rounded anteriorly,
anterior region inclined vertically downward, angulate both laterally and posteriorly;
scutum shorter in length than prescutum, flat dorsally, angulate both Jatcrally and pos-
teriorly; scutellum somewhat triangular, broader than long, broad anteriorly and narrow
posteriorly. Legs (Fig. 104c) small, slender, finely pubescent and also beset with rows of fine points,
femora shorter than tibiae, all tibiae with an apical fringe of long setae, hind femora with
three sensoria-like structures located ventrally, hind tibiae with a series of small basal
spurs, one spur stronger than others, with three tooth-like setac (two on one side and one
on the other) at apex, basal tarsal joint slightly smaller than apical; meracanthus small,
slender and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 104d) small, transparent, about two and a half times as long as broad,
without pterostigma, sub-acute at apex, R4+-M--Cu arising from the same point, radius
slightly less than half as long as cubitus at point of furcation, Rs short and flexed upward,
basal vein longer than Cu at point of furcation, fork M,+, meeting near apex, first
marginal cell longer and broader than second,

Hind wings (Fig. 104e) small, thickly beset with minute points, costal margin with a
few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen small, finely and sparsely pubescent and also beset with fine points. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 104f) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve
(proctiger) longer than parameres, about 0:19 mm long, broad basally and narrow
apically, truncate at tip; in lateral view, anterior margin nearly straight, or weakly convex
in basal two-thirds and weakly emarginate in apical one-third, posterior margin broadly
convex, upper surface bearing fine, simple, scattered setae and also armed with minute
points; parameres (forceps) (Fig. 104g) about 0-16 mm long, with sides subparallel,
curved inwards and ending in a sharp point, outer surface beset with small, simple
scattered setae, marginal setae longer and stouter, a group of small, thick setae directed
downward present just below apex, mesal surface armed with similar scattered setae;
hypandrium of usual shape, bearing sparse sctae and beset with minute points; outer

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 321

 

Fig. 104, Leuronota minuta (Crawford) —a: head, front view; br antenna; o: hind log; di: forewing; es hind
wing; ft male genitalia, lateral view; gt forceps, caudal and partly mesal views; ht sperm
pump; is fernale genitalia, lateral view. atm of aedeagus smaller than basal; sperm pump as figured (Fig, 104h). Female genital segment (Fig. 104i) smaller than abdomen, pubescent, both plates
almost equal and divergent posteriorly; dorsal plate broad basally, narrowly rounded
apically, apical region armed with a group of small, thick setae, anal region somewhat
horizontal; ventral plate acutely pointed; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant.. On new flush of leaves of Mangifera indica Linn. Distribution. Previously recorded from Hazaribagh, Bihar, on leaves. Fresh record is from Dehra Dun (U.P.). Material examined. Two males and 2 females, collected on May 1962, from Dehra Dun
(U.P.) (R. N. Mathur), on Mangifera indica. The collection at the Agricultural Rescarch Institute, New Delhi, includes a few speci-
mens (R/7331, R/7332, R/7334), in poor condition, from Hazaribagh, 1997 ft, Bihar,

al

322 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

10-5-1911 (C.$.M.) and a small tube containing dried specimens, in poor condition
(R]7333). :

Comparison. The specimens collected from Dehra Dun resemble closely with the spec
mens from Hazaribagh and present at LA.R.I., New Delhi. ‘The specimcns from Hazari-
bagh are labelled as Allotrioza minuta by D. L. Crawford, I have placcd these specimens
under the genus Leuronota, with great hesitation, as the characters differ greatly from that
of Leuronota, known to me. Tt may be noted here that Allofrioza has been considered synonymous with Leuronota by
Crawford (1914) and this has been indicated by Ramakrishna Ayyar (1924) in the latter
genus. The types of the two gencra are, however, distinct,

 

Genus PETALOLYMA Scot 1882

Petalolyma
Scott, J. 1882. Trans. ent. Soc. Lond. pp. 459-460,
Froggatt, W. W. 1901. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W. 26: 273,
Crawford, D. L. 1910. Pomona J. Ent. 2 (2): 228. Aulmann, G. 1913, Pyltidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 60. Tuthill, LD. 1943. Jowa State Coll, J. Sei. V7: 548. Type species, Petalolyma basalis (Walker) (=Pslla basalis Walker 1858) (original desig-
nation). bel, large and robust, surface strongly rugulose, head and thorax clothed with long
hairs, Head slightly shorter than thorax, moderately declivous. Vertex slightly broader
than long, disc depressed, with two pairs of distinct foveal impressions, posterior margin
slightly emarginatc. Genal cones long, deflexed downward, separate but approximate
at base, divergent apically, apices bluntly rounded, slightly porrect, Frons not visible
from above. Eyes large, somewhat hemispherical. Antennac short, two basal segments
robust, remaining filiform, sparsely hairy with Jong hairs, 3rd segment longest and
longer than 4th. Thorax robust, strongly arched, wider than head. Prothorax narrow,
convexly rounded, descending cephalad and almost concealed by the head, lateral
margins not reaching beyond the outer margin of the eyes. Legs long and slender ; hind
tibiae without basal spur, apex broad and expanded into a strong spur on one side and
three spurs on the other. Forewings large and elongate, shape unlike that of triozine
form but venation typical triozine, without ptcrostigma, apex narrowly rounded, radial
sector long and terminating near apex, basal vein slightly smaller than cubitus, fork Cu,
strongly curved, radius as long as R,, fork My ,, slightly smaller than media, first marginal
cell smaller than second, veins conspicuously hairy, Genitalia of charactcristic shape. “Crawford considered Prtalolyma Scott as a synonym of Trioza. There is nothing
in Scott’s description to distinguish the two, but his figure of the wing does not appear
to be that of a species of Trioza* (Tuchill, 1943),

This genus possesses triozine features and includes only one species, Petalolyma basalis
(Walker, 1858), recorced from N. India. The combination of the characters of shape
of genal cones, hairiness of veins and maculation of wings is distinctive. VAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 325

Petalolyma basalis (Walker) 1958
(Fig. 105)
Palla basalis
Walker, F, A. 1858, List Hom. B. M., Supp...p. 275. Petalolyma basalis
Scott, J. 1882. Trans, ent, Soc, Lond., pp. 459-462, pl. xix, fige. 2-2, (N. India). Laing, F. 1930. Indian Forest Rec. 14(8)+ 178. Length of body, in male, 2-32 mm; in female, 2-58 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3:50 mm; in female, 3-80 mn
Width of head with eyes, 0°70 mm

Width of vertex between eyes. 9-43 mnt

Length of antennae, 1:10 mm

Golowration, (Preserved specimens in alcohol). Male: General colour of body,
genac (except the tip), femora of legs, fore and middle tibiae fuscous; vertex dark-brown;
tip of genac, hind tibiae and all iarsi, coxac and antennal sockets dirty white; antennae
with basal joint light brown, apical joints black, remaining segments dirty white or yellow ;
forewings hyaline with flavus tinge,’ basal one-fourth area dark-brown with or without
transparent area inside; in some specimens, anotha broad, dark-brown band present,
of varying length and extending fram anal vein to half of or completely the first marginal
cell or along the entire posterior margin (Figs. 105f, g). Female; Body yellowish-brown
with dark-brown longitudinal bands on mesothorax, antennae except the apical segments,
and tarsi dirty white, abdomen and genitalia partly yellowish and dark-brown; forewings
hyaline with a light brown basal-one-fourth area; in rare cases, a broad fuscous band
present along the posterior margin, extending only half the length of the first marginal
cell. Hind wings with a smoky band near clavus, in both sexes. Structure. Body large and robust, clothed with (except dorsum of abdomen) long
yellow or dirty white hairs, surface strongly rugose. Head, including eyes (Fig. 105a),
slightly shorter than thorax, moderately declivous, slightly shining, coarsely pubescent,
finely rugulose along the borders and on either side of median suture (visible under high
magnification), slightly broader than long, disc depressed, with two pairs of distinct circnlar
foveae, posterior to centre, anterior foveae nearer the median suture and larger than the
posterior foveae; postcrior margin slightly emarginate ; frons not visible, completely occu-
pied by the front ocellus; posterior occlli slightly elevated; genal cones about 0-20 mm
long, slightly smaller than vertex, cleflexcd, not on the same level as the vertex, surface
rugose and also beset with minute points, separate but approximate at hase, divergent! slightly near apex, densely hirsute, bluntly rounded and slightly porrect at apex. Eyes
large, somewhat hemispherical when seen in front angl oval from the side, Antennal
sockets lateral and located near base of genal cones. Antennae (Fig. 105b) short, ten-segmented, slender, filiform, clothed sparsely with
long hairs, two basal segments robust, subquadrate, weakly rugulose, remaining segments
imbricate, 3rd segment longest, thinner, about twice as long as 4th, 4th to 7th also thinner
and nearly equal to one another, 8th slightly shorter than 7th, 9th and 10th almost

  

324 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

equal and smaller than others, apical segment with two unequal spines at apex, four
sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9,

Thorax (Fig. 105c) robust, strongly arched, coursely pubescent, surface rugose™ “and
also armed with minute points when seen under high power. Prothorax narrow,
convexly rounded, descending cephalad and almost concealed by the head, lateral sides
broader, with two foveal impressions on cach side; when viewed dorsally, prescutum
broader than long, broadest beyond middle, gradually sloping anteriorly and narrowly
rounded cephalad, somewhat acutely angled laterally, posterior margin’ with two weak
angles; scutum large, flat, broadest before middle, about two and one-third broader
than long, acutely angled at the sides, slightly shorter in length than prescutum; scutellum
somewhat vase-shaped, broad anteriorly and narrow posteriorly anterior margin
straight, with prominent antero-latcral angles. Legs (Fig. 105d) long and slender, coarsely pubescent, tibiac longer than femora,
tibial groove of fore and middle legs much longer than that of hind leg, hind tibiae
without basal spur and a strong apical spur on one side and three spurs on the other,
all tibiae with apical comb of setae, tarsal segments of fore and middle legs equal in length,
while in hind leg, basal segment longer than apical; meracanthus large and
sub-conical. Forewings (Fig. 105e) large, clear, transparcnt except thé basal région, abut two and
three-quarter times as long as broad, without pterostigma, anterior and posterior margins
sub-parallel, apex narrowly rounded, ‘Rs long and' terminating at-thé apex, R as long
as R,, furcation M,,, smaller than media, furcation Cu, strongly -eurved and ‘thrice
as long as Cu, basal vein (R+-M-+Cu) slightly smaller than cubitus, ‘without cubital
petiole (i.e., the radius, media and cubitus emerging at the same point), first marginal
cell smaller than the sccond but nearly equal in width on the mar rginal nerve; veins spar-
sely hairy with long hairs. Hind wings (Fig. 105h) relatively small, uniformly beset with minute points, costal
margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen moderately large, tergites telescoped, sternites coarsely hairy with long
hairs, dorsum finely rugulose, both dorsum and venter thickly beset with minute points
(visible under high magnification). Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 105i) smaller than abdomen, coarsely pubescent
with long hairs; anal valve (proctiger) slightly longer than forceps, about 0:25 mm
Jong, with large lateral lobes; in profile, anterior margin almost straight, apical fourth
attenuate, outer surface thickly armed with minute points arranged in rows, marginal
setae very long; parameres (Figs, 105j, k) about 0-20 mm long, slightly broad basally;
in caudal view, bowed mesad to join other forcep, in lateral view posterior margin almost
straight to near apex, while the anterior margin is produced dorsad apically into a strong
flange just below apex and separated from the sharply notched antero-apical region,
each forcep terminates distally in a horizontal black ridge having acute points both
anteriorly and posteriorly, the anterior point is slightly longer than the posterior, apical
region sinuate mesally, outer surface beset with simple setae, marginal sctac slightly longer,
mesal surface armed with short setae pointing downward; hypandrium (Fig, 105j) of usual

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE

325

 

Fig. 105. Petalolyma basalis (Walker)—at head, front view; bs antenna; et thorax, dorsal views di hind leg;
¢: forewing; £ gt part of forewing; hz hind wings i: male genitalia, lateral view; j: parameres

and hypandrium, caudal view; k: forceps, outer and miesal views; I: sperm pump; mat female
genitalia, lateral views m: dorsal plate, dorsal view,

 

shape and coarsely beset with simple setae; outer arm of aedeagus smaller than basal

and gradually becoming broader apically; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 105 1). Female genitalia (Figs, 105m, n) smaller than abdomen, coarsely hairy with Iong hairs,

both plates sub-equal in length, divergent posteriorly and sub-acute at apices, outer sur-

326 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBGONTINENT

face of plates thickly armed with minute points, setae smaller and numerous near the
apices, dorsal plate steeply sloping posteriorly; anal pore-ring large, with a double row
of pores; ovipoyitor acutely pointed and scrratulate. Host plants. On young leaves and twigs of ‘khandiara’ {local name); on leaves of
Quercus dilatata. Distribution, “Vehvi and Chakrata (U.P.}. Material examined. A good series of adults, both males and females (6f'¢, 82 ¥), 8,000fi,
Akhori Sain Block, Tehri range, T.G. Forest Div. (U.P.) 5.6.62. (A.C, Mathur); 3g',
599 from the same locality, collected 13.6.62, preserved in alcohol; and 19¢'¢, 72.9.
mounted on cards, same locality; also from Mundali, 2,565 m, Chakrata, U.P. 31,5.1934,
(J-G.M. Gardner), 2g, 292 (females immaturely developed), mounted on
cards. Comparison. "Vhis species is redescribed from a good collection of specimens from
‘E.G. Porest division, during June 1962 (A.C. Mathur), and its identification has been
confirmed by Dr V.F, Eastop. British Museum (Natural History), by comparing with
Walker’s Type specimen, One pair of this species has been donated to the British
Museum. Genus TRIOZA Foerster 1848
Trioxa
Foerster, A. 1848. Verh. naturk, Ver, preuss. Rheinl. 31 67,
Flor, G. 1861. Rhynch. Lioland 2: 484,
Flor, G. 1861. Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou, 34% 336. Frauenfeld, V. 1867. Verh. zool. -bot. Ges. Wien. 17: 804. Scott, J. 1876. Trans. ent. Soc, Lond., p. 551. Loew, F, 1878. Verh. zool. bot. Ges. Wien. 28: 609. Maskell, W. M, 1890. Trans, N. Z. Inst. 22, pl. X.
Edwards, J. 1896. Hem. Hom. Br. Ist., p. 253, Pl. 3, fig. 38. Froggatt, W. W. 1901, Proc, Linn, Soc. N.S.W. 26: 273. Aulmann, G. 1913. Psyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 37. Crawford, D. L, 1910. Pomona Coll. 7. Ent. 2: 229. Crawford, D. L. 1911. Pomona Coll, 7. Ent. 3: 423. Crawford, D. L, 1914. Bull, U.S. natn. Mus. 85: 74. Crawford, D.L. 1919. Philipp. 7. Sci, 151 186. Crawford, D.L. 1920, Ent. News 31; 70,
Klyver, F, D, and Ferris, G. F, 1930, Can. Ent. 62(8): 169. Haupt, H. 1935, Psylloidea, Tierwelt Mitteleur., & (10): 242. Tuthill, L. D. 1943. Towa State Coll, 7. Sci. 17(4)1 546-548. Tuthill, LD. 1944, J. Kant, ent. Soc, 17(4)+ 1456146,
Tuthill, L. D. and Taylor, K. L. 1955, Aust. J. Zool. 3(2)+ 281. Vondracck, K. 1957. Fauna C.S.R. Praha, Ceskoslovenska akademie Ved. t. 9: 304-305. Dobreanu, E. and Manolache, C. 1961, Fauna Repub. pop. rom. Insecta, Vol., 8 Fasc. 3, Homoptera
Prylloidea, pp. 257, 258. Megatrioza

Crawford, D. L. 1915. Philipp. J. Sei. 102 258, 265. Spenioza

Enderlein, G. 1926. Hnt. Miu. 15: 400. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 327

Colopeima
Enderlein, G., 1926, Ent, Mitt, 15: 400,
Phylloplecta
Zacher, F. 1913. Ent. Mitt. 2: 148,
Ferris, G. F. 1926. Canad. Ent. 58: 16. Laing, F. 1930. Indian Forest Rec, 14(8): 39,
Caldwell, J. S. 1988, Bull. Ohio. biol, Surv, 34: 248,

Type species: Trioza urticae (Linn.) (=Ghermes urticae Linn.) (original designation
Foerster, 1848). Phylloplecta was erected by Zacher in 1913, with Psylla tripunctata Fitch (=Trioza
tripuntata Fitch) as type species. Crawford (1915) named it Megatrioga, with M. armata
as type species. Ferris (1926) and Laing (1930) consider Megalrioga as a synonym of
Phylloplecta. Dr Russell (én litt.) has stated: “I have examined about 25 species from
different parts of the world and all specimens have metacoxal spurs though they are better
developed in some species than in others. They are present in urticae, the type species
of Trioza, and in tripunctata, the type species of Phylloplecta. Therefore this character
cannot be uscd to separate the two and I do not know of other characters that can be
used for this purpose.” However, for convenience it is proposed to treat this genus
Trioza in two groups, Phylloplecta group (treated under Megatrioza or Plhylleplcta by
authors) and Trioza group. Puy..opiecta Group

Head long, usually not as broad as thorax, more or less deflexed; vertex broader
than long; genal cones usually rather short }but in a few species long, usually _ thick,
bluntly rounded and directed forward. Frons concealed. Thorax broad or narrow,
moderately arched or sometimes nearly flat, usually sparsely clothed with long hairs. Pronotum long, not or only slightly depressed below level of mesonotum and vertex,
with or without cpiphysis. Prescutum sometimes with an anterior median point. Legs
Jong, apparently strongly saltatory; hind tibiae with a small or large spur or a series
of spurs at base, and expanded and armed with strong spurs at apex; hind coxae with an
anteriorly directed spur in addition to the posteriorly directed spur. Forewings hyaline,
sometimes coloured, long and narrow, acute at apex, venation triozine, with radius
and clavus short, fork M,,» mecting near apex. Hind wings seldom more than half
as long as forewings. Abdomen usually long and narrow, Male anal valve usually
broad, sometimes with lateral lobes produced caudad. This group is represented by seven spccics from India, including three which are new
to science, A key for five species, studied by me, is given below. KEY TO THE SPECIES OF PHYLLOPLECTA

1, First marginal cell unusually very large; genae almost wanting or represented as
small swellings... bebe eeae

Lees P, hirsuta Craw
—. First marginal cell not large; genae present, small... s,s

 

 

328 PSYLLIDAE OR THE iNDIAN SUBCONTINENT

2, Radial sector and medialong and looped . 6.0 eee eee ee ees P. malloticola Craw. —. Radial sector and media short and not Jooped
3. Second marginal cell much smaller than first
4,

  

Second marginal cell almost aslong as fitSt 6. ee eee eee
Prothorax with two submedian epiphysis P, serrata, sp. n.
. Prothorax without epiphysis... ... Sct eee eee ee Py lobata, sp. n.

 

In the above key of this group, two species, viz., M. vitiensis Kirkaldy and M. eugenioides
Crawford, are not included, as these species are not seen by me. However, their descrip-
tions are reproduced from the authors. Trioza eugentoides (Crawford) Comb. n,

Crawford, D.L. 1917. Philipp, J. Sei. 121 171-172. (under Trioza eugenioides), (Mindanao Butuan). Crawford, D. L. 1919. ibid. 15: 198, (under M. eugenioides), (Mindanao, Butuan; India, Pusa,
Bihar; Borneo, Sandakan). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T, V. 1924. Rec, Indion Mus. 26: 625 (Pusa, Bihar; Philippines). The description of this species is reproduced from Crawford (1917, 1919),

“Length of body 1-9 millimetres; length of forewing 3-8 mm; width of head 0-7 mm. General colour brown to dark-brown, with lighter tawny stripes along dorsum and patches
of the same colour on pleura and abdomen.”

“Mindanao, Butuan (Baker), 3 females; no data on food habits given.”

“The general appearance and structure are similar to Trioza eugeniae Crawford and
Trioza asiatica Crawford, but the species differs from both in colour, wing venation, and
a few other characters, These differences may be summarized as follows:

1, Thorax smooth, shining, black; wings very narrow, about threc times as
long as broad; second marginal cell about twice as long as greatest
width; fowth furcal (M,,;) terminating in wing apex; male anal
valve almost quadrate; genal cones about one third as long as vertex Trioza asiatica Crawl. 2, Thorax punctate or rugulose, not smooth; light green or yellowish-green;
wings about three times as long as broad; second marginal cell about
two and one-half times as long as greatest width; fourth furcal (M,4,3),
extending to apex or near it. Male anal valve triangular, Genal
cones half as long as vertex. 3. Thorax punctate and brown with light stripes and blotches; wings about
two and three-fourths times as long as broad; second marginal cell only
alittle longer than greatest width; fourth furcal (M; 2) terminating in
front of apex within second marginal cell, Genal cones strongly de-
current, fully one half as long as vertex or more.”

T, eugeniae Craws. T. eugenivides Craw? (Crawford, 1917)

Its later description runs as follows:

“Length of body, 2 millimetres; forewing, 4. General colour chocolate brown with
orange yellow markings; vertex flavous; dorsulum brown with a flavous stripe down
center and flavous borders; mesoscutum with several tawny stripes and bands; legs

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 329

except hind femora and antennae except at tip yellowish; forewings clear with a black
spot in clavus.”

“Head nearly as broad as thorax, only a little declivous; vertex about half as long
as broad, with a deep, brown, foveal depression on each side of median line; anterior
ocellus in front; genal cones directed downward, about half as long as vertex, narrowly
rounded at apex. Antennae very slender, about one and one-half times as long as
width of head.”

“Thorax somewhat arched, reticulately marked, sparsely pubescent. Hind tibiae
with two small spurs at base close together, subapical spines moderately large. Fore-
wings clear, very transparent; hind wings a little more than half as Jong as forewings.”

“Female genital seginent very short, bluntly pointed.”

“Mindanao, Butuan (Baker), 3 females. India, Pusa, Bihar (Misra), 1 female
taken on the wing, January 26, 1914. Borneo, Sandakan (Baker), 1 female. The
last specimen differs slightly from the others in being less pubescent on the dorsum. This species appears to be a widely distributed one and may prove to be identical with
some already-known species of Trioga.” (Crawford, 1919). Distribution. Mindanao, Butuan (Philippines); Sandakan (Borneo); Pusa, Bihar
(India). Comparison. This species is not examined by me and, therefore, it has not been included
in the synoptic: key. Trioza hirsuta (Crawford) Comb. u,
(Fig. 106%

Crawford, D.L. 1912, Rec, Indian Mus, 7(5): 427-428, pl. xxxiii, figs. V,Y; pl. cox, fig.1, (Kuwayama
hirsuta), (Igatpuri, Western Ghats, Bombay Presidency). Grawford, D. 1, 1919. Philipp. J. Sci. 15: 201 (Megutrioza hirsuta), (ex galls on ‘Terminalia tomentosa;
Lonavala, Bombay, India}. Crawford, 1). L. 1924. Rec, Indian Mus. 26: 621 (Megatrioza hirsuta), (In galls on leaves of Terminabia;
-Mundakayam, Travancore, S. India). Ramakrishna Ayyar, I. V. 1924. Ree, Indian Mus, 26: 625. Mani, M. S, 1935, J. Asiat, Soc. Beng. 1(2): 106-108 (Distribution, etc. ),

Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Forest Rec. (2): 53-54 (Biology) (P. hirsuta). Beeson, C.F. C, 1941, Forest Insects, p. 779 (Biological notes). Mathur, R. N, 1949, Indian J. Ent, 8(2): 281-233, fig, 5 (Nymphal stages under P. hirsuta). Mani, M. 8. 1959. Agra. Univ. J. Res. (Science) 8(2): 170 (Plains of India), (P. hirsuta),

 

Length of body, in male, 2-52 mm; in female, 2-84 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 5+82 mm; in female, 5-61 mm
Width of head with cyes, 1-03 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0:55 mm

Length of antennae, 2:04 mm

Colouration. General colour light brown, with dark-brown markings on dorsulum,
antennal segments black at tips, venter of abdomen lighter, wings hyaline, transparent,
with a brown spot near tip of clavus,

330 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Structure. Body large, long, entire surface covered with long, light brownish hairs. Head (Fig, 106a) large, incliding eyes about as brocd as thorax, not deflexed, hirsute,
surface armed with strong points when seen under high magnification; vertex about
one and a half tines as broad as long, sulcately inypressed on cach side of median
suture, with two foyeae posicrior to centr h lobe rounded forward in front, posterior
margin deuply invaginated, post-occllar regions strongly elevated, anterior margin
strongly invaginated at point of excision; anterior ocellus visible in front and situated
in a deep depression; genal cones wanting, with a slight rounded swelling at base of
antennac. Eyes large, very prominent. Clypeus somewhat oval and visible in front. Labrum small,

Antennae (Fig. 106b) long, slender, ten-segmented, imbricate, two basal segments
robust and transverse, ist Jarger and longer than 2nd, cach segment from 3rd onward
with a long apical seta, 3rd and 4th nearly equal, 5th and 7th equal, but smaller than
th, 6th slightly longer than 5th but smaller than 4th, 8th smaller than 7th, last two seg-
ments smallest and equal, terminal segment with two apical spines; four sensoria present
on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax long, rather narrow, scarcely arched, hirsute, and armed with strong and thick
points when seen under high power; pronotum moderately long, narrow transversely,
roof-shaped, with two median epiphyses, one near the anterior border and the other on
the posterior margin, anterior epiphysis weaker than the posterior, with two foveal
impressions on each lateral side; propleurites large; episternum prominently bulging
outward above; prescutum long, longer than broad, narrower both anteriorly and
posteriorly, posterior margin angulate; scutum large, much broader than long, smaller
in length than dorsulum, somewhat flat dorsally, gradually sloping laterally, angulate
both laterally and posteriorly; scutellum broadly transverse, broad anteriorly and
narrow posteriorly, convex dorsally. Legs (Fig. 106c) long and thickly beset with minute points, pubescence long, femora
stout and shorter than tibiae, with tibial groove long, tibiae with apical comb of setae,
hind femur with three sensoria-like structures on ventral side and with a group of 6 to 8
long, blunt, dorsal setae near apex, hind tibiac with an extremely large and strong spur
associated with a scrics of small spurs at base, apex expanded, swollen, bearing four black,
stout, spur-like setae (3 on one side and | on the other), hind coxae very large, having
prominent anteriorly and posteriorly directed spurs (Fig. 106d); mcracanthus large and
triangular; tarsal segments almost equal in length. Forewings (Fig. 106e) very large, hyaline, transparent, about two and a, half times as
lung as broad, broadest across middle, acutely angled at apex, R, M, Cu arising from the
same point, this junction, tip of R, and a loop in the basal vein brownish, Cu as long as
R, but slightly shorter then R, radius short, basal vein quite long with a small loop near
base, first marginal cell unusually large and about twice as large as second and
also wider, M,,_ terminating at tip of wing, veins armed with microscopic
setae. Hind wings (Fig. 106£) comparatively very small, costal vein armed with simple and
hooked setae, membrane armed uniformly with minute points,

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 331

 

Fig. 106. Trioza hirsuta Crawford—a: head, front view; bt antenna; et hind leg; di metacoxal spars;
©: forewing; f: hind wing; gi male genitalia, lateral view; hh forceps, caudal view; 4: sperm pump;
i: female genitalia, lateral view; ke: dorsal plate of female; I: ventral plate of female. Abdomen short, thick, fincly and sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute points
arranged in lines. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 106g) shorter than abdomen, somewhat
retracted. Anal valve longer than forceps; in profile, anterior marginal most straight,
lateral lobes strongly expanded, anal region narrower, somewhat cylindrical and trun-
cate at apex, sparsely beset with simple setae, outer surface wrinkled, and beset with
minute points, marginal setac long, mesal surface armed with small, simple setae; para~
meres (Fig. 106h) strong, stout, arched inward, two-toothed at apex, upper surface
having small simple setac, marginal setae long and thick, setac on the mesal surface small

332 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

and curved, a group of thick, curved setae also prescnt just below apex; hypandrium
simple, of usual shape, bearing small, simple sctac and also armed with minute points;
outer arm of acdeagus quite long and a little shorter than basal; sperm pump (Fig. 106i)
short, spoon-shaped, the ends with a heavily sclerotic flange, the median portion trans-
versely striate. Female genital segment (Fig. 106j) smaller than abdomen. Dorsal plate (Fig. 106k)
longer than ventral, beset with hairs of varying length, broadest near basc, gradually
sloping caudally in profile, apical region acuminate with subacute apex, having 4 or 5
pairs of long sctae and a brush of setac at apex; circum-anal ring large and composed of
a double row of pores. Ventral plate (Fig. 1061) broad basally and gradually narrowed. caudally, with acute apex, beset with long setae and also armed with thick points, apex
with a brush of small setae; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plants. Bred ex hard leaf-curls of Terminalia alata Heyne ex Roth. var. tomentosa C.E,
Parkinson (= T. tomentosa W. & A. ), and T. arjuna (Roxb. ex, DC) W. & A. Material examined. The specimens present atI.A.R.I., New Delhi, are | example, July
1916, from Lonavla, Bombay, ex galls on T. tomentosa; | example, 27.8,34. and 4examples,
4.9.34, from New Forest, Dehra Dun, recorded from T. tomentosa (R. N. Mathur). The collection at the Z.S.I., Calcutta, includes the male type specimen, 20.xi.09,
from Igatpuri, Western Ghats, Bombay Presidency (Type No. 9730/18); and 1 male and
1 female, of 11.9,63, from Kalyani, W. Bengal, on ‘ arjan’ plant (A. K. Bhattacharya). The collection at the F.R.I., Dehra Dun, consists of 15 males and 30 females, recorded
from Jhajra, Dehra Dun (U.P. ), 14.10.1925 and bred ex galls on Terminalia tomentosa
(C. F. G. Beeson) (RRD. 481. 138. P.); 2 males, 2 females, from Dehra Dun, collected on
12.11.32 (R. N. Mathur); 2 examples, 27.9.37, from Ramnagar division (U.P. ), on T.
tomentosa (D.F.O.) and 32 examples from Amritsar (Punjab) bred ex galls on Terminalia
arjuna, during October-November 1933 (G. D, Bhasin), (RRD. 579. 47. P3.). Distribution. Apparently throughout the plains and low hills of India. Comparison. P. hirsuta was described by Crawford (1912) from one male, under the
name of Kuwayama hirsuta. Subsequently, it has been referred to the genus Megatrioza
by him in 1924, and also listed by Ramakrishna Ayyar (1924) in the same
genus. ... :

This species is redescribed from a good series of male and female specimens, and i is
readily recognised by its triozine wing venation, hirsute body, remarkable hind tibial
spur, large brown spot near clavus and an unusually large first marginal cell in forewing,
and by other characters; genae represented by small rounded swellings at. base of
antennae. Biological nous. Its brief life-history is given by Mathur (1935) and short notes by. Beeson
(1941). The description of nymphal stages is published by Mathur (1949). ‘Trioza Iobata, sp. n.
(igs. 107, 108)

Length of body, in male, 2-13 mm; in female, 2:24 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2:91 mm; in female, 3-12 mm

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 333

Width of head with eyes, 0-53 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-32 mm
Length of antennae, 1-12 mm

Colouration. General colour yellowish-brown to dark-brown, with head dark lemon,
legs pale-yellow, antennac yellowish-brown with apical segments black, last abdominal
sternites pale-yellow in both sexes, tergites and genitalia yellowish-brown in female, tip
of labium black; wings hyaline, transparent, veins pale-yellow. Structure. Body long and robust. Head (Figs. 107a,b) nearly as broad as thorax,
moderately declivous, hirsute, finely rugose; vertex broader than long, about twice es
broad as long, gradually inclined downwards, rounded and swollen anteriorly on either
side of median suture, with decp circular foveal impressions near posterior margin and
one on cither side of median line, shallow depression extending from each fovea up to
base of antenna; post-ocellar region elevated; posterior margin arcuate; anterior margin
emarginate medianally at the point of excision; front ocellus visible from above; genal
cones large, about 0-15 mm long and slightly smaller than vertex, vertical, hirsute, broad
basally, subacute apically, divergent, hairs slightly longer than that on vertex. Eyes
large, somewhat hemispherical. . Clypeus large, circular. Antennae (Fig. 107c) long, ten-segmented, bearing a few setae, two basal segments
large and robust, remaining segments slender, imbricate, 3rd segment longest and twice
longer than 6th, 4th a little longer than 6th, 5th slightly smaller than 6th, 7th and 8th
equal but smaller than 5th, 9th and 10th smallesi, but somewhat broader than others,
9th a little smaller than 10th, last segment with two unequal apical spines, four sensoria
present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax moderately arched, rugose, sparsely hirsute. Prothorax (Fig. 107b) scarcely
visible from above, hidden behind head, posterior border prominently but shallowly
excavated submedianally, lateral sides upturned anteriorly behind eyes, with deep lateral
foveal impressions; prescutum large, longer than scutum, arched and sloping anteriorly,
slightly longer than broad, narrowly rounded cephalad, with an anterior median, elevated
point or epiphysis, broadest in middle, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutum. large, two and a half times broader than long, broadest before middle, angulate laterally,
posterior margin also angulate, disc flat dorsally and sloping laterally; scutellum small,
subtriangular, broad anteriorly and narrowly rounded posteriorly, anterior margin
straight, with antero-lateral angles; post-scutellum narrow, transverse; mesopleurac
large and prominent. Legs (Fig. 107d) long and pubescent, also beset with minute points arranged in rows,
femora shorter than tibiae, all trochanters and femora with long ventral setaé, all tibiae
bearing a comb of setae at apex, hind femur with four thick, dorsal setae near apex, hind
tibiae with a scries of promment basal spurs, and three thick spines at apex (two inside
and one outside), antcriorly directed metacoxal spur somewhat weak, meracanthus
comparatively longer, triangular and acutely pointed. Forewings (Fig. 107e) large, clear, transparent, two and a half times as long as broad,
radius, media and cubitus arising from the same’ point, costal margin somewhat arcuate

334 PSYLLIDAR OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

SISs SI

33

        

0.25 mm,

_— 0.25 mm
Fig. 107. Trioza lobata, sp. n.—as head, front view; fb: head and part of thorax, lateral view; er antenna;
di hind leg; et forewing; f: hind wing; gz male genitalia, lateral view; bt anal valve of male;

i: parameres, dorsal and mesal views; jt aedeagus; le sperm pump; I: female genitalia, lateral
view. than usual, apex rounded but not broadly so, basal vein slightly longer than cubitus,
radial sector shorter than media to furcation point, radius and R, almost equal in length,
cubitus three times longer than radius, first marginal cell slightly longer than second,
distance between Cig and Ci, a little longer than the distance between Cy and Mg 44,
veins armed with small setae. Hind wings (Fig. 107£) small, uniformly and thickly beset with minute points, costal
margin armed with a few simple and hooked sctae. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 335

Abdomen longer than broad, thickly beset with minute points, arranged in rows,
sternites bearing long hairs. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 107g) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve
(Fig. 107h) longer than parameres, about 0-28 mm long, in profile, anterior margin
somewhat straight, narrower both basally and apically, broadest in middle, posterior
margin strongly convex, sparsely pubescent in upper half and also thickly beset with
minute points, hairs longer on lateral sides; parameres (forceps) about 0-20 mm long,
thick, bilobate, somewhat with parallel sides in middle when seen laterally, basal region
broad, apical area narrow, divided into two short processes, posterior process small,
subacute at tip, anterior process slightly longer than posterior, narrower, bent inward. and ending in an acute black point, long and thick sctac directed downwards present just
below this point, basal anterior border also armed with short, thick setae directed upwards,
short and thick setae pointing downwards also present on the posterior process near apex;
hypandrium of usual shape, sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute points arranged
in series; aedeagus with outer arm short, having the spoon end acutely pointed at apex
(Fig. 107j); sperm pump as figured (Fig: 107k). Female genital segment (Fig. 1071) smaller than abdomen, pubescent, posterior region
bearing longer setae, dorsal plate Jonger than ventral, roundly pointed at apex and armed
with short and thick setae, circum-anal ring composed of double row of pores; ventral
plate also roundly pointed at apex; ovipositor short and pointed. Host plant, Bred ex pit galls on leaves of Duabanga grandiflora (Roxb.) Walp. (=D. sonneratioides Buch. ~Ham.). Type locality. Samsing, Kalimpong (Bengal). Types. Holotype male; Allotype female, both from the type locality, and
collected on October 25, 1934 (A. M. Posford); Paratypes: 3 males and 5 females, from
the same locality and date of collection (A. M. Posford), and few adults and nymphal
stages also preserved in alcohol, data same. All types, nymphal stages and some slides
having mounted parts of adults and nymphs, deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Comparison. T. lobata, sp. n. is characterized and differentiated by the shape of headand
forewings, venation, legs and genital features. Biological notes. ‘The pit-galls formed by this specics are deep, oval in shape and located
on the under surface of leaves. They may be separate or congregated in a mass, and the
area around each pit is thickened and light red in colour. Young nymphs are cream or
pale-yellow in colour, with eyes pinkish-red, and broadly oval in shape. Mature nymphs
are oval in shape, pale-yellow, with a fuscous median stripe, body adpressed to the leaf
surface, while the venter is bulging and. resting deep inside the pit. Their body is fringed
with a continuous waxy secretion and the honey dew is exuded as small drops of globules. Its nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig. 108a), Length 1:52 mm. Of the typical triozine form; somewhat
broadly and regularly ova], but the continuity of margin is slightly interrupted near eye
and at the base of abdomen, where the abdomen is narrower than the wing-pads; humeral

336 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

   

Ay
- 2 03mm

Fig. 108, Triage lobata, sp. n.—at
anal pore ring,

 

fifth stage nymph; br antenna; et tibio-tarsal segment of leg; dt circum-

angle of the wing-pads not projecting beyond the contour of the body but produced
cephalad beyond the eye. Dorsum strongly sclerotic thronghout, except for a small
area at the base of abdomen. Abdomen for the most part composed of a single posterior
plate, showing traces of segmentation, and two narrow, medianally interrupted plates near
base. Margin of the body, except at the base of abdomen, beset with a continuous series
of secta-setae, borne upon distinct prominences; these secta-setae are of various length,
Jong and slender on the margin of head and at the base of abdomen, thick and stout along
the margin of wing-pads. Derm vermiculate and also beset with simple ring-based setae. Ventral side membranous throughout except for a weakly sclerotic marginal zone,
irregular areas around anal ring, weak submedian lines in the abdomen, and a small
area about each spiracle. Derm strongly beset with minute points, and each abdominal
segment with a transverse series of small simplesetae, posterior caudal area with minute,
fringed processes. Antennae (Fig. 108b) 0-91 mm long, ventral, short and thick, appa-
rently seven-segmented, segmentation obscure, four sensoria present. Legs (Fig. 108c)
short and thick, femora not reaching the margin of body; apparently without or with
weak indication of trochanters; tibio-tarsal articulation distinct; claws present, pulvillus
quite large, triangular. Anal-opening (Fig. 108d) set well away from apex of abdomen,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAR 337

 

surrounded by an outer pore:
ring of indistinct pores. ring consisting of a single row of slit:

 

ike pores ancl an inner

Fourth stage. Length 0-92 nim, Resembling the last stage nymph, except in being
smaller in size, smaller wing-pads, antennae apparently five-segmented with three sensoria,
tibio-tarsal articulation absent. Trioza malloticola (Crawford) Comb. n.
(Fig. 109)
Crawford, 1D, L, 1928, Ent. Mitt, 17: 426, t. fig. (Megatriaca malloticola). (ev galls on Mallotus philipp-
inensis, Fort de Kock, Sumatra). Laing, F, 1930, Indian Forest Rec. 14 (8): 43 (Fiom galls on Madlntus philippinensis, Dehra Dun, U.P.) Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Forast Rec. 1 (2): 5-56 (Biology). Beeson, ©. F.C. 1941, Forest Insects, p. 779 (Biological notes). Mathur, R. N. 1949. Indian J. Ent. 8(2) : 233-234, fig. 6 (Nymphal stages). Mani, M.S. 1948. J. Roy. Asiat. Sor, Bengal 14: 27-195. Mani, M. S. 1959, Agra Unio. J. Res (Sci.). Be
Weiclner, H. 1961, Sonderdr. Abh. Verl. der naturw vere Hamburg 5: 31, 46. Length of body, in male, 2-33 mm; in female, 2-62 mm
Length of forewings, in male, +35 mm; in female, 4-84 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-73 mm

Width of vertex between cyes, 0-4-1 mm

Length of antennae, 1-0] mm

Colouration. General colour light ochreous brown; wings transparent, Mlayvus, with a
light black spot near clavus. Structure, Large species. Head (Fig. 109a) slightly wider than thorax, somewhat
declivous, sparsely hairy with long hairs, rugulose; vertex about twice as broad as long,
with two circular foveac, posterior to centre, onc oncither side of median suture, disc deeply
depressed on cither side of median linc, post-ocellar region swollen, bearing large ocelli,
anterior ocellus visible from above, anterior margin invaginated at point of excision,
posterior margin strongly emarginate; genal cones small, about 0-15 mm long, one-third
smaller than vertex, clothed with long hairs, hairs longer than that of vertex, finely
rugulose, concs situated below the level of vertex, divergent, subacute at apex. Eyes large. Antennae (Fig. 109b) long, about one and a half timcs as long as head, tcen-segmented,
bearing a few setae, imbricate, two basal segments robust, Ist narrowly transverse, 2nd
sub-square, broad apically, remaining segments slender, 3rd longest, onc and three-fourth
times as long as 4th, 4th slightly long. than 5th, 5th and 6th equal, 7th smaller than 6th,
8th slightly longer than 7th, 9th smallest and slightly smaller than apical segment, ter-
minal segment with two uncqual setae at apex; four sensoria present on scgments 4, 6, 8
and 9,

Thorax strongly arched, broad, clothed dorsally with long hairs, finely rugulose. Prothorax short, roof-shaped, situated below the level of mesothorax, postero-latcral
margin produced like a thin flange, with two foveal depressions on cach lateral side;
prescutum nearly as long as broad, gradually sloping anteriorly, anterior margin some-

22

338 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

a

 

Fig. 109. Trisga malloticola Crawford—a: head, front view; ‘br antenna; et hind leg; di forewing; et hind
wing; f: male genitalia, lateral view; gt anal valve and aedeagus; ht forceps, lateral and mesal
views; i sperm pump; js female genitalia, lateral views kx dorsal plate of female. what convex; scutum about twice as broad as long, smaller in length than prescutum,
depressed dorso-medianally and then gradually sloping on cach lateral side, angulate

posteriorly; scutellum somewhat triangular, swollen, broad anteriorly and narrow
posteriorly. FAMILY PSYLLIDAR 339

Legs (Fig. 109c) moderately long and hairy, hairs arranged in longitudinal rows, also
besct with minute points arranged in lines, tibiae longer than femora, all tibiae with a
comb of apical setae, hind femur with a group of three or four dorsal, blunt setae near
apex, hind tibiae with a serics of smallbasal spurs and three black apical spines (one spine
on one side and two approximate spines on the other), tarsal segments equal in length;
meracanthus long, slender and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 109d) quite long but variable in length, transparent, without ptero-
stigma, subacute at apex, radius, media and cubitus arising from the same point, cubitus
nearly twice as long as radius, basal vein longer than cubitus, radial sector (Rs) usually
long, and looped, R, smaller than redius; first marginal cell Jonger and lroader than
second; fork M, 42 mceting near apex of wing. Hind wings (Fig. 109e) clear, thickly beset with minute points, slightly more than half
as long as forewings, costal margin armed with a few simple andhookcd sctac. Abdomen sparsely hairy, hairs prominent on sternites, and also beset with minute
points arranged in lines. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. L09f) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve
(Fig. 109g) higher than forceps, in profile, anterior margin almost straight except at
apex, where it is deflexed caudally, lateral lobe produced posteriorly from the basal
region on each side into a long, slender club-like arm, basal region of these arms beset
with minute points while the apical region with long simple sctac, outer surface of valve
armed apically with small simple setae, marginal setae on lateral lobes longer; parameres
(Fig. 109h) small, curved inwards, in profile, narrower both basally and apically,
broadest beyond centre, basal mesal region invaginated, apical region triangular, ter-
minating in a bidentate black point, outer surface besct with simple setae, marginal
setac slightly longer, apical mesal surface armed with rows of thick setae; hypandrium
simple and of usual shape, beating simple setae and also beset with thick points; outer
arm of acdeagus (Fig. 109g) smaller than basal, spoon end with a smal! hood and bifur-
cated into two acutely pointed processes; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 109i). Temale genital segment (Fig. 109j) moderately long and slightly smaller than abdomen,
plates sub-cqual and armed with strong points; dorsal plate (Fig. 109k) longer than
ventral, broad basally, gradually sloping caudally, acuminate in the apical region and
clearly differentiated from the basal region, basa! region beset with simple setae, apical
region armed with small peg-like sctac, setae in centre Jonger, caudal end slightly up-
turned and subacute; circum-anal pore ring large and longer, and composed of a double
ring of pores; ventral plate broad basally and acuminate apically, acutely pointed at
apex, basal surface bearing simple setac while the apical region having small peg-like
setae, setae longer in centre; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant, Bred ex galls on leaves of Mallotus philippinensis Mucll.-Arg. (= M. philip-
pinensis Muell.-Arg.) (Plate 4c, d). Distribution, Previously recorded from Fort de Kock, Sumatra (Crawford, 1928) and
Dehra Dun (U.P.) (Laing, 1930),

Material examined. The collection at F.R.I., Dehra Dun, consists of a good  serics
of males and females, collected during March 1933 (Exp.No.435) aud May 1934 and

340 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

March 1938, from New Forest, Dehra Dun (R.N. Mathur); 7 examples of 21,2.21,
from Dehra Dun (M. Cameron); 5 examples of 25.10.25 and 2 examples of 19.3.27,
from Dehta Dun (M. Bose), ex M. philippinensis (6 examples of 2.12.49 and 2 ex. of
6.3.50, from New Forest (R.N. Mathur); 1 ex. of 17.4.48 from Dehra Dun (R. N,
Mathur); 8 ex. of 29.1.33 from Dehra Dun (M. Bose); and 3 phials containing adults
and nymphs, in alcohol, and collected on 14,3.52, 28.3.53 and 18,3.62 from Dehra Dun,
respectively,

Four examples are also present at LA.RI., New Delhi, and these specimens were
collected from New Forest, Dehra Dun, on March 10, 1933 (R.N. Mathur). Comparison. This species is casily recognisable in having long and narrow wings,
shape of head, veins Rs and media longer and looped and with characteristic genitalia;
genal cones about one-third smaller than vertex, narrowly and roundly pointed at apex,
separate and divergent distally. Biological notes. Mathur (1935) has described its biology and brief life-history
notes are also given by Beeson (1941). Its nymphal stages are described by Mathur
(1949). Trioza pitformis, sp. n.
(Figs, 110, 111)

Mathur, RN. 1935. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2): 86-57, PL. II, fig. 19. (Phyllaplecta sp.) Beeson, G. F.C. 1941. Forest Insecta, p. 779. Length of body, in male, 1-25 mm; in female, 1-75 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3-72 mm; in female, 4:10 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-56 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0:24 mm

Length of antennae, 0°87 mm

Colouration. (Live specimens), General colour light yellowish-brown, with bluish-green
abdomen; in dried examples, light yellowish-brown, head pale-yellow with dark-brown
foveal impressions; genae pale-yellow basally and dark-brown or black at apices; antennae
yellow, having bases of first two segments, tips of 4th and 6th segments and three terminal
segments black; thorax with two light brown longitudinal dorsal bands on prescutum,
two dorsal and two pairs of dorso-lateral bands on scutum; legs pale-yellow; abdomen. bluish-green or yellowish with black segmental margins; wings hyaline, veins flavus. Structure. Head (Fig. 110a) including eyes, slightly broader than thorex, slightly
declivous, finely rugulose, sparsely pubescent with long hairs; vertex broader than long,
about twice as broad as long, strongly emarginate in front, with a median suture and
a pair of deep foveal impressions, posterior to centre, each half with a shallow depression
extending forward from cach fovea and bifurcating towards the anterior margin but
not attaining it, conspicuously swollen anteriorly above antennae, posterior margin
deeply emarginate; post ocelli orange, latcral, anterior ocellus visible from above; genal
cones about 0+]0 mm long, a little more than half as long as vertex, sparsely pubescent,
pubescence almost as long as on the vertex, and also armed with rows of'minute points,

+ FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, . 341

 

Fig. 110. Trioza pifformis, sp. n.—at head, front views br antenna; e: hind coxa; di: hind leg, in two parts;
e: forewing; f: hind wing; g: male genitalia, lateral view; ht anal valve, dorsal view;
i: parameres, caudal and partly mesal view; jz aedeagus; Is: sperm pump; Ii female genitalia,
lateral view; ma: dorsal plate; n: ventral plate,

broader at base and bluntly rounded at apex, separate, divergent. Eyes large, somewhat
hemispherical. .

Antennae (Fig. 110b) long, slightly longer than head including eyes, ten-segmented,
bearing a few setae, two basal segments robust and beset with rows of minute points,
Ist joint rather rectangular, 2nd subquadrate, remaining segments slender, imbricate,
3rd longest, slightly less than twice as long as 4th, 5th and 7th equal and each smaller than
4th, 6th and 8th equal and each slightly longer than 5th, 9th and 10th smallest, but
thicker than others, apical joint with two unequal spines at tip, four sensoria present
on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9, . Thorax long and slender, moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent with long
hairs, finely rugulose, .Pronotum somewhat roof-shaped, beset with rows of minute
points, slightly longer in middle and narrower laterally, with two distinct lateral foveae

  

342 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

located near the posterior border, posterior margin with a prominent thin flange;
prescutum somewhat seven-sided in shape when seen from above, longer than broad,
anterior margin with a small, median epiphysis; scutum much broader than long, about
twice as broad as long, broadest before middle, smaller than prescutum in length,
angled both laterally and posteriorly, disc flat dorsally; scutellum vase-shaped, broad
anteriorly and narrow posteiorly, anterior margin straight; post-scutellum of meta-
thorax broadly transverse, swollen and convexly rounded in middle. Legs (Fig. 110d) long and slender, pubescent and also thickly beset with whorls of
minute points, tibiae longer than femora, hind coxa with broad, black spot, hind femur
with three subapical, dorsal, blunt setae, hind tibiae with a series of distinct basal spurs,
and three black tooth-like spines at apex, tarsal segments of equal length, basal tarsal
segment of hind leg narrower and constricted neav base, thicker in apical half, hind coxae
with an anteriorly directed spur (Fig. 110¢), meracanthus long and slender, claws strong
and dark-brown. Forewings (Fig. 110e) long and narrow, about thrice as long as broad, acutely pointed
at apex, radial sector long and almost straight, cubitus a little more than twice as long
as radius, first marginal cell longer and broader than second, fork M;,» meeting near
apex, venation typical triozinc type, veins armed with microscopic setac,

Hind wings (Fig. 110£) comparatively quite small, membrane uniformly and thickly
beset with minute points, costal margin armed with a few basal stout setae and four
hooked setae, last seta strongly hooked. Abdomen longer than broad, slender, finely pubescent and thickly besct with minute
points ventrally. Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 110g) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent;
anal valve (Fig. 110h) large, about 0-28 mm long, longer than parameres, in profile
anterior margin almost straight, posterior margin arcuately rounded, forming strong
lobes, marginal setae very long, apical anal region small, truncate at apex; parameres
(Fig. 110i) about 0-20 nm long, broader at apex when seen laterally, with a black pointed
tip, sides subparalle], each forcep curved towards inside, outer surface beset with small
simple setae, marginal sctac longer, mesal surface with a row of thick setae directed down-
ward; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely beset with simple setae; aedeagus
(Fig. 110j) short and robust, outer arm slightly smaller than basal, the spoon end with
a small hook; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 110k). Female genital segment (Fig, 1101) smaller than abdomen, pubescent with long hairs,
posterior region dark brawn; anal plate (Fig, 110m) slightly longer than ventral plate,
beset with minute points, broad at base, acuminate posteriorly, roundly pointed at apex,
circum-anal pore ring with a single row of pores, guarded by small setae; ventral plate
(Fig. 110m) broad at base, acuminate, acutely pointed at tip; ovipositor acutely pointed,

Host plant. Bred from nymphs in pit galls on leaves of Mallotus philippinensis Muell.-
Arg. (= Mallotus philippinensis Muell.-Arg.) (Plate 4e, f). Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Holotype male, March 6, 1950; Allotype female, March 6, 1933;
Paratypes: 2 males, March 21, 1933; 2 males, March 6, 1950; 5 fernales, April

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 343

6, 1948; 2 females, March 6, 1950; + examples of July 24, 1933, and 9 examples of May
5, 1934; all from the type locality (R.N. Mathur). Additional specimens not designated
as paratypes, are: 2 males and | female, March 6, 1933; 1 female, March 7, 1933;
2 examples, June 20, 1933; 4 examples, July 24, 1933; 10 examples, May 5, 1934; 1
example, May 6, 1934; 2 males and 10 females, March 6, 1950, all from the type
locality (R.N. Mathur); 7 examples, April 6, 1948 and 1 male and 6 females, March
15, 1953, from Dehra Dun (U.P.) (R.N. Mathur). One phial containing some adults
and nymphal stages, preserved in alcohol, on February 20, 1933, from the type locality
(R.N. Mathur). All types, preserved material and some slides, are deposited at
F.R.L, Dehra Dun, A few paratypes of 6,3.1950 are donated to LA.R.L, New
Delhi. Comparison. This new species is easily distinguished from others, in shape of head and
wings; wings long and narrow, and genitalia of characteristic shape; radial sector almost
straight and not looped, second marginal cell smeller and near apex, vertex
conspicuously swollen anteriorly, and genae small and divergent. Biological notes. Brief life-history notes are given by Mathur (1935), and record of
this species has also been mentioned by Beeson (1941). The top leaves of young, weak
and semi-suppressed trees are more heavily infested. The leaves turn yellow in severe
outbreaks. Young expanding buds are ruined by the draining out sap by the adults. The nymphal stages are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. Length on slide, 1:75 mm, Of triozine form; broadly oval (Fig. 11a),
being slightly interrupted near about the eyes and base of the abdomen. Humeral
angles of the wing-pads produced forward almost to the middle of eyes, and rounded. Dorsum strongly sclerotic except for a small area at the base of abdomen, the
abdomen being composed of a single plate showing traces of segmentation. Derm bearing
conspicuous markings which are weakly vermiculate in appearance, and also thickly
beset with minute secta-setac borne on large conspicuous tubercle-like prominences or
shafts. These setae are arranged segmentally in the abdomen, intermixed with
numerous comb-like structures. Body margin provided with a continuous series of
large slender secta-sctae interspersed alternately with smallsecta-setae, all borne on small
tubercle-like prominences. Marginal prominences are smaller than those present on
the dorsum. Ventral side membranous throughout, except for small sclerotic areas about cach
spiracle, thin submedian abdominal strips and a pair of irregular plates below the circum-
anal ring. Derm sparsely beset with simple ring-based sctae, and minute points are
restricted to the anterior marginal region of head and along the peripheral region of
abdomen. Minute fringed processes present below the circum-anal ring. Antennac
(Fig. 111b) ventral about 0-30 mm long, moderately thick in basal half, seven-segmented,
apical four segments imbricate, 3rd segment large, broader at base and narrower at
top, with four sensoria on 3rd, 5th and 7th joints, terminal joint with two small spines
at apex. Legs small, slender, beset with few setac, femora not reaching the body

344 PS¥LLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

   

0.01 mm
Wig. il. Triosa piffornis, sp. n.—ai fifth stage nymph; b: antenna of Gfth stage; ¢: circum-anal ring;
di third stage nymph; e: antenna of third stage; ft first stage nymph; gt antenna of first stage. margin, without trochanters; with tibio-tarsal articulation distinct, and having a
single golf-club seta on each tarsus; claws present, pulvillus petiolate and like a fish-
tail. A strong papilla-like structure present just below each hind coxa. Anal opening
(Fig. 111e) ventral, away from the apex of abdomen, and surrounded by an outer ring
of slit-like pores and the inner ring of minute, weak, circular pores, both rings are inter-

rupted medianally, and are guarded by two anterior and one lateral pairs of small
setae,

Fourth stage. Length 1-07 mm. Resembling the fifth stage in form and markings;
antennae five-segmented, with three sensoria; tibio-tarsal articulation absent. Third stage. (Fig. 111d) Length 0-65 mm. Similar to the fourth stage in form; wing
pads small; antennae (Fig, 111e) three-segmented, with two sensoria. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE *° ~ 345

Second stage. Length 0-45 mm. Similar to the third stage, but with few
setae; antennae two-jointed with a single scnsorium; wing-pads smaller but
distinct. First stage. (Figs. 111f, g) Length 0-28mm. Similar to the second stage, but with
less number of body and marginal secta-setae. Rudiments of wing-pads represented
by long sccta-setac; claws absent and replaced by minute sclerites; pulvillus long and
fish-tail like. Trioza serrata, sp. n.
(ig. 112)

Length of body, in male, 1-97 mm; in female, 2-20 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3-0 mm; in female, 3-82 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-62 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-40 mm

Length of antennae, 1-22 mm

Colouration. General colour pale-brown, venter of abdomen lighter; antennae and
legs pale-yellow; apices of antennal segments 4 to 8, and two apical segments black;
tip of labium black; wings hyaline, transparent. Structure. Head (Figs. 112a,b) large, slightly broader than thorax, moderately
declivous, sparsely pubescent with long setae; vertex large and broad, nearly twice as
broad as long, finely rugulose, gradually rounded and bent downward and swollen an-
teriorly on each side of median line, with deep foveal impressions near posterior margin
and one on either side of median suture, with a linear depression from each fovea ex-
tending towards anterior margin, posterior margin arcuate; emarginate in front at median
line over front ocellus; anterior ocellus visible from above; post-ocellar region well
clevated and disc deeply invaginated in between; genal cones short, about 0-18 mm long
and smaller than vertex, vertical, broad at base, subacute at apex, divergent, depressed
below plane of vertex, setae longer than on vertex. Clypeus Jarge, somewhat circular,
visible in front. Eyes large. Antennae (Fig. 112c) long, ten-segmented, slender except two basal segments which
are robust, bearing sparse pubescence, imbricate, 3rd segment longest, 4th about half
as long as 3rd, 5th smaller than 4th, 6th and 7th nearly equal but shorter than 4th, 8th
as long as Sth, 9th and 10th equal and smaller than 5th, but slightly broader than other
segments, terminal ségment with two unequal spines at apex, four sensoria present on
segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. BaThorax large and robust, moderately arched, conspicuously rugose, finely and sparsely
pubescent. Prothorax (Fig. 112,0) narrow, roof-shaped, sometimes much inclined
below head, slightly swollen dorso-medianally, with two knob-like « epiphyses
submedianally near posterior border, lateral sides slightly directed forward behind eyes,
with prominent foveal impressions, posterior border margined, bearing long setae;
prescutum large, longer than scutum, almost as long as broad, narrowly rounded cephalad,

346 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 112. Triza serrata, sp. n.—as head, front view; br head and part of thorax, lateral view; e: antenna;
di hind leg; et forewing; f apical part of forewing; gt hind wing; hr male genitalia, lateral
views is anal valve and aedeagus; J: parameres, mesal view; kk: sperm pump; 1: female genitalia,
Jateral view; ms posterior region of ventral plate; n: ovipositor; o: prothorax. with an anterior median point, broadest in middle, angulate laterally, posterior margin
also angulate; scutum large, much broader than long, about two and a half times as
broad as long, posterior margin angulate; scutcllum small, subtriangular, braad anteriorly,
narrowly rounded posteriorly; mesopleurae large, projecting forward. Legs (Fig. 112d) long, pubescent and also besct with minute points arranged in small
series, femora shorter than tibiac, all trochanters and femora bearing a few long ventral
setae, all tibiae with a comb of setae at apex, hind tibiae thicker apically, with prominent
basal spurs and two strong, black spines at apex on inner side and one outside, hind femora
with four thick, dorsal setae near apex, basal tarsal segments slightly longer than apical
segments, meracanthus long and triangular, tibial groove of fore and middle legs longer
than that of hind leg. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 347

Forewings (Fig. 112e) large, clear, transparent, nearly two and three-fourths times
as long as broad, subacute at apex, R, M, Cu arising from the same point, R and R,
nearly equal in length, radial sector shorter than media to furcation point, Cu three
times as long as R, distance between Cu,, Cug equal to the distance between Cu, and
My4ss fork M,,2 meeting near apex, first marginal cell slightly longer and broader
than second, veins armed with minute setae. In one female specimen, the stem My 45
of right wing is branched (Fig. 112f). Hind wings (Fig. 112g) small, thickly and uniformly besct with minute points, costal
margin armed with a few simple and hooked setac. Abdomen longer than broad, sternites sparsely pubescent, both tergites and sternites
strongly beset with minute points arranged in series. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig, 112h) much smaller than abdomen, Anal
valve (Fig. 112i) scarcely longer than forceps, about 0-25 mm long, narrower both
basally and apically, broadest slightly above middle in apical half when seen caudad,
pubescent, setae longer on lateral borders, also strongly beset with minute thick
points arranged in series, anterior margin nearly straight, posterior margin broadly
convex when viewed laterally; parameres (Fig. 112j) broad basally and narrow apically,
ending in a sharp point bent inward, just below this point a small knob-like process
present, Outer surface bearing a few small setae, both anterior and posterior borders
with longer setae, apical half of mesal surface armed with a few thick setae directed
downwards; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely pubescent and strongly
armed with minute, thick points; outer arm of aedeagus (Fig. 112i) shorter than basal
arm, with a broad spoon end; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 112k). Female genital segment (Fig. 1121) much smaller than abdomen, pubescent, setac
longer posteriorly, dorsal plate raiscd and not in plane of abdomen, triangular in shape in
caudal view and longer than ventral, strongly inclincd downward to apex from posterior
part of anus when scen laterally, apex narrowly rounded and weakly invaginated
medianally, bearing small thick setae; ventral plate (Fig. 112m) concavely emarginate
at apex; ovipositcr pointed, serrated ventrally (Fig. 112m); circum-anal pore ring
composcd of a double ring of pores. Host plant. On Sabia paniculata Edgew. Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Holotype male; Allotype female, both from the type locality, and
collected on July 11, 1958 (R.N. Mathur); Paratypes: 6 males and 7 females,
from the same locality and collected on July 10-16, 1958 (R.N. Mathur). All types,
6 females preserved in alcohol and some slides, having dissected parts mounted on them,
deposited at F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Comparison. This species differs from others in shape of head, leaf-like forewings,
venation, presence of epiphysis on prothorax, legs end genital characters; genal cones
longer than in other species,

Biological notes, Trioza serrata is commonly found on this creeper (Sabia paniculata)
at New forest, Dehra Dun, during rainy months, but the nymphs are not located. The
adults are active fliers and fly about with the slight disturbance. 348, PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Trioza vitiensis (Kirkaldy) Comb, n,
(Fig. 39)

Kirkaldy, G. W. 1907. Proc. Hawaii. ent, Soc. 1: 103-104 (Viti, Rewas under Trioza citiensis). Aulmann, G, 1913, Pyllidarum Gatalogus, Berlin, p. 58. Crawford, D. L. 1915. Philipp. J. Si. 10: 265 (in galls on Eugenia malaccensis, under Triosa
eugeniae). Crawford, D.L, 1919. Philipp. J, Sci. 18: 195 (Under Megatrioca vitiensis). Crawford, D. L. 1927. dnsects of Samoa, pp. 31-32 (Tutuila). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924, Rec. Indian Mus, 26: 624. Kiyer, F. D, 1932, B.P. Bishop Mus. Bull. 98: 99-101,

Klyver, F. D. 1935, ibid. 113: 27. Mani, M.S. 1935, J. Asiat. Soc, Beng. 12): 104-106 (Bred cx galls on leaves of Eugenia jambolana;

collected in different parts of India; also near Tanjore, Madras Presidency). Mani, M.S, 1959. Gécidotheca Indica, pp. 177-78 (Coxomandal Coast; Java and Malaya),

Tuthill, LD. 1942. B. P, Bishop Mus., Occ. Papers 17(6): 75. Tuthill, L.D. 1951. Pacif. Sei. 5: 274-75. Tuthill, L.D. 1964, B. P, Bishop Mus. Insects of Micronesia 6(6): 371. ‘This species is not secn by me, and, therefore, its description is reproduced below as
given by Kirkaldy (1907) and Crawford (1915, 1919). “Q. Vertex obscure testaceous with a narrow blackish-brown line down the middle
and an obscure spot on cach side at the base between this line and the ocelli, Frons
orange, the middle ocellus pale-yellow, ringed with blackish-brown, the others at the
posterolateral angles of the vertex and conspicuously orange. Antennae pale yellow. Eyes red-brown. Pronotum, dorsulum and mesonotvm pitchy, wigh the following
yellowish-ferrugineous marks; dorsulum with a median and. a curved lateral line. Mesonotum with 4 lines, the inner curved inwardly, the outer curved outwardly; scu-
tellum pale with a black median linc, abdomen black, genital segment yellowish. Tegmina and wings hyaline, veins pale fuscous. Legs yellowish-brown, femora basally
more or less piccous. Vertex flat, transverse, forewing truncate, medio-longitudinally
narrowly sulculate and shallowly pitied on cach side near the base. Head nearly as
wide as thorax, frontal cones rounded apically. Pronotum scarcely as wide as vertex,
very short. Dorsulum longer than wide, suboval, narrower than the mesonotum, which
is transverse. Scutellum small. Tegmen about 2} times as long as wide, in form like
that of J. koebelei Kirkaldy and with similar venation, exccpt that the brachial (lower
branch of cubital) forks basal of the middle.”

“ff largely orange yellow. Head dorsally yellow cinercous with a line down the middle
as in ather sex, Cones bright orange. Nota orange brown, rather feebly lined with
fuscous and yellow brown. Abdomen ferrugineous, last tergite deeply excavated
apically,’ wavily reflexed, the reflexed part creamy, genital segment diamond-
shaped.”

“Length to apex of abdomen 2$ mill. ; to apex of tegmina folded 5} mill.”

“Hab, Viti, Rewa (iii,06. Muir 1 12 2.9),” (Kirkaldy, 1907). The description of this species under Trioga eugeniae as given by Crawford (1915)
is as follows:

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 349

“Length of body, 2 millimeters; length of forewing, 5-2 mm; width, 1-7 mm; width
of head, 0:7 mm. General colour greenish-yello
(field notes by Rutherford).”

“Head distinctly narrower than thorax, rather large; vertex concave on cach side
of median suture; genal cones scarcely half as long as vertex, broadly rounded, a little
divergent, pubescent; antennae about one and one-helf times as long 2s width of head,
slender.”

“Thorax broad, long; pronotum large; prescutum longer than broad; legs moderately
long; hind tibiae with 4 black spines at apex, 3 together and | aloné; wings hyaline, very
long, acute at apex, more than half of length beyond abdomen; marginal cells long.”? “Abdomen rather short, especially in male; forceps short, slender; anal valve larger,

triangular, with a petiolate attachment at base. Female genital segment very short;
dorsal valve longer than ventral; both subacute.”

“Described from 9 males and femaks from Peradeniya (Ceylon), collected by
A, Rutherford on May 12, 1913, in galls on leaves of Eugenia malaccensis. The galls
‘were so numerous that they formed a continuous gall on the upper surface of the leaf.”

“This... +..species is closely related both in structure and habits to two
American species of the same genus, Tioga magnoliae Ashmead and T. koebelei Kirkaldy. An Asiatic genus, Cccidotrioga Kieffer, bears a close resemblance to these gall makers
and is probably congencric.”

Again in 1919, Crawford has described it under Megatrioza vitiensis (Kirkaldy), as
below. “Length of body, 2-6 millimeters; forewing, 5 to 6. General colour brown, dorsulum
with a pale or yellow central streak and often two lateral oncs; mesoscutum with several
yellowish or pale longitudinal bands; femora dark-brown, tibiae lighter; antennae -pale
yellow, black at tip; forewings.clear with a small brown spot at anal angle of both front
and hind wings. Colour of newly emerged adults usually yellowish or pale brownish-
yellow, without the markings described above.”

“Head declivous, not as broad as thorax; vertex about half as long as broad between
eyes, sparsely pubescent, deeply.impressed on cach side of median line, with a transverse
sulcus connecting the two foveae, somewhat convex in anterior half; genal cones about
half as long as vertex, broad, rounded, not much divergent, pubescent. Antennae
about one and one-half times as long as width of head, yes large.’*

“Thorax strongly arched, rather broad, clothed sparsely with long hairs. Legs long
and stout; hind tibiae stout, with basal spur not very large and apical spines moderately
small, Forewings long, about three times as long as broad, acutely pointed, marginal
cells very long. Hind wings about half as long as forewings or a little more.”

“Abdomen short and broad. Male forceps about as long as anal. valve or a little
shorter, slender, basal two-thirds about three times as Iong as thick, rounded apically,
and distal third abruptly narrowed with a finger-like process directed inward and
acutely pointed; anal ‘valve about as broad as long, lateral wings broadly convex. Female genital segment very short, much shorter than abdomen, dorsal valve a little
longer than ventral,.both subacute.”

 

tbdomen bright green, wings shining

 

350 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

“Type locality. Fiji Islands, Rewa (Muir), March, 1906, 3 males and 2 females.”

“Singapore (Baker), 1 pair. Amboina (Muir), 1 female. Pemalonga (Leeuwen-
Reijnvaan), 1 male and 1 female, on Eugenia malaccensis, April, 10, 1912. Ceylon,
Peradeniya (A. Rutherford), 9 males and females from galls on leaves of Eugenia malac-
censis, May 12, 1913 (described as Trioza eugeniae).”

“This appears to be a widely distributed specics in the South Pacific in tropical Asia,
making galls on Eugenia malaccensis (known also as Jambosa domestica). The name
Trioza eugeniae, applicd to some newly emerged Ceylonese representatives of this species,
was preoccupied by an Australian species named by Froggatt, but subsequent study
shows the species to belong to Megatrioza and further to be synonymous with Kirkaldy’s
T. vitiensis. The Fiji specimens before me bear no identification mark indicating that
they were cxamined by Kirkaldy, but they agree well with his description of T.  vitiensis
and probably are paratypes in as much as the date of collection and locality are identical
in both lots,” (Crawford, 1919). Distribution. Widely distributed in several western and south western Pacific Islands,
Strait Settlements and Ceylon, making galls on Syzygium malaccensis. Mani (1935) has
recorded this species from different parts of India making galls on Syzygium jambolana;
also from a scrub jungle ncar Tanjore, Madras Presidency, 30.xii.1928. Comparison. This species is readily separated from other species of Trioza, having very
long wings, colouration, long and large marginal cells, and second marginal cell meeting
posterior margin of wing, quite below the apex. Trroza Grove

Body small to quite large. Heacl not broader than thorax, usually distinctly narrower,
sometimes as wide as thorax, deflexed. Vertex much broader than long, usually deeply
impressed discally, rounded downward in front, median suture prominent, sometimes
deeply grooved, with more or less of an emargination in front between the two lobes,
posterior margin moderately to strongly emarginate or arcuate; post-ocellar region usu-
ally swollen. Genal cones variable in Jength, shape and trend, depressed from plane
of vertex and usually deflexed, usually subacute to roundly pointed, always more or
less divergent. Clypeus pyriform or subglobose, scarcely visible from in front. Eyes
large, hemispherical but variable in shape. Antennae slender, from one to two and a
half times as long as width of head, sometimes pubescent with long hairs. Thorax
usually arched, rather strongly. Pronotum short, collar-like and convexly rounded,
descending quite strongly cephalad, often depressed below level of head and prescutum. Prescutum usually about as long as broad, narrowed conspicuously cephalad. Scutum
large and broad. Propleurites as in Pyylda; pleural suture oblique, not extending to
middle of lateral extremity of pronotum; cpimeron usually shorter than episternum. Legs usually slender; hind tibiae often with basal spur or carina, with two or three black
spines al apex on inner side and one outside, in some species a conspicuous spur bearing
a black spine present towards outside near apex; basal tarsal segment of hind legs without
black claw-like spine at apex. Wings hyaline, membranous, usually acute apically,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 351

sometimes rounded, radius, media and cubitus diverging at same point from basal vein
(R+-M+Cu), and cubital petiole (M+Cu) wanting. No pterostigma. Hind wings
comparatively smaller and sometimes abortive. Male proctiger usually with caudal
lobes. Trioza is a very large genus of which many of the species are difficult to distinguish. It is widespread in distribution, being found all over the world. Fourteen species with
two subspecies have been recorded: from India, of which 6 are new to science. T. analis Crawf. is not scen author, but it has been added in the key by the
characters given by Crawford. KEY TO THE SPECIES OF TRIOZA

1, Hind wings greatly aborted, reduced to very small stube, 2... 2 ee T. obsoleta Buckt. Hind wings normally developed, at least half as long as forewings , . .
Insects large; veins of forewings seteose Fe eae 7. sigantea ‘Craw
Insects small to medium in size... ee
; Forewings more or less acutely angled or pointed at apex, not broadly —
vounded, . 2... se eee
— Forewings broadly rounded at apex, not angular nor acutely pointed
4. Radial sector long and greatly deflexed
. Radial sector short, curved to costa. .
5. Forewings with apices of veins marked with black and a spot at apex of anal
VEN, ee ee ee Se ee » T, cardi Berg. —. Apices of veins without black spots...
6. Antennae small, not more than 1 mm long . —. Antennae longer thanimm,,..... we oe 9
7. Basal vein almost as long as cubitus, ©... ee ly. oblique Thom. —. Basal vein longer than cubitus . , 8
8, Second marginal cellsmall. ©. 6 6 0s ee ee “t. Jotchert Crawt,

Second marginal celllong.. ee Lt + fet iin Cee
Hind tibia thick and swollen apically... .. . .

 

 

 

 

 

—. Hind tibia with a strong, conspicuous apicalspur 6. 2 5 i
10, First marginal cell distinctly arched... ee ee T. jambolanae Crawt,
—., First marginal cell scarcely arched © 2.) ee ee es tee «+ T, fusca, sp. n.
11, Head subhorizontal; genal cones ong... 6... 2. ss ss. 4 T langiantennata, sp. n.
—. Head deflexed; genal conessmall. 2.0 0. eee T. bifureata, sp. n.
12. Colour of body dark-brown to black... . . Se ee 13
—. Colour of body yellowish-brown to orange Cee ee tenes 4
13, Colour dark-brown; radial sector forking distad of its mid point... . . , Zo spinulata, sp. n,
=. Colour black; radial sector forking at its mid point...» . . vee ee se Teanalis Crawl,
14. Vertex with lateral epiphysis near each eyes. 6 tee ee + T. simplifiea, sp. n
—. Vertex not asabove, . 4-5 +s . Fe ee
15, Antennae three times as long as width of head, ; black at ‘ip Le eee , T. hyalina Gave
—. Antennae twice as long as width of head, distal halfblack. 6 6. ee es T. urtice (Linn.) Trioza analis Crawford 1912
(Fig. 38)
Crawford, D. L. 1912, Ree. Indian Mus, 7(5)1 429, Pl, xxiv, figs. C, 1D; Pl. sxxv, fig. L.
Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V, 1924. Ree, Indian Mus, 26: 624,

PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

I have examined the type at the Zoological Survey of India, Calcutta, which is in
a_very badly damaged condition (only remnants sticking to the pin), and therefore its
description from Crawford is reproduced below. “Length of body 2-4 mm; length of forewing 3-4 mm; greatest width 1-3 mm; width
of vertex between eycs 0:30 mm; with cyes 0-57 mm, General colour black, with vertex,
part of pronotum, abdomen ventrad, legs, basal half of antennae reddish-brown.”

“Head not as broad as thorax, somewhat deflexed; vertex with a deep sulcus down
median line and one on each side extending obliquely toward front margin of eye, pubes-
cent; facial cones almost as long as vertex, slightly divergent, deflexed from plane of
vertex, subacute at tip, pubescent. Antennae slender, about twice as long as width of
head; eyes large.”

“Prothorax moderately long; propleurites large, prominent; dorsulum long. Legs
rather short and stout. Wings hyaline, about two and a half times as long as broad,
youndly acute at tip; first marginal cell smaller than second; radius rather short; clayus
black at tip.”

“Female—Abdomen long, convergent to tip; genital segment very short, slightly longer
than preceding segment; ventral valve very small, triangular in profile.”

“Described from two females from Simla, West Himalayas, 2135m (N. Aunandale).”

“Type No. 9702/18" (Crawford, 1912). Trioza bifurcata, sp. n.
(Figs. 113, 114)

Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Fer Rec. 1(2)1 58-59, Pl. I, fig. 17 (Plylloplecta, sp. n. (Biology)
Beeson, C. F.C, 1941. Forest Insects, pp. 780-781 (Biological notes). Mani, M.S, 1959. Agra. Univ. J. Res. (Sci.) 8(2): p. 233,

* Length of body, in male, 212 mm; in female, 2-30 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 4*10 mm; in female, 3:10 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0480 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-42 mm
Length of antennae, 1-40 mm

Colouration. (Preserved specimens in alcohol). Flavus. Wings transparent but
dull, veins pale-yellow. Structure. Body quite large. Head (Fig, 113) including eyes, smaller than thorax,
moderately declivous, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex sub-square,
convexly rounded downward in front and somewhat produced forward on cach side’ of
median suture, with two deep foveae posterior to the centre, posterior margin moderately
arcuate, post-ocellar region slightly swollen, anterior margin somewhat emarginatc at
median line above front ocellus, anterior ocellus not visible from above; genal cones
very small, sparsely pubescent, with setae slightly longer than on the vertex, contiguous
near base, divergent and bluntly rounded at apex. Eycs quite large and bulging,
somewhat hemispherical. . . .

FAMILY psyLLDar 353

   

   

YY WS
0.25 mm h 0.25 mm, * NS

Fig. 113. Trioza bifurcata, sp. n.—ai head, front view bt antenna; e: part of forcleg; di hind Jeg; et laws
fi forewing; gt hind wing; bb anal valve, upper surface; 4, j1 forceps, outer and mesal views;
Jk: acdeagus; J: female genitalia, lateral view. Antennae (Fig. 113b) long, ten-segmented, having a few sctac, a little less than twice
as long as head with cyes, two basal segments robust, sub-quadrate, remaining segments
slender and imbricate, 3rd segment longest and slightly smaller than 4th to 7th combined,
4th, 5th and 7th equal to one another, 6th and 8th equal but slightly smaller than 4th,
9th slightly smaller than Sth, apical joint smaller than penultimate segment, having two
unequal spines at tip, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. 28 . 384 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Thorax moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescént, finely rugulose. Prothorax
of nearly equal length throughout, convexly rounded, sub-vertical, with two deep foveal
impressions on cach lateral side; prescutum nearly as broad as long, broadest in centre,
narrowly rounded both anteriorly and posteriorly; scutum much broader than long,
slightly smaller than prescutum in length; scutellum broadly transverse, twice as broad
as long. Legs (Fig. 113d) long, sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute points, hind
femora with a scries (apparently five) of subapical, dorsal, blunt setae, and having three
sensoria-like structures ventrally, all tibiac with a comb of apical setae, fore tibia with
one and middle tibia (Fig. 113c) with four subapical and thick setae, hind tibia with
a series of small basal spurs and a large, conspicuous, strong subapical spur bearing a
black tooth on one side and three epical spms armed with black teeth on the other, fore
and middle trochanters with a series of about five sensoria-like structures, apical tarsal
segment longer than basal, claws (Fig. 113e) peculiarly shaped,. being bladder-like at
base, with microscopic ridges; meracanthus large and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 113£) long and narrow, variable in sexes, about three times as long
as broad, broadest across middle, anterior margin arched, angled at apex, posterior
margin nearly straight, radius about half as long as cubital petiole (M+Cu), R, half
as long as R, basal vein (R+-M-+-Cu) slightly shorter than M+-Cu, M,+, terminating
near tip of wing, second marginal cell a little longer than first, distance between Cu,
and Cu, slightly longer than the distance between Cu, and M,-+4 and the distance
between M;4-, and M,+, along the hind margin, Cu, longer and strongly arched in
female. Hind wings (Fig.113g) small, thickly beset with minute points, costal margin armed
with a few basal, stout setae and six hooked setae,

Abdomen longer than broad, sparsely pubescent ventrally. Genitalia, Male genital segment smaller than abdomen, pubescent; anal valve
(Fig. 113h) about 0-37 mm long, nearly as long as forceps; in [ateral aspect, anterior
margin nearly straight, posterior margin broadly convex haszlly, bearing long setae,
anal region small, tubular, beset with minute setae; parameres (Figs. 113i, j) about
0-38 mm long, quite deeply bifurcate, the anterior branch sharply pointed and smaller
than the posterior branch, outer surface beset with fine setae, mcsal surface armed with
groups of stout setae directed downwards; hypandrium of usual shape, bearing simple
sparse sctae; outer arm of acdeagus (Fig. 113k) slightly longer than basal. Female genital segment (Fig, 113 1) slightly smaller than abdomen, pubescent, Dorsal
plate a little longer than ventral, roundly pointed apically, setae longer in middle;
ventral plate acuminate, gradually narrowed posteriorly and roundly pointed apically,
central region furnished with 2 cluster of long hairs, apices of hoth plates crmed with
minute, thick setac; ovipositor acutely pointed,

Host plant. Brod ex galls on wigs of Populus euphratica Oliv. Type locality. Ghazighat, Multan Forest Division (Pakistan). Types. Holotype female, March 20, 1929; Allotype male, March 20, 1929,
parts mounted on slide, as the specimen was in poor condition, from the type

 

  

FAMILY PSYLEDAE 35. Fig. 1M. Trioza biftrcata, sp. n.—az fifth stage nymph; br antenna; et legs ds circum-anal pore ring,

locality (R.N. Mathur). Several nymphal stages with the same data were also preserved
in alcohol. Both the types (male on slide) and preserved material deposited at F.R.L.,
Dehra Dun. Comparison. Trioza bifurcata, sp.n. bas been described from one female and one
male (in poor’ condition) and can he recognised by ils head, shape of wings and genital
characters. Biological notes. lts brief biological history is given by Mathur (1935) and Beeson
(1941) under Phylloplecta sp. This species is responsible for making galls on young shoots
of Populus euphratica, growing along the hanks of Indus in the Séuthern West Pakistan. The description of its nymphal stages is given below. The nymphs are pale-yellow
with greenish tinge in the abdomen, with antennae and Segs light grey and cyes pale
grey. They are covered with flocculent mass and exude sticky liquid from the anus. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig, 14a). Length 2.0mm. Of triozine form; broadly oval; the humeral
angle of the wing-pads produced cephalad near about the posterior part of the eyes, and
bluntly rounded. Dorsum weakly sclerotic throughout, except for the intersegmental
portions of the abdomen. Thick sclerotic submedian patches present in the head and
thoracic regions, Derm weakly vermiculate and also beset with simple setae of various

356 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

length. Minute points present along the border of abdomen. Body margin furnished
with numerous small spear-shaped setae borne on small tubercles. Few spear-shaped
setae also present along the anterior border of head. Ventral side membranous throughout. Derm thickly beset with simple setae of
various lengths. Antennae (Fig. 114b) ventral, 0:85 mm long, short and stout, apparently
seven-segmented, bearing simple setae and four sensoria, 3rd joint broader at base and
narrower at apex, with a weak division, 5th joint smallest, 6th slightly longer than 5th,
terminal segment imbricate, showing weak segmentations and two spines at apex, Legs
(Fig. 114c) stout, having simple setac, without trochanters; with distinct tibio-tarsal
articulation, tarsal joint with a single golf-club scta; claws present, pulvillus small, some-
what tubular, Anal opening (Fig. 114d) ventral, surrounded by an irregular outer
band of reticulate pores, and the inner band of the same pattern but weakly defined;
outer ring armed with one anterior and two posterior pairs of minute, simple setac
located medianally, and also another set of one anterior and two posterior pairs of long
simple setae. Fourth stage. Length 1-27 mm. Resembles the fifth stage, but the posterior half
of the abdomen consisting of a single plate with faint traces of segmentations; antennae
obscurely five-segmented, with three sensoria, and tibio-tarsal division weakly represented
by a row of setae. Third stage. Length 0-65 mm. Similar to the fourth stage, but with antennae
obscurely three-segmented, having two sensoria; tibiotarsal indication by setae absent;
few spear-shaped setae present on head, thorax and abdomen. Trioza ceardi (De Bergevin) 1926

igs, 115, 116)
De Bergevin, E. 1926. Bull, Sos. Hist, nat, N. Afr. 17: 149-153, pl, 1 (Trioza ceardi)
De Bergevin, E. 1931, Boll, Lab. Zool. 24; 268 (Ligeirotrioza ceardi. Laing, F, 1930. Indian Forest Rec. 14(8): 170-172, fig. 8, (Phylliplecta gardneri). Mathur, R. N. 1935, Indian Forest Rec, 1(2): 52, Dl. 2, fig. 12 (Phylloplecta gardneri Laing) (Biology). Beeson, C, F. C, 1941, Forest Insects, p, 779 (Biological notes),
Heslop-Harrison, G, 1946. Eniomalogist’s mon. Mag. 822 37 (Trioza ceardi). Loginova, M. M, 1958. Eniomological Rev. 37: 94-99, figs. 18-33. Mani, M. S. 1959. Agra. Unio, 7. Res. (Sei.) 8(2): 238 (Phylloplecta gardueri Laing). KlimaszeWwski, S, M. 1964, Annls, Zool. Warsz, 22(5): 36, fig. 47. This specics was placed under different genera by various workers and Heslop-Harrison
(1946) writes: “‘Laing’s species Phylloplecta gardneri, my own Megatrioza rustamiya aud
the two forms of Aegerotrioza described by Boselli in 1930 are all 1eferable to this species,
erected by De Bergevin in 1926.” Its description given by Laing (1930) is reproduced
as follows. “General colour green and black (all the specimens have been preserved in alcohol,
thus causing the green to fade to pale clay colour), Antennal segments 1 and 2 shaded
with black, 3-7 with black tips, 8 distally, and the whole of 9 and 10 black; the extreme
apical border of the genal cones, a narrow ring around the antennal insertions, and a

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 357

 

 

Fig. 115, Trioza ceardi (Berg).—(*Phylloplecia gardneri Laing).—Adult—As tegmen; Bs larva (second
instar); @and Dsits antenna and circum-anal ring; E: antenna; F: spines on apex of hind tibia;
G: civcum-anal ring; Hz part of fringe of sectasetae on margin of last abdominal segment of
nymph (After Laing). median fovea on each half of the vertex dark; a small spot on the extreme lateral margin
of pronotum black; dorsulum with a lunulate dark area on either side of the median
line, the patch, in front, paler in the centre, and sometimes showing signs of interrup-
tion at the middle; mesonotum, on each half, with two longitudinal dark areas, the outer
usually with its basal third partially or completely separate and the posterior portion with
pale narrow streak, the inner not quite reaching the front margin, and two subcircular
spots on the lateral margin, one in front and one adjoining the wing _ insertion; abdominal
segments with a varying amount of black, from quite a narrow area on the margin of
each tergite leaving but a narrow median grcen area; legs with the tarsal segments and
a small area on the tibiae distally dark, but there may be quite a considerable quantity
of shading; tegmen with the apices of the veins slightly marked with black, a spot at
the apex of the anal vein, and midway on the margin of the three posterior cells jet black. Under surface mainly dark-brown.”

“Antennae not quite twice the length of the head, including the eyes; genal cones
with long pale hairs, the inner margins more or less parallel, the length scarcely reaching
that of the vertex; lateral ocelli elevated; the median fovea deep; the hind margin of
head rather deeply arcuate; dorsulum almost biconvex, the length and breadth sub-
equal; tegmen with a length equal to 2} times the breadth; # genitalia: outer margin

 

* The abults emerge in January and February; the formation of galls coincides with the appearance of
new leaves in February and early March. 358, PSYLLIDAR, OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

  

of anal valve with a sparse fringe of white hair, the outer and basal margins sub-equal;
claspers simple, incurved apically: 2 genitalia: valves rather short, the dorsal extending
slightly beyond. the ventral; the hind tibiae with 3 black apical spincs, and a very strong,
Dlack-tipped, sub-equal spur, but no basal one, Length 3 mm; length of tegmen 3°5 mm.”
“Larva (? second instar): material preserved in alcohol, but the general colour is
probably green, with pale-green Jegs,* and the abdominal segments, on the upper
surface, barred with black. Ou the dorsal surface of the posterior half of the thoracic
region are irregular rows of short, strong, sharp, spines, affixed to the body by conspicu-
ously thic! around the margin of the abdominal segments are also stout,
sharp, spinose setar, more or less clustered together in bunches, but on the margin of
the last segment these are replaced by secta-setae. Length 1+] mm.”
“Nymph (final stage) of the typical triozine form, but peculiar in that the secta-
setae are confined to four dense rows on the apical margin of the last abdominal segment;

on the remainder of the body and wing-pad margins there are long slender setae. Length
2-5 min.”

 

ened ba:

   

Gall; sub-globular. Hattencd somewhat (rom side to side. narrowing slightly at the
point of contact with the
both surfac
surlace. eat; smooth surlace; unicellular. ‘The galls may appear on
of the leaf, but judging from those in front of me most are on the lower
t from the gall is by a small cirewar opening on the other surface of the
leaf from the gall, Length subequal to breadth, 4 mm; thickness 3 mm.”

Ghazighat, Multan, ¢x leal-galls on Populus euphratica (R.N. Mathur, per

h Instiuue, Dehra Dun). Host plant, Bred ex galls on leaves of Populus euphratica Ol

Distribution. Common in Traq om Populus euphratica Oliv. ; Sind District (Pakistan);
‘Tunisia (Heslop-Harrison, 1946); Ghazighat, Multan (Pakistan). In the FART. National Collection. there are 2 of Laing’s paratypes of P. gardneri,
February 1929 (Exp. No. 244, 245), 2 examples of 7.2.29 and 2 examples preserved
in alcohol (Exp. No. 244, 245), all from Ghazighat, Multan, Punjab (now in Pakistan),
bred ex leaf-galls, Populus euphratica (R.N, Mathur). Comparison. Heslop-Harrison (1946) has synonymised Piylloplecta gardneri Laing
with that of Trioza ceardi Bergevin, but the shape of forewing figured by Laing differs
greauy with the figure given by Loginova (1958); in the fermer it is angulate apically
while in the latter it is narrowly rounded apically; the shape of second marginal cell is
also different. However, having bcen unable to make a critical comparison with the
inaterial from the type locality or Middle East, it ix. considered better to accept
Heslop-Harrison’s synonymy for the present. Nymphal stage

Fifth stage (Fig. 16a). Length about 2°7 inm (on slide). Form triozine, rather
narrowly oval. Head uarrower than abdomen. Humeral angle of the wing-pads

 

* The colour of the young living larva is yellowish wilh the appendages darker and eyes redd ish-brovin:
in the later stages the colour deepens to yellowish-brown,

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 359

 

Fig. 116. Trioza ceardi (Bergevin)—a: ith stage nymph; br antennas et hind leg; di circum-anal pore
rings et funnel-shaped structure; f: bifurcate triangular basal portion and place of
. attachment,

produced forward slightly beyond the posterior margin ef eyes, and natrowly rounded. Dorsum strongly sclerotic throughout, except for the’ anterior half of abdomen, which
is partly membranous containing narrow strip-like plates in the first four segments. Posterior half of-abdomen covered by a single continuous plate, showing some traces
of segmentation, the lateral margins of which are membranous and extending to the
ventral side. Derm presenting a slightly vermiculate appearance. ' Eyes small, weakly
demarcated in two zones. Margin of wing-pads with a continuous series of small simple
setac, which are quite widely spaced. - Small simple setac also. occur sparingly: on. the
dorsum; the posterior area of the candal plate armed with a group of numerous
lanceolate setae. Small groups of thick setae also present sulmcdianally in the‘abdominal
plates. 360 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Ventral side membranous che ‘oughout, except for weak zones around the anal opening,
the posterior marginal zone in the abdomen and small areas around spiracles. Derm
beset with simple setae of varying length in the head region and intersegmentally in
the abdomen; minute points and comb-like structures occur in the posterior region. Antennae (Fig. 116b) about 0°61 mm long, quite short, ventral, apparently
(en-segmented, sparsely bearing small setae, two basal segments robust and narrowly
transverse, 3rd also robust, broad basally, gradually narrowed apically, remaining scg-
ments slender, 4th about one-third as long as 3rd, 5th and 7th smallest and equal, 6th
slightly longer than 4th, 8th, 9th and 10th combined almost as long as 3rd, bearing two
sensoria and two minute apical spines, 4th and 6th each having one sensorium. Legs
(Fig. 116c) small, sparsely bearing simple setae, femora not reaching body margin, middle
and hind legs having weak representation of trochanters; tibio-tarsal articulation well-
defined, each tarsus with a long curved seta at apex; claws present, with a relatively
large empodium. Anal opening at a short distance away from the apex of abdomen,
surrounded by a prominent, sinuous, outer ring of slit-like pores (Fig. 116d), having an
expanded band of pores on cach lateral side; the inner pore-ring weakly defined; these
rings are guarded by two anterior, two posterior and one lateral pairs of long setae;
both rings are mesally separated. Mature nymphs are provided with a curious funnel-shaped structure (Fig. 116e),
attached near the junction between thorax and abdomen (Fig. 116£), by a small
bifurcated triangular base. This funnel has a long shaft and resembles a cylindrical
trophy cup, the apical margin armed with thick papillae, and each papilla beset thickly
with lanceolate setac. It appears that this funnel probably acts in attaching firmly the
nymph to the cell-wall of the gall and ultimately helps in shedding off the last moult
(Mathur, 1935). The final skin bears this funnel-shaped structure with a stalk on
the dorsal surface. This curious structure has also been mentioned and drawn by
Loginova (1958. Figs, 32, 33), Within the body of the funncl, cast skins of the earlicr
nymphal stages are usually present,

Trioza Hetcheri Crawford 1912
(Fig. 117)

Crawford, D. L. 1912. Rec. Indian Mus. 71 434, pl. xxxiv, fig. V; pl. xooxv, fig. © (Pusa, Bihar). Crawford, D. L, 1917. Philipp. J. Sci, 12: 173 (Coimbatore, S, Tadia). Crawford, D. L. 1919. ibid, 15: 190 (Singapore). Crawford, D, L. 1924. Rec, Indian Mus, 26(6): 621 (Coimbatore). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus. 26(6): 624. Enderlein, G. 1926, Ent, Mitt. 15 (5-8): 400 (Spaniaza flecheri)..

Rahman Khan, A. 1932, dndian J. ogric. Sci. 2(4): 360, 372-74, pl. xxxix (Nymphal stages; Pusa,
Bihar). Mathur, R. N. 1935. Indian Forest Rec, (nu8. ), 1(2): 63. Beeson, C.F. G. 1941, Forest Insects, p. 781. Mani, M. S. 1935, J. Asiat, Soc. Beng. 1(2): 104 (Coimbatore, Vellore, Calcutta). Mani, M, §. 1959. Agra, Univ. J. Res, (Sei.) 8(2)1 299 (Throughout India and Java),

 

Length of body, in male, 1:42 mm; in female, 1°83 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2°41 mm; in female, 2°80 mm

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 36)

 

Fig. 117, Thioza fletcheri Grawford—a; head, front view; br antenna; o hind leg; dt forewing; et hind
wing; f: male genitalia; g; hr forceps, lateral and mesal views; it sperm pump; js female geni-
talia, lateral view. Width of head with cyes, 0-46 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0°25 mm
Length of antennae, 0°81 mm

Colouration. General colour flavus yellow with greenish tinge or dark yellowish-brown,
apical antennal segments black. Structure. Body rather small. Head (Fig. 117a) smaller than thorax, moderately
deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex somewhat horizontal,
swollen anteriorly, slightly more than twice as broad as long, with a prominent, circular
fovea on each side of median suture and nearer to the posterior border, a prominent

362 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

longitudinal suleate impression extends from each fovea, both anteriorly and posteriorly,
another transverse impression extends up to the eye, posterior margin strongly arcuate,
front ocellus visible from above, post-ocellar region slightly swollen; genal cones small,
sub-vertical, about half as long es vertex, divergent, sub-acute at tip, bearing 3 or 4 long
setae and also beset with minute points arranged in lines, Eyes hemispherical. Antennae (Fig, 117b) long, ten-segmented, about twice as long s width of head, bearing
a few setae, imbricate, two basal segments robust, Ist joint transverse, narrower anteriorly,
2nd sub-quedrate, remaining joints slender, 3rd longest, 4th halfas long as 3rd, Sth smaller
than 4th, Gth, 7th and 8th nearly ‘equal to one another but each slightly smaller than
dth and a litle Ionger than 5th, 9th and 10th joints smallest but equal, terminal
segment with two unequal apical spines, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8
and 9,

Thorax arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely reticulate mid-dorsally,
otherwise finely rugulose. Prothorax very narrow, roof-shaped; prescutum nearly
as broad as long, broadest in middle, narrower both anteriorly and posteriorly, subacute
antero-medianally, augulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutum slightly smaller
in length than prescutum, about twice as broad as long, angulate posteriorly; scutellum
somewhat triangular, broad anteriorly and narrow posteriorly. Lxgs (Fig. 117c) moderately long, slender, bearing small setae and also beset with
fine points arranged in lines, femora shorter than tibiae, all tibiae with an apical comb
of setae, hind femur armed with four long dorsal setae just behind apex, hind tibiae beset
with several conspicuous basal spurs and three tooth-like spines at apex (two on one side
and one on the other), tarsal segments cqual in length; mcracanthus small, slender and
triangular. Forewings (Fig. 1174) long, hyaline, clongate, more than two and a half ties as long
as broad; subacute at apex, basal vein quite long, R, M and Cu arising nearly from
the same point, radius short, Cu a little less than twice as long as R, marginal cells
unequal, first longer than second. Hind wings (Fig. 117e) small, beset with minute points, costal snargin armed with
a few simple and hookcd setae. :

Abdomen long and slcnder; finely and sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute
points arranged in linear series. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 117£) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve
(proctiger) nearly as long as parameres; in lateral aspect, anterior margin nearly straight,
posterior margin moderately convex, emarginate near apex, narrower both dorsally and
ventrally, surface finely rugulose and sparsely beset with setac dorsally and along the
posterior border; paramercs (Figs. 117g, h) irregular, broad basally, narrow apically,
ending in an incurved sharp black point, outer surface bearing small simple sctac, mesal
surfice with a cluster of thick setae just below apex and pointing downward, sctac on
inner margin slightly longer and stronger, inner caudal margin slightly projecting
out like a thick spur; hypandrium of usual shape, sparscly beset with small simple setac
and thickly with minute points arranged in lines; outer arm of acdeagus (Fig. 117£)
slightly smaller than basal; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 117i). FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 363

Female genital segment (Fig. 117j) smaller than abdomen, stout, pubescent with hairs
of various length, also armed with minute points; plates sub-equal, dorsal plate a little
longer than ventral, roundly pointed at apex, caudal end armed with a small cluster of
thi

thick sei

  
 

|, ventral margin with a row of long and
urd; ovipositor acutely pointed,

Host plants. On Gmelina arborea Linn; ex galls on leaves of Trewia nudiflora
Linn. .

Distribution. Previously recorded from Pusa, Bihar, on Gmelina arborea (Crawford,
1912); from Coimbatore (8. India) in galls of Trewia sp. (Crawford, 1917, 1924); from
Singapore (Cirawford, 1919). Mani (1935) has recorded this species from Coimbatore,
Vellore and Calcutta. , Throughout India and Java (Meni, 1959). Material examined. Su the collection at the F\R.1., Dehra Dun, are present 4 males
and 2 females, of 6.4.59, from New Forest, Dehra Dun, and collected on Gmelina arboreu
(R.N, Mathur); 5 imales and 2 females of 4.8.53, from New Forest, Dehra Dun, and
bred ex galls on Trewia nudiflora (R.N. Mathur) ; few examples of 27.12.37, from Hardwar
(U.P.) (R.N. Mathur), ev galls on Trewia nudiflora; and some adults and nymphal stages,
preserved in alcohol, in four phials, having same data. The Z.8.1., Calcutta, collection contains 2 tubes containing 2 adults of 27.12.34,
fron Shibpore, Botanical Garden, ex Trewia nudiflora; and few adults and
nymphs collected on 24.1,54, from Gobardanga, 24. Parganas (Bengal) (B.
Dasgupta),

The collection at the 1.A.R.L., New Delhi, consists of 3 ex. of 1.3,09 (C.S.M. ); 4 ex. of 1.1.16 (U. Bahadur); 7 ex of 1.3.16 (G. 5. Misra); 2 ex of 11.4.18. (Dwarka Pd.) ;
all from Pusa, Bihar and collected on Gmelina arborea; and 1 ex. of 9.12.13, from
Joimbatore (S. India) and galls on Trewia leavcs (Y.R. Rao). Comparison. Crawford has described this species from 3 females. It is redescribed
and supplemented with some notes and figures here, “Uhis is a small species and is readily
recognised by the shape of head and wings, Iegs and venation. Biological notes. Trioza fletcheri Crawford is a common species damaging the leaves
of Trewia nudiflora by the heavy formation of galls (Plate 6c), Fresh leaves on
appearance are badly attacked and distorted or crumpled. Galls are found through
out the year at Dehra Dum and other places. Mani (1935, 1959) has given its distribu-
tion and description of the gall. Rahman (1932) has described its nymphal stages. Trioza fletcheri minor Crawford 1912
(Figs. 118, 119)

Crawford, D. L. 1912. Ree, Indian Mus. 7(5)1 434-435, Pl. xxxv, fig. R. (On Terminalia axjuna; Pusa,
Biber). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec, Indian Mus. 26(6): 624. Mathur, R. N, 1935. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2): 64-65 (Biology; New Forest). Beeson, C.F. C, 1941, Forest Insects, p, 781,

Saksena, R. D. 1944, Jl. R, Asiat. Soc, Beng. 10+ 123,

Mani, M.S. 1948, Jl. R, Asiat, Soe, Beng. (Sci.) 14(2)+ 80, 112. Mani, M. 8. 1959. Agra, Univ. J. Res, (Sci.) (2) 170-171, 174-175,

364 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Length of body, in male, 1-4:mm; in female, 1-8 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 1°85 mm; in female, 2°12 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°52 mm

Width of vertex between cyes, 0°28 mm

Length of antennae, 0°55 mm

Colouration. General colour light yellowish-brown; antennae black at tip. ‘Structure. Body uniformly smaller. Head narrower than vertex, deflexed, finely
and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose (Fig. 118a). Vertex moderately long, slightly
broader than long, with a deep fovea posterior to centre and a prominent, longitudinal
sulcate impression on each side of median line, ocellar and lateral regions near the eyes
swollen, gradually rounded anteriorly, posterior margin slightly emarginatc, anterior
margin invaginated at point of excision; anterior ocellus visible in front; genal cones
small, about one-fifth as long as vertex, much below the level of vertex, beset with
minute points, sub-vertical, slightly divergent, subacute at tip, pubescence longer than
that of vertex. Eyes small. Antennae (Fig. 118b) small, a little longer than width of head, ten-segmented,
imbricate, bearing a few setae, slender, except two basal segments which are robust,
lst narrowly transverse, 2nd sub-quadrate, 3rd longest, 4th about half as long as 3rd,
Sth and 8th segments cqual and each smaller than 4th, 6th a litle longer than 5th, 7th
and 10th equal and slightly smallcr than 5th, 9th slighdy smaller than 10th , terminal
segment with two unequal spines at apex; four sensoria present on segments 4, 6,
8 and 9. Thorax somewhat arched, finely and sparscly pubescent, finely rugulose; prothorax
convex, roof-shaped, descending, sides narrower, with two foveal impressions on cach
lateral side; prescutum broader than long, broadest posterior to centre, narrower
anteriorly, angulate laterally and on posterior margin; scutum much broader than long,
slightly shorter than prescutum, weakly depressed dorso-medianally, angulate laterally,
posterior margin weakly invaginated along scutellum; scutcllum trapezoid, broad
anteriorly and narrow posteriorly, about twice as broad as long. Legs (Fig. 118c) moderately long, slender, pubescent and also armed with minute
points; femora shorter than tibiae, all tibiac with apical comb of setac, hind femur with
four dorsal setae just before apex and threc sensoria-like structurcs on veniral side, hind
tibia with a smal] basal spur and three spur-like black setae at apex (2 on one side and
I on the other); apical tarsal segment a little longer than basal; meracanthus small,
slender and triangular,

Forewings (Fig. 118d) small, hyaline, three or a little more times as Jong as broad,
subacute at apex, veins R, M, Cu arising from the same point, basal vein longer than
Cu, radius short, shorter than cubitus, marginal cells subequal, first marginal longer
and broader than second, M,,, meeting just before apex; veins armed with microscopic
setae. Hind wings (Fig, 118e) moderately long, thickly heset with minute points, costal
margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae in the basal half,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAL 365

0.25 mm

 

Fig, 118, Triaza flatcheri minor Crawford—at head, front views bt antenna; et hind leg; ds forewing;
ex hind wing; £ male genitalia, lateral view; g: anal valve, caudal view; he forceps; is aedeagus;
jt sperm pump; kx female genitalia, lateral view; lz dorsal plate; m: ventral plate. Abdomen rather long, longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent and also beset
with minute points, pubescence longer on sternites,

Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 118f) small, smaller than abdomen. Anal
valve (Fig. 118g) somewhat as long as forceps, broad basally, sub-triangular in profile,
anterior margin almost straight, lateral lobes bent inwards, upper surface armed with
minute points and the apical region and lateral lobes with simple setae, marginal setac
somewhat longer; parameres (Fig. 18h) bowed, together forming an ellipse when

566 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

seen caudally, sides sub-parallel, converging gradually to apex, apex sharply curved
mesad and cephalad, terminating in a small, black bifid tooth, wpper surface bearing
small simple setae, mesal surface armed with small thick setae directed downward, a
group of thick setae also present just below apex, marginal setae slightly longer; hypan-
drium simple, of usual shape, bearing simple setae and also armed with minute points;
outer arm of aedeagus (Fig, 118%) small and thick. spoon cnd divided into two lobes;
sperm pump as figured (Fig, 118f). Female genital segment (Fig. 118k) smaller than abdomen, both plates sub-equal,
broad basally and gradually narrowed apically, armed with minute points and also
heset with simple setae of varying length, setae fongerin middle; dorsal plate (Fig. 1181)
longer than ventral, gradually sloping from base to apex, subacute at apex, apical region
armed with minute peg-like setae; ventral plate (Fig, 118m) acute at apex and similarly
armed with peg-like setae; circum-anal pere ring composed of a double row of pores;
ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plants. Bred ex galls on leaves of Terminatia alata Heyne ex Roth. var. tamentosa
CLE, Parkinson (=T. tomentosa W. & A.) and T. arjuna W. & A. and T, catappa Linn. Distribution. Vreviously recorded from Pusa, Bihar (Crawford, 1912); from New
Forest, Dehra Dun, U.P. (Mathur. 1933); and from South India and throughout the
plains and low hills of India (Mani, 1959). Material examined. 3 males end 3 females, 26.34.32, from New Forest, Dehra Dun
(Exp. 364) (R.N. Mathur); 4 males and 2 Iemales, 29.6.3, from New Forest (R.N. Mathur); and 5 males and + females, !.6,50, from New Forest (R.N, Mathur); two
tubes containing some adults, preserved in alcohol, and collected from New Forest, on
7,6.61 and 6.7.62 (R. N. Mathur), ev galls on T. alata var. tomentosa; few specimens
collected on 13,9.1965 and received from Ludhiana, Punjah and bred ex galls on
T. agua (O.S. Bindra); few nymphs ex galls on T. catappa Linn. (ND. Paul), and
veceived from Bapaula (Anchra Pradesh). There are ++ examples of this species, collected on 26.9.U9, from Pusa, Bihar (c.
and also few specimens from New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P. ), collected ex galls on {
var. tomentosa, March 1932 (R.N, Mathur), at the LA.R.L, New Delhi,

Comparisou, "This species is uniformly smaller than T. fletcheri and differs from it in
shape cf head, genal cones, marginal cclls in forewings and genital characters. Biological notes. This gall-forming species is very common in many parts of India,
severly damaging the leaves of Terminalia alata var. tomentosa (Plate 5c, d) and 7)
arjuna, Saksena (1944) has given the anatomical characters, while Mani (1959) has
described the gall. Mathur (1935) has studied in detail its life-history and biology,
and bricf notes are also given by Beeson (1941). ‘Te structure of the nymphal stages
resembles very much wich the swneture of the nymphs of T. fltcheri, with minor
differences,

  

 

 
     

 

M.);
* alata

    

 

Nymphal stages

Fifth stage, (Fig. 119a), Length 1+G mm (on slidei. ‘Typical iviozine form. Body
oval, Humeral angle of the wing-pads extending cephalad up to te posterior margin

FAMILY PSYLLIDAK 367

 

Fig. 119. Trioza fletcheri minor Crawford—ay fifth stage nymph; be antenna; ct hind leg; d: circum-apal
pore ring. of eyes, Margin of body beset with closcly spaced secta-sctae of two sizes, borne on
minute tubercles. Head narrower than abdomen. Dorsum with the derm strongly
sclerotic throughout, except the antcrior half of abdomen, in which thin sclerotic strips
are present; the posterior half of abdomen having a single sclerotic plate, showing traces
of segmentation and mesally scparated. Derm weakly vermiculate, and bearing minute
simple setae, the posterior abdominal plate armed with minute points and comb-like
structures, Eyes small. Ventral side membranous throughout. Derm. beset with simple, small setae of varying
length and thickly with minute points; a small weakly sclerotic zone present posterior
(o circum-anal ring. Antennac (Fig. 119b) ventral, about 0°27 mm long, apparently
ten-segmented, bearing four sensoria, four apical segments imbricate and darker,
terminal segment with two minute apical spines. Legs (Fig. 119¢) small, sparscly bearing
small, simple setae, femora not reaching margin of body; trochanters weakly represented;
tibio-tarsal articulation distinct; each tarsus with a long golf-club seta; claws absent,
pulvillus in the form of a circular pad. Anal opening located slightly away from the
tip of abdomen, and surrounded by a double ring of pores (Fig. 119d), the outer ring
consisting of slit-like pores, while the inner ring composed of minute and poorly defined
pores; both rings are mesally interrupted and guarded by one anterior, three lateral
and one posterior pairs of long setae. 368, PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Fourth stage. Length 0°83 mm. Resembling the fifth stage, except in being smaller
in size; antennae apparently seven-segmented, bearing three sensoria ; tibio-tarsal articu-
lation absent. Third stage. Length 0:55 mm. Resembling the above stage, with antennae apparently
five-segmented, with two sensoria; wing-pads smaller. First stage. Length 0°22 mm. Antennac apparently three-segmented, bearing onc
sensorium, apical sctae very long; dorsum for the most part sclerotic, having few marginal
setae; wing-pads knob-like, bearing one or two secta-sctae; abdominal segments distinct. Trioza fusea, sp. n.
(Figs, 120, 121)

Length of body, in male, 1°55 mm; in female, 1-60 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3*10 mm; in female, 3-48 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°71 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0°32 mm

Length of antennae, |-Q mm. Colouration. Gencral colour dark-chocolate to fuscous, shining; antennac lighter
basally, with ninth and apex of eighth segment black; wings hyaline, transparent, veins
black. In live specimens, general colour yellowish-brown with greyish tinge, prothorax
and scutellum grecnish-grey, scutum with two pairs of dark-brown longitudinal bands;
abdomen with dark-brown dorsal segmental bands, ash grey ventrally; legs light brown,
femora of hind legs light black ventrally. Structure. Body small but robust. Head (Figs. 120a, b) slightly smaller than thorax,
pubescent with long hairs and also strongly rugulose; vertex broader than long, about
twice as broad as long, with a deep sulcus on either side of median suture extending
laterally towards the cycs, foveac present posterior to centre in sulcus, disc swollen on
either side of the deeply grooved median line and also along the eyes, gradually rounded
downward in front, posterior margin moderately cmarginate, anterior margin invagi-
nated at the point of excision; anterior ocellus scarcely visible from above; genal cones
small, about 0-18 mm Jong, shorter than vertex, divergent, deflexed vertically downward,
somewhat decurrent, situated below the level of vertex, pubescent, setae longer than
on vertex, finely rugulose, apices angulately rounded. Eyes small, somewhat hemi-
spherical. Antennal sockets lateral and locatcd below the level of eyes. Antennac (Fig. 120c) long, ten-segmented, having a few setae, two basal segments
robust, narrowly transverse, 2nd slightly longer than Ist, remaining segments slender
and imbricate, 3rd longest, 4th about one-third as long as 3rd, 4th and 6th equal, 5th
a little longer than 4th, 7th slightly smaller than 6th, 8th smaller than 7th , 9th a little
longer than [0th, terminal segment smallest, bearing two uncqual apical spines, four
sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9, two apical segments somewhat clavate and
compressed,

Thorax (Fig. 120b) large, robust, moderately arched, sparsely pubescent with long
hairs, strongly rugulose. Prothorax small, strongly convex, descending, with two foveal

-PAMILY. bsytLipaiz B6u

 

Fig. 120. Trioza fusca, sp.-n.—ai head, front view; bt head and part of thorax, lateral view} ¢t antenna;
dt hind leg; es forewing; f part of forewing of female; g: hind wing; Ih: anal valve and aedeagus;
ix anal valve, mesal surface; j, kt parameres; It aedeagus; mt sperm pump; nt female genitalia,
lateral view; o: dorsal plate; pr ventral plate. impressions on each side, posterior margin with a thick epiphysis nedianally; prescutum

Jarge, slightly broader than long, broadest in middle, gradually narrowed both anteriorly

and caudally, angulate laterally, posterior margin angulate sub-medianally; scum

large, slightly more than twice as bread as long, broadest before middle, angulate laterally,
2

370 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

slightly smaller in length than prescutum; scutellum vase-shaped, broadly transverse+
with prominent antero-lateral angles, twice as broad as long; post-scutellum of meta,
thorax narrowly transverse, somewhat rectangular. Legs (Fig. 120d) long, coarsely pubescent, and also besct with minute points, arranged
in linear series, femora shorter than tibiae, tibiae with apical comb of setae, hind femur
with three sensoria-like structures on ventral side, and six long, blunt, dorsal setae near
apex, hind tibiae with a scrics of basal spurs, 3 or 4 spurs stronger than others, apical
one-third thicker, having three or four spur-like spines at apex, tarsal segments almost
equal in length, each tibia with a small but prominent basal process which fits in a
concavity present at apex of each femur, meracanthus large and sub-triangular. Forewings (Fig. 120e) quite long but variable in length, hyaline, transparent, about
two and a half times as long as broad, broadest in middle, subacute to narrowly rounded
at apex, radial sector not very long, straight, R, M and Cu arising from the same point,
basal vein slightly longer than cubitus, radius a little less than half as long as cubitus,
first marginal cell slightly longer and wider than second cell, veins armed with micro-
scopic setae. In the forewing of a female example, a small callus present arising
from near base of radial sector and extending to R, (Fig. 120£). Hind wings (Fig. 120g) small, membrane uniformly beset with minute points, costal
margin armed in the basal half with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen rather globose, thickly besct with minute points, sparsely pubescent
ventrally. Genitalia. Male genital segment smaller than abdomen, Anal valve (Figs. 120h,i)
about 0:25 mm long, longer than forceps, broadest near about middle, in profile, anterior
margin almost straight, postcrior margin broadly and convexly rounded, with a weak
angulation below middle, outer surface thickly armed with minute points, pubescence
sparse apically along posterior bordcr, mesal surface beset with few small apical setae
and two groups of small setae laterally; parameres (Figs. 120j, k) about 018 mm long,
bowed, sides sub-parallel, anterior margin conspicuously sinuate, apical portion of each
forcep enlarged, terminating in two divergent cephalic and caudal lobes, former smaller
and subacute, while the latter lobe large, curved downward and acute, outer surface
bearing small simple setae, mesal surface having long setae directed downward, marginal
setae longer; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, wrinkled, with sparse pubescence;
aedeagus (Fig. 1201) small, outer arm strong, robust, with the spoon-end like a hood,
having two small, acute points; sperm pump as figured (Fig, 120m). Female genitalia (Fig. 120m) smaller than abdomen, wide apart posteriorly. Dorsal
plate (Fig. 120 0) longer than ventral, inclincd with a steep slope caudally, pubescent
and finely rugulose, broadest in middle, caudal end slightly invaginated medianally,
forming two small lobes, one on cither side, strongly rugulose and also beset with strong,
simple setae of varying length; circum-anal ring quite long and composed of a double
row of pores, inner row of slit-like pores complete; ventral plate (Fig. 120p) pubescent
with simple setae of varying length, subacute at apex, setae in the posterior region closely
set; ovipositor provided with saw-like teeth on the ventral side and acutely pointed at
apex. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 371

Host plant. Bred ex pit galls on leaves of Syzygium cumini (L) Skeels (= Eugena
jambolana Lam.)}. Type locality. New Forest, Dehra Dun (U.P.). Types. Described from a very small series of specimens bred ex pit galls on leaves
of Syzygium cumini. Holotype male; Allotype female; Paratypes: one male
and one female, all from the type locality, and reared during February-March, 1950
(R.N. Mathur). Teneral specimens were dissected and their parts mounted on slides. All type-material deposited at the F.R.I., Dehra Dun. The preserved material
in alcohol consisis of some galls, few adults and nymphal stages, in two
phials. Comparison. This species and Trioza jambolanae Crawford resemble closely with each
other, hoth in structure and habits, except the formation of galls on leaves of Syzygium
cumini which is different. The shape of wing and venation match very much with the
figure of TJ. jambolanac given by Crawford (1917). The male genitalia of one
example from the collection of the 1.A.R.I., New Delhi, and identificd as jambolanae was
also examined in detail aac thé structure agrecs well with the male genital characters of
fusca. Crawford (117) has described jambolanae from two females, collected on
February 3, 1915, from Pusa (Bihar). Both species occur at Dehra Dun and their
emergences take place when the season warms up. It is quite possible that some con-
fusion is likely to exist in mixing the two species together, and hence they’ are described
separately for the present, until more specimens are examined in detail. Trioza fusca is distinguishable by its vertically deflexed posture and shape of head,
having deep sulci on disc and the deeply grooved median suture, small genal cones,
shape of forewing, venation and genital structures. Biological notes. This is a rare species and is met with during February-March. 11 forms
pit-galls (Plate 5b) surrounded by an irregular, wavy, thick and clevated rim of crimson
or carmine colour, while the pitted area is greenish-pink. Such galls are generally
found on the under surface of young leaves of Syzygium cumini, and on the upper surface
they are slightly raised and are coloured greenish-carmine. A leaf may contain | to
9 pit galls and each pit is tenanted by a nymph having a bulging venter occupying the
depression. Young nymphs are usually pale-yellow, with pinkish-red eyes, Mature
nymphs are yellowish-brown to smoky black, surrounded by a waxy fringe. The
nymphs are described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage (Fig. 121a). Length 2:00 mm. Form somewhat regularly oval, the
continuity of margin interrupted near the head and at the base of abdomen. Wing-
pads produced cephalad beyond the eyes. Dorsum quite strongly sclerotic... Entire
margin of the body, except the eyes, beset with a continuous serics of short, thick
secta-setae, borne on distinct prominences. Derm vermiculate and beset with small,
simple setae scattered over the entire dorsum. Abdomen composed for the most part
of a single plate, with two narrow, medially interrupted plates at the junction betweei,
thorax and abdomen. 372 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 121. Trioge fusca, sp. n.—au fifth stage nymph; bt anteuna; et leg; di circutn-anal pore ring,

Ventral side membranous throughout, except for a small area about each spiracle,
five pairs of small, strip-like, submedian plates and three pairs of lateral plates and a
small, irregular plate surrounding the anal ring, which is interrupted anteriorly and
inverted V-shaped posteriorly.- Derm thickly beset with minute points throughout
and with slender simple setae of various length in the abdomcn. Antcnnac (Fig. 121b)
very short, thick, about 0°24 mm long, the segmentations obscure, apparently scven-
segmented, with four sensoria, basal segments broad basally, narrow apically, terminal
segment with two small spines at apex. Legs (Fig. 121c) small and thick, femora scarcely
reaching the margin of the body; without trochanters; tibio-tarsal articulation distinct;
each tarsus with a long seta. near apex; claws:rather weak, the pulvillus in the form of
a large circular pad. Anal opening (Fig. 121d) sct well in from the apex of the body,
the outer circum-anal pore ring consisting of a single row of slit-like pores, the inner
ring indistinct, consisting of extremely minute somewhat circular pores; the. circum-anal
ring guarded by two pairs of anterior and posterior setae. Fourth stage. Length 1°81 mm. : Identical with the fifth stage, except in smaller size
and wing-pads, without tibio-tarsal articulation, and with apparently five-segmented
antennae, bearing three sensoria,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 373

Trioza gigantea Crawford 1912
(Fig, 122)

Crawford, D.L, 1912, Rec. Indian Mus, 71 428, PL xooxii, figs. X, Z; Pl. xexv, fig. J (Trioza giganta). Darjeeling, E, Himalayas. Enderlein, G. 1921, Zool. Anz. 52s 122 (Dasymastix gigantea Crawford 1912), Sikkim. Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec, Indian Mus, 26(6): 624. Length of body, in female, 4:12 mm. Length of forewing, in female, 5-51 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°93 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0°53 mm. Length of antennae, 3°62 mm

Colouration. General colour black on dorsum, light brown on venter; vertex, cycs
and antennae black; genal cones brown; pronotum brown; dorsulum shining black
in anterior two-thirds and rest brown; scutum with one pair of submedian and one pair
of lateral longitudinal black bands; metanotum dark-brown; scutellum bordered black
laterally; tibiae of all legs dark-brown, apical tarsal segments light black. Structure. Body very large and the surface clothed sparsely with long brown
pubescence, which is not very prominent. Head (Figs. 122a,b) broad, much
broader than prothorax and dorsulum, moderately, deflexed, bearing sparse
pubescence; vertex large, broadly concave between eyes, descending, smooth, glossy
about half as long as broad, median suture longer than lateral edges, posterior margin
strongly arcuate, disc with foveal impressions posterior to centre; anterior ocellus visible
in front; frons slightly visible; post-ocelli strongly raised; genal cones about 0-25 mm
long, about half as long as vertex, directed vertically downward, divergent, broad
basally and bluntly rounded apically, sparsely hairy. Eyes large and prominent. Antennal sockets large. Antennae (Fig. 122c) very long, smaller than body, moderately thick, densel yhirsute,
with stiff setae, all segments long, except I, 2 and 10; segments 1 and 2 short, thick and
hairy, Ist subquadrate, 2nd nairowly transverse and smallér than Ist, 3rd longest, 4th
and 5th nearly equal and each smaller than 3rd, 6th and 7th again equal but each
smaller than Sth, 8th smaller than 7th, 9th much smaller than 8th, terminal segment
extremely small, bearing two small, blunt apical spines. .

Thorax (Fig. 122b) very broad, well arched, surface smaoth ‘and glossy, ‘spatéely
covered with hairs; prothorax short, narrow, depressed below ° head and prescutum,
narrowly convex, with two. foveal impressions on “lateral sides; ‘propleurites. large;
prescutum strongly arched, overhanging pronotum, nearly’ as long as’ broad, broadest
in middle, riarrowly rounded anteriorly, angulate laterally,’ broadly rounded posteriorly;
scutum large, broad, slightly more than twice as broad as long, broadest in’ middle,
smaller than prescutum in length, anterior margin concavely rounded, disc depressed
niedianally, forming a’shallow longitudinal channel, sides sloping and angulate laterally,
posterior margin weakly rounded; scutellum broadly transverse, somewhat trapezoid in

374 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 122, Trisze gigantea Crawford—as head, front views ‘bt head and part of thorax, lateral view (copied
from Crawford, 1912); e: antenna; d: hind leg; et forewing; f hind wing; g: female genitalia,
Jateral view. shape, broadest anteriorly narrower posteriorly, anterior margin weakly concave, with
prominent antero-lateral angles. Legs (Fig. 122d) long, coarsely pubescent with Ieng setae, tibiae longer than femora,
each bearing an apical comb of setae, hind femur with a group of 3 or 4 dorsal setae
near apex, hind tibiae with a moderately large basal spur and with 2 or 3 small spurs,
apical region robusi and armed with three stout spines on one side and one on the other;
hind coxae very large; basal tarsal segments slightly longer than apical; meracanthus
long and stout. Forewings (Fig. 122e) large, hyaline, transparent, about two and a half times as long
as broad, narrowly rounded at apex, almost triozine in venation, radius smaller than

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 375

cubitus, Rs very long, parallel with costa and flexed downward, first marginal cell much
longer than second, about twice as large as second, veins setose, conspicuously so on
basal portion of wing. Hind wings (Fig. 122f) small, slender, hyaline, costa armed with some simple and
hooked setae, membrane uniformly beset with minute points. Abdomen leng, large and stout, strongly rugulose and also armed with minute points,
sternites coarsely pubescent with long setac. Genitalia, Female genital segment (Fig. 122g) smaller than abdomen, Plates unequal,
dorsal plate longer than ventral, broad basally and very narrowly rounded apically,
pubescent, setae longer in middle and in the apical region, a strong lateral ridge
present near base, on either side of circum-anal ring; circum-anal ring somewhat
oval in shape, and composed of a double ring of pores; ventral plate acutely pointed
at apex, coarsely pubescent with long setae; valvulae exserted; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. On trees locally named as ‘ uttis . Distribution. Previously known from Darjecling (Bengal) and Sikkim,

Material examined. One female specimen (Type No. 9734/18) from Darjeeling
(E. Himalayas), altitude 2135m (E. Brunetti), May 26, 1910 (slightly in poor condition),
is present at the Z.S.I., Calcutta. Few specimens, all females, were also received
from Mirik area (Darjeeling), collected on 16.3.67, on a tree locally named as uitis
(V.R. Phalak). Comparison. This species is redescribed from the type specimen present at the Zoological
Survey of India, Calcutta, and also from the material received from Mirik area, Darjeeling. Crawford (1912) writes: ‘This is somewhat related to Kuwayama’s Stenopsylla nigri-
cornis, and probably does not belong in the genus Trioza. Until further evidence,
however, is avilable, it will be included in the large genus.” I have also retained this
species under Trioza, for the present. T. gigantea is recognisable by its long body, large
wings, hirsute antennae, shape of head and venation. Trioza gigantea curta, ssp, n.
(Figs. 128, 124)
Length of body, in male, 2°25 mm; in female, 2°31 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3°51 mm; in female, 4°12 mm
Width of head, with eyes, (60 mm. Width of vertex between eyes, 0°30 mm. Length of antennae, 1:25 mm

Colouration. General colour yellowish-brown, with thorax shining light brownish,
antennae black or apices of segment 4 to 8 black, except three basal segments which
are pale-yellow, legs pale-yellow, tarsal segments light black. Structure. Body moderately long and slender, sparsely clothed with brown pubescence. Head (Fig. 123a) slightly broader than thorax, much broader than prothorax and pre-
scutum, strongly deflexed, vertex almost plane on either side of median suture, glossy,
sparsely pubescent with long setae and also finely rugulose along the sides and median

376. PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

    

0.25 mm 0.25 mm,

pn
0.25 mm__,

Fig. 123. Trivza gigantea curta, ssp. n.—at head, front view; bbt antenna; et hind leg; di forewing; et hind
wings fe anal valve and aédeagues; gy Br forceps, cade, lateral and mesal views; it sperm pump;
jt female genitalia, lateral view. suture, narrow and abrup ly bent anteriorly; the two lobes appearing like a parallelogram,
with two foyeal impressions posterior to centre and near the mcdian suture, posterior
margin deeply invaginated, post-ocellar region strongly elevated; appearing as small
papillae, anterior ocellus visible in frcnt, antcrior margin deeply invaginated at point
of excision; genal cones large and about 0-18 mm long, and slightly more than half
as long’as vertex, beset with minute points arranged in lines, vertical, divergent, narrowly
rounded at apex, pubescent, pubescence longer than that of vertex; antennal sqckets
large, lateral and situated below vertex. Eyes: large, prominent and somewhat
hemispherical. Antennae (Fig. 123b) long and slender except two robust basal segments, ten-segmented;
sparsely pubescent with long setac, imbricate, Ist and 2nd segments narrowly transverse,
2nd slightly smaller than Ist, 3rd longest, 4th, 7th and 8th equal to one another, and

FAMILY: PSYLLITAR” 377

each about half as long as 3rd, 5th and 6th equal and slightly smaller than 4th, 9th
smaller and about half as long as 8th, terminal scgment smaller than 9th, bearing two
uncqual apical spines, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax long and slender, arched, sparsely pubescent, Pronotum short, collar-like,
roof-shaped, dellexed below head and dorsulum, fincly rugulose, with two foveal impres-
sions on cach side; propleurites large and directed antcriorly; prescutum strongly arched,
narrow, surface weakly rugulose, overhanging pronotum, nearly as long as broad, narrowly
rounded both anteriorly and posteriorly, broadest in middle, angulate laterally; scutum
broad, about twice as broad as long, shorter in length than prescutum, disc smooth,
shallowly depressed longitudinally, finely rugulose and angulate laterally; scutellum
small, broad anteriorly, narrow posteriorly, fincly rugulose, with prominent antero-
lateral angles; post-scutellum of meta-thorax large and broad, with a shallow median
longitudinal channel. Legs (Fig. 123) long, sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute points arranged
in linear series, femora thick, arched and shorter than tibiae, all tibiae with apical comb
of setae, hind femur with five dorsal, long setae near apex and with three sensoria-like
structures on ventral side, hind tibiae with three strong and a scries of small spurs near
base, and four spur-like spines (3 on one side and } on the other) at apex, apical portion
of hind tibiae robust and thick, tarsal segments of fore and middle legs almost equal,
basal tarsal segment longer than apical in hind leg, hind coxae very large; meracanthus
large and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 123d) quite large and leng, hyaline, tansparent, slightly less than
three times as long as broad, broadest in middle, subacute at apex, R, M and Cu arising
from the same point, Rs quite long and flexed subapically, radius longer than R,, cubitus
much longer than radius and almost as long as basal vein, marginal cells unequal, first
cell longer and broader than second, veins armed with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 123e) (partly broken) quite small, costal yein armed with few simple
and hooked setae, membrane uniformly besct with minute points. Abdomen long, slender, baloon-shapcd, gradually tapering caudally, sparsely pubescent
and alsb armed with minute points. .

Genitalia, Male genitalia smaller than abdomen. Anal valve (Fig. 123£) -about
0-25 mm long, ‘longer than forceps, ‘broadest at base, converging to narrow apex, in
profile, anterior margin wcakly convex, invaginated near base, posterior margin broadly-
cgnyex, outer surface beset with minute points arranged in, small linear series, apical
region bearing sparse setac, marginal sctae longer; paramercs. (Figs. 123g,h) about
0-22 mm long, strongly bowcd inward: in caudal view, sides irregular, inner margins
conspicuously sinuate both in the apical and basal regions, broadest in middle, apex
black, .bidcntate with acute points, outer surface beset with simple sotac, mesal margina)
setac thicker and longer, setae on inner surface also thicker but shorter, and directed
downward, below the apical teeth, a group of thick and strong setae present, arranged
in rows and pointing downward; hypandrium of usual shape, bearing sparse setae and:
also strongly rugulose; outer arm of acdeagus smaller than the basal and’sickle-
shaped, sperm pump as figured (Fig. 123%). 378 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Female genital segment (Fig. 123§) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent, thick
dorso-ventrally, plates wide apart, dorsal plate longer than ventral, descending sharply
and abruptly bent downward posteriorly, narrowly rounded and blunt at apex, with a
small median point, bread basally, thickly armed with minute points arranged in lines,
apical caudal region beset with a bunch of small setae, circum-anal ring composed of
a double row of pores; ventral plate subacute at apex, surface beset with simple setac
and also with minute points; ovipositor small and acutely pointed. Host plant. On unkown plant. Type locality. Darjeeling (W. Bengal). Types. Holotype male; Allotype female; Patatypes: one male and one female,
of March 16, 1967 from the type locality (V.R. Phalak). A few damaged speci-
mens and some nymphal stages, also from the type locality and same data, preserved in
alcohol. All types, preserved material and few slides are deposited at the F.R.I., Dehra
Dun. Shri Phalak has written to me that this species is also present at Kalimpong
(W. Bengal). Comparison. ‘This sub-species is described from two males and two females, resembling
closely with T. gigantea except in size and lack of hirsute body and antennae and some
other characters. Since both gigantea and this lot have been collected on unestablished
host plants and comparison could not be made of the male genitalia and of nymphal
stages, it is preferred to treat this as only a sub-species. It differs from other species
in shape of head, venation and genital characters. Its nymphal stages are similar to
the nymphs of Leuronola, but the features of adult show great affinity with the genus
Trioza, in having pronotum shorter, descending cephalad and depressed below head
and prescutum. Biological notes. Few adults and nymphal stages were received preserved in alcohol
from Darjecling (West Benga!) on March 16, 1967, collected from an unknown plant,
Its nymphal stage is described below. Nymphal stage

Fifth stage. (Fig. 124a). Length 1-78 mm on slide. Triozine form, cxcept that the
wing-pads are not produced cephalad. Entire dorsum sclerotic except for the sutural
areas and a narrow basal area on the abdomen. Derm sparsely beset with small, simple
setae borne on minute tubercles. Marginal setac on head, wing-pads and abdomen
somewhat lanceolate, borne on small tubercles, Head large and broad, having a large
head plate; thorax completely sclerotic; sclerotisation separated mesally. Abdomen
bearing a Jarge plate occupying about two-thirds of the posterior region. Derm sparsely
beset with simple setac of various length, borne on minute tubercles. ‘Ventral side membranous throughout, except for a weak plate below each antenna,
a small caudal plate, and very small, weakly sclerotic sub-median strips in the abdomen
Derm beset with simple setae of different length. Antennae (Fig. 124b) short, about
0-61 mm long, eight-segmented, weakly imbricate, bearing few simple setae borne on
tubercles and four sensoria, 5th segment smallest, apical segment black, about as long
as 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th segments together. Legs (Fig. 124c) large, the femora not at-

FAMILY PSYLLIDAF 379

 

 

Fig. 124. Trinca gigantea curla, ssp. n.—az fifth stage nymph; b: antenna; et part of leg; dt circum-anal
rings,

taining the margin of the body, bearing few simple setae, without trechanters, tibio-tarsal
articulation distinct, each tarsus with a long curved seta near apex; claws present, the
pulvillus triangular, fish-tail like, very slightly petiolate. Anal opening situated at
the apex of the abdomen; circum-anal pore ring (Fig. 124d) encircling the anus and has
become enormously enlarged, forming an outer, extremely sinuous, single row of slit-like
pores, lying partly on the dorsal and partly on the ventral side of the abdomen, the inner
ring also sinuous, very faint, consisting of extremely minute circular pores, a number of
setae present guarding this sinuous band on both the dorsal and ventral sides. Trioza hyalina Crawford 1912
(Figs. 38, 125)

Crawford, D. Ly 1912. Ree. Indian Mus, 7(5): 428-429, Pl, xxxiv, figs. A, B; Pl. xxv, fig. K.
Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus. 26(6): 624,

This specics is described by Crawford (1912) frorn 3 males and 2 females, and one type
male is only present in the collection of the Z.S.I., Calcutta. It is redescribed here

380 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

#
B &
4

 

Fig. 125. Trioza hyalina Crawford—a: head, front view; br head and part .of thorax, lateral views
e+ antenna; d: hind leg: e: forewing; £: hind wing; gr male genitalia, lateral view. from this male type. According (o Crawford, the measurements are: “Length of body,
1-9 mm; length of forewing, 2:9 mm; Breatest width, 1-2 mm; width of vertex between”
eyes 0:33 mm, with eyes, 0:47 mm." Length of body, in male, 1:75 mm
Length of forewing, in male, 2-6 mm
Width of head with cyes, 0-46 mm
Width. of vertex between cycs, 0-30 mm
Length of antennae, 1-12 mm

Colouration. Genera} colour lemon yellow; dorsulum brown cephalad; antennae black
at tip; head yellowish-brown with a light brown patch in middle; abdomen with male

PAMUY PSYLLIDAr 381

genitalia yellowish-brown; legs yellowish-brown cxcept apical tarsal joints and coxac
which are light brown. Structure. Body small. Head (Figs, 125a, b) small, deflexcd,: narrower than thorax,
finely and sparsely pubescent; vertex broadcr than long, slightly less than twice as broad
as long, impressed discally, bulging or swollen on cach sicle of median line in fiont, with
two round foveal impressions, posterior to centre, onc on each side of median suture,
posterior margin moderately invaginated, post-ocellar region swollen, anterior occllus
scarcely visible from above; genal concs slightly smaller than vertex, divergent, sub-
vertical, subacute at tip, sparsely pubescent with long hairs. Eyes large, somewhat
hemispherical. Antennal sockets latcral, located nearly on level with the lower margin
of eyes. Clypeus somewhat oval, rostrum large, projecting between legs. Antennac (Fig. 125c) long, slender, ten-segmented, bearing a few sctac, imbricate,
two basal segments robust, Ist subquadrate, 2nd cylindrical but equal in length, 3rd
longest and about two and a half times as long as 4th, Sth, 6th and 7th cqual to once
another, and cach a little longer than 4th, 8th slightly longer then 7th, 9th and 10th
almost equal, terminal segment with two unequal spines at apex, scgments 4 to 6 slightly
broader at apices, last two segments thicker, four sensoria present on scgments 4, 6, 8
and 9. Thorax (Fig. 125b) not broad, sparsely pubescent, fincly punctate; pronotum small,
collar-like, convexly rounded, descending, narrower in -middle,: lateral sides
large extending forward, with two foveal impressions on cach side; prescutum slightly
arched, almost as long as broad, broadest in middle, gradually narrowed both anteriorly
and posteriorly, angulate latcrally; scutum and scutclhim damaged by the pin. _

Legs (Fig. 125d) quite long, pubescent, tibiac longer than femora, all tibiae with apical
comb of setae, hind tibiae without basal spur, with four black spines (three on one side
and one on the other) at apex, basal tarsal joints longer than apical, hind coxac quite
large, meracanthus long and slender. .

Forewings (Figs. 38g, 125e) proportionately rather large, hyaline, transparent, about
two and a third times as long as broad, costal margin arched, rather rounded at apex, R,
M and Cu arising from the same point, radial sector long and almost straight, radius
almost as long as Ry, basal vein about twice as long as radius, cubitus about thrice as
long as radius, first marginal cell almost equally long and broad as second cell, fork
Miy terminating at apex of wing, membrane uniformly besct with minute points. Hind wings small (Fig. 125£), membrane uniformly beset with minute points, costal
margin with few simple and hooked setae in the basal half. Abdomen long and slender, finely and sparsely pubescent, setae longer on sternites. “Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 125g) rather large. Anal valve about 0:22 mm
long, longer than forceps, anterior margin weakly while the posterior margin broadly
convex, both margins invaginated near apex, truncate at apex, apical region beset with
simple setae, setae longer on posicrior margins; forceps long and slender, about 0:19 mm
long, bowcd when seen caudally, broad basally end gradually narrowed at apex,
terminating in an acute point, sides subparallcl, sinuate mesally, outer surface. beset
with ‘small, simple setac, mesal surface armed with long setae directed downward,

382 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINEN'

inarginal setae slightly longer; hypandrium cf usual shape, simple, sparsely beset with
simple setae; outer arm of acdeagus smaller than basal, but quite long. “Female genital segment about half as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal plate slightly
longer than ventral, both acute.” /Crawford, 1912). Host plant. Unknown. Distribution. Recorded from Simla, West Himalayas at 2135 m (Crawtord, 1912). Material examined. One male specimen, 12.5.08, Simla, 2135 m (N. Annandale)
(C 9707/13), Type (Indian Museum), partly in pocr condition. Comparison. Trioza hyalina Crawford can be readily separated from other species
by the characters given in the key. Trioza jambolanae Crawford 1917
(Figs. 38, 126)

Crawford, D. L. 1917. Philip. J. Sci. 12; 173-174, pl. 1, fig. 4 (Pusa, Bihar). Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924. Ree, Indian Mus. 26: 624. Endeclein, G. 1926. Ent. Mitt, 15(5-6); 400 (Spanioza jambolanae). ‘Mathur, R..N. 1935. Indian Forest Ree, 1(2): (Biology), pl. 1, fig. 8:

Beeson, C. F.C. 1941. Forest Insects, p. 782 (Biological notes). Mathur, R.N. 1949, Indian J, Ent, 8(2): 234-236, fig. 7 (Nympbal stages). Mani, M.S. 1959, Agra. Univ. J. Res. (Science) 8(2): 178. Weidner, H. 1961. Sonderdr. Abh. Verh, der. naturw Ver. Hamburg (1960) 5 : 37-46. Length of body, in male, 2-35 mm; in female, 2-66 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 4-22 mm; in female, 461 mm. Width of head with eyes, 0-80 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-48 mm

Length of antennae, 1-31 mm

Colouration, General colour reddish-brown, abdomen darker, antennac and legs a
little lighter brown, antennae black at tip, apex of anal valve, forceps and bottom of
ventral valve black, in male. Structure. Body moderately robust. Head (Fig. 126a) scarcely narrower than thorax,
deflexed, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex slightly more than half
as long as broad, median suture with a deep furrow and a convexity on each side, and
a deep furrow on each side of these convexities, two circular foveae present posterior to
centre in furrows, post-ocellar region much elevated, posterior margin moderately arcuate,
anterior margin deeply invaginated at point of excision, anterior ocellus visible in front;
genal cones smaller than vertex, about 0-12 mm long, 2 tittle more than half as long as
vertex, divergent, somewhat decurrent, pubescent, hairs longer than thet of vertex,
finely rugulose, apex subacute, Byes large, somewhat hemispherical. Antennae (Fig. 126b) small, about one and a half times as long as width of head,
slender, except two robust basal segments, bearing a few setae, imbricate, 1st segment
narrowly transverse, 2nd subquadrate and as long as Ist, 3rd segment longest, about
two and a half times as long as 4th, 4th slightly longer than 5th, 6th and 7th equal and

EAMILY PSYLLIDAL 383

 

Fig. 126, Trioza jambolanae Crawford—as head, front view; bt antenna; et hind leg; dt forewing (male);
ex hind wing (male) ; £ part of hind wing of female; g: male genitalia, lateral view; hi forceps;
i: sperm pump; js female genitalia, lateral view; ks posterior part of ventral plate; Is part of
ovipositor. slightly smaller than 5th, 8th a little smaller than 7th, 9th and 10th smallest, 9th a little
longer than epical segment, terminal segment with two unequal, small spines at apex;
four sensoria present on segmenis 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax broad, well arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose, Pronotum
short, strongly deflexed, convexly rounded in dorsal view, longest in middle, with two:

Sot PSYLLIDAY OF ‘THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

foveal impressions on cach lateral side; prescutum as long as broad, broadest in middle,
narrower both anteriorly and posteriorly, also angulate both laterally and posteriorly;
scutum broad, twice as broad as long, but smaller in length than prescutum, angulate
laterally; scutellum vase-shaped, broad anteriorly, with prominent antero-latcral angles,
narrow posteriorly; post-scutellum of meta-thorax narrowly transverse. Legs (Fig. 126c) of moderate size, pubescent, also beset with minute points arranged
in lines, femora shorter than tibiac, all tibiac with apical comb of setae, hind femur with
a group of 6 to & blunt dorsal sctae uear apex and three sensoria-like structures in centre
on yentral side, hind tibiae with a scrics of small basal spwrs and thickly swollen apically,
hearing three black, thick spines (2 on one side and 1 on the other), basal tarsal segments
of all legs slightly smaller than apical, claws with swollen, fleshy basal pads; meracanthus
quite long, slender and triangular. Forewings (Figs, 38p, 126d) long, hyaline, transparent, about two and threc-fourth
times as long as broad, broadest near middle, rather acute at apex, three veins (R, M,
Cu) arising from the same point, basal vein about twice as long as cubitus, R and Ry,
somewhat equal in length, cubitus slightly less than twice as long as radius, first marginal
cell about as long as second but slightly wider, fork M,-+, terminating slightly above
apex. Hind wings (Figs. 126e, £) small, veins clearly visible under high magnification, uniformly
beset with minute points, costal vein with a few simple and hooked setac; media forked
at apex in one specimen. Abdomen longer than broad, finely and sparsely pubescent, also armed with minute
points arranged in lines, venter with long hairs. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 126g) smaller than abdomen. Anal valve
about 0°35 mm long, longer than forceps, broadest above middle half and then becoming
narrower apically when seen anteriorly; in profile, anterior margin almost straight,
posterior margin broadly convex except for basal concavity, and produced into small
lateral lobes bent inward, outer surface beset with simple setae and with minute points,
marginal setac longer; parameres (Fig. 126h) about 0°25 mm long, in side view, broad
basally and gradually narrowed apically, both anterior and posterior margins irregular,
having concavities in the apical region, apex terminating in a black, anteriorly and
posteriorly produced acute processes, the posterior pfocess longer than the anterior,
outer surface sparscly beset with small, simple setac, mesal surface bearing similar setae
but slightly longer'and thicker; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, having simple’setaé
and.also armed with minute points; outer arm of aedeagus (Fig. 126g) smaller than
basal, with a thick and strong spoon end, bearing small, finger-like processes; sperm
pump as figured (Fig. 1262). Female genital segment (Fig. 126j) smaller than abdomen, very short, plates wide
apart posteriorly; dorsal plate longer than ventral, deflexcd vertically downward, ‘beset
with simple setae, setae longer in centre, broadest and rugulosc in middle, basal and apical

.Fegions armed with thick points, apex sub-acute, with a moderately decp, small median
invagination, apical sctae also slightly longer; circum-anal ring composed of a double
ting of pores,. the inner ring being’ complete; ventral plate, (Fig. 126k) bearing simple

 

 

FAMILY PSYLLIDAR 38;

setac and also armed with strong points, apex acute in profile, with a broad, weak median
invagination, marginal setae longer and stronger; ovipositor acutely pointed; bearing
also saw-like teeth (Fig. 1261). Host plant. Bred ex galls on leaves of Spzygittm cumini (== Eugenia jambalana\
(Plate Sa). Material examined. ‘The collection at the Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun;
contains several specimens from New Forest, Dehra Dun and bred ex galls on Eugenia
Jambolana, as follows: 1 female , 14.3.32 (Exp.No.360); 1 male, 15.3,32 (Exp.No.365);
1 female, 21.3.34 ; 23 maics and 26 females and 17 examples of both sexes, bred during
8th to 29th March 1936 (Exp.No,593); 1 female, 19.3,37 (Exp.No.724); 2 females,
18.3.41; | male and 1 female, 13.3.50; | male and 1 female, 23,3.50; 1 male, 26.2.51. Some adults and nymphal stages from these experiments were also preserved in alcohol
(in phials). The specimens present at the LA.R.I., New Delhi, are mostly in poor condition,
bearing the following data: Pusa, Bihar, | example, 11.2.14 (D.P.S.) (R7201); 12
examples, 16.2.14 (D.P.S.) (R/7298, 7299, 7300, 7302, 7304; 2 examples, 26.1.15
(D.P.S.) (R/7296, 7297), all collected on jaman leaves. Some nymphal stages preserved in alcohol were also received from the Assistant
Entomologist, Agricultural College, Bapatla (Andhra Pradesh), on 6th June 1966. ‘They were collected on Eugenia jambolana. Distribution. This species appears to have a wide distribution, and has been reported
from Dehra Dun (U.P. ); Pusa (Bihar); Bapatla (Andhra Pradesh); Mani (1959) has
mentioned throughout India. Comparison, This specics is recognised by the shape of forewings, venation, first
marginal cell, shape of head and the characteristic genal structures. There is some confusion in identification of this species and Trioza fusca. The male
genitalia of one specimen identified as jambolanae in the collection of the LLA.R.L, New
Delhi, was examined by me and its structure resembles very much with that of T. fusca. Crawford (1917) has described jambolanae from two female specimens. Biological notes. Mathur (1935) and Beeson (1941) have given brief life-history of
this species; while Mani (1959) has described the gall. Its nymphal stages are described
by Mathur (1949). :

 

Trioza longiantennata, sp, 0. (Figa. 127, 128)
Length of body, in male, 2:0 mm; in female, 2-25 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 3-65 mm; in female, 3:90 mm. Width of head with eyes, 0-80 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0-45 mm
Length of antennae, 1-62 mm

“ Golouration, (Dried specimens), General colow light yellowish-brown with pinkish
linge,’ mesothorax having two light brown submedian, longitudinal bands, tips. of
23

386 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

0.25 mm. Fig. 127. Trioga longiantennate, sp. n.—at head, front view; br antenna; et part of foreleg; di hind leg; >
et claw; ftforewing; g: hind wing; hh, is anal valve, lateral and outer views 4, kt parameres,
lateral and mesal surfaces; It acdeagus; mt dorsal plate; m: ventral plate,

antennae black, abdamen dark-brown dorsad and pale yellow ventrad in male, male
genitalia dark-brown; wings hyaline, veins pale-yellow. ‘Structure, Body moderately large. Head (Fig. 127a) including eyes, broader than
thorax, slightly declivous, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose; vertex large,
much broader than long, slightly impressed discally, not entircly flat, divided by the
median suture into two subquadrate lobes, rounded in front with a median sulcus, with
a fovea on each side of median suture and posterior to the centre, posterior margin
slightly emarginate; anterior ocellus visible in front; posterior ocelli orange, slightly

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 387

raised; genal cones small, about 0:18 mm long, much shorter than the length of vertox,
directed vertically downward, broad and contiguous at base and bluntly rounded at
apex, pubescent with setae slightly longer than on the vertex and also beset with rows
of minute points. Eyes large and bulging. Antennae (Fig. 127b) long, ten-segmented, having a few setae, basal two segments
robust, having rows of minute points, remaining segments slender and imbricate, 3rd
segment longest and a little longer than 4th, 5th and 6th segments together, 4th, 6th
and 7th equal to one another, Sth slightly smaller than 4th, 8th slightly longer than
7th, 9th slightly less then half as long as 8th, two apical segments club-shaped, terminal
segment smallest, bearing two uncqual spines at apex; four sensoria present on segments
4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax moderately arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Prothorax roof-shaped, conyexly rounded, moderately declivous, besct with minute
points, with two foveal impressions on cach lateral side; prescutum slightly broader than
long, broadest beyond centre, anterior margin narrowly rounded, posterior margin broadly
rounded, angulate laterally; scutum slightly smaller in length than prescutum, about
twice as broad as long, flat dorsally; scutellum broadly transverse, slightly broad anteriorly
and narrow posteriorly. Legs moderately long, pubescent and thickly beset with minute points, all tibiae
with an apical comb of setae, hind femora (Fig. 127d) armed with five long, dorsal,
subapical, truncate setae and three sensoria-like structures ventrally, fore (Fig. 127c)
and middle tibiae with two and four subapical lanceolate setac respectively, hind tibia
with a series of minute basal spurs, containing 2 or 3 prominent spurs and also a
conspicuously large subapical spur armed with a black tooth and three apical black
teeth present on the other side; basal tarsal segment smaller than apical; claws pecu-
liarly shaped (Fig. 127e), being bladder-like at base, bearing microscopic ridges;
meracanthus large and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 127£) long and narrow, broadest across middle, about thrice as
long as broad, angled at apex, posterior margin nearly straight, anterior margin arched,
cubital petiole slightly longer than basal vein and about two and a quarter times as
long as radius, Ry slightly shorter than radius, radial sector irregularly curved, fork
My 49 terminating near tip of wing, distance between Cug, Cu, and Cu, and M,,, equal
along the hind margin, second marginal cell longer than first. Hind wings (Fig, 127g) a little more than half as long as forewings, membrane
thickly beset with minute points, costal margin in the basal half armed with some simple
and hooked setac. Abdomen longer than broad, sternites bearing longer setae and also minute points. Genitalia. Male genital segment smaller than abdomen, pubescent; anal valve
(Figs. 127h, i) about 0-32 mm long, smaller than parameres, with a small apical anal
lobe, anterior margin almost straight, posterior margin broadly convex, lateral and
apical regions besct with setae of varying length; parameres (Figs, 127j, k) about 0:38 mm
long, bifurcate, anterior branch bluntly pointed at apex and smaller than the posterior
branch, which is rounded apically, both arms beset on the mesal surface with groups

388 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

of stout setae directed downward, outer surface having fine simple setac; hypandrium
of usual shape, sparsely beset with scattered setae; outer arm of aedeagus (Fig. 1271)
longer than basal, with a cap-shaped spoon end. Female genitalia smaller than abdomen, pubescent; anal and ventral plates (Figs. 127m, m) widely separated distally and bluntly rounded apically, dorsal plate longer
than ventral; anal opening surrounded by a double ring of pores and armed with simple
setae, sctae longer in aniddle and postcrior regions. Host plant. Bred from the pit galls on twigs of Populus euphratica Oliv. Type locality. Ghazighat, Multan (Pakistan). Types. Described from a small scries of specimens. Holotype male, of 26.3.34,
from the type locality (Foresicr collection) (R.R.D 668.203.Y5); Allotype female,
of 3.4.29, from the same locality (R.N. Mathur) (R.R.D.960); Paratypes: 1 male
of 3.4.29 (R.N. Mathur); 2 males of 26.3.34, | male and 1 female of 27.3.34, 1 male
of 31,3.34; 1 male of 3.4.34, all from the type locality (Forester collection) (R.R.D. 668.203.Y5); 1 male of 7.4.34, from the same locality (Forester collection) (R.R.D. 676.217.¥6). Some slides with parts of adults and nymphal stages were prepared from
the same material, All types, slides and some preserved material are deposited at the
F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Comparison. This species rescmbles in some characters with the other species recorded
on Populus euphratica, but it is easily separated by the shape and venation of wings,
shape of head and genal cones. Biological notes. Mathur (1935) and Beeson (1941) have discussed its biology and
economic importance. Pit galls are more abundant on ‘poplars than the globular twig
galls. This species is reported to check the growth of a twig entirely and kill it in one
season, or reduce its growth in length, without killing it in the first season. Sometimes
dying-back of the subsequent year’s shoot is caused due to the distortion in the older
part of the branch, The life-cycle appears to be annual. During February and March,
nymphs of various stages are found abundantly and they transform into winged adults
in March-April, The nymphs are broadly oval, with flat dorsal surface and bulging
venter which occupies the pit. The sternal region has two pairs of long fleshy pro-
tuberances between the legs which evidently press against the sides and bottom of

the pit and anchor the insect in position. Its nymphal stages are described
below. Nymphai stages

Fifth stage. (Fig, 128a). Length 2-12 mm. Typically of triozine form, Broadly
oval, the humeral angle of the wing-pads produced forward beyond the eyes and almost
to the anterior margin of the head. Dorsum: with the derm strongly sclerotic, except
for the joint between thorax and abdomen. Derm of the thorax ornamented by nu-
merous small, strongly pigmented arcas having honey-comb like structure. Derm
also vermiculate and beset vith small pores, each bearing a minute seta. A continuous
fringe of long, slender sect:.-setae borne on small prominences present along the entire
margin of the body. Eyes small. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 389

 

Fig. 128. Trioza longiantennata, sp. n.—at fifth stage nymph; b: antenna; et leg; d: circum-anal pore ring. Ventral side membranous throughout, except for a small sclerotic strip at the base
of each antenna, small areasaround each spiracle, broad area encircling the circum-anal
ring, and a continuous thick border along the body margin. Derm thickly beset with
minute points and scattered simple setac of various length, which are arranged seg-
mentally in the abdomen. Thick area along the border furnished with broad flattencd
points, Antennae (Fig. 128b) veniral, 0-35 mm long, short and stout, seven-segmentcd,
bearing few setac and four sensoria, 3rd segment large, broader at base and narrower
at apex, terminal segment weakly imbricate, having two spines at tip. Legs (Fig. 128c)
short, and stout, bearing few simple setae; femora not reaching margin of the body;
with trochanters; tibio-tarsal articulation distinct, cach tarsus with a golf-club séta;
with claws; pulvillus _ small, . triangular. Anal aperture (Fig. 128d) ventral and
at a distance from the apex of the abdomen, surrounded by two’simple rings of slit-like
pores, and.:guarded. by two anterior, one lateral and one posterior pairs of long
selac. .

Fourth stage, Length 1-48 mm. Rescmbles the fifth stage except for small size,
having numerous pores bearing minute setae; antennae obscurely five-segmented with
three sensoria; tibio-tarsal division weak. 390 PSYLLIDAF. OF THE INDIAN SUBGONTINENT

Third stage. Length 0-75 mm. Differs from the fourth stage in having small
wing-pads; peculiarly shaped secta-setae along the body margin; antennae apparently
three-segmented with sensoria; tibio-tarsal joint absent. ‘Trioza obliqua Thomson 1877
(Pigs. 129, 130)

Trioza obliqua
Thomson, CG. 1877, Opuse, ent, 8:
Osiannilsson, F. 1944, Opuse. ent, 94 154-156. Osiannilsson, F, 1952, ibid. 17; 198. Dobreanu, E. and Manolache, C, 1962. Fauna Repub. pop. rom., Insecta, 8 Fasc. 3, pp. 344-348,
figs. 252-256,

 

 

Trioza horvatht

Loew, F. 1882. Perk, zool. -bot, Ges, Wien, 31: 263-264,

Oshanin, B. 1907, Ann, Mus, Zool. de PAc, imp. des Sc. Petersburgh, Bd, XM: 373,

Aulmann, G. 1913, Psyllidarum Gatalogus, Berlin, 47. Sule, K. 1913. Monogr. gen. Trioza Foerster, pars LV, no. 36-49, pp. 4-8. Horvath, G. 1918, Fauna Regni Hung., H. 8: 59,

Schaefer, H. A. 1949, Mitt. schuviz. ent, Ges, 222 71-72,

Smreczynski St.sen. 1954. Fragmrenta Faunistica 73 142. Vondracek, K, 1957. Fauna C.S.R. Praha, Geskoslovenska akademie Ved., t. 9; 360-362,
Spanioze horvathi

Enderlein, G. 1926, Ent, Mitt. 15: 397-401,

 

Length of body, in male, 1-76 mm; in female, 1-74 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2:28 mm; in female, 2:30 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-38 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-25 mm

Length of antennae, 0:85 mm

Colouration, (Specimens preserved in alcohol), Gencral colour  yellowish-brown;
in male, head, genae, dorsum of thorax, two basal and distal antennal segments, clypeus,
tip of labium, and apical tarsal segments black; in female, head and genac with blackish
tinge, anterior and posterior borders of prothorax blackish, ‘prescutum and scutum with
two submedian, longitudinal blackish bands, each band in scutum with a yellowish
stripe in between, two basal and apical antennal segments, clypeus, tip of labium, and
apical tarsal segments of legs also black; wings transparent in both sexes. Structure. THead (Fig. 129a) nearly as broad as thorax; finely and sparsely pubescent,
finely rugulose, horizontal; vertex nearly twice as broad as long, swollen on either side
of median line, rounded downward anteriorly, similarly median suture abruptly
inclined downward anteriorly, with foveal impressions and linear depressions on each
side of median line, the depression diverging and bifurcating anteriorly before reaching
the anterior margin, posterior margin moderately arcuate, antcrior margin emarginate
medianally, having front ocellus at the point of excision, post-ocelli small and lateral;
frons small, visible in front with anterior ocellus; genal cones small, about 0:12 mm

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 391

 

Fig. 129, Trioza obliqua Thomson—a: head, feont view; bs antenna; ex hind leg; dt forewing; ex hind wings
fz male genitalia, lateral view; gt anal valve and aedeagus; bt forceps and hypandrium;

iz spoon end of aedeagus; jt sperm pump; kx female genitalia, lateral view; 1k dorsal plate;
mt: ventral plate. long and two-thirds as long: as vertex, contiguous near base, divergent, subacute at
apex, pubescent with long hairs and also beset with rows of minute points. Clypeus
globular, visible in front. Eyes small, hemispherical. Antennal sockets lateral and
located below the level of lower margin of eyes. Antennae (Fig, 129b) ten-jointed, two basal joints robust, Ist transverse,
2nd subquadrate, remaining segments slender and imbricate, 3rd segment longest, about
three times as long as 4th, 4th slightly longer than 5th, 5th smallest, 6th, 7th and 8th. 392, PSYLLIDAE UF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

equal to one another and each slightly longer tian 4th, 9th slightly smaller than 10th,
terminal segment with two unequal spines at apex, four scnsoria present on segments
4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax slightly arched, finely and sparsely pubescent, finely rugulose. Prothorax
roof-shaped, narrow in middle, lateral sides broad and upturned, with foveal impressions
on each side; prescutum large, htly broader than long, narrow anteriorly and
broad posteriorly, angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutum about twice as broad
as long, slightly longer than prescutum, engulate laterally; scuteIIum small, transverse,
about twice as brcad as long, anterior margin straight,

Legs (Fig. 129c) moderately long, slender, sparsely pubescent, and also beset with
rows of minute points, femora shorter than tibiae, hind femur with two dorsal, subapical,
blunt setae, hind tibiae with a prominent basal spur together with a series of smaller
spurs, with three stout, black tooth-like spines (2 on one side and | on the other) and also
with a comb of small setae at apex, basal tarsal segments of fore and middle legs slighlly
longer than apical segments, while in hind leg, both are of equal length; meracanthus
large and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 129d) small, slighty more than two and a half times as long as broad,
subacute apically, R, M and Cu arising together from the same point, cubitus slightly
less than twice as long as radius, R, smaller than radius, basal vein slightly longer than
cubitus, fork M,, 2 meeting near apex, marginal cells unequal, first marginal cell
slightly longer and broader than second, distance between Cuy, Cu, slightly longer
than the distance between Cu, and M,,4, radular areas present in first and second
marginal cells and medio-cubital cell, venation light brewn and armed with
microscopic setac. .

Hind wings (Fig. 129e) small, mentbranc uniformly beset with minute points, costal
margin armed with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen moderately long, longer than broad, sparscly pubescent and also beset
with minute points. .

Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 129f) smaller than abdomen, pubescent. Anal
valve (Fig. 129g) large, about 0°20 mm long, longer than forceps, front margin almost
straight, slightly invaginated near base, posterior margin arcuately rounded, outer sur-
face beset with small setae, marginal setae longer, anal apical region short, outer.surface
also armed with minute points arranged in rows; parameres (Fig. 129h) short, about
0:13 mm long, asymmetrically pyriform in lateral view, anterior margin convexly
rounded and armed with thick, curved setae, narrowed and pointed in a Sharp black
point distad, outer surface beset with small simple setae, mesal surface bearing thick
setae directed downward; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, sparsely pubescent’ and
also beset with rows of minute points; acdeagus (Figs. 129g, i) with the outer arm gmall,
the inner atm curved, having a bulge distad, spoon end with two small processes directed
downward. Sperm pump as figured (Fig. 1294). Female genital segment (Fig, 129k) smaller than abdomen, sparsely pubescent and also
beset with rows of minute points, both plates broad basally and acuminate posteriorly,
dorsal plate (Fig. 129 1) longer than ventral, roundly pointed at apex, anal area: clearly

     

 

 

FAMILY PSY! LIDAE 593

differentiated from the rest, posterior region steeply inclined downward in lateral view,
circum-anal ring composed of double ring of pores, surrounded by small setae, ventral
plate (Fig. 129m) short, acute at apex; ovipositor small and pointed. Host plants. Chenopodium album Linn, and Atriplex sp. Distribution, Recorded for the first time from India and Pakistan: Chichawatni
plantation, Montgomery forest division (Pakistan); and New Delhi. Originally recorded from Europe, where this species is widely distriluted: Poland,
Sweden, Rumania, England, France, Czechoslovakia and U.S.S.R.; and also in
Japan. Material examined. A small series of both sexes, 6 males and 4 females, collected on
May 13, 1939, from Chichawatni plantation, Montgomery (Pakistan) (R.N. Mathur);
5 males and 5 females collected from New Delhi, April 29, 1964, and May, 1964,
(M.G. Ramdas Menon). This material has becn deposited at the F.R.I., Dehra Dun
and the IARI, New Delhi. Some adults and nymphal stages, preserved in alcohol,
also deposited at the former institute,

Comparison. Two pairs of adults of this species were scnt to Professor Ossiannilsson,
Sweden, for confirmation, and he agreed with my identification. Further, he writes:
an ... However, in a letter dated 24.3,1966, Mr. Pavel Lauterer in Brno,
Crechoslovakia, informed me that Trioza obliqua Thomson is only a photo-periodic
saison form of Trioza chenopodit Reutcr, according to the results of experimental work
done by himself. ‘Yhese studies are still unpublished, as far as I know.”

The characters drawn above are based on Indian specimens, and this species is recognised
by the shape of head; genal cones, shape of wings and venation and several other
characters. Biological notes. Nothing is known about its life-histroy and economic importance,
except that the adults and nymphal stages are found on young buds and leaves of
Chencpodium album. ‘Uhe nymphal stages sre described below. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig, 130a). Length 1-54 mm, Of triozine form, somewhat broadly
and irregularly oval. Humeral angle of the wing-pads produced forward slightly beyond
the posterior margin of the eyes and broadly rounded, Eyes rather small. Dorsum
strongly sclerotic throughout, except for a small area at the base of abdomen. Derm
vermiculate and also beset with small scattered secta-setae and a few simple setae; comb-
like sctac also present in the posterior part of abdomen. Margin of the body with a
continuous scrics of short and stout secta-sctac. Ventral side membranous throughout, except small sclerotic areas near spiracles. Derm thickly beset with minute points and sparsely with scattercd simple setae of various
length. Antennae (Fig. 130b) ventral, 0:29 mm long, five-segmented, armed with a
few simple setae, Ist basal segment small, transverse, 2nd robust, broad basally and
narrow apically, having a weak constriction, remaining segments slender, 3rd segment
subsquare, slightly longer than broad, with a weak constriction, 4th smallest, transverse,
5th longest, imbricate, having two sensoria and two unequal spines at apex;. the other

594 PSYLLIDAE OF 1HE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 130. Trioza oblique Thomson—a: fifth stage nymph; b: antenna; e: leg; d: circum-anal pore ring,

two sensoria are present on 2nd and 3rd segments. Legs (Fig. 130c) quite short, sparsely
beset with scattered setae, femora not reaching the margin of body; without trochanters;
tibio-tarsal articulation distinct; each tarsal segment with a golf-club seta; claws present,
the pulvillus broadly triangular, sessile, Anal-opening (Fig. 130d) ventral, set well
away from the apex of abdomen, surrounded by an outer pore-ring consisting of a single
row of slit-liké pores and an inner ring with small, more or less oval pores, and guarded
by two anterior, one lateral and one posterior pairs of long, simple setae. Foitrth stage. Length 0-93 mm, Resembling the fifth stage, except in being smaller
in size, with smaller wing-pads, antennae apparently three-segmented, having three
sensoria, tibio-tarsal articulation absent. Trioza obsoleta (Buckton) 1900
(Figs. 131, 132)

Buckton, G3, B. 1900, Indian Mus, Notes 5(2): 35, pl. V, figs. 10-15, (ex leaf-galls on Diospyres melax
noxylon Thana, Bombay) (Psylla obsoleta). Froggatt, W. W. 1900, Indian Mus, Notes 5(3): 111-112. Stebbing, E. P. 1902. Dept. Notes 1x 190-131. Lefroy, H, M, 1909. Indian Insect Lift, p. 743 [Trioza (Psylla) obsoleta Buckt. }, fig. 516. Aulmann, G, 1913. Psyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, p. 50. Ramakrishna Ayyar, T. V. 1924, Ree, Indian Mus, 26: 628,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 395

Laing, F. 1930, Indian Forest Rec, 14(8): 444. Mathur, R.N, 1935, Indian Forest Rec, 1(2): 66. Beeson, C.F, C. 1941, Forest Insects, p. 782. Mani, M.S, 1959, Agra Unio. 7, Res, (Science) 8(2): 202 (W. Ghats). Length of body, in male, 1-71 mm; in female, 1:95 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2/83 mm; in female, 3-20 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0-55

Width of vertex between eyes, 0-43 mm

Length of antennae, 0:82 mm

Golouration. General colour ferrugineous and shining black ventrally, abdominal
segments with pale borders, antennac pale-ycllow, with two basal and apical segments
and apex of eighth scgment black, apices of segments fourth and sixth orange, wings
hyaline and transparent, femora of legs black, fore tibiae partly black and pale-yellow,
middle and hind tibiae pale-yellow, tarsi pale-ycllow. Structure. Body variable in length, short and robust. Head (Fig. 131a) narrower
than thorax, moderately deflexed, sparsely beset with small setae and also with minute
points arranged in lines. Vertex broader than long, slightly less than twice as broad
as long, somewhat flat, rounded down in front, with two foveae posterior to centre, onc
on either side of median suture, posterior margin moderately emarginate, post-ocellar
region swollen, bearing post ocelli, anterior ocellus visible in front; genae small, somewhat
swollen and porrect, separate, divergent, bearing fine long pale hairs and also armed
with minute points, narrowly rounded at apex. Eyes large, bulging. Antennal
sockets large. Clypcus long, visible from below, somewhat cylindrical and protruding
forward; labium long and also protruding forward between forclegs. Antennae (Fig. 131b) small, ten-segmented, about one and a half times as long as
head including eyes, bearing few setae, two basal segments robust, Ist transverse, 2nd
subquadrate, broad basally, as long as Ist, remaining segments slender and imbricate, 3rd
longest, 4th small, about half as long as 3rd, 5th to 8th equal to one another and slightly
smaller than 4th, 9th slightly smaller than apical, terminal segment having two unequal
apical spines, four scnsoria prescnt on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. ‘Thorax robust, arched, sparsely bearing simple, stiff setae and also finely shagreened. Prothorax partly or completely concealed underneath head, armed with minute points,
narrow, convexly rounded, sides produced like flaps and extending towards the cyes;
prescutum slightly broader than long, narrowly rounded anteriorly, broadest in middle,
angulate both laterally and posteriorly; scutum broad, much broader than long, slightly
more than twice as broad as long, flat dorsally with a shallow median depression, sides
gradually sloping, broadest slightly before middle, smaller in length than prescutum,
angulate laterad, posterior margin also angulate; scutellum transverse, convex dorsally,
broad anteriorly and narrowly rounded posteriorly, anterolateral angles prominent,
anterior margin almost straight; post-scutellum of metathorax very large and broad,
with a median and two submedian furrows, disc weakly swollen on either side of these
furrows, and besct with minute points. .

396 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

 

Fig. 131. Triaza obsoleta (Buckton)—at head, front views bt antenna; e: hind leg; d: forewing; et hind
wing; fi male genitalia, lateral view, g, ht parameres; i: aedeagus; jt sperm pump; kt female
genitalia, lateral view; 1: dorsal plate; nas anal valve of male. Legs (Fig. 131c) long, pubescent, and also beset with fine minute points arranged ‘in
lincar scries, femora shorter than tibiae, all tibiae with apical comb of setae, hind femur
with three sensoria-like structures on the ventral side, and with four dorsal blunt setae
near apex, hind tibiae with a group of basal spurs, 3 or 4 spurs strong, three spur-like
tooth present at apex (2 approximate teeth on one and | on the other); tarsal segments
almost equal in length; meracanthus long and slender. Forewings (Fig. 131d) long, clongate, hyaline, transparent, slightly more than two
and a holf times as long as broad, subacute to narrowly rounded at apex, R, M and Cu
arising from the same point, cubitus longer than the basal vein, Rs usually long and slightly

FAMILY PSYLLIDAF, 397

arched near apex, R and R, almost equal in length, Rs originating from middle, marginal
cells sub-equal, second marginal cell slightly longer and wider then first, fork Mi,»
meeting near apex. Hind wings (Fig. 131e) represented by very small membranous flaps, costal margin
armed with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen longer than broad, almost circular in outline, pubescent, and also beset
with minute points,

Genitalia. Male genital segment (Fig. 131£) smaller than abdomen. Proctiger
(anal valve) (Fig. 131m) longer than parameres (forceps); in profile, anterior margin
slightly convex in basal half and weakly concave in distal half, posterior, margin
produced into large lateral lobes, broadest ncar about middle, narrow both basally
and apically, apex truncatc, distal half and lateral lobes beset with simple setae of
varying length; paramercs (Figs. 131g, h) broad basally, with sides sub-parallel
in the apical half, terminating in a short but stout three-lobed apex, the two mesal
processts acutcly pointed, the outer process bluntly rounded, basal region produced
into a thick round lobe, directed cephalad, outer surface of forceps bearing small,
simple setae, mesal surface beset with small, thick setae, marginal setae slighlly
longer, basal lobe also armed with strong thick setae; hypandrium simple, of usual shape,
bearing simple setae and also minute points; accleagus (Fig. 131i) with a long outer arm
having a median notch but smaller than inner, spoon end large and broad; sperm pump
as figured (Fig. 131)). Female genital segment (Fig. 131k) smaller than abdomen, strongly deflexed somewhat
vertically downward, plates sub-cqual, dorsal plate (Fig. 1311) longer than ventral,
strongly sloping caudally, beset with minute points, broad basally, narrowly rounded
apically, caudal end armed with small, thick setae, setac in middle longer, anal opening
small, surrounded by a double ring of pores; ventral plate broad at base, acute at
apex, surfacc beset with simple sctae and with minute points; ovipusitor acutely
pointed,

Host plants. Bred ex galls on young leaves of Diospyros melanoxylon Roxb, and D. tomentosa
Roxb. Distribution. Previously recorded from Thana (Bombay), in galls on Diospyros melan-
oxylon (Buckton, 1900); while Lefroy (1909) has mentioned only from India, Mani
(1959) has recorded from W. Ghats, on leaves of Diospyros melanoxylon. Its fresh distri-
butional records are: Sambalpur, Orissa; and Chimnapur, East Asir Range, Nimar
Forest Division (M.P. ), bred ex galls on leaves of D. melanoxylon and D. tomentosa. Material examined.. Some adults and nymphal stages collected on February 15-18,
1955, from galls on leaves of D, melanoxylon, from Sambalpur Forest Division
(R.N. Mathur); 5 males and 2 females from Chimnapur, East Asir Range (M.P. ), of
23.357 (F.R.I. Project); 4 males and 4 females from East Asir Range (M.P.) of 20.3.59
(R.N. Mathur) and 6 males and 6 females from Chimnapur, of 21,3.59 (R.N. Mathur);
all these specimens were bred from galls on leaves of D. melanoxylon and D. tomentosa;
and six phials containing numerous adults and nymphal stages, preserved in alcohol,
collected from the Nimar Forest Division (M.P. ), ex galls on D, melanoxyton;

398 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

 

Fig. 132. Trioza obsoleta (Buckton)--a: fifth stage nymph; fb: antenna: e: hind leg; dz circum-anal pore
ving. Comparison, Buckton (1900) has not given specific characters and has placed the
species under the genus Psylla; while Froggatt (1900) considered it to be undcr the
genus Trioza, due to triozinc venation. Laing (1930) has confirmed the species under
Trioza. Stebbing (1902) has given detailed colouration notes. Trioze obsoleta is
redescribed here with detailed specific characters and figures, It is easily separated
from other species by the atrophied hind wings, form of head and other features. Biological notes. This species is commonly met with, infesting the leaves of
D. melanoxylon and D. tomentosa, wherever these trees are located. Young galls are
of biscuit colour end appear like small vesicles, while the mature galls are pale-yellow,
projecting on the ventral side of leaves (Plate 6b, c,d). On the dorsal surface they
appear like small scars and pale-green in colour. The galls are finely hairy, unilocular
and uninymphal, in rare cases binymphal. Dehiscence occurs on the ventral side, and
usually the nymphs cast their last skin inside the galls. The freshly emerged adults crawl
out from the slit, expand their wings and gradually become mature. Young nymphs are
somewhat circuler in shape, light brown, with pinkish red eyes, and fringed all round
with white waxy threads, Mature nymphs are broadly oval, with dark-brown stripes on
thorax. Emergence takes place in February when the season warms up. Its nymphal
stages are described below, . FAMILY PSYLLIDAE,

2
3
a

Nymphal stages

Fifth stage (Fig. 132a). Length 1°32 mm. Of triozine form, somewhat broadly
and irregularly oval. Humeral angles of the wing-pads produced forward almost to
the anterior margin of the eyes and bluntly rounded. Head large and broad. Eyes
large. Derm weakly vermiculate. Dorsum strongly sclerotic throughout except for
a small area at base of the abdomen. Margin of the body with a continuous serics of
short and stout secta-setae borne on small prominences, which are quite widely spaced. Similar setac of varying length also present, distributcd on the dorsum in a rather
definite arrangement. Derm also beset with small, simple scattercd setae. Abdomen
consisting mainly of a single plate with traces of segmentation, and also armed sparscly
with minute points, and comb-like stuctures. Ventral side with the derm apparently membranous throughout, except for faint areas
around the anus, the marginal zone and small areas round the spiracles. Derm strongly
beset with minute points, and with simple, scattered setae of varying length. Seg-
mentation of the abdomen represented by very narrow transverse strips, Antennae
(Fig. 132b) quite short, about 0°02 mm long, apparently consisting of seven segments,
three basal segments robust, first two segments transverse, third broad basally, narrow
apically, with a weak constriction, remaining segments slender, terminal segment long,
bearing two apical spines and two sensoria, the other two sensoria present on segments
3rd and Sth. Legs (Fig. 132e) relatively short, the femora not or scarcely attaining the
margin of the body; without trochanters; tibic-tarsal articulation well-defined, each
tarsal joint with a golf-club scta near apex; claws present, the pulvillus in the form of a
sub-circular pad, Anal opening (Fig. 132d) sct well away from the apex of the abdomen,
surrounded by a double ring of pores, the outer ring consisting of slit-like pores, while
the inner ring is composed of somewhat indistinct oval pores, these rings are interrupted
medially, both anteriorly and pesteriorly, and also guarded by two anterior, two posterior
and two lateral pairs of setac. .

Fourth stage. Length 0°86 mm. Resembling the fifth stage, except in being smaller,
antennae apparently five-segmented with three sensoria, and without tibio-tarsal
articulation,

 

Trioza simplifica, sp, n,
(Fig. 133)

Length of body, in female, 2°40 mm

Length of forewing, in female, 3°90 mm
Width of head with eyes, in female, 0°63 mm
Width of vertex between eyes, 0°38 mm
Length of antennae (missing)

Colouration. (Preserved specimens in alcohol, in partly damaged condition), Gencral
colour pale clay yellow, with light brown longitudinal, submedian bands on prescutum
and scutum, labium black, venter of abdomen of lighter colour; wings dull. 400 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 183. Triosa simplifica, sp. n.—as head, front view; br head and part of thorax, lateral view; ot hind
leg; dt forewing; et hind wing, partly broken; f female genitalia, lateral view. Structure, Body robust. Head, (Figs. 133a, b) including cyes, slightly shorter than
thorax, slightly deflexed, sparsely hairy with long hairs; vertex much broacler than long,
about twice as broad as long, rugulose, posterior margin strongly arcuate medianally,
deeply excavated discally in the shape of W, and produced on each side into a rather
acute epiphysis near cach eye, rounded and full on cach side of median line anteriorly,post
ocellar region elevated; anterior occllus visible from above; frons visible in front;
genal cones small, broad at base, narrow and broadly rounded at apex, divergent,
descending below plane of vertex, hairs longer than on vertex. Antennae broken,
except two basal segmenis, which are robust,

Thorax robust, moderately arched, rugulosc, sparsely pubescent. Prothorax much
deflexed and partly concealed below head; bearing long hairs, with conspicuous
lateral foveac. Prescutum nearly as broad as long, acutely angled both laterally and
posteriorly, scutum much broader than Jong; scutellum transverse, about ¢ twice as broad
as long. FAMILY PSYLLIDAL ant

Legs (partly broken) (Fig. 133e) long, coarsely pubescent, femora shorter than
tibiae, hind tibia with a series of weak spurs at base and three black apical teeth. 2 on
one side and 1 on the other; meracanthus long, slender and triangular. Forewings (Fig. 133d) (partly damaged) much longer than body, very large. about
two and a half times as long as broad, narrowly rounded to subacute at apex, Rs as long
as M to furcation point, radius, media and cubitus arising at the same point from basal
vein, R about one-third as long as Cin, second marginal cell longer than first, veins armed
with microscopic setae. Hind wings (Fig. 133e) (partly damaged) also quite large. Abdomen robust, tergites rugulose, with sparse pubescence, pubescence longer on
steritites, sternites also armed with minute points arranged in linear rows. Gmnitalia, Femalé genital segment (Fig. 133£) smaller than abdomen, plates wide
apart posteriorly ; dorsal plate subacute apically, slightly longer than ventral and differen-
tiated into two areas, the basal two-thirds area hears the small anal pore-ving. consisting
of double row of pores, the distal one-third area is somewhat darker in colour and
armed with a group of minute setae, pubescence sparse; ventral plate acutely pointed;
ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plant. On awild shrub. Type locality. Devithan, Central Nepal. Types. Described from four female specimens, which were in poor condition,
antennae, legs and wings broken in picces or missing. This material was received
(preserved in alcohol) from the Head, Division of Entomology, I.A.R.1., New Delhi,
Holotype female; Paratypes: one female; and one female dissccted and mounted
on slide, and one badly mutilated specimen kept in alcohol; all from the type locality,
and collected on 22.4.61 (No.IV) (S.R. Wadhi). Type deposited at the F.R.I., Dehra
Dun, and one paratype female deposited at the 1.A.R.I., and also the mutilated specimen
in alcohol. Comparison. Trioza simplifica, sp.n. differs from other species in shape of head,
bearing a small epiphysis near cach cye on vertex, shape of genal cones and in some
other characters. Biological notes. ‘Vhis species has becn collected on a wild shrub, from Central Nepal. Nothing is known about its life-history and economic importance. ‘Triozm spinulata, sp. 0. (Figs, 134, 135)

Length of body, in male, 1'70 mm; in female, 2°12 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2°98 mm; in female, 3°30 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°75 mm

Width of vertex between eyes, 0°40 mm

Length of antennae, 1°25 mm

Colouration. General colour dark-brown: to fuscous, with reddish tinge, wings hyaline,
wansparent, flavus; antennae lighter basally and black distally; veins pale-brown,
26

402 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

9.5 mm

Fig. 134, Triogaspinulata, sp. n.~a1 feont view of head; bt head and part of thorax, lateral view; et antenna;
dz hind leg; e: forewing; fs hind wing; gs male genitalia, lateral view; lat parameres; it forcep,
mesal surfaces jx sperm pump; kk female genitalia, Interal view; Is dorsal plate; mi ventral
plate. Structure. Body small but robust, hirsute. Head (Figs. 134a,b) slightly narrower
than thorax, deflexed, pubescent with long hairs, finely rugulcse; vertex broader than
long; disc swollen on either side of median suture having a circular fovea posterior to

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 403

centre, abruptly rounded down in front, postcrior margin deeply emarginate, post-ocellar
region swollen, anterior margin deeply emarginate at point of excision, antcrior ocellus
visible in front; genal cones small, about 0:18 mm long, smaller than vertex, subacute at
apex, divergent, sparsely pubescent with long hairs, finely rugulose, cones inclined
vertically downward. Eyes large, recessive, somewhat hemispherical, Antennal sockets
large, somewhat lateral. Antennae (Fig. 134c) long, slender, ten-segmented, imbricate, having few simple
setae, two basal segments robust, narrowly transverse, lst broader than 2nd, but in length
as long as 2nd, 3rd segment longest, as long as 4th, 5th and 6th combincd together, 4th
almost one-third as long as 3rd, 5th and 6th equal but smaller than 4th, 7th and 8th
equal but each smaller than 6th, 9th a little longer than 10th, apical segment about
half as long as 8th, bearing two unequal spines at tip, distal segments compressed, four
sensoria present on scgments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax (Fig. 134b) large, arched, sparsely pubescent, rugulose. Prothorax small,
deflexed vertically downward, convexly rounded, postcrior margin with a conspicuous
median epiphysis, with two foveal impressions on each lateral side; prescutum broader
than long, broadest somewhat in middle, narrower both anteriorly and posteriorly,
convexly rounded anteriorly, having asmall median epiphysis, angulate laterally, posterior
margin also angulate; scutum broad, about twice as broad as long, and as long as prescu-
tum, sloping and depressed posteriorly, angulate laterad; scutellum convex dorsally, broad
anteriorly, gradually narrowed posteriorly, about twice as broad as long, anterior margin
somewhat straight, with prominent antero-lateral angles; post-scutellum of metathorax
narrowly transverse, broad posteriorly, narrow anteriorly, swollen middorsally,
postero-lateral angles prominent. Legs (Fig. 134d) long, coarsely pubescent and also besct with minute points arranged
in serial lines, femcra shorter than tibiae, all tibiae with apical comb of setae, tibial
groove rather large, hind femur with a group of 5 to 7 long dorsal setae near apex, and
with three or four sensoria-like structures on ventral side, hind tibiae swollen apically,
beset with longitudinal rows of thick setae, with a series of small basal spurs and four
spur-like thick spines at apex, apical tarsal segment slightly longer than basal; meracan-
thus slender, long and triangular. Forewings (Fig, 134e) hyaline, transparent, somewhat oblong-ovate, about two and
one-fourth times as long as broad, narrowly rounded to subacute at apex, marginal
cells subequal, first cell slightly smaller but broader than second, basal vein longer than
cubitus, cubitus slightly more than two and a half times as long as radius, media and cubitus
arising slightly away from the point of emergence of radius; veins armed with
microscopic setae,

Hind wings (Fig. 134f) small, uniformly beset with minute points, costal vein armed
with a few simple and hooked setae. Abdomen small and thick, strongly beset with minute points and sparsely with simple
setae, setae longer on sternites. Genitalia, Male genital segment (Fig. 134g) smaller than abdomen, : Anal. valve
about 0°31. mm long, longer than parameres, broadest,in middle, in profile, anterior

404 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

margin almost straight or weakly conves. posterior margin produced caudad into a
large broad flap on each side, tiangular in shape, abruptly narrowed apically, truncate
at apex, upper surface strongly armed with minute points and also beset with simple setae
in the apical region and on lateral lobes, marginal setae Jonger; parameres small, about
0-26 mm long (Figs. 13¢h, i), in caudal view, stout, swollen in basal two-thirds and very
narrowly elongated like a triangular neck with three sides in the apical third, in dorsal
view, apices round. trispinulate, angles black, acute and bent downward, outer
surface having sparse simple setae, basal mesal surface armed with long, strong sctac
and also a cluster of setac present near the anterior margin, three sides of the apical neck
bearing strong setae pointing downward; hypandrium simple, of usual shape, having
long, simple setac and also beset with series of minute points; outer arm of aedeagus
smaller than basal, spoon cd strong, thick and somewhat globular and human head in
shape ; sperm pump as figured (Fig. 134j). Female genital segment (Fig. 134k) smaller than abdomen. Dorsal plate (Fig. 1341)
Jonger than ventral, gradually sloping downward and then directed caudally, and ending
in two subacute lobes with a deep median invagination, cach caudal lobe armed strongly
with simple thick setae and also with a bunch of very long setac, surface of plate strongly
heset with thick ininute points and also with simple setae, setae longer in the apical region,
circum-ana] pore ring large, longer than broad, and composed of a double ring of pores;
ventral plate (Fig. 134m) subacute at apex, having a deep caudal invagination, surface
armed with strong minute points and also with setae of varying length; ovipositor
exserted, acutely pointed and also bearing saw-like tecth near apex (Fig. 134m). Host plant. Bred ex globular cum pit galls on leaves of Syzygium cumini (L.) Skeels
(=Engenia jambolana Lam.). Type locality, New Forest, Dehra Dum (U.B.). Types. Described from a small series of specimens preserved in alcohol and later 5
examples were mounted on cards, Holotype male; Allotype female; from the
type locality, collected on March 9, 1952 (R.N. Mathur); Paratypes: one iale
and one female of the same data aud one female from the type locality but collected on
March 20, 1937 (R.N. Mathur). Few females and some nymphs from the type locality
and collected on April 1, 1951, aud some nymphs collected on March-April 1936 and
March 1950, from New Forest, Dehra Dun, were preserved in alcohol (R.N. Mathur). All types, preserved nymphal stages and some slides, deposited at the F.R.I., Dehra Dun. Comparisor. This species is recognised by the characters given in the key. ‘The shape
of head, genal cones and forewings are special fealures of this species. Biological notes. Nothing is known about its life-history and economic importance,
except that it has been recorded during March-April, and the nymphs are found located
in deep pits formed inside a large globular gall, projecting out on the upper surface of
leaves and having a large opening on the under surface. It isa compound gall, irregular
in shape and pale green in colour. A gall may harbour 2 to 9 nymphal stages. The
nymphs are broadly oval, with bulging venter and waxy fringe all round. Their colour
is pale clay yellow, with eyes pinkish-ved and abdomen of orange tinge. They excrete
small globules of honey dew. The description of the nymphal stages is given below. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE, 405

 

Fig, 135. ‘Trioea spinulata, sp. n.—at fifth stage nymph; bs antenna; ot leg; d: circum-anal pore ring. Nymphal stages

Fifth stage. (Fig.135a). Length 1°72 mm. Form very broadly oval, almost circular. Derm strongly sclerotic, except for the joint between thorax and abdomen. Wing pads
not projecting beyond the contour of the body, produced cephalad beyond the eycs. Entire margin of the body beset with a continuous fringe cf long, slender secta-setac,
hore on low prominences, Derm fincly vermiculate. Dorsum sparsely beset with
small, simple setae. Ventral side apparently membranous throughout and strongly bulging. Entire
derm thickly beset with minute points, which become stronger and thicker towards the
margin and in the caudal region. Small simple setae are also distributed, these setae
becoming longer and thicker of varying longths in the abdomen. Antennae (Fig. 135b)
very short, about 0°30 mm long, thick, the segmentation obscure, apparently seven-
segmented, basal segments thicker, broad basally, narrow apically, with four sensoria,
terminal segment with two setae near apex, Legs (Fig. 135e) quite long, femora scarcely
veaching the margin of the body, somewhat archcd; without trochanters; division
between tibia and tarsus distinct, each tarsus with one simple seta near apex; without
claws, pulvillus in the form of a circular pad, “Anal opening (Fig. 135d) situated well
in from the apex of the body, both outer and inner circum-anal pore rings distinct, and

406 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

consisting of rows of slit-like pores, both the rings interrupted medianally, both anteriorly
and posteriorly, and guarded by two anterior, one lateral and one posterior pairs of setac. Fourth stage. Length 1-40 mm. Resembling the fifth stage, except for smaller size
and wing-pads, antennac apparently five-scgmented, with three sensoria, tibio-tarsal
articulation absent. Teloza urticae (Linnaeus) 1758
(Fig. 196)

hermes wrticae
Linnaeus, C. 1758. Syst. Nat, p. 454. Linnaeus, C. 1761. Fauna suec. Holmiae, No. 1006. Triosa urticae (L..)
Foerster, A. 1848, Verh, naturlt, Ver. preuss, Rheinl, Bd, 3 1 82, 84,
Flor, G. 1861. Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou, t, 34 : 383, 387, 392. Scott, J. 1876. Trans. ent. Soc, Lond., pp. 558-554. Reuter, O. M. 1876. Afeddn. Soc. Fauna Flora Fenn, 1 : 71. Loew, F. 1877. Verh, zool. -bot. Ges. Wien., Bd. 27 1 141. Witlaczil, E. 1885, 2, wiss. Zool., Bd. 42 + 569. Szilady, Z. 1908. Roo, Lap, 16 : 120,
Sule, K. 1910, Monogr, gen. Triaza Foerster, pars, 1, no. 1-10, p. 1-5. Crawford, D. L. 1912, Rec. Indian Mus. 7(8): 434 (From Keonthal, Punjab, on nettle (Urtica sp)
‘This is quite typical of the European form of the same species,
Aulmann, G. 1913. Pyyllidarum Catalogus, Berlin, pp. 56-57. Horvath, G, 1918. Fauna Regni Hung. HL 8 + 59,
Ramalaishna Ayyar, T, V. 1924. Rec. Indian Mus, 26 : 624,
Ferris, G, F. 1925. an. Ent, 57 + 47, fig. 1 (Nymphal stages). Klyver, F. D, 1930, Can. Ent, 62(8) 2 169-172, Pl. 14, figs. H, M, genitalia of female and male. Lal, K.B, 1934. Trans. R. ent, Soc. Lond. 82 : 378-380 (Biology). Lal, K.B. 1937, Proc, R. Soc. Edinb, 57(3), no 21, pp. 323-324 (Nymphal stages),
Heslop-Harrison, G. 1935. Scot. Nat., May-June, p. 59,
Heslop-Harrison, G, 1936, Entomologist’s mon. Mag. 72 : 51. Heslop-Harrison, G. 1936. Trans. nth. Nat. Un. 1(4) + 225,
Heslop-Harrison, 1946. Entomologist’s mon. Mag. 82 : 37. Tothill, L. D, 1943. Jowa State Coll. J. Sci. 17(4) 2551,
Schaefer, H. A. 1949, Mitt. schuceiz. ent, Ges, v. 22, pp. 1-96. Ossiannilsson, F. 1952. Opuse. ent. 17 + 198. Smreczynski, St. sen. 1954, Fragmenta Faunistica 7 + 142. Vondracek, K. 1957. Fauna C.S.R, Praha, Ceskoslovenska akademie Ved., t. 9 + 314-816,
Lindberg, H, and Ossiannilsson, F. 1960. Fatina Fenn. 8 : 18 (Finnish Lapland),
Klimaszewski, 8, M. 1961. Fragmenta Faunistica, Warsz, 9(8) + 82 (W. Poland). Klimaszewski, S. M. 1963. Anls. Zool, 21(8) + 75 (Mongolia). Klimaszewaki, S.M. 1964. ibid. 22(5) + 100, fig. 24. Klimaszewski, S. M. 1964, ibid. 22(6) : 155 (Mongolia). Dobreanu, E, and Manolache, C. 1961, Fauna Rep. pop, rom. Akad. Insecta, Vol. 8, Fasc. 3, Homoptera:
Paylloidea, pp, 262-266, figs. 179-181. Wiedner, H. 1961. Sonderdr. Abh. Verh, der. natarw, Ver, Hamburgh (1960) 5 + 28, 46. Loginova, M. M, 1962. Proc. Inst. Zool. Acad, Sci. U,S.S.R. 31. + 42. Loginova, M. M. 1964. Jnst. Biol. Acad. Sci, U.S.S.R. p. 477, Pl. 218, figs. 14, 15,
Paylla evpoda
Hartig, Th. 1841. Ent. Germa, Bd. WH, p, 374. FAMILY DSYLLIDAF 407

Trioza enpoda
Foerster, A. 1848. Verh. natur, Ver. preuss, Rheiul. Bd. 3 + 82. Moyer-Dur, R. 1871, Mitt. schweiz. ent. Ges, 3 : 389,
Trioza forcipata
Foerster, A. 1848. ibid : 84. Meyer-Dur, R. 1871. ibid. p, 389. Trioza crassinervis
Foerster, A. 1848. ibid. p. 83. Meyer-Dur, R, 1871. p. 387. Trioza bicolor
Meyer-Dur, R. 1871, ibid. p, 389-391,

 

Length of body, in male, 2°33 mm; in female, 1°73 mm
Length of forewings, in male, 2'7 mm; in female, 2.6 mm
Width of head with eyes, 0°52 mm

Width of vertex between cyes, 0°31 mm

Length of antennae, 0-9 mm

Colouration. General colour variable; fuscous-yellow or brownish-black, with
yellowish-brown or black longitudinal streaks on thorax; head yellow or dark-brown,
with genal concs black, sometimes ycllow basally; antennae black, 2nd and 3rd segments
pale-ycllow or brown, 4th pale-brown basally and black apically, remaining distal scg-
ments black; legs fuscous yellow, femora yellow, somewhat blackish dorsally, tibiac
brownish-black apically, tarsi somewhat black; forewings clear, transparent, veins
pale-yellow; abdomen brown or black dorsally and yellowish-brown ventrally; genitalia
partly dark-brown to black. Structure. Body moderately long, slender. Head almest as broad as thorax, moderately
deflexed, finely and sparscly pubescent; verlex about one and a half times as broad as
long, along the median suture, disc more or less flat in dorsal view, gradually rounded
downward in front, two foveal impressions, posterior to centre, one on cach side of median
line, linear depressions extending anteriorly and laterally from each fovea; post-ocellar
region swollen; disc also swollen antcriorly on either side of median line; front ocellus
visible from above and located at the point of excision; posterior margin weakly cmargi-
nate; genal cones vertical from plane of vertex, porrcct anteriorly, broad basally, slightly
smaller than vertex, separate but approximate basally, divergent and subacute at apex,
bearing few long hairs. Antennal sockets lateral and situated below the anterior margin
of vertex. Eyes small, somewhat hemispherical. Antennae long, slender, tcn-segmented, sparsely pubescent, imbricate, two basal
segments robust, equal, Ist broadly transverse, 2nd subquadrate, 3rd longest, about
one and one-fourth times as long as 4th, 4th, 6th, and 7th equal, cach slightly longer than
5th, 8th a little longer than 7th, 9th and 10th almost cqual and as long as 5th, terminal
segment with two unequal apical spines, four sensoria present on segments 4, 6, 8 and 9. Thorax large, arched, finely and sparsely pubescent. Prothorax collar-like, strongly
convex, descending, narrow in middle, broad laterally, with two foveal impressions on
each side; prescutum slightly broader than long, broadest beyond middle, narrowed bet

Ans PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Fig. 136. Trioza urticae L.-~Forewing. anteriorly and posteriorly, narrowly rounded and bent vertically downward anteriorly,
angulate laterally and posterior margin also angulate submedianally; scutum large,
broad, slightly more than twice as broad as long, broadest before middle, slightly smaller
than prescutum in length, disc flat dorsally and gradually sloping and angulate laterally,
posterior margin also angulatc; scutellum broadly transverse, slightly brcad anteriorly,
with prominent antero-lateral angles, both anterior and posterior margins almost straight
and parallel. Legs Jong, pubescent and also armed with minute points, femora shorter than tibiae,
all tibiae with apical comb of sctae, without basal spur, with three black spines at apex,
basal tarsal segment longer than apical, meracanthus long, slender, sub-tubular. Forewings (Fig. 136) small, transparent, hyaline, narrowly rounded at apex, about
two and one-quarter times as long as broad, radial sector long and weakly sinuate, radius
slightly longer than R,, cubitus and basal vein almost equal, marginal cells unequal,
first cell slightly longer and broader than second, veins armed with microscopic setae. Hind wings small, membrane uniformly beset with minute points, costal margin in
the basal half armed with a few simple and hooked sctae. Abdomen small, slender, finely and sparsely pubescent and also beset with minute
points arranged in lines, setac slightly longer ventrally. Genitalia. Male genital segment smaller than ebdomen. Anal valve almost as long
as parameres, about 0°25 mm long, in profile, ante1ior margin nearly straight, posterior
margin broadly convex, thus forming lateral lobes, outer surface beset with simple setae,
marginal setae slightly longer, anal region clearly demarcated and truncate at apex;
parameres long and slender, bowed, broad basally, sides sub-parallel, with a conspicuous
midway constriction, strongly narrowed abruptly and tcrminating in a hook-like point
at apex; under high magnification, this process comprises three distinct stout setae,
attached to the antero-mesal surface of the apex, apical seta conical in shape and directed
anteriorly and mesally, while the two situated below are also conical with their halves
strongly deflected and directed forward and mesally, outer surface besct with strong setae,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 409

marginal setae slightly longer; hypandrium of usual shape and sparsely beset with simple
setae; aedeagus with the outer arm smaller than basal, with the large spoon end. Female genital segment smaller than abdomen, cocked up, sparsely pubescent, both
plates broad basally and gradually narrowed posteriorly, dorsal plate almest as long as
ventral, roundly pointed at apex, anal region depressed, setae longer in middle; ventral
plate acutely pointed at apex; ovipositor acutely pointed. Host plants. On nettle (Urtica sp. ); Urtica dioics L, and U. urens; and U. pilulifera L.
(Heslop-Harrison, 1946); U. holosericia (Klyver, 1930). Distribution. Most abundant species all over the Palaearctic area and always associated
with the nettles. In America, it is replaced by a very similar specics, also feeding on
nettles (U. holosericiz). Common in Hebrides; British Isles; Scotland; throughout
Europe: France; W. Poland; Norway; Finland; Denmark; Finnish Lapland; Siberia;
Mongolia. Most common and variable species in Europe. India: Recorded from Keonthal, Punjab; Dehra Dun and Naini Tal in Northern
India. Material examined. There are three examples, in very poor condition (wings, legs,
antennae and abdomen missing), (R/7267, R/7268, RJ7265), one female determined
and labelled by D.L. Crawford, at the I.A.R.L, New Delhi. These specimens bear
this data: Keonthal, Punjab, December 1908 (G.M.C), on nettle. Comparison. Trioga urticae (Linn.) is easily recognised by the shape of forewings which
are broadly rounded at apex, genal cones divergent, distal half of antennae black, and
genital characters. Colouration and part of measurements are taken from fresh exotic
material received from Dr Eastop of the British Museum. Biological notes. This species is very rare and is not commonly met with on nettles. Its nymphal stages are described by Ferris (1925). 410 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Prare 1

 

Payllid galls
Apgiltacistellata Buckt, damaging bud galls on Mangifera indica. FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 4h

Prater 2

 

Free-living psyllids with flocculent mass

a, nymphal stages of Prylla cedrelae Kicff. on leaves of Gedrela toona; bb, nymphal stages of Psausia
indica, spm. feeding in the axils of fruits of Ficus micracarpa,

412 VSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCON'TINE! Payllid galls

a,b,c, Pauropsylla depresia Crawf, galls on leaves of Ficus racemosa (upper and uncer surface) ; P. beesoni
Laing galls on leaf of Litsea monopetala; dy e, pit galls of P. purpurescens, sp.n. on leaves of Ficus racemosa
(upper and under surface); £ Phacopteron lentiginosum Buckt. galls on Garuga pinata,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 413

Pate 4

 

Payllid galls

a, b, pit galls of Geropsylla minuta, sp.n, on leaves of Shorea robusta (upper and under surface); ey dy
Trioze malloticola Crawf. galls on leaves of Mallotus philippinensis (upper and under surface); e, f, pit
galls of Triaza pitformis on leaves of Mallotus philippinensis (upper and under surface); gy galls on shoots
of Terminalia alata var. tomentosa, mace by an unidentified species of psyllid,

414 PSYLIIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

Pratr 5

 

Poyllid galls

a, galls of Trioza jambolance Crawf, on leaves of Syzygium cumini; by pit galls of T, fusca, sp.n. on leat
of S. cumini; ©, galls of T. fletcheri minor Crawf. on leaf of Terminatia alata var. tomentosa; d, same, under
surface; e, rolled galls on margin of leaf of Schima wallichii, made by Cecidopsylla schimae Kicfl,

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE 415

Prax 6

 

Psyllid galls

a, rolled galls on leaves of Schima wallichii by Cocidopsylla schimae Kicff. ; by cy dy galls on
leaves of Diaspyros melanoxylon by Trioza obsoleta (Buckt.) (ce, under side; d, upper side of leaves);
© galls on leaves of Trewia nudiflora by Trioza fleicheri Crawl; £, rolled leaf margins of Miliusa
oelutina by Ceropsylla ferruginea, sp.n. ; gy curled leaves of Ficus microcarpa by Ceropsylla fulvida, sp.n. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Auraann, G, 1913, Psyllidarum catalogus, Berlin. Branson, C. F.C. 1941, The Healogy and Contil of the Forest Insects of India and the Neighbouring Counties,
pp. 775-782 (Vasant Press, Dehradun). Rerea, M. 1936, 1938. Homopeterain; Kukenthal W. u. Krumbach, ‘Th.—Handbueht der Zoologie, 4(2)
Insecta 111, Homoptera, pp. 2205-2456. Bonen, C. 1910. Dic Flugeladerung der Aphidina, und Psyllina, Zool. Ang, 36: 16-24,

Bosnert, F. B. 1928. Studii sugh Psyllidi (Hompotera: Psyllidae Chermidac). Boll. Lab, oll.. Portici

21; 218-264. - 1981a, Studi sugli Psyllidi. VI, Boll. Lab. Zool. agr. Portici 24: 175-210. 1931b. Studi sugli Psyllidi, |X. Boll, Lab. Zool. agr. Portici 24: 267-278. Barrrawy, W. H. 1922. The apple sucker (Paylla mali). J. econ. Hnt. 15: 96-101,

Brocupe, F. 1926. Observations biologiques sur Pyylla pyrisuga (Hemipt.). nn. Soc. ent. France 95: 183-188. Buoxron, G. B. 1893a. The mango Psylla, Indian Mus Notes 3; 13-14,

1893b, The mango-shoot Psylla, ibid. 3: 91-92. 1894. Notes on a new Psyllid. ibid. 3 (5): 18-19. —— 1900. Description of new species of a Psylla destructive to forest trees. ibid. Carpwett, J. S. 1936. Seven new species of the genus <lphalara (Homoptera: Cherri
Columbus 36: 220-223. 1937, Some North American relatives of Aphalara calthae Linnaeus (Homoptera: Chermidac),
Ann. ent. Soc. Am., Columbus 30: 563-571,

—-—--- 1938, Three new species of Psyllidac and the description of the allotype of Livia opagua Cald. (Homoptera: Psyllidae). Ann, ant. Soc. Am., Columbus 31: 442-444. Corrs, . C. 1891-93, Miscellaneous notes. Indian Mus. Notes 2: 18, 167. Crawronp, D. L. 1910a, American Psyllidae. I, (Triozinae). Pomona Coll. J. Ent. 2: 228-237. —- 1910b, American Psyllidae. II. (Triozinae). i. 2; 347-362,

191la, American Psyllidae. £11. (Triozinac). ibid. 3: 442-453,

1911b, American Psyllidac. IV, (Partial Revision of Sub-familics), iid. 3: 480-503,

1911c. American Psyllidae. V. ibid. 3: 628-632. 1912, Indian Psyllidae, Rec. Indian Mus. 7: 419-437. 1913, New genera and species of Psyllidae from the Philippine Islands. Philipp. J. Sci. 8: 293-301. 1914. A monograph of the jamping plant-lice or Psyllidae of the New World. Bull. U.S, Natn. ‘Mus., Washington 85: 1-186. —~—— 1915. Ceylonese and Philippine Psyllidae (Homoptera). Philipp, 7. Sci. 1
1917, Philippine ancl Asiatic Psyllidae. ibid. 12: 163-174, pl. 1, figs. 1-13. 1918. The jumping plant-lice of the Hawaiian Islands, Proc, Hawaii Soc. 3: 430-457. 1919. ‘The jumping plant-lice of the Palaearctics and the South Pacific Islands, Philipp. J. Sci. 15: 139-205, pls. I-III, t. figs. 1-3. 1920a. Cerotrioza. (Psyllidae, Homoptera). Proc. Hawaii ent. Soc, 4: 374-375. —— 1920b. Notes on Psyllidae. Ent. News 31: 69-70. ———— 1925a. Notes on Psyllidae. Philipp, J. Sci. 28: 39-43, Fig. 1. 1925b. The Homopterous genus Mesokomotoma (Psyllidae). Prac, Hawaii ent. Soc. 6: 32-35. —— 1925c. The genus Macrohomotoma (Psyllidae), ibid. 6: 36-39, figs. 1-2. ——— 1927. Insects of Samoa. pp. 29-33, t. figs. 1-4. 1928a, Fauna Sumatrensis. Ent, Mitt, 17: 425-426, t. fig. 1. ——— 1928b, ‘The Payllidae of Borneo, Philipp. F. Sci. 17: 353-359, pl. 2, figs. 1-6. Dosasanu, E. and Manotacue, C. 1958, Contribution a la connaissance des Psyllides de la Republique
Populaire Rounmaine (Psylloidea-Aphalarinae). Acad. Rep. Pop. Roum. Revue de Biologie, t, TIT,
ne, 1, pp. 123-143. 35-36.
ae). Ohio F. Seis

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

57-267, pl. 1, figs. AK,

  

416

RIMIOGR TY 7

++ += 1959, Nouvelle contribution a la connaissance des Piles (Pyylloideas ‘T
Pop. Rount., Revue de Biologie. t, IV, nv, 2, pp. 279-299,

1959. Contributii la conoasterea Psyllidelor (Byylloidea-Arytaininae) iu Republica Poyulaa
Romina, Omagiu | ui Traian Savulescu, Ad, lead. RPR.. pp. 193-209,

+ 1960, Rechérches sur Porgane copulateur de quelques especes de Psylles (Psylloidea-Tovinae
et Aphalaridae). Acad. Rep. Pop. Roum. Reone de Biologie. t. Var. 1-2, pp. &

——— ~~ 1962, Homoptera Psylloidea. Fauna Repnd. Pop. rom. 8, 3, Bucuresti, 376 pp. Dusras, A. G, 1927. ‘The artificial cultave and dissemination of Enfonaphthora sphasasperms Fas.. i Inngus
parasite for the control of the Enropean apple sucker (Palla mali Schmdb.),,7. econ. Kut. 20

Exsior, V, F, 1958. Some neglected taxonomic characters of Psyllidae (Hom,). Euamnlogist’s non. Mag,
94: 18. ‘ADs. J. 1915. On certain British Homoptera, Kntonolngist’s mun. Mag. 51

G. 1910. Payllidac, Tiss, Engein. Sehewed, Zonlog. Exp. Kilimandiaves

194. Payllidolngica. If. Ent. Mitt, 8: 230-2

1918a. Psyllidologica, IV’, Zant, .inz. 49: 344-352, ligs. 1-8

1918p. Psyllidologica. V. Zoal. 7h. Systent. 41: 479-486. 1921, Psyllidologica, V'T. Zool. Anz. 5! 1926, Psyllidologica, VIII. Ent. Mint. 15; 397-401. 1929, Entomologica Canaria. IV. Wien, ent, Zy. 46; 106-109,

F, 19234, The life history of Eubhyllua arbuti Schwarz (Hemiptera, Chermidae). 55: 99.92. ~1923b. Observations em the Chermidae (fem. -Hom), Part 1. ibid, 55: 250-256. ~ 1924. The nymphs of two species af Ghermidac Hem.) Pan.- Pacif. Fit. 1; 24-28. 1925. Observations on the Ghermmidac, Part 11. Gan. But. 37: 46-50. - 1926. Observations on the Chermidar (Hemiptera, Homoptera), Part LI, ibid, 58: 13-20,

1928a. Observations on the Chhermidae. Part TV. ibid. 60; 109-117. - 1928b. Observations on the Chermidac. Part V. ihid, 60: 240-245,

186 la, Die Rhynchoten Livlands 2. ctrekio Ma Naturkinade Liclands. 4: 438-548,

~ 1861b. Zur Kenninis dor Rhynchatev, Neschreihung ncuer Arten in cer Famillie Prylloidea, Bult. Nat. Moscou, 34; 331-422. Foursrar, A. 1848. Ubersicht der Gateungen umd Acten in dor Familie Psyllocen (mit 2 Nachtragen),
Ferh, raturw. Ver. prewss Rheinl. Bonn, pp. 65-98. Frocaarr, W. W. 1900-1903. Psyllidae, 1-111. Proc. Wr

Guorrroy, E. L. 1762. Histoire abbregee des Insectes qui se trowvent aux environs dle Paris, [,

Grove..\. J. 1919. The anatomy of the head and mouth parts of Palla mali. the apple sucker, with some
romarks on the function of the labium. Parasitology 11. Hanotaascis, A. 1903. Zur Phyllogenic der Hexapoden, Sher, Akad. Wiss, Math. Kil, CXHL (1), pp. 710-738. 1906, Uber der Phyllogenie der Arthropoden. Verh: Zool. bot. Ges. Wien. t. LVI, pp. 88-103,

Unrrana, FZ, and Gawnrsit. F, 1, 1931, Relation of environment to pear Psylla infestation, 7. econ,
Ent, 24: 66-77,

Haurr. H, 1933, Uber des Plugelgeader cles Singcicaden and psylliclen, Mitt. de. ent, Ges. 4. 1985, Psylloidea. Tierwelt Aft, 4 + 221-252. Hestor-Harrisos, G. 1946, A contribution to our knowledge of the distribution of certain Palacarctic
Psyllidac (Hem), Lat. mon, Mag. 82: 36-37,

~~ += 1940, The subfamily Livinac Loew of the Homopterous family Psyllidac. 1, dan. Mag. nat, Hist. (12) 1: 284-293. =~ 1949a. The phalaran genera aphatara Foerster, Graspedalepia End, and Metaphalare Crawf. with
special reference to the Baropran species of Aphalara, Hemiptera, Homoptera, Family Psyllidac,
ibid. 2: 782-801. == -+1949b, Contributions 10 our knowlerige of the Psyllidae of Australia andl New Zealand with special
reference to Tasmania, ibid. 1(12), 2(21): 641-660. ———--~ 1951, Sub-lamily separation in the Homopterous Psyllidae. ibid, (12) 4: 1-35. 28

 

Arad. Ref

    

     

 

   

 

   

 

 

 

    

08-211. Forres, €

 

 

 

 

    
 

 

 

 

 

  

   

 

 

 

 

 

  

4p PSYLLIMAR OF THE INDIAN SURCONTINENT

1951b. The slrptuinini of the sub-family Psyllidac. Hemiptera-Homoptera: Family Psyllidae. bid, (12) 4: 417-454,
——— 195lc, Notes on Scandinavian Psyllidae. I. ibid. (12) 4(43): 657-672,
1951d, Preliminary notes on the ancestry, family relations, evolution and speciation of the Homo-
prerous Psyllidac. 1, ibid, (12) 4: 1057-1072. ———— 1952. ‘The number and distribution of the spiracles of the adult psyllid, ibid. (12) 5(51): 248-260. ——-=— 1952a, Preliminary notes on the ancestry, family relations, evolution and speciation of the
Homoplerous Psyllicae-I1, sbid, (12) 5: 679-696, . 1954. Contributions to our knowledge of the Psyllicae of Australia anc New Zealand with
special reference to Tasmania-II. ibid. (12) 7: 519-530. ~ 1958, Sub-family separation in the Homopterous Payllidae, Part IIL, ibid. (13) 1: 561-579. Sub-Gemily separation in the Homopterous Poyllidac-IIT. (c-e), ‘The Giriacreminae
id. (13) 2: 157-168,
ical genera of the Ciriacreminae (Hem. Hom. slide) (1). The genus Carsidara
Walker, its status, synonymy and relationships, ibid. (13) 2; 237. 19G0a. The Arytainini of the sub-family Psyllidac. 11. ibid, (13)
1960b, Psyllid Classification and ‘Taxonomy. ibid. (13) 3: 497-504,
Hustor-Harrison, G. 1960c, Critical Genera of the creminae. I. The genus Afastigimas Ender-
Jein, ibid. (13) 3: 551-559,
1960d, Contribution to our knowledge of the Psyllidae of Australia anc| New Zealand with special
reference to Tasmania-IIL, ibid. (13) 3; 705-718. ———- 1963. Hemiptera (Homoptera): Psyllidae. W. South African Animal Life. Goteborg- Stockholm-
Uppsala, pp. 487-532. Horvat, G. 1918. Fauna Regni Hungariae, Hemipteren, Psyllidae. H 8: 57-59. Howarn, C. 1908-1909, Les Zoocecicties des plantes d’Europe, I-IT. Husary, M. A, and Diva Nari, 1927, The citeus Psylla, “* Diaphorina citri Kuw’, Mem. Dep, Agric, India,
Ent. Ser. 10(2): 5-27,
Sensex, D, D. 1951. The North American species of Pylla from willow with descriptions of new species
and notes.on biology. /ilgardia 20 (16): 299-324,
1956, New species of Pyyila from Western United States and biological notes. Gan. Ent. 88; 101-
109,
——— 1957. A new genus and five new species of Psylliclae from California, Wasmann. J. Biol, 15(1):
15-34. Krrena, J. J. 1905. Etude sur de nouveaux Insectes et Phytoptides Gallicoles due Bengale. Ann. Soc. Sci. Bruxelles 29: 159-182. :
——— 1906, Eine neue gallener Zeugende psyllide aus vorder-indien, (A new gall making Psyllid
from India). Wiss. Insekt. Biol. 2: 387-390,
————— 1908. Galles et cl’ Insectes Gallicoles d’Asie. Marcellia. 7: 149-167. Kirxatpy, G. W. 1902, Fauta Hawaiiensis, pp. 113-114,
——— 1904, Nomenclature of Hemiptera (Psyllidae- Chermicae). Entomologist, p. 254. ——— 1905. Two new Homoptera of the family Chermidae. Gan. Ent. 37: 290-292. Kunaszewskt, S.M, 1961, Bemerkungen uber die ‘mali’Gruppe (Homoptera, Psyllidac), Bull. Acad. pol. Sci. Warsz. 9: 429-433. 1962. Bemerkungen uber cinige neotropische Dlattfloh-Arlen (Homoptera, Psyllidae), ibid. 10: 251-255. 1963a, Kine neue Axt der Unterfamilie Ciriacreminae aus Korea (Homoptera, Psyllidae). ibid. IL: 91-94,
1963b, Polnische Arten der Gattung Pylla Geoff. (Homoptera, Payllidac). Annis, Zool. Warsz,
20; 363-455,
—--—— 1963c. Bemerkungen zur systematik der Aphalarini Loew (Homopiera, Psyllidae). Bull. Acad. pol. Sci, Warsz, U1: 187-189,
1964, Studien uber die systematik der unterordnung Payllodea, Annis, Zool. Warsz. 22(5): 81-138

 

    

  

 
 
  

 

 

 

 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 419

Kram, FD. 19304. Notes on the Chermidac. Pt. 1. Gan. Ent, 62: 167-175. -— += 1990b. Buphyllura arctostaphyli Schwarz and Euphylltaa reveipenais (Schwarz),
pretation, Proc. ent, Soc. Wash. 32 (9): 59. ——- 1931. Notes on the Chermidae, Pe. TL, Gan. Ent. 63(5): LLL-115. Kuwavamta, §. 1908, Die Psylliden Japan, [. Trans. Sapporo nat, Hist. Soc. 2: 149-188,
~ 1909-1910. Psylliden Japan. 1, Trans. Sapporo nat. Hist. Soc. 3:
Lanse, F. 1922. On some Fijian Psyllidne (Homoptera). lin. Afog. Vat. Hi
——— - 1923. On some Psyllidae from the New World. ibid. (9) 11: 696-7
~ —-~ 1930, Some records of Indo-Malayan Psyllidae. Indian Forest Rec. 14(8) + 166-175. Lat, K. B, 1953, Biological races of Pylla mali Schinidlh. Nature, Lond. 132. — 19340. Prplla pregrina Frst., the Hawthorn race of the apple sucker. P. inti Schmidb. Am.oppl. Biol., Cambridg: 21: (41-648. ——--— 1934b. The biology of Soottish Pyyllidac, Trans. Re ent, Sac, Loud. 82: 363-385, pls. XIENTY. ———~—- 1936-37, On the immature stages ef some Scottish ane other Pwilidar. Prnc, R. Sor, Edinb, 37
(21): 305-331,
Lyrnunuta, Pe A, 1798. Meinoire sur une nouvelle expece de Prilla, Bull. Sor. Philoemath. 2
Luenoy, H.M. 1909, Psyllidae of India, in Indian Insect Life. Thacker and Spink Co., London, pp. 742-743. Larmurey, M. 1890, Description of a New Paylliel (Diaphorina guttulata). Prac. siat. Soc. Beng, pp. 165-166,
Loawova, M. M,, Dupioutvad-Pavenrisv, V. J. and Listonoskt, 1958, (Homoptera- Psylloidea)
Verdiascie Turanghe v Pribalhase, fivt. Obozr, 37(1): 88-104,
Locixova, M. M. 1960, New and litte known leaf hoppers (Psylliclae) of Middle Asia and Kazakstan. Horae Soc, Ent. U.S.S.R. 47: 53-93,
——-~ 1961. Revizija rodov Aphalara Forst. i, Ciaspedolepia Tauerl, (Homoptera, Psylloidea) Pauny
SSSR. T. Bvt. Olver Moskva-Leningrad 40: 602-62:
a= 1962a, Novye Listobloski (Homoptera, Psylinicien) fanny SSSR. Tindy Zool, Just, Maskva-Leningrad,
30: 185-220. — 1962b, Faunna of the Leningrarl and Karetia. Proc. fust. Zool. Acad. Sci. USSR. 31: 34, 37, 22. —~ 1963. Revizija Vidov rodov Aphalara Forst. i, Graspedolepta Enderl, (Homoptera, Psyllidar)
fauny SSSR. If. Ent. Obozr., Moskoa-Laningrad 42: 62 1-648. 1964a. New species of insects of Kazakstan fauna. Proc, Inst. Zool, Acad. Sci, USSR. 34
—1964b, Systematics of insects. Psyllinea. Inst. Biol. Acad. Sci, U.S.S.R.. pp. 437-482. — + 1966, New species of insects of U.S.S.R, and adjacent countries. Proc. Inst. Zool. Acad. §
R37: 18-20, 28.
Review on Palacarctic Psyllids of the gouns Pylla Geottr, (Hom., Prylloidea), associated
with willows, Anns. Zool. Warsz. 24(7): 434-485, figs, 15-18. ——---- 1967b. Ergebnisse der Zoologischen Nubien- Pxpedition 1962. Anr, Natur. Mus, Wien. 10: 404,
Lomw. F. 1862. Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Rhynchoten, Verh zool. -bot. Ges. Wien. 12: 105-112. - 1876, Zur Biologie und Charakteristikt der Prylloden Nebst Beschveimg gzweier nener species
der Gattung Psylla, ibid. 26: 187-216. ~- 1877a, Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Psylioden. ibid. 27, 123-154,
- 1877, On the identity of Trioza abjeticola Vorst, with Chermes rhemni Schrank. Entomologists'
mon, Mag. 14; 20. ———~ 1878. Zur Systematik der Psylloden. Verh. Zool. -bot. Ges. Wien, 28: 585-610,
Mitteilungen uber Psylloden. ibid. 28: 549-598,
Turkestanische Psylloden, ibid. 30; 251-266. Beitrage aur Biologic und Synonimie der Psylloden, ibid. 31: 157-170,
Beschreibung von 2ehn neuen Psyllocen Arten. ibid 31; 255-268. Zur Chavakteristik der Psylloden- Genera Aphalara und Rhinocola. ibid, 32: 1-6. Revision der Palaerktischen Psylloden in Hinsicht auf Systematik und Synonimie. ibid. 32: 227-254. —~——-~ 1884, Beitrage zur Keuntnis der Jugendstadien der Psylliden, ibid, 34: 143-152. 28a,

a difference ina inter-

 

   

 

 

     
  

   

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 
    

 
 

   

 

   

112,

       
  

 

 

 

3, Homoptera- Peylloidea,

 

 

 

 

 

    

420 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

1886, Neue Beitvage zur Kenntuis der Psylliden, ibid. 35: 148-170,
1888. Ubersicht der Psylliden von Qsterreich-Ungarn mit, Einschluss von Busnien und der
Herzegowina, nebst Beschreibung neuer Arten, ibid. 38: 5-40. Mast, M. §, 1935, Notes on some Indian gall-forming Psyllidae (Homop,) Jl. R. Asiat, Soc, Beng. 1(2):
99-108. 1953a, On a collection of plant galls from the Central Himalayas. Agra Univ. J. Res. (Sci.) 2; 135-158,

——— 1953b, On a collection of plant galls and gall midges from India, ibid, 2(2): 247-266. 1959. Cecidlotheca Indica. ibid, 8(2): 91-280,

———— 1964. Ecology of Plant Gals. Dr. W. Junk, Publisheis, The Hague. Maruva, R. N. 1935. On the biology of the Psyllidae. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2): 35-70, pls. 1, I. ——— 1946 (1949). On the immature stages of some Psyllidac, Indian 7. Ent, 8: 224-236,
1950, Immature stages of Psylla cedrelaz Kicller. Entomologists mon, Mag. 86: 226-227, figs. 1-3,
1952, Immature stages of Neopsylla indica Heslop-Hartison (Hemiptera-Homoptera: Payllidae). Indian F. Ent, 14; 159-160. 1954, Immature stages of Psylla simlae Crawford (Psyllidae: Hemiptera- Homoptera), Indian 7. Ent. 16: 247-249,

Mryer-Diia, R. 1871, Dic Psylloden, Skizzen zur Einfuhrung in das Studium Dieser, Hemipteren-Familie,
‘Mitt. schweiz. ent. Ges. 3: 377-406. Osuamn, B. 1907, Verzeichnis der palaarktischen Hemipteren vol. I, Lief, IT, p. 338-381. Annis. Mus. Kool. Acad, inp, Soc. Petersburg, BA. 12. ———— 1908. ibid. Lief. IIL. p. 454-492. Anals. Mus. Zool. Acad. imp, Soc. Petersburg, Bd. 13. Osstansirsson, F. 1942. Revision von zetterstexlts lapplandischen Homopteren, 2 Psyllina. Opuse. ent. 7:
57-62. -

1944, On Trioza obliqua Thoms. ibid, 9: 154-156. 1949, The male genitalia of Chermes nigrita Zett. ibid. 14: 111. ——~— 1950a, Sound production in Psyllids, ibid. 15: 202. ——— 19505, On the Psyllid of thé Marsh Marigold, Aphalara calthae (Linne). Soc. Sci. Fennica 12,
Conmentations Biologicaz 13: 1-8,
1952. Gatalogus insectorum Succiae. Opusc. ent, 17: 193-200,

———— 1960. On the host plants of certain Trioza species (Hom., Psyll.). Ent. Tidskr. 81:

Ossrawicsson, F., Rosswet, L. M, and Waver, H. 1956, 27-Homoptera, Psyllina: Taxomor
Genitalia in insects (in S. L. Tuxen, Copenhagen, pp. 150-155. figs. 188-189, 196),

Paros, E.M, 1909. Homologies of the wing veins of the Aphididae, Psyllidac, Aleurodidae and Coceidac,
Ann. ent. Soe, Am. 2: 101-135. Pusson, P, 1951. Homopteres in Grasse P. Traite de Zoologie, pp. 1390-1656. Privorstorr, O. 1941. Pyyllina, Bronn’s Klassen und ordnungen des Tierreichs, Vol. 5, Abt. 3, Insecta,
Leipzig, pp. 1-95. Paurnit, Hex Sixcit, 1925, The morphology of the male genitalia in R/ynchota, Trans. ent. Soc. Lond. pp. 126-
256. Purow, A. 1871, Description de deux nouvelles especes de pasyllides, nn. S

1876. Notes pour servir- a L’etude des Hemipteres. 3-c partie. ibi

1886. Catalogue des Hemipteres de Ia faune palearatique, 3 ed. Ranma, K, A. 1932, Observations on the immature stages of some Indian Psyllidae. Indian J. agric. Sci,
2: 358-377. Rawaxnusiwa Avvar, T. V. 1924, List of Psyllidae recorded from India and Ceylon. Rec. Indian Mus. 26: 621-625. Ricey, G. V, 1883. Notes on North American Psyllidae, Proc, biol, Soc. Wash. 2: 67-68,

Russaamen, B. H. 1699, Mitteilungen uber neue und bekannte Gallen aus Europa, Asien, Aftika und
Amerika. Ent, Nachr. 25: 225-281. Russet, L. M. 1943. An apparently new specics of Paurocephala Crawl. Homoptera. Psyllidae, Pauro-

payllinac). Proc, ent. Soe. Wash, 45: 115-120. 16.
s Glossary of

  

  

» ent. France X; 435-438. 6; 283-288,

 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 421

Rossnit, L. Ms 19462, A new African species of Paurocephala Crawf, (Homoptera, Psyllidae: Pauropsyllinae),
F. Wash, Acad. Sci. 36: 94-97. -—— 1946b. The identity of Chermes alni Linne 1758 (Elomoptera, Psyllidae). Proc. ent. Soc, Wash.
8: 249-250. Scuaprer, H. A. 1949, Beitrage zur kenntnis der Psylliden, Afitt. scheweiz. ent, Ges. 22: 1-96,

Scusnposrcwr, J. 1836. Beitrage zur Obsthaumzucht und zur Naturges-chichte der den Obstabaumen
schadlichen Insckten 4: 186-189,

Satrwarz, E. A. 1898. Notes on the Lerp Insects (Psyllicae) of Australia. Proc. ent. Soc. Wash. 4: 66-75,

1899, Note on the Cedvela Psyllids (Freysuila Aleman). Proc. ent. Soc. Wash. 4: 195-197. -1904a, A nest-making Payllid larva (Euphalerus midifex). Proc, ent. Soc. Wash. 6: 153. 1904b, Notes on North American Psyllidae I, Proc. ent. Soc. Wash, 6: 234-245,

Scorr, J. 1876. Monograph of British Psyllidae, Trans. ent. Soc. Lond. : 525-569,

———— 1882, The British Psyllina, with corrections in the synonymy. Extomologists’ mon. Mag. 18: 253-256. Sanecaynskt, Sr. Sux, 1954, Materially do fauny pluskwiakov Polski, 3. Psylloidea, Fragmenta Faunistica
7: 135-146. Spnyer, W. 1927, Von der Bekampfung des Aplelsaugers an der Nicderlbe, Nackrbl. Disch. Pflanzenschute-
dienst, 6. Suc, K. 1907. Nove avesti o Psyllach. Cas. Gsl. Spal. ent., Praha 1: 37-40. 1910a. Monographia generis Trioza Foerster. Species regionis palearcticae, Cast 1. Vest. Ky,

G. Spot. Nauk, Praha 17; 1-48,

1910b, Prispevky k poznani Psylla II, Rozpr. C, Akad., Praha, 19 (2); 1-22. 1911, Monographia Generis Trioga Foerster. Vest. Kr. C, Spol. Nauk, Praha 1912, 16: 1-34,

1912. Monographia generis Trioza Foerster. Cast IL. Vest Kr. C. Spol. Nauk, Praha, 16: 1-63. 1913a, Monographia Generis Trioza Foerster, Cast IV, Vest. Kr. C. Spol. Nauk, Praha 1: 1-48,

1913b. Zur Kenntnis ciniger Psylla- Arten aus dem Ungarischen National Museum in Budapest. Ann, Natal. Mus. Hung., Budapest 11: 409-435,

1915, Prispevky k poznani Psylla. Cast III. Rozpr. ceske Akad. Praha 24(5): 1-35,

‘Tuomson, C. G. 1877, Ofversigt af Skandinaviens Ghermes-arter. Opusc. ent. 8: 820-841. Tura, L. D. 1937a, The genus Luphalerus in America North of Mcxico (Psyllidae: Homoptera). J.
Kans. ent. Soc., Manhattan 10: 69-72. —-——— 1937, The genus Euphalerus in America North of Mexico (Psyllidae: Homoptera) (Conclutled). J. Kans. ent, Soc., Manhattan 10; 73-74. ———~— 1944, Contributions to the knowledge of the Psyllidae of Mexico. 7. Kans, ent. Soc., Manhattan

17: 143-159. ——~-- 1945, Contributions to the knowledge of the Psyllidac of Mexico 7. Kans. ent. Soc., Manhattan

18: 1-29. 1950a, Contributions to the knowledge of the Psyllidae of Mexico (Part I). 7. Kans, ent. Soc. Manhattan 23: 52-62. 1950b. South American Psyllids. nt, News, Philadelphia G1: 178-179. 1952. On the Psyllidae of New Zealand (Homoptera), Pacif. Sci, Honolulu 6: 83-125,

1959, Los Psyllidae del Peru Central (Insecta: Homoptera). Rev. Poru, Ent. agric. Lima 2: 1-27. Torm, L, D. and Tayror, K. L. 1955. Australian genera of the family Psyllidae (Hemiptera: Homo-
ptera). Aust, F. Zool., Melbourne 3; 227-257,

Urouanco, L. B, 1921, New records and species of Psyllidae from the Philippine Islands with descriptions
of some preadult stages and habits, Philip, J. Sci. 18. Vonpracex, K. 1957. Fauna C.S.R. Praha, Ceskoslovenske akademie ved., t, IX, p. 1-481. — 1959, Zur Validitatsfrage der Art Psylla klapaleki Sule. 1909 (Psylloidea- Homoptera), Acta

Saun, ent. Mus. Not., Pragae 5: 1-14. 1963. Jumping plant-lice (Psylloidea- Homoptera) of Central Africa. Part I (Congo). dca

ent. Mus. Nat,, Praha 35; 263-290. Vossarnr, J. 1906. Eine Pasyllide als Erzeugerin von Gallen am Mwulebaum, 2 wiss. Insektbiol. 2: 278-285,
305-316. 420 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

1886. Neue Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Psyllicen. ibid. 35: 148-170,
1888. Ubersicht der Psylliden von Qsterreich-Ungarn mit, Einschluss von Bosnien und der
Herzegowina, nebst Beschreibimg neuer Arten. ibid. 38: 5-40. Mast, M.S, 1935, Notes on some Indian gall-forming Psyllidae (Homop.) Jl. R. Asiat. Soc, Beng. 1(2):
99-108. 1953a, On a collection of plant galls from the Central Himalayas. Agra Univ. J. Res. (Sci.) 2: 135-158. —~——— 1953b, On a collection of plant galls and gall midges from India. ibid. 2(2): 247-266. 1959. Cecidotheca Indica. ibid. 8(2): 91-280. 1964, Ecology of Plent Galls, Dr. W. Junk, Publishers, The Hague. Maruur, R. N. 1935, On the biology of the Psyllidac. Indian Forest Rec. 1(2): 35-70, pls. I, II,
1946 (1949). On the immature stages of some Psyllidae. Indian J. Ent, 8; 224-236. 1950, Immature stages of Psilla cedrelae Kictfer. Entomologists” mon. Mag. 86: 226-227, figs. 1-3. ——— 1952. Immature stages of Neopyilla indica Heslop-Harrison (Hemiptera-Homoptera: Psyllidae). Indian J. Ent. 14: 159-160. ———— 1954, “Immature stages of Pella simlas Crawford (Psyllidae: Hemiptera- Homoptera). Indian J.
Ent, 16: 247-249. Maver-Diiz. R. 1871, Die Psylloden. Skizzen 2ur Einfuhrung in das Studium Dieser. Hemipteren-Familie,
Mitt. schweiz. ent. Ges, 3: 377-406. Ositani, B. 1907, Verzeichnis der palaarktischen Hemipteren vol. IZ, Lief. I, p. 338-381. Annis. Mus. Rook. Acad. inp. Soc. Petersburg, Ba, 12. —— 1908. ibid, Lief. IIT. p. 454-492. Annis. Mus. Zool, Acad. imp. Soc. Petersburg, Bd. 13. Ossransmsson, F. 1942. Revision von zctterstedts lapplandischen Homopteren, 2 Psyllina, Opusc. ent. 7:
97-62. ——— 1944, On Trioza obliqua Thoms. ibid. 9: 154-156. ——— 1949, The male genitalia of Chermes nigrita Zett. ibid. 14: 111. ———— 1950a. Sound production in Psyllids, ibid. 13: 202,

——— 1950b. On the Psyllid of the Marsh Marigold, Aphalara calthae (Limne). Soc. Sci. Fennica 12,

Comm:ntations Biologicae 13; 1-8. 1952, Catalogus insectorum Sueciae, Opusc. ent. 17: 193-200,

1960, On the host piants of certain Trioza species (Hom., Psyll.). Ent. Tidskr, 81:116,

Osstanitsson, F., Russert, L.M, and Waner, H. 1956. 27-Homoptera, Psyllina: Taxomonist’s Glossary of
Genitalia in insects (in S. L. Tuxen, Copenhagen, pp. 150-155, figs. 188-189, 196). Parow, B. M. 1909. Homologies of the wing veins of the Aphididae, Psyllidae, Aleurodidae and Coccidae,
Ann. ent. Soc, Am. 101-135. Passon, P, 1951. Homopieres in Grasse P. Traite de Zoologie, pp. 1390-1656,

Pruvorstpsr, O, 1941, Pyllina, Bronn’s Klassen und ordnungen des Tierreichs, Vol,'5, Abt. 3, Insecta,
Leipzig, pp. 1-95. Paurat, Hawt Smart, 1925, The morphology of the male genitalia in Riynchota, Trans. ent, Soc, Lond. pp. 126
256. Putox, A. 1871. Description de deux nouvelles especes de psyllides. Ann. Soc. ent. France ¥; 435-438,

1876, Notes pour servir- a Letude des Hemipteres. 3-c partic, ibid. 6: 283-288. 1886, Catalogue des Hemipteres de la faunc palearctique. 3 ed,

Rauwan, K. A, 1932, Observations on the immature stages of some Indian Payllidae. Indian J. agric. Sci,
2: 358-377,

Rawaxrsuna Avvar, T. V. 1924, List of Psyllidae recorded from India and Ceylon, Re, Indian Mus. 26: 621-625,

Ruay, C. V. 1883. Notes on North American Psyllidae, Proc. biol. Soc, Wash. 2: 67-68,

Ruusaaex, E. H. 1899, Mitteilungen uber neue und bekannte Gallen aus Europa, Asien, Afrika und
Amerika, Ent. Nochr. 25: 225-281,

Russet, L, M. 1943. An apparently new species of Paurocephala Crawf, (Homoptera. Prylidae, Pauro-
psyllinae). Proc, ent. Soc. Wash. 45: 115-120,

 

  

 

 

  

 

 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 421

Rossa, L.M. 1946a. Anew African species of Pauwracephala Crawf, (Homoptera, Psyllidae: Pauropsyllinae). J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 36: 94-97,

——~— 1946b, The identity of Chermes alni Linne 1758 (Homoptera, Psyllidac). Proc. ent, Soc. Wash.
48: 249-250. Somasrer, H. A, 1949, Beitrage zur kenntnis der Psylliden, Mitt, selueeiz. ent. Ges. 22: 1-96,

Scmapnercsr, J, 1836, Beitrage zur Obstbaumzucht und zur Naturges-chichte der don Obstabaumen
schadlichen Inselten 4: 186-189. Sonwarz, E. A. 1898, Notes on the Lerp Insects (Psyllidac) of Australia, Proc. ent. Soc. Wash. 4: 66-75,
1899, Note on’ the Gedrela Psyllids (Freysuila Aleman), Proc. ent. Soc, Wash. 4: 195-197. 19042, A nest-making Psyllid larva (Zuphalerus nidifex). Proc. ent. Soc. Wash. 6: 153. 1904b, Notes on North American Psyllidae I, Proc. ent. Soc. Wash, 6: 234-245,

Scorr, J. 1876. Monograph of British Psyllidae. Trans. ent. Soc. Lond. : 525-569,

———— 1882. The British Psyllina, with corrections in the synonymy. Eniomologists? mon. Mag. 18: 253-256. Smreozvnskt, Sr, Sux, 1954, Materially do fauny pluskwiakov Polski, 3, Prlloidea. Fragmenta Faunistica

 

7: 135-146,
Spayer, W. 1927, Von der Bekampfimg des Apfelsaugers an der Niederlbe. Naclirbl. Disch. Pflanzenschute-
dienst, 6. Suc, K. 1907. Nove avesti o Psyllach, Cas, Gsl. Spal. ent., Praha 1: 37-40,
1910a, Monographia generis ‘Triaza Foerster. Species regionis palcarcticae. Cast 1. Vest. Kr,
G. Spol. Nauk, Praha 17; 1-48. 1910b. Prispevky k poanani Psylla II. Rozpr. C. Akad., Prakaa, 19 (2); 1-22. ———— 1911. Monographia Generis Trioza Foerster. Vest, Kr. G. Spol. Nauk. Praha 1912, 16: 1-84. 1912. Monographia generis Trisga Foerster. Cast II. Vest Kr. ©. Spol, Nauk, Praka, 16: 1-63,

1913a, Monographia Generis Trioza Poorster, Cast IV. Vest. Kr. C. Spol. Nauk, Praha 1: 1-48. 1913b, Zur Kenntnis einiger Paylla- Arten aus dem Ungarischen National Museum in Budapest. Ann. Natal, Mus. Hing., Budapest U1; 409-435. 1915. Prispevky k poznani Psylla, Cast II. Rozp, ceske Akad. Praha 24(5): 1-35. Toso, C. G. 1877. Ofversigt af Skandinaviens Chermes-arter. Opusc. ent, 8: 020-841,

Tura, L. D, 19872, The genus Hyplous in America North of Mexico (Psyllidac: Homoptera). J.
Kans, ent, Soc., Manhattan 10: 69-72. ———— 1937b. The genus Euphalerus in America North of Mexico (Psyllidae: Homoptera) (Concluded). J. Kans. ent, Soc. Manhattan 10: 73-74. ———— 1944, Contributions to the knowledge of the Psyllidae of Mexico, 7. Kans. ent. Soc. Manhattan
17: 143-159,
1945. Contributions to the knowledge of the Psyllidae of Mexico J. Kans. ent, Soc., Manhattan
18: 1-29. 1950a. Contributions to the knowledge of the Psyllidae of Mexico (Part I). J. Kans. ent. Soe. Manhattan 23: 52-62. ——— 1950b, South American Psyllids. Ent, News, Philadelphia 61: 178-179. ———— 1952, On the Psyllidac of New Zealand (Homoptera). Pacif, Sci, Honolulu 6: 83-125. 1959, Los Psyllidae del Peru Central (Insecta: Homoptera). Rev. Peru. Ent. agric, Lima 2: 1-27,

Tormut, L. D. and Tavtor, K. L. 1955. Australian genera of the family Psyllidae (Hemiptera: Homo-
ptera), Aust. J. Zool., Melbourne 3: 227-257. Urowanco, L. B, 1921, New records and species of Psyllidac from the Philippine Islands with descriptions
of some preadult stages and habits, Philipp. J. Sci. 18. Vonoractx, K, 1957, Fauna C.5,R. Praha, Ceskoslovenske akademie ved., t, IX, p. 1-431. 1959. Zur Validitatsfrage der Art Psylla Klapaleki Sule. 1909 (Psylloidea- Homoptera). Acta

faun. ent. Mus, Not., Pragae 5: 1-14. 1963. Jumping plant-lice (Psylloidea- Homoptera) of Central Africa, Part I (Congo). Ada

ent. Mus. Nat., Praka 35: 263-290. Vossaur, J. 1906, Eine Psyllide als Erzeugerin von Gallen am Mwulebaum, Z, wits. Insehibiol. 2: 278-285,
305-316. 422 PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

 

Was. A. 1842. Diraphia novam insectorum Genus Livia prosinun. (Aphidii, Homoptera). Anan, Soe. ent. Frame, Pavis 11: 275-278.

pr, W. 1903, Horas Sor, Hut. Rass. 36: 138, 140.

ex, W. IDL, Zwei newe Craspedolepta—Arten (Vorlaufige Mitteilung). Zur Unterscheidung der
Gattungen Aphalara und Craspedolepte. Bombus. faun. Milt, aus Nord-westdeutschland, p. 131-132,

———— 1947. Beitvag zur Systematiks der deutschen \phala inne. Mesh. Ver. neuro. Heimatforsch. Hamburg. 29: 55-71. 1961. Uberfarnilie Sternonhyncha /Paylloidex), w Brant Hl. Die Nordost-Alpen in Spiegel inkeer

Landtierwelt. Bd. IT. Innsbruck, pp. 158-179. .

1869, Catalog of the Homoptera of the Indian Archipelago, pp. 329-330,

hologische Studie. 2. Morph. Wane:

Weoer, H. 1929, Kopf und Thorax vou Pilla mali Schunidb. Eine m
Okot. Tiere 14: 59-165,

Wrpxer. H. 1961. Gailen aus Indien und neue Grundsatze fur eine Binteilung der Gallen, Sonderdr. lbh. Ver. dei, natu, Ver. Hamb. Bel. 5, 1960. pp. 19-67. 1941. Biologie en morphologie van Psylla buxi L. Tijd-schr. Plziekt. 47: 41-89. 185. Die Anatomie der Paylliden, Z. raiss, Zool. 42: 569-638. Wace,

Abdomen, |

acaciae (sAcizzia\. 172

acaciae (PoyMa), Y72

Acigzia, 170, 171

ancutipernis (Leuronota), 317
acutipennis (Tenaphalara), 4,7, 9, WS, 166
ctegerotrioza, 356

Agonascena, Gt

lacris (Tricea), 11

aliena (Aphatara), 37

aliena (Colposcenia), 37
alotrisza, 1G, 314

ani (Ghermas). 244

ni (Paylla), 264

analis (Trioza), 7, (0, 351
antennae, 13

ants, 3

elphalara, 13, 26, 27, 39
Aphalaravia, 26

Aphalavidae, 19, 26

Aphalarinne, B, 12. 18. 25, 28, 166
Apsylla, 43, 44

apsylloides (Pauropsytia), 139
apsglloides (Macrohomotoma), 139
artificial regeneration areas, +
slrytaena, 1765 177

Arytaina, 13, 170, 171, 172 176, 297
asiatica (Tringa), 328
elsphagiedella, 244

Asphagis, 244

uspirator, |

Ataenia, 176, 177

attenuata (Leuronota), 317

hacearum (Gecidatrioga). 1

Bactericerini, 125

Beacopelma, 244

bakeri (Elomatonia), 155

bakeri (Prausia), 156

busatis (Petalolyma), 6, 10, 322, 329
hasalis (Psylla), 822, 323

beesani (Pauropsylia), 6, 8, 72, 73, 76
bengatensis (Psylla), 5, 9. 245, 246, 248
Bibliography, +1]

INDEX

INSECTS

bicolor (Trioza), 407

hifwreata (Trioza), 6, 10, 351, 352, 335
bikanerensis (Diaphoring), 6, 9, YO, ¥91, 236
biliniata (Homotoma), 155

biliniata (Psausia), 150

blisters, 3

Brachypsylla, 244

braconids, 4

Lrevicephala (Paurocephata), 64, 67

brevicornis (Microceropssylla), 76

brevicomnis (Pawropsylla), 6, 8, 72, 73, 76, 79. 80
Srunettii (Diceraopsytla), 7, 8, V1

ui (Povlla), V1, 12

 

calthae (dphalara), 27, 31
Gamaratoscena, 48
camphorae (Mesohomotome), V4, 145, 149
cardiae (Diaphorina), 5, 9, 190, 194, 197
Carsidara, 133, 146, 119
Carstdaridae, 19, 124
Garsidarinae, 19, 124, 125, 136, 163, W665
Carsidariniy 125
caudata (Buphyllura), 7, 9, 230, 243
ceardi (Egeirotrioza), 356
ceard: (Trioza), 6, 10, 17, 351, 356, 358
Gecidopsylla, 124, 125, 126
Cecidotrioza, 300, 349
cedyelae (Palla), 1, 5, 9, 245, 230, 253, 259
ceeltidis (Lewronota), 317
reltidis-mamma (Paclypsytla), U1
Geropsyita, 300, 391
Corotrioza, 314
chalcids, 4
Ghernes, 27, 24+
Ghermidas, \8
chenopodii (Triaze), 393
Chrysopids, +
Giriacreminae, 8. 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 43, 123,

124

Giriacrenwunt, 119
cistellata (Appllla), 1, 3, 6, 8, 44
cistellata (Psylla), 4
citri (Diaphorina), 1, 5, 6, 9, 190, 198, 200, 202, 213
cilri (Euphaleras), 198

423

 

424

citrus prglla, 202
clypeus, 12

Coccinellids, +

ockerelli (Paratrioea), 11
Colopelma, 327
Colposcenia, 26, 27, 97

communis (Diaphorine), 5, 6.9, 190, 202, 205, 210, 213,

320
compound eye, 12
concolor (Euphyllura), 7, 9, 230, 234, 237, 243
constrict (Colposcenia), 7, 8, 39
corniculata (Epicarsa), 14+
comniculaia (Leuronota), 7, 10, 15, 314, 317
corniger (Lewsonola), 317
cornuta (Dynopsylla), 193, 134
costatopunctata (Psylla), 255
crassinereis (Trioga), 407
coataegi (Chermes), 254
evataegi (Psylla), 5, 9, 17, 254, 255, 256
Ctenaphalara, 166

Damage, 3

depressa (Pawopslla), 1,5, 8, 72, 73, 81

Diaphora, 189

Diaphorina, 15, 16, 170, 171, 178, 109, 190

Diceraopsylla, 124, 125, 130

Diraphia, 25

distincta (Honotoma), 155, 156, 157, 161

distincta (Psausia), 5, 8, 156, 157

dunensis (Diaphorina), 5, 9, 190, 205, 207, 213,
220

Dynopsyliay 124, 125, 132, 133

castopi (Pylla), 5, 10, 245, 256
Ecology, 3

Economic importance, 3, +
elongata (Ctenaplalara), 166
elongata (Tenapkalara), 166
enderleini (Diaphorina), 7, 9, 190, 210, 213, 320
Epicarsa, V4

exytreae (Triaza), 11, 202
eageniae (Triaza), 328, 348, 350
eugenioides (Megotrioza), 328
eugenioides (Trioza), 7, 10, 328
Euphaterus, 170,171, 224
Eupiyllura, 170, 171, 228, 230
expoda (Psylla), 406

supoda (Triaza), 407

External morphology, 12

PSYLLIDAE OF THE INDIAN SUBCONTINENT

fasciata (Arytaina), 7,9 177

ferruginea (Ceropsylla), 6, 10, 302, 305,
ferruginea (Psylla), 255

Sick (Mycopsylla), 151, 15+

fici (Poylla), 151

ficicola (Pawopsylla), 1, 5, 8, 72, 73, 83, 86
Situs (Homotoma), 155

Sfletcheri (Spanioza), 360

fletcheri (Trioza), 5,7, 10, 351, 360, 363, 366 ,
Sletcheri minor (Trioza), 7, 10, 351, 363
Flocculent matter, 3

furcipata (Trioza), 407

fraxini (Chermes), 298

Srasini (Psylla), 298

frasini (Psyllopsis), 5, 10, 17, 170, 298, 299
fraxinicola (Paylla), 297

“fraxinicola (Psyllopsis), 297

free-living types, 4

falvida (Geropsylla), 5, 10, 302, 306, 309
fusca (Trioza), 7, 10, 351, 368, 371, 385

gall-forming, +

gallicola (Phacosema), 119, 123

gardneri (Phylloplecta), 356, 358

geniculata (Macrohomotoma), 5, 8, 136, 1+
‘genistae (Arytaina), 176

genistae (Psylla), 176

Genitalia, 15

gigantea (Dasymastix), 373

gigantea (Trioza), 7, 10, 351, 373, 375, 378
gigantea curta (Trinza), 7, \1, 351, 375
<gladiatum (Macrohamatoma), 135, 136, 139
globuli (Pauropsylta), \

Gonanoplicus, 189

grandis (Dynopgylla), 5, 8, 133, 134
gravelyi (Eurkinocola), 237

greening virus disease, 11, 202

guitulata (Diaphorina), 1, 210, 213
guttulatus (Gonanoplicus), 210

gomnosporiae (Diaphorina), 5, 9, 190, 199, 213, 216

Habits, 3

Head, 12

Heteropsylla, 131

Aibisci (Mesohomotoma), 149
hibisci (Tyora), 145, 149
hirsuta (Kuwayama), 329, 332
hirsuta (Magatrioza), 329
hirsuta (Plylloplacta), 327, 329

tNOEX. hirsuta ( Tring), 7, 10, 329
Homotoma, 12:

 

honey bers, 3

honey dew, 3

horeathi (Spancoza), 390

horvathi (Trioza), 390

Host-Peyllid list, 4

hyalina (Psylla), 4, 5, 10, 245, 259, 262, 274
Iyalina (Trioza), 7, 11, 351, 379, 382

Immature stages, 15

indica (Acizzia), 4,9, 172, 176
indica (Mycopsylla), 6, 8, 151, 15+
indica (Psausia), 5, 156, 158
indica (Tyora), 145, 146, 149
Introduction, 1

isitis (Psylla), 179, 182

iambolanae (Shaniozd), 382

jambolanae (Trioza), 7, 11, 351, 382, 385
‘uncorum (Livia), 6, 8, 11, 21, 23, 24, 25
‘uncorum (Psylla), 24

Katacephala, 229

Khaziensis (Livia), 6, 8, 21, 22, 25
koabelei (Trioza), 349

Kecwayama, 163

Labricia, 244

Laurinearum (Ozotrioza), 1

Legs, 13

leguminicole (Leuronota), 317

lentiginosum (Phacopteron), 1, 5, 7, 8, 16, 118, 119, 123
Leuronota, 16, 300, 313, 378

Livia, 20, 25, 27

Livlaria, 20

Liviidae, 19, 20

Liviinae, 8, 12, 19

Livillinae, 20

lobata (Psyllaplecta), 328

lobate ( Trioza), 5, 10, 952, 935
Lobobrackia, 155

Loginoviena, 230

longiantennata (Trioza), 6, 11, 361, 385
longigena (Psylla), 5, 10, 245, 263, 266
longipennis (Leuronota), 317

longispiculata (Pauropisylla), 4, 8, 72, 73, 08

 

lutheri (Mesohonotoma), 7, 8, 146, 149
latheri (Udamostigma), 146

machili (Neotrioza), 1

Macrohomotoma, 16, 124, 125, 135, 144, 151
maculata (Leuronota), 314, 317

maculata (Macrohomatoma), 136, 140
maculata (Peuropsylla), 6, 8, 72, 92
maculata (Trioza), 314

maculipennis (Aphalara), 6, 8, 17, 28, 31, 36
magnoliae (Trioza), 349

mali (Palla), 11, 170, 280

malloticala (Megatrioza), 337

malloticole (Peylloplecta), 320

matloticola (Trioza), 6, 10, 26, 337
marginalis (Carsidara), 133

Materials, |

Megatrioga, 326, 327

menoni (Paurecephala), 5, 8, 48, 49, 50, 52, 71
Mesohomotoma, 16, 125, 144, 145, 146, 149
Metapsausia, 155

Methods, |

mickoacana (Leuronata), 317

Microceropsylla, 43

microceres (Leuronota), 317

minor (Dynopsylle) , 133

minula (Allotrioza), 16, 319, 322

minuta (Ceropsslla), 7, 10, 302, 809

minuta (Paurocephala), 6, 8, 48, 49, 53, 56
minuta (Lauronota), 314, 317, $19

mites, +

multipunetata (Aphalare), 182

murrayi (Psylla), 6, 10, 245, 268, 270
Mycopsylia, 16, 125, 150, 151

Neccarsidara, 149

Neodiaphorina, 224

Neopyylla, 11, 176

Neotrioza, 300

Nesiope, 146

nidifex (Buphalerus), 224

nigra (Microceropsylla), 95

nigra (Pauropsytla), 6, 8, 72, 73, 9
nigricornis (Stenopsylla), 375

obliqua (Trisza), 4, 5, 11, 351, 390, 393
oblonga (Psylla), 4, 10, 245, 262, 272
abscura (Arytaina), 5, 6, 9, 177, 178

 

126 PSYLLIDAR OF THE INDIAN SUBCON'TT

obsciaa (Pesllopa, 178, 179
ahsoleta (Euphyllina), 6, 9, 230, 238, 241
absolota (Prylla), 394, 398

obsoleta (Trioza). \,
oleae { Euphyllioad, 241

nlivina (Et lua), 6. % 229, 230, TA, D8
alecinus (Tho ips), 241
arsiannilssan’ (Iphalmai, 6, 8
Ozatrinza, 1, 300

 

TL 14,'351, 394, 398

 

 

   

<pacifica (Homatoma\, 154
Pachypyytla, 119

parasites, 4

Paw acephata, 12, +3, 48, 64

Peuropsrlia, 12, 13, 16, 43, 48, 72, 15
Pawropsyllinae, 8, 16, 18, 19, 42. 124, 125, 136
pauvopsylline type, 13

Pauropsyltini, 16, 43

pear decline virus, 11

Peripssllopsis, 176, 182, 183

perseae (Trioza), V1

Petalolyme, 16, 300, 322

Phocoptermmini, 43, 115, 125, 136

Phacopleron, 43, 115, 118

Phacosema, 114, 119

 

 

 

‘phalaki (Paurocephala), 7, 8, 48, 49, 58, 61

phillyrae (Euplyllura), 229

Phylloplecia, 16, 327

Phylloplecta group, 10, 13, 16, 300, 301, 327

inwativena (Dynopsylla), 133, 134

biformis (Phytloplecta), 328

pitforms (Trioza), 6, 10, 340

pits, 3

plant deformities, 3

Platystigma, 229

polygoni (Aphatara), 31

Prionocnemidae, 19, 123, 12-4

Privnocnemus, 124

proxima (Mycopyylla), 154

Peausia, 124, 125, 155

Pseudophacopteron, 43, \\4

psidii (Fenseniella), 11

Pajlla, 12, 13, 16, 28, 170, 171, 175, 177, 2H,
350

Pola sp., 1, 10, 245, 285

Pgillaria, 170

Pallia, 244

Psyllid-Host list, 4, 8

Payllinae, 9, 15, 18, 19, 124, 125, 169

 

Payllinea, 18, 19
Psylline type, 15

 

Pasllopa, 178, 177, 182
Paullopsis, 170, 297

Paylloptera (Paurocephala, 3, 7, 8, 48, 49, 62
punctipennis (Arytaina). 4, 6, 9, 177, 178, 182
punetipennis (Psyllapa), 179, 182

papmuescens (Pawoperlia, 5, 8, 15, 72. 7, 98
putoni (Diaphora), 190

putoni (Diaphorina). 189

prvicola (Pevlla\, 11, 170, 26%

   

quadrimocnlata \Psvlla\, 7. 0. 245, 276

vndiata (Psausia), 155
radiatum (Homotomas, 133. 157, 161
radiatum (Psausial, 156

ramakrishni (Arytaina), 5.9, 177.1
ramakrishni (Peripsyllopsis), 182
reticulata {Pauropsylla), 4, 8, 72, 73, 102, 105
Rhinopsylla, 125, 131, 162, 163, |
russellae (Pawocephala), 6, 8, 48, 19,
rustamiya (Megahioza). 356

 

 
 
   

santali (Psplla), 6, 10, 245, 279, 282
schinae (Gedidopsylla), 1, 7, B, 126, 129
schwargii (Rhinopsylla), 163

scotti (Trinzd), 17

seed beds, 4

serrata (Phylloplecta), 328

serrata (Trioza), 6, 10, 345, 347

ssidero.yli (Ceropsylla), 301

ssimlae (Psylla), 4, 10, 171, 245, 282
simplifica (Trieza), 7, 11, 351, 399, 401
solanicola (Russeltiana), 11

sootayeni (Pyylla), 293

sooty mould, 3

Shanioza, 326

Sphingocladia, 133

spiders, 4

spinesa (Arytaina), 4,9, 177, 185, 188
spinulaia (Trioze), 7, 11, 351, 401
spondiasae (Paveropsylla), 7, 8, 72, 73, 105, Loa
Spondyliaspinac, 19

sterculiae (Tyora), V49

stevensi (Pauropsylia), 7, 8, 72, 109

striata (Macrohomotome), 5, 8, 136, 140, 144

Strongylocephata, 165, 166
styracearum (Ozotrioza), 1
stylata (Rhinopsylla), 7, 9, 163
suleata (Lenronota), 317
sweeping net, 1

Syatomoza, 229

Syringilla, 229

Syrphids, 4

Taxonomic treatment, 12

Tenaphalara, 16, 124, 125, 145, 146, 149, 165, 166
Tenaphalarini, 125

Thorax, 13

Thysanogyna, 133

trimaculata ( Paurocephala), 7, 8, 48,49, 69
Thioza, 12, 13, U6, 300, 314, 326

Trioza group, 10, 16, 301

Triozaria, 299

Triozidae, 19, 299

Triozinae, 10, 14, 18, 19, 163, 299
triozine type, 15

tripunctate (Phylloplecta), 327

tripunctata (Psylla), 327

tripunctata (Trioza), 327

Acacia, 172
Albizia chinensis (=A. stipulaia), 4, 188
odoratissima, +, 262, 274
procera, 4, 175, 176, 188, 261, 262
Alstonia scholaris, 4, 111, 113, 172
Anthocephalus indicus (=-1, eadamba), 4, 105
apple, 4, LL
Atriplex, 4, 393
avocado, 11

 

 

Bauhinia variegata, 4, 284, 285
ber,
Bombax ceibu (=B. matabaricun), ‘, 169
Buchanania lanzon (==B. latifolia), 4 90, 91
Bucklandia populnea (=Symingtonia populnea), 5, 266
Buscus sempervirens, V1
camphor, 145
Garex, 20
Carica papaya, 139
Cassia fistula, 5, 228
siamea, 5, 261, 262
Cedrela toona, 1, 5, 248, 252, 253, 256, 259

 

INDEX 427

trizoptera (Pauropsylla), 76

truncata (Diaphorina), 7, 9, 190, 205, 213, 218, 220

tuberculata (Pauropsytla), 1, 4, 6, 8, 16, 43; 72,73, 111,
14

tubercutata (Pseudophacopteron), 1

Tyora, 125, 145, 146, 149

Udamostigma, 144, 145, 146

udei (Pauropsylia), 44, 72

urticae (Chermes) , 327, 406

urticae (Trioza), 7, 11, 17, 327, 951, 406, 409
venata (Diaphorina), 6, 9, 190, 222, 224
nenniculasus (Eupheleras), 228

verrucosa (Paurocephala), 7,8, 72, 115, 117
niburni (Prytla), 7, 10, 17, 245, 288, 291
vitiensis (Megatrivza), 328, 340, 349
vitiensis (Trioza), 5, 7, 10, 348, 350
vittatus (Euphalerus), 5, 9, 225, 228

wasps, 3
wings, 14

zaicevi (Psylla), 6, 10, 17, 245, 293
zinmermani (Phacosema), 114

PLANTS. Chenopodium album, 5, 393
Chloroxylon swictenia, 5, 182, 185
Chukrasia velutina, 5, 252
Ginnamomum sp., 5, 81, 83
citron, 200
Citrus aurantium, 200
medica, 200, 202
medica acida, 200
medica limonium, 200
medica lunetta, 200
decuntana, 200
spp., 4, 11, 200, 201, 202, 205
Cordia grandis (=C. cordata), 5, 196
myxa, 5, 196
oblique, 5, 196
Cordia spp,,
Crataegus sp., 5, 256
Crataagus oxycantha, 256

 

Dalbergia sissoo, 5, 178, 179
Diospyros melanosylon, 1, 5, 394, 398
tomentosa, 5, 397, 398,

 

PSY LLIDAK OF

Dodonea, 172
Duabanga gyandiflora (s=12, sonneratiides},
a5

 

 
 

Ehretia acuminata,
Enaenin malarcensiy. 5

 

Fucus asperiima, 5, 63. 4
hispida, 5, 63, GF
hookeri, 5, 8
Incescens (=F. infectorie
microcarpa (

309
neronsa, 5, |
racemose (=F, glomerata), 1, 5, 1, 83. 100
religiosa, 5, 157, 158
roxburghii, 5, 86
rumphii, 5, 309
spp., 1, 5, 83, 140
ulmifolia, 5, 63, 64

Fraxinus ortus. 5, 299
spp. +5, 161
FP, retusa. 5.139. 140, 161,

 

 

 

 

2, 128

 

Garuga pinata, 1, 5, 119,
Gimelina arborea, 5, 363
Grewia asiatica, 4, 5, 51
guava, IL

Gyno sporia spinosa (=G. montana}, 5, 236

hackberry, 11
Hakea, 172
Hibiscus tiliaceus, \45

indigo, 4, 182

Indigofera anil, 6. 182
aurecia, 6, 182
hebepetala, 6, 182
aligasperma, 6, 182
paucifolia, 6, 182
pulchella, 6, 182
sumatrana, 6, 182
spp. +

Juan, 4, 385
Juncus spa, 6, 11, 20, 21, 22, 2

THE

INDIAN SURCONTINENT

 

 

handiara,
Khasare, 61
Kydia Calyeina, 6, 1B, 30, 57, 67, 68

 

el, 1

lemon. 200, 201

Leptadenia spartiun, 0, 13. WW

Litsea monapetata (= L., palvantha), 6, 7b

 

AMachilus gambler, |
Meallotus philippensis |
340, 342
Mangifera indica, (47, 7:
imango, 5, 4, 47, 179
Miliusa retutina, 6, 30+, 303
-Murrayu koenigii, 6, 200, 205
paniculata. 6, 200, 205

 

M. philippinensir). 6, 337, 339,

79, HL, 94, 95, 97; 98,821

270

 

nettle, 490

  

Olea europace,
olive, 6, 243
orange, 200. 201

peat, 4, 1
phalsa, 4
Polygonum hydropiper, 6,
microcephalum, 6, 35, 36
pomelo, 200
Populus euphratica, (, 35%, 355, 358, 3BB
potato, 11
pumpkin, + 6. 11, 113
Pras, 288
Paras communis, 6, 287, 288
pushia, 6, 287, 288
vistata, 6, 287

 

28, 31

Quereus dilatato, 6, 326

Sabia paniculata, 6, 347

Salix glauca, 295

tantane; 295

Salix sp., 6, 295, 296
Saloadora oleoides, 6, 24, 241
sundal, 224

 

 

INDEX

Santulum album, 6, 143, 154, 224, 281

‘Schima wallichii, 1, 7, 129

Schleichera trijuga, 7, 119, 122

Semecarpus anacardiun, 7, V7

Shorea robusta, 7, 311, 312, 314, 317

silk cotton, 169

sour’ lime, 200

Sondias pinnata (=S. mangifera), 7, U5

Sterculia foetida, 7, 179

Stranwuesia glaucescens, 7, 170, 287

Strychinos nux-vomica, 7, 220, 221

sweet lime, 200

Symplocos sp., 1

Spaygiun cumini (=Bugenia jambolana), 7, 232, 236,
350, 371, 305, 404

Tamarix sp., 7, 26, 4)
Terminalia alata (=T. tomentosa), 7, 829, 382, 366
arjuna, 7, 382, 363, 366
catoppa, 7, 366
paniculata, 7

429

Trema orientalis, 7, 64
Trewia nudiflora, 1, 363

Urena lobata, 7, 149
Urtica dioica, 409
holosericia, 409

 

  

 

sp. ; 7, 406, 409
urens, 409
uitis, 375,

Viburnum spy 7, 291
Tantana, 291

walnut, 7
willow, 296

Zizyphus jujuba, 4, 7, 71