Arctic and Alpine Research, Vol. 12, No. 3, 1980, pp. 369-376

THE DISTRIBUTION OF PSYLLIDS (HOMOPTERA: PSYLLOIDEA)
IN ARCTIC AND SUBARCTIC ALASKA

S. F. MacLean, Jr.* anv I. D. Hopxinsont

 

ABSTRACT

Psyllids—small, pholem-feeding insects—
were collected from the vegetation at 23 sites
along a transect across arctic and subarctic
Alaska, from the arctic coast at Prudhoe Bay
to Fairbanks. Seventeen psyllid species were
collected from willows (Salix spp. ); nine addi-
tional species were collected from other host
plants. The Salix-feeding psyllids extend
nearly to the arctic coast, and are as rich in
species in arctic as in subarctic Alaska. The

richness of psyllid species on other host plants
increases from the arctic to the subarctic por-
tions of the transect, and increases further in
Alaska south of the transect. Holarctic and
Amphi-Beringean species dominate the psyl-
lid fauna of the arctic; Nearctic species domi-
nate the subarctic and more southerly areas. Comparable distribution patterns are seen in
the psyllid fauna of Fennoscandia. INTRODUCTION

Surprisingly little is known of the richness
of species and the factors responsible for the
distribution of any but the most familiar of or-
ganisms (i.c., vertebrate animals and vascular
plants) in Alaska. Recent construction of the
trans-Alaska pipeline, which traverses Alaska
from the Arctic Ocean at Prudhoe Bay to the
North Pacific at Valdez, provides a means of
expanding our knowledge of the Alaskan
fauna and flora. This paper describes the dis-
tribution of psyllids (Homoptera: Psylloidea)
along the northern half of this transect (Prud-
hoe Bay to Fairbanks), and compares this with

similar data for Scandinavia compiled from
the literature. Psyllids are small, phloem-feeding insects. They are almost entirely restricted to dicotyle-
denous plants, with most species restricted to
a single genus of host plants. Recent studies
have increased the number of psyllid species
known from Alaska from 8 to 39 (Hodkinson,
1978, plus one additional species reported
here). Results of an ecological study of willow-
feeding psyllids in arctic Alaska have been re-
ported elsewhere (Hodkinson et al., 1979). DESCRIPTION OF THE TRANSECT

The transect begins at Prudhoe Bay on the
coastal plain of arctic Alaska (Figure 1). This
is an area of low surface relief, poor drainage
due to permafrost, and numerous ponds and

"Institute of Arctic Biology, University of
Alaska, Fairbanks, Alaska 99701. {Department of Biology, Liverpool Polytechnic,
Byrom Street, Liverpool L3 3AF, England. 0004-085 1/80/030369-08$01.20
©1980, Regents of the University of Colorado

lakes. Summer here is short and cool, with the
plant growing season limited to about 2/4 mon. The vegetation and phytogeography of the
northern part of the transect were discussed by
Murray (1978). The richness of vascular
plants on the coastal plain is low: sedge mead-
ows form the dominant vegetation, with wil-
lows and other dicotyledenous plants more
abundant on better drained ridges, lake and
stream margins, and occasional pingos. S. F. MacLean, Jr. ano I. D, Hopkinson / 369

South of the coastal plain lies the rolling ter-
rain of the northern foothills of the Brooks
Range. Tussock tundra dominated by Erio-
phorum vaginatum L. ssp. spissum (Fern.) Hult.,
with a rich assemblage of associated shrubs
and herbs, covers vast expanses of the foot-
hills. The Brooks Range is a young, rugged, east-
west oriented mountain range that was re-
cently (and, east of the transect, currently is)
glaciated. The crest of the range forms the
continental divide, separating the Yukon
River drainage from rivers that flow north to
the Arctic Ocean. Mountain peaks in the vi-
cinity of the transect reach to about 2000 m.
Valley bottoms contain sedge meadows and
shrub tundra dominated by willow (Salix lanata
L. and S. alaxensis [Anderss.] Cov.) and dwarf
birch (Betula nana L. ssp. exilis [Sukatsch.] Hult.). The slopes have a dry meadow or
heath community dominated by Dryas oclope-
tala L.. with sparse Dryas fellfield on exposed
ridges. The latitudinal tree line which occurs at
about 68°N latitude on the south slope of the
Brooks Range, at an elevation of about
800 m, is taken as the dividing line between
arctic and subarctic Alaska. South of this, is-
lands of tundra vegetation are found at eleva-
tions above 800 to 1000 m and in low-lying,
permatrost-dominated sites where drainage is
impeded. The transect slopes gradually from the
southern Brooks Range to the broad valley of
the Yukon River, within which it crosses the
Arctic Circle. It traverses the Tanana-Yukon

 

    
 

BROOKS

ae

 

Ficure 1, Location of the transect across arctic and
subarctic Alaska, from Prudhoe Bay to Fairbanks,
showing locations of sample collection sites. uplands, and ends at Fairbanks, on the flood
plain of the Tanana River. Here the interior
Alaskan taiga forest is dominated by black and
white spruce (Picea mariana [Mill] Britt et al.,
P. glauca [Moench] Voss). Psyllids are usually
found on dicotyledenous trees, shrubs, and
herbs in riparian and successional vegetation

METHODS

Collections were made along the transect
between Fairbanks and Prudhoe Bay in Au-
gust of 1976 and 1979, and in June and Au-
gust of 1977 and 1978. At selected sites spaced
along the pipeline road, insects were collected
from the vegetation using a sweep net (Table
1, Figure 1). Wherever possible, bushes of
willow, dwarf birch, and alder (Alnus crispa
[Ait.] Pursh) were sampled, as well as the
ground vegetation characteristic of the site. Unfortunately, it was not possible to identify
and sweep willow species individually in all

370 / Arctic AND ALPINE RESEARCH

cases. Although distinct differences occur in
the psyllids found on prostrate and erect
shrubby willows, there appears to be only
weak selectivity within these categories; we
have found no psyllid species limited to a
single species of Salix (Hodkinson, 1978; Hod-
kinson et al., 1979). The dwarf birches, Betula
nana L. ssp. exilis (Sukatsch.) Hult. and B. glan-
dulosa Michx. hybridize and introgress freely,
and no attempt was made to separate these
forms. RESULTS

Seventeen psyllid species were collected
from Salix along the transect (Table 2); four
other species known from Salix in Alaska
(Hodkinson, 1978) were not encountered. The fauna includes one species, Psylla palmeni,
that is found only in the arctic region of the
transect, and three additional species, P. zae-
cevi, P. toolikensis, and Trioza atkasookensis, that
are mainly arctic in distribution. These four
species comprise an arctic component of the
fauna. One additional species found on the
arctic coastal plain, P. macleani, is widely dis-
tributed along and south of the transect. Four more species (7. arctica, P. phlebophyl-
lae, P. kananaskensis, and P. alaskensis) join the
former five in the arctic foothills. Trioza arctica
is known, so far, only from sites north of the
Yukon River, and Psylla phlebophyllae reaches
its southern limit in subarctic-alpine tundra at
Eagle Summit. Psylla kananaskensis and P. alas-
kensis, in contrast, were both collected south of
the transect in Alaska and are also known
from North American sites south of Alaska. Two new species appear in the central
Brooks Range: the widely distributed nearctic
species P. hamata, and P. jenseni, so far known
only from the Brooks Range and Eagle Sum-
mit. Two species of the arctic foothills, P.
phlebophyllae and T. arctica, were not found in
the central Brooks Range, so the total number
of species remains at nine. South of the central Brooks Range, the arc-
tic element of the fauna disappears, the arctic-
subarctic element remains, and a new boreo-
alpine element gradually appears. This ele-
ment consists largely of widely distributed
nearctic species which also occur in the moun-
tains of Canada and the northern continental
United States. Only 7. salicivora, of this
group, also occurs in northern Europe or
Asia. The psyllids collected from other host plants
(Table 3) show a more southerly distribution
in Alaska, although Psylla betulaenanae, P. ledi,
P. myrtilli, Craspedolepta nebulosa, and C. sub-
punctata are holarctic in distribution. No psyl-

Taste 1
Collecting sites along the arctic-subarctic transect in Alaska

 

 

 

__ Area Site Lat. N
Arctic Alaska

Coastal Plain 1, Cape McIntyre 70°23"
2. South of Prudhoe Bay 70°07"
3. Franklin Bluffs 69°43"
4. Pump Station No. 2 69°28"
Arctic Foothills 5. Sagwan 69°20°
6. Happy Valley 69°01"
7, Slope Mountain 68°43"
8. Toolik Lake 68°38"
Central Brooks Range 9. Atigun River 68°16"
10. Atigun Camp 68°11"
Southern Brooks Range 11. Treeline 68°00
12. Dietrich Camp 67°40"
13, Sukakpak Mt. 67°37"

Subarctic Alaska
Yukon Valley 14, Marion Creek 67°20"
15. Grayling Lake 66°58"
16. Gobbler Knob-Bonanza Creek 66°43"
17. Old Man Camp-Finger Mountain 66°07"
18. No-name Creek 66°07"
19. Yukon River 65°53"
Tanana-Yukon Uplands 20. Eagle Summit (Steese Highway) 65°29"
21. Elliott Highway 65°19"
22. Washington Creek 65°10"
23. Fairbanks 65°50"

 

S. F. MacLean, Jr. ANDI. D. Hopkinson / 371

Taste 2
Distribution of psyllid species on Salix in arctic and subarctic Alaska

 

Arctic Alaska Subarctic Alaska
Central Southern ‘Tanana-
Coastal Arctic Brooks Brooks Yukon Alaska b
Plain Foothills Range Range _Yukon Valley Uplands sow Sout
of

 

 

Psyllid species 123 45 67 8 9 10 1112 13 141516171819 2021 22 23 Fairbanks Alaska Distribution
P. palmeni Low XXXXXXXX Holarctic

P. zaecevi Sule. XXXXXXXX x xX Holarctic

P. toolikensis Hod. X XXXXX x Nearctic

P. macleani Hod. xX XX XX xX xX xX XXX X Nearctic

P. phlebophyllae Hod. xX xX x Amphi-Beringean
P. kananaskensis Hod. x x X  Nearctic

P. alaskensis Ash. x xX x xX xX xX xXx x X  Nearctic

P. hamata Tuthill x x X  Nearctic

P. jenseni Hod. x x Nearctic

P. fibulata Crawl. XXX xX xx Xx X  Nearctic

P. sinuata Crawf. X XXX X X  Nearctic

P. haliaeeti Hod. XXX x Nearctic

P. rufipennis Hod. XX x X — Nearctic

P. breviata Patch X  Nearctic

P. longiforceps Hod. x Nearctic

P. highwoodensis Hod. x X  Nearctic

P. minor Crawf. x X  Nearctic

Trioza atkasookensis Hod. XXXXXXXX x Amphi-Beringean
T. arctica Hod. x xX XxX Amphi-Beringean
T. salicivora Reut. x xX XXX xX X  Holarctic

T. incerta Tuthill x XX x X__Nearctic

 

Taste 3
Distribution of psyllid species on host plants other than Salix in arctic and subarctic Alaska

Arctic Alaska ____ Subaretic Alaska

 

 

 

 

Central Southern ‘Tanana-
Coastal Arctic Brooks Brooks Yukon — Alaska
Plain __Foothills_ Range _Range __Yukon Valley __Uplands_ Suth_— South

Host-psyllid 1 23 45 67 B 9 10 I 12-13 1415 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Fairbanks Alaska Distribution
Betula papyrifera

Psylla striata Patch x Nearctic
Betula nana ssp. exilis

Pyylla betulaenanae Oss. x xXx x x xX XXXXXX Xxx x Holarctie
Alnus crispa

Paylla galeaformis Patch xx XXX XX X X XXX x X — Nearctic

P. floccosa Patch X — Nearctic
Ledum palustre

Paylla ledi Flor. x x xx x Holaretic
Vaccinium uliginosum

Psylla myrtilli Wag. ssp. canadensis Hod. x x x x X — Holarctic
Viburnum edule

Pyylla rara Tuthill x X Nearetic
Epilobium angustifolium

Craspedolepta alaskensis (Ash.) x X  Nearetic

C. nebulosa (Zett.) ssp. kinkaidi (Ash.) x X — Holaretic

C. subpunctata (Forster) x X — Holaretic
Polygonum-Rumex

‘Aphalara manitobaensis Cald. x x X  Nearctic

A. nigra Cald. x x x Nearctic

A. nubifera Patch x Nearctic
Sheperdia canadensis

Pyylla stricklandi Craw. x x X  Nearetic
Urtica

Trioza albifrons Craw! xe X_Nearetic

 

*New to Alaska. Not recorded by Hodkinson (1978). ’Recorded by Tuthill (1943); we have not encountered this species. lids were found on plants other than Salix on
the coastal plain. Four species (P. betulaenanae
on Betula nana, P. galeaformis on Alnus crispa, P.
edi on Ledum palustre, and P. myrtilli on Vac-
cinium uliginosum) were found in the arctic
foothills, and only P. betulaenanae in the central
Brooks Range. South of the arctic zone psyllid
species are added on a variety of host plants. The largest number of species occurs south of

Fairbanks, the end of the transect described
here. Each of the species found in arctic
Alaska on host plants other than Salix is also
found south of the transect as well; however,
Aphalara manitobaensis, A. nigra, P. betulaenanae,
and P. ledi possibly reach their southern limit
in Alaska, as they have not been recorded
from regions farther south. DISCUSSION

The species richness of psyllids along this
arctic-subarctic transect is summarized in
Table 4. In all segments of the transect the
number of species on Salix exceeded the num-
ber on all other host plants. Salix-feeding psyl-
lids extend well into the arctic; they were es-
sentially as rich in species in the arctic foothills
as in any other segment of the transect. The
decline in psyllid species on the coastal plain
might be attributed to a decline in the avail-
ability of host plants; however, willows, dwarf
birch, and alder all extend farther north along
the transect than do their characteristic psyllid
species, so that plants at the northern end of
their distribution are free of psyllids. In fact,
psyllids are lacking altogether from Cape
McIntyre, the northernmost site along this
transect, as they are from Barrow, farther
west, although both of the sites have Salix
pulchra and S. phlebophylla which are preferred
hosts of psyllids elsewhere. These data on the distribution of psyllid
species in Alaska may be compared with pub-
lished information on the distribution of psyl-
lids in Scandinavia. Fennoscandinavia has
been divided into a number of biogeographic
provinces (Arnell, 1956), and detailed data on
the distribution of psyllids in these provinces is
available for Sweden, Finland, and, to a lesser

extent, Norway (Ossiannilsson, 1952, 1970,
1972, 1974; Lindberg and Ossiannilsson,
1960; Meinander, 1972). Here, we allocate
each province to that 1° interval of latitude in
which most of its territory lies, to produce six-
teen 1° latitudinal zones between 55° and
>70°N latitude. The northern terminus of
the Scandinavian transect, at approximately
71°N, is almost identical to that of the
Alaskan transect. The distribution of psyllid species asso-
ciated with Salix, Betula, Alnus, Ledum, and
Vaccinium in Sweden, Finland, and Norway
north of the arctic circle have been plotted
within these latitudinal bands (Table 5). Data
for southern Norway are excluded because the
high mountain plateaus, such as the Har-
dangervidda, act as arctic islands and obscure
any possible latitudinal regularities in faunal
distribution. Twenty-one psyllid species occur on these
host plants along the Scandinavian transect,
including 13 species on Salix. This compares
with 17 species on Salix and 26 species in total
in Alaska north of 64°. Thus, the Alaskan
fauna is somewhat richer than that of Scandi-
navia. Six species occur in both Scandinavia
and Alaska. These all occur north of 69° in
Scandinavia; all but Trioza salicivora occur on

Tae 4
Number of psyllid species found on Salix spp. and on other host plants in various
regions of arctic and subarctic Alaska

 

 

 

 

Arctic Alaska Subarctic Alaska
Central Southern ‘Tanana- Alaska
Coastal Arctic Brooks Brooks Yukon Yukon —Total_ south of
Hos __ Plain Foothills Range Range _Valley Uplands _transect_transect_
Salix-feeding 5 9 9 6 7 10 17 13,
Other hosts 0 4 1 5 5 6 9 12
Total 5 13 10 u 2 16 HH

 

374 / Arctic AND ALPINE RESEARCH

Taste 5
Distribution of Psyllids on Salix, Betula, Alnus, Vaccinium, and Ledum along a composite north-south transect through Scandinavia

 

 

 

 

 

70 -70 88 69 67-68 66-67 65-66 64-65 63-64 62-63 61-62 60-61 59-60 58-59 57-58 56-57 55-56 South of
Host-Psyllid 1 2 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 i 12 13 14 15 16 Scandinavia
Salix
Psylla zaecevi Sulc.> x xX x —
P. palmeni Low» x x x x x x x -
P. moscovita And.« x x x x x x x x x x x x
P. elegantula (Zett.) x x
P. nigrita (Zett.) x xX x x x x
P. pulchra (Zett.) x x xX xX xX xX xX x x x
Edw. x x x x x x
st x x x x x x x x x x
P. parvinpennis Low x x x x x x x x x x
Trioza striola Flor x x x x x x x x x x
T. curvatinervis Forst.« x x x x x x x x
T. salicivora Reut.» x x x x x x xX xX x
T. albiventris Forst. x x x x xX
Betula nana ssp. nana
Psylla betulaenanae Oss.” x x x x x x x x x x xX xX -
Betula (other)
Poylla hartigi Flore xX xX xX xX xX xX xX x xX xX X xX x x
P. betulae(L.) x xX xX xX xX xX X X X X xX x x x
Alnus spp. Paylla alni (L. x x x x x x x x x xX x
P. foersteri Flor x x x x x xX xX xX x x xX x xX
P. fusca (Zett.) x x xX x xX xX xX x
Ledum palustre
Psylla ledi Flor x x x x x x x x x x x
Vaccinium
Psylla myrtilli Wag. x x x x x x x x x x x
Total 3 9 15 1017 17 16 15 9 6 1118

 

 

  

‘Latitude °N. pecies occurring in Alaska. “Species having a close relative in the Alaskan fauna. ~

the arctic coastal plain and/or arctic foothills
of northern Alaska. Five of these species are
also found on the tundra of northeastern
USSR (Hodkinson and MacLean, 1980), and
Psylla palmeni and P. zaecevi from this group are
the dominant psyllids of the Taimyr Peninsula
(Chernov, 1978). Thus, the fauna of the
northernmost sites is dominated by species of
holarctic distribution. There is a tendency for species to reach
farther north in Scandinavia, as is seen in T.
salicivora on Salix, P. betulaenanae on Betula, P.
myrtilli on Vaccinium, and P. ledi on Ledum. This is also seen in comparing the distribution
of closely related species pairs: P. moscovita (S)
and P. macleani (A), and T. curvatenervis (S) and
T. incerta (A), on Salix; P. hartigi (S) and P.
striata (A) on Betula; P. alni (S) and P. galea-
formis (A), and P. fusca (S) and P. floccosa (A),
on Alnus. Tree line is similarly displaced to the
north in Scandinavia compared with Alaska. In general, arctic psyllids have a 1-yr life
cycle. Species such as Prylla galeaformis, P. betu-

laenanae, P. myrtilli, and P. ledi all overwinter
as eggs which hatch coincident with bud burst,
and the nymphs complete their development
on the current year’s growing shoots. In con-
trast, all of the Salix-feeding Psylla studied to
date overwinter as adults which oviposit on
catkins as soon as they appear. The nymphs
usually complete the whole of their develop-
ment within the catkin (Hodkinson et al.,
1979). The Salix-feeding Trioza species, which
seldom reach the high densities seen in Psylla
species, have a similar life cycle on the leaves
rather than in catkins. In all these species, de-
velopment must be completed within the short
growing season, before catkin development is
completed or leaf senescence occurs. It ap-
pears that the northern limit of the distribu-
tion of arctic psyllids is set by the length and
temperature of the growing season, as these
influence their ability to complete the annual
life cycle, rather than by availability of host
plants. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was made possible by support
from the U. S. Army Cold Regions Research
and Engineering Laboratory, as part of a pro-
gram of bioenvironmental research along the

REFERENCES CITED

Arnell, S., 1956: Illustrated Moss Flora of Fenno-
scandia. 1. Hepaticae. Lund: CWK Gleerup. 308 pp. Chernov, Yu. I., 1978: Structure of the Animal Popu-
lations in the Subarctic. Moscow: Publishing
House Nauka. 165 pp. [In Russian]

Hodkinson, I. D., 1978: The psyllids (Homoptera:
Psylloidea) of Alaska. Systematic Entomology, 3
333-360. Hodkinson, I. D., Jensen, T. S., and MacLean, S.
F., Jr., 1979: The distribution, abundance, and
host plant relationships of Salix-feeding Psyllids
(Homoptera: Psylloidea) in arctic Alaska. Eco-
logical Entomology, 4: 119-132. Hodkinson, I. D. and MacLean, S. F., Jr., 1980:
The Psyllids (Homoptera: Psylloidea) of
Chukotka, northeast USSR. Arctic and Alpine
Research, 12: 377-380. Lindberg, H. and Ossiannilsson, F., 1960:
Verzeichnis der ostfennoskandischen Homop-
tera Psyllina. Fauna Fennica, 8: 1-23

Meinander, M., 1972: The invertebrate fauna of
the Kilpisjarvic area, Finnish Lapland. 7. Hemiptera. Acta Societatis Pro Fauna et Flora

376 / Arctic AND ALPINE RESEARCH

trans-Alaska transportation corridor in north-
ern Alaska. V. M. Behan, J. E. Cowling, A.
Fjellberg, A. Power, A. E. Reges, and R. H.
Thomas all assisted in collecting specimens. Fennica, 80: 67-92. Murray, D. F., 1978: Vegetation, floristics, and
phytogeography of northern Alaska. In
Tieszen, L. L. (ed. ), Vegetation and Production
Ecology of an Alaskan Arctic Tundra. Ecological
Studies, Vol. 29. New York: Springer Verlag,
19-36. Ossiannilsson, F., 1952: Catalogues Insectorum
Sueciae. XII, Hemiptera Homoptera Psylloi-
dea. Opuscula Entomologica, 17: 193-200.

, 1970: Contributions to the knowledge of

Swedish Psyllids (Hem., Psylloidea). 1-4. Ento-

mologica Scandinavica, 1: 135-144

, 1972: Till kannedomen om abiskatraktens

Hemiptera. Entomologisk tidskrift, 93: 88-89

, 1974: Hemiptera (Heteroptera, Auch-
enorryncha and Psylloidea). Fauna of the Har-
dangervidda, 5: 13-35. Tuthill, L. D., 1943: The psyllids of America
north of Mexico (Psyllidae: Homoptera) (sub-
families Psyllinae and Triozinae). fowa State
College Journal of Science, 17: 443-660. Ms submitted November 1979