Journal of Biogeography (1980) 7,127—146

Present-day distribution patterns of the holarctic Psylloidea
(Homoptera: Insecta) with particular reference to the origin
of the nearctic fauna

I. D. HODKINSON Department of Biology, Liverpool Polytechnic,

Byrom Street,

Liverpool L3 3AF

ABSTRACT. The Psylloidea or jumping plant lice tend to be host-plant specific
with related species usually occurring on closely related host plant species. The
distribution of the eighty-two holarctic genera across eighteen floral realms was
investigated. There is a marked faunal similarity between floral realms lying to
the north of the deciduous forest regions. However, within the warmer
Mediterranean/steppe/prairie/desert regions the faunas of the nearctic and
palaearctic diverge with a large number of genera being endemic to their respec-
tive regions. Infiltration of tropical genera northwards occurs throughout
holarctic but the genera involved tend to differ in different regions. The probable origins of the nearctic fauna are discussed in detail. It is con-
cluded that three distinct phases of development occurred. Firstly evolution of
endemic genera from a stock existing prior to the separation of Europe and
North America, secondly repeated waves of migration across a Beringia connection
and finally a southern infiltration of neotropical genera and species. Introduction

The Psylloidea or jumping plant lice are a
group of usually narrowly polyphagous sap-
sucking insects which feed almost exclusively
on dicotyledenous plants (Eastop, 1972;
Hodkinson, 1974), The psyllids as a group
probably arose in the early Permian (Becker-
Migdisova, 1973) and thus initially almost
certainly were associated with the gymno-
sperms, This coniferous feeding habit has not
survived and transfer on to the angiosperms
probably occurred just prior to or coincident
with the angiosperm explosion in the early
Cretaceous, which probably heralded the
evolution of the present-day forms. Certainly
several of the extant psyllid genera had
evolved by the Oligocene and by the Miocene
these genera contained species very close to
present-day forms (Becker-Migdisova, 1967). This situation is very similar to that pertaining
to the flowering plants (Takhtajan, 1969). Thus psyllid evolution, making due allowance

0305-0270/80/0600-0127 $02.00 ©1980 Blackwell Scientific Publications

for some possible disjunct host range exten-
sions, appears to have closely paralleled that
of the Angiosperms so that today closely
related psyllid species tend to occur on
closely related plant species. In general, but
with the notable exception of the large genera
Cacopsylla Ossiannilsson and Trioza Forster,
which will be discussed later, the psyllids
tend to form reasonably homogeneous groups
and the analysis has been largely conducted
at the generic level. However, more detailed
information at the species level is presented,
where appropriate, in the discussion of the
origin of the nearctic fauna, The study is
confined to the holarctic region as the fauna
is reasonably well known: extension into
other zoogeographical regions would require
massive taxonomic revision, Eastop (1978),
however, has discussed the broad geographical
distribution of the major psyllid groups. The psyllid data used in the study are
drawn from a huge literature and from un-
published records in museums, especially the

127

128 I, D. Hodkinson

British Museum (Natural History) and the
U.S. National Museum. It is impractical to
give a complete bibliography but the prime
source references listed by geographical
tegion are given below: Macaronesia (Loginova,
1976b), Morocco (Loginova, 1972b), Egypt
(Samy, 1972), Spain (Ramirez-Gomez, 1956a,
b, 1960), Britain (Hodkinson & White, 1979),
Switzerland (Schaefer, 1949), Central Europe
(Haupt, 1935), Poland (Klimaszewski, 1975),
Rumania (Dobreanu & Manolache, 1962),
Czechoslovakia (Vondracek, 1957), Scandi-
navia (Ossiannilsson, 1952; Lindberg &
Ossiannilsson, 1960), European U.S.S.R.
(Loginova, 1964), Turkey (Klimaszewski &
Lodos, 1977, 1979), Asiatic U.S.S.R. and

Mongolia (several references summarized
by Klimaszewski, 1973), Northern India
(Mathur, 1975), Japan (Miyatake, 1963,

1964, 1969, 1973, 1974, 1978; Kuwayama,
1908, 1910), China (Enderlein, 1937); Kuwa-
yama & Miyatake, 1971), Greenland (Hen-
tiksen, 1939; Koponen, 1978), Alaska
(Hodkinson, 1978), Canada (Strickland, 1938,
1939; Kitching, 1971; Hodkinson, 1976 and
unpublished), U.S.A. (Crawford, 1914; Tuthill,
1943; Caldwell, 1937, 1938, Jensen, 1951a,
b, 1957a,b; Russell, 1971, 1973), Mexico
(Tuthill, 1944, 1945, 1950) and Central
America (Caldwell, 1944a,b; Caldwell &
Martorell, 1952). A complete list of the
holarctic psyllid genera together with their
world distribution and host plant associations
is given in Appendix 1. This classification of
the holarctic Psylloidea is in broad general
agreement with those proposed by Becker-
Migdisova (1973), Klimaszewski (1964) and
Heslop-Harrison (1948, 1949a,b,c, 19Sla,
b,c, 1952a, b, 1958, 1959, 1961), but I have
also made use of recent data on the classifi-
cation of the Psylloidea presented by Loginova
(1972a, 1974, 1975a,b, 1976a,c, 1977,
1978a, b). A total of eighty-two psyllid genera occur
in the holarctic and of these, twenty-one are
monobasic, Fifty genera are endemic and
of the remaining thirty-two a further fifteen
exhibit maximum species diversity within
the holarctic suggesting that their origin or
their main centre of evolution was within
the region. The residual seventeen genera
exhibit maximum species diversity in other
zoogeographical regions, usually the tropics,

and represent a southern infiltration into
the holarctic fauna,

Information on continental drift is derived
largely from Cox et al. (1973), Smith et al,
(1973) and Schuster (1976); on the evolution
of the flowering plants from Cronquist (1968),
Takhtajan (1969), Hutchinson (1964, 1967,
1969, 1973) and Beck (1976), and on the
present-day distribution of plants from Good
(1974) and Willis (1973). Present-day distribution patterns of the
holarctic psyllid genera

Takhtajan (1969) classifies the holarctic
region into nine distinct sub-kingdoms based
on the dissimilarity of floras, This system
has been used, with some further subdivision,
to investigate psyllid distribution patterns. The subdivisions (Fig. 1) are:

1, Palaearctic tundra

2. West palaearctic coniferous forest
3. East palaearctic coniferous forest
4, West palaearctic deciduous forest
5. East palaearctic mixed forest

6. Mediterranean

7, Macaronesian

8. Palaearctic grassland /steppe/desert
9. Nearctic tundra

10, Greenland

11. Nearctic coniferous forest

12. Nearctic eastern deciduous forest
13. Rocky Mountains

14. Pacific northwest rain forest

15. Nearctic prairies

16. Nearctic southwest deserts

17. California

18, Nearctic subtropical

The basic presence (1) or absence (0)
matrix for each psyllid genus in each floral
realm (Appendix 2) forms the basis for
interpretation. The  psyllid communities
associated with the different floral realms
exhibit a general gradient of diversity from
north to south which parallels the gradient
in plant diversity. In the arctic tundra regions
of both the nearctic and palaearctic regions
just four psyllid genera Aphalara, Psylla,
Cacopsylla and Trioza are present, usually
associated with plants of the families Poly-
gonaceae, Betulaceae and Salicaceae, Green-

Distribution of holarctic psyllid genera 129

 

FIG. 1. Subdivision of holarctic region into floral realms. For explanation see text. land shows an impoverished fauna with just
two genera, Psylla and Cacopsylla, represented. As one moves south into the coniferous
forest zones of both the nearctic and palae-
arctic then the genus Livia on Carex and
Juncus and the Craspedolepta species on
Onagraceae appear. In addition a number of
genera with a more southerly distribution
reach their northern limit. These include
Strophingia and Psyllopsis on Calluna and
Fraxinus respectively in the palaearctic and
Pachypsylla on Celtis in the nearctic,

In the deciduous forest zones throughout
the holarctic, species of the genera Livia,
Aphalara, Craspedolepta, Psylla, Cacopsylla
and Trioza predominate but with an infiltra-
tion of genera which exhibit maximum
diversification in more southerly floral realms. In the west palaearctic these include Camaro-
toscena on Populus, Spanioneura on Buxus
and a number of Arytainine legume-feeding
genera — Arytaina sensu stricto, Alloeoneura,
Arytainilla, Floria, Livilla and Amblyrhina. There are no true endemics but Psyllopsis
spp. on Fraxinus show maximum diversifi-
cation in the region and the monotypic genus
Rhinocola on Acer is typical of the warmer
parts of the region,

In the eastern palaearctic forest the picture
is similar with several oriental genera including
Paurocephala on Ficus, Togepsylla on Litsea
and Euphalerus on Gleditsia and Caesalpina
reaching their northern limit and supple-
menting the dominant ubiquitous genera
previously listed. In addition, seven endemic genera Ano-
moneura on Morus, Epitrioza on Eleagnus,

Metapsylla on Gleditsia, Syntomoza on
Myroxylon, Syringilla on Syringa, Ligustrinia
on Ligustrum and Epheloscyta (host unknown)
are apparent. The presence of Calophya on
Anacardiaceae and Pachypsylla on Celtis
indicate links with the nearctic deciduous
forest fauna. In the nearctic deciduous forest the six
ubiquitous genera are again dominant, Charac-
teristic genera include Pachypsylla, but there
appears to be only a single monotypic endemic,
Hemitrioza on Sonchus. However, more
southerly elements are present in Neotriozella
(host unknown), Amorphicola on Amorpha
and Gyropsylla on Ilex. The faunas of the Pacific North West rain
forest and the Rocky Mountains are again
dominated by Livia, Aphalara, Craspedolepta,
Psylla, Cacopsylla and Trioza. Endemics are
absent but there is again an infusion of
southern genera including the Arytainines
Euglyptoneura and Ceanothia on Ceanothus
and the Aphalaraoidine Neophyllura on
Arctostaphylos and Arbutus. Thus in general there are broad similarities
throughout the holarctic region in the psyllid
genera associated with floristic regions lying
north of the more arid or warmer zones and
it is not until these zones are reached that
differences become marked. Within the palaearctic Mediterranean zone
the fauna changes: Aphalara, Craspedolepta,
Psylla, Cacopsylla and Trioza, while still
present, cease to dominate and genera associ-
ated with xerophilous plant species become
predominant, Endemism is rare as most genera
have spread outwards from the Mediterranean:

130 LD. Hodkinson

the monotypic triozid genus Engytatoneura
(host unknown) from Morocco and the mono-
typic Arytainine genus Pseudacanthopsyilla on
Retama from Egypt appear to be exceptions. However, several genera have their centre of
distribution in the region. These include a
large number of closely related Arytainine
genera associated with the fabaceous shrubs
of the tribe Genisteae, namely Arytaina sensu
stricto, Alloeoneura, Amblyrhina, Arytainilla,
Floria and Livilla; a number of Strophingia
species associated with Ericaceae, and Euphyl-
lura on Oleaceae. The fauna also encompasses
a large desert—steppe element which appears
to have its origins further to the east. This
includes the Aphalaroidine genera Camaro-
toscena, Acaerus and Pachypsylioides, the
Aphalarine genera Xanioptera, Caillardia,
Rhodoclanis, Colposcenia and Crastina, the
Arytainine genus Cyamophila and the Triozid
genera Egeirotrioza and Eutrioza. In addition
two genera Acizzia (Psylla bicolorata Samy)
on Acacia and Albizia and Pauropsylla on
Ficus appear to have entered the region via
a southern route, either from India or Africa
south of the Sahara where their centres of
distribution lie. Also, for the genus Diaphorina
it is possible to postulate a similar northward
movement, although a westward movement
from an Asian centre of origin must also be
considered. Homotoma, a genus associated
with Ficus spp., which exhibits maximum
diversity in the eastern Oriental region com-
pletes the fauna (Miyatake, 1973). The Macaronesian fauna can be derived by
reduction from the Mediterranean fauna
although two highly specialized endemic
Aphalaroidine genera Lisronia on Cistus and
Megadicrania (host unknown) are present and
the Arytainine genus Arytainilla on Fabaceae
has undergone explosive evolution. The desert-steppe region of central Asia is
especially interesting in that it contains a
large endemic fauna associated with xero-
philous plants. The genera involved are the
Aphalaroidine Eremopsylloides on Calligonum,
the Aphalarines Brachystetha on Nitraria
and Zygophyllum, Xenaphalara on Cerato-
carpus, Eurotica on Eurotia, Eumetoecus on
Kochia and Camphorosoma, Rhombaphalara
on Halocnemum and the Arytainine A stragilita
on Astragalus, In addition the genus Craspe-
dolepta has undergone explosive evolution on

Artemisia, A number of genera are also
present which appear to have spread westwards
into the Mediterranean and beyond yet
exhibit maximum diversity in the steppe/
desert, suggesting that this is the centre of
their diversification. These include the Apha-
laroidine genera Pachypsylloides and Acaerus
on Calligonum, the Aphalarine genera Cail-
lardia on Anabasis and Haloxylon, Rhodo-
clanis on Salsola, Suaeda and Salicornia,
Crastina on Myricaria, Colposcenia on Tama-
rix, the Arytainine genus Cyamophila on
Caranga, Glycyrrhiza and Astragalus and a
mixture of Triozine forms including Egeiro-
trioza on Populus and Eutrioza on Pinus
(unconfirmed), The Aphalaroidine genus
Diaphorina on Lycium, Convolvulus, Zygo-
phyllum, Clutia and Salvadora is especially
interesting. It has undergone wide diversifi-
cation within this region but it also occurs
abundantly throughout the Ethiopian and
Oriental regions. Its origins are somewhat
obscure. The ubiquitous Cacopsylla, Apha-
lara and Trioza are present but not dominant. It is interesting to note that relic popu-
lations of certain arctic—temperate species
such as P. zaecevi Sulc, P. viburni Low,
Aphalara maculipennis Léw and Trioza
urticae (L.) are found south of the arid
zone in the mountains of northern India. The fauna of the North American prairies
is derived from the ubiquitous northern ele-
ment Livia, Aphalara, Craspedolepta, Psylla,
Cacopsylla and Trioza with the addition of
Californian/desert forms including Aphala-
roida, Euglyptoneura, Amorphicola and Leuro-
lophus. The genus Craspedolepta has under-
gone only moderate diversification in this
region. The presence of Rhinopsylla and
Heteropsylla indicates an infiltration of
southern neotropical forms. The faunas of the nearctic desert and
California are similar with a number of typical
genera exhibiting maximum species diversity. These include the Aphalaroidine genera
Aphalaroida and Heteropsylla on the Mimo-
soidea, Neophyllura on Arctostaphylos and
Arbutus, the Arytainine genera Amorphicola
on Amorpha, Purshivora on Purshia, and
Ceanothia on Ceanothus, True endemics are
uncommon but the Aphalaroidine genus
Paraphalaroida on Fremontia, the Arytainine
genus Pexopsylla on Cercocarpus and the

Triozid Levidea on Parthenium are unique to
these regions. In addition a number of genera
of clearly neotropical origin are present
including Leuronota, Metatrioza, Neotriozella
and Kuwayama. Northern forms including
Aphalara, Craspedolepta, Cacopsylla, Pachy-
psylla and Calophya on Rhus are present but
no longer dominant. In contrast to the arid zones of the old
world the nearctic arid zone fauna appear to
contain fewer endemic genera and a lower
species diversity. Whereas in the forest zone
northwards the typical genera exhibit holarctic
distributions, in the arid zones the nearctic-
palaearctic links are at the tribe or subfamily
level through the subfamilies Aphalaroidinae
and Arytaininae: there are no common
typical genera. Furthermore, within the sub-
family Aphalarinae the massive radiation
which occurred in the Old World has not
occurred in the nearctic. The implications
of this will be discussed later. The subtropical south-east zone retains a
small proportion of the ubiquitous Livia,
Aphalara, Cacopsylla and Trioza within the
fauna but also contains a large element of
genera having their centre of distribution
either in the neotropical zone or at least
within the tropics. These genera are Gyro-
psylla on Ilex, Rhinopsylla (host unknown),
Leuronota on Celtis, Ceropsylla on Side-
roxylon, etc., and Euphalerus on Piscidia. Analysis

To summarize the basic data matrix, to
identify recurrent groupings of psyllid genera
with common distributions and to measure
the faunal similarity at the generic level
between faunal kingdoms two similarity
matrices were calculated. These were firstly
a matrix expressing, on a scale from 0~ 1,
the similarity between the faunas of the
eighteen floral realms based on the psyllid
genera which occur in them and secondly a
matrix expressing the similarity between the
distributions of the psyllid genera based
on their occurrence in the different floral
realms, In both instances Jaccard’s coefficient,
of similarity A/(A +B + C) was used, where,
for example, to calculate the faunal similarity
between two floral realms A is the number of

Distribution of holarctic psyllid genera 131

genera occurring in both realms, B is the
number of genera found in the first realm
only, and C is the number of genera found in
the second realm only. Minimum spanning
trees were calculated across each of the
matrices which were then clustered by single
linkage (Gower & Ross, 1969; Farris, 1970)
to produce classifications in dendrogram form
(Figs. 2 and 3). Within the classification of psyllid genera
(Fig. 2) a number of basic groups can be
recognized above the 0.5 similarity level, i.e. the level at which genera occur together more
often than they occur apart. There are three tight clusters of endemic
genera (1.0 similarity) associated with the
eastern palaearctic forest (nine genera),
Macaronesia (two genera) and the Californian
region of the nearctic (two genera). A further
four looser major clusters can be identified. These are firstly a typically Mediterranean/
steppe/desert group of forty genera associated
with the more arid southern zone of the palae-
arctic. This group contains generic elements
such as the Alloeoneura/Livilla cluster which
have spread northwards into the west palae-
arctic deciduous forest and the Pauropsylla/
Acizzia which represents a southern infiltra-
tion into the palaearctic fauna. The second
major grouping includes seven genera which
exhibit a broad distribution throughout the
holarctic and which, with the exception of
Calophya, can be regarded as an ubiquitous
northern element. A third very loose cluster
encompasses a group of seven genera which
appear to have entered the southern nearctic
from the neotropical region. The apparent
looseness of this cluster is partly a reflection
of sporadic records across a few floral king-
doms. The final major cluster incorporates
a group of seven genera which are endemic
to the warmer southern regions of the nearctic. One further cluster is worthy of note,
namely, that including Pachypsylla and
Paratrioza, These genera occur both in the east
palaearctic and the nearctic but their more
widespread occurrence in the latter gives them
a high similarity with the endemic nearctic
genus Amorphicola. The classification of floral realms based on
the distribution of psyllid genera (Fig. 3)
shows that in the northerly vegetation zones,
the tundra, the coniferous and the deciduous

132 I. D. Hodkinson

SIMILARITY
19 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
— Pobobo to bt ob be tt

© lHerenorsvita
(© Kunavana
TeTRAGONOCEPHALA

 

Levocoms
PHALAROIDA | —

rn
NEOPHYLLURA —_—___J

hans

 

 

 

SOUTHERN
ENDEMIC

 

 

Pacnvrsyuia
1 Paeataioza
erarrioza
Levipex
GenopsviLa
Karecernate J
© Evpwacenus
RuInoPsvLLa
LeuRonora
L., Grrorsvite
 Hemtretoza

Gacorsyeca
Trioza

APHALARA

Psvita. CrasPepocerra
Livia
Caopaya

 

 

NEARCTIC

SOUTHERN

 

NEOTROPICAL
ELEMENT

TW

1

HOLARCTIC

Eurayicura
Covroscents
Ruodocanis
Dixeworina
CyamorHitn
famaroroscena
Spanioncura
Envnatorac
Aryraina
Arvrainieta — /——————
Aconoscena ——___! ALLOEONEUeA

Ruinococa
AML YHA
Fortra

Livicta
Euraioza

Ese inoraiozn
Bactericena
CarecarDiA
Eurorica
Aecerus
PachvesyLoror
Kanioprene
TrrcHocneR'
Honororn
Stroraiue in
Bevcvorsis. ——__
Apuonms

AstRAGiLita
Erenorsyevornes
KENAPHALARA
Bracursterin

Fuse Torcus,

RuoMBAPHALARA

Crasr ina
Encrraroneurn
Pruropsyicx —
Acizzia

Pseuorcrmnrsy.u

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MEDITERRANEAN/STEPPE/DESERT

PALAEARCTIC

 

 

 

@ Neormiozeuta
Sywromoza
Hetapsvica
SYRINGICLA
Licusreinia
Epnvcoscyra
Tocepsvica
ANowoneuRA
Eprreioza
PaUuROCEPHALA

Imacaro| — Listkonin

Cc Mecnoicennin

cALiFoR[ insaouncaroinn

 

E MIXED
FOREST

 

Ts

 

 

 

1 9 8
toot

|
PALAEARCTIC TUNDRA

NEARCTIC TUNDRA

Distribution of holarctic psyllid genera 133
SIMILARITY
7 6 5

4 £3 = =2
Porobobotot

 

 

E.PALAEARCTIC CONIFERCUS
W,PALAEARCTIC CONIFEROUS
EARCTIC DECIDUOUS
NEARCTIC CONIFEROUS
PACIFIC N.Y. FOREST
CALIFORNIA

ROCKY MOUNTAINS
GREENLAND

NEARCTIC S.W.DESERTS
NEARCTIC PRAIRIES
E.PALAEARCTIC MIXED

ome
MEDITERRANEAN ee |

PALAEARCTIC STEPPE/DESERT
NEARCTIC SUBTROPICAL
MACARONES LAN

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIG. 3. Phenogram to illustrate the faunal similarity between the eighteen floral realms based on the

presence of eighty-two psyllid genera. forests, there is generally a high similarity
(greater than 0.5) in the psyllid genera which
occur. However, as one moves into the more
southerly floral realms their level of similarity
with the former zones decreases. Similarly
the similarity between the nearctic and
palaearctic regions also decreases, Again the
east palaearctic forest, the nearactic sub-
tropical and the Macaronesian zones appear
as outliers showing low similarity with other
floral realms. The origins of the nearctic fauna

A number of species have been introduced
into North America within recent times and
should be excluded from the analysis. These
species are Arytaina genistae (Latr. ), Ary-
tainilla spartiophila (Forst. ), Acizzia unca-

toides (Ferris & Klyver), Psyllopsis fraxini
(L.), P. fraxinicola (Férst. ), P. discrepans
(Flor), Spanioneura fonscolombii (Forst. ),
Cacopsylla mali (Schmidtb. ), C. sorbi (L.),
C. pyricola (Forst. ), C. fatsiae (Jensen),
C. buxi (Férst. ), Trioza alacris Flor, and
Homotoma ficus (L.). The present-day nearctic psyllid fauna
could possibly be derived in three separate
ways: firstly by evolution in situ prior to and
after the final separation of North America
and Europe in the Late Cretaceous (70
million years BP, although island chains may
have provided a migration corridor for a
further 20 millions years); secondly by sub-
sequent immigration from the palaearctic
across a Beringia connection, and thirdly
by immigration through the Isthmus of
Panama, after the joining of North and South
America in the Miocene (20 million years

 

FIG. 2. Phenogram to illustrate the similarity in range of distribution of the holarctic psyllid genera
across the eighteen floral realms, @ indicates genera with unusual distributions which, as an artifact of
the method used, cluster outside their expected groups. Heteropsylla, Kuwayama and Neotriozella are
southern nearctic in distribution, Hemitrioza, Paraphalaroida and Pexopsylla are endemics unique to one
floral realm in the nearctic and Pachypsylla and Paratrioza are holarctic genera widespread in the nearctic

but with restricted distribution in the palaearctic. 134 I. D. Hodkinson

BP). Fossil evidence is rare and conclusions
are drawn from zoogeographical and host
plant data together with a consideration of
adult and nymphal morphology. In general the nearctic fauna is much
poorer both in terms of number of genera
and numbers of species when compared to the
palaearctic, Sixty-one genera are recorded
from the palaearctic whereas only thirty-one
are recorded from the nearctic,

A number of nearctic genera, Katecephala,
Gyropsylla, Rhinopsylla, Kuwayama, Leuro-
nota, Metatrioza, Neotriozella and Euphalerus
are largely associated with southern vegetation
zones, Each of these genera exhibit maximum
species diversity within the neotropical
region and can undoubtedly be considered as
having entered the nearctic via a southern
route within the last 20 million years. In
addition, within the heterogeneous genus
Trioza, a number of nearctic Baccharis-
feeding forms, T. proxima Crawf,, and T.
collaris Crawf., have their nearest relatives
in the Baccharis-feeding species of South
America, again suggesting a neotropical origin
for this segment of the genus, Baccharis
itself is thought to have spread north up the
mountain chains from a neotropical origin. On the basis of adult morphology the
Heteropsylline genus Heteropsylla has pre-
viously been placed in the Aphalaridae close
to Aphalaroida. However, the structure of its
nymph and the elongate eighth antennal
segment in the adult suggests that it is a very
highly evolved Ciriacremine. Heteropsylla
species feed on the Mimosidae section of the
Fabales, the normal host plants of the neo-
tropical Ciriacremines, Furthermore Hetero-
psylla is distributed throughout Central and
South America and shows certain morpho-
logical affinities with Euceropsylla, a neo-
tropical genus, A neotropical origin for this
genus appears most likely. Since the final separation of the North
American and European land masses and the
final closure of the Atlantic corridor in the
mid-Eocene (60 million years BP), faunal
immigration into the nearctic must largely
have been controlled by climatic conditions
existing in the Beringia region. Recent evidence
suggests that climatic conditions, as indicated
by fossil floras, has undergone progressive
deterioration from the Eocene onwards. During the later Cretaceous the Alaskan flora
was analogous to that found in North China
and Korea today, while during the Palaeocene
and Eocene a temperate deciduous flora
became dominant (Cox ef al., 1973). At this
time the northern limit of the subtropical
vegetation lay about 15°N of its present
position. From this time onwards the climate
began to cool and a marked temporary severe
deterioration occurred during the Oligocene,
at which time forest persisted over much of
Eurasia and this condition persisted through
into the somewhat warmer Miocene. The final
climatic deterioration began in the mid-
Miocene and by the Pleistocene the simpler,
cold-adapted arctic/sub-arctic vegetation types
had developed and occupied the northern
regions of the holarctic. Hence, as climate has changed, vegetation
type has changed and the potential for migra-
tion by different groups of psyllids has
altered, Is there any evidence to support this
hypothesis? A number of predominantly
North temperate genera Livia, Aphalara,
Craspedolepta, Calophya, Pachypsylla, Psylla,
Cacopsylla and Trioza are common to both
the palaearctic and nearctic zoogeographical
regions and do not, with the exception of
Calophya and Trioza sensu lato, occur in the
neotropical region. An examination of the
evidence from present-day species distri-
bution patterns within these genera suggests
that faunal exchange across Beringia must
have occurred on many occasions. Working
backwards through time it is possible to
identify several distinct waves of migration. A number of holarctic species occur
within the genera Craspedolepta, Psylla,
Cacopsylla and Trioza (Table 1). Nearly all
these species exhibit a far northern distri-
bution on circumpolar plant species within
the genera Salix, Alnus, Betula, Vaccinium,
Ledum and Epilobium. The circumpolar
continuity of these psyllid species reflects the
known Pleistocene history of the vegetation. The opening of the Bering land bridge during
glacial maxima provided a corridor for faunal/
floral exchange of arctic species. There is an
excellent correlation between the psyllids
which have retained their circumpolar integrity
and the presence of their host plant, as indi-
cated by pollen spectra, in the Wisconsin and
Illinoian glaciation zones of sediment cores

Distribution of holarctic psyllid genera 135

TABLE 1. The holarctic psyllid species

Species

Craspedolepta subpunctata (Forst)
C. nebulosa (Zett)

. sonchi

Psylla alni (L.)

P, betulae (L.)

P. hartigi Flor

P. carpinicola (Crawf.) P, betulaenanae Oss. Cacopsylla palmeni (Low)
C. zaecevi (Sule)

C. myrtilli (Wag.) C. ledi (Flor)

C. phlebophylae (Hod.) , tenuata (Jensen)
Trioza salicivora Reut. T. atkasookensis Hod. T. arctica Hod,

taken from the Beringia region (Hopkins,
1967). Craspedolepta sonchi is somewhat
exceptional as it has only been found in sub-
montane nearctic habitats further to the south
and this possibly indicates extinction in the
northern parts of its range. The position of
Cacopsylla tenuata and Psylla carpinicola is
discussed later. In summary, these species represent the
most recent groups which have been geo-
graphically isolated for about 13000 years
since the last closure of the Bering land
connection and which have not yet diverged. However, the effects on speciation of
repeated glaciation are manifest within the
nearctic region. Some holarctic species such as
C. palmeni, P. alni and C. subpunctata which
are broadly distributed within the palaearctic
appear to have diverged within the nearctic. For instance, in North America C. palmeni

Host plant

Epilobium angustifolium
Epilobium angustifolium
Sonchus, Leontodon
Alnus spp. Betula spp. Betula spp. Carpinus spp. Betula nana

Salix spp. Salix spp. Vaccinium sp. Ledum palustre

Salix spp. Salix spp. Salix spp. Salix spp. Salix spp. is confined to the old glacial refugium north
of the Brooks Range in Alaska; further south
it is replaced by the closely related but morpho-
logically distinct C. alaskensis (Ashmead). Similarly C. subpunctata appears to have
given rise to the arctic/alpine C. alaskensis
(Ash. ), and P. galeaformis (Patch) and P.
caudata (Crawf.) appear to have separated
from P. alni. In these cases the exact isolating
mechanisms leading to speciation are obscure. A slightly earlier, but still recent, wave of
migration is indicated by the presence of
pair species within the genera Psylla, Caco-
psylla and Trioza (Table 2). These pair species
are morphologically similar and of undoubted
common origin yet exist as distinct palaearctic
and nearctic forms. In general these species
tend to occur in a latitudinal zone lying just
to the south of that occupied by the circum-
polar species. They are again largely associated

TABLE 2. Palaearctic—nearctic psyllid pair species

 

Palaearctic species

Craspedolepta malachitica (Dahl.) Psylla fusca (Zett.) Cacopsylla zinovjevi (Log.) C. elegantula (Zett.) C. propinqua (Schaef.) CC. arcuata (Log.) C. sibirica (Log. Trioza acutipennis (Zett.) T. urticae (L.)

T. apicalis Forst. T. curvatinervis Forst. Nearctic species

C. vancouverensis (Klyv.) Artemisia
P, floccosa Patch. Alnus

C. sinuata (Crawf.) Salix

C, fibulata (Crawf.) Salix

C. macleani (Hod.) Salix

C. kananaskensis (Hod.) Salix

CC. rufipennis (Hod.) Salix

T. singularis Tut. Alchemitla, Comarum
T. albifrons Crawf. Urtica

T, stygma Tut. Umbelliferae

T. incerta Tut. Salix

 

10

136 I, D. Hodkinson

with the plants of the genera Salix and Alnus,
although species pairs on Alchemilla/Comarum,
Urtica, Umbelliferae and temperate species of
Artemisia also occur. The sequence of events
leading to their separation appears to be that
the parent species crossed through Beringia
when climatic conditions were slightly more
favourable, prior to the Pleistocene, Sub-
sequent climatic deterioration pushed the
species southwards and geographical isolation
leading to speciation resulted,

Craspedolepta vancouyerensis is especially
interesting. It occurs on Artemisia, the same
host as C. malachitica, but it also occurs on
Achillea millefolium, the normal host of C.
nervosa (Férst.) in the palaearctic, The latter
occurs across the palaearctic from Europe to
Eastern Siberia and Japan but has not crossed
into the nearctic. This suggests that disjunct
host-range extension can occur in the absence
of competition from closely related species. A much earlier wave of migration of species
within the genera Aphalara, Craspedolepta
(temperate species), Livia, Cacopsylla and
Trioza appears to be associated with the
somewhat warmer conditions extant in the
Oligocene or Miocene, at which time the
Beringia flora was cool temperate. Most of
these genera are well documented in palae-
arctic Miocene fossil records, The species
groups involved are today generally associated
with deciduous forest vegetation types and are
widely distributed throughout the holarctic
yet still remain coherent groups, This suggests
an older common ancestry followed by
diversification throughout each region. For
instance, the palaearctic Aphalara polygoni
Forst./borealis H-H/calthae (L.)/longicaudata
Sch./sibirica Log. group has its North American
counterpart in the A. loca Cald./A. nubifera
Patch./nigra Cald./eurta Cald./persicaria Cald. complex. Similarly the palaearctic A. exilis
W & M/hedeni End, and A, maculipennis
Low/itadori (Shinji) groups are close to the
nearctic A.rumicus Mally/monticola Hod. and
A, manitobaensis Cald./dentata Cald, groups
respectively. The family Liviidae (one genus
Livia) and the genus Craspedolepta both
contain equivalent species groups with apparent
common ancestry. Fossil evidence suggests
that by the Miocene the genera Cacopsylla
and Trioza had undergone wide divergence
onto a variety of host plants within the

palaearctic and it is reasonable to assume
multiple migration by different groups of
these genera, with subsequent proliferation
in each region. This phenomenon is best
illustrated by the Salix-feeding species in each
genus which have undergone wide diversifi-
cation in each region to form large distinct
species groups which nevertheless retain a
certain common morphological identity, Simi-
larly certain Cacopsylla which feed on Eleag-
naceae show similar divergence. The nearctic
C. magnicauda (Crawf. )/tuthilli (Cald. )/strick-
landi (Cald.) complex is very close to the
palaearctic C. hippophaes (Zett. )/zetterstedti

(Thoms.) group. Cacopsylla tenuata Jensen on Salix and P.

carpinicola Crawf. on Carpinus are two species
which occur only in Japan and the lower
U.S.A. and do not appear to be introduced. These may well be Miocene relict species which
have retained their morphological integrity. Evolutionary links between several groups
of temperate Cacopsylla and Trioza species
within the nearctic and palaearctic faunas
remain obscure but it is reasonable to assume
that their divergence and proliferation probably
occurred during Oligocene—Miocene times
when climatic conditions were favourable for
their development. A slightly earlier migration during a warmer
climatic period, perhaps the late Eocene, is
suggested by the distribution of two genera,
the Pauropsylline Calophya on Rhus (see
earlier) and the Pachypsylline Pachypsylla on
Celtis. These two genera are largely concen-
trated in the warmer temperate forest zones
of the eastern palaearctic and the nearctic
regions south of Canada. The endemic North
American genus Tetragonocephala appears
to be an offshoot of Pachypsylla, Although
the majority of Pachypsylline genera and
species occur in North America, suggesting a
nearctic origin, the most primitive lerp-
forming species Pachypsylla japonica Miyatake
occurs in the east palaearctic. This suggests a
palaearctic origin. The endemic nearctic Euphyllurine genera
Neophyllura and Leurolophus are possible
Eocene derivatives, via a Bering connection,
from the Euphyllurine stem which proliferated
in the east palaearctic. However, for reasons
stated later a trans-Atlantic origin from a
Euphyllura line appears most likely. Thus migration of species associated with
Arcto-Tertiary vegetation types through
Beringia appears to have played a significant
role in the development of the nearctic
psyllid fauna, However, it does not explain
the origin of many endemic nearctic genera
and an alternate origin must be sought. The residual endemic genera belong to just
three groups; firstly the Aphalaroidines
Aphalaroida on Prosopis, Pithecellobium,
Acacia and Mimosa and Paraphalaroida on
Fremontia, secondly the Euphyllurines Neo-
phyllura on Arctostaphylos and Arbutus, and
Leurolophus on Rhus, and thirdly the Ary-
tainines, Purshivora on Purshia, Pexopsylla
on Cercocarpus, Euglyptoneura and Cea-
nothia on Ceanothus amd Amorphicola on
Amorpha. All these genera have their centres
of distribution within the warmer more
southerly vegetation zones of the nearctic,
suggesting that their evolution occurred
within such a region. It is significant to note
that these three psyllid stocks also form the
dominant elements in the faunas of the drier
Mediterranean areas of the Western palaearctic,
Two possible origins can be postulated for
these genera, evolution from a neotropical
element and/or evolution from an early
Laurasian stock. The evidence suggests the
latter. The Aphalaroidini, with the exception of
the primitive Paurocephala and Tainarys
Brethes, do not occur in the neotropical
region and Aphalaroida and Paraphalaroida
have their closest relative in Strophingia, a
west palaearctic Mediterranean/Macaronesian
genus feeding on Ericaceae. This strongly
suggests that these genera can be derived from
a common Laurasian stock which existed
prior to the separation of the land masses in
the mid-Eocene, Certainly Strophingia itself
had differentiated by the Oligocene (Enderlein,
1915). Within the Euphyllurines, Neophyllura
is morphologically closer to the European
Euphyllura than to the east palaearctic genera
centred around Syntomoza or the neotropical
Katecephala, This again suggests a trans-
Atlantic connection. The origin of the nearctic Arytainine
genera is again open to speculation: as possible
candidate stock is available in both South
America and the palaearctic. The evidence,
however, again suggests that the North

Distribution of holarctic psyllid genera 137

American genera are derived from an old
Laurasian Arytainine type stock which pro-
liferated within the region rather than from a
neotropical Euphalerid type ancestor. In its
North American usage the genus Euphalerus
is very broad, containing several only distantly
related species. The true ‘nest making’ Eupha-
lerus centred around E. nidifex Schwarz are
found only in the extreme south of the
nearctic (Russell, 1971), The remaining
species, on both host plant and nymphal
morphology data, are referable to other
groups within the Arytainini and possibly
the Euphyllurini. The Arytainine genera
Euglyptoneura,  Pexopsylla, _ Ceanothia,
Amorphicola and Purshivora form a relatively
close group, most probably derived from a
common stock, These genera are closer to
the old world genera than to extant South
American forms yet have retained more
primitive Arytainine characters (e.g. open
frons, two basal-metatarsal spines) than some
of their more highly derived palaearctic
counterparts, The genus Amorphicola on
Amorpha (Fabaceae) retains a link with the
legume-feeding habit of the postulated
ancestor, whereas the other genera have moved
onto other closely related host plant families,
Pexopsylla and Purshivora onto Rosaceae, and
Euglyptoneura and Ceanothia onto Rham-
naceae. Wide proliferation of the latter two
genera on a large endemic plant genus like
Ceanothus (forty known species) suggests a
long parallel evolutionary association between
the psyllid and its host. Certainly on the
evidence of rates of psyllid evolution from
elsewhere, the 20 million year time scale
obligated by the neotropical origin hypothesis
appears far too short. All other nearctic genera
of neotropical origin have not proliferated
and are usually confined to an extreme
southern distribution. Further evidence for the Laurasian origin
of the endemic genera is provided by the
known history of the Madro-tertiary flora of
the southwestern U.S.A. which began its
development possibly as early as the late
Cretaceous (Raven, 1973). Plant communities
of a Mediterranean type containing the host
plants Acacia, Amorpha, Arctostaphylos,
Ceanothus, Cercocarpus, Fremontia, Pithe-
cellobium, Prosopis and Rhus had already
differentiated by the Miocene (Axelrod,

138 1. D, Hodkinson

1973). In discussing the origin of the Cali-
fornia Mediterranean type vegetation Axelrod
concluded that ‘the close similarities between
the mid-Cretaceous floras of southern Europe
and the central U.S.A, must have been due
to east-west connections which have since
been removed by sea floor spreading’,

It is interesting to speculate that, in the
absence of competition from Cacopsylla
species during the initial stages of their
evolution, the nearctic Arytainines were
able to transfer onto the Rosaceae and Rham-
naceae, the normal Cacopsylla host plants. In conclusion, the development of the
nearctic psyllid fauna can be traced through
several phases. First, the development of
a common fauna with the western palaearctic
followed by the final separation of the two
tegions in the mid-Eocene with the residual
faunas continuing their development in situ. Secondly, successive waves of immigration
through the Beringian region in response to
climatic changes which continued up until
about 13000 years BP. Finally, small-scale
immigration into the southern regions from
the neotropical kingdom subsequent to their
joining in the Miocene (20 million years BP). Discussion

Within the holarctic region the main centres
of psyllid diversification, each with their own
highly characteristic fauna, are the Mediter-
ranean basin, the steppe/deserts of Central
Asia, the east palaearctic forests and the
desert/Californian region of south-western
North America. In contrast, the characteristic
faunas of the deciduous forest zones of the
Old and New World are simpler and share
the same major elements in common. The
faunas of the arctic and boreal forest zones
appear to be derived by reduction from the
deciduous forest fauna and several species
exhibit an holarctic distribution. There is
evidence to indicate penetration of the
southern nearctic by neotropical genera and
the southern palaearctic by Ethiopian and
Oriental genera,

At the generic level there is close corre-
lation between the holarctic floral kingdoms
recognized by Takhtajan (1969) and Good
(1974) and the main centres of psyllid diversi-

fication. This is not surprising in view of the
close association between psyllids and their
host plants. Nevertheless, the insect and plant
data are complementary and thus mutually
supportive. Acknowledgments

I thank Mr I. M. White (Liverpool Poly-
technic) for running data on computer packages
developed in conjunction with his own
research program and Mr D. Hollis and Dr
V. F. Eastop (British Museum) for reading
an earlier draft and restraining my wilder
speculations. References

Axelrod, D.I, (1973) History of the Mediterranean
ecosystems in California. In: Mediterranean type
ecosystems: origin and structure (Ed, by F. di
Castri & H. A. Mooney), pp. 225-283. Springer,
Heidelberg. Beck, C.B. (1976) Origin and early evolution of
angiosperms: a perspective. In: Origin and early
evolution of the angiosperms (Ed, by C. B.
Beck), pp. 1-10. Columbia University Press,
New York. Becker-Migdisova, E.E. (1967) Tertiary Homoptera
of Stavrapol and a method of reconstruction of
continental palaeobiocoenoses, Palaeontology, 10,
$42—533. Becker-Migdisova, E.E, (1973) Systematics of the
Psyllomorpha and the position of the group
within the order Homoptera. In: Dokalady na
dvadzat chetvertom escheghodnom  chtenii
pamyati (Ed. by E. P, Narchik), pp. 90-117. N. A. Kholodovskogo 1971. [In Russian, English
translation, British Lending Library, Boston
Spa.] Caldwell, J.S, (1937) Some North American relatives
of Aphalara calthae Linn, (Hom.—Chermidae). Ann, ent, Soc, Amer. 30, 563-571. Caldwell, J.S, (1938) The jumping plant lice of
Ohio (Homoptera: Chermidae). Bull, Ohio Biol. Survey, 34, (vol. 6), 227-281. Caldwell, J.S. (1944a) Psyllidae from tropical and
semi-tropical America (Homoptera). JI N.Y.
Ent. Soc, §2, 335-340. Caldwell, J.S. (1944b) Notes on Mexican and Central
American Psyllidae. Ohio J. Sci, 44, 57-64. Caldwell, J.S. & Martorell, L.F. (1952) A brief review
of the Psyllidae of Puerto Rico (Homoptera). Ann, ent. Soc. Amer. 44, 603-613. Cox, C.B., Healey, T.N. & Moore, P.D, (1973) Bio-

 

 

geography — an ecological and evolutionary
approach. Blackwell Scientific Publications,
Oxford. Crawford, D.L. (1914) A monograph of the jumping
plant lice of Psyllidae of the New World, Bull. U.S, Nat, Mus, 85, 1-182. Cronquist, A. (1968) The evolution and classification
of flowering plants, Thomas Nelson and Sons,
London,

Dobreanu, E. & Manolache, C. (1962) Homoptera
Psylloidea, Fauna Repub. pop. rom. Ins. 8,
1-376. Eastop, V.F. (1972) Deductions from the present
day host plants of aphids and related insects. Symp. R. ent. Soc. Lond. 6, 157-178. Eastop, V.F. (1978) Diversity of the Sternorrhyncha
within major climatic zones. Symp. R. ent. Soc. Lond, 9, 71-88,

Enderlein, G. (1915) Psyllidologica III. Strophingia
oligocaenica nov. spec., eine fossile Psyllide. Zool. Anz, 45, 246-248. Enderlein, G. (1937) Psyllidae, In: Zur Arthro-
podenwelt Nordwest-Chinas, Xa, Zoology 2, pp. 1-5, Bokforlags Aktiebolaget Thule, Stockholm. Farris, J.S. (1970) Methods for computing Wagner
trees. Syst. Zool, 19, 83-92. Good, R. (1974) The geography of flowering plants. Longman, London. Gower, J.C. & Ross, G.J.S, (1969) Minimum spanning
trees and single linkage cluster analysis. Appl. Stat. 18, 54—64. Haupt, H. (1935) Gleichfluger, Homoptera. Tier. Mittleur, 4, 221-252. Henriksen, K.L. (1939) A revised index of the
insects of Grgnland. Medd. om Grgn, 119,
1-111,

Heslop-Harrison, G. (1948) The subfamily Liviinae
Léw of the Homopterous family Psyllidae —
part 1. General notes on the subfamily. Ann,
Mag. nat. Hist. (12), 1, 284—293. Heslop-Harrison, G. (1949a) The subfamily Liviinae
Léw of the Homopterous family Psyllidae — part
2. Ann, Mag. nat. Hist. (12), 2, 241-270. Heslop-Harrison, G. (1949b) The Aphalaran genera
Aphalara Forster, Craspedolepta Enderlein and
Metaphalara Crawford, with special reference to
the European species of Aphalara; Hemiptera:
Homoptera, family Psyllidae. Ann, Mag. nat. Hist. (12), 2, 782-801. Heslop-Harrison, G. (1949c) Subfamily separation in
the Homopterous Psyllidae I. Ann, Mag. nat
Hist. (12), 2, 802-810. Heslop-Harrison, G. (1951a) The Arytainini of the
subfamily  Psyllinae, _ Hemiptera-Homoptera,
family Psyllidae. Ann. Mag. nat. Hist. (12), 4,
417-462. Heslop-Harrison, G. (1951b) Preliminary notes on
the ancestry, family relations, evolution and
speciation of the Homopterous Psyllidae. 1. Ann, Mag. nat. Hist. (12), 4, 1087-1072. Heslop-Harrison, G. (19S1c) Subfamily separation
in the Homopterous Psyllidae. II. Ann, Mag. nat. Hist. (12), 4, 1-35,

Heslop-Harrison, G. (1952a) The genus Rhinocola
Forster and associated genera of the Aphalarinae. I, Ann, Mag. nat. Hist. (12), 5, 957-974. Heslop-Harrison, G. (1952b) Preliminary notes on

 

 

 

Distribution of holarctic psyllid genera 139

the ancestry, family relations, evolution and
speciation of the Homopterous Psyllidae. Il,
Ann, Mag. nat, Hist, (12), 5, 679-696. Heslop-Harrison, G. (1958) Subfamily separation in
the Homopterous Psyllidae. II (a—c). Ann, Mag. nat, Hist, (13), 1, $61—S79. Heslop-Harrison, G, (1959) Subfamily spearation in
the Homopterous Psyllidae. III (d—e). Ann, Mag. nat, Hist, (13), 2, 157-168. Heslop-Harrison, G. (1961) The Arytainini of the
subfamily Psyllidae. __ Hemiptera-Homoptera,
family Psyllidae — 2. Ann, Mag. nat, Hist. (13),
3, 417-439. Hodkinson, LD. (1974) The biology of the Psyl-
loidea (Homoptera): a review. Bull, ent, Res. 64, 325-339. Hodkinson, 1D. (1976) New psyllids (Insecta:
Homoptera: Psylloidea) from Canada. Zool,
J. Linn, Soc. $8, 321-330. Hodkinson, LD. (1978) The psyllids (Homoptera:
Psylloidea) of Alaska. Syst, Ent. 3, 333-360. Hodkinson, ID. & White, ILM. (1979) Psylloidea. Handbk Ident. Brit, Insects, 5(2), 1-98. Hopkins, D.M. (1967) The Bering land bridge,
Stanford University Press, Stanford, California,

Hutchinson, J. (1964) The genera of flowering
plants, Dicotyledones, Vol. 1. Oxford University
Press. Hutchinson, J. (1967) The genera of flowering
plants. Dicotyledones, Vol. 2. Oxford University
Press. Hutchinson, J. (1969) Evolution and phylogeny of
flowering plants, Academic Press, London. Hutchinson, J. (1973) Families of flowering plants
arranged according to a new system based on
their probable phylogeny, 3rd edn. Clarendon
Press, Oxford,

Jensen, D.D. (1951a) The North American species
of Psylla from willow, with descriptions of new
species and notes on biology (Homoptera:
Psyllidae). Hélgardia, 20, 299-324. Jensen, D.D. (1951b) The Psyllidae of Utah, Utah
State Agricultural College Mimeograph Series,
380, 1-s.

Jensen, D.D. (1957a) Four new species of Arytaina
from California (Homoptera: Psyllidae). J.
Kansas ent, Soc. 30, 89-98. Jensen, D.D. (1957b) A new genus and five new
species of Psyllidae from California and Lower

(Hemiptera). Wasman J, Biol, 15,

  

  

 

Kitching, R.L. (1971) The Psyllidae of British
Columbia with a key to species. J. ent, Soc. Brit, Columb, 68, 36-43. Klimaszewski, S.M. (1964) Studien dber die Syste-
matik der unterordnung Psyllodea, Annis zool. Warsz, 25, 138-227. [In Polish, English trans-
lation, British Lending Library, Boston Spa. |

Klimaszewski, S.M. (1973) The jumping plant lice
or psyllids (Homoptera: Psyllodea) of the
Palaearctic: an annotated check list. Annis zool. Warsz, 30, 155-286. Klimaszewski, S.M. (1975) Psyllodea. Koliszki
(Insecta: Homoptera), Fauna Polski, 3, 1-295. 140 I D. Hodkinson

Klimaszewski, $.M. & Lodos, N, (1977) New infor-
mation about jumping plant lice (Homoptera:
Psylloidea) of Turkey. Ege Universitesi Ziraat
Fakultesi Dergisi, 14, 1-9. Klimaszewski, S.M, & Lodos, N. (1979) Further
data about jumping plant lice of Turkey (Homop-
tera, Psylloidea). Turk. Bit, Kor, Derg, 3, 3-16. Koponen, S. (1978) Notes on herbivorous insects
of the birch in Southern Greenland. Rep. Kevo
Subarctic Res, Stat, 14, 13-17. Kuwayama, S. (1908) Die Psylliden Japan, 1. Trans,
Sapporo nat, Hist. Soc. 2, 149-189. Kuwayama, S. (1910) Die Psylliden Japan. Sapporo nat. Hist. Soc. 3, 53-66. Kuwayama, S. & Miyatake, Y. (1971) Psyllidae from
Shansi, North China (Hemiptera). Mushi, 45,
51-88. Lindberg, H. & Ossiannilsson, F, (1960) Verzeichnis
der Ostfennosckandischen Homoptera: Psyllina. Fauna Fennica, 8, 1-23. Loginova, M.M. (1964) Suborder Psyllinea, In: Keys
to the insects of the European part of the U.S.S.R.
(Ed. by G. Ya Bei Bienko), Vol. 1, pp. 437—
482. Moscow, Zool. Inst. Akad. Nauk SSR. [English translation: Israel Programme for
Scientific Translations, Jerusalem, 1967.] Loginova, M.M. (1972a) Revision of plant lice of
the tribe Pauropsyllini Crawf. (Homoptera,
Psylloidea, Carsidaridae). Ent, Obozr, $1, 837-
853 [in Russian]. Loginova, M.M. (1972b) On the fauna of Psylloidea
(Homoptera) from Morocco. Commentat, Biol. Soc, Sci. Fenn, 47, 1-37. Loginova, M.M. (1974) Systematics of the family
Liviidae (Homoptera: Psylloidea). Zool. Zh. 53, 858-865 [in Russian]. Loginova, M.M, (197Sa) A revision of the genus
Camarotoscena Haupt (Psylloidea: Aphalaridae). Ent, obozr. $4, 43-61 [in Russian]. Loginova, M.M. (1975b) Psyllids of the subfamily
Diaphorininae (Psyllidae, Homoptera. Zool, Zh,
$4, 543—S51 [in Russian]. Loginova, M.M. (1976a) Classification of the sub-
family Arytaininae Crawf. (Homoptera, Psyllidae). I. A review of the genera of the tribe Arytainini. Ent, obozr. 55, 589—601 [in Russian]. Loginova, M.M. (1976b) Psyllids (Psylloidea,
Homoptera) of the Canary Islands and Madeira. Commentat. Biol. Soc. Sci. Fenn, 81, 1-37. Loginova, M.M. (1976c) Psyllids of the tribe Pachy-
psylloidini, Zool, Zh, $5, 612-614

Loginova, M.M. (1977) The classification of the sub-
family Arytaininae Crawf. (Homoptera, Psyl-
lidae). I. Review of the tribe Cyamophilini. Ent. obozr, $6, 577-587 |in Russian]. Loginova, M.M. (1978a) New species in psyllid
(Homoptera: Psylloidea). Trudy Zool Inst,
Leningr. 61, 30-123 [in Russian]. Loginova, M.M. (1978b) Review of the genus Cail-
lardia Bergevin (Homoptera: Aphalaridae) with
descriptions of new species. Trudy Zool. Inst.,
Leningr. 71, 6-22 [in Russian |. Mathur, R.N. (1975) Psyllidae of the Indian sub-
continent, Indian Council of Agricultural Re-
search, New Delhi. Trans

 

   

Miyatake, Y. (1963) A revision of the subfamily
Psyllinae from Japan, I. (Hemiptera: Psyllidae). J. Fac. Agric, Kyushu Univ, 12, 323-357. Miyatake, Y. (1964) A revision of the subfamily
Psyllinae from Japan, II. (Hemiptera: Psyllidae). J. Fac. Agric, Kyushu Univ, 13, 1-37. Miyatake, Y. (1969) On the Psyllidae from Niigata
Prefecture, North Honshu, Japan (Hemiptera) I. Bull. Osaka Mus, nat. Hist, 22, 63-83. Miyatake, Y. (1973) Notes on the genus Euphalerus
of Japan with description of a new species
(Homoptera: Psyllidae). Bull, Osaka Mus. nat,
Hist, 27, 23-28,

Miyatake, Y. (1974) A new species of Homotoma
from NE New Guinea (Homoptera: Psyllidae). Bull. Osaka Mus, nat. Hist, 28, 17-21. Miyatake, Y. (1978) Notes on the genus Epitrioza
of Japan, with descriptions of two new species
(Homoptera: Psyllidae). Bull. Osaka Mus. nat,
Hist, 31,93-111. Ossiannilson, F. (1952) Catalogus insectorum
Sueciae. XII, Hemiptera, Homoptera, Psylloidea,
Opusc. Entomol, 17, 193-200. Ramirez-Gomez, C. (1956a) Los psilidos di Espana. Boin, R. Soc, esp. Hist, nat, $3, 151—219. Ramirez-Gomez, C. (1956b) Los psilidos di Espana,
Boln. R, Soe. esp. Hist. nat, $4, 63—106. Ramirez-Gomez, C, (1960) Los psilidos di Espana. Boin, R. Soc. esp. Hist, nat, §7,4—87. Raven, P.H. (1973) The evolution of Mediterranean
floras, In: Mediterranean type ecosystems: origin
and structure (Ed. by F. diCastri& H. A. Mooney),
pp. 213—224. Springer, Heidelberg. Russell, L.M. (1971) Notes on Euphalerus nidifex
Schwarz and related nest-making _psyllids
(Homoptera: Psyllidae). Fla Ent. $4, 3-12. Russell, L.M. (1973) A list of the species of Craspe-
dolepta Enderlein recorded from North America
(Homoptera: Psyllidae: Aphalaridae). J. Wash,
Acad. Sci. 63, 156-159. Samy, O. (1972) The psyllids of Egypt. Bull. ent. Soc. Egypt. $6, 437—480. Schaefer, H.A. (1949) Beitriige sur Kenntnis der
Psylliden der Schweiz. Mitt. Schweiz, ent. Ges. 22, 1-96. Schuster, R.F. (1976) Plate tectonics and its bearing
on the geographical origin and dispersal of angio-
sperms. In: Origin and early evolution of the
angiosperms (Ed. by C. B. Beck), pp. 48-138. Columbia University Press, New York,

Smith, G.A., Briden, J.C. & Drewry, G.E. (1973)
Phanerozoic world maps. Special Papers in
Palaeontology, 12, 1-42. ‘kland, E.H. (1938) The Chermidae (Homoptera)
of Alberta. Can. Ent, 70, 200-206. Strickland, E.H. (1939) Further notes on Psyllidae
taken in Alberta (Homoptera). Can, Ent. 71,
212-215. Takhtajan, A. (1969) Flowering plants — origin and
dispersal, Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh,

Tuthill, L.D. (1943) The psyllids of North America
north of Mexico (Psyllidae: Homoptera) (Sub-
families Psyllinae and Triozinae), Jowa St, Coll,
J. Sci. 17, 443-660,

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Tuthill, L.D. (1944) Contributions to the knowledge
of the Psyllidae of Mexico. J. Kansas ent. Soc. 17, 143-159. Tuthill, L.D. (1945) Contributions to the knowledge
of the Psyllidae of Mexico. J. Kansas ent. Soc,

18, 1-29. Tuthill, L.D. (1950) Contributions to the knowledge

Distribution of holarctic psyllid genera 141

of the Psyllidae of Mexico. J. Kansas ent, Soc. 23, 52-62. Vondracek, K. (1957) Mery Psylloidea. Fauna
CSR, 9, 1-431. Willis, J.G, (1973) Dictionary of the flowering plants
and ferns, 8th edn, Cambridge University Press. APPENDIX 1. The classification, worldwide distribution and host-plants of the holarctic psyllid genera. Key: P — Palaearctic, E — Ethiopian,
N — Nearctic, NO — Neotropical, O — Oriental, A — Austro-Oriental, PN — Polynesian. * Indicates monobasic genera. SUPER-FAMILY PSYLLOIDEA Burm. Family Subfamily Tribe Genus Distribution Host plants
APHALARIDAE —_Aphalaroidinae Vond. Rhinocolini Vond. * Rhinocola Forst. P Acer (Aceraceae)
Euphyllurini BM. Euphyllura Forst. P,E,O Olea, Phillyrea (Oleaceae)
* Syntomoza Enderl. Pp Myroxylon (Fabaceae)
* Megadicrania Log. P ? * Syringilla Log. Pp ‘Syringa (Oleaceae)
* Ligustrinia Log. P Ligustrum (Oleaceae)
Neophyllura Log. N Arctostaphylos, Arbutus (Ericaceae)
* Leurolophus Tut. N Rhus (Anacardiaceae)
Katecephala Crawf. N,NO ? Agonoscena Enderl. P,E,O Peganum, Ruta, Pistacia
(Zygophyllaceae, Rutaceae,
Anacardiaceae)
Aphorma Hod. P 2
Strophingia Enderl. P Calluna, Erica (Ericaceae)
Camarotoscena Enderl. P, E Populus (Salicaceae)

* Lisronia
Aphalaroida Crawf. P Cistus (Cistaceae)
N Prosopis, Pithecellobium, Acacia,
Mimosa (Mimosaceae)
Heteropsylla Crawf. N.NO Mimosa, Pithecellobium, Prosopis,
Acacia, Quassia (Mimosaceae)
N

* Paraphalaroida Log. Fremontia (Bombaceae)

Paurocephala Crawf. P,E,O,NO, Ficus (Moraceae)
A, PN
Pachypsyllodini Log. Pachypsylloides Bergev. P Calligonum (Polygonaceae)
Acaerus Log. P Calligonum (Polygonaceae)
Eremopsylloides Log. Pp Calligonum (Polygonaceae)
Diaphorinini Vond. Diaphorina Low P,O,E,A Lycium, Convolvulus, Zygophyllum,

Clutia, Salvadora (Solanaceae,
Convolvulaceae, Zygophyllaceae,
Euphorbiaceae, Salvadoraceae)

real

uosulyPoH ‘dT

LIVIIDAE
PSYLLIDAE

Aphalarinae Low

Ciriacreminae End. Arytaininae Crawf,

Aphalarini Vond. Xenaphalarini Log. Caillardiini Log. Colposceniini Log. Anomoneurini B.M. Arytainini Vond. Aphalara Férst. Craspedolepta Enderl. Brachystetha Log. * Xanioptera Ender. Gyropsylla Breth.? Epheloscyta Log. Xenaphalara Log. Eurotica Log. Caillardia Bergev. * Eumetoecus Log. Rhodoclanis Log. Rhombaphalara Log. Colposcenia Enderl. Crastina Log. Livia Ltr. Anomoneura Schwarz

Alloeoneura Low
Amblyrhina Low
Arytaina Forst. sensu
stricto
* Astragilita Log. Floria Low

Livilla Curt. Arytainilla Log. Cyamophila Log. Acizzia H.H. * Pseudacanthopsylla Samy
Euglyptoneura HH
Purshivora HH
Amorphicola H-H
Ceanothia H-H

* Pexopsylla Jensen

~

wee Ue
Zz mm

we

wo

ZAAZZw3

°°

E.0,A

Polygonum, Rumex, Caltha
(Polygonaceae, Helleboraceae)
Asteraceae and Onagraceae,
several genera

Nitraria (Zygophyllaceae)
Artemisia (Asteraceae)

Mex (Aquifoleaceae)
Ceratocarpus (Chenopodiaceae)
Eurotia (Chenopodiaceae)

Anabasis, Haloxylon (Chenopodiaceae)
Kochia, Camphorosoma
(Chenopodiaceae)

Suaeda, Salsola, Pterosimonia, Salicornia
(Chenopodiaceae)

Halocnemum (Chenopodiaceae)

Tamarix (Tamaricaceae)
Myricaria, Tamarix (Tamaricaceae)

Carex, Juncus (Cyperaceae, Juncaceae)
Morus (Moraceae)

Cytisus (Fabaceae)

Genista (Fabaceae)

Cytisus, Adenocarpus, Genista
(Fabaceae)

Astragalus (Fabaceae)

Genista, Retama, Cytisus, Ulex,
Laburnum (Fabaceae)

Ulex, Genista (Fabaceae)
Cytisus, Genista (Fabaceae)
Caranga, Glycyrrhiza, Astragalus
(Fabaceae)

Acacia, Albizia (Mimosaceae)
Retama (Fabaceae)

Ceanothus (Rhamnaceae)
Purshia (Rosaceae)

Amorpha (Fabaceae)
Ceanothus (Rhamnaceae)
Cercocarpus (Rosaceae)

puauas pyydsd 14040104 fo uounquasiq

eer

SUPER-FAMILY PSYLLOIDEA Burm, (cont.) Family Subfamily Tribe Genus Distribution Host plants
Euphalerini B.M. Euphalerus Schwarz P,N,O,A,E ‘In nearetic Piscidia (Fabaceae)
NO, PN In palaearctic Gleditsia & Caesalpina
(Caesalpiniaceae)
Metapysila Kuw. P Gleditsia (Caesalpiniaceae)
Psyllopsiini B.M. Psyliopsis Low P Fraxinus (Oleaceae)
Pachypsyllini B.M. Pachypsylia Riley N,P,O Celtis (Ulmaceae)
* Tetragonocephala Crawf. N ? Psyllinae Low Psyllini BLM. Psylla Geoft. P,N,O Alnus, Betula (Betulaceae)
Cacopsylla Oss. P,N,O Many families incl. Rosaceae,
Gensu Klimaszewski, Rhamnaceae, Salicaceae, etc. 1978)
* Spanioneura Forst. P,O Buxus (Buxaceae)
CARSIDARIDAE — Homotominae B.M. Homotomini H.H. Homotoma Guerin P,O,A Ficus (Moraceae)
Pauropsyllinae Crawf. Pauropsyllini Vond. Pauropsylla Rubs. P,E,O,E Ficus (Moraceae)
* Togepsylla Kuw. P,O Litsea (Lauraceae)
Calophyini Log. Calophya Low P,A,O,N,NO — Rhus (Anacardiaceae)
TRIOZIDAE Triozinae Low Triozini BM. Egeirotrioza Bos, P,O Populus (Salicaceae)
Trioza Férst. sensu lato P, N, ete. Several plant families, esp. Asteraceae, Salicaceae, etc. Paratrioza Crawt. P/N Lycium, Lavatera, Solanum
(Solanaceae, Malvaceae)
Eryngiofaga Klim. P Eryngium (Apiaceae)
Epitrioza Kuw. P Eleagnus (Eleagnaceae)
Kuwayama Crawf. N,NO,O,PN —_Lavatera (Malvaceae) & Asteraceae
Ceropsyla Riley N,NO,A,O Sideroxylon, Olmediella, Ocotea, Persea
(Sapotaceae, Lauraceae)
* Hemitrioza Crawf. N Sonchus (Asteraceae)
Eutriozini B.M. Eutrioza Log. P Pinus? Trichochermes Kirk. P,O,E Rhamnus, Frangula (Rhamnaceae)
Bactericerini H.H. Bactericera Put. P Artemisia (Asteraceae)
Triozid /Carsidarid genera not placed in tribes
* Engytatoneura Log. P 2
Rhinopsylla Riley N,NO,O Persicaria (Polygonaceae)
Leuronota Crawf. N,NO,O,PN _Celtis (Ulmaceae)
* Levidea Tut. N Parthenium (Asteraceae)
* Metatrioza Tut. N,NO 2
Neotriozella Crawf. N,A 2

 

vl

uosurypoH “GT

145

Distribution of holarctic psyllid genera

d floral kingdoms

APPENDIX 2. Basic distribution matrix of the holarctic psyllid genera across the eighteen
recognize

 

Teoidosnqns -g-s oy9380N,

18
oO
°
°
oO
°
0
°
1
0
oO
o
°
0

 

Buse ONIN | 1 | CoOCCCOO HHO OCS
neseponowen | © | coccon COC CSCO
samead opoavay | & | COCCOMOCHAOCCO

ysasogutes oyoeg HoIwaN | ¢ | COC DCCOSH=COCOCS
suyeyunow oyo1vey | m | COC CCHOHCOOCCS
3s210j “pep “gonsen | a | coo CoH OCHO OC COS

¥S040} "1U09 OHOIGON,

rat
°
oO
o
°
°
0
°
1
°
o
oO
°
oO

purjusery

10
oO
0
°
0
0
°
0
°
°
°
°
°
oO

vapuny oposeaN

9
°
°
°
°
°
oO
0
1
0
0
o
o
°

yesep/addeys onoseaereg

8
1
0
1
°
oO
oO
°
1
oO
1
°
0
1

uesouosny | | conc ooo CO OnWO

ueouenoypew | o | a-~a-aconconno
ysoJ05 poxnus opomoned "a | | coccoo~ncoCCS
ys0203 “proep onoswavred "M | ¢ | conan ocH OWA HO
ys003 “spuoo oHoxevped "a | m | cooCoCOHOSC COO
ySo10§ “suoo onoreawed "Mm | a | CooCoCOHCOCOOS

vupuny onoseavteg | «| cocccoo-cocce]

 

 

Bactericera

f223i 3. s
g8222.3 228
zqgeseiesess
Ssssesceee ds
Sagsee ee
222 eg2e 22992

 

0

Eremopsylloides

Brachystetha
Cacopsyila
Caillardia
Calophya
Camarotoscena
Ceanothia
Ceropsylla
Colposcenia
Craspedolepta
Crastina
Cyamophila
Diaphorina
Egeirotrioza
Engytatoneura
Epheloscyta
Epitrioza
Eryingiofaga
Euglyptoneura
Eumetoecus
Euphyllura
Eurotica
Eutrioza
Gyropsylla
Hemitrioza
Heteropsylla
Homotoma
Katecephala
Kuwayama
Leurolophus
Leuronota

Euphalerus
Floria

I. D. Hodkinson

146

APPENDIX 2.

 

reidongns “4°

 

9I0IN,
PYWOSHED 220eaN,
4280p 9119300N

somesd 919382N

   

yos0jures d1j19eg 2199180N
suyejunow 9n2s0aN

78940) "‘pPep "gq W9780N
382105 "y}u09 9H;22aN
purjuoar

eapuny onoseen,
yuosop/oddays aposeanjed
uvpsouosEyy

ueauesan pay,

389J0J poxyw djoseaR]ed “y
38210} “ppep oyosvoRTed “yy
4¥S9I0J “JHUOD d1joIBoRyEd “gq
ysoxoy “yu09 onomoryed “M

vapuny oposeaRfed

 

9 10 11 12 13 14 18 16 17 18

8

 

Levidea

Ligustrinia
Lisronia

Livi

Livilla

Megadicrania
Metapsylla
Metatrioza
Neophyllura
Neotriozella

Pachypsylla

°
0

Pachypsylloides
Paraphalaroida

Paratrioza

Paurocephala
Pauropsylla
Pexopsylla

oO

Pseudacanthopsylla

Psylla

Psyllopsis
Purshivora

Rhinocola

 

 

Rhodoclanis

°

Rhombaphalara
Spanioneura

Strophingia

Syntomoza
Syringilla

°

Tetragonocephala

Togepsylla

Trichochermes

Trioza

Xanioptera

Xenaphalara

2 8 12 14 10 17 18 16 10

4

5 24 20 36 12 32

Total

 

Journal of Biogeography (1980) 7, 414

Corrigendum

Hodkinson, I.D. (1980) Present-day distri-
bution patterns of the holarctic Psylloidea
(Homoptera: Insecta) with _ particular
reference to the origin of the nearctic
fauna. J. Biogeogr. 7, 127-146. The printers and publishers regret that a
correction line was misplaced: in Appendix 2
(page 145) the third and fourth entries should
read ‘Agonoscena’ and ‘Alloeoneura’.