Chronic

In 2006, the presence of the plum psylla (Cacopsylla
pruni), vector of the chlorotic leafroll of apricot
tier (ESFY), was verified by knocking on apricot-
third, plum trees and blackthorn trees in nineteen places
distributed throughout German-speaking Switzerland. On the memes
trees, samples of branches were taken at
randomly to detect possible symptoms of ESFY. Of the forty samples analyzed, only one was positive.
tif, although the vector was detected at all sites
examined. I] therefore seems that German-speaking Switzerland is
(still) spared by the ESFY. Fifty-seven nurseries
Swiss were also checked, of which 86% were
ESFY-free. Fig. 1. Symptoms of ESFY on apricot: yellowing (chlorosis)
and leaf curling (@ right); left: branch of a tree
healthy (photo M. Biinter, ACW). Apricot chlorotic leafroll (ECA) (or ESFY in
English for European stone fruit yellows) is also ap-
peeled Apricot chlorotic Leafroll, apricot dieback,
Europiiische Steinobst-Vergilbungskrankheit, chlorotisches
Blattrollen der Aprikosen, infected Aprikosensterben or De-
albicocco period. It is a quarantine disease.
taine whose pathogen is a phytoplasma. These organisms
are very small bacteria without a cell wall that live
in the phlo&me (conductive tissue used to transport
nutrients from the leaves to the roots) of
plants. Phytoplasmas can only proliferate in
living plant material and are unable to move. To be transmitted from an infected plant to a healthy plant,
phytoplasmas therefore need a vector. Swiss magazine Vitic. Arbor, Hortic. Flight. 99 (6):391-393, 2007

 

LESFY is a quarantine disease and must therefore
notified to the Cantonal Phytosanitary Service
concerning. The essential:

Symptoms: Chlorotic leaf curl
Necrotic phloema

Abnormalities in the development of
fruits

Dieback of branches and trees

whole

Vegetative propagation

Plum psyllid (Cacopsylla pruni)
Propagation by root contact
Detect sick subjects and de-
sow

Buy certified plants

Transmission:

Measures:

 

 

 

All Prunus species are susceptible to ESFY, but
it is on the apricot tree (Prunus armeniaca), the Japanese plum tree
(P. salicina), peach and nectarine (P. persica), mirabel-
bind (P. domestica spp. syriaca) and bitter almond (P. amyg-
dalus amara) that it causes the most economic damage. the
plum (P. domestica) is known to be tolerant and does not show any
symptom, the cherry tree (P. avium) is even considered
wearing. But all species of Prunus, including those
who show no symptoms, can serve as a source of
this of infection and spread. Depending on the variety, rootstock and growing conditions,
apricot chlorotic leafroll symptoms
(ESFY) take different forms. leaf curling
yellowed (chlorotic) is the most common symptom
observed here (fig.1), it is associated with phloem necrosis
(fig. 2). Symptoms worsen as the season progresses
progress and can go as far as drying out and wasting away.

   

Fig. 2. Symptom of ESFY on an apricot branch: phlo&me
necrotic (photo M.-E. Ramel, ACW). 391

 

Fig. 3. Symptom of ESFY: partial dieback of branches or
trees (other causes come into consideration, such as frost or
cryptogamic diseases) (photo P. Gugerli, ACW). seeding of branches or entire trees (Fig. 3). The fruits are
spindly, partially shriveled and browned, lackluster and fall off
early from the tree. Phytoplasmas are resistant to any curative treatment, even
antibiotics effective against bacteria remain without
effect on phytoplasmas. The only remedy is to destroy
infected plant material. Any form of vegetative propagation by man of
infected plants can spread ESFY. In addition, phyto-
plasmas can be spread by insects that feed on
phloem and by root contact of a tree has
Pautre (as in nurseries). So far, the size
trees is not considered a means of transmission
session of the ESFY. Next to man, Cacopsylla pruni (fig. 4) has been identified
as a vector of lESFY. When it feeds on a plant
affected, it can absorb phytoplasmas and spread them on
healthy plants. According to the studies of Schaub and Monne-
ron (2003), it overwinters as a winged adult on conifers
and settles & from March on the species of Prunus (host
main) to reproduce there, with only one generation per
year. From March to May, winged adults are likely to
disseminate phytoplasmas in Prunus orchards. The
eggs and larvae which develop from April to May on these
host plants are wingless and therefore do not show
danger at this stage. Furthermore, the psyllid is totally in-
offensive to fruit trees of Prunus species on
which he settles. Manifestation and proliferation
ESFY and psyllid

Situation in Europe

Currently, ESFY is one of the diseases that causes
more damage to 4 core fruit trees, especially
Vapricotier and peach. LESFY has already detected in the
most European countries. Major producing regions
apricots from countries such as Germany, France, Greece,
Italy, Austria, Romania, Spain and the former Yugoslavia
lives are particularly affected by ESFY, according to data
births listed by EPPO on quarantine diseases. 392

Fig. 4. Plum psyllid Cacopsylla pruni (photo L. Schaub, ACW). Situation in French-speaking Switzerland

Researchers from Agroscope Changins-Widenswil ACW have
been able to demonstrate in the context of their previous studies
(Ramel et al., 2001) that ESFY was widespread in Switzerland
French-speaking part of Switzerland, especially on Valais apricot trees but also elsewhere
theirs, and that the psyllid was present everywhere in French-speaking Switzerland
on all species of Prunus. Study in German-speaking Switzerland in 2006

Apricot production also increasing in Switzerland
the German-speaking part of the country, there is growing concern about this disease. The mode of dissemination of ESFY and that of the psyllid
were, however, little known until now in these regions. This is why the 4 Core Tree Forum has proposed to
carry out a study on this topic which was given priority in 2006. From the winter of 2005-2006, ACW researchers from the site of
Wiidenswil have systematically searched for symptoms
and found isolated subjects with ESFY, usually
in recent plantations and almost exclusively on
apricot trees and imported Japanese plum trees. Plants
patients were immediately destroyed. To deepen its knowledge, ACW conducted the main
time and in the summer of 2006 a large-scale observation of ver-
gers and hedges in nineteen different places. Fifteen plan-
stations of apricot trees, nine of plum trees, sixteen of blackthorn trees
(Prunus spinosa) and a widespread wild variety of Prunus
in the hedges & the edge of the forests have thus been examined
in the Psyllid and Disease Screening Project. The psyllids were collected by striking from March to May 4. The
insects were present at all sites and on all three areas.
spaces of Prunus (fig. 5). However, the vector alone is not
dangerous as long as a region is unscathed. To check for the presence of ESFY on the trees, samples
samples of plant material were randomly sampled from ten
trees in each orchard. Molecular and genetic analyzes
ticks performed in the laboratory revealed a single sample
of positive apricot out of forty examined in total; all the
plum and prickly plum trees were free of ESFY. But a systematic search carried out in the vicinity
of an affected apricot orchard in the canton of Thurgau

 

 

 

Fig. 5. Dissemination of the psyllid C. pruni [>
and ESFY phytoplasma in some areas
regions of French-speaking Switzerland, in the orchards
wapricot and plum trees, as well as on the
blackthorns in the hedges and at the edge of
forests of nineteen sites studied in Switzerland
Germanic. allowed to detect an old plum tree
affected by ESFY in a family garden
lial. The disease had probably been
transmitted by C. pruni. Because of this sick plum tree,
traces of ESFY were sought on
twenty-five samples of plums in-
sent by the cantons of AG, BL, TG,
SG and ZH, 4 causes of malformations
of unknown origin. None of these
samples was ESFY positive. These results show that Switzerland
can be generally
considered ESFY-free,
but new diseased subjects are a
foresee, especially in the new ver-
gers planted with imported material. Monitoring in French-speaking Switzerland 1999-2002
@VS. pruniet ESFY certified

Monitoring in German-speaking Switzerland in 2006
© C. pruniatte
@ ESFY attested

 

 

Situation in Swiss nurseries

In June 2006, just before the annual passport control
phytosanitary products in nurseries, all farms
tion declared as producing Prunus have &
me in writing from the ESFY control. The controllers of Con-
cerplant and Agroscope then collected samples. Five & 10% of apricot trees and some peach and nectari-
niers were tested & blinded in each nursery. The
typical symptoms of ESFY (fig. 1 and 2) appear
usually no earlier than three years in young trees. In all, more than 2000 samples reached the laboratory.
tory of ACW, which has performed more than 200 genetic and
molecular. LESFY was detected in seven nurseries (table 1) on the
following varieties:

© apricot: Bergeron, Hargrand, sweet apricot from Holub,
Jumbo Cot, Luizet, Abricot Royal and selection number;

@ fishing: Beautiful of the Red Cross. Two of the nurseries ott' ESFY was present had purchased
their third trees. In the nurseries concerned, all
sick subjects were destroyed and it was recommended to
farms to adopt certification standards for their
production. In Switzerland, the certification of fruit trees has
kernel is in progress. Table 1. ESFY infestation in pepii
in 2006. Dee
D
studies including affected
French-speaking Switzerland and Ticino 13 4
German-speaking Switzerland 44 4

 

 

 

 

Swiss magazine Vitic. Arbor, Hortic. Flight. 99 (6):391-393, 2007

Assessment and measures

LESFY being rebellious 4 any treatment, the only way to fight
is to avoid transmission (by human beings through the
vegetative propagation with infected material or by the vector
tor). Because of its biological cycle, vector control
turns out to be difficult. The only really effective way is 4 re-
remove diseased trees and destroy them, then plant young ones
plants free of phytoplasmas. The best guarantee against
The infestation of plant material consists of certifying trees
fruit trees. If this precautionary rule is systematically applied
Therefore, our apricot crops should be protected from ESFY. Thanks

We thank the teams of Maja Hilber-Bodmer and San-
tiago Schiirer for genetic and molecular analyzes
carried out in their laboratories, the Concert inspectors
plant Bea Buchmann and Pierre-Henri Crausaz for collecting
samples in nurseries, cantonal stations
of arboriculture for the taking of samples in the
production facilities, as well as all nurseries and
all 8 core fruit growers for their precious support
here. Finally, we thank Alfred Klay, OFAG, for his
informed information and for reading the manuscript. Bibliography

Ramel M.-E., Gugerli P., Bourquin L., De Meyer J. & Schaub L., 2001. That-
characterization of chlorotic leafroll of apricot and detection of
ESFY phytoplasma in French-speaking Switzerland. Swiss journal Vitic., Arboric.,
Hortic. 33 (5), 279-286. Schaub L. & Monneron A., 2003. Cacopsylla pruni phenology, vector
of the chlorotic rolling up of the apricot tree. Swiss journal Vitic., Arboric.,
Hortic. 35 (2), 123-126. EPPO (European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization), 1997. Data Sheets on Quarantine Pests: Apricot chlorotic leafroll phytoplasma. {http://www.eppo.org/QUARANTINE/bacteria/European_stone_fruit/PH
YPPR_ds.pdf}

Ramel M.-E., Gugerli P. & Schaub L., 2003. Chlorotic coiling of
apricot tree. Swiss review Vitic., Arboric., Hortic. 35 (1), 48-49. Thekla Ackermann, Heinrich Héhn and Markus Biinter, ACW
Email: markus.buenter@acw.admin.ch

393