Ecology and Epidemiology

Efficient Transmission of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum

’

Is Delayed by Eight Months Due to a Long Latency
in Its Host-Alternating Vector

Gaél Thébaud, Michel Yvon, Rémi Alary, Nicolas Sauvion, and Gérard Labonne

First, second, fourth, and fifth authors: Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), UMR BGPI, CIRAD TA A-54/K, Campus
international de Baillarguet, 34398 Montpellier cedex 5, France; and third author: INRA, UMR DAP, 2 Place Viala, 34060 Montpellier

cedex 1, France. Accepted for publication 5 December 2008. ABSTRACT

Thébaud, G., Yvon, M., Alary, R., Sauvion, N., and Labonne, G. 2009. Efficient transmission of *Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ is delayed
by eight months due to a long latency in its host-alternating vector. Phytopathology 99:265-273. Understanding at which spatiotemporal scale a disease causes signifi-
cant secondary spread has both theoretical and practical implications. We
investigated this issue in the case of European stone fruit yellows (ESFY),
a quarantine vector-borne phytoplasma disease of Prunus trees. Our work
was focused on the processes underlying disease spread: the interplay
between the life cycles of the pathogen (‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
prunorum’) and of the vector (Cacopsylla pruni). We demonstrated ex-
perimentally that C. pruni has only one generation per year and we
showed that, at least in southeastern France, C. pruni migrates between
conifers in mountainous regions (where it overwinters) and Prunus spp. at
lower altitude (where it breeds). In acquisition-inoculation experiments
performed with C. pruni over its period of presence on Prunus spp., both

     

immature and mature C. pruni were hardly infectious (0.6%) despite
effective phytoplasma acquisition and multiplication, We demonstrated
that most immature vectors born on infected plants reach their maximum
phytoplasma load (10’ genomes per insect) only after migrating to
conifers and that, after a life-long retention of the phytoplasma, their
transmission efficiency was very high (60%) at the end of winter (when
they migrate back to their Prunus host). Thus, most transmissions occur
only after an effective latency of 8 months, following vector migrations
and overwintering on conifers in mountainous regions. From this
transmission cycle, we can infer that local secondary spread of ESFY in
apricot orchards is marginal, and recommend that disease management
strategies take more into account the processes occurring at a regional
scale, including the role of wild Prunus spp. in ESFY epidemics. Additional keywords: blackthor, monocyclic, polycyclic, polyetic, pri-
mary infection, Prunus spinosa, psyllid, real-time PCR. The concepts of primary and secondary infections have both
theoretical and practical implications in epidemiology. Primary
infections originate from outside a given host population, whereas
secondary infections originate from within it. On this basis, dis-
eases are commonly classified as monocyclic (where only pri-
mary infections occur during one growing season of the host) or
polycyclic (where an infected plant can give rise to further
infections within the same growing season) (3,42). Both types
exhibit different spatiotemporal patterns of spread (3,15,39) that
have to be taken into account in the definition of relevant control
strategies. Vector-borne diseases are generally polycyclic within a
year and sometimes between years; thus, in perennial crops, the
roguing of infected plants is often suggested to prevent an expo-
nential increase in disease incidence. Implementing or enforcing
this control method can be economically and socially costly. Thus, it is desirable to make sure that roguing is likely to be
efficient, which requires identifying the spatial and temporal
scales at which secondary transmissions can occur. However, such
crucial biological information is lacking for a number of diseases,
including European stone fruit yellows (ESFY). ESFY is a quarantine disease affecting mainly apricot (Prunus
armeniaca) and Japanese plum (P. salicina) orchards in Europe

Corresponding author: G. Thébaud; E-mail address: thebaud @supagro.inra.fr

 

doi:10.1094/PHYTO-99-3-0265

This article is in the public domain and not copyrightable. It may be freely
printed with customary crediting of the source. The American Phytopathological
Society, 2009. (23). The disease can be graft- or vector-transmitted to most
Prunus species (5,27); however, different species, cultivars, and
rootstocks have a different susceptibility (4,19,40). ESFY is caused
by a phytoplasma (28) for which the name ‘Candidatus Phyto-
plasma prunorum’ has been proposed (36). The disease is charac-
terized by various physiological disorders (9,27): short internodes,
early leafing, leaf rolling, and chlorosis, late and scarce flowering,
premature fruit fall, increased frost sensitivity and, depending on
weather conditions, sudden or slow tree death. Because of the
‘obvious economic consequences of these symptoms, ESFY is
recorded as a quarantine disease by the main national and inter-
national organizations in charge of plant protection. Up to now, only one insect species has been identified as a
vector for ‘Ca. P. prunorum’: Cacopsylla pruni (8). In the scarce
entomological records concerning this psyllid, it is described as a
European and Middle-Asiatic univoltine species: after winter, the
mature (dark-winged) adults breed on blackthorn (P. spinosa)
where five larval instars can be observed, and the subsequent
immature (light-colored) adults disappear from Prunus spp. at the
beginning of the summer; during the rest of the year this species
is reported mainly on conifers (16,21,31). The temporal dynamics
of C. pruni population density has been assessed on different
Prunus hosts, showing the synchronous presence of the psyllid on
different Prunus spp. from the beginning of February to the end
of June or July in all the French areas where C. pruni has been
searched (20). This multihost multisite field survey and measures
of mortality and fecundity in experimental conditions (5) pro-
vided a congruent hierarchy of host preference for C. pruni:
blackthorn > plum (European, Japanese, myrobalan) >> apricot >

 

Vol. 99, No. 3, 2009 265

peach > almond >> cherry. In contrast, nothing is known about
the long period spent by C. pruni on conifers, and the biological
cycle of the species has never been completed in controlled
conditions; thus, the hypotheses regarding C. pruni life cycle still
have to be tested. During recent years, several aspects of the transmission proper-
ties of ESFY by its vector have been revealed. ESFY-positive C.
pruni have been found in several countries: Italy (8), France (18),
Spain (22), Switzerland (33), Czech Republic (12), and Bosnia
Herzegovina (10). ESFY-positive and infectious C. pruni have
been detected among both immature and mature adults sampled
from natural populations (6). It has been shown that ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ is transmitted in a persistent manner, with minimum
acquisition, latency, and inoculation periods of 2 to 4 days, 2 to
3 weeks, and I to 2 days, respectively (7). Although these are
minimum times and not median times, such biological features
generally lead to local secondary spread and polycyclic diseases
(or polyetic, for long latent periods in perennial piants), However,
three crucial points for the epidemiology of ESFY remain
unclear; (i) the transmission efficiency of immature vectors before
leaving their Prunus hosts, (ii) the persistence and infectivity of
the phytoplasma until the end of the period spent by the vector on
conifers, and (iii) whether a healthy adult can acquire the phyto-
plasma after migrating back on Prunus spp. and transmit it before
the end of its life. These three unresolved points determine whether
transmission from infected to healthy plants occurs mainly within
or between years; depending on the distances involved in C. pruni
biannual host alternations, these points may also define the basic
spatial scale of ESFY epidemics, which is of major concern to
control strategies. In the work presented here, our aim was to improve the
knowledge of ESFY epidemiology by confronting the biology of
the vector C. pruni with the biology of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ trans-
mission. More specifically, we demonstrate experimentally the
life cycle of C. pruni, and assess the possibility for the psyllid to
complete the acquisition-latency-inoculation’ sequence within
each period spent on Prunus spp. by comparing transmission
experiments and phytoplasma load in the vector throughout its
lifetime. MATERIALS AND METHODS

Insect collection and rearing. Adult C. pruni were collected
from plants with a 0.5-m? white beating tray. For the acquisition-
inoculation tests, mature adults were gathered between February
and May from blackthorn (P. spinosa) mainly on the 800-m-high
Larzac plateau (55 km northwest of Montpellier, France). For the
study of C. pruni life cycle, blackthorn bushes in the plain to the
north of Montpellier (site 3) were used as a source of mature adults
for caging experiments and for weekly surveys of adult C. pruni
density in comparison with a conifer forest located on the 700-m-
high Séranne mountain (site 1, 35 km northwest of Montpellier). For density surveys, the sampling effort was standardized on coni-
fers (20 minutes) and on blackthorn (20 plants). The insects were
reared on P. marianna under fine-meshed sleeve cages in climatic
chambers (23°C, 16-h day length, relative humidity 280%). Demonstration of C. pruni life cycle. To test whether some C.
pruni overwinter within blackthorn bushes, part of a bush was
enclosed under two fine-meshed cages in December 2002, after
the departure of the immature adults but before the arrival of the
mature insects. Each cage contained two sticky blue traps (attrac-
tive to C. pruni) and covered 3.24 m? of ground. In spring 2003,
the traps were checked under the cages after the arrival of C.
pruni on the neighboring blackthorn bushes. The experiment was
replicated over the next winter. In addition, a survey was carried
out from 2003 to 2007 in the whole Languedoc area in order to
identify natural overwintering sites for C. pruni. The resulting
count data were analyzed using a generalized linear model (GLM)

266 PHYTOPATHOLOGY

accounting for overdispersed Poisson data (2) as implemented in
the dispmod R package. To complete C. pruni life cycle, we reared mature insects in the
laboratory. Their eggs hatched and, after five larval instars, they
developed into immature adults, 2,935 of which were transferred
in June and August 2004 on conifers at three sites: on Abies sp. in
site 1, on Picea abies at an altitude of 1,260 m in the Aigoual
massif (site 2), and on Pinus halepensis in site 3. The psyllids
were maintained until February inside fine-meshed sleeve cages
enclosing conifer shoots. Within each site, the standard deviation
(SD) survival rates between cages was compared with the
expected SD under the hypothesis of binomial distribution of
survival rates within each cage. Survival was analyzed with a
GLM accounting for overdispersed binomial data (43) as imple-
mented in the dispmod R package. Experimental acquisition-inoculation of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’
by C. pruni. To investigate the acquisition-latency-inoculation
sequence, 10 Prunus marianna plants were graft-inoculated with
‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strain POOO. At least 18 months later, mature
C. pruni collected on blackthorn were reared on these ESFY-
infected (tested positive using polymerase chain reaction [PCR])
plants. On some plants, the mature insects were removed 20 days
after laying eggs, and the nymphs and immature adults obtained
from their progeny were kept on the infected plant. A sample of
immature adults was transferred to the experimental overwinter-
ing sites, subsequently maturing into adults with a known history
of exposure to the phytoplasma. Mature adults (and their progeny)
reared on four healthy plants were used as controls. After an acquisition access period (AAP) of 1 to 20 days (ma-
ture adults) or 16 to 65 days (immature adults), a sample of the
psyllids was conserved at -80°C and the remainder of the experi-
mental population was set on healthy test plants (young P. mari-
anna cuttings) in groups of 2 to 15 individuals, or individually at
the end of the overwintering experiment. After a subsequent 20-day
inoculation access period (IAP), the surviving psyllids were
recovered and conserved at —80°C until DNA extraction. Phyto-
plasma presence was assessed using PCR for 475 C. pruni
(including 330 controls), and the transmission tests involved
6,633 C. pruni (including 3,408 controls). The test plants were
sprayed with an insecticide and incubated in an insect-proof
greenhouse or in climatic chambers. Because of the slow phyto-
plasma multiplication, the plants were tested for ESFY infection
at least 7 months later, using PCR. The experiments were repli-
cated on a smaller scale with other field isolates and other source
species (P. armeniaca and P. salicina) in order to check the
generality of the results regarding ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ isolate and
Prunus species. Fisher’s exact test (13) was used to compare
proportions. All reported confidence intervals (CI) are exact 95%
CI (1) as implemented in the binGroup R package. DNA extraction and ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ detection. Total DNA
was extracted as previously described from 0.5 g of plant phloem
(24) and whole insects (26). The reproducibility of insect DNA
extraction was assessed from 10 individual C. pruni with the
PicoGreen dsDNA quantification kit (Molecular Probes) using
DNA as a standard; after excitation at 480 nm, the fluorescence
emission was measured at 526 nm with an LS50B fluorescence
spectrophotometer (Applied Biosystems). Plant and insect DNA
was stored at 20°C after resuspension in 100 and 30 ull, respec-
tively, of water treated with diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC). The
primer pair ESFYf/r (Table 1) was used to specifically detect ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ in plants and individual insects (38). Each amplifi-
cation reaction was performed in 20 pl containing | ul of template
DNA, 1x PCR buffer, and 0.5 units of Tag DNA polymerase
(Invitrogen), 1.5 mM MgCh, 125 uM each dNTP, and 0.35 uM
each primer. The PCR conditions were as follows: denaturation at
94°C for 1 min; followed by 20 cycles at 94°C for 30 s, 65°C for
20 s, and 72°C for 45 s; and then 20 cycles at 94°C for 30 s, 62°C
for 20 s, and 72°C for 45 s.

‘Ca. P. prunorum’ quantification. The timing of ‘Ca. P. pru-
norum’ accumulation in its vector was investigated through esti-
mating the number of copies of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ genome present
in 139 individual psyllids (including 13 controls) sampled during
the acquisition-inoculation experiment after several combinations
of AAP and IAP. To this aim, we developed a new real-time PCR
assay based on TaqMan technology. Using Clustal W v1.83 (41),
we identified fragments in ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ rDNA region with
enough divergence across taxa to provide a good level of speci-
ficity in the detection of the phytoplasma. ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ 16S
rDNA region was screened with the software Primer Express v1.5
(Applied Biosystems) to design the primers ECAQf/r (delimiting
a 108-bp fragment) and the probe ECAQp (Fig. 1). Extensive
BLAST searches in GenBank confirmed that ECAQf/p/t were
highly unlikely to detect DNA from organisms outside the 16SrX
phytoplasma group (Fig. 1). The primers CPf/r and probe ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ complementary to a 92-bp fragment of C. pruni 18S
rDNA (Table 1) were used as a control of DNA extraction in
insects. The probes ECAQp and ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ were labeled at
the 5’ end with the fluorescent dyes VIC and FAM, respectively,
and at the 3’ end with the quencher TAMRA (Applied Biosystems). We used the following real-time PCR conditions: 5 il of plant
or insect total DNA extract, 0.2 uM (CPf/t) or 0.6 WM (ECAQfir)
each primer, 0.2 uM (CPp) or 0.25 tM (ECAQp) probe, adjusting
the volume to 25 yl with TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix
(Applied Biosystems), according to the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions. An initial cycle of 2 min at 50°C and 10 min at 95°C was
followed by 40 cycles alternating between 95°C for 15 s and 60°C
for 1 min. The analyses were performed in triplicates with an ABI
Prism 7700 and the Sequence Detector software (v.1.9.1; Applied
Biosystems). The number of phytoplasma genomes per insect
(Np) was estimated as Np = a x Ny/2 = 3.75 Nr, where a is the
overall dilution factor and N;/2 is the number of phytoplasma
genomes in the sample, because there are 2 rRNA operons per
“Ca. P, prunorum’ genome (25). The results were analyzed with
the R statistical software (34). RESULTS

Demonstration of C. pruni life cycle. No C. pruni were
trapped in the blackthorn bushes caged during two consecutive

winters whereas, at the end of each winter, mature C. pruni were
found on the rest of the bush; in addition, during the survey
carried out from 2003 to 2007, no C. pruni were found in winter
on blackthorn bushes or in their immediate surroundings. Thus, it
is at best infrequent and maybe impossible for C. pruni to over-
winter within blackthorn bushes. Moreover, during the same sur-
vey (Table 2), only two overwintering C. pruni were found in the
plain (in December, on Pinus halepensis), while their density was
much higher (P = 1.7 x 10) on the nearby plateau and mountains
on conifers of the genera Abies, Picea, or Pinus (but not Cedrus). Overall, the Larzac plateau and Aigoual massif had similar psyllid
densities (Table 2), but the distribution of C. pruni was hetero-
geneous within each zone, with sites 1 and 2 consistently shelter-
ing more individuals than their respective vicinities (P = 4.7 x
10"); even within site 1 and site 2, C. pruni appeared to
congregate in restricted parts of the forests (G. Labonne, personal
observation). Few insects survived until the end of the experimental over-
wintering, and survival was very irregular between cages (on
average, 2.8 times more variable than expected if insect deaths
were independent), indicating that individuals within a given cage
share many risk factors, such as predators and pathogens; for
example, entomopathogenic fungi killed many psyllids in both
natural and caged populations at site 2 (Table 3). Survival in site 1
(8.2%), at higher altitude, was significantly greater than in the
other sites (P = 0.021). Survival on conifers in the plain (site 3)
was lower but 1.9% of the caged insects still managed to survive
until the following year, contrasting with their quasi-absence in
the field survey. The 136 C. pruni that survived the overwintering
experiment at altitude were caged on P. marianna, where they laid
eggs that developed normally into nymphs and immature adults,
thus completing the experimental replication of C. pruni
biological cycle. Ina C. pruni population density survey in spring 2004 (Fig. 2),
the highest number of immature adults on P. spinosa in site 3
occurred in a narrow peak during the first 2 weeks of June, fol-
lowed by a sudden drop and a complete absence after early July,
defining a maximum 5-week-long period during which an imma-
ture adult might stay on its Prunus host. On conifers in site 1, the
first C. pruni was collected in mid-June, and the highest density
was reached in mid-July. Thus, the emigration period of the im-

TABLE I. Primers and probes for the detection and quantification of *Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ and Cacopsylla pruni targets

 

Oligonucleotide name

Sequence (5'93")

 

“Ca. P. prunorum’ 168 rDNA

ESFYf (forward) CCATCATTTAGTTGGGCACT

ESFYr (reverse) ATAGGCCCAAGCCATTATTG

ECAQf (forward) AAACGACTGCTAAGACTGGATATGAA

ECAQp (probe) VIC-CCCGCAAGGGTATGCTGAGAGATGG-TAMRA

ECAQr (reverse)
C. pruni 18S rDNA

TTACCAACTAACTAATGTGCCGCA. Pf (forward) CAAGTACGTCCCCGTTGATCA
CPp (probe) FAM-TTAGAGGTTCGAAGGCGATCAGATACCGC-TAMRA
Pr (reverse) GCTGGCTGACATCGTITATGG

 

ECAQf

ECAQp ECAQr
ESFY G1 (X) [AAACGACTGCTAAGACTGGATATGAAK- 30 bp ICCCGC----AAGGGTATGCTGAGAGATG! 'GCGGCACATTAGTTAGTTGGTAA|

ESFY G2 (x)
AP158 (X)
PD18 (X)
SpaWB (X)
BWB (X)
OY-M (I)
AlmWB (IX)
WX (Ill)

   

Fig. 1. Aligned 16S rDNA sequences for phytoplasma occurring in stone fruit trees or in the 16SrX group, showing the primers and probe (ECAQf/p/r) designed

for the real-time polymerase chain reaction assay. Vol. 99, No. 3, 2009 267

mature adults from P. spinosa in the plain corresponded roughly
to their arrival period on conifers 27 km away, after a gap of at
least 2 weeks (Fig. 2). Acquisition and inoculation of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ by C.
pruni. In the acquisition-inoculation experiments, the ESFY
phytoplasma could be detected in 2.8% (CI: 1.2 to 5.2%) of the
control mature adults (overwintering on conifers), increasing to
85% (CI: 63.1 to 95.8%) after only a 1-day AAP (Fig. 3A). However, most of them appeared to lose the phytoplasma when
acquisition stopped, because only 25% of the insects were still
ESFY-positive (highly significant difference: P = 3.3 x 10“) after
subsequently feeding on a healthy plant until day 20 (Fig. 3A,
solid arrow). After 2 to 20 days of AAP, 96% of the mature adults
were ESFY-positive; likewise, all the tested immature adults were
ESFY-positive after spending 30 days on infected plants (Fig. 3A); thus, phytoplasma ingestion is easy for both mature and im-
mature C. pruni. The progeny of adults exposed to the phyto-
plasma for 1 and 20 days was ESFY-negative (0/40, CI: 0 to 8%),
showing no evidence of transovarial transmission of the phyto-
plasma (Fig. 3A). For mature controls, transmission rate (0.47%; CI: 0 to 0.8%)
was five times smaller than infection rate (P = 3.8 x 10+), After
acquisition on infected plants, almost all the insects were ESFY-
positive (Fig. 3A); despite that, subsequent inoculations proved to
be inefficient for all stages (Fig. 3B). In fact, the transmission
rates after acquisition were not even significantly different from
the respective controls (Fig. 3B, inset): of 900 immature insects,
0.56% (CI: 0.21 to 1.3%) were infectious after an AAP of 16 to
37 days, of 2,315 immature insects, 0.65% (0.36 to 1.1%) were
infectious after an AAP of 1 to 20 days; in the linear model built
to analyze these results, neither acquisition nor stage nor their
interaction was significant (0.13 < P < 0.37). There was no sig-
nificant difference in the transmission efficiency between nymphs
and immature adults (not shown). Among the insects that survived
until the end of the experimental overwintering, 10 had been born
on ESFY-infected plants (AAP: 57 to 65 days); 80% of them (Fig. 3A) were ESFY-positive (CI: 34 to 99%) and, in striking contrast
with all the other transmission rates, 60% of these insects (Fig. 3B) were infectious (CI: 28 to 85%), indicating that transmission

 

was efficient after a long latency and providing, in addition, a
useful positive control for the whole acquisition-inoculation ex-
periment. We found no indication of different transmission effici-
ency between source species or ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ isolates. Quantification of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ in C. pruni. The extrac-
tion yield varied little, producing very stable DNA concentrations
(mean + SD: 246.3 + 6.17 ng.ml''). The standard curves (not
shown) indicated that real-time amplification performed well,
with a consistent and high PCR efficiency (95.4% for ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ and 98.2% for C. pruni). For mature and immature C. pruni reared on ESFY-infected
plants, phytoplasma load measured at any time between | and 65
days was significantly higher than phytoplasma load in the
control groups; thus, both mature and immature vectors were able
to ingest the phytoplasma, even after just 1 day of AAP (Fig. 4A). We built a series of nested models (not shown) relating the
logarithm of the number of phytoplasma genomes to vector stage
and AAP, and the best model had one slope for each stage (where

 

     
      

 

 

 

 

 

354 apie
E
2°] g
z H12 2
& 254 8
= f10 <
= 5
5 20-4 >
2 rs @
| 2
215 Pe jaameiersncaaa| eee
s |-O- Immature adults on blackthorn) =
= 104 PS Adults on conifers
= 10 ae
2 9 &
a n 6
Ss 54 \ h2

0-4 @&--00-0- © ©0900 fo

 

Feb! Mar ‘April! May June’ July ‘Aug ‘Sept’ Oct ‘Nov

Fig. 2. Temporal dynamics of Cacopsylla pruni density on blackthorn (Prunus
spinosa) and conifers. Numbers are standardized by the sampling effort (20
plants for blackthorn; 20 minutes for conifers). TABLE 2. Occurrence and number of overwintering Cacopsylla pruni collected during surveys on conifers in the Languedoc area (20 minutes per sampling)

 

 

Location (no. of sites) Altitude (m) Host plant Occurrence* Total? Mean‘ Sb! Significance®
Aigoual massif (7) 1,100-1,400 Abies alba, Picea abies, Pinus nigra 22/26 157 6.04 6.22 -
Site 2 1,260 A. alba, P. abies, P. nigra 1717 138 8.12 6.58 Al
Others A. alba, P. abies 5/9 19 241 2.76 By
Montagne Noire (1) 1,000 P. nigra, P. sylvestris VW 2 2.00 0 -
Larzac plateau (13) 550-800. nigra, P. sylvestris, Abies sp. 39/52 267 5.14 5.17 -
Site | 700 Abies sp. 31/32 250 7.82 4.87 Ay
Others P. nigra, P. sylvestris, Abies sp. 8/20 7 0.85 1.31 B,
Herault plain (8) 100-300 P. nigra, P. halepensis 220 2 0.10 0.31 c

 

* Occurrence: (number of samplin;

» Total number of C. pruni individuals collected at each location. © Mean number of C. pruni individuals collected per 20-min sampling. @ Standard deviation. © Significance group (— = not tested): different letters stand for si
A») = 0.85, P(B; = B>) = 0.10, P(A = B) = 4.7 x 10-8, P(B =

 

  

       

= 17x 105,

   

which at least one C. pruni was collected)/(total number of samplings). icantly different means (overdispersed Poisson generalized linear model; 5% level). P(Ay =

TABLE 3. Survival of Cacopsylla pruni during experimental overwintering on conifers

 

 

Location Cages Caged Recovered Survival (%) Obs. SD (%)* __ Exp. SD (%)? Significance®
Site 1 (Séranne) 43 1,380 113 8.19 147 4.45 A
Site 2 (Aigoual) 30 920 re 1.20 4.57 1.88 B
Site 3 (Montpellier) 21 635 12 1.89 4.74 1.86 B

 

* Observed standard deviation (SD) of the survival rate between cages. » Expected SD under the assumption of binomial distribution of survival rates within each cage. © Significance group: different letters stand for significantly different means (overdispersed binomial generalized linear model; 7? test at the 5% level). P(A = B) =

0.021. ¢ Many psyllids were killed by entomopathogenic fungi

268 PHYTOPATHOLOGY

only the slope for the immature insects was significantly different
from 0; P = 8.11 x 10) and a common intercept. All points but
one lied on the regression line fitted for the immature insects,
which could also be extrapolated up to 85 days after acquisition
start because this regression line was an excellent predictor of the
overplotted phytoplasma load after an AAP of 65 days followed
by 20 days of IAP on a healthy plant. Later on, there was no sig-
nificant difference between 85, 181, and 325 days after acquisi-
tion start: there was a plateau at ~10’ phytoplasma genomes per
insect (Fig. 4B), and the insect with the highest number of phyto-
plasma genomes (4.9 x 10) was found at the end of the over-
wintering period (325 days after acquisition start). The comparison between four AAP modalities observed 20 days
after acquisition start unveils important characteristics of the
phytoplasma—vector interaction (Fig. 5): after 20 days of AAP,
immature insects harbored significantly more phytoplasmas than
mature insects; in addition, phytoplasma load in mature insects
was significantly higher after 20 days of AAP than after 1 day but
not 2 days, indicating that, after at least a 2-day AAP, most C.
pruni can keep a high phytoplasma load throughout the sub-
sequent IAP. Where the AAP is followed by an IAP, the larger
variance is noteworthy even if it is not statistically significant
(Fig. 5); it can be explained by a decrease in phytoplasma load in
some insects during the IAP. Finally, after a 20-day AAP, phyto-
plasma load was not significantly different between four males
and nine females (not shown). Phytoplasma multiplication can be inferred from the nature of
the increase in phytoplasma load for the immature insects in
continuous AAP, which is not linear but exponential (Fig. 4A). To
test whether multiplication occurs in mature insects, we compared
the distribution of the number of phytoplasma genomes just after
an AAP of 2 to 20 days and after 20 to 30 days of subsequent IAP. There was no difference between the means of the two distribu-
tions but the variance was significantly higher after the IAP (P =
3.6 x 10°; Ansari-Bradley test) because many individuals had
extremely low or high phytoplasma loads (Fig. 6A). This experi-
ment demonstrates that, after AAP, the phytoplasma disappears. from some insects and multiplies in others. Just after a 1-day
AAP, the distribution (not shown) matched the solid curve but,
after a subsequent 19-day IAP (Fig. 6A, dashed line), most insects
had lost the phytoplasma (P = 1.2 x 10°; Mann-Whitney test). Similarly, we compared the distribution of the number of phyto-
plasma genomes in immature insects at the end of a 65-day AAP
and after 20 days of subsequent IAP (Fig. 6B); the mean phyto-
plasma load was significantly higher after the IAP (P = 2.4 x 107;
Mann-Whitney test) and, despite the long AAP, the phytoplasma
had disappeared from some insects, leading to a bimodal

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Log(number of phytoplasma genomes) 5,
=
i

25 24
4 i
@ Mature C. pruni ~
© Immature C. pruni
0+ oO
T T T T 1 TTT
0 2 40 60 80 85 181 325

Time after acquisition start (days)

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A1o0+ Fig. 4. Logarithm of the number of phytoplasma genomes per individual
= ‘acopsyllapruni estimated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction at
I 20 ifferent times after acquisition start. A, Mean phytoplasma load and associ-
ated 95% confidence intervals for mature and immature vectors after con-
3 tinuous acquisition access period (AAP) on ESFY-infected plants. The solid
8 604 and dotted lines represent the best-fitting linear models for immature and
a mature insects, respectively. Extrapolating the regression line for immature
3 sects predicts phytoplasma load for a 65-day AAP followed by a 20-day
< 40+ joculation access period (IAP) (distribution represented by the overplotted
2 gray boxplot). B, Boxplot showing the plateau reached when the AAP is
5 20 7 followed by a 20-day IAP or by an experimental overwintering period (140
20 . pruni ig
$ Poet immestnd eee and 244 days) on conifers; there is no statistically significant difference in the
« medians. OP it
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 270 300 330
Broo z P=00535 __P=08891__P=0,0008
= E °
= oo 8 64
8 5
3 &
= £ —
2° / 3 —
£ =. /:. = a0 3 =
2 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 2 °
2 24 s °
8 3 24
a s
z
|_ e—————————
° ot 2 90 «40-6060 0" “sb0" “380 z
S04 Mature C. pruni
Time after acquisition start (days) 3 o tt inmature © prunt
Fig. 3. Infection status of Cacopsylla pruni (mature and immature insects) in i aa 5

relation to the time after acquisition start. The bars define 95% confidence
intervals, and the points after the temporal gap on the x-axis correspond to
tests made after the experimental overwintering. A, Proportion of ESFY-
positive C. pruni; each inoculation access period (IAP) following an acqui-
sition access period is represented by an arrow which base and head corre-
sponds to the beginning and end of the IAP, respectively. B, Proportion of
infectious C. pruni. The inset is a close-up view of the low transmission rates. Acquisition access period (days)

Fig. 5. Logarithm of the number of phytoplasma genomes per individual
Cacopsylla pruni estimated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction 20 days
after acquisition start. The P values correspond to pairwise comparisons for
the medians between groups with a different acquisition access period (Mann-
‘Whitney tests, with Holm multiple testing correction). Vol. 99, No. 3, 2009 269

distribution. The same pattern was observed (Fig. 6B, dashed
line) for the insects overwintering on conifers tested long after
acquisition start (181 and 325 days; AAP: 41 and 65 days). DISCUSSION

The goal of this work was to better understand the biological
processes that determine the spatiotemporal scale at which secon-
dary transmission of ESFY occurs, We established important fea-
tures of the interactions between the transmission cycle of the
phytoplasma and the life cycle of its vector (Fig. 7): we provided
the first experimental demonstration of C. pruni life cycle, we
showed that ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ multiplies in both immature and

 

2
¢

Mature C. pruni

 

 

S
@

 

Density estimate
oo
sf
r 7

‘

 

T T T T T T T T T
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

 

 

 

 

 

 

Boel — AApsts tape Immature C. pruni
2
2 AA
£06:
20.44
2
80.24
00-4

 

T T T T T T T T T
o 4 #2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Log(number of phytoplasma genomes)

Fig, 6. Estimated distribution of the logarithm of the number of phytoplasma
genomes per A, mature and B, immature individual Cacopsylla pruni. Each
line represents a different combination of acquisition access period (AAP) and
inoculation access period (IAP). A

Acquisition of the:
phytoplasma? Retention of the
3 phytoplasma?

. Back

on Prunus

 

Prunus
(plain)

‘Acquisition of
the phytoplasma

Ey
re iS
Ns

 

October i April

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
 
   
 
  

mature vectors, and we proved that the full acquisition-latency-
inoculation sequence can be completed only by a few immature
adults before emigrating from Prunus hosts and by very few, if
any, mature adults before their death. In contrast, after acquisition
by the immature vectors, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ can be conserved
throughout the 8 months they spend on conifers (where phyto-
plasma load reaches a plateau) and can be transmitted very
efficiently without additional acquisition when the vectors
migrate back to Prunus hosts. C. pruni biology. Our results on C. pruni life cycle validate
previous assertions based on entomological observations (16,21,
31): C. pruni is a univoltine species breeding on Prunus spp. in
spring and spending the rest of the year on conifers, However,
contrasting with observations in the Czech Republic (21), we
found no indication that C. pruni might overwinter within P.
spinosa bushes: in winter, we could not find a single C. pruni in
two caged blackthorn bushes or during intensive searches on
Prunus spp. Indeed, it has been previously noticed that “caged
insects die in the greenhouse when in nature the new adults are
abandoning the primary hosts” (7). This period at the beginning
of summer corresponded to a sharp drop in C. pruni population
density on Prunus spp. (Fig. 2). We also documented a surprising
feature of the overwintering sites: even if some individuals could
survive an experimental host alternation in the plain (Table 3), C.
pruni density on conifers in the plain next to blackthorn hedges
was 8 to 80 times lower than in mountains several kilometers
away from Prunus spp. (Table 2). Taken together, these lines of
evidence show that host alternation is obligatory for C. pruni; in
southeastern France, migrations occur between Prunus spp. and
conifers over several kilometers, probably helped by the dominant
winds blowing from the sea toward the mountains in summer and
in the opposite direction in spring. Characteristics of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ transmission by C.
pruni. Thanks to the breeding of C. pruni in seminatural con-
ditions, we obtained, for the first time, several mature adults
known to be born on ESFY-infected plants. This technical progress
enabled us to unveil the interactions between the life cycle of the
vector and the growth rate of the phytoplasma, As shown by PCR
tests and phytoplasma quantification, both mature and immature
vectors needed at least a 2-day AAP to conserve the acquired

 

Acquisition of thi
phytopl:

  
       
 
  

Retention of

phytoplasma

  

 

Prunus
(plain)

 

Conifers in
mountainous
areas

 
  

Departure
{from Prunus

 

Fig. 7. Summary of Cacopsylla pruni life cycle (inner circle) and transmission cycle (outer circle). Comparison between A, initial questions and B, direct evidence
from this study. Striped and dashed arrows and dotted frames correspond to suspected processes. 270 PHYTOPATHOLOGY

phytoplasma, which is consistent with previous results (7). The
significant difference in phytoplasma load between immature and
mature vectors observed after a 20-day AAP may be caused by a
slower phytoplasma multiplication in mature vectors. A previous
study on ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ showed that, after an initial latency, C.
pruni is infectious until its death (7); through quantifying ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ in C. pruni, we demonstrated that ‘Ca. P. prunorum’
multiplies in both mature and immature insects and, therefore, is
transmitted in a persistent-propagative manner. However, the
short-term transmission rate by mature and immature insects
remained very low (0.6%). To explain this low transmission rate, it has been hypothesized
that a number of immature insects complete the latency on the
secondary host (6). Here, we provided three lines of evidence sup-
porting this hypothesis. First, only the few vectors that survived
85 days on Prunus spp. in laboratory conditions could reach the
phytoplasma load observed in overwintering adults (and, in
nature, most of them would have migrated to conifers before
reaching such high values). Second, the proportion of infectious
control mature adults (coming from natural populations and, as
such, only partly exposed to the phytoplasma when they were
immature) was the same as in the group of immature insects fully
exposed to the phytoplasma in controlled conditions (Fig. 3B,
inset). A third and more direct demonstration is that the trans-
mission rate for adults born on ESFY-infected plants is strikingly
higher after overwintering than before; thus, the vast majority of
ESFY-positive immature insects are not infectious before migrat-
ing from Prunus spp. to conifers. As a result, the mean latency is
much longer than the minimum latency of 2 to 3 weeks estab-
lished previously on 500 immature C, pruni (7); in fact, minimum
values are almost uninformative (if not misleading) on the median
values of the corresponding variables. Previous studies had con-
vincingly suggested that mature adults could conserve the phyto-
plasma acquired in the previous year, based on phytoplasma
detection in the first mature adults appearing in the orchards at the
end of winter (6,7), or in mature adults collected on conifers in
winter (11,44). Our work provides direct proofs of phytoplasma
retention and infectivity after the 8 months spent by the vector on
conifers: once exposed to the phytoplasma, C. pruni is an efficient
vector, but only the following year. After spending several weeks
on conifers, most exposed C. pruni probably excrete enough
phytoplasma in their saliva to be infectious, thereby ending the
latency as defined by Nault (29). However, under this mechanistic
definition, latency might be impossible to measure because no
Prunus spp. can be inoculated at that time. Instead, we use a defi-
nition of more direct epidemiological relevance (referred to as the
“effective latency” below): the delay between pathogen acquisi-
tion and first inoculation by an individual vector in field condi-
tions. The 8-month-long effective latency reported here is, to our
knowledge, unprecedented for any vector-borne disease; it is
more than three times higher than the maximum values for other
phytoplasmas (17) and for viruses (30). There is some heterogeneity within the species C. pruni regard-
ing phytoplasma-vector interactions, with vectors being in major-
ity “competent”, sporadically “hypercompetent” (right tail in Fig. 6A), and “resistant” for ~20% of the vectors (Figs. 3A and 6). This heterogeneity may have a genetic basis, with important epi-
demiological consequences if competent and resistant insects also
differ in their geographic range or biology. Epidemiological consequences. Combining the results on ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ transmission and on C. pruni life cycle suggests that
ESFY is likely spread according to the following scenario: im-
mature C. pruni acquire ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ while feeding on an
infected Prunus sp. (wild or cultivated) and migrate soon after
onto conifers located in mountainous regions; C. pruni stays there
for 8 months, during which ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ has enough time to
multiply and colonize the salivary glands; at the end of winter, C.
pruni migrates back to the plains to reproduce on Prunus spp.,

and infects susceptible plants while feeding. In this scenario, host
alternation involves two long-distance migrations between acqui-
sition and inoculation, leading to long-distance dissemination of
the disease. This aspect of ESFY transmission cycle has two
major epidemiological implications. First, it means that ESFY is
essentially a monocyclic disease, with the annual rate of increase
in a given orchard depending on the product between the total
number of trees in the orchard fed upon by all the mature C. pruni
and the proportion of infectious vectors in the regional popu-
lation. Second, long-distance dissemination implies that the pro-
portion of infectious vectors depends on the relative contribution
of wild and domesticated Prunus species to the regional pool of
infectious C. pruni; their relative contribution is itself determined
by their relative abundance, infection frequency, infectivity, and
host value for C. pruni. These two points affect the potential effectiveness of different
disease management strategies. The first point implies that the
same effectiveness can be achieved through reducing by a similar
proportion either vector density or vector mobility or the propor-
tion of infectious vectors. The second point implies that regional
disease management strategies implemented at a scale matching
the scale of vector dispersion should take into account the wild
reservoirs of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ and C. pruni: P. spinosa, P. do-
mestica, and P. cerasifera (4). Where these wild hosts are a sig-
nificant source of infectious vectors, any control strategy coordi-
nated at a regional scale is likely to be inefficient (e.g., removing
the source trees in all the orchards), unreasonable (e.g., removing
wild source trees), or unpredictable (e.g., biological control of
natural C. pruni populations); however, where wild Prunus species
play a negligible role in the pathosystem, the regional control of
immature C. pruni in the infected orchards should efficiently
reduce the number of infectious vectors, as should the widespread
removal of infected cultivated trees. Paradoxically, control methods
focused on the orchard scale are more likely to bear fruit re-
gardless of the role of wild Prunus species; in principle, disease
incidence can be lowered through reducing either vector infec-
tivity, the density of mature C. pruni, or the number of trees
visited by each vector. The best way to reduce vector infectivity in
the orchard would be to plant less-susceptible trees. When this is
not an option, chemical (or microbiological) control of mature C.
pruni should enable limiting both vector density and the number
of trees fed upon by each vector; vector density should also
decrease through a reduction in orchard attractiveness to C. pruni
(e.g., cutting shoots of the attractive myrobalan or plum root-
stocks). General insights into phytoplasma-vector-plant pathosys-
tems. To what extent are our results generic or completely
specific to ESFY in southern France? First of all, the entomo-
logical records on C. pruni across Europe are fully consistent with
the demonstrated life cycle (including host alternation). In
addition, C. pruni preference for overwintering at altitude has also
been reported in Italy (32) and the Czech Republic (11), where
ESFY is thus expected to spread at a regional scale. However, in
northern Europe, there is no mention that C. pruni favors over-
wintering sites located at higher altitude; therefore, this feature
might be an adaptation to warmer summers, increasing survival
until the next breeding season through a reduction in the number
of degree-days. If host alternation happens between closely lo-
cated Prunus spp. and conifers, the disease should spread locally;
more generally, local secondary spread of the disease might occur
where different environmental conditions prevail. The findings of this study also shed light on the transmission of
the Apple proliferation (AP) phytoplasma. Like C. pruni, the
psyllid vectors of AP (C. melanoneura and C. picta) are univol-
tine, overwinter on alternative hosts (conifers, for C. melano-
neura), and spend only a small fraction of their life on their culti-
vated host (31). Moreover, both AP vectors have low transmission
rates in experimental conditions, and the proportion of infectious

Vol. 99, No.3, 2009 271

insects is higher among mature adults without controlled acqui-
sition than among immature insects with controlled acquisition
(35,37). Thus, AP and ESFY vectors have similar biological
cycles and transmission features. These two pathosystems are also
closely related in evolutionary terms: AP and ESFY phytoplasmas
belong to the same clade (16SrX) within the genus *Candidatus
Phytoplasma’, their vectors belong to the same genus (Caco-
psylla), and their host plants belong to the same family (Rosaceae). Because of this evolutionary and biological proximity, we hy-
pothesize that AP and ESFY transmission cycles are identical
(long effective latency included); other examples of this original
transmission cycle may exist among the univoltine psyllid species
overwintering as adults on alternative hosts (generally conifers),
which represent a third of the species listed in Hodkinson and
White (16). Finally, this pathosystem raises puzzling evolutionary ques-
tions. ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ would have an obvious selective advan-
tage if a full transmission cycle could be completed within each
period spent by C. pruni on Prunus spp. So, why has ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ life history not evolved toward a faster multiplication
and translocation within the vector, which would lead to short-
term transmission? One hypothesis is that there may be a trade-off
between intra- and interannual transmission resulting from a
trade-off between pathogen growth rate and vector longevity and
fecundity (14). If short-term transmission could only be increased
at the expense of a decrease in C. pruni longevity, the infected
vectors would die before migrating back to Prunus spp., reducing
both vector population size and interannual transmission by
mature adults; thus, the cost would likely overcome the benefit,
which may explain the observed 8-month-long effective latency. Indeed, a formal study of the evolutionary epidemiology of this
pathosystem would be interesting. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank S, Duriez for her help with the initial work on transmission
rates, and we are also grateful to S. Dallot, D. Haydon, V. Marie-Jeanne,
J.-L. Nottéghem, and M. Peterschmitt for their critical review of this
manuscript. The C. pruni overwintering experiment was undertaken in
collaboration with the Office national des foréts (ONF) and Pare national
des Cévennes. This work was partly founded by the PSDR program
(INRA/Région Languedoc-Roussillon) and by the AIP EpiEmerge
(INRA). LITERATURE CITED

1. Blaker, H. 2000, Confidence curves and improved exact confidence
intervals for discrete distributions. Can, J. Stat. 28:783-798

2. Breslow, N. E, 1984. Extra-Poisson variation in log-linear models. J. R.
Stat. Soc. C 33:38-44

3. Campbell, C. L., and Madden, L. V. 1990. Introduction to Plant Disease
Epidemiology. Wiley, New York. 4, Carraro, L., Ferrini, F, Ermacora, P, and Loi, N. 2002. Role of wild
Prunus species in the epidemiology of European stone fruit yellows. Plant
Pathol. 51:513-517,

5. Carraro, L., Ferrini, F., Ermacora, P., and Loi, N. 2004. Transmission of
European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma to Prunus species by using
vector and graft transmission. Acta Hortic. 657:449-453. 6. Carraro, L., Ferrini, F, Labonne, G., Ermacora, P., and Loi, N. 2004. Seasonal infectivity of Cacopsylla pruni, vector of European stone fruit
yellows phytoplasma. Ann. Appl. Biol. 144:191-195. 7. Carraro, L., Loi, N., and Ermacora, P. 2001. Transmission characteristics
of the European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma and its vector
Cacopsylla pruni. Eur. J, Plant Pathol. 107:695-700. 8. Carraro, L., Osler, R., Loi, N., Ermacora, P, and Refatti, E. 1998,
Transmission of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma by Cacopsylla
pruni. J, Plant Pathol, 80:233-239. 9. Chabrolin, C. 1924. Quelques maladies des arbres frui
Rhone. Ann. Epiphyties 10:263-338. 10. Delic, D., Martini, M., Ermacora, P., Carraro, L., and Myrta, A. 2005. First report of fruit tree phytoplasmas and their psyllid vectors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. J. Plant Pathol. 87:149-150. 11, Fialova, R., Navrétil, M., Lauterer, P, and Navrkalové, V. 2007.

 

 

 

 

 
 

  

 

   

 

 

rs de la vallée du

 

272 PHYTOPATHOLOGY

18. 19. 20. 2. 22. 23. 24. 26. 27. 28. 38.

. Fi

. Hodkinson, I. D., and White, 1. M.

). Nault, L. R., and Ammar,

. Ramel, M-E., Gugerli, P,, Bourquin, L., de Meyer, J., and Sel

. Tedeschi,

“Candidatus. Phytoplasma prunorum’: The phytoplasma infection of
Cacopsylla pruni from apricot orchards and from overwintering habitats
in Moravia (Czech Republic). Bull. Insectol. 60:183-184.

 

. Fialové, R., Navratil, M., Valova, P., Lauterer, P., Kocourek, F., and

Poncarova-Vorickova, Z. 2004. Epidemiology of European stone fruit
yellows phytoplasma in the Czech Republic. Acta Hortic, 657:483-487

er, R. A. 1935. The logic of inductive inference. J. R. Stat. Soc. A
98:39-54,

 

. Galvani, A. P. 2003. Epidemiology meets evolutionary ecology. Trends

Ecol. Evol. 18:132-139. Gibson, G. J. 1997. Investigating mechanisms of spatiotemporal epidemic
spread using stochastic models. Phytopathology 87:139-146. 1979. Homoptera. Psylloidea. Handbooks for the Identification of British Insects vol. II, Part 5(a). Royal
Entomological Society of London, London. Hogenhout, S. A., Oshima, K., Kingdor
H.N., and Namba, S. 2008. Phytoplasmas: Bacteria that manipu
plants and insects. Mol. Plant Pathol. 9:403-423

Jarausch, W., Danet, J-L., Labonne, G., Dosba, F., Broquaire, J-M.,
Saillard, C., and Garnier, M. 2001. Mapping the spread of apricot
chlorotic leaf roll (ACLR) in southern France and implication of
Cacopsylla pruni as a vector of European stone fruit yellows (ESFY)
phytoplasmas, Plant Pathol, 50:782-790. Kison, H., and Seemilller, E. 2001. Differences in strain virulence of the
European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma and susceptibility of stone fruit
trees on various rootstocks to this pathogen. J. Phytopathol. 149:5
Labonne, G., and Lichou, J. 2004. Data on the life cycle of Cacopsy
pruni, Psyllidae vector of European stone fruit yellows (ESFY)
phytoplasma, in France, Acta Hortic. 657:465-470. Lauterer, P. 1999. Results of the investigations on Hemiptera in Moravia,
made by the Moravian museum (Psylloidea 2), Acta Musei Moraviae Sci

 

    

   

 

 
   

Biol. 84:71-151
Lavifia, A., Sabaté, J., Garefa-Chapa, M., Batlle, A., and Torres, E. 2004. Occurrence and epidemiology of European stone fruit yellows

phytoplasma in Spain, Acta Hortic. 657:489-494,
Lorenz, K.-H., Dosba, F., Poggi Pollini, C., Llécer, G., and Seemiiller, E.
1994. Phytoplasma diseases of Prunus species in Europe are caused by
genetically similar organisms. Z. Pflanzenkrankh, Pflanzenschutz
101:567-575. Maixner, M., Ahrens, U., and Seemiiller, E. 1995. Detection of the
German grapevine yellows (Vergilbungskrankheit) MLO in grapevine,
alternative hosts and a vector by a specific PCR procedure. Eur. J. Plant
Pathol. 101:241-250.

   

 

. Marcone, C., and Seemiiller, E. 2001. A chromosome map of the

European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma. Microbiology 147:1213-1221. Marzachi, C., Veratti, F, and Bosco, D. 1998. Direct PCR detection of
phytoplasmas in experimentally infected insects. Ann. Appl. Biol. 133:45-
54

Morvan, G. 1977. Apricot chlorotic leaf roll. EPPO Bull. 7:37-55

Morvan, G., Giannotti, J., and Marchoux, G. 1973. Studies on the
aetiology of apricot chlorotic leaf roll: Detection of mycoplasmas. Phytopathol. Z. 76:33-38

. Nault, L. R. 1997. Arthropod transmission of plant viruses: A new

synthesis. Ann, Entomol. Soc. Am. 90:521-541. -D. 1989, Leafhopper and planthopper
transmission of plant viruses. Annu, Rev. Entomol. 34:503-529. Ossiannilsson, F, 1992. The Psylloidea (Homoptera) of Fennoscandia and
Denmark. Fauna Entomolog’ vol. 26. Brill E. J., Leiden,

 

 

 

. Poggi Pollini, C., Bissani, R., Giunchedi, L., Mori, N., Dradi, D., and

Visigalli, T. 2004, Detection of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma
(ESFYP) in Homoptera insects and in wild stone fruit trees collected in
peach orchards in Northern Italy. Acta Hortic. 657:513-518. 2001. Caractérisation de Venroulement chlorotique de I’abricot
détection du phytoplasme ESFY en Suisse romande. Rev. S
Arboric. Hortic. 33:279-286.

     

. R Development Core Team. 2004. R: A Language and Environment for

 
   

|| Computing. R Foundation for Stat

 

ical Computing, Vienna.

. Seemiiller, E., Dickler, E., Berwarth, C., and Jelkmann, W. 2004.

 

urrence of Psy! apple orchards and transmission of apple
ration by Cacopsylla picta (syn. C. costalis) in Germany. Acta
Hortic. 657:533-537.

. Seemiiller, E., and Schneider, B. 2004. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’,

*Candidatus Phytoplasma pyri’ and *Candidatus phytoplasma prunorum’,
the causal agents of apple proliferation, pear decline and European stone
fruit yellows, respectively. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol, 54:1217-1226. R., and Alma, A. 2004. Transmission of apple proliferation
phytoplasma by Cacopsylla melanoneura (Homoptera: Psyllidae). J.
Econ, Entomol. 97:8-13. Thébaud, G. 2005. Studying the spatio-temporal spread of a vector-borne

39. 40. 4l. disease by the integration of statistical modelling and experimentation:
The case of ESFY (European stone fruit yellows). Ph.D. dissertation,
Ecole Nationale Supérieure Agronomique de Montpellier, France. Thébaud, G., Peyrard, N., Dallot, S., Calonnee, A., and Labonne, G. 2005. Investigating disease spread between two assessment dates with
permutation tests on a lattice. Phytopathology 95:1453-1461

‘Thébaud, G., Sauvion, N., Chadeeuf, J., Dufils, A., and Labonne, G. 2006. Identifying risk factors for European stone fruit yellows from a survey. Phytopathology 96:890-899. Thompson, J. D., Higgins, D. G., and Gibson, T. J. 1994, Clustal W:

Improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment
through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight
matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res. 22:4673-4680.

 

. van der Plank, J. E. 1963. Plant Diseases: Epidemics and Control. Academic Press, New York. Williams, D. A. 1982. Extra-binomial variation in logistic linear models. Appl. Stat. 31:144-148. Yvon, M., Labonne, G., and Thébaud, G. 2004. Survival of European
stone fruit yellows phytoplasma outside fruit crop production areas: A
case study in southeastern France. Acta Hortic. 657:477-481

Vol. 99, No. 3, 2009 273