ISSN 2079-0961, Arid Ecosystems, 2011, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 3845, © Pleiades Publishing, Ltd., 2011
Original Russian Text © A.K. Bagachanova, N.N. Vinokuroy, TG. Evdokarova, Yu.V. Ermakova, S.N. Nogovitsyna, A.A. Popov, 2011, published in Aridnye Ekosistemy, 2011,

Vol. 17, No. 1(46), pp. 64-74. APPLIED PROBLEMS
OF ARID LANDS DEVELOPMENT

Taxonomic Diversity of Insects from the Relic Steppes
of the Mid-Lena River Valley (Central Yakutia)

A. K. Bagachanova, N. N. Vinokurov, T. G. Evdokarova,
Yu. V. Ermakova, S. N. Nogovitsyna, and A. A. Popov
Institute for Biological Problems of the Cryolithozone, Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences,
pr. Lenina 41, Yakutsk, 677007 Russia
vinok @ibpe.ysn.ru
Received August 5, 2010

Abstract— Data on insects of the central Yakutian steppes preserved in the relic state since the Late Pleis-
tocene are presented. Orthoptera, Homoptera, Heteroptera, Coleoptera, and Diptera are used as examples
to demonstrate that, in addition to meadow and meadow-steppe species, these steppes are inhabited by spe-
cies belonging to an extrazonal steppe fauna—genetic complex comprising five elements: Eurasian, Dauria—
Mongolian, Black Sea—Kazakhstan, desert—steppe, and mountain—central Asian. Disjunctive areas are

characteristic for these species. Keywords: insects, Orthoptera, Homoptera, Heteroptera, Coleoptera, Diptera, fauna, steppe, central Yaku-

tia, Siberia. DOI: 10.1134/$20790961 11010033

A peculiarity of central Yakutian landscapes is relic
steppes, which were described by botanists as early as
the 1900s (Cajander, 1903; Abolin, 1929; Dolenko,
1913; Drobov, 1914). Steppe sites are situated among
massifs of larch taiga and occupy forest-less edges of
river valleys on southern slopes, altitudinal river ter-
races, and thermokarstic alas kettles. In the Late Pleis-
tocene, steppe communities spread throughout the
periglacial zone of northern Eurasia (Velichko, 1973),
and during the Holocene interglacial pockets were
preserved in central Yakutia, in the northeast in
Verkhoyanskaya and Oimyakon kettles, and along the
upper reaches of the Kolyma River (Karavaev, Skry-
abin, 1971; Yurtsev, 1981). The main factors facilitat-
ing the preservation of these steppes in northeastern
Asia are the acutely continental, dry climate with high
summer and extremely low winter temperatures, and
deficient precipitation comparable to the Lower Trans-
Volga Region, under conditions of a powerful under-
ground ice complex (Gavrilova, 1973). D.I. Shashko
(1961) remarked noted that the summer climate in
central Yakutia resembles that of the steppe in terms of
structure; in terms of absolute and relative humidity, it
differs little from steppe areas of Kazakhstan. No special research on the entomological fauna of
Yakutian steppes has been conducted to date. In the
literature, there are disparate data on various insect
groups: Orthoptera (Ermakova, 2003), Coccids (Dan-
zig, 1978), leafhoppers (Emeljanov, 1976; Sivtsev and
Vinokurov, 2002), Hemipterans (Vinokurov, 1979a,
1979b), Chrysomelids (Medvedev and Ammosov,

38

1978), weevils (Korotyaev, 1977; Korotyaev and Ter-
Minasyan, 1977); and cornflies of the genus Meromyza
(Narchuk and Fedoseeva, 1980). In these papers, data
are presented on the existence of an extrazonal steppe
complex of insects in the boreal taiga fauna of this part
of eastern Siberia and on disjunctive areas belonging to
this complex that had not been observed earlier. In the present paper, results of studies of insects of
true steppes in the middle part of the Lena River valley
are described. Studies devoted to the complex investi-
gation of the flora and arthropod populations of steppe
landscapes in central Yakutia were carried out at the
Institute of Biological Problems of the Cryolithozone,
in the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sci-
ences. MATERIALS AND METHODS

The studies were conducted at an expanded site of
the Lena River valley called “Tuimaada” (61°52'N,
129°31’E and 62°18'N, 129°49’E), 60 km long and a
maximum of 14 km wide, in 2007—2009. This report is
based on materials collected at ten sites of relic
steppes, located on the slopes of the primary bank (fig-
ure), as well as data collected in preceding years by the
authors. Due to agricultural development and expansion of
the territory of the city of Yakutsk, ecosystems of the
Tuimaada valley have long been subject to anthropo-
genic impact. The natural steppe vegetation has also
been transformed. Thus, V.P. Ivanova (1971) pointed

TAXONOMIC DIVERSITY OF INSECTS FROM THE RELIC STEPPES

129°

Toward Namtsy

39

130°

 

 

 

  

 

2
2
2
5
2
2 5
5 &
= ee]
5 8
z 3
§ B
as
&
62° 62°
s
2
g
Ci =
K Z
S s
SS z
S é
&
129° Towards Pokrovsk Towards Aldan 139°
0 5 10
Lis
km

Layout of surveyed sites on the slopes of the Tuimaada valley. to the disappearance of primary fescue—stipa steppes,
which were widespread on superinundated terraces in
early the 20th century (Abolin, 1929; Dolenko, 1913). Today they have been replaced by greatly expanded
digressive steppes, while stipa, wormwood, and hard-
sedge formations of true steppes have remained pre-
dominantly on the slopes of the primary bank of the
Lena River (Zakharova et al., 2009). The cleistogenic
formation described by Ivanova (1971) is also absent,
and Cleistogenes squarrosa is only a codominant or
adulterant in stipa and wormwood formations. The stipa formation, which is among the most
widespread, occupies southern, eastern, and western
expositions on the valley’s slopes. Typical are forbs
(Stipa capillata, Pulsatilla flavescens, Artemisia com-
mutata, Chamaerhodos erecta, or Orostachys mala-
cophylla), wormwood—stipa (Stipa capillata and Arte-
misia frigida), and stipa—forbs associations (Stipa
capillata, Pulsatilla flavescens, and Artemisia frigida). Wormwood steppes with predominant Artemisia
Jrigida are distributed at the same expositions of slopes
as stipa steppes. Most frequently observed are stipa—

ARID ECOSYSTEMS Vol. 1

No.1 2011

wormwood (Artemisia frigida, Stipa capillata, and
Cleistogenes squarrosa) associations, while cleistogenic
stipa—wormwood (Artemisia frigida, Stipa capillata,
and Cleistogenes squarrosa), wormwood—hard sedge
(Carex duriuscula and Artemisia frigida), and worm-
wood—large gramineous (Artemisia frigida, Calama-
grostis epigeios, Leymus littoralis, and Stipa capillata)
associations are rarely seen. The hard-sedge formation has been described on
the slope of the southeastern exposition of the moun-
tain Chochur-Muran, and two plant associations are
distinguished here: forbs—gramineous (Agropyron cris-
tatum, Festuca lenensis, Stipa capillata, and Pulsatilla
flavescens) and hard sedge—graminaceous (Carex
duriuscula, Agropyron cristatum, Festuca lenensis, and
Elytrigia repens). Insect counts at the grass layer were carried out by
collection with entomological nets, with the subse-
quent reduction of results to 50 wags. Orthoptera were
similarly collected during a preset period of time, and
the results were reduced to | h (Gause, 1930; Pravdin
et al., 1972). Grades of dominance are presented

40 BAGACHAN:

Faunal composition of insects of the Tuimaada valley steppe

OVA et al. ord Number of species Number of genera Number of families
mes Steppes Meadows Steppes Meadows Steppes Meadows

Odonata 12 28 7 nt 4 7
Orthoptera lL 27 8 16 2 3
Homoptera 106 140 45 80 9 9
Heteroptera 57 About 130 46 86 1 14
Thysanoptera 12 29 7 16 3 3
Coleoptera 69 About 150 54 77 14 17
Lepidoptera ahs 116 59 66 9 10
Hymenoptera 29 - 22 - 1 -
Diptera 97 About 200 45 90 1 18
Total 471 Above 800 293 About 440 65 81

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

according to Kontkanen (1948). The volume of col-
lected material consisted of approximately 25000
arthropods, of which 24000 specimens were insects. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

As the conducted studies have shown, the grass
layer of relic steppes of the Lena River valley is inhabited
by four groups of arthropods: ticks, spiders, centipedes,
and insects. The latter are represented by 12 orders: Col-
lembola, Odonata, Orthoptera, Psocoptera, Thysan-
optera, Homoptera, Heteroptera, Coleoptera, Neu-
roptera, Lepidoptera, Hymenoptera, and Diptera. For
dragonflies, which develop in water reservoirs, steppe
vegetation sites are hunting territory. In addition,
counts include single cases of Trichopterans, which
are also not permanent inhabitants of steppe cenoses. The composition of the steppe entomofauna of the
Tuimaada valley has been studied insufficiently. The
diversity of Orthoptera, Coleoptera, Heteroptera, and
some families of Diptera is revealed rather well. On the
whole, there are limited data on such major orders as
Hymenoptera and Diptera, while inferior Lepi-
doptera, Collembola, and some other orders remain
unstudied. Thus, at the current stage of research, the
insect fauna of steppes in the Tuimaada valley is
known to include 471 species of 293 genera, 65 fami-
lies, and 9 orders (table). Homoptera (106) and
Diptera (97) prevail, followed by Lepidoptera (78),
Coleoptera (69), Heteroptera (57) and Homoptera
(106); the other orders (Odonata, Orthoptera, Thysan-
optera, and Hymenoptera) are currently represented by
12—29 species. The real volume of steppe insect fauna,
taking into account the erratic examination of taxons,
evidently exceeds these numbers. The fauna of some
families is more diverse: Chloropidae, 45 (Diptera);
Aphididae, 35; Cicadellidae, 42 (Homoptera); Miri-
dae, 19 (Heteroptera); and Carabidae and Curculion-
idae, 17 species each (Coleoptera). From 6 to 15 spe-
cies were revealed in the following families: Acrididae,

9 (Orthoptera); Lygaeidae, 9; Pentatomidae and Rho-
palidae, 8, (Heteroptera); Thripidae, 8 (Thysanoptera);
Chrysomelidae, 7 and Coccinellidae, 6 (Coleoptera);
Nymphalidae, 15; Geometridae, 14; Noctuidae, 14; Saty-
ridae, 12; Lycaenidae, 9 and Pieridae, 8 (Lepidoptera);
Chamaemyiidae, 9; Ephydridae, 7; and Conopidae,
6 (Diptera). Other families have 1—5 species. The low taxonomic diversity of steppe insects in the
Tuimaada valley, confined to slopes of southern expo-
sition and high levels of super-floodplain terraces,
becomes visible when compared with the fauna of true
and damp meadows of super-floodplain and inundated
terraces. The table below provides comparative data on
some well-studied orders. Only 11 species of acridoid
katydis and grasshoppers are manifested in steppes, while
meadows are occupied by 27 species of Orthoptera,
including many mesophils and hygrophils, as well as
some eurymesophils. The number of species and gen-
era of Hemipterans is twice as low as in meadows, and
mesophils and hygrophils disappear. The same picture
of fauna depletion can be traced in orders of damself-
lies, thrips, coleopterans, lepidopterans, and dipter-
ans. Thus, the examined relic steppes of central Yaku-
tia are largely inhabited by stenoecic specimens of
steppe biota, with their main habitat lying far to the
south, and xerophil meadow-steppe and meadow spe-
cies. According to D.I. Berman (2008), the heat supply
in mountainous steppes located in the sub-Arctic zone
on southern bank slopes of the Kolyma River’s upper
reaches is very high and comparable with that of the
mountainous steppes of Altai. At a depth of 1 cm, the
sum of positive soil temperatures reaches 2500°C;
given the longer warm period, this measure should be
even higher in central Yakutia (up to 3000°C). This
factor, along with the serious siccation of the upper
layer of soil, creates an acute temperature—humidity
regime; as a result, meso- and hygrophilous species
tend to avoid areas of steppe vegetation and are only
incidentally registered along their periphery. This can

ARID ECOSYSTEMS) Wl. 1 No. 1 2011

TAXONOMIC DIVERSITY OF INSECTS FROM THE RELIC STEPPES 41

explain the scarcity of insect fauna of the Yakutian
steppes. The average number of chortoecic insects in all
steppe plant associations under survey was 490 speci-
mens/50 wags. This indicator was greatest in stipa—
wormwood, heterogramineous—grassland, and grass-
land—stipa steppes: 1845, 1805, and 1510 speci-
mens/50 wags, respectively. The minimum numbers
(172 specimens/50 wags) are typical of the stipa
steppe. Inthe chortoecic community, four dominant orders are
remarkable in terms of season-averaged values of abun-
dance according to Kontkanen’s gradient (Kontkanen,
1948). Diptera account for about one-third (23.4%, or
155 specimens/50 wags) of the total numbers of chortoecic
insects; Heteroptera (17.9%, 88 specimens/50 wag);
Homoptera (16%, 78 specimens/50 wag); Thysanoptera
(15.5%, 75 specimens/50 wag). Two orders, Coleoptera
(11.1%, 55 specimens/50 wags) and Hymenoptera (8%,
39 specimens/50 wags), pertain to influents. Indicators for
all other orders are below 6%. CHARACTERISTICS OF MAIN ORDERS
OF INSECTS

Given below are the characteristics of the five
insect orders comprising the core of insect fauna of
relic steppes in the Tuimaada valley. Order Orthoptera

Relic steppes of the Tuimaada valley are inhabited
by 11 species from the families Tettigonidae (2) and
Acrididae (9). Steppe (7) and forest—steppe (3) spe-
cies comprise the basic fauna, and one forest-dwelling
species has been recorded (Aeropus sibiricus L.). According to M.G. Sergeev (1986), most species (6)
pertain to the steppe—west Asian fauna—genetic com-
plex (Montana montana Koll., Omocestus haemor-
rhoidalis Charp., Glyptobotrus maritimus jacutus Stor-
ozh., Aeropedellus variegatus variegates F.-W., Euthy:
tira brachyptera Ocsk., and Bryodemella tuberculata F.
two species belong to the forest—steppe—east Palearc-
tic complex (Chorthippus fallax Zub. and Celes skaloz-
ubovi Adel.). The steppe—central Asian, forest—
steppe—west Palearctic, and forest—east Palearctic
complexes are represented by one species each (Gamp-
socleis sedakovi F-W., Chorthippus albomartginatus
De Geer, and Aeropus sibiricus L., respectively). Polyzonal trans-Palearcts dominate by type of habitat
(64%), followed by north steppe—west Palearctic spe-
cies (18%); steppe—European-Siberian (9%) and for-
est—forest-steppe Siberian-Pacific species (9%) are
also represented. Most steppe Orthopterans are
cereal-dwelling (46%) in terms of the spectrum of life
forms and facultative (27%) chortobionts, while other
species are undercover geophils, eremobionts, and
specialized phytophils (9% each). In terms of food
specialization, phytophages prevail, comprising all

 

ARID ECOSYSTEMS Wol. | No.1 2011

 

specimens of the Acrididae family. The family Tettigo-
niidae is divided into zoophages and phytozoophages,
the former being represented by the large grasshopper
G. sedakovi, and the latter, by the smaller one, M. mon-
tana. Asa rule, communities of Orthopterans dwelling
in central Yakutian steppes are comprised of a few spe-
cies (3—10), most of them being G. maritimus jacutus,
G. sedakovi, M. montana, and B. tuberculata. G. maritimus jacutus dominated in virtually all sur-
veyed steppe communities, with abundance indicators
varying in the range of 12.3—80%. Order Homoptera

In the relic steppes of Yakutia, populations of
Homopteran insects are represented by four subor-
ders, which are numerous, especially leafhoppers. Their characteristics by suborder are given below. Suborder Cicadinea. According to the data col-
lected by Sivtsev and Vinokurov (2002), 43 species
from 31 genera and 4 families dwell in the steppes and
meadow steppes of the territory in question. The
extrazonal steppe element in the studied fauna is very
high, up to 34.9%, which is evidence of close genetic
bonds with zonal steppes in the Palearctic. Eurasian
steppes are represented by 7 species; Dauria—Mongo-
lian, 4; Black Sea—Kazakhstan, 1; and desert—steppe, 1. For central Yakutia, A.F. Emeljanov (1976) described
two steppe endemics of the genus Mongolojassus Em. Interestingly, they pertain to different groups of spe-
cies that are not closely related, and M. jakuticus Em. was found only on the right shore of the Lena River,
while M. vinokurovi Em. dwells only on the left shore. The remaining 28 species of leafhoppers are widely
occurring meadow xerophiles and eurymesophils;
they occupy meadow steppes and are found on steppe
slopes. Horologic analysis showed that they are domi-
nated by trans-Palearcts (27.9%) and species spread
throughout the Asian part of the continent (16.3%). Suborder Coccoidea. According to Danzig (1978),
steppe sites are occupied by 12 species of Coccids, of
which the steppe fauna—genetic complex is repre-
sented by the Eurasian steppe and Dauria—Mongolian
elements. Six species pertain to the former; they are
related to cereals, mainly fescue. They are two species
of the genera Phenacoccus, Metadenopus festucae Sulc,
Rhodania porifera Goux, and Euripersia tomilini New-
stead; one species, Rhodococcus spiraea Both., lives on
Spiraeae media. The Dauria—Mongolian element
includes Heliococcus pavlovskii Borh. d. Terez. and
Euripersia herbaceae Danzig. Phenacoccus discadena-
tus Danzig is a steppe endemic. The remaining three
species are widespread dwellers of dry meadows. Suborder Psyllinea. According to data of the
authors and the literature (Loginova, 1961, 1963, and
1966; Klimaszewski 1983; Labina and Evdokarova,
2009), there are 40 known species in the Yakutian
fauna. At steppe sites of the Tuimaada valley, the
authors collected 6 species, of which Bactericera cur-

42 BAGACHANOVA et al. vatoventris Forster and B. rossica Horvath are new for
Yakutia. Suborder Aphidinea. According to the authors,
39 aphid species pertaining to 17 genera of 4 families
dwell in the studied steppes. The scope of their trophic
relationships is wide and includes mainly background
plants belonging to families of Poaceae, Asteraceae,
Brassicaceae, Rosaceae, Apiaceae, Scrophulariaceae,
etc. Chorological analysis is deemed impossible at the
current stage due to insufficient data on the geo-
graphic distribution of these species. However, it
should be noted that the vast majority of habitats of
aphids harvested in steppes are very wide and repre-
sented by multiregional, Holarctic, trans-Palearctic,
and trans-Eurasian types. Order Heteroptera

At steppe sites of the Lena River valley, confined to
slopes of southern exposition, 57 species from 11 fam-
ilies have been revealed. This is one-fifth of the bug
fauna occurring in the middle-taiga subzone of Yaku-
tia. The families Miridae (19), Lygaeidae (9), Rhopal-
idae (8), and Pentatomidae (8) are most representa-
tive. Most Heteroptera collected are phytophages
(48 species), trophically related to cereals, legumes,
Rosaceae, the goosefoot family, and crucifers, as well
as steppe mosses, etc. The carnivore complex includes
nine species: four species of the genus Nabis
(Nabidae), two steppe species of the genus Orius
(Anthocoridae), Deraeocorus punctulatus Fall. (Miri-
dae), Geocoris arenarius Jak. (Lygaeidae), and Zicrona
caerulea L. (Pentatomidae). Dominants of the grass
layer are Lygus gemellatus H.-S. (in meadow steppes,
dwelling on Compositae), Leptopterna albescens Reut. (steppe, on cereals), Dictyla platyoma Fieb. (meadow
steppe, on Lappula echinata), Stenodema virens L.
(meadow, on cereals), and Aelia klugii Hahn. (meadow, on cereals). In the ground layer, the steppe
polyphage Lygaeosoma sibirica Seid prevails. Hemipterofauna of the studied steppes includes
three fauna—genetic complexes: steppe, meadow-
steppe, and meadow (Vinokurov, 1979a). The specific weight of the relic steppe complex in
the middle-taiga subzone of Yakutia is surprisingly
high and reaches 35.6% (16 species). The main habitat
of these bugs lies far to the south in the steppe zone,
whereas Yakutian habitats are disjunctive and confined
to the dry central Yakutian province and Olekminskii
enclave of steppe vegetation in southwestern Yakutia. Holarctic (2), Eurasian steppe (7), Dauria—Mongo-
lian (5), and desert—steppe (2) types of habitats are
typical of steppe species. The meadow-steppe complex contains 11 xero-
philous species (24.4%), which are found in steppes,
meadow steppes, and steppe meadows in Yakutia. Very
broad temperate areas are characteristic for this com-
plex, i.e., trans-Palearctic (6), west-central-Palearctic (4),
and trans-Eurasian (2 species). The meadow complex includes 18 xerophilous and
mesophilous species (40%), which as a rule are con-
fined to the fringes of steppe plots, adjacent to moister
habitats, i.e., forest edges along narrow valleys and
edges of water reservoirs at the foot of slopes. Hygro-
philous and eurymesophilous bugs from neighboring
meadow and swampy sites go to the steppe’s periphery. Species of this complex pertain to boreal and temper-
ate xero- and mesophilous meadow and eurymeso-
philous meadow—forest species and have broad habi-
tats: Holarctic, 4; trans-Palearctic, 6; west-central-
Palearctic, 2; and European—Siberian, 6. Order Coleoptera

According to the data available to the authors,
about 120 steppe and meadow Coleopteran species
dwell at steppe sites of the surveyed territory. Carabid
beetles (25), Chrysomelid beetles (22), and weevil prevail
here; ladybugs (7) and capricorns (7) were also recorded,
and other families are represented by 1—5 species. Typi-
cal steppe species are Carabids Pseudotaphoxenus dau-
ricus F-W., Carabus kruberi F.-W., Poecilus fortipes
Chaud., and Microlestes minutulus Gz. ; the blossom
beetle Creniopinus altaicus Gebl. (a new species for the
Yakutian fauna); the borer Cylindromorphus pyrethri
Stierlin. ; blister beetles Me/oe violacea L. and Mylabris
aulica Men. ; leaf beetles Cassida lineola Creutz., Cryp-
tocephalus equestris Gebl., and Labidostomis imitatrix
Ogi. et. L. Medv. ; the hister beetle Saprinus spernax
Mars. ; the antlike flower beetle Notoxus raddei; and
ladybugs Adonia amoena Fald. and A. variegate Gz. In accordance with L.N. Medvedev and
Yu.N. Ammosov (1978), the fauna—genetic complex
is represented in the Yakutian fauna of leaf beetles by
Dauria—Mongolian (8%) and Eurasian steppe (3%)
elements. Order Hymenoptera

The fauna of Hymenoptera in the Tuimaada valley
has been studied little, and most data are on the subor-
der of Symphytans (Kaimuk and Popov, 2003; Popov
and Kaimuk, 2007; Popov, 2004 and 2008). During the
study, the authors revealed 29 species of 22 genera and
11 families. The basic list consists of bees (13 species);
a poorer abundance of wasps (10 species) is observed,
and sawflies and ants together account for 6 species. The family Tenthredinidae. The largest family of
sawflies is represented in the richest abundance in
moderate and northern latitudes of the Holarctic. There are three species of sawflies: Al/antus cinctus L.,
Dineura virididorsata Retz., and Selandria serva F.
Larvae (caterpillars) are leaf-eating phytophages, and
imago feed on flower nectar. Selandria serva dwelling
on cereals is the most characteristic for the steppes. The family Formicidae. Typical carnivores, they are
an inseparable part of insect cenoses, and they are
almost always observed in masses. There are three spe-

ARID ECOSYSTEMS

Vol. 1 No. 1 2011

TAXONOMIC DIVERSITY OF INSECTS FROM THE RELIC STEPPES 43

cies (Formica gagatoides Ruzs., F. picea Nyl., and
Camponotus saxatilis Ruzs.) from two genera, and For-
mica picea and Camponotus saxatilis are characteristic
representatives of steppe landscapes in Yakutia (Dmi-
trienko and Petrenko, 1976). Wasps. This taxon is represented by ten species of
four families: Pompilidae (Anoplius viaticus L. and
Ceropales_ maculata F.), Sphecidae (Ammophila
campestris Latr., A. pubescens Curt., Lestica alata Panz.,
and Tachysphex pompiliformis Panz. ), Mutillidae
(Myrmosa atra Panz. ), Vespidae (Allodynerus delphi-
nalis Gir., Polistes riparius Sk. Yamane, and Pseude-
bipona herrichii Sauss.). All species are entomophages
except Myrmosa atra, which is an insect ectoparasite. Vespidae seem to be the most useful of the wasps,
because as social insects they have the broadest spec-
trum of food resources. Specialization of sole fossori-
als and spider wasps is narrow; as food for larvae, they
hunt only on spiders and therefore decrease the num-
ber of entomophages. Bees. The vast superfamily of bees (Apoidea)
includes numerous specialized pollinators, broadly
represented in steppe biocenoses. This group incorpo-
rates 13 species from 5 families (Colletidae, Halic-
tidae, Megachilidae, Apidae, and Andrenidae), of
which Halictidae (Anthidium punctatum Latr., Evy-
laeus jakuticus Pes. et Dav., E. subfulvicornis Bliithg.,
and Seladonia leucahenea Ebm.) and Apidae (Epeolus
cruciger Panz., E. variegata L., Psithyrus bohemicus
Seidl., and P. rupestris buyssoni Vogt.) are the most
numerous. Order Diptera

The Dipteran fauna of steppes and steppe meadows
includes specimens of 39 families, out of which 97 spe-
cies from 45 genera of 11 families were identified. Chloropidae (44 species), Syrphidae (25), Chama
myiidae (9), and Ephydridae (7) manifest diversity
and species richness; other families include 1—3 spe-
cies. In terms of biotopical confinement, steppe (35 spe-
cies, 36%), meadow-steppe (8, 8.3%), and meadow
(54, 56.7%) groups are most distinguished. The first
two groups are of interest for chorological analysis. The total diversity of the steppe group of Dipterans
can be divided into 16 types. Widespread species (23,
65.7%) are predominant: multiregional polyzonal (1),
Holarctic polyzonal (4), trans-Palearctic polyzonal
(8), trans-Eurasian temperate (2), Euro-Siberian—
central Asian temperate (1), west-central Palearctic
(1), and Euro-Siberian temperate (6). These thermo-
philic species seem to be genetically related to steppe
landscapes, as, judging by their numbers, the habita-
tion optimum falls on steppe meadow and steppe sites. A narrower geographic dispersion, comprising 6 types,
has been revealed for 12 species: east-Palearctic tem-
perate (1), Siberian—American temperate (1), east
Siberian—central Asian temperate (1), Kazakhstan—

 

ARID ECOSYSTEMS Wol. | No.1 2011

Mongolian temperate (1), Dauria—Mongolian tem-
perate (5), and east Siberian boreal (3). Broad habitats are typical of meadow-steppe
Dipterans: multiregional polyzonal (1), trans-Eur-
asian (2), Euro-Siberian—central Asian (2), west-cen-
tral-Palearctic temperate (1), Euro-Siberian (1), and
east Siberian—far eastern temperate (1). Representatives of the families Chloropidae,
Chamaemyiidae, and Ephydridae are numerous in
relic steppes and meadow steppes. Among cornflies,
the steppe species Meromyza zachvatkini Fedos. is fre-
quently found in net collection, up to 100 speci-
mens/50 wags; in grassland—stipa steppe at the bottom of
slopes, its abundance may reach 224 specimens/50 wags. The diversity of Chamaemyiidae flies is greatest on
steppe slopes, where 7 species are found; at steppe
meadows in the Lena River valley and alas hollows of
Lena—Amga interfluves, only 3—4 species were col-
lected, predominantly from genus Chamaemyia. Spec-
imens of Ch. subjuncorum Tanas. (up to 28 speci-
mens/50 wags) and, sometimes, Ch. aestiva Tanas (up
to 48 specimens/50 wags) are most numerous. Plant-
eating meadow species of ephedrids from the genus
Psilopa (with a large population of P. stackelbergi
Nartsh., up to 72 specimens/50 wags) are widely rep-
resented. Widespread hoverflies from the xerophilous
genus Paragus—P. lelejii Mutin and P. tibialis Fall.—
are also typical of true steppes. CONCLUSIONS

A total of 421 insect species has been revealed in
relic Pleistocene steppes of the Tuimaada valley; they
are incorporated in 285 genera of 76 families from
9 orders. The fauna includes species pertaining to
steppe, meadow-steppe, and meadow fauna—genetic
complexes. Disjunctive areas are typical of steppe and
some meadow-steppe species. In this case, the main
section of the habitat is located in the southern arid
part of Eurasia; the minor section is located in the
north in central Yakutia and in the northeast beyond
the Verkhoyanskii range. According to the results of chorological analysis
conducted for various orders of insects, the steppe
fauna—genetic complex includes five elements: Eur-
asian steppe, Dauria—Mongolian, desert—steppe,
Black Sea—Kazakhstan, and mountain—central
Asian. Analysis of the zoogeographic relationships
among the species of the extrazonal element, under
conditions of the taiga zone of the steppe complex,
shows that the formation of the fauna of the relic
steppes in central Yakutia in its modern shape took
place over a long period of time; and repeated expan-
sions of the steppe fauna seemingly took place in dif-
ferent periods. For example, the presence of single
desert—steppe species spread throughout central Asia
and Kazakhstan points to ancient contacts between
biotas of the studied region and deserts of the ancient
Mediterranean. The last penetration of steppe and

44 BAGACHANOVA et al. meadow-steppe insects into the fientral Yakutian plain
could possibly have taken place in the Middle
Holocene 4000—6000 years ago, in the Xerothermic
period. The presence of a series of relic west-central-Pale-
arctic species is characteristic for the meadow-steppe
complex; along with steppe species, they are found in
the Cryolithozone of Siberia in areas with better heat
supply, i.e., at sites of xerophyte steppe vegetation. Compared to the population in the bottomland
meadows and terraces above the floodplain, the insect
fauna of the steppes of the Lena River valley is essen-
tially poor. The high xerophytic degree of steppe and
meadow-steppe landscapes, occupying the slopes of
southern exposition and the high-level terraces above
the floodplain, hinders the colonization of these sta-
tions by meso- and hygrophilous components of the
local fauna. Therefore, the core of the fauna is com-
prised of stenoecic steppe species, meadow-steppe
and meadow xerophils, while low numbers of meso-
philous and hygrophilous insects invade the periphery
of these communities and are found in mesophilous
microcaverns, which highlights the mosaic nature of
the steppe communities. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are grateful to N.G. Davydova (Yakutian
State University), D.A. Novikov (IBPC), A.A. Shmakov
(Paleontological Institute, RAS), and B.A. Korotyaev
(Zoological Institute, RAS) for help in defining bees,
aphids, thrips, and weevil, respectively. This research was
supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic
Research, project no. 08-05-00747. REFERENCES

Abolin, R.I., Geobotanical and Soil Description of the
Lena—Vilyui Plain, in Trudy komissii po izucheniyu
Yakutskoi ASSR (Transactions of the Commission on
Studying the Yakut ASSR), Moscow: Akad. Nauk
SSSR, 1929, vol. 10, pp. 1-334. Berman, D.I., Life on the Permafrost, Priroda (Moscow,
Russ. Fed. ), 2008, no. 10, pp. 23-35. Cajander, A.K., Beitrage zur Kenntniss der Vegetation der
Alluvionen des Nordlischen Eurasiens. 1: Die Alluvi-
onen des Unseren Lena-Thaler, Acta Soc. Sci. Fennica
Helsingfors, 1903, vol. 32, no. 1. Dantsig, E.M., The Fauna of Coccidians (Homoptera,
Coccoidea), in Ekologo-faunisticheskie issledovaniya
nasekomykh Yakutii (Ecological and Faunistic Studies
of Insects of Yakutia), Yakutsk, 1978, pp. 71-78. Dmitrienko, V.K. and Petrenko, E.S., Murav’i taezhnykh

biotsenozov Sibiri (Ants of Taiga Biocenoses of Siberia),
Novosibirsk: Nauka, 1976. Dolenko, G.I., The Lena River Valley near Yakutsk, in
Predvaritel’nyi otchet po organizatsii i ispolneniyu rabot
po issledovaniyu pochy Aziatskoi Rossii v 1912 g (Prelim-
inary Report on the organization and execution of stud-

 

ies on the soils of Asiatic Russia in 1912), St. Peters-
burg, 1913, pp. 221-224. Droboy, V.P., Vegetation in the Area of Yakutsk—Ust-Maya
Tract of Yakutsk Oblast and District, in Trudy poch-
venno-botanicheskoi ekspeditsii po issledovaniyu koloni-
zatsionnykh raionov Aziatskoi Rossii (Transactions of
the Soil—Botanical Expedition to Study the Coloniza-
tion Areas of Asian Russia), Ch. 2: Botanicheskie issle-
dovaniya, 1912 g (Botanical Studies, 1912), St. Peters-
burg, 1914. Emel’yanov, A.E, New Genera and Species of Cycads
(Homoptera, Auchenorrhuncha) from the North-East
of the USSR, Entomol. Obozr., 1976, vol. 76, no. 2,
pp. 357-363. Ermakova, Yu.V., Materials for Studying the Structure of
the Orthopteran Community (Orthoptera) in the Cen-
tral Yakutia, Entomologicheskie issledovaniya v Yakutii
(Entomological Researches in Yakutia), Yakutsk, 2003,
pp. 9-21. Gause, G.F, Studies on the Ecology of Orthoptera, Ecol-
ogy, 1930, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 307-325. Gavrilova, M.K., Klimat Tsentral’noi Yakutii (Climate of
Central Yakutia), Yakutsk, 1973. Ivanova, V.P., Steppe Phytocoenoses with the Bunchgrass
Cleistogenes squarrosa (Trin.) Keng. in the Lena River
Valley, Uchen. Zap. Yakut. Gos. Univ., 1971, no. 18,
pp. 70-75. Kaimuk, E.L. and Popov, A.A., Entomofauna of Wild and
Cultivated Berries in Environs of Yakutsk, in Entomo-
logicheskie issledovaniya v Yakutii (Entomological
Studies in Yakutia), Yakutsk, 2003, pp. 162—170. Karavaev, M.N. and Skryabin, S.Z., Rastitel’nyi mir Yakutii
(The Flora of Yakutia), Yakutsk, 1971. Klimaszewski, S.M., A Competent to Our Knowledge of
Psyllid (Homoptera, Psylloidea) of Siberia, Acta Biol. Prace Nauk. Uniw. Slaskiego w Katowicach, 1983,
vol. 13, no. 627, pp. 22-29. Kontkanen, P., On the Restriction of Dominance Group in
Synecological Research of Insects, Ann. Ent. Fenn.,
1948, vol, no. 2, pp. 33—40. Korotyaev, B.A. and Ter-Minasyan, M.E., Review of wee-
vils of the genus Coniocleonus Motsch. (Coleoptera,
Curculionidae) Fauna of East Siberia and Far East,
Entomol. Obozr., 1977, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 823-832. Korotyaev, B.A., Ecological—Faunistic Review of the Wee-
vils (Coleoptera, Curculionidae) Fauna of North-East
of the USSR, Entomol. Obozr., 1977, vol. 56, no. 1,
pp. 60—70. Labina, E.S. and Evdokarova, T.G., Psyllids (Homoptera,
Psyllinea) of Relic Steppes of Central Yakutia, Entomol. Obozr., 2009, vol. 88, no. 3, pp. 539-541. Loginova, M.M., New and Poorly Known Species of Psyl-
lids (Homoptera, Psylloidea) of the USSR, Trudy Zool. Inst. AN SSSR, 1966, vol. 37, pp. 3-35. Loginova, M.M., Revision of Genera Ahpalara Frst. and
Craspedolepta Enderl. (Homoptera, Psylloidea) of the
Fauna of the SSSR, Entomol. Obozr., 1961, vol. 40,
no. 3, pp. 602—623. Loginova, M.M., Revision of Genera Ahpalara Frst. and
Craspedolepta Enderl. (Homoptera, Psylloidea) of the
Fauna of the SSSR. Ch. 2, Entomol. Obozr., 1963,
vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 621-648. ARID ECOSYSTEMS

Vol. 1 No. 1 2011

TAXONOMIC DIVERSITY OF INSECTS FROM THE RELIC STEPPES 45

Medvedev, L.N. and Ammosov, Yu.N., The Fauna of Leaf
Beetles (Coleoptera, Chrysomelidae) and Its Key Zoo-
geographical Features, Ekologo-faunisticheskie issledo-
vaniya nasekomykh Yakutii (Ecological-Faunistic Study of
Insects of Yakutia), Yakutsk, 1978, pp. 113-128. Narchuk, E.P. and Fedoseeva, L.I., The Fauna of the
Steppes of Yakutia: Grassflies of the Species Meromyza
Mg. (Diptera, Chloropidae), Bio. Nauki, 1980, vol. 19,
no. 201, pp. 46—52. Popov, A.A., Sawflies of the Suburban Area of Yakutsk, in Trudy
Stavropol’skogo otdeleniya russkogo entomologicheskogo
obshchestva. Materialy mezhdunarodnoi nauchno-prak-
ticheskoi konferentsii (Proceedings of the Stavropol Branch
of the Russian Entomological Society, Int. Sci.-Pract. Conf. ), Stavropol: Agrus, 2008, vol. 4, pp. 127-129. Popov, A.A., Symphytofauna of Environs of Yakutsk, in
Sibirskaya Zoologicheskaya konferentsiya. Tezisy dokla-
dov vserossiiskoi konferentsii, posvyashchennoi 60-letiyu
Instituta sistematiki i ekologii zhivotnykh SO RAN, 15—
22 sentyabrya 2004 (Siberian Zoological Conference. Abstracts of All-Russia Conference on the 60th Anniver-
sary of the Institute of Animal Systematics and Ecology,
Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences, Septem-
ber 15—22, 2004), Novosibirsk, 2004, pp. 68-69. Popoy, A.A. and Kaimuk, E.L., The Fauna of Sawflies
(Hymenoptera, Tenthredinoidea) of the Yakut Botani-
cal Garden, in Raznoobrazie nasekomykh i paukov
osobo okhranyaemykh prirodnykh territorii Yakutii
(Diversity of Insects and Spiders of Especially Pro-
tected Natural Territories of Yakutia), Yakutsk, 2007,
pp. 84—86. Pravdin, EN., Guseva, V.S., Kritskaya, I.G., and Chernya-
khovskii, M.E., Some Principles and Techniques of
Study of Nongregarious Mixed Populations of Grass-
hoppers in Different Landscape Conditions, in Fauna i

ARID ECOSYSTEMS Wol. | No.1 2011

ekologiya zhivotnykh (Fauna and Ecology of Animals),
Moscow, 1972, pp. 3-16. Sergeev, M.G., Zakonomernosti rasprostraneniya pryamokry-
lykh nasekomykh Severnoi Azii (Consistent Patterns of
Orthopteran Insects of North Asia), Novosibirsk:
Nauka, 1986. Shashko, D.I., Klimaticheskie usloviya zemledeliya Tsen-
tral’noi Yakutii (s voprosami metodiki sel’skokhozyaist-
vennoi otsenki klimata) (Climatic Conditions of Agri-
culture in Central Yakutia (with Issues of Agricultural
Methods of Assessing Climate Changes)), Moscow:
Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1961. Sivtsev, VV. and Vinokurov, N.N., Tsikadovye Yakutii
(Leafhoppers of Yakutia), Novosibirsk: Sib. Otd. Ross. Akad. Nauk, 2002. Velichko, A.A., Prirodnyi protsess v pleistotsene (Natural
Process in the Pleistocene), Moscow: Nauka, 1973. Vinokurov, N.N., Nasekomye poluzhestkokrylye (Heteroptera)
Yakutii (Insects Heteropterans (Heteroptera) of Yaku-
tia), Leningrad: Nauka, 1979a. Vinokuroy, N.N., Zoogeographical Characteristic of
Steppe Bugs (Heteroptera) Yakutia, Byull. NTI “Bio-
logicheskie Problemy Severa’(NTI Bulletin “Biological
Problems of the North”), Yakutsk, 1979b, pp. 15—16. Yurtsev, B.A., Reliktovye stepnye kompleksy Severo-Vostoch-
noi Azii (Relic Steppe Complexes of the North-East
Asia), Novosibirsk: Nauka, 1981. Zakharova, V.I., Sosina, N.K., Sofronov, R.R., Ivanova, E.L.,
and Poryadina, L.N., Flora of Tuymaada Valley Relict
Steppe (Central Yakutia), in Proceeding of 4th Interna-
tional WS on C/H,O/Energy Balance and Climate over
Boreal Regions with Special Emphasis on Eastern Eur-
asia, Nagoya, 2009, pp. 85-87.