Bulletin of Insectology 64 (Supplement): S145-S146, 2011
ISSN 1721-8861

Survey on the presence of Cacopsylla pruni in Turkey:
preliminary results

Gigdem ULuBas SERCE', Michel Yvon’, Kamuran Kaya’, Mona Gaze", Feza Can Cenciz', Kadriye
GaG.ayan’, Nicolas SAUVION? ‘Mustafa Kemal University, Agricultural Faculty, Plant Protection Department, 31034 Antakya, Hatay, Turkey
2INRA, Unité Mixte de Recherche Biologie et Génétique des Interactions Plante-Parasite, Montpellier, France

Abstract

Although ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ has been previously detected in different regions of Turkey, its vectors have not
been identified yet. A survey was conducted in 2010 and 2011 in order to determine the presence of Cacopsylla pruni populations
in six different fruit tree producing areas. The psyllid was found in Adana, Mersin, Bursa and Yalova on either Prunus spinosa or
wild plums (Prunus spp.) and also on fir trees. The mean percentage of individuals of C. pruni infected with Ca. P. prunorum was

around 23% in Mersin. Key words: *Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’, Prunus spp., psyllid vector. Introduction

Stone fruits are important fruit crops in Turkey, where
local land-races and new varieties are cultivated. In
recent years, diseases caused by phytoplasmas have
become increasingly important in stone fruit trees in
this country. Severe decline of plum and apricot trees
growing in nurseries and commercial orchards has re-
cently reached alarming levels. For example, in for-
eign (e.g. ‘Precoce de Tyrinthe’, ‘Fraccaso’) and local
(e.g. ‘Sakit’, ‘Sekerpare’, ‘Alkayisi’) apricot cultivars
symptoms have been observed, i.e. deformation and
rolling of the leaves, reduced yield, and decline; ‘Can-
didatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ was detected on apri-
cot or plums from different regions of Turkey
(Jarausch et al., 2000; Caglayan et al., 2004; Ulubas
Serge et al., 2006). Despite these records, no information was presented
on the presence of vectors of phytoplasma diseases and
their prevalence in Turkish orchards. Therefore, the
main objective of this research was to survey the pres-
ence of Cacopsylla pruni Scopoli the expected vector
of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ in Turkey. Materials and methods

Sixteen localities from six provinces where apricot,
peach and plum growing is important in Turkey, were
selected for surveys of C. pruni (figure 1). These sur-
veys were carried out during the springtime of 2010
and 2011, respectively. Psyllids were essentially col-
lected from wild Prunus species (e.g. P. spinosa, P.
cerasifera), or Prunus orchards, and conifers (table 1). DNA was extracted from C. pruni and then the pres-
ence of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ was determined from indi-
vidual insects with the primers ESFYf/r as described
by Thébaud et al. (2009). Meditersncan Sea

 

Figure 1. Sampled localities where the psyllid C. pruni
was found (@) or not found (©) in Turkey in springs
2010 and 2011. Locality 7 was described by Giiglii
and Burckhardt, 1996. See table 1 for more details on
the host plants and the number of collected psyllids. Results

Remigrant C. pruni individuals were found and col-
lected at the end of March in all surveyed localities ex-
cept those from Hatay and Malatya (table 1). Specimens
on P. spinosa were found only in Bursa and Yalova
provinces. In Adana and Mersin, the psyllids were
abundant on wild Prunus and Prunus trees inside apple
orchards. Psyllids have been found but very rarely on
other host plants: Malus domestica, Cydonia oblongua
and Crataegus ssp. Many overwintered individuals were
collected from Abies nordmanniana subsp. bornmulle-
riana and Pinus ssp. from Uludag, but never from other
locations even there has been fir trees in the forests. Nymphs of C. pruni were first detected on wild Prunus
trees in the first half of May 2010 in Mersin. In June 2010
nymphs were also collected from apricot and peach trees. The higer percentage of remigrant individuals of C. pruni
infected with “Ca. P. prunorum’ was around 23% and was
found in Mersin (7 positives out of 30 specimen tested). Insect vectors of phytoplasmas and phytoplasma-vector interaction II

Table 1. Localities sampled during springs 2010 and 2011, and number of C. pruni collected on different host plants. “0” indicates that psyllids have been searched but not found, “-” not investigated. Pspi: Prunus spinosa, Psp: Prunus
sp., Pdo: P. domestica, Cra: Crataegus sp., Cyd: Cydonia oblongua, App: apple, Apri: apricot, Con: conifers. Host-plant

 

 

Province District spi Psp Pdo _Cra__—Cyd_—App ——Apri__—_—Con
1-Yalova Center 27 = - - - E 5
Keles 2 - - - - - -
Orhaneli 11 3 1 - - -
2-Bursa Niliifer 65 - - - - : :
Uludag - - - - - - 143
. Silifke - > 100 2 - 1 0 -
3-Mersin an ; A 2 : I :
Pozanti - 180 - 1 - - -
4-Adana Ceyhan 0 - - - - - -
Samandag 0 0 - - = 5 -
Center 0 0 - - - B 3
SeHaLay Yayladag 0 0 - - - - -
Iskenderun 0 0 - - - B 5
Dogansehir - 0 - - - - -
6-Malatya Yesilyurt - 0 - - - - -
Akgadag - 0 - - - - -
Discussion Acknowledgements

These preliminary data presented here are the results of
two consecutive spring surveys of C. pruni in Turkey. They exhibit limited distribution of the psyllid in some-
surveyed areas, but abundant in the localities of the
provinces of Bursa, Adana and Mersin. These are im-
portant provinces for growing apricot, peach and plum
trees, where ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections have been re-
corded in previous research (Caglayan ef al., 2004:
Ulubag Serge et al., 2006). Overwintered psyllids have
been caught on conifers at Uludag (National park in the
Bursa province, 1510 m alt. ), near (10-25 km) localities
where we have found them on P. spinosa. Actually, in
this region, the psyllids could complete their life cycles,
and so they could play a major role in the phytoplasma
dissemination at a local scale (Thébaud et al., 2009). Fortunately C. pruni has not been found near Malatya,
the most important apricot growing province. In this re-
gion, the conifers are not common and the nearest coni-
fer forests are 100-120 km as the crow flies. Thus, the
insect would not be able to survive in that province. In France, the highest range of phytoplasma infected
remigrant C. pruni was recorded as 15% but is generally
around 3% (Yvon et al., 2004). In Turkey, this range
was determined as 23% what seemed considerably high. This situation clearly revealed the potential spread risk
of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ by C. pruni in Turkey and the ne-
cessity of taking precautions. Turkey is a centre of diversity of a wide range of fruit
trees. To determine if only one or both genetic groups
identified in C. pruni is found in Turkey will inform
about the speciation history of the species, which can
also be linked to phytoplasma transmission capacity. For this objective, all specimens collected in this survey
will be typed for phytoplasma and for determining their
genetic groups A or B.

S146

The research was founded by the Project PIA-
Bosphorus between TUBITAK-Turkey and EFSA-
France. References

CAGLAYAN K., GAZEL M., ULUBAS SERCE ©., EMBER I., 2004.-
Dogu Akdeniz Bélgesindeki sert gekirdekli meyve aga-
clarinda Avrupa sert cekirdekli meyve agaci sarihgi (ESFY)
fitoplazmasinin yayginhk durumunun PCR/RFLP yéntem-
leriyle saptanmasi.- Proceedings of Turkish I"' Plant Protec-
tion Congress:141. GOCLU S., BURCKHARDT D., 1996.- New records of jumping
plant-lice from Turkey (Hemiptera, Psylloidea).- Entomo-
fauna, \T: 381-384. JARAUSCH W., SAILLARD C., BROQUAIRE M., GARNIER M.,
Dossa F., 2000.- PCR-RFLP and sequence analysis of a non-
ribosomal fragment for genetic characterization of European
stone fruit yellows phytoplasmas infecting various Prunus
species.- Molecular and Cellular Probes, 14: 171-179.

 

prunorum’ is delayed by eight months due to a long latency in

its host-alternating vector.- Phytopathology, 99(3): 266-273. ULuas SERGE ¢., GAZEL M., CAGLAYAN K., BAS M., SON L.,

2006.- Phytoplasma diseases of fruit trees in germplasm and

commercial orchards in Turkey.-
Pathology, 88(2): 179-185. YVON M., LABONNE G., THEBAUD G., 2004.- Survival of the
European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma outside fruit crop
production areas: a case study in the southeastern France.-
Acta Horticulture, 657: 477-481. Journal of Plant

Corresponding author: Gigdem ULupas SERGE (e-mail:
culubas@gmail.com), MKU, Agricultural Faculty, Plant Pro-
tection Department, 31034 Antakya, Hatay, Turkey.