Bulletin of Insectology 64 (Supplement): S263-S264, 2011
ISSN 1721-8861

Effects of possible repellents on feeding and survival of
Cacopsylla pruni (Scopoli)

Monika RIEDLE-BAUER, Helmut BAUER, Judith MORTEL
Lehr~ und Forschungszentrum fiir Wein- und Obstbau, Klosterneuburg, Austria

Abstract

During the last years Cacopsylla pruni has become a major concern in Austria because of its vectoring of Stone fruit yellows in
apricots. Products based on kaolin, paraffin oil, orange oil and extract of fennel oil as active ingredients were tested for their abil-
ity to repel the disease vector C. pruni from landing and feeding on Prunus armeniaca. In free choice experiments all products
showed significant repellency to adults 24 h after start of the tests. After 72 h, however, fennel extract oil and orange oil had lost
their effect as compared with the untreated control, whereas plants treated with kaolin or paraffin oil were barely colonized. In no choice experiments kaolin and paraffin oil significantly influenced feeding behaviour. All tested products significantly re-

  

duced the number of surviving insects in comparison to water treated controls. Key words: Cacopsylla pruni, kaolin, paraffin oil, repellent. Introduction

Wachau is one of the most important apricot growing
areas in Austria. Apricot gardens dominate the banks of
the river Danube. The river valley is adjoined by areas of
higher altitude covered by forests. In European Union
law the apricot produced there are designed as “Wa-
chauer Qualitétsmarille” a product with protected desig-
nation of origin (PDO). Fruits are produced mainly of
the local cultivar ‘Klosterneuburger Marille’ (a clone of
“Hungarian Best’) and the rootstocks are apricot seed-
lings, myrobalans and other plums. In addition to its
commercial value, apricot farming in the Wachau is very
important for tourism. The Wachau was inscribed as
"Wachau Cultural Landscape" in the UNESCO List of
World Heritage Sites in recognition of its architectural
and agricultural history. The spring landscape is charac-
terized by wide expanses of flowering apricot trees. During the last decade European stone fruit yellows
caused by ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ has be-
come a major concern in the Wachau area. Due to the
high susceptibility of the predominant cultivar, the small
scale structured apricot gardens and the close vicinity of
conifers as putative overwintering hosts for the vector
Cacopsylla pruni (Carraro et al., 1998) disease inci-
dences are high. Tree losses are a daily occurrence. It is
well established that apricot cultivars differ in regard to
their disease sensitivity and disease incidence might also
depend on a grower effect (Thébaud et al., 2006). In the
case of the ‘Wachauer Qualitatsmarille’, however, a
switch to less sensitive cultivars is not in accordance
with the PDO status. The small scale structured apricot
gardens are a part of the protected landscape and should
therefore be kept as they are. All these factors make the
development of control strategies very difficult. Previous studies point out that overwintered adult C.
pruni returning to apricot orchards in spring are the
most efficient disease vectors (Thébaud et al., 2009). The aim of our present work is the development of
strategies to repel the vector Cacopsylla pruni from

 

 

landing and feeding on apricot plants. Therefore, we in-
vestigated the repellency to C. pruni of commercially
available products (based on kaolin, mineral oil and
plant extracts) under experimental conditions. Materials and methods

Cacopsylla pruni adults used in this study were field
collected on Prunus spinosa in March and April 2011. One year old Prunus armeniaca (cv. ‘Klosterneuburger
Marille’) grafts in pots and excised P. armeniaca
branches (cv. ‘Klosterneuburger Marille’) inserted into
water were used for the experiments. The plants were
maintained under outdoor conditions but protected from
rain. Concentrations and manufacturers of the products
evaluated in this study are indicated in table 1. Deonized
water was used for untreated controls. The apricot grafts
and excised branches were sprayed to run off with the
tested products and allowed to air dry before placement
of insects. In free choice assays excised branches treated with the
mentioned products were simultaneously placed into
insect proof cages (40x35x40 cm). 100 insects were in-
troduced into the cages and allowed to freely move
around in the cage. Numbers of adults present on each
branch and on the cage surface were counted daily. Eggs present on 5 randomly selected leaves per treat-
ment were also counted. In no-choice assays insects were kept in cylindrical
cages (diameter 9 cm, height 25 cm) on potted grafts
and excised branches. 10 individuals were introduced
into each cage. Numbers of feeding and surviving
adults were counted daily. Numbers off eggs were also
recorded. All experiments were repeated four times. Statistical
analyses (ANOVA, least significant difference test)
were performed by aid of the statistics program SPSS
12.0 (SPSS, Chicago, Illinois, USA). Working Group 3 - Phytoplasma control in crop systems

Table 1, Plant protection products and concentrations used in this study. Product name Active ingredient Concentration Manufacturer
Cutisan Kaolin 5% (wiv) Biofa, Miinsingen, Germany
Prev-B2 Orange oil, fatty alcohol ethoxylate 0.4% (viv) Biofa, Miinsingen, Germany
Nu Film 17* Pine oil 0.15 (v/v) Léffler, Leopoldsdorf, Austria
Promanal Paraffin oil 2% (viv) Proagro, Abenberg, Germany
HF Pilzvorsorge Extract of fennel oil 0.4% (v/v) Biofa, Miinsingen, Germany

 

*, only used in combination with Cutisan. Results

In free choice experiments all tested products signifi-
cantly influenced host plant choice of C. pruni adults 24
h after start of the experiment. On average of 72% of
adults had landed on untreated controls, 8% on plants
treated with fennel oil extract, 20% on plants treated
with orange oil. No insects were observed on kaolin or
paraffin oil treated plants. After 72 h, however, fennel
extract oil and orange oil had lost their repellency as
compared with the untreated control, whereas only few
individuals were present on plants treated with kaolin or
paraffin oil. In no choice experiments the active ingredients kaolin
and paraffin oil significantly influenced feeding behav-
iour. One day after treatment on average of 53% of in-
sects fed on water treated control plants but only 10% on
paraffin oil treated plants and 12.5% on kaolin treated
plants. All tested products significantly reduced the num-
ber of surviving insects in comparison to water treated
controls. In the control treatments on average of 83% of
insects were still alive after an observation period of 6
days. On plants treated with kaolin in combination with
pine oil 22.5% of insect were still alive after this period,
on plants treated with kaolin alone 19%, on fennel oil ex-
tract treated plants 53%, on orange oil treated plants 57%
and on paraffin oil treated plants 21%. Discussion

In the present study especially kaolin (Cutisan with and
without addition of Nu Film) and paraffin oil (Pro-
manal) had a prominent repellent effect on C. pruni
adults both in free-choice and in no-choice experiments. Therefore, they might have a great potential for the use
in integrated pest management programs targeted
against C. pruni. Our experiments, however, were con-
ducted under experimental conditions excluding rainfall. Thus, the repellent effects of these products to C. pruni
must be verified under field conditions. Kaolin was su-
cessfully used in laboratory and field experiments a-
gainst the European pear sucker, Cacopsylla pyri (L.)
significantly reducing the population density of this

S264

polyvoltine species (Daniel et al., 2005; Erler and Cetin,
2007). These experiments show that the kaolin particle
film is stable under field conditions. In the mentioned
experiments with C. pyri, however, attention was
mainly paid on the effects of kaolin on oviposition and
development of nymphs. In case of the univoltine C.
pruni repellency to incoming adults as the most effec-
tive vectors would be required. Thus, long term experi-
ments proving the effect of these products not only on
vector density but also on disease incidence are desir-
able. Besides this, more products should be screened for
their ability to repel C. pruni from landing and feeding
on apricot trees. Acknowledgements

The present work has been carried out in the frame of
COST action FA0807 “Integrated Management of Phy-
toplasma Epidemics in Different Crop Systems”. References

CaRRARO L., OSLER R., Lot N., ERMACORA P., REFATTI E.,
1998.- Tran: ion of European Stone Fruit Yellows by
Cacopsylla pruni.- Journal of Plant Pathology, 80: 233-239. DANIEL C., PFAMMATTER W., KEHRLI P., Wyss E., 2005.-
Processed kaolin as an alternative insecticide against the
European pear sucker, Cacopsylla pyri (L.).- Journal of Ap-
plied Entomology, 129: 363-367. ERLER F., CETIN H., 2007.- Effect of kaolin particle film on
winterform oviposition of the pear psylla Cacopsylla pyri.-
Phytoparasitica, 35: 466-473. TuEBAUD G., SAUVION N., CHADOEF J., DUFILS A., LABONNE
G., 2006.- Identifying risk factors for European Stone Fruit
Yellows from a survey.- Phytopathology, 96: 890-899. THEBAUD G., YVON M., ALARY R., SAUVION N., LABONNE G.,
2009.- Efficient transmission of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
prunorum’ is delayed by eight months due to a long latency
in its host-alternating vector.- Phytopathology, 99: 265-273. Corresponding author: Monika RIEDLE-BAUER (e-mail:
Monika.Riedle-Bauer@weinobst.at), Lehr- und Forschungs-
zentrum fiir Wein- und Obstbau Klosterneuburg, Wiener Stra-
Be 74, 3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria.