COST ACTION FA0807

LISBON, PORTUGAL

COST Action FA0807
Integrated Management of Phytoplasma Vxstetat Book

Epidemics in Different Crop Systems

“-
CcoseE

COST ACTION FA0807
FINAL MEETING

LISBON, PORTUGAL

Carcavelos
September 30" - October 1° 2013

Abstract Book

Edited by
Assunta Bertaccini: Alma Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, DipSA - Patologia Vegetale,
viale Fanin, 42 - 40126 Bologna, Italy; e-mail: assunta.bertaccini@unibo. it

Contents

Diseases and vectors in COST countries
Phytoplasmas and phytoplasma vectors in Denmark, Finland, Lithuania and Norway-M. Nicolaisen 1

Phytoplasma diseases and vectors in United Kingdom, The Netherlands and Belgium - G. Peusens,
P. Lepoivre, S. Steyer, P. Laurent, K. De Jonghe, M. Dickinson, M. Verbeek, T. Belién 3

Phytoplasma diseases and their vectors in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland - J. Franova,
J. Pribylova, M. Navratil, D. Safarova, I. Ember, M. Kélber, S. Stile, M. Cieslinska, M. Kaminska 4

Presence and distribution of phytoplasma diseases and vectors in Germany and Switzerland - current
state of the art - B. Jarausch, M. Maixner, P. Kehrli, S. Schaerer 6

Recent insight on phytoplasma diseases and vectors in France - X. Foissac 8

Overview of the phytoplasma and vector research in Austria, Croatia and Slovenia since 2009
Dijana Skoric 10

Overview of the phytoplasma and vector research in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
FY Republic of Macedonia, Romania and Serbia - Bojan Duduk 12

Review of occurrence of phytoplasmas in Spain, Portugal and Malta - E. Torres, A. Batlle,
A. Lavifia, J. Bech, A. Bertaccini, E. Sousa 14

Phytoplasmas and phytoplasma vectors in Greece, Israel, Italy and Turkey - P.A. Bianco 17

Diseases and vectors in non COST countries

Almond witches’ broom phytoplasma: disease monitoring and preliminary control measures in
Lebanon - M. Molino Lova, Y. Abou Jawdah, E. Choueiri, M. Beyrouthy, R. Fakhr, P.A. Bianco, A. Alma,
H. Sobhn, M. Jawahri, C. Mortada, P. Najjar, P. Casati, F. Quaglino, L. Picciau, R. Tedeschi, S. Khalil,
R. Maacaroun, C. Makfoud, L. Haydar, R. Al Achi 19

Potential vectors of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma phoenicium’ in Lebanon - L. Picciau, R. Tedeschi,
F. Quaglino, M. Jawhari, Y. Abou-Jawdah, M. Molino Lova, P. Casati, E. Choueiri, H. Abdul-Nour,
P.A. Bianco and A. Alma 21

First report of 'Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’ associated with grapevine “bois noir” disease in
Jordan - N.M. Salem, F. Quaglino, A. Abdeen, P. Casati, D. Bulgari, A. Alma, P.A. Bianco 23

Identification and molecular characterization of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma’ strains from maize in
four Countries - J.F. Mejia, B. Duduk, L. Zamora, S. Paltrinieri, E. Satta, A. Bertaccini, N. Contaldo 25

Advances in knowledge about phytoplasma diseases in Argentina - L. Conci, F. Guzman, F. Fernandez,
E. Galdeano, T. Perez Grosso, A. Saavedra Pons, L. Torres, N. Meneguzzi 27

An update on the status of grapevine yellows disease in vineyards of the Olifants River region of
South Africa - R. Carstens, J. Burger 29

Diseases and insect vectors

‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ - a new phytoplasma species molecularly characterized in Croatia
J. Plavec, |. KriZanac, Z. Budin8tak, D. Ivié, D. Skorié, M. Seruga Musié 31

Molecular characterization of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ and ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma pyri’
isolates from Romania - C. Chireceanu, M. Cieslinska 33

Fruit tree phytoplasmas in Turkey - K. Gaglayan, M. Gazel, C.U. Serce, K. Kaya 35

Molecular diversity of phytoplasmas infecting Rubus sp. plants in Poland - M. Ciesliriska, J. Wéjcik-Seliga,
B. Kowalik 36

Phytoplasmas associated with Rubus idaeus and Rubus fruticosus - R. Ramkat, M. Ruinelli, F. Maghuly,
M. Laimer 38

Phytoplasma infections in Rhododendron hybridum - J. Pribylova, J. Spak, J. Franova 40
Maize redness disease: current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina - B. Loli, G. Perkovié,D. Delié 41

Fruit tree phytoplasmas and their vectors in pome fruit growing in Belgium: overview of current
status and recent research efforts - G. Peusens, C. Duchéne, P. Lepoivre, T. Olivier, S. Steyer,
E. Demonty, P. Laurent, T. Belién 43

Molecular tools developed

Use of groEL gene in characterization of strains belonging to some ‘Candidatus phytoplasma’
species - J. Mitrovic, N. Contaldo, A. Bertaccini, M. Kube, B. Duduk 44

Multiplex and real-time PCR assays for the specific detection of chicory phyllody phytoplasma
(16SrIX-C) - M. Martini, S. Moruzzi, P. Ermacora, F. Ferrini, N. Loi 46

Searching for new markers of the phytoplasma diseases of grapevine - A. Rotter, P. Nikoli¢,
P. Kogovéek, N. Turngek, N. Prezelj, K. Gruden, M. Dermastia 48

Multilocus sequence typing of phytoplasma strains associated with “bois noir” in Italian vineyards
F. Quaglino, Y. Zhao, N. Mori, G. Romanazzi, P. Casati, W. Wei, S. Murolo, R.E. Davis, P.A. Bianco 49

DNA barcoding of phytoplasmas: a tool for their fast identification - M. Nicolaisen, O. Makarova,
S. Paltrinieri, A. Bertaccini, N. Contaldo 51

To the problem of reliable detection and sanitation of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma in
apricots - J. Polak, J. Salava, B. Kfizan, J. Svoboda 52

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases
Molecular Epidemiology

Identification and characterization of European stone fruit yellows and pear decline phytoplasma
strains in Austria C. Paleski¢, G. Brader, M. Riedle-Bauer 54

“Stolbur” phytoplasma strains in Austria and their association with grapevine, bindweed, stinging
nettle and Hyalesthes obsoletus - G. Brader, A. Aryan, J. Mortel, M. Pastar, M. Riedle-Bauer 55

Occurrence of Hyalesthes obsoletus and “stolbur” phytoplasma strains in grapevine and host plants
in Spain - A. Laviria, J. Sabaté, A. Batlle 57

Advances in molecular detection of the sesame phytoplasmas and resistance to sesame phyllody in
Turkey - B. Uzun, C. Ikten, M. Catal, R. Ustun, S. Furat, E. Yol 58

Management

Monitoring programs for quarantine phytoplasmas on grapevine and fruit trees and problems for the
phytosanitary control in Bulgaria - Z. Avramov, A. Etropolska, D. Chavdarova, M. Eftenov,M.Laginova 60

Modeling epidemiological and economic consequences of “flavescence dorée” to Austrian
viticulture as a novel decision tool for control strategies - R. Steffek, G. Strauss, |. Kopacka,
J. Pusterhofer, J. Klement, W. Luttenberger, A. Wenzel, A. Kleissner, R. Alt, H. Reisenzein 62

Scaphoideus titanus Ball and “Flavescence dorée” disease in Portugal - E. Sousa, C. Paula, C. Mimoso,
K. Teixeira, A. Pereira 64
The role of vineyards not treated with insecticides on Scaphoideus titanus spreading - N. Mori,
F. Pavan, A. Pozzebon, D. Fornasiero, C. Peruffo, C. Duso 66

Mark, release and recapture experiments in two model apricot orchards tracking the effects of the
insecticide thiacloprid on the dispersal of Cacopsylla pruni (Hemiptera: Psyllidae), vector of
European stone fruit yellows - M. Riedle-Bauer, C. Paleski¢, K. Bachinger, J. Mértel, C. Engel,
M. Kickenweiz, L. Wurm, L. Czipin, G. Brader 68

Isolation of potential biocontrol agents of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ - D. Bulgari, P. Casati,
F. Quaglino, P.A. Bianco 70

Genomes and their expression
From genomics to the characterization of virulence mechanisms of phytoplasmas -S.Hogenhout 72

Complete genomes and deduced metabolism of acholeplasmas in comparison to members of
‘Candidatus Phytoplasma’ genus - M. Kube, C. Siewert, A.M. Migdoll, B. Duduk, S. Holz, R. Rabus,
E. Seemiiller, J. Mitrovic, C. Bittner, R. Reinhardt 74

Overtime expression of selected chrysanthemum yellows phytoplasma genes during infection of
plant and leafhopper vectors - L. Galetto, D. Pacifico, S. Abba, S. Bertin, S. Palmano, M. Rashidi,
D. Bosco, G. Firrao, C. Marzachi 76

Re-arrangement of sieve element endomembrane network in tomato leaves infected by “stolbur”
phytoplasma S.V. Buxa, R. Polizzotto, F. De Marco, A. Loschi, K-H. Kogel, A.J.E. van Bel, R. Musetti 78

Effect on disease development of suppressive strains of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ and their
molecular characterization - B. Schneider, E. Seemiller 80

The antigenic membrane protein Amp of chrysanthemum yellows phytoplasma is involved in
transmission by leafhopper vectors - Rashidi, L. Galetto, A. Bulgarelli, F. Veratti, D. Bosco, C.Marzachi 82

Adaptation of phytoplasmas responsible for grapevine “flavescence dorée” to Scaphoideus titanus
insect vector: the role of variable membrane proteins VMPs - D. Desqué, D. Khalil, P. Salar, J-L. Danet,
P. Carle, N. Bouvery, L. Béven, S$. Malembic-Maher, X. Foissac 84

 

ol

Diseases and vectors in COST countries
Wat -wG2

 

 

()

 

Phytoplasmas and phytoplasma vectors in Denmark, Finland, Lithuania
and Norway

M. Nicolaisen
Department of Agroecology, Aarhus University, Slagelse, Denmark; Mogens. Nicolaisen@agrsci.dk

Background and objectives

All these countries located in the Northern part of the EU are believed to be not seriously affected by
phytoplasmas, however, during the project a few reports have emerged on the presence of
phytoplasmas in Norway, Finland and Lithuania. Denmark
No phytoplasma or phytoplasma vectors were reported from Denmark. Finland

Phytoplasmas were detected in old reverted black currant plants and RFLP analysis showed that they
belonged to the aster yellows (AY) group (16Srl). In carrot infested by Trioza apicalis Forster together
with the bacterium ‘Candidatus Liberibacter solanacearum’, aster yellows phytoplasma (16Srl-A) was
detected in 20% of samples showing both leaf curling and discoloration but no phytoplasma was
detected in the carrot psyllid samples. Mixed infection of both phytoplasma and ‘Ca. L.
solanacearum’ also was detected in 20% of symptomatic plants. Results of a survey confirmed the presence of both psyllid vector species of ‘Ca. P. mali’, Cacopsylla
picta and C. melanoneura, in Finnish apple orchards. The number of individuals of both species varied
but C. picta prevailed in both years. Reduction in numbers of C. me/anoneura after the hard winter in
2010 was relatively much higher compared with that for C. picta. As C. melanoneura is considered to
be a newcomer in Finland, it may be present at its northernmost border. Occurrence of ‘Ca. P. mali’
in C. picta was determined in samples collected from two localities, one in which numerous imported
apple varieties were planted and the other with ‘local’ varieties. To establish the presence of ‘Ca. P.
mali’ in apple trees, a survey was conducted in 17 commercial apple orchards. Two samples tested
positive and were further analyzed for subtypes and were shown to be apple proliferation subtypes
AT-1 (Lemmetty et a/., 2013). Lithuania

Studies on phytoplasma diseases in this country has at least a fifteen year history allowing
identification of several phytoplasmas in diverse species. Since 2009 a few new phytoplasma-
associated diseases were reported. In diseased sour cherry on the Neringa peninsula showing shoot
proliferation and abnormally small leaves phytoplasmas classified in 16Srl (aster yellows
phytoplasma group), new subgroup 16Srl-Q were detected. Onions plants grown for seed production
in the Kaunas region exhibited mild yellowing of leaves and stems, stunting, phyllody, and
proliferation of flowers. RFLP and sequence analysis of PCR-amplified 16S rRNA, ribosomal protein,
and secY genes revealed the presence of phytoplasmas belonging to subgroups 16Srl-A (rpl-A) and
16Srl-L (rpIB, secYI-B). The results indicated that phytoplasma strains in subgroup16Srl-A (rpI-A) have
the potential to infect onions in Europe and for the first time demonstrated onion as a host for
subgroup 16Srl-L. In diseased plants of clover exhibiting symptoms of clover phyllody or of clover dwarf, two distinct
phytoplasmas were identified: clover phyllody-diseased plants were infected by a subgroup 16Srl-C,
while clover dwarf-diseased plants were infected by both 16Srl-C and a phytoplasma classified in
subgroup 16Srlll-B. These findings extend the known geographical ranges of subgroup I-C and

ns
Ccos Ec Diseases and vectors in COST countries
WG1 - WG2

subgroup III-B taxa. Phytoplasma strains belonging to subgroups 16Srlll-P and 16Srl-C were identified
in leafhoppers collected from a meadow and an orchard. Phytoplasma strains belonging to subgroup
16Srl-C were found in Euscelis incisus and Macrosteles sexnotatus. Phytoplasma strains belonging to
subgroup 16Srlll-P were detected in E. incisus. These results indicate that E. incisus and M.
sexnotatus possibly act as vectors of strains classified in subgroups 16Srl-C and 16Srlll-P, the latter
sub-group containing phytoplasma strains that have to date been found only in Lithuania. Norway

Apple production is an important disease in specific areas in both the western and the eastern parts
of the country. AP is listed as a quarantine disease and a survey in the years 1996 and 1997 revealed
14 diseased trees in orchards throughout the country however no conclusive evidence for natural
spread by vectors was found. The infected trees at these locations were eradicated. From 2000 until
2008 only two or three more infected trees were detected and eradicated. In 2010, however, some
new serious cases of AP disease were found in the western parts of the Country. A survey program
for orchards close to nurseries in the most important fruit districts was then started. During autumn
2011 orchards were inspected and symptomatic plants sampled, in orchards where no AP-like
symptoms were found a random sampling was carried out. AP was found in both symptomatic and
asymptomatic trees. There was not found any infected trees in the nursery production in any of the
nurseries due to a strict use of healthy propagation material and good control of potential vector
populations (Blystad et a/., 2012). Literature cited

Buystao D-R., B. Toppe, M.A. Hoist, M.B. BRURBERG. 2012. Survey for apple proliferation in orchards close to
nurseries in Norway in 2011. Abstract book 22" International Conference on Virus and other graf
transmissible diseases of fruit crops. Rome June 3-8: 98. Lemmetty A., M. SOUKAINEN, T. TUOVINEN. 2013. First report of ’Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’, the causal agent of
apple proliferation disease, in apple trees in Finland. Plant Disease in press http://dx.doi.org/10.1094/PDIS-
04-13-0397-PDN. Diseases and vectors in COST countries
Wat -wG2

ol

 

 

()

 

Phytoplasma diseases and vectors in United Kingdom, The Netherlands
and Belgium

G. Peusens’, P. Lepoivre’, S. Steyer’®, P. Laurent’, K. De Jonghe’, M. Dickinson®, M. Verbeek’
and T. Belién'

'Proefcentrum Fruitteelt vzw, Fruittuinweg 1, 3800 Sint-Truiden, Belgium

“Université de Liege, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, Unité de Phytopathologie, Avenue Marechal Juin, 13, 5030
Gembloux, Belgium

“Centre wallon de Recherches agronomiques, Unité Biologie des nuisibles et biovigilance, Rue de Liroux, 4,
5030 Gembloux, Belgium

‘agence fédérale pour la sécurité de la chaine alimentaire, Avenue Thomas Edison 3, 7000 Mons, Belgium
SInstituut voor Landbouw- en Visserijonderzoek, Burgemeester Van Gansberghelaan 96, bus 1, 9820
Merelbeke, Belgium

®University of Nottingham, School of Biosciences, Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough LE12 5RD, United
Kingdom

“Wageningen UR, Plant Research International, Bio-interacties en Plantgezondheid, Droevendaalsesteeg 1,
6708PB Wageningen, The Netherlands

Here we give an overview of the current status of phytoplasma diseases, their vectors and recent
research efforts in Belgium, UK and The Netherlands. Belgium

In 1981, apple proliferation (AP, associated with ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’, EPPO A2 list) was
discovered for the first time in Belgium. Until recently symptomatic trees had sporadically been
reported and found infected but they were subsequently destroyed. In 2009 two samples collected in a
nursery in the south-west of Belgium tested positive by PCR. Infected trees as well as adjacent trees
have been uprooted and burned to prevent disease spread. Symptoms of pear decline had been observed in the past in some orchards but the presence of
‘Candidatus Phytoplasma pyri’ (EPPO A2 List) was never confirmed by molecular tests. In 2010 and
2011 a limited survey was carried out in a few commercial and non-commercial orchards (apple and
pear) and revealed the presence of both quarantine organisms in root (AP) and leaf samples (PD). Psyllids were collected as well and identified. Following Cacopsylla sp. were found: C. mali, C.
melanoneura and C. pictain apple, C. melanoneura, C. peregrina, C. affinis and C. crataegiin adjacent
hawthorn hedges, C. pyri and C. pyricola in pear. Further research and official inspection of orchards
and nurseries is currently on going and preliminary results will be presented. The Netherlands

Both diseases are also present in the Netherlands - AP at low incidence, PD at moderate rate - as well
as the vector species C. melanoneura, C. pyri and C. pyricola. Another phytoplasma was detected in
gladiolus and hyacinth - ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris’ - as well as its vector Macrosteles
sexnotatus. United Kingdom
In the UK, phytoplasmas are detected only sporadically in minor crops. However imported
poinsettias contain phytoplasma but this does not constitute a disease. ost Diseases and vectors in COST countries
WG1 - WG2

 

 

 

()

Phytoplasma diseases and their vectors in the Czech Republic, Hungary
and Poland

J. Franova', J. P¥ibylova', M. Navratil’, D. Safafova’, I. Ember®, M. Kélber’, S. Sille®,
M. Cieslinska® and M. Kaminska®

‘Bc ASCR, IPMB, Branigovska 31, 370 05 Ceské Budéjovice, Czech Republic; jana@umbr.cas.cz

°Palacky University, Fac. of Science, Dept. of Cell Biology and Genetics, Slechtiteld 11, 783 71 Olomouc,
Czech Republic. SCorvinus University of Budapest, Viticulture and Oenology Inst., Dept. of Viticulture, Villanyi 29-43, 1118
Budapest, Hungary; ibolya.ember@uni-corvinus.hu

‘Genlogs Biodiagnostica Ltd, Dioszegi 37, 1113 Budapest, Hungary. *Plant Protection Institute of Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 1525 Budapest, P.O.Box 102, Hungary. “Dept. Pl. Protect., Institute of Horticulture, Konstytucji 3 Maja 1/3, 96-100 Skierniewice, Poland;
Miroslawa.Cieslinska@insad.pl

Czech Republic (CR)

‘Candidiatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ is a long-standing problem in the CR. Survey was done in
apricot, peach and cherry orchards. Different methods of DNA extraction and PCR detection were
evaluated, including comparison of symptom variability after inoculation in different Prunus spp.. Occurrence of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma pyri’ (PD), ‘Ca. P. mali’ (AP) and ‘Ca. P. asteris’ (16Srl-B and
16Srl-C subgroups) was confirmed in orchards as well as wild growing trees. Extensive study of AP
revealed prevalence of P-I 16-235 profile, rpX-A subgroup, subtypes AP-15 and AT-2. ‘Ca. P. solani’ (stolbur) was detected in many plant species and its epidemics have been recorded in
tomato, pepper and celery in South Moravia. Study of genetic variability of stolbur also by use of
polymorphic gene vmp 1 in annual crops and wild plants revealed presence of 4 genetic variants. First mass occurrence of Hyalesthes obsoletus (vector of stolbur) in South Moravia since 1950’ was
recorded in 2010. Alarming information were obtained about the infectivity of overwintering
Cacopsylla pruni and C. picta that in which phytoplasmas were detected in up to 23% of the samples
and Anaceratagallia ribauti with 50% of stolbur positive individuals. Trifolium pratense and
Chenopodium album were found to be new hosts for stolbur phytoplasma that was also found to be
associated with “bois noir” (BN) disease of grapevine. Asparagus officinalis and Plantago lanceolata were found to be hosts for ‘Ca. P. asteris’ (AY, 16Srl-B). Phytoplasmas belonging to 16Srl-C ribosomal subgroup were firstly reported in Echinacea purpurea,
Rhododendron hybridum, Ribes rubrum and Apium graveolens; phytoplasma of subgroup 16SrllI-B in
E. purpurea and Chenopodium album and phytoplasmas of 16SrVI-A subgroup in Rhododendron
hybridum. The report about U/mus minor affected by elm yellows (EY) in Moravia represents the
northernmost occurrence of this phytoplasma on elm trees within Europe. AP and PD were sporadically monitored in C. picta (90 individuals tested/4 positive) and C. pyri
(966/11), C. pyrisuga (47/1), C. pyricola (17/1) in apple and pear orchards in East Bohemia,
respectively. Examination of hemipterans in Czech vineyards revealed presence of phytoplasmas
belonging to subgroups 16Srl-B, 16Srl-C, 16Srl-F, 16SrIII-B, 16SrXII-A and, unexpectedly, in Jassargus
obtusivalvis of phytoplasmas of the 16SrXIV group. Hungary

National survey of grapevine yellows disease allow to determine the distribution of BN in all the
grape-growing regions of Hungary. Molecular characterisation of ‘Ca. P. solani’ proved the presence
of different genotypes all resulted to belong to the tuf-type b. Most of the isolates clustered in tuf-
type b, STAMP cluster II, while one isolate from tomato resulted to belong to STAMP cluster III. Diseases and vectors in COST countries Co cosc
WG1 - WG2

 

Grapevine isolates from north-west Hungary clustered together in a monophyletic branch of the
STAMP tuf genotype. Transmission of stolbur phytoplasma via potato tubers was studied in a 3-year experiment. Tubers
and their daughter plants (4 varieties of high starch content) were tested with PCR/RFLP and real-
time PCR analyses. In average of three-years 83.8% and 0.5% of the tubers and daughter plants,
respectively resulted positive to the presence of 16SrXII-A subgroup phytoplasmas. The 2010 survey conducted in the maize production areas for the occurrence of maize redness (MR)
disease and of its known vector Reptalus panzeri allow to detect the presence of ‘Ca. P. solani’ in MR
symptomatic maize plants and R. panzeri at one locality. Although Scaphoideus titanus, the vector of “flavescence dorée” (FD) was found in the southern
counties since 2006 and its spreading to north is continuous, FD has not been detected in grapevine. In order to evaluate the risk represented by the wild reservoir as a source of FD outbreaks diverse
wild perennial plants in vineyards were tested for the presence of 16SrV-C and -D phytoplasmas. Phytoplasmas belonging to group 16SrV were detected by nested PCR/RFLP analyses in alders (86%)
and in clematis (71%). Characterisation of the map gene revealed that both strains have the same
map gene sequence as the one reported in FD epidemic strains. This survey has also identified the
presence of Oncopsis a/niand Dictyophara europaea reported to be phytoplasma vectors. ‘Ca. P. pyri‘ the causal agent of PD was detected in C. pyriand C. pyricola and ‘Ca. P. prunorum‘ from
stone fruits as well collected in central region of Hungary. Poland

Epidemiological study on stone fruit phytoplasmas in several regions in Poland revealed
predominantly ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ presence. Moreover, in single peach and sweet cherry trees ‘Ca. P.
mali’ and ‘Ca. P. pyri’ were identified, respectively. Survey of the apple orchards and several home
gardens and study on identification of phytoplasmas revealed the presence of AP and in several cases
of AY (16Srl-B). Most of the AP isolates were identified as belonging to subgroup rpX-A, subtype AP-
15. Only two of them were classified to rpX-B, subtype AT-1. AP was identified also in C. melanoneura
and C. picta, while AY in a single leafhoppers batch. The presence of three phytoplasmas was demonstrated in 11 out of 13 tested coniferous plant
species; 9 are new natural host plants. ‘Ca. P. pini’ (16SrXXI), was detected in Abies procera, Picea
pungens, Pinus banksiana, P. mugo, P. nigra, P. sylvestris, P. tabuliformis and Tsuga canadensis. X-
disease (16Srlll), was detected in Picea abies and P. glauca while ‘Ca. P. asteris’ (16Srl) was identified
in Picea pungens tree. The presence of phytoplasmas was found in about 42% of the tested plants
which originated from the witches’ brooms or showed pronounced shoot proliferation symptoms as
well as in some hybrid trees without disease symptoms. Pisum sativum with stunting, shoot proliferation and leaf chlorosis was found to be a new
phytoplasma host infected by stolbur. AY (16Srl-B) was firstly identified in Brassica interspecific
hybrids with green foliage and complete flower bud failure, in Brussels sprout with stunted growth,
severe leaf malformation and flower bud failure, in Chinese cabbage with abnormal flowers,
virescence and phyllody, in oilseed rape and European hazel and in Fraxinus excelsior showing ash
yellows symptoms. Oriental lily hybrids were found to be infected by AY (16SrI-B) and AP. A
phytoplasma closely related to members of 16Srl-C subgroup was detected in tomato plants in the
western region of the country. The natural occurrence of EY, AY and X diseases in Rubus spp. with
stunting, short and thin shoots was firstly reported in this Country. ost Diseases and vectors in COST countries
WG1 - WG2

 

 

 

()

Presence and distribution of phytoplasma diseases and vectors in
Germany and Switzerland — current state of the art

B. Jarausch’, M. Maixner’, P. Kehrli® and S. Schaerer®

'RLP AgroScience, AlPlanta-Institute for Plant Research, Breitenweg 71, 67435 Neustadt/Weinstrasse,
Germany; barbara.jarausch@agroscience.rlp.de

Julius Kiihn Institute (JKl), Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants Institute for Plant Protection in Fruit
Crops and Viticulture, Geilweilerhof, 76833 Siebeldingen, Germany; Michael.Maixner@jki.bund.de

’station de recherche Agroscope Changins-Wadenswil ACW, Département de recherche Protection des
végétaux grandes cultures et vigne/Viticulture et oenologie, Route de Duillier 50, CP 1012, 1260 Nyon1,
Switzerland; patrik.kehrli@agroscope.admin.ch

Background and objectives

Phytoplasmas are quarantine organisms causing several economically important diseases on different
crops all over Europe. For this reason, updated knowledge on their distribution as well as on the
presence of their vectors is very important for pest risk assessment and phytosanitary decisions. Within
WG2 (Epidemiology and Vector Ecology) of the COST Action FA0807, a questionnaire about distribution
of phytoplasma diseases and their putative vectors throughout European regions has been drafted and
distributed among all members of the action. The objective of this survey was to compile current data
about the spread of different phytoplasma diseases and the presence of their proven or putative
vectors. This abstracts describes the particular situation in Germany and Switzerland. Materials and methods

Phytoplasma detection in plants and insects has been carried out by molecular analysis via PCR as
cited in references. Psyllid identification was done using the key of Ossiannilson (1992) and the
electronic key www.psyllidkey.eu. Vector capacity has been proven by transmission trials in Germany
for Hyalesthes obsoletus, Cacopsylla picta and C. prunias cited in references. Results and discussion

GERMANY: the most important grapevine-related phytoplasma disease is “bois noir” associated with
‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’ (16SrXII-A-group) present in 11 of 13 viticultural regions of Germany
(Darimont and Maixner, 2001). Two other locally spread diseases on grapevine are: the Palatinate
grapevine yellows associated with phytoplasmas of the elm yellows group (16SrV) found in
viticultural areas of Palatinate, Mosel and Franken (Maixner et a/., 2000) and another grapevine
yellows associated with a phytoplasma belonging to the aster yellows group (16Srl) occasionally
found in Palatinate and Mosel areas, respectively (Ipach et a/., 2010). The cixiid Hyalesthes obsoletus,
the proven vector for ‘Ca. P. solani’ to grapevine (Maixner et a/., 1994) has been found in all areas
where the disease is present while the agent of Palatinate grapevine yellows has only found being
erratically transmitted from Alnus glutinosa to grapevine by Oncopsis alni (Maixner et a/., 2000). The
vector(s) for the aster yellows-related phytoplasmas in grapevine are still unknown. So far,
“flavescence dorée” has not been found in Germany. The most important and most widespread
phytoplasma diseases on fruit crops in Germany are: apple proliferation (‘Ca. P. mali’), European
stone fruit yellows (‘Ca. P. prunorum’) and pear decline (‘Ca. P. pyri’) with all agents belonging to the
apple proliferation group (16SrX group). Proven vectors are the psyllid species Cacopsylla picta for
‘Ca. P. mali’ (Jarausch et al, 2003: 2007; 2011) and C. pruni for ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ (Jarausch et al.,
2007). All pear psyllids, C. pyri, C. pyricola and C. pyrisuga are present in Germany, but only C. pyri
and C. pyricola have been found infected with ‘Ca. P. pyri’ (Monien et a/., 2012). Detailed information
about the spread of ‘Ca. P. mali’ and the infection status of its vector C. picta is described by Jarausch
et al. (2011) and online at www.apfeltriebsucht.de. The distribution of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ and its vector

Diseases and vectors in COST countries << cos Ec
WG1 - WG2

C. pruni is recorded in detail for Southwestern Germany (Jarausch et a/., 2007; 2008) while for pear
decline no comprehensive study is published. Further phytoplasma diseases of minor incidence in
Germany are: rubus stunt associated with ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma rubi‘ (16SrV, elm yellows group)
and potato “stolbur” (16SrXII-A group) found in Hesse and Rhineland-Palatinate (Ulrich et al., 2010). SWITZERLAND: both important diseases on grapevine, “bois noir” and “flavescence dorée” are present in
Switzerland. While ‘Ca. P. solani’ and its vector H. obso/etus are widespread all over the country (Kehrli
et al., 2010; 2011), the agent of ‘flavescence dorée’ (16SrV-group) so far has only been found in the
Tessin region (Linder et a/., 2007). ; its proven vector, the leafhopper Scaphoideus titanus, is found not
only in canton Ticino, but also in cantons Vaud and Geneva. The fruit crop diseases apple proliferation
and pear decline are widespread in Switzerland (Bunter and Schaerer, 2012) while European stone fruit
yellows (ESFY) is only reported from some local stone fruit growing regions, mostly in canton Valais,
where its proven vector, C. pruni, is also present (Genini and Ramel, 2004; Ramel and Gugerli, 2004). C.
picta was present in the cantons Aargau and Solothurn, but infected with ‘Ca. P. mali’ only in the
canton Aargau (Jarausch et a/., 2011). No information is so far available concerning the presence or
infection rate of putative vectors of ‘Ca. P. pyri’. The rubus stunt phytoplasma has been episodically
reported from local blackberry and raspberry cultivations. Potato stolbur is also found, but rarely. Literature cited

BUNTER M., S. ScHAERER. 2012. Phytoplasmes en arboriculture. Revue suisse Viticulture, Arboriculture,
Horticulture 44(1): 21

DariMont H., M. MAIXNeR. 2001. Actual distribution of Hyalesthes obsoletus Signoret (Auchenorrhyncha:
Cixiidae) in German viticulture and its significance as a vector of Bois noir. OBC/WPRS Bulletin 24: 199-202. GENINI M., MLE. RAMEL. 2004. Distribution of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma in apricot trees in
Western Switzerland. Acta Horticulturae 657: 455-458. IPACH U., L. KLING, M. MAIXNeR. 2010. Erstes Auftreten von Aster Yellows Disease an Reben in der Pfalz. 57. Deutsche Pflanzenschutztagung, Berlin, 6.-9. September 2010. Julius Kiihn-Archiv 428: 315-316. JARAUSCH B., N. SCHWIND, W. JARAUSCH, G. KRCZAL, E. SEEMULLER, F. DickLer. 2003. First report of Cacopsylia picta as a
vector for apple proliferation phytoplasma in Germany. Plant Disease 87: 101. JARAUSCH B., A. FUCHS, |. MUHLENZ, |. LAMPE, U. HARZER, W. JARAUSCH. 2007. Research on European stone fruit
yellows (ESFY) in Germany. Bulletin of Insectology 60(2): 389-390. JARAUSCH B., A. FUCHS, N. SCHWIND, G. KRCZAL, W. JARAUSCH. 2007. Cacopsylla picta as most important vector for
‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ in Germany and neighbouring regions. Bulletin of Insectology 60(2): 189-190. JARAUSCH B., N. SCHWIND, A. FUCHS, W. JARAUSCH. 2007. Characteristics of the spread of apple proliferation by its
vector Cacopsylla picta. Phytopathology 101: 1471-1480. JARAUSCH B., |. MUHLENZ, A. BECK, I. LAMPE, U. HARZER, W. JARAUSCH. 2008. Epidemiology of European stone fruit
yellows in Germany. Acta Horticulturae 781: 417-422. KEHRLI P., S. SCHAERER, N. DELABAYS, S. KESSLER. 2010. Hyalesthes obsoletus, vecteur du bois noir de la vigne:
répartition et biologie. Revue Suisse de Viticulture Arboriculture Horticulture 42: 190-196. KEHRLI P., S. KESSLER, S. SCHAERER, S. DELABAYS. 2011. Distribution and host plant preferences of Hyalesthes
obsoletus, the vector of bois noir disease, in Switzerland. OBC/WPRS Bulletin 67:3-8. Linper C., M. JERMINI. 2007. Biologie et distributions du vecteur de la Flavescence dorée dans les vignobles. Revue Suisse de Viticulture Arboriculture Horticulture 39: 97-101. MAIxNer M., U. AHRENS, E. SEEMULLER. 1994. Detection of mycoplasmalike organisms associated with a yellows
disease of grapevine in Germany. Journal of Phytopathology 142: 1-10. Maixner M., W. REINERT, H. DARIMONT. 2000. Transmission of grapevine yellows by Oncopsis alni (Schrank)
(Auchenorrhyncha: Macropsinae). Vitis 39: 83-84. Monien S., C. WILLMER, E. Mester, B. KALAND. 2012 Monitoring of Cacopsylla species in Schleswig-Holstein 2009-
2011. Julius-Kihn-Archiv 438: 354. Ramet M.E., P. GuGERLI. 2004. Epidemiological survey of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma in two
orchards in Western Switzerland. Acta Horticulturae 657: 459-463. ULRICH R., U. Preis, S. FABICH. 2010. Potato stolbur phytoplasma in Hesse and Rhineland-Palatinate. Ju/ius-Ktihn-
Archiv 428: 288. Diseases and vectors in COST countries
Wat - WG2

 

 

 

Recent insight on phytoplasma diseases and vectors in France

Xavier Foissac
UMR1332 Fruit Biology and Pathology, INRA and Université Bordeaux Ségalen, 71 avenue Edouard Bourlaux,
CS20032, 33882 Villenave d’Ornon, France; foissac@bordeaux.inra.fr

Phytoplasma diseases mainly affect the French grapevine, stone fruit and lavender production. These
diseases are mainly spreading by sap feeding hemipteran insect vectors. Two strains of “flavescence dorée” (FD) phytoplasmas are present in French FD outbreaks and
surrounding wild Vitis regrowth and infected alders and may constitute potential epidemic
reservoirs. In France, FD is epidemically transmitted by the grapevine leafhopper Scaphoideus titanus, an insect
of North American origin now widely distributed in the vineyards of Southern France and also
present in Burgundy, Jura, Champagne and Loire Valley. The S. titanus populations were shown to
have been introduced once from the USA and therefore low genetic diversity is encountered (Papura
et al., 2009; 2012). Grapevine yellows are surveyed using a reference diagnosis method consisting of
a Taqman triplex real-time PCR for FD and “bois noir” (BN) phytoplasmas as well as a Vitis vinifera
endogenous control (Pelletier et a/., 2009). The sequencing or the restriction map of the gene map
allows to differentiate different genetic clusters associated with FD outbreaks. In France, the genetic
cluster mapFD2 is clonal and represent 85% of the disease cases, whereas the cluster mapFD1 only
represents 15% of the FD cases and is mainly detected in South-Western France (Salar et a/., 2009). This two strains have been isolated and transmitted to broad bean. Experiments in controlled
conditions showed both strains multiply at the same kinetics in plant, so they should have the same
epidemiological properties. The prevalence of the strain mapFD2 may have resulted from
propagation from nurseries (Salar et a/., 2013). Despite the control measures such as the pulling out
of the infected grapes and the spread of insecticide, the disease is difficult to control due to the large
viticulture areas involved. In order to use less insecticide, some growers organizations decided to
improve the disease management by monitoring the insect vector populations and extensively
surveying the vineyards for disease symptoms. Alders were randomly sampled in France. So called
alder yellows phytoplasmas (AldY) were detected in more than 85% of the alder trees. Most of the
AldY map gene sequences showed some diversity but formed a monophyletic cluster with other map
gene sequences of FD, AldY and Palatinate Grapevine Yellows (PGY) strains. The map gene sequence
of some AldY strains was found identical to the one of French mapFD1 type strains while other AldY
isolates clearly classified in the mapFD2 cluster. In South-western France, along rivers, uncontrolled
rootstock regrowths have shown to constitute in many places a reservoir for FD phytoplasmas and S.
titanus populations escaping the insecticide treatments. BN is endemic in French vineyards and ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’ strains detected belong to
the stamp cluster IA and IV. Specific strains are responsible for severe outbreaks of lavender decline. The “bois noir” disease associated with ‘Ca. P. solani’ presence is endemic in France and is transmitted
by Hyalesthes obsoletus, a planthopper residing in weeds such as bindweeds (Convolvulus arvensis) and
stinging nettles (Urtica dioica) which also is endemic and acts as plant reservoirs. ‘Ca. P. solani’ is also affecting solanaceous crop such as tomato, tobacco, eggplant, pepper but also
sugar beet and small fruit production such as strawberry. The most important damages are caused to
lavender fields where H. obso/letus are proliferating. Lavender decline is associated with several
genetic variants of ‘Ca. P. solani’ (Danet et a/., 2010) but one specific strains is prevalent the secY
strain $17 which was representing about 75% of the disease cases in 2010. Diseases and vectors in COST countries << cos Ec
WG1 - WG2

A gene encoding a variable surface protein of Ca. P. solani’ was recently isolated and used for strain
genotyping (Fabre et a/., 2011a; 2011b). Stamp gene sequencing allowed to differentiate 56 different
genotypes in the Euro-Mediterranean basin. Phylogenetic analysis showed the existence of four main
stamp genetic clusters. French isolates corresponded to genetic clusters tuf-type b and stamp IA
corresponding to strains from bindweed in Western Europe and tuf-type a stamp IV corresponding to
strain detected in U. dioica. European stone fruit yellows and its psyllid vectors

‘Ca. P. prunorum’ induces economic damages essentially to apricot and Japanese plum
production and two cryptic species corresponding to Cacopsylla pruni are present in France
as vector of European stone fruit yellows; they have overwintering and latency stage on
conifers (Thebaud et al., 2009; Peccoud et a/., 2013). Eleven different genotypes of ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ have been detected so far in France (Danet ef al., 2011). ‘Ca. P. pyri’ and ‘Ca. P.
mali’ are present but do not cause important losses to the pome fruit production. Literature cited

Daner J-L., O. SEMeTEY, J. GAUDIN, E. VERDIN, E. CHAISSE, X. Foissac. 2010. Lavender decline is caused by several
genetic variants of the Stolbur phytoplasma in south eastern France. In: COST FA0807 Integrated
management of phytoplasma epidemics in different crop systems. Edited by A. Bertaccini, A. Lavina, A.
Batlle, Sitges, Spain: 9. DANET J-L., G. BALAKISHIYEVA, A. CIMERMAN, N. SAUVION, V. MARIE-JEANNE, G. LABONNE, A. Lavitia, A. BATLLE, |. KRIZANAC,
D. Skorié, P. ERMACORA, C. Utusas SERGE, K. CAGLAYAN, W. JARAUSCH, X. Foissac. 2011. Multilocus sequence
analysis reveals the genetic diversity of European fruit tree phytoplasmas and the existence of inter species
recombination. Microbiology 157: 438-450. Fapre A., J-L. DANET, X. Foissac. 2011a. The stolbur phytoplasma antigenic membrane protein gene stamp is
submitted to diversifying positive selection. Gene 472: 37-41. Fare A., G. BALAKISHIYEVA, I. EMBER, A. OMAR, Z. Acs, M. KOLBER, L. KAUZNER, M. DELLA BARTOLA, J-L. DANET, X. FOISSAC. 2011b. StAMP encoding the antigenic membrane protein of stolbur phytoplasma is useful for molecular
epidemiology. Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): $21-S22. Mavemeic-Maner S., P, SALaR, D. VERGNES, X. Foissac. 2007. Detection and diversity of "flavescence dorée” - related
phytoplasmas in alders surrounding infected vineyards in Aquitaine (France). Bulletin of Insectology 60: 329-330. Papura D., F. DELMOTTE, X. GIRESSE, P. SALAR, J-L. DANET, M. VAN HELDEN, X. Foissac, S. MALEMBIC-MAHER. 2009. Comparing the spatial genetic structures of the Flavescence dorée phytoplasma and its leafhopper vector
Scaphoideus titanus. Infection Genetics and Evolution 9: 867-876. Papura D., C. BURBAN, M. VAN HELDEN, X. GIRESSE, B. NUSILLARD, T. GUILLEMAUD, C. KERDELHUE. 2012. Microsatellite and
Mitochondrial Data Provide Evidence for a Single Major Introduction for the Neartic Leafhopper
Scaphoideus titanus in Europe. Plos One 7(5): e36882. Peccoup J., G. LABONNE, N. SAUVION. 2013. Molecular test to assign individuals within the Cacopsylla pruni
complex. Plos One 8(8): e72454. PELLETIER C., P. SALAR, J. GILLET, G. CLOQUEMIN, P. VERY, X. Foissac, S. MALEMBIC-MAHER. 2009. Triplex real-time PCR
assay for sensitive and simultaneous detection of grapevine phytoplasmas of the 16SrV and 16SrXII-A
groups with an endogenous analytical control. Vitis 48: 87-95. SALAR P., D. CLAIR, X. Foissac, E. BOUDON PADIEU, S. MALEMBIC-MAHER. 2009. Comparison of prevalence,
geographical distribution and biological properties of two flavescence dorée phytoplasma strains. Le
Progres Agricole et Viticole HS: 137-138. SALAR P., C. CHARENTON, X. FoIssac, S. MALEMBIC-MAHER. 2013. Multiplication kinetics of the Flavescence dorée
phytoplasma in broad bean. Effect of phytoplasma strain and temperature. European Journal of Plant
Pathology 135: 371-381. THEBAUD G., M. Yvon, R. ALARY, N. SAUVION, G. LABONNE. 2009. Efficient transmission of 'Candidatus Phytoplasma
prunorum' is delayed by eight months due to a long latency in its host-alternating vector. Phytopathology
99: 265-273.

 

ost Diseases and vectors in COST countries
WG1 - WG2

 

 

 

()

Overview of the phytoplasma and vector research in Austria, Croatia
and Slovenia since 2009

D. Skorié
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Maruli¢ev trg 9a —- HR-10000 Zagreb, Croatia;
dijana.skoric@biol.pmf.hr

Background and objectives

The phytoplasma research in Austria, Croatia and Slovenia has some common features probably due
to the geographic proximity, cultural links and overlaps in agricultural practices. The focus is on
grapevine problems, the importance of “bois noir” phytoplasma disease (BN, ‘Candidatus
Phytoplasma solani’) and on the constant improvements in diagnostic approaches. This overview
summarizes the main achievements in phytoplasma and vector research from 2009 onwards
entailing the readers’ familiarity with the previous publications. The data were gathered from the
published papers and conference contributions available to the author for the years 2009-2013. For
brevity, only the most relevant contributions not recorded in the COST Action FA0807 yearly
publication lists (www.costphytoplasma.eu) are cited here. Austria

Significant increase of BN infected vineyards has been noted in the recent years in Austria. Systematic
field investigations of the diseased vineyards as pathosystems consisting of infected vines, insect
vectors and weed phytoplasma enabled both detecting new members of the pathosystem and
experimenting with measures like pruning and pollarding to manage BN. Agalliinae leafhopper
Anaceratagallia ribauti captured on grapevine, and reared in the laboratory, was proven to transmit BN
to Vicia faba in the experimental conditions. The BN transmission by A. ribauti was also demonstrated
to occur from Convolvulus arvensis to Catharanthus roseus (Riedle-Bauer et a/., 2013) introducing
potentially a new member in the BN epidemiological cycle. In this recent grapevine epidemiology
research, the evidence of nettle and bindweed infections with ‘Ca. P. convolvuli’ was found. The
outbreaks of FD in Austrian vineyards were not recorded until 2009. The foci in Southeast Styria and
later in South Styria regions included indigenous varieties and an American hybrid, as well as Clematis
plants. Mixed infections of BN and “Flavescence dorée” phytoplasmas (FD) were also recorded. Apricot,
pear and apple orchards were surveyed for psyllid vectors and the insects were investigated for
phytoplasma presence. The expected Cacopsylla species were found in the corresponding orchards but
apparently C. pruni as an ESFY agent (‘Ca. P. prunorum’) vector has become a major concern in the
Austrian apricot production. Expectedly, C. pruni was found positive for ESFY in molecular tests whilst
the pear decline phytoplasma (PD; ‘Ca. P. pyri’) was detected in C. pyricola, C. pyri and C. pyrisuga. In
apples, both C. melanoneura and C. picta were present but without AP detected, as yet. Croatia

The BN impact on the Croatian vine growing is still the largest. Correspondingly, BN molecular
epidemiology and diversity is the most investigated resulting in finding its vast molecular diversity by
multigene sequence analysis (about 20 different genotypes). Closed Hyalestes obsoletus-bindweed-
grapevine pathosystems have been found but also indications of different pathosystems at some
locations (Seruga Musié ef al., 2012; 2013). The first FD foci were recorded in 2009-10 both in
commercially well-known and indigenous grapevine varieties. FD presence has been confirmed in
Clematis and Scaphoideus titanus (Seruga Musi¢ et al., 2012). FD1 and FD3 (16SrV-C) strains were
found at different locations. ‘Ca. P. asteris’ (AY) was sporadically detected in grapevines, S. titanus,
fruit trees and C. pyri. Even though symptoms of PD and AP were reported in the country long ago,

10

Diseases and vectors in COST countries << cos Ec

 

Wat -wG2

the molecular characterization of pathogens and the vector survey are more recent. ‘Ca. P. pyri’ and
‘Ca. P. prunorum’ are the most widespread and have the highest incidence in pears and several stone
fruit species, respectively. C. pruni has been implicated in the ESFY transmission, whilst C. pyri and C.
pyrisuga were found positive for PD. Molecular diversity of fruit tree phytoplasmas was richer than
expected which was later confirmed by multigene sequence analysis of some local strains within an
international consortium. Interestingly, BN was found in pears as often as PD. Moreover, some C.
pyrisuga samples also harboured stolbur phytoplasmas. The epidemiological significance of these
findings is still unresolved. The finding of C. melanoneura and C. picta preceded the molecular
identification of AP for about 5 years (Seruga Musi¢ et a/., 2013). A phytoplasma known to infect
conifer species ‘Ca. P. pini’ was detected in Croatia for the first time in 2011 in Pinus mugo and P.
halepensis (Jezié et al., 2012). Slovenia

The Slovenian phytoplasma research in the last five years has been marked by the efforts to
understand the grapevine interactions with phytoplasmas via biochemistry, genomics and
transcriptomics approaches and to introduce new diagnostic procedures like real-time PCR and loop-
mediated isothermal amplification (Prezelj et a/., 2013; Rotter et a/., 2013). Besides the main BN
vector H. obsoletus, Euscelis incisus, $. titanus, Reptalus cuspidatus and R. panzeri also harbour BN
apparently without major epidemiological significance. Besides in symptomatic Echinacea purpurea
plants, the aster yellows phytoplasma (AY) has not been detected in any other host in the country. The FD in Slovenia has been present in grapevine and Clematis vitalba since 2005, however, the
comparison of Clematis and neighbouring grapevine FD isolates was undertaken in 2010 and yielded
interesting results regarding this phytoplasma molecular diversity and epidemiology. Besides S.
titanus, harbouring FD2 (16SrV-D) phytoplasmas, the mosaic leafhopper Orientus ishidae was found
infected with FD adding it to the complexity of the FD pathosystems. Alders (A/nus glutinosa and A.
incana) and Oncopsis a/ni were found to host phytoplasmas with sequence similarities to all three FD
clusters, as well as those similar to other alder yellows strains. The presence of AP, PD and ESFY in
Slovenia is long known, as well as the wide distribution of their common vectors, and does not differ
from the usual scenarios. Besides in apple, AP was detected in cherry, apricot and European plum. ESFY was detected in C. pruni, PD in C. pyriand C. pyricola. Literature cited

Jezié M., |. Powuak, M. lozourié, M. Curkovic-PErICA. 2012. First report of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma pini’ in Croatia. 19” Congress of the IOM, Toulouse, 15/20 July: 158-159. Prezel) M., P. Nikouic, K. GRUDEN, M. RAVNIKAR, M. DeRMASTIA. 2013. Spatiotemporal distribution of flavescence
dorée phytoplasma in grapevine. Plant Pathology 62: 760-766. RapISeK S., N. FERANT., J JAKSE., J. JAVORNIK. 2009. Identification of a phytoplasma from the aster yellows group
infecting purple coneflower (Echinacea purpurea) in Slovenia. Plant Pathology 58: 392. RieDLE-BAUER M., J. MOrTeL, M. PasTAr, A. ARYAN, G. BRADER. 2013. Mass occurrence of Hyalestes obsoletus on
Urtica dioica in Austria and sole presence of tuf-b stolbur phytoplasma on stinging nettles, grapevine and in
the transmitting insects. x” European Bois Noir Workshop, Barcelona, 20/21 March: 26-27. Rotter A., P. Nikou¢, M. RAVNIKAR, K. GRUDEN, M. DermastiA. 2013. Classification trees based on the gene
expression information from selected genes for the prediction of “bois noir” disease status of grapevine. x
European Bois Noir Workshop, Barcelona, 20/21 March: 67-68. SRUGA Musi M., J. PLAVEG, |. KRIZANAG, Z. Bupinscak, D. Sxorié, 2012. A case study of Bois noir and Flavescence dorée phytoplasma
pathosystems: multilocus sequence typing approach. 19” Congress of the IOM, Toulouse, 15/20 July. 156-157. SeruGa Musi¢ M., J. PLAVEC, |. KRIZANAC, Z. Bupinséak, D. Skori¢. 2013. A case study of “bois noir” phytoplasma
pathosystem: multilocus sequence typing approach. x European Bois Noir Workshop, Barcelona, 20/21
March: 32-33.

 

ost Diseases and vectors in COST countries
WG1 - WG2

 

 

 

()

Overview of the phytoplasma and vector research in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, FYR Macedonia, Romania and Serbia

B. Duduk
Institute of Pesticides and Environmental Protection, Banatska, 31b - 11080 Belgrade, Serbia;
Bojan.Duduk@pesting.org.rs

Background and objectives

The examined countries showed increasing interest in phytoplasma research trough the Action that
was shown by increasing number of publication mainly focused on phytoplasmas and insect vectors
identification as detailed below. Bosnia and Herzegovina

The phytoplasma associated diseases detection in Bosnia and Herzegovina was greatly increased
trough the action as well as the research on potential insect vectors. Main research was carried out
on phytoplasmas infecting grapevine, and mainly related with “bois noir” strain characterization,
however considering the presence in southern districts of Scaphoideus titanus (Delié et a/., 2007)
extensive monitoring were performed. Presence and diffusion of grapevine yellows phytoplasmas
was investigated in 2008 and 2010 in twelve vineyards located in two viticultural areas of Srpska
where samples from different cultivars and weeds were collected for molecular analyses together
with some potential insect vectors. Phytoplasmas belonging to 16SrXII-A group were confirmed to be
associated with grapevine yellows, while in a Clematis vitalba sample a phytoplasma belongin to
16SrV-C subgroup was identified. RFLP analysis of the tuf gene indicated the presence of the tuf-type
b of stolbur phytoplasmas. Dictyophara europaea and Reptalus cuspidatus were identified but
molecular analyses did not show phytoplasma presence in the tested insect samples of these species
(Delié et a/., 2011). Bulgaria

Rubus fruticosus in the region of Plovdiv showing severe stunting and bushy aspect resulted infected
with a “stolbur” phytoplasma belonging to tuf-type b (Bobev et a/., 2013); the same phytoplasma was
reported in Convolvulus arvensis and Prunus avium (Avramov et al., 2011a). Epidemiological studies on
“bois noir” presence as well as on insect vectors indicate the presence of Hyalesthes obosoletus and
Reptalus spp. infected with “stolbur’. The presence of “flavescence dorée” vector S. titanus was also
reported (Avramov et al., 2011b). In fruit trees all three main phytoplasmas belonging to the apple
proliferation group were identified. The spread and the frequency of individuals from the psyllid genus
Cacopsylla in four fruit tree orchards in three different regions indicated that all psyllid species
described as vectors of fruit tree phytoplasmas were present: Cacopsylla pruni specimens from two
different regions were carrying ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ (Etropolska et a/., 2011). FYR Macedonia
In this Country research was carried out on grapevine yellows presence and spreading in 13 locations
of seven regions and “bois noir” tuf-type b was always identified (Mitrev et a/., 2011). Romania

“Stolbur” phytoplasmas were detected in several crops such as potato, tomato, pepper, eggplant and
beet (Beta vulgaris); the same phytoplasma was also detected in weeds, particularly Convo/vulus
arvensis, Cuscuta sp., and Euphorbia falcata. All infected samples had the same RFLP profile

12

Diseases and vectors in COST countries ~s cos Ec
WG1 - WG2

corresponding to the tuf-type b. “Stolbur”-affected potato plants produced a large number of spongy
tubers that resulted in commercially unacceptable potato chips upon processing (Ember et al., 2011). Apple proliferation and pear decline were also detected respectively in apple and pear. Serbia

Phytoplasmas studied in Serbia enclose “stolbur”, “flavescence dorée” in grapevine, European stone
fruit yellows, apple proliferation, pear decline, aster yellows, 16Srll-E, 16Srlll-B, bermudagrass white
leaf, ‘Ca. P. ulmi’, ‘Ca. P. rhamni’. The new ‘Ca. P. convolvuli’ was also reported in bindweed together
with “stolbur” phytoplasmas. Epidemiological studies on stolbur and aster yellows phytoplasmas
insect vectors have been conducted (Jovi¢ et a/., 2009; Drobnjakovié et a/., 2010). A new marker,
groEL gene, has been used for analyses of some of the examined phytoplasmas (Mitrovié et al.,
2011). Literature cited

AvraMmov Z., N. CONTALDO, A. BERTACCINI. 201 1a. First report of stolbur phytoplasmas in Prunus avium in Bulgaria
Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): $71-S72. Avramov Z., |. IvANOVA, M. LAGINOVA. 2011b. Screening for phytoplasma presence in leafhoppers and
planthoppers collected in Bulgarian vineyards. Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): 115-S116. Bosev S.G., K. De JONGHE, M. Maes. 2013. First Report of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’ on Blackberry (Rubus
fruticosus) in Bulgaria. Plant Disease 97(2): 282. Deui¢ D., G. SELJAK, M. MARTINI, P. ERMACORA, L. CARRARO, A. Myrta, G. Duric. 2007. Surveys for grapevine yellows
phytoplasmas in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Bulletin of Insectology 60(2): 369-370. Detic D., N. CONTALDO, S. PALTRINIERI, B. Louic, Z. Duric, S. HANcic, A. BERTACCINI. 2011. Grapevine yellows in Bosnia
and Herzegovina: surveys to identify phytoplasmas in grapevine, weeds and insect vectors. Bulletin of
Insectology 64(Supplement): $245-S246. Droswakovic T., P. Peri¢, D. Marcic, L. Picciau, A. ALMA, J. Mitrovic, B. Dubuk, A. BERTACCINI. 2010. Identifying
potential phytoplasma vectors in infected carrot fields in Serbia. In: Current status and perspectives of
phytoplasma disease research and management. A. Bertaccini, A. Lavina & A. Batlle (eds). Sitges, Spain: 49. ETROPOLSKA A., B. JARAUSCH, G. TRENCHEV, W. JARAUSCH. 2011. Survey of psyllid vectors of fruit tree phytoplasmas in
Bulgaria: a preliminary report. Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): 261-262. Jovie J., T. Cvrkovic, M. Mitrovic, S. KANJAuI¢, A. Petrovic, M.G. REDINBAUGH, R.C. PRATT, S.A. HOGENHOUT, |. TOSEVSKI. 2009. Stolbur phytoplasma transmission to maize by Reptalus panzeri and the disease cycle of maize
redness in Serbia. Phytopathology 99(9): 1053-1061. Mitrovic J., S. KAKIZAWA, B. DuDUK, K. OsHiMA, S. Nama, A. BERTACCINI. 2011. The groEL gene as an additional
marker for finer differentiation of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris’ - related strains. Annals of Applied
Biology 159: 41 - 48. Mitrev S. |. KaRov, E KosTADINOvskA. 2011. Grapevine yellows in the Republic of Macedonia: molecular
identification of stolbur phytoplasma strains in grapevine and weeds. Petria 21 (2/3): 112-113.

 

ost Diseases and vectors in COST countries
WG1 - WG2

 

 

 

()

Review of occurrence of phytoplasmas in Spain, Portugal and Malta

E. Torres’, A. Batlle”, A. Lavifia’, J. Bech’, A. Bertaccini® and E. Sousa’

‘Plant Health Laboratory, Agriculture Department, Generalitat de Catalunya, 08348 Cabrils, Spain;
ester.torres@gencat.cat

"IRTA.Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentaries.Dpt. Patologia Vegetal, 08348 Cabrils, Barcelona, Spain. assumpcio.batlle@irta.cat

*Alma Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, DipSA - Patologia Vegetale, Viale Fanin, 42 - 40126 Bologna,
Italy; assunta.bertaccini@unibo.it

“Esmeraldina Sousa, National Institute Agrarian and Veterinary Research (INIAV). Edificio 1,Tapada da Ajuda,
1300-018 Lisboa, Portugal; esmeraldina.sousa@iniav.pt

Phytoplasmas and vectors involved in grapevine yellows diseases

Two diseases in cultivated grapevines, “flavescence dorée” (FD) and “bois noir” (BN), have been
reported in Spain and Portugal. FD is the most aggressive disease but the symptoms of both are
similar and mainly involve plant decline, desiccation of inflorescences, withering of clusters, irregular
maturation of the wood, leaf rolling, vein banding, leaf yellowing on white variety and leaf reddening
on red variety. The most spread disease in Spain is the BN, it is present in different vine growing
regions such as “La Rioja”, Alava, Navarre, Catalonia and Aragoon. The first outbreak of FD in Spain
was detected in 1996 in the French boarder in Northeast of Catalonia and by now the disease is
eradicated. FD is the most dangerous disease caused by phytoplasmas in Portugal where it was
detected since 2002 (Sousa et al/., 2003:2009) after the first identification of its vector, the
ampelophagous leafhopper Schapoideus titanus Ball in 1998 (Quartau et a/, 2001). The phytoplasma
associated with FD in Spain and Portugal belongs to the ribosomal group 16SrV-D. This strain shows
also epidemic activity in other countries as France and Italy. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’ is the
phytoplasma associated with BN. The study of the geographical distribution of stolbur isolates (tuf-
type) in grapevine plants showed that tuf-type a was identified in La Rioja and Navarre and tuf-type b
in Catalonia, Aragon and Navarre. In Hyalesthes obsoletus signoret only tuf-type b was identified until
now (Batlle et a/., 2009). In Spain S. titanus was identified in the north of the country: Catalonia (Northeast) and Galicia
(Nothwest). The limit in the distribution of this insect seems to be the south of Catalonia, any individual
has been captured in the viticultural areas of the south of Catalonia (Ribera d’Ebre and Terra Alta). In
Portugal, S. titanus is present in Northeast and Central regions as well in Madeira Island. The vector of BN, H. obso/etus, is present in all areas were BN is present but in low populations. The
highest number of individuals was recorded in Navarre and Aragon, whereas in Alava and Catalonia,
the population of H. obsoletus was lower. The peaks of population take place between June 6" and
July 14" (Sabaté et al., 2007). In Malta small surveys were carried out in the main grapevine growing areas from 2009 and
phytoplasma presence was not detected so far. Monitoring about insect vectors were not carried out
in this Country. Phytoplasmas and vectors involved in fruit tree diseases

European stone fruit yellows is widespread in Spain. ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ has been identified in plum,
apricot, nectarine, peach and almond crops. The vector Cacopsylla pruni was identified for the first
time in Spain in fruit areas near Barcelona in 2003. The population of C. pruniis low in Spain, showing
higher population in Extremadura and Catalonia (Barcelona and Tarragona) and lower in Aragon and
Valencia (Lavifia et al., 2004). Pear decline disease is widespread in several pear fruit areas of Spain. The main affected varieties are
Llimonera (Jules Guyot), Abate Fettel and Bartlett. Blanquilla variety shows the lowest incidence of

14

Diseases and vectors in COST countries << cos Ec
WG1 - WG2

the disease (Garcia-Chapa et al. 2003). Apple proliferation is spread only in the north of Spain,
Asturias and Basque Country. ‘Ca. P. pyri’ and ‘Ca. P. mali’ are present in pear and apple orchards in
Spain; ‘Ca. P. pyri’ was recently identified also in the central region of Portugal. Cacopsylla pyriis, as in other Mediterranean areas, the pear decline vector in Spain and Portugal. It is
also a pest in pear orchards of both countries and mainly the only Cacopsylla present in the orchards. Sampling carried out in apple plots of different geographical areas of Spain indicated the presence of
the two species of Cacopsylla reported as vectors of the apple proliferation disease. The population
evolution of C. picta and C. melanoneura showed two peaks, one for adults re-immigrants in early
April and the other for new generations between June and July. The populations of C. picta are
higher than those of C. me/anoneura (Lavifia et al., 2011)

Other phytoplasmas detected

Phytoplasmas belonging to the “stolbur” group (16SrXII) were detected in willow (Salix babylonica
Linn) showing yellows, ball-like structures and small leaves symptoms collected in Valencia Province
(Eastern Spain), in Dianthus caryophyllus, in solanaceous and in other horticultural crops. Phytoplasmas clustering in the 16Srlll group, the type member of which is X-disease phytoplasma,
were detected in faba bean (Vicia faba L.) plants showing symptoms of shoe stringed leaves, phyllody
and flower abortion in Malaga (Southern Spain). ‘Ca. P. pini’ has been detected in Pinus halepensis in
the Mediterranean coast of Spain. Phytoplasmas related to phytoplasmas of group 16SrVI, of which
the type member is clover proliferation phytoplasma, where detected in Capsicum annuum plants
showing short internodes and green flowers buds. ‘Ca. P. asteris’ has been detected in ornamental
and horticultural plants. Table 1. Presence of phytoplasma diseases of fruit trees and grapevine in Spain. Region/s Phytoplasma/s Strain/s | Phytoplasma | iieigence | Host/s
disease
Spain ‘Ca. P. pyri’ PD medium Pear
Spain “Ca. P. prunorum’ ESFY medium Plum, apricot
Spain ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ ESFY low Peach, nectarine
Basque /Asturias | ‘Ca. P. mali’ AP. low Cider
Spain ‘Ca. P. solani’ Tuf-types “bois noir" : low Grapevine, parsley,
aandb ‘stolbur’ strawberry, carrot.....
North Catalonia_| “flavescence dorée” | 16SrV-D | FD Eradicated | Grapevine
Table 2. Phytoplasma vectors identified in Spain and Portugal. Population density | Phytoplasma/s Infection rate
wectors Spain Portugal | Spain Portugal | Spain _| Portugal vector hosts
. . 4 .,| Ca. P.

C. pyri high high Ca. P. pyri pyri’ 6% nd Pear
C. pruni low . ‘Ca. P. |. 10-30% | - Prunus mahleb;

prunorum P. spinosa; Prunus sp. C. picta medium | - ‘Ca. P. - 30% - Malus sp. mali

Convolvulus;

H. obsoletus | low ? Ca. P. Ca. P. 30-80% | nd Lavandula;

solani solani Solanum nigrum

Portugal: grapevine

S. titanus medium | high FD FD nd high Grapevine

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ns
cosc Diseases and vectors in COST countries
WG1 - WG2

Literature cited

BaTite A., J SABATE, A LAVINA. 2009. Incidence of Bois Noir phytoplasma in different viticulture regions of Spain
and stolbur isolates distribution in plants and vectors. Le Progres Agricole et Viticole HS: 190-192. GarciA-CHAPA M., A. LAVINA, |. SANCHEZ, V. MEDINA, A. BATLLE. 2003. Occurrence, symptom expression and
characterization of phytoplasma associated with pear decline in Catalonia (Spain). Journal of
Phytopathology 151: 584-590. Lavina A., J. SABATE, M. GARCIA-CHAPA, E. TorRES, A. BATLLE. 2004. Occurrence and epidemiology of European stone
fruit yellows phytoplasma in Spain. Acta Horticulturae 657: 489-494. Lavifia A., J. Sabaté, A. Batlle. 2011. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasmas mali’: identification of potential insect vectors in
apple orchards of Spain. Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): $125- $126. QUARTAU J., J. GUIMARAES, G. ANDRE. 2001. On the occurrence in Portugal of the neartic Scaphoideus titanus Ball
(Homoptera, Cicadellidae), the natural vector of the grapevine ‘flavescence dorée’ (FD). Reuniaéo Grupo
trabalho de Protecgao Integrada da Vinha OILB/SROP, Ponte de Lima, Portugal 3-7 March 2001. SABATE J., A. LAVINA, A. BATLLE. 2007. Incidence of “bois noir” phytoplasma in different wine-growing regions of
Spain and its relation to Hyalesthes obsoletus. Bulletin of Insectology 60(2): 367-368. Sousa E., F. CARDOSO, P.A. BIANCO, M. GUIMARAES, V PEREIRA. 2003. Detection and identification of phytoplasmas
belonging to 16SrV-D in Scaphoideus titanus adults in Portugal. In: Proceedings 14" Meeting of the
International Council for the Study of Virus and Virus-like Diseases of the Grapevine, Locorotondo, Bari,
Italy, September 12-17: 78. Sousa E., C. SA, F. CARDOSO, M. Mesquita, A. OLIvelRA, P. Casati, P.A. BIANCO. 2009. Epidemics of flavescence dorée
disease in Portugal. Le Progrés Agricole et Viticole HS: 178. 16

 

ol

Diseases and vectors in COST countries
Wat -wG2

 

 

()

 

Phytoplasmas and phytoplasma vectors in Greece, Israel, Italy and Turkey

Piero A. Bianco
Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie ed Ambientali, Universita degli Studi di Milano, 20133 Milano, Italy;
piero.bianco@unimi.it

The improvements on phytoplasma and vector knowledge in Italy, Greece, Turkey and Israel
obtained in the frame of the COST FA0807 are of great impact for the Mediterranean areas of these
Countries and also for the EU as well. The information concerns new plant hosts of phytoplasmas,
new vectors and development of new techniques for pathogen detection and production of novel
tools and strategies for disease containment. Also, the characterization of phytoplasma infecting already established hosts allowed to give more,
detailed information concerning taxonomy, etiology and epidemiology of several crops including
grapevine, fruit tree species, cereals and ornamental plants. In particular a new phytoplasma species
infecting bindweed has been found and described by Martini and colleagues (2012). Grapevine

Grapevine appears to be the most investigated crop in terms of phytoplasma characterization of
phytoplasma group and subgroup involved in the grapevine yellows (GY) etiology. For “flavescence
dorée” (FD) interesting achievements allowed Filippin and colleagues (2009) to identify different
plant species as new hosts of the phytoplasma agent such as Clematis vitalba and Ailanthus altissima. Also, the same research group showed the capacity of Dictyophara europaea to transmit the FD
phytoplasma from C. vitalba to grapevine. FD phytoplasma characterization has been also conducted
in different areas of Italy by other groups using ribosomal and non ribosomal genes in single and
multilocus sequence analysis. The use of this technique made possible to draw a more precise
picture of the presence and the distribution of FD phytoplasma strains in Italy (Bertaccini et al.,
2009). Recently in Turkey has been also detected for the first time the presence of 16SrV group
phytoplasmas and of phytoplasmas belonging to group 16SrIX (Ertunc et a/., 2013), the latter
phytoplasma group is known to contain phytoplasmas associated with a tremendous diseases of
almond and other stone fruit trees in EU geographically contiguous Countries such as Lebanon. As for FD, also for “bois noir” (BN) several works underlined the molecular diversity among the BN
stains based on analysis of different phytoplasma genes (Pacifico et a/., 2009), helping to investigate
the presence of BN in wild plants, mainly weeds, in vineyard and their role as reservoir for the
phytoplasma and the vector Hyalesthes obsoletus, survival in field. The BN ecology in fact is critical
for the disease management in particular for the production of healthy plant material to be provided
to nursery companies and for surveys and tests to be carried out by the phytosanitary services. The
BN phytoplasma was detected and studied in Israel, Italy and Turkey. Fruit trees

Among the plant quarantine phytoplasma apple proliferation (AP) took an important part in the
research activities in Italy, Turkey and Greece often related to outbreak of the disease like in Italy and
Greece (Rumbou ef a/., 2011). The studies on the phytoplasma characterization have been
accompanied to the investigation on vector/s ecology allowing to draw a more precise map of the
disease in Italy accompanied with the phytoplasma strain information based on 16S rDNA and
multilocus sequence analysis (Casati et a/., 2011). In Turkey also European stone fruit yellows and
pear decline were studied together with other phytoplasmas infecting fruit trees. ns
cosc Diseases and vectors in COST countries
WG1 - WG2

Literature cited

BerTACciN! A., S. PALTRINIERI, F. DAL MOLIN, J. Mitrovic, B. DuDUK. 2009. Molecular identification and geographic
distribution of Flavescence dorée phytoplasma strains. Le Progrés agricole et viticole HS: 135-136. Cast! P., F. QUAGLINO, A.R. STERN, R. TEDESCHI, A. ALMA, P.A. BIANCO. 2011. Multiple gene analyses reveal extensive
genetic diversity among ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ populations. Annals of Applied Biology 158(1):
257-266. ErTUNC F., D. CANIK OREL, $. BAYRAM, S. PALTRINIERI, A. BERTACCINI, $. TOPKAYA, G. Sovemezoétu. 2013. Occurrence and
molecular characterization of grapevine phytoplasmas in main viticultural regions of Turkey. Turkish Journal
of Agriculture And Forestry (in press). FILipPIN L., J. Jovi¢, T. Cvekovic, V. Forte, D. CLAIR, |. TOSevski, E. BOUDON-PADIEU, M. Borgo, E. ANGELINI. 2009. Molecular characteristics of phytoplasmas associated with “flavescence dorée” in clematis and grapevine
and preliminary results on the role of Dictyophara europaea as a vector. Plant Pathology 58(5): 826-837. Martini M., C. MARCONE, J. Mitrovic, M. Malxner, D. Deui¢, A. Myrra, P. ERMACORA, A. BERTACCINI, B. DUDUK. 2012. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma convolvuli’, a new phytoplasmas taxon associated with bindweed yellows in four
European countries. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 62(12): 2910-2915. PaciFico D., A. ALMA, B. BAGNOLI, X. Foissac, G. PASQUINI, M. TessiToRI, C. MARZACHI. 2009. Characterization of bois
noir isolates by restriction fragment length polymorphism of a stolbur-specific putative membrane protein
gene. Phytopathology 99(6): 711-715. Rumeou A., D. MILIORDOS, C. ATHANASIOU, A. KOUTROUMPAS, A. SAHINOGLOU, I. RUMBOS. 2011. Investigation on the
apple proliferation epidemics in the orchards of the Pelion Mountain and preliminary observations on
possible phytoplasma vectors. Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): $259-S260. 18

Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
Wat -wG2

 

 

 

Almond witches’ broom phytoplasma: disease monitoring and
preliminary control measures in Lebanon

M. Molino Lova’, Y. Abou Jawdah’, E. Choueiri®, M. Beyrouthy’, R. Fakhr’, P.A. Bianco®,
A. Alma’, H. Sobhn?, M. Jawahri*, C. Mortada®, P. Najjar’, P. Casati®, F. Quaglino®,
L. Picciau®, R. Tedeschi®, S. Khalil’, R. Maacaroun’, C. Makhfoud', L. Haydar’ and R. Al Achi”
‘AVSI Foundation, Jounieh Ghadir, Lebanon

?Faculty of Agricultural and Food Sciences (FAFS), American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon

“Lebanese Agricultural Research Institute, Tal Amara, Rayak, Zahlé, Lebanon

‘Universite’ Saint Esprit de Kaslik, Kaslik, Lebanon

SDISAA, Universita degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy

®DISAFA — Universita di Torino, Italy

"Ministry of Agriculture, Beirut, Lebanon

Background and objectives

A national survey was conducted in Lebanon in 2009/2010 and updated in 2012 in order to detect
the almond witches’ broom disease (AlmWB) spread in the country, as well as preliminary researches
about the disease epidemiology and phytoplasma characterization. Over four years of work,
Lebanese and Italian efforts were joined to define focus and endemic areas, to discover the
phytoplasma vector(s) and to elaborate preliminary management plans. Materials and methods

Lebanon is divided in 26 districts, where local offices of the “Ministry of Agriculture extension
services” are located. Training sessions for sixty technicians have been developed in order to train
the extension services personnel about the disease symptoms and the sample collection. According
to the national census and the field condition, 561 stone fruit cultivated regions have been visited, in
order to collect leaf samples for the detection of the phytoplasma presence in the stone fruit
orchards. A common protocol of detection has been established and shared among three laboratory
units at AUB, LARI and USEK departments, by using the specific primer pair AIWF2/AIWR2. A
complete survey of 279 mother plants at the LARI-Tal Amara station (used for the Lebanese certified
seedling production), as well as of 136 registered and non-registered nurseries has been
implemented, in order to check the phytosanitary status of the nursery sector in Lebanon. A scientific
committee has been created to discuss and share, every 6 months, the partially achieved results and
the strategies to be implemented among all the involved partners and subjects. Four meetings have
been organised so far and a final event will resume the four year works in December 2013. Since the
research about the phytoplasma vector(s) is still on going, in order to reduce the presence of foci of
infection in the Country, an eradication plan has been first implemented in a pilot area (Zahle district)
in 2012 and then extended to seven districts in 2013. Results and discussion

Almond, peach and nectarine were severely affected and the number of infected trees was
increasing. The disease presence, detected in 16 districts out of 26 in 2010, was also confirmed in 2
different districts in 2012 (Bent Jbeil and Bcharre); 216 out of 561 monitored villages have been
recorded with positive samples collected in stone fruit orchards. About the nursery sector, 282 samples were collected and analyzed from registered and non-
registered nurseries. Five out of 136 visited nurseries were found selling positive seedlings; a prompt
decision from the Lebanese Ministry of Agriculture was adopted to destroy all the seedlings. Extension services have been developed for farmer and nurseryman awareness. The pilot area for

19

ns
cosc Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
WG1 - WG2

 

tree elimination and replacement has been implemented in 14 villages, with the elimination of 182
infected trees. Within the last year, a plan of tree elimination and crop replacement has been
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture to reduce the impact of the disease and to support the
rural affected areas in Baalback, West Bekaa, Rachaya, Hasbaya, Marjayoun, Bent Jbeil and Jezzine
districts. A total of 2,666 infected trees have been eliminated until the end of July by the field team in
61 villages. The farmers will receive from the Ministry of Agriculture new crops, adapted to the
different regions, in support of their economic losses. The cooperation for the complex research for ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma phoenicium’ epidemiology
and control is the necessary tool to achieve the expected and necessary results. Regulation and
control measures must urgently adopted to contain the diffusion of almond witches’ broom in
Lebanon but also to avoid its spread in the Middle East and in Europe. 20

Diseases and vectors in non COST countries Scos Ec

 

Wat -wG2

Potential vectors of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma phoenicium’ in Lebanon

L. Picciau’, R. Tedeschi’, F. Quaglino”, M. Jawhari’, Y. Abou-Jawdah’, M. Molino Lova’,
P. Casati’, E. Choueiri®, H. Abdul-Nour®, P.A. Bianco? and A. Alma’

'DISAFA, Universita degli Studi di Torino, Via L. da Vinci 44, 10095 Grugliasco (TO), Italy; alberto.alma@unito.it
2DISAA, Produzione, Territorio, Agroenergia, Universita degli Studi di Milano, Via Celoria 2, 20133 Milano, Italy
“Faculty of Agricultural and Food Sciences, American University of Beirut, PO Box 11-0236, Beirut, Lebanon
‘AVSI Lebanon, Rue St. Fawka, Centre Jean Paul Il, 1200 Jounieh Ghadir, Lebanon

SLebanese Agricultural Research Institute, Tal Amara, Rayak, PO Box 287, Zahlé, Lebanon

5B.P, 90 549, Jdeidet al-Matn, 1202 2050, Lebanon

Background and objectives

The presence and rapid spread of almond witches’ broom disease (AlmWB) in Lebanon,
causing serious economic losses, entails the activity of one or more insect vectors. Previous
investigations focused on the family Cicadellidae showed Asymmetrasca decedens Paoli to
be the most abundant species in stone fruit orchards and able to carry ‘Candidatus
Phytoplasma phoenicium’. Although other leafhopper species, usually present in very low
density in the orchards and belonging to the subfamilies Typhlocybinae and Deltocephalinae
were found positive to the phytoplasma as well, their vector ability has never been proved
by transmission trials (Abou-Jawdah e¢ a/., 2003, Dakhil et a/., 2011). Beside the leafhoppers some cixiid (planthopper) species are known as vectors of
phytoplasmas to various crops (Maixner, 1994; Jovié et al., 2007; Pinzauti et a/., 2008). For
this reason we focused the survey on the cixiid-fauna present in almond and nectarine
orchards of Lebanon with particular attention on their natural infection by phytoplasmas. Materials and methods

Deepened samplings were carried out through the years 2010-2012 by means of Malaise
and yellow sticky traps in two AlmWB infected orchards planted respectively with almond
and nectarine trees. Additional direct samplings with a hand-held D-vac were performed in
the same orchards and surroundings. All cixiids captured with the different methods were
identified by morphological features and subsequently analysed for phytoplasma
detection. Total DNA was subjected to direct and nested PCR, using respectively the semi-specific
primer pair AIWF2/AIWR2 (Abou-Jawdah et a/., 2003) and the primer pair P1/P7 (Deng and
Hiruki, 1991; Smart et a/., 1996) followed by the primers R16F2n/R16R2 (Gundersen and Lee,
1996) universal for phytoplasmas. Nested PCR products were then sequenced to identify
16Sr group/subgroup. Results and discussion

The following cixiid genera were collected during the different insect field collections: Cixius,
Tachycixius, Eumecurus, Oliarus, Pentastira, Pentastiridius and Hyalesthes. The molecular
analyses pointed out Cixius, Tachycixius, Eumecurus and Hyalesthes as carriers of ‘Ca. P.
phoenicium’. These results highlighted the role of planthoppers in the epidemiology of
AlmWB disease. Nevertheless further studies about their vector activity as well as their
specific identification are needed. Concerning this latter a deep systematic revision is

21

ns
cosc Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
WG1 - WG2

 

desirable to solve the taxonomic critical situation of this family. Moreover, since almost no
information is known about their biology, new surveys will be important to better
understand the disease spread and define suitable control strategies. Literature cited

ABOU-JAWDAH Y., H. DAKHIL, S. EL-MEHTAR, I-M. Lee. 2003. Almond witches’ broom phytoplasma, a potential threat
to almond, peach and nectarine. Canadian Journal of Plant Pathology 25: 28-32. DAKHIL H.A., E. A.-F. HAMMAD, C. EL-MOHTAR, Y. ABOU-JAWDAH. 2011. Survey of leafhopper species in almond
orchards infected with almond witches’ broom phytoplasma in Lebanon. Journal of Insect Science 11: 1-12. DENG S., C. HIRUKI. 1991. Amplification of 16S rRNA genes from culturable and nonculturable mollicutes. Journal
Microbiological Methods 14: 53-61. GunperseNn D.E., I-M. Lee. 1996. Ultrasensitive detection of phytoplasmas by nested-PCR assays using two
universal primer pairs. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 35: 144-151. JoviéJ., T. Cvrkovic, M. Mitrovic, S. Kansasic, M.G. REDINBAUGH, R.C. PRATT, R.E. GINGERY, S.A. HOGENHOUT, |. TOSEVSKI. 2007. Roles of stolour phytoplasma and Reptalus panzeri (Cixiinae, Auchenorrhyncha) in the epidemiology
of maize redness in Serbia. European Journal of Plant Pathology 118: 85-89. Ma\xNeR M. 1994. Transmission of German grapevine yellows (Vergilbungskrankheit) by the planthopper
Hyalesthes obsoletus (Auchenorrhyncha: Cixiidae). Vitis 33: 103-104. PinzauTiF., V. TRIVELLONE, B. BAGNOLI. 2008. Ability of Repta/us quinquecostatus (Hemiptera: Cixiidae) to inoculate
stolbur phytoplasma to artificial feeding medium. Annals of Applied Biology 153: 299-305. Smart C.D., B. SCHNEIDER, C.L. BLOMQUIST, LJ. GUERRA, N.A. HARRISON, U. AHRENS, K.H. LORENZ, E. SEEMULLER, B.C. KirkpATRICk 1996. Phytoplasma-specific PCR primers based on sequences of the 16-23S rRNA spacer region. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 62: 2988-2993. 22

 

Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
Wat -wG2

ol

 

 

()

 

First report of 'Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’ associated with grapevine
“bois noir” disease in Jordan

N.M. Salem’, F. Quaglino”, A. Abdeen’, P. Casati’, D. Bulgari’, A. Alma‘ and P.A. Bianco”
‘Department of Plant Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Jordan, Amman, 11942, Jordan;
n.salem@ju.edu.jo

2Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie e Ambientali - Produzione, Territorio, Agroenergia, Universita degli Studi di
Milano- via Celoria 2, 20133 Milano, Italy; piero.bianco@unimi.it

*Knowledge Sector, Royal Scientific Society, Amman, 11942, Jordan

‘Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie, Forestali e Ambientali, Universita degli Studi di Torino - via L. da Vinci 44,
10095 Grugliasco (TO), Italy; alberto.alma@unito.it

Background and objectives

“Bois noir” (BN) is a disease of the grapevine yellows (GY) complex associated with 'Candidatus
Phytoplasma solani’ phytoplasmas (subgroup 16SrXII-A) mainly transmitted by the polyphagous
Cixiidae Hyalesthes obsoletus Signoret (Alma et a/., 1987; Quaglino ef a/., 2009; 2013). BN is largely
spread in Europe and in Countries of the Mediterranean Basin, but in the last years its presence was
reported also in South America, in South Africa, in Iran and in China (Botti and Bertaccini, 2006;
Gajardo et al., 2009; Karimi et a/., 2009; Duduk et a/., 2010). In the present work, we communicate
the first report of BN in Jordan. Materials and methods

A survey was carried out in Jordan vineyards in August and October 2012, grapevine plants showing
typical grapevine yellows (GY) disease symptoms were observed. In the same vineyards, bindweed
plants showing stunting and leaf chromatic alteration were found suggesting the involvement of
phytoplasmas in the disease etiology. Total DNA was extracted from leaf veins of 25 symptomatic
and two asymptomatic grapevines, and from five symptomatic and two asymptomatic bindweeds. Phytoplasma detection by nested PCR assays carried out using universal primer pairs P1/P7 followed
by R16F2n/R16R2 (F2n/R2) (Lee et a/., 1998). DNAs from periwinkle plants infected by ‘Ca. P. asteris’
strain SAY (group 16Srl), ‘Ca. P. solani’ strain STOL (group 16SrXIl), and ‘Ca. P. ulmi’ strain EY1 (group
16SrV), were used as positive controls. DNAs from healthy periwinkle and reactions without template
DNA were employed as negative controls. F2n/R2 PCR products amplified from grapevines and
bindweeds were sequenced and analysed through the software BlastN (sequence identity), BioEdit
(alignment), iPhyClassifier (group/subgroup affiliation), and MEGA 5 (phylogeny). Results and discussion

Amplification of a band of the expected size (1,250 nt) in three grapevines and in five bindweeds, and
in the positive controls through 16S rDNA nested PCRs was observed. No amplification with DNA
from 22 symptomatic grapevines, probably because samples were collected late in the growing
season and phytoplasma distribution in plants was non-uniform (Skoric et a/., 1998; Constable et al.,
2003), nor from asymptomatic plants and negative controls. PCR products were sequenced by
commercial services in Italy (Primm, Milan) and Korea (Macrogen Inc., Soul). Representative 16S
rDNA nucleotide sequences were deposited in NCBI GenBank with accession number KC835139
(from grapevine) and KC835140 (from bindweed). The 16S rDNA nucleotide sequences of
phytoplasmas identified in grapevine and bindweed in Jordan shared >99.5% sequence identity with
‘Ca. P. solani’ reference strain STOL (AF248959), and carried identical STOL-unique signature
sequences and distinguishing sequence blocks (Quaglino et a/., 2013). Phylogenetic and in silico RFLP
analyses confirmed the affiliation of phytoplasma strains identified in grapevine and bindweed in

23

ns
cosc Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
WG1 - WG2

 

Jordan to ‘Ca. P. solani’ (subgroup 16SrXII-A), opening an avenue to future studies on the
dissemination and impact of “bois noir” disease in Jordan. These studies may add new information
about BN, previously reported in neighboring countries (Davis, et al., 1997; Choueiri et a/., 2002;
Contaldo et a/., 2011). Further studies will investigate the role of Hyalesthes obsoletus Signoret, a
polyphagous Cixiidae responsible for the BN phytoplasma transmission in Europe, and other possible
insect vector(s) in the BN spread in Jordan. Literature cited

Auma A., C. ARNO, A. ARZONE, C. VIDANO. 1987. New bio-logical reports on Achenorrhyncha in vineyards. In:
Proceeding of the 6th Auchenorrhyncha Meeting, Turin, Italy, 7-11 September: 509-516. Bewu! G., P.A. BIANCO, M. Conti. 2010. Grapevine yellows in Italy: past, present and future. Journal of Plant
Pathology 92: 303-326. BomiiS., A. BERTACCINI. 2006. First report of phytoplasmas in grapevine in South Africa. Plant Disease 90: 1360. CHoueIR! E., F. JREWIRI, S. EL ZAMMAR, E. VERDIN, P. SALAR, J.L. DANET, J. Bove, M. GARNIER. 2002. First report of
grapevine ‘Bois Noir’ disease and a new phytoplasma infecting solanaceous plants in Lebanon. Plant Disease
86(6): 697-697. CONSTABLE F.E., K. S. Gigs, R.H. SYMONS. 2003. Seasonal distribution of phytoplasmas in Australian grapevines. Plant Pathology 52: 267-276. CONTALDO N., Z. Souri, A. BERTACCINI. 2011. Preliminary identification of phytoplasmas associated with grapevine
yellows in Syria. Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): S217-S218. Davis R.E., E.L. DALty, E. TANNe, I.C. RumBos. 1997. Phytoplasmas associated with grapevine yellows in Israel and
Greece belong to the stolbur phytoplasma subgroup, 16SrXII-A. Journal of Plant Pathology 79: 181-187. Dupuk B., J.B. TIAN, N. CONTALDO, X.P. FAN, S. PALTRINIERI, Q.F. CHEN, Q.F. ZHAO, A. BERTACCINI. 2010. Occurrence of
phytoplasmas related to stolbur and to ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma japonicum’ in woody host plants in China. Journal of Phytopathology 158(2): 100-104. GavarDo A., N. FloRE, S. PRODAN, S. PALTRINIERI, S. BOTTI, A.M. PINO, A. ZAMORANO, J. MONTEALEGRE, A. BERTACCINI. 2009. Phytoplasmas associated with grapevine yellows in Chile. Plant Disease 93: 789-796. Karimi M., N. ConTALDO, B. MaHMoupi, B. Dupuk, A. BERTACCINI. 2009. Identification of stolbur-related
phytoplasmas in grapevine showing decline symptoms in Iran. Le Progrés agricole et viticole HS: 208-209. Lee I-M., D.E. GUNDERSEN-RINDAL, R.E. Davis, |.M. BARTOSzYK. 1998. Revised classification scheme of phytoplasmas
based on RFLP analyses of 16S rRNA and ribosomal protein gene sequences. International Journal of
Systematic Bacteriology 48: 1153-1169. QUAGLINO F., Y. ZHAO, P.A. BIANCO, W. Wel, P. CasATI, G. DURANTE, R.E. Davis. 2009. New 16Sr subgroups and distinct
single nucleotide polymorphism lineages among grapevine Bois noir phytoplasma populations. Annals of
Applied Biology 154: 279-289. QUAGLINO F., Y. ZHAO, P. Casati, D. BULGARI, P.A. BIANCO, W. Wel, R.E. Davis. 2013. 'Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’,
a novel taxon associated with stolbur and bois noir related diseases of plants. International Journal of
Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 63(8): 2879-2894. Skoric D., A. SARiCc, M. ViBlo, E. Murari, M. KRAJACIC, A. BERTACCINI. 1998. Molecular identification and seasonal
monitoring of phytoplasmas infecting Croatian grapevines. Vitis 37: 171-175. 24

 

ol

Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
Wat -wG2

 

 

()

 

Identification and molecular characterization of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma’
strains from maize in four Countries

J.F. Mejia’, B. Duduk’, L. Zamora’, S. Paltrinieri’, E. Satta’, A. Bertaccini' and N. Contaldo"
‘Alma Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, DipSA — Plant Pathology, Viale Fanin, 42 - 40126 Bologna, Italy;
jfmejiadr1 @gmail.com; assunta.bertaccini@unibo.it

Institute of Pesticides and Environmental Protection, Banatska, 31b - 11080 Belgrade, Serbia;
Bojan.Duduk@pesting.org.rs

Background and objectives

Maize is affected by phytoplasma diseases in some of its cultivation areas where losses of production
can be higher than 50%. However diverse phytoplasmas can be associated with similar disease
symptoms such as stunting, reddening of leaves, early and abnormal ripening, precocious death,
poor and shriveled grains in kernels that are in some cases also malformed. Phytoplasmas infecting
corn in Americas are associated with maize bushy stunt disease and belong to 16Srl-B ribosomal
subgroup (aster yellows or ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris’), while in Europe the same symptoms
were mainly associated with corn reddeness and belong to ribosomal subgroup 16SrXII-A (“stolbur”)
(Bedendo et al, 2000; Duduk and Bertaccini, 2006). Besides the identification of “stolbur”
phytoplasmas in Serbia, Hungary and Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Italy preliminary identification of
phytoplasmas belonging to 16Srl (aster yellows), 16Srlll (X disease) and 16SrXIl (“stolbur”) groups, in
same cases in mixed infection was reported (Calari et al, 2010). Molecular analyses and
characterization were carried out on aster yellows and “stolbur” strains from different geographic
areas. Materials and methods

Plants showing typical disease symptoms were collected and aster yellows and “stolbur” strains from
Colombia, Serbia, Cuba and Italy were selected after 16S rDNA identification, and characterized by
MLT (multi locus typing) assays. Nucleic acid was extracted from 0.4 — 1.0 g of leaf tissues, stem and
young cobs (Prince et a/., 1993). Direct PCR analyses with P1A/P7A (Lee et a/., 2004) followed by
nested PCR by F1/B6 (Duduk e¢ a/., 2004), R16F2n/R2, R16(I)F1/R1 (Gundersen and Lee, 1996; Lee et
al., 1994) were carried out. RFLP analyses with Tru7l were carried out for aster yellows and “stolbur”
identification and with Hhal and Mboll respectively, for strains characterization. Aster yellows strains
from Cuba and Colombia were further studied by direct sequencing with F1, B6, F2n and R2 of
P1A/P7A amplicons and by RFLP analyses with Trufl, Hpy8l, Taal, Alul e Tsp5091 and direct
sequencing of groEL, tuf, amp, pseudo helicase and rp genes (Schneider et al., 1997; Duduk and
Bertaccini, 2006; Kakizawa et a/., 2004; Martini et a/., 2007; Mitrovi¢é et a/., 2011a). Results and discussion

From all countries phytoplasmas were identified only in samples from symptomatic materials and
aster yellows phytoplasmas (16SrI-B) were identified in Colombia, Cuba and Italy, while
“stolbur”(16SrXII-A) phytoplasmas were only detected in Serbia and Italy. While “stolbur” strains
collected in either in Serbia or in Italy show polymorphism in 16Sr DNA, aster yellows strains from
corn collected in Colombia, Cuba and Italy show no polymorphisms in this gene. Further molecular characterization of aster yellows strains from Colombia and Cuba on groEL gene
allow distinguishing the aster yellows strains detected in these countries in maize from all other aster
yellows phytoplasmas used as reference (Mitrovi¢ et a/., 2011a; 2011b). RFLP analyses with Tru?l and
Tsp5091 on amp gene amplicons and with Trufl, Hpyél, Taal, Alul on rpL22/rpS3 gene showed
differential profiles between strains infecting maize in Colombia and in Cuba and reference

25

ns
cosc Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
WG1 - WG2

 

phytoplasma strains. Moreover the Hpy8l restriction on the latter gene show a SNP distinguishing
Colombian strain from the strain from Cuba and Mexico (Accession number AY265208). The results
of RFLP analyses were confirmed and consistent with those obtained by sequencing for the aster
yellows phytoplasmas. Predicted translation products for all genes evaluated, confirmed the
differentiation of phytoplasmas in corn from Cuba and Colombia from all other strains used for the
analyses. Literature cited

BepeNpo I.P., R.E. Davis, E.L. DALLY. 2000. Detection and identification of the maize bushy stunt phytoplasma in
corn plants in brazil using PCR and RFLP. International Journal of Pest Management 46: 73-76. CALARI A., N. CONTALDO, S. ARDIZZI, A. BERTACCINI. 2010. Phytoplasma detection in corn with reddening in Italy. Current status and perspectives of phytoplasma disease research and management. Sitges—Spain, February
1st and 2nd: 5. Dupuk B., A. BERTACCINI. 2006. Corn with symptoms of reddening: new host of stolbur phytoplasma. Plant
Disease 90: 1313-1319. Duouk B., S. Bort, M. Ivanovic, B. Kasti¢, N. Dukic, A. BERTACCINI. 2004. Identification of phytoplasmas associated
with grapevine yellows in Serbia. Journal of Phytopathology 152: 575-579. Gunpersen DE, Lee I-M. 1996. Ultrasensitive detection of phytoplasmas by nested-PCR assays using two
universal primer pairs. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 35: 114-151. KaKIZAWA S., K. OsHIMA, H. NISHIGAWA, H.Y. JUNG, W. Wel, S. SUZUKI, M. TANAKA, S. Miyata, M. UcaKi, S. NAMBA. 2004. Secretion of immunodominant membrane protein from onion yellows phytoplasma through the Sec protein
translocation system in Escherichia coli. Microbiology 150: 135-142. Lee I-M., D.E. GUNDERSEN, R.W. HAMMOND, R.E. Davis. 1994. Use of mycoplasmalike organism (MLO) group-specific
oligonucleotide primers for nested-PCR assays to detect mixed-MLO infections in a single host plant. Phytopathology 84: 559-566. Lee I-M., D.E. GUNDERSEN-RINDAL, R.E. Davis, K.D. BoTTNer, C. MARCONE, E. SEEMULLER. 2004. 'Candidatus
Phytoplasma asteris', a novel phytoplasma taxon associated with aster yellows and related diseases. Intemational Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 54: 1037-1048. Martini M., I-M. Lee, K.D. BOTTNER, Y. ZHAO, S. BOTTI, A. BERTACCINI, N.A. HARRISON, L. CARRARO, C. MARCONE, A.J. KHAN,
R. Oster. 2007. Ribosomal protein gene-based phylogeny for finer differentiation and classification of
phytoplasmas. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 57: 2037-2051. Mitrovic J., S. KakiZAWA, B. Dubuk, K. OsHiMA, S. NAMBA, A. BERTACCINI. 2011a. The cpn60 gene as an additional
marker for finer differentiation of 'Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris' related strains. Annals of Applied
Biology 159: 41-48. Mrrrovic J., N. CONTALDO, S. PALTRINIERI, J.F. MEJA, M. Mori, A. BERTACCINI, B. DUDUK. 201 1b. The use of groEL gene in
characterisation of aster yellows phytoplasmas in field collected samples. Bulletin of Insectology
64(Supplement): $17-S18. Prince J.P., R.E. Davis, T.K., I-M. Lee, B.D. Mocen, E.L. DALLY, A. BERTACCINI, R. CreDI, M. Bars. 1993. Molecular
detection of diverse mycoplasmalike organisms (MLOs) associated with grapevine yellows and their
classification with aster yellows, X-disease, and elm yellows MLOs. Phytopathology 83: 1130-1137. SCHNEIDER B., K.S. GipB, E. SEEMULLER 1997. Sequence and RFLP analysis of the elongation factor Tu gene used in
differentiation and classification of phytoplasmas. Microbiology 143: 3381-3389. 26

 

Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
Wat -wG2

Q
i

 

 

 

Advances in knowledge about phytoplasma diseases in Argentina

L. Conci’, F. Guzman’, F. Fernandez’, E. Galdeano’, T. Perez Grosso’, A. Saavedra Pons',
L. Torres’ and N. Meneguzzi*

‘Instituto de Patologia Vegetal (IPAVE), CIAP-INTA. Camino 60 cuadras Km 5,5. X5020ICA, Cordoba, Argentina;
Iconci@correo.inta.gov.ar

“Instituto de Botanica del Nordeste (CONICET-UNNE). Universidad Nacional del Nordeste. Corrientes, Argentina
5Facultad de Ciencias Agropecuarias. Universidad Nacional de Cordoba, Cordoba, Argentina

‘Estacion Experimental Agropecuaria Famaill-INTA. Tucuman, Argentina

Background and objectives

Two well defined situations can be seen in Argentina as regards the presence of phytoplasmas, similar
to what is reported in several other Countries. On one hand, plant species that develop symptoms of
infection sporadically, and with low frequency. In such situation only the pathogen characterization can
be performed and eventually maintain them under controlled conditions on experimental plant hosts. On the other hand, there are other situations in which systematically affected plants are found in the
crop, and it is possible to study the pathogen involved, identify insect vectors, establish the disease
incidence, the losses and the cycle of the disease. Currently the work team is focused on detection and
molecular characterization of new phytoplasmas; identification of different species of Hemiptera
vectors and the components involved in the transmission; epidemiological studies of phytoplasmas
diseases in different crops; study of proteins potentially involved in host-pathogen interaction. Materials and methods

IDENTIFICATION AND MOLECULAR CHARACTERIZATION. DNA from symptomatic plants is purified and amplified
by PCR using universal primers (Lee et a/., 1993; 1998). Usually amplicons produced by PCR are
analyzed by RFLP, cloned, sequenced and aligned to database sequences. When possible transmission
of the pathogen into periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) by grafting or by Cuscuta subinclusa is also
carried out. EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES. In crops systematically affected by phytoplasma diseases, the epidemiological
studies were carried out. In production areas of strawberry (Fragaria x annanassa), alfalfa (Medicago
sativa) and garlic (Allium sativa) crops where sampled. The incidence and prevalence were
determined. When possible, Hemiptera fauna in each crop has been studied, and losses caused by the
disease have been established. VecTors. The transmission of the agent associated with "escoba de bruja de la alfalfa" (ArAWB) was
studied in an experimental way. Hemiptera insects collected from alfalfa fields were identified and
the presence of phytoplasma determined. The insects are being reared under controlled conditions in
order to study each species transmission parameters. PHYTOPLASMA HOST INTERACTIONS. In order to characterize and immunolocalize pathogen proteins in
infected tissue, we are producing antisera against effector, immunodominant membrane and SecA
proteins of selected phytoplasmas from Argentina. Results and discussion

IDENTIFICATION AND MOLECULAR CHARACTERIZATION. We have identified four different 16Sr pytoplasma
groups in more than 20 plant species. The highest number and widest distribution of strains was
found in 16Srlll group (X-disease) with subgroups -J, -W and -X (Galdeano et a/., 2004; Fernandez et
al., 2013b). Phytoplasmas of 16Srl group (aster yellows) subgroup -S were described (Torres et al.,
2011) and of group 16SrVII (Ash yellows) with subgroups -B and -C (Conci et a/., 2005; Meneguzzi et
al., 2008; Fernandez et a/., 2013a). 16SrXIII group (Mexican periwinkle virescence phytoplasmas) was

27

ns
Ccos Ec Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
WG1 - WG2

detected in China tree and in strawberry (Arneodo et a/., 2005, Fernandez et a/., 2008). Several of
these pathogens have been identified exclusively in South America. EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES. Phytoplasmas present in strawberry, garlic and alfalfa are present with high
prevalence and low incidence. We have also demonstrated that the symptoms in strawberries are not
always related to phytoplasma presence suggesting the presence of other pathogens or abiotic
stresses involved in the symptom development. In alfalfa, the incidence increased with the crop age
and lead to premature death of the affected plants. The severity of the disease is extremely high in
garlic and leads to death of the plant in early infections. “Morado” genotype is significantly more
susceptible to garlic decline (16Srlll-J group phytoplasmas) than “nco” and “Colorado” types. However, the absence of an efficient vector reduces the disease incidence and symptom remission
during sprouting has also been observed. VECTORS. Ceresa nigripectus (Membracidae, treehoppers) was reared under experimental conditions
and its biological cycle was determined. Under the hypothesis that it is a terminal host, we are now
rearing the Hemiptera vector of ArAWB with the aim of studying protein interactions and to establish
the transmission capacity. PHYTOPLASMA-HOST INTERACTIONS. Effector proteins: the recombinant protein of 11kDa expressed from
AY-ACLL was designed as SAP11ar and was confirmed by MALDI-TOF analysis. We are adjusting
purification protocols for SAP11ar from bacterial culture to rabbit sensibilization to produce a specific
antiserum. SecA protein: the SecA protein of ChTYXIII was expressed in bacterial culture and an
antiserum was developed for its detection and immunolocalization in infected tissues. Literature cited

ARNEODO J., E. GALDEANO, A. ORREGO, A. STAUFFER, $. NOME, L CONCI. 2005. Identification of two phytoplasmas
detected in China-trees with decline symptoms in Paraguay. Australasian Plant Pathology 34: 583-585. Conci L., N. MENEGUZZI, E. GALDEANO, L. TorRES, C. Nome, S. Nome. 2005. Detection and molecular characterisation
of an alfalfa phytoplasma in Argentina that represents a new subgroup in the 16S rDNA Ash Yellows group
(‘Candidatus Phytoplasma fraxini’). European Journal of Plant Pathology 113: 255-265. FerNANDEZ F., V. CONcI, N. MENEGUZzI, F. GUZMAN, C. Nome, D. KIRSCHBAUM, V. MOLLINEDO, A. BORQUEZ, O. BAINO, J.
Ramalto, J. AGUERO, L. CoNncI. 2008. Fitoplasma asociado al sintoma conocido como “planta maricona” en
frutilla. 1er Congreso Argentino de Fitopatologia. Cordoba, Argentina. FerNANDEZ F., V. Concl, D. KIRSCHBAUM, L. CONCI. 2013a. Molecular characterization of a phytoplasma of the ash
yellows group occurring in strawberry (Fragaria x ananassa Duch.) plants in Argentina. European Journal of
Plant Patholology 135: 1-4. FERNANDEZ F., F. GUZMAN, V. CurzeL, N. BEJARANO, L. Concl. 2013b. Detection and molecular characterization of a
phytoplasma affecting Prunus persica L. in Jujuy, Argentina. European Journal of Plant Pathology 135: 627-631. GALDEANO E., L. Torres, N. MEeNeGuzziI, F. GuzmAN, G. Gomez, D. Docampo, L. CoNnci. 2004. Molecular
characterization of 16S ribosomal DNA and phylogenetic analysis of two X-disease group phytoplasmas
affecting China-tree (Melia azedarach |.) and garlic (Allium sativum L.) in Argentina. Journal of

Phytopathology 152(3): 174-181. Lee I-M., R.W. HAMMOND, R.E. Davis, D.E. GUNDERSEN. 1993. Universal amplification and analysis of pathogen 16S
rDNA for classification and identification of MLO's. Phytopathology 83: 834-842. Lee I-M.; D.E. GUNDERSEN-RINDAL, R.E. Davis, |.M. BARTOSZYK. 1998. Revised classification scheme of phytoplasmas
based on RFLP analyses of 16S rRNA and ribosomal protein gene sequences. International Journal of
Systematic Bacteriology 48: 1153-1169. MeNeGuzzI N., L. Torres, E. GALDEANO, F. GUZMAN, S. Nome, L Conci. 2008. Molecular characterization of a
phytoplasma of the ash yellows group (16SrVII-B) occurring in Artemisia annua and Conyza bonariensis
weeds. AgriScientia XXI(1): 7-15. Torres L., E. GALDEANO, F. FERNANDEZ, N. MENEGUZzI, L. CONCI. 2011. Establishment of the new subgroup 16Srl-S (rr-
rp) tuf-H belonging to ‘Ca. Phytoplasma asteris’ in wild and cultivated plants in Argentina. Journal of Plant
Pathology 93(2): 311-320. 28

 

ol

Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
Wat -wG2

 

 

()

 

An update on the status of grapevine yellows disease in vineyards of the
Olifants River region of South Africa

R. Carstens' and J. Burger”
‘ARC-Infruitec-Nietvoorbij, Private Bag X5026, Stellenbosch, 7599, South Africa, carstensr@arc.agric.za
?Department of Genetics, Stellenbosch University, Private Bag X1; Matieland, South Africa, jtb@sun.ac.za

Background and objectives

Grapevine yellows is a widespread phytoplasma disease in Europe where it causes serious damage
ranging from lower yields to the death of vines (Magarey, 1986). Symptoms of grapevine yellows
disease were observed for the first time in South Africa in 2006. Since then, the agent associated with
the disease has been identified as aster yellows (AY) phytoplasma (Engelbrecht et al., 2010). Symptoms of the disease initially occurred on grapevines in two production regions, Olifants River
and Wabooms River, but recently they were also found near Robertson and Trawal in the Western
Cape Province. Mgenia fuscovaria (Stal) was identified as a vector for the disease (Douglas-Smith et
al., 2010). Observations of grapevine yellows disease spread necessitated the monitoring of its
incidence and spread. Materials and methods

Thirteen trial sites in the Olifants River region, planted with vines of seven different cultivars
(Chardonnay, Chenin blanc, Sauvignon blanc, Colombar, Shiraz, Cabernet Franc and Pinotage), with
ages ranging from 6 months to 18 years at the time of the initial disease evaluation (January 2010),
and all displaying symptoms of varying severity, were selected for the study. Annual vine-to-vine
mapping of vineyards was conducted during the past four seasons (January/February, 2010-2013). Each grapevine plant was marked as healthy, AY-affected or missing/dead. Grapevines were
considered AY-affected if any one of the visual symptoms of the disease were present: (1) aborted
fruit clusters, (2) downward rolling and yellowing/reddening of leaves, (3) green, immature canes
and/or (4) die back of shoot tips and shoots. The Patchy Programme (Maixner, 1993) was used to
determine incidence of the disease. In order to confirm visual symptom evaluation of grapevines, five
symptomatic and five asymptomatic grapevines were sampled per vineyard and subjected to PCR
analysis. Total nucleic acid was extracted from leaf veins according to Angelini et a/. (2001). The
presence of AY phytoplasma was determined by using PCR-RFLP, as described by Lee et al. (1998),
using the restriction enzymes Alul, Hhal, Hpal and Rsal. Nested PCR was performed using two sets of
universal primers (P1/P7, followed by R16F2n/R16R2). Results and discussion

Previously reported results of detailed annual mapping of 13 selected vineyards in the Vredendal
region (Carstens et a/., 2011) showed that disease incidences varied between the different cultivars
and vineyards. The cumulative incidence of AY in all 13 vineyards increased from year to year over
the survey period, but varied significantly between vineyards. The cumulative incidence of AY
increased by 2.1%, 4.6%, 5.1%, 5.2% and 32.7%, 62.2%, 63%, 63.5% in two different Chardonnay
vineyards; and by 0.9%, 2.3%, 4.9%, 5.6%; and 7.9%, 8.5%, 11.3, 14.6% in two different Pinotage
vineyards. For the verification of visual symptom evaluation of grapevines, leaf samples
(symptomatic and asymptomatic) were collected every year for PCR analysis. A correlation of 83%
was found between PCR positive results and visual symptom analysis during the first two seasons and
a 95% correlation the last season. This could be ascribed to the technical team becoming more
experienced in recognising AY symptoms in the different cultivars. During the survey two vineyards
(Pinotage and Shiraz) where symptoms were previously observed showed some reddening of leaves,

29

ns
cosc Diseases and vectors in non COST countries
WG1 - WG2

but no typical AY symptoms. This observation may suggest an example of “recovery phenotype”, but
needs to be further investigated by PCR diagnostics. This study reports the current status of AY
disease incidence in South African vineyards. Results showed that AY disease is spreading in
vineyards located in a region of high disease incidence. Moreover, the disease has emerged in two
new production areas in the Western Cape. Detailed annual mapping showed varied disease
incidences in different cultivars and vineyards of different ages. A clearer picture of the spreading
tempo should emerge after data of the past season has been analysed. Literature cited

ANGELINI E., D. CLAIR, M. BorGo, A. BERTACCINI, E. BOUDON-PADIEU. 2001. “Flavescence dorée” in France and Italy -
Occurrence of closely related phytoplasma isolates and their near relationships to Palatinate grapevine
yellows and an alder yellows phytoplasma. Vitis 40: 79-86. CARSTENS R., Y. PETERSEN, D. STEPHAN, J.T. BURGER. 2011. Current status of aster yellows disease in infected
vineyards in the Vredendal grape producing area of South Africa. Phytopathogenic Mollicutes 1(2): 83-85. DouGLas-SmiT N., G. PIETERSEN, K. KRUGER. 2010. Transmission of aster yellows to grapevine by Mgenia fuscovaria
(Stal) (Hemiptera, Cicadellidae). 2nd Meeting, COST Action FA0807 Integrated Management of Phytoplasma

Epidemics in Different Crop Systems. Sidges, Spain: 47. ENGELBRECHT M., J. JouBERT, J.T. BURGER. 2010. First report of aster yellows phytoplasma in grapevines in South
Africa. Plant Disease 94: 373. Lee I-M., D.E. GUNDERSEN-RINDAL, R.E. Davis, |.M. BARTOSZYK. 1998. Revised classification scheme of phytoplasmas
based on RFLP analyses of 16S rRNA and ribosomal protein gene sequences. International Journal of
Systematic Bacteriology 48: 1153-1169. Macarey P.A. 1986. Grapevine yellows - aetiology, epidemiology and diagnosis. South African Journal of Enology
and Viticulture 7: 90-100. MAIXNeR M. 1993. Ein programm zur analyse raumlicher verteilungsmuster von rebkrankheiten. Nachrichtenblatt
des Deutschen Pflanzenschutzdienstes 45: 157-164. 30

 

ol

Diseases and insect vectors
Wat -wG2

 

 

()

 

‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ - a new phytoplasma species molecularly
characterized in Croatia

J. Plavec?, I. Krizanac”, 2, Budin&éak’, D. Ivic’, D. Skorié' and M. Seruga Musi¢’

‘Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Maruli¢ev trg 9A, HR-10000 Zagreb, Croatia;
martina.seruga.music@biol.pmf.hr

2CCAFRA- Institute for Plant Protection, Rim 98, HR-10000 Zagreb, Croatia

Background and objectives

A survey on presence and diversity of phytoplasmas infecting fruit trees and their vectors in Croatia
has been conducted since 2002. Although the presence of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma pyri’ and ‘Ca. P.
solani’ was sporadically associated with symptomatic apples (Krizanac et a/., 2010), there was no
direct evidence of the presence of ‘Ca. P. mali’, the main agent of apple proliferation disease (AP) in
neither plant or insect vector samples. Materials and methods

Throughout 2011 and 2012, orchards from all fruit growing regions of Croatia were surveyed for AP
symptoms and nearly 70 samples of different apple cultivars/varieties were collected. Psyllid samples
were collected from two selected orchards in the north-western part of the country only in the year
2012. Total nucleic acids were extracted following CTAB procedure. PCR/RFLP analyses of
phytoplasma 16S rDNA were performed by using P1/P7 primers (Deng and Hiruki, 1991; Schneider et
al., 1995) in a direct PCR assays followed by nested PCR using R16(X)F1/R1 (Lee et a/., 1995) primers. Amplicons from nested PCR were digested with Rsal and Sspl in order to determine the affiliation to
the ‘Ca. P. mali’ species. To confirm the results, real-time PCR experiments amplifying 16S rDNA were
performed as well (Baric and Dalla-Via, 2004). Furthermore, pnp and aceF genes encoding
polynucleotide phosphorylase and pyruvate dehydrogenase (dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase
component) were amplified, sequenced and analyzed to assess the genetic variability among ‘Ca. P.
mali’ isolates. Results and discussion

For the first time, in the year 2011, the presence of ‘Ca. P. mali’ was detected in samples collected
from apple orchards at seven locations from continental as well as Adriatic Croatian regions while the
survey in the following year one additional location with samples positive for the ‘Ca. P. mali’
presence was obtained. The analysis of psyllid vectors revealed one positive finding of ‘Ca. P. mali’ in
Cacopsylla picta (Foerster) sample from one orchard in the north-western Croatia. PCR/RFLP results
were consistent with the results obtained by real-time PCR analyses. Phylogenetic analysis of pnp and
aceF gene sequences have shown very close relatedness to the reference ‘Ca. P. mali’ genes
(NC_011047) with 99% of sequence identity for most of the obtained sequences. This is the first
finding and molecular characterization of ‘Ca. P. mali’ in Croatia, from both apple and insect vector
species. Literature cited

Baric S., J. DALLA-ViA. 2004. A new approach to apple proliferation detection: a highly sensitive real-time PCR
assay. Journal of Microbiological Methods 57: 135-145. Dene S., C. HIRUKI. 1991. Amplification of 16S rRNA genes from culturable and nonculturable mollicutes. Journal
of Microbiological Methods 14: 53-61. 31

~s cos Ec Diseases and insect vectors
~ Wat - wa2

KriZanac I., Z. Buoins¢ak M. SeRUGA Musi¢, D. Skori¢. 2010. Diversity of phytoplasmas infecting fruit trees and
their vectors in Croatia. Journal of Plant Disease and Protection 117 (5): 206-213. Lee I-M., A. BerTaccini, M. Visio, D. E. GUNDERSEN. 1995. Detection of multiple phytoplasmas in perennial fruit
trees with decline symptoms in Italy. Phytopathology 85 (6): 728-735. SCHNEIDER B., E. SEEMULLER, C. D. SMART, B. C. KIRKPATRICK. 1995. Phylogenetic classification of plant pathogenic
mycoplasma-like organisms or phytoplasmas. In Molecular and Diagnostic Procedures in Mycoplasmology. S. Razin and J. G. Tully, editors. Academic Press. Volume 1: 369-380. 32

Diseases and insect vectors CcosE
WG1 - WG2

Molecular characterization of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali and
*Candidatus Phytoplasma pyri’ isolates from Romania

C. Chireceanu' and M. Ciesliriska”

‘Research Development Institute for Plant Protection, lon lonescu de la Brad, 8 — 013813 Bucharest, Romania,
cchireceanu@yahoo.com

Research Institute of Horticulture, Konstytucji 3 Maja 1/3, 96-100 Skierniewice, Poland,
Miroslawa.Cieslinska@inhort.pl

Background and objectives

Apple proliferation (AP) and pear decline (PD) are quarantine diseases associated with the presence
of phytoplasmas 'Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ (16SrX-A) and ‘Ca.P. pyri’ (16Sr16X-C), respectively
and they are considered of major importance for apple and pear orchards in Europe (Seemiiller and
Schneider, 2004). This paper aims to detect and molecular characterize the 16S rDNA and the 16S-
23S rDNA spacer region of phytoplasma isolates infecting apple and pear trees in Romania. Materials and methods

Samples of symptomatic apple (35) and pear (11) of different varieties, collected in autumn 2012
from four pomicultural regions of Romania as well as 10 insect of Cacopsylla melanoneura (6),
Fieberiella florii (2) and Metcalfa pruinosa (2) were tested for phytoplasma presence. Total DNA
extracted using the CTAB-based protocol, was employed for PCR-RFLP analyses in the Virology
Section of the Research Institute of Horticulture in Skierniewice, Poland. Direct PCR was conducted
with P1/P7 (Deng and Hiruki, 1991; Schneider et a/., 1995) or f{U5/rU3 (Lorenz et al., 1995) and AP
group specific primers fAT/rAS (Smart et a/., 1996). Nested PCR with primers F1/B6 (Davis and Lee,
1993; Padovan et a/., 1995) or R16F2n/R16R2 (Gundersen and Lee, 1996) was applied on P1/P7
amplicons diluted 1:29 in water. Healthy periwinkle and apple infected with AP-15 subtype strain of
‘Ca. P. mali’ were used as negative and positive controls, respectively. RFLP analyses were conducted
on F1/B6 amplicons digested with Msel, Hpall, and Sspl enzymes. The restriction patterns were
compared to those for the reference strains (Lee et a/., 1998; Paltrinieri et a/., 2010). Results and discussion

PCR with primers fAT/rAS showed that eight out of 35 apple and four out of 11 pear samples were
infected with phytoplasmas from AP group. Negative results were obtain for insect samples. The
RFLP analyses on F1/B6 amplicons digested with Hpall showed three restriction profiles: P-I, P-II and
P-Ill (Fig. 1, table 1). The P-I profile was detected in majority of ‘Ca. P. mali’, Pll was also detected in
symptomatic apple while a different profile was detected in pear (P-III). Hpall Msel Sspl

    

 

M1234567891011121314 M1234567891011121314 M1234567891011 121314

Fig. 1. RFLP patterns on F1/B6 amplicons of 16 rDNA fragments digested with Hpall, Msel and Sspl. M-
molecular marker 100 bp. Samples: apple 1-8; pear 9-12; 13- healthy plant, 14- positive control ‘Ca. P. mali’. 33

a—~ cos Ec Diseases and insect vectors
~ Wat - wa2

Table 1. Results of RFLP analyses of 16S rDNA and the 16S-23S rDNA spacer region of phytoplasmas infecting
apple and pear trees. . . restriction pattern 7

No. species/cultivar Isolate Msel Hpall Sspl Profile
1 apple/Golden Delicious GD1.DB A A A P-|
2 apple/rootstok Root1.DB A A A P-I
3 apple/Golden Delicious GD2.DB A A A P-|
4 apple/Golden Delicious GD1.Bu A B A P-Il
5 apple/Golden Delicious GD2.Bu A B A P-ll
6 apple/Generos G1.BN A B A P-Il
7 apple/Generos G2.BN A A A P-I
8 apple/Iris Ist.AG A A A P-|
9 pear/Williams W1.Bu B A B P-lIl
10 pear/Conference C1.Bu B A B P-lIl
iu pear/Williams We.Bu B A B P-lil
12 pear/unknown Un1.Bu B A B P-lIl

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This is the first report on molecular characterization of ‘Ca. P. mali’ and ‘Ca. P. pyri’ isolates from
Romania. The presence of these phytoplasmas represents a serious threat for national fruit
production, thus further investigations are needed on their distribution and incidence. Acknowledgements
This work was performed as STSM within the framework of COST Action FA0807 “Integrated
Management of Phytoplasma Epidemics in Different Crop Systems”. Literature cited

Davis R.E., I-M. Lee. 1993. Cluster-specific polymerase chain reaction amplification of 165 rDNA sequences for
detection and identification of mycoplasmalike organisms. Phytopathology 83: 1008-1011. Dena S., HiRUKIC. 1991. Genetic relatedness between two nonculturable mycoplasmalike organisms revealed by
nucleic acid hybridization and polymerase chain reaction. Phytopathology 81: 1475-1479. Gunpersen D.E., I-M. Lee. 1996. Ultrasensitive detection of phytoplasmas by nested-PCR assay using two
universal primer pairs. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 35: 144-151. LORENZ K.H., B. SCHNEIDER, U. AHRENS, E. SEEMULLER. 1995. Detection of the apple proliferation and pear decline
phytoplasmas by PCR amplification of ribosomal and nonribosomal DNA. Phytopathology 85: 771-776. Lee I-M., D.E. GUNDERSEN-RINDAL, R.E. Davis, |.M. BARTOSZYK. 1998. Revised classification scheme of phytoplasmas
based on RFLP analyses of 16S rRNA and ribosomal protein gene sequences. International Journal of
Systematic Bacteriology 48: 1153-1169. Pavovan A.C., K.S. GisB, A. BERTACCINI, M. Visio, R.E. BONFIGLIOLI, P.A. MaGarey, B.B. Sears. 1995. Molecular
detection of the Australian grapevine yellows phytoplasma and comparison with a grapevine yellows
phytoplasma from Emilia-Romagna in Italy. Australian Journal of Grape and wine Research 1: 25-31. PALTRINIERI S., B. DUDUK, F. DAL MOoLin, N. Mori, G. COMERLATI, A. BERTACCINI. 2010. Molecular characterization of
*Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ strains in outbreaks of apple proliferation in north eastern Italy, Hungary,
and Serbia. Julius-Kahn-Archiv 427: 178-182. SCHNEIDER B., E. SEEMULLER, C.D. Smarr, B.C. KIRKPATRICK. 1995. Phylogenetic classification of plant pathogenic
mycoplasma-like organisms or phytoplasmas. In: Razin R. and Tully J.G., eds. Molecular Diagnostic
Procedures in Mycoplasmology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press: 369-380. ‘SEEMULLER E., B. SCHNEIDER. 2004. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’, ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma pyri’ and ‘Candidatus
Phytoplasma prunorum’, the causal agents of apple proliferation, pear decline and European stone fruit
yellows, respectively. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 54: 1217-1226. Smart C.D., B. SCHNEIDER, C.L. BLOMQUIST, LJ. GUERRA, N.A. HARRISON, U. AHRENS, K.H. LORENZ, E. SEEMULLER, B.
KirkPaTRIck, 1996. Phytoplasma-specific pcr primers based on sequences of the 16s-23s rrna spacer region. Applied and environmental microbiology 62: 2988-2993. 34

Diseases and insect vectors
Wat -wG2

cose

 

()

Fruit tree phytoplasmas in Turkey

K. Gaglayan’, M. Gazel’, C.U. Serce” and K. Kaya
‘Mustafa Kemal Uiiniversitesi, Bitki Koruma Béliimii, 31000 Antakya-Hatay; Turkey:kcaglayano@yahoo.com
2Nigde Universitesi, Tarim Bilimleri ve Teknolojileri Fakiiltesi, Ni&de, Turkey; culubas@gmail.com

Background and objectives

Although fruit tree phytoplasmas have been studied since 1999 in Turkey, most reports were on
symptomological, microscopic and molecular characterization of European stone fruit yellows, pear
decline and apple proliferation associated diseases and their epidemiology (Caglayan ef al., 2011). Recently phytoplasma-like symptoms were observed on cherries, pomegranate, persimmon (kaki)
and also olives. The main symptoms on apricots were off season flowering in winter and leaf rolling
whereas decline was the most obvious symptom on plums. Cherries exhibited proliferation of
branches, off-season flowering and declining whereas yellowing was the main symptom on
pomegranate, kaki and olives. Materials and methods

More than 500 cultivated and wild Prunus plants in or nearby germplasm nurseries and commercial
orchards and 116 pear samples during 2002-2009 were tested by using universal primers P1/P7 and
{U5/rU3 for direct and nested PCR, respectively. Amplification products were digested with the Real
and Sspl enzymes. Some symptomatic pomegranate, persimmon (kaki) and olive samples were also
tested by the same method. Results and discussion

The average incidence of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ was detected as 10.19%. The most
infected stone fruit species were apricot and plum followed by almond and peach, but cherries were
always negative for this phytoplasma. When 116 pear trees were tested for ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
pyri’ presence 61 samples were found infected by this phytoplasma (52.58%). Despite ‘Ca. P. mali’
was also detected in different regions of Turkey, its presence was much lower comparing to other
16SrX group phytoplasmas. Although other symptomatic fruit tree samples (kaki, pomegranate and
olive) gave positive results by using universal phytoplasma primers P1/P7 followed by R16F2n/R2,
characterization studies are still under investigation. Vector psyllids of 16SrX group phytoplasmas were found in limited locations in Turkey. Many
overwintered individuals of Cacopsylla pruni were collected from Abies nordmanniana subsp. bormulleriana and Pinus spp.. DNAs of individual psyllid species of C. pruni and C. pyri were
analysed by RFLP and the presence of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ and ‘Ca. P. pyri’ was confirmed, respectively. As a potential vectors of ‘Ca. P. mali’ ; C. picta, C. affinis and C. melanoneura were also reported. Healthy pear and plum plants were able to be inoculated with ‘Ca. P. pyri’ and ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ by
using new generation of C. pyri and C. pruni respectively. Experimental transmission trials of ‘Ca. P.
mali’ is still in process. Literature cited
Gaétayan K., M. GazeL, ¢. U. SERCE, i.A. Bozkurt, E. ELcl. 2011. Phytoplasma diseases of stone fruit trees in Turkey
and their containment. Cost meeting, Istanbul, Turkey. 11-14. 35

Scos Ec Diseases and insect vectors
~ WG - wG2

Molecular diversity of phytoplasmas infecting Rubus sp. plants in Poland

M. CieSliriska, J. Wojcik-Seliga and B. Kowalik
Research Institute of Horticulture, Plant Pathology Department, 96-100 Skierniewice, Konstytucji 3 Maja 1/3,
Poland; miroslawa.cieslinska@inhort.pl

Background and objectives

Phytoplasma-associated diseases affect wild and cultivated raspberry, blackberry, and crosses of
these species throughout Europe, north-eastern USA and Turkey. The associated disease agents are
phytoplasmas belonging to several 16Sr groups: 16SrV, elm yellows (Marani et a/., 1977; Bertaccini et
al., 1995;), 16Srlll, X disease (Davies, 2000), 16Srl, aster yellows (Fahmeed et a/., 2009) and 16SrXIl,
“stolbur” (Borroto Fernandez et al., 2007). The infected plants show stunting, shoot and flower
proliferation, and fruit malformations. Detection and molecular characterization of the 16S rRNA
gene of the phytoplasmas infected Rubus sp. Plants in Poland are reported. Materials and methods

Rubus spp. plants with severe symptoms of stunting, short, and thin shoots were observed on
raspberry and blackberry plantations as well as in their natural environments in Poland. Shoot
samples were collected from selected red raspberry, blackberry (Rubus fruticosus), as well as from
hybrids loganberry (R. loganobaccus) and tayberry (R. loganobaccus x R. idaeus). Nested PCR of DNA
extracted from diseased plants and from healthy raspberry were conducted using phytoplasma
universal and group-specific primer pairs. The RFLP and sequence analyses of 16S rDNA fragment
amplified with universal primers R16F2n/R16R2 were performed to identify the phytoplasmas. Results and discussion

On the basis of PCR/RFLP with Hpall, Rsal, and Bfal (Fig. 1) and comparative analysis of the
nucleotide sequence of the 16S rRNA gene it was shown that Rubus spp. plants were infected by
phytoplasmas belonging to three different groups. Most of Rubus sp. plants were infected by
‘Candidatus Phytoplasma rubi’ belonging to subgroup E of the Elm yellows phytoplasma group, 16SrV
(Davis et a/., 2001). M12345678 9101112183M 123 456789 10111213M1 23 4 5678910111213

Fig. 1. RFLP profiles of 16 rDNA fragments amplified from samples of Rubus spp. with primers R16F2n/R16R2
and digested with Hpall, Rsal and Bfal restriction enzymes. M - 100 bp DNA Ladder (Fermentas, Lithuania). Lines: 1 — EY-1; 2 -CX; 3 -AY-1; 4-7, 11, raspberry; 8, 9, 13 — blackberry; 10 —loganberry; 12 — tayberry. 36

Diseases and insect vectors a cos E
Wat -wG2

Phylogenetic analysis showed that they form a monophyletic cluster with the reference strain RuS
from Rubus fruticosus from Italy (GenBank accession no. Y16395) and that they are genetically
related to the strain FD isolated from Vitis vinifera from France (GenBank accession no. X76560)
(data not shown). It was possible to identify phytoplasma belonging to subgroup 16Srill of the X diseases group in
loganberry plant. Based on the results of phylogenetic analysis this isolate was assigned to one
cluster with a reference strain CYE of the clover yellow edge phytoplasma isolated from clover in
Canada (GenBank accession no. L33766). X disease phytoplasma was previously identified in
loganberry in the UK (Davies, 2000). Supposedly, the infected loganberry plant growing in germplasm
collection was imported from the UK. One of the blackberry plants (Rubus fruticosus) from forest was infected by a phytoplasma from
subgroup B of the Aster yellows phytoplasma group (‘Candidatus P. asteris’, 16Srl-B). The analysis
revealed high similarity of the sequence of this isolate with the sequences of reference strain of ‘Ca. P. asteris' OAY from periwinkle from Michigan, USA (GenBank accession no. M30790) and SAY
isolated from celery in California, USA (GenBank accession no. M86340). The partial sequences of the 16S rDNA region of the five isolates of phytoplasmas detected in Rubus
spp. plants were deposited in the GenBank database under accession numbers: GU125723-27. Although the phytoplasmas are transmitted mainly with infected plant material, Rubus spp. plants
growing in a natural environment can become a reservoir of these pathogens. The phytoplasmas
belonging to group 16SrV were reported in wild and cultivated Rubus spp. in Germany, France, Italy
(Maurer and Seemiiler, 1994), the UK (Davies, 2000), and Poland (CieSliriska, 2011). X disease
phytoplasma was identified in loganberry in the UK (Davies, 2000) and Poland (Ciesliriska, 2011), as
well as in black raspberry (Rubus occidentalis) with witches’ broom symptoms in Oregon (Davis et al.,
2001). It was shown that aster yellows phytoplasma (16Srl-B) infected wild raspberry and blackberry
growing in Austrian forests (Borroto Fernandez et al., 2007), and blackberry found in Pakistan
(Fahmeed e¢ a/., 2009) and in the UK (Reeder et a/., 2010). Literature cited

BertacciNi A., M. Visio, F. GENNARI., $. GUERRINI., A. BENNI. 1995. Detection of mycoplasmalike organisms
(phytoplasmas) in Rubus by nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Acta Horticulturae 385: 126-131. BoRROTO FERNANDEZ E.G., A. CALARI., V. HANZER., H. KATINGER., A. BERTACCINI., M. LAIMER. 2007. Phytoplasma infected
plants in Austrian forests: role as a reservoir? Bulletin of Insectology 60: 391-392. Ciesuinska M. 2011. Detection and characterization of phytoplasmas associated with diseases of Rubus spp. plants in Poland. Journal of Plant Pathology 93(1): 51-56. Davies D. 2000. The occurrence of two phytoplasmas associated with stunted Rubus species in the UK. Plant
Pathology 49: 86-88. Davis R.E., E.L. DALLY, R.H. CONverse. 2001. Molecular identification of a phytoplasma associated with witches’
broom disease of black raspberry in Oregon and its classification in group 16Srlll, new subgroup Q. Plant
Disease 85: 1121. FAHMEED F., Y.A. Rosete, K.A. PEREZ, E. Boa, J. Lucas. 2009. First report of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris’ (group
16Srl) infecting fruits and vegetables in Islamabad, Pakistan. Journal of Phytopathology 157: 639-641. Maran! F., A. Pisi., A. BERTACCINI. 1977. The association of mycoplasma-like bodies with Rubus stunt disease. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 16: 150-153. Maacone C., A. RAGOZZINO, E. SEEMULLER. 1997. Identification and characterization of the phytoplasma associated
with elm yellows in southern Italy and its relatedness to other phytoplasmas of the elm yellows group. European Journal of Forest Pathology 27: 45-54. Maurer R., E. SEEMULLER. 1994. Nature and genetic relatedness of mycoplasma-like organisms causing rubus
stunt in Europe. Plant Patholology 44: 244-249. Reever R., P.L. Ketty, Z. AROCHA. 2010. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris’ identified in blackberry (Rubus
fruticosus) in the United Kingdom. Plant Pathology 59: 394. 37

Diseases and insect vectors
Wat - WG2

CcosE

Phytoplasmas associated with Rubus idaeus and Rubus fruticosus

R. Ramkat, M. Ruinelli, F. Maghuly and M. Laimer
Plant Biotechnology Unit (PBU), Dept. Biotechnology, BOKU VIBT, Muthgasse 18, 1190 Vienna, Austria

Background and objectives

Phytoplasmas infecting Rubus fruit species are considered to be a major challenge in their
production. Common symptoms in infected plants include: stunting, shoot proliferation, small leaves,
short internodes, enlarged sepals, phyllody, flower proliferations and fruit malformations (Valiunas
et al., 2007; Bertaccini and Duduk, 2009; Cieslinska, 2011). So far, Rubus spp. has been associated
with phytoplasmas belonging to the groups of elm yellows (16SrV), X disease (16Srill), aster yellows
(16Srl) and stolbur (16SrXIl) (Lee et a/., 1995; Bertaccini et a/., 1995; Maurer and Seemilller, 1995;
Marcone et al/., 1997; Davies, 2000; Vindimian et al., 2004; Borroto Fernandez et a/., 2007; Valiunas
et al., 2007; Cieslinska, 2011). Due to its distinct biological niche and genomic differentiation, the
Rubus stunt phytoplasma of the elm yellows group (16SrV) was proposed as novel distinct candidate
taxon: ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma rubi’ (Malembic-Maher et al., 2011). An early detection of
phytoplasma is of prime importance to minimize spread of disease to larger areas. Materials and methods

For this reason PCR, restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and cloning were employed to
detect and identify phytoplasmas infecting this plant species. PCR using the universal and specific
phytoplasma primers listed in table 1 was conducted on total DNA extracted from symptomatic and
asymptomatic plants. Table 1. Primers employed for the Rubus phytoplasma detection

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Primer Primer sequence 5’ to 3” Source
R16mF2 CATGCAAGTCGAACGGA (Gundersen and Lee, 1996)
R16mR1 CTTAACCCCAATCATCGAC (Gundersen and Lee, 1996)
R16F2nM GAAACGGTTGCTAAGACTGG this study
R16R2 TGACGGGCGGTGTGTACAAACCCCG (Gundersen and Lee, 1996)
R1I6VF1 TTAAAAGACCTTICTICGG (Lee et al., 1994)
R16VR1 TTCAATCCGTACTGAGACTACC (Lee et al., 1994)
P41 AAGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAGGATT (Schneider et a/., 1995)
P7 AAGAGCCGATGAAGGACG (Deng and Hiruki, 1991)
RubF GTGGTGCATGGTTGTCGTCAG this study
RubR CTAACATCTCACGACACGAACTGA this study
PA2F GCCCCGGCTAACTATGTGC (Heinrich et a/., 2001)
PA2R TTGGTGGGCCTAAATGGACTC (Heinrich et a/., 2001)

 

 

Results and discussion

Cloning and sequencing of nested PCR products allowed the assembly of a 1,852 bp fragment
extending from the 5’end of the 16S rRNA gene to the 5’end of the 23S rRNA. Blastn analyses revealed
the presence of a phytoplasma having 98% to 99% similarity to phytoplasmas belonging to group 16SrV
in R. idaeus. For RFLP analyses, a nested PCR was performed with the primer pairs R16mF2/R16mR1
followed by R16F2nM/R16R2. Products were digested with Msel and the results confirmed that the
assayed Rubus plants were infected by phytoplasma belonging to the group 16SrV. 38

Diseases and insect vectors -~s cos E
WG! - WG2 ~

Positive samples produced the expected 1,250 bp fragment of phytoplasma 16S rDNA after nested
PCR using primers R16F2nM/R16R2. From a total of 39 plants, 28 (71.8%) were positive. In general,
from the 133 samples collected from different plant parts, 35 (26.3%) were positive of which 14 out
of 56 (25%) were leaf veins, 10 out of 49 (20.4%) bark scrapings, 4 out of 9 (44.4%) sepals and 4 out 7
flowers (57.1%) and 1 out of 3 (33%) fruits. Furthermore, nested PCR with primer pair
R16(V)F1/R16(V)R1 specific for group 16SrV phytoplasma gave positive results in 21 out of 34 (61.8%)
samples. Explants of positive plants were established as in vitro cultures and maintained in the Vienna
collection of Fruit Pathogens. Sanitation experiments by in vitro thermotherapy and meristem
preparation are currently underway. Literature cited

BerTaccini A., M. Visio, E. GENNARI, S. GUERRINI, A. BENNI. 1995. Detection of mycoplasmalike organisms
(phytoplasmas) in Rubus by nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Acta Horticulturae 385: 126-131. BerTaccini A., B. DuDUK. 2009. Phytoplasma diseases: a review of recent research. Phytopathologia
Mediterranea 48, 355-378. BoRROTO FERNANDEZ E.G., A. CALARI, V. HANZER, H. KATINGER, A. BERTACCINI, M. LAIMER. 2007. Phytoplasma infected
plants in Austrian forests: role as a reservoir? Bulletin of Insectology 60: 391-392. CIESLINSKA M. 2011. Detection and characterization of phytoplasmas associated with diseases of Rubus spp in
Poland. Journal of Plant Pathology 93: 51-56. Davies D.L. 2000. The occurrence of two phytoplasmas associated with stunted Rubus species in the UK. Plant
Pathology 49: 86-88. Dene S., HiRUKI C. 1991. Amplification of 16S rRNA genes from culturable and nonculturable Mollicutes. Journal
of Microbiology Methods 14: 53-61. Gunpersen D.E., I-M. Lee. 1996. Ultrasensitive detection of phytoplasmas by nested-PCR assays using two
universal primer pairs. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 35: 144-151. HeInRIcH M., S. Borti, L. CAPRARA, W. ARTHOFER, S. STROMMER, V. HANZER, S. PALTRINIERI, M. MARTINI, H. KATINGER, A.
BerTACCINI, M. LAIMeR DA CAMARA MACHADO. 2001. Improved detection methods for fruit tree phytoplasmas. Plant Molecular Biology Repprter 19: 169-179. Lee I-M., D.E. GUNDERSEN, R.W. HAMMOND, R.E. Davis. 1994. Use of mycoplasma like organism group-specific
oligonucleotide primers for nested-PCR assays to detect mixed-MLO infections in a single host plant. Phytopathology 84: 559-566. Lee I-M., A. BeRTACCINI, M. Visio, D.E. GUNDERSEN, R.E. Davis, L. MITTEMPERGHER, M. ConrI, F. GENNARI. 1995. Detection and characterization of phytoplasmas associated with disease in U/mus and Rubus in northern
and central Italy. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 34, 174-183. MatemBiCc-MAHER S., P. SALAR, L. FILIPPIN, P. CARLE, E. ANGELINI, X. Foissac. 2011. Genetic diversity of European
phytoplasmas of the 16SrV taxonomic group and proposal of 'Candidatus Phytoplasma rubi’. International
Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 61: 2129-2134. Marcone C., A. RAGOZZINO, E. SEEMULLER. 1997. Identification and characterization of the phytoplasma associated
with elm yellows in southern Italy and its relatedness to other phytoplasmas of the elm yellows group. European Journal of Forest Pathology 27: 45-54. Maurer R., E. SEEMULLER. 1995. Nature and genetic relatedness of the mycoplasma-like organism causing Rubus
stunt in Europe. Plant Pathology 44: 244-249. SCHNEIDER B., E. SEEMULLER, C.D. SMART, B.C. KIRKPATRICK. 1995. Phylogenetic classification of plant pathogenic
mycoplasma-like organisms or phytoplasmas. In: Molecular and Diagnostic Procedures in Mycoplasmology. Razin, R., Tully, J.G. (eds).Academic Press, San Diego 1, 369-380. VaLIUNAS D., R. JOMANTIENE, R.E. Davis. 2007. Phytoplasmas detected in cultivated fruit plants in Lithuania. Bulletin of Insectology 60: 139-140. VINDIMIAN M.E., A. GRASSI, A. CiccoTTi, C. Poca! POLLINI, F. TERLIZzI. 2004. Epidemiological studies on Rubus stunt
(RS) in blackberry orchards located near Trento (Italy). Acta Horticulturae 656: 177-180. 39

Co cos Ec Diseases and insect vectors
Wat - wa2

 

Phytoplasma infections in Rhododendron hybridum

J. Pribylova, J. Spak and J. Franova
Department of Plant Virology, Institute of Plant Molecular Biology, Biology Centre of the Academy of Sciences
of the Czech Republic, v.v.i., Branigovska 31, 370 05 Ceské Budéjovice, Czech Republic; pribyl@umbr.cas.cz

Background and objectives

Some reports of phytoplasma diseases on Rhododendron sp. were described in the past. Symptoms
of yellowing, leaf malformation and variegation, shortened axillary shoots, reduced leaves, little leaf
disease and witches’ broom always caused devastation of shrubs. “Stolbur” phytoplasmas (Mertelik
et al., 2006), ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma trifolii’ (Pribylova et a/., 2009) and aster yellows (AY) 16Srl-T
(Wei et al., 2011) phytoplasma subgroup have been identified in some plants. Materials and methods

A rhododendron plant with symptoms of irregular shape of small malformed leaves, mosaic, leaf tip
necrosis and multiple axillary shoots from Bohemia was examined by transmission electron
microscopy and tested by PCR. Some phytoplasma-like bodies were found in phloem cells, and RFLP
and sequence analyses enabled classification of the detected phytoplasma into 16Srl subgroup -C.

Results and discussion

A PCR product of 1.1 kbp obtained with primer pair R16(I)F1/R1 was digested with Msel. The
restriction profile corresponded to the profile of clover phyllody (16Srl-C). The resulting sequence of
1,724 bp, containing sequences of the 16S rRNA gene, 16S-23S rRNA spacer region and the start of
the 23S rRNA gene confirmed the closest relationship of this phytoplasma with members of
ribosomal subgroup 16Srl-C, however some differences were found between them and the sequence
from the symptomatic rhododendron plant. Acknowledgements

The authors thank Dr. J. Mertelik for providing infected plant material. This research was supported
by grants LD12074-COST of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports and with institutional
support RVO:60077344. Literature cited

MerreLik J., K. KLoudovA, P. VANC, V. MoxrA, J. Sepiva, M. NAVvRATIL, P. VALOVA. 2006. First occurrence of
phytoplasma in Rhododendron sp. in the Czech Republic. Acta Horticulturae 722: 355-358. Paipytova J., K. PETRZIK, J. SPAK. 2009. The first detection of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma trifolii” in Rhododendron
hybridum. European Journal of Plant Pathology 124: 181-185. Paipytova J., J. SPAK, J. FRANOVA. 2013. Aster yellows subgroup 16SrI-C phytoplasma in Rhododendron hybridum. Journal of Phytopathology 161: 590-593. Wel W., H. Cal, Y. JIANG, I-M. Lee, R.E. Davis, Y. DING, E. YUAN, H. CHEN, Y. ZHAO. 2011. Anew phytoplasma associated
with little leaf disease in azalea: multilocus sequence characterization reveals a distinct lineage within the
aster yellows phytoplasma group. Annals of Applied Biology 158: 318-330. 40

 

ol

Diseases and insect vectors
Wat -wG2

 

 

()

 

Maize redness disease: current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

B. Loli¢', G. Perkovié? and D. Delié! ‘University of Banjaluka, Faculty of Agriculture, Bulevar vojvode Petra Bojoviéa 1A, 78000 Banjaluka, Bosnia and
Herzegovina; duska.delic@agrofabl.org

2University of East Sarajevo, Faculty of Agriculture, Vuka Karadzi¢a 30, 71123 East Sarajevo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina; perkan66@gmail.com

Background and objectives

“Maize redness” (MR) disease symptoms were observed for the first time in 1957 in Banat district of
Serbia. According to historical data during the sixties MR were also rerecorded in corn fields in
Bulgaria and Romania (Bekavac ef al., 2007). For long time the causal agent of the disease was
unknown and many abiotic and biotic agents were suspected to be cause of MR. Nevertheless,
Duduk and Bertaccini (2006) found that “stolbur” phytoplasma (‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’,
subgroup 16SrXII-A) associated with MR symptoms was present in symptomatic corn plants. Ciixid
planthopper Reptalus panzeri (Low) was proved to transmit “stolbur” phytoplasma to corn (Jovié et
al., 2007). Jovié et al. (2009) found that johnsongrass, Sorghum halepense, and wheat, Triticum
aestivum, play important role in disease epidemiology since roots of these plants serve as a bridge of
overwintering populations (nymphs) of R. panzeri. Molecular analyses of infected corn plants showed
also stolbur phytoplasma presence in Italy and Hungary (Calari et a/., 2010; Acs et a/., 2011). During the past five years MR symptoms occurred in corn fields in Semberija region of Bosnia and
Herzegovina causing significant yield losses. Consequently, in 2012 first survey was conducted in corn
fields of Semberija in order to check the presence of phytoplasma and ciixid vectors in the region. Results of laboratory analyses showed the presence of “stolbur” phytoplasma in infected corn and
johnsongrass plants as well as in R. panzeri (Kovaéevié et al., 2013). Since corn is an important crop in
Bosnia and Herzegovina extended survey for phytoplasma presence and distribution was also
conducted in 2013. Materials and methods

During August 2013 selected corn fields in production areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina were
surveyed for the occurrence of reddening symptoms on corn. Plants expressing symptoms such as
midrib, leaf and stalk reddening were collected from ten sampling sites in Semberija, Bréko District
and Posavina regions. On all surveyed localities, the symptomatic maize plants were in range from 10
to 50%. Maize (Zea mays L.), field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis L.), johnsongrass [Sorghum
halepense (L.) Pers.] and foxtail [Setaria viridis (L.) Beauv.] were sampled for laboratory analyses. DNA was extracted from leaf midribs and roots of MR symptomatic maize plants and weeds collected
randomly in areas adjacent to MR symptomatic fields following a CTAB protocol (Angelini et al.,
2001). Phytoplasma identification was conducted using nested PCR assays on the 16S rRNA gene with
primer pairs P1/P7 and R16F2n/R16R2 (Lee et al., 1998). The obtained nested-PCR products were
digested with Trutl restriction enzyme. Subsequently, all phytoplasma positive samples were
retested in nested PCR employing tuf-gene and Stol11 “stolbur’-specific protocols (Langer and
Maixner 2004; Clair et a/, 2003). Molecular characterization of identified phytoplasma was
performed by RFLP analyses of the tufgene using Hpall endonuclease. Results and discussion

Corn fields with intensive wheat-maize crop rotation were selected for the survey. Wheat-maize crop
rotation is a key factor for MR occurrence and persistence and found to favour the disease
development because winter wheat roots can constitute a bridge (for overwintering stages of the

4

a—~ cos Ec Diseases and insect vectors
~ Wat - wa2

vector and the phytoplasma) between two maize crops (Jovié et a/., 2009). “Stolbur” phytoplasma
(16SrXII-A) was identified in symptomatic maize plants collected from all three surveyed regions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that point of view, spreading of MR in new Bosnia and Herzegovina
regions is in dynamic progress. Study of MR in Bosnia and Herzegovina showed that the disease play
important role leading to significant losses in corn production in areas where wheat-maize crop
rotation is practice. Presence of MR and possible correlation with longer periods of high
temperatures during last few years and droughts can cause significant economic damage in maize
production, since the presence of MR in new regions and the most severe damage were recorded
during the warmest summer decade in 2012 and 2013. Literature cited

Acs Z., J. Jovié, |. EMBER, T. Cvrkovic, Z. NaGy, C. TALABER, L. GERGELY, I. TOSEvsKI, M. KOLBER. 2011. First report of
Maize redness disease in Hungary. Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): 229-230. ANGELINI E., D. Clair, M. Boro, A. BERTACCINI, E. BOUDON-PADIEU. 2001.- Flavescence dorée in France and Italy -
Occurrence of closely related phytoplasma isolates and their near relationships to Palatinate grapevine
yellows and an alder phytoplasma. Vitis 40: 79-86. BekAVAc G., B. PuRAR. 2007. Corn reddening: the disease and breeding for resistance. Journal of Plant Pathology
89(3): 397-404. Dupuk B., A. BERTACCINI. 2006. Corn with symptoms of reddening: New host of stolbur phytoplasma. Plant
Disease 90: 1313-1319. CALARI A., S. PALTRINIERI, N. CONTALDO, D. SAKALIEVA, N. Mori, B. DuDUK, A. BERTACCINI. 2011. Molecular evidence of
phytoplasmas in winter oilseed rape, tomato and corn seedlings. Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement):
157-158. CLAIR D., J. LARRUE, G. AUBERT, J. GILLET, G. CLOQUEMIN, E. BOUDON-PADIEU. 2003. A multiplex nested-PCR assay for
sensitive and simultaneous detection and direct identification of phytoplasma in the elm yellows group and
stolbur group and its use in survey of grapevine yellows in France. Vitis 42: 151-157. Jovie J., T. Cvrkovic, M. Mitrovic, S. Krnuasic, M.G. REDINBAUGH, R.C. PRATT, R. GINGERY, S.A. HOGENHOUT, |. TOSEVSKI . 2007 Roles of stolbur phytoplasma and Reptalus panzeri (Cixiinae, Auchenorrhyncha) in the epidemiology of
maize redness in Serbia. European Journal of Plant Pathology 118(1): 85-89. Jovié J., T. Cvrkovic, M. Mitrovic, S. Krasi¢, A. Petrovic, M.G. REDINBAUGH, R.C. PRATT, S.A. HOGENHOUT, |. TOSEVSKI. 2009. Stolbur phytoplasma transmission to maize by Reptalus panzeri and the disease cycle of maize
redness in Serbia. Phytopathology 99(9): 1053-1061. Kovacevié M., Z. Buri, J. Jovic, G. Perkovic, B. Loui¢, $. Hrncic, |. Tosevski, D. Devi. 2013. First report of stolbur
phytoplasma associated with Maize redness disease of maize in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Plant Disease
(submitted). Lancer M., M. Malxner. 2004. Molecular characterisation of grapevine yellows associated phytoplasmas of the
stolbur-group based on RFLP-analysis of non-ribosomal DNA. Vitis 43: 191-199. Lee I-M., D.E. GUNDERSEN-RINDAL, R.E. Davis, |.M. BARTOSZYK. 1998. Revised classification scheme of phytoplasmas
based on RFLP analyses of 16S rRNA and ribosomal protein gene sequences. International Journal of
Systematic Bacteriology 48: 1153-69. 42

 

Diseases and insect vectors
Wat -wG2

ol

 

 

()

 

Fruit tree phytoplasmas and their vectors in pome fruit growing in
Belgium: overview of current status and recent research efforts

G. Peusens’, C. Duchéne?, P. Lepoivre’, T. Olivier’, S. Steyer®, E. Demonty’, P. Laurent’ and
T. Belién’

'Proefcentrum Fruitteelt vzw, Fruittuinweg 1, 3800 Sint-Truiden, Belgium

“Université de Liege, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, Unité de Phytopathologie, Avenue Marechal Juin, 13, 5030
Gembloux, Belgium

“Centre wallon de Recherches agronomiques, Unité Biologie des nuisibles et biovigilance, Rue de Liroux, 4,
5030 Gembloux, Belgium

‘agence fédérale pour la sécurité de la chaine alimentaire, Avenue Thomas Edison 3, 7000 Mons, Belgium

Background and objectives

Apple proliferation (AP, ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’) and pear decline (PD, ‘Candidatus
Phytoplasma pyri’) can cause severe damage and economic losses to the production of top fruit. Both
pathogens are member of the 16SrX, apple proliferation group and are listed as quarantine
organisms (EPPO A2). Materials and methods

In a recent research project a survey was carried out to obtain data on the presence of AP and PD in
Belgium. Root samples of symptomatic and apparently healthy apple trees were collected in 8
commercial and 3 non-commercial orchards and leaf samples of pear trees with premature yellow or
red discoloration were collected in 14 commercial orchards, all samples were analysed by real-time
PCR assays. As some Cacopsylla spp. are able to transmit ‘Ca. P. mali’ from infected trees to healthy trees within
and between orchards, the dynamic of the psyllid population was studied in 4 apple orchards and in
5 hawthorn hedges from March till August. Results and discussion

Results confirmed the presence of AP in both symptomatic and asymptomatic apple trees and in 8 of
the pear inspected orchards an infection with PD was detected. The study of the dynamic of the psyllid population studied in 4 apple orchards and in 5 hawthorn
hedges from March till August allow the identification of several species were: Cacopsylla mali, C.
melanoneura and C. picta in apple trees, C. melanoneura, C. peregrina, C. affinis and C. crataegi in
hawthorn. PCR- analysis of individuals of C. mali and C. peregrina revealed their infectivity but in
transmission trials performed with C. mali under lab conditions no transmission of AP to an artificial
feeding source could be obtained. In a previous study C. pyri and C. pyricola were found to be
present in pear trees. These research efforts represent the first systematic survey on presence of fruit tree phytoplasmas in
Belgium and the first confirmed detection of PD in our fruit growing region. The study also revealed
insights into the diversity, infectivity and dynamics of the psyllid population complexes in and around
pome fruit orchards. 43

 

ost Molecular tools developed
Wat

 

 

 

()

Use of groEL gene in characterization of strains belonging to some
‘Candidatus phytoplasma’ species

J. Mitrovicé", N. Contaldo?, A. Bertaccini?, M. Kube® and B. Duduk’

‘Institute of Pesticides and Environmental Protection, Banatska, 31b - 11080 Belgrade, Serbia;
jelenamitrovic@pesting.org.rs; Bojan.Duduk@pesting.org.rs

2alma Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, DiSTA - Patologia Vegetale, Viale Fanin, 42 - 40126 Bologna,
Italy; nicoletta.contaldo2@unibo.it; assunta.bertaccini@unibo.it

SDepartment of Crop and Animal Sciences, Humboldt-Universitat zu Berlin, Lentzeallee 55/57, 14195 Berlin,
Germany; Michael.Kube@agrar.hu-berlin.de

Background and objectives

The highly conserved double copy 16S rDNA has been used for more than a decade as the primary
marker for classification of phytoplasmas. However, many closely related strains, but ecologically or
epidemiologically different, usually could not be differentiated by this marker while an accurate
molecular distinction is necessary for phytoplasma strain characterisation and epidemiological
studies. To overcome the high conservancy and the interoperon heterogeneity, new additional
markers are needed (Lee et a/., 2010). The heat shock protein and molecular chaperone GroEL (also known as Hsp60, cpn60, MopA or
Group | chaperonin), of about 60-kDa, is present in almost all bacteria but it is absent in many
Mollicutes (Wong and Houry, 2004), while his homologues are present in plastids, chloroplasts, and
mitochondria. This ubiquitous and highly conserved single-copy gene has been used for identification
of many bacteria because of his species-specific sequence variations (Goh et a/., 1996; Teng et al.,
2001). A new PCR system for amplification of groEL gene was developed and used for strain
differentiation of several ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma’ species (Mitrovi¢ et a/., 2011a; 2012). Materials and methods

Available phytoplasma and Acholeplasma groEL genes were acquired from the GenBank, aligned and
primers were designed according to species specific sequences (Mitrovié et al, 2011a; 2012). Phytoplasma positive samples identified on 16S ribosomal gene were subjected to PCR amplification
on groEL. Successfully amplified products of representative strains were sequenced and obtained
sequences were aligned with those of other representative phytoplasmas. Phylogenetic tree was
constructed in MEGA 5 by Maximum Parsimony (MP) method employing Acholeplasma laidlawii as
the outgroup; 1,000 bootstrapping was performed to estimate the stability and support for the
inferred clades and nucleotide and amino acid sequence identity values were calculated. Results and discussion

Sixty four AY strains belonging to seven 16SrI- ribosomal subgroups (-A, -B, -C, -M, -L, -F and -P) were
divided into 11 groELI- subgroups (I-X!) according to their Tru7| and Alul RFLP profiles (Mitrovi¢ et al.,
201 1a; b). Around 100 stolbur phytoplasma strains belonging to tuf-types a and b from six countries (Serbia,
Italy, Croatia, Bulgaria and Germany) were tested. After examination of groEL gene sequences of the
tested strains, six nucleotide differences were observed. The majority of the strains showed no RFLP polymorphisms and were very similar also at the
sequence level. However after examination of groEL gene sequences of the tested strains six
nucleotide differences were observed. One of them was present only in some of the Serbian strains
(Tru1l restriction site), three were differentiating the German strains belonging to tuf-type b, but one

44

Molecular tools developed “~s cos E
wat —

of the showed only one SNP. One SNP was differentiating Croatian strains and the last one was
specific for on of the Italian strains. Four strains (two from Italy and one from Albania and Serbia) of ‘Ca. P. cynodontis’ from Cynodon
dactylon were successfully amplified. After examination of the groEL gene sequences, 39 nucleotide
differences were observed - one was differentiating one of the Italian strains from the other three
while the remaining 38 SNPs were differentiating the Serbian strain from the others. The groEL gene was successfully amplified from three Serbian strains of ‘Ca. P. convolvuli’, the
obtained amplicon was shorter than those from the other ribosomal groups tested (around 1,000 bp
compared to 1,400 to 2,200 bp) and the obtained sequences were identical. Since the designed primers for 16Srl, 16SrXII ribosomal groups are specific, a multiplex PCR system
for differentiating AY from stolbur phytoplasmas can be developed, which would be suitable for
detecting mixed infection of these two phytoplasmas. The phylogenetic tree based on groEL gene sequence analysis was highly congruent with the 16S
rDNA based tree and confirmed delineation of distinct phylogenetic lineages for ribosomal groups
among the phytoplasma strains analyzed. GroEL gene showed to have lower sequence similarity than
16S rDNA and more resolution power in separating closely related strains. Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the project 31043 of the Serbian MESTD. Literature cited

GOH S.H., S. Porter, J.O. Woon, S.M. HEMMIHGSEN, R.P. REYNOLDS, A.W. CHow. 1996. hsp60 gene sequences as
universal targets for microbial species identification: studies with coagulase-negative staphylococci. Journal
of Clinical Microbiology 34(4): 818-823. Lee I.-M., J. ZHAO, R.E. Davis. 2010. Prospects of Multiple Gene-based Systems for Differentiation and
Classification of Phytoplasmas. In: Phytoplasmas: Genomes, Plant Hosts and Vectors. P.G. Weintraub and P.
Jones editors, CAB International. Chapter 4: 51-63. Mitrovic J., S. KAKIZAWA, B. DUDUK, K. OSHIMA, S. NAMBA,A. BERTACCINI. 2011a. The groEL gene as an additional
marker for finer differentiation of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris’-related strains. Annals of Applied
Biology 159(1): 41-48. Mitrovic J., N. CONTALDO, S. PALTRINIERI, J. F. MEvIA, N. Mori, A. BERTACCINI, B. DUDUK,. 201 1b. The use of groEL gene
for characterization of aster yellows phytoplasmas in field collected samples. Bulletin of Insectology 64(S):
17-18. Mrrrovic J., B. DuDUK. 2012. Variability of groEL gene in Stolbur Phytoplasmas. 19" International Congress of the
IOM, Toulouse, 15/20 Jul. : 157-158. TeNG LJ., P.R. HSUEH, Y.H. WANG, H.M. LIN, K.T. LUH, $.W. Ho. 2001. Determination of Enterococcus faecalis groESL
full-length sequences and application for species identification. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 39: 3326—
3331. 45

 

ost Molecular tools developed
Wat

 

 

 

()

Multiplex and real-time PCR assays for the specific detection of chicory
phyllody phytoplasma (16SrIX-C)

M. Martini, S. Moruzzi, P. Ermacora, F. Ferrini and N. Loi
Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences (DISA), University of Udine, Via delle Scienze 206 -
33100 Udine, Italy; marta.martini@uniud.it

Background and objectives

In 2011 a severe outbreak of chicory phyllody has been reported in the Carlino area (Udine province)
in Friuli Venezia Giulia region (FVG, North-eastern Italy). Plants of Cichorium intybus L., (chicory,
family Asteraceae) showed symptoms of phyllody, virescence and proliferation of axillary buds. Molecular characterization of chicory phyllody (ChiP) phytoplasma strains (Martini et al., 2012;
Ermacora et al., 2013) based on the three genes 16S rDNA, ribosomal protein (rp, rp/22 and rps3) and
secY showed that all the strains were nearly identical and were closely related to strains PEY (Picris
echioides yellows) and NaxY (Naxos periwinkle virescence), belonging to 16SrlX-C, rp(IX)-C1 and
secY(IX)C1 subgroups (Lee et a/., 2012). The aim of the present work was to develop new molecular
tools (multiplex-PCR and real-time PCR) for specific, sensitive and robust detection of chicory
phyllody and very closely related phytoplasma strains (16SrIX-C) on the basis of the two variable
genes rp and secY. Materials and methods

Chicory phyllody phytoplasma (16SrIX-C) specific primers have been designed based on rp (rpi22-
rps3) and secY gene sequence alignments of 16SrlX phytoplasma strains including chicory phyllody
phytoplasma strains and all strains used in the work by Lee et al. (2012). A total of 11 primers, 5 on rp and 6 on secY gene sequences, have been designed for the specific
detection and identification of chicory phyllody and very closely related phytoplasma strains (16SrIX-
C). PCRs assays were performed on dilutions (20-60 ng/ul) of extracted DNA samples that were
positive in previous nested-PCRs on 16S rDNA, and on 16SrlX phytoplasma group reference strains:
PEY (16SrIX-C), NaxY (16SrIX-C), PPWB (16SrlX-A), KAP (16SrIX-C), AlmWB-A112 (16SrIX-B) (Lee et al.,
2012). Multiplex-PCRs (duplex-PCR, with simultaneous amplification of ChiP phytoplasma rp and secY gene
fragments) with four different primer combinations have been tested on 5 chicory phyllody
phytoplasma strains, on 5 positive insect DNA samples and 16SrIX reference strains. Combinations of
specific rp and secY primers were also used to develop a multiplex nested-PCR assay for a more
sensitive detection and identification of ChiP phytoplasma. Furthermore, one of the specific primer pair designed on secY gene (amplifying a fragment of 142 bp)
has been validated in an EvaGreen® Real-time PCR protocol for sensitive and specific quantification
of ChiP phytoplasma strains in plants and insects. Results and discussion

All the four duplex-PCRs tested (with four different primer combinations), worked very well when
used on plant DNA samples; however two of them resulted more sensitive allowing the simultaneous
amplification of the two targets in the majority of the plant and insect samples analysed. All samples
tested in multiplex nested-PCR resulted positive including the few negatives and weak positives
obtained with the duplex-PCRs. Therefore the multiplex nested-PCR allowed a more sensitive
detection and identification of ChiP phytoplasma in samples with a low target concentration. In the
EvaGreen® Real-time PCR protocol a unique melting peak was observed with all positive samples and
slopes of real-time PCR for quantification of ChiP phytoplasma were very similar, indicating a PCR

46

Molecular tools developed “~s cos E
wat —

efficiency close to 100%. In all PCR assays the reference strains PEY and NaxY (16SrIX-C) yielded very
good reactions, whereas all the others yielded weak or no PCR products. In the present study, we have demonstrated that multiplex conventional PCR assays, using a
combination of a rp-based and a secY-based primer pairs, effectively detected the target pathogen
and gave dual signals that confirmed the pathogen identity unequivocally in a single PCR assay. Therefore, the specific multiplex-PCR and multiplex nested-PCR assays developed, represent valuable
and robust tools to be used especially in epidemiological studies. Furthermore, the specific real-time
PCR protocol established in the present work will allow the quantification of the target phytoplasma
in both plant and insect hosts. Literature cited

Ermacora P., F. FERRINI, M. MARTINI, F. PAVAN, A. LoscHi, N. Loi, S. Moruzzi, R. Osler. 2013. Biological and molecular
characterization of a phytoplasma associated with chicory phyllody in North-East Italy. Petria 23(1): 29-32. Lee I-M., K.D. BotTNer-Parker, Y. ZHAO, A. BERTACCINI, R.E Davis. 2012. Differentiation and classification of
phytoplasmas in the pigeon pea witches’-broom group (16SrIX): an update based on multiple gene
sequence analysis. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 62: 2279-2285. Martini M., P. ERMACORA, S. Moruzzi, N. Lol, R. Oster. 2012. Molecular characterization of phytoplasma strains
associated with epidemics of chicory phyllody. Journal of Plant Pathology 94(Supplement 4): $4.50. 47

 

ost Molecular tools developed
Wat

 

 

 

()

Searching for new markers of the phytoplasma diseases of grapevine

A. Rotter, P. Nikolié, P. Kogovsek, N. Turngek, N. Prezelj, K. Gruden and M. Dermastia
National Institute of Biology, Vecna pot 111, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia; marina.dermastia@nib.si

Background and objectives

Phytoplasma associated diseases cause big losses in yield and additional economic losses due to lost
investment in application of pesticides to control the insect vectors, laboratory analysis for detection,
follow-up costs for monitoring and eradication campaigns. Because of difficulties associated with
research of phytoplasmas their early detection is hard and great efforts are put in search for new
approaches and strategies for its improvement. In order to understand the determining factors of
plant diseases to obtain sustainable practices for their strategic management several different data
analysis tools have been employed in epidemiology, but similar approaches have not been used for
phytoplasma diseases. In this work the results of data analysis based on the previous transcriptome
study and carbohydrate analysis of grapevine plants infected with ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’,
which is associated with the “bois noir” disease, were used for identifying new potential markers
with high efficiency for disease forecasting. Materials and methods

A production vineyard of grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.) cv. ‘Chardonnay’ in the southwestern part of
Slovenia in the Brda region was selected for the study carried out from 2004 to 2010. 22 selected
genes were analyzed as described (Hren et a/., 2009). From the fully developed leaves glucose,
fructose and sucrose were isolated and determined by the enzyme based spectrophotometric sugar
determination SUFRG kit. Classification trees were calculated using Weka software using the J48
classifier. Results and discussion
Construction of two classification trees based on the expression data from selected genes revealed
two trees constructed of two genes each. Validation showed the accuracy of 92% for the first tree
and 86% for the second one; the precision of 66% and 100%, respectively; and the sensitivity of 100%
and 60%, respectively. Sugar determination revealed healthy grapevine plants having either very low or high concentration
of fructose. Only the low-fructose plants showed a significant change in fructose level upon the
phytoplasma infection and symptom development. Up to a certain fructose concentration, each unit
of sugar increase increases the odds of having a symptomatic plant in summer season by roughly 3-
fold (p<0.01). In addition, statistical analysis revealed a significant connection between the fructose
level and a gene involved in starch biosynthesis. Literature cited

Hren M., P. Nixouié, A. RoTTer, A. BLEvec, N. TERRIER, M. RAVNIKAR, M. DeRMasTiA, K. GRUDEN. 2009. Bois noir
phytoplasma induces significant reprogramming of the leaf transcriptome in the field grown grapevine. BMC Genomics 10: 460-477. 48

 

ol

Molecular tools developed
wet

 

 

()

 

Multilocus sequence typing of phytoplasma strains associated with
“bois noir” in Italian vineyards

F. Quaglino’, Y. Zhao’, N. Mori’, G. Romanazzi’, P. Casati’, W. Wei’, S. Murolo’, R.E. Davis”
and P.A. Bianco"

‘Department of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences, University of Milan, Via Celoria, 2 - 20133 Milano,
Italy; piero.bianco@unimi.it

Molecular Plant Pathology Laboratory, USDA-Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA;
robert.davis@ars.usda.gov

SDipartimento di Agronomia Animali Alimenti Risorse Naturali e Ambiente, Universita degli Studi di Padova, Via
dell'Universita 16, 35020 Legnaro (PD), Italy; nicola.mori@unipd.it

‘Department of Agricultural, Food and Environmental Sciences, Marche Polytechnic University, Via Brecce
Bianche, 60131 Ancona, Italy; g.romanazzi@univpm.it

Background and objectives

“Bois noir” (BN) is an important grapevine yellows (GY) that is widely spread in Europe and in the
Mediterranean basin. BN is attributed to infection of Vitis vinifera by 'Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’
strains that are transmitted plant-to-plant mainly by the cixiid Hyalesthes obsoletus Signoret
(Quaglino et al., 2013). Complex disease epidemiology related to the numerous weed plants hosting
BN phytoplasmas within and around vineyards, and to the possible presence of additional vector(s)
has increased the necessity to study the genetic diversity among BN populations in diverse ecological
niches. Recent studies, based on molecular characterization of more (16S rRNA, tuf, secY) or less
(vmp, stamp) conserved gene nucleotide sequences, evidenced an unexpectedly high genetic
diversity among BN strains from European Countries (Foissac et a/., 2013). In the present work,
multilocus sequence typing (MLST) analyses including 16S rRNA, tuf, hlyC, cbiQ-glyA, trxA-truB, and
rplS- tyrS-csdB were carried out for investigating the genetic diversity among BN populations from
distinct regions of Italy. Materials and methods

BN strains identified in 108 grapevine plants collected from 2008 to 2012 in vineyards located in
Lombardia (north-western Italy), Veneto (north-eastern Italy), Marche and Abruzzi (central Italy), and
Sicily (southern Italy) regions were characterized by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based
amplifications of the genes 16S rRNA, tuf, hlyC, cbiQ-glyA, trxA-truB, and rplS-tyrS-csaB, followed by
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) analyses. Reaction conditions were as previously
described (Quaglino et a/., 2009). PCR products and RFLP patterns were visualized on 1% and 3%
agarose gels, respectively, under a UV transilluminator. Results and discussion

RFLP analyses performed on 16S rDNA amplicons revealed that all BN strains analyzed in the present
work belong to subgroup 16SrXIl-A. Based on tuf gene characterization, BN strains were divided in
two types, BN-type | (formerly called VK-I or tuf-type a) and BN-type Il (formerly called VK-II or tuf-
type b). BN-type | was prevalent (65 strains) in the examined Italian vineyards, but prevalence of the
two BN-types differed depending on the region studied. Thus, BN-type | was prevalent in Veneto;
type Il in Marche/Abruzzi and in Sicily. In Lombardia, BN-types | and Il were almost identical in
regional prevalence. Based on hlyC RFLP analyses, two distinct restriction patterns were found,
distinguishing the BN strains into two groups consistent with BN-types. Based on cbiQ-glyA, trxA-
truB, and rplS-tyrS-csdB RFLP analyses, it was possible to identify two distinct restriction profiles for
each of those genomic segments, distinguishing the BN strains into groups that were not consistent
with those defined by tuf/hlyC gene RFLP patterns. Considering the cbiQ-glyA, trxA-truB, and rpis-

49

a—~ cos Ec Molecular tools developed
~ wat

tyrS-csdB RFLP profiles of each BN strain as unique collective RFLP pattern, it was possible to
evidence the presence of eight collective patterns: four associated with BN-type | and II; three unique
for BN-type Il; and one unique for BN-type |. In detail, five and seven collective patterns were
identified among BN-type | and Il strains, respectively, showing a possibly higher genetic variability
among BN-type Il. Such evidence reinforces previous results obtained by vmp1, stamp, and groEL
gene sequence analyses (Murolo et a/., 2010; Foissac et al., 2013; Mitrovi¢ et al., 2013). On the basis of overall RFLP collective patterns, MLST analyses including all the analyzed genes
evidenced the presence of 12 BN lineages (BN1 to BN12) among BN phytoplasma populations
analyzed in the present work. Prevalent lineages were BN1 (24 strains), BN4 (20 strains) and BN12
(15 strains), but in each examined region the lineage prevalence was found different. In detail, BN1
and BN4 were prevalent in northern Italy, BN12 in central Italy, and BN6 in southern Italy. Interestingly, no BN lineage was found in every region studied, suggesting a possible influence of
region-specific weed host plants and/or insect vector(s) in selecting BN strain lineages and
determining regional BN population composition. Molecular markers identified in the present study will be employed for investigating more accurately
the presence of BN lineages in grapevine, weed host plants and insect vector(s) in diverse ecological
niches in order to clarify the “bois noir” epidemiology. Literature cited

Folssac X., P. CARLE, A. FABRE, P. SALAR, J-L. DANET, STOLBUR-EUROMED CONSORTIUM. 2013. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
solani’ genome project and genetic diversity in the Euro-Mediterranean basin. 3° European Bois Noir
Workshop, Barcelona, 20-21 March: 11-13. Mirrovic J., N. CONTALDO, Z. AVRAMOV, M. Smiukovic, A. BERTACCINI, B. DUDUK. 2013. GroEL gene characterization of
“bois noir” phytoplasma from Serbia, Bulgaria and Italy. 3° European Bois Noir Workshop, Barcelona, 20-21
March: 63-64. Muroto S., C. MARCONE, V. PROTA, R. GARAU, X. Foissac, G. ROMANAZZI. 2010. Genetic variability of the stolbur
phytoplasma vmp7 gene in grapevines, bindweeds and vegetables. Journal of Applied Microbiology 109:
2049-2059. QUAGLINO F., Y. ZHAO, P.A. BIANCO, W. Wel, G. ROMANAZzI, S. MuROLO, MLR. SILLETTI, V. SAVINO, P. CASATI, G. DURANTE,
R.E. Davis. 2009. Molecular markers among stolbur phytoplasma (16SrXII-A) strains and their association
with natural ecologies of grapevine Bois noir in Italy. Progrés Agricole et Viticole Horse Série: 145-146. QUAGLINO F., Y. ZHAO, P. CASATI, D. BULGARI, P.A. BIANCO, W. Wel, R.E. Davis. 2013. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’,
a novel taxon associated with stolbur- and bois noir-related diseases of plants. International Journal of
Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 63(8): 2879-2894. 50

 

ol

Molecular tools developed
wet

 

 

()

 

DNA barcoding of phytoplasmas: a tool for their fast identification

M. Nicolaisen’, O. Makarova’, S. Paltrinieri”, A. Bertaccini* and N. Contaldo”

‘Department of Agroecology, Aarhus University, Slagelse, Denmark; Mogens.Nicolaisen@agrsci.dk

2 alma Mater Studiorum, University of Bologna, DipSA - Plant Pathology, Viale Fanin, 42 - 40126 Bologna, Italy;
assunta.bertaccini@unibo.it

Background and objectives

Phytoplasmas infect a high number of plant species. Based on the 16S ribosomal gene sequence,
over 30 RFLP groups have been established within the ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma’ taxon, some of
which are of quarantine status. The basic phytoplasma identification methods is based on RFLP
analysis of a 1.2 kbp region of the 16S rDNA, however, this method is not easy to set up and it only
considers a part of the available phytoplasma sequence information. As part of QBOL project a
universal DNA barcoding based tool for phytoplasma identification was developed and the system
was validated for relevant quarantine phytoplasmas. The phytoplasma secY and tuf genes were
employed as tools to provide reliable information in combination with 16SrDNA for phytoplasma
strains differentiation (Makarova et al., 2012; 2013). Materials and methods

Two sets of primers amplifying a fragment of the Tuf gene and a fragment of the 16S rDNA gene,
respectively, were designed and their potential as DNA barcodes was verified using both
experimentally infected samples in periwinkle and naturally infected samples from original host
species. Results and discussion

The set of Tuf specific primers designed amplified a product (420-444 bp) from all phytoplasma
strains tested and belonging to a number of 16S ribosomal groups including both EU quarantine and
non-quarantine representatives. Similar results were obtained with primers amplifying a fragment of
about 600 bp at the 3’ of the 16S ribosomal gene. Successful amplification and sequencing of more
than 150 phytoplasma strains in total, and ability to separate various phytoplasma strains to
‘Candidatus species’ level, 16S ribosomal group and sub-group level suggest that these barcodes are
efficient phytoplasma identification tools. Tuf barcode sequence alignments and NJ tree
construction showed that the Tuf tree was highly congruent with 16S rDNA derived trees. The Tuf amd 16S ribosomal barcodes could separate main ribosomal groups and most of
their sub-groups. Phytoplasma Tuf barcodes were deposited in the NCBI GenBank and to the
newly developed Q-bank (http://www.q-bank.eu/Phytoplasmas/), a freely available online
identification tool for plant pests and pathogens of quarantine status. The obtained
sequences can thus be used by plant health services and researchers for online phytoplasma
identification following an amplification scheme reported in the same web page. Literature cited

Maxarova O., N. CONTALDO, S. PALTRINIERI, G. KaWuBE, A. BERTACCINI, M. NICOLAISEN. 2012. DNA barcoding for
universal identification of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasmas’ using a fragment of the elongation factor Tu gene. PLOS ONE 7(12): 52092. Maxarova O., N. CONTALDO, S. PALTRINIERI, A. BERTACCINI, H. NysKJOLD, M. NICOLAISEN. 2013. DNA barcoding for
phytoplasma identification. Methods in Molecular Biology 938: 301-317. 51

 

ost Molecular tools developed
Wat

 

 

 

()

To the problem of reliable detection and sanitation of European stone
fruit yellows phytoplasma in apricots

J. Polak’, J. Salava', B. Kfizan? and J. Svoboda’
‘Department of Virology, Division of Plant Health, Crop Research Institute, Prague, Czech Republic
?Mendeleum, Horticultural Faculty Lednice, MENDELU Brno, Czech Republic

Background and objectives

The presence of European stone fruit yellows (ESFY) phytoplasma, ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
prunorum’, (Bertaccini, 2005) was confirmed in the Czech Republic in 1990s (Navratil et al., 1998). The phytoplasma infected apricot trees died within two years after appearance of symptoms and
infection was verified only in symptomatic apricot trees (Navratil et al, 2001). In 2002 ESFY
phytoplasma was detected in symptomless apricot trees and they were not dying. The results of
nested PCR were completely different from the biological test (Polak et a/., 2006). Therefore another
experiment was established in apricot orchard where typical symptoms of ESFY were observed. Materials and methods

Collection of samples from thirty eight trees of four apricot cultivars grew in orchard where ESFY
symptoms appeared was evaluated during eight years. The presence of ESFY was evaluated by
inspection of symptoms, PCR detection, and indexing on the peach indicator GF-305. All trees were
tested by direct and nested PCR assays in every year. Specific primers fAT/r PRUS were used in direct
PCR assays (Lorenz et a/., 1995). The first step of nested PCR was carried out with the primers
R16F1/R16RO (Lee et a/., 1995), the second step with two different pairs of primers, R16F2/R16R2
(Lee et al., 1995) and fU5/rU31 (Lorenz et a/., 1995). The hot water (temperature 45°C) was used for the elimination of ESFY in shoots of several apricot
cultivars. In vitro cultures of apricot cultivars ‘Leskora’ and ‘Bergeron’ were prepared in trials to
eliminate ESFY by combination of in vitro culture with chemotherapy. Six different media and two
concentrations of tetracyklin (10mg/I and 20 mg/l) were applied. Results and discussion

Eighteen trees showed no ESFY symptoms during the whole eight years period of evaluation. Six
trees with ESFY symptoms in the first year of evaluation died by the end of the first vegetation
period. Another twelve trees died during the next seven years, from that three trees died of
apoplexy. The number of died trees during the eight years: 1. - 6, 2.—0, 3.—5, 4.-1,5.-1,6.-3, 7. —1,8.-2. Apricot trees showing ESFY symptoms died in the year when ESFY symptoms appeared, or
in the next year. The biological indexing on GF-305 was not reliable because a lot of negative results
were obtained from tested trees with ESFY symptoms. Some false positive reactions was recorded by
nested PCR in several trees with no ESFY symptoms during the eight years of evaluation. The only
reliable detection of ESFY resulted to be visual evaluation of specific symptoms in leaves and shoots. Thirty nine percent of apricot trees infected with ESFY died during the eight years of evaluation. The attempts to eliminate ESFY by hot water and by in vitro cultures of apricots in combination with
chemotherapy were not successful. Some positive results with hot water were obtained without
confirmation by molecular tests. Cultures of apricots died in two months, therefore the
thermotherapy was not suitable to use. 52

Molecular tools developed CcosE
wai

Literature cited

BeRTACcINI A. 2005. Phytoplasma diseases and importance of their molecular identification. 6" International
Symposium in the Series, Recent advances in plant biotechnolonology From Laboratory to business, Ceské
Budéjovice: 75. Lee I-M., A. BerTaccini, M. Visio, D.E. GUNDERSEN. 1995. Detection of multiple phytoplasmas in perennial fruit-
trees with decline symptoms in Italy. Phytopathology 85: 728-735. LoreNz K-H., B. SCHNEIDER, U. AHRENS, E. SEEMULLER. 1995. Detection of the apple proliferation and pear decline
phytoplasmas by PCR amplification of ribosomal and nonribosomal DNA. Phytopathology 85: 771-776. NavratiL M., P. VALOVA, R. FIALOVA, J. FRANOVA, Z. VorACcKovA, R. KARESOVA. 1998. Occurrence of fruit tree
phytoplasmas in the Czech Republic. Acta Horticulturae 472: 649-653. NavpATiL M., P. VALOVA, R. FIALOVA, K. PETROVA, Z. PONCAROVA-VorAcKovA, J. FRANOVA, J. NeBesARovA, R. KARESOVA. 2001. Survey for stone fruit phytoplasmas in the Czech Republic. Acta Horticulturae 550: 377-382. PoLAK J., J. SALAVA, M. BryxlovA, J. SvoBoDA. 2007. Problems in detection of European stone fruit yellows
phytoplasma in apricot trees in the Czech Repubic. Bulletin of Insectology 60: 261-262. 53

Co cosc Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases
Molecular epidemiology WG3

 

 

Identification and characterization of European stone fruit yellows and
pear decline phytoplasma strains in Austria

C. Paleskié’”, G. Brader' and M. Riedle-Bauer”

‘austrian Institute of Technology, Konrad-Lorenz-StraBe 24, 3430 Tulln, Austria; Caroline.Maier.fl@ait.ac.at
*Lehr- und Forschungszentrum fiir Wein- und Obstbau Klosterneuburg, WienerstraBe 74, 3400 Klosterneuburg,
Austria

Background and objectives

European stone fruit yellows (ESFY) and pear decline (PD) are widely spread in Austria and cause
severe damage in affected cultures. So far little is known about present phytoplasma strains. Previous work showed a high variability in virulence of different ESFY strains in other European
countries and cross protection has been reported as a possible tool for disease control (Kison and
Seemiiller, 2001; Ermacora et al., 2010). Identification and characterization of ESFY and PD strains in
Austria aims to create a basis for further analyses and control strategies. Materials and methods

Various apricot and pear orchards with different origin of planting material were sampled for
phytoplasma identification and strain characterization. Symptom expression of trees in the orchards
has been recorded. Samples were first screened for phytoplasma infections on 16S rDNA gene. Genes previously shown as being less conserved such as imp, hflB and aceF were chosen for strain
characterization (Danet et al., 2011). Amplification products were sequenced and aligned in
ClustalW. Sequences were further analysed by maximum parsimony (phylip) method and visualized
in T-Rex. Results and discussion

Analyses of the imp gene revealed polymorphisms in ESFY and PD sequences. Comparison with NCBI
database showed homologies with published imp strains but also different polymorphisms could be
observed. Interestingly different ESFY strains were present not only within Austria but even within
orchards. Analyses of aceF gene displayed less dissimilarities. Amplification of hflB gene could only be
obtained for a few pear decline samples but not for European stone fruit yellows. Literature cited

DANeT J.L., G. BALAKISHIYEVA, A. CIMERMAN, N. SAUVION, V. MARIE-JEANNE, G. LABONNE, A. LAVIKIA, A. BATTLE, I. KRIZANAC,
D. Skori¢, P. ERMACORA, ¢.U. SeRcE, C. KADRYE, K. GaGLavan, W. JARAUSCH, X. Foissac. 2011. Multilocus sequence
analysis reveals the genetic diversity of European fruit tree phytoplasmas and supports the existence of
inter-species recombination. Microbiology 157: 438-450. Ermacora P., N. Lol, F. FERRINI, A. LOSCHI, M. MARTINI, R. OSLER, L. CARRARO. 2010. Hypo- and hyper-virulence in
apricot trees infected by European stone fruit yellows. Ju/ius-Kuihn-Archiv 427: 197-200. Kison H., E. SEEMULLER. 2001. Differences in strain virulence of the European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma and
susceptibility of stone fruit trees on various rootstocks to this pathogen. Journal of Phytopathology 149:
533-541. 54

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases

 

 

 

Molecular epidemiology WG3

“Stolbur’” phytoplasma strains in Austria and their association with
grapevine, bindweed, stinging nettle and Hyalesthes obsoletus

G. Brader’, A. Aryan’, J. Mértel?, M. Pastar’ and M. Riedle-Bauer”

‘Austrian Institute of Technology, Konrad-Lorenz-StraBe 24, 3430 Tulln, Austria; guenter.brader@ait.ac.at
*Lehr- und Forschungszentrum fiir Wein- und Obstbau Klosterneuburg, WienerstraBe 74, 3400 Klosterneuburg,
Austria; Monika.Riedle-Bauer@weinobst.at

Background and objectives

“Bois noir” (BN) is widespread in several winegrowing regions in Austria. Investigations between
2003 and 2008 revealed an absence or low population densities of the confirmed vector Hyalesthes
obsoletus in most viticultural areas of Austria. The phytoplasma was frequently ascertained in
bindweed and grapevines whereas infections of nettles were very unusual. Analysis of tuf-types
showed sole presence of tuf type b (Riedle-Bauer ef a/., 2006; 2008). The aim of the present study
was to collect update data on the epidemiology of BN in Austria and to characterize previous and
present “stolbur” strains by the molecular markers secY, stamp, tuf and vmp1. Materials and methods

The investigations were carried out in more than 30 vineyards and their surroundings all over Austria. H. obsoletus and Anacaratagallia ribauti were collected by vacuum sampling directly from Urtica
dioica and Convolvulus arvensis using a modified garden blower-vac (Stihl, Dieburg, Germany). Morevoer samples were taken from diseased grapevines and from the weeds on which the insects
had been collected. DNA extraction and PCR/RFLP analyses were carried out as published (Langer
and Maixner 2004; Riedle-Bauer et a/., 2008). Phytoplasma DNA was amplified directly as previously
described with the primer pairs stampfw-0/rv-0 (stamp, Fabre et a/., 2011), fTUFAY/rTUFAY (tuf,
Schneider et a/., 1997), POSecF1/POSecR1, TYPH10F/TYPH10R (secY and vmp1, Fialova et a/., 2009),
and for 16S with 5-CTAATACATGCAAGTCGAACG-3 (R16mF2m) and 5- T@ACGGGCGGTGTGTACAAACC-
3 (R16R2m) for 40 cyles, 30 sec 94°C, 45 sec 58°C and 90 sec at 72°C with 10 min final extension. The
PCR products were sequenced with stamp fw-0, TYPH10R, rTUFAY and R16R2m, respectively. Field
collected H. obsoletus and A. ribauti were employed transmission trials on Catharanthus roseus
seedlings using 10 to 50 insects per experiment. Results and discussion

Transmission experiments with H. obsoletus collected from stinging nettle and with A. ribauti
collected from bindweed resulted in several infections of C. roseus and in successful transmission of
three different strains based on stamp and vmp sequences. In contrast to earlier works (Maixner,
2011) we have not found the previously described association (Langer and Maixner, 2004) between
tuf type and herbaceous host plant in the epidemic cycle. Positive H. obso/etus individuals trapped
from stinging nettles were infected with tuf-type b stolbur phytoplasmas and transmitted this stolbur
type to C. roseus. The same tuf type was identified in grapevines and in stinging nettles. Sequence analysis shows, however, that only the minority of these tuf sequences are “pure” tuf-type
b type as compared with reference strains, but the majority has a G instead of an A on position 568. For a better analysis of epidemiological cycles we characterized also secY, stamp and vmp1
sequences and identified at least 7 stolbur subtypes in Austria. The finding raises the question
whether in the investigated vineyards tuf-type b stolbur phytoplasmas are transmitted in an
epidemiological cycle including H. obsoletus and nettles. Moreover our data indicate a significant
change in the epidemiology of BN in Austria within a few years. Whereas till around 2008 H.
obsoletus and infections of nettle were rare we now face high population densities of H. obsoletus

55

ns :
cosc Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases
Molecular epidemiology WG3

and frequent infections of nettles. BN is a disease characterized by sudden outbreaks and different
epidemiological cycles (Maixner, 2011). It seems likely that a transmission cycle including nettles and
H. obsoletus will account for future BN outbreaks in Austria. Interestingly, we also found in three nettle and several bindweed samples 16S sequences
corresponding to bindweed nettle phytoplasma ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma convolvuli’, a recently
described taxon (Martini et a/., 2012) and could also describe strains within this phytoplasma based
on vmp1 and tuf sequences. Literature cited

Fapre A., J-L.DANET, X. Foissac. 2011. The stolbur phytoplasma antigenic membrane protein gene stamp is
submitted to diversifying positive selection. Gene 472: 37-41. FIALOVA R., P. VALOVA, G. BALAKISHIYEVA, J-L. DANET, D. SAFAROVA, X. FoIssAc, M. NAVRATIL. 2009. Genetic variability of
stolbur phytoplasma in annual crop and wild plant species in south Moravia. Journal of Plant Pathology 91:
411-416. LANGER M., M. MAIXNER. 2004. Molecular characterisation of grapevine yellows associated phytoplasmas of the
stolbour group based on RFLP analysis of non-ribosomal DNA. Vitis 43:191-199. MaIxNer M. 2011. Recent advances in Bois noir research. Petria 21(2/3): 95-108. Martini M., C. MARCONE, J. Mitrovic, M. MAIXNeR, D. Detic, A. Myrta, P. ERMACORA, A. BERTACCINI, B. DUDUK. 2012. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma convolvuli’, a new phytoplasma taxon associated with bindweed yellows in four
European countries. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary microbiology 57: 1855-1867. RieDLe-BAUER M., W. TIEFENBRUNNER, J. OTREBA, K. HANAK, B, SCHILDBERGER, F. REGNER. 2006. Epidemiological
observations on Bois Noir in Austrian vineyards. Mitt Klostermeuburg 56: 177-81. RieDLe-BAUER M., A. SARA, F. REGNER. 2008. Transmission of a stolbur phytoplasma by the Agailiinae leafhopper
Anaceratagallia ribauti (Hemiptera, Auchenorrhyncha, Cicadellidae). Journal of Phytopathology 156: 687-90. SCHNEIDER B., K.S. Gis, E. SEEMULLER. 1997. Sequence and RFLP analysis of the elongation factor Tu gene used in
differentiation and classification of phytoplasmas. Microbiology 143: 3381-3389. 56

 

ol

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases

 

 

()

 

Molecular epidemiology WG3

Occurrence of Hyalesthes obsoletus and “stolbur” phytoplasma strains
in grapevine and host plants in Spain

A. Lavifia, J. Sabaté and A. Batlle
Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentaries, Departamento de Patologia Vegetal,- 08348 Cabrils,
Barcelona, Spain; assumpcid.batlle@irta.cat

Background and objectives

“Bois noir” (BN) is one of the most important grapevine yellows in Europe and it is associated with
the stolbur phytoplasma named ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’ (Quaglino et a/., 2013). BN is
vectored by Hyalesthes obsoletus Signoret from vineyard weeds to grapevine, although other insects
as Reptalus panzeri and R. quinquecostatus have also been reported as potential vectors (Palermo et
al., 2004, Trivellone et a/., 2005). Molecular characterization of strains in plants and vectors is an
important tool to find out more about the vectors and the host plants involved in the dissemination
of BN. In Spain, BN disease was first identified in 1994 (Lavifa et a/., 1995), but in recent years its
incidence seems to have increased in different wine regions (Sabaté et a/., 2007). According to the
results obtained in previous studies, the tuf-type b was the prevalent in the regions studied in Spain. This “stolbur” strain was identified in all the H. obsoletus specimens and in most of the grapevine
samples with the exception of the plants from La Rioja Alta and some plants from Navarre. The strain
tuf-type b is associated with Convolvulus arvensis while the strain tuf-type a is associated with Urtica
dioica. With the aim to determine the cause of the BN incidence increase, a new study about Bn
strains was undertaken in several regions in the northeast of Spain. Materials and methods

Samples of grapevine plants were taken in affected plots of different regions in La Rioja, Navarre,
Aragon and Catalonia. H. obsoletus was captured in these regions in C. arvensis and U. dioica. The
insects were captured weekly with a D-Vac aspirator and classified and stored in Eppendorf tubes at
-20°C until analysis. Samples of grapevine and H. obsoletus were analyzed by PCR technique. The molecular characterization of “stolbur” strains is being evaluated using PCR-RFLP analyses with
primers for tuf gene encoding the elongation factor TU and primers stol-1H 10, for a gene vmp 1
encoding a membrane protein (Langer and Maixner, 2004, Cimerman et a/., 2009). Results and discussion

In the surveys conducted in Spain until now, tuf-type a and tuf-type b were identified in grapevine
plants, however in the vector H. obso/etus only tuf-type b was identified (Batlle et a/., 2009). In the
surveys conducted in 2013, H. obsoletus has been captured for the first time in U. dioica in Navarre
and La Rioja, with a higher population that appeared later than those obtained on C. arvensis. The
maximum population in U. dioica was obtained in Navarre in August 6th, where as much as 30
individuals were captured in one aspiration. In C. arvensis only a maximum of 4 individuals were
captured by aspiration in the same region in July 9th. The individuals captured in U. dioica are
probably responsible for the spread of the strain tuf-type a in grapevine plants of La Rioja and
Navarre. In Catalonia the strain tyf-type b continues being the only one identified. Literature cited
BATLLE A., J. SABATE, A. LAVINA. 2009. Incidence of bois noir phytoplasma in different viticulture regions of Spain
and stolbur isolates distribution in plants and vectors. Le Progres Agricole et Viticole HS: 190-192. 57

eo Cos E Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases
Molecular epidemiology WG3

 

CIMERMAN A., D. PAciFico, P. SALAR, C. MARZACHI, X. FoIssac. 2009. Striking diversity of vmp1, a variable gene
encoding a putative membrane protein of the stolbur phytoplasma. Applied Environmental Microbiology 75:
2951-2957. LANGER M., M. MAIXNer. 2004. Molecular characterization of grapevine yellows associated phytoplasmas of the
stolbur-group based on RFLP-analysis of non-ribosomal DNA. Vitis 43(4): 191-199. Lavina A., A. BATLLe, J. LARRUE, X. Dale, D. CLAIR, E. BOUDON-PADIEU. 1995. First report of grapevine bois noir
phytoplasma in Spain. Plant Disease 79: 1075. PaterMo S., M. ELeKes, $. Botti, |. EmBer, A. ALMA, A. Orosz, A. BERTACCINI, M. KOLBeR. 2004. Presence of stolbur
phytoplasma in Cixiidae in Hungarian vineyards. Vitis 43: 201-203. QUAGLINO F., Y. ZHAO, P. CASATI, D. BULGARI, P.A. BIANCO, W. Wel, R.E. Davis. 2013. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’,
a novel taxon associated with stolbur- and bois noir-related diseases of plants. International Journal of
Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 63(8): 2879-2894. SaBATE J., A. LAVINA, J. LEGORBURU, J. FORTANETE, J.J. PEREZ DE OBANOS, J.L. PEREZ Marin, J. Reves, A. BATLLE. 2007. Incidence of “bois noir” phytoplasma in different wine-growing regions of Spain and its relation to
Hyalesthes obsoletus. Bulletin of Insectology 60(2): 367-368. TRIVELLONE V., F. PINZAUTI, B. BAGNOLI. 2005. Reptalus quinquecostatus (Dufour) (Auchenorrhyncha Cixiidae) as a
possible vector of Stolbur-phytoplasma in a vineyard in Tuscany. Redia 88: 103-108. 58

 

ol

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases

 

 

()

 

Molecular epidemiology WG3

Advances in molecular detection of the sesame phytoplasmas and
resistance to sesame phyllody in Turkey

B. Uzun', C. Ikten’, M. Catal’, R. Ustun’, S. Furat’ and E. Yo!" ‘Department of Field Crops, Faculty of Agriculture, Akdeniz University, TR-07058, Antalya, Turkey;
bulentuzun@akdeniz.edu.tr

?Department of Plant Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, Akdeniz University, TR-07058, Antalya, Turkey

Background and objectives

Sesame plants with symptoms typical for those associated with phytoplasma infections were
observed in Antalya province of Turkey. Symptoms includes of proliferation of branches with smaller
leaflets, yellowing, decline and witches’ broom. Identification and molecular characterization of
phytoplasmas in sesame have been reported in several countries. Restriction fragments length
polymorphism (RFLP) analysis together with the sequencing of 16Sr phytoplasma genes and PCR
amplification of rDNA gene are predominantly used for sesame phytoplasma detection and
characterization. However, further molecular analyses combined with field observations would be
necessary for better phytoplasma characterization and selection of resistant and/or tolerant plants. The objectives of the present study were detection and quantification of sesame phytoplasmas with
real-time PCR and field selection of resistant genotypes in a world-wide sesame collection. Materials and methods

A wide collection of sesame varieties was grown in experimental field of Antalya, Turkey for
screening to phytoplasma infection. Genotypes were observed under both field and greenhouse
conditions. In the field, genotypes were scored using 1-5 (resistant-susceptible) scale according to
degree of phyllody symptoms. The possible resistant/tolerant varieties identified in the field were
further analysed under greenhouse condition. The plants in the greenhouse were observed for
symptom development or tested by molecular analysis. Molecular assays were conducted with real-
time PCR assay. Total DNAs were extracted using a modified CTAB extraction method and real time
PCR assays were used for detection and quantification of sesame phytoplasmas. This technique with
relative quantification method allowed to verify the phytoplasma quantity for each variety. Results and discussion

About 28% of the sesame collection scored 1 which means that they had no phyllody symptom. These genotypes were further analysed under greenhouse conditions and the disease transmission
were made by the vector insect, Orosius orientalis. Up to date, 24 genotypes of possible resistant
varieties identified under field conditions were tested under greenhouse conditions and the rest is
currently under investigation. Three of those genotypes were identified as highly tolerant to the
disease because either symptom development was no recorded or symptoms were observed one
month later comparing to control plants. These accessions were also analysed by real time-PCR
assays and as a preliminary result, their phytoplasma loads were at negligible level compared to
control plants. In addition, these accessions were able to produce capsules and seeds. The study also
showed that the real time PCR technique was very powerful for qualitatively and quantitatively
detecting the pathogen in sesame. Acknowledgments

This study was supported by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK)
code: 1110027, in connection with the COST Action FA0807 “Integrated Management of
Phytoplasma Epidemics in Different Crop Systems”

59

 

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases

 

 

Management WG3

Monitoring programs for quarantine phytoplasmas on grapevine and
fruit trees and problems for the phytosanitary control in Bulgaria

Z. Avramov', A. Etropolska’, D. Chavdarova’, M. Eftenov’ and M. Laginova'
‘Bulgarian Food Safety Agency, Sofia, 15A P. Slaveikov Blvd, Bulgaria, Z.Avramov@bfsa.bg
?Regional Food Safety Service — Plovdiv, BFSA, Bulgaria

SRegional Food Safety Service — Rousse, BFSA, Bulgaria

Background and objectives

Apple proliferation (AP), pear decline (PD), apricot chlorotic leaf roll (ESFY) and “flavescence dorée”
(FD) phytoplasmas are quarantine diseases described in Annex 1, Part A Chapter II of Ordinance Ne 1
of 27 May 1998 for phytosanitary control (Corresponding to Dir 2000/29/EC). They are the most
economically important diseases in many grapevine and fruit-growing areas of Europe and fruit
growing regions in Bulgaria (Topchiiska and Sakalieva, 2001; 2002; EPPO, 2006; Sakalieva et a/., 2007,
Avramov et al., 2011a; 2011b). To verify their distribution in the country to implement adequate
control measures, the phytosanitary inspectors from Bulgarian Food Safety Agency annually perform
surveys in the country as part of the official monitoring program for quarantine pests on grapevine
and fruit trees. Materials and methods

SAMPLE COLLECTION. Since 2003 the control has been provided in Border Inspector Points on imported
planting materials, in fruit plantations created by such material and mainly in nurseries, producing
fruit seedlings, mother trees and growing materials (Table 1). Vector Insects for phytoplasma are
usually collected from June until September (Avramov et a/., 201 1a; 2011b; Etropolska et a/., 2011). DNA’s were extracted from symptomatic and asymptomatic grapevine plants and fruit trees using a
CTAB method (Doyle and Doyle, 1990), and from single insect vector by the method of Maixner et a/
(1995). Final products are suspended in 200 I of sterile double distilled water or TA buffer [pH 8]. PCR assays. The extracted DNA was tested by nested PCR (Lee et al., 1995), using two pairs of generic
primers (P1/P7, R16F2/R16R2) and specific primers for AP group (fO1/rO1) on fruit trees (Lorenz et
al., 1995) followed by RFLP analyses using restriction enzymes Rsal (Afal), Alul and Sspl (Thermo
Scientific, Lithuania). PCR and RFLP products were analysed by electrophoresis on 1.5% agarose gel
followed by staining with ethidium bromide and visualization with a UV transilluminator. Results and discussion

Apple proliferation phytoplasma was detected in Blagoevgrad, Kjustendil, Pazardjik, Plovdiv and
Veliko Turnovo regions (Table 1.) Pear decline phytoplasma was detected on the territory of 10
Regional Food Safety Services (RFSS) - Blagoevgrad, Kjustendil, Pazardjik, Plovdiv, Veliko Turnovo,
Sliven, Silistra, Bourgas, Yambol and Haskovo. Apricot chlorotic leaf roll phytoplasma was detected in
Pazardjik, Lovech, Sliven, Dobrich, Bourgas and Yambol. “Flavescence dorée” phytoplasma was not detected in Bulgaria. During the monitoring program “bois
noir” (BN) phytoplasma was detected (Avramov et al., 2008). Phytoplasma presence was confirmed in
181 samples in all Bulgarian vineyards. Infection on vectors from Psyllidae was detected in 13 out of 28
Regional food safety services and Scaphoideus titanus was identified but not found to be infected with FD. On the bases of the results to eliminate possibility to spread the infection, Phytosanitary department
of BFSA took measures to eradicate 200 mother trees, 4,600 units of plants for planting — 1st year,
22,000 units 2nd year and up to 2 ha of garden plots. Second step was the optimization of the
monitoring program and development of additional measures including - increasing the number of
plant samples and samples from insects for analysis in high-risk areas, - development of preventive

60

 

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases YVcose
vs
Management WG3

measures in mother trees and nurseries and - focus on the monitoring of the vectors across the
country, to get a comprehensive picture of their distribution in the region and of their population
density. Works of optimization were performed also on the development of an effective scheme
against vectors. Extremely small number of registered insecticides against vectors of phytoplasma
and officially controlled stock production plots appears a major problem at the moment. Table 1. Results of molecular tests on plant samples collected during the period of monitoring programs. Samples tested Results

(rads Revo Grapevine | Fruit trees | Grapevine | Fruit trees

Regions with infection

 

Bourgas, Sliven, Pleven,
2003-2004 | Varna, Plovdiv, St. Sagora, 83 - 0 - None
Rousse, Blagoevgrad
Pleven, Veliko Turnovo,

 

Sliven (7), Lovech (2),

 

 

 

 

 

2005 Dobrich, Haskovo 362 . 10 BN . Veliko Turnovo
2006-2007 | __ All 24 vine growing 962 7 23 BN - I 14
43PD BN: all 24 regions
2008 All 578 326 34 BN 42 AP PD: Rousse, Plovdiv, Kjustendil
AP: Plovdiv, Pazardjik, Veliko Tumovo
5PD;5 AP BN: all regions; PD and AP: Plovdiv
2009 all 632 276 43 BN S ESFY ESFY: Yambol, Dobrich
13 PD BN: all regions
2010 All 274 226 19 BN SESFY PD: Bourgas, Rousse, Kustendil
1AP AP and ESFY: Yambol, Pazardjik
2011 All 305 348 1BN 6PD BN: Bourgas ; PD: Rousse, Pazardjik

4ESFY _| ESFY: Pazardjik, Kjustendil, Bourgas

31 PD BN: all regions, PD: Rousse, ;

2012 All 392 437 44.BN 40 ESFY Haskovo, Plovdiv, Silistra, Kjustendil

5 AP ESFY: Sliven, Lovech, Bourgas
AP: Plovdiv, Pazardjik

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Literature cited

AvRAMOV Z., J. GILLET, M. LAGINOVA. 2008. First detection of stolbur phytoplasma in grapevines (Vitis vinifera cv. Merlot) affected with grapevine yellows in Bulgaria, Journal of Phytopathology 156: 112-114. Avramov Z., N. CONTALDO, A. BERTACCINI. 2011a. First report of stolbur phytoplasmas in Prunus avium in Bulgaria
Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): $71-S72. Avramov Z., |. IvANOVA, M. LAGINOVA. 2011b. Screening for phytoplasma presence in leafhoppers and
planthoppers collected in Bulgarian vineyards. Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): 115-S116. Dove J.J., J.L. DoyLe. 1990. Isolation of plant DNA from fresh tissues. Focus 12: 13-15. EPPO. 2006. First report of stolour phytoplasma causing “Bois noir” on grapevine in Bulgaria. Reporting Service 8: 167

ETROPOLSKA A., B. JARAUSCH, G. TRENCHEV, W. JARAUSCH. 2011. Survey of psyllid vectors of fruit tree phytoplasmas in
Bulgaria: a preliminary report. Bulletin of Insectology 64(Supplement): 261-262. Lee |-M., A. BeRTACCINI, M. Visio, D.E. GUNDERSEN. 1995. Detection of multiple phytoplasmas in perennial fruit
trees with decline symptoms in Italy. Phytopathology 85: 728-735. LORENZ K.H., B. SCHNEIDER, U. AHRENS, E. SEEMULLER E. 1995. Detection of the apple proliferation and pear decline
phytoplasmas by PCR amplification of ribosomal and non ribosomal DNA. Phytopathology 85: 771-776. MAIxner M., U. AHRENS, E. SEEMULLER. 1995. Detection of the German grapevine yellows (Vergilbungskrankheit)
MLO in grapevine, alternative hosts and a vector by a specific PCR procedure. European Journal of Plant
Pathology 101: 241-250. SAKALIEVA D., S. PALTRINIERI, A. CALARI, A. BERTACCINI. 2007. Molecular identification of “bois noir” phytoplasmas in
grapevine in Bulgaria. Bulletin of Insectology 60: 153-154. TorcHilskA M., D. SAKALIEVA. 2001. Detection of pear decline phytoplasma by polymerase chain reaction in
Bulgaria. Bulgarian Journal of Agricultural Science 7: 611-614. TorcHilskA M., D. SAKALIEVA. 2002. PCR procedure for detection and identification of European stone fruit yellows
(ESFY) phytoplasma on trees of Prunus varieties. Bulgarian Journal of Agricultural Science 8: 19-22. 61

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases

 

 

 

Management WG3

Modeling epidemiological and economic consequences of “flavescence
dorée” to Austrian viticulture as a novel decision tool for control strategies

R. Steffek’, G. Strauss’, |. Kopacka’, J. Pusterhofer’, J. Klement’, W. Luttenberger®, A. Wenzel’,
A. Kleissner’, R. Alt’ and H. Reisenzein’

‘Austrian Agency for Health and Food Safety, SpargelfeldstraBe 191, 1220 Vienna, Austria; robert.steffek@ages.at
’styrian Government, Agricultural Experimental Center, RagnitzstraBe 193, 8047 Graz, Austria

*Chamber of Agriculture in Styria, Department of Wine, Hamerlinggasse 3, 8010 Graz, Austria

“Economica Institute of Economic Research, Liniengasse 50 - 52, 1060 Vienna, Austria

Background and objectives

The knowledge and understanding of the biology and the behaviour of Scaphoideus titanus and
“flavescence dorée” (FD) is essential when planning effective control measures against the FD
disease. Stochastic spread simulation is a very useful tool, providing insight into the spread dynamics
of plant diseases and enabling the identification of critical control points and the prediction of high
risk areas. The aim of the economic impact analysis is to evaluate different intervention and
abatement strategies regarding the spread of FD. As FD is a new invasive disease in Austria and
control experience is limited, the provision of novel decision tools for decision makers and
stakeholders is important. Key objectives of the research project VitisCLIM include the development
of a stochastic spread model to simulate the temporal and spatial spread dynamics of FD and the
assessment of the potential economic impact of the disease on Austrian viticulture as a function of
different pest management options. Materials and methods

Two Austrian model regions (the communities Tieschen and Glanz in two different vine growing
areas of Styria) were selected. These domains have differing situations in disease incidence, in the
abundance of wild arbours, in the average acreage of vineyards and in the presence of organic
vineyards. Using an individual-based Monte-Carlo simulation model, geographic and topographical information
could be incorporated into the spread model. Each vineyard or arbour was represented by a set of
static and dynamic data. Dynamic data were created for each plot and each day in the season
reflecting the spread of the disease and its vector. The model was initialized by using different
realistic scenarios. The results of the model runs were compared with data and spread patterns of
the real outbreaks in these communities and thereby the model was calibrated. For a macroeconomic impact analysis the most appropriate method is input-output analysis (IOA). In
the context of this topic a multi-regional IOA was used to determine the economic impact of FD
based on a multiregional input-output table. For each model region (Glanz and Tieschen) the spread
model evaluated different initial conditions. These considered the intensity of the initial disease
outbreak (severe/limited) and the size of the initial leafhopper population (large/small). Based on the
existing data eight scenarios of potential economic impact were calculated depending on the
selected intervention scenarios as reaction to given outbreak scenarios. Different current control
strategies depending on the type of municipality were tested in the economic impact model. Results and discussion

For both model regions (Glanz and Tieschen), the spread simulation illustrated the importance of
early detection. Furthermore, the result revealed that robust varieties in arbours favour the spread
of the disease, as — apart from being the favourite host plant of S. titanus — they typically display an

62

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases YVcose
Management WG3 -

unclear disease pattern or do not exhibit symptoms at all and, therefore, act as a reservoir for the
disease. The results of the economic impact model revealed that the potential losses calculated for eight
scenarios vary from zero to 5-6 Mio Euro. The scenarios demonstrate that in situations of limited
outbreaks potential economic losses are not likely to occur. The two situations that result in high
potential losses are both related to severe outbreaks. A severe outbreak in a community of type
Tieschen (many wild Vitis plants in hedges and arbours) demands a control strategy that includes
both arbours and other wild Vitis sp.. In cases where outbreaks are limited, controls of the arbours
are not effective from an economic point of view. In communities of type Glanz (limited number of
wild plants) high intensity control strategies are necessary only in cases of severe outbreaks. A scientific basis was developed to better understand the different factors involved in the local
spread of FD and S. titanus in a grapevine growing area. The biology of the vector and the pathogen,
as well as the topography and the agricultural structure of the domain were considered. The results
can be used as a decision making tool in an outbreak-case, identifying the best specific risk reduction
option with respect to its efficacy on the spread of FD and on its cost-effectiveness. Acknowledgements
The research project “VitisCLIM” is funded by the Austrian Climate and Energy Fund. www.vitisclim.org

63

 

ost Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases

 

 

 

()

Management WG3

Scaphoideus titanus Ball and “Flavescence dorée” disease in Portugal

E. Sousa’, C. Paula’, C. Mimoso’, K. Teixeira” and A. Pereira®

‘National Institute Agrarian and Veterinary Research (INIAV), Edificio 1, Tapada da Ajuda 1300-018, Lisboa,
Portugal; esmeraldina.sousa@iniav.pt

?General Directorate of Food and Veterinary (DGAV) Plant Health Department, Edificio 1, Tapada da Ajuda,
1300-018, Lisboa, Portugal; p.carvalho@dgav.pt

SCITAB-Centro de Investigacao e de Tecnologias Agro-Ambientais e Bioldgicas, Universidade de Tras-os-Montes
e Alto Douro, 5001-801 Vila Real, Portugal

Background and objectives

“Flavescence dorée” (FD) is a grapevine disease that affects several wine production areas in Europe,
namely in Portugal (Sousa et al., 2003). FD is associated with a phytoplasma belonging to ribosomal
subgroups 16SrV-C/D which is spread, in Portugal as in the other infected areas of Europe,
throughout the vineyards by the leafhopper Scaphoideus titanus Ball (Cicadellidae) (Quartau et ai.,
2001; Sousa et a/., 2009). Materials and methods

The grapevine “flavescence dorée” phytoplasma is included in the list of quarantine pathogens of the
European Union and belongs to the list A2 of EPPO. Official control and eradication measures are
enforced. Following its detection in Portugal, additional emergency measures of plant protection
were established (Portuguese legislation 976/2008, 1 September). The program’s procedures, which
were carried out into a national plan regarding the compulsory control of FD, include both the
control of the leafhopper vector S. titanus and the removal of infected grapevines in infection foci. The control of S. titanus, which has already been imposed on the grapevine nurseries, has also been
mandatory for all vineyards in the infected regions, and is based on one or more seasonal spraying
procedures, depending on epidemic risk. Results and discussion

Since it is impossible to distinguish FD from other grapevine yellows (GY) just through observation of
the symptoms, nested-PCR is used to confirm the symptoms and removal of FD infected plants has
been done by uprooting all symptomatic grapevines in infected FD parcels. Preventive measures,
such as the use of healthy-certified propagation material and the respect of quarantine measures,
are the most important approaches to reduce the risk of epidemic diffusion of FD in areas where the
disease is still not present. The control of the local vector populations and the elimination of infected
plants are good agricultural practices that reduce the risk of contamination. However, despite these
measures both, S. titanus and FD are progressing along the Portuguese northwest region. At the end of 2012 several stakeholders (government, researchers, farmers, nurserymen’s
representatives and wine organizations) have joined in order to prepare a particular national action
plan to control the FD disease in the country called by PAN-FD, setting up new intervention measures
for strengthening of existing ones. Towards this aim a new project was developed named PAN-FD DGAV-2013, “Plano de Acao Nacional
para o Controlo da Flavescéncia Dourada (PAN-FD)” (www.dgav.pt). The PAN-FD’s main objectives
are to contain the disease within the wine-growing regions where it is declared, reducing to a
minimum the impact on the grape production and wine industry in these regions. Starting with a
strategy of medium-term actions can contribute to eradicate the disease, or, if it will be not possible,
at least to reduce the presence of the disease to acceptable phytosanitary and economic levels. 64

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases -~s cos Ec
Management WG3 ~

Another important goal of the project is ensuring the health status of grapevine propagation material
and ensure confidence and sustainability of national nursery industry. Some of this new measures
were included in ‘grapevine sampling surveys’, ‘containment measures of insect vector’ and
‘eradication measures’. The particular factors that determined disease progression in northeast
region of Portugal in last years and the definition of new measures that will provide an effective
control of the disease will be also undertaken. Literature cited

QuarTAU J., J. GUIMARAES, G. ANDRE. 2001. On the occurrence in Portugal of the Neartic Ball (Homoptera,
Cicadellidae), the natural vector of the grapevine ‘Flavescence dorée’ (FD). Reuniao Grupo trabalho de
Protecgao Integrada da Vinha OILB/SROP, Ponte de Lima, Portugal 3-7 March. Sousa E., F. CARDOSO, P.A. BIANCO, M. GUIMARAES, V. PEREIRA. 2003. Detection and identification of phytoplasmas
belonging to 16SrV-D in Scaphoideus titanus adults in Portugal. In: Proceedings 14" Meeting of the
International Council for the Study of Virus and Virus-like Diseases of the Grapevine, Locorotondo, Bari,
Italy, September 12-17: 78. Sousa E., C. SA, F. CARDOSO, M. MesquitA, A. OLIVEIRA, P. CASATI, P.A. BIANCO. 2009. Epidemics of Flavescence dorée
disease in Portugal. Le Progrés Agricole et Viticole HS: 178. 65

 

ost Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases

 

 

 

()

Management WG3

The role of vineyards not treated with insecticides on Scaphoideus
titanus spreading

N. Mori’, F. Pavan’, A. Pozzebon", D. Fornasiero’, C. Peruffo' and C. Duso'
'DAFNAE, University of Padova, Agripolis — Viale dell’Universita 16, 35020 Legnaro (Padova), Italy. ?DISA, University of Udine, Via delle Scienze 206, 33100 Udine, Italy

Background and objectives

The “flavescence dorée” (FD) is a grapevine yellows disease causing severe damage in European
vineyards. The phytoplasma associated with the disease, is transmitted from grapevine to grapevine
by the leafhopper Scaphoideus titanus Ball (Homoptera: Cicadellidae) (Bianco et a/., 2001; Mori et al.,
2002). In various surveys carried out on vineyards untreated with insecticides (cultivated or
abandoned) high population levels of S. titanus were found (Pavan et al., 2005a, 2012; Lessio and
Alma, 2006; Lessio et a/., 2007). The highest population of the vector and the highest percentage of
symptomatic grapevines were found in cultivated vineyards where insecticides against S. titanus are
not applied (Pavan et a/., 2005a, 2012; Bressan et a/., 2005). Therefore, infectious vectors moving
from these vineyards can represent a potential risk for other vineyards. It should be noted that, insecticide treatments against the vector are compulsory in Italy only in
grape-growing areas where FD is present (Barba, 2005; Pavan et al., 2005b). These areas are annually
identified by the local governments, but in other areas, insecticides against S. titanus may not be
applied despite the presence of the vector. Furthermore, insecticides applied against other pests
(e.g. grape berry mouth), may not be effective against S. titanus. Information on vineyard to vineyard mobility of S. titanus are needed to understand the risk posed
by the vineyards without S. titanus control to the other vineyards. To address this issue a research
was performed in Italy to study the mobility of S. titanus adults between contiguous untreated and
treated vineyards. Materials and methods

The research was carried out in two localities in north-east Italy where a cultivated untreated
vineyard contiguous to a cultivated treated vineyards are present. YEAR 2011. Breganze location (45°42.43’ N - 11°34.50’ E, 117 ma.s.I. ), Merlot and Cabernet Sauvignon
cultivars, espallier training system at a distance of 3.5 m x 0.9 m. The treated (two applications/year
organophosphate and neonicotinoid against young stages) one and untreated vineyards were 1.92
and 1.35 ha, respectively. The rows were north-south oriented on the untreated vineyards, east-west
on the treated one

YEAR 2012. Lonigo location (45°24.05’ N - 11°23.24’ E, altitude 32 m a.s.l. ), Garganega cultivar,
pergola training system at a distance of 4.0 m x 1.0 m. The treated (two applications with
organophosphate per year against young stages) and untreated vineyards were 1.04 and 1.06 ha,
respectively. The vineyard rows were north-south oriented for both vineyards. No other vineyards were present at the borders of the investigated fields. In both vineyards, the presence and flight dynamics of S. titanus were monitored every two weeks
from July to October by using yellow sticky traps (SuperColor Giallo®, Serbios) positioned according
to a regular grid design (approx. 30m x 30m). Each trap was geo-referred using GPS. All traps were
analysed under dissection microscope in laboratory and captured S. titanus adults were counted. Data were analysed using SADIE (Spatial Analysis by Distance IndicEs) red-blue methodology (Perry
et al., 1999), to detect spatial patterns in S. titanus cumulative captures. At each sampling point we
assessed the local contribution to a group (cluster) of relatively high-density (patch) or to a group of
zero or relatively small counts (gap). Tests of non-randomness based on the overall index of

66

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases Co cosc
Management WG3

 

aggregation (la) and on the average indexes of clustering into patch (“') and into gap (‘!) were
performed (a = 0.05) using kriging with SURFER (Golden Software Inc., CO), indexes of local
aggregation (vi; vj) and catches were mapped on a two-dimensional map showing their spatial
distribution. Results and discussion

S. titanus adults were captured in both untreated and treated vineyards, but the captures were
significantly higher in untreated ones. Significant clustering into patch was detected in the
distribution of S. titanus observed during the two years (p < 0.05). S. titanus resulted aggregated in
untreated vineyards, but some patches were found in treated vineyards, particularly in 2011. In both
grape-growing areas a decreasing gradient of S. titanus captures were observed from untreated to
treated grapevines. Results proved that the vector can move from untreated vineyards to contiguous
vineyards where insecticides are specifically applied for its control. The majority of adults were
captured within 40-50 m from untreated vineyard confirming the low mobility reported in previous
surveys (Lessio and Alma, 2004; Beanland ef a/., 2006, Pavan et al., 2012), even if some individuals
were captured at 80-100 m. The migration of S. titanus adults from untreated vineyards started at
the beginning of August and the maximum number of captures on treated vineyard was at the end of
August. The risk posed by grapevines untreated with insecticides against the S. titanus for FD spread
in other vineyards is confirmed by the results obtained. These results stress that insecticide
applications for FD infections’ risk reduction can be ineffective if untreated FD-infected grapevines
are present in the surrounding areas. Acknowledgements
Research was funded by Veneto Region Project “Indagini su Scaphoideus titanus vettore della
Flavescenza dorata della vite in Veneto”. Literature cited

Barsa M. 2005 Lotta obbligatoria alla flavescenza dorata e al suo vettore Scaphoideus titanus. Flavescenza
dorata e altri giallumi della vite in Toscana e in Italia (ed. by A. Bertaccini and P. Braccini), pp. 135-138. Quaderno ARSIA 3/2005, Firenze, Italy. BIANCO P.A., A. ALMA, P. CasATI, G. SCATTINI, A. ARZONE. 2001 Transmission of 16SrV phytoplasmas by Scaphoideus
titanus Ball in Northern Italy. Plant Protection Science 37(2):49-56. BressAaN A., V. GIROLAMI, E. BOUDON-PADIEU. 2005 Reduced fitness of Scaphoideus titanus exposed to Flavescence
dorée phytoplasma. Entomologia experimentalis et applicata 115: 283-290. Lessio F., A. ALMA. 2006 Influence of grapevines presence in different ecosystems on the density of Scaphoideus
titanus Ball (Homoptera: Cicadellidae). IOBC/WPRS Bulletin 29(11): 155-159. Lessio F., R. TEDESCHI, A. ALMA. 2007 Presence of Scaphoideus titanus on American grapevine in woodlands, and
infection with “flavescence dorée” phytoplasmas. Bulletin of Insectology 60(2): 373-374. Mor! N., A. BRESSAN, M. MARTINI, M. GUADAGNINI, V. GIROLAMI, A. BERTACCINI. 2002 Experimental transmission by
Scaphoideus titanus Ball of two Flavescence dorée-type phytoplasmas. Vitis, 41(2): 99-102. Pavan F., C. BELLOMO, F. VIDONI, G. BIGOT, M. OsTAN, W. BoccaLon, A. BRESSAN. 2005a. Efficacia della lotta insetticida
contro Scaphoideus titanus Ball in Friuli Venezia Giulia. Supplemento al Notiziario ERSA 2004 17(5-6): 11-21. PavaN F., G. STEFANELLI, A. VILLANI, N. Mori, G. POSENATO, A. BRESSAN, V. GIROLAMI. 2005b. Controllo di FD attraverso
la lotta contro il vettore Scaphoideus titanus Ball. Flavescenza dorata e altri giallumi della vite in Toscana e
in Italia (ed. by A. Bertaccini and P. Braccini), pp. 91-116. Quaderno ARSIA 3/2005, Firenze, Italy. Pavan F., N. Mori, G. Bicor, P. ZANDIGIAcoMo. 2012. Border effect in spatial distribution of Flavescence dorée
affected grapevines and outside source of Scaphoideus titanus vectors. Bulletin of Insectology 65(2): 281-290. Perry J.N., L. WINDER, J.M. HOLLAND, R.D. ALSTON. 1999. Red-blue plots for detecting clusters in count data. Ecology Letters 2: 106-113. 67

Y CoS E Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases

 

Management WG3

Mark, release and recapture experiments in two model apricot orchards
tracking the effects of the insecticide thiacloprid on the dispersal of
Cacopsylla pruni (Hemiptera: Psyllidae), vector of European stone fruit
yellows

M. Riedle-Bauer', C. Paleskié', K. Bachinger®, J. Mortel', C. Engel*, M. Kickenweiz',
L. Wurm’, L. Czipin’ and G. Brader”

‘Lehr- und Forschungszentrum fiir Wein- und Obstbau Klosterneuburg, WienerstraBe 74, 3400 Klosterneuburg,
Austria, Monika.Riedle-Bauer@weinobst.at

? austrian Institute of Technology, Konrad-Lorenz-StraBe 24, 3430 Tulln, Austria

5NO Landes-Landwirtschaftskammer, Referat Obstbau, WienerstraBe 64, 3100 St. Pélten, Austria

“Wein- und Obstbauschule Krems, Wienerstrasse 101, 3500 Krems, Austria

Background and objectives

During the last fifteen years European stone fruit yellows associated with ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
prunorum’ has become a major concern in Austrian apricot production (Maier et a/., 2013). Well
adapted management strategies including control of the disease vector Cacopsylla pruni are an
urgent need. A mark and recapture study with overwintered C. pruniin a model apricot proved a fast
and frequent tree to tree movement (Maier et al., 2013). Here we present mark and recapture
experiments tracking the effects of the insecticide thiacloprid on dispersal of overwintered C. pruniin
two apricot orchards. Materials and methods

Overwintered C. pruni adults were collected on Prunus spinosa and marked by several fluorescent
dyes. Stability of the dyes in the field and effects of the pigment on insect survival were examined as
previously described (Maier et a/., 2013). The field experiments were carried out right after flowering in two apricot orchards (orchard 1:
spindle shaped trees, within row spacing 2 m, distance between rows 4 m, 15 by 9 trees; orchard 2:
standard trees, within row spacing 4-5 m, distance between rows 5-6 m, 5 by 9 trees). Per
experiment 600 stained C. pruni were freed on one single tree in the middle of the orchard. Insect
survival and movement in untreated and insecticide treated orchards were monitored by yellow
sticky traps and UV light for one week. In order to estimate the effect of the insecticide on freshly
incoming remigrants trees were sprayed before insect release. Thiacloprid (Calypso, Bayer Crop
Science, Mannheim, Germany) was applied according to the manufacturer’s instructions and trees
were allowed to air dry for 4 hours before insects were freed. Results and discussion

After exposure of marked insects to outdoor conditions for five weeks all dyes were clearly visible in
UV light. Laboratory experiments revealed no statistically significant adverse effects of the dyes. Orchard 1. On untreated trees 37 marked and 128 unmarked C. pruni were captured within one
week. Already after 24 h some marked specimen had reached the farthest traps. Insect movement
continued during the whole observation period. The ratio of marked and unmarked insects on the
traps allowed the estimation that around 2000 C. pruni individuals naturally occurred in this orchard. Application of thiocloprid had a striking effect. It decreased the number of stained insects to 10 and
the number of unstained individuals to 18. Spatial dispersal of stained individuals was reduced to the

68

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases Co cosc
Management WG3

 

close vicinity of the release tree. Insects were mainly trapped within 24 hours after release, after this
period only two specimens were caught. Orchard 2. The effect of thiacloprid was less prominent although still clearly visible. Before
insecticide treatment on average (of 3 repetitions) 17 marked and 40 unmarked individuals were
captured allowing the calculation that around 1600 individuals naturally occurred in the orchard. Some insects reached the farthest traps already within 24 h after release and insect movement
lasted during the whole observation period. Insecticide treatment decreased the number of stained
insects on the traps to 11, the number of unmarked individuals to 18. As in orchard 1 thiacloprid
reduced the spatial dispersal and almost all individuals were trapped within 24 h after release. Our data indicate that mark and recapture experiments could be a helpful tool to monitor the effect
on insecticides on vector dispersal. Thiacloprid significantly reduced insect spread especially in orchard 1. It should therefore also reduce
disease spread as long as its insecticide effect lasts. Further experiments, however, are required to
explain the apparently lower effect of thiacloprid in orchard 2. The differing tree shapes might result
in different quality of insecticide application or influence the trapping success. A repellent effect of
thiacloprid could explain the finding that after treatment relatively high numbers of individuals were
trapped close to the release point within the first 24 h (in both orchards). Additionally also site or
“grower” effect is conceivable. Although the results of our study might represent a first step towards an appropriate sustainable
management of C. pruni there is still a long way to go. The flight period of the remigrants lasts at
least for 6 weeks, starts early in the year and includes the blossom period. In order to overcome 6
weeks a combination of several insecticides and applications considering bee activity will be
required. Cold temperatures and early developmental stages of the trees at the beginning of March
might adversely influence the effects of some insecticides. Authorization of insecticides and effects
on beneficial insects must be kept in mind. Last but not least field experiments proving the effects of
such a vector control strategy on disease spread are necessary. Literature cited

Maler C., K. BACHINGER, J. MOrTeL, C. ENGEL, L. CzipIN, M. RigDLe-BAUER. 2013. European stone fruit yellows in
Austria: Epidemiological observations and a mark and recapture experiment tracking the dispersal of its
vector Cacopsylla pruni (Hemiptera: Psyllidae) in a model apricot orchard. Journal of Phytopathology (in
press): doi:10.1111/jph12.122

69

 

ost Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases

 

 

 

()

Management WG3

Isolation of potential biocontrol agents of 'Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’

D. Bulgari, P. Casati, F. Quaglino and P.A. Bianco
Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie ed Ambientali, Universita degli Studi di Milano, 20133 Milano, Italy

Background and objectives

Apple proliferation (AP), associated with the presence of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’, is one of the
most important phytoplasma diseases in Europe. So far, due to the absence of AP resistant varieties,
its management mainly consists in insecticide treatment against the insect vectors and in the
eradication of symptomatic plants. These treatments have a strong economic and environmental
effect, representing a risk for both operators and final customers. One of the most innovative
solutions to develop sustainable approaches is the use of endophytes as inducers of the natural plant
defense responses. Bacterial endophytes are plant-associated bacteria that affect the plant life cycles
in different manners such as nitrogen fixation or the biocontrol of plant pathogens (Lugtemberg and
Kamilova, 2009). A basic point for the success of sustainable management of plant diseases based on
biocontrol agents is the study of endophytic bacterial community associated with plants. In this work,
the endophytic bacterial community associated with healthy and AP phytoplasma-infected apple
roots was described and characterized in order to find potential biocontrol agents. Materials and methods

Apple roots were collected from five asymptomatic and five AP-symptomatic plants during field
survey conducted in 2010 in North-western Italy. Roots were opportunely sterilized and the total
DNA was extracted with the method describe by Doyle and Doyle (1990), with some modifications. Extracted DNA was used as template for ‘Ca. P. mali’ identification by PCR-based amplification of
ribosomal RNA genes. In detail, ‘Ca. P. mali’ was detected by the use of primer pairs fAT/rAS specific
for 16SrX phytoplasma group (Smart et al., 1996). Endophytic bacterial community associated with
healthy and ‘Ca. P. mali’-infected apple roots was described by cultivation dependent and
independent methods (16S rRNA gene library analyses and sequencing). Endophytic bacteria were
isolated by cultivation on Tryptic Soy Agar (TSA) and Luria-Bertani (LB) media. Total DNA from
bacterial colonies was extracted and the 16S rRNA genes were amplified and sequenced using
bacterial universal primers. The endophytic bacteria isolated on culture media were characterized for
five beneficial traits related to mineral nutrition (phosphate solubilization, siderophores, nitrogen
fixation), development (indolacetic acid synthesis), stress relief (catalase activity), disease control
(siderophores). Results and discussion

The diversity of microbiota associated with healthy and phytoplasma-infected apple roots was
investigated both with cultivation-independent and -dependent methods in order to increase the
range of diversity explored in a sample. In this study, 16S rRNA gene libraries from infected and
uninfected apple roots were analyzed to describe the endophytic bacterial community. A total of 120
clones were sequenced, 76 clones from the healthy roots and 44 from the infected ones. 16S rDNA
sequence analysis showed the presence of the groups Proteobacteria, Acidobacteria, Bacteroidetes,
Actinobacteria, Chlamydiae, and Firmicutes. Library analyses underscored 24 and 17 Operational
Taxonomic Units (OTUs) in healthy and infected roots, respectively, with a dominance of
Betaproteobacteria. Also in previous work, clone library analysis of plant-associated bacteria in ‘Ca. Liberibacter asiaticus’-infected and uninfected citrus roots evidenced differences in the composition
of their bacterial community (Trivedi et a/., 2010), moreover the influence of pathogen infection on

70

Management of phytoplasma-associated diseases YVcose
Management WG3

 

endophytic bacterial community was reported in healthy and phytoplasma-infected grapevine leaves
(Bulgari et a/., 2011). Cultivation dependent methods allowed to isolate twelve colonies with different morphology from
healthy roots and six colonies from infected roots. Sequences of the 16S rRNA gene identified
Firmicutes of the genus Bacillus, Lysinibacillus and Paenibacillus, Gammaproteobacteria of the genus
Pseudomonas. Six different Bacillus species were isolated from healthy apple trees and, among
these, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens and Bacillus gibsonii were found also in infected plants. Interestingly, bacterial strains, here isolated, belong to genera widely studied for developing
biocontrol strategies to contain plant pathogens. The endophytic bacteria isolated on culture media
were characterized for the five beneficial traits described above in order to select some strains for in
vivo biocontrol tests. These assays allow to select different strains belonging to the genus
Pseudomonas and Lysinibacillus that showed biocontrol and plant-growth promotion abilities. Future
studies will be carried out to investigate the activity of these endophytes to control apple
proliferation. Literature cited

Bu.aarl D., P. Casati, P. CREPALDI, D. DAFFONCHIO, F. QUAGLINO, L. BRUSETTI, P.A. BIANCO. 2011 Restructuring of
endophytic bacterial communities in grapevine yellows-diseased and recovered Vitis vinifera L. plants. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 77: 5018-5022. DoYLe Jid., J-L. DOYLE. 1990. Isolation of plant DNA from fresh tissue. Focus 12: 13-5

LucTemperc B., F. KAMILOVA. 2009. Plant-growth-promoting rhizobacteria. Annual Review of Microbiology 63:
541-556. Smart C.D., B. SCHNEIDER, C. L. BLOMQUIST, L.J. GUERRA, N.A. HARRISON, U. AHRENS, K.H. LORENZ, E. SEEMULLER, B.C. KIRKPATRICK. 1996. Phytoplasma-Specific PCR Primers Based on Sequences of the 16S-23S rRNA Spacer
Region. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 62: 2988-2993. TriveD! P., T. SPANN, N. WANG. 2011. Isolation and characterization of beneficial bacteria associated with citrus
roots in Florida. Microbial Ecology 62: 324-336. 71

 

ost Genomes and their expression
WG4

 

 

 

()

From genomics to the characterization of virulence mechanisms of
phytoplasmas

$.A. Hogenhout
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UH,
United Kingdom; saskia-hogenhout@jic.ac.uk

Background and objectives

Phytoplasmas are insect-transmitted bacterial pathogens that induce dramatic changes in plant
development, including proliferation of stems (witches’ brooms) and the reversion of flowers into
leafy structures, often resulting in sterile plants that only serve to help phytoplasmas reproduce and
propagate (zombie plants). As well, phytoplasma-infected plants are often more attractive and
susceptible to insect vectors. It was hypothesized that phytoplasma secrete virulence proteins that
act as effectors to interfere with plant pathways involved in the regulation of developmental
processes and defense to insects (Bai ef a/., 2006; Hogenhout and Loria, 2008; Hogenhout ef ail.,
2008; Sugio et a/., 2011a). In plants, phytoplasmas are restricted to the phloem. The virulence
effectors may unload from the phloem and migrate to different plant tissues (Hogenhout and Loria,
2008; Sugio et a/., 201 1a). Materials and methods

To test this hypothesis, the genome of aster yellows phytoplasma strain witches’ broom (AY-WB) was
sequenced to completion (Bai et a/., 2006). Candidate virulence effectors were identified by finding
genes potentially encoding secreted proteins that have a cleavable signal peptide at the N-terminus
and absence of transmembrane domains in the mature protein (part of the protein without signal
peptide) (Bai et a/., 2009). To assess the functions of the AY-WB candidate virulence effectors in
plants, the corresponding AY-WB genes were stably expressed in Arabidopsis plants under control of
the Cauliflower mosaic virus (CaMV) 35S promoter and transgenic plants were examined for changes
in development, such as increased stem production, changes in leaf shape and structure, altered
flower development and increased susceptibility of plants to insect vectors (MacLean et al., 2011;
Sugio et a/., 2011b). A yeast two-hybrid screen was conducted to find targets of SAPs in the plant
host (Sugio et a/., 2011b). Results and discussion

The approximately 700 kb AY-WB genome consists of one chromosome and four plasmids with about
700 predicted genes (Bai et a/., 2006). Of these genes, 56 were predicted to encode secreted
proteins; these were named secreted AY-WB protein (SAPs) and are candidate virulence effectors
(Bai et a/., 2009). SAP11 and three other SAPs contain a nuclear localization signal (NLS) and SAP11
was detected in nuclei of cells beyond the phloem in AY-WB-infected plants suggesting that SAP11 is
secreted by AY-WB and unloads from the phloem (Bai et a/., 2009). Transgenic Arabidopsis plants for
about 50 SAPs were generated and those for SAPOS, SAP11 and SAP54 showed changes in
development (MacLean et a/., 2011; Sugio et al., 2011b). The 35S:.SAP05 transgenic plants had
changed leaf shapes, increased production of aerial rosettes and altered flowering time, the
358::SAP11 plants had changed leaf shapes and increased stem production and the 35S:SAP54 plants
produced leafy flowers with indeterminate growth (MacLean et a/., 2011; Sugio et a/., 2011b). A
yeast two-hybrid screen of SAP11 against an Arabidopsis seedling library identified CINCINNATA
(CIN)-related TEOSINTE BRANCHED1, CYCLOIDEA, PROLIFERATING CELL FACTORS (TCP) class Il
transcription factors as targets of SAP11 (Sugio ef a/., 2011b). SAP11 destabilizes these transcription
factors resulting in changes in leaf shape, increased production of stems, downregulation of jasmonic

72

Genomes and their expression << cos Ec
wea

acid (JA) production and greater susceptibility of plants to AY-WB leafhopper vectors (Sugio et al.,
2011b). Thus, AY-WB phytoplasma produces virulence effectors that are secreted and unload from
the phloem to perturb specific plant transcription factors leading to changes in plant development
and increased susceptibility of plants to insect vectors that together will help phytoplasmas
reproduce and propagate. Literature cited

Bal X., J. ZHANG, E. EWING, S.A. Miter, A. RADEK, D. SCHEVCHENKO, K. TSUKERMAN, T. WALUNAS, A. LAPIDUS, J.W. CAMPBELL, S.A. HOGENHOUT. 2006. Living with genome instability: the adaptation of phytoplasmas to diverse
environments of their insect and plant hosts. Journal of Bacteriology 188: 3682-3696. Bal X., V.R. CORREA, T.Y. TORUNO, E-D. AMMAR, S. KAMOUN, S.A. HOGENHOUT. 2009. AY-WB phytoplasma secretes a
protein that targets plant cell nuclei. Molecular Plant Microbe Interactions 22: 18-30. HoGENHOUT S.A., R. LorIA. 2008. Virulence mechanisms of Gram-positive plant pathogenic bacteria. Current
Opinion on Plant Biology 11: 449-456. HOGENHOUT S.A., K. OsHIMA, E-D. AMMAR, S. KAKIZAWA, H.N. KINGDOM, S. NAMBA. 2008. Phytoplasmas: Bacteria that
manipulate plants and insects. Molecular Plant Pathology 9: 403-423. MacLean A.M., A. Sucio, O. MaKAROVA, K. FINDLAY, V.M. Grieve, R. ToTH, M. NICOLAISEN, S.A. HOGENHOUT. 2011. Phytoplasma effector SAP54 induces indeterminate and leafy flower development in Arabidopsis plants. Plant Physiology 157: 831-841. Suaio A., A.M. MacLean, H.N. KINGDOM, V.M. Grieve, R. MANIMEKALAI, S.A. HOGENHOUT. 2011a. Diverse Targets of
Phytoplasma Effectors: From Plant Development to Defense Against Insects. Annual Revue of
Phytopathology 49: 175-195. Sucio A., H.N. KINGDOM, A.M. MACLEAN, V.M. Grieve, S.A. HOGENHOUT. 2011b. Phytoplasma SAP11 enhances insect
vector reproduction by directly manipulating plant development and defense hormone biosynthesis. Procedings National Academy of Science United States of America 108: E1254-E1263. 73

Genomes and their expression
wea

 

 

 

Complete genomes and deduced metabolism of acholeplasmas in
comparison to members of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma’ genus

M. Kube’, C. Siewert’, A.M. Migdoll?, B. Duduk’, S. Holz’, R. Rabus*, E. Seemiiller®,
J. Mitrovic’, C. Bittner’ and R. Reinhardt®

‘Humboldt-Universitat zu Berlin, Department of Crop and Animal Sciences, Division Phytomedicine, Lentzeallee
55/57, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Michael.Kube@agrar.hu-berlin.de

?National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 460, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
Sinstitute of Pesticides and Environmental Protection, Banatska 31b, P.O. Box 163, 11080 Belgrade, Serbia
‘Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the Marine Environment, Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg,
Carl-von-Ossietzky StraBe 9-11, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany

*Julius Kuehn Institute, Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants, Institute for Plant Protection in Fruit
Crops and Viticulture, 69221 Dossenheim, Germany

®Max Planck Genome Centre Cologne, Carl-von-Linné-Weg 10, 50829 KéIn, Germany

Background and objectives

The family Acholeplasmataceae comprises the genus Acholeplasma and the provisory taxon
‘Candidatus Phytoplasma’. Strains of the last one are associated with several hundred of plant
diseases worldwide infecting many important crops (Bertaccini, 2007). Phytoplasmas are
characterized as obligate parasites of the sieve cells and mainly spread by phloem-sucking insects. Colonization by phytoplasmas can result in manipulation of host and vector by interacting with
membrane proteins and/or secretion of effector proteins (Sugio et al, 2011). In contrast,
acholeplasmas are widespread saprophytes, not described as primary pathogens. Several
Acholeplasma species were reported as commensals of plants (A. /aidlawii, A. axanthum and A. ocull)
and some of them, such as A. brassicae and A. palmae, refers even by scientific name to the source
of isolation (Tully et a/., 1994). Genome research provided a first view on the metabolism of phytoplasmas and was also the starting
point for many subsequent studies. Six complete genome sequences from Acholeplasmataceae were
determined so far comprising two strains from ‘Ca. P. asteris’ (OY-M, AY-WB) and ‘Ca. P. australiense’
(PAa, SLY), ‘Ca. P. mali‘ (AT) and A. /aid/awii (PG-8) (reviewed in Kube et al., 2012; Andersen et al.,
2013). Here, we provide insights into the complete genome sequences of A. palmae and A. brassicae. The comparative analysis provides a more complete picture of the evolution and shared gene
content of the Acholeplasmataceae. Materials and methods

A. brassicae strain 0502 and A. pa/mae strain J233 were grown at 30°C and 37°C, respectively, in SP4
medium (Tully et a/., 1994). Whole genome shotgun sequencing was performed applying clone-based
Sanger- and pyro-sequencing. Finishing procedure included manual editing and additional
experiments for gap-closure (Kube ef a/., 2010). Annotation of protein coding genes and structural
RNAs was performed and metabolic pathways were reconstructed (Kube et a/., 2013). Results and discussion

Sequencing of the plant-derived A. brassicae and A. palmae resulted in determination of circular
chromosomes with 1,9 Mb and 1,6 Mb in size and a G + C content of 36% and 29%, respectively. Genomes encode above 1,700 and 1,400 proteins, respectively. Comparative analysis of these and
recently published genomes of A. /aidlawii, ‘Ca. P. asteris’ strains, ‘Ca. P. australiense’ and ‘Ca. P.
mali’ highlights a limited shared basic genetic repertoire of acholeplasmas and phytoplasmas (Kube
et al., 2012; Kube et a/., 2013). Besides, acholeplasma chromosomes are characterized by a lower

74

Genomes and their expression AScosce
wG4 Vw

genetic instability. Rare exceptions are unusual duplications of rRNA genes and independently
occurring horizontal gene transfers. Furthermore, acholeplasmas differ for instance by encoding a
wide variety of transport systems, a FoF; ATP synthase and a Rnf-complex, an additional gene of the
Sec-dependent secretion system, a rich equipment for carbohydrate, fatty acid, isoprenoid and
amino acid metabolism. Important proteins of phytoplasmas such as several transporters, proteins
involved in metabolism as well as host-interaction and virulence-associated effector proteins were
not identified in acholeplasmas indicating an early evolutionary split of both genera. Literature cited

ANDERSEN M.T., L.W. LIEFTING, I. HAVUKKALA, R.E. Beever. 2013. Comparison of the complete genome sequence of
two closely related isolates of 'Candidatus Phytoplasma australiense' reveals genome plasticity. BMC
Genomics 14: 529. Beraccini A. 2007. Phytoplasmas: diversity, taxonomy, and epidemiology. Frontieres in Bioscience 12: 673-689. Kuse M., A.M. MIGDolL, |. GeHRING, K. HEITMANN, Y. Mayer, H. KUHL, F. KNAUST, K. GEIDER, R. REINHARDT. 2010. Genome comparison of the epiphytic bacteria Erwinia billingiae and E. tasmaniensis with the pear pathogen
E. pyrifoliae. BMC Genomics 11: 393. Kuse M., J. Mitrovic, B. Dubuk, R. RABus, E. SEEMULLER. 2012. Current view on phytoplasma genomes and encoded
metabolism. Scientific World Journal: 185942. Kuse M., C. Siewert, A.M. Migolt, B. Dupuk, S. Holz, R. RABUs, E. SEEMULLER, J. Mitrovic, |. MULLER, C. BOTTNER, R.
REINHARDT. 2013. Analysis of the complete genomes of Acholeplasma brassicae, A. palmae and A. laidlawii
and their comparison to the obligate parasites from ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma’. Journal of Molecular
Microbiology and Biotechnology (in press). Susio A., A.M. MacLean, H.N. Kincpom, V.M. Grieve, R. MANIMEKALAI, S.A. HOGENHOUT. 2011. Diverse targets of
phytoplasma effectors: from plant development to defense against insects. Annual Revue of
Phytopathology 49: 175-195. TuLty J.G., R.F. WHiTcome, D.L. Rose, J.M. Bove, P. Carle, N.L. SOoMERSON, D.L. WILLIAMSON, S. EDEN-GREEN. 1994. Acholeplasma brassicae sp. nov. and Acholeplasma palmae sp. nov., two non-sterol-requiring Mollicutes
from plant surfaces. International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology 44: 680-684. 75

Genomes and their expression
wea

 

 

 

Overtime expression of selected chrysanthemum yellows phytoplasma
genes during infection of plant and leafhopper vectors

L. Galetto’, D. Pacifico’, S. Abba’, S. Bertin’, S. Palmano', M. Rashidi', D. Bosco’, G. Firrao®
and C. Marzachi’

‘Istituto di Virologia vegetale CNR - Strada delle Cacce 73 - 10135 Torino, Italy; I|.galetto@iw.cnr.it;
c.marzachi@iwv.cnr.it

7Universita degli Studi di Torino DISAFA - V. L. da Vinci 44 - 10095 Grugliasco (Torino), Italy. SDipartimento di Biologia e Protezione delle Piante - Universita degli Studi di Udine, Via delle Scienze, 206 -
33100 Udine, Italy. Background and objectives

Microarrays analysis suggests that phytoplasma genome expression in the plant can be modulated
according to the infection stage (Oshima ef a/., 2011). A real time PCR protocol was set up to study
the expression profile of different ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris’ Chrysanthemum yellows isolate
(CYP) genes during infection of Arabidopsis thaliana and the two vector species Macrosteles
quadripunctulatus and Euscelidius variegatus. Target genes were selected among secreted proteins,
known effectors, general metabolism and unique CYP ORFs, obtained following Illumina sequencing. A detailed study on gene expression of an obligate parasite in the plant and insect hosts is a
prerequisite for the identification of molecular mechanisms involved in phytoplasma perception and
regulation of host switch. Materials and methods

Expression of 14 CYP genes coding three secreted proteins, four generic transporters (a
mechanosensitive channel, the translocation component of SecY translocase, a multidrug and an
oligopeptide transporters), two specific transporters (for arginine and Zn** ion), a protein involved in
phospholipid metabolism and the 30S rRNA ribosomal subunits obtained by the Illumina sequencing
of CYP genome, one effector protein (Tengu, Hoshi et a/., 2009), the major antigenic membrane
protein (Amp, Galetto et a/., 2008), and the immunodominant membrane protein (Imp, Kakizawa et
al., 2009) was analyzed in the plant (A. thaliana) and vector (M. quadripunctulatus, E. variegatus)
hosts. For each selected target, specific primers were designed and a qPCR protocol with SYBR Green
chemistry was optimized. Amplification efficiencies and melting temperatures of the amplicons were
obtained by analyses of qPCR amplification plots using serial dilutions of plasmids containing the
specific fragment of each target gene. To study phytoplasma gene expression in plant, CYP-infected
M. quadripunctulatus were fed on 10 A. thaliana plants and leaf samples were collected at different
days post inoculation (dpi). To study phytoplasma gene expression in the vector, several individuals
of the two analyzed species were collected at different days post acquisition (dpa) on the same CYP-
infected daisies. Total DNA and RNA were separately extracted from each plant and insect sample. Presence and titre of CYP were determined by PCR (Lee et al., 1994) and qPCR (Marzachi and Bosco,
2005), respectively, with total DNA as reaction template. Total RNA was DNase treated, reverse
transcribed and amplified by qPCR to quantify the transcripts of each selected gene. Results and discussion

Phytoplasma specific symptoms appeared on A. thaliana plants at two weeks post infection. Fifteen
and 83% of the plants were infected at 5 and 25 dpi, first and last sampling dates, respectively. At the
first two sampling dates (7 and 14 dpa), 91 and 71% of sampled M. quadripunctulatus and E.
variegatus were already CYP positive. Later on (up to the last sampling date, 35 dpa) all M.
quadripunctulatus and about 90% E. variegatus sampled adults were CYP infected, in line with the

76

Genomes and their expression AScosce
wG4 Vw

acquisition efficiencies already observed for these species (Bosco et al., 2007). CYP titre in A. thaliana
increased from 5 to 28 dpi, and the final concentration was similar to that observed for other
herbaceous hosts (Saracco ef al., 2006). In the two vector species, CYP titre increased up to 21 dpa. The newly designed primers produced specific amplicons and the standard curves obtained following
the amplification of serial dilutions of appropriate plasmids showed R* values above 0.99 and
efficiencies ranging from 74% to 100%. The expression level of each target gene was calculated with
respect to the CYP titre measured in 100 mg of each leaf tissue sample or in each entire insect body
at every sampling date. Preliminary results have shown that CYP gene expression in plant and vectors
is maximum at the beginning of the infection. Overall, CYP genes were more expressed in A. thaliana
than in the two vector species. Profiling the expression of the selected CYP genes during infection of
different hosts (plant and insect) and of different vector species will improve knowledge on the
molecular mechanisms underlying phytoplasma adaptation to different life styles. Literature cited

Bosco D., L. GALETTO, P. LEONCINI, P. SARACCO, B. RACCAH, C. MARZACHI. 2007. Interrelationships between ‘Candidatus
Phytoplasma asteris’ and its leafhopper vectors. Journal of Economic Entomology 100: 1504-1511. GALETTO L., J. FLETCHER, D. Bosco, M. TURINA, A. WAYADANDE, C. MARZACHI. 2008. Characterization of putative
membrane protein genes of the 'Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris', chrysanthemum yellows isolate. Canadian Journal of Microbiology 54: 341-351. Hos! A., K. OSHIMA, S. KAKIZAWA, Y. IsHit, J. OzEkI, H. HASHIMOTO, K. KOMATSU, S. KAGIWADA, Y. YAMAuI, S. NAMBA. 2009. A unique virulence factor for proliferation and dwarfism in plants identified from a phytopathogenic
bacterium. Proceeding of the National Academy of Science United States of America 106: 6416-6421. KakizAwa S., K. OsHIMA, Y. IsHI, A. HOsHI, K. MAgIMA, H.Y. JUNG, Y. YAMAJI, S. NAMBA. 2009 Cloning of
immunodominant membrane protein genes of phytoplasmas and their in planta expression. FEMS
Microbiology Letters 293: 92-101. Lee I-M., D.E. GUNDERSEN, R.W. HAMMOND, R.E. Davis. 1994. Use of mycoplasmalike organism (MLO) group-specific
oligonucleotide primers for nested-PCR assays to detect mixed-MLO infections in a single host-plant. Phytopathology 84: 559-566. MarzacHi C., D. Bosco. 2005. Relative quantification of chrysanthemum yellows (16Sr I) phytoplasma in its plant
and insect host using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Molecular Biotechnology 30: 117-127. Ostia K., Y. IsHil, S. KAKIZAWA, K, SUGAWARA, Y. NerIvA, M. HIMENO, N. MINATO, C. MiuRA, T. SHIRAISHI, Y. YAMAJI, S.
Namea. 2011. Dramatic transcriptional changes in an intracellular parasite enable host switching between
plant and insect. PlosOne 6: 23242. Saracco P., D. Bosco, F. VERATTI, C. MARZACHI. 2006. Quantification over time of chrysanthemum yellows
phytoplasma (16Sr-l) in leaves and roots of the host plant Chrysanthemum carinatum (Schousboe) following
inoculation with its insect vector. Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology 67: 212-219. 77

 

ost Genomes and their expression
WG4

 

 

 

()

Re-arrangement of sieve element endomembrane network in tomato
leaves infected by “stolbur” phytoplasma

$.V. Buxa’, R. Polizzotto”, F. De Marco’, A. Loschi’, K.-H. Kogel’, A.Jv.E. van Bel’ and R. Musetti”
‘Department of Phytopathology and Applied Zoology, Justus Liebig University, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 26-32,
D-35392 Giessen, Germany

?Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, University of Udine, via delle Scienze, 206, I-33100
Udine, Italy; Rita. Musetti@uniud.it

Background and objectives

Despite the economic importance of the diseases associated with phytoplasmas, progress on
deciphering the interactions with the hosts has been slow compared to other plant bacterial
pathogens; therefore phytoplasmas remain as the most poorly characterized plant pathogens. During
infection, phytoplasmas manipulate plant host leading to severely impaired assimilate translocation,
being responsible for massive changes in phloem physiology (Musetti et a/., 2013). But despite this
partly negative modulation that causes constricted or blocked vascular system, phytoplasmas
systemically spread throughout the plant (Christensen et a/., 2004). The possibility to move through
the sieve elements of the phloem is a first fundamental trait of phytoplasma pathogenicity and one
possible mechanism seems to be the actin-based movement (Boonrod et a/., 2012). Moreover, host
plasma-membrane adherence is considered an important factor in pathogenesis (Seemiller et al.,
2013), as well as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (as closely connected to the actin) might play an
important role in the complex interactions occurring between phytoplasmas and sieve element
endomembrane network. The aim of this work was to give a new insight about the relationships
between phytoplasmas and the sieve element plasma-membrane - ER — actin network, using healthy
and “stolbur”-infected tomato plants as a model. Materials and methods

Solanum lycopersicum plants (cv Micro-Tom) were infected with the “stolbur” phytoplasma
‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’ (‘Ca. P. solani’, Quaglino ef a/., 2013), subgroup 16SrXII-A, isolate V9
(Pacifico et al., 2009), by grafting. Approximately 2 months after grafting, when “stolbur” symptoms
appeared, phytoplasma presence was assessed in leaf tissues by real time RT-PCR analyses, according
with the method reported by Santi et a/. (2013). To facilitate the accurate observation and the
imaging of the above-reported cellular compartments and to evaluate the localization of
phytoplasmas in and with sieve element structure, an integrated approach based on the use of
epifluorescence microscopy (EFM) and specific protein-binding fluorochromes (Bell et a/., 2013) and
transmission electron microscopy (TEM)-immunogold labeling technique was set up and applied to
London Resin White (LRW)-embedded tomato leaf samples (Musetti ef a/., 2002; Hafke et al., 2013). Results and discussion

EFM and specific fluorochromes allowed to detect phytoplasmas, as well as endomembrane —actin
filament network in tomato sieve elements. The DNA-specific dye DAPI (4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole),
already extensively used to detect phytoplasmas in fresh plant materials (Musetti et a/., 2013), resulted
to be suitable for the identification of phytoplasmas inside the sieve elements of LRW-embedded
samples, both in longitudinal and cross-sections. By using the membrane-soluble fluorescent probe RH-
414 [-N-(3-triethylammoniumpropyl)-4-(4-(4-(diethylamino)phenyl) butadienyl) pyridiniumdibromide],
a dramatic re-arrangement of host plant endomembranes in the “stolbur”-infected samples was
detected, in particular in the sieve element-companion cell complex, as indicated by the increased
fluorescent signal. TEM imaging revealed the close connection between phytoplasma cells and sieve

78

Genomes and their expression AScosce
wG4 Vw

element plasma-membrane, in the form of membrane junctions or overlays. These structural features
result common of the class of Mollicutes, being present also in animal and human pathogenic
Mycoplasmas (Razin et a/., 1998). The organization of actin filaments has been visualized at EFM using
immunofluorescence via a-actin-Texas Red (TR)-conjugated antibody. Differences in the signal intensity
and distribution resulted between healthy and “stolbur”-infected samples. Whereas in healthy-control
samples actin was mainly localized at the periphery of the cells, the lumen of sieve element appeared
to be filled after infection. TEM immunolabeling, by gold-conjugated anti-actin monoclonal antibody,
was used to evidence the precise localization of actin in respect to phytoplasma cell. Gold particles
were localized on the phytoplasma membrane surface, indicating a direct connection of phytoplasma
surface and host plant actin. Moreover, they were invariable positioned on one side of the
phytoplasma cell, forming clusters, demonstrating a polarity in the actin and phytoplasma association,
as extensively demonstrated in prokaryotic microorganisms (Lybarger and Maddock, 2001). It has been
reported that the polar polymerization of the actin drives the motility of the pathogenic intracellular
bacteria into the host (Lybarger and Maddock, 2001). As closely connected to the actin (Boevink et al.,
1998), ER network shows re-organization in infected areas, demonstrating a role in the host-phytoplasma
interaction. During the infection process, sieve element ER acts as the site of synthesis, control and
secretion of a range of signal molecules (calcium, proteins, etc. ; Jelitto-Van Dooren et al., 1999), triggering
defence responses. In conclusion, our finding shows that “stolbur’-phytoplasma infection results in a
tremendous re-organization of S. lycopersicon sieve element endomembrane systems, resembling a
conserved widespread cellular response common to different classes of pathogens. Literature cited

Bewt K., S. MITCHELL, D. PAULTRE, M. PoscH, K. OparkA. 2013. Correlative imaging of fluorescent proteins in resin-
embedded plant material. Plant Physiology 161: 1595-1603. BoevINK, P., K. OPARKA, S. SANTA CRUZ, B. MARTIN, A. BETTERIDGE, C. HAWES. 1998. Stacks on tracks: the plant Golgi
apparatus traffics on an actin/ER network. The Plant Journal 15(3): 441-447. Boonrob K., B. MUNTEANU, B. JARAUSCH, W. JARAUSCH, G. KRCZAL. 2012. An immunodominant membrane protein (Imp)
of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ binds to plant actin. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 25: 889-895. CHRISTENSEN N.M., M. NICOLAISEN, M. HANSEN, A. SCHULZ. 2004. Distribution of phytoplasmas in infected plants as
revealed by real- time PCR and bioimaging. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 17: 1175-1184. Harke J.B., K. EHLERS, J. FOLLER, S.-R. HOLL, S. Becker, A.J.E. VAN BEL. 2013. Involvement of the sieve-element
cytoskeleton in electrical responses to cold shocks. Plant Physiology 162: 707-719. JELITTO-VAN DooreN E.P., S. VIDAL, J. DENECKE. 1999. Anticipating endoplasmic reticulum stress. A novel early
response before pathogenesis-related gene induction. The Plant Cell 11(10): 1935-1944. LyBARGER S.R., J.R. MADDOCK. 2001. Polarity in action: asymmetric protein localization in bacteria. Journal of
Bacteriology 183(11): 3261-3267. Muserti R., S.V. Buxa, F. de Marco, A. Loschi, R. Polizzotto, K.-H. Kogel, A.v.E. van Bel. 2013. Phytoplasma-
triggered Ca’* influx is involved in sieve-tube blockage. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 26: 379-386. PaciFico D., A. ALMA, B. BAGNOLI, X. FoIssac, G. PASQUINI, M. TessiToRI, C. MARZACHI. 2009. Characterization of bois
noir isolates by restriction fragment length polymorphism of a stolbur-specific putative membrane protein
Gene. Phytopathology 99: 711-715. QUAGLINO F., Y. ZHAO, P. CASATI, D. BULGARI, P.A. BIANCO, W. Wel, R.E. Davis. 2013. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’,
a novel taxon associated with stolbur and bois noir related diseases of plants. International Journal of
Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 63: 2879-2894. Razin S., D. Yoaev, Y. Naot. 1998. Molecular biology and pathogenicity of mycoplasmas. Microbiology and
Molecular Biology Review 62: 1094-1156. SANTI S., S. GRISAN , A. Plerasco, F. De Marco, R. Musetti. 2013. Laser microdissection of grapevine leaf phloem
infected by stolbur reveals site-specific gene responses associated to sucrose transport and metabolism. Plant Cell & Environment 36: 343-355. SEEMULLER E., S. SULE, M. KUBE, W. JELKMANN, B. SCHNEIDER. 2013. The AAA+ ATPases and HfIB/FtsH proteases of
"Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’: phylogenetic diversity, membrane topology, and relationship to strain
virulence. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 26: 367-376. 79

 

ost Genomes and their expression
WG4

 

 

 

()

Effect on disease development of suppressive strains of ‘Candidatus
Phytoplasma mali’ and their molecular identification

E. Seemiiller, W. Jelkmann and B. Schneider
Julius Kuehn Institute, Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants, Institute for Plant Protection in Fruit Crops
and Viticulture, D-69221 Dossenheim, Germany; erich.seemueller@jki.bund.de

Background and objectives

‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ is the agent associated with apple proliferation (AP) disease. This
psyllid-transmitted disorder induces in apple a range of symptoms such as witches’ brooms,
undersized fruits, foliar reddening, reduced vigor and decline. However, symptom expression is often
subject to fluctuation. Following few years of disease, trees may recover and may show no or only
mild symptoms for shorter or longer periods, after which severe symptoms may re-appear. From
recent work, there is evidence that such fluctuations can be attributed to multiple infections by
distinct strains of ‘Ca. P. mali’. Such infections are common and are usually composed of strains that
greatly differ in virulence. Obviously due to antagonistic interactions between mild and severe
strains, shifts in the population may occur that result in increased or reduced virulence of the
infecting phytoplasmas (Seemiller et a/., 2010; 2011; 2013). In this communication we provide
further evidence of antagonistic interactions between AP phytoplasma strains, focusing on the
suppressive action of largely avirulent strains on aggressive strains. Materials and methods

Several inoculation experiments were carried out with the experimental hosts Catharanthus roseus
(periwinkle) and Nicotiana occidentalis using avirulent/mild ‘Ca. P. mali’ strains 1/93Vin and 1/93Tab
as suppressors and aggressive strains AT and AP15 as challengers. Graft inoculation was performed
by either inoculating the suppressors prior to grafting of the challengers or by co-inoculating
suppressor and challenger. The inoculated plants were observed for up to 43 months for symptom
development and the presence of suppressors and challengers by multiplex real-time PCR
monitoring. The effect of suppressive strains in infected apple trees was examined by comparing
disease history and symptomatology at sampling with the presence of suppressive mild strains and
nonsuppressive severe strains. These were distinguished based on unique substitutions in the
sequence of a variable 5’ fragment of AAA+ATPase AP460. Results and discussion

Periwinkle plants pre-inoculated with strain 1/93Vin and challenged with strains AT or AP15
developed predominantly the mild symptoms of suppressive strain 1/93Vin. Only the growth
developed from the challenger scions and leaves below the grafting site showed the typical
symptoms induced by strains AT and AP15. They were clearly present for about 10 months. Then the
symptoms slowly disappeared. At the end of the observation periods, no differences between
healthy controls, pre-immunized and co-inoculated plants were observed. In contrast, all AT- and
AP15-inoculated plants were either dead or declining at the final symptom scoring. In monitoring the occurrence of suppressor and challenger in pre-inoculated periwinkles, suppresser
1/93Vin was detected in all stem and root samples over the entire observation periods of 33 to 43
months whereas challengers AT and AP15 were never detected in the stem and rarely in the roots. Following simultaneous inoculation, the suppressor successively colonized all stem and root regions. One to two years post inoculation, the suppressor was detected in all samples. In contrast, detection
of challenger AT steadily decreased but often remained detectable in up to 13% of the stem samples
and up to 27% of the root samples. However, the reduced presence of the challenger did not

80

Genomes and their expression AScosce
wG4 Vw

markedly affect the plants. The trials with N. occidentalis, in which strain 1/93Tab was used as
suppressor and which were performed in the pre-inoculation modus, yielded results similar to that of
the pre-inoculation experiments with C. roseus. In the N. occidentalis trials, challenger AT was never
detected in stem and root samples. Single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of cloned fragments of ATPase gene AP460
revealed that suppressive strains 1/93Vin and 1/93Tab show similar profiles that are distinctly
different from those of AT, AP15 and other aggressive strains. Both types of profiles were also
identified in ‘Ca. P. mali’ strains isolated from apple. Nearly all trees examined showed severe
symptom once or repeatedly during 15 years of observation and all of them were nonsymptomatic
for shorter or longer periods. This indicates shifts in the predominance of mild and severe
phytoplasma strains. The symptomatology at sampling corresponded with the virulence of the
accessions and with the prevalence of cloned fragments associated with suppression or
nonsuppression. In accessions inducing severe symptoms, only fragments showing the profile of
nonsuppressive strains were identified whereas in nonsymptomatic trees only suppression-
associated fragments were observed. Both types of fragments were detected in trees exhibiting mild
symptoms. Based on the SSCP results, selected AP460 fragments were sequenced and subjected to
phylogenetic analysis. The phylogram resulted in two homogenous major branches formed by
sequences of suppressive mild strains and nonsuppressive severe strains, respectively. Literature cited

SEEMULLER E., E. Kiss, S. Sue, B. SCHNEIDER. 2010. Multiple infection of apple trees by distinct strains of
‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ and its pathological relevance. Phytopathology 100: 863-870. SEEMULLER E., M. KAMPMANN, E. Kiss, B. SCHNEIDER. 2011. HfIB gene-based phytopathogenic classification of
"Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’ strains and evidence that strain composition determines virulence in
multiply infected apple trees. Mo! Plant-Microbe Interact 24: 1258-1266. SEEMULLER, E., S. SULe, M. KUBE, W. JELKMANN, B. SCHNEIDER. 2013. The AAA+ ATPases and HfIB/FtsH proteases of
"Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’: Phylogenetic diversity, membrane topology, and relationship to strain
virulence. Mol Plant-Microbe Interact 26: 367-376. Genomes and their expression
wea

 

 

 

The antigenic membrane protein Amp of chrysanthemum yellows
phytoplasma is involved in transmission by leafhopper vectors

M. Rashidi"”, L. Galetto’, A. Bulgarelli’, F. Veratti’, D. Bosco” and C. Marzachi'

‘Istituto di Virologia vegetale CNR — Strada delle Cacce 73, 10135 Torino, Italy; c.marzachi@iw.cnr.it
2Universita degli Studi di Torino DISAFA - via L. da Vinci 44, 10065 Grugliasco (Torino), Italy;
rashidii.mahnaz@gmail.com

Background and objectives

The major antigenic membrane protein (Amp) of different isolates of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
asteris’ interacts in vitro specifically with cytosolic (actin, myosin) and membrane (ATP synthase)
proteins of leafhopper vector species (Suzuki et a/., 2006; Galetto et a/., 2011). Such interaction has
not been observed with proteins of other phylogenetically-related, non-vector species. Once
acquired by the vector upon feeding on an infected plant, phytoplasmas cross the gut epithelium and
basal lamina, multiply in the haemolymph and colonize the salivary glands, before being transmitted
to a new plant during a successive nutrition (Bosco and D’Amelio, 2010). As these bacterial
pathogens lack a cell wall, one or more phytoplasma membrane proteins may interact with cells of
the gut and salivary gland epithelia and may be involved in defining specificity of transmission. Aim of
this work was to develop a system to evaluate in vivo the effect of the most abundant antigenic
phytoplasma membrane protein on the acquisition and transmission capabilities by vector
leafhoppers. Materials and methods

To study the in vivo role of Amp of the ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris’ (chrysanthemum yellows
strain, CYP) at the gut level, nymphs of two species (Macrosteles quadripunctulatus Kirschbaum ed
Euscelidius variegatus Kirschbaum), before CYP acquisition on infected daisies, were fed on an
artificial medium containing a partial fusion construct of CYP Amp (CYPfAmp, Galetto et a/., 2008),
specific antibody raised against CYPfAmp (AbfAmp), and a mix of CYPfAmp and AbfAmp. At the end
of the latency period (LP), adults were singly caged on healthy daisies for the inoculation access
period (IAP). After IAP, insects were collected and assayed for phytoplasma presence (Lee et al.,
1993; 1994). To study the in vivo role of CYP Amp at the salivary gland level, adult E. variegatus were
microinjected with a phytoplasma suspension (Bressan et a/., 2006; Galetto et a/., 2009) added with
CYPfAmp (Galetto et a/., 2008) and AbfAmp. Following microinjection, serial inoculation to healthy
daisies were performed to establish the length of the LP. After the last IAP, vectors were collected
and assayed by PCR to confirm phytoplasma presence (Lee et a/., 1993; 1994). Following IAP, plants
were treated with insecticide and kept under controlled conditions for symptom observation. Preliminary experiments were carried out to define the optimal protein concentration for the
artificial feeding as well as the microinjection experiments, the minimal acquisition length on the
infected plant as well as the minimal LP length to obtain efficient phytoplasma acquisition and
transmission. ELISA was used to monitor CYPfAmp and AbfAmp persistence in the artificial medium
and in the body of microinjected E. variegatus adults. Results and discussion

Sucrose 5% in TE was the artificial substrate which allowed the best survival of both vector species
(100% survival for M. quadripunctulatus and 80% for E. variegatus after 24h), and the fusion protein
was assayed at 1 mg/ml in the feeding medium. Under these conditions, survival of both species was
over 50% following 24 h artificial feeding and about 80% following abdominal microinjection, in
agreement with what previously reported for microinjection of a Spiroplasma citri protein in the

82

Genomes and their expression AScosce
wG4 Vw

Circulifer haematoceps vector (Labroussaa et al., 2011). CYPfAmp was detected by ELISA up to 24h
post abdominal microinjection and up to 30 h after the acquisition on the artificial medium. Preliminary experiments under artificial feeding conditions showed that 4 and 6 h AAP were enough
to obtain high CYP transmission efficiencies with M. quadripunctulatus and E. variegatus,
respectively. Moreover, LP in the vector in average lasted for 20 (M. quadripunctulatus) and 33 days
(E. variegatus). Following abdominal microinjection, LP decreased to 22 days for E. variegatus, about
10 days shorter than required following acquisition by feeding on the infected plant. Preliminary
results showed that the mere presence of CYPfAmp in the feeding medium had no effect on
phytoplasma acquisition and transmission efficiencies of both vector species. The presence of
AbfAmp in the feeding medium had no effect on the transmission of phytoplasmas that were able to
pass the gut barrier and colonize the insect body. Reduction of phytoplasma transmission rate of
both vector species was recorded after the ingestion of the antibody against CYPfAmp (AbfAmp),
possibly due to reduction in phytoplasma acquisition efficiency. This suggests that Amp is involved in
the interaction with vector proteins in vivo and that this interaction is important for transmission
efficiency. Lack of any effect of CYPfAmp on the acquisition and transmission efficiencies of both
species may be explained by absence of the in vivo interacting domain on the fusion construct
(Galetto et a/., 2008) or by the requirement of more complex protein complexes involving Amp (such
as those present in the phytoplasma membrane) for the in vivo interaction. Abdominal
microinjection experiments to define the role of CYP Amp interaction with vector proteins at the
salivary gland level in determining vector efficiency are currently ongoing. Literature cited

Bosco D., R. D’AMELIO. 2010. Transmission specificity and competition of multiple phytoplasmas in the insect
vector. In: Phytoplasmas: genomes, plant hosts, and vectors. P. Weintraub and P. Jones editors, CABI. Pages:
293-308. BressAN A., D. CLAIR, O. SEMETEY, E. BOUDON-PADIEU. 2006. Insect injection and artificial feeding bioassays to test
the vector specificity of flavescence dorée phytoplasma. Phytopathology 96: 790-6. GateTTO L., J. FLETCHER, D. Bosco, M. TuRINA, A. WAYADANDE, C. MARZACHI. 2008. Characterization of putative
membrane protein genes of the 'Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris', chrysanthemum yellows isolate. Canadian Journal of Microbiology 54: 341-51. GaLeTTO L., M. Nabi, P. SARACCO, A. BRESSAN, C. MarzacHi, D. Bosco. 2009. Variation in vector competency
depends on chrysanthemum yellows phytoplasma distribution within Euscelidius variegatus. Entomologia
Experimentalis et Applicata 131: 200-207. GateTTO L., D. Bosco, R. BALESTRINI, A. GENRE, J. FLETCHER, C. MARZACHI. 2011. The major antigenic membrane
protein of “‘Candidatus Phytoplasma asteris”’ selectively interacts with ATP synthase and actin of leafhopper
vectors. PLoS ONE 6: €22571. LABROUSSAA F., N. ARRICAU-Bouvery, M.P. DUBRANA, C. SAILLARD. 2010. Entry of Spiroplasma citri into Circulifer
haematoceps cells involves interaction between spiroplasma phosphoglycerate kinase and leafhopper actin. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 76: 1879-1886. Lee I-M., R.W. HAMMOND, R.E. Davis, D.E. GUNDERSEN. 1993. Universal amplification and analysis of pathogen 16S
rDNA for classification and identification of mycoplasmalike organisms. Phytopathology 83: 834-842. Lee I-M., D.E. GUNDERSEN, R.W. HAMMOND, R.E. Davis. 1994. Use of mycoplasmalike organism (MLO) group-specific
oligonucleotide primers for nested-PCR assays to detect mixed-mlo infections in a single host-plant. Phytopathology 84: 559-566. SuzuKI S., K. OsHIMA, S. KAKIZAWA, R. ARASHIDA, H.Y. JUNG, Y. YAMAJI, H. NISHIGAWA, M. UGaKI, S. NAMBA. 2006. Interaction between the membrane protein of a pathogen and insect microfilament complex determines
insect-vector specificity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
103: 4252-7. 83

Genomes and their expression
wea

 

 

 

Adaptation of phytoplasmas responsible for grapevine “flavescence
dorée” to Scaphoideus titanus insect vector: the role of variable
membrane proteins VMPs

D. Desqué, D. Khalil, P. Salar, J-L. Danet, P. Carle, N. Bouvery, L. Béven, S. Malembic-Maher
and X. Foissac

UMR1332 Fruit Biology and Pathology, INRA and Université Bordeaux Ségalen, 71 avenue Edouard Bourlaux,
CS20032, 33882 Villenave d’Ornon France, foissac@bordeaux.inra.fr

Background and objectives

Vineyards of Southern Europe are affected by the “flavescence dorée” (FD) phytoplasma, a
quarantine pathogen transmitted by the leafhopper of neartic origin Scaphoideus _titanus. Phytoplasmas genetically related to FD have been detected in European alders Alnus glutinosa and in
Clematis vitalba. According to multilocus sequence analyses, all constitute a monophyletic cluster
within the taxonomic group 16SrV (Arnaud et al., 2007; Malembic-Maher et al/., 2011). Alder
phytoplasmas are transmitted by the leafhopper Oncopsis aini, which can occasionally inoculate
them to grapevine leading to Palatinate Grapevine Yellows (PGY) disease (Maixner and Reinert, 1999;
Maixner et a/., 2000). A survey conducted in five European countries led to the detection of 120
different map genotypes in alders, grapevine, clematis and insect vectors. Only eight genotypes were
associated to FD outbreaks, i.e. were epidemically propagated in vineyards by S. titanus. All alder
phytoplasma genotypes transmitted to date to the broad bean Vicia faba could not be
experimentally transmitted by S. titanus. In order to identify genetic determinants responsible for
the adaptation of FD phytoplasma strains to the S. titanus insect vector we searched the draft
genome of the epidemic strains FD92 for genes encoding surface proteins with high genetic diversity. Materials and methods

Plant and insect DNAs were classically extracted by the CTAB procedure. VmpA and vmpB genes were
amplified by PCR and sequenced by Beckman Coulter Genomics (Takeley, UK). Raw chromatograms
were assembled and edited using the Phred-Phrap-Consed package. Sequences were aligned using
CLUSTALW and phylogenetical analysis using maximum parsimony was conducted in MEGAS. VMPs expression and purification were conducted according to pET28 cloning manual instructions
(NOVAGEN). Expression of VMPs in phytoplasma infected faba bean were detected using
fluorescent-labelled anti VMP polyclonal antibodies using epifluorescent microscopy or confocal
microscopy. Protein-Protein interactions were detected by VMP proteins overlay assays performed
on SDS-PAGE separated, membrane transferred insect proteins. Results and discussion

Vmp genes which encode surface proteins VMP-A and VMP-B display low homology to the
Mycoplasma agalactiae variable lipoprotein VPMA. VMP possess a putative signal peptide, three
large repeated domains of about 80 amino acids and a C-terminal transmembrane alpha helix. Such
organization in repeated domains was reminiscent of surface proteins of Gram+ bacteria involved in
the invasion of eukaryotic cells. Vmps were sequenced among a representative set of 16SrV
phytoplasma isolates. VmpA and vmpB sequences form 3 phylogenetic clusters, out of which the
cluster Il and Ill corresponded to isolates epidemically propagated by S. titanus. As previously
reported for the ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma solani’ vmp1, vmp genes were shown to be submitted to
positive selection pressure. Phylogenetic analysis of the repeated domains indicated that VMP of
cluster II and III quickly varies by deletion and duplication of the repeated domains. The hydrophilic

84

Genomes and their expression AScosce
wG4 Vw

central part of FD92 VMPs was cloned in pET28 expression vector in E. coli in fusion with a
polyhistidine tag and purified. Anti-VMP polyclonal antisera detected the expression of VMPs in plant
and insect. VMP-A was shown to interact in farwestern-blot assays with two proteins of 55 kDa and
120 kDa of the experimental leafhopper vector Euscelidius variegatus. The 55 kDa receptor was
detected in the ovaries of E. variegatus, whereas the 120 kDa receptor was present in testis and
salivary glands but not in the ovaries. S. titanus protein receptors of equivalent molecular mass were
also able to bind VMP-A in vitro. VMPs represent valuable marker for the adaptation of “flavescence
dorée” phytoplasma to S. titanus insect vector and its sequence should be a useful tool for risk
assessment of epidemics in the vineyard. Literature cited

ARNAUD G., S. MALEMBIC-MAHER, P. SALAR, P. BONNET, M. MAlxNer, M. MARCONE, E. BOUDON-PADIEU, X. FoIssac. 2007. Multilocus sequence typing confirms the close genetic interrelatedness of three distinct flavescence doree
phytoplasma strain clusters and group 16SrV phytoplasmas infecting grapevine and alder in Europe. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology 73: 4001-4010. Maixner M., W. REINERT. 1999. Oncopsis alni (Schrank) (Auchenorrhyncha : Cicadellidae) as a vector of the alder
yellows phytoplasma of Alnus glutinosa (L.) Gaertn. European Journal of Plant Pathology 105: 87-94. Ma\xneR M., W. ReINeRT, H. DARIMONT. 2000. Transmission of grapevine yellows by Oncopsis alni (Schrank)
(Auchenorrhyncha : Macropsinae). Vitis 39: 83-84. MALeMBIC-MAHER S., P. SALAR, L. FILIPPIN, P. CARLE, E. ANGELINI, X. Foissac. 2011. Genetic diversity of European
phytoplasmas of the 16SrV taxonomic group and proposal of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma rubi’. International
Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 61: 2129-2134. 85


COST Action FA0807

Integrated Management of Phytoplasma Epidemics
in Different Crop Systems

 

Chair
Assunta Bertaccini (Italy)

Vice-Chair
Mogens Nicolaisen (Denmark)

Coordinators

Bojan Duduk (Serbia), Jana Franova (Czech Republic) - WG1

Phyllis Weintraub (Israel), Barbara Jarausch (Germany) - WG2
Wolfgang Jarausch (Germany), Ester Torres (Spain) - WG3

Saskia Hogenhout (United Kingdom), Xavier Foissac (France) - WG4

STSM Chair
Matthew Dickinson (United Kingdom)

Webmaster
Martin Verbeek (The Netherlands)

Secretary
Dijana Skoric (Croatia)