Bulletin of Insectology 61 (1): 143-144, 2008
ISSN 1721-8861

Hawthorn psyllid fauna in northwestern Italy

Rosemarie TEDESCHI’, Pavel LAUTERER’, Luca BERTIGNONO’, Alberto ALMA‘

"Di. Va.P.R.A., Entomologia e Zoologia applicate all'Ambiente “C. Vidano”, Universita di Torino, Grugliasco, Italy
?Department of Entomology, Moravian Museum, Brno, Czech Republic

{Institute Agricole Régional, Aosta, Italy

Abstract

Hawthorn is one of the natural hosts of Cacopsylla melanoneura (Forster), the main vector of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’, the
causal agent of apple proliferation (AP) disease, a serious and growing problem for apple production in Europe, particularly in
northern Italy

Other psyllid species are acknowledged as hawthorn feeders, but no data are available on their presence and abundance in north-
western Italy. Samplings with yellow sticky traps and beat trays were carried out in two sites located in the Aosta Valley, contain-
ing wild Crataegus monogyna Jacquin plants and surrounded by meadows, wastelands, and vineyards, in the neighbourhood of
apple orchards, C. melanoneura was the predominant species followed by C. peregrina (Forster) and C. affinis (Low), while C.

    

crataegi (Schrank) was sampled sporadically. Other six s

ies are only occasional migrants. The population dynamics of the two most abundant species, C. melanoneura and C. peregrina were investigated. Key words: Crataegus monogyna, Cacopsylla melanoneura, Cacopsylla affinis, Cacopsylla. peregrina, Cacopsylla crataegi. Introduction

Hawthorn has always been considered as the primary
host of Cacopsylla melanoneura (Forster), the main
vector of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’, the causal
agent of the Apple proliferation (AP) disease in north-
western Italy (Conci ef al., 1993; Lauterer, 1999;
Tedeschi et al., 2002; Tedeschi and Alma, 2004). The
diffusion of the plant in the neighborhood of apple or-
chards induced us to investigate the hawthorn psyllid
fauna to understand better the relationships between
those insects and hawthorn plants and the possible im-
plications in spreading the disease. Materials and methods

The research was carried out from 2003 until 2005. Two
sites with wild plants of Crataegus monogyna Jacquin
surrounded by meadows, wastelands, vineyards, in the
neighborhood of apple orchards were chosen in the
Aosta Valley (northwestern Italy), at an altitude between

Table 1. Psyllid species caught on hawthorn plants by
means of yellow sticky traps in 2003. Total number of
adults collected. Species No__ Proportion (%'
C. melanoneura-C. affinis 3669 70.24
complex

Cacopsylla peregrina (Férster) 1526 29.22
Cacopsylla crataegi (Schrank) 20 0.38
Cacopsylla pulchella (Low) 2 0.04
Cacopsylla pruni (Scopoli) 2 0.04
Cacopsylla pyrisuga (Forster) 1 0.02
Baeopelma foersteri (Flor) 1 0.02
Psyllopsis fraxini (L.) 1 0.02

Trioza rhamni (Schrank) 1 0.02

480 and 580 m a.s.l. Yellow sticky traps were firstly
used to identify and quantify the psyllid fauna, and then,
in addition with beat trays, to study the population dy-
namics of the most abundant species. In each site 3 traps
(150x80 mm Rebell®giallo, Andermatt Biocontrol AG,
Switzerland) were hung in the hawthorn canopy from
mid February to end October. The traps were changed
weekly. Beat tray samplings were carried out only in
2004 and 2005, weekly, during the same period. To
identify psyllids, samples were classified examining
male and female terminalia (Ossiannilsson, 1992). Results

During the preliminary trap samplings, ten species of
psyllids were identified (table 1). C. melanoneura was the predominant species, fol-
lowed by Cacopsylla peregrina (Forster), while Cacop-
sylla crataegi (Schrank), was sampled sporadically. Other 6 psyllid species on the table beginning with
Cacopsylla pulchella (Léw) are only occasional migrants
living on other trees. In-depth examinations of the api-
cal part of the aedeagus, of the shape of the paramer as
well as of the forewing on 3,700 specimens of C.
melanoneura, revealed that, on hawthorn, the C.
melanoneura populations in the Aosta Valley is mixed
with the congeneric Cacopsylla affinis (Low). The re-
semblance to C. melanoneura is so close that the fe-
males of the two species cannot be reliably distin-
guished. For reliable data, the proportion of the two
species was assessed only with the males among the
3,700 specimens analyzed. C. affinis makes up to 21.6%
of the overwintered population and 6.9% of newly
emerged adults of both species. Subsequently the sam-
plings were focused on the most abundant species, C.
melanoneura-C. affinis complex and C. peregrina. The
population dynamics of C. melanoneura on C.
monogyna is similar to that observed on apple trees

(Tedeschi et al., 2002) and the presence period is almost
the same on the two hosts. Overwintered adults arrive in
mid February, while newly emerged adults move to al-
ternative hosts at the beginning of June. C. peregrina overwinters as eggs on hawthorn plants,
nymphs were observed in the second half of April,
while adults emerged at the end of April, reaching a
peak in the second half of May, then the population rap-
idly decreased because of migration to occasional plants
as observed by Lauterer (1999). A second peak was ob-
served in mid October, but C. peregrina was still col-
lected by traps until mid November. In our regions the presence of C. crataegi, already
known as a typical hawthorn feeder, is irrelevant, thus
not worrying. On the contrary attention should draw to C. peregrina
and in particular to C. melanoneura, because of the high
density and the vicinity to apple orchards. From this
point of view, C. monogyna can be considered as a dan-
gerous source for the AP phytoplasma vector, but fur-
ther analyses are required to confirm this assumption. Discussion

The present work points out the leading role of C. mela-
noneura in the hawthorn psyllid fauna, but the difficul-
ties in discriminating females of the C. melanoneura-C.
affinis complex influenced the research. Studies to develop molecular tools to separate the two
species C. melanoneura and C. affinis are in progress
hoping to find an easy and reliable way of discrimina-
tion, compatible also with phytoplasma detection. Mo-
lecular analyses to detect the presence of phytoplasmas

144

in the hawthorn psyllid fauna and, if necessary, trans-
mission trials will better define the real risk of C. mo-
nogyna as a possible source of phytoplasma vectors. Acknowledgements

This research was funded by the “Regione Valle
Aosta”. References

Conc C., RAPISARDA C., TAMANINI C., 1993.- Annotated cata-
logue of the Italian Psylloidea. First part (Insecta Homop-
tera).- Atti dell’Accademia Roveretana degli Agiati, 242 se-
ries VII, 2B: 33-136. LAUTERER P., 1999,- Results of the investigations on Hemip-
tera in Moravia, made by the Moravian museum (Psylloidea
2).- Acta Musei Moraviae (Scientiae biologicae), 84: 71-
151. OSSIANNILSON F., 1992.- The Psylloidea of Fennoscandia and
Denmark.- Fauna entomologica scandinava, 26: 1-346. TEDESCHI R., ALMA A., 2004.- Transmission of apple prolif-
eration phytoplasma by Cacopsylla melanoneura (Homop-
tera: Psyllidae). Journal of Economic Entomology, 97 (1):
8-13. TEDESCHI R., Bosco D., ALMA A., 2002.- Population dynamics
of Cacopsylla melanoneura (Homoptera: Psyllidae), a vec-
tor of apple proliferation in northwestern Italy.- Journal of
Economic Entomology, 95 (3): 544-551. Corresponding author: Rosemarie TEDESCHI (e-mail:
rosemarie.tedeschi@unito.it), Di.Va.P.R.A., Entomologia e
Zoologia applicate all’Ambiente “C. Vidano”, University of
Turin, via L. da Vinci 44, 10095 Grugliasco (Turin), Italy.