Hawthorn psyllid fauna in northwestern Italy Bulletin of Insectology 61 (1): 143-144, 2008 ISSN 1721-8861 1, Pavel LAUTERER Rosemarie TEDESCHI 1Di.Va.P.R.A., Entomologia e Zoologia applicate all’Ambiente “C. Vidano”, Università di Torino, Grugliasco, Italy 2Department of Entomology, Moravian Museum, Brno, Czech Republic 3Institute Agricole Régional, Aosta, Italy 2, Luca BERTIGNONO 3, Alberto ALMA 1 Abstract Hawthorn is one of the natural hosts of Cacopsylla melanoneura (Förster), the main vector of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’, the causal agent of apple proliferation (AP) disease, a serious and growing problem for apple production in Europe, particularly in northern Italy. Other psyllid species are acknowledged as hawthorn feeders, but no data are available on their presence and abundance in northwestern Italy. Samplings with yellow sticky traps and beat trays were carried out in two sites located in the Aosta Valley, containing wild Crataegus monogyna Jacquin plants and surrounded by meadows, wastelands, and vineyards, in the neighbourhood of apple orchards. C. melanoneura was the predominant species followed by C. peregrina (Förster) and C. affinis (Löw), while C. crataegi (Schrank) was sampled sporadically. Other six species are only occasional migrants. The population dynamics of the two most abundant species, C. melanoneura and C. peregrina were investigated. Key words: Crataegus monogyna, Cacopsylla melanoneura, Cacopsylla affinis, Cacopsylla. peregrina, Cacopsylla crataegi. Introduction Hawthorn has always been considered as the primary host of Cacopsylla melanoneura (Förster), the main vector of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’, the causal agent of the Apple proliferation (AP) disease in northwestern Italy (Conci et al., 1993; Lauterer, 1999; Tedeschi et al., 2002; Tedeschi and Alma, 2004). The diffusion of the plant in the neighborhood of apple orchards induced us to investigate the hawthorn psyllid fauna to understand better the relationships between those insects and hawthorn plants and the possible implications in spreading the disease. Materials and methods The research was carried out from 2003 until 2005. Two sites with wild plants of Crataegus monogyna Jacquin surrounded by meadows, wastelands, vineyards, in the neighborhood of apple orchards were chosen in the Aosta Valley (northwestern Italy), at an altitude between Table 1. Psyllid species caught on hawthorn plants by means of yellow sticky traps in 2003. Total number of adults collected. No Proportion (%) 3669 Species C. melanoneura-C. affinis complex Cacopsylla peregrina (Förster) 1526 20 Cacopsylla crataegi (Schrank) 2 Cacopsylla pulchella (Löw) 2 Cacopsylla pruni (Scopoli) 1 Cacopsylla pyrisuga (Förster) 1 Baeopelma foersteri (Flor) 1 Psyllopsis fraxini (L.) 1 Trioza rhamni (Schrank) 70.24 29.22 0.38 0.04 0.04 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 480 and 580 m a.s.l. Yellow sticky traps were firstly used to identify and quantify the psyllid fauna, and then, in addition with beat trays, to study the population dynamics of the most abundant species. In each site 3 traps (150x80 mm Rebell®giallo, Andermatt Biocontrol AG, Switzerland) were hung in the hawthorn canopy from mid February to end October. The traps were changed weekly. Beat tray samplings were carried out only in 2004 and 2005, weekly, during the same period. To identify psyllids, samples were classified examining male and female terminalia (Ossiannilsson, 1992). Results During the preliminary trap samplings, ten species of psyllids were identified (table 1). that, on hawthorn, C. melanoneura was the predominant species, followed by Cacopsylla peregrina (Förster), while Cacopsylla crataegi (Schrank), was sampled sporadically. Other 6 psyllid species on the table beginning with Cacopsylla pulchella (Löw) are only occasional migrants living on other trees. In-depth examinations of the apical part of the aedeagus, of the shape of the paramer as well as of the forewing on 3,700 specimens of C. the C. melanoneura, revealed melanoneura populations in the Aosta Valley is mixed with the congeneric Cacopsylla affinis (Löw). The resemblance to C. melanoneura is so close that the females of the two species cannot be reliably distinguished. For reliable data, the proportion of the two species was assessed only with the males among the 3,700 specimens analyzed. C. affinis makes up to 21.6% of the overwintered population and 6.9% of newly emerged adults of both species. Subsequently the samplings were focused on the most abundant species, C. melanoneura-C. affinis complex and C. peregrina. The population dynamics of C. melanoneura on C. monogyna is similar to that observed on apple trees. (Tedeschi et al., 2002) and the presence period is almost the same on the two hosts. Overwintered adults arrive in mid February, while newly emerged adults move to alternative hosts at the beginning of June. C. peregrina overwinters as eggs on hawthorn plants, nymphs were observed in the second half of April, while adults emerged at the end of April, reaching a peak in the second half of May, then the population rapidly decreased because of migration to occasional plants as observed by Lauterer (1999). A second peak was observed in mid October, but C. peregrina was still collected by traps until mid November. In our regions the presence of C. crataegi, already known as a typical hawthorn feeder, is irrelevant, thus not worrying. On the contrary attention should draw to C. peregrina and in particular to C. melanoneura, because of the high density and the vicinity to apple orchards. From this point of view, C. monogyna can be considered as a dangerous source for the AP phytoplasma vector, but further analyses are required to confirm this assumption. Discussion The present work points out the leading role of C. melanoneura in the hawthorn psyllid fauna, but the difficulties in discriminating females of the C. melanoneura-C. affinis complex influenced the research. Studies to develop molecular tools to separate the two species C. melanoneura and C. affinis are in progress hoping to find an easy and reliable way of discrimination, compatible also with phytoplasma detection. Molecular analyses to detect the presence of phytoplasmas in the hawthorn psyllid fauna and, if necessary, transmission trials will better define the real risk of C. monogyna as a possible source of phytoplasma vectors. Acknowledgements This research was funded by the “Regione Valle d’Aosta”. References CONCI C., RAPISARDA C., TAMANINI C., 1993.Annotated catalogue of the Italian Psylloidea. First part (Insecta Homoptera).- Atti dell’Accademia Roveretana degli Agiati, 242 series VII, 2B: 33-136. LAUTERER P., 1999.Results of the investigations on Hemiptera in Moravia, made by the Moravian museum (Psylloidea 2).Acta Musei Moraviae (Scientiae biologicae), 84: 71151. OSSIANNILSON F., 1992.The Psylloidea of Fennoscandia and Denmark.Fauna entomologica scandinava, 26: 1-346. TEDESCHI R., ALMA A., 2004.Transmission of apple proliferation phytoplasma by Cacopsylla melanoneura (Homoptera: Psyllidae). Journal of Economic Entomology, 97 (1): 8-13. TEDESCHI R., BOSCO D., ALMA A., 2002.Population dynamics of Cacopsylla melanoneura (Homoptera: Psyllidae), a vector of apple proliferation in northwestern Italy.Journal of Economic Entomology, 95 (3): 544-551. Corresponding author: Rosemarie TEDESCHI (e-mail: rosemarie.tedeschi@unito.it), Di.Va.P.R.A., Entomologia e Zoologia applicate all’Ambiente “C. Vidano”, University of Turin, via L. da Vinci 44, 10095 Grugliasco (Turin), Italy. 144.