mid BHL

Biodiversity Heritage Library

https://www. biodiversitylibrary.org/

Annals of the Entomological Society of France
Paris: The Company,
https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/8188

ser.5:t.1 (1871): https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/34152
Page(s): Page [435], Page 436, Page 437, Page 438

Holding Institution: Smithsonian Libraries
Sponsored by: Smithsonian

Generated August 27, 2020 10:38 AM
https:/ww.biodiversitylibrary.org/pdt4/117286800034152.pdf

This page intentionally left blank. DESCRIPTION

OF

Two new species of PSYLLIDS

AND

OBSERVATIONS ON SOME SPECIES OF THIS FAMILY. By Doctor Auc, PUTON. (Session of November 22, 1871.) The Psyllids constitute one of the most graceful and most
of the order of the Hemiptera, and have been the subject of mono-
important eraphic works by MM. Forster, Flor and Meyer-Dur. Unhappy-
ment Mr. Forster's overly brief descriptions did not allow us to
M. Flor, who has not seen the types of the Rhenish enlomologist, to éyiter de
re-describe species already described; on the other hand Mr. Meyer-
Dur, who did not know the excellent Monograph by M. Flor, but who
had in his possession types of Mr. Forster, could not avoid the same
pitfall, This resulted in a fairly complicated synonymy to establish. Another cause of complication in synonymy comes from the
great variability in coloration. It even results from my observations that
Psyllids have two generations, which often differ completely
by their coloring system and which have received two different names. The study of the genital appendages so well described by M. Flor, and that of
The habitat will serve to elucidate the synonymy in a more certain way. Already my good friend Mr. Meyer-Diir and I have brought together many —
documents that we will publish later; today, describing
two new species, I want to limit myself & give a few examples
meetings to be held, in order to warn against the multiplicity of
species entomologists who wish to undertake the study of these
charming little insects,

ae

"has
has - , .
.

Pies - flavescens, abdomine infubctite: antennts apice tin gueiculdaipa g
nigris, alis lutescentibus; conis frontalibus vertice paulo brevioribus, bast
latis, apice attenuatis, ee divaricatis. mas

-Flavescent yellowish with brownish abdomen. Antennae reaching —
: ‘at the base of the lower wings, the last three or four black articles,
Frontal cones directed downwards, a little shorter than vertex at mid-
local, divergent, with broad base and attenuated but obtuse apex. Vertex -
-strongly arched at the posterior edge, about twice as broadace
long gue edge in the middle. Very short, arched pronotum, its anterior edges
and posterior parallel. Upper wings fairly short, slightly rounded
dies at the top, transparent, yellowish, the veins very prominent, —
slightly more colored than the background; stigma very large, transparent;
radius almost straight or very slightly curved towards its basal third;
-petiole of the second fork of the ulna slightly curved, its two branches

straight heads, equal to each other; petiole of the first right fork, a

_ just under twice as long as its first branch, its second

very strongly curved branch. Size of small individuals of P.
Pyri L.

_d. Genital valves and pincers simple, without lateral appendages. mn, Genital tip conical, 4 base broad, lower valve as long-

~ gue than the previous three segments combined. -Trouyée on the Rhododendron at the edge of the Trubsée near Engelberg _
(Switzerland) by M. Hofer. RHINOCOLA TAMARICIS. *

Viridis aut luteo-virescens, dntennarum arliculo ultimo tarsisque nigris;

alis hyalinis, presertim apice fusco punctatim nebulosts. Pale green or light yellow; tarsi, last segment of the antennae,

eyes and tip of genital tip black. Antennae short, verlex

mtal, longer than in R. aceris, strongly notched in front
thus forming two short and obtuse frontal cones; its edge

horizontal
and }

  
 

- posterior slightly arched. Pronolum arcuate forward and backward. _ Wings showing their greatest width after the middle, hyaline, unequal

BIOS ss PSYLLA RHODODENDRI. | theese Bk

 

   
 

“i ‘: ie nt = n 2
a o . None ti o> Tee re my
::rs_:d
a:Y=

Two new species of Psyllids, elec. 437

marked by cloudiness formed by small brown dots, more
tight and more apparent towards the end; a small blackish line at the extremity
moth of the clavus; veins colorless like the bottom of the wing; radius abou-. weaving at the outer edge before the top of the wing; ulna in a straight line
to the very summit of Vaile, petiole of the second fork (the furthest
extern) twice as long as that of the first, the two branches
of the second fork straight and almost equal; second branch of
the first very long and very arched fork. Slightly bigger size
than that of R. aceris. © Genital tip short and wide seen Jerally, the inferior valve

4 barely shorter than the upper and equal in length to both seg-

preceding ventral ments united. Found in September, & Agde, on Je Tamarix. I only took
females. Notes relating to the synonymy of various species. PSYLLA ALNI Lin., Flor. Hydenti Forst. var. fuscinervis Forst. — pyril,
Rubra Goureau. var. pyricola Forst. apiophila Forst. — SALICICOLA Forst. var. chlorogenes Meyer-Dtr. — MALI Forst. var. rubida Meyer-Dur. — FERRUGINEA Forst. var. pyrisuga Forst. — SPARTIOPHILA Forst. torifrons Flor. — FLORI Puton. insignis Flor, not Forst. — BREVIANTENNATA Flor. terminalis Meyer-Dur. E pF I Tee: ¥": ee ay eg Poe oe

 

= sie ss Relative observations & UVhabitat. | “F and Es

Many species are described § without indication of the Hietians who

- nourish; it is an omission & repair little by little, because Phabitat is
as important from the point of view of the study of manners as from that of eh,

) species determination, and I believe this habitat is more restricted than one might ~

_ generally think so. Psyllids are very light and very heavy insects.

; “Mobile, which the slightest wind can carry 4 great distances; —
‘ also the capture of isolated individuals in no way indicates that they live on
the plant on which they were found,

- However, certain species have often been encountered on yege-
very different rates; but although I have confirmed by my hunts the sta-
tion of Psylla prunt on blackthorn and fir, of Aphalara poly-
gont on fir and herbaceous plants, etc., it is not yet
demonstrated that they live as larvae on these plants indistinctly. I make an exception for species which live on conifers and which, I
—crois, are found indiscriminately on fir, spruce, pines,

Bias etc. Here are some indications resulting from my hunts:

S Piytla alpina Forst., on Alnus viridis, in the Hautes-Alpes, Brian-
con, Mont-Cenis, etc. Psylla pyrenza Mink, on spiny gent (Calycotome spinosa) a
Bedarieux. Psylla spectabilis Flor, on Spanish broom (Spartium junceum), has
-Lamalou (Hérault). - Psylla breviantennata Flor, on conifers. Spanioneura Fonscolombei Forst., on the boxwood, in Bédarieux. Livia Crefeldensis Mink, on Juniperus owicedrus, 4 Lamalou. I must
point out, on the occasion of this species, that I found more often 8
Livia juncorum on conifers than on rushes. I

ee

1S rN
Pir s, * 2:

The following text is generated from incorrect OCR or manual transcriptions. [Begin Page: Page [435]]

DESCRIPTION

OF

Two new species of PSYLUDES

AND

SDR OBSERVATIONS ON SOME SPECIES OF THIS FAMILY. By M, Doctor Auo. PUTON. (Session of November 22, 1871.) The Psyllids constitute one of the most graceful and most
of the order of the Ilemipleeres, and have been the subject of mono-
important graphics from AIM. Forster, Flor and !Meyer-Dir. Unhappy-
ment Mr. Forster's too short descriptions did not allow a

M, Flor, who has not seen the types of the Rhenish entomologist, to avoid
re-describe species already described; on the other hand Mr. Meyer-
Dur, who did not know the excellent Monograph by M. Flor, but who
had in his possession types of Mr. Forster, could not avoid the same

pitfall. This resulted in a rather complicated synonymy to establish. Another cause of complication in synonymy comes from the

great color variability. It even follows from my observations that

Psyllids have two generations, which often differ completely

by their coloring system and which have been given two different names. The study of the genital appendages so well described by .Al. Flor, and that of

the habitat will serve to elucidate the synonymy in a more certain way. Already my excellent friend M. !\leyer-Dar and I have brought together many
documents that we will publish later; today, describing

two new species, I want to limit myself to giving a few examples
meetings to be held, in order to warn against the multiplicity of
species entomologists who wish to undertake the study of these

charming little insects. [Begin Page: Page 436]

/i36 A, PUTON. PSYLLA RHODODENDRI. Luteo-flavescens, abdomine infuscato, antennis apice unguiculisque
nigris, alis lulescentibus; conis frontalibus vertice paulo brevioribus, basi

latis, apice attenuatis, obtusis, divaricatis. Flavescent yellowish with brownish abdomen. Antennae reaching
the base of the lower wings, the last three or four segments black. Frontal cenes directed downwards, a little shorter than the vertex at mid-
place, divergent, with broad base and 4 attenuated, but obtuse apex. Vertex

strongly arched at the posterior edge, about twice as broad at this

edge as long in the middle. Very short, arched pronotum, its anterior edges
and posterior parallel. Upper wings fairly short, briefly rounded
dies at the top, transparent, yellowish, the very prominent veins,
slightly more colored than the background; stigma very large, transparent;
radius almost straight or very slightly curved towards its basilar third;
petiole of the second fork of the ulna slightly curved, its two branches
straight heads, equal to each other; petiole of the first right fork, a
slightly less than twice as long as its first branch, its second
very strongly curved branch. Size of small individuals of P.

Pyri L.

vs?. Genital valves and pincers simple, without lateral appendages. G. Genital tip conical, base broad, lower valve as long

gue than the previous three segments combined. Found on the Rhododendron at the edge of the Trubsée near Engelberg

(Switzerland) by M. Hofer. Rhinocola tamaricis. Viridis aut lutco-viresccm, antennarum arliculo ultimo tarsisquenigris;

alis hyalinis, proescrtim apice fusco punctatim nebulosis. Pale green or light yellow; tarsi, last segment of the antennae,
eyes and tip of genital tip black. Antennae short, vertex
horizontal, longer than in R. accris, strongly notched in front
and thus seeming to form two short and oblong frontal cenes; his body

posterior slightly arched. Pronolum arched forward and backward. Wings showing their greatest width after the middle, hyaline, unequal

[Begin Page: Page 437]

Two new species of Psyllieles, elc, Uol

marked by cloudiness formed by small brown dots, more
tight and more apparent toward retirement; a small blackish line at the extremity
moth of the clavus; veins colorless like bottom of wing; radius abou-
weaving at the outer edge before the top of the wing; ulna in a straight line
to the very top of the wing, petiole of the second fork (the furthest
external) twice as long as that of the first, the two branches
of the second fork straight and almost equal; second branch of
the first very long and very arched fork. Slightly bigger size

than that of B. aceris.

? Genital tip short and wide viewed laterally, the valve inferior
slightly shorter than the upper and equal in length to both segments.

preceding ventral ments united. Found in September, at Agde, on the Tamarix. I only took

females. Notes relating to the synonymy of various species. PSYLLA ALNI Lin., Flof. Heydenii Forst. var. fuscinervis Ferst. —PYRIL. laughed Goureau. var. pyricola Ferst. apiophila Forst. — sALicico LA Férst. var. chlorogenes Meyer-Diir. — MALI Ferst. var. rubida Meyer-Dar. — FERRUGINEA FORST. var. pyrisuga Ferst. — SPARTIOPHILA FORST. torifrons Flor. — FLORi Puton. insignis Flor, not Férst. — BREVIANTENNATA Flor,

terminalis Meyer-Dar. [Begin Page: Page 438]

/i38 A. PUTON. — Two new species of Psyllids, etc. Observations relating to habitat. Many species are described without indicating the plants which
nourish; it is an omission to be repaired little by little, because the situation is
as important from the point of view of the study of morals as from that of
determination of species, and I believe this habitat more restricted than one would

generally think so. Psyllids are very light and very
mobile, which the slightest wind can transport to great distances;
also the capture of isolated individuals in no way indicates that they live on

the plant on which they were found. However, certain species have often been encountered on plants.
very different rates; but although I have confirmed by my hunts the sta-
of Psylla pruni on the blackthorn and the fir, of the phalara poly-
goni on fir and herbaceous plants, etc., it is not mine yet
demonstrated that they live as larvae on these plants indistinctly. I make an exception for species that live on conifers and which, I
believe, are found indiscriminately on fir, spruce, pines,

juniper, etc. Here are some indications resulting from my hunts:

Psylla alpina ForsL, on Alnus viridis, in the Hautes-Alpes, Brian-

con, Mont-Cenis, etc. Psylla pyrensea Mink, on spiny broom {Calycotome spinosa) h

Bedarieux. Psylla spectabilis Flor, on Spanish broom (Spartium junceum), a

Lamalou (Herault). Psylla breviantennata Flor, on conifers. Spanioneura Fonscolombei Forst., on the boxwood, in Bédarieux. Livia Crefeldensis Mink, on Juniperus oxicedrus, &€ Lamalou. I must

point out, on the occasion of this species, that I have more often found the

Livia Juncorum on conifers than on rushes.