On the biology and characteristics of the psyllods
Description of two new species of the genus Psylla. You
dr Franz Low. With plates I and II. (Put before the meeting on March 1, 1876.) Among the highlights which the Psyllodes rank above other rhyn-
characterize is the great variability to which most species
are obviously subject to their coloring, very noteworthy. It's not
merely the result of a tendency to this already inherent in these insects,
but also stands with the age of the individuals, the food plant, the
climate and especially in connection with the season. Very special
However, the winter has an influence on the color of the overwintering individuals. Through this it happens that one and the same species in the course of the year and
occurs in different places in different colorings, which is the case with the mere
Trapping these insects by grazing or tapping them, the true
identity of the captured individuals unknown or at least un-
certainly remains, slightly giving rise to the different color varieties than just
so many ways to look at. That letateres really happened not infrequently,
prove the many synonyms that have already been determined,” which, with lovely ones
Exceptions, only the sorting of the caught individuals by color
owe their creation. So the catch of the psyllods is over
Stripping and tapping is not the way to increase knowledge
of this family, To achieve this, must au studying their biology
be grasped, through which alone it becomes possible, the extent of each
To get to know species well and to ensure synonymy. Imbued with this conviction', I have for several
subjected to years of mahe to raise these insects not only from young,
but also at the same time outdoors in all their stages of development
watch. From the results obtained in this way, the following should be
serve to confirm what has been said before. If you are in an area where Psyllodes occur, in the Frablinge die
If you carefully examine bushes, trees and other growths, you will find them
then, depending on the weather sooner or later and more or less necessary,
already imagines of the same, which in comparison to those in the summer there

24s

 

188 Franz Low. occurring eive have much darker coloring. These are the wintered ones
Individuals who have emerged from their hiding places and are in search
after that plant which serves as nourishment for their offspring. hereby
of course they reach for all kinds of plants until they succeed
To find what you are looking for, and this is partly the reason why
the various authors the information about the food plants of the Psylloden
often go so far apart. On the forage plants in question are found
then both sexes together to mate, whereupon the females
set them down here on the shoots and leaves. From these eggs cine generation emerges, whose imagines of the
above-mentioned, overwintered parent trees in the coloring mebr or less
conspicuous, but often deviate so significantly that the person who
quantitatively unknown, as is the case with the mere capture of this in-
sects: it is easily possible, it is all the more tempting for different ones
To keep species, as well as their size, always below that of the overwintered
individuals is left behind. But not only between the individuals of the summer
generation and the wintered there is such a difference, also the
imagines developing from one and the same brood agree with regard to
do not always agree with each other in terms of their colour, but not infrequently show this
a fairly large variability. No less great are the colors
differences caused by the food plant itself and its location,
but still more by the age of the imagines and the degree dependent on it
due to their coloration. Always right after the last hay day
The imago that appears very pale only fades in color very slowly and
usually takes three days, but sometimes more. Because now
The development isn't a simultaneous one, because that's also the case here from the females
are not removed at once and on the same day, one finds both
among the cultivated ones, as well as among those outdoors, on their host plants
developing adults usually represent all degrees of colouration. .

Add to that the fact that most individuals, even after the
suffer a change in color after death, it goes without saying that
that the color is not a sufficient characteristic for the identification of the species
and is therefore only of secondary value for this purpose. About Psyllode species
to be able to distinguish between them with certainty, it is therefore necessary, in addition to knowing
knowledge of their earlier developmental states is mainly due to the most careful
equation of all their plastic features. dr Flor first drew attention to this and pla-
to have first applied stic features to distinguish the species. His related works'».), in which he identified a total of 68 species in the ex-
fibrlichst way describes plastic features, bildon thus the

4) pile. Die Rhynchoten Liviands, Dorpat 1861, 'T. I, p. 438546. (From the archive f. a.
Naturk, Liv-, Est- and Kurlands 2. ser Biological nature, 1¥. bi, 1861, Dorpat.) 4) pile. On the Reuntniss of the Rhynchotes, (Bullet. Soc, Imp. naturalist. Moscow, 1861, p. 34,
P 931-422.) On the biology and characteristics of the peyllodes. 189

Basis for the study of the Psyllodes. After him is only Dr. to name Puton®),
which in the description of the species newly set up by him in the same
way. Since Forster on the coloring of the Psylloden so large
specific value and as a result the
ments and species in the family of the Psyllodes*) species almost described
only characterized by color differences, then it will be as it is
more and more, many varieties are described as independent species. It already has Dr. Flor correctly recognized that among the Korportheilon,
which lend themselves to the distinction of species, the external genitalia the
are the most excellent, for the proportions of size and shape of their individual
Parts form, as a rule, the surest marks for the characterization of the
Species, This is especially true of the males, whose illustration therefore of
Keinom, which describes a new species, should be absined. *)

Since this subject has hitherto received little attention, I think so
it is all the more expedient not to discuss it here, as my observations
ments with those of Dr. Flor') information given about it not in all
points are consistent. Behind the six annular segments s (Plate. I, Fig. 1) of the abdomen
of the psyllodes there are still two clearly separated segments, which each
are peculiarly formed according to sex and the dubious visible
form the bare part of the genital apparatus. These two segments of which
dr Flor one the upper, the other the lower Genitalplatto new,') are
formed in the female like the two parts of a bird's beak, i. bra. extended at the back into a more or less long, channel-like tip
and enclose like a white flapper v w the laying sheath «, of which only
which Spitzo is visible between them (Pl. I, Fig. 8, 9, 12, 22 and 'faf. H,
figure 31, 85, 40). In males, on the other hand, they differ in shape more from
each other The first adjoining the ring-shaped segments and
hence the segment corresponding to the lower genital plate of the female ¢ (Plate. I
figure 1 and 4) has a trough-like shape, ie half a bowl
Hazelnut, and its elevation is directed upwards. It will be given by Dr. pile
denoted by the dom name "genital segment"®) and carries on the back of his
upper edge the so-called tongs 2 (plate. I, Fig. 1), which depending on the

 

 

9) Puton, Ann, Soo. Ent. Mrs. ser. 5 T. 1, 1873, p. 435-438; — T. 111, 1873, p. 21-22. 4) Forster. marriage i.e. of course, association d. prouss Rheinlando, 1848. V Ba., p. 65-98,

8) Moine's Wieson's oxistiron of dieson's body parts only the few in Dogeor's
other 2. business Ins, 1780, 'T. I contain images, which are fairly true to nature
are prepared and anf Tab. 9, figure 10-12 for males, Fig. 13-16 the female genitulion
You Psylla pyri L. nod on tab. 10, Fig, 5—6 represent the male of Trioza urticae L. and
in Curtis' Brit. Entome, Vol. XII, from. 65 cine entirely incorrect illustration of the manulichon
Gonitalion of Psylta frazini L.

*) I kept for all parts of the outer genitals that Dr. pile levels
naming because, on the other hand, a change here easily causes confusion and other
since 0s orst uoch more thorough, morphological studies are required to understand the true meaning of these
Organo to orkenuon and to be able to rename them afterwards. 190 Prance Low. species, and is sometimes provided with lateral extensions
(Tab. I, Fig. 5, 8, 16, 21 and pl. Il, Fig. 30, 34, 39, 43, 44). These pliers
usually stands upright, but in many species it can move forward into the cavity
of the trough-shaped segment. This latter encloses with
its base the base of one corresponding to the upper genital plate of the female
second segment f, which extends upwards in the form of a conical,
blunt-pointed and vertically projecting channel g (Plate. I, Fig. 7
and tab. I, Fig. 29 and 83) lengthened. This part that Dr. flor male
called genital plate,®) has in some species, as well as the forceps, on its
Lateral cattle lobed extensions, such as B. at Zrioza Walkeri Frst. (Tab. I
figure 15), Zr. rhamni Schrk, (plate. I, Fig. 17) and Psylla frawinicola Frst. (Tab. 1,
figure 41 and 42), or longer extensions, as in all species of the genus Apha-
lara (Tab. II, Fig. 36, 87 and 38). Between the genital plate just mentioned, and the forceps protrudes from the
The bottom of the trough-shaped segment is still a very thin, long, chitindses
Organ p (Tab. I, Fig. 18 and plate. II, Fig. 28 and 82) out, which in the
Kneeling in the middle and expanding to a head or lobes at the end. is common
this organ buckled (Pl. I, Fig. 1p) and then you only see it with his
Joints protrude beyond the edge of the trough-shaped segment. In this
It bears some resemblance to a very small closed pincer,
as which, in fact, Dr. Flor was viewed as made of his
About the male genitals p. 4441) the information provided shows in which
he of two pairs of movable, pincer-like stickle placed against each other
speaks of which he only mentions the "back, foot" in his descriptions of the species
pair” (i.e. the actual pair of pliers) considers that, as he puts it: the between
or sometimes standing in front of this, inner pincers very fine and small and in the
rule is very difficult to discern". The organ in question is the
Penis,?) for it penetrates during mating, as I have often observed
Had the opportunity to cin all alone in the female vagina, while the forceps
clasping the tip of the upper, female genital plate, which is otherwise vertical
erected genital plate of the male but simply lying on his back
of the abdomen and apparently unrelated to the bogat-
performance act. Speaking of the last abdominal segments, I will
don't forget to touch an object that you haven't yet

1) Degeor and Ratzeburg already recognized him as such. In Goeze's Usher
setting of Degeer's Abh. 2. history a, Ins. 1780 part III, p. 95, pl. IX it is said of this or-

It consists of two parts, Fig. 11, mn, by a joints, or sine kind of
figure 12, 9, tusammengegli 'mediates the same can beat it up
around that is its usual position out of action, the first half of the picture, Fig. 11, n, is
brown, but the other, m, transparent, with an oval terminal tip, Fig. 11, ¢. Unetre
the Minglichtoval part the male sex organ*. And Ratzeburg (Forstins, 1844 7. 101, p. 187, note) says: 'When Méonchen are on the
top (i. 0 Above the abdomen) erect appendages between the rearmost pair of the
fine penis appears*. On the biology and characteristics of the psyllods. 191

was mentioned. It is this the anus and its position in both sexes
tern, Even Dufour, who in his Recherches anatomiques et physio-
logiques sur les Hémipteres, Paris 1833, the alimentary and gastrointestinal tract
Psylloden, says nothing about that Koxperstelle where the end of the intestine
out. That he saw the anus, but did not recognize it as such
has, is from his (1. c. p. 228) about the abdomen of Psylla (Homotoma)
fieus L., which reads: 'L'abdomen de la
female se termine en un cOne pointu, comprimé, A Ia face dorsale duquel on
apergoit prés de sa base un space ovale, Iégérement creusé, dont le-fond est
fermé par une membrane blanche, une sorte de diaphragme ott la loupe découvre
ga et 1A quelques vestiges d'une bourre cotonneuse". This oval indentation
or rather opening, is actually the anus of the female. He's on
the top of the abdomen at the base of the upper genital plate
(Tab. I, Fig. 8, a). In the male, too, the upper genital plate is the seat of the anus. However, here he is not at the base of them, but at theirs
Tip @, running all along its length from the end of the intestinal canal
is pierced (Tab. I, Fig. 1 and 7). Because the male usually the
Ability to curve abdomen downwards so much that apex
the otherwise erect genital plate touches the base of the animal, so can
there is also the excretion that comes out of the anus in the form of drops
mente get rid of more easily than the female, in which the latter often schr
sticking to the anal orifice for a long time, until it spreads out
the wing or by some other movement. the white flakes,
which usually cover the anus of the psyllod and are therefore easily recognizable _
make, stem from the nature of the castings, which are indeed glass
bright droplets appear, but immediately appear in the air
tberzieben a wax cap, which prevents her deliquescence and them
Endowment lingers like mercury globules rolling on without sticking. Since these encrusted droplets always contain some wax
leave behind at the edge of the anus, then arise at the same after and
after larger accumulations of white flakes, which in the female in
Consequence of prolonged adherence of the excretions to the anus to a greater extent
is the case than with Minnchen,

As for the other plastic characters of the psyllods, it is except
the proportions and shapes of the prothorax, the vertex, the forehead
kegel, the fubler and fabler limbs also mention the fligelgedder au. Although this is not a great variety in the species of this insect family
offers, quite useful characters can often be derived from it-
Find. However, in order to obtain correct information about the course of a species' vein
to be able to do, the investigation of individual individuals is not sufficient, but
a larger number is required here, because in almost every species small ones
Fluctuations in the Flagelgeider occur, apart from larger deviations
Changes in the vein type, which are caused by an abnormal branching of the veins

192 Prang Low. be caused, about which already G. v, Frauenfeld (Verh. a. zool.-bot. total Vienna 1867, p. 801-804) made a communication explained by illustrations. I have in the relationship i.e. zool.-bot, Ges. of 1862, p. 105-107
Remarks, however, the plumage of the wings of the Psyllodes is published, in which in general
think of the vein course and its nomenclature in the various
genera is mentioned. Since then, however, I have become convinced that
that with the uniformity of the questionable fligelgedders with the
Naming of the veins is not done, but that, since predominantly individual
Parts of certain Adorn in the species differentiation come into consideration, these
must be given special names. Such parts of the Geider
are: the individual sections of the marginal vein (Costa) and lower marginal vein (Sub-
costa or humeral vein) and the stick of the cubitus from its origin to
m its fork. Now in order to designate all these parts briefly and appropriately, it is on
It makes no sense to name them after the cells whose boundaries they form. Accordingly, the marginal vein section would then be called (Plate. I, Fig. 2) border
the anterior basal cell or stick of the costa (pars basalis costae
anterior), be border of the radial cell or radial stick of the costa (pars radialis co-
stae), cd edge of the discoidal cell or discoidal piece of the costa (pars discoidalis
costae),’) de edge of a wide marginal cell (margo cellulae marginalis secundae),
ef edge of the cubital cell or cubital piece of the costa (pars cubitalis costae),
fg edge of the first marginal cell (margo cellulae marginalis primae), g h edge of
behind the basal cell (margo cellulae basalis posterior) and there the edge of the clavus
(pars clavalis costae). The sections of the subcosta can also be named in the same way
be, namely: the one from the wing root to the point of origin of the cubitus
reaching part ai the same basal stick of the subcosta (pars basalis subcostae),
the next, between the origins of cubitus and radius
lying stick ik discoidalstick of the subcosta (pars discoidalis subcostae), because
it limits the discoidal cell inwards and the last section kb between
Radius and wing edge radial stick of the subcosta (pars radialis subcostae) as
inner boundary of the radial cell. What finally that part of the cubitus
concerned, which from its origin i to the first bifurcation point U of the same
enough, I keep the ones from Hartig,9) Forster and Flor for the same
used the naming 'stem of the cubitus' (petiolus cubitus), although I used it for
more correctly to call the same cubitus par excellence or stalk of the cubital cell. The presence or absence of pterostigma is not common in all Fallon
a useful mark for the distinction of species, in that it is itself
in one and the same species either entirely absent, or more or
may be less clearly developed (See below at Psylla Foersteri Fl.) 5) dr Flor has in the genus Trioza that stick of the costa, which is between the
The tip of the radius and the sweet tip of the fiigol lie, called the outer edge of the tip
(v. Ball, Soe. T. 34, p. 334). %) Hartig in Gormar's Zoitsch. f.a. Entom, 1841, 'T, IT, p. 378 On the biology and characteristics of the payllodes, 193

Since an insect species cannot be defined by the imago alone, but by
the totality of all their forms of development is represented
also naturally the most characteristic distinguishing features of the same
not-always in the fully developed insect, but sometimes it is
in one of its earlier stages, By this circumstance the study appears
of the development of each species, and the comparison of their analogous ones
Stages all the more so as further points of departure for the characteristics can be drawn from them
and securing the species can be obtained. + This now also applies to the psyllods and specifically to those
of their species, which as imagines see each other very ahulich, it should therefore
paid more attention to the young people of the same than hitherto
so that little by little the darkness is also barked up from this side,
but which the independence of many a species is still spread. As
the difference between two species that are very closely related is often clear
just expressed in their youthful stages: is, both of them give it to Alnus
glutinous Grin. living species, Psylla alni L. and Ps. Foersteri Fl., a
game, whose young appear completely different from afar, waving
the almost identically colored, grin images of the same
search as two different species. Finally, as to the food plants of the Psyllodes, so may
knowledge of which can only be gained by studying the biology of these insects
be reached because they cben only in their youthful stages to certain plant
are bound to species, but as imagines their place of birth is not uncommon
entirely relied on and in the vicinity of all occurring there
drifting around.") Since now that plant, on which the development
of a psyllod species takes place, a. i. the actual food plant of the same,
is not surrounded by the same vegetation everywhere, the
Imagines when migrating to other plants in almost every area. It is therefore practically important a species after that Pélanze on which
their imagines were caught, so without further naming, because such
naming just frequently only a purely coincidental and local occurrence
draws, like this e.g. B. in Trioza abieticola Fst., Psylla pityophila and pi-
neti Fl, which is the case, which were named after plants not known to them as
Nutrient plants are dependent by the Zr. abieticola on Rhamnus cathar-
tica L., the Ps. pityophila on Crataegus omyacantha L. and the Ps. pineti

 

 

4%) The first communication but the emigration of the Peylloden-Imagines from Ibror Kntwick-
Schmidberger. He says about this in a "Natural History of the Birnsanger"
Chermes jyri* titled and in the first issue of his 'Contributions cur Obstbaumencht und aur Natur-
history of the insects harmful to fruit trees* (Linz 1827) p. 192,
After speaking of the coloring of the newly developed insect, he said the following:
Now os leaves the place of birth and seeks to gain freedom. From that time au had
I met only two of all those who took off the nymph's dress on fruit trees. Where they wander around until late autumn, what they feed on, where and on which ones
How they survived the winter I could not find out*. Z.BR. Gos. B. XXVI. Fig, 25

   

 

194 > Franz how. on Saliw purpurea L, is undergoing metamorphosis. If psyllod species
are named after plants, this can only be after those
on which all their development takes place. My biological and other psyllod related
Investigations, about which I let the special communications follow here, led
me also to the discovery of two hitherto undescribed species whose
Description is also included below. Psylla viburni n.sp. | :
(Tab. I, Fig. 1-8.) Tota pallide viridis; thorax supra maculis albidis vel flavis vel fusces
centibus. Vertex fere triplo latior quam longior. Coni frontales 1'|,—1"/3 lon-
gitudinis verticis, via divergentes. Antennae longitudinem capitis thoracisque
aequantes, apice atrae, articulus tertius quarto Y, longior. Pronotum ubique
eodem longitudine. Hemelytra hyalina vel flave tincta; petiolus cubitus parte
discoidali subcostae brevior; pars discoidalis costae, margo cellulae marginalis
secundae et pars cubitalis costae fere codem longitudine; pterostigma breve. Lamina genitalis maris sine ullo appendice, forcipe paulo altior; forceps
quadruplo altior quam latior, ubique eodem latitudine. Valoula inferior
feminae sensim acuminata, superiore paulo brevior. — Long. corp. ¢ 28—3mm.,
Q 38-33mm. Insectum imperfectum secretione lanuginosa caret et in surculis et in-
florescentiis Viburni Lantanae habitat. Austria (mihi), Helvetia (Puton). This new one, developed by me in the Vienna Woods on Viburnum Lantana L,
covered species I also obtained by the goodness of the distinguished Hemiptero-
lied to Dr. Puton, which they also found in the canton of Graubünden
found a woolly snowball. The Swiss specimens deviate a little from
the Austrian one by having a somewhat yellowish color overall
coloring and stronger tinged wings and are also a little larger. In the characteristic features, however, they agree completely. Head and thorax pale green or pale yellow-green (on dry specimens)
clear also pale yellow), the latter on the back with some whitish, yellow ones
or brownish spots; crown three times as wide as long, behind only
markedly lobed, almost straight, with a fine deepened longitudinal furrow in
the middle, on each side of which is a flat indentation; mesh eyes green-
light gray; pinnacles orange-red; Frontal cone almost parallel with the plane of the
Crown protruding, slightly longer to five quarters of the length of the crown,
little diverging, gradually tapering from a broad base, with a rounded tip,
straight and rather rough on the outer and inner edges; Clypeus'!) bad

 

4%) Instead of the expression "keblzapfon" used by Forster and Flor, I keep it

the common name for this organ in all other insect orders "Clypous"
here too. On the biology and characteristics of the Psyllodes. 195

raised, whitish or yellowish; Feeler 1°5 mm. long, they are just very long
little but the thorax and are quite pale grin or yellow, just that
last link is gauz and penultimate usually only half black, third
limb one and a half times as long as the fourth; Pronotum ribbon-like, tiberall
equal in length, nearly as long as the crown; Legs pale yellow or pale green
with yellowish tarson, each hind tibia with black veins at the end,
the tarsi segments at the tip sometimes a little browned, claws black,
Fore wing (Tab. I, Fig. 2) 21/, times as long as wide in the middle, outside
somewhat broader in the middle, transparent or tinged with yellowish, wing veins whitish
or yellowish; Stalk of cubitus shorter than the discoidal stick of the lower marginal
Vein; radius almost straight, only very slightly bent forward in the middle;
Discoidal part of the costa, border of the outer border cell and cubital part of the
costa of nearly the same length; the outer half of the discoidal cell and
the radial cell of much the same average width; pterostigma
rather wide, moderately long, evenly merged, uncoloured, only slightly
callés, it usually occupies half the length of the radial stick of the costa. abdomen pale bluish green with whitish or yellowish segmental rinds;
Genitalion®) of the ' (Taf. I, Fig. 1) grin, sometimes yellowish at the tips or
brownish, delicately haired; the genital plate g of g' without lateral extensions or
Enlarged, somewhat higher (about 1'/, as high) than the pincers on which
tip only slightly inclined backwards; Forceps z four times as high as wide,
straight, almost equal in width to the apex and the same with two turned inwards
straightened, black lace. (On dry specimens, the forceps are after
a little faded towards the tip.)") Lower genital plate des-Q 0
(Tab. I, Fig. 3) slightly shorter than hind legs, broad base
uniformly pointed; the upper genital plate of the Q has about the same
Shape like the one below and only slightly protrudes with its peak, but that of the
the latter before; both are grin with a brownish tip and are quite strong
bearded. The imperfect insect is broadly oval, flattened and lenticular
pale green; on the crown it usually has 2 large, brownish
breathy spots, which lie on either side of the middle and on the back
between the wing sheaths some pale brownish, more or less distinct
various dots and dashes; the abdomen is broadly rounded behind, yellowish-
grin with brownish segment margins (in the stage before the last Hiutang is
mostly the posterior half of the abdomen more or less distinctly brownish
approached) and carries a transverse row on the upper side of each segment
long, yellow hair buttoned at the end; the flagel sheaths are pale green
or pale yellow, fading to brown towards the margin, above and at
edges trimmed with buttoned yellow hairs; the legs grin or yellow that
tarsiform and tarsi brownish, sparsely hairy; the Fubler yellow, on

 

4) Unless something else is explicitly stated, the Zango is always like that
veschriobon, how io presents itself in the Seitou view of the Insektos,

 

25"

196 Franz Low. tip blackish; the eyes pale red; the clypeus mostly with briun-
lich approach; the crown 'sparsely hairy, thorax and underside of the whole
Karpers naked. : :

You can find the young of this species as early as late April or early May
on Viburnum Lantana L., where they are found both in the leaf axils of the young
shoots, as well as in the umbels of flowers. You're not into woolly
or fluffy secretion and their castings consist only of light,
iridescent bluish droplets, which mostly fall to the ground, but sometimes
also remain on the plant. Towards the end of May or beginning of June
seem the first imagines. These have the light color variety of
Psylla mali some resemblance; except for some plastic differences
of the imagines of these two species, however, lies an essential difference
parted in her young, putting the of Ps. mali have a woolly secretion,
by which they are completely covered, while these the boys of Ps. viburni
entirely lacking. :

Psylla iteophila n.sp. (Tab. I, Fig. 4-5.) Viridis vel pallide ochracea, abdomen viridi. Thorax supramaculis
flavis vel fulvis vel brunneis, plus minusve obscuris. Vertex duplo latior
quam longior. Coni frontales fere longitudine verticis, apice obtusi, vie diver-
gentes. Antennae capitis thoracisque longitudinem fere aequantes; articulus
tertius quarto Yz—¥/, longior; articuli flagelli apice, 2—4 ultimi toti atri. Hemelytra hyalina; petiolus cubitus parte discoidali subcostae brevior; pars
discoidalis costae, margo cellulae marginalis secundae et pars cubitalis costae
fere eodem longitudine; pterostigma longum, basi parallelis fere marginibus et
apicem versus sensim acuminatum; clavus apice fuscus. Lamina genitalis maris
sine ullo appendice, forcipe paulo altior; forceps apice valde dilatata, paulo
retrorsum inclinata, ad basin marginis posterioris appendice sursum curvato,
acuminato, piloso, apicem segmenti genitalis superante et dimidiam forcipis
altitudinem attigente. Valoula inferior feminae sensim acuminata, superiore
paulo brevior. — Long. corp. G? 1'8mm. Q 2 mins,

Insectum imperfectum secretione lunuginosa caret et in surculis Salicis
incanae habitat. Austria. This species is the Psylla salicicola Frst. very similar. you under-
differ, however, from the latter essentially by smaller size and by
the shape of the genitals. Another difference between the two types
is also still in the boys, which in Ps. salicicola after the Vorletaten
skin change color, while in Ps. iteophila in all stages
are of the same colour. The head and thorax of the imago is green or light ocher, with yellow
reddish or brownish, more or less dark markings and spots:

On the biology and characteristics of the psyllods, 197

the metathorax has at its posterior margin. a brown or black cross
spot. The abdomen is green with yellowish or whitish segmental rinds
urd sometimes also with pale brown bands on top. the apex
slightly bulging behind, flat, between the eyes twice as wide as
long in the middle, there with a fine longitudinal furrow, 2u both sides
there is a small, rounded impression near the posterior edge of the crown
finds. The frontal cones are small compared to the level of the vertex
directed downwards, standing close together, scarcely diverging and so long
or slightly shorter than the crown. They spring from a broad base,
taper to the middle faster than from there to their blunt point. The clypeus") is flatly curved, slightly raised. The mesh eyes are brown;
the pinpoints red. Dic fiber almost as long as the head and thorax out,
yellow, their limbs from the third or fourth onwards tipped with black, the 2—4
last all black; the grim or yellow limbs also sometimes have
blackish tips; the third segment 1'/,—15/, times as long as the fourth. the
Legs are either all yellow or pale green, or the thighs grin like that
abdomen and tibia and tarsi yellow; the tarsi limbs, and sometimes the
Rails very narrowly ringed with black or brown at the tips. the front
fligel 21/, times as long as wide in the middle, slightly wider outside the middle,
clear as glass or sometimes pale, brownish shadows between the veins,
which, proceeding from the edge of the wing, gradually lose inwards; Top
of the clavus mostly brownish, close in front of it a small, blackish one
Nebelfieck, which, however, is often completely absent; flage veins yellowish at the base,
tinged more or less brown externally, but the costa usually
yellow from root to tip of marginal mark. The Fligelgeider has the-
same arrangement as the preceding species, only the pterostigma is here
longer, but usually occupying half to 9, of the costa radial,
but up to half its length parallel-sided and only then gradually tapered. The tip of the appendix is ​​usually pointed on the transparent hindwings.
brunt. Genitalia®) of ’ (Taf. I, Fig. 4) smile; the genital plate obne side-
tal extensions or extensions, slightly higher than the pincers, at the apex
tilted only slightly backwards; the pliers") (Taf. I, Fig. 5) has at its base
a broad, backward-pointing and upward-curved eye-
pointed process, which, however, protrudes the end of the genital segment, half
as high as the pincers, more or less tanned and densely hairy
is. He wears a small tooth on his upper side, the side facing away from the forceps.
chen, which, however, is only visible when greatly enlarged and forms part of it
the pincers the figure of a broad hook. The pliers themselves are at the top
much broadened, twice as high as there wide, i. i. a little higher than with
Enclosure of the process wide, slightly tilted backwards and thus in the
Convex in the middle of their anterior margin and correspondingly eoncavous on the posterior margin. The two parts of the forceps touch each other only at the tip, where from
the broadened ends of the same two very small, blunt, mostly black ones
Cones protrude towards cinander (Plate. I, Fig. 4). Lower Genital Plate

 

198 Franz Low. of the Q somewhat shorter than the thighs of the hind legs, gradually tapering and
about '—/, their length shorter than the upper one; both genital plates of the Q very
delicately bearded,

The imperfect insect is broadly oval, flattened lenticular,
zend grin, mostly darker above than below, yellowish or brownish on the head
translucent, pale grinning, or brownish wing sheaths. the eyes
are brownish yellow, greyish yellow or brown; The fubler yellowish or grizzled
with black end links; the legs are either all smiles or just hers
Thighs green and splints yellow. Tarsi yellow, brown or black. The abdominal segments each have a transverse row of buttons on their upper side
Hairs, making the abdomen appear very hairy above, it is like below
the rest of the body almost naked. On the top and on the edge of the wing
sheaths are also knotted hair, from which the marginal ones alternate
are both short and long. There is also the apex and the front edge
of the head clothed with a few short little hirs. All the hair is
yellowish or pale brownish. The young of this species can be found as early as May on the tips of the shoots
Sali incana Schrk., where they sit sucking in the axils of the young leaves. However, as they have no woolly or flaky secretions, only
secrete crystal-clear drool from her anus and also no deformationon whatsoever
in the plants, their presence is revealed in the branch
do not sharpen easily and you only become aware of them when the leaves separate
aware The first adults appear in mid-June. I collected this species im
Weidlingbachthale near Vienna. Psylla salicicota Frst. (Tab. I, Fig. 6-9 and pl. if, fig 23-25.) p.s. salicicola Forster, Verh. natural Ver. i.e. prussia Rhineland 1848, ‘T. V, p. 72 — — Flor, Rbyn. Livi, 1861, part II, p. 467. — Rufula Forster, as above, p. 76 Since this species, which I also found in the Wienerwalde in the valley of the Wien-
river found, with the previous one has very great resemblance and also in the
That agrees with her in many respects, so might at superficial
a mix-up all the more easily, as it is not uncommon for
of one kind individuals occur, which with individuals of the other kind
appear the same color. Therefore, to avoid any error, I give
Below is a summary of those characteristics which distinguish both species
differ significantly from each other:

Ps, salicicola Frst. p.s. iteophila F. Lw. Corporeal 2-25 mm. corporeal 18-2 mm. _
Forceps of the cf (Taf. I, Fig. 6 and 8) forceps of jf (plate. I, Fig: 4 and 5)

without lateral process, against the | behind with a wide, bent,
End gradually narrowed and sharp | pointed, very hairy appendages
pointed. and init broadened end. On the biology and characteristics of the psylodes. 199

Lower genital plate of Q (Pl. i,
figure 9) shorter by '/,—'/p its length
as the top. Third Fable member 1'/, times as long | Third Fabler link 1"/.—15/, times like this
as the fourth. long than the fourth. The young live on Salix Caprea | The young live on Salix in- *
and aurita L. and change after the | cana Schrk. and are in all stages
penultimate hatching their coloring (Plate II, | almost identically colored. figure 28, 24 and 25),

Lower genital plate of Q around '/,—",
their length shorter than the upper one. Of what little importance the coloring of the psyllod imagines for
the description of the species is sometimes witd by Ps. saticicola Frst. right on
clear, because this one is pretty much at the top as far as color variability is concerned. Dr! Flor, in his detailed description (given 1st c.) of this species
pretty much all colors mentioned, which in the body coloring of the same in
of manifold variation and nuance; what, however, the coloring of the wings
As far as this is concerned, there is still a lot to add. Among the imagines I have raised in quite a number is not true
for the help of the total fee in relation to the wings with the Dr. pile
The information given here more or less agrees, but the rest differ
mainly in two ways. Thus spread in a part of
Ben in the cells of the forewings from the edge of the wing inwards by more or less
far-reaching, often very faded, but sometimes also quite dark, brown
light or black shadows, which in life are always much more intense than
are after death. (In one individual these even have such an
elongation that its forewings viewed against white paper at the apex
almost identical in shape to the veins of the wings except for very narrow strips of kings
Appear ill-tempered with black grief.) In other individuals, however
the flagels are clear as glass and only the first fork tine is brown on both sides
siumt. There is also the blackish streak in front of the tip of the clavus,
which Forster gives as a characteristic feature of this species
in all individuals and one could almost say that it is absent in the majority. In those imagines which have brownish or blackish shades in the
Cells of their front wing have, as a rule, also the veins, as far as they are
Shadows are enough, more or less dark-colored. Temporarily in the Frithlinge, as soon as the willows begin to sprout, one meets
the hibernated, dark red-brown colored females on the fawns
and leaf shoots of Salie Caprea and aurita L. are employed in laying beer. A few days are enough for the ripening of the children, so that usually at the beginning of April,
both the axes of the fawns and those at this time still very much
short leaf shoots are already populated by the young, which are usually found in
deliver the first adults in the second half of May. But since the diberwin-
females do not lay their eggs all at once and at the same time, so
the development of the young is also very different, which is why often in

 

200 Frauz Low,

June still here and there at different stages of development dying individuals
are to be found. The imperfect insect is oval, about as wide as long, on the
Dorsal rather high arched, almost flat below, with blunt body
margin, which appears somewhat sharper only in the last abdominal segments
(Tab. figure 23, 24 and 25). Hs is grin-colored, lighter towards the head and
has the following black or dark brown markings, which on both sides
a wide, light central stripe, which extends from the head to the middle of the
Abdomen extended, arranged symmetrically: On the top of the head
(Fig. 28) a white large spots, which extend over the front edge of the head
extending slightly to the underside and a light spot around the eyes
leave free Behind each of them and still before the front border of the
Wing sheaths (but not equally clearly visible in all individuals) inside
a triangular spot and a small line on the outside. On the thorax between
the flagel sheaths two pairs of small, quadrangular spots, which with two pairs
round dots stand alternately one behind the other and usually behind them
each side three more or less distinct, short, narrow lines. on
the underside of the thorax (Fig. 24) near the margin next to the anchors
the forelegs a longitudinal transverse spot. On the abdomen are the last three
Segments entirely black except for their undersides, which have some sparse
Post shows (Figs, 23 and 24), the preceding segments have both above
than narrow, short, black ones below on the incisions on both sides of the middle of the body
Lines, which usually become completely invisible when the animal has its abdomen
moves in. The Clypeus'?) is black or brown. The eyes are light brown;
the fables black at the apex, the basal limbs black or blackish;
the hips, thighs and last segments of the tarsi black, the tibiae and first
tarsi segments brown or dark brown; the wing sheaths black against the
Brown towards the edge, covered above and at the edge with almost hyaline, knotted hair
puts. The abdominal segments each carry a transverse row on their upper side
pale, knotted hair, making the abdomen appear rough above. vertex
and front edge of the head with a few short deer, the rest
body naked. After skinning before skinning, the black coloring either disappears
completely or except for a more or less clear, blackish or brownish
slight approach to the affected body parts and also the green color
becomes significantly bleaker (Fig. 25). The young of this species have no woolly or flaky secretions
encased. That described by Foster (1. c. p. 76) under the name Psylla rufula,
from V. Heyden captured a man in a swampy place near Offenbach
chen, which is now in the collections of the k. k. zoological court cabinets
located in Vienna is nothing other than a somewhat more intensely red colored one
Variety of Psylla salicicola Est. On the biology and characteristics of the Psyllodes. 201

 

Psylla Foersteri Fi. (Tab. I, Fig. 27-81.) Ps, Foersteri Flor, Rhyn. livi 1861, T.I, p. 458. .
— alni (L.) Forster, Verh. natural Ver. i.e. prussia Rhineland 1848, T.V, p. 70 — — Andinet-Serville, Encycl, méth. 1825, T.X, p. 229 This large, by the long Fibler, the wings tinged yellow and
the large genitals distinguished, green, yellow or yellow-green species
in the Wienerwald often on Alnus glutinosa Grtn. and at the same time with her
very closely related Psylla alni L. It varies in coloring in the
Usually not much, but there are sometimes individual individuals who
are colored falling darker. I received one of these from a breeding under
cirea 80 Embroidering of ordinary color. It is ocher yellow with pale ocher

yellow tinged flags and ocher wing veins, while the hind thighs
on the outside, the tips of the rails, the tarsi and the tips of the geni-
talien are dark brown. Also with regard to the wing mark (pterostigma) there
units before. Have among the 60 copies in my possession
9 no pterostigma at all, while the others show it more or less clearly
is developed. From the description that Dr. Flor of this kind gives,
and in which it says: 'The edge mark is missing completely or is only very indistinct,
where the radius") meets the marginal nerve, it thickens the same* it can be seen
that only specimens with undeveloped marginal marks were available to him. In Forster, on the other hand, who erroneously called this species Ps. alni L. aufftbrt,"4)
the reverse must have been the case, because otherwise he would certainly have in his
genus Arytaina, in which the absence of the marginal mark means that
only distinguishing feature from the genus Psylla. *®)

The young of this species (Taf, Il, Fig. 27) live like those of Psylla alni L.
in May and June on the shoot tips of Alnus glutinosa Grtn. and sit
with preference in the leaf axils in one is 2u several next to and behind each other. They are elliptical, flattened to lenticular shape and grass green. on her crown
there are two large ones, gray-green or brown-green, sometimes lighter, sometimes darker
Spots, which in the middle of it by a moderately wide space

4%) Should probably be hot, Untorrandnery*. 4) The eclite Prylta alni L., from which Linn 6 states: albae, venis fuseis* and
which also formed through the black points at the base of the schions, through others
Gouitaly (plate. I, Fig. 38-36) and through their white-wooled young from Ps. Foersteri Pl. essentially

t, was made by Forster partly under the name Ps, Heydeni, partly ale Pe. fusci-

 

 
   

18) Forster (1c, p. 68) says: 'The genus Arytaina deviates very little from the typical
Character of the family, which is found in the Gattang Psylla, the most species-rich of all, on
you reflect the lack of a stigma may provisionally justify the separation* here. so variable, in certain of Fallon scarcely usable for the definite differentiation of species
Mentos gostilzte genus was developed by Dr. Flor not maintained and also in the publications
from Dr. Puton not mebr approached. 2. B.Gos. B. XVI. dep. 26

 

202 Franz Low. the long ones are also separated and cut out round next to the eyes. Of the
Thorax is brownish or brown above between the wing sheaths
Drawn with dots and dashes, which are symmetrical on both sides of the -middle-
lie in order, but are often very indistinct. The Clypeus') is bluish green,
The eyes are brick red; the fable long, yellow, with green basal limbs,
ringed black or brown from fourth joint on; the 2-8 last links
completely black; \ the claws bluish grin; the legs grim, the splints outside
touched with black, each with a longer bristle at the end, both of them
Tarsi segments ringed with black at the end. The wing sheaths gray or brown
light grey, somewhat translucent, those of the fore limbs with a black line
bordered and covered with black hair only on this one, otherwise naked and
a little shiny. The abdomen is swollen and slightly narrower behind
than in front, the segments have on their front edges on both sides the body
middle dark streaks, which are more distinct on the first and fourth segments
than are on the rest; the posterior part of the abdomen is of half
of the fourth segment colored quite blackish-green or grey-green. The black hairs on the upper side of the abdomen are in six lingsreil
ordered, of which the two outer ones are marginal. These boys wear their castings in the form of a white, at the end
buttoned strand, which breaks off after reaching a certain length
and reforms again, but have no woolly or fluffy ones
Secretion, which distinguishes them, in addition to several other characteristics, conspicuous
those of Psylla alni L. (Pl. UL, Fig. 26) differ, you are also in
Contrasts with the young of other psyllods are lively and braided when
they are disturbed, with great rapidity down the branch,
always running on the side of the branch facing away from the observer. The annual appearance of the imagines arising from these young
usually falls in the second half of June and is always about 14 days later
than that of the Ps. alni L., whose biology was already described by Degeer (Fig. 2. born i.e. Into the. 1780,
T.UL, p. 96, pl. X, Fig. 8-20) described in great detail and
education has explained. Psylia breviantennata Fi. (Tab. I, Fig. 11-12.) Ps, breviantennata Flor, Bull, Soc. imp nat. Moscou 1861, plate 34, p. 375 — terminalis Meyer-Dir, Mitth. Swiss ent. total Schaffhouse 1871,
T.I, p. 392 Through the breeding of this species I came to very rich material,
which puts me in the position of Dr. Flor (I None given description
the same, which after a single, from him at Seewiesen in Styria
captive females is made, hence the necessary detail. de
behrt, in many ways complete 2u. On the biology and characteristics of the Peylods, =~ - 203

imago. — Head and thorax whitish gray, grey-green, light yellow or light
brownish yellow with reddish yellow spots and more or less dark brown
Drawing. Pronotum band-shaped, equal width everywhere, always monocolored, in the light-
gray streaks and on both sides with a .brown or black, deepened
dash. Back label in front of the transverse seam with a brown double leak,
behind the same between the roots of the front wing with five brown longitudinal
welts, the middlemost of which is very narrow and mostly indistinct; to the
Sides of the thorax under the wing roots three lingish, -brown on each side
spots, the posteriormost of which lies almost at the posterior margin of the metathorax; below between
the fore and middle limbs have a brown butterfly-shaped macula;
‘Thoracic lobes brown at the tip, crown relatively long, at least
%f, 80 long than wide between the eyes, slightly cut out behind, flat,
with high raised, orange-yellow or red point eyes, in the middle with
very fine longitudinal furrow and on both sides with a brown or
black, punctiform impressions. Face cone compared to the plane of
Vertex only slightly downwards, almost not diverging at all - half that
longer than the crown, almost the same thickness, with a broader, blunt, hairier one
Pointed, its inner edge straight, its outer edge slightly convex in front, always
monochromatic, of the base color of the body. Clypeus') very clearly visible,
strongly convex, prominent, half pear-shaped, black or dark-
brown. Reticulated eyes gray or greenish-grey, pedicles very short, at most 06 mm. long,
scarcely reaching to the root of the forewings, yellow, tapered from the apex
widely divided, often darkened brownish up to the third segment, as a rule
only the two terminal segments and the tips of the seventh and eighth segment
black, but not infrequently the three terminal segments and also the tip of the sixth
limb black, the first limb mostly blackish on the underside, the third
twice as long as the fourth, legs and hips pale green or dirty
pale yellow, the latter sometimes bulging with black, the thighs from the base
towards the tip more or less browned, blackish or also
black; tibia browned on the outside; Tarsi brownish with blackish apex. Fore wing 2½ times as long as wide, scarcely in the outer half of the wing
wider than the inner one, somewhat whitish opacified, sometimes at the base
wasgerbell and with a more or less dark brown markings. This
usually consists of a large apex spot, eating inner border in the direc-
direction from the tip of the pterostigma to that of the clavus and which
a two uncolored areas, namely the inner half of the first marginal
cell and a round, mostly washed-out spot on the posterior edge between
the tip of the clavus and the first prong. This dark drawing is
usually brown, with scattered darker dots, but sometimes almost
black-brown or completely faded, in which case their contours are complete
are blurred. However, there are also individuals in which the wing
marking consists only of 2-4 small, brown or black-brown spots,
which, in the direction from the tip of the marginal mark to that of the clavus,
lie next to each other and leave the tip of the wing free; of these spots is the am

: 26"

204 - Franz Low. Anterior edge of the wing lying, triangular grisste. The veins of the anterior
wings are pale or light yellow, mostly light brownish on the outside; stalk of
cubitus shorter than the discoidal part of the inferior marginal vein; cubital piece of the edge
ader shorter than all other marginal sections; Radial cell significantly narrower than
the discoidal cell; marginal mark long and fairly wide, evenly merged,
uncolored, just callés, it usually takes */, the length of the radial piece
the costa one. abdomen pale green, yellow-green, light yellow or brownish yellow with broad,
black-brown or blackish bands, which narrow the segmental cattle
leave free and interrupted on the sides and on the middle of the bottom
are. Genitalplatte®) of ¢' (Pl. I, Fig. 11) at the top a little after
inclined backwards, without lateral extensions or extensions, 1'/.—13/. times so
taller than the pincers, pale brown with darkened tip and delicately hairy. pliers 2)
throughout almost the same width, about four times as high as wide, with one at the base
very slight bend forwards, therefore a little there at the front edge
concave and correspondingly convex on the rear edge, obliquely tapering off at the apex
clipped, being slightly lower in front than behind, pale brown at the rear
Tip dark, almost black, slightly hairy, viewed from behind a narrow 0
forming. The trough-shaped genital segment has a stronger protrusion to the rear
bulging than is usually the case with the psyllium and therefore stands
but with its end quite far out the base of the forceps. it is light-
brown, much darkened below and behind and too fine especially towards the back,
but very hairy. Lower genital plate of Q (Pl. I, Fig. 12) hardly that long
than half the hind thighs, almost as wide as long, blunt at the back
rimmed and extended there into a thin, upwardly curved tip,
which is a little shorter than the genital plate; upper genital plate of Q
shaped like the lower one, only the narrow part of the same is straight,
somewhat thicker, throughout of the same thickness and protrudes to the aid over the fine tip of the
lower front. Both genital plates are dark or blackish brown, according to their
Base too light, on the broad part with fine, long hairs, on which
narrow with microscopic thorns. Body splints 2 mm. at ¢* and Q.

The imperfect insect is not broadly oval but slightly over two-
times as long as it is wide, and its abdomen is not round but round
somewhat narrowed at the back and has the shape of a semi-oval. It's in the beginning
almost white, off-white, becoming more yellowish as it develops *
or grinning. The doe usually shows a very delicate, indistinct,
brownish markings, consisting of short lines and dots, of which
only four larger points between the wing sheaths are conspicuous. Not infrequently, however, this drawing is completely faded. The whole top of the
The body is covered with a dense, fine, white growth of hair, which grows on the scalp
slightly longer but very long in the abdomen. The eyes and ends of the tarsi
are brown and in some individuals the mid-abdominal
segments brownish incisions. On the biology and characteristics of the psyllods, 205

The young of this species live on the underside of the leaves of Sorbus
Aria L., where they, formally buried in the white felt of these sheets, in
sit at the nerve corners. As a result of this and as a result of their own light coloring
they easily escape the perception and discovery which still thereby
is made more difficult that no change at the upper side of the leaves their
verrith. Incidentally, this psylla is like this in some localities
frequently that often no leaf of the said plant remains unoccupied by it. I always found these boys in the Vienna Woods only in August and September
and received in the second half of the last month from my kennels the
first imagines, about which time I usually found them outdoors. G. v. Frauenfeld'*) also observed the young of this psylla only in
Late summer and fall and also Dr. Flor caught his specimen in September. This spite development suggests that Psylla breviant-
nata fl. in addition to the autumn generation, there is also a spring generation,
which, however, until now result from the difficulties arising from the perception
oppose these small ships, has not yet come to observation. G. v. Frauenfeld, whose relevant communication**) is a fairly successful one
illustration of the front wing of this psylla is only a scant one
Description of the boys. He couldn't do the imagines that were raised from it
determine, because at that time only Forster's work on Psylloden*)
knew was. Psylla pruni Scop. (Yat. I, Fig. 10.) Chermes pruni Scopoli, Entom. carniol. 1763, p. 140 Psylla fumipennis \ Forster, Verh. a. nature, ver. i.e. prussia Rhineland 1848,
= pruni } TV, p. 76 and 7. — — — Flor, Bull, Soc. imp nat. Moscow 1861, b. 34, p. 370 Temporally in Friblinge, when the buds of the Prunus species are still
are closed, one meets the overwintered adults of these easily recognizable ones
Species isolated on different bushes. Spiter but towards the end of April,
one finds them more numerously, namely on the already developed leaf
sprouted from Prunus, where they are both on the axes of the sprouts and on
the underside of the leaves set their here. From here evolve
in a short time the young, which then at the outermost tip of the shoot in
the axils of the leaves and accessory blisters. Young are oval, lenticularly flattened, with broadly rounded end
abdomen and rather sharp body edges. Her body color is dark-
grin. On the crown between the eyes are two large, yellow-
Light brown spots, which widen in the middle of the apex of the liner
are separated; the quill sometimes has a few, but mostly indistinct points
and dashes of the same color. On the abdomen are the rear half

¥) Frauonfold, Mar. a, zool.-bot. total 1866, b 16, p. 978,

206 Franz Low. same and the segment incisions more or less dark yellowish brown. Felers and legs yellowed. only their outermost tips blackish, lastly
tere spirally hairy. Clypeus'') brownish attached. eyes grey-red. winged
Sheaths yellow-brown, only at the edge with a few knobbed, brownish ones at the end
hair. Around the edge of the abdomen are 16-18 brown
hairs, which are directed more backwards and of which six,
equally spaced unbuttoned and almost twice as
longer than the other hair, which is tied at the end. The upper and lower
side of the body is bare except for the crown, which is covered with a few delicate ones
Harchen is occupied. These boys shed no woolly or fuzzy secret
off, only on the underside of their abdomen a white plaque is often seen
Their excrements only captivate with crystal-clear drops. The ima-
gines are much lighter colored than the wintered ones from which they came
and correspond largely in coloring to Psylla fumipennis Frst. So this Férster species is nothing else than the summer
stepping, lighter color variety of Ps. pruni Scop., with which they all
has the other features in common and is therefore identical. I have the detailed description which Dr. Flor (I ‘c.) from
of this kind, only add that there are also single individuals,
where all otherwise yellowish or reddish parts of the body are grin, yes
even those with green forehead cones and the same abdomen, the
has only slightly darker bands and yellow segmented rinds above. Further that
the hibernated adults, as with most other species, somewhat larger
than those resulting from the Friblingsbrat. My specimens all come from the Vienna Woods, where this species
is not rare. ~

Psylia crataegi Frst."?) (Tab. I, Fig. 13-14.) p.s. crataegi Férster, Verh. natural Ver. i.e. press. Rhineland 1848 V, p. 75 — — _ Nordlinger, Kl, enemies d. agriculture 1869, 2nd edit.,.p. 574 — pityophila Flor, Bull. society imp nat. Moscou 1861, t.a p. 369 — oxyacanthae Meyer-Diirr, Mitth. Swiss ent. total Schaffhouse 1871,
T.I, p. 393 #) Up to now, however, Scopoli has been wrongly treated as an author of this kind, dean
according to the description which he (Ent. carn. 1763, p. 199) from his Chermes cratacgi gives wod
which reads: 'Larva plumbeo virens; plica abdominis longitudinali media, In convolutis et Udesie
{foliis Crataegi spinosi. Insectum non vidi* he has not Ps. crataegi Fret. but probably
“Aphis crataegi Kt. or Aphis oxyacanthae Koch. 6s is different for closet. This describes (Fauna Loica T. II, 1801, p. 142) under
the noun Chermes crataegi (Scop.) aio Imago of a true Peyllode, which, however, is from Paylia
erataegi Fret. differs in that the trailing edge of their leading wings , in its entirety
Long with watery black dots* and that her young have a woolly secret
retire,

  

Tsar biology and cuaracteristics dor Payllodon. "207

The hibernated adults of this species are usually found towards the end
April on the young, tender shoots of Crataegus Oxyacantha L., wn
set their eggs on it. They are very dark in color at this time, brown
or red-brown and then reproduce that color variety which Moyer
you (1. ¢) as a separate species under the name Ps. oxyacanthae described
Has. The young laid from the individuals overwintered by these
Eggs arise, develop on Imagines, not only in coloring
deviate greatly from their parents, but also vary among themselves, The ver:
different color varieties of this spring generation were published by German authors
under the name Ps. crataegi Frst. and ps pityophila fl. !8) described. It
are therefore all previously listed under the aforementioned names, green,
yellow, reddish, brownish, brown and red-brown psyllium only Vi
titen ciner kind, for which the name Ps. crataegi Frst. as the most appropriate b
is closed. In order to visualize this species in its entirety,
merge the existing descriptions of their varieties into one. However, since with such a variable type it is mainly only a matter of specifying '
more constant, plastic features and an exhaustive description
of all their color varieties is almost an impossibility, so I limit myself
Below is a summary of the former. Apex flat, slightly excised at the rear edge, between the
Eyes twice as wide as long in the middle, with the usual awei
shallow impressions, frontal cone as long as the crest in the middle, in the
Slightly downward sloping when compared with the plane of the vertex
broad base gradually merged and more or less sharply pointed,
often bluntly rounded at the end, standing parallel in some individuals
others more or less diverging, Fabler 1 mm. long, reaching almost to
the end of the thorax; third fubler segment 1!/, as long as the fourth, anterior
fligel (Tab. I, fig 14) 2%, times as long as wide in the middle, outside the
center distinctly broader; Figelrandmal wide and long, gradually fading away,
4g-%, occupying the radial portion of the costa; Cubital piece of marginal vein at
smallest among those between the first fork tine and the tip of the radius
lying four edge sections; Radial cell significantly narrower than the discoidal
cell; Veins pale, or black towards their ends, or quite dark-
brown; Fligel surface usually clear as glass, but with some individuals
Indications of longitudinal shadows in the cells, Genitalplatte®) of the ' (af. I
figure 18) obne lateral extensions or extensions, with their upper end
slightly inclined backwards, x as high as the pincers, sparsely hairy;
pliers") straight, sharpened shortly before their end, straight at the front edge,

 

  

  

  

4) That Peylla pityophita Fl. with pe crataegi fsst. is identical, I already have from the
Description assumed to be the same. A comparison of my bred individuals of Pe. era~
taegi with from Dr. Flor orhaltonen types of pe. pityophila, as well as with specimens, which mine
under last Namon from Dr. Puton sent from France, completed in full
the identity of these two species. 208 Prauz Low. slightly concave in the middle of the posterior margin, somewhat at the base of the same
enlarged and covered with longer hairs than on the other parts, four times
as high as broad at the base, seen from behind 0-form.’%) Lower geni-
tal plate of the Q slightly longer than the thighs of the hind legs, with a broad base
gradually acuminate, by about '/, their lengths shorter than the upper ones
the darkest specimens is the underside of the metathorax, behind the hips
the jumping legs always lighter colored than the rest of the body. Very pure and
predominantly overwintered specimens show on the sides and on the underside
side of the thorax and abdomen in places a slight, bluish-white
tires Another peculiarity of Ps. crataegi Frst. is still the
different coloring of their young. When I saw the first shoots of Crataegus
collected, which with boys of Ps. crataegi were besetat, the un-
same coloration of the latter, and I suspected the young at the time
of at least two types of psyllium in front of me, I therefore subjected them
a precise investigation and although I in the plastic features
the same could not be ascertained any difference, I held it for complete
averaging their similarity, nevertheless far necessary, the light, monochromatic indi-
to separate viduen from the rest and to write them separately, The result
made my initial guess appear erroneous, for out of both
From the end of May onwards, only adults of one species were bred, namely the Ps. cra
daily Frst. in many color varieties, whereby it happened not infrequently that
that from light boys dark colored imagines and vice versa from dark ones
Tungen light arose. The imperfect insect is broadly oval, flattened lenticular, with
broadly rounded abdomen, either monochromatic light green without markings or
green to dirty green with more or less dark brown spots and
Drawings. In individuals with the latter colouration, it runs from the front edge
of the head to the middle of the abdomen in the direction of the midline of the
body a very faint, vaguely broad, grime sublimity, .to both of them
Sides symmetrically arranged two large spots on the crown, on the thoracic tick
four small spots and 6-8 dots and lines and in the front half of the ab-
domen there are streaks of brown color at the segment incisions. With you
are also the wing sheaths, the rear half of the abdomen and the tarsi,
yes, sometimes the whole legs of such coloring, which on the concerned
Spots varied from a brownish tinge to almost blackish-brown. 1%) dr Flor' statement about the claw of the pincers of his Prylta pityophita (he uses them
5—G times as high as wide) is not always true, because the two parts of the forceps are not always
are equally curved, which is mostly the case with dry pieces on which the forceps
parts are often completely twisted. According to my investigations on living specimens
the pincers seen from the side without pinching Almost four times as high as wide at the base. The fact that the pincers appear higher on dry specimens is also due to the narrower
become the same when drying. On the biology and characteristics of the payllodes. 209

The fligol sheaths, which are whitish, yellowish on the light individuals
or greenish and transparent, have no beaks either above or below
hair, only the lower edge has 6-8 short hairs clipped at the end
occupied. The rest of the body is also naked, only the crown has a spiral,
short hairs and on the edge of the posterior half of the abdomen stand 10
short, buttoned and 6 long, unbuttoned, hyaline hair in almost equal proportions
stand from each other, which are not, as in the boys, from Ps. great scope. are directed backwards, but stick out straight. The eyes are red;
the fables usually only brown or black at the tip, but sometimes
also ringed. Those young, which have no woolly or flaky secretion, hold
always only at the outermost tip of the shoots of Orataegus between the
young leaves without causing a deformation of them. your
Presence is therefore betrayed merely by the castings, which as white,
strands knotted at the end are visible between the shoot tips. The previously discussed inequality of boys in relation to their colour
does not seem to occur only locally, for all of me to increase my
Breeding material in the Wienerwalde, in the Prater and in the garden in Vienna
melted Crataegus shoots, although from different localities,
always occupied by boys of unequal coloring. G. v. Franenfeld gave already 1864 in the Verh. i.e. zool.-bot. total B. XIV.,
p. 691 a brief description of the dark variety of the young of this species,
However, he made an erroneous statement about their way of life when he
the red or yellow spreads originating from Aphis o«yacanthae Koch
Exercises of the leaves of Crataegus for the product of Psylla crataegi. Triova Walker's Frst. (Tab. I, Fig. 15-16.) Trioza Walkeri Forster, Marriage i.e. natural Ver. i.e. prussia Rhineland 1848, T.V, p. 88,
~ — Flor, Rhyn. livi 1861, T. IL, p. 494 So common and widespread Zrioza Walkeri Frst. is, but so are theirs
Lifestyle so far only two brief dates from Dr. Flor and G. v. Women-
field, which, however, are almost exclusively limited to statements about the deformation,
caused by the young of this species on the blobs of Rhamnus
will. G. v. Frauenfeld, which (relationship i.e. zool.-bot. total 1861, B.XI,
p. 169-170, pl. II D, Fig. 5—6) a description and illustration of the
formation, designates Rhamnus Frangula L. as the host plant of these
Trioza, while Dr. Flo Rham. cathartica L: indicates as solebe. After my
varied observations on this subject, I must refer to Frauenfeld's
describe the statement as erroneous, because even in such cases where the two
Rhamnus species mentioned grow next to and between each other, Rham remains. Frangula L, always by the boys of the Zrioza Walkeri Fret. unbreakable 2 B. Ges. B. XVI. fig 27

210 Franz Low. Already at the beginning of May one finds the aforesaid deformation on the leaves
by Rham. cathartica L.. At this time, however, it is still very narrow and
inconspicuous and consists of an upward curling of the leaf margin, which
only reached their full size and formation in June and then a thick,
forms a fleshy, almost cartilaginous, tightly closed roll, in whose inner hollow
only a few, at most 5 or 6 young of the Trioza species in question
live, which usually only become imago in July (in later years only at the end of July).
transform. This has either a yellowish, reddish, brownish, brownish
or also a grinning more or less dark basic color and also varies
with regard to the color of the flags, because, apart from the fact that the three are clear as glass
Spots, which are in their forewings, vary in size, what
especially of the one lying in the middle of the front edge, and also those
brown coloring of these winglets is not equally intense, are not uncommon
individuals in which the forewings are uniformly duokel brown
colored and whether all lighter spots are. The imperfect insect is broadly ovate, very flattened, quite feral, initially
ochre-yellow, spiter grin and has in the middle of the whole body a broad,
more or less intensely red longitudinal stripe, which is both above and below
is visible. His fables stand like all young of the genus Trioza
at the base of the head a little inside the front edge of the head and
are short and not properly structured in their final help. Hs has brown eyes
and the sharp edge of its body is lined all over its circumference
close together, standing, small cones lined, from which a sparse
Secretion takes place in the form of fine white threads, These threads break
light and then cover the body as a powdery or finely flaky mass
of these animals, as well as the internal winds of the named, for them to stay
serving leaf edge curls. The young leave before their transformation to
Imago these leaf deformations, which change at a certain time, analogous to the
Aphid galls, open by themselves and disperse on both leaf surfaces,
where they then complete their metamorphosis by shedding their skin for the last time
strip off Therefore, as long as the galls are closed, those who inhabit them have
boys not yet attained full maturity. This species occurs frequently in the Vienna Woods, where I im
Weidlingbachthale and by G. v. Frauenfeld in the Brithl near Modling
was found. The latter has (I.c.) that of Wardrobe (Fauna Boica 1801, T. II, Abth. 1,
p- 141) described under the name Chermes rhanmi only in the juvenile stage
Psyllode fir is kept identical to the above and therefore this name as a syno-
nym to ibr without considering that closet in its
writing calls the body of the imperfect insect translucent, what
at the one by Trioza Walkeri Frst. is not the case. The fact, however,
that closet mentions nothing of a sheet deformation, let G. v. Women-
Field in the further course of his message again the identity of the
said Blattsanger doubt and not wrongly, because cabinet's

On the biologic and characteristics of the psyllods, 211

Chermes rhamni is actually a different species, which is also found on Rhamnus
cathartica L. lives, but there another much more obvious leaf deformation
causes. (See the description of Zrioza rhamni Schrk below.) Trioza rhamni Schrk. (Tab. I, Fig. 17-18.) Chermes rhamni closet, Fauna Boica 1801, T. II, Abth. 1, p. 141 Trioza abieticola Forster, Verh. i.e. natural Ver. i.e. prussia Rhine}. 1848, T.V, p. 88 - — — Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1861, T. IL, p. 496 — argyrea Meyer-Dir, Mitth. Switzerland. ent. total Schaffhouse. 1871, part II], p. 390 On the same shrubs of Rhamnus cathartica L. on which I
the young of the Zricea Walkeri Frst. autraf, I have also through several
for years observed the young of another species of Trioza on the flowers,
which are no doubt identical with those already on the same cabinet
Plant found and (I. None as follows: 'No. 1249. cruciferous
Leaf sucker = Chermes Rhamni, place of residence: on the crossberry bushes in Junius. The larva grin, flattened, shield-shaped, with a transparent body; the
Edge of the wing sheaths and the rounded abdomen fringed. The fully
coming insect I don't know",

Through repeated discipline I came to the complete conviction that
that these young psyllods belong to that species which first came from
Forester (1. ¢) under the name Trioza abicticola. This
Species name would therefore mean that closet does not describe the perfect insect
wrote has priority; after he is not happily elected
and its origin merely from the accidental finding of some imagines on fir trees
owes, hence misled to the erroneous Annahine, Abies pectinata DC. be the
buttercup of this trioza and because it also occurs in areas where coniferous
hdlzer does not grow at all, so I preferred the ye. from closet
to use the given name, which points to the plant that
young of this beautiful leaf hopper as a food plant,
nender fir the species is. Depending on the weather, either as early as April or as late as May
one on Rhamnus cathartica L. the overwintered adults of both sexes. They mate around this time, after which the Q sporadically transfers its eggs to the
underside of the still tender leaves. After a short time, these leaves show
on its upper side very small pustular bumps, which
shaped depressions, in which the Kier lie isolated. *)
In about 810 days, the young Zrioea hatches from the egg and stays in
of the mentioned leaf depression initially sit sucking, with each following one
Skinning, however, she leaves her place and sits in another place

%) The same deformation on the bitters of Khamnus cathartica L. has also Dr. Thomas
described in nouester time (see Giebel's Zeitsch. f.a. tot, natural 1875, b 46, p. 445). Ha

212 Franz Low. the underside of the leaf (rarely also on the upper side of the leaf) with a preference in the nerve
angle firmly. The blitter only suffer from the laying of the eggs before
Discussed minor deformity, suckling the young does not bring any outside of them
change. The young trioza of this species is broadly oval, extremely flat
godriickt, very cable, glinzond, initially yellowish later pale green, translucent,
almost colorless towards the edge of the body. Their tribbyaline wing sheaths are
av its outer edge as well as the sharp-edged edge of the head and the
abdomen with hair-like, cylindrical, equally thick, glassy rods
fringed, which stand close together in a single row and radiate that
surrounding whole animals. Each such stibehen has at its base two micro-
scopically small abodes, one might say limbs, which through their
unity and regular arrangement form a double line, which
bordered. This corona is 2-3 times as large on the head and abdomen
long as on the wing sheaths, on the head about as long as the fublers,
which stand on the underside of the head a little inside the edge of the head, quite
lich thick, glabrous and clearly articulated only at their base sipd. have the legs
no hairs, only the second segment of the tarsi has one knotted at the end
Bristle. The eyes are relatively small and dark brown, the extra
ordinary flatness of the body of these animals and their chromaticity with
the underside of the Rhamnus leaves makes it extremely difficult to find and likes
may be partly the reason why they were not observed later. The ima-
gines show great diversity in body colour. she
are either green, yellow, yellow-green, yellow-brown, brown-green or brown with dark
older markings and spots, but dark brown after hibernation
to almost black. Constant is on them except those of Dr Flor (I.c.)
specified plastic features and the always crystal-clear wings only the
Drawing of the white body dust, which, however, on the one with the net
or the individuals caught in the crotch bag is never preserved pure. too much
pure specimens are obtained either through breeding, or by
captive individuals with fresh food and so for some time
preserve life. The white, waxy body dust caused by secretion
only reaches full capacity on the third day after hatching.
ity and disappears after death either completely or just for the sake of it
parts. It covers almost the whole of the head and thorax except for the
Underside of the forehead cone, the fibler, legs together with the hips, two of the
Eyes reaching over the wing roots to the posterior edge of the thorax,
rather narrow, straight lingstripe and one point on each side of the meta-
thorax along its posterior margin, whereupon, however, three white dots one above the other

* standing and lining the abdomen below and on the sides. On the bare
upper surface of the letater, the first segment is dusty throughout, while the other
which, from the third onwards, have a white secretion spot in the middle, which

On the biology and characteristics of the Peyloden. 213

is punctiform on the third segment, but increases in size on each following
uimmt and on the sixth touches the moral pollination on each side. Dor knows-
Specimen Clypeus"") usually has two black dots in front. the
official description, which Dr. Flor of this type there, I only have
to agree that the black tip of the feeler appears slightly thicker
than the preceding limbs of the fable flagellum. I have this species in Weidlingbachthale, in Bribl, in Schénbrunn
and found in the Prater near Vienna. dr Thomas”) referred to as further
Fund locations Ohrdruf near Gotha, Feldafing am Starembergersee, the park of
Schwaige Wang near Garmisch and Berchtesgaden. In the botanical garden too
In Vienna, it also comes in abundance on a Caucasian rhamnus variety
namely on Rhamnus spathwlaefolia B. et M. That of Meyer-Dir under the name of Zrioza argyrea as a new species
I consider the Psyllode described to be nothing more than one of the summer
occurring, green varieties of Trioza rhamni Schrk., which is why I them
also placed under the synonyms of this species. Lrioza flavipennis Frst. (af. I, Fig. 19-22.) Zr. flavipennis Forster, Verh. natural i.e. prussia Rhine}. 1848, T.V, p. 98 — = Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1861, 'T. Uy, p. 521
cersteri: Meyer-Diir, Mitth, Schweizer entol. total Schaithausen 1871,

T.HL, p. 390 Among the communications which I have already made, however, is the way of life of these
Species have made”) there are some indications which I have obtained from more recent
am able to correct observations made by us. First:
The cause of the simultaneous presence of young and perfect
Insects of all ages on one and the same plant is not, as I thought,
in an irregularity of development, but in the non-simultaneous
Settling the Kier through the wintered Q 2u seek, Second: The up
leaf deformations (hemi-
ptero-cecidia according to Dr. Thomas) will not, as I suspected, through this
suckling of the young animals, but already by attaching the eggs to the
produce leaves. Third: Not only the Q winters, but both
o as Q and mating takes place only in spring, after which the Q theirs
Kier on the leaves of Lactuca muralis Don., Hieracium Pilosella L., pra-
tense Tsch., praealtum Vill. and discontinue similar ones. The imagines emerging from these hiern are significantly lighter than
the wintered, which have a dark red color in life, after the
But these change differently and are either lighter or much darker
will. But also the host plant and perhaps also its location
flow the coloring of the imagines, because, as I have repeatedly observed
had the opportunity to go out from those living in the forest shadows on Lactuca

Mrs

 

 

  

‘Ow, negotiation. a, zool.-bot, Ges. 1871, b 21, p. $13 and 1873, B. 29, p. 141 214 Franz Low. Tungon produces much brighter imagines than those that are found on
develop on sunny meadows on Hieracium species. The previously known localities of this species are still Berchtesgaden
gaden and the Partnachthal in Oberbaiern, which Dr. Thomas in
his in Giebel's Zeitsch. f.d. total science 1875, b 46 under the title:
"Cecidia produced by psyllods on Aegopodium and other plants" or-
seeming interesting work. Since in this species such individuals occur very frequently, which
show exactly the same coloring as Meyer-Diir's Trioza Foersteri
indicates, I take all the less scruple to see the latter as mere colour-
variety of Trioza flavipennis Frst. to be considered and therefore as synonymous
to draw her, as well as the few plastic features which Meyer-Diir
indicates that the two species agree completely. Explanation of the illustrations.??) tab. I figure 1. Abdomen of ¢* of Psylla viburni 1m. s the 6 annular segments,
t the trough-shaped genital segment,
g dio genital plate,
2 the pliers. p the penis when collapsed,
@ The anus. 2. Fore wing of Psylla viburni m.
ab front basal piece of the marginal vein (pars basalis costae anterior). be Radial piece of the marginal vein (pars radialis costae). ed discoidal piece of the marginal vein (pars discoidalis costae),
the edge of the 2nd marginal cell (margo cellulae marginalis secundae),
ef cubital piece of the marginal vein (pars cubitalis costae),
fg edge of the 1, edge cell (margo cellulae marginalis primae),
gh border of the posterior basal cell (margo cellulae basalis posterior). ha edge of the clavus (pars clavalis costae),
ai basal piece of the inferior marginal vein (pars basalis subcostae),
ik Discoidal piece of the inferior marginal artery (pars discoidalis subcostae),
kb radial stick of the inferior marginal vein (pars radialis subcostae),
il stem of the cubitus (petiolus cubitus). Genital apparatus of the Q of Psylla viburni m.
© lower genital plate,
w upper genital plate,
a.s. sheath,
a anus. 2

%) All figures are drawn in a very enlarged scale. figure 4,

no

2

S

1

13,

14 16 17 19 21 22,

. 28 24 25 26 27 28 On the biology and characteristics of the psyllods. 215

Genital apparatus of the g of Paylla iteophila m. with a bent penis,
t the trough-shaped genital segment.

. Side view of the pincers of the ¢' of Psylla iteophila m.

Genital apparatus of Psylla salicicola Frst. with a collapsed penis.

. Second genital segment of the ¢’ of Psylla salicicola Frst. f the part enclosed by the trough-shaped first genital segment
the same,

g the upright protruding part (the genital plate),

p the stretched penis,

a the anus. Posterior view of the pincers of the g* of Psylla salicicola Frst. Genital apparatus of the Q of Psylla salicicola Frst.,

a the anus.

. Genital apparatus of the "g" of Psylla pruni Sep. with slightly blunted forceps

and collapsed penis.

. Genital apparatus of the g' of Psylla breviantennata Fi. with buckled

tem penis.

. genital apparatus of the Q of Psylla breviantennata Fl,

a the anus. Genital apparatus of the ¢* of Psylla crataegi Frst. with some dffucter
Tongs,

p the erect penis. Front wing of Psylla crataegi Frst.

. Genital apparatus of the ¢ by Trioza Walkeri Frst. Tongs of the g* by Trioza Walkeri Frst: in a crooked view. Genital apparatus of ¢ from Trioza rhamni Schr¥. with a collapsed penis.

. Front flag of Yrioza rhamni Schrk. Genital apparatus of the ¢’ from Trioza flavipennis Frst. with buckled
tem penis. genital plate of the g* of Trioza flavipennis Frst, with the stretched
th penis. Rear view of the ¢' pincer of Trioza flavipennis Frst. Genital apparatus of the Q of Trioza flavipennis Frst. tab. IL

Young Psylla saticicola Frst, in the stage before the penultimate moult. Given from above. Same seen from below. The same in the stadivm after the penultimate hatching. Seen from above. Tange Psylla alni L. in the stage before the last heat. Young Psylla Foersteri Fl. in the stage before the last molt. Genital apparatus of the g of Psylla Foersteri Fl. with erect penis p.

216

figure 29 30 31 32 33 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 Franz Low. Tsar Biology and Characteristics of the Peyllodes,

Second genital segment of the ¢' of Psylla Foersteri Fi.,
f the part enclosed by the trough-shaped first genital segment
of the second genital segment,

g the upright protruding part of the same (the genital plate),

p the stretched penis,

a the anus. Posterior view of the pincers of the ¢' of Psylla Foersteri Fl. Genital apparatus of the Q of Psylla Foersteri Fl. a dor anus. Genital apparatus of * of Psylla alni L. with extended penis. Second genital segment of the "g" of Psylla alni L. (designation like
at Figure 29). Posterior view of the pincers of the ¢’ of Psylla alni L.

Genital apparatus of Q of Psylla alni L,

a the anus. Genital apparatus of Aphalara picta Zit. with an erect penis. Genital plate of the ¢' from Aphalara picta Ztt. with the requested
Penis. side view,

a anus. genital plate of the ! from Aphalara picta Ztt. given from above

a anus. :

Pincers of the g' from Aphalara picta Ztt.,

m rear view,

nm side view..

Genital apparatus of the Q of Aphalara picta Ztt..

a the anus. Genital apparatus of Psylla fracinicola Frst. Genital plate of the g* of Psylla fraxinicola Frst. Side view of the pincers of the ¢' of Psylla frasinicola Frst. Rear view: same. .

 

+ ~
DPF Liw, Psyllodes

negotiation dk: xo0l bot tot. 7
Band WOT. 86 tab. I

 

Paul Low del Xk Hof: Chromelith v. Ant Martinger's son Yen. Negotiated.d. cookies <wol bot Ges. Banal XXV. isi. Paul Lowdei

 

chromolith v. At. Hartinger 4 son, Wier