—™
Oy
lS
C1

~~

XVI. Monograph of the British species belonging to the
Hemiptera-Homoptera, family Psyllide; together
with the description of a genus which may be ex-
pected to occur in Britain. By Joun Scorv. [Read Ist March, 1876. ] I HAVE been induced to undertake the present Monograph
for two reasons, viz. : first, because such a thing has not
previously been attempted, and I therefore thought it
desirable for the sake of science to bring together and de-
scribe all those species In my own collection as well as
those in the collections of others which have been kindly
lent for this purpose; secondly, because the Catalogue now
in course of publication by the Entomological Society of
London will thus be rendered more complete. I have also
added translations of the original descriptions of some
species which I have not seen, but which were taken by
Messrs. Haliday and Walker, and forwarded to Dr. Forster
at Aix, where they appeared in the ** Verhandlungen des
naturhistorischen Vereins der preussischen Rheinlande ”
for 1848. ‘Phat author’s generic divisions are natural and

easy of recognition, but his diagnoses of the various
species are meagre in the extreme, ‘and, in many instances,
not sufficient to lead to their identity. The same remarks
also apply to the descriptions of Meyer-Diir, published in
the ‘‘ Mittheilungen der schweizerischen entomologischen
Gesellschaft,” v ol. iii. On the other hand, Dr. F lor, j in his
** Rhynchoten Liviands,” vol. 11., and in a paper published
at Moscow in 1861, under the title “ Zur Kenntniss der
Rhynchoten,” has more than compensated for the in-
completeness of the others by the elaborate descriptions he
there gives. He is pre-eminently the man in this group,
and his works have afforded me valuable assistance in
determinating between species where I had any doubt. I have followed other authors by placing this group where
it now stands, but I am not prepared to say that this is its
true position, as it possesses some points in common with
the true Cicadide. TRANS. ENT. SOC. 1876.—PART IV. (DEC.)

o
526 Mr. John Scott’s Monograph of the

The best methods I have found for the capture of these
tiny creatures is by sweeping and by beating trees and
bushes into a sw eeping-net or inverted mire te 1 then
put such species as | have found on a particular tree or
bush or plant into a small glass tube, of which I carry a
quantity ready labelled on w which to write with a pencil the
name of such tree, bush or plant, so that when I come to
set them I am at no loss to know where they came from ;
and although three or four species may be found on one tree,
yet | believe this is accidental, or for the purpose which |
shall mention presently, as Sach species, like the dphide,
seems to have its special food plant. Dr. Flor and
M. Lethierry give many species as found by them upon firs,
and these are ‘eenerally taken in early spring or very late
in the season. May they not haye assembled there for the
purpose of hibernation, as these trees would afford them
an excellent retreat? The two seasons would seem to
point to this. In conclusion I may add that I shall be glad to examine
and name to the best of my ability any species which may
be sent to me for this purpose, as ‘I feel certain I have not
yet exhausted the riches of the group. family PSY LUIDJZE. Head, including the eyes, generally broader than long. Crown horizontal, or more or 186 deflected. Ocelli three,
placed one in front and one near each eye, close to or almost
on the posterior margin. face with or without lobes. Antenne 10-jointed, inserted before the eyes; two basal
joints stout, generally shortish; remainder filiform; apex
of the last joint furnished w ith two projecting hairs- of
unequal length. yes globose, placed on the side of the
head. Thorax: pronotum small, collar-shaped; mesonotum
large, exposed, very convex, divided laterally into three
unequal portions; anterior portion more or less ‘shuttle-
shaped, posterior portion largest, broad, with a scutelliform
process attached to the posterior margm. Scutellum
minute, rounded posteriorly. £/ytra fully developed in
both sexes; longer than the abdomen, and either acute or
rounded at the apex; costal margin with or without a
stivma; from the nerve of the external basal cell, whose
apex reaches the costal mar ain before the middle, proceed
the following nerves, viz., the radius, generally running

British species of Psyllide, 527

almost parallel with the costal margin to the apex; the
TCubitus divided into two arms, each of which is bifurcate
before reaching the apical and dorsal margin; cubitus with
or without a petiole. Legs formed for springing; 3rd
pair; coxe with a long spine on the underside. Zbie ;
3rd pai with a fringe of very short stout spines at the
apex. YZ arst 2-jointed, subequal. Claws two. Abdomen with six segments visible from above; genital
processes of the ¢ generally pincers-shaped, such as those
used by a smith; ¢ with a long, projecting, stout, pointed,
Ovipositor. Primary characters of the various genera. 1. Face produced into two lobes of greater or less length. Antenne 10-jointed; Ist and 2nd joints (except in
Livia) short, stout, remainder filiform; 3rd gene-
rally longest. Cubitus always divided into two arms, each of which
becomes bifurcate before reaching the ; apex. Elytra coriaceous, costa without a stigma, cubitus

petiolate . . 1. Livilla. Elytra mem- apex rounded ( costa without a
branaceous stigma, cubi-

tus petiolate . 2. Arytena. costa with a

stigma, cubi-

tus petiolate . 3. Psylla. lanceolate .,costa with a

stigma, cubi-

tus petiolate . 4. Spanioneura. *
costa without a

stigma, cubi-

tus not petio-

late. jects 5 oO. aed,

2. Face not lobate. Elytra membranaceous, apex rounded. costa without a stigma, cubitus petiolate. { 6. Aphalara. 17. Huphyllura. *
Elytra coriaceous, more or less lanceolate. costa with a stigma, cubitus petiolate . 8. #hinocola. costa without a stigma, cubitus petiolate . 9. Livia. Genus Livitua, Curt. Head: crown divided into two lobes by a central longi-
tudinal channel; anterior margin of the lobes rounded ;
disk with a deep fovea on each side. Ocelli three, placed
one on the posterior margin close to each eye, and one in

 

* Not a British genus. -

528 Mr. John Scott’s Monograph of the

front, at the base of the cleft. Face: lobes dong, stout
almost cylindrical. Antenne longer than the head an

thorax; 1—2 joints short, stout ; remainder filiform; 3rd
about twice as long as the 4th. Thorax: pronotum narrow, collar-shaped, with two
fover on each side near the lateral margin; mesonotum
large, exposed, flattish convex, divided into three irregular
portions by two transverse channels. //ytra coriaceous ;
longitudinally ovate, convex; transversely very convex ;
costa without a stigma. Species 1. tty ulicis. Livilla Ulicis, Curt. B. EK. 625, and pl. ; Forst. Verh. eee Pacuk v. 68,1; re coleoptrata, Klug, Isis,

(1837). nea pitchy-brown, shining. Head: crown deep chestnut or black, divided longitu-
dinally into two lobes by a central channel ; anter ior
margin of the lobes rounded, posterior ma rein concave. Face : lobes long, stout, almost cylindrical to the slightly
narrowed and rounded ApeX 5 clothed with very fine hairs. Antenne black; 1—4 joints yellow or yellowish-white ;
apex of the 4th fr equently brown. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum and scutellum black. Elytra coriaceous, deep pitchy-brown; finely wrinkled
transversely; nerves black ; costa w ithout a stigma. ings
small, fuscous. Legs yellow. Thighs: 3rd_ pair brown,
apex pale. Claws dark brown. Abdomen above black. Length 1—1} Ine. A_ perfect anomaly, and when at rest more resembling
a seed of some plant. than an insect. Curtis has omitted the external basal cell of the elytra
in his figure. I have old specimens taken by Mr. Wol-
laston, and more recent ones captured by Dr. B. White. It occurs upon furze bushes ( Ulex Eur op@us), in June,

but appears to be local. Genus ARYTAENA. Arytaina, 2’orst. Head much broader than long. Crown shghtly de-
flected; without the cyes almost pentagonal, with two
fovere almost in the centre ; width between the eyes more
than twice the length, measured down the centre, which

British species of Psyllide. 528)

is divided by a channel, leaving a small notch in front ;
posterior margin angulate. Ocelli three, placed one in
the frontal notch, and one adjoining each eye, almost on
the posterior margin. Face lobate. Antenne 10-\ointed ;
two basal joints short, stout, somewhat obconic ; remainder
filiform; 3rd longest. yes large, placed on the sides of
the head - wiewed from above, the outer margin very
convex ; Inner margin straight, almost parallel with the
central channel. Thorax: pronotum collar-shaped ; lateral margins con-
tracted posteriorly; on each side two fover ; mesonotum,
anterior portion shuttle-shaped ; posterior portion at its
ereatest breadth about equal to the width of the head
without the eyes. Scutellum minute, apex rounded. £ly-
tra almost uniform in width from in a line with the base
of the eubitus ; cortwm, costal margin without a stigma;
cubitus petiolate. Species 1. Arytena ulicis. Psylla -Ulicts, Curt. B. E. 565, 22 a (1835); Psylla
Spartit, Hartig, Germ. Zeits. 11. 375, 9 (1841); Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. 1. 88, 3 (1874) ; Arytaina Spartit,
Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 69. Green, dusky yellow or red. Mesonotum posteriorly
with five longitudinal, brown or black streaks. Elytra
transparent, with a black or brown longitudinal streak
between the radius and cubitus, and three others at the
margin alternating with the nerves

Head: crow Ns fover and cenerally a small spot in front
of each dark brown ar.black. Ocelle bright red. Face
variable in colour; lobes clothed with fine, pale hairs ;
apex of each lobe with a long, fine, pale hair. Antenne
dark brown or black, 2—6 yellow, apex of 3—5 narrowly
brown. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum green, dusky yellow or
red ; fovexe on the former dark brown, and five longitudinal
streaks on the posterior portion of the latter dark brown
or black. Scutellum generally yellow. lytra transpa-
rent; cortwm, nerves frequently pale, except the radius
and the bifurcations of the cubitus; between the radius
and the cubitus a broad brown or black streak extending
from the base of the former to the apex; alternating with
the nerves round the apex, three small patches attached to
the marginal nerve by a fine line; claval suture with a

530 Mr. John Scott's Monograph of the

fuscous-black or brown margin. F requently these charac-
ters are more or less indistinct. Legs generally yellowish. Thighs more or less dark brown. Abdomen black, posterior margin of the segments nar-
rowly yellowish or orange; genital processes vellow, apex
black. Length 13 line.

] have restored Curtis’s name for this insect as it is
some years older than that of Hartig. A very common species on furze bushes from May to
August. (renus PSYLLA. Head broader than long. Crown considerably deflected ;
without the eyes broader than long; divided down the
centre by a channel, and with a fovea on each side; the
space between the fovex and the inner margin of the eyes
much elevated or silhaa era, posterior margin more or
less concave. Ocelli three, placed one in the frontal
notch and one near each eye, adjoiming the posterior
margin on the summit of the elevated portion. Face
lobate; lobes variform. Antenne 10-jointed; two basal
joints short, stout, somewhat obconic; 3—10 filiform ; 3rd
longest, 9—10 together about equal to the 8th; 10th with
two projecting fine hairs of unequal length. Eyes large,
placed on the side of the head; view ed from above the
outer margin very convex, inner margin shghtly convex
and lying at an angle to the central channel. Pioras « pronotum narrow, collar-shaped, with two
fovez near the lateral margins, which last are incrassated ;
posterior margin concave; mesonotum, anterior portion
more or less obtuse, shuttle-shaped; base generally denti-
form at its extremities; posterior portion across the middle
as broad as or broader than the head and eyes together. Scutellum minute, apex rounded. //ytra generally trans-
parent, rounded at the apex; costal margin at the base
very convex, from thence straight or shghtly convex,
with a stigma sometimes almost obsolete. Cubitus pe-
tiolate. Differs from the genus Arytena by haying a smaller and
more deflected crown, the two basal ocelli placed on a
callus-formed elevation, the eyes lying at an angle to the
central channel, and more “particularly by its creater
breadth of mesonotum, in which respect it approaches the
genus T'rioza. British species of Psyllide. 531

Species with the costal stigma obsolete or almost obsolete:
Forstert, alni, buxt, spartiophila, hippo-
phaes. 5 with the elytra more or less yellowish or tes-
taceous: Frsteri, buxt, hippophaés, spartio-
phila, sylvicola, Lowi. ¥ with brown elytra: prunt. 5 with dark clouds or patches between the nerves:
pyr. - with a black or dark streak alone the dorsal
margin next the apex of the clavus: saliczcola,
rhamnicola. ns spotted round the apex: costatopunctata, ferru-
ginea. 3 with a black band before the apex: fravini. Species 1. Psylla Forsteri. Psylla Forsteri, Flor, Rhyn. Lavl. 1. 458, 2; Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. 1. 88, 2; Psylla Alni, Forster,
Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 70, 1. Pale green, yellow or greenish-yellow. ace: lobes
short, sparingly clothed with fine pale hairs, and with one
long one projecting from the apex. Antenne very long,
4—8 joints gradually growing more broadly black at the
apex; 9—10 black. lytra faintly testaceous or almost
clear, transparent; costal nerve frequently bright green. Head: crown very broad, posterior margin deeply con-
cave. Face: lobes short, sparingly clothed with fine pale
hairs; about as long as the crown down the centre; cone-
shaped, with a long, stoutish hair projecting from the apex 3
base broad. Antenne very long, clothed with very short
somewhat erect hairs; 4—8 joints gradually growing more
broadly black at the apex; 9—10 black; 4th about two-
thirds the length of the 3rd; 5—6 subequal; 7th longer
than the 3rd. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum pale green, yellow or
ereenish-yellow. £lytra faintly testaceous, sometimes
almost clear, transparent; nerves entirely y ellow or with the
costal margin bright ereen; stigma almost obsolete. Legs
pale green or yellow. Yarsi: 2ndjoint brownish. Claws
dark brown. Abdomen pale green, or greenish-yellow. Leneth 3 13, 2 24 lines. This species stands next in size to P. A/ni, from which

~ - 5
532 Mr. John Scott’s Monograph of the

it may be distinguished by the want of the black spot at
the base of the tibix and the faintly-coloured elytra, as well
as the difference in the form of the genitalia. Iixceedingly abundant on alders (Alnus glutinosa), from
June to the end of October. Species 2. Psylla alni. Chermes Alni, Lin. F. S. 262, 1008; S. N. i. 738, 10;
Fab. E. 8. 1v. 222, 12; Scop. Ent. Carn. 140, 417:
De Geer, Mém. 11. 96, 3, t. 10, fig. 8; Ps sy lla Alni,
Burm. Hdb. 11. 98, 1; ¥ ba Rhy n. Liles 1. 460, 3:
Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. u. 90,8; Psylla fuscinervis
and Heydeni, Forst. Vern. Ver. Rheinl. v. 20, 2 &
S1,.32. Green, yellowish, red or reddish. Face: lobes short,
stumpy, conical, diverging towards the apex. Mesonotum
frequently with two longitudinal, oval, light or dark-brown
patches on the posterior portion ; costal stigma narrow,
somewhat short. ‘Tibi with a small black spot exter iorly
at the base. Head: face, lobes conical, short, stumpy, base broad,
about equal to the length, divergence at the apex about
equal to the base of either. Antenne yellow, reaching almost
to the base of the stigma; 1st joint broadly black at the
base, 3—7 brown at the apex, 8—10 brown, 3rd and 7th
almost equal in length, 4—6 subequal. Thorax: econetia in yellow or green examples with
or without two light-brown, oval patches on the posterior
portion; in red or reddish examples these characters are
darker. //ytra clear, transparent or slightly dimmed, as
if having been breathed upon; nerves dark brown or
black from the base of the ecubitus to the apex; costal
nerve bright green, ciliate, the hairs very minute; stigma
ereen, narrow, somewhat short. Legs yellowish or green. Thighs: 1st and 2nd pairs frequently with a short,
more or less distinct, brown streak on the upper side
before the apex. Tvtb¢e with a small black spot exteriorly
at the base. Abdomen generally green. Length 23 lines. One of the largest European species and most easily
recognized by the black spot on the tibie. Not common. ‘The only examples I have seen, in
addition to my own, were taken by Dr. Power and Mr,

British species of Psyllide. 533

Douglas. It occurs on alders (Alnus glutinosa) in
August. Species 3. Psylla spartiophila. Psylla spartiophila, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 75, 18;
Psylla torifrons, ¥lor, Kennt. Rhyn. 30, 2. Orange yellow or somewhat reddish, with red-brown
streaks on the mesonotum more or less distinct in different
individuals. Face: lobes extremély short. Antenne
yellow or slightly reddish, reaching beyond the apex of
the external basal cell; 4th joint, apex broadly black,
5—10 black. Flytra faimtly testaceous, darker towards
the apex, transparent ; base generally clear as far as the
apex of the external basal cell; nerves yellow; costal
stigma almost obsolete, sometimes the nerves are finely
dark brown, and apparently very narrowly margined with
brownish-testaceous. Head orange yellow or reddish. Crown between
the eyes more than twice the length down the centre;
posterior margin concave, foveee dark brown. Face: lobes
very short, about half the length of the crown down the
centre; base very broad; apex bluntly rounded. Antenne
yellow or slightly reddish, long, reaching beyond the apex
of the external basal cell ; Ath joint, apex broadly black,

5—10 black, 4th about three- -quarters the length of the 3rd. Thorax: pronotum generally pale yellowish-white,
fovere: dark brown; mesonotum orange yellow or reddish,
posterior portion with a broad yellowish-white — stripe
down the centre, or with four red-brown longitudinal
streaks, more or less distinct, or partly or entirely wanting
in different individuals. /ytra faintly testaceous, darker
towards the apex, moderately rounded, transparent; base
generally clear as far as the apex of the external basal
cell; nerves yellow, stoutish, sometimes slightly darker
towards the apex; distance between the apices of the
nerves of the lower or dorsal bifurcation of the arm of the
cubitus almost equal to twice the length of the inner
branch of the same; costal stigma almost obsolete. Legs
yellow or somewhat orange. TZarsi: 2nd joint and cluws
black. Abdomen above generally black, posterior margin of
the segments more or less broadly yellow; ¢ genital
seoments yellow; processes long, yellow; apex brown,
exteriorly clothed with very short, fine, pale hairs. Length 1} line. -
534 Mr. John Scott’s Monograph of the

This insect belongs to the same section as P?. Firster?,
Buxi, §c., owing to “the shortness of the frontal lohes s, and
the almost total absence of a costal stigma; but from its
smaller and more delicate appearance, independent of the
form of the genitalia, it is easily distinguished. Apparently not uncommon in May and June on
broom (Spartium scoparium). It is in the collections of
Mr. Douglas, Dr. Power, and my own,

eon 4. a buat. Chermes Buzi, LS. N. u. 738, 7; Reaumur, Ins. i.
t. 19, fig. 1—14; Fab. E. D, bv. 221 Se. po S04, Be
Psylla Buxi, Forst. Verh. Ver. RKheinl. v.71, 3; Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. 11. 90, 10. Green or yellowish-green. Face: lobes short, divergence
at the apex small, outer margin much more rapidly inclined
than the inner one. J/esonotum not untrequently with two
triangular orange patches on the anterior portion and four
others of the same colour on the posterior portion. //ytra
and nerves testaceous, the former shining; costal stigma
wanting. Thighs frequently brown. Head: crown pale green or dark brown, or the base
dark brown. Face pale green or yellowasn or greenish-
white, clothed with fine, pale hairs; lobes short, shehtly
div ergent at the apex, outer margin much more rapidly
inclined than the inner one. Antenne yellow, reaching to
about in a line with the apex of the petiole of the cubitus ;
3rd joint about as long as the 4th and 5th together; 4—8
narrowly brown at the apex, J—10 dark brown. Thorax : pro- and meso-notum greenish or yellowish-
ereen; anterior portion of the latter generally with two trian-
ocular orange-coloured patchesin front, posterior portion with
four orange-coloured patches; the two interior oval, the
two exterior somewhat trapezoidal. lytra and nerves
testaceous; costal stigma wanting. egs dusky yellow. Thighs sometimes dark brown, apex dusky yellow. Abdomen generally green. Length 1# line. Not unfrequently the crown, pro- and meso-notum are
entirely dark brown or piceous, the posterior portion of the
latter on the sides with two or three short, pale, longitudinal
lines. An extremely common species on box trees (Buxus
sempervirens); everywhere from May to October. British species of Psyllide. 535

Species 5. Psylla hippophaés. Psylla Hippophaés, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 73, 12;
Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. ii. 91, 14; Psylla Alaterni,
Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 97,5; Psylla Hartigii,
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 11. 469, 8. Pale yellow or greenish-white. Face: lobes very long,
clothed with fine, pale hairs; base broad; exterior margin
concave, inner margin straight. Antenne yellow; 4—8
joints narrowly dark brown at the apex, 9—10 dark brown
or black. Elytra very pale testaceous, transparent, nerves
pale; costal stigma almost obsolete. Head pale yellow or greenish-white. Crown: posterior
margin concave. face: lobes very long, clothed with fine
pale hairs; base broad; exterior margin concave; inner
margin straight, from the middle to the shghtly narrowed
and rounded apex almost cylindrical. Antenne yellow,
reaching: to beyond the base of the stigma; 4—8 joints
at the apex narrowly dark brown, 9—10 dark brown or
black. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum pale yellow or greenish-
white sometimes intermixed. lytra very pale testaceous;
nerves fine, pale; external basal cell clear; costal stigma
almost obsolete. Legs yellow. Claws brown. Abdomen pale g oreen,

Length 14 line. An easily aicanamcned species from the shape of the

=
frontal lobes and the almost obsolete stigma. Not uncommon on the sea buckthorn ( Hippophaé

rhamnoides), at Deal, in August. Férster received the above insect from Mr. Haliday
under the name of Alaternz, and so described it. In his
foot-note, Forster says he has doubts as to whether this
specics may not be the Psylla Rhamni, Schrank. That it
is impossible to say, I give that author’s description from
the ** Fauna Boica,” 1. 141, 1249 (1861) :—

“ Chermes Rhamnt. “Wohnort am Kreugbeerstrauche. “Im Junius. « Anmerk. Die Larve griin, flachgedriickt, schildformig,
mit durchscheinigen Lidibe, dee Rand der F liig sleeheen
und des cerundeten Hinterleibes oefranzet. Das vollendete
Insect honne ich nicht.”

-
036 Mr. John Sceott’s Monograph of the

Species 6. ae pyrt. Chermes Pyri, Lin. F. , 1004; S. N. 11. 737, 4;
Fab. EK. S. 1v, 221, te S. “iB 303, 3; De Goer,
Mém. in. 91, 2, t. 9, fig. 1—16 ; Psylla ‘Pyri, Curt. B, i. x0.-665,. 0 . Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. Wks
24; Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 3 i. 463, 5; Psylla apiophila,
Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 78, 26. Dusky red or reddish-yellow, with dark brown streaks
on the mesonotum. ace: lobes about as long as the
crown down the centre, exterior and interior margins
tapering towards the narrow apex, where the divergence
from each other is about equal to the base of either of them. Antenne yellow; Ist joint frequently dusky red; 3—5
black at the apex, 6—10 dark brown or black. lytra
clear, transparent; nerves fine, dark brown or black,
spaces enclosed between them more or less distinctly stained
with fuscous; costal marginal nerve and stigma yellow or
pale red, the latter wide and long. Head dusky red. Crown: posterior margin slightly
but distinctly concave; fovee dark brown; margins of
the central channel more or less yellowish- white. Face:
lobes dusky or reddish-yellow, with the apex sometimes pale,
about as long as the crown down the centre, base some-
what broad, exterior and inner margins tapering towards
the narrow apex, divergence at the latter about equal to
the base of either of them. Antenne yellow, not reaching
to the base of the stigma; Ist jomt frequently dusky red,
3—5 black at the apex, 6—10 dark brown or black ; 4th
about two-thirds the length of the 3rd. Thorax.—Pronotum dusky yellowish-white. Mesonotum
dusky reddish-yellow, anterior portion in front broadly
dark brown or black, with a central, longitudinal line and
posterior margin yellowish-white ; posterior portion with a
fine central, longitudinal, dark-brown line; an almost oval
patch on each side dark brown, and beyond this a broad
streak of the same colour. lytra clear, transparent ;
nerves fine, dark brown or black, spaces enclosed between
them more or less distinctly stained with fuscous down
the centre; costal marginal nerve and stigma yellow or
pale red, the latter wide and long; clayval suture on both
sides more or less broadly and distinctly maregined with
fuscous; apex of the clavus with a short black streak. Wings clear, transparent, costal margin and nerves of the

British species of Psyllide. 537

appendix blackish. Legs yellow or brownish-yellow. Thighs black, apex yellow. Tarsi: 1st and 2nd joints,
or the 2nd only, and claws black. Abdomen dark brown or black; posterior margin of the
segments narrowly reddish or yellow. Length 14 line. The markings on the elytra are a peculiar characteristic
of this species. It lives on pear trees, and is to be found
from June to October. Of its mode of life, Curtis gives
a short account in his B. E. xi. 565, 5. I have only seen
old examples taken by the late Mr. J. C. Dale. Species 7. Psylla salicicola. Psylla salicicola, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 72, 7;
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1. 467, 7; Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. ne 89, 7;

Green, or yellow intermixed with green, or orange
intermixed with streaks of yellowish-white. Face: lobes
longish, about equal in length to the crown down the
centre; base very slightly broader than in the middle,
where the outer margin runs off obliquely towards the
apex, which is more or less broadly rounded. Antenne
yellow; 3—7 joints black at the apex; 9—10 and some-
times the 8th dark brown or black. lytra clear, trans-
parent; nerves, according to the colour of the meso-
sternum, pale or dark; dorsal marginal nerve next the
apex of the clavus with a dark brown or black streak ;
costal stigma somewhat broad and long. Head green or orange. Crown: posterior margin dis-
tinctly concave. Face: lobes longish, about equal in
length to the crown down the centre; inner margin almost
straight, scarcely diverging; base very slightly broader
than in the middle, where the outer margin runs off
obliquely to the apex, which is more or less broadly
rounded. Antenne yellow, reaching to or beyond the
base of the stigma; 3—7 joints black at the apex, 9—10
and sometimes the 8th dark brown or black ; 4th about
three-fourths the length of the 3rd. Thorax: pronotum pale greenish or greenish-white ;
mesonotum in yellow examples with the anterior portion
more or less pale green; posterior portion generally with
four longitudinal greenish-white lines; in orange-coloured
specimens the anterior portion with a narrow longitudinal
central line, and the lateral points pale yellowish-white ;

TRANS. ENT. SOC. 1876.—PART IV. (DEC.) NN

538 Mr. John ss Monograph of the

posterior with a narrow pale yellowish-white line down
each side of the centre, and two others of the same colour
exterior. lytra clear, transparent; nerves pale yellow,
clear, or dark brown, according as the insect is coloured. Costal stigma somewhat broad and long; dorsal marginal
nerve next the clavus with a short dark brown or black
streak. "Legs pale yellow. Zarsi: 2nd joint and elaws
generally dark brown. Abdomen green or brown; in the latter case the margins
of the segments are pale. Length 1}—1} line. Allied to P. crategicola, which insect differs from the
above in the want of the streak on the margin at the apex
of the clavus, the different form of the face-lobes and the
colouration of the antenne. Not uncommon on sallows from June to September. I have also beaten it from larch (Larix communis) in
August. Species 8. Psylla pineti. Psylla pineti, Flor, Rhyn. Livl.1.471,10; Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. ii. 91, 15; Psylla ornata, Meyer, Mitth. schw. ent. Ges. 11. 393. Red, or brown-red, with lighter or darker streaks on the
mesonotum. Face: lobes as long as the crown down the
centre, base somewhat narrow, exterior margin sloping
cently from the base to the middle, afterwards to the apex
almost straight; inner margin straight; divergence mo-
derate. Antenne short, yellowish or reddish-yellow; Ist
joint blackish, 4—5 at the apex black, 6—10 black. £/y-
tra with an extremely faint testaceous tinge, transparent;
nerves fine, ight or dark brown; costal stigma wide and
long. Head reddish or brown-red. Crown: posterior margin
concave. face: lobes red or red-brown, as long as the
crown down the centre, base somewhat narrow, exterior
margin sloping gently from the base to the middle, from
thence to the apex almost straight ; inner margin straight,
apical half almost cylindrical. Antenne yellowish or red-
dish-yellow, short, not reaching to the base of the stigma ;
Ist joint blackish, 4—5 black at the apex, 6—10 black;
4th about three-fourths the length of the 3rd. Thorax: pronotum red; mesonotum red or brown-
red; posterior portion with four pale or red longitudinal
streaks placed one on each side of the centre, and another,

British species of Psyllide. 539

curved, more remote; in dark examples these are some-
times almost obsolete. /ytra with an extremely faint
testaceous tinge, transparent; nerves fine, pale or dark
brown; costal stigma wide, long. Legs yellowish or red-
dish, or brownish-yellow. Thighs pitchy brown: apex
pale or frequently reddish, with a pitchy-black line on
the inside near the upper margin. TYarsi: 2nd jomt and
claws brown. Abdomen, in pale examples, bright green or reddish-
yellow; in dark ones black; side margins narrowly bright
red. Length 14 line barely. Extremely variable in colour on the body; and according
to the colour there, so are all the other portions of the
insect. Mr. Douglas has taken it somewhat commonly on
Scotch fir (Pinus sylvestris), and Dr. Power has also met
with it at Holm Bush, Mickleham, &c., from May to
November. Species 9. Psylla sylvicola. Psylla sylvicola, Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. 11. 90, 11 (1). Orange yellow. Face: lobes about as long as the crown
down the centre; apex narrow; divergence less than the
base of either of them. Antenne somewhat short, not
reaching to the base of the stigma; 3—7 black at the
apex; 8—10 black. Flytra: pale brownish-testaceous,
transparent; nerves yellow, somewhat fine; costal stigma
wide, gradually tapering to the apex. Head orange yellow. Crown: posterior margin con-
cave. Face: lobes orange yellow, or sometimes pale
green, about as long as the crown down the centre; base
somewhat broad; exterior and interior margin slopmg
gradually to the narrow apex; divergence at the latter
less than the base of either of them. Antenne somewhat
short, not reaching to the base of the stigma; 3—7 at
the apex black; 8—10 black; 4—6 together a little
longer than the 3rd. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum orange yellow, without
paler or darker streaks. Elytra pale brownish-testaceous, transparent; nerves
yellow, somewhat fine; costal stigma wide, gradually
tapering to the apex. Legs testaceous. Tarsi: 2nd
joint and sometimes the Ist also brown. Claws brown. Abdomen above yellow; ¢ four basal segments with a

NN2

-
540 Mr. John Scott’s Monograph of the

very fine transverse black line before the pale posterior
margin; genital segments yellow; processes yellow;
extreme apex Pee

Leneth ¢ 1} + line. The sexes are alike in colouring in every respect. It
differs from P. pruni in being larger and paler than that
species, difference in the shape of the frontal lobes and
colouration of the elytra. I have one specimen, taken either at Eltham or Bexley,
in May, 1863; and Dr. Power has taken a few specimens
at Weybridge on birch ( Betula verrucosa). M. Lethierry
has seen the insect, and determined it to be his species. Species 10. Psylla pruni. Chermes Pruni, Scop. Ent. Car. 140, 143 Psyl/a fumi-
pennis and Pruni, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. vy. 76,
22, and 77, 23; Flor, Kennt. Rhyn. 40, 8. Dark red, somewhat-dusky. Face: lobes shorter than
the crown down the centre; base broad, exterior margin
sloping to the somewhat narrow apex more rapidly than
the imner one, divergence moderate. Antenne short,
brownish-y ‘ellow ; 5—6 joints at the apex very narrowly
black, 9—10 black. El ytra semitransparent, brown, ex-
ternal basal cell pale ; costal stigma wide, long, gradually
tapering from the base to the apex. Head dark red. Crown: posterior margin slightly
concave. face: lobes dark red, shorter then the crown
down the centre; base broad, exterior margin sloping to
the somewhat narrow apex more rapidly than the inner
one, divergence moderate. Antenne short, brownish-yel-
low, reaching to or a little beyond the middle of the external
basal cell, 5 —6 joints at the apex very narrowly black,
9—10 black ; ; 4th about three-fourths the length of the 3rd. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum dark red, somewhat dusky. Elytra semitransparent, brown, external basal cell pale ;
nerves stout ; costal stigma wide, long, gradually tapering
from the base to the apex. Legs brownish-yellow. Thighs
black, apex brownish-yellow. Zv%bie brownish-yellow,
apex sometimes darker. Abdomen black, side margins narrowly red. Length 1+ line barely. Apparently a very scarce species, as I have only seen a
specimen taken by ‘Dr. Power at Esher, May 19th. It
is said by Forster to live on the black thorn (Prunus
spinosa). British species of Psyllide. d41

Species 11. Psylla Lowit. Red or somewhat brownish-red, generally with pale
streaks on the mesonotum. ace: lobes as long as the
crown down the centre; base broad, rapidly narrowing to
the middle, from thence to the apex almost parallel, where
they become somewhat divergent. Antenne short, barely
reaching to the base of the stigma. /ytra smoky testa-
ceous, or almost clear, transparent; nerves, in fresh ex-
amples, yellow, inclining to orange, in others dark brown;
stigma moderate, almost regularly narrowed from the base
to the apex; upper arm of the cubitus long, very convex. Head: crown red, posterior margin distinctly concave. Face: lobes reddish or yellowish; base broad, rapidly
narrowing to the middle, from thence to the apex almost
parallel; apex rounded or slightly acute, somewhat di-
vergent. Antenne reddish-yellow, short, barely reaching
to the base of the stigma; 3rd joint short, scarcely longer
than the lst and 2nd together; 4th about four-fifths of
the 3rd; Ist frequently black, or base of 1—2 black; 4—8
at the apex narrowly brown ; 9—10 black. Thorax: pronotum generally yellowish; mesonotum
red or brownish-red; in the latter case the posterior por-
tion with four slightly indistinct pale longitudinal lines,
the two exterior curving round and enclosing the inner,
which are on each side of the centre. lytra smoky tes-
taceous, or almost clear, transparent; greatest breadth
before the apex of the stigma, length equal to about two
and a half times the breadth; nerves yellow, inclining to
orange or dark brown; stigma moderate, almost regularly
narrowed from the base to the apex; upper arm of the
cubitus long, twice the length of the bifurcation, very
convex and approaching the base of the radius. Legs
reddish-yellow. Thighs: 3rd pair sometimes brown at
the base. Tibie yellowish. TYarsi: apex of the 2nd
joint very narrowly and claws dark brown. Abdomen above, in both sexes, deep pitchy-brown,
shining ; posterior margin of the segments very narrowly
red, or sometimes the ¢ reddish, with a dark band across the
segments; ¢ genitalia pale chestnut; ¢ frequently green. Length 14—13 line nearly. Taken abundantly by Mr. Douglas beginning of No-
vember, at Addington, on fir and birch, and by Dr. Power
in February, at Esher. ‘The latter are, no doubt, over-
wintered examples. 542 Mr. John oft’: Monograph of the

Species 12. Psylla crategicola. Psylla crategicola, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 72,6;
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. u. 474, 12; Leth. Hém. Nord,
ed. u1. 91, 14. Green or pale yellow, or yellow and green irregularly
intermixed. Face: lobes somewhat elongate, stoutish at. the base, and narrowing gradually to the shghtly stumpy
apex; length about equal to the crown down the centre. Pro- and meso-notum yellow, or intermixed with green. Elytra clear, transparent, glassy; costal stigma distinct,
whitish. Head: crown pale green or yellow, posterior margin
gently concave. Face: lobes generally pale green, some-
what elongate, proportionately stout at the base, and
tapering gradually to the slightly stumpy apex, where they
somewhat diverge ; length about equal to the crown down
the centre. Antenne yellow, reaching almost to the base
of the stigma; two last joints always, and sometimes the
apex of the 7th and 8th, black; 4th about three-fourths
the length of the 3rd. Thoraz : pro- and meso-notum yellow, or the latter with
the anterior portion more or less green, and the posterior
portion with a broad green space down the centre. Llytra clear, transparent, glassy; nerves fine, pale yellow;
costal stigma distinct, whitish. Legs pale green or
yellowish-green ; claws frequently dark brown or black. Abdomen greenish or yellowish. Length 14 line. A. very delicate species, and somewhat resembling pale
specimens of P. salicicola, to which it is related, but the
different form of the face-lobes, colouring of the antennze,
and want of the dark streak at the apex of the clavus, sail
at once separate them. Very common in May and June on hawthorn ( Crategus
oxyacantha). Species 13. Psylla malt. Psylla Mali, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 72, 8; Flor,

Rhyn. Livl. 1. 476, 13; Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. ii. 91, 16; Psylla rubida, Meyer, Mitth. schw. ent. Ges. il. 393. Green, yellow, red or brown-red. Face: lobes some-

what long, divergent at the apex, about as long as the

British species of Psyllide. 543

crown down the centre; base broad, sides sloping to the
middle; from thence to the apex gently inclined. Antenne
yellow ; 9—10 joints black, or sometimes the last four
dark brown. £lytra transparent, very faintly testaceous ;
nerves pale; costal stigma widish at the base, and termi-
nating about in a line with the apex of the upper arm of
the cubitus. Head: crown, posterior margin slightly concave. Face:
lobes somewhat long, divergent at the apex, about as long
as the crown down the centre ; base broad, sides sloping
to the middle, from thence to the stumpy or slightly
rounded apex gently inclined, inner margin somewhat
straight. Antenne yellow, reaching to about the base of
the radius; 9—10 joints black, or sometimes the last four
dark brown, 4th about two-thirds the length of the third. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum green, yellow, red or
brown-red, sometimes the latter, with very indistinct
indications of pale longitudinal lines. lytra transparent,
with a very faint testaceous tinge; nerves pale, varying
shehtly in depth of colour, according to that of the indi-
vidual; costal stigma widish at the base, and terminating
about in a line with the apex of the upper arm of the
cubitus. Legs yellow; in dark coloured examples some-
times the thighs brownish ; tibi@, apex and tars? brown. Abdomen above green or red, or brown-red; in the
latter case generally the posterior margins of the segments
pale, sometimes the entire abdomen black. Length 14 line. The var. rubida, Meyer-Diir, somewhat resembles
P. salicicola, but it is smaller in size than the last-
named, which has, in addition to the differences in the
antenne and frontal lobes, a short dark streak at the apex
of the clavus. Not uncommon from June to the end of August on
various trees; amongst others I have taken it on birch
and whitethorn. Species 14, Psylla viridissima. Bright green. Face: lobes longer than the crown down
the centre; base broadish; apex somewhat acute; outer
margin concave; divergence at the apex about equal to
the base of either. lytra clear, transparent, 24 times as
long as broad; nerves fine; costal stigma moderate. Head bright green. Crown: posterior margin concave. Ocelli reddish or orange red. Jace: lobes bright green,

544 Mr. John sts Monograph of the

longer than the crown down the centre; base broadish;
apex somewhat acute; outer margin concave; divergence
at the apex about equal to the base of either. Antenne
somewhat brownish; 1—2 joints green, or the latter yellow,
9—10 black. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum green; after death more
or less yellow. lytraclear, transparent, at least 24 times
as long as broad; greatest breadth beyond the middle; nerves
fine, white or slightly clouded towards the apex; costal
stigma pale green, changing to whitish after death, wide
at the base, and gradually tapering to the apex, which is
a little beyond, in a line with the apex of the upper arm of
the cubitus; radius concave in the middle, at which point
it is slightly nearest to the stigma. Legs green. Claws
brownish. Abdomen bright green. Length 14 line. This species belongs to the same group as P. mali and
P. fraxinicola. It is larger than the first of these species,
and about the size of the latter, and may at once be dis-
tinguished from either by its bright green colour. A few
specimens have been taken by Mr. Douglas on the common
buckthorn (Rhamnus catharticus) or apple (he is not
certain which), at Lee, in September; probably a form of
P. mali. Species 15. Psylla fraxinicola. Psylla fraxinicola, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 76, 20;
Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. 11. 89, 5; Psylla unicolor,
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1. 479, 15. Green or yellowish. Face: lobes shorter than the crown
down the centre, exterior margin sloping rapidly to the
stumpy apex. Antenne yellow, 3—8 joints at the apex
narrowly dark brown, 9—10 dark brown. S£/ytra clear,
transparent; apex almost imperceptibly fuscous; nerves
brownish-yellow towards the apex; petiole of the cubitus
and the lower arm subequal or nearly so; costal stigma
long, wide at the base, diminishing gradually to the apex. Head green or yellow. Crown: posterior margin almost
straight. Face: lobes shorter than the crown down the
centre, exterior margin sloping rapidly to the stumpy apex. Antenne yellow, 3—8 joints at the apex narrowly dark
brown, 9—10 dark brown or black, sometimes from the
4th to the apex dusky; 4th and 5th together a little longer
than the 3rd. British species of Psyllide. 545

Thorax: pro- and meso-notum green or yellow, without
paler longitudinal lines. /ytra clear, transparent; apex
almost imperceptibly fuscous; nerves from the base to the
apex of the petiole yellow, from thence to the apex brownish-
yellow; petiole of the cubitus and the lower arm subequal or
nearly so. Costal stigma sometimes greenish, long, wide
at the base, diminishing gradually to the apex. Legs
yellow. Claws frequently brown. Abdomen entirely green or yellow. Length 14 line. A good character for the identification of this from other
ereen species, as pointed out by Forster, is the shortness
of the lower arm of the cubitus, which is only a little longer
than the petiole. I have met with this species in the Isle
of Wight in July, and in this neighbourhood, on ash trees
(Fraxinus excelsior), m August and September, but not
commonly. M. Lethierry says he finds it on elm. Dr.
Power has taken it at Balmuto (Fifeshire). Species 16. Psylla fraxint. Chermes Fraxini, Lin. F. 8S. 264, 1013; S. N. i. 739,
15; Fab. E. 8S. iv. 223, 15; S. BR. 305, 15; Scop. Ent. Carn. 140,415; Psylla Fraxina, Curt, B. E.
xu. 565 and pl. ; Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 80, 31;
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1. 481, 16; Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. 1478945. Yellow, or sometimes slightly orange. Head and
mesonotum with black patches and streaks. ace: lobes
much shorter than the crown down the centre, in outline
somewhat pyramidal. Antenne yellow, 4—6 joints black
at the apex, 7—10 black. lytra clear, transparent ;
nerves and costal stigma yellow, except when intercepted
by the fuscous black-mar kings. Head: crown generally black, side margins yellow or
orange, posterior margin lightly concave. Face: lobes
frequently black, much shorter than the crown down the
middle; in outline somewhat pyramidal. Antenne:
yellow, reaching to beyond the base of the stigma, 4—6
joints black at the apex, 7—10 black, 4th about half as
long as the third. Thorax: pronotum pale yellow ; mesonotum yellow
or orange ; anterior portion with two black triangular
patches in front, and a somewhat square spot on the ‘sides
posteriorly, in the channel; posterior portion with four
longitudinal, broad, biack streaks, not unfrequently jomed

546 Mr. John i's Monograph of the

in front and forming a fj-shaped character. lytra clear,
transparent; nerves fine, pale yellow, except where they are
intercepted by the fuscous-black markings, when they
become black; costal stigma moderate, its inner nerve very
finely mar sined with black exteriorly ; dorsal margin at
the base with a short black str eak, from thence to the apex
of the clavus yellow, nerve adjoining the latter margined
with fuscous-black on each side; round the apex a broad,
irregular fuscous-black band, frequently more or less
interrupted or entirely wanting. Wings clear, transparent ;
dorsal margin at the base fuscous-black. ‘Legs yellow. Thighs w ith a black line along the upper margin. Zarsi:
2nd joint at the apex and claws black. Abdomen black ; posterior margin of the segments more
or less broadly yellow. Length 14 line. Unlike any other species known to me in its markings. A common species on ash-trees (fraxinus excelsior)
from June to September. Species 17. Psylla ferruginea. Psylla ferruginea, Forst. Verh, Ver. Rheinl. v. 79, 29. Reddish or pale brownish-red, with dark red-brown
streaks on the mesonotum. Face: lobes nearly as long as
the crown down the centre; base broad, exterior and inner
margin sloping to the somewhat stumpy apex, where the
divergence is about equal to half the base of either of them. Antenne yellow ; 4—7 joints black at the apex, 8th obscure,
9¥—10 black. £lytra clear, transparent, nerves and costal
stigma clear chocolate-brown ; apex of the nerves and the
spaces enclosed by them on the pale dorsal margin to
round the apex with dark-brown spots. Head reddish. Crown: posterior margin concave. Face:
lobes dark red, nearly as long as the head, sparingly clothed
with pale hairs, base broad, exterior and inner margin
sloping to the somewhat stumpy apex, the latter when seen
from the side is more acuminate; divergence at the apex
about equal to half the base of either of them. Antenne
yellow, reaching to the base of the stigma; 4—7 joints
black at the apex, 8th obscure, 9—10 “black, 4th about
two-thirds the length of the 3rd. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum pale brownish-red ; poste-
rior portion of the latter with four dark red-brown, longi-
tudinal streaks, the two interior somewhat oval im shape. Elytra clear, transparent, nerves and costal stigma gene-

British species of Psyllide. 547

rally clear chocolate-brown, sometimes the costal marginal
nerve and stigma pale red or rose-pink; dorsal margin
from the base to the apex of the clavus brown, terminating
in a short black streak, from thence to round the apex
yellowish-white; nerve adjoining the apex of the clavus
margined with brown on both sides; apex of the other
nerves and an elongate spot in the spaces enclosed by them
on the marginal nerve pitchy brown. ings clear, trans-
parent; costal margin dark fuscous. Legs reddish or
reddish-brown. TZhighs: Ist and 2nd pairs brown at the
base, 3rd entirely dark brown. T%bie reddish, slightly
darker at the apex. Tarsit pale red. Claws brown. Abdomen above black; posterior margin of the seg-
ments narrowly and sides broadly bright red. Length 14 line. The only species with which the above can be confounded
is P. costatopunctata, which it resembles very much in
the markings along the dorsal margin of the elytra. The
last-named, however, is narrower, paler and has different
formed face-lobes. Dr. Puton, in the Ann. Soc. Fr. for
1871, p. 437, refers P. pyrisuga, Forst. to this species as
being only a variety. This appears to me to be a decided
mistake, as Forster does not make mention in his descrip-
tion of any spots on the dorsal margin of that species ; he
simply says: “ Die Fliigel ziemlich wasserhell, mit r6th-
lichem Stigma und ahnlich gefarbten Adern,” and speci-
mens I have from Meyer-Diir fully bear this out. It would appear to be rare with us, as I have only seen
a single example taken by Dr. Power at Cowfold (Sussex )
in May, another by Mr. Bb. Cooke, and two others by Mr.
en beginning of November, on beech (fagus syl-
vatica). Species 18. Psylla costatopunctata. Psylla costatopunctata, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v.
76, 20. Reddish-yellow, with pale yellowish-white _ streaks. Face: lobes slightly clothed with pale hairs; shorter than
the crown down the centre, base broad, exterior margin
sloping to the bluntly-rounded apex, inner margin straight. Antenne yellow; 4—8 joints at the apex black, 9—10
black. Elytra somewhat clear and transparent, nerves
pale yellow; costal stigma yellow, wide and long; apex
of the clavus and adjoining nerve with a black dash, apex

O48 Mr. John Fs Monograph of the

of the other nerves and the spaces between with a black
spot. Head reddish-yellow. Crown: posterior margin some-
what deeply concave, margins of the central channel and a
space round the ocelli pale yellowish-white. Face: lobes
entirely pale yellowish-white, or the apex reddish-yellow,
shorter than the crown down the centre, and _ slightly
divergent at the apex; base broad; exterior margin sloping
to the bluntly -rounded apex, Inner margin straight. An-
tenne yellow, reaching beyond the base of the stigma;
srd joint faintly, 4—8 “distinctly black at the apex, 9—10
black; 4—6 of almost equal length, and each a little
shorter than the 3rd. Thorax: pronotum pale yellowish-white, with a small
reddish-yellow spot on each side behind the ocelli; meso-
notum reddish-yellow; anterior portion with a longitudinal
central line, posterior margin and a transverse line before
the same pale yellowish-white; posterior portion with a
broadish longitudinal line on each side of the centre, a
finer curved one exterior, and the lateral margins pale
yellowish-white; the curved lines appear to form a circle
enclosing two I-shaped characters. /ytra somewhat clear
and transparent, nerves pale yellow; costal stigma yellow,
wide and long; apex of the clavus and the adjoining nerve
with a broad black dash; apex of the remaining nerves
with a small black spot, and alternating with these are four
short, black streaks proceeding from the marginal nerve. Legs yellow, or faintly reddish-yellow. YZarsi: 2nd joint
at the apex narrowly and claws brown. Abdomen above in the ¢ red, down the centre broadly
dark brown, sides broadly pale yellowish-white. Length 14 line. I met with two ? examples, in July and September,
1862, which I suppose must have been captured by
sweeping. Dr. Power has also taken a single specimen at
Mickleham in October. I drster records having received
it from the late Mr. Walker, and there is a specimen in the
British Museum confirming this statement. Species 19. Psylla rhamnicola.,

Red or orange red with red-brown streaks on the meso-
notum. Face: lobes as long as or a little longer than the
crown down the centre; base broad; exterior margin
sloping rapidly for two-thirds its length, inner margin

British species of Psyllide. 549

sloping gently ; from thence to the apex knoblike ; diver-
gence about equal to one-half the base of either of them. Antenne yellow; 4—5 at the apex broadly black, 6—10
black. lytra clear, transparent; nerves somewhat
brownish-yellow, or frequently rose-pink; apex darker;
costal stigma wide, long. Head: crown red or orange; apex narrowly pale yellowish-
white ; posterior margin concave. ace: lobes yellowish-
white or white, sparingly clothed with pale hairs; exterior
margin sloping rapidly for two-thirds its length ; inner
margin sloping gently for the same distance ; from thence
to the apex knoblike, white; round the base of the con-
traction is a fuscous ring. Antenne yellow, reaching to
the base of the stigma; “4—5 broadly black at the apex,
6—10 black; 4th three-fourths the length of the 3rd. Thorax: pronotum pale yellow or yellowish-white, fre-
quently with a fine, more or less interrupted, red line across
the middle; mesonotum red or orange; anterior portion
with a more or less distinct pale central line; posterior
portion with four broad, longitudinal, red-brown streaks
narrowly margined with pale yellowish-white. Elytra
clear, transparent; nerves somewhat brownish-yellow or
rose-pink as far as the bifurcation of the arms of the
cubitus, from thence to the apex darker; costal stigma
wide, long; dorsal margin at the base brownish-yellow,
prolonged into a black streak which terminates at the apex
of the clavus; within the spaces enclosed by the nerves
and adjoining the apical margin is a small, almost obsolete
fuscous-stain. Legs yellow. Tarsi and claws: 1st and
2nd pairs fuscous-brown; 3rd, second joint only and claws
fuscous-brown. Abdomen above more or less red or orange, with a
broad dark streak down the middle in some examples;
3 genital segments greenish-yellow ; plate above brownish ;
processes yellow; apex narrowly brown. Length 1} line. This species belongs to the group in which are P. cos-
tatopunctata and P. ferruginea, but it is larger than
either of these species, has different formed face-lobes and
genitalia, as also much less defined markings round the
apex of the elytra. The only specimens I have seen were taken by Mr.
Douglas and myself on the common buckthorn (Ahamnus
catharticus), at Sanderstead, in August. o
550 Mr. John Scott’s Monograph of the

Species 20. Psylla visci. Psylla Visct, Curt. B. E. xu. 565, 5a; Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 71, 4? * Breadth 22 lines: pale green, becoming ochreous
after death; antenne as long as the body, black at the
apex, each joint, excepting the two basal ones, tipped with
the same colour; superior wings slightly tinged with brown,
with a darker undefined spot on the inferior margin.”

“This I bred in the middle of May from pupz found on
the mistletoe at Rougham by Mr. Ralph Bennet.”

Genus SPANIONEURA, FOrst. *

Head vertical. Crown without the eyes pentagonal,
with a central longitudinal channel and a fovea on each
side; about twice as broad as the length down the centre ;
two anterior sides slightly convex. ace: lobes long,
stout, conic, scarcely diverging at the apex. Antenne
short, 10-jointed ; 1—2 joints short, stout; remainder
filiform, very fine ; 3—4 almost of equal length. Ocelli
three, placed as in the other genera. Thoraz : pronotum narrow, deflected, with a fovea on
each side near the lateral margin; mesonotum as in the
other genera. Elytra lanceolate, radius terminating in
the apex; costal stigma distinct, widest at the mouth and
suddenly narrowed ; “dorsal margin without nervelets. Species 1. Spanioneura Fonscolombei. *

Spanioneura Fonscolombii, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 94. Pale green or reddish-yellow. Face: lobes long,
conical, very finely clothed with short pale hairs. lytra
lanceolate, transparent, with four small black granules on
the dorsal margin in the spaces enclosed by the nerves;
cubitus petiolate. Head pale green or reddish-yellow. Crown pentagonal. Ocelli placed. as in the other genera. Antenne yellowish,
shightly browner towards the apex; 10th joint brown. Eyes reddish-brown. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum pale green or reddish-
yellow ; the former narrow, deflected, with a fovea on each
side near the lateral margin. Elytra clear, transparent ;

—_-_ —-——_——_ mm

* Not yet known to be British. British species of Psyllide. 591

nerves pale greenish or yellowish; dorsal margin with
four small black granules in the spaces enclosed by the
nerves. Legs pale green. Abdomen green. Length 1} line. This genus seems to unite Psylla with Trioza, but
differs from both in the shortness and fineness of the
antenne and the length of the face-lobes. Like Psydla it
has a costal stigma, but the elytra are shaped like those of
Trioza, from which genus it also differs in having the
cubitus petiolate and the nervelets replaced by small
oranules on the dorsal margin. Forster says there are
only three, but my specimens distinctly have four. Baron de Fonscolombe, who gave to Forster the insects
from which his description is made, says he believes he
obtained them from box (Luxus sempervirens), and also
from other plants near Aix. Forster throws doubt upon
the box theory, and perhaps correctly ; but if the insect
was found at Aix, I see no reason against its occurrence
here. The specimens which I possess were kindly presented
to me by M. Lethierry, and are from St. Girons (Ariége),
a department of I’rance bordering on the Pyrenees. Genus Trioza, Forst. Head broader than long. Crown considerably deflected,
divided down the centre bya channel and with a fovea on
each side between the eyes; the space between the former
and the latter slightly raised ; anterior margin more or
less M-shaped; posterior margin more or less concave. Ocelli placed as in Psylla. Face lobate; lobes mode-
rately long, generally triangular in outline, acute at the
apex where the divergence is great. Antenne 10-jointed,
formed as in Psylla, but shorter. Thorax: pronotum very narrow, collar-shaped, de-
flected ; sides with a depression causing the lateral margins
to become more or less lobate. Mesonotum and scutellum
as in Psylla. lytra generally transparent, lanceolate,
more or less acute at the apex; costal margin convex,
without a stigma; spaces enclosed by the nerves along
the dorsal margin with three nervelets; upper branch of
the upper arm “of the cubitus terminating almost in the
apex; cubitus not petiolate. The lanceolate form of the elytra with the three nerve-

-
552 Mr. John Scott’s Monograph of the

lets, the cubitus without a petiole, and the short antenna,
sufficiently indicate the difference between this genus and
that of Psylla. Species 1. Zrioza Walkeri. Trioza Walkeri, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 88, 23 ;
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1. 496, 1. Long and narrow, entirely brown, or more frequently
with a more or less interrupted white band across the
middle of the elytra, and before the apex a somewhat
triangular white patch. Head pale or dark brown, clothed with short, semi-
erect pale hairs. Crown less deflected than ordinary. Face: lobes dark brown, not so long as the crown down
the centre; base broad; apex stumpy; exterior margin
convex, only slightly divergent at the apex. Antenne
yellow ; Ist joint entirely, 2nd at the base dark brown ; 4th
and 6th, apex narrowly black ; 9—10, or sometimes 8—10,
black, 4th about three-fourths the length of the 3rd. Thorax: pronotum generally pale brown; mesonotum
dark brown, clothed with short, semi-erect, pale hairs;
anterior portion generally with a central longitudinal line,
and the lateral margins pale; posterior portion with four
pale longitudinal lines, placed one on each side of the
centre, somewhat broad, and one narrower, a little more
remote. lytra aaa semi-transparent, weriniled trans-
versely, and thickly powdered with dark-brown atoms;
across the middle a more or less interrupted irregular
white band, very broad on the costal margin, spmieiines
almost pbealeve between the radius and cubitus, but always
distinct between the nerves adjoining the apex of the
clavus, sometimes the entire elytra are brown; costal
margin very convex from the base to almost the apex of
the radius, where it is suddenly cut off obliquely to the
acute apex, before which is a somewhat triangular white
patch. Legs yellow. Thighs generally dark brown at
the base. V'arsi: 2nd joint sometimes at the apex red. Claws brown. Abdomen above black; posterior margin of the seg-
ments very narrowly and sides red. Length 13—2 lines. The colour and peculiar manner in which the costal
margin is cut off towards the apex is sufficient to separate
the above from all other species. British species of Psyllide. 553

Taken by Mr. Douglas and myself somewhat abun-
dantly on blackthorn (Prunus spinosus), on Mickleham
Downs in August, and by Dr. Power on the spindle
tree (Huonymus europeus), near Addington, in October. Dr. Flor has taken it on the common buckthorn (Rhamnus
catharticus ). In the collection of Mr. B. Cooke are two ? examples
of a remarkable variety of this species, in which the elytra
are entirely pale, almost white, with only a few fuscous
atoms seattered across the middle of the disk, and for
which I propose the name albipennis. They were taken
by him at the same time and place as the others. Species 2. Zrioza urtice. Chermes Urtice, Lin. F. 8. 263, 1006; S. N. 1. 738,
8; De Geer, Mém. 11. 87, 1, t. 9, fig. 17—26, and
t. 10, fig. 1—7; Zett. I. L. 308, 4; Psylla Urtice,
Burm. Handb. 1. 98, 3; Psylla eupoda, Hartig,
Zeits. 11. 374, 8; ZLrioza Urtice, eupoda, protensa
and forcipata, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 82, 1, 3,
4 and 84,10; Trioza Urtice, Flor, Khyn. Livl. 1. 505, 7; Trioza bicolor, Meyer, Mitth. schw. ent. Ges. i. 391. Fuscous-yellow, yellow, orange, red or black, with
brown or black streaks on the mesonotum in the first and
third forms. Face: lobes black ; base more or less broadly
pale, longer than the crown down the centre. lytra
somewhat elongate, clear, transparent or sometimes very
faintly testaceous; apex obtuse; nerves pale yellow;
distance of the radius at its base from the costal nerve
about equal to that from the cubitus. Head: crown yellow or dark brown; in the latter case
generally with the anterior margin pale or fuscous-yellow ;
posterior margin almost straight. Mace: lobes black,
base more or less broadly yellow, rarely entirely black, or
sometimes yellow with the apex black, longer than the
crown down the centre, acuminate, considerably divergent
at the apex. Antenne black; 2—3 jomts white, 4th
brownish, base white; 4th barely half the length of the
3rd. Thorax: pronotum fuscous-yellow or yellow; meso-
notum fuscous-yellow, yellow, orange, red or black; in the
last case with the sides broadly red; in the Ist and 38rd
with four brown or black longitudinal streaks on the

TRANS. ENT. SOC. 1876.—PART IV. (DEC.) OO

554 Mr. John Mi Monograph of the

posterior portion, placed one in a line with each extremity
of the scutelliform process, and another generally broader
than the last nearer the lateral margin. /lytra some-
what elongate, clear, transparent, or sometimes very
faintly testaceous ; apex obtuse or sometimes bluntly
rounded ; nerves pale yellow; radius at the base about
equidistant from the costal margin and the cubitus, its
apical half shehtly convex tow ards the anterior margin. Legs fuscous-yellow. Thighs yellow, with a broad black
longitudinal line somewhat on the inside, near the upper
margin, generally extending to the apex. Tvbie: apex
frequently brown. Tarsi and claws pitchy brown. Abdomen above brown or black, posterior margin of
the segments narrowly greenish or yellowish-green ; be-
neath generally green. Length 14—13 lhne. Var. bicolor, Meyer-Diir. Head and thorax deep
yellow. Abdomen green; all the other characters as
above. ‘Types in my possession. Allied to 7. albiventri “ts, from which it may be recog-
nized by the difference in colour and divergence of the
face-lobes, and more particularly by the radius, which is
almost one-half further distant from the costal nerve. Perhaps the most common and variable species of the
genus, and may be swept from nettles (Urtica dioica, §c.) from May to October. Species 3. Zrioza viridula. Chermes viridula, Zett. I. Li. 309, 7; Psylla simplex,
Hartig, Zeits. 11. 374, 6? Vrioza apicalis, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 82,2; Zrioza viridula, Flor,
Rhyn. Livl. 1. 499, 3. Pale green. £lytra clear, with a glassy or crystalline
transparence. Head pale green. Face: lobes at the apex brown or
black, shorter than the crown down the centre, moderately
divergent; apex acuminate. Antenne whitish or yellowish-
white ; apex of the 8th joint and 9—10 entirely black;
srd twice as long as the 4th. Thorax pale green. £lytra clear, with a glassy or
crystal transparence ; costal margin convex, somewhat
abruptly curved from and at the oreatest breadth of the
corium, which lies a little before the apex of the radius, to
the stumpy, almost acute apex; nerves clear. Legs pale

British species of Psyllide. 559

green or greenish-yellow. TZarsi: 2nd joint entirely, or
apex only, and claws brown. Abdomen pale green. Leneth 13 line. The delicacy and transparency of this species will sepa-
rate it from all others. Flor says that it is not uncommon with him from June
to October, upon the spruce fir (Pinus abies). I have
only met with two examples; one in the August of this
year, amongst rubbish at the bottom of a hedge, and the
other in September, 1869, in the Sallow Pit, Lee. Species 4. Trioza galii. Trioza Galt, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 87, 19;
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. u. 511, 9; Leth. Hém. Nord,
ed. u. 92, 2; Trioza velutina, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 87, 20? ; Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1. 513, 10? ;
Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. 1. 92, 2? ; Zriozu thoracica,
Flor, Rhyn. Livi. u. 514. Black, shining. Face: lobes short, outline somewhat
pyramidal. Antenne black; 2nd joint at the apex and
3rd entirely white. lytra very pale brownish-testa-
eeous, transparent; apex not acuminate. Head black, shining, Face: lobes not so long as the
crown down the centre; base broad; outline somewhat
pyramidal. Antenne black; 2nd jomt at the apex and
3rd entirely white; 4th not halfas long as the third. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum black, shining; the latter
at the insertion of the elytra brownish-yellow. £lytra
very pale, brownish-testaceous, transparent, a little more
than twice as long as broad ; apex not acuminate; dorsal
margin and wings at the base with a small black dash. Legs black. Thighs: apex brownish-yellow. Tvibie white,
base entirely fuscous, apex slightly brownish. TZarsz:
2nd joint at the apex and claws fuscous. Abdomen black; base reddish ; posterior margin of the
seoments very narrowly red. Length 14 line nearly. After carefully reading and comparing the description
of 7. galit and velutina, as set forth both by Forster and
Flor, I have come to the conclusion that the differences
are more imaginary than real, and I have therefore ranked
them as one species only, until I have examined more
specimens. Haliday had collected this species in Ireland, as men-

O02

556 Mr. John SM: Monograph of the

tioned by Forster; and the only specimens of recent cap-
ture T have seen are one taken by Dr. Power at Darenth,
in June, another at Lee, in August, and a third by
Mr. Douglas. According to Haliday, he found T. galii
on the yellow ladies’ bed-straw (Galium verum); and
Lethierry says he takes 7. velutina very commonly upon
the same plant in August and September. Species 5. Trioza acutipennis. Chermes acutipennis, Zett. I. Li. 308, 5; Trioza acuti-
pennis, Flor, Rhyn. Livl. nu. 516, 12; nec Lorst. Trioza Saundersi, Meyer, Mitth. schw. ent. Ges. u. 390. Black. Face: lobes black, somewhat broad at the
base, not longer than the crown down the centre. An-
tenne yellowish-white ; 1—2 joints black, 4th, 6th and
8th narrowly brown at the apex, 9—10 black. Elytra pale
brownish-testaceous, transparent; apex acute; nerves pale. Head black, shining. Crown: posterior margin straight. Face: lobes black, somewhat brvad at the base, not longer
than the crown down the centre; exterior and imner
margins gradually sloping to the somewhat acute apex,
where the divergence is less than the base of either of
them. Antenne yellowish-white, 1—2 joints black, 4th,
6th and 8th narrowly brown at the apex, 9—10 black ;
4th about ?# the length of the 3rd, apex slightly thicker
than the base of the 5th. Thorax: pronotum black; lobate side margins yellow;
mesonotum black; at the base of the elytra red. Elytra
pale brownish-testaceous, transparent; apex acute; nerves
pale; radius straight, or very shghtly bent before the
apex; pro- and meso-sternum black; metasternum generally
red. Legs yellow or brownish-yellow. Thighs pitchy
black; apex yellow or brownish-yellow. TYarsi: 2nd
joint more or less dark brown. Claws dark brown. Abdomen above black; ¢ genital segments pale
brownish-yellow. Length 14 line. I have hesitated to refer the 7. acutipennis, Forst.,
to this species, as the differences he points out in the
antennz and elytra are so much at variance with that
of Zetterstedt. There is no doubt, however, but that the
T’. Saundersi, Meyer-Diir, belongs here, as I possess the
specimens which he sent to Mr. Saunders, with his own
label attached. British species of Psylide. O57

I have only seen a few specimens, although on the
Continent it is said to be common in damp places from

May to October. Species 6. Trioza hematodes. Trioza hematodes, Korst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 85, 13;
Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. ii. 93, 5. Klongate, brown-red, with paler streaks upon the meso-
notum. Face: lobes brownish-yellow. Antenne black;
Ist and 2nd joints brown, 3rd yellow. lytra clear,
transparent; nerves pale brown; radius short, space
enclosed between it and the costal nerve lanceolate. Head: crown orange reddish. ace: lobes brownish-
yellow, as long as the crown down the centre; base
moderate; ner margin diverging from about the middle
to the paewl at acute ape Caan black; Ist and
2nd joints brown, 3rd yellow, 4th not $ the length of the
ord. Thorax: pronotum pale; mesonotum brown-red, pos-
terior portion with four somewhat brownish-yellow longi-
tudinal streaks; scutelliform appendage yellow, with a
faint reddish hue. /ytra elongate, clear, transparent,
nerves pale brown; costal and dorsal margin almost
equally rounded towards the somewhat acute apex; radius
short, about equal in length to the costal margin of the
basal cell; enclosed space lanceolate. Legs slightly dusky
yellow. Thighs with a dark streak along the inside near
to the upper margin. TZarsi: Ist jomt dusky, 2nd and
claws black. Abdomen above brown ; posterior margin of the segments
narrowly paler; beneath yellowish, ¢ genital segments
and processes yellow, apex of the latter narrowly brown. Length 13 line. Somewhat resembling 7. Urtice in some points, but
differmg from that species in the shape of the elytra, the
short, plese straight radius and enclosed lanceolate space,
and as also frequen tly having a slight fuscous shade along
the dorsal margin before the apex of the clavus. The insects ticketed 7’ forcipata by Meyer-Diir, which
are in my possession, belong to the above species. Taken both by Dr. Power and Mr. Douglas: by the
latter at Addington, end of October, on fir, and by the
former in I ebruary at Hsher. 558 Mr. John Wt. Monograph of the

Species 7. Zrioza salicivora. Trioza salicivora, Reuter (MS.). Orange red. Elytra clear, pale brownish-testaceous,
transparent ; costal margin curved somewhat recularly
from beyond the external “basal cell to the somewhat acute
apex. Head: crown orange red. Face: lobes orange yellow,
scarcely as long as the crown down the centre; base
broad; apex somewhat acuminate; divergence about equal
to 2 » of the base of either. -Antenne white; Ist and 2nd
joints somewhat fuscous at the base, 3rd and 4th slightly
clavate; apex narrowly brown; 8—10 black, 4th about 3
the length of the 3rd. Thorax orange red. Elytra clear, pale brownish-tes-
taceous, transparent; costal margin curved somewhat
regularly from beyond the external basal cell to the some-
what acute apex. Legs pale orange yellow. TYarsi: 2nd
joint, apex and claws fuscous-black. Abdomen, $, above somewhat orange yellow; base
orange red. Length 14 line. We have no other British species for which it is likely
to be mistaken. I have only seen a single ¢ example taken by Dr.
Power at Balmuto, Fifeshire. Species 8. Trioza albiventris. Trioza albiventris, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 84, 8;
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1. 503, 6. Reddish-yellow or yellow-reddish, with two generally
M-shaped characters on the mesonotum. Face: lobes
black, longer than the crown down the centre, slightly
divergent ‘at the apex. lytra clear, transparent, apex
sents: ; dorsal margin for about 3 its length from the base
somewhat moderately and regularly curved, from thence
to the apex more abrupt; radius long, apical half curved
and running’ parallel with the costal margin. Head: crown black, margin yellowish-red ; posterior
margin very slightly concave. ace black; lobes black,
longer than the crown down the centre, regularly tapering
from the base to the somewhat acute apex; divergence
trifling. Antenne black; 1—3 joints bone white, 4th
about half the length of the 3rd. Thorax: pronotum yellow-reddish, with a short, trans-
verse, fine, black line posteriorly next the lateral margin;

British species of Psyllide. 559

mesonotum reddish-yecllow, or yellowish-red; anterior por-

tion with a large more or less dark red-brown streak on each
side, not reaching the posterior margin; posterior portion
with two more or less dark red-brown M-shaped charac-
ters; scutelliform process usually yellowish, with a more
or less distinct brown or reddish-brown spot in the middle. El ytra clear, transparent, apex acute; dorsal margin for
about 3 its lenoth from the base somewhat moder ately anc
regularly curved or shehtly flattened in the middle, from
thence to the apex more abrupt; radius long, basal half
almost straight, from thence curving round towards. and
running parallel with, the costal margin, until just before
its termination, when it suddenly recurves ; nerves at the
base white, apical half yellowish or brownish. Legs
yellow. Thighs along the upper margin with a broadish
black streak, not reaching to the base. Tibie: Ast and
2nd pairs fuscous-yellow or dark brown, 3rd pale yellow. Tarsi: 1st and 2nd pairs more or less dark brown, 3rd
yellow; 2nd joint at the apex frequently brownish. Abdomen above black, beneath pale yellowish-green
or green, becoming white or bone white after death. Length 12 line. This insect stands nearer to 7. urtice than any other
of our at present known to me British species, but differs
from it in the colouration of the antenne, in having entirely
black face-lobes, a long and peculiarly-formed radius much
nearer to the dorsal mar gin throughout its entire length
than is usual, of itself an excellent distincuishing char acter,
and the abdomen beneath white after death, apart fre
other differences in the genitalia. I have only seen a few examples taken by Mr. Douglas
at Addington in October, both on fir and birch. Genus APHALARA. Head much broader than long. Crown considerably
deflected, divided down the centre by a channel and with
a deep fovea on each side; anterior margin more or less
M-shaped; posterior margin more or less angulate. Ocelli minute, placed as in “the other genera, the frontal
one not perceptible from — e. Face without lobes. Antenne 10-jointed, short; 9—10 slightly thickened; all
the others as in Psylla. Ex st placed on the side of the
head; inner margin almost parallel with the central
channel; outer margin very convex. 060 Mr. John SF: Monograph of the

Thorax: pronotum narrow, more or less deflected or
almost horizontal, with two foveze on each side frequently
connected by a channel ; ; lateral margins rounded, almost
in a line with the outer margin of the eyes. Mesonotum
as in Psylla and Trioza. Elytra semi-transparent,
rounded at the apex; cubitus petiolate, the petiole about
4 the length of the lower arm; stigma obsolete. Resembles Psylla through havi ing a rounded apex to
the elytra and the cubitus petiolate, ‘and Trioza through
its having no stigma: and it differs from both in the shape
of the head and the two slightly thickened terminal joints
of the antenne. Species 1. Aphalara exilis. Tettigonia exilis, Weber et Mohr, Nat. Reise, 65, t. 1,
fie. 2 (1804); Chermes exilis, Fallén, Hem. Suec. i. 80; Aphalara exilis, Forst. Verh. Ver. Kheinl. v.
89, 2; Flor, Rhyn. Livl. n. 532, 1; JLeth.. Hém. Nord, ed. 1. 94, 1,

Greyish-yellow, orange or reddish-y allow, with paler
streaks on’ the mesonotum. Antenne pale yellow or
sometimes whitish ; 1—2 and 9—10 joints black. lytra
white, transparent, more or less thickly sprinkled with
fuscous or fuscous-black spots, which are more or less
confluent; before the apex a broad transverse fuscous-
black band more or less interrupted. Head: crown in front on each side of the channel
shehtly produced into a lobe with rounded top. Antenne
pale yellow or sometimes whitish; Ist jomt entirely and
base of the 2nd black; 9—10 black. Thorax: pronotum pale; mesonotum greyish-yellow
or reddish-yellow ; posterior portion with four pale, more
or less distinct in certain individuals, longitudinal lines. Elytra white, transparent, with a somewhat frosted ap-
pearance when the insect is in repose, more or less thickly
sprinkled with fuscous or fuscous-black spots, which are
more or less confluent ; before the apex a broad transverse
fuscous-black band, generally more or less interrupted and
spotted with the ground colour; dorsal margin with three
fuscous or fuscous-black patches, placed, one a short dis-
tance from the base, one a short distance from the apex of
the clavus, and the 3rd margining the nerve adjoming the
latter; nerves white or yellow. ‘Legs yellow. Zhighs in
the middle broadly dark brown or black. Claws dark
brown. British species of Psyllide. d61

Abdomen black; sides and posterior margin of the seg-
ments narrowly yellow; genital seements of both sexes
yellow. Length 1 line. The broad appearance of this species, its white elytra,
with the dark atoms and band before the apex, render it
unmistakeable. Flor gives its size as greater than A. polygoni, but this
is evidently an error. Dr. Power has taken it somewhat
commonly at Weybridge from June to October, and I have
an old example from Mr. T. Wilkinson, taken near Scar-
borough. Species 2. Aphalara polygoni. Aphalara polygoni, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 20, 3 ;
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1. 534, 2; Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. 11. 95, 4. Orange red or reddish-yellow, with pale streaks on the
mesonotum. Antenne somewhat dusky yellow; Ist jomt
entirely, and 2nd at the base, reddish-brown or brown;
9—10 black. lytra pale testaceous or yellowish; apex
eenerally somewhat fuscous; dorsal margin with a short
streak before the apex of the clavus, and margin of the
adjoining nerve, black. Head: crown red or orange red; margin of the central
channel at the base frequently whitish. Antenne some-
what dusky yellow; 1st joint entirely, and 2nd at the base,
reddish-brown or brown; 9—10 black. Thorax: pronotum generally pale; frequently with a small
red or brownish spot in the middle, and the foveze brown ;
mesonotum orange red or reddish-yellow ; anterior portion
with a longitudinal central line, and the sides whitish or
yellowish-white; posterior portion with four whitish or
yellowish-white longitudinal lines; lateral margin whitish
or yellowish-white. lytra pale testaceous or yellowish,
apex generally somewhat fuscous; nerves pale or dark
brown in certain positions, appearing as though margined
with yellowish; dorsal margin, before the apex of the
clavus, with a short black streak, and the adjoming nerve
margined on both sides with black ; sometimes these last cha-
racters are obsolete; clavus, apex frequently white. Legs
pale brownish-yellow or yellow. Thighs on the inside, near
the upper margin, generally with a brownish or blackish
longitudinal streak. Tarsi: 2nd joint at the apex fus-
cous. Claws brown. 562 Mr. John es Monograph of the

Abdomen dark brown or black; posterior margin of the
segments narrowly yellow. ‘Length 1—14 line. The black streak on the clavus will serve to distinguish
this species from either of the other two. Dr. Power has taken it somewhat commonly on birch,
at. Birch Wood, in May and June; Mr. Douglas, two or
three examples, on fir, in October; and I have also one
from Esher. Messrs. Walker and Haliday also met with
it, the latter on the sorrel (Rumex acetosella). It occurs
from May to the end of October. Species 3. Aphalara radiata. Yellow or yellowish-green, with darker longitudinal
streaks on the mesonotum. Antenne yellowish; Ist and
2nd joints, except the apex of the latter, dark brown ; 9—10
black. lytra white, almost transparent, about two and a
half times as long as broad; nerves yellowish or brownish-
yellow ; internal basal cell with a fuscous-brown spot in
the middle; the four branches of the arms of the cubitus
and base and apex of the radius margined with fuscous-
brown. Head: crown yellowish or yellowish-green; posterior
margin slightly concave. Antenne yellowish ; Ist and
ond joints “dark brown, apex of the latter pale; 9—10
black. Thorax: pronotum pale ; ; mesonotum yellow or yellow-
ish-green ; posterior portion with two br oad, longitudinal
dark-brown streaks on either side. Klytra w hite, almost
transparent, about two and a half times as long as broad ;
nerves yellowish or brownish-y ellow; internal basal cell
with a fuscous-brown spot in the middle; base and apex
of the radius with a large fuscous-brown spot, the latter
divided by a white streak next the costal margin; the
four branches of the arms of the cubitus margined with
fuscous-brown, widest at the marginal nerve, and joined
internally by an irregular transverse fuscous-brown band,
thereby giving a somewhat radiated character to the mark-
ings; base of the cell between the arms of the cubitus with
a fuscous-brown spot. Legs yellow. Claws brown. Abdomen dark brown or blackish; posterior margin of
the segments narrowly yellow; ¢ genital processes yellow;
apex black. Length 1—14 line. Very similar to A. nervosa, Forst., but distinguishable

British species of Psyltide. 563

from that species by the spot in the internal basal cell, the
irregular transverse band connecting the fuscous-brown
margins of the branches of the cubitus, and the spot at the
base of the cell of the latter. |

As regards the colouring of the pro- and meso-notum,
the description may be found hereafter to be defective,
because the specimens from which the foregoing has been
drawn up are very old, and have been submerged along
with the other valuables of the Rev. T. A. Marshall. There are four or five specimens in his collection taken
at Cheltenham. Species 4. Aphalara picta. Chermes picta, Zett. I. L. 308, 3; Aphalara flavi-
pennis, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 89, 1; Leth. Hém. Nord, ed. 1. 95,4; Aphalara Sonchi, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 96,2; Aphalara picta, Flor,
Rhyn. Livl. 1. 539, 6. Greenish-yellow or dusky yellow, with darker streaks
on the mesonotum. Antenne yellowish; Ist and 2nd
joints underneath brown; 9—10 black. lytra clear, or
sometimes faintly yellowish and sprinkled with pale brown
towards the apex. Head greenish-yellow, or dusky yellow. Antenne
yellowish ; 1st and 2nd joints underneath more or less
brown; 4—8 very narrowly brown at the apex; 9—10 black. Thorax: pronotum pale greenish-yellow; mesonotum
pale yellowish-green or dusky yellowish; anterior portion
with two small reddish-brown triangular patches in front ;
posterior portion with four broad, pale brown or yellowish-
brown longitudinal streaks. lytra clear, or sometimes
faintly yellowish, transparent; nerves yellow, their margins
and the spaces enclosed by them more or less thickly
sprinkled with pale brown, the particles more or less
confluent ; sometimes the nerves towards, and at the apex,
brown. Legs greenish or dusky yellowish. TZarsi: 2nd
joint sometimes brownish. Claws brown. Abdomen above fuscous-black; posterior margin of
the segments narrowly, and sides broadly, green; under-
neath green. Length 123—2 lines. The largest of all the known
European species. It appears to be a very common species on the
Continent, occurring in damp meadows from June to the

| -
564 Mr. John Scott’s Monograph of the

end-of August. I have only seen two examples, one
taken by Dr. Power, the other by Mr. Douglas. Forster
mentions haying received it both from Messrs. THaliday

and Walker. Genus RHINOCOLA

Head much broader than lone. Crown deflected, with
a shallow fovea on each side: central channel obsolete ;
anterior margin convex ; posterior margin faintly concave. Ocelli as in ~ Aphalar a. Face without lobes. Antenne
10-jointed, very short; 9—10 slightly thickened, 3rd
elongate, 4—10 about equal in length. yes placed on
the side of the head ; outer margin convex. Thorax: pronotum narrow, somewhat deflected or
horizontal; lateral margins about in a line with the outer
margin of the eyes. lytra not transparent, somewhat
lanceolate; apex rounded; costal margin more convex
than the dorsal one ; stigma distinct. In this and the preceding ¢ eenus the crown and face
appear as continuous, and not separated as in Psylla and
Trioza. Differs from Aphalara im the shape of the head and the
elytra, and moreover possesses a stigma. The species of this genus are minute. Species 1. Rhinocola erice. Psylla Erice, Curt. B. E. xu. 565, 25; Rhinocola Erica,
Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 91, 2; Flor, Rhyn. Livl. ll. 527, 2. Green, greenish-yellow or yellow. Antenne yellow;
three terminal joints frequently brown. Elytra testaceous,
semitransparent, finely wrinkled transversely. Head: crown, posterior margin straight. Antenne
yellow; 8—10 joints frequently brown. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum green, greenish-yellow or
yellow. lytratestaceous, semitransparent, finely wrinkled
transversely, narrowed towards the apex; disk with or
without minute brownish particles. Legs greenish-yellow
or yellow. Claws brown. Abdomen green; genital segments of both sexes yellow,
or sometimes in the r faintly “brownish-y ellow. Length ? line. The small size and more broadly-rounded apex of the
elytra will at once establish the difference between this
and the following species. Messrs. Walker and [aliday

British species of Psyllide. 565

both knew it as mentioned by F’6rster, but I have seen no
recent specimens, except those taken by myself by sweeping
heather in a portion of the New Forest near Fawley, in
June last. Species 2. Rhinocola aceris. Chermes Aceris, Lin. F. 8. 264, 1014; S. N. 11. 739, 16. Green or yellow. Antenne pale green or yellow, apical
joint brown. L/ytra testaceous, scarcely transparent, finely
wrinkled transversely. /ead: crown almost horizontal;
much broader than long; posterior margin straight. An-
tenne pale green or yellow, apical joint brown. Thorax: pro- and meso-notum green or yellow. lytra
testaceous, scarcely transparent, finely wrinkled transversely;
radius extending to the middle of the narrowly-rounded
apex. Legs pale green or yellow. Claws brown. Abdomen green; % genital segments yellow. Length 12 line. Nearly one-half as large again as #. ertce; without
brown particles on the elytra, and with the apex much
more narrowly rounded. I have only seen a single ? example taken by Dr. Power. Mr. Douglas informs me that on Monday evening last,
12th June, he met with it plentifully in Farm Lane, Lee,
on the common maple (Acer campestris). Genus Livia, Latr. Head horizontal; as long as the breadth on the posterior
margin. Crown in front divided into two lobes by a deep
valley, with a channel down the centre. Face not lobate. Antenne short, 10-jointed; 2nd joimt somewhat pyriform
or conate, apex truncate, much longer than the Ist; 3rd
stouter than the remainder, which are filiform. Thorax: pronotum lemniscular. Eh ytra longish oval,
coriaceous; radius reaching the apex above the middle;
upper branch of the bifurcation of the cubitus adjoining
the radius terminating in the middle. Species 1. Livia juncorum. Livia Juncorum, Latr. Gen. Crust. et Ins. 11. 170, 399, 1;
Enc. Méth. x. 225, 1; Germ. F. E. fase. vi. t. 21:
Burm. Hdb. ii. 97, 1; Cuv. R. A. t. 99 bis, fig. 2;

566 Mr. John Poiv's Monograph of the

Curt. B. E. xi. 492 and pl. ; Zett. I. L. 306, 1; Am. et Serv. Hém. 596, 1; Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v.
91; Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1. 542, 1; Leth. Hém. Nord,
ed. il. 95. Brownish or reddish-pink. lytra pale fuscous-tes-
taceous; very finely wrinkled transversely. Head: crown brownish or reddish-pink. Antenne red
or reddish-pink; 4—8 joints white, 9—10 black; 2nd
somewhat pyriform or conate, apex truncate, at least three
times longer than the Ist. Thorax: pro-and meso-notum brownish or brownish-red. Elytra pale fuscous-testaceous, semitransparent, very
finely wrinkled transversely; nerves concolorous; dorsal
marginal nerve whitish, with minute fuscous spots at some-
what regular intervals between the apex of the clavus and
that of the radius. Legs pale yellow. Claws brownish. Abdomen above fuscous-yellow or brownish, sometimes
with the posterior margin of the segments very narrowly
pale reddish; underneath yellow. Length 1 line. On rushes (Juncus conglomeratus), &c. everywhere from
June to the end of August. The following descriptions are extracted from Forster’s
Monograph, so copiously referred to in this paper. All
the species had been taken either by Mr. Haliday or Mr.
Walker, or sometimes by both, and were sent to and
determined by Dr. Forster. Specimens of none of these
have come under my notice. Species 21. Psylla ulmi. Chermes ulmi, Lin. F. S. 262, 1002; S. N. i. 737, 2;
Fab. E. 8. iv. 221, 2; S. RK. 303, 2; Psylla Ulmi,
Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 71, 5. Green, with a slight mixture of yellow; extreme tip of
the antennze brown,—é¢ sometimes the last joint, 2 the
two last (or the antennz are entirely yellowish). Face:
lobes somewhat long, broad from the base to the middle,
but from there to the apex perceptibly smaller. £lytra
clear, transparent; nerves pale yellow. Note.—Nothing is said about the stigma. This species was taken by Mr. Walker. British species of Psyllide. 567

Species 22. Psylla melanoneura. Psylla melanoneura, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 75,
Lie

Reddish-yellow. A/esonotum posteriorly with pale mark-
ings. Abdomen above with brown bands, beneath pale. Antenne: 3—6 joints at the apex and the remainder
almost entirely brown. Face: lobes long, strongly nar-
rowed to the apex. /lytra clear, transparent; nerves
pale at the base, from the middle deep brown; inner
margin, almost as far as the nerve adjoining the apex of
the clavus, pale brownish (in one example the stigma 1s
similarly coloured). A single ¢ received from Mr. Walker. Species 23. Psylla eruginosa. Psylla eruginosa, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 97, 6. Green. Jesonotum posteriorly with reddish-yellow
markings. Antenne and legs yellow, the former from the
3—8 joimts brown at the apex; 9—10 brown, the latter
more or less green. Slytra clear, transparent; nerves
pale at the base, towards the apex reddish or almost
brownish. Through the colour of the nerves P. eruginosa may be
distinguished at first sight from all other green species. Note.—N othing is said about the stigma. Kight specimens received from Mr. Haliday. Species 24. Psylla occulta. Psylla occulta, Forst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 98, 7. Reddish-yellow. Mesosternum posteriorly with some-
what darker-coloured streaks. Abdomen above with
brownish bands; underneath green. Antenne and legs
yellow ; the former from the 3—8 joints brown at the apex,
9—10brown. Face: lobes long; base broad; apex acute,
widely divergent. lytra clear, transparent; nerves at
the base yellow, towards the apex reddish and somewhat
darker. Note.—Nothing is said about the stigma. Two és and three ?s received from Mr. Haliday. 568 Mr. John ott’s Monograph of the

Species 9. Trioza munda. Trioza munda, Porst. Verh. Ver. Rheinl. v. 88, 22;
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1. 515, 11. Green or yellowish. Mesonotum brown. Antenne:
Ist and three terminal jomts brown. Abdomen yellow-
ereen. Legs yellow. face: lobes somewhat long and
moderately pointed. #lytra clear, transparent, radius
reaching the costal margin at some distance from the : apex. One & received from Mr. Walker and another from
Mr. Haliday. Flor says he meets with this species commonly in July
and August on Urtica. Species 10. Trioza abieticola. Trioza abieticola, Forst. Verh. Ver. Kheinl. v. 88, 21;
Flor, Rhyn. Livl. 1.496, 2; Zrioza argyrea, Meyer,
Mitth. schw. ent. Ges. 11. 390. Sordid yellow. Mesonotum with confluent brown
streaks. Abdomen with brown bands. Antenne yellow;
9—10 joints brown. Face: lobes somewhat short and
stout, moderately pomted. /ytra clear, transparent ;
2nd forked cell very small, radius very near to the costal
margin posteriorly, terminating near the apex; costal
margin near the base with a black-brown streak, whereby
this species may be easily recognized from 7’. curvati-
nervis. A 2? sent by Walker as Psylla Abietis ; but as there was
already a species bearing that name, Forster described it
under the one now given. flor takes it not uncommonly
on the spindle tree (“wonymus europeus), and also on the
spruce fir (Pinus abies), m1 May and August. —

CORRIGENDA. Page 548, Species 14. Psylla viridissima, add name and description to
that of P. Mali, of which it is only a form. ote. Psylla fumipennis, Forst., sp. 11, p. 92 of the Catalogne of British
Hemiptera, has been altered in this Monograph to P. Léwii, n. sp., the
former being synonymous with P. Pruni, Forst., and the one described
at p. 541 being new to science. . Fig. 1.

la. 1d. le. 1d. le.
. Do. of 9, underneath. SHON AAP we

1

Fig. Soap ge sere Lieearesd, RO kes

11. 12. 13. British species of Psyllide. O69

DESCRIPTION OF PLATES. PLATE VIII. Arytena ulicis, Curt. Head of do., front view. Elytron and wing of do. Abdomen of ¢, side view. Genitalia of ¢, as seen from behind. Abdomen of 9, side view. Elytron of Psylla spartiophila, Forst. Do. Do. Do,
Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. Do. »  salicicola, Forst. »  Jsraxinicola, Forst. rhamnicola, n. ep. » pyri, L.

» serruginea, Forst. »,  costato-punctata, Forst. » Lowi, Scott. »  pruni, Scop. PLATE IX.

. Elytron and wing of Zrioza Walkeri, Forst.
. Elytron of Zrioza urtice, L.

‘ acutipennis, Zett. es galii, Forst. ‘4 albiventris, Forst. ss hematodes, Forst. 5 salicivora, Reuter, MS.
Spanioneura Fonscolombei, Forst. Aphalara picta, Zett. - exilis, Weber et Mohr. » polygoni, Forst. <5 radiata, 0. sp. Rhinocola aceris, L.

TRANS. ENT. SOC. 1876.—PART IV. (DEC.) PP

 

Trans Ent.Soc.1I816 PLVIL. J. Scott del. GJarman sc. Trans. Fnt.Soc1816 PLIX. tl

 

—— a

_s

J.Scott del. GJarman sc.