THE LIBRARY
OF
THE UNIVERSITY
OF CALIFORNIA
LOS ANGELES

ace ti

 

   
 

THE HISTORY

, oF
- GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2007 with funding from
Microsoft Corporation

http://www.archive.org/details/historyofglanvil00daleiala

 

THE HISTORY

or

GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON,

IN THE COUNTY OF DORSET,

INCLUDING ITS

ZOOLOGY AND BOTANY. BY

Cc. W. DALE. LONDON:
HATCHARDS,. 187, PICCADILLY. 1878. “We can’t keep back the daily zun,
‘The wi'nd is never still,
‘An’ never ha’ the streams a done
A runnin down at hill. Zoo they that ha’ their work to do
Should do't so soon's they ean,
Vor time an’ tide will come an’ goo

An’ never wait vor man.”

Rey. W. Banxes (Dorset Poems). IN MEMORIAM

PATRIS CARISSIMI, ‘
REBUS NATURALIBUS HUJUS LOCI
PER ANNOS PLUS SEXAGINTA INVESTIGATIS

ILLUSTRIS. -

 

CONTENTS. Part I—HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Iyrropuerion . .

Manon oF Woorroy Gravis

Manor or NewhaND «se . Tae Courch . . . . oo

Tae Caantry . CuANTARISTS . Reosten ae

Beorons or tue Pam 5, ss
Anyriquities

PAGE
. 1
4

. 8
10

. 13,
. 20
21

22

25

Part II.—ZOOLOGY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Mannaxta (Bats, and other animals)

Aves (Birds)...

Ferra) (Snakes; Togs) isardi)™

Pisces (Fish)... we

Insrora (Insects) . ,
rlbexsoerina( (Bees) Avits hWaepe) Sawiiceth) ee
Conzorrera (Beetles, Ladybirds, Cockchaffers)
Onraoprera (Barwigs, Locusts, Grasshoppers). Nevroprera (Dragonflies, Mayflies, Caddisflies, &c.)
Lepworrera (Butterflies and Moths). ;

27

29

87

83

40

40

79

126

- 129
. 188

viii CONTENTS. PAGE

Drrrera (Gnats, Midges, Houseflies, &c.) % . . 289
Apnanrrena (Fless) . . «+ ews 200
Hemrera a. «(208
Homorrena fecretoorecs! Blight). ©. 5. 808
Ametanora (Springtails,&e.). . - .  . «B15
Aracuntpa (Spiders, Scorpions, &.) . . . . 818
Myrropopa (Wireworms, Centipedes) . . . . 829
Crustacea (Shrimps, Woodlice, &.) . . . . 881
Moutwsca (Snails, Slugs) . . . . . «881
Vermes (Worms) - - - - we 884
Proroza ss ee eee 8B

Parr III.—BOTANY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. PHANEROGAMEA . eee BRM
Prcorcamonss (Trees, Skmbs, Sc) . . . . 883
Monocoryuepones (Orchids, Grasses, &e.) . . . 862
Onvprogamma . see eee 88D
Furs (Fems) . . . . ew ee BO
Hourseracea (Horsetails) . . . . .  . 871
Qumee . . 1. 1] ew. TL
Muscr (Moses) . . . . . . . . 82
Hepariom (Liverworts). .  . . . es BUT
Aes . . . eee 8B
Iicuenes (Lichens, Lungworts) . . . . . 879
Foner (Mushrooms, Toadstools, &.) . . . . 880
AvenpK. 6s eee 888

PART IL

PAROCHIAL HISTORY AND ARCH AOLOGY
OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Introduction. Woorron Giaxvintw—or, as it is generally called,
Glanville’s Wootton—lies in the beautiful vale, and
within the limits of the ancient forest of Blackmore,
or the White Hart; so called for the following
reason :—

King Henry the Third, having disported himself in
the Forest of Blackmore, spared a certain beautiful
and goodly white hart, which afterwards one Sir
Thomas de la Lynde, a gentleman of ancient descent
and note, with his companions, hunted and killed at
King’s Stag Bridge, in the parish of Lydlinch. On
hearing of it, the king was so enraged that he not
only punished them with imprisonment and a fine,
but taxed their lands, the owners of which until the
last few years paid a yearly sum of money into the
Exchequer, called White Hart Silver. The forest for
some time lost its ancient name of Blackmore for that
of the White Hart. The White Hart silver for this

B

2 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. parish was collected by the lord of the hundred of
Buckland Newton. Glanville’s Wootton is bounded on the south by
Buckland Newton; on the west by Middlemarsh, in
the parish of Minterne ; on the north-west by Holwell ;
on the north by Haydon; on the east by Holwell;
and on the south-east by Pulham. On the southern
boundary of the parish is an old Roman fortification,
called Dungeon. The area is above ten acres. On
its being cleansed several years ago, by the late Mr.
Foy of Castlehill, from the wood with which it was
overgrown, human bones, antique pickaxes, sword
blades, Roman coins, and other remains were dug up. It is surrounded bya single ditch and rampart, on’
which are situated several very large and ancient
Scotch fir trees, giving it an imposing appearance from
a distance. Glanville’s Wootton contains by estimation about
1665 acres of rich land, for the most part in pasture,
and divided into several dairy farms. It lies at a
distance of twenty miles from Weymouth, twelve from
Dorchester, ten from Sturminster Newton, six from
Cerne Abbas, and Seven from Sherborne. The
parish is divided into two tithings, viz., Wootton
and Newton Monteacute, alias Newland; and into
three manors, viz., Wootton, Oslehill or Oselhill, and
Newland. The inhabitants, which are about 300, in
number, are for the most part farmers and labourers,
whose houses and cottages are dispersed over the

- INLRODUCTION. 3

whole parish. The soil consists of chalk on White-
down, greensand under and around the chalk ;
limestone in the Cowleaze and Hartleaze ; and blue
clay in the rest of the parish. The hedgerows are in
general thickly planted with oak and elm. The oak
in particular thrives in Newland, as it does in most
of the deep clay lands which lie at the foot of the hills
forming the southern boundary of the vale. The
most important of the woods, copses, &c., are as
follows :—Broad Alders, Wootton Wood, Sandhills
Copse, Haywood, and Whitedown Copse in Wootton ;
Fernyknap, Mulletts Copse, Mead Copse, Birch Copse,
Pelles, Cockroad, Waterly Lane Withybed, Rabbitts,
Buttons, and the Common Plantation in Newland. The arable lands are mostly on Whitedown and New-
land Common, which latter place, until a few years
ago, was covered with furze and heath. A little furze
still crops up, but the heath has entirely disappeared. The places on the Common where charcoal used to be
burnt can still be discerned. On each side of the
road leading to Holwell are a couple of very ancient . oaks, called Gog and Magog, formerly denizens of the
forest; and also several birches, Wyche elms, and
Turkey oaks, planted by my father. Opposite the
manor-house at Wootton is a fine grove of tall elms
(in which the rooks delight to build their nests),
planted by Mr. Henley about 150 years ago. Another
very ancient oak stands in the middle of Dursels. A stream called the Caundle, one of the numerous

4 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. branches of the Lidden (a tributary of the Stour
which flows into the sea at Christchurch, the ancient
dwelling-place of the Dale family), runs through the
parish; and receives a large influx of water from
several springs which rise round Dungeon. There is
avery fine pond opposite Roundchimneys (of about an
acre in extent, stocked with several kinds of fish, and
on which is a boat-house), and several much smaller
ones in the parish. A few years ago a beech tree was
eut down on Whitedown, and several old-English
letters were found in the heart, similar to those found
in Sherwood Forest. In the ‘Gardener’s Chronicle’
of September 5th, 1845, is an account of an oak
tree which had its entire bark stripped off by light-
ning, but nevertheless came out in leaf the following
spring. The Manor of Wootton Glanville. The most ancient lords of this manor were the
family of Manger mentioned in the Inquisition 5
of Edward II., when the Abbot of Milton Abbas
held in Wolverne Wootton, in pure alms, 17 solitate,
yearly rent issuing out of that manor; the gift of —
Godfied of the family of Manger, formerly of that
manor, who had enjoyed it beyond the memory of
man. Before the time of Henry III., Henry de
Glanville held one knight’s fee of the honour of
Dramele de Conquestu Anglia. The following is the
survey in Doomesday Book:—William de Brasiose

MANOR OF WOOTTON GLANVILLE. 5

held Widetown of the king, and Radulf of him. In
the reign of Edward III. it was found not to the
king’s detriment to grant license to Sibylla de Glan-
.ville, to give the manor of Foffardeston, alias
Forston, and one messuage and lands in Wootton
Glanville, toa chaplain to celebrate divine service for
ever at the altar of the Blessed Virgin Mary in her
chantry at the parish church. She held in Wolverne
Wootton one-fourth part of a knight’s fee, formerly
held by Henry de Glanville. John de Glanville, the
last of this family, left two daughters, one of whom
married Robert More of Marnhull, whose only daughter
married John Newburgh, of East Lulworth, about the
time of Henry IV. It continued in the Newburgh
‘family till the time of Richard-III; after which, it
appears no more in their inquisitions, and was per-
haps alienated to the Leighs. A subsidy roll in the
time of Henry VIII. gives this account of the parish: —
Dr. Lacton, Archdeacon of Dorset, in lands, 40s. ;
Sir Thomas Trenchard, knight, steward; Sir Richard
Monkton, parson, value £13; Sir Thomas Broke,
chantry priest, in lands £6. This manor subsequently
passed through the hands of the De la Lyndes,
Stephensons, and Collins, to George, fourth son of
Sir John Williams, of Herringstone, about 1600, whose
daughter and heiress brought it to the Everys. John
Every, Esq., having died without issue, left this part
of his estate to his sister Barbara, wife of Sir Robert
Henley, knight, of the Grange, Hampshire. Robert,

6 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. youngest son of Barbara (Lady Henley), died in the
year 1758 unmarried; but before his death he sold
his estate to Edward Walter, Esq., of Stalbridge, on
October 10th, 1754, who again sold it on October
16th, 1767, to Captain James Dale, of Blandford. His log-books, which are still in the possession of the
family, are very interesting; and contain an account
of his battle with the East Indian pirate, Tullagree
Augria. The aforesaid Robert Henley, Esq., a gentle-
man of great virtue and learning, was formerly Fellow
of New College, Oxford, and member of parliament
for Lyme Regis. The manor-house, late Henley’s,
stood at a little distance to the north of the church,
and was an ancient building, probably erected by the
Williams whose arms were in the front of the house. In 1804 it was rebuilt, for his own residence, by the
son of Captain Dale—James Dale, Esq., of Bland-
ford, father of James Charles Dale, Esq., M.A., F.L.S. In pulling down the old house a coin of Henry VIII. was found, which was again put into the foundations
with one of George III. The house is pleasantly
situated, surrounded with lofty oaks and elms planted
by Mr. Henley, and is close to a beautiful and spark-
ling spring of water, which never fails and always
keeps to the same degree of temperature. Upon the
lawn used to stand a very large and handsome ever-
green oak. Part of the estate which was allotted to the Collins’s
seems to have been alienated to the Napiers of More

MANOR OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 7

Crichel, from whom it passed to Humphrey Sturt,
Esq., and afterwards to Charles Sturt, Esq., who sold
it to Mr. John Young, of Glanville's Wootton. This
estate was purchased of his executors in 1861, by
James Charles Dale, Esq. The house belonging to it,
called the Church Farm-house, has been considerably
altered and spoiled ; but on pulling off the roughcast,
an old carved doorway and windows were found,
which prove it to be of considerable antiquity. That part of the manor which was allotted to
Henry Stephenson came afterwards to Robert White,
Esq., of Dorchester, whose son (the Rev. George
White, rector of Huntshill) sold it in 1807 to
Mr. George Young, the grandfather of the present
owner. Another estate in the manor, which belonged to the
Foys of Castlehill, was sold in 1875 by the executors
of the late C. W. Minet, Esq., in two halves; one
half being purchased by my brother, E. R. Dale, Esq.,
and the other by Sir William Clay, the brother of Sir
George Clay, the present owner. The rectory which stands in this manor was erected
by Mr. Fox in a field next to the church, and enlarged
and fitted up commodiously by Mr. Evans. Mr.
Evans also drained the whole field, and converted
part of it into an excellent garden, well stocked with
fruit trees, and surrounded by an extensive brick wall. The rector is entitled to tithe of every kind, and has
between forty and fifty acres of excellent glebe land. 8 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Osehill,

alias Odershill, alias Oakhill, is a little manor situ-
ated in the north-west corner of the parish, of which
there is no ancient account. It belonged to the
Harbins, of Dorchester, who conveyed it to the Loders. One of them, Andrew Loders, Esq., sold it about
1729 to Mr. Henley, who sold it again in 1754 to
Mr. Walter ; of whom it was purchased (1767) by
Captain James Dale, the grandfather of James Charles
Dale, Esq., the owner in 1870. .

A farm in Osehill, of about sixty-two acres, be-
longed in 1806 to Mr. George Young, who left it by
will to his second son, Mr. John Young, on whose
death it came to his daughter-in-law, Mrs. Pauley of
Minterne. The poor allotments, and the Yetminster
Charity Lands, are in this manor, also a few acres
belonging to the church of Sarum. The Manor of Newland,

alias Newton Monteacute, alias Blackmore Manor,
was granted by King Edward I., with the woods of
Blackmore, to Simon de Monteacute at a rent of ten
shillings per annum. In the reign of Henry VI. Thomas, Earl of Sarum, held this manor of Newton
Monteacute of the king. Margaret, Countess of
Sarum (wife of Sir Richard Pole), beheaded May 27th,
1541, held this manor, valued at £18 10s, 1d. In the reign of Mary this manor of Newton

* MANOR OF NEWLAND. Monteacute, part of the possessions of the Countess
of Sarum, was granted toFrancis, Earl of Huntingdon. In the reign of Elizabeth it was held by Gamage:
hence it came to the Churchills. John Churchill,
gent., compounded for assisting the king’s forces at
£440. His son Winston, born in London, 1620, and
admitted at St. James’s College, Oxford, in 1636,
adhered to the royal cause, for which he suffered
severely, being forced to take refuge with his wife
Elizabeth at the house of her father, Sir J. Drake, at
Ash, Devonshire, and to compound for £446 18s. In 1661 he was chosen member for Weymouth, and
soon after fellow of the Royal Society. He was author
of ‘Divi Britannica; or, Remarks on the Lives of all
the Kings of this Isle’: (London, 1675). In 1663 he
was knighted, and died 1688, leaving his property to
his surviving son, John, born at Ashe, 1650, who was
afterwards created Duke of Marlborough. The Duke
of Marlborough sold this manor and estate to Dr.
Wellman, of Poundisford, Somerset; of whose de-
scendants it was purchased, in 1839, by James Charles
Dale, Esq., the father of myself the present owner. It contains a little more than 800 acres. What remains now of the ancient manor-house
(called, from the shape of its chimneys, Round-
chimneys) is a farm-house inhabited by Mr. Hawkins. From a date on one of the chimneys it appears to
have been built between 1590 and 1600. Upon
another chimney is a device, perhaps a mason’s

10 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. mark, * + . Neither painted glass nor arms remain
in the windows or upon the walls. The situation is
pleasant, and the surrounding grounds appear to have
been laid out into gardens, fish-ponds, and every
convenience for a man of fortune. The annexed
considerable and very much improved estate consists
chiefly of rich pasture lands, and abounds with oak
and other timber. At a little distance from the house
is the old wooden pound. There is also another very
old farm-house in the manor, called Hamper’s Farm. It is built of mud and stone, and covered with thatch. The inhabitants are a family of the name of Dunning,
who have resided in the parish for generations, and
are connexions of the Ashburton family. The Church,

which is dedicated to God in honour of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, is a small structure, built entirely in the
Perpendicular style, with the exception of an ancient
chantry chapel on the south side, called the Glanville
Chapel. At the west end stands the tower, which is
low and has two stages only, moulded battlements,
angle pinnacles and gurgoyles, a western door with a
window above it,. and four windows with stone louvre
to the belfry. The bells it contains are four in
number, with the following inscriptions :—

1. Sunt mea spes Hii tres Es Maria Fohes. 2. AVE Mania. 8. In memoriam patris. E. R. Dale, 1876. 4. Thomas Knight, John Drake, Anno Dom. 1700. THE CHURCH i

The chancel, according to Hutchins, is chiefly a
modern building, with no pretensions to architectural
propriety. On the south side is a small doorway under
an ogee arch, a perpendicular piscina with an arch of
a similar character ; and a very fine arch, which forms
part of the hagioscope leading into the Glanville Chapel. In the north wall was a semicircular arch, which might
perhaps have enclosed an ancient monument. The
chancel was entirely rebuilt in 1876 by the rector and
patron, the Rev. J. S. Woodman, with the help of his
friends and Queen Anne’s Bounty. The nave of the church, which had become very
dilapidated, was restored in 1876 by E. R. Dale, Esq.,
and the parishioners, with the help of a few friends ;
under the able supervision of G. R. Crickmay, Esq.,
of Weymouth, who was the architect for the entire
restoration of the church. The principal entrance is
from a neat tiled porch, which abuts against the
west end of the Glanville Chapel. Close to the
door on the north side, which is disused, is a
curious niche; but for what purpose intended is
not known. In the window on the north side were
the arms of Newburgh: bendy of seven or and azure,
in a border engrailed gules. On the opposite side,
between the porch and the doorway of the chantry is
u place in the wall for a stoup. ‘The font, which has
been removed from the chantry to the south side of
the nave, has an octagonal bowl of rough Purbeck
marble, with two shallow-pointed arches on each face ;

12 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. and is very massive, standing upon one large and
eight small pillars of Purbeck marble. The fol-
lowing account is taken from the ‘Dorset County
Chronicle and Somersetshire Gazette’ of April 27th,
1876, which gives the history of the re-opening of the
church by the Bishop of Salisbury, on the 22nd of
April, 1876 :—“ All the stonework of the interior has
been divested of whitewash, the rough rubble being
left unplastered, and the pointing being properly
managed, a good effect of light and shade has been
produced. The singing gallery, also, has been re-
moved, and the tower-arch (which is rather a rude
piece of work) exposed. New pitch-pine open benches,
varnished, have taken the place of the former pews ;
and the waggon-headed roof has been replaced with
one of a similar pattern made of pitch-pine, with
oaken bosses or pattern after the old style at the
intersections of the ribs. The old stone tiles have
again been put on. The northern wall has been taken
down and re-erected, but the same stones having been
used, the venerable aspect has been unchanged. The
lower window has been repaired, but much of the
original tracery has been preserved ; and a new window
ofa similar pattern (rather early Perpendicular) has
taken the place of one of a nondescript character. At the intersection of the nave and chancel a chimney
has been added, but the ‘ native ugliness’ that usually
clings to these structures has been avoided, and it has
been made to assume the appearance of a rather

THE CHANTRY. 1B

handsome turret. The lectern is the work of E. R.
Dale, Esq., who has shown himself to be an accom-
plished turner. It is composed of oak (from the -old
roof of the chantry), walnut, ebony, and holly; and
the design is very beautiful. The carving in the
pannels of the pulpit is by Mr. Grassby, of Dorchester,
who also executed the greater part of the stone carving. It stands on a base of Ham Hill stone, and is a re-
markable improvement upon the old one.”

The Chantry,
or Glanville Chapel, which extends only from the
chancel to the porch, is built of flints intermixed with
Ham Hill stone and Purbeck marble. It was founded,
or rather refounded, by Sybilla de Glanville, in the
reign of Edward III. ; and was valued in the reign of
Edward VI. at £6 18s. There was one silver chalice
of nine ounces, and John Mylle was incumbent. The
patronage of it was always in the lords of the manor. The following account is taken from the ‘Dorset
County Chronicle’ :—‘* We come now to the Chantry,
which is truly an ecclesiastical gem, and a capital
example of the Decorated period—probably in its
most palmy time, if we may judge by the exquisite
tracery and the flowing grace with which the windows
have been executed. The character of the windows
seems—notably in one instance—to indicate the work
of a French artist; at least, there is something of the
Flamboyant style about it which betrays the foreign

4 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOYr'TON. taste. One of these windows is also quite unique, as
we cannot find an example of the kind in any archi-
tectural work ; and it has the peculiarity of the middle
light being circular-headed, while the other two are
square ; the design of the tracery is very original and
quite different from the ordinary types of this period. The upper window in the south side, although elegant,
has little to distinguish it from the ordinary Decorated
tracery ; but its neighbour has some of the features of
the Flamboyant style, not usually seen in country
churches. The removal of the plaster from the walls
has revealed that it is built of knapped flint, and it is
one of the finest pieces of this class of masonry we
have witnessed, being quite equal to that of the Abbey
barn at Cerne. But all who are interested in church
architecture owe a debt of gratitude to Mr. C. W. Dale
for coming to the rescue of this beautiful building,
and saving it from falling a victim to the ravages of
time; and, apparently, his munificent hand did not
intervene too soon, for there were serious appre-
hensions that the place would tumble on the heads of
the worshippers, as the walls were cracked, and
there were alarming signs of a general settling down,
owing to the foundations being sapped with damp. The roof also was reduced to touchwood, and it was
marvellous how it remained so long in its place. However, Mr. Crickmay was called in, and he has
effected so complete a transformation as to restore the
building to a condition that would certainly rejoice

THE CHANTRY. 15.

the heart of its foundress, Sybilla de Glanville. Very
beautifully it has been restored, both architect and
mason having dealt reverently with the ancient walls. The plaster coating has been removed, and reveals the
' flintwork both on the exterior and the interior, and
the effectis admirable. The stonework of the windows
has been removed where defective, but this, happily,
has not been found necessary to any great extent. The roof has been replaced exactly on the old pattern,
with large moulded beams of oak grown in the neigh-
bourhood, four of which extend right across the build-
ing, and had to be hollowed out in the centre; and
the panels having been boarded with cedar, the appear-
ance is both novel and pleasing. The ancient altar
slab of rough Purbeck marble having been found
in the floor, was restored to its place of honour
under the east window, and set upon two pillars of
Ham Hill stone. The beautiful Decorated piscina,
with its shelf under an ogee canopy, has been cleaned,
and forms one of the prettiest features in the building. Underneath it is a curious corbel head. The hagio-
scope, which gave a view of the high altar from this
building, is exceedingly curious, and we are told has
no parallel in any other church. Into it leads a
smaller hagioscope, from under the chantry arch. This also has received the renovation necessary to its
condition. The east window has been filled with
stained glass, by Messrs. Lavers, Burraud and West-
lake; and the colours are exceedingly good. The

16 MISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. central light contains the Good Shepherd, and to the
left is Elijah fed by ravens; on the right being St.
Paul bitten by the viper at Melita. At the lower
part of the window is the inscription — ‘In memo-
riam Jacobi Caroli Dale, Qui natus est Dec. 13th,
MDCOXCLI, et Obiit Feb. 6th, MDCCCLXXII’
This is a memorial window to the father of the present
lord of the manor. In the tracery is the Lord of
Hosts ; with a figure of St. John and his eagle on the
right, stated by Hutchins to be the Virgin. This was
a portion of the original glass. On the other side is
a figure of St. Matthew, the head of which has been
restored. Two new figures of St. Mark with the bull,
and St. Luke with the lion, have also been inserted in
the tracery. Several old fragments of glass with oak
leaves, various devices, &c., have been put into the
upper parts of the south windows. The foundation of
the south wall was found so undermined by damp
that it was found necessary to underpin it and the
buttresses ; and it has been strengthened and made
thoroughly secure. Five stalls have been placed in
the chantry, the ends of the centre one being made
from a walnut tree grown in Mr. Dale’s garden, and
is carved with a figure of the dove and olive branch. The others are of oak, and the ends are carved to
represent the baptism of Christ, the flight into Egypt,
St. Peter’s denial, pelican and young, &e. We should
add that the recumbent figure has been removed from
under the wide four-centred arch opening into the

THE CHANTRY. 7

church, and placed in one of the niches under the
south windows, apparently its original position, as it
fitted exactly; and a not improbable theory is broached,
that the efligy is the figure of Henry de Glanville,
Sybilla’s husband, and that she intended the other
recess for her own statue, but was prevented from
carrying out her intention—perhaps by dying in a dis-
tant part. So interesting a building as this chantry
could hardly fail to give rise to an archwological con-
troversy, and accordingly it has been advanced that
it was originally an independent building, and the
church was afterwards built adjacent to it. The
proofs of this can hardly be contradicted. A buttress
built into the wall of the porch, and visible inside the
church, with the same occurring in the chancel, are
pretty sure signs the church was added to the chantry,
and not the chantry to the church. Moreover, the
flintwork ceases suddenly at the commencement of
the porch and at the chancel, in both instdhces being
continued by later stonemasonry. But further proof
is given by the doorway leading from the nave into
the chantry being clearly an outside entry; and the
holy water stoup close at hand still further strengthens
the belief, which gains additional force by the circum-
stance that the foundation of the former northern
wall was found existing under the arch before men-
tioned. No trace of a former church having been
found is another argument in favour of the statement,
although, on the other hand, we are told there is no
c

18 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. instance of a chantry being built separate from a
church ; but there never was a rule without an excep-
tion, and we shall leave the question to the learned in
archeology. ‘The passage in the chantry is paved with encaustic
tiles, made by Messrs. Minton & Co., after the pattern
of some old tiles found in removing the floor, viz. :
Fleur-de-lis, Deo gracias, Pomegranates, Arms of
Bishoprick of Exeter, Arms of Edward the Confessor,
Arms of Edward I.; Paternal arms of Eleanor of
Castile, consort of Edward I.; Horseman; Archer ;
the White Hart, which latter symbolise the local
legend of the King’s Stag or the White Hart, and are
exceedingly curious. On referring to the chantry, in his ‘History of
Dorset,’ Hutchins says it is the most interesting part
of the church, the architecture being of the Decorated
period; and it has two windows, with three lights
apiece, on the south side; whilst another, of a similar
character, fills the east gable. A pair of massive
flying buttresses of three stages support each angle ;
and there is another between the side windows,
all which have hoed mouldings externally. Upon the
buttress nearest to the porch is a place where asun-dial
formerly was. Internally the windows have a circular
column with moulded capitals and bases at the angles
of the jambs; and below each of these, on the south,
is a low segmental arch, now roughly built up, but
which probably contained altar tombs, and perhaps

 

THE CHANTRY. 19

effigies. There is a large ogee-headed piscina across
the south-eastern corner of the chantry, and also a
bracket on each side of the east window; that on the

. north being of a circular shape, and ornamented with
a goodly suite of mouldings. Here, no doubt, was
the chantry altar. This chapel is connected with the
nave by a large arch of two orders. ‘The inner or
western order rests on a slender engaged pillar, and
the other on a corbel-head of two characters. There
is a large hagioscope built diagonally towards the
high altar, and another through the western jamb of
the arch last mentioned. Under this arch, also, on a
plain altar-tomb, lies the effigy of Sybilla de Glan-
ville (? ), foundress of the charity. It is sculptured in
Ham Hill stone. The head, which rests on a pillow,
has the hair long, parted in the middle of the fore-
head, and falling in massive clusters on the shoulders,
which are covered with a hood or mantle thrown
back, beneath which the body is clad in a loose frock
reaching to the knees, but tucked up at the waist. A broad strap passes across the hips, which sustains
a sword on the left side. ‘The feet rest against a dog,
and the straps of the spurs may still be made out on
each heel. The hands rest on the breast, the palms
placed together in an attitude of supplication. A low stone sedillia goes round inside of the eastern
and southern walls of the chantry. There are a few
old monuments of the Williams and Everys, who
were successively lords of the manor of Wootton

20 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. between 1600 and 1700. The most curious is the one
to John Every, Esq., on the top of which is a pedi-
ment supported by two pillars; over it are the effigies
of a man and woman, kneeling and painted—the man
ina laced coat, full bottomed wig, and high-heeled
shoes with rosettes ; the woman in a black gown, with
weepers and black hood. Chaplains or Chantarists. Reginald de Soucham, pbr., instituted chaplain
March Sth, 1344, of this chantry in the church of
Wootton Glanville, founded anew. Patron, Sybilla de
Glanville, foundress. Matthew Bremyl or Bremele, instituted April 13th,
1896, who exchanged with Thomas Wynestone, vicar
of Batonstone, 1377. Patron, John de Glanville, lord
of the manor. Henry Hew, pbr., instituted February 28th, 1399. Henry Hort, instituted March 29th, 1410, who ex-
changed with Richard Benet, who again exchanged
with John Walerys on July 2nd, 1412. He exchanged
with Richard Hernag, rector of Frome St. Quintin,
who was instituted May 20th, 1417. Patron, Robert
More. Thomas Borying, instituted October 6th, 1431. On
his death, William Morys was presented on September
28th, 1458. Patron, John Newburgh, Jun. Richard Botover, on the death of Morys, was insti-
tuted May 29th, 1458,

- THE REGISTER. 21

John Dyvyas instituted, on the death of Botover,
June 28th, 1462. Patron, John Newburgh, of East
Lulworth. John Browne, instituted on the resignation of
Dyvyas, September 26th, 1462. Gervais Ketyl, instituted on the death of Browne,
July 29th, 1488. Patron, John Leigh, of the Isle of
Wight. Richard Jamys, instituted on the resignation of
Ketyl, October 4th, 1489. On his death, John Agnel
was instituted January 8th, 1509. On his death,
Thomas Broke was instituted February 5th, 1512. John Myll, pbr., was instituted the last chantarist
(on the death of Broke) on November 22nd, 1528. He had a pension of £5 a year. Patron, George de la
Lynde, in right of his wife, the daughter of Henry,
the son of John Leigh. The Register. ‘The marriage register begins May 22nd, 1546, and
is perfect till March, 1642. ‘The most important
entries were :— B

1546, Walter Holwall, gen., and Joane Glandfield,
gen., May 22nd. 1550. Hugho St. Fabin, gen., and Christian King-
ston, gen.

1641. Mr. John Every and Mrs. Anne Williams. 1669. John Leigh, esq., and Mrs. Anne Every. a2 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1674. Sir Robert Henley and Mrs. Barbara Every. 1677. Bever Williams, gen., and Mrs. Martha Lockett.

. ‘The register of baptisms begins 1549; from 1557
to 1574 is lost; but it is perfect from 1574 to 1650. The register of burials is perfect, 1578 to 1641. ‘The most important of the entries are :—

1578. William Holwall, gen.

1681. Mary, wife of George Williams, gen.
1643. John Pine, gen.

1758. Robert Henley, esq. 1856. Rev. John Wickens. 1872. J.C. Dale, esq. Rectors of the Parish. Jolin Sprat, instituted July 4th, 1802; Galfred de
Wermondesworth, instituted on April 6th, 1826. Patrons, Henry de Glanville ; Isabel de Glanville. Robert de Mucheldever, instituted December 11th,
1339; William Thornhull, pbr., instituted on the
cession of Mucheldever, March 1st, 1350; Robert
Stone. Patrons, Sybilla de Glanville ; John de Glan-
ville. John Criteman, pbr., instituted on the death of
Stone, October 21st, 1898. Patron, Robert Attemore. John Hasard, instituted December 21st, 1425;
evchanged with William Gervais, instituted April 10th,
1482; exchanged with —. Patrons, John Fauntleroy,
Nicolas Latymer, and Robert Veale. a RECYORS OF THE PARISH. 28

John Goderich, vicar of Cranborne, instituted Sep-
tember 6th, 1483; exchanged with —. Patron,
Nicholas Latymer. ‘Thomas Byrkworth, instituted March 22nd, 1435. Simon Roos, M.A., instituted on the resignation of
Byrkworth, July 19th, 1440; exchanged with John
Holme, instituted April 27th, 1443. Patron, John
Newburgh, sen.

Richard Hancock, instituted on the resignation of
Holme, December 11th, 1448; exchanged with John
Baron, instituted September 26th, 1448; exchanged
with John Baron, instituted May 6th, 1460; exchanged
with John Lugge, instituted February 12th, 1465 ; ex. changed with John Chamberlayn, instituted October
26th, 1467; exchanged with Thomas Rope, instituted
August 21st, 1468; exchanged with John Wykes,
instituted Nov. 12th, 1478; exchanged with Giles
Wright. Patron, John Newburgh, jun. John Leigh, instituted on the death of Wright,
October 28th, 1511. Patron, Sir John Leigh, knt.,
of the Isle of Wight. Richard Monkton, instituted on the death of Leigh,
April 4th, 1521. At his death John Conized, pbr.,
was instituted April 25th, 1525. Patron, Agnes Leigh,
widow. Robert Philips, instituted 1570; Henry Tuickner,
Archdeacon of Dorset,’and aforehand Vicar of Buck-
land Abbas, instituted 1582. Patrons, Henry Stephen-
son; John Lowman. 24 - HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. John Parker, instituted 1598, on the resignation of
Tuickner. On his death, Thomas Mew was instituted
1639; John Hanne, instituted on the death of Mew,
1678. Patrons, Sir George Morton, knt. ; John Wil-
liams; Gregory Backway ; John Phelps. George Dival Rosunville, a native of France, insti-
tuted 1675. Patron, Sir John Morton. Benjamin Derby, M.A., instituted October 30th,
1710, and died in 1718. He was formerly Rector of
Bryanstone and Master of Blandford School. Nicolas
Pickard. Patron, The Queen by lapse. Benjamin Culme, M.A., Rector of Studland, insti-
tuted Noy. 8th, 1717. On his death John King, B.A.,
was instituted March 6th, 1743 ; Thomas Fox, LL.B.,
son of. Thomas Fox, J.P. of Mapperton, instituted
November 16th, 1770; Humphrey Evans, M.A., insti-
tuted on the cession of Fox, October 4th, 1793. Patrons, Edward Morton Pleydel; John King, of
Sherborne; John Slade, of Hammersmith; John
Isles, of Leddiard, Wiltshire. Isaac Monkhouse, B.D., Rector of Holwell, in-
stituted February 15th, 1814, on the death of Evans. Patrons, Trustees of the will of the late Rev. H. Evans. John Wickens, M.A., instituted on the death of
Monkhouse, February 9th, 1885; Edmund Roberts,
B.A., instituted on the death of Wickens, September
12th, 1856; John Sibley Woodman, B.A., instituted
on the death of Roberts, July 15th, 1857. Patrons,

ANTIQUITIES. 25

The Rev. John Wickens, of whose executors it was
purchased by the Rev. G. R. Langdon, of St. Paul's
Cray, Kent, who sold it in 1857 to Mrs. Charleton. Since the death of his aunt (Mrs. Charleton), Mr.
* Woodman has been his own patron; which shows
that an alteration in the law of patronage is much
needed. Antiquities. A bronze celt for cutting down trees was dug up on
Newland Common, two or three years ago, by Henry
Warr. An old rusty iron spur (very long) was found
by William Durrant on Whitedown, just outside of
Dungeon, some years ago; and which the Rey. W.
Barnes, Rector of Came—the Dorset poet—thought
was very ancient. It has unfortunately been lost. A few old coins have been found, from time to
time—such as monk’s base money, old Spanish
moidas, &e.

In the Manor House are some very fine pieces of
old Chelsea china; Japanese and Chinese, with the
three, four, and five-claw dragons upon them—which
belonged to Captain Dale. The freedoms of Glasgow,
Renfrew and Stirling (which were presented to him),
are exceedingly curious. There is, also, the old gold
watch given him by Governor Lally, who came over to
England in Captain Dale’s ship, when Pondicherry was
taken from the French. 26 HISLORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. A few fossil shells and ammonites have been
found in the Green Wall sand-pit, and also in the
lime-stone quarry of Hartleage; but none of any

quality. PART II. ZOOLOGY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Crass I.—MAMMALIA. In the second edition of his History of the British
Quadrupeds, Professor Bell gives seventy-three species
as found in the British Isles, of the following orders,
viz. :—Cheiroptera, 14; Insectivora, 5; Carnivora,
15; Rodentia, 18; Ruminantia, 4; and Cetacea, 22. In Glanvilles Wootton we have twenty-seven, as
follows, viz. :—Cheiroptera, 5; Insectivora, 4; Carni-
yora, 6; Rodentia, 11; and Ruminantia, 1. 1. Martes foina. Marten Cat. Has been killed at
Holnest. _

Cheiroptera. 1. Scotophilus noctula. Great Bat. Common. I
found several a few years ago in a hole of the
old walnut tree in the Cowleaze. 2. S. pipistrellus. Common Bat. Common. 28 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Vespertilio Daubentonii. Daubenton’s Bat, or
Little Black Bat. Abundant. 1. Plecotus auritus. Long-eared Bat. Not common. 2. P. barbastellus. Barbastelle Bat. Not common. A few were found in the tower of the church
when it was restored (1875) in company with
the above. Insectivora. 1. Erinaceus europeus. Hedgehog. Common. 1. Talpa europea. Mole or Want. Common, but
not often seen except when caught in a trap. 1. Sorex vulgaris. Shrewerop. Common. 2. S. fodiens. Water Shrew. Common. Carnivora. 1. Meles taxus. Badger. Common in the Green
Wall and Wootton Wood, but not often seen. One was captured and brought up here alive a
few years ago; but it managed to Ceye during
the night. 1. Lutea vulgaris. Otter. Rare and not often seen. I have a specimen stuffed, which was caught in
the river a few years ago (1863). 1. Mustela vulgaris. Weasel. Common. 2. M.erminea. Stoat. Common. putorius. Polecat. Rare. A few only have

been seen at irregular intervals. 1. Vulpes vulgaris. Fox. Abundant. MAMMALIA. 29

Rodentia. 1. Sciurus vulgaris. Squirrel. Abundant. The
prettiest and most playful animal we have. - 1. Myoxus avellanarius. Dormouse. Common. It
sleeps all through the winter.

. Mus minutus. Harvest Mouse. Common.

. M. sylvaticus. Long-tail Field Mouse. Common.

. M. musculus. Common Mouse. Abundant.

. M.decumanus. Brown Rat. Abundant.

. Arvicola amphibius. Water Rat. Abundant. A. agrestis. Common Field Mouse. Common.

. A. glareolus. Red Field Mouse. Common.

. Lepus timidus. Hare. Abundant formerly, but
rare of late years. 2. L. cuniculus. Rabbit. Abundant. Black varieties
have occasionally been met with. errr onr

Ruminantia. 1. Cervus capreolus. Roe Deer. Rare, but more
common in the Middlemarsh Woods. It used
~uset formerly to be hunted with greyhounds. Cuass II.—AVES. Of the three hundred and seventy-six birds which
have been observed in the British Isles, thirty-four
belong to the order Raptores; one hundred and forty-
two to Insessores; seventeen to Rasores; seventy-

30 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. seven to Grallatores; and one hundred and six to
Natatores. In the parish of Glanville’s Wootton ninety-two have
been observed of the following orders :—Raptores,
eight species ; Insessores, sixty-four; Rasores, six ;
Grallatores, nine ; and Natatores, five. The following birds have been killed in the adjoin-
ing parishes —

1. Muscicapa atricapilla. Pied Flycatcher. Shot at
Bishop’s Caundle by Stephen Digby, Esq. 2. Cypselus alpinus. White-bellied Swift A single
specimen was shot at the Caundle Holts by
Somerville Digby, Esq. .

3. Ardea stellaris. Great Bittern. Shot at Bishop's
Caundle by C. W. Digby, Esq. 4. Numenius arquatus. Curlew. Killed at Holnest
by J. S. W. S. E. Drax, Esq.’s gamekeeper. 5. Machetes pugnax. Ruff. Shot at Holwell by the
late Mr. Warry. 6. Fulica atra. Bald-faced Coot. Common at Alton
St. Panchas. 7. Thalassidroma pelagica. Stormy Petrel. One was
knocked down by a boy at Middlemarsh with a
stick on November 5th, 1863, and brought
here—twenty miles from the sea. 8. Strix otus. Long-eared Owl. Shot at Holnest by
J. 8. W. S. E. Drax, Esq.’s gamekeeper; and
also at Stock Gaylard by M. Yeatman, Esq. ay

 

81

Raptores.

. Falco peregrinus. Peregrine Faleon. Very rare. A single specimen was caught by a boy, after
having just knocked down a partridge, in the
year 1838.

. Falco subbuteo. Hobby. Rare. It used formerly

to breed on Dungeon, and also in the Middle-
marsh Woods. F. Hsalon. Merlin. Formerly common, but none
have been seen for a great many years.

. F. tinnunculus. Kestrel. Common. It is curious

to observe how, as the other Hawks have de-
creased in numbers, this one has increased.

. F, nisus. Sparrow Hawk. Common, and formerly

more abundant than the Kestrel.

. F. milvus. Kite. Formerly common, but none

have been seen for thirty years. It used to
breed in the Middlemarsh Woods; and the
children of Sam Skeats, the keeper, took some
young ones, which they used to teaze with red
bits of cloth.

. Strix aluco. Tawny Owl. Very rare, if not ex-

tinct now; but formerly common. About
three or four years ago I saw one on a branch
of a fir tree in the Withybed, and mobbed by a
crowd of small birds of various kinds.

. S.flammea. Barn Owl. Common. 32

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Insessores.

. Muscicapa griseola. Spotted Flycatcher. Common. Tt is very fond of grapes.

. Turdus pilaris. Fieldfare or Wildfare. Occa-

sionally abundant in the winter. In the
autumn they are very destructive to apple
trees.

. T. iliacus. Redwing. Occasionally abundant in

the winter. Some years they remain with us as
late as May.

. 'L. viscivorus. Stone Thrush, or Missel Thrush. Abundant. T. musicus. Song Thrush. Abundant.

 

. T. merula. Blackbird. Abundant. Sylvia modularis. Hedge Sparrow. Abundant.

. S. rubecula. Robin Redbreast. Abundant. 3. S. pheenicurus. Redstart or Firetail. Common. o

. S.rubicola. Stonechat. Rare. A few have been

seen by my father on Newland Common.

. S. enanthe. Wheatear. Rare. A few have been

killed by my father on Newland Common. }. S.philomela. Nightingale. Occasionally abundant.
. 8. atricapilla. Blackeap. Abundant.

. S. hortensis. Garden Warbler. Common.

. S. cinerea. Whitethroat. Common.

. S.curruca. Lesser Whitethroat or Pettichaps. Common. $. sylvicola. Wood Wren. Common. eornrewe

»

rPYprpe

. Anthus arboreus. ‘Tree Pipit.
. A. pratensis. Meadow Pipit or Tit Lark, Abundant. AVES. 38

. Sylvia trochilus. Willow Wren. Abundant. 13. 14. S. rufa. Chiffchaff. Abundant. S. locustella. Grasshopper Warbler. Common. It chirps in the evening very much like a
cricket.

. Regulus cristatus. Gold-crested Wren. Common.
. R. ignicapillus. Fire-crested Wren. Rare..

. Parus major. Great Tit. Common.

. P. ceruleus. Blue or Tom Tit. Abundant.

. P. ater. Cole Tit. Rare. In 1862 I found a

nest of this bird in Ham Orchard.

. P. caudatus. Long-tailed Tit or Chattermag. Common.

. Motacilla Yarrellii. Pied Wagtail, Water Wagtail,

or Molly Washdish. Abundant.

. M. sulphurea. Grey Wagtail. Common.
. M, flava. Ray's or Yellow Wagtail. A much rarer

bird than the preceding ones. Rare. Alauda arvensis. Sky Lark. Common.

. A. arborea. Wood Lark. Common.
. Emberiza miliaria. Common Bunting. Not

common.

. E. citrinella, Yellowhammer. Abundant.
. Fringilla celebs. Chaffinch. The most abundant

little bird we have.

. F. domestica. House Sparrow. Abundant.
. F.chloris. Greenfinch. Common. 34 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 4. Fringilla coccothraustes. Hawfinch. Rare; but in
the winter of 1874 several were seen in the yard
at the back door of the Manor House, one of
which I had stuffed. 5. F. carduelis. Goldfinch. Common. 6. F.spinus. Siskin. Has been but very rarely seen. 7. F.cannabina. Linnet. Common. 8. F. linaria. Lesser Redpole. Rare. In 1862 I
found a nest with four eggs of this bird on
Newland Common. 1. Loxia pyrrhula. Bullfinch. Common. My father
kept one tame for seven years, and it used to
talk very plainly. 2. L. curvirostra. Common Crossbill. Rare. A few
old nests of this species have been found in the
orchard by G. B. Wollaston, Esq., and myself. 1. Sturnus vulgaris. Starling. Abundant. 1. Corvus corax. Raven. Formerly common. A
pair, until the last ten years, used to build ina
Scotch fir tree on Dungeon. 2. C. corone. Crow. Common. 8. C. frugilegus. Rook. Abundant. There is a
rookery close to the Manor House. 4. C. monedula. Jackdaw. Abundant. 5. C. pica. Magpie. Common. 6. C. glandarius. Jay. Common. A man in this
parish (Tucker by name) kept one alive in a
cage for fifteen years. 1, Picus viridis. Green Woodpecker. Abundant. AVES. 85

A pair are very fond of walking about the lawn
in front of the Manor House.

. Picus major. Greater Spotted Woodpecker. Rare.

. P. minor. Lesser Spotted Woodpecker. Rare,
but has been more often observed than the
above. - Yunx torquilla. Wryneck. Rather rare. One
was caught by a boy near Pulham Lake last
summer.

. Certhia familiaris. Creeper. Not common. Last
spring I found a nest with young ones in the
hole of an ash tree at Holwell.

. Troglodytes Europeus. Common Wren or Cutty. Abundant.

. Sitta Europea. Nuthatch. Common. In cold
winters several come into the yard at the back
of the Manor House to be fed, along with
numerous other birds. 1. Cuculus canorus. Cuckoo. Abundant.

. Alcedo ispida. Kingfisher. Common about the
little streams and Roundchimneys Pond.

. Hirundo rustica. Swallow. Common.

. H. urbica. House Martin. Common. This and
the preceding have decreased in numbers
of late years. .

. Cypselus apus. Swift. Rare, and has been but
seldom observed in this parish, although it
builds in the church tower of the adjoining one
of Holwell. 36 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Caprimulgus Europeus. Nightjar or Goatsucker. Abundant in the woods. Rasores. e

. Columba palumbus. Ring Dove, or Wood Pigeon. Abundant. 2. C. Ainas. Stock Dove. Common. It builds in

hollow old apple trees. C. livia. Rock Dove. Not common. 4. C. turtur. Turtle Dove. Not common. 1. Phasianus colchicus. Pheasant. Not so common
as in most places, nor truly native. 1. Perdix cinerea. Partridge. Generally abundant. a

Grallatores.

. Vanellus cristatus. Peewit, Plover, or Lapwing. Common. 1. Ardea cinerea. Common Heron. Occasionally
seen. Scolopax rusticola. Woodcock. Occasionally
common in the winter time. It has been
known to breed in the Middlemarsh Woods. S. gallinago. Common Snipe. Occasionally com-
mon in the winter time. Pr

2

=

S. gallinula. Jack Snipe. Occasionally common
in the winter time.
. Crex pratensis. Land Rail or Corn Crake. Occa-
sionally common.
. Rallus aquaticus. Water Rail. Not common. REPTILIA. 37

1. Gallinula chloropus. Moorhen. Abundant. 1. Phalaropus lobatus. Grey Phalarope. Rare, but
has been occasionally seen flying over Round-
chimneys Pond. Natatores. 1. Anas boschas. Wild Duck. Occasionally com-
mon. Last spring an old duck hatched her
young on Roundchimneys Pond. 2. A.crecca. Teal. Rare. A few have been shot by
my father years ago. 1. Podiceps minor. Little Grebe or Dabchick. Not
common. One was captured alive by a boy a
few years ago. 1. Sterna minuta. Lesser Tern. Very rare. A
single specimen was shot by my father in Oc-
tober, 1881. 1. Larus canus. Common Sea Gull. Has been seen
here several times, especially when there is
rough weather out at sea. Crass IIT.—REPTILIA. Sauria. 1. Lacerta vivipara. Common Lizard. Not com-
mon. It has been seen in Haywood Broad-
alders and Pelles. Bs HISLORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Ophidia. 1. Pelius berus. Viper or Adder. Not so common
as it used to be. I had a beautiful dog a few
years ago which was bitten by one, and had to
be killed in consequence. 1. Natrix torquata. Common Snake. Common. 1. Anguis fragilis. Slow-worm. Not common. I
have occasionally found it under bark, when
hunting for beetles. Amphibia. 1. Bufo vulgaris. ‘oad. Common. 1. Rana temporaria. Frog. Abundant. The young
(which are very different-looking creatures, and
live entirely in water) are called Tadpoles. 1. Triton cristatus. Great Water or Warty Newt. Not common. 1. Lophinus punctatus. Little Water Newt or Eft. Abundant in the Eweleaze Pond, &c.

Crass IV.—PISCES. Chondeopterygia. 1. Petromyzon fluviatile. Lampern. Common in
the river. PISCES. 39

Apodii. 1. Anguila vulgaris. Common Kel. Abundant. Malacopterygii. 1. Salmo fario. Common Trout. In the river, but
not so common as it used to be. 1. Leuciscus phoxinus. Minnow. Abundant. 2. L. vulgaris. Dace. Common in the river. 3. L. rutilus. Roach. Common in the river. 1. Tinca vulgaris. Tench. Common in Round-
chimneys Pond, where it was introduced by
my father several years ago. 1. Cyprinus carpio. Carp. Not common. About a
dozen were put into Roundchimneys Pond
several years ago by my father, and they have
now grown to a very large size. Acanthopterygii. 1. Pecea fluviatilis. Perch, Abundant in Round-
chimneys Pond, where it was introduced several
years ago by my father. 1. Cottus gabio. Bullhead. Abundant. 1. Gasterosteus trachiurus. Common Stickleback. Common in the river. 40 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. Crass V.—INSECTA. Of the 13,280 insects which (as far as I know) have
been taken in the British Isles, A118 belong to
the order Hymenoptera, 3374 to Coleoptera, 49 to
Orthoptera, 331.to Neuroptera, 2062 to Lepidoptera,
2235 to Diptera, 55 to Aphaniptera, 441 to Hemiptera,
and 622 to Homoptera. 3890 have been taken in the parish of Glanville’s
Wootton, of the following orders :—Hymenoptera,
681; Coleoptera, 911; Orthoptera, 23; Neuroptera,
149; Lepidoptera, 910; Diptera, 800; Aphaniptera,
33; Hemiptera, 178; and Homoptera, 194. Owing to its having been my father's favourite
branch of Natural History, and to the multitude of
species, I have thought it best to divide the class
Insecta into orders and tribes, or families. Several of the insects found in this parish are figured
and described in Curtis's ‘ British Entomology.’

Order I.—Hymenorrera. Amongst the rarer species of Hymenoptera found in
this parish, I think the following are most deserving
of notice:—Pompilus variegatus; Crabro signatus ;
Cephus phthiscus; Lyda marginata; Lyda arbustorum;
Hylotoma segmentaria; Myrmosa melanocephala;
Evagethes bicolor; Spilomena Troglodytes; Alyson

HYMENOPTERA. 41

lunicornis; Saropoda fureata; Heriades campanu-
larie ; Osmia pilicornis; Chrysis fulgida; Decatoma
Cooperi; Encyrtus mirabilis; Coccophagus flavus;
Ceraphron Halidayi; Streblocera fulviceps; Janus
femoratus; Cephus troglodytes; Allantus punctum;
Lophyrus rufus ; Hylotoma cyaneocrocea; Hylotoma
enodis; Hylotoma cerulea; Mymar pulchella; and
Myrmecomorphus rufescens. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. British Isles. Glanyille's Wootton. Heterogyna . . 22 8
Fossores . . . . 122 42
Vespide . .. . 20 10
Apide . 1... 14 87
Chrysidide . . . 22 8
Cynipide . 2. 100 34
Chaleidide . . . 1344 109
Proctotrupide . . 375 26
Braconide . . . 439 85
Ichneumonide . . 1186 91
Evanide . .. . 7

Xiphydriide . . 17

Tenthredine . . . 250 122

Total number of species) an cs

as far as I can make out. On looking over the summary, it may be observed
that Glanville’s Wootton is very deficient in the

42 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Ichneumonide and Chalcidide. The reason of this
is, that I possess numerous species of these families
without names. The following eight species have been taken in the
surrounding parishes :—

1. Formica rufa, Linn. Horse Ant. Taken by my
father at Holnest. 2. Aporeus unicolor, Spin. Very rare. A. single
specimen only was taken by my father at
Middlemarsh, June 18th, 1835. 8. Astata boops, Sch. Rare. Taken by Mr. Dalton
Serrel, at Stourton Caundle. 4. Nomada Roberjeoctiana, Panz. Rare. Taken by

my father at Holnest, July Ist, 1824, and July
8th, 1832. 5, Smiera sisipes, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father
at Cosmore Quag, July Ist, 1839, and July
12th, 1843. 6. Banchus pictus, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father
at Middlemarsh, May 13th, 1831; also by
myself, May 18th, 1865. 7. Ichneumon sugillatorius, Linn. Very rare. A

single specimen only was taken by my father
at Middlemarsh, July 28th, 1831. °

8. Zarwa fasciata, Linn. Very rare. A couple
of specimens were taken by my father at
Middlemarsh, July 27th, 1836. HYMENOPTERA. AB

Heterogyna. 1. Formica fuliginosa, Lat. Black Ant or Emmet. The neuters are occasionally met with in the
woods, but the males and females are rare. 2 F.nigra, Linn. Garden Ant. Common, especially
in the greenhouse, where they may be observed
milking the Aphides.

. F. umbrata, Nyl. Brown Ant. Common. One
day, as I was going to Holwell, I saw an

3°

immense swarm of all the three sexes on an
old oak tree called Gog. 4. F. flava, De Geer. Yellow or Turf Ant or Emmet. Abundant. 5

Myrmica ruginodis, Nyl. Common. M. scabrinodis, Nyl. Abundant. It is very fond
of eating unripe fruit in the kitchen garden,
and also of being under bark.

. M. acervorum, Fab. Rare. I found 2 nest of the
neuters of this ant in the stump of a tree, in
the hedge, between the Eweleaze and Brook
Furlong, in 1872. 1. Myrmosa melanocephala, Fab. Rare. A mele
was taken by my father in Broad Alders,
August 1st, 1867; males have also been taken
by myself in Broad Alders, July 24th, 1866;
and in Sandhills, July 31st, 1867 ; also a female
by myself in Sandhills, July 25th, 1870.

eae

£2

a

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S Woorron. Fossores. Tiphia minuta, Vand-Lind. Occasionally common
on flowers in June.

. Pompilus niger, Fab. Of frequent occurrence but

not common, on dry banks, from June to
August. P. variegatus, Linn. Very rare. Taken by my
father ; also a single specimen by myself on a
post in Waterly Lane, June 11th, 1868.

. P. hyalinatus, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father

and by myself in Sandhills, July 21st, 1870.

. P. exaltatus, Fab. Of frequent occurrence, but

not common, in hot and dry weather, from May
to September.

. P. affinis, Vand-Lind. Very rare. A single specimen

only was taken by myself in the yard, May 28th,
1872.

. P. sepicola, Smith. Of frequent occurrence, but

not common, in hot and dry weather, from
May to August.

. P. gibbus, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father,

and myself, in Wootton Wood, July 19th,
1873.

. Evagethes bicolor, St. Farg. Rare. The last

specimen was taken by myself on June 27th,
1874.

. Ceropales maculata, Fab. Very rare. Taken by

my father on Newland Common, August 9th,

HYMENOPTERA. 45

1842; and by myself in Sandhills, July 30th,
1868. 1. Nysson spinosus, Fab. Of frequent occurrence, but
not common, on flowers from May to July. 2. N. interruptus, Lat. Of frequent occurrence, but
not common, on flowers from May to July. 1. Gorytes mystaceus, Linn. Of frequent occurrence,
but not common, on flowers from June to
August. 1. Mellinus arvensis, Linn. Common on flowers
from July to September. 5. M. sabulosus, Fab. Common on flowers, July and
August. 1. Trypoxylon figulus, Linn. Common on trees from
June to August. 2. I’. clavicerum, St. Farg. Common on trees from
July to September. 1. Crabro clavipes, Linn. Common on trees from
July to September. 2. C. tibialis, Fab. Common on trees from July to
September. 3. C. signatus, Panz. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by myself off wood in the
withy bed, June 20th, 1867. 4. C. cephalotes, Panz. Common on wood, July and

August. C. cribrarius, Linn. Common, July and August. C. xylurgus, Shuck. Common, July and August. C. vagus. Fab. Common from June to August. noe

46 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 8. Crabro cetratus, Shuck. Common from June to

August. 9. C. tarsatus, Shuck. Common from June to
August. 10. C. leucostoma, Linn. Common from June to
August. 11. C. elongatulus, Vand-Lind. Common from June
to August. 12. C. spinispectus, Shuck. Common from June to
August. .

13. C. obliquus, Shuck. Common from June to
August. 14. C. albilabris, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father
and myself on Whitedown, July 6th, 1870, and
August 11th, 1870. 1. Stigmus pendulus, Panz. Common from June to
August. 1. Spilomena troglodytes, Shuck. Very rare. Taken
by my father at Roundchimneys Pond, June
25th, 1839. 1. Diodontus minutus, Fab. Rare. Taken by my
father, April 21st, 1842. 9. D. tristis, Vand-Lind. Common from May to July. 1. Passalecus gracilis, Curt. Common from May to
July. 2. P. cornigera, Shuck. Common from May to July. , 1. Pemphredon lugubris, Fab. Common from June
to August. 2. P. anthracinus, Smith. Common from June to
August. HYMENOPTERA. 47

. Cemonus unicolor, Vand-Lind. Common from
May to August.

. Alyson lunicornis, Fab. Rare. Taken by my
father in the garden, August, 1838; August
20th, 1841; August 7th, 1842; also in Sand-
hills Copse, July 26th, 1870; and by my-
self in Mullett’s Long-ground, August 22nd,
1873; and in the garden August 20th, 1875. - Mimesa unicolor, Vand-Lind. Rare. Taken by my
father ; also by myself on Newland Common,
June 27th, 1874.

. Psen atratus, Vand-Lind. Rare. Taken by myself,
September 12th, 1870, in Ham.

. P. equestris, Fab. Very rare. Taken by myself,
July 25th, 1877, on Whitedown. Vespide.

. Odynerus murarius, Linn. Common from June to
August.

. O. bifasciatus, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father
June. 26th, 1841, and July 7th, 1866; it has
also been bred by myself from an oak-apple,
May 28th, 1867, and taken on July 2nd, 1873.

. O. parietum, Linn. Common Black Wasp. Abundant from May to August. A few years
ago one made her nest in a work-box, and
used to tap the window to be let in and out.

. O. trifasciatus, Fab. Common, June and July.

. Epione spinipes, Linn. Common in May and June. 48 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Vespa crabro, Linn. Hornet. Common. It is the
most formidable insect we have. The males
(which have no stings) are only found in
September and October; but the females
hibernate in old thatch.

. V. vulgaris, Linn. Common Wasp. Abundant
in most years. The males (which have no
stings) are only found in the autumn; but the
females hibernate in old thatch. 8. V. rufa, Linn. Common. 4. V.Germanica, Fab. Common. 5. V. sylvestris, Scop. Common. ~

Apide. Nomada ruficornis, Linn. Common Cuckoo Bee. Abundant from April to June. 2. N. borealis, Zett. Common in company with
Andrena Clarkella, from March 18th to May. r

8. N. succincta, Panz. Abundant from April to June. 4. N. ochrostoma, Kirby. Common, May and June. 5. N. Lathburiana, Kirby. Common, June and July. 6. N. varia, Panz. Common, May and June. 7. N. signata, Jur. Not common. 8. N. alternata, Kirby. Not common. 9, N. lineola, Panz. Not common. 10. N. Fabriciana, Linn. Common, May and June. 11. N. Germanica, Panz. Common, in company with
Andrena estiva, from March 27th to May. 12. N. flavoguttata, Kirby. Common in June. - HYMENOPTERA. 4u

18. Nomada furva, Panz. Common in the woods in
June. 1. Stelis pheoptera, Kirby. Very rare. Taken by
my father, June 19th, 1825

1. Ceelioxys simplex, Nyl. Not common. I have
taken this bee on the roof of the house in
June and July, in company with Osmia rufa. 1. Melecta punctata, Fab. Rare. ‘Taken by my
father, April 27th, 1840; and by myself, May
14th, 1875,

. Apathus Barbutellus, Kirby. Not common.
. A.nemorum. Fab. Not common.
. A. rupestris, Fab. Common.
. Bombus Harrisellus, Kirby. Of frequent occur-
rence, but not common.

. B. lapidarius, Linn. Common.

. B. Derhamellus, Kirby. Common. 4, B. pratorum, Linn. Common. 5. B. terrestris, Linn. Common. Humble Bee or
Dumbledor. Abundant. Pode

~~

6. B. hortorum, Linn. Abundant. 7. B. lucorum, Linn. Common. 8. B. silvarum, Linn. Common. 9. B. muscorum, Linn. Abundant. It is fond of
taking possession of old birds’ nests. 1. Apis mellifica, Linn. Honey Bee. Abundant. 1. Anthophila retusa, Linn. Abundant from March
to June. 1. Sarropoda fureata, Panz. Rare, ‘Taken by my
E

50 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. father, May 18th, 1837; also by myself in
Sandhill’s Copse, June 22nd, 1870, and in
Wootton Wood, August 1st, 1870. 1, Eucera longicornis, Linn. Long-horned Bee. Oc-
casionally common, May and June. 1, Anthidium manicatum, Linn. Occasionally com-
mon on flowers from June to August. 1, Chelostorna florisomnis, Linn. Abundant on
posts from June to August. 1. Heriades campanularum, Kirby. Very rare. Taken by my father, June 26th, 1828. 1. Megachile centuncularis, Linn. Occasionally
common on posts, June and July.
. M. ligniseca, Kirby. Carpenter Bee. Occasionally
common on posts, June and July. 1. Osmia rufa, Linn. Large Mason Bee. Common
on the house and walls from May to July. 2. O. pilicornis, Smith. Rare. Taken by myself in
Mullett’s Copse, May 8th, 1871, and in Sand-
hill’s Copse, May 11th, 1871. 8. O. aurulenta, Panz. Not common, April and
May.
. O. enea, Linn. Not common, May and June.
. O. fulviventris, Panz. Not common, June and
July. 1. Colletes fodiens, Kirby. Occasionally common on
flowers in the island. July and August. 1. Andrena xanthura, Kirby. Not common, April
and May. 2»

ae

oe

ll. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. Cre
PPP pe

HYMENOPTERA. 51

. Andrena convexiuscula, Kirby. Oceasionally

common, May and June.
. Afzeliella, Kirby. Common, April and May. fuscata, Kirby. Not common, April and May. dorsata, Kirby. Not common, July and
August. parvula, Kirby. Common on flowers in May. nana, Kirby. Not common, June and July. labialis, Kirby. Abundant, May and June. chrysocles, Kirby. Common in June. albicrus. Occasionally common, May and
June. A. aprilina, Smith. Rare. Taken by my father,
May 12th, 1835, and May 15th, 1835. A. fulvago, Kirby. Not common, May. A. fulvescens. Smith. Very rare. Taken by
my father, May 29th, 1840. A. denticulata, Kirby. Not common, July and

Pee

August. A. Trimmerana, Kirby. Abundant, March and
April. A. nigroenea, Kirby. Abundant, April and May. A. atriceps, Kirby. Abundant, April and May. A. varians, Rossi. Common, April and May. A. helveola, Linn. Common, April and May. A. estiva, Smith. Common, May and June. A. Gwynana, Kirby. Abundant from February to
April. A. Clarkella, Kirby. Abundant, March and April. od HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOUTTON. 23. Andrena fulva, Schr. ‘This, the most beautiful
Bee we have, has been occasionally taken in
April and May. 24. A. albicans, Kirby. Abundant, April and May. 25. A. nitida, Kirby. Not common, May and June
26. A. thoracica, Fab. Not common, April and May. 27. A. spinigera, Kirby. Very rare. ‘l'aken by my
father on Newland Common, April 18th,
1858. 28. A. rose, Panz. Very rare. Taken by my father
in the garden, April 8th, 1842. 29. A. cingulata, Fab. Occasionally common, May _
and June. 1. Halictus rubicundus, Kirby. Common, July and
August.
. H. cylindricus, Fab. Abundant om flowers from
August to October. 3. H.albipes, Fab. Abundant froin August to October. 4. H. flavipes, Fab. Abundant from July to
September. 5. H. lugubris, Kirby. Common, July and August. 6. H. Smeathmanellus, Kirby. Common, July and
August. 7. H. nitidiusculus, Kirby. Common, July and
August. 8. H. morio, Fab. Abundant from August to Octo-
ber, and again in March and April. y. TH. minutissimus. Common, August and Septem-
ber, and again in March and April. 2»

HYMENOPTERA. 5a
10. Halictus minutus, Kirby. Abundant, August and
September, and again in March and April. 11. H. eratus, Kirby. Common, July and August.

. Hyleus communis, Nyl. Common on flowers,
June and July. ‘These little bees emit a
delicious scent, like musk. 2. H. signata, Panz. Not so common as the pre-

ceding, July and August. 1. Sphecodes gibbus, Linn. Occasionally common
in July and August, and also in April. 2. S. Geoffroyellus, Kirby. Occasionally common,
September and October; and also in April and
May. Chrysidide. -

. Chrysis ignita, Linn. Common Ruby-tail. Abun-
dant on posts and palings from May to August. Itis rather a variable species, especially in size. Var. effulgens, Leach. Common. » affinis, Leach. Common. » aurulenta, Steph. Common. micans, Steph. Common. pulchra, Steph. Common. »» ephippium, Steph. Common. », confinis, Steph. Not common. » fulvimans, Steph. Not common. » nitens, Steph. Not common. 2. Chrysis austriaca, Fab. Rare. Taken by my
father, June 22nd, 1821, and July 24th, 1825. 54 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 8. Chrysis fulgida, Linn. Very rare. A single speci-
men only was taken by myself on the gate of
Sandhill’s Copse, June 22nd, 1870. 4. C. bidentata, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father,
August 19th, 1840, and June 29th, 1870; also
by myself, August 2nd, 1867, and July 4th,
1870, in Sandhill’s Copse. 6

5. C. cyanea, Linn. Very rare. Taken by my father
June 22nd, 1824. 1. Cleptes semiaurata, Linn. Very rare. Taken by
my father, August 6th, 1823; and by myself,
July 10th, 1866, in the garden. 1. Hedychrum enea, Fab. Of frequent occurrence,
July and August. 2. H. auratum, Linn. Of occasional occurrence,
Tune and July. Cynipide. 1. Cynips Kollari, Giraud. Devonshire Gall Insect. The females are common in September and
October ; but no males even of the genus have
ever been seen. 2. C. conglomerata. Common Gall Insect. Abundant
in September and October. 3. C. lignicola, Hart. Common in April and May. 4. C. quercus-radicis, Fab. Rare. A few years ago I
found some very hard galls on the trunk of
an oak, near the ground, in November; cut
them open, and found a few of this species
inside. 1

HYMENOPTERA. 55

. Cynips quercus-gemme, Linn. Artichoke Gall
Insect. The galls of this species are very
common on the twigs of oaks.

. C. quercus-folii, Linn. Of occasional occurrence
in October and November. - Biorhiza aptera, Fab. Very rare. A single speci-
men only was taken by myself on a post in
Sandhill’s Copse on January 3rd, 1870. 1. Andricus quereus-ramuli, Linn. Woolly Oak-Apple

Insect. Not so common as the next. 2. A. quercus-terminalis, Fab. Common Oak-Apple

-

Insect. Abundant, May and June.
. Trigonaspis megaptera, Panz. Of frequent occur-
rence in June. 2. T. longipennis, Fab. Oak Spangle Insect. Not

common, June. 1. Rhodites rose, Linn. Rose Gall Insect. Common

in June. 2. R. nervosa, Curt. Rare. Taken by my father in

Mullett’s Copse, June 12th, 1839. 1. Neuropterus numismatis, Oliv. Button Gall Insect. Common.
. N. longiventris, Hart. Common.

. N. globuli, Hart. Common. 2. 3. N. fumipennis, Hart. Common. 4
1

. Dryophanta divisa, Hart. Pink Gall Insect
Common. 7

.D. agama, Hart. Common Leaf Gall Insect. Common. HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Dryophanta quercus-pedunculi, Linn. Common. 4. D. quercus-inferus, Linn. Common. ~

oo ~

wee

PEPER wo

. Diastrophus rubi, Hart. Bramble Gall Insect. Common.

. D. viminalis, Linn. Common.
. D. coryli. Nut Gall Insect. Common. Cothonapsis rufiventris. Common on oaks. - Seytodes opacus, Walk. Common.
. Aulax pedestris, Curt. Rare. Taken by my father.
. A. subapterus, Walk. Very rare. Taken by my

father.

. A. testaceus. Common.

. A. graminis. Rare. Taken by my father.

. Figites aceris. Common on maples.

. F, juniperina. Common on junipers.

. Anacharis eucharoides, Dal. Common.

. A.eucera. Very rare. Taken by my father. Chalcidide.

 

. Chalcis minuta, Fab. Very rare. A single speci-

men only was taken by my father on White-
down, August 9th, 1870.

. Perilampus italicus, Latr. Rare. Taken by my

father in Wootton Wood, July 22nd, 1863, and
Tune 30th, 1864 ; also by myself in Sandhill’s
Copse, July 7th, 1870.

. Eurytoma abrotani, lig. Common on thistles. E, nodularis, Boh. Common.

. E. plumata, Mig. Common, July and August. 2°

HYMENOPTERA. a
=

. Isosoma verticillata, Walk. Common.

. I. egesta, Walk. Not common, June and July.

. I. brevis, Walk. Not common. - Decatoma Cooperi, Curt. Rare. Taken by my

father, June 15th, 1839.

. D. mellea, Walk. Not common.

. Megastigmus dorsalis, Fab. Common.

. M. atedius, Walk. Rare. Taken by my father.

. M. collaris, Boh. Not common.

. M. transyersus, Walk. Common.

. Diomorus armarus, Boh. Very rare. A single

specimen only was taken by my father. Callimone nobilis, Boh. Common.

. C. eynipedis, Walk. Of frequent occurrence. T

have taken it in company with Trigonaspis
megaptera.

. C. Devoniensis, Parfit. Common in the galls of

Cynips Kollari.

. C. bedeguaris, Spin. Common in galls on roses.

. nigri¢ornis, Walk. Common in oak apples.
. varians, Walk. Common.

. Greenii, Curt. Not common.

. purpurascens, Boh. Not common.

. confinis, Walk. Common.

. flavipes, Walk. Common. , quadricolor, Walk. Not common.

. inconstans, Latr. Common. maanannanda

. Spalangia nigra, Latr. Not common.
. Asaphis grammea, Hal. Not common. 58 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Cerocephala formiciformis, Walk. Rare. Taken
by my father ; and a single specimen by myself
in the house, February 21st, 1870. Calypso serratule, Hal. Rare. Macroglenes penetrans, Kirby. Rare.

. Gastrancisteus terminalis, Walk. Rare.

. Pachylarthus smaragdinus, Curt. Common.

. P. flavicornis, Hal. Not common.

. Lamporatus splendens, Westw. Common. L. hortensis, Curt. Not common.

. Seladerma capre, Linn. Common.

. S. encyrtoides, Walk. Not common. Melaporus pyrrhogaster, Hal. Common. M. tumidus, Linn. Common. M. graminicola, Walk. Common.

. Pteromalus puparum, Linn. Common.

. P. fasciventris, West. Common.

. P. tibialis, West. Common on oaks.

. P. micans, Oliv. Common. P. musearum, Linn. Abundant in windows. P. tenuis, Walk. Abundant. P. perpetuis, Walk. Common.

. P. conifer, Walk. Common.

. P. tricolor, Walk. Not common. 10. P. ovatus, Walk. Common. 1L. P. patulus, West. Abundant. 12. P. deplanatus, Walk. Abundant. 13. P. robustus, Walk. Abundant in windows. 14. P. naubolus, Walk. Common. 15. P. platynotus, Walk. Common. PNARMOAP HONKY EP HY PY Pwo Pee

°

16. 18. ~ PPP Rewer re

=

HYNENOPTERA. a9

Pteromalus modestus, Walk. Common.

. P. combustus, Walk. Common. P. redactus, Walk. Common.

. Heteroxys pulcherrimus, West. Of occasional
occurrence, July and August. 2. H. scenicus, Walk. Not common

. Cheiropachus tutela, Walk. Not common.

. C. quadrum, Fab. Of occasional occurrence,
May and June.

. Cleonymus depressus, Fab. Rare.

. Merostenus lunaris, Curt. Not common.

. Trigonoderus immaculatus, Curt. Not common.

. T. bimaculatus, Walk. Common.

. ‘I’. pulchra, West. Rare.

. T. elegans, Walk. Rare.

. Caloseta vernalis, Walk. Rare.

. Eupelmus Degeeri, Dalm. Not common.

. Encyrtus mirabilis, Walk. Very rare. Taken by
my father in Buttons, August 9th, 1842.

. E. clavicornis, Dalm. Common. .

. E. sericeus, Dalm. I have met with this (the
commonest species of this interesting genus)
even in the winter time.

. E. tesselatus, Dalm. Not common. 5. E. hemipterus, Dalm. Common.

. T. Zetterstedtii, Westw. Rare. Taken by my
father, August 28th, 1838.

. E. apicalis, Dalm. Rare. Taken by my father on

thistles, August 7th, 1838, and May 28rd, 1839. »

60 “HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 8. Encyrtus Swederi, Dalm. Very rare. Taken by
my father; and a single specimen by myself,
Suly 18th, 1866. 9. E. punctipes, Dalm. Very rare. Taken by my
father in Mullett’s Copse, August 13th, 1840. 10. E. sylvius, Dalm. Rare. 11. E. flaminius, Dalm. Taken by my father in
Waterly Lane Withy-bed, June 27th, 1870. 12. E. conifere, Hal. Rare. 13. E. vernalis, Walk. Rare. 1. Trichogramma evanescens, West. Rare. Taken
by my father near the pond, July 2nd, 1840. 1. Coccophagus flavus, Curt. Rare. Taken by my
father in Broad Alders, August 31st, 1866 ;
and by myself in Haywood, August 28th, 1868. 1, Aphelinus basalis, Westw. Not common. I beat
a few of this species from a juniper in Pelles,
February, 1868. 2. A. abdominalis, Walk. Not common. 1. Entedon trifasciatus, Westw. Not common. E. Tegar, Walk. Not common. E. gemmeus, Walk. Common. E. acorus, Walk. Common. E. anarus, Walk. Not common. E. Ptarmys, Walk. Not common. E. Epigonus, Walk. Not common.
. Tranocera leucothris, Hal. Of occasional occur-
rence from September to February. 1. Stenomesius notata, Westw. Rare. cae es

ras

ww

°

we

Ree ewe

oer

wreonr

 

 

s HYMENOPTERA. 61

. Stenomesius maculatus, Westw. Rare.
. Closterocerus newnia, Walk. Rare. C. maculipennis, Walk. Not common.

. C. lunatum, Walk. Very rare. Taken by my

father, May 29th, 1833.

. Stelonus galle, Curt. Not common.

. S. vittatus, Curt. Not common.

. Eucercus parvus, Walk. Rare.

. E. laogonus, Walk. Not common.

. Omphale admirabilis, Westw. Rare.

. Euplectus bicolor, Swed. Not common.
. Choreius ineptus, Dalb. Not common.
. C. coleoptratus, Curt. Rare,

- Eulophus capre, Linn. Rare.

. E. pectinicornis, Linn. Rare. E. Iapetus, Walk. Common. Artynes, Walk. Not common. E. Tanthes, Walk. Not common.

  

. E. Beotus, Walk. Not common. E. Gonippus, Walk. Not common.

. E. elegans, Curt. Rare. Cirrospilus vittatus, Walk. Common. C. flavovarius, Walk. Common. C. elegantissimus, Walk. Common.

. C. orsinus, Walk. Not common.
. C. Lycomedes, Walk. Not common.
. C. Lynacus, Walk. Not common. C. medidas, Walk. Not common. C. metalarus, Walk. Not common. Perey

-

 

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Cirrospilus anamentus, Wlk. Not common.

. Tetrastrichus evonymele, Bouche. Common.
. 'T. quercens, Walk. Common.
. T. Achemenes, Walk. Common. T. Xerxes, Walk. Common. apo, Walk. Common. T. Orodes, Walk Not common.
. Bunus, Walk. Not common.
. T. Tymba, Walk. Not common.
. ‘LT. Orsillus, Walk. Not common.
. T. Prosymna, Walk. Not common.
. Prosorus Sarpedon, Walk. Not common.
. P. fulvicollis, Walk. Rare.
. Dicladocerus Westwoodii, Walk. Rare. Proctotrupide.

. Mymar pulchellus, Curt. Rare. Taken by my
father in Frith, Eugust 18th, 1838; ‘August
Slst, 1838; and August 5th, 1846. A most
singular insect.

. Ooctonus vulgatus, Hal. Rare. In windows.

. Anophes ovulorum, Linn. Rare. In windows.

. Litus cynipseus, Hal’ Not common.

. Litus fimbriatus, Westw. Taken by my father near
the pond, September 8th, 1834.

. Anagrus atomos, Linn. Not common.

. A. incarnatus, Hal. Rare.

. A. termo, Steph. his is the smallest insect we
possess. pwr

-

Hauke

PPE

HYMENOPTERA. 63

. Platygaster ruficornis, Latr. Not common.

. P. tipule, Kirby. Not common.

. P. sonchi, Walk. Not common.

. Inostemma Boscii, Jur. Rare. Taken by my

father, May 25th, 1839, and June 6th, 1839;
also by myself, April 14th, 1868.

. Thoron metallicum, Hal. Rare. Taken by my

father and myself.

. Seelio rugosulus, Latr. Rare.
. Teleas clavicornis, Latr. Rare. T. varicornis, Latr. Common. T. elatior, Hal. Not common. 'T. procris, Walk. Rare. 'T. Medon, Walk. Common.

. Ceraphron Halidayi, Curt. Very rare. A couple of

specimens were taken by my father in the
withy-bed, August 20th, 1838.

. C. serricornis, Walk. Rare. Taken by my father,

August 15th, 1840.

. Megaspilus dux, Curt. Not common.

. Bethylus formicarius, Latr. Common.

. B. Dalii, Walk. Common.

. Myrmecomorphus rufescens, Westw. A single

specimen only of this very rare and curious
insect was taken by myself in the house, upon
my coat, October 4th, 1869. 1. Embolemus Ruddii, Westw. Very rare. Taken
by A. H. Halliday, Esq., in Broad Alders,
November 10th, 1847 ; by my father in Broad

64 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Alder, October 9th, 1855; and by myself in
Wootton Wood, September 80th, 1870. 1. Drynus infectus, Hal. Rare. Taken by my father
in Mullett’s Copse, June 1837, and May, 1838. 2. D. torquatus, Hal. Not common. 1, Proctotrupes brevipennis, Latr. ‘I'aken by myself,
November, 1867, and November 17th, 1873, in
Wootton Wood. 2. P. niger. Panz. Common. 8. P. viator, Hal. Common. 4, P. fuscipes, Curt. Common. 5. P. pallipes, Jur. Common. 1. Helorus corruscus, Hal. Of frequent occurrence
on oaks, July and August. 1. Aphelopus atratus, Dalm. Rare. Taken by my
father, May, 1841.

. Ismarus dorsiger, Curt. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by myself, May 30th,

1867.

. Cinetis gracilipes, Curt. Common.

. Galesus fuscipennis, Curt. Common.

. Paramesius rufipes, Westw. Common.

. P. longicornis, Curt. Common.

. Spilomicrus brevicornis, Walk. Not common.

. Diapria elegans, Jur. Common. D. conicus, Fab. Common.

. Cephalonomia formiciformis, Westw. Rare in

moss. PePrPrwreey

2 HYMENOPTER\ 65,

Braconide. 1. Aphidius pseudoplatanus, Curt. Common. A. rose, Hal. Abundant. 3. A. ervi, Hal. Abundant. 1. Cheenon anceps, Curt. Common. 2. C. niger, Nees. Common. 8. C. procerus, Hal. Common. 4. C. elegans, Curt. Common. 5. C. gracilis, Curt. Common. 6. C. viduus, Curt. Common. 1. Dacnusa diffinis, Nees. Common. 2. D. areolata, Nees. Common. 1. Alysia manducator, Panz. Common. 2. A. mandibulator, Nees. Common. 8. A. tipule, Scop. Common. 4. A. apii, Curt. Abundant. 5. A. contracta, Hal. Common. 6. A. picinervis, Hal. Abundant. 7. A. conspicuata, Hal. Common. 8. A. rufinotata, Hal. Not common. 9. A. lucicola. Hal. Common. 10. A. speculnm, Hal. Common. 1. Opius carbonarius, Nees. Abundant. 2. O. pactus, Hal. Common. 3. O. pygmeatus, Nees. Common. 4. O. nitidulatus, Nees. Common. 1. Colastes braconius, Hal. Common. 2. C. hariolatus, Hal. Common. r

66 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Hormius monileatus, Nees. Not common. 1. Rhyssalus clavator, Hal. Not common. 1. Spathius rubidus, Rossi. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by myself in Ham
Orchard, out of rubbish, December 30th, 1872. 2. S. clavatus, Panz. Of occasional occurrence

amongst ivy, September and October.

. Clinocentrus excubitor, Hal. Common. - Rogas bicolor, Spin. Common. R. testaceus, Fab. Abundant.

. R. subecolor, Curt. Common.

. R. dispar, Curt. Rare. Taken by my father in the

garden, August 29th, 1888; August 20th, 1841;
and August 24th, 1841.

. Bracon variator, Nees. Abundant.

. B. urinator, Hal. Abundant.

. B. aleator, Curt. Abundant.

. B. desertor, Fab. Not common.

. Microgaster impurus, Nees. Abundant.

. M. falcatus, Nees. Common.

. M. nigricans, Nees. Abundant.

. M. tibialis, Nees. Abundant.

. M. rufipes, Nees. Common.

. M. lateralis, Hal. Common.

. M. vitripennis, Curt. Abundant.

. M. caje, Bouqu. Abundant.

. Acelius germanus, Hal. Of occasional occurrence

in the garden, September and October. 1. Microdus ochropes, Curt, Common. Roepe

NegeEerwneeovne

ro

HYMENOPTERA, oF

Microdus impurus, Nees. Abundant.

. M. deprimatus, Panz. Common. Ascogaster rufescens, Latr. Very rare. A couple
of specimens were taken by myself on July 27th,
1868, and July 27th, 1870. Chelonus oculata, Fab. Abundant.

. C. scaber, Nees. Abundant. C. pulchellus, Curt. Not common.

. C, fulviventris, Curt. Not common.
. Sigalpus caudatus, Nees. Not common. Phylax testaceata, Curt. Not common.

. Macrocentus abdominalis, Fab. Common. M. thoracicus, Nees. Common.

. M. marginata, Nees. Not common.

. Diospilus oleraceus, Hal. Not common.

. Orgillus obscuratus, Nees. Not common.
. Eubadizon pectorale, Nees. Not common. Ganychorus pallipes, Hal. Common. G. ruficornis, Nees. Common. G. paganus, Hal. Rare. Pygostolus stictitus, Fab. Common. P. faleatus, Nees. Rare. Leiophron pallipes, Curt. Common. L. fulmipes, Curt. Not common. L. apicalis, Curt. Rare. Streblocera fulviceps, Westw. Very rare. Taken
by myself in Wootton Wood, September 20th,
1869.

. Perlitus ceralion, Hal. Common. 6S HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Microctonus Idalins, Hal. Common. 2. M. Cynathius, Curt. Not common. 1. Meteorus rubens, Nees. Common. 2. M. colon, Hal. Not common. 3. M. cinetellus, Nees. Common. 4, M. fulvifrons, Curt. Common. 5. M. icterius, Nees. Abundant. 6. M. albitarsis, Curt. Rare. Taken by my father,

"May 28th, 1834; and by myself, July 22nd,

1873. 7 M. pendulator, Lat. Common. Taken by myself,
Tuly 22nd, 1873. 8. M. deceptor, Westw. Not common. ‘Taken by
myself, July 22nd, 1873. Ichneumonidae. 1. Pristomerus vulnerator, Grav. Common. 1. Xylonomus pilicornis, Grav. Very rare. Taken
by my father in the withy-bed, June 24th, 1838,
July 2nd, 1838, and June 20th, 1839. 1. Ophion ventricosum, Gray. Of occasional occur-
rence, May and June.

. O. luteum, Linn. Abundant.

. O. testaceum, Grav. Abundant in August and Sept.

O. cireumflexum, Linn. Abundant.

. O. fibulatum, Grav. Common.

. O. tenuicorne, Gray. Common.

. Campolex mixtus, Schr. Common. 2. C. pugillator, Linn, Common,

Hear en

reper

Bow

2

eee ew

—-

HYMENOPTERA. 69

. Banchus faleator, Grav. Not common.

. Bassus letatorius, Panz. Common.

. B. exsultans, Grav. Common.

. B. albosignatus, Grav. Not common.

. Rhyssa persuasorius, Linn. Of occasional occur-

rence on palings, May and June. Ephialtes carbonarius, Christ. Veryrare. A single
specimen only was taken by myself in the Com-
mon Plantation, on September 2nd, 1872.

. E. gracilis, Sch, Not common.
. Pimpla instigata, Fab. Of occasional occurrence,

August and September.

. P. alternans, Grav. Not common.

. P. turionella, Linn. Abundant amongst fir trees.
. P. graminella, Schr. Abundant.

. P. spuria, Grav. Abundant.

. P. varicornis, Fab. Abundant.

. Schizopyga podagrica, Grav. Common.

. Lampronota arcusata, Grav. Common.

. L, bellata, Gray. Common.

. L. segmentata, Fab. Abundant.

. L. cylindricata, Vill. Common.

. Phytodietus corvinus, Grav. Very rare. A single

specimen only was taken by myself in Broad
Alders, June 2lst, 1867.

. Pezomachus agilis, Fab. Abundant.
. P. acararum, Fab. Abundant. 3. P. fasciatus, Fab. Common.

. P. brachypterus. Common. 70 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 5. Pezomachus Hopei, Grav. Rare. Taken by my
father, May 10th, 1882, und May 25th, 1839. 1. Hemiteles areatus, Panz. Abundant. 2. H. modestus, Grav. Abundant. 3. H. melanarius, Gravy. Abundant. 1. Cryptus nubeculatus, Gray. Very rare. Taken by
my father in the garden, June 15th, 1839, and
August 24th, 1841. 2. C. rufoniger, Grav. Very rare. A single specimen
was taken by myself, September 26th, 1876, in
Wootton Wood. 3. C. minutorius, Fab. Abundant. 1. Alomya nigra, Gray. Very rare. Taken by my
father, June Ist, 1837; and by myself, June,
1863. 2. A. semiflava, Steph. Common. 8. A. ovata, Fab. Common. 1. Tryphon rutilatum, Linn. Common. 2. 'T. elongatum, Fab. Common. 8. 'T. varitarse, Grav. Common. [. albocinctum, Gray. Not common.

. sanguinicolle, Grav. Abundant. 6. T. sexlituratum, Gray. Not common. 7. 'T. sexcinctum, Gray. Common. 8. T. flavilabris, Steph. Common. 9. T. prerogatum, Linn. Common. 1. Mesoleptus testaceus, Fab. Abundant. 2. M. seminiger, Gravy. Common. 3. M. levigatus, Grav. Common. BH

HYMENOPTERA. 71

1. Stilpnus gagates, Grav. Common. ll. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. Spree

- Ichneumon raptorius, Linn. Common.
. I. alboguttatus, Grav. Very rare. A single

specimen only was taken by myself, June 4th,

1868.

lineator, Grav. Common. castigator, Fab. Common. nigerrimus, Steph. Common.

. bilineatus, Grav. Not common.

. maculifrons, Steph. Common. nubeculosus, Grav. Common. fossorius, Linn. Common. fabricator, Fab. Common. Proteus, Christ. Very rare. A single specimen

only was taken by myself in Broad Alders,

June 21st, 1867.

multiannulatus, Gray. Not common. subsericans, Grav. Not common. albifrons, Steph. Not common. grossorius, Fab. Very rare. A single speci-

men only was taken by myself in Mullett’s

Copse, July 7th, 1870.

flavocinctus, Grav. Very rare. Taken by my

father, June 2nd, 1821. I terminatorius, Gravy. Common. I. extensorius, Linn. Abundant. I. sarcitorius, Linn. Abundant. I. ornatorius, Panz. Common. I. Cerinthius, Grav. Very rare. ‘Iaken by my
father. HHA ea

regenerator

w

 

1,

. Janus femoratus, Curt. Ver

 

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WourroN.

. Ichneumon vaginatorius, Linn. Not common.
. I. infractorius, Panz. Not common.
. I, palliatorius, Grav. Common. I. fasciatorius, Fab. Abundant. quadrimaculatus, Schr. Common. occisorius, Fab. Common. oratorius, Fab. Rare. ‘l'aken by my father,
June 7th, 1823.

. flavoniger, Grav. Common.

. natatorius, Fab. Common. La

. sputator, Fab. Common.
. culpatorius, Fab. Common. I
I
. I. hemorrhoidalis, Grav. Common. iF
I

Evanide.

. Fownus assectator, Linn. Of frequent occurrence

on flowers in July. Niphydriide.

. Sirex gigas, Linn. The females are common in

June and July, but the males are rare. It is a

yery injurious insect to fir timber. rave. .\ couple of
specimens were taken by myself in Sandhill’s
Copse, June 5th, 1871, and June 8th, 1871. Cephus troglodytus, Fab. Rare. Taken by my
father in Sandhill’s Copse, June 27th, 1839,
and in Mullett’s Copse, May 29th, 1840; a
single specimen was ulso taken by myself in the
island, June 7th, 1869. - MYMENOPTERA. 2. Cephus satyrus, Panz. Common in the woods,
May and June. 3. C. phthiscus, Fab. Very rare. A single specimen
was taken by my father in Sandhill’s Copse,
May 27th, 1839. 4. C. pygmeus, “Linn, Abundant on flowers, May
and June. e

. C. pusillus, Steph. Common on flowers in June
and July. on

6. C. immaculatus, Steph. Common on flowers in
June and July. Tenthredine. 1. Lyda marginata, St. Farg. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by my father in Sand-
hill's Copse, off ash, June 24th, 1870. 2. L. arbustorum, Fab. Very rare. A single speci-
men only was taken by my brother in Sandhill’s
Copse, June 4th, 1871. 1. Abia sericea, Linn. Of frequent occurrence from
May toJuly. The larvee have often been taken
in the autumn off the dyer’s green weed, and
also off seabious. 1. Hylotoma cyaneocrocea, Foure. Very rare. ‘Taken
by my father, July 8rd, 1833; also a single
specimen by myself at Roundchimneys Pond,
June 8rd, 1874. 2. H.segmentaria, Panz. Very rare. A single speci-
men only was taken by myself in Little Wootton
Wood, May 16th. 1874.

ue

4 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 3, Hylotoma ustulata, Linn. Rare. Taken by my

4,

5. PPP HEDE WED

»

father, May 18th, 1831 ; and by myself, July
28th, 1868.

. H. cerulea, Klug. Very rare. Taken by my father
in the garden, May 16th and 24th, 1842.

. H. enodis, Linn. Very rare. Taken by my father,
June 4th, 1838; and also by myself in Broad
Alders, August 1st, 1867.

. Lophyrus rufus, Klug. Very rare. Taken by my
father in Mullett’s Copse, July 24th, 1843.

. Leptocerca rufa, Panz. Rare. Taken by my
father; and also by myself, July 2nd, 1872,
in Mullett’s Long-ground.

. Hemichroa alni, Linn. Occasionally common.

. Dineura Degeeri, Klug. Very rare. A couple of
specimens were taken by myself in the Green
Wall, May 25th, 1874.

. D. stilata, Panz. Not common.

. Cladius difformis, Panz. Abundant.

. C. padi, Linn. Not common.

. Cryptocampus varipes, St. Farg. Not common.

. C. saliceti, Fab. Common.

. Priophorus pallipes, St. Farg. Not common.

. Trichiocampus luteicornis, Steph. Abundant.

. LT. morio, St. Farg. Common.

. Emphytus serotinus, Klug. Of frequent occurrence
on oaks, September and October.

. E. tibialis, Panz. Common.

. E. calceatus, Klug. Common, May and June. rPoaranpon OSHA AAR

peepee

BAW nwh

HYMENOPTERA.

. Emphytus succinctus, Klug. Common.

. cinctus, Linn. Common.
. togatus, Fab. Common.
. varipes, Curt. Common.
. rufocinctus, Klug. Not common. Bee

. E. perla, Klug. Very rare. ‘Taken by myself,

June 19th, 1868, and July 38rd, 1876, in
Wootton Wood.

. Dolerus hematodes, Schr. Abundant from March

to May.

. D. gonager, Fab. Abundant.

. coracinus, Klug. Common.

. fulviventris, Scop. Abundant.
. palustris, Klug. Abundant.

. hyalinalis, Fab. Abundant.

. Eglanterie, Klug. Common.

. fulviventris, Scop. Common. BpyyuuY

. Hoplocampa crategi, Klug. Very rare. A single

specimen only was taken by myself in Little
Wootton Wood, May 17th, 1873.

. H. ferruginea, Fab. Not common. H. rutilicornis, Klug. Not common.

. Blennocampa emarginata, Thoms. Not common.

. pusilla, Klug. Common.

. hyalina, Klug. Not common.
. cinereipes, Klug. Common.

. Athiops, Fab. Abundant.

. fuliginosa, Sch. Not common.
. ephippium, Panz. Common. 76 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S Woorron.

. Selandria stramineipes, Klug. Abundant.

. S. lutevirentris, Klug. Abundant. » S.serva, Fab. Abundant.

. Athalia spinarum, Fab. Abundant.

. A. rose, Linn. Abundant.

. A. lugens, Klug. Common.

. A. glabricollis, ‘Thomp. Common.

. Phyllotoma microcephala, Klug. Very rare. Taken

by myself in Wootton Wood, May 18th, 1874. 1. Druida Ianthe, New. Rare. Taken by my father,

June 15th, 1889; May 20th, 1862; and June
29th, 1870. .

1. Fenusa pumilla, Klug: Common. Croesus septentrionalis, Linn. Rare. Taken by
my father at Ham, May: 30th, 1865; also by
myself in the Quag, July 15th, 1868, and in
Little Wootton Wood, July 26th, 1873. This
species is remarkable for the extreme thickness
of the hinder legs. 1. Nematus lucidus, Panz. Abundant. 2. N. luteus, Fab. Of frequent occurrence in the

woods, June and July. 3. N. interruptus, St. Farg. Common. 4. N. fuscipennis, St. Farg. Abundant. 5. N. capree, Fab. Abundant. 6. N. teniatus, St. Farg. Not common. miliaris, Panz. Abundant. 8. N. dorsalis, St. Farg. Common. trimaculatus, St. Farg. Not common. oye

be

a

-

 

 

- HYMENOPTERA. 10. Nematus bicolor, Steph. Common. 11. N. Ribesii, Steph. Gooseberry Sawfly. Abundant
in the garden. 12. N. myosotidis, Fab. Common. 13. N. duplex, St. Farg. Abundant. 14. N. intercus, St. Farg. Abundant. 15. N. pallescens, Klug. Common. 16. N. abdominalis, Panz. Not common. 17. N. crassulus, Dom. Not common. 18. N. ruficornis, St. Farg. Common. 19. N. dimidiatus, St. Farg. Not common,

20. N. appendiculatus, Hartig. Not common. 21. N. punetulatus, Dbm. Not common. 22. compressicornis, Fab. Rare, and not before

recorded as British. 23. N. fulvescens, Cameron. Not common. 1. Tenthredo scutellaris, Fab. Abundant. ornata, St. Farg. Common. microcephala, Steph. Abundant. 4. T. ambigua, Klug. Common. 5 gnobilis, Klug. Common. 6. T. livida, Lim. Common.
. T. bicincta, Linn. Abundant. iridis, Linn. Common. T. scalaris, King. Abundant. 10. picta, Klug. Common. 11. 'T. mandibularis, Panz. Common. 12, T. lateralis, Fab. Common. 13. T. Aucuparie, Klug. Abundant on flowers from
April to June. 78 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 14. Tenthredo punctulata, Klug. Common. 1. Perineura rubi, Panz. Not common. 1. Peecilostoma pulchella, Steph. Very rare. Taken
by my father, and also by myself, in sand-hills,
May 18th, 1875.

. P. impressa, Klug. Common.

. P. excisa, Thoms. Not common.

. Strongylogaster pulveratus, Ratz. Common
occasionally.

. S. cingulatus, Fab. The females are of frequent
occurrence in Wootton Wood during May, but
the males are very rare.

. Taxonus nitidus, Klug. Not common.

. T. rufipes, Zeig- Not common. * 3. 'T. Equiseti, Fab. Not common.

. T. glabratus, Fab. Not common.

. Pachyprotasis rape, Linn. Common.

. P. antennata, Fab. Common.

. Allantus blandus, Fab. Abundant.

. A. neglectus, Klug. Not common.

. A. hematopus, Panz. Rare. Taken by my father,
May 27th, 1837 ; and also by myself on White-
down, June 2nd, 1875. 4, A. punctum, Fab. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by my father in Broad Alders,
May 27th, 1865; also by myself, June 28rd, 1877.

. ribis, Sch. Not common. albicinctus, Klug. Not common. rusticus, Linn. Common. yp Few

we

eyPwee

ree
at

COLEOPTERA. 79

8. Allantus 18-punctatus, Linn. Common. 9. A. arcuatus, Forst. Abundant. 10. A. Scrophularie, Linn. Abundant.
.

Order II.—Corzorrera. Amongst the rarer species of Coleoptera found in
this parish, I think the following are deserving of
notice :—Aphanisticus pusillus; Trachys pygmeus ;
Throscus carinifrons; Prinocyphon _ serricornis ;
Eubria palustris; Haplocnemis femoralis; Aspidi-
ophorus orbiculatus; Apate capucinus; Tropiphorus
carinatus ; Callidium alni; Phytecia cylindrica ;
Cassida murea; Cistela ceramboides ; ~ Abdera
bifasciata ; Orchesia minor ; Scraptia fusca ; Tomoxia
biguttata; Stylops Dalii; Eleuchus Walkeri; Eu-
plectus Karsteni; Philonthus fuscus; and Cassida
vittata. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. British. Glanville’s Wootton. Geodephaga . . . 318 63
Hydradephaga . . 125 31
Philhydrida . . 110 41
Cordylocerata . 60 13
Necrophaga . . . 520 180
Lamellicornes . . 90 26
Sternoxi . . . . 80 22
Malacodermata . 150 62

By
Rhynchophora . 520 171

40 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. British. Glanyille's Wootton. Longicomes . . . + 78 14
Phytophaga . . . 244 78
Trimera . . .,. 50 28
Heteromera . . . 125 36
Strepsiptera . . 4 3
Brachelytra . . . 900 193

‘Lotal number of species,
3374

as far as I can make 911

out . The following beetles have been taken in the sur-
rounding parishes, although they have never been
seen in Glanville’s Wootton. Owing to Cosmore
Quag having been drained by Lord Allington, about
ten years ago, several rarities have been destroyed. 1. Creophilus maxillosus, Linn. Rare. Taken by
T. V. Wollaston, Esq., and myself from a dead
fox at Middlemarsh, May 30th, 1873. 2. Agabus paludosus, Fab. Very rare. ‘l'aken by my
father from a pond at Middlemarsh, May 15th,
1822. 3. Pachyrhinus 4-tuberculatus, Fab. Very rare. Taken
by my father at Cosmore Quag, July 2nd, 1846. 4, Donacia affinis, Kunze. Very rare. ‘laken by my
father at Cosmore Quag, June 14th, 1842. 5. Chrysomela decempunctata, Linn. Very rare. Taken
by myself at Middlemarsh, May 80th, 1873;
also by 'T.-V. Wollaston, Fsq., May 80th, 1874. COLEOPTERA. 81

6. Zeucophera subspinosa, Fab. Rare. ‘Taken by Mr.
Dalton Serrel at Stourton Caundle. 7. Cryptocephalus aureolus, Suff. Rare. Taken by
myself at the Caundle Holts, June 28rd, 1866. 8. Haltica holsatica, Lim. Rare. Taken by my father
and T. V. Wollaston, Esq., at Cosmore Quag. 9. Aromia moschata, Linn. Very rare. A couple of
specimens were taken by H. Wood, Esq, at
Holwell, September 1st, 1877. As Coleoptera was my father's least favourite order
of insects, it cannot be surprising that ninety species
have been added to the list by IT. Vernon Wollaston,
Esq., and myself, notably in the tribes Necrophaga
and Brachelytra. In the genus Cassida we possess
nine of the twelve British species. Geodephaga. 1. Cicindela campestris, Linn. Rare; and has only
been taken at irregular intervals. 1. Notiophilus aquaticus, Linn. Common. 2. N. biguttatus, Fab. Common. 1. Elaphus riparius, Linn. Common. 1. Cychrus rostratus, Linn. Very rare. A single spe-
cimen was taken by R. Weaver on the gate of
Birch Copse, May 7th, 1821. One was also taken
by myself in Wootton Wood, June 17th, 1873. 1. Carabus violaceus, Linn. Not common. It makes
a peculiar squeaking noise. 82 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. C. nemoralis, Mull. Very rare. A couple of speci-
mens were taken by my father in the Green
Wall, February 17th, 1819. 3. C. monilis, Fab. Rare. ‘Taken by my father,
August 9th, 1829, September 5th, 1834, and
June 28th, 1856, in Downton’s Lane. 1. Helobia brevicollis, Fab. Common under stones. 1. Leistus spinibarbis, Fab. Common under stones. 2. L. fulvibarbis, Dej. Rare. Taken by my father,

June 4th, 1818, and June 4th, 1830. 3. L. ferrugineus, Linn. Common.

. Clivina fossor, Linn. Of occasional occurrence in
rotten wood from March to May.

. Dyschirius eneus, Dej. Common on mud.

. Demetrius atricapillus, Linn. . Abundant.

. Dromius linearis, Oliv. Abundant.

. D.agilis, Fab. Of occasional occurrence under loose
bark. I have taken it even in the winter.

. D. melanocephalus, Dej. Common.

. D. quadrimaculatus, Linn. Abundant.

. D, quadrinotatus, Panz. Not common.

. Metabletus obscuroguttatus, Dufts. Common.

. M. truncatellus, Linn. Common.

. M. foveolus, Gyll. Common.

. Lamprius chlorocephalus, E. H. Very rare. A
couple of specimens taken by my father in
Mullett's Long-ground, June 16th, 1835; also
by myself from moss, April and May, 1877. 1. Loricera pilicornis, Fab. Abundant under stones. -

oper

reproaar

ese eyPPEe PR wD e

epes

COLEOPTERA. 83

. Chlenius nigricornis, Fab. Not common.

. Badista bipustulatus, Fab. Common.

. Trimorphus humeralis, Bon. Rare. Taken by my-
self in Fernyknap, February 22nd, 1868; in
Wootton Wood, March 9th and 14th, 1868;
March 20th, 1869; and May 29th, 1874; also
April, 1877.

. Broseus cephalotes, Linn. Not so common as in
other places.

. Anchomenus prasinus, Thunb. Sometimes common
under stones.

. A. pallipes, Fab. Common under stones.

. Agonum sexpunctatum, Linn. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by myself on White-
down, June 9th, 1870.

. A. marginatum, Linn, Common under stones.

. A. levis, Mull. Abundant.

. A. viduum, Panz. Common.

. Pecillus cupreus, Linn, Abundant.
. Abax striola, Fab. Not common.
. Pterostichus niger, Il]. Common.

. P. madidus, Fab. Abundant.

. P. melanarius, Ill. Common.

. P. nigritus, Fab. Common.

. P. vernalis, Gyll. Abundant.

. P. strenuus, Panz. Common.

. Amara communis, Panz. Abundant.
. A. trivialis, Gyll. Abundant.

. A. plebeia, Gyll. Abundant. BL HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Anisodactylus binotatus, Fab. Common. 1. Harpalus eneus, Fab. Common. 2. Harpalus anxius, Dufts. Common. 1. Pagonus chalceus, Marsh. Abundant. 1, Patrobus excavatus, Th. Not common. 1. Trechus meridianus, Linn. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by my father, May
16th, 1826. 1. Bradycellus fulvus, Marsh. Abundant. 2. B. minutus, Fab. Common. 1. Bembidium rufescens, Guer. Common. 2. B. eneum, Guer. Common. 8. B. guttulum, Fab. Common. B. quadrimaculatum. Common in the woods. B. doris, Panz. Common

. B. gilvipes, Sterm. Common. 7. B. lampros, Herbs. Common. 8. B. articulatum, Panz. Common. 1. Tachypus flavipes, Linn. Rare. Taken by my
father, April 26th, 1822; and by myself, May
26th, 1878.

eae

Hydradephaga. 1. Dytiscus marginalis, Linn. Large Boat Beetle. Of frequent occurrence in ponds. 2. D. punctulatus, Fab. Not common. 1. Acilius sulcatus, Linn. Of frequent occurrence in
ponds. 1. Colymbetes fuscus, Linn. Common,

COLEOPTERA. 85

. Agabus guttatus, Pk. Common.

. chaleonotus, Panz. Abundant.

. stermii, Sch. Abundant.

. bipustulatus, Linn. Common,

agilis, Fab. Not common. didymus, Oliv. Common. maculatus, Linn. Common.

. Noterus sparsus, Marsh. Abundant.

. Laccophilus minutus, Linn. Abundant,

. L. hyalinus, De Geer. Abundant.

. Hydroporus inaequalis, Fab. Abundant.

. H. palustris, Linn. Common.

. H. lineatus, Fab. Common.

. H. flavipes, Oliv. Abundant. H. 12-pustulatus, Fab. Not common.

. H. parallelogrammus, Ahr. Abundant.

. H. planus, Fab. Abundant.

. Haliplus elevatus, Panz. Not common.

. H. fulvus, Fab. Common.

. H. obliquus, Fab. Abundant.

. H. ruficollis, DeGeer. Abundant.

. H. lineatocollis, Marsh. Common.

. Pelobius Hermanni, Fab. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by myself in the
Church Pond, July 12th, 1872, and it made a
squeaking noise. 1. Gyrinus natator, Scop. Common Whirligig Beetle. Abundant in water everywhere. 2. G. bicolor, Payk. Common. PP Pb bb

RPEOPewrrPYyrrragapene

exe

roe

86 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 3. Gyrinus villosus, Mull. Very rare. A. single
specimen only was taken by my brother in a
stream, July 18th, 1863. Philhydvida. 1. Hydrophilus piceus, Linn. Very rare. A couple
of specimens were taken by my father in the
pond, April 16th, 1821.

. Hydrobius fuscipes, Linn. Abundant.

. H. oblongus, Herbs. Common.

. H. eneus, Germ. Abundant.

. H. globulus, Pk. Abundant.

. Philhydrus testaceus, Fab: Abundant.

. P. lividus, Forst. Common.

. P. marginellus, Fab. Common.

. Laccobius minutus, Linn. Abundant.

. Berosus luridus, Linn. Abundant.

. Limnobius truncatellus, Thunb. Abundant. L. nigrinus, Marsh. Abundant.

. Hydrena riparia. Klug. Common.

. H. testacea, Curt. Very rare. Taken by my father
on mud, March 31st, 1815.

. Ochthebius pygmeus, Fab. Common.

. Hydrocus carinatus, Germ. Common.

. H. angustatus, Mull. Common.

. Helophorus aquaticus, Linn. Abundant.

. H. granularis, Lim. Abundant.

. H. nubilus, Fab. Abundant.

. H. griseus, Herbs. Common. DREYER Ped E RODE

Rope ynee

POOR PPP Ee PoP weEPwYEroe

Peer
HH bd Bt

COLEOPTERA. 87

- Helophorus rugosus, Oliv. Common.

. H. intermedius, Muls. Common.

. H. dorsalis, Marsh. Not common.

. Heterocerus marginatus, Fab. Common.
. H. levigatus, Panz. Common. - Parnus prolifericornis, Fab. Common.

. P. auriculatus, Ilig. Common. Elmis eneus, Mull. Not common.

. E. nitens, Mull. Not common.

. Spheridium scarabeoides, Linn. Abundant.
. S. bipustulatus, Fab. Abindant.

. Cyclonotum orbiculare, Fab. Common.

. Cercyon hemorrhoidalis, Fab. Abundant.

. depressum, Steph. Abundant.

. unipunctatum, Linn. Common. melanocephalum, Linn. Common. minutum, Fab. Common.

. lugubra, Payk. Abundant. eaaaa

. Cryptopleurum atomarium, Fab. Common. Cordylocerata.

. Hister cadaverinus, E. H. Abundant. carbonarius, Illig. Common.

. nitidulus, Payk. Common.

. unicolor, Linn. Abundant.

. bimaculatus, Linn. Rare. ‘Taken by T. V.
Wollaston; and by myself at the cucumber frame
in the garden, June 2nd‘and 10th, 1878, and
May 29th and 30th, 1874. 88 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1

omer

Pep De

e

. Saprinus rotundatus, Ill. Common in old stock
dove’s nests, which are built inside of hollow ©
apple trees, in the orchard.

. §. eneus, Fab. Common, in company with the
above.

. Onthophilus striatus, Fab. Common in the spring
amongst the refuse of hay-ricks.

. Abreus minutus, Payk. Common.

. Simplocaria semistriata, Fab. Not common.

. Byrrhus varius, Fab. Common.

. B. murinus, Fab. Common.

. B. pilula, Linn. Not common. Necrophaga.

. Anthrenus scrophularie, Linn. Common.

. A. varius, Fab. Common. A. muscorum, Linn. Common.

. Attagenus pellio, Linn. Not common.

. Dermestes murinus, Linn. Abundant on dead
moles.

. Mycetea hirta, Marsh. Abundant,

. Typhea fumata, Linn. Common.

. Mycetophagus quadripustulatus, Linn. Rare. A
few specimens were taken by my father out of
Fungi in Dursell’s, August 10th and 81st, 1840.

. Triphyllus punctatus, Fab. Not common.

. Corticaria gibbosa, Pk. Abundant.

. C. fuscula, Gyll. Common.

. C. rufula, Zt. Abundant. RODS

COLEOPTERA. 89

- Corticaria punctulata, Marsh. Not common.
. Latridius ruficollis, Marsh. Abundant.

. L, elongatus, Curt. Not common.

. L. nodifer, Steph. Abundant.

. L. carinatus, Gyll. Abundant.

. L. transversus, Oliv. Abundant. fils. lardarius, DeGeer. Common. SYP PY Pegs errr roenrweneven

. L. minutus, Linn. Abundant.

. Epistomus gyrinoides, Msh. Abundant.
. E. globulus, Pk. Abundant.

. Atomaria atricapilla, Steph. Common. A. fuscata, Sch. Abundant. A. linearis, Steph. Abundant. A. umbrina, Gyll. Common. A. apicalis, Er. Common. A. fuscipes, Gyll. Abundant. A. ruficornig, Marsh. Abundant.

. Paramecosoma melanocephala, Herbs. Not common.
. Cryptophagus scanicus, Linn. Abundant.
. C. vini, Panz. Common. C. dentata, Herbs. Not common.

. C. pilosus, Gyll. Not common.

. C. badius, Sterm. Not common.

. C. lycoperdi, Herbs. Common.

. Antherophagus pallens, Oliv. Not common.
. A. nigricornis, Fab. Not common. .
. Monotoma angusticollis, Gyll. Abundant. M. spinicollis, Aub. Common.

. M. longicollis, Gyll. Not common. 90 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Monotoma picipes, Payk. Common. Diphyllus Junatus, Fab. Not common.

. Telmatophilus caricis, Olv. Not common. - Silvanus Surinamensis, Linn. Rare. In sugar. - Ips quadripunctatus, Herbs. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by myself from a
fungus in Nursery Lane, August 26th, 1876;
also by my brother, June 4th, 1870.

. I. ferruginea, Fab. Not common.

. Rhizophagus ferrugineus, Pk. Common.

. R. bipustulatus, Fab. Not common.

. Cryptarcha imperialis, Fab. Not common.

. Byturus tomentosus, Fab. Abundant on guelder
roses. .

. Pocadius ferrugineus, Fab. Common in Fungi.

. Cychramus fungicola, Heer. Of occasional occur-
rence in Fungi.

. Meligethes rufipes, Gyll. Abundant. M. eneus, Fab. Abundant. —

M. pedicularis, Gyll. Abundant. M. serripes, Gyll. Abundant. M. erythropus, Gyll. Abundant. M. picipes, Sterm. Abundant. M. pyrrhopus, Marsh. Abundant. M. flavipes, Sterm. Abundant. M. viridescens, Fab. Common.

. Lemophleus duplicatus, Walt. Very rare. Taken
by T. V.- Wollaston, Esq,, June 1874. 1. Cerylon histeroides, Fab. Not common. Pee ee

Pepe ew

ee

PeMRmraarene

RE VE POY HP AR ODER ODE Ee

SAP EE rw AH

COLEOPTERA. m1

. Pria duleamarie, Illig. Not common.

. Soronia punctatissima, Ill. Not common.
. Nitidula discoidea, Fab. Not common.

. N. colon, Linn. Not common.

. N. depressa, Linn. Not common.

. N. bipustulata, Linn. Not common.

. Epurea limbata, Fab. Abundant.

. E. estiva, Linn. Abundant.
. E. obsoleta, Fab. Abundant.

. E. pusilla, Herbs. Abundant. E. melanocephala, Marsh. Not common.

. Cercus pedicularis, Linn. Abundant.

. C. bipustulatus, Payk, Abundant.

. C. rufilabris, Latr. Abundant.
. Brachypterus urtice, Fab. Abundant. Olibrus corticalis, Panz. Abundant.

. O. bicolor, Fab. Abundant. O. geminus, Illig. Abundant.

. O. eneus, Germ. Abundant. O. affinis, Sterm. Abundant.

. O. picipes, Erich. Common.

. Phalacrus caricis, Sterm. Abundant. P. corruscus, Payk. Abundant.

. Scaphisoma boleti, Panz. Common in Fungi.
. Corylophus cassidioides, Marsh. Common.
. Sericoderus lateralis, Gyll. Abundant.

. Ptenidium punctatum, Gyll. Common.

. P. pusilum, Gyll. Common.

. P. apicale, Er. Not common. 92 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Nephanes Titon, Newm. Not common, amongst
hay refuse. It is the smallest beetle we have.
. Ptilium Spencei, All. Not common.
. Tricopterex lata, Mots. Common amongst hay
refuse. T. sericans, Heer. Common. T. brevipennis, Er. Not common. Clambus pubescens, Redt. Not common. Calyptomerus dubius, Marsh. Not common. Agathidium nigripenne, Fab. Not common amongst

dead brambles in May. 2. A. levigatum, Er. Not common. 3, A. varians, Bech. Not common. 1. Leiodes humeralis, Fab. Rare. Taken by my
father in Mullett’s Copse, August 2nd, 1862;
also by T. V. Wollaston, Esq., June, 1874. 1. Colenis dentipes, Gyll. Not common. 1, Anisotoma parvula, Sahl. Not common. 2. A. badia, Sterm. Not common. 3. A. calcarata, Er. Of frequent occurrence. ee

rPererw

4, A. dubia, Klug. Not common. 5. A. litura, Steph. Not common. 1, Hydnobius punctatissima, Steph. Very rare. Taken only by 'T. V. Wollaston, Esq., in the
Cowleaze, May 1873. 1. Colon brunneum, Latr. Not common. 1. Ptomophagus sericeus, Fab. Not common. 2. P. anisotomoides, Spence. Not common. 3. P. velox, Spence. Abundant. -

e

e

Sar epeakevwee

COLEOPTERA. 93

. Ptomophagus Watsoni, Spence. Abundant.
. Choleva angustata, Fab. Abundant
. C. fusca, Panz. Abundant. C. fornicatus, DeGeer. Abundant. C. tristis, Panz. Abundant. C. chrysomeloides, Panz. Common. Silpha atrata, Linn. Abundant.

. S. subrotundata, Leach. Common.
. S. levigata, Fab. Abundant. S. obscura. Linn. Common.

. §. rugosa, Linn. Common on dead moles.
. S. thoracica, Linn. Very rare. A single specimen

only was taken by myself in Broad Alders,
May 20th, 1867.

. Necrophorus mortuorum, Fab. Common..
. N. vespillo, Linn. Not common. ©
. N. humator, Fab. Large Burying Beetle. Rare. Taken by myself in a rabbit's hole in the
garden hedge, April 2ist, 1864; and in the
greenhouse, March 22nd, 1872. Lamellicornes.

. Leucanus parallelopipedus, Linn. Small Stag

Beetle. Common amongst sawdust in the yard.

. Sinodendron cylindricum, Linn. Rare. Taken by

my father from old apple trees in the orchard,
June 9th, 1828, and June 27th, 1887.

. Onthophagus nuchicornis, Linn. Rare. Taken by

my father; and also by myself on Newland
Common, June 5th, 1874. 94 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Onthophagus ccenobita, Herbs. Very rare. Taken by myself in Alder-mead, May 14th,
1875. 1, Aphodius erraticus, Linn Not common. 2. A. subterraneus, Linn Not common. 8. A. fossor, Linn. Abundant. » 4, A. hemorrhoidalis, Linn. Not common. 5. A. seybalarius, Linn. Not common. 6. A. foetens, Fab. Not common. 7. A. fimetarius, Linn, Abundant. 8. A. inquinatus, Fab. Not common. 9. A. ater, DeGeer. Not common. 10. A. rufipes, Linn. Abundant. 11. A. pusillus, Herbs. Common..
12. A. merdarius, Fab. Abundant. 13. A. contaminatus, Herbs. Common. 14, A. lucidus, Panz. Common..

15. A. stictitus, Panz. Common. 1. Trox scaber, Linn. Common in stock dove’s
nests inside of hollow old apple trees. 1. Geotrupes stercorarius, Linn. Shakespear's

Beetle. Abundant from July to November. G. sylvaticus, Panz. Common.

. Hoplia philanthus, Sulz. Apple Eater. Common. 1. Melolontha vulgaris, Fab. Cockchafer. Generally
abundant. 1. Anomala horticola, Linn. Not common. 1. Cetonia aurata, Linn. Rose Chafer. Abundant. ne

COLEOPTERA. 98

Sternoxi. 1. Agrilus angustulus, Illig. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by myself in Haywood,
Tuly 10th, 1877. 1, Aphanisticus pusillus, Oliv. Very rare. Taken by
my father and T. V. Wollaston, Esq., on New-
land Common, May 9th, 1834. 1. Trachys pygmeus, Fab. Very rare. A couple
only were taken by my father in Fernyknap,
June 20th, 1843. 1. Throseus carinifrons, Baw. Very rare. Taken by
my father, May 10th, 1867; and by T. V.
Wollaston, Esq., June, 1874. 2. T. dermestoides, Linn. Rare. Taken by my
father, June 13th, 1839; and also by myself
and T. V. Wollaston, Esq., in Wootton Wood,
May 29th, 1874. 1, Elater murinus, Linn. Common Skipjack. Abundant. 2. E. niger, Linn. Common. 3. E. hemorrhoidalis, Fab. Common. 4. E. longicollis, Oliv. Abundant. 5. E. minutus. Linn, Not common. 6. E. rufipes. Herbs. Common. 7. E. asellus, Erich. Common. 8. E. tessellatus, Linn. Abundant. 9. E. metallicus, Payk. Not common. 10. E. quereus, Gyll. Common. 96

11. 12. 13. 14,
15. 16. 17.
. Campylus linearis, Linn. Abundant.

. Dascillus cervinus, Linn. Very rare. ‘Taken by

et

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Elater bipustulatus, Linn. Not common. E. holosericens, Fab. Not common. E. lineatus, Linn. Common. E. obscurus, Linn. Abundant. E. sputata, Linn. Not common. E. limbatus, Fab. Common. E. marginatus, Linn. Abundant. myself in Honey Mead, June 22nd, 1877. Malacodermata. 1

. Elodes pallida, Fab. Common. E. marginata, Fab. Abundant.

. KE. livida, Fab. Abundant. Cyphon variabilis, Thunb. Abundant.

. C. padi, Linn. Abundant.

. C. coarctata, Payk. Not common.

. C. deflexicollis, Muller. Not common.

. Prionocyphon serricornis, Mull. Very rare. Taken

by my father in the garden-hedge, August 7th,
1841.

. Eubria palustris, Germ. Very rare. Taken by

my father in Mullett’s Long-ground, June 23rd,
1838; and also by T. V. Wollaston, Esq.

. Scirtes hemisphericus, Linn. Kare. Taken by

my father, June 25th, 1840; also by myself in
the Quag, August 10th, 1875.

. Lampyris noctiluca, Linn. Glow-worm Beetle. COLEOPTERA. 97

Generally common. Some autumns the males
fly into the house in great numbers. I have
met with the female in the winter time amongst
rubbish. 1. Telephorus fuscus, Linn. Abundant. 2. T. rusticus, Fallen. Common. 3, pellucidus, Fab. Common. 4. T. nigricans, Fab. Abundant. 5. T. lividus, Linn. Abundant. 6 T. lituratus, Fallen. Common. 7,

8,

9,

 

 

. T. rufus, Linn. Abundant.

. T. bicolor, Fallen. Common.

. T. clypeatus, Illig. Not common. 10. T. lateralis, Linn. Common. flavilabris, Fallén. Abundant. 12. T. thoracicus, Gyll. Not common. 18. T. melanuras, Fab. Common. 14, T. testaceus, Linn. Common. 15. T. pellidus, Fab. Common. Malacodermi.

. Malthinus fasciatus, Fallen. Abundant.

. M. balteatus, Suff. Abundant.

. M. flaveolus, Payk. Abundant.

. M. frontalis, Marsh. Common.

. M. flavoguttatus, Kies. Abundant.

. M. sanguinolentus, Linn. Abundant.

. marginatus, Latr. Common.

. M. brevicollis, Payk. Rare. Taken by my father
H

 

Prank eowe

98 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. on Dungeon, June 17th, 1825 ; June 27th, 1828;
June 28th, 1838 ; and in Wootton Wood, June
10th, 1869 ; also by myself in Pelles, June 25th,
1873. 1. Malachius eneus, Linn. Common. 2. M. bipustulatus, Linn. Abundant. 3. M. fasciatus, Linn. Of frequent occurrence around
hay-ricks, June and July. 1. Dasytes eratus, Steph. Common. 2. D. flavipes, Fab. Not common. 1. Haplocnemus femoralis, Illig. Very rare. Taken
by my father from a whitethorn bush, May
11th, 1829; also in the Quag, August 10th,
1838, and July 18th, 1848. A single specimen
also was taken from a rotten branch of a tree in
Haywood, November 19th, 1874. 1. Thanasimus formicarius, Linn. Very rare. A
couple only were taken by my father from
under the bark of a fir tree on Dungeon, June
30th, 1820. 1. Phleophilus Edwardsii, Steph. Rare. Taken by
my father from a holly-bush in the orchard,
November 6th, 1841, and in Sandhill’s Copse,
December 6th, 1864 ; also by myself in Sand-
hill’s Copse, December 8th, 1864, September
22nd, 1866, and September 11th, 1873. 1. Corynetes violaceus, DeGeer. Not common,

2. C. erruleus, Linn. Not common. 1. Ptilinus pectinicornis, Linn. Common. rap ene

we

Hox eo

ene

oe

COLEOPTERA. 99

. Anobium castancum, Fab. Abnndant.

. A. molle, Linn. Abundant on wood.

. A. striatum, Oliv. Abundant.

. A. tesselatum, Fab. Common.

. A. fulvicorne, Sterm. Common.

. Ochina hedere, Mull. Rare. Taken by my father
in Mullett’s Copse, June 30th, 1839, and July
8th, 1841.

. Ptinus imperialis, Linn. Not common.

. P. fur, Linn. Common Death-watch Beetle. Abundant in dead timber.

. P. sexpunctatus, Panz. Common. - P. lichenum, Marsh. Common.

. P. crenatus, Fab. Not common.

. Aspidiophorus orbiculatus, Gyll. Very rare. ‘Taken
by my father in Mullett’s Copse, June 25th,
1840.

. Cis boleti, Scop. Common in Fungi.

. C. villosulus, Marsh. Common in Fungi.

. C. bidentatus, Oliv. Not common.

. C. nitidus, Herbs. Not common.

. Apate capucinus, Linn. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by my father on the
table-cloth in the dining-room, July 2nd, 1854. Rhynchophora.
. Scolytus destructor, Oliv. Abundant.
. Tomicus bidens, Fab. Common.
. T. bispinus, Ratz. Common. 100 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 8. Tomicus laricis, Fab. Not common. 4, T. villosus, Fab. Not common. 5. T. mierographus, Gyll. Not common. 1. Hylesinus crenatus, Fab. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by myself in the Cow-
leaze, June 12th, 1873 ; also taken by my brother,
June 7th, 1870. 2. H. fraxini, Fab. Common on dead ash trees. 1. Hylurgus piniperda, Linn. Common. 2. H. ater, Payk. Common. 3. H. palliatus, Gyll. Common. 4. H. opacus, Erich. Not common. 1. Calandra granaria, Linn. Common. 1. Mecinus pyraster, Herbs. Abundant. 2. M. circulatus, Marsh. Common. 1. Spherula lythri, Fab. Of frequent occurrence. 1. Gymnatron pascuorum, Gyll. Not common. 2. G. veronice, Germ. Not common. 8. G. noctis, Herbs. Not common. 4, G. labilis, Herbs. Common. 1. Cionus serophularie, Linn. Abundant. 2. C. verbasci, Fab. Common. 3. C. thapsus, Fab. Abundant. 4. C. blattarie, Fab. Abundant. 5, C. pulchellus, Herbs. Not common. 1. Poophagus sisymbrii, Fab. Very rare. Taken by

my father near the pond, April 26th, 1833;
and in Ham, May 19th, 1862.
. Nedyns terminatus, Herbs. Not common. =
°

o

e

~

YPPwea

Seren

eeaea9aaa

a oe Ce

COLEOPTERA. 101

Ceutorhynchus sulecicollis, Gyll. Abundant.
. C. troglodytes, Fab. Abundant. C. chrysanthemi, Mull. Not common. C. asperifoliarum, Gyll. Rare. Taken by my
father in the garden, May 6th, 1861.
. assimilis, Payk. Abundant.
. pollinarius, Forst. Abundant. liturus, Fab. Common. trimaculatus, Fab. Abundant. quadridens, Payk. Abundant. melanostigmus, Marsh. Common.
. contractus, Marsh. Common.
. constrictus, Marsh. Common.
. Rhinonchus pericarpus, Fab. Abundant. R. subfasciatus, Gyll. Common.
. R. castor, Fab. Abundant.
. Ceuthorhynchideus floralis, Payk. Common. Acalles misellus, Schr. Not common.

. Litodactylus leucogaster, Marsh. Common.

. Orobitis cyaneus, Linn. Not common.
. Ceeliodes quercus, Fab. Abundant.

. C. ruber, Marsh. Abundant.

. C. rubicundus, Payk. Common.

. C. didymus, Fab. Abundant.

. C. guttulus, Fab. Common. Baris T-album, Linn. Common.

. B. picicornis, Marsh. Common.

. Orchestes quereus, Linn. Abundant.

. O. melanocephalus, Oliv. Abundant. L

aS

Kk oarprxragn

02 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON.

. Orchestes alni, Linn. Abundant. 0. ilicis, Fab. Common.

. O. avellane, Don. Common.

. O. scutellaris, Fab. Common.

. O. stigma, Germ. Abundant.

. Tychius Schneideri, Herbs. Abundant.

. T. flavicollis, Sch. Not common.

. T. tomentosus, Herbs. Common.

. Sibinia primita, Herbs. Rare. Taken by my father
and myself in Whitedown Chalk-pit, August
Ast and 9th, 1870.

. Balaninus nucum, Linn. Nut Weevil. The larve
are common in nuts, but the only specimen of
the beetle ‘taken was by myself in Broad
Alders, August 21st, 1868.

. B. venosus, Germ. Acorn Weevil. The larve are
common in acorns; but the only specimen of
the beetle that has been taken was by myself in
Mullett’s Long-ground, June 11th, 1872.

. B. villosus, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father in
Broad Alders, June 18th, 1864; also by myself
in Hartleaze, May 14th, 1874, June 4th, 1876,
and June 8th, 1877. B. pyrrhoceras, Marsh. Not common.

. B. brassice, Fab. Not common.

. Amalus scortilum, Herbs. Very rare. Taken by

T. V. Wollaston, Esq., May 1873. 1. Anthonomus rubi, Herbs. Common. 2. A. ulmi, DeGeer. Abundant. =

Pes

SPprereyep
be bt BS ot bt bt te

COLEOPTERA. 103

. Anthonomus pomorum, Linn. Abundant.
. Ellescus bipunctatus, Linn. Rare. Taken by my

father, July 27th, 1865, in Sandhill’s Copse, and
May 8th, 1871.

. Gryphidius equiseti, Fab. Rare. Taken by my

father, July 26th, 1820, June 19th, 1821, June
17th, 1825, September 5th, 1834, and June
27th; 1889; also by myself in Alder Mead,
September 11th, 1870, in Sandhill’s Copse,
May 14th, 1874, and in Wootton Wood, July
12th, 1875; also by T. V. Wollaston, Esq., on
Whitedown, May 28th, 1878.

. Erirhinus tortrix, Linn. Of occasional occurrence

on poplar trees, September and October. pectoralis, Panz. Abundant.

. affinis, Payk. Abundant. maculatus, Marsh. Abundant. costirostris, Sch. Abundant. tremule, Payk. Not common.

. vorax, Fab. Common. scirpi, Fab. Not common. acridulus, Linn. Not common. nereis, Payk. Abundant.

. Magdalis pruni, Linn. Common.
. M. atramentaria, Marsh. Abundant.
. Larinus carline, Oliv. Rare. Taken by my father,

June 10th, 1825, June 14th, 1841, in Mullett’s
Copse, and July 21st, 1870, in Wootton Wood ;
also by myself in Wootton Wood, September
18th, 1872. 104 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S Woorron.

. Otiorhynchus tenebricosus, Herbs. Not common.

. O. niger, Fab. Not common.

. O. raucus, Fab. Not common.

. O. picipes, Fab. Common. ©

. Omias brunnipes, Oliv. Abundant.

. Phyllobius oblongus, Linn. Common.

. P. argentatus, Linn. Abundant. 8. P. pyri, Linn. Abundant. 4. P. calcaratus, Fab. Abundant.

. P. alneti, Fab. Common.

. P. uniformis, Marsh. Abundant.

. Hypera variabilis, Herbs. Abundant.

. H. murinus, Fab. Abundant. H. rumicis, Linn. Abundant.

. H. polygonis, Linn. Abundant.

. H. punctata, Fab. Not common.

. H. pollux, Fab. Common.

. H. tigrinus, Dej. Not common.

. H. trilineatus, Marsh. Common.

. Hylobius abietis, Linn. Not common.

. Leiosomus ovatulus, Clav. Not common.

. Tropiphorus carinatus, Mull. Rare. Taken by my
father, February 26th, and March 16th, 1832 ;
by myself, May, 1864, and May 23rd, 1867, in
Pelles, and May 21st, 1875, in Little Wootton
Wood ; also by T. V. Wollaston, Esq., in Little
Wootton Wood, May 28th, 1873. 1, Barynotus obscurus, Fab. Not common. 1. Liophleus nubilis, Fab. Common on Whitedown. on pwrrawne

FHP Oreaak one

rPrerahRonrerpone

Se REP EERE eeep

COLEOPTERA. 105

. Orthochetes setiger, Germ. Very rare. Taken by

my father in the garden, May 12th, 1841.

. Tanymecus palliatus, Fab. Of occasional occur-

rence on Whitedown, June and July.

. Strophosomus coryli, Fab. Abundant.
. S. retusus, Marsh. Abundant.

. S. fulvicornis, Curt. Common.

. S. limbatus, Fab. Common.

. Polydrusus micans, Fab. Abundant.

. P. flavipes, DeGeer. Abundant.

. P. sericeus, Sch. Common.

. P. confluens, Kirby. Abundant.

. P. marginatus, Steph. Common.

. P. undulatus, Fab. Not common.

. Sciophilus muricatus, Fab. Not common.
. Sitona hispidula, Fab. Abundant. sulcifrons, Thun. Abundant. Regensteinensis, Herbs. Abundant. lineatus, Linn. Abundant. tibialis, Herbs. Abundant. humeralis, Kirby. Common. flavescens, Marsh. Abundant. puncticollis, Kirby. Common.

. Apion pomone, Fab. Common.
. A. Spencii, Kirby. Common.

. A. subulatum, Kirby. Abundant.
. A. pisi, Meg. Common.

. A. verox, Herbs. Common.

. A. loti, Kirby. Abundant. 106 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. ~

. Apion virens, Herbs. Abundant. 8. A. striatum, Marsh. Abundant. 9. A. eneum, Fab. Abundant. 10. A. carduorum, Fab. Abundant. 11. A. violaceum, Kirby. Abundant. 12. A. frumentarium, Linn. Abundant. 18, A. rubens, Ingall. Abundant. 14. A. vernale, Fab. Common. 15. A. flavipes, Fab. Abundant. 16. A. nigritarse, Kirby. Common. 17. A. assimile, Kirby. Abundant. 18. A. trifoli, Linn. Abundant. 19. A. varipes, Germ. Common. 20. A. ulicis, Marsh. Abundant. 21. A. geniste, Fab. Common. 22. A. Gyllenhalii, Kirby. Common. 23. A. cracce, Linn. Common. 24. A. seniculus, Kirby. Not common. 1. Rhynchites eneovirens, Marsh. Common. 2. R. pauxillus, Germ. Common. 3. R. alliare, Payk. Common. 4. R. equatus, Linn. Not common. 5, R. nanus, Payk. Not common. 6. R. conicus, lig. Not common. 7. R. betuleti, Fab. Very rare. Taken by my father
in the withy-bed, July 5th, 1838, and in Little
Wootton Wood, June 10th, 1828. 1. Deporaus betule, Linn. Of frequent occurrence
on birch trees, May and June. COLEOPTERA. 107

. Apoderus coryli, Linn. Of occasional occurrence
on nut bushes, from July to September.

. Bruchus rufimanus, Sch. Common. .

. B. loti, Payk. Common.

. B. cisti, Fab. Of occasional occurrence on Cistus
in Whitedown Chalk-pit, July and August.

. B. seminarius, Linn. Not common. Longicornes.

. Liopus nebulosus, Linn. Not common.

. Pogonocherus hispidus, Linn. Not common.

. P. pilosus, Fab. Abundant. I have taken it as
late in the year as November, and as early as
February. - Saperda populnea, Linn. Very rare. A couple
of specimens only were taken by myself on
Newland Common, June 19th, 1874, and in the
withy-bed, June, 26th, 1876. - Phytecia cylindrica, Linn. Rare. Taken by my
father in the orchard, June 8th, 1839; also by
myself on Newland Common, May 9th and
31st, 1873.

. 'Tetrops preusta, Linn. Not common.

. Grammoptera ruficornis, Fab. Abundant.

. Strangalia melanura, Linn. Common on white-
thorn blossom.

. S. armata, Herbs. Common some years in the
woods on white flowers, June and July. 108 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 1. Toxotus meridianus, Linn. Common. Var. chrysogaster, Oliv. Common. 1. Rhagium inquisitor, Fab. Common under loose
bark, March to June. 2. R. bifasciatum, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father,
May 8th, 1819, June 19th, 1820, and June 12th,
1823, in Wootton Wood; a single specimen
also was taken by myself in Wootton Wood,
April 25th, 1873. 1. Clytus arietis, Linn. Occasionally eommon during
May. 1. Callidium alni, Linn. Very rare. A single speci-
men only was taken by my father in the orchard,
June 26th, 1838. Phytophaga.

. Donacia sericea, Linn. Abundant. D. lemne, Fab. Common.

. D. sagittarie, Fab. Common.

. Lema puncticollis, Curt. Not common.

. L. cyanella, Fab. Abundant.

. L. melanopa, Linn. Abundant.

. Crioceris asparagi, Linn. Asparagus Beetle. Rare. First found in the kitchen-garden, August,
1877. 1. Oomorphus concolor, Sterm. Not common. 1. Cryptocephalus Morei, Linn. Very rare. ‘Taken
by my father in Wootton Wood, July 12th,

1843; also by myself, July 19th, 1873.

epee

rere

»

pyre

Pepe kRonene

COLEOPTERA. 109

. Cryptocephalus pusillus, Fab. Common. Var. minutus, Fab: Common.

. Timarcha levigata, Linn. Not common.

. Chrysomela staphylea, Linn. Not common.

. C. polita, Linn. Abundant.

. C. hemoptera, Linn. Very rare. Taken by my

father in Broad Alders, September 15th, 1836.

. C. lamina, Fab. Very rare. A single specimen

only was taken by my father in Alder Mead,
August 8th, 1867.

. C. fucata, Fab. Not so common as the next.
. C. didymata, Scr. Abundant some years in the

woods from September to November.

. Gonioctena litura, Fab. Common on the dyer's

woad, June and July.

. Melasoma populi, Linn. Very rare. Taken by my

father, May 28rd, 1819.

. Gastrophysa polygoni, Linn. Abundant.

. G. raphani, Fab. Abundant.

. Phedon tumidulum, Kirby. Common.

. P. betula, Linn. Common.

. P. vulgatissima, Linn. Abundant.

. P. vitellina, Fab. Abundant.

. Helodes aucta, Fab. Abundant.

. H. beceabunge, Illig. Common.

. H. phellandrii, Linn. Common.

. Galeruca tanaceti, Linn. Very rare. ‘Taken by

my father, September, 1839, in Whitedown
Chalk-pit. 110 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Galeruca capre, Linn. Common. 3. G. nymphe, Linn. Abundant. 4, G. tenella, Fab. Common. 5. G. calmariensis, Linn. Abundant. 6. G. lineola, Fab. Common. 7. G. viburni, Payk. Not common. 1. Luperus rufipes, Fab. Common. 1. Calomicrus circumfusus, Marsh. Common. 1. Haltica oleracea, Linn. Abundant. 2. H. Coryli, All. Abundant. 3. H. consobrina, Kerts. Not common. 4. H. mercurialis, Fab.’ Abundant. 5. H. rufipes, Linn. Common. 6. H. helxines, Linn. Common. 7. H. aurata, Marsh, Abundant. 8. H. Modeeri, Linn. Common. 9. H. rustica, Linn. Abundant. 10. H. obtusata, Gyll. Common. 11. H. rubi, Payk. Abundant. 12. H. wrata, Marsh. Common. 13. H. fuscipes, Fab. Abundant. 14. H. transversa, Marsh. Common. 15. H. testacea, Fab. Abundant. 16. H. pseudacori, Marsh. Common in Alder Mead. 17. H. nodicornis, Marsh. Common. 18. H. lepidii, E. H. Abundant. 19. H. peciloceras, Kems. Common. 20. H. vittula, Redi. Not common. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 3l. 32. 33. 34. 35.
. Cassida murrea, Linn, Rare. Taken by my

29

COLEOPTERA. ill

Haltica uemorum, Linn. Common Turnip-fly

mat fat bt fot Et

mmm me

a

Beetle. Abundant.

. brassice, Fab. Abundant in the garden.
. concinna, Marsh. Common.

. aridella, Payk. Abundant.

. lurida, Gyll. Common. exoleta, Lim. Abundant. ochroleuca, Marsh. Common.

. nasturtii, Fab. Not common. .lycopi, Ford. Rare. Taken by T. V. Wol-

laston, Esq-, May, 1873.

. suturalis, Marsh. Abundant. fuscicollis, Kirby. Abundant. napi, Gyll. Abundant. dulcamare, E. H. Common. marcida, Illig. Common. graminis, Panz. Common. father off horse-mint, July 11th, 14th, 22nd,
and 26th, 1820; a single specimen was also
taken by myself in Alder Mead, off horse-mint,
August 22nd, 1872.

vittata, Fab. A single specimen only was taken
by myself off mint in Alder Mead, October 1st,
1877. .vibex, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father off

mint, July 11th, 1820, and July 2nd, 1838;
also by myself in Haywood, July 12th, 1865,
and on Newland Common, May 22nd, 1873. 112 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 4. Cassida viridis, Linn. Abundant on mint, &c.

5. C. sanguinolenta, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father
in Mullett’s Copse, June 7th, 1841; and at
Osel, off a thistle, June 5th, 1865; by T..V.
Wollaston, Esq., in the Cowleaze, May 27th,
1873; also by myself, May 30th and June 4th,

1873. 6. C. obsoleta, Tl. Rare. Taken by my father,

August 16th, 1822, May 13th, 1833, and: June
22nd, 1843; and by T. V. Wollaston, Esq.,
May 30th, 1873; also by myself on Newland
Common, June 21st, 1873, and in Wootton
Wood, May 18th, 1874, and March, 1877.

. C. equestris, Fab. Not common. 8. C. hemispherica, Herbs. Rare. ‘Taken by my
father in the orchard, August 31st and Sep-
tember 12th, 1881; a single specimen also was
taken by myself near Sandclose Islands, August
29th, 1864. 9. C. nobilis, Fab. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by myself in Roughground,
May 7th, 1877. ~

Trimera. J
1. Coccinella ocellata, Linn. A single specimen only
was taken by my father in the Common Plan-
tation, September 16th, 1870. 2. C. septempunctata, Linn. Common Ladybird
Beetle. Generally abundant throughout the
year. eae

14,

COLEOPTERA. 113

. Coccinella oblongoguttata, Linn. Rare. Taken

by myself in the Common Plantation, March
19th, 1870, and April 2nd, 1875.

. C obliterata, Linn. Common on fir trees. C. mutabilis, Ser. Not common. C. bipunctata, Linn. Not common. C. 16-guttata, Linn. Of frequent occurrence in
the woods since 1871; the first specimen was
taken by Miss Bursey in Pelles, October 15th,
1864.

. 11-punctata, Linn. Not common,
. 18-guttata, Linn. Not common. c
C.

. C. 14-guttata, Linn. Not common. Cc.

. 14-punctata, Linn, Not common.

. C.22-punetata, Linn. Very rare. A couple of

specimens were taken by myself, December
28th, 1868, and November 22nd, 1873, in the

garden. 8, C. variabilis, ig. Abundant. Var. humeralis, Sch. Abundant. C. impustulata, Linn. Rave. Taken by my father
in Wootton Wood, September 8th, 1864; also
by myself in Mead Copse, June 2nd, 1874, and
in Waterly Lane, June 27th, 1876.

. Chilocorus renipustulatus, Ser. Rare. Taken by

my brother in the Island, July 25th, 1868, and
in Fernyknap, January 7th, 1869; also by myself
in Buttons, March 27th, 1874, August 22nd,
1876, and November 8th, 1877. 1l4 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. ry

. Chilocorus bipustulatus, Linn. Common.
. C. quadripustulatus, Linn. Common.
. Lasia globosa, Sch. Rare. Taken by my father,

May 22nd, 1822, September 15th, 1836, and
Tune 12th, 1865, in Broad Alders.

. Rhizobius litura, Fab. Common. 1. Coccidula rufa, Herbs. Abundant. ~

. Seymnus hemorrhoidalis, Herbs. Rare. Taken

by my father, July 12th, 1843; also by 'T. V.
Wollaston, Esq., and myself, at Roundchimneys
Pond, June 8rd, 1874.

. S. discoideus, Illig. Rare. Taken by my father,

May 25th. 1858; and by 'T. V. Wollaston, Esq.,
May, 1873.

. S. pygmaeus, Foure. Rare. Taken by my father

in the orchard, July 13th, 1860.

. S. humeralis, Marsh. Very rare. ‘Laken by myself

off the dyer's woad, September 8th, 1876.

. Engis rufifrons, Fab. Of occasional occurrence in

Fungi.

. Tritoma bipustulata, Fab. Rare. Taken by my

father. Heteromera.

. Blaps mortisaga, Linn. In bags of flour, but it is

not nearly so common as in most places.

. Helops caraboides, Panz. Not so common, as in

many places. COLEOPTERA. 115

1. Cistela ceramboides, Linn. Very rare. A single

ee

specimen only was taken by myself in Hart-
leaze, July 4th, 1867.

. Lagria hirta, Linn. Abundant.

. Abdera bifasciata, Marsh. Very rare. Taken by
myself in the orchard, August 5th, 1875.

. Orchesia minor, Walk. Very rare. A single speci-
men only was taken by T. V. Wollaston, Esq.,
June, 1874. Of this rare species I possess no
example.

. Scraptia fusca, Latr. Very rare. A single speci-
men only was taken by Mr. Curtis in a window
of the house, June 25th, 1842. Of this rare
species I possess no example.

. Melandrya caraboides, Linn. Rare. Taken by my
brother in the withy-bed, May 20th, 1868, and
June 4th, 1870 ; by my father, June 80th, 1868 ;
and also by myself in the garden, June 9th,
1868, and in Alder Mead, June 5th, 1869.

. Conopalpus testaceus, Oliv.” Rare. Taken by my
father in Mullett’s Copse, June 14th, 1841;
in Sandhill’s Copse, June 24th, 1870; and in
the orchard, June 25th, 1870; also by myself
off the old oak tree in the Cowleaze, June 30th,
1868, and July 19th, 1869.

. Pyrochroa rubens, Fab. Common.

. Anthicus antherinus, Linn. Not common.

. A. pedicularius, Sch. Abundant. 116

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 1. Tomoxia biguttata, Cast. Very rare. A single

a

a

a ae

. M.

.M.

. M.

A. A. A. A. A.

specimen only was taken by my father off the
garden hedge, June 28rd, 1870.

. Mordella abdominalis, Fab. Rare. Taken by my

father, June 18th, 1828, June 18th, 1828, and
June 80th, 1838; by myself, in Little Wootton
Wood, June 18th and 24th, 1873; and by
T. V. Wollaston, Esq., in Pelles, May 27th,
1873; in Mullett’s Copse, May 28rd, 1873, and
in Wootton Wood, May 29th, 1874. - aculeata, Linn. Of occasional occurrence on

guelder roses, May and June. pumilla, Gyll. Of frequent occurrence on
flowers. humeralis, Linn. Very rare. Taken by my
father off flowers in Marvells, August 16th,
1838.

pusilla, Redt. Very rare. Taken by myself,
in Little Wootton Wood, July 26th, 1873.

. Anaspis frontalis, Linn. Abundant. ee
bi. rufilabris, Gyll. Abundant. furcipata, Muls. Abundant. fasciata, Forst. Common. ruficollis, Fab. Abundant. subtestacca, Steph. Not common. nigricollis, Marsh. Not common. melanopa, Forst. Abundant.

. Rhipiphorus paradoxus, Linn. Very rare. Taken

by my father in the orchard, August 15th,

eT. 2
3.
a

~

re»

COLEOPTERA. 117

1822; by my brother in Alder Mead, August
27th, 1866; and by myself, in Pelles, August
22nd, 1877. Meloe proscarabeeus, Linn. Not common. M. violaceus, Marsh. Common. M. brevicollis, Panz. Not common. (Edemera femorata, Fab. Of occasional occurrence
from May to July ; but I took a specimen in the
Green Wall, December 26th, 1872.

. CE. nobilis, Scop. Occasionally abundant. Asclera cerulea, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father,
June 16th, 1816, and May 19th, 1831. Salpingus ruficollis, Linn. Not common. S. planirostris, Fab. Not common.

. Lissodema quadripustulata, Marsh. Very rare. Taken by my father in the garden, June 12th,
1839. Strepsiptera.

. Stylops Dalii, Curt. Very rare. ‘Taken by my

father, flying over the garden-hedge, May 3rd
and 23rd, 1827, and May 10th, 1829. The
females are only to be found inside the tails of
Andrena labialis. S. Kirbii, Leach. Rare. Taken by my father,
May 7th, 1827, May 10th, 12th, and 14th, 1828,
May 9th, 10th, and 23rd, 1829, May 12th, 1836,
and May 12th, 1840. The females are only to
be found inside the tails of Andrena barbilabris. 118 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. a

. S. hirticollis, Mig. Common. Elenchus Walkeri, Curt. Very rare. A couple of
species only were taken by my father, on White-
down, June 11th, 1830, and in Alder Mead,
June 27th, 1839. Brachelytra.

. Cephennium thoracicum, Mull. Very rare. Taken

by T. V. Wollaston, Esq., May, 1873. Seydmenus pusillus, Mull. Common. S. fimetarius, ‘Th. Common.

. Eumicrus tarsatus, Mull. Of frequent occurrence

in hay refuse.

. Euplectus nanus, W.C. Common. .E. Karsteni, Reich. Very rare. Taken by my

father, April 11th, 1888. 1. Pselaphus Heisei, Herbst. Not common. 'Tychus niger, Payk. Abundant. 1. Bythinus Curtisii, Leach. Rare. ‘Taken, by my

wea e

»

father from moss, March, 1838.

. B. puncticollis, Denny. Not common.

. B. bulbifer, Reich. Not common.

. B. securiger, Reich. Not common.

. B. glabricollis, Leach. Not common.

. Bryaxis juncorum, Leach. Common amongst rushes.
. B. hematicus, Reich. Not common.

. B. Helferi, Sch. Occasionally common. B. fossulatus, Reich. Common in moss.

. Autalia impressa, Oliv. Common. 2

ry

COLEOPTERA. iy

Autalia rivularis, Grav. Not common.

. Falagria obscura, Grav. Not common. Bolitochara bella, Marsh. Common in Fungi.

. B. lucida, Grav. Rare. Taken by T. V. Wol-

laston, Esq., and myself, from Fungi in Wootton
Wood, June, 1874.

. Leptusa ruficollis, Er. Of occasional occurrence

under bark.

. Aleochara fuscipes, Payk. Common.
. A. lata, Grav. Abundant. A. lanuginosa, Gray. Common.

. A. bipunctata, Ol. Common.
. A. morion, Grav. Common.
. Myrmedonia canaliculata, Fab. Occasionally com-

mon under stones in company with Myrmica
ruginodis.

. Oxypoda opaca, Gray. Common. O. alternans, Grav. Not common.

. Microglossa suturalis, Sahl. Not common.

. M. pulla, Gyll. Not common.

. Homalota elongatula, Grav. Common.

. H. languida, Er. Common.

. H. elegantula, Bris. Not common.

. H. sylvicola, Fuess. Rare. Taken by T. V. Wol-

laston, Esq., June, 1874.

. H. plana, Gyll. Abundant.
. H. cuspidata, Er. Rare. ‘Taken by T. V. Wollas-

ton, Esq.

. H. fungicola, Th. Common. 120 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 8. Homalota nigricornis, Th. Rare. Wollaston, Esq. 9. H. palustris, Kiesen. Rare. Taken by T. V.
Wollaston, Esq. 10. H. autumnalis, Er. Common. 11. H. inquilina, Grav. Rare. ‘Taken by T. V.
Wollaston, Esq. 12. H. testudinea, Er. Rare. ‘Taken by T. V. Wol-
laston, Esq. 13. H. fungi, Grav. Abundant. 14. H. clientula, Er. Common. 15. H. scapularis, Sahl. Very rare. ‘l'aken by myself
at Roundchimneys Pond, June 3rd, 1874. 16. H. melanaria, Sahl. Rare. Taken by myself in
Waterly Lane, March 11th, 1873. 17. H. trinotata, Kr. Common. 18. H. aualis, Grav. Common. 19. H. graminicola, Grav. Common. 20. H. ineana, Er. Common. 1. Hygronoma dimidiata, Grav. Rare. Taken by
my father in Broad Alder, September 26th,
1839 ; in Mullett’s Copse, June 14th, 1841, and
May 16th, 1842; also by myself, February 7th,
1865, and June 3rd, 1875. + Oligota inflata, Mann. Abundant under fir trees.
. O. atomaria, Er. Common. Encephalus complicans, Steph. Rare. Taken by
T. V.Wollaston, Esq., at Roundchimneys Pond,
June 5th, 1874, and also by myself. Bp,

COLEOPTERA. 121

1. Gyrophena affinis, Mann. Not common. 2. G. gentilis, Erich. Common. 3. G. nana, Payk. Common. 4. G. fasciata, Marsh. Abundant in Fungi. 1, Myllena brevicornis, Math. Very rare. Taken by

myself in Cunniger Pit, February 2nd, 1874. 1, Gymnusa variegata, Kies. Rare. Taken by T. V.

Wollaston, Esq., and myself, at Roundchimneys
Pond, June 5th, 1874. 1. Hypocyptus agaricum, Linn. Common. 2. H. longicornis, Payk. Common. 1. Conurus littoreus, Linn. Common. 2. C. pubescens, Gray. Common. 3. C. lividus, Er. Not common. 1. ‘Tachyporus obtusus, Linn. Abundant. 2. T. solutus, Er. Abundant. 3. ‘T. chrysomelinus, Linn. Abundant. hypnorum, Fab. Abundant. 5. T. brunneus, Linn. Abundant. 6. T. ruficollis, Grav. Common. 7. T. humerosus, Grav. Abundant. 1, Leucoparyphus silphoides, Linn. Common round
the cucumber frame in the garden, May and
June.

. Tachinus rufipes, DeGeer. Abundant. 2. T. flavipes, Fab. Abundant. 3. T. marginellus, Fab. Abundant. 4. 'T. bipustulatus, Fab. Common.

. T. subterraneus, Linn. Not common. -

on

122 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. .

. Megacronus analis, Payk. Not common.

. M cingulatus, Mann. Not common. Bolitobius atricapillus, Fab. Abundant. B. trinotatus, Er. Abundant. 8. B. pygmaeus, Fab. Common. Mycetoporus splendidus, Gray. Not common.
. M. lepidus, Grav. Not common.

. Heterothops binotata, Steph. Not common. + Quedius fulgidus, Grav. Common. 2. Q. tristis, Grav. Abundant. 3. Q. fuliginosus, Grav. Abundant. 4. Q. brevis, Er. Common. 5. Q. impressus, Panz. Common. 6. Q. molochinus, Gray. Abundant. 7. Q. picipes, Mann. Abundant. 8. Q. fumatus, W.C. Abundant. 9. Q. cruentatus, Ol. Abundant. 10. Q. boops, Gray. Common. 1. Euryporus dissimilis, Grav. Not common. 1. Leistotrophus nebulosus, Fab. Of frequent oc-

eee

be wy

 

currence. 2. L murinus, Linn, Abundant. Staphylinus erythropterus, Linn. Very rare. ‘Taken by my father, April 28th, 1816; and by
myself, May Ist, 1875, in Hartleaze. S. stercorarius, Ol. Not common. Ocypus olens, Mull. Abundant. O. brunnipes, Fab. Common.

. O. eupreus, Rossi. Abundant. =

oe

SPSS
yr

Pere

COLEOPTERA. 1235

Ocypus ater, Gravy. Common. O. morio, Grav. Abundant. Philonthus laminatus, Crew. Abundant.

. P. eneus, Rossi. Abundant. P. politus, Fab. Abundant.

. P. marginatus, Fab. Common.
. P. fuseus, Grav. Very rare. A few specimens

were taken by myself and ‘I’. V. Wollaston, Esq.,
from a stock dove’s nest inside of a hollow old
apple tree in the orchard, on September 22nd, *
1871.

. fimetarius, Grav. Abundant.

. xantholoma, Grav. Abundant.

. bipustulatus, Panz. Common.

. micans, Gray. Abundant.

. discoideus, Grav. Common.

. P. nigritulus, Gray. Not common

Xantholinus glabratus, Grav. Common. X. punctulatus, Payk. Abundant.

. X. ochraceus, Gyll. Rare. ‘l'aken by ‘I’. V. Wol-

laston, Esq.

. X. longiventris, Heer. Common.

. Leptacinus batychrus, Gyll. Not common.

. L. linearis, Grav. Not common.

. Othius myrmecophilus, Kies. Rare. ‘Taken by

'T. V. Wollaston, Esq.

. Lathrobium brunnipes, Fab. Abundant.
. L. longulum, Gray. Not common.
. L. fulvipenne, Grav. Common. HISTORY OF GLANVILLE's WOOTTON. Lathrobium punctatum, Zett. Common. 1. Achenium depressum, Grav. Not common. te

PRBAE YY EDP WEEE

. Stilicus fragilis, Grav. Rare. Taken by myself at

the cucumber frame in the garden, May 27th
and 29th, 1873; also by I’. V. Wollaston, Esq.,,
May 30th, 1873. S. rufipes, Germ. Not common. S. affinis, Er. Abundant. S. orbiculatus, Payk. Abundant.

 
  

. Sunius angustatus, Payk. Abundant.

. Lithocharis melanocephala, Fab. Abundant.
. L. obsoleta, Nord. Common.

. Peederus littoralis, Grav. Abundant.

. P. riparius, Linn. Not common.

. Stenus bimaculatus, Linn. Common.

. S bipunctatus, Er. Common. S. pusillus, Steph. Abundant. S. providus, Er. Abundant. S. nigritulus, Gyll. Common. 8. brunnipes, W. C. Abundant. S. plantaris, Er. Abundant. S. gonymelas, W. C. Abundant. S. impressus. Germ. Abundant. S. flavipes, Steph. Abundant. S. oculatus, Grav. Abundant. S. nitidus, Steph. Abundant. S. caniculatus, Gyll. Common.

. Platystethus morsitans,Grav. Common.
. P. cornutus, Gray. Common. 7 COLEOPTERA. 125

1. Oxytelus rugosus, Fab. Abundant. 2. O. nitidulus, Grav. Common. 3. O. depressus, Grav. Common. 4, O. complanatus, Er. Abundant. 5. O. sculpturatus, Grav. Abundant. 6. O. laqueatus, Marsh. Abundant. 1. Trogophleus elongatulus, Er. Rare. Taken by
T. V. Wollaston, Esq. 2. 'T. viparius, Lac. Common. 1. Coprophilus striatulus, Fab. Common. 1. Acrognathus mandibularis, Gyll. Not common. 1., Olophum piceum, Gyll. Common. 1. Lathrimeum atrocephalum, Gyll. Abundant. 2. L. unicolor, Steph. Not common. 1. Lesteva punctata, Er. Not common. 1 Philorinum humile, Er. Abundant. 1. Coryphium angusticolle, Steph. Not common. 1. Homalium planum, Payk. Common. 2. H.concinnum, Marsh. Abundant. 3. H. vile, Er. Common. .

4, H. leviusculum, Gyll. Abundant. 5. H. riparium, Th. Abundant. 6. H. rivulare, Payk. Abundant. 7. H. iopterum, Steph. Not common. 8. H. pygmeum, Payk. Common. 9. H. pusillum, Grav. Common. 1, Anthobium minutum, Fab. Abundant. 2. A. torquatum, Marsh. Common. 3. A. opthalnicum, Payk. Common. 126 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 4, Anthobium sorbi, Gyll. Not common. 1, Proteinus ovalis, W.C. Abundant. 2. P. brachypterus, Fab. Common. 8. P. macropterus, Gyll. Not common. 1. Megartheus depressus, Payk. Abundant. 1, Phiewobium clypeatum, Mull. Common,
1. Micropeplus porcatus, Payk. Abundant. 2. M. staphylinoides, Marsh. Abundant. Order III.—Orrnoprera. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. ' British, . Glanville’s Wootton. Forficulide . . . 5 8
Blattide . . . . 6 2
Achetide . . . . 4 2
Gryllide . . . . 10 4
Locustide. . . . R4 12
Total number of species . 49 23

Forficulide. 1. Labia minor, Linn. Little Earwig. Abundant. 1. Forficula auricularia, Linn. Common Earwig. Abundant. It very seldom uses its wings, and
then only at night. Var. forcipata, Steph. Common. neglecta, Marsh. Common. media, Marsh. Common.

. ORTHOPTERA, 127

2. Forficula decipiens, Gene. Very rare. A single
specimen was taken by my father in the garden,
Noy. 14th, 1860; one was also taken by myself
at ivy bloom, November 8th, 1871. Blattide. 1, Blatta livida, Fab. Very rare. A single female
only was taken by my father off an elm tree in
the Cowleaze, November 15th, 1687. 1. Periplaneta orientalis, Linn. Oriental Cockroach. Abundant in this house, where it must have
been introduced some years ago in some
packages from London. Achetide. 1. Gryllotalpa vulgaris, Latr. Mole Cricket. Very rare. Taken by my father in the garden, November
20th, 1827, and June 13th, 1837. 1. Acheta domestica, Linn. House Cricket. Abundant. in some houses. Gryllide. 1. Thamnotrizon cinereus, Linn. Rare. Taken by
my father; and also by myself in Haywood,
July 22nd, 1866, and in Wootton Wood, Sep-
tember 12th, 1874. 1. Odontura punctatissima, Bose. Common on bushes. 1. Acrida varia, Fab. Common on trees and bushes
from August to December. 128 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WoOTTON,

1. Phasgonura viridissima, Linn. Of occasional oc-
currence in the larva state ; but the only one in
the perfect state taken, was by my father in the
Green Wall, July 16th, 1822. Locustide. 1. Pachytylus migratorius, Linn. Locust. Very rare. A single specimen only was captured on New-
land Common bya labourer, James Downton,
September Ist, 1859. It was very amusing to
see him jump about under a bell glass. 1. Locusta viridula, Linn. Not common. 2. L. venosa, Steph. Common in September and
October. 3. L. hemorrhoidalis, Charp. Common. 4. L. rhomboidalis, Sah. Common in August and
September. 5. L. biguttulus, Lim. Abundant. 6. L. rufipes, Charp. Common in September and
October. 7. L. dorsata, Zett. Abundant. 8. L. pratorum, Fieb. Common Grasshopper. Very
abundant from June to August. 1. Gomphocerus biguttatus, Charp. Abundant. 1. Tettix subulata, Lim. Common. Very seldom
flies. 2. T. bipuncta, Linn. Common. NEUROPTERA. 129

Order IV.—Nevroprera. The rarest species of Neuroptera found in this
parish are:—Aushna mixta (the oldest Glanville’s
Wootton insect in my collection); Ccenis chironomi-
formis ; Chrysopa capitata; Sisyra Dalii; Micromus
aphidivorus; Hemerobius  pellucidus; Cecilius
Dalii; Panorpa germanica; Leptocerus conspersus ;
and Hydropsyche fulvipes. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. British. Glanville’s Wootton. Odonata . . . . 48 21
Ephemeride. . . 37 19
Perlide . ... 27 11
Raphidide . . . 4 2
Hemerobide . . . 40 26
Psocide . . . . 380 25
Panorpide. . . . 5 ’
Trichoptera . . . 140 42
Total number of species . 831 149

The following have been taken in the surrounding
parishes :—
1, Libellua quadrimaculata, Linn. Rare. Taken by
any father at Cosmore Quag. 2. L. ceerulescens, Fab. At Cosmore Quag. 130 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Lestes pennipes, Fab. Occasionally common at
Holwell.
. Betis vulgata, Linn. Abundant at Holwell. 5. Chloroperla grammica, Oliv. Common at Holwell. 6. Raphidia notata, Fab. Very rare. Taken by my
father at Middlemarsh, July 1st, 1837, and
May 8th, 1869. 7. Neuronia ruficrus, Scop. Very rare. Taken by my
father at the Holnest Gravel-pits, May 26th,

1842. Odonata.
. Libellua depressa, Linn. Common from May to
July.

. L. fulva, Mull. A single specimen only was taken
by my father in Wootton Wood, May 24th, 1825.

. L. striolata, Charp. Abundant.

. L. seotica, Don. Rare. Taken by my brother in
the orchard, August 15th, 1871 ; also by myself,
October 4th, 1872. -

. Cordulegaster annulatus, Latr. Cominon.

. Anax formosus, Vand-Lind. A single specimen only
was taken by myself on Roundchimneys Pond,
Tuly 24th, 1864.

. Hishna cyanea, Mull. Common Dragonfly or
Horse Stinger. Abundant from August to
October.

. AB. juncea, Linn. Very rare. ‘Taken by Mr. Curtis
in Brook Furlong, August 18th, 1822.

ewe ryewe

Ree

~

NEUROPTERA. 131

. AEshna mixta, Latr. Very rare. A single speci-

men only was taken by my father on Stockhill,
October, 1807. This Dragonfly is remarkable

_ for being the oldest specimen of my father’s
taking in my collection.

. Calopterex virgo, Linn. Abundant.

. C. splendens, Harris. Common.

. Lestes viridis, Vand-Lind. Occasionally common.
. L. forcipula, Charp. Not common.

. Agrion cyathigerum, Charp. Not common.

. A, puellum, Linn. Common.

. A. mercuriale, Charp. Abundant.

. A. pulchellum, Vand-Lind. Abundant. A. minimum, Harris. Abundant. A, tenellum, DeVill. Common.

. A. elegans, Vand-Lind. Rare. Taken by my father.
. A. pumilio, Charp. Rare. Taken by my father,

August 17th, 1859. Ephemeride.

. Ephemera danica, Mull. Common May Fly. Oc-

casionally abundant in June, but none are to
be seen in the next parish, Holwell, although
the allied species (Vulgata) is in abundance

there.

. Cenis chironomiformis, Curt. Rare. Taken by

“my father, July 15th, 1854, and June 22nd,
1855, at Roundchimneys Pond. 182 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’s WOOTTON. 2. Cenis luctuosa, Berm. Rare. Taken by my
father, June 22nd, 1855. 3. C. vittata, Eaton. Rare. Taken by my father at
Ham, May 29th, 1868.

. Leptophlebia helvipes, Steph. Common.

. L. marginatus. Linn. Common.

. L. fuscus, Curt. Abundant.

. L. cinctus, Retz. Not common.

. Cloeon dipterum, Linn. Common. C. dimidiatum, Curt. Not common.

. C. luteolum, Mull. Abundant.

. Baetis binoculatus, Linn. Abundant.

. B. vernus, Curt. Abundant. Ihave taken this

May Fly as early in the year as January. B. pumillus. Berm. Common.

. B. niger, Linn. Common.

. Heptagenia semicolorata, Curt. Not common.

. H. lateralis, Curt. Not common.

. H. venosa, Fab. Common.

. H. caudata, Steph. Common. Pepe eowe

RODE Be ow

Perlide. 1. Chloroperla flava, Geoff. Abundant. 1. Leuctra pallida, Steph. Abundant. I have taken
it as early in the year as February.
. L. fusciventris, Steph. Abundant.
. L. carbonaria, Steph. Abundant. - Nemoura variegata, Oliv. Abundant. 2

omraone

NEUROPTERA. 133,

. N. cruciata, Steph. Abundant.

. N. sulcicollis, Steph. Abundant.

. N. inconspicua, Pict. Abundant. I have taken it
as early as February.

. N. fumosa, Steph. Abundant.

. Sialis lutaria, Linn. Common Monkey Fly. Abundant.

. 8. fuliginosa, Pict. Abundant. Raphidide.

. Raphidia maculicollis, Leach. Not common June

and July.

. R. xanthostigma, Sch. Common Snake Fly. Com-

mon the last few years in May and June. The
first specimen taken was by myself, June 19th,
1867. Hemerobide.

. Chrysopa flava, Scop. Abundant.
. C. vittata, Westm. Common.
. C. alba, Linn. Abundant. I have met with

this Golden Eye as early in the year as
January.

. C. vulgaris, Sch. Abundant.

. C.aspersa, Westm. Abundant.

. C. ventralis, Curt. Common.

. C. perla, Linn. Abundant.

. C. abbreviata, Curt. Common. 184 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 9. C. capitata, Fab. Rare. ‘Taken by my father from
a maple bush on Dungeon, August 6th, 1821;
also by my brother in the yard, June 22nd,
1863, June 30th, 1865, and June 7th, 1868;
a single specimen also was taken by myself in
the garden, June 4th, 1865. 1. Osmylus chrysops, Linn. Occasionally common in
Ham and Marvells. q

1. Sisyra fuscata, Fab. Abundant. 2. S. Dalii, MeLach. Common. 1. Micromus aphidivorus, Sch. Very vare. A couple
of specimensiwere taken by my father in the
garden, April 15th, 1830, and June 27th, 1886;
a single specimen also was taken by myself in

* Mallett’s Copse, June 11th, 1873.

. M. variegatus, Fab. Common. Hemerobius paganus, Linn. Common. Hi. nervosus, Fab. Abundant. H. subnebulosus, Steph. Common. H. albifrons, McLach. Very rare. A single speci-
men only was taken by myself in Pelles, April
23rd, 1873.

. H. pini, Leach. Common. - H. limbatus, Westm. Abundant.

. H. humuli,Linn. Abundant. 8. H. micans, Westm. Abundant. 9. H. fuscinervis, Sch. Not common. 10. H. pellucidus, Dale. Common in May and June,

and again in August and September. ‘This

peer

  

ea

J

2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7,
8. 1
2. 8,

1
2. 8,
4,
1
2. 1
2. NEUROPLERA. 135

species is remarkable for not having been
known to occur elsewhere.

. Coniopterex psociformis, Curt. Abundant.

. C. parvulus, Vill. Abundant. Psocide. - Psoeus longicornis, Panz. Common from July to
September.

. P.nebulosus, Steph. Common.

. P. variegatus, Fab. Common.

. P. fasciatus, Fab. Common.

. P. sexpunctatus, Linn. Not common. P. bifasciatus, Latr. Abundant.

. P. quadrimaculatus, Latr. Common.

. P. subnebulosus, Steph. Not common.

. Stenopsocus immaculatus, Steph. Abundant.

. S. cruciatus, Linn. Abundant.

. S. nervosus, Steph. Not common.

. Elipsocus flaviceps, Steph. Not common.

. E. hyalinus, Steph. Not common.

. E. Westwoodii, McLach. Not common. E. unipunctatus, Mull. Abundant.

. Peripsocus pheopterus, Steph. Abundant.

. P. alboguttatus, Dalm. Rare. Taken by my father.

. Ceecilius vittatus, Dalm. Common.

. C. Dalii, McLach. Common amongst box bushes
in the garden, June and July; and also in the
greenhouse throughout the winter.

. C. obsoletus, Steph. Common. 136 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Ceecilius flavidus, Steph. Abundant.

. C. pedicularius, Linn. Abundant.

. Atropos divinatoria, Mull. Of frequent occurrence
in books and cabinets, where, if not detected,
it does a great deal of damage.

. A. picea, Mots. Of occasional occurrence amongst
old papers. 3. A. pulsatoria, Linn. Death Watch. Rare. This

species has only been met with in boxes of

insects sent from Hastings and London. roe

~

Panorpide. 1. Panorpa communis, Linn. Common Scorpion Fly. Abundant.
. P. affinis, Leach. Abundant. 8. P. germanica, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father
in Mullett’s Copse, July 14th and 15th, 1820;
in Alder Mead, July 20th and 28th, 1821,
June 24th and July 17th, 1828, August 16th,
1822, August 26th and 27th, 1830. ~

Trichoptera. 1. Phryganea grandis, Linn. Large Caddis Fly. Very
rare. Taken by Mr. Curtis at Roundchimneys
Pond, May 29th, 1842; also by my brother in
June, 1864, and in the orchard in June, 1876. 2. P. minor, Curt. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by my father in Mullett’s Copse,
June 14th, 1869. Oakereereee

PPPPPOrNearone

NEUROPTERA. 137

. Colpotaulius incisus, Curt. Common.
. Grammotaulius atomarius, Fab. Very rare. A single

specimen only has been taken by my father.

. Limnephilus pellucidus. Oliv. Not common.

. rhombicus, Linn. Occasionally abundant.
. marmoratus, Curt. Abundant. »

. affinis, Steph. Abundant.

. auriculus, Curt. Common.

. vittatus, Fab. Common.

. centralis, Curt. Abundant.

. sparsus, Curt. Abundant. Pe Pe ee

. Anabolia fusca, Linn. Not common.

. Stenophylex striatus, Pict. Common.

. S. lateralis, Steph. Common.

. Halesus digitatus, Sch. Not common.

. Phacopterex villosa, Fab. Common from October

to December 16th.

. Sericostoma Spencii, Kirby. Abundant.
. Goera flavipes, Curt. Common.

. Silo pallipes, Fab. Abundant.

. Mormonia hirta, Fab. Not common.

. Leptocerus cinereus, Curt. Common. L. aterrimus, Steph. Abundant. , L. dissimilis, Steph. Not common. L. bifasciatus, Oliv. Not common.

. L. bicolor, Curt. Not common.
. L. conspersus, Ramb. Rare. Taken by my father,

brother, and myself on Roundchimneys Pond,
Tuly, 1868. 138 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 1. Mystacides quadrifasciatus, Fab © Abundant. 2. M. atra, Pict. Common. 1. Setodes testacea, Curt. Not common. 1. Hydropsyche pellucida, Curt. Abundant. 2. H. fulvipes, Curt. Occasionally common, June and
July. This Caddis Fly is not known to occur
elsewhere.

. H. angustipennis, Curt. Abundant. H. contubernalis, McLach. Not common. 'Tinodes luridus, Curt. Abundant. Plectrocnemia conspersa, Curt. Not common. Polycentropus multiguttatus, Curt. Common. P. flavomaculatus, Pict. Not common. 1. Agapetus fuscipes, Curt. Abundant. 1. Berea pullata, Curt. Abundant. 1. Agraylea multipunctata, Curt. Common on Round-

chimneys Pound. Hydroptila tineoides, Dalm. Common, and a very

variable species. oe

QS

Order V.-—Lermoprera. The rarest species of this splendid order, which
have been taken in Glanville’s Wootton, are:—
Papilio Machaon, Vanessa C-album, Lycena Acis,
Deilephila Livornica, Lithosia quadra, Acronycta
alni, Cosmia pyralina, Plusia orichalcea, Heliothis
peltigera, Ennomos erosaria, Scoria dealbata, Macaria

LEPIDOPTERA. 139

alternata, Ephyra orbicularia, Lobophora lobulata,
L. viretata, Eupithecia irriguata, E. subciliata,
Eudorea lineola, Simaethis vibrana, Lobesia Ser-
villana, Peronea cristana var. albovittana, Ephip-
piphora Trauniana, Stigmonota obscurana, Euchro-
mia ericetana, Adela fasciella, Cerostoma asperella,
C. horridella, Psoricoptera gibbosella, Cleodora
striatella, Aplota palpella, Gracillaria imperialella,
Chrysoclista bimaculella, Asychna terminella, and
Bohemannia quadrimaculella. Cerostoma asperella
has never been taken elsewhere in England. Those which have not been taken in the county of
Norfolk are forty-seven in number, namely :—Neme-
obius Lucina, Sesia cynipiformis, Lithosia Helveola, *
Cosmia pyralina, Noctua neglecta, Twniocampa
miniosa, Cucullia scrophulariw, Heliothis peltigera,
Ephyra orbicularia, Macaria alternata, Lobophora
lobulata, L. hexapterata, Simaethis vibrana, Exapate
gelatella, Adela fasciella, Yponomeuta vigintipunctella,
Cerostoma asperella, C. horridella, Depressaria pallor-
ella, D. capreolella, D. Douglasella, D. nervosa,
D. pastinacella, Gelechia Lyellella, Cleodora striatella,
Aplota palpella, Gelechia subocellea, Gelechia Aleella,
Acrolepia granitella, Argyresthia Andereggiella,
Gracilaria semifasciella, G. stramineella, G. impe-
rialella, Coleophora deauratella, C. hemerobiella,
C. Tenstromella, Bedellia somnulentella, Laverna
lacteella, Chrysoclista bimaculella, C. Schrank-
ella, Asychna terminella, Lithocolletis Bremiella,

140 HISTORY OV GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Lithocolletis* Klemanella, Cemiostoma Wailesella,
Pterophorus punctidactylus, P. baliodactylus, and
P. tetradactylus. It will be seen, after looking through the following
pages, that nine hundred and ten species of butterflies
and moths have been taken in the small parish of
Glanville’s Wootton (which only consists of sixteen
hundred and sixty-five acres). af 2 4 _ ie

eeoag & &€ & 2 & &
Diurni.... 44 54 66 25 43 48 81 41
Sphinging.. 18 26 40 8 18 25 12 20
Bombycina. 48 65 110 12 72 70 48 36
Noctuina. . . 146 198 805 85 200 220 160 110
Geometrina. 150 201 282 47 195 195 148 116
Pyralidina.. 38 41 68 16 44 54 28 41
Crambina.. 80 49 98 25 25 54 2 ? Tortricina. . 148 160 313 52 1389 200 ? ? Tineina . . . 280 820 750 53 212 860 ? ? Pterophorina 18 16 80 9 18 20 18

910 1180 2062 277 961 1246

~~

The above are the total number of species, as far as
I can make out. LEPIDOPTERA. 141

The following seven Lepidopterous insects (usually
found on heaths) have been taken in this parish :—
Satyrus Semele, Saturnia pavonia-minor, Euthemonia
russula, Noctua neglecta, N. porphyrea, Fidonia
atomaria, and Aspilates strigillaria. Those found on the chalk are twenty in number :—
Arge Galathea, Lycena Corydon, Lycena Alsus,
Geometra vernaria, Zerene procellata, Phibalapterex
tersata, Eupithecia isogrammata, Spilodes cinctalis,
Scopula lutealis, Halonota Brunnicherana, Dicro-
rampha simpliciana, D. plumbagana, Catoptria
Hohenwarthiana, C. Scopoliana, Euchromia pur-
purana, E. ericetana, Sericoris conchana, Argyrolepia—
enicana, Antispila Pfeifferella, Pterophorus trigono-
dactylus, and P. baliodactylus.. The following, which are found in gardens, have
probably been introduced :—Sesia _ tipuliformis,
Acherontia Atropos, Mamestra brassice, Cidaria
dotata, and Pionea forficalis. Geometra papilionaria,
which is found on birch, and Trachea piniperda, &c.,
which are attached to fir trees, must also have been
introduced. The larve of the following five moths feed on plants
growing in water:— Hydrocampa stagnalis, H.
nymphealis, H. stratiotalis, H. lemnalis, and Acen-
tropus nivosus. Two great features in the Lepidoptera of Glanville’s
Wootton are—the abundance of the genus Depressaria,
and the paucity of the genus Gelechia. 142 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. The number of moths which have been beaten from
thatch during the month of November are so nume-
yous as to be worthy of special notice; they are as
follows :—Xylina semibrunnea and petrificata ; Simae-
this pariana ; Eudorea angustea ; Cerostoma variella ;
Theristis caudella; Depressaria pallorella, atomella,
propinguella, subpropinquella, rhodochrella, purpurea,
Alstremeriana, capreolella, conterminella, ocellana,
arenella, Yeatiana, granulosella, applana, cherophyl-
ella, ciliella, Weirella, albipunctella, ultimella, Doug-
lasella, badiella, nervosa, pastinacella, and heracliana;
Psoricoptera gibbosella; Gelechia Lyellella; Laverna
decorella and epilobiella; Acrolepia pygmeana
Chauliodus cherophyllellus ; Gracillaria semifasciella
and syringella; Zelleria insignipennella ; Gracillaria
sulphurella ; Pterophorus pterodactylus; and Alucita
polydactyla ;—three-and-forty in all. On the other
hand, moths at ivy bloom are few and common. The following species seem to be attached to
orchards :—Ypsipetes psitticata and miata; Cero-
stoma asperella and horridella; Exapate gelatella ;
Carpocapsa pomonana; CEcophora unitella ; Ornix
guttea; Gracillaria sulphurella; Lithocolletis pomi-
foliella ; Argyresthia curvella and Andereggiella. The remainder of the Lepidoptera have been
obtained in the woods and fields. The following
have occurred more plentifully in the neighbouring
parishes :—

LEPIDOPTERA. 143

Melitea Artemis, of which the last specimen was
taken by myself at Middlemarsh, June 8rd, 1875. Nemeobius Lucina, of which the last specimens
were taken by my father and brother at Middlemarsh,
June 4th and 7th, 1866. Lycena Alsus, at Alton St. Panchas. Euchelia jacobew, at Holwell Rectory. Ephyra punctaria, at Middlemarsh. Fidonia atomaria, at the Caundle Holts. Aspilates strigillaria, of which the last specimen
was taken by myself at the Caundle Holts, June 15th,
1871. Scoria dealbata, taken by my father at the Caundle
Holts, June 27th, 1836, June 22nd and June 29th,
1837. Coremia multistrigaria, at Holnest. Simaethis Myllerana, at Middlemarsh. Eudorea pallida,taken by my father and Mr. Stevens,
at Cosmore Quag. Before proceeding with the Lepidoptera of Glan-
ville’s Wootton, I think it will be best to give a
list of the butterflies and moths which have, been
taken in the surrounding parishes, but not in this
one :—

1. Colias Hyale, Linn. Pale Clouded Yellow Butter-
fly. A single specimen only was taken by
myself, at Holnest, July 7th, 1876. 144 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Lycena Adonis, Fab. Clifden Blue Butterfly. Taken by my father on Knowle Hill, Buckland
Newton. 8. Stauropus fagi, Linn. Lobster Moth. Very rare. A larva (which died) was found by Mrs. Groves,
at Hermitage, in May, 1835. 4. Nemeophila plantaginis, Linn. Wood Tiger Moth. Taken by Miss Frome, at Folke.

. Phragmatobia fuliginosa, Linn. Ruby Tiger Moth. Taken by Dalton Serrel, Esq., at the Caundle
Holts. 6. Chareas graminis, Linn. Antler Moth. A single
specimen only was taken by my father on
Knowle Hill, Buckland Newton, August 7th,
1826. 7. Catocala promissa, W. V. Light Crimson Under-
wing. The wings of a single specimen were
found by my father near the turnpike-gate at
Middlemarsh, July 13th, 1836. 8. Ennomos fuscantaria, Haw. Dusky Thorn Moth. Taken by Dalton Serrel, Esq., at Stourton
Caundle. 9. Sterrha sacraria, Linn. Vestal Moth. A single
specimen only was taken by my brother in the
Rectory garden at Holwell, August 31st, 1867. 10. Phibalapteryx vitalbata, Hub. Taken by Dalton
Serrel, Esq., at Stourton Caundle. 11. Hypenodes costestrigalis, Steph. Taken by my
father at Cosmore Quag, July Ist, 1839.

o

LEPIDOPTERA. M45

12. Crambus inquinatellus, W.V. Common at Hol-

nest, July and August. 13. Retinia pinivorana, Zell. Taken by my father at

14,

15. Holnest.

. Pancalia Lewenhockella, Linn. Taken by my

father at Cosmore Quag, June 17th, 1843.

. Glyphipteryx Schenicolella, Boyd. ‘Taken by my

father at Cosmore Quag, May 28th, 1842. Diurni. 1. Papilio Machaon, Linn. Swallow-tail Butterfly. This splendid butterfly used to be tolerably
common here before the year 1816, as the
following extracts from my father’s journal will
show :—June 22nd, 26th, 27th, 1808, July
2nd, 5th, 18th, 30th, 31st, 1808, August Ist,
Qnd, 3rd, 17th, 1808, September 1st, 1809,
August 16th, 19th, 24th, 1810, August 5th,
8th, 1811, June Sth, 1812, July 14th, 1812,
July 11th, 12th, 1813, August Llth, 14th,
20th, 1813, August Ist, 1814, June 16th,
1815, on Whitedown; and August 17th, 1815,
on Newland Common (which specimen is still
in my collection), was the last day on which my
father took it, although he saw one on Dungeon,
June 22nd, 1816, settled on a thistle. It used
to smell strongly of mint. Drainage, culti-
vation, and the keeping of more cattle, seem to
L

146

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. be the chief causes of the disappearance of this
noble butterfly (and other rarities) from Dor-
setshire, as it is still to be met with in the
fens of the eastern counties. 1. Gonepteryx rhamni, Linn, Brimstone Butterfly. Generally abundant, but in certain bad years
(such as 1863) not one can be seen. 1. Colias edusa, Linn. Clouded Yellow Butterfly. Common in certain years from August to
October—such as 1808, 1811, 18138, 1818,
1859, 1862, 1876, and 1877. In 1877 it was
also common in June and July. Sometimes
for consecutive years not one can be seen. Var. Helice, Hub. Specimens of this white variety

were seen by my father on August 16th, 1834;
and by my brother in 1877. 1. Aporia crategi, Linn. Black-veined White. Very

rare. Taken by my father, June 11th, 1818;
July 2nd, 1814; June 10th, 1815, in Sandhills. 1. Pontia brassice. Large Cabbage White. Common

from April to August. My father took a speci-
men smaller than one of P. rape. 2. P. rape, Linn. Small Cabbage White. Abundant

from February to October. 5. P. napi, Linn. Green-veined White. Abundant

from April to October. L. Anthocharis cardamines. Orange-tip Butterfly. Occasionally abundant. I have taken it as
early as the Sth of April, and as late as the Ist
of July. LEPIDOPTERA. 147

1, Leucophasia sinapis, Linn. Wood White. Of
frequent occurrence in the garden and woods
from May to August, but none were seen
between June 14th, 1870, and June 8th, 1874. Var. Dinensis, An. Not common. 1. Arge Galathea, Linn. Marbled White. Rare. Taken by my father, July 30th, 1808, August
6th, 1808, August 7th, 1809, July 12th, 1812,
July 9th, 1813, July 13th, 1814, July 26th,
1815, June 26th, 1820, July 27th, 28th, 1836,
on Whitedown; a single specimen also was
taken by myself in the Cowleaze, July 22nd,
1869. 1. Satyrus Semele, Linn. Black-eyed Marble. Rare. Taken by my father on Newland Common,
September 12th, 1812, September 5th, 1813;
in Sandhills, August 22nd, 29th, 1814, August
10th, 1818, June 12th, 1828; by my brother in
the Withy-bed, August 12th, 1868, August 9th,
1870; also by myself in Sandhill’s Copse, July
28th, August 5th, 1870; and in Pelles, August
15th, 1870, which was a hot and dry year. 2. S. Janira, Linn. Meadow Brown. Abundant in
the fields and woods from June to September;
but on St. Boniface’s Down, in the Isle of
Wight, 1866, I met with it as late as the 11th
of October. It is fond of roosting in oak trees. T have taken a female with the right upper wing
quite white ; females with the plumage of the

148 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. male; also males of a light brown colour, and
beautifully suffused with white. 3. Satyrus Tithonus. Hedge Brown. Abundant in
hedges, July and August. 4. S. Hyperanthus, Linn. Ringlet Butterfly. Com-
mon in the woods during July. It is very
variable on the under side. Var. Polymeda, Hub. Rare. 5. S. Aigeria, Linn. Speckled Wood. Abundant in
shady places. I have met with it as early in
the year as March 25th, and as late as No-
vember 2nd. 6. S. Megera, Linn. Wall Butterfly. Common on
banks from May to Angust. 7.8. Pamphilus, Linn. The Little Gatekeeper. Occasionally common in dry situations. 1, Vanessa cardui, Linn. Painted Lady. In some
years common; in others none can be seen. I
have seen it flying on December 31st. 2. V. Atalanta, Linn. Red: Admiral. Common in the
autumn. It is very fond of apples and black-
berries. :

8. V. Io, Linn. Peacock Butterfly. In some years
common ; in others none can be seen. An old
hollow oak was cut down in Dursells during
the month of January, and inside of it were a
dozen of this butterfly. 4. V.urtiee, Linn. Small Tortoise-shell. Abundant
during the summer. A few specimens spend

LEPIDOPTERA. 149

the winter indoors, and have even been known
to fly to lamp-light. 5. Vanessa polychloros, Linn. Large Tortoiseshell. Rare. Taken by my father, August 7th, 1808,
April Ist, 1817, March 2ard, 24th, 1858 ; also by
myself in Sandhill’s Copse, July 26th, 1870;
in the garden, March 11th, 1871; in Sandhill’s
Copse, August 19th, 1873; and in the Cowleaze,
May 1ith, 1877. 6. V. C-album, Linn. The Comma Butterfly. The
following are my father's recorded captures of
this butterfly, which has totally disappeared
from the county of Dorset :—October, 1807,
July 27th, 1808, September 11th, Octo-
ber 8rd, 15th, 1811, August 25th, October
4th, 1814, May llth, 1815, March 81st, Oc-
tober 8th, 1816, in Park Lane; also saw one
April 22nd, 1836. Its food plant, the hop, has
become very rare. 1, Argynnis Paphia, Linn. Silver-striped Fritillary. Occasionally common in the woods from June
to August. 2. A. Aglaia, Linn. Silver-spotted Fritillary. Very
rare. A couple were taken by my father on
Newland Common, August 11th, 1809, July
80th, 1814. 3. A. Adippe, Fab. High Brown Fritillary. A single
specimen only was taken by myself in Mullett’s
Copse, July 25th, 1870. 150 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 4, Argynnis Euphrosyne, Linn. Light Pearl-bordered
Fritillary. Abundant in the woods from April to
June. 5. A. Selene, Fab. Dark Pearl-bordered Fritillary
Of occasional occurrence in the woods, May and
June, but not common. 1. Melita Artemis, Fab. Marsh Fritillary. Rare. Taken by my father on Newland Common,
June 12th, 1815, in Wootton Wood, May 26th,
1882, and in Mullett’s Copse, May 29th, 1833,
May 28th, 1841. 1. Nemeobius lucina, Linn. Duke of Burgundy. Rare. Taken by my father in the orchard, May 27th,
1833 ; on Whitedown, June 25th, 1837; in
Mullett's Copse, May 28th, 1841, June 9th,
1847. 1. Thecla betule, Linn. Brown Hairstreak. Rare. Taken by my father August 11th, 19th, Sep-
tember 9th, October 8th, 1809, September 6th,
1810, August 12th, 80th, 1811, September 8th,
1813, September 10th, October 8th, 1814,
August 19th, September 80th, 1815, August
7th, 1842; a larva was taken by myself in the
Quag, June 12th, 1868.

. ‘I’. quereus, Linn. Purple Hairstreak. Common

on oak and ash trees from July to September.

. rubi, Linn, Green Hairstreak. Of occasional

occurrence on hedges from April to June. 1. Polyommatus Phlwas, Linn. Small Copper. Occa-

a

 

mel

LEPIDOPTERA, 151

sionally abundant. I have met with it as late
in the year as November 8th. 1. Lycena Argiolus, Linn. Azure Blue. Of occasional
occurrence on holly bushes, laurels, and ever-
green oaks in April and May, and also in
August. 2. L. Corydon, Fab. Chalk-hill Blue. A single speci-
men only was taken by my father in Downton’s
Lane (which is some distance from any chalk),
August 8th, 1836. 3.. L. Alexis, Hub. Common Blue. Abundant from
May to October. 4, L. Agestis, Schiff. Brown Argus. Common until
1830, and also in 1868 and 1870, when several
were taken during the month of August in
Pelles and on Whitedown. 5. L. Acis, Schiff. Mazarine Blue. This rare
butterfly, which has almost disappeared from
the British Isles, used to occur here in pro-
fusion, as the following extracts from my father’s
journal will show:—June 22nd, 26th, 27th,
July 2nd, 6th, 1808, July 24th, 1811, July 12th,
1812, June 11th, 12th, 16th, 1813, July 4th,
25th, August Ist, 1814, June 10th, 12th, 2Ist,
28rd, 26th, 1815, June 11th, 13th, 16th, July
8th, 9th, 1816, June 12th, 1818, June 11th,
15th, 19th, 22nd, 23rd, 27th, 1819, in Mullett’s
Long-ground, and July 1st, 1819, in the
Green Wall; June 17th, 1820, on Dungeon;

152

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 19th in Long Mead, and July 1st in Mul-
lett’s Copse; June 29th, 30th, 1821, June 18th,
1822, June 25th, 1828, June 13th, 15th, 1825,
Tune 26th, 1828, June 19th, 29th, 1830, June
14th, 22nd, 1831, June 7th, 11th, 1884,
June 15th, 17th, 1835, July 4th, 1836, June
13th, 1837, June 12th, 1839, and June 5th,
in Mullett’s Long-ground. 5. L. Alsus, Fab. Little Blue. A single specimen

only was taken by myself on Newland Common,
June 19th, 1874.

. Syrichthus alveolus, Hub. Spotted Skipper. Occa-

sionally common in the woods in May. 1. Thanaos Tages, Linn. Brown Skipper. Of ocea-

sional occurrence in May and June. This
butterfly sleeps with its wings deflexed like a
moth, and not erect like other butterflies. 1. Hesperia sylvanus, Fab. Large Skipper. Abun-

2

dant from June to August. H. linea, Fab. Small Skipper. Common, July

and August. Sphingina. 1. Ino statices, Lim. Green Forester. Of occasional

occurrence in the meadows, June. 1. Zygena trifolii, Esp. Five-spot Burnet. Common

in the meadows, June. A variety with the
spots united has been occasionally taken. LEPIDOPTERA. 158

. Zygena filipendule, Linn. Six-spot Burnet. Abun-

dant, June and July.

. Smerinthus ocellatus, Linn. Eyed Hawk Moth. Not common, June and July. The pupe may
be occasionally found at the roots of limes,
elms, and willows in the autumn, in company
with the next.

. 8. populi, Linn. Poplar Hawk Moth. Not com-

mon, June and July.

. S. tilie, Linn. Lime Hawk Moth. Not common,

June and July.

. Acherontia Atropos, Linn. Death’s-head Hawk

Moth. Three specimens were bred by my
father, October 26th, 1825, August 25th and
October 5th, 1850 ; one was also bred by myself,
October 2nd, 1865. Larve have been found in
digging up potatoes.

. Sphinx ligustri, Linn. Privet Hawk Moth. Of

occasional occurrence, June and July.

. §. convolvuli, Linn. Unicorn Hawk Moth. A

single specimen was taken in the village by
Sam Jeanes, August 28th, 1859; also a larva,
September 11th, 1847.

. Deilephila livornica, Esp. Striped Elephant. A

single specimen only was taken by my brother
in the garden on the evening of August 22nd,
1870.

. Cheerocampa elpenor, Linn. Large Elephant. Of

occasional occurrence, June and July. 1

54

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Cheerocampa porcellus, Linn. Small Elephant. Rare. Taken by my father in the garden, June
28rd, 1822; also by my brother, June 20th,
1870, July 18th, 1876, July 6th, 1877.

. Macroglossum stellatarum, Linn. Humming Bird.

. M.

Sometimes abundant from April to November;
it has even been seen at Christmas. fuciformis, Linn. Clear-wing Humming Bird. Very rare. Taken by my father in the gatden,
June 11th, 1816; by myself also in the garden,
Tune 10th, 1870; and by my brother in Ferny-
knap, June 7th, 1871. Trochilium bembeciformis, Hub. Lunar Hornet

Moth. The larvee and pupz are very abundant
in the stems of willows all through the winter;
but the moths have not been seen, with the
exception of what have been bred.

. Sesia cynipiformis, Esp. ‘The Oak Clear-wing. Rare. Taken by my brother in the Withy-bed,
June 19th, 1865; by my father in Sandhill’s
Copse, June 29th, July 16th, 1870, June 7th,
1871; and by myself in Sandhill’s Copse, June
18th, July 7th, 1870; in Wootton Wood, May
26th, 1874; and in Mead Copse, July 22nd, 1876. 2. S. tipuliformis, Linn. The Currant Clear-wing. Occasionally common in the garden in June.

. S. culiciformis, Linn. Red-belted Clear-wing. A

single specimen only was taken by my father in
Alder Mead, May 26th, 1865. 3.

q

1

1

1

LEPIDOPTERA. 155

Bombycina.

. Hepialus hectus, Linn. Golden Swift. Abundant
in the woods, June and July.

. H. lupulinus, Linn. Silver Swift. Abundant in
fields, May and June.

. H. sylvinus, Linn. Angle Swift. Very rare. Taken
by my father in Nursery Lane, August 4th,
1813; and by my brother in the garden; August
26th, 1869. H. humuli, Linn. Ghost Moth. Occasionally
common, May and June.

. Zeuzera esculi, Linn. Wood Leopard. Rare. Taken by old Tucker, August, 1849; and by
myself in the garden, July 6th, 1859, July 29th
1863. The larve are found in rotten wood.

. Cossus ligniperda, Linn. Goat Moth. The larve
are common in rotten wood ; but the only days
on which the perfect insect has been taken are,
June 18th, 1822, August 18th, 1823, July 6th
1864, July 10th, 1872.

. Pygera bucephala, Linn. Buff-tip Moth. The
larve are occasionally common on nut-bushes
in the autumn, but the perfect insects are rare.

. Cerura vinula, Linn. Puss Moth. Rare. It has
been bred by my father, May 5th, 1821, June
10th, 11th, 1839, June 8th, 1843, June 1st,
1848, March 25th, 1863; also by myself, June
llth, 1867. 156 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON,

2. Cerura furcula, Linn. Sallow Kitten. A larva of
this singular species was taken by my father in
Wootton Wood, July 28th, 1869; and bred by
my brother, May 31st, 1870. 1. Notodonta ziczac, Linn. Pebble Prominent. Bred
by my father, May 5th, 1821, June 27th, 1837. ‘The larvee are of occasional occurrence in the
autuinn. 2. N.dromedarius, Linn. Iron Prominent. Very rare. A couple of larve were taken by myself in
Sandhill’s Copse, August 31st, 1870, and in
Wootton Wood, September 26th, 1876, off
alder. 3. N. camelina, Linn. Coxcomb Prominent. Very
rare. A moth was bred by my father, June
4th, 1855; and a larva was taken by myself in
Wootton Wood, September 26th, 1876. 4. N. dicteoides, Esp. Lesser Swallow Prominent. A single specimen only was bred by my brother,
May 15th, 1868. 5. N. chaonea, Schiff. Lunar Marbled Brown. Very
rare. Taken by Mr. Curtis in Hartleaze, June
5th, 1850; and by Miss Bursey in the Manor
House, May 6th, 1871. 1. Diloba cwruleocephala, Linn. Figure-of-eight. The larve are frequently met with, but the
moths are very scarce. 1. Petasia cassinea, Fab. Sprawler. Rare. Taken
by my father in the orchard, November 12th,

LEPIDOPTERA. 157

1816; also by myself in the orchard, November
1st, 1869, and in Pelles, November 6th, 7th,
1871, November 14th, 1876.

. Ptilodontis palpina, Linn. Pale Prominent. Rare. ‘Taken by my father in the garden, May 26th,
1818; by my brother also in the garden,
August 20th, 1872; by myself in Wootton Wood,
June 27th, and in the garden August 19th,
1876.

. Saturnia pavonia-minor, Linn. Emperor Moth. A single female was taken by my father in
Lady Mead, April 18th, 1821.

. Odonestis potatoria, Linn. Drinker Moth. Com-
mon in the larva state,

. Bombyx quercus, Linn. Large Eggar. Common
in the larva state.

. B. rubi, Linn. Fox Moth. Rare. The larve
have only been met with at irregular intervals.

. B. neustria, Linn. Lackey. Abundant in the
larva state on apple-trees. Var. bilineatus, Haw. Abundant on nut-bushes.

. Eriogaster lanestris, Linn. Small Eggar. The
larvee are sometimes abundant on blackthorn-
bushes in webs, but have been very rarely bred. - Peecilocampa populi, Linn. December Eggar. Rare. Bred by my brother, November 22nd,
1868. Larve have been taken by my father,
June, 1831; by myself, May 29th, 1874, June
4th, 1876, in the Common Plantation. 158 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 1. Trichiura crategi, Linn. Pale Eggar. Rare. Taken
by my father in the garden, September 14th,
1812, September 16th, 1816; by my brother,
September 3rd, 1871; and by myself, September
5th, 1871. _
1. Gastropacha quercifolia, Linn. Lappet. Very rare. Acouple were bred by my father, July 28th,
1814, June 18th, 1853. 1, Orgyia antiqua, Linn. Common Vapourer. The
males are occasionally abundant from August
to October ; but only a single female has been
met with, which was bred by my brother on
September 18th, 1870. 1. Demas coryli, Linn. Nut-tree Tussock. Rare. A larva was taken by my father in the orchard,
Tuly 28th, 1828, and a second on July 4th,
1831, which he bred on the 28th of that month.

. Laria pudibunda, Linn. Pale Tussock. The larve
are occasionally common in the autumn. I
have bred the moth as early in the year as
February 12th. _

1. Liparis monacha, Linn. Black Arches. A single
specimen only was taken by myself in Pelles,
August 15th, 1870,

2. L. auriflua. Fab. Yellow-tail Moth. Common,
July and August. 1, Spilosoma mendica, Linn. Large Muslin. Of
occasional occurrence, but not common, May

=

and June. LEPIDOPTERA. 159

29

Spilosoma urtice, Esp. Water Etmine. Taken
by my brother in the orchard, June 15th, 1868.

. S. menthastri, Schif. White Ermine. Common,
June. S. lubricipeda, Linn. Buff Ermine. Abundant,
June and July. 1. Euthemonia russula, Linn. Clouded Buff. Very
rare. Taken by my father in Sandclose, June
Qist, 1815, and July 5th, 1855.

. Chelonia villica, Linn. Cream-spot Tiger. Of
occasional occurrence, but not common, June. 2. C. caja, Linn. Large Tiger. Common, July. The larva are sometimes abundant.

. Callimorpha dominula, Linn. Scarlet Tiger. Oc-
casionally abundant in Broad Alders and
Wootton Wood, July and August.

. Euchelia jacobeew, Linn. Pink Underwing. Very
rare in this parish, although common enough
at Holwell. Taken by my father, June 15th,
1815, July 11th, 1814, June 26th, 1828, June
18th, 1888, July Ist, 1855. 1. Calligenia miniata, Forst. Pink Arches. Of occa-

sional occurrence, July and August. 1, Lithosia rubricollis, Linn. Red-necked Footman,

Rare. Taken by my father, June 2nd, 1815,

Tune 12th, 16th, 1816, May 2Ist, 1888; by my

brother on Newland Common, June 15th, 1871 ;

and by myself in the Common Plantation,

June Mth, 1872, June 9th, 1874.

o

>

-

-

-

160 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON

2.

. L. helveola, Hub. Buff Footman. Rare. Lithosia quadra, Linn. Large Footman. Rare. Taken by my father, July 13th, 1815; by my
brother in the garden, July 16th, 1868, and in
the Common Plantation, July 27th, 1876; by
myself also in the Common Plantation, July
24th, 27th, 1876, and July 30th, 1877.

 

ken
by myself in the Common Plantation, July 24th,
27th, and August 4th, 1876 ; also by my brother,
July 27th, 1876. L. complanula, Bdy. Common Footman. Abun-
dant, July.

. L. griseola, Hub. Dingy Footman. Rare. Taken

by myself in Mullett’s Long-ground, July 27th,
1870, and in Knight’s Mead, August 17th, 1876. L. mesomella. Four-spot Footman. Rare. Taken
by my father in Mullett’s Copse, June 21st,
1839, June 28rd, 1864, June 12th, 1865; also
by myself in Broad Alders, June 12th, 1865,
Tuly 18th, 1866, and in Wootton Wood, July
20th, 1871.

. Nudaria mundana, Linn. Little Muslin. Of oc-

casional occurrence, July. Var. hemerobia, Haw. Not common. 4 Noetuina.

. Bryophila perla, W. V. Marbled Beauty. Rare. Taken by my father in the garden; also by
myself, July, 1863, and August 30th, 1869.

iL,

2

LEPIDOPTERA. 161

Acronycta alni, Linn. Alder Moth. Very rare. Larve have been taken by my father, August
15th, 1821, July 29th, 1863, in Fernyknap ;
one was also taken by my brother in the garden,
August, 1872, which he bred on May 8ist,
1873.

. A.rumicis, Linn. Bramble Moth. The larve are

very common from August to November ,on
various plants.

. A. ligustri, W. V. Dark Coronet. A single larva

was taken by my father in Sandhill’s Copse,
June, 1831, and which he bred July 8th, 1832.

. A, megacephala. W.V. Poplar Gray. Very rare. Taken by my father in the garden, May 24th,
1823 ; also by myself in Haywood, June 26th,
and in the garden, July 8th, 1873.

. A. psi, Linn. Light Dagger. Of occasional occur-

rence, May and June.

. A. tridens, W. V. Dark Dagger. Of much rarer

occurrence than the preceding.

. A. leporina, Linn. Miller of Mansfield. Yery rare. A couple of larve were taken by my father off
alder, August 29th, 1822.

. Cymatophila ridens, Fab. Frosted Green. Rare. Bred by my father, March 25th, 31st, April 2nd,
1844, April 4th, 1845; a single specimen was
taken by mysélf in Hartleaze, April 30th, 1875.

. Ceropacha diluta, Fab. Lesser Lute-string. Very

rare. Bred by my father, July 15th, 1837. M

162 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Ceropacha duplaris, Linn. Lesser Satin. Abun-
dant in the woods, June. 1. Thyatira batis, Linn. Peach Blossom. Very rare. Taken by my father, June 2nd, 1818, July 24th,
1814, May 28th, 1844, at sugar ; a single speci-
men also was taken by myself in the orchard,
September 2nd, 1872. 1. Gonophora derasa, Linn. Buff Arches. Rare. Taken by my father at sugar, July 27th, 31st,
and August 3rd, 1855; by Mr. Curtis, July 23rd,
1847; by myself in the garden, July 21st, 1873,
June 20th, 1874, July 28th, 1876. 1. Scoliopteryx libatrix, Linn. Herald Moth. Com-
mon in the woods, August and September;
also in the cellar all through the winter. 1. Lemuris typica, Linn. Taken by my father at sugar,
September 6th, 1843, August 10th, 1844; a
single specimen also was taken by myself near
Roundchimneys Pond, July 15th, 1875. 1, Mania maura, Linn. Old Lady. Of oceasional
occurrence in July and August, but not common. 1. Amphipyra pyramidea, Linn. Copper Underwing. Very rare. Bred by my father, August 3rd,
1829; taken at sugar, September 2Ist, 1844. 2. A. tragopogonis, Linn. Mouse Moth. Abundant

from August to October. Triphena pronuba, Linn. Large Yellow Under-

wing. Abundant everywhere from June to
August. LEPIDOPTERA. 168

2. Triphena orbona, Fab. Common, July and August. 3. T. interjecta, Hub. Of occasional occurrence, July
and August. 4. T. fimbria, Linn. Broad-bordered Yellow Under-
wing. Very rare. A bad specimen was picked
up by my father in the road, August 27th, 1837;
one was also bred by my brother, July 10th,
1871. 5. T. janthina, W. V. Common, August and Sept.

1. Agrotis saucia, Hub. Very rare. ‘Taken by my
father at sugar, October, 1843. 2. A. tritici, Linn. Common, July and August. 8. A. nigricans, Linn. Garden Dart. Common, July . and August. 4. A. corticea, W.V. Heart and Club. Abundant,
June and July. 5. A. exclamationis, Linn. Heart and Dart. Abun-
dant, July and August. 6. A. suffusa, Hub. Dark Sword Grass. Of occasional
occurrence, September and October ; but by no
means common. 7. A. segetum, W.V. Turnip Moth. Abundant from
July to October. 1. Noctua xanthographa, Linn. Abundant everywhere
from June to August. 2. N. umbrosa, Hub. Rare. Taken by my father at
sugar. 3. N. rubi, View. Common in the garden, July and
August. 164 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 4, Noctua augur, W.V. Rare. ‘Taken by my father. 5. N. baja, W.V. Very rare. ‘Taken by my father
at sugar, September 4th, 1844.
triangulum, Och. Very rare. Taken by myself,
July 22nd, 1866, July 15th, 1875, near Round-
chimneys Pond. 7. N. brunnea, Fab. Rare. ‘Taken by my father ;
also by myself in the garden, July 23rd, 1870. 8. N. C-nigrum, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father
at sugar, September 3rd, 1843, May 24th and
September Lith, 1844. 9. N. neglecta, Hub. Very rare. Taken by my
father at sugar, September 13th, 1848, August
4th, 1849. 10. N. plecta, Linn. Flame-shoulder. Of oecasional
occurrence, May and June. 11. N. porphyrea, W.V. True Lover’s Knot. A
single specimen only was taken by my father,
June 12th, 1815. 1. Grammesia trilinea, W. V. Of occasional occur-
rence, May and June.
. Caradrina alsines. Common, July and August.
. C. blanda, W.V. Common, July and August.
. C. cubicularis, W. V. Common in thatch, &c.,
July and August. 1. Heliophobus popularis, Fab. Feathered Gothic. Abundant, August and September. 1. Neuria saponarie, Esp. A single specimen only
was taken by my brother in the garden, June
16th, 1870. 6. N.

me

go 2

2. LEPIDOPTERA. 165

. Luperina basilinea, W. V. Of occasional occurrence,
May and June, but not common.

. L. testacea, W.V. Of occasional occurrence,
August and September, but not common.

. Apamea unanimis, Hub. A single specimen only
was taken by myself near Roundchimneys Pond,
June 5th, 1874.

. A. oculea, Linn. Abundant everywhere, July and
August. It is a very variable species. - Miana strigilis, Linn. Marbled Minor. Abundant,
July and August.

. M. furuncula, W. V. Of occasional occurrence in
June, but not common.

. Mamestra anceps, Linn. Of occasional occurrence
in June, but not common.

. M. brassice, Linn. Cabbage Moth. Common in
the garden from June to August.

. M. persicariw, Linn. Very rare. ‘Taken by my
father in the garden, June 18th, 1815.

. Axlia putris, Linn. Rare. Taken by the Rev. F. C. Morris and my father in the garden, June
11th, 1885; also by myself in Wootton Wood,
June 28th, 1873, and in Sandhill’s Copse, June
lith, 1874.

. Hydreecia nictitans, Linn. Ear Moth. Very rare. A couple were taken by my father, August 2nd,
1818.

. H. micacea, Esp. Very rare. Taken by my father
at sugar, September 12th, 30th, 1843, September
11th, 1844; also by my brother, Aug. 8th, 1870. 166 HISTORY OV GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Xylophasia rurea, Fab. Of occasional occurrence,
May and June. 2. X. hepatica, Linn. Common, June and July. 8. X. polyodon, Linn. Brown Arches. Abundant,
June and July. 4, X. lithoxylea, W.V. Light Arches. Common,
June and July. 1. Gortyna flavago, Hub. A single specimen only was
taken by myself in Mead Copse, October 6th,
1877. 1. Nonagria lutosa, Fab. Large Wainscot. A single
specimen only was taken by my father at sugar
in the garden, September 30th, 1848. - fulva, Hub. Little Wainscot. Very rare. Taken
by my father ; also by myself in Wootton Wood,
September 26th, 1876. 83. N. arcuosa, Haw. Of occasional occurrence in

damp situations, July and August. 4. N. pallens, Linn. Common Wainscot. Of ocea-
sional occurrence in damp situations from July
to September. 5. N. impura, Hub. Smoky Wainscot. Of occasional
occurrence, June and July. 6. N. comma, Linn. Dark Wainscot. Of occasional
occurrence, June and July. 1, Leucania lithargyria, Esp. Of occasional occur-
renee, June and July. 2. L. conigera, W.V. Rare. Taken by my father,
July 31st, 1813, July 6th, 1820, July 17th, 1820;
also by myself, July 29th, 1875. ~
A

x

LEPIDOPTERA. 167

. Scopelosoma satellitia, Linn. Rare. Taken by

my father at sugar, October 5th, 1838, October
and November, 1842, 1843, 1844, 1845. - Cerastis vaccinii, Linn. Common Chesnut. Abun-

dant at ivy bloom from October to December. C. spadicea, W. V. Dark Chesnut. Abundant
from October to December.

. Orthosia rufina, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father

at sugar, September and October, 1848, 1844 ;
a single specimen also was taken by myself,
October 2nd, 1872. O. litura, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father at
sugar, September and October, 1848, 1844. O.lunosa, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father,
October 8th, 1816, September and Oetober,
1838, 1848, 1844, at sugar; a single specimen
also was taken by myself in the garden, October

2nd, 1873.

: O. lota, Linn. Red-lined Quaker. Of occasional

occurrence, October and November. O. macilenta, Hub. Yellow-lined Quaker. Rare. Taken by my father, October and November,
1831, 1838, 1842, 1843, 1844; also by myself
at ivy bloom, November 4th, 1874, November
16th, 1875.

. O. pistacina, W. V. Rare. Taken by my father at

sugar; also by myself, October Ist, 1873,
October 7th, 1874.

. O. upsilon, W.V. A single specimen only was bred

168 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. Lo

zal

eeelte

by my brother, June 23rd, 1868, from a larva
found on Ham Bridge.

. Teniocampa gothica, Linn. Of occasional oceur-

rence, March and April, but not common.

. T. cruda, W. V. Little Quaker. Occasionally

common among oaks, March and April.

. T. stabilis, W. V. Common Quaker. Occasionally

common, March and April.

. T. instabilis, W. V. Drab Quaker. Rare. ‘laken

by my father, March 31st, 1822, May 7th, 18255
also bred by my brother, March 28rd, 1867,
March 10th, 1868, March 10th, 1870. [. munda, W.V. Large Quaker. Of occasional
occurrence, March and April, but not common.
. T. populeti, Fab. Poplar Quaker. A single speci-

men only was found drowned in Pelles, April
18th, 1874.
gracilis, W. V. Powdered Quaker. Very rare. Taken by my father in Broad Alders, June 8tli,
1837 ; and bred on April 8th, 1838.

. T. miniosa, Hub. Beautiful Quaker. Rare. A

wing was picked up by my father on Osel Green,
May 4th, 1837; it has also been bred by my
brother, March 7th, 1868 ; taken by myself in
Pelles, March 31st, 1871, and bred on March
7th, 1872. Trachea piniperda, Esp. Pine Beauty. A single
specimen only was taken in Fernyknap by
William Perris, February 26th, 1876. 1

a

2. 3. LEPIDOPTERA. 169

Xanthia citrago, Linn. Orange Sallow. Very rare. Taken by my father in the Green Wall, Sep-
tember 8th, 1864; and bred by myself, August
23rd, 1876.

. X. cerago, W. V. Common Sallow. Very rare. Taken by my father at sugar, September 29th
and 30th, 1843.

. X. silago, Hub. Pink-barred Sallow. Rare. Taken

by my father at sugar, September 2Ust, 1838,
September 13th, 2Ist, 1844, September 22nd,
1866, in Wootton Wood; September 8th, 1870,
in Sandhill’s Copse ; also by my brother and
myself in the garden, September, 1864.

. X. croceago, Fab. Very rare. Taken by my father

at sugar, October 17th, 1842.

. X. xerampelina, Hub. A single specimen only was

taken by my father, September 26th, 1816.

. X. ferruginea, W.V. Rare. Taken by my father

at sugar, September and October, 1830, 1831,
1832, 1843, 1844; a single specimen also was
taken by myself, July 21st, 1869.

. Cosmia trapetzina, Linn. The Dun-bar. Abun-

dant everywhere, from July to September. C. pyralina, Hub. Lunar-spotted Pinion. Very
rare. Taken by my father at sugar, August
26th, 1846, August 18th, 24th, 1855. C. affinis, Linn. Double-spotted Pinion. Of occa-
sional occurrence in damp situations from July
to September, but not common. 170 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 4. Cosmia diffinis, Linn. White-spotted Pinion. Taken by my father, August 21st, 1812, August
27th, 1823, August 24th, 1863; a single speci-
men also was taken by myself in Sandhill’s
Copse, July 18th, 1868. 1. Tethea retusa, Linn. Kidney Moth. Rare. Taken
by my father, September 5th, 1814; also by
myself in the Common Plantation, August 4th,
20th, 1876. 2. T. subtusa, W. V. Olive Moth. Very rare. Taken
by myself in Alder Mead, September 11th,
1878, and in the Common Plantation, August
4th, 1876. 1. Dianthecia conspersa, W.V. Marbled Coronet. Very rare. Taken by my father, May 25th,
27th, 1815, June 8th, 1816.

. D. capsincola, W.V. Campion Moth. Very rare. Taken by my father in Mullett’s Copse, May
Qlst, 1841. 1. Polia flavicincta, Linn. Large Ranunculus. Very

rare. Taken by my father at sugar, October
Ist, 1846. 1. Aplecta nebulosa, Ter. Grey Arches. Occasionally
common, May and June. 2. A.advena, W.V. Shining Arches. Very rare. Taken by my father at sugar. 8. A. herbida, W.V. Green Arches. A single speci-
men only was taken by myself in the garden,
July 16th, 1863. »

LEPIDOPTERA. i

. Miselia oxyacanthe, Linn. Ealing’s Glory. Of
occasional occurrence in the garden, September
and October, but not common.

. Agriopsis Aprilina, Linn. Marvel de Jour. Of
occasional occurrence from September to
November, but not common.

. Epunda viminalis, Fab. Rare. Taken by my
father, June 29th, 1822; by my brother, June
28th, 1865, July 10th, 1871; by myself, in
Mullett’s Copse, July, 1863, and in the Common
Plantation, August 4th, 1877.

. Phlogophora meticulosa, Linn. Common Angle-
shades. Abundant in the autumn, but in 1873
I took a specimen on January 7th.

. Euplexia lucipara, Linn. Rare. ‘Taken by my
father at sugar, June 18th, 1818, June 20th,
1822, June 9th, 1823, June 13th, 1844; also
bred by myself, May 15th, 1874.

. Hadena thalassina,Sch. Very rare. Taken by my
father, May 13th, 1828; also by myself in the
garden, June 15th, and in Pelles, June 25th,
1873.

. H. geniste, Bork. A single specimen only was
taken by my brother in Mead Copse, June
13th, 1875.

. H. pisi, Linn. Broom Moth. Occasionally met
with in the larva state, two of which were bred
by my father, June 30th, 1814, June 18th,
1821. 172 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 4, Hadena oleracea, Linn. Very rare. Taken by myself
in the garden, June 80th, July Ist and Sth, 1875. 5. H. gemina, Hub. Common in the garden, June

and July. 6. H. dentina, Linn. Of occasional occurrence in June. 7. H. protea, W. V. Brindled Green. Of occasional
occurrence from August to October, but not
common.
. Xylocampalithoriza, Bork. Early Gray. Common
on palings, &c., March and April. I have taken
it as early as March 10th.
. Calocampa exoleta, Linn. Large Sword Grass. Taken by my father at sugar, October 9th, 18th,
1842, April 7th, 1845; also on a gate-post,
June 2nd, 1864. 2. CO. vetusta, Hub. Very rare. Taken by my father
at sugar, September 22nd, 25th, 1843.
. Xylina rhizolitha, W. V. Common in the autumn
and spring on palings; I have even taken it in
January. 2. X. semibrunnea, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father
at sugar, September and October, 1842, 1848,
1844, and 1845, and from thatch in Ham,
October 2nd, 1867 ; also by myself, from thatch
in Nursery Lane, November 15th, 1871. 8. X. petrificata, Och. Rare. Taken by my father at
sugar, September and October, 1842, 1843,
1844, 1845, and from thatch, October 14th,
1864; also by myself, from thatch in Ham,

_

29

LEPIDOPTERA. 178

November 14th, in Nursery, November 24th,
1873, and in Ham, October 8th, 1875.

. Cucullia umbratica, Linn. Common Shark Moth. Occasionally common on palings, June and July.

. C. asteris, W. V. A single specimen was bred by

myself, July 12th, 1871, from a larva found by
my mother on a china aster in the garden, Sep-
tember 10th, 1870. C. verbasci, Linn. ‘The larve are occasionally
abundant on the black mullein in the garden. The moth I have bred as early as March 28th.

. C. scrophularie, Hub. ‘The larve have been taken

on figwort or water betony in the island and
orchard, July and August. ‘The moth I have
bred in May.

. Abrostola urtice, Hub. Light Spectacle. Very

rare. ‘Taken by my father, June 28th, 1813.

. A. triplasia, Linn. Dark Spectacle. Very rare. ‘Taken by my father, July 10th, 1820.

. Plusia orichalcea, Hub. Scarce Burnished Brass. Rare. Taken by my father, July 25th, 29th,
August Ist, 13th, 1813, July 81st, August 6th,
1814, August 3rd, 1815, July 16th, 22nd,
August 9th, 1820; a single specimen also was
taken by myself, in Wootton Wood, July 13th,
1872, off the flowers of meadowsweet.

. P. chrysitis, Linn. Common Burnished Brass. Of frequent occurrence, July and August.

. P, V-aureum, Gn. Scarce Golden Y-Moth. Very

174 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. rare. Taken by my father, July 23rd, 1816;
and by myself in the garden, July 15th, 1876. 4, Plusia iota, Linn. Common Golden Y. Of occa-
sional occurrence, June and July. 5. P. gamma, Linn. Common Silver Y. Abundant
everywhere from July to November.

. Heliothis peltigera, Hub. Bordered Straw. Very
rare. Bred by my father, June 2st, 1836;
taken by myself in the garden, July 27th, 1871.

. Heliodes arbuti, Fab. Little Yellow Underwing. Common, May and June.

. Catocala nupta, Linn. Large Red Underwing. ‘Taken by my father at sugar, August 16th, 1813,
September 21st, 1843 ; also taken by my brother
settled against the house, August 2Ist, 1870,
September 10th, 1877, and seen September
14th, 1872.

. Euclidia glyphica, Linn. Burnet Moth. Of occa-
sional occurrence in meadows, May and June. 2. E. Mi, Linn. Old Mother Shipton. Of occasional

occurrence in fields, May and June. 3. Phytometra «nea, W.V. Very rare. Taken by

my father, June 9th, 1815; also by myself in
the Cowleaze, April 29th, 1864. 1. Toxocampa pastinum, ‘I'r. Black-neck Moth. Very

rare. Taken by my father in Mullett’s Copse,
July 6th, 1831; and by Mr. Abraham in Wootton
Wood, July 6th, 1836. 1. Aventia flexula, Fab. Occasionally common, July

and August. LEPIDOPTERA. 175

Geometrina.

. Drepana faleula, W. V. Rare. Bred by myself,

July 26th, 1869; taken in Broad Alders, June
8rd, and in Wootton Wood, August 20th, 1875.

. D. unguicula, Hub. Beech Hook-tip. A single

specimen only was taken by my father in the
Withy-bed, May 18th, 1838.

. D. hamula, W. V. Oak Hook-tip. Occasionally

common, May, June, July and August.

. Cilix spinula, W. V. Goose-egg Moth. Occa-

sionally common, April, May, July and August.

. Amphidasis betularia, Linn. Peppered Moth. Rare. Taken by my father, May 24th, 1815, June
27th, 1829, July 12th, 1831; by Miss Bursey,
in the Cowleaze, June 17th, 1870; and bred by
myself, May 29th, 1867, May 81st, 1871.

. A. prodromaria, W. V. Oak Beauty. Very rare. Bred by my brother, March 23rd, 1871; and
taken’ inside the house by George Butroyd,
March 22nd, 1873.

. Biston hirtaria, Linn. Brindled Beauty. A single

male was taken by my father settled against the
house, April 25th, 1816.

. Phigalia pilosaria, W. V. Rare. Males have been

taken, February 26th, 1818, February 25th,
1830; they have also been taken by myself
in Mullett’s Copse, February 9th, 1867, in
Rabbitt’s, February 15th, in the Cowleaze,

176 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. February 29th, 1876, in Pelles, January 29th,
1877 ; a female was bred by my brother,
February 26th, 1868.

. Anisopteryx escularia, W. V. The males are of
occasional occurrence, February and March ;
but no female has ever been seen. 1. Hibemia leucophzaria, W.V. Spring Usher. The
males are generally abundant from January 20th
to March 4th; but the females have never
been seen. H. rupicapraria, W.V. The males are occasionally
common from January to March, but the female
has never been seen. 3. H. progemmaria, Hub. The males are of occa-
sional occurrence, February and March; but the
only female that has been taken was by myself,
in Pelles, March 25th, 1876. 4. H. defoliaria, Linn. Mottled Umber. The males
are of occasional occurrence in November and
December; a female was bred by myself,
January 5th, 1874. H. aurantiaria, Hub. Scarce Umber. Rare. Taken
by my father, November 11th, December 23rd,
1815, November 24th, 27th, 1817. Himera pemnaria, Linn. October Thorn. Rare. Taken by my father, October 29th, 1816,
October 23rd, 1820, October 24th, 1824, Oc-
tober 14th, 1832, November 14th, 1841; one
was bred by my brother, October 29th, 1870. ES

LEPIDOPTERA. 177

1. Crocallis elinguaria, Linn. Of occasional occur-

rence, July and August, but not common; one
was bred by my father, October 18th, 1817. 1. Odontopera bidentaria, Linn. Of occasional occur-

rence, May and June, but not common. 1. Ennomos angularia, W. V. August Thorn. Of

occasional occurrence, August and September,
but not common. 2. E. erosaria, W. V. September Thorn. Rare. Taken by my father, August 10th, 1815, Sep-
tember 5th, 1811, September 10th, 1823; a
single specimen also was taken by myself in the
orchard, September 138th, 1873. 3. E. tiliaria, Hub. Canary-shouldered Thorn. Rare. 4. EB

5

1

Taken by my father, September 9th, October
9th, 1816, August 27th, 1837; one also was
bred by my brother, July 26th, 1868.

. illustraria, Hub. Beautiful Thorn. A single
specimen only was taken by myself in Ferny-
knap, July 81st, 1873. E. illunaria, Hub. April Thorn. Occasionally

common from March to May. Specimens have
been bred as early as March 7th, and even in
December. Var. Juliaria, Haw. Occasionally common from
June to August.

. Pericallia syringaria, Linn. Richmond Beauty. Of occasional occurrence from June to August,
but not common. N

178 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Epione apiciaria, W. V. Common amongst willow-
herb from July to September. 1..Eurymene dolabraria, Linn. Scorch-wing. Of
occasional occurrence, May to July. 1. Numeria pulveraria, Linn. Of occasional occur-
rence, May and June. 1. Ellopia fasciaria, Linn. Of occasional occurrence
amongst fir trees, June and July. 1. Angerona prunaria, Linn. Orange Moth. A single
specimen only was taken by my father in
Nursery Lane, June 21st, 1831. 1. Rumia crategata, Linn. Brimstone Moth. Abun-
dant from April to October, but in 1848 my
father took one on March 27th. 1: Ourapteryx sambucaria, Linn. Swallow-tail Moth. Common in July evenings. 1. Metrocampa margaritaria, Linn. Light Emerald. Abundant, June and July. 1. Geometra papilionaria, Linn. Large Emerald. Rare. Three larve were found by my father
ona birch tree in Mullett’s Copse, May 18th,
1843, and which he bred on June 28th and
29th ; the moth has been taken by my brother
in Broad Alders, July 9th, 1867, and in Wootton
Wood, July 29th, 1870, and July 7th, 1871. 1. Phorodesma bajularia, W.V. Blotched Emerald. Rare. Taken by my brother in Alder Mead,
July 9th, 1869; by my father in Sandhill’s
Copse, July 2nd, 1870, and in Mullett’s Copse,

LEPIDOPTERA. 179

July 8th, 1871; also by myself in Wootton
Wood, July 19th, 1872, in Sandhill’s Copse,
July 1st, 1873, and in Hartleaze, July Ist, 1874. July 6th, 1877.

. Hemithea vernaria, Linn. Rare. Taken by my
father on Whitedown, July 28rd, 1828, July
10th, 1881; also by myself, July 28nd, 24th,
28th, 1876, August 8rd, 1877.

. Iodis lactearia, Linn. Little Emerald. Common,
May and June.

. I. thymiaria, Linn. Common Emerald. Abun-
dant, June to August.

. Pseudopterna cytisiaria, W. V. Grass Emerald. Of occasional occurrence, July and August, but
not common.

. Cleora lichenaria, W. V. Brussell’s Lace Moth. Abundant in orchards and woods, June to Aug.

. Hemerophila abruptaria, Thun. Burnt Umber. Very rare. Taken by my father, May 5th,
1815, and May 10th, 1831.

. Boarmia repandaria, Linn. Abundant, June to
August. Var. conversaria, Haw. A single specimen only
was taken by myself in the garden, July 2Ist,
1873.

. B. rhomboidaria, W.V. Abundant, July to Sept.

3. B. biundularia, Esp. A single specimen only was

taken by myself in the Green Wall, July 27th,
1872,

180 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Tephrosia crepuscularia, W.V. Occasionally com-
mon on trunks of trees, from March 10th to
May 3rd. 2. T. punctularia, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father,
May 16th, 1842, June 2nd, 1864; also by
myself, May 20th, 1867, in Wootton Wood. 1. Aspilates strigillaria, Hub. Vary rare. Taken by
my father on Newland Common, June 18th,
1818, June 18th, 1829. 1. Fidonia atomaria, Linn. Common Heath Moth. Very rare. Taken by my father in Pelles,
May 24th, 1850; by myself in Wootton Wood,
June Ist, 1864. In neither of these places is
there any heath; and one of the moths isa
male, but of the same colour as the female. 1. Strenia clathrata, Linn. Latticed Heath. Rare. Taken by my father, August Ist, 1814, June
4th, 1838, in Mullett’s Copse; also by myself
in Wootton Wood, May 80th, June 24th; and
in Whitedown, July 31st, 1871. 1. Cabera exanthemaria, Scop. Abundant, May to
September. 2. C. rotundaria, Haw. Of occasional occurrence in
the woods, June. 8. Cabera pusaria, Linn. Common White Wave. Abundant, May to August. 1. Scoria dealbata, Linn. Black-veined Moth. A
single specimen only was taken by my father in
Buttons, June 19th, 1847. LEPIDOPTERA. 181

1. Timandra amataria, Linn. Blood-veined Moth. Common, and in 1874 abundant in woods from
June to September. 1. Halia wavaria, Linn. Gooseberry Moth. Occa-
sionally common in the garden, June and July:
The first was taken by my father, July 19th,
1854,

1. Macaria alternata, W.V. Scarce Peacock Moth. Rare. Taken by my father in Whitedown
Copse, July 6th, 1870; by my brother, July
22nd, 1871; also by myself in the Island, July
16th, 1866; in the orchard, August 18th, 1868 ;
in Pelles, June 20th; in Fernyknap, June 22nd,
in Sanicul Lane, July 4th, in the orchard, July
9th, 1870; in Wootton Wood, July 10th, 1873;
in Kettle’s orchard, September 7th, 1874; in
Haywood, June 22nd; on Newland Common,
June 24th, 1875, on Whitedown, July 18th,
1876; on Newland Common, July 6th, 1877;
and on Whitedown, July 9th, 1877. 1. Acidalia emarginata, Linn. Scalloped Wave. Of
occasional oecurrence, June to August. 2. A. imitaria, Hub. Little Blood-vein. Occasionally
common, June to August. 3. A. aversata, Linn. Riband Wave. Abundant
everywhere, June to August. 4, A. remutata, Hub. Cream Wave. Common in the
woods, April to June. 5. A. bisetata, Bork. Abundant, June to August. 182 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 6. Acidalia scutulata, Hub. Common, June to August. 1. Asthena candidata, W. V. Rare. Taken by my
father, May 14th, 1838, June 11th, 1870; also
by myself in the garden, August 28th, 1869,
Tune 25th, July 25th, 1870, May 20th, 1871,
June 8th, 1877. 2. A. luteata, W.V. Of occasional occurrence, June
and July; in 1870, abundant. 1. Eupisteria heparata, Linn. Dingy Shell. Com-
mon in the woods, May to July. 1. Ephyra punctaria, Linn. Maiden’s Blush. Very
rare. Taken by my father in Mullett’s Copse,
June 16th, 1835; and by myself in Cockroad,
July 17th, 1876. 2. E. poraria, Linn. False Mocha. Rare. Taken
by my father in Mullett’s Copse, July 25th;
in Sandhill's Copse, August 2nd, 5th; by my
brother, August 2nd; also by myself in Sanicul
Lane, July 28th, August 2nd, 4th, 5th, 11th,
1870; in Sandhill’s Copse, August 26th, 1871;
on Newland Common, June 11th, 1874. 3. E. omnicroaria, W. V. Common Mocha. Abun-
dant, May and June, and also in August. 4. E. orbicularia. Dingy Mocha. Very rare. Taken
by my father in Wootton Wood, August 28th
1869; also by myself in Alder Mead, August
Ist, 1870, and in the orchard May 27th, 1874. 1. Tanagra cherophyllata, Linn. Looping Chimney
Sweeper. Very rare. Taken by my father,

LEPIDOPTERA. 183

July Ist, 1843; by my brother, July 12th, 1869,
in Alder Mead. - Lomaspilis marginata, Linn. Clouded Border. Abundant, May to July. Curious varieties,
with scarcely any markings, occasionally occur.

. Abraxas grossulariata, Linn. Magpie Moth. Abundant everywhere, August and September
A very dark variety was taken by my father in
Mullett’s Copse, August 12th, 1840.

. Melanippe subtristata, Haw. Abundant everywhere,
May to September.

. M. rivata, Hub. Rare. Taken by my father and
myself in Buttons, July 18th, 1870; on New-
land Common, July 22nd, 1873, July 2nd, 1874;
on Whitedown, June 24th, 1874; and in Pelles,
June 12th, 1876.

. M. unangulata, Haw. Rare. Taken by myself in

Wootton Wood, July 5th, 1870, in Knight's
Mead, June 24th, 1874; on Whitedown, July
18th ; in Honey Mead, July 15th, 1876; and on
Newland Common, July 6th, 1877.

. Zerene procellata, Hub. Rare. ‘Taken by my

father on Whitedown, July 10th, 1881; also by
myself, July 22nd, July 24th, 1876, and July
llth, 1877. 2. Z.albicillata, Linn. A single specimen was bred

3.

by my brother, June 12th, 1863.
. Z.adustata, W. V. Occasionally common, May to
August. 184 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 4, Zerene rubiginata, W. V. Common, June and
July. In 1816, my father met with it on
August 28th. 1. Melanthia ocellata, Linn. Of occasional occurrence
in May, June, and August, but not common. 2. M. montanata, W. V. Chalk Moth. Abundant,
May and June. 8. M. fluctuata, Linn. Garden Carpet. Abundant,
April to October. Var. costovata, Haw. A single specimen of this
variety was taken by myself in the garden,
May 29th, 1871.

. Anticlea sinuata, W. V. Royal Mantle. A single
specimen was bred by my brother, June 9th,
1864.,

2. A.rubidata, W.V. Rare. Taken by my father in

the garden, July 20th, 1816 ; also by myself in
Ham, July 4th, 1872, and in the orchard, July
10th, 1876. 3. A. berberata, W. V. A single specimen only was
taken by my father in the garden, May 26th, 1828. 4, A. badiata, W.V. Common, March to May. In
1872 I met with it as early as March 11th,
and in 1864 I took a specimen as late in the
year as June 3rd.

. A. derivata, W.V. Common in hedges, April
and May. 1. Emmelesia alchemillata, Linn. Common in the
woods, May and June. x

LEPIDOPTERA. 185

. Emmelesia affinitata, Steph. Little Rivulet. Com-
mon in the woods, June and July.

. E. decolorata, Hub. Occasionally common in the
woods, May and June.

. E. albulata, W.V. Very rare. Taken by my
father in Mullett’s Copse, May 31st, 1843;
also by myself in Broad Alders, June 2nd, 1866.

. Coremia propugnata, W. V. abuniany) May, June,
August, and September.

. C. ferrugaria, Linn. Abundant, May, June, and
August. C. didymata, Linn. Twin Spot. Abundant, May
to July.

. C. multistrigaria, Haw. The wings of one were
found by myself in Hayes Pond, April 4th, 1871.

. C. pectinitaria, Fuess. Common, April to Sept.

. Camptogramma bilineata, Linn. Yellow Shell. Abundant everywhere, May to September.

. Cidaria fulvata, Forst. Common, June and July.

. C.dotata, Linn. Spinach Moth. Rare. Taken
by my father in the garden, July 20th, 1816,
June 15th, 1825; also by myself, June 20th,
28rd, 1870, June 27th, 1873, June 21st, 1874,
July 10th, 1876.

. C. testata, Linn. Abundant, June to September.

. Cidaria pyraliata, Bork. Abundant, June to August.

. C. prunata, Linn. Phoenix Moth. Very rare. Taken by my father in the garden, July 16th,
1822; and by myself, July 28th, 1868. 186 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 6. Cidaria silaceata, W. Y. Common, May and June;
also in August. 7. C. suffumata, W. V. Common, April and May;
but in 1816 my father took one, August 30th;
and in 1871 I met with it as early as March 28rd. 8. C. russata, W. V. Abundant in orchards and
woods, May and June; also August, September,
October. Var. perfuscata, Haw. Abundant. » centum-notata, Haw. Common. » comma-notata, Haw. Common. 9. C. corylata, Thunb. Abundant, May and June. 10. C. picata, Hub. A single specimen only was
taken by myself in Pelles, July 19th, 1871. 1. Harpalyce miata, Linn. Of occasional occurrence
but not common in orchards and woods, Sep-
tember to May. 2. H. psitticata, W. V." Abundant in the orchards
and woods, September to June. 1. Upsipetes elutata, W. V. July Highflier. Abun-
dant everywhere, July 10th to September 14th. 2. U. impluviata, W. V. May Highflier. Of occa-
sional occurrence but not common in the woods,
May and June. 3. U. ruberata, Frey. Ruddy Highflier. Very rare. Taken by myself in Wootton Wood, May 23rd,
1871; and in the Cowleaze, June 11th, 1874. 1. Thera variata, W. V. Abundant in the planta-
tions, April to June; also August to October. LEPIDOPTERA. 187

2. Thera firmaria, Hub. Pine Carpet. Rare. Taken

-

by my father, September 28rd, 1864; also by
myself, June 27th, 1871, September 5th, 1872,
June 4th, 1876, and October Ist, 1877, in the
Common Plantation.

. Cheimatobia brumata, Linn. Winter Moth. The

males are abundant everywhere, October to
December; but the females (which are almost
apterous) are very rarely met with. 2. C.boreata, Hub. Rare. Taken by myself in the

-

garden, November 25th, 1867; in Pelles, Dec.
10th, 1870; in Rabbitts, December 27th, 1871.

. Oporabia dilutata, W.N. November Moth. Abun-

dant, October and November. 1. Lobophora lobulata, Hub. Tooth-striped Moth. Very rare. Taken by my father in the orchard,
April 19th, 1818, and April 7th, 1822; a single
specimen also was taken by myself in the
orchard, April 7th, 1876. L. hexapterata, Fab. Large Seraphim. Rare. Taken by my father on Newland Common,
May 23rd, 1818; also by myself in Alder Mead,
June 18th, 1874; in the Common Plantation,
June 4th, and in Fernyknap, June 12th, 1876.

. L. sexalata, Hub. Small Seraphim. Rare. Taken

by my father, May 27th, 1823, May 22nd, 1882,
May 24th, 1812, June 8th, 1846, May 31st, 1871;
also by myself in Broad Alders, May 27th, 1865;
in Wootton Wood, June 17th, 1878, May 27th,

188 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1875; on Newland Common, June 18th, 19th;
in Wootton Wood, June 22nd, July 24th, 1875,
June 12th, July Ist, 1876. 4. Lobophora viretata, Hub. Yellow-barred Brindle. Rare. Taken by my father in the garden,
August 10th, 1829, May 12th, 1838; by Mr.
Mitford, June 4th, 1837 ; by Mrs. Wollaston in
Hartleaze, May 27th, 1874; also by myself in
the garden, May 6th, 1871, and in the orchard,
May 12th, 1875. 1. Eupithecia rectangulata, Linn. Green Pug. Abun-
dant in the orchards and woods, June and July. Var. inturbata, Hub. A single specimen of this
dark variety was taken by myself in the orchard,
July 11th, 1874. 2. E.coronata, Hub. Of occasional occurrence but
not common in the orchards and woods, April
and May; also in August. 3. E. isogrammata, Tr. Rare. Taken by myself from
clematis on Whitedown, July 13th, 22nd, 28th,
1876, July 25th and August 8rd, 1877. 4, E. pumillata, Hub. Rare. Taken by my father in
the garden, June 18th, 1819, June 27th, 1829 ;
also by myself in the orchard, July 25th, 1871,
July 11th, 1874; in Pelles, August 12th, 1875. 5. E. exiguata, Hub. Abundant in the orchards and
woods, May and June. 6. E. abbreviata, Steph. Abundant, March to May;
in 1872 I met with it as early as March 12th. 10. 11. 12. 18. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. LEPIDOPTERA. 189

. Eupithecia dodoneata, Gn. Rare. Taken by my

father, May 8rd, 1871; also by myself in
Wootton Wood, May 8th, 1873; in Sandhill’s
Copse, May 8rd, 1871; in the orchard, May
12th, 1875; in Heartleaze, May 12th, 1876;
in the orchard, May 8rd, 1877.

. E. subciliata, Gn. Rare. Taken by my father;

also by myself in the orchard, August 6th,
1874, and on Newland Common, August 16th,
1875. E. tenuiata, Hub. Of occasional occurrence,
June and July. E. indigata, Hub. Very rare. Taken by myself
in the Common Plantation, May 19th, 1874. E. vulgata, Haw. Abundant everywhere, May to
July. E. lariceata, Frey. Very rare. Taken by myself

in the Common Plantation, May 31st, 1876.

. castigata, Haw. Abundant, May to July.

. minutata, Hub. Abundant, May and June. E. satyrata, Hub. Of occasional occurrence in
June. E. fraxinata, Crew. Very rare. Taken by myself
in the garden, July 22nd, 1875. E. subnotata, Hub. Very rare. Taken by .my
father on Osel Green, May 17th, 1818. E. subfulvata, Haw. Rare. Taken by myself in
Sandhills, July 30th, August 14th, 1872;

ae

190

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. in Hartleaze, August 16th, 1872; in Wootton
‘Wood, September 2nd, 1876. 19. Eupithecia centaureata, W. V. Lime-speck Pug. 20. E.

21. BE. 1. Phi

Very rare. Taken by my brother in the garden,
May 19th, 1868; by myself in the Common
Plantation, May 19th, 1874.

irriguata, Hub. Variegated Pug. Rare. Taken
by my father in the orchard, May 7th, 1819;
in Patey’s Copse, May 20th, 1839; in Knight's
Mead, May 11th, 1849; also by myself in
Hartleaze, May 14th, 1863; in Haywood, April
15th, 1868, and April 26th, 1870; in the
orchard, April 29th, 1871; on Newland Com-
mon, May 9th, 1873; in Hartleaze, April 23rd,
in Sandhill’s Copse, May llth; in Sanicul
Lane, May 12th, 1874; in Hartleaze, April
30th; in Sandhill’s Copse, May 8rd; in Hart-
leaze, May 6th, 1875, May 17th and June
2nd, 1877.

yenosata, Fab. Netted Pug. Very rare. Taken by my father on Whitedown, May 18th,
1837.

ibalapteryx tersata, W. V. Common on White-
down amongst clematis in July, 1876 and 1877,
but none were taken previously. 1. Scotosia rhamnata. W. V. Very rare. Taken by

my father, July 24th, 1816; also by myself in
Pelles, July 2nd, 1868. LEPIDOPTERA. 191

. Scotosia vetulata, W.V. Rare. Taken by my
father in Rabbitts, July 6th, 1839; in Ham,
July 18th, 1863; in Pelles, June 30th, 1864;
also by myself in Ham, July 18th, 1863; in
the garden, July 12th, 1870; in Waterly Lane,
July 10th, 1872; in Ham, July 18th, 1876.

. Triphosia dubitata, Linn. Rare. Taken by my ~
father, August 27th, 1818, July Sist, 1814,
August 24th, 1815, April 17th, 1831, Sep-
tember 25th, 1847; also by myself in Pelles,
September, 1863.

. Eucosmia undulata, Linn. Ringlet Moth. Occa-
sionally common, June and July.

. Anaitis plagiata, Linn. The Treble-bar Moth. Of occasional occurrence, May and June; also
in August and September.

. Phasiane palumbaria, W. V. Rare.. Taken by my
father, May 27th, 1818; also by myself on
Newland Common, June 5th, 1874, and in the
Quag, June 6th, 1875.

. Loxogramma petraria, Hub. Brown Silver-lines. Rare. Taken by my father. May 17th, 1819,
May 18th and June 8th, 1821; also by myself
in Wootton Wood, May 80th, 1871; in the
garden, June 18th, 1874; in Broad Alders,
June 4th, 1875; and on Whitedown, June
llth, 1877.

. Eubolia mensuraria, W. V. Abundant amongst
brambles, July and August. 192 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Pyralidina. 1. Aventia flexula, Fab. Of occasional occurrence,
July and August. .
. Hypena proboscidalis, Linn. Snout Moth. Abun-
dant amongst nettles, June to October. 2. H. rostralis, Linn. A single specimen only was
taken by myself inside the Manor House, Sep-

25th, 1874. 1. Polypogon tarsipennalis, Tr. Abundant, June to
August. 2. P. grisealis, W. V. Common in the Woods, June
and July. 1. Hypenodes albistrigalis, Steph. Very rare. Taken
by my father in Mullett's Long Ground, June
25th, 1829. 1. Rivula sericealis, W. V. Common in damp situ-
ations, June and July. 1. Aglossa pinguinalis, Linn. Common in houses and
stables, June and July. 1. Pyrausta purpuralis, Linn. Purple - and-Gold. Common from May to September, and in 1872
I took one as late as September 22nd. 2. P. ostrinalis, Hub. Common in the fields, June
and July. 3. P. cespitalis, W. V. Very rare. Taken by myself

* in Hartleaze, July Ist,.1865 ; in the Cowleaze,

August 16th, 1870. LEPIDOPTERA. 193,

1. Simethis Myllerana, Fab. Beautiful Nettle-tap. Very rare. A few specimens were taken by my
father and myself in Haywood, May, 1864. 2. 8. vibrana, Hub. Scarce Nettle-tap. A single
specimen only was taken by my father in
Frith, August 26th, 1846. 8. S. Fabriciana, Linn. Common Nettle-tap. Abun-
dant amongst nettles, June to October. 4, 8. pariana, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father, June
22nd, 1822, September 12th, 1821, August 12th,
1859; also by myself, September, 1864, Sep-
tember 26th, 1867, March 23rd, 1871; in Pelles,
September 4th, 1868; in the orchard, March
19th, 1873 ; in Rabbitts, August 27th, 1875. 1. Nola cucullatella, Linn. Rare. Taken by my
father, August 25th, 1816, July 12th, 1823,
July 11th, 1824, and bred June 18th, 1831;
taken by myself in the orchard, July 28rd,
1867, July 19th, 1870, July 22nd, 1875; in
Birch Copse, August 2nd, 1875, July 17th and
20th, 1876. 2. N. cristulalis, Dup. Least Black Arches. Rare. Taken by my father, June 3rd, 1817, May 15th
1829; also by myself in Hartleaze, May 17th,
1868 ; in the orchard, May 26th, 28th, 1874. 1. Acentropus niveus, Oliv. Rare. First taken on
Roundchimneys Pond, June 8th, 1854, by
Miss Carpenter ; afterwards by my father and
Mr. Curtis, June 19th, 1854, June 15th, 22nd,

: °

lyst HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. July 5th, 20th, 1855; a single specimen also
was taken by my father, July 7th, 1857. Var. Garnonsii, Curt. Very rare. ‘Taken by
my father and Miss Carpenter on Round-
chimneys Pond, June 8th and 19th, 1854. 1. Hydrocampa lemnalis, Linn. Beautiful China-
mark. Very rare. A few specimens were
taken by my father on the pond opposite
to Jacob Weir’s house at Newland, June 6th,
1818. 2. H. stratiotalis, Linn. Very rare. Taken by my
father on Roundchimneys Pond, June 28th,
1866. 8. H. nympheealis, Linn. Large China-mark. Abun-
dant, June and July. 4. H. stagnalis, Don. Common on water, June and
July. .

J. Ebulea sambucalis, W. V. First taken by my
father in the Green Wall, July 27th, 1869,
since when it has been moderately common in
July and August. 1. Botys urticalis, Linn. Common amongst nettles,
June and July. 2. B. verticalis, W. V. Mother-of-Pearl. Abundant
amongst nettles, June to August. 8. B. fuscalis, W. V. ‘Taken in the meadows by my
father, June and July. 4. B. crocealis, Tr. Abundant amongst fleabane,
June to August. LEPIDOPTERA. 195

. Pionea forficalis, Linn. Garden Pearl. Abundant,
May to September.

. Spilodes cinctalis, Tr. Occasionally common on
Whitedown, June to August. - Scopula lutealis, Haw. Very rare. Taken by my
father in the Green Wall, July 16th, 1822.

. S. olivalis, W. V. Abundant, June and July.

. S. prunalis, W.V. Abundant, June and July. + Scopula ferrugalis, Hub. Common amongst flea-
bane, July to November.

. Stenopteryx hybridalis, Hub. Of occasional occur-
rence, August to November. Crambina.

. Eudorea cembre, Haw. Common amongst bram-
bles, July and August.

. E. ambigualis, Tr. Common on tree-trunks, May
to July.

. E. dubitalis, Hub. Common, May to July.

. E. crategella, Hub. Abundant, June to September.

. E. mercurella, Linn. Common, June to August. Var. concinella, Curt. A single specimen of this

variety was taken by my father in Sandhill’s
Copse, July 28th, 1870.

. E. resinea, Haw. Common, June to August.

. E.lineola, Curt. Rare. Taken by my father ;
also by myself in Ham orchard, July 20th, 1874. }. E. angustea, Curt. Common in woods and orchards ;
and amongst thatch from August to April. 196 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 9. Eudorea pallida, Curt. Rare. Taken by my
father; also by myself on Whitedown, July
17th, 1876.

. Crambus pratellus, Clk. Abundant, May & June.

. C. hortuellus, Hub. Abundant, June and July.

. C. pascuellus, Linn. Abundant, June and July.

. C. uliginosellus, Zell. Abundant, June and July,
in the Quag (which consists of only twenty
square yards). 5. C. culmellus, Linn. Abundant, June and July. C. geniculeus, Haw. First taken by myself on

Newland Common, August 19th, 1868; since

when it has been moderately common. 7. C. selasellus, Hub. Common, July and August. 8. C. tristellus, W. V. Abundant everywhere, July
and August. 9. C. pinetellus, Linn. T'aken by my father, August
16th, 1838; and by myself, June 27th, 1870,
in Waterly Lane; since when it has been
moderately common from June to August. 10. C. perlellus, Scop. Silver Grass Moth. Com-
mon on Newland Common and Whitedown,
June and July.

. Myelophila cribrella, Hub. A single specimen
only was taken by my father.

. Ephestia elutella, Hub. Of occasional occurrence,
June to August.

. Cryptoblabes bistrigella, Haw. Very rare. Taken
by my father in Mullett’s Copse, June 19th,

owe

»

LEPIDOPTERA. 197

1830; and by myself in Sandhill’s Copse, June
28rd, 1877.

. Pempelia dilutella, Hub. A single specimen only
was taken by my father. - Phycita abietella, W. V. A single specimen only
was taken by myself in the Common Plantation,
September 14th, 1868.

. P. roborella, W. V. Of occasional occurrence,
July to September. - Rodophwa advenella, Zinck. Rare. Taken by
my father; also by myself, July 29th, 1865,
August 8rd, 1867, August 3rd, 1868, August
14th, 1869.

. R. marmorea, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father;
also by myself in Ham, July 27th, 1870; in
Sandhills, July 22nd, 1876. 3. R. consociella, Hub. Very rare. Taken by my
father in Sandhill’s Copse, July 24th, 1871;
also by myself in the Cowleaze, July 19th, 1869,
and in Hartleaze, July 27th, 1871.

. R. tumidella, Zinck. Very rare. Taken by my
father in Sandhill’s Copse, July 4th, 1870.

. Melia sociella, Linn. Common, June to August. Tortricina.
. Halias prasina, Linn. Common Silver-lines. Of
general occurrence, May and June.
. H. quercana, W. V. Scarce Silver-lines. Rare. Taken by iy father, July 18th, 1814, and

198

2 Sa

10. It
12. Te
T.
de

T.
ig
T.
T
T

PT. ay
T.
oo

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. Tuly 19th, 1815; by my brother in Newland
Lane, July 6th, 1868; by myself in the Com-
mon Plantation, July 24th, 1876; a couple also
were bred by myself, June 20th, 1867, and
June 14th, 1874. ‘ortrix viridana, Linn. Abundant, June and July. adjunctana, Tr. Common, June and July. sorbiana, Hub. Rare. Taken by my father ;

also by myself on Whitedown, July 18th, 1876. '. pyrastrana, Hub. Abundant, June and July.

. xylosteana, Linn. Abundant, June to August. roborana, Hub. Common, July and August.

. rosana, Linn. Abundant, June to September.

. transitana, Gn. Rare. Taken by my father;

also by myself on Newland Common, July

4th, 1876.

ribeana, Hub. Common, June to August.

. heparana, W.V. Abundant, June to August. corylana, Hub. Common, June and July.

. unifasciana, Dup. Of occasional occurrence
amongst privet, June and July.

. Sarrothrippus ilicanus, Fab. Common in orchards,

woods, and amongst fir-trees, August to April. Var. dilutanus, Hub. Common. Afzelianus, Wood. Common. Lathamianus, Steph. Not common. » degeneranus, Hub. Very rare. Taken by
my father in the orchard, October 17th, 1837,
and October 22nd, 1838. LEPIDOPTERA. 199

Var. ramosanus, Hub. Very rare. Taken by my
father in the garden, September 2st, 1838;
and by myself in the orchard, Oct. 5th, 1875.

. Leptogramma literana, Linn. Abundant in the
orchards and woods, August to May. Var. squamana, Fab. Abundant. » irrorana, Steph. Common. »» tricolorana, Steph. Common. » fulvomixtana, Steph. Common.

. L. seabrana, Fab. Rare. Taken by myself in the
orchard, October 19th, 1872; in Pelles, October
28th, 1874; in Cunniger orchard, November
80th, 1874; in Ham orchard, Nov. 15th, 1876.

. L. boseana, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father,
September 14th, 1823, October llth, 1848,
March 10th, 1871; also by myself in Hart-
leaze, April 4th, 1868, March 20th, 1871; in
Wootton Wood, April 6th, 1871; in Sandhill’s
Copse, January 12th, 1874.

. Peronea cristana, W. V. Button Moth. Common
in orchards and old whitethorn bushes, August
to November. Var. fulvovittana, Steph. Rare. Taken by my
father, October 5th, 1858; by myself in the
orchard, October Ist, 1874. » eristalana, Don. Common. » subcristalana, Steph. Common. » substriana, Steph. Common. »» Striana, Haw. Common. 200 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Var. vittana, Steph. Common. »  unicolorana, Desv. Very rare. ‘Taken by
myself in Wootton Wood, September 18th, 1877. » spadiceana, Haw. Common. », Semiustana, Curt. Rare. Taken by my
father ; and by myself in the orchard, September
26th, 1874. Bentleyana, Curt. Rare. ‘Taken by my
father; and by myself in the orchard, Sep-
tember 26th, 1874. » Chantana, Curt. Rare. Taken by myself in
the orchard, October 3rd, 1873.

fulvocristana, Steph. Common. Desfontianana, Fab. Common. consimilana, Steph. Common. sericana, Hub. Common. albovittana, Steph. A single specimen only
was taken by myself in Little Wootton Wood,
November 8th, 1871. » capuzina, Johns. A single specimen only was
taken by myself in the Green Wall, September
12th, 1874. 2. Peronea Hastiana, Linn. Rare. Taken by my

father. » Yamostriana, Steph. Rare. Taken by myself
in Pelles, July 31st, 187! ; also in the orchard. » Yadiana, Hub. Rare. Taken by my father
on Newland Common, September 14th, 1857. », combustana. Hub. Rare. Taken by my

ao

LEPIDOPTERA. 201

father and by myself in Hartleaze, May 11th,
1874. Var. Byringerana, Hub. Rare. Taken by my
father in the orchard, October 5th, 1838.

. Peronea favillaceana, Hub. Abundant amongst

beech, July to October. Var, fagana, Curt. Common. » veticulana, Haw. Common.

. P. Schalleriana, Linn. Abundant amongst sallow,

August and September.

. P. comparana, Hub. Common amongst sallow,

August to November. Var. costimaculana, Steph. Common.

. P. variegana, W. V. Common, July and August. Var. cirrana, Curt. Common. » borana, Haw. Common. » asperana, Fab. Common.

. P tristana, Hub. Common, September to No-

vember. Var. semirhombana, Curt. Common. »» trigonana, Steph. Common.

. P. mixtana, Hub. Very rare. Taken by my

father on Newland Common, April 28th,
1842.

. P. ferrugana, W. V. Common in hedges, August

to October. Var. bifidana, Haw. Common. » gnomana, Haw. Common. » tripunctana, Hub. Common. 202 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 10. Peronea aspersana, Hub. Common in the woods,
July and August. 1. Teras effractana, Hub. Shallow Notchwing Moth. Common in the woods, Sept. to November. 2. T. caudana, Fab. Abundant everywhere, July
to September. Var. emargana, Fab. Common. » excavana, Haw. Common. 1. Dictyopteryx ciliana, Hub. Abundant everywhere,
August to October. Var. contaminana, Hub. Abundant. » Thombana, Haw. Common. 2. D. Leeflingiana, Linn. Common, June to August. Var. plumbana, Hub. Common. 8. D. Holmiana, Linn. Common, June and July. 4. D. Bergmanniana, Linn. Common, June to
August. 5. D. Forskaleana, Linn. Common amongst maple,
June and July. 6. D. Conwayana, Fab. Common in June. Var. subaurantiana, Steph. Common. 1. Lophoderus ministrana, Linn. Common in woods
and hedges, May and June. 1. Ptycholoma Lecheana, Linn. Common in the
woods, June and July. .
1. Ditula semifasciana, Haw. Rare. Taken by my
father; also by myself in Broad Alders, August
Qist, 1866, and in Fernyknap, July 22nd,
1876. LEPIDOPTERA. 208

. Penthina betuletana, Haw. Not common, in the
woods, July and August.

. P. capreana, Hub. Not common, in the woods,
June and July.

. P. ochromelana, Gn. Rare. Taken by myself in
the garden, July 4th, 1870.

. P. cynosbana, Linn. Common in hedges, June.

. P. pruniana, Hub. Common in hedges, June and
July.

. P.gentiana, Hub. Rare, July; although the
larve are very common inside of teazel heads
all through the winter.

. P. marginana, Haw. Common, May and June. 8. P. carbonana, Dbl. Rare. Taken by my father

3.

off an oak, May 19th, 1870 ; also by myself.

. Pardia tripunctana, W.V. Abundant in gardens
and hedges, May and June.

. P.roborana, W.V. Abundant in hedges, June to
August.

. P. rosecolorana, Dbl. Common in gardens and
hedges, June and July.

. P. suffusana, Kollar. Common in hedges, May
and June. - Spilonota ocellana, W. V. - Common in orchards,
woods and hedges, July and August.

. S. neglectana, Dup. Common in the woods, June
and July.

. §. dealbana, Frol. Abundant in woods and orchards,
June to August. 204 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Var. incarnatana, Hub. Common in woods and
orchards. 1. Bactria lanceolana, Hub. Abundant among rushes,
April to September. Var. egenana, Haw. Abundant among rushes. 1. Anchylopera lundana, Fab. Occasionally common
in the wood in May and the beginning of June. 2. A. diminutana, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father
in Mullett’s Copse, May 28th, 1864; in
Wootton Wood, May 31st and June 7th, 1871;
also by myself in Sandhill’s Copse, May 19th,
1871; in Wootton Wood, June 13th, 2Ist,
1872, June 8th, 1874, June 22nd, 1875. 3. A.ramana, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father in
Maullett’s Copse, June 11th, 1870, May 26th,
1871; also by myself in Mullett’s Copse, June
10th, 1871; in Haywood, June 26th, 1873,
June 22nd, 1875; in Fernyknap, June 16th,
1876; also by Mrs. Wollaston on Newland
Common, May 22nd, 1873. 4. A, Mitterbacheriana, W. V. Abundant amongst
oaks, May and June. 1. Grapholita nisana, Linn. Abundant amongst
sallow, May and June; again in August and
September. Var. berberana, Haw. Abundant. » stictana, Haw. Common. »» pavonana, Don. Common. » Thombifasciana, Haw. Not common. LEPIDOPTERA. 205

. Grapholita cinerana, Haw. Common amongst
poplar, June and July.

. G. Paykulliana, Fab. Common in the woods, July
and August.

. G. campoliliana, W. V. Abundant amongst sallow,
May and June.

. G. Penkleriana, W. V. Common in the woods,
June and July.

. G. trimaculana, Don. Abundant amongst elm,
June and July.

. G. obtusana, Haw. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by myself in Wootton Wood,
June 11th, 1873.

. G. nevana, Hub. Common in the woods, May
and June.

. Phleodes tetraquetrana, Haw. Common in the
woods, April and May, and again in August.

. P. immaculana, Fisch. Abundant in orchards,
April and May, and again from July to October.

. Hypermecia cruciana, Hub. Common amongst
sallows, May and June.

. Batodes angustiorana, Haw. Common in the
woods, July and August.

. Cartella bilunana, Haw. Very rare. A single
specimen was taken by myself, June 13th, 1871,
and two in the Common Plantation, June 18th,
1876.

. Peedisca corticana, W. V. Abundant amongst oaks,
June to August. 206 HISLORY OF GLANVILLE’S WoOrrToN. 2. Poedisca profundana, W. V. Abundant amongst
oaks, June to September. Var. nebulana, Don. Common. » scutulana, W.V. Common. » Sparmanniana, Fab. Common. »» trapezana, Fab. Not common. 8. P. solandriana, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father,
August 11th, 1823; by my brother, August
2nd, 1870, in Sandhill’s Copse; also by myself
in Sandhill’s Copse, August 2nd, 1875. 4. P. semifuscana, Haw. Not common, amongst
sallow, August and September. 5. P. sordidana, Hub. Common amongst alder, Sep-
tember to November. 1. Halonota cirsiana, Zell. A single specimen only
was taken by myself in Wootton Wood, May
28rd, 1871. 2. H. scutulana, W. V. Common amongst thistles,
June and July. 3. H. Brunnichiana, W. V. unl ent on Whitedown,
June and July. 1. Ephippiphora nigricostana, Haw. Rare. Taken
by myself in the orchard and garden, June
24th, 1870. 2. E. trigeminana, Steph. Taken by myself in the
garden, July 17th, 1875. 3. E. tetragonana, Steph. Common in the woods,
June and July. LEPIDOPTERA. 207

»

. Ephippiphora ephippana, Hub. Common among
sallows, July to September. Olindia ulmana, Hub. Common in woods and
orchards, June to August. Semasia spiniana, Fisch. Common in hedges and
orchards, August and September. S. janthinana, Dup. Common in the woods, July
and August. S. Weeberiana, W. V. Common in orchards and
hedges, May and June; and again in August
and September. 4. S. argyrana, Hub. Common in the woods, April

and May.

. Dicrorhampha petiverana, Linn. Common in May

and June, and again in August. 2. D. sequana, Hub. Common in May and June, and

again in August.

. D. plumbagana, Tr. Not common, on Whitedown,

in June and July.

. D. simpliciana, Haw. Not common, on Whitedown,

from the end of May to July. Stigmonota redimitana, Gn. Not common, in the
woods, the end of May and beginning of June.
. S. perlepidana, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father,
in Mullett’s Copse, May 5th and 18th, 1842.

. S.dorsana, Steph. Very rare. One specimen
only was bred by myself from an oak apple,
April 4th, 1868. =

=

~

2

cy

~

nn

~

2

208 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 4, Stigmonota composana, Fab. Occasionally common
amongst clover, May and June. 5. Stigmonota Trauniana, W. V. Rare. Taken by my
father, May 31st, 1839; by my brother, June
22nd, 1869; and by myself in Wootton Wood,
Tune 18th, 1874. 1, Coceyx splendidulana, Gn. Not common, in the
woods, in June. B

2. C. strobilana, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father,
June 4th, 1838; by myself, June 24th, 1875. 8. C. nanana, Tr. Not common, among fir trees in
June. 4. C. distinctana, Bent. Not common, among fir trees
in May and June. 5. C. Hyrciniana, Uslar. Common among fir trees,
May and June. 1. Retinia pinicolana, Dbl. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by myself in Common
Plantation, August 12th, 1876. 1. Heusimene fimbriana, Steph. Rare. Taken by
myself in Hartleaze, April 3rd, 1868; in the
Cowleaze, March 22nd, 1871; in Sandhill’s
Copse, March 11th, 1872; in Waterly Lane,
March 29th, 1873; in the garden, May Ist,
1876. 1. Endopisa saturnana, Gn. Common in Wootton
Wood the end of June. 2. E. nigricana, Fab. Common in the Island the end
of May and beginning of June. LEPIDOPTERA, 209

. Endopisa proximana, Haw. Common in the Island
the end of May and beginning of June.

. E. ulicana, Gn. Rare. Taken . by my father;
and also by myself-in Wootton Wood, June
27th, 1876.

. Carpocapsa Juliana, Curt. Very rare. A single
specimen was taken by myself in Alder Mead,
July 5th, 1870, and a second in Wootton Wood,
July 3rd, 1874.

. C. splendana, Hub. Very rare. A single specimen
was taken by myself in Pelles, July 31st, 1871,
a second on August 4th, 1874, and a third on
August 2nd, 1875.

. C. pomonana, Linn. Rare in the perfect state, the
end of June and July, although the caterpillar
is plentiful inside of apples during the autumn.

. Trycheris aurana, Fab. Rare. Taken by my
father, July 13th, 1814, July 15th, 1819, June
27th, July 20th, 1836; also by myself in June,
1864, June 9th, 1868, on Newland Common;
June 27th, 1870, in Watery Lane.

. Pyrodes Rhediana, Linn. Not common. Amongst
hawthorn in May and June.

. P. albersana, Hub. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by my father in Mullett’s Copse. June 6th, 1871.

. Catoptria ulicetana, Haw. Abundant in furze
bushes, April to September. 210 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Catoptria hypericana, Hub. Common amongst St.
John's Wort, July to September 12th. 3. C. scopoliana, Haw.- Rare. Taken by my father,

July, 1870. 4. C. Hohenwarthiana, W.V. Common among thistles,
July and August. 1, Cnephasia musculana, Hub. Occasionally common
in May. 2. C. hybridana, Hub. Occasionally common in June. 8. C. subjectana, Gn. Abundant in June and July. 4. C. virgaureana, Tr. Abundant in June and July. 5. C. alternana, W.V. Not common, June and July. 6. C. nubilana, Hub. Not common; amongst hawthorn,

June and July. 1. Orthotenia antiquana, Hub. Rare. Taken by
my father; also by myself in Pelles, June 5th,
and on Newland Common, June 19th, 1874. 2. O. striana, W.V. Occasionally common in July
and August. 1. Euchromia ericetana, Bent. Rare. Taken by my
father on Whitedown; also by myself, July
24th, 1875. 2. E. purpurana, Haw. Rare. Taken by myself on
Whitedown, June 19th, July 18th, 15th, 1874. 1. Aspis Udmanniana, Linn. Common among bramble,
June to August. 1. Sideria achatana, W. V. Rare. Taken by myself
in Waterly Lane, June 27th, 1870, and on
Whitedown July 17th, 1875. LEPIDOPTERA. 211

. Sericoris conchana, Hub. Common on Whitedown,

July and August.

. S. urticana, Hub. Abundant, June and July.
. S. lacunana, W.V. Abundant, June and July. Var. obsoletana, Steph. Common, June and July.

. S. latifasciana, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father

in Wootton Wood, July 14th, 1869, June 24th,
1870; in Mullett’s Copse, July 2nd, 1870; also
by myself, July Sth, 1870, and July 24th, 1875,
in the orchard.

. Mixodia Ratzburghiana, Sax. Rare. ‘Taken by my

father from firs, July 12th, 1838, July 7th, 15th,
1841, July Bist, 1843; also by myself, July
17th, 1869.

. Roxana arcuana, Linn. Veryrare. One specimen

only was taken by my father, June 17th, 1840.

. Lobesia Servillana, Dup. Rare. Taken by my

father in Mullett’s Copse, June 10th, 1889; in
Marvell’s, June 4th, 1840; in Patey’s Copse,
June 14th, 1843; and in Sandhill’s Copse,
June 8th, 9th, 1871; by my brother in Wootton
Wood, June 6th, 1867; by myself in Mullett’s
Copse, June 14th, 1869, June 6th, 1871; in
Sandhill’s Copse, June 9th, 1871; in Mullett’s
Copse, June 10th, 1871, and June 12th, 1877. Eupecilia maculosana, Haw. Occasionally com-
mon in the woods; May and the beginning
of June. 212 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 2. Eupecilia rupicola, Curt. Rare. Taken by my
father in Mullett’s Copse, June 26th, 1871;
by myself in Mullett’s Copse, June 10th, 1871;
also in Wootton Wood, June 24th, 1871, June
19th, 1875, June 19th, 1875. A curious black
variety was taken by my father in the Island,
June 25th, 1869. 3. E. roseana, Haw. Rare. Taken by myself in
Alder Mead, August 14th, 1872; on White-
down, July 22nd, 1876, and July 28th, 1876. 4. E. ruficiliana, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father
in Patey’s Copse, May 20th, 1839; by myself
in Rabbitts, May 5th, 1871; in Patey’s Mead,
May 19th, 1874. 1 Argyrolepia Baumanniana, W.V. Rare. Taken by
my father, May 24th, 1839, June 12th, 1840,
May 29th, 1849, June 10th, 1841; a single
specimen also was taken by myself on Newland
Common, June 5th, 1874, which is about half
the usual size. 2. A. cnicana, Dbl. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by my father on Whitedown,
July 6th, 1870. 1. Xanthosetia Zoegana, Linn. Not common in fields,
June to August. Var. ferrugana, Haw. Very rare. Two specimens
only were taken by my father and my brother,
June 30th, 1870. LEPIDOPTERA. 213

2. Xanthosetia hamana, Linn. Common among
thistles from the end of May to the end of
July. 1. Cochylis inopiana, Haw. A single specimen only
was taken by myself in Wootton Wood, July
8rd, 1876. Tineina. 1. Fumea roboricolella, Br. The curious case-bearing
larve of this moth are occasionally common on
hazel, alder, and willow during the month of
June. When full fed, they may be found
adhering to the trunks of trees. 1. Exapate gelatella, Linn. Males of this dull-
coloured moth have been taken by myself in
the garden, December 24th, 1863; and in
orchards, December 8rd, 15th, 1868; January
7th, 1869, January 8rd, 1870, December 12th,
15th, 22nd, 1871, January 2nd, December 4th,
80th, 1872, December 8rd, 4th, 24th, 1873,
November 30th, 1874, January 5th, 1875. A couple of females were taken by myself on
December 15th, 1868, and December 8rd, 1873. 1. Lemnatophila phryganella, Hub. The males are
common in the woods, October and beginning
of November; but the only females taken were
by myself on October 29th and November
9th, 1874, in Sandhill’s Copse. 1. Diurnea fagella, W. V. The males are very common

214 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. certain seasons, March 17th to April 14th,
on the trunks of trees, but the females are
scarce. 1. Tortricodes hyemana, Hub. Common, January
27th to April 14th, by beating oaks. 1. Semioscopis Steinkellneriana, W.V. Rare. Taken
by my father, April 18th, 1831, April 9th, 1844 ;
also by myself, April 1st, 1868, from a hedge
in Frith. 1. Psychoides Verhuellella, Heyd. Rare. Taken by
my father, July 13th, 1869; by myself, July
19th, 1869, July 23rd, 1873, August 7th, 1875,
in the garden. 1. Diplodoma marginepunctella, Steph. Very rare. One specimen was taken by my brother, June
8th, 1865, and two by myself, June 24th, 1870,
June 22nd, 1875. 1. Lepidocera Birdella, Curt. Rare, amongst short
herbage. Taken by my father, August 11th,
1834, August 16th, 18th, 1838, in Frith; by
myself, August 10th, 16th, 1870, on White-
down, and August 2nd, 1873. 1. Tinea granella, Linn. Common, May to August,

in and near granaries and outhouses.

. cloacella, Haw. Common, May to August, on

and near rotten wood. 3. 'T. arcella, Fab. Rare. Two specimens were taken
by myself in Coates, July 28th, 1869, and one
in Hartleaze, August 12th, 1869." 10.

li

12. 2. 3. LEPIDOPTERA. 215

. Tinea ferruginella, Hub. Rare. A single specimen

was taken by my father, July 23rd, 1838. It has
also been taken by my brother. T. rusticella, Hub. Common in the house, May
and June. T. tapetzella, Linn. Common in the house, June
and July. T. pellionella, Linn. Common in the house,
February to November.

. T. fuscipunctella, Haw. Common in the house,

April to October. T. biselliella, Hemm. Common in the house,
January to December. T. ganomella, Tr. Of general occurrence, but not
very common in May and June, and also in
August on old posts. T. nigripunctella, Haw. Rare. Taken by my
father and myself. T. semifulvella, Haw. Rare. Taken by my
father, July Ist, 1837; also by myself, July
17th, 1869, and July 8rd, 1877.

. Lampronia quadripunctella, Fab. Very rare. A

single specimen only was taken by myself on
Newland Common, May 31st, 1873. L. Luzella, Hub. Common in the woods, May
and June. L. prelatella, W. V. Common in the woods,
June and July. 216 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 4, Lampronia rubiella, Bjerh. Rare. Taken by my
father in Mullett’s Copse, June 15th, 1839,
June 28th, 1871; by myself in Wootton Wood,
June 24th, 1871. 1. Incurvaria masculella, W. V. Common in hedges,
April and May. 2. I, Oehlmanniella, Hub. Common in the woods,
May and June. 1. Micropteryx calthella, Linn. Abundant in May and
June on the flowers of the water buttercup. 2. M. Seppella, Fab. Common in June amongst
various flowers. 3. M. mansuetella, Zell. Common in the woods, May
and June. 4, M. Thunbergella, Fab. Not common amongst
beeches in May. 5. M. semipurpurella, Steph. Not common; amongst
birches in April and May. 6. M. Sparmanella, Bosc. Not common; amongst
birches in April and May. 7. M. subpurpurella, Haw. Abundant amongst oaks
in April and May. 1. Adela fibulella, W. V. Very rare. One specimen
was taken by my brother in Wootton Wood,
May 18th, 1871; a second by myself in Broad
Alders, June 8rd, 1875. 2. A. rufimitrella, Scop. Occasionally common in
meadows, May and June. 2. LEPIDOPTERA. 217

. Adela Sulzeriella, W.V. Not common; in fields the

end of May and beginning of June.

. A. viridella, Linn. First taken here on May 9th,

1871, since when it has been common.

. A. scabiosella, Scop. Very rare. Taken by my

father, May 9th, 1826. A. cupriacella, Hub. Taken by my father, May
29th, 1840; also by myself May 16th, 1874,
and August 18th, 1866.

. A. fasciella, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father and

myself near Haywood, June 9th, 1866, and near
the Quag, July 26th, 1876.

. A.minimella, Zell. Rare. The last specimens

were taken by my father and by myself on July
28th, 1865.

. Nemophora Swammerdamella, Linn. Rare. Taken

by my father, June 18th, 1837. N. Schwarziella, Zell. Rare. ‘Taken by myself,
Tune 8th, 1871, June 2nd, 1874.

. N. metaxella, Hub. Abundant in May and June.
. Swammerdamia apicella, Don. Rather rare; in

hedges the end of April and beginning of May.

. S. cesiella, Hub. Common in hedges, May to

August.

. S. lutarea, Haw. Common in hedges, May to

August.

. S. pyrella, Vill. Common in hedges and orchards,

April, May, July, and August.

. Scythropia crategella, Linn. Rare. A few speci-

218 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. mens were bred by my father, from larve he
found in Mullett’s Copse in a web on hawthorn,
June, 1814. 1. Hyponomeuta vigintipunctella, Retz. Rare. Taken
by my brother in the garden hovering over
stonecrop, April 29th, 1871; also by myself,
May 5th and August 23rd, 1871. 2. H. plumbella, W.V. Rare. Taken by myself in
Hartleaze, July 15th, 1868; in Alder Mead,
August 17th and 26th, 1876. 8. H. padella, Linn. Common amongst hawthorn,
July and August. 4. H. malivorella, Sta. Common in orchards, July to

September.
. H. cognatella, Hub. Common amongst spindle,
July and August. 1. Prays Curtisella, Don. Common amongst ash,
May to July. Var. rustica, Haw. Common amongst ash, May
to July. 1. Plutella xylostella, Linn. Common in the garden
and arable fields, April and May, and again
in August and October. 2. P. porrectella, Linn. Common in the garden
in May and June, and again in August and
September. 1. Cerostoma sequella, Linn. Common in orchards
and woods, July to September. a

LEPIDOPTERA. 219

. Cerostoma vittella, Linn. Common amongst elms,
July and August.

. C. variella, Hub. Abundant from July to May in
orchards, woods, and hedges. It is also com-
mon in thatch all through the autumn and
winter. Var. fissella, Hub. Common. » Yadiatella, Don. Common. » Tufimitrellus, Steph. Common.

. Cerostoma costella, Fab. Common from July to
September in woods, orchards, and hedges.

. C. sylvella, Linn. Common, July to September,
in woods, orchards, and hedges.

. C. alpella, W. V. Not so common as the preceding. In woods from August to October.

. C. horridella, Tr. Rare in orchards. It was taken
by my father, September 17th, 1831, September
12th, 1836; by myself, August 17th, September
12th, 1870, and September 22nd, 1873, in Ham.

. C. asperella, Linn. Very rare. In the orchard on
apple trees and old whitethorn bushes. It was
taken by my father, September 8th, 1815,
October 1st, 1819, September 8th, 19th, 1821,
and September 17th, 1831; also by Mr. Curtis,
October 17th, 1827.

. Harpipteryx harpella, W. V. Occasionally common
among honeysuckles in the woods and garden,
July to September. 220 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Harpipteryx nemorella, Linn. Rare. It was bred
by my father, July 31st, 1816; and taken by
myself in Pelles, August 4th, 1874; in Mead
Copse, August 2nd, 1875; and in Sandhill’s
Gopse, July 22nd, 1876. 1. Theristis caudella, Linn. Rare. Three specimens
were beaten from thatch near Watery Lane,
on November ist, 1871, November 20th, 1873,
and November 16th, 1876, by myself. 1. Enicostoma lobella, W.V. Very rare. Taken by
my father in the garden, June 26th, 1815. 1. Phibalocera quercana, Fab. Abundant amongst
oaks, July and August. 1. Depressaria costosa, Haw. Not common. Amongst
furze bushes, July to September. 2. D. liturella, W. V. Rare. ‘Taken by my father
and by myself in Haywood, July 18th, 1865. 8. D. pallorella, Zell. Rare. A single specimen was
taken by my father in Watery Lane from
thatch, October 18th, 1864; and three were
beaten by myself from thatch in Ham, No-
vember 25th, 1873, November 11th, 1867,
and November 25th, 1875. 4, D. atomella, W. V. Taken by my father in Ham
from thatch, October 4th, 1864 ; by myself from
thatch in Watery Lane, November 4th, 1874;
and in Rabbitt’s orchard, November 12th, 1874. 5. D. arenella, W. V. Abundant in thatch from
August to April. 2

LEPIDOPTERA. 221

. Depressaria propinquella, Tr. Rare. Taken by
my father and myself near the house, August
29th, 1864; also by myself from thatch in
Nursely Lane, November 24th, 1873.

. D. subpropinquella, Stn. Common amongst thatch
from August to April.

. D. Alstroemeriana, Linn. Common in thatch from
August to April.

. D. purpurea, Haw. Common in thatch, August
to April.

. D. capreolella, Zell. Rare. Taken by myself in
the garden amongst box, April 19th, 1874,
March 24th, 1875, March 29th, 1876; and from
thatch in Ham, November 10th, 1874.

. D. angelicella, Hub. Very rare. A solitary
specimen was taken by my brother in the Cow-
leaze, August 22nd, 1863.

. D. rhodochrella, H.S. Rare. Taken by myself
from thatch, November 15th, 1867, November
17th, 1873, November 15th, 1876.

. D. conterminella, Zell. Rare. Taken by myself
from thatch, November 12th, 1874 ; November
20th, 1876.

. D. ocellana, Fab. Common amongst sallows, and
in thatch, August to April.

. D. Yeatiana, Fab. Abundant in thatch, August
to April.

. D. applana, Fab. Abundant in thatch, August
to April. 222 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 17. D. ciliella, Stn. Common in thatch, Aug. to April. 18. D. granulosella, Stn. Common in thatch, August
to April. 19. D. albipunctella, Hub. Common in thatch,
August to April. 20. D. Douglasella, Stn. Rare. Taken from thatch
by myself, November 11th, 1874, and November
20th, 1876. 21. D. Weirella, Stn. Common in thatch, August to
April. 22. D. cherophyllivorella, Dbl. Abundant in thatch,
August to April. 23. D. ultimella, Stn. Common in thatch, August

to April. 24. D. nervosa, Haw. Abundant in thatch, August
to April. 25. D. badiella, Hub. Common in thatch, August
to April. 26. D. Heracliana, De Geer. Common in thatch,
August to April. 27. D. Pastinacella, Dup. Not common. In thatch
from August to April. 1. Psoricoptera gibbosella, Zell. Rare. Two speci-
mens were beaten from thatch by myself in
Ham, October 17th, 1864, November 19th,
1867; another was taken by myself off an oak
tree in Wootton Wood, August 22nd, 1872. 1. Gelechia malvella, Hub. Common in the garden,
May and June. LEPIDOPTERA. 223

2. Gelechia vilella, Zell. Taken'by myself, May 30th,
1874, June 22nd, 1875. 3. G. populella, Linn. This variable species is
common in the woods amongst sallows, July to
September. 4. G. tenella, W.V. Common among short grass,

June and July.
. G. diffinis, Haw. Common in the woods, August
and September, 1875. 6. G. domestica, Haw. Common in thatch and
about old outhouses, July and August. 7. G. rhombella, Hub. Not common. In orchards,
July, August, and September. 8. G. Lyellella, Curt. Common and very variable,
amongst old lichen-covered whitethorn bushes
and in thatch, September to April. 9. G. vulgella, Hub. Not common. In the woods
and hedges, June and July. 10. G. luculella, Hub. Rare. Taken by my father. 11. G. costella, Steph. A single specimen was taken
by myself, August 18th, 1868. 12. G. maculea, Haw. Not common. In woods,
July, August, and September. 13. G. fraternella, Don. Very rare. A single speci-
men was taken by myself in Ham, September
Ist, 1876. 14. G. tricolorella, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father. 15. G. Hubneri, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father. 16. G. scriptella, Hub. Rare. Taken by my father. x

224 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 17. Gelechia nanella, Hub. Rare. Taken by myself,
August 27th, 1870,

18. G. aleella, Fab. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by myself in the garden, August
9th, 1869. 19. G. Mouffetella, W.V. Not common. In the
woods and hedges, June and July. 20. G. tenebrosella, Zell. Rare. Taken by myself,
June 20th, 1874, June 19th, 1875, and June
26th, 1876. 21. G. ligulella, Zell. Occasionally common in flowery
meadows, June and July. 22. G. vorticella, Zell. Not common. Amongst the
Dyer’s-Woad, June and July. 28. G. teniolella, Tr. Occasionally common on White-
down, June and July. 24. G. bifractella, Mann. Occasionally common in
meadows, May and June. 25. G. cerealella, Oliv. Rare. Taken by my father,
June 14th, 1843; by myself in 1872. 26. G. gemmella, Linn. Rare. Taken by myself,
August 16th, 1872, September 2nd, 1876. 27. G. neviferella, Zell. Very rare. Two specimens
ouly were taken by my father in Watery Lane
Withybed, May 22nd, 1844. 28. G. subocellea, Steph. Taken by my father in the
Island, July 26th, 1871; by myself in Wootton
Wood, July 21st, 1871; July 18th, 1872, July
15th, 1873, and July 11th, 1874.

a

LEPIDOPTERA. 225

« Cleodora striatella, W. V. Very rare. A single

specimen only was taken by myself in the
Island, August 3rd, 1870.

. C. conscriptella, Hub. Common amongst sallows

and poplars, July to September. - Anarsia ,spartiella, Schr. Very rare. A single

specimen was taken by myself in Wootton
Wood, June 27th, 1876.

. Aptola palpella, Haw. Very rare. A single speci-

men was taken by my father, July 28th, 1828,
and another in the garden, August 12th, 1869 ;
two specimens were also taken by myself in
Wootton Wood, July 27th, 1872, and August
14th, 1872. - Harpella Geoffrella, Linn. Common in hedges from

the middle of May to the middle of June. - Dasycera sulphurella, Fab. Abundant on and

about old posts and rotten wood, April to June. + Gcophora minutella, Linn. Rare. Taken by my

father, June 27th, 1823, May 28rd, 1842; also by
my father and myself in Pelles, June 27th, 1870.
. flavimaculella, Stn. Occasionally common in
the woods in the end of August and beginning
of September.
. tripuncta, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father.
. tinctella, Tr. Not common ; amongst oak, June
and July. aa

. GE. unitella, Hub. Abundant in orchards, May

and June. Q

226 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 6. CEcophora fuscescens, Haw. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by myself in the
garden, September Ist, 1870. 7. GE. flavifrontella, Hub. Not common, in old hedges
in June. 8. CE. pseudospretella, Stn. Abundant in the house
and the woods, July to September; but not so
formerly. 1. Endrosis fenestrella, Scop. Common in the house
throughout the year, and in the summer abun-
dant in woods and hedges. 1. Butalis fuscocuprea, Haw. Not common, in hedges,
June. 1. Acrolepia pygmwana, Haw. Common in the woods,
August and September; also in thatch, from
September to May. 2. A. granitella, Tr. Not common in the woods and
the garden, July to September. 1. Glyphipteryx fuscoviridella, Haw. Common in
flowery meadows from the middle of May to
the middle of June. 2. G. thrasonella, Scop. Abundant amongst rushes,
June to September. 8. G. Fischeriella, Zell. Abundant among flowers,
May to August. 1, Aichmia dentella, Stn. Rare. Taken by my father
June 80th, 1828. 1. Perittia obscurepunctella, Stn. Rare. Taken by

LEPIDOPTERA. 227

myself in hedges, March 27th, 1868, April 23rd,
1874, and May 3rd, 1875. 1. Tinagma sericiella, Haw. Common amongst oaks

the end of April and beginning of May. 2. T. resplendella, Doug. Taken by my father among

alders in Wootton Wood, June 28th, 1869. 1, Argyresthia nitidella, Fab. Common in orchards

2. 10. A.

. AL

. A.

oat

A. A. A.

and hedges, June and July. semitestacella, Curt. Common amongst beech
August and September. albistria, Haw. Common in hedges, June and
July. semifusca, Haw. Common amongst travellers’
joy, July and August. mendica, Haw. Common in hedges, May and
June. glaucinella, Zell. Rare, amongst privet. Taken
by my father; and by myself, June 24th, 1874.

. dilectella, Zell. Rare, amongst juniper. Taken

by my father. .retinella, Zell. Common amongst willow,

June and July. Andereggiella, Fisch. Occasionally common
in orchards, August and September. curvella, Linn. Common in orchards, June
and July. 11. A. pygmeella, Hub. Abundant amongst willows

and alders, May and June. 228 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 12. 18. 14. 15.

x

Argyresthia literella, Haw. Rare. Taken by
myself in June, 1868. A. Brockeella, Hub. Common amongst alder,
May and June; and again in August and Sept.

A. Geedartella, Linn. Common amongst alder,
May and June ; and again in August and Sept.

A. arceuthina, Zell. Taken by my father from
juniper, May, 1871.

. Cedestis farinatella, Zell. Rare. Taken only by
myself in the Common Plantation, July 6th,
1875, July 27th, 1876, and August 4th, 1876.

. Ocnerostoma pinariella, Zell. Occasionally com-
mon in fir plantations, from March 4th to July.

. Zelleria insignipennella, Stn. Common among
fir trees, August to April.

. Gracillaria Swederella, Thunb. Common amongst
oak in June, May, and August.

. G. stigmatella, Fab. Common amongst willow
from August to May.

. G. hemidactylella, Hub. Common in orchards
and among fir trees from August to May.

. G. elongella, Linn. Common among alders and

fir trees from August to May. G. stramineella, Stn. Rare. Taken by myself in

Haywood, October 5th, 1876.

. G. semifasciella, Haw. Common in the woods
from August to May.

. G. tringipennella, Zell. Common in hedges ;

May and the beginning of June. LEPIDOPTERA. 229

8. Gracilaria syringella, Fab. Common in hedges
and orchards, and amongst firtrees, from August
to May. 9. G. auroguttella, Steph. Rare. Taken by my
father in the Common Plantation, July 18th,
1870; and by myself in Pelles, Aug. 15th, 1870. 10. G. omissella, Doug. Very rare. <A solitary speci-
men was taken by myself, May 28th, 1873. 11. G. imperialella, Mann. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by my father in
Buttons, May 25th, 1840. 12. G. Brogniardella, Fab. Not common; amongst oak,
August and September. 18. G. cucullipennella, Hub. Common amongst privet ~
and fir trees from August to April. 14. G. sulphurella, Haw. Abundant in orchards and
woods, and amongst fir trees from August to
April. Some specimens are almost black. 1. Ornix avellanella, Stn. Common amongst nut
bushes in May, and again in August. 2. O. anglicella, Stn. Abundant amongst sloe and
hawthorn bushes in April and May, and again
in August. 8. O. torquilella, Stn. Common amongst privet,
May and June. 4. O. guttea, Haw. First taken here by my father on
June 4th, 1862, and again on June 8th, 1868;
since when it has been abundant in the orchards,
May and June. - 230

10.

ll. 12. Cc. G,

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Coleophora Fabriciella, Vill. Common in flowery

meadows from June to August. brevicornis, D. Common on Whitedown in
July and August. deauratella, Linn. Very rare. A single speci-
men was taken by my father near Round-
chimneys Pond, July 8rd, 1868; by myself,
June 16th, 1874, on Whitedown. lixella, Zell. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by myself in the yard, May
27th, 1874.

albicosta, Haw. Rare. Taken by my father
amongst furze, May and June, 1830.

. troglodytella, Stn. Common in the woods,

June and July.

. lineola, Haw. Very rare. A solitary specimen

was taken by myself in the Island, July 11th,
1874.

. muripennella, Fisch. Common in flowery

meadows, May and June.

. ewspitiella, Zell. Abundant amongst rushes,

June and July. Tengstromella, Dbl. Common in the woods,
July and August.

. hemerobiella, Zell. Not common in the garden,

July and August.

. juncicolella, Stn. Rare. Taken by myself from

rushes growing amongst furze bushes, June
12th, 1876. 18.
i. 15. 16. 17. LEPIDOPTERA. 231

Coleophora laricella, Hub. Common in the Com-
mon Plantation, June and July, 1876. C. nigricella, Steph. Common amongst hawthorn,
June and July. C. fuscedinella, Zell. Common amongst alder in
July. :

C. gryphipennella, Borck. Common among roses
in June. C. lutipennella, Zell. Common among oaks in
June and July.

. Bedellia somnulentella, Zell. Very rare. A single

specimeu only was taken by myself in Sandhill’s
Copse, October 14th, 1865. - Batrachedra preangusta, Haw. Rare. Taken by

my father on willow trunks, August 10th, 1888,
July 1870, and August, 1871; also by myself,
Aug. 16th, 1869, July 22nd, 1878, and July
24th, 1876.

. Chauliodus Illigerellus, Hub. Very rare. A single

specimen only was taken by my father in Mul-
lett’s Copse, June 15th, 1865; a second by my
brother in Wootton Wood, June 2nd, 1868;
and a third by myself in Watery Lane withybed,
June 16th, 1873. C. cherophyllellus, Gor. Not common, among
oaks and in thatch from August to April.

. Laverna propinquella, Stn. Rare. Taken by my

father in Wootton Wood, July 30th, 1869 ; and
by myself on August 2nd, 1869, and July 24th,
1872. 232 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Laverna lacteella, Steph. Rare. ‘Taken by my
father ; also by myself in the Cowleaze, June
24th, 1874.

. L. epilobiella, Schr. Common amongst willow-herb,
and in thatch, from August to May. 4. L. ochraceella, Curt. Very rare. Two specimens
were taken by my father and my brother on
August 12th, 1869. 5. L. decorella, Steph. Abundant in the woods,
orchards, and thatch, from August to May. 6. L. Hellerella, Dup. Common in the orchards and
hedges, June and July. 1. Chrysoclista bimaculella, Haw. Very rare. A
specimen was taken by T. V. Wollaston, Esq.,
from willow on Newland Common, June 4th,
1874; a second by myself, June 9th, 1874;
and a third by myself in Little Wootton Wood
June 22nd, 1874. 2. C. Schrankella, Hub. Very rare. A single speci-
men only was taken by my father in Mullett’s
Copse, May 28th, 1864. 8. C. flavicaput, Haw. Common /amongst hawthorn
the end of May and beginning of June. 1. Asychna terminella, Dale. Very rare. Taken by
my father, June 8th, 1836, and June 22nd,
1838; also by myself in Wootton Wood, June
8th, 1867, June 8th, 1874, June 22nd, 1875,
and July 8rd, 1877.

ry

x

LEPIDOPTERA. 233

. Asychna eratella, Zell. Very rare. Taken by

my father on Newland Common, June 18th, 1870.

. Chrysocoris festalinella, Hub. Common among

brambles from March 11th to May, and again
in August.

. Antispila Pfeifferella, Fab. Very rare. A single

specimen was taken by my father in Mullett’s
Copse, May 11th, 1835, and another by myself
in Wootton Wood, May 12th, 1873.

. Elachista albifrontella, Hub. Common in the

woods in June.

. E. atricomella, Stn. Common in hedges, May

and June.

. E. luticomella, Zell. Common in hedges, June

and July.

. E. nigrella, Hub. Common amongst grass, May

and June.

. E. humilis, Zell. Common amongst grass, May

and August. - obscurella, Stn. Common amongst grass, May
and August. a

. E. pulcliella, Haw. Very rare. A single speci-

men was taken by myself in the Cowleaze,
Tune 10th, 1870, and a second on September
14th, 1876. E. gangabella, Fisch. Common in the woods, June.

. E. Megerlella, Zell. Common amongst grass,

May and August. 284 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 10. Elachista cingilella, Fisch. Common amongst
grass, May and August. 11. E. rufocinerea, Haw. Common in hedges, April
and May. 1. Tischeria complanella, Hub. Common among
oaks in June. 2. T. marginea, Haw. Common among brambles in
May, and again in August. 1, Lithocolletis roboris, Zell. Common among oaks
in May and August. 2. L. Bremiella, Zell. Rare. Taken by my father and
myself in Pelles, May 20th, 1870. 8. L. lantella, Zell. Rare. Taken by my father in
Mullett’s Copse, June 8th, 1844. 4. LL. pomifoliella, Zell. Common in orchards in
May, and again in August and Seplember. 5. L. faginella, Mann. Common amongst beech in
April and May, and again in August. 6. L. spinicolella, Zell. Common amongst sloe in
May, and again in August. 7. L. coryli, Nic. Common amongst hazel in May,
and again in August. 8. L. salicolella, Sire. Common in May and again in
August, among sallow. 9. L. viminetorum, Stn. Common amongst sallow
in May, and again in August. 10. L. quercifoliella, Fisch. Abundant amongst oak
in April and May, and again in August and Sept.
11. L. Messaniella, Zell. Abundant in the garden

12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 18. 19. 20. 21. LEPIDOPTERA. 285

amongst evergreen-oak from April to June, and
again from August to November. Lithocolletis coryfoliella, Haw. Common amongst
hawthorn in May, and again in August. L. viminiella, Sire. Common amongst sallow in
May, and again in August. L. alnifoliella, Hub. Common amongst alder in
‘April and May, and again in August. L. Heegeriella, Zell. Common amongst oak in
May, and again in August. L. Cramerella, Fab. Abundant amongst oak in
May and June, and again in August.

. L. acerifoliella, Zell. Abundant amongst maple,

May and June, and again in August. L. Klemannella, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father
and myself from alder, May 12th, 1871. L. Schreberella, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father
from elm on May 28th, 1835, September 1st,
1869, and April 25th, 1870; and by myself on
August 15th, 1870, in Pelles. L. tristrigella, Haw. Common amongst elm in
May, and again in August. L. trifasciella, Haw. Abundant in May, and from
August to November.

. Lyonetia Clerkella, Linn. Common in the woods

and orchards from August to December. Some
specimens are almost black.

. Cemiostoma spartifoliella, Hub. Not common. Amongst broom in the garden, June and July. 236 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Cemiostoma laburnella, Heyd. Abundant amongst
-laburnum in the garden; April and May, and
again in July and August. 8. C. Wailesella, Stn. Rare. Taken by myself on
Newland Common amongst the dyer’s woad,
Sept. 6th, 1870, and Sept. Ist, 1876. 4. C. scitella, Zell. Rare. Taken by my father in
the orchard, June 25th, 1839. 5. C. lotella, Stn. Rare. ‘Taken by my father and
myself. 1. Opostega crepusculella, Fisch. Very rare. A single
specimen was taken by myself in the orchard,
July 9th, 1870; and a second on Newland
Common, June 21st, 1873. 1. Bucculatrix aurimaculella, Stn. Very rare. A
couple were taken by my father in Pelles, July
14th, 1845. 2. B. cidariella, Fisch. Common amongst alder, June. 3. B. ulmifoliella, Hub. Very rare. Taken by my
father, May 10th, 1870; and by myself, June
10th, 1876, in Wootton Wood. 4. B. crategifoliella, Dup. A couple were taken by
myself in the Cowleaze, May 28th, 1875. 5. B. cristatella, Fisch. Very rare. Taken by myself
on Newland Common, September 8th, 1876,
and September 26th, 1877. 1. Nepticula ruficapitella, Haw. Common amongst
oak in May, and again in August. LEPIDOPTERA. 237

2. Nepticula anomalella, Goe. Common amongst rose
bushes in May, and again in August. 3. N. pygmeella, Haw. Common amongst hawthorn
in May, ‘and again in August. 4. N. subbimaculella, Haw. Common amongst oak
in June. 5. N. floslactella, Haw. Not common. In the woods
in May. 6. N. microtheriella, Wing. Common in May, and
again in August. It is the smallest moth
known. 7. N. ignobilella, Stn. Common amongst hawthorn
in May, and again in August. 8. N. argentipedella, Zell. Common among birch in
May and June. 9. N. aurella, Fab. Common among brambles from
March to August. 1, Bohemannia quadrimaculella, Stn. Very rare. Taken by my father and myself in Wootton
Wood on July 30th and August 2nd, 1869. Pterophorina. 1. Pterophorus trigonodactylus, Haw. Very rare. One specimen only was taken by my father on
Whitedown, June 10th, 1825. 2. P. acanthodactylus, Hub. Rare, except in the
year 1872, when it was common on Whitedown
andin Wootton Wood during the months of July,
August, September, and October. 238 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 8. Pterophorus punctidactylus, Steph. Rare. Taken
by my father in the orchard, April 5th, 1816,
April 21st, 1816, March 80th, 1817, July 4th,
1820, October 4th, 1825, and April 4th, 1831. A single specimen also was taken by myself in
the garden, September 6th, 1876; and one by
my brother on May 26th, 1865. 4. P. bipunctidactylus, Haw. Common in the fields
and woods, June and July. 5. P. fuscodactylus, Vill. Abundant in the fields and
woods, June to August. 6. P. lithodactylus, Tr. Rare. Taken by my father in
Mullett’s Copse, July Ist, 1831, and August
28th, 1840; also by myself in Wootton Wood,
August 20th and 27th, 1875, and September
2nd, 1876, amongst fleabane. 7. P. pterodactylus, Linn. Abundant in the garden,
orchards, and woods, and also amongst thatch
from August to April. 8. P. microdactylus, Hub. Rare. Taken by my father
in the withybed, June Ist, 1818, in Haywood,
May 15th, 1820; by myself and my father
in Broad Alders, May 13th, 1865, June 2nd,
1866; and in Wootton Wood, June 9th, 1866 ;
also by Mrs. Wollaston in Wootton Wood, June
8th, 1874. 9. P. tetradactylus, Linn. A single specimen only
was taken by my father on Newland Common,
June 26th, 1815. LEPIDOPTERA. 239

10. Pterophorus baliodactylus, Zell. Very rare. Two
specimens were taken by my father on White-
down, June 10th, 1841. 11. P. galactadactylus, Hub. Common in the woods,
June and July. 12. P. pentadactylus, Linn, Garden Plume. Com-
mon in the garden, June and July. 1. Alucita polydactyla, Hub. Twenty Plume. Com-

mon amongst honeysuckle and in houses, from
August to May. Order VI.—Drrrera. Of this interesting order (which has hitherto been
rather neglected in Britain, although a considerable
amount of attention has been paid to it on the
Continent, as the works of Meigen, Zetterstedt,
Schiner, and Rondani bear witness), seven hundred
and eighty-seven species have been taken in this
parish of the following families :—

Psychodide, 7; Culicide, 17; Chironomide, 51;
Tipulide, 84; Rhyphide, 8; Cecidomyide, 10;
Mycetophilide, 47; Bibionide, 21; Scenopinide, 1;
Sargide, 14; Stratiomyde, 16; Acroceride, 1; Bom-
bylide, 4; Tabanide, 11; Eristalide, 28; Rhingide,
2; Syrphide, 49; Pipunculide, 11; Myopide, 3;
Conopide, 4; Asilide, 7; Leptide, 7; Empide, 39;

240 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. Tachydromide, 14; Hemerodromyide, 7; Doli-
chopidw, 25; Lonchopteride, 4; Phoride, 9; Platy-
pezide, 9; Borboride, 9; Ephydride, 8; Droso-
philide, 10; Agromyzide, 15; Geomyzide, 7 ; Chloro-
pide, 11; Psilidx, 11; Tanypezide, 4; Sepside, 9;. Ortalide, 10; Trypetide, 29 ; Sapromyzide, 14;
Lauxanide, 5; Sciomyzide, 7; Tetanoceride, 14;
Helomyzide, 4; Scatophagide, 6; Cordyluride, 6;
Anthomyide, 47; Muscide, 19; Sarcophagide, 4;
Dexide, 5; Tachinide, 17; stride, 3 ; and Hippo-
boscide, 3. As Diptera was my father's favourite Order of
insects, I intend this to be the crowning part of my
work. . The following species are undescribed in Walker’s
“Diptera Britanica” :—

1. Culex dorsalis; 2. Culex lateralis; 3. Culex
calopus ; 4. Culex unistriatus; 5. Anopheles pygmeus ;
6. Coretha flavicans; 7. Chironomus terminalis; 8. Chironomus nitidus ; 9. Chironomus obscuripes; 10. Chironomus festivus ; 11. Tanypus palustris; 11. Tanypus hortensis; 12. Tanypus pallidulus; 18. Spheromias annulitarsis; 14. Cylindrotoma glabrata;
15. Limnobia sexpunctata; 18. Lasioptera fuliginosa;
12. Leia crassicornis ; 20. Leia ornata; 21. Oxycera. pygmea; 22. Xylota abiens; 23. Pipunculus nigri-
tulus; 24. Hemerodromyia supplicatoria; 25. Ar-
doptera oblongoguttata ; 26. Platypeza modesta; 27. DIPTERA. 241

Platypeza rufa; 28. Madiza oscinia; 29 Phytomyza
lonicere ; 30. Phytomyza primule; 31. Phytomyza
lappe ; 32. Diastata nebulosa; 33. Selachrops flavo-
cincta; 84. Heteroneura albimana; 35. Herina palu-
. dum ; 36. Herina lugubris; 37. Herina luctuosa; 38. Herina nigrina; 39. Ortalis guttata; 40. Aciura
rotundiventris ; 41. Trypeta lappe ; 42. Trypeta colon ;
48. Tephritis hyoscyami; 44. Tephritis irrorata; 45. Phyllomyza litura; 46. Lauxania longipennis; 47. Trigonomentopus frontalis ; 48. Elgiva dorsalis ;
49. Tetanocera arrogans; 50. Limnia pratorum ;
51. Limnia obliterata; 52. Colobea bifasciella; 53. Scatophaga inquinata; 54. Cordylua tiliata; 55. Hydromyza livens ; 56. Myopina riparia ; 57. Coenosia
means; 58. Ccenosia pedella; 59. Ccenosia triangula ;
60. Coenosia gemmalis ; 61. Coenosia nigridigitata ; 62:
Ceenosia albicornis; 63. Homalomyia pretiosa; 64. Homalomyia pallitibia ; 65. Homalomyia maniculata ;
66. Homalomyia mutica; 67. Homalomyia floricola;
68. Homalomyia lactuce ; 69. Anthomyia transversa ;
70. Azelia Stegeri; 71. Azelia Macquarti; 72. Azelia
parva; 78. Azelia triquetra ; 74. Acanthiptera inanis; 75. Chortophila rotundicornis ; 76. Chortophila canescens;
77. Chortophila antiqua; 78. Chortophila argyrata ;
79. Chortophila bicolor; 80. Hylemyia strigosa; 81. Mydea diaphana; 82. Mydea nigrocolor; 83. Ono-
dontha dentipes; 84. Onodontha cyrtoneurina; 85. Spilogaster duplicata; 86. Spilogaster communis ;
87. Spilogaster obscuripes; 88. Hyctodissa perdita ;
R

242 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 89. Hyctodissa scutellaris ; 90. Hyctodissa variegata ;
91. Musca azurea; 92. Musca atramentaria; 93. Musea sepulcralis; 94. Stomoxys irritans ; 95. Sarco-
phaga nigriventris ; 96. Exorista chelonie; 97. Exo-
rista dubia; and 98. Tachina hirsuta. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. British. Glanville’s Wootton,
Nemocera. . . . 759 245
Sargina. . 2. . 92 47
Syrphina. . . . 153 90
Conopina. . . . 15 7
Empina . . . . 330 102
Muscina . . . . 877 308
Omaloptera . . . 9 6
Total number of species . 2235 800

Glanville’s Wootton is particularly rich in the
genera Oxycera (ten out of the eleven British species),
Platypeza (seven of the twelve British species). and Tephritis (twenty-eight of the forty-two British
species). Among the rarest flies found in this parish may be
mentioned :— Tephritis Geedii, Platypeza modesta,
rufa, and picta; Callomyia elegans and amena;
Sybistroma discipes; Ardoptera oblongoguttata ;
Oxycera longicornis, pygmwa, and analis; Xylota
abiens; Selachrops flavocincta ; Diastata nebulosa ;
Coretha pallida; and Anopheles pygmaeus. ,

DIPTERA. 243

As it will be seen, I have commenced with the
Psychodide, because they bear the strongest resem-
blance to the Lepidoptera; and concluded with the
(stride and Hippoboscide, as the former have no
proboscis, and the latter have been made into a
separate order, or suborder. Some of the larve of the Tipulide are Fungi-feeders,
as are also those of the Mycetophilide, Phoride,
Platypezide, Drosophilide, and Helomyzide. The
larve of the Cecidomyide and the Trypetide are
gall-makers:

The parasitic larve are of two kinds, viz., external
and internal. Among the former are those of the
Bombylide, Syrphide, and Conopide; among the
latter are those of the Tachinide, which breed inside
the pupe of other insects, and of the (stride, which
attack animals. The Empine prey on other insects in the perfect
state. The Hippoboscide feed on the substance at
the roots of the hair and feathers of animals and birds. The flies which suck the blood of man and animals
belong to the genera—Culex, Ceratopogon, Chrysops,
Tabanus, Hematopota, and Stomoxys. 7

Some of the species of the ‘genus Chironomus are
only to be obtained in the winter, as are all of the
genus Trichocera, which may be seen, even when the
snow is on the ground, dancing up and down in the
sunshine. Several of the order may be obtained all
the year round. Some species of the genera—

244 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. Eristalis, Anthomyia, and Musca hibernate in old
thatch and rubbish, in considerable numbers. The following species have been taken in the sur-
rounding parishes :—

1, Stratiomys Hydroleon, Linn. Very rare. Taken
by my father at Cosmore Quag, July Ist, 1839,
and July 12th, 1843. 2. S. viridula, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father at
Cosmore Quag. 8. Dioctria GElandica, Linn. Very rare. Taken by
my father at Middlemarsh, June 28th, 1837. 4, Laphria nigra, Meig. Rare. Taken by my father
at Middlemarsh, May 9th, 1842; also by my
brother, June 27th, 1874. 5. Dolichopus clavipes, Hal. Very rare. ‘Taken by
my father at Cosmore Quag, August 8th, 1839. 6. D. atratus, Meig. Very rare. ‘'aken by my father
at Holnest, May, 1842.

. Sareophaga mortuorum, Linn. Very rare. Taken
by my father in a wood at Buckland Newton,
August 7th, 1826. 8. Colobxa bifasciella, Fall. Very rare. A ‘single
specimen only (which is unique) of this very
pretty little fly was taken by my father at Cos-
more Quag, August 11th, 1855. It belongs to
the family Sciomyzide. x

DIPTERA, 245

NEMOCERA. Psychodidae. _

1. Psychoda phalenoides, Linn. Abundant. 2. P. sexpunctata, Curt. Common. 1. Pericoma canescens, Meig. © Abundant. 2. P. ocellaris, Lat. Abundant. 3. P. bullata, Hal. Common. 4. P. soleata, Hal. Not common. 5. P. trifasciata, Lat. Not common. 1. Ulomyia fuliginosa, Meig. Common. eek ere
eaaaaa

Cc. C.
c.

. C.
. Anopheles bifurcatus, Linn. Common. A
eae

Culicide.

. Culex annulatus, Fab. Common. dorsalis, Meig. Not common. cantans, Hoff. Common. nemerosus, Meig. Common. sylvaticus, Meig. Common. pipiens, Linn. Common Gnat. Abundant. The ceiling of our cellar in the winter is often
covered with them. lateralis, Meig- Not common. calopus, Meig. Abundant. ornatus, Meig. Not common. unistriatus, Curt. Not common. maculipennis, Meig. Common. pygmeus, Curt. (Probably the same as pictus,
Low.) Taken by my father and Mr. Curtis. 24

1

o

es kerr

6 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Coretha pallida, Fab. This, the most delicate
gnat we have, is occasionally common in
Rabbits ‘the beginning of June, flying over the
little pond.

. C. culiciformis, DeGeer. Common.
. C. plumicornis, Fab. Abundant.
. ©. flavicans, Meig. Abundant. Chironomide.

. Chironomus nubeculosus, Meig. Not common. C. rufipes, Linn. Not common, August. C. sticticus, Meig. Abundant from April to June. C. plumosus, Linn. Abundant, August. C. prasinus, Meig. Abundant from July to Sept.

C. pallens, Meig. Abundant during September
and October. 7. C. annularis, DeGeer. Abundant. July. 8. ©. Aprilinus, Hoff, Common in April and May. 9. C. riparius, Meig. Abundant. 10. C. tentans, Fab. Abundant, May. 11. C. albimanus, Meig. Not common. 12. C. viridis, Meig. Common, May. 18. C. virens, Linn. Abundant. 14. C. virescens, Meig. Common. 15. C. viridulus, Linn. Not common. 16. C. pedellus, DeGeer. Common in May and also
September. 17. C. ictericus, Meig. Common, May and June. 18,

, C. bicinctus, Meig. Common. 19. 20. 21. DIPTERA 27

Chironomus moltitatrix, Linn. Not common. C.
Co.

RBAHAARAHHA

tremulus, Linn. Abundant, May. stercocarius, DeGeer. Winter Gnat. Abun-
dant throughout the winter. I have seen it,
when the ground is covered with snow, flying in
swarms in company with Trichocera hyemalis,
or winter Daddy-long-legs. .

C. aterrimus, Meig. Abundant. C. olivaceus, Meig. Abundant. C. terminalis,,Meig. Common.
. C.
C.
C.
C.

nitidus, Meig. Not common.

. festivus, Meig. Not common.
. dolens, Walk. Not common.
. carbonarius, Meig. Common. c.
. C. minimus, Meig. Abundant throughout the winter.
. Tanypus varius, Fab. Abundant. obscuripes, Meig. Abundant, April and May. punctipennis, Meig. Common.

. zonatus, Fab. Abundant.
. culiciformis, Linn. Common. monilis, Linn. Abundant.

. melanops, Meig. Common.

. pallidulus, Meig. Common.

. preecox, Meig. Abundant.

. hortensis, Meig. Common.

. palustris, Lat. Common.

. Ceratopogon illustris, Wtz. Beautiful Midge. * Rare. Taken by my father in the Quag, on

Tuly 12th, 1845, and July 10th, 1868. 248 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 0

. Ceratopogon pulicarius, Linn. Abundant.

. C. scutellatus, Meig. Abundant.

. C. niveipennis, Meig. Common inside of the hollow
stems of the teazel.

. C. varipes, Curt. Not common.

. Spheromias annulitarsis, DeGeer. Very rare. A couple were taken by my father by side of
Roundchimneys Pond, May 31st, 1861. 1. Serromyia femorata, Fab. Abundant. 1. Palpomyia fasciata, Hal. Rare. On August Ist,
1867, in Broadalders, I took one with seven
legs. 2. P. rufipes, Meig. Common. 3. P. ferruginea, Meig. Rare. Ro

eo

Tipulide. 1. Ctenophora pectinicornis, Linn. Rare. Taken by
my father in Mullett’s Copse, May 22nd, 1871;
also by myself in the garden, June 12th, 1867,
and in the Cowleaze, May 27th, 1874. 2. C. bimaculata, Linn. Very rare. Taken by my
brother at Roundchimneys Pond, May 31st,
1872. i

. Ptychoptera albimana, Fab. Abundant.

. P. contaminata, Linn. Common.

. P. fasciata, Sep. Abundant.

. P. scutellaris, Hoff. Very rare. Taken by my
father and Mr. Curtis, on October 6th, 1838.

. Pachyrhina imperialis, Meig. Common. eM

DIPTERA. 249

. Pachyrhina senna, Hoff. Abundant.

. P. quadrifaria, Meig. Abundant.

. P. cornicina, Linn. Abundant.

. Tipula annulicornis, Meig. Common. T. pagana, Meig. Of occasional occurrence in
October. The females have very short wings. peRow

 

 

3. T. oleracea, Fab. Abundant. 4. T. fascipennis, Hoff. Common. 5. T. lunata, Linn. Common. 6. T. fimbriata, Meig. Common Daddy-long-legs. Abundant from September to November. 7. T. flavolineata, Meig. Not common. 8. T. vernalis, Meig. Abundant. 9. T. marginata, Meig. Common. 10. T. lateralis, Meig. Abundant. 11. T. nubeculosa, Meig. Common. 12. T. rufina, Meig. Abundant. 18. T. hortensis, Hoff. Abundant. 14, T. scripta, Meig. Not common. 15. T. irrorata, Meig. Not common. 16. T. nervosa, Meig. Abundant. 17. T. lutescens, Fab. Abundant. 18. T. gigantea, Fab. Giant Daddy-long-legs. Occa-

sionally abundant. 1. Pedicia rivosa, Linn. Common from June to’Sep-
tember. 1. Cylindrotoma distinctissima, Meig. Of occasional
occurrence in the woods, May, and also in
August and September. 25

0

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 2. Cylindrotoma diversa, Walk. Very rare. Taken

by my father, July 20th, 1863, in Fernyknap. 3. C. glabrata, Wied. Rare. Taken by my father in

ore

SP EP ee
pee

Mullett’s Copse, May 5th and June 10th, 1862.

. Rhipidia irrorata, Curt. Common in orchards.
. R.
. Rhamphidia flava, St. Rare. Taken by my father

SePre

10. 12. 18,
14,
p ib

maculata, Meig. Not common. in Fernyknap, June 18th and 20th, 1862, and
Tuly Ist, 1863.

. Gonomya tenella, Meig. Abundant. Limnobia littoralis, Meig. Common. L.

Peed

L.
L.
L.

straminea, Meig. Not common. gracilipes, Curt. Common,

immaculata, Meig. Common. pilipes, Fab. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by my father near the Somerset-
shire Gate, April 20th, 1833.

lateralis, Meig. Abundant.

. finitima, Walk. Not common.
. secreta, Walk. Not common. turpis, Walk. Not common.

. dumetorum, Meig. Not common. sexguttata, Hal. This, the prettiest Daddy-
long-legs we have, is of frequent occurrence in
the Quag during June. didyma, Meig. Common. morio, Fab. Abundant. stigmatica, Meig. Abundant. lutea, Meig. Abundant. 16. Wie

18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24,
25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34.
. Symplecta stictica, Meig. Not common.

. Erioptera maculata, Meig. Common.

. E. trivialis, Meig. Abundant.

. E. flavescens, Linn. Not common.

. E. cinerascens, Meig. Abundant from March to

FeDpee

a

DIPTERA 251

Limnobia albifrons, Meig. Not common. L. sexpunctata, Fab. Very rare. A couple of
specimens were taken by my father on May
20th, 1839. L. tripunctata, Meig. Not common. L. quadrinotata, Meig. Not common. L. xanthoptera, Meig. Of occasional occurrence

in the woods from August to October. flavipes, Meig. Abundant. nubeculosa, Meig. Common. picta, Fab. Common. punctata, Meig. Not common. nemoralis, Meig. Common. leucophéa, Hoff. Abundant. dispar, Meig. Abundant.

. lineola, Meig. Common. L. punctum, Meig. Abundant. L. ferruginea, Meig. Abundant. L. lucorum, Meig. Common. L

L

PPh

isa)

. discicollis, Meig. Not common.
. fuscata, Meig. Common. L. marmorata, Hoff. Abundant. May.

. E. teniota, Wied. Common. 252 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 6. Erioptera ochracea, Hoff. Abundant. 7. E. costalis, Curt. Common. 8. E. varia, Hoff. Not common. 9. E. obscura, Meig. Common. 10. E. murina, Meig. Not common. 1. Trichocera hyemalis, DeGeer. Winter Daddy-
long-legs. Abundant throughout the winter
from October to April. 2. T. fuscata, Meig. Abundant throughout the
winter. 8. T. regelationis, Linn. Common throughout the
winter. Rhyphide.

. Rhyphus nigricans, Linn. Abundant.

. R. fenestralis, Scop. Abundant. R. ochraceus, Curt. Abundant.

. Ornephila testacea, Ruth. Not common.

. Dixa estivalis, Meig. Common throughout the
winter.

. D. aprilina, Meig. Abundant.

. D. maculata, Meig. Common. 4, D. nebulosa, Meig. Common. reer

or

Cecidomyide. 1. Cecidomyia pini, DeGeer. Rare. Taken by my
father in the Quag, July 2st, 1866, and
August 22nd, 1877. 2. C. salicina, DeGeer. Not common. aperne

RoOoMVeE

DIPTERA. 253

. Cecidomyia flava, Meig. Not common.
. C. cucullata, Meig. Not common.
. C. pictipennis, Meig. Rare. Taken by my father,

February 10th, 1832, and May 29th, 1833.

. C. tritici, Kirby. Wheat Midge. Occasionally

abundant in the cornfields.

. C. verna, Curt. Occasionally abundant on sallow

blossoms.

. Lasioptera fuliginosa, Steph. Not common.
. Lestremia leucophea, Meig. Very rare. Taken by

myself in February, 1868.

. Campylomyza bicolor, Meig. Common. Mycetophilide.

. Molobrus Thome, Linn. Abundant.
. M. fuscipes, Meig. Abundant. M. brunnipes, Meig. Common.

. M. morio, Fab. Abundant.
. M. brevipennis, Walk. A single specimen only was

taken by myself from the nest of an ant
(Myrmica acervorum) in the hedge between
the Eweleaze and Brook Furlong.

. Cordyla fasciata, Meig. Rare. Taken by my father

and myself, June, 1864.

. Dynastoma fuscicornis, Meig. Not common.
. Mycetophila lineola, Meig. Abundant.

. M. bimaculata, Fab. Abundant.

. M. lunata, Fab. Abundant.

. M. biusta, Meig. Common. R54 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Mycetophila cingulum, Meig. Abundant.

. M. punctata, Meig. Common. M. flavipes, Meig. Not common.

. Exechia lateralis, Meig. Not common.

. E. dilaticornis, Curt. Not common.

. E. sericea, Meig. Not common.

. Azana anomala, Stg. Very rare. A single specimen
only was taken by my father in Pelles, on May
20th, 1870.

. Leia pulchella, Curt. Common.

. L. fasciola, Meig- Abundant.

. L. fascipennis, Meig. Abundant.

. L. Winthemii, Meig. Abundant.

. L. erassicornis, Curt. Very rare. Taken by my
father and myself in Wootton Wood, May
20th, 1869. 6. L. ornata. Rare. Taken by my father, February
6th, 1856, and August 10th, 1863; also by
myself in Fernyknap, January 7th, 1870, and
in Sandhill’s Copse, September 24th, 1873. 1. Anaclinia nemoralis, Meig. Rare. Taken by my
father in Wootton Wood, August 2nd, 1862,
and July 30th, 1868; also by myself, July 30th
and August 3rd, 1869. 1. Sciophila rufipes, Hoff. Not common. 2. S. hilaris, Walk. Occasionally common. 3. S. cingulata, Meig. Common. 4,

5. Perron

oR eope

. S. marginalis, Meig. Common.
. S. unimaculata, Meig. Not common. FPP Page oewewe

3. B. venosus, Meig. Very rare. Taken by my father

DIPTERA. 255

- Sciophila annulata, Meig. Not common.

. Lasiosoma lutea, Meig. Not common. - Diadocidia ferruginosa, Meig. Of occasional occur-
rence on Fungi. - Bolitophila fusca, Meig. Common.

. B. cinerea, Meig. Common. - Macrocera phalerata, Meig. Common.

. M. centralis, Meig. Common.

. M. stigma, Curt. Common.

. M. lutea, Meig. Common.

. M. dorsalis, Curt. Not common.

. M. fasciata, Meig. Not common.

. Mycetobia annulata, Meig. Not common.

. M. pallipes, Meig. Rare.

. Platyura atrata, Fab. Very rare. Taken by my
father in Wootton Wood, August 21st, 1867,
and July 30th, 1869; also by myself in Wootton
Wood, August 27th, 1875.

. P. fasciata, Lat. Common.

. P. flavipes, Meig. Common. Bibionide. :
. Bibio Marci, Linn. Occasionally abundant in May. B. leucopterus, Meig. Common in May and June. in Wootton Wood, May 7th, 1835, and in
Mullett’s Copse, May 12th, 1871.
. B. ferruginatus, Linn, Abundant. 5. B. Johannis, Linn. Abundant. 256 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. - Bibio clavipes, Meig. Common.

. B. varipes, Meig. Abundant. B. nigriventris, Hal. Common.

. Dilophus vulgaris, Meig. Fever-fly. Abundant.

. D. femoratus, Meig. Common.

. Seatopse flavicollis, Meig- Abundant.

. §. punctata, Meig. Abundant.

. S. notata, Linn. Common.

. S. minuta, Meig. Common.

. S. albitarsis, Zett. Of frequent occurrence inside
the stems of burdock.

. S. infumata, Hal. Not common.

. Simulium marginatum, Meig. Abundant.

. S. lineatum, Meig. Abundant.

. S. latipes, Meig. Abundant.

. 8. elegans, Meig. Not common. 5. S. oculatum, Meig. Not common. AR ONVEDE DRO

ROeNnHEa

Bracuycera. Saraiva. Scenopinide. 1. Scenopinus niger, De Geer. Not common. Sargide.
. Beris clavipes, Linn. Not common.
. B. vallata, Forst. Not common. B. chalybeata, Forst. Common.
. B. fuscipes, Meig. Not common.
. Actina tibialis, Meig. Abundant. PR eYe

Bo 2

ReDea

DIPTERA. 257

. Sargus bipunctatus, Scop. Rare. A female was

taken by my father at Osehill, on August
28th, 1863; females have also been taken by
myself in Sandhills Copse, September 7th and
2Qist, 1866, and August 31st, 1870; a male
was taken by myself in Sandhills Copse, Sep-
tember 7th, 1866.

. S. cuprarius, Linn. Common.
. S. nitidus, Meig. Common.

. §. flavipes, Meig. Abundant.

. S. infuscatus, Meig. Common. Chrysomyia formosa, Sch. Common.

. C. flavicornis, Meig. Common.
. C. pallipes, Meig. Common.
. C. politus, Linn. Abundant. Stratiomyde.

. Stratiomys chameleon, Linn. Rare. ‘I'aken by

my father in the Quag; by my brother on
July 11th, 1866; and by myself on July 28rd,
1866, and July 20th, 1872.

. S. viridula, Fab. A single specimen only was

taken by myself in Alder Mead, July 7th,
1877.

. Oxycera rara, Scop. Rare. Taken by my father

in Mullett’s Copse, July 3rd, 1881; in Broad-
alders, August 1st, 1863, July, 1866; and in -
Sandhills Copse, July 28th, 1870: by my
brother in Roughground, July 25th, 1863, and

s

258 HISTORY OV GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. in Broadalders, July 30th, 1869; and by
myself in Wootton Wood, July 29th, 1872. 2. Oxycera trilineata, Linn. Common, June and July. 3. O. formosa, Wied. Abundant from May to July. 4, O. analis, Meig. Occasionally common on alders,
May and June. The first specimen of this fly,
which is not known to have occurred elsewhere
in the British Isles, was taken by my father,
July 2nd, 1838. 5. O. maculata, Zett. Rare. ‘Taken by my father in
Mullett’s Copse, July Ist, 1862 and 1863, and
July 7th, 1866; a single specimen also was
taken by myself in Alder Mead, June 24th,
1878. 6. O. terminata, Meig. Rare. Taken by my father
in Mullett’s Copse, June 18th, 19th, 20th, 1830,
July 24th, 1832, July 17th, 1884; in Ham, June
18th and 22nd, 1864; and in Mullett’s Copse,
July 4th, 1864: also by myself in Wootton
Wood, June 10th, 1865. 7. O. Morrisii, Curt. Rare. Taken by my father in
Mullett’s Copse, June 24th, 1828, August 18th,
1830, July 13th, 1860, and in Alder Mead,
July 20th, 1867. .

8. O. longicornis, Dale. Rare. Taken by my father
in Mullett’s Copse, June 30th and July 4th,
1864; in Wootton Wood, June 20th, 1866, and
June 27th, 1871; by my brother, June 3rd,
1868; and by myself in the Quag, June 27th,

DIPTERA. 259

1871, and July Ist, 1873. This fly has not
been taken elsewhere. *

9. Oxycera muscaria, Fab. Rare. Taken by my
father, June 6th and 23rd, 1863; also by
myself in the Quag, June 28rd, 1869. 10. O. pygmea, Fall. Very rare. Taken by my father
in the Quag, June 6th and 28rd, 1863. This fly
is not known to have been taken elsewhere in
the British Isles. Glanville’s Wootton seems
to be the head-quarters of this interesting
genus. 1. Nemotelus pantherinus, Linn. Not common. 2. N. nigrinus, Fall. Common, June and July. 1. Pachygaster ater, Fab. Very rare. Taken by my
father, June 27th, 1828, July 15th, 1831, and
July 24th, 1832. 2. P. Leachii, Curt. Common, July and August. Acroceride. 1. Acrocera globulus, Panz. Rare. Taken by my
father in the Quag, July 22nd, 1829, and July
10th, 1865; also by myself, July 10th, 1865,
and July 18th, 1870. Bonbylide. 1. Bombylius medius, Linn. Occasionally common in
March and April. It hovers over primroses,

very much like the humming-bird moth. 260 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Bombylius major, Linn. Occasionally common. In 1872 I met with it as early as March 10th,
and in 1878 as late as May 12th. 3. B. minor, Linn. Very rare. Taken by myself in
Little Wootton Wood, June 22nd, 1870, and in
the garden, July 25th, 1870, which was a very
dry year. 1, Atherix unicolor, Curt. Very rare. A couple were
taken by my father in the Quag, June 17th,
1842. Tabanide. 1. Chrysops cxcutiens, Linn. Abundant from June
to August. 2. C. relictus, Hoff. Not so common as the above. 1. Tabanus bovinus, Linn. Rare. Taken by my
father, July 14th, 1820, and July 17th, 1885 ;
also by myself in the garden, July 9th, 1868. 2. T. autumnalis, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father ;
and also by myself in Sandhills Copse, July
18th, 1873. 3. T. Austriacus, Fab. Rare. Taken by my brother
in the garden; and also by my father in Sand-
hills Copse, July 16th, 1871. 4, T. tropicus, Linn. Of occasional occurrence from

June to August.

. rusticus, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father.

. nemoralis, Meig. Abundant. ‘T. bromius, Linn. Common. nes
8

PVE PR wow

Repe

pean

DIPTERA. 261

. Hematopota Italica, Meig. Not so common as the
next.

. H. pluvialis, Linn. Common Stout Fly. Abundant
from June to August. Empina. Asilide.
. Asilus crabroniformis, Linn. Rare. Taken by my
father.
. A. cristatus, Hoff. Common.
. A. varipes, Meig. Common. A. rusticus, Meig. Common.
. Gonypes cylindricus, DeGeer. Abundant.
. Dioctria rufipes, DeGeer. Not common.
. D. flavipes, Meig. Not common.

. D. annulata, Meig. Common. Leptide.

. Rhagio scolopacina, Linn. Common.

. R. tringaria, Linn. Abundant.

. R. annulata, DeGeer. Common.

. R. notata, Meig. A single specimen only was
taken by myself in Broadalders, May 27th,
1865. .

. R. lineola, Fab. Abundant.

. Leptis holosericea, Scop. Abundant.

. L. aurea, Meig. Abundant. .

w
3

ii

Prege err

3. 4,
°
5. Ts
2. 3. HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Empide

. Empis tessalata, Fab. Abundant. - livida, Linn. Abundant.

. vernalis, Meig. Common.

. pennaria, Fall. Abundant.
. chioptera, Fall. Common. pennipes, Linn. Abundant. vitripennis, Meig. Abundant. trigramma, Hoff. Common. pilipes, Meig. Abundant.

. stercorea, Fab. Abundant. ignota, Meig. Common. testacea, Fab. Abundant. lutea, Meig. Common. femorata, Meig. Abundant. SASS SEA

. Rhamphomyia nigripes, Fab. Common.

. suleata, Fall. Common.

. spinipes, Fall. Abundant.

. cinerascens, Meig. Abundant.
. dispar, Curt. Common.

. flava, Fall. Common. PRADA

. Hilara manicata, Meig. Common.
. H. obscura, Meig. Common. H. maura, Fab. Abundant on sallow-bloom. H. cilipes, Meig. Abundant. H. thoracica, Macq. Not common. Hybos grossipes, Linn, Abundant. H. femorata, Mull. Common. H. fumipennis, Meig. Abundant. RODE DEP OWE Re

DIPTERA. 263

. Hybos vitripennis, Meig. Abundant.
. Microphorus velutinus, Macq. Common.
. M. clavipes, Meig. Not common.

. M. flavipes, Meig. Not common.

. Cyrtoma spuria, Fall. Not common. - GEdalia minuta, Fall. Not common.

. CE. stigmatella, Zett. Not common. - Ocydromia glabricula, Fall. Common.
. O. scutulata, Meig. Not common.

. O. rufipes, Meig. Not common.

. O. nigripennis, Fab. Not common. Tachydromide.

. Drapetis nigrum, Meig. Not common. 2. D. graminum, Fall. Of occasional occurrence

Paae

RS

amongst dead grass during the autumn. It
has remarkably short wings.

. Platypalpus nigritarsis, Fall. Very rare. Taken

by my father in Wootton Wood, June 15th,
1838, and May 17th, 1870. P. luteus, Macq. Very rare. Taken by myself in
Wootton Wood, May 29th, 1874. P. minutus, Meig. Common. P. stramineipes, Zett. Abundant. P. fasciatus, Meig. Not common. P. fascipes, Meig. Abundant. P. varius, Walk. Common. P calceatus, Meig. Common. P. flavipes, Fab. Common. 264 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 10. Platypalpus maculipes, Meig- Common. 1. Tachydromia arrogans, Linn. Common. 2. T. cimicioides, Fab. Common. Hemerodromide. 1. Elaphropeza ephippiata, Fall. Rare. Taken by
my father in the garden, August 7th, 1841;
also by myself in Mullett’s Long-ground, August
22nd, 1873, and June 23rd, 1877. 1, Phyllodromia melanocephala, Fab. Of frequent
occurrence in the woods from July to Sep-
tember. 1. Hemmerodromia supplicatoria, Meig. Rare. Taken
by my father at Ham, June 18th, 1866; also
by myself in Sandhills Copse, June 30th and
Tuly 8rd, 1873. 2. H. monostigma, Hoff. Not common. 3. H. precatoria, Fall. Abundant. 1, Heleodromia stagnalis, Hal. Abundant on water. 1. Ardoptera irrorata, Fall. Of frequent occurrence
in damp shady places. 2. A. oblongo-guttata, Dale. Rare. ‘Taken by my
father in Mullett’s Copse, July 1st, 1862; also
by myself in Wootton Wood, May, 1873, and
in Fernyknap, May 17th, 1877. The following
is the description of this new species, which is
larger than either irrorata or guttata :—Nigro-
nea, capite argenteo ; antennis nigris; thorace
albo fasciato et utrinque notato; alis fusco-

yews

paisa)

o

2

DIPTERA. 265
cinereis, margine postico apiceque maculis ob-
longis limpidis, venis fusco-nebulosis ; halteribus

et pedibus fulvis; tibiis tarsisque apice fuscis. Dolichopidee.

. Psilopus platypterus, Fab. Common, June. P. obscurus, Meig. Common.

. Dolichopus nobilitatus, Linn. Common, June. D. brevipennis, Meig. Abundant. D. plumipes, Scop. Common. D. popularis, Wied. Common. D. diadema, Hal. Common on the leaves of the
water-lilies in Roundchimneys Pond. D. cupreus, Fall. Abundant. D. notatus, Stan. Common. 1. Medeterus notatus, Fab. Rare. Taken by my

3. Bod ee

father, August 7th, 1838, and June, 1863; also
by myself in Birch Copse, July 17th, 1877.

. M. bipunctatus, Meig. Not common. M. curvipes, Fall. Rare. Taken by my father in
company with the moths at sugar, October 7th,
1839, and October 8th, 1842; and in the Quag,
February 27th, 1868.

. M. scambus, Fall. Not common.
. Rhaphium cupreus, Macq. Abundant. R. caliginosum, Meig. Common.

. R. macrocerum, Zett. Not common.
. RB. flavicolle, Macq. Very rare. Taken by myself

in Mullett’s Copse, July 6th, 1871. 266 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 5. Rhaphium denticulatum, Zett. Very rare. Taken
by my father in Button’s, October 10th, 1855.

. Argyra diaphana, Fab. Abundant.

. A. vestita, Wied. Common.

. Diaphorus oculatus, Fall. Not common.

. Chrysotus nigripes, Fab. Common.

. C. viridulus, Fall. Common.

. C. truncorum, Meig. Of occasional occurrence on
trunks of trees.

. Sybistroma discipes, Wied. A single specimen only
was taken by my father in the withy-bed, May
80th, 1838.

ervrerrne

e

Lonchopteride. Lonchoptera lutea, Panz. Abundant. L. tristis, Meig. Abundant. L. trilineata, Meig. Common. L, flavicauda, Meig. Not common. Peper

Syrenina. Eristalide. Eristalis tenax, Linn. Abundant throughout the
year. It spends the winter in houses and
amongst thatch. E. vulpinus, Meig- Common. E. similis, Fall. Not common. E. fossarum, Meig. Abundant. E. nemorum, Linn. Abundant. Pep

o

DIPTERA. 7 267

. Eristalis arbustorum, Fab. Common. 7. E. horticola, DeGeer. Abundant. 8. E. intricarius, Linn. Common on flowers, July

10.

and August.

. E. florens, Linn. Occasionally common on flowers,

August and September. E. sepulchralis, Linn. Rare. Taken by myself
on Whitedown, July 7th, 1877.

. Helophilus trivittatus, Fab. Very rare. Taken

by myself, July, 1863, and August 10th, 1877,
on Whitedown.

. H. pendulus, Linn. Abundant.

. Syritta pipiens, Linn. Abundant.

. Xylota sylvarum, Linn. Common.

. X. segnis, Linn. Abundant.

. X.lenta, Meig. Very rare. Taken by my father

in Wootton Wood, June 12th, 1870, and June
Lith, 1871; also by my brother in Pelles, May
12th, 1865, and in Wootton Wood, June 20th,
1877.

. X. abiens, Meig. Very rare. Taken by my father

in Wootton Wood, August 2nd, 1869; also by
myself in Wootton Wood, May 80th, 1871, and
Tune 28rd, 1875.

. Spilomyia femorata, Linn, Rare. Taken by my

father in the garden, June 4th, 1840, and May
28th, 1870; also by myself in Sandhill's Copse,
May 30th, 1867, and in Wootton Wood, June
10th, 1876. 268 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Criorhina ranunculi, Panz. Rare. Taken by my
father in the garden, April 24th, 1858; also by
myself in the garden, April 19th, 1864; in
Sandhill’s Copse, April 19th, 1875; and in the
orchard, April 11th, 1876. 2. C. floccosa, Meig. Not common. 3. C. oxyacanthe, Meig. Common on flowers from
July to September. 4. C. mussitans, Fab. Common. In 1877 I met with
it as late as September 21st. 1. Volucella bombylans, Linn. Abundant. 2. V. plumata, DeGeer. Abundant. 3. V. inflata, Fab. Of occasional occurrence on
flowers in June. 4. V. pellucens, Linn. Abundant. 1. Sericomyia borealis, Fall. Very rare. Taken by
my brother in July, 1866. 1. Microdon apiformis, DeGeer. Very rare. Taken
by my father, June 11th, 1829; also by my
brother and myself in Broadalders, June 2Ist,
1867. 1. Eumerus strigatus, Fall. Very rare. Taken by
myself on Whitedown, July 13th and 25th,
1877. Rhingide. 1, Brachyopa bicolor, Fall. Not common. 1. Rhingia rostrata, Linn. Abundant. e

2» PR OY PPPOE es

»

DIPTERA. 269

Syrphide.

. Chrysotoxum marginatum, Meig. Occasionally

common on flowers in June.

. C. octomaculatum, Curt. Rare.
. C.arcuatum, Linn. A single specimen only was

taken by myself in the Green Wall, June 28rd,
1874,

. C. bicinctum, Linn. Common.

. Pipiza bimaculata, Meig. Not common.
. P. biguttata, Curt. Common.

. P. noctiluca, Linn. Common. Paragus obscurus, Meig. Not common.

. Chrysoclamis cuprea, Scop. Common.
. Cheilosia longula, Zett. Common. C. chalybeata, Meig. Abundant. C. variabilis, Panz. Abundant.

. C. flavipes, Panz. Common from March to June. - Leucozoma cstracea, Linn. Of occasional occur-

rence on flowers, July and August.

. L. lucorum, Linn. Of occasional occurrence on

flowers, June and July.

. Pyrophena rosarum, Fab. Common.
. P. ocymi, Fab. Not common.
. Melanostoma hyalinata, Fall. A single specimen

only was taken by myself in Wootton Wood,
August 9th, 1871.

. M. scalaris, Fab. Common. 3. M. manicatus, Meig. Common.

. M. peltatus, Meig. Abundant. 270 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOrron,

. Melanostoma clypeatus, Meig. Common.

. M. cyaneus, Mull. Common.

. M. immarginatus, Zett. Not common. - Syrphus pyrastri, Linn. Abundant. ‘This fly
survives the winter; and its larva (which is
green) feeds on the leaves of fruit trees.

. tribes, Linn. Abundant.

. vitripennis, Meig. Abundant.

. bifasciatus, Fab. Not common.

. balteatus, DeGeer. Abundant. corolle, Fab. Common. glaucius, Linn. Abundant.

. venustus, Meig. Common. umbellatarum, Fab. Abundant.

. auricollis, Meig. Common.

. laternarius, Meig. Not common.

. nitidicollis, Meig. Common. 1. Melithreptus niticollis, Stag. Common. 2. M. scriptus, Linn. Common. 8. M. menthrasti, Linn. Common. 4,

1

1

rN

ePrXreaaepr

PARANDNANRNNAM

. M. melissiw, Meig. Common.

. Sceva citrofasciata, DeGeer. Rare.

. Doros conopseus, Fab. Very rare. Taken by my
father in the Green Wall, June 10th, 1828, and
in the garden, June 27th, 1839. 1. Sphegina clunipes, Fall. Rare. Taken by my
father in the orchard, May 21st, 1863; also by
myself in Wootton Wood, June 24th, 1873, and
September 26th, 1876. Fewmepe

cae
Brrr

preengss

DIPTERA. am

- Baccha elongata, Fab. Common.

. B.-obscuripennis, Meig. Abundant. .,Ascia podagrica, Fab. Abundant.

. A. dispar, Meig. Common.

. A. hastata, Hoff. Common.

. A. floralis, Meig. Common. Pipunculide.

. Pipunculus campestris, Latr. Common in shady

situations during September.
. ater, Meig. Not common.
. pratorum, Fall. Common.
. flavipes, Meig. Abundant.
. sylvaticus, Meig. Abundant.
. geniculatus, Meig. Common.
. nigritulus, Zett. Common.
. auctus, Fall. Common.
. ruralis, Meig. Abundant.

. Chalarus holosericeus, Meig. Abundant.
. C. spurius, Fall. Common. Conopina. Myopide-

. Occemyia atra, Fab. Very rare. Taken by myself,

near Roundchimneys Pond, June 14th, 1870,
September 24th, 1870, and June 28rd, 1877.

. Myopa buccata, Linn. Of occasional occurrence on

flowers in May and June. 272 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Myopa ferruginea, Linn. Common on flowers, July
and August. Conopide. 1. Conops quadrifasciata, DeGeer. Abundant on
flowers, July and August. 2. C. flavipes, Linn. Common on flowers, July and
August. 8. C. aculeata, Linn. A single specimen only was
taken by myself off the flowers of the horse-
mint in Alder Mead, on August 22nd, 1872. 4. C. rufipes, Fab. Abundant on flowers, July and
August. Muscrna. Phoride. 1. Phora abdominalis, Fall. Rare. Taken by my
father in the garden, June 8th, 1836, June 19th
and 20th, 1837, and August 25th, 1855; also
by myself in Sandhill’s Copse, September 27th,
1876.

. P. thoracica, Fall. Not common.

. P. incrassata, Meig. Common.

. P. fasciata, Fall. Common.

. P. rufipes, Fab. Common.

. P. flava, Fall. Common.

. P. fuscipes, Macq. Abundant.

. P. aterrima, Fab. Abundant.

. Conicera atra, Meig. Abundant. Karen won

DIPTERA. 273

Platypezide. 1. Callomyia elegans, Fab. Very rare. A single
specimen only was taken by my father in the
withy-bed, July 15th, 1862. 2. C.ameena, Meig. Very rare. Taken by my father
in Mullett’s Copse, June 6th, 1861; also by
myself in Fernyknap, May 28th, 1878, and in
Pelles, July 17th, 1878. 1. Platypeza modesta, Zett. A single specimen only
of this exceedingly pretty little fly was taken by
myself in Wootton Wood, June 29th, 1875. It
has not been previously recorded as British. 2. P. rufa, Meig. Rare. Taken by myself in Wootton
Wood, September 17th, 1878; in the Green
Wall, September 12th, 1874 ; in Wootton Wood,
September 25th, 1876; in Fernyknap, Sep-
tember 26th, 1876 ; and in Haywood, September
29th, 1876. It-has not been previously recorded
as British. 3. P. picta, Meig. Very rare. A couple were taken
by my father off ivy bloom, October 22nd,
1846; a single specimen also was taken by
myself in Nursery Lane, September 24th, 1877. 4. P. infumata, Hal. Rare. Taken by my father in
Mead Copse, September 29th, 1870: also by
myself in Sandhill’s Copse, October 8rd, 1873 ;
in Rabbitts, September 30th, 1874 ; in Wootton
Wood, September 25th and 26th, 1876; in

T

Q74 HISTORY OF GIANVILLE'S WOOTTON. Haywood, September 29th, 1876; and in Mead
Copse, October 6th, 1876. 5. Platypeza aterrima, Walk. Very rare. ‘Taken by
myself in Sandhill’s Copse, September 7th,
1866; and in Haywood, September 29th,
1876. 6. P. atra, Fall. Rare. Taken by myself in Pelles,
August 2Ist, 1873; in Wootton Wood, August
27th, 1875, and September 6th, 1877. This is
the smallest species of this interesting genus.

. P. dorsalis, Meig. Occasionally common in shady
situations during September and the beginning
of October. 2

Borboride.

. Spherocera vaporarium, Hal. Abundant.

. S. subsultans, Fab. Abundant.

. Apterina pedestris, Meig. Rare. Taken by my
father out of moss in the garden, March 20th,
1832: also by myself in Birch Copse, Decem-
ber 10th, 1868; in Nursery Lane, December
26th, 1872, January 7th and February 26th,
1873; in Wootton Wood, March 31st, 1877;
in Parson's Copse, April 14th, 1877; and in
Wootton Wood, September 6th, 1877. 1. Limosina sylvatica, Meig. Common. 2. L. limosa, Hal. Common. 3. 1

=~

. L, erassimana, Hal. Common.
. Borborus equinus, Fall. Abundant. eR owe

re PP ane ewe

DIPTERA. 275

. Borborus nitidus, Meig. Abundant.
. B. ater, Meig. Abundant. Ephydride.

. Ephydra riparia, Fall. Abundant.
. E. noctula, Meig. Common.

. E. quadrata, Fall. Common.

. E. coaretata, Fall. Common. :

. Discomyza incurva, Fall. Very rare. Taken by

my father in Whitedown chalk-pit, July 6th,
1870.

. Gymnopa subsultans, Fab. Common.
. G. glabra, Fall. Common.
. Madiza oscinia, Fall. Very rare. Taken by my

father in Whitedown chalk-pit, August 4th,
1871. Drosophilide.

. Drosophila cellaris, Linn. Abundant.
. D. cameraria, Curt. Abundant. D. graminum, Fall. Abundant.

. D. apicalis, Hardy. Abundant.

. D. flava, Fall. Common.

. D. transversa, Fall. Common.

. Asteia amena, Meig. Abundant. A. concinna, Meig. Common.

. Leucopis puncticornis, Meig. Common.
. Leptomyza gracillis, Fall. Not common. 276 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Agromyzide. 1. Phytomyza lateralis, Fall. Common in the spring. 2. P. obscurella, Fall. Abundant. 8. P. aquifolii, Gour. Common on holly. 4. P. geniculata, Macq. Abundant. 5. P. lonicere, Desv. Common on honeysuckles. 6. P. ranunculi, Desv. Common. 7. P. scolopendri, Desy. On fern leaves. 8. P. sonchi, Desv. Common. 9. P. lappe, Gour. Common. 10. P. primula, Desy. Common. 11. P. thapsi, Desy. Common on the black mullein
in the garden. ,

1. Agromyza ornata, Meig. Very rare. Taken by my
father in the garden, May 6th, 1844. 2.°A. denticornis, Panz. Of occasional occurrence,
March and April. 8. A. flaveola, Fall. Common. 4, A. nigripes, Meig. Common. Geomyzide. 1. Ochthiphila juncorum, Fall. Common. 1. Diastata obscurella, Fall. Common. 2. D. punctum, Meig. Of occasional occurrence on
ivy bloom. 3. D. nebulosa, Fall. Rare. Taken by my father,
May 18th, 1883; and in Wootton Wood, March
15th, 1864; also by myself in Hartleaze,
February 27th, 1863; and in Wootton Wood,

on

DIPTERA. R77

May 17th, 1874, and October Ist, 1877. This
pretty fly has not been previously recorded as
British.

. Opomyza germinationis, Linn. Abundant. 2. O. florum, Meig. Abundant. - Geomyza combinata, Linn. Abundant. Chloropide.

. Chlorops messoria, Fall. Abundant. C. lineata, Fab. Abundant. C. cereis, Fall. Abundant. C. gracilis, Meig. Common. C. leta, Meig. Abundant. C. elongata, Meig. Abundant. C. albiseta, Meig. Common.

. Meromyza saltatrix, Linn. Abundant.

. M. pratorum, Meig. Common.

. M. variegata, Meig. Abundant.

. Selachops flavocincta, Whalby. Very rare. Taken
by my father and myself in Broadalders, July
18th, 1866. It has not been previously recorded
as British. Pe YP PN eee epe

Psilide.

. Psila fimetaria, Linn. Abundant in the woods from
September to November.

. P. pallida, Fall. Common.

. P. bicolor, Meig. Abundant.

. P. rose, Fab. Common. 278 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WooTTON. 5. Psila nigra, Fall. Common. 1. Heteroneura albimana, Meig. Rare. Taken by my
father in the orchard, August 17th, 1863: also
by myself in Wootton Wood, June 3rd, 1867,
and June 24th, 1873; on Newland Common,
September 5th, 1878; and in Wootton Wood,
May 29th, 1874. 1. Chyliza scutellata, Fab. Common. 2. C. attiseta, Meig. Common. 1, Loxocera ichneumonea, Linn. Abundant in the
woods from July to September. 2. L. sylvatica, Meig. Common. 1. Lissa dolium, Fab. A single specimen only was
taken by my father in Mullett’s Long-ground,
May 26th, 1865. Tanypezide. 1. Tetanura pallidiventris, Fall. Of occasional oceur-
rence in the woods from May to July. 1. Calobata cothurnata, Panz. Abundant. 2. C. petronella, Linn. Abundant. 8. C. cibaria, Linn. Common. Sepside. 1. Saltella scutellaris, Fall. Common. 1. ‘Themira putris, Linn. Abundant. 2. T. minor, Hal. Not common. 1. Nemopoda cylindrica, Fab. Abundant. 1. Sepsis annulipes, Meig. Common. wr wp~p

Perr AR ene

DIPTERA. 279

. Sepsis punctum, Fab. Abundant.

. 8. cynipsea, Linn. Common.

. Piophila casei, Linn. Cheese Fly. Common.
. P. luteata, Hal. Bacon Fly. Common. Ortalide.

. Myodina vibrans, Linn. Common.

. Herina paludum, Fall. Common.

. H. lugubris, Meig. Abundant.

. H. luctuosa, Meig. Common.

. H. nigrina, Meig. Not common.

. H. cerasi, Linn. Abundant.

. Rivellia syngenesiz, Fab. Not common.

. Ceroxys picta, Meig. Not common.

. C. crassipennis, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father

and inyself in Broadalders, July, 1864.

. Ortalis guttata, Curt. A single specimen only was

taken by myself in the Cowleaze, June 4th,
1873. Trypetide.

. Anomoia Gedii, Meig. A single specimen only (of

this, the rarest and most beautiful species of
this beautiful family) was taken by myself on
Newland Common, July 18th, 1870.

. Platyparea discoidea, Fab. Abundant.
. Aciura rotundiventris, Fall. Very rare. Taken by

my father and niyself in Whitedown chalk-pit,
August 10th, 1870. 280 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 1, Acidia heraclei, Linn. Common. 2. A. cognata, Wied. Rare. Taken by my father,
July 2nd, 1842; also by myself in Wootton
Wood, June 11th and 24th, and July 19th,
1873. 1. Spilographa Zoe, Meig. Of occasional occurrence
ia May and June. <

2. S. continua, Meig. Rare’ Taken by my father,
August 20th, 1861; also by myself on White-
down, July 30th, 1868, July 27th, 1876, and
August 15th, 1876. 1. Trypeta cornuta, Fab. Common on Whitedown
during August.

. T. arctii, DeGeer. Abundant.

. 'T. lappe, Meig. Common.

. T. colon, Meig. Common in the autumn.

. T. florescentie, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father,
June 29th, 1838; June 23rd, 1864; and July
26th, 1870, in Sandhill’s Copse: also by myself
in Broadalders, July 24th, 1869 ; and in Wootton
Wood, July 12th, 1875. 6. T. serratule, Linn. Common during August. 1. Urophora cardui, Linn. Rare. Taken by my
father in the garden, July 18th, 1832, and
June 28th, 1838; a couple also were bred by
myself, July 8th, 1877, from a gall found on a
thistle, near Hamper’s Farm.

. U. aprica, Fall. Not common. 38. U. spoilata, Hal. Not common. oR & DP

~

DIPTERA. 281

. Urophora solstitialis, Linn. Abundant. 1. Ensina sonchi, Linn. Abundant. re
HH

oon

. Tephritis marginata, Fall. Of occasional occur-

rence from August to October.

. T. stellata, Fuess. Rare. Taken by my father,

August 9th, 1840; also by myself in the Quag,
September 8th, 1876.

. arniee, Linn. Abundant.

. leontodontis, DeGeer. Common. T. bardane, Schr. Rare. Taken by my father,
September 27th, 1839; and September 26th,
1869, in Wootton Wood; also by myself in
Sandhill’s Copse, September 8th, 1870. T. hyoscyami, Linn. Abundant. It is a hiber-
nating species. _T. irrorata, Fall. Common in the autumn. Te
T. absinthii, Linn. Common in the autumn. T. parietina, Linn. Common in the autumn.

. Oxyphora corniculata, Zett. Abundant. Tt is a

hibernating species. 1. Carphotricha guttularis, Meig. Occasionally com-

mon. Sapromyzide.

. Phyllomyza litura, Meig. Rare. ‘Taken by my

father in the garden, July 11th, 1860: also by
myself in Sandhill’s Copse, September 21st,
1866; June 28th, 1873, and June 23rd, 1877,
in Haywood. 282 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Palloptera pulchella, Rossi. Common. P. trimacula, Meig. Common. P. ustulata, Fall. Common. P. umbellatarum, Fab. Abundant. P. saltuum, Linn. Common. P. arcuata, Fall. Not common.

. Sapromyza decempunctata, Fall. Abundant.

. 8. quadripunctata, Linn. Not common.

. S. pallida, Fall. Abundant.

. §. rorida, Fall. Common.

. S. inusta, Meig. Common.

. S. preusta, Fall. Abundant.

. Lonchea vaginalis, Fall. Rare. ‘I'aken by my
father; also by myself in the Quag, June 2nd,
1874,

PEAR eye oaaRovwe

Lauxanide. 1. Ulidia demandata, Fab. Not common. I have
bred it from little red pup.
. Lauxania cylindricornis, Fab. Not common.
. L. lupulina, Fab. Not common.
. L. enea, Fall. Abundant.
. L. longipennis, Meig. Common. ewe

o

Sciomyzide. 1. Platystoma seminationis, Linn. Abundant on
flowers in May and June. 1. Sciomyza albocostata, Fall. Rare. Taken by my
father ; also by myself in Wootton Wood, May

rer akon

DIPTERA. 283,

26th, 1874, June 29th, 1874, September 30th,
1875, and June 20th, 1877.

. Sciomyza obtusa, Fall. Not common.
. S. monilis, Fall. Common.

. S. cinerella, Fall. Common.

. S. nana, Meig. Rare. Taken by my father in the

Quag, May 18th, 1833, and June 2nd and
22nd, 1838. - Pheomyia fuscipennis, Meig. Rare. Taken by

my father in the garden, July 17th, 1862: also
by myself in Wootton Wood, May 29th, 1874,
and July 3rd, 1876, off Equisetum. Tetanocerida.

. Tetanocera umbrarum, Linn. Not common.
. LT. hieracii, Fab. Abundant.
. T. sylvatica, Meig. Not common. T. arrogans, Meig. Common in the autumn,
. ferruginea, Fall. Not common.

 

. Elgiva dorsalis, Fab. Not common.

. E. lineata, Fall. Not common.

. E. cucullaria, Linn. Abundant.

. Limnia pratorum, Fall. Very rare. Taken by my

father in Whitedown chalk-pit, August 9th,
1870.

. L. rufifrons, Fab. Common.
. L. obliterata, Fab. Not common.
. Trigonomentopus frontalis, Meig. Of occasional

occurrence amongst rushes from September to
May. 284 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Sepedon Hefneri, Fall. Common. 2. S. sphegus, Fab. Abundant. Helomyzide. 1. Dryomyza preusta, Meig. Common.

. D. flaveola, Meig. Common. Helomyza rufa, Fall. Abundant. H. affinis, Meig. Common in October and No-
vember. pre

Scatophagide. 1. Scatophaga stercoraria, Linn. Abundant. 2. S. merdaria, Fab. Abundant. 3. S. cinerea, Meig. Abundant. 4. S. lutaria, Fab. Abundant. 5. S. inquinata, Meig. Common. 6. S. squalida, Meig. Common. Cordyluride. 1. Cordylura pubera, Linn. Not common. 2. C. ciliata, Meig. Common. 3. C. albipes, Fall. Common. 1. Norellia spinimana, Meig- Common. 1, Leptopa flava, Hal. Not common. 1, Hydromiza livens, Fall. Common on the leaves of
the water-lilies in Roundchimneys Pond during
June and July. ~

oak oe De

eSYPHYE NAAR HH EN

Pepa

DIPTERA. 285

Anthomyide. Lispe tentaculata, DeGeer. Of occasional occur-
rence on the leaves of the water-lilies in
Roundchimneys Pond, June and July. Myopina riparia, Fall. Rare. - Ceenosia means, Meig. Common. C. triangula, Zett. Common. C. pedella, Fall. Rare. C. gemmalis, Rond. Rare. C. nigridigitata, Rond. Rare. C. albicornis, Meig. Not common. C. tigrina, Fab. Rare.

. Homalomyia pretiosa, Sch. Rare.
. H. pallitibia, Rond. Rare.

. H, maniculata, Meig. Common.

. H. mutica, Zett. Common.

. H. canicularia, Linn. Abundant.
. H. floricola, Meig. Common.

. H. lactuee, Bouch. Abundant.

. Anthomyia pluvialis, Linn. Common.
. A. transversa, Fall. Very rare.

. Azelia Stegeri, Zett. Rare.

. A. Macquarti, Zett. Rare.

. A. parva, Rond. Rare. A. triquetra, Fall. Rare.

. Acanthiptera inanis, Fall. Very rare.
. Mycophaga fungorum, Desv. Rare.
. Chortophila rotundicornis, Zett. Common from

September to April. 286 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Chortophila canescens, Zett. Rare.:
. C. antiqua, Meig. Abundant.

. C. argyrata, Zett. Common.

. C. bicolor, Wied. Rare.

. Hylemyia strigosa, Fab. Common.
. Mydea diaphana, Wied. Common. M. urbana, Meig Common.

. M. nigricolor, Fall. Rare.

. M. pagana, Fab. Common.

. Hydrotea ciliata, Fab. Rare.

. Onodontha cyrtoneurina, Zett. Rare.
. O. dentipes, Fab. Rare.

. Spilogaster duplicata, Meig. Rare.
. S. communis, Desv. Common.

. S. obscuripes, Zett. Rare.

. §. uliginosa, Fall. Very rare.

. Hyctodissa perdita, Meig. Common.
. H. pallida, Fab. Abundant.

. H. populi, Meig. Abundant.

. H. scutellaris, Fall. Common.

. H. variegata, Meig. Abundant.

. Polietes albolineata, Fall. Common. KAR ONE RODE DEE RODE Hae wD

Muscide.
. Pyrellia serena, Meig. Common.
. P. lasiophthalma, Macq. Common.
. Lucilia Cesar, Linn. Green Bottle Fly. Abundant.
. L. equestris, Meig. Common. L. illustris, Meig.. Not common. epreye

- Rp An

Prep

a

DIPTERA. 287

. Lucilia cornicina, Fab. Common.

. Onesia azurea, Meig. Common.

. O. sepulchralis, Meig. Abundant.

. Mesembrina meridiana, Linn. Common from July

to October.

. Calliphora erythrocephala, Meig. Abundant.
. C. vomitoria, Linn. Blue Bottle Fly. Abundant

everywhere. - Onesia vespilio, Fall. Common.
. Pollenia rudis, Fab. Abundant, especially in

thatch, throughout the winter.

. P. nitens, Zett. Common.

. P. atramentaria, Meig. Abundant.

. Graphomyia maculata, Scop. Abundant.

. Musca’ domestica, Linn. House Fly. Abundant

throughout the year.

. Stomoxys calcitrans, Linn. Leg Stinger. Abun-

dant.

. S. irritans, Linn. Common. Sarcophagide.

. Sarcophaga hemorrhoidalis, Fall. Common.

. S. carnaria, Linn. Abundant.

. S. albiceps, Meig. Not common.

. S. nigriventris, Meig. Not common.

. Trixa estroidea, Desv. Very rare. Taken by my

father, August 31st, 1838. 288 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. Dexide. - Dexia rustica, Fab. Common. D. canina, Fab. Common.

. Mintho compressa, Fab. Common.
. Melania volvula, Fab. Common. Melanophora roralis, Linn. Common. Tachinidae. Exorista chelonie, Rond. Rare.

. E. dubia, Fall. Common.
. Mascicera munitata, Walk. Rare. Miltograinma punctata, Meig. Common. Bucentes geniculatus, DeGeer. Not common.

. Scopolia concinnata, Meig. Common. S. carbonaria, Panz. Abundant. Olivieria lateralis, Fab. Abundant.

. O. hirsuta, Don. Common.
. Gymnocheta viridis, Fall. Rare. Tachina tessellata, Fab. Abundant. ’. vulpina, Fall. Common. T. lurida, Fab. Common. 'T. ursina, Meig. Common in the woods from
March to May. In 1872 I met with it as early

as March 11th.

. Echinomyia fera, Linn. Rare. ‘Taken by my father
in Whitedown chalk-pit, August 9th, 1870;
also by myself in Sandhill’s Copse, August

16th, 1871. DIPTERA. 289

. Echinomyia ferox, Panz. Rare. Taken by my
father, brother, and myself, in Whitedown
chalk-pit, August, 1870.

. E. grossa, Linn. A single specimen only was taken
by my brother in a window of the Manor House,
July 31st, 1870. It has been bred from the
larva of Bombyx rubi. Gstride.

. Gasterophilus equi, Fab. Horse Fly. Not common.

. Cephalemyia ovis, Linn. Sheep Fly. Rare in the
perfect state. Taken by my father, August
16th, 1820, and June 22nd, 1829; also by
myself in Sandhills, July 7th, 1870.

. Gstrus bovis, Linn. Bot Fly. Not often seen in
the perfect state. OMALOPTERA. Hippoboscide.
. Hippobosca equina, Linn. Forest Fly. Rare. A few
specimens only have been taken by my father.
. Ornithomyia avicularia, Linn. Common in the
spring on blackbirds and thrushes.
. O. viridula, Meig. Common in the spring on
. Tooks.
. O. fringillina, Curt. This small species is of rare
occurrence on chaffinches in the spring.
. Stenopteryx hirundinis, Linn. Common in certain
v

290 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. nests of swallows and martins, where they
remain throughout the winter. 1. Melophagus ovinus, Linn. Sheep Tick. Common
amongst the wool of sheep. Order VIT.—ApruanirrEra. Of this neglected order, or sub-order, of Diptera,
only fourteen species have hitherto been described as
British; but on looking over the follewing pages it
will be seen that thirty-eight have been taken in this
parish. I have added short descriptions of those not
previously described, but refrain from doing more, as
it would take up too much room to give long ones;
and besides I hope to write a monograph of them
another day. Owing to the diversity of shape I think
one or two additional genera might be formed. Pulicide. 1. Pulex irritans, Lin. Common Flea. 2. P. canis, Curt. On dogs. 3. P. erinacei, Leach. On hedgehogs. 4. P. felis, Bouche. On cats. 5. P. sciurum, Olf. On squirrels. 6. P. gliris, Dale. On dormice. Piceo-fusca, levis,
capite flavo et nitente, pedibus pallidioribus,
abdominis lateribus nudis, prothorace nigro-
costato, tarsorum articulo primo longissimo. Long. 1 lin. APHANIPTERA. 291

-7. Pulex furoris, Dale. On ferrets. Pallide piceo-
fusca, pedium spinulis paucioribus, abdomine
fusco-flavo. Long. 1 lin. 8. P mustela, Dale. On weasels. Pallide piceo-
fusca, abdomine fusco-flavo. Long. | lin. 9. P. leporis, Leach. On hares, but very rarely. 10. P. cuniculi, Dale. On rabbits. Pallide piceo-

fusca. Long. 1 lin. .

. Ceratophyllus elongatus, Curt. On the great bat. C. vespertilionis, Curt. On the common bat. C. fasciatus, Latr. On rats. C. musculi, Bouche. On the common mouse. C. muris, Curt. On the common field-mouse. C. sorecis, Dale. On shrews. Pallide piceo-

fusca, pedibus gracilibus. Long. 1 lin. 7. C. minor, Dale. On moles. Pallide piceo-fusca,
pedibus gracilibus, tarsorum omnium articulo
primo longissimo. Long. 1! lin. Talpx, Curt.,
which is almost double the size, has never been
seen in this parish. 1. Ceratopsyllus gallinule, Dale. In moorhen’s
nests. Piceo-fusca, ovata, abdominis quadri-
setoso. Long. | lin. 2. C.monedule, Dale. In jackdaw’s nests. Piceo-
fusca, abdomine spinulis nonnullis. Long. 1
lin. 3. C. turdi, Dale. In song-thrush’s nests. Piceo-
fusca, femoribus posticis intus ciliatis, probosce
porrecta variegataque. Long. 1} lin. ee he Ee

292 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 4, Ceratopsyllus viscivora, Dale. In stone-theush’s
nests. Piceo-fusca, pedibus pallidioribus. Long. liin. 5. C. merule, Dale. In blackbird’s nests. Pallida
piceo-fusca. Long. 1 lin. 6. C.garruli, Dale. In jay’s nests. Piceo-fusca, pedibus
pallidioribus, antennis elongatis. Long. 1 lin. 7. C. pyrrhule, Dale. On bullfinches. Piceo-fusca,
pedibus, pallidioribus. Long. 1 lin. 8. C. fringille, Steph. In chaffinch’s nests. 9. C. citrinelle, Dale. In yellowhammer’s nests. Piceo-fusca, abdomine compresso. Long. 1 lin. 10. C. pratensis, Dale. In meadow-pipit’s nests. Piceo-fusca, antennis obesis. Long. 1 lin. 11. C. atricapille, Dale. In blackcap’s nests. Piceo-
fusca, pedibus pallidioribus. Long. 1 lin. 12. C. cinerer, Dale. In whitethroat’s nests. Piceo-
fusca et nitens. Long. 1 lin. 13. C. arvensis, Dale. In skylark’s nests. Piceo-
fusca et obesa. Long. 1 lin. 14. C. trochili, Dale. In willow-wren’s nests. Piceo-
fusca et oblonga. 15. C. caudati, Dale. In longtailed-tit’s nests. Piceo-
fusca. 16. C. spini, Dale. Taken by my father off a siskin,
February 9th, 1863. Piceo-fusca in toto. Long. 1 lin. 17. C. enas, Dale. In stock-dove’s nests. Piceo-

fusca, pallidioribus pedibus. Long. 1 lin. HEMIPTERA. 293

18. Ceratopsyllus palumbi, Dale. In wood-pigeon’s
nests. Pallide piceo-fusca. Long. 1 lin. 19. C. columbe, Steph. In pigeon’s nests. 20. C. sterni, Curt. In starling’s nests. 21. C. hirundinis, Curt. In the nests of swallows and
house-martins. Order VIII.—Hemrerera. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. ~ British. Glanville’s Wootton. Scutating . . . . 35 18
Coreinma. . . . . 20 4
Beryting . . . . ll +7
Cecigeninn . . . 1 0
Lygeina 2... 61 16
Tingidinma . . . . 28 ll
Corticicolina . . . 4 1
Capsing. . . . . 163 76
Anthocoring . . . 27 8
Oculatinn . . . . 21 2
Reduvina . . . . 15 8
Hydrodromica. . . 18 5
Aquatilia . . . . 47 17
Total number of species . 441 78

The two following species have been taken in the
adjoining parishes :—

204 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. Cydnus dubius, Scop. Very rare. Taken by my
father on Hodd Hill, Buckland, Newton,
August 17th, 1835. Lopus gothicus, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father at
Middlemarsh ; also by myself, August, 1864. Scutatina. 1. Cydnus albomarginatus, Fab. Very rare. Taken
by my brother, June 26th, 1866; also by myself
off ivy in the garden, July 16th, 1866. 1. Zicrona cerulea, Linn. Rare. Taken by my father
in Mullett's Copse, July 17th, 1869; also by
myself in the garden, July 10th, 1868; and in
Wootton Wood, September 29th, 1877. 1, Alliodes inflexus, Wolff. A single specimen only
was taken by myself in the Common Planta-
tion, October Ist, 1877. 1. Podops inunctus, Fab. Rare. Taken by myself
in Mullett’s Copse, May 8th, 1871; and from
moss in Hartleaze, March 28th, 1877. 1. Eurygaster maurus, Linn. Very rare. Taken by
my father in Broadalders, October 4th, 1860;
also by myself on Newland Common, June
24th, 1875. 1. Pentatoma baccarum, Linn. Common in the
autumn. 2. P. dissimilis, Fab. Common in the autumn. I
possess specimens of a purple colour. 1. Tropicus purpureipennis, DeGeer. Common. HEMIPTERA. _ 295

2. Tropicus rufipes, Linn. Abundant on oak trees.

. Picromerus bidens, Linn. Common in the autumn.
. Asopus luridus, Fab. Common in the autumn, and

also in the spring.

. Acanthosoma hemorrhoidale, Linn. Common from

August to May. Sometimes on birch trees.

. A. dentatum, DeGeer. Rare, on birch trees in the

Cowleaze and on Stockhill from August to
October.

. A. griseum, Linn. Common on birch trees from

August to October. Coreina.

. Syromastes marginatus, Linn. Of occasional occur-

rence from September to May.

. Coreus hirticornis, Fab. Very rare. Taken by my

father in Haywood, May 9th, 1869.

. Corizus hyoscyami, Linn. Very rare. Taken by

my father in the garden, May 16th, 1837.

. Myrmus iniriformis, Fall. Not common. Berytina.

. Neides tipularis, Linn. Rare. Taken by myself

in Mullett’s Copse, April 2nd, 1870 ; in Wootton
Wood, August 1st, 1870, and September 2nd,
1873; also in the Quag, September 22nd, 1876.

. Metacanthus punctipes, Germ. Rare. Taken by

my father in the garden, April 28th, 1838; also
in Whitedown chalk-pit, August, 1870. 2

Pepe

PPP ekR op

96 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S Woorron.

. Berytus cognatus, Fieb. Not common.
. B. minor, H.-Sch. Common in the woods.

. B. commutatus, Fieb. Not common.
. B. crassipes, Fab. Very rare. Taken by myself in

Broadalders, June 29th, 1866. Lygeina.
. Gastrodes ferrugineus, Linn. Very rare. Taken
by my father; also a single specimen by myself
in Pelles, September 26th, 1868. -1. Calyptonotus pedestris, Panz. Taken by my father. - Scolopostethus pictus, Schill. Very rare. Taken
by my father in the garden, July 17th, 1862.
. S. adjunctus, Doug. Abundant.

. S. affinis, Schill. Abundant.
. S. contractus, H.-Sch. Abundant.

. Drymus sylvaticus, Fab. Abundant.

. D. brunneus, Sahl. Abundant.

. Plinthisus brevipennis, Latr. Very rare. Taken
by my father in the orchard, 1838."

. Hyporophilus hemipterus, Sch. Not common.

. Acompus rufipes, Wolff. Not common. A speci-
men with developed wings was taken by my
father in Wootton Wood, June 14th, 1865.

. Ischnorhynchus resedw, Panz. Rare. Taken by
my father and myself off alder, September 20th,
1867, and October 2nd, 1868.

. Cymus claviculus, Fall. Abundant.

. C. glandicolor, Hahn. Common. rere

»

HEMIPTERA. 297

. Zosmerus quadratus, Fieb. Abundant.
. Z. capitatus, Wolff. Common. Tingidina,

. Agramma leta, Fall. Rare. Taken by my father

on Newland Common, May 13th, 1833, and
September 11th, 1840.

. Tingis humuli, Fab. Common.
. LT. dumetorum, H.-Sch. Not common.
. LT. quadrimaculata, Wolff. Of occasional occur-

rence on old whitethorn bushes.

. T. ciliata, Fieb. Very rare. Taken by my father

in Broadalders, September 5th, 1864, and June
4th, 1865.

. T. cardui, Linn. Abundant.

. Monanthia foliacea, Fall. Not common.

. Dictyonota strichnocera, Fieb. Not common.

. Orthosteira obscura, H.-Sch. Common on prim-

roses.

. O. cervina, Germ. Not common.
. Campylosteira verna, Fab. Not common. Corticicolina,

. Avadus depressus, Fab. Rare. ‘Taken by my father

in the orchard, May 7th, 1823, and June 27th,
1837; also by myself in Nursery Lane, No-
vember 29th and December 26th, 1872. 298

ma ©

=
oes

PRR OMEN PE AR ODE eee

D.
D.
. D.

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Capsina.

. Bryocoris pteridis, Fall. Not common. - Monalocoris filicis, Linn. Common.

. Pithanus Mirkeli, H.-Sch. Not common.
. Miris holsatica, Fab. Common. - M. levigata, Linn. Abundant.

. M.
M.
. M.
. Lopomorphus ferrugatus, Fall. Abundant.

. L. dolobratus, Linn. Common.

. Phytocoris tilie, Fab. Abundant.

. P. populi, Linn. Abundant.

. P. crassipes, Flor. Abundant.

. P. divergens, Wolff. Abundant.

. P. ulmi, Linn. Abundant. « Derocoris fulvomaculatus, DeGeer. Not common. D.

calcarata, Fall. Abundant. erratica, Linn, Abundant. ruficornis, Fall. Abundant. striatus, Linn. Very rare. Taken by my father,
May, 1820, and June, 1837.

striatellus, Fab. Abundant. sexguttatus, Fab. Common. chenopodii, Fall. Common amongst rest harrow
on Whitedown in August.

. ferrugatus, Fab. Not common.
. binotatus, Fab. Abundant.
. infusus, H.-Sch. A single specimen only was

taken by myself in Sandhill's Copse, August
22nd, 1873.

ypewene

HEMIPTERA. 299

. Pantilus tunicatus, Fab. Common on alder, Sep-
tember and October.

. Litosoma viridinervis, Kirsch. Not common.

. L. chloropterus, Kirsch. Common.

. L. flavinervis, Kirsch. Common.

. Aitorhinus angulatus, Fall. Abundant.

. Hi. bilineatus, Doug. Common. 3. A. elegantulus, Meyer. Rare. Taken by my father

Pee PPR ONE EPP PROD e

p

in the Quag, August Ist, 1842, and August
28rd, 1863.

. Mecomma ambulans, Fall. Common.

. Brysoptera caricis, Fall. Not common.

. Phyllus palliceps, Fieb. Abundant.

. P. melanocephalus, Linn. Common.

. P. coryli, Linn. Common.

. P. avellane, Meyer. Not common.

. Globiceps selectus, Fieb. Abundant.

. G. flavonotatus, Wolff. Common.

. Gyllocoris histrionicus, Linn. Abundant.

. Camplyloneura virgula, H.-Sch. Common.

. Idolocoris annulatus, Wolff. Common. I. errans, Wolff. Abundant.

. I. globulifer, Fall. Not common.

. I. pallidus, Fall. Common. Malacocoris chlorizans, Panz. Abundant.

. Macroleus molliculus, Fall. Common.

. M. Paykullii, Fall. Abundant.

. Plagiognathus arbustorum, Fab. Abundant. P. yviridulus, Fall. Not common. 300 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. rPrYpyeeerene

a a ee)

. Apocremnus ambiguus, Fall. Common. A. variabilis, Fall. Abundant.

. Psallus querceti, Fall. Common.
. P. salicellus, Meyer. Abundant. P. salicis, Kirsch. Not common. P. varians, H.-Sch. Not common.

. Orthocephalus mutabilis, Fall. Common.

. O. saltator, Hahn. Not common.

. Heterocordylus unicolor, Hahn. Not common.
. Heterotoma merioptera, Scop. Abundant.

. Capsus ‘ater, Linn. Common. Var. semiflavus, Linn. Not common.

. C. capillaris, Linn. Common.

. Charagochilus Gyllenhalii, Fall. Not common.
. Liocoris tripustulatus, Fab. Abundant.

. Orthops Kalmii, Linn. Abundant.

. O. cervinus, H.-Sch. Common. O. pastinace, Fall. Common.

. O. seladonius, Fall. Not common.

. Lygus pabulinus, Linn. Not common.

. L. spinole, Meyer. Not common.

. L. contaminatus, Fall. Abundant.

. L. pratensis, Fab. Abundant.

. L. tenellus, Fall. Not common.

. Peeciloscytus unifasciatus, Fab. Not common.
. Harpocera thoracica, Fall. Abundant.

. Halticoris pallicornis, Fall. Not common.

. Stiphrosoma leucocephala, Linn. Abundant. rpeerwe

HEMIPTERA. 301

Anthocorina.

. Zygonotus pselaphiformis, Curt. Rare. Taken by

my father in the orchard, July 15th, 1838, and
Tune 20th, 1839; also by myself, July 11th, 1874.

. Z. elegantulus, Berens. Rare. Taken by my father

in Long Meadow, August 20th, 1867; also by
myself in the orchard, July 11th, 1872, and
September 4th, 1878. These two species are
remarkable for the great dissimilarity of the
sexes.

. Anthocoris nemorum, Linn Abundant.

. A. nemoralis, Fab. Common.

. Lyctocoris domesticus, Schill. Abundant.

. Piezostethus galactinus, Fieb. Abundant.

. P. rufipennis, L. Duff. Common.

. Cimex lectularia, Linn. A single specimen only

was taken by myself, September Ist, 1874. Oculatina.

. Salda saltatoria, Linn. Abundant. I have met

with it in January.

. S. elegantula, Fall. A single specimen only was

taken by my father in Mullett’s Long-ground,
June 28th, 1838. Reduvina.

. Ploiaria erratica, DeGeer. Of occasional occur-

rence amongst dry rubbish and thatch. 302 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Ploiaria vagabunda, Linn. Of frequent occurrence
during the summer and autumn.

. Nabis ferus, Linn. Common.

. N. flavomarginatus, Sch. Abundant.

. N. apterus, Fab. Abundant.

. N. limbatus, Dahl. Abundant.

. N. dorsalis, L. Duff. Abundant.

. N. brevipennis, Hahn. Common. ek ene

Hydrodromica. 1. Hydrometra stagnorum, Linn. Abundant on running
streams of water.

. Gerris najas, DeGeer. Abundant.

. G. lacustris, Linn. Abundant.

. G. gibbifera, Sch. Abundant.

. G. thoracica, Sch. Not common.

. Velia currans, Fab. Abundant. It very seldom
has wings. rPRewe

Aquatilia. 1. Nepa cinerea, Linn. Not common. 1. Naucoris cimicioides, Linn. Very rare. Taken by
myself in the Eweleaze Pond, April Ist, 1872.
. Corixa Geoffroyi, Leach. Common.
. ©. Panzeri, Fieb. Not common.
. O. Sahlbergi, Fieb. Abundant.
. C. striata, Linn. Abundant.
. C. meesta, Fieb. Abundant.
. C. fossarum, Leach. Abundant. eonreone

HOMOPTERA. 303

7. Corixa Falleni, Fieb. Common. 8. C. distincta, Fieb. Common. 9. C. hieroglyphica, Duf. Abundant. 10. C. lugubris, Fieb. Common. 11. C. nigrolineata, Fieb. Common. 12. C. limitata, Fieb. Common. 1. Pica minutissima, Fab. Abundant. 1. Notonecta glauca, Linn. Abundant. Var. fureata, Fab. Abundant. 2. N. maculata, Fab. Common in the Eweleaze

Pond. Order IX.—Homoprera. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. British. Glanville’s Wootton. Cicadiide . . . . 225 82
Psyllide. . 2. . 43 21
Thripide . . .. 46 20
Aphide. . . . . 280 51
Coccide. . . . . 18 13
Alerodide . . . . 10 7
Total number of species . 622 194

The two following species have been taken in the
adjoining parishes :—

Asiraca pulchella, Curt. Taken by my father at
Middlemarsh; and by my brother at Holwell. 804 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Dryobius roboris, Linn. Taken by my father off
holly at Holnest, July, 1842. Before proceeding further I wish to call attention to
a very curious black parasite, about the size of a
mustard-seed, adhering to the side of various species
of the Homoptera, where the elytra joins the thorax. Through the microscope it looks like a little black
bag. I think it must belong to the Acari. Not
having seen any account of it, I propose to call it
Homopterophagus Dorsettensis. Cicadiide. 1. Cixius cunicularius, Linn. Abundant. 2. C. nervosus, Linn. Abundant. 8. C. contaminatus, Germ. Abuudant. Var. albicinctus, Germ. Common. 4. C. brachycranus, Fieb. Common. 1, Delphax longipennis, Curt. Of occasional occur-
rence in certain spots of Wootton Wood and
Broadalders during the autumn. The first
specimens were taken by my father on Sep-
tember 15th, 1836. 2. D. minuta, Fab. Common. 3. D. notula, Germ. Common. 4. D. fuscovittata, Stal. Abundant from September
to May. .

5. D.lineola, Germ. Common from September to May. 6. D. guttula, Germ. Abundant. 10.
ll. 12. 13. 14,
15. 16. 17.

ar)

HOMOPTERA, 305

+ Delphax Scotti, Fieb. Common at the roots of

sedge from September to May. pellucida, Fab. Abundant. hamata, Boh. Abundant. striatella, Fall. Abundant. albomarginata, Curt. Abundant. pteridis, Boh. Common. albosignata, Dalb. Common amongst dead
bracken in Rabbitt’s and Wootton Wood, in
the undeveloped form only, during the autumn
and winter months. mesomela, Boh. Common. limbata, Fab. Abundant. discolor, Boh. Common. lineata, Perris. Rare. Taken by my father,
October 15th, 1827, and June 80th, 1870, in
the Cowleaze ; also by myself, May 28th, 1874.
. leptosoma, Flor. Abundant.

. nasalis, Boh. Not common. Peyouy

Sess

D.
D.

20. D. aterrima, Boh. Common. D.

.collina, Boh. Very rare. Taken by my father
in Mullett’s Long-ground, June 7th, 1866.

. D. lepida, Boh. Not common.
. Cercopis sanguinolenta, Linn. Abundant.
. Aphrophora alni, Linn. Abundant. Ptyelus spumaria, Linn. Cuckoo-spit Insect. Abundant. It is a very variable species. Var. similis, Curt. Abundant. Var. lateralis, Linn. Abundant. 306 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Var. vittata, Fab. Abundant. Var. abbreviata, Fab. Abundant. Var. apicalis, Ahr. Not common. 2. Ptyelus lineatus, Linn. Abundant. 8. BR. exclamationis, Thunb. Not common. 1. Ledra aurita, Linn. Very rare. A single specimen
was taken by my father in Sandhills Copse,
July 25th, 1870; also a larva by myself,
October 29th, 1874. 1. Centrotus cornutus, Linn. Common. This frog-
hopper bears a ridiculous resemblance to the
long-eared owl. 1. Eupelix cuspidata, Fab. Rare. Taken by my
father in the garden, May 22nd, 1871; also by
myself in Wootton Wood, June 20th, 1873. 1. Megothalmus scanicus, Fall. Not common. 2. M. pallidipennis, Curt. Not common. 1. Euacanthus acuminatus, Fab. Common. 2. E. interruptus, Linn. Abundant. 1. Tettigonia viridis, Linn. Abundant. 1. Macropsis lanio, Linn. Abundant. 1. Idiocoris varius, Fab. Abundant.»

2. I. venustus, Scott. Common. 3. I. populi, Linn, Abundant. 4. J. adustus, H.-Sch. Common. 1. Bythoscopus alni, Sch. Common. 1. Pediopsis fruticola, Fall. Abundant. 2. P. distinctissima, Dale. A single specimen of this
froghopper, which differs chiefly from fruticola

3,
4,
5. 6. 1
2. HOMOPTERA. 307

(of which it is probably a variety) in the
arrangement of the nerves of the wings, was
taken by myself in the Cowleaze, June 26th,
1878. Subjoined is a brief description:—
Caput ruguloso-punctatum; lineis in fronte
duabus glabris. Abdomen nigrum; annulis
pallidis. Femora pallida. Hemelytra hyalina
fuscentibus ; nervis crassis et distinctissimis. Pediopsis nassatus, Germ. Abundant. P. seutellatus, Boh. Common. P. flavicollis, Linn. Not common. P. virescens, Fab. Common. Agallia venosa, Fall. Abundant. A. puncticeps, Germ. Common. 1. Acocephalus rusticus, Fab. Abundant. 2. 1. Var. cardui, Curt. Abundant. Var. sparsus, Curt. Abundant. Var. unicola, Curt. Common. Var. fasciatus, Curt. Abundant. Var. bicinctus, Curt. Common. Var. rugosus, Curt. Abundant. Var. obscurus, Curt. Abundant. Var. pulverulentus, Curt. Abundant. Var. costatus, Fab. Common. A. albifrons, Linn. Of occasional occurrence
amongst the dyer’s woad.

. Stronglocephalus agrestis, Fall. Abundant. Var. nitidus, Curt. Abundant. Deltocephalus striatus, Linn. Abundant. 308 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S woorron. 2. Deltocephalus assimilis, Fall. Not common. 8. D. pascuellus, Fall. Abundant. 4. D. ocellaris, Fall. “Not common. 1. Athysanus prasinus, Fall. Abundant. 2. A. subfusculus, Fall. Common. 8. A. punctifrons, Fall. Not common. 4, A, attenuatus, Boh. Common. 5. A. mixtus, Fab. Abundant. 1. Tassus attenuatus, Germ. Common. 2. I. quadrinotatus, Fab. Abundant. I. argentatus, Fab. Not common.

. Cicadula septemnotata, Fall. Not common. 2. C. sexnotata, Fall. Not common,

C. variata, Fall. Common. oo

ee

. ©. Glanvillei, Dale. A single specimen only was

taken by myself in Sandhills Copse, October
2nd, 1876. Subjoined is a brief description :-—
Caput flavum, macula nigra ex utraqueé parte. Abdomen nigrum, ventre flavo. Femora flava,
lineolis nigris. Hemelytra fusca, notatis flavis. parte media. 1. Gnathodus punctatus, Thunb. Of occasional oc-
currence amongst fir trees throughout the
winter. Some specimens are of pink, and

others of a yellowish green colour. Eupterex albostriella, Fall. Common. 2. E. smaragdula, Fall. Abundant. 3. E. viridula, Fall. Abundant. 4, E. flavescens, Fab. Abundant. r

nee

10.
vs

12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.

 

eo rel

HOMOPTERA. 309

. Eupterex decempunctata, Fall. Common. E. quereus, Fab. Abundant. E

. ulmi, Linn. Abundant. One of my specimens
is quite white. E. nitidula, Fab. Common on wych-elm trees

Bee

oS bt bt bt bt bt ot

Fe
Ee
P.
es
re

Pp. during August. I possess specimens of this
very pretty little species with the spots united. geometrica, Sch. Common. rose, Linn. Abundant. blandula, Rossi. Abundant. Some of my
specimens have black tibiz. parvula, Boh. Common. scutellaris, Sch. Common. auriceps, Curt. Common. pulchella, Fall. Abundant. notata, Curt. Common. picta, Fab. Common. melisse, Curt. Abundant in the garden. urtica, Fab. Abundant. I possess specimens
with black tibic. Psyllide.

. Psylla alni, Linn, Abundant.

. Forsteri, Flor. Abundant.

. buxi, Linn. Abundant.

. pyri, Linn. -Not common.

. mali, Forst. Abundant.

. pruni, Scop. Abundant.

. salicicola, Forst. Abundant. 310 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 8. Psylla pineti, Flor. Abundant. 9. P. crategicola, Forst. Abundant. 10. P. fraxini, Linn. Abundant. 18. P. sylvicola, Lath. Common. 19. P. urtice, Linn. Abundant. 1. Trioza Walkeri, Forst. Common on the buck-
thorn bush which grows in Marvell's hedge
(but nowhere else in the neighbourhood), from
August to October. 1. Livia juncorum, Latr. Abundant. 11. P. costatopunctata, Forst. Not common. 12. P. senecionis, Scop. Not common. 18. P. nervosa, Flor. Not common. 14. P. aceris, Linn. Common. 15. P. betule, Linn. Common. 16. P. abieticola, Forst. Common. 17. P. hematodes, Forst. Abundant. P.
a

Thripide. 1. Phleothrips tristis, Hal. Very rare. Taken by
my father from under the bark of fir poles,
close to the Somersetshire Gate, on September
6th, 1841. 2. P. coriacea, Hal. This, the largest species of the
family, I have taken off oak trees in July. 8. P. ulmi, Fab. Under the bark of oak trees.

. P. aculeata, Fab. Not common. 1. Heliothrips adonidum, Hal. Off flowers in the
greenhouse. oR ey

HOMOPTERA. 311

. Sericothrips staphylinus, Hal. On the blossoms
of furze.

. Limothrips cerealium, Hal. Abundant in the
wheat fields.

. Aptinothrips rufa, Gmel. Abundant on various

flowers.
. Thrips juniperina, Linn. On the juniper bush in
Pelles. ulicis, Linn. Abundant on furze. obscura, Mull. Abundant on wheat. vulgatissima, Hal. Abundant.
. physapus, Linn. Common.
. urtice, Fab. Abundant.
. minutissima, Linn. Abundant.
. primule, Hal. Abundant.
. persiee, Hal. Common on peach trees.
. 'T. grossularie, Hal. On gooseberry bushes.
. Coleothrips fasciata, Linn. Abundant. ~

BREREHRHRHHR

Aphide.

. Lachnus pice, Fab. Rare. Taken by my father,
June 28rd, 1863, and June 24th, 1871, in
Wootton Wood; also by myself, June 19th,
1863, and July 16th, 1873, in the Quag.

. L. pini, Linn. Not common.

. L. pineti, Fab. Not common.

. L. pinicola, Hal. Not common.

. L. juniperi, Fab Of occasional occurrence on the
juniper bushes, in Pelles and Fernyknap, during
June. 312 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 6. Lachnus costatus, Zett. Common. 7. L. salicis, Linn. Common. 8. L. laricis, Hal. Not common. 9. L. abietis, Steph. Not common. 10. L. saligna, Sulz. Not common. 1. Callaphis juglandis, Frisch. This, the prettiest
of the blight insects, is occasionally common on
walnut trees during August. 1. Callipterus tilie, Linn. Common on the lime
trees in the garden. 2. C. coryli, Gtz. Common. 8. C. alni, Fab. Common. 1. Chaitophorus aceris, Linn. Abundant. 1. Phyllaphis betule, Linn. Abundant. 2. P. fagi, Linn. Common. 8. P. acerina, Walk. Abundant. 4. P. platanoides, Sch. Common. 1, Siphonophora rose, Linn. Abundant. S. sonchi, Linn. Abundant. 8. S. ulmarie, Sch. Common. S. rubi, Kalt. Common. S. urtice, Linn. Abundant. 6. S. fragarie, Kalt. Common. 7. S. tussilaginis, Walk. Not common. 1. Aphis brassice, Linn. Abundant. 2. A. rumicis, Linn. Abundant.
. A. capree, Fab. Common. 4. A. persice, Sulz. Abundant in the garden. 5. A. cerasi, Fab, Abundant in the garden. HOMOPTERA. 313

. Aphis ribis, Linn. Common.
. A. hedere, Kalt. Not common. A. tanacetina, Walk. Common in the island.

. A. sambuci, Linn. Not common. A. pomi, Lat. Common.

. A. mali, Fab. Common.
. A. xylostei, DeGeer. Abundant. Atheroides hirtellus, Hal. Rare. Taken by my
father from furze, December 6th, 1864; and
by myself from ivy, in Haywood, November
10th, 1870.

. Schizoneuralanigera, Illig. American Blight. Occa-

sionally common on apple trees, June and July. S. lanuginosa, Hart. Of occasional occurrence,
but not common, in September and October. S. corni, Fab. Not common. S. ulmi, Linn. Common.

. S. obscura, Walk. Not common. Pemphigus bursarius, Linn. Not common. P. ranunculi, Kalt. Not common. ‘rama troglodytes, Heyd. Not common. Aleyrodide. Aleyrodes proletella, Linn. Common amongst
brambles from September to March.

. A. immaculata, Steph. Common on hazel.

. A. lonicere, Walk. Not common.

. A. fragarie, Walk. Common.

. A. brassice, Forst. Abundant in the garden. 314 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. e

   

6. Aleyrodes phyllyree, Hal. Common in the garden. 7. A. carpini, Koch. Abundant in the greenhouse. Coccide. 1. Dorthesia urtice, Linn. The females are found in
moss throughout the winter; but the only
specimens of the male were taken by my father,
June 5th, 1837; and by myself, June 9th, 1866,
in Broadalders. D. cataphracta, Shaw. The females are found in
moss throughout the winter; but the only
specimen of the male was taken by my father,
June 4th, 1841. 8. D. cimiciformis, Leach. The females are found in
moss throughout the winter; but the only
specimen of the male was taken by my father
in Mallett’s Copse, June 14th, 1841. 1. Coceus quereus, Linn. A single male only was
bred by myself from an oak-apple, April 4th,
1866. It puts one in mind very much of a
May-fly,

. C. alni, Gmel. Not common. C. fagi, Walk. Common.

. C. adonidum, Linn. Mealy Bug. Abundant in the
greenhouse. 1. Lecanium hesperidum, Linn. Orange Scale Insect. Abundant in the greenhouse. 2. L. persice, Linn. Common on peach trees. 8. L. vitis, Schr. Vine Scale Insect. Not common. 7

©

Bw

ANOPLURA. 315

4. Lecanium aceris, Fab. On sycamore trees. 5. L. ulmi, Linn. Not common. Class VIL—AMETABOLA. The two best British works on this class are by
Mr. Denny on the order Anoplura, and Sir John
Lubbock on the order Thysaneura. I have worked
but very little at this class, as the following summary
will show; but yet have obtained species of which I
cannot make out the names. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. British. Glanville’s Wootton. Pediculide . . . . 4 3
Philopteride . . . 211 13
Lepismide . . . . 3 2
Poduride . . . . 45 24

Total number of species, as } Ph a

far as I can make out
Order I.—Avyortura. Pediculide. 1. Pediculus capitis, Nitz. Not common,
1. Hematopinus suis, Leach. Common. 2. H. piliferus, Burm. On dogs. 316 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Philopteride. 1. Docophorus ocellatus, Denny. On crows. 2. D. atratus, Denny. On rooks. 8. D. auratus, Denny. On woodcocks. 4. D. leontodon, Denny. On starlings. 5. D. merule, Denny. On blackbirds. 6. D. rubecule, Leach. On chaffinches and linnets. 1. Nirmus scolopacis, Denny. On snipes. 2. N. marginalis, Berm. On fieldfares. 1. Lipeurus baculus, Nitz. On pigeons. 1. Goniodes stylifer, Nitz. On turkeys. 1. Colpocephalum ochraceum, Nitz. On peewits. 1. Menopon pici, Denny. On green woodpeckers. 1. Trinoton luridum, Nitz. On ducks. Order Il.—'Tuysanura. Lepismide. 1. Forbicina polypoda, Linn. Abundant in the woods. Some specimens are of a pink colour. 1, Lepisma saccharina, Linn. House Springtail. Not
common. Poduride. Anoura muscorum, Temp. Abundant.
. Lipura corticina, Bourl. Abundant under bark.
. L. fimetaria, Linn. Abundant.
. Podura aquatica, Linn. On pools of water. Pees

THYSANURA. 317

. Achorutes purpurescens, Lubb. Common in the

garden. Isotoma viatica, Linn. Common in moss. I. aquatilis, Mull. Common. Degeeria cincta, Lubb. Rare. I have taken this
pretty little species amongst chips of wood in
the Common Plantation.

. Lepidocyrtus curvicollis, Bourl. Of occasional oc-

currence amongst dead leaves. 2. L. lignorum, Fab. Abundant.

. L. purpureus, Lubb. Common. 1. Beckia albinos, Nicol. Abundant amongst rotten

grass.

. Templetonia crystallina, Mull. Common.
. Tomocerus plumbeus, Linn. Abundant. TT. longicornis, Mull. Of occasional occurrence
amongst dead grass.

. Orchesella cincta, Linn. Abundant.
. O. villosa, Geoff. Common. - Papirius fuseus. Geoff. Abundant.
. P. ornatus, Nicol. Common.
. P. nigromaculatus, Lubb. Common. Smynthurus viridis, Linn. Abundant amongst
rotten grass.

. 8. fuscus, DeGeer. Abundant.
. S. luteus, Lubb. Common.
. S. niger, Lubb. Common. 318 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Class VII.—ARACHNIDA. Order I.—ARrayemEa. For the names of the hundred and five spiders I
have taken in Glanville’s Wootton, this year, I am
indebted to the kindness of the Rev. O. P. Cambridge
(the best authority on the subject), who has taken by
far the greater number of the four hundred and sixty
British spiders in Dorsetshire. The rarest species I
have taken in this parish are :—Clubiona corticalis,
Chiracanthium erraticum, Agroca brunnea, Dictyna
arundinacea, Episinus truncatus, Steatoda quadri-
punctata, Linyphia frenata, Ero thoracica, Zilla atrica,
Epeira Wastrugii, Xysticus trux, and Philodromus
elegans. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. British. Glanville's Wootton. Theraphosides. . 4 0
Dysderides. . . . 7 2
Drassides . . . . 50 12
Dictynides. . . 6 2
Agelenides. . . . 24 7
Seytodides. . . . 1 0
Pholeides . . . . 1 1
Theridiides. . . . 242 36
Epeirides . . . . 32 16

Qarried forward 367 76

ARANEIDEA. 319

British. Glanville’s Wootton. Brought forward 367 76
Uloborides. . . . 2 0
Thomisides. . . . 42 17
Lycosides . . . 30 9
Sphasides . . . . 1 0
Salticides . . . 31 3
‘Total number of species . 473 “105

Dysderides. DeErPeEHaaRone

. Dysdera Cambridgii, ‘Thor. Very rarely under

stones, on Whitedown.

. Segestria senoculata, Linn. Abundant in outhouses. Drassides.

. Clubiona pallidula, Clerk. Rare.

. corticalis, Walck. Common.
. comta, C. Koch. Common.

. lutescens, L. Koch. Rare.

. reclusa, Cambr. Rare.

. furca, L. Koch. Rare. aaaana

. Drassus lapidicolens, Walck. Rare.

. Chiracanthium erraticum, Black. Rare.

. Anyphena accentuata, Walck. Common.

. Agroeca proxima, Cambr. Rare.

. A. brunnea, Black. Very rare. Taken by myself,

November, 1877.

. Heeaerge maculata, Black. Rare. B20

HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOLTON. Dictynides. 1. Dictyna arundinacea, Linn. Rare. D. uncinata, Westr. Common. 2. WB

Agelenides. Amaurobius similis, Black. Abandant in cellars
and outhouses. A. ferox, Walck. houses. bushes. Abundant in cellars and out-

. Lethia humilis, Black. Common.
. Agelena labyrinthica, Clerck. Common in furze

. Tegenaria atrica, C. Koch. Very rare. A specimen

was taken by myself in the cellar last September.

. T. campestris, C.

Koch. Rare. In the cellar of

the Manor House. houses.

. LT. Derhamii, Scop. Common in cellars and out-

Pholeides.

. Pholcus phalangiodes, Fuessl. Common in houses. This curious long-legged spider does not seem
to shun the light so much as do many others. Theridiides. Episinus truncatus, Walck. Common in moss. Theridion sisyphium, Clerck. Common. T. denticulatum, Walck. Common. T. varians, Hahn. Common. ARANEIDEA. 321

. Theridion tinctum, Walck. Common.

. LT. pulchellum, Walck. Common.

. T. bimaculatum, Linn. Common.

. T. pallens, Black. Abundant.

. Phyllonethis lineata, Clerck. Abundant.
. Steatoda bipunctata, Linn. Common.

. S. quadripunctata, Black. Rare.

. Nereine graminicola, Sund. Rare.

. N. rufipes, Sund. Common.

. N. rubella, Black. Abundant.

. N. dentata, Reuss-Wid. Common.

. N. cornuta, Black. Common. Walckenzra unicornis, Cambr. Common.
. W. acuminata, Black. Common.

. Pachygnatha Clerkii, Sund. Common.

. P. Listeri, Sund. Rare. P. DeGeeri, Sund. Rare.

. Linyphia frenata, Black. Rare. leprosa, Chl. Common. tenebricola, Reuss-Wid. Common. variegata, Black. Common. nigrina, Westr. Abundant. dorsalis, Reuss»Wid. Abundant. circumspecta, Black. Rare. linguata, Cambr. Abundant. concolor, Reuss-Wid. Common. 10. L. clathrata, Sund. Rare. 11. L. montana, Clerck. Common. 12. L. triangularis, Clerck. Very abundant. Pe NYVEPYePeErRraane

vPee rey pers

POR Rr

B22 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 13. Linyphia peltata, Reuss-Wid. Common. 14. L. hortensis, Sund. Abundant. 1. Ero thoracica, Reuss-Wid. A single specimen
was beaten by myself from thatch in Waterly
Lane, September, 1877. i.

Epeirides. 1. Meta segmentata, Clerck. Abundant. 2. M. Meriane, Scop. Common. 1. Tetragnatha extensa, Linn. Abundant. 1. Cyrtophora conica, Pall. Common. 1. Singa pygmea, Sund. Common. 1. Zilla x-notata, Clerck. Common. 2. Z. atrica, C. Koch. Rare. 1. Epeira Wastrugii, Thor. Rare and new to Britain. 2, E. cucurbitina, Clerck. Abundant. 3. E. diademata, Clerck. Garden Spider. Abundant. 4. E. scalaris, Walck. Common. 5. E. arbustorum, C. Koch. Common. 6. E. agelena, Walck. Common. 7. E. cornuta, Clerck. Rare. 8. E. umbratica, Clerck. Rare. 9. E. solers, Walck. Common. Thomisides. 1. Misumena vatia, Clerck. Abundant. 1. Diwa dorsata, Fab. Common on fir trees. 1. Xysticus cristatus, Clerck. Abundant. Pere

ere

as

 

ARANEIDEA. B23

. Xysticus viaticus, C. Koch. Rare. X. pini, Hahn. Common. X. lanio, C. Koch. Common. X. luctuosus, Black. Rare. X. ulmi, Hahn. Common. X. praticola, C. Koch. Common. X. trux, Black. Very rare. XX. versutus, Black. Common. X. horticola, C. Koch. Abundant.

. Philodromus dispar, Walck. Common. P. margaritatus, Clerck. Common on lichen-
covered apple trees (which it resembles in
colour) all through the winter.

. aureolus, Clerck. Rare. P. elegans, Black. Very rare. Lycosides. - Ocyale mirabilis, Clerck. Abundant.
. Pirata latitans, Black. Rare.
. Trochosa ruricola, DeGeer. Common. T. terricola, Thor. This formidable-looking spider
is common under stones in the orchard.

. Lycosa amentata, Clerck. Abundant.

. L. annulata, Thor. Common.

. L. pullata, Clerck. Common.

. Lycosa monticola, Clerck. Rare.

. Tarentula pulverulenta, Clerck. Common on

Whitethorn. 324 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’s WOOTTON. Salticides. 1. Epiblemum scenicum. Abundant. 2. E. histrionicum. Abundant. 1. Heliophanus cupreus, Walck. Common. Order Il.—Puatanemea. In this and the following order I have also received
valuable assistance from the Rev. O. P. Cambridge. Homalenotus quadridentatus and Trogulus Cam-
bridgii are very rare. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. British. Glanville’s Wootton,

Phalangiide . . . 19 ll
Trogulide . . . . 1 1
Cheliferide. . . . 7
27 15
Phalangiide. 1. Leiobunum rotundum, Linn. Harvest Spider. Abundant in the autumn. 1. Phalangium urnigerum, Herm. Common in the
autumn. 2. P. parietinum, DeGeer. Abundant in the autumn. 3. P. cornutum, Linn. Abundant in the autumn. 1. Opilio agrostis, Meade. Common in the autumn. ACARIDEA. 325

1. Megabrunus cornuger, Herm. Commoninthe spring. 2. M. insignis, Meade. Rare. 1, Nemastoma bimaculata, Fab. Common under
stones, wood, and rubbish. 2. N. chrysomelas, Herm. Rare. 1. Homalenotus quadridentatus, Fab. A single speci-
men only was taken by myself from moss, in
Sandhill’s Copse, March, 1877. Trogulide. 1. Trogulus Cambridgii, Westw. A single specimen
only was taken by myself from moss, in Sand-

hill’s Copse, March, 1877. Order IIT.—Cnetirerivea. Cheliferide. 1. Chthonius Rayi, C. Koch. Common in moss and
rubbish. 1. Obisium muscorum, Leach. Common. This little
scorpion is fond of catching hold of the legs of
flies, and of thus being conveyed from one
place to another. 1, Cheridion museorum, Leach. Very rare. Order IV.—AcarwwEa. About this order I know very little, except that it is
a numerous one for species; and would know less

B26 HISTORY Ol GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. still if it was not for Mr. Andrew Murray’s valuable
book on the Aptera. I have met with several species
of which I am unable to make out their names. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. British, Glanville's Wootton. Trombidiide . . . 19 15
Bdellide . .. . 3 sgh
Hydrachnide . 4 2
Gamaside Pane 9 6
Ixodide. . .. . 4 2
Halacaride . 5 0
Oribatide: oar 2 1
Acaride. . . . . 13 5
Sarcoptide. . . . 15 2
Phytoptide. . . . 20 3

Total number of species, as
far as I can make out

In the introduction to the Homoptera I have made
mention of a curious parasite, which may perhaps
belong to this order. Trombidiide. 1. Tetranychus telarius, Linn. Occasionally common. 2. T. cucumaris, Boisd. Of occasional occurrence on
the leaves of cucumber plants. 3. T. vitis, Boisd. Of occasional occurrence on leaves
of grape vines,

=

eee

ACARIDEA. B27

Tetranychus autumnalis, Shaw. Harvest Bug. Abundant in the autumn. Petrobia lapidum, Koch. Occasionally common.

. Tydeus mutabilis, Koch. Common in moss. Calyptosoma Hardyi, Cambr. Rare. Taken by
myself from moss and rotten wood, &c. It has
only been met with elsewhere by Mr. Hardy on
the Cheviot Hills. Trombidium holosericeum, Fab. Abundant. T. phalangii, Duges. On harvest spiders. T. parasiticum, Latr. On flies. T. libellule, Duges. On dragonflies. -

T. trigonum, Herm. Common. 6. T. curtipes, Herm. Common. ao

1,
1. T. rubrum, Leach. On Daddy-longlegs. Eupodes celer, Herm. In moss. Bdellide.

. Scirus insectorum, Herm. Common. Hydrachnide. Limnochares aquaticus, Linn. Common. Atax miniata, Koch. Common. It is an interesting
sight to see this pretty little tick swimming
about in a bottle of water. Gamasine. Gamasus coleoptratorum, Linn. On beetles. 328 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Uropoda vegetans, Linn, On humble-bees and
beetles. Dermanyssus avium, Duges. On poultry. D. pipistrelle, Gerv. On little bats. Pteroptus vespertilionis, Herm. On the large bat.

. P, pipistrelle, Audoin. On little bats. rrr

»

Ixodide. 1. Ixodes erinaceus, Audoin. Common.
. I. marginatus, Leach. Common. ©

Oribatide.

. Oribata globula, Nicol. Common in moss. Acaride. 1, Hypopus muscarum, Linn. On flies. 2. H. arvicole, Duges. On field-mice.

. Tyroglyphus entomophagus, Laboulb. In dusty
boxes of insects, but not often. 2. T. siro, Linn. Cheese Mite. Common. 3. ‘T. rostroserratus, Meguin. Abundant in decaying

mushrooms. Sarcoptide. 1. Sarcoptes cati, Hering. On cats and ferrets. 1. Dermaleichus plumbeus, Leach. On house-martins. MYRIOPODA. 329

Phytoptide. 1, Phytoptus ribis, Westw. On currant bushes, where
it destroys the immature buds. 2. P. fraxini. On ash. 3. P. betulinum, Schum. Makes curious bird’s-nest-
like clusters on birch trees. Class VIII—MYRIOPODA. As far as I am aware of the only British authors
who have written on this class are Dr. Leach, in his
‘Zoological Miscellany, and the eleventh volume of
the Linnean Transactions; and Mr. Newport, in the
nineteenth volume of the last-mentioned work. In
Glanville’s, Wootton I have found ten of the twelve
British species of the order Chilopoda; and nine of
the fourteen British species of the order Chilognatha. In the next class, Crustacea, this parish is of course
very deficient, as out and out the greatest number of
species are marine. Chilopoda. 1. Pauropus Huxleyi, Lubb. Of occasional occurrence
amongst dead leaves in the autumn. 1. Lithobius variegatus, Leach. Large-headed Centi-
pede. Common under rotten wood. 2. L. Leachii, Newp. Common under stones. 330 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 8. Lithobius fornicatus, Linn. Abundant in rotten
wood. 4. L. pilicornis, Newp. Common under rotten wood. 1. Geophilus longicornis, Leach. Of occasional oc-
currence under rotten wood. I have a specimen
of this curious creature (without eyes) two inches
and a half in length. 2. G. subterraneus, Shaw. Common under rotten
wood. 3. G. acuminatus, Leach. Of occasional occurrence
in moss. 4. G. breviceps, Newp. Not common. 1. Crytops hortensis, Leach. Common under rotten
wood. Chilognatha. 1. Polydesmus complanatus, Linn. Abundant. The
young are very different looking creatures. 1, Julus terrestris, Linn. Large Wireworm. Common. 2. J. Londinensis, Leach. Common. 3. J. pulchellus, Leach. Abundant. This wireworm
is very destructive to strawberry plants.

. J. punctatus, Leach. Abundant under loose bark.

. J. sabulosus, Linn. Abundant in moss.

. J. pilosus, Curt. Abundant, and very destructive
to roots.

. J. pusillus, Leach. Common under bark. 1. Glomeris marginata, Vill. Common under stones. ae

o

~

ere

MOLLUSCA. 331

Class IX—CRUSTACEA. Isopoda.

. Armadillo vulgaris, Linn. Abundant. |
. Oniscus asellus, Linn. Common Woodlouse, or

Old Sow. Abundant. It is the most destructive
in the garden we have, and is found every-
where. - Porcellio scaber. Latr. Abundant.

. P. levis, Latr. Abundant.

. Philoscia muscorum, Scop. Not common.

. Platyarthris Hoffmansegii, Br. Common under

stones in company with an ant, Myrmica
ruginodis. Entomostracea.

. Branchipus stagnalis, Edw. Freshwater Shrimp. Abundant in all the streams.

. Daphinia pulex, Linn. Water Flea. Abundant.
. Apus cancriformis, Sch. Abundant.
. Cyclops vulgaris, Leach. Abundant. Class X.—MOLLUSCA. Of the one hundred and sixteen British land and

freshwater Mollusca, seventy-two are terrestrial; and
twenty-nine belong to Gasteropoda, and fifteen to

332 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Lamellibranchiata. In Glanville’s Wootton thirty-
nine species have been taken, as follows :—Lamelli-
branchiata, five; Gasteropoda, fourteen ; and ter-
restrial, twenty. About the next two classes, Vermes and Protozoa,
I know almost absolutely nothing, and therefore am
able to make but a very poor list of them indeed. In
Linnean Transactions of 1864 Dr. Bastian describes a
hundred new species of worms. Lamellibranchiata. 1, Spherium conneus. Common in water.

. S. lacustris. Common.

. Pisidium fontanale. Abundant in water. P. nitidum. Common.

. Unio tumidus. Large Mussel Shell. Common in
Roundchimneys Pond. Some of the specimens
are of an immense size. rPePw

Gasteropoda. 1, Bythinia tentaculata, Common in Roundchimneys
Pond.
. Valvata piscinalis. Common in water. - Planorbis nitidus. Common in water.
. P. spinorbis. Pond Snail. Common.
. P.lineatus. Rare.
. P.albus. Rare. P. vortex. Rare. 6. P. complanatus. Common. Popeye

PPPYeN

we

>

PeYpee

Nee EeEyne

MOLLUSCA. 333

. Planorbis contortus. Rare.

. Physa hypnorum. Rare.

. P. fontinalis. Common.

. Limnea peregra. Common.

. L. palustris. Common in Roundchimneys Pond.

. Ancylus lacustris. Rare. On the leaves of the

water-lilies in Roundchimneys Pond. Terrestrial.

. Succinia putris. Common.
. Zonites cellarius. Common.
. Z. alliarius. Garlic Shell. Abundant in moss and

amongst rubbish.

. Z. nitidulus. Common.
. Helix aspersa. Common Snail. Abundant. H. nemoralis. Abundant. H. rufescens. Abundant. H. hispida. Abundant. H. virgata. Abundant in the Cowleaze, &e.
H. rotundata. Common. H. lapicida. Very rare. A couple of specimens
have been taken by my mother in the garden. H. pulchella. Rare.’ Found by my mother in

Wootton Wood.

. Bulinus obscurus. Common on Whitedown.

. Pupa ringens. In the woods, but not common.
. P. umbilicata. Rare.

. Vertigo antivertigo. Common.

. Cyclostoma elegans. Rare. On Whitedown. 334 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON.

. Arion ater. Large Black Slug. Abundant.
. Limax flaveus. Yellow Slug. Abundant.
. L. marginatus. Abundant.

. L. agrestis. Abundant. syee

Class XI.—VERMES. Hirudinea.

. Hirudo vulgaris. Horse Leach. Common in ponds
. H. bioculata. Abundant in ponds. Oligachata.
. Lumbricus terrestris. Earth Worm. Abundant.
. Nais proboscidea. Abundant in the mud of ponds
and streams. Nematoda.

. Anguillula glubinus. Abundant in stale paste.

. A. fluviatilis. Abundant in bad vinegar.

. A. brassicae. Abundant amongst decayed cabbages.

. Gordius aquaticus. Common in water.

. Spherularia bombi. Common inside of humble-
bees.

. Fasciola hepatica. Occasionally found inside of
sheep. ‘

rPrewe

    
    

Class XII —PROTOZOA. Tnfusoria. 1, Ameba diffluens. Abundant in water. 1. Volvox globater. Abundant in water. PART Il. BOTANY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Class 1—PHANEROGAMEA. As there is a very good work upon the Flora of
Dorsetshire there is no occasion here to enumerate all
the various plants found in the surrounding parishes,
so I will only mention the following :—

1, Viola palustris. Marsh Violet. Used to grow
abundantly in Cosmore Quag, before it was
drained, in company with the next six species.

. Drosera rotundifolia. Round-leaved Sundew.

. Menyanthes trifoliata. Bogbean.

. Anagallis tenella. Bog Pimpernel.

. Epipactis latifolia. Broad-leaved Helleborine.

. E. palustris. Marsh Helleborine.

. Pedicularis palustris. Upright Lousewort’

. Campanula glomerata. Clustered Bell Flower. Mintern. ;

9. Polygonum bistorta. Greater Bistort. Mintern. 10. Neottia nidus-avis. Bird’s-nest Orchis. Mintern. z

oR ww

oro

338 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 11. Geranium rotundifolium. Round-leaved Crane’s-
bill. Mintern and Buckland Newton. 12. Erica tetralix. Cross-leaved Heath. Holnest. 13. E. cinerea. Fine-leaved Heath. Holnest. 14. Cotyledon umbilicus. Common Navelwort. Hol-
well. 15. Ranunculus parviflorus. Small-flowered Crowfoot. Holwell. Glanville’s Wootton is particularly well off in
Orchids, possessing fifteen of the thirty-three British
and twenty-two Dorset species. The following plants in this parish cannot be con-
sidered truly indigenous. Dicoryiepones. Thalamiflore. Nympheacee. 1, Nymphea alba. White Water-lily. Common in
Roundchimneys Pond, where it was introduced
by my father many years ago, along with a few
other plants. 1. Nuphar lutea. Yellow Water-lily
Roundchimneys Pond. Abundant in

 

Papaveracee. 1. Chelidonium majus. Celandine. Rare. Grows in

Park Lane,

DICOTYLEDONES. 339

Aceracee.

. Acer pseudo-platanus. Sycamore: Common. Corolliflore. Vinca major. Greater Periwinkle. Grows in Park
Lane. Primulacee.

. Lysimachia vulgaris. Common Loosestrife. Grows

in Roundchimneys Pond. Monochlamydee. Urticacee.

. Ulmus montana. Wych Elm. Common. Amentifere.

. Carpinus betulus. Hornbeam. Not common. 1. Betula alba. White Birch. Common, but intro-

duced by my father.

. Populus canescens. Hoary Poplar. Common. P. nigra. Black Poplar. Not common.

. Myrica Gale. Sweet Gale. Grows in Round-

chimneys Pond.

. Quercus cereis, Turkey Oak. Introduced by my

father. Gymnogene.

. Pinus sylvestris. Scotch Fir. Common. Some of

the trees on'Dungeon are very ancient, and of
an immense size. :

340 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’s WOOTTON. 1. Abies excelsa. Common Spruce. Introduced by
my father. 1. Larix europeus. Larch. Introduced by my father. 1. Taxus baccata. Yew. Common. In this parish
it propagates itself. MonocryLepongs. Floride. Amaryllidacee. 1, Narcissus biflorus. Two-flowered Narcissus. Rare. Grows in Pelles. * Liliacee. 1. Polygonatum multiflorum. Common Solomon's
Seal. Common in Pelles and Fernyknap, but
introduced by my father. In the seventh edition of the London Catalogue
1601 species of the Phanerogamee are given as
inhabitants of the British Isles: being 1203 Dicoty-
ledones, and 898 Monocotyledones. In his ‘ Flora of Dorsetshire,’ J. C. Mansel-Pleydell,
Esq., has included 1008 species: being 767 Dicoty-
ledones, and 236 Monocotyledones. In Glanville’s Wootton 414 species have been found
by my father, mother, myself, G. B. Wollaston, Esq.,
the late Justice Norman, and other friends (several of
which are figured in Curtis's ‘ British Entomology’):
being 318 Dicotyledones, and 96 Monocotyledones, as

DICOTYLEDONES, 341

the following summary will show. The Dictyogene is
represented by Tamus communis. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. Glanville’s British

Wootton. Dorsetshire. Isles. Thalamiflore . . . 62 176 293
Caleyciflore . . . . 97 212 323
Corolliflore . . . . 119 282 451
Monochlamydew . . 40 92 132
Gymnogene . . . . 0 8 5
Dictyogene . . . . 1 2 2
Floride ..... 36 98 175
Glumacee . . . . 59 145 220

Total number of species 414 1010 1601

The rarest plants found in this parish arc Malva
moschata, Hypericum Androsemum, Vicia sylvatica,
Asperula odorata, Rhamnus frangulus, Chrysosplenium
oppositifolium, C. alternifolium, Adoxa Moschatellina,
Inula Helenium, Vinca minor, Chlora perfoliata,
Lathrea squamaria, Daphne laureola, Spiranthes
autumnalis, Neottia nidus-avis, and Habenaria viridis. Order I—Dicotytepones. Thalamijlore. Ranunculacee. 1. Clematis vitalba. Traveller's Joy, or Old Man’s
Beard. Common on Whitedown. 342 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Thalictrum flavum. Meadow Rue. Common. 1. Anemone nemorosa. Wood Anemone. Abundant. 1. Ranunculus floribundus. Common Water Crow-
foot. Common. 2. R. cireinatus. Rigid-leaved Water Crowfoot. Not

common. 8. R. hederaceus. Ivy-leaved Water Crowfoot. Common. 4. R. sceleratus. Round-leaved Water Crowfoot. Common. 5. R. flammula. -Lesser Spearwort. Common. 6. R. auricomus. Wood Crowfoot. Common. 7. R. acris. Upright Meadow Crowfoot. Common. 8. R. repens. Creeping Crowfoot. Common. 9. R bulbosus. Common Buttercup. Abundant. 10. R. hirsutus. Hairy Crowfoot. Grows in the
ditch between Whitedown and Honey Mead. 11. R. arvensis. Corn Crowfoot. Common on White-
down. 12. RB. ficaria. Lesser Celandine. Abundant. 1. Caltha palustris. Marsh Marigold, or Water
Buttercup. Common. Papaveracee. 1. Papaver hybridum. Round-headed Poppy. Com-
mon on Whitedown. 2. P. rheas. Common Poppy. Common. e

Pee

~

DICOTYLEDONES. 343

Fumariacee. - Fumaria officinalis. Common Fumitory. Common

on Whitedown. Cruciferae.

. Capsella bursa-pastoris. Shepherd's Purse. Common.
. Cardamine pratense. Common Cuckoo Flower. Abundant,

. C. hirsuta. Hairy Cuckoo Flower, or Milk Maid. Common.

. Barbarea vulgaris. Yellow Rocket. Common.

. Nasturtium officinale. Watercress. Abundant.

. Sisymbrium officinale. Hedge Mustard. Common.
. Erysimum alliaria. Garlick Hedge Mustard. Common.

. Sinapis arvensis. Wild Charlock, or Mustard. Abundant.

. S.alba. White Mustard. Abundant.
. Reseda lutea. Wild Mignonette. Rare.
. Draba verna. Common Whitlow Grass. Common. Cistacee.

. Helianthemum vulgare. Common Rock Rose, or

Cistus. Rare. It only grows in Whitedown
chalk-pit, so far as this parish is concerned. Violacee.

. Viola odorata. Sweet Violet. The white variety

is common, but the blue one is rare. 844 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Viola sylvatica. Wood Violet. Common. 3. V. canina. Dog Violet. Abundant. 4. V. tricolor. Pansy, or Heartsease. Common on
Whitedown. Polygalacee. 1. Polygalia vulgaris. Common Milkwort. Common. Caryophyllacee. 1. Silene inflata. Common Bladder Campion. Com-
mon on Whitedown. 2. S. anglica. English Catchfly. Rare. On the
sloping stone tiles at the back of the Manor
House. 1. Lychnis floscuculi. Ragged Robin. Abundant. 2. L.diurna. Red Campion, or Robin Hood. Abun-
dant. 8. L. vespertina. White Campion. Common. 4, L. Githago. Corn Cockle. Common on Whitedown. 1, Sagina procumbens. Procumbent Pearlwort. Common. 1. Spergula arvensis. Corn Spurrey. Common. 1. Arenaria serpyllifolia. Thyme-leaved Sandwort. Not common.

. Stellaria media. Common Stitchwort. Abundant.

. S. holostea. Greater Stitchwort. Abundant.

. S. graminea. Lesser Stitchwort. Abundant.

. Cerastium triviale. Narrow-leaved Mouse-ear

Chickweed. Abundant. Pope

©

DICOTYLEDONES. 345

. Cerastium semidecandrum. Little Mouse-ear
Chickweed. Abundant. Malvaceae.

. Malva moschata. Marsh Mallow. Rare. Grows

in Park Lane.

. M. sylvestris. Common Mallow. Rare. 8. M. rotundifolia, Dwarf Mallow. Abundant on

Whitedown. Hypericacee.

. Hypericum Androsemum. ‘Tutsan. Rare.

. H. perforatum. Perforated St. John’s Wort. Common.

. H. quadrangulum. Square-stalked St. John’s Wort. Common.

. H. pulchrum. Small Upright St. John’s Wort. Abundant.

. H. hirsutum. Hairy St. John’s Wort. Rare. Found’ by G. B. Wollaston, Esq. Aceracee.

. Acer campestris. Common Maple. Abundant. Some of the trees in this parish are of a large

size. Geraniacee.

. Geranium Robertianum. Herb Robert. Abundant.
. G. lucidum. Shining Crane’s Bill. Very rare. 346 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Oxalidacee. 1. Oxalis acetosella. Common Wood Sorrel. Grows
in Nursery Lane and Sandhill’s Copse. Caleiflore. Celastracee. 1. Euonymus Europieus. Spindle Tree. Not common. Rhamnacee. 1. Rhamnus catharticus. Common Buckthorn. Very
rare. It only grows in the hedge between
Marvells and Little Marvells. 2. R. frangulus. Alder Buckthorn. Rare. Grows
in Haywood. Leguminose. 1. Ulex Europeus. Autumn Furze. Common. 2. U. Gallicus. Spring Furze. Common. 1. Genista tinctoria. Dyer’s Woad. Abundant in
Hartleaze and the adjacent fields. 2. G. Anglica. Needle Furze. Rare. Grows on New-
land Common. 1. Ononis arvensis. Procumbent Rest Harrow. Rare. Grows in Whitedown chalk-pit. 2. O. spinosa. Upright Rest Harrow. Rare. Grows
on Newland Common. 1. Anthyllis vulneraria. Common Kidney Vetch. Common. .

1. Medicago lupulina. Black Medich. Common. DICOTYLEDONES. 347

. Trifolium repens. White Clover. Common. T. pratense. Purple Clover. Abundant. .'T. fragiferum. Strawberry-headed ‘Trefoil. Abun-

dant.

. T. procumbens. Hop Trefoil. Abundant. .minus. Lesser Yellow Trefoil. Common.

. Lotus corniculatus. Common Bird’s-foot Trefoil. Common.

. Hippocrepis comosa. Horse-shoe Vetch. Common.
. Vicia sylvatica. Wood Vetch. Rare. Grows on

Dungeon. V.cracca. Tufted Vetch. Common. V. sativa. Cultivated Vetch. Common. V. angustifolia. Common Wild Vetch. Abundant. V. sepium. Bush Vetch. Common. V. hirsuta. Hairy Tare. Common. V. tetrasperma. Four-seeded Slender Tare. Common.

. Lathyrus pratensis. Meadow Vetching. Common. Rosacee.

. Prunus spinosus. Common Sloe. Abundant.
. P. institia. Bullace, or Snag. Abundant.
. P. domesticus. Wild Plum. Common. P. avium. Wild Cherry. Not common. A very
large tree grows in Pond Close.

. Spirea ulmaria. Meadow Sweet. Abundant.
. Geum urbanum. Common Avens. Common.
. Potentilla anserina. Silver-weed. Abundant. 348 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Potentilla reptans. Common Creeping Cinquefoil. Common. 8. P. tormentilla. Common Tormentil. Abundant. 4. P. fragarias. Strawberry -leaved  Cinquefoil. Abundant. 1. Fragaria vesca. Wood Strawberry. Common in
some of the woods.

. Rubus Ideus. Wild Raspberry. Not common.

. R. discolor. Common Blackberry. Abundant.

. R. rhamnifolius. Buckthorn Bramble. Common.

. R. leucostachys. Long-clustered Bramble. Abun-

dant. R. carpinifolius. | Hornbeam-leaved Bramble. Common.

. rosaceus. Rose-flowered Bramble. Common. .rudis. Coarse Bramble. Abundant. radulus. File-leaved Bramble. Common. Koehleri. Koehler's Bramble. Abundant. glandulosus. Glandular-stemmed Bramble. Not common. 11. R. corylifolius. Hazel-leaved Bramble. Abundant. 12. R. cesius. Dewberry. Abundant. 1. Rosa micrantha. Small-flowered Sweetbriar. Common. 2. R. tomentosa. Downy-leaved Rose. Abundant. 3. R. canina. Common Dog Rose. Abundant, and
very variable.

. R. systyla. Columnal-styled Dog Rose. Common. 5. R. arvensis. White-flowered Trailing Rose. Common. ys FePe

PPR

»

DICOTYLEDONES. 349

. Agrimonia eupatoria. Common Agrimony. Abun-

dant. - Poterium sanguisorba. Salad Burnet. Common
on Whitedown.

. Alchemilla arvensis. Field Lady's Mantle. Common

on Whitedown.

. Crategus oxyacanthus. Hawthorn, Whitethorn, or
May. Abundant.

. Pyrus malus. Crab Apple. Common. Onagracee. 1. Epilobium hirsutum. Hairy Willow-herb. Abun-
dant. 2. E. parvifloram. Small- flowered Willow - herb. Common. 8. E. palustre. Narrow-leaved Willow-herb. Abun-
dant. 4. E. tetragonum. Square-stalked Willow - herb. Common. 1. Cireea _lutetiana. Enchanter’s Nightshade. Common. Haloragiacee.
. Callitriche verna. Vernal Wate¥ Starwort. Abun-
dant in pools and ditches.
. C. platycarpa. Large-fruited Water Starwort. Common.
. C. hamulata. Hooked Water Starwort. Common. 350 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON

Lythracee. 1. Lythrum salicaria. Purple Loosestrife. Abundant. Cucurbitacee. e

. Bryonia dioica, Red-berried Bryony. Common. Seleranthacea. =

Scleranthus annuus. Common Knawel. Common. Grossulariacee.
. Ribes rubrum. Red Currant. Common in Wootton
Wood and Pelles. 2. R. grossularia. Wild Gooseberry. Abundant in
Wootton Wood and Pelles. _

Crassulacee. Sedum acre. Golden Stonecrop. Not common. S. reflexum. Crooked Yellow Stonecrop. On old
walls, but not common. 1. Sempervivum tectorum. House Leek. Rare. Grows on an old wall at Loder's Hill, and also

near Jacob Warr’s house. cS

Sazifragacee. 1. Saxifraga tridactylites. Rue -leaved Saxifraga. Rare. Grows on Roundchimneys, and formerly
on the back part of the Manor House. L

DICOTYLEDONES. 351

. Chrysoplenium oppositifolium. — Opposite-leaved

Golden Saxifrage. Abundant on Dungeon, and
in all the springs round Whitedown.

. C. alternifolium. Alternate-leaved Golden Saxi-

frage. Rare. Grows in Broadalders. Araliacee.

. Adoxa Moschatellina. Tuberous Moschatel. Com-

mon in Pelles, Fernyknap, and Birch Copse.

. Hedera helix. Common Ivy. Abundant. Cornacee.

. Cornus sanguineus. Common Dogwood. Abundant. Umbellifere.

. Sanicula Europea. Wood Sanicul. Common in

some of the woods. Sanicul Lane derives its
name from it.

. Conium maculatum. Hemlock. Common. Helosciadium nodiflorum. Procumbent Water
Parsnep. Common.

. Bunium flexuosum. Earthnut, Common.
. Pimpinella saxifraga. Common Burnet Saxifrage. Common.

. Sium angustifolium. Water Parsnep. Common. CEnanthe crocata. Hemlock Water Dropwort. Common.

. Althusa cynapium. Fool’s Parsley. Common.
. Angelica sylvestris. Wild Angelica. Common. 352 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Pastinaca sativa. Wild Parsnep. Abundant.

. Heracleum sphondylium. Cow Parsnep. Abundant.

. Daucus carota. Wild Carrot. Common.

. Torilis anthriscus. Upright Hedge’ Parsley. Common. 1. Scandix pecten-veneris. Venus’s Comb. Common
on Whitedown. 1. Anthriseus sylvestris. Wild Chervil. Common. 1. Cherophyllum temulum. Rough Chervil. Common. freee

Corolliflore. Caprifoliacee. 1. Sambucus nigra. Common Elder. Abundant. 1, Viburnum opulus. Guelder Rose. Common. * 2. V.lantana. Mealy Guelder Rose, or Wayfaring
Tree. Common. 1. Lonicera periclymenum. Honeysuckle. Abundant. Rubiacee. 1. Galium verum. Yellow Bedstraw. Common on
Whitedown. 2. G. palustre. Marsh Bedstraw. Common. 3. G. mollugo. Great Bedstraw. Common. 4. G. aparine. Goosegrass, or Cleavers. Abundant. 1. Sherardia arvensis. Blue Field Madder. Common
on Whitedown. 1. Asperula odorata. Sweet Woodruff. Common in
Sandhills Copse and the Green Wall. rome ew»

DICOTYLEDONES. 353

Valerianacee.

. Valeriana dioica. Small Marsh Valerian. Rare. Grows in the Quag.

. V. officinalis. Great Wild Valerian. Common in

Wootton Wood and Broad Alders. Dipsacee.

. Dipsacus sylvestris. Wild Teazel. Abundant.
. Scabiosa succisa. Devil’s-bit Scabious. Common

on Whitedown. - S. columbaria. Small Scabious. Common on

Whitedown.

. Knautia arvensis. Field Scabious. Abundant. Composite.

. Tragopogon pratensis. Yellow Goat’s-beard. Not

common.

. Helminthia echioides. Bristly Ox-tongue. Not

common.

. Leontodon hispidus. Rough Hawk’s-bit. Abun-

dant.

. L. hirtus. Hairy Hawk’s-bit. Common.
. L. autumnalis, Autumnal Uawk's-bit. Common. Hypocheris radicata. Long Cat’s-ear. Not common.

. Sonchus arvensis. Corn Sow Thistle. Abundant.
. S.asper. Rough Sow Thistle. Common.

. S. oleraceus. Smooth Sow Thistle. Common.

. Crepis virens. Smooth Hawk’s-beard. Common. Qa

354 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 1. Hieracium pilosella. Mouse-ear Hawk - weed. Abundant. 1. Taraxacum officinale. Dandelion. Abundant. 1. Lapsana communis. Nipple-wort. Common. 1. Arctium majus. Greater Burdock. Abundant. 1, Carduus nutans. Musk Thistle. Common. 2. C.crispus. Welted Thistle. Common. 3. C. marianus. Milk Thistle. Common. 4. C. lanceolatus. Spear Thistle. Cornmon. 5. C. palustris. . Marsh Thistle. Abundant. 6 C.acaulis. Dwarf Thistle. Abundant. 7. C. arvensis. Creeping Plume Thistle. Abundant. 1. Centaurea nigra. Black Knapweed. Common. 2. ©. scabiosa. Greater Knapweed. Common. 1. Bidens cernua. Nodding Bur-Marigold. Common. 1. Eupatorium cannabinum. Hemp Agrimony. Com-
mon. A white variety grows in Wootton Wood. 1. Gnaphalium uliginosum. Marsh Cudweed. Common. 1. Filago Germanica. Common Cudweed. Common. Tussilago farfara. Common Coltsfoot. Common

on Whitedown.

. Senecio vulgaris. Common Groundsel. Abundant.

. 8. Jacobwa. Common Ragwort. Abundant.

. S. aquaticus. Marsh Ragwort. Common. - Inula Helenium. Elecampane. Rare. Grows in
the hedge between Whitedown and Honney
Mead. 2. L. dysenterica. Greater Fleabane. Abundant. 1, Bellis perennis. Common Daisy. Abundant. A

err -

e

go

aR

DICOTYLEDONES. 355

"few years ago my brother found a double one
in Hartleaze.

. Chrysanthemum leucanthemum. Great Ox-eye, or

Horse Daisy. Abundant.

. C. parthenium. Feverfew. Abundant.

. C.tanacetum. Tansy. Not common.

. C.inodorum. Scentless Mayweed. Not common.
. C.chamomilla. Wild Chamomile. Not common. Anthemis nobilis. Common Chamomile. Not
common.

. Achillea ptarmica. Sneezewort Yarrow. Grows

in the Quag and on Newland Common.

. A. millefolium. Common Yarrow. Not common. Campanulacee.

. Campanula rotundifolia. Hare-bell. Rare. Grows

in Park Lane.

. C. trachelium. Nettle-leaved Bell-flower. Rare. Grows in Marvells. Ericacee. Calluna vulgaris. Common Ling. Formerly abun-

dant on Newland Common. Ilicacee.

. Tex aquifolium. Holly, or Holme. Abundant. 856 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Jasminacee. 1. Ligustrum vulgare. Common Privet. Abundant. A variegated variety grows in Fernyknap. 1. Fraxinus excelsior. Common Ash. Common. “Apocynacee. 1. Vinca minor. Smaller Periwinkle. Rare. Grows
in Buttons. Gentianacee.

. Erythrea centaurium. Common Centaury. Abun-
dant. A white variety grows in Buttons. 1. Chlora perfoliata. Yellow Centaury. Rare. Grows
on Whitedown. Convolvulacee. 1. Convolvulus arvensis. Field Bindweed. Common

on Whitedown. 2. C. sepium. Great Bindweed. Abundant. Solanaceae. Solanum nigrum. Black Nightshade. Common. 2. S. dulcamara. Woody Nightshade. Abundant. Scrophulariacee. 1. Verbascum thapsus. Great Mullein. Very rare. Grows in Park Lane. 1. Veronica Buxbaumii. Buxbaum’s Speedwell. Not
common. oe»

reese
aad

DICOTYLEDONES. B57

. Veronica arvensis. Wall Speedwell. Not common.
. V. serpyllifolia. Perennial Smooth Speedwell. Common. - beccabunga. Brooklime. Abundant.
. chamedrys. Germander Speedwell. Abundant. - hederifolia. Ivy-leaved Speedwell. Abundant.
. agrestis. Great Procumbent Speedwell. Abun-
dant,
V. polita. Gray Procumbent Speedwell. Common.

. Bartsia odontites. Red Bartsia. Not common.
. Euphrasia officinalis. Common Eyebright. Abun-

dant.

. Rhinanthus Crista-Galli. Yellow Rattle. Abun-

dant.

. Melampyrum pratense. Cow Wheat. Common.
. Pedicularis palustris. Upright Lousewort. Rare. Grows in the Quag.

. P. sylvatica. Procumbent Lousewort. Abundant.
. Scrophularia aquatica. Common Water Betony, or

Figwort. Abundant.

. Digitalis purpurea. Foxglove. Not common. Grows in Fernyknap and Dursells.

. Linaria cymbalaria, Ivy-leaved Snapdragon. Com-

mon on a wall near the church.

. L. spuria. Round-leaved Fluellin. Common on

Whitedown. Orobanchacee

. Lathrea squamaria. Toothwort Very rare. 358 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S Woorron. Grows in a hedge, on Whitedown, from the
roots of a sycamore tree. Last year it came up
twice : in February and in April; but in certain
years none can be seen. Lamiacee. 1. Mentha hirsuta. Hairy Water Mint. Abundant. 2. M. arvensis. Corn Mint. Abundant. 1, Thymus serpyllum. Creeping Wild Thyme. Not
common. 1. Calamintha clinopodium. Wild Basil. Not common. 1. Teucrium scorodonia. Wood Sage. Common. Ajuga reptans. Common Bugle. Abundant. Ballota nigra. Black Horehound. Not common. 1. Lamium galeobdolon. Yellow Archangel. Abun-
dant. 2. L. album. White Dead Nettle. Abundant. 3. L. purpureum. Red Dead Nettle. Abundant. 1. Galeopsis tetrahit. Hemp Nettle. Abundant. 1. Stachys betonica. Wood Betony. Abundant. 2. S. palustris. Marsh Woundwort. 3. S. sylvatica. Hedge Woundwort. Abundant. 1. Nepeta glechoma. Ground Ivy. Abundant. 1. Prunella vulgaris. Self-heal. Common. ee

Boraginacee. 1, Myosotis arvensis. Field Forget-me-not. Abun-
dant. 2. M. collina. Dwarf Forget-me-not. Abundant,

13

2. 3. DICOTYLEDON 359

 

. Myosotis versicolor. Yellow-and-blue Forget-me-

not. Common.

. Symphytum officinale. Common Comfrey. The

blue variety is common; but the white one is
rather rarer. Primulacee.

. Primula vulgaris. Primrose. Abundant. It

blossoms in this parish from October to June,
especially in mild winters. White varieties,
and also pink ones, have been occasionally
found.

. P. officinali-vulgaris. Common Oxlip. Abundant.
. P. veris. Cowslip. Abundant. A few years ago

my brother picked one with more than one
hundred flowers on a single stalk; which is
now in the collection of the Linnean Society.

. Lysimachia nemorum. Yellow Pimpernel. Common.
. Anagallis arvensis. Scarlet Pimpernel, or Old

Man’s Weather-glass. Abundant. Plantaginaccee. Plantago major. Greater Pluntain. Common on
Whitedown. P. media. Hoary Plantain. Abundant. P. lanceolata. Common Rib-grass. Abundant. 360 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. Monochlamydee. Chenopodiacee. 1. Chenopodium album. White Goose-foot. Common. 1. Atriplex deltoides. Triangular-leaved Orache. Common. 2. Atriplex angustifolia. Narrow-leaved Orache. Common. Polygonacee. 1, Polygonum amphibium. Amphibious Bistort. Abundant.

. P. lapathifolium. Glandular Persicaria. Common.
. P. persicaria. Spotted Persicaria. Abundant.
. P. hydropiper. Water Pepper. Abundant.
. P. aviculare. Common Knotgrass. Abundant. 6. P. convolvulus. Climbing Buckwheat. Common.
. Rumex hydrolapathum. Great. Water Dock. Common. R. crispus. Curled Dock. Abundant. R. obtusifolius. Broad-leaved Dock. Abundant. R. conglomeratus. Sharp Dock. Abundant. R.
R.

Om oo

acetosa. Common Sorrel. Abundant. acetosella. Sheep’s Sorrel. Abundant. eaRen

Thymeleacee. 1. Daphne laureola. Spurge Laurel. Rare. Grows
on the bank between Newland Common and
Holwell; also on Stockhill, and in Pelles. Pope

rPeew

DICOTYLEDONES. 361

‘Euphorbiacee.

. Euphorbia helioscopis. Sun Spurge. Not common.
. E. peplus. Petty Spurge. Common on Whitedown.
. E. amygdaloides. Woody Spurge. Not common.

. Mercurialis perennis. Perennial Herb Mercury. Abundant. Urticacee.

. Urtica dioica. Stinging Nettle. Abundant. - Humulus lupulus. Rare. Grows in a hedge near

Gog and Magog; also in Long Mead.

. Ulmus suberosa. Common Elm. Common. Amentifere. - Quereus pedunculata. Common oak. Abundant. This parish is celebrated for oak timber, which
grows faster and produces better bark than
anywhere else in Dorsetshire. Two large trees
near the Somersetshire Gate, named respectively
Gog and Magog, are still standing as memorials
of the forest.

. Q. sessiliflora. Sessile-fruited Oak. Abundant.

. Fagus sylvatica. Beech. Common.

. Corylus avellana. Nut or Hazel. Abundant.

. Alnus glutiosa. Common Alder. Abundant. There is a very large tree in Pondclose.

. Populus alba. White Poplar. Abundant.
. P. tremula. Aspen. Common. Salix fragilis. Crack Willow. Common. 362 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 2. Salix alba. Golden Willow. Common.
. S. triandra, Almond-leaved Willow. Common in
some of the woods. 4. S. purpurea. Purple Willow. Common. 5. S. rubra. Fine Basket Osier. Common in some
of the copses. 6. S. acuminata. Pointed-leaf Willow. Common in
some of the woods. 7. 8. cinerea. Common Sallow. Common. 8. S. viminalis. Common Osier. Common in some

of the copses. .
9. S. caprea. Great Sallow, or Withy. Abundant
in all the hedges. 10. S. repens. Dwarf Willow. Common on Newland
Common. Order II.—Moxocoryneponss. Floride. Orchidacee. 1. Spiranthes autumnalis. Autumnal Lady's T'resses. Rare. Found by myself in Sandhills and on
Newland Common, September, 1876. 1. Neottia nidus-avis. Bird’s-nest Orchis. Very
rare. Discovered by G. B. Wollaston, Esq.,
in Mullett’s Copse, June, 1874. 1. Listera ovata. Common ‘I'way Blade. Abundant
in the woods,

no

aoe

w

seer

MONOCOTYLEDONES. 363

. Epipactis palustris. Marsh Helleborine. Conimon

in the Quag. .
. Orchis morio. Meadow Orchis. Abundant. O. mascula. Early Purple Orchis. Abundant. O. vistulata. Dark-winged Orchis. Rare. O. pyramidalis. Pyramidal Orchis. Abundant. O. latifolia. Broad-leaved Marsh Orchis. Rare. Grows in the Quag. O. incarnata. Common Marsh Orchis. Common. O. maculata. Spotted-leaved Orchis. Abundant. O. conopsea. Fragrant Orchis. Rare.

. Habenaria chlorantha. Greater Butterfly Orchis. Common in the woods. 2. H. viridis. Frog Orchis. Rare. Discovered by

G. B. Wollaston, Esq., in Honny Mead,
June, 1874.

. Ophrys apifera. Bee Orchis. Very rare. Found

by myself in a field near the Quag last June. It used formerly to grow in Alder Mead and in
Whitedown chalk-pit. 9 Tridacee.

. Iris fetidissima. Feetid Iris. Common.
. I. psendacorus. Yellow Water Iris. Common. Amaryllidacee.

. Narcissus pseudo-narcissus. Daffodil, or Lent Lily. Abundant on Dungeon, and in several of the
fields of Newland; also in Broad Alders. 364 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. 1. Galanthus nivalis. Abundant in the hedges in
Nether Newland. Liliacee. 1. Fritillaria meagris. Common Fritillary.. Rare. Grows on Dungeon. One of the fields in the
parish of Buckland Newton is covered with the
white variety. 1. Allium compactum. Crow Garlic. Common. 2. A. ursinum. Ramsons. Abundant. 1. Hyacinthus non-scriptus. Wood Hyacinth, or Blue
Bell. Abundant. The white variety grows in
this parish. Dioscoreacee. 1, Tamus communis. Black Bryony. Common. Melanthiacee. 1. Colchicum autumnale. Autumnal Crocus, or
Meadow Saffron. Very rare. Grows in Broad-
alders and Mullett’s Copse. It grows abundantly
in a field in the parish of Bishops Caundle. Alismacce.

. Alisma plantago. Greater Water Plantain. Potamacee. _

. Potamogeton lucens. Great Pondweed. Abundant
in Roundchimneys Pond.
. P. natans. Floating Pondweed. Abundant. ~

MONOCOTYLEDONES. 365

Lemnacee. 1. Lemna minor. Lesser Duckweed. Abundant. Typhacee. 1. Sparganium ramosum. Branched Bur-weed. Com-
mon in Roundchimneys Pond. Araceae. 1, Arum maculatum. Lords and Ladies, or Cuckoo-
pint. Abundant. Juncacee,

1. Juncus conglomeratus. Common Rush. Abundant. 2. J. effusus. Soft Rush. Abundant. 3. J. lamprocarpus. Shiny-fruited Rush. Abundant. 4. J. glaucus. Hard Rush. Abundant. 5. J. bufonius. Toad Rush. Abundant. 1. Luzula campestris. Field Wood Rush. Common. Glumacee. Cyperacee. 1. Scirpus lacustris. Bullrush. Common in the river. 2. S. palustris. Marsh Club Rush. Common. 1. Eriophorum angustifolium. Common Cotton Grass. Very rare. Grows in the same field, near
Hartleaze, as the Bee Orchis does. 1. Carex paniculata. Greater-panicled Sedge. Common
in Wootton Wood. 2. C. acuta. Slender-spiked Sedge. Common. 366 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WoOrTon. 3. Carex pallescens. Pale Sedge. Not common. 4. C. panicea. Pink-leaved Sedge. Common. 5. C. pendula. Great Pendulous Sedge. Common. 6. C. glauca. Carnation Grass. Abundant. 7. C. precox. Vernal Sedge. Abundant. 8. C. riparia. Great Pond Sedge. Common in the
river. Gramina. 1. Phalaris arundinacea. Reed Canary Grass. Com-
mon in the river and Roundchimneys Pond. 1. Anthoxanthum adoratum. Sweet-scented Vernal
Grass. Abundant. 1. Phleum pratense. Timothy Grass. Abundant. 1. Alopecurus pratense. Meadow Fox-tail Grass. Abundant. 2. A. geniculatus. Bent-stemmed Fox-tail Grass. Common. 3. A. agrestis. Slender Fox-tail Grass. Abundant. 1. Milium effusum. Wood Millet Grass. Abundant. 1. Agrostis setacea. Bristle-leaved Bent Grass. Rare. Grows in Sandhill’s Copse. 2. A. canina. Brown Bent Grass. Common. 3. A. vulgaris. Fine Bent Grass. Abundant. 4, A. alba. Marsh Bent Grass. Abundant. 1. Arundo phragmites. Common Reed. Common in
the river and Roundchimneys Pond. 1, Aira cespitosa. Tufted Hair Grass, Abundant. A. flexuosa. Heath Hair Grass. Common on

Whitedown. ad

Howe

Pewee

MONOCOTYLEDONES. 367

. Aira precox. Early Hair Grass. Abundant.

. Avena pubescens. Downy Oat Grass. Common.
. A. flavescens. Yellow Oat Grass. Common.

. Arrhenatherum avenaceum. Oat-like Soft Grass. Common on Whitedown.

. Holeus lanatus. Meadow Soft Grass. Abundant.
. H. mollis. Creeping Soft Grass. Abundant.

. Melica uniflora. Wood Melic Grass. Common.

. Molinia cerulea. Purple Melic Grass. Common

in Wootton Wood and Broadalders.

. Catabrosa aquatica. Water Whorl Grass. Common

in Roundchimneys Pond.

. Glyceria fluitans, Floating Meadow Grass, Abun-

dant.

. Sclerochloa rigida. Hard Meadow Grass. Com-

mon on old walls.

. Poa annua. Annual Meadow Grass. Abundant.
. P. pratensis. Smooth Meadow Grass. Abundant.
. P. trivialis. Rough Meadow Grass. Abundant.
. P. compressa. Flat-stemmed Meadow Grass. Com-

mon on old walls.

. P. nemoralis. Wood Meadow Grass. Abundant. 3riza media. Common Quaking Grass. Abtindant. Cynosurus cristatus. Crested Dog-tail Grass. Abundant. Dactylis glomerata. Rough Cock’s-foot Grass. Abundant. K

. Festuca sciuroides. Barren Fescue Grass. Com-

mon on old walls. 368 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON.

. Festuca ovina. Sheep's Fescue Grass. Abundant.

. F. diriuscula. Hard Fescue Grass. Common. F. elatior. Tall Fescue Grass. Common. F. pratensis. Meadow Fescue Grass. Abundant.

. Bromus giganteus. Tall Brome Grass. Grows in
a hedge at Osel.

. B. asper. Rough Brome Grass. Common.

. B. sterilis. Barren Brome Grass. Common.

. B. mollis. Soft Brome Grass. Abundant.

. Brachypodium sylvaticum. False Wood Brome
Grass. Common. 1. Triticum caninum. Wood Couch Grass. Abun-
dant. 2. T. repens. Common Couch Grass. Abundant. 1. Lolium perenne. Common Rye Grass. Abundant. 1. Hordeum pratense. Meadow Barley. Common in
Long Mead. 1. Nardus stricta. Mat Grass. Common. Pak ow

rp op

Class II.—CRYPTOGAMIA. As I know but little of the three last orders of this
class of plants (Alge, Lichenes, and Fungi), I am,
therefore, obliged to omit numerous species found in
in this parish; but among the Filices and Musci I
have received much valuable assistance from my
friends G. B. Wollaston, Esq., of Chislehurst, and

CRYPTOGAMIA. 369

the Rev. H. H. Wood, of Holwell. Subjoined is the
summary of species. SUMMARY OF SPECIES. Glanville’s British  Dorset-

‘Wootton. Isles, shire. Filices. . 2. 1. 18 46 24
Equisetacee. . . . 4 8 5
Characewn. . . . 2 15 6
Lycopodiacee . . . 0 10 4
Musi. . . ... 88 Ci 560 =
Hepaticn. . . . . 18 90 39
Ale... 2... 16 1000
Lichenes. . . . . 25 800
Fungi... ... 109 3081
Tolalammbnyctepedes) are ant

The following have been found in the adjoining
parishes :—

1. Ceterach officinarum. Scaly Spleenwort. On Hol-
well Church. 2. Blechnum boreale. Hard Fern. Holwell and
Middlemarsh. 3. Bartramia pomiformis. Common Apple Moss. Holnest. 370 HISLORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Order I.—Fruces. Ophioglossacea. 1. Ophioglossum vulgatum. Adder’s-tongue Fern. Abundant in some of the meadows. Polypodiacea. 1. Polypodium vulgare. Common Polypody. Abun-
dant. Some of the limbs of the elms in the
grove are covered with this Fern. Aspidicee. 1. Polytrichum aculeatum. Prickly Shield Fern. Common. Var. lobatum. Not common. 2. P. setiferum. Angular Shield Fern. Abundant. Var. congestum. Rare. Found by G. B. Wol-
laston, Esq. 1. Lastrea filix-mas. Male Fern. Abundant. 2. L. dilatata. Broad Shield Fern. Abundant. 3. L. spinulosa. Spinulose Shield Fern. Abundant. Var. pseudo-mas., Woll. Common. Asplenia. 1. Athyrium filix-feemina. Lady Fern. Abundant. 1. Asplenium adiantum-nigrum. Black - stemmed
Spleenwort Fern. Common. 2. A. ruta-muraria. Wall Rue Spleenwort Fern. Grows on the church and Roundchimneys. °

EQUISETACEA!— CHARACEX, a7

. Asplenium trichomanes. Common Spleenwort Fern. Common.
. Scolopendrium vulgare. Hart’s-tongue Fern. Abun-
dant. Var. lobatum. Not common. Var. bifidum. Found by G. B. Wollaston, Esq. Var. marginatum. Found by G. B. Wollaston, Esq. Adiantarie.

. Pteris aquilina. Common Brake. It only grows
in some of the woods. Order II.—EguiseTacez.

. Equisetum maximum. Great Horse-tail. Grows
in Birch Copse and Wootton Wood.

. E.arvense. Common Horse-tail. Abundant.

. E.limosum. Smooth Horse-tail. Abundant.

. E. palustre. Marsh Horse-tail. Abundant. Order III.—Caracex.

. Chara vulgaris. Common Water Horse-tail. Abun-
dant in the stream which flows from the spring
in Hartleaze.

. C. Hedwigii. Hedwig’s Water Horse-tail. Com-
mon in the Quag. 372 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Order V.—Musc1. Acrocarpi. Astomi. 1. Phascum alternifolium. Alternate-leaved Earth
Moss. Rare. 2. P. subulatum. Awl-leaved Earth Moss. Abundant. o

. P. cuspidatum. Cuspidate-leaved Earth Moss. Common. Gymnostomi. 1. Gymnostomum ovatum. Hairy-leaved Beardless
Moss. Abundant. 2. G. truncatulum. Abundant. 8. G. pyriforme. Common. Aploperistomi. 1. Weissia cirrata. Abundant. 2. W. curvirostra. Abundant. 8. W. contraversa. Abundant. 1, Grimmia apocarpa. Abundant. 2. G. pulvinata. Abundant. 1. Didymodon purpureum. Abundant. 1. Fissidens bryoides. Abundant. 2. F. adiantoides. Abundant. 8. F. taxifolium. Yew-leaved Fork Moss. Abundant. 1. Dicranum scoparium. Broom Fork Moss. Rare. Grows in Sandhills Copse, and on a bank near

MUSCI. 373

Sandclose Islands; also on Newland Common ;
but I have not seen it in fruit.
. Dicranum varium. Variable Fork Moss. Abun-

eee eee oe ieee

2

dant.
. D. heteromallum. Silky-leaved Fork Moss. Abun-
dant.
. Campylopus fragilis. Zigzag Fork Moss. Rare.
. Tortula enervis. Abundant. T. brevipila. Abundant. T. rigida. Common. T. muralis. Wall Screw Moss. Abundant. T. ruralis. Great Hairy Screw Moss. Abundant. T. subulata. Awl-shaped Screw Moss. Abundant. -
T. unguiculata. Bird’s-claw Screw Moss. Abun-
dant.
. T. fallax. Abundant. 2

. Atrichum undulatum. Undulated Hair Moss. Abundant.

. Polytrichum juniperinum. Juniper-leaved Hair
Moss. Very rare. Grows in Sandhills Copse.

. P.commune. Common Hair Moss. Common;
but I have neither found it nor the preceding
in fruite

Diploperistomi.

. Funaria hygrometrica. Common Cord Moss. Abundant everywhere. 7
F. Mublenbergii. Rare.

. Zygodon conoideus. Lesser Yoke Moss. Common

on trees. 374 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON

1. Orthotrichum cupulatum. Common on stones. 2. O. anomalum. Anomulous Bristle Moss. Abun-
dant on stones. 3. O. affine. Pale Straight-leaved Bristle Moss. Abundant on trees. 4. O. diaphanum. White-tipped Bristle Moss. Com-
mon on trunks of trees. 5. O. rivulare. River Bristle Moss. Rare. On
stones. 6. O. leiocarpum. Smooth-fruited Bristle Moss. Abundant on trees. 7. O. crispum. Abundant. 8. O. Lyellii. Common on trunks of trees. 1. Bryum carneum. Pink-fruited Thread Moss. Rare. 2. B. argenteum. Silvery Thread Moss. Common. 3. B. pyriformis. Golden Thread Moss. Rare. 4. B. capillare. Greater Matted Thread Moss. Abun-
dant. 5. B. cespitium. Lesser Matted Thread Moss. Abun-
dant. a
1. Mnium hornum. Swan’s-neck Thyme ‘I'hread
Moss. Common in Sandhills Copse, Alder
Mead, Wootton Wood, and Broadalders. 2. M. ligulatum. Long-leaved ‘'hyme Thread Moss. Common. M. punctatum. Dotted-leaved ‘Thyme ‘Thread
Moss. Very rare. Grows on the bank of the
river, and in Broadalders,

 

Peery

~

eee

MUSCI. 3875

. Mnium rostratum. Long-headed Thyme Thread

Moss. Rare. Grows by the side of Pulham
Lake.

. Bartramia fontana. Fountain Apple Moss. Rare. Grows on Newland Common. Pleurocarpi. Peristomi.

. Leptodon Smithii. Curled Wing Moss. Very rare. On trunks of trees. - Leucodon sciuroides. Common.

. Anomodon viticulosum. Abundant.

. Daltonia heteromalla. Common.

. Fontinalis antipyretica. Great Water Moss. Rare. Grows on roots in the river.

. Neckera complanatum. Flat Feather Moss. Abun-

dant. N. crispa. Very rare. Grows near Holme’s

Corner, in the hedge between Glanville’s
Wootton and Holwell.

. Hypnum trichomanoides. Blunt Fern-like Feather

Moss. Abundant.

. H. riparium. Short-beaked Feather Moss. Common. H. serpens. Creeping Feather Moss. Abundant. H. populeum. Matted Feather Moss. Abundant. H. murale. Wall Feather Moss. Common.

. H. purum. Neat Meadow Feather Moss. Abun-

dant; but I have only found the fruit in
Buttons. 376 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 7. Hypnum plumosum. Rusty Feather Moss. Common. 8. H.sericeum. Silky Feather Moss. Abundant. 9. H. alopecurum. Fox-tail Feather Moss. Abun-

dant. 10. H. myosuroides. Mouse-tail Feather Moss. Common. 11. H. splendens. Glittering Feather Moss. Common. 12. H. tamariscinum. Proliferous Feather Moss. Abundant. 18. H. prelongum. Very Long Feather Moss. Abun-
dant. 14. H. rutabulum. Common Rough-stalked Feather

Moss. Abundant.
. velutinum. Velvet Feather Moss. Abundant.
. ruscifolium. Long-beaked Water Feather
Moss. Abundant. 15. H.
H.

17. H. striatum. Striated Feather Moss. Common. H.
H.

16. 18. H. cuspidatum. Pointed Bog Feather Moss. Abundant. 19. H. squarrosum. Drooping-leaved Feather Moss. Abundant. 20. H. triquetrum. Triquetrous Feather Moss. Abundant; but I have not found it in
fruit. 21. H. cupressiforme. Cypress-leaved Feather Moss. Abundant. 22. H. molluseum. Plume-crested Feather Moss,
Common. .

HEPATICE. 377

28. Hypnum loreum. Rambling Feather Moss. Rare. Grows in some of the hedges on Newland
Common. 24. H. polycarpum. Long-headed Feather Moss. Common. 25. H. pumillum. Dwarf Feather Moss. Common. 26. H. piliferum. Hair-pointed Feather Moss. Not

common. 27. H. lutescens. Rough-stalked Feather Moss. Not
common. 28. H.stellatum. Yellow Starry Feather Moss. Common. 29. H. brevirostre. Common Rough-stalked Heather
Moss. Common. 30. H. commutatum. Curled Feather Moss. Not

common. Order VI.—Hepaticz. Ricciacee. ~

1. Riccia crystalline. Common on wet banks. Marchantiacee. 1. Marchantia polymorpha. Polymorphous Liver-
wort. Abundant. 2. M. conica. Conical Liverwort. Common round
the sides of the spring in the garden. It bears
its fruit in March. 378 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 8. Marchantia hemispherica. Hemispherical Liver-
wort. Common on wet banks. Jungermanniacee. 1. Jungermannia asplenoides. Common on banks. 2. J. bicuspidata. Abundant. 8. J. pusilla. Abundant on banks. 4, J. albicans. Abundant. 5. J. scalaris. Abundant. 6. J. complanata. Abundant on trees. 7. J. heterophylla. Common. 8. J. reptans. Abundant. 9. J. platyphylla. Common on valls. 10. J. tomentella. Common on banks. 11. J. dilatata. Abundant. 12. J. furcata. Abundant. 18. J. epiphylla. Common. 14. J. inflata. Common. Order VII.—Atex. Filiformes. 1, Vaucheria terrestris. Abundant. 2. V. racemosa. Abundant in ditches. 3. V. ovoidea. Abundant in ditches. 4. V. dichotoma, Abundant in ponds. 1, Lemania fluviatilis. Common in the river. om

Pees

LICHENES. 379

. Batrachospermum confusum. Abundant in the

spring, near the Manor House, during the
month of March. ° It is a very pretty species.

. Draparnaldia glomerata. Abundant.
. Cheetophora elegans. Abundant in water. Zygnema nitida, Abundant in water.

. Eladophora glomerata. Abundant in the river. It

puts one in mind very much of a regular
seaweed.

. Lyngbya muralis. Abundant on wet ground.
. Oscillatoria cyanea. On old walls.
. O. tenuis. Common in ditches. Nostoc commune. Common in the garden. Globulifere.

. Botrydum granulatum. In dried-up ponds. Palmella cruentata. Common in the wine-cellar of
the Manor House. .

Order VIII.—Licuenzs. Gymnocarpi.

. Usnea barbata. Beard Lichen. Abundant.
. Cornicularia flavicans. Common.

. Ramellina farinacea. Common.

. R. fraxinea. Abundant. Physcia prunastri. Abundant.

. Cetraria glauca. Common,

380 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Peltigera canina. Ash-coloured Ground Liverwort. Abundant. 2. P. rufescens. Common. 1. Sticta pulmonaria. Oak Lungwort. Common. 1. Parmelia ceratophylla. Leaf Lichen. Common. 2. P. pulverulenta. Common. 8. P. stellaria. Abundant. 1, Lecanora murorum. Abundant. 2. L. subfusca. Common. 8. L. pallescens. Abundant. 1. Lecidea canescens. Abundant. 2. L. geographica. Abundant. 3. L, punctata. Abundant. 1. Opegrapha vulgata. Abundant. 1. Coniocarpon cinnabarium. Abundant. Cladonia alcicornis. Elk’s-horn Lichen. Abundant.

. C. pyxidata. Abundant. vr

: Angiocarpi. Pertusaria communis. Abundant on bark. Verrucaria epidermis. Abundant on bark. 2. V. muralis. Abundant on stones. Pe

Order IX.—Fonat. Hymenomycetes. Agaricini. 1, Amanita rubescens. Red-fleshed Mushroom. Com-
mon in the woods. FUNGI. 381

2. Amanita vaginata. Common in the woods. 10.
ll. 12. 18. 14. 15. 16. 7%. 18.

. Agaricus procerus. Scaly Mushroom. Abundant

in the meadows.

. A. melleus. Honey Mushroom. Common on dead

stumps of trees.

. A. gambosus. St. George’s Mushroom. Common

in pastures.

. A. dealbatus. White Mushroom. Common in the

fir plantations.

. A personatus. Lilac-stemmed Mushroom. Com-

mon in pastures.

. A. nebularis. Clouded Mushroom. Common

amongst dead leaves.

. A. giganteus. Large Mushroom. Common in the
woods. A. geotrupes. Abundant in the fir plantations. A. fuscipes. Abundant on dead stumps. A. velutipes. Abundant on dead stumps. A. ulmarius. Common on elm trees. A. ostreatus. Oyster Mushroom. Common on

old trees. A. campestris. Common Mushroom. Abundant. A. arvensis. Horse Mushroom. Abundant in the
meadows. A. pudicus. Abundant on old trees. A. fascicularis. Common on dead stumps. A. crustuliniformis. Incrusted Mushroom. Abun-
dant in the woods. A. semiglobatus. Common in pastures. 882 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 1. Coprinus comatus. Maned Mushroom. Rare. Grows in Park Lane. 2. C. atramentarius. Common. 1. Cortinarius cinnamomeus. Cinnamon Mushroom. Common in the woods. 2. C. castaneus. Marron. Common. 1. Hygrophorus virgineus. Viscid Mushroom. Com-
mon in the garden. 2. H. pratensis. Common. 8. H. eburneus. Common in the woods. 1. Lactarius deliciosus. Orange Milk Mushroom. - Abundant in the fir plantations. 2. L. piperatus. Fiery Milk Mushroom. Common
in the woods. 1. Russula heterophylla. Variable Mushroom. Abun-
dant in the woods. 2. R. alutacea. Yellow-gilled Mushroom. Common

in the woods. 3. R. feeteus. Foetid Mushroom. Abundant in the
woods. 1. Cantharellus cibarius. Chantarelle. Common in
the woods. 1. Marasmius orcades. Fairy-ring Champignon. Abundant in pastures. 2. M. urens. False Champignon. Common in
pastures. 1. Panus stypticus. Astringent Mushroom. Common
on dead trees. roewmHeHowe

1

FUNGI. | 383

Polyporei. - Boletus edulis. Large Toadstool. Common.

. B. scabei. Dark Toadstool. Common.

. B. luridus. Gloomy Toadstool. Abundant.

. Fistulina hepatica. Common on oak trees.

. Polyporus squamosus. Common on ash trees.

. P. sulphureus. Common on various kinds of trees.
. P. fomentarius. Common on trees. Trametes pini. Common on the roots of fir trees
which have been uprooted.

. Deedalea quercina. Common on oak stumps.
. D. unicolor. Common on stumps.
. Merulius lacrymans. Dry rot. Abundant. Hydnei.

. Hydnum repandum. Common in the woods.
. H.imbricatum. Rare. Grows in Pelles. Auricularini. Stereum hirsutum. Abundant on old stumps ‘of
trees.

. Corticium quercinum. Common on the bark of

oak trees.

. C.roseum. Common on posts. Clavariei. Clavaria cinerea. Rare. Grows in Sandhills
Copse. It is the prettiest Fungus we have.

. C. fastigiata. Common in pastures. 384 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. 8. Clavaria rugosa. Rare. 4. C. cristata. Rare. 5. C. vermiculata. Grows on the lawn. Tremellini. 1. Hirneola auricula-Jude. Common. 1. Tremella mesenterica.’ Common on dead sticks. Gasteromycetes. Phalloidei. 1. Phallus impudicus. Common Stinkhorn. Common. Trichogastres. _

. Lycoperdon giganteum. Giant Puff-ball. Common. 2. L. celatum. Common Puff-ball. Abundant. 8. L. pyriforme. Common. Bovista plumbea. Common. 2. B. nigrescens. Common. Nidulariacei. Crucibulum vulgare. Common. “

Ascomycetes. Helwellacei. 1. Morchella esculenta, Morell. Rare. Grows on
the lawn. Helvella crispa. Not common. H. lacunosa. Not common. =

FUNGI. 385

. Geoglossum olivaceum. Not common. 2. G. hirsutum. Not common. 1. Penziza aurantia. Not common. ;

2. P. coccinea. Rare. Grows in the lane between
Wootton Wood and the Green Wall, on the
roots of sycamore, during March and April. 3. P. elegans. Rare. Grows on the twigs of larch. 4. P. phascoides. Grows on dead twigs of oaks
during the winter. It looks like a piece of
calf’s-foot jelly. 1. Helotium eruginosum. Grows on oak. Tuberacei. 1. Tuber estivum. Truffle. Very rare; and has
only been found in the garden at the roots of
an old evergreen oak. Coniomycetes. Pucciniei. 1. Aregma mucronatum. Rose Brand. Common. 2. A. bulbosum. Abundant on bramble leaves. 1. Puccinia graminis. Corn Mildew. Sometimes
abundant. 2. P. buxi. Common in the garden. 1. Medo filicum. Common on fern leaves. 1. Trichobasis fabe. Bean Rust. Common. 2. T. suaveolus. Thistle Rust. Common. 1. Momyces primule. Common on primroses. zo

886 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE'S WOOTTON. r
2. 3.
de

»

3. »

co

Lecythea ruborum. Common on bramble leaves. L. caprearum. Sallow Rust. Common on sallow
leaves. :

L. rose. Rose Rust. Abundant. Ustilago segetum. Corn Smut. Sometimes abun-
dant on ears of wheat.

. U. hypodytes. Grass Smut. Sometimes abun-

dant during the autumn. Alcidiacei.

. Alcidium leucospermum. White-spored Cluster

Cups. Common on the leaves of the wood
anemone.

. A. ranunculacearum. Common on the leaves of the

buttercup. A. urticee. Abundant on nettles. A. grossularie. Common on the leaves of goose-
berries and currants. Hyphomycetes. Mucedines. Penicillium crustaceum. Yeast Plant.

. Peronospora infestans. Potato Mould. Sometimes

abundant. It is the cause of the potato
disease. P. parasitica. Cabbage Mould. Occasionally abun-
dant.

. P. urtice, Common on nettles,

FUNGI 387

Perisporiacei. 1, Sphwrotheca pannosa. Rose Mildew. Occasionally

abundant. Uncinula adunca. Willow Mildew. Common. U. bicornis. Maple Mildew. Abundant during the

autumn. 1. Erysippe graminis. Grass Mildew. Common. 2. E. Martii. Pea Mildew. Abundant on the leaves
of peas during the summer. 8. E. communis. Buttercup Mildew. Abundant. 1. Chetomium elatum. Straw-bristle Mould. Abun-
dant amongst the refuse of straw and hay ricks
during the winter. 2. C chartarum. Paper-bristle Mould. On damp

papered walls. Eurotium herbariorum. Not common. ee

~

Physomycetes. Mucorini. _

- Sclerotium fungorum. Abundant on decaying
mushrooms. S. stercorarium. Abundant. S. muscorum. Common on dead flies. ep

APPENDIX. Perhaps the following summary may be interesting. I may as well observe that by far the greater number
of species belonging to the classes—Pisces, Crustacea,
Mollusca, Echinodermata, Celenterata—are marine,
as are also most of the Alge. SUMMARY OV SPECIES. Glanyille’s Wootton. British Isles. Animals . . . 2. 4321 17,542? Plants. . . 1... 676 7111
Mammalia . . . . 27 73
Aves... 1... 92 376
Reptilia. 2. 8 16
iDinoaa) <=. “eee ll 300? Insecta . . . . . 3890 13,280
Ametabola 2. . 42 273
Arachnida... . 170 590
Myriopoda . . . 19 26
Crustacea. . 2. 10 600? Mollusca. . . . 40 690? Vermess . 2 1 se 10 500? Carried forward 4319 16,724

 

APPENDIX. 389

 

Glanville’s Wootton. British Isles. Brought forward 4319 16,724
Echinodermata. . . 0 100? Cwlenterata. . . . 0 500? Protozoa. . . . . 2 200? Phanerogamia . . . 4d 1601
Cryptogamia . . 262 5510
—te
Tota number otapaio| or 2uei0? ADDITIONS UP TO JULY, 1878. Inszcra. Neuroptera. 1. Capnia nigra, Pict. A single specimen only was

taken by myself in the river, near Marvels,
January 19th, 1878. Hymenoptera. 2. Nematus Zaddachi, Cam. Very rare. ‘Taken by
myself in Wootton Wood, June 20th, 1877. 3. N. rumicis, Fall. Not common. 4. Cyphona gemmata, Hartg. Rare. June 8th, 1877. 5. Selandria melanopoda, Cam. Rare. 6. Blennocampa fuscipennis, Fall. Rare. 7. Trichiostoma lucorum, Linn. Very rare. Bred on
May 20th, 1878. 390

10.
ll. 12. 14,
15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Lepidoptera. Coremia unidentaria, Haw. Common.

. Acidalia immutata, Linn. Rare. Ebulea stachydalis, Zink. Very rare. Tortrix sorbiana, Hub. Common. Diptera. Cordyluride. Cordylura geniculata, Zett. Common. Anthomyide.

. Ceenosia mollicula, Fall. Common. C. geniculata, Fall. Common. C. infantula, Rond. Rare. C. unculata, Rond. Rare. C. villipes, Rond. Rare. C. pygmea, Zett. Common. C. pumula, Fall. Common. Chortophila gilva, Zett. Very rare. C. curvicauda, Zett. Very rare. C. angustifrons, Meig. Rare. C. dissecta, Meig. Rare. Hylemyia flavipennis, Fall. Common. H. pullula, Zett. Common. Azelia Merstedtii, Rond. Very rare. Homalomyia scalaris, Fab. Rare. Hydrotea dentipes, Fab. Common
Limnophora didyma, Meig. Common. Ophyra leucostoma, Wied. Common. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 54. APPENDIX. 891

. Hyctodissa lucorum, Fall. Common. H. signata, Meig. Common. H. nivalis, Zett. Very rare. H. leta, Fall. Common. Muscide. Pollemia fulvicornis, Desv. Very rare. Pyrellia cadavarina, Linn. Rare. ‘Musca tempestiva, Fall. Rare. Lucilia cerulea, Macq. Common. Tachinide.

. Mascicera major, Macq. Common.
. M. pratensis, Meig. Common. - Macquartia nitida, Zett. Common.
. M. chalybeata, Meig. Common.

. Degeeria ornata, Meig. Rare.

. D. minima, Macq. Common.

. D. muscaria, Fall. Common.

. D. pulchella, Meig. Rare. - Morinia nana, Meig. Common.

. M. melanoptera, Fall. Common. Hypostena suturata, Rond. Rare.

. Metopia argyrocephala, Meig. Common.
. Plexina maculata, Rond. Rare.

. Nemorea consobrina, Meig. Common.

. N. radicum, Fab. Common. Coleoptera. Oligota apicalis, Erich. Rare. 392 HISTORY OF GLANVILLE’S WOOTTON. Hemiptera.

. Metratropis rufescens, Schaff. A single specimen

of this very rare insect was taken by myself in
Fernyknap, June 17th, 1878.

ox

Arachnida. Araneidea,

56. Harpactes Hombergii, Scop. Common. 57. Segestria Bavarica, C. Koch. Very rare. A single
specimen was taken by myself last October. It
is a new species to Britain. 58. Lycosa palustris, Linn. Common. 59. L. riparia, C. Koch. Common. 60. L. proxima, O. Koch. * Rare. 61. Pirata piscatoria, Black. Rare. 62. Nesticus celluanus, Clerck. Rare. 63. Philodromus cespiticolus, Walck. Rare. 94. Neriene anomala, Cambr. Rare. 65. N. panicillata, Westr. Rare. 66. Walckenewra pumila, Black. Rare. Phalangidee. 67. Sclerosoma Romanum, L. Koch. Rare, and new
to Britain. Cheliferidee. 68. Chermes Reussii, C. Koch. Rare, and new to
Britain. 1. P, NEWMAN, PRINTER, 82, BOTOLPH LANE, EASTONEAP, LONDON, B.C. Form L9—42m-8,'49 (B5573) 444

 

690 misvory of
—G437D15—-Glanville's —
Wooton

 

690
G437D15

HERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACLITY

(ining

000 997 224 1