250 (April,

Selandria Sixt, Voll. (Bouwstoffen voor eene Fauna van Neder-
land, ili, 278, 1858), according to Vollenhoven, is identical with S.
grandis, Zad., and, as it has priority by a year, the name of Sizxi
must stand. The larva, according to the Dutch entomologist, feeds
on Poa aquatica. WS. serva is not known in its earlier stages, but it
frequents the same marshy situations as Siz. Pecilosoma longicorne, Thoms. (Hymen. Scand., 1, 232, 6), I find
among my Scotch specimens. Mr. J. B. Bridgman has taken near
Norwich a Pecilosoma which seems to be intermediate between
longicorne and submuticum ; while I have from Rannoch an apparently
undescribed species. Without further specimens, however, I can say
nothing definite about them. The species mentioned at p. 119 of this
Magazine (vol. xvi) I have seen through the kindness of Mr. Roebuck. It is a badly set specimen of excisuwm, Thoms. (To be continued.) DESCRIPTIONS OF FOUR NEW SPECIES OF RUSSIAN PSYLLID. BY JOHN SCOTT. Some few months ago I wrote to M. Jakowleff at Astrachan,
asking him to be good enough to permit me to see all of the Russian
species of Psyllide which he had in his collection, in order that I might
be able to give the localities of those already known to science, and,
further, to describe such as might prove to be new, in my monograph
of the Psyllide of Europe, on which I am at present engaged. I
received a box from him in September last, and I think it will be of
interest to give a list of the species forwarded to me. These are as
follows:

Aphalara Jakowleffi, Scott, described in Ent. Mo. Mag., p. 266,
May, 1879. I am now able to say that this species is found on
Tamarix laxa, in May. Aphalara lurida,n. sp. A. bicolor, n. sp. A. unicolor, n. sp. Rhinocola tamaricis, Puton. Found upon Tamarix laxa in May. Alleoneura radiata, Forst. Psylla glycyrrhize, Becker. P. spiree, Becker, taken at Sarepta. Trioza dichroa, Scott, described in Ent. Mo. Mag., p. 265, May,
1879. ZT. Dalei, Scott ?, immature example, found on Atriplex lact-
niatain May. T. ele@agni, n. sp. APHALARA LURIDA. Green. Head scarcely as long as broad. Crown with a deep fovea on each side,
posterior margin slightly concave. Face: anterior margin somewhat deeply cleft
in the middle, lobes distinctly rounded. (Antenne wanting.) +
h

 

1880.) 251

Thorax: pro-and mesonotum green, convex both longitudinally and transversely, the
former scarcely as broad as the anterior portion (dorsulum) of the latter. Llytra pale, scarcely transparent, apical half pale dirty yellow: anterior margin
concave next the apex of the basal costal cell; radius suddenly concave towards
the dorsal margin, immediately on leaving the nerve of the costal cell, then
almost straight until near its extremity, where it curves round and joins the
costal margin a little way before the apex; petiole of the cubitus longer than
the posterior arm; posterior furcation elongate, the inner nerve directed towards
the apex of the clavus, which it almost reaches. Legs green. TYarsi: 2nd joint
brownish. Abdomen green, g processes scapulate at the apex. Length, 1 line, barely. A single specimen from the Caucasus. Neither date of capture
nor food-plant given. APHALARA UNICOLOR. Buff. Head almost twice as broad as long, considerably depressed on each side of

the centre. Crown: posterior margin very slightly concave. Face: anterior

- margin flatly hollowed out in the middle. Antenne buff, terminal three joints
dark brown. Thorax: pronotum buff, considerably deflected towards the head, almost uniform
in width, with two deep foves on each side, placed one near the outer margin,
and the other about in a line with the inner margin of the eyes: mesonotum
convex, widest across the base of the posterior portion. Elytra transparent,
pale yellow with a slight fuscous tinge, thickly and finely wrinkled transversely,
costal margin at the base broadly rounded, costal basal cell broadest in a line
with the base of the cubitus, its apex terminating in a short narrow stigma ;
radius almost straight, extending to the apex; petiole of the cubitus longer
than the posterior arm; width of the cells of the furcations measured on the
margin almost equal. Legs buff. Claws dark brown. Abdomen, 9, buff, slightly greenish on the under-side at the base; genital plate
elongate, about one and a half times as long as the basal margin. Length, 14 line. The fine transverse wrinkling of the glossy and transparent elytra
is the best character I can at present give for distinguishing this from
all the other species of this genus. A single 2 example from Sarepta, but neither food-plant nor date
of capture indicated. APHALARA BICOLOR. Deep reddish or purplish-black. Head about one and a half times as broad as
long. Crown generally reddish-brown ; the usual fovea on each side distinct
and darker than the other portion of the surface, posterior margin concave. Face, anterior margin faintly hollowed out in the middle. Thorax: pro- and mesonotum deep reddish-black, lateral margins, especially at and

252 (April,

around the insertion of the elytra, red. Elytra pale yellow, scarcely transparent,
nearly twice as long as broad ; radius straight, terminating in the apex ; petiole
of the cubitus about one-fourth longer than the posterior arm; posterior fur-
cation elongate, about twice the length of the anterior measured on the margin :

pro- and mesonotum pale yellow. Legs pale yellow. Abdomen bright green; genitalia bright green, upper margin of the processes of the
$ very narrowly black. Length, 1 line. Taken at Astrachan in August, but at present I am unable to say
upon what plant. Appears to be a common species, as a number of
individuals were sent to me ina quill. Unfortunately the shaking in
transit detached the antennze in every case. Its small size and
peculiar coloration will at once enable any one to recognise it. TRIOZA ELEAGNI. Delicate pale green. Head almost perpendicular. Crown: down the middle a little
more than one-half the width between the eyes, on each side near the posterior
margin is a fovea, from which proceeds a deep channel running obliquely in the
direction of the lower margin of the eye; posterior margin concave. Face:
lobes delicate pale green, about two-thirds the length of the crown, measured
down the centre, sparingly clothed with some very fine pale hairs, base of either
nearly equal to the length, divergence at the apex equal to the base of either. Hyes reddish-brown. Antenne very pale, 9—10 joints black. Thorax green: pronotum narrow, deflected to almost in a line with the head; meso-
notum convex, anterior portion (dorsulum) narrowed towards and rounded at the
middle of the anterior margin, posterior angles produced into a short spine ;
posterior portion on either side adjoining the insertion of the elytra with a
distinct round callus. #lytra clear, transparent, about two and a quarter times
as long as broad, nerves white ; costal margin convex, greatest convexity-beyond
the middle, apex obtuse ; radius flatly convex next the base, then concave to-
wards the costal margin, and recurving just before joining it, junction con-
siderably before the apex. Legs delicate pale green. Tarsi pale. Claws black. Abdomen, g, pale malachite-green, sparingly clothed with short, very fine white
hairs; genitalia clothed with very fine white hairs, genital plate conical, height
about equal to twice the width of the base, processes in outline, shaped some-
what like the breast and neck of a bird with the breast-shape inwardly ; ¢ pale
malachite-green, genitalia inclined to brownish; upper genital plate considerably
longer than the lower one, from which it diverges and curves upwardly. Found upon Hleagnus angustifolius in June and July at Petrowsk
(Caucasus). The earlier stages of the life of the species are at present un-
known. Lee, S.E. : 27th January, 1880. 88a 5°,
THE S70,
* O.

ENTOMOLOGIST'S
MONTHLY MAGAZINE:

CONDUCTED BY

J. W. DOUGLAS. E. C. RYE, F.ZS. R. McLACHLAN, F.B:S. H. T. STAINTON, F.R:S.

VOL XV I. “In Nature’s infinite book of secrecy
A little I can read.”

SHAKESPEARE. So COD SS ti th

Zu 937! HON-D ON :
JOHN VAN VOORST, 1, -PATERNOSTER ROW. £879.80.