ee peponre Pe ay

 
    

ad

Tt

  
  
   

Lola ouch

<4 nroy
Pa DN arrtacana comm th re

ee iNireniepeogers Te pts He

ee nest

Era ae cae SPR YW ry
Misia! pee ry: ee fe
+ee Pat alae! in Clee |

Epp ran penny aahanipaaae,
BAe hey MALASNEAS

art Ye Oe Pro Tey “inn

 

 

     

Tt. mitt you
rrr ” Po eht|

EO oN -
ATUL Palins

HL PHT This tal

| <has

  
   
    
  

 
 

PySea

wyatt

  
  
 
 

rt las ae

y | rh) Tell ml tT Lt patel hal ph
ms Shee a me TA Al bl

 
  
  
  

  

has

anoken nage SH

m eee ae ined a Prins

ed\
js oe dd

nth
cae tg! Hn ca MND ai Say

haha
SA Laan AVY vt Warraccconcewernt thy t
4: AR Ay mM
ee aA J erry ssp i
4 hela de tt Ne TN saaustdacatear eye a Hy f r
rr al | Arty It Di 4 f

aT Ar

WY rn aie) wt +
I) ‘ PCT REN

sl aataasl TON
H ee fr me Foner tee Ore
penta ey fi Rattan aati | See you again. Her
and

  
    
       
  
 
  
    
   

AP Pheteble et al |

di EY tact lal
leit jal tele an
Tht
Pe etach 7 MATT
MTLBA
NPO

. biol indeed) a tity

 

 

iy anne WEEN EH
i c sallyo! ee

LL my

in aT
CATT

 
  
  

ry)
BCP AY n NTT

Path
seh} ps Rabe rere
Head Set
Naa” an Pater ten ty]

ey} Wing eye iy

ah Lh Sea4
you 5 Jey

e alee caine
Tilt oahantild

Lr yt
HH Ly ee

  

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
    
      
         
   
 

ENTOMOLOGICAL COMPANY

BELGIUM

 

THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME

I

ero must be retained; it will not be sent a secondo
times as before. BRUSSELS '
AT THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE COMPANY

20, MUSEUM STREET, 20th
1892

 

ANNALS

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FROM BELGIUM

FILED UNDER LOL. The opinions given in the Annals of the Society are
specific to their authors. The Company does not assume any
the responsibility. mprim, C, Annoot-Braeckman,

 

Ghent,

 

ANNALS

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

BELGIUM

 

BRUSSELS
AT THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE COMPANY
20, MUSEUM STREET, 20

1892

ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION

FOR THE YEAR 1892. Council @Wadministration,

MM. Giron, President. TosquineT, vice-president. Lameere, secretary and librarian. Fo.oane, Treasurer. Duvivier, Assistant Secretary. KERREMANS. Ropre. *

Couneaux, assistant librarian. Commission for the verification of accounts. MM. L.Coucke. Dvusois. VanNerom. Supervisory Board

 

born from collections. MM. Giron, President. Berek. Van Nero. ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. Minutes of the monthly meeting of
January 9, 1891. CHAIRMANSHIP OF M. Giron. Present: Messrs. Bergé, Coubeaux, Duvivier, Fologne, Jacobs,
Melise, Robbe, Rousseau, Séverin and Lameere, secretary. MM. of Selys-Longchamps, Tosquinet and Kerremans have
excuse their absence. The session is open 4 to 8 hours in the temporary rented room
4 the Company by the State, rue du Musée, 20. The minutes of the meeting of December 5, 1891 are approved. Board decisions. MM. Tosquinet, Fologne, Lameere and
Duvivier were maintained in their respective attributions of
vice-president, treasurer, secretary and librarian and secretary
silence-deputy; Mr. Coubeaux will continue to fulfill the functions
of assistant librarian. — Mr. Bovie, already an associate member, was admitted as
effective member, at his request. — The Synonymous Catalog of the Buprestids presented by
M. Kerremans will be published outside the Annales: this work
will form the first volume of the Memoirs of the Society. Correspondence Mr. Minister of the Interior and Education
public opinion writes to us:

“I have the honor to inform you that while waiting for the
when it will be possible to permanently house your Company
in a State building, two places of sufficient size
for your meetings and the installation of your library, are
rented on the first floor of the house located rue du Musée, 20. »

Thanks were expressed by the Council to the Minister. — Messrs. Brenske and Kuwert thank for their admission in
full member status. Works presented. The Assembly decides on the insertion in the present
number of the Annals of the notices read to him. Communications. Mr. de Selys-Longchamps prevented from attending
4 the sitting writes the following:

Not having been able to complete today the manuscript of the 6¢ Causerie
Odonatological, however, I do not want to wait any longer
to rectify a serious mistake I made in the 5" Cause-
rie, and which is pointed out to me by my friend Mr. Mac Lachlan. Subsequently
regrettable distraction, I lost sight of the notice published in
1889 by Mr. Kirby (Proc. zool. Soc., p. 301), in which he
names, describes and figures the Zatocnemis malgassica, and I have described the
same genus and the same species under the name of Vesocnemis sinuati-
pennies. The name given by Mr. Kirby must therefore prevail. On another occasion, in the same notice (page 300), Mr. Kirby described
a Sapho pulchella from Cameroon, which it seems is identical with the
Thore concinna from Colombia described by M. Mac Lachlan in 1881. The error will probably have originated from a confusion in
the name of the locality of origin, because there is no Zhore
in Africa. Finally, I notice 4 things about the publications of the Honorable
Mr. Kirby, that in the same Proceedings (in March 1891, page 204,
plate xx), it describes and appears under the name of Meurobasis apicalis
a Vestalis, which I have already described under that of Vestalis apicalis
in the Additions to the Synopsis of the Calopterygines (the male in 1873,
the female in 1879). —M. Hippert reports the following captures: Welitea Dictynna,
& Schaerbeek, June 24, 1873 and Zygana Filipendule, June 23
June of the same year in Brussels, rue Royale. —M. Jacobs announces that he has attended, as delegate of the
Society, to the meetings which led to the formation of an Association
Belgian for ’ Advancement of Sciences, and that he considers his mission
as finished. — Assent. The meeting adjourned at 4 o'clock. HETEROCERA EXOTICA, NEW Spices! INDIA
DUTCH ORIENTAL (continued),

 

 

by FB. Heylaerts. BOMBYCIDA. Gen. Bombyx Linn. (Lebeda Walk group.) rotundata
nov sp. Males, resembling, for the cut of the wings, a little to our
B. rubi L., but having the forewings broader and relative-
ment shorter. The head, covered on both sides with hair
reddish-brown, has antennae, very strongly pectinate down to
that at the top, with a shaft of a waxy yellow and
than Ponies The horizontal palpi, like a bird's beak, are very
hairy and blackish too: they are very wide at the base and end
peak; the hairs completely hide the joints
articles. The thorax above and the pterygodes bear fairly
long, which have the color of the forewings, i.e. a
reddish ochraceous; the abdomen is yellowish-grey. The legs, rela-
tively short but strong, are colored like the thorax in
below; they are ochre-brown; their femurs and tibiae
are very densely covered with hair; hooks are strong. The
forewings have almost straight anterior edge 4 apex
curved; the outer edge is very convex; the external angle is
completely erased, so that the inner edge is a quarter
shorter than the previous one. The design is as follows: the a large black dot in the middle
disco-cellular; 2° two parallel transyersal lines
white, curved towards the base of the wing, shaded with black;
they are somewhat wider 4 their origin at the costal edge. They
cross the disc in the middle, between them the background color is
greyish; both touch the inside edge, and the 2¢ is there
limited externally by a large spot of a brown red
pretty sharp; 3° a black line, illuminated with white, strongly and
irregularly toothed, sometimes interrupted, separates the disc from
the terminal part of the wing, which is greyish. The fringe is
grey-brown. The hindwings have their edges recurved, the apex and
Yangle anal are erased. Their color is an ocher yellow
greyish, like all the underside of the wings and the abdomen; the
fringe is concolorous. We notice 4 hardly the traces of a line
transverse, parallel to the outer edge. Below, there are for any drawing a few dark atoms
indicating a transverse line, more pronounced on the wings
previous. Towards the base there are only a few black scales. The ribbing is as follows:

The forewings have an extraordinarily short cell
and 11 nerves, of which 3 and 4 from the same point; 5 + 6 on a court
peduncle near which 7 originates; 8 + 9 on a long
peduncle; 10, very long, is at its origin, the middle of the edge
front of the cell, very far from 11, the costal, to
so close that it almost touches her in the middle of
the side, so that the two form near the base a triangle
large enough. The hind wings have 8 nerves, 4 of which and 5 of the same
point: their cell is relatively even shorter than on the
fore wings. Wingspan: 48 min. Habitat: Java, Buitenzorg. I owe both gga Mr. Lt.-Colonel W.E.J. Hekmeyer. LIPARIDA. Gen. Euproctis Hiibn., (Cheerotricha Feld. group) sabulosa
nov sp. One of the largest species of the aforementioned group, measuring only
not less than 64mm. scale for the Q, which I received from
Mr. Lieut.-Colonel W.E.J. Hekmeyer. The small head, the very short palpi, as well as the collar, are
ochracea; the antennae, about 1/3 of the anterior edge, are,
for a Q, very long and strongly bipectinate, with a stem of one
rather light Naples yellow and 4 long, ochraceous beards. the
thorax and pterygodes are of a greyish ochreous colour; the abdomen
is blackish gray and the anal tuft is whitish yellow. tt

The legs, short but strong, have their femurs and their:
very hairy, the color of the hair is for the 1st pair a BBlilacd
clear, for the 2° and 3° a greyish white. the

The forewings are wide, like those of Char. bipartite Moore (Moore. Descr. Ind. The P. Atk., pl. 2, fig. 4), of
Expensive. Feld asked. or Dear. globifera Feld. (Reise Nov.,
pl. 98, fig. 12 and 13) and better still from Cher. Milleri Vol. (Snellen, Tijdschr. vy. Ent., t. XX, pl. 1, fig. 6) which, for Ja
cut wings, looks completely like my species. The con-
their background is a whitish gray, which is sandblasted with an infinite
ochracd and brown dots, piled up especially in an oblique line
fairly wide network, which goes from the external angle towards the apex,
without reaching the latter. The hind wings are

 

   

 

 

 

 

  

   

{)

also wide, 4 erased angles. The color is a blackish gray
quite dull. The fringe of both wings is dirty white. The entire underside is blackish. — The ribbing is normal. I don't know the evil. Habitat: Java, Buitenzorg. Gen. Porthesia (Steph.) isabellina nov. sp. A perfectly preserved Q, which comes to me from Padang Pandjang,
Sumatra. It looks a lot like Porthesia fumosa Snell. ,
described and figured in the “Tijdschrift v. Ent. » t. XX, p. 69,
pl. 5 f. 4. It is distinguished from the latter by the characters
following:

1° On the front wings there are no transverse lines
white. The big dot is there, but it is much smaller;
below it is 4 hardly noticeable. 2° The posterior wings are frankly white; below
they are without black point. 3° The thorax and abdomen, which ends in a yellow anal tuft
of Naples, are less dark. 4° The entire underside is more whitish, the hindwings
even silvery white. The rest is the same. — Ribbing
is normal. Wingspan 32mm. My species may be a variety of P. fumosa Snell.,
which was found 4 Kotta Kadja (Atjeh). Education ab ovo
can decide. Gen. Artaxa (Walk.) albinotata nov. sp. A very well preserved ¢, taken 4 Fort-de-Kock, Sumatra. The new species comes, for the cut of the wings and the color,
quite close to the Artaxa digramma Boisd. (Icon. reign anim. Ins.,
p. 508, pl. 86, f4, and Moore, Lep. of Ceylon, part II, p. 85,
pl. 112, f. 1). — The mile, the only sex I possess, is small,
measuring only 17 mill. of scale. His head is covered with
white hairs on the face; forehead and occiput bear hair
white and ochraceous mixed together; the palps are hairy, white and
placed horizontally; the antennae are bipectinate, 4 poles
and 4 bearded dugues of a light Naples yellow. The necklace and the
thorax are colored like the forewings; the abdomen is
pure white like the legs which are hairy. The forewings have their white background so sprinkled
Watomes of an ocher yellow more or less clear than it shows
only here and there. It is common if the ochraceous background had
white spots. These are: a large one on the
discoidal cell, one on the middle of 1 a, two near the apex and
a few others, smaller, scattered on the disc. atoms

 

 

10

ferruginenx or ochracea pile up especially along the edge
external and form a kind of terminal band. The fringe is
Wun blane dirty divided by a ferruginous line. The hind wings, with their fringe, are white on both sides.
and other. Underneath the forewings are dirty white;
but the rib, upper cells, discoid cell and
the veins are sprinkled with ferruginenx. Artaxa bicolor nov. sp. A <, quite well preserved and coming to me from Padang (Sumatra),
is also small in size, having only 18 mm. of scale. The new species comes pretty close to | Artaaa apicalis Walk. figured “Moore, Lep. of Ceylon”, pl. Ill, fig. 4. But she walks away
easily distinguishable because the yellow border on the outer edge is
much narrower and lighter (Naples yellow); than the dots
apex black 4, very large in apicalis, entirely lacking;
that the rib is not yellow and that the thorax is the same brown
blackish than abdomen above. Underneath the wings are blackish brown with a yellow border
is even clearer and more diffuse. According to the Herrich-Schiffer system, the species described would be
a Luproctis Hitbn., because on the forewings there is no
no interposed cell, that from 7, 8 +-9 and 10 take their
origin and that6+-7are on a peduncle on the hindwings. Euproctis cinerea nov. sp. A fairly well-preserved ¢, which comes to me from Sindaglaja (Java). He
resembles for the cut of the wings and in relation to the wingspan,
23 mm., a Huproctis incomta De Haan, figured Tijdschr. v. Entom., t. XX, pl. 1, fig. 2. It differs greatly in
color and drawing. The head, on either side, the rather hairy and horizontal palpi,
the strongly bipectinated antennae, the collar, the thorax with the
pterygodes and abdomen are ash gray. The legs very
hairy are more whitish. The fairly wide forewings are also ash gray
a little icy, but sprinkled here and there with ferruginous
the cell is a large black dot. A cross line
brown, and parallel to the outer edge, separates the disc from the
darker terminal part of the wing. The fringe is concolorous and
Juicy. Below the color is the same, but sprinkled with
ferruginous especially on the ridge, the disc and the veins. Wings
hind legs are whitish gray like the fringe, slightly
darker along the outer edge. Antipha (Walk.) biplagata nov. sp. A well-preserved male, which comes to me from Le Préanger (Java) and

 

1

found by Lt. Col. Hekmeyer 4 3500' high. The new species is close to Ant. costalis Walk., represented by
Mr. Moore in his "Lepid." of Ceylon,” part. II, pl. 110, fig. 2. The head is covered above and below, as also the
collar, the thorax and the pterygodes, of ferruginous red hairs.
new. The horizontal palpi are russet outside, whitish
deep inside, their third article is dirty white. The
antennae, strongly bipectinate, have a very strong shaft and
long beards of red color. The abdomen is gray 4 tuft
anal of a clear ochreous. The legs are long, quite
hairy and gray. The hind tibiae have four spurs.-

The forewings are a very light ochreous dusted
Slightly ferruginous. A large irregular plate, in
crescent-shaped, sits at the top of the disc and touches
its extremities the costal edge, while two triangular spots
lie against the outer edge, one in cell 5 and the other
in cell 6. There is an incomplete basal and two thin lines
cross sections go very obligingly from the aforesaid plate towards the
middle of the inner edge. Plaque, spots and lines are brown
purplish black. The fringe is concolor, interspersed with the color
stain. Below these wings are more heavily dusted with black
sooty with a dark spot on the cell for any design. The hindwings are a yellowish gray without pattern with
the fringe of the same color and somewhat shiny. Below
there is a large black dot on the exuremity of the cell. Ribbing is normal. Wingspan 22mm. Olene (Walk.) basinigra noy. sp. A male, fairly well preserved, which comes to me from Padang
(Sumatra). Slightly more slender than ''Olene mendoza Hiibn. (fig. Zutrage,
f. 293-94; Reise Novara, pl. 99, f. 6 and Moore “Lep. of Ceylon »
pl. 115, fig. 4) but having the same cut of the wings; our species
differs greatly in color and design. The head, the broad and very hairy palps and the collar are of a
slightly dirty white. The antennae, strongly bipectinate, have their
brown shaft and their long reddish beards. The chest and the
pterygodes are of the aforementioned white except for a broad stripe in the middle of the
first, which is brunette. The abdomen and the anal tuft are of one
yellowish gray. The legs have their trochanters, femurs and tibiae
covered with yellowish gray hairs, the tarsi are dirty white. The forewings have on a yellowish-grey ground, a little
powdered with ferruginous, some very black dots on the base; of them

12

transverse lines, very close to each other, parallel to
2, then diverging, cross the disc. From the base to the
first line three large black spots cover this part
of Vaile and only show the background color on the part
base of the disco-cellular cell and, at the top of the latter, up to the
anterior edge. Between the transverse lines the wing is white,
enough, pure above, dirtier towards the inner edge. Outside
the 2¢ line there are still some white streaks. A line terminated
nale black, composed of black dots on the veins and in the
cells, begins around rib 6 and extends to the border
internal, outside of which the color of the wing becomes a
ochraceous chestnut. The fringe is brown, sprinkled with blackish over-
all towards the apex. Below, the wings have for all design a
brown transverse line, and their color is a uniform yellowish gray
form more or less, especially towards the side and the apex, sprinkled with
brown. The hind wings have, on both sides, also this
color. Above there is a large brown dot on the cell, and the
brown atoms, piled up especially towards the external edge, form here
a kind of transverse line, parallel to the outer edge. The fringe is colorless, speckled with blackish. Below the
color is lighter; we can see the traces of a transverse line
dirty. The fringe is little or not spotted. — The ribbing is
normal. Wingspan 23 mil. Dasychira tristis nov. sp. A Q, quite well preserved, which comes to me from Sumatra, Padang. It is very similar, for the cut of the wings and the design, to the
Das. mavens Feld., of Ceylon, figured Reise Nov., pl. 99, fig. 4. It is smaller, measuring only 40 mill. large while
that the other has 60. Its color is a dull gray-brown, and its designs are rather
of a dirty whitish gray. The small head, the horizontal palpi
very yellow and wide, the collar, the thorax with the pterygodes,
The abdomen, the legs (the tarsi are blackish), everything is
of the aforementioned brown. The antennae, quite short and pectinate, are
clearer. The fore wings, which have the color of the thorax, have the des-
following sin: le a recurved basal; 2° a wavy band on
the midpoint of the disc, broadest at the top and decreasing in width
towards the inner edge, between two whitish transverse lines,
whose outer is toothed: here and there this band is spotted
of brown; 3° a semi-terminal line composed of brown dots
illuminated whitish on the outside. 13

The fringe is whitish-grey, widely mottled with black.
ratre between the eyes. The hind wings are yellowish grey: a transverse line
dirty, parallel to the outer edge, and brown veins. Fringe
is divided by an unbroken brown line. Underneath the forewings are yellowish gray, dusted
brown on the disc. At the coast there is a beginning
of transverse line. Fringe as above. The hindwings have a large brown spot on the cell, two
transverse lines, and the fringe therein is speckled. Nor-
male. .
Dasychira (Mardara Walk group. )preangerensis nov. sp. A Q, fairly well preserved, which was found in the
Preanger (Java) 4 3500’ high by Mr. Lieut.-Colonel Hek-
meyer, and now in my collection. She cannot be
trimmed to the species described by Walker. The head is covered with intertwined black and white hairs; the
palps are yellowish and ascending without reaching the forehead; the
antennae are dirty whitish gray and slightly pectinate. The collar is gray edged with white. The chest is covered with
blackish gray and white intermingled hairs, and the pterygodes, of the
same color, are edged in white. The abdomen bears hair
gray brown and has a whitish yellow anal tuft. The
legs, not too hairy, are brown on the outside and almost
whitish inside. The forewings, very wide, with a slightly oblique outer edge,
have a blackish gray ground color sprinkled with scales
of a dirty white. The drawing consists of: 1° a basal line
white formed of two triangles, one on the other, whose upper
rieur has the apex facing the outer edge, the 2' facing
the base; (2) a first almost straight transverse line. Between
this and the basal are four large black spots
separated by the veins, which here are sprinkled with white;
3° the 2° transverse line, partially double, formed by
white lunules, which, fairly close to the first on the edge
internal, deviates from it quite a bit on the anterior border; 4° a big point
black on the cell and some white streaks on the disc;
5th a fairly strong and snow-white ziczac line separates
the disc of the terminal part of the wing, which is entirely
of a white gray. The space between these last two lines is filled by four
large black dots, the largest of which are found 4 the side and
at the inner edge. The fringe is gray and cut by a brown line. 14

Below the wing is a brownish gray clouded with dark brown. The posterior wings are also broad and 4 anal angle pres-
than erased. They are on both sides of a gray brown, also
cloudy like the forewings below. The fringe is
here a white-yellow spotted with brown. Wingspan 36mm. (Nervulation as in the genus Dasy-
chira Steph.). URANINA. Erosia Guen. (Dirades Walk group.) tridentata nov. sp. A Gy, well preserved, which comes to me from Preanger (Java), 4 3500! height, and was taken with the following species by M. lelieut.-colo-
nel Hekmeyer. It looks a bit like the Dirades adjutaria Walk. figured “Moore, Lepid. of Ceylon,” pl. 186, fig. 9, but here the
outer edge of the forewings is not indented and the color
and different design. The head, collar and thorax are covered with white scales
as well as the small palpi, whose 3rd article is however blackish. The antennae are dirty white. The abdomen is grey-brown. The patties, short but strong, are of the same white as the
antennas,

The forewings have their anterior edge nearly straight a
apex recurved; the outer edge is notched from the rib 3, ob
there is an obtuse tooth, up to the nerve7; another indentation
exists from the external angle to the aforementioned tooth; the edge
internal is concave. The background color is a dirty white sa-*
powdered with ferruginous, especially at the terminal part, which seems
darker. Two bands, formed by a series of ferruginous spots,
framed by the two edges of a white line, are on the
disc and leave between them a whitish space. A terminal,
parallel to the external edge and almost touching it, is made of the
same manner. The fringe is lighter. Below the fore wings
posteriors, like the posterior ones, are of a shiny dirty white without
design. The hind wings have their fore edge deeply
indented in the middle, the outer edge has three teeth, one on the rib
4, one on rib 6 and one on rib 7, the inner edge
is almost straight. There are three transyersal lines, made
tioned in the same way as those of the forewings:
the first two in a triangle, the third extending from the
I up to the 3rd tooth, almost straight. Enyergenre 17 mm. 15

Erosia (Dirades) bidentata nov. sp. A well-preserved Q, which has the same habitat as the previous species.
cedent, and resembles it for the cut of the wings except that the
hind wings have only two teeth, one on nerve 4 and
one on nerve 7. The color of any Vinsect above it is
rather a light ochreous, somewhat purplish, uniform; below
yellowish brown without pattern. The palpi also have their 3rd article
blackish. The designs of the forewings are beginning with the
base: the few striae indicating the basal; 2° 3 big spots
brownish red, one above the other, as a first
cross line; the 2° is formed by a double white line
heavily shaded reddish-brown on disc; 3° a ter-
minale, composed of three points (at the top) and a broad streak of the
even red brown. — The fringe is whitish with a little dusting
ferruginous. — The design of the hindwings is: the one
oblique streak going from the basal part of the crest and cutting the
rib 4 at a 30° angle to the middle of the wing; close to the
base a large spot; 2° a transverse line in a triangle, plus
wide at the top, almost linear at the bottom, flanked by the two sides
with a white line; 3° a terminal, parallel to the edge
external, lit in white 4] outside. All lines are
same reddish-brown as on forewings. The fringe is
whitish and less dusty. Wingspan 20mm. Remark. — Until recent times the Lvosiids
were counted among the Geometrids. Indeed the nervula-
tion is that of this great cohort: however the brake of the wings
posterior conspicuous by its absence. The Heroids therefore did
exception, and hence there was some doubt. When
Mr. F. Moore had published his great work on the Lepidoptera
of Ceylon we were surprised to see the caterpillars of
Dirades latifasciata Moore, pl. 186, f. 12b, and D. guadricau-
data Moore, pl. 186, f. 1a, who are by no means Geometries,
but have 16 legs. Also in 1887 Mr. Butler, in his work on
the “New Lepidoptera of the Solomon Islands” (Ann. and Magazine. of Natur. History, March 1887) places the Hvosiids between the
Thermesiid and the Hypenidwx, both Noctuids, proba-
4 because of the clipping of the wings, and not 4 because of the
ribbing. In 1889 Mr. P. G. F. Snellen in his work on a collection
of Lepidoptera from New Guinea (Tijdschr. y. Entom.,
t. XXXII, p. 398) showed the relationship between the family
cited above and the Uranina H.S., precisely because of the neryu-

16

tion and lack of the brake. It counts now, and by right,
the genera Micronia Guén., Medusia Guén. and Fvosia Guén. among the Uranina, Later, in his work on the Lepidoptera
de Ville Flores (Tijdsch. v. Entom., t. XXXIV, p. 255) he
come back to it again. I] believe, and with good reason, that there will be
many more genera, counted among the Geomeetrides, which
do not belong to it, among others the genus Cyclidia Guén. who
is a true Drepanulid (Vide Tijdsch. v. Ent., t. XXXII,

p. 7). THE COCCINZLLIDS OF CHOTA-NAGPORE,
by Jul. Weize. Under a similar title, my esteemed colleague Mr. Duvivier,
published, in the Proceedings of January 10, 1891, a work
in depth on the Phytophages of West Bengal. R. P. Cardon, hunting in July 1891 near Mandar,
a few miles N. of Ranchée, at about 2200 feet
above sea level, harvested a considerable number
de Coccinellides, which were submitted to my examination by M. Severin. Generally the Coccinellids are badly represented in the
collections from tropical regions, because the
professional collectors pay less attention to them than to
beautiful and large species, with rich colors, which fall in
same time in the umbrella or the net, and are more productive
on sale. Thus there are among the Coccinellids so many
Wespecies which cannot be obtained either by purchase or by exchange,
and why, for the past twenty years, knowing her
knowledge of this family of Coleoptera has made less progress than
those of other families of the same order. On the other hand, the harvests of Fr. Cardon, made with zeal and intelligence
gency, contain numerous coccinellids, and much more
ressing varieties than species. Among these varieties are
complete series of variations, with the help of which I have succeeded in
establish, that several species described by Mulsant and Crotch (even
referred to different genera by the latter), are simply
forms I one and the same species. However, it is only after
many hesitations, and because I could not discover the
slightest positive difference between these various forms which I have
together the Colophora Romani Muls. and wnicolov Fabr. Yes
my opinion is confirmed, we will have learned 4 to know
here, a disposition 41a variability of which we have no example. It is an established fact, that in species has clear elytra and
4 uniform coloration, marked with black dots or spots,

 

17
these dots and spots may gradually spread to the
not to invade the entire surface; but what is particularly
striking is to see those spots and blackheads replaced
by well-marked red spots or dots (as in
C. Romani Muls.) while the light ground color,
yellow or red of the elytra turns into black. This question and many other similar questions
obscure, would quickly find their solution, if one encountered
more often hunters as attentive and as meticulous as
Father Cardon. 1. Coccinella '7-punctata L. — A few specimens of colo-
ration 4 penalty variable. 2. Coccinella spread Thunb. Nov. Spec. 1781, 18. - What-
copies. 3. Halyzia japonica Thunb. Dissertation. Nov. Spec. 1781, 12. —
8 copies. The /habitat of this species extends from the East Indies
to Japan; the design is very variable:

HAS. Variations of the prothorax. has. Corselet of a testaceous red, adorned with two triangular spots
short and wide, black, tied at the base. 6. These two spots closely linked together and forming a
bidentate basal border, sometimes emitting an anterior
shortened stroke on the middle line. ¢c. Prothorax adorned with a basilar border and four spots
more anterior punctiform, arranged in a transverse row,
black: the two intermediaries arranged in a sort of triangle
transverse, the lateral ones small. d. These four spots linked together, forming a trans-
versal. e. Prothorax black, adorned with a wide lateral border, dilated in
front of the middle. B. Variations of the elytra:

a, Elytra tawny or tawny red without spots, or showing no
only a black suture border. This border, either extended only
slowly up to a quarter of the length, sometimes gradually a little
widened behind and forming a very long scutellar spot
(specimens captured in the East Indies), or extended to
narrowing to the end (specimens from Japan). v. virginalis m.

b. Similar to the previous one, but offering on each elytron
a black punctiform spot, located either on the callus or on the
middle (Monog. 57, Hazmonia). East Indies, Japan. v. Felicie Muls. ANNALS OF THE SOC. FNTOM. OF BELGIUM, T. XXXVI 2

18

vs. Elytra adorned with a sutural border, often reduced gra ~
dually 4 a simple border, with a point on the callus and a
spot in the same longitudinal direction, located towards the middle
of their length, black (Monogr. 66, Harmonia). India, China,
Japan y. Dionea Muls. d. Blytra adorned with an oyally swollen sutural border
yers one-third and 4 from two-thirds, and each of two spots
black, the first on the callus, the second, larger, narrowed
posteriorly, located between the three septisms and the two
third (Monog. 72, Harmonia). China. y. anxious Muls. e. Elytra adorned with a black sutural border and each with a
black circle and spot; the circle originating on the 4th side of
escutcheon and passing over the callus encompassing an orbicular spot
based on a pale or testaceous flave; the black spot (sometimes close together
of the margin), located two-thirds of their length (Monogr. 250, Lemmnia). India, China. v. mystacea Muls. Jf. Wlytra adorned with a sutural border and three bands
transverse common, externally shortened; the anterior™
located in the first quarter, dilated at its extremities in the form of an accent
circumflex, covering the calus, encompassing, between this and
The escutcheon, an oval space of the land color; the median,
nearly two-thirds oval, swollen at the extremities; the
posterior, subapical (Monogr. 249, Lemmia). India, China. y. dissected Muls. g- Similar 4 la var, d, but the sutural border dilated towards
one-third and 4 from two-thirds in the shape of a quadrangular spot;
The humeral spot oval, obliquely placed; the stain posted-
upper incipient in the middle, extended parallel to the outer edge
up to five-sixths of the length. (Nov Sp. Inspector., 12,
Coccinella). China, Japan. japonica Thunb. h. Second united spot posterior to the suture; elytra
further marked with a small common, subapical, black spot. This variety has a lot of analogy with Halyzia 14-punetata
L. (conglobata Ul.). Japan (Kraatz, Monatsblitter, 1880, 118). vy. anchora Ws. i. Black spots dilated and bound so that the elytra
appear black with a fairly wide outer border, two
transverse bands linked to the outer border, and two spots on
each flaves; the first band located in the middle, the second
subterminal, the first spot in a square 4 the base, juxta-
sutural, the other, below the middle. The first band
often adjoining or interrupted 4 the side border. Similar
Ala Halyz. 14-punetata L. var. fimbriata Sulzer. Love, Japan. y. tessellata Ws. 19

kh. Blytra black, adorned with a narrow outer border and a
basilar spot next to shield, flaves (Kraatz, Monatsblitter,
1880, 119). Japan. v. tristis Ws. 1. Elytra entirely black or with an outer border
very narrow with a red yellow or flave. — Japan (I. c. 119). v. Lewisi Ws. 4. Verania Cardoni. —Subhemispherica, flava, nitida, minus
crebre, subtilissime and obsolete punctulata, prothorace maculis
2 parvis trigonis in basi punctisque binis paullo ante medium
nigris, elytris sutura anguste nigro limbata, lineis 4 curvatis
punctisque duobus ante apicem nigris. - Long. 3.3-3.6mm. Mas. : segmento penultimo margine postico leviter sinuato. Var. has. Punctis 2 ante medium prothoracis obsoletis vel defi-
cientibus,

Var. 4. Punctis subapicalibus elytrorum nullis. Var. vs. Lineis nigris elytrorum interruptis. Subhemispherical body, flabby, shiny, superficially pointed
tilled. Prothorax transversely convex, about three times
as wide as high on its middle line, narrowed in front, 4
sides regularly rounded, adorned with two basal spots
triangular, black, and, on its disk, two black dots,
very close to the midline. Elytra adorned with a border
narrow sutural, each of two longitudinal and postero-
clearly with a punctiform spot, black. The bands are
narrow, sublinear; the external, formed by the union of a stain
oblique with a longitudinal line, starting at the inner quarter and
one-fifth of the length. extends in are to the callus
humeral or connects by its postero-external angle 4 a line
longitudinal subparallel to the outer edge, extended to the
about three-fifths of the length. The nascent internal one
little more posteriorly, located between the previous one and the border
sutural, extended up to four-fifths and strongly
curved outward, The outer band appearing on the elytron
left a kind of big C, the inside a kind of big J. The
punctiform spot is subapical, closer to the suture
than the outer edge. Underside of the body and legs of a yellow or
of a russet yellow. Variations:

Blackheads, located a little before the middle of the prothorax
are brownish or erased. The elytra often lack subapical points; the lines
curved quarter notes are sometimes split close to the curvature. I make a point of dedicating this pretty species to R. P. Cardon. It has a lot of analogy with the Verania Gauthardi Muls.,

20
from which it is easily distinguished by its shape and the design of the
elytra. 5. Coelophora unicolor. -—— Subhemispherica, late rufo-testa-
cea, nitida, prothorace subtiliter punctato, elytris evidenter punc-
tatis, punctis in margine laterali deplanato-declivi majoribus;
subtus flavo-testacea, prosterno carinis brevissimis, mesosterno
carinato, metasterno basi subcalloso and ante suleum profundum
emarginato, epipleuris foveis obsoletissimis. - Long. 3.2-5mm. Coccinella wnicolor Fabr., Ent. System I, 267; System El. I. 357. — Mulls. Spec. 413 (Celophora); Monogr. 275. — Crotch, Revi-
154. Celophora versipellis (pars.) Crotch, Revis., 151 (N. India,
Deyrolle),

A.Var. has. Supra testaceo-flava, fere lurida. Var. 6. Prothorace rufo-testaceo vel brunneo-rufo, maculis
2 elongatis, obliquis, ante scutellum flavescentibus. Var. vs. Prothorace rufo-testaceo, marginem laterem versus
dilutive, flavescent. Var. d. Prothorace lurido vel flavo albido, punctis duobus
fascia basalibus transversa, subtrigona, ante medium obscuris,
sat deletis, translucent. Var. None Supra saturate ferruginea, castanea vel fusca, protho-
race sepe plus minusve dilutiore, toto rufescente, aut lateribus
flavescentibus; dorso interdum etiam utrinque maculis binis
nigris basalibus, szpe confluentibus notato; margine laterali
elytrorum dilute rufo-limbato. Var. f. Elytris nigris, exterius rufo-limbatis vel unicoloribus,
prothorace rufo. Var. g. Supra nigra, margine laterali elytrorum interdum sub-
tiliter rufo-vel flavo-limbato, prothorace antice and latera versus
rufescent or flavescent. B.Var. cinctipennis. Flavo-aut rufo-testacea, margine late-
rali deplanato elytrorum epipleurisque nigro-limbatis. Var. None Elytris epipleurisque ante medium anguste nigro-
limbatis. Var. None Elytris pone medium nigro-limbatis, limbo apicem ver-
sus rarius dilatato. Limbo laterali nigro elytrorum integro. Var. vs. Prothorace rufo, fascia parva acute flexuosa nigra,
utrinque ante angulos posticos sita. Var. d. Prothorace rufo, lateribus late flavo-limbato. Var. None Eadem, limbo flavo marginali internal vitta curvata
nigra terminato. Var. f. Prothorace nigro, marginibus antico and lateralibus

21

anguste vittaque media (aut sat lata, aut angusta, interdum pos-
ticke abbreviata) rufis. Var. g. Prothorace nigro, limbo lato laterali, ante medium
angulatim vel rotundatim dilatato, albido. Var. 1. Elytris castaneis, fuscis aut piceis (in sutura et basi
nonnunquam dilutioribus), margine deplanato nigro-limbatis,
rarius supra limbum vitta angusta rufa ornatis. Prothorace omnino
rufo, vel ut in var. ¢c-g signato. C.Var. caliginosa. Supra picea, prothorace margine antico
et laterali anguste rufo vel flavo-limbato, epipleuris elytrorum
exterius piceis. Cell. caliginosa Muls., Species 414. Var. has. Eadem, elytris nigris, unicoloribus, prothorace nigro,
lateribus anguste flavo-limbatis. Celophora Dumortieri Muls., Mon. 260. Celophora caliginosa Crotch, Revision 151. Var. 5. Eadem, prothorace limbo lato laterali albido, ante
medium dilatato. Celophora Dupasquiert Muls., Mon. 261. — Crotch, Revi-
151. D.Var. 4-punetata. Supra lete ferruginea vel lateritia, subtus
dilutor, elytris punctis 4 nigris, 1.1 collocatis, primo prope basin,
intra callum humeralem, altero pone medium. Var. has. Signaturis elytrorum obsoletismis, fere deletis, trans-
lucid. Var. 4. Elytris punctis 2 nigris, distinctis, anteriore nempe in
utroque elytro deficient. Var. vs. Ut in 4, sed puncto posteriore deest. Var. d. Prothorace latera versus albido tincto. Var. None Prothorace lateribus late albido-limbatis, internal limbo
exact terminato, ante medium dilatato. E.Var. signed. Pallid testaceo-flava, aut albida, prothorace
rufescente, limbo basali utrinque abbreviato nigro, elytris sutura,
punctis 2 disci (primo prope basin, secundo pone medium) macu-
lisque 2 elongatis, subtrigonis, supra marginem lateralem in sin-
gulo elytro nigris. Macula prima ante medium, secunda longe
pone medium sita. Var. has. Sutura elytrorum concolor. Var. 6. Prothorace flavo-aut rufo-testaceo toto. Var. None Prothorace nigro, limbo lato marginali ante medium
albido dilatato. Var. d. Supra lutea, interdum rosea, elytris maculis 2 sub-
marginalibus infuscatis, obsoletis, translucidis. Var. None Omnia eadem, sed maculis distinctis, nigris. 22

Var. None Ut in d, sed maculis submarginalibus et punctis interio-
ribus nebulosis, paullo infuscatis, obsoletismis. Var. g. Maculis submarginalibus elytrorum distinctis, inter
se connatis, punctis interioribus aut nebulosis aut distinctis. Var. i. Elytris maculis submarginalibus tribes, adjecta parva
humerali. Var. 7. Maculis exterioribus elytrorum diletatis, inter tribes
se et cum sutura connatis, vittam nigram inzequalem formantibus. Var. i. Vitta angusta nigra suturali dilatata, in medio et
ante apicem utrinque ramulum trigonum exserente. Var. 7. Ramulis vitte ruturali cum vitta ineequali supra mar-
ginem confluentibus, punctis 2 interioribus annulo nigro inclusis. F.Var. Petrequini. Testaceoflava vel lutea, elytris nigris,
basi margineque laterali luteo-limbatis. Limbo laterali in medio
and ante apicem contracto. Calophora Petrequini Muls. My. 276. Var. has. Prothorace basi fascia nigra, utrinque abbreviata. Var. b. Elytris nigris, limbo ineequali marginis laterali flavo. Var. vs. Eadem, sed limbo laterali flavo interrupto et in macu-
las 3 divisa, prima infra humerum, altera in medio, tertia apical. Cal. Petrequini Crotch Mon. 154. Var. d. Ut in 4, sed limbo laterali flavo sat angusto, ubique
equilato. G.Var. Romani. Subtus testacea, supra nigra, prothorace
limbo lato marginali albido ante medium angulatim dilatato;
elytris in singulo guttis 2 magnis, rubris, prima basali, secunda
pony medium; praterea interdum maculis 2 submarginalibus,
anteriore lineari infraehumerum, posteriore parva, variabili, in
mediocre. Celophora Romani Muls., Mon. 273. Dysis Romani Crotch, Revision 160. Var. None Supra testacea vel rufo-testacea, elytris guttis 2 (una
in utroque elytro, aut basali, aut postmedio) vel 4 paullo dilutiori-
bus, vix conspicuis. Hee varietas a Celoph. unicolori (vera) Fabr. vix certainly distin-
east genda. Var. d. Pothorace rufo-testaceo, elytris castaneis, piceis aut
nigris, guttis 4 sat magnis flavis vel rufis, elytro singulo praterea
spe macula parva in medio juxta marginem lateralem notato. Dysis Saundersii Crotch, Revision 160. Var. vs. Eadem, prothorace rufo-testaceo, versus marginem
lateralem dilutor, Havescente. Var. d. Prothorace rato, limbo basali nigro, lineolis 3 vel 4 in
emitting disc. Var. None Prothorace nigro lateribus subtiliter rufo-marginati

Var. None Ut in 4, sed elytris external sat late rufo-vel flavo-lim-
build. Var. g. Elytris rufis, castaneis aut piceis, external nigro-limba-
tis, guttis flavis aut rufescentibus. This species is well recognizable by its small size, 4 its shape
almost orbicular and 4 the color of the underside of the body, of a blane
flave, flave-testaceous or red-testaceous, The prothorax is densely and
finely dotted; the elytra are less finely punctate than
the prothorax, the margin, quite narrow and sloping, quite distinctly
limited, is much more strongly punctate than the rest of the
surface. The prosternum has two short keels, the mesosternum is
keeled, the metasternum deeply furrowed, notched anteriorly
on the middle part; the epiplerium marked with very weak dimples. It is without any scruple that I report here as varieties
the Celops. Dumortieri, Dupasquieri, Romani, Petrequini Muls. and Petrequini and Saundersi Crotch. Individuals, on a large scale
number, that I have had the opportunity to examine have between them the most
intimate analogies and only differ in color and design from
the dress. We find, but still very rarely, the transitions
which connect the various varieties to one and the same species. A. In the normal state the elytra are uniformly of one
testaceous red or pale testaceous. When the coloring matter
darkens, the elytra entirely are reddish-brown,
dark brown or black, or adorned on the outside with a
edge of a testaceous red. The prothorax is red or testaceous,
outwardly often paler or still black, trimmed forward and
on the sides of a variable border, clear. Common in West Bengal. B. The cinctipennis variety differs from Col. typical F. unicolor
by the margin of the elytra black; the coloring of the latter varies
in an analogous way. Wouldn't she be identical to Artemis
circwmusta Muls. from Hong Kong? Uncommon in Mandar. C. Calophora caliginosa, Dumortieri and Dupasquieri Muls. are variations by excess of the preceding variety. A few copies captured 4 Mandar. D. In the 4-pwnctata variety, uncommon in Bengal, the
bright red color from above fades to pale red or yellowish. The elytra have two black dots on each of them, one
on the internal side of the humeral calus, the other after the middle, a little
closer to the suture than to the outer edge. Sometimes the
elytra show only more or less apparent traces of these
black dots. 24

E. The variety signata is similar 4 to the preceding, but it
present on each elytra a sutural border, two spots
suborbicular on the disc and two subtriangular spots,
often confused into a longitudinal band, externally
wavy, black. The arrangement of the punctiform spots is the
same as in the preceding variety; subtriangular spots
are located near the outer edge, one in the middle, the other lower. When the black pigment has failed, all you see is
brownish, ebulous traces of the sutural border or other
drawings of the elytra. In variations par excess, the border
sutural less narrow, is dilated in the middle and at the cing
sixths of the length. Fairly common. F. The elytral spots are dilated and confused, the pigment
black usurped the entire disk: var. Petrequini Muls. Pro-
thorax rufous or testaceous, either without spots or with a border
basilar narrow, gradually dilated to the anterior edge. Black elytra, the base and the outer edge (the latter often irregular)
lightly) a dirty yellow or white russet. Rare 4 Mandars. G. A very remarkable modification is the Cel. Romani Muls.
adorned on the elytra with two large red orbicular spots
and more rarely a few traces of russet spots near
margin. Unusual. 6. Chilomenes sexmaculata Fabr. Spec. Ins. I, 96.—Name-
specimens with little variable coloration: in some specimens
please the black parts of the corselet are reduced 4 a line
transverse antemedian and 4 a very narrow basilar border. Sometimes the transverse line is inconspicuous, nebulous,
of a red or yellow fauye, rarely absent, and the basilar border
reduced 4 two blackheads. 7. Chilocorus nigrita Fabr. Supplement Ent. System, 79. --
A few copies. This species occurs not only
in India, but also in Annam, China, and Japan. 8. Genus Clanis Muls. Species, 1851, 999; Jawravia Motsch.
Btud. ent., VI, 1858, 117. Prosternum latum, fere planum, processu utrinque carinula
subtilissima instructum. Oculi minus subtiliter ocellati, nudi, margine interno evidenter
marginalized. Incomplete abdominal laminae marginem posticum segmenti
primi conjunct. Corpus fere hemisphericum, pubescens. maxillary palpi

25

articulo ultimo elongato, apicem versus oblique truncato loin. Has generated Scymno epipleuris latissimis, acute inflexis, coxis
anticis late distantibus, palpis maxillaribus articulo ultimo acutis-
simo, oculis nudis mox distincta. The species of this genus are small, rounded, mediocre-
ment convex, subhemispherical, pubescent; they look like
rather for the shape and contours to species of the genus
Exochomus. The eyes are quite large, slightly obliquely directed
in front, oval, indented at the inner edge vis-a-vis the inner
antennal connection. The elytra have a margin more or less
pronounced, broad, rather concave epipleures, without dimples. Flat prosternum, fairly broad and bisillon between the hips,
mesosternum broad, 4 barely notched in front. I have united under this name the genus Jawravia Mortch. because he
does not differ in reality; species inhabit the East Indies
and the island of Ceylon. Clanis soror. —Orbiculata, sat convexa, rufo-testacea, albido-
pubescens, transverso prothorace, antrorsum angustato, crebre
punctato, elytris sat crebre punctatis. - Long. 2.5-2.8mm. To Cl. pubescent Fabr. Supplement Ent. System 77 (=Jauravia
pallidula Mortch., Etud. Ent. VII. 117) cui statura and magni-
dine simillima, prothorace evidenter angustiore, lateribus minus
rotundato, elytris minus crebre punctatis bene distincta. Four copies found 4 Mandar. 9. Genus Rodolia Muls. Species 902. Palpi maxillares crassiusculi. Antenna breves, 8-articulated, articulis 2 primis sat magnis,
sequentibus tenuibus, ultimis 3 clavam subdentatam formantibus. Oculi vix emarginati, subtiliter ocellati, hispidi. Prosternum antice abrupte assurgens, inter coxas carina trans-
versa vel hastula destitutum, post illam declive. Femora sulcata, tibize oblique sulcate, margine superiore
angle. This genus is described by Mulsant so briefly and so vaguely-
ment, that it is difficult 4 to recognize generic cuts
yoisines. At first glance, it stands out from other Cocci-
nellides by the conformation of the prosternum. This one is very short,
suddenly raised at the base and steeply sloping behind; his 
summit between the axes is sometimes very high, in the shape of a point,
sometimes a little lower and truncated. The legs are compressed,
the thighs and shins with a groove at the outer edge, the
last angular. Tarsal hooks bifid or appendix
cules. The species of this genus, 8 in number, are very similar

26

among themselves for shape and color; they live all over the
Indo-Malaysian region and China. In two species that I have before my eyes the fangs of
tarsi are appendiculate ('), in two others they are bifid. Rodolia smoked Muls. Species 904. — Breviter-ovalis, postice
sat angustata, convexa, dense breviterque albido-cinereo pu-
bescens, capite, prothorace (interdum basi infuscato) limboque
laterali elytrorum flavo-rufis, elytris densissime obsoleteque punc-
tulatis, dorso infuscato medium versus rufescente, carina trans-
versa prosternali minus elevata, unguiculis bifidis. - Long. 4-6mm. Vedalia fumida Crotch, Revison 281 (pars) (’). Var. has. Supra testacea, rufo-testacea vel rufa, tota. Var. b. Ut in a, sed elytris in sutura, basi and supra marginem
lateralem nigro-limbatis, prothorace ante scutellum rarius nigro-
bimaculate. Var. vs. Ut in a, sed elytris pone medium nigro-infuscatis. Var. d. Elytris omnino nigricantibus. Many copies have been collected at Mandar; they
seem to relate 4 the real &. fwmida Muls., a species
exceedingly variable in size and colaration. In the normal state, the prothorax is red, often testaceous and
spotless; more rarely it is marked in front of the crest,
two isolated black spots or a brown transyersal band
or black, rather nebulous. The elytra are uniformly reddish
variable (var. a), often adorned with a black suture border, 4
extended sentence by shrinking, up to three quarters of the
length, forward extended along base to callus
humeral, or binding 4 a sub-external border, extended parallel-
lJement at the outer edge up to the suture (var. 4). At others
specimens the elytra show a blackish spot, more or
less extensive below the middle (var. c), sometimes the elytra
are distinctly blackish (var. d). 10. Rodolia breviuscula. Subhemispherica, testacea, sub-
tiliter albido-cinereo-pubescens, elytris densissime obsolete
punctulatis, carina prosternali alte elevata, arcuata, unguiculis
bifidis. - Long. 3-4mm. Mandar; rarius. (°) Rodotia rufopitosa Muls. Spec. 903. — Subhemisphierica, testaceo-rufa, sat
dense lurid pubescens, elytris erebre su imedue panctatis, punctis majoribus
intermixtis, carina transversa prosternali sat elevata, unguiculis appendiculatis. Long. 5.5-6.5mm. — Hong Kong (Simon). Rodolia pumila. Sub-hemisphirica, testacea, sat dense cinereo-pubescens,
elytris “qualit ereberrime et subtilissime punctatis, carina transversa prosternali

altissima, ungniculis appendiculatis. Long. 3.8mm. — Hong Kong (Simon). (2) Crotch gave (p, 281) an inaccurate synonymy. 27

ll. Ortalia discoidea. — Breviter ovalis, sat convexa, pube
subtilissima argentea sat dense vestita, ochracea, elytro singulo
plaga discoidali rosea ornato, capite subtiliter punctulato, fronte
plana antice linea transversa inter oculos obsolete impressa, pro-
thorace subtiliter punctulato, elytris fortius crebreque punctulatis,
appendix magna unguiculis, instructis translucida. - Long. 8.8-4.5mm. Body briefly oval, rather convex, of a white ocher yellow.
catre, furnished with a fine and short down, of silvery color. Heat
dotted, flat front, with a line transversely impressed
between the eyes. Transverse brace, more than twice
as wide as high, 4 anterior edge slightly indented, sur-
finely dotted face. Helytra slightly enlarged to the
middle, in ogive posteriorly, of a flave on a long space
tudinal discoidal, of a flave of ocher in the periphery of each;
less finely punctate than the prothorax. Legs slender, 4 barely angular or arched on their edge
external, dug with a furrow to receive the tarsi; every fingernail
subbifid, inner branch light-coloured, subdiaphanous and two
times as wide as the outer branch. Mandar, two copies. This species offers a certain analogy with !Ortalia Meklini
Muls. (Books III, 130) described from Java and found 4 Siam
(Fischer); it differs from it by its narrower size, its shape
more convex stroke, its flat forehead and the color of the elytra. Ortalia proxima Crotch (Revis. 276) of Menado is described
briefly and so vaguely that it is impossible to recognize it.
be born. 12. Scymnus (Nephus) Severini. — Breviter ovalis, con-
vexiusculus, dense albido pubescens, stramineus, basal pectore
abdominis infuscatis aut nigris; prothorace trausverso, antrorsum
angustato, lateribus subrectis, dorso vix punctulato; elytris
subtilisssime punctatis, in singulo macula basali lineaque lata
oblique, postice suturam convergent, pone medium, nigris,
sutura ante medium interdum infuscata vel nigro-limbata. —
Long. 1.5-2mm. Var. has. Macula basali elytrorum deficient. Var. b. Elytro singulo puncto parvo, aut in medio, aut pone
medium site, ornato. Var. None Corpore stramineo vel testaceo toto. Body briefly oval, moderately convex, of a yellow of
wax, or a straw yellow, furnished with a flavescent white down. Black underside on the mid and post-pectus and on the middle of the
first and second arches of the belly, of a straw yellow on the

28

rest. Prothorax rectilinearly and rather slightly widened
from front to back, two and a half times at least as wide 4 sound
posterior edge than high in the middle, surface 4 barely poin-
tilled. Very finely punctuated blytra, each adorned with a
spot and a black line: the transverse spot at the base, the line
(or a shortened longitudinal band) covering the middle third
is oblique, close to the suture behind, the latter provided
sometimes with a short, nebulous or black border, after the crest. The coloring varies as follows:

has. Basilar stain of the elytra nil. 4. Blytra each offering only a discoidal black point, near the
middle. vs. Elytra without stains. Mandar, a few copies. Dedicated to Mr. Séverin, assistant naturalist at the Museum of Natural History
real from Brussels. 13. Seymnus lepidulus Motsch. Study. ent., 1858, 120. —
A copy. 14.Scymnus(Pullus) dorsualis.—Breviter ovalis, convexius-
culus, obsolete brunneo-testaceus, nubilo pubescens, pectore abdo-
mineque plus minusve infuscatis, prothorace transverso lateribus
antrorsum subrotundato-convergentibus, disco elytrisque brunneo-
vel piceo-infuscatis, his margine laterali late testaceo limbatis,
male internal limbo terminato apicem versus paullo dilatato,
metasterno crebre subrugoso-punctato. - Long. 1.7-2.4mm. Of a fairly short oval shape; quite densely covered with a
fairly cloudy, short, whitish-grey pubescence. Protho-
rax transverse, slightly rounded laterally, slightly strongly
narrowed in front, surface covered with a very fine and
quite tight; disc pitch brown on the middle third. Elytra rounded on the sides and 4 the extremity, with the shoulders
protruding callus, they are covered with a fairly fine punctuation and
very tight, of a testaceous yellow on the slightly widened lateral margin
4 Vend, brown or pitch-brown in the middle
longitudinally. These two colors separated in a way little
sharp and very indistinct. Underside of ferruginous body, with
the chest and the middle of the abdomen often blackish, covered
with not very fine and very tight, rough punctuation. Antennas and
feet of a pale or testaceous rufous. Sometimes the elytra show only a nebulous ov black line.
tre, obliquely extended from the middle to two-thirds of the length. This species seems close to Seymnus O. nigrum Muls. (Papers, III, 1853, 148) and Zimbatus Motsch. (Istud. ent., 1858,
118), Se. Vietoris Crotch (Revision, 1874, 253) both described

29

of India. It is perhaps distinguished from the first by the color
blackish ration of the middle of the corselet and the blackish sign of the
elytra extended up to two-thirds of the length, from the second by
the antennae fully testate and the indeterminate russet border
born. Mandar, 8 copies. 15. Secymnus nubilus Muls. Species 972. Seems to be rare in
Bengal. — This species has much analogy with our
Se. sutwralis Thunb. by size and color, but the plates
abdominals are incomplete. SuMNIUS nov. gen.

Antenna breyes, 10-articulated, articulo primo magno, sub-
triangular, sequentibus sat gracilibus, ultimis 3 dilatatis, clavam
formingibus. Prosternum margine antico recte truncatum, processu haud
carinato. Tibi sat late, compress, anticis apice oblique sinuato-
angustatis. This genus is very close to Rhizobius, and is not distinguished
only by the short antennae, formed of 10 articles, by
the fairly flat prosternum, 4 straight front edge, not furrowed
between the hips, by the shins rather wide, compressed, dug
with a furrow at the end. I have before my eyes two native species
of Bengal. 16. Sumnius Renardi. — Ovalis, rufo-ferrugineus, griseo-
pubescens, prothorace antice rotundato-angustato, angulis posticis
subrectis; elytris nigris, unequal punctatis, fascia commun
cordiformi in tertia media parte lunulaque sub humeris (in elytro
singulo), cum fascia conjuncta, rufo-ferrugineis. antennarum
claya lata, utrinque angustata, articulo secundo fortiter trans-
back. - Long. 4.5-5mm. Mandar, minus frequens. Var. has. Fascia cordiformi elytrorum medio utrinque interrupta. Body oval, moderately convex, reddish, furnished with down
ash. Transverse prothorax, about twice as wide as
high in the middle, narrowed in front, 4 anterior edge arched or
very slightly indented, double edged side edges,
almost straight, rounded on its anterior angles; dense surface-
ment and very finely punctuated. Slightly wider elytra 4 la
base than the prothorax, subrounded 4 the extremity, rather convex,
densely and finely punctate, and also presenting
many bigger dots. 30

The elytra are black, adorned with a common band in the shape
heart-shaped (or in the shape of a handle or a sort of C on the left elytra)
che) and @a lunate band, bordering the external side of the callus hu-
meral and prolonged by curving from the third of the external edge
to the anterior curvature of the inner band, with which
she is confused. Progressively dilated antennae club
from the inner side to the middle. Pretty arched abdominal plates
regular, extended up to about three quarters of the arch,

17. Sumnius Cardoni — Oblongo-ovalis, rufo-ferrugineus,
griseo-pubescens, prothorace ante medium rotundato-angustato,
angulis posticis subrectis, elytris nigris, inaqualiter punctatis,
fascia communi cordiformi rufo-ferruginea, antennarum clava
minus Jata lateribus subparallelis, articulo secundo sub-quadrato. - Long. 5-5.5mm. Mandar, minus frequens. Body oval-oblong, moderately convex, reddish, furnished with a
ash down. Transverse prothorax, narrowed in front, 4 edges
sides almost straight, rounded a little above the middle,
densely and finely punctate surface. Black helytra, pre-
smelling of a common rufous band, shaped like a handle, on each
delles, originating near the suture at the quarter of the length,
open on the outside and extended outwards towards the middle of the
width approximately up to three quarters of the length, or binding
at the suture. Antennae club fairly narrow, sides slightly
arched, almost parallel. This species has much analogy with the preceding one, and it
would seem, at first sight, to be only a variety of this,
if the shape of the body and the antennae did not leave doubts
serious about the reunion of the two species. ON THE NEW BOOK BY M. L. GANGLBAUER

 

(Die Kifer von Mittel-Europa. Erster Band. Familienrethe Carabotdea.) Vienna, Gerold, 1892

by Alfred Preudhomme de Borre. The last days of last year saw the release of 4 Viennese
the first volume of a work of the highest utility for all
those who attach themselves to the study of European Coleoptera. M.L.
Ganglbauer, considering that the 3rd edition of the Fauna austriaca
of Redtenbacher (another work which we regarded as

31

essential for coleopterologists knowing German) was
already somewhat exhausted, undertook to replace it with a larger work. He entitled this work: Die Kifer von Mittel-Luropa, and the
the volume, 558 pages, has just been published. This volume is
dedicated to the series of families that the author calls the Carabotdea. I'll come back to that in a moment. £1 tells us that the 2nd volume includes
will take the Staphylinoidea (Necrophages), the 3" the Clavicornes and
Lamelticornes, the 4"°, the Serricornes (in the sense of Le Conte and Horn) and
Heteromeres, the 5", the Rhynchophores, the 6th and last, the
Phytophages (in the sense of Le Conte and Horn). Redtenbacher's Fauna had taken as its geographical circumscription
graph the only Austrian monarchy, which, in geography
zoological, forms a whole that is both very heterogeneous and well
incomplete. Often, moreover, the author included spaces of
central and northern Germany. Better advised, Mr. Ganglbauer stepped outside the confines of the monarchy
Austro-Hungarian and it includes in a centro-
Europe, first all of Germany, then towards the south, all of
maine of the Alps, absorbing all of Switzerland and parts
of the massif included in eastern France and northern Italy
end; its fauna includes even the Mediterranean coastline since
The mouth of the Rhine as far as Savona. This, 4 my opinion, would be to
too much, if, on the side of Trieste, Istria and Dalmatia, the fauna
from Redtenbacher, kept as a nucleus by
Mr. Ganglbauer, had not already incorporated many media forms +
terraneans. As for heights, there is no inconsistency in
follow the many genera 'e Alpine beetles from the alps
or high pastures of Styria to those of Dauphiné and the
Provence; there are faunal characters of an avoidable connection
toothed. If, to the south and west, the wildlife region established by Mr. Gangl-
bauer avoids, as far as possible, the reproach of arbitrariness,
it is perhaps not the same towards the east and the south-east. If Mr.
Ganglbauer included Bosnia and Herzegovina in this region
of which he gives us the fauna of the Coleoptera, why does not advance=
isn't it a bit further? Zoologically, it is difficult to separate
Bosnia, Croatia, Transylvania, Galicia, countries
which are not part of the political domain of the Austro-
Hungary. The external organography or anatomy is exceptionally
well treated in the work of M. Ganglbauer and numerous and
excellent figures serve to make it well understood. I said that this first volume dealt with a large series of
families of Coleoptera which the author calls: Caraboidea, and which

32

does not absolutely correspond to what is still generally called
Adéphages or Carnassiers. To Cicindelida, Carabid, Amphizoid, Haliplid, Pelobiid,
Dyltiscide and Gyrinide, which constitute, for the last authors
generals, the set of carnivorous beetles, Mr. Ganglbauer
brings together, for reasons that seem quite plausible, the small
aberrant families of Pausside and Rhizodide. Here is the synoptic table of the characters of these nine families,
whose systematized whole is the subject of the volume which has just appeared:

1”, Metasternum with a transverse suture in front of the hips
posterior. 2'. The transverse suture occupies the entire width of the metaster-
number The coxal lobe of the metasternum is as wide as its part
anterior and forms, between the posterior hips, a projection
triangular. 3”. Antennae of 11 articles. Abdomen having 6 4 8 segments
ventrals. The first three welded together with the visi-
wheat. Posterior hips not enlarged in plates. 4', Antennae inserted between the bases of the mandibles. Chaperone
extended laterally above the base of the antenna. CicinpELIDz. 4'. Antennae inserted behind the bases of the mandibles, Cha-
peron not extending laterally above the base of
Antenna. . . . + + “. CaRaBida. 3”. Antennae having, or2 2 articles, of which the second enormous and of
irregular shape, or 6 articles, or 10 articles, in club. Abdomen
has 4 ventral segments, the first of which is formed by 3 segments
welded without visible sutures. Posterior hips not dilated in
plates. . . . + Paussipa. 3'. Antennae of 10 articles, flliform. ” Abdomen having 6 seg-
ventral ments; the first three welded together, with sutures
visible. Posterior hips enlarged in large and wide plates,
completely covering the first ventral segments. HALIPLIDA. 2'. The transverse suture occupies only half of the metaster-
num, The coxal lobe of the metasternum is reduced to a small piece
median truncated behind. Antennae with 11 filiform articles. Abdomen has 6 ventravux segments; the first three welded together
ble, with visible sutures. 5”. Globulous anterior hips. Tibiae and tarsi without eyelashes

 

 

  

swimming. None oh . AMPHIZOIDA. 5'. Tapered front hips. stock and tarsi furnished with
swimming cilia. . : +. None PELOBUDA. 1’, Metasternum without; transverse suture in front of the hips
posterior. 33

6”. Very large posterior hips, extending to the
sides of the body, dividing entirely the first ventral segment
dwith the metathorax, and touching completely on the line
median. Metasternum forming a triangular projection between the
posterior hips. Swimming legs. 7”. Whole eyes. Antennae 11-segmented, filiform or setaceous;
seldom their medial or terminal articles enlarged or provided
of extensions. Shorter front and middle legs
than the hind legs built for swimming. Abdomen
4 6 ventral segments; the first three welded together,
with visible sutures. 2. . 2... . Dyncipa. 7'. Eyes completely divided, so that the head seems
have two upper eyes and two lower eyes. Antennas very
short and irregular, their first excavated globose article, the
second in the ear, ciliate on the edge, the following nenfs very short,
transverse, forming a tight club. Forelegs long
gues, the intermediate ones and the posterior ones short and compressed,
built for swimming. Abdomen 4 7 ventral segments,
of which the first two in general are separated only near the
posterior hips by a rudimentary suture. . GyriniDar. 6'. Hind hips much smaller than metaster-
num, strongly separated in the middle. Metasternnm forming between
the posterior hips a deeply angular extension:
cut out. Clean paws when walking. Abdomen at 6 seg:
ventral ments; the first three welded together, with sutures
visible. Antennae moniliform. . . . . . . Rutzopips

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

To my praise of the new work, however, I must
a slight restriction. In my opinion, the author suffered a little too much V'in-
fluency of the school which, under the pretext of priority, changes so many
names consecrated by the unanimous use made of them by authors whose
the works remain a first-rate authority; of ot in this
case two names 4 impose 'tthe memory for a species. But I must
however to say that it was relatively more moderate than many others.
very much in the use of resurrected names and the cascades of change-
ments which are the consequence. That's how he didn't think he should
to substitute for the name of Carabus that of Zachypus; what can we
hope that, further on, he will not make the Clythrids the ALelo-
lonthids, and of these I do not

 

 

 

is what. ANNALES DLA SOG FNTOM GF MELGIUEE, 1, NNAVT

Comics

yuueration DES HEMIPTERA pp belcique (continued),

by Bug. Coucheaux. He. — HOMOPTERA Am. Serv. Src'

 

FP, CICADIDES. Cicadetia Am, mustana Scop. ULGORLD!I

Myndus St9)., musirus Germ. Cixins Fieb, pilosus Ol. infwnatus Bieb

albicinctus Gerin. — nervous L.

— cunicularius L.

Ligimaticus Gerin. Oliarus Sil, teporinus L. nee Fieb. — Vied cuspidatus. Dietyophora Germ,, exropaed 1. ., coleoptratus Fab,

ca Late , clavicornis Wab. Aracopus Spin., crassicornis Kab. — Puichellus Curt. Megamelus Fieb., notula Germ,

Stenocranus Hieb., lineola Germ. — fuscovittatus Stal. — Kelixa Fieb., paltidula Boh? — perspicillata Boh. = gti
= rillipennis Knows 2

Delphaciuus Fieh., mesomelas Boh,

Chloviona Vib., smaragdula St
=prasinuta Vick

Eurdella Put., speciosa Boh. wrysa Wieb.. lineata Perris? Conomelus Fieb, limbatus Fab. Delphax Vab., discolor Boh. - pellucid Bab. Flower. Hriatella Vall. ? — elegantuta Bou. — ulbostriata Wieb,? = sordidwia Stw\? — Hill Boh. — olscurelta Boh. = heyi ¥ied.? — soreipata Boh. uscifrous Keb. — leptosoma Vlov. — lepida Boh

= quedrimaculata Sig? —venosa Germ,

= Ingubrina Boh. atidiotus Spin., dissimilis Fall.

. I. — Auchenorhyncha Dumer. Delphaw Aubei Perris,
—ewigua Bol
= denticavda Boh. — spinosa Fieb,
— limitata Fieb. Vior patulosa. —Fairmairei Vei
Metropis Fieb. 1866., Mayri Fieb. Dicranotopis Fieb., flavipes Fieb,
— divergens Kb. — hamata Boh. Stiroma Fieh, aldonarginata Curt. — Pteridis (Gene) Amyot. — dicarinata H.
—finis Fieb. Tettizometra Latr., adre Hagenb,

— var. /rta H.S.? — virescens P:
— lepida ¥ied,
— impressopunctata Dut. — let's impress Mr. Re
— macrocephala V
— pointed Pz. F. CERCOPIDS. Triecphora Am. $., sangvinolenta L.

Lepyvona Am. S., coleoptrata L.

Aphvophora Ger., corticea Germ. — Salicis of G
—Alni Fall

Ptyelus Lep S

— minor kK. — exclamation Thunb? — albipennis Kab. — Campestris Fall

— spunarius L.

— var. lineata: B. — var, narginellus P. Enc., lineatus Lin,

 

 

   

F MEMBRACIDS. Fab, Cornntus L.
Aun, S., Genistee Fab,

Centroty
Gargay

 

F. JASSIDES,

Ulopa Fall., reticulata Fab,
— Germ trivia. Megoplithalmus Curt, seanicus Fall. Ledra Fab., aurita Le
Idiocerus Leivis., scurra Germ. salicicola Flor. notatus Fab. adustus H.-S.
imitations Kb. — varius F.

 

 

 

tibialis Fieb. pocilus H.-S.
signatus Fall.? lituratus Fall. Tremble Bstlund. — elegans Flor.? — laminatus Flor. — fasciatus Ficb. — cognains Fieb. 68. — ustulatus M.
— confused Flor
= socialis Fieb. = aurulentus Kb. — Populi Fab,
idus Fab. Macropsis Leivis., microcephaia 1. — prasina ab. —lanio L
Bythoscopus Germ., Alni Sehk. — flavicollis L:
— rufusculus Vieb.? = Carpini J. Sah\v.? Pediopsis Burm., Tilie Germ. — cerea Germ,
— glandacea Fieb. 68. — fussulated Fieb.? — virescens Fab. — mendaz Kied. — tmpura Good. = Fuscinervis Boh. — Nassata Germ. — scutellata Boh. = nang HS. ? Agallia Curt., nezuata Mls. R.2
—puneticeps Germ
— reticulata H.-S. ? — yenosa Fall., Germ. Tettigonia Ol, viridis L.
Euacanthus Lep. Serv., interruptus L.
uminatus Fab. Penthimia Ger., atra Fab, 1794. Evrhomencilus Pat, Lrachypterus Vieb? Eupelix Germ., cuspidata I'. — produced Germ. Strongylocephalus Flor., agrestis Fall. — Meipertei Scott. YOUR. Acocephalus Germ. o*, striatus Fab., 2
isticus Fab
— bifasciatus L
— tricinetus Curt,
— bifaseiatus Voure. B.

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

Acocephalus albiirons L, Sahlb. — Serratulx B, Kb,
— histrionicus Fab. — rivolaris Germ. 21. = pelas Leth, 80? Gnathodus Vieb., punctatus Thunb. Cicadula Zett., Cyance Boh. — frontis Scott. — Warioni Leth. ? — diminished Leth. — sexnotata Fall. — punetifrons Fall. — variata Vall? — septemnotata Fall. Grypotes Wieb., pinetellus Boh. Doratura J Sahib, stylata Boh. — Homophyia Flor. Graphocraerus Thoms., ventralis Fall. Thamnotetti “Zett, fenestratus H.S.? — strigipes Zett? = quadvipunctatus Fall.? — maritimus Perris 51. — tenuis Germ? — coronifer Marshal? — eroceus H.-S
— attenuatus Germ,
— splendidulus F.

 

 

 

 

torneellus Zett. abietinus Fall. Pietus Leth. crucntatus V2. Preysslert H ~
quadrinotatus
‘ontalis H.-S. ? — ‘Intermedius Good? — sulphurellus Zett. nus Burm., stactogala Am.? — Heydeni Leth.? — canescens Dgl. S, 73. Fab. ? germ. ? — striatulus Fall He
— ocellaris Leth. 807? — screeched Van. — obscurellus Kb. — grisescens Zett. — cognatus Dgl. Se.? fuselus Fall. stroke Leth. 80,

 

  

 

 

 
  

 
 

 

 

—Irvis Leth. — russeolus Fall. zmulans Kb. Sahibergi Reut, 89.
sordidus Zett. variegatus Kb. — obsoletus Kb. = luvidus Vi

 

Fieber? : rasinus Kall,
— simplex H.-S
ennis Kb. s Leth. 80.
Kieb, oniaguathus, brevi
Jassus Vab, atomarius Ge

— commutatus \

— mixtas Fab , Germ. — ‘ubitus (Vieb.) — abbreviatus Leth

— infuscatus (Vieb.)? Platynetopius Wurm, guttatus

— undatus by G.
Deltocephalus Burm, Phragmitis Boh? — formosus Bol. = punetun Wor. = liavatus Vieb. ? = sociatis Vlor. ccetlaris Vall. Bohemanni Zett, var. calceolatus

Boh. multinotatus Boh,

ar. Mayri Vieb. Bellevoyee Put. plump Kieb,
distinctions Flor. paralletus Vieh,
Mori Freb
Faltenie Bieb
pulicaris Mall,
Sabulicola Curt,
rhombus
striatus L,
breviceps Kb. Linnei Vieb,
languidus Flor. abdominalis ¥ab,
dahitb collins. cephalotes H.S,
pascucllus Wail

 

       
  

 

 

 

1.66? destroy ¥lor. Alebra Fieb., albostriella Fall. = var. fulveola H.
Dieranenra Hay. Manderstjerny Kb. = aureola Fall. — aridella J. Sahib,
— agnata L

    

 

Dieranewra Na: ipeunis ¥ar,
— mollicula Boh. — culrinella ‘hott. Clilorita ieb., apicalis Flor. = avecens Fab. = anrantiaca Leth. 80. — Solani Kollar, Leth. — viridula Vali. Kybos smmaragdulus Fa
Eupterys Curt. Wieb_ 1866.,
— Wallengreni Stl
— signatipennis Boh.? — Germari Zett
— filicum New. — concurred Germ,
— pulchella Fall. —ornata Leth., 74
— Uinotata Leth., 7
— Lelievree Leth Cat. 74. —Carpini Foure, 1785. — aura L.
Urtiew Fab. — Curtisii Flor

 

 

 

  

    

— sexpunetata Fall. — nitidula Fav,

= var. Vorgueti Leth 7. = candiduta Kb., 68. — grateful Bol.? — UniL. — Quercus Fab., H.-S.

— tenerrina HS. Zygina Fieb, Alneti Dahl. — atrea Mis. R.

= Hyperhere WS. — Frauenfeldi Leth. 80.? — seutellaris H.-S. 38,

— Boh spoke. — Rose Vior.? — blandala Rossi. — Titix Geolf. ¥all.? = angusta Leth.? —rubrovittata Leth, 69,

 

Hi. ittata L.

 

 

-
ANNALS

OF THE

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OF

BELGIUM

THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME

It

This number must be kept; it won't be sent for a second
times as before. BRUSSELS
AT THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE COMPANY
20, MUSEUM STREET, 20

1892

 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. I

Minutes of the monthly meeting of February 6, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP OF Mr. Giron. Present: Messrs. Becker, Coubeaux, L. Coucke, Duvivier,
Fologne, Jacobs, Kerremans, Rousseau, of Selys-Longchamps,
Séverin, Tosquinet, Van Nerom and Lameere, secretary. The session is open 4 8 hours. ;

The minutes of the meeting of January 9, 1892 (and not 1891,
as the previous issue of the Annales erroneously indicates) is
approved,

Board decisions. Mr. André Théry, winegrower 4 S'Charles,
pres Philippeville (Algeria), taking care of Coléopteres d’Europe
and Longicornes du globe, presented by MM. Dollé and Lameere,
been admitted as a full member. Resigned: Messrs. Cuni y Martorell, member. workforce and
Ducarme, associate member. Correspondence. Mr. Minister of the Interior and Instruction
public sends us the subsidy. Company's annual
for 1891. — Mr. Storm van 's Gravesande sends us bulletins of
subscription 4 the demonstration which is being prepared in Holland in
The honor of M. Roelofs. — The Meeting resolves to register the Company
for the sum of 20 francs. Works presented. The Assembly votes the insertion in the present tense
number of the Annals of the notices which are read. Eeurion. Next March 13, 4 Dieghem. Departure from Brussels-
(place S** Marie) 4 8 a.m. 42m. in the morning. The meeting adjourned at 9 a.m. ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM. bE DLLGIQUE, T. XXXVI, 4

MYRMECOLOGICAL NOTES
by Auguste Forel. I. — Pueworz Rist nov. sp. (formicidal). 2. L. 8.84 4.2 mil. Mandibles very thick, strongly and
abruptly curved close to their base, very smooth and
shiny, with a few very scattered dots and large streaks on the
outer side of their base. Head much longer than wide, 4
barely broadened behind, A sides subparallel, strongly
created in apricot behind. Its anterior lower edge (behind the
mouth) is provided near the middle with two strong teeth directed in
front, and a small indented lobule between these teeth. epistome
lifted and smooth in the middle back, with some wrinkles in front and
sideways; its anterior edge is slightly sinuous. Frontal area
smooth and shiny. Short scapes, not reaching the third post-
laughing head; 4 their base they are strongly curved, coming out
Wa deep antennal fossa; the curve is like in the
Ph. Guilelmi Miilleri Forel, but the scapes are 4 barely one
bit depressed. Behind the antennal fossa, a slight depression
sion 4 weaker sculpture mark the place od apply the
escapes. Eyes located a little behind the anterior quarter of the sides
of the head. The frontal furrow extends into the occipital notch
tale. Except the posterior angles which are smooth and shiny, the head
is coarsely wrinkled-reticular longitudinally; on the cheeks
and the forehead rather stride-wrinkled, behind rather reticulate. Basically
meshes it is finely reticulated, matte or subopaque. Pronotum with two rather prominent lateral-upper tubercles
slow. The mesonotum has the usual shape of a metanotum: a
horizontal superior-anterior surface which continues directly
the back of the pronotum and tne almost vertical posterior face,
flat, bordered, forming almost a right angle with the preceding one,
and rising in a very high step above the face
base of the metanotum. The latter a little longer than the
sloping face, bordered by two small edges, and terminated by two
very short triangular spines, as long as the width of
their basis. Second node of the pedicle without the appearance of a tooth below,
very short, almost three times as wide as the first, with two
almost spiniform lateral conules. These conules are long,
quite distinct and are not just the angled side edge
knot as in Ph. Guilelmi Miilleri, typical form. —
Fairly short legs; fairly swollen thighs. 39

Pronotum coarsely wrinkled-reticular transversely; sides
chest irregularly and grossly wrinkled reticulate. What-
que transyersal wrinkles 4 the anterior end of the basal face
of the metanotum. First node of the pedicle and anterior surface
upper pronotum more or less reticulate or smooth. Face
posterior slope of the mesonotum, interspinal space and face
slope of the metanotum, second node of the pedicle, legs, abdomen
and antennae smooth and shiny. Hair erect, yellow, shiny, coarse, pointed, partly
long, abundant everywhere, also on the shins and on the scapes. This hairiness closely resembles that of Ph. Guilelmi
Milleri, but the tarsi have only oblique and short hairs
(at the Ph. G.A/. also long very bristly hairs). Pubes-
almost zero cent. Russet or a brownish rufous with slightly longer legs
clear, wide transverse cloud bands, brown on
the abdomen. Terminal edge of the mandibles, edge of the frontal ridges
and anterior border of the iete brown. f

@. L. 2.1 4 2.6 mill. Mandibles large, 4 outer edge slight
slightly concave, 4 terminal edge very large, also toothed on
all. its length, narrow at their base, very smooth and shiny with
a few very scattered points. — Almost square head with the sides
convex behind, but with a rather straight posterior edge and well
distinct (in the Ph. Guilelmi Miilleri she almost forms a half
circle of a ceil 4 other and has no distinct posterior border, except
around the foramen magnum). The scapes are quite thick, weakly
curved towards their base, and hardly exceed 4 the posterior edge of
the head. Third and fourth articles of the funiculus a little more
thick than long. Epistome with a small median carina. Shape
of the pronotum and mesonotum as in 2, but the face
the slope of the mesonotum is less vertical. Mesonotum without sample
distinct crure or transverse bead. Hmeso-meta-
notale much deeper than in the 2,. Basal face of the metanotum
submerged, terminated by two very small triangular teeth. Second node of the pedicle a little wider than long, with the sides
very angular (longer than wide and sides only a little
convex in Ph. Guilelmi Milleri). Frontal area, legs, antennae, second node of pedicle and
abdomen smooth and smooth. Epistome, middle of forehead and faces
slopes of the metanotum and mesonotum more or less smooth
and shiny. The remainder reticulate, punctate and subopaque or even
matt (specimens of the Rio Grande do Sul variety); thorax
sometimes partly sublime. Large longitudinal wrinkles
on the head, especially on the forehead and cheeks, transverse on

40

I pronotum, the mesonotum (little) and especially on the metanotum. Hairiness and color of the soldier, except the brown edges of the front of
the head, etc. Q. L. 4.9 4 5 mill. All 4 is similar to 2., but the head is not
only slightly and widely indented behind. Larger head
than the thorax, with the posterior border only smooth and shiny. Mesonotum and scutellum smooth and shiny above, except for a few
longitudinal stripes in the middle. Metanotum armed with two teeth
very wide and very foamy. Second pedicle node even more
wide and shorter than in 4, but with lateral conules
less spiniform. ‘Head russet or yellowish-red with a spot 4 the place-
ment of the ocelli and the terminal edge of the mandibles of a brown
dark. Thorax and legs of a testaceous russet with spots
brown on mesonotum and escutcheon. Pedicle and abdomen of a
dark brown with russet edge of abdominal segments. the
first node of the pedicle often partly reddish. wings of
lJonger mediocre, hyaline or subhyaline with veins and
marginal spot fairly pale brown. None L. 3.43.2 mill. Rather hail. Eyes and eyespots of greatness
poor. Mandibles very narrow, bidentate. Metanotum enough
low, elongated, with two indistinct tubercles; the sloping face
forms almost a right angle with the basal face. First node
from the elongated pedicle; the second a little wider than long. Abdomen elongated and narrow; small genital valves. Epistome, mandibles, legs, mesonotum, seutellum, pedicle and
abdomen shiny and 4 almost smooth. Shiny forehead with some
longitudinal wrinkles. The rest of the head densely reticulated and matte
or subopaque with longitudinal wrinkles in front. Metanotum and
sides of thorax partly wrinkled, reticulate and subopaque. Pale brown hairiness, much finer than Q, etc.,
oblique on the legs. Brown with black-brown head, articular edges of
body and epistome of a yellowish testaceous, the mandibles (except
Is two reddish teeth), mouth, antennae and legs
very pale. Fairly long wings with darker veins than in Q.

This small, short and robust species, very characteristic by
the shape of the mesonotum of 2. and 9, as well as of the scape of
the Q and the 4, seems at first sight so different from the Ph. Mistletoe-
lelmi Milleri Forel that one is hardly tempted to compare it with
she. Close examination, however, reveals considerable affinities.
maples (scapes, hairiness, general shape, mandibles, teeth of the
below the head, shape of the pedicle) which even made me think

41

that the Ph. Risii is perhaps a small extreme race of the
Ph. G. M., @as much as this last species is strong
variable. However the shape of the head, especially in © and
many other different characters do not allow to make
such a synthesis without more substantial equipment. §, 4, Q and d collected around Buenos-Ayres by my
colleague and friend Dr. Fr. Ris, January 1, 1891. I received from then on
of Dr. H. vy. Ihering 4 Rio Grande do Sul the 4 and the Q of a Variety
of the Ph. Risii which is a little more matte, a little more colored
dark and in which the mesonotum of © is slightly
indented in the middle. Otherwise identical. II. — Synopsis of Genre ACANTHOLEPIS Mayr (9),
WITH NEW SHAPES. . The mesothorax is narrowed in the middle in the form of a neck
cylindrical, elongated and narrow. The prothorax and the
meatathorax each form a strong bulge at the
both ends of this neck. 1

The mesothorax is indented and more or less narrowed at the
middle, but without forming an elongated neck or cylindrical
that. The scapes do not exceed the posterior edge
from the head half their length. 2

1. The scapes extend beyond the posterior edge of the head.
about half their length or a little more. Cook-
its hind legs shorter than the length of the
thorax. Size, color and sculpture very variable. Shiny or subopaque. Shiny typical form. Heat
generally a little wider behind than in front. India;
northern Africa and southern Europe. A.FRAUENFELDI Mayr. var. bipartite Sm. Reddish; brown abdomen. L. 24/2 43 mill. Subopaque chest. Sublime head
health. var. syriaca André, L. 2424/2 mill. Little him-
health. Color of the previous one. Q different. var. n. var. L. 3 43 4/2 mill. suck more
flattened and wider, especially behind. Subopaque,
silky. Dark brown. Bispinous metanotum. India. var. pubescens n. var. L. 3.2 4 4 mill. Meso-
wider notum. Pubescence more abundant and more
rude. Black and shiny. Enlarged metanotum der-
laugh. Gabès. The scapes exceed the posterior edge of the head of the
2/3 of their length. Longer hind thighs

than the chest. Head as wide in front as behind. Mandibles narrow, armed with 5 teeth. strong eyes
big and prominent. Pedicle not extended behind
scale. Metanotum with two narrow spines, quite
long, pointed. Quail with two small teeth. Very shiny; very weakly reticulated. Almost
glabrous. Dark brown. Antennae, tarsi, tibiae,
tips of reddened thighs. Aden, Dr. F. Ris. A. GRACILICORNIS li. sp. 2. Shiny, black. Sturdy, wide size. Oval, enlarged head
behind. Weakly convex pronotum. Metano-
tum subopaque, sculpted, with two lateral extensions
broad, triangular and obtuse rals. pretty thin
with two short spines. Pedicle by no means pro-
alongbehind the scale. Abdomen large, fairly elongated. Upright whitish hair, abundant on the body,
nil on the shins and scapes. Mandibles red. Joints of legs, scapes and testaceous tarsi. L, 2.3 43.2 mill. Southern Africa; Madagascar;
Mainland India, A. capensis Mayr. Like capensis, but more slender; more mesonotum
Shrunk; simply enlarged and angular metanotum
behind. Slightly indented scale, without teeth. Very shiny all over, almost smooth and almost glabrous. Somalis (Prof. Keller). A. SIMPLEX. sp. Like capensis, but L. 2 4 2.7 mill. Mate; ab-
domen shiny, pubescent. Bidentate metanotum; tortoiseshell
bispinous. Somalis. A. CARBONARIA Emery,
Entirely dull, densely reticulate-punctate, except
The abdomen which is shiny. Ferruginous red. Abdomen reddish brown. Size more slender than at
the previous. Scapes Exceeding 4 Third Penalty
of their length the posterior edge of the head. Heat
almost square with slightly convex sides, Eyes located
in the middle of the sides of the head (back in all
other species). Mandibles narrow. epistome
very convex in the middle, subcarnate. Ocelli very small,
but distinct, faint frontal furrow. Back of the prono-
tum presiue flat, sublimated and subshouldered at its angles
previous. Strongly printed pro-mesonotal suture
shimmering, shining. Metanotum short, with two strong
elongated side protuberances, in the shape of a large
triangular, raised, pointed teeth, with the
point slightly bent backwards. Narrow mesonotum. 43

Scale thicker than in A. capensis, topped
of two long spines, narrow, straight and poiatues. Short, sparse, obtuse, yellowish erect hair;
none on legs and antennae. Very pubescence
sparse. Pedicle with a cylindrical extension
quite long behind the scale. Abdomen short. L.
2.2 mill. Kanara (India), Mr. Aitken. A. oPACA n. sp. r. A. pulchella n. st. Form and general characteristics
rals of the typical race, but the mesonotum is a
slightly less constricted and the pronotum less widened
front, without distinct shoulders. Breastfeed a little less
short. Softer abdomen; posterior portion of
pedicle a little less elongated. The length is the
same, the abdomen being a little larger and the rest
smaller. The abdomen is subopaque, strongly reticulated
eule. Blackish brown; a large median spot
on the 1st segment of the abdomen, the tips of the teeth
or metanotal protuberances, the tarsi and arti-
pale yellow leg marks; antennas and
mandibles testaceous yellow. Erect hairiness of a
pale yellow, more abundant than in the typical race,
especially on the abdomen. Poona (India), Mr. Wroughton. The species, races and varieties of Acantholepis contained in
the table above constitute all that has been described so far
of this curious kind. — Gathered in mainland India, the
species Frauenfeldi and capensis seem to have a geographical radius
distinct phic 4 the west, the first being alone in
the Mediterranean countries where it abounds and the second only to the south
from Africa where it also seems common. This fact is interesting. HETEROCERA EXOTICA, NEW INDIES ESPI PES
DUTCH ORIENTAL (szi¢e),

by F,. J.M.He
LITHOSINA. Gen. Nola (Leach) quadrimaculata n. sp. M. Snellen describes in the Tijdschrift voor Entom., volume XVIII,
p. 61, four new species of the genus Wola, all of which are
figured ib. pl. 6, fig. 1-4. I now add two more,
which were found in the Preanger (Java) 4 3500’ high. The species which occupies us, belongs to the division 6 of Herrich-
Schiiffer, that is, she does not possess the nery. 4 in the
hind wings. The rest of the neryulation is similar 4 to that

 

rts. 44

of the 1. dimidiata Snell. (empty loc. cit. p. 66, pl. 6, fig. 2). — The G, the only sex I have, is small, measuring only
17mm. of scale. The head, with the antennae, the first two
articles of the broad palpi (the 3° is blackish), the thorax, the abdomen,
the trochanters and femurs are milky white. The knees, tibiae and tarsi are canceled black. The forewings are creamy white above with
the side bordered with a slightly purplish brown. The basal is indicated
by a few dots of this last color, and instead of the two
transverse lines, two triangles, the base of which touches the edge
anterior and the subcostal tip, are at the top of the
disc cell. There is a brown terminal line, a little wavy-
lined and composed of dots and half-moons. The fringe, long and
white, is divided by a brownish line. — Beams
bristly scales, peculiar to the genus Wola Leach, are
powdered brown. — Below these wings are absolutely without
design and heavily dusted with blackish. The hindwings are, on both sides, of a white gray
dirty and shiny. Their fringe is long, concolorous and divided by a
dark line. Nola van Hasseltii b. sp. A Q, belonging to the @ section of Herrich-Schiiffer, because
that she has nerve. 4 to hindwings. By the cut
of the wings it resembles, as also by the drawing, 41a Wola
pumila Snell. (empty loc. cit. p. 68, pl. 6, fig. 4), but it differs
by the color, which is a slightly whitish gray, and above all
by the possession of the nerve. 4 hind wings. The nerve-
lation of the forewings is the same for both. The head, the antennae, the first two segments of the broad palp-
pes (the small 3° is black), the collar, the thorax with the pterygodes and
The abdomen are gray, a little sprinkled with brownish especially on the
above the meso- and metathorax. The legs are darker, the
knees, tibiae and tarsi being canceled blackish-brown. The forewings are gray or rather a grayish white,
sprinkled with sooty especially 4 the side, at the base and 4 the part
terminal of the wing, where the veins are also tinged with brownish. the
drawing is as follows. The basal is indicated by a few streaks
black. The first transverse line is black and curved, the
concavity towards the base; the 2nd is also black and almost straight
from the rib to the nerve. 4; 14 she curves towards the base
to the nerve. 3 to then descend vertically to the edge
internal. The space between these last two lines is almost
White. A terminal wavy line is composed of atoms

45

blackish. The bundles of bristly scales are black. Fringe
is gray and cut by a dark line. — Below these wings
are white-grey sprinkled with sooty and shiny: all
drawing missing. The hind wings are more frankly white and silky
above and below: a small black half-moon is on
the disco-cellular. The fringe is also white, but divided by
a slightly darker line. Wingspan 17mm. I dedicate the nova species 4 General D’A.W.M.
Van Hasselt, vice-president of the Dutch Entomological Society
landaise, the well-known scholar arachnologist. COSSINA. Gen. Eudoxyla (H.S.) Bossche n. sp. A couple, whose ¢ is very rough and the Q fairly well preserved,
which was found by Mr. V the civil engineer Bosscha during his
stay in the island of Borneo. He gave me the new species and that's it.
Ini that I dedicate it. — The wingspan of the is 78 mm., of theQ 87 mm. The mile has a small head, very large eyes and antennae
fairly short, bipectinate to the middle (the barbs are strong
but relatively short: articles 7, 8, 9 and 10 carry the
longer), the rest is simply crenellated, but then each
item has two fairly thin eyelashes. The palpi are short,
thin, ascending, pressed against the face and do not reach the
forehead, their 3rd article is very short. The collar is very wide, snow-white, and descends
up to the shoulders. The thorax is strongly built: especially the mesothorax. The abdomen
is very long, the anal angle not exceeding the 24th segment, and
ends in a white anal tuft. (We would like to notice
that I only describe the anatomical parts, the specimen is in
too poor condition as to the drawing and the colors.) The paws
are short 4 hooks very dilated; trochanters, femurs and
the tibiae are quite hairy and the tarsi are bare. The hind tibiae have a single pair of very short spurs. The venation of the very elongated forewings is the
following: there are 12 nerves, 4 and 5 almost from the same point, 6 quite
far from 5, 7-+8-+-9 on a long peduncle, which is born, almost 10, from the
apex of a narrow appendicular cell. The disco-cellu-cell
the area is long and divided. — The hind wings, also very
elongated, have 8 nerves. free; the cell is also divided. The female, fairly well preserved, has the anatomical parts

 

46

exterior, 4 namely the head, the palpi, the collar, the thorax,
the legs and venation like the . However, the antennas
are short, almost filiform, only slightly crenate,
and the abdomen, with a very short red anal tuft, is very strong. The head
is covered with intermingled red and white hairs; the antennae are
russets; the palpi a brown-black. The collar is white lined
red below. The pterygodes are white above, russet, speckled with black
and white, with a slight black border inside. The thorax has
color of the pterygodes, but a very white longitudinal line
wide is in the middle, while a wide black plate, in
semicircle, circumscribing the mecathoraa below. Below the chest
is black. The abdomen is light red, the interstice of the seginents is
very dark and four very black longitudinal lines are:
one on the dorsal side, one on each side and one below. The legs are very hairy on the trochanters, femurs and
the shins; the hairs and scales covering them are yellow-
brownish, mottled more or less black; the tarsi are covered
a very short down, brown for the front legs and frankly
blank for 2nd and 3rd pair. The forewings are very elongated 4 apex slightly
curved; the front edge hardly describes a curve; the edge
external, with erased angle, is very oblique and the internal edge (3/4 of
V'anterior) is a little bent. The background color is a yellow-brown
be. Cells 12, 11 and 10 are grey, coarsely dotted
black; cell 8, also divided by a similar row more
short, is white above and brown below, cell 7 is divided
by a wide longitudinal streak, lit white below, while
like the 6°; 5, 4 and 3 have some small black transverse striations.
res; but a black longitudinal stripe, which begins towards the base,
divides cell 1a, rises near outer corner (erased), section 16
and 2 vertically to then turn to the outer edge and
rises obliquely up to 5 where it touches the aforementioned edge. Everything now outside this line is
@a silvery white here and there streaked with black. This drawing is very
pretty and characteristic. On the disco-cellular cell are
a few black longitudinal streaks illuminated with white. The fringe is yellowish and speckled with russet on the veins. Below these wings are streaked with russet, black and white;
the chest is speckled with black; the fringe as above. The hindwings are also very elongated, the apex slightly
ment curved and the anal angle indicated. The background color, yellow
brownish, has almost disappeared under the black atemes, of which it is
sprinkled. The fringe is clear and speckled with russet. 47

Below they are yellow-brownish, dusted with black. The
cells 14 and 2 are black as well as part of cell 7. Fringe as above. Along the outer edge of the fore and hind wings there
there 2 some whitish clouds. Habitat: Tnsula Borneo, Sambas. ZYGAENOIDEA (H.S.). Gen. Leptothrix nov. gen. (of pi£ hair. and Aewrds, thin). Mas. capita parvo; oculis prominentibus; ocelli forecourt; palpis
ascendentibus latis, articulo tertio brevi, frontem non superan-
tibus; aatennis longis (fere 2/s marginis anterioris al. ant.) articulis tenuissime ciliatis (do the name of the genus). Thorace
valido; abdomen angulum analem loin superante. Pedibus
validis, tibiis posterioribus quadricalcaratis. Alis anterioribus
elongatis, costis 12, subtus in medio regionis costalis fovea rotunda
pilis sericeis albis obtecta, operculo tamen nigro piloso occlusa. Alis posterioribus triangularibus apice atque angulo anali pro-
ductis; costis 8: ramulo obliquo n. subcostalem and costalem
jungent. Leptothrix tettigonioides n. sp. The curious new species, which comes to me from Padang-pandjang
(Sumatra) is an example of remarkable mimicry. Although having
wings spread, 'Labitus Vune Zygaena F., she has, when she
rests, quite in fact the figure and the design of a Hemiptera belonging
to the genus Tedtigonia Geoffr. This last one comes to me at the same time
from the same country. The resemblance is such that the two be-
tioles could be wrong themselves. The length and cut
of the elytra of one and the forewings of the other are the
memes. As I cannot compare species nova & none
other, I said, well 4 regret, create a new genre. Male of a black brown 4 reflection, here by 14 metallic, greenish. The head is on both sides covered with hairs of the color pre-
quoted. The antennae are filiform, ciliated with very thin cilia,
very short and blond; the palps are black and wide enough for the
first two articles; the spiritrompe is black. The necklace is
Wun dark green metallic above, below and both
sides of a magnificent light carmine red. The thorax is the same
green, but a large carmine spot covers the metathorax;
the pterygodes, also green, are bordered with carmine above. The abdomen, dark green on both sides, has the anal tuft of the
supra carmine below. The legs, strongly constituted,
are yertes 4 metallic sheen. 48

The forewings are very elongated with an oblique outer edge;
they are brownish black with concolorous fringe. A spot
oblong of a magnificent carmine is on the cell, limited
by the external part of the subcostale, the median and the disco-cel-
lulsire. Below the color is a dull blackish tint without pattern. A perfectly round, yesicular depression in which
silky, snow-white hairs are implanted and on
which extends, as a cover, a very thin membrane
covered with black down. This depression is limited inside
by the disco-cellular and outside it covers the origin of the nerves. 6-10. The membrane can close or open the depression according to
the will of the insect, because, when the latter rests, the edge
Vaile's anterior curves inwards: then the membrane,
which is only attached to its anterior part and on the sides,
but which is free at the bottom, hermetically closes the depression
in question. On the contrary, by strongly extending its wings,
The insect opens, because the aforementioned rollback disappears and the
membrane is raised 4 its free part: then the white hairs
show. Undoubtedly the organ described is what the allergens
mands call a "Duftapparat", and the male sex alone is
possessor. I don't know the Q, so I can't decide the
question. The ribbing is as follows: 1a and 1d are parallel and reach
both interfere with the outer edge; 2, 3 and 4 are Remote
equal to each other, 5 is born from the middle of the disco-cellular,
6-+-7 are on a long peduncle, 8 reaches the anterior edge, 9 and
10 are very short: 11 comes from the middle of the subcostal and 12 from
the base. The disco-cellular cell is very long. The hindwings are very elongated, triangular and of a
Fairly dull black-brown above and below. A big
transparent or glassy spot 4 silvery and triangular reflection
occupies the entire disk. It is limited by the median, by 1¢ (there is
three internal), by 3 and the background color of the internal edges and
external. There is nerve. including 3+4 and 6-+-7 on a long peduncle. Here too the cell is long and quite wide. Wingspan 51mm. 49

Nore on AFRICAN CHRYSODEMIDS arrainuzes
TO THE GENUS IRIDOTAUNIA

by Charles Kerremans. Under the name of Buprestis chrysochlova, Palisot de Beanvois has
describes and depicts(') an African space placed by Gory (’) in the
genus Chrysodema, and that Mr. Edw. Saunders (*) ranks among the
species of the genus Jridotenia H. Deyrolle(*) especially widespread
in the Indo-Malaysian region. The type of 2. chrysochlora having disappeared, it happens that we
today attributes this name indiscriminately to 4 three or four
forms of Chrysodemids of African origin and offering different
very sensitive ferences with the authors' texts and figures
aforementioned. Each of these forms also presents a character of
nature has indisputably separate it from the genus Jridotenia, of which
all species have the third segment of the antennae elongated and
much longer than the second, while B. chrysochlora
and the affine forms have the second and the third article of the
antennae very short, globular and almost equal. This antennal conformation, aberrant for the group of
Chrysodemides, justifies the creation of a separate generic cut
in which will be placed, in addition to the new species of which
description follows, B. chrysochlora Palis., chalcographa
Klug and opaca Lansb. There remains no doubt as to the validity of the last of
these species, and the discussion should bear only on the first two
mothers. B. chrysochlora Palis. is represented, in the various
collections that I was allowed to examine, by very insects
different from what the drawings of Gory and
Palisot, and first of all we do not know which of these forms there is
instead of maintaining this name. These differences led to the description by
Klug(*), under the name of chalcographa, a Buprestide in all respects
similar & what I believe to be the real chrysochlora
Palace. He probably knew under this last name an insect
different from the one he described as new with a certain
appearance of reason, given that many collections seem

(1) Insects @ Africa and America, 1805, p. 44, pl. 11, £. 3-4. 3) Monogr. supp., te IV (1841), p. 68, pl. XII, f. 68. catal. synon. and syst. Bupr. (1871), p. 15, no. 20. () Ann. Soc. Ent, Belgium, t. VII (1865), p. 25, pl. IV, f. 4. () Zrm. reis. (1835), p. 30, pl. KV, f. 2. 50

blent possess chrysochlora, when in reality they do not,
under this name, only one species not described to date. Murray, in Coleoptera of Old Calabar ('), citing the Chry-
sodema chrysochlora Palis., is an insect quite different from
that which the plates of Gory and Klug show us, and which,
in many collections, bears the name given by Palisot. the
elytral drawing presents itself in a completely different way in each
of these forms and, if we relegate to the background the very question
secondary to the coloring, I think there is reason to consider
the chalcographa Klug as the true chrysochiora Palis., and
Wattribute this name 4 the insect which, in the series of fifty six
individuals that I was able to examine and who all bore the name of
chrysochlora, comes closest to Gory's figure and text
and Klug. There are then four well-defined forms, without passages, and
to which until now the name given by Palisot has been applied. Those
uous forms offer, in truth, only a few different characters.
sufficiently appreciable structural resources to be able to
delimit their grouping into spaces, but they present, for
against, a facies so characteristic as to design and color
ration of the elytra, both constant in each of the forms
qwil was given to me to separate, which I do not hesitate to see there, if-
not species in the absolute sense of the word as it is understood
today, at least a series of cuts deserving of a name
distinctive. SYNOPTIC TABLE OF THE GENERA AND SPECIES. 1. The third article of the antennae much longer than the second;
Alytra presenting, along the outer edge, a broad bronze furrow or
coppery and very finely grainy. Genus IRIDOTANIA. ‘A, The elytral furrow extending in a straight line along the sides of the
protliorax and leaving out the humeral callus. n. sp. B. The elytral furrow not extending to the edtes of the
prothorax and ending in decd of the humeral calus when it does not
does not circumvent externally; decorated thorax, towards its anterior part,
of four small smooth purplish and subrounded plates, placed
transversely along a slightly curved line, limbata Klug. He. The second and third article of the antennae very short and globular;
elytra keeled along outer margin. Genus PARATANIA,

"HAS. Thorax green golden or coppery shiny, presenting on the disc two
large longitudinal spots of a purplish black, separated by the furrow

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

   

median. has. Elytra of a purplish black blew with designs of a golden green or a
shiny copper. median length of the thorax very enlarged; thorax subrectan-
gular; general coloring of dull and matte appearance,
coarse punctuation; elytra presenting inter-
broken. opaca Lansh. () Ann. and Mag. of Nat, Hist., 4th series, t. 2 (1868). 51

8. Linear median furrow; elongated trapeze thorax, staining
shiny, clean and well-marked designs on the entire elytron which
has regular or finely punctate streaks. chrysockiora Palis. 7 Absent elytral designs on disc ot shrinking &
a few elongated spots along the outer edge and towards the
apical part; very accentuated and regular elytralos streaks
punctuated. inornata 0. sp. '. Elytra of a golden green or a shiny coppery A drawings @’un
purplish blue-black. a, Elytra of a shiny golden green or coppery; the drawing
elytral formed of a sutural band often not very pronounced
and branching off to the base to leave & discover the part
circa-scutellar, and, of a jagged marginal band,
widening towards the summit to the point of completely invading it
ment to leave, of the dark shade, only two spots
elongated along the apical part and a small spot
subrounded towards the upper third. aspera n. sp. 8. Hlytra of a very brilliant coppery; reduced elytral drawing
& a subrounded spot, placed towards the upper third of the
disc and common to both elytra, with an apical spot
external subtriangular. orbicularis n. sp. B. Thorax entirely light golden green; protruding enlarged elytra
obtuse on the shoulder, of a light golden green and very brilliant with the
sutural part and extremity green. simplicollis n. sp. IRIDOTANIA H. Deyrolle. I. cingulata nov. sp. — Flongata, navicularis, supra obscure
viridis vel wnea, thoracic elytrorum margine externa wide
sulcata, sulco purpureo tenuissime granulato. Subtus viridi-
aurata, pedibus concoloribus. Length, 17; L., 4.5 mm. Elongated and navicular, attenuated 4 the extremity, of a tan or
dark metallic green above, light metallic green
below. Head deeply excavated between the eyes, epistome
indented in are of a circle; antennae 4 article 1 elongated, pyriform
and thick, 2 very short, globular, the following elongated. Thorax
as long as wide 4 the base, almost square, barely narrowed at its
anterior part, finely punctate, with the median furrow and two
wide marginal furrows of a metallic red and finely grained
them; it presents a small purplish smooth plate at the top of
each of the anterior angles. Elytra slightly wider than the
thorax 4 the base, sinuous 4 the height of the hips, gradual-
thinned to the end and multispined on the edges
posterior; they are finely chagrined and present, 4 a
some distance and along the outer edge a wide groove 4 bottom
fine grainy and metallic red. Below very finely
punctuated 4 except for the extremity of each of the segments
abdominals and a subtriangular plate located on each of the
sides of these, both smooth; punctate legs. Zanguebar: 2 ex. (coll. Oberthur). 52

I. limbata Klug, Mon. Berlin. Academic, 1855, p. 645; Peters
Reese n. Mozambique, 1855, p. 182, pl. XI, f. 4 = Paracupta bechu-
ana Thoms., Bull. Soc. Franc., 5¢ Sis, t. IX, p. CKXXV. This species is distinguished from the preceding by its more
robust, by the much more marked roughness of the elytra and
especially by the arrangement of the wide elytral furrows which, in addition to
qwils do not extend to the sides of the thorax,
always end before the humeral callus when they do not
turn in such a way as to circumscribe it externally, while
in the cingudata this groove extends in a straight line on the thorax
so as to leave out the humeral callus. The Paracupta bechuana of M. J. Thomson, of which I had the type
under the eyes, relates exactly 4 to the description of the limbata
by Klug. Zambize, Zanguebar, Bagamoyo, Usagara: 12 copies
(coll. Oberthur and Kerremans). PARATAENIA nov. gen.

Head depressed between the eyes, vertex furrowed, episteme strong-
ment scalloped, its angles. front legs rounded and directed forward. Toothed antennae 4 from the fourth article, the first
elongated, thick and pyriform, the next two short and globu-
lar, the others elongated and flattened. Small, trapezoidal escutcheon. Spiny elytra on posterior sides, parallel in front,
broadened at the shoulders, armed on their lower edges, with a
small tooth located at the end of the epipleural lobe, and presents
while, along the outer edge, a smooth carina. Prosternum flat, having a well-marked median lobe behind
inserted between the hips of the mesosternun. Last segment of the abdomen keeled in the middle of the extremity. Fairly long legs, sturdy thighs, slender tarsi and tibiae. P.opaca Lansb., Not. Leyd. Mus., 1886, p. 117. — Elongata,
postice attenuata, supra nigro-violacea, sublus aureo-viridis; capital
antice sulcato, grosse ac valde punctato; antennis brevibus; thoracic
subquadrato, broad ac profunde trisulcato, sulcis virvidibus ac
large punctate; elylvis valde punctatis, costulatis, utringue
septemplagiatis, plagis viridibus, in his plagis costis interruptis. — Length, 15; L., 4 mm. Elongated, attenuated 4 tip, purplish-black above with
chest impressions and elytral designs of golden green
mast. Head coarsely pitted, furrowed on the forehead and hollowed
between the eyes dull golden green with black scooping;

53

very short antennae for the genus, barely reaching half the
thorax. This one is square, with the marginal furrows and the furrow
very wide and deep, densely dotted and of a green
matte gold. Elytra coarsely punctate, straight up to a third
superior ov they attenuate following a regular curve; they
each have raised, smooth ridges and seven spots
elongated, dull golden green, densely dotted and placed:
4 along the suture and the other three along the outer edge. Underparts and legs of a shiny golden green. Congo: 1 specimen (Mus. of Leiden). This species is easily recognizable by its dull appearance
which distinguishes it from all those of its kind and from which it moves away
also, by its less robust facies, by the well accentuated sides
killed and interrupted on the elytral drawings, by its thorax
square and broadly trifurcated and by the extreme brevity of the antennas
nes, unique for its kind. P. chrysochlora Palis., Ins. of Afr. and America, 1805, p. 44,
pl. 11, f. 3-4. — Gory, Monog. supp., t. 4 (1841), p. 68, pl, XII,
f. 68 = chalcographa Klug, Erm. reis. (1835), p.30, pl. XV, f.2. — Elongata, navicularis, antice apiceque attenuata, supra vio-
laceo-nigra, subtus aureo-vel cupreo-viridis; grainy capitis,
modice antice excavato; thorace elongato, trapezoidali, lineis tri-
bus longitudinalibus awreo- vel cupreo-viridibus ornatis; elytris
punctato-striatis, plagis septem viridibus vel aureis ornatis. Sub-
tus viridi-aurata vel cuprea, punctata and nitida. — Length, 25-29;
7-5 mm. Elongated, navicular, attenuated at the extremities; above a
purplish black with shaded designs of metallic green or a
bright cuprous; shiny metallic green or golden underside. Heat
furrowed on the forehead and moderately hollowed between the eyes;
antennae long, almost reaching the base of the thorax. Thorax
ep elongated trapezium, the lateral edges almost straight, the furrow
midline not very pronounced and sometimes presenting a vague keel
smooth; it is a smooth and shiny purplish-black and finely dotted
with three longitudinal stripes of a light golden green or
strongly pitted and grainy. Elytra 4
barely wider than the thorax 4 the base, sinuous 4 high
hips, gradually re-reduced following a regular curve
4 from the upper third; they have punctate streaks
and regular, and, on each of them, seven spots of a beautiful green
golden or bright coppery: two 4s at the base, one sutural and
Vother close to the shoulder, elongated, two others on the disc, the
along the suture, the first oval and the second angular;
two others, elongated, along the outer edge and the last,

ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM, OF BELGIUM, T, AXXVI. 5

54

apical, in a very elongated triangle, along the suture. The streaks
are often interrupted on these spots, and always
less accentuated. Shiny and dotted underside. Liberia, Gabon, Congo, South Africa: 11 copies
(Mus. from Leiden and Brussels; coll. Oberthur, Meyer-Darcis
and Kerremans). P. inornata nov. sp. — Hlongata, apice attenuata, supra
violaceo-nigia, subtus viridi-aurata; capite antice excavato, eaca-
vatione sulcata; thorace elongato, lineis tribes viridibus longitudi-
nalibus ornato; elytris punctato-sulcatis, interstriis elevatis, ad
latera apicibusque viridi plagiatis. — Length, 22-18; lat.,
7-5.5mm. Species very similar to the previous one, but with a less
robust, with more pronounced elytra streaks and spots
elytra of the disc always absent while those of the parts
marginal and top are less pronounced and even sometimes
null. This species may just be a variety of the previous species.
dente, but not having found a passage, I momentarily separate it.

nement from its congener. Liberia and Gabon: 7 copies (Museums of Leiden, Genoa

and Brussels; coll. Oberthur, Meyer-Darcis and Kerremans). P. aspera nov. sp. = Chrysod. chrysochlora Murray, Ann. Nat. Hist., 4% series, t. 2 (1868), pl. VIII, tig. 6. — Zlongata,
navicularis; capite viridi, nigro-plagiato; violaceo-nigro thoracic,
lineis tribus aureo-vividibus longitudinalibus ornato; elytris vividi-
auratis vel cupreis, nitidissimis, punctato-striatis, nigro-violaceo
variegated. Subtus viridi-aurata, nitida. — Length, 24-17; lat.,
7-4.5mm. Elongated, tapering at the ends, of a bright golden green with
the elytra of a metallic green with copper reflections. suck strongly
grainy, furrowed on the vertex and sunken between the eyes;
antennae almost as long as head and thorax combined. Trapezoidal thorax as long as wide 4 the base, the two impres-
lateral sions and the median furrow very strongly granular and
of a very shiny golden green with the disc barely punctuated
and a glossy purplish-black. Elytra slightly wider than
the corselet at the base, sinuous 4 height of the hips,
gradually narrowed 4 from upper third; they present
have regular, punctuated stripes and are adorned with a design
wave of black shade with purplish reflections, often insensitive along
of the suture and on the anterior sides, but still forming at the
vertex an elongated triangle in the middle of which we see a spot

55

clear, rounded and of the dark shade of the elytron. Shiny underside
and punctuated. Sierra-Leone, Gabon, Cameroon and Congo: 18 copies
(Brussels Museum; coll. Oberthur, Meyer-Darcis and Kerremans). This species is particularly distinguished from the two preceding
by the nuance and design of the elytra whose streaks are less
deep, and whose special punctuation gives them a more
rough. .

P. orbicularis nov. sp. — Aspere simillima sed minus
robusta, elytris cupreis, plaga magna communi nigra subrotun-
data ornatis. — Length, 22-13.5; 6.5-4.5 mm. Species very similar to P. aspera, but still having the elytra
cuprous and presenting, towards the lower half, a spot
rounded, blackish, common to both elytra. Head and thorax
finely pitted; vertex furrowed; sunken forehead; antennae too
longer than the head and thorax together. Elongated trapeze thorax,
purplish black with green side edges and midline
shiny and rough metallic. Elytra 4 barely wider than the
thorax at the base, straight up to the upper third and then
suddenly thinned. They present regular series of
Longitudinal and punctate streaks and some smooth side waves. Underside similar to previous species. Old Calabar, Gabon and Sierra-Leone: 20 copies (Mus. from Genoa and Brussels; coll. Oberthur, Meyer-Darcis and
Kerremans). P. simplicicollis nov. sp. —Witida, claro viridimetallica;
elytris granulatis, punctato striatis, ad latera aureis, ad humera
dilatatis ac tuberculatis; thoracic capita valde punctatis;
subtus punctata. — Length, 21; lat. ; 6.5mm. Light metallic green above, elytra sides and below
very shiny golden green. Head and thorax very grainy and
strongly punctuated. Very widened elytra 4 the shoulder, the callus
protruding and acute humerus; they gradually thin 4
starting from the upper third and following a regular curve, present
both regular streaks of dots, and have a very grainy appearance.
them. Below very shiny and very finely punctuated. A single copy, from Gabon (coll. Oberthur). 56

DIAGNOSES OF TWO BUPRESTIDES in THE REGION OF
TANGANYKA Lake

by Ch, Kerremans. Psiloptera Stormsi nov. sp. — Obscure viridi-metallica aut
ened, epistomi margine anteriori and articulo primo antennarum
rubro-cupreis; capite rugoso, thoracic antice subrecto, ad basin sub-
sinuato, lateribus regulariter rotundatis, disco granuloso, plagis
duabus minimis rotundatis violaceis and nitidis ornato, plagaco
imitation utringue in angulo anteriori; elytris ad humerum truncatis,
dein subsinuatis, apice incurvatis atque subtruncatis, longitudi-
naliter punctato-striatis, interstriis subtiliter sparsim punctatis,
punctis interdum glomeratis. Subtus rugosa, pedibus punctatis,

utringue segmentibus abdominis nitido-plagiatis. - Long.,
21-26; lat. 7-10mm. Acmeodera smaragdina nov. sp. — Ovata, elongata,

apice attenuata, supra claro viridi-metallica, elytrorum lateribus
vividi-auratis and sutura obscure purpurea; subtus obscure viridi-
metallica; capite grosse punctato; thorace antice attenuato, ad basin
dilatato, lateribus rotundatis, dense ac grosse punctato, medio
sulcato, duabus fasciis parallelis obscure cupreis ovnato, fossulis
tribes ad basin instructo; elytris convewis, deep punctato-
striatis, ad suturam interstriis levibus, lateribus apicibusque den-
ticulatis. Subtus punctata; subtle pedibus punctatis. - Long.,
17; L., 6 mm. ENTOMOLOGICAL MIXTURES

by Ant. Duvivier. X. — DIAGNOSES OF NEW CONGO BEETLES. CARABIDA. Leptorembus Kolbei Duviv. Subdepressed; black underside with reflections of a steel blue, above
d@a matte black very slightly bluish especially on the head;
antennae (except first three segments) palps, labrum, trochan-
thirds of the four anterior femurs of a more or less pale red;
tibiae and tarsi pitch brown, the latter lighter; bodice
rough, elytra regularly rounded on the sides, deep-
finely streaked, finely streaked, 4 densely punctate intervals,
both covered with russet pubescence; ornate elytra
@a common apical spot (on intervals 1-3) and each

57

@an irregular transverse spot 4 the height of the middle (on the
intervals 4-8) yellow. Long 14 1/2 mils. ; width max. 6 1/2 mill. — Ibembo (August 15/31,
J. Duvivier). Differs mainly from L. favomaculatus Kolbe, the type of
genus Leptorembus, by the arrangement of the anterior spots on
the elytra; it is the second species of this genus of Licinides,
recently created. MELOLONTHIDA. Evrrey.is Duviv. Subtransverse chin, its ligular part narrowed in front;
maxillary palps 4 last segment very elongated, fusiform, impressive
sioned above; wrasse large, deeply bilobed. Hood in
semi-circle, everywhere edged. Antennae of 10 articles 4 club
of 6 items: art. 3 and 4 very elongated. Short, rounded prothoraa
on the sides, with distinct angles. HJytves oblong subpa-
parallel, broadly truncate posteriorly. Pygidium in triangle
curvilinear 4 obtuse apex. Poor legs; front legs
tridentate outside with the upper tooth very weak, without
internal spur, the other sublinear, spiny ga and 14; farses
almost as long as the corresponding tibiae, their hooks
fairly robust, dilated and toothed 4 the base. Point of sternal protrusion. This new genus belongs to the group of Schizonychids; he
is very close to the genus Pegylis and is distinguished by its antennae
of 10 articles 4 club of 6 articles, the length of the articles 3
and 4. Eupegylis confused Duviv. More or less light reddish brown with a very light
bronze reflection on the head and the bodice; reddish brown elytra
paler and indistinctly spotted with blackish; head, bodice
and abdomen darker, the first two coarsely pitted;
elytra rough more or less transversely wrinkled; all
furnished with very small reddish hairs; chest long enough
villous. Long. 17 mill. ; width 8 mill. — Ibembo (September 16/30,
J. Duvivier). Pseupopro.is Duviv. Transversal chin, its ligular part slightly narrowed
forward, not sinuce; last article of the subova- labial palpi
lar, that of the maxillary palps very elongated, oblong-oval, acu-
undermined at the top, depressed outside. Deeply notched wrasse

58

in are of a circle. Coping rounded at the corners, 4 front edge
strongly raised, full forward. Years of nine articles:
art. 3 most slender, one and a half times as long as 4, 5 short,
6 very short, wide, the last three forming an elongated club
at g. Transverse prothorax, angular on the sides. heusson
large, curvilinear triangle. Zlytra oblong, obliquely
impressed in their length on the sides. Forelegs
tridentate in the Gy, 4 internal spur very short, the
others rounded, unarmed; mediocre tarsi, strong nails,
simple, provided inside with a small obtuse tooth close to
the base, with a remnant of a tooth between the latter and the base. Pygidium subvertical, in an elongated triangle, acute at the apex. Sail-
no mesosternal link. From the group of true Melolonthides, this genus is distinguished from
those who have the 3¢ article of the antennae longer than the 4¢ and point
of sternal gall, by its antennae of nine articles and their club
of 3 articles in the G. It is close to the geure Leucopholis. © unknown. Pseudopholis squamulosa Duviv. Below a blackish-brown, covered with small hair-like scales,
and on the chest, of a rather long villi of a light white color.
mentrouser; parts of mouth and hips reddish brown;
head, escutcheon and bodice black, except the side edges of the latter
which are brown, these organs densely covered with small scales
pinpoint white; elytra brown with base and margin
narrowly blackish and a thin black sutural border, covered with
small whitish punctiform scales, fairly spaced; pygidium
blackish 4 scales a little tighter. Long. 24 mil., width. max. 11 mill. — Ibembo (J. Duvivier). CURCULIONIDAL. Cylloderus Josephus Duviv. Elliptical, convex, bluish-black, entirely covered
@a pubescence of a russet gray and presenting the following spots
more or less bare, of the dark color: a
large diamond spot on the middle of the bodice and two others
elongated forward; on the elytra: a large humeral spot,
a second large medial oval transyersal spot, a
apical angular spot (encompassing a small whitish spot);
whitish pubescence on the legs; rostrum and antennae black;
finely rough prothorax; oblong crest; elytra clearly
punctate-striate 4 humeral callus smooth, 4 intervals finely
punctuated. 59

This Cylloderus is close to C. sutwralis Faust, as
form, but is distinguished from known species by its system of
coloring. ANTHOTHRIBIDA. Philceotragus prasinus Duviv. Subcylindrical, covered above with scaly pubescence
of a dull light green dotted and finely smudged with black; of them
spots on the vertex, an elongated spot on each side of the base
of the corselet, a humeral spot, another subscutellar, and finally
a rectangular marginal spot as well as a small apical spot
black; bodice a little wider than long, regularly rounded
on the sides, not narrower in front than in the back, 4 hardly impress-
Zioned to disk; calloused elytra near the top, barely
wider than the corselet, finely pitted; brown antennae,
gray ringed; mediocre rostrum, deeply impressed in
triangle having. Underside of a light ferruginous with the legs
ringed and spotted with blackish brown; abdominal arches
convex. Long. 17 mill. (rostrum excluded); width 64/2 mill. —Ibembo
(February 15, J. Duvivier). Recognizable by its slightly shortened shape, its corselet no more
narrowed in front than behind, a little wider than long, regular
literally rounded on the sides, as wide (in its widest part
extent) than the elytra; its livery of a beautiful green above
recalls certain Ptychoderes of America. LONGICORNIA. Anybostetha Quedenfeldti Duviv. Parallel, reddish brown, covered above with a
brownish ferruginous pubescence, below yer-grey
date. Head covered with yellowish-green pubescence; forehead
finely streamlined longitudinally. Subcylindrical thorax, bisil-
lined transversely in front and behind, arugula, greenish
on the sides; a small tuber on each side. Elytra rugosula,
clearly punctate, adorned with yerte spots: a large spot
subtriangular basilar and a transverse band placed before
the middle, bound on the suture, and some small irregular spots
ligers along the margin, in the apical part. Long. 14 1/2 mill. ; width at the shoulders 4 5/s mill — Ibembo
(August 1/16, J. Duvivier.) A G; space adjacent to A. saperdoides Qued., of which it does not
seems to differ by the greenish coloring of the underside and the arrangement
spots with which the elytra are adorned. 60

PHYTOPHAGA. Podagrica decolorata Duviv. Oblong, slightly convex, shiny, entirely yellow with the extremity
moth of mandibles black; black antennae, with the four
first fawn articles; head finely, corselet and elytra quite
densely punctate, the punctuation of these arranged in series
more or less regular doubles, partly erased at the top. Long. 3 1/2 mill. — Ibembo (November, J. Duvivier). BENGAL CLAVICORNS
by. M.A., Grouvelle,
2nd LIST. 1. Carpophilus foveicollis Murr. 2. —marginellus Murr. 3. —tectus Murr. 4. — Flavipes Murr. 5. — cylindricus Murr. 6. —dimidiatus Er. 7. — mutilatus Er. biguttatus Motsch. 9. Haploncus luteolus Er. 10. — subguadratus Reitt. 11. Stelidota multiguitata Reitt. 12. Lordites glabricola Cand. None -— I bring back the copies
that I have before my eyes with great hesitation In this space. 13. Amphicrossus discolor Er. 14. Amphicrossus opacus n. sp. —Oratus, subconverus,
vianitidus, nigro-piceus; abdomina lateribusque prothoracis, rufo~
fuscis; prothorace elytrisque dense punctatis, leviter reticulalis.

. Margo apicalis ultimi segmenti abdominis in medium height
productus, leviter elevatus. Long. 5 mill. General form of Amphicrossus discolor Er; characterized
by the fine reticulation of its integument which gives it a
mast; by the color of the abdominal segments and by the shape of the
apical margin of the last segment of the abdomen of the male which is
simply raised in the middle and not projecting forward. At last
at 'A. discolor the dorsal bundle of the male is proportional-
ment closer to the base of the elytra than in IA. cloudiness. 15. Pocadius testaceus n. sp. — Ovatus, conveaux, nitidus,
pubescens; prothorace because punctato; elytris apice truncatis, testa-

@>
|

61
ceis, punctato-striatis, intervallis haud punctatis, ultimo segmento
abdominis haud occulto. Long. 3 mill. 1/2. Oval, convex, shiny, testaceous, furnished with a pubescence available
see enlings. Head sparsely and coarsely pitted, episteme
separated from the forehead by an arched impression. Prothorax very trans-
versal, narrowed in front, coarsely and rather sparsely punctate. Almost smooth escutcheon. Elytra 2 times 1/2 longer than the pro-
thorax, truncated at the top, leaving 4 the last segment uncovered
of abdomen, pitted, streaked; smooth intervals with a few
spaced dots; streaks more sunken towards the top. .

16. Cyllodes dorsalis Reitt. — Variety 4 black prothorax. NOTE ON THE ANTS OF BELGIUM

by Auguste Lameere. I was brought into the course I give this year 41'Ecole
of Social Sciences on Organic Associations 4 take care of
ants in our country, and I thought it might be useful to
publish the data that I have been able to collect on this subject. I had 4 my disposal the collection of the Museum of Brussels
determined very carefully by M. Ernest André, and that of
Dr. Tosquinet, 4 to whom I owe thanks for the
information he gave me. M. Sauveur published in volume 11 of our Annales (p. XII)
a note on the Formicides of Belgium, in which he quotes
11 species: I now know 33 forms (spaces or races)
truly indigenous, to which must be added 3 introduced species
picked. There are probably still a few 4 discovered
vrir: I point them out in this work. I thought I did well not to limit this notice 4 to a simple
listing of species with indication of their distribution
geographic in the country; I have attached a brief description
workers in order to allow 4 those who would like to study the
of our Ants to recognize 4 what type they are dealing with. To those who intend to begin the study of these
insects, I would recommend the following books:

G.Mayr. Die Europiischen Formiciden. Vienna, 1861. A. Foreu. The Ants of Switzerland. Ziivich, 1874. E. Anpre. Species of Hymenoptera from Hurope and Algeria,
t. He. Beaune, 1881. 62

I. — FORMICINA. This tribe is mainly characterized; the by the pedicle
abdominal of a single article and superiorly offering a scale
more or less developed; 2° by the unstrangled abdomen between the
first two segments; 3° by the absence of a sting. 1. Fifth abdominal segment visible above, conical and terminal. 2
Fifth abdominal segment eacheated under the preceding. Tapinoma. 2. Antennae inserted at a distance from the epistome, near the middle of the ridges
frontals, Camponotus. Inserted anterine taken from edge of epistome, near end
anterior of the frontal ridges. has
8. First segments of the antennal funicle shorter than the others. 4. First sections of the funicle as long as the others. Formica. 4, Abdomen bulging forward, touching the posterior surface of the scale which is

oblique. Prenolepis. Abdomen not bulging forward, not touching the vertical scale, Lasius. 1. G. Camponotus Mayr. We have in Belgium the race ligniperdus Latr. from C. her-
culeanus Linn., large blackish ant, 4 thorax, pedicle and
first segment of the abdomen forward, reddish: it establishes
its nest in the old trunks that it undermines, and is found above all
in the woods. Not widespread, and living only in Upper Belgium,
mainly the calcareous region: Vielsalm, Embourg, Tilff,
Rochefort. 2. G. Formica Linn. 1. F. exsecta Nyl. — Very recognizable by the indentation
semilunar of the head in arrigre and of the scales, this species
arrived 4 a size of 7 mm., and is quite bright red with
Abdomen blackish brown. Its nest is made of plant debris.
rates soared. She was met on the hills
forests of the Ardennes by M. Tosquinet. 2. F. sanguinea Latr. — This blood-red species has
dark abdomen, can reach 9 mm., and it is distinguished from all
the others by its notched epistome in the middle of its anterior edge
laughing. It is the only slave ant of our country: it leaves
at war with Formica fusca and steals its nymphs. Its nest, established at the edge of the woods or in the meadows, is a deme
plant debris. I have seen some from the most remote localities.
diverse in the country, and it seems quite widespread: it is common
in Campina. 3. F. rufa Linn. — It's like the previous one a big
More or less red ant, dark abdomen and 4 dull body; his 

 

63

frontal area is always smooth and shiny. She also beats
a deme-shaped nest made of twigs. The type of the species has hairless eyes; its color is
of a fairly bright red, and it has the pronotum almost entirely
red; it is found in the woods and is widespread everywhere. The race pratensis Deg. (congevens Nyl.) live on the contrary
prairies and is also common: it has hairy eyes, and offers
on the pronotum a large blackish spot which extends to its
posterior edge. The race truncicola Nyl., which occurs in the woods, has also
hairy eyes: it is of a light ferruginous hue
and uniform over the head and thorax; his hairiness is shorter and
less tight. Coll. Wesmail; Beverloo (M. Tosquinet). Between these various races exist intermediaries designated by
Mr. Forel under the denominations of rufo-pratensis and truncicolo-
pratensis. 4. F. fusca Linn. — This Ant is frequently called
black-ash: it is black-brown, 4 partly reddish appendages
geatres, and of a smaller size than the two preceding species
(7 mm.). Subject 4 sometimes becoming ferruginous, it is distinguished
then from F. 2wfa 4 its shiny body and 4 its matte frontal area,
finely wrinkled. It makes its nest in the ground, under stones, in
woods or meadows. It is a shy space, fleeing when we
bothers her, instead of taking an aggressive attitude like her
congeners. The type, quite common everywhere in cool places, often
slave of F. sanguinea, is dark brown, pubescent
mediocre and not silky. The race gagates Latr. differs in its darker shade,
almost black, and his forehead shining; she only meets
in oak woods and is rare: Glons, Dave, La Houssière,
Tessenderloo. The race cinerea Mayr, which is local and quite rare, does not inhabit
never woods or meadows, but sandy places or
loam and heather. Her whole body is dark brown,
covered with a thick silky pubescence. Coll. Wesmail;
Louette St-Pierre, Beverloo. The race rufibarbis Fab. (ewaicularia Latr.) is common by-
all in dry places, but neither does it haunt the woods. It is partly of a more or less clear ferruginous. The intermediate forms recognized by M. Forel are: /usco-
gagules, fusco-cinerea, cinereo-rufibarbis, fusco-rufibarbis. 64

3. G. Lastus Fab. 1. L. fuliginosus Latr. - It is the largest species of
genus (5 mm. ), and it immediately stands out 4 its color
dark black, shiny and 4 the absence of pubescence of its
integuments; it spreads a particular smell. It is found mainly
mainly in the woods or hedges, digging its nest in the
thrones, and I have often seen her climbing the trees where she goes to harvest
Aphid honey. Captured in the most varied regions
from the country. 2. L. niger Linn. — This Ant, reaching to the maximum
a size of 4 mm., has a slightly shiny body and a very pubic abdomen-
hundred: it is of a more or less dark brown, sometimes with the tho-
yellowish rax. Its nest is usually dug in the ground where it
delivered to the breeding of root aphids. The type of the species, very common everywhere, is of a brown hue
quite dark and uniform; it offers erect hairs on the scape of the
antennae and on the tibiae. Pest in gardens. The race alienus Foerst., which is much less widespread, affection-
ing the hot spots and lacking in the Ardennes, differs from the type
by its lighter color, its smaller size, and the absence of
erect hairs on the scape of the antennae and the tibiae. The race brunneus Latr. a I thorax sharp by its color
brownish yellow on the rest of the body; the scape of the antennae
and the shins are devoid of erect hairs; the body is more
short and more massive than in other breeds. She makes her nest
in old thrones and walls. I have only seen Louette
St-Pierre, Blankenherghe and Beverloo. Race emarginatus Latr. has a reddish-yellow thorax and
offers erect hairs on the scape of the antennae and on the tibiae. It exhales a particular odor, and nests like the preceding race.
dente, seeming like it to be uncommon: surroundings of Brussels
and from Liège, Melsbroek, Yvoir. The intermediate forms are: alieno-niger, alieno-brunneus,
nigro-emarginatus, brunneo-emarginatus. 3. L. flavus Deg. — Spice of yellow color, more or less
reddish on the head and thorax or on the abdomen, with a
size variable, but not exceeding 4mm, The scale is low,
a little wider at the top than at the bottom. This insect is common

 

everywhere in humid places, nesting under stones and
raising aphids there. 4. L. umbratus Nyl. — This species, entirely yellow, a

slightly larger than the preceding, differing from it chiefly in

65
Scale which is quite high, narrower at the top than at its base. It makes its nest quite deep in clearings or
brushwood. The type has the shins bristling with long hairs, and offers a strong
hairiness on the chest and abdomen. Seems rare: Auderghem,
Blankenberghe, Jemeppe-sur-Meuse, Beverloo. The race mixtus Nyl., more common than the type, hairless
erect on the shins, hairless on the chest and abdomen,
was captured 4 Brussels, Schaerbeek, Rhode St-Genése, Asse-
nede and Ghlin. There is an intermediate form: miato-wmbratus. 4, G. PRENOLEPIS Mayr. This genus is made up of small brownish ants of
243 mm.,meeting in greenhouses and becoming cosmopolitan. We frequently find P. vividula Nyl., 4 thorax
short, hardly longer than the head, with a pubescent body, and one
will probably also encounter P. longicornis Latr., 4 thorax
cylindrical, almost as long as the head and abdomen combined, has
very shiny body. 5. G. Tapinoma Foerst. T. erraticum Latr. — This Ant, 3 mm. approximately, is
very recognizable 4 the slenderness of its body and its appendages. Blackish and very agile, it raises its abdomen while running and spreads
a characteristic smell. It nests in the land of meadows and clearings, and abandons
often gives up his dwelling to go and form another: from
his name. It is fairly common or fairly rare throughout the
countries, and mainly likes warm places. He, — PONERINA. The pedicle, surmounted by a scale, is formed of a single article
as in the preceding tribe, but the abdomen is constricted between
the first and the second segment; there is a sting in the
females and workers. We have of this tribe only species belonging to the
genus Ponera Latr., living in small societies under stones,
has a fairly large depth in the earth, which makes their
difficult discovery. G. Ponera Latr. 1. P. contracted Latr. — The maxillary palps offer two
fairly elongated articles, the punctuation of the head and thorax is

66

strong and loosely packed, the color is a yellowish brown, the size of
3mm. approximately. Spread all over the place. P. punctatissima Roger. — This species has palps
jaws of a single very short article, the body covered with a
very fine and extremely tight ponetuation, the integuments of a
darker shade, smaller size. Coll. Wesmail. He]. — MYRMICINA. The abdominal pedicle formed of two articles characterizes clearly-
this tribe whose species offer a sting like the
Ponerine. 1. Not Wonyriere: Anergates. A worker. 2. 2. Antennae of 10 articles, & large club, formed only of

 

 

2 items. Solenopsis. Antennae of 1] or 12 articles, club formed of more than 2 articles. 3. 8. Second article of the armed pedicle below a long and strong
spine directed downwards and forwards. Formicowenus. Second segment of the unarmed pedicle. 4,

4, Mandibles very narrow, almost cylindrical, arcuate, ending in
tip, without terminal edge and without teeth. ‘Strongylognathus. Mandibles broad and flattened, with a toothed terminal edge. 5. 5. First article of the pedicle & pen near cubic Myrmecina. First segment of the eylindric pedicle in front, thickened behind. 6. 6. The last three segments of the antennal funiculus taken together more
shorter than the previous ones combined. 1. The last three sections of the funicle at least as long as the
precedents together. 8. 7. Maxillary palps of 4 articles, labials of 8; sunken frontal area,
rounded back. Aphenogaster. Maxillary palps of 6 articles, labials of 4; frontal area no
sunken, pointed back, Myrmica. 8. Inerme metanotum. monomorium. Metanotum armed with two teeth or spines 9. 9. Antenna funicle gradually thickening from base to tip.
mothballed without forming a limited club, Stenamma,
Antennae with a distinct club, 3 articles. 10. 10. Thorax more than twice as long as high; pronotum with rounded shoulders
dies, not angular. Leptothoraw. Short and high chest; pronotum with well-defined, angular shoulders. Tetramorium. 1. G. Formicoxenus Mayr. This genus includes one species, F. nitidulus Nyl. (= Ste-
namma Westicoodi auct. ), 3 mm., reddish, 4 dark abdomen,
that lives in the nests of Formica vufa. She has not yet been
found in Belgium. 2. G. Myrmeorna Curt. Mr. Latreillei Curt. — Species of 3 mm., black, very hairy,
with appendages and a spot on the metanotum red. She

67

lives in small communities in underground nests, under the
stones or moss. Coll. Wesmail. 3. G. Aneraatzs Forel. A. atratulus Schenk. — It is an Ant that does not have
yet been encountered in our country, but it can be found there:
it is difficult to discover, living as a commensal in the nests of
Tetramoriwm cespitwm. There is no worker: the male, grey-
sallow, heavy and limp, hardly able to walk; the female, winged,
is blackish. 3mm size. 4, G. Sirroney Lognatuus Mayr. S. testaceus Schenk. — This space also lives as a commensal
in the nests of Zetramonium cospitum, and she looks very similar
4 her host, which makes her very difficult to capture: she is
expensive in our country. Its size is 3 mm. at most, and its color
brownish yellow. 5. G. TeTRamMorium Mayr. 1. T. cespitum Linn. — This species which has the ridges bordering
tales rather short, extending only to the level of the edge
posterior to the eyes, varies from blackish to yellowish-brown and has a
size about 3 mm. It nests in the ground under stones and is
extremely widespread everywhere, especially in lawns. 2. T. guineense Fab. — Introduced and very common ant
in some greenhouses; she is yellowish, with a dark abdomen, and
slightly larger than the previous one, from which it is distinguished by its
frontal edges reaching the vertex. 3. T. simillimum Smith. — Space of greenhouses still a
discover with us; reddish-yellow, smaller than the
LT. guineense, which it resembles, it offers as character
distinctive a pedicle wider than long. 6. G. Monomorrum Mayr. Mr. Pharaonis Linn. — Small reddish-yellow space,
cosmopolitan, and occurring quite frequently in greenhouses
and in the houses where it constitutes a real scourge by digging
furniture and woodwork. 7. G. APH#NOGASTER Mayr. A. subterranea Latr. — This Ant reaches a size of
445mm. : it is brownish red and shiny, with the abdomen
dark. It nests in the ground in rocky places, and seems
very rare in Belgium: I saw a copy taken 4 Yvoir and
others in the Wesmael collection without indication of locality. 68

8. G. Solenopsis Westw. S. fugax Latr. — Very small, russet, living in societies
numerous under the stones, in the meadows, sometimes in the
nests @other species. Rare with us: Hént, Flémalle-Haute,
Vaulx near Tournai. 9. G, Stenamma Westw. S. Westwoodi Westw. (= Asemorhoptrum lippulum Mayr
nec Stenamma Westivoodi auct.). — This species of 3 mm. about is reddish with mostly dark abdomen. She
lives in the ground in the forests, under the moss, and is very difficult 4
discover. Coll. Wesmail. 10. G. Myrmica Latr. Mr Rubra Linn. — It is an Ant with a body generally
entirely ferruginous, with two spines at the metanotum. It nests in the ground almost everywhere and raises root aphids.
schools. Its size is 5 mm. about, and it offers a large number
of breeds that the following table allows to distinguish. pre arched antennae ape
Antenna scape

of its base, not geniculate A right angle. 2.
geniculate A right angle near its base; club

 

  

 

 

 

funicular of 8 sections only. 5. 2. Antennae scape imperceptibly arched; club of 4 items. 3. Seape of the antennae sharply arched; club of 3 items. 4. 8. Pedicle almost smooth. Levinodis. Pedicle coarsely wrinkled. ruginodis. 4 Meshes of the sides of the head dull and granulated; smooth frontal area and
inizing. rugulosa. Meshes of the sides of the head smooth and shiny; coarse frontal area~
ment streaked. suleinodis. 5. Antennae scape conde & hardly dentate; smooth and smooth frontal area;
metanotum finely roughened transversely. seabrinodis. Elbow of the scape showing a transverse semicircular lobe; frontal area
strides; metanotum smooth or shiny. lobecornis. Of all these forms, the most common is the race leevinodis
Nyl., which is found everywhere in damp places; the race
ruginodis Nyl., is less widespread and prefers dry places. The
races rugulosa Nyl., suleinodis Nyl., and lobicornis Nyl., are
very rare: Beverloo (M. Tosquinet); finally the scabrinodis race
Nyl., is quite common everywhere, in the meadows and places
wet.

. Forel found intermediaries in Switzerland; ruginodo-levi-
nodis, scabrinodo-lobicornis, suleinodo-scabrinodis and ruguloso-
scabrinodis. 11. G. Lepronorax Mayr. L. tuberum Nyl. — This Ant, yellow, more or less
adorned with dark brown, is 3 mm in size. approximately. She has

69

twelve articles to the antennae and its tibiae are devoid of hair
trained. It is found under the moss of the trunks and under the
barks. The type has the top of the head and abdomen largely
brown. I have not yet seen specimens captured in Belgium. The race unifaciatus Latr. was found 4 Esneux, Chokier,
Marche-les-Dames and Statte. It is characterized by I above
the yellow head, as well as abdomen, except a brown band trans-
versale on the first dorsal arch. The individuals in whom
this strip is interrupted in the middle or lacks constitute
the var. interruptus Schenk. THE BRACHYMERES OF BELGIUM zr REGIONS
NEIGHBORS

by Edward Coucke. These dichotomous tables have been composed with the aim of facilitating
liter the determination of the Belgian Brachymera. I mostly
sought 4 to bring in the easy differences 4 to notice, but
quite constant. The exclusive use of these tables could sometimes not allow
the determination of any abnormal or deteriorated specimen. In this case, the following works should be consulted. Muxant and Rey. History of the beetles of France. — Scuticollis (Dermestides)('). — Piluliforms (Byrrhides)(*). E. Redirect. Bestimmungs-Tabellen der Europaischen Coleopteren. — III. Heft. — Dermestide(*). — IV. Heft. — Cistelid (Byrrhides)(‘). L. ReprensacuER. Fauna Austriaca. —Die Kafer. Vienna, 1858,
p.p. 395-410. G. Sgwiirz. Fauna Baltica. — Die Kifer (Coleoptera). Kenigs-
Berg, 1891, pp. 186-196. — Fauna Transsylvanica. — Die Kifer (Coleoptera). Kenigs-
Berg, 1891, pp. 201-214. (*) Extract from the Annals of the Linnean Society of Lyon, Volume XV, 1867. (*) Extract from the Annales de la Société Linncenne de Lyon, Volume XVIl, 1869. (*) Extract from Verhandlungen der Katsertich-Konigtichen zoologisch-botanischen
Gesellschaft in Wien, XXX. Band, 1880. Abhandlungen, p. 7]. A translation
French version of this work, by M. C. E, Lepricur is found in the Recue d’ Entomo-
logy published by the French Society of Entomology, Volume VII (1888), pp. 384-413. (‘) Extract from the Verhandiungen der Kaiserlich-Koniglichen coologisch-bolanischen
Gesellschaft in Wien, XXXI. Band, 1881. Abbandlungen, p. 67. A translation
French version of this work, by M. C. E. Leyrigur is in the Reowe of Entono-
logy published by the French Society of Enlomology. Volume VII (1888), pp. 384-413. ANNALS OF THE SOC. ENTOM, OF BELGIUM, T. XXXVI. 6

70

Ericuson. Naturgeschichte der Insecten Deutschlands, T. III. Berlin, 1848, pp. 419-499. everts. Proeve eener rangschikking der in Nederland vertegen-
woordigof Coleoptera Familien('). CATALOG OF SPECIES ('). The list below includes all Dermestid species
and Byrrhides entered, or from Belgium in the catalog
Mathieu and in the Annals of the Belgian Entomological Society,
either from Holland or from some neighboring locality by Everts, from the
Westphalia by Westhoff, Alsace and the Vosges by Wencker
and Silberman, from the Nord department by Norguet or from
Nassau and Frankfurt by L. von Heyden. It also includes three varieties of Byrrhus fasciatus, of which
do not speak of these authors and of which I have seen captured copies
in Belgium. These varieties are the following, not yet reported
of our country, and of which I will inform at the same time some
capture locations. Var. Reitt accomplices. Tervueren (M. E. Bertrand), Auder-
ghem, Hoeylaert. Var. auratofasciatus Duft. Groenendael, 11-4-72 (coll. Museum). Var. Fabricii Reitt. Surroundings of Brussels (M. de Gouve de
Nuncques). I also saw, from Belgium, Byrrhus fasciatus belonging
to the Dellus Reitt varieties. and subornate Reitt. But I believe I can
confuse these varieties with var. arietinus Stef. and awratofascia-
tus Duft. (See supporting note 4 at the end of the dichotomous table of

Byrrhids). DERMESTID. Dermestes. bicolor Kabr. lardarius L.
vulpinus Fabr. ater Ol. Frischi Kug. var. fuliginosus Rossi. murinus L.
laniarius Tl, Attagenus. mustelinus Er. undulatus Brahm. ATTAGENUS. tessellatus Vabr. cadaverinus Vabr. Schaeffert Herbst. var. domesticus Gebl. piceus Oliv. (\) Extract from Tijdschrift voor Entomologie uitgegeven door de Nederlandsche
Entomologische Vereeniging. 32° Deel. Jaargang, 1888-89. Tweede aflevering. (*) The names in italics are those of species of which I have not yet seen any specimens.
authentically captured in Belgium. Names in parentheses are synonyms. var. dalmatinus Kiist. pellio L.

Lanorvs. vigintiguttatus abr. trifasciatus Fabr. megatoma. undata L.
Hadrotoma. Haprotowa. marginata Payk. corticalis Eich. Grosicornis. nigripes Fabr. fasciata Fairm. Trogoderma. versicolor Creutz. glabrum Herbst. var. nigrum Herbst. Nosodendron. booklet 0). Syncalypta. setosa Waltl. setigera Ml. paleata Er. spinosa Rossi. Curimus. ertnaceus Dutt. Porcinolus. murinus F,
var. alternate Muls,

Byrrhus. SgEMinowus. signatus Panz. 71
villosulum Dutt. Tiresias. Babr shook. Anthrenus. ANTHRENUS. pimpinelle f.
scrophularive L.
verbasei L.

Formuanus. museum L

Heocervs. fugcus Latr. Trinodes. Hirtus Babr. Orphilus. glabratus Babe,
(Niger Rossi),

BYRRHIDA. ornatus Panz. luniger Germ. BYRRHUB. pill L,
var. oblong Sturm,
var. aurofuscus Reitt. var. auratopunctatus Reitt. yar. albopunctatus Fabr. var. Denny Curtis. fasciatus F.
var. Reitt accomplices. var. cinetus Ill.
var. arietinus Steff. (var. bellus Reitt.). var. auratofasciatus Duft. (var. suboratus Reitt.). var. inornatus Reitt. var, Dianse Fabr. var. Fabricii Reitt. var. fusculus Reitt. pustulatus Forster. var. ater Fabr. ~
w

Simplocaria. Cytilus. Sunprocarta. sericeus Forster. (varius F.). Metallica Sturm. var. fuscns Steph. maculosa Er. var. tessellatus Reitt. semistriata F.
auricomus Dutt. Trinity. Pedilophorus. acuminata Er. Morycnus. Pelochares. Nitens Panz. seneus Fabr. versicolor Waltl. PepiLop Horus. Limnichus. auratus Dutt. pygmeus Sturm. (serious Steph.). sericeus Dutt. SYNOPTIC TABLES OF FAMILIES AND SPECIES. BRACHYMERA. Whole elytra. Antennas of 5, 8, 10 or 11 articles, finished
by a club of 3, 4 or 5 articles. All pentameric tarsi. Abdomen has 5 rings. Hind hips close together
Yautre, widened externally into a narrow plate forming
with the abdomen a furrow in which are sometimes lodged entitlement

* Jes femurs. The latter dug into a gutter and sheltering the shins. A. Oval or subcylindrical shape, rarely very round

gaped above. Front usually charged with a

ocellus. When the latter is lacking, the hips

are only separated anteriorly

by an extension of the prosternum. Hoops of

Abdomen free. DERMESTIDA. B. Ovoid or subhemispherical shape, very domed in

above. Forehead always without ocellus and hips ante-

completely separated by the extension

of the prosternum, The first 3 arches of the ab-

domen welded together. BYRRHIDE. DERMESTIDE. 1, No bulge or ocellus in the middle of the forehead; size of at least
54/2 mill, generally superior. 2. A raised point or ocellus in the middle of the forehead; size not more than 54/2 mill.,
generally lower. 12,

2. At least the first 4 segments of the abdomen covered with down
blank. 8

Sogments of the abdomen covered with black or colored hairs, never
@a white down, 8. 73

8. Blytra covered with black hairs and white hairs, the latter dis-

perforated in a uniform manner over the entire surface. 4. Elytra covered with black hairs and white or colored hairs, cos der-
niers united g& and 1a in spots or marbling. 6. 4. A small spine at the end of each elytron; long. 8-10 mill. Dermestes vulpinus Fabr. 5. Elytra not terminated by a small spine

5. Black corset, broadly bordered on the sides and the front part by
do long yellowish-gray hairs; long. 7-10 mill. Dermestes Frischi Kiig. Corselet & unicoloured pubescence, except for a few red hairs on the posted edge.
laugh. Long. 7-8 mill. Dermestes laniarius I. 6. A black dot between the middle and each lateral hord of the 4* abdominal segment
minal, sometimes also in the middle of the 3¢ and 4° segments. Long. 7 mill. Dermestes mustelinus Erich. Fourth segment of the abdomen without a black dot on either side of the
middle. 7. Bluish-white hairs on corselet and elytra; on the crest, att
front edge of the corselet and on each side of its middle a few
thin hairs. Long. 79 mill. Dermestes murinus L.

Bluish-white hairs on the surface of the elytra only; horn-
selet ot base of the dlytra covered with red hairs. Long. 5 4/26 mill. Dermestes undulatus Brahm. 8. Down of the elytra never single-coloured. 9,
Down of the elytra always unicoloured. ll. 9. Elytra covered with blackish hairs and showing marbling,

greyish on the surface, yellowish towards the extremity of the elytra. Long. 6 mill. Dermestes tessellatus Babr. Elytra never having anything but black hairs on their posterior half, 10. 10. Edges of the corselet, crest and shoulders reddish and covered with down
russet-gold. Long. 7-8 mill. Dermestes bicolor Fabr. Base of the dlytra covered with a wide band of marked grayish hairs
three black dots. Long. 7-8 mill. Dermestes lardarius L.
11. The first 4 segments of the abdomen except sometimes the edges of the
third and fourth covered with black hairs. Long 6-7 1/: mill. Last segment of abdomen covered with red hairs. Club

7.

ferruginous antonary. Dermestes ater Ol. Last segment of abdomen covered with black hairs. Club an-
black tenary. var. fuliginosus Rossi. All segments of the abdomen covered with yellowish or shimmering hairs
golden, Length. 7-9 mill. Upper A black bottom covered with dark brown hairs. Dermestes cadaverinus Babr. Above and bottom of a ferruginous brown covered with a gray down
yellowish. var. domesticus Gebl. 12, Insects glabrous or covered with hairs, never scales. Insects covered with scales of several colors. 13. Elytra & pubescence always dark, spotted or striped
well-cut transverses with white, greyish, or ash-yellow hairs.

 

nitrates. 4. Elytra never marked with dots or sharp bands. 20. 14. Blytra stained with well separated dots, 15. Elytra marked with at least one transverse band. 16. 15. A single white point towards the middle of each elytron. Long. 35 mill. Altagenus peltio L.

Nine or ten white dots, in two longitudinal lines on each
elytron. Long. 4-5 mill. Lanorus vigintiguttatus Faby. 16. A single transverse band, greyish, largely covering the base
of each elytron. Long. 2-8 mill. Glovicornis fasciata Fairm. 74

he. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. No more transverse band on each elytron. Mr.
Two white, angular bands on each of the elytra, one in front
the middle, the other towards the end. Long. 4-5 /2 mill. Megatoma undata La

Three colored bands and often other spots on each of the
elytra. 18. Down of the bands resting on a reddish or ferruginous background, the
general color of the dlytra remaining black or pitch brown. 19. Down of the bands resting on a background of the general color of the
elytra. Badly limited bands, formed by the meeting of 2 or 3 spots
of a yellowish gray. Long, 2-4 mil. Entirely black or pitch-brown elytra. Trogoderma glabrum Herbst. Elytra With extremity and sometimes 4 reddish external edges. var. nigrum Herbst. All the posterior edge of the corselet, except sometimes the anteescutellar part
largely covered with yellowish-gray hairs extending to the edges
side. Long. 3-4 mill. Lanorus trifasciatus Fabr. Posterior edge of the corselet never entirely furnished with colored hairs,
except the ante-cutellar part which is always covered with a stain

 

 

ashy. Long. 2 sec/2- 4/2 mill. Trogoderma versicolor Creutz. Insect glabrous, black, punctate, having the middle of the suture raised in

fairing. Long, 3-4 mil. Onphilus glabratus Fabr. Insect covered with hairs. 21. Elytra covered with long, dark, loose hairs. 22,
Elytra covered with a fine down, short and almost flat, 23. Black or brown insect; edged suture at the extremity. Antennae and legs

of a reddish yellow. Long. 2 mill, Lrinodes hirtus ¥abr. Shiny black insecta; antennae of a tawny bran A black club; paws
of the same color has black thighs. Long. 2 sec/2-5 mil.

. Trogoderma villosulum Dutt. Eiytres covered with a black or ashen down, sometimes barely visible. 24. Elytra and corselet covered either entirely or partially with down

fauye or golden yellow, 28.

. Below body 4 barely pubescent. Black or brown upperparts with fine hairs and

of the same color, Antennae and fawn legs 4 darkened thighs. Long, 4-5 mils. Tiresias shook Fabr. Underside of body lined with black or colored down. 25. 25. Underside of body hair often black, always dark, very fine, 26. Shades of the body With yellowish or greyish hairs. 2. 26. Last article of the club of the antennae as long as the 2 preceding

teeth united in 2, longer than all the others united in o”. Posterior edge of the corselet not raised, Long. 8"/t-4 4/2 mill. Attagenus Schaeferi Herbst,
Last article of the antenna club shorter than the 2 previous ones
reunited. Posterior edge of the raised corselet, Long. 2.8-3.2 mill. Globicornis nigripes Fabr.

. Blasters wider than the corsclet; posterior edge of this last statement. Above black or red testacd with black down in the o”, ashy
or fawn in Q. Underside A down always greyish. Long. 31/24 4/2 mill. Hadrotoma marginata Payk. Blytra the width of the corselet; co last & posterior edge no
raised. Upperside Dark-haired, sometimes with a few greyish hairs on the
base of elytra Below Yellowish pubescence or greyish fawn,
Long. 34/25 mill. Body and elytra black, wrasse bran. Attagenus piceus O1. Black or dark body and elytra, red wrasse. —_var. dalmatinus Kiister. Dark brown body; reddish elytra, red wrasse. var. sordidus Hur. 75

 

28. (') Insect entirely covered with fine, short fawn or yellow down
nitre. Corselet with a wide print on each posterior corner. Long. 3-4 4/2. mill. Hadrolowa corticalis Kichs. Insect having only the circumference of the corselet, the base of the elytra and the
underside of body covered with yellowish hairs. Corselet without print
to each posterior angle. Long, 3 4/2~4 4/2 mils. Attagenus marginicollis Kiister. 29. Dark color of scales black. A wide white band
back of the shoulder, bifurcated towards the suture. A few scales
colored on the elytra, the corselet and the underside of the body. Long. 3 mill. Anthrenus burnet Faby. Dark black or yellowish color. A white band behind
of the shoulder, of the same width as two subparallel bands one
to the million, the other towards the extremity of the elytron. Cos 3 bands sometimes
little distinct. 30. Dark color of the scales black on the disc of the elytra. The
suture, the lateral border, covered with brick-red scales or
has an ocher yellow. Long. 3-4 mill. Anthrenus scrophularia L.
Dark color of the scales blackish or yellowish. Suturing of the elytra
colored like the other parts, never covered with red flakes~

 

30.

very. 31. 31. Base of the corselet, in front of the escutcheon, marked with a white spot, rounded
dio ot well marked. Posterior corners stained with white. 22. Base of the corselet not marked with a white spot in front of Pécusson. At most a narrow band of white scales connecting the
2 white spots which cover the posterior angles. Long. 2-24/2 mill. Helocerus fuscus Latr. 82. Antennae and legs blackish. Long. 2-3 mill. Anthrenus verbasci L.

Antennae and legs fawn or reddish. Of each edty of the segments
on the abdomen a black dot not surrounded by a yellowish spot,

Long. 2-8 mill. Floritinus museumum L.

BYRRHIDA. 1. Tate free, disengaged from bodice; black top; elytra pardes each of
five rows of 1m reddish fawn hair bundles. Long. 44/am. Nosodendron fasciculare Olive. ‘Head engaged under corsel: 2

 

2. Size never exceeding 5A5i/2mill., often much less. 3. Size at least 6 mill., often much larger. para. 8. Above always covered with bristly, rough hairs, often thicker towards
lenr end, 4,
Top never converted from bristly hairs. 10. 4, Size not exceeding 14/2 mill. Bottom of the elytra black or brownish,

unicoloured, not covered with colored scales. Hairy top
whitish. Syncalypta spinosa Rossi. Size at least 2#/2 mill. Top often covered on some
parts of colored scales. 5. 5. The marginal cutmarks and the posterior part of the juxta-sutural cutmarks

 

much deeper than the other lines. These slightly

punctuated. 6. The marginal striae always of the same depth as all the

others. 4

6. Elytra with short, whitish bristly hairs, Long 2 4/2-3 mill. Syncalypta paleata Erichs. (') See also year n° 27 Hadrotoma marginata Payk. whose Q is covered with a
fawn down. 76

Blytra & long, blackish or dark tawny hairs. Long. mill. Syncalypta setigera N\. 1. Elytral striae deeply ponetose. 8. Striae of the elytra appearing unpunctuated. Hairs erect on the elytra very
short and half curved. 9. 8. Size of 24/243 mill, Top bristling with short brownish hairs or a
fawn brown. Deeper juxta-sutural striae posteriorly. Syncalypta setosa Waltl. Size about 84/2 mill. Top bristling with rather long hairs. Pubes-
general blackness with a few tawny or yellowish spots. Fur
black on the black parts, whitish on the pale spots. Streaks

 

 

 

 

uniform juxta-suturals. Curimus erinaceus Dutt. 9. Hairs raised on the elytra black or bran foned on all the inter-
streaks. Long 4-5 mil. Porcinolus murinus I.

Hairs raised on the elytra foned on the 2", 4%, 6°, 8° and 10° intorstries,
a whitish gray tan on the others. Long. 4-5 mill. var, alternating Muls. 10. Elytra without traces of streaks, marked with non-disposed sunken points
in lines. L.

Elytra strides at least on their third or on their anterior half. Sometimes over their entire extent, 16. 11, Bottom of the elytra of a coppery bronze or greenish sometimes blackish
always with a metallic sheen. 12,
Bottom of the elytra black or dark brown without any metallic reflection. 14. 12. A whitish or yellowish colored hair emerging from each point
sunken elytra. 13

No hair coming out of each depressed point of the elytra, Dessons of the
black or brownish body. Red feet. Long 3 1/2-41/2 mil.
. Pedilophorus auratus Dutt. 18, Keusson covered with long white hairs. Quite whitish elytra & hairs
long. Underside of the body & fine punctuation. Dark green feet ow
blackish. Long. 4-5 mill. Morychus eneus Fabr. Crest almost glabrous Elytra Short-haired. Below the
body marked with large dots. Brownish red feet. Long. 3-3 4/2 mill. Morychus nitens Panz. 14, Beusson developed, almost as wide as long. Posterior edge of
corselet & barely extended behind. Black feet, Long 2-2 1/4 mil. ; Pelochares versicolor Walt\. Kcusson small, much longer than wide. At the posterior edge of
bodice, on each side of the middle, a well-marked hip. Those
indentations separated by an extension of the corselet in the form of
half-circle or roughly Brown or reddish thighs and shins. ‘arses often paler
15, In addition to the ordinary punctuation, a series of sunken dots along
the posterior part of the suture, Long 1 4/2-1 3/4 mil. Limnichus sericeus Dutt. No series of sunken points along the posterior part of In

 

15.

 

suture, Long 1 4/2 mil. Linnichus pygmaeus Sturm
16. Size at least 4 4/2 mill. Fine and complete elytral striae,
uniform over the entire elytron, MN. Size not more than 34/2 mill. Striae, except the juxta-sutural striae, weaken-
healthy or disappearing completely on the external parts ot
posterior of the elytra, 18,
Ti, 1", 8°, 5e, 7° ot 9° intorstries A bronzed, greenish or blackish rotlet; others
black interstriae, dull or velvety, adorned with spots more or less
pubescentos. Long. 4 1/2-5 4/2 mill. @a brilliant green. Cytitus sericeus Forster. Stains of the intorstries } of a golden yellow, var. fuscus Steph. of a fawn bran, var. tessellatus Reitt. 77

All intorstries of the same color, Top covered with a brown down
golden sometimes spotted with white. Long. 5 mill. Cytiius auricomus Dutt. 18, Striae visible up to the end of the elytra or nearly, & barely
punctures. Some spots of whitish hairs on the elytra. Long. 3-3 4/2 mill. Simplocaria metallica Sturm. Striae, except the juxta-sutural striae, visible on the first half or the
first third of the elytra only. 19,

19. Juxta-sutural striae less deep on its second half than on the
first. Metallic black above, sometimes brownish At the tip
elytra. These covered with a short and loose ashy down. Long. 3 mill. Antennae and legs reddish yellow. Simplocaria semistriata WN. Deeper juxta-sutural striae on its second half than on the
first, Top of tan or metallic greenish color. 20. 20. Above covered with a rather tight ashy down and rather long, more
dense on certain parts of the dlytra. Very marked elytral striae
quées.Long. 3 mill. Antennae and legs reddish brown. Simplocaria maculosa Er. Top covered with loose, very fine ashy down. Striae of the elytra
very light. Insect very acuminate behind. Long. 2 4/2 mill. Trinaria acuminata Br. 21. Prosternum terminated between the anterior hips by a sub-

 

 

quadrangular much shorter than wide. R.
Prosternum terminated between the anterior hips by a sub-
-quadrangular at least as long as wide. 24. 22, Elytra having fairly well marked only the juxta-sutural striae and
some streaks on the outer side. Internal side furrowed with little lines
deep irregular or intertwined. Long. 9-10 mill. Seminolus signatus Panz. Elytra 4 11 well marked striae complete or nearly. 23. 28, Second interstria (starting from the suture) of the same width as all the
others, without a rudimentary furrow; 2¢ and 3* stripes joined towards the middle
elytra. Long. 8-9 fzmill. Seminolus tuniger Gorm

Second interstria much, fourth and sixth less noticeably
wider than all the others. Second interstria scratched with a furrow
punctuated rudimentary. Long. 94/2-11 mill. Seminolus ornatus Panz. 24, Size of 6 A64/2 mill. Maximum width of the elytra in front of the millicu. Pubescence of elytra brownish or blackish on 3°, 5*, 7, 9¢ and
last interstriae, always partly velvety black or brown
very focused on others. Towards the middle of the elytra a band
transverse, ferruginous or eendrée bordered by two lines or
series of yellowish or whitish dots. Byrrhus pustulatus Forster. Pubescence of the elytra blackish on all the interstriae, one part
smooth on le, 2¢, 4°, 6¢ and 8°. Ferruginous band or
cindered completely & completely erased. Transversal leagues always white

 

often reduced & 2 points scries. var. ater Fabr. Size of 7 & 10 mill. Maximum width of the elytra in the middle or
behind. 25. 25, Blytra not enlarged behind the middle, Abdomen very shiny, Barely
covered with a few very short hairs. Last segment marked at
the 9th of 8 sunken points, at the o* of a transverse impression. Edge
_posterior of this very raised segment in the o*. 26. Elytra widened behind the middle. Abdomen dull, dense
~ converted from a greyish or yellowish down, Flat anal segment or &
hardly impressed in the 2 sexes, little or not raised at the edge
posterior. 27. 26, A. Medium-sized specimens (7-9 mill.). has. General pubescence of a yellowish-gray or golden-yellow colour. 78

b, Interstria alternately unicolored and covered with spots
darks separated by intervals of the dark color. Elytra marked with 2 transverse lines of a slightly golden brown
distinct from the ground color, sometimes reduced to 2 series of
points. Byrrhus pilula L. ('). These whitish lines or series of dots. _ var. odlongus Sturm. None Interstria alternately covered with ordinary pubescence
and thicker and longer golden-brown pubescence,
interrupted in some parts. var. aurofuscus Reitt. a’, General pubescence of dark color. Elytra marked with 2 transverse lines of golden yellow, sometimes

 

reduced & 2 series of dots(?). var. auratopunctatus Reitt. These white lines or series of dots. var. albopunctatus Fab. HAS'. Large specimens (9-10 mill. ); velvety spots of
interstria often very small. var. Denny Curt. 27. A. General blackish or dark brown pubescence. has. A broad colored and transverse band towards the middle of the elytra. b. This hande yellowish or ferruginense. This band not surrounded by 2 lines or series of points
whites. Byrrhus fasciatus Fabr. This band surrounded by 2 lines or series of white dots. var. Reitt accomplices. 4’, This strip of silvery white. var. cinctus Ill.
has'. Elytra without broad transverse band towards the middle. b. Elytra marked with 2 transverse lines of pale color, reunited
nies near the outer edge, sometimes reduced & 2 series of points. continue. var. arietinus Steff. These silver-white lines | reduced to 2 series of points. var. subornate Reitt. continue. var. Dellus Reitt. These lines of a golden yellow } reduced to 2 series of dots. var. auratofasciatus Dutt. 0', Blytra without transverse lines or series of points. var. ¢nornatus Reitt. A', General pubescence of a golden brown,
a, Elytra marked with 2 transverse lines or series of dots
pale in color, united near the outer edge. These lines or series of dots of a silver blane. var. Diana Fabr. Cog lines or series of golden yellow dots, var, Fabricii Reitt. a', SSlyters without transverse lines or series of points. _var. fusculus Reitt. Specimens of the variety subornate Reitt. could it me
seems to be assimilated 4 those of the var. arietinus Steff. and those of
the bed/us Reitt variety. to copies of the var. awratofasctatus. The difference from which these two varieties were created,
found when examining several individuals belonging either
ala var. Diane is 4 the var. Mabricii of Byrrhus fasciatus either a

(') One sometimes finds specimens of Byrrhus pilula or fasciatus, whose
elytra are reddish brown, the abdomen testaceous red; but they are only
immature specimens. () In the varieties of 2. pilula, the second transverse lines form in s@
unites at the suture an almost sharp augle, the apex of which is directed forward. In those of B. fasialus, ves handes on the contrary form a kind of are of eer-
ele rounded towards Varri

Entin in the varieties of B. pustulatus they are, when complete,
sinuous and form at the suture a small angle, often very small, the point of which
is directed backwards,

   
 

   

 

 

 

 

 

79

Either of the auratopunctatus and albopunctatus varieties of the
Byrrhus pilula. Reitter points this out for the first two,
but does not give a different name to the insects of the latter
varieties according to whether their transverse lines are continuous or
dots. THIRD NOTE ON SOME HETEROMERIC BEETLES
FROM BELGIUM

by Louis Goucke. I have seen in Mr. Jacobs' collection quite a number
of Corticeus bicolor Olive. taken over time 4 the Veterinary School
of Brussels, Mr. Gérard took the same space at Lidge in a throne
Worme died February 20, 1891. The parenthesis (0. W.-C. M.), which
follows the name of this species in my list for the April 5 session
the latter must therefore be deleted. M. de Moffarts having kindly communicated to me the Hetero-
mothers of Mr. Gerard, I saw there a Pyrochroa pectinicornis Fabr. taken at the Hockai on June 2, 1889. A young entomologist, M. Gilet, gave me the other day a
copy Q of the Anoncodes dispar Dufour (brought Schmidt) that he
took around Litge. This fact confirms the assertion of
Donckier who reported as coming from the surroundings of Liege
Y copy of the Wesmael collection and entails the deletion
of the parenthesis (C. W.) which follows the name of this insect in my
April 5 list. I just noticed a printing error in this list. The author name Costa which follows the species name Abdera quadri-
JSasciata, in the family Mélandryides, should be replaced by
Curtis. In the same family, behind the name TZetratoma fungorum
Fabr., I had put the parenthesis (C. W.). When I posted
this list, the space was known to me as part of the
Wesmael collection, but I could not indicate any
locality of Belgian capture and I had not found it in the
Matthew catalog. However, I just discovered it in this
catalog. Mathieu informs her as well as the Tetratoma ancora
Fabr., as found throughout Belgium. But he places these
species in the Cryptophagidae family. There is therefore place
add in the parenthesis the notation C. M. until a
authentic Belgian locality of capture be informed to me
for the Zetratoma fungorum and completely eliminate the
parenthesis. 80
Enumeration pes HEMIPTERES bE BELGIUM (end),

 

by Bug. Coucheaux. sect. He. — Sternorhyncha Am. S,

Subs. I. — Puytoputires Burm. F. PSYLLIDS. Livia Latr., juncorum Latr. Psylla Hippophats ¥st. =: limbata Waga 42? — Hartigit Flor? Rhinocola Forst., Aceris L.—Pruni Scop.? —Eriew Curt. — East melanoneura. Aphalara Fst., nervosa Fst. —finis Lw. 80.2

— subpunctata Fst. —nigrified Zott. — Calthe Le — Saliceti Fst. nec Fl. — oxilis Web. and M. — Silicicola Fst. — pictured Zot. — ambigua ¥st. Psyllopsis Lw., Fravini 1. — Spartii Guerin, 43,
Diaphorina Lw., Putoni Lw. 78? Arytaina Fst., Gonist Latr. Paylla Geoff. (Chermes L.), parvipennis Lioilla Curt. Ulicis Curt. Lw. 77? Trioza Fst. velutina Fst. — breviantennata E\.? — Galie Fst. — Pyri LF. — East albiventris. — eastern pyricola. — Rhamni Schrk.? — simulans ¥st.2 — remota Fst. = Crategi Schrk. — Urtiew L.

— costalis B1.? — est. nigricornis? — Eastern pyrisuga. —acutipennis Zett. — peregrina Fst. —Siriola Flor. — Mali Schabg. Fst. — viridula Zott.? — Alni L. Late. —favipennis Fst. — Fosrsteri F. —prowima Fi. — Busil. F, APHIDS. (Aphids — Aphid monograph — Aphididae Passerini, Phytophtires
Burmeister — by J. Lichtenstein, Montpellier 1885, I, Genera.) Siphonophora Koch, Absinthis L. Siphonophora Vince Walker. — cereatis Kalt. Drepanosiphunt Koch, Acerina Walker. — Dirrhoda Walker. Phorotlon Passerini, Carduinum Walker. — Hieracti Kalt. — Galeopsidis Kalt. — Jacee 1. — Humuli Sehrk. — Cactuce L. Rhopalosiphum Koch, Berbertdts Kalt,
— Lactuce Koch. — Ligustri Kalt. — Malee Mosley. ~ Nymphae F.

— Mellefolit Fab. —Persica Sulzer. — pallida Walker. Melanocanthus Buckton, Saticis L.
— Pusi Kalt. ‘Myzus Passerini, Cerasi¥. — Platanodes Kalt. — Lychnidis 1. - Pink. — Lythri Schrk. — Rudi Kalt. — Rhamni Boyer. — Sonchi L. — Ribis L.

— Tanacetaria Kalt. — Rosarum Kalt. — Tanaceticola Kalt. — Tetrarhoda Walker. — Tussilagints Walker. Hyalopterus Koch, Arundinis¥. — Uliarie Schranck. — Eriophori Walker. — Urtice Schranck. — Prunt¥. Hyalopterus Prirhoda Walker. Aphis L. Abietina Walker. — Acericola Walker. — antennata Kalt,

— Avenue F.

— Brassica L.

— Cardui Le

— Cichorii Dutrochot. — Cnicé Sehr. —Asteris Walker. — Crategaria Walker. — Crategi Kalt. — Dauei F.

— Dianthi Schr. — Epilobit Kalt. — Erysimi Kalt. — Buphorbia Kalt. — Eoonymi ¥. Frangule Kalt. Bufo Walker. Grossularia Kalt. Hedere Kalt. Helichrysi Kalt. Jacobe Schrk. mali. Mint Walker. Myrice Kalt. Yapellé Schrk. Nasturtie Kalt. Cerasina Walker. Nerii Kalt. Padi L.

— Papaveris F.

—Persice Boyer. —Plantaginis Schr. — comes Walker. — Pruwicola Kalt. — Prunina Walker. — Pyri Boyer. — Pyri Koch. — gquadrituderculata Kalt. —Rumicis L.

—Saliceti Kalt. — Sambuct L.

Sanguisorb Schrk. Scabiose Schrk. Sorbi Kalt. subterranea Walker. Symphiti Schrk,

Tanacetina Walker. truncata Haussmann,

— Tuberose Boyer. — Urticaria Kalt. — Verbasct Schrk. = Viburni Scop. — Zee Bonafous

— illata Walker. = tmpingens Walker. — Juglandinis Walker. ee

81

Aphis Prunaria Walker. Siphocoryne Passerini, Capree B. — Xylostei Schrank. Myzocallis Passerini, Avellane Schrk. — Ononidis Kalt. — Quercea Kalt. — Quereus Kalt. Cladobius Koch, Populus Kalt. Chaitophorus Koch, Aceris L.

— Populi L.

— Salicivora Passerini. — Saticti Schrk. Pterocallis Passerini, Tilia 1. Trama Heyden, Troglodytes Heyden. Paracletus Heyden, cimiciformis Kalt. Sipha Passerini, Glycerie Kalt. Lachnus Wiger, agilis Kalt. — costa Zett. — Juniperi De Goer. — Picea Pana. —Pineti ¥. — Pintle. — Pinicola Kalt. — Quercus L.

—Saligned Walker. Callipterus Koch., Alni EF. —Betula

— Betularius Kalt. — Betulicola Kalt. — Coryli Gotz. — Juglandicola Kalt. — Juglandis Frisch. — oblong Heyde
Pterochlorus Rondani, Roboris L.
Phyllaphis Koch, Fagi L.

Schizoneura Hartig, Corni B. — lanigera Houssman. — lanuginosa Hartig. —Mali Tougard. — Reaumuri Kalt. — Lremule De Geor. — UimiL,

Pemphigus Hartig., kalt. — Bursarius L.

—Ranunculi Kalt,

Tetraneura Hartig, alba Ratzeburg. — Ulmi DeGeer. Rhicobius Burmeister, Piloselle Bur-
master,

— Pini Burmeister. Rhizoterus Hartig, vaca Hartig. Vacuna Heyden, Dryophila Schrk. Glyphina Koch, Betula Kalt. Adelges Vallot(=Chermesauct.)AbietisL. — corticalis Kalt. — Laricis Hartig. — Strobilobius Kalt. Phyllowera Boyer, Quercus Boyer. F. WHITEFLY Latr. (Monographic essay on whiteflies by M. le Dt Signoret, Ann. Soc. Ent. of
France, 1868, p. 369.) Whiteflies Late. Protella L.
— Brassice Walker. Lonicera Walker. Carpini Koch. Ruby Signoret. Fragaria Walker. Capree Signoret. = Quercus Signoret. Whiteflies Avellane Signoret. — Fraaini Signoret. Phillyrea Haliday? ¢mmacutata Hogeer (1855). Aubia Hegeer 1859. Jelinekii Franonfeld? Aceris Geof. Aceris Baerensprung, 1849. Ptbodd

F. COCCIDES. (Essai sur los Cochenilles on Gallinsecticides, Homoptères Coceides, by M. Dr. Signo-
ret, Ann. Soc. Ent. of France, 1868, 1869, 1870, 1871, 1872, 1873, 1874, 1875.) DraspibEs. Aspidiotus Bouché, Betule Barensp.?? "Hedere Vallot?" -
— Micis Sign.?? "Nerti Bouche?" — niger Sign.? — Quercus Sign.?? — Camélie Boisduval. Diaspis costa., Calyptroidis costa. — Leperii Signoret. — ostreformis Curtis. — Rose Bouche. Chionaspis Sign., Aceris Sign. None — AlniSign.?? — Frazini Sign. None — Salicis L.? — Vaccinti Blocked? Mytilaspis Abietis Sch., 1796, 48, 5. "Busi Bouché nee Fonscolombe?" — conchiformis Gmelin? — linearis Geoftroy? Lencaspis Targioni Tozzetti, Signoreti
Targ? "Pini Hartig?" Aonidlia Targioni, Lauri Bouche. Planckonia Signoret, fmbriata Boyer??? Signoretia Targioni, Luzule L.? Eriopeltis Signoret, Festuca Boyer? Ceroplastes Gray, Ruscé L.? Lichtensia Sign., Viburni Licht.? Pulvinaria Targioni, Vitis Auct.?? — Artemisia Licht. ? Betula...

Cameticola Sign. Carpini L.

Evonymt Goureau? Fagi Hardy? Fraxini Light? Lanatus Gmelin? Putvinaria Mesembrianthemt Wallot?? — Oxyacanthe L.
"Pyri Asa Fiteh?" — Poputi Sign.? Ribesia Sign., Tremule Signoret? Lecanium Auct. I, — Hesperidum Auct. — Lauri Boisd. — maculatum Sig. Berberidis Schirk., Lw?? elongatum Sign.?? Geniste Sign.?? — Mori Sign.??? — Persicae F.
— Picew Schr. 2? Il.— Aceris Auct.? "Asculi Kollar?" —Capree L.
"Corni Bouche?" = Coryli L.
— Corylifex Asa Fitch. — fuscus Geott.? — Geneva Targ.? —gitber Dalman, L.
"Prunaster Fonscolombe?" — Pyri Schrk. Rosarum Snellen. rotundum Reaumur? rugosum Sign. Tilie L.? imi The
Wistaria Sign. 2? IV.— Abietis Geof. "Emerici Planchon?" — racemosus Ratz. Physokermes Targ., hemicryphus Dalm.? Lecanopsis Varg. ?, radicum graminis
Barensp. 2? — Targ. ?, radicum graminis Fonsco-
lower back? HE

Aclerda Sign., subterranea Sign. %
Fairmairia Sign., Bipartita Sign,?? Kermes Auct., Ballota Lich.?? — Baukinii Planchon?? — gibbosus Sign.?? — pallidus Réaumur?? —Reaumur reniformis. — variegatus Gmelin. — vermilio Planchon 2? ACANTHOCOCCITIS. NidulariaTarg., pulvinatus Planchon?? Gossyparia Sign., ulmi Groot. — Gramuntie Planchon? Antonina Sign., purpurea Sign.? Eriococcus Targ., Busi Fonsc.?? — Erica Sign? — Thymi Schrk.? Acanthococcus Sign., Aceris Sign. 22? DACTYLORITES. Dactylopius Sign., Adonidum L.

ee

83

Dactylopius Alaterni Sign. 2? — Robiniw Sign. 22? — Viburni Sign. None — Vitis Niedielsky ??? Pseudococcus Westwood, Aceris Auct. ? — Hsculi Sign. None — brunnitarsis Sign. None — Hedere Sign.? — Mespili Geot. 2? — Platani Sign.? Ripersia Sign., Corynephort Sign.?? Westwoodia Sign., Perristt Sign. None Boisduvatia Sign., Lauri Boisd. 2
Puto Sign., antennata Sign.?? Coccus Auct., Cacti Auct. None — Aceris B.? MONOPHLEBITES. Porphyrophora Brandt, Gallica Sign.?? — Perrisii Sign. None Orthezia Urtice L.

 

ANNALS

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

BELGIUM

1

THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME ©

Bed

Co number must be kept; it will not be sent for a second
times as before. BRUSSELS
AT THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE COMPANY
20, KUSEE STREET, 20

13892

 

 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. yy

Minutes of the monthly meeting of March 5, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP OF M. Giron. Present: Messrs. Becker, L. Coucke, Fologne, Ledrou, Robbe,
Rousseau, Selys-Longchamps, Séverin, Tosquinet and Kerre-
mans, ff. of secretary. MM. Duvivier, Lameere and Van Nerom excused their
absence. The session is open 4 8 hours. The adoption of the minutes of the meeting of February 6 is postponed
at the next meeting. Mr. Heylaerts writes that he made an error in his description.
tion of Lithosia gigas inserted in the minutes of December 5
last: he gives birth there 4 wrongly to the nerve 5 of an appendix cell
cular of the forewings. The secretary places on the desk of the Assembly for the
Company library two copies of volume XXXV of the
Annals just published. Board decision. Baron J. de Crombrugghe of
Picquendaele, 4 Etterbeek, presented by MM. Robbe and Michels has
been admitted as a full member. Correspondence. The Linnean Society of New-South-Wales
announces the death of Sir William Macleay. Mr. Minister of Agriculture, "Industry and Works
public send 4 the Company two copies of the Royal Decree
establishing a fifth Guinard competition. Works presented. 1’ Assembly votes the insertion in the present
number of the Annals of the notices which are read. Excursion. On April 10, 4 Eggenhoven near Louvain. Departure from Brussels (North) 4 8 h. 54m. in the morning. The meeting adjourned at 4 o'clock. ANNALES DE LA SOG, ENTOM, EU BELGIUM, T. XXXVI. 86

ODONATOLOGICAL TALKS

by Selys Lo

   

Do 6. (© March 1892.) THE GOMPHINES OF AFRICA. Mr. Dr. Karsch (of Berlin) published in 1890 in No. 24,
page 370, Lutomologische Nachrichten, an important article
under the title of: Ueber Gomphiden, in which he analyzes the
characteristics of African genera and describes new species
existing in the Berlin Museum. It does not include Cordulegaster in this statement because wil
adopts the opinion of Dr. Hagen which makes it a distinct subfamily
(Cordulegasterines) based on the character of the larvae which according to
would have a great analogy with those of Dragonflies and
of the Cordulins. For the moment, I cannot agree to this way of
see, because we do not yet know the larvae of the
large genera Chlorogomphus, Petalia, Phenes and Petalura which has
the perfect state do not deviate from Gomphines by reticulation
wings and are closely related to the Cordulegaster by
the middle lobe of the lower lip cleft; by the eyes little
away from each other in several of them and also by
the vulvar laminae of females—in any case, these genera and
the Cordulegaster are quite different from the Dragonflies and Cor-
dulines by this character of the lower lip which brings them closer
of the Aischnines. Mr. Karseh, in the work which I have just quoted, pointed out a
character that we have not yet used and which is like
he says it sometimes generic, sometimes specific, but sometimes uncon-
residing in some species. It is a small transverse nerve
located 4 the base of the subcostal space between the
costal and the median, a little before the 1 strong antecu-
bital which, for its part, erases both the costal space and the subcostal. He gives to the small nerve of which I have just spoken the name of nerve.
subcostal basal vulva, very appropriate denomination
(Lasalesubcostalquerader). She sometimes exists with four wings,
sometimes to superiors only; or as an anomaly
yariable 4 only one of the four wings. In three quarters of

 

 

87
known genera, numbering about 50, this nervule lacks
entirely on all four wings. Having recently received from Madagascar four new species
and two others from the African continent I was led to write the
present work, especially since there are two new
genera, which I have named Crenigomphus and Jsomma, and find useful
to summarize at the same time what we know of all the
Africa and Madagascar gomphines. In 1854 (Synopsis des Gomphines), I counted only 13
African species, i.e. 2/s™ of what we know
now. in 1857 (Monographie des Gomphines), I listed 15; and in
1878 (Fourth Additions to the Synopsis) I arrived 4 19 species,
including none from Madagascar. In 1890, Mr. Karsch (I. None described 5 new species, among
which he established two new genera: Vewrogomphus and
Podogomphus. The work that I present enumerates 33 species distributed in
13 genres — I say genres to simplify, but mentioning
that several of them are for me only the subgenres
of the great genres of which I persist & maintain the principle as
a necessity in the classification. The Palearctic zone of Africa so far provides only 6 4
7 species. They are found, with the exception of one, on the Euro-
Europeans or Asians of the Mediterranean. These are the genres
Gomphus, Lindenia and Cordulegaster, strangers to the rest of
Africa, and Onychogomphus, the latter widespread throughout
ancient continent. The equatorial and southern zone is on the contrary very rich,
counting more than 20 species, all of which belong exclusively to
VAfrique or 4 Madagascar, among which we count the
genera Crenigomphus Selys, Ceratogomphus Selys, Phyllogom-
phus Selys, Menrogomphus Karsch, Podogomphus Karsch,
Notogomphus Selys, Diastatomma Selys (ex Burm.) and Jsumma
Selys. These genres are peculiar to Africa alone. We also find
in this region Onychogomphus and analogous Jctinus
to those of tropical Asia, but not similar as species. The five Gomphines observed & Madagascar are different from
those of the continent. However, they have all the characteristics of the
African fauna, appreciation that I have already expressed each time
I have spoken of the Odonata of Madagascar ('). (‘) M. Kirpy, in the Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London in 1889,
p- 209, described a genus and species from the Cameroons as Pseudo-

88
LEaion pes GOMPHUS. Genus ONYCHOGOMPHUS Selys. 1, Onychogomphus forcipatus L., race wigiculatus Van
der Linden (forcipatus var. consobrinus Kolbe Q). Lefebvrei Ramb. (nec Selys). Algeria. — Ugypt. (Southern Europe and Western Asia) The type of the species inhabits the rest of Europe and northern Asia.
trional. 2. Onychogomphus Lefebvrei Selys (nee Ramb.). Egypt (Mus. of Berlin). — (Asia Minor, coll. Selys). I had believed this species to be identical with G. Levebvrei from Ram-
bur, but I have since posted that the unique female type of
Rambur is a clear variety of the waguiculatus. Mr. Karsch does
observe with reason that MM. Kolbe and Kirby did not
overview of this correction. 3. Onychogomphus uneatus? Charp. Forcipatus, var. socialis Kolbe (Q). Algeria. (Southern France, Spain, Alps). I added a sign of doubt to the name of the species, because the
Dr. Karsch brings back to the cognatus of Cape V the specimen from Algeria
described by Dr. Kolbe. However, 4 judging from the description and the figure of the thorax
given by the latter, I cannot relate it to the cognatus of which
I described two females in the Monographie des Gomphines and
I doubt that the Cape species inhabits Algeria, while Pwicatus
is found on the European coasts in France and Spain, which
makes it quite likely that he ended up in Algeria as
many other Palearctic species. 4, Onychogomphus supinus Hagen. — Selys, Mon. Gomph. Cafrerie. Known by a male from the Stockholm Museum. 5. Onychogomphus zequistylus Selys n. sp. G Abdomen 42. Lower wing 30. Black reticulation including costal neryure. Pterostigma
black (3 1/2 mm long), surmounting 6 cells. Upper wing:
15 antecubital, 11 postcubital. Lower wing: 11 antecubi-
tales, 12 postulnar. Membrane almost nil. (In the exem-

 

gomphus insignis, listed again in his Catalog of 1890 among the
Gomphines — but, in the 2¢ Appendix to this Catalogue, he rectifies this by plagiarizing,
this genus Pseudogomphus among the Cordulines to which it offect belongs, and
he adopted for the species the name do sophia, under which Jo Pai described, in 1871, in the
genro Macromia from which it hardly differs. 89

please single there is an asymmetric subcostal basal nervula a
only one of the wings.) Black, marked with bright yellow. Lower lip and base of mandibles dirty yellowish; face
yellow; upper lava surrounded and largely crossed by black; rhi
light brown narium; blackish nasus; protruding forehead, black 4 the base,
this color crossing it widely above and prolonged fine-
lies on the ridge. Black vertex and occiput, the latter with slight edge
slightly concave, ciliate. Back of the head black with two spots
yellow temporals against the eyes. Prothorax black, with yellow basal ring and lateral point. Thorax black but marked with numerous yellow spots, namely:
in front half a mesothoracic collar interrupted in the middle,
and on each side an isolated elliptical antehumeral spot, a
small spot against the sinuses and a lower humeral line. Abdomen slender, thickened at both extremities, black to
7th segment with a spot at the 1st segment, a dorsal band has
Variety of 2, narrower at 3m and 4th, and side spots a
these yellow segments. The basal half of the yellow 7° above; the
last three cinnamon-red segments, but the top of the 8m and
a dorsal spot at 9= and 10 are black. Sides of 8 and Yme
dilated into black, elliptical leaves, not denticulate. ¢gawa anal appendages having double the last segment. The upper ones russet yellow, thick at the base, tapering to
cloudy to the tip which is blackish, tapered, curved downwards. seen
above they are almost straight, slightly apart. lower appendix
blackish, of the same length, split in its two terminal thirds
into two almost contiguous slender branches. Seen in profile, he is
@first bent down, then bent up to the tip
of the superior appendages which it reaches. Feet thick, very short, blackish, fading to brown on the sides
femora, which are finely denticulate. Tibias briefly ciliate. Q (unknown). Homeland: Rumena Valley, Mayemga (Madagascar), one mile
unique, coll. Selys. It is very reminiscent of the fritil/arius (no 6) by its coloring,
but larger in size and very distinct by the blade of the occiput
black and by the blackish lower anal appendage, as long as
the superiors, owes the name that I have imposed on space. 6. Onychogomphus fritillarius Selys n. sp. G. Abdomen 36-38, Lower wing 26-28. Black reticulation; the costal rib Slightly yellow in
out to the nodus. Black pterostigma (3 mm long.) on my-

 

 

cells. Upper wing: 12-15 antecubital, 9-10 post-
cubital. Lower wing 10-11 antecubital, 9-11 posteubital. No subcostal basal nerve. Black, spotted with bright yellow. Lower lip and base of mandibles yellowish. yellow face,
upper lip surrounded and crossed by black; the black nose
except on its sides; yellow forehead, surrounded and crossed by black in
above, this color forming in front a wide black band against
I crest. Vertex black; straight occiput, ciliated, yellow surrounded by black. Back of the head black, but with a dot at the temples and a
spot lower against yellow eyes. Black prothorax with one or two small spots. Black thorax marked with numerous yellow spots as well as it
follows: forward half a mesothoracic collar interrupted at the
middle, and on each side an isolated oblique antehumeral line,
a spot near the antelar sinuses and an elongated line juxtaposed
humeeral isolated. At the sides of the thorax two kidney-shaped spots
superimposed in the first space, three in the second and two
gathered in bands in the third. Breast grey-brown. Slender abdomen, swollen at both ends, black up to 7" seg-
ment, marked with yellow namely: At the 1st and 2nd segments a rai
on the dorsal ridge and lateral spots, every 3-5 a spot
basal and a median, one and the other short, divided into two
by the dorsal ridge; at 6 and 7° the basal spot alone, this one more
wide at the 7* that it surrounds. The 8-10 segments of a cinnamon roux;
the 8 ct 9" dilated on the sides in pleated sheets, not denticulated. Cinnamon red anal appendages. Upper ones (3" long)
thick at the base, slightly apart, decreasing in length to the end
which is thin, blackish, curved downwards. Lower appendage almost
half shorter, wide and leaning downwards in its first half,
divided in its second into two straight subcylindrical branches,
somewhat distant, curved upwards at the tip, which is thickened, subar-
rounded with a small external tooth 4 each of its branches. Thick, very short feet. Dark brown femora, subdenticulate in
above. Black shins with short eyelashes. Q (unknown). Parvie. Rumeua Valley, Mayanga (Madagascar); is also found
4 City Nossi-be. Coll. Sely:

(See his comparison with I'O. eguistylus). Onychogomphus atratus Selys, Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1885. G Abdomen 29. Lower wing 24 (6 1/2 mm wide). Wings uniformly striped very light brown. Crosslinking
black. Blackish pterostigma (3mm long). Upper wings:

  

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

91

12-13 antecubital and 9-10 posteubital; to the lower ones:
9 antecubital and 10 posteubital. (In this copy there is a
asymmetrical subcostal basal nerve on left upper wing.) Black, closely marked with yellowish. Upper lip olivatre, bordered with black (more broadly has its
base). Rhinarium, sides of nasus and above forehead yellow ver-
datre, but the base of the forehead in front of the ocelli, the vertex and
Vociput black; the blade of the latter almost straight, ciliate. Behind
of the head black, bordered with dirty yellowish against the eyes towards the
base. Shiny blackish prothorax, marked with greenish yellow as it
follows: in front half a mesothoracic collar and on each side
an antehumeral isolated oblique reniform spot, pointed in
before, finally a juxtahumeral line. The sides of the thorax with
three stripes of the same color, the first touching neither the top
nor the bottom, the intermediate narrow, the posterior wider. Dirty yellowish chest. Abdomen very slender, thickened at the base and at the tip, shiny black. The 1st greenish segment, the 2* marked above a dorsal line
longitudinal and of two large lateral spots, and the 3-6" with
a small yellowish lateral basal spot. Almost basal half
from 7 yellow. Sides of 8-10: dark yellowish as well as their underside. Edge of the 8's and 9''s dilated into broad black, subrounded leaves,
that of the 9° smaller. Upper anal appendages yellowish-brown, fading to blackish
in their second half, being three times the length of the 10° seg-
is lying. Seen from above, they are slightly apart at the base, arched in
outside 4 from their middle (which has a furrow inside) tapered
almost pointed at the end. Seen in profile they decrease in thickness
from the base and are regularly arched below, Appendix
lower half shorter, broad 4 the base, divided into two bran-
ches a little apart, parallel, thickened at the end where they touch
chen. Seen in profile, the appendix is ​​first, leaning downwards then
curved at the top. Short black pts; underside of femora a little brownish. Q (unknown). Homeland: i (Congo), a single male. Coll. Selys. In the Proceedings of the Entomological Society ot I published
e in 1885, I wai provided only a short description. Today it was necessary to give a detailed description of it-
Iated to make it comparable with that of !'0. abnormis Karsch,
1890, which is no doubt very close to the advatus, but which I have
not seen. 92

8. Onychogomphus abnormis Karsch, 1890,

Abdomen 31. Lower wing 26 (wide 7 +/s mm.). Hyaline wings; all black veins; a basal nerve
subcostal with four Pterostigma yellowish braun (long
31/2mm. ), surmounting 4-6 cells. Upper wings: 12-13
antecubital; 8-9 postulnar. At the lower ones: 9 antecubitals
and 9 posteubital. Dominant yellow coloring in front, blackish behind. Upper lava lined with black as well as its base. Space of
black eyespots. Mesothorax with a wide median band at the edges of the ridge
dorsal fin yellow and on each side a wide straight band touching
a point the first of the broad lateral bands of the sides of the thorax
to which she is very close. The median of the latter is between
breaking at the stigma. Abdomen 4 dominant black color, 1-7th segments only-
ment stained with yellow. Blackish brown anal appendages. Superiors a little apart
At the base and the tip which is obtuse at the end and visibly a
little indented. Lower appendage having 4 approximately half
superiors. Feet 4 shins and. black tarsi. (Based on the description in De Karsch.) Patvie: single male wi taken 4 Barombi station (Cameroons) by
Dr. Paul Preuss. Mus. from Berlin. Mr. Karsch adds that according to the description this species would be
definitely different from O. atvatus Selys, from the Congo, the only
this genus observed so far in West Africa. The principal character which would separate it from the atratus would be,
it seems, the tip of the upper anal appendages probably
wn slightly indented. The size a little stronger; the dorsal edge of the front of the thorax
yellow and the dominant yellow having the yellowish-brown pterostigma
neither do they agree with my aévatus. As for the nerve
basal subcostal existing at the four wings, it is 4 notice
that she already sees herself asymmetrically 4 one of the four wings of
Vatratus. 9. Onychogomphus obliteratus Selys n. sp. Abdomen 3 30; Q31. Lower wing 3 23; Q27. Black reticulation; the costal vein finely pale yellow
to the pterostigma which is blackish (3 mm long. g; of 3.1/2 Q)
and surmounted by 3-4 cells @, 5 in the Q. Upper wing:

93

11-13 antecubital and 5-8 postcubital; lower wing: 9 antecu-
bital, 6-7 postcubital. Membrane almost nil. No
subcostal basal nerve.

. Pale oliva, variegated with blackish. Lips and face olive yellow; dark border appearance
at the bottom of the nasus, and black at the base of the forehead. Vertex black; blade
of Vocciput right, ciliate, olivatre. Behind livid eyes
pale, washed with brown. Brown prothorax. Olive-yellow thorax, varied with brown as follows: a
dorsal band broadened in front, but reserving the Mesotho-
pale root; this band containing from each cdté from below
a clear oblique spot, and joining an antehumeral line
brown which is followed parallel by another dark one at the suture
humeral. Sides marked with a dark line that is poorly stopped at the
first and 4 the second suture. Abdomen slender, thickened at both ends, dark yellowish,
mixed with blackish as follows: the joints; every 3-6~ sec-
ments a black transverse band before the tip and a basal
incomplete; at 7™ the yellowish basal half; 8-9" above
blackish. The 10° yellow pile; the sides of the 8u ot 9a dilated in
leaves subovate not denticulated, dark and larger at 8°;
only lined with darkness at 9,

Anal appendages livid, the upper ones blackish in their
second half, thick at the base, tapering to the end which is
tapered, curved at the bottom and notched when seen in profile. lower appendix
half shorter, divided into two thick branches, villous in
their second half. These branches straightened at the top and each
provided on the outside with a blunt tooth before the tip. Dirty yellowish feet, short; femora thick, spinulous below. Dark shins, briefly eyelash:

Q (altered body colors). Fairly thick abdomen, bran
light yellowish. Joints circled in black; appearance of a
Blackish lateral jongitudinal band at 2-6" segments, consisting of
mengant after the base. No side sheets at 8m and at
9m segments. The pale yellowish 10 as well as the anal appendages
which are thin, sharp, a little longer than the last segment. Vulvar scale short, swollen, indented. Brownish yellow feet; exterior of the tibi

Fatherland: Miss of Nossi-be (Madagascar), a couple. Coll. Selys. Remarkable for the pale face and lips without black patterns;
the dark marks of the body badly stopped, and the 10° segment
pale yellow in both sexes. black. 94

10. Onychogomphus madegassus Karsch, 1890,

Abdomen 3 32; Q30. Lower wing G 22; Q25. G. Almost like male odliteratus. I only find
the following differences:

The center of the pterostigma is longitudinally bron
yellowish. 2° The top of the 10th segment is dark brown. 3° The end of the upper appendages is pointed (not at all
truncated as in the obliteratus). de The lower appendage is black above and on the sides, and
seen in profile, its upward curvature is regular, its tooth
external anteterminal not being straightened and being placed
almost at the end of each branch. Q type (from the description of D* Karsch):

Wings washed with yellowness. The inner half of the pterostigma
yellow, outer half black. 3 cells then 2 postrigonal rows
(at the upper right wing there are accidentally 2 nerves
medians instead of one). Yellow coloring; upper lip lined and crossed with black. Black forehead ridge in the middle. The black streaks of the thorax well
marked; the first lateral in the shape of an S, the segments of
Abdomen broadly brown-blackish behind with a small
median circle, from which arises on each side a straight lateral line. Vulvar skin with a small indentation behind:

Patric: The type of Vespece, described by Dr. Karsch, is a
single female taken & Madagascar in June 1880, by M. Hilde-
brandt. — (Mus. of Berlin.) It is doubtful whether the male in my collection, coming from the island of
Nossi-be, belongs there. I first thought of him as a
obliteratus. I did not dare to unite it to this species because of the
difference in shape of the anal appendages mentioned above. 11. Onychogomphus cognatus Ramb. Homeland: Cape of Good Hope. N. B. M. Dr. Karsch says that the female from Algeria, described
by Dr. Kolbe under the name of Onychogomphus forcipatus,
var. socialis goes there. (See my observation 4 in this regard a
Yarticle by ’O. wncatus.) 1. ny chon om pane lacustris Karsch, 1590. Abdomen ¢ 27 1/2-30; Q30. Lower wing ct 23; Q26. cross-linking brane; the large blackish veins, except
Exterior of the costal which is yellowish. Pale yellow pterostigina
(3} mmn long. ), surmounting 3 1/2 4 4 cells between veins
black upper island; 11-12 antecubital and 7 posterior
bital; lower wing 8-9 antecubital and 8 postcubital. 95

GS young. Pale yellow marked with brown and blackish. Base
extremity of forehead blackish; olive vertex; occiput 4 barely sinuate,
slightly raised in the center. Prothorax and thorax yellowish livid with the appearance of a band
brown at the top of the humeral suture, and on the sides a stripe
at the median suture. Abdomen slender, pale yellowish; joints from 2-7"*
segments circled blackish; these segments marked with brown
as follows: the edges of the 2"* segment; every 3-6", a spot
blackish dorsal fin pointed posteriorly on the transverse suture, a
other small on each side has half of the segments, and a band
brown starting a little after the base. The basal half of the 7°
stack yellow. The last three brown segments en de:es cdtés
8 and 9™ dilated into undenticulated, blackish sheets, that of the
8™* larger. Dirty yellowish anal appendages; the upper ones thick at the base,
decreasing to the end which ends in a blunt point
black. They are strongly curved at the bottom 4 from their half. Lower appendage only two fifths in length
of the upper ones, curved at the top in the form of an S, divided in its
terminal half in two thick branches widened at the end
laterally, 4 dark ciliated edge. Yellowish feet (very short), thick femurs, denticulate below. Tibias 4 very short eyelashes:

Dr. Karsch has described the species according to both sexes. Here is
what I take from his description:

3 (probably adult). Ocelli region black; a band
dark dorsal fin in front of the thorax and three black stripes at the sides. Black tibiae and tarsi. Very short lower appendage, the upper ones:
thick laughing, as in the pumilio. Q (Mr. Karsch only gives the dimensions.) Homeland: Lake Tanganica. The young mile, coll. Selys, by Mr.
Captain Storms. — Two males and one female by M. Paul Rei-
chard (Mus. of Berlin). The smallest males are those described
by Dr. Karsch. This species from the African continent has many connections with
the madegassus Karsch and Vobliteratus Selys, from Madagascar. It seems to differ from it the yellow pterostigma, the appendages
superiors more epal ucteres which bring them closer to the pumilio
and Hagenii, species smaller and less stained with marks
obscure 4 Vabdomen. 3. Onychogomphus Genei Selys, Revue Zvol., 181);
id. Ray. Odon., 1850 (the Q). —Syn. Gomphines, 1854; Monog. Gomph., 1857. Report Soc. Ent. Belgium, December 1889. 96

Gomphus eacelsus, Achille Costa, Actes Acad. Naples, 1883 ($Q). For the moment it is still uncertain if the Genet is
actually in [egypt. In 1854 and 1857 Dt H agen having examined a couple
from Egypt to the Berlin Museum sent me the description of the male and
the drawing of the appendages which is shown on plate 3 of my monograph
phic des Gomphines. — But in 1890 Dr. Karsch declared that the
male existing Berlin currently is the Costa Selys (he does not speak
not female). From Hagen's drawing the mile he saw
cannot be the Costa d'Oran, because its drawn appendages are
as in the Genei of Sardinia. The 3 of the O. Genei different from Hagenii Selys and pumilio
Ramb., by their large size, the pterostigma between veins
very dense with black and the leaves of the 8° and 9° segments very
edged in black. At the sides of the thorax there are two dark lines,
the first incomplete and inferior. Homeland; Sicily, the typical female, taken by Mr. Victor Ghiliani,
Mus. from Torino. — Sardinia, several couples taken by Mr.
teacher. Achille Costa, one of which was kindly given to me by him-
same. Coll. MacLachlan and Selys. Portugal, observed by
Mr Girard. I have not seen the copy, but the drawing of the appendages
these anals of the male he sent me relate very well to Genet. The comparison of the dimensions of the three neighboring species is
useful 4 reproduce here. 0. Genei Selys | 0. Hagenii Sas | 0. pumilio Ramb. (Sardinia). (Abyssinia and Syria). | (Egypt). ——————
Abdomen. . 33
Lower wing. 24
Pterostigma. 34/2% 2 fa |

14, Onychogomphus Hagenii Selys, 3 e¢ do Additions;
id. Odon, Asia Minor, 1887; Gomphus pumilio (pars) Hagen. Homeland: Abyssinia; McLachlan collection. (Beirut, coll. Selys.) Alongside the thorax of the example from Beyrut there is almost
no dark, distinct lines. That of Abyssinia has nuances
those darker. It must be very close to the dacustris. These miles
are, by their dimensions, intermediate between the O. Genet and
pumilio, but closer to the last. 15. Onychogomphus pumilio Kamb. Paltrie: Weypte, Abyssinia, White Nile. At the pumilio
sides of the thorax usually have the two dark lateral stripes

   
   

97

fairly well marked, while the side leaves of the 8m and
9m segments of the male are not bordered with black as in
the Genei. 16. Onychogomphus Coste Selys. - Reports
Soc. Ent. Belgium, December 1887. O. Genei (leaving) Selys, Révis. Order. Alger. 1870 (figure of
male anal appendages). Homeland: Oran. A single indle, coll. Selys. (Fgypt, Dt Karsch.) In 1870, I had described Him as being the male of the Genei that
I didn't know then. He belongs entirely to the group of
grummicus from india by its superior anal appendages quite
apart, curved inwards at the end where they are widened, truncated
and indented, as well as by the expansion of the cdtés of the 8m and
Qme segments which is rudimentary and not leafy as in
the cognatus and Genet group. Genus CRENIGOMPHUS Selys, 1892. Onychogomphus (pars) Selys. No subcostal basal nerve. Occiput straight, denticulate. Forehead excavated above, its crest projecting
leap forward. Thorax yellowish, having six bands in front
brown very little marked, the medians containing each
side with the antehumerals an oval yellowish space. Abdomen
fairly robust, with blackish sutures and poorly defined half-rings. Short feet 4 many short spines. The femora posted-
laughing not exceeding the 1st segment of the abdomen. G. 10th segment "lenticulate at end, having twice the length
of the 9°, which is half as short as the 8°. The 8* and 9° dilated in
mediocre leaves equal, denticulate at the end. Upper anal appendages shorter than the last segment,
thick, almost straight. The lower subtriangular, also long, comprises
fully straightened between uppers; its split end. Q. 8* and 9° segments of abdomen dilated into more toothed sheets
abutments than in the male. Separate cylindrical anal appendages
by a protuberance which terminates the abdomen. Yulia Scale
short, wide, divided into two points by an indentation. I am obliged to propose the establishment of a new sub-
genre to classify a new space, of Schoa, which is singular
liter by the combination of its characters, and especially by those of the
miile whose 9* segment is much shorter than the 10° and by
Long lower anal appendage, completely curved at the top
between superiors. This nonvean group is related to the Ceratogomphus of

98

southern Africa by the thorny serrations of Yocciput and the
lateral leaves of the 8* and 9° segments, as well as by the appendages
male anal dice. But among the Ceralogomplhus there is
four wings a subcostal basal nervulus, the lateral leaf of the
8* segment of the mile is very large, and its 9° segment is equal to
10+ which carries a long and narrow dorsal extension behind. The Crenigomphus seem to me to have to place themselves between the Ceralo-
gomphus and the Ophiogomphus, quite calling the latter by
the absence of a subcostal basal nerve and by all the
anal appendages of males, but not by the occiput nor by the pro-
singular portions of the last three segments of the males, these two
last characters being quite different in the Ophiogomphus. 17. Crenigomphus denticulatus Selys n. sp. Abdomen @ 28; Q 26-30. Lower wing G 24; Q25-28. Large black veins, but the outside of the costal finely
yellow all the way; the rest of the reticulation brown. Pterostigma (3 1/2 mm long. G, of 3.4 4 Q) black, surmounting
almost 5 cells. On the upper wings: 11-14 antecubital and
6-7 posteubital; lower: 8-11 antecubital and 8-10 post-
cubital. Yellow, variegated olivatre, 4 black designs 4 abdomen. Stature
robust. Pale olive head; the protruding crest of the blackish forehead as well as
its extreme base against the ocelli. Vertex and occiput livid,
soiled, the blade of this one has a straight edge lined with about twenty
small black teeth. The center of the back of the head against the
black prothorax. Yellowish prothorax. Chest yellow. The grey-brown front, reserving the meso-
thoracic; an isolated antehumeral band and a juxtahumeral one
completely yellow. At the humeral suture a grey-brown band. the
below and the yellowish tops with a fine black stripe, on the first
space, an incomplete median and the beginning of a
another lower one after the feet. Abdomen rather robust, thickened at the base and at the end, yellowish,
marked with black as follows: wne lateral spot reserving a
yellow dorsal band at the 2nd segment, the basal joints of the
3-7™" segments and a macular lateral band at the 3-6" segments. Basal joints of yellow 8-9m; the top of these segments
shiny black with two small lines 4 the dorsal ridge of 8 and the
final edge of the yellow 9 as well as the sides which are dilated in
narrow leaves almost pointed at the tip which is blackish with
a few small teeth. The 10m black segment above with a

  

    

 

  

   

 

 

 

 

  

   

 

   

 

99

terminal spot and sides yellowish; its rear edge furnished
Wabout twenty small black teeth. This last segment is th
very swollen above, at least twice as long as the 9
is twice as short as 8m,

Yellowish upper anal appendages, one-third shorter than
the 10th segment, thick tablets internally, almost straight,
provided 4 their extreme base above internally with a tooth
black quite abutting along the central edge of the 10th segment;
their rounded, truncated blunt tip, slightly bent downwards, ob
it becomes black, furnished with a series of 5 4 6 black teeth. Lower appendage olivatric, dark at tip, triangular
elongate; its terminal half split into two compressed branches,
contiguous, pointed. This appendage is as long as the upper ones,
but it seems shorter because it is straightened, subcurved in
arrigre, its point separating above the appendages 'superior
between which it passes. Feet mediocre, yellowish dirty. Fairly thick femora, having in
dessovs a series of strong but short spines. The posteriors
5mm long. Shins with short eyelashes. Blackish tarsi. Colored Q 4 much like the male, but obscure patterns
of the thorax even less marked. Slightly thicker abdomen. Foliaceous expansions of the 8¢ and 9m segments bordered with black and more
serrated than in the male. The last three segments decreasing
successively in length. Slender, obscure anal appendages of
the length of the 10" segment, separated by a protuberance
conical which terminates the abdomen. Vulvar scale short, wide,
divided into two conical points, black at the end, by a
rounded crure,

Homeland: Schoa, by M. Ragazzi (Mus. of Genoa). 18. Crenigomphus abyssinicus Selys. Onychogomphus abyssinicus Selys, 4ms Add. at Syn. from
Gomphines, No. 17“r (1878). It is possible that the two female specimens on which
I established the species belong to C. denticulatus, type of this
new subgenre. However, their male being still unknown, the identity is doubtful.
you. Here is how these females differ from those of the dentex
culatus

the Size a little stronger; belly 33-37mm. ; lower wing
higher 28-31. 2» Washed wings of dirty oeraceous; longer pterostigma (long
5mm.) surmounting 5 46 cells. Very narrow pale membrane,
but visible. 3e The black marks of the abdomen more extensive,

 

 

who

 

 

 

 

 

‘conscript-

 

100

vant trilobed spots on the 2-7 segments. The 8 and 9™
slightly dilated (in my copy they are in poor condition). The back of the 7-10 black segments except the yellow circle of the joints
basal relationships. At the femurs there is before their extremity a kind
@annean brown of which we only see a very slight vestige in the
denticulatus. Homeland: Abyssinia. Communicated by Mr Mac Lachlan. Not knowing the male I had placed this species among the
Onychogomphus which the female resembles in stature and
by coloring; but the discovery of the couple of Crenigomphus
proved to me that Pabyssinicus does not belong to the Onychogomphus. Genus CERATOGOMPIIUS Selys. 19. Ceratogomphus pictus Hagen; Selys. Homeland: Cape of Good Hope. Genus PHYLLOGOMPHUS Selys. 20. Phyllogomphus zthiops Selys. Patrick: Gambia. The typical mile (British Museum). —Isubu
in the Cameroons, single female (coll. McLachlan). The male is described and figured in the Gomphines Monograph
(1857). The description of the female is given in a very
detailed in the 4s Additions to the Synopsis (1878). She is very
remarkable for the very long vulvar blades, reminiscent of those
of the Cordulegaster. Genus NEUROGOMPHUS Karsch, 1890. On all sides the two triangles and the hypertrigonal space
free; a single transverse in the median space; the 1 and the
7 strong antecubital nerves; a subcostal basal nervulus;
two rows of cells beginning 4 halfway from the nodus and
inner border of the pterostigma in the space between the main sector
cipal and the nodal sector. Membrane absent. Forehead rounded, not noticeably projecting forward, the lip
upper front, top view. Normal feet; femurs
hind legs not exceeding the 1st segment of the abdomen, lined
below small regular pines. G (unknown). Q. Abdomen slender, of the length of the upper wing
compressed segment; 9™ and 1U"* shorter than the

Dr. Karsch, after whom I have just given the characters
generic, pointed out that by the conformation of the rounded forehead
who is black, this group cannot belong to the CeratogomphusSelys,
in which the forehead 4 its top is angular and the face vertical.

    

. The One

 

 

101

21. Neurogomphus fuscifrons Karsch, 1890. Q. Abdomen 49. Lower wing 47 (12 mm wide). ¢ (unknown). Wings washed lightly with yellow. Yellowish brown pterostigma,
mediocre (long 1 mm. ), surmounting 6-7 cells, the neryule
forming its basal edge extended to the main sector. To the
upper wings: 21 antecubital and 13-15 postcubital; of them
rows of posterior cells. On the lower wings: 14 antecubi-
tales and 14 postulnar; 3 cells after the triangle, then 2 rows. Matte blackish-brown. Lower lip, base of mandibles, a wide band along
eyes and the back of the head dirty yellow. In front of the thorax two large yellow antehumeral stripes
dirty, diverging forward. Base of 8" segment of abdomen dirty yellow, closely
interrupted mid dorsal and sides of first segments
stained with yellowish. (Description after Di Karsch.) Homeland: Barombi station (Cameroons). A single female, taken
by Dr. Paul Preuss in 1890. Observation. Mr. Karsch does not describe the anal appendages or
vulvar scale. Genus PODOGOMPHUS Karsch, 1890. On the four wings: the two triangles and the hypertrigonal space
free; the Ir and the 7™* strong antecubital nerves (exceptional-
ment the 1st and the 6m or else the 1" and the 5™); wne basal nerve
constant subcostal. A nerve in the median space of the
superior; 2 in that of the lower ones; 2 rows of cells
mengant 4 midway of the nodus and the pterostigma between the sec-
main and nodal; membrane ¢ res narrow, long. Forehead moderately forward, upper lip visible from above. Feet 4 extraordinarily long posterior femurs, ranging
up to half of the 2nd segment of the abdomen, irregularly
denticulate. Between the little thorns of the last half arise
feels 3-5 very long spines. GS. Abdomen slender, longer than upper wing; the last
unexpanded segments in sheets on the sides. Short and straight upper anal appendages. their end
pointed. Strong forked lower appendage with diva-like branches
risked. Q. Abdomen thicker, longer than upper wing; the
Qth uncompressed segment. ANNALES DE LA SUC, KNTOM, DE BELGIQUE, T. XXXVI. 8

102

22. Podogomphus spinosus Karsch, 1890,

Abdomen @ 45; Q50. Lower wing G 38 1/2; Q44. Wings slightly streaked with yellow. To superiors: 17-18 antec-

set 13-15 posteubital; lower: 12 antecubital

16 posteubital; 3 cells then 2 postrigonal rows. After the pterostigma a row of 4-5 cells. Shiny black. The lateral lobes of the lower lip,
the base of the mandibles, the forehead in front of the ocelli, the vertex and
the prothorax yellow in the middle. Thorax having in front two broad longitudinal bands
yellow, separated on each side by a narrow black line. The
yellow color of the longitudinal median edge widened in front. Two yellow dorsal spots 4 the interalar space. Back and sides of the 1st and 2nd segments of the abdomen widely
yellow; those of the 3" dirty yellow at the base. G. Shiny black anal appendages. The base of the 7” segment in
yellow tops and sides. Posterior femora reaching the
half of the 2nd segment (10 mm long. ), armed below 3-4
Pterostigma yellow, bordered with black (long
lower wings 10 mm. Q. Anal appendages at base of 8 segment of abdomen
yellow above. Posterior memurs reaching the end of the
‘2nd segment (11 1/2 mm. long) armed below 5 long
thorns. Yellowish brown pterostigma (5 mm long. ); lower wings-
13 min wide res. (Description after that of M. le Dr. Karsch.) Homeland: A male from the Cameroons; a female Barombi-
station, same country, by Dt Paul Preuss (Museum of Berlin). The spinosus certainly relates to the pratorius Selys of the Trans-
vaal, by his much stronger size; but these two species seem
very similar in other respects. As much as I pulse
Judging from the very brief description given by Dr. Karsch, I
must believe that the black coloring dominates on the abdomen of the spino-
sus, because] the author only mentions yellow spots at 1+ and 2eeseg-
lies and says nothing about the yellow longitudinal stripes of the others
segments that characterize these segments in the pratorius; and the
superior anal appendages would be straight according to his description. 23. Podogomphus preetorius Selys, 1878. Abdomen ¢ 37; Q40. G32 lower wing; Q34. Wings slightly streaked with yellow; black reticulation but the costal
yellow to the pterostigma which is yellowish brown and surmounts
4-5 cells. At the superiors 12-13 antecubital. GS. Light yellow, a blackish transverse line in front of the
forehead between the erete and the nasus, interrupted in the middle, and a

   
  
 
   

 
  

  

  

   

very long spines. 4mm. ); width d

  
 

 

 

103
thinner 4 its base; black vertex with a yellow line behind the
vesicle. Occiput yellow, its crest blackish except in the middle,
ciliated with black; a small black mark behind the eyes. Yellow prothorax with black median suture. Black thorax in front with a double median dorsal stripe
yellow communicating above and below with an antecedent
humeral which forms a 7 by meeting at a half collar
mesothoracic, and a slightly wider juxtahumeral line. The
sides and underside also yellow, with a close line
of the humerus, an incomplete superior 4 the Ite suture and a
other dla second black. Abdomen thickened 4 the base, slightly dilated at 8% and 9m segments,
black above, spotted with yellow as follows; 1* segment with
median transverse band; the 2™* 4 yellow three-lobed dorsal band
widened at the end. The 3-10 has yellow dorsal stripe drawn by a
black lateral stripe starting slightly after each knuckle
base and encircling the terminal joint, except at 10™ which is
half shorter than the 9”. Yellow underside. Strong auricles,
yellow. Upper anal appendages yellowish, black below except
the base. Seen from above they are shorter than the 10™ segment,
straight, slightly divaricate, thick at the base, suddenly curved
inside, bevelled to form a fine point in
their second half. Seen from the side they are straightened in a curve,
then straight, bearing below after the base wne angle tooth
right, then a smaller one at the origin of the tapered point. Lower appendage yellowish at the base, then black, from nipple-
length, divaricate forked protruding outside the superiors. Feet yellow with long femurs with a double black stripe; shins
black inside; spines of the femurs short, but at the posterior
there are five larger than the others (like those
American Dromogomphus). Q. Colored like the male. Abdomen 4 barely dilated at 8 and
Qth segments. Black anal appendages. Yulva scale having
almost half of the 9th segment, in a straight blade split at the end. Small ear cups. Homeland: Transvaal (Southern Africa). A communicated couple
by M. Mac Lachlan, who writes to me that he possesses the four wings of the nerve
subcostal basal view, so that there is no doubt that this
species belongs to the new genus Podogomplus from D¥ Karsch. Genus NOTOGOMPHUS Selys. In the Gomphines Monograph, in 1857 (page 119),
characterizing type C of the Gomphus, composed of the G. Ruppeli

     

 

104

Selys and dorsalis Selys, I said that if Von dismembers again
the Gomphus, we could give this (African) group the name of
Notogomphus. This is what Dr. Karseh adopted (1. c.
page 373, footnote). The Notogomphus differ mainly in the design of the front of the
type D thorax (same Monograph, page 119), which includes
the Gomphus occipitalis Selys and bivittatus Selys, from India, for
which I then proposed the name of Anisogomphus if one followed
the same ideas of dismemberment. That's what Mr. Kirby did
in his catalog and M. Karsch (I. None But it remains 4 to see, for the future, if there is no need to reduce
the number of subgenera of Gomphus, rather than increasing them
ter. We cannot decide with full knowledge of the facts that
when we have received from India and northern Asia
complete pairs of species assigned to Anisogomphus; and of
Africa equally complete pairs of Wotogomphus. Unfortunately today many of these spaces are not
known only to one sex. 24. Notogomphus Ruppeli Selys. Homeland: The Simmen (Abyssinia). A single male taken by the
D* Riippel. Frankfurt am Main Museum. 25. Notogomphus dorsalis Selys. Homeland: Abyssinia. A single female. Paris Museum. Genus GOMPHUS Leach. 26. Gomphus Lucasii Selys. Homeland: Algeria. Museum of Paris and Berlin et al. Selys. Lraion weighs LINDENIA. Genus ISOMMA Selys, nov. gen.

Membrane zul/e. Internal nerve of pterostigma prolonged
obliquely in the costal space. Very Distinct Sectors of Varculus:
completely separated from birth. Free hypertrogonal space. Discoidal triangle divided into dewa cells by a vein running from the
external side has the internal which is almost equal to the superior, followed by
two vangs of cells from the origins. Internal triangle of two cells
ules to the upper wings; free to the lower ones: two 4 four
midribs,

Putry. Nossi-be (Madagascar). The species on which I establish the subgenus Zsomma is very
neighbor of the Diastatomma proper composed of two species
(tricolor Bauvois and bicolor Selys), both of Tro-
western picale, of which the only males are known. 105

However, although I only know the female of I'7. hey~
roglyphicum I do not hesitate 4 to separate it because the Diastalomma
differ by the presence of a rudimentary membrane, the
pterostigma inner nerve not extended directly into
Vcostal space, the sectors of the arculus arising almost from one
same point, the hypertrigonal space crossed by several nerves,
as well as the discoidal triangle with the four wings and internal to the
superior. It is likely that the Zsomma male has:
hooked upper anals like the Diastattomma. 27. Isomma hieroglyphicum Selys n. sp. Q. Abdomen 44. Lower wing 39 (1] mm. wide). Wings washed light brown. Blackish reticulation. Pterostigma
(4mm long.) dark brown, surmounting 4-5 cells. on the wings
upper: 18-19 antecubital and 12-13 postcubital; to less-
upper: 12-14 antecubital and 12-14 postcubital; 3.45 veins
medians. Red lower lip as well as the bottom of the back of the eyes. Upper lip yellow in the center, thinly bordered with russet in
front and broadly of black 4 the base and ¢ Rhinarium, a
round spot on each side near the eyes and an oval on the sides of the
forehead yellow. The rest of the head black. Blackish prothorax. Shiny black thorax marked with yellow spots on each side,
to know ; a half mesothoracic collar very interrupted in the middle;
an isolated short oval antehumeral band; the beginning
from an upper strip 4 the humeral suture; another irregular
4 each of the side spaces, touching neither the top nor the bottom; the
trochanters, finally a longitudinal band divided into four spots
on the interalar space, Chest reddish-brown. Abdomen somewhat compressed, somewhat thickened at 7-9" segments,
black, marked with yellow as follows: at the 1* segment a mark
dorsal; at 2° a wedge-shaped dorsal band pointed behind and
another side passing over the auricles which are rudimentary;
at 3-6 a lateral basal spot and a smaller median of
each side of the dorsal ridge. The 7-10 reddish yellow segments
sitre, the cylindrical 10” almost as long as the 9. Learn-
conical anal dices, thin, pointed, yellowish, having the third
of the 10th segment. Vulvar keaille extended into two straight narrow lamellae a
little apart. Short, blackish feet. Femurs very finely denticulate in
below, hind legs 7 1/2 mm long. Shins with short eyelashes. G (unknown). hangings

  

  

   

 

 

 

106

Putrie: EU of Nossi-be (Madagascar). A single female
(coll. Selys). Genus DIASTATOMMA Burm., Selys. 28. Diastatomma tricolor Bauvois. Homeland: Coast of Benin. Male, single type. Selys collection. 29. Distatatomma bicolor Selys. Homeland: Old Calabar. An incomplete female. Collection
Selys. Birmarckburg-station, in the interior of Togo; a male,
by Captain Kling, Berlin Museum. Genus ICTINUS Ramb. 30. Ictinus ferox Ramb. Puvie: Senegal. Le male type, Museum of Paris, and a
female, Selys collection; Bahr-el-Abiad, Stockholm Museum. 31. Ictinus pugnax Selys. Homeland: Port Natal. Selys summer collection. — Cap de Bonne
Hope. — Zanzibar by M. Hildebrandt and Island of Zanzibar by
Dr. Schmidt, Berlin Museum. Genus LINDENIA Selys (ex. DeHaan). 32. Lindenia tetraphylla Vander Linden. Lctinus predator Ramb. Aeschna quadrifoliata Eversmann. Homeland: Algeria, Egypt (Mediterranean Italy, Pontifical Russia)
tick, Asia Minor). Legion pes CORDULEGASTER. Genus CORDULEGASTER Leach. 33. Cordulegaster annulatus Lat. Race: tmmaculifrons Selys. Peerage: Tangier (Mediterranean Europe). The type of the species
live in the rest of Europe. CORRECTION. My friend M, Mac Lachlan pointed out to me a serious error which I
committed in the 5 talk (November 7, 1891) by describing
as new the Vesocnemis and its unique species sinuatipennis. This i identical with Ja atocnemis malgassica described
by Mr. Kirby in 1889 (Proceed. of the Company. zool. from London,
page 301). The name of this author therefore takes precedence. On the other hand, I notice that the Newrobasis apicalis Kirby
(Proceed., March 1891, page 204, plate XX) is identical with

 

 

    
   

107

my Vestalis apicalis (written in my Synopsis des Calopterygines
(3m Additions 1873, no 27° le 3; and in the 4mes Additions 1879,
27% Ja Q). It's a real Vestalis. Finally, it seems that the Sapho pulchella Kirby (Proceed., 1889,
page 300), indicated from the Cameroons, is a hore from Colombia,
probably identical with the 77. concinna of Mr. Mae Lachlan
(1881). Mr. Kirby will no doubt have been misled about the gender
by the general appearance of the Insect, and there will have been confusion
label for the country indicated: Cameroons instead of Columbia. INSECTS OF WEST BENGAL. 15° memory('). COPROPHAGOUS LAMELLICORNS,
by HL. von Schoenfeldt. 1. Ateuchus sanctus Fabr., Ent. System Supplement, p. 34; System Eleut., I, p, 56. Several copies. Kurseong. 2. Sisyphus longipes Oliv., Ent., 1, 3, p. 164, tab. 19, f. 177;
Sisyph. minutus Fabr., Ent. System, 1, p. 70; Gory, Monog.,
1833, p. 15, tab. 1, f. 12. Only one copy. Konbir. 3. Gymnopleurus indicus Cast., Hist. Nat., 1, p. 73. Not uncommon, different coloring ranging from steel blue
light to dark blue. Tetara, Konbir, Kurseong. 4. Gymnopleurus spilotus MacLeay, Hor. Ent., I, 2, p. 517. Several copies. Tetara. 5. Gymnopleurus parous MacLeay, Hor. Ent., I, p. 517. Not uncommon. Konbir, Kurseong. 6. Gymnopleurus opacus Redtenb., Hiigel Kaschmir, IV,

Tetara. ,p-516. (1) 1 memoir (Elaterides, by Dt Candéze), Annales, 1890, p. CXLVI;
2 memoir (Cicindétides, by B, Fleutians), Anu. 1890, p. CLNVI; 3rd memory
(Dytiscides et Gyrinides, by G. Severin), Ann., 1890, p. CL:i
(Buprestids, by Ch. Kerremans), Ann., 1890, p. CU; 5° memory (Prictenotomids,
Prionides and Cerambycides, by A. Lameere), Ann., 1890, p. Cl
(Phytophages, by A. Duvivier), Ann, 1801, p. XXIV; Memory temperature (isterides,
by G. Lewis), Ann., 1891, p. CXXXV; 8 memory (Dascillides ot Matacodrrmes,
by J. Bourgeois), Ann., 1891, p. CXXXVI; 9 memory (Hemiptera, by
L, Lethierry), Ann., 1891, p. CNLL; 10th memory (Clavicornes, by A. Grouvelle),
Ann., 1891, p. COXXXVIL; L1* memoir (Carabides, by H. W. Bates), \nn., 1891,
p. CCCXXIV; 12* memoir (Curculiontdes ot Brenthides, by J. Desbrochers des
Lodges), Ann., 1891, p. CUCL; 13° memory (Coccinellides, by J. Weise), Ann.,
1892, I, p-16; 14th memoir (Clavicornes, U1, by A. Growvelle), Ann., 1892, II, p. 60. 108

7. Heliocopris Midas Fabr., Syst. Ent., 1, p. 21.3; The TR.,

Same. Mus., V, p. 270, t. 18, f. 2, Q.

The copies sent are not very large. Kurseong. 8. Catharsius sabeus Fabr., Spec. Ins., 1, p. 23. The two sexes of this species have been described under different
names, the G as Cribricollis Walker, Ann. Nat. History, 1858,
3° ser., II, p. 208; Pithecius Herbst Kaefer, I, p. 25; the Q
as Hope sinensis, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, Vol. 1V, 1845, p. 6. Var. : nanus Fabr., Ent. System, 1, p. 42, are only examples.
smaller light-brown colored ones that present all the
intermediate forms between variety and type by increasing
in size and offering darker colorations. Kurseong. 9. Catharsius sagax Quens., Schénh. Syn. Ins., I, p. 43, 3. Tetara. 10. Copris Tullius Oliv., Eut., 1, 3, p. 118, vol. 19, f. 88°; Mfg.,

System Eleut., I, p. 44. A few rare copies. Tetara. 11. Copris orientalis Fabr., Ent. System, 1, p. 52; System Eleut., I,

p. 44. Tetara, Kurseong. 12. Onitis Philemon Fabr., Syst. El., 1, p. 30. Many copies; very variable in size like most
species of the genus Onitis. Tetara, Konbir. 13. Onitis indicus Lansb. Compared to the typical examples of v. Harold. Konbir. 14. Onthophagus Pactolus Fabr.,Mant. Ins., 1, p. 52; Harold, Col.

Hefte II, p. 39. Belongs to the beautiful group of harpaz Fabr. whose species
are mostly found in Africa. It comes closest to 0. har-
not Kabr. This last species is smaller, all the edges of the thorax
are yellow, the frontal horn is divided at the tip, the part
anterior of the thorax is smooth in the middle. According to v. Harold O. havpax bears a well transverse rim
marked having the frontal horn; in Pactolus this edge does not exist
not. I cannot see this edge either in harpax or in the de
Pactolus, On the other hand the Q of Pactolus show a short and
broad horn on the vertex, which tapers sharply in the middle
in a small point, short and rounded; in front of this horn
finds in the Q a well-marked transverse edge, curved in
front, and which continues on both sides up to near the eyes. Kurseong, Konbir, Tetara. 109

14. Onthophagus bonasus Fabr., Syst. Ent., p. 23. Differs not only by the difference in size of Pespece sui-
boasts, but still by the strongly diverging frontal horns
and in front of which is still a little pointed horn,
whereas with gazella, the space seems almost smooth all the way to the edge
(not punctuated). Not uncommon. Tetara, Kurseong. 15. Outhophagus gazella Fabr., Ent. System, 1, p. 56. Widespread species. It is 4 Madagascar;

Arabia, Cape of Good Hope, Zanzibar. The best of

was made by F&hr., in Boh. Ins. Caffv., I, p. 275. Konbir, Kurseong, Tetara. 16. Onthophagus divisus Wiedm., Zool. Mag., I, 1, p-12. Many copies, fairly constant in development

yellow spots on the edge of the elytra. The small round spots of

yellow color at the base of the elytra on the first, second and
third interval of punctuated striae, which often show

W@habitu, are very rare on these copies. Konbir, Tetara. .

17. Onthophagus rubricollis Hope, Gray, Zool. Misc., p. 22;
Redtenb., Hiigel Kaschmir, IV, 2, p. 521, vol. 24, f. 5 = ruji-
Collis Kollar. In many copies. I also received it from Borneo. Kurseong. 18. Onthophagus unifasciatus Fabr., Ent. System,1, p. 49. Described by Walker, Ann. Nat. Hist., 3 ser., II, 1858, p. 208,
of Ceylon, as prolizus. Lots of copies. Tetara, Kurseong. 19. Onthophagus tarandus Fabr., Ent. System, I, p. 48. In the well-developed 3, the anterior angles of the thorax
are stretched in the shape of a tooth. Very common insect in Bengal. Tetara. 20. Onthophagus ramosus Wiedem., Zool. Mag., Il, 1, p. 13. Tetara, Kurseong. 21. Onthophagus angulatus Redtenb., Hiigel Kaschmir, IV, 2,
p-522, t. 24, f. 6. Few copies. Kurseong. 22. Onthophagus vulcanus Fabr., Syst. El., 1, p, 41. Only 1 Q. Tetara. /

23. Onthophagus mopsus Fabr., Syst. El., 1, p. 49. 2 exemples. mandar. ”, Ceylon,
iption

  

110

24. Onthophagus limbatus Herbst, Kaefer, I, p. 207, vol. 14, f. 11;

Harold, Col. Hefte II, 1867, p. 48. Not very rare species, which is also found 4 Ceylon. Tetara. 25. Oniticellus pallipes Fabr., Spec. Ins. 1, p. 33. Widespread everywhere. Two specimens, however common in Bengal. Konbir. 26. Oniticellus cinctus Fabr., Spec. Ins., 1, p. 34 = tight

Drury, Ill. exot. Ins. I, p. 79, vol. 36, f. 8-9(?). Not uncommon in (Baigslte where it extends to China. Tetara,
Konbir. 27. Oniticellus Rhadamistus Fabr., Syst. Ent., p. 22; Olive.,

Ent. I, 3, p. 185, vol. 28, f. 243. 2 Q. The $ are distinguished by the deep excavation of the thorax,
which extends from the posterior edge to the anterior edge and
attaches it to a pointed horn curved backwards. Both sexes of this pretty species have been collected as
kindly to Burja. Tetara. 28. Oniticellus Brahma Redtenb., Hiigel Kaschmir, IV, 2, 1848,

p. 521. Reiche received this insect from the Himalayas and gave it (i. lit.) the very tick name of lamicornis. Many copies. Kurseong, Konbir. 29. Oniticellus phancoides Westw., Royle Himal., 1839, Ent.,

p. 55, t.9, 1.3. Widespread species; is found not only in Bengal and
in the Himalayas but also in Japan and Korea, from whom you described
Motschulsky, like O. minueus, in Etud. Ent. 1860, p. 13. Konbir. 30. Aphodius orientalis Har., Berl. Zeit., 1862, p. 147. Compared to typical specimens. Konbir. 31. Aphodius marginellus Fabr., Mant. Ins., 1, p. 11; Har., Berlin. Ent. Zeit., 1862, p. 146. This common species in the East is widespread everywhere.Konbir. System El., I, p. 81.
in the form of the band
Bit often at the base and at the tip

 

 

Aphodins impudicus Fabr.,
Strong many 2c

 

     
  
 

33. Aphodius irregularis Westw., Royle Himalaya, 1839, Ent. p-55; Harold, Berl. Ent. Zeit., 1863, p. 345. Similar to Aphodius conjugatus Panz., by coloring

11

elytra and especially the splendid Aphodius elegans Allibert, which

however is much larger. 1 copy. Kurseong. 34. Rhyssemus germanus L., var. rufipes Muls.,Col. Fr. Lamel-
lic., p. 314. mandar. 35. Orphnus Mysoriensis Westw., Trans. Ent. Soc. London, Vol. IV, 1846, p. 176. Very common. Tetara. 36. Orphnus impressus Westw., Trans. Ent. Soc. London, Vol. IV, 1846, p. 177. With black headline copies, there are also
ment dark brown individuals with lighter thorax. Less common. Konbir, Tetara. 37. Aybosorus orientalis Westw., Trans. Ent. Soc. London, Vol. IV, 1846, p. 159. Few copies. mandar. 38. Bolboceras calanus Westw., Ann. Nat. History, 1848, p. 354;
Monog. (On the Genus Bolb.) 1852, p. 22, vol. 3, f. 9, t.4, f.6-7. The largest of the 4 species sent by Fr. Cardon. Kurseong, Tetara. 39. Bolboceras Westwoodi Haldem., Proc. Ac. Phil., V1, 1853,
p- 362 = furcicolla Westw., Monogr., p. 20, t. 3, f. 16. Took 4 Burju. Fr. Cardon has not yet sent this
species, but he will undoubtedly find it. Chota Nagpore. 40. Bolboceras quadridens Fabr., Spec. Ins. I, p. 11; Klug,
Monogr. (Die Coleopt. Gatt. Athyreus u. Bolboceras) 1843, p. 47. Common, varying greatly in size, usually from a

brown-chestnut color. Tetara, Konbir. 41. Bolboceras plagiatum Westw., Monogr., p. 27, vol. 4, f. 23. A specimen in which the black color of the elytra is

very developed. Kurseong. 42. Bolboceras posticale Westw., Monogr. p
An exemplary soul, without head or thorax, m

no doubt about this species. mandar. 43. Geotrypes ammon Pallas, Fn. Ross. II, app., p. 707. One was among the insects received from Kurseong. 27, vol. 4, f. 24.
belonging without

 

 

112

 

INSECTS OF WEST BENGAL. 16° Memory. HYDROCANTHARES,

by Dr. M. Regimbart. Since the note that M. G. Séverin published on Hydro-
canthares of Chota-Nagpore, & the session of the Entomolo-
gic of Belgium of November 8, 1890, R. P. Cardon made
new shipments of these insects, of which some species are
arrivals in considerable quantity. The number of novelties is
quite limited, which is not surprising, since the investments
gations have focused on relatively very close points
of the first hunting grounds. I will continue in this note the list of species already
known, without mentioning them & new, only indicating
those that have not yet been reported or those that were not
only a few copies arrived. HALIPLIDAS. Haliplus pulchellus Clk. (oceanicus Reg.). - He came back
a few copies of Konbir-Nowatoli; their size varies from
24/5 434/s mill. ot their appearance does not differ from that of the specimens
pleasers from Annam, Cochinchina, Sumatra and Celebes
that I have examined. Haliplus angustifrons Reg., n. sp. - Long. 31/2-4 mill. —
Oblongo-ovalis, antice angustalus, postice acuminatus, rufo-ferru-
gineus. Capite in medio because punctato, inter oculos angustato;
pronoto trapiformi, lateribus rectis, anguste marginatis and sub-
elevatis, in medio and antice because and sat tenuiter punctato, secundum
basin pracipue utringue depresso, punctis extus et postice multo
najoribus, trregularibus and magis approximatis, angulis posterio-
ribus fere rectis; elytris ante medium subparallel, post medium
allenuatis and acuminatis, fusco vel ferrugineo plus minus vage
variegatis, serievum punctis regularibus, modice approzimatis,
fovtiter impressis, intervallorum punctis minoribus, minus appro-
aimatis, uniseriatim disposilis. Certainly very similar species to the previous one due to its aspect
general and its coloring, the spots of the elytra being however
less clear, more confluent, less dark, but nevertheless very
distinguish it forms much less regularly oval, more
narrowed in front, more subparallel in the first half of the
elytra and by the much greater narrowness of the forehead between the

 

 

 

   
    

   

   

113.

eyes that appear more prominent. The narrower pronotum in
having a rectilinear sides, a little more strongly edged and
raised, the antebasal depression much more pronounced on the
sides where the punctuation is at the same time larger, more
irregular and more confused. On the elytra the points of the series
principal and those of the intervallar s are appreciably

 
  
 

 

 

larger, less close together and more printed; finally the shins
hind legs generally appear more elongated and straighter.
gnes, being somewhat curved in H. pulchellus Clk. Konbir-Nowatoli, a dozen copies. DYTISCIDA. Canthydrus letabilis Walker. — Among about thirty

of copies, there are hardly any variations such as coloring,
except the confluence of the two basilar spots of the elytra which
then represent a transverse strip contoured in the form
dS, while they are separated in the greatest number. Konbir-Nowatoli, Mandar. Laccophilus Sharpi Reg. (fewwosus Shp). - This species is
returned in fairly large numbers; the design of the elytra does not vary
only by the more or less confluence of the sinuous lineoles
and sowing black dots, but the anterior black bands and
posterior part of the pronotum very marked in certain specimens
are almost absolutely lacking in a few others, which I
had never observed in the hundreds of specimens that I have
seen from the Indo-Malaysian region. Laccophilus parvulus Aubé (orientalis Aubé, proteus Rég.,
obtuse Sharp.). — Thousands of specimens of this species
show an extraordinary variability in coloration, sometimes
the flexuous lines of the elytra united two 4 two are uniform
clearly visible and covering the entire length of the elytra;
sometimes, which is the most frequent case, they are interrupted more
or less towards the base, behind the middle and at the top, sometimes
they are very obliterated to the point that some copies do not
show more than slight vestiges, finally the black bands before
superior and posterior of the pronotum, in general very little apparent,
are most often lacking. .

I consider my Manila L. proteus to be just a variety
4 Very developed black coloring and black thoracic bands
more intense, and it is likely that Z. derasus Shp. should equal-
how to fit into this species. Laccophilus inefficiens Walker. — Many copies
of Konbir-Nowatoli and Mandar, among which all passages
to the Ceylon type. 14

Laccophilus flexuosus Dawn (coguatus Shp.). — This species
very variable is widespread from India to China. the
type of Vespece has the more or less flexible lines of the elytra
gemini very close together, very i and uniformly covering
ment all of the elytron, except the outer edge; in variety
solution Shp. lines are. more or less obliterated and inter-
rompnes, which gives a more tawny color to the elytra. I
now consider a mere variety of this meme
species the LZ. chlovoticus Reg. of China which presents only a few
remains of the flexuen lines and whose shape is somewhat
wider and more obtuse behind. In all the reticulation
is double, the small aeroles entirely thin and rounded, the
large polyhedrals,

 

 

  

    

 

     

 

   

Laccophilus rufulus Reg. — Very many copies of
Tetara, Konbir-Nowatoli and Mandar. In this species the reticu-
ation of the elytra is simple, extremely fine, although well
printed and composed with round areolas. The elytra are sown
with a barely visible brownish dotted line, vestiges of flexural lines
which sometimes disappear entirely; in two or three specimens
please this dotted line is interrupted by a macular band post-
the and another very inconspicuous anteapical, a little more
»s as the background color. As Mr. Séverin said, the examples
pleasers of Burma have the punctuation of the second half of
elytra infinitely less developed than those of India. Laccophilus ellipticus Reg. Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr., 1889, p. 152. — Insect uniformly light ferruginous red with head
and the pronotum barely paler, with no trace of irritation on the
elytra which however often present a vestige of band
postmedian transverse barely darker; cross-linking is
double, the thinnest well-printed and polyhedral areolas, the
generally more elongated and 4 contours less printed
més, especially in specimens from India. About twenty copies of Konbir-Nowatoli (Cochinchina:
myth). Hydrovatus pinguis Reg., n. sp. — Length 3 mil. — Ovatus,
brevis, crassus, ad humeros inflatus, oblique postice attenuatus,
ad apicem breviter acuminatus; subliliter reticulatus, sat fortiter
dense punctatus, rufescens, prothorace ad basin, elytris ad basin,
ad medium and ad apicem plus minus obscurioribus; clypeo sub-
truncato, tenuiler marginato. This insect has great affinities as shape and general appearance
with I'H. subtilis Sharp, but it is much larger, more
dilated at the shoulders; the reticulation is fine, fairly well printed,

 

 

 

  

 

   
  

 

 

 

115

With round areolas, very fine and wide punctuation on the head,
is quite strong, well printed and dense on the elytra, intermediate
diary on the pronotum; the underside of the body and in particular the
posterior haunches have coarse pitting and, moderately
tight. The color is a uniform testaceous red and most often
wind we notice on the posterior edge of the pronotum a double
dark and faint spot, and on the elytra a darker tint
obscure and very vague along the base, towards the middle and towards the
Mountain peak; in a small number of exceptionally
coloured, this dark tint invades most of the
elytra and leaves a wide post-basal band and another anterior
wedges clearer. The clypeus is nearly truncated anteriorly and very
finely margined. Konbir-Nowatoli. Hygrotus interruptus Sharp., On. Dyt., p. 398 (Calambus). — I think that the insect indicated by M. Séverin under the name of
H: musicus Wug. must be this species, as several other indi-
vidus of Mandar, a neighboring locality of Konbir Nowatoli, appear
conforms well to the description; males indeed have abdomen
blackish and in both sexes the punctuation seems less regular
bind than in the Egyptian species. Hyphoporus bengalensis Severin, Compt. makes. Soc. Ent. belg. 1890, p.cxcr. — The size varies within the extreme limits of
31/2 4 4 mill. ; females are more opaque and generally
smaller than males. Hyphoporus Severini Reg., n. sp. - Long. 5-5 4/2 mill. —
Ovalis, in mediominimal dilatatus, parum convecus, rufescens,
elytris obscurioribus longitudinaliter trregulariter nigro nolatis,
pronotosecundum basin fusco vage binotato; corpore supra creber-
rhymes fortiter and subregulariter punctato, subtus cowis posterioribus
Sortiter and multo minus crebre punctatis. — Q subopaca, to mimic
punctata, ceterum persublilissime reticulata, magis lata. This large species is extremely close to lH. Solieri
Aubé, of which she has the color, design and size; she goes away
distinguished by its less oblong shape, by its more
dense and larger and by the reticulation of the family less
sensitive, which makes it less opaque. Konbir-Nowatoli, fairly numerous copies. Hyphydrus flavicans Reg., n. sp. - Long. 4-4 1/2 mills, —
Ovalis, conveaus, crassus, pallide rufo-ferrugineus, pronoto ad
basin in medio transversim S late, Qanguste nigro notato, elytris
pallid flavo-griseis, sutura, linea interna antice and postice abre-
viata and plus minus dilatata, altera brevi sublaterali, antice

  

L1G

cum precedente, postice ud medium lerminata and oblique lineola
post secundam lineam nigricantibus, his signature saepe obsoletis
and aliquots omnino deletis; sublus fortiter parnim dense punctatus,
supra S dense minus fortiter ct requlariter punctatus, nitidus;
Q subopaca, persublilissime reticulata, paulo subtilius punctata,
elytris in lineola externa longitudinaliter foveolatis. Extremely close to VH. lyratus Sharp, but of more
regularly oval, shorter, more obtuse behind, with the
noticeably shorter pronotum and even more contour
continuous with that of the elytra; the coping is less rounded and
more finely edged; the coloring is a light tawny yellow,
with the elytra more greyish; the posterior edge of the pronotum
presents in its middle a fairly wide blackish band, often a
slightly dilated on each side, which is barely apparent or nil in the
female; the elytra have the suture, two longitudinal bands and a
blackish oblique line, the first band located in the half
internal expands more or less 4 its extremities where it is more or less
less abbreviated, the second located in the outer half is
stroke shorter, same level forward as internal, but not
not exceeding behind the middle where it almost joins a line
oblique directed backwards and outwards; these black marks are more
sensitive in males than in females, often they are
more or less obsolete and even in a small number of examples
please they are entirely lacking, the elytra being uniformly
greyish yellow. Punctuation, as in H. lyratus
Sharp and Reg. canthomelas, is dense, fairly heavily printed,
especially in the male, the female being a little weaker
punctate and more subopaque & cause of a very
subtle and lightly printed; the sublateral foveola of the female located
on the outer black band is similar to that of the other two
species. About thirty copies, Konbir-Nowatoli. Bi-above Severini Reg., n. sp. - Long. | 3/-1 4/5 mill. —
Late ovalis, subrhomboidens, antice ac postice altenuatus, ad medium
elylrovum sat conveaus, Wranversim subdepressus, supra sub-
nitidus, flavus, nigrosignatus, infra vufo-ferrugineus; capita rufo,
lenuiler punctato, clypeo rotundato, anguste marginato; pronolo
fluro utringue plica minima in elytvis haud continuata tnstructo,
fortius and densius punctato, secundum basin transversim nigro-
bimaculate; elytris carina acute elevata sublaterali ab humero
usque post medium continuata munitis, densissime fortiter punc-
lalis, flavis, sutura, basil late (ad humeros punctum flavum inclu-
dente), fasciis duabus trausversis eatus dilatatis nigris,

eg

epiplenris ante medium latissimis; tibiis anterioribus et interme-
said latis; 3 antennas in medio leviter incrassatis; Q paulo magis
opaca, supra distinctthe persublilissine reticulata. This pretty species is very similar to B. Gestroi Rég. (Ann. Mus. civil. Genoy. 1888, p. 613), of which it has approximately the color
tion; it differs from it by its smaller size, its less rae form:
shortened and above all by the infinitely denser punctuation, this
which removes a lot of shine from the elytra. Suck fine, but
very distinctly punctate, pronotum a little more strongly and
more densely punctate, provided on each side with a small pliponc-
tiforme not prolonged on the elytra, of a tawny yellow as well as the
head, with a transverse black spot on each side of the lobe
median of the base; elytra provided on the side with a hull
sharp and prominent, beginning at the very base and ending
imperceptibly a little behind the middle, with the epipleures
very wide in their first half; they are tawny yellow with
the suture, a black band at the base enclosing a numeral point
yellow and two black transverse bands: the first band,
located exactly in the middle, is formed by a sutural patch
joint more or less closely connected 4 a large spot
median oblong barely reaching 4 the carina on the outside; the
2nd band located in the middle of the second half, is formed of a
large spot united at the suture and extended outside to the
edge of the elytron. With a good magnifying glass we discover on the top
of the body an excessively fine obsolete reticulation, more marked
in the female and making her a little more opaque. Mandar, a few copies. Bisupers indicus Reg., n. sp. - Long. | 2/s-1 4/s mill. —
Ovalis, sat latus, postice leviter attenuatus modice convexus, angulo
thoraco-elytrali sat conspicuo, flavo-rufus, elytris obscurioribus
old and obsolete fusco marmoratis; capite obsolete punctulato,
clypeo in medio obsolete, ad latera fortius marginato, antenna in
medio crassiusculis, articulo tertio minimo; pronoto tenuiter and
vage, ad basin fortius punctulato, omnino concolore, utringueplica
brevi et in elytris oblique et longius continuata instructo, latervibus
leviter arcuatis and tenuissime marginatis; elytris ovatis, fortiter
sat dense punctatis, epipleuris latis, stria suturali nulla. This Bi-top represents quite exactly the shape of our
B. Goudoti Aubé, but he is twice as small and does not have
no suture ridge; the color is red fawn, except on the
elytra which are greyish, darker and very vaguely mottled
of dark brown, with yellowish sides; head punctuation
and pronotum is fairly wide apart, thin, not very marked, except on the
vertex and along the base where it is stronger, much more
9

 

 

 

ANNALS OF THE SOC. ENTOM, FROM BELGIUM, T, XXX

 

118

thick and fairly dense on the elytra; the clypeus is quite strongly
bordered on the sides, less noticeably in the middle; antennas
are thick in the middle with the 3rd article very small; langle tho
raco-élytral is quite felt and the broad epipleures are almost
vertical; the ridge or fold of the pronotum is very short and continues
longer and obliquely inwards on the elytra. A few copies: Konbir-Nowatoli, Mandar. Bufo Sharp overcoat. — Species remarkable for its shape
wide, subparallel, its pronotum very dilated, 4 edges strongly
rounded in front, almost narrowed behind where it forms with the
elytra a fairly sensitive thoraco-elytral angle. Konbir-Nowatoli, Mandar. Bisupers consanguineus Reg., n. sp. -Long. 1 3/¢ mill. —
Sal breviter ovalis, subrhomboideus, antice.et postice attenuatus,
angulo thoraco-elytrali evident, elytris ventricosis; supra in
medio planatus, ad latera obliquus, infra convexus. Capite tenui-
ler remote punctulato, vufo, postice and circa oculos late nigricante,
clypeo utvingue tuberculato; pronoto tenuiter and sat remote punc-
tulato, utrinque plica intus obliqua instructo, rufo, antice et
postice late nigro limbato; elytris nigris, faciis nigris tribes,
1° postbasali, 2" viz post medium, 5" paulo ante apicem ornatis,
punctis magnis ct densis lougitudinaliter seriatim dispositis
impressis, cristis tribus elevatis, 1° media arguta cum plica pro-
thoracis continua, 2" and 5° ad latera, approximatis et minus
argutis instructis. Corpore subtus nigricante, pedibus antennisque
rufis. Species certainly very close to B. ‘dicarinatus Clairy. from Europe and Algeria, but smaller and distinct by the pronotum
narrower, by the sharper elytral ridges, mainly
the median and especially by the punctuation of the elytra which is formed
very large dots arranged in very obvious series, despite
their approximation, while these points are much more
smaller, more numerous and evenly distributed in the
B. bicarinatus. Finally, the black color is more accentuated, without
however|be as much as in the odscurtor Desh variety. from Corsica. A single copy of Konbir-Nowatoli (Brussels Museum). Bisupers antennatus Reg., n.sp. - Long. 2 1/2 mill. — Zlon-
gato ovalis, subparallelus, parum conveaus; infra niger vel fusco
niger, prosterno pedibusque testaceis, antennis testaceis, articulo-
sum apice plus minus obscure; capita and pronoto pallid testaceis,
persublilissime vix visibiliter reticulatis, tenuiter subobsolete punc-
tulatis, illo post oculos, hoc antice anguste and postice plus minus
lincto fusco; elytris flavis, basi, sutura, common plagiarism

119

magna ivregulari, plus minus expansa, aliquoties reducta et dis-
juncta ornatis, tenuiler punctulatis, pubescentibus, stria sutwrali
bene impressed, ad basin abbreviata; prothoracis striga sat longa,
intus curvata, in elytris minima continuata; 3 nitidus, signa-
luvis magis nigricantibus, antennis simplicibus, moniliformibus;
Q minus nitida, evidentius reticulata, pronoto leviter breviore,
antennis magis crassis, brevibus, articulis 4-9 transversis,10° cur-
vato duplo longiore, 11° elongato-fusiformi. Charming species which comes to be placed in the vicinity of B. orient-
talis Clark, from which she stands out 4 at first sight by her size
larger and its shape more oblong, but of which it has little
near the coloring above. The head and pronotum are covered
an extremely subtle cross-linking, more noticeable in the
female, and provided in addition with a fine dotted line, fairly tight, but
quite obsolete; the striae of the pronotum, curved inwards, reaches
at least one-third of its length and does not continue on
the elytra; these have fine moderately tight punctuation
and very fine pubescence; they are yellow with the suture,
a wavy basal band connected 4 the suture, but not reaching
not the lateral edge, and a broad black common plate in the
mile, more or less dark brown in the female; this plate
common, quarid it is very developed, occupies more than two
third of the elytron, and sends forward one or two prolongations
and on the sides a median projection and a posterior one which does not
do not dye the edges remained yellow as well as the top; at the house of
some specimens less colored, this plate is reduced more or
less and even disjoint to the point of presenting only two
or three elongated spots more or less separated The antennae of the
male reach the base of the elytron, are simple with the articles
moniliform; in the female they are shorter, the articles
4 49 are transverse, short, the 10¢ as long as two of the
previous ones, bent above and behind and the 11* one more
slightly longer and fusiform. Konbir-Nowatoli, Mandar. Bi-above inconstants Reg., n.sp. - Long. | 6/s-2 mill. —
Oblongo-ovalis, haud parallelus, parum convezus, rufus, protho-
vacis basi vage infuscata, elytris plus minus infuscatis, margine
laterali, apice, maculisk nonnullis elongatis pallidis more
minus distinctis, ornatis; capite and pronoto tenuiter, obsolete and
because punctulatis, hoc striga obliqua in elytris breviter continuata
ulringe instructo; elytris persublilissime via visibility reticu-
latis, parum dense punctulatis, pubescentibus, stria suturali pro-
funda fere usque ad basin continuata. The underside of the body, the head and the pronotum are red, this one

 

 

 

  

120

vaguely darkened along the base and provided with a streak
rather long oblique more briefly prolonged on the elytra;
these brownish more or less dark with the lateral edge two
once dilated, the apex and two pale yellow longitudinal bands:
of these two bands the internal one, which touches the sutural striae, is
apparent in the second quarter, then in the last quarter sub-
form of a spot sometimes united at the top, the external one more
closer to the base, stops in the first third, then reappears
towards the middle to end in the last third; this provision
distinct in highly colored individuals is less distinct in
many others ot the more faded pale bands merge with
the color of the elytron or disappear more or less completely. The punctuation is fine, not very tight, more erased on the head and the
pronotum than on the elytra where it is accompanied by a
extremely subtle and hardly visible ticulation; pubes-
cent of the elytra is thin, flat, quite long and scanty,
their very marked sutural streak ending very near the base. Bengal: Konbir-Nowatoli, Mandar. (A copy 4 macula-
very indistinct ture was found by M. A. Grouvelle in
tobacco from Sumatra.) Bisupers livens Reg., n. sp. - Long. 1 1/2 mill. — Oblongo-
ovalis, subparallelus, flavo-lestaceus, abdomine elytrisque infus-
catis, his ad latera dilutioribus, sine signaturis distinctis; capital
el pronoto remote obsolete punctulatis, hoc striga brevi recta in
elytris breviter continuata utringue instructo; elytris parum dense
evidenter punctatis, because pubescentibus, stria sulurali destitutis

Shape & nearly the same as in the preceding species, but a
little more parallel, much smaller size; even lower &
that of B. atomus Reg. (Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. 1877, p. 361) of
Manila. Pale yellow color, darkened on the abdomen
with the elytra of a brownish gray without visible spots, but
weakly darkened 4 the scutellar region; good punctuation
printed and fairly wide on the elytra; where she is accompanied
of rare pubescence, very fine, spaced and obsolete on the head and the
pronotum whose striae is straight, short and prolonged by a
equal width and in a straight line on the elytra. Two copies: Konbir-Nowatoli. Copelatus indicus Sharp. — I bring back 4 this species
Q copies of Konbir-Nowatoli, which however differ
of a typical female that I have from Moradabad by their shape
narrower and more elongated, by the more yellow coloring of the sides
and by the sexual strioles which completely cover two-thirds
anterior and even the sutural region of the elytra. 121

Copelatus discoideus Sharp, On Dytisc. p. 582? - It is
with doubt that I bring back 4 this insect a few specimens Q
from the same provenance as the previous ones, but quite distinct by the
more oval shape, less parallel, more attenuated at both ends,
by the absence of sexual strioles on the elytra and by the coloration
tawny elytra which have black only a discoidal plate consisting of
mune touching neither the base nor the top, as well as lines on
which are the 6 stripes; we also notice a
vague posthumeral brownish spot more or less united at the
discoidal plate. On the other hand this Copelatus would differ from the
description of Sharp by the internal streak as printed as the
others. Moreover, the species of this group, in the present state of our knowledge,
births, seem to me very difficult to delimit, the examples
pleasers with great differences in shape, sculpture and
coloring according to the localities. Hydaticus luczonicus Aube. — Two or three copies
of Konbir-Nowatoli, 4 lateral border less developed than
Whabit. Cybister cognatus Sharp. — A few copies of
mandar. GYRINIDA. Orectochilus indicus Reg. — A second female. Orectochilus Cardoni Reg. — Tetara: two or three specimens
please this new species, close to the previous one and whose
the description was submitted last October 4 the Entomo-
logic of France, part of the second supplement 4 mon
Monographic essay on the Gyrinide family. 122

NSECTS OF WEST BENGAL. 17° Memo

 

LIST OF A COLLECTION OF LEPIDOPTERA

COLLECTED IN WEST BENGAL; WITH THE DESCRIPTION OF A

NEW VARIETY AND SOME SPECIES CONSIDERATIONS
KNOWN,

 

by Dr. HL. Robbe. R. P. Renard of Liege had the kindness to send us
come two consignments of Lepidoptera captured in the region of
The Himalayas: the first of these shipments was made under conditions
quite defective; the insects had been caught by hunters
still inexperienced and arrived in a state of deterioration
complete. The second shipment is much more suitable, the examples
most of them quite fresh were placed in foil which,
from the point of view of the antennae, is of capital importance. We hoped to find among the quite numerous captures,
new species; our expoir was degu and we only had a
describe only one variety. I] nevertheless seemed interesting to us
to give the nomenclature of what we have received. Although fairly well known already, especially in recent years,
The entomological fauna of the Himalayas nevertheless reserves us
more valuable discoveries; variability in species
depending on the neighboring localities and according to the altitude, the dimorphism
in the same species according to the seasonal period, are all
things still relatively unclear; this would require meetings
sure bloodline, exact origins and precise dates. It would also be necessary that those who hunt in these regions ot
Entomologist almost never has the opportunity to go, become attached
4 to take, not only the showy or giant things, described
by many authors, but even the modest little insects
your, Lepidoptera or others, which will offer at the same time as
unknown species, a new interest. Let us hasten to say that
we applaud the zeal of the valiant hunters of Darjeeling
and Kurseong and that we thank them for their efforts
to enrich entomological science. The two localities which we have just mentioned are remarkable-
mentriches for certain families of Lepidoptera: the Papilionids
among others are abundantly represented; Oberthur quotes,
in an old list in his collection, a shipment from Sikkim
containing twenty six different species of this group; the Nym-

 

 

 

   

 

123

phales are also found there in fairly good numbers, the Satyrs and
the Hesperides seem less frequent. The consignment did not contain
only one Lycene completely & completely deteriorated. Classification for the names of genera and species according to the
Kirby's catalog. For the order of family succession we have kept the
Boisduval classification. :

PAPILIONIDES. Genres Papilio Linn. 1. P. (Ornithoptera Bdy.) Cerberus¢ Feld. (Darjeeling,
Kurseong). This Papilio appears in Kirby's catalog as a variety
locality of P. Pompeus de Cramer, of which he is similar to the rest
a lot. Staudinger points out, in his last work
on the exotic Lepidoptera, that he possesses specimens from Java
absolutely identical to P. Cerberus of Felder, who dices
therefore can no longer be considered a local variety. At the house of
P. Pompeus as in the rest with several others of the same
group, the number of premarginal spots on the lower wing
seems to us a completely negligible sign of differentiation; in
effect, the spots vary in number and aspeot, according
each individual; in some, they are well marked, 4 little
nearly all of the same extent, in others only one or two. subsist, the remainder being 4 barely faded; we can say that there is
there are no two perfectly alike specimens. It is 4 to notice however that two spots, that of the angle
anterior and that of the anal angle disappear last;
they are more constant than the others. P. Cerberus, known as Standiger, is distinguished above all by the background
upper wings, all 4 black, without whitish lines the
along the veins which go to the marginal edge; we have
of Java individuals who are absolutely black and others who
by insensitive transitions happen to have their ribs
largely sprinkled with white. In summary, all these varieties
seem to be based only on the knowledge of the place of their capture
and it would seem difficult, not to say impossible, to
determine without this information. 2. P. Kenocles ¢ Doub. -- Kurseong. Closely approximates in its inferior aspect to certain
species of Danaides, such as D. Melanoides which flies in
same places as Fr. Xenocles. The copies we received are from Kurseong. 124

Only they offer between them certain design differences
regarding the upper wings. The green lines
contained in the area of ​​the discoidal cell are sometimes very
narrow and well distanced, sometimes wide and very close to each other
others; in one of our copies the two middle lines
are all 4 confluent and together constitute a
large quadrilateral spot. Solid lines between secondary veins vary
a lot; one of them, corresponding to the middle of the marginal edge
nal is often reduced 4 a very small lunula surmounting the
premarginal spot. 3. P. Geoduck 3 Linn. — Kurseong. It is yet another mimetic species that comes close
a lot of certain uplaa Q. 4. P. Aristolochia ¢ ​​Fabr. (Diphilus Esper). — Kurseong,
a single copy. 5. P. Polytus $Q Linn. (sf P. Pammon Linn.). — Kurseong,
a mile and a female, this one about 1/5 larger than
those of Java. 6. P. Helenus $Q Linn. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Some specimens have the top of the lower vaile not present-
as a single black spot topped with a dark red crescent
At Vangle anal, others possess three and even four spots and
crescents occupying part of the edge of Vaile. 7. P. Chaon SQ Westw. — Darjecling, Kurseong. This butterfly must be very common because the shipment contained one
considerable number. I] shows notable variations in size. 8. P. Beaver $Q Westw. — Kurseong. A completely deteriorated Q 4. The ¢ is totally different from the Q also described by Westw. under the name Pollwa. 9. PB. Paris SQ Linn. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. A large number of copies, unfortunately cn enough
bad condition. This space presents differences in development.
ment very appr two localities pr
individuals from Darjeeling are much smaller than those from
Kurseong, especially the Js; in the latter we notice that the
green line extending from the inner part of Vaile's spot
inferior, towards anal angle is subject to 4 variations, well marked
quays; large in some, it is completely lacking
in others or is sometimes not very indicated. 125

10. P. Ganesa G Doub. — Darjeeling, Kurseong, two or
three damaged copies. Although constituting a species quite distinct from the preceding one,
by the shape of the green spot of the lower Vaile and by the nerves
plumaceous on the upper wing, there are however indi- viduals
vidus which participate in the characters of both species. A sign
differential which seems constant to us for the Ganesa type, it is
a bluish iridescent sheen, which extends from the inner edge of the spot
green from the lower wing to the base of this wing: it is necessary to
capture this character that the insects are fresh. The Q of Ganesa seems to be much rarer than the 3 there is
were none in this shipment. 11. P.Androgeos 3 Cram. — Darjeeling, Kurseong, whatever
few specimens of this curious butterfly. Androgeos 3 was described by Cramer (E.g. 1, t. 91 AB)
as being specific to the fauna of the Indian continent where it represents
Fr. Memnon who is an islander. We have before us quite a large number of P. Andro-
geos 3 and we find that the spot or rather the basal line
red of the upper wing is far from constant, most do not
have it point and move away by 1a from the figure given by
To screw up. 12. P.Androgeos var. Depelchini 3 Robbe. — Kurseong. Differs from type by the following characters: red basal line
of the upper wing very marked, ribs going to the edge
marginal 4 nearly devoid of bluish dotted lines
found in the type. A Lower wing: darker background, only a few blue lines.
ment, remaining very far from the marginal edge especially on the side of
Anal valve. On the back: no differences for the upper wing. The lower wing shows the first four marginal spots.
black fins (beginning 4 the anal angle) rimmed with ochre; the
first two completely, the others incompletely. Genera-
only the first two have a dark surround. The black spot on the anterior angle is surmounted by another
reddish triangular spot; head, thorax and abdomen without features
special lands. We allow ourselves to dedicate this variety to Fr. Depelchin
as a token of appreciation for interesting cap-
tures. 13. P. Astorion Q Westw. — Darjecling, Kurseong, two
Q copies in poor condition. 126

14. P. Erioleuca Q Oberth. — Darjeeling. 15. P. Antiphates $ Cram. — Darjeeling. 16. P. Sarpedon $9 Linn. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Very widespread in the Indian region, the Celebes, the Moluccas
and Australia. According to the localities it constitutes the varieties Zere-
don, Milo, Anthedon and Choredon Feld. All the rest little
different from type. Individuals from Darjeeling and Kurseong
deviate from it a little by the appearance of the green spots which start from
Vapex of the upper wing to join the posterior edge of
this wing; these spots are less confluent, rounded on the side
of the marginal edge and the veins which separate them darker. 17. P. Eurypylus¢ Linn. — Darjeeling. Not listed in Kirby's catalog as having been
found in the region from which our specimens come. not
not differ from the individuals of the Moluccas and Papua. 18. P. Agamemnon Q Linn. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Even more common than P. Sarpedon quoted above; to
found throughout the Indo-Malay region. Very frequent 4 Java,
Borneo and Sumatra. PIERIDES. Genus Pieris Schrank. 19. P. Nadina ¢ Luc. — Darjecling, Kurseong. Genus Tachyris, Wall. 20. T. Hippo Cram. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Is only a variety of 7. Lynerda de Cramer. Genus Delias Hubn. 21. D. Pasithoe G Linn. — Kurseong. 22. D. Thysbe Cram., var. Pyramus ¢ Wall.—Darjeeling. 23. D. Descombesi ¢ Bay. We had determined this insect (after the description that in
gives Boisduval and we noticed that the marginal spots
Sides of the back of the lower Vwing are white instead of
of the background color of this wing; since we received a good
number of these Lepidoptera and we have observed a whole series
color transitions from white to dark yellow. These spots can therefore have either the color of
those of the back of upper Vaile or the background shade of Vaile
lower,

 

 

 

   

127

Genus Prioneris Wall. 24. P. Thestylis g Doub. — Darjecling, Kurseong. Genus Hebomoia Hubn. 25. H. Glaucippe Linn. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. A fairly good number of individuals of this species which does not vary
only by size. Genus Ixias Hubn. 26. I. Pyrene 3 Linn. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. This Lepidoptera is only represented in the shipment we received,
only by individuals G. The fact is regrettable, given the
great resemblance of Qs and ¢s and the characters we
we found among the last. It has been interesting to compare the two sexes when considering
ine locality. Cramer gives the figure of this butterfly (Cr. e.g. He, t. 125, A-C) and points out that the ¢ shows on the back
a series of brownish premarginal spots which do not exist
at Q. Boisduval (Spec. Gen., I, p. 593, ne 3) describes precisely-
ment the opposite and gives as distinctive character of the male the back
absolutely plain and presenting only four small disco-
black dals. In specimens from Darjeeling and Kurseong, the
discoidal black dot above the upper wings is well dis-
tinct and away from the black band which is on its internal side,
and is not confused with it in any of the copies. Fusion
of this point with the band constitutes, according to several authors, a
peculiarity of the Q. However, we have Gi from
other parts of India, which have the point quite confused. On the back, some of our 3 copies have the uniform shade
yellow described by Boisduval and the four black discoidal points;
but others possess in quite a marked way a
series of brown spots, white pupils parallel to the mar-
ginal of the lower wing. We cannot therefore give for this
species of the absolute differential signs of the two sexes, based on
the peculiarities of the wings; you have to refer to the characters
abdomen specials. DANAIDES. Genus Euploea Fabr. 27. E. Midamus GQ Lin. — Darjeeling, both sexes plus
about 1/s larger than those of Java and Borneo. 128

28. E.Core 3 Cramer. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. .

29. E. Deione S Westw. — Kurseong, a single copy
completely deteriorated. 30. E. Hopei 9 Feld. — Kurscong, a faulty copy. Danish Genus. 31. D. Septentrionis Butl. — Darjeeling. 32. D. Plexippus 39 Linn. — Kurseong. NYMPHALIDS. Genus Elymnias Hubn. 33. E. Undularis 3 Orn. — Kurseong. 34. E. Vasudeva Moore. — Darjeeling. Genus Discophora Bdv. 35. D. Tullia var. Indica ¢ Stdg. — Kurseong. Genus Thaumantis Hubn. 36. T. Camadeva $$ Westw. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. This beautiful Lepidoptera seems quite common in Bengal. The
various samples we received do not differ from each other
only by size. Genus Cethosia Fabr. 37. C. Biblis ¢ Dru. — Kurseong. Genus Cirrhoeroa Doub. 38. O. Aoris 3 Doub.-Hewit. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Gets so close to C. Z'hais Fabr. (Zndigete Bdv.) that
these two species could be considered as simple
local varieties. None Aoris is 1/5 larger than C. Zhais, but
the color and design of the wings are identical, in both we
finds individuals that are different from each other; some G only show
4 Upper wing than the black apex, a black line at the level of the
middle of the front side and the rest of the drawing & hardly marked
on the yellow background, others, on the contrary, have all the strokes, lines
and points strongly marked, which gives a set of the insect
quite different from the first. Intermediate forms
naturally exist. The lower wing varies less. The two shipments from Darjeeling and Kurseong contained a
many of these Lepidoptera. 129

Genus Cynthia abr. 39. C.Erota 3. — Kurseong. Considered distinct species; is in fact only one of
varieties of C. Arsinoe described by Cramer. Genus Kallima Westw. 40. K. Inachis 9 Biv. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Genus Cyrestis Bdv. 41. C Thyodamas Bdv. — Kurseong. Genus Stibochiona Butl. 42. S. Nicea¢ Gray. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Genus Hypolimnas Hubn. 43. H. Jacintha Dru. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Is one of
many varieties of H. Bolina Linn. whose nomenclature
seems quite confusing to us. Genus Hestina Westw. 44. H. Nama ¢ Bdy. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Genus Athyma Westw. 45, A. Cama J Moore. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. 46. A. Inara Doub.-Hew. — Kurseong. 47. A.Ranga Moore. — Kurseong. Genus Euthalia Hubn. 48. E.Appiades 2 Men. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Genus Apatura Fabr. 49. A. Namouna ¢ Doub. Genus Nymphalis Latr. (Charazes Ochs.) 50. N. Athamas GQ Dru. A few specimens relating very well to the type represented by
Drury. This species presents several varieties such as VV. Her-
Matha Moore, Baratha Feld., Altalus Feld. and Avja Feld. Stau-
dinger believes he can classify as species and not as varieties
1° Bharatha, 4 cause of the great extent of the white band of the
wings; 2° Azja which he received from Sikkim in large numbers and mixed

130
to the Adhamas type. The shipment we received contains two
NV. Arja. We will point out that the differences based on the extent
white bands in the varieties of A¢hamas, are well done-
bles, because Bharata, Altalus and Arja of Felder all three have the
4 bands of approximately equal width and they may not differ
than by tint. D1. N. Athamas Dru., var. Arja Feld. — Kurseong. 52. N. Eudamippus ¢Q Doub. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. Found in boreal India and especially in Sikkim. 53. N.Polyxena Cr., var. Marmax ¢ Westw. — Darjee-
ling, Kurseong. 54. N. Hindia ¢ Butl. — Darjeeling, Kurscong. SATYRIDS. Genus Lethe Hubn. 55. L. Mekara GS Hubn. — Darjeeling, Kurseong. 56. L. Kansa G Moore. — Kurseong. Genus Neope Butl. 57. N. Bhadra G Moore. — Kurseong. Some very ordinary Heterocera such as Adtacus Atlas,
A. Pernyi, Lrasmia Pulehella, Histia Flabellicornis. The study we have made on the few Lepidoptera that
we have just listed, commits us to submit certain considerations
derations on the creation of new species and new
varieties. The current classification trend seems to be working
towards a vast entanglement and towards a regrettable confusion. We willingly admit that an insect presenting characteristics
well-defined areas or significant changes in its
aspect or its structure, is differentiated from its neighbors in
Classification scale; we also understand that he
should not restrict the notion of the species too much and consider
as similar individuals completely disparate beings
that a scientific and logical filiation nevertheless links between
them, but we do not admit only insensitive nuances,
details of coloring or dots, ocelli, spots more or
less numerous become the starting point of a manufacturing
senseless creation of new types. Multiple groups, 4 this account,
could contain as many species as individuals if we

131
consider for example in the genus Ornithoplerus, the Priam
of Linnaeus, the Urvilliana of Guérin and the Cresus of Wallace, we
will certainly see three insects very different in appearance, the
first green, the second blue and the third yellow and yet after
a careful examination it will not come to the mind of the entomologist,
The idea of ​​separating these different Lepidoptera into distinct species. If we tilt the green Priam at a certain angle, we will see
produce a color similar to that of the Crasus, if we do the counter
test with the latter, we will obtain the brilliant green of the Priam. There is quite simply a question of the position of the scales and
not a difference of intimate composition; it is moreover remarked
as the yellow color of the abdomen does not vary in these three
Lepidoptera. What is true for this group is also true for others.
very; the Parnassians whose list increases every year can
relate all to a few typical species and a good number
Wcopies which appear in the collections do not have the character
distinctive than the label that is 4 the pin. If we
raise against the useless creation of new species, we admit-
on the contrary, the description of all the varieties and all
the slightly important nuances that an insect can present. Without
nothing to alter the value of the species, the multiplicity of these descriptions
often makes us aware of a series of internal modifications
ressing, a series of transformations where we see some
characters sometimes accented sometimes attenuated in 4 ways print
to the facies of the Lepidoptera all different gaits the nnes of the
others. This way of doing things would seem to us especially useful for
Lepidoptera whose dispersal area is very wide and ready
therefore has changes in relation to the conditions
environment, climate, altitude etc. We would thus avoid this confusion which confuses the entomologist and
fact that at some point he finds himself forced for a task of
more or less on a wing to baptize different names of
insects identical to the background. Several collectors of merit,
have already put into practice this way of considering the classification
sification; we will cite one of the most competent and self-
laughed at among them, Mr. Charles Oberthur, who attached himself 4 to link
between them the types and the varieties, by all the possible transitions
possible. By rallying to these views, the interest of merchants, authors
of quite a few whimsical species, will certainly be sacrificed, but the goal
scientific will seem to us more suitably reached. 132

CONGO LEPIDOPTERA. DESCRIPTION OF TWO NEWS
varied

  

SPECIES AND TWO NEWS

 

 

by Il Robbe. 1. Lyceena Stormsi 9, Nov. spec. Tanganyika region. — Cap. Storms. Wingspan 50 millimeters. This species presents the characteristics common to the genus Lycana
but cannot be closely related to any known form
of this group. The general color of the insect is gray-brown, but
with a purple iridescent reflection extended over the entire surface of the wings, This
reflection varies with the incidence of light. At the upper wings we find at the level of the external end
of the discoidal cell the black spot common to the Lycena group
This spot is oblique, has an extent of 3 mm. around and is
ringed with a light white border. Towards the middle of the wing surface we
distinguishes by transparency a series of black dots on the back which
by their juxtaposition form a curved line extending from
the outer third of the anterior bone up to 5 mm. corner
posterior. The marginal band is brane, 3 mm wide. and
presents between each of the terminal neryures a small crescent
yellowish-white. On the lower wings we also see by trans-
ence the many black dots on the back grouped from the base
to the middle of Vaile. The anterior border concealed by the supe-
terior is browner. The marginal band of the same extent as has
Top vaile, only the crescents are less marked and
exist only between the first three veins; they are replaced
to the following ones by spots of a violet blue each surmounted
of a yellowish crescent, the penultimate spot is blackish, the
fringe of the four wings is immediately preceded by a thin line
black. On the back: general yellow-ochre colour, 4 the upper wing the stain
very black disc; in the middle of the wing a series of seven points
also very dark, the first five arranged in a curve
has internal conevity, the last two more outside and confluent. There is then a black premarginal line, scalloped, and the
fringe is preceded by two extremely thin parallel lines. The lower wing is of a generally darker color, it presents
a series of eight points forming a curvature @ internal concavity and
five other points closer to the base. 133,

Scalloped premarginal line, black, parallel to the edge and extending
ant of the anterior angle up to the 4"° rib where it ceases
abruptly and is followed by a wider, yellow band that goes
to the anal angle; we find a little outside this angle a
blue metallic spot, pupillary of black; grayish fringe like a
Upper vaile. Head, thorax and abdomen brown above, yellow below. Antennae brown. This Lepidoptera is one of the largest and most beautiful that we
knew in the genus Lycwna: we are happy to
dedicate it to Captain Storms who captured in the Tanga-
nika a good number of interesting insects. Charaxes Pelias Cr., var. Tanganyika Rob. (cap. Storms,
Tanganyika region). Smaller than type. It differs first by the general color
paler, then by the absence of the small black spots which
found in the large yellow band on the upper wing. The marginal border of this wing is not interspersed with lines
black. On the lower wing, the upper half of the marginal border
nale is yellow, with no trace of white. The blue dots that are
located on the side of the posterior angle in the type are confused
in our example and form a purplish line extending
throughout and parallel to the marginal edge of the wing;
between the ribs and in the center of this line there are
whitish lines. The underside of the wings has notable differences; everything
white drawing has disappeared, some dots and some black lines
only at the base and towards the middle of the upper wings. The rest of the wing is almost uniform in color 4. With lower wings
we find a slightly pronounced design made up of variations
intensity of the brown color of the background. White, blue and black lines do not exist. Head, thorax and abdomen paler. The captured copy is
a Q.

Cyclopids Romi G, nov. spec. — Mr. Rom, Congo. Wingspan: 35 mil. Approaches as a whole aspect of the European species:
Cyclopids Morpheus Pall. The 4 wings have a uni-
brown-black shape, without any trace of drawings. On the back the color is a little paler and the apex of the upper wings
less dark than the rest of the background. On the lower wings two white lines, clearly marked,

ANNALS DB The SOC. ENTOM, OF BELGIUM, T. XXXVI. 10

134

extend, the upper from the base to the marginal edge,
in its anterior third; the lower also from the base
to the vicinity of the anal angle. Head, thorax and abdomen the general color of the insect. The brown antennae have the end of their club terminated
by a small light yellow point. Mr. Rom brought us back from his expedition to the Congo, a
notable quantity of interesting Lepidoptera, captured and preserved
with care and intelligence. We thank him and dedicate him with
enjoy this new and curious species. Pardaleodes CEdipus Cram., var. Dilute Rob. (Mr Rom,
Congo). 0

The dominant yellow color of this Lepidoptera is more extensive,
warmer in tone than that of the type. On the upper wing only one
black line starts from the base and reaches 4 approximately the middle of the sur-
side where it ends in a small spot. The yellow background of this
wing occupies two-thirds of its extent and is bounded by a wide
marginal border blackish brown. On the back the spots and blackheads are less numerous and
have a less intense color. MATERIALS FOR A STUDY OF TABANIDES
FROM BELGIUM

by Louis Coucke. I gathered in this work all the information that I could
obtain on the Tabanids of Belgium, in the collection of the Museum
and in mine. In addition Messrs. Bivort, Claessens and Tosquinet
communicated to me Diptera which provided me with valuable information.
bloodshed. It's time to see that all those to whom
I approached gave me their support. I thank them
strongly. Unfortunately Mr. Jacobs not wanting to intervene in
work of this kind, I could not draw information from his
collection. I insist on the point that this work must be considered only
as a first base. The study of the Tabanids is not as
easy as you might think. The genus Zabanus in particular is
very difficult. The essential work to study it properly
is the Monograph of the Zabanus of Europe published by Brauer in
the Denkschriften der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften. — Vienna 1880. 135

Schiner's book: awna Austriaca no longer understands
certain Zabanus in the sense admitted by the later works. When using it, care must always be taken to check the
determinations

As for the other Belgian genera belonging to the family of
Tabanids, their study is less delicate. I have indicated as incidental information whether the space had been
captured in Holland. I didn't want to do the same for
the other countries which surround us, being unable to affirm that the
related catalogs include the Z'abanus in the
Brauer's sense. When I speak of a book called Bowstofen, it is the
catalog of Diptares published in: Bowmstoffen voor cene
Fauna van Nederland. I warmly thank Mr van der Wulp
for the information he kindly communicated to me and the
benevolence with which he guided me with his great authority. TABANIDES. Head the width of the corselet or even wider. Antennas
inserted far from the mouth, formed of 3 articles, of which the last,
of very variable form, seems to constitute four of them in the genre
Hezatoma. Eyes touching in the SJ, separated by a wide
frontal band in Q. Keusson without thorns. costal rib
going all the way around the wing. Fairly broad abdomen. I know of this family 4 genera represented in Belgium. has. Wings 4 unicoloured, hyaline, at most a little rem-
browned towards the upper edge, or marked towards the middle of a
vague smoky stain. Antennae as long as width of head. Hexatoma. Antennae less than half the width of the head. Tabanus. 6. Wings 4 greyish or pale-brown ground, marked with numerous
small whitish spots often elongated. Hematopota. vs. Wings‘ gray or blackish background, without many small spots
whitish, or hyaline, bordered 4 their upper part by a
black or dark brown band crossed in the middle by a
wide black or dark brown band very well defined. Chrysops. It is possible that we also have in Belgium species of
genus Pangonia. These species will recognize each other immediately by their
long proboscis about three times as long as the antennae
and their posterior tibiae furnished with one or more spines 4 their
end. 136

Genus Tasanus L.

I know eleven Belgian spaces that I will divide into two large ones
groups characterized by the following two patterns. In the I** group I will include the species which never have the
bifurcation of the 3"° longitudinal rib provided with an appendix

(fig. @),
- =a

Fig. has. Fig. b.

   
   

In the second group, on the contrary, those which have this bifurcation
of rib almost always provided with an appendix (fig. 4). I* Group. Character of the group: bifurcation of the 3rd longitudinal rib
never provided with an appendix. This group will consist of two sections. 1" section. Completely black legs. T.micans Mg. — Louetie-St-Pierre, Awenue (17-06-81) (coll. Museum). — Morlanwelz (8-6-89) (Claessens). The species is listed in the Bowiwstofen as being
in Holland. 2nd Section. Legs partly yellowish and blackish. A. Wings marked above the discoidal cell with a spot
brownish-yellow. Black belly. T. gigas Herbst. — A copy taken 4 Litge was sent to me
nicked by M. Claessens. This species was taken around Maestricht from the
publication of Bouwstofen. None Wings not marked with a darkened spot above the
disc cell; hairless eyes. has. Antennae black; abdomen blackish, marked with 3 long series
tudinales of greyish or reddish spots. T. autumnalis L. — Louette-St-Pierre (13-7-70); Geraardsbergen
(2-7-72); Ixelles (19-7-79) (coll. Museum). — Red Cloister. —
Fleurus (7-83) (Bivort). — Morlanwelz (June 89) (Claessens). Holland (Boomstofen). 4. Antennae brownish or reddish, at least in part. width of at least

  
   

Length of at least 20

 

&
*
=
2
5
star
s
&

 

Length up to 14

187

1. Abdomen dark brown with each lined section has its
| posterior part of a very sharp and marked yellow band
in the middle of a whitish triangular spot. T. sudeticus Zett. — Auderghem, Mariemont, surroundings
@'Izel-sur-Semois (16-7-91). — Surroundings of Auby-sur-Semois
(7-90) (Rousseau). — Groenendael (Tosquinet). Was taken in Dutch Limburg near Venlo
since the publication of the Bounstofen. and 2. Reddish abdomen with a longitudinal band and
often posterior segments blackish. Each segment
marked in the middle with a greyish-white triangle. Corselet
Bluish-grey wun with 3 paler longitudinal bands
well marked. T. bovinus L. — Surroundings of Antwerp; Old God. —
Fleurus (Bivort), — Approx. of Izel (16-7-91). Holland (Bouwstofen). 3. Posterior border of eyes gray white, at least
as wide in the Q as a quarter of the posterior part
of the frontal band, and bristling with long hairs which one
sees the eyes protrude strongly when looking at the head
of the insect from the front. T. maculicornis Zett. — Marbehan (23-6-78) (Museum). I took 4 copies 4 Rouge-Cloitre, and 2 around
from Izel on 16-7-91. Was taken in Dutch Limburg near Bunde
since the publication of the Boumstoffen. ‘4, Posterior border of eyes greyish white, not
wider in the Q than 1/6 of the posterior part of the
frontal band, bristling with very tight but very short hairs
and that we do not see or hardly see beyond the eyes when
we look at the head of the insect from the front. | _T. bromius L.— Marbehan (23-6-78), Louette-St-Pierre
(13-7-70), Carlsbourg, Bauche (13-6-80) (coll. Museum). —
Surroundings of Izel (July 91). — Mariemont. Holland (Bouwstofen). C. Wings not marked with a darkened spot above the

disc cell; hairy eyes, 4 pubescence often very short and
fine, but still clearly visible by reflection and quite tight. 1. G Joint of contact of the two eyes much longer than the

transverse part of the frontal triangle above the point of insertion
antennas. Q Frontal band between the eyes at least 4 times as long as

wide at the base. 138

T. tropicus Mg. Panz. — Carlsbourg (16-6-70) (coll. Museum). — Surroundings of Izel (21-7-91); Groenendael (18-8-91). Holland (Bouwstofen). 2. 3 Joint of contact of both eyes not much longer than the
transverse part of the frontal triangle above the point of insertion
antennas. © Frontal band between the eyes about 2 1/2 times as long
that wide at the base. T. luridus Fil. — Forest of Meerdael (23-5-70) (coll. Museum). — Rouge-Cloitre; Surroundings of Izel (16-7-91). This species is to be suppressed from Bouwstoffen, the insects determined
mined as such being ¢ropicus according to the monograph of
Brauer. The solstitialis Mg. must be removed from Bouwstofen for the
same motive. IInd GROUP. Character of the group: bifurcation of the 3rd longitudinal rib
almost always with an appendix. 1. Hind thighs entirely gray. T. ruticus L. — Surroundings of Izel (22-7-91). Holland (Bouwstofen). 2. Hind thighs yellow with gray base. T. fulvus Mg. — Surroundings of Izel in July. Holland (Bouwstoffen). Note. Zabanus plebejus Fil. was taken near Breda and in
Dutch Limburg. Genus Hamatopota Mg.

1. Antennae much longer than the head, completely
black in Gy, first article longer and slightly wider
than the third in Q.

H. italica Mg. — Rouge-Cloitre (13-7-91), Mariemont. Holland (Bowiwstoffen). 2. Antennae 4 barely longer than the head, at third article
red at the base in both sexes, ’ first article shorter and
at least twice as wide as the third in the Q.

H. pluvialis L. — Forest, Laeken (6-6-81), Watermael,
Auderghem, Haeren, Mont-St-Guibert, Aalst, Louette-St-Pierre,
Yvoir (21-6-79), Fallais, Marbehan, Dave, Carlsbourg, Valley of

139

Ja Molignée, Comblain-la-Tour, Ronquitres, Hozémont, Bauche,
Melreux, Arlon, Bergen, Tilff (coll. Museum). — Surroundings of Izel. Holland (Bouwstofen). Genus Hexatoma Mg.

The only European species is Hexatoma pellucens F.
(bimaculata F. Mg.). Wolume-St-Lambert (15-8-91), Auderghem (12-7-91), Vivier
d'Oie (Tosquinet). — Mariemont (Claessens). Holland (Boumwstofen). Genus Curysops Mg.

1, Second segment of the abdomen yellowish with a spot
black never prolonged behind by two divergent lines. C. quadratus Mg. — Louette-St-Pierre (13-7-70), Grammont,
(coll. Museum). — Rouge-Cloftre, surroundings of Izel (18-7-91). Holland (Bouwstofen). 2. Second segment of the abdomen all black, except the edges, in
the Gi, yellow with a black spot prolonged behind by two
divergent lines in Q. Tibiae black or dark brown. C. coecutiens L. — Brussels (2-7-72), Auderghem, Mont-
St-Guibert, Fallais (23-6-79); Arlon, Dave, Marbehan (23-6-78);
Comblain-la-Tour, Laroche, Awenne, Dinant, Postel, Genck
(3-7-7). — Mariemont (Claessens). Holland (Bowwstofen). 3. Second segment of the abdomen greyish with a black spot
extended behind by two divergent lines or reduced 4 two
divergent spots. Fawn shins. C. relictus Mg. — Hoeylaert (24-7-81), Ronquiéres (20-7-81),
Louette-St-Pierre, Yvoir, Genck (3-7-77), Calmpthout (coll. Museum). — Surroundings of Izel (17-7-91). Holland (Bouwstofen). Note. Mr. van der Wulp again indicated to me as having been
taken in Holland two Chrysops which are not mentioned in
the Bouwstofen. The rufipes Mg., easily recognizable by its legs almost
entirely yellow, and the F. sepwlcralis remarkable for its
almost entirely invaded by shiny black spots and its
second abdominal ring all black. SS

 

ENTOMOLOGY SOCIETY

OF

BELGIUM

THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME

IV

fo number must be retained; it won't be sent for a second
times as before. BRUSSELS
AT THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE COMPANY
20, MUSEUM STREET, 20

1892

 

  
  

paper)

,

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. IV

Minutes of the monthly meeting of April 5, 1892. PristpENcE OF M. Giron. Present: Messrs. Becker, Bergé, Coubeaux, Ed. Coucke, L. Coucke,
Kerremans, Robbe, Rousseau, Severin, Tosquinet and Lameere,
secretary. MM. de Selys-Longchamps and Duvivier excused their
absence. The session is open 4 8 hours. The minutes of the meetings of February 6 and March 5 are
approved. Erratum to number III of the Annales, page 138: read Z’abanus
rusticus and not ruticus. Mr. Lameere informs the congregation of the death of H. W. Bates,
Illustrious explorer of the banks of the Amazon river: he was
must, apart from his many entomological works on the
Lepidoptera, Carabids, Longhorn beetles and Lamelli-
horns, observations of great interest on tropical fauna
and the discovery of mimicry. H. W. Bates published one of his
latest work in our Bulletins of last year (Carabi-
Chota-Nagpore islands). Few scholars will leave so many
regrets than this man of a truly superior mind. Correspondence. Mr. Minister of the Interior and Instruction
public announces that a royal decree grants the Company its
annual grant. Mr. Duvivier let it be known that his brother, Lieutenant Joseph Duvi-
vier, is leaving today for the Lake Tanganyika region where he
will continue to deal actively with Entomology, as he did
already with so much success in the Upper Congo. Readings, communications. The Assembly decides on the insertion in the
this issue of the Annals of the notices which are read. Mr. Coubeaux notes the following additions and corrections 4
make 4 his list of the Hemiptera of Belgium. The name of the Cimicide family was omitted by mistake. ANNALS OF THE SOG, ENTOM, OF BELGIUM, T. XXXVI, 41

142

Add: Macrocoleus Tanaceti Fall., Macrotylus Paykulli
Fall., Adractotomus magnicornis Fall., Plagiognathus alpinus
Receive. and albipennis Fall., Chlamydatus pulicarius Fall. and Capsules
Schach Fab. reported as captured 4 Louvain by Lady Seymour
(Catalogue of the specimens of Hemiptera Heteroptera in the
collection of the British Museum, part VI, p. 78
walker). On the other hand Mr. Fokker has found: Corizus distinctus
Sign., Scolopostethus pilosus Keut., Monauthia angusticollis
H.-S. et Humuli Fab., Microphysa elegantula Baer, ​​Lygus
rubricatus Fall. and limbatus Fall., Pilophorus cinnamopterus Kb. and perpleaus Scott, Dicyphus pallidus and Hpilobii Reut. Errata: Pionosomus and not Pionozomus, Aphanus Pini and not
Pizi, Salda scotica and non Scolica, Labops and non Lacops, Sthenarus
and not Sthenaris. Excursion. May 8, 4 Beersel. Departure from Brussels (Midday) 4
8h, 2m. a.m. (Greenwich Mean Time). The meeting adjourned at 4 o'clock. WEST BENGAL BEETLES. 18™* memory. ON a NEW species or HISTERIDAS or BENGAL. By G. Lewis F.L.S.

Paratropus Severini n. sp. Oblongus, via parallelus, bruwneus, antennis pedibusque flavis;
pronolo oblongo-punctato; elytris 6-carinatis; apical propygidio
prominulo obtuse producto. - Long. 3 mill. Oblong, somewhat parallel, reddish brown; the head is rather
flat above, sparsely punctured with shallow points, widening out
and angulate before the eyes, margin narrowly elevated bisinuous
anteriorly on each side; the thorax, lateral margin finely raised,
margin continuing as a fine stria behind the head, somewhat thickly
punctate, punctures behind the middle of the neck round, ten others
oval ocellate and much larger; the elytra (fig. 1) are 6-carinate,

suture also raised and a subhumeral carina, epipleure

it \\\ finely carinate, the fourth carina turns towards thesuture
) at the base and obsoletely joins the sutural elevation, the
) fifth and sixth are shortened before the scutellum and
| somewhat bowed, the ends turning towards the suture,
WY interstices have oblong punctures evanescent posteriorly
Do. and clustered and forming roughnesses at the base; tea
propygidium is a little compressed at the sides with the apex con-

     

   

143

spicuously and obtusely produced over and beyond the pygidium,
the surface has oblong ocellate punctures at and near the base
which are evanescent before the apex, apex smooth; the pygidium is
verticle and feebly convex, obscurely and sparsely punctured, apex
semicircular and very finely marginate; the prosternum (fig. 2) is
narrow, bistriate, the strie widen out a little at the
base and are parallel to each other along the keel and
anteriorly widen out rather abruptly forming, with
the suture of the anterior lobe as a base, a triangular
enclosure; the mesosternum is acutely produced in
front, with a strong sinuous stria on either side, also
a transverse stria which is feebly bowed towards the prosternum,
the suture is visible close behind the transverse stria and there is
a median line down the metasternum; the metasternum has a
lateral sulcus and at each side near the base are large scattered
punctures; the first segment has a line of punctures on the ante-
rior edge and on the lateral margins. The tibie and tarsi are
formed exactly like those of P. testudo Gerst. and P. meri-
Dianus Lew. Hab. : Mandar, Bengal (Pére Cardon, 1891). The figures for this species have been kindly drawn by M. G. Se-
verin to whom I have much pleasure in dedicating the species. Fig. 2. In several of the genera of Histerida we have round, oval and
oblong species and J have no doubt at this moment from the shape
of the sterna and the legs and tarsi that the present species
is rightly (notwithstanding its extraordinary form) assigned to
Gerstiicker's genes. 144

DESCRIPTIONS OF SURROUNDINGS BEETLES
OF AKBES (SYRIA)

 

- Leon Fairma

 

by

Hydrous dichromus. - Long. 12 mill. — Ovatus, toupee
paulo ampliatus, agreed, supra fusco-olivaceus nitidus, subtus
cum pedibus rufotestaceus, antennis pallidis, clava obscura, palpis
pallidis, articulo ultimo precedenti breviore and apice brevissime
dark; capite antice utringue arcuatim punctato; prothorace
longitudine duplo latiore, antice paulo angustato, lateribus leviter
rotundatis, angulis posticis valde obtusis, fere rotundatis, dorso
lateribus medio et antice punctis aliquot impresso; elytris sat
breviter ovatis, utrinque lineis tribus punctatis, primis via sub-
striatis, margine externo biseriatim punctato; subtus levis minus
nitidus, prosterno carina antice angulata, postice acutissime spi-
nosa signato, carina pectorali valde compressa, inter cowas anticas
erminata. Smaller and shorter than the flavipes, well colored
different and remarkable for the sharp spine that ends the blade
prosternal back. Choleva major. - Long. 7 mill. — Oblonga, sat conveaa,
castaneo-rufescens, subtus cum pedibus dilutor, subtiliter pilo-
sula; antenna sat gracilibus, medium elytrorum longe superan-
tibus, articulo 2° quinto equali, ultimo acute appendiculato; pro-
thorace parum transverso, elytris angustiore, antice paulo ampliato
et cum angulis rotundato, margine postico recto, ad angulos paulo
obliquato, his obtusis, dorso dense subtiliter aspero-punctato,
postice utringue impresso, disco breviter sulcatulo; trian scutello
gulari sat acuto, subtiliter asperulo; elytris oblongo-ovatis, medio
leviter ampliatis, apice sat abruple rotundatis, dorso dense subti-
liter asperatis, trausversim levissime plicatulis, leviter striatis,
slriis 2 primis and omnibus apice profundioribus, intervallis primis
paulo convexis, epipleuris latis, concavis, subtiliter asperulis;
sublus dense subtiliter asperula, pedibus gracilibus, tarsis anticis,
articulis 3 primis dilatatis, 1° longiore, pedibus posticis valde
elongatis, trochanteribus apice acute spinosis; 3. Quite similar to the 4 angustata, but much larger, with the
antennae longer, the corselet narrower, widened further forward,
the wider elytra. Corticus syriacus. - Long. 4 mill. — Ovatus, converus, fusco-

 

145

brunneus, nitidulus, terreno-squamosulus, hispidus; capita brevi,
inter antennas leviter concavo, his crassis, brevibus, prothoracis
medium via attingentibus, articulis 3-10 transversis, brevibus,
ultimo majore, fere truncato, prothorace brevi, elytris parwn
angustiore, lateribus pracipue and dorso conico-tuberculato; elytris
brevibus, ad humeros angulatis, apice rotundatis, dorso utringue
paulo bicostatis, costis crassis, inlerruptis, asperatis, pedibus
brevibus, crassis, hispidis. Resembles diabolicus, but shorter, more convex, with
the antennae more cylindrical, the first articles not more
wider than the others, the bodice less prolonged in the middle of the
base, the more prominent dorsal tubercles, the disk not impressed
sioned in the middle, and the elytra more hispid, less tuberculate. Platycerus Delagrangei. - Long. 11 mill. — Odlongus,
subparallelus, convexiusculus, fusco-cerulens, paulo nitidulus;
capite dense ruguloso-punctato, antice paulo concavo, clypeo sat
fortiter emarginato, tuberculis antennariis levigatis; prothorace
valde transverso, antice magis quam postice angustato, lateribus
sat late marginato and ante medium obtusissime angulato, angulis
posticis obtusis, dorso dense rugosulo-punctato, linea media tenut
lavigata; scutello levi, feretruncato, fere levi; elytris ad humeros
angulatis, lateribus postice marginatis, dorso dense fortiter punc-
tatis, subtiliter striatis, sutura elevata; subtus magis nigrans, dense
acfortiter punctatus; 3 magis parallelus, mandibulis longioribus,
sed capite brevioribus. Quite distinct from the caraboides by its more elongated, more parallel
lele, its dark coloring, not very shiny, its densely
and quite strongly punctate as well as the head and the mandibles well
shorter; the anterior angles of the corselet are more obtuse. P. caucasicus Saund. (Trans. Lat. Soc. London, 1864, 60)
seems to differ by its larger size, its coloring of a blue
shiny, the punctuation less tight, and the mandibles less
short. Here is the rest of the description:

Ceruleus, nitidus; capite parcius punctato, antrorsum profunde
emarginato, imprint; mandibulis elongatis, capitis fere longitu-
dine, curvatis, supra sulcatis, extus prope basin angulatis, intus
ad basin dente obtuso parvo instructis; transverse prothorace,
angulis anticis prominulis, deflexis, lateribus sinuatis, angulis
posticis obtusis, parcius sat fortiter punctato; elytris elongatis,
parallelis, punctatis, leviter lineatis; corpore subtus nigro; tibtis
anticis minule denticulatis, quartet posticis inermibus. - Long. (mandib. inel.) 6 1/2 line. (English). — Caucasus. Readily distinguished from its European ally, P. caraboides,

 

146

by its narrower and more convex form, its prominent and more
slender mandibles, its impressed and sparsely punctate head, the
sinuate lateral margin of the prothorax, the obtuse posterior
angles and punctuation of that segment, and finally, by its more
parallel and sparsely punctate elytra, the interstices being smooth,

Triodonta deformipes. - Long. 6 mill. — Ovato-oblonga,
convera, fusca, nitidula, fulvo-pilosa and fulvo-ciliata, elytris,
pedibus, ore antennisque fulvo-testaceis, sutura and margine externo
anguste infuscatis, capite sat magno, subtiliter rugoso-punctato,
antice fere truncato, angulis rolundatis, margine antico and late-
vibus reflexo, sutura clypeali medio transversim recta, utringue
oblique, levitate elevata; prothorace longitudine viz latiove, antice
a medio angustato, margine postico utringue obsoletissine sinwato,
transversim impressiusculo et subtiliter reflexo, angulis posticis
fere rectis, anticis valde deflexis, dorso dense sat subtititer punc-
tattoo; scutello oblongo-ogivali, punctato; elytris oblongo-ovatis,
medio leviter ampliatis, apice abrupte rotundatis, subtruncatis,
dorso striatulis, striis extus obsoletis, intervallis sat dense sat for-
titer punctatis, alternatim paulo conveais, sutura paulo elevata;
pygidio subtiliter punctulato; corpore sublus longius villoso, dense
subtiliter asperulo, pedibus 4 posticis elongatis, tarsis tibiis fere
duplo longioribus, pedibus anterioribus brevioribus, tibiis triden-
tatis, dente supero valde obtuso, apicali elongato, tarsorum arti-
culo ultimo magno, dilatato, wnguibus 2 magnis, incwrvis armato,
externo majore acutissino, interno breviore, apice obtuso. This insect is more elongated than its congeners. conformation
anterior tarsi is an exaggeration of what we see in
the G Triodata. The length of the intermediate and postero-
laughing is more curious. The chin forms a rounded plate
which almost hides the mouth. Triodonta dispar. - Long. 5 4 51/2 mill. — Oblongo-ovata,
Snigra, nitidula, subtiliter fulvo-cinereo-sericans, lateribus fulvo-
ciliata, Q major, elytris paulo ampliatis, rufo-testacea, fulvo-
sericans; capita nigro, prothorace medio vittula longitudinalis and
scutello fuscis; pedibus rufo-testaceis; capite sat lato, vrugoso-
punctato, antice veflexo and leviter rotundato; prothorace trans-
verso, antice leviter angustato, lateribus paulo avcwatis. angulis
posticis veclis, anticis valde declivibus, dorso dense pwnctato;
scutello ogivali, punctato; elytrix ovatis, abrupt apice rotundatis,
dense vugoso-punctatis, sutura and utvingue costulis 2 paulo elevatis;
pygidio fere levi; tibiis anticis sat late tridentatis, dente supero
sat obtuse:

This species is remarkable for the difference in size and
coloration in both sexes. It looks like 7'. dutetpes. 147

Serica fusconitens.—Long. 8 1/2 mill. — Oblongo-ovata, sat
fortiter convexa, fusca, sat nitida, paulo metallescens, capite antice
attennato and leviter reflexo, margine antico sat late sinuato, summo
sat subtiliter laxe, antice sat dense fortiter punctato, inter oculos
transversim sat late impressiusculo, palpis antennisque ferru-
gineis; prothorace tvansverso, antice attenuato, lateribus via
arcuatis, angulis posticis fere vectis, dorso dense sat fortiter punc-
tattoo; scutello sat acute ogivali, punctato, lateribus levigato; elytris
postice leviter ampliatis, apice abrupte roduntatis, dorso stria-
tulis, intervallis sat grosse fortiter parvum dense punctatis,
alternatim paulo convewiusculis, striis 2 primis apice paulo
convewioribus, suturali apice cum marginali conjuncta; pygidio
dense fortiter punctato; subtus dense punctata, mesosterno lato,
tibiis obtuse bidentatis. Looks a bit like S. mulata, but larger, with the
hood sinuate in the middle, the strongly punctuated bodice and the
elytral intervals flat, alternately convex. S. punctatissima Fald. must be close to this species; but
it is smaller (3 1/2 1. ), with the finely punctuated corselet,
having dimples on the sides and 4 the base and the elytra with
these are quite prominent. Homaloplia ursina. - Long. 9 mill. — Oblongo-ovata, valde
convent, fusco-nigra, nitida, pilis supra nigris, subtus fulvescen-
tibus long and dense hirta; capite planato, grosse fere ocellato-
punctato, margine antico fere truncato, ad angulos sat rotundato,
reflexo and cum lateribus reflexo, sutura clypeali fere indistincta;
transverso prothorace, elytrorum basi haud angustiore, antice
angustato, lateribus votundato, dorso fortiter sat dense punctato;
scutello ogivali, parum dense punctato, lateribus paulo elevato;
elytris ovatis, medio paulo ampliatis, apice fortiter rotundatis,
dorso striatis, intervallis viz conveviusculis, rugosulis, irregula-
riter sat laxe and sat grosse punctatis; pygidio and propygidio aspe-
rulis; subtus cum pedibus asperulo-punctata, abdomine magis
asperato; tibiis anterioribus acute bidentatis, unguibus piceo-rujis. Slightly resembles holosericea, but quite distinct in its
larger size, its long villus and less short elytra
rounded 4 the sutural angle, with more punctuated intervals
as well as the bodice; the mesosternum is also wider. Homaloplia mutilata. - Long. 7 mill. — Brevissime ovata,
valde convexa, nigra, modice nitida, glabra; capite subtiliter punch-
tulata, antice leviter attenuato et fere truncato, utringue sat
obtuse angulato; antenna fuscis; prothorace elytrorum basi paulo
latiove, longitudine paulo plus duplo latiore, antice angustato,

 

148

latevibus sat votundatis, dorso subtiliter sat dense punctulato;
scutello triangulari, paulo punctulato; elytris brevibus, lateribus
sat rotundatis, apice abrupte truncatis, dorso striatulis, strits
parum impressis, sed sat latis, intervallis punctatis; pygidio
convexiusculo, subtlety asperulo; sublus vir nitidior, coxis posti=
cis fortiter punctatis and cum pedibus, nitidioribus. — Smyrna. Species quite distinct by its stocky body and its distinct elytra.
ment truncated, appearing cut at the extremity. Tanyproctus rugosulus. - Long. 7 49 1/2 mill. - This
new species looks a lot like the 7'. (Brachydema) Barryt
Fairm., from central Lebanon; but the shape of the elytra is wider,
shorter and their coloring much less dark, of a brown enough
clear ; moreover, their punctuation is much stronger, without being more
tight, the sutural interval is strongly pitted and somewhat rough,
the head and the bodice are a little more strongly punctuated, the
pygidium is 4 barely more punctate; finally the mesosternum is pres-
than roughly punctuated with the furrows more marked, and the
small median furrow of the corselet is much shorter. Orthopleura funebris. - Long. 7 mill. —Flongata, nigra,
nitida, sat dense nigro-villosa, abdomine rufo; capitate dense punch-
tato, inter oculos impresso; prothorace elytris paulo angustiore,
longitudine haud latiore, dense punctato, antice utringue obsolete
transversim impresso, angulis posticis obtusiusculis; scutello
convexo, punctato, elytris clonga apice separatim rotundatis,
dorso subtiliter punctato-rugosulis, basi paulo fortius, postice
punctis seligeris rarius sparsutis; subtus levius and paulo nitidior. Differs from sanguinicollis by its narrow shape, the corselet
being no wider than long, its punctuation much stronger and
its coloring, its longer and more parallel elytra. Colpotus magnicollis. - Long. 10 mill. — Odlougo-sub-
quadratus, niger, parum nitidus, sat convecus; capitate subtlety
dense punctulato, clypeo arcuatim late emarginato, angulis rotun-
date; antennis parum gracilibus, prothoracis basin haud attin-
gentibus, articulis paulo nodulosis; prothorace amplo, elytris
haud angustiore, transverso, antice paulo angustato, lateribus
leviter arcuatis, dorso densissime strigoso-punctato, lateribus den-
sius strigoso, basi late emarginata, angulis parwm obtusis, anticis
acutiusculis; scutello brevi, obtuse, via punctulato; elytris apice
tantum angustatis and rotundatis, fortiter punctato-striatis, inter-
vallis planis, subtiliter dense punctatis; subtus cum pedibus niti-
dior, prosterno dense fortiter strigoso, pectore rugoso-punctato
lateribus fortius, abdomine subtiliter sat dense punctato, lateribus
rugosius and impressiusculo, pedibus validis, femoribus posticis

   

149

sublus dense fulvo-pilosis, tibiis anticis apicem versus dilatatis. Differs from other Colpotus by its broad shape, not attenuated in
rear, its antennae less slender, a little nodular; the sculpt-
ture of the corselet and the shape of the posterior edge would bring it closer
of C. byzantinus, but the general shape, size and sculpture
elytra are very different

Opatroides curtulus. - Long. 7 mill. — Oblong, convenous,
niger, nitidulus; prothoracic capitis subtiliter punctatis, illo
parum convexo, elytris triangulariter emarginatis, antennis basin
prothoracis haud attingentibus, parum crassis, articulis 8-10
transversis, paulo latioribus, ultimo breviter ovato, 3° sequenti
paulo longiore; transverso prothorace, elytris fere latiore, antice
viz angustiore, lateribus parum arcuatis, basi fere recta, ante
angulos via sinuata, his fere rectis; scutello punctulato, valde
obtuse aut fere truncato; elytvis oblongo-ovatis, ad humeros rotun-
datim angulatis, apice rotundatis, dovso subtiliter substriato-
punctatis, intervallis planis, subtilissine punctatis; subtus punch
tato-rugosulus, prosterno lateribus magis rugoso. Very close to the subcylindrus, but shorter, smaller, the sample
deeper crure of the cap, the crest shorter, punctuated,
the elytra shorter, but 4 identical sculpture, and less strong
ment rough below. Mycetochares grandicollis. - Long. 6 1/2 mill. — Zlon-
gata, subparallela, nigro-fusca, nitida, antenna, palpis pedibusque
rufo-Serrugineis, antennis fractis, an apice infuscatis? sat capitate
lato, punctulato, inter oculos obsolete impressiusculo, epistomate et
labro pallid fulvis; prothorace elytris basi haud angustiore,
medio paulo ampliato, antice paulo angustiore, sat fortiter sat
dense punclato, basi utringue foveolato, medio impressiusculo,
angulis posticis acute rectis; scutello subtiliter punctato, apice fere
truncated; elytris oblongis, apice conjunctim rotundatis, punctu-
lato-striatis, striis parum impressis, 2 primis profundioribus,
caternis fere obsoletis, intervallis sat dense punctatis, paulo rugo-
sulis, planiusculis, 3 primis convexiusculis; subtus do levis,
prosterno lateribus fortiter punctato. This Mycetochares is remarkable for the size of the corselet
which is as wide as the elytra. Mycetochares longior. - Long. 5 mill. — M. lineari simé-
lima et similiter colorata, sed statwra angustiore et minore, pro-
thorace breviore, lateribus postice haud ampliatis, dorso minus
convexo, impressiusculo, ad angulos posticos deplanato, elytris
longioribus, minus convexis, striolatis, striis 3 primis sat pro
Sundis, intervallis subtilius rugosulis distincta. 150

The If. rudis Kiist., from Greece and Turkey, seems close to
this species, but it is much larger, finely punctate, the
corselet is less short, and the streaks of the elytresses all subsul-
ciforms. Cistela forticornis. - Long. 10 mill. — Obdongo-elliptica,
modice convera, fusco-cerulescens, nitida, elytris testaceo-castaneis;
capite sat subtiliter dense punctato, antice transversius sat fortiter
impresso, fronte medio leviter foveolata; aerial corpore vix
brevioribus, articulo 2° brevissimo, 3° quarto parum breviore; pro-
thorace valde transverso, elytris angustiore, antice angustato,
latevibus leviter armatis, angilis posticis acute rectis, dorso dense
subtiliter punctulato, basi medio and utringue leviter impresso;
scutello valde obtuse, dense punctulato; elytris elongatis, postice
angustatis and apice obtusis, sat fortiter striatis, strits sat subtiliter
punetatis, intervallis planis, subtlety and obsolete postice punc-
tulatis; subtus dense subtilissime punctata, tibiis tarsic fusco-
piceis. Looks a lot like the @. ceramboides but smaller, less
convex, the elytra more parallel, the antennae longer, a
articles not angulated at the extremity, the 3¢ less short, the punctuation
tion of the head and the corselet is quite distinct, the latter has a
weak impression in the middle of the base, the crest is very obtuse,
the streaks of the elytra are less punctuated and the intervals are
more planes; the coloring of the body is brighter, faintly
metallic and that of the elytra a little more reddish. Cistela flavida. - Long. 10 mill. — Odlonga, convera, flava,
sat nitida, elytris paulo sulphureis, sublime pubescens, anten=
nis obscurioribus; capite brevi, subtiliter densissime punctulato,
antice transversim profunde sulcato; antenna validiuseulis, arti-
culo 3° quarto long life; prothorace elytris vix angustiore,
longitudine fere duplo latiore, lateribus cum angulis anticis rotun-
datis, angulis posticis obtusis, basi fere vecta, dorso densissime
sublime punctato, postice medio obsolete impresso; scutello
oblusissimo, punctulato; elytris oblongo-ovatis ad humeros angula-
tim rotundatis, medio indistinct ampliatis, dorso subtiliter
striatulis, stria suturali et striis aliis apice distinctioribus, inter-
vallis planis, subtilissime vic perspicue densissime punctulato-
alutaceis; subtus fere lavis, prosterno and metasterno angustis,
brevissimo intercoxalt process. Quite distinct by its coloring and its rather short and
convex, and its ample corselet, 4 obtuse posterior angles. Gonodera Delagrangei Long. 9 mill. — Oblongo-ellip-
tica, sat conveca, fusca, nitida, pube subtili fuliginosa dense

 

151

vestita, antenna, ore pedibusgue obscure ferrugineis; capitate sub-
tiliter dentissime punctulato, antice transversin fortiter impresso,
oculis approximatis, antennis validiusculis, corpore parum brevio~
ribus, opacis, articulo 1° excepto, 3° secundo paulo longiore; pro-
thorace brevi, elytris viv angustiore, antice valde angustato,
lateribus armatis, dorso subtilissime dense punctulato, basi subli-
liter marginato, utrinque sinuato; seutello obtuse triangulari;
elytris oblongis, medio haud ampliatis, subtiliter densissime punc-
tulatis, stria suturali impressa et intus striola obsoleta, postice
paulo evidentiore; subtus dense punctulata. Looks a lot like 27. ru/ipes, but more elongated, more
black, with more robust and longer antennae, the 3rd arti-
key a little longer than 2¢, but barely reaching a quarter of the
4th, moreover the eyes are a little closer together and the sides of the
corselet are less rounded. Gonodera atronitens. - Long. 51/2 mill. — Odlonga, modice
couvera, nigra, valde nitida, antennis pedibusque fuscis; capital
subliliter dense punctato, watice fortiter transversim impresso,
antennae sat validis, dimidium elytrorum superantibus, articulis
apice angulatis, opacis and densissime punctatis, articulo 1° excepto
articulis 2°3°que brevibus, aqualibus; transverse prothorace,
elylris haud angustiore, a basi antice sat fortiter angustato, late-
vibus arcuatis, dorso subtiliter punctulato, basi anguste marginato
el utvingue leviter firmato, angulis posticis vix rectis; scutello
minuto, lriangulari; elytris oblongo-ovatis, basi truncatis, pilo~
sulis, subtiliter and subseriatim asperulo-punctatis. In this species the 2° and 3¢ articles of the antennae are very
short and equal; the antennae are quite strong and the articles quite
strongly angulated 4 the end and the punctuation of the elytra is a
bit raspy. Eryx asiatica. - Long. 11 mill. — Obdlongo-ovata, sat con-
vena, nigra, modice nitida, glabra, pedibus piceis, femoribus
paulo obscwrioribus; capite densissime subtiliter punctulato, medio
transversim profunde sulcato, oculis valde convexis, parum distan-
tibus, antennis medium corporis haud attingentibus, parum gra-
cilibus, articulis parum serratis, 3rd quarto paulo longiore;
prothorace brevi, antice valde angustato, lateribus viz arcuatis,
dorso densissime subtiliter punctulato, margine postici utringue
late sinuato, angulis posticis acutissimis; seutello triangulari,
punctulato; elytris oblongo-ovatis, post medium via sensim amplia-
tis, subtiliter punctato-striatulis, striis apice and ad suturam pro-
Sundioribus, intervallis planis, subtiliter densissime punctatis;
subtus nitidior, densissime subtiliter asperulo-punctata, processy
antercocali acuto. — Smyrna. 152

Looks quite like I'Z'. lugens, but more elongated, with the ridges
elytra more distinct, the intervals flatter, the eyes more
close together and the antennae a little serrated. Cteniopus impressicollis. - Long. 7 mill. —-Oblongo-
clongatus, sulphureus, fere opacus, antennis, tarsis and palporum
articulo ultimo fuscis antennarum articulo 1° dilutor; capital
ovato, subliliter densissime punctulato, antice transverium pro-
funde sulcato, antennis gracilibus medium elytrorum superan-
tibus, articulo 3° sequentibus haud longiore; transverse prothorace
elytris paulo angustiore antice angustato, lateribus rotwadatis,
dorso subtilissime densissime punctulato, disco elevato, paulo
rufescente, postice angustato and utringue fortiler impresso; scutello
acute triangulari; elytris elongatis, ad humeros angulatim rotun-
datis, apice rotundatim subtruncatis, dorso subtilissime striatulis,
intervallis planis, subtilissime strigosulo-aluvaceis, subtilissime
prbescentibus; subtus similiter pubescens, tarsis gracilibus, haud
lamellatis, articulo ultimo sulphureo. Resembles C. sulphureus, but shorter, with antennae
less long of a blackish brown as well as the tarsi and the last
section of the palpi; the corselet is remarkable for its disc
forming a more convex space, not reaching the anterior edge
laughing, narrowed 4 the base with a strong impression on each side. Cteniopus? crassus.—Long. 10 mil.— Ovato-oblongus, sat
converus, flavo-rufescens, sat nitidus, subtlety sat dense pubescens,
elytris pallidioribus, capite sat lato, dense subtiliter punctulato,
mandibulis and palpis maxillaribus apice infuscatis, antennis cras-
siusculis, sat brevibus, basin prothoracis paulo superantibus, arti-
culo ultimo graciliter appendiculato; transverse prothorace, elylris
haud angustiore, lateribus leviter, antice cum angulis rotundato,
margine postico fere recto, angulis calde obtusis, dorso densissime
subtilissime punctulato; scutello obtuse ogivali, similir punc-
tulato; elytris oblongo-ovatis, postice leviter ampliatis, subtilis-
sime dense reticulato-punctulatis, subtiliter stviolatis, striis primis
magis evidentibus, externis obsoletis; pectore subtiliter, abdomen
subtilius punctulatis, hoc lateribus impressiusculo, prosterno and
mesosterno inter covas angustissimis, pedibus parum gracilibus,
libtis asperulis and breviter setulosis, tarsis subtus hispidulis, pos-
teriovibus articulo 1° ceteris conjunctis fere vquali. The facies of this insect is rather that of /ymenalia, but the
antennae are not slender, the 3° article is equal to the 4°, the last
section of the maxillary palps is only slightly widened 4
Vextremity, and obliquely truncated, the posterior edge of the corselet
is not bisinate, the posterior haunches are almost contiguous

 

 

 

 

 

153

and the tarsi are not laminated. But on the other hand the abdomen
is composed of only 5 segments while the mandibles me
appear whole 4 V end; the intercoxal protrusion is short,
quite sharp. It will undoubtedly be the type of a new genre with
rather negative than very positive characteristics. Omophlus densepunctatus. - Long. 81/2 mill. — 0. syriaco
sat similis, niger, nitidus, breviter, lateribus longe fusco-villosus;
capite sat brevi, punctato, medio multo minus and inter oculos leviter
biimpresso, antice transversim impresso, antenna modice graci-
libus, medium corporis superantibus, articulo 3° sequenti fere
dimidio longiore; prothorace elytris paulo angustiore, longitudine
fere duplo latiore, lateribus anguste marginatis, antice rotundatis,
dorso sat subtiliter sat dense punctato, utringue medio transversim
obsolete impresso, linea media interrupta via impressa; scutello
punctulato, apice fere truncato; elytris ad humeros rotundatin
angulatis, postice leviter ampliatis, apice obtusis, parum rotun-
datis, dorso dense punctulatis and sat subtiliter transversim rugo-
sulis, linea juxta-suturali via impressiuscula; metasterno via
punctulato, abdomine sat dense pwnctato. Resembles syriacus in coloration, but smaller, more
convex, 4 black bristly villi, longer on the sides of the
corselet with the head much less punctuated, the corselet less rounded
on the sides, the posterior angles marked, the elytra less
broad, densely dotted, without sunken lines or protrusions.
lanterns. Omophlus cribricollis. - Long. 9 1/2 mill. — 0. orientali
valde Afinis, similiter coloratus, niger, sat nitidus, elytris rujis,
nigro-hirtulus; capite sat brevi, convexiusculo, sat subtiliter den-
sissime punctato, inter oculos biimpresso, antice transversim sat
exit impresso; antenna medium corporis vix attingentibus,
articulo 3° elongato; transverso prothorace, elytris sat angustiore,
antice paulo attenuato, lateribus vix arcuatis, anguste marginatis,
dorso subtiliter dense punctulato, wndic paulo inwquali, basi
subtiliter marginata, angulis obtuse rotundatis; scutello sat lato,
apice rotundato, subtiliter punctulato; elytris sat brevibus, postice
ampliatis, apice obtusis, dense subtiliter rugosulo-punctatis, sub-
liliter striatulis, striolis suturam and apicem versus paulo evidence-
tioribus; subtus cum pedibus subtiliter coriacens, tarsis piceis. Looks quite like 4 V'orientalis, but shorter with the corselet
wider, densely punctate, much less rounded at the corners
anterior, the anterior edge almost straight, and the elytra more
finely and more densely roughened. Omophlus foveicollis. - Long. 9 mill. — Oblong, postice

 

154

paulo ampliatus, convexus, supra glaber, niger, nitidus, elytris
vubro-rufis, basi late, suturausque ad medium anguste el margine
exlerno lenuissime fuscis; capite sat dense punctato, antice trans-
versim fortiter impresso, inter oculos ulringue foveolato; pro-
thovace longitudine duplo latiore, elytris angustiore, latevibus
rolundatis, margine antico cum angulis rotundato, basi recta, sat
fortiter marginata angulis obtusissimis, dorso subtiliter punc-
tulato, utringue impressionibus 2 lats, profundis, extus confusis;
scutello punctulato, apice trwncato-rotundato; elytris ad humeros
angulatim votundatis postice paulo ampiiatis, apice separatim
obtuse rotundatis, sat subtiliter dense ruguloso-punctatis, basi and
suluram versus lineato-punctatis; sublus cum pedibus albido-
villosus, segmento ventrali ultimo medio carinato, ultimo apice
Sat Fortiter Sulcato. Looks a bit like the ¢erminatus, but with the coloring of the
elytra reversed, the black being 4 the base and not 4 the extremity; the
deep impressions of the corselet make this species easy &
to distinguish. Mylabris outfitpicta. - Long. 15 mill. — Convewa, ceru-
lescenti-nigra, parum nitida, elytris rufis utringue punctis 2 mi-
_ nutissimis ante medium transversim positis, macula discoidali
paulo post medium majore and margine apicali brevi nigris; capital
prothorace haud latiore, convexo, dense sat fortiter punctato, inter
oculos costula via elevatalevi signato, sutura clypeali sat profunde
arcuata, labro basi breviter sulcatulo; antenna articulis 5 primis
sat gracilibus, ultimis 6 crassioribus, 8-10 transversis, ultimo
paulo angustiore acuminato; prothorace parum transverso, a medio
antice sat fortiter angustato, dorso haud inequali, dense sat fortiter
punctato, medio brevissime sulcatulo, basi transversim impressius-
culo and utringue plagulis 3 nitidis, minutis, lateribus utringue
medio plagula transversa, interdum interrupta signato; scutello
dense punctato, apice rotwndato and breviter sulcatulo; elytris
breviter nigro-pilosulis, dense punctato-rugosis, sutura anguste
elevata, utringue nervulis 3 via distinguishndis; subtus cum pedibus
sat subtiliter dense punctato-rugosula, pedibus validis, sat brevi-
bus, tibiis anticis intus cinereo-pubescentibus. Similar to calida Pall., but very distinct in the design of the
elytra reminiscent of that of J/. nzligena Reiche, by sculpture
from the forehead and by the antennae which are not toothed at all. Mylabris posticata. - Long. 10 mill, — Sat elongata, valde
conveaa, nigra, nigro- et griseo-villosa, parum nitida, elytris tes-
taceis, basi and apice angustissime nigris, puncto aut vitta brevi
humerali, puncto discoidali ante medium, macula aut puncto sub-

 

  

155

marginal post medium and macula ante apicem transverse, inter-
dum per suturam cum margine apicali coeunte nigris; capital
convexo, sat subtiliter sat dense punctato, fronte medio interdum
anguste elevata and nitidula; antennis brevibus, basin prothoracis
haud attingentibus, clavatis, articulo 3° paulo longiore, ultimo
pyriformi; transverso prothorace, subguadrato, postico margine
cum angulis sat rotundato, dorso sat subtiliter sat dense ruguloso-
punctato, basi interdum medio vage impresso; scutello punctato,
apice rotundato; elytris postice viz ampliatis, dense punctato-
rugosulis, haud nervosis, subtus nigro-villosa, cum pedibus subti-
liver punctato-rugosula, pedibus sat brevibus, sat gracilibus. Neighbor of I. Silbermanni, differs by the shorter corselet,
less shrunken anteriorly and elytral spots reduced anteriorly,
Has small dots sometimes indistinct, the anteapical spot remaining
fairly developed and sometimes forming a transverse band joining
gnant by the suture the narrow apical border. Lydus pilicollis. - Long. 12 mill. — L. algirico valde Afinis
sed minor, elytris dilutioribus, corpore griseo-villosulo, prothorace
angustiore, basi utrinque tantum marginato, scutello magis trian-
gulari, medio impresso, elytris pubescentibus, subtilius rugulosis,
abdomine fere glabro, lateribus transversim sat fortiter impresso,
pedibus brevioribus distinctus. Lydus vulneratus. ~ Length. 13 mill. — Sat elongatus, niger,
nitidus, elytris rufis, paulo minus nitidis, glaber; capita protho-
race medio haud latiore, vertice convexo, because punctulato, fronte
inter oculos late impressa, medio levissime elevata and signature rufa
nitida ornato, inter antennas punctata; antenna crassis, protho-
racis basin paulo superantibus, apicem versus haud incrassatis,
articulo 2° brevissimo, 3° seguenti paulo longiore, ultimo prace-
denti via longiore, paulo acuminato; transverse prothorace, longi-
tudine dimidio latiore, antice via angustiore, lateribus paulo
rotundatis, dorso subtiliter punctulato, postice medio impressione
breviter ovata, fundo sulcatula, lateribus convewis signato, antice
transversim fortiter impresso, margine antico paulo incrassato;
sculello viz punctulato, apice rotundato; elytris a medio postice
leviter ampliatis, apice rotundatis, dorso dense punctato-rugosulis,
sutura paulo elevata and utringue lineis 3 tenuiter elevatis, externa
submarginali; sublus fere levis, abdomine medio sat acule cari-
nato, segmento penultimo haud carinato, apice lute obtuse sinuato. The shape and sculpture of the head, corselet and abdomen
make this species easy to recognize. The antennae are a
slightly shorter and thicker at the base than in its congeners,
the corselet is above all much shorter and strongly impressed

156

as well as the front which also presents a small reddish relief. This feature is found in Z. stigmatifrons Mars.,
but the latter is twice as tall with the oblong corselet,
without impressions, and the elytra marked with a sutural band and
of an apical spot. Lydus impressicollis—Long. 12 1/2 mill. —Hlongatus,
sat convecus, niger, nitidus, elytris testaceis, paulo minus nitidis,
griseo-villosulus and subtus griseo-sericans; capital convewiusculo,
dense punctato, fronte inter oculos longitudinaliter carinulata,
antennis crassis, brevibus, prothoracis basin via superantibus,
articulo 3° sat tenui, seguenti fere dimidio longiore, ultimo pyri-
Sormi, paulo acuminato; prothorace latitudine paulo longiore, antice
paulo angustiore, cum capite villoso, sat fortiter sat dense punctato,
ante medium transversim impresso et fere bifoveolato, antice trans-
versim impresso; scutello dense punctato, apice rotundato; elytris
sat elongalis, medio ampliatis, apice sat rotundatis, sat subtiliter
dense punctato-rugosulis, sutura leviter elevata, basi paulo
depressa, utringue lineolis 3 lenuiter elevatis, 2 primis apice coewn-
tibus, externa submarginali; pedibus mediocribus, tibiis interme-
diis paulo arcuatis. Resembles vulneratus, but the elytra are testaceous, the
forehead does not have a large smooth depression with a small red relief
geatre, the corselet is much longer, with trans-
yersales but without a median groove, and the body, except the elytra, is
coated with a fairly long whitish villus, which changes
in silky pubescence on the legs. Zonitis gracilenta. - Long. 9 1/2 mill. — Hlongata, conveza,
nigra, elytris flavo-fulvis immaculatis, Z. fulvipenni sat similis
sed angustior, elytris magis elongatis, antennis gracilioribus and
longioribus medium corporis superantibus, prothorace angustiore,
because punctato, medio haud suicato, utringue fere medio trans-
versim fortiter impresso, scutello magis triangulari, obtuse acu-
minato, ruguloso, marginibus paulo elevatis, elytris longioribus
clear distinction. Zonitis anatolica Friv. - Long. 9 mill. — Precedenti
Afinis, sed major, longior and magis conveaa, capite, scutetlo and cor-
pore sublus ceruleo-fuscis, prothorace rufo, pedibus antennisque
JSuscis, elytris aureo-cupreolis; capite magis ceraleo, sat fortiter
punctate, medio parcius, inter oculos impressiusculo, antennis gra-
cilibus, medium corporis fere attingentibus, articulo 2° tertio fere
dimidio breviore; prothorace sicut in precedente, sed tantum a
medio angustato, dorso basi sat fortiter arcuatim sulcato, lateribus
utvingue foveolis 2 minutis and disco foveola media signato; elytris

157

elongatis, apice abrupte rotundatis, subtilissime coriaceis; subtus
cum pedibus griseo-pubescens, abdomine apice piceo. Relates well 4 to the description of the anatolica, differs from it only
by the impressions of the corselet which has a strong groove at the base
arched and 5 small dimples on the disc and by the coloring of the
elytra which are of a slightly golden bronze. Zonitis coeruleiceps. - Long. 7 mill. — Satgracilis, nitida,
glabra, capite ceruleo, prothorace rufo, elytris xneo-viridibus,
sublus ceerulescens, fulvo pubescens, abdomina pedibusquerufis tarsis
antennisque infuscatis, his articulis 2 primis dilute fulvis; capital
convexiusculo, sat fortiter parum dense punctato, clypeo labrogue
piceis; antennis fliformibus medium corporis superantibus, articulo
2° tertio parum breviore, 3° degue axqualibus; prothorace elytris
angustiore, a basi antice fortiter attenuato, dorso subtilissime
punctato, basi marginato, ante basin arcuatim impresso, medio et
latevibus antice leviter, impresso; scutello brevi, truncato; elytris
ad humeros plicatis et rotundatim angulatis, postice levissime
ampliatis, apice rotundatis, dorso subtiliter coriaceis; dense subtus
coriaceo-punctata. Similar to 7. anatolica Friv., but with a slightly
different ; this last species has black legs as well as
antennae, the violet head, roughly dotted, the corselet little
convex, having in front a transverse impression, and the
elytra of a metallic green, 4 copper reflections; in addition the abdo-
men is only red at the tip. In our species the color of
elytra is a metallic green, but softened by a tint
of brass. Xanthochroa foveata. - Long. 13 mill. — X. carniolice
simillima, sed prothorace ante basin steep constricto, dorso
utringue fortiter foveato, bast medio quadratim impresso, lateribus
haud infuscatis, scutello medio impresso, elytris utringue vitta
submarginali fusca medio evanescente, Q.

Cdemera apicipennis. - Long. 10 mill. — Rufa, parum
nitida, rufo-sericans, capite fusco-virescenti, nitidiore, pectore,
antennis(articulo 1° rufescente excepto), genubus tibiisque 4 posticis
infuscatis, palpis piceis, abdomen 3 fusco-virescenti segmentis
apice fusco anguste marginatis, elytris apice anguste ac breviter
fusco-virescentibus; capita sat levi, antice leviter transversim
imprint; antennis gracilibus, valde elongatis, articulo 3° sequenti
paulo longiore; prothorace ante basin paulo constricto, basi medio
transversine, post medium utringuefoveato, antice leviter impresso,
disco paulo elevato; elytris dehiscentibus, a basi angustatis, apice
obtuse subacuminatis, dorso subliliter rugosulis, utringue subtiliter

 

 

ANNALS OF THE SOG. ENTOM. OF BELGIUM, T XXXVI. 2

158

sal acute bicostulatis, costula interna abbreviata, sutura anguste
elevated; pedibus sat gracilibus, 3 femoribus posticis valde incras-
salis, tibiis arcuatis. Looks a lot like the @. similis which is found in Italy and
in Turkey, differs in coloring of legs and abdomen;
sometimes the dark color of the knees is almost obliterated. Stenaxis parallela. - Long. 6 1/2 mill. — Minus elongata,
minus convea, fere parallela, fusca, nitida, fere glabra, elytris
minus nitidis, paulo metallescentibus; capite sublimer punctato,
inter antennas late parum profunde impresso, vertice interdum
obsolete sulcatulo, antenna sat validis, medium elytrorum super-
antibus, articulo 3° quarto avquali; prothorace brevi, subcordato,
elytris valde angustiore, lateribus antice paulo rotundato-ampliatis,
basi viv sinuatis, basi ipsa elevata, angulis paulo exsertis, dorso
subtiliter punctulato, medio transversim elevato, basi medio sat
late impressiusculo and medio breviter subcarinato; minute scutello
tissimo; elytris fere parallelis, ad humeros sat rotundatis, apice
obtusis, densissime subliliter rugulosis, sutura and utringue lineolis
3 tenuiter elevatis, \« mox ​​abbreviata, external longiore; subtus
albido-pubescens, abdomine basi rufo. Much smaller and shorter than S. annulata, with the antennae
legs and shorter legs, shorter elytra and
not acuminate, each having 3 slightly projecting lines, the body
is much less convex, the coloration of the underside and of the legs is
very different. Asclera partitipennis. - Long. 5 mill. — Sat elongata,
parum convera, virescens, sublime pubescens, elytvis paulo
carulescentibus minus nitidis, parte apicali fere a medio awran-
liaca, antice lunata, capite densissime subtiliter punctulato, inter
oculos leviter biimpresso; antennis parum gracilibus, joint
2° primo paulo breviore, 3° quarto equali; prothorace subcordato,
transverso, lateribus antice ampliato-rolundatis, postice sinuatis,
dorso densissime subtiliter punctulato, angulis posticis rectis; scu-
tello obtuse, nitidulo; elytris paulo elongatis, postice leviter
ampliatis, subtiliter dense asperulis, sutura and utringue lineis
3 subtiliter elevatis, parte aurantiaca opaca, basali subopaca;
subtus cum pedibus fusco-carulescens, subtiliter griseo-pubescens. This insect has ‘rather the facies of a Malachian than of a (idea-
méride, 4 because of its coloration which is quite reminiscent of that of
Malachins ruficollis and lateplagiatus, and which is quite abnormal
among the true Gidemerides. Chrysanthia oralis. - Long. 8 mill. — Zlongata, lete
metallico-viridis, pedibus brunneis, femoribus rufis, anterioribus

159

supra fusco lineatis, ceteris apice longe fuscatis, tibiis anterioribus
rufis, fusco lineatis aut-obscure rufis, palpis fuscis; dense capitate
rugosulo-punctato, inter oculos leviter biimpresso, sutura clypeali
valde impressa, anteunis gracilibus, fuscis, articulis primis
sublus rufis, articulo 3° quarto aquali; prothorace convexo, ovato,
postice angustato, lateribus via sinuatis, antice votundato-dilatato,
angulis cum margine antice rotundatis, dorso dense rugosulo-
punctato, basi trausversim obsolete depresso and medio leviter im-
presso, linea dorsali media via distinction; dense scutello
punctate; elytris subtiliter dense punctato-granulatis, subtiliter
fulvo pubescentibus, sutura and utringue lineis 3 tenuiter elevatis
and costula submarginali sat acute elevata; subtus densius pubescens. Extremely resembles 4 C. viridis in shape, size and
coloration, but the head is more dotted, the mouth is conco-
lore, the palps are brown as well as the antennae, the corselet is
more oval, the sides less sinuate towards the base, rougher
as well as the head, the elytra are more parallel, 4 rib less
protruding, and the 4 hind legs are brown except the base of the
femurs. Chrysanthia chalcochroa. - Long. 8 49 mill. —Flongata,
viridi-enescens, modice nitida, elytris interdum levissime carules-
centibus, subtiliter fulvo-pubescens, palpis, antennis pedibusque
fuscis, his griseo-pubescentibus; capite postice altenuato, subtiliter
punctato, supra antennarum basin plicato-elevata; antennarum
articulo 2 sat elongato, primo parum breviore; prothorace ovato,
postice angustato, lateribus basi sinuatis, antice paulo angulatim
rotundato-dilatatis, basi marginata, angulis extus prominulis,
dorso subtiliter punctato-rugosulo, sat ineguali, basi medio sat for-
titer impresso, linea dorsali medio dilatata and utringue disco plus
minusve elevato, lateribus medio impressis; scutello obscuro, punc-
tulato; elytris elongatis, ad humeros sat rotundatis, postice leviter
attenuatis, apice obtusis, dorso dense ruguloso-punctulatis, sutura
and utringue lineis 3 tenuiter elevatis, externa plus minusve obsoleta. Resembles, in coloration and facies, 4 C. varipes Ksw.,
the head is likewise attenuated towards the base, but the corselet is not
deeply furrowed in the middle, the legs are much less robust-
tes, entirely dark brown, and the mouth is concolorous. I owe the communication of these insects 4 Mr. Delagrange who
collected them 4 Akbes and 4 Smyrna. 160,

RHYNCHOTA ATHIOPICA

 

described E. Ber

Family PENTATOMID &. 1. Holeostethus Distanti n. sp. — Subobovatus, pallide stra-
mineus, fuscoferrugineo-punctatus, disco pronoti pone medium
ferrugineo-tincto, articulo ultimo rostri (basi excepta), maculis
duabus transversis ante medium pronoti, macula majuscula basali
semilunari scutelli maculaque hujus parva laterali ante apicem,
vitta media corii antice et postice abbreviata, macula minuta ad
acetabula omnia et utrinque ad marginem anticum mesosterni,
strigula brevi ad angulos posticos prosterni, puncto ad angulos
posticos segmentorum ventralium, maculis tribes parvis pone
medium femorum dorsosque abdominis piceo-nigris. caput vade
nutans, sat crebre punctatum, antennis ferrugineis. Pronotum
antice fortiter declive sat remote irregulariter punctatum, pone
medium paullo densius and magis regulariter punctatum, margi-
nibus antico-lateralibus subrectis, obtusiusculis, impunctatis,
levibus, angulis lateralibus rotundatis, haud eminulis. scutellum
minus dense, basi and apice remotissime punctatum. Hemelytra
apicem abdominis vix superantia, corio minus dense punctato,
margine laterali ante medium levi, obtusiusculo, impunctato,
membrane infuscata. Pectus sat dense punctatum. Abdomen
hemelytris paullo latius, margine laterali pallido, superne impicto,
belly sat dense punctulato, medio anguste sublavigato. —
Long. 96mm. Africa australis. Corpore antice fortiter declivi Z. scapulavi Thunb. affinis, sed
ceteris notis facillime distinctus. 2. Halyomorpha bimaculata n. sp. — Subovata, subo-
paca, subtus straminea, unequal fusco-punctata, supra fusco-
testacea, sat dense hic et illic acervatim fuscovel nigro-punctata,
vittis duabus mediis mesosterni, macula media segmenti sexti
ventralis spiraculisk fusco-nig maculis duabus perminutis
ante medium pronoti and callis tribes parvis basalibus scutelli, uno
utrinque mox intra foveolam nigra angularem, uno in medio,
pallidis, scutello praterea maculis duabus majusculis basalibus
eburneis levibus ornato. Caput longitudine paullo latius, tylo
jugis paullulum longiore, rostro apicem segmenti ventralis secundi
subattingente, testaceo, articulo ultimo nigro, antennis tenuibus,

 

 

161

testaceis, articulis tribes primis fusco-punctatis, tertio apice nigro,
duobus ultimis basi excepta fuscis, articulo tertio secundo parum
longiore, quarto secundo dimidio longiore, quinto and quarto eque
long. Pronotum marginibus lateralibus anticis levissime rotun-
datum, angulis lateralibus levissime prominulis, subrotundatis. Hemelytraapicem abdominis paullo superantia, membrana seriebus
tribes transversis arcuatis macularum parvarum fuscarum in venis
positarum signed. Abdomen hemelytris latius, connexivo fusco-
nigro, macula media laterali segmentorum sordide testacea. Pedes
testacei, fusco-punctati, tibiis annulis duobus subfuscis signatis. - Long. 9 14mm. Sierra Leone. AbZH. annulicorni Sign. statura majore et ceteris notis allatis
easy to distinguish. Family REDUVIIDA. 3. Coranus longiceps n. sp. — Niger, because longius pilosus,
macula parva mox extra ocellos, angulis apicalibus and tuberculis
quartet anticis pronoti, carina scutelli, metasterno medio, disco
ventris, maculis marginalibus abdominis dimidium apicalem seg-
mentorum oceupantibus, segmento genitali, maculis superioribus
femorum, tibiis tarsis flavidis, annulis duobus subbasalibus and
apice tibiarum apiceque tarsorum fuscis, antennis piceo-testaceis,
articulo primo rostri apice obsolete pallescent, hemelytris fuscis,
disco dorsi abdominis rufo, belly lateribus fusco-variegato. Caput
pronoto longitudine “quale, e latere visum depressum, elonga-
tum, antrorsum parum attenuatum, a supero visum ab oculis
retrorsum sensim angustatum, parte anteoculari et postoculari
eeque longis, articulo secundo rostri primo longiore. Pronotum
lobo postico rugoso-punctatum, angulis lateralibus rotundatis,
levissime prominulis. Carina scutelli postice nonnihil elevata. —
Long. 3 10mm. Africa australis. C. oblongicipitate Stal structura capitis affinis, sed pictura C. pullo
Stal multo similior. 4. Endochus africanus n. sp. — Supra ferrugineo-testaceus,
subtus pallid lurido-testaceus, spina laterali pronoti fusco-nigra,
capitis, pronoto, pectore, scutello ac coriis atomis numerosis
albido-puberulis conspersis, membrana umbrata, venis (presertim
posticis) fuscis, pedibus pallide flaventibus, annulo anteapicali femo-
rum anticorum, tibiis anticis geniculisque posterioribus rufescen-
tibus. Caput distinct pronoto brevius, articulo primo antennarum
capiti pronoto scutelloque unitis longitudine equali, flavo-rufes-

 

162

cente, basi, apice et annulo paullo pone medium obscurioribus
(ceteri articuli desunt). Pronotum lateribus inter lobos levissime
constrictum, lobo antico levi, angulis anticis obtuse tuberculatis,
lobo postico antico dimidio longiore, subtilissime concoloriter
punctulato, disco spinis and tuberculis destituto, angulis lateralibus
pone spinam inermibus. Scutellum apice leviter deplanatum and
pallescens, summo apice anguste rotundato, Abdomen subtus sub-
tilissime addresses puberulum, marginibus lateralibus segmenti
quinti pone medium levissime rotundato-ampliatis. - Long. Q
16.5-18mm. Sierra Leone (Rhobomp) and Gabon. Hoe genus solum ex Asia tropica and Australia adhue cognitum
flees. 5. Cleptria bicolor n. sp. — Corallina, antennis, hemelytris
(corii basi, limbo costali venaque interna exceptis), macula laterali
postica mesosterni, metasterno, macula basali ventris utrinque,
segmento ultimo ventrali (lateribus et basi medio exceptis), seg-
mento genitali maris, annulo subapicali femorum posticorum
subbasalic tibiarum posticarum fusco-nigris, annulo tibiali
dilutore et magis diffusa, tarsis luridis. Caput aque latum ac
longum, tylo distinct compresso-eleyato, oculis maximis totam
altitudinem capitis oceupantibus, supra quam subtus plus quam
duplo latius distantibus, antennis longe erecte ferrugineo-pilosis,
articulo secundo primo saltem tertia parte longiore. Pronotum
longitudine latius, longe ante medium leviter constrictum, angulis
lateralalibus rotundatis, haud prominulis, angulis posticis fere
deletis, lobo postico antico duplo and dimidio longiore. Hemelytra
apicem abdominis loin superantia. Abdomen subtus convexum,
lateribus nonnihil explanatum and paullum intra marginem late-
ralem longitudinaliter carinatum, spiraculis mox intra carinam
sublateralem positis et hanc contingentibus, segmento secundo
ventrali medio longitudinaliter sulcato, segmentis insequentibus
carina media longitudinali instructis. - Long. Gi 13, cum
hemelytr. 15mm. Africa australis. C. oculatz Stal affinis sed oculis subtus magis approximatis,
lobo antico pronoti breviore, belly medio carinato nec sulcato
coloreque pectoris distincta. Species supra described in collection G. Falloui asservantur. 163

ENTOMOLOGICAL MIXTURES

by Ant. Duvivier. XI. — DIAGNOSES OF NEW CONGO BEETLES. TENEBRIONID AS. Tenesis Duviv. This new genus is similar to the Amenophis in its antennae.
born strongly in saw from the 4th article, by its four shins
hind legs subcanaliculated throughout their entire length, but
moves away by the shape of its prosternum which is not terminated by
a wedge-shaped protrusion, but curved forwards as well as backwards
ot it is distinctly truncated; it is marked above two
lateral furrows; the mesosternum is enlarged forward and slightly
depressed, without raised or angular edges; so it gets closer
of the genus Setenis Words. which does not have pectinate antennae. His
corselet is much narrower than the elytra, these are
regularly pitted streaked; the crest is large, in a triangle
curvilinear. Tenesis femoratus Duviv. Black, with the basal two-thirds of the femurs red and the
elytra of a beautiful metallic green; head and bodice strongly
dotted; finely dotted coat of arms; very ample elytra, pro-
fundamentally striated, the points slightly marked, slightly cutting into the
intervals which are slightly convex, quite densely but
very finely dotted. Long 20 mil. ; width of the horn. 5 mill. ; width elytra, 9 mill. — Ibembo (September, J. Duvivier). Hoplonyx distinctus Duviv. g.

Oblong, convex, black with antennae, tibiae and tarsi
reddish brown; matte head and corselet, vaguely head, corselet
loosely and superficially pitted; interocular space very
narrow but wider than in H. monophthalmus; crest and
very shiny elytra, the latter deeply and serially
punctuated, at intervals vaguely and superficially pointed
tilled; below less shiny than above. Long. 12 1/2 mill. ; width 6 2/s mill. — Ibembo (October, J. Duvi-~
live). Very similar to H. monophthalmus Thoms. ; eye distance
double, punctuation of the corselet more distant, labrum less rough,

 

164

more brilliant elytra, the dimples of the same size in
all series (the dimples of the smaller subsutural series
in monophthalmus), smaller in size; tibiae, tarsi and antennae
reddish. Strongylium variolosum Duviy. Elongated, subparallel, convex; dark metallic green
bronzed and golden reflections; bluish tarsi; dark blue antennae,
not exceeding the base of the corselet; eyes fairly close together, slightly
slightly converging forward; head and corselet and legs densely
and deeply pitted; subquadrangular bodice, slightly
rounded on the sides; elytra each marked with eight series of
very deep elongated dimples, at very vague intervals
dotted; prosternal projection extended into a truncated triangle at the
Mountain peak; densely dotted below. Long. 22 mill. ; width ep. 6 1/5 mill. — Ibembo (August 16-31,
J. Duvivier). CURCULIONIDAS. Blosyrus obliquatus Duviv. Oval, black, covered with yellowish gray scales a
reflections of a golden copper, rare on the head, the disc of the corselet,
the base of the elytra and the flanks of the prothorax; on each elytra
a large completely denuded triangular spot, resting
on the margin from the shoulder to the 3/s, 4 point directed internally
laughingly; thorax rounded on the sides, surface covered with
depressed warty tubercles with a median keel
elytra angularly widened near the base, subparallel,
rounded at apex, punctate-streaked, at alternate intervals
slightly raised, the 5¢ bituberculate, the 7° unituberculate after the middle,
the 8¢ 4 V’shoulder. Long. 10 mill. (incl. rostr. ), width. 4 2/s mill. —Ibembo
(August 1-15, J. Duvivier). B. obliquatus Faust, i. lit. Lixus itimbirensis Duviv. Moderately elongated, entirely black and covered with a pubes-
short and not very thick, of a whitish ash, more accentuated
below, on the sides of the prothorax, the elytra and on the part
apical of these, rostrum short and thick, finely punctate, longi-
tudinally wrinkled on each side at the base; antennas a art. 2-3
subequal, 4 scape not reaching the eyes which are very trausver-
sals, 4 three-jointed club, velvety; conical corselet, also long
than broad, markedly narrowed in front, longitudinally furrowed
in its middle, obliquely rough. Elytra oblong, slightly

  

165

wider than the corselet At the base, narrowed and rounded at the
apex, distinctly punctate-ridged, 2 elongated points, has inter
very finely rough valleys, slightly impressed around
Pecusson; all femora dentate, the anterior sharply. Long. 16 1/2 to 18 mill. ; width 5 1/2 & G mill. —Ibembo
(August-September, J. Duvivier). Neighbor of the LZs. spinimanus Boh. and swbnebulosus Kolbe. the
subnebulosus Kolbe is transversely impressed & the base
(itimbirensis Pest longitudinally) and the rostrum of is more
longer and thinner. Spinimanus Boh. is shorter, has the
rostrum also short, but thinner, the antennae longer, the
prothorax having the anterior constriction more accentuated and more
clearly furrowed. Neotrocerus Duviv. Slightly arched rostrum, as long as head and prothorax
united, very slightly compressed on the sides; scape antennas
almost reaching the eyes, 4 clubs almost as long as the
funicle, oblongo-ovate, velvety; wide-eyed, depressed, trans-
versals; transverse prothorax, narrowed in front, with ocular lobes
slightly protruding, provided with a broad longitudinal hull finely pro-
lengthened forward. also prolonged behind into a tubercle
conical; deep prosternal canal, entering the middle of the meta-
sternum, open laterally between the anterior hips and
intermediaries; crest in long square; parallel elytra, tres
sloping at the back, strongly trisinated at their base; legs medi-
ocher, rather wide thighs, arched outside, triangularly
toothed below, compressed like the legs which are very
weakly bisinate inwards; very convex abdomen, both
first segments very swollen, 2 almost twice as long as
3-4 combined; intercoxal projection broad, parallel, truncated in front;
densely scaled oblong body

Of the group of Sophrorhinides and having to take place between
Sophrorhinus and Mecistrocerus; differs from the first by the channel
prosternal extended to the middle of the metasternum, its elytr
parallel, its elongated metasternum, its second abdominal segment
minal much longer than segments 3-4 combined; of the second,
also through its prosternal canal extended to the middle of the
metastermum, the size of the 2nd abdominal segment, its thighs not
in mass, its parallel intercoxal projection, truncated in front, etc. Nestocerus Fausti Duviv. ' Elongated, entitlement covered with very tight gray scales,
fading to whitish on the sides and at the top of the elytra, on

  

 

 

  
  

 

 

   

    

ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM HE RELGIQUE, T. ANAT. 15

166

the legs and part of the underside; russet head; rostrum, antenna
black nose, eyes and crest; velvety antennae club; head and
densely dotted corselet: ene median of the corselet black;
elytra adorned with a very poorly defined blackish annean on the half
posterior; numerous bundles of scaly hairs at the edge
front of the corselet, on the sides of this one and on the elytra. Long. 5 4 8 1/2 mill, — Ihembo (J. Duvivier). Temnoschoita eruditus Duviv. Depressed, black with the base of the elytra red and the sides, in
below, covered with a greyish coating; in elongated oval, large
dually constricted forward and backward; rostrum thin, clean-
slightly curved, very finely punctate; narrow, parallel prothorax,
abruptly constricted near the anterior edge, depressed, converted from
points 4 brownish background, tighter on the sides; Subparal-elytves
ieles forward, depressed, attenuated in arriving, deeply
striated-punctuated 4 plane intervals and unilaterally dotted;
pygidinm narrowed behind, truncated at the top, very gibbous,
punctuated and furnished with a greyish coating, last abdominal segment
largely hollowed out. Long. (excl. rostr.) 10 1/2 mill. ; width 3 1/2 mill. —Ibembo
(April, J. David.) Temnoschoita basipennis Duviv. Depressed, pitch black, elongated oval, gradually
narrowed forward and backward; slender rostrum, as long as the cor-
salty, reddish-brown, finely furrowed At the base, distinctly
ment punctuated; shiny, depressed, slightly constricted prothorax
forward, covered with fairly large dots, each dot trimmed with a
earthy scale; elytra flat, deeply ridged-ponc-
killed, at subangular intervals, costiform on sides, each
uniserially punctuated interval; they are reddish brown
dull, and each bears a large black tick in the back.
bounded in front; very convex pygidium. truncated at the top,
strongly pitted, pubescent; underside distinctly punctate, covered
scales; Legs reddish-brown with thinner shins. Long. (excl. rosty.) 9-9 1/2 mill. ; width 31/14 3 1/2 mill. —
Ibembo (J. Duvivier). Sipalus Aurivilli Duviy. Oblong black, almost entirely covered with a dull matte coating
light brown splitting into blotches and dots, especially on the
elytra; black crest, as well as the anterior part of the rostrum, the
vertex and shoulder of the corselet; rostrum with elongated punctuation;
head coarsely pitted, the points however shallow;
corselet regularly rounded on the sides, abruptly and very

 

     

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

  

 

167

strongly constricted forward, wearing scattered stitches, without tuber-
cules; elytra without tubercles, finely punctate-ridged, with inter-
yallessmooth, 4 barely convex; underside punctuated like the corselet. Long. (excl. rost.) 21 mill. ; width 6 1/2 mill. — Djabir-Pandja
(Lt Milz). Neighbor of 8. mendicus Boh., is distinguished by the absence of
tubercles on the body, its very finely punctate-striated elytra,
her bodice more convex, wider, weakly but very regular
boundly rounded on the sides. LONGICORNIA. Tragocephala timida Duviv. Oblong, subparallel, dull, of a lighter brownish black on the
breast, covered below with greenish-grey pubescence,
on top of a very short velvety down; vertex, antennae,
disc of the prothorax and lower part of the flanks thereof,
g posterior of the elytra and disc of the anterior half,
as well as an elongated lateral spot, touching 4 the margin, of a
brownish-black; forehead, a band on each side of the prothorax
extending on the elytra to the middle of these, of a yellow
Wocre more or less saffron; trimaculated abdominal segments,
breast and legs stained black or brownish-black. Long. 15 mill. ; width 5 mill. — Ibembo (August 1-15, J. Duvi-
live). Seems to me close to 7 '. Gorilla Thomas. PHYTOPHAGA. Platyxantha africana Duviv. Entirely of a greenish tan above and below, par-
times purple on the elytra; hips, legs and antennae (except
the extremity of these) of a light fawn; vaguely bodice
punctuated, marked with a transverse impression, large crest,
elytra irregularly punctate almost in the posterior quarters,
subcostiform; four posterior tibiae fitted with an extension
ment internally, reaching the third of the first segment of the tarsi. Long. 9 mil., width. 3.1/2 mill. — Djabir-Bandja (Lt Milz). Could be the type of a new genre, 4 reason for the prolong-
internal ment of the four posterior tibiae. Of the

ENTOMOLOGICAL COMPANY

BELGIUM

v

number must be kept; it won't be sent for a second
times as before. BRUSSELS
AT THE SOCIBTE HEADQUARTERS
20, MUSEUM STREET, 20

1892

 

 

,

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. vv

Minutes of the monthly meeting of May 7, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP BY M. Tosquinet, Vice-Chairman. Present: Messrs. Becker, Bergé, Ed. Coucke, L. Coucke, Duvi-
vier, Fologne, Jacobs, Kerremans, Ledrou, Melise, Robbe,
Séverin, Van Nerom and Lameere, secretary. MM. Gironet de Selys-Longchamps excused their absence. The session is open 4 8 hours. The minutes of the monthly meeting of April 2 are approved. Mr. Candéze informs us of the death of Mr. Dohrn, President
@honor of the Entomological Society of Stettin and member
honorary of our Company. The President reminds the services
returned to Science by the deceased who was at the same time a
distinguished writer who always had with entomologists
the most affable reports; his loss will be deeply regretted by all. The Assembly decides that a letter of condolence will be sent
To his family and the Society of which he was a soul. Board decision. Mr. Camille Poncelet, forest engineer 4
Orsinfaing (Luxembourg) was admitted as a full member
on the presentation of MM. Preudhomme by Borre and Lameere. Correspondence. Mr. Théry thanks for his admission as
effective member. The Royal Academy of Sciences, Letters and Fine Arts
of Belgium sends the program of its competitions for 1893. The Management of the Royal Museum of Natural History acknowledges
tion of the report of the Collections Monitoring Commission
of the Company, and declares that the wishes expressed
quant 4 Ja Putzeys collection. The Assembly decided to exchange the Annals of the Society for the
Bolletino della Societe romana per gli studi Zoologici et les Trans-
actions and Proceedings and Report of the Royal Society of
South Australia solicited by these institutions. The Imperial Society of Friends of Natural Sciences of Moscow
sends us the program of the congresses of Zoology, Anthropo-

 

ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM. OF DELGIQUE, T. XXXVI. 16

170

logy and Prehistoric Archeology which will take place from 13 to
August 30 in this city. Readings, communications. 11 is given communication of the me-
moire inserted in this issue of the Annales and of a certain name-
ber more work postponed to next month. Mr. Fokker announces the capture at Alle in July 1890 of an example
please Zropistethus gentilis Horvath, Heteroptera which was not
known only from Dalmatia and Herzegovina. Mr. Hippert reports that several species of Rhopaloceres
and Noctuelles out offered a very early outbreak this year. Mr. Séverin read out the following:

Our colleague M. E. Brenske begs me to let you know
the following comments:

1) Our illustrious colleague Fairmaire described in the last fasci-
cule IV of the Annales, p. 146, Triodonta deformipes. This species
= flavimana Burm. Reitter described it in 1889 (Wiener Intomol. Zeitung, p. 283) as Siversii, and I have fixed the synonymy in
this same collection in 1890, p. 51. 2) Fairmaire describes, page 117, a Homatoplia wrsina. This
space is the 2. Diabolica Reitter (Badeni mihi), Wiener Bntom. Zeit., 1887, p. 137. Fairmaire's meticulous descriptions allow me to
recognize with certainty these two species. The Secretary presents on behalf of Mr. Lethierry a Review
des Hémipteres de Belgique published in Lille by our colleague, and
including the statement with indications of localities of all the
species whose capture has been reported in our country. — Thank-
cements. Excursions. MM. Coucke surrendered 4 Eggenhoyen without
capture nothing of interest. June 12 excursion & Dieghem. Departure from Brussels (place S¢
Mary) 48 hours. 42m. in the morning. The meeting adjourned at 4 o'clock. 171

WEST BENGAL BEETLES,

19th memory. BUPRESTIDES OF INDIA
by Ch. Kerremans. The Buprestids collected in 1891 by Fr. Cardon in the
Chota-Nagpore form the fundamental part of this
notice which thus forms the second booklet, concerning this
family, relating to the crops of the Missions of India. M. René Oberthiir communicated to me quite a large number
Unpublished species of Hindustan that I thought I could intercalate
in my work of way 4 form a homogeneous whole con-
tributing to the study of Hindu fauna. To the thanks I owe 4 the indefatigable and zealous P. Cardon
are added those that I address 4 Mr. René Oberthiir, of which
Obligance has never wavered in my regard and who has not
fears letting its precious and often unique types
long and dangerous journey to enable me to examine them. It is thanks to this circumstance that I was able to undertake the study
of the genus Sphenoptera including the Indian species, very difficult 4
identify, were only known by summary descriptions,
scattered in various publications. CaToxaNntHA BicoLor Fab. — Two copies constituting
a variety of dark blue 4 purplish reflections, having the antennae
brownish 4 from the fourth article, the base tubercles
of the thorax similar 4 those of the var. Shaller gigantea and the spot
elytral large, elliptical and transverse. The body shape is
more parallel and the facies less robust than those of the previous
variety,

I propose to name it cyanura. Sikkim (P. Cardon); my collection. The C. gigantea Shaller, Mowhoti and brannea Saund., nigricor-
nis H. Deyr. and assamensis Thoms. cannot be separated from
C. bicolor Fab., and seem to me to be only yarieies or rather
local breeds of one and the same species belonging to the
Indo-Malaysian fauna. Poecilonota magnifica nov. sp. — Hlongata, granulosa,
viridi-awrata nitidissima, plagis numerosis cyaneo-violaceis
adorned; grainy capitus; thoracic rugoso-punctato, subquadrato,

172

latervibus subrotundatis, ad basin bisinuato, lobo medio producto,
dorso quadriplagiato and plagis tribus in singulis angulis posticis
positis ornato; scutello nitido, sublime punctato, trapezoidalt
and transverso, medio profunde longitudinaliter sulcato; elytris
granulosis, punctatostriatis, lateribus posticis dentatis, plagis
inaqualibus subrotundatis and cyaneo-violaceis ornatis; subtus
rugosa, nitida, abdominis segmentis utringue cyaneo-violaceo~
plagiarism; pedibus rugosis. - Long. 12.5; lat. 4mm. Elongated, subparallel, entirely of a very bright golden green
with smooth purplish-blue spots, grainy head with a
very short smooth and transverse hull between the eyes and two spots
blue, one between the eyes, the other on the vertex; short antennas
tes, a very shiny metallic green. Slightly wider chest
that high, grainy and chagrined, subrounded at the top, the sides
slightly curved, sinuous base with broad median lobe
and acute lower angles; it is adorned with ten plaques or spots
of a brilliant purplish blue, three of which are small in each of the
anterior angles and four larger ones, on the disc and placed
in a diamond. Elytra a little wider than the thorax at the base,
slightly sinuous 4 hip height, attenuated and rounded
4 Pend which is multi-spinated; they are very finely grained
two and slightly chagrined, show longitudinal streaks
and punctate, and are adorned with irregular and subrounded spots
@a brilliant purplish blue. Grainy underside, presenting cha-
that side of the abdominal segments a small blue spot; paws
grainy. Konbir: 1 single copy (P. Cardon); my collection. Buprestis impressicollis (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. — Vir
aurata nitida, supra valde, subtus leviter granulosa; internal capitate
oculos modice depresso; thorace antice angustiore, postice leviter
sinuato, lobo medio longitudinaliter sulcato, lateribus subrotun-
date; elytris apice truncatis et bispinosis, utringue quingue-
costatis, costis levibus. - Long. 20; lat. 6.5mm. Entirely a shiny metallic green, grainier in
above than below. Head slightly depressed between the eyes;
antennae short and slender, the first article green, the following
coppery. Thorax coarsely punctate, very weakly sinuate a
the base, the rounded sides; it is narrower at the top than at the
base and presents on the disc a wide longitudinal furrow and little
deep. Elytra 4 barely wider than the thorax at the base, very
slightly dilated towards the upper third, then attenuated following
a regular curve and truncated 2 the extremity, which is bi-spinous;
they are finely grained and each have five cdtes

 

 

 

173

smooth, the first of which is sutured and the 4th of which alone does not reach
not the extremity and ends towards the upper third. Below more
shiny than the top, with golden reflections. A single copy of India, without determined locality and of the
René Oberthiir collection (by Mniszech). This species vaguely recalls the American Buprestis of the
group of the aurulenta Linnaeus, in which she comes to place herself. Philanthaxia latifrons (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. — Viridi. metallica, cyaneo-micans, elytrorum humeris and dimidio basilart
cyaneis; capite convexo, sublimely granuloso; thoracic trapezoid
dali, levissime and requlariter punctato, basi anticeque recto, later-
bus subrotundatis; elytris convexis, mediocriter punctato-striatis,
post medium lateribus denticulatis; subtus punctata. - Long. 12;
Jat. 4mm. Entitlement of a metallic green 4 blue reflections with a stain
on each side has the shoulder and the upper half of the elytron of a
purplish blue. Slightly convex head; rounded epistome on the
sides, middle slightly indented; dark antennae. Thorax
trapeze a little wider than high, finely and regularly
punctuated, the top and base barely sinuate, the sides almost
rights. Convex elytra, apparently smooth, but with 4
the magnifying glass a very fine punctuation arranged in regular stripes; they
are straight beyond their anterior half, tapering
then abruptly and present on the sides, from the retrenchment
sharpening and up to the top, a series of sharp teeth. Below
and finely pitted legs. A single copy from India, with no specific location:
R. Oberthiir collection (by Mniszech). Anthaxia capitata nov. sp. — Paraillela, apice attenuata ac
separatim rotundata, claro viridi-metallica, granulata, disco tho-
racis longitudinaliter nigro-biplagiato, elytris ad sutwram obscure
cupreo-plagiatis; capita magno, convewo, oculis prominentibus;
thoracic subquadrato, transverse, subtle transverse-rugato; elytris
granulatis; subtus punctata. - Long. 5; lat. 1.7mm. Parallel, attenuated at the end, of a brilliant golden green with
two black and elongated longitudinal spots on the thora-
cique and two bands of dark copper on the elytra, along
of the suture. Concave, pitted head; protruding eyes, thorax
entirely covered with small barely perceptible transverse wrinkles;
elytra granular, separately rounded at the tip. below and
punctate legs. Konbir (P. Cardon), a single copy; my collection. Anthaxia morosa (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. — Obscuro-anea,

 

174

granulosa; capite planato, sugoso; thoracic antice sinuato, lobo
medio producto, lateribus rotundatis, basi recta; elytris apice sub-
tilissime dentatis; subtus nitidor, punctata. - Long. 4; lat. 1.5mm. Entirely dark tan above, lighter below. Head flat, grainy. Thorax slightly bisinate at the top,
with the median lobe advanced, the sides very rounded, the base straight;
it is very grainy and covered with very short pubescence
whitish. Slightly sinuous helytra 4 hip height,
abruptly retracted: r of the upper third, very slightly
spiny at tip; they are very grainy and covered with a
very fine whitish pubescence. Punctate underside. A single copy from India, without specific locality and from
R. Oberthiir collection (by Mniszech). Polycesta curta nov. sp. -——- #neo-brunnea, subopaca, big
punetata, elytris vage nigro-fasciatis, utrinque costatis, inter costas
longitudinaliter geminatim punetato-striatis; eapite rugoso, antenna
nis brevibus; thoracic antice angustiore, basi recta, medio sulcato,
lateribus volundatis, gross ae confertim punctato; scutello nigro,
rectangulari; elytris ad humerum rotundatis, dein vectis, apice
rotundatin attenuatis. Subtus grande punctata, albido tomentosa;
pedibus punctatis. - Long. 12; lat. 5mm. Subparallel, slightly broadened towards the upper third, 'entirely-
ment of an obsenr dull tan with two apical spots and a
black transverse and dorsal band on the elytra. Riddled head of
sunken points, converted from a very short russet pubescence;
bulging forehead; antennae short, black. Transverse, enlarged thorax
at the base, covered with large sunken spots very close together,
slightly sinuate at apex with accentuated pen median lobe;
almost straight 4 the base, the lower angles acute and slightly
inflected, the sides rounded, the dorsal furrow very accentuated. Lights-
its almost square, matte black. Elytra slightly wider than
the thorax from the base, straight up to the upper third where they present
their greatest breadth, then attenuated and rounded; they are
very rough and present a series of high ridges between the
which are seen two parallel rows of sunken points. Underparts and legs rough and pitted, entirely covered with a
very short red villus. Mandar: one copy (P. Cardon); my collection. Despite its shortened shape, this spice must undoubtedly
be ranked among those of the genus Polycesta, of which it presents
all characters. It is so far the only Hindu species
known of this genus widespread especially in America, Africa
and in Arabia. 175

Acmeodera interrupta nov. sp. -- Hlongata, apice atte-
nuala, supra convexa, subtus vecta, nigra, clytris utringue sea-
Jlavo-plagiatis; capite plano, rugoso, ochvaceo-tomentoso; aerial
nigris, brevibus; thorace valde confertim punctato, antice bisinuato,
medio producto, disco elevato, lateribus rotundatis and deplanatis;
elytris valde punctato-striatis, apice attenuatis and spinosis, ad
humerum circumseissis, callo humerali projecto, plagis sex flavis
utringue ornatis, sic positis: 1* and 2* minimis, subrotundatis, ad
basim, prope suluram el marginem externum; 3*, 4° and 5* trans-
versis margine externo preter positis; 6° apical, minima, subro-
tundata. Subtus nigra, densissime ac subtilissine punctata;
abdominis segmentis utringue fulvo-plagiatis; pedibus punctatis. - Long. 6 1/2; lat. 3mm. Elongated, attenuated at the extremity, convex above, flat
underside entirely shiny black with six tawny spots on
each of the elytra. Head flat and rough, furnished with a villus
dull yellow; antennae short and black. Thorax strongly and
densely punctate, bisinate at apex, with median lobe
advanced, the disc convex, the sides rounded and slightly
depressed, straight base. Elytra elongated, attenuated and spiny A
Yend, indented 4 the shoulder with the humeral callus very
accentuated; they present longitudinal series of punctuated streaks
and are adorned with six fawn spots: 1 and 2 very small, sub-
rounded and placed on either side at the base, one against the
suture and the other near the outer margin; 3rd, 4 and 5¢
transverse, along the outer margin and equidistant from one
on the other, appear to be interrupted bands towards the suture;
the 6°, small, apical and subrounded. Finely dotted underside,
Abdominal segments marked on either side of a spot
Wildcat; punctate legs. Konbir (P. Cardon), Madras: coll. R. Oberthiir and Kerremans. I noticed a third specimen of this species at the British
Museum, on my last trip 4 London, It was labeled
as coming from India and had no name. Genus SpHENoPTERA Solier. The genus Sphenoptera, very numerous in species in the region
Mediterranean, that of Africa and Turkestan was not
known in India only by a small number of representatives;
less two species specific to the Andaman Islands
(cupreotoma Thoms, and andamanensis Waterh. )(') and which do not fit

(‘) The description of Vandamanensis Waterh. relates fairly well to cupreo-
toma Thoms, of which I have three types in front of me and these two species could
make only one, but I dare not pronounce in an absolute way without having examined
Mr. Waterhouse's type. 176

not in the context of our study, there were 4 that day only nine
spices described: anea Fab. (=arosa Gmel. = tricuspidata Olive. ),
Perroteti Guer. angustala Thoms. ), indica and orientalis Cast. and Gory, Lafertei, nigrescens and pisciformis Thoms. , cupriventris
and cyaniceps Kerr. The descriptions, mostly too short, of these different
authors hardly allow rigorous identification of the species,
that it is impossible to determine without comparing them to the types. I therefore thought it useful to describe & again the ancient species
only known. To this are added today ten new ones,
thus bringing to nineteen the number of known species of the
Hindu region and which fall into three groups,
vant the general shape of the body. The first includes the Sphenoptera 4 ever more prothorax
wider than high, more or less flat, with ever wider elytra
that the thorax 4 the base, divaricates at the top in consequence of the
position of the external terminal spine protruding outside, making
thus the divergent armature; their greatest width is
towards the base of the elytron 4 height of the shoulder, 4 cause of callus
humeral and, seen in profile, they form above a line first
straight as to the thorax, then convex at the base of the elytron, ol
note a transverse bead and finally slightly curved up to
only at the top while the bottom is in an almost straight line, 4
convex sentence: these are the divarigues. The second group, a cylindrical and convex body, attenuated at the
extremities, and whose greatest width consequently lies
towards the middle of the body, includes the fusiforms which, seen from
profile, are more convex above than below, but still
following a regular curve. Finally, the third group comprises the species of which the most
great width is found towards the middle of the prothorax; the eyes
sometimes protrude to the point of making the head appear more
wide as the thorax; this one is almost square or rectangular and,
in the latter case, as high as wide, while the elytra are
gradually narrow, often in a straight line, to the
Mountain peak ; seen in profile, they present above a line almost
straight while the underside is angularly convex: these are
cundiforms. The uniformity of the facies and the coloring of the Sphenoptera make
reside the specific differences in a set of details
vaguely indicated which make one feel that one is in the presence
A species, but a description, however minute,

  

 

 

 

117

can hardly render. The shape of the prosternum, sometimes flat and
furrowed, sometimes convex or limited by a punctuated streak, the
shape of the crest, the presence or absence of the furrow in the middle of
the base of the abdomen, the structure of the elytra, their ter-
minale, the height of the thorax proportionally 4 Ja length
elytra are all characteristics that must be taken into account and
which allowed me to form the following table:

DICHOTOMIC TABLE OF SPECIES. 1. External terminal spine of the elytra protruding outside; flat prothorax,

trapeze wider than high; protruding elytra on the shoulder, more

broad than the thorax 4 the base; this one transversely high and
gibbous (Divaricates). 2

Terminal spine of the elytra not protruding outside; more prothorax

or less cylindrical and convex; elytra the width of the thorax &

  

the base. 6
2. Abdomen furrowed in the middle of the base. 3
Abdomen not furrowed at the middle of the base. 4

8. Flat head; shiny coppery underside, the middle part a green
metallic; elytra covered with punctate streaks. Larerte: Thoms. ‘Head uneven and husky; uniform coppery-violet undertones; elytra
not striated, presenting longitudinal series of dots. viscrrorMis Thoms. 4. Crosswise keeled escutcheon. 5
Eeusson not streamlined transversely. curta nov. sp. 5. Median scutellar keel, intersecting the escutcheon in all its width;
elytra without impressions along the outer margin. N1GRESCENS Thoms. Superior scutellar keel, separating the body of the crest from its tip
apical; elytra having three impressions along outer margin. impressa nov. sp. 6. Body biconvex, cylindrical, attenuated at the extremities; prothorax con-
vexed, rounded, wider than high (Wusiformes). flat body; square or rectangular thorax, almost as high as wide;
elytra almost straight on the sides, gradually narrowed, from the

 

 

7.

 

 

width of the thorax at the base (Cuniformes). 15
7. Ridged vertex, 8
Vertex not furrowed, 13
8 Prosternum furrowed in the middle. 9
Prosternum not furrowed, 10
9. Elytra nearly 4 times as long as the thorax; purplish blue above
With purple reflections; shiny coppery underside. curriventiis Kerr. Elytra 2 12 times as long as the thorax; evenly tanned, but
always brighter below. NEA Fabs
10. Abdomen flat or raised, but without furrow. a
Abdomen furrowed At its base. have in TALIS Cast. and Gory. 11. Eeuston plan, unearned, 12
Eeusson keeled at the base innocua nov. sp. 12, Square prothorax with rounded anterior angles; short form and

 

depressed. . depressa nov. sp. Prothorax large, bulging, rounded; conical shape; very convex. konbirensis n. sp. 13. Head blue or fiery red. M4
Concolorous head. crebrepunctata nov. sp. 14. Shiny metallic blue head. cyaniceps Kerr. Crazy shiny red head. fulgidiceps nov. sp. 178

15 Uniformly bronzed above, often lighter on the thorax. 16
Brilliant coppery thorax With green tints; purplish elytra,
auricollis nov. sp. 16, Chest sinuous or nearly straight. 17
Sides of the thorax rounded. deducta nov. sp-
17. Sides of the thorax weakly sinuous. 18
Sides of the thorax very sinuous; the lower angles of the thorax very
forward and sharp. inpica Cast and Gory. 18. Prothorax furrowed longitudinally; eyes moderately prominent
ents. Perrorett Guer,
Prothorax not furrowed; head wider than the head because of the eyes
very prominent. gossypii nov. sp. sp. Larertei Thoms., 7'yp. Bupr. Mus. Thoms., 1878, p. 65. — Antice apiceque attenuata, in medio parallela, dorso gibboso,
supra obscuro-anea, capite antice in 3 viridi, inter oculos and
postice “neo, cupreo punctato, cupreo-punctato thorace; subtus
cupreo-nitida, medio viridi, pedibus cupreis. tarsic antenna
nigri; capile plano, obsolete punctato, epistomo angusto, lunato;
trapezoidal thorace, antice angustiore and sinuato, lobo medio valde
producto, lateribus anticis votundatis, basi sinuata, lobo medio
bi-angulatim producto, dorso medio brcve sulcato, cavina laterali
levi and sinuata; scutello valde transverso, subcordiformi, apice
acutissimo; elytris punctato-striatis, apice attennatis and valde
trispinosis, spina media longiore. Subtus granulata and punctata,
prosterno canaliculato nec ad latera striato; abdominis seqmentis
duobus primis profunde ac large sulcatis; tibiis anticis and mediis
in 3 valde incurvatis, Q subrectis. - Long. 10; lat. 3.25mm. Elongated, parallel on the sides, attenuated at the ends, of a
bronzed blackish above, the head and thorax covered with a
copper punctuation; epistome and parts surrounding the mouth
@a metallic green in the G; shiny coppery underside
with the middle of the sternal region metallic green; paws
cuprous, antennae and tarsi black. Head flat, punctate and very
grainy; epistome narrow, strongly indented. Trapped chest=
zoidal, wider than high, bisinate apex, median lobe
wide and rounded; the sides rounded anteriorly with a carina
smooth and sinuous lateral not reaching the apex; the base very
sinuous, its midlobe tapered and angularly indented;
it presents, on the disc, a very short longitudinal furrow and is
entirely covered with an irregular and dense punctuation, thoroughly
coppery, and whose intervals are very finely dotted. Elytra raised at the base, 31/4 times as long as the thorax,
a little wider than this 4 the base 4 cause humeral callus
salient, sinuses at the height of the hips, slightly dilated towards the
upper third and then attenuated to the terminal spines ot
they widen again because of the external spine, which is very

 

   

 

   

     

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

    

 

  

Slightly protruding outside; median spine broad, its p
curved towards the suture, sutural spine very short and sharp; the
elytra are deeply ridged, the ridges punctate; inter-
streaks, finely dotted and raised, seem to be sides of which
three of them are more pronounced at the top and. train, speaker
extension, the terminal spines. Legs and underparts rough and
dotted; furrowed prosternum, without marginal striae; the two
first abdominal segments broadly canaliculated in the middle;
strongly curved anterior and median tibiae in the , pres-
that rights at the Q.

Moradabad and N. W. Himalaya: coll. R. Oberthiir. This species is easily recognized by the very special shape of the
median lobe of the base of the prothorax, which affects that of a W.

 

 

 

 

Sp. piscirormis Thoms., 7yp. Bupr. Mus. Thomas., 1878,
p - 64. — Obscuro-anea, subtus nitidior, eneo-violacea, antennis
tarsic nigris; capite rugoso, irregulariter gibboso, punctato,
sulcato vertex; thorac trapezoidali, dorso sparsim and lateribus
utringue confertim punctatis. medio vix sulcato. antice angustato
and sinuato, lobo medio rotundato and producto, basi sinuata and rotun-
data, lobo medio producto ct recto, lateribus anticis rotundatis,
posticis subrectis, carinalaterali subrecta, summum fere attingente;
seutello punctato, rotundato, valde transverso, apice acuto; elytris
ad humerum lobatis, lateribus anticis sinuatis, dein altenuatis,
apice utringue trispinosis, dorso antice elevato, seriebus longitudi-
nalibus punctorum instructis, inter series obsolete and sparsim punc-
tatis, postice breviter utrinque tricarinatis. Sublus valde and sparsim
punctata, prosterno ad laterva valde striato, medio via sulcato, sulca
punctata; abdominis segmentis duobus primis sulcatis; walking bus
roughness. Long. 12-13; lat. 3.5-4.5mm. Elongated, navicular, of a blackish bronze above, the head
and thorax covered with coppery pitting; tanned underside
bright purplish; tarsi and antennae black. Head punctate, uneven-
humpbacked; narrow and indented epistome, furrowed vertex, the furrow
widened between the eyes. Trapezoidal thorax wider than high,
bisinate at the apex with the median lobe broad and rounded, the cdts
rounded forelegs with a smooth and almost
straight, reaching to the upper quarter; the strongly sinuous base,
its advanced and straight cut median lobe; it presents, on the disc,
a vague longitudinal furrow and is covered with irrelevant punctuation.
regular, 4 cuprous bottom, tighter and more compact on the sides
than on the disc and whose intervals are very finely dotted. Very wide escutcheon, straight base, rounded sides, top,
sinuous and advanced in a very sharp point. Blytra raised 4 the base,

 

 

 

 

 

   

 
 

 

 

180

three times as long as the thorax, a pen broader than this
4 the base 4 cause of the protruding, sinuate humeral callus 4 height of the
hips, a little dilated towards the upper third and then attenuated
to the terminal spines which are moderately sharp and whose
external, slightly protruding outside, is equal in dimensions and
located the same height as the sutural while the median is
wide and exceeds its two neighbours; the elytra present series
longitudinal lines of sunken stitches and on each of them and outside
tremity three very short high sides whose extension
form the terminal spines. Legs and underparts rough
dotted; prosternum lined with a punctate and vaguely
furrowed in its middle part, the furrow being formed of a series
large irregular points; the first two abdominal segments
channeled in the middle u.

India and Ragpoor; coll. R. Oberthiir (by Thomson and Mniszech)
2 examples Q.

This species is easily distinguished from the preceding one, of which it
recalls the facies, by its more robust and enlarged appearance,
by the rough and uneven appearance of the head, by the structure of the
elytra not striated but only longitudinally punctate,
by the completely different arrangement of the terminal spines of the elytron and
finally by the rectilinear shape of the median lobe of the base of the thorax;
the coloring of the underside also differs from that of the preceding
tooth species. Sph. curta nov. sp. — Supra violaceo-nigra, thorac leviter
cuprescenti, subtus cupreo-wnea, medio subvirescenti, antennarum
tribes articulis primis cupreis, cwteris tarsis nigris; capital
punctalo, antice leviter transverso, postice vage sulcato; thoracic
subquadrato, lateribus anticis angulatim angustis, posticis sub-
rectis, antice leviter sinuato, lobo medio latissimo, rotundato, vix
producto, carina laterali sinuata, ad basin sinuato, lobo medio
producto and subrecto, dorso minute, lateribus confertim punctatis,
medio baseos vix fossulato; elytris ad humerum dilatatis, callo
hunerali producto, ad latera rotunditer attenuatis, apice utringue
bicostatis and trispinosis, spinis acutis, spina eaterna ad elytrorum
latera ante apicem posita. Subtus punctata; prosterno plano,
valde irregulariter punctato, ad latera via striato; abdominis
segmentis primis planatis nec canaliculatis; pedibus punctatis. - Long. 9; lat. 3mm. Navicular, purplish black above, the thorax slightly
cuprous; underside coppery bronze on sides, middle lightly
greenish, the first three articles of the antennae cuprous,
the following as well as the black tarsi. Punctuated head, transverse

181

furrowed above the epistome and vaguely
born on vertex; indented epistome. Almost square thorax,
anterior sides angularly inflected, the hind legs straight, the
sinuous apex, its median lobe broad, rounded and not very pronounced;
the disc faintly impressed in the middle of the base which is
bisinate with an advanced and straight median lobe; he is entirely
covered with dense punctuation on the sides and spaced on the
disc and the lateral hull is slightly sinuous. Hcusson
transverse, elliptical, very sharp behind. Elytra three times
as long as the thorax, dilated 4 the shoulder because of the humeous callus
ral protruding, the rounded sides following a slight curve
but regular, attenuated and tri-thorny at the end, the spine
external margin very far from the other two and placed on
the side towards the extremity; they present longitudinal series
points between which they are very finely dotted and slightly
ment rough, especially on the sides. Underside punctate; prosternum
plan, & barely streaked laterally, vaguely impressed on the
middle where it is coarsely and irregularly punctuated; the seg-
flat abdominal ments; punctate legs. Trichinopoli and Almorah: coll. R. Oberthiir and Kerremans. The less robust facies, the abdomen without a groove and the coloration
purplish distinguish this species from the two previous ones. Spy. nicrescens Thoms., 7'yp. Bupr. Mus. Thomas., 1878,
p - 64. — Subparallela, deplanata, dorso elevato, supra nigro-
virescens vel plumbeo-micans, subtus ad latera cuprea, in medio
viridi-metallica; capite punctato, levissime granulato, antice’
viridi, transverse sulcato, fronte canaliculato, epistomo minute
lobato, antennis nigris, articulo primo viridi-plumbeo; thoracic
trapezoidali held granulato, ad latera confertim and in medio
minute punctato, antice lobato, lateribus subrotundatis, basi valde
sinuata, lobo medio producto and recto, dorso leviter carinato;
scutello transverso, lenuissime punctato, transverse in medio cari-
nato; elytris punctato-striatis ac levissime granulatis, lateribus
subrectis, ‘dein rotunditer attenuatis, ad humera lobatis, apice
mediocriter utringue tri-spinosis. Subtus granulata, punctata;
prosterno plano, leviter sulcato, ad latera striato; tibiis anticis and
mediis in 3 incurvatis. - Long. 10; lat. 3.5mm. Subparallel, tapered at the ends, pitch black
slightly greenish above, the thorax often paler than
the elytra and sometimes slightly coppery, the epistome and the
frontal region green; underside coppery on the sides and green
metallic on the middle region; antennae and tarsi black. Heat
grainy and pitted, flat, slightly depressed above

182

Vepistome, the transverse depression; vertex slightly furrowed. Thorax punctate and granular, almost square, bisinate at the top,
its forward midlobe; the slightly sinuous sides, their
lateral carbene smooth and 4 barely sinuous; the very sinuous base, its
median lobe almost straight, very slightly concave; the disc
offering a slightly pronounced median hull. Elliptical Keusson, tres
ee slightly depressed and transversely streamlined throughout its
width: elytra 2 1/2 times as long as the thorax, wider
than the thorax 4 the base, sinuous 4 haunting the hips, the callus
protruding humeral, the upper third attenuated in regular curve
to the summit; they present rather long longitudinal streaks
deep and punctate; the insterstries, raised and grainy,
accentuate towards the top where they seem to form three strong edtes
maut the extension of the terminal spines, the external of which is very
slightly protruding outside, the median wide and very accentuated
and the sutural small, but very sharp. Grainy, punctate underside
kill; prosternum broad and flat, ridged on the sides and levement
depressed in the middle; flat abdominal segments; punctate legs. coll R. Oberthiir and Kerremans. India, Almora:
This species vaguely recalls, for the elytral structure, the
Sph. Lafertei Ths., with which it could be confused,
w were its more robust facies and the absence of the abdominal sulcus. Sph. impressa nov. sp. — WVavicularis, elongata, supra
nigra, thorace ad latera cupreo, labro vividi; subtus cuprea,
sterno virescenti, pedibus antennisque nigro-cyanets; capitate granu-
loso and punctato, medio frontis leviter fossulato, epistomo lunato;
thorace subquadrato, ad latera valde, in medio minus punctato,
antice et ad latera via votundato, basi valde sinuata, lobo medio
subrecto, carina laterali sinuata; scutello lato, transverse,
marginale posterior carinata; elytris ad latera lougitudinaliter
tvi-impressis cage, valde punctato-striatis, ad basin elevatis, ad
humera dilatatis, latevibus leviter sinuatis, apice attenuatis,
summo breviter utringue tri-carinato and tri-spinoso, spina externa
acuta sed minima, media valde producta, lata et acutissima, tertia
productive life. Subtus granulata and puactata, prosterno sulcato, ad
latera striato; abdominis segmentis complanatis; pedibus punc-
tatis. - Long. 10-12; lat. 3.5-4.5mm. Navicular, elongated, black above, the sides of the thorax and the
underside of a bright coppery, the sternal region and the parts of
the mouth greenish; tarsi and antennae bluish black. Heat
punctate and finely granular, furrowed on the vertex, trans-
versally impressed above the epistome; this narrow one,
deeply indented. Antennae long in G, their end

 

 

  

 

 

183

reaching the upper hips, their articles elongated and
widened; short at the Q, their articles shorter, tighter
Yun on the other('). Thorax punctate and finely granular, almost
earré, the base a little wider than the top, this one very
weakly sinuate, its median lobe broad, rounded and slightly advanced;
The sides are slightly curved, the hull smooth, sinuous and protruding
barely the lower half; the base strongly bisinate, its lobe
very forward and almost straight, barely concave and impressive
sioned in the middle. Very wide, elliptical crest, transversely
keeled, the keel separating it from its apical point, the latter in
curvilinear triangle. Elytra nearly four times as long as the
thorax, wider than this 4 the base 4 cause humeral callus
salient, slightly sinuous 4 hip height, slightly
widened in the upper third, then attenuated following a curve
regular up to the top, the external spine of which is slightly
protruding outside, the median straight, wide, long and very
sharp and the sutural barely noticeable; the elytra present
quite deep and punctuated streaks and, along the
outer margin, three irregular and vague impressions; toward
the upper third, can be seen, on each of the elytra, a
high hull which forms, in its extension, the spine
median. Underside grainy and pitted; broad, ridged prosternum
on the sides and furrowed in the middle; first abdominal segments
ungrooved minerals; punctate legs. Upper Burma: coll. R. Oberthiir. Very similar to the previous species, this one departs from it in particular.
ment by the elytral impressions, the position of the carina
llary scute and general coloration. Spx. cupriventris Kerr., C.R. Soc. Ent. Belgium, t. XXXIV,
p. count(*? )—= swbviolacea La Ferté mss. — Hlongata, subparallel,
convera, apice anticeque attenuata, supra obscuro-wnea vel
cuprea, violaceo-micans, subtus cuprea, slerno viridi, abdominis
segmentis utringue ad latera violaceis, antennis pedibusque

(') This distinctive character of the sexes seems to have escaped Lacordaire and & de Mar-
alone, the latter admitting that it is difficult to recognize the oY of the Q of the Sphenop-
tera. Possible test that it does not exist to the same degree for all species, but I
I noticed, as will be seen later, on all the complete copies that
I was able to examine. If, for the preceding species, I have not insisted on this
sexual modification of the antennae, it is that I have in 4 my disposition only a”
‘or serious Qs, or else, when the two sexes were before my eyes, it was that
One of them was mutilated and could not serve me as a term of comparison. None Although this description appeared recently, I believe I can reproduce it
in an overall work, easier to consult. I did not know then that this species
had been named by M. de La Ferté, but I do not think it necessary to complicate the
synonymy: I therefore leave to it its name acquired by the first description. 184

nigri; capile rugoso et punctato, antice deplanato, postice sulcato,
medio bituberculato, epistomo angulatim lunato; thoracic trap-
zoidali, punctato, lateribus anticis angulatim attenuatis, antice
lobato, basi modice sinuata, lobo medio paulo producto and depresso;
scutello cordiformi, transverso, apice acuto; elytris modice regu-
laviter punctato-striatis, interstriis subtilissime granulatis, apice
altenuatis and trispinosis. Subtus granulata, nitida; prostrate
canaliculato ac striato; segmento abdominis primo leviter sulcato;
pedibus punctatis and granulatis. - Long. 13-15; lat. 4-5.25mm. Elongated, parallel, attenuated at the ends, flat and of a leather
shiny wormy below, very conyx above and bronzed
dark 4 purplish or copper reflections; the greenish sternal region,
sides of abdomen purplish; antennae and tarsi black. Heat
punctate, slightly furrowed on vertex, bituberculate between
the eyes, slightly depressed above the epistome which is
angularly indented. Trapezoidal thorax, angularly
attenuated on the anterior sides, weakly sinuate at the top, its
median lobe barely indicated; the weakly sinuate base, its lobe
midline short and straight, slightly advanced; the sinuate lateral margin and
then angularly inflected, the hull smooth and abruptly
interrupted towards the upper quarter; the middle of the base is
weakly impressed and it is entirely covered with a
fine, irregularly spaced and denser cut on the sides
only on disk. Elytra nearly four times as long as the
thorax, very convex, a little wider than the thorax 4 the base,
the humeral callus smooth and protruding, curved 4 height of the hips,
then attenuated following a regular curve; they present
regular punctate streaks, but not very pronounced and on each
Weux, From the upper third, a low rise
curved and whose extension forms the median spine which is
broad and strong, while the external one, placed on the side, is little
pronounced and the sutural hardly noticeable. Underside pitted and rough;
prosternum broad and flat, coarsely punctate and weakly
furrowed in the middle, ridged on the sides; punctate legs. Konbir and Mandar (P. Cardon); India, without designation of location
lit: coll. R. Oberthiir and Kerremans. This species forms a passage between the group of divaricates and
that of the fusiforms at the head of which it comes naturally
to place. It is the only species of this group whose elytra are
noticeably wider than the thorax 4 the base and whose
dorsal humpback is as accentuated as that of divaricates. The external terminal spine of the elytra is straight and not protruding
outside. 185

Spn. 2NEA Fab., Spec. Zns., t. 1 (1781), p. 275. — Cast. and Gory,
Monog., t. 2 (1839), p. 27, pl. 7, f. 40 = erosa Gmel., Syst. Nat., t. 1 (1788), p. 1928 = tricuspidata Oliv., Batom., t. 2
(1790), gen. 32, pl. 29, pl. VII, f. 87. — Ovata, elongata, bicou-
sells, nitida, supra wnea, sublus nitidior, in medio cupreo-nitida,
capite antice in 3 viridi, antennis nigris, larsis exneis; capital
rugoso, punctato and yranulato, epistomolunato; trapezoidal thoracic. dorso rotundato, antice attenuato. summo valde bisinuato, lobo
medio producto, lateribus rotundatis, basi bisinuata, lobo medio
subrecto and producto, disco vage longitudinaliter sulcato, punctato
and granulato, carina laterali subsinuata; transverse scutello, antice
recto, ad latera rotundato, postice sinuato, medio valde producto;
elytris granulatis, longitudinaliter punctato-striatis, ad latera
antice leviter rugatis, postice atlenuatis and leviter trispinosis,
summo ad suturam wtringue carinato. Subtus punctata and granu-
late; prosterno plano, medio via sulcato and large irregularity
punctate; abdominis segmento primo leviter sulcato; pedibus punc-
tatis. -~- Length. 11-18; lat. 3.5-6mm. Var. HAS. — Corpus minus; supra xnea; articulis tribes primis

   

 

  

antennarum cupreis. /ENEA Fab. Var. B. — Corpus majus, supra cuprescens; antenna nigris,
articulo primo sepe cuprescenti. falsa nov. var. Oval, elongated, biconvex, light tan or copperx
above, middle part of the underside of a reddish coppery;
tip of epistome and parts of mouth metallic green
than in 3, whose underside also sometimes has greenish reflections
between; black antennae; his first articles often cooked
wormy; bronzed tarsi. Head rough, pitted and grainy;
indented epistome; vertex 4 barely crisscrossed. Thorax as wide
that high at the base, attenuated at the top, very convex, the
were rounded, their hull slightly sinuous and reaching
the middle; sinuous apex, its median lobe advanced; very basic
sinuous, so.1 median lobe very slightly concave; he is whole~
covered with an irregular and dense punctuation whose
intervals are grainy and finely dotted. Crest
broad, transverse; its straight base, its rounded sides, the top
bisinuate and advanced, in the middle, in a very acute curvilinear triangle. Elytra 2 1/2 times as long as the thorax, barely wider than
this one 4 the base, the humeral callus slightly protruding, the sides regular
slightly inflected to the top, the spines of which are slightly accentuated.
killed; they are covered with punctuated longitudinal striae between
which they appear rough and very finely dotted in
their bottom and, moreover, they present on the anterior sides of
small transyerse voids, often anastomosed; a high hill

ANNALS OF THE SOC. ENTOM, DE RELGIQUE, T. SNAVI. 45

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

186

starts from the upper quarter to end in the middle of the end ot
it curves abruptly to form, in its extension,
the middle spine. Underside grainy and pitted; flat prosternum,
not striated laterally but coarsely ponted in the middle, which
is slightly furrowed as well as the first abdominal segment;

 

   

 

sharply curved front and median tibiae
at 3. Var. HAS. - Average height; light bronze above; the
first three sections of the antennae, wnea Fab. Var. B. — Large size; sometimes bronzed

  

darker on the elytra; antennae completely black or with the
first article only slightly metallic, falsa nov. var. Tetara, Konbir, Mandar, India, Malabar, Madras (P. Cardon);
coll, Oberthiir and Kerremans. This last variety was sent in large quantities from
Mandar, Tetara and Konbir. All copies ¢ have the
longer antennae with their articles further apart and more
expanded than the Qs.

Sp. ortenranis Cast. and Gory, A/onogr., t. 2 (1839), p. 38,
pl. X, £. 59. -- Zlongata, subovata, apice attenuata, cupreo-enea,
nitida, elytris nigris, subviolaceis, apice violacei-cupreis; aerial
larsisque nigris; sublus nitidior, purpwreo-micans; capite puncture
tato, inter oculos tuberculato, vertice sulcato; thoracic sparse ac
gros punctato, in medio longitudinaliter sulcato, dorso rotundato,
ad latera subvecto, summo bisinuato, lobo medio producto, basi
bisinuata, in medio lobata, lobo recto; scutello elliptical, transverse,
sinuato and acuto postice; elytris seriebus punctorum longitudina-
liter instructis, ad latera subrotunditer attenuatis, callo humerali
elevato, snmmo tricarinato and lrispinoso. Subtus rugosa and pune-
aunt; prosterno plano, ad latera striato; abdominis segmentis
duobus primis sulcatis; pedibus punctatis. -- Long. 10.25;
lat. 3.75mm. Elongated, subovate, reaching 4 V'extremity, bronzed
shiny coppery above, slightly purple below, the
elytra purplish black, tip slightly purplish; year-
tenna and tarsi black. Head uneven, pitted and grainy;
furrowed vertex. Thorax punctate, convex, trapezoidal wider
that high; the sinuous apex, its rounded and broad median lobe; the
tees almost straight, their carina bisinuate and reaching the third
superior; the base hisinate, its median lobe nearly straight. Keusson elliptical, transverse, sinuate at apex, tip apical
in a very acute triangle. Elytra 4 barely wider than the thorax 4
the base, the humeral callus protruding, the sides nearly straight and regular.

  

 

 

 

 

   

 

187
closely attenuated to the top, the terminal spines of which
are very sharp and form the extension of three hulls
high whose median alone is very clearly marked and forms,
with the suture, the edges of a kind of channel or furrow running from the
vertex to upper third; they present longitudinal series
dots well marked on the anterior half. Underside punctate;
prosternum flat, laterally striated; the first two segments
abdominals canaliculated in the middle; a smooth, triangular plate
can be seen on each side at the base of each of the four
last segments; punctate legs. India; coll. Oberthiir (a single Gory type specimen). Sph. innocua (LaFerté mss.) nov sp. — Subparallel, convera,
pice attenuata; supra xnea, subtus ad latera subpurpurascens,
medio subvirescenti; antennis pedibusque nigris; capita punctato,
antice leviter depresso, postice convexo and sulcato, epistomo bilobato,
middle angle lunato; thovace subguadrato, punctato, antice
angulatim attenuato, summo sinuato, lobo medio valde votundato
nec producto, basi bisinuata, lobo medio rotundato nec producto;
scutello transverso, basi subrecta, margine elevato, apice sinuato,
lobo medio acutissimo; elytris gradatim rotunditer attenuatis,
convenis, apice modice trispinosis, seriebus longitudinalibus punc-
torum instructis, inter series granulatis, summo prope suturam
wide sulcato. Subtus granulata; prosterno plano, ad latera via
stviato; abdominis segmentis primis haud canaliculatis; walking bus
roughness. - Long. 8.25; lat. 2.5mm. Convex, parallel, attenuated 4 end; light tanned
above; below a bronzed purple on the sides, the middle
greenish; antennae and tarsi black. Spotted head; light vertex-
ment convex and furrowed in the middle; forehead 4 hardly depressed; ears-
bilobed volume, the middle angularly indented. Thorax almost
square, slightly wider than high at the base; the anterior sides
angularly inflected, the lateral carina sinuous and reaching
Barely half the height; the slightly sinuous summit, its
median lobe very rounded, barely advanced; the sinuous base, its
median lobe rounded, not very pronounced. lytres three times as long
than the thorax, attenuated in a regular curve to the top which
is tri-spinous; the slightly accentuated spines; they present
longitudinal series of sunken points between which they are
very finely grained and their apex, along the suture, is
dug in a wide shallow furrow. Grainy underside; pros-
ternum flat, barely ridged on sides; abdominal segments
not furrowed; rough legs. India: coll. R. Oberthiir (only one copy). 188

Sph. depressa (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. ~ Subparallel, apice
attenuata, supra subplanata, sublus convera, lola anea, subcupres-
cens, ove viridi, antennis tarsisque nigris: capile granulato et
puactato, vertice sulcato, epistomo angusto and lobato; thovace valde
and confertim punctalo. subquadrato, plano, medio leviter sulcato. lateribus anticis rotundatis, posticis sinuatis, summo bisinnato,
lobo medio acuto et producto, basi bisinuata, lobo medio subrecto;
elytvis granulosis, cage vegulariter punctato-striatis and lransver-
sim rugatis, apice mediocriter trispinosis and unicavinatis; subtus
granulosa and punctate; prosterno plano, ad latera striato; abdomi-
nis basi plana; pedibus puactatis. - Long. 8; lat. 3.5mm. Subparallel, attenuated at tip, depressed above, con-
vex below, entirely from dark to very light tanned
coppery reflections, the parts near the mouth green; antennae
and tarsi black. Head flat, grainy and pitted; Vertex
furrowed; narrow and strongly indented epistome. Thorax almost
square, a little wider than high, the anterior sides rounded,
the sinuous posteriors, the almost straight lateral carina and
almost reaching the top of the thorax; bisinate apex, its lobe
middle advanced and acute; bisinate base, its advanced median lobe,
almost straight, weakly concave; it is completely covered with a
regular punctuation and present, in the middle of the disc, a depression
longitudinal section. Elytra three times as long as the thorax,
a little wider than this at the base, the humeral callus quite
projecting; they are straight up to the upper third, then attenuated
up to the extremity, the spines of which are not very pronounced; they are
moreover very lightly streaked, the punctuated and more accentuated streaks
see you! pmmet ow their intervals form small keels
whose median alone is markedly accentuated. Below
rough and pitted; prosternum flat, ribbed on the sides; abdomen
é At the base; legs, pitted. coll. R Oberthiir (a single copy). Sph. konbirensis nov. sp. — Oblongo-ovata, supra valde
convera, violacei-vnea; tarsic antenna nigris; capita rotun-
dato and punctato, vertice sulcato, epistoma producto, valde lunato;
thovace votundato, glohoso, antice angusto el sinuato, lobo medio
viz producto, large votundato, ad latera rotundato, ad basin
sinuato, lobo medio recto and via producto; transverse scutello, basi
recta, ad latera rotundato, apice sinuato, lobo medio acute producto;
elytris seriebus longitudinalibus punctorum instructis, inter series
granulatis, apice multistriatis, summo ulrinque minute trispinoso. Sublus granulata and punctata; prosterno elevato, rugoso and plano. latevibus infevivribus cia striatis; abdominis segmentis elevatis

 

 

   

 

189

nec canaliculatis; pedibus rugosis. - Long. 14; lat. 5nm,

Oval-oblong, very convex above, flat below, entire-
ment of a purplish tan; antennae and tarsi black. convex head,
punctate; furrowed vertex; very advanced epistome, very narrow and
strongly indented in a semicircle. Thorax globular, very domed
above, densely and regularly punctate, a little wider
only high at the base, very narrow at the top, this one weakly
sinuate, its median lobe broad and slightly advanced; sides very rounded
say, their fairing almost straight and slightly exceeding the middle;
the base bisinate, its right median lobe. Convex elytra, 3 1/5
times as long as the thorax, the width of the latter at the base. the humeral callus smooth and protruding, the attenuated sides following a
regular curve to the top, which is tri-spinous; the spikes
weak; the elytra have longitudinal series of dots
between which they are very finely gritty and, towards the top
and to the end, four or five stripes on either side and
of which the suturals alone are clearly marked. Below
rough ; prominent prosternum, flat and punctate, laterally striated
has its lower part; flat, ungrooved abdominal segments;
punctate legs. Konbir (P. Cardon): my collection. Sph crebepunctata (La Ferté mss.) nov. sp, — Llongata,
oblonga, nitida, supra subcuprescenti-enea, sublus purpureo~
metallica; capite rugoso, densissime punctato, deplanato, fronte
levissime bituberculata, epistomo angulatim lunato:; sub-thoracic
quadrato, densissime punctato, antice leviter rotundato, lateribus
fere rectis, subrotundatis, basi bisinuata, lobo medio recto; elytris
rugosis, ad latera fere rectis, leviter sinuatis dein gradatim atte-
nuatis, apice via utringue tri-spinosis, seriebus longitudinalibus
punctorum instructis. Subtus punctata; prosterno plano, ad latera
striato; abdominis basi non sulcata; pedibus punctatis. - Long. 9-11; lat. 3-3.5mm. Oblong, elongated, shiny, above a very tanned
Slightly coppery, below a brilliant purple. Heat
rough, pitted, flat, barely bituberculate on forehead;
angularly indented epistome. Thorax finely punctate,
convex, almost square, barely 4 wider than high, the apex and
the sides barely curved, these slightly bent at the top
the short and sinuous lateral hull; the sinuous base, its lobe
right midline. transverse ncusson, its slightly convex base, its
sides rounded, apex sinuate and strongly acuminate Elytra 4
barely three times as long as the thorax, slightly conyex, from
Ja width of the thorax at the base, the sinuous sides 4 height of the

190

hips, then attenuated following a regular curve, @ barely
spiny 4 tip; they are covered with small transverse wrinkles
and present longitudinal series of dots. Underside punctuated,
prosternum broad and flat, ribbed on the sides; base of the abdomen
not furrowed; punctate legs. Tetara (P. Cardon), Calcutta, Himalayas (coll. Oberthiir and
Kerremans). Spn. cyanicers Kerr., C.R. Soc. hut. Belgian, t. XXXIV,
p. CCI. — Hlongata, oblongo-ovata, conveaa, nigra, nitida,
capite cyaneo, sublus nigro-wnea, antennis tarsis nigris; capital
plano, punctato and granuloso, epistomo bilobato, medio lunato;
granuloso thorace, rotunditer convero, medio modice, ad latera
big punctato, summo bisinuato, lobo medio valde rotundato,
Sere producto, lateribus votundatis, basi sinuata, lobo medio recto
and product; scutello transverse, sublriangulari; elytris seriebus
loagitudinalibus punctorum instructis, inter series granulosis,
apice ad suturam utringue lri-striatis, summo via trispinoso. Sublus punctata; prosterno plano, ad latera striato; walking bus
roughness. - Long. 9-11; lat. 2.75-3.25mm. Oval-oblong, elongated, biconvex, shiny black in
above, the blue head; dark tan underparts; antennae and tarsi
black. Head flat, pitted and grainy; bilobed epistome,
scalloped in the middle; vertex not furrowed. Trapeze plus thorax
wide than high, convex, bisinate at the top, its median lobe
wide, slightly rounded and slightly advanced; the Arvondi sides with their
hull very slightly sinuous and exceeding the lower half;
the base very curvy, the median lobe cut straight. Keusson trans-
pours, broad and subtriangular. Elytra three times as long as
the thorax, convex, regularly attened to the next vertex
a slightly pronounced curve, barely tri-epinense 4 the extremity; they
are very finely rough and offer along the suture, in their
upper half, deep striations. Punate underside; prostrate-
num plan, striped on the cdtés; base of abdomen not furrowed;
pontuate legs. Konbir and Mandar (P. Cardon): my collection. The Ga antennae noticeably longer than those of
the ©, but in a less accentuated way than the species on the
what observations could be made. Sph. fulgidiceps (La Ferté mss.} nov sp. —Zlongato-
oblonga, supra obscuro-wnea, capite fulgido-ignita; subtus aneo~
virescens, tarsis nigris antenna; capita rugoso, fronte planata,
epistomo lunato; thorace subguadrato, antice panlo angustior, ad
latera leviter rvolundato, antice modice producto, postice valde

191

bisinuato, lobo medio recto; elytris ad latera leviter sinuatis, apice
attenuatis and leviter trispinosis, transversim rugatis, seriebus long-
gitudinalibus punctorum instructis, transversim leviter rugatis,
prope suturam post medium vage sulcatis. Subtus rugosa and punc-
aunt; prosterno plano, ad latera striato; mid abdominis baseos
plane; segmentis utrinque plagis cuprescentibus et levibus vage
ornatis; pedibus rugosis. - Long. 9.5; lat. 3mm. Oblong, elongated, bronzed bright and dark above,
the head of a brilliant fire-red, the underside tan greenish;
antennae and tarsi black. Head rough and flat; strong epistome-
ment indented. Thorax slightly convex, almost square, barely
wider than high, finely and densely dotted, slightly
attenuated at the top which is very slightly advanced in the middle; the
were very slightly rounded, their hull almost straight and
reaching the top quarter; the base strongly bisinate, its lobe
right midline. Crest wide, transverse, straight at the base, its
sides very sinuous and advanced in point very sharp in the middle. Elytra a little more than three times as long as the thorax, too
wider than this 4 the base ot they are very irregular and little
deeply depressed; the slightly protruding humeral callus, the sides
Slightly sinuous 4 height of the hips, then attenuated in
regular curve to the tip, with terminal spines
are slightly accentuated, the external one very far from the other two,
these close to the suture and equal in length; the
elytra are very rough, the roughness consisting of small wrinkles
transverse; they are further covered with longitudinal series of
points and present, at the top, towards the suture, two furrows
vague and shallow. Shiny, pitted and grainy underside;
prosternum flat, ridged on sides; abdomen not furrowed
middle of base; abdominal segments presenting on both sides
on the other a small irregular smooth plate; rough legs. India: coll. Oberthiir (a single copy 3). Sph. auricollis (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. — Hlongata, cwnei-
formis, thoracic capita cupreo- vel anreo-nitidis, viridi mican-
tibus, elytris obscure purpurei-violaceis apice cyaneis; subtus
aureo-viridis, purpwreo-variegata, antennis larsisque nigris;
capite rvugoso and punctato, antice gibboso, vertice fere sulcato,
thorace subquadrato, punctato, medio fere longitudinaliter sulcato,
antice angustiore, ad latera rotundato, angulis posticis leviter pro-
ductis, basi bisinuata, lobo medio recto; sculello lato, transverse,
basi recta, ad latera rotundata, summo bisinuato, apice producto;
elytris transversim fere rugatis, seriebus longitudinalibus punc-
torum insructis, ad latera subrectis, summo gradatim rotunditer

192

attenuatis, apice lrispinosis. Subtus granulata and punctata;
pedibus punctatis. - Long. 11-13; lat. 31/44mm. Elongate, wedge-shaped; head and thorax of a shiny copperhead 4
green highlights; elytra of a light purplish purple on the half
anterior, dark posteriorly, apex dark blue;
shiny coppery underside mixed with purple spots; antennae
and tarsi black. Head rough, uneven and pitted; low vertex-
ment furrowed; indented epistome, almost square thorax, slightly
wider than high; the sinuous summit, its broad median lobe and
round; the sides noticeably rounded; the posterior angles
high-pitched and not very prominent; very sinuous lateral fairing, reaching
gnant the upper 1/s; sinuous base, its median lobe cut
straight; it is covered with fine, regular and
dense and presents, on the disc, a longitudinal furrow little
pronounced. Ecusson transverse, wide, straight At the base, the sides
rounded, bisinate apex with slightly advanced apical part
but very sharp, Blytra 2 s/s times as long as the thorax and
as wide as this at the base; the right sides anteriorly,
then attenuated, up to the top which is very thorny; they pre-
feel slightly pronounced transverse wrinkles and longitudi-
points and, at the top, three short keels, including the
suture and forming, by their extension, the terminal armature. Underside rough and pitted; flat prostrate, ridged on sides;
abdomen not furrowed in the middle of the base; the sides of the segments
abdominals adorned at the base with a smooth irregular plate; paws
punctuated. India, Burma: coll. R. Oberthiir and Kerremans. The coloring mode alone 4 recognizes this species of
all of India. The male has smaller antennae attei
almost gnaw the upper hips, his anterior shins and
medians are curved and its elytra are straighter on the sides
In short, this species, which I place at the head of the cunciforms, makes
rather the passage between this group and the preceding one, since
the female could without inconvenience be included among the
fusiform. Sph. deducta nov. sp. — Ovata, elongata, nitida, tota claro-
ened, sublus in medio purpurea, antennis larsisque nigris; capital
rugoso, punctato, vertice levissime sulcato, froutle inter oculos vage
rolunditer sulcata, antice leviter bituberculata, epistomo lunato;
thorace punctato, convexo, dorso leviter deplanato, antice angustior,
summo sinuato, lobo medio vir rotundato, lateribus rotundatis,
basi bisinuata, lobo medio subrecto; disco longitudinaliter vage in
middle sulcato; scutello transverso, basi lateribusque subrectis,

193,

apice valde producto and aculo; elylris convexis, seriebus longitudi-
nalibus punctorum instructis, lateribus subsinuatis, dein valde
allenuatis, apice leviter carinatis and valde Wispinosis, spina media
lata and longior. Subtus granulata and punctata; prosterno plano and
striato; segmentis abdominis ad basin leviter sulcatis; walking bus
roughness. - Long. 12; lat. 3-5mm. Subovate, very elongated, of a uniform light bronze, the middle
purple body below; antennae and tarsi black. Heat
rough and pitted, vertex weakly furrowed; uneven forehead,
furrowed transversely between the eyes, this curved and
encompassing two vague and irregular tubercles surmounting the post-
epistome; angularly indented epistome. Thorax a little more
wide than high, convex, flattened on the disc near the base, the
slightly sinuous summit, its very wide median lobe, 4 hardly
round; the very rounded sides with the sharp posterior angles and
slightly protruding outside; the middle of the longitudinal disk-
slightly furrowed, the furrow vague and not very pronounced; the side hull
straight, and almost reaching the upper third; the base very
sinuense, its middle lobe advanced and almost straight. escutcheon very
wide, transverse, the base very slightly convex, the sides straight,
the apex advanced in a very sharp point. Elytra three times too
long as the thorax, the width of the latter at the base, light~
winding at hip height, then gradually
attenuated following a slight curve and tri-spinous 4
extremity; the thorns are equidistant from each other; the median,
wide and advanced, forms the extension of a high cdte which
borders a wide shallow longitudinal depression, running
along the suture to the upper third; they are rough, the
roughness consisting of a series of small insensate transverse wrinkles
sible 4 V’ceil bare and presenting longitudinal series of dots. Underside rough and pitted; prosternum flat, ribbed on the sides;
abdomen weakly furrowed in the middle of the base; punctate legs. Mandar, Konbir (P. Cardon), India (by Gory); coll. R. Ober-
Thiir and Kerremans. The difference in antennal structure is very accentuated here; from
two Sphenoptera labeled indica Gory type in the coll. of
Mr. R. Oberthiir, this one is quite different, as we can see.
will see by the description which follows, of the species described by
MM. Castelnau and Gory. Finding myself in the presence of two types
bearing the same name, but with very significant differences
as for the structure and the facies, I leave the old denomination
Alinsect which comes closest to the description of the authors. Sp. inpica Cast. and Gory, Monogr., t. 2 (1839), p. 37, pl. x,
f. 57. — Elongata, cuneiformis, supra wnea, nitida, thorace

 

 

   

 

 

 

   

    

 

 

 

194

clariori; subtus purpurea, viridi-vel cyaneo-variegato, antennis
tarsic nigris; capite rugoso and gibboso, vertice sulcato; thoracic
subquadrato, antice angustiore and sinuato, lobo medio producto, ad
latera sinuato, angulis posticis productis et acutis, basi valde
bisinuata, lobo medio recto and producto; scutello antice recto, ad
latera rotundato, postice bisinuato ct producto, apice acuto; ely tris
ad latera via transversim rugatis, seriebus longitudinalibus punc-
torum instructis, apice utrinque viv tri-spinosis, summo prope
suturam vage longitudinaliter canaliculato. Subtus punctata and
granulata, pedibus punctatis. - Long. 10-12; lat. 3-3.5mm. Elongated, wedge-shaped; brighter, lighter tan above
on the thorax than on the elytra; these sometimes obscure
at the top; below a brilliant purple mixed with blue or
green, especially on the abdominal segments; antennae and tarsi
black. Head pitted, rough and uneven; furrowed vertex; ears-
indented volume, almost square thorax, barely as wide as
high, irregularly punctuated, the punctuation denser and more
irregular on the sides than on the disc which is furrowed longitudinally
dinally in the middle; apex bisinute, its median lobe advanced;
sinuous sides, convex on the anterior part, concave on the
posterior part, the posterior angles advanced, lowered and
treble; lateral carina almost straight and reaching the upper third
laughing; very sinuous base, its right median lobe. Keusson trans-
pours; its straight base, its rounded sides, the acuminate summit in
arrive. Elytra 4 about three times as long as the thorax,
the sides barely rounded, regularly attenuated to the top
put; this one very weakly spiny 4 the extremity and vaguely
furrowed along the suture; they are transversely wrinkled on
the sides, but in an insensitive way and present series
longitudinal points. Underside rough and pitted; prostrate-
num plan, streaked on the sides; base of abdomen not furrowed
in the middle. Konbir and Tetara (P. Cardon); India (by Gory ¢ype); coll. R.
Oberthiir and Kerremans. This species, based on the 2nd adica type of Castelnau and Gory,
is more slender than the preceding one; the sides of the thorax are
less rounded and much more sinuous, the lower angle more
acute, very low on the base of the elytra; these are less
rough and their punctuation is much finer than in the
Sph. deducta which precedes. Sen. Perrotetr Gucrin, Revue de Zool. (1841), p. 328. —
Gory, Mongr. sup., t. 4 (1842), p. 316, pl. LIM, f. 312 =
angustata Thoms., Typ. Bupr., 1878, p. 72. 195,

 

Elongata, cuneiformis; supra nitida, vnea, thoracic nitidiori,
elytris obscurioribus; subtus purpurea; tarsic antenna nigris;
capilte punctato et rugoso, antice transversim vir, vertice fere
longitudinaliter sulcato; thoracic subquadrato, punctato, antice in
medio valde producto, ad latera subrecto, basi valde sinuata, lobo
medio recto, dorso longitudinaliter sulcato; transverse scutello,
basi recta, ad latera rotundato, apice bisinuato and acuto; elytris
postice valde attenuatis, ad latera subrectis, apice modice trispino-
sis, seriebus longitudinalibus punctorum instructis, summo
utringue leviter tri-carinato. Subtus punctata; pedibus granulosis. - Long. 7.5-10; lat. 2-2.5mm. Very elongated, wedge-shaped, with a light shiny bronze on the
thorax, dark on the elytra; below @a bright purple;
antennae and tarsi black. Head uneven, with a vague furrow
transverse above the epistome; furrowed vertex. Thorax pres-
only square, 4 hardly attenuated at the top, the median lobe very
advanced; sides almost straight, barely sinuate; very sinuous base,
his right median lobe; almost straight lateral fairing, protruding
sant 4 barely half of the sides; it is fully covered
with dense punctuation on the sides and spaced out on the disc
which is further longitudinally furrowed in the middle. Klytra
3 1/6 times as long as the thorax, the width of it
ci at the base, rough and longitudinally pitted; they
are very sharp at the back and the top is tri-keeled and
moderately prickly. Underside pitted and rough; prosternum
plane, ribbed on sides; rough, pitted legs. Mandar and Konbir (P. Cardon); India (E.C. Cotes); Trichino-
polished (P. Castets); Madras, Coromandel: coll. R. Oberthiir and
Kerremans. Very variable species in terms of size and very characteristic
as for the frankly wedge-shaped facies. Although I didn't have
under the eyes the type of Guérin, I do not hesitate to relate to this
species the Sph. angustata Thomson whose type is in all respects
conforms to a copy of my collection labeled: Perroleti,
gift of Mr. Guérin, and coming from the coll. Chevrolet. Sph. gossypii (E. C. Cotes mss(')), nov. sp. — Subparallel,
apice attenuata, wnea; tarsic antenna nigris; capite magno,
plano and granulato, oculis valde prominentibus; quadrato thoracic,

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

() In the Indian Museum Notes, t. 2, no.} (1891), p. 338, M.E.C. Cotes
names and figures this species, some copies of which had been sent to me
for determination and in which I had not hesitated & recognize a species
unpublished, Mr. Cotes reproduces the passages of the letter that I had written and in
which I mentioned some peculiarities on this Sphenoptera,

 

196

punclato, antice subrotundato, ad latera recto, fere sinuato, basi
bisinuata, lobo medio subrecto; transverse scutello, cordiform;
elytris seviebus longitudinalibus punctorum instructis, ad latera
subrectis, apice allenuatis and modice li-spinosis, summo leviler
carinato and strialo. Subtus granulosa; pedibus anticis and mediis 3
incurcatis. - Long. 9; lat. 2.25mm. Elongated, wedge-shaped, dark bronze; antennas and
black tarsi. Head flat, grainy; very prominent eyes;
forehead separated from the epistome by a sinuous transverse carene. Square thorax, 4 barely attenuated at the apex, the median lobe of which is
wide and rounded; sides weakly sinuate; short side fairing,
nearly straight; base strongly bisinate, its median lobe straight; he
is entirely covered with dense punctuation on the sides and
spaced on the disc. Crest subcordiform, broad and transverse;
its right base. Elytra 23/s times as long as the thorax, from the
width of this 4 the base, then angularly widened 4
the shoulder, very slightly sinuous 4 height of the hips, regular
slightly attenuated to the summit which is tri-spinous; they are very
finely granular and present longitudinal series of
points; the upper third is faired, the fairings alternating with
slightly accentuated streaks Underside rough and punctuated; prostrate-
num broad, flat, ribbed on sides; elevated base of abdomen and
not furrowed in the middle; punctate legs. India (E. C. Cotes), Konbir (P. Cardon), Madras: coll. Ober Thiir
and Kerremans. G was formerly fired 4 M. Cotes; I can't do
express my opinion on the sexual diflerences presented by
antennas. The dilation of the head, wider than the thorax 4 causes
very protruding eyes, the absence of furrow on the vertex and on the
thoracic disc distinguish this species from all others
of the cuneiform group. BELIONOTA PRASINA Thunbg., Wov. sp. ins. Diss., V, p. 90. —
An example. of Kurseong (P. Cardon). Chrysobothris tricolor (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. — Oblongo-
ovata, rough; capita obscuro-cupreo, thorace nigro-riolascenti,
margine antico viridi, in medio transverse flameo-fascialo;
elytris nigro-violaceis, utringue omnino viridi-cinclis fascia
transverse vitidi post medium posita, dorso summoque ulringue
Jammeo-plagiato; subtus violacea, episternorum lateribus flam-
capite planato and granuloso; transverse thorace, lateribus
anticis truncatis, basi bisinuata lobo medio rolundato et producto;
etylris granulosis, post medium dilatatis and denticulalis, apice

  

 

197

valde atlenuatis and rotundatis. Subtus granulata; prostrate big
and confertim.abdomine sparse and minute punctato; pedibus rugosis. - Long. 9; lat. (ad humeros) 4 mm. Oval-oblong, enlarged in the upper third; head of a copper
obscure; antennae with first article coppery, the following ones of a
bluish black; dark purplish thorax with the anterior margin
upper part of a light metallic green and a transverse band of
brilliant fire red on the lower half; elytra of a purplish
dark surrounded by a border of a light metallic green and pre-
feeling towards the upper third a transverse band of this
last nuance and dividing the elytron into two parts whose middle
is adorned with a spot of a bright fiery red; below a purplish
dark, the sides of the episternum a fiery red or a brilliant gold.
slow; bluish tarsi. Head flat, grainy; very narrow vertex,
furrowed; very oblique eyes. Thorax transverse, enlarged, punctate,
punctuation consisting of dots or small elongated lines in the
horizontal direction; anterior margin truncated on the sides; base
strongly bisinate, its median lobe rounded and broad. Elytra
grainy and punctate, a little wider than the thorax at the base,
broadened towards the upper third, then attenuated and toothed on the
sides; rounded top; they present, at the base, a short furrow
transverse. Underside rough and coarsely pitted on the ster-
num, weakly punctate on the abdomen; strong anterior femora
unidentity; last abdominal segment not keeled in the middle,
slightly depressed at the base and terminated by two long spines
separating a slightly advanced median lobe. India: a single example. of the coll. R. Oberthiir. Chrysobothris carinata nov. sp. — Oblongo-oval; capital
obsenro-cuprea; thorace antice rotundatim viridi, postice obscuro-
cupreo; elytris violaceis, basi, humero, utrin-quartet fossulisk
as cyaneo-viridibus; subtus in medio viridi-metallica, ad lutera
obscuro-cuprea; pedibus obscuris, tarsis cyaneis; capital antice valde
depresso and circulatim rugato, postice transverse cavinato, vertice
big punctato; transverse thoracic minute rugato, lateribus anti-
cis truncatis, basi bisinuata, lobo medio rotundato and producto;
elytris valde and confertim punctatis, lateribus posticis denticulatis,
summo prope suluram utringue carinato, fossulis quartet instructed
lis, sic positis:1* in medio baseos; 2* in media parte; 3* and 4° gemi-
natis and minoribus in triente apicali. Sublus antice big and con-
Sertim, postice minute punctata; pedibus rugosis. - Long. 10; lat. (ad humeros) 4 mm. Oval-oblong, enlarged in the upper third; head of a copper
dark, thorax half metallic green at the top and a

198

dark cuprous at base; elytra purplish with the base, the shoulder
and four dimples of a greenish metallic blue; green underside
metallic in the middle, dark coppery on the sides; paws
cuprous, tarsi blue. Grainy head; depressed forehead, the
circularly wrinkled depression separated from the vertex by a
transverse hull. Thorax wider than high, rounded on the
cetae, its anterior edge raised; slightly concave sides
mniliew; bisinaeous base, its advanced median lobe, broad and rounded; he
is covered with small sinuous and interrupted transyerse wrinkles. Grainy elytra, covered with fine, very dense punctuation,
widened in the upper third, then attenuated and serrated on the
edges; they present at the top, at a certain distance and the
along the suture, a raised and sinuous keel or cdte and are
adorned with four dimples located: the 1 in the middle of the base, the 2¢
in the middle of the disc, the 3¢ and the 4, smaller and very close
View of the other, towards the upper third; the two first
are united by a band of greenish blue color and semi-
circular. Below very coarsely punctate on the sternum and
finely dotted on the abdomen; grainy paws; femurs
forelegs very strongly unidentate; last abdominal segment
streamlined in the middle and semi-circularly indented at the top. India: a single copy of the coll. R. Oberthiir (by
van Lansberge). Chrysobothris quadraticollis (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. —
Oblongo-ovata; capite antice viridi, postice wneo-cupreo, prope
post oculos viridi thoracem; aneo-cupreo thorace; elytris nigris,
astringent minute viridi-trifossulatis; subtus in medio viridi-
metallica, ad latera cuprescens, larsis cyaneis; capile rugoso, antice
irregulariter depresso, postice grosse ac valde punctato; thoracic
quadrato, lranverso, transversim rugato, lateribus anticis and pos-
ticis subrotundatis, basi sinuata, lobo medio rotundato and producto;
elytris rugosis, punctatis, ad latera denticulatis, longe suturam
utrinque bicarinatis et fossulis tribus vagis et minimis instructis. Sublus granulata; pedibus punctatis and rugosis. - Long. 10;
lat. 3.75mm. Oblong oval, slightly enlarged in the upper third; green head
ricurely and of a dark tan on the vertex, the part
nt the thorax behind the eyes of a metallic green;
cuprous bronze ax; shiny black elytra with three
your green dimples; below golden green in the middle, coppery on
coppery legs, blue tarsi; green antennas 4 la
base, cuprous at top. Head uneven, rough, slightly
depressed; frontal hull rounded and slightly accentuated; Vertex

       

 

     

   

 

199

coarsely punctuated. Transverse, rectangular thorax, the
blunt and rounded angles, the bisinuous base, its median lobe
very pronounced and rounded. Elytra granular and punctate, serrated
on the posterior edges 4 from the middle, presenting 4 a
some distance and along the suture denx elevated ribs paral-
islands and a third side oblique along the outer edge; they
are adorned with three small dimples placed in line
oblique: the 1", in the middle of the base, the 2° in the middle of the disc and
Ja 3° in the upper third closer to the lateral margin than to the
suture. Underside punctate; very rough prosternum; ante-femur
strongly unidentate laughing; the last keeled abdominal segment
in the middle, strongly bi-thorny and circularly indented at the
Mountain peak. India: a single example. from the coll R. Oberthiir (by Mniszech). Chrysobothris violacea nov. sp. — Oblonga, supra obscuro-
violacei-purpurea, thoracis margine laterali elytrorumque fossulis
quingue aureo-ciridibus ornatis; subtus viridi aurata, nitidissima,
ad latera utringue wide cupreo-violaceo-tincta; pedibus viridibus,
cupreo-viovaceo-variegatis, tarsis cyaneis; capite rugoso, forehead
undulatim rugata, carina frontali levi, vertice votundatin
impresso, postice carinato; thoracic transverso, subquadrato, trans-
versin rugato, medio baseos leviter carvinato, summo leviter sinuato,
angulis anticis truncatis, lateribus posticis fere productis, basi
valde bisinuata, lobo medio producto; elytris granulosis, post
medium ad latera denticulatis, longe suturam vage costatis, fossu-
read quinque utringue instructis. Subtus punctata; pedibus rugosi
- Long. 10.5-14; lat. 4.25-5mm. Oblong; above a dark purplish purplish with the keel
frontal, the lateral edges of the thorax and five dimples of a green
very shiny gold on each elytron; shiny golden-green underside
with two broad lateral bands of a bright purplish coppery;
femurs of a golden green largely speckled with purplish copper,
coppery tibiae, blue tarsi; coppery antennae at the base, with
then greenish blue. grainy head; forehead flattened, covered with
small sinuous and transverse wrinkles; smooth frontal fairing, over-
rise of a curved depression; very weakly keeled vertex. Thorax rough and covered with small interrupted transverse wrinkles.
stinks; Slightly sinuous summit; nearly straight sides, its angles

 

 

 

fore and hind legs truncated; bisinate base with its lobe

 

advanced median. Elytra rough, wider than the thorax 4 la
base, almost straight to the posterior third and then gradually
slightly narrowed and serrated at the edges; they are very fine
pitted and vaguely keeled 4 some distance and along

 

200

of Ja suture and each have five raised dimples: the first A
the base; the 2¢ and the 3° on the anterior third, one against the edge
exterior, the other in the middle of the disk; the of, widened, towards the third
superior and the 5° near
pitted legs; very rough prosternum; anterior femars for-
ly unidentate; last abdominal segment keeled in the middle,
bisinate and slightly bi-spinous at the top. Upper Burma: coil. R. Oberthiir. from the top, in the apical angle. below and

    

Coreebus dorsalis nov. sp. — Hlongalus, subparallelus, supra
agreed, viridi-metallicus, plaga magna in medio thoracis and in
elytrovum basi posita; elytris apice cyaneis elfasciis duabus undu-
latis and albo-lomentosis in summa speaks positis ovnatis; capital
rough, medium sulcato; thovace antice angustiore, basi sinuata, lobo
mid producto and recto: elytris granulatis and punctatis, apice
separation rolundatis and multispinosis. Sublus nitidus, subtilis-
sime punctatus. -- Long. 15; lat. 5mm. Elongated, subparallel, convex above, metallic green
very shiny with the top of the elytra nuanced with blue and a
large purplish patch extending over the thoracic disc and on the
anterior dorsal region of the elytra which present, towards the third
upper, two wavy bands formed by short pubescence
hlanchatre surmounted by a spot of the same nature and semicircular
lar. Head rough, coarsely pitted; furrowed vertex. Transverse thorax, at the base and attenuated at the top, which is
broadly rounded; sides rounded and topped, at the base, with a
short curved hull; very strongly bisinulated base, the lobe
center forward, wide and cut straight. Keusson transverse, cordi-
shape and acuminated on arrival. Elytra finely granular, dense-
minutely punctate, almost as wide as the thorax 4 the base, sinate
4 hip height, separately rounded and very thin
serrated 4 Vend; protruding humeral callus; high suture,
well-marked interhumeral dimple. Underside very shiny, fine-
ment and densely punctate; very enlarged prosternum in front and
bordered by the deep transverse furrow; very finely punctate legs. India: a single example. by Ja coll. R. Oberthiir (by Mniszech). Corpus Sip Kerr., C.R. Soc. Hat. Belgium, t. XXXII
(1888), p. 67. — Upper Burma (coll. R. Oberthiir). Coreebus coeruleus nov. sp. — Oblongus, caruleus, elytris
albescenti-cinereo tri-fascialis apicegue subviolacentibus; capital
punctate. medio longitudinaliter sulcato, fronte bituberculata;
thorace punctato, antice and ad latera rotundato, basi bisinuata, lobo
medio valde producto, angulis anticis demissis et acutissimis, ad
basin utringue fossulato et leviter carinato, dorso rotunditer elevato;

201

elytris rugosis et punctatis, ad latera leviter sinuatis, dein atte-
nuatis, apice separatim rotundatis and multidentatis, basi utringue
prope callum humeralem fossulata. Sublus granulatus and puncta
you s; abdominis segmentis albido-tomentosis. - Long. 9; lat. 2.5mm. Oblong, elongated, of a brilliant blue with the apical part of the
purplish elytra and, on the upper part of these, three
wavy bands of white grey&tve, the two extremities of which are
only clear, the anterior reduced 4 a small circle, half of which
lower alone is well marked. Pitted head, deeply
furrowed along its entire length; forehead bituberculate in front. Thorax wider than high, very rounded at the top and on the
sides, the anterior angles strongly lowered and very acute, the
very sinuous base, its widely rounded median lobe; the disc
raised; it is thoroughly covered with dense punctuation and
present, on each side, at the base, a large depression surmounting
born, near the edge, of a very short barely noticeable hull. Elytra rough and punctate, sinuous 4 height of the hips,
attenuated, separately rounded and pluridentate at the extremity, impres-
sioned on both sides 4 the base. Underside rough and pitted;
the abdominal segments marked with chayue next to a spot
villous and whitish; the last abdominal segment weakly
tapered at the end. Upper Burma: coll. R, Oberthiir. Corsebus cyaneopictus nov. sp. — Hlongatus, apice attenua-
tus, claro-aneo-auratus, nitidus, cyaneo-variegatus; capite puncture
tato, medio longitudinaliter sulcato, fronte modice bituberculata;
thovace punctato, antice recto, ad latera votundato, basi bisinnata
utringue ad latera fossulata and levissime carinata, lobo medio
product; elytris granulosis and punctatis, ad latera fere sinuatis,
dein attenuatis, apice separatim rotundatis, Subtus granulosus and
punctate. - Long. 7-9; lat. 2-25mm. Elongated, attenuated at the extremity, entirely of a golden bronze
shiny with dark blue spots and bands on the elytra. Head punctate, longitudinally furrowed; slightly bitu-
rocked. Thorax wider than high, straight at top, rounded on
the sides, strongly bisinate at the base with the broad median lobe and
round ; it is rough and densely pitted and presents from every
side, from the base, a large irregular depression, rough elytra
and punctuated, elongated, very slightly sinuous 4 height of
hips, attenuated and separately rounded 4 V'extremity, this one
multitoothed; they feature a varied design of golden bronze and
dark blue, the tan parts always grainy and

ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM. OF BELGIUM, T, XXXVI. 16

202

appearing to be formed of a short, shiny villus, while

the blue parts are simply dotted and consist of

irregular spots on the dorsal region and in two broad bands

parallel to the apical region. Roughly dotted underside. Upper Burma: coll. R. Oberthiir. Coreebus chloropictus (La Ferié mss.) nov sp. —Zlonga-
tus, apice allenuatus, granulatus and calde punctatus, vividi-aura-
tus, sulura fasciisque duabus subviolaceis, capite rugoso and punc-
tato, antice leviter sulcato; thoracic rugoso and punctato, entice
rotundato and producto, ad latera volundato, postice sinuato. lo bo
middle front; scutello cordiformi; elytiis ad latera modice sinuatis,
apice atlenuatis et separatin rotundatis, utvingue pluridentatis et
unispinosis. Sublus rugosus and punctatus, albido pubescens. —
Long. 7.5; lat. 2mm. Elongated, attenuated At the end, very rough punctuated,
Brilliant golden green wun with the sutural region and two bands
apical parallels dark purple. Grainy and pitted head,
bisillonment on the forehead. Thorax roughly punctate, very rounded
an apex, sinuous 4 the base with the right median lobe, the angles
forelegs strongly lowered and very sharp, the sides rounded; he
present, on both sides, at the base, a large depression and,
Jong of the lower edge, a high and short hull. Crest
cordiform. Protruding elytra 4 the shoulder, with the humeral callus
well marked, sinuous 4 height of the hips, then attenuated and
separately rounded 4 the end which is armed with a long spine
exceeding the terminal serration. Rough underside and dune trimmed
short whitish villus. India: coll. R. Oberthiir (1 ex. by Mniszech). Coreebus modestus nov. sp. — Hlongatus, niger, nitidus; capite
Sulgido, viridi-micant; thoracic interdum ad latera viridi-mar-
ginato; elylris plaga dorsali fasciisc duabus apicalibus cinereis
adorned; capite punctato, plano, antice via sulcato; antic thoracic
and ad latera rotundato, basi valde bisinuata, lobo medio producto and
rotundato, dorso elevato, carina laterali flexuosa; elytris granu-
losis et punctatis, ad latera subrectis, in tertiam partem leviter
dilatatis, dein allenuatis, separatim rotundatis and multidentatis. Sublus punctatus and rugosus. - Long. 6.5; lat. 1.5mm. Elongated, convex above, shiny black with the head of a
fiery red with green reflections, the thorax often edged laterally with
shiny green, the elytra adorned with two wavy apical bands
and an ash gray dorsal patch. Head punctate, flat;
barely furrowed vertex. Thorax rounded anteriorly and on the
cdtes, its excessively sinuous base, the advanced median lobe,

  

 

   

very wide and rounded; the high disc; the curved lateral fairing
towards the edges. Grainy and punctate elytra, projecting very
sharply on each side, into a very pronounced lobe, in tho-
they are straight on the sides up to the upper third where they
widen noticeably, and then attenuate to the end
which is separately rounded and multitoothed. Rough underside and
punctuated. Upper Burma: coll. R. Oberthiir. Coreebus fulgidiceps nov. sp. — Hlongatus, niger, capite
fulgido, viridi-micante; elytris antice claro-viridi-xneis, postice
nigris cinereogue bifasciatis, apice fulgidis; capite vugoso and punc-
lato, medio longitudinaliter profunde sulcato; thorace valde con-
vexo, granwloso and punctato, dorso levissime rotundatim rugato,
antice angustiore, valde votundato et producto, ad latera sinuato,
angulis anticis valde demissis et acutissimis, basi bisinuata, lobo
mid lato and rotundato; elytris ad humerum utringue profunda
Sossulatis, ad latera sinuatis, dein leviter dilatatis, summo atte-
nuato, separatim rotundato and apice denticulatis. Subtus granula-
tus and punctatus, cinereo-villosus. - Long. 6-8; lat. 1.75-
2.25mm. Lying down; head of a fiery red sometimes 4 green reflections; thorax
black with three longitudinal bands or stripes of ash gray,
Tune dorsal, the other two lateral; elytra of a golden bronze
clear in their anterior half with a few black spots on the
disk, black at the top with two wavy bands of a gray
ash ; the extremity of a fiery red. Rough and pitted head,
longitudinally and deeply furrowed. Veryconvex thorax,
almost as high as broad, rough and pitted, broadened at base,
attenuated at the top and presenting small wrinkles on the disc
hardly noticeable concentric; very rounded top and very
advanced; the sides sinuous, the anterior angles strongly inflated. chi; the bisinuate base, its median lobe very jarge and very rounded;
sides presenting & the base a longitudinal depression and a
curved side fairing. Eousson tranyerse, cordiform. Elytra
as wide as the thorax at the base, sinuate 4 height from the hips,
slightly dilated in the upper third, attenuated in a straight line up to
that at the top where they are separately rounded and multitoothed; they
are very rough and punctuated and present on each side at the
base and against the humeral callus which is very prominent, a wide
irregular depression. Underside rough and pitted, covered ga and
1a of a short ashy villus. Konbir and Mandar (P. Cardon); Kolkata; my collection,

Corszebus smaragdineus nov. sp. —Flongatus, nitidus;

 

   

 

204

thoracic capita cwruleis, elytris viridi-metallicis, cerulei-mican-
tibus, apice cyaneis; sublus subcyaneus; capite held punctato,
medio longitudinaliter profunde sulcato; /ronte bituberculata;
thorace lransverso, antice atlenuato, punctato, fere granuloso,
postice volundato, angulis anticis valde demissis et acutissimis,
lateribus posticis valde rotundatis nec carinatis, basi bisinuata,
lobo medio rotundato and amplissimo; scutello transverse, cordi-
went out; elytris punctatis and leviter granulatis, ad basin fossulatis,
lateribus sinuatis, summo attenuato and separatim rotundato, apice
dentatis. Sublus rugosus and punctatus; prosterno antice transversim
sulcato; abdominis segmentis utvingue cinereo-plagiatis. - Long. 10; lat. 3.75mm. Elongated, shiny; head and thorax blue, elytra of a beautiful green
emerald with blue reflections; the blue end. Spotted head, pro-
foundationally furrowed throughout its length; bituberenlated forehead. Pontuate thorax, very finely granular, slightly convex, much
wider than high; its rounded apex, the anterior angles
strongly lowered and very acute, the lateral margin very oblique
but straight, without lateral fairing; the very sinuous base, its lobe
median very wide and very rounded; it presents on each side, ala
base, a broad transverse impression, Eeusson heart-shaped,
expanded. Elytra punctuated and very finely granular, impressed
on each side at the base, the slightly accentuated humeral callus, the sides
sinuous & high from the hips, the rounded and jagged top, the
suture high, underside finely rough and pitted; prosternum
furrowed along the upper border; trimmed abdominal segments
on either side of an ashy, villous stain. India: Kodeicanel Mountains (P. Castets), a single example. of the
coll. R. Oberthiir. sup., t. 4 (1842), p. 278,
R. Soc. Goal. Belgium, t. 34

Corpus Gonais Gory, Jonog? pl. XLVI, 270 = gentilis Kerr.,
(1890), p. ccv. Melybeeus indicolus (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. —Hlongatus,
convecus; capile violaceo, thorace obscuro-viridi, elytris violaceis,
viridi-micantibus; sublus violaceus; capite punctato, convexo, long-
gitudinalit sulcato; sublime chest rotundatim rugato,
dorso conveao, antice leviter producto, margine laterali undulato,
angulis anticis valde demissis, acutissimis and depressis, basi bisi-
nuala, lobo medio lato and recto; scutello angulatim cordiformi,
elongato, acutissimo postice; elytris rugosis and punctatis, convexis,
ad latera fere rectis, summo separatim rotundato and muitidentato,
ad basin utringue depressis. Subtus granulosus and punctatus; pedi-
sublevibus bus. - Long. 8.5; lat. 2.75mm. 205,

Elongated, convex, purple head, dark green thorax, elytra
purple with green reflections; purple underside. Convex, grooved head
longitudinally. Thorax very convex, slightly wrinkled around
larly, attenuated at the apex, widened at the base, the anterior sides
oblique in greater part, straight towards the base, the margin
wavy side, the bisinate base, its right median lobe, the angles
Forelegs strongly inflected, very acute and depressed. Crest
higher than broad, subcordiform, angular. Convex elytra,
roughly pitted, the width of the thorax at the base, the
sides almost straight, attenuated at the apex, separately rounded and
multi-toothed 4 the extremity. Underside grainy and pitted; men-
prosternal thunder very large, very advanced and divided into two
rounded lobes and entanglement Will be almost smooth legs, has
punctuated sentence. India: a single example. of the coll. R. Oberthiir (by Mniszech). Melybeeus chrysomelinus nov. sp. — Oblong, nitidus,
carulens, tenuiter virescens, thoracis interdum lateribus auratis;
capile rolundato, punctalo; thorac convexo, transverse, dorso cir-
culatim levissime sulcato, antice attenuato, ad latera postice valde
rotundato, angulis anticis demissis and valde productis; basi valde
bisinuata, lobo medio producto and recto; scutello cordiformi; elytris
granulatis, ad humerum rotundatis, ad latera sinuatis, dein leviter
dilatatis, summo atlenuato, separatim rotundato and multidentato. Sublus granulatus and punctatus. - Long. 5-5.5; lat. 2mm. Oblong, of a very brilliant blue with slight green reflections, the sides
of the thorax sometimes bordered with golden green. Convex head, punctate,
not furrowed. Convex thorax on the disc, which is covered with
small barely noticeable circular wrinkles, attenuated anteriorly,
dilated and rounded on the posterior sides, the anterior angles
very inflected and very acute; the very sinuense base, its median lobe
very advanced and straight. Cordiform crest. Elytra convex, large
no-nosed, broader than the thorax and rounded on the sides at the
base, sinuous at hip height, dilated in the upper third and
then gradually attenuated to a peak which is separated
ment rounded and serrated; they also present, on each side,
at the base, a large depression near the humeral calus which is very
projecting. Underparts and legs rough and pitted. Upper Burma: coll. R. Oberthiir and Kerremans. Melybeeus aurarius nov. sp. — Zlongatus, convexus; above
surdo-v auratus, obscuro-variegatus, aureo- and griseo-villosus;
subtus nitidus, surdo-rividi-auratus; capite rugoso, fronte fossu-
late; thovace trapezoidali, antice angustiore, rngoso and punctato;
margine antico rotundato, lobo medio producto, lateribus utrinque

 

206

sinuatis, angulis posticis carvinatis, dorso rotunditer elevato, ad
basin utringue valde depresso, basi sinuata, lobo medio via lunato;
scutello transversim cavinato; elytvis rugosis et punctatis, ad
basin utringue depressis, lateribus sinuatis, apice altenuatis,
votundatis and levissime multidentatis. Subtus vrugosus, pedibus
punctatis. - Long. 4.5; lat. 1.25mm. Elongated, convex above, dull golden-green mixed with spots
dark, covered with golden and gray pubescence; shiny underside
slow, dull golden-green. Rough head; forehead impressed between
the eyes, trapezoidal thorax, enlarged 4 the base, the disc very
bunive, rounded top and projecting in the middle, sinuous sides,
the rear angles streamlined in the middle; the sinuous base, its
weakly indented median lobe. Eeusson transversely
keeled, elytra convex, rough, depressed on each side ala
base, sinuous ‘hip height, rounded and pluridentate a
the end. Below almost smooth, slightly rough; paws
punctuated. Upper Burma

 

   
  

 

 

 

: coll. R. Oberthiir (only one copy). Sambus gibbicollis nov. sp. — Oblong, cyaneo-niger;
JSroute viridi, vertice, thoracis latevibus genubusque fulgidis;
elytris antice clavo-vividi-wneis, postice cinereo-bifascialis, apice
Sulgidis; capite rugoso, punctato, medio longitudinaliter profunde
sulcato, vertice elevato and bilobato; thorace punctato, antice leviter
angulatim producto, ad latera valde votundato et utvinguecarinato,
dorso valde convero, basi bisinuata, lobo medio producto and sub-
front; elytvis convexis, ad latera sinuatis, ante medium valde
rugosis, dein irregulariter punctatis, summo separatim rotundato
and denticulato. Subtus rugosus and punctatus. - Long. 4.75;
lat. 1.75mm. Oblong, convex, of a bluish black, the front green, the vertex,
the sides of the thorax, the knees and the end of the elytra of a
brilliant fiery red; elytra of a very light golden or bronzed green on
the anterior half and covered with an ash-grey pubescence,
the top adorned with two sinuous bands of the same shade. Heat
convex, longitudinally furrowed in the middle, vertex very prominent
slow and strongly bilobed as a result of the furrow. Thorax punctate,
almost straight at the top, with a very low angular median lobe
duly advanced; sides flattened and widened, very rounded; the
anterior angles lowered and very acute; the bisinous base with
its right median lobe, the disc very convex; lateral fairing
quite long and curved. Convex elytra, slightly wider than
the thorax at the base, sinuous 4 height of the hips, attenuated,
separately rounded and multitoothed at the apex; they are very

 

207

 

rough on their anterior half and strongly pitted on their
posterior half. Underside rough and pitted. Mandar (P. Cardon): my collection. Sambus melanoderus (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. —Hlon-
gatus, supra nigro-cyaneus, subtus niger, nitidus; capita cyaneo-
nigro, purpureo-micante, scutello purpureo, elytris cinereo-varie-
gatis, in summa parte undulatim bifasciatis; capita convero,
punctato and vugoso, longitudinaliter sulcato; thorac vugoso and
punctato, antice leviter, ad latera antica valde rotundato, ad postica
subrecto, basi sinuala, lobo medio producto, dorso elevato and rotwit
dato, utvinque depresso and carinato; elytris granulosis and punctatis,
ad humerum rotundatis, dein sinuatis, summo separatim rotundato
and minute pluridentato. Subtus modice granulatus and puncta-
you s. - Long. 6; lat. 2mm. Elongated, oblong, bluish-black above, black below
bright; dark blue head with purple reflections; purple crest;
elytra adorned 4 the anterior part and A the median with sinuous lines
ses and Ala upper part of two wavy bands of a gray
ash; purple crest. Convex head, rough and pitted,
longitudinally furrowed. Thorax rough and pitted, very
convex on the disc, slightly rounded in front, depressed and
very rounded on the anterior sides which then bend from
way 4 form an almost right angle at the base; this one bisinue
with its right median lobe; it presents, on each side, a wide
depression and a high hull straight and perpendicular to the base. Elytra granular and punctate, from the length of the thorax to the
base, rounded at the shoulder, sinuous at the height of the hips, separated
slightly rounded and very slightly multidentate 4 the end. From-
below less rough and less densely dotted than above. India: coll. R. Oberthiir (by Mniszech). Sambus nigritus nov. sp. — Ommnino niger, S. melanodero
similimus; thovace ad latera valde rotundato nec antice ampliato,
elytrovrum lineamentis and fasciis angustis; thoracis disco sulcato. - Long. 5; lat. 2mm. Entigrement black, very close to melanoderus which precedes, but
with the sides of the thorax rounded and not sinuate backwards, the dis-
that furrowed chest in the middle and the designs and bands of the
narrower elytra. India, Upper Burma: coll. R. Oberthiir. Cryptodactylus cyaneoniger nov. sp. —Flongatus,
subparallelus, supra niger, subcyaneus, subtus cyaneo-niger,
elytris wudulatim cinereo-lineatis; capite punctato, longitudina-

 

 

208

liter sulcato, ante cavitates antennarum transverse sinuatim
sulcato and carinato; thoracic rugosoel punctato, anticefere bisinuato,
ad latera valde rotundato, basi bisinuata, lobo medio recto, dorso
rotundatim elevato, utringue longe arcuatim fossulato, carina
laterali projecta et undulata; elytris rugosis et punctatis, ad
humerum rotundatis, dein ad latera sinuatis, summo separatin
rotundato, apice vin multidentato, sutura elevata. Subtus rugosus
and punctatus. - Long. 8.5; lat. 8mm. Elongated, almost parallel, very slightly bluish black
above, dark blue below; elytra presenting des-
sins and wavy lines of ash gray. Rough head and
punctate, longitudinally furrowed; antennal cavities very
large, strongly rimmed and separated from the forehead by a furrow
bisinuous. Rough and punctate thorax, very weakly bisinate
at the top, broadly rounded on the sides, the base bisinuate with
the right cut median lobe; the raised and rounded disc; fairing
winding side and very high, along a wide and deep
marginal furrow; it presents, moreover, along the base and
each side a deep arched depression. Elytra as wide
that the thorax 4 the base, the protruding and rounded shoulder, the summers
sinuenx to the upper third, the apex attenuated and separated-
slightly rounded, the end 4 slightly serrated; they are very
rough and bridged and present wavy designs of a gray
ash in which we notice in particular, on each elytron,
a small dorsal circle surmounting two undulating apical hands
his('). Underside rough and pitted. Mandar (P. Cardon): a single copy in my collection. This species is the largest I know of the genus Cryp-
todactylus. Its size and the appearance of the thoracic depressions the di
tinguent 4 first sight of all those of the kind. Crypropacry.us nigricans Kerr., C. R. Soc. Hunter. Belgium, t. 34
(1890', p. cevi(?). — Wiger, nitidus, capite granuloso, postice

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

() The appearance of these designs and undulations is, as a whole, very pew
variable throughout the series of corebiform genera; it is always, towards the base,
@first an arcuate line, very indistinct and seeming to circumvent the lower region
humeral callus; on the disc, one or two small circles, rarely. complete,
but of which sometimes wn are subsisting in a way to appear a C or an S in various
upright, leaning or lying positions; it is then, towards the upper third, a
sinuous band whose undulations are (variable res and finally, at the apical part,
a second undulating band, parallel to the first, and appearing to be a
reduction of it

(2) The discovery of the two new species which follow, very close to this one,
compels me to insist on a few differential characters which it has been impossible for me to
remark during the first eavoi from West Bengal, which included a fairly
large number of nigricans and a few rare copies (too few for
convince me of the constancy of certain characters) presenting certain differences
ences with the type. I was able today to fix my opinion thanks to series
sufficiently numerous of each of these species. 209

suleato; thoracic antice rotundato, medio producto, ad latera
utringue bicarinato, dovso circulatim rugato and antice elevato;
basi valde bisinuata, utrinque fossulata, lobo medio producto and
front; scutello concolori, triangulari; elytris apice inermibus. —
Long. 6-7; lat. 2-2.25mm. Oblong; shiny black; grainy head, impressed vertex. Thorax rounded anteriorly, median lobe advanced, sides
almost rounded and streamlined; a lateral hull bypassing the
thorax towards the base, and then forming the outer edge; It is
covered with small circular and concentric wrinkles on the disc
which is very high at its anterior part and presents at the base,
every summer, a deep depression. Concolor crest, in
equilateral triangle. Elytra rounded and not serrated at the end. Mandar and Koubir (P. Cardon); my collection. Cryptodactylus scutellaris nov. sp. — Zlongatus, subpa-
rallelus, nigrocyaneus, scutello cupreo; capite rugoso, lougitudi-
naliter sulcato, thorace vugoso and punctato, antice sinuato, lobo
medio producto, ad latera rotundato and carinalo, basi bisinuata,
lobo medio recto; scutello valde granuloso; elytris apice denticn-
latis. - Long. 6.5; lat. 2inm. Facies less robust than that of Cx. nigricans; dark blue
ayee the shiny and very grainy copper crest; the bottom
much rougher, the head furrowed longitudinally in
its entire length; the thorax rounded anteriorly and not sinuate,
shallower basal dimples; the multidentate elytra a
Vextremity. Mandar and Konbir P. Cardon): my collection. Cryptodactylus cuprascens nov. sp. — Obscuro-wnens,
levitate cuprascens; capita vugoso and punctato, longitudinaliter
sulcato; thoracic antice rolundato, margini antico levi, ad latera
subrotundato, utringue carinato and subtilissime longitudina-
liter rugato; scutello levi; elytris ad latera utringue transversim
rugatis, apice inermibus. - Long. 5-5.5; lat. 1.75-2mm. Slightly coppery or purplish dark bronze; heat
rough, pitted, furrowed throughout. Chest gra-
null and pitted, rounded at the apex, the margin of which is smooth and
quite high; sides almost rounded; it presents along the
internal fairing a series of small longitudinal wrinkles decreasing
in length 4 as they approach the disc, which is
very high and rounded; the base is surmounted by two wide fossa-
rounded heads. Almost smooth escutcheon. Grainy elytra and
punctate, not serrated 4 V at the end, and presenting on the sides
little accentuated wrinkles. Mandar and Konbir (P. Cardon): my collection. 210

I thought it useless to start over, for the three species that pre-
cedent, a tedious repetition of details as to the drawings
elytra which all reproduce 4 more or less in the same way,
according to the details given in the note. Amorphosomus pectoralis (La Ferié mss.) nov sp. —
Elongatus, niger, nitidus, metasterno sordide flavo-tincto, supra
sparse griseo-pubescens, antennis pedibusque wneis; capital valde
vugoso and punctato, postice bituberculato; thorace antice fere
sinuato, ad latera votundato et valde dentato, basi valde sinuata,
lobo medio producto and lunato, dovso in medium quadriverrucato,
cerrucis circulatim leviter vugatis; scutello angulatim cordiformi;
elytvis valde vrugosis, ulvinque quinguetuberculatis, loin margi-
nem externum dentatis, summo utringne divavicato and quadvispi-
noso. Subtus granulatus and punctatus. - Long. 11; lat. 3.5mm. .

Elongated, of a shiny black slightly purplish at the top and
covered with a rare greyish villus; antennae and patties tan;
dirty yellow metasternum. Very rough head, bituber forehead
culé('). Thorax sinuate at the top, very rounded and strongly
telé on the sides, the bisinuous base with its indented median lobe
and very advanced, the very high disc 4 cause of four nipples
rounded separated by two cross-shaped furrows ct showing small
concentric wrinkles; on each side of these nipples we
notice two others, smaller and placed, one across the
horizontal furrow, the other immediately below the first and
on the same line as the large lower nipples; sides of
flattened chest. Crest cordiform, but angular. Elytra very
grainy, sharply serrated along the outer margin,
attenuated and then divaricate into a spatula at the top, the spatula t
prickly at tip; they present, on the sides, wrinkles
transverse and, on each side, five tubercles similar to those
which are noticeable on the thorax and placed: the 1 has equal distance
from the escutcheon and the suture, towards the lower part; the 2¢ under
the 1*, but more towards the middle of the elytron; the 3rd immediately
below the 2¢, the 4° towards the upper third, near the edge and
the 5°, the tallest of all, 4 the same height as the 4°, but
near the suture. Underside rough and pitted. India: Himalayas; coll. R. Oberthiir. Agrilus niveoguttatus (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. — Elon-
gatus, valde angustatus; capita viridi, thovace elytrisque surdo-
nigris, levissime virescentibus, his utringue albido-trimaculatis;
subtus nitidior, niger, sterno abdominis segmentis utrinque

 

 

 

 

 

(*) These tubers are actually only a

forming a brush. small tufts of stiff hair,

211

albido-maculatis, pedibus viridibus; capite granuloso, postice votun~
dato, front plane; thoracic subquadrato, granulato, postice leviter
attenuato, margine antico subrotundato, ad latera leviter depresso,
basi valde bisinuata, lobo medio latissimo and rotwndato, dorso longi-
tudinaliter bifossulato; elytris granulosis, ad humerum utringue
fossulatis, ad latera sinuatis, dein subdilatatis, summo attenuato,
apice utringue lounge wnispinosis and levissime multidentatis. Subtus
granulatus; pedibus punctatis. - Long. 9.5; lat. 2mm. Elongated, very narrow; green head and legs, matte black top
very slightly greenish, the sides of the thorax, three points on
each of the elytra and the sides of the sternum as well as those of
each of the abdominal segments of a pure blane; black underside
bright. Head grainy, rounded on the vertex and flat on the
forehead. Granular thorax, enlarged in front, almost square, very
weakly rounded anteriorly, the sides lowered, the base
sinuous with a very broad rounded median lobe; he presents, on the
disk, two broad dimples, rounded and placed longitudinally-
is lying; carenelateral inferior(‘) sinuous, placed under the thorax;
protruding upper lateral fairing and overhanging the lower one,
very sinuous 4 its anterior region and joining the inferior
before reaching the base, thus forming an intercarinal space
anterior excessively rough over its entire surface. Elytra
granular, depressed on each side at the base, sinuate 4 high
hips, widened in the upper third, then attenuated; the
apex with a long spine and a few small teeth. Rough underside. India: coll. R. Oberthiir (a single example. by Mniszech). Agrilus birmanicus noy. sp. — Hlongatus, valde attenuatus,

(') The arrangement and shape of the denx fatal keels of the prothorax deserve a
special mention because of their constancy in the same space, Déja
Mr. Waterhouse (Biol. Centr.-A mer., t. 3, pt 1, p 57), found the way @uti-
read this character for the delimitation of certain divisions within the genus. Agrilus,
and perhaps one could seek there the bases of a classification of this group if
many and so little studied. The posterior hull (posterior ridge) which he mentions
is in fact only the posterior extension, often high and clearly accentuated,
of the upper fairing, It is therefore important to specify the terms & to use, and

I will call the lower lateral fairing that which constitutes the margin proper.
‘Iu thoras is To say In line, usually smooth, which separates the pronotum from the
prosternum; often it is only visible above on the posterior region dn
thorax. As for the sinuous carina which runs along the external one, I will call it late-
superior rale. It is always more sinuous than its neighbour, often sharper
in the anterior and posterior angles of the thorax and of which it is the bisector; &
the rigor, in certain cases, one could see there two very distinct hulls, one
anterior, starting from the anterior angle and joining the lower carina, the other
Posterior starting from the posterior angle and joining Anterior. The hull
upper side sometimes forms, with the lower one or two spaces in the form of
segments or spindles whose surface is rougher and more wrinkled than that
of the chest. 212

niger, stern obscuro-purpureo, elytris utringue albido-bimaculatis;
capite transversim vugato, lougitudinaliter profunde sulcato;
thorace subquadrato, undulatim transverse-rugato, medio longi-
tudinaliter sulcato, antice vic sinuato, ad latera fere rotundato,
bast angulatim bisinuata, lobo medio recto; transverse scutello
carinato; elytris granulosis, utringue ad humerum fossulatis, ad
latera sinualis, dein leviter dilatatis, summo attenuato, apice
dentatis and utringue wnispinosis. Subtus granulosus. - Long. 9;
lat. 2mm. Elongated, very narrow, black entanglement with the sternal region
dark purple; the elytra each adorned with two small
white dots, one in the middle of the disc and the other at the top. Heat
covered with small transverse wrinkles and deeply furrowed
in its entire length. Thorax as wide 4 the base as at
top, almost square and covered with small wavy wrinkles and
transverse, longitudinally furrowed in the middle; the top has
barely sinuate, the sides almost straight, very slightly rounded;
the base angularly bisinate, its right median lobe, carina
slightly sinuous lower side, upper side hull
anterior sinuous, joining the lower towards the quarter of the
base; very arched posterior superior lateral fairing and joins
extending the anterior towards the middle of the edge; intercarinal spaces
rough, covered with a network of tangled lines. Crest
transversely streamlined. Grainy elytra, deeply impressed
sioned in the middle of the base, slightly depressed along the
suture, sinuate 4 height of the hips, slightly widened to the third
superior, attenuated at the top, the end armed with several
very sharp teeth and a long median spine. below minus
rough and brighter than above; very thin legs
punctuated. Upper Burma: a single example. of the coll. R. Oberthiir. Agrilus Lafertei nov. sp. = auriventris La Ferté mss. (") —
Elongatus, apice atlenuatus, supra niger, subtus ad latera aureus,
in medio virescens; pedibus virescentibus; longitudinal capile
naliter rugato, fronte antice bituberculata, inter oculos transver-
sim impressa, vertice sulcato; thorace postice angustiori, fere
undulatim transverse rugato, triimpresso, antice vix sinuato, ad
latera votundato, basi valde angulatim sianata, lobo medio lunato;
elytris rugosis, ad basin utringue depressis, valde lounge suturam
sulcatis, ad latera leviter sinuatis, dein fere dilatatis, in summo
attenuatis, apice truncatis and multidentatis. Subtus granulatus;
pedibus tenuissime punctatis. - Long. 12; lat. 2.5mm. (*) The name danriventris has already been given, by Mr. Ed, Saunders, & an Agritus of
Japan. 213

Elongated, attenuated at the extremity, of a matte black above, the
parts of the metathorax and abdomen visible above as well
that the sides of the bottom color old gold, middle of the bottom, ster-
num and legs dull green. Head covered with small wrinkles
slightly accentuated yerticales; forehead bituberculate in front, transverse
badly furrowed between the eyes; vertex longitudinally sil-
loned. Thorax narrower at the base than at the top, very slightly
transversely wrinkled, interrupted and wavy wrinkles; the
top barely meandering, the cities rounded, the base angular
bisinate, its median lobe indented; it presents three large
rounded dimples, one of which is in the middle of the disc, above
crest and the other two on each side, towards the middle of the

 

edges; it is also very slightly depressed above the
middle dimple; very sinuous lower side fairing; carene
lateral superior anterior sinuous, almost parallel 4 inferior
higher, merging imperceptibly with it towards the quarter of the
edge 4 from base; rough intercarinal space, its surface
forming an anostomosed network of high, smooth lines; no

 

posterior superior lateral carina. Elytra rough, wide-

ment impressed on both sides 4 the base, sinuous i high

hips, slightly dilated in the upper third, then

attenuated and very strongly toothed, truncated at the internal part of

Vend. Rough underside; very finely punctate legs. India: coll, R. Oberthiir (only one exemp. by Mniszech). Agrilus decoloratus nov. sp. — Hlougatus, upice allenuatus;
thoracic capita surdo-viridi-auratis, elytris nigro-wneis, utringue
albido-tripunctatis; sublus viridi-cwruleus, nitidus; capita rugoso,
plano, vertice leviter sulcato; thoracic transversim rugato, fere
longitudinaliter impresso, antice bisinuato, ad latera antica et
postica truncato, basi valde angulatin bisinuata, lobo medio lunato;
scutello transversim carinato; elytris granulosis, ad suturam
planis, basi utvingue depressa, lateribus fere rectis, summo
attenuato, apice multidentate Sublus confertim punctatus;
pedibus rugosis, — Long. 13; lat. 2.5mm. Extended, attenuated 4 Vend; head and thorax of a golden green
dull, bronze-black elytra, each with three small
white spots placed: the 1'*4 height of the lower hips,
the 2¢ in the upper third and the 3¢ near the end, against the
suture; above a brilliant bluish-green. Rough, flat head;
vertex slightly furrowed. Thorax showing transverse wrinkles
and wavy; the middle of the disc longitudinally depressed, the
apex bisinuate, the sides almost straight, truncated at the extremities;
the base angularly sinuate, with its notched median lobe;

 

 

 

214

lower lateral paren nearly straight; upper lateral fairing
very sinuous anterior posterior, intercarinal space enlarged
reticle; reduced posterior superior lateral fairing, very short
and curved. Ecussion transversely streamlined. rough elytra,
the sutural region flattened, depressed on each side, at the base,
rights on the sides up to the upper third where they are attenuated
strongly, multi-spined at the tip. Below very finely and
very densely punctate; rough legs & quite punctuation
furte but spa
India: coll, R. Oberthiir (only one copy). Agrilus villosostriatus (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. — Zlon-
gatus, cupreo-eneus, sublus cupreo-micans; capita, thovracis
lateribus, elytris longe suturam, sterno abdominis segment-
torum lateribus griseo-villosis; capite rugoso, forehead depressed;
thovace subquadrato, postice angustiore, transversim rugato,
antice bisinuato, lateribus utvingue subvotundatis, angulis anticis
valde acutis, posticis subrectis et cavinalis, basi bisinuata, lobo
medio producto and sinuato, dovso longitudinaliter sulcato;
seutello transcersim carinato; elytris vugosis, ad basin leviter
lvansversim vugatis, longe suturam profunde sulcatis, sutura
lineaque dovrsali elecata, ad humera utrinque depressis, ad
latera sinuatis, dein attenuatis, summo separatim rotundato
and multidentato. Subtus nitidus, via punctatus. - Long. 9;
lat. 2mm. Var. HAS. —Supra cupreo-wneus, yviseo villosus, villosostriatus. Var. B. — Ochraceo-villus; thorace nigro, elytris ad latera
carmineis, ad suturam vividibus, carmineus. Elongated, rough head, depressed forehead and longitudinally sil-
Jonne. Thorax a little wider at the top than at the base, present
so many small tranyerse and undulating wrinkles, bisinuate at the top,
slightly rounded on the sides, strongly bisinuate 4 the base, its
indented median lobe; it presents on the disc a depression
longitudinal; lower lateral fairing almost straight; arena
lateral superior anterior 4 hardly sinuous, very close
of the lower and almost parallel 4 this one, joining it insen-
slightly towards the base; posterior superior lateral keel
strongly curved, very short and not reaching the anterior;
coarsely reticular superior intercarinal space. Elytra
grainy, presenting towards the base small trans-
pours; they are straight up to the upper third, then gradual-
slightly attenuated and separately rounded at the extremity which is
multidenied and present a longitudinal furrow, limited by the
suture and by a high and smooth side curving 4 the base to

 

 

 

215

form the humeral callus. Shiny underside, weakly pitted. Var. HAS. — Light bronze above; the villus of a gray

whitish, villosostviatus. Var. B. — Russet villi; head and thorax black, elytra of a
dark yert and edged with carmine, cavmineus. India: coll. R. Oberthiir (by Mniszech). Although these two varieties differ absolutely from the point of view
coloring, I don't think we should separate them into two species
distinct. Agrilus imbellis (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. — Oblong, according to
gatus, post medium dilatatus, dein allenuatus; supra wxneo-
cupreus, thorace rubescenti; subtus purpureo-exneus; capital levitate
transversim rugato, antice subrecto, ad latera votundato; ad basin
vaide bisinuato, lobo medio lunato; elytris rugosis, ad basin valde
utringue depressis, ad latera ante medium subrectis, dein dilatatis,
apice attenuatis, separatim rotundatis and multispinosis. Subtus
valde confertim et tenuissime punctatus; pedibus sparse punctatis. - Long. 8; lat. 2mm. Oblong, elongated, broadened to the upper third, then attenuated; of one
coppery bronze above with reddish thorax; shiny underside
bronzed purple, Head flat on the forehead, slightly bulging
open on the vertex and covered with small transverse wrinkles, Thorax
covered with transverse and slightly undulating wrinkles, almost
straight at the top, rounded on the anterior sides and very light
meanders near the base; this one strongly bisinuated with its
broad and indented median lobe; lower side fairing almost
right; arched anterior superior lateral carina joining
Lower than one third of the edge; upper lateral fairing posted-
lower back short, arched; coarsely reticular intercarinal space. Escutcheon transyersally faired. Very rough elytra; the base
depressed on each side, humeral callus projecting but narrow;
the straight sides up to the upper third, then widened to inflate
chir sharply and end in a separately rounded point and
finely toothed. Below very finely and very densely punctured
kill ; punctuation of the legs thicker and very spaced. India: coll. R. Oberthiir (by Mniszech). Agrilus inops nov. sp. — Hlongatus, subparallelus; forehead
viridi, vertex thoracic vneis, antennis nigris, ulringue punctis
flavis ornatis tribes; subtus niger, leviter wnescens; capita Tugoso,
antice plano and leviter depresso, bean sulcato postice; trans-thoracic
versim rugato, subquadrato, antice fere sinuato, ad latera leviter
sinuato and carinato, ab basin sinuato, lobo medio recto, angulis
posticis utringue carinatis, carina recurva; elytris granulosis ad

 

 

  

216

basin utvingue fossulatis, ad latera antica subvectis, postice
altenuatis and separatim vrolundatis, apice multidentatlis, sutura
postice elevata, Subtus fere rugosus and punctatus. - Long. 8.5;
lat, 2 mins. Elongated, parallel; forehead green, vertex and thorax bronzed, elytra
black, each adorned with three yellow dots; glossy black underside
very slightly tan or greenish. Rough head; flat front,
very slightly depressed forward; vertex 4 barely crisscrossed. Thorax
almost square, covered with small transyerse and sinuous wrinkles,
barely bisinate at top; slightly rounded edges, the margin
crenellated side; the base strongly bisinate with its median lobe
advanced and straight; it presents on the disc and immediately at the
above the crest two vague rounded impressions placed
Tune above the other; the sides are largely impressed;
very sinuous lower lateral fairing; upper side fairing
anterior almost parallel and very close to the inferior,
imperceptibly approaching it and merging with it
at the top of the lower angle; upper lateral fairing posted-
strongly arched, its base very raised, gradually decreasing
ment to join the anterior towards the middle of the thorax; spaces
reticulated intercarinals. Elytra grainy, almost straight along
of the anterior sides, attenuated to the upper third, separately
rounded and toothed 4 the tip; they present, at the base and
each side a large rounded depression and are each decorated
of three yellow dots placed in an almost straight line: the le, in
the basilar depression, the 2¢ to the anterior third and the 3¢, a
little beyond the upper third. Shiny underside, 4 barely rough. Tenasserim: coll. R. Oberthiir. Agrilus mandaricus nov. sp. — Hlougatus, thoracic capita
subro-cupreis, elytris nigris, apice griseo-bifasciatis; capitate rugoso
and punctato, antice in medio depress, fronte sulcata; thovace
subquadrato, postice angustiore, antice sinuato, lobo medio amps-
simo et volundato, ad latera subrecto, fere sinuato, ad basin bist-
auato, lobo medio lunato, longe latera utringueundulatin carinato,
disco in medio fossulato, ad latera postice depresso; elytris
granulosis, ad basin utrvingue depressis, ad latera antica subrectis,
dein fere dilatatis, apice separatim acutis et vie dentatis. subplus
granulosus; pedibus punctatis. - Long. 8; lat. 2mm. Elongated, subparallel; head and thorax of a reddish coppery,
black elytra adorned with two apical bands parallel and trans-
greyish pours; underside very lightly bronzed black, head
rough and pitted, slightly depressed above the ear
volume; furrowed vertex. Thorax rough, almost square, wider

 

217
both at the top and at the base, covered with slightly accentuated transverse wrinkles.
killed; sinuous apex, its median lobe very wide and rounded; the
sides very slightly sinuous, the base very sinuous, its lobe
forward and notched midline; the depressed disc in the middle, the
rounded depression; sinuous lower lateral fairing, fairing
lateral superior anterior sinuous, joining the inferior towards
the quarter of the base, arched posterior upper lateral carina,
joining the anterior towards the middle of the sides, interspaces
strongly granular keels. Slightly depressed elytra of the
two sides 4 the base, almost straight along the anterior edge,
slightly widened in the upper third, then attenuated and separated-
ment acute at the apex, which is barely toothed. Grainy underside;
punctate legs. Mandar (P. Cardon): a single copy in my collection. Agrilus mixtus noy. sp. —Hlongatus; capita antice viridi,
postice cuprescenti-aureo; cuprescenti-aureo thorace; scutello
nigro; elytris viridi-cyaneis; subtus niger, pedibus vividibus;
capite valde transversim rugato, fronte plana; transverse thoracic
sim valde rugato, subquadrato, antice bisinuato, lobo medio rotun-
datim amplissimo, margine latevali levi and sinuato, basi valde
sinuata, lobo medio recto, angulis posticis utvinque carinatis, medio
baseos depresso; scutello transversim carinato, apice valde pro-
duct; elytvis granulosis, ad basin utvinque depressis, lateribus
anticis fere sinuatis, post medium dilatatis, apice separatim rotun-
datis and multispinosis. Subtus granulatus; pedibus punctatis. —
Long. 6.5; lat. 1.5mm. Elongated, green forehead, vertex and thorax of a coppery gold;
matte black crest; elytra of a slightly yerdatre blue; underneath
and legs black. Head covered with transverse wrinkles, flat forehead. Thorax almost square, covered with transverse wrinkles, bisinate 4 the
base with the very wide and rounded median lobe, the base very
strongly sinuous, its right median lobe; lateral fairing
lower sinuous; arched anterior upper lateral carina,
joining the lower towards the third of the sides 4 from the base,
very arched posterior superior lateral hull, joining
Anterior a little beyond its junction with the inferior;
granular and reticular intercarinal spaces, transverse Eeusson
badly keeled, very finely grainy; very sharp apex. Elytra granular, depressed on each side 4 the base, the sides
slightly sinuous up to the upper third where they widen
to then fade to the top where they are separately
rounded and pluridentate. Rough underside; punctate legs. Upper Burma: coll. R. Oberthiir (only one copy). ANNALES DR LA SOC, EXTOM, DE BELGIQUE, T, XXXVI, 7

218

Agrilus ineptus nov. sp. — Plongalus, capita viridi, supra
niger, sublus obscure glaucus; capite rugoso, fronte plana, vertice
convevo and sulcato; thovace subquadrato, transversim rugato,
antice votundato, margine laterali valde sinuato, angulis posticis
Seve vectis, basi sinuata, lobo medio subrecto; transverse scutello
cavinato; elytris tenuissime granulatis, basi utringue depressa. luteribus anticis sinuatis, post medium fere dilatatis, apice
votundatis. Subtus granulatus; pedibus punctatis. - Long. 5
lat. 1.5mm. Subparallel, elongated; green head; black top, bottom of a
dark glaucous green. Head rough, flat on the forehead, convex and. furrowed on the vertex. Almost square chest, covered with wrinkles
sinuous and transyerse, bisinate at the top with the median lobe
very wide and rounded; tras sinuous base, its median lobe almost
must; lower lateral fairing arched in its most: large
length, abruptly bent towards the base so as to form 4
with this one an almost right angle; upper lateral fairing
right anterior; no posterior superior lateral keel;
granular intercarinal space. Elytra grainy, impressed
the base, sinuous At hip height, slightly widened at the
upper third, rounded a <tré: res Below granular;
punctate legs. Upper Burma: coll. R. Oberthiir (only one copy). Agrilus neelgheriensis (La Ferté mss.) walnut. sp. —Hloa-
gatus, subpavallelus, supra obscuro-wneus, subpurpurascens,
subtus nilidior, purpurascens; capita vugoso, vertice sulcato;
thoracesubyuadrato, transverse vugato, antice fere recto, margine
laterali curvato, utvingue carinato, basi valde sinuata, lobo medio
lunato; elytvis rugosis and punctatis, ad basin depressis and rugatis,
ad lateva leviter sinuatis, apice attenuatis and separatim rotun-
date. Subtus granulatus; pedibus punctatis. - Long. 5.5; lat. 1.25mm. Elongated, subparallel, of a dark tan slightly purplish in
above, bright purple below. Rough head; vertex sil-
loned. Thorax almost square, covered with transverse wrinkles and
sinuous, almost straight at the top; lower side fairing
arched and weakly sinuous lily; upper side fairing
right anterior, joining the inferior yers the base, lateral carina
Posterior superior rale curved, joining Anterior
yers one-third of the sides 4 from the top; intercarinal spaces,
granular and slightly reticulate; bisinate base, its median lobe
indented. Kcusson streamlined transversely. Ei rough lytres,
depressed and wrinkled transversely 4 the base, slightly sinvenx

    

 

 

  

 

219

height of the hips, widened to the upper third and separately
rounded 4’ end. Rough underside; punctate legs. Neelgheries: coll. R. Oberthiir (only one copy). Aphanisticus metallescens (La Ferté mss.) nov sp. —
Ovatus, nitidus, subenescens; deep capita excavate; thoracic
antice angustiore, postice profunde transversim sulcato, lateribus
levissime punctatis, rotundatis and deplanatis, disco levi, rotunda-
tim elevato, in medio summi gibboso; elytris conveais, seriebus
longitudinalibus punctorum instructis, apice separatim rotundatis
and pluridentatis. - Long. 2; lat. 1mm. Oval, shiny black very slightly tanned, Deep head
madly excavated between the eyes. Thorax much wider than
high; the anterior margin almost straight, the sides very rounded
and flattened; the base almost straight, presenting on each side a
deep, rounded depression and, in the middle, a furrow leading to
on either side of the lateral depressions; the very sides
finely and densely pitted; the globular disc, elevated and
smooth, surmounted by a nipple in the middle of the anterior margin. Elytra convex, the width of the thorax at the base, sinuous at
height of the hips, abruptly flattened 4 from the upper third
laughing, separately rounded and multi-toothed 4 end; they are
largely depressed along the suture and At the base, near the shield
sound, and present regular and longitudinal series of large
sunken points. Smooth underside, & hardly punctuated; finely paws
punctuated. India: coll. R. Oberthiir (only one copy). Endelus coreboides nov. sp. — Oblongo-ovatus, conveaux;
capile, thorace scutelloque nitidi-cupreis, elytris nigro-ceruleis;
sublus obscuro-xneo-cupreus; capite rotundato, punctato, medio
Sere suleato; thovace valde conveao, transversim rugato, antice
subrecto, lateribus rotundatis, basi valde bisinuata, lobo medio
recto producto and antice depresso; scutello cordiformi; elytris
conveais, seriebus longitudinalibus punctorum instructis, transverse
sim leviter rugatis, apice rotundatis and fere pluridentatis. Subtus
nitidus, life punctatus; metasterno transversim fere rugato;
pedibus sublevibus. - Long. 3.5; lat. 1mm. Oval-oblong, elongated, convex; head, thorax and crest of a
shiny cuprous, blue elytra; below an obscure gilt bronze;
legs of a light tan. Head convex, pitted and weakly
furrowed. Thorax convex, covered with transverse wrinkles, the margin
right anterior, the sides rounded, slightly depressed, the
high and convex disc, the base very sinuous with the median lobe
advanced and straight, convex elytra, as wide as the thorax at the

220

base, sinuous at the height of the hips, attenuated, rounded and more
wrinkled 4 tip. Glossy underside, 4 barely dotted; paws
brilliant. India: coll. R. Oberthiir (a single copy, by Mniszech). This insect recalls, by its facies, the small species of the genus
Corebus. Endelus aureocupreus (La Ferté mss.) walnut. sp. — Ovatus,
capita aureo-cupreo, elytris obscuro-viridi-auratis, cupreo-mican-
tibus; subtus obscurior; capita deep and wide sulcato; thoracic
antice broad lunato, lateribus rotundatis et planis, basi bisinuata,
lobo medio valde votundatim producto, disco elevato and rotundato,
media transversim bitmpresso; elytris irregulariter seriebus
longitudinalibus punctorum instructis, convexis, ad latera antica
utringue depressis, apice separatim rotundatis and pluridentatis. Subtus rugosus and leviter punctatus, —- Long. 2.75; lat. 1mm,

Oval, shiny, covered header, above, very thin
granulation; head and thorax of a golden copperhead, greenish elytra
has reflections of a golden coppery; dull underside. Breastfeed widely and
deeply hollowed between the eyes, strongly engaged in the
thorax whose anterior margin is excavated. Thorax a lot
wider than high, dilated and rounded on the anterior sides, the
almost straight hind legs, the base very sinuous with its lobe
very advanced and rounded median; rounded disc, convex, with
two transverse impressions 4 the middle part, above
Vécusson; flattened sides. Elytra convex, deeply
excavated on the anterior sides and along the edge, attenuated, separated
minutely rounded and pluridentate 4 the extremity; they are slightly
depressed at the top along the suture and present series
longitudinal and very irregular of sunken points. Below a
barely rough. India: coll. R. Oberthiir (a single copy by Mniszech). This species belongs to the group of Hndelus having the facies
of the Aphanisticus. rw
©

Genus TRACHIS Fabricius. Synoptic table of species (*). 1, Elytra without keels or keel-shaped ridges on eetae. 2
Hlytra having a lateral carina or an eariform cdte located & a
some distance from the edge. v
2, Head uneven, furrowed or impressed, but not strongly sunken
between the eyes. 3
‘Head strongly hollowed between the eyes, these appearing to be bordered with a
high earane. 9
3. Robust facies; golden cuprous thorax; bronzed or blue elytra. 4

Facies less robust;
4. blue elytra,

 

lytres ot thors

 

eoncolors. 5
BicoLon Kerr. Bronzed elytra. ORIENTALIS Thoms. 5. Uniform light tan.7 6
Black, shiny or purplish. 7

   

Cuneiform, pen convex; villus of the elytra of golden red im. ocuPREA Kerr. Oval, very convex, globular; greyish villus, @NESCENS NOY. SP»
7. Shiny black. 8
Dark purplish. subviolacea nov. sp. 8, Pett convex, subtriangular. ANTHRENOIDS Thoms. Oval, very convex. miGREscens Kerr. ()

9, Head moderately hairy; when the villus exists, always
same shade as on the thorax and the elytra. 10

‘Head covered with a very dense villi and a golden rufous. —_ flaviceps nov. sp. 10. Longitudinally impressed thorax of the two cdtés known as disc;
humeral callus linear, projecting, oblique and rather elongated, —obliqua nov. sp. Thorax transversely ionized on both sides of the disc:

 

   

  

short humeral callus may ant. transverse nov. sp. 11. A single hull & a certain distance and along the edge of the
dlytra, oP
Two side hulls; the internal short and barely noticeable, parallel
& the first one. bicarinata nov. sp. 12, Forehead weakly indented or convex; the part skirting the eyes &
penalty relieved, 18

Bisinate front; the part along the eyes raised in a protruding hull. stigmatica nov. sp. 13, Of a greenish black; tate weakly executed. integra nov. sp. Bronze-black; convex forehead, furrowed. LILMPUTANA Kerr. Trachys enescens nov. sp. — Oblonga, supra and subtus
valde convera, wnea, nitida, sparse albido-villosa; capita vugoso
and punctato, fere convero, medio sulcato; transverse thoracic valde,
levissime rugoso, antice bisinuato, lobo mediovix producto, lateribus

() This table includes all currently known species of Bengal,
except four, of which I could not find the types and on the descriptions of which I
could not base myself to form an opinion. These are: minima Wiedem., Zool. Mag,,t. 2, ppt. 1 (1825), p 104; BaliGuér., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 390, —Gory, fon
sup., t. TV (1842), p. 352, pl. 60, f. 351; commixta Thoms., 7yp. Bupr., App. 1879, p 76 and Torrida Thoms., /. ¢ , p. 77. — The types of all the species mentioned:
in the painting are either in the collection of M. R. Oberthiir or in the
mine. (*) Murinus La Kerté mss. (see note 2, page 183). 222

rotundatis, basi bisinuata, lobo medio valde rotundato; scutello
minutes; elytris convexis, seviebus longitudinalibus punctorum
vage instructis, utringue ad humerum impressis, callo humerali
levi and rolundato, lateribus regulariter rotundatis, apice attenuatis. Subtus punctata, nitida, concolor. - Long. 2.5; lat. 1.25mm. Oblong, very convex above and below, light bronze
uniform and very shiny and covered with a sparse white villi
castrated. Head finely pitted and rough, slightly convex,
furrowed on the forehead. Thorax very enlarged, finely rough,
bisinate at the top, the median lobe Barely advanced, the sides
rounded; the base bisinuous, its median lobe very wide and rounded. Elytra convex, covered with vague longitudinal series of
sunken points, depressed on each side at the base, the callus
humeral smooth and rounded, the attenuated sides following a curve
regular, the top rounded, the underside finely punctuated and little
rough ; legs 4 hardly pitted. Kodeicanel Mountains: coll, R. Oberthiir (by J. Castets). Trachys subviolacea nov. sp. — Oblongo-orata, supra
conveaa, nigra, subviolacen, sparse albido-villosa; capita lavi, via
punctato, inter oculos modice suleato; transverse thoracic valde,
minute rugoso and punctato, antice fere vecto, lateribus obligquis and
Jererolundatis, basi valde bisinuata, lobo medio amplo and rotundato;
scutello minutissino, subltriangulari; elytrisad humerum utringue
lobatis, lateribus rotundatim attenuatis, apice rotundatis. Subtus
rugosa and punctata. - Long. 3.5; lat. 2mm. Oval-oblong, widened, convex, shiny black with 4 purple reflections
ces, furnished on the thorax and the anterior part of the elytra with a
very sparse whitish villi and, on the disc and the posterior part,
upper, of three wavy bands of the same shade and vaguely
indicated. Head punctate, slightly conyex, furrowed between the
eyes. Thorax punctate, very slightly grainy, much more
wide than high, barely indented at the top, the sides almost
straight, very slightly rounded, the base bisinuate with the lobe
very wide and rounded median. Rough and punctate elytra,
slightly convex, attenuated following a regular curve,
rounded 4 the extremity, the humeral callus rounded and slightly protruding,
the sides 4 hardly depressed has Ja hase. Rough and pitted underside,

Upper Burma: coll. R. Oberthiir, a single copy. This species is wider and more convex than the following,
it is less attenuated at the top and the interocular part of the
head does not present the deep excavation surmounted by a hull
lining the eyes which is noticeable in the Zr. laviceps; its nuance
suffices alone 4 to recognize it from anescens which precedes. 223

Trachys flaviceps (La Ferté mss.) walnut. sp. Ovata,
omnino nigra, nitida, capite flavo-tomentoso; elytris albido-
variegated; capita inter oculos valde depresso, oculorum margine
elevation; thorace rugoso, valde transverso, antice modice lunato,
lateribus obliquis et subrotundatis, basi valde sinuata, lobo medio
rotundato, lato and producto; scutello minutissimo and triangulari;
elytris rugosis, ad basin utringue depressis, ad humerum lobatis,
latervibus vegulaviter attenuatis, summo albido bifasciato, fasciis
vagis and valde sinuatis. Subtus nitida. - Long. 4; lat. 2.25mm. Oval, widened, shiny black header with ornate head
with a short pubescence of a golden red and the elytra lined with the
anterior part of a rare very sparse whitish villus and dla
rear part of two very wavy bands of the same shade
and very vaguely indicated. Head deeply excavated between the
eyes, these bordered by a high carina. very enlarged chest,
rough, slightly indented in front; his oblique sides, barely
curved; very sinuous base, its wide and rounded median lobe. Keusson very small and triangular. Elytra rough, enlarged and
truncated at base, protruding humeral callus, depressed base of
each side, the sides gradually tapering to the end,
which is rounded. Below smooth, slightly pitted. India: coll. R. Oberthiir (a single example. by Mniszech). Trachys obliqua nov. sp. —Ovata, ad humerum dilatata,
apice attenuata, nigra, nitida, rugosa, capite subanescenti, vage
cinereo-villosa; capite vugosv, deep excavato, longe oculos
carinato; thorace ad latera rugoso, medio leviore, disco utringue
longitudinaliter sulcato, antice valde sinuato, lobo medio fere pro-
duct, ad latera sinuato; basi bisinuata, lobo medio valde rotun-
data and product; elytris valde rugosis, ad basin utringue oblique
carinalis, antice utringue depressis, callo humerali valde producto,
lateribus anticis sinuatis, posticis valde attenuatis. Subtus rugosa;
pedibus confertim tenuissime punctatis. - Long. 3; lat. 1.75mm. Oval, dilated At the shoulder, attenuated 4 Vextremity, shiny black,
very rough and completely covered with a short greyish villus
and very scattered. Head rough, deeply excayed, keeled and
raised around the eyes. Thorax very sinuous in front, the angles
forelegs very advanced, the median lobe not very pronounced; sinuous sides;
bisinate base, the median lobe broad and rounded; disc little con-
vex, finely punctuated and longitudinally furrowed on both sides
Wother; depressed and rough sides. Rough, wider elytra
than the thorax 4 the base, sinuous ’ height of the hips, attenuated
and rounded at the end; they are impressed, along the base

  

 

224

and the humus callus:
rough. Mandar (P. Cardon); a single example. from my collection. Trachys transversa nov. sp. — Ocata, nigra, cinereo-villosa,
thoracic capita interdum subenescentibus; cupite lavi, deep
sulcato, margine oculorum elevato; thorace valde transverso, late-
vibus confertim, disco minute punctatis, antice valde lunato, late-
vibus obliquis et fere volundatis, utringue medio lranscersim
sulcato, basi valde bisinuata, lobo medio rolundato; elytris rugosis,
summi medio votundatim elevato, ad humerum dilatatis, callo
humevali elevato et vugoso, utringue oblique carinatis, apice rotun-
date. Subtus granulata; pedibus punctatis. - Long. 2.75; lat. 1.75mm. Oval, black; head and thorax sometimes dark bronzed,
covered with a short whitish villus very spaced and irregular,
interspersed with a few rare yellowish hairs. Almost smooth head,
deeply excavated between the eyes which seem bordered with a
sharp earene. Thorax very enlarged, regularly conyex,
strongly indented in front; disc almost smooth, barely
punctate; sides finely rough and punctate, furrowed trans-
yersally in the middle, the lateral margin oblique, 4 barely curved;
very sinuous base, the median lobe rounded and wide. Elytra
granular, bulging in the anterior part, the protruding calushumeral,
surmounted by a short oblique hull which extends very vaguely
ment toward disc to anterior third; round top
Grainy underside, pitted legs. Mandar (P. Cardon); my collection. Trachys bicarinata nov. sp. — Ovala, supra obscuro-violaceo-
cuprea, thoracic capita lateribus aureo-cuprescentibus, sparse
aureo-villosa, subtus vnea; capite punctato, froute magna, levitate
excavata, loin oculos utringue carinata, vertice sulcato; thoracic
transverse, medio levi, zaleribus vugosis, antice valde lunato, ad
latera oblique rotundato, ad basin bisinuato, lobo medio amplissimo
and rotundatim producto, apice via lunato, subconvexo disco; elytris
rugosis, ad humerum prominentibus, ad latera sinuatis, apice
votundatim attenuatis, disco antice elevato and rotundato, utringue
oblique bdicarinatis. Subtus rugosa; pedibus punctatis, —
Long. 3.25; lat. 2mm. Oval, widened 4 the shoulder, tapered 4 the extremity, above a
yiolacaceous cuprous, with the head and edges of the thorax of a cuprous
Golden; covered with a short golden villus, mainly on the
sides of thorax and elytra; bronzed underside, punctate head;
forehead very broad, slightly raised, streamlined along the eyes;

 

al is salient and oblique. Underside punctuated and

 

 

 

 

 

 

225
furrowed vertex. Transverse thorax, smooth in the middle. rough on the
sides very indented in front, the sides rounded and oblique; the base
bisinnate, its median lobe very wide, rounded and weakly
scalloped at the top; convex disk. Granular, enlarged klytra
at the shoulder 4 because of the very protruding humeral callus, sinuous on the
sides, very attenuated and rounded at the extremity; they each present
two oblique keels, one of which, external, runs along the lateral margin
in all its length and the second, on the disc, very short
is parallel 4 the first. Rough underside; ponied legs. Konbir (P. Cardon); one copy from my collection. Trachys stigmatica nov. sp. — Orala, subriolacea, nitida,
sparse albido-villosa; capite punctato, fronte fere excarata and
sulcata, loin oculos utringue cavinata, vertice sulcato; chest
medio sparse punctato, lateribus rugosis, utringue antice depressis;
thovace antice valde lunato, ad latera oblique votundato, basi
bisinuata, lobo medio amplissimo and rotundato: scutello triangulari;
elytris rugosis, ad basin utringue depressis, callo humerali
elevato, ad lalera rotundatin altenuatis, apice volundatis, ulringue
carinatis. Sublus punctata; pedibus leviter punctatis. - Long. 2.5; lat. 1.5mm. Oval, of a brilliant purplish, marzué on the posterior part of the
elytves of small irregular spots formed of clusters of hairs
whitish. Punctate head; furrowed front and 4 hardly excavated; Vertex
furrowed; the part bordering the eyes raised. transverse thorax,
pitted on disc, rough on CDs; very exeaved summit,
oblique and rounded edges; sinuous base with its lobe
very wide and rounded median. Triangular Keusson. Elytra
convex, slightly grainy, widened 4 lepanel, attenuated
following a regular conrbe and rounded 4 the end; they present
tent a high hull 4 a certain distance from the edge and parallel-
ment this Below punctuated; barely punctate legs

Barway (P. Cardon): a single copy in my collection,

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

  

Trachys integra nov. sp. — Triangularis, conreaa, nigra,
Tere subrirescens, sparse flaco-villosa: capite lwri, viv punctato,
antice plano, fere excarato, vertice contezo. middle sulcato; thoracic
trausverso, vir punctato, antice valde lunato, lateribus votundatis,
basi valde sinuata, lobo medio producto apice lunato; scutello
parro, ovali, leri, apice acuto; elytris triangularibus holding
punctatlis, apice calde attennatis et volundatis, lateribus utringue
cavinatis, carina subelerata, callo humerali clevato. subplus life
rugosa. - Long. 3; lat. 2mm. Triangular, convex, of a very slightly greenish black and
green with a sparse villi of a dirty yellow. Smooth head, 4 barely pone-

 

226

study; forehead very slightly concave and tilted in avaut, vertex
rounded and furrowed, separated from the front by a notched carene. Thorax very broad, smooth, & hardly punctate, finely granular on
vdts; the strongly indented top, the oblique edges and
rounded, the base sinuous with its median lobe advanced and tapering
time; he is very slightly depressed on both sides. Eeusson small,
oval and smooth. Flytres convex, 4 hardly punctuated, triangular,
attenuated and 'ondis & Vend; eleyed humeral callus, sound
prolonzement forming a pen accentuated hull running entirely along
moves the edge of the elytron & a certain distance from it. Underside & barely rough; finely punctate legs. Himalayas: coll. R. Oberthiir (a single copy by Muiszech). Galbella globosa nov. sp. ~- Oblongo-ovata, supra. valde con-
wea, antice apiceque attenuata, cavulea, nitidissima; capital
plano, lenuissine and confertim punctato; thoracic confertim requla-
riler punctato, antice ralde angustiore, lateribus obliquis, basi fere
bisinuata, seutello triangulari; elytris conveais, lenusissime sub-
punctato-striatis, interstriis sericbus longitudinalibus punctorum
instructis, ad latera antica fere sinuatis, postica votundatim atte-
nuatis, lonye suturam ulringue apice striatis. Subtus punctata. Long. 4; lat. 21min. Oblong oval, very convex above, shiny blue and very smooth. Head flat, very finely punctate. Convex chest, very narrow
in front, very widened in the rear, finely and very regularly
punctate; barely indented top, oblique sides forward, rounded
say towards the base; the latter weakly bisinulated. Ecusson_ triangu-
lar. Elytra very

 

    

 

  

 

es convex almost straight and 4 scarcely sinuate on
the anterior sides, attenuated following a regular curve up to the
semmet which is rounded; they are covered with punctate streaks very
weak except towards the apical part, along the suture, ot they
are accentuated; the finely punctate longitudinal-
is lying. Punctate underside. Konbir (P. Cardon): a single copy in my collection

This species is close to @. feliz Mars., of City of Cyprus,
but it is more convex, more widened, less parallel, the
sides of the thorax are less rounded and the latter is much
more attenuated in front than in the preceding species. ETD PO

 

   
    
   
       
      
      

ENTOMOLOGICAL COMPANY

BELGIUM

THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME

VII

number must be retained; it won't be sent for a second
times as before. BRUSSELS
AT THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE COMPANY
20, MUSEUM STREET, 20

1892

 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. VII

Minutes of the monthly meeting of June 4, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP OF Mr. Giron. Present: Messrs. Ed. Coucke, L. Coucke, Duvivier, Jacobs,
Kerremans, Ledrou, Melise, Robbe, from Selys-Longchamps,
Séverin, Tosquinet, Van Nerom and Lameere, secretary. The session is open 4 8 hours. The minutes of the meeting of May 7 are approved. The President informs the assembly of the death of Mr. J. Lafon-
taine, founding member of the Society. A letter of condolences
will be sent to his family. Readings, communications. The assembly decides on the insertion
present number of the Annales des travaux joined 4 this account-
rendered. Mr. Candéze writes:

One of our most skilful entomologist hunters, M. J. Gérard,
which has already enriched our Belgian fauna with a remarkable variety of
V£later pomonz 4 yellow elytra, just discovered at the Hockai,
locality located at an altitude of 600 meters, not far from Spa, a
Alpine Elaterid, which we could not suspect
existence on our modest heights. This is Corymbites virens Schrank, also called
in several collections C. eneicollis Ol. or C. aulicus Panz. ‘This space, one of the most beautiful and largest of its kind,
is specific to the great mountains of central Europe. It belongs to the group of Corymbites 4 pectinate antennae
in males (section I), including the @. pectinicornis is the type. We
already knew a Sabalpine representative of the same group, the
C.cupreus var. vruginosus, quite common in Barague Michel,
the highest place in our country; this therefore constitutes a
most interesting addition. ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM, OF BELGIUM, 7. XXXVI. 18

228

The unique specimen found on May 29, on flowers
de Sorbier, by M. Gérard, is a male. It differs significantly from
type by the straw-yellow color of the elytra, which makes it look like
more @. Kendalli Kirb. of Canada, than to the typical virens which has the
elytra of a brick red; the body is also smaller and more
hail as a whole. I gave him the name of C. Vérens
var. stramineus. The Hautes-Fagnes region deserves, as we can see, to be explored
with care. She still has in store for us, 4 no doubt, others
unexpected finds in all orders of insects. Mr. Preudhomme de Borre sends the following communications:

Among a certain number of Coleoptera that M. Poncelet,
forest engineer in the province of Luxembourg, has just
submit, I found two absolutely new species for
our wildlife. The first is the Poecilus Koyi Germar. A female of this
species, common in central France, but not yet
reported to us, was taken 4 Orsinfaing, near Marbehan. P. Koyi differs from the neighboring species, common with us,
the P. lepidus, mainly in that the corselet is wider,
less narrowed at the back and 4 regular curved side edges
to the very corner of the base. In his Catalog des Coléopt. of the Bassin de la Seine, 1, 200,
Mr. Bedel reports captures in several departments
closer to our border, especially in the Somme; but
it is rare throughout the North of France. She is on the other hand
more common in the east, in this Lorraine region to which
connects this southern extremity of our Luxembourg so well, where we
we can still hope for discoveries. This is how she is
reported as a common species in the Catalog des Coléopts. of
TAlsace and the Vosges, of Wencker and Silbermann, and I think that
it is in the faunal region of which this catalog lists the
Beetles, which we must understand, at least 4 title
border zone, our cantons of southern Luxembourg located
on secondary ground. The other species new to Belgium, and also found in
Orsinfaing or vicinity by M. Poncelet, is the Bembidium
decoratum Duft. (Azdipes de Sturm, Schaum and Jacquelin Duval,
crenatus of Dejean). On May 10 of this year, I found 4 Calmpthout, where I was
hunting, the Anchomenus (Agonum) ericeti, a small species of

229
Northern Europe, close to A. sexpwnetatus, and who
has only been indicated with us for the Hautes-Fagnes
(see Putzeys, Ann. Soc. hut. belg. XI, xxx) ('). This same day, I took 4 Calmpthout the Carabus clathratus
and nitens; the latter seemed relatively abundant this year,
in the great heather, and even more to the east of the village of
Calmpthout, in cultivated land. Mr. Hippert reports the following captures:

Xylina vetusta, at the Pare in Brussels, on April 2;
Lophoptera Carmelita, Cidaria Trifasciata, Lasiocampa Betuli-
folia, Tremulifolia and Ilicifolia, near Spa, at the end of April;
Notodonta Trepida, in Etterbeek, on May 20; Acronycta Menyan-
thidis, 4 Spa, April 26. Excursion. July 10 & Stockel. Departure from Brussels
(Luxembourg) 4 8h. 14m. in the morning. The meeting adjourned at 4 9 1/2 hours. (*) Putzeys notices that the specimens of the Baraque Michel are blackish. Such is also a Swedish copy which I possess; but the one i just
brought back from Calmpthout, has the elyria of a dull reddish-coppery. 230

WEST BENGAL BEETLES. 20° memory. SECOND LIST OF CARABIDA(),

by the late H, WW. Bates. Thanks to the pious care with which the heirs collected
the papers left by the learned and lamented entomologist, he
is allowed to publish the 2nd part of the collected Carabidew
by Fr. Cardon in Bengal. The late H. W. Bates enthusiastically agreed to work
this interesting fauna, which he loved to study all the more, that he
was at this time completing a similar work on the Carabids of
Burma for the Museum of Genoa. A first list appeared
soon, and he intended to complete it by successive supplements. For this purpose he studied without delay a new despatch sent to him by
our intermediary, but the number of species not yet mentioned,
seeming to him relatively weak enough, he wanted to wait for the
subsequent mailings before delivering this list 4 printing. The death
unfortunately stopped too early this valiant worker, and despite
shortness of his note, it seemed to us that this would render
tribute & his memory to publish this work, the last of
his life. G. SEVERIN. Subfamily BEMBIDIIN A.
Tachys (Barytachys) hemorrhoidalis Dej., Sp. Gen.,
V, p. 58: change. The Nagpore examples agree well with European specimens
except that the elytra are unicolored to the apex. Subfamily CHLASNIIN AS. Chleenius hamifer Hot., Bull. Mosc., 1856, II, p. 209. A species generally distributed throughout the Indian Penin-
sula. Chlenius neelgheriensis Guérin, Rey. Zool., 1840, p. 38. Also a widely-distribuied Indian species. (') See for the first list, C. 2. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891, p. ccoxxtv. 231

Subfamily HARPALIN A‘. Platymetopus amoenus Dej., Sp. Gen., IV, p. 73. A large number of examples. Platymetopus colombensis Nictn., Journ. As. Soc. bengal,
1857, p. 151. There is one example in the collection, of the typical form of
the species viz. with unicolorous testaceous-red legs. All the
examples previously sent were of the var. I named braccatus,
having dark fusco-czeneous femora. Amblystomus femoralis Motsch., Etud. Ent., 1858, p. 24. Amblystomus rotundiceps n. sp. A. metallescens (Dej.) similis sed oculis haud prominentibus,
capita post oculos gradatim mediocriter angustato. graciliter
oblongus, viridescenti-niger, seviceo-nitens, antennis fuscescenti-
rufis, tibiis and tarsis testaceis. Caput ante oculos brevissimum;
epistoma paullo assymetricum, marginatum. Thorax angulis pos-
ticis obtusis sed distinctis. Elytra striis parum impressis. —
Long. 3 4/4 mm. Two examples. Of similar form and color to A. metallescens, but
very distinct in the form of the head, which is short and broad
before the scarcely prominent eyes and gradually narrowed behind;
the form in fact is nearly that of A. mawritanicus. The thorax is
also different in its less rounded form, the curvature of the sides
behind the middle being very slight and the hind angles distinct,
though very obtuse. The sinuation of the epistome is not strongly
asymmetrical or deep and the membranous base of the labrum is
not uncovered. Amblystomus indicus Nietner, Ann. Nat. History, 1858,
p. 427,
Amblystomus guttatus Bates, Trans. Ent. Soc., 1873, p. 327. The species was originally described from Chinese examples. The Nagpore insect differs only in having the antenna nearly
wholly rufous, joints 3 and 4 only being dark fuscous, the Chinese
form having joints form 3 to the tip fuscous, becoming paler
towards the tip. The epistome is very strongly asymmetrical in this
species. Amblystomus punctatus Bates, Ann. Mus. Civil. d. Geneva. Amblystomus vittatus n. sp. A. lineato (Woll.) prowime Afinis et similimus, difert tantum
thorace magis rotundato antennisque toto obscure rujis. - Long. 4 mm. One example, besides fragments of others. 282

This peculiar species in which the elytra are ornamented by a
testaceous-yellow discoidal vitta, curved towards the shoulder
near the base, straight in its central portion and curved again,
slightly towards the suture (near the apex), resembles so closely
A. lineatus Wollaston, from the Cape Verde Islands that it can
scarcely be considered as more than a local variation. The shape,
colors and sculpture are exactly the same, with the exception that
the sides of the thorax are perceptibly more rounded behind the
middle and the antennas are entirely reddish instead of blackish with
the 3 basal joints only red. I have examples of A. véttatus from
Angola, and others of A. vitatus from Bombay. The distribution of
the species is paralleled by that of 7rechichus fimicola Woll. which
is also found in the Cape Verde Islands (and Madeira) and is met
with again (under slight modifications) over great part of South-
EasternAsia. Subfamily STENOLOPHIN A.

Stenolophus crenulatus Dej., Sp. Gen., IV, p. 432 (2). Four examples agreeing so closely with Dejean’s description
that I think they may be safely referred to it. The strong sculpt-
ture is a highly peculiar feature for a Stenolophus. Dejean did not
know the locality of his specimen. Subfamily PTEROSTICHINA. Abacetus cyclodes n. sp. A. guttule (Hot.) qfinis and similimus, sed differt thorace
distinct latiori, lateribus usque ad angulos posticos rotundioribus
nec sinuatis, angulis posticis denticulo excepto, obtusis; aerial
omnino rufis. - Long. 6-6 1/2 millimeters. Closely allied to A. guttula and having a similar red, posterior
elytral spot on interstices 4-7 or 4-8 (smaller on 6-8 especially
on 6), but a larger insect, with somewhat more broadly rounded
thorax, the sides showing no trace of sinuation before the hind
angles which would be obtuse if it were not for a dentiform pro-
throw at the angle. The base of the thorax is broader, but is
strongly though scantily punctured in the middle as in A. guttula. The antennae differ in being uniformly testaceous-red (like the
legs) and not fuscous with the three basal joints only red as in
A, guttula. I have seen several examples of both species which
are constant in their points of difference; but A. cyclodes does not
offer the variety, which seems in fact, to be the most frequent form
of A. guttala in which the elytra have a subhumeral as well as
subapical spot,

233

Subfamily BRACHININA. Pheropsophus Catoirei Dej., Sp. Gen., 1, 301; Warm., Monogr. Brachynids, p. 14.
var. Hot lineifrons., Bull. Mosc., 1850, I, 80; Monogr. d. Br., p. 14. Apristus subtransparens Motsch., Bull. Mosc., 1861, I, p. 104. Several examples agreeing well with others I have examined
from Ceylon, the locality of the species as originally described. Subfamily DROMIINAS. Blechrus inconspicuus Schmidt-Gebel, Faun. Birm., p. 41
(Microlestes id.). Subfamily CALLIDIINA. Calleida splendidula Fabr., Syst. El., I, p. 184. Bengal is the locality given by Fabricius for this species. Lebia Cardoni b. sp. L. japonice (Hot.) Afinis, elytris oblongo-ovatis, deep
punctulato-striatis interstiitis convewis, sed differt thorace
multi ratio. Rufo-testacea, glabra, capite subtilissime punctulato,
elytris nigris, macula utringue elongata basali, apice late margini-
busque angustissime rufo-testaceis. - Long. 7-8 millimeters. — Konbir. Belongs to the section of Zedia in which the elytra are deeply
striated with convex intersticesglabrous and impunctate; the streak
are stronger and deeper even than in Z. japonica, minutely punc-
tulated at bottom and the interstices very convex. The thorax is
very short and broad, broadly rounded to the middle, from the
sides of the neck and thence parallel-sided to the hind angles
which are subacute and reflexed with the broadly explained
lateral margin, the surface is distinctly coriaceous. The elytra
are black with an elongate-oval basal spot testaceous-red, on
each, reaching from the base (within the humeral angle) to the
middle of the elytron and covering interstices 2-6, but at the base
only 5 and 6 and at the apex 3-6; the apex is also broadly rufo-
testaceous together with the anterior margin biflexuous and the
extreme lateral margin with the epipleure and the rest of the body. The penultimate tarsal joint in the 4 hinder legs is not bilobed, but
simply triangular with the middle of the front edge emarginate. A single example of this species came with the first collection,
and was reserved as it seemed to be probably a variety of an
unpublished Burmese species (L. Maharani Bates). The arrival
of a second identical specimen shows that its differences are
constant and probably specific. 234

WEST BENGAL BEETLES. 21¢ memory. DASCILLIDS grr MALACODERMAS

by M, J. Bourgeois,

former President of the Entomological Society of France. I('). DASCILLIDAS. 1. Lichas Davidis? Fairm., Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr., 1876, p. 111. Kurseong. It is only with doubt that I report 4 this space of the
Central China unique specimen captured, its poor state of
conservation does not allow a rigorous determination. 2. Dascillus calvescens sp. nov.

A. D. indico Guér., cujus similimus, statura paullo majore
indumentoque rariore et obscuriove discedit. Oblongus, convewus, opacus, supra nigro-castaneus, pube
adpressa, sat longa, minus densa, fulvo-cinerea, setis brevibus,
albidis, longitudinaliter ordinatis, in elytris intermizta, vesstitus;
labro, mandibulis (summo apice nigro excepto) palpisca lavis;
antennis brunneis, articulis duobus primis rufis, sequentibus
elongatis, ad angulum apicalem intus paulum productis; protho-
transverso race, lateraliter arcuato, antice recte truncato, postice
sat deep bisinuato; scutello rotundato; elytris leviter punch-
tato-striatis; corpore subtus pedibusque rufo-testaceis, pube flavida
dense vestitis. - Long. 10 mill. ; lat. 4 mill. Kunbir Nowatoli, 3. 3. Dascillus rufovillosus sp. nov.

Oblongus, converus, parum nitidus; capite nigro-castaneo,
postice interdum rubescente, rufo-villoso, parum dense punctato,
Sronte triangulariter deplanata; antennis nigris, dimidium cor-
poris longitudine paulum superantibus, articulis duobus primis
rufis, sequentibus elongatis, acute serratis, ad angulum apicalem
tatus paulum productis; labro flavo; mandibulis magnis, valde
arcuatis, fuscis, basi haud appendiculatis; prothorace trans-

 

(') See for the first part: C. 2. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891, p. cxxxvu
and following. 235

verso, apicem versus sat valde attenuato, lateral subarcuato,
antice recte truncato, postice sat profunde bisinuato, punctato,
fulvo, indumento sublanuginoso, rufo-aureo dense vestito, disco
minus valde convexo, longitudinaliter canaliculato, ad basin
angustissime nigro-limbato; scutello rotundato, rufo-pubescent;
elytris brunneo-castaneis vel castaneo-nigris, pube brevi, rufo-
aurea, densissime hirsutis, sulcato-striatis, intervallis sat con-
vevis, dense punctatis; corpore subtus pedibusque testaceis, pube
Navida dense vestitis, tibiis tarsis nigris, his articulo ultimo
unguiculisk rufis. - Long. 8-8 1/2 mill. ; lat. 3 1/2 mill. Mandar('), 3 (July). Very close to Renardi Bourg., it differs from it by the pronotum
less domed above, by the elytra more densely punctate
between the streaks, by the head of a blackish-brown and not russet and
by the vestiture of the elytra which is of a beautiful golden red like
that of the prothorax, while it is black in Renardi. MALACODERMID. 1. Lycus (Lycostomus) preeustus Fabr., Ent. System, 1792,
I, 2, p. 107. Mandar, & (in July). City of Kunbir Nowatoli, Ceylon, Assam and
Madras. 2. Plateros? cribripennis sp. nov.

Elongatus, subparallelus, nitidiusculus, niger, thoracic elytro-
rumgue basi flavis; fronte antice prominula, medio transversim
impressed; prothorace valde transverso, trapeziformi, apicem ver-
sus sat attenuato, antice paulum votundato, lateribus subrectis,
basi utrinque sinuata, unequal disco, pone medium transversim
depresso, postice longitudinaliter leviter canaliculato; seutello
infuscato, apice recte truncato; elytris crebre et profunde striato-
punctatis, punctis foveolas simulantibus, interstitiis alternatim
latioribus and elevatioribus. - Long. 6 mill. ; lat. 2 mill. Mandar, in July. Remarkable species by its very strongly streaked-punctured elytra.
killed, with large, wide points, almost resembling
dimples, separated by alternately wider intervals
and more salient. They are yellow on a little more than the third anterior
laughing. The absence of antennae in the only captured specimen does not

(") Locality situated at an altitude of 2200 feet, and a few leagues above Kunbir
Nowatoli. 236

does not allow to decide if this space belongs to the genus Plateros

or to the genus Planeteros. 3. Calochromus rugatus? C.0. Waterh., Cist. ent., II, 1877,
p-199, pl. II, fig. 7. — Illustr. typ. Spec. Col., I, 1879,
p. 4, pl. I, fig. 4. Kunbir Nowatoli, 3. Also in northern Hindustan (Allahabad). It is only with some doubt that I relate to the rugatus
Unique copy G that I have in front of me. The size is
significantly less (long. 9 mill. to the liew of 11 1/2 mill. ), the
prothorax is dug, in all its length, of a furrow more
deeper than the figure of the "Illustrations" seems to indicate,
and the penultimate ventral arch of the abdomen is only very
slightly meandering, while the description reads "penultimate
segment of the abdomen with a deep incision”. 4. Lamprophorus nepalensis Hope in Gray, Zool. Miscellaneous,
fasci. I, 1831, p. 26. — Gorh., Trans. ent. Soc. London, 1880, 1,
p - 89. — Ern. Olivier, Ann. Mas. civil. Genov., 1885, p. 343. Kunbir Nowatoli, 1 S.

City also of Ceylon, Assam, Khasia Hills, Nepal
and the Himalayas. The double mucro that completes the last article of the antennae
is very distinct in this copy. The pygidium is visibly
marginalized. 5. Luciola chinensis L., Syst. Nat., 10th ed., 1757, p. 401. —
Ern. Olivier, Ann. Mus. civil. Genov., 2nd ser., Il, 1885, p. 359,
3, Q. — vespertina Fabr., Syst. El., I, 1801, p. 103. Mandar, G, Q (in July). Already quoted from Kunbir Nowatoli, from Ceylon, from Laos (Luang
Prabang), Assam and Tenasserim. 6. Rhagophthalmus scutellatus Words., Ktud. ent., 1853,
p. 45; 1859, pl. I, fig. 12. Kunbir Nowatoli, g.

Keusson and suture darker, prothoracic groove better
marked than Motschulsky's description indicates. Also 4 Peking. 7. Tylocerus bimaculatus Hope, Royle Himal. Ins., p. 55,
pl. 9, fig. 9. — Kohl. and Redtb., Hiig. Kashm., IV, 2,
p-511, pl. 24, fig. 1 (s.g. Anisotelus Hope). - Town.,
C.R. Soc. ent. Belgium, 1891, p. cxxxvim. Mandar, & (in July). Already city of Kunbir Nowatoli, Kurseong, Kashmir
and the Naga Hills. 237

8. Ichthyurus sp.? Mandar, 9. . The poor condition of the only captured individual does not allow me
to identify this species. She has some similarity in color
with J. denticornis Gestro (Ann. Mus. civil. Genov., 2¢ series, VI,
1888, p. 121 and X, 1891, p. 585), but its size is larger
and its more transverse prothorax. Long. 12 mill. ; width 3 mill. 9. Apalochrus letus Fabr., Syst. El., 1801, I, p. 305. —
Erichs., Entomogr., 1840, p. 51. — Bourg., C. R. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891, p. cxL. — fasciatus Fabr., Ent. System,
I, 1792, p. 218. Mandar, 3, Q (in July). City already of Kunbir Nowatoli, of Tetara, of Kurseong. Describe
originally from Sumatra. 10. Idgia Cardoni Bourg., C.R. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891,
Pp. CXLI. Mandar, , Q (in July). Already reported from Kunbir Nowatoli. 1l. Idgia flavibuccis sp. nov.

Elongata, subplanata, nitidiuscula, breviter pubescens, flavo-
testacea, elytris apice nigris; capite flavo-testaceo, spatio interocu-
lare ex parte oculisk ipsis tantum nigris; prothorace angustato,
latitudine multo longiori, sat dense sed parum profunde punctato,
lateribus via arcuatis, pone medium subsinuatis, angulis anticis and
posticis rotundatis, disco antice transversim tmpresso, pretereaque
impressionibus elongatis 3, una mediana postica, duabusque
lateralibus notato; scutello quadrato; elytris thorace latioribus,
apicem versus paululum dilatatis, subtilissime dense granulatis;
corpore subtus pedibusque omnino flavo-testaceis. - Long. 9-10 mill. ; lat. max. 3-4 mill. G. Paullo elongatior, elytris fere parallelis, oculis intus
magis approximatis, spatio angustissimo remotis. Mandar, 3, 9 (in July). Species close to 7. Cardoni Bourg. ; it differs in size
a lesser penny, by the head entirely of a yellow-testaceous, has
exception of the eyes and an adjacent V-shaped spot which
circumvents these in their posterior half, as well as by the
prothorax shallow but visibly and quite densely
punctuated. 12, Idgia melanura Kollar and Redtenb., Hiig. Kashm., IV,

238

2, 1844, p. 512, pl. 25, fig. 6. — deusta Fairm., Ann. Soc. ent. Fr., 1878, p. 118. Kunbir Nowatoli, 3, Q.
Also in Kashmir. The characters that distinguish G from Q are the same as
those I have already reported for 7. Cardoni and flavibuceis. List of collected DASCILLIDS and MALACODERMS
by R. P. Cardon
BAN THE Cuota-NaGprore. Dasci.iipa. 1. Lichas Davidis? Fairm..... . Kurseong. 2. Dascillus indicus Guér.-Méney. . Kunbir Nowatoli. 3. — nigripennis Guér.-Ménev. . Kunbir Nowatoli. 4. — Renardi Bourg....... Kunbir Nowatoli. 5. —calvescens Bourg. .... - Kunbir Nowatoli. 6. — rufovillosus Bourg. ... . mandar. MALACODERMIDE. not EU ere Ort) eet Fabr. Kunbir Nowatoli, Mandar. 2. Plateros? cribripennis Bourg. . . mandar. 3. Calochromus rugatus? C. Waterh, Kunbir Nowatoli. 4. Vesta saturnalis Gorh. .... "Kurseong." 5. Lamprophorus nepalensis Hope. . Kunbir Nowatoli. 6. Luciola chinensis L.. 2... - Kunbir Nowatoli, Mandar. 7. Rhagophthaimus scutellatus Words. Kunbir Nowatoli. 8. Tylocerus bimaculatus Hope. . . Kunbir Nowatoli, Kur-
Seong, Mandar. 9. Themus Khasianus Gorh., var, . . Kurseong. 10. — fuliginosus Bourg. ... . Kunbir Nowatoli, Kur-
seong. vl. Lchthyurus sp.? 6. 2 nd Mandar. 12. Apalochrus letus Fabr. . 2... Kunbir Nowatoli, Tetara,
Kurseong, Mandar. 13. Laius jucundus Bourg. .... - Kunbir Nowatoli. 14. Ldgia Cardoni Bourg... ... - Kunbir Nowatoli, Mandar. 15. — flavibuccis Bourg... . “Mandar. 16. — melanura Koll. and Retb. . . Kunbir Nowatoli. ERRATA IN THE FIRST PART:

(Reports of the Soc. ent. Belgium, 1891, p.

P. exxxvu, line 25. — Instead of Loas, read:

P. ext, line 16. — Instead of wngwiculi simplices, read: wagut-
culis simplicibus. WEST BENGAL BEETLES. 22° memory. CETONIDES,
by Albert Bergé. 1. Dicranocephalus Wallichi Hope, Gray, Zool. Misc., p. 24. A single copy GJ. Kurseong. 2. Rhomborrhina opalina Hope, Gray, Zool. Misc., p. 24. Several copies. Kurseong. 3. Rhomborrhina apicalis Westw., Arcan. Ent., I, p. 118,
t. 30, f. 2. Several copies. Kurseong. 4, Anomalocera Mearsi Hope, Trans. Linn. Soc., 1842, p. 107,
t. 10, f. 1. A copy. Kurseong. 5. Trigonophorus gracilipes Westw., Trans. Ent.Soc., IV, 1845,
p. 88, t. 4, f. 5. A few copies. Kurseong. 6. Lrigonophorus Hardwicki Gory et Perch., p. 128, vol. 19, f. 1. A few copies. Kurseong. 7. Coryphocera punctatissima Westw., Arc. Ent., I, p. 135,
t. 34, f. 5. Several copies. Kurseong. 8. Coryphocera tibialis Westw., Arcan. Ent., 1, p. 136, t.34, f.36. Quite rare. Kurseong. 9. Coryphocera elegans Fabr., Spec. Ins., I, p. 56,
Many copies. Konbir, Tetara and Mandar. 10. Coryphocera elegans Fabr., var. Feisthameli Gory and Perch-
ron, Mon., p. 131, vol. 19, f. 5. Not uncommon. Konbir. 11. Coryphocera olivacea Guer., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 80. A few copies. Tetara. 12. Clinteria confinis Hope, Gray, Zool. Misc., UI, p. 25. Many copies. Kurseong. 13. Clinteria Hearseiana Westw., Trans. ent. Soc., V, 1849,
p. 149, vol. 16, f. 8. Several copies. Tetara. 240

14. Clinteria hilaris Burm., Handb., III, p. 303 and 827. “Very large number of copies. Kurseong. 15. Agestrata orichalcea Linnaeus, Ameen. Acad., VII, p, 507. Only one copy. 16. Clerota Budda Gory and Perch., Mon., p. 310, t. 61, f. 1. Only one copy. 17. Macronota antennata Wallace, Trans. ent. Soc., 3° ​​ser., IV,
1888, p. 560. Only one copy. 18. Macronota quadrilineata Hope, Gray, Zool. Misc., 1831, p. 24. A few copies. 19. Macronota Mearssi Westw., Arc. ent., I, p. 104, vol. 28, f. 3. Two copies. Kurseong. 20. Thaumastopeus pullus Bilber. A few copies. Kurseong. 21. Glycyphana Horsfieldi Hope, Gray, Zool. Misc., III, p. 25. Many copies. Tetara, Mandar. 22. Glycyphana tricolor Oliv., Ent., I, 6, p. 88, t. 12, f. 116. A few copies. mandar. 23. Glycyphana versicolor Fabr., Syst. Ent., 1, p. 51. Many copies. Mandar, Tetara. 24. Glycyphana viridi-obscura Gory and Percheron, Mon., p. 285,
t. 55, f. 5. This species is remarkably abundant 4 Kurseong; she
shows a fairly large variability in coloration. Some
examples are entirely dark chocolate brown, others
entirely of a tan red-brown and form the extreme types
of the Sanguinalis variety of Hope; an individual is for so
say completely reddish brown except for a green sutural patch
and two green spots on the bodice. It is therefore very difficult to
exactly limit the varieties in this genus because the transitions
are insensitive; however the white spots seem to present
enough fixity, and there are very few specimens where they are absolutely
lacking. 25. Chilobota acuta Wiedem., Zool. Mag., Il, 1, p. 87. This pretty space is represented by quite a few examples.
pleasures from Kunbir. All individuals have a
remarkable fixity. 26. Protecia alboguttata Vigors, Zool. Journal, II, 1826, p. 238,
t.9, f. 3. A few copies. Tetara, Kunbir. 241

27. Protecia peregrina Herbst, Kif., II, p. 236, vol. 30, f. 4. Quite a number of copies. Tetara, Kunbir. 28. Protecia maculata Fabr., Spec. Ins., 1, p. 58. A few copies. Kurseong, Kunbir. 29. Protecia Dalmani Gory and Perch., Mon., p. 195, vol. 35, f. 2. A few copies. Kurseong. 80. Cetonia speciosissima Scopoli, Del. fn. Insubr., 1786, 1, p. 48,
t. 21, f, 4. A few copies. mandar. 31. Anthracophora crucifera Oliv., Ent., I, 6, p. 39, vol. 5, f. 29. Not uncommon. Konbir. 32. Anthracophora Bohemani Westw., Trans. ent. Share, V, 1849,
p. 149, vol. 16, f. 7. A few copies. Kurseong. 33. Macroma canthorhina Hope, Gray, Zool. Misc., III, 1831,
p - 25. Only one copy. Kurseong. This list is of course not complete: we will have Anoter
many additions, successive shipments and 4 each
two new species are added to the previous ones,
but it seems that from the present 4 we can consider as very
the following species are widespread:

Rhomborrhina opalina Hope. Coryphocera elegans Fabr. Clinteria confinis Hope. Clinteria hilaris Burm. Glycyphana Horsfeldi Hope. Glycyphana versicolor Fabr. Glycyphana vividi-obscura Gory and Perch. Protecia peregrina Herbst. Anthracophora crucifera Olive. 242

DESCRIPTIONS OF SOME ARGENTINE BEETLES
by M. L. Fairmaire. These Insects whose communication I owe the kindness of
my colleague and friend, Mr. Dollé, come for the majority
part of the province of Rioja, located quite 4 makes 4 Vwest of the
Argentine Confederation. It is a region that is still little explored and
which looks very interesting. Euparia ovalipennis Har., Coleopt. Heft., VIII (1871), 116. - Long. 5 1/2 mill. — Obscure rufa, subnitida, elongato-ovata,
modice convexa; capite dense subliliter asperulato, clypeo antice
late cmarginato, utringue denticulo acuto armato; thoracic equa-
liter subasperato-punctato, because breviter pubescent, basi rotun=
data, margine basali acuto; elytris leviter striatis, obsolete striis
tantum catenulatis, interstitiis utringue juxta strias seviatim
aspero-punctulatis, punctis piliferis, medio leviter convexis. Two individuals from Rioja agree well with this
description; only they only have 5 mill. in length and the
words of: modice conveza do not seem exact to me, because these
insects are very convex; the bodice is covered with fine
nulations that do not become confluent and mixed with large dots
only on the sides. In addition, the streaks of the elytra are wide,
if not deep, and the intervals present, along the streaks,
scratchy, piligerous points, which, at first sight, make you appear
these crenulated streaks. The front edge of the chaperone is not
indented, but largely sinuate. Athyreus chalybeatus. - Long. 15 mill. — Subglobosus,
obscure aneo-cerulescens, elytris nitidis, subtus rufus, dense
fulvo-villosus, libii picescentibus; capita magis brunneo, asperato,
apice fere truncato, clypeo transversim bicarinato, carina antica
Fere apicali, medio dentata and cum mediana juncta, hac tridentata,
dende medio magis elevato, genis acute angulatis, vertex medio
anguste breviore and obsolete bituberculato, antennis vuhs; prothorace
amplo, elytris latiore, lateribus valde deflexis, antice rotundatis,
postice angulatim dilatatis, dovso dense granulato, granulis
setuliferis, disco antice retuso, medio carinis duabus basi approwi-
matis, antice gradatin divaricatis et transversim recte conjunctis,
utringue carinulis 3 brevioribus, subtransversis; elytris brevibus,
late sulcatis, suleis rugoso-punctatis, intervallis carinatis, la-
vibus, valde nitidis, lateribus confused punctato-rugosulis, parte
anteapicali fere levi, costula marginali parum elevata; metasterno
nudo, subtiliter asperulo, pedibus validis. — Eastern Plata. 243

Looks quite like 41'A. Corinthius Klug from Brazil; but besides
the very different coloring, the median fairings of the corselet are
joined in front by a transyersal carina and the elytra have
protruding ridges. Liogenys opacicollis. - Long. 11 mill. — Oblong, cras-
sus, castaneus, nitidus, fulvo-pilosulus, prothoracic capita
subopacis, fere metallicis; capite sat lato, antice angustato, mar-
gine antico fere arcuatim emarginato, angulis latis, parum acutis,
fortiter ac dense punctato, rugoso, palpis antennisque rufulis;
prothorace transverso, elytris angustiore, antice angustato, lateri-
bus ante medium angulato-rotundatis, dorso dense ac fortiter
punctato-rugoso, margine antico fere recto, postico late leviter
sinuato; scutello apice rotundato, dense punctato, spatio medio
levi elevato; elytris medio vix ampliatis, fortiter sat dense
punctatis, sutura sat elevata, utringue costulis 4 parnm elevatis;
pygidio rugoso, pubescent; subtus dense griseo-squamosus, abdo-
nine medio denudato, dense rugoso-punctatus, tibiis anterioribus
sat fortiter tridentatis, tarsis sat elongatis, subtus pilosis. —
Rioja. Resembles in general shape to the LZ. obscure, but good
distinct by the rough carving of the head and corselet which are
almost dull, by the shape of the teeth of the cap which are
simply angular, not detached from the edge, and by the vestiture
scaly underside of body. Liogenys bidentulus. - Long. 9 mill. — Oblong, valde
convexus, rufo-fulvus, nitidus, capite and prothorace antice inter-
dum infuscatis; capite minore, fronte planata, gross parum
profunde punctata, clypeo paulo leviore, sutura clypeali sat
impressa, margine antico ulringue dente protenso armato;
prothorace elytris paulo angustiore, lateribus ante medium angu-
lato, grosse sed parum profunda lava punctato, lateribus et basi
laxius; scutello obtuse ogivali, fere levi; elytris oblongis, medium
leviter ampliatis, leviter striatis, intervallis fere planis, alterna-
tim angustioribus, 1° latiore, satfortiter sat dense punctato, ceteris
tenuiius ac varius pwnctatis, apice fere levibus; pygidio lato,
obtuse, fere levi, subtus because punctatus, pilis longis hirtus,
metasterno profunde sulcato, tarsis elongatis, antennarum clava
elongata, pallida. —Rioja. Neighbor of the LZ. fulvescens Bld., distinct in its smaller size
and especially by the corselet whose sides are angulated and whose
large, but shallow punctuation, is widely separated, especially
4 base and sides; the sculpture of the elytra is also good
different. ANNALS OF THE S0C. ENTOM, DE ELCIQUE, T. XXXVI. 49

244

Ligyrus bidentulus. - Long. 16 mill. —Ovatus, convewus,
castaneus, nitidus, capite prothoracic paulo magis obscuris;
capite sat brevi, antice triangulari, lateribus vie sinuato, rugoso-
puwnctato, apice levissime recurvo and acute bidentulo, carina frontali
sat acuta, medio paulo interrupta, prothorace tranverso elytris via
angustiore, antice a medio sat fortiter angustato-rotundato, dorso
sat grosse parum dense punctato, plagula media postica levi;
margine antico medio obtusissime tuberculato et supra obsoletis-
sime impresso; scutello triangulari, levi, elytvis sat fortiter and
oblique punctato-lineatis, utringue lineis 3 geminatis regularibus,
intervallo 1° basi lato, irregulariter punctato, sutura elevata;
pygidio subtilissime asperwloreticulato, medio sat elevato; chest
dense rufo-villoso, abdomine levi lateribus punctulato, pedibus bre-
vibus, validis, femoribus latis, tibiis anticis valde tridentatis. —Rioja. Much taller and shorter than the L. Burmeisteri Steinh. with the cap ending in two very small sharp teeth,
slightly raised; the corselet and the elytra are less thick-
ment punctuated and the sculpture of the pygidium is very different. Ligyrus distinctus. - Long. 13 mill. — Precidentifinis,
similiter coloratus, sed minor, capite polius punctato, clypeo apice
denticulis multo minoribus et minus acutis armato, prothorace
lateribus minus angulatim votundato and pygidio punctis ocellatis
parum densis and parum profundis impresso. —Rioja. This last species resembles, more than the preceding, the
L. Burmeistevi which is smaller, shorter, with the tips and
the fairing of the chaperon more erased, and the punctuation of the corselet
and larger elytra, these having weak streaks with the
fairly convex intervals, and the points of the pygidium are not
ocellated. Cyclocephala occipitalis. - Long. 12 4 13 milli. — Odlonga
sat fortiter convexa, rufo-testacea, nitida, capite obscuro, summo
infuscato, abdomine interdum fumato, libii apice tarsisque paulo
obscurioribus; capite dense sat subtiliter punctato-rugoso, clypeo
antice leviter attenuato, margine antico parum reflexo, fere recto,
rolundato utringue; transverso prothorace, elytris viz angustiore,
antice arcuatim angustato, basi fere recta, haud marginata,
angulis posticis sat rotundatis, dorso sat dense parum fortiter
punctato, medio vitta leviore parum distincta; triangular scutello
lari, punctato; elytris medio via ampliatis, parum dense modice
punctatis, sutura and utringue lineis 3 paulo elevatis, intervallo
the latiore, costulis utringue linea punctata comitatis; pygidio
modice convexo, subtiliter punctulato; sublus fere levis, segmentis

 

  

 

245

ventralibus transversim aspero-punctatis, punctis setiferis, tibiis
anticis grosse tridentatis, larsis anticis 3 articulo ultimo crasso,
unguibiis magnis, externo crasso longiore. —Rioja. Looks a bit like C. hirta Le C., but much narrower, with
I chaperone much more rounded in front, the corselet more strongly
punctate, 4 rounded posterior angles, narrower elytra,
longer, less punctate and the pygidium much shorter. Dysids platensis. - Long. 8,411 mill. — Resembles ex-
mement to lodscwrus Perty, of Colombia and quater, ranging
to St Paul, in Brazil, but smaller, with less antennas
slender, the corselet narrower in arrigre, having the anterior edge
tuberculate, the 4 tubercles placed transversely on the disc,
larger and more prominent, the rear angles raised like ears.
more or less projecting, the elytra having a spot on each
side of the crest. These insects transition well from Ptiniores to Terediles
and present a great analogy with g. Polycaon for the
head, mouth and antennae; but the tarsi are a little different
rents, the 2¢ article not being long like the 5° and the le a little
longer than the 2° or equal. The g. Apoleon Gorh., postpones 4 sentence
of the Dysides and is distinguished from it only by one more article
funicle of the antennae and the 2nd segment of the tarsi almost as long
than the 5; the facies is the same, but the homeland is very different,
PA. edaa Gorh. from the Malay region. Xylopertha hexacantha. - Long. 5 mill. — Oblong, cylindrical
drica, picea, nitida, prothorace interdum basi rufescente; capital
brevi, subliliter punctato-rugosulo, fulvo-pubescent, inter oculos
linea tenui, medio bigranulata signato, labro fulvo-piloso, oculis
globosis, prominulis, antennis rufulis, clava valde elongata, arti-
culo ultimo acuminato, precedentilongiore; subquadrato prothorace,
antice paulo angustato, dorso basi subtilissime punctato, antice
retuso, sat subtiliter dense asperato, lateribus antice dentibus
acutis aliquot; elytris oblongis, abrupt apice truncatis, fortiter
punctatis, humeris rufo-piceis, sulura elevata, utringue costulis 3,
externa obsoleta, apice in dentem validum lterminatis, parte apicali
Sere levi, acute marginata, sutura apice dehiscente, angulo sutu-
rali 3 sat producto, pedibus rufopiceis. —Rioja. Cardigenius densegranatus. - Long. 11 mill. — Ovatus,
valde converus, fusco-picescens, subopacus, setulis brevissimis sat
dense clothes; capite asperulo, clypeo rufescente, fere truncato,
labro rufescente, antennis brevibus, prothoracis medium paulo
superantibus, rufo-piceis, apice haud incrassatis; prothorace valde
transverso, elytrorum basi paulo latiore, antice angustato, lateri-

246

bus sat fortiter votundatis, sat late deplanatis, extus dense
setulosis, dovso convero, equali, dense subtiliter, medio paulo
laxius, asperato, margine postico ante angulos sinuato, his sat
obtusis sed paulo retroversis; scutello lato, brevi, medio acute
product; elytris brevissime ovatis, postice valde declivibus, apice
obtuse rotundatis, sat dense asperulis; subtus cum pedibus magis
piceo~rufescens, subtilius and densius asperulus, densius setosulus,
prosterno fusco, nitido, fere levi, mesosterno latissimo, tibiis
asperatis, extus denticulatis, anterioribus apice eatus acute
angulato-productis. — Plata. Resembles, for the form, the C@. evinifer, but the sculpture is
very different, being formed of very fine asperities, mixed with
small, extremely short bristles instead of long bristly hairs
on the elytra. AMBICATUS n. g.

This new genus is close to Afelanophorus from which it differs
by the more globular hips, much less protruding, the protrusion
intercoxal rather short, in a pointed triangle, the eyes larger, the
more slender antennae, the 3¢ section 4 barely longer than the 2¢, the
penultimate triangular, slightly toothed, the body less con-
vexed, the corselet less globular, clearly margined on the
sides, with the posterior angles well marked, the elytra more
oblong, 4 more angled shoulders; the tarsi are slender, the
A section of the hindquarters is almost longer than the next 2
reunited. A. rufonitens. — Long 4 1/2 mil. — Oblongus, subelongatus,
modice couvevus, rufus, nitidus, capite ovato, substiliter dense
punctato, utrvingue ad antennas valdeimpresso, clypeo antice rotun-
datim angulato, oculis sat grossis, antennis prothoracis basin paulo
superantibus, articulo 1° crasso, secundo paulo longiore; prothorace
parwm transverso, elylris angustiore, postice angustato, lateribus
antice leviter rotundatis, angulis posticis acutiusculis, dorso
subtiliter parum dense punctato, lateribus sat fortiter marginato,
basi medio late rotundato and utringue sat fortiter impresso; scutello
meticulously; elytris ovato-oblongis, dorso paulo planiusculis, apice
parum fortiter declivibus ct conjunctim obtusis, subliliter punctato-
lineatis, linea suturali postice substriata. —Rioja. Two insects are found in Tucuman which are very similar.
blow of this one 4 because of the corselet marginé; they differ
by the more convex body, the shorter elytra, the antennae
thicker and the tarsi less slender. They form the passage
to g. Melanophorus. 247

A. stricticollis. - Long. 4 mill. — Same coloring as the
previous, but shorter and more conyex, head weaker
impressed near the antennae, less angulated cap, eyes
a little less thick, antennae a little thickened towards the end,
2 article a little shorter than 3:, slightly convex corselet,
almost heart-shaped, densely and roughly punctate, for-
slightly marked on the sides, unimpressed at the base, elytra
shorter, slightly widened in the middle, 4 rounded shoulders, but
marked, A very finely rough punctuation with traces of
indistinct lines, obtuse end, a little more sloping. A. bembidioides. —Length.5 mil. - A little bigger than the
previous, same coloring, a little more convex, head a little
less short, densely punctate, impressed anteriorly
in a semi-circle, antennae a little thicker 2¢ article almost
longer than 3, corselet more convex, densely pitted but
not rough, sides not sinuate posteriorly, posterior angles
less marked, wider, more convex elytra, 4 shoulders well
rounded, more steeply sloping and more rounded at the end,
has punctate streaks 4 barely sunken but quite distinct, the
finely leathery intervals with very fine points, tarsi
less slender. isses

Epitragus eneus. - Long. 12 mill. — Oblongo-ellipticus,
eneus, nitidus, modice converus, wadic dense punctatus; capital
antice utrinque oblique striato, margine antico utringue leviter
sinuato, antennis gracilibus, piceo-vnescentibus, basin prothoracis
haud attingentibus, apice via crassiusculis, articulo 3° sequenti
parum longiore; prothorace elytris anyustiore. valde lversverso,
antice angustato, lateribus a basi rotundatis, angulis anticis
obtusissimis, margine postico utringue sat fortiter sinuato, angulis
acute; scutello obtuse, concavo; elytris oblongis, postice angus-
tatis, apice acuminatis, subtililer punctulato-substriatis, tnter-
vallis planis, sat dense punctatis; subtus sat subtiliter dense
punctatus, prosterno rugosulo, medio villoso, seginentis abdomina-
libus eatus acute dentatis, pedibus wneo-piceolis, sat gracilibus. —
Flat. . Also found in Brazil, province of Mines. Resembles metallicus, but much less densely punctate,
the antennae are more slender, less thick towards the extremity, the
head presents in front two well-marked impressions in the shape
streaks, the escutcheon is shorter, the elytra have longer streaks
distinct; the underside of the body is more densely and stronger-
ment punctuated. Epitragus rufocastaneus. - Long. 8 4 12 mill. — Sat

 

 

248

elongatus, rufo-castaneus, nitidus, sal convexus; sublimates
dense punctato, clypeo fere truncato; antenna paulo dilutiori-
bus, articulo 9° quarto longiore, articulis 9-10 brevioribus, trian-
gularibus, 11° ovato; prothorace subquadrato, elytris multo
angustiore, antice leviter parum attenuato, postice haud angustato,
dorso subtiliter sal dense punctato, margine postico medio rotun-
dato, angulis posticis and anticis fere vectis; scutello levi, make
concavo, apice rotundato, elytris ovato-oblongis, post medium
leviter ampliatis, apice acuminatis, dense punctato-asperis, utrin-
that lineis 3 via elevatis; subtus dense subtiliter asperulus;
S angustior, minor, elytris haud sensim ampliatis. —Rioja. Seems very close to the Z'. porcellus Berg, but in the latter the
labrum is projecting, rounded, slightly sinuate on each side, the cor-
selet is somewhat narrowed behind with obtuse posterior angles,
and below the prosternun is grossly pitted with the base les
central segments obsolete and longitudinally rough. Epitragus nitidicollis. — Length 12 mil. — Previous
forma Afinis sed obscurus, fusco-piceus, modice nitidus, glaber,
nitidissimo prothorace; capite dense punctato, summo multo sub-
tilius, clypeo antice fere truncato, utvingue leviter sinuato, antenna
nis piceis, articulo 3° secundo plus duplo longiore, articulis 8-10
triangularibus, 11° haud longiore, breviter ovato, acuminato;
prothorace elytris valde angustiore, antice leviter parum attenuato,
lateribus ante angulos anticos levissime sinuatis, his acutis, paulo
extraversis margine postico medio sat fortiter votundato, angulis
obtusiusculis, dorso levi, polito, scutello levi, apice rotundato;
elytris ovato-elongatis, apice obtuse acuminatis, dorso sat dense
fortiter punctatis, basi paulo scabriusculis, postice gradatim subti-
lius punctatis; subtus subliliter asperulus, femoribus asperis. —
Rioja. I would gladly have reported the only individual of this species to
VA, levicollis Berg, but the latter seems pubescent, the chaperon
is widely twisted in the middle, the bodice is very finely punctuated,
very convex, a little narrowed behind with the posterior angles
subrounded and the forequarters only a little prominent, the crest
is punctate and the elytra are densely and sharply punctate. Epitragus crassus. -- Long. 17 4 20 mill. — Oblongo-ellip-
licus, sat fortiter converus, fusco-brunneus, nitidus; capita brevi,
dense punctato, clypeo fere vugoso, transversim leviter impresso,
margine antico subtruncato, antennis gracilibus, basin protho-
racis vix superantibus, articulis 8-10 brevioribus, magis triangula-
ribus, 11° breviter ovato, acuminato; prothorace elytris angustiore,

249

longitudine duplo latiore, a basi antice augusto, lateribus via
arcuatis, dorso laxe subtiliter punctato, margine postico medio
rotundatim lobato, utringue sinuato, angulis posticis acute rectis,
anticis acutis; scutello levi, truncato; elytris post medium vix
sensim ampliatis, apice acuminatis, dorso fortiter sat dense
punctatis, spatio suturali paulo elevato, utringue lineolis 3 via
distinct elevation; subtus dense punctato-asperatus, metasterno
medio sulcato, pedibus sat magnis, rugosis. —Rioja. Seems close to #. Bacchulus Berg, but differs in the head
not hairy, 4 tight punctuation, almost rough on the front,
the corselet 4 fine, spread punctuation, the truncated crest and the
elytra longer, 4 not scratchy, equal punctuation. Seems
closer to #. gigas Steinh., but with the latter the corselet
is narrowed in front and behind, with the posterior angles
obtuse, and the elytra are laterally rough with two impres-
let us 4 the base of each. Epitragus nanus. - Long. 6 mill. — Odlongo-ovatus, parum
converus, fusco-piceus, parum nitidulus, breviter sat dense fulvo-
pilosulus, subtus cum pedibus, ove and antennis piceo-rufescens;
capite subtiliter densissime punctulato, clypeo antice arcwatim
sinuato, labro easerto, sat magno, punctato; antennae gracilibus,
prothoracis basin haud attingentibus, apice leviter crassioribus;
articulo 3° sequenti parum longiore; transverse prothorace, elytris
vix angustiore, a basi antice attenuato, lateribus fere rectis,
angulis anticis acutiusculis, dorso subtiliter dense punctulato,
basi medio arcuato, utringue sinuato, subtiliter marginato and
levitate impresso, angulis posticis acutis sed life porrectis; scutello
minute, punctulato; elytris ovatis, medio vix ampliatis, apice
obtusis, dense subtiliter punctato-asperulis, haud striatis, suturam
versus utringue lineolis 2 obsoletissime indicatis; subtus subtilis-
sime punctato-asperulus, prosterno lateribus paulo fortius, pedibus
sat gracilibus. — Plata. This Fpitragus is the smallest of its kind with the species I
described below; it is quite remarkable for its fine carving and
its fine villi. Epitragus minutissimus. - Long. 5 1/2 mill. — Odlongo-
ovatus, modice convexus, fusculo-xneus, sat nitidus, glaber; capital
prothoraceque subtiliter densissime punctatis, antennis piceis,
parum gracilibus, prothoracis basin hand attingentibus, apicem
versus crassioribus, articulo 3° sequenti parum longiore; protho-
race amplo, elytris haud angustiore, antice paulo angustato, late-
ribus a basi rotundatis, angulis anticis sat obtusis, dorso xquali,
basi sat fortiter bisinuato, medio rotundatim, fere lobato and

250

obsolete marginato, angulis obtuse rectis; scutello minuto; elytris
a medio attenuatis, apice obtusis, punctato-lineatis, lineis leviter
elevatis, punctis parum impressis, nitidulis, intervallis planis,
subliliter et parum regulaviler subseriato-punctatis; subtus niti
dior, sat dense punctulatus, pectoris lateribus and prosterno paulo
rugosis, pedibus fere levibus. — Brazil, province of St. Paul. This species is remarkable, in addition to its small size, for its
ample bodice, rounded laterally, slightly narrowed in front, by
the elytra whose punctuated lines are slightly projecting and
by its ocellated punctuation, very shallow. Platydema basicorne. - Long. 6 mill. — Odlugo-ovatum,
convecum, fuscum, opacum, pedibus, ove and anlennarum articulis
2 rufi primis; capite subtiliter punctato, clypeo antice tranversim
sulcato, antenna sat gracilibus, apicem versus paulo crassioribus,
articulo 3° sequenti via longiore, sed angustiore; prothorace trans-
verso, antice augusto, lateribus a basi arcuatis, dorso levi, basi
bisinuato, angulis posticis sat oblusis; scutello levi, triangulari,
elytvis ovato-oblongis, apice obtusis, dorso subtiliter substriato-
punctatis, intervallis levibus, life convewiusculis; subtus paulo
rufescens, nitidior, prosterno medio convexiusculo. — Plata. Resembles P. europwum, but smaller, narrower, with
the antennae a little too long, differently colored, with
less transverse, the corselet less short, the elytra a little
less edged laterally, with even less convex intervals. Ulosonia parvicornis. - Long. 6 mill. —Odlonga,subparal-
lela, rufo-picea, nitida, subtus cum pedibus, ore and antennis magis
rufescens; capite levi, inter oculos late concavo and ad oculos
utringue dente sat brevi, compresso, apice obtuso avrmato, clypeo
convexo, antice dente minuto acuto armato; antenna basin protho-
racis atlingentibus, articulis 5-10 transversis, 3° quarto vi
long; prothovace angustato, dorso sublilissime punctulato,
inter discum and margines evidentius punctato, basi sat fortiter
bisinuato, medio obsoletissime and utvinqueviter impresso, angulis
posticis sat acutis; obtuse scutello; elytris sat fortiter substriato-
punetatis, stria sulurali sat impressa, intervallis plauiusculis,
via perspicue punctulatis; subtus fere levis, femoribus compressis. — Plata. Looks quite like the U/. racca, differs from it as well as from the others
species, by its smaller size, the cephalic horns much more
short, and especially by the shape of the corselet which does not widen
in front, the sides being parallel behind; the sides of
prosternum are 4 barely distinctly striate. 251

Allecula seriatopora. - Long. 9 mill. — Sut elugata,
convera, piceo-fusca, subopaca, elytris leviter nitidulis, sericeis,
femoribus minuscve piceo-rufis; capite sat subtiliter rugosulo-
punctato, sulura clypeali valde impressa, antennis sat gracilibus,
corporis medium attingentibus, articulo 3° sequenti equali; protho-
race valde transverso, elytris angustiore, lateribus fere parallelis,
antice tantum votundatis, ante basin obsotetissime sinuatis, dorso
medio dense punctato, lateribus fere levi, postice leciter triim-
presso, margine postico vir bisinuato, angulis acutiuseulis; scutello
apice rotundato, levi; elytris clongatis, a medio leviter atlenuatis,
apice conjunctine rotundatis, dorso punctis grossis oblongis seriatine
impressis, apice viz minoribus, intervallis levibus; subtus nitida,
Sere levis, pectore lateribus punctato, femoribus punctulatis, tibiis
levitate asperulis. — Plata. Shape and coloring of I'4. brunnea, but much smaller; the
sculpture of the elytra formed of large oblong points, without streaks,
distinguishes this species from its congeners. Strongylium platense. - Long. 17 mill. — Zlongatum,
converum, obscure vneum, nitidum. subtus cum pedibus obscurius;
capite dense punctato, oculis distantibus, clypeo levvissine sinuato,
antennis fuscis, articulis 6 wltimis latis, opacis; prothorace
transverse, elytris angustiore, lateribus fere parallelis, antice
tantum cum angulis rotundatis, dorso fortiter sat dense, disco
minus punctato, basi utringue late sinuato, leviter marginato;
scutello obtuse ogivali, life perspicue punctulato; elytris elon-
gatis, fortiter striatis, striis subtiliter crenatis, intervall:
convexis, levibus, apice fere costulatis; pectore punctalo, metas-
terno medio subtiliter strigosulo, abdomen indistinct. lateribus
evidentius punctulato, pedibus sat elongatis, femoribus subtus
dense brevissime pilosulis. —Rioja. Quite similar to 8. auratum and hemorrhoidale; the bodice
is not tuberculate laterally, but the punctuation is scatter,
the streaks of the elytra are finely crenellated and the articles of the
antennae are wide from 5. So far we have not described
than two Strongylium from the Argentine region, but they are noted
slightly smaller, the coloring is different as well as the
sculpture of the head and the corselet. Aryenis minor. - Long. 7 mill. — A. uniculori BL. ‘Statira)
facie and colore simillima, sed minor, angustior and pallidior, capite
angustiore, minus dense and minus fortiter punctato, punctis haud
strigosis, antennis gracilioribus and elytris irregulariter punctatis,
Tinis nullis. —Rioja. Smaller and paler than A. wnicolor Blanch. (rufescens FP. ANNALS OF 1A S06. FATOM, DE RELGIQNF, T XAAvI. 20

 

Bates); the head is narrower, more extended forward, much less
heavily dotted, and the stitches are less tight, by no means
striate, the antennae are more slender, longer, reaching the
middle of the elytra, the 2 article shorter than the 4*, the pouetuation
of the elytra is more equal, proportionally tighter, without
traces of lung lines. Rhipiphorus argentinus. - Long. 5 mill. — Odlongus,
postice attennatus, niger, prothorace rufo, elytris fulvis, apice
and interdum basi, paulo infuscatis; capite subtiliter sat dense
rugosulo-punclato, vertice clecato, lransversim compresso and antice
depresso, antennis brevibus, fuscis, basi piceis, gracilibus; protho-
race fortiter sal dence punetato, ulringue postice profunde
imprint. lobo medio apice hand elerato nec impresso; elytris
postice gradatim angustatis, rice divavicalis, apice acutis, dorso
sat subliliter, apice eridentins punctulato-rugosulis, longitu-
dinaliter sat fortiter tmpressis; libiis larsisque interdum ferru-
gineis. — Plata. Looks like a PR pen. rvfpennis. from Chile, but very distinct
parse its coloring and its narrower elytra, very little divaricate
at the extremity, yuoic dehiscent from the middle. Epicauta griseonigra Fairm. see you Riojana. - Long. 13.4
16 mill. — Oblongo-elongata, valde conrera, fusco-nigra, pube
griseo-cinerca densissime et undique vestita, elyvis sapius
ulringue citladiscoidalidenudata.anteapicem abbreriata, extremely rare
subintegra, sapius medio plus minus interrupta; capile
prathorace paulo latiore, conrexo, antice abbreviato, elypeo fere
truncato, sulura clypeali profunde arcuata, froule ulringue prope
oculos puncto signata; antennis denudatis, medium corporis attin-
gentibus, parwn gracilibus, articulo 39 quarto longiore; prothorace
parvum transcerso, elyivis angustiore, abrupt antice angustato,
margine postico and angulis vectis, dorso aquali: sentello trunca=
tulo; elytris apice rvotundatis and paulo dehiscentibus; libiis apice
larsisque denudatis. ~Rioja. This Hpican/a looks great. when the band of elytra
is well marked, a type of IZ’. grisconigra Fairm., of Mendoza;
but it is larger, the band of the elytra is not well marked
qwa the base and at the end, almost always more or less
erases in the middle, never regular as in the type; besides
the frontal spot when it exists, is not very marked. I have a penis
nevertheless see in this inseete only a local variety. Mr. Berg (Stett. eat. Zeit, 1881, 904) brings together in this space the
Cantharis digramma Burm. Luke. 24). The description relates to it,
it is true, quite well, but it indicates the legs as: dilute

      

   

 

   

 

 

   

rufis, and the suture as black, as well as the fine longitudinal furrow
head and bodice. Ananca sellata. - Long. 51/2410 mil. — Hlongata, fulco-
teslacea, nitidula, subliliter fulvo-pubescens, elytris fere opacis,
piceolis, villa media lata pallide fulva, sulura anticesapius paulo
prolougata, transversali capite ovato, dense punctulato, oculis
ovalis, parum converis, mandibulis elongalis, apice areualis and
fuscis, labro megno, apice rolundato; antenna gracilibus, medium
corporis atlingentibus, articulo 2° minulo, 3° quarto via breviore,
celeris subaqualibus; prothorace orato, postice sat fortiter angus-
lato, lateribus a medio sinuatis, dorso convexo, dense subtiliter
coriaceo-punctulalo, antice transversim leviter tnpresso, basi
medio impressiusculo; scutello sat lato, apice late rotundato, sub-
Use punctulato; elytris ad humeros angulatin rotundatis, ante
apicem angustalis, apice conjunctim votundatis, dense subliliter
coriaceis, utvingue lineolis aliquot tenuibus, rie sensim elevatis;
S minor, angustior, oculis supra magis approxinalis, prothorace
ante basin transcersim impresso, antennis longioribus. —Rioja. The coloration of this species makes it easy to recognize, and has no
no analogue to my knowledge. Ananca luridimembris. - Long. 10 1/2 mill. — Zlongata,
dilute brunnea. modice nitida, pubescens, capile antice, antenna,
palpis pedibus luritis; capite dense punctulato, inter oculos
obsolele impressiusculo, lubro magno, mandibulis apice arcwatis
et fuscis, anlennis gracilibus, medium elylrorum allingentibus
articulis 3°-Lque equalibus; prothorace breviter ovato, postice
angustato, latevibus basi sinuatis, dorso sat conveco, subliliter
deasissine punctulalo, medio oblonge impresso, lateribus rage
impressiusculo; scutello triangulari, puactato, apice obtuse;
elylris elongatis, ad humevos votuadatis, subliliter densi
coriaceo-punctatis, sulura paulo elevata, utringue Lincolis 3 lenwi-
bus, viv perspicue distinctionndis; sublus densins pubescens,
dilution, segmentis ventralibus apice pallidins marginatis, pedibus
sericantibus. —Rioja. IT OP 7

 

   
 
   
   
    
       
    
       
   
 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

BELGIUM i

 

THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME

Lives

o number must be kept; it won't be sent for a second
times as before. Volume I of the Memoirs of the Society will appear before August 1:

it will only be sent to foreign members when they

will have sent to the Treasurer their contribution for the year 1892. BRUSSELS
AT THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE COMPANY
20, NUSEE STREET, 20

1892

 

-

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. VIL

Minutes of the monthly meeting of July 2, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP OF Mr. Giron. Present: Messrs. Bergé, Hid. Coucke, L. Coucke, Dubois, Fologne,
Jacobs, Kerremans, Ledrou, Mac Lachlan, Robbe, Sév

Tosquinet, of Selys-Loagchamps, Van Nerom and Lameere, secretary
to hush up. MM. Becker and Duvivier excused their absence. The meeting opened at 8 a.m. Board decision. Has been admitted as a full member
Mr. J. Poskin, lecturer at Zool:
Agricultural Institute of E
Selys-Longchamps and Candeze. Readings, communications. The Assembly 3
present issue of the Annales. The Secretary read the following note:

  

ie and Entomology a
at 4 Gembloux, presented by MM. of

 

  

 

 

rest the composition of the

 

Review by: Perer Cameron. Hemenoprera, Formeiwe;
EXTRACTED FROM SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX TO TRAVE
AMONGST THE GREAT ANDES OF iquaTor By Epw. Wuymrer. London 1891.

     

 

by Auguste Forel,
Professor i Zirieh. In the work whose title I have just indicated, Mr. Cameron
writes a new genus and three new species of Formicides. This little notice contains errors which, leading to confusion
considerable differences, need to be rectified. Mr. Cameron describes as Holcoponera Cameron a
a genre that he believes to be new and gives a drawing of it. The new species
also, is the H. Whymperi P. C. Or M. Mayr described in 1887,
in his Siidameric. Formiciden (Verh. Zool.-Bot. Ges. Wien},
under the name of Holcoponera (so under the name used by
Mr. Cameron) an important new subgenus of the genus 2cla-

 

ANNALS OF THE SOC. ENTOM. HE NELGIQUE, T, XXXVI. did

256

tomma. It is therefore inadmissible to use the same name for five years
later for a completely different genre. But much more: the genre that Mr. Cameron believes is new is
other than the genus Cylindromyrmex Mayr (Neue Formiciden,
1870). All the characters indicated and the figure agree absolutely.
lies with the genus Cylindromyrmex Mayr. Done: Holcoponera
Cameron (nee Mayr) = Cylindvomyrmez Mayr. The species is however
obviously new, for the striae of the thorax, pedicle and
of the head are infinitely coarser than in C. striatus
Mayr, then the color is different. C. ongiceps André is
entirely different. Done I’ Holcoponera Whymperi Cameron must
take the name Cylindromyrmex Whymperi Cameron. Second Mr. Cameron describes a Camponotus Mayri nov.
sp. of the Andes, neighbor of the anricomus Roger. If Vespece is true-
ment new, which is difficult 4 to say in this considerable genre
and complicated, she can't keep this name that I already gave
myself & an African species (Camponotus Mayri Forel,
bullet. Soc. Vaud. of sc. Natural, 1879, Vol. XVI, no. 81,
p. 92). I therefore propose to call the new species of the Andes
M. P. Cameron: Camponotus Cameroni nov. sp. Quant 4 the Pheidole monticola noy. sp., otherwise controlled by
Mayr, I abstain from any comment; description and figure
hardly allow us to form a precise judgment on its
account. —M. Mac Lachlan points out that in the month of March
of this year from the Humologist's Monthiy Magazine, p. 67,
Mr. Cameron has already called attention to corrections to be made
his work, stating among other things that Pheidole monticola =
P. Cameroni Mayr. Mr. Robbe shows a copy of the Aberration Dowbledayaria
of Amphidasis betularia, taken 4 Stockel by M. Vincent. Mr. Hippert announces the following captures: Acidalia Albularia
In Sart-lez-Spa; Acronycta Menyanthidis, Hockai and Bara-
than Michael; Pachyenemia Hippocastanaria, at Nockai; Syrichtus
Alveus, Luperina Hepatica, Cidaria Impluviavia, in the valley of
la Molignée, Luperina Basilinea, 4 Huy; Sesia Culiciformis, a
St. Gilles; Zhyatira Derasa, in Linkebeek; Hepialus Humuli, &
Rancid. Factories. M Ed. Coucke went to Dieghem and gives a
list of the Dipterae he observed in this locality. August 14 and 15, excursion to Spa: meeting at Spa station in
Arrival of the 10:17 a.m. train. The meeting adjourned at 2 9 1/2 hours,

  

 

         

CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ENTOMOLOGICAL FAUNA OF CENTRAL APRICA. He. NOTE ON BEETLES

VALLEYS OF

LITIMBIRI-RUBI AND UELLE

(UPPER CONGO REGIONS)

COLLECTED IN 1890, by MM. JOSEPH DUVIVIER ev MILZ. LIST OF NEW SPECIES AND DESCRIPTIONS

by Antoine DUWVIWVIER. = —

I published last year in the Annales de la Société ento-
mological (vol. XXXV, 1891) a short report on the Coléop-
land collected from various parts of the Congo Basin by some
Belgian explorers. I allow myself to give today a note on the hunts
of my brother Joseph, made in the heart of Africa as well as
on some captures made by Mr. Lieutenant Milz; those
hunts have been made in the region between I’Itimbiri
(Lubi or Rubi), a tributary of the Congo, and the Uellé, a tributary of
VUbandji, itself the most powerful of the right tributaries of the
Congo, i.e. between 23 and 24 degrees E longitude of Greenwich
and the 2¢ and 4th of latitude N, and more particularly around the
Ibembo (Itimbiri) and Djabir-Bandja (Uellé) stations. Ibembo is located at the terminus point of the lan: tion on the Itimbiri,
a beautiful river dotted with islands and banks, presenting many
breuses falls, having still meadows of 100 meters of width in front of
Tbembo, and whose afiluents are exe: verment numerous. the
the most common terrain in the region is alluvium, sand is rare
and the dark, damp earth. Many mangrove trees grow in

   

 

 

 

258

banks of the rivers and the thick forest which extends over the whole region
up to the Uellé, is made up of various species, some
reach a considerable height; Elais and other palm trees
varieties of palm trees grow there in abundance; mostly cloudy
herbs come here and brighten up the monotony of the forest. The Sultanate of Djabir is located About 10 days' walk from
north of the Rubi Falls (Itimbiri) and stretches along the shore of [Uellé;
Djabir-Bandja is a high plain 7 4 8 meters above the
average level of the river and at about 350 meters above sea level,
green of plantations to the thick forest which extends on the banks
of the Itimbiri, and which forms the western part of the immense forest of
the Aruwimi crossed by Stanley, during his rescue expedition
d@'Emin Pasha. The Uellé presents in front of Djabir-Bandja, a lar-
distance of about 200 meters; it flows between rocks and
hanes of sand and therefore remains completely inaccessible 4 a
serious sailing. The stay of my brother 4 Ibembo and surroundings lasted approximately
a year, so that his hunts are spread over the different
annuities times of the year; they thus give a physiognomy
fairly accurate of Ja fauna of the region and 4 this point of view, I think
that the list that I give later, will be of scientific interest.
fairly serious fic About 350 species of Coleoptera have been
captured, of which more than GO species are considered absolute-
lying news,

 

 

 
  
 

ats

I think it useful to summarize here the catches by family, to
allow to get a more exact idea of ​​their distribution
geographical. Cicindelidae: three species, all three common to the various
regions of West Africa. Carabids: 21 species, common in Old Calabar, Sierra-
Leone, & Senegambia, 4 Guinea; a more or less special
4 the Congo region; another appearing to affect the regions of the
center: Zeflus Jamesoni Bates, recently described from Aruwiti;
a species extending to the Cape and finally three new species,
the: Thyreoplerus cordicollis, Craspedophorus Milziet Leptorembus
Kolbei; this last species belongs to a genus recently
described from the Congo region

Dyliscides: a sev) representative, but a remarkable form
Cylister viva, native to Madagascar, according to a community
cation of Dr. Regimbart, this form is absolutely speci-
cial in the Congo; it is still very rare. 259

Gyrinids; two species, one of which is specific to the region of
Congo and its tributaries and the other widespread over the entire coast. Hydrophilides: wn vepresenting, known throughout Africa. Histerids: The Histerids are very interesting because out of four
Collected forms, two are absolutely new; both forms
known belong 4 fauna of the western region; the
two others are Apopletes Duvivieri and Pachycrarus violacei-
pennis which Mr. Lewis was good enough to make known in the Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., Nov. 1891, pp. 381-386. Nitidulides: three species, known from Old Calabar and the
Guinea. Dermestids: a cosmopolitan species. Trogositids: three species, one of which is cosmopolitan, the two
others are found all over the western coast, between the
spades. Lucanides: a new form. the Prosopocoilus congoanus
bringing together known species from Senegambia and Guinea, the
Mesotopus tarandusSwed. (Q), still uncommon in col-
lections and the Migidius Albersi Duviv., which I recently described
of Kasai. Passalides; seven species, one of which is known only from
Madagascar and that it is interesting to find in the heart of
Africa, the others, except for one species described from the land of the Niams-
Niams, common to various regions of West Africa
intertropical. Mr. Kuwert was kind enough to compare them to the
many types in his collection. Scarabs: most of the species collected are species
already known from Senegambia, Guinea, etc. ; two species seem-
local scents: the Smaragdesthes subsuturalis Kr. and Macroma
congoensis Bates; some are also common to
more southern regions, a few others do not appear
extend beyond the Congo Basin and its tributaries; such:
Pheochrus dispar Qued., Holoschiza dentilabris Lansb., Pseudo-
trochalus quadrisignatus Qued., Anomala Guessfeldti Kolbe and
Anomala vitticollis Lansb. Two unusual species were captured by my brother:
they are: Heliocopris Diana Hope and Diastellopalpus noctis Thom. ;
as well as a certain number of species which seemed unpublished to me. Among the Melolonthids, two species each representing a
new genus: Lupegylis (n. g.) confusa of the group Schizo-
nychids and Pseudopholis (n. g.) squammulosa of the group of
True Melolonthids; this last genus is especially remarkable for
its antennae which are formed of only nine articles; two others

260

species, the Apogonia virescens and congoana, also
appeared undescribed. Among the Ketonides: three new forms,
including a new genus: Zmesorrhina tridens, very elegant form,
Diplognatha subenea, remarkable for its large size and Pre-
linotarsia (n. g.) limbatipennis, whose analogies with the genera
madagasses are striking and also a very rare form:
Platygenia exarata Schaum. which my brother had the pleasure of
capture both sexes: only the Q was known in the collections. Elatevides: Four species, including two new ones: Alaus interme-
dius and Psephus itimbirensis; the other two forms are ancient-
known from the same regions. Buprestids: Eight species, some of which are very interesting.
tes, among others: Chrysaspis propingua Saund., Steraspis calida
Har. as well as some of the Actenodes so well described by
Mr. Gen. Quedenfeldt. Bostrichidae: About ten species, some of which are cosmo-
polites and others also belonging to the fauna of the coast
western Africa. Clerides: some rather local forms, such as Cardiosti-
chus Mechowi Qued., Stigmatium dorsigerumW estw., and a form
new which seems to me to constitute a new genre: the Pseu-
dachlamys penicillatus; few African Clerides have been described,
but I believe that the collections contain a considerable number
ple of new spaces. Cylidrus fasciatus, a common species in
Madagascar and all of tropical Africa, has also been captured
In the region. Tenebrionids: The collected tenebrionids are those that are
found throughout the western part of Africa located between
the tropics, as well as some new species: Zenesis (n. g.)
JSemoratus, interessania form, Zoplonys distinctus and Strongylium
variolosum; some other species do not seem to deviate
many of the region are: Himatismus Lindnervi Kolbe,
Nyctobates bifasciatus Qued., Lyprops Biittneri Kolbe, Pycnocerus
exaratus Har., Bupezus rufipes Qued., Pareupezus glaber Kolbe,
Pwranarygmus nigrowens Qued., Strongylium Poggei Har., and
Strongylium muata Har., all described species from the Congo Basin. Cistelids: two species common to the whole region. Lycids: seven species, all specific to African countries
West, such as Senegambia, Guinea, Sierra Leone,
Old Calabar and Bas-Congo. Aeloids; five known species. Telephorids: only one very common species. Malachiids: two species that are difficult to determine. 261

Curculionides: this group has some interesting representatives
in the collection brought back by my brother, first a certain
number of new species: Blosyrus obliquatus, Livus itimbi-
rensis, Alcides eruditus, Alcides Josephus, Ithyporus nigrosi~
gnatus, Neotocerus (n. g.) Fausti, Cyllophorus Josephus, Temnos-
choita eruditus, Temnoschoita basipennis, Sipalus Aurivilli;
then some species of a group still little represented in
collections: Zchthyopisthen bimaculatum Auriv., Ichthyopisthen
deplanatum Roel. and Haplorrynchus Valdaui Auviv. ; finally one
a number of common species 4 Guinea and a few
described from the Congo region. Platypids: two species, both new, the: Crosso-
tarsus Chapuisi and Platypus congoanus; Platypids @ Africa
known are very few, so I am convinced that the
collections contain a large number of unpublished African types. Brenthids; six common species 4 Guinea, 4 Sierra-Leone
and the Bas-Congo regions. Anthothribides: a few known types as well as a type that I
seems new, of a particular shape and of a beautiful coloring
green; two other species, which have only been reported from the
Congolese region: Anocerastes undulatus Qued. and Deuterocrats
nigropiclus Qued. Longhorn beetles: these are widely represented in the collection.
tion reported by my brother and alone make up a quarter of
its crops; this abundance of Longhorn beetles is easily explained if
Yon remembers that the whole region between the Uellé of a
hand, Itimbiri, Congo and Aruwimi on the other hand, is covered with
this immense virgin forest, on which attention has mainly been
attracted by Stanley, the tireless explorer. Of the 86 species of
Beetles harvested, 19 are new to science; more than 50
others are found in particular in Guinea, & Cameroon, in
Senegambia, 4 Sierra-Leone, in Calabar, finally, some species
only appear to be specific to the Congo region; they are
described from Lunda, Quango and the province of Angola. The
novelties belong 4 two groups of Longhorn beetles: Ploce-
derus tenuis, Djabiria (n. g.) geniculata, Luporus itimbirensis,
Xylotrechus Gahani among the Cerambyeids, and Velleda aberrans,
Leprodera congoana, Monohammus centralis, Anybostetha Que-
denfeldti, Bax licheneum, Lasiopezus Josephus, Prosopocera
signatifrons, Tragocephala timida, Phrynetoides (n. g.) quadri-
maculata, Eumimetes tropicus, Sthenias minor, Hyllisia imitans,
ELaocentrus variegatus, Mystacophorus (n. g.) mystax, among the
Lamiids. Only one form of eastern fauna has been observed: the
Cymatura mucorea Fairm. 262

Phytophages: Phytophages are relatively poorly represented

felt, in spite of the powerful vegetation which covers the region;
out of 43 species, 4 are new: Podagrica tropica, Platycantha
africana, Aspidomorpha engens and Gonophora interrupta; the
other species belong almost exclusively to the fauna of
the western coast of Africa. An interesting space is a
new Clytride that M. Lefebvre has just described
as Diapromorpha engens. “rotylides: out of four species collected, two are new,
the: Hpiscaphula congoana and tricolor; the other two were
previously known; the Erotylides seem uncommon
in Africa; Does it have to do with their way of life? Languriids: a species, described from Cameroon. Lndomychides: a new species: Zrycherus Josephus. Coccinellids: three common species in much of
PAfrica. From the preceding enumeration it results that the coleopteran fauna
rology of this part of intertropical Africa explored by
my brother and by Mr. Lt Milz is absolutely identical 4 that
of much of the western coast of Africa, including
the regions that extend from Senegambia to the province
from Angola. Before ending this foreword, I would like to address 4 my
brother Joseph, and & Mr. Lieutenant Milz, who kindly
give me part of his crops, both in my personal name
qwin the name of entomological science, my thanks
livelier and the expression of my deepest gratitude. These thanks
cements also extend 4 those of my colleagues in entomo-
logy that made my job easier, either by wanting to compare
to the types that they had 4 available to them, the species that I
I couldn't 4 identify exactly, either by obtaining
obligingly useful information: I will quote MM. Bates,
Dr Candéze, Faust, Rev Fowler, Gahan, Kerremans, Dr Kraatz,
Dr Kolbe, Lameere, Lewis, Ritsema and Severin,

   

    

  

 

Dieghem, May 7, 1892. A.D.

263

CICINDELID&. Cicindelid. Cicindela cincta Fabr., Ent. System, 1, p. 175. — Olivier, Ent. I,
33, p. 10, pl. 3, f. 33. — Dej., Spec. I, p. 40. A specimen with a beautiful green coloration was captured in April
(Ibembo, J. Duvivier). — Occurs in a large part of
the western region of Africa and also in Abyssinia; she
was also encountered in the Aruwimi region. Cicindela interstincta Schenh., Syn. Ins., 1, p. 241. - Lunch,
Spec. I, p. 42. — Guér., Mag. Zool., 1845, p. 9, pl. 160, f. 6. —
interrupted Fabr, Syst. Ent., p. 215. — Olivier, Ent. II, 33, p.16,
pl. 2 F. 15. My brother captured an example of this species 4 Ibembo
(April 1890); the species is described from Senegal, it is found in
Gabon and in the Quango region. Cicindela nitidula Dej., Spec. 1, p. 120. — Luc., Expl. Alger.,
p-7, pl. 1, f. 5a. — capensis var. Oliv., Ent. II, 33, p. 19, pl. 2,
f. 19 a-e.

A copy was taken 4 Ibembo (March 1890), another was
Basoko (April 7), both by my brother; this species is originally
native to Guinea, it is also found in Bas-Congo,
4 Liberia, Senegal. CARABIDE. Ozeenidee. Pachyteles Wylet Murr., Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 2nd ser., XIX,
1857, p. 445. A copy taken & Thembo (May, J. Duvivier) relates
exactly to the author's description; this species is described
of Old Calabar. Scaritis. Ochyropus Savagei Hope, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 1842, X, p. 93;
var. Ajaz Murray, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 1857, 2 ser., XIX,
p-455, pl. XII, f. 4. A copy taken on March 3 4 Ibembo (J. Duvivier) recounts
bearing exactly the description of the Ajaa Murr. Distichus picicornis Dej., Spec. Col.V, p.493.— troglodytes Er.,
Wiegm. Arch. 1843, I, p. 214. Up copy taken in March 4 Ibembo (J. Duvivier) seems to me
belong 4 this space; the only difference I see is

 

264

Almost complete obliteration of the line of points which separates the
front of the vertex. This species has a geographical distribution
phic quite extensive, because not only is it found on the
western and eastern coasts of Africa, but again, following
Chaudoir, in the Decean and 4 Ceylon. Galeritis. Dendrocellus Bocandei Laferte, Rev. Zool., 1849, p. 348. —
Hot., Bull. Mose., 1850, I, p. 35. — pectoralis Murr., Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 2nd ser., XIX, 1857, p. 157. A specimen of this pretty species was taken during the
second half of September in Ibembo (J. Duvivi is located
also in Senegal and Old Calabar. Galerita africana Dej., Spec. Collar. I, p. 190. Four copies of this Galérite were found 4 Ibembo
(May and August, J. Duvivier) and 4 Djabir-Bandja (May-June, Lt Milz);
its habitat is quite extensive, because it is found not only
in Senegambia, 4 Liberia, but also in Nubia, in Kordofan. Galevita interstitialis Dej., Spec. Collar. V, p. 295. Two specimens of this easily recognizable species have
were captured during the second half of August 4 Ibembo
(J. Duvivier); this Galérite is originally from Sierra-Leone. Brachinid. Aptinus obliquatus Thom., Arehiv. entom., II, 1858, p. 30. Two copies, one taken & Ibembo (J. Duvivier), the other
4 Djabir-Bandja ‘May-June, Lt Milz); match perfectly &
the author's description, and leave me in no doubt as to
their determination. The species was described from Gabon and was
recovery i Malange in the province of Angola. Pericalid. Rhaphidognatha trimaculata Murray, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist.,
1857, 2¢ ser., XIX, p. 316, pl. XII, f.

A specimen of this species was taken 4 Ibembo (march, J. Duvi-
live). The anterior spots of the elytra are less developed
than in the type described by Murray, but otherwise the insect
captured 4 Tbembo fully corresponds 4 to the description of
author; this species is described from Old Calabar. Thyreopterus flavosignatus Dej., Spec. Collar. V, p. 446. - of
Chaud., Ann. Soc. ent. Belgium, XII, 1869, p. 142. A specimen of this species was captured in Ibembo, during
the second half of August, by my brother Joseph. Se
found in Senegal, Cap, Natal and Bas-Congo. 265

Thyreopterus cordicollis Duviv., Ann. Soc. ent. Belgium, 1891,
XXXV; C.R., p. cccLxxvi. Entirely dull dark brown, with the lateral edge of the cor-
selet and elytra of a more or less clear ferruginous, the
mouth, the palps, the antennae also ferruginous and the
reddish brown legs. Almost smooth corset on the disc,
subcordiform. Ample elytra, very slightly chagrined, fine-
furrowed, each adorned in front with a zigzag spot
orange-yellow and behind a common spot of the same
color. Long. 13 mill. ; width max. 6 1/s mill. — Ibembo (August 15/31,
J. Duvivier). Head quite small, as long as wide, relatively wider
that in 7, flavosignatus Dej., very finely chagrined; collar
cylindrical, slightly narrowed; prominent eyes; light surface
slightly impressed in the middle and forward towards the sides, very
slightly longitudinally wrinkled near the eyes; antennae
reaching half the length of the body, middling, fili-
forms, glabrous on the first three articles and the base of the qua-
third, pubescent on the rest: art. 2 very short, 3 the longest. Prothorax subcordiform, in its middle part a little more
wide as the head is at eye level, 1 1/s times as wide as
long in its most developed part, clearly indented anterior
slightly with the angles a little advanced, broad and obtuse-
ment rounded; the base is slightly indented on the peduncle
and goes up in a very sensitive way towards the angles which are
slightly obtuse; straight sides 4 the base, then sinuous and regular-
dilated rounded in front to narrow towards the corners
anterior; slightly convex surface, marked with a longitudinal furrow
well printed, reaching neither the front edge nor the base, more
smooth on the disc as on the sides, presenting a large number
extremely fine transverse wrinkles and a translucent impression
rather marked versale very close to the anterior edge, ott one observes,
in addition, some fine longitudinal wrinkles; the sides of the disc
are quite depressed, the mediocrely wide lateral edge is sharp-
ment raised and widens a little towards the corners; base cdts
and the anterior angles are slightly hollow. Klytres considered
slightly wider at the base than the corselet, about a third wider
long than wide, square with very rounded corners; the
middle of the base is cut squarely, the cdts are also and
moderately rounded, the tip is obliquely truncated, distinctly
slightly indented with the subacute sutural angle; the area is
glabrous, slightly convex transversely; the streaks are fine,
well printed, not punctuated, the first six meet

 

266

in pairs at the top, the 7 continues along the posterior edge
up to the 2nd; rudimentary precutellar stria; plane intervals,
very finely chagrined, dull, the odd ones narrower than the
others; on the third interval three points inserted: the 1* towards
the first third, the 24th towards the posterior 5th, the 3¢ at the junction of the
stripes 3 and 4; submarginal series of dots interrupted in the middle;
fairly wide side edge, slightly raised around the shoulder, flattened
on the rest of the side. Underside of the body flattened, smooth, glabrous. Dull dark brown upper with side bodice edge
and elytra of a more or less clear ferruginous; on each
elytron a fairly wide, very angular, zigzag spot arranged
between the 2¢ and 8¢ stripes, towards the first third and another joint,
towards the posterior quarter, also in zigzag, slightly exceeding the
7th streak; these spots are orange-yellow; underside smoother than
the top, mouth, palpi and antennae of a ferruginous plus
or less obscure. Brown legs with slightly darker shins. This species will easily be recognized by its heart-shaped corselet,
not rectangular; it differs from 7'. favosignatus Dej., not only
partly by the shape of the corselet, but also by its larger size
tall, its relatively fuller form, its corselet almost
smooth, its elytra not covered with piliferous ocellated points, but
simply finely chagrined, glabrous and 4 well-marked striae
and not punctuated. Catascopus rufipes Gory, Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1833, p. 204. —finis Westernm., Dej. Cat., 3rd ed., p. 15. Two specimens appearing to me to belong to the variety rugi-
front Murr. were taken one in Ibembo, the other in Djabir-Bandja. Morionide. Platynodes Westernmanni Westw., Trans. Had. Soc. London, IV
1841, p. 278, pl. 21, f. HAS. —Murray, Ann. Nat. Hist. London,
2¢ ser., XIX, 1857, p. 448, pl. XVI, f. 7. — Lac., Gen. Collar. Atl., I, pl. 7, f. 2. — Hot., Bull. Mose., 1854, II, p. 331. Three specimens of this species were captured during the
first half of April, the second half of September
October and the end of October At Ibembo (J. Duvivier); she was described
of Old Calabar and found in the land of the Niams-Niams (Bohn-
dorf). Morio guineensis Imhoff, Verh. d. Nat. Gesel. Basle. V, 1843,
p - 166. — senegalensis Dej., Cat. —Murray, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. London, 2nd ser., XIX, 1857, p. 447. A specimen taken in May i Ibembo (J. Duvivier). - This
species is widespread and is found in Senegal, Old
Calabar, Gabon, in the Quango region, summer. 267
Broscide. Glyptus sculptilis Brulle, Hist. Nat. Ins., V, p. 83, pl. 4, f. 4. —Lacord., Gen. Col., Atl., pl. 10, f. 3. — Laferte, Rev. Mag. Zool., 1852. Both sexes of this interesting Carabid have been captured
in several copies in March, May, August and September
Ibembo, at least I consider both sexes of one and
same species, the two interesting forms that I have in front of me,
and which were captured together in termite mounds, so name-
breuses in or near the Congo. CG. Long. 19 to 20 mill. (without mandib. ); width 7'/2 48 mil. (under the shoulders). Pitch brown with the labrum, palps, jaws and
reddish-brown antennae, strongly transverse corselet,
a little more than twice as wide in the middle as it is high on its
median line ; intervals of the elytra marked with fine carvings
transverse, however slightly accentuated; normal legs and tarsi;
last abdominal segment sharp, ending in a point, weak-
lies bi-impressed. Q. Long. 20 4 21 mill. (without mandib. ); width 8 mill. (under
shoulders). Entirely black, on the elytra of a more satiny aspect than the
CG, with the labrum, palps, jaws and antennae of a
reddish brown as in G; wider bodice, more
elongated, with the posterior edge narrower than the anterior edge,
appearing a pew more convex, the median furrow more pro-
nuncio; intervals of the elytra marked with fine and deep
clearly marked transverse carvings; tarsi plus ep:
hips strongly marked, thighs mericest especially the post-
upper which are almost twice as thick as those of G;
last abdominal segment absolutely rounded and broad; shins
hind legs more strongly dilated 4 tip. Panageid. Craspedophorus Milzi Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.R., p. cocrxxvun. Oblong-oral, very shiny black; corselet quite similar to
that of Cr. tet ‘asigma Chd., punctuated-rugueua, quoted strongly
raised to a7” oblong-oval elyra, slightly flattened
nis, Cun shiny black, punctate-striate, d intervals riddled
piliferous points, each adorned with two large red laches,
the first very close to the base, obliquely forward, occupying the
intervals 5 to 8 and stopping at the first third, the second pres

 

 

268

from the top, skewed backwards and running intervals 4-8,

both unequal on their edges, except the anterior edge of the

first which is almost straight. Bottom and legs no

Long. 19 mill. ; width max. 8 mill. — Djabir-Bandja (May-June,
The Milz). Head mediocre, black, slightly enlarged in front, a little more
long as wide, longitudinally impressed from each
side with the vaulted middle part; epistome smooth, convex; forehead
very rough in the lateral impressions, punctuated and transverse
slightly wrinkled behind as well as on the vertex; side edges
slightly raised in the shape of a hull; pitch brown palps
’ last segment of the jaws longer than the previous ones
united, in the shape of an ax head; mandibles black, pointed
brownish; antennae long, robust, exceeding half the
body length, densely pubescent: art.3 excessively long,
longer than the next two combined; prominent eyes,
rounded. Prothorax shiny black, transverse, once and
half as wide as long in its most developed part, more
wide 4 the base that has its anterior part ott it is very slightly
indented in are of a circle with the angles deviating a little from the
sides of the collar and little protruding; the base is slightly sinuate on the
peduncle and presents on each side a small more pronounced sinus
towards the posterior angles which are tooth-like 4 due to a
slight indentation that marks the end of the side edges; those
the latter are at first obliquely directed outwards on a weak
extended then distinctly and for a long time sinuate, then dilated-
rounded, finally 4 from a point located a little below the
middle, obliquely arched forward, where they round on the
anterior edge: the greatest width of the corselet lies a little
below middle; the disc is traversed by a longitudinal furrow
dinal very accentuated and fading a little before reaching the base
and the anterior border, this disc is limited on each side by a
wide gutter and the sides are strongly raised especially in the
widest part of the corselet and towards its posterior angles, ott
they are almost vertical; the side edge, which is very thin, is not
however visible only in its anterior part, 4 from the middle;
the surface of the bodice is densely rough, dotted with dots
of different sizes, coarser and more intermingled towards the
base and in the gutter; towards the posterior angles the punctuation
tion is further apart; the whole is covered with black hairs, quite long,
directed backwards; crest triangular, small, smooth, concave, black. Elytra oblong-oval, 4 regularly rounded sides, visi-
slenderly sinuate at the top; they are shiny, fairly flat,
marked with nine deep longitudinal ridges, and finely

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

269

dotted; the intervals are moderately convex on the disk,
more accentuated at the top: they are riddled with small dots
sunken ocellated, from which emerge small reddish hairs, stiff,
directed backwards: on the ninth interval a continuous series
large inverted stitches; the elytra are shiny black and
each adorned with two large spots of a beautiful orange-red:
the first, located not far from the base, covers the intervals 34 8,
it is subquadrangular, obliquely forward and stops at the
height of the first third approximately, its front edge is almost
straight, its posterior edge uneven, the spot being shortened, on the
intervals 3, 5, 7; the second spot, also subquadrangu-
lar, obliquely backwards and placed not far from the summit of such
so that its anterior edge is 4 height of the third
third, covers intervals 4-8 with a small complementary spot
silence on the 3°; this spot is shortened, at the anterior edge, on the
intervals 5, 6, 8 and at the posterior edge, on intervals '4, 6, 8. Below less shiny black than above, weakly
pubescent, coarsely pitted on prosternum, rough on
the sides of the meso- and metasternum and of the abdomen, ante-
laughing of the abdominal segments crenellated longitudinally; paws
black, covered with fiery red hair. This species is very close to Cr. tetrastigma Chd. that I do not
unfamiliar in kind; she is a little smaller, the spots
reds appear to be narrower and more serrated on their
edges. This species is also close to Cr. westernmanni
Laf., it differs from it by the spots of the elytra much more
wider, larger, more parallel, less convex elytra,
its corselet more strongly twisted on the sides, near the angles
posterior. Craspedophorus Westemanni Laf., Rev. and Mag. Zool., 1850,
p-392. “Hot, Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXI, 1878, p. 92. A copy of this pretty species, was captured 4 Ibembo,
yers at the end of October, by my brother Joseph. Craspedophorus camerunus Bates, Ent. Mountain. Mag. XXII,
18X6, p. 196. Two specimens, absolutely similar to those of Cameroon,
according to Bates, were taken, one at Ibembo (August 15/31, J. Duvivier),
Vautre in Djabir-Bandja (May-June, L'Milz). Picosmus tropicus Hope, Ann. Nat. Hist., X, 1842, p. 94. —
conicus Murr. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 2 ser., XX, 1857, p. 117,
f. 1 in the text. — Hot., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1878, XXI,
p. 108. This species was encountered in one specimen 4 Djabir-Bandja
(May~June, Lt Milz); it is known from Old Calabar. 270

Epicosmus Evichsoni Hope, Ann. Nat. Hist., X, 1842, p. 94. —
Murr., Ann. Mag. Hist., 2° ser , XX, 1857, p. 123, f. 5 in the
text. — Hot., Ann. Soc., Ent. Belgium, XXI, 1878, p. 117. A specimen of this species was also taken 4 Djabir-
Bandja (May-June, L' Milz). It is found in Senegambia, in
Old Calabar and just recently it was brought back from the area
of Aruwimi by members of the last Stanley expedition. Epicosmus oxygonus Hot., Bull. Soc. Nature. Moscow, 1861,
II, p. 342; Ann. Soc. Ent, Belg., XX1, 1878, p. 118. A specimen of this species was reported from Thebo (15/31
August, J. Duvivier); the species is native to Gabon. Teffius Jamesoni Bates, Proc. zool. Soc. London, 1890, p. 481. Four copies, including a Gy, were taken 4 Ibembo, by my
Brother Joseph, in February, June and August and respond perfectly to
the author's description; it is the third species belonging
to the group defined by Kolbe, and cavactered by sia carenes on
each elytron; it was recently described on specimens
reported by Messrs. Jameson and Bonny, who were part of the
last expedition in !Aruwimi. Tofflus Mergerli Faby., Syst. El., 1, 169. — Dej., Spee. 11,
p. 21. — Qued, Berl., ent. Zeit., XXVI, 1883, p 269. —Kolbe,
Ent. Nachr., XI. 1886, p 228. Of this species which is met with quite commonly in
West Africa. two G specimens were captured a
Djabir-Bandja (May-June, Lieut! Milz). Leflus planifrons Murr., Aun. Mag. Nat. Hist. 1857, p. 156. --Kolbe, Ent. Nach. XII, 1886, p. 227

Both sexes of this species, originating in the Congo, were taken
the G a Djabir-Bandja (May-June, Lieut! Milz), the Q has Tbembo
(1/15 August, J. Duvivier). 2° ser., XX,

  
   
 

 

 

 

Chleniide. y, Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1833, p. 222.
Enator Lafert., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1851,

Chlenius Goryi G
— Buq,, i. lit. —
p. 226. Ibembo 1/15 August J. Duvivier). - A copy. - Is located
in Senegal, Gabon and Congo. Chlanius conformis Dej., Spec. V, p. 630. Djabir-Bandja (May-June, Lieut! Milz). — Only one copy. — This species is known from Senegal, Quango and even from
Zanzibar. 271
Licinide. Leptorembus Kolbei Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,
1892, p. 57. Subdepressed; black underside with steel blue linings, above a
matte black very slightly blendter especially on the side; antennae
(except the first three segments palps, labrum, trochanters of the
four forelegs of a more or less pale fawn;
tibiae and tarsi pitch brown, the latter lighter;
rough corselet, elytra regularly rounded on the
sides, deeply striated & finely streaked, at intervals
densely pitted, both covered with pubescence
russet; elytra adorned with a common apical mark (on the
intervals 1-5) and each of an irregular transverse spot
@ middle height (on intervals 4-8), yellow. Long. 14'/2mil. ; width max. 6'/: mill. — Ibembo 15/31 August. (J. Duvivier). This species presents all the characters that Kolbe gives
(Stett. Ent. Zeit., 1889, p. 5), for the new genre he created there
in the Licinid group; she is pretty close to the
L. flavomaculatus Kolbe, the type of the genus and differs mainly
by the arrangement of the anterior spots; in the favomaculatus
the anterior spots are located between the shoulder and the middle, in
the Kolbet, these spots are 1 level from the middle. The L. Kolbei is matte black on top with a slight shimmer
bluish especially accentuated on the head and the bodice, and covered on
this last organ as well as on the elytra of a fine pubescence
russet, not very thick, the mandibles are black, long and
robust, the deeply indented labrum has its anterior edge is
fawn like the mouth organs; the palpi are slender, 4 last
nier cylindrical article, thinned at the top and truncated; thin head-
slightly pitted, very shiny, finely wrinkled along the edge
internal eye, subrough on vertex; fawn antennae with
the first three articles in pitch brown: art. 3 almost two
times as long as 1 and 1 1/2 times as long as 4. prothorax one
slightly wider than long, equally narrowed in front and behind,
regularly rounded sides and slightly raised at the corners
hind legs which are broadly rounded; blunt anterior angles
his; very rough surface with a fine longitudinal groove
reaching neither the base nor the anterior border and presenting
each side of the base, in front of the posterior angles, an impression
sion slightly oblique, shallow. Elytra regularly
rounded on the sides, presenting their greatest width one
slightly below middle, subdepressed on disc; they are

ANNALS OF THE SOCIETY. ENTOM, FROM HEI

 

 

 

QUE, To XXXVI. 22

 

272

deeply streaked, the streaks moderately punctate with the
intervals 4 fairly tight punctuation, & barely convex and ornamented
of a common stain, in the form of an inverted angle, 4 horses on the
suture near the top and covering the first three intervals;
each of them is decorated, moreover, with a transverse spot,
ticulate on its edges, placed almost 4 level from the middle, repo-
sing on the intervals 5 4 8 and still starting the
4¢interval; these spots are yellow. Glossy black underside,
has steel blue reflections; pitch-brown tibiae and tarsi, these
latter lighter; trochanters of the four anterior femurs
fawns. Last three abdominal segments slightly depressed
widthwise, last narrowly bordered with brown;
breast segments subrough with smoother sides. I am happy to dedicate this space to Mr. H. J. Kolbe, the rea-
tor of the genre and 4 to whom we owe such interesting works
entomological. DYTISCIDA. Cybister owas Lap de Cast., Etud. ent., p. 100. — Dawn,
Spec., p. 86. A copy 3 of this space was captured in Ibembo, in
March 1890. According to a communication from Mr. Regimbart, who
wanted to compare my copy 4 with those contained in his collection,
The insect represents a remarkable variety of the aforementioned species,
variety distinguishing itself above all from the type, by its more elongated shape,
more attenuated at both ends and thicker in the middle; I propose
to call it var. congoana; she has only been captured
Congo; the Qs of this variety hardly differ from those of
Madagascar. According to M. Regimbart the C. oiras is still caught in Zanzibar,
but these specimens do not differ appreciably from those of
Madagascar. GYRINIDA. Dineutes Fauveli Reg., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1883, p. 470;
1886, p. 219. — Four and three Q of this species described in

V'Ogowé were captured in March at Ibembo, by my brother Joseph. Orectogyrus dimidiatus Lap. of Cast., Ktud. Ent., p. 109. —
Aubé, Spec., 1838, p. 738. —Reg., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1883,
p. 452, pl. 13, £156. — semévillosus Dej., Cat., 3rd ed., p. 67. A Q was taken in March 4 [bembo; the species is widespread in
Guinea and 4 Liberia. 273

HYDROPHILIDA. Sternolophus Solievi Solier, Ann. Soc. Ent. France, HL, p. 311. — Brulle, Hist. Nat. Ins., V, p. 280, pl. 12, f. 2. — Cast., Hist. Nat. Col., II, p. 54. A copy taken 4 Djabir-Bandja in May-June. HISTERIDAS. Apopletes Duvivieri Lewis, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., Nov. 1891,
. 381. This new species was taken 4 Ibembo. Pachycrerus cyanescens Erich., Jahrb., 1834, p. 155.—Mar.,
Mon., 1853, p. 458, pl. 14, f. 7. Two specimens of this Pachycrerus captured in Ibembo, in March. Pachycerus violaceipennis Lewis, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist.,

Nov. 1891, p. 386. A copy taken 4 Ibembo. Saprinus gabonensis Mars., Mon., 1853, p. 468, pl. 16, f. 27. A specimen from Ibembo and captured in March. NITIDULIDAS. Brachypeplus rubidus Murr., Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 3rd ser., IV,
p:356; My. p. 304, pl. 34, £.6. Two individuals of this species were captured 4 Ibembo, end
october. Azyra perforata Thom., Arch. entom., II, 1858, p. 43. Three copies in October at Ibembo. Platychora (Phevocopis) ebena Thom., Arch. entom., II, 1858,
p.42. An individual & Ibembo, August 15. DERMESTID A.

Dermestes culpinus Fabr., Spec. Ins., I, p. 64. Two specimens of this cosmopolitan species taken 4 Ibembo. TROGOSITIDA. Alindra elongata Guer., Ic. Regn. Anim. Ins., p.

Two specimens of this species were captured
February 5. Tenebrioides mauritanicus Lin., Syst. National, ed. X, 1, p. 417. — Sturm, Deut. Ivs., I, p. 242, pl. 48, f. a N. — caraboids
Mfg., Syst. Ent., II, p. 256. 200. In Ibembo

  

274

Many specimens of this cosmopolitan species have
been taken throughout the year at [bembo and 4 Djabir-Bandja (May-June). Gymnochila varia Fabr., Syst. El., I, p. 151. — variegata
Bugq., Dej. Cat., 3rd ed., p. 339. A few specimens taken in March, April and August (Ibembo,
J. Duvivier). The species is known from Senegal and Gabon,

PECTICORNS.
. Lucanid. Mesotopus tarandus Sweder., Vet. Ak. Handl., 1787, VII,
p-186, pl. 8, f. 1, Gg. — Burm., Hand. Entom., V, p. 363.—
Parry, Proc. Ent. Soc. London, 1862, p. 107; Cat., p.7, pl. 5, f. 4.2. A female of this beautiful species was taken by my brother
Joseph & Ibembo. Prosopocoilus congoanus Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.-R.. p. cccoxvir. Chestnut brown with slightly lighter elytral disc;
mandibles, antennae and tarsi frankly black; head trans-
versale, very finely granular, slightly indented in are of
circle forward, arcuate at anterior angles, subangular
below the eyes; narrow, slightly longer mandibles
than the corselet, arched, finely roughened, subdilated at the
summit which is tridentate, unidentate at the inner edge a little in
below middle; deeply indented prothorax towards the
posterior angles, indentation bounded in front by a small wae
very prominent tooth, finely granular, & shiny disc;
elytra ¢ tooth-shaped humeral angles; anterior tibias wulti-
dentate in dehovs, the intermediate unidentate. Long. 29 mill. (without mandib.) ; width 11 mill. (at the shoulders), —
Tbembo (September 16-30, J. Duvivier). — A ¢ (female
unknown). Head large, depressed in front, opaque because of the fine granules.
lations of which it is converted, marked with large and broad dots in
rear of the yenx; scalloped anterior edge in are of a circle, barely
sinuate from each with the transverse clypeus, short, bilobed;
anterior lateral angles truncated obliquely, slightly rounded
anteriorly, not ants posteriorly, canthus reaching the middle of
Lovil; coming from the eyes the lateral edges are obliquely
truncated with slightly rounded Tangle. black mandibles,
narrow, & hardly longer than the corselet in its part
median, regularly arched, dilated at the extremity and provided
of three small obtuse teeth, of which the median, the shortest, is more
closer to the posterior than to the terminal tooth; 4 man-

  
 

  

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

275

right dibula, we still observe above, a very small tubercle
tooth-like between the terminal tooth and the middle tooth; the same
small tubercle reproduces 4 the left mandible. but below-
under; above, towards the middle part and starting from the inner edge,
a sturdier tooth, also obtuse and slightly straightened;
internal face of the mandibles concave, finely roughened, external face
and rough underside. additionally dotted with many small dots
arranged in an irregular way, merging with the roughness of the
bottom towards the ends; base of the mandibles smooth, bearing large
points; chin wide, rough, covered with large rounded scars
die. Prothorax somewhat wider and brighter than the head, with
the anterior angles slightly rounded, the sides strongly
indented at the posterior angles, and a tooth-shaped protrusion limiting
forward this indentation; it is narrowly bordered on the sides
and at the base, covered with finer granulations than those of the
head, these interspersed with sunken points, less marked on
the middle of the disc; a few large dimples all against the edge
anterior, next to the scars on the head. Heusson subcordi-
shape, bearing a few dots on the sides. Mlytres carrying 4
Vshoulder a small tooth-shaped protrusion, entirely and finely
rough, blackish-brown with the disc of each one a
slightly reddish. Blackish-brown underparts with black tarsi and
femurs slightly reddish; depressed anterior femora, with
Wa slight oval depression near the base, this depression
furnished with reddish hairs; anterior tibiae multidentate outside,
armed with three strong teeth at their end; intermediate shins
armed in their middle with a small tooth. This space is the size of P. modestus Parry, from which it is
approximates by the shape and the denticulation of the mandibles, the shape
of the upper lip; it differs from this species by the coloring
tion (the sides of the corselet and the elytra of P. modestus being,
according to the description, largely fawn), by the shape of the angles
posterior parts of the prothorax, which are notched here, with the sample
crure limited in front by a protruding tooth, while in the
P. modestus these angles are truncated obliquely, the truncation
being limited in front, not by a tooth, but by a simple
angle; finally, the P. modestus Vépine in the middle of the edge is missing
external of the intermediate tibiae. P. congoanus recalls in
certain points the P. senegalensis Klug, in particular by the shape
of the corselet, which in this last species is also notched
and presents! the tooth-shaped protrusion limiting in front the indentation and
by the spine visible at the outer edge of the intermediate tibiae; but,
on the other hand, the shape and denticulation of the mandibles and the shape
of the upper lip are other,

 

 

 

276
Nigidius Albersi Duviv., Ann. Soc. ent. Belgium, 1890, XXXIV, p.6. Three specimens of this species were taken & Ibembo
in February and March; they are smaller than the type and vary
between 21 and 17 mill. Passalid. Passalus (Erionomus Kaup) Studti Kuw., Deut. Ent. Zeit.,
1890, p. 103. A few specimens of this species have been captured 4 Ibembo
(J. Duvivier) from September 15 to the end of October. It is quite interesting
to meet in the heart of Africa this species recently
described from Madagascar. Passalus (Eumelosomus Kuw.) Klugi Kaup, Col. Hefte, Ill,
1868, p. 12. var. : Kamerunensis Kuw. A specimen of this species encountered so far in
Guinea, Cameroon and 4 Ashante was taken 4 Ibembo (J. Duvivier,
February 5, 1890). Passalus (Eumelosomus Kuw.) Emini Kuw., Deut. Ent. Zeit.,
1891, p. 191. A copy of this Passale was captured in Djabir-Bandja
on the Uellé, by M. Lieutt Milz (May-June 1890); this space
was originally reported 4 Sierra Leone. Passalus (Didimus Kaup) duplicatus Har., Coleop. Hefte, XVI,
1879, p. 32. Thembo (August and end of October, J. Duvivier); four copies of
this species first described from the Lunda (Pogge), taken up later
in the Quango (von Mechow), were taken in that locality. Passalus (Pentalobus Kaup) Palini Perch., Mon. Supplement I,
p. 8, pl. 135, f. 1. — Burm., Handb. d. Entom., V, p. 475. —
Gabonicus Thom., Archiv. Entom., II, 1858, p. 48. This Pentalobus is common in Gabon and Ashante; a five-
zaine copies were taken by my brother 4 Ibembo (April,
August, October 1890). — A specimen was also found
4 Djabir-Bandja (May-June 1890, Milz). We still encounter this
species in the Quango region, and probably throughout
Congo Basin, where it seems to me almost as frequent as
next species. Passalus (Pentalobus Kaup) barbatus Fabr., Syst. El., Ul,
p. 256, 1801. — Pereh., Mon., p. 33, pl. 2 F. 8. — Burm,
Handb. d. Ent. V, p. 475. subpentaphyllus Thom., Archiv. Entom., II, 1858, p. 48. About forty specimens of this species, which occurs
usually in large numbers, were harvested in March, May,

  

 

 

 

 

277

aolit and October (Ibembo, J. Duvivier) and in May-June (Djabir-
Bandja, Milz); among these specimens are a large
number of immature subjects. This Pentalobus is very common in
Guinea; it was also encountered in the Quango region
(v. Mechow). Passalus (Pentalobus Kaup) Reitteri Kuw., Deut. Ent. Zeit.,
1891, p. 192. Four specimens of this Pentalobus described very recently from
country of the Niams-Niams were recruited 4 Ibembo (end of October,
J. Duvivier). LAMELLICORNIA. Ateuchid. Pachylomera femoralis Kirby, Zool. Journal, II, p. 520, t. 14,
f. 1,—Bertolon., Nov. How. Ac. Bonon., X, 1849, p. 390. — horvidus Boh., Ins. Caffr., I, p. 179. A¢& took 4 Ibembo. — Is taken in the whole meritorious part
region of Africa from Mozambique on one side to
Congo Basin on the other. Scarabeus Lamarki MacLeay, Hor. ent., I, 2, p. 499. A copy in Ibembo. Widespread species in Africa. Gymnopleurus virens Er., Wieg. Archiy f. Naturg., 1843, I,
p. 231. A single copy 4 Ibembo; this space is also very
widespread in Africa where it is found from Abyssinia on one side,
Guinea on the other to the south of the continent. Gymnopleurus cerulescens Oliv., Ent., 1, 3, p. 189, vol. 27, f.281. One individual at Ibembo (April). Gymnopleurus azureus Fabr., Syst. El., I, p. 57. A copy taken 4 Ibembo. Gymnoplenrus hilaris Hope, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., IX, 1842,
p. 494. Three specimens, one taken 4 Djabir-Bandja (L* Milz), the
two other 4 Ibembo, seem to me to relate 4 to this species
described from Sierra Leone. Anachalcos cupreus Fabr., Syst. Ent., p. 29. — Oliv., Ent.,
I, 3, p. 156, pl. 7, f. 58. An individual 4 Ibembo. Ooprides. Heliocopris Dianz Hope, Ann. Nat. Hist., IX, 1842, p. 494. I think I can report 4 this species a specimen
worn by Ibembo,

278

Catharsius Sesostris Waterh., Proc. zool. Soc. London, 1888,
p - 86. — Dej., Cat., 3rd ed., p. 151. —pithecius Oliv., Ent., I, 3,
p. 117, pl. 9, f. 73. A copy taken 4 Ibembo. Catharsius sp. A specimen whose development is not absolutely
complete and which seems to me to belong to an unprecedented species; she places herself
in the vicinity of C. nemestrinus, but is absolutely distinct from it. Onthophagus catta Fabr., Mant. Ins., I, p. 12. — Oliv., Ent.,
I, 3, p. 125, pl. 23, f. 201. — gazella Fabr., Ent. System, 1,
p - 56. — Ill., Mag. III, p. 159. —Fahr., Ins. Caflr., I,
p-275. A specimen taken 4 Ibembo of this species, widespread not
only in the whole of Africa, but finding themselves even in
Indies. Proagoderus Ritseme Lansb., Notes Leyd. Mus., V, 1883,
p. 15. I think I can bring back this species a specimen Q taken 4
Tbembo (May 15), He has a slightly golden green head, the corselet
@a dark green more or less golden on the convex parts, the
black elytra lightly tinged with indigo blue, the underside and
the legs dark green, the tubercles of the head less
presented, Mr. Ritsema, who had the kindness to compare this example
to please the types of van Lansberge which are in the Museum of
Leiden, finds that the spur of the anterior tibiae is more strongly
curved inwards and the pygidium more strongly punctate than in
typical specimens of the same sex of P. Rilsema, but do not
finds no other difference, except with regard to the colora-
tion. It is most likely a local variety of the species
described by van Lansberge. Diastellopalpus noctis Thom., Archiv. ent., II, 1858, p. 52. —
Murrayi Har., Col. Hefte, IV, 1868, p. 83. A copy 4 Ibembo (May 10, 1890). - This species is
known from Gabon and Old Calabar. Aphodiid. Aphodius impurus Roth., Wiegm Arch., 1851, I, p. 31. —
Boh., Ins. Caffr., II, p. 332. — Har., Berl. Ent. Zeit., 1862,
52. — picipes Klug. Monatsb. Berlin. Academic, 1855, p. 656;
's Reis., 1862, p. 244
A copy 4 Ibembo (March); the species is widespread in
Africa. 279

Hybosorid. Phexochrous dispar Qued., Berl, Ent. Zeit., XXXVIII, 1884,
p. 293. .

Two copies 4 Ibembo (March and April); species is described
of Quango. Sericide. Holoschiza dentilabris Lansb., Notes Leyd. Mus., VIII, 1886,
p. 97. An individual of this species was taken at Tbembo (end of October). This species has also been captured in Bas-Congo,
Matadi ('schoffen), ott it seems quite frequent. Pseudotrochalus quadrisignatus Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit.,
XXXVIII, 1884, p. 304. Two copies, taken 4 Ibembo; the species is described by aQuango
and is found in the Bas-Congo region. Melolontide. Apogonia virescens Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891,
XXXV; C.R.p. cccexvim. Oblong, slightly curved, very shiny, reddish brown with reflections
Cun bronzed greenish, particularly accentuated on the head, the
bodice, crest, underside and femurs; chaperone strongly
narrowed in front, widely and deeply indented at its edge
anterior, with rounded lateral angles, covered with large dots
confluent, tight; prothorax & poor punctuation, tighter
on the sides and towards the corners. Subparallel llytres, & pain
pubescent, coarsely pitted, barely smooth lines
salient, presenting four regular series of dots near
margin. Below clearly punctuated on the sides, pubescent;
anterior tibiae bidentate outwards. Coarsely pygidium
punctuated. Apogonia virescens Chevr. i. lit. Long. 6 1/2 48 mill. ; width 32/344 1/1 mill, — Old Calabar
(coll. Brenske); Ibembo (J. Duvivier); Djabir-Bandja (May and June,
Lt Milz). Fanve palps 4 last segment very elongated, fusiform; wrasse
pitch brown, in are of a circle; strongly shrunken coping
in front, clearly separated from the forehead by a fairly deep furrow
going from one qil to the other, sloping, broadly and deeply
scalloped 4 its anterior border, with the lateral angles rounded;
it is tightly edged, the edge edged and smooth, the surface

280

is covered with large confluent points, tight, which give it a
rough appearance; the head is vertical, slightly convex, equal-
covered with fairly large sunken points, partly elongated,
more accentuated and closer together towards the anterior part ot they
are limited in front by a smooth space. Antennae 4 club
Wildcat. Prothorax short, about three times as wide as long,
indented and sinuate 4 its anterior border, bisinuate at the base; the
sides are dilated rounded up to the height of the basilar third,
then steadily tapered forward or they form with the edge
anterior almost right angles; the bodice is finely
rimmed, except 4 the base; the surface is transversely convex,
it is marked on each side, towards the middle, with an impression
outdated and covered in tighter, deeper mediocre stitches
and more numerous towards the sides and towards the angles. large crest,
in curvilinear triangle, punctuated on the sides. Elytra a little more
broad 4 the base than the corselet, subparallel, broadly and
singly rounded at the top, slightly impressed in
inside the shoulders; they are slightly convex, coarsely pone-
killed, this punctuation made a little confused by vestiges
transverse wrinkles, especially towards the sides; we notice, in
besides, a few longitudinal series of geminate dots not very
accentuated, and on the sides, between the shoulder and the margin, four
regular series of large, very tight subquadrangular dots;
towards the apical angle the punctuation is absolutely confused; of
each point, both of the corselet and of the elytra, emerges a hair
white, very short, scaly in nature, barely distinct. Propygi-
dium densely covered with large irregular dots; pygidium in
curvilinear triangle strongly bordered behind, roughly
punctate, sparsely pubescent. Underneath clearly punctuated on
sides of the chest, abdominal segments and along the
posterior edge of these, each point giving rise to a
whitish scale; punctate legs, covered with whitish hairs,
longer than those of the abdomen; bidentate anterior tibiae
outside. One of the copies differs somewhat from the others by the reflections
tan less pronounced: less parallel form, its epistome sub-
horizontal, & sharper punctuation, less rough, with the
middle part & roughly widowed of points. The forehead is less
strongly punctuated, the points are a little more spaced and not
elongated; the elytral punctuation is sharper with smooth lines
longitudinal lines more apparent. The underside and the legs are more
dark, the punctuation seems less widely distributed, more
deep and the pubescence better accentuated; this copy does not
appears to be a simple variety of I'd. virescens. 281

THE. virescens differs from its African congeners by its
strongly indented clypeus having; this character is also
common 4 I’A. insularis Karsch of Prince's Island, but this
species is black and heavily hairy. Another species of Apogonia, also unpublished, is found
in Bas-Congo; this species belongs to the group of
Apogonia having the cap rounded anteriorly; here it is
description :

Apogonia congoana Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.-R., p. cccoxvim. Oblong, slightly convered, shiny, entirely Cun reddish brown
more ow less clear, presenting a very slight bronzed reflection,
particularly pronounced in the darker specimens; chaperone
subtruncated in front, clearly and broadly rounded on the sides,
with the side corners also rounded, sloping, converted from
many large dots; transverse prothorax, short, covered with
mediocre points, intermediate between those of the head and
chaperone; elytra slightly dilated posteriorly, strongly
punctuated, with well-defined smooth lines; bidentate anterior tibiae
outside with the vestige of a third tooth. Long. 9 49 1/2 mill. ; width 5 1/2 45 3/5 mill. — Boma (Lower-
Congo) Dugniolle. — Landana (Dr. Petit). Fawn palps and antennal club; chaperone subtruncated in
front, clearly and broadly rounded on the sides with the angles
rounded sides; it is clearly separated from the forehead by a furrow
transverse, sloping, narrowly edged in front (the edge
raised and wider in front) side covered with many large dots

s tight, partly confluent, especially near the eyes; head sub-
ical, not very convex, covered with fairly spaced mediocre dots
and rare on the part adjoining the coping, slightly impressive
forward and presenting, opposite, behind, an impression
obsolete semicircular sion going from one ceil 4 to the other. Prothorax
three times as wide as high, quite short, distinctly indented a
its anterior edge with the anterior angles lowered in such a way
that the corselet seems noticeably narrower in front than in
back; the front edge is slightly advanced in its part
median, the base is slightly bevelled, the dilated sides rounded
to near the middle, then sharply narrowed in front, the angles
anterior acute and advanced, the marked surface on each side of three
outdated prints, headline covered in poor dots,
intermediate between those of the chaperone and those of the front: these points
loosely packed on the disc, are closer together on the sides. heusson
large, triangular, bearing a few points on the sides. Elytra
across the chest and at the base, moderately convex, slightly

  

 

 

 

282

dilated back towards the last third ott the convexity is a little
more accentuated, broadly and singly rounded at the top, very
weakly impressed on the inside of the shoulders; they are pro
fundamentally punctuated, with the points clearly separated, like
visible over the entire surface although a little smaller
towards the top; they each carry a regular line of
stitches along the suture, two sets of twin stitches on the
disc and between the shoulder and the margin, four regular lines of
sunken points; lines of smaller dots, partly erased
in the anterior part; the last two series of points
join, at the top, the first two discoidal series: in
each point two small whitish scales. Propygidium neck-
green with large elongated dots, irregularly arranged; pygidium
in curvilinear triangle, very convex in ¢, moderately
convex in Ja Q, covered with dimples and slightly pubescent. Underneath clearly punctuated on the sides of the breast and the seg-
abdominal ments as well as along the posterior edge of these
latter, the much finer punctuation on the middle of the metasta-
ternum which is longitudinally furrowed on Jes two-thirds of its
length ; in each large spot a whitish scale; paws
sparsely pitted, pubescent; fore tibiae lengthily
bidentate outside, bearing in addition, especially in the Q, a
third tooth, 4 penalty charged, before the other two. Eupeey.is Duviv. Ann. soe. Ent. Belgium, 1892, XXXVI, p. 57. Subtransverse chin, its linear part narrowed in front. Last segment of the oval and acuminate labiaur palps; palps
macillaives & last article tris elongated, fusiform, impressed
above. Large, vertical, deeply biloheal wrasse. 7 was enough
short ; half-circle coping, tightly edged everywhere. Antennae of 10 articles, 4 clubs of 6 articles: art. 3 and 4 very
elongated, 3 one-third longer than 4. Prothovaz short, slightly convex, rounded on the sides, sinuate of
each side & the base with distinct angles. — Point of protrusion
sternal. Eeusson rather, broad, in curvilinear triangle. Lyters oblong, subparallel, very slightly narrowed in
rear, subtruncated widely at the top. Poor anterior pulps tridentate outside,
(the upper tooth very weak) without internal spur, the others
sublinear, spiny ca and 1a; tarsi together almost as long

 

 

283

that the corresponding shins, their rather sturdy hooks,

strongly arched at the tip, dilated and toothed 4 the base. Pygidivm in curvilinear triangle, 2 obtuse apex. This new genus belongs to the Schizonychid group; he
is close to the genus Pegylis, but is very diflerent in its club
antennal of 6 articles, the stem of 4 articles with articles 3 and
4 very elongated; its hooks are swollen at the base and provided, pres
of this, of a tooth-shaped elevation; the anterior tibiae are
tridentate with the upper tooth much reduced. Eupegylis confused Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI, 1892,

p. 57. A more or less light reddish brown, with a very slight sheen
tanned on the head and on the bodice; reddish brown elytra
lighter and indistinctly spotted with blackish; TV,
corselet and abdomen darker, the first two rough-
ment punctuated; wormy elytra, more or less wrinkled trans-
versally; the whole furnished with very small reddish hairs;
fairly long hairy chest. Long. 17 mill. ; width, 8 mill. — Ibembo (September 16-30,
J. Duvivier). Head and bodice of a blackish brown with slight bronze reflections; heat
deeply rough, pitted-rough corselet, both
furnished with hairs of a testaceous-reddish, longer and more numerous
on the head ; antennae pitch brown 4 club fawn. Prothorax
strongly transverse, more than twice as wide as long,
equipped in its middle with a fine longitudinal furrow extending
a smooth line forward and backward; thinly anterior edge
emarginate, 4 slightly advanced in its middle with obtuse angles;
widely sinuate base on each side with its angles slightly
obtuse; cdts rounded, rather distinctly narrowed in front. Bcusson
tall, reddish-brown, broad, rounded triangle at top,
rough. Elytra oblong, 4 hardly dilated in their middle, very
Slightly truncate at top; they are not very convex, of a
fairly light reddish brown, indistinctly spotted with blackish
with base and margin also of this coloration; the surface
is pitted rough, more or less transyersally wrinkled, the
ill-defined punctuation with punctuated intervals, especially towards
the top, it is furnished with many small reddish hairs; a
poorly defined impression is observed between the shoulder and the crest; three
remnants of high lines on the disc as well as two other more
marked, very close together, along the margin. Pontate pygidium-
rough. long pubescent. Rather densely dotted below,
pubescent, very villous on the chest where this villous is in
whitish part. One mile. 284

Psgupop Hoiis Duviv. Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI, 1892, p. 57. Transverse chin, its ligular part slightly narrowed in
front, not sinuate 4 its anterior border. Labial palps inserted on
the sides of the chin. Last article of the subova- labial palps
laive, that of the maxillae very elongated, oblong-ovate, acuminate
at the top, depressed outside. Deeply indented wrasse
are of circle. Almost square Zvle, flat forehead, rounded coping
at the corners, & anterior edge strongly raised, entire in front. Antennas of ueut articles: art. 3, the most slender, one and a half times
as long as 4, which is thicker, 5 short, 6 very short, wide,
the last three forming an elongated club in G.

Transverse prothoraz, angular on the sides, sinuate on each
edted at the base, with obtuse angles

Large Eeusson, in curvilinear triangle. Lytra oblong, slightly narrowed behind, obliquely
impressed in their length on the sides, individually rounded
say at the top. Tri-toothed front legs in G, with
of a very short internal spur, the others rounded, unarmed;
tarsi mediocre, nails stout, simple, furnished inside with a
small obtuse tooth, close to the base (a remnant of a tooth is
still visible between this last tooth and the base of the nail). Pygidium subvertical, in an elongated triangle, acute at the apex. No mesosternal projection; wide metasternal parapleia,
suture of the abdominal segments erased in the midline. Very wide metathoracic hips. Among the true Ielolonthids, this genus is distinguished from those
which have the I article of the antennae longer than the 4° and point of
sternal projection, by its antennae of newf articles and their club
of 3 articles in G. It is close to the genus Lewcopholis. I
don't know the Q.

Pseudopholis squammulosa Duviy., Aun. Soc. Ent. Belgium,
XXXVI, 1892, p. 58. Underside Wun dark brown, covered with small hair-like scales
white and on the chest a fairly long villi of white
slightly russet; mouth parts and hips of a brunette
reddish; tele, eousson and corselet black, except the side edges
of the latter which are brown, those densely curt organs of
small white, punctiform scales; brown eye covers with
base and narrowly blackish margin and a fine black border sul-
valley, coucerts of small punctiform whitewashed splinters, quite
this blackish pygidium has slightly tighter scales. Long. 24 mill. ; width max. 11 mill. —- Ibembo (J. Duvivier). 285

Chaperone slightly dilated in front, regularly rounded at the
angles, 4 anterior edge strongly raised; he is covered in fat
very tight points, each giving rise to a small scale
white, these scales interspersed with a few piliform scales;
flat forehead, presenting a smooth median line and also
large sunken stitches less tight in the central part, and therefore
nant birth 4 a small white scale, as on the chape-
ron; brown antennae 4 duller club: art. | filled with a strong
tuft of red hair. Moderately convex transverse prothorax
ment, about twice as wide at its base as it is high at its
middle; it is strongly angular on the sides which are very
slightly crenellated (the widest part being observed in the middle),
and riddled with sunken points much finer than those of the
head, especially tight towards the sides which are reddish,
much rarer in the midline; anterior edge and base
fringed with reddish hairs. gE cusson punctate and covered with scales. Oblong klytra, slightly dilated behind, marked each
one of a large oblique print extending from below the shoulder
to the apical callus, which is not very prominent, provided with one or proud
remains of high lines on the disk, of another line not far
from the margin and a last suture; they are brown with a
fine sutural border, base and marginal border narrowly black; the
surface is a rough texture, covered with quite a few small dots.
very fine brenx and from each of which emerges a small scale
white; these points are very close together at the base, on the sides and
year summit. Propygidium densely covered with scales. Pygidium
blackish, subvertical, in a triangle longer than wide, very dense
covered with scales. Below a blackish-brown with the
haunches paler, densely covered with hair-like scales on
the abdomen and a long yellowish villus on the chest; femurs
and fairly long pubescent tibiae; simple tarsal nails,
each provided with two small teeth, of which a submedian tras
accused. Rutelide. Anomala Guessfeldti Kolbe, Berl. Ent. Zeit., 18: 3) p. 20;
Noy. act. Ac. L.-C. Nat. Cur., L, 1887, p. 256, pl. 2 ie 1

A copy pri Ibembo; the species is described from cae
and is quite common in the Bas-Congo region,

Anomala vitticollis Lansb., Notes Leyd. Mass., VIII, p. 102. I believe I can relate to this species, an individual taken
Ibembo in May; this species, according to M. Van Lansberghe, must
belong to the division whose tarsi have the split external hook
4 fuck the paws: I can't check this point, the hooks posted~

   

 

286

laughing precisely missing from the copy I have in front of me,
but all other characters refer to the description of
author. I have a second copy, lighter than the first,
but which I cannot separate from it; this one has its hooks,
sometimes & only one of the hind legs: the hook seems to me
simple; could it be accidental? This copy comes from Boma
(Bas-Congo); the species is described from the Congo. The individual taken 4 Ibembo is a @, the biggest of the hooks
forelegs, which is rather thickened, bears in its middle a rather
strong tooth, character that the descriptor did not report. Oryctide. Lemnorynchus trvidentatus Lansb., Notes Leyd. Mus., VIII,
p. 106.
: Two females taken 4 Ibembo; this species has been described
as coming from Gabon and Bas-Congo; I believe her frequently
ment confused in the collections with the 7’. Diana P. de Beauv. Cyphonistes vallatus Wiedem. ,Zcol. Mag. II, 1, p. 1. Burm.,
Handb. Entom., V, p. 213. A¢ taken & Ibembo on May 5th. —- This species is found
in Cape Town and in different regions of the Congo. Dynastide. Archon centaurus Fabr., Syst. Ent., p. 8. — Olivier, Ent. I, 3,
p. 14, pl. 11, f. 104. — Burm., Handb. Entom., V, p. 2
Gideon Drury, Exot. Ins. I, p. 80, pl. 36, f. 1. A get a Q taken Albembo. — This species is quite common
throughout the Congo region. Cetonide. Mecynorrhina torquata Drury, Il. t. Ins. HI, p. 60, pl. 44,
f. 1 (Q). — Waterh., Aun. Mag. Hist., new ser., II, p. 635
(3). — Westw., Arean, ent., 1, p. 169, pl. 44, f. 1, 2. — Burm.,
Handb. Entom., Ill, p. 184. — Kraatz, Deut. E-, 1890,
p. 267, pl. HI, f. 1-3. A B captured at Basoko (Haut-Congo) towards the end of October. He is
medium in size, bears the four white lines on the prothorax
without the median lineolus; the lateral band of the elytra is complete
and rises a little along the suture. Megalorrhina Harrisi Westw., Trans. Ent. Soc. London, V,
p. 20, pl. 1, fig. 2. — Kraatz, Deut. Ent. Zeit., 1890, p. 269. A female of normal color taken 4 Ibembo. Dicvanorvrhina micans Drury, Exot. Ins., 1878, UH, p. 59,

    

   

   
    

  

 

,

287

pl. 32, f. 3. — Westw., Arcan. Entom., I, p. 172. —Proc. Ent. Soc. London, 1849, p. 87. — Trans. Ent. Soc. London, new ser.,

III, 1854, p. 61, pl. 6, f. the the (3). A female captured at Ibembo. Aphelorrhina gultata Oliv., Entom., 1, pl. 2 F. 7a (Q).—Gory
and Perch., Monogr., pl. 22, f. 6 (Q). — Buquet, Ann. soe. ent. France, V, pl. 5b, f. 4(3). —Burm., Hand. d. Entom., LI, p. 208. One mile taken around February 5, 1891 4 Basoko (Haut-Congo). Eccoptocnemis superba Gerst., Mitt. Nat. Worm. Neu-Vorpom-
mern u. Riigen, XIV, p. 12. Two females and a mile caught 4 Ibembo. Tmesorrhina tridens Duviv., Ann. Soc. ent. Belgium, 1891,

XXXV; C.R., p. cccLx1. Elongated, narrowed in the back, very shiny, Cun beautiful metallic green
Soncé, with reddish reflections below as above; shins and
red tarsi; tele rough, prothoraa sparsely pitted;
very finely punctate elytra on the disc (the pew puncture
regular), more coarsely on the sides with numerous
transverse hatching around the apical callus; anterior shins
distinctly tridentate (teeth equidistant from each other),
the intermediates simple, the posteriors clearly identified;
subtriangular mesosternal protrusion,

Long. 19 mill. ; width (at the shoulders) 8 mill. — Ibembo, May 25
1890. A Q taken in flight in full sun. This new 7mesorrhina is very close to 7'. iris; she
distinguished from the latter species by its smaller size, its
much narrower shape, its cap more distinctly marked
giné, the much more numerous and tighter hatchings that
cover the apical angle of the elytra, the much finer punctuation
of these, the green coloring has reddish reflections, and especially its
anterior tibiae much more distinctly tridentate, hence the name of
tridens, proposed by Mr. Dr. Kraatz for this species and which I have
preserved as very characteristic. The coping is rough, relatively a little more elongated and
more parallel than in 7', iris and more distinctly notched,
with the disc a little more convex; the palps are red; the
antennas have the first article of a metallic green, the following
@a pitch brown, finally the red club. The prothorax is sem-
blable To that of the iris, 4 finer punctuation however. The crest
is also similar to that of V'iris, but also less punctuated
on the sides. The elytra are elongated, regularly narrowed
posteriorly with the non-dentiform sutural angle and the protruding suture
run to the top; they are very thin and not very regular
punctuated on the disc, more clearly on the sides, with de nom=-

ANNALS OF THE SOC. ENTOM. OF HELGIUM, T. XXXx¥I. 25

 

 

288

small hatching very tight in the apical angle. The bottom is
colored like the top, i.e. a beautiful metallic green
dark, 4 reddish reflections especially when looking at the insect
sideways or back to front; the tibiae and tarsi are sharp-
ment red, as well as the metathoracic episternum. The projection
mesosternal is subtriangular rather than perfectly rounded
and the anterior tibiae present on the inner hip, three
teeth clearly marked and equally spaced. I have only seen one specimen of this species, a female. Smaragesthes subsuturalis Kr., Deut. Ent. Zeit., 1891, p. 123. Three specimens of this pretty species were captured by my
brother Joseph 4 Ibembo on April 10 and August 1-15, 1890; She is
described from the Congo and is found at the Delagoa hedge. Diplognatha gagates Forst., Nov. Spec. Ins., 1771, p. 6. —
Harold, Coleop. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 79. Quite a number of specimens were captured 4 various
times of the year in Ibembo and & Djabir-Bandja in May and June;
it is a species excessively widespread in Africa. Diplognatha subzenea Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891,

XXXV; C.-R., p. ccoLxi. Form of D. Gagates Forst. and D. silicea Mac Leay, but more
tall, shiny, entirely dark tan faintly
cuprous; punctuate-rough coping on the sides, ad angles
forelegs sharp and raised; superficially stippled prothovax
on the disc, finely chagrined on the sides; regular elytves-
slightly narrowed behind, superficially dotted, finely
reticulated at the top, marked besides a few servies of
very fine and spaced stitches; chagrined pygidium, mat. Projection
mesosternal in an oblong triangle, very fine suture; anterior shins
tridentate, intermediate and posterior unidentate. Long. 29,431 mill., Jarg. 15 4 16 mill. — Ibembo, from 2 to

February 5, 1890. In form, this species is reminiscent of D. gagates Forst. and
D. silicea Mac Lewy, but it is larger, more elongated, more
brilliant, and entirely of a slightly coppery dark bronze. The coping is subquadrangular, clearly raised on the sides
with acute anterior angles and projections, its surface is dense-
punctuated, even partly rough on the sides with the pone-
less pronounced killing between the eyes; the antennae are brown
of pitch with the first metallic article. The prothorax is sem=
blable to that of D. gagates, however more elongated, slightly conyex,
strongly bordered on the cdtés, very fiuement dotted on all
the surface (this dotted line is superficial and visible only under the
magnifying glass), finely chagrined on the sides which thus appear more

 
    

 

 

   

 

 

289

dull, very shiny on the disc. The crest is presented in a triangle
elongated, appearing smooth, but also superficial dotted-
is lying. The elytra are elongated, regularly narrowed in
back, sinuous under the shoulders, planes, more clearly and more
densely stippled than the prothorax, strongly reticulate on
the sides from the middle and at the top around the calluses
apical; on these one also notices some long series
rather regular tudinales of not very marked and rather spaced points;
the suture is raised near the apex and the apical angle of each
elytron is rounded and slightly prolonged. Reticulated pygidium. Very shiny underside with breast and abdomen sides

distinctly grieved; the hatched femurs and the tibias

strong scars; the anterior tibiae are tridentate, the four
unidentate hind legs; the mesosternal projection is subtriangular,
clearly limited behind by a very fine suture. One of the specimens, the largest, is of a greenish bronze,
it is less bright than the others, but does not differ otherwise
of these. .

Briulis variolosa Gory and Perch., Monogr. Keton., p. 128,
pl. 18, f. 6. — Burm., Handb. d. Entom., III, p. 618. — nigrita
Bainb., Trans. Ent. Soc. London, III, p. 216; proc. Ent. Soc. London, 1840, p. 5. A specimen captured during the first fortnight of the month
Waoit to Ibembo. Pilinopyga nigra Duviy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891, XXXV;

C.R., p. cccLxi. Closely related to P. ornatipennis Hope (sub Diplognatha), but
entirely dull black above with dark brown palps.
poiz and the club of the antennae reddish; densely pygidium
covered with long silvery pubescence. Long. 25 mill. ; width (at the shoulders) 10 mill. — [bembo, May 5
1890. an S? This species is extremely similar to D. ornatipennis Hope,
for which Dr. Kraatz rightly founded the genus
Pilinopyga (Deut. Ent. Zeit., i888, p. 415, pl. V, f. 7); P. nigra
seems to me to differ from P. ovnatipennis in its relative chaperone.
slightly more transverse, its appearance more shiny, less
yelouté, the impressed lines of the elytra better marked and
on the other hand the higher intervals; its coloring is
surplus, uniformly black, below as above, with the
brighter underside. The anterior tibiae are distinctly tri-
toothed as in Hope's species. Possibly just a variety of P. ornatipennis, altogether

290

case, it seems characteristic enough to deserve a name
special, if not as a species, at least as a variety. The copy taken by my freve seems to me to be one, the angles
antero-lateral of the chaperone being quite raised. PRELINOTARSIA
Duvivier, Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV, 18091; C.R., p. cecnxu. Hood sub-enlarged and slightly depressed in front, deep-
ment indented 4 penny anterior edge, sub-acuminate lobes. Prothorax barely convex, sub-orbicular, slightly rounded
at the base, truncated in front; sides sub-obliquely dilated to the
a/s anterior, then regularly rounded forward. Very large crest, elongated, in a curvilinear triangle, acute at the
Mountain peak. Elytes not exceeding the last dorsal segment of the abdo-
men, notably wider at the base than the prothorax, 4 shoulders
protruding, slightly dilated up to the first third, then suddenly
slightly attenuated behind, isolated rounded at the top with
Dentiform sutural tangle; depressed surface on the disc, present
both a dimension starting from the shoulder and parallel to the margin; suture
raised. Pygidium very large, in a curvilinear triangle, swollen at the top. Prosternum erased between the hips. Mesosternum not prominent, sublinear. Stout and long legs; tridentate anterior tibiae, the inter-
medians sinuate outwards in their last third, without a tooth well
marked on the outside, the hindquarters as long as the femurs
corresponding, unidentical beyond the middle, then abruptly
dilated outside: the dilatation deeply bifid, ciliated below
under; slender tarsi, always longer than the corresponding
ants, intermediates and posteriors one and a half times as well
longer than the tibiae of the same pair. This belly belongs to the Schizorhinidae group and seems to have
a great analogy with certain genera of Madagascar, in particular
Lyicanthis and Linotarsia which it approaches
elytra and especially the shape

 

 

  
 

 

lie with the genders:
by the length of the tarsi; the courts
of the hind tibiae are particularly remarkable. Type: P. limbatipennis Duviv
P. limbatipennis. Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891, XXXV;

C.R., p. cccxiut. Entirely black, shiny on the legs, abdomen and

hood, mate on the other parts; light brown elytra

 

 

 

 

  

291

dove reflections, obsoletely dotted, bordered with black on the sides
and at the top; underside covered with yellowish and greyish hairs,
slightly tight, straightened. Long. 15 mill. ; width (at the shoulders) 6 mill. — Ibembo (March
1890, J. Duvivier). Head and corselet black, covered with a short pubescence little
dense, black, except on the hood or it is reddish; chaperone
with slightly raised anterior lobes, parallel on the sides,
4 acicular surface, quite shiny; forehead velvety black, dull;
very prominent, subglobose eyes; black antennae with
a pitch-brown club, composed of three leaves. Prothorax
subhexagonal, slightly convex, narrowly rimmed on the sides;
surface finely rugosula, poorly punctuated, the bottom
completely hidden by a velvety, matte black coating; flanks
prothorax acicular and bearing black bristles; crest in
large, elongated curvilinear triangle, of a matte black like the
prothorax. Elytra not extending beyond the penultimate dorsal arch of
the abdomen, of a light brown color and each bearing a band of one
matte black, marginal, starting from the shoulder, where it is narrow, then
widening sharply a little below it to keep
then this same width up to the apical angle, where it rises a
little on the suture; seen from the side, the elytra show reflections
a little golden; their surface is flat and the sides drop just 4
the inner limit of the marginal band; the suture is subcostiform
as well as a line starting a little below the shoulder
and stopping at the apical callus, so that the disc appears
depressed; they are noticeably wider 4 the base than the
prothorax, widen up to the first third, then attenuate
regularly up to the top where they are individually rounded
and present between them a deep indentation; the sutural angle
is tooth-shaped and the posterior edge of each elytron crenate;
six series of obsolete dimples, arranged quite regularly
and more or less erased the base, are observed on each elytron;
at the top the dimples are replaced by hatching in
various meanings; some short black bristles still appear ca
and 1a. Pygidium very large, in curvilinear triangle, subglobose,
bulging at the top; its surface is acicular and covered with a
coated black, matte, velvety in appearance as well as a short pubes-
black cent. Underside black, acicular, covered with short bristles,
greyish, interspersed with reddish, rather dense on the proster-
num, the hips and the anterior femurs, rarer on the
other organs; on the edge of the last two abdominal segments
there are also some long red hairs. 292

Macroma congoensis Bates, Proc. zool. Soc. London. ,1890, p.484. A specimen of this species was taken on May 15, 4 Ibembo;
it is described from the region of Aruwimi, from where it was brought
by Mr. W. Bonny (Stanley Expedition). Trichiid. Platygenia barbata Afzel, in Schonh., Synon. Ins., I, p. 3;
Appendix, p. 38. — Burm., Gen. Insect., tab. c, f. 1, 2 (gh and 9). — Zaivica MacLeay, Hor. entom., 1, p. 152 (G). — Guér., Icon. Reg. Anim., Ins., pl. 26, f. 6 (Q). — Gory and Perch., Mon. Keton., p. 40, pl. 14, f. 5 (Q). A G captured at Ibembo on May 5; this species is found
throughout the western region of Africa. Platygenia evarata Schaum, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, V, 1848,
p. 75. A number of specimens of this rare species have been
captured at [bembo on September 20, 1890, by my brother Joseph;
this insect, as well as the Platygenia barbata, usually stands
on the top of the Elais palm trees. The female alone of P. exarata seems to me to have been described;
I therefore believe it useful to give below the differential characteristics
of both sexes:

G. Prothorax more transverse, finely punctate, very shiny;
elytra more parallel; pygidium broad, rounded at the top,
simple; anterior tibiae obsoletely tridentate on the edge
external, distinctly angular inside; intermediate shins
presenting inside a deep angular indentation followed
a tooth partially closing the indentation; posterior tibiae
provided on their internal surface with a tuft of reddish hairs; abdo-
men concave on the median line; metasternum and abdomen
pubescent in the middle. Q. Prothorax less transverse, punctate rough, much less
brilliant than in the g; slightly larger elytra; pygidium
shorter, with a horizontal extension, flattened below
under, slightly depressed above; strongly anterior shins
tridentate outside, slightly angular inside; inter-tibias
single medians within; hind tibiae without tuft
reddish bristles on the inner side; convex abdomen on the line
median; middle of metasternum and abdomen glabrous. This species differs from P. darbata Afz. by its plus size
reduced: 26 4 28 mill. at liew of 28 4 3) mill. what measure generally
ally P. barbata Afz., its much less transverse chaperone,
notched at the anterior border, with the antero-lateral angles

 

293

yes; the lateral edges of the prothorax are deeply notched
at the posterior angles and the elytra each presented four
very distinct sides; the hind tibiae of P. exarata do
are not dilated in G and the pygidium of Q presents a pro-
very pronounced horizontal extension. Clastocnemis sexguttatus Afz., in Schoenh., Syn. Ins., 1, App. p. 42 (Q). — guadrimaculatus Afz.,1. ¢., p. 48, 3. — incurvatus
MacLeay, Ill. zool. South. Afr., III, p. 14. — sewmaculatus Gor. and Perch., Monog. Keton., p. 97, pl. 11, f. 4, Q. —maculatus
Burm., Gen. Ins., tab. g, f. 1-2 (gi and Q); Zeit. f. Entom., II,
p. 403; Handb. Entom., III, p. 742. A get a Q from Djabir-Bandja (May, June;
The Milz). — This species also occurs in almost
the entire western region of Africa,

ELATERID. Alaus eacavatus Fabr.,Syst. El., II, p.23.— senegalensis Cast.,
Silb. Rev., IV, p. 9. — Cand., Mon., I, p. 120, pl. 4, f. 14 —
Lac., Gen. Coléop., Atl.. p. 42, f. 3. A certain number of specimens taken 4 Ibembo and 4 Djabir-
Bandja. Alaus intermedius Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.R.p. cocexrx. Robust, fairly wide, moderately convex, black-bottomed, fully
covered with white scaly hairs interspersed with a few
brownish hairs; prothorax a little longer than wide, very
slightly narrowed behind, very convex, marked with very
small brownish spots blending with the white, faintly
sinuate on the sides near the posterior angles which are streamlined
and divergent; transverse crest, trapezoidal; wn little elytra
more than twice as long as the corselet, as wide as
this ad the base, narrowed towards the posterior third, broadly
truncated at the end, white and adorned with a few brown spots.
very poorly defined around the escutcheon, along the margin towards
the middle of it and between the middle and the top. Long. 31 mill. ; width max. 101/2 mill. — Ibembo (April 7,
J. Duvivier). Head slightly depressed lengthwise. Prothorax
a little wider than long, very convex, especially in front,
indented on each side 4 its anterior edge, slightly sinuate in
its environment; the edts are rather strongly rounded in front, slightly
slightly narrowed behind, and rather distinctly sinuous towards the
posterior angles which are divergent and keeled; the edge posted~

 

294

in the middle has a protrusion prolonging to the rear the con-
yexity of the disc as with!’A. Jacari Cand., the surface is
finely and very densely punctuated and further marked with dots
bigger and thicker; the dress is white, interspersed with
very small brownish spots blending into the white coloring. Kensson wider than long, trapezoidal. Elytra also eou-
green with very dense white scaly hairs, intermingled with hairs
brownish blending with the white, as wide 4 the base as the
corselet, slightly dilated towards the middle of their length then
gradually narrowed 4 from the last third, finally largely
truncated at top; they are less convex than the corselet,
a little more than twice ai long than the latter, densely
dotted, further marked with regular series of dots
mediocre sunken, all hidden by the vestiture which covers them;
along the margin, a little below the middle, we notice a
ill-defined brownish spot and following it another spot
just as ill-defined as the first and more elongated; the same
brown coloration reproduces around the crest. The bottom and
the legs are also furnished with scaly hairs very
tight, yellowish-white, less tight towards the middle of the
chest and abdominal segments, which are slightly black
brownish and densely pitted; the last abdominal segment is
broadly truncated and terminated by a thick fringe of hairs of a
bright red. This species is close to A. nigrosignatus Qued. and A. Macari
Cand., larger than one and the other and marked with brown spots
ours ill-defined; at the. intermedius, these hues. less good
defined, blend together more. Psephus elimatus Cand., Mon., I, p. 22. Two specimens, one taken 4 Ibembo in September, the other 4
Djabir-Bandja in May-June. Psephus itimbirensis Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.-R., p. ccccxix. Brownish black, shiny, pubescent; broadly impressed forehead
zioned; art. 3 antennae twice as long as 2. Pro-
wn thorax slightly longer than wide, widened at the base, densely
and weakly punctate. the convoluted points on the sides, with
the posterior angles directed straight ahead, streamlined. Elytra
more suitable than the corselet, regularly dotted-striated,
at subannually and weakly converging intervals, the
odd one per narrower, all very finely dotted; four
trilamellate anterior arses, bilamellate posterior denas. Long. 24 mill. ; width 7 mill. — Ibembo (February 5, J. Duvivier). Front very slightly rounded having, provided with a print

 

 

 

  

    

295

weak triangular, rough; reddish-brown antennae,
slightly shorter than the prothorax, with the angular segments in
outside: art. 3 twice as long as 2, 4 almost as long as
2 and 4 together. Prothorax slightly longer than wide, narrowed in
before oi} it is very convex, broadened behind, densely and strong-
ment punctuated with the umbilicus dots on the summers; of each
side of the disc we notice two small impressions, the antecedent of which
lower, the smallest, is at the height of the middle, the second, more
large, a little below the first; the sides are going to widen
lying slightly backwards and have a very slight sinus
very close to the posterior angles which are very elongated, streamlined and
simply divergent; along the base, the habitual impressions
tual. Keusson subovate, acuminate at apex, densely
punctuated. Elytra almost three times as long as the prothorax
on its middle line, no wider than the corselet 4 its base,
subparallel over two-thirds of their length, regularly
tapered towards the top; they are also somewhat more convex than
the bodice, regularly dotted-striated, covered with a very
fine and very dense punctuation; odd intervals a little more
narrower than the others, all slightly and subangularly
convex. Below darker than above, densely dotted;
slightly sloping prosternal projection; reddish brown legs,
four trilamellate anterior tarsi, 2 bilamellate posterior. This species is, according to M. le D* Candéze, very close to the
P. Stanleyi. Cand., but larger; the posterior angles of the
prothorax are not curved inwards at the top. she
also seems very close to P. fulvipes Qued., but this author
also reports 3 lamellae at the posterior tarsi, while
in the species that I describe above, the first article of the tarsi
hind legs seem to be stripped of a lamella. BUPRESTDIDA. Chrysaspis propingua Saund., Cist. entom., I, 1874, p. 221. Three copies differing only in punctuation
more accentuated from the elytra, and seem to me to be only a variety
local. Steraspis calida Har., Coleop. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 91. A copy that M. le Géu Quedenfeldt has understood
match the type, kept in the collections of the Berlin Museum. (‘) Belionota canaliculata Faby., Mant., I, p. 181. (') The Psiloptera Kassaiensis written by me in Ann, Soc. ent, Belgium.yXXXV,
1891, p. 16, is, according to Gen. Quedenfuldt, who kindly compared a
of my types aus Psiloptera from the Berlin Museum, autye that a variety of the P, xeuate
Har., Coleop. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 95. 296

This species has been caught in considerable numbers a
Djabir-Bandja as in Ibembo; in this last locality, on-
all in April. Actenodes Westernmanni Cast. and Gory, Mon., II, p. 5, pl. 1,
fig. 3 3. — Gory, Mon. 1\, p. 187, pl. 32, f. 182b. —femorata
Guer., Rey. Zool., 1840, p. 107. A few jet Q specimens were taken from A Ibembo (August) and
4 Djabir-Bandja. Guérin's description of A. femorata
applies so exactly to the males of the B. Westermanni that I
do not hesitate for a moment to put these two names in synonymy. Actenodes chrysifrons Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXX, 1886,
p. 16, pl. 1, f. 8 and 8a. Four specimens taken in April and August (Ibembo). Actenodes unicolor Cast. and Gory, Mon., II, p.3, pl. 1, f. 2. Three specimens encountered in March and October 4 Ibembo. Actenodes levior Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXX, 1886, p. 18. Djabir-Bandja and Ibembo: four copies answering by-
exactly as described by author. Chrysobothris dorsata Fabr., Mant. I, p. 179. Three specimens taken 4 Ibembo (April-September) and at Djabir-
Bandja (May-June). LYMEXYLONIDAS,

Atractocerus necydaloides Latr., Hist. Nat., 1X, p. 1387. —
A few specimens of this species were captured 4 Ibembo. BOSTRICHIDA. Apate francisca Fabr., Syst. El., II, p. 379. Two copies, one taken 4 Ibembo, the other 4 Basoko, at the
confluence of the Aruwimi and the Congo. Apate tevebrans Pallas, Spice. Zool., Ins., p. 7, pl. 1, f. 3. —
Oliv., Ent., VI, 77, p. 5, pl. 1, f. 4. — muricata Fabr., Syst. Ent., p. 54. A single individual caught 4 Ibembo in August. Apate carmelita Fabr., Syst. E)., 11, p. 379. A few copies at Ibembo. Apate rufiventris Lucas, Rev. Zool., 1843, p, 159; Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1843, Bull., p. 25. A copy taken 4 Ibembo; this species is described from
VAlgeria. Xylopertha cultvata Thom., Arch. Ent., II, 1858, p. 83. One individual captured & Ibembo in March; the species is cited from
Gabon and East Africa. 297

Xylopertha picea Oliv., Ent., 1V, 77, p. 14, pl. 2 F. 10, 10a-b. An individual caught 4 Ibembo in March. Xylopertha polita Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXX, 1886, p. 327,
pl. VIII, f. 11. A single copy 4 Ibembo (April); described from Angola. Bostrychus productus Murray, List of Col. Old Calabar, 1878,
p-113. A few specimens, including only one Q, were collected at
Ibembo in April and September. Bostrychus cornutus Oliv., Ent., 1V, 77, p. 7, pl. 1

A number of individuals were taken 4 different times
of the year to Ibembo and 4 Djabir-Bandja. CLERIDA. Cylidrus fasciatus Cast., Silb. Rey., IV, p. 75. — Klug,
My. Clerid., p. 7. — Spinola, Mon. Cler., I, p. 88, pl. 1, f. 2. —
Var: abdominalis Klug, Mon. Clerid., p. 7. — Fairm., Ann. Soc. Ent. France., 6° ser., VI, 1886, p. 42. Three copies of variable size; this species is found
in Angola, Congo and 4 Madagascar. PsEUDACHLAMYS. Mandibles deeply and widely bifid. transverse labrum,
indented by having; yeww finely granulated, subrounded, subde-
primed, deeply scalloped forward; antennae gradually
widened 4 from the 5° article, the last subovary, acuminate at the
vertex, almost as long as the two previous ones together: art. 3
slender and elongated; last segment of the labial palps elongated,
securiform, last segment of the maxillary palpi subfusiform. Prothorax & barely less wide than the head At the height of the
eyes (including these), as wide as they are long, sharply and
greatly narrowed i the base into a short neck limited in front by
a groove, narrowed in its anterior third and provided, in this place,
of a transverse furrow, subangular behind in its part
median; part between the furrows forming the bead. Zcusson tvansversally rounded in the back. Elytra wider than the corselet at the base, subparallel,
rather short, marked with a series of deep dimples, arranged
regularly and visible all the way to the top. Robust puaites with thicker anterior femora; femurs

 

 

298

hind legs as long as abdomen; five articles to the tarsi,
the first four wide, tight, provided with felted slats
below, bilobed, subequal; distinctly tarsal hooks
appendiculates @ the base. 0

Pubescent body, further furnished with bristles of silky hairs
on the elytra. This genus belongs to the Tillid group; it seems enough
neighbor of the genus Pailenis, and also present some
analogies with the genus Achlamys from Madagascar; antennas
gradually widened from the 5¢ article, the shape of the corselet,
the relatively short elytra, the posterior thighs too
longer than the abdomen, the strong elytral punctuation, the brushes
of hairs with which the elytra are furnished, will make it easy to recognize
this genre. Type: Pseudachlamys penicillatus Duviv. Pseudachlamys penicillatus Duviy. Oblong, subparallel, pubescent, reddish testaceous. Below, head
and iron legs; verter, anterior part of the prothoraz,
base of the tibiae, catremity of the mandibles and antennae,
blackish: posterior part of the corselet of a sanguine fawn;
elytra deeply punctate-ridged, Pun black slightly vio-
laced, densely furnished Cune reddish pubescence, upright,
directed in arviere and of some pinches of silky white hairs. Long. 8 1/2 mill. ; width ep. 2 2/3 mill. — Djabir-Bandja (May-

June, The Milz). Entirely furnished with reddish hairs, abundant especially on
the elytra. You're 4 sparse and fine punctuation, each point giving
birth 4 a reddish coat, straightened, short, additionally bearing
a few long brownish bristles; epistome truncated in front, subde-
primed, separated from the forehead by an arched furrow; sturdy mandibles,
tawny, 4 tip black, strongly toothed internally;
antennae slightly exceeding half the length of the prothorax,
uories with the first four fawn articles: art. 1 thickened,
slightly curved, 2 short, 3 more slender and slightly elongated, # one
little shorter than 3, thicker, 5 and following gradually dilated,
the last subovary, almost as long as the two preceding ones
reunited. Fawn prothorax with the anterior part of a black of
pitch, as long as it is wide, abruptly constricted into a narrow neck
very close to the base, this neck bounded in front by a transverse furrow;
it is marked at the height of the anterior 2/5 by a deep furrow
distinctly sinuate in are behind; the space between the two furrows
convex and forms a real bead; cdted strongly
rounded at the level of the globular part; finely surfaced

 

 

  

 

   
 

        

299

punctate (the dots scattered), and furnished with a few long russet hairs.
sdtres. Crest transversely rounded behind, fawn, sub-
rough, pubescent. Elytra depressed and 1 1/5 times as wide &
the base than the corselet in its greatest width, bearing a
slight transverse impression towards the anterior tivrs, rights to the
base, 4 rounded shoulders, very slightly narrowed a little in
below the shoulder, then subparallel, finally jointly rounded
say at the top; they are of a slightly purplish black, shiny,
deeply punctuated in series, the points in rounded dimples,
deep 4 the base and gradually decreasing towards the top of the
oi elytra: these points are however still visible, although quite
purposes; almost plaus intervals, bearing a series of very small
ot points emerge from small straightened, short, russet hairs,
directed backwards; a few brushes of silky white bristles a
the base of the elytra and under the crest and others scattered on the
surface. Below a reddish tawny, pubescent; paws enough
robust, fawn, with blackish base of tibiae and tarsi
partly obscured. Cardiostichus Mechowi Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXIX, 1885,
p. 269, pl. IXB, f. 1 a, b, this. A specimen of this interesting species was captured in
Djabir-Bandja (May-June); it measures only 12 mill. length
but corresponds in all respects to the description of the author;
Yexemplary having served for the description of M. Quedenfeldt,
measured 14 mill. A second copy, even smaller (10 mill.) was taken 4
Tbembo (May 15); he is partly immature: the head, the corselet
and the knees are reddish-brown, the antennae (except the
last article) are black as well as the tarsi; the elytra are
@a brighter green than the specimen from Djabir-Bandja;
the sides and the extremity of the abdomen are reddish. Stigmatium dorsigerum Westw., Proc. zool. Soc, London, XX,
1852, p. 37, pl. XXVI, f. 8. An individual caught 4 Ibembo in March relates quite well 4 the
description: it just looks darker than the type that the author
had 4 his disposition; the species is described from Sierra-Leone. Necrobia vufipes De Geer, Ins., V, p. 165. — Mfg., Ent. System, 1, p. 230. — Oliv., Ent., IV, 76%, p. 5, pl. I, f. 2a and b.

A few copies taken 4 Ibembo (March) and A Djabir-Bandja
(May-June, L' Milz); this space is found under all
latitudes. 300
TENEBRIONIDS. Himatismus Lindnevi Kolbe, Berl. Ent. Zeit., 1883, p. 22. 5
Nov. Act. Ac. L.-C. Nature. Cur., V, Halle, 1887, p. 288, pl. 2,
f. 6. A specimen of this species was taken 4 Ibembo; She is
known from Lower Guinea (Chinchoxo). Ceropria Romandi Cast. and Brulle, Aun. Se. Nat., Paris, XNIU,
1828, p. 79. — janthina Thom., Archiv. ent., II, 1858, p. 86. A few individuals were encountered in March and August a
Ibembo and 4 Djabir-Bandja. ~ The species is known from Senegal and
from Guinea. Ceropria anthracina Lac., Gen. Col., V, 1, p. 308. - Than.,
Berlin. Ent. Zeit., XXIX, | pile

A specimen taken in the first fortnight of August
1 Ibembo seems to me to relate entirely to this space. Toxicum taurus Fabr., Syst. El., 1, p. 153. — Cast., Hist. Nat., Il, p. 217. — Lac., Gen. Col., Atl, pl. 55, f. 2. —
gazella Fabr., Ent. Syst., Suppl., p. 176. A few individuals were taken 4 different times of the year A
Ibembo. TENESIS
Duvivier, Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI, 1892, p. 163. This new genus is close to the genus Amenophis Thoms., by
its strongly serrated antennae from the 4th article, by its four
hind tibiae subcanaliculated throughout their length, but
differs from it by the shape of its prosternum which does not present the
strong projection so characteristic of some tenebrionid genera:
Amenophis, Tarazides. ete; the prosternum is here bent forward
as backward or clearly truncated; it is marked in
above two lateral furrows, the mesosternum is wide in front
and slightly depressed, but without prominent or angular edges; this
genus is thus close to the genus Sefenis Mots., which does not have the
saw antennae,

Here is the description of the characters of this new genus:

Maxillary palps 4 last securiform segment; salient dabber,
truncated in front, with rounded corners. 7th rhomboidal,
prolonged behind the eyes; epistome truncated forward, separated
of the forehead by a slightly marked semi-circular furrow; eyes wide
transverse, moderately spaced, notched in front; orbits
antennal not spiny; aafennes reaching approximately the base
of the prothorax, greatly enlarged, with sections sawn from
of the 4*, the last one is a little wider than the previous one and rounded
at the end: art. 3 as long as the previous two together. Prohto-

 

 

  

 

 

301

rat \ 4/s times as wide as long, rounded on sides, slightly

slightly convex above, weakly bisinate 4 the base, strongly

marginalized at the posterior edge, very narrowly on the sides and on
part of the front edge. Large escutcheon, in curvilinear triangle. Elytra once as wide at the base as the prothorax, subpa-
straight, convex, slightly attenuated at apex, where they are
jointly rounded; narrow epipleural fold,

Prosternum curved forwards and backwards, truncated at its base,
bifurcated lengthwise; mesosternum widened anteriorly, not con-
cellar; metasternum longitudinally furrowed behind; protrusion
intercostal of abdomen in acute triangle. Poor legs; sublinear thighs; depressed anterior tibiae
outwards, the four posterior subducted throughout
their length; last segment of the tarsi much longer than
previous ones together. Tenesis femoratus Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,

1892, p. 163. Black, with the basal two-thirds of the femurs red and the elytra
@a beautiful golden green; strongly pitted head and bodice; crest
Finely punctuated; elytra deeply striated, the points little
accused, lightly entering the intervals that are converged,
quite densely and very finely dotted. Long. 20 mil., width. of the proth. 5 mil., width. of the elect. 9 mill. —
Ibembo (September, J. Duvivier). Head very rough in front, heavily pitted in back,
with a less punctate space between the eyes. Prothorax a little
narrower in front than behind, dense and deep
punctuated, especially on the cdtés. Very weakly bisinate elytra a
the base with the shoulders obliquely rounded, subparallel, tras
weakly dilated behind, carrying each, outside the
scutellar striole, eight deep, weakly pitted striae. Pitch black below, finely and densely dotted on
The abdomen with the metasternum finely wrinkled on the sides. Amenophis iphthinoides Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., 1885, XXIX,
p. 15 (sub Hemerobates). — Buq., i. lit. I report to this species a specimen taken 4 Ibembo in August;
this species is found in Quango and Guinea. Tavaxides cvenatostriatus Imh., Verhandl. Nat. Ges. Basle,
1843, V, p. 174. An individual 4 Ibembo. Tarazides sinuatus Fabr., Syst. El., 1, p. 160. — Beauy., Ins. afr. and American, p. 139, pl. 30b, fig. 92 and b. — confused Westw.,
proc. zool. Soc. London, 1842, p. 118; Trans, Zool. Soc., III, 1843,

 

302

p. 224, pl. 15, f. Get 7; Ann. My
A few specimens of this species were taken from 4 Ibembo. Tarawxides punctatus Fabr., Syst. El, p. 160. — Westw.

proc. zool. Soc., 1842, p. 118; Trans. zool. Soc., II, p. 224,

pl. 15, f. 10; Ann. Mag. Nat. History, 1843, p. 533. A number of individuals were captured in Djabir-Bandja
and A Ibemho; this space is excessively common in all
the Congo region; these insects project, when captured,
a very abundant and very corrosive reddish liquid; they take each other
in number under the bark of dying trees, as well as the
T. sinuatus. Nyctobates bifasciatus Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., 1885, XXIX,
p. 16, pl. IH, f. 5, 5a and b.

A specimen of this pretty species, known only from
Quango region, was found in Ibembo. lobicollis Thom., Archiv. ent., II, 1858, p. 100. A single specimen of this species caught 4 Ibembo. Lyprops Biitinevi Kolbe, Stett. Ent. Zeit., 1891, p. 16. A copy taken at Ibembo is perfectly worn & the
description of the author who, moreover, was kind enough to compare it
his type. The species is described from an individual reported from
Gabon by Doctor Biittner. Dichastops obscura Vab Ent. System, 1, 2, p. 79; System EL, 1
p. 70. —Klug, Dey Mads 187. — Fairm., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1869, p.

This species:

    

 

Nat. Hist., XI, 1843, p. 532. now as belonging to the

 

Gerst., as given by Kolbe (Ent. Zeit., 1890, p. 17). —
Some examples: a Ibembo and a j

Odontopus tristis Westw., Trans. Z
p. 218. An individual matching 4 the author's description, and taken
in September in Ibembo. Chiroscelis dilatata Fabr., Syst. El., 1, p. 145. — Westw.
Trans. zool. Soc. London, III, 1843, p. 208, pl. XV, f. 1. A copy 4 Ibembo. Chiroscelis bifenestrella Westw., Trans. zool. Soc. London, HI,
1843, p. 209, pl. XIV, f. 2;Area. Entom., II, p. 160, pl. 87, fig. 3a. Ibembo (August), two copies; Djabir-Bandja (May-June),
1 copy. Prioscelis serrata Fabr., Ent. System, 1, p. 4. — Oliver.. Ins.,
p-57, p. 1, f. 1, — Westw., Trans. zool. Soc, London, LI, 1843,
p. 213, pl. XIV, f. 5

Ibembo, February: 1 copy. , III, 1843,

    

 

303

Prioscelis Raddoni Westw., Trans. Zool, Soe London, Ill, 1843,
p. 215, pl. XV, f. 6. Tbembo, May: 1 copy. Pycnocerus Westemanni Hope, The Coleop. Man., III, p. 186. — Westw., Trans. zool. Soc. London, III, 1843, p 217, pl. XV, f. 2. A fairly small copy seems to me to relate to 4 this
species, he was taken in Ibembo; from Gabon, from Liberia, summer. Pycnocerus exaratus Har., Mitth. Minch. Ent. Ver., 1878,
p-107; Coleop. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 121. Three individuals taken in February and March 4 Ibembo; is located
again in Lunda and Quango. Aspidosternum physopterum Har., Mitt. Minch. Ent. Ver., IV,
1881, p. 164. :

A copy 4 Ibembo; the species is described from Guinea. Megacantha tenebrosa Westw., Proc. zool. Soc. London, 1842,
p-122; Trans. zool. Soc. London, II, 1843, p. 229, pl. XV,
f. 12; Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 1843, XI, p. 536. — dentata Fabr.,
System El., I, p. 160. — Lac., Gen. Col., V, p. 468, note 1. Two individuals, G and Q, at Ibembo. Hoplonyz alleculoides Thom., Arch. ent., II, 1858, p. 9

A single copy taken in August 4 Ibembo. — The species is described
Gabon and has since been found in the Quango region. Hoplonyx distinctus Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,

1892, p. 163. Oblong, convex, black, with the antennae, tibiae and tarsi of a
reddish brown; dull head and bodice, the first vaguely, the
second sparse and superficially pitted; interpersonal space
very narrow blade; crest and very shiny elytra, the latter
deeply and serially punctuated, & vaguely interspersed
and superficially dotted; underside less shiny than
elytra. Long. 12 to 12 1/2 mill. ; width 6 9/s mill. — Ibembo (August
and October, J. Duvivier). Oblong, convex, black, dull, except on crest and elytra;
epistome large, with reddish anterior edge, transverse, separated from the
forehead by a not very marked transverse furrow, bearing a few points
mediocre tighter; forehead punctuated like the epistome; space
interocular a little narrower than the length of the 1st segment of the
antennae, very slightly constricted in its middle part; eyes
broadly transverse, reddish, deeply indented in
forward triangle; antennae barely reaching half the length
figure of the body, of a reddish brown: art. 4 a bit shorter
than 3 and subequal to the following, which are slightly thickened. Transverse prothorax, about twice as wide as it is high,

ANNALS OF THE SOC. ENTOM, DR BELGIUM, T. XXXVI. 2

 

 

 

304

d@un matte black, very little shiny on the middle of the disc,
sinuate base on each side and subtrouched above the escutcheon,
right sides up to the anterior third from where they are abruptly
directed forward, anterior angles lowered, straight, posterior
nearly straight; depressed surface, covered with a few dots
spaced out and superficial. Smooth, shiny, curved triangular crest
line, carrying a few points. Klytra not wider at the base
than the corselet, obliquely widened at the shoulders, then parallel
up to the last third, whence they are regularly narrowed down to
only at the top; they are convex, very shiny and present
each eight whole series of large elongated sunken dots and
fairly wide apart; the intervals are flat on the record, barely
slightly raised on the sides and towards the top, and covered
small superficial dots. Underside not very shiny, quite 4 matte
on the flanks of the prothorax and the metasternal parapleura;
these clearly punctuated; pitted legs; tibiae and tarsi
reddish brown; strongly toothed anterior femora. This space is very close to HZ. monophthalmus Thom., but
I believe it is distinct by the distance between the eyes which is twice
as wide as in H. monopththalmus, where the spacing is
excessively narrow; in H. distinctus, the punctuation of the cor-
selet is further apart, the transverse impressions which are observed
on each side of the base of the corselet in H. monopththalmus
are here insensitive; the labrum is less rough, the elytra more
shiny, all series of dimples are equal, while
in H. monopththaimus the dimples of the three earliest series
close to the suture are narrower and less pronounced than the
others; the size is also somewhat smaller in Z. distinctus
which has, moreover, the tibiae, the tarsi and the antennae of a brown
reddish. Eupezus brevicollis Har., Coleop. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 128. Two copies taken 4 Ibembo; this species, described from the Lunda,
was found in the Quango region and 4 Ashantee. Bupezus rufipes Qued., Ber). Ent. Zeit., XXIX, 1885, p. 24,
pl. II, f.8a@ and d.

Two individuals captured 4 Ibembo and Djabir-Bandja, relate
tent has the description of author. Parenpizus gliber Kolbe, Stett. Ent. Zeit., 1890, p. 17. One individual caught 4 Djabir-Banidja; Vespece is described from the
Quango region. Nesioticus flaropictus Westw., Proe. Zool Soc. London, 1842,
p. 121; Trans. zool. Soc. Lend., HI, 1843, p. 227, plate XV, f. 13. Thom., Arch. ent, II, 1858, p. 92, pl. 3, f. 1. —Champion,
Proe. zool. Soc. London, 1890, p. G41, pl. LVI, f. 4, var. 305

A large number of copies were taken 4 Ibembo and a
Djabir-Bandja, they relate to the variety represented by Champion
(I. None ), from specimens taken in the region of ’Aruwimi
by members of the last Stanley expedition; this space
seems extremely common throughout the region. Paranarygnus nigroeneus Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXIX,
1885, p. 27, pl. II, f. 9. A specimen of this species taken 4 Djabir-Bandja; She is
described from the Quango. Strongylium Pogget Har., Coleop. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 126. Three copies 4 Ibembo (end of October). Strongylium dichromum Thom., Arch. ent., II, p. 94. A specimen taken 4 Ibembo (aoat), notably larger than
the type of Thomson (26 mill. ), but which I cannot separate from it,
the structure being absolutely the same. Strongylium muata Har., Coleop. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 126. An individual from Ibembo and appearing to belong 4
this species; this, as well as the preceding, have been described from
Interior of the Congo. Strongylium variolosum Duvivy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium,

XXXVI, 1892, p. 164. Elongated, subparallel, convex, dark metallic green, shimmering
golden; blue tarsi and antennae, the latter not exceeding
the base of the bodice; yeua fairly close together, slightly converging
ahead ; head, prothorax and legs densely and deeply
punctate; prothorax subquadrangular, rounded on sides;
elytra each marked with eight series of deep dimples
elongated, very vaguely dotted intervals; proster- protrusion
end extended into a triangle truncated at the apex; dense underside-
ment dotted. Long. 22 mill. ; width (at shoulders) 6 1/5 mill. —Ibembo
(August 16-31, J. Duvivier). Wrasse of a blackish bronze, punctuated; anterior part of the epi-
stoma smooth and reddish, this one strongly transverse, straight in
front, with deep but not very tight stitches, fitted at the back with a
oval dimple; antennal orbits subangular, well developed
lopped, punctate like the epistome; front and vertex 4 punctuation
larger and a little looser than that of the epistome; a
small smooth triangular plate between the eyes at the level of their
posterior edge; eyes rather strongly granulated, large, wide, 4
anterior border deeply indented in a triangle, converging in
front, or their gauge is a little narrower than the length
of the 3rd article of the antennas; antennae not extending beyond the edge
posterior of the prothorax, metallic blue: art. 2 short, 3 and 4

 

 

306

the longest, subequal, the following shorter and dilated-
angular. Subquadrangular prothorax, cut straight forward and
behind, with slightly rounded sides; clearly edged base,
thickened, with posterior angles extended outwards; edge
anterior distinctly edged; slightly conyex trans-
versally, slightly impressed on each side not far from
the base, covered with very large, closely spaced points whose inter-
valleys are occupied by points half smaller: all these
points have a very shiny background and a longer green
tudinal 4 barely scored. Keusson in curvilinear triangle, marked with
some points. Elytra elongated, notably wider than the
protiorax 4 the base, distinctly convex, parallel in their
first quarter, then very slightly twisted on the sides, finally
weakly dilated to narrow towards the top where they are
jointly rounded; the shoulders are rounded, not protruding
tines; the elytra are marked with eight longitudinal series of
very large rather elongated dimples, interspersed with more
rounded, all very deep and with a very shiny bottom and a
shade golden green while the intervals are a bronze green
blackish, these bear a very fine and spread dotted line; epilations
transversely wrinkled. Below a shade a little lighter
than the top; flanks of the prothorax very rough, sides of the meso-
sternum and metathoracic parapleria distinctly punctate;
metasternum 4 fine and widely spaced punctuation, abdomen dotted
thin and very tight, sides of the abdominal segments impres-
curved and wrinkled, more distinctly pitted; legs 4 punctuation
deep and very tight, knees and tarsi with bluish reflections. Slightly concave prosternuin between the hips, prolonged in
back of these into a short triangular protrusion truncated in
arrigre, compressed on the sides; concave mesosternum, meta-
sternum furrowed longitudinally, the groove very deep behind. The S. rariolosum is very close to the cribratum Thom., the corselet
is less elongated, its punctuation less rough,
The distance between the eyes is greater, the intervals between the elytra
are more densely pitted and the dimples more elongated, the
elytra show no trace of pubescence, while
that in 8. cribratum, each small point gives rise to a
a short hair, straightened, directed backwards, g1 re; the metasternum
is sparsely dotted with densely punctate sides; at the house of
the S. cribratum Thom., the sides of the metasternum are very
rough. Praogena rubripes Cast., Coleop., Il, p. 241. —
sanguinipes Dej., Cat., 3rd ed., p. 230, — Miklin, Mon., p. 559. A number of individuals of different shades, taken 4
Tbeimbo. 307

CISTELIDA. Synallecula soorcula Kolbe, Berl. Ent. Zeit., 1883, p. 25;
Noy. Act. Ac. L.-Car. Nat. Cur., L, 1887, p. 300. A specimen captured 4 Tbembo, absolutely similar to
others that I have from Banana (Bas-Congo); this species
would it not be identical with the Cistela rufa Thom., from Gabon? Synallecula picea Sahlb., Thon's Archiv, II, 1829, p. 16. —
Kolbe, Nov. Act. Ac. L.-Car. Nat. Cur., L, 1887, p. 300. A specimen from Ibembo, identical 4 to another specimen
please that I own from Léopoldyille (Congo). MALACODERMAS. Lycide. Lycus (Acantholycus) premorsus Dalm., in Schoenh., Syn. Ins.,
II, Append., 1817, p. 25, pl. 5, fig. 1 (g') — Murray, List of Col.
Old Calabar, 1878, p. 134. — Jatissimus Fabr., Syst. Ent.,
1775, p. 203 (Q). — Bourg., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1889, p. 237. A typical specimen (Q) was taken 4 Ibembo by my brother
Joseph, during the second half of August. Lycus (Acantholycus) premorsus var. harpago Thom., Archiv. entom., II, 1858, p. 76.—Murray, List of Col. Old Calabar, 1878,

. 134,

7 Two Q belonging to this variety, with the discoid spot
separated from the lateral spots, come, one from Ibembo (aoat,
J. Duvivier), V'aatre de Djabir-Bandja (May-June, Milz); at a
third Q also coming from Ibembo, the three spots are
unite in a transverse band. The habitat of this space and its varieties is very extensive: the
harpago diversity seems to me to dominate not only in Guinea,
but also in the Congo Basin. Lycus elegans Murr., Ann. Mag. Nat. History, 1868, p. 332,
pl. IX, f. 20 (Q). - VS. Waterh., Iustr. typ. Spec., I,
1879, p. 19, pl. Vs f. 5 (By and 6 (Q). — Bourg., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1889, p. 238. A Q, coming from Djabir-Bandja (Milz) presents as the only
black coloration, the anteapical lateral band on each elytron;
Our copy taken 4 Ibembo, also Q, has only one
black sutural band widening behind and interrupted at the
middle of the length of the elytra. Lycus foliaceus Dalm., in Schenh., Syn. Ins., Ill., Append.,

308

1817, p. 26, pl. 5, fig. 4 (3). —Murray, List of Col, Old Calabar,
1878, p. 128, pl. IX, fig. 1. Ibembo, a . Also found in Sierra Leone, Gabon,
in Old Calabar, Abyssinia and Bas-Congo. Lycus aspidatus Murray, List of Col. Old Calabar, 1878, p. 129,
pl. IX, fig. 4 and 5. A male caught 4 Ibembo in March; this species is described
of Old Calabar. Lycus constrictus Fihr., Ins. Caffr., 1, 2, p. 434. A ¢ of this species, widespread in Caffrerie, in Angola and
in Congo, was taken 4 Ibembo. Lycus (Lycostomus) Dalmani Bourg., Ann. Soc, Ent. France,
1889, p. 228. A typical specimen of this species (Q) was captured in March
4 Ibembo, — This species is found in Senegambia, Sierra-
Leone, in the land of the Niams-Niams, in Sudan as well as in Zanzibar. Cantharidide. Cantharis (Telephorus) senegalensis Cast., Hist. Nat. Ins., I,
p. 271. — Dej., Cat., 3rd ed., p. 120. A specimen of this species was taken 4 Ibembo between the
J" and August 15. Malachiid. Hedybius sp. A G of a probably new species, but hardly
determinable on the sight of a single specimen, has been reported
d'Ibembo (March, J. Duvivier). Hedybius ceruleus Murray, List of Col. Old Calabar, 1878,
p. 125. A small Q, taken 4 Ibembo and that I do not bring back
that with doubt has this species described from Old Calabar. MELOID A.

Cissites africana Auriv., Entom. Tids., 1890, p. 203. The species already cited by me (Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXIV,
1890, p. 9) like C. dransversicollis Fairm., is none other than the
C. africana Auviy., name which must predominate, C. transversicollis
Fairm. not having been described. The copy collected by my brother
4 Ibembo is also an @. Zonabris bifasciata Oliv., Ent. II, 470, 5, pl. 1, f. 10. An individual 4 Ibembo in February. 309

Lytta frontalis Kolbe, Berl. Ent. Zeit., 1883, p 24; Nov. Act. Ac. L.-Car. Nat. Cur., 1887, p. 309. Two specimens of this recently described species from Bas-
Congo were taken 4 [bembo in May. A few other copies
were also captured by my brother 4 Banana. Lytta melanocephala Fabr., Syst. El., I, p. I, p. 77. — Cast.,
Hist. Nat, Il, p. 274. — Haag-Rutenberg, Deut. Ent. Zeit.,
XXIV, 1880, p. 70. Three individuals, which I believe I can relate to this species,
were taken in May-June 4 Djabir-Bandja; the species is found at
Senegal and Guinea. Doridea curculionoides Westw., Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1875,
p-227, pl. VII, f. 4. —Farm., Ann, Soc. Ent. France, 189],
p. 265,

A few copies taken 4 Ibembo. According to Fairmaire, 1. c., this species would be none other than the
Leptura tenuicollis Fabr. that Schenherr, in “Synonymia
Insectorum” ranks among the Zonitis, giving it the name of
dispar and bringing together, as varieties, Z. attelaboides and
L. cylindricollis Fabr., because the coloring of this insect seems very
variable. As to the place which this insect must occupy in the classi-
general fication, it is still uncertain. Mr. Fairmaire is
@advise to place genus Doridea after Gnathinm as
aberrant genre forming the passage to @demeridz. CURCULIONIDA. Blosyrus obliquatus Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,
1892, p. 164. Oval, black, covered with yellowish gray scales & reflections
of golden copper, rare on the head, the disc of the corselet, the
base of the elytra and the flanks of the prothorax; on each elytron, a
large completely denuded triangular spot, resting on
the margin from the shoulder to the 3/s, & point directed internally
slowly; rounded prothorax on the sides, & cowverted surface
small warty and depressed tubercles with a keel
median smooth; elytves angularly widened near the base,
subparallel, at alternate intervals a raised pew, the 5° bituber-
culé, the 7° unituberculate after the milien, the 8° has the shoulder. Long. 10 mill. (incl. rostr. ); width 4 2/s mill. —Ibembo

(August 1-15, J. Duvivier). B. obliquatus Faust i. lit. Rostrum a little longer than wide, sides parallel, deep
demented and subangularly indented in front, separated from the forehead

 
  

310

by a deep, undulating, longitudinally keeled transverse furrow
in its middle part, black, shiny, 4 irregular surface,

 

pitted-rough; on the sides some small scales
purple; very deeply trifurcated forehead, the intervals
dotted; prominent eyes, narrowed forward. Prothorax at
middle wider than high, covered with small irregular tubercles,
verrucous, depressed, separated by fairly deep furrows,
equipped in the middle with a longitudinal foam hull, inter-
broken in front and behind, and separating four small dimples
slightly marked; the sides of the corselet are almost straight from the base
in the first quarter, then dilated rounded, finally convergent in the
vertex, the greatest width being thus before the middle;
black surface, lined on the sides with quite a few syuamules
purple in shade. Helytra short-ovate, together
almost as wide as they are high, indented 4 their base where they
are barely wider than the corselet, thickened and angular
yers the angles: they are obliquely truncated at the shoulders,
(these marked by a small tubercle), then subparallel, finally
rounded at the top; slightly convex on the disc, strongly decli-
yes at the back, they are covered with a coating formed of small
scales of a yellowish gray, with reflections of a coppery gold or
purple; on each side there is a large trian-
gular denuded, resting on the margin from the shoulder
up to 3/5 of the length and 4 tip directed towards the suture:
this point stops on the third interval; the base and the
discoidal part of the elytra are partly denuded; they have
punctate-striated, with the alternating intervals a little more con-
yexes than the others, the points are quite deep, shaped like
dimples and tapers off a bit towards the top; a little below
middle: two small tubercles with bundle of hairs following each other
on the 5° interval and another on the 7*. Enough underside and legs
densely covered with scales as above, except breast
who is naked. Platyomicus tuberosus Qued., Berl, Ent. Zeit., XXXII, 1888,
p-283. I think I can report 4 this species, two specimens
caught 4 Ibembo; they relate fairly well to the description of
tors, except, however, for the tubercles of the basal half of the
elytra; is my espoce separate from the DP. twberosus where is it
simply of a variety of this space, I could not say it without
a comparison with the types; I temporarily leave my
species under the name given above. Ischnomias opulentus Faust, Deut. Ent. Zeit., XXX, 1886,
p. 340. 3ll

A captured copy 4 Ibembo matching perfectly 4
the description ; this attractive species has been described from Gabon. Of them
other species of this genus are known from coastal regions
western Africa: these are the 7. nobilis Faust and Z. Donchieri
Faust. Brachycerus atror Gerst., Ins. d. Sansib Geb., III, 1873. p. 235,
pl. XI, f. 10. An individual corresponding exactly 4 to the description and 4 to the
figure given by Gerstiicker of this space; it was taken 4 Ibembo
(april). It is curious to meet in the very center of Africa
this species hitherto known only from Zanzibar. Liaus auritus Boh., in Schoenh., Gen. Sp. Cure., III, p. 18. It is only with doubt that I refer to this species as an example.
please d'Ibembo (September), not having been able to compare it to a copy
exactly determined. Liaus rhomboidalis Boh., in Schnh., Gen. Sp. Cure., VII, 1,
p. 462,

One individual caught 4 Ibembo. Lixus itimbirensis Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,

1892, p. 164. Moderately elongated, entirely black and converted from pubescence
short and not very thick of a whitish ash, more accentuated in
below, on the sides of the prothorar, the elytra and on the part
apical of these; short and thick snout, finely punctate,
longitudinally emptied on each side of the base; antennas &
art. 2-5 subegua, d scape watt not gui eyes are
tres transverse, ad triarticulated club, velvety. Corselet
conical, as long as wide, distinctly narrowed in front, longi-
tudinally furrowed in its middle, obliquely rough. Ellytres oblong, wn slightly wider than the corselet & the base. narrowed and rounded at apex, distinctly punctate-ridged, @
elongated points, very finely rough intervals, slightly
impressed around the crest; all dentate femurs,
strong anteriors. Long. 16 1/2 4 18 mill. ; width 5 1/2 4 6 mill. —Ibembo
(J. Duvivier, August-September). Rostrum no longer than the prothorax on its midline,
cylindrical, very robust, slightly arched, barely sinuate from
each side not far from its end, quite densely but fine-
punctuated over its entire surface, the points elongating strongly
lying towards the base and forming oblique lines near the eyes;
a very slight dimple towards the anterior third and another between
the eyes are connected by a distinct pen furrow. Scrobes antenna
nares originating not far from the end of the rostrum, pro-

 

 

 

 

  

312

funds, arched and obliquely directed below. black antennae,
reaching in length to the middle of the prothorax, with a regular scape-
ly thickened, not reaching quite 4 does the eyes, 4 club a
slightly longer than the funicle, oval, acuminate at the apex,
velvety. Very transverse eyes, finely rough head. Pro-
thorax as wide at its base as it is long in the middle, conical,
noticeably narrowed in front, slightly constricted near its edge
anterior, strongly sinuate on each side under the eyes with the
moderately protruding, non-angular eyelobes; little surface
convex, obliquely rough, provided in its middle part with a
longitudinal furrow not reaching the anterior edge; light base-
bisinuated. Elytra intimately linked to the prothorax 4 the base,
broadening slightly, then parallel, finally slightly rounded
say at top, about 3 1/2 times longer than prothorax;
they are convex, weakly impressed on each side
under the apical callus, which is very shallow, and around the crest,
with the base of intervals 2 and 3 a little raised; little shoulders
protruding; very finely rough surface, slightly wrinkled
transversely on the sides and in front, quite clearly punctuated
kill-stride with elongated stitches and longer stitch series
or less closely spaced in pairs; the punctuation is a bit more
fine and tighter towards the end. Mediocre legs, femurs
hind legs reaching the middle of the 3rd abdominal segment; all the
femora sinate and dentate below, the anterior much
more strongly; slightly arched fore shins; strong legs-
ment and densely pitted; tarsi provided with a russet sole. This species, of which I only know Gs, is very close to
L. spinimanus Boh. from Sierra Leone and L. subnebulosus Kolbe from
Lower Guinea. The ZL. subnebulosus Kolbe is, according to M. Faust
who was kind enough to compare one of my type 4 a copy
typical of this species, transversely impressed at the base
(the Z. itimbirensis V is longitudinally and very slightly) and the
¢ rostrum is longer and thinner. The LZ. spinimanus Boh. is shorter, has the rostrum just as short but less robust, the
longer antennae, the prothorax having its constriction
anterior more accentuated and more clearly furrowed. Rhynchites castaneus Jekel. I report 4 this variable species an individual taken 4 Ibembo. Alcides fasciculatus Boh., Schoenh., Gen. Sp. Cure., III, p. 624. One individual caught 4 Ibembo, in March; the species is known from
Caffrie. Alcides eruditus Duviv. Elongated parallel, Shiny black Cun, lined with a short down of a

313

sparse russet gray; robust, fairly long snout,
Finely and densely punctate; subconical, subdepressed corselet,
densely rough. regularly narrowed in front; elytra
parallel, barely wider than the corselet & the base, widely
impressed in the scutellar region, impressed in
inside the shoulders, depressed on the disc, deeply
punctate-striate, double dots, a@ densely intervals
dotted, planes on the disc, subconvex towards the top and
on the collars. Underside and legs very rough, pubescent

Long. (sin, rostr.) 7 mill. ; width 2 1/2 mill. — Ibembo (J. Duvi-
live). A. eruditus Faust i. lit. Entirely black. Robust, very slightly curved rostrum,
longer than prothorax and head combined, subparallel on the
sides, very slightly narrowed near the end to widen
again at the end; shiny, finely and densely dotted, the
almost rough punctuation 4 the base, partly obliterated towards
Vend; on each side two thin hulls starting from the wil
and meeting at the height of the middle of the rostrum, thus encompassing
a rough triangular space; eyes small, subovate, sub-
depressed; scape of the antennae reaching approximately 4 the base of the
rostrum below, oval club, furnished with pubescence
greyish; head rough, impressed between the eyes, pubescent. Prothorax a little wider at the base than high in the middle,
subconical, regularly narrowed in front, quite strongly
constricted near its anterior edge, this clearly sinuate
under each eyelash; base deeply bisinate with median lobe
subacute; depressed surface on the disc, covered with numerous
large, very tight sunken points, subgranular on the flanks,
furnished with a very short and rather rare pubescence of a golden gray. Crest elongated, narrow, convex, subtruncated at the top. Elytra
intimately connected with the prothorax, 4 barely enlarged immediately
shoulder-length, parallel, rounded at the top; they are a bit
more than three times longer than the prothorax, depressed on the
disc, sloping towards the sominet. marked in the scutellar region
of a fairly wide subquadrangular impression and right against the
base, near the shoulder, of a small rather deep impression;
the elytra are deeply punctate-ridged, the points of the
doubled streaks, in the shape of an 8 and appearing to be formed from the meeting of
two points, the intervals are plane, except towards the vertex and
on the sides, densely dotted: the whole is lined with a very
short and sparse pubescence of a russet gray, more
dense towards the apex. The underside and the legs are very rough,
and more densely pubescent than above; the femurs are
moderately elongated, sharply toothed, except the hind legs of which
the tooth is less developed. 314

I have kept for this species the name it bears in the
collection of the specialist scientist, M. Faust, Engineer A Libau. Alcides brevirostvis Boh.,in Schenh., Gen.Sp. Cure., III, p. 621. A specimen of this species caught 4 Ibembo (August 15-31);
it is described from Caffrerie. Alcides erroneus Thom., Arch. entom., II, 1858, p. 132. A specimen captured 4 Ibembo; the species is known from Gabon. Alcides Josephus Duviv. Oblong-ovate, requlidrement and imperceptibly attenuated behind,
black, fairly shiny, fine and sparse pubescence above; flanks
of the prothorax, a small longitudinal line in the middle of the base of the
conselet, a few small patches scattered on the elytra and a
transverse line isolated at the level of their declivity, lined with
yellowish scaly hairs; antennae pitch brown; head and
densely pitted prothoraz; deeply punctate elytra-
striated, transversely emptied anteriorly, at intervals
subconvewes and punctate. G. Rostrum barely longer than head and prothorax combined,
very stout, very rough at the end, strongly punctuated towards
Veatremity. Q. Rostrum noticeably longer than teleus and prothorax combined,
thinner than in 5, roughness at the base, very finely punctate
ahead; antennal scrobe farther from the attremity than
at the . Hong. (sin. rostr.) 11 mill. ; width 4 1/2 mill. — Ibembo (August,

J. Duvivier). Oblong-ovate, regularly and imperceptibly attenuated in

rear, black, fairly shiny. Q. Rostrum noticeably longer than head and prothorax
united, fairly stout, cylindrical, 4 scarcely dilated at the apex or i}
has a slight curvature; it is rough and striped in the
basal half, densely punctate in the other half, finely
dotted 4 the end; on each side at the base, there is a
vestige of longitudinal hull and between the eyes which are verti-
cal, subovate and subdepressed, a deep triangular dimple
lar, smooth; te te mediocrely and densely punctate, almost
smooth in ar; antennas inserted on the sides of the rostrum 4 level
of the anterior two-fifths, scape almost reaching the eyes,
(a reddish brown, funicle and club of a brownish black, this
last oval, attenuated at the apex, pubescent. Prothorax
subconical, depressed on disc, markedly constricted and constricted
near anterior edge, 4 sides subrounded; deep base
bisinnate, distinctly indented anterior edge of each side in
back of eyes, ocular lobes densely ciliated; surface

 

 

   

315

densely converted with mediocre points, very finely pubescent,
additionally adorned with a longitudinal line in the scutellar lobe;
the flanks are densely converted with yellowish scaly hairs. Elytra intimately connected At the base of the prothorax, with the lobes clearly
longitudinally wrinkled, a little wider than the prothorax
At the base, 4 obliquely rounded shoulders, slightly protruding, insen-
slightly and regularly attenuated behind where they are
jointly and obtusely rounded; their surface is sub-
depressed on the disc up to the posterior declivity, impres-
on each side under the apical callus, very weakly in
the scutellar region and quite deep inside the shoulders;
they are deeply punctate-ridged with elongated points
4 barely separated from each other; the two sub-intervals
tural appear flat, the others increase in convexity at
as we get closer to the margin where they are
moderately convex, as also under the apical calluses;
all are obsoletely and transversely laughed in the part
anterior, densely punctate and furnished with a very short pubes-
yellowish color, not very visible on the disc, marked at certain
places on the sides, forming on each elytron, between the striae
1 and 3, At the height of the slope a small transverse line;
in the apical angle the pubescence is also tighter. Roughly pitted underparts and legs, densely lined with
this scaly yellow pubescence, quite long on the chest and
the abdomen; rather elongated legs, gradually decreasing from
length of the first pair 4 the last; all femurs
strongly toothed near their apex.

. Rostrum 4 barely longer than head and prothorax combined,
more robust than in the Q, entirely rough and strongly
striped on sides 4 base; closer antenna scrobe
from the end of the rostrum. A male and a female, at least I can't separate the two
copies that I have before my eyes, only by the differences
ted in the rostrum, differences appearing to me to be sexual. This species seems to me absolutely distinct from all
spaces described so far: its imperceptibly attenuated form
back from the shoulders, will make him recognize. I dedicate it 4
my brother Joseph. Pevrolophus ulula Gylh., Scheenh., Gen. Sp. Cure., I], 1836,
p-457. — coguatus Dej., Cat., 3rd ed., p. 306. Two individuals of this species, one brownish, the other greyish,
were taken 4 Ibembo; the species is found in Senegal, Guinea,
in Bas Congo. Mecocorhinus loripes Chevr., Ann. Soc. Ent, France, 1833,

 

316

p. 64, pl. 3, f. 2 y. —Westermanni Boh., Schenh., Gen. Sp. Curc., IV, p. 185. Several individuals caught 4 Ibembo, 4 different eras of
Breaded. Ithyporus nigrosignatus Duviv

Narrow, elongated, fully lined with scales Vun russet gray
light brown; a longitudinal strip starting from Vépauie,
interrupted two-thirds and on the suture: a small stain
oval in the anterior third and a fairly large spot vectangu=
lar after the middle, black or brownish black; rostrum of a
pitch black; brown antennae; head and bodice densely punctured
slain, punctate-ridged elytves, bearing regular series of
small smooth granules, disappearing at the top; below and
legs of a gray yousatre. Long. (sin. rostr.) 8 1/2 mill. ; width 2 2/s mill. — Djabir-Bandja
(May-June, L' Milz). Elongated, narrow, obtusely rounded behind,
depressed on disc, not shiny, lined with many small
russet gray scales, mixed with light brown scales and
@ others of a dirty white forming irregular spots, especially
on the elytra; the latter are additionally adorned with a narrow
longitudinal band starting from the shoulder and extending to the
two-thirds the length of each elytron, with a small spot
common oval located on the suture, in the anterior third, and of a
fairly large rectangular spot also occupying the suture
and located equidistant from the anterior sutural spot and the
Mountain peak; these spots are black or brownish-black. Rostrum reaching the base of the prothorax, pitch black,
almost smooth, simply pitted 4 the base, longitudinally keeled-
ment and striole on the cdts in the posterior half, slightly. curved; coarsely pitted head; reddish-brown antennae
with the club furnished with a very dense greyish pubescence. Prothorax as long as wide, narrowed in front, longi-
tudinally, densely and rather deeply punctate, each
point covered with a small russet gray scale; disc in
bare part, cdtés rather chestnut. Crest of a yellowish white. Elytra narrow, subparallel, flattened on the disc, punctate-sorted,
each point furnished with a small scale; almost plane intervals,
marked with small smooth, rounded, shiny, moderate granulations
slightly apart, black, each provided behind with a small
brush of russet, scaly hairs; these granulations enough
strong at the base, around the escutcheon, disappearing at the top. Below a russet gray spotted with chestnut; meme paws
color, tibiae stained with brown 4 the base. 317

This species seems to me excessively similar to J. asperulatus
Har., of the Lunda, by form, dress and even coloring
general; only the author indicates the elytra as decorated
a humeral band and a sutural stain of a lighter white:
in I'J. nigrosignatus the patterns are black or brownish black. Harold gives Z's tibias and femurs. asperulatus as
ringed with blackish brown: at I'Z. nigrosignatus, the shins are
simply stained with brown 4 the base and the femora are unicoloured. NEOTOCERUS
Duvivier, Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI, 1892, p. 165. Slightly arched rostrum, as long as head and prothorax
joined together, very slightly compressed on the sides 4 its base, slightly
ment dilated and depressed anteriorly, its scrobes originating in
its middle, oblique and running along the lower lateral edge. Antennae a little longer than the rostrum, moderately
robust; club-like scape at tip, nearly reaching eyes;
funicle 4 articles 1-2 elongated, obconical, the first thicker
and 4 barely shorter than the second, 3-7 very short, transverse,
tight; thick club, almost as long as the funicle,
compact, velvety, oblong-oval. Eyes large, depressed, broken oval, transverse,
separated below by the width of the rostrum. Transverse prothoraz, irregular surface, slightly constricted
having on the sides in the posterior half, then abrupt-
narrowed anteriorly with the anterior border excessively
protruding, provided with ocular lobes moderately protruding and sub-
rounded; base distinctly bisinate; a strong side impression
a little above the middle and a flattened longitudinal hull,
fairly wide behind, finely extended in front until near
from the anterior edge and terminating behind in a tubercle
angular overhanging the base of the escutcheon; prosternal canal pro-
fundus, entering middle of metasternum, open laterally
between the anterior and intermediate hips. Long square escutcheon. Fairly convex elytra, barely 4 wider at the base than the
prothorax, parallel on the sides, steeply sloping behind,
rounded at the top, strongly trisinated 4 their base with the
obtuse shoulders, very slightly bent forward. Mediocre legs, the forelegs a little longer than the
others ; thighs arched outwards, fairly wide, triangularly
toothed below, strongly compressed; compressed legs,

 

318

angularly bent outwards near their base, very weak

internally bisinate, strongly ungulate at apex;

tarsi mediocre, spongy below, art. 1-2 narrow, the
first elongated and a little wider than the second, 4 as long
than 1; mediocre hooks. Abdomen very convex at the base, the first two segments
very convex abdominal muscles, the second separated from the first by a
suture arcuate, almost twice as long as segments 3-4
gathered; intercoxal projection broad, parallel, truncated in front;
metasternum almost as long in the middle as the first
abdomen segment; body oblong, densely scaly. This genus belongs to the Sophrorhinida group and takes
place between the genera Sophrorhinus and Mecistrocerus; he says to himself
tingue: from the first, through the prosternal canal extended to the
middle of the metasternum, its parallel elytra, its metasternum
elongated, its second abdominal segment much longer than
segments 3-4 joined together; of the second also by its canal proster-
nal extended to the middle of the metasternum, the size of the
"abdominal segment, its thighs not club-shaped, its inter-
coxal parallel, truncated anteriorly, etc. Type: Neotocerus Fausti Duviv. Neotocerus Fausti Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,

1892, p. 165. Lying down, entirely covered with tight gray scales,
passing to whitish on the sides and at the top of the elytra, on
the legs and part of the underside; head down; rostrum,
black antennae, eyes and crest; median hull of the corselet
black ; elytra adorned with a blackish ring very poorly defined on
the posterior half: from a number of bundles of scaly hairs
at the front edge of the ecorselet, on the side of it and on the
elytra. Long. 5 48 1/2 mill. —Ibembo (J. Duvivier), seems quite frequent. Elongated, covered with gray scales fading to whitish
on the sides of the elytra in front, on the sloping part, or
satre on the head and part of the legs, the metasternum and the
first abdominal segment; these squamules are rather oval
above, narrow, very tight, and let nothing appear from the
integuments that they recover; on the metasternum and both
first abdominal segments, these scales are much more
large, rounded, each partly overlapping the next, and
are marked in the middle with a sunken dot; under the coating
scaly covering them, the organs are rough, the elytra
fairly deeply punctate-ridged with shallow intervals
vexed, each dimple formed by the meeting of two points
touching each other in such a way that it represents an 8. 319

Rostrum pitch black, finely and densely dotted with
base, 4 more widely spaced punctuation in terminal half ot
appears a smooth, median line; on each side of the rostrum, in
the terminal 2/s, we can see two very fine poorly defined hulls
and separated by a line of dots; black antennae with
velvety club, rather densely pitted head. Corselet fitted
its anterior edge, along the median carina and on the
reddish, scaly hairs; gi and the few small
blackish spots. Eeusson black, smooth, shiny. Regular elytra-
punctuated-striated, adorned with a very vague blackish spot-
clearly defined, arranged from the middle to the slope,
ring shape slightly dilated towards the sides; marked at the base,
on each side, a tuft of scaly, blackish hairs, occupying
obliquely the base of intervals 4 and 3; at the height of the quarter
posterior, a bundle of velvety black scaly hairs arranged
on the 2¢ interval and surrounded by small velvety dots placed
irregularly formed of hairs of the same nature; below more
clear, except on the last abdominal segments which are more
dark; the tarsal hooks as well as the terminal nail of the tibiae
are light brown, reddish; everywhere below, many
scaly hairs. The design of the elytra is very vague in most specimens.
please. Two specimens have the rostrum a little shorter, more robust,
covered with a russet coating in the basal half; half
anterior is marked with five separate longitudinal keels
by a line of dots. Could it be the G's? I am happy to dedicate this interesting species 4 M. Faust,
the eminent specialist in Curculionides, who has indeed compared
some of the species reported in this work, to the many
types in his collection. Cyllophorus sutwralis Faust, Deut. Ent. Zeit., XXX, 1886,
p-368. An individual taken 4 Djabir-Bandja in May (L' Milz), relates
quite well 4 the description of the author; the white bands of
prothorax have largely disappeared, but visible traces
allow to reconstruct the drawing; this species is described from
Gabon. Cyllophorus fasciatus Faust, Deut. Ent. Zeit., X
p-369. A few copies collected 4 Ibembo, respond perfectly-
ment 4 the description; described from Gabon, as the pre-
yielding. » 1886,

ANNALS OF THE SOGs ENTOM. OF BELGIUM, Ty SSXVI, 8

320

Cylophorus Josephus Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,
1892, p. 58. Elliptical, agreeable, of a slightly blewatre black, entirely
covered with a pubescence of a dark gray and presenting the
following spots, which are more or less denuded and of the cou-
their funcieve: a large diamond-shaped coward on the middle of the cor-
selet and two others, elongated, arranged forward; on the elytra:
a large humeral spot, wne large spot transversely
median oval, wne apical angular spot enclosing a
small whitish puff; whitish pubescence on the legs;
rostrum and antennae black; finely roughened prothorax; crest
oblong; elytra distinctly punctate-ridged, d humeral callus smooth. Long. 9 1/2 mill. ; width 4 5/¢ mill. — Ibembo (September 16-30,

J. Duvivier). Rostrum black, no longer than the prothorax, curved, dilated and
depressed at the top where it is strongly punctate, subtriangular 4
the base, bearing on the basilar half a fine median carina and
two lateral hulls separated by a lightly punctuated space
pubescent; below these side fairings is
each side another more accentuated hull meeting 4 those
there and separated by an elongated triangular space, rough and very pu-
becent. Very developed eyes, separated by a thin carina; play
and vertices punctate-rough and densely pubescent; antennae
black. Prothorax a little shorter than wide at the base, this one
weakly bisinate with the median lobe clearly pronounced in
rear and subtriangular; rounded sides in front, very narrow
near the anterior edge which presents as width, approximately the
half the width of the base; the surface is convex, raised
in the middle basilar part, punctate-rough, presenting a
narrow longitudinal line smooth in its middle, near the base,
covered with a very tight, rather long, gray pubescence. ve and showing some smooth spots of the color
land, that is to say of a bluish black: a large spot in
diamond shape covering two-thirds of the length is located
on the midline; on each side, adjoining the base, a stain
oblong stopping at the anterior 2/s; we still observe
each side, near the base, a very small spot and a
second to the sides, 4 the height of the middle. Oblong escutcheon,
densely pubescent. Elytra intimately linked to the prothorax 4 la
base oli they are no wider than this, widening a
slightly below the shoulder, more regularly narrowed behind
they are individually rounded; their surface is regularly
convex, very slightly depressed at the base, marked with
4-point streaks elongated and very close together, at intervals

 

 

   

  

 

 

 

321

planes rather densely and finely punctuated, furnished with a pubes-
centenary long, of a russet gray and presenting some spots
smooth; a large subquadrangular spot occupying the part
humeral, a transversely oblong spot a little above
from the middle and a large apical irregular macule encompassing a
small spot covered with whitish pubescence. Underside dotted-
rough, furnished with a rather whitish pubescence, rather dense
on the sides of the chest, the flanks of the prothorax and the first
abdominal segment; long legs, hind femurs protruding

the abdomen half their length; thighs slightly

swollen, longitudinally keeled outside, not canaliculated

below, all distinctly sinuate and toothed two-thirds
their length; tibiae laterally compressed, distinctly mucronate

at their end; tarsi with 3¢ spongy article below;

weakly toothed nails. Lchthyopisten bimaculatum Auriy., Gifver. Vet. Ak. Ferh.,
1891, p. 365. A Q individual caught 4 Ibembo in September; the species is described
from Gabon. Ichthyopisten deplanatum Roel., Notes Leyd. Mus., XIII,
1891, p. 116; XIV, 1892, p. 34. A copy 4 Ibembo, end of August; this Jchthyopisten is described
from the land of the Niam-Niam. Haplorrhynchus Valdaui Auriv., Ent. Tidskr., VII, 1886,
p-96, G. — Roel., Notes Leyd. Mus., XIII, 1891, p. 172, 9. —
Cyrtopisthen rubicundum, Auriv., Gify. Vet. Akad. Ferh., 1891,
p. 369, 9. —Roel., Notes Leyd. Mus., XIV, 1892, p. 36. A copy ¢ taken 4 Ibembo during the first fortnight
@aoit; this species is known from Gabon and Cameroon. Cercidocerus albicollis Oliv., Ent., V, 83, p. 91, pl. 28, f. 414
(subSphenophorus). Four specimens of this pretty species captured 4 Ibembo, in
have. Temnoschoita eruditus Duviy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,

1892, p. 166. Depressed, in an elongated oval, gradually narrowing in front and in
back; black with the base of the elytra red and the sides below,
covered with a greyish coating; slender, distinctly curved snout,
very finely punctuated; narrow, parallel, abrupt prothorax
constricted near the anterior edge, depressed, covered in stitches
brownish background, tighter on the cites; subparallel elytra
anteriorly, depressed, attenuated posteriorly, deeply streaked-
punctuated, @ plane intervals and uniserially dotted; pygi-
dium narrowed behind, truncated at the top, tres gibbeua,

 

 

 

 

ponetud and furnished with a grayish coating; last abdominal segment

nal widely dug. Long. (excl. rostr.) 10 1/2 mill., width. 31/2 mill. —Ibembo
(April, J. Duvivier). Rostrum thin, as long as the prothorax, cylindrical, quite
distinctly curved, recessed in its basilar third, very finely
punctuated by having, more strongly on the swollen part oi the
punctuation is the same as on the head; a small dimple between
the eyes; black antennae, 4 art. 2 elongated rod, 4 club
similar to that of the 7'. quadrimaculatus Gyll. black prothorax,
shiny, narrow, parallel to near the anterior edge where it is
suddenly greatly shrunk and suddenly strangled; base
regularly arched; surface marked with many small dots
has a brownish bottom, tighter towards the sides, as well as along
the longitudinal smooth line that can be seen in the middle; intervals
are very finely arugula; the dots are larger and very
tight on the sides, which are at the same time lined with a coating
yellowish. Black crest, very elongated, concave, slightly sinuate
on the sides. Elytra subparallel in front, narrowed behind,
noticeably wider than the prothorax at the base, flattened,
singly rounded at the top; they are deeply ridged:
punctuated with the flat and covered intervals of a series more
or less regular small dots very close together; they
are black with the anterior third red. Pygidium shrunk in
rear, truncated at the top, very gibbous, sparsely dotted,
covered with a coating of russet gray and golden pubescence
quite steep and wide. Shiny black below, depressed on the
metasternum and the first two abdominal segments, strongly
and widely hollowed out on the last ventral arch, which is slightly
sinuate on each side; bottom surface covered with large dots
scattered, closer together on sides of organs; the sides of
metasternum, metathoracic parapleura and caes of the
abdominal segments are largely covered as well as a part
legs, of a grayish coating; strongly pitted legs. Temnoschoita basipennis Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium,
XXXVI, 1892, p. 166.
me, a black poi. Depy in an elongated oval, gradually

 

narrowed forward and backward; slender rostie, as long as the
bodice, reddish brown, finely furrowed at base, distinctly
ment punctuated; prothovux shiny, depressed, slightly retracted
big dots. each dot garnished with a

forward, covered with assi
earthy squumule; elytra flat, deeply ridged-ponc-
slain, & subangular intervals, costiform on the sides,
each intercalum unisevially dotted; they are brown-

 

 

 

23

dull reddish and each bears a large, badly

bounded in front; pygidium very suitable, truncated at the top,

Strongly pitted, pubescent; underside nally punctate, covered

scales; reddish brown legs with longer shins

clear. Long. (excl. rostr.) 9-9 1/2 mill. ; width 3 1/1 to 3
Ibembo (May-August, J. Duvivier). Rostrum long and thin, as long as the prothorax on its line
median, rather curved, rather strongly swollen 4 the base where it is
sometimes covered with an earthy coating, of a reddish brown, more
dark at the base which is provided above with a fine longitudinal furrow
and distinctly punctate like the head; the thinned part of the rostrum
is very finely dotted. Prothorax black, shiny, longer than
broad, depressed, parallel on the sides, narrowed in front towards the
2/s anterior, suddenly constricted near the anterior edge, at base
slightly arched; surface very finely arugula, covered
fairly large, tighter stitches towards the anterior edge and towards the
sides, each point furnished with an earthy scale; an area
longitudinal smooth in the middle of the corselet. Very elongated escutcheon,
black, shiny, weakly furrowed 4 the base, sinuate on each side. Elytra wider than the prothorax At the base, flat, barely 1 4/2
times as long as this, imperceptibly backward
oi they are singly and obtusely rounded; they are pro
base striated, 4 subangular intervals, costiform on the
sides; the points of the stripes are rounded, a little spaced and
interconnected by a fine furrow; each interval carries a
regular series of small dots; the elytra are reddish brown
matt gedtre and each adorned, in front, with a large black spot
poorly demarcated. Pygidium narrowed behind, truncated at the top,
rather strongly convex, deeply punctate and lined with a
thick tuft of yellowish hairs. Pitch-black below, shiny
slow, depressed on the metasternum and the first two segments
abdominals, covered with fairly large spread points, each point
closed by an earthy scale. Sturdy, brown legs
reddish with paler shins, pitted and covered with
scales; last abdominal segment slightly bisinate. Sphenophorus lateritius Gyll., in Schoenh., Gen. Sp. Cure., IV,
p. 920. Unin
Leone. Liocalandra squamosa Boh., in Schoenh., Gen. Sp. Priest.,
VIII, 2, p. 245. Two copies taken 4 Ibembo, in the month of August; the species is
known from Guinea. mill. —

 

 

 

 

  

 

lu took A Ibembo; this species is known from Sierra-

324

Sipalus guineensis Fabr., Ent. Syst., Suppl., p. 165.—Boh.,
in Scheenh., Gen. Sp. Cure., IV, p. 800. A few individuals of this fairly common species, from
from Ibembo; this species is found throughout Guinea and the
Lower Congo. Sipalus mendicus Boh., in Schonh., Gen. Sp. Cure., IV, p.804. 1 specimen captured at Ibembo, in the second half of the
month of August. Sipalus Aurivilli Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,

1892, p. 165. Oblong, black, almost entirely covered with a matte dun coating
light brown, dividing into blotches and dots, especially on the
elytra; black crest, as well as the anterior part of the rostrum,
the vertex and the strangulation of the corselet; rostrum & punctuation
elongated; coarsely dotted tele, the dots however few
deep; corselet regularly arched on the cites, abrupt-
lying and very strongly strangled in front, wearing stitches
sparse, without tubercles; elytra without tubercles, finely punctured
dead-striated, & smooth intervals, barely suited; underneath
punctuated like the corselet. Long. (excl. rostr.) 21 mill. ; width 6'/2mil. — Djabir-Bandja
(May-June, Lt Milz). This species is a little larger than S. mendicus Boh. ;
it is distinguished from it 4 at first sight by its absolutely widowed surface
of tubercles, its corselet a little more convex, wider, low-
slightly but very regularly rounded on the sides, the strange fort
anterior regulation which forms a real bead, the elytra
finely punctate-striated, the more robust rostrum, the club of the
antennae shorter and ending in an arc at the apex. Rounded head, marked with rather large, shallow and
slightly tight; snout long, robust, as arched as in S. mendicus,
thickened in just under its basal half, then slightly
narrowed on the sides, finally a little broadened and depressed in front, with
the protruding mandibles; it is black, except in its basal part,
bears a longitudinal print on each side of the base and a
fine median longitudinal furrow, not extended forward; the puncture
tuation is elongated, finer and less visible in front, much
more accentuated on the sides; antennae brown, 4 gradual scape-
ly in a club, reaching the eyes: art. 2 of the funicular
longer than the others; the more transverse funicular sections
than in S. mendicus; club in reversed cone, a little more
long as the last two sections of the funiculum together, slightly
ment depressed, truncated in an arc and spongy at the end. Prothorax
a little longer than wide, slightly and very evenly

  

325

rounded on the sides, abruptly and strongly constricted near
its anterior edge, the constricted part forming a veritable
bead; subtruncated corselet base; slightly convex surface,
smooth, marked with fairly large, shallowly sunken spots and
little tight. Crest elongated, acute behind, black, convex, smooth,
bright. Elytra about twice as long as the prothorax,
wider than this 4 the base, convex, parallel, constricted
and slopes in the rear part; they are slightly
indented in an arc 4 the base, and the shoulders are obtuse, the surface
is smooth like that of the corselet and without the slightest tubercles; they
are finely punctate-ridged, at barely convex intervals and not
punctuated: on the sides, the intervals are however a little better
marked and towards the top we observe on these some traces
granules; the elytra are black and mottled brownish;
the legs are more robust than in S. mendicus; inter-projection
subangular coxal bone in front. Sitophilus oryze Linn., Amon. Ac., VI, 1763, p. 395. —
Oliv., Ent. V, 83, p. 97, pl. 7, f. 81a-b. A fairly large number of copies taken 4 Ibembo; this
species is found everywhere and has been brought to the Congo by the
imported rice, in which it is found in quantity. Rhyncophorus phenicis Fabr., Syst. El., 11, p. 430. — Gyl. in
Schenh., Gen. Sp. Cure., IV, p. 825. — Gerst., Peters Reise,
1862, p. 317. Very many specimens of this species have been taken
Ibembo; this species is particularly fond of the juice that flows
of the incisions that the blacks make in the palm tree, to collect the
sap, from which they make massanga, their favorite drink; one can
take around the containers intended to collect the massanga from the
quantities of R. phenicis, of all sizes. PLATYPIDA. Crossotarsus Chapuisi Duviv., Anu. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXIV,
1891; C.-R., p. cocLxxvu. Subcylindrical, reddish brown with the disc of the elytra, the
antennae and tarsi flavescent. Q. Forehead flat, dull, strongly pubescent in front, rugosule,
longitudinally rough on sides, pitted behind;
prothorax oblong, finely and rather densely punctate; elytra
punctate-striate, flat, with very uneven posterior edge, serrated
and spinuleuc, cut obliquely outwards; 2" abdominal segment
strongly developed and deeply indented. bone. Unknown. Long. 7 mill. ; width 2 mill. — Ibembo (March 1890, J. Duvivier). Q. Forehead flat, as wide between the eyes as it is long, matte, &
reddish pubescence, upright, very abundant in front, on the surface
ragosula, longitudinally rough on sides and pitted
backward; vertex separated from the front by a very marked angle,
punctate, brighter than the forehead, also pubescent and present
both in its middle a short smooth line; fawn antennae,
has lighter palette, similar to those of Cr. crinitus Chp. Pro-
oblong thorax, almost one and a half times as long as it is wide,
Irregularly narrowed circularly at the anterior border, with a furrow
median preceded by a smooth line, 4 surface irregularly par-
strewn with dots of two kinds: some very small, arranged
over the entire surface, the other larger ones and which one meets
particularly along the median sulcus, on the posterior third and
on the lateral parts up to the anterior border. Elytra para-
thin, dotted-striped, planes, with the points of the plus series
pronounced in the hasilar part; the intervals are flat and
each have quite a number of small, very fine dots, arranged
ses irregularly; intervals 2, 4, 6 are narrowed before the ex-
rounded and therefore shorter than the others, the posterior edge
is very uneven, strongly denticulate and spinulous, cut obliquely-
lies outwards with the subacute sutural angle; the 1* interval is
truncated obliquely outside, like also the 3° which is
however longer than this one and of which the oblique part is part-
particularly salient: the truncation of these two intervals is
denticulate; intervals 5, 7, 8 and 9 are also obliquely
truncated 4 their end, all have their external angle acute
and salient and gradually decrease in length, both
however, are substantially of the same length: all
these truncations are adorned with a few red hairs at their extremities.
moth. Beneath the uneven edge of the elytra is a parallel groove.
lele at the marginal edge and the abdomen is transversely convex,
very bright; the 2nd ventral arch is very developed in a large
protruding lamella, blackish 4 its extremity, 4 posterior edge pro-
grounded and broadly indented; this lamella covers the three
last abdominal segments. Underside lighter brown than
the top; legs similar 4 to those of most Crossotarsus. I know of only one Q individual of this species, who was
captured at Ibembo, in March, by my brother Joseph. I took it
first for a large Q copy of Cr. crinitus Chp.,
but a closer look 4 using the author's description
and accompanying figures, convinced me that I had
before me a distinct species. In order to be certain
In this regard, I requested M. Ch. Brongniart, the obliging naturalist of
Museum de Paris ott are registered types (3 and Q) of Cr. crinitus

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

327

Chp., please compare my copy to the types in
question; here is the result of this comparison, according to the
data from M. Ch. Brongniart: the type of the crinitus is much
more slender, its size notably reduced, its corselet
almost as long as that of Chapuisi, but much longer
narrow; the C. Chapuisi is much stockier, almost twice as
wide as the crinitus, in the latter we observe at the posterior edge
of each elytron a middle tooth twice as wide as the
others, while in the Chapuisi all the teeth that form
this posterior edge are subequal to each other. The cr. Chapuisi is therefore a good species, which must take
place in the group of abdominal Crossotarsi, between the
cr. crinitus Chp. on the one hand, the Cr. exile Chp. and Cr. bohemian
Chp. on the other hand; the end of the elytra is otherwise in conformity
even in these last two species, which are also more
smaller than the Cr. Chapuisi. Platypus congoanus Duviv., Aun. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R., p. cooLxin. G. Light ferruginous dun with elytra disc
testaceus, the mandibles and the anterior part of the epistome
blackish. Oblong, finely and fairly densely dotted prothorax,
the unequal points, stronger towards the sides; posterior furrow
short, very deep in front; triangular side cutout;
elytra punctate-striate, interstriae planes, subsimilar. Q. Dark ferruginous red with the epistome and third
posterior of the elytra strongly darkened. oblong prothorax,
similar to that of ¢, more clearly punctuated than in this one;
interstria of the raised elytra, the odd subcostiform of the
base, the others convex 4 their end, the first streamlined at the
Mountain peak; terminal extension of prismatic shape, depressed
outside, with truncated end; semicircular anal notch. Long. 4 2/3 mill. — 4 G taken 4 Matadi (Tschoffen) and a Q a
Tbembo (March 1890, J. Duvivier). GO. Forehead covered in front with transverse striae, less
tight towards the epistome; areolas of the posterior part of the head
wider; vertex 4 midline subsalient, smooth, limited in
each side by a rather strongly punctuated space; we observe
on each side of the vertex loose suboblique striae, in
behind and towards the inner side of the eyes: a series of dots
pillars. Fawn antennae 4 lighter palette, this one large,
oblong-ovate. Oblong prothorax, with an anterior edge slightly
advanced, provided with a very deep and prolonged median furrow in
front by a slightly sunken line, sometimes obsolete; the
punctuation is uneven, rather tight, formed of more pronounced dots.

328

funds and more numerous towards the lateral parts and intertwined
on the discoidal region numerous very fine points; some 
larger stitches near the indentation; no disc pores;
a very small smooth space on either side of the groove; enough elytra
strongly punctate-striated, the series of dots well marked;
smooth intervals, except on part of their base where they
are punctuated and the last interval in which we notice a
uneven series of dots; base of the 3rd protruding interval, forming
beaded and adorned with transverse carinules; the streaks are
covered at the top by small granulations and a fairly
thick yellowish pubescence; rough sloping part under the furrow
apical. Q. Forehead completely covered with smaller and more
tight towards the epistome; vertex similar to that of the @, appearing
however a little rougher; antennas 4 pallet a little less
oblong. Prothorax oblong, more strongly dotted than in led,
the punctuation much more accentuated towards the lateral parts than
in the other sex. Elytra deeply punctate-ridged, a
very strongly raised intervals, the odd subcostiform ones
from the base, subcarnate at the top, the first interval
presenting a very prominent hull, the others very convex
behind, all rather densely pitted, rough at the base,
grainy-rough at the top; first interrupted interval
before the summit, the 2° greatly shortened, the 3° limiting in
inside the terminal extension of the elytron, in which the
intervals blend together; this extension is in the form taken
matic, it is covered with long russet hairs, depressed on the
sides; its extremity is obliquely truncated, its external angle
acute, the internal of the same, the superior almost straight; indentation
between the two extensions is semi-circular. Below a little
paler, finely arugula and coarsely pitted; abdomen
without keel or tubercles, subrough, adorned with numerous dots
pillars. This species, because of the lateral indentation of the very
large and triangular, the presence of a sinuous indentation,
concave, pubescent, parallel to the posterior edge of the prothorax,
terminal extension of the elytra, seems to me to
take place in the group Platypi trispinati Chp., and belong
hold at the 3rd division of this group, due to the absence of pores
subdiscoidal on the prothorax. It is, I think, the first species described from the African continent.
and 4 this point of view alone, extremely interesting. 329

BRENTHIDA. Zemioses cancelllatus Lac., Gen. Col., VII, 1866, p. 409, footnote 1;
AtlL., pl. 77, f. la-b. Two specimens that I bring back 4 of this species were taken
by my brother Joseph at Ibembo (March 1890); the species is described
of Natal. Cerobates debilis Thom., Arch. ent., II, 1858, p. 118. Two copies also of this interesting small space
were taken 4 Ibembo (March 1895); the species is described from Gabon. Eupsalis gentilis Thom., Arch. ent., II, 1858, p. 117. Three specimens of this species described from Guinea, where it is
fairly common, and taken at Ihembo in March. Rhinopteric foveipennis Thom., Archiv. entom., II, 1858,
p- 119.—Lac.,Gen., Atl., VIII, pl. 77, f. 5a.— Datinosus Chvt., i.
lit. A copy of this space was taken 4 Ibembo (February 15);
it is described from Gabon and has been encountered since 4 Sierra-Leone. A species very close to this one and coming from Bas-Congo
has since been described by M. J. Kolbe: 2. errans. Ceocephalus picipes Oliv., Ent., V, 84, p. 442, pl. 2 F. 18, Q. — Gyll.,in Schenh., Gen. Sp. Cure., I, p. 356. — Gerst., Wieg. Archive, 1871, I, p. 76. Three specimens of this Ceocephalus were reported from Ibembo
(March) ; it is a species excessively widespread on the continent
African, where it is found not only in the Cape of Good Hope
rance, 4Natal, in lower Guinea, in various regions of
Congo Basin, Senegal, but still 4 Madagascar. Stereosomus Rissi Labr. and Imh., Gen. Cure., I, do. 12. —
Three specimens captured 4 Ibembo (April). The species is native to Gabon, and has since been found in the
Bas-Congo and the Quango region. ANTHOTHRIBIDA. Phileotragus gigas Fabr., Syst. El., Ul, p. 404. — Fahr.,
in Schenh., Gen. Sp. Curc., V, p. 175. A Q of very light shade, measuring 18 mil., seems to me to be
report 4 this space; she was captured at Ibembo, in August;
this species is found in Guinea, Quango and Bas-Congo. Philceotragus prasinus Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,

1892, p. 59. Subcylindrical, covered above with a scaly pubescence of a

330

dull light green dotted and finely smudged with black; two spots
on the vertex, an elongated spot on each side of the base of the cor-
salt; on each elytron: a humeral spot, a prescutellar,
a marginal vectangular as well as a small apical spot
black; bodice a pew wider than long, regularly
rounded on the sides, no more narrowed in front than in the back,
@ barely impressed on disk; elytra callosum near the
apex, barely wider than the corselet, finely punctate
in series; antennae brown, ringed with grey; mediocre rostve,
deeply impressed in triangle forward; under a
pale ferrugineua with ringed and brown-spotted legs
blackish; convection abdominal arches. Long. 17 mill. (rostrum excluded); width 6 1/2 mill. — Ibemho
(February 15, J. Duvivier). - A G.

Top covered with small scales of a light green, dull, dotted
black and marked ca and there with small blackish spots; head gone-
particularly dotted with small black dots, adorned on the vertex
two small blackish spots and, along the inner edge of the
eyes which close in front, with a narrow yellowish border;
snout black on sides, moderately elongated, robust,
parallel, barely angular, strongly indented at its edge
anterior, provided in its anterior part with a deep dimple
in the shape of an isosceles triangle, the apex of which extends into a
fine furrow up to the vertex; mandibles fairly robust, black;
palps pitch brown; antennae reaching two-thirds of the
length of the body, has articles slightly knotty at the end, except the
last three which form an elongated and flattened club: they
are reddish-brown, slightly pubescent with the extremity
moth gray items as well as the club. little prothorax
convex, barely impressed above, marked on each side
in front of a lateral furrow, regularly rounded, no more
narrowed in front than behind, rather wider than high. in its middle; anterior edge slightly sinuate, base subsi-
cloudy, on either side; anterior hull located towards the three
hind quarters, interrupted in the middle, slightly undulating
leuse, prolonged on the sides in front until towards the middle of the
prothorax; well-pronounced posterior extension of the carina
and curved inside right against the base of the corselet, two furrows
transverse near the base; the anterior two-fifths of the
bodice are of a light green, the posterior three-fifths of a
light ferruginous, entirely dotted with black and finely
mottled, adorned on each side: towards the middle, with a spot
formed by the union of these small spots, and behind, on the
discs with a narrow longitudinal band, black. Very small crest,

 

 

331

of a light red. Cylindrical elytra, slightly more than twice
as long as they are wide, barely wider than the prothorax
in its middle, slightly convex on the disc, with base slightly
sinuous, 4 obliquely rounded shoulders, sloped back
close to the top where they are rounded; very apical angle
slightly protruding; weakly marked basilar groove stopping at the
humeral callus; surface transversely wrinkled, finely pitted
killed, the points widely spaced, arranged in regular series; the
wrinkles being quite pronounced, the surface looks absolutely rough
when the insect is seen in a certain light; marginal line pro-
grounded; near the summit, one observes on each ely-
tre, a small, rather prominent, rounded tubercle, limiting in front the
sloping part; intervals 3, 5, 7 slightly raised; the elytra
are of a beautiful dull green with the extreme base and the fer-
rough: they are also dotted and smudged with black
and adorned each with a spot on the shoulder, another near the
the escutcheon, elongated, of a third subrectangular, narrow,
resting on the margin a little before the middle, finally of a spot
poorly limited, in the apical angle. Below a reddish brown,
covered with small scales of a light ironstone, mottled with brown
on the sides of the chest, on the sides of the abdomen, and each
that it was in the middle of the first three arches, all these arches
convex; legs of a russet gray, ringed and spotted with brown
blackish; russet tarsi, spotted with brown at the base. This species seems to me absolutely distinct from all those
described, by its somewhat shortened shape, its wide bodice
than the elytra, a little wider than long, no more constricted in
before and behind, regularly rounded on the sides; the livery
of this species recalls those of certain Ptychoderes of the Americas.
laugh. Phieotragus heros Fab., Syst. El., Ul, p. 404 —Fihr.,
in Schoenh., Gen. Sp. Cure., V, p. 175. A small Q, taken on March 4 Ibembo; is in
all of Guinea, Quango, and Senegal. Phleotragus similis Qued., Berl. ent. Zeit., XXX, 1886, p. 305. I think I can report 4 this species a female of small
size, captured 4 Ibembo, in March. Mecocerus Mnizechi Vhom., Arch. ent., Il, 1858, p. 106,
pl. Ill, f. 7. A number of specimens taken from 4 different eras of
Vanished, but above all. in Ayril, 4 Ibembo; some also
4 Jabir. Taken in Guinea, in the Quango region, summer. Mecocerus tigrinus Thom., Arch. ent., I, 1858, p. 107,
pl. UI, f. 5. 332

‘Three specimens: a couple at Ibembo, a Q 4 Djabir-Bandja;
Vespece is described from Gabon. Anocerastes undulatus Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXX, 1886,
p. 309, pl. VIII, f. 4. A male caught 4 Ibembo in September; this species is described from
Quango. Deuterocrates nigropictus Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXX, 1886,
p. 312, pl. VIII, f. 5

A male from Djabir-Bandja. — This space is very common
in Quango. Chirotenon adustum Labr. and Imhoff, Gen. Curcul., I, No. 41. —
Thom., Arch. ent., II, 1858, pl. IV, f. 5 and 6. A female from Ibembo. This Chirotenon gets caught in
a large part of West Africa, but does not appear
go beyond the Quango region to the south. Gynandrocerus antennalis Lac., Gen. Col., VII, 1866, p. 568,
footnote 3. Two male specimens, corresponding to the short diagnosis of
Lacordaire: Ibembo, March and April. Phileobius albopygyalis Thom., Archiy. entom., II, 1858,
p. 144. A number of specimens reported from Ibembo and
Djabir-Bandja relate well 4 the short description of
Thomson. LONGICORNIA. Prionid. Macrotoma palmata Fabr., Entom. System, I, p. 249. — Cast.,
Hist. Nat., II, p. 400. — senegalensis Oliv., Ent., 1V, 66, p. 22,
pl. 7, f. 25, a 3, 2 Q.

A single specimen of this species however excessively
common throughout the region, reported from Ibembo (May). Dorycera spinicornis Fabr., Ent. System, I, p. 243. — Oliver,
Ent., IV, 66, p. 24, pl. 11, f. 3, oe duphihaimus Fabr., Syst. EL, I, p. --White, Cat. Collar. Ins. B.-M., Longicornia,
1853, p. 13, pl. 1, fig. 1. A G, in perfect condition, measuring 58 mill. (sin mand. ), with well-marked elytral spots, was caught 4 Ibembo
in the second half of September; he was captured in the evening,
while attracted by the light of a lamp, he came and fell into
my brother's hut. I also saw a G from the
Aruwimi region. 333
Mallodon Downesi Hope, Ann. Nat. Hist., XI, p. 366. —
Thom., Rev., p. 96. — Levipennis White, Longic., VI, p. 45. About ten specimens of this species, both Gt and Q, have
were captured 4 Djabir-Bandja and around Ibembo; the
catches 4 Djabir-Bandja were made during the months of May
and June, those 4 Ibembo in August and October. This Mallodon is. very
widespread throughout tropical Africa. Cerambycide. Lystrocera nigrita Serv., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1834, p. 70. — Dej., Cat., 3¢ ed., p. 353. Three copies of very different sizes (from 25 4 37 mill.) have
been taken 4 Ibembo in March and August; it is a very common species
in Africa, because it is taken not only from the western coast,
but still 4 the eastern coast. Lystrocera trivittata Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXXII, 1888,
p. 196. 7

Tbembo, in April. — Two copies 3 correspond perfectly
ment 4 the description of the author, except however for the color
antennae that are brown in the two reported individuals
by my brother; one measures 19 mil., the other 17 mil. ; the elytra
of the latter turn purple. — This space has been described
of the Kasai region. Plocederus tenuis Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.-R., p. cccLXxvn. Q. Blackish brown, covered with a very short pubescence of a
ash-grey, silky, thick, this pubescence fading to yellow
golden on head and bodice; labrum and palps light brown;
prothorax elongated, irregularly pleated obliquely and trans-
versally, with two well-marked oblique furrows; elytra
elongated, bidentate at their extremity; antennas of length
of the body, @ art. 5-10 epineum at their internal apex; femurs
redness, except at the top. Long. 28 mill. ; width max. 7 1/2 mill. — Ibembo (April 20, 1890,
J. Duvivier). Head rough in front, finely pitted behind, covered
of a short, fairly dense golden pubescence; brown wrasse
clear as well as the palpi; anterior edge of clypeus slightly
sinuate; frontal plate convex, in transverse triangle; a
deep longitudinal furrow between the eyes; antennae of the
length of the body, densely covered with gray down
ashy, with 5-10 spiny articles at their inner extremity. Pro-
thorax longer than wide, slightly forward 4 its anterior edge

334

laughing, strongly narrowed in front and behind, 4 subrounded sides,
covered with fairly large folds irregularly and partly obliquely
arranged and presenting on each side, on the disc, an impression
fairly marked oblique: these two impressions starting from the middle
and approaching towards the base ott they do not exceed the furrow
subbasilar; the surface is dotted with small golden hairs, very
brilliant. Escutcheon in transverse triangle, rounded at the top
and furnished with small silver-gray hairs. Oblong elytra,
elongated, 3 1/2 times as long as the prothorax, slightly
meandering on the sides a little below the shoulders, 4 barely
dilated towards their middle, then slightly narrowed to the top.
met ot they are obliquely truncated; the external angle is
directed slightly outwards, the sutural strongly spiniform;
they are fairly flat, slightly depressed towards the anterior third
laughing, has a finely rugosule and dotted background, and present, in
in addition, over the entire surface, small stronger points, quite tight
and irregularly arranged; we still notice, on each
elytron, two remains of high lines, the inside of which recedes towards
the posterior third; thick ash-grey pubescence, very
silky, very short, covers everything. Below also pubescent,
this pubescence longer on the sides of the breast. Paws
elongated with reddish femora, except 4 their apex. Projection
sternal vertical, obtuse at apex. According to Mr. Gahan, who kindly compared my copy
to the Plocedevus of the British Museum, this species is very similar
of his P. melancholicus from West Africa (Ann. Mag. Nat. History, 1890, p. 257); it differs by its more slender form,
by the first article of the antennae being shorter and less curved
and by the much thicker pubescence which covers the whole body. I only know the Q.

DJABIRIA

Duvivier, Ann. Soc. Ent. Belg., XXXV, 189]; C.-R., p.cccLxxvil. (Nov. gen. Cerambycidarum verarum.) Mandibles short, vertical, keeled above, unarmed below.
inside. Head subconcave, obsoletely keeled between the tubercles
antennae, which are separated by a narrow furrow; epistome sub-
sinuate at its anterior edge, cheeks short. Antennae very short, barely exceeding the middle of the length
figure of the body, after: art. 3 by 1/5 longer than 4, slightly
compressed in its middle part, 4 a little shorter than 5, this
last almost as long as 3, subsequent ones decreasing progressively

335

sively in length, 5-10 strongly expanded into a triangle, spiny

4 their inner apex, 11 a little longer than the preceding, sinuate

before the end and obtuse at the top. Eyes slightly separated above, exceeding in front the condyle
antennas. Prothorax as wide as it is long, not spiny on the sides which
are rounded, subdepressed on the disc, strongly narrowed in front
and back, covered with a few transverse wrinkles. Eeusson small, in curvilinear triangle. Elytra moderately elongated, not very convex, regularly
though slightly constricted behind, obliquely truncated
Mountain peak. Prosternum oblong, deeply channeled between the hips,
4 raised sides, lowered back, or it expands triangularly. Transverse mesosternum, arched at its anterior edge,
deeply indented in square in the back. Mediocre puttes; femurs bulging towards the top. Body elongated, glabrous above. This genus is close to the genus Plocederus, of which it has a
large part of the characters, but I believe I can separate it a
because of its excessively short antennae, par-
particulars of the pro- and mesosternum, the bulge of the femurs and
the relative shortness of the 3 article of the antennae. Djabiria geniculata Duviy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV, 1891,

C.-R. p. cocLxxu. Black, brownish below, reddish brown above; palps,
base of the mandibles and legs, reddish (except the knees
are black and the tarsi @a dull brown); very fine elytra
dotted, adorned a little below the middle with a large spot
transverse blackish, sometimes extending far forward
on the coast. Long. 19 mill. ; width max. 4 s/s mill. — Djabir-Bandja
(May-June, L* Milz) and Ibembo (April, J. Duvivier). Short head, provided with a dimple behind; epistome bearing
a few large sunken dots; reddish-brown antennae,
strongly pubescent, especially from the 4th article: art. 1 dun
light red, the others brown, all ringed with black at their extremities. Prothorax 4 base and anterior edge strongly edged, bearing a
transverse fold limiting 4 the interior of the anterior transverse furrow,
another strongly angular in front limiting the furrow inside
basilar, three wavy folds are arranged between the middle and the fold
subbasilar, the first of these folds rises on the sides to
surround two smooth, rounded spaces, which form the disc;
these smooth spaces are separated by a fine furrow which divides into

 

 

 

ANNALFS OF THE SOC, EVTOM, OF BELGIUM, Ty XXXVI. 26

336

back; some folds on the sides of the prothorax. Fine escutcheon-
punctate, covered with a short gray pubescence. Elytra
a little wider 4 the base than the corselet at its largest
width, subsinuated 4 the base, 4 rounded shoulders, regularly
although very slightly narrowed behind, obliquely truncated
at the top; very short, tooth-shaped sutural angle; they are
slightly convex, finely arugula and covered with a multitude
small, tightly sunken stitches; on each elytra two
vestiges of smooth lines, and in arrigre de Vécusson, all against
the suture, a longitudinal impression; they are brown
reddish and adorned, just below the middle, with a wide band
transverse of a black-brown, extending more or less in front of the
along the lateral edges: in one of the specimens this band
extends far forward on the sides. Underside brownish-black, covered
a few sparse hairs and a few scattered large dots: last
abdominal segment with a tuft of red hair; red paws,
the legs and the extreme part of the tibiae, black, tarsi of a brown
mast; strongly ciliated tibiae. Hesperophanes fasciatus Billb.,in Schenh.,Synon. Insect., Ap-
hang, p. 191. Two specimens of this species were captured, one 4 Ibembo
(15-31 August), Vautre 4 Djabir-Bandja (May-June). Callichroma proliva Bates, Cist. Entom., I, p. 406. I think I can report 4 this species a g, taken Albembo; this
beautiful Callichroma is described from Angola. Callichroma obscuricorn Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1858, p. 52. Ibembo. — Four specimens were brought back from this last
nth locality; the species is found in a large part of
West Africa. Callichroma Chranchiti White, Cat. Coleop. Ins. B.-M. Long-
gicornia, I, p. 156 — ? carinicolle Qued., Ber]. Ent. Zeit., XXXII,
1888, p. 198. A certain number of specimens of this pretty species have been
captured i Ibembo in March, April and August, two others & Djabir-
Bandja in May or June; they differ quite considerably from
size and coloring of the anteunes is not very constant: general-
these are black with the first item red, one of the
copies of Ibembo has them completely black, in another they
pass a reddish brown. This species is described from the Congo. A
specimens has been compared by Mr. Gahan to the types deposited
at the British Museum in London. By consulting the various works of M. le gen. Quedenfeldt on
the entomological fauna of Central Africa, I was struck to see
how much the @ description. carinicolle applied well 4 months

 

 

  

 

337

specimens of C. Cranchii; I therefore sent one of these copies
aM.J. Kolbe and asked him to compare it to C. carinicolle Qued. :
this one answered me that my Callichroma was identical to
Tespece de Quedenfeldt, which however was missing 4 my copy,
the "weak wavy wrinkles" that Quedenfeldt points out as belonging
holding the vestiture of the elytra; this last character can vary
in intensity from one copy to another, moreover the author indicates these
wrinkles as weak (noch schwéicheren wellenartigen Runzeln),
I am therefore not surprised to see them 4 almost disappear at
some individuals. Under these conditions I think that the synonymy
of C. carinicolle Qued. with C. Cranchii White is perfect
totally justified. Philematium Currori White, Cat. Coleop. Ins. B.-M., Longi-
cornia, p. 155. Two § of this Philematium have been brought from Ibembo, where they
were caught in April and August; in the copies
fresh, the tarsi are absolutely silvery above. Philematium imperator Thom., Archiv. entom., II, 1858.
p - 153. I believe I can relate to this species a specimen taken at
Tbembo in the first half of August. Phiosyne brevicornis Fabr., Syst. El., 11, p.289.—Sery., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1834, p. 20. — Murr., Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist.,
ser. 4, VI, 1870, p. 162. —disparilis Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool.,
1856, p. 371. I report to this species two specimens taken 4 Ibembo in
August and September by my brother Joseph. Fuporus strangulatus Serv., Aun. Soc. Ent. France, 1834,
p. 20. — Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XX VI, 1882, p. 331. — splen-
dens Newm., The Entom. Mag., V, p. 496. Many copies of this space were taken, especially
in March and April, 4 Ibembo and a few others in May and June
& Djabir-Bandja; this species is excessively widespread in
the entire Congo region; it is also found in the island of
Fernando Po. Buporus itimbirensis Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891;C. R., p cectxxvut. Parallel, depressed, of a beautiful shiny metallic green; bigger
and more hardy than E. strangulatus; green and purple head, barely
dotted on the forehead which is more voted; very elongated prothorax,
Strongly narrowed in front, of a golden green with the ante-
lives a beautiful dark purple; the rough punctuation of the disc
not extended to the anterior sulcus, the basilar part sim-
plement wrinkled transversely; elytra opaque, dark green,

 

338

adorned with a purple stain covering part of the base, the

sides and posterior quarter; underside of a golden green, very shiny,

purple legs and antennae. Heavily pitted underside. Long. 19 4 20 mill. — Ibembo (April, August, September,
J. Duvivier). — Djabir-Bandja (May-June, L* Milz). This species being very close to the strangulatus Serv., I
I will not give the differential characters which seem to me sufficient.
sants to justify this new specific cut. The Luporus itimbivensis is consistently larger than the
strangulatus and more robust than this one; the forehead is more arched
in the middle and bears only a few sunken points, while
that it is totally punctate in the species of Serville. The bodice
of V'itimbirensis is relatively wider in its dilated part
and the rough punctuation of the disc stops a little before the silence.
anterior transverse lon without ever reaching this one, while
that it exceeds it in estrangulatus; the basilar part of the protho-
rax which, in this last species, is covered with large dots
interspersed with wrinkles, is here simply pleated transversely. The crest is quite elongated, impressed longitudinally. The
elytra are similar to those of the s¢rangulatus with the shoulders
almost smooth, the roughness of the elytra not rising on
these; the purple coloring that adorns the cases is arranged a
much like in the serangulatus, it is however more intense,
runs the base for a certain length and runs obliquely
yers the suture, covering the posterior quarter. The punctuation that
covers the underside is much stronger and tighter, it is almost
rough on abdomen; the chest is barely pubescent,
and the prosternum seems a little less widely dilated behind. Cloniophorus Mechowi Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXVI, 1882,
p. 333,

Two miles, originating from Ibembo (April), relate perfectly-
ment 4 the description and the figure given by the author in the
early publication; they are smaller, measuring only 21 1/2
mill., but that's the only difference I see. This char-
Mantis species has been described from the Quango region, from where it was
reported by Major von Mechow. Plycholemus Troberti Chevr., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 3¢ ser.,
VI, 1858, p. 324, pl. 8, f. 5. None simplicicollis Thom., Arch. ent., Il, 1858, p. 149, pl. 5, f. 1. Ibembo; a copy ; a few other individuals still have
been captured by my brother & Basoko (Haut-Congo) in the
first days of February; several have elytral bands
rather golden than silver; I do not see how the simplicicollis
Thomas. may differ from this species. 339

Xylotrechus Gahani Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R., p. cocLxxIx. Black, pitted and covered with thick pubescence below a
russet grey, becoming white at the posterial margins of the
ments of the chest and the first abdominal arch, and on the
sides of the second hoop. Tricarnate forehead; prothorax covered with
small granulations hidden by a greyish down, a small spot
round of each city and a - on the hard, blackish; elytra
finely rough, & silky pubescence, golden gray on the
posterior third, Cun tawny gray in front, adorned each with
following drawings: an oblique line starting from the base between
Peccusson and Vshoulder and running obliquely towards the margin
along which it extends up to two-thirds of the
length, extends in a triangle towards the suture and rises on
this one up to the level of the middle (this triangle includes a small
russet gray spot), wne second narrow, oblique band, se
dividing backwards, starting from the extremity of the first east
opposite to it and ends a little before Mreaching the suture
about a third of the length; wne narrow arcuate band limit in
before the last third; antewns and legs black. Long. 13 mill. ; width 3 mill. — Djabir-Bandja (May-June,
Lt Milz). This species is elongated and the elytra, at the base, are not
wider than the bodice. The forehead is rounded between the antennae
and door outside the two side fairings which are quite high
above the antennal calli, a median carina throughout
its length; the autennes reach two-fifths of the
length of the body, they are black and covered with gray down.
sat. The prothorax is regularly rounded on the sides (its more
great width in the posterior third) and strongly narrowed at the base. it is clearly edged in front and more weakly behind;
it is very convex, a little high at the back and covered with asperities
numerous, partly concealed by a very dense greyish down; of
each side in front, we notice a small rounded spot, black
and another on the A-shaped disk encompassing a spot
russet oval. Eeusson covered with a silky, whitish down. Elytra three times as long as wide, slightly narrowed in
rear, truncated at the apex, with the outer angle barely toothed
shape; they are moderately convex, finely rough and
decorated as stated in the diagnosis. Underside covered with a
down of a russet gray mixed with white, especially against the
anterior hips, on the sides of the chest and on the posterior hor-
different segments of it, all along the edge
posterior to the first abdominal segment and on the sides of the second. 340

The . Gahani ine seems quite similar to Y. Reichenowi Qued. but seems to differ from it by the coloring system, which is all
lair. I am happy to be able to dedicate this species To Mr. Gahan,
The obliging naturalist of the British Museum & London who, with the
competence which is known to him, wanted to compare a series of
my Longicornes to the types preserved in the aforementioned Museum. Paristemia Theovini Auviv., Entom. Tidskr., VII, 1886,
p. 89 (sub g. Amphidesmus). —Bates, Proc. zool. Soc. London,
1890, p. 488. Two copies, one from Ibembo, the other from Basoko
relate reasonably well to the author's description; however the
black sutural line extends, in these two specimens, very strong
ment back in the shape of a triangle; these are getting closer
thus individuals taken in the Aruwimi region; the species is
described from Gabon and Cameroon. The Royal History Museum
Naturelle de Bruxelles has one individual from Equateur-ville
(Van Gele). Lamiid. Apomempsis bufo Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1855, p. 186,
pl. 1, f.11. An individual of this species, described from Old Calabar, was taken
in Djabir-Bandja. Velleda aberrans Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891, XXXV;

C.-R., p. CCCLXXIX. A brownish black, entirely covered with a fine and thick
white-ash pubescence; mandibles, labrum and palps
black ; spiny prothorax on each side, adorned with two bands
blackish longitudinal; white crest; gray elytra
whitish, truncated at the top with subspinous angles,
apical ad partic of a greenish gray, limited in front by a
narrow darkish band slightly arched at anterior edge;
the base is occupied until av beyond the first third by a wide
blackish band, agreeing behind, and including a small lunula
light gray, barely perceptible, extending from the shoulder to the crest. Long. 9 1/2 mill. ; width max. 3 1/s mill. — Ibembo (September,

J. Duvivier). Gray head, broadly and weakly concave between its tuber-
antennae, these very short; subequilateral front,
convex, very finely furrowed in its middle, this furrow
extending on the vertex; epistome finely emarginated; antennae
finely pubescent, a little shorter than the elytra:
art. 3 a little longer than 1] and 2 together, almost twice

 

 

341

as long as 4, this one much longer than 5. Prothorax
slightly transverse, cylindrical, slightly raised on each
been in front, provided with a rather deep median furrow behind,
andtwo transverse furrows in front and at the base, as well as
@a very sharp short thorn, located on each side at the height
middle; its color is an ash gray with two wide bands
longitudinal blackish, not exceeding the anterior furrows,
and slightly rounded outside. Crest in curvilinear triangle,
lined with a long white down. Noticeably wider elyires
than the corselet at the base, quite short, flattened 4 the base, then
clearly raised and steeply sloping at the rear; they are
slightly sinuous on the sides, a little below the shoulders,
then regularly although slightly dilated, finally attenuated
towards the top, or they are truncated, with the external angles
subspinate and the suturals broadly rounded; shoulders slightly
raised; surface deeply punctuated in series, especially in the
basal portion; the elytra are of a whitish ash with the
apical part of a greenish gray limited in front by a narrow
blackish transverse band, slightly arched, and whose convexity
is directed forward; the basilar third is occupied by a large
blackish band, strongly arched behind and sinuate on each
side very close to the margin: this band encompasses a narrow lunula
of an ash gray, starting from the span to end a little in
below the crest. The legs are short with the thighs
slightly swollen, hind legs not keeled; tibiasintermé-
winding diaries a little before the end; underside and paws covered
with ashy pubescence, less thick than above. This space has all the facies of V. callizona Chyt. and V. murina
Thomas. , which could well form only one and the same species;
its coloring system V'en far away, as well as the absence of
keel to posterior femora; it seems to present a passage
between the genus Velleda and the genus Stizis (the latter created by
Gahan, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1890, p. 310) because of the ab-
sence of hull to the femurs, but its other characteristics bring it
it is more of the Veleda genre in which I have left it provisionally.
ment. Leprodera oculifrons Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1856, p. 490. —
Murray, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 4, VI, 1870, p. 477. A few copies from Thembo and Djabir-Bandja
were caught in May, June, August and September. A specimen taken 4 Ibembo differs from the others in these points:
the head and the corselet are more elongated, the elytra relatively
shorter, but Mr. Gahan, who kindly compared this
aberrant specimen to the type of Vocudifrous, deposited at the British

 

 

342

Museuin, considers it as forming only a variety of this

species. Leprodera congoana Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.-R., p. ccoLxxix. Black, covered below with thick brown-gray pubescence
nitre dotted with white hairs, above a dark gray dotted
yellowish gray; mandibles and eyes black; two spots of one
velvety black, yellow borders, on each side of the vertex; bodice
Sorlementépinewa on each side, unison in front, bisillon in
behind, bearing on the disc three obsolete tubercles;
yellowish crest; each ornate elytron, a little below the
middle, of a large subtriangular spot, of a velvety black,
resting on the margin; sinuate anterior tibiae near the top,
the intermediates a little beyond the middle. Long. 19 mill. ; width max., 6 9/3 mill. ~ Ibembo (16-30
September, J. Duvivier). Black and fully covered below with thick pubes-
a hint of a brownish ash mixed with a few whitish hairs,
above a dark gray dotted with yellowish gray, especially towards
sides and top of elytra; vertical forehead, slightly
widened in front, bearing a few scattered sunken points, deep-
dug between the antennal calluses which are quite prominent,
a deep furrow runs through its entire length and
extends on the vertex; mandibles strong and broad, black;
labrum and palps light brown with the last segment of the
blackish palps; vertex punctuated along the furrow, adorned behind
eyes, on the edge of the corselet, of four ocellated spots of a
velvety black, bordered with yellow in front. Antennae brown, protruding-
slightly less the length of the body (shorter than the body in
the Q): art. 1 extending a little beyond the anterior edge of the corselet,
thick, 3 the longest, the following, gradually decreasing from
length. Prothorax a little wider than high, sparsely
dotted, fringed with yellow in front and behind, straight on its
anterior and posterior edges, and provided on each side, in the middle,
of a robust sharp spine; it bears three transverse furrows, one
near the anterior edge, flexuous and less deep in its
median portion, the other two very close together, located near
low and nearly straight; the disc bears three tubercles
few accused, between these he is depressed. Half crest
circle, covered with a golden down. Broadly rectangular blytra
broad, high shoulders, slightly sinuous on the sides a
slightly below the humeral calli, slightly dilated in
rear, regularly attenuated From the last third,
narrowly and singly rounded at the top; they are mediocre

   

 

 

 

343

convex crest on the disk. a bit depressed transversely
lately 41a height of first third, subserially pitted
over the entire surface, wrinkled transversely in their first
half ; at the base and in the humeral region, we notice some
small smooth tubers; the elytra are completely covered
@a short down of an ash gray mixed with yellowish, especially
towards the top, and adorned each with a fairly large spot subtri-
angular, velvety, brownish-black, resting on the margin and
whose apex stops, 4 a short distance from the suture, 4 the
height of the posterior third: the whole is also covered with hair
black enough spaced and directed behind. Underside and legs dense-
dotted, covered with short, very thick pubescence,
ash gray mixed with yellowish and white; anterior shins
sinuates a short distance from the summit, the sinuate intermediaries and
tuberculate beyond the middle; the end of the ciliated tibiae of
yellow; mesosternum clearly tuberculate in front. This species is easily recognizable by its color system.
ration; it belongs to the Z. oculifrons Chvt. Bizadus sierricola White, Proc. zool. Soc. London, 1858,
p-510. An individual from this space was taken 4 Ibembo. — Known to
Sierra Leone. Monohammus ruspator Fabr., Syst. Eleut., 11, p. 300. — Oliver,
Ent., IV, 67, p. 99, pl. 17, f. 129. —Murray, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 4, VI, 1870, p. 475. A copy captured 4 Ibembo, in April. — Guinea, Sierra-
Leone, Congo, Senegal. Monohammus irrorator Chyt., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1855, p. 517. —Murray, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 4, VI, 1870, p. 479. A few small specimens were taken in August and
September in Ibembo; this space is very common in some
regions of the Congo. Monohammus centralis Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.-R., p. cocLxxx,

Black, entirely covered with a short and thick pubescence of a
light brown; transverse corselet, strongly spined on the celes,
disc trituberculate; elytrves slightly depressed on the
disk, regularly tapered behind, truncated at the top,
each adorned, at the base: with a narrow interrupted band, towards
the first quarter: of several transverse spots, wn little in
below the middle: of a transverse rectangular spot more
closer to the margin than to the suture, black. CS. Very developed forelegs with enlarged tarsi;
antennae exceeding the body of all its length. 344

Long. 22 to 31 mill. ; width 7410 mill. — Ibembo (April, August,
September October; J. Duvivier). From the form of the JV. griseoplagiatus Thom., but slightly more
attenuated back than this one, entirely covered with a short
and thick pubescence of a light brown, longer, silkier and
streaked with greyish below. Head hollowed out in a triangle between the
antennal calluses which deviate strongly, provided with a fine furrow
deep longitudinal, starting from the epistome and continuing on
the vertex; brownish episteme; finely rough forehead, bearing
like the vertex some mediocre points; antennas 4 art. 3 and
4 very elongated and very robust. Weakly transverse prothorax,
very strongly thorny on each side, transversely bifurcated
in front and behind, the anterior internal sulcus strongly sinuate
arched back in its middle part, the internal of the posterior furrows
very deep laughing and slightly meandering in the middle; disk
bearing three well-marked tubercles, arranged in an inverted triangle
and separated by a fairly deep depression, a boundary dimple
behind the two lateral tubercles, all marked, especially
behind, some large sunken points. Large crest, subar-
rounded behind, rather long pubescent. Straight elytra at the
base with slightly raised shoulders, noticeably wider
at the base than the corselet, very slightly twisted on the sides in
below the shoulders, regularly and slightly narrowed in
back, & truncated top; they are slightly flattened on the
disc, covered with smooth, black granulations at base, weak-
ment and fairly regularly dotted and adorned each with spots
brownish-black: a narrow, interrupted basal band, somewhat
a few irregular spots arranged transversely, 4 the height
of the first quarter and a subrectangular spot, mediocre, at the
height of the last third, closer to the margin than to the
suturing; some very small spots are still observed in some
tain individuals, close to the suture, between the large spots. Legs robust, densely pubescent, the intermediate
created and tuberculate beyond the middle; arched prosternal protrusion
posteriorly, unarmed mesosternal projection, both canalicu-
tied in their length. G. Antennae protrude almost the whole length of the body,
very developed forelegs, 4 slightly sinuate shins and
arched near the end. Q. Antennae not exceeding the length of the body, legs
normal anteriors. This species is very similar to J/. scadiosus Qued. of Quango,
it seems to differ from it by its generally larger size, its
browner coloring and the different arrangement of the spots which
adorn the elytra. 345

Monohammus griseoplagiatus Thom., Archiv. entom., I, 1858,
p. 166, pl. 5, f. 3. A number of individuals varying considerably from
size were encountered Djabir-Bandja and 4 Ibembo 4 different
times of the year; this space is quite common in the Congo. Menalophila frenata Bates, Ent. Mountain. Mag., vol. XXI, 1834,
p. 16. I bring back 4 this species a specimen from Ibembo
(February 15, 1890) and corresponding description 4; it is described
from Gabon. Noserocera tuberosa Bates, Ent. Mountain. Mag., vol. XXI, 1834,
p - 17. Two individuals caught 4 Ibembo (end of September); the hope was
described from Cameroon; it is also found in Bas-Congo. Anybostetha Quedenfeldti Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium,

XXXVI, 1892, p. 59. Parallel, reddish-brown, runs above a pubes-
cence Mun ferrugineuw brundtre, below an ashy
greenness; head covered with yellowish green pubescence; forehead
finely keeled longitudinally; subcylindrical, bi-
furrowed transversely forwards and backwards, rugosule,
greenness on the sides; rugosule elytra, clearly punctate,
smudged with green: a large subtriangular spot resting
on the base and a transverse band placed before the middle,
connected on the suture, some small irregular spots along
of the margin and the suture in the apical part. Length, 14 1/2 mil.; width. shoulder, 4 5/+ mill. — Ibembo (August 1-16,
J. Duvivier). This species seems to me to be extremely close to A. saperdoides
Qued., the type of the genus, whom I do not know in kind; she
seems to differ from it by the greenish coloration of the underside, of the head
and sides of the prothorax; the spots that adorn the elytra are
otherwise arranged. Subvertical front, a little longer than wide, provided in its
middle of a thin longitudinal hull extending into a thin
furrow on the vertex and, between the antennae, of a trans-
versale, covered with a few blackish granulations, spaced;
antennae exceeding a quarter of the length of the body, bristle-like,
of a light reddish brown, 4 articles ringed with greenish gray, no
cilia below: art. 1 slightly thickened, 3 double 1 and 1 1/2 times
as long as the first, the following a little shorter, equal
between them, the last a little elongated. Slightly wider prothorax
only long, slightly bevelled at the base, provided in front and behind
Wun thin transverse furrow, parallel to the edge, and 4 quarter height

 

346

anterior and the posterior quarter of another furrow, fine and deep and
extending sideways to anterior hips;
slightly convex, uneven surface; side parts each provided with
a small, granuliform, black tuber; the surface is rugosule
and covered with a pubescence of a brownish ironstone on the
disk, light green on the sides. Transversal escutcheon, bru-
natre with greenish edges. Elytra 4 slightly protruding shoulders,
light reddish brown, parallel, rounded at the top,
deeply and quite densely covered with sunken spots a
little weaker along the suture; they are entirely
furnished with a very tight brownish ferruginous pubescence
and adorned with spots of a greenish ash: a triangular spot
resting on the base and extending quite widely on the
suture, to join a transverse band located a little
above the middle and irregular at its edges; some very
small spots also greenish are still observed against the
suture and close to the margin, in the apical part, on the other hand
some brownish spots are found in the green parts. Finely alutaceous underparts of a reddish brown with longer legs
dark, entirely furnished with an ashy greenish down; shins
almost straight, divergent nails. Prosternum arched forward and
behind, mesosternum arched forward, not tuberculate. The various characters on which relied the late Gen. Quedenfeldt, to whom I am happy to dedicate this species, for
establish the genus A nybostetha, are found in |’ A. Quedenfeldti. The genus Anybostetha first differs from the genus Alphitopola,
which it is particularly close, by the presence of a tuber
granuliform on each side of the corselet and the absence of any
mesosternal projection. Coptops xdificator Fabr., Syst. Eleut., II, p. 292. Numerous specimens of this species, very common in
Africa. were taken throughout the year 4 Ibembo and at Djabir-
Bandja. Aderpas brunneus Thom., Archiv. entom., II, 1858, p. 179. Ibembo (March); two copies; the species is described from Gabon. Aderpas griseus Thom., Archiv. entom., II, 1858, p. 178. Ibembo (October). — Also two copies of this
species, described from the same region as the previous one. Aderpas lineolatus Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1856, p. 489. An individual taken 4 Ibembo by my brother Joseph. This species is everywhere cited as A stynomus lineola-
tus Chyt., but it does belong to the genus Aderpas, of which it
has all the characters,

Ancylonotus tribulus Fabr., Syst. Ent., p. 170 (1775). — Oliver,

347

Ent. IV, 67, p. 65, pl. 14, f. 100. —Casteln., Hist. Nat., [,
p. 459. Two specimens taken 4 Ibembo at the end of October; this species
varies considerably. Ancylonotus nasicornis Pasc., Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 4th ser.,
VIII, 1871, p. 275. An individual Q from this space taken 4 Djabir-Bandja, in May-
June; the species is known from Sierra Leone. Ceax lichenea Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891;
C.-R., p. ccoxx. Oblong, brownish black, covered with a thick down of a
lichen green coloration; underside stained with small brown spots,
few ; brownish wrasse, black mandibles; antennae
russets; head finely pitted, russet between the antennae and
behind the eyes; prothorax laterally tuberculate, strongly
punctate, bearing on the disc five small tubercles, the
very prominent median; elytra regularly narrowed behind,
each bearing two basal crests, as well as two other crests
obsolete near the top; basal part and posterior third
stained with golden fawn. Long. 10 1/2 mill. ; width 3 2/s mill. — Ibembo (October,
J. Duvivier). Entirely blackish-brown and covered with thick down
of a lichen green colour, this longer and silkier down
below than above. Broad, transverse, brown wrasse as well as
the parts of the mouth; mandibles black; large, longer forehead
wide, furrowed along its whole length (this furrow prolongs
giant on the vertex), slightly convex, rugosule, carrying two
small brownish spots between the eyes; little antennal callus
salient, very divergent; between the antennal calluses and behind
of the eyes, the pubescence takes on a hue of bright red; antennae
slightly exceeding the length of the body, brownish, and densely
covered with a reddish down, long ciliated downwards
under. Prothorax a little wider than long, with two thin sil-
transverse furrows forward and backward (the internal furrows
slightly sinuous), bearing on each side, at the height of the
middle, a subacute tubercle and on the disk five small tubercu-
the, four of which are arranged in a trapezium, the two anterior
being the closest and also the most salient, the
fifth, placed in the middle is very salient and acute; coloring
general is a fairly light green, speckled, especially on the sides,
fairly numerous small brown spots; around the tuber
median, the pubescence is bright red and on the flanks
note a narrow longitudinal brownish band. Hcusson very

 

348

broad, greenish, bordered with blackish on the sides. Elytra almost
once as wide at the base as the bodice, with projecting shoulders;
they are straight at the base, then regularly attenuated to the
apex where they are quite sharply and narrowly rounded
say; they are subdepressed on the disk, each provided with 4 la
base and up to about a quarter of their length, of two crests
longitudinal, the closest to the crest being the furthest
protruding, ridges surmounted by tufts of bright reddish hair; this
reddish coloring even extending over the entire basal part;
not far from the summit, one still notices on each elytron two
longitudinal ridges less accentuated, especially the external one, separated
created by a longitudinal depression; these ridges are also
spotted with golden russet like all the apical portion of the elytra;
the ground color of this one is lichen green. The suture
as well as the margin bear a series of small brown spots
and the surface is strongly and not very regularly punctuated, especially
at the base. Very finely dotted underside; mostly soft paws
mottled brownish, hooks brown. This is the second species of this genus, mistakenly placed in the
Cat. Gemm. Har., as a synonym of the genus Acmocera of which it is
absolutely distinct; the typical species of the genus is !'O. triangle-
wash White, Proc. zool. Soc., XXVI, p. 400; Paseoe, Journ. of
Ent., II, p. 185, pl. 61, f. 3, from Gabon. Lasiopezus longimanus Thom., Archiv. entom., II, 1858,
p. 164; Class test. Ceramb., 1861, p. 83. An individual of this beautiful species was captured at Ibembo in March. Lasiopezus Josephus Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.-R., p. here
Black, covered with a thick ducet of a yellowish white; tee, antennae
and crest black; forehead strongly granulated; prothoraa fine-
ment roughened with the black calluses as well as the tip of the tuber-
cules latévaua, the underside of these and the sides of the corselet;
elytra of a yellowish white ad very prominent shoulders, provided
each with a strong basilar crest, covered on the quarter
anterior numerous small smooth tubercles, each ornamented
black spots as follows: wne small subtriangular spot
between the shoulder and the éeusson, then a large oblong spot
covering the shoulder and slightly exceeding the first quarter, a
second smaller between this and the crest, wne third between
the latter and the suture, leaving the latter free; wn bit into
below the middle, a very irregular transverse band on
its Lords, covering neither the margin nor the suture, between this
and the top, four irregularly arranged spots; imme-
immediately below the basal spots, two small dots along

 

349

of the suture. Legs spotted black and yellowish white. Long. 25 mill. ; width 9 mill. — Ibembo (end of October, J. Duvivier). G. Forehead longer than wide, furrowed longitudinally, strong-
ly and densely grainy, 4 sparsely pubescent; dense wrasse-
ment punctuated; antennal callus clearly separated; antennae
almost twice as long as the body, brownish black. Prothorax almost twice as wide as long, provided on the
disk, of two transversely oval calluses, separated by
a furrow and followed by a small, slightly protruding tubercle; 4-ply disc
fine and tight killing, without large scattered points. Fine crest
punctate, black, velvety. Elytra with strongly raised shoulders,
each provided with a strong ridge 4 the base, strongly granular
on the first quarter, quite regularly punctuated: the punctuation
tion fading partly towards the top, especially accentuated in
the black parts where it looks more irregular. underside finely
and densely pitted, pubescent, dark gray pubescence,
slightly accentuated on the abdomen, thick and yellowish on the sides of
Chest. Very strong legs, very developed forelegs
with the extremity of the tibiae and the tarsi dilated, these tarsi equal-
ment long hairy; sinuate intermediate tibiae; The paws
are black, more strongly pitted than the underside of the body, the
four yellow-stained anterior femora, alternating posterior jes
tively yellow and black, the tibiae and the first two segments
yellowish tarsi in their basilar half. This species will easily recognize by its coloring system;
it seems to me to be subject to quite a large variation. Lasiopezus variegator Fabr., Spec. Insect. , I, p. 221. A certain number of specimens of this spice, which seems quite
common in the region were captured 4 Ibembo, from August to
october. This species varies considerably in size. Prosopocera ocellata Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1857, p. 56. —Murray, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser., 4, VU, 1871, p. 40. A few individuals from this space were taken in January, August,
September and October 4 Ibembo. Prosopocera signatifrons Duviy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belg.,XXXV,

1891; C.-R., p. cccLxxx1. Silky tawny with black mandibles; wn small line
midline and two small oblique blackish lines on the anterior part.
front life; two oblique lines, wider on the vertex,
of the same couwr; the tip of the side tubercles of the corselet,
on the elytra wne large oval spot located a little above
of the middle, not far from the suture, a small spot quite near
margin, located a little higher than the large one, also
blackish; elytves lightly punctuated, smeared with brown as well as

350

than the bodice; a triangular spot under the anterior hips

teriors, cites the mesosternum, part of the meta-parapleura

thoracic and wne small spot on sides of metasternum

whites. Prosopocera signatifrons Chyt. mss. Long. 31 mill. ; width max., 11 mill. — Ibembo (J. Duvivier). Q. More or less reddish brown, fully covered
A thick silky villus of a yellowish brown varied with tawny
and dark brown; mandibles black, powerful; forehead more
long as wide, longitudinally furrowed, subdepressed in sound
middle, rugosule and marked with a series of sunken dots
diocres along the lateral edges, 4 varied yellowish villi,
marked near the anterior edge, with three glabrous blackish lines, the
median longitudinal, the other two oblique; vertex separated from
forehead by a fine transverse furrow, furrowed along its length
like the forehead, of the same color as the latter, marked with
a few sunken dots and adorned with two oblique lines diverging
behind, antennae a little shorter than the body, dark brown
reddish, 4 segments ringed with light yellow 4 their base. Prothorax
transverse, 4 anterior edge slightly advanced, edged with a
villus of a golden rufous in front; slightly convex, provided with 4 the base of
two transverse furrows, the anterior very deep, 4 its edge
front of two other furrows, the closest to the edge of which is
visible only on the flanks and the posterior is strongly
flexuous, behind, in its middle part; surface widely and
obsolete trituberculate; sides each with a tubercle
terminated in a short, obtuse tooth, with a blackish tip; the bottom
is densely dotted and the whole covered with this thick villus
Wun reddish fawn varied with brownish. Escutcheon larger than
long, broadly rounded behind, yellowish red. Elytra one
little more than three times as long as the corselet, wider than
this one 4 the base, slightly raised at the shoulders, subsinuated in
below these, singly rounded at the top; they are
conyexes, very finely rough, 4 yellowish yillness varied from
brown, especially towards the shoulders, on the disc and in the portion
apical and each adorned with two brownish-black spots,
velvety: a first spot of medium size, oval,
placed a little above the middle, closer to the
suture than from the margin, a second smaller one is adherent 4
this margin and is placed a little above the first;
in addition to the fine ground roughness, there are still series more
or less regular large sunken dots better marked on the
sides and towards the top. Underside finely and densely pitted
like the top, covered, but less densely than the top,

  

 

 

 

351

tawny-brown down varying from brownish, especially on the
chest flanks; a spot of dull white covers the underside
and the sides of the anterior hips, the sides of the mesosternum and
part of metathoracic parapleuries; a small stain
oval, of the same color, is observed on the sides of the metasternum. Legs reddish brown, colored like the underside; legs
intermediaries incised obliquely 4 the outside a little below
middle. A copy identical to mine is in the British Museum
4 London, under the name of P. signatifrons Chvt. mss., I have done
retained this name 4 the present species (1). (1) For the purpose of this work, I give below the description of a new
species of Aiphitopola from Gabon. Avpuitopota Lamreret Duviv. Reddish brown, entirely pubescent; vertex, prothorax, elytra, pro-,
meso- and sides of the metasternum of a dull, soft green bean; forehead, umbrellas
metathoracic, sides of the abdomen of a golden fawn; middle of metasternum and
abdomen blackish; brown antennae; a small dot from each side of the prothorax
black, a mediocre spot on each elytron, before the middle, of a darker green. Long. 22 1/2 mill., width. ep. 9 mill. — Gabon. y*. Entirely matte, forehead higher than wide, carrying a thin longitn= carina
dinal, armed with a robust horn, curved upwards, bifid at the top, black,
furnished with thick tawny pubescence like the whole forehead; wrasse and mandibles
black; reddish-brown palps; moderately concave head between the tubercles
antennifers which are quite apart, vertex furnished with very short pubescence
a soft green; antennae almost twice as long as the body, branes,
Prothorax a little wider than long, convex, smooth, a little narrower in front than in
rear, crossed by two well-marked rectilinear furrows, near the anterior edge
and from the base, furnished each summer, a little below the middle, with a small tubercle
grainy; entirely of a beautiful soft green of the shade of the green of the Sterno-
fomis imperialis Fab. with a small blackish dot located a short distance from the tuber-
side abutments. Heusson rounded behind, yellowish green, Elytra regularly
attenuated behind, four times as long as the prothorax, & obtuse shoulders,
bearing a few small granulations in the basilar region and a few dots
sunk on the other parts, these points decreasing gradually as one
approaches the top; entirely of the same green as the prothorax, and bearing
each a little above the middle, a little closer to the suture than to the margin,
a small oval patch of darker green surrounded by yellowish tawny;
some spots of this yellowish shade are also observed very close to the
base ; marginal border narrowly fanned. Very finely rough underside. covered
dune thick and short pubescence of a green heath on the pro-, the meso- and the sides
of the metasternum, a golden fawn on the legs, the metasternal parapleura and
the sides of the abdomen; middle of metasternum and black abdominal segments,
very slightly pubescent. This species seems to me to be closer to 1', dipunctata Thom,

I have placed in the genus Adphitopola for the following reasons: front plane,
antennae not fringed below, art. 3 almost double of 2, longer than the
next, granular tubercles at the prothorax, elytra regularly attenuated
posteriorly, posterior femurs not reaching end of third segment
abdominal, lower eye lobe oblong, fifth abdominal segment slight
meandering at the top. I dedicate this interesting species 4 to my friend and colleague Mr. Aug. Lameere, who has
kindly help me in the study of some of the species cited in this work. ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM. OF BELGIUM, T. XXXVI. 7

352

Sternotomis imperialis Fabr., Syst. Eleuth., I, p. 286. —
Westw., Arcan. entom., I, p. 149, p. 86, f. 3. This species has been found in considerable numbers a
Ibembo as well as in Djabir-Bandja; we can capture it 4 every
times of the year. Sternotomis variabilis Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXV, 1881,
p. 289; XXVI, 1882, p. 341. Also taken 4 at any time of the year, but this species
is much less common than S. imperialis Fabr. — Ibembo and
Djabir-Bandja. Sternotomis Bohndorgi Westw., Ann. Mag. Nat. History, 1886,
p-501. A few individuals were captured 4 Ibembo in February, August
and October; the species is described from the Niams-Niams country. Quimalanca vegalis Fabr., Spec. Ins., I, p. 217 (1781). — Oliver,
Ent., IV, 67, p. 89, pl. f. 171. — Cast., Hist. Nat. Ins., I,
p. 475. — Thom., Phys. I, 6, p. 175. This species is almost as common as S, imperialis
Fabr., and is also taken throughout the year. — Ibembo and
Djabir-Bandja. Pinacosterna Nachtigali Har., Coleop. Heft., XVI, 1879,
p. 190. Two individuals of this species described from the “Lunda, were cap-
turés, one in Ibembo in April, the other in Djabir-Bandja in May-June;
it was also taken in Quango and in the region of
by Ruwimi. Pinacosterna Mechowi Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXV, 1881,
p-289; XXVI, 1882, p. 345, pl. Lively. 3. A certain number of specimens of this species have been
collected &4 Ibembo, in April; the species has been reported for the
first time in the Quango. Tragocephala timida Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,

1892, p. 167. Oblong, sub-parallel, matte, lighter brownish-black on the
breast, covered below with a greenish gray pubescence,
on top of a very short velvety down; Vertex,
antennae, prothorax disc and lower flanks
of it, posterior half of the elytra and disk of the mottiate
anterior, as well as an elongated lateral spot, of a black
brownish; forehead, a band on each side of the prothorax, projecting
along the elytra to the middle of these, of a yellow
@ocher more or less saffron; trimaculate abdominal segments
chest and legs stained with black or brownish black. 353

Long 15 mil. ; width 5 mill. — Ibembo (August 1-15, J. Duvivier),
Vectangular forehead, very finely streamlined in the middle (this
carina extending over the vertex), rugosula and furnished with a
rather tight pubescence, of a beautiful yellow, extending between the
antenniferous tubercles and on the sides below the posterior lobe
laughing eyes, as well as on the mandibles; vertex of a brown
blackish; anterior edge of epistome tawny; black wrasse, as well as
the mandibles; antennae protruding about a quarter the length
figure of the body, 4 first article black, the others of a dark brown,
velvety. Prothorax slightly wider than long, transversely
impressed near the base, 4 straight side edges 4 the base on
a short length, then abruptly and distinctly angular a
slightly below the middle, then very slightly convergent in
before; convex surface beyond: of the transverse impression, den-
streaky and finely punctuated, title lined with a short
velvety brownish-black pubescence on disc, adorned with
each side of a wide longitudinal band, of an ocher yellow,
paler and whitish towards the base; lower part of the flanks
dark brown like the disk. Very strong triangle crest-
transversely. Almost straight elytra 4 the base, a little more
wide as the corselet has the height of its lateral tubercles, &
shoulders 4 slightly advanced, subparallel and narrowed near the top
put; they are depressed, densely and finely pitted like
the prothorax, 4 sutures protruding and bearing each not far from the
suture a longitudinal side interrupted forwards and backwards;
between this dimension and the suture, the elytra are slightly hollowed
longitudinally; they are slightly reddish brown 4 la
base, brownish black in the posterior half, and adorned with each
side of a longitudinal band of slightly saffron yellow ocher,
(prolongation of the lateral band of the prothorax), which extends
until about the middle of the length, ot it is a little dilated, it
is obliquely truncated towards the suture and connected 4 to it by a
small oblique line of sulfur yellow; in the lateral yellow spot,
we observe a small black rectangular spot, resting on the
margin and located at the bottom; near the sutural angle a small point
White. Underside fairly densely covered with gray pubescence
greenish; legs, middle of the chest and a spot on the sides of
this one, of a brownish black; on each abdominal segment, a
large rounded median spot having and a triangular spot
lateral, blackish; each femur vaguely smeared with blackish. Diastocera trifasciata Fabr., Syst. Ent., p. 174. — Olivier, Ent. IV, 67, p. 61, pl. 6, f. 121. — Cast., Hist. Nat. Ins., II, p. 472. — Thom., Class. Length, p.
A Collected Copy & Tbembo,

 

 

354

Ceroplesis quinquefasciata Fabr., But. System, 1, 2, p. 281. —
r., Gefvers, Vet. Ak. Ferh., V, 1872, nt 2, p. 41. This species is quite common in the Congolese region: a
certain number of copies, 4 irregular designs, were taken
4 Ibembo and 4 Djabir-Bandja. Ceroplesis calabarica Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1858, p. 55. Ibembo (August) and Djabir-Bandja (May-June); two copies
in each locality. Ceroplesis fissa Har., Coleop. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 197

A few specimens of both sexes, taken at Ibembo, others
a Djabir-Bandja seem to me to be related to C. fissa Har. and such is also the opinion of Mr. Kolbe, who has had the kindness to
compared to the types kept in the Berlin Museum, some of
these copies. They differ, however, from types in such a way that
Your species cannot remain so clearly characterized as it was,
when Harold described the few specimens collected by
There Pogge Expedition. Harold's types have all the epilators
red as well as the apical edge of the elytra. Some of my exem-
likes that come from the same region as the types of
Berlin (approx. of Luluabourg-Congo) have the apical edge of the elytra
partly black, as also part of the base of the spikes
cry, the black 4 the base of it however not extending
up to the level of the edge of the first red fascia of the elytra. The arrangement of the elytral red fascia is very variable: for
sometimes they are wider, other times quite narrow, sometimes very
irregular. The head has two wide longitudinal bands
red, or with traces of red dots, or entirely
black; likewise the cheeks are black or spotted with red; the Horn-
selet appears either entirely black, or with traces of
red on the sides, or bordered with red in front and behind;
the sides of the inetasternum are spotted with red or widowed from this
shade. This species therefore varies considerably in its system of
coloring. The specimens collected 4 Ibembo all have a red head and
the top of the forehead marked with a small black line, the cheeks are entirely
dark, the corselet is edged in red in front and
back, the sides of the metasternum are smeared with the meine nuance:
they are Q. The elytral bands are quite wide, the epipleures
are black at the base and the apical edge of the elytra is entirely
red. A copy of Djal

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

wala band anteviewre of the elytra for-

slightly thrown back, it thus forms a pronounced angle with
the suture. The @. calabarica Chyt. is a space very close to C. fissa
Har., but here the elytral bands are wider, especially the
second and there is no trace of black in the apical part
red ; the antennal tubercles are nearly as close together
in one space than in the other, but they are in C. calabarica
less angular in front; moreover, the prothorax of C. calabarica
is brighter, less broad, entirely black, transversely
pleated, and not tuberculate on the sides. Ceroplesis Mechowi Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., 1882, p. 347,
pl. Lively. 4. A single individual of this pretty species was caught at Ibembo. Macha adusta Har., Coleop. Heft., XVI, 1879, p. 198. This space is taken quite frequently in the basin of the
Congo, and also occurs in Guinea; we find it all
Vannée 4 Ibembo as well as in Djabir-Bandja. Phryneta obscura Ent. Syst., Suppl., p. 144.— Oliv., Encycl. Meth., VII, 1792, p. 462; Ent., VI, 67, p. 80, pl. 8, f. 5:
pl. 18, f. 1387. — Fahr., Efvers. Vet. Ak. Forh., 1872, no. 2, p. 44. This Lamiaria was taken in April and September 4 Ibembo; some 
copies only. Phryneta macularis Har., Coleop. Heft., XVI, 1879, p. 202. I report 4 this species two specimens captured |’one has
Djabir-Bandja, the other in Ibembo (August); She also meets
in Aruwimi. PHRYNETOIDS
Duvivier, Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891; C.-R., p. cocLxxx. Head fairly broad and triangularly concave between the
antenniferous tubercles, these contiguous 4 the base, moderately
highlights; very narrow forehead; very short cheeks; mandibles
mediocre, very robust; robust antennae, similar to those
Phryneta; lower eye lobes very large, subquadran-
gular. Transverse prothoraxz, depressed, tuberculate on the disc, the
tubercles clearly separated by deep furrows, provided in
before and behind a deep transverse furrow, carrying
each side a large conical tubercle, very acute. Triangular escutcheon, rounded back. Elytra short and depressed on the disc, very weakly

 

tapered at the back, broadly rounded at the top, 4 shoulders
slightly prominent. Robust legs, relatively shorter than those of
Phryneta. Sublinear thighs, subdepressed tibiae, deeply
indented on the Vewtremity collar, Limited indentation in front and
behind by a strong tooth. Abdomen similar 4 to that of the Phryneta; prosternal protrusion
vertical behind, provided with a small, very acute tubercle; risen
right mesosternal in front, surmounted by an obtuse tubercle. Body densely pubescent. This genus is very close to the genus Phsyneta; the forehead is beautiful
narrower than in most species of this genus, the
posterior lobes of the eyes are less elongated, subsquare; the form
general is even more stocky with pro- and meso-
well-marked sternals; the shape of the shins is especially particular,
and it is mainly on this that I base myself to justify
this new generic cut. The shins are short, depressed,
widened at the top and present at the end a deep
lateral crure limited by two strong teeth; this indentation is
larger and deeper than the anterior tibiae, these tibiae
shovel, for! the form, the shins of a certain number of Lamelli-
horns. Phrynetoides quadrimaculatus Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium,
XXXV, 1891; C.-R., p. cooLxxxi. Very stocky, running with a thick brownish-grey down, passing
russeting on certain parts of the elytra; very narrow forehead;
corselet strongly tuberculd, bifurcated, with robust lateral spines,
whose point is directed backwards; strongly embossed elytra @
the base, each adorned with two spots of a velvety black adhering to a
margin; a triangular coward a little below the shoulder,
melting into the waffle thereof, wne second below the
middle, indented in back. Long. 28 mill. ; width max. 13 mill. — Ibembo (J. Duvivier). ‘Head finely roughened, marked with a few large scattered dots
especially on the vertex; posterior eye lobes wider than
forehead; vertex adorned behind each eye, with a small velvety spot
blackish tee. Transverse prothorax, transverse furrows very
deep (the anterior strongly sinuate in its median part),
both on the disc, in front, two large tubercles separated by a
strong subquadrangular impression and followed by a small tubercle
median; two oblique furrows limit these three tubercles in
rear and separate them from two other small elevations less
protruding, closer to the base; the lateral tubercles are
very robust, ending in a strong tooth weakly directed in

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 
      

 

397

rear, black and bounded at their base by a strong furrow; the surface
of the corselet is finely roughened and marked with dots
dark; a black spot is observed on each side, under the
lateral tubercle. Crest smeared with dark brown, silky. Elytra significantly wider than the prothorax at the base, 4 shoulders
the slightly raised, short, weakly and imperceptibly
tapered to apex or broadly rounded; they
are flat on the disc, strongly embossed in their half
anterior especially towards the shoulders, grainy on the callus
humeral, finely but fairly densely pitted on the remainder
from the area; they are of a slightly shiny brown, lined with a
fairly silky pubescence and each adorned with two large
velvety black subtriangular spots, one a little
above, the other a little below the middle: both hold
born at the margin; between these two spots and a little behind the
second, the ground color is more vivid; some points
blackish are still visible: one near the suture a little in
below the middle, the other a little below the second spot. Underside light brown, marked with many small spots
darker. A single copy, taken 4 Ibembo. Inesida leprosa Fabr., Syst. El., Il, p. 304. —brunnicornis
Guér.-Men., Icon. Reg. Anim., Ins., p. 239. — bisignata Dej.,
Cat. 3rd ed., p. 368. This species, excessively common on the western coast
was taken, both in Djabir-Bandja and in Ibembo, in one
certain number of copies. Phrystola ceca Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1857, p. 75. —
Murray, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 4° ser., VI, 1870, p. 412. Two individuals of this species, one caught 4 Ibembo, the other a
Djabir-Bandja. Eumimetes Haroldi Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXVI, 1883,
p-139, pl. I, f. 7. A few specimens of this species described from Lower Guinea,
4 Ibembo were captured in August and October. Eumimetes tropicus Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R., p. ccoxx. Oblong, oval, short, black, covered with a pubescence of a
whitish ash-grey, thick, with brown head and corselet
ours; some small brownish spots on the middle and the part
apical of elytra; fine brown hairs straightened on the vertex, the
corselet and elytra, these last granules & the base, finely
pitted on the rest of the surface. Long. 15 mil., width. max. 8 mill. — Ibembo (August, J. Duvivier),

358,

Forehead broad, vertical, flat, subquadrangular, finely furrowed
longitudinally and rough, 4 pubescence of a yellowish brown,
very short ; mandibles strong, black, bearing 4 the base a few
scars; black palps; frontal furrow extending over the
vertex which is slightly convex, pubescent, and bears a few dots
sunken scattered; a line of large dots can be seen along the
outer border of the posterior lobe of the eyes; little antennal callus
prominent, widely separated; antennae extending half the length
length of the body in 3, reaching the top of the elytra in
the Q, black, furnished with a brownish pubescence, finely
ciliates below: art. 3 4 sentence longer than 4, the following
gradually decreasing in length. Prothorax almost two
times as wide as high, subcylindrical, slightly rounded on
the sides, cut straight forward, twisted on each side behind,
furrowed transversely 4 the base and at the top, these furrows very
purposes; the disc is plain, rugosule, marked on the sides, especially
towards the flanks, some large sunken points not very close together;
a very small tuber with an obtuse and smooth tip on each side, a
slightly below the middle; all covered with pubescence
brownish. Ecus strongly transverse, short, subtruncated in
back, grey, spotted with brown. Short elytra, protruding noticeably
ment the prothorax at the base, imperceptibly narrowed behind,
obtusely rounded at the top; shoulders showing a small
subtuberculiform projection; moderately convex surface, presenting
many small sunken dots arranged without order on the
posterior two-thirds of the elytra, the anterior part being occupied
by many small black tubercles, rounded, very shiny,
I all furnished with a pubescence of a light ash gray, dotted
darker speckles, thick and coated; to the middle and
on the apical quarter there are some small rough speckles
natres arranged without order; from each point emerges further,
fine, straight brown hair; similar hairs are also observed
ment on vertex and corselet. Underside and legs densely
and finely punctate, pubescent like the elytra; 'end
shins and tarsi fringed with golden russet. G. Slightly curved fore tibia near top, tarsi
widened, more elongated shape, last abdominal segment more
short, long fringed. This species is reminiscent in size and general shape
VE. sparsus Klug, and seems to me to come very close to
V2. Johanne Gahan, from which she seems to differ in coloring,
the absence of strong punctuation on the disc of the prothorax, etc. Dichostates collavis Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1856, p. 534. —
Thom., Arch. ent., H, 1858, p. 178. — Lac., Gen. Col., IX, 2,
1872, p. 509, footnote 2. 359

A few individuals caught 4 Ibembo in April and August, as well as in
Djabir-Bandja, in May-June. — From Old Calabar. Dichostates quadripunctata Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1855,
p. 523. Also some copies 4 Ibembo in April, August and
october. — From Old Calabar and Bas-Congo. Dichostates molossus Duviv., n. sp. Broad, robust, regular and distinctly attenuated at the back,
subgibbous; brownish black, & bronzed reflections above,
entirely furnished with a short pubescence of a light gray color, with
brown irregular spots blending into gray; underneath
of a light gray, & tighter pubescence, this and the mark of
bran; last abdominal segment & very thick pubescence, of a
light red; brown antennae, @ articles ringed with gray a la
base. Long. 19 mill. ; width 91/2 mill. — Djabir-Bandja (May-June,
Lt Milz). Head slightly concave between the antenniferous tubercles, very
inconspicuous from above; subequilateral forehead, finely furrowed
along its length, bearing a few mediocre spots; antennae
weakly ciliated below, a little longer than the body:
art. 1, stout, noticeably shorter than 3, the latter
subequal to 4, the following much shorter, decreasing slightly to
little. Transverse prothorax, a little uneven, quite clearly
narrowed in front, provided on each side, a little above the
base, of a strong, slightly arched tubercle, obtuse at the top;
rugosule bottom, marked with a few very fine dots. badge enough
broad, in curvilinear triangle, subtruncated at the top, gray, with
two oblique brown bands. Significantly wider elytra a
the base than the prothorax, 4 slightly protruding shoulders, subgibbous
in the anterior third, regularly attenuated behind, obtusely
rounded at the top; a small tubercle on the shoulders, a short
arcuate ridge, acute behind, terminated by a bundle of hairs,
between the shoulder and the crest, a small oblong tubercle under the crest,
two more lower, a little below the middle, topped with a pine-
black hairs and finally a last small brush of hairs between
these two small brushes and the top; the background is a brownish black
tre, arugula, has bronze reflections, quite shiny, the surface marked
Alabase of fairly strong granulations and large dimples arranged
without order; the punctuation becomes finer towards the top; they
are lined with a fine greyish pubescence, marked with spots
brown blending into the gray, and still have small hairs
black straightened, not very tight. Underside longer pubescent
than the top, with the last segment lined with a thick

360

fringe of light reddish hair; shins & thick pubescence. I still have two copies from Ibembo,

(August 1/15, J. Duvivier) which measure only 13 mill., are more

narrower than the type, a little paler, with the hair bundles

less accused, but I see no other difference and I
therefore consider as belonging to the same species. Cymatura mucorea Fairm., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1887, p. 343. An individual measuring 28 mill. and took 4 Djabir-Bandja, correspond-
responds fairly well to Fairmaire's description of this
species; the first copies came from Makdischu
(Country of the Somalis). Acmocera conjuz Thom., Archiv. entom., II, p. 183, pl. 6, f. 6. Two copies taken 4 from Djabir-Bandja relate well to the
author's description. — From Gabon and Old Calabar. Acmocera wadulata Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., 1882, XX VI, p. 354,

I believe I can report 4 this species a few individuals taken
in Ibembo in February, April and August; this species has been described from
Quango region. Planodema scorta Thom., Archiv. entom., II, p. 195. Two individuals caught 4 Ibembo, during the first fortnight of
month of August, seem to me to belong to this species, described from
Gabon. Z£lara severa Duviv. not. sp. Elongated, very slightly attenuated in the back, pitch black;
underside with thick, short, white-grey pubescence
catre, marked with black speckles on abdomen, with
sides of metasternum russet brown; partly brown femora and
grey, tibiae and tarsi black, spotted with grey; top and antennae
Gun brown voussitre mottled with grey; prothorax @ furrows
longitudinals separated by tnberculenx intervals; elytra
from convection alternate intervals, rather densely punctuated, & angle
acute sutural, provided with a bundle of reddish hairs. Long. 18,419 mill. ; width 6 1/2 mill. — Basoko (Upper Congo)
(December 1890, J. Duvivier). Head very slightly concave between the antennal tubercles,
these very short; subtransverse front; fairly short cheeks;
labrum, palps and mandibles black; rather strongly granulated eyes;
ciliate antennae below, slightly exceeding the end of the
elytra, brown, speckled with white and black: art. 1, enough
short, thick, subovate, 3-4 subequal, subsequent ones decreasing
gradually, the last acuminate, straight. transverse prothorax,
a little depressed on the sides in front, cylindrical, subbituberculate
over its edges, marked on the disk with several longitudinal folds,
the intervals of which bear fairly strong black granulations;

 

 

 

 

361

finely pitted surface; head and prothorax lined with a thick
reddish-brown pubescence, mixed with light grey. Crest
broadly rounded at apex, brownish. BE lytres wider than the
prothorax 4 the base, slightly and gradually attenuated towards the
vertex, which is truncated; depressed on disk, quite densely
covered with dots, larger 4 at the base, fairly regularly arranged
with convex alternate intervals; the elytra entirely
furnished with a thick pubescence of the same color as that of the
prothorax and head and also mixed with light gray, the
base is often of a uniform brown, and one still observes on
each elytron, close to the margin, 4 the height of the middle, a
small rectangular spot of a velvety brownish black, but these
spots and bands are not constant; under the crest, a small
bundle of black hairs. Pitch black below, very finely
and very densely dotted, furnished with a thick pubescence of a
light gray with small black speckles, on the segments of

The abdomen, and a large russet-brown patch on the sides

from the metasternum; the posterior edge of each ventral arch

is also brownish; the femurs are brownish with the underside
mostly greyish; the shins are black, speckled with gray
and of brown, the divergent hooks; posterior thighs protruding

barely the 2nd abdominal segment; middle of abdominal segments

partly naked. It is the second African species of its kind, the other is |. appendiculata Gerst., different from the species described above. Theticus dentifer Oliv., Entom., n°67, p.132, n° 182, pl.23, f.185. Some copies 4 Ibembo, in August, as well as in Djabir-
Bandja. — From Gabon. Sthenias Mioni Guér., Rev. Zool., 1840, p. 109. — verticalis
Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1857, p. 81. — Thom., Arch. ent., II,
1858, p. 180. Three specimens of this species were taken 4 Ibembo, at least
dofit. -~ From Old Calabar. Sthenias minor Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891;

C.-R., p- CCCCLXXXI. Elongated, covered with a greyish down, stained with rowa and white
dirty; russet, mottled with gray; cylindrical prothorax, @a
pale white, marked at the base with two black spots, unarmed
on the coast; black crest, edged in white; elytra heavily
punctate, brownish, each bearing a small ornate tubercle
a cluster of bright red hairs, placed close to the base,
wn second tubercle not far from the top and near the suture, a
third & level dw second and near the margin, these two
last tubercles also adorned with a bundle of reddish hairs

362

and bordering behind a whitish subtviangular spot;

apical speckled with russet, white and black; Mountain peak

élytia indented on the suture. Long. 81/2 mill. ; width 2 2/5 mill. — Ibembo (September 16-30,
J. Duvivier). Head subquadrangular, slightly narrowed in front, low-
convex, punctate, densely furnished with thick pubes-
gray streak mixed with brown, broadly concave between its tubercles
the antennae which are strongly divergent and pendent;
labrum and palps pitch brown; vertex colored like the forehead,
longitudinally depressed in its middle, blackish depression;
a few sunken spots behind the eyes; pubescent antennae
your, slightly exceeding the middle of the elytra (Q), of a blackish brown,
a articles ringed with grey, the first two also speckled with
dark red: art. 1 thick, subcylindrical, 3 as long as 1-2
joined together, twice as long as 4, subsequent ones decreasing gradually-
length. Prothorax a little wider than long, almost
straight on the sides, very slightly narrowed in front and behind,
Slightly sloping in its posterior part, without tubercles on
the disc, smooth on the sides, densely furnished with pubescence
Dirty white wun darker in back on sides, adorned along
the base of a small black spot on each side. Patch trans-
versal, rounded behind, black with whitish sides. Elytra
motablertent wider At the base than the corselet, subparallel,
narrowed 4 from the posterior third, individually rounded at the top,
obliquely indented on the suture; they are big converts
loose stitches arranged in irregular series, weakly
granular 4 the base, furnished with a brownish pubescence, me-
striped of gray and black, the black especially pronounced along the
suture and on the sloping part: a large stain of a dirty white,
subtriangular, taking 4 the margin, is observed 4 the height of the third
posterior: the elytra carry, near the base, a very small
tuber adorned with a bundle of bright reddish hairs and each
summer, not far from the summit, a very prominent tubercle, located 4 little
distance from the margin, and showing the elytra — views from
above — as if suddenly widened here; near the
suture, 4 approximately @ level of lateral tubercle, another tuber-
cule smaller, these tubercles also furnished with a bundle of
bright red hair; on the disc two vestiges of cétes stopping
each has one of the tubercles; apical lobe of elytra slightly
raised. Greyish underparts, speckled with black on the legs; edge
posterior of the abdominal segments fringed with white with
brown or black speckles. This species is remarkable for its small size. 363

Apomecyna parumpunctata Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1856,
p. 583. — Lac., Gen. Col., 1, 2, 1872, p. 580, footnote 1. — longi-
pennis Thom., ‘Arch. ent., II, 1858, p. 187, pl. 8, f. 5. A few specimens captured at Ibembo in August and at Djabir-
Bandja in May-June. The species is described from Old Calabar, it has
has since been found in Bas-Congo. Hippopsicon luteolum Qued., Berl. Ent. Zeit., 1882, p. 360. I think I can relate to this species, two specimens
captured 4 Ibembo; this species has been described as originating
of Quango. Praonetha lichenea Duviv. not. sp. Oblong, subparallel, pitch brown, entirely lined with a
short and thick greyish down, mixed with fawn below, on
legs and head; antennae brown, sections ringed gray
at the top, & from the 3°; prothovrax Vun brown yousdtre &
base grey, strongly punctate, subbituberculate on disc;
Cun lichen gray elytra with two brown transverse bands
ours; on each of eua: a small tuber topped with a pincen
of black hairs, located on each band near the suture. Long. 10 mill. ; width ep. 3 1/, mill. — Djabir-Bandja (May-June,
The Milz). Front subvertical, flat, broad, 4 sparse punctuation, lined with a
fairly thick greyish pubescence; transverse labrum, with enough down
long and brownish tawny; brown mandibles with black tips,
bifid at top; lower eye lobe small, not wider
that long; head barely concave between the antenniferous tubercles,
who are far apart; rather strongly granulated eyes; Vertex
russet; antennae not ciliated below, almost as long
that the body, quite robust, furnished with a reddish down, the
articles ringed in light gray 4 end 4 from 3°: art. 1,
cylindrical, very thick, equal to 4, 3 the longest, the other smaller
gradually tapering in length, the last acuminate at the apex. Prothorax subcylindrical, unarmed, almost as wide as long
on its median line, with anterior edge slightly advanced, with sides
barely rounded on each side forward, marked with large dots
spaced and carrying in the middle of the disc, two small tubercles
oblong, very slightly protruding, separated by a fairly deep channel; the
everything is furnished with a reddish pubescence except at the extreme base where
this pubescence is greyish. Transversal, broadly arched
rounded at top, brown, 4 end gray. Slightly wider elytra
that the prothorax at the base, 4 shoulders barely advanced, subparallel,
abruptly attenuated from the last quarter, subobliquely
truncated at the top, they are slightly convex, weakly depressed
on the disc, of a lichen gray, marked with small blackish spots,

364

adorned with two transverse bands, irregular on their edges, the

first located not far from the base, narrowed on each side 4 its

posterior edge, the second placed a little below the middle,
narrowed towards the margin with its angular anterior edge protruding
on each elytron; one also notices, at the anterior edge of
each band, not far from the suture, a small oblong tubercle,
provided with a bundle of black hairs; fully marked surface

@a fairly strong and fairly regular punctuation. Underside of a gray

lichen, speckled with russet. Hippopsis imitans Duviv. not. sp. Reddish brown, furnished with a short yellowish pubescence;
antennae three times as long as the body in the 3, once
as long as this in laQ; very oblique forehead, finely
vugueu, yellowish; verter bearing three yellowish bands; horn-
cylindrical selet, densely punctate, adorned, on the disc, with
three narrow yellow bands; very elongated elytves, narrowed in
rear, obliquely truncate at the top, densely converted
large dots very close together, partly erased towards the top,
each adorned with four ow five wide longitudinal bands
yellowish. Underside finely rough, pubescent; flanks of the pro-
thorax, sides of the mesosternum and metasternal parapleura
yellow. Long. 17 4 22 mill. ; width 3'/2 44'/2 mill. — Ibembo (August and
September, J. Duvivier). — Djabir-Bandja (Lt Milz). G. Reddish brown. Fairly protruding head; tubers
antennifers closely separated, subparallel; very oblique forehead,
elongated, narrowed between the eyes, widened below, finely rough and
bearing many rather tight middling stitches, trimmed with a
yellowish pubescence; vertex large, punctate like the forehead, trimmed
a narrow yellow longitudinal band and two large spots
of the same color behind the eyes. Very slender antennae, with
reddish brown, pubescent, very slightly ciliate below,
three times as long as the body: art. 1 subcylindrical,
reaching 4 approximately the base of the prothorax, appearing a little more
short than 3, this one longer than the following ones which decrease a
sentence, very elongated last article; lower lobes of the eyes a
slightly taller than wide. Prothorax elongated, cylindrical, unarmed,
finely furrowed longitudinally in its posterior half,
densely dotted, adorned on the disc with three narrow bands
longitudinal yolks; largely yellow sides. Transversal escutcheon,
furnished with a thick yellowish pubescence. Very elongated elytra, 4
straight base, slightly sinuate a little below the shoulders which
are rounded, narrowed behind, obliquely truncated at the
somiet; they are slightly convex, rugosulate and densely covered

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

365

large dots very close together, which partially fade towards the
Mountain peak ; they are reddish-brown, finely pubescent and
each adorned with narrow yellowish longitudinal bands; a
first sutural, a second subsutural, slightly sinuated towards
the first third and interrupted before the summit, a third,
starting from the slight intra-humeral impression and joining the band
sutural at the top, a fourth wide band, whole or divided,
starting from the shoulder, runs along the margin and branches off into two narrow
little distinct bands, finally between the marginal band and the third
century, a last reaching neither the shoulder nor the top and
rather whitish tint. Pitch-brown below, reddish above
the middle of the abdomen, very finely rough, pubescent; a
narrow yellow band, extension of the one that covers the flanks
of the prothorax, runs along the sides of the mesosternum and the parapleuras
from the metasternum; legs pitch brown, hairy. Projections
prosternal and mesosternal narrow. This species is reminiscent of Hipposicon luteolum Qued., but
distinguished by its projecting head, its oblique forehead, the scape of the
antennae reaching 4 or so near the base of the prothorax, its shape
longer, etc. Exocentrus variegatus Duviy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.-R., p. cocexx1. Dark pitch brown, covered with a short pubescence of a gray
clear ; mouth parts, antennae, hips and shins more
clear; elytra punctate-striate, speckled with grey, dotted
long blackish hairs; unidentate prothoraa on each side; of
long cilia on antennae and legs. Long. 4 mill. ; width 1 1/2 mill. — Ibembo (March, J. Duvivier). Broad head; forehead slightly conyex, dark, bearing some
brownish hairs, finely punctate-rough, furnished with pubes~
gray cent; labrum and parts of mouth light brown; antenna
nes exceeding the length of the body, of a blackish-brown with the
base of articles lighter, finely pubescent and bearing
numerous blackish eyelashes. Prothorax twice as wide as long,

barely convex transversely, finely rough, pubescent

and carrying, besides, some black hairs, straightened: it is entirely-

ment of a dark brown and provided on each side, a little
below the middle, of a tooth whose tip is clearly directed
backward. Ecus fairly wide, semi-rounded, very pubescent. Elytra noticeably wider at the base than the corselet, slightly

ment advanced 4 the base, subparallel and narrowly rounded at the

Mountain peak; they are very dark brown, very shiny, covered
many gray speckles, closer together in the part
basilar; they are slightly convex, distinctly and regularly

366
punctate-striated, with the streaks partly obliterated in the part
apical; on each side there is a vestige of this side starting from
Vshoulder and going to the top: the intervals are finely
arugula and carry transverse points each giving
birth has long black hair. Underparts and legs of a brown of
pitch with paler hips and shins; enlarged femurs,
subfusiform. Sumelis occidentalis Chevr., Rev. Mag, Zool., 1857, p. 516. A copy taken 4 Ibembo; this species described as
Faocentrus seems to me to have to enter the genus Sumelis is right
of the double spine on each side of the prothorax. Nyoma
(Nov. gen. Acanthocinidarum). Clear head as wide (including eyes) as the prothorax 4 sound
anterior border; subtransyersal front, furrowed longitudinally;
Poor cheeks; rather slender antennae, slightly exceeding the extremity
elytral moth, finely pubescent, slightly ciliate in
below: art. 1] subcylindrical, thick, slightly overhanging the edge
anterior of prothorax, 3 and 4 a little longer than 1, sub-
equal, the following ones decreasing imperceptibly in length, the
last acuminate; yeww moderately granulated, very close together
above, lower lobes large, transverse, somewhat attenuated
At the lower end. Prothoraz longer than wide, subcylindrical, subdepressed on
the disk, straight forward and backward, weakly rounded on each
side, unarmed, provided with two fine transverse furrows 4 some
distance from its anterior edge and near its base, the furrow
anterior interrupted in the middle. Subtransverse crest, broadly rounded at the top. Elytra a little wider than the prothorax 4 the base, approximately
's times and a half as long as this, faded near the top,
ot they are singly and angularly rounded; depressed surface,
densely pitted, showing four remnants of longitu-
dinals. Mediocre legs, hind legs longer; femora subpe-
dimpled 4 their base, club-shaped, the posterior reaching 4 few
near the lower edge of the third abdominal segment; inter-tibias
intermediate branches scalloped outside at two-fifths of their extremity
mite, the forelegs arched and ¢widened 4 their extremity; first
segment of the posterior tarsi as long as the next two together. Mesosteraum almost planar, weakly arched forward, barely
narrowed back; prosternum subparallel, narrower than the

 

 

367

mesosternum, widely dilated in a triangle posteriorly, slightly

bent forward; simple, divaricate brackets. Intermediate acetabular cavities closed. Body fairly elongated, parallel, pubescent. This genus belongs to the division Acanthocinidae, which has the
mediocre legs. the first article of the posterior tarsi not more
longer than the next two together, the prothorax not tuberculate on
the sides, the body rather elongated, pubescent, without erect hairs. Type: Vyoma parallela Duviv. Nyoma parallela Duviv. not. sp. Entirely Cun fairly light pitch brown, furnished with pubescence
@a rather dense light grey, lying down, forming small spots on
the elytra. Long. 6 1/2 mill. ; width 1 1/2 mill. — Ibembo (March, J. Duvi-
live); 4 copies. Head and prothorax roughly pitted; deep elytra-
slightly punctate, 4 fairly regular punctuation, at rough intervals
sules, showing four remains of longitudinal ridges separating
each three 4 four rows of dots. Pretty deep bottom~
ment and densely pitted, 4 pubescence a little longer than
the one above; very finely punctate legs. Volumnia adelpha Thom., Archiv. entom., II, 1858, p. 201. I believe I can bring back to this space a reported copy
of Ibembo and captured in August. Volumnia quinguelineata Chevr., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1855,
p. 187, pl. 2 F. 18. —Murray, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser.4, VI,
1870, pl. 2 F. 13. Two specimens collected 4 Ibembo (March and August) correspond-
tooth 4 the description of this species. Volumuia apicalis Chevr., Rey. Mag. Zool., 1857, p. 108;
Diary of Ent., 1861, p. 189. A copy taken 4 Ibembo (February 15). Volumnia vigintiduomaculata Thom., Archiv. entom., IT
1858, p. 291. Two individuals taken in August 4 Ibembo respond well to the des-
Thomson's description. Nupserha basalis Er., Wiegm. Arch., 1843, I, p. 262. Tbembo a single specimen.— Common species in Angola and
in Bas-Congo ov it was taken in number by M. Tschoffen. Nupserha Homeyeri Har., Coleop. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 205. Two copies from Ibembo seem to belong to me
4 this species; the apical spot of the elytra is missing, but in
all other points they respond quite well & the description of
Author. ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM OF MELGIQUE, T. XXXVI. 368

MysTacopHorus
(Nov. gen. Ze¢raopidarum)
Duvivier, Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891; C.-R.p. cccexx. Head not retractile, overflowing the prothorax on the sides; forehead
vertical, wide, sloping 4 its anterior edge, impressed longi-
dinally; eyes strongly set apart, widely divided, bearing
at the inner edge of the posterior lobe, a thick tuft of long eyelashes
directed horizontally; strong and prominent mandibles, very
broad 4 the base; slender palps. Antennae rather robust, a little shorter than the body. cylindrical scape, 4 smooth end, slightly protruding from the edge
anterior to the prothorax, unhealed at the top: art. 2 obco-
damn, 3 a bit longer than 1. 4 subequal to the latter, the
following gradually decreasing in length and thickness,
intimately linked Pun A Vautre, the last elongated and acuminate;
art. 1-5 long fringed, the following closely ciliated. Pyothorax subeylindric, & barely longer than wide, not sil-
transversely linear, unarmed on the sides. Crest small, subtriangular. Elytra depressed on the disc, parallel, subtruncated to the
vertex, unarmed behind, not keeled laterally, present
so many slight remains of cdtes. Very narrow prosternum between the anterior hips that it
separate; depressed mesosternum between the hips and metasternum
without anterior protrusion; poor metathoracic episternum,
acuminate in arrival; three intermediate segments of the abdomen
shorter than the others, all laterally depressed. Short, sturdy legs; shins broad, the intermediate ones mu-
with a weak dorsal furrow; bifid nails, the inner tooth more
shorter than the outer. This new genre, very interesting, belongs to the group of
Tetraopids Lake. ; he is well recognizable & his broad head,
a Vthick tuft of eyelashes that line the 4 V interior of the posterior lobe
eyes, its unarmed prothorax, 4 its depressed elytra, not dense
end tees, etc. Mystacophorus mystax Duviy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.R.p. cccexxi. Parallel, faintly shiny, black below; end of the mandi-
bules, palpi, a wide transverse band on the forehead, tuft
of cilia, antennae, lances of the prothorasx and posterior third of the ely-
very equally black; other parts of the body Cun fawn

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

369

slightly reddish and covered with reddish pubescence

dove; prothorax moderately, elytra deeply punctate. Long. 9 mill. ; width 24/2 mill. — Djabir-Bandja (May-June,
L! Milz). Mandibles of a more reddish fawn color than the forehead, with |'ex-
black tip; mouth organs also black; forehead
finely rough, with a few scattered large dots on the part
adorned with the wide black transverse band; posterior lobes of
eyes furnished at their inner edge with a strong tuft of black eyelashes,
terminated in a point and directed forward; wrasse and epistome very
short ; fairly convex vertex, with a few smaller dots
than those of the forehead, antennae roughly punctate, except the extremity
moth of the scape, which is smooth, having the first four segments shiny
lants, the other masts. Prothorax barely longer than wide, sub-
eylindrical, rather convex in its middle part, unarmed on the
sides, 4 black flanks; it is finely rough ‘and marked ca and 1a
a few sunken stitches; its anterior edge is slightly
advanced in its middle part, the weakly sinuate base of
each side, nearly straight sides; a slight impression
right and 4 left a little above the base. parallel elytra,
depressed on the disk, bearing some remnants of long cavities
tudinal, deeply punctuated, the dots available in series
fairly regular, a little weaker towards the end; top of
each elytron weakly truncate, without terminal tooth; a
pubescence of a golden red, lying, quite dense, garnishes all
the fawn parts, this pubescence becomes gi re on the part
apical of the elytra. Underside finely and transversely rough,
pubescent, black. PHYTOPHAGA. Sagrid. Sagra tristis Fabr., Ent. Syst., Suppl., 1798, p. 104. —Weber,
Obs. ent., 1891, p. 63 — Oliv., Entom., V, 90, p. 499, pl. 1,
f. 4, 3.— Lac., Mon. Phyt.,p. 62. — femorata Latr., Gen. Crust. Ins. HI, p. 42. — var Q: morosa Oliv., l. v., p. 499, pl. 1, f. 5. Two specimens, one greenish, the other bluish were
captured by my brother Joseph, A Ibembo (May and August 1890). This
species seems to me quite widespread in the western region of
T Africa. Sagra cyanea Dalm., Analect. ent., 1823, p. 72.— Guer., Icon. Regn, Anim. Ins., pl. 47, f. 2. I cannot separate from this species a small specimen taken 4
Djabir-Bandja (May and June, Milz) and a beautiful coloring

370

blue, matching perfectly 4 another copy of this
same species I have from the West Coast of Africa;
Vespece has been described from Sierra-Leone and does not seem to me
common in collections. Criocerid. Lema armata Fabr., Syst. El., 1, p. 472. —Klug, Erman,
Reis., Atl., p. 45. — Lake., Mon. Phyt., p. 327. — senegalensis
Oliv., Ent., VI, 94, p. 730, pl. 1, f. 3. Four specimens of this commonly widespread species
throughout the western region of Africa were taken 4 Ibembo
in March and August. Megalopid. Pecilomorpha Lacordairei Westw., Trans. Ent. Soc. London,
3° ser., II, 1864, pe 273. Two copies of Ibembo (March and May, J. Duvivier) relate to
carry exactly 4 the description of the author; the species is
described from Old Calabar. The two copies taken by my brother differ from the type
described below entirely fawn. Clytrid. Nosognatha mandibularis Lac., Mon. Phyt., p. 107. - Lunch,
Cat., 3¢ ed., p. 443. — Har., Coleop. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 208. A Q of this species was captured on April 4 Ibembo. The
XV. mandibulavis Lac., seems to me excessively abundant in
Bas-Congo where it has been encountered in fairly large numbers 4
Boma by M. Tschoffen; it seems to replace the WV there. su/icollis
Olive. (senegalensis Lac. ), frequent in other regions of
West Africa. Diapromorpha ingens Eid. Lef., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, LX,

1891; Bull., p. ccxxim. A copy taken 4 Ibembo during the first fortnight of the
month of August and belonging to the variety of M. Lefevre. This slide
morpha is remarkable for its large size, its color system
ration and its obconical prothorax, strongly and widely impressed
sided on the sides. The type has trimaculated elytra (a spot
subquadrangular humeral, a second wide, placed below
from the middle, reaching neither the margin nor the suture, and a small
apical spot, black); it comes from Gabon. Peploptera postica Lac., Mon. Phyt., I, p. 251. A specimen from Ibembo (April); the species is known
from various parts of intertropical West Africa. 371

Gynandrophthalma zanzibarica Ed. Lef., Rev. Zool., 1877,
p. 229. Tbembo (April): one copy; the species is described from Zanzibar. Cryptocephalid. Cryptocephalus bifasciatus Fabr., Spec. Ins.,1, 1781, p. 145. —
Oliv., Ent., VI, p. 788, pl. 4, f. 50. — Suffr., Mon. Crypt., XI,
p - 169. — maculicollis Klug, Erman. Reis., Atl., 1835, p. 49. A specimen of this Cryptocephalus was taken at Ibembo, in
March 1890, by my brother Joseph. Eumolpides. Scelodonta egregia Lef., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1877, p. 161.—
bidentata Baly, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1877, p. 43; Diary Linn. Soc. London, 1877, p. 252. A specimen of this species, described from Old Calabar, was
captured 4 Ibembo (J. Duvivier) in the second half of August. Scelodonta vicina Har., Mitt. Minch. Ent. Ver., 1877, p. 106. — Jacobyi Baly, Ent. Mountain. Mag., 1878, p. 178. A copy, in poor condition, that Mr. Lefévre has, to whom I had
communicated, relates only with any doubt to this species described from
Nyasa; he was taken 4 Ibembo, in the month of aoiat. Eryzia holosericea Klug, Erman. Reis., Atl., 1835, p. 49. —
Dej., Cat., 3rd ed., p. 438. A single specimen, captured in the second half of August, was
Ibembo (J. Duvivier). Currently known species of #ryzia are among
five, all of whom inhabit tropical Africa. Merissus griseoscutellatus Karsch, Berl. Ent. Zeit., XXVI,
1882, p. 396, pl. IV, f. 11. A copy taken 4 Ibembo, in August. Psendocolaspis setulosa Lef., Notes Leyd. Mus., 1886, VIII,
p. 247; IX, 1887, p. 263. Of this species, very common in Bas-Congo and Assinie,
a copy was brought back by my brother from his stay in albembo. Pseudocolaspis aurichalcea Thom., Arch. entom., II, 1858,
p. 212. A single specimen also brought back from Ibembo (August 15/31,
J. Duvivier); this species is described from Gabon. Syagrus calcavatus Fabr., Syst. Entom.. 1775, p. 109. —cal-
caratus Oliv., Encycl., VI, 1791, p. 614; Entom., VI, 1808,
p. 908, pl. 3, f. 33. — Buqueti Dej., Cat., 1837, p. 436. —
ruficollis Thom., Arch., ent., Il, 1858, p. 486. — Chp., Gen.

ate
Col., X, 1874, p. 332, footnote 1. — Lef., Rev. Mag. Zool., 1875,
p. 132. This pretty common space on the West Coast of Africa
from Senegal to the Congo, was encountered in three specimens.
please in May, August and September at Ibembo by my brother Joseph;
all have bluish green elytra. Syagrus vavicolor Lef., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891;
C.-R., p. CCLXXv. Two specimens of this very recently described species of the
Old Calabar, were taken during the second half of the month
Waott a Ibembo (J. Duvivier). Corynodes cervulescens Fairm., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1885;
Ball., p. cxxxu. Of this species, described from the country of the Niams-Niams, a whole
series of copies were taken 4 Ihembo (J. Duvivier) at various
times of the year and Djabir-Bandja (May-June, Milz),

 

Chrysomelide. Plagiodera thovacica Fabr., Syst. El., I, p. 426. —Vogel,
Nunq. Otios., 1, 1871, p. 136. I bring to this species two specimens, one taken 4 Ibembo
(August 15-31, J. Duvivier), another 4 Djabir-Bandja (May-June, Milz). This space is described from Guinea. Melasoma livida Stil, (Efvers. Vet. Ak. Ferh., XV, 1858,
p. 252. — Vogel, Nunq. Otios., I, 1871, p. 138. A specimen that I believe I can relate to this species
comes from Ibembo (April, J. Duvivier); the species is oviginary of
Sierra Leone. Halticidal. Nisotra dilecta Dalm., Analect. Ent., 1823, p. 81. A few copies taken 4 Ihembo. — Taken in Guinea, a

Sierra-Leone, in Bas-Congo, etc. Podagrica decolorata Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXVI,
1892, p. 60. Oblong, slightly rounded, shiny, entirely yellow with the extremity
black mandibles; black antennae with the first four
fawn items; head finely, corselet and elytra quite densely
punctuated, the punctuation of the latter arranged in double series
more or less regular, partly erased at the top. Long. 3 1/2 mill. — Ihembo (November, J. Duvivier). 'Head finely dotted behind, bearing a few large dots

 

 

373

between the antennae; antennal calluses 4 barely prominent, not very
ment limited behind; rather large labrum, end of man-
black chisels; antennae reaching half the length of the
body, filiform, black with the four basal segments fawn:
art. 2-3 subequals, 3° thinner than 2¢, last articles
very slightly thickened. Prothorax twice as wide as
long, narrowed in front, transversely convex, marked with each
side of the base of a deep and short longitudinal furrow, running
pretty tight mediocre dot green. Quite wide crest, trans-
versal, smooth. Elytra oblong 4's subparallel, acuminate
at the top; they are very slightly conyex, covered with points
similar to those of the corselet, arranged in series
more or less regular and partly erased at the top:
a few additional points make, 4 certain places, appear
triple sets. Underside of a testaceous a little paler than the
above; moderately swollen posterior femora. Two copies. Galerucide. Oides typographica Ritsem., Tijschr. Ent., XVIII, 1875, p. 21. Two individuals caught 4 Ibembo; the species is described from Lower
Guinea; it was found in Aruwimi. Aulacophora vinula Er. , Stett. Ent. Zeit., 1859, p.85.—,festiva
Gerst., Peters Reise, 1862, p. 343, pl. 20, f. 13. A copy captured 4 Ihembo in September; the species meets
between the two tropics, from Bas-Congo to
Mozambique; it is even found at the Cape of Good Hope. Aulacophora fissicollis Thom., Archiv. ent., Il, 1858, p. 218. Some specimens of this ce, of the most variable, were
captured at Ibembo and at Djabir-Bandja. Hyperacantha hypomelena Thom., Arch. entom., I, 1858,
p. 219. Hyperacantha melanoptera Thom., Archiy. ent., It, 1858,
p. 219. Two individuals, one captured 4 Ibembo, the other 4 Djabir-Bandja. Ornithognathus generosus Thom., Archiy. ent., I, 1858,
p. 216. A number of specimens of this mad species have been
took 4 Djabir-Bandja. Cerochroa maculicollis Baly, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 3rd ser.,
II, 1864, p. 232. Two specimens taken in August and September at Ibembo; the species
is described from Old Calabar. Pachytoma gigantea \., Wiedem. Archive, 1, 2. 1800, p. 131. —Westermanni Bertol., Nov. Comm. Ac. Bonon., X, 1849,
p. 482. — nigripes Oliv., Ent., VI, p. 609, pl. 1, f. 2 (sub
Ochvralea). Many individuals caught 4 Ibembo and 4 Djabir-Bandja. Se
found in Guinea, in Sierra-Leone, in Bas-Congo, the province
from Angola, summer. A thonea Murvayi Baly, Ent. Mountain. Mag., 1866, Il, p. 101. — adustus Har., Col. Hefte, XVI, 1879, p. 212 (sub Hap-
losonyz). — Fromholzi Kavsch, Deut. Ent. Zeit., XXVI,
1882, p. 399. — variabilis Duviv., Stett. Ent. Zeit., XCVI,
1885, p. 242 (sub Bonesia), — ​​variabilis Jac., Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1888, p. 199, p!. VIL. f. 14.15 (sub. Mthonea). This species is extremely variable and I have no doubt
that the different forms that I enumerate do not belong to 4 one
one and the same type; priority belongs to Baly, who described
Vespece in 1866, in the publication cited above. This species is most common in West Africa
tropical and it is found throughout this region in all its
forms, It comes with immaculate elytra (A. Murrayi
Raly), with dots and spots arranged in different
manners (adustus Har., Fromholzi Karsch, variabilis Duviv. and
vaviabilis Jac. ); on the femurs the yolk also takes on a
more or less large extension; the size variation is equal-
ment sensitive. I have seen all these passages in various collections,
especially in the coll. Baly at the British Museum, the coll. Jacoby
and I still remember the physiognomy of the insects, described
by Harold and Karsch, which I saw at the Berlin museum in
November 1884. Harold made this species a Haplosonyx because he
had seen only Qs; the genre is indeed enough
neighbor of the genus Haplosonya, but Athonea 3 have the antennae
pectinate, while they are filiform in Haplosonya 3;
moreover there are still diflerences in the shape of the palpi, the
bodice, etc., etc. The A. Murvayi vbrought by my brother, were taken a
Djabir-Bandja. Monolepta vinosa Gerst., Wiegm. Archive, 1871, I, p. 83;
von Decken's Reise., III, 1873, p.

A specimen of this space, captured albembo; it is described
Lake Jipe (eastern coast of Africa), and is commonly found
in Bas Congo. Sternoplatys piceus Fabr., Spec. Ins., I, 1781, p. 129. —
Pascoei Baly, Journ. of Entom., I, 1861, p. 300, pl. 12, f. 5. 375

I saw typ2 of S. picens Fabr. in the coll. Banks at
British Museum in London, and I was able to convince myself that this
species, which gave rise to some bittersweet discussions between
some specialists, is none other than the S'. Pascoei Baly: both
types have been before my eyes. Here is a question that was emptied once
for all: the piceus Fabr. is therefore neither an Aulocophora
neither a Diacantha nor a Hyperacantha, it is simply the
iS. Pascoei Baly; Fabricius must have priority with the name of
piceus. Platyxantha africana Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1891; C.-R. p. 167. Entirely of a greenish tan above and below, sometimes
slightly purple on the elytra; hips, legs and antennae
(except at the end of these) of a light fawn; corselet wave-
ment punctuated, marked with a transverse impression; crest
large, smooth; elytra irregularly pitted except at base
and at the top where they are almost smooth, subcostiform; four
posterior tibiae provided with an internal prolongation. Long. 9 mill. ; width 3.1/2 mill. — Djabir-Bandja (May-June,
Lt Milz). Short muzzle; head subcarinated between the antennae, provided with a
large dimple between the eyes; palps pitch black; Vertex
smooth, antennae up to two-thirds of body length,
in light fawn with the last three smoky articles: art. 3
two and a half times as long as 2, 4 almost as long as 2-3
united and equal 4 7, 5-6 and 8-10 subequals a little shorter than
4 and 7, the last elongated and finished in a point. Weak prothorax-
ment transverse, furrowed across a little below the middle,
acetates straight from the base to the middle, then slightly narrowed in
before ; posterior angles cut obliquely, the anterior ones slightly
slightly thickened; convex surface, vaguely pitted on the
disc, more strongly on the sides where the points are fairly close
chees; the bodice is very finely edged, except in front. Crest
quite large, in curvilinear triangle, smooth, convex. Elytra subpa-
ralles, rounded at the apex, notably wider than the
prothorax 4 the base, with well marked shoulders, impressed in
inside these, also marked, a little behind
the crest, with a transverse print that continues along
of the suture, so as to delimit on each side, between the impression
intra-humeral layer and crest a smooth, raised plate; the
elytra are irregularly punctate, smooth in the basal part
Jaire and the posterior quarter, marked with eight 4 nine striae tres
ill-defined, whose intervals are irregularly convex, of
so that the elytra appear costiform; these streaks are

376

interrupted in front and partly erased towards the top; the
elytra are usually a darker shade than the rest
of the body and 4 purple reflections. Below slightly pubescent, very
finely arugula; haunches and legs of a light fawn; coty- cavities
closed laws, unarmed tibiae, appendicular hooks; shins of the
denx posterior pairs provided 4 their extremity with an extension
internal ment reaching about a third of the first article of the
tarsi. The general characters of this species are indeed those of the genus
Platyxantha, but all species currently known as
belonging to 4 this genus are Indo-Malaysian, it is therefore interesting
to find this form in the center of Africa. In P. africana
the tibiae of the two posterior pairs are provided At their extremity
interior of an extension, a character that could have a certain
some generic value if I knew the two sexes of the species. Provisionally we will leave this species in the genus Platy-
aantha ov we will find it easily. Cassidides. Aspidomorpha chlorotica 3 Oliv., Ent., VI, p. 931, 10, 97,
pl. 4, f. 56. — Boh., Mon. Cassid., II, p. 244. — spectabilis Q
Boh., Mon. Cassid., Il, p. 245. Many specimens of both sexes were taken 4 Djabir-
Bandja. Aspidomorpha confinis Klug, Erm. Reise, Ins., V, p. 48. —
Boh., Mon., II, p. 2! A copy taken 4 Ibembo (August 1-15). — Gets caught in Caf-
frerie, Senegal, Guinea and Congo. Aspidomorpha quadvi-maculata 3 Oliv., Ent., VI, p. 945, 35,
97, pl. 4, f. 68. — Boh., Mon. Cassid., II, p. 263. — Wester-
mannt Q Boh., My, Cassid., He, p. 263. A few individuals 4 Ibembo; is taken in Senegambia, in
Guinea, Bas-Congo. Aspidomorpha stolata Boh., Mon. Cassid., II, p. 274. A few individuals were captured & Ibembo has different
times of the year: February, March and August. Aspidomorpha silacea Boh., Mon. Cassid., II, p. 277. A few copies 4 Ibembo. — Located in Cape Town, Caf-
brotherhood, in Guinea. Aspidomorpha quadrivamosa Boh., Mon. Cassid., I, p. 305. A copy 4 Ibembo. — This species is described from
Guinea. 377

Aspidomorpha ingens Duviy., Aun. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R., p. ccccxu. Broadly oval, testaceous, very transparent, with eyes,
last two articles of the antennae and three small dots on
each elytron, black; disc of the corselet and the elytra, angles
minerals thereof of a very light brown; subangular shoulders;
very strongly gibbous elytra, at the base, with sub-
serial, very fine and rare; lateral edges of the elytra quite strong
slightly raised in droplets
Long. 18 mill. ; width max. 14 mill. — Ibembo (J. Duvivier,

september). Very shiny above, less shiny below, entirely
Light yellowish testaceous Wun, very transparent, with eyes,
two last segments of the antennae and three small spots on
each of the elytra (spots which tend to disappear) only black;
the coloring is less clear on the legs and the middle of the
chest, it goes to very light brown, on the disc of the corselet,
that of the elytra and towards the humeral angles; the side edges
elytra and the end of the suture are also
somewhat darkened. The head is very finely punctate and very conyex on the forehead;
the antennae slightly exceed the base of the corselet in length,
the 1+ and 2¢ items are bulging, the latter short, the 3¢ very long,
more slender, the last five slightly thickened, the last the more
elongate. The prothorax is twice as wide as it is high, widely
and fairly regularly rounded in front, strongly rounded on the
sides near the base which is slightly bent on each side;
its median lobe is short, weakly rounded and raised; the known
face is quite convex on the disc, marked with some imprints
obsolete sions in front and on the sides; the hords are widely
dilated, subconcave, the disc is absolutely smooth, the edges punctuated
killed-reticulated by transparency. The escutcheon is mediocre, smooth, in
subequilateral triangle. The elytra are wider than the pro-
thorax 4 the base, where they are sinuate with the humeral angles
long carried forward; they widen regularly
until about the middle, then attenuate until the top where they
are a little prolonged; the disc is moderately convex and
carries a pen below the base a very strong and very protruding
pointed, this projection is limited in front by two impressions
obliques which end on each side in a dimple; the
shoulders are very prominent and form a subangular roll;
the cdtés are widely dilated, very transparent, concave, the
margin being strongly raised, especially behind; the surface
presents a few fairly regular series of very fine dots, the

 

 

    

378

side edges are punctate-reticulated by transparency. The
three black dots that can be seen on each elytron are arranged
as follows: I on the side, at the base of the hump, 2 and 3 are
against the suture, a little above and wn a little below the middle;
these points tend to disappear. The only specimen of A. ingens that I have under my eyes seems to me
to be a G A due to its slightly extended elytra in
rear, it is likely that the Q is more widely rounded
backward; this species seems to me to be absolutely distant from
African species known for its strong elytral humpback. Aspidomorpha signatipennis Boh., Mon. Cassid., II, p. 345. A copy taken 4 Djabir-Bandja. — Is located in Sierra-
Leone, Guinea, Senegal. Aspidomorpha Mouffeti Boh., Mon. Cassid., I, p. 346. One individual captured 4 Ibembo. — Taken in Gabon and the
Lower Congo. Aspidomorpha nilotica Boh., Mon. Cassid., II, p. 352. A copy of Djabir-Bandja that I relate to this species. Cassida tosta Boh., Mon. Cassid., Il, p.486. — fossulata Boh.,
Cat. Coleop. Ins., IX, p. 142. A copy 4 Ibembo (March). — Taken in Guinea,
Calabar, Congo, Princes' Island. Coptocycla Aubei Boh., Mon. Cassid., II, p. 195. A copy 4 Ibembo. — From Old Calabar. Hispid. Cryptonychus bipunctatus Baly, Cat. Hisp., 1858, p. 78. A specimen of this species taken 4 Djabir-Bandja; She is
described from Old Calabar, and has been found in Bas-Congo. Gonophora interrupted Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891,

XXXV; C.-R. p. cecexxn. Elongated, testaceous; mandibles, s. antennae, 7 lines on
each elytron, black; transverse prothorax, trituberculate longi-
tudinally; deeply punctate-ridged elytves, bearing
each three partially interrupted longitudinal sides. Long. 5 mill. ; width 1 2/s mill. — Ibembo (J. Duvivier). Fully testaceous with the top a little darker than the
below. Convex forehead; tip of labrum and mandibles black;
vertex very finely rough, a little more reddish than the forehead;
antennae somewhat shorter than half the length
of the body, filiform, fairly robust, finely pubescent: art. 1
and 2 thick, 3-4 subequal to each other, a little longer than 2, the
following 4 hardly shorter than 4, cylindrical, very tight, the

 

 

379

last elongated, acuminate at apex, art. 1-2 of the antennae of a
light reddish brown, 3-7 black, 8-11 fawn. Prothorax a little
wider than long, anterior border 4 slightly advanced, 4 sides pres-
than straight, distinctly angular a little before the anterior angles
laughing; a line of sunken stitches along the front edge;
disk broadly punctate, bearing three oblong tubercles, separated
res by excavations; base subsinuated on each side. heusson
reddish brown, finely rough, matte. Elytra 1 1/2 times
as wide 4 the base as the bodice, 4 rounded shoulders, subdi-
sideways at the back, fairly broadly rounded at the top, without
marked external angle; they are moderately convex, marked
regular series of very deep subquadrangular dimples
des, arranged in pairs and separated by three longitudinal sides
fairly prominent, partly interrupted; they are fawn, a little
more reddish than the corselet and marked with seven black lines,
three on the subsutural side, three on the middle side placed one
slightly further forward than on the first hill, and one on the submar-
ginale, not far from the top; the submarginal summer is interrupted
in its entire middle part, over half of its length, the
median side a little below the middle on a short length
and the subsutural ridge a little above the middle. Below testaceous,
brighter than the top; prosternum hollowed longitudinally,
widened back; concave mesosternum; mediocre legs, has
fairly broad tibiae, obliquely truncated at the extremity; article
non-protruding ungual. This space seems to me to offer all the main characters of the
genus Gonophora, it is the first species of this genus which is
reported from Africa and 4 this title it is interesting. Others
Gonophora all inhabit |’ Indo-Malaysia. Hispa armata Guer., Rev. Zool., 1841, p. 10. Two individuals caught 4 Ibembo, in March. Hispa aculeata Klug, Erman's Reise, Atl., 1835, p. 47. A copy taken 4 Ibembo, in March 1890. EROTYLIDA. Erotylde vere. Linodesmus cecus Fabr., Gen. Ins., 1777, p. 234 — Lac., Erot.,
p - 62. — Bedel, Ann. Mus. Civil. Gen., vol. XVIII, 1882, p. 443,
pl. X, f. 6. — elegans P. de Beauv., Ins. of Africa, 1865, p. 10,
pl. VII, f. 4. — apicalis Westw., Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., VIII,
1841, p. 173. Three copies taken in September at Ibembo. A fourth copy is taller and wider (it measures

 

380

24 mill. in length over 10 mil. width) than individuals
usual of Z. cecus, less narrowed behind, 4 vertex more
round; the punctate series of the elytra are completely
erased, the posterior fascia forms a much more pronounced hook
extending further back and the apical spot is more
broad, more rounded. Are these local or sexual differences, or is this individual
does it represent a distinct species? A few copies
would be needed to elucidate this question. This copy
remarkable was captured at Ibembo on May 31, 1890. Episcaphula congoana Duviy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, 1891,

XXXV; C.-R., p. cocexxi. Oblong, attenuated behind, below reddish fawn; heat
and corselet densely pitted, the former a reddish-brown, the
second colored in the same way with largely tawny side edges,
brown crest; finely dotted dlytra, furthermore presenting
longitudinal series of sharper dots, black with Vangle
apical reddish, each adorned with two narrow bands, irregular
vines on their edges, of a straw yellow: Vune & little distance
from the base, skirting the shoulder, encompassing the humeral callus which
remains black and extending to near the suture, the other
arched, located towards the last third. Long. 12 mil., width. 43/s mill. -- Ibembo (March, J. Duvivier). ‘Head and corselet almost identical to those of Il’ Z.-¢vicolor whose
the description follows, as form and as coloration; the bodice
uit however a less transverse fart, the yellow border of this
latter is best limited in the present species, the autennae
are otherwise conformed, the third article is here a little more
long only that the previous and the last three are relative-
ment less dilated. The crest is finely dotted. The elytra
are more strongly attenuated behind than in the Z. tricolor,
punctuated as in the latter, but the arrangement of the fascia
is different: the red apical spot is more elongated, more distinctly
angular outside, the arched band located towards the posterior third
laughing is of form 4 somewhat similar in the two species,
but the internal hook that at I'Z. tricolor extends to
near the apical spot is here abruptly stopped at the place of
the curve; finally, At the base of each elytron we notice, no
not a broad transyersal fascia, but a yellow square encompassing the
humeral callus which retains the deep color and extends
close to the suture in a narrow irregular band on its
edges. The underparts and the patties are a uniform reddish tawny;
the prosternum is depressed on the sides. 381

The Z. congoana still presents a great analogy with
VB. trichroa Crotch, which I do not know in kind; according to
Mr. Gorham who has the advantage of possessing the type of the Z. trichroa
and well youlu compare my congoana to this species, the latter
differs especially from ¢richroa by the reddish color of the sides of the
prothorax and legs and by the third article of the antennae more
short. Episcaphula tricolor Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R., p. cccexxm. Oblong, tapering behind; below a reddish fawn in
part browned; head dark brown, densely pitted;
prothoraz narrowed in front, transverse, more finely punctate
than the head, reddish with darkened disc; red crest;
elytra superficially dotted, black with apical angle
red, each adorned with two straw-yellow fascias; one enough
broad basilar fascia encompassing a humeral blackhead and worms
the last third, a much narrower, toothed arched fascia
abutment on its edges; 5° article of the double antennae of the second. Length, 13 mil. ; width 5'/2mil. — Ibembo (end of October,

J. Duvivier). Shiny, elongated. Head reddish brown, densely covered
mediocre points; very short wrasse, light fawn, provided with a
thick fringe of golden red hair; mandibles and palps brown;
antennae extending a little beyond the middle of the prothorax, of a brown
reddish: art. 3 almost twice as long as the previous one,
4-8 not longer than 2.94 11 greatly enlarged, the last subar-
rounded at the top, as long as the two preceding ones joined together; those
last three articles are densely pubescent and of more shade
Claire. Prothorax 1 5/, times as wide as long on its line
median, clearly narrowed in front, bordered on the sides, little
deeply indented at its anterior edge, distinctly sinuate from
each side has the base, with the median lobe quite pronounced; angles
forelegs sharp, slightly protruding, hindquarters almost
rights; surface a little less strongly punctuated than that of the
corselet, red, largely darkened on disc. Crest
pentagonal, smooth, red, narrowly edged with black. Elytra
elongated, regularly attenuated in arritre, distinctly rounded
dice on the sides, jointly rounded at the top, no more
wide as the corselet at the base; they are moderately convex,
superficially dotted and also show some series
more pronounced dots, barely visible with a magnifying glass, they are black with
Red apical tangle over a certain length and adorned with a fascia
basilar fairly wide, covering entire base, stopping 4' inward
& very small distance from the suture, 4 the outside right against the

382

margin which it does not however reach, wavy below and encompassing
bant a small black dot located immediately under the humeous callus
ral; another fascia much narrower, strongly arched,
wavy at the edges is located towards the last third. below and
legs of a very shiny reddish fawn with the middle of the chest
and the first three strongly darkened abdominal segments,
densely dotted, covered everywhere with a very short and rare
golden pubescence. Prosternum depressed on the sides, subcarinate in
before. Episcaphula vectesignata Crotch, Cist. Entom., I, p. 414. —
Revised, p.

Four copies of this space were taken 4 Djabir-Bandja
in May and June; this species also occurs in Liberia. Languriide. Stenolanguria Gorhami Fowler, Trans, Ent. Soc, London, 1885,
p. 388. A specimen of this species was taken 4 Ibembo (J. Duvivier);
she is described from Cameroon. ENDOMYCHIDA. Trycherus Josephus Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R., p. CcoLXxxI. Subovate, elongate, shiny black with abdomen, Ueatremity
tibiae, tarsi and palpi of a light pitch brown; elytra
black, finely dotted and each adorned with a fawn ring
occupying the posterior two-thirds. Long. 13 mill. ; width max. 6 mill. — Ibembo (16-30 September. J. Duvivier). Head black, subdepressed on the forehead, vaguely pitted
as well as the epistome which is subrounded by having; transverse wrasse
sal, pitch-brown, ciliate 4its anterior border; mandibles
black, split at the top; palps pitch brown; antennae
black, reaching about 4 half the length of the body:
art. 1 subclaviform, 2 short, subcylindrical, 3 almost as
longer than the first two together or than 4 and 5 remnis, 4-8 grams
dually shortened and dilated, 8-11 forming a very
wide, 4 separate articles, the last of which is brownish and rounded
at the top. Black prothorax, narrowed in front almost twice
as wide as it is long on its midline, strongly indented 4
its anterior edge with the projecting anterior angles, the angles
hindquarters sharp and directed backwards; convex surface on the

383

disc, depressed towards the sides which are raised in front and in
rear, finely dotted, with a furrow running along the base. Keusson semi-circular, black, smooth, shiny. Elytra wider than
the prothorax at the base, oblong-ovate, elongated, quite strong=
ment attenucs en arrives. moderately convex, ¢ broadly
edged on the sides, impressed on the inside of the shoulders, fine-
only rugosules and entirely converted from a ts punctuation
thin and tr; they are black, shiny and ornate ¢
dun annean fauve occupying two-thirds position
extends into a triangular patch of the same shade, covering all
Apical vagle. Underside of dark pitch limb with abdomen
paler, as well as the top of the tibiae and the tarsi; prosternum
narrow, lanceolate, slightly exceeding the hips in arrival, its
extremity resting on the mesotermum; bulging femurs in the middle
and depressed; intermedial tibiae notched a little before their
Mountain peak; fourth abdominal segment provided with two small tnber-
acules moderately wide apart and arranged along the posterior edge. A single specimen, found on dead wood. none
ers; this year

 

   

   

   
      

COCCINELLID-F.

Chilomenes lunata Faby., Syst. Ent., p. 86. — Olive
p. 1057, pl. 18 a-b. — Hope, Col. Man., HI, p. 15
Spec., p.431. Some examples i Ihembo.—Caught throughout Africa

Exochomus nigvipennis Br., Wieg. Arch., 1843, 1, p-
aigromaculatus Goeze, Ent. Beytr., 1, 1777, p. 248. A copy & Ibembo. Epilachna chrysomelina Fabv., var. : reticulata Oliv., Bucyel. Meth., VI, 1791, p. 56. — Mals., Spec., p. 704. — argulata
Mfg., Ent. Syst., Suppl., p. 80. — Oliv., Ent., VI, p. 1020,
pl. 6, f. 77

Two individuals 4 Ibembo. SPLIT eeAvLg
— Muls..

 

 

 

     

 

 

          

  

AVSALIS DE UA S06. EWTOM, WE RELGIQUR, Te XVI 2

 

ANNALS

  
  
  
 

OF THE

ENTOMOLOGY SOCIETY

be

BELGIUM

  

THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME =

VIII

This number must be kept; it won't be sent for a second
‘ 7 times as before. BRUSSELS
TO THE SIRGE OF THE COMPANY
20, MUSEUM STREET, 20

1892

 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. VIII

Minutes of the monthly meeting of August 6, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP OF Mr. Giron. Present: Messrs. Bergé, Bd. Coucke, L. Coucke, Dr. Jacobs, de
Sélys-Longchamps, Severin, Van Nerom and Duvivier, ff. of
Secretary. MM. Fologne, Kerremans, Lameere and Tosquinet made
excuse their absence. The session is open 4 8 hours. The minutes of the meeting of July 2, 1892 are approved. The Secretary places on the desk of the meeting for the
library of the Society, two copies of volume I of the Memoirs
res, which has just appeared. The President lays on the desk of the assembly, the speech
quwil delivered on Sunday, July 3, 1892, at the Banquet offered by
the Entomological Society of Belgium 4 Mr. de Sélys-Longchamps
4 On the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the publication of
The Fauna of Belgium and the printing of which has been decided upon:

DEAR AND VENERE Conrrire,

Fifty years ago you published the Fauna of Belgium,
the first of the great works which have illustrated your name. The
Society of Entomology celebrates this anniversary today. You are the Dean of the Society and its Honorary President. You are the worthy representative of its tradition, and I am happy
to be able, in his name, to send you the congratulations of all your
colleagues,

From the year 1831, Barely 18 years old, you prelude to your
research on natural history, by publishing the Catalog of
Birds around Liage and the List of Neuroptera and
Lepidoptera of the province of Liege. ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM, GE DELOIQUE, T. XXXVI. 30

386

Since that time your scientific activity has not
slowed down a single day, and you've filled with your scholars
monographs Memoirs and Bulletins of the Academy,
Annals of the Entomological Society of Belgium, those of the
Entomological Society of France, and most French journals
cases, Italian, English and German which deal with the sciences
natural. More authoritative voices than mine will speak of originality and
value of these publications. What I can say is that they are marked on the inside.
imprint of the qualities that make true scholars: the method, the
circumspection, exactness. If sometimes you got lost
in the infinite maze of nomenclatures created by so many specialists
lists Both in France, in Germany, in England, we do not
Did you know that by the corrections that you spontaneously inserted?
published in the Bulletins of our Society. Your scientific works have, early on, pointed out to you
To the attention of the first of our learned bodies. You have become
still very young, a member of the Academy. December 16, 1846
the King approved your election as a titular member of
the science class. You have been twice elected Director of this
class, in 1864 and in 1879. Your innumerable works, the discoveries which have been the
coronation have won you notoriety for sixty years
universal and have earned you the most flattering distinctions. I
will not attempt to list all the learned societies of which you are
are a member. It would be easier and shorter to name those
of which you are not a part. This fame belongs to you. But it reflects on the
Entomology Society, of which you are one of the founders, it
reflects on all of us. The honor of attaching your name to so many useful works
yous not enough. You have, by your example and your counsel,
aroused a host of entomologists, who follow you from afar
in the path you have traced. You even encouraged them by your liberalities. There are
just a few months, the Company of which you are the President
@honor was awarding 4 one of its members the prize you have
founded in favor of the one who would collect the most beautiful collection
of Diptera. The study of nature has not absorbed your entire activity. You thought that in a free country a good citizen should serve

387

his homeland in public office. For many years
you represent the district of Waremme in the Senate, and you
have so worthily fulfilled your mandate that the votes of your
colleagues have carried you, for four years in a row, 4 the
Presidency of this meeting. Shall I say that the King has conferred on you the Grand Cordon of his Order? These dazzling distinctions, which dazzle the crowd, are few
thing 4 our eyes in comparison to the scientific titles you
have amassed through your entomological work. I will say, as
Alfred de Musset, that politics has been your misery, but I add-
that Natural History has been your rest, your consolation
and your glory. It is not only "man of science that we honor
In you. We also celebrate "benevolent man who, by the america-
nity of its character and by a rare urbanity has been acquired
verselles sympathies, and which has never counted a single enemy. The testimonies of Vestime and the friendship that surrounds you
came from everywhere. They are contained in the many
memberships only the most illustrious representatives of science
have sent 4 the manifestation of which our company has taken
Initiative. We are in charge of giving you the diplomas of:
Honorary member of the Entomological Society of Stettin. > > » » Entomology of Germany 4
Berlin. > > > » Entomological Switzerland 4 Bern. > > > » Physical and Natural Sciences

real Geneva. Honorary member of the Rotterdam Zoological Garden. *
ee

The following Societies let us know that they have elected you
Honorary member:

The Swedish Entomological Society 4 Stockholm; the company “Pro
Fanna and Flora Fennica » 4 Helsingfors; Hippo Academy 4
bone; the Society of Luxembourg Naturalists. *
ee
We have received for you addresses of congratulations from
Following companies:
The Entomological Society of London,
>” from France. 388

The Entomological Society of Berlin. > > Dutch. > > Italian 4 Florence. > > Tris 4 Dresden. The Royal Academy of Sciences, Letters and Fine Arts of Belgium. The Royal Botanical Society of Belgium. Belgian Microscopy. » Royal Malacological of Belgium. » Belgian Geology, Paleontology and Hydrology. » from the Naturalists of Dinant. The Circle of Hutois Naturalists. The Society of Melophiles of Hasselt. *
xed
The management of the main Museums of Europe have asked us
also to give you an address these are:
The Museums of Paris, Leiden, Berlin, Genoa and the Garden
Amsterdam zoo. Congratulations are sent to you by:
The Linnean Society of London. » Natural History 4 Madrid. Roman for zoological studies. Zoological of France. Zoo Natura Artis Magistra 4 Amsterdam. Zoological and Botanical of Vienna. eevee

ee

M. Bolivar, professor at the University and Director of the Museum
of Natural History of Madrid, in its name and in the name of the natural
Spanish realists. M. Gestro, curator at the Museum of Genoa. Mr. Max Lachlan, on behalf of the editorial staff of Lxtomologist's
Monthly Magazine. M. Hartig on behalf of the editorial staff of the Zoologist. M. H. de Saussure, of Geneva. Mr. Baron Jules de Guerne, former Chairman of the Company
Zoological of France. M. A. Newton, Professor of Zoology and Comparative Anatomy
At the University of Cambridge. *
ee

Please therefore, dear and revered colleague, accept, 4 the opportunity to
your scientific fiftieth anniversary, the expression of our esteem and

389

of our gratitude. We all form the wish that you may-
be honored for a long time to come to the Entomological Society by your
active cooperation. Correspondence. — The Verein fir vaterlindische Naturkunde
in Wiirtlemberg announces to us the sending of his Annals, tome
XLVII, 1892. The Naturforschende Gesellschaft 2u Basel acknowledges receipt of the
volume XXXV of our Annals. Mr. Lameere sends for the library of the Society a
yolume which he has just published and entitled: Zsquisse de la Zoologie. Readings, communications. — 1) the memorials are read
inserted in this issue of the Annales. Mr. de Sélys-Longchamps reads the obituary
following :

ADRIEN MAURISSEN. OBITUARY NOTICE
by M, de Sélys-Longchamps. On July 15, we made a very significant loss in
the person of Mr. Aprien-Hupert Mavrissen, deceased
Maastricht, 4 the age of 69. He was a zealous and very conscientious entomologist who made
part of the Intomological Society of Belgium for 21 years,
having been admitted in 1873. He assiduously followed our sessions during
during his regular stay at 4 Brussels 4 the end of
Yautomne. The collections he has assembled are considerable and include
take insects of all orders; but he stuck
especially 4 the study of Lepidoptera indigenous to the Duchy of Lim-
town, whose determinations were controlled by its scholars
Dutch colleagues, notably by M. de Graaf. In 1863, in the List of Macrolepidoptera of the Netherlands,
published by M. De Graaf, wrote M. Maurissen, 640 species are
enumerated in the nine provinces of this Kingdom, but those of the
Duchy of Limburg have been passed over entirely in silence. II is
true that this region detached from the Belgian Province of Limburg
and containing the right bank of the Meuse, forms a geographical point
southern phic, outside the normal limit of the Netherlands,
and that it conforms to the contrary by its natural productions

390

with those of the southern provinces which in 1830 constituted
killed Belgium and in particular Limburg which remained Belgian, which
parallel to the left bank of the Meuse. In 1866, M. Maurissen, in the Annales de la Société Ento-
Dutch mology (7'ijdschrift, volume IX) has filled this
lacuna in publishing the list of "Jacrolepidoptera observed in
the Duchy of Limburg" which Mr. De Graaf V had engaged to
know: 442 species are reported, collected by himself,
including 31 not observed then in Holland. In 1870 (Zijdschvift, volume XIII), M. Maurissen published a
Supplement, partly on the indications of MM. A. van der
Brandt and G. Hamm of Venlo, and MM. Maas and Kattenbach
of Aachen. This supplement includes 119 species, which
makes a total of 561 Macrolepidoptera for the Duchy of Limburg,
including 31 not observed in Holland. By considering the Rhopaloceres and the Sphinxes, I note the
correctness of the opinion of the eminent M. de Graaf, who was of the opinion of
do not include the species of the Duchy of Limburg in the
Fauna of the Netherlands, because geographically this region
belongs 4 the Fauna of Belgium. Indeed, all species of the Duchy are found in Belgium. The two lists published by Mr. Maurissen are all the more
valuable to us, that they are compiled with great care, and
that the localities and times of appearance are indicated for
each species. Those of our colleagues who take special care of our Lepi-
Doptera will do something very useful by extending to Bombyces,
Noctuz and the Geometre the comparison of which I have just given
the summary for the Rhopaloceres (Diurnal) and the Sphinxes (Cre-
puscular). I have visited the collections of M. Maurissen several times and I
found important information for the study of our
Neuroptera. I recorded them in my Catalog des Orthop-
teres et Névropteres de Belgique (1888). Mr. Maurissen welcomed
with extreme kindness the entoiologists who came on
yoir. He was also a distinguished pomologist. Despite his health which left 4 to be desired for several years
he continued until the last moment his entomological research
ques with a zeal all the more meritorious that he found himself (me
he said) absolutely isolated and deprived of collaborators 4 Maastricht. Let's wish for his collections to be treasured
preserved 4 Maastricht. May they revive the taste of this
part of zoology, and serve as a basis for further research

 

 

301

that it is all the more important for us to have to complete that they concern
the left bank of the Meuse detached from our former pro-
Belgian vince from Limburg. Mr. de Sélys-Longchamps continues:

Note. Maybe it's time to sum up in a few words
ot we are for the knowledge of our Lepidoptera
native. In 1844, in my Buumeration of the Lepidoptera Insects of
Belgium (Aun. of the Soc. Roy. des Sciences de Lidge, T. 2), I have
indicated 1221 species (including 362 Microlepidoptera). Thirty eight years later, in 1882, M. Ch. Donkier de Donceel has
published his Catalog of the Lepidopteves of Belgium (Ann. of the
Soc. Ent. Belg., T. XX VI). The total of the species shown is enormously increased, sur-
everything for the Microlepidoptera: it rises 4 near 1850 (including
nearly 900 Microlepidoptera). With regard to the Rhopaloceres (Diurnal), there are a few
additions 4 make 4 my 1844 enumeration. Colias paleno L.

Polyommatus amphidamas Esp. (Helle Hubn.). Lycena alcon Schiff. Lrebia xthiops Esp. (blandina, Fab.). — lined L.
Satyrus briseis L.
— Hermione L.
— Statilinus Hubn. (fauna Sulz.). Argynnis aphirape Hubn. — arsilache Esp. And maybe :

Lycena baton Bergstr. (hylas Hubn.). — cyllarus Rottl. Cyclopides aracinthus F. (morpheus Pall.). As for 41a Zycena damon, found, it is said, once around
rons of Antwerp, I think it is the result of a misunderstanding on the
origin. In a word, the number of our Rhopalaceres is about one hundred.
species, one or two more or less. The total of the Sphinxes is increased by the Zygana hippocrepidia
Ochs. and of Ino (Procris) pruni Schiff., and Geryon Hubn., but
there is to delete the Sesia nomadaformis registered by mistake from
determination. So we have thirty nine Sphinxes. In 1857, the late M. Ch. Dubois began illustrated publications
entitled: The Lepidoptera of Belgium, their Caterpillars and their

392

Chrysalides, work continued by M. Alph. Dubois, which contains
good figures of all the Microlepidoptera, except
Surveyors. It is deeply regrettable that the author did not con-
continued this useful publication for Geometrists and Microlepi-
dopteras. The Secretary reads Mr. Plateau's work entitled:
A special form of temporary colonies of Coccinella septem-
punctata, inserted later. This work gives rise to observations
statements of some members present:

Mr. Dr. Tosquinet points out that he has already noticed 4 many times
occasions in October and November, of these masses of ladybugs
who entered the dwellings and came to cover the walls and
the furniture. M. Bergé cites this fact that he saw, among others Blaesvelt,
The chestnut trees abundantly covered, in autumn, with Coccinella
septempunctate; his uncle observed, on Vesuvius, agglomerates
considerable rations of Lina populi, on the stones. Mr. von
Schenfeldt reported in time 4 Mr. Séverin, that he had
observed in Nice countless quantities of Coccinella undecim-
punclata, covering in compact masses the greater part
of a rock. Mr. Hippert reports some captures of Lepidoptera. Among
these: Satyrus Davus, Nudaria mundana, Macaria signavia
and Cidaria rivularia taken around Neufchiteau. On the proposal of Mr. de Sélys-Longchamps, the meeting
vote of thanks 4 MM. Duvivier and Lameere, for the speed
saying with which they published the Annals of the month of
July. Factories. — No member was able to attend 4 the excursion 4
Stockel, fixed for the past July 10. September 11, excursion 4 Auderghem. Departure from Brussels
(Quartier-Leopold) 4 8 h. 14 in the morning. The session adjourned at 4:09 a.m. 393

A SPECIAL FORM OF TEMPORARY COLONIES OF

COCCINELLA SEPTEMPUNCTATA,
by F, Plateau. In the month of June, 1888, I observed with the keenest interest, in
the dunes around Ostend, colonies of Ladybugs
seven points (C. septempunctata L.) whose individuals were
gathered in tight groups sometimes comprising of forty 4
fifty insects, around the stem and 4 leaves of the twigs
sea ​​buckthorn (Hippophae rhamnoides). The attached figure gives an exact idea of ​​the colonies in question. There were none on other plants and as I am concerned-
I already see the phenomena of Aimetism and Resemblance
protectvice, I noticed and made notice to the people who
accompanied me only these Ladybugs, accumulated in real
bunches, copy very well, by their arrangement and by their coloring
fundamental feature, the small orange-yellow fruits of the Hippo-
phase. However, by recounting the observation in my work

304

entitled: Za protective resemblance in the animal kingdom ('),
I expressed doubts about the phenomenon of imitation, recalling
lant, by a note at the bottom of the page, that the colonies of Ladybugs
had been seen in June, therefore 4 a time when the
Hippophae do not yet bear real fruit. I soon had proof that my doubts were shared, because
my learned colleague and friend, Lorenzo Camerano, professor of
comparative tomy 4] from the University of Turin, sent me a notice
very interesting dealing precisely with the temporary colonies of
Ladybirds, notice which he had read to the Ento~ Society
Italian mological(*). The examination of the work of the naturalist of Turin and some
bibliographical research that I have done on my side, having
demonstrated that the facts reported by the authors do not provide
explanation of the phenomenon observed in our dunes, I believe that it
useful to come back to this little question, if only to
attract the attention of entomologists and provoke discussion. Hoping that the Dutch scholars to whom the fauna of the dunes
is so familiar would have noticed the same fact, I consulted
Bennet en Olivier(*) and Snellen van Vollenhoven(‘), but they
do not allude to Ladybird meetings. Maurice Girard in: Some entomological excursions on the
dunes normandes(*) does not report anything either. These gaps indicated, here, very briefly, Aquoise summarize
the observations of my predecessors. Kirby and Spence (°) cite several cases of extra-
common of Coccinella septempunctata: on the shores of the Humber,
on the dunes at the northwest end of Norfolk County, 4
Orford (Suffolk), on the rocks of the coasts of the counties of Kent and
of Sussex, finally in a city of Berkshire where one was obliged
Wemploy fire pumps to disperse these small
beetles,

Lacordaire(") then Maurice Girard(*) only say a few

(') Bulletin of? Royal Academy of Belgium, 3rd series, volume XXIII, n° 2, 1802. () Cameraxo. Vota intorno alle emigrazioni della Coccinella septempunctata
(Sociata entomologica italiana, December 21, 1879). (@) Benner en Oliver. Naamlijst van Nederlandsche Insecten (Naturkundige
Verliandeling van de Hollandsche Maatschappij der Wetenschappen, Haar-
Jom, 1825). () SNELLEN van Voutennoven. Vaanlijst van Nedertndsche Schildvleugelige
Insekten (Bouwstotten voor cene Fauna van Nederland, tweede deel, Leiden 1858). — Ib. From Dieren van Nederland, Gelede Dieren (Haarlem, 1860). (°) Annals of the Entomological Society of France, session of November 14, 1877. (*) Kirny and Spence. An Introduction to Entomology, Letter XVI (Edition of
1867, page 295). () Lacorpatre. Introduction & ! Entomology (Butfon Suites), t. I, p.494, 1838,

(*) Maurice Ginapp. Elementary Z'rite @ Entomologie, t. 1, 1873. 395,

words of these temporary meetings and probably drew their
information in the book above. J. H. Fabre(') observed a colony of Ladybirds 4 seven points
literally covering the chapel of Mont Ventoux (Alps du
Dauphiné), 41905 meters above sea level and found a group
similar, but with fewer individuals, 4 a height of
734 meters on the pedestal of the cross which surmounts the plateau
of Saint Amans. Finally, in the meeting of December 21, 1879 of the Entire Society
Italian mology, a series of naturalists made communications
cations on the subject which occupies us or recalled communications
previous cations. I will quickly quote: Targioni (1876), colonies
Ladybirds under rocks on lofty peaks; Cavanna,
more or less numerous meetings of Ladybugs on almost
all the luminaries visited in 1877, 1878 and 1879, at altitudes
varying from 1040 4 2729 meters; Osten Sacken, accumulation of
Various beetles, including Ladybugs, on small
stone pyramids, 4,1830 meters high, at the top of the
Mount Washington in New Hampshire (North America);
Lorenzo Camerano (1877), very dense colony of Ladybugs on the
base of a small column, 4 a little more than 1000 meters of
height, at the top of Mount Asinaro (Monte Musiné). The accumulation of Ladybirds by the hundreds and even by the
linking of copies grouped in a small space is therefore a
fairly common phenomenon. I will point out, however, that the case I have studied is of a
particular nature: it is not a question here of insects seeking
a cottage to spend the winter, since the group has been observed
in June, no animals swept away by a gust of wind and
having fallen on a lofty summit, nor of a mass emigration
4 the aphid suite, as assumed by Kirby and Spence. The Ladybugs were absolutely located in the armpit of the
branches of the Hippophae; there were none on the other plants
or on the floor; they were pressed against each other and
motionless; finally the Hippophae they furnished grew
near the crest of the relatively low dunes near the hippo-
Wellington drome. I only encountered mention of a vaguely analogous fact
in the French edition of Znsectes de Brehm, by Kiinckel
@Hereulais(*). Talking about ladybugs looking for shelter
in autumn, Vauteur says: “others settle down at the end of the
young pines, hanging between the needles. »

 

(\) Fanre. Entomological memories, pp. 204 or 205. Paris, 1879,
() Volume I, p. 382. 396

We know of quite a number of examples of accumulations of
Beetles and even Emipteres on small areas
due; having only intended to report a form of colony
temporary quite exceptional, I refrain from recalling
facts whose enumeration would unnecessarily lengthen this little notice. Ghent, July 5, 1892. PHYTOPHAGES OF CHOTAH-NAGPORE
by Ant, Duvivier. (2nd Note.) I published in January of last year, in the Annales de
the Entomological Society of Belgium, volume XXXV, Account-
Rendering, pp. xxiv 4 11), a first note on part of the
entomological collections by Belgian missionaries in Bengal
western. Since then, new shipments have successively been sent to me.
submitted and I summarize, in this note, the results of my
research. The latest shipments, largely from Mandar and
Barway (P. Cardon) and de Kurseong (P. Braet) contained sur-
all interesting things and I found myself in the need of
create several new generic cuts, such as gender
Parathrylea among the Halticides, and the Mandarella genera,
Konbirella and Hylaspoides among the Galerucides. It is among the
small species especially as the novelties have presented themselves:
I can therefore only commit the missionaries 4 to persevere in
this way and 4 harvest in large numbers the minutiae. I have, in this note, taken all the species that I had
already quoted in my first work, but without expanding on
these and for the sole purpose of giving an overall idea of
all reported forms; I added the description of a
new species from Pedong, part of the collection of
M. René Oberthiir 4 Rennes and that of a new genre
from Sikkim and part of my collection; these descriptions
fit perfectly into this work. The fauna of Chotah-Nagpore seems to me quite homogeneous; in
Indeed, until now few wide-ranging species have been found there.
encountered and among them I found a few old species
Europeans, Cryptocephalus Coryli, Charysomela menthastri
and Chetocnema concinna. About 165 species have been collected and among these

  

 

397

57 were new, of which 39 are described here for the first
time. This result exceeds, I confess, my expectations. We don't
can therefore only encourage the missionaries who devote themselves 4
our science, 4 to continue 4 to hunt with the zeal that they have there
brought so far. Entomological science will be theirs
grateful. Dieghem, August 6, 1892. A.D.

Sagrina. Sagra Druryi Lake., Mon. Phyt., 1, p. 32. One copy: Asansol. Sagra purpurea Licht., Cat. Mus. Hamb., 1796, p. 60. —
formosa Lake., Mon. Phyt., I, p. 49. — ignited Lac., Mon. Phyt.,
1, p. 47. — Mouhoti Baly, Journ. of Ent., 1, 1860, p. 193. Quite numerous specimens of this species excessively
variable, both in coloring and in size, and having a
quite extensive habitat, were captured 4 Konbir-Nowatoli and 4
mandar. A few tall individuals seemed to belong to me.
hold 4 another species, Sagra chrysochlora Lac., but as
I have since been able to ascertain that these copies are simply
S. purpurea Licht. This species is also found in China where it is very
common, in Cochinchina, in Tonkin, in Annam, in Cambodia. Sagra multipunctata Jac., Ann. Mas. Ciy. Gen., 2° ser , VII,
1889, p. 5. An individual: Asansol. Criocerinz. Lema quadripunctata Oliv., Ent., V1, p. 751, 5, pl. I, f. 5. Two copies ; Asansol and Tetara. I did not find this
species in subsequent shipments from Kurseong, Konbir
or mandar. Lema histrio Clk., Cat. Phyt., App. 1866, p. 29. — crassi-
palpis Duviy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891; C.R.p. XVI. I have redescribed, by mistake (1. c.), one of the many varieties of
this species, of which a few specimens were collected 4 Kon-
bir (P. Cardon). Lema Downesi Baly, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., London, 3rd ser.,
XVI, 1865, p. 156. — nigrosuturalis Clk., Cat. Phyt., App. 1866,
p. 37. A few copies 4 fanve crest collected 4 Konbir
(P. Cardon). 398,

Lema terminata Lac., Mon. Phyt., 1, p. 841. Some individuals captured 4 Konbir (P. Cardon) and 4 Barway
(P. Cardon). Lema coromandelina Fabr., Syst. El., 1, p. 475. — eyanipen-
nis Oliv., Ent., VI, p. 740, 21, pl. II, f. 21. — Malayana Lake.,
My. Phyt., I, p. 378. — melanocera Lac., Mon. Phyt., I, p. 374. — dichvoa Blanch., Homb. and Jacq., See. South Pole, Zool., IV,
p-310, pl. 18, f. 2. —Bredinghami Baly, Journ. of Entom., I,
p-278. — fulvula Lac., Mon. Phyt., I, p. 388. — cyanea Fabr.,
System El, p. 475; Lake., Mon. Phyt., I, p. 349. This species was found 4 Konbir (P. Cardon) and 4 Kur-
seong (P. Braet) into a variety whose elytral margin is
fawn, but not differing in any other way from L. coroman-
delina which are in my collection. Lema bengalensis Duviv., Ann, Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891;
C.-R., p. XXVI. A few copies 4 Konbir (P. Cardon) and a 4 Kurseong
(P. Braet). Crioceris impressed Fabr., Ent. System, I, p. 6. — castanea Lac.,
My. Phyt., I, p. 564. — crassicornis Oliv., Ent., VI, 94, p. 731,
pl. 1, f. 6. — omophloides Lac., Mon. Phyt., I, p. 564. Meets 4 Kurseong, Tetara and Konbir. Crioceris unicolor Hope, Gray, Zool. Misc., 1831, p. 28. —
badia Lac., Mon. Phyt., I, p. 560. An individual; Konbir (P. Cardon). Crioceris semipunctata Fab., Syst. El., I, p. 472. One copy: Tetara (P. Cardon). Megalopine. Temnaspis speciosa Baly, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 3¢ ser., IV,
1865, p. 41, pl. 1, f. 6. A copy G taken 4 Kurseong, seems to me to relate to 4
this space. Clytrin. Lacawva indica Duviv., Ann. soe. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891;
C.-R., p. XXvul. A number of copies were captured 4 Konbir and
in Tetara. Clytra palliata Fabr., Syst. El., 1, p. 30. This species is fairly common in India; she was picked up
in a number of copies of both sexes 4 Konbir. Clytra conformis Lac., Mon. Phyt., I, p. 194. 399

Also collected in a number of copies of the
two sexes 4 Konbir. Clytra plagiata Duviy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891;
C.-R., p. XXIX. Some copies 4 Konbir and 4 Mandar (P. Cardon). Clytrva crassipes Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891;
C.-R., p. XXXI. A few individuals collected 4 Konbir. Aspidolopha decora Fabr., Syst., El., I, p. 35. Konbir: a certain number of copies. Aspidolopha sublevicollis Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium,
XXXV, 1891; C.-R., p. Xxx. Konbir: a few copies. Aspidolopha distincta Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R., p. XXxi. Konbir: a few copies. Diapromorpha turcica Fabr., Syst. El., I, p. 37. This species is very abundant 4 Konbir; she was taken back
from 4 Mandar, 4 Kurseong and 4 Barway. Diapromorpha melanopa Oliv., Ent., VI, p. 836. Some copies 4 Konbir, Mandar and Kurseong. Gynandrophthalma laticollis Duviv., n. sp. Short, weakly dilated in arviere; crest, metasternum and abdo-
black men; head, prothoraz, pro- and mesosternum and legs dun
light faure; antennae smoky, yellow-based; elytra of a handsome
dark blue, shiny, strongly pitted; very transparent corselet
versal. Long. 3 mill., width. 1 1/2 mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). - A
copy. Head of a light fawn, smooth, very shiny, marked on the vertex
of a weak longitudinal impression and at the inner edge of the eyes,
some small wrinkles; scalloped epistome arching forward;
transverse labrum; palps slender, elongated; antennae exceeding one
little the base of the prothorax, blackish with the first four arti-
keys of a light fawn, the last 7 articles dilated. Excessively short prothorax, at least three times as wide
than long, of a tawny color lighter than the head, 4 barely narrowed in front,
subrounded on the sides, appearing smooth, but bearing some
superficial points towards the base. Escutcheon large, smooth, black, trian-
gular. Elytra very slightly dilated in the back, moderately
convex, of a beautiful dark blue, shiny, covered with a deep
and dense regular punctuation with alternate intervals, located
close to the suture, subconvex. Below slightly pubescent,

 

400

tan-black with pro- and midsternum and legs
testaceous. A dimple on the last abdominal segment (Q). This pretty Gynandrophthalma, appeals by its colors, cer-
some European species, notably G. flavicollis Charp. Gynandrophthalma semipunctata Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium,
XXXV, 1891; C.-R., p 1. One copy, taken 4 Konbir; the species has not been found
from. Cryptocephalin. Cryptocephalus guttifer Sf., Mon., IX, p. 22. Two copies taken & Konbir (P. Cardon); this space is not
known only from India. Cryptocephalus nagpurensis Duviv., n. sp. Subparallel, barely retracts in the back, quite convewe, flare in
below with the vougedtre metasternum; above a very fawn
clear with two spots near the anterior edge of the corselet, the
posterior edge of it, a basilar border to the elytra, the
base of the epipleures and on each elytron: two spots at the base and
a third after the middle, close to the suture, black,
the elytral spots, largely surrounded by light brown; bodice
smooth, punctate-ridged elytra. Long 31/2 mil. ; Q 41/s mill. — Mandar and Konbir (P. Cardon). Vertex fairly deeply furrowed longitudinally, provided with
some mediocre points; more finely punctate epistome, wrasse
transverse, ciliate in front; antennae exceeding half the
Length of body in G, yellow, mediocre; art. 3 once
and a half as long as 2, subequal to 44. Prothorax quite clearly
globose in its anterior part, almost twice as wide
than long, yellow, shiny, punctuate, with a thin border 4 the
base and two subtriangular spots, located fairly close to the edge
anterior, brownish-black. Yellow escutcheon, black border, very
shiny, smooth. Elytra slightly narrowed behind, quite convex,
punctate-striated, the points partly efficacious at the top with the
plane intervals, carrying a series of very fine points; they are
distinctly impressed on the inside of the shoulders and the region
skullcap is slightly raised; they are yellow, with a band
transverse basilar and much of the posterior half
light brown, shading to sanguine (g); on this brown background we
observes, near the crest, a rounded spot and on the shoulder, a
another smaller one, also rounded, both black, like
the third spot, which is transverse and located a pen after the
middle, close to the suture; basal border and base of epiplea

 

 

 

 

 

401

also black. Below testaceous, dotted, slightly pubescent
with reddish metasternum; anterior border of the prosternum
salient, angular. The Q is taller, has shorter antennae and the last
abdominal segment with a dimple. This species seems to me to have to take place in the neighborhood
of Cr. parasiticus Sit. from the same regions. Cryptocephalus suavis Duviv., n. sp. Short, shiny, convex, slightly narrowed behind; fawn in
below with the extremity of the tibiae and the tarsi a little browned,
the metasternum, Vécusson, the labrum, the mandibles and the antennae
nes (except base), black; reddish head and corselet, this one
almost smooth with two spots on the disc, the side edges
and basilar, black; punctate-ridged elytra, jawnes with a thin
basilar and lateral border, sutural band and on each sheath,
a wide discoidal band interrupted before the apex, black. Long. 3 mill. ; width ep. 1 s/s mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). -A G. Head rather densely and confusedly pitted, without furrow
longitudinal; epistome separated from the forehead by a transverse furrow;
labrum and mandibles black; antennae exceeding half the
length of the body, black, with the first four segments fawn:
art. 3 a little longer than 2, the last six dilated. Protho-
rax rather convex on the anterior two-thirds, distinctly narrowed
forward with the anterior angles lowered and the posterior angles
laughing slightly backwards, subacute, the sides almost
straight, the base sinuate on each side with the median lobe distinct-
bisinute; a small oblique impression on each side of
V crest; the surface seems smooth, but with a little attention
we see a spaced and very superficial dotted line; the bodice is
adorned with two small subrounded spots, located a little above
from the middle, to the first and second third of the width; edges
laterals and the base (which is finely denticulate), are closely
black borders. Black crest, elongated, smooth, provided with a dimple
Basically. Elytra slightly widened under the wings, then insensible-
slightly narrowed behind and rounded at the top, slightly raised
around crest with mediocre epipleural lobes; surface
convex, finely punctate-ridged, the points more accentuated in
the basilar half with the intervals finely arugula, yellow,
narrowly marked with black along the base, on the lobes
epipleurals and along the margin, up to near the top;
a sutural band not exceeding the first streak, and a
large discoidal band on each case, slightly attenuated in

 

  

 

 

ANNALS OF THE SOC. EXTOM, OF BELGIUM, T. XXXVI) a

402
back, starting from the base, interrupted a little before the top
and extending between the ridges 3 4 7, slightly cutting into the
2ndinterval. Tawny underparts with the end of the tibiae and the tarsi
Slightly darkened and black metasternum. I don't know the Q.

Cryptocephalus Mephistopheles Duyiv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium,
XXXV, 1891; C.-R., p. xxvt. Two copies taken & Konbir. Cryptocephalus seasignatus Fabr., Syst. Eleuth., I, p. 71. —
Sff., Mon., IX, p. 5:

This species was captured in large numbers 4 Konbir and 4
Tetara. Here are the varieties collected:

a) three points on each elytron (1, 2);

d) the humeral point erased or simply indicated by a dot
sooty;

c) a humeral point and after the middle a wide trans-
yersale. This species is found throughout the Indian peninsula and &
Ceylon. Cryplocephalus indicus Sff., Mon., IX, p. 58; XIV, p. 29. A copy taken 4 Mandar (P. Cardon). — The species lives
V India. Cryptocephalus konbirensis Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium..
XXXV, 1891; C.-R., p. xxxiv. I have described this species after one of its varieties. The typical shape should be considered as follows

a) Yellow elytra, each adorned with five mediocre spots (2, 2,
1): an oval spot on the shoulder; a second, subovate, against
the margin, a little below the middle, free; a third, in
the apical part, transverse, closer to the margin than
suture; a quartium, a little below the crest,
between the Ir and the 4 striae (the scutellar striole not being
counted); a fifth, a little lower than the 2nd, rounded,
between stripes 2 and 4; pygidium, underparts and legs entirely
flaves; prothorax with two small rounded dots, slightly spaced. 0) The apical spot is missing, the elytra therefore have four
spots (2, 2). “) Two black spots on the bodice;
() Corselet uniformly yellow. c) The first two spots, i.e. the humeral spot and
the subscutellar spot and a broad band, transverse, inter-
broken 2 the suture, black. 403

2) Two black spots on the corselet;
f) Corselet uniformly yellow. d) Sometimes one of the two spots is missing, either the humeous spot
ral, i.e. the spot near the crest; sometimes both are missing. I believe that these various variations belong to a single
and same species. Variety 4) is very similar to C7. oclospilotus Baly, she in
differs in the following points: at Cr. octospilotus Baly, the
spot near the crest is closer to the base, and does not
extinguishes only between stripes 1 and 3; the second subsutural spot is
placed higher than the corresponding lateral spot, while
at Cr. konbirensis, the subsutural spot is somewhat lower than
Vother. The crest is also relatively larger on my
species. Cryptocephalus quadvatus Sff., Mon., IX,

A few specimens of typical form taken

Cryptocephalus analis Oliv., Ent., VI, p. 786, pl. 4, f. 47. —
Sff., Mon., IX, p. 67. This species seems to me just as common in the region as
the Cir. sexsignatus Fabr., it was collected in large numbers 4
Konbir and 4 Mandar (P. Cardon). Cryptocephalus Sandrocottus Sff., Mon., 1X, p. 71; XIV, p. 87. A few specimens collected 4 Konbir (P. Cardon). Cryptocephalus laterimaculatus Duviv., n. sp. Subparalicle, d hardly shrivelled in arvidve; black underside with the proster-

num, the middle of the meso- and metasternum and the first segment
abdominal, Veatremity of last ventral segment, yellowish;
Pun brown pitch patles with knees and base of shins
darkened; top of a fanve ferruginenx with two spots on
the prothoras and the base of it narrowly black; puncture elytra
tuds-striated, adorned with a basal border and a small spot in
elongated square, adhering to the margin. Long. 4 1/2 mill. ; width 29/5 mill. — Konbir (P. Cardon). Head dark brown, fading to black, flat, finely pubescent.
hundred, densely covered with small rather deep dots; CDTs
epistome and labrum testaceous, extremity of mandibles black,
tawny palps; filiform antennae, quite slender, black with
first four articles fawn, appearing to reach half of
Ja body length: art. 1 pear-shaped, large, 2 subovate,
short, 3 almost as long as 1, subequal to 3, subsequent 4 barely
longer, weakly dilated. Transverse prothorax, clearly
narrowed anteriorly, moderately globose anteriorly, of a
reddish fawn darker than the elytra, very superficially

66. 4 Konbir. 404

dotted (this dotted line visible only under very high magnification)
ment), without perceptible impression on each side of the crest; the
furrow extending along side edges and base;
particularly deep; the base is bordered in black and we observe
on the disc two transverse black spots, placed 4 equal
distance from both anterior and posterior edges. smooth escutcheon,
black border. Subparallel elytra, 4 barely narrowed behind,
singly rounded at the top; they are moderately convex, &
hardly protruding around the crest, very weakly impressed
inside the shoulders, punctuated-striated (the points weakened towards the
vertex), with the intervals plane on the disk, convex on
the sides, bearing a line of very fine dots; cases of a beast
ferruginous, with a black border at the base and a small spot
in an elongated square, placed 4 the height of the middle, adhering 4 the
ct margin not exceeding, 4 the inside, the last series of
points; the humeral callus is darkened; enough epipleural lobe
pronounced. Underside densely punctate, mediocre points,
pubescent; strongly advanced prosternal projection into a chin-
salient niere, in acute triangle; black pygidium, densely
punctuated. Two copies. Cryptocephalus coryli Lin., Syst. National, ed. X, p. 375. —
Weise, Naturg. Ins. Deut., VI, 1882, p. 147. A specimen captured at Konbir (P. Cardon). I cannot separate this copy from my C7s. European coryli,
which belong to the var. : temesiensis Sff. Cryptocephalus fatuus Si., Mon., XIV, p. 43. A single copy collected 4 Konbir. Cryptocephalus fraternus Duviv., n. sp. Oblong, subcylindrical, convection, shiny; completely yellow
straw with the yeua, the mandibles and two small arvon- spots
dies on the bodice, black; antennae not extending beyond the middle
of the body: art. 3 double of 2, the last 7 dilated; prothorax
smooth, elytra punctate-striae, with subconvex intervals. Long. 7 mill. ; width ep. 31/s mill. — Mandar (P. Cardon). —
A Q.

Head weakly impressed and longitudinally furrowed;
deeply and angularly ripped cpistome 4 his edge
free; surface covered with mediocre dots, shallow and quite
spread apart, smaller and tighter on the vertex; mandibles black;
antennae straw-yellow 4 tip slightly brownish, only
not exceeding the middle of the body: art. 3 most slender, twice
as long as 2, 4 as long as 3, the following a little longer

405

long and slightly dilated into an elongated triangle, the last acu-
mined at the top. Prothorax twice as wide as long, moderate
slightly convex in front ol it appears shrunken due to
the lowering of the anterior angles, which are obtuse; angles post-
very short, high-pitched laughter; smooth surface, adorned with 2 small spots
rounded, black, placed 4 levels in the middle, the space between them
separates, being 1 1/2 times as wide, as that which separates them from the side
to which they correspond. Keusson rounded on the sides, sub-
truncated at the top, smooth, adorned with a brown border at the base. Elytra
subcylindrical, of a slightly darkened yellow, conyexes, a little
raised around the escutcheon, weakly impressed inside
shoulders, deeply punctate-ridged, the punctuation iden-
tick 4 that of C. fatuus Sff., but a little deeper with the
dark brown dot background: punctuation fades a little
at the top; mediocre epipleural lobes. Subrough pygidium,
slightly convex, regularly rounded at the top, very thin
pubescent. Below very finely pubescent, finely punctate,
except on the sides of the metasternum and on the metatho-
racy, where the punctuation is strong and tight. Prosternum no
lifted forward. Q. Last abdominal segment with a protrusion in the middle
dimple base and on each side of a small rounded dimple. This spice is close to Cr. fatuus Sff. with which I had it
Wabord confused, but I believe it quite distinct by the characteristics
following areas: The Cv. fraternus is more elongated and narrower
that the Cr. fatuus, his epistome is angularly indented,
that of Cr. fatuus sinuate in an arc; the forehead of Cr. fatuus is over
plane, its prothorax is one-colored, more strongly narrowed in front,
so that it looks more transverse, with the posterior angles
long pointing backwards; its crest is in an elongated triangle;
its pygidium more broadly rounded behind, its interstriae
arugula, less shiny; the abdominal dimple of the Q is
less deep, very finely pubescent, and the two lateral dimples
rales observed in Cr. fraternus are missing here; art. 3
of the antennae is only slightly longer than 2, the hooks
tarsals are simple. I only know the Q.

Eumolpine. “Anterior border of prothoracic episternums straight ow concave. Dermorhytis unicolor Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R., p. xxxvu. A few copies taken 4 Konbir (P. Cardon). 406

Nodostoma variabile Duviy., n. sp. Oblong-ovate, convex, very shiny; underside, legs, part dw
Sront, prothoraz and escutcheon of poia black; antennae (the three
ow first four articles excepted) black; head partly Faure;
testaceous palps, & rembrunic extremity; black or dun elytra
greenish black; head and prothorax with fine and widely spaced punctuation,
last strongly angular on the cites; fairly thin elytra
punctate-streaked; armed femurs. Var. 1) — Underside and patles, head, prothoraa, escutcheon and antennae
(except darkened end) fawn; tarsi sometimes dark brown
pitch. Length, 445 mils. ; width 2 4/3 4 2 2/s mill., Kurseong (P. Braet). Head vertical, 4 barely conyx; transverse labrum, barely sinuate
in front, fawn, bearing a few eyelashes; epistome contiguous to the forehead,
indented in are of a circle at its free edge; rmernib ai blackish;
palps very light fawn, 4 last segment darkened; eyes
oblong, black, very slightly sinuate 4 their inner edge;
antennae reaching almost 4 the length of the body, filiform:
art. 3 one and a half times as long as 2, the last five articles
very weakly dilated; they are black with the first 3 or 4
fawn items; forehead and vertex covered with a fine and
rare, closer to the anterior edge of the prothorax, the last
slightly more than twice as wide at the base as long in
its middle, transversely convex, narrowly bordered on the
sides, showing 4 little distance from the anterior edge, a thin furrow
punctate; the space between this series of points and the leading edge
almost always fawn; the base is weakly bisinulated and its
angles are in the form of a small sharp tooth, although
pronounced, bearing a point setigere 4 the extremity; the sides expand
attempt angularly for a short distance, then head
slightly rounded to the anterior angles which are
also rounded; the surface is franeyersalament conyex,
the fine and spread punctuation. Fcusson in curvilinear triangle,
broadly rounded at apex, subsinuated on each side, smooth. Ely-
very slightly wider than the prothorax at the base, at shoulders
rounded and smooth, slightly protruding, impressed with each
cdté a little below these, then very slightly dilated and
jointly rounded at the top; they are completely overboard
on the sides, very convex, strongly impressed inside
from the shoulders and transversely under the scutellar region; they are
punctate-striated, the fine points and a pen spread apart, a little less
pointed towards the top, the intervals are flat and present, under
a very high magnification a fine dotted line very far apart; some 
transverse wrinkles more pronounced on the sides, under the shoulder;

 

 

 

 

407

base of the elytra having a slight bluish sheen. Below a black
of pitch with the knuckles and joints generally of a
brownish fawn, finely rugosule and slightly dotted; some 
stronger points are observed on the sides of the prothorax. Proster-
num broad, subquadrangular, straight truncated 4 the base. Paws
fairly long, femurs swollen in the middle, thin at the base, all
armed with a small tooth. This species gives rise to a variety:

Var. a) — Variety a is entirely a beautiful light fawn
with the elytra pitch black or yerdatre black; sometimes
the tarsi are pitch brown. This species is not Vodostoma fulvipes Mots., nor any
of its varieties; 4 because of its femurs armed with a tooth,
the separation of the punctuation of his forehead and his prothorax,
which is also more rounded on the sides. It differs from WV. eneipenne Mots., of which I have an example.
please determined by Mr. Ed. Lefevre, by his black elytra, less
strongly punctate, its prothorax relatively narrower,
much more finely dotted, his shoulders a little more protruding
smooth, the less reddish color of the tawny parts. Finally, according to Mr. Ed. Lefevre, this species must take place
close to 1. Davidi Lef. from China. Variety a) of NV. variable
seems to differ from this last species, by the franker color
tawny aspect of the prothorax, the absence of lateral foveoli on this
last, the anterior angles not salient, the punctuation more
strong in the basal part of the elytra and the size generally
bigger. Nodostoma sculpturatum Words., Schrenk. Reese, p. 177. It is only with much doubt that I report to the WV. sculpt-
twratum of Motschulsky a copy captured 4 Mandar by the
R.P. Cardon. Zl measures 5 1/2 mill., is entirely blue above with a
slight purplish sheen. The abdomen, the tibiae and the tarsi are black,
breast segments and femurs blackish blue; the
antennae are black with the first four segments fawn and the
first spotted with brown above, they reach two-thirds
body length; the palps and the labrum are fawn and the
mandibles black; fairly strong and tight punctuation covers
the epistome, it is more spaced on the forehead and the vertex; Between
the eyes, a little behind, is a short furrow, very deep;
the prothorax is not twice as wide as it is long, it is
conyexe, its base is slightly bisinuate with its angles denti-
forms; the sides, a little dilated at first, form a rounded angle
slightly protruding, are slightly twisted beyond this angle, then

408

straight, finally clearly rounded at the anterior angles, which are
also dentate; it is covered with quite large dots very
tight, especially on the sides, 4 smooth intervals; the elytra are
much wider 4 the base than the prothorax, slightly sinuate
below the shoulders, impressed within them as well as
transversely a little below the base, distinctly raised
dice and covered with a strong serial punctuation, finer towards the
summit but everywhere visible; under the shoulder the stitches are even
very wide and a small vestige of this part of the humeral callus to
extend to the middle of the length; the underside is lined
with a light, silvery pubescence, thicker and longer on the
the tibiae and tarsi; all the femurs are dentate. Nodostoma angulicolle Duviv., n. sp. Oblong-oval, convere, shiny; bottom, legs, tele (except the
anteviewre part which is tawny) and prothorax of poia black;
fawn crest; black antennae & brown base; elytra of a black
greenish, strongly dotted-striated at the base, finely at the top,
strongly impressed on each side, near the base; protho-
ran angularus surles cites, strongly and rather densely punctate. Long. 4 2/s mill. ; width 2 2/s mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). Head with mediocre punctuation, vertical, pitch black with

Vepistome and the fawn wrasse; mandibles black-tipped; palps

fawn, darkened at tip; antennae black 4 brownish base. Prothorax a little more than twice as wide at the base as it is long

in its middle, strongly angular on the sides 4 a small

distance from the base, this slightly raised angle; the angles post-
sides of the corselet are tooth-shaped, the anteriors rounded; the
surface is covered with a fairly dense strong punctuation, except the
along the anterior edge. Fesson fawn, rounded at the top. Elytra oblong-oval, slightly wider than the prothorax 4
the base, impressed faintly on the sides and distinctly on
the disc, a little below the base, equidistant from the callus
humeral, which is salient, and crest; they are punctate-ridged,
the mediocre stitches in the anterior half, much finer
and partly obliterated in the posterior half, the staining is
greenish black. Pitch-black underside, with the joints
joints and joints clear, very slightly pubescent; paws
also pitch black, all the femurs provided below

@a small tooth; flanks of the protborax also strongly pitted

than the disc. This species is quite distinct from WV. variable Duviv. by Ja
stronger punctuation of the head, that much stronger of the
prothorax which is also more distinctly angular, with the angle

  

 

 

 

 

   

409

raised side; the form is a bit more robust, the punctuation

of the elytra is stronger in the first half and the impression

discoidal is more pronounced. According to M. Lefevre, the shape of the prothorax of this species
very close to the JV. chinense Lef., while the punctuation
of this organ is analogous to the JV. puneticolle Lef. (nec Weise);
these two species live, one in China, the other in Tonkin. In this connection, I believe I should point out that there are two Vodo-
puncticollis stoma,\'a described by M. lid. Lefevre in the Anns. Soc. ent. France, 1889, p. 295, from Tonkin, Vauire by M. Weise in
the Hors. Soc. Ent. Ross, XXIII, 1889, p. 600, from Kan-ssu, all
two described around the same time. I believe the post
of M. Lefevre a little earlier than that of M. Weise and, as
the two species seem different to me, I beg the latter to
want to give a new name to his WV. puncticoll. Nodina rotundata Mot., Etud. entom., 1858, p. 109. It is only with many doubts that I bring back the copies
taken 4 Mandar (P. Cardon) has this species, because it is absolutely
impossible to determine an insect 4 using descriptions too
shorter than those of Count Motschulsky; it would be 4 to desire
that once and for all all these worthless descriptions were
deleted from the catalog. M. Lefevre has the same species of
Tonkin, but only applied the name of Motschulsky to him with
also doubt. It goes from tan to dark blue. Nodina tarsalis Duviv., n. sp. Broadly oval; underparts, femurs and tibiae black; labrum, palpi,
tarsi and antennae fawn; bluish black above. head and
very finely dotted prothorax. Regularly punctuated llytres
dead-striated, the streaks more or less obliterated towards the sides and the
Mountain peak. Long. 1 9/s mill. ; width 1 1/s mill. — Mandar (P. Cardon). Finely dotted head, furrowed on each side against the edge
posterior of the eyes; epistome contiguous to the forehead, subquadrangu-
laire, distinctly notched in arc 4 its free edge; fawn wrasse;
antennae fawn, a little thickened at the top. Trans prothorax
versally convex, with the anterior angles strongly
inflected, the base broadly sinuate on each side and the angles
almost straight hind legs; sides regularly rounded forward;
dotted surface, 4 points equal distance from each other;
a fine furrow to which adheres a series of dots runs parallel
4 the base. Crest in curvilinear triangle. Elytra closely linked
4 Ja base of prothorax, not wider 41a base than last,
regularly rounded and narrowly edged on the sides,
weakly attenuated behind, very convex, punctuated-striated, the

 

410

very regular series formed of small dots, the intervals
flat, very finely arugula; towards the top and on the sides, the
punctuation is partly obliterated. This space is close to WV. celebensis Jac., plus size
small, of another coloring with the less punctuated corselet and
the tarsi only fawn. Pagria xneicollis Lef., Notes Leyd. Mus., XII, p. 181. A specimen of this species, described from Java and Sumatra,
was collected 4 Mandar (P. Cardon). Scelodonta indica Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891;
C.-R., p. XxxIx. The species was described by me from Konbir; other copies,
true to type were collected from 4 Mandar (P. Cardon). Trichotheca basifemorata Duviv., n. sp. Oblong, shortened, entirely pubescent; metasternum and abdomen
Cun noir de poia with the sides and the atremity of the abdomen plus
clear; pro- and mesosternum, base of the femurs, a small spot
in the middle of each tibia, base of the antennae, cities of the vertex,
prothorvaz and crest of a light faure, the latter densely
short, deep dots; deeply punctured elytra
killed in series, of dotted intervals, black & reflections of a
greenish tan. Long. 5 mil., width. ep. 2 2/3 mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). —
A copy. Head slightly elongated, pubescent, fawn, with forehead and
middle of the pitch-brown yertex, largely impressed in
rectangle on the forehead; antennal calluses quite strongly raised,
elongated; a transverse furrow between the eyes which are oval and
very weakly sinuate on their internal edge; mandibles of a
light brown, spotted with black; long and robust maxillary palps:
3° art. shorter than 2, the last elongated, black 4 white tip;
antennae reaching s/s of body length: art. 1 very
thick, arched, 2 short, oval, 3 more than twice as long
than 2, hail, 4 as long as the previous two together, the last 4
shorter and somewhat sturdier niers; they are black with
the first fauvist articles. Subcylindrical prothorax, 4 penalty
wider than long, pale tawny, subangular on the sides
a little below the middle, tapering regularly in front;
straight anterior edge, the base slightly rounded and finely
bordered: the surface is slightly convex, converting very large dots
deep enough tight and shows on the disc some small
smooth spaces, the whole is furnished with a light pubescence, short,
a little directed forward, of a tawny shade. 411

Keusson rather developed, attenuated at the bottom, truncated at the top.
met, distinctly sinuate on each side, tawny and punctuated like the
prothorax. Elytra nearly once as wide at the base as the prothorax,
oblong, rather short, 4 slightly oblique shoulders, impression-
born within them as well as transversely under the region
skullcap; they are deeply punctuated in series with the
weaker points towards the top; the intervals are flat and
bear a row of small dots; the whole is garnished with
very fine, sparse pubescence, slightly directed backwards, reddish;
they are black with a slight greenish tan sheen. Thin underside-
punctate and slightly pubescent, pro- and mesosternum,
sides and extremity of the abdomen, hips and basilar third of the
fawn or testaceous femurs as well as a small spot in the middle of
each tibia; wide prosternum, slightly dilated behind,
inclined forwards and backwards, punctuated like the prothorax and the
flanks thereof; rather long legs, strongly shrunken femurs
at the base, fusiform, the anterior strongly, the four posterior
laughers poorly toothed in anterior third; bifid hooks,
the inner tooth half shorter. It is the second species of the genus; the only one known being 7. hirta
Baly, from northern India. Trichotheca hirta Baly, Journ. of Ent., I, 1860, p. 26, pl. 1, f.5. A specimen measuring 3 1/2 mill. in length was taken a
Kurseong (P. Braet); it is entirely flaved; It's possible that
it is a variety of Z. hirta, which is very variable, but i
doubt; a type of 7. hirta should be able to be put at my disposal
place to compare. I express the hope that our intelligent and
zealous hunters in Bengal, the RRs. PP. Cardboard and Braet, find-
sell a few specimens of this interesting species. Hyperaxis distincta Duviv., n. sp. Oblong, subcylindrical, tawny brown, varying from greyish to
above, densely covered with small depressed scales more
clear as the bottom, with the fawn antennae and wrasse, the
yeuz and black mandibles. Long. 4 1/s 45 mils. — Mander. (P. Cardon). Head perpendicular, densely pitted, covered with scales
elongated, marked with a fine smooth longitudinal groove between the
eyes; epistome triangular, very transverse, smooth in front; wrasse
transverse; open mandibles; pale tawny palps; antennae
a light tawny, filiform, reaching o/s the length of the
body, with the last five articles somewhat shorter and lighter
slightly thickened, subcylindrical prothorax, 4 lateral edges effacing

412

ees, longer than wide, slightly narrowed in front, weakly
depressed in the middle, covered with greyish scales and marked on the
disc, of two brownish longitudinal bands. Keusson enough
large, subpentagonal, covered with greyish scales. Flyters almost
once as wide 4 the base as the prothorax, almost three times
as long as this one, deeply and regularly punctuated
killed-striated, densely covered with small tawny scales extending
aged, interspersed with greyish scales, arranged in small spots
little pronounced cross sections, visible especially on the sides and in
back, and further furnished with small, stiff, brownish hairs. Below
brownish, with the abdomen sometimes blackish (except the last segment
abdominal) and legs of a lighter brown, all covered with these
same small scales of light shade; bulging thighs, wearing
each below a small very sharp tooth, the medium pair
less developed than the other two; middle and posterior shins
slightly indented 4 their outer edge near the end;
tarsal hooks bifid. Prosternum oblong, broad. Very close to 7. salt/ata Baly of Borneo, the only species of
type known so far. According to Mr. Gahan, who kindly
compare one of my specimens to the type of Baly, to the British
Museum, 4 London, at 2. sellata the epistome is longer and
less transverse, the elytra are of a uniform tawny brown,
covered with shorter, more rounded scales; according to
description of Baly The end of the antennas would be, at ZZ. sellata
darkened and a large brown spot would extend from the base
from the elytra to their middle. Heteraspis sp. I don't know & what species to bring back a Zeteraspis caught 4 Konbir
(P. Cardon) and 4 Kurseong (P. Braet); this species does not seem to me
be neither ZZ. vestita Baly, nor Z. hirta Fab., maybe I could
fix later, on the view of other copies, those that I have
under the eyes being damaged. Pseudocolaspis bengalensis Duviy., n. sp. Greenish or coppery tan, densely pubescent below,
more slightly above; palps, tibiae and tarsi, base of
antennae @a dark brown; rather densely pitted head;
dotted-rugueua conselet; elytra & tighter punctuation and
finer than that of the corselet, furnished with series of small hairs
silky, whitish. Long. 4 4441/2 mill. ; width 2 1/2 mill. — Konbir. Bright; entirely coppery bronze or greenish. Heat

& barely conyexe, quite densely and deeply punctuated,

the partly anastomosed points on the top of the vertex; wrasse

413

scalloped in front, pitch black; epistome contiguous to the forehead,
&punctuation a little further apart than that of the rest of the head;
reddish-brown palps; mandibles pitch brown a
black tip; antennae extending a little beyond the middle of the protho-
rax, stout, reddish-brown with the last five articles
thickened and black. Prothorax barely wider than long, distinctly
slightly narrowed in front, slightly behind, subcylindrical,
depressed on disc, finely margined at base with angles
obtuse posteriors, and inflected anteriors; densely surface
pitted, rough, (the slightly elongated points, those of the
longitudinal median part, those of the oblique sides), with
remnants of a smooth line in the middle of the prothorax. Keusson sub-
pentagonal, wide, covered with equally dense punctuation,
but finer than that of the prothorax. Elytra 1 1/2 times also
broad than the prothorax 4 the base, almost straight base, 4 shoulders
obliquely rounded, made somewhat protruding by the printing
intrahumeral, slightly sinuous on the sides, then regular
narrowed backwards, finally obtusely and jointly
rounded at the top; their surface is moderately convex,
weakly depressed in the sutural region, punctate-rough,
Ja ponetuation a little finer and tighter than that of the protho-
rax, and fairly regularly arranged, marked in ear towards the
sides, small transverse wrinkles; some remains of streaks
are observed towards the top, only under a certain light; all
is furnished with twinned series of small silky white hairs,
which, in very fresh specimens, should give 4 this species a
particular look. Underside densely dotted, lined on the
various segments of the breast, of fairly long pubescence
silky golden yellow; densely and strongly pitted legs,
slightly pubescent, tibiae and tarsi reddish brown;
all strongly toothed femora. I cannot report this species & any of those described
from the same region; as for the descriptions of Motschulsky, it does not
not make it possible to recognize a species, as I said above. Var. : labrum and femurs reddish like the rest of the legs. Rhyparida bimaculata Jac., Ann. Nat. Civil. Gen., 2nd ser.,
flight. VII, 1889, p. 30. A few copies captured 4 Kurseong belong 4 this
species; Mr. Jacoby kindly compared a copy to the
types in his collection. They form a pretty variety of this species: they are entirely
a light fawn with the apical part of the elytra of a yellow
lemon. The type is fawn with the extremity of the femurs, the tibias and
the black tarsi, and the elytra adorned with a longitudinal band

 

 

414

black. The punctate striae of the elytra and the prothorax almost
smooth, as well as the antennae, as long as the body, make easy-
how to recognize this species. Colasposoma pulchervimum Baly, Descrip. NewGen. and
Spec. Phyt., 1864, p. 15. Several copies have been collected & Tetara and Konbir
(P. Cardon). Colasposoma refine Let., Nouv. Archive. Mus., Paris, 1890, p. 193. Two copies taken from Konbir (P. Cardon); the species is found
again in Cochinchina and Tonkin. Colasposoma serratulum Lef., Eumolp. whoop. cogn. Cat., 1885,
p-109, note f.

A large number of individuals of this species have been captured,
especially 4 Konbir (P. Cardon), 4 Tetara and 4 Kurseong. Colasposoma albovillosum Duviv., Ann., Soc., Ent. Belgium,
XXXV, 1891; C.-R., p. xb. A number of copies were taken 4 Konbir, Tetara
and Kurseong. “Anterior border of the prothoracic episternums convene. Lurypelta vittata Chap., Gen. Col., X, 1874, p. 318, footnote 1
(sub-Buvaspis). Numerous specimens of this species, the only one known in the
kind, were captured 4 Konbir (.P Cardon) and 4 Kurseong
(P. Baert). Pachnephorus seriatus Lef., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 6: ser.,
VII, 1887, Bull., p. uvn, — Fairm., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium,
XXXII, 1888, p.

A single specimen captured & Mandar (P. Cardon). Species
known from Cochinchina, Annam and China. Pachnephorus vaviegatus. Let., Ann. Soc. Ent. France, Ge ser.,
VII, 1887; Bull., p. seen. A single copy also & Mandar (P. Cardon); this
species is known from Annam and Cambodia. Cleoporus Lefevrei Duviv., b. sp. Subovate, slightly tan black below, with the
legs, the antennae and the head, of a reddish fawn; prothorax,
escutcheon and elytia of a greenish tan; finely prothovrax
punctate; Ponte-striated elytra. Long. 3″/2mil. ; width 1 3/" mill. — Mandar (P. Cardon). Head smooth, a reddish fawn with pitch brown vertex;
epistome separated from the forehead by a distinct transverse furrow,
scalloped at its free edge; inner edge of eyes with
Wun wide and deep furrow, eyes wide apart and weakly sinuate

 

 

415

inside; mandibles black, palps fawn; fawn antennae a
slightly smoky end; prothorax 4 pain twice too
wide than long, distinctly narrowed in front, 4 anterior angles
lowered, hindquarters almost straight, sides weakly
rounded; sinuous anterior border on each side, near the angle;
surface moderately convex, marked with obsolete punctuation. Smooth escutcheon. Elytra wider than the prothorax 4 the base, &
slightly protruding shoulders, moderately conyex, weakly and
regularly rounded at the top, narrowly rimmed on the
sides, distinctly punctate-ridged, with flat intervals, very
finely dotted in the anterior part. Below a black
lightly tanned with tawny legs and the base of the shins a
slightly darkened; prosternal projection of a reddish fawn color. It is the first species of this genus reported from India; the
other Cleoporus species are Cl. cruciatus Lef. Islands
Philippines and CZ. Badius Lef. from Cambodia. I am pleased to dedicate it & M. Lefevre, the eminent specialist
cialist in Clytrides and Humolpides, as a weak testimony
of my gratitude, for the kindness with which he places himself 4 my
disposition to compare questionable species with the many
types in his collection. Cleorina Jacobyi Duviv. not. sp. Oblong-ovate, convex. Head, bodice and dytres of a metallic green
shiny liquid; palpi testaceous, last segment darkened;
antennae black with the Se and part of the 4 article fawn;
chest and femora Pun tan black; lip, knees, shins and
tarsi Cun reddish fawn; abdomen black; mediocre head,
densely and strongly punctate prothorax; punctate elytra
strids, the points fading toward the top. Long. 3.43 1/2 mill. ; width 2 2 1/4 mill. —Kurseong (P. Braet). Subvertical head; epistome confused with forehead; surface
covered with mediocre and stray stitches; transverse labrum, of a
faded reddish; fawn palps has last article largely
darkened; antennae reaching two-thirds the length of the
body, black with the first three articles and the largest
part of 4: big cats: art. 1 and 2 thickened, 2 short, 3 and 4 slender,
subequal, | s/2 times as long as 2, subsequent ones gradually
dilated and thickened. Prothorax about 1 1/2 times as wide as
long, clearly narrowed in front, with the sides regularly
arched, deeply punctate-rough with intervals con-
vexed on the disc, of a metallic green like the head. Eeusson

subpentagonal, green, smooth. Elytra wider than the prothorax 4

the base, 4 oblique shoulders, subparallel, rounded behind,

canaliculated along Ja margin, faintly impressed in

 

 

  

 

 

416

inside the shoulder and presenting, in addition, a small impression
A short distance from the base, 4 equal distance from the shoulder and
the crest; convex, punctate-ridged surface, the sharp points 4 the
base, accentuated in the small depression, more marked and more
thick near the margin, thinner and almost obliterated at the top;
flat and smooth intervals; cdts marked with a few trans-
versales; metallic green, sometimes slightly bluish. Poi-
trine and femora tan-black with black abdomen, covered
of rare silvery pubescence; knees, shins and tarsi of a wild animal
redness; prosternum broad, subquadrangular, 4 slightly sinuate
between the hips, truncated straight at the base; flanks of the prothorax
rough; fusiform femurs, mutic; appendiculate nails. Var. @) green prothorax, purple elytra. — 1 copy. I am happy to dedicate this pretty species & M. Jacoby. The Cleovina excessively resemble the Vodostoma, and it is
highly probable, as presumed by M. Lefevre, that among the nominees
Several Vodostoma species from India and Malaysia described
by Baly, there are some which must be referred to the genus Cleorina. The Cleorina are distinguished first of all from the Vodostoma, by the edge
external of the prothoracic episternum which is conveze, it is con-
cellar among the Nodostoma; the former usually have a form
more oval than the latter, the present species is more elongated
than are most of the species of Cleorina described. Tricliona puneticeps Duviy., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV,
1891; C.-R. p. xLI. — A few copies 4 Konbir and Mandar
(P. Cardon). Corynodes peregrinus Herbst, Fuessly Archiv., V, 1788, p. 63,
pl. XXIII, f. 25. — Marsh, Day. Linn. Soc., London, Zool., 1864,
p- — Baly, Trans. Ent. Soc., London, 1867, p. 132. —
cyaneus Oliv., Ent., VI, 1808, p. 899, pl. 1, i Aa-b. Quite a number of copies 4 Konbir (P. Cardon). Corynodes pyrophorus Parry, Proc. Ent. Soc. London, 1843,
p. 87. — Kurseong: two copies already mentioned. Coe ieee dengalens Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXIV,

 

 

 

 

  

ee

This species was caught 4 Tetara and 4 Konbir, but it did not
not been found in the other localities explored. Corynodes decemnotatus Baly, Journ. of Ent., 1, 1860, p. 3. The only specimen, captured 4 Tetara, is in poor condition;
Yesspece has not been taken, and it is however a very beautiful insect,
which must attract the sight of the hunter. ‘orynodes curvipes Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,

1801; C.-R., p. XLU. Konbir; the only specimen reported. It is however a

 

417

remarkable species, which, like the previous one, attracts attention;
they are perhaps both infrequent. Corynodes Mouhoti Baly, Descrip. of new Gen. and Sp. Phyt.,
1864, p. 7. One copy took 4 Konbir. Colaspoides sublaevicollis Duviv., n. sp. The rise of an obscure, brilliant fawn; palps, antennae and
light fawn Tun blades; tip of mandibles black; tv and
prothorax bearing a few superficial stitches; elytra strong-
regularly punctuated, the double severity in the
first half, simple in the second, of an obscure fawn @
lightly tanned clothes; anterior and posterior femurs
armed one tooth. Long. 6 mill. ; width 3 1/2 mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). Two copies. Head almost smooth, showing a few superficial dots between
the eyes, as well as a fine longitudinal furrow; epistome a little more
long as it is wide, separated from the forehead by two arched furrows meeting
health back and little accused; testaceous maxillary palps, the
brown labials; labrum strongly indented in front; mandi-
strong, black bubbles; antennae reaching s/s in length
of the body, rather slender, last 4 articles a little thickened. Pro-
thorax twice as wide as long, sides subparallel 4 the
base, rounded in front and narrowed from the middle, 4 angles
forelegs lowered, hindquarters almost straight, base bisinude;
the surface is weakly conyex transversely, and shows a
excessively fine dotted line, very spaced out: along the base a
line of tight and well marked stitches. Keusson subrounded to
rear, smooth. Elytra subparallel, rounded at the top, very
faintly impressed on the inside of the shoulders, which are smooth and
slightly protruding; no discoid impression; moderately surface
convex, covered with a fairly regular strong punctuation, disposed
in the anterior half by double series, with intervals
shots, in the other half, by simple series with the intervals
convex; the two series closest to the suture are
best marked. Brown underparts with paler legs;
fore femora quite strong, hind femora moderately
armed with one tooth, the unarmed intermediaries. This species seems very close to C. inornala Baly de
Penang; it is distinguished from it, I believe, by its prothorax almost
smooth, its head not pitted except against the eyes, the antennae
entirely light fawn, the prothorax no darker than the
elytra. ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM. OF BELGIUM, T, XXXVI. 52

418

Colaspoides bengalensis Duviv., n. sp. Oblong-ovate; below, of a reddish fawn with the sides of the
prosternum, heart of the metasternum and middle of the abdomen
Cun greenish tan green; paws of a reddish fawn of veflts
bronzes with the ends of the tibiae and blackish tarsi, antennae
nes Cun faure clear, slender, as long as the body; party
anterior of epistome, labrum and palps Cun reddish faucet;
above Cun bronzed greenish; prothorax poorly and enough
densely punctate, elyria strongly punctate-ridged, has inler-
smooth valleys, planes following the disc, subcostiform in the part
posterior, interrupted by wrinkles on the sides; epilations
red. Long. 5 46 1/2 mill. ; width 2 1/2 43 mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). Front and base of the epistome marked with large dots, the latter
contiguous to the first, reddish in front, indented at its edge
free, smooth, with obtuse teeth; transverse labrum, red, smooth;
mandibles very powerful, black; tawny palps; vertex equipped

Wa deep dimple, less punctate than the forehead; antennae

slender, of the length of the body, fawn with sections 5 47 a

slightly smoky and the last five elongated. Prothorax about 2 1/2

times as wide as long, distinctly narrowed in front, having the

straight 4 at the base, then rounded towards the top; It is
moderately convex and densely punctate. Keusson in triangle

curvilinear, reddish, smooth. Elytra wider than the corselet 4

the base, hardly impressed under the escutcheon, strongly punctuated

striate, 4 punctuate intervals, planes on disc, subcostiform
in the posterior third, interrupted by vestiges of wrinkles on
the sides, ot the punctuation is coarser and absolutely
irregular; reddish epipleia. Underside of a reddish fawn
with the sides of the prosternum and metasternum and the greater
part of the abdomen of a greenish tan, very finely dotted
and slightly pubescent; the legs are red with bronze highlights,

The ends of the tibiae and the tarsi are blackish; the femurs

forelegs are a little thicker and provided below with a small

barely noticeable tooth. This species seems close to C. fusconea Baly which I do not
know however not in kind. Chrysomeline. Plagiodera cinctipennis Baly, Ann. Mag. Nat. History, 1862,
p - 26. A number of individuals of this species have been collected
4 Konbir (P. Cardon) and 4 Mandar (P. Cardon). 419

Var. : rufescens Gylh., Schinh. Syn. Ins., I, 2, p. 267, footnote /;
Grendal, Dej. Cat. 3rd ed., p. 429. I bring the ufescens Gylh. some copies collected
in the same regions, and which seem to me to relate exactly
lies with Gyllenhal's description. Having compared them to P. cine-
tipennis Baly, I cannot separate them, and the rufescens Gylh. me
seems to have been described on absolutely immature specimens
of P. cinctipennis Baly; all the details of form and punctuation
tion are the same, only the coloring of the elytra differs, but
in rufescens, the elytra still retain a slight reflection of
cinctipennis staining. I keep the name given by Baly,
because it gives a more exact idea of ​​the species. Pavlina indica Hope, Gray, Zool., Ins., 1831,
mirensis Redth., Hiigel Kaschm., IV, 1848, p.
Stil, fy. Vet. Akad. Ferh., XIV, 1857, p. 60. A number of copies collected 4 Kurseong (P. Car-
don and P. Braet), this species is found in Tibet and Nepaul. Parlina fallaciosa Stil, Nova Act. Upsal., 3rd ser., 1862, p. 5. Two copies: Kurseong (P. Braet and P. Cardon). Lumela cyanicollis Hope, Gray. zool. Mise., 1831, p. 29. —
Baly, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1875, p. 23. A few copies: Kurseong (P. Cardon). I own this
area of ​​Sikkim, Darjeeling and also China. Chrysomela Vishnu Hope, Gray Zool. Misc., 1831, p. 30. —
cingulata Baly, Journ. of Entom., I, 1860, p. 97. This species is very abundant in the region; she was re-
picked in number & Konbir (P. Cardon) and 4 Kurseong (P. Braet). Chaysomela democratica Duviy., Ann, Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R., p. XL. Some copies 4 Tetara and 4 Konbir. Chrysomela menthastri Sir. My p. 90. — Weise, Naturg. Ins. Deutsch., VI, 1884, p. 426. Two specimens of this species were taken 4 Kurseong
(P. Braet); they are bluish green and cannot be separated
of my copies from Europe. One of these copies among others
from Lanaeken (Belgium) does not differ from the two individuals
collected 4 Kurseong only by its more golden color and the punctu-
barely finer killing of the prothorax and elytra. Lygaria Westermann Stal., Gifvers. Vet. Akad. Ferh., XIV,
1857, p. 59. Two specimens captured 4 Kurseong (P. Cardon). Agasta formosa Hope, Coleop. Man., II, p. 177, pl. II, f. 3. A number dindiyidus were collected 4 Kurseong
(P. Cardon and P. Braet). 29. — cash-
8. — elata

  

420

Halticin. *Prothorax without basilar groove. 0 — Anterior acetabular cavities closed. Amphimela cyanea Duviv. not. sp. Subrounded, purplish-black below, dark blue & purplish reflections
ces above, very bright; black crest; brown wrasse
poia; last segment of palps and base of antennae testaceous;
superficially dotted top. Long. 4 mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). Wrasse pitch-brown, sinuate forward; maxillary palps

4 art. 2 and 3 obconical, pitch black, the latter thinner, in
acute cene, testaceous; fawn labial palps; forehead with a
weak rectangular impression, extending to the
Vertex; no trace of frontal carina, nor of antennal calluses;
a few sunken stitches between the eyes; head blackish blue;
antennae inserted in front, very close to the inner edge of the eyes,
slightly exceeding the base of the corselet in length, black with the
first four articles testaceous or of a light fawn: art. 1
Coo thickened, 2 short, subovate, 3 and 4 somewhat longer
only 2, the following enlarged, thickened. forming an elongated club. Prothorax shiny, transverse, more than 2 1/2 times as wide as
long, strongly narrowed on the sides, transversely convex,
weakly and widely indented at the anterior edge, the indentation
straight, the anterior angles a little advanced and thickened; sides
almost straight, posterior angles slightly raised; surface
superficially dotted; entirely dark blue. Crest
quite large, curvilinear triangle, black, smooth, shiny. Elytra
gradually widening after the base, strongly rounded on
the sides, broadly rounded at the top; they are moderately
convex, shiny, dark blue, & purplish reflections, superficial-
slowly and irregularly dotted. Subconcay epipleures, very
Gradually narrowing eae margins after the first third,
narrowly prolonged up to about 3/s of the length. Below
pitted, slightly pubescent, purplish-black fading to brown
pitch; narrow prosternum between the hips, suddenly widened
back into a broadly triangular lobe whose extremities
join the ends of the prothoracic episternum; shins
subprismatic, canaliculate outward, posterior mucronate;
appendicular hooks. PARATHRYLEA. Body oblong, oval, conyex, glabrous,
Labrum weakly transverse, deeply notched in an arc 4

421

its front edge; forehead thickened, subtriangular, limited in
rear by two oblique furrows; wide vertex; subovate eyes,
entire, not very prominent; maxillary palps 4 last article in cene
reversed, the last as long as the previous, a little more
slender, acute cone; antennae not reaching half the
length of the body, thickened at the end: art. 1 slightly arched,
thickened, 2 short, subovate, 3 and 4 subequal, slightly longer
and thinner than 2, the following the length of 4, thickened,
especially 4 from 6°. Transverse prothovaz, transversely convex and somewhat
forward slope; slightly indented anterior edge between the
angles, the right notch; strongly bisinute base of each
summer, 4 broad median lobe, rounded; almost straight sides 4 the base,
regularly arched forward from the middle; ante-angles
laughing a little obliquely rounded, slightly thickened. Mediocre escutcheon, in curvilinear triangle. Elytra oblong, oval, slightly dilated obliquely at the
shoulders, presenting a slight curve on the sides, subtly
at the top, superficially dotted; fairly wide epipleuses, 4
barely narrowed back, continuous. Punctate underside. Prosternum narrow in front, widened into a triangle
posteriorly, resting on the mesosternum, subcarnate in the middle;
open anterior acetabular cavities; rather short mesosternum,
transverse. Mediocre legs, fairly strong hind femora-
ment swollen, channeled below; subeylindrical tibiae, 4 penalty
widened at the top, the hindquarters rather long mucronate;
posterior metatarsals a little longer than the two following tarsals
doors joined together; nail article at least as long as both
precedents gathered; appendicular hooks. This genus is distinguished from its congeners by its subova-
lar, somewhat reminiscent of the genus Zaneamera, the latter easily
recognizable 4 its antennae of nine articles. I believe this genre close to the genre 7/rylea Jac, recognizable
to the longitudinal furrows of the base of the corselet, 4 its shape more
rounded, etc. The genus Parathrylea seems to me to have to enter the group
des Arsipodites Chap., is due to its ungrooved prothorax,
its open acetabular cavities, its non-canaliculated tibiae in
outside and only mucronate posteriors, of its hooks appending
diculés and its entitling epipleures. Paratrylea apicipennis Duviy. not. sp. Shiny, black with the first 4 articles of the antewns, a part
of the mandibles, the prothorax, the hips and the last 5

422

yellowish abdominal segments; faintly black elytves

greenish, superficially and fairly densely pitted. Long. 3 4 3 1/2 mill. ; width 1 s/s mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). Head very shiny black, slightly pubescent on the forehead
which is quite neatly punctuated; vertex smooth or superficially
dotted; mandibles 4 yellowish base, palps pitch brown. Transverse prothorax, twice as wide as long, one-third
shorter on the sides, yellow, densely, but superficially
dotted. Keusson in curvilinear triangle, smooth, black. Elytra
oblong-ovate, moderately conyex, very weakly impressed
sioned inwards from the shoulders, dent iment and. superficially
dotted in a rather irregular fashion; they are black, 4 light
greenish sheen, with yellow tip. Black underparts, slightly
pubescent, with the last three abdominal segments and the
yellow hips; sometimes the shins become brownish as well as
the tarsi. This space is quite reminiscent of the Paralina transcia Mots.,
distinct by its transversely furrowed corselet, etc. Nisotra gemella Er., Noy. Act. Ac. Leop. Carol., XVI, 1834;
add. I, p. 275. A few copies. Clitea picta Baly, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1877, p. 287. A few specimens of this extremely variable species
were captured 4 Konbir (P. Cardon); it is known from India
and Burmah,

Cheetocnema (Exorkina Ws.) Concinna Marsh., Ent. Brit., I
1802, p. 196. — Weise, Naturg. Ins. Deut., VI, 1886, p. 759. A copy brought back from Kurseong (P. Braet) seems to me to be
bring back 4 this species. Mr. Weise of Berlin, has an example
please identical to the one I have in front of me, and coming from
Mongolia: these two specimens are extremely close to the
Ch. concinna Marsh., and will only be on the view of an important series
aunt of individuals, that the species can be fixed. Chetocnema costulata Mots., Schrenck. Reis., I], 1860, p. 234,
pl. 11, f. 22. A specimen captured 4 Konbir (P. Cardon), the species is described
from Daouria and ends up in Mongolia; next Mr. Weise
(Wieg. Arch. Naturg., LILI, 1887, p. 193), this spice would not
that one of the many varieties of Ch. horlensis Foure., from Europe. Chetocnema nagpurensis Duviy., n. sp. Subovalaive, moderately convene, black; lele, prothorax and elytra
tanned; antennae and legs testaceous with posterior femora
Cun black bronze, the anterior and intermediate femurs macu-

423

strips of black poia; tele and prothorax finely arugula, fine-

ment dotted, the latter not narrowed forward, & quoted almost

straight, carrying a whole line of deep points along
the base; elytra deeply punctate-ridged, at intervals

Slightly conveaed, dotted and wrinkled transversely;

mediocre shoulders. Long. 2 mill. — Barway (P. Cardon). Head rugosule and finely dotted, without frontal keel,
showing a small dimple between the eyes; wide, sloping forehead;
antennae of a white testacean. Prothorax about once and
half as wide as long, transversely convex with the
anterior angles slightly lowered, almost straight on the sides,
finely arugula and marked with a very fine, fairly tight dotted line,
uniform; along the side edges and all along the base,
we observe a line of deep and tight points, that of the base
absolutely uninterrupted. Elytra a little wider at the base
than the prothorax with moderately protruding shoulders, deep
dementedly punctate-ridged, the intervals subconvex, densely
dotted and transversely wrinkled: the part surrounding the shield
its is very slightly convex. This species belongs to the Chetocnema proper, 4
because of its wide vertex and its forehead without a hull;
it forms the type of a new group in the Chatocnema a
due to the presence of a line of endidve points along the
base of the corselet, it is at this very interesting point. Only one copy. 00 — Anterior cotyloid cavities open. Nonarthra variabilis Baly, Journal of Ent., 1, p. 456, pl. 21, f. 1. This Vonarthra, of which I was able to see a small series of copies
lives up to its name, because it is particularly variable and
I am almost convinced that WV. ornata Baly, from the
same regions, is only one of its many forms. Here are the different forms that I had the opportunity to observe:

a) NV. variabilis Baly. — Black underparts with white legs,
except the posterior femora which are either entirely or partly
so black; hind tibia ciliate black; head, or hear-
ment black, or black with white or white forehead and epistome
with two black dots on the vertex; white prothorax; elytra
blanes, adorned with black as follows: a basilar band, interrupted
at the shoulder, extends back triangularly along the suture,
then joins another median transverse band, which extends
on each side up to the margin which it does not, however, encroach upon; the
marginal rim always remaining very narrowly white; the second

424

tape also extends along the suture and along the
margin, reaches the top of both sides widening into
apical tongue; the marginal black border and the sutural border encompass
thus a transverse spot of the dark color. Antennas
are lightly smoky, except 4 the base. 4) var: obsolete Duviv. — The underside sometimes fades to brown
dark, the head still has the black vertex, but the spots of the elytra
disintegrate and thus give rise to 4 several sub-varieties:

2) a triangular spot 4 the base, not going beyond the
shoulders, extending over the suture to the limit of the first third;
behind a fine black border along the suture, a black spot
on each side, & middle level, extending narrowly in
back along the margin to the apical angle where it widens
weakly: I always white marginal edge. The extent of
spots varies and leads us 4 the sub-variety;

@) here, the basilar triangular spot disappears; there is no more
a black border 4 the base of the cases and a point on each shoulder,
a narrow transverse band in the middle and behind this
band, suture and margin edged in black. 7) this sub-variety is intermediate between the type and the sub-
variety a; the underside is rather brownish, and the part between the
basal spot and the transverse band is reddish brown. c) var. : biguttatus Duviv. — The elytra are fully
black and adorned on each side near the top, with a small spot
white. d) change. : fuscipennis Duviv. — The elytra are tawny
brownish, discolored underside:

2) uniformly fawn elytra;

6)» fawn each having a whitish spot near the
Mountain peak,

Nonarthra albofasciata Duviv., n. sp. Oval, black below, with prosternum, forelegs
viewres and the white posterior tibiae, the latter ciliates of
black, head tawny or marked with two black dots on vertea;
whitish antennae; white bodice; black ow darkened crest;
black elytra with a white transverse band in the middle and
a white coward, from each cele, in the apical part. Long. 34/s 44 mil. — Kurseong (P. Baert). This space seems different to me from the previous one, it is more
elongated, generally larger than WV. variabilis Baly;
would it still be one of the forms of this last species? Var. a) The subapical white spots are missing. Nonarthra nigriceps Weise, Hor. Soc, Ent. Roos., XXIII,
1889, p. 642. 425

A copy taken from 4 Kurseong (P. Braet), seems to me to be
bring to this space, described from China. Sebethe nigrciornis Baly, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1877, p. 164. A copy collected 4 Kurseong (P. Braet). I did not have
the opportunity to have this specimen compared to the type of Baly, which
found in the British Museum 4 London; crest, chest and
tarsi are testaceous, the bodice has invisible punctuation, the head
is smooth. It is likely that he is a somewhat aberrant individual
of S. nigricornis Baly. Argopistes bis-tripunctata Duviv. not. sp. Subhemispherical, fawn above, paler below, very
shiny, densely but finely pitted, bearing on the disk
of each elytron three black dots. Long. 5 mill. —- Mandar (P. Cardoon.) Entirely tawny more or less reddish above and
very shiny. Head 4 paler front, streamlined between the antennae,
has smooth vertex; mandibles black at tip; maxillary palps
has penultimate article very developed, the last much more
short, in obtuse cone; antennae reaching half the length
of the body, tested; art. 1 strongly developed, as long as the
4 followers together, 3-5 more slender, the followers a little wider
and slightly thickened. Crescent-shaped prothorax, very
strongly constricted from each cdté, 4 strongly sinuate base of
each side of the posterior lobe which is thus distinctly marked;
surface quite conyex on the disc, depressed on the sides,
superficially punctate: a few large dots arranged on a
oblique line, are observed on the sides. Keusson very small, in
curvilinear triangle, smooth. Strongly rounded elytra on the sides,
very convex, sublong behind, densely and very fine-
ment punctuated; immediately outside the shoulder are born
two parallel lines of points which extend, 4 a certain
distance from the margin, to merge into the apical angle, between these
lines of stitches and a broad marginal band of more accentuated stitches
killed, a smooth band is observed; on the disc of each elytron,
three black dots are arranged in a triangle (*-*) both
points forming the base of the triangle at the height of the first third,
the third at the height of the last third approximately; hair removal
dually narrowed to the top, located inside the
elytra. Below lighter than above, also very shiny,
finely pubescent, with the chest and abdomen sometimes rebru-
nis; moderately wide prosternum, notched on each side,
right 4 the base; very short and broad mesosternum; femurs posted-
strongly swollen laughing,

 

426

This species will be recognized by the superficial punctuation of the
surface and the three black dots in a triangle, which adorn each
elytron. Phyllotreta chotanica Duviv., n. sp. Black below; on top of a greenish bronze or blendtre, den-
seedy and very finely punctuated; black antennae; smooth forehead. Long. 2 mill. ; width 3/4 mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). Narrow, elongated and depressed on the disc, above a tan
metallic with greenish or bluish reflections; black below
with brownish knees and tarsi, forehead punctuated, furnished
in front of a short silver pubescence, distinctly keeled
between the antenniferous tubercles; smooth vertex. Black antennae;
art. 3 a little longer than 2.4 subequal 4 3.5 one and a half times
as long as the preceding, the following slightly thickened. Pro-
thorax 1 4/2 times as wide as long, narrowed in front, very weak-
slightly rounded on the sides, covered with very fine and very tight stitches
on a rugosule background. Crest looking smooth. Elytra 4 penalty
wider than the prothorax 4 the base, very slightly rounded
on the sides, singly rounded at the top, punctuated a little more
finely than the prothorax, 4 points a little further apart. This species is very similar to P. nigripes Marsh., from Europe,
from which it is distinguished by the punctuated forehead; in P. chotanica
as in P. nigripes Fabr., the piliferous pores are found in
a small sinuosity of the base, very close to the posterior angles
of the bodice. Hespera sericea Weise, Hor. Soc. Ent. Ross., XXIII, 1889,
p. 639. A number of copies taken 4 Kurseong (P. Braet) ne
nothing different from captured types 4 Kan-ssu. Aphthona nigrilabris Duviv., n. sp. Subovate, testaceous, shiny; labrum, crest, chest and femurs
hind legs pitch black; antennae testaceous, vembrunia
at the top ; entirely smooth. Long. 2 9/5 mill. — Konbir (P. Cardou). Shiny, testaceous, sometimes slightly ferruginous on the head and
the bodice. Smooth head; keeled forehead between the antennae; wrasse
large, black; flava palpi; antennae reaching half of the
body length, flaves with last 5 or 6 segments replaced
bru art. 3 a little longer than 2 and subequal to 4, both
first sections thickened t nearly twice as wide as
long, smooth, very shiny, testaceous or flaved, with cut front edge
straight, with the anterior angles lowered and obliquely truncated,
Straight sides, weakly rounded base, triangular Eeusson, black. 427

Elytra oval, wn slightly wider than the corselet at the base,
slightly dilated behind, smooth, testaceous; by transparency
we can see numerous fairly regular series of points sunk
ees arranged in groups of 4, separated by long lines
smooth dinals. Underside testaceous with chest and femurs
hind legs of a black or a pitch bran. Luperomorpha vittata Duviv. not. sp. Elongated, light fawn pun with meso- and metasternum, antennae
nes (except lewr base) and hind femurs a pot black;
brown legs; fawn head and bodice; brownish crest; elytra
blackish brown, each adorned with a wide longitu-
nal yellowish, ending before the apex; finely elytra
dotted. Long. 3 1/2 mill. — Barway (P. Cardon). Head appearing smooth, but very finely tufted under a very
high magnification; scalloped wrasse, brown, furnished with a few hairs
like the forehead; blackish palps; antennae as long as
half body, sturdy, pitch black with the first three
reddish-brown sections; art. 2 and 3 very short, subequal, the
following as long as 1, distinctly thickened and hairy
Fawn prothorax, 4 barely wider than long, slightly retracted
forwards and backwards, with the straight anterior border, the sides
weakly rounded, the base slightly sinuate above the crest,
the posterior corners rounded, the anterior slightly thickened,
provided with a setiger pore; very finely dotted surface. Keusson triangular, brown. Elytra of a pitch strand, 4 deep
finely alutaceous, superficially dotted, each adorned with a
broad yellow longitudinal band; this band is rounded in front,
right up against the base (which remains dark in color), sinuate
externally in the middle, then widened slightly to in-
break off a little before the summit; apical part of the elytra
furnished with a few short and rare hairs, very deciduous. Below
of a brownish tawny, with the meso- and the metasternum of a black of
pitch, rather pubescent, especially on sides of breast and
legs, these brown, more or less clear with the femurs
black posteriors. This species does belong to the genus Luperomorpha, created by
Weise (Wiegem. Archive. Naturg., LIII, 1887, p. 202) and who
distinguished from the genus Aphthona by its thickened antennae 4 departing
of the 4th article, 4th art. 2-3 very short, subequal, the elytra weak-
ment pubescent in the apical part, the shape of the tibiae post’—
laughing, summer. Two species have been described so far:
L. trivialis Ws. from Siberia and L. nobilis Ws. from Mongolia. 428

L. vittata is subject to 4 variation in coloration; sometimes the
yellow coloration of the longitudinal bands extends over the base of
Patch 4 on the shoulder; the underside is sometimes lighter. Luperomorpha nigripennis Duviv. not. sp. Shiny black; forehead, base of the antennae, anterior part of the
head, sternum, extremity of the abdomen, forelegs and
intermediaries (except tarsi), tibia posterior testacds;
corselet of a reddish testaceous. Long. 3 4/2 mill. — Mandar (P. Cardon). Head superficially arugula; black antennae with the three
first segments pitch brown or tawny; brown palps
of pitch. Subtransverse prothorax, covered with a dotted 4 penalty
noticeable, sometimes smooth. Smooth cover. Finely marginal helytra
born on the sides, 4 more or less regular punctuation, fine but
well marked, very finely arugula intervals. black underside,
sternum and extremity of abdomen testaceous; chest and femurs
fairly densely pubescent. This species seems close to Z to me. ¢rivalis Ws., the black head 4
fawn anterior part and the almost smooth reddish corselet, the
first distinguish. Luperomorpha albofasciata Duviv., n. sp. Subelongated, shiny; black below with the prosternum and the
forelegs testacds; antennae and prothorax jawnes, tele
reddish; crest and elytra black, these finely arugula,
adorned just below the middle with a white transverse band=
che not reaching the margin. Long. 3 1/2 mill, — Kurseong (P. Braet). Slightly more oval in shape than the two previous species. Smooth head; almost smooth bodice, very weakly bi-exposed
in the middle of the disc, has superficial punctation excessively
thin; antennae entirely yellow like the prothorax. Cusson
black, very finely arugula. Helytra long impressed
inside the shoulders, the impression extending a little obliquely
only on the disc, rugosules, clearly dotted, black;
a white transverse band, stopping just against the margin,
on each side, a little irregular on its edges, adorns the cases. The intermediate legs are partly stained with testaceous,
and slightly reddish knees. This species will be easily recognized by the coloring of the elytra. - A copy. 429

“Prothorax provided with a transverse furrow & the base. 0 — Anterior acetabular cavities closed. Hyphasis signed Duviv., n. sp. Oval, light tawny with the antennae (except the base), the
labrum, underside (except prosternum), end of femurs
posteriors, the posterior two-thirds of the suture, a stain
oblong, median in the second half of each elytron, dun
pitch black; corselet superficially, elytra very finely
punctuated. Long. 4 1/2 mill., width. 2 mill. — Konbir (P. Cardon). Tawny head, bearing on each side of the vertex, very close to the
eyes, a few deep dimples, and separated from the forehead by a
transverse furrow, epistome thickened, wide, slightly narrowed in
back; transverse labrum, black; testaceous maxillary palps, 4
last article in acute supper; antennae protruding a little from the edge
posterior of the prothorax, black with the first four segments
fawns; art. 3 fairly long, double 2, 5-11 slightly thickened. Prothorax 21/2 times as wide as long, clearly narrowed in front,
transversely convex, broadly bordered on the sides, the
flat rim marked with two fairly wide rounded impressions
which follow one another; subconvex disc, superficially dotted,
a little uneven; it is fawn with a slightly lighter outline. Heusson smooth, fawn, in curvilinear triangle. Suboval elytra,
slightly convex, fairly clearly edged, very strongly impressed
sioned inside the shoulders, print extending over the
first third of the elytra, showing large sunken spots
tight; finely punctuated surface and offering by transparency a
large dot network; the elytra are fawn with two-thirds
posterior to the suture, a middling oblong spot in the
second half of each, pitch black; epilations
fawn, prolonged. Below (except the prosternum) of a brown of
pitch darker on metasternum; fawn legs, with femurs
hind legs darker and having a blackish brown tip;
nail article strongly swollen yesicular; flat prosternum. A single copy, which I cannot bring back any of the
known species. 00 — Open anterior acetabular cavities. Xuthea orientalis Baly, Ann. Nat. Hist., 3* ser. XVI, 1865,
p. 249,

A few copies taken 4 Kurseong (P. Cardon and P. Braet);
Vespece is still found in Assam. Haltica cyanea Web., Obs. entom., I, 1801, p. 57. 430

Some specimens taken in the various localities mentioned
in this memory. Lactica? silacea Wig., Mag., VI, p. 121. I relate to this species, with doubt, the two specimens
captured 4 Mandar (P. Cardon) having been able to obtain the description
tion of Illiger. [they measure 4 1/3 mill., are of a yellowish flave
with black tibiae and tarsi; the antennae are fawn 4 base
testaceous; the prothorax appears smooth and the elytra are densely
and finely dotted. Galerucina. Oides pectoralis Clk., Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 3rd ser., XV,
1865, p. 144. Balsor: one copy; the species also occurs in
some islands of Malaysia,

Morphosphera maculicollis Baly, Journ. of Entom., I, p. 1861,
p. 298. A specimen collected at Konbir (P. Cardon),

Aulacophora Downesi Baly, Journ. Linen. Soc., Zool., XX, p. 20. A single Q taken 4 Konbir (P. Cardon). Aulacophora palliata Schall. , Abhandl. Hal. Ges. ,1, 1783, p.279. A Q individual captured 4 Konbir (P. Cardon). Aulacophora Lewisi Baly, Journ. Lin, Soc., Zool., XX, p. 24
and P. 179. A few copies from Mandar (P. Cardon), me
seem to relate well to this species. Aulacophora foveicollis Kiister, Kit. Eur., XXVIII, p. 100, —
Baly, Journ. Linen. Soc. Zool., XX, p. 16. Konbir and Kurseong. — The habitat of this species is excessive-
lying extended; it is still taken in the south of Europe and the
North Africa. Aulacophora similis Oliv., Ent., VI, p. 624, pl. 2 F. 23. —
Femoralis Words., Study. entom., 1857, p. 37. — flavipes Jac.
Notes Leid. Mus., V, p. 202. Two Q taken 4 Konbir (P. Cardon) belonging 4 to the var. :
Jlavipes Jac... This species is also very widespread; we have it
found not only in India, but also in Japan, China,
in Cochinchina, Manchuria and almost all the islands of
Ja Malaysia. Toplasoma unicolor Wig., Wied. Archiy., I, 2, 1800, p. 135. A few copies collected 4 Konbir. Paridea approximata Duviv. not. sp. Shiny, oblong, weakly dilated in back, Wun testaceous white

 

 

 

431

catrum with the vertex, the antennae (except the base), the meso- and

metasternum, the base of the femurs and tibiae, the atremity of

this, the tarsi, the crest, two large spots on each
elytron and part of epipleure, black; elytra with some
severities interrupted by sunken stitches. Long. 4 1/s 45 mils. — Konbir (P. Cardon) 1 ex. —Kurseong
(P. Braet) 1 ex. Smooth head; blackish, transverse wrasse; maxillary palps 4
penultimate article swollen, the last a little shorter, in cene
acute; triangular epistome, prolonged in carina behind; callus
antennae slightly projecting, subquadrangular, contiguous; a furrow
between the eyes; vertex black; subovate, fairly prominent eyes;
antennae half the length of the body, filiform: art. very short, 3 twice as long, black with the basi-
whitish larvae spotted with black on their inner face. Protho-
rax transverse, at base 4 barely one and a half times as wide as
long; slightly sinuate sides up to 2/5 of the base, then
dilated rounded, finally narrowed towards the anterior angles, which are
weakly thickened; straight posterior angles; marked surface
of a transverse impression, interrupted in the middle,
closer to the base than to the anterior edge, presenting on each
side a double sinus and extending on the margin, upwards;
smooth surface. Heusson triangular, black, smooth, very shiny,
convex. Oblong klytra, slightly dilated behind, impressive
sioned inside the shoulders, showing, by transparency, a
mediocre punctuation rather dense and presenting between the le
fifth of the length and the 3°, some not very regular series
large sunken points; the elytra are whitish and ornate
each of two large shiny black spots: one basilar,
occupying the first quarter, holding neither to the suture of which it is
very close together, neither 4 the margin, nor 4 the epiplein under the shoulder, the
second, subovate, covers the 3° quarter, rests on the margin,
covers the epiplerium but does not reach the suture in front of which
it is rounded. Fairly wide, prolonged epipleures. Pros-
ternum invisible between the hips, acetabular cavities open. Below slightly pubescent, with meso- and metasternum
@shiny black; back of the femurs and tibias, extremity of these
last and tarsi blackish. I only know two Q's from this space, they both have
the last rounded abdominal segment; it is likely that the d
have this trilobed segment, perhaps also they have tubercles on
the elytra. This species is close to P. thoracica Baly, it is of
smaller, a little less elongated, of whitish shade; Colo-

2

 

 

 

432

ration of the underside, the head, the corselet, the antennae and the

legs is different; traces of series of dots on the elytra

are more accentuated than in P. thoracica Baly; the anterior stain
of the elytra is shorter and the posterior more regular.
ment rounded. Pavidea thoracica Baly, Journ. Linen. Soc., London, vol. XX,
1888, p. 27. Two copies of this species were captured Yun 4 Kur-
seong (P. Braet), the other 4 Konbir (P. Cardon); she is easily
recognizable 4 its fawn color with the head, the prothorax and the
antennae of a more reddish shade. Below the metasternum,
the metathoracic parapleuras and on each side, the external part
of the mesosternum, an oval transverse spot on each side
abdominal segments, are black; the epilations are narrowed
4 from the first third, then narrowly prolonged. Here are the sexual characteristics of this species which have, 4 ma
knowledge, not yet given:

G. — On each elytron, a short distance from the apical angle and
from the suture there is a small, oblong, smooth tubercle; the last
abdominal segment is trilobed, the middle lobe subrectangular,
subtruncated 4 its free edge, plane; the antennas are a little more
robust than the Q.

Q.- Elytra without tubercles; the last abdominal segment
is subrounded, not lobed; the antennas are a little weaker
than at the @. Paridea livida Duviv., n. sp. Oblong, moderately conveae, testaceous, with metasternum and
Abdomen (except last segment) black; back of the tibiae ante-
riewrs, ​​tibiae and intermediate and posterior metatarsals equally-
are black; pitch brown wrasse; end of the antennae
vembrunia; palps, head and corselet of a testaceous vougedtre ow
brownish; elytra of a livid testace. CG. —Avaiut last abdominal segment extended for quite a long time
arriving in a subtriangular lobe resting on the last
segment; last trilobed segment, the transverse median lobe
quite short, the transversely impresses. Q. — Two last abdominal segments normal; remains of
streaks on the elyres a little more pronounced than in 3. Long. 61/2 mil., width. 2 2/s mill. — A Gt, Kurseong (P. Braet). — A Q, Phedong (P. Desgodins. — Coll. Oberthiir). Forehead clearly streamlined between the antennae, transversely furrowed
dirty between the eyes; epistome large, convex, subtriangu-
laire, separated from the forehead by oblique furrows; antennal calluses

 

 

433

sub-transverse, slightly projecting, separated behind by a furrow;
maxillary palps 4 penultimate segment swollen, last short,
conical; antennae reaching two-thirds the length of the
body, filiform: art. 1 slightly curved, gradually thickened,
long enough, 2 short, half of the first, 3 as long as 1,
barely more slender than 2, subequal to the following, top of the
antennae darkened; smooth vertex. Prothorax slightly wider than
long, almost straight base, 4 straight posterior angles; the sides
are straight, from the base to the posterior two-fifths,
then dilated rounded to narrow again towards the edge
anterior, so that the greatest width of the corselet
sits a little having the middle; the prothorax is quite wide-
edged on the sides and provided, a little below the middle,
of a fairly deep transverse impression, interrupted at the
environment; almost smooth surface, offering only a few points towards
the anterior angles. Triangular escutcheon, obtuse at the top,
smooth. Elytra oblong, barely edged, almost twice as
broad 4 the base than the prothorax, shoulders very slightly
advanced, limited on the inside by a weak longitudinal impression
dinal; they are moderately conyex, impressed longitudinally
nally along the margin, very finely and very superficially-
punctuated and show, in addition, a few isolated series,
more or less regular, fairly large sunken points, visible
only between the first fifth until a little beyond the
middle. Poor weeping, narrowed in the first third, then
narrowly prolonged, disappearing a little before the top. Mediocre legs, the six short mucronate tibiae, the fangs
appendiculates. Invisible prosternum between the hips, 4 cavities
open anterior cotyloides. Underside finely dotted, slightly
barely pubescent. Var: The abdomen seems to me to have a tendency to pass
fawn, maybe even black. MANDARELLA. Poor head, clear of the prothorax, transversely furrowed-
lies between the eyes; slightly convex forehead, subcarnate between the
antennae; epistome triangular, somewhat thickened; maxillary palpi
small 4 penultimate subtransverse article, the last in
acute cone; filiform antennae, distinctly pubescent from the
8° article, of the length of the body: art. 1 bulging at the top,
arched, 2 obconical, short, 3 almost twice as long as 2,
4 as long as the previous two combined, the following ones subequal
44, the last 4 barely longer than the previous one, acuminated at the
Mountain peak. ANNALS OF THE SOC. ENTOM. OF BELGIUM, Ts XXXVI 83

434

Transverse prothorax, slightly narrowed posteriorly, 4 edge
straight front, slightly rounded base; increased anterior angles
slender, the hindquarters forming a small pointed projection; surface
obsoletely bifoveal. Crest in curvilinear triangle. Ellytra much wider at the base than the prothorax, with the
slightly forward shoulders, subparallel on sides, 4 barely
dilated at the back, very slightly edged on the sides, a little
acuminate towards the apex where they are singly rounded; surface
irregularly punctate, rather convex behind; epilations
moderately broad below the shoulder, gradually tapering
to apex, subconcave, punctate. Invisible prosternum between the hips, anterior acetabular cavities
open doors. Legs mediocre, tibiae sub-enlarged 4 extremity
and mucronate; posterior tarsi 4 first article a little more
longer than the next two together; sharply appended hooks
cules and divaricates; slightly more developed posterior femora
than the others. This genus belongs to the group of Agelusticites Chap. has
because of its open acetabular cavities, its pro-
lengthened, its mucronate tibiae, its appendicular hooks. It differs
of the genus Jfalacosoma Chyt., which also has all mucro-
born, by his invisible prosternum between the hips, his long
gues antennae, its elytra notably wider than the prothorax
at the base, summer. Mandarella nagpurensis Duviy. not. sp. Oblong, fairly shiny, convex; of a beautiful dark blue with me=
tallic, sometimes violucous on legs and elytves; abdomen,
tibiae and tarsi pitch brown tinged with blue or violet;
new antennae; tele sometimes greenish; prothorax with punctuation
large and deep like that of the elytra. Long. 5 1/2 26 mill. ; wide, 2 1/2 mils. — Kurseong (P. Braet). — Mandar (P. Cardon). Subtriangular head; wrasse large, pitch brown; Vertex
bearing a few sunken points arranged transversely;
maxillary palpi moderate, pitch brown; black antennae,
with the first article 4 metallic reflections. Prothorax 1 2/5 times
as wide as long, 4 weakly rounded base, 4 sides oblique-
ment directed outward, slightly dilated rounded towards 2/5
anterior, then narrowed towards the anterior edge which is straight, and
whose angles are obliquely cut, thickened and present
a small tooth outside; a large setiger point on the protrusion,
wn another in the posterior angles, which are acute and make
protrusion; distinctly marked marginal border; very little surface

 

 

 

 

435
convex, marked on each side with an obsolete rounded impression
lete, covered, except on the anterior part of the large disk
scattered deep points. Convex triangular escutcheon, smooth, black. Oblong elytra, twice as wide at the base as the corselet,
clearly impressed on the inside of the shoulders which are a little
advanced, very moderately broadened behind; they are weak
impressed along the margin and very narrowly rimmed;
convex surface, covered with fairly wide and deep sunken points
bottoms, quite close together and laid out in a more or less regular
liere, these points a little smaller and more spread out towards the angle
apical: smooth intervals, some light wrinkles on the sides. Moderately broad epipleures, bearing a series of large dots
similar to those of the elytra. Anterior hips 4 hardly separated
dated by the prosternum, which is very narrow, not lobed at the base:
open anterior acetabular cavities; metathora-parapleures
cical, strongly narrowed behind, subconcave; paws enough
long with stout femora; subcylindrical tibiae, 4 penalty
dilated at the top, all armed with a small spine; abdomen,
tibiae and tarsi of a pitch brown tinged with blue or metallic violet-
liquid; light brown hips. Agetocera heterocera Redt., Reis. Novar., Zool., 1, Col., 1868,
p. 206. A copy taken from Tetera. Agelocera Hopei Baly, Trans. Ent. Soc., London, 2¢ ser., 1865,
p. 438. A number of copies were captured 4 Kurseong. Agetocera lobicornis Baly, Trans. Ent, Soc. London, 2 ser.,
1865, p. 437. Kurseong: only one female. Cneorane Braeti Duviy., b. sp. Oblong, slightly dilated at the end; antennae (except the three
basilar keys) ours; patles (except the tarsi which are blackish),
lle, prothorax, pro- and mesosternum of a yellowish testaceous; eous-
pitch black dun sound; dark blue metasternum and abdomen
purplish; fairly densely dotted elytra, purplish-purple
has opal reflections. S — Art. Antennae 8-10 distinctly thickened, subcylindrical,
1 1/2 times as wide as the previous ones. Q — Filiform antennae. Long. 6 4 7 mill. ; width 3 1/2 & 4 4/s mill. —Kurseong

(P. Braet) a Gt — Sikkim (my coll.) a Q. 3 — Oblong, regularly but weakly dilated behind,
poorly connected. Extremity of the mandibles and anterior edge

436

laughing pitch brown wrasse; long and robust palps, a
penultimate article clearly swollen, 4 last article almost
half shorter and narrower, in acute cene; antennal calluses
nearly flat, separated by a longitudinal furrow; vertex lily
antennae reaching about 3/s of the length of the body,
black with the first 3 segments of a yellowish testaceous and marked
of black on the inside: art. 1 bulging in its second half,
weakly arched, 2 subovate, short, 3 twice as long
than 2, as long as the previous two combined, 5-7 decreasing
imperceptibly in length, 8-10 thickened, 1 1/2 times as wide
than the previous ones, cylindrical, the last also cylindrical,
as long and no thicker than 4, acuminate at apex. Prothorax
about 1 1/2 times as wide as long, sparsely and very
regularly rounded on the sides with the base presenting a
very slight curve and a very weak sinus in front of Vécusson; angles
hind legs straight, front legs a little thickened; surface moderate-
ment convex, without impression. Triangular crest, rounded
at the top, smooth, with a pitch strand. Helytra slightly
dilated behind, impressed on the inside of the shoulders and very
slightly behind the scutellar region, a little wider
than the prothorax at the base, densely enough and deep enough
punctuated with the intervals marked with a fine dotted line; they are
Wa beautiful purplish violet with opal reflections; wide and
continuous, subconvex, dark blue. Dark blue underside
slightly purplish with yellowish pro- and mesosternum,
finely punctate and slightly pubescent. yellow legs with
tarsi only blackish-brown. This species seems to me quite distinct from its congeners; the
opal reflections presented by the elytra, the penctuation of
these attached @ the coloring of the underside and the legs, as well as a
the shape of the antennae at the ¢ will make it easily recognizable. She stands next to @. fulvicollis Baly, due to the shape
widened in rear and of the shape of the antennae in &. She
distinguished from C. /ulvicollis Baly by its smaller size, its shape
a fart less dilated behind, its coloring and the shape of the
art. 8-10 antennae in G; of C. elegans Baly by the
size also a little smaller, the antennae shorter, the
broader epipleuses, coloration of underparts and legs; of
@. alutacea All., by its form more broadened behind, the color
tion of the legs, the antennae relatively longer; of
C. rugulipennis Baly by the more dilated form, the coloration, the
noticeably more transverse corselet. +

Cneorane alutacea All., Ann. Soc. Ent, Belgium, XXXIV, 1889,
PS LXX. 3

 

 

487

Two copies captured 4 Kurseong (P. Braet) seem to me
refer to the author's description. Mimastra cyanura Hope, Gray, Zool. Mise., 1831, p. 29. —
Tetara: one copy. Mimastra areuata Baly, Ann. Mag. Nat. History, 1865, p. 253. A few specimens of this species have been captured 4 Kurseong
(P. Braet). Malaxia viridis Jac., Notes Leyd. Mus., VI, 1884, p. 63. A few individuals reported from Konbir and Tetara. Luperodes Braeti Duviv. not. sp. Oblong, moderately convex, quite shiny; metasternum and abdo-
black men; front of the head, hips, legs, antennae and crest
of a yellowish testaceous; vertex, corselet and vougedtres dlytres, these
last subtruncated at top; very fine corselet, elytra
Finely and densely dotted. Long. 6 1/2 mill. ; width 3 mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). Smooth head, showing under very high magnification some
very fine points, furrowed transversely between the eyes which
are long oval; antennal callus slightly protruding, continuous
guy; epistome 4 barely convex, weakly sinuate 4 its edge
anterior, transverse labrum, slightly sinuate anteriorly; extruded=
moth of mandibles black; antennae almost as long as the
body, filiform: art. 2 and 3 very short, equal, 4 4 hardly more
long as 1, the following subequal, the last accuminate 4 the extreme
moth. Prothorax twice as wide as long, 4 anterior edge
weakly indented, the posterior slightly rounded. CDTs
almost straight, the anterior angles thickened, the posterior
obtuse; very finely punctuated surface on the cdtés, some
points only on the disk. Neusson triangular, smooth, shiny
slow. Vlytra slightly wider at the base than the prothorax,
oblong, obliquely truncated at apex with external angles
and internal rounded, densely and finely punctate; epilations
fairly broad 4 at base, concave, subangularly dilated 4
middle level of metathoracic parapleuries, from 1 to 4 pain
narrowed, extended to the top. Below slightly pubescent with metasternum and ab-
shiny black domen, the hips, legs, pro- and
mesosternum of a yellowish testaceous; longer posterior metatarsus
than half of the corresponding tibia. & Last abdominal segment as long as half the ab-
domen, presenting a broad and deep impression occupying the
median third and limited on each side by a fairly strong hull,

© Last normal abdominal segment. 138

Neighbor of Z. aigrocinetus Words. but seeming distinct to me
by the more transverse, unimpressed prothorax, the staining
different from the underside and the legs and the less rough punctuation
elytra. KOonnIRELLA. Oblong body. Head transversely furrowed between the eyes; callus anten-
contiguous, suddenly raised; streamlined front between the
antennae, its anterior part very convex; transverse labrum,
subemarginated forward; rather developed maxillary palps: art. 2
elongated, swollen at apex, 3 as wide as long, obconical, 4
as long as 3, in acute cone; antennae protruding one-third
about the length of the body, filiform, fairly robust: art. 3
twice as long as 2, 4 4 barely longer than 2-3 put together,
the following gradually decreasing in length, the last
acuminate. Prothorax about a third longer than wide, distinctly
bordered on the sides, transversely furrowed on the postero-third
laughing, the furrow interrupted in the middle; broadly rounded escutcheon
at the top. Oblong elytra, notably wider than the corselet, im-
snapped inside the shoulders and transversely at the back
of Vécusson, narrowly bordered on the sides, punctuated;
Epipleria moderately broad, extending to the apical angle. Invisible prosternum between the hips; acetabular cavities
anterior open. Quite robust blades; poorly developed femurs, all depressed in
below; subeylindrical tibiae, slightly dilated at the top,
mucronate; first segment of the posterior tarsi as long as
the next two together; appendiculate nails. This genus is remarkable for the length of its antennae appended
4 the length of the prothorax. Konbirella Cardoni Duviv., n. sp. Brilliant, entirely dark blue with purplish elytra,
the labrum, the palps and the antennae black, and the Vécusson bronze;
fairly densely punctate elytra. Long. 5 1/2 4 6 mill. ; width 2 1/2 mill. ~Konbir-Nowatoli. Head smooth, shiny, slightly impressed behind the
frontal furrow; epistome and wrasse bronze-black; entire palps-
are black. Almost smooth prothorax, presenting a very dotted
end towards the anterior angles, which are slightly thickened, projecting
Rims, and a little headed apart; right front edge and base

 

 

139
posterior angles cut obliquely; side edges almost
straight up to the height of the transverse impression, then slightly
ment dilated rounded; distinctly convex surface on each side
of the furrow. Eeusson bronzed, smooth, very shiny. Elytra of a blew
purplish, rather densely punctate, the punctuation partly obliterated
created close to the margin and towards the top. Underside covered
scanty russet-grey pubescence, more mar-
on the sides of the metathorax and especially on the tibiae and
tarsi. I am happy to dedicate this interesting Galérucide to Rey. P. Cardon, 4 to whom we owe quite a number of discoveries
interesting for entomological science. Peudadimonia variolosa Hope, Gray., Zool. Misc., 1831, p. 30,
— Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891; C.-R., p. XVI. A number of individuals were caught 4 Kurseong (P. Car-
don and P. Braet). Haplosonyx rufipennis Duviv., n. sp. Oblong, black with faves abdomen and midpoint of melasternum;
elytra red, finely pitted, marks besides large
widely spaced points, laid out quite regularly in ten sections. Long. 10 1/2 mill. ; width 5 1/2 mill. — Pedong (East Indies)

tales) R. P. Desgodins. — Coll. R. Oberthiir. Oblong, subparallel. Head black, sparsely dotted, with
on the top of a wide dimple; transverse epistome, short;
notched labrum 4 its anterior edge; maxillary palps black, 4
penultimate article swollen, the last in obtuse and marked cene
at the top, a small dimple; antennae black, reaching the
half the length of the body: art. 3 twice as wide as 2,
4 as long as 2-3 joined together, subsequent ones shorter and sub-equal
between them. Black prothorax, just over twice as wide
that long in the middle, clearly bordered on the sides, these
sinuate at the basilar third, then rounded dilated, finally narrowed in
before; the four slightly projecting angles, bearing a large
piliferous point; strongly impressed surface on each side,
superficially dotted and marked with fairly large scattered dots
near the base and in the side impressions; large crest,
triangular, 4 subrounded apex, smooth, black, fairly shiny. Elytra very shiny, subparallel, very convex, furrowed
inside the shoulders, marked with a transverse impression
arched, behind the escutcheon, 4 slightly widened behind, regular
lightly rounded at the top, broadly edged on the sides,
they are reddish brown with purple reflections, finely dotted
and further marked with very large irregularly spaced dots

440

and arranged in ten regular series: these series taper towards the

posterior third, except the 1 and 2¢ as well as the last; epilations

large, red. Black underparts and legs; mid metasternum
and abdomen fawn. I have seen only one specimen of this easily recognizable species.
sable has its coloring system and i the large punctuation of the
elytra. Haplosonyx chalybeus Hope, Gray. zool. Misc., 1831, p. 28. — elongatus Baly, Trans. Ent. Soc., London, 3¢ ser., 1, 1863,
p-G24. Many specimens of this species were taken at Kur-
seong, where it is very abundant. Haplosonyx scutellatus Baly, Cist. Entom., 1, p. 452. I believe I can relate to this species a few specimens
from Kurseong, but I cannot confirm my determination.
nation only after I have been able to have a copy compared to the
Baly type, now in the collections of the British Museum
in London. Merista Cardoni Daviv., b. sp. Oblong, broadened behind, convex, shiny, metallic green
blackish; elytra red, densely and not regularly punctured
killed, dashed intervals; antennae (except base) and palps
noi's; multi-impressed prothorax. Long. 18 4 15 mill. ; width ep. 6 1/2 to 7 1/2 mill. —Kurseong
(P. Braet). — Konbir (P. Cardon). — Darjeeling (A. Desgodins). Coll. R. Oberthiir. Head metallic green, smooth, with blackish labrum and
mandibles pitch brown; black maxillary palps, 4 reflections
greenish with the tip of the last article light brown;
subearate front between antennae; subovate eyes; antennae
reaching two-thirds of the length of the body, black with the
first three metal articles: art. 2 very short, 3 double
longest, 4 equal to the previous two combined, the following decreasing
some pen, 4-11 furnished with a very short silvery pubescence and
quite tight. Prothorax | 9/5 times as wide as long, cut straight
at the anterior edge, with the anterior angles acute and long
directed forward, one pen narrower in front than behind, 4 base
slightly rounded; surface bearing a thin, loose dotted line and
marked with various impressions: a transverse, wavy, pres
from the front edge, another foveiform above the crest,
one on each side, at the height of the middle and a last impression
oblique, prolonged towards the margin and arranged in front of each
posterior angle; it is entirely a dark metallic green &
golden reflections. Neusson triangular, broadly rounded at the top,

441

golden green, convex. Elytra oblong, dilated behind, not
wearing only a 4 hardly noticeable impression in the back of the region
skullcap, quite distinctly impressed on each side in
under the shoulder, well convex, showing punctuation
not very regular: these are more or less geminated series of
dots so slightly arranged that the punctuation seems
absolutely confused, the intervals have a fine dotted line; the
elytra are a beautiful red. Slightly large epipleures, 4 barely
dilated under the shoulder, narrowly prolonged. Underside of a green
blackish metallic, shiny, barely 4 pitted; legs 4 pain
pubescent; extreme part of the abdomen reddish; hooks
bifid. This space can be, at first glance, confused with the
Leptarthva Dohrni Baly, abdominalis Baly, and intermedia Sac.,
but it is distinguished from it first of all by its bifid hooks, which
classify it in the real Merista, the Leptarthra having the hooks
appendiculates. The Leptarthra Dohrni Baly (rufipennis Har. ), is 4 approximately
same size, the head and the corselet are generally more bluish,
the elytra are much more clearly impressed behind
of the scutellar region, the punctuation of these is much
finer, more regular, subgeminate, with smooth intervals;
the anterior angles of the prothorax are less acute, the impressions
divisions of this one are about the same as in I. Cardoni,
however, it lacks the long oblique print, in front
each posterior angle; the crest is more elongated. — From India. The Leplarthra abdominalis Baly is smaller than my new
old space, the impressions of the prothorax are less pronounced,
the more rounded front angles, the impression behind
the escutcheon also weak; the elytra are deeply, irre-
thinly and densely punctate, the epiplerium is notably
wider and the abdomen is red; the color of the head,
bodice, chest and legs is rather bluish and even
has purplish reflections. — From "India. The Leplathra intermedia Jac., which I do not know in
nature, has the elytra finely and intricately punctuated, presenting
a deep transverse impression under the scutellar region;
moreover the abdomen is pale tawny. - From China. Merista sex-maculata Redtb., Hiigel Kashm., IV, 1848, p. 555,
pl. 27, f. 5. This species is less common than the following; she was
captured so far exclusively 4 Kurseong. In your fresh state,
the parts which in the dry state are of a yellowish flave, are of a beautiful
orange-red which disappears as soon as the insect becomes dry. 442

Merista trifasciata Hope, Gray. zool. Mise., 1881, p. 28 —
variabilis Har., Stett. ent. Zeit., 1880, XLI, p. 142. Many specimens of this species were taken 4 Kur-
seong (P. Braet), in some of them we only see
some remnants of the elytral spots. Merista fallax Har., Stett. ent. Zeit., XLI, 1880, p. 143. This species is also very common 4 Kurseong and all
as common as the preceding; I saw a copy of
Konbir; space seems less variable to me than Jf. trifasciata
Hope and I notice that on the elytra are the little spots
of the anterior transverse series which have the greatest tendency
to meet in a more or less wavy line. This Merista
is described from Darjeeling. Mevista flaviventris Har., Stett. ent. Zeit., XLI, 1880, p. 143. Of this species, also described from Darjeeling, I have only seen
one copy took 4 Konbir (P. Cardon), as well as another
from Pedong (A. Desgodins) and part of the
collection of M. R. Oberthiir. Leptarthra abdominalis Baty, Journ. of Ent. I, 1861, p. 203. A number of specimens of this species have been captured
res, some & Konbir (P. Cardon), others 4 Kurseong (P. Braet);
They match the author's description perfectly. It is by mistake that in my first note on the Chotah-
Nagpore, I quoted the Z. Dokrni Baly which has not yet been
captured by the Belgian Missionaries, I had taken for L. Dohrni
the Mevista Cardoni described above; Z. Dohrni is done &
delete from my first note. (Has a. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R, p. xivn). Parastetha nigricornis Baly, Cist. entom., II, p. 461. I think I can bring back two specimens of this species.
collected 4 Kurseong (P. Braet); I also have the species
from Sikkim. Var. nigricornis Duviv., n. var. I bring back to P. nigricornis Baly, a specimen that I have
stde of Sikkim, and who has the corselet of a beautiful black; it does not differ in
no other way of the two copies taken 4 Kurseong. Aylaspes? assamensis Baly, Cist. entom., I, p. 460. It is only with doubt that I determine as J/. assamensis
Baly, the few specimens collected 4 Kurseong (P. Braet and
P. Cardon}, as well as two other individuals that I have from
Sikkim. Hylaspes Dohrni Duviy., Stett. ent. Zeit., XLVI, 1885, p. 246. A broken copy, from Kurseong. A438

HyYLAspoibEs. Transverse labrum, arcuate and ciliate 4 its anterior edge;
epistome thickened, triangular, straight forward; unkeeled forehead
between the antennae; slightly protruding antennal calli, separated from the
vertex by a fairly deep transverse furrow; subglobus eyes
Games, highlights; robust maxillary palps, the penultimate article
thickened, the last subconical, m shorter than the previous
tooth; antennae longer than half that of the body. Transverse prothorax, subrounded 4 the base, straight forward,
almost straight on the sides, transversely impressed with
each side. Crest in curvilinear triangle. Elytra oblong, subparallel, finely rimmed, broadly
rounded at the top, provided with a print below and
inside the shoulders, moderately conyex, bearing series of
poor sunken points; on each elytron (starting from the
suture) three simple series of stitches moderately close together,
then three double sets of spread stitches. Prosternum narrow between the hips and subcanaliculated; my bones-
ternum vertical, short, lamellate, deeply indented 4
its anterior border to receive the metasternal projection which
hides completely; metasternum clearly furrowed longitudinally
nally, extended between the intermediate hips in a protrusion
compressed, obliquely raised, obtuse at the end and exceeding the
posterior level of the anterior hips; antecedent acetabular cavities
doors closed. Fairly robust legs, fusiform femurs, sybeylindri-
ques, the four mucronate posteriors; first article of the tarsi
as long as the next two together, the 3rd dilated; hooks
distinctly appendiculate the base. G — Antennae reaching about 9/3 of the length of the
body; art. 1 thickened, fairly long, slightly arched, 2 very short,
3 as long as 1, strongly triangular, 4-10 slightly longer
than 3, strongly dilated in a triangle with the antero-internal angle
acute, 11 narrow, elongated, subsinuate either side at tip, terminating
cutting edge. Last abdominal segment largely impressed by
each side with a small deeper impression, oval,
between. Q Antennae half the length of the body, has articles more
shorter than with G: art. 1 thickened, arched, 2 very short, 3-6
subequal, a little shorter than 1, weakly broadened into a triangle
at their apex, 7-10 more greatly expanded into a triangle, also
long than wide at their extremity, the last subovate, terminated
cutting edge. Last abdominal segment normal. 444

This genre seems to me absolutely distinct from all the genres of the
group of Zylaspites Chap., by its saw-like antennae from the
third article and 4 article 2 only short, by the mode of puncture
formation of the elytra, the shape of the sternal projection, etc. ; he takes
place near the genus Hylaspes. Hylaspoides magnifica Duviv. not. sp. Oblong, slightly dilated in April; head, corselet, chest and

Semurs Tun beautiful metallic green with dove or purple reflections;

red abdomen; escutcheon and elytra of a tan copper & reflections

purple; black antennae as well as the tibiae and tarsi. Long. 9 mill. ; width 41/2 mill. — Sikkim (my coll.) Head bearing a few scattered spots; black wrasse, transverse, ©
scalloped in are and carrying a series of sétigeres points along
from its anterior edge; epistome thickened, triangular, smooth; callus
antennal separated by a slightly widened longitudinal furrow towards
the base and limited behind by a transverse furrow going from a
wil 4 other; eyes large, protruding, suboval, very convex,
each as wide as the interocular space; black antennae,
finely pubescent: the first two articles smooth, with reflections
metallic. Prothorax twice as wide as long, a little
narrowed forward, with the projecting front corners, thickened, the
Subsequent nearly rights; few small scattered points on the
surface. Keusson smooth, convex. Hlytra punctate as it is said
in the description of the genus, having in addition a series of large
points along the margin and the intervals very superficially
dotted; the end of the elytra is almost smooth. light underside
barely pubescent; femurs with a few dots, dense tibiae
finely and roughly punctuated, furnished with a blackish pubescence
short and thick. Monolepta konbivensis Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV,
1891; C.-R., p. xivn. A few specimens taken 4 Konbir, the species was found
a Mandar (P. Cardon). Monolepta ovientalis Jac., Ann. Mus. Civil. Gen., 2¢ ser., VII,
p. 227. A few specimens of this species were collected from
Mandar (P. Cardon); it is described from Birmah. Monolepta birmaensis Jac., Ann. Mus. Civil. Gen., 1892, p.? Two copies were taken at Kurseong (P. Braet). Monolepta signed Oliv., Ent. V1, p. 665, pl. 5, f. 89. A number of specimens from Konbir, Man-
dar and Kurseong. Monolepta suturalis Words., Vitud. entom., 1858, p-100. A few copies taken 4 Mandar (P. Cardon). 445

Monolepta bifasciata Fabr., Ent. System, 1, 2, p. 27. — Jack,
Notes Leid. Mus., VI, 1884, p. 53. Konbir and Mandar: a few individuals. Ochralea nigripes Oliv., Ent. VI, p. 648, pl. 4, f. 58. Some copies 4 Tetara. Dereetis (Antipha) indica Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, >
1891; C.-R., p. cLy. Two copies taken 4 Kurseong. Platyxantha indica Duviv. not. sp. Oblong, light fawn, not very shiny with the posterior third of
each elytron a bluish black; end of the antennae rem-
browned. Long. 7 1/2 mill. ; width 3 mill. — Konbir-Nowatoli. Light fawn. "Smooth yete, transversely furrowed between
the eyes; antennal callus contiguous, almost flat; part
front of the forehead raised behind, sloping forward,
transverse labrum; tips of mandibles blackish; palps
jaws 4 art. 2 elongated, thickened at top, 3 strongly
swollen, 4 half shorter, in subacute cene; filifor-antennae
mes, quite sturdy, 4, smoky end: art. 1 clavate,
as long as 2-3 put together, 3 almost three times as long as 2. Prothorax finely arugula, as wide at the base as long at the
its middle, presenting on each side a subqua-
drangular; weakly rounded base, suksinated in the middle
with its slightly obtuse angles; straight side edges to the
first third, then regularly rounded, finally narrowed in front,
so that the greatest width appears at the height of the
anterior third, the insect being seen from above; anterior angles
lowered, anterior edge straight; narrowly rimmed base and sides
Kcusson small, triangular, rounded at the top. Elytra Subpa-
ralles, rounded at the top, flattened on the disc, 4 barely
impressed behind the escutcheon, narrowly bordered on
the sides, finely arugula, weakly but quite densely
punctuated and presenting, in addition, some longitudinal veins
nal; they are light fawn and each adorned with a large
spot, rounded in front, of a bluish black, occupying the third
posterior and detached from the suture. Fairly wide nipples at the base
from the first third, regularly narrowed and narrowly
extended to the apical angle. Fairly shiny underside, & pubes-
rare cent; prosternum erased between the hips, dilated in a triangle
behind, 4 closed cotyloid cavities; unarmed shins, fingernails
bifid; tarsi sometimes slightly darkened. KXXV,

 

446
Hispine. Callispa arcana Duviv. not. sp. Oblong, subparallel, below and above, reddish fawn,
very shiny, with the femurs in part, the tibiae and the tarsi
blackish; tawny epiplotures; black antennae as well as the hull
Frontal and anterior part of the head; elytra regularly
and deeply punctate, ornds of a rounded common spot,
median, of a small oblique suboval spot, on each side
of the crest, of a narrow longitudinal band running from the shoulder
until the middle, where it is a little widened and in your part
apical, a common spot, arranged in a semi-circle of conveailed
posterior and formed of three adherent spots: one on the
suture, arvondia, and on each side of it, placed against the
anterior edge of common spot, a larger round spot;
all those black cowards. Long. 4 1/2 mill. ; width 2 1/5 mill. — Konbir (P. Cardon). - the:
Head reddish, smooth; forehead provided with a small fairing
acute, protruding between the antenniferous tubercles, black as
the front of the head; antennae extending beyond the base of the
prothorax, black entanglement: art. 1 very short, 3 barely longer
long than 2, the following short, intimately linked to each other, the
last a little elongated. Reddish prothorax, slightly more than one
times and a half as wide as long, convex on the disc, subde-
award-winning on the sides; slightly indented anterior border with the
anterior angles a little protruding and acute, sides rounded in
before, straight behind, wavy, clearly sinuate base of each
side, surface marked with an irregular longitudinal fold on each
side of the disc, forming a dimple near the posterior angles and
bearing a print on the front of the crest; on disk
2 longitudinal lines made up of 3 or 4 large dots, a few
large dots on the sides. Eeusson small, fawn. ytres wider
than the corselet 4 the base, slightly depressed transversely
a little having the middle; they are marked with ten rounds of large
sunk points (the series 6 4 7 interrupted in the first
half), the weakest points at the top, those of the series
submarginal the largest, forming a furrow and adorned as it is
said in the diagnosis. Underside of a reddish fawn with the femurs
partly the tibiae and tarsi blackish. Botryouopa Sheppardi Baly., Cat. Hisp., p. 92. A copy collected 4 Kurseong (P. Braet). Esstiymena chinensis Hope, Col. Man., Ill, p. 175, pl. 2 F. 1. — Baly., Cat. Hisp., p. 100, pl. 7, f.
Two copies taken 4 Konbir (P. Cardon). 447

Hispa wnescens Baly., Journ. Asian. Soc. Bengal., vol. LV,
do. 1, 1886, p. 412. An individual from Kurseong (P. Cardon). Hispa dilaticornis Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgium, XXXV, 1891,
C.-R., p. XLVI. A copy taken 4 Konbir (P. Cardon). Hispa brevispinosa Chap., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belg., XX, 1877, p.56. Hispa elegantula Duviv. not. sp. Oblong, very slightly dilated behind, yellowish testaceous;
antennae and head tawny, vertex spotted with brown; trans prothorax
versal with two blackish loose patches on disc, punctate, slight
ment pubescent, bearing from each city, in front, two thorns, and
on each side edge two other spines; elytra of a light Faure
slightly brownish, punctate-ridged, armed with fairly long spines
yellow on the cites and & the base, faures on the disc. Long. 3 1/2 mill. ; width ep. 2 mill. — Kurseong (P. Braet). Very slightly dilated on arrival, subdepressed. Oblique forehead,
a little uneven; very narrow wrasse, reddish brown like the
mandibles; vertex finely furrowed behind the antennae,
smooth, reddish, marked with two small brown spots; antennae
exceeding half the length of the body, robust, tawny,
furnished with a slight golden pubescence: art. 1 large, very low-
ment arched, thickened, 2 short, 3 twice as long as 2,
4 barely shorter than 3, the following subequal to each other,
the last acuminated. Transverse prothorax, markedly narrowed
forward, depressed, slightly impressed on either side,
subrough with a smooth space in the middle, fawn with two
blackish spots, slightly pubescent; it is equipped with each
edt, at the anterior edge, of two mediocre spines, starting
of the same foot, the anterior oblique, directed forwards, the posterior
higher and longer, vertical upper; on each side
anteriorly there is a small dilation bearing three
spines the first two oblique, subequal to each other, holding
the base (a little longer than those on the anterior edge), the
posterior half shorter, slightly separated from the two pre-
sights. Crest rather large, fawn, adorned with a black spot of
each side of the base. Elytra noticeably wider at the base
than the prothorax, very slightly sinuate under the shoulders, very
dilated posteriorly or they are truncated with the lateral angles
rounded edges; they are depressed, deeply punctate-ridged,
very slightly impressed longitudinally 4 the height of the
middle, of a slightly brownish fawn, armed with numerous
mediocre spines: around the escutcheon, on each side, four
spines short, 4 point brownish; along the base, very

 

 

448

short clear spines; four longer, on the shoulders, the
two posteriors projecting above the others, pitch brown; along
from each margin a series of longer spines, clear except the
last, which is black; unarmed truncation; on disk:
series of four thorns on the 2¢ interval, between this series and the
margin, another, irregular from 4 to 5 spines; back, no
far from the top, a few spines arranged transversely, the
more robust and more colorful; all disc spines
are black or dark pitch brown. Testaceous underparts and legs
with sides of metasternum brownish; unarmed legs. Cassidinz. Calopepla Leayana Latr., Gen. Crust. and Ins., III, p. 50, pl. I,
f. 7. —Boh., Mon., I, p. 91, fol 1, f.

Two copies were collected 4 Kurseong; space is
known from India and Assam. Episticta viridimaculata Boh., Mon., I, p. 15. From Nepal. — Two specimens of this species were taken 4
Kurseong (P. Braet). Aspidomorpha Sancte-Crucis Fabr., Ent. Syst., 1V, Append.,
p. 441, — Boh., Mon., I, p. 287, pl. 6, f. B.

This species is excessively widespread throughout India: it
was collected at Konbir, et & Kurseong. Aspidomorpha dorsata ¥abr., Mant., I, p. 64. — Boh., Mon.,
IT, p. 296. A single copy was taken 4 Kurseong. Aspidomorpha clathrata Fabr., Ent. Syst., Suppl., p. 83. —
Boh., Mon., II, p. 330. This species absolutely belongs to the fauna of India: two
individuals were collected 4 Barway (P. Cardon). Aspidomorpha nigrovittata Boh., Mon., I, p. 341. A single copy taken 4 Konbir (P. Cardon). Cassida cruenta Fabr., Syst. El., I, p. 3889. — Boh., Mon., I,
p. 416. A few specimens collected 4 Konbir (P. Cardon). Cassida dorsata Duviv., Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgian, XXXV, 1891;
C.-R., p. the

Two individuals from Konbir. Cassida (Odontionycha) indicola Duviv., n. sp. Conveceous, subovate, testaceous, greenish; end of the

smoky anteanes; subogival prothorac, densely punctate,

vugueuc; elyra obliquely sloping on the sides, deep-

ment ponetnes, striated, with slightly convex intervals. Long. 4 1/2 mill. ; width ep. 3 mill. — Barway (P. Cardon). 449

Forehead 4 barely convex, finely ragosula, bearing a few
very fine dots near base of antennae; wrasse and mandibles
darkened; antennae not exceeding the base of the prothorax, flaves
with the last slightly smoky articles: art. 1 bulge,
2 short, subovate, 3 shorter than 2, more slender, 4-6 sub-
eganx 2, 7 somewhat dilated, 8-11 markedly thickened, 8-10 also
‘ges que long, the last almost double the previous one, finished
cutting edge; very elongated eyes. Subogival prothorax, sloping on
the sides barely twice as wide as they are long in the middle;
‘distinctly sinuate base of each edte of the median lobe, which is
straight truncated, rounded near the angles which are obtuse; it's light
slightly dilated 4 the base, then narrowed anteriorly, subsinuated a pen
above the middle, rather broadly rounded in front; of each
cate, a mediocre furrow extends parallel to the margin,
approach forward where it stops; finely ground surface,
oblong punctate-rough with the dots more pronounced along the
along the base and on the sides. Keusson in triangle widely
rounded at the top, arugula. Klytres a little more than the
prothorax at the base, & slightly advanced humeral angles, sub-
rounded; sides not dilated, obliquely lowered, regularly
narrowed behind, or they are rounded; surface regularly
convex, weakly impressed laterally parallel &
the margin, deeply and regularly punctuated with the inter-
very slightly convex valleys, each point giving rise
has a very short, transparent coat, 4 barely perceptible; a line
large dots in the side print and a slight print
on each side of the escutcheon; a triangular spot, of a brown
very clear, holding 4 the base and covering the juxta-
skullcaps. Beneath a yellowish testaceous, finely arugula and
very slightly pubescent; brown tarsal nails, with their
base of a fairly large transparent tooth. The subgenus Odontonycha, created by Weise (Wien. Ent. Zeit.,
X, 1891, p. 204,) is distinguished from the other Cussida, by the lamella
or the tooth with which the tarsal hooks are armed. Coptocycla bistrimaculata Boh., Mon., U1, p. 112. Two individuals caught in Konbi

     

 

     

 

 

   

     
 

 

 
   

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

     

in

Annals of the. SOGE ENFOW, DE RELGIONF, Te XXXVI. BY

 

    
  
 

OF THE

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OF

  
  
   
   
 

BELGIUM

THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME

ix

Co number must be kept; it won't be sent for a second
times as before. '

BRUSSELS
AT THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE COMPANY
20, MUSEUM STREET, 20

1892

 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. IX

Minutes of the monthly meeting of
September 3, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP BY M. Tosquinet, Vice-Chairman. Present: Messrs. Ed. Coucke, L. Coucke, Fogne, Dt Jacobs,
Kerremans and Duvivier, ff. of secretary. Mr Aug. Forel de Ziirich, attends the meeting. MM. Giron, Lameere, de Sélys-Longchamps, Séverin and Van
Nerom apologize for their absence. The minutes of the meeting of August 6 are adopted. Board Decision: The Board accepted the resignation of
M. H. Albarda, who resolved to abandon entomology for
health reasons. Correspondence: Prof. Dr. C. Berg communicates 4 the
Company that he became the successor of Prof. burmeister,
former Director of the National Museum 4 Buenos-Aires. Mr. Roeloffs thanked the Society for its participation in the
celebration organized in his honor, 4 on the occasion of the seventieth
anniversary of his birth. Works presented: The assembly decides on the insertion in the present
fascicle of the Annales, works which are read. Communications: Mr. Hippert reports a few internal captures.
recent surveys of Lepidoptera. Those are :

Satyrus Briseis L. —5 & and 4 Q captured 4 Han, 17, 18 &
August 19, above the cave, as well as a Q taken 4 Anffe. This
species, which was observed for the first time in Belgium, in
1860, 4 Arlon, by J. Colbeau, had no longer been encountered in
the country since. Cymatophora fluctuosa H. — A Q captured 4 Vierves on
July 26 and an S in the Hertogenwald on August 8. Acronycta euphorbix Sv. — var. : montivaga Gr. - This
espice was encountered 4 Asch (Campine) on 3 August. Acronycta menyanthidis Sy. — Taken Asch and Genck, August 3rd. ANNALS OF THE 0G, ENTOM, OF DELGIQUE, T. XXXVI, 3B

452

Aydrilla nictitans Bkh. — Taken 4 Genck, August 3. Heliophobus graminis L. — Captured at Genck, August 3. Heliothis dipsaceus L. — Taken at Genck, August 3rd. Emydia eribrum L. — Caught 4 Niel, August 3. The meeting adjourned at 4 o'clock. SOME ANTS FROM THE MEDITERRANEAN FAUNA

by Auguste Forel
Professor & Zirich,

Mr. Dr. M. Medina 4 Seville sent me a number
very interesting ants from Andalusia and the Canary Islands and my
friend and colleague M. le D* Ris brought me back two curious forms
of these last. Here is the description of what is new
for the Mediterranean fauna. Apheenogaster (Messor) barbara L.
r.: sordida n. st.

© L. 6 mill. (© media?). — Appearance of an Uf. structor, & media. The mandibles have 11 4 12 teeth, of which the three anterior
strong and the 8 or 9 posterior small, but very pointed and of
irregular length (this fact does not exclude the existence of individuals
With worn mandibles, as in all Jessors). For the rest, the
mandibles are exactly as in the ordinary form. Epistome not indented in the middle, convex in front,
severely striated and strongly crenellated & its anterior border, which
presents in the middle six teeth or strong crenals, each of which is
dug with a gutter on its front face. Moreover, the insect
is smooth and shiny, the head very weakly, very finely and
vaguely streaked with faded impressions on the vertex. the
pronotum and mesonotum are very bumpy, smooth and shiny. The metanotum is striated across. Otherwise identical to
I. barbarus ordinary, but of a dirty brown color, quite light,
identical 4 to that of Jf. séructor from which it is immediately distinguished
by its brilliance, its sculpture and its much weaker hairiness. This shape looks a bit like the Jf. rufo-testaceus, but
distinguished by its antennae and its much less slender legs, as well as
than by its much duller and darker color. Its color, its
crenulated epistome and its teeth distinguish it from the yew. barbarus 7. sp. Pornelo, Andalusia (M. Medina). I collected myself a
Burgas, on the Black Sea, a slightly less accentuated variety of
this breed. 453,

Aphenogaster screeched Roger. var. : Jaevior n. var. None L. 4 mill. — At first glance, you think you see a 4. subter-
ranea, both in color and in sculpture. However, dice
that we examine attentively, we recognize 4 the shape of the
antennae, 4 the narrow and elongated head, 4 the shape of the metanotum,
quwil is an A. striola of sculpture and color altogether
aberrant. Its color is a dirty russet brown, with the
antennae, legs and mandibles testaceous yellow. the
thorax is smooth and shiny as well as the pedicle; only the meta-
notum and sides of mesonotum are rough. Half
back of the head is shiny and weakly reticulated. Pornelo, Andalusia (D* Medina). Aphenogaster hispanica André. 9. L. 3.72 4 mill. — Characters of the Q, but the terminal tooth
of the mandibles is much shorter, of ordinary form, and
the eyes are elongated, terminated at the bottom by an extension
pointed almost as accentuated as in A. Blanched; but the
eyes are farther from the joint of the mandibles than in
GO. Blanched. It is above all the epistome that distinguishes these two species
very related. At the. Blanched, it is extremely short, so
that the frontal edges reach approximately 4 the anterior edge
of the head and are also very close together, leaving between
only a narrow median portion of the epistome and an area
very narrow frontal. At the. hispanica, the frontal edges,
Frontal yaire and epistome are arranged as in the others
species. The thorax is robust; the pronotum and the mesonotum
form a single convexity (the mesonotum is only prominent
nowhere). The metanotum does not form a staircase, it is as in
A. striola and splendida. The basal side is longer than the
sloping face; the spines are spread apart, pointed, shorter than
the distance from their bases. The metanotum is transversely
striped; as in the Q, the streaks, arriving on the sides, are directed
gent longitudinally forward, which makes the cdts of the thorax
Juggitudinally striated. The rest of the thorax is coarsely and
irregularly rough as well as the pedicle; everything else is
similar to what exists in Q.

Pornelo, Andalusia (Mr. Dr. Medina). Liouvriere of A. hispanica was still unknown, and the one that
I just described was harvested with no corresponding Q or GS. This
it is therefore not without a slight hesitation that I bring it back 4

 

 

 

454

André's species. Mr. André was kind enough to communicate to me
one of the guys from the Q. I could see that the eyes of the Q, without
be as elongated, nor especially as pointed at the bottom as those of
the ©, however, have an elongated shape and an antero-
well-marked lateral lines, which Mr. André had not pointed out in his
description, although he had recognized the affinities of this species with
GO. Blanched. The difference of the anterior tooth of the mandibles
remains very unique. Maybe that tooth was scraped off
by wear and tear among the ©. All the details of shape, sculpture,
hairiness, color match the rest so fully that I am
obliged to report this © to 1'A. hispantca until proof of
opposite. Moreover, Mr. D' Medina also collected the Gt of
GO. hispanica in Andalusia, in another locality. Monomorium Medina n. sp. 9. L. 2.3 mil. — Closely related to Af, Salomonis L., from whom he
distinguished by the following characters. The metanotum is very low;
its basal face does not form an angle with the back of the mesonotum,
like at the Jf. Salomonis, but is in the same plane
horizontal than her. The indentation between the mesonotum and the metanotum
is nevertheless very distinct. The sloping face of the metanotum is
very short, very oblique, and passes through a curve so insensitive ala
basal face, which one can hardly distinguish the two faces. The body
is smooth and shiny, except the sides of the mesothorax and the
metathorax as well as the sloping face of the metanotum which are
reticulate, pitted and subopaque or dull. Very chestnut brown
dark with thorax and pedicle, especially near sutures and
joints more reddish brown. Legs, antennae and
mandibles reddish-brown or yellowish, lighter at the joints
lations, darker in the middle of the limbs. The mandibles, very
narrow, have four small teeth. The head is shorter and more
wider than in the Jf. Salomonis. The basal face of the metanotum is
long and narrow, longer than the mesonotum, at least as
longer than the pronotum. This space also looks a lot like I. gracillimum Sm. But at the J/. gracillimum, the basal face of the metanotum is
quite different, clearly delimited in front and behind, much more
short, nearly rectangular, transversely ribbed. Angles
front of the pronotum are also more rounded, less shouldered
in the Medinw whose whole body is narrower and more elongated. Then the If. gracillimum has erect hairiness and pubescence
distinct lines on the dorsal part of the head, thorax and
the abdomen, while these parts are, so to speak, completely
ment glabrous in the Medina (as in the Salomonis); 4 penalty

 

455

do you see one or two small hairs if you look carefully. The legs have only a fairly wide adjacent pubescence. The
yew head. Medina is very smooth and very shiny, only on
the front of the cheeks we observe some very short streaks; at the house of
the If. gracillimum, the front of the head is more streaked. The
eyes are small, which distinguishes it from the Jarbatulum. Finally our
species has nothing to do with Jf. minutwm, carbonarium
and clavicorn, whose antennae, metanotum and nodes of the
pedicle are otherwise shaped. antennas and
pedicle nodes of Jf. Medine are shaped as in
the If. Salomonis, but the 1+ section of the funicle is substantially
longer, almost as long as the next 4 combined. At the house of
the I. gracillimum the sections 2 4 8 of the funicle are narrower,
more distinct from each other (more rounded) and more distinctly
separated from the club. At A. Aedine, the last article of
the club is barely longer than the two previous ones put together. The different species of the genus Monomorium are not very
easy to distinguish, and the two neighbors of our species are subject
Spoil a lot. Close examination shows that the If. Medina
actually relates to the Salomonis and not to the gracillimum,
despite its smooth and shiny appearance. Until further notice I believe.
however, its characteristics sufficiently marked to distinguish it specifically
only Salomonis. Laguna, Canary Islands (M. the D: Medina). Tetramorium cespitum L.
R. T. depressum n ste

©. L. 2.8 43.5 mill. — The entire top of the body (from the head,
thorax and abdomen, but especially the thorax) slightly, but
distinctly depressed (a little flattened). Without being very accentuated, this
character gives the 7'. depresswm look different from others
7' breeds. caspitwm. The shoulders of the pronotom also appear
more distinct and wider. Frontal furrow short, reaching a
barely the middle of the length of the head. Strong frontal edges
short, not reaching the posterior end of the frontal sulcus. Epistome without trace of median carina. Proinesonotal suture
obliterated; fairly distinct meso-metanotal suture. The metanotum
has only two very small triangular teeth; its sloping face is 4
barely long as half the basal side. The knots of
pedicle are broad and short, both 4 about twice as
wide than long. The first node is more briefly petiolate than
in the other races of the 7', caspitum. The 2" node is truncated
previously. 456

Shiny head, smooth behind and in the middle, quite finely and
levement stride in front and on the sides. Kpistome smooth back. On the forehead and vertex two or three longitudinal rows of
sunken, spaced stitches. Basal face of the metanotum wrinkled lengthwise,
sloping face wrinkled across; sides of the thorax wrinkled lengthwise and
reticulated. The rest of the thorax, the pedicle and the abdomen smooth and
shiny. Very sparse erect hairiness, much rarer than in
other 7' breeds. cwspitum. The shins and scapes have only one
adjacent pubescence. ¢a brown and 14 a little yellowish. Antennae, tibiae and tarsi
testaceous. Mandibles reddish as well as the front of the head. The rest as with the 7'. caspitum. Las Palmas, Canary Islands (Dr Ris). — This form is very parti-
particular and yet many clues make me admit that it
nvest only an extreme aberration of the 7 '. caspitum. Dr. Ris has
brought back from the same place a smaller variety of this race which
is less aberrant and more closely approximates semilwve forms,
punicum, summer. Leptothorax Risii n. sp. 9. L. 3.43.7 mil. —— Very narrow and elongated. Rectangular head,
much longer than wide, longer than in the Rotten-
bergi, as wide in front as behind. The scapes reach the
posterior border of the head or close to it. The eyes are a little
closer to the anterior border of the head than to the posterior border.
laughing. Elongated thorax, mesometanotal suture recognizable 4 a
transverse impression less marked than in L. Rottenbergi. The basal face of the metanotum is wider in front and in the middle,
than the height of the thorns. These are close together
on the other, narrow straight, a little obtuse at their extremity,
long as the interval between their bases, directed upwards,
out and back a bit. The sloping face is not longer
only half of the basal face, First segment of the pedicle very
long stalked and surmounted behind by a very low, very
small, rounded in all directions, half lower, shorter
and narrower than in Z. Rottenbergi, much shorter than
the anterior petiole; a small pointed tooth under the anterior end
higher than the latter. The 2nd article of the pedicle is also very
small, 4 barely wider than the first node, rounded, too
long than wide. Thighs very strongly swollen in the middle, more
strongly than in the Rottendergi. Abdomen, frontal area and posterior end of the epistome

 

 

 

 

457

smooth and shiny. Mandibles and epistome striated and wrinkled, all
rest of the body finely reticulate-punctate and dull, including the face
slope of the metanotum. Besides the head, the thorax and the first
neud of the pedicle are strongly reticulate. On the head and on a
part of the thorax the reticulations are accentuated in longitudinal wrinkles
nal. Both the reticulations and the wrinkles are much less
coarse and lower than in L. Rottenbergi. Hairiness as in Z. Rottenbergi. A dull, slightly brownish red; head (except mandibles),
abdomen, a dorsal spot on each node of the pedicle, hips
and middle of thighs dark brown, almost black. Mace of
antennae, end of scapes, 1st article of funicles, middle of
tibiae more or less brownish (the club of the antennae quite dark). At first glance, this space looks a lot like 4 the variety
semiruber of the Rottenbergi. However, she is not only good
thinner, narrower, and duller red, but completely
ment different by its sculpture and by the shape of its pedicle. The description of Z. gracilicornis Emery does not allow us to see
what degree of kinship exists between the two species. The club
of the antennae is a little more slender than in the Rottenbergi,
but the difference is not great. The figure given by Emery
of the antenna of Z. gracilicornis does not seem to me to differ very
notably not L. Rotlenbergi, nigrita etc. either. However
the Z. Risii differs in various respects from the description of the gracili-
cornis, at least by its color, the sculpture of the thorax, the
the shorter section of the funicle and the narrower 2m bare of the
pedicle. The shape of the 1** article of the pedicle is very particular. Las Palmas, Canary Islands (D' Fr. Laugh). THE MALE OF THE CARDICONDYLA

AND PERPETUATED INBREEDING,

 

St Forel,

Professor & Ziirieh. (Oral communication made at the session.) The polymorphism of the female in ants is a fact
known for a long time. Not only does the working caste pro-
comes from the female sex, but this caste itself differed
renounced petit 4 petit in many genres, first in © major
(a big head) and in © minor (hail shape with a small head),
still linked by © media (intermediaries); and then
into workers and soldiers (2,) distinct. The soldiers, descended from
the © major, are sometimes real warriors, stronger than the ©,
of the Achilles whose armor is represented by enormous man-
leathery dibulae, but most often they are grinders of
seeds (Pheidole), living plugs for the entrance to the nest
(Colobopsis), summer. In addition, it was later discovered in some species that a
singular gender dimorphism mile. The of ants, in general
winged, with a small head, large eyes and a broad thorax, can
to become similar to Pouvrière (ergatoide), fitter, with a narrow thorax. The first slightly ergatoid male ant, that of Anergates
atratulus, fat discovered by Schenk about 40 years ago. In
the genus Anergates Forel, genus parasite('), Vouvrière has disappeared,
having become useless. The Gest heavy, thick, slow, looks like 4 un
lice; its color is pale; his thorax still has the shape of the one
winged sexes, but only has the rudiments (joints
wings. In 1874 (Ants of Switzerland), I demonstrated that the Ponera
Roger's androgyna was not a separate species, as
Roger believed him, but a kind of lean, dimorphic mile,
of the Ponera punctatissima Roger, which also has
a winged male of ordinary form. I was wrong about this
time to use the term hermaphrodite to designate this

(') In his remarkable studies on mixed anteaters (Die zusammenge-
setzten Nester und gemischten Colonien der Ameisen, 1891), E. WASMANN subdi-
aimed at the different symbiotic relationships between two species in a very exact way
and very wise. To abbreviate, I use here the term "parasite" in a sense

very extensive which is hardly exact and jo refers to A WASMANN for the details. I mean by "parasite" simply that of the two species which seeks the other. 459

male, both its form, absolutely similar to that of a worker
(except the miles genitals), seemed to me to constitute a
transition from form ga to form Q. I did not hear of a
true case of hermaphroditism, which is clear enough from the text, but
Wun being has sexual organs G and has body ©, whose position
social in the anthill where I had taken it, was all the more
less clear that a winged ¢ also exists in this species. Since
when Paul Mayer made known the dimorphism of the ¢ in
some fig gall beetles. Previously Fritz Miiller (ir
Darwin) had demonstrated the dimorphism of the ¢ of certain crustaceans
these. The fact has therefore become clear since then. Later, Adlerz 4 Stockholm discovered the ¢ apt, erga-
toide also, of the genus Formicovenus (Mayr), genus of ant
parasitic, although less parasitic than I Anergates and possessing a
workman who works. Formicowenus g has a thorax
Wouvriere, he is quite straight, completely fit, but he has
ocelli and one more article in the antennae than the © and the Q,
like the ordinary winged ¢ of ants. It is more ergatoid
than that of Anergates, but much less than that of Ponera
punctatissina which has no docells and has the same antennae
number of articles than the worker (12). The fact to which I want to draw attention is, that the
Anergates and the Formiconenus, despite careful research
which were made on their walls by Schenk, Von Hagens,
Adlerz, Wasmann and myself, have no other G than the S
ergatoid apterus, and that mating always takes place in the
even anthill, between brothers and sisters. Once fertilized, the 9
enyolent and will obviously found new anthills
by imposing themselves on their hosts. (Ze¢ramorium cwspitum and Formica
rufa). But Huber, Lubbock, Mac Cook and Blochmann have demonstrated that
the fertile Qs of ants know how to feed their
first larvae and found new anthills. Lubbock has
moreover demonstrated the extreme longevity and fecundity of the fertilized Q
of ants. They can still live and lay fertile eggs
after 12 years of existence and without having been fertilized 4 again. The ancient fable of the annual renewal of the fertile Qs or
mothers of each anthill, fable published by the ancients, then
republished by Huber and myself on insufficient observations.
health and misunderstood, is therefore reduced to nothing. Population
of each anteater throughout its existence is the proge-
one and only birth of the founding mother or founding mothers
dates, because several Qs often unite to found a
anthill; if there are exceptions, they are in any case strong

460

rare. In ordinary ants, the winged Qs and Gs leave
the native anthill in flight and mate in the air with their
congeners of other anteaters, which allows crossbreeding
multiple. But in genera which have only one ¢ apter, it
resulting from the above-mentioned facts a permanent consanguineous coupling
petulant, because in the same anthill there are only brothers and
sisters and these brothers and sisters can only mate with each other. The fact seems absolutely clear for the genus Anergates where one does not
ever finds only one fertile Q or founding mother in
each anthill. At most one can object, for the cases where
there are two or more founding mothers, whom they can pro-
come from two different anthills, which then allows a
limited interbreeding, their mutual offspring may interbreed
in the nest. But we see that here, the crossing is very limited. These facts are extremely curious, if we consider them at the point
view of the advantages of reproduction by conjunction of
the cell Q with the cell ¢, for the crossings and therefore for
processing and production of species with respect to
fissiparous or gemmiparous reproduction. We rightly admit that
it seems that reproduction by conjunction of cells
sexual relationships of two unrelated individuals, promotes variability and
by 14 the evolution of species. A host of facts support
from this view, among others all the facts which gave rise to the
Wagner's theory (Die Lutstehung der Arten durch vaumliche
Sonderung), facts of which Darwin had moreover perfectly understood
range without exaggerating it like Wagner. However, the genera Anergates and Mormicorenus, as well as the genus |
Tomognathus Mayr., also a “parasitic” genus, which, according to Adlerz,
probably has no males and reproduces only parthe-
nogenesis (which also leads to inbreeding
perpetuated), each have only one known species, of the form
very aberrant, we can say a termination of a phylogenetic branch
netics which no longer seems to have a great tendency to vary. Tl is otherwise with the genus Cardiocondyla Emery, genus of
very small Myrmicides whose male was unknown until now. This genus contains 7 known species, quite distinct from each other.
others, including one still unpublished from India and one that I discovered
last year 4 Burgas and 4 Anchialo, in Bulgaria, on the edges
of the Black Sea, in the sand, species which I called C. Stambu-
lofii. I observed the habits of the Cardiocondyla. They make
small nests in the sand and feed on almost impervious insects.
susceptible (diptera, aphids, etc. ), which they report in their
nest. They are not parasites of other species, but
independent and hardworking. However, until now their G was unknown. 461

By opening the nests of the C. Stambulofii and the new
variety (bulyarica) of Velegans Emery, I found several
wingless females and winged females. At the
Stambulofii I further discovered in the nest of singulars
suitable individuals, of a fairly strong yellow (the 9s and the Qs are of a
black-brown), slow-moving, shaped like a worker ant
and possessing miles genitalia; they are erga-males
toides. I couldn't find any winged miles. I had described a year ago in the Bulletin de la Soc. Ent. of
Belgium (Ainictus-Typhlatta ete.) as Lmeryia Nov.
gen., a singular ant with very long mandibles, which I
believed to be a new genre and which had been taken with
Cardiocondyla Wroughtonii® and Q, in India. My discovery in
Bulgaria gave me doubts. I carefully examined
new my Hmeryia and I discovered genitals there
males very small and hidden under the last abdominal segment. No more doubt, '#meryia is the ergatoid male of Cardiocondyla
Wroughtoniz, though not at all like him. My new
genre was based on error and must fall. It therefore seems that the Cardiocondyla have only 3 aptera
ergatoides. And yet they are subdivided into species too
differentiated from those of other genera. It seems however
result from the fact that each nest of C. Stambulofii contains
several females that have lost their wings; the possibility of a
relative crossing as we indicated above. But
in various species of ants, some virgin females
often lose their wings in the nest itself (thus among the
Leptothoraz, or I Vai observed myself). It could therefore be that
the various Q apteres of the Cardiocondyla nests are not
founding mothers, but sisters of the nest population. What could speak in favor of this last hypothesis is
that Cardiocondyla anthills are quite sparsely populated,
and that the abdomen of wingless Qs was poorly developed. In short, there
still has various problems to solve in these insects, but the
facts acquired are no less interesting. The Cardiocondyla Stambulofii will be figured and described with my
other ants from Bulgaria in a note read last 4 a
session of the “K.-K. Zoologisch-botanische Gesellschaft » de
Vienna in Austria. 462

ON MY CRITICISM OF MR. CAMERON. I regret not having known the criticism that Mr. Cameron
made 4 himself, when I criticized his ants of the explo-
Whymper's ration. Mr. Cameron (Zatom. Month. Mag., No. 334,
March 1892) recognizes that Camponotus Mayri and the genus Holco-
ponera should be renamed; he had sent his work 8 years
previously 4 Mr. Whymper and, had forgotten it; he was himself
very surprised to receive it printed, without having received a proof
prior. A.Fore. REPORT OF A DIPTEROLOGICAL EXCURSION
IN THE BELGIAN PART OF THE HERTOGENWALD,

BETWEEN GOE, LA BARAQUE-MICHEL AND EUPEN,

 

had L. Coucke. FIRST PART. From August 8 to 12, we made an excursion to the
part of the Hertogenwald included in the triangle formed by Goé,
Baraque-Michel and Eupen. This excursion was dedicated to the
search for Diptera. These appear to be very abundant in
this area at the time reported. We have said to limit our research
ches 4 a very limited number of families and yet we
have captured several species which once again prove
Analogy of the fauna of this country with that of the countries of high
mountains. We believe that whatever information we have
collected will not be without interest. TIPULID FAMILY. Species caught:
Tipula fulvipennis De Geer. — A single specimen taken near
Vétang de la Gileppe. — scribbled Meig. — Commune. — muttered Meig. — Only one copy. — lateralis Meig. — Commune along the Vesdre. — paludosa Meig. — Very common in the Fagnes region. 463

Pachyrhina lwaulicornis Schumm. - A copy. Amalopis tipulina Egger. - We did not catch of this species
only one copy. Schiner says he never found
lV Amalopis tipulina than in countries with high mountains
tags. M. Vander Wulp in his Diptera Neerlandica
said to know this space only from copies
taken in Switzerland, and never to have known Tipulids from
genus Amalopis captured in Holland. Limnobia quadrinotata Meig. — Not uncommon. — bifasciata Schrank. — A single copy took 4 Goé. — dumetorum Meig. - We only met him once
in the Hertogenwald. Ephelia marmorata Meig. — One copy taken 4 Goé, another
in the Hertogenwald. Limnophila ochracea Meig. — Encountered twice in Hertogen-
wald. The Tipulids, in general, during the day stand in
tall grass, heather, shrubs, and preferably
in damp places. The most favorable time 4 them
search is rainy or overcast weather. When we knock
then in the plants indicated above, the Tipulids fly away
and, without rising much, will land a little further. FAMILY pES CULICIDES. We only captured:

Culex pipiens Linn. — ciliaris Linn. SYRPHID FAMILY. Species caught:

Melithreptus scriptus L. }
—v. disappear Low. ; One of each form. —v. strigatus Stag. \

I will take this opportunity to say that by examining many
many Belgian specimens, we find all the phases of coloring
tion between the typical scriptus, which has the posterior half of
the abdomen of a rather pale reddish-brown, and consequently the drawings
slightly accentuated yellows on this part of the body, and the dispar
typical which has this part of the abdomen of perfect black and the
very marked yellow designs. All intermediate degrees

464

observed in many specimens ¢ taken simultaneously
and in large numbers in a small quarry near Brussels,
and I have already noticed this fact everywhere I have found the seripeus. The
disparate variety seems to me not to be justified and not to be constituted
than by dark specimens of Ielithreptus scriptus, at least
when we only consider Belgian copies. Melithreptus teniatus Mg.

Didea fasciata Meq. — A copy taken 4 Goé,

Syrphus pyrastrt L. — Common. — laterarius Miller. — 2 specimens taken around the pond
of Gileppe. It's a species we didn't know
not in Belgium. Schiner who gives it as quite rare,
adds that it seems more common in the regions of
high mountains. — Glaucius L. — Common. - We have not met
of copies with 4 white stripes. All have slate them,
from very pale slate, to almost black slate. Syrphus tricinctus M1. —A specimen taken in the Hertogenwald. — albostriatus Ul. — A specimen taken in the Hertogenwald. — covolv F. — Less common than around Brussels. — grossulavie Mg. — Much more common than around

from Brussels. — excisus Zett. — One copy took 4 GB. — ribesit L. — Seems less common than around
Brussels. — umbellatarum F. — One copy taken 4 Goé, one in
lHertogenwald. — balteatus Deg. — Very common. — cintellus Ztt. - Commmon. —lineola Zit. — Goé, Hertogenwald, — Rare. — Vittiger Ztt. — God, Hertogenwald. - Rare. — Wiaphanus Ztt. — 1 specimen taken in the Hertogenwald. Melanostoma mellina L. — Fairly common in | Hertogenwald and

4 Goé, at the water's edge. — gracilis Mg. - Rare. Cheilosia scutellata F\l. — Commune Goé and in Hertogenwald. — impressed Low. — Commune 4 Goé and in the Hertogenwald. — chrysocoma Mg. — We took 12 copies in

an hour in a meadow near the Vesdre upstream from
Goe. It was the only time we met her. This
species stands on the flowers, preferably at the edge of the
roads. Schiner gives it as very rare for Austria. It is probably a species that lives in societies. 465

Rhingia campestris Mg. - Unusual. Volucella pellicens L. — Quite common around the pond of the
Gileppe. Scricomyia borealis Fil. — A male captured in the Hertogen-
wald. — Although Schiner gives the spice as proper
in the countries of high mountains, it was taken already &
Fleurus, Groenendael, Stockel and Holland. Arctophila bombyformis Fil. — A copy taken from Her-

togenwald. Eristalis sepulcralis L. — Fairly rare. — tenaz L. — Very common. — intricarius L. — At the water's edge on the flowers. Little
commmon. — arbustorum L. — Common,
— rupium F. — Not uncommon. Schiner gives the species as

peculiar to countries with high mountains. In Belgium we
We also met 4 Izel. — horticola Deg. — Not very common. Helophilus floveus L. — Fairly common. Xylota segnis L. — Not rare 4 Goé and in the Hertogenwald. — florum F. Mg. — A specimen taken in the Hertogenwald. — abiens Mg. — A specimen taken in the Hertogenwald. Schiner gives these 2 species as peculiar to the countries of
high mountains. — sylvarum Linn. — A copy taken from Hertogenwald. Syritta pipiens L. — Very common. Chrysotoxum arcuatum L. — Not very rare in the Hertogenwald
and to Goé. — Schiner gives the species as common to
Schneeberg and in the Hautes-Alpes. Opposed to the Tipulids, the Syrphids, during the day,
flit from flower to flower. It is in the sun that they are the most
abundant. They are found mainly on the umbellifers of
clearings and meadows and on those bordering the roads and
watercourse. CONOPID FAMILY. Species caught:
Stcus ferrugineus L. — Common on umbellifers around
Gileppe pond. Conops quadrifasciatus Deg. — On umbellifers in |’Her-
togenwald. — flavipes L. — With the preceding species, but more common. 466

FAMILY pES TABANIDES. We only captured:

Tabanus bromius L.

Hematopota pluvialis L.

This shortage of Tabanids is probably due to the 4 season which
was a bit advanced for this family. STRATIOMYIDE FAMILY. Species caught:
Sargus cuprarius L. — We only saw a few specimens
in the Hertogenwald. This species very widespread in

surroundings of Brussels, seems much less so in
this region. WIS

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

BELGIUM

x

This number must be kept; it won't be sent for a second
times as before. BRUSSELS
AT THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE COMPANY
20, MUSEUM STREET, 20

1892

 

 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. x

Minutes of the monthly meeting of
October 1, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP OF Mr. Giron. Present: Messrs. Becker, Bergé, Ed. Coucke, L. Coucke, Jacobs,
Robbe, Séverin, Tosquinet and Lameere, secretary. MM. de Selys-Longchamps and Duvivier excused their
absence. The meeting opened at 8 a.m. The minutes of the meeting of September 3, 1892 are approved
after the following corrections requested by Mr. Hippert: it is
a ¢ of the Satyrus Briseis which was captured A Aufe; it's the variety
albinewra of V Heliophobus graminis which was encountered 4 Genck. The Meeting decides on the composition of this issue of the
Annals. The meeting adjourned at 4 o'clock. REPORT OF A DIPTEROLOGICAL EXCURSION

IN THE BELGIAN PART OF THE HERTOGENWALD
BETWEEN GOE, LA BARAQUE-MICHEL AND EUPEN,
by E, and L. Coucke. SECOND PART. SYRPHID FAMILY. We have 4 add 4 the Syrphid family both species
following that Mr. van der Wulp was good enough to determine:
Leucozona lucorum L. — A female taken around the pond of

Ja Gileppe. Eriozona syrphoides Fall. — A captured mile around the pond
of Gileppe. This is a species of which Macquart does not nae

ANNALS OF THE $OC+ ENTOM, OF BELGIUM, Te XXXVI. 468

not in his Diptera of Northern France; Mr Gobert
does not mention it in its catalog of the Diptera of France
and M. van der Wulp does not mention it in the Bouwstoffen. Schiner gives it as quite rare in the Austrian Alps.
female dogs. CONOPID FAMILY. In addition to the three Conopides reported in Part 1, we have
taken in the Hertogenwald a remarkable Conops that we have
submitted 4 Mr van der Wulp. It looks a lot like the Conops
Jlavipes L. but is distinguished at first sight by the head which is
almost entirely black. Mr. van der Wulp does not know any
European species offering this character. LEPTIDE FAMILY. Species caught:

Leptis strigosa Meig. — We have captured a large number
specimens of this species on tree trunks
bordering the road from Dolhain to Eupen. Leptis lineola F. — 2 specimens taken in the Hertogenwald. Leptis tringaria L. — Taken in the Hertogenwald. FAMILY OF EMPIDS. Empis livida L. — Hertogenwald. MUSCIDES FAMILY. Species caught:
1) Muscidae calypters. PARAMACRONYCHIID Group,
Nemorea canthogastra Round. — Schiner gives this species
as very rare in Austria. We took one
mile in |'Hertogenwald. croup DEXIDZ. Dewia ferina Fall. — La Gileppe. crore SARCOPHAGIDA. Onesia sepulcralis Meig. — La Gileppe. Sarcophaga carnaria Linn. — Hertogenwald and Goe. TACHINIDA Group. Echinomyia grossa Linn. — Common in the Hertogenwald on the
Umbelliferae. Echinomyia will do Linn, — Hertogenwald. 469

GYMNOSOMATIDA Group. Gymnosoma rotundata L. — Around the Gileppe pond. red PHASIIDA. Alophora hemiptera Fabr. — 1 Q in the Hertogenwald. Muscid group. Graphomyia maculata Scop. — 2 males taken 4 Goé. Musca corvina Fabr. Calliphora vomitoria Linn. — In the Hertogenwald. Calliphora erythrocephala Meig. — In the Hertogenwald. Lucilia cesar L. — In the Hertogenwald. — illustrated Meig. — In the Hertogenwald. Grours ANTHOMYINAE. Mydaca urbana Meig. — La Gileppe. 2) Muscide acalyptère. red TRYPETINE. Trypeta onotrophes Low. — Hertogenwald. THE ROYAL MUSEUM COLLECTIONS OF ARTICLES
OF NATURAL HISTORY OF BELGIUM,

by G, Severin,
Assistant naturalist at the Museum. It is often desirable to know the history of a collection
entomological, especially when it is extensive and can
To be called to become a guide for studies on the group she
represents, as is the case for the collections of the Museum. If we have to proceed 4 new classifications, research
of this kind must necessarily precede them; they are the
essential preliminary, since these new classifications
entail a revision of the species and that this requires that we
be fixed on the value of the determinations whose specimens have
was the object. This work, moreover, sometimes procures other advantages; he conducted
the discovery of old types supposedly lost or else he makes recon-
produce precious specimens that have been the subject of special studies
carefully detailed. The Management of the Museum had asked me, at the time of the reclassification-

470

collection of the establishment was decided not to
neglect for my investigations to be in this respect as complete as possible.
complete as possible and, as their results may be of interest
all the entomologists, she engaged me 4 to communicate them 4 our
Company, as they 4 progress and without restricting myself
has a systematic order. That's what I'm doing today for
group of water beetles, taking into consideration
the following points :

The historical part must first include, as much as possible
sible, the origins of the collections and the indication of their elaboration
before and after their acquisition by the Museum;

Then the list of types(') used for descriptions,
specialists and that of the rare species contained in the collections.
tions, will be attached, given their usefulness for future work. BEETLES. HE

Haliplid, Amphizoid, Pelobiid, Dytisciae, Gyrinid. These five families, included in the old classifications
under the general name of Hydrocanthares, are widely
represented in State collections. Before 1872, there were only a small number of species
all natives. They receive a first supplement, little
important for the rest, by the acquisition of the small Ogier collection of
Baulny (85 species with around 180 specimens), soon followed
the purchase of the important Chevrolat collection (composed of
633 species with approximately 3500 specimens) than this entomo-
logist considered to be the most complete of that time. The insects that composed it had been used for the descriptions
d'Aubé in his "Species des Coléopteres". It contained
many types of this author, as well as types of Chevrolat
himself. The collection also included the Hydrocanthares relating
taken by Olivier from his trip to the Orient and purchased by Chevrolat,
during the regrettable dispersal of this famous collection. (*) Jo gives the word Tire the broadest meaning it can have, in
admitting that the type described is not only the unique specimen whose par-
features have served 4 Ja description and which ordinarily remains in the collection of
Author, but also the whole, whatever the number, of the copies examined
mined at the time of work and whose characters were, in reality, synthesized
in the work of the deseriptor. 471

In 1875, when Dr. Sharp undertook the revision of the Dytis-
cides, i] requested the communication of our aquatics, and the
complete collection was sent to him. She then served at work
well known “On Dytiscide” published in 1882. The number of types was greatly increased and all species
compared with the Aubé types in the Dejean collection,
M. le Comte de Bonvouloir put 4 at the disposal of the monograph
English. Since then, the Museum has received successive shipments, including
we must cite those of Cam's travels. Van Volxem in Brazil and
of Mr. Purves 4 City of Antigua and finally those coming from the Congo re-
worn by Captain Thys, Mr. Tschoffen and others, all of whom
also passed under the eyes of DF Sharp. I had gathered myself, during the years 1889 4 1891, a
collection of about 750 species and 14,000 specimens, among the
which were the Hydrocanthares of North America?
trial and central part of the Fairmaire collection. There were also several valuable types of MM. Sharp and
Regimbart. Similarly, the fauna of Bengal, thanks to the hunts of the
P. Cardon, was largely represented there, which satisfied many
shortcomings during the merger of this collection with those of the Museum. The Haliplides have not yet been revised and
remain with the old determinations of Aubé and others. The monograph of the Gyrinides was undertaken by Dr. Régim-
bart in 1881 and the Museum's collection served the remarkable
work of this entomologist; the number of types increases by
widely. It is worth mentioning also in this series the few
types of the revision of the genus Gyretes by Laboulbéne which, in
1853, the Chevrolat collection 4 its disposal. Then MM. manager,
Ritsema and Oberthur also provided several types which
were to be found in duplicate in tewrs rich collections. Finally U.S
have been able to do recently, to M. le prof. J. Sahlberg, acquisition
Wa number of its types of boreal fauna. Since 1890, Dr Régimbart has continued to lend his precious
competition for the determination of the species included in the
latest shipments, notably from Bengal and Africa
tropical. The following list enumerates the types deerit of the collections of
VState("). (1) Pai adopted the names from the catalog
XIX, p. 5 (1885). for the first four funilles and dud
Gyrinides which the DF Régimbart has just published at
if Monograph, Axw. Soe Ent Franr, 1891, p

  

Den Branden, Az

 
     

record of
continuation of the second supplement &

       

    

Hauptus Late. angustifrons Regb. Aube cinereus. Susciatus Aube. gravidus Anbe,

 

Hyprocorrvs Sharp. Subvittulus Sharp. Proxoterus Sharp. punctipennis Sharp. Clear Norerus
Japancus Sharp. Supms Aube. Dawn cinucoides,
: Sharp. Cantuyprus Sharp. billus Reégb. biguttatus Regb. biguitulus Regb. dammutatus Sharp. ‘grossus Sharp. aube nigrinus. Potions Sharp. quadrivittatus Regh. Rotundatus Sharp. Simoni Regh. subsignatus Sharp. tenuicornis Chevr. vicinus Sharp. Hyprocantuts Say. came Sharp. Deyrotte: Sharp. Tecanus Sharp
MACROVATELLUS
rudis
Sakibergi Sharp. Laccopunus Leach. bifascratus Chevy. Birmanicus Reg. Cayennensis Dawn. Clarki Sharp. dificitis Sharp. evanescens Reg. sasciatus Dawn. Havoscriptus Reg. geninatus Reg. tuterruplus. — var. lestaceus Aube. Jacanus Regh. Lateralis Sharp. Let's see Sharp. Lewisius Sharp. licenses Reg. — var,

 

    
 
  

 

HALIPLIDA. intermedia Sharp. pantherinus Auds. (= Aube punctatus). Robustus Sharp. Sanojedorum Sahib. DYTISCIDA. Mathani Regd. Mocquereysi Reg. obese Sharp. orthogrammus Regh. ovatus Sharp. Posticus Dawn. Sharp solutions. subsignatus Sharp. sufrusus Sharp. taentolatus Regb. Tschoffent Regb. undatus Dawn. Venezuetensis Regh. venustus Chevr. PTOSTERNUS Sharp. obtigus Regb. bicincts Reg. Hyprovatus Motseh. abrvoides Regh. Carioni Sev. Sharp compressor. confertus Sharp. Gabonicus Reg. Sharp nigricans. pictulus Sharp. pinguis Regb. Dra Moracunta Bab. will converse Aubé. Sharp ovalis. suitilis Sharp. Biessus Shar}
antennatus Re
Atomarius Sharp. Borrey Sharp. Tufo Sharp. caraibus Chevr. inbred Regh,
sharp cowalis. Gestroi Regh. Godfrey Sharp. incoustans Regd. Indicus Reg. inornatus Sharp. Tivens Régb
Lori Regh. Neoguincensis Regh. pseudogemiuus Rézh. senvinulum Reg. Severini Regh. Simoni Regh,
Tschoffent Régh. tuberculatus Regh. Huxett typrus Sharp. syntheticus Sharp. Awpex Sharp. Sharp badges. Hypuyorus Ill.
Birmanicus Regh. circularis Regh,
curvipes Reg. Havicans Reg. Gabonicus var. :
gibbicollis Regb. Jayonicus Sharp. Lorie Regh. lyratus

Reg. — var. foveolatus Regb. Major Sharp. Parvicollis Sharp. platycephalius Regh. Renardi Sev. Serorriscus Sharp. Browni Sharp. Hypuororus Sharp. Bengalensis
pugnator Shar
Severini Regh. Heropuyprus Sharp. coufusus Regb. Guineeusis Aube. hero Sharp. Obscurity Sharp. obsoletus Reg. virimilate Reg. Coriamnus Thoms. unguicularis Sablb. Deroxecres Shar
Sardus Gem. and Har. (=says Audé). Arabicus Sharp,
aachoralis Sharp. carinipennis Reg. Croleke of Bor! Princeys Sharp. Prosternalis Sharp. Suavis Sha
suspicions 8

 

  

 

   

 

 

 

 

Hyprororws Claitv. came Sharp. alticola Sharp
Americanus Dawn. anas Subs,

 

designer Seidl. sharp decipiens. 473

diversicornis Sharp. Sractus Sharp. inept Sharp. insularis Sharp. leticulus Sharp. longipes Sal. modestus Aubs. Natria Sharp. pubipennis Aube. = undulatus Say). pectoralis Sahib. punctipennis Satlb. rubripes Sab. sibiricus Saulb. Acanus Leach. conspicuous Sharp. suspension

— var. obscurus Sahlb. Mmm Sharp. nigripalpis Sharp. fevanus Sharp. Pratyngctes Régb. Ornatifrons Sharp. Rodriguezi Sev. Sharp Neuroxects. sharp. A Gamereus Sharp. humiliate Sharp. — var. : Sharp. labratus Sharp. Pratampus 'Thoms. fimbriatus Sharp,
pictipennis Sharp. Corer.atus Erich. alternatus Sharp. — var. : Sharp. Sharp atriceps. Capensis Sharp. Chevrolat Aube
calatipennis Aube. distinctus Aube. duodecimstriatus Aube. Iron Reg. Gestror Reg. fnaequatis Sharp. insolitus Chevr. sharp switch,
Longicornis Sharp. — var. : Sharp. maculatus Sharp. mundus Shar}
neglectus Sharp. nigritulus Sharp. Nutidus Sharp. puichellus var. + Sharp. pusilius Shaxp. (= tenebrosus Regh)
Aube striatulus. 474

Laccoxrectus Motsch. obscurus Sharp. Ruaytus Lacord. atricor Aube. Devitis Sharp. Hispanicus Sharp. Sharp latitans. Goudoti Sharp. Sharp longipes. Aubé obscuricollis (debris). pleveius Sharp. remator Sharp. Couyanères Clairv. Thomsoni Sharp. Dyriscus L.
Cordieri Aub
Hyparicus Leact
bikamatus Aube. (= pacificus Dawn). Gorye Aube. — var. Moluccarum Sharp. Moquereysi Régh,
nigroteniatus Rey

 

 

 

Diners Mac Leay. albyssinicus Regh,
analis Regh. Regh denticulatus,
sinusipennis Casteln.). discolor Aubve
curtulus Regh,
Tadicus Dawn,
Mellyi Regh,
provmus Aubé. Regimbarti Régh,
Neogurneensis Regd. solitarius Aubs. sublineatus Chevr
unidentatus Aube,
Macroayrus Regh,
srnescens Reg. angustatus Reg. Borrei Regh. Caledonicus Fauvel. obliquatus Aube
Sedilloté Réph. Avioxocrnus Regb. allernatus Regb. Bedeli Rexh,
caer Aubs. elegantissinius Regh. Goudoli R
virescens Re

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

glaucus Aube). Platteenw
suffusus Re;
Tuermonectes Crotch. nigrofasciatus Dawn. suceinctus Aubé,
Sanpracorrus Sharp. — var. Chevrolati Aube. Meoapyres Sharp. aepositus Sharp. shouted Sharp. Sraternus Sharp. gravidus Sharp. Cyisrer Cu
aterrinus Reg. Celevensis var. Sharp. cincius Sharp. Cardont Sev. confused Sharp. Erassus Sharp. Savocinetys Aube. Landaisi Ri
Lewisianus Sharp. Roeseli
— var, lusitameus Sharp. Stamensis Sharp. GYRINIDAL. Gyrinus Geoflr. srneus Aube,
Canadensis K
chalybeus. — var. derasus Sharp. Cubensis Regh,
curtus shar
distinctus Aube. — var, columbus Aubé,
elongatus. — var. angustatus Aube. Gestrot Sharp. giius. — var. apicati Sharp. Japonicus Sharp. Libanus Sharp. Wankoriezi Reg. (= mergus Ahr.). yptincus Regh. (= nitoticus Waltl). opatinus Regh,

picipes Aube. Regh plicatus,

roar Regh,

Steulus Regb. smaragdinus Reg. supereiliavis Régh,

tenuistriatus Regh,
violaceus Rezh,

    

 

 

  
 

Gyreres Brulle,
glabratus Regh. Tionotus Dawn. Mexicanus Regh. Morio Aube,
nitidulus Laboulb. Saliei Laboulb. Sericeus Laboulb. OrecuTocmitus Lacord. Birmanicus Reg. cardiophorus Regb. Cardoni Regb. Castetsi Regh. cribratellus Regb. Aube discus. Reg Fee. Jiguratus Regh. hemorrhous Regb. indulans Reg. incrassatus Regb. ‘marginipennis Aubs. metallicus Regb. 475

nigricans Reg. Regb product,
purpureus Regd. Regimbarti Sharp. scalaris Regb. Severini Reg. sublineatus Regb. tomentosus Regb. validus Reg. villosovittatus Reg. villus. — var. Syriacus. Reg. Orecrocyrus Regb. angularis Regb,
discors Reg. lionotos Reg. Madagascariensis Aube,
ornaticollis Aube. grow Regh,
seauatis Régb. Aube specularis,
vicinus Regh. Among the rare species it is necessary to mention again. DYTISCIDA. Mesonotus levicollis Sharp. Colpius inflatus Lec,
Canthydrus simplec Sharp. Macrovatellus ventralis Sharp. Derovatellus lentus Wehneke. Laccophilus unifasciatus Sharp. Mac Leay basalis basalis. — Orientalis Clark. — nitidus Babingt. — Chilensis Solier. Hydropeplus trmacuiatus Lap. Sternopriscus Wehnckei Sharp. Colambus corputentus Schaum. — saginatus Schaum. — lautus Schaum,

— pallidulus Aube. — Caspius Wehnche. (These own species & Russia deserves
dionale were found by M. Becker
at Zarephath). Chostonectes gigas Boh. Antiporus Wakefeldi Sharp. — Sharp Duplex. — Gilberts Clark. Necterosoma dispar Germ. Macroporus humatus Clark. Deronectes parvicollis Schaum. (This interesting species described in
1864 by Schaum, was recently found
ment in quantity by M. Kruper of Ath®-
nes). Deronectes vigilans Wall. — Hispanicus Rosenh. (The black species of the genus Dero-
nectes have been studied by MM. Fair
mayor and Leprienr according to their types). Deronectes quadricostatus Aubé. (This pretty species was described by
Aubé in 1838 on two copies of the
Museum of Paris, and I do not believe that she
has since returned. I got it from the Ben-
scabies speaks P. Cardon. For a second
closely related species D. carinipennis a
was discovered & Matadi (Congo) by
M. Tschotfen). Deronectes steppensis Motsch. (There is only one defective copy
of an extremely rare species). Hydroporus humeratis Aube. — lugubris Aube,

Cetina angustatus Aubé,
Agabus lineatus Gebl. (This charming spice was given to me
seen by M. Becker & Sarepta). Colymbetes Groentandicus Aube,
Hyderodes Shuckardi Hope. Dytiscus paroulus Mannh. — Dauricus Gebl. — piceatus Sharp. — Camer disjunctus,

(A copy 2 of this space, which
seems to me to be only a local variety of

476

D. Lapponicus Gyth., & was sent to Cybister occidentatis Aubé. Museum by M. Baudi) — Reichei Aubé. Hydaticus flavolineatus Boh. — Welckianus Sharp. (This gigantic Hydaticus returns © — ventralis Sharp. now in insect shipments © — Sharp gracilis. of Congo). — crassus Sharp. Cybister auritus Gerst. — Javanus Aube. — Irritans Dohrn. — Sharp cognatus. — operosus Sharp. — Dehaani Aube. GYRINIDA. Dineutes Fairmairei Regb. Macrogyrus venator Boisd. — Regh hypomelas. — Oblong Boisd. — Angolensis Régb. — Reichei Aube. — Gondaricus Reiche. Aulonogyrus splendidulus Aubé. — Sharpi Regh. — Amenulus Aube. Porrhorhynchus indlicans Walker. — Aube marginatus. Enhydrus tibialis Regb. Orectockilus tucidus Regb. — atratus Rezb. — Indicus Regh. Macrogyrus Howitti Clark. If the value of a collection is all the more important as it
contains a greater number of specimens that served as types
for the creation of species, we must however recognize that it
depends, also and perhaps even to a greater degree, on the whole
of the work to which the specimens gave rise. It is obvious that the elements which compose it, when they have
successively studied by such renowned specialists
as Aubé, Sharp, Regimbart, and many more
4 various titles, have a 4 part scientific value, very high,
since they concentrate the appreciation of the most
experimented and a series of other works embracing a period
over fifty years old. In fact, they actually wear the
mark of the entomological movement that occurred during
all this time. It is ultimately in this spirit that this note has been
congue. In summary, we were currently talking about:

Haliplidxz 85 sp. The Museum has approx. 45 including 8 T. and 290 ex. ;
Studied mainly by Aubé, Chevrolat and Sharp. Amphizoid 4 sp. ;
Pelobiidw 4 sp. The Museum has 1 sp. and 17 ex. ;
Dytiscide 1700 sp. The Museum has approx. 1050 including 212 T. and
4500 ex. Both studied mainly by Aubé, Chevrolat,
Sharp and Regimbart. Gyrinide 335 sp. The Museum owns approx. 205 including 79 T. and 1,200 ex. Studied mainly by Aubé, Chevrolat and Régimbart. 477. That is, out of 2129 sp. known to Aquatics, 1301 sp. with
299 Types. The double magazines also contain about 11,000
copies. Here, moreover, is the list of Perea in which the types
of the museum's collections have been described:
ausz. Species of Coleoptera, Hydrocanthares and Gyrinians,
T. VI, 1838. Cuevroxat. Cuba island beetles. Ann. Soc. Ent. Franc.,
1863, p. 183. Fauvet. Entomological Notices, 1867, V, p. 78, vol. I, f. 14. (Macrogyrus caledonicus). :
Lasoursine. Description of several nodes. sp. of the kind
Gyretes. Ann. Soc. Ent. Franc., 1853, p. 47. PREUDMAN OF Borre. Description of a new species of
genus Hyphydrus. Has a. Soc. Entom. Belgium, XIV, 1870,
p. x. (Zyph. lugubris). ‘— Description of a new species of the genus Hydroporus
loc. cit. p. xm. (Deronectes Crotchi). Rampart. Monographic essay on the family of the Gyrinides. Ann. Soc. Ent. Franc. (1882), p. 379 (1883); p. 119;
1* add. (1886), p. 247; 2¢ extra (1890) p. 278. — Leon's journey. Fea in Burma. Dytiscide and Gyrinide
Ann. Mus. Civil. Gen., Series 2, vol. VI (1888), p. 609. — Same trip. List no 2, loc. cit., vol. X (1891) p. 587. — New or rare Dytiscide and Gyrinide from the collection
of the Royal Museum of Leiden. Notes Leid. Mus., vol. XI,
p. 51 (1889). — 4 new species of Gyrinides, loc. cit. flight. XIII, p. 191
(1891). _- Dyitsatie and Gyrinides from M. E. Simon's trip to
Venezuela (1888). Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr., p. 381. — New Dytiscide of Manila, loc. cit. 1877, p. 355. — Description of a new species of Gyrinus (G. siculus). Naturalista Siciliano, T. I, No. 10. — Voyage of L. Loria in East Papua., Dytiscides and
Gyrinids. Ann. Mus. Civil. Gen., Series 2, vol. XII (1892). Saubera. Kongl. Sv. Ak. Handl. 17, 4, p. 45. — Bull. Mosk. 1834, p. 270. (Hydrop. brevis). — Not. Sallsk. Fenn. Ferh. XIV, p. 151. Semiirz. Bestimmungs-tabellen der Europ. Dytisciden und
Gyriniden (p. 67, 1887) in Verhandl. Nat. Worm. Briann. (Zydroporus convexior). 478

Suarp. On Dytiscida in Scient. Trans. of the Royal Dublin
Soe., Series II, vol. II, 1880-82. — Aquatic Coleoptera collected by M. Cam. Van Volxem in
Portugal and Morocco. Ann. Soc. Entom. Belg., KX. 1876, p. 112. — Aquatic Col. coll. by M. J. C. Purves in Antigoa, 1. ¢.

. 120. — Aquatic col. coll. by M. Cam. Van Volxem in Brazil, 1. c.
. 116. — ‘Trans. Ent. Soc. 1873 and 1884. — We are aquat. coleopt. from Ceylon. Trans. Ent. Soc. London,
1890, pt II, p. 339. Sévertn. Note on the Hydrocanthares of Chota-Nagpore. Anne,
Soc. Ent. belg. 1890. XXXIV, p. cLxxxvi. — List of cols. water. collected by Dr. Platteeuw at the
islands of Sumatra and Borneo, loc. cit. p. xovir. (Hyda-
ticus Platteeunt). — Description of a new species of the genus Platynectes
Regb. loc. cit. p. xevi1. (Platynectes Rodrignezi). tr

 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OF

   
  
  

BELGIUM

on Ey
THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME. XI

Co number must be kept; it won't be sent for a second
times as before. BRUSSELS
AT THE HEADQUARTERS OF THE COMPANY
20, MUSEUM STREET, 20

1892

 

 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. XI

Minutes of the monthly meeting of
November 5, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP OF Mr. Giron. Present: Messrs. Candéze, L. Coucke, from Crombrugghe, Fologna,
Jacobs, Michels, Preudhomme de Borre, Robbe, Seeldrayers, de
Selys-Longchamps, Séverin, Tosquinet and Kerremans ff. of
secretary. MM. Lameere and Duvivier excused their absence. The session is open 4 8 hours. The minutes of the meeting of October 1* are approved. Correspondence. Mr. de Crombrugghe de Picquendaele thanks
for admission as a full member. The Naturforschende Gesellschaft in Danzig invites our Society
4 the celebration of the 150: anniversary of its foundation. A letter
congratulations will be sent to him. The Assembly votes to exchange the Annals and Memoirs for the
publications of the Society of Natural Sciences of the West of the
France 4 Nantes. Readings, communications. Tl is read out by their authors
or by the secretary of the works contained in this issue
of the Annals. — M. Preudhomme de Borre shows a copy of the Phol-
cus opilionoides, Arandid new to our fauna, which has
captured at his home 4 Schaerbeek, and on which he made the communication
tion inserted below. — Mr. Jacobs speaking of the few Diptera reported as cap-
turés on the banks of the Gileppe is expressed as follows:

Leucozona lucorum L. is taken quite frequently; I
has a number of specimens, taken from the Campine
to the vicinity of Nivelles. Mr. Devaux also met
many of these insects. £riozona syrphoides Fall. was taken for the first time
month of August 1890 near Ottignies. The collection of

ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM. OF BELGIUM, T. XXXVI. 37

480
Mr. Devaux contained a copy 3 in poor condition, without
date or place of capture. I found in my collection a Conops flavipes Q a téte
almost black and should resemble 4 the variety reported in the
last issue of the Annales; this insect also has legs
darker. I consider it a variety of C. flavipes;
Apart from the color differences, it has the characters of
Vespece. — M. de Crombrugghe circulated before the eyes of the Assembly
a copy of A mphidasis betularius ab. Boisduvaliacaptured at
Olsene and expresses the desire that the species reported as
news be presented to the Society, so that there may be
control over their exact determination. — Mr. Hippert reports the following captures: Eupithecia
Laquararia Q, new species for Belgium, determined
by M. Staudinger, 4 Genck, last August 3; Gortyna Micacea 3
4 Forest, September; Calamia ZLutosa, 4 Leuven, September;
Syrichtus Cirsii Q, 4 Han-sur-Lesse, and Ga Ostend, August; Colias
Fdusa ab. Q Helice 4 marginal bands of the four wings almost
entirely black, 4 Han-sur-Lesse, August. Evebia Blandina was very common this year at Han-sur-
less; M. de Crombrugghe also met her there in very
large number. The meeting adjourned at 4 91/2 hours. BENGAL INSECTS. 24th memory. Second Note on the ELATERIDES of CHOTA-NAGPORE
by E, Candéze. The Cardon bumper, which has already made itself known throughout the world
logical by the beetle harvests that he operated with so much
of zeal and success in Tetara and 4 Konbir-Novatoli, is
currently in residence About twenty leagues further north-
west, 4 Chichuani, in Barwai. The insect collections he made there during the months of July
and August of this year, are even greater than those
from previous years. It is no exaggeration to fix at sixteen hundred species and 4 one
thirty thousand individuals the number of Coleoptera that have been
captured by this skilful entomologist, during the short space of
time that I have just indicated. 481

Father Cardon did not neglect the very small species, so
only too often do naturalist collectors in
tropical countries; also the quantity of forms still unpublished
is it considerable in these last shipments. Judging by the Elaterids, the number of new species
encountered in this region of Bengal is more than doubled. I there
even recognized a new genus which will have to form the type
of a particular tribe. Before listing the species which have been submitted to
my examination, I believe it is well to expose in a few words the
character of the country where Father Cardon transports us this
year. The following information is taken from a notice
published last June in the Précits historigues,
by Fr. Maene S. J. who, also a Belgian missionary, evangelist
jelly with Fr. Cardon in these distant regions. “We are here” writes Mr. Maene “in the center of the Barwai,
in the extreme part of our mission, 4 more than one hundred miles
English from Ranchee, by the ordinary route. "It took us no less than five days 4 horse to get there
reach..... Barwai, Chechari, Kasir and part of
Noaghar who form the four great divisions of our
parish, are between 22° 58’ and 23° 30’ lat. North,
84° and 84th 30’ d. long. East (Mer. of Greenwich), which makes
straight line about 12 leagues from North to South and as many from East
4 / West. “The country is very rugged, crossed by two great rivers,
the Sunk and the Koel, and covered with magnificent woods; he doesn't look like
not bad in the Ardennes, but with this difference that it is
more fertile and richer. Wheat and barley are grown here,
as well as rice; the rivers are peopled with tall and beautiful
fish; the mountains, still unexplored, seem to contain
amount of various metals. “This country was once renowned for providing pre-prepared stones.
and there was a time when the Mughal emperors demanded
a certain amount as annual tribute. Lovers of
scientific collections could satisfy here their tastes and
collect numerous and rare specimens of mineralogy,
botany, etc “The inhabitants belong largely to the race
Ouraonne. By complexion and characteristic features, they relate
very close to the African Moorish type. »

On the other hand, Fr. Cardon writes 4 Liége, to Fr. Renard, in him
sending the product of his hunts: “the field of exploration chosen

482

is a plateau 3400 feet in elevation, cut by a valley
deep whose sides are lined with forests, called Ambacona
or “Valley of the Mango Trees”. At the bottom flows the Sunk which, towards the
top of the valley, dropped 200 feet. The sides are
covered with thick forests; the upper trays are less
wooded. “The hunting conditions are not the same as Novatoli. The vegetation is more powerful there, the forests more numerous and
more extensive and consequently the insects more dispersed. Cer-
a few trees are missing here; others, common to both regions,
don't give anything, while down there they shelter insects
hundreds. “On the other hand, the productive season lasts longer, and such
species that disappear at the beginning of July 4 Novatoli
only show up here in the same month. »

“I believe,” the ardent investigator also writes to me, “that I have
place to be happy with the result of the first entomological season
in a new country, where the fixation 4 the advance of “habitats”
is very difficult the first year, 4 because of the immense extent
forests and the different distribution of the various species
@trees. In particular, I looked for several trees that give me
were many Elaterids of the genera Agonischius and Melano-
canthus, and I Vai did in vain. “Although the hunting ground is only twenty leagues north-
West of Novatoli, the fauna of Barwai is far from being the same. You will notice several overly abundant types down below
whom I have not encountered here, and vice versa. »

These differences will be noted later, when enumerating
some change. Let us add that if general aspect of the country recalls our Ardennes,
the animal population there is quite different. The tigers in particular
are numerous and replace, under the wood, our modest cats
wild animals. It is easy to understand that they leave no
rer to the entomologist hunter certain apprehensions that we
we hardly experience it in the valleys of the Ourthe and the Ambléve. Elaterids harvested this year are divided into 78 species
some of which are represented by hundreds of individuals. On the number, it had already been discovered about forty has
Konbir-Novatoli and 4 Tetara; 19 are new, the others without
be unpublished, had not yet been found in the regions
explored by Father Cardon. As for the other families, it results from the sorting which has been carried out
courtesy of our colleague M. Séverin, that they appear there in the
following way:

  

483

Tiger Beetle and Carabids. Few novelties and specimens
in general, quite badly treated by a kind of maceration suffered
during the trip and having dislocated their articles. Tiger Beetle
particularly suffered. The majority of the Cilenins are there. Aquatic predators and rove beetles are lacking. The
Histerids and Syiphids are few in number. There's enough good
of Scydmenides, Trichopterigians and Clavicornes

The Lamellicorns are mainly represented by the Ielolonthi-
from. Number of Buprestids, especially small species,
where there will be novelties. Absence of Lucanids and relatively few large longhorn beetles; this
which is surprising for the origins of a country so
wooded; but the Curculionids, especially the smaller ones, and the Chiryso-
melides literally swarm there and will undoubtedly produce a
large number of new species and even completely different types
aberrant and extraordinary. Apart from the Coleoptera, there are hardly any but the Hemiptera which
are represented there by a strong contingent of Plataspids and
Pentatomids and moreover by some Homoptera of small and
medium size. The other orders were not researched by Fr. Cardon. It would be unfair to ask too much of the indefatigable collector, but
there is no doubt that if the same ardor were deployed by
our insightful entomologist 4 with regard to other groups of in-
sects, of which some of our colleagues from the Society have
a special study, such as the Odonata, the Bombycites, the
little Hymenopleres and others, there is no doubt, I say, that these
careful investigations would lead to strong findings
interesting for our science in general and for our colleagues
Belgians in particular, given that the regions explored in this way 4
background are still untouched by any entomological research. Survey of the Elaterids. Agrypnus Renardi Cand., Soc. hut. Belg., Reports,
1890. A. punctatus Cand., Monogr., I, p. 26. The first of these spaces is so far specific to the Chota-Nagpore. She has already been found 4 Konbir-Novatoli and 4 Tetara. As for
Secondly, it is found throughout Hindustan, 4 Ceylon, in
transgangetic India and the great islands of Malaysia. Lacon lutosus Cand., Monogr., 1, p. 119. Uncommon. L. tabularius. /usco-brunneus, opacus, dense cervino-sqguamu-

484

losus, immaculatus; front concava, irregulariter punctata;
prothorace latitudini longitudine xgquali, medio paulo ampliato,
disco convexo, big punctato, sulcato, utringue versus basin
impresso, squamulis magnitudine inequali, angulis posticis
parum acutis, curved apice; elytris postice sensim attenuatis,
puntalo-striatis, striis tenuibus, interstitiis planis, pilis cervinis
passin evectis; subtus sulcis quartet distinctis. —Long 18-20mill. ;
lat. 5-6 mill. Large for the genre. Like the previous one, it is placed among the
some species which are conspicuous by erect hairs,
scattered, on the elytra. Its uniform yellowish color, without
brure, do not allow it to be confused with the Jutosus, setwlosus,
defective etc. having the same character. Only a very small number of copies have been found. Her
place is 4 the continuation of Z. multiforis, from Siam. L. melancholicus Cand., Soc. Belg., Reports, 1890. Rare 4 Konbir, collected in Barwai in considerable numbers. L. piger Cand., Zlat. now v., IV, 1889. Few individuals. This space was most abundant 4 Kon-
bir-Novatoli. L. jurulosus Cand., Hlat. new, IV, 1889('). .

Replaces the previous Barwai, as abundance. I do not have
received hundreds of individuals. A feature that helps a lot
4 to make it recognized is existence, near the lateral edge of the
prothorax, with a small, short, oblong protrusion, which is not
although by oblique lighting. This character is constant. L. lustratus Cand., Soc. Belg., Comples-rendus, 1890. Rare. L. transversus Cand., Monogr., 1, 123. Rare. L. tostus Cand., Monogr., I, 129. Few specimens of this species, which is found mainly
separately 4 Sumatra and Borneo,

L. serrula Cand., Monogr., I, p. 149. Abundant. Some are blacker, others more or less yellow.
natres, coloring due to the scales covering the integuments. L. adspersus Cand., Monogr., 1, 125. Many. Very variable in size and color. This last,
reddish or brownish-black, due to the color of the integuments themselves.
memes. L. demissus Cand., Zlat. new, IV, 1889. A dozen people. (‘) Bt not Blat. Birm., as erroneously stated in Cat. System 485

L. succinctus Cand., Soc. Belg., Reports, 1890. Rare. L. nebulosus, Cand., Monogr., 1, p. 115. Rare. L. trifasciatus, Cand., lat nouv., 1, 1865. First described from individuals found 4 Ceylon by
Nietner. I received some later from Japan, then from Sikkim,
Cochinchina and Borneo. It varies a lot in size (2 1/2 4 5 mil.). The specimens, in
large number, found by P. Cardon are very unequal under
this report. Meristhus indecorus. Fuscus, opacus, squalide squamulosus;
prothorace tumido, squamulis argenteis circwmeincto; elytris
punctatostriatis, interstitiis granulosis, seriatim squamulosis,
guttulis duabus posticalibus argenteis. - Long. 6 mill., lat. 1 4/2 mill. Turning of the Jepidotus, of a dull dark grayish color, with the edge
of the prothorax and two small round spots near the top of the
elytra furnished with whitish-silvery scales. Two specimens found by Father Cardon. He is bigger
than other Indian species and resembles African types. Pericus discedens. Brunneus, nitidus breviter fulvo-pilo-
sulus; prothorace longitudine latiore, punctato, circuitu rufescente,
marginis extensione angusta, obscure translucida, angulis posticis
levibus, tumidis, aureo-fasciculatis; elytris vagus subsulcatis,
punctatis, basi ad humeros aureo-villosulis, margine anguste
deplanato; subtus vufescens, sulcis quartet nolatis. - Long. 6 mill., width. 21/2 mill. It differs from the two species previously described: from the nitidus
by its punctuation and the lateral expansions of the prothorax and
elytra much less pronounced; rubicundus by punctuation
of the prothorax normal and not made up of large points 4
flat bottom. This species, found in July, running on the ground, in the
Sunk Valley is unique in that its characters
tend to degenerate to bring it closer to the Lacon of the
Group II, Div. C, 4 diffuse punctuation of elytra. These Lacons
have in fact, the posterior angles of the prothorax constituted 4 little
meadows as in the Pevicus. The general appearance, determined
by the short, wide and domed shape, is also common to them. All that remains is the translucent side expansion of the
corselet and elytra as characteristic of the genus; Again
is this expansion here much reduced, and does it have a tendency
to occur behind the shoulders, in these same Lacon. It is obviously a form of transition. 486

OCTOCRYPTITES. This new tribe, which is established for the next genus is
characterized by the receptive furrows of the antennae and tarsi,
arranged otherwise than among the Agrypnites, as is said
in the diagnosis below. OcrocryPTus n. g.

Antenna breves, in sulco parapleurorum recepte, articulo primo
crasso, secundo minimo, tertio longo, subcylindrico, sequentibus
sensim latioribus. Prosterni suture laterales postice apertw, ad receptionem tar-
sorum anticorum. Metathorax and abdominis basis suleis profundis muniti, ad
receptionem tarsorum pedum sequentium. We see by this diagnosis that this genus, not only
tinge of all known Elaterids, but even then it could not
take rank in the tribe of the Agrypnites which has the condition of
change its characteristic. Indeed we read 4 about the Agrypnites:

"Prosternum having on each side its sutures open to
veceive and hide the antennas aw rest. »

Now, in the extraordinary genus in question here, the
prosternal sutures are wide open, but it is within their scope
tion and not to receive the antennas, but the
tarsi of the first pair of legs. As for the antennas, they
is attributed, in the prothoracic flanks, a deep furrow which
receives them and hides them carefully; in a word, things happen,
Reverse AV of what is seen in Agrypnites. Secondly, the abdomen is the same with two furrows
of the same value, has the effect of receiving and hiding the posterior tarsi
laughing. This feature is not unique to
Elatérides: it has already been encountered in a Chilean genus, the
g. Hexaulacus('). It follows from what precedes that the genus Octocryptus must for-
sea ​​the type of a separate tribe, like the Agrypnites
and summer two. As a secondary feature, I would add that the antennas
are short and do not fold up to enter the furrows
receptors, that they have their 3rd long article, the following more and more
shorter and wider, and that the genus, despite its facies,

(') Independently of G. Potergus, Gastraulacus and Temnilius of the family of
Eucnemids. 487

is more Adelocera than Lacon. The head is very retractile,
to the point that the eyes are only seen when we extract it from the
thorax ot it is deeply encased. The chin guard
prosternum is large and wide, the posterior tip straight; the
mesosternal dimple has prominent and divergent edges, confusing
due with the metasternum, without a separating furrow; finally the
hips are suddenly dilated in their inner half. This remarkable genus is established on the following species:

O. Cardoni. Sgualide niger, opacus, brevissime, rude, parum
conspicuous pilosulus; fronte plana, hevagonali, rugata; prothorace
unequal trapezoidal, verrucoso, medio tumido, postice sulcato,
angulis porrectis, posticis fere vectis; elytris thoracis latitude
verrucis umbilicatis seriatis; subtus convecus, punctatus, opacus;
antennis, tibtis quartet anticis tarsis rufescentibus. - Long. 5-6 mill., lat. will make 2 mill. This little Hlaterid was discovered by Father Cardon, in the month of
July, in the Valley of the Mango Trees, near Chichuani, in
Barwai. The skilful entomologist to whom I make it a point to
dedicate, captured five individuals deeply buried under
plant detritus accumulated on the banks of the Sunk. the way
amazing how this little insect is organized to conceal its
eyes, its antennae and its legs, to the point that it no longer presents
below as above that a resistant surface devoid of
any projection, would seem to demonstrate that it is sometimes subject to 4 of the
bumps and jolts such as he would experience while driving
in the whirlpools of a raging river. All Agrypnites can, in truth, shelter 4 their
antennae; several, many Zacon in particular, make it
as much for their anterior and middle tarsi. Octocryptus,
they have eight caches; hence the name I gave them. Apart from its exceptional characters, its facies
@Terricole Heteromere made me doubt at first that it
belonged to the Hlaterids, and I thought I should submit it to the examination
men of my friend L. Fairmaire who saw there, like me, a mem-
undeniable ber of this last family although somewhat
aberrant. Campsosternus Cantori Hope, 7vans. London, 1841. Several specimens smaller than the types from Assam and
Burma. None brunneicornis Cand., Hat. now v., IV, 16. Only one copy. The guy is from Darjeeling. Singhalenus gibbus. Azgustus, piceus, griseo-pilosulus;
fronte carinata, antice truncata, prothorace latitudine longiore,

 

488,

apice angustato, crebre, antice confluent, punctato, dorso,
femine presertim, parte antica gibboso; elytris parallelis, fortiter
punctatostriatis, interstitis versus basin granulatis; walking bus
rufescentibus. - Long. 12-13 mil., lat. 21/2-3 mill. Father Cardon found 4 Konbir-Novatoli last year and in
very large quantity, the S. Horsfieldi. The latter is invariable-
reddish brown and its prothorax is regularly bulging
and fairly evenly punctuated. In Barwai, all Singhalenus harvested in numbers as
considerable, are much darker in color and I prothorax,
in the female especially, is strongly domed and as if humped in
before. Its punctuation is also stronger and more confluent in
its anterior portion than behind. It is not possible to confuse these two forms. Adiaphorus modestus. Muscus vel brunneus, subopacus, dense
griseo pubescens; procumbent forehead, convexa, carina longitu-
dinali verticis destituta; antennis filiformibus, maris dimidio
corporis longioribus; prothorace latitudine multo longiore,
creberrime punctato, angulis posticis divaricatis, carinatis; elytris
prothorace paulo latioribus, punctato-striatis, interstitiis convexis,
punetatis; subtus nitidior, laminis tarsorum latis. - Long. 10-11 mil., lat. 15/4-2 mill. A dozen specimens. The male is much narrower
than the female and her antennae are longer. The brown color
is particularly noticeable in the latter. The species has
somewhat like the appearance of the Singhalenus gibbus described above
ment, but the generic characters, especially the shape of the forehead,
make a marked difference. It is the fourth known species of the genus. Pachyderes niger Cand., Hat. new, I, 14. Commmon. P. bengalensis Cand., Hlat. new, IV, 23. Rare. Heteroderes lenis Cand., Monogr., Il, 357. Uncommon. H. sericeus Cand., AMonogr., II, 358. Harvested in extreme abundance. I] varies in size and color
changes from light brown to reddish. He is very recognizable by
relative length of its prothorax which sometimes equals 2/3 of the
elytra; no Flaterid is comparable to it in this respect. H. spinosus Cand., Soc. Belg., Reports, 1890. Fairly common. Individuals generally smaller than those
of Konbir-Novatoli. 489

H. canus. Depressus, testaceus, opacus, dense and breviter
griseo-pubescens; dark front, prothorace latitudini longi-
tudine fere vquali, submaculatim infuscato, basi pallidiore;
angulis posticis unicarinatis; elytris tenwiter punctato-striatis,
interstitii planis; subtus concolor, pedibus dilutioribus. - Long. 8-9 mil., lat. 2 1/2 mill. The fourth article of the tarsi bears below a lamella
narrow, which puts it in the 3¢ section. Just looking at it
very close that we see that the disc of the prothorax bears
darker maculatures. Its place is after the albicans. H. brachmana Cand., Monog7., Il, 345. Commmon. H. chrysites Cand., Monogr., Il, 346. Formerly included, like the preceding, in the genus Molus. It is part of a group of small yellow colored Heteroderes
varied with blackish spots or lines, widespread in the regions
tropics of Asia and Africa. Drasterius brahminus Cand., Monogr, II, 426. Quite rare. Usually black. D. sulcatulus Cand., Monogr., II, 427. Abundant. D. collaris Cand., Monogr, Il, 427. Very common. Megapenthes modestus Cand., Soc. Belgium, 1890.

. Commmon. M. moestus Cand., Soc. Belgium, 1890. Commmon. M. aspernendus. Minutus, fusco-niger, opacus, pubescens;
fronte convewa; antennis brunneo-testaceis; prothorace latitude
longiore, parallelo, subcylindrico, postice rufescente, angulis pos-
ticis haud divaricatis, acutis, non carinatis; elytris brevibus,
punctato-striatis, interstitiis subtiliter granulatis; subtus testa-
these. - Long. 6 mill., lat. 1 4/s mill. The smallest of its kind; his appearance is that of one of these
Drasterius so abundant in Bengal, but this appearance is only
superficial. In addition to wildcards, it differs
by the elongation of the prothorax, which makes the elytra appear
tively short; by the testaceous coloration of the underside of the body,
which is never seen in the Drasterius, ow the prosternum alone
is sometimes yellow. This small Megapenthes seems rare. Melanoxanthus dimidiatipennis Cand., M/onogr., II, 513. 490

M. dorsatus Cand., Bull. Belgium, 1890. M. carbunculus Cand., iid. These three species less frequently encountered than at Konbir-
Novatoli. M. anticus. Viger, parumnitidus, brevissime pubescens; aerial
brevibus, nigris, basi brunneis; prothorace subquadrato, convexo,
basi sulcato, rubro, macula antica nigra; angulis posticis retrorsum
productis, acute carinatis; elytris thovacis via latitudine, minus
elongatis, punct.to-striatis, interstitis presertim ad basin granu-
latis, apice integris; subtus pedibusque rufis. - Long. 7 mill.,
lat. 1 4/2 mill. Found at Novatoli from last year, but later than
the publication of the species of this locality. He was found, but
less commonly in Barwai. The arrangement of colors, reminiscent of some Hlater and
Cardiophorus, is also the same as in Melanoxanthus nigro-
signature of Java. It is, however, noticeably smaller and the
underside of the body, including the legs, is entirely red. The
two spaces are nevertheless very close. Anchastus bengalensis. Nigvo-brunneus, nitidus, because
Susco-pilosulus; antenna obscured; prothorace latitude haud
longiore, equaliter sed dense punctato, angulis posticis retrorsum
productis, bicarinatis; elytris fortite punctato-striatis, tnter-
Stitiis planis, punctatis, ad suturam depressis; subtus pedibusgue
concolovibus. - Long. 11 mill., lat. 34/s mill. Big for the genre; aspect of a Diploconus coracinus a thorax
more shortened. The hairs are very deciduous so that the insect,
unless very fresh, appears quite hairless; it's only by
looking very closely we see some preserved brown hairs
in the parts less exposed to friction. Its uniform color, its gloss and above all the size does not allow
not confuse it with another species. It must be placed before the vulneratus. Cryptohypnus sericeus. Wneus, parum nitidus, sericeo-
pubescens; antennis nigris, basi rufis; longitudinal prothorace
latiore, a basi angustato, lateribus carinato, punctato, punctis
medianis majoribus, longitrorsum carinato, angulis posticis loin
carinatis, basi medio dentato; elytris brevibus, striatis. - Long. 3 mill., lat. 141/s mill. Size and shape of the curtus; distinctly tanned
and above all by a short, longitudinal tooth-shaped protrusion, which
located in the middle of the basilar border of the prothorax, in front of the crest. He was captured by Father Cardon, first 4 Konbir-Novatoli and

491

found in greater numbers, in July, under plant detritus
at the edge of the Sunk. C.pictus. Brunneo-niger, opacus, griseo-pubescens; aerial
basi rufis; prothorace longitudine paulo latiore, a basi angustato,
medio longitrorsum carinato, angulis posticis longe carinatis,
vittis rufi tribes; elytris tenuiter striatis, singulatim rufo-trima-
culatis, duabus anticis oblique transversis, tertia subapicali ma-
jore, flavo-rufa; pedibus rufis. - Long. 2 mill., lat. o/s mill. Close to the previous one, as a form, remarkable for its spots
red. The three bands of the prothorax are located: the median on
the hull of the same name, the other two, narrow, inside the
lateral carinas which start from the posterior angles and extend
gent to an anterior edge. On each elytra the 3 spots
are one humeral, the second further back and near the
suture, the third larger and yellower not far from the top. Three individuals were found under plant debris in
edge of the Sunk. C. ovalis Cand., Mem. Soc. sc. Liege, V, 2nd ser., 1873, p. 11. At the same time as the two preceding species, Fr. Car-
don took from the same places, in immense quantities, a
species closely related to Cr. minutissimus from Europe. This species,
wider, more oval in shape, seemed to me to be assimilated
at Cr. ovalis, originally described from specimens pro-
coming from Japan. Arrhaphes opacus Cand., Hat. now v., I, p. 33. A dozen copies. Hemirrhaphes ruficollis. Viger, subopacus, pubescens;
artennis articulo primo rufescente; prothorace sanguineo, latitu-
dine paulo longiore, a basi ad apicem paulo attenuato, crebre
lateribus rugose punctato, angulis posticis carinatis, carina
arcuata intus directa; elytris cum seutello basi rufescentibus,
prnctato-striatis, interstitiis, basi presertim granulatis; subtus
niger, antice rufescens, pedibus rufis. - Long. 6 mill., lat. will make 2 mill. Half a dozen specimens. These two species are among the most remarkable discoveries.
greens of P. Cardon in Bengal. The only known species of Hemirrhaphes, |'H. notabilis, seems
come from regions closer to the Himalayas, while
the true Arrhaphes are more southern, in general. He is
good to remember that the difference between these two very
neighbors consists in the complete absence or inconspicuous presence
of the prosternal suture which, when it appears, as in the

492

current genus, greatly widens the prosternum, main character
Cryptohypnites. H, ruficollis, presents the same coloration as notabilis,
though the bodice is a lighter red; the shape of
prothoracic angular carinas is however different: bisi-
clouds in the notables, it is here simply arched, the concavity
backward. I] is also a bit narrower. Cardiophorus tetradicus Cand., Wonogr., III, 138. Less abundant than at Konbir-Novatoli. C. eximius Cand., Monogr., II, 140. Same comment. C. notatus Fabr., Spec. Jns., I, 273. A single specimen. It is more widespread in the Coromandel and 4
Ceylon. C. anaticus Cand., Monogr, III, 140. Very rare. Like the nodatus, it is mainly found in the south of
V'Hindustan. C. mirabilis Cand., Monogr., Ill, 141. This cute little Cardiophorus has only been found once. I
I have only known two specimens, indicated, without more than
precision, like from the East Indies. C. argutulus Cand., Monogr, Ill, 142. Only one copy. C. umbraculatus Cand., Bull. Belgium, 1890. Less abundant than Konbir-Novatoli and Tetara. C. contemptus Cand., Monogr., III, 202. Uncommon. C. servilis Cand., Monog7., III, 203. Uncommon. C. nebulosus Cand., Monogr., III, 204. Harvested in excessive abundance in Barwai, when it had
was not encountered at Novatoli by Fr. Cardon. A minute study
tious of this small and pretty species convinced me that the C.
cinus, described later (1865), must not be separated from it. The nails are less visibly toothed in the last; there is
no other differences

C. humerosus Cand., Monogr., III, p. 206. Quite rare. C. madidus Cand., Bull. Belgium.. 1890. Fairly common. C.stolatus Erichs., Monog7., p. 316. Very abundant. To delete C. Dohrnt, which only differs
by the less conspicuously toothed tarsal hooks. 493

C. sequabilis Cand., Monogr., III, 209. Rare. C. gangeticus Cand., Monogr., III, 212. Several copies. C. fulvivellus Cand., Monogr., III, 214. Rare. C. anceps Cand., Bull. Belgium, 1890. At the time of the diagnosis which was given of this species, I did not
had seen only about ten specimens. Later the father
Cardon found it in abundance 4 Konbir-Novatoli. It is also common in Barwai. C. macer, Angustus, brunneus vel brunneo-fuscus, parwn niti-
dus, griseo-pubescens; prothorace latitudine multo longiore, basi
apiceque equaliter angustato, crebre invqualit punctato; elytris
fortiter punciato-striatis, interstitiis convewis apice carinatis;
pedibus flavis, tarsis wnguisculis acute dentatis. - Long. 7-9 mil., lat., 1 4/2-2 mil. Found in very large quantities. He is from the section of the last
Cardiophorus, characterized by their toothed nails, their structure
elongated at the same time as by the intervals of the keeled striae
at the end. This one, which varies in size and color, stands out
above all by its narrowness and the length of the prothorax. Melanotus fuscus Fabr., System. Lleut., Il, 228. Uncommon. Widespread especially in the south of Hindustan. M. carinatus Cand., Blat. now v., I, 181. An individual from Barwai showed me no difference with
the typical specimens, which come from Sumatra. Penia Eschscholtzi Cast., Si/d. Rev., IV, p. 11. The guy is from Nepal. Twenty individuals were captured
in Barwai. Aphanobius longithorax Wiedm., Zool. Mag., Il, 1, 106. Commmon. Agonischius finitimus Cand., ull. Belgium, 1890. Commmon. Several copies are devoid of the stain
apical of the elytra. A. humilis. Viger, opacus, angustus; front rugose punctata;
prothorace latitudine longiore, crebre punctato, angulis posticis
divaricatis, not carinatis; elytris thorace paulo latioribus, levi-
terstriatis, dense rugose punctatis; tarsis brunneis. - Long. 7 mill.,
lat. 1 4/2 mill. Following the diversus. 494

The female is a little larger than the male and seems less
opaque. The posterior angles of the prothorax, although high in the middle,
are not properly streamlined. This little species is
easily recognizable 4 the uniformity of its black color and its
opaque appearance, two exceptional characters in the genre. Found in very large numbers. A. limbatus. Parous, niger, nitidus fusco pubescens; ore
rufo; prothorace latitudine longiore, punctato, haud medio sul-
cato, angulis posticis brevibus, intus breviter carinatis; elytris
fortiter punctato-striatis, sutwra late flava; subtus concolor, ept-
pleuris tibiis tarsiscus testaceis. - Long. 5 mill., lat. 5 4/4 mill. One of the smallest species of the genus. Its coloring system recalls the cardiorhinulus, margi-
natus and chalcovanthus. By its unicolored prothorax, it resembles
ble 4 the latter, but it is much smaller. Rare. Glyphonyx brunneus Cand., at new., I, 52. Uncommon. It conforms to the types of Burma. G. suturalis. Viger, parum nitidus, griseo-pubscens; forehead
conveaa, antice fere acuminata; labro ufo; antenna rufo-
Brunei; prothovace longitudine paulo latiore, convexo, crebre
punctato, angulis rufescentibus, posticis carina destitutis; elytris
punctato-striatis, flavo-rufis, sutura plus minusve late nigra;
sublus niger, pedibus rufis. — Long 4 mil., lat. 1 1/5 mill. I hesitated over the genus designation of this species, its forehead
not being absolutely acuminate in front as in the Gly-
typical phony. It is therefore only by examining it very attentively-
ment that we see that its anterior edge is not as angular
in the middle than in the latter, but that it is slightly blunt. It is nonetheless a kind of transition between the two genres. Its place is 4 the end of the Glyphonyz. Silesis inficetus. /'vsco-testaceus, griseo-pubescens; aerial
Brunei; forehead nigra; prothorace longitudine, paulo latiore,
conveco, subliliter punctato, sulcis basalibus obsoletis; elytris
punctato-striatis, interstitis planis, punctatis; subtus obscurior. - Long. 4 mill., lat. 11/s mill. Small space of uniform dark yellowish color, except the forehead
which is black. You have to look closely to recognize that this
the latter is truncated above the labrum. He is so briefly
that at first glance one would think it acuminated, as in the genre
who is before. Rare. 495

S. nigriceps. Rufus, minusve brunneus, haud nitidus,
griseo-pubescens; fronte conveaa, nigra, margine antico late trun-
cat; labro nigra; antennis brunneis, articulo primo nigro; pro-
thorace subquadrato, valde convexo, regulariter crebre punctato,
angulis posticis carinatis, nigris; elytris prothorace paulo latio~
ribus, @ basi attenuatis, punctato-substriatis, interstitiis planis,
crebre punctatis, apice extremo nigro; subtus obscurior femoribus
nigri. - Long. 7-8 mil., lat. 2 2/6 mill. Size and shape of the sericeus which it resembles, were it not for the disposition
sition of colors, apart from a few other characters
less easily visible. The transverse suture which separates the
forehead labrum here is very long. About ten people. Plectrosternus rufus (Latr.) Lacord., Genera, 1V, 228. Fairly common. Hemiops crassa Gyll., in Schénh., Syn., App., 155. Commmon. Most captured individuals are conspicuous
by their small size which sometimes goes down to 7 mill. so
that the normal size is 16,418 mill. ACCIDENTAL APPEARANCE

MANTIS RELIGIOSA AND SOME OTHER INSECTS
IN BELGIUM,

by M. of Selys-Longchamps. Fifty years ago, when I published La Faune belge (1842),
I thought it would be useful to make a separate list of the Birds which
have only been observed in our country as accidental visitors.
such, and which therefore cannot characterize its physiognomy
ornithological. Later, in the article Mammals, Birds and
Reptiles de la Patria belgica (Part 1, page 272, 1873) which contains
a list of all the birds observed so far in Belgium, I had
take care to note again, by a particular sign, those who have not
appeared only accidentally. It seems to me that several orders of our insects have been suffi-
carefully researched and studied by our entomologists, so that
Yon can undertake work of the same kind with regard to the
concerned,

In giving today a summary of what I know about
Orthoptera, Neuroptera Odonata, Lepidoptera Rhopalo-
ceres and the Sphingides, I hope to provoke from our

ANNALS OF THE SOC ENTOM, OF BELGIUM, Ty XXXVI. 38

496

colleagues of the notes of the same kind for the other groups
qwils study specially. I was inclined to write this first essay today for
publicize the twice-noted appearance of the Mantis
religious (A/antis religiosa L.) which does not appear in the Znwmeratio
Orthopterorum Belgii da Prof. Wesmail (Bull. Acad, R. de Bru-
xelles, 1838) nor in my various catalogs of the Orthopteres of
Belgium, which I published in the Annals of our Society ('). The genus Mantis, type of the Jantid family, belongs to
a large section of the Orthoptera, that of the Walkers (Gressoria)
and fills an important void in our lists: it is placed
between the Cowreurs (Blattides) and the Orthopteres Sautewrs (Acri-
Dides, Locustids and Gryllids). I. — ORTHOPTERA. Buarripes. Periplanata americana L. — Imported from South America
dional by ships. It reproduces in the shops of
colonial foodstuffs in particular 4 Anyers in those of sugars and
skins. Periplaneta australasiz Fai. — Brought to the greenhouses
warm with plants from New Holland. It multiplies
sporadically. We understand that horticulturists give it a
interested war. Periplaneta orientalis L. — Native to Asia Minor. Common in homes, especially in bakeries,
kitchens, grocery stores, etc. Phyllodromia germanica L. — Of Asian origin. She
especially inhabits kitchens, where it multiplies in large numbers
number, then disappears, probably chased by the
P. orientalis which is more robust. The four species of Blaites that I have just mentioned could not
live in our climate outside heated buildings. They are not
therefore not indigenous. In my catalog raisonné des Orthopteres de Belgique
(1889), I placed the Blattides at the end of the order, because of the reports
ports they have with the Termitids that start the order
next, that of the Neuroptera. However I think it is

  

 

(') Catalog raisonné des Orthopteres de Belgique, 1862. — Additions or correction
ments to the previous catalogue, 1862, — Catalog raisonné des Orthoptères et
NVeuroptires de Belsrique, 1888. four hundred ninety seven

preferable to follow the series adopted by Mr. Brunner as he
follows:

Runners: Forficulids — Blattids. Walkers: Mantids — Phasmids. Jumpers: Acridids — Locustids — Gryllids. MANTIDS. Mantis religiosa L. — Last August 30 M. Rossignol,
professor 4 at the Athénée de Chimay, informed me that he had
brought a live specimen of the Praying Mantis, taken on August 26
towards evening, on a lettuce, in the garden of Mr. Depasse, receiver
of recording. He had fed with flies that we
was amused to see him take with dexterity and devour. He deigned to me
communicate this singular insect, and graciously offered me to
keep for my collection of native Orthoptera, which
I accepted with deep gratitude. The copy belongs
to type, 4 green coloration. Two years ago, Mr. Guill. Séverin, assistant naturalist at the Museum,
had received another copy of La Mante, taken from Mr. Rifflard,
his relative, 4 the end of August, against a window in the interior of
his house 4 Haine St-Pierre in the same province of Hainaut,
but further north (latitude 50° 30”). Chimay and Haine St-Pierre
are points which quite significantly exceed the septen-
trionale observed for the Mantis. It seems obvious that if this insect of large size and shape
extraordinary lived regularly in Belgium, he did not
so long escaped the eye of our entomologists. It is, moreover, an essentially southern species. Mr. Brown-
ner of Wattenwyl, in his excellent Prodromus der ewrupdischen
Orthopteven (1882) notes that it is common throughout
southern Europe in September and October, and lives in her-
bags. He also received it from Asia and tropical Africa. He considers the northernmost points ott on la
encountered: Le Havre, Fontainebleau, Geneva, Valais, Friborg
in Brisgau, Passau, Vienna, Budapest and Sarepta. But M. Finot, in his important treatise: Orthoptères de
France (Paris 1890), adds 4 various Vhabitat de la Mante
localities in the North and North-East of France such as the surroundings
rons of Paris, the Haut Rhin, Reims, and finally Charleville ot her
was taken in 1879. These are probably accidental appearances.
such especially for Charleville, which is near our borders. Chimay and Haine St-Pierre are even further north, and it is
which makes the two captures that I have reported very interesting
according to MM. Rossignol and Severin. A498

AcripiD)

 

Pachytylus migratorius L.—Native to Tartary and
Ja Southern Russia, dot she art undetermined oques
in central Europe to Belgium. I reported it for the
first time in a note: On the Traveler Grasshopper (Bulletin
Acad. Belgian, t. XVI, 1849) from a copy that I took 4
Longehamps-sur-Geer near Waremme, on September 5 of this
year, in a field of clover. During the same season we
Vobserva 4 Seals near Paris. It is the westernmost locality.
tale of its appearance has been well noted, because the species until
in later times had almost always been confused with
cinerascens Fab., which regularly inhabits certain localities
from Belgium and France. It is even at the cinerascens that he
must report most of the other captures, reported in my
note from 1849. In 1859 the migratovius further pushed its migrations to
Belgium, I took several copies 4 Longehamps. I
collected an individual at the beginning of October, and another
in 1862, August 29; finally our colleague, Bo Paul de Chestret,
has a copy he took two or three years ago. It is well to point out that the Pachytylus migratorius has no
nothing in common with the Acridium peregrinum author of a part
devastation often caused by grasshoppers in Algeria, ob
the most frequent damage is attributable to Stawronotus

 

 

 

 

maroccanus. I am not quite sure that Psophus stvidulus L. inhabits
regularly Belgium, because I know so far only two

examples of its capture; both in the heather meadows
from Lanaeken, in the Limburg Kempen; one by M. Fologne
August 12, 1862 and the other by the late Mr. Adrien Maurissen. I do not
let us not already attribute to him, however, the epithet of spice
erratic, because Mr. Snellen yan Vollenhoven pointed it out in
heathers in Holland. In the collection of the late Mr. Bouillon, there was a copy
of Caloptenus italicus L. i pink wings. He thought he was Belgian, but
without recollection of the exact provenance. This species lives
southern and central Europe. Mr. Brunner mentions that she has
been observed as far as Mecklenburg; and as it is more
or less migratory, it is possible that the individual in the collection
Bouillon was actually taken in Belgium, especially since
M. Finot Vindicates in Lorraine. It is therefore in the parts
Luxembourg's Jurassic period that there would be hope of meeting her,
especially around Virton. 499

In this same country we should also look for the @dipoda
miniata Pallas (germanica Laty.) which lives mainly in Europe
southern, but whose northern limit reaches not only
ment around Paris, but in Lorraine, 4 Verdun, has
a few leagues from our frontier, according to M. Finot. There is all the more chance of meeting her in our
Luxembourg to the southern part, around Arlon or
in the yallée de la Sure, only recently during an excursion
that the Belgian Geological Society made to the extinct volcanoes of
I’Eifel, my grandson Mare de Se this species on August 30
on a schist and arid slope 4 Daun, which is only at the
distance of about ten leagues from our frontier, to the east of
Vielsalm. GRYLLIDS,

Gryllus domesticus L. — The Cricket, or Domestic Cri-cri,
is perfectly acclimatized in the homes of almost any
VEurope; but it is in the same case as the Oriental cockroach; he
could not live and reproduce there if the houses were not
chautt He probably originated in northern Africa
and Madare ot, says Mr. Brunner, it breeds freely in
outside the houses. We can also cite among the acclimatizable Gryllids the
Gryllus bimaculatus De Geer (@. capensis Fabr.) who lives in
coasts of the Mediterranean, Africa and Asia, and that we meet
accidentally in the greenhouses 4 Ghent, and elsewhere,
imported with exotic plants. I received from the same greenhouses living specimens of another
Exotic gryllid, the Gryllotalpa didactyla Latr., imported from
Mexico with living plants. It's 4 fire our colleague Puls
that I owe the communication of these Gryllids and of the Periplaneta
australasiv vepicked in greenhouses 4 Ghent. He. — ODONATE NEUROPTERA. The flight of Dragonflies and Auschnids is powerful. We see
often Aschnids, Anau formosus for example, cross
along a pond for hours without resting; some big
migrations have been observed especially for the Libellula quadri-
maculata, and more recently for Hemianar ephippigerus; he
is therefore not surprising that I have to cite a few species observed
accidentally with us, but which do not reproduce there regularly.
lightly. Those are :

500. Crocothemis erythraea Brulle. — I collected 4 Long-
champs-sur-Geer, three or four individuals during the big
summer heat twice in June and July 1859 and 1878. It inhabits all of southern Europe and central France.
to the outskirts of Paris. Epitheca bimaculata Charp. — The Robyns collection in pos-
seded a copy taken I believe 4 Geel, before 1830. Mr Putzeys
found it 4 Rouge-Cloitre near Brussels in 1841. On his
indications I came to hunt there the following year 4 the same time:
Vespece had undoubtedly reproduced there and was quite abundant there. Since that time they have searched for her in vain. However I took
another female individual isolated on June 4, 1850 on pond 4
Longchamps where I had never observed this species, and where
has not reappeared for forty-two years. The bimaculata inhabits
Eastern and Central Europe. Gomphus similimus Selys. — A single copy taken
at Rouge-Cloitre on July 3, 1881 by Mr. Auguste de Bormans. Her
homeland is southern Europe; its northern limit the surroundings
come from Paris. Cordulegaster bidentatus Selys. — I discovered it 4
Colonster near Tilif in 1834. It was quite common there in June
ot July 1835, at the same time as the IMelitea maturna. Since
this time, we have not seen these species in Belgium, from where they seem
seem to have disappeared. The didentatus inhabits certain mountains
Alps of Germany, Switzerland and the Pyrenees. Anax parthenope Selys. — Known to us by a male
unique taken by M, Auguste de Bormans 4 Ixelles on August 22, 1884. It is a species of southern and central Europe. But she
reproduced regularly around Paris. Hemianax ephippigerus Burm. (mediterranean Selys). —
A copy, from the Museum of Brussels, is indicated as having
was taken June 4, 1874 in the streets of the capital by Mr. Stephenne. The species mainly belongs to North Africa and has
Asia Minor, but its migrations in Mediterranean Europe
have been observed several times. One of them very numerous, which
spread throughout northern Italy, was the subject of a note
of Mr. Victor Ghiliani that I commented on in our reports
(T. XI of our Annales, session of December 7, 1867). 501

MW. ~ LEPIDOPTERA. RHOPALOCERE. Pieris daplidice L. — Meets from time to time at
us in the summer in the meadows and clover fields, but there exists
certainly not every year. It probably comes from France,
or it is quite widespread. Lyceena boetica L. — Three to four isolated individuals have
been observed near Visé, Namur and Louvain in the meadows
artificial, probably imported with seeds. The species is
mainly southern, but extends to the vicinity of Paris,
ott it is common, as almost all Zycwna are
in localities where they reproduce regularly. Lycena hylas Hubn. (baton Bergstr.). — Indicated a
Annevoie near Namur and which has not been found; She is
probably in the same case as the dbetica. The species
found in France. Lyceena cyllarus Fab. — Would have been taken between Verviers and
Aachen. This fact needs to be confirmed, and if it is correct,
it must, it seems, still be attributed to an accidental transport
— 4 even stronger reasons for Zycwna Damon including one
specimen was taken near Antwerp. Melitea maturna L. — Was fairly common in the woods
to 4 Colonster Creeks in 1834 and bred there in 1835. She disappeared. It is found in several parts of France. SPHINGIDAE. Deilephila nerii L., and Deilephila celerio L. — These two
species have been observed several times in fair numbers since
sixty years, but have not persisted with us, any more than in
the greater part of France, although the years or
migrations have taken place we have collected 4 several times the
caterpillars. Their homeland is North Africa and the coasts of
Mediterranean. Deilephila livornica Esp. (lineata Fab.) - Two or three
only copies were taken. Although this species inhabits
regularly the Center and the South of France, its appearance is
much rarer with us than that of D. Werii and Celerio. Sphinx pinastri L. — Did not exist in Belgium before
introduction of pines. According to botanists, these trees

502
were not part of the native flora. The planting of woods
fir trees (as they are called) is relatively recent, and the
Sphinx is perfectly acclimatized and not uncommon. In England
the Sphina pinastri is newly introduced and still very rare. Acherontia atropos I.. — Is by general opinion a
species introduced since the cultivation of potatoes. It is not
not certain that it reproduces regularly in Belgium, but we
Vy meets almost every year. The Harvester Moth and the Plusie gamma. There are also some normally Belgian species, which
some years are much more common than usual.
nary as a result of the arrival of foreign migration. We have it
observed several times throughout Europe for Vanesse
du Chardon (Vanessa Cardui L.). It is assured that these invasions,
which have extended as far as England, come from the North of
Africa, what we claimed to recognize as the greatest
vividness of the colors of the wings. They often coincided with the
extraordinary overabundance of Plusia gamma (Plusia gamma L.)
especially during the month of August 1879. This Plusie caused this summer (1892) serious damage 4 nos
growers. The caterpillar, which is polyphagous, attacked the fields
of clovers, then threw himself on the field crops of beets
Hesbaye sugar. Several farmers remarking the quantity
of Pieris rape L. (the white turnip butterfly), another species
harmful, especially to crucifers, which were seen flying from all sides,
imagined that the Pieris was guilty of the wrong done to the
beets. Having received caterpillars and pupae by
The courtesy of Mr. Charles De Wanck, Provincial Councilor and
agronomist, I found that it was the Plusie gamma. The cabbage and turnip worms operate from the rest of large
migrations in certain years. They devastated this year the
vegetable gardens. We know that the P. rape which did not exist in
United States of America was transported there a few years ago,
that it spreads there in a frightful way, and causes damage
incalculable, as the sparrow that had been acclimatized there
great expense believing it clean 4 to destroy harmful insects,
but which the Americans seek, also at greater cost and
with little success in getting rid of. In our Annales (T. X, session of November 3, 1866) I have
talked about the devastation caused this year by the moth
ringer (Voctua segetum) which attacked the collar of the root

    

  

503,

beets and destroys part of the harvest in certain
localities. In 1866, as in 1892, the rooks (Corvus frugi-
legus L.), which breed together in large colonies in
some small woods of Heshaye, in particular 4 Longchamps-sur-
Geer, 4 Hollogne-sur-Geer, and 4 Limont, and who make excursions
around, have rendered great services to agriculture; they
are thrown on the beet fields devoured by the two
Noctuelids of which I have just spoken, and purged them of them in a few
days, It should be noted with regard to V. segetum, that this
crow is the only bird with the instinct to search the ground
around the neck of the beet, to look for the caterpillars. Note again that in this part of the country the meadows
not suffer from the ravages of the white grub (in Walloon Warbot), larva
du Chafer, again thanks to the Rooks. This habit
study of digging the earth has the effect of making them lose (among
adults) the feathers of the nostrils and those of the upper throat. Do not confuse the Frenx with the Corbine or Corneille
black (Corvus corone L., in Walloon Coirbd d'marass) which
very similar in size and plumage entirely
gloss black; but la Corbine has feathered navines and throat
4 any age; she lives in couple or in small isolated families. This is
a carnivorous bird, harmful, attacking chicks, young
ducks, levreaux and constantly @ the search for eggs. BENGAL INSECTS. 25° memory. BENGAL BOREAL ARADIDS
by E, Bergroth,

In the Bull. Soc. ent. Belgium, 1891, p. oxii-cxty, M. Lethierry
published a note on the Hemiptera collected by the missionaries
Belgians in Bengal. About half of these insects were
Kurseong, not far from Darjeeling a little south of Sikkim('). No Aradide appears in Mr. Lethierry's list. Since
R. P. Braet sent new materials from Kurseong and
also some Aradides, which were communicated to me by M. Severin
and whose names are these. (*) The insects of Kurseong have been enumerated and described in our Annals as
being "of West Bengal" or "of Chotah-Nagpore". Copendant Kurseong
is very far from West Bengal and the Chotah-Nagpore province and must
have a subalpine fauna. 504

1. Aradus abnormis Vergr., Ann. Mus. Civil. Genoa XXVII,
730 (1889). — Two females with black tibiae

2. Brachyrrhynchus sp. — A single copy, which I dare not
not separate from the Fabr membranaceus protein. 3. Brachyrrhynchus sp. — May be new, but on I saw
of a single copy, I cannot decide the question. 4. Brachyrrhynchus undulatus n. sp

Oblongo-ovatus, brevissime pilosulus, fusco-niger. Caput lati-
tudine nonnihil longius, processu apicali medium articuli primi
antennarum paullo superante, apice vix inciso, spinis antenniferis
acutis, articulo primo antennarum elongato, graciliusculo, erect
pilosulo (ceteri articuli desunt), dentibus postocularibus rectis,
acutissimis, oculos superantibus. Pronotum longitudine duplo latius,
margine basali subrecto, marginibus lateralibus crenulatis, paulo
ante medium sinus, angulis apicalibus in lobum apice obtusum
porrectis, disco medio transversim impresso, lobo antico quadri-
calloso, callis externis sat obsoletis, lobo postico antico paulo
latiore. Hemelytra segmentum genitale subattingentia, corio scu-
tello multo longiore, apicem segmenti secundi connexivi vix
attingente, prope basin ultra latus abdominis rotundato-ampliato
and reflexo, angulo apicali rotundato, margine apicali prope
medium subangulato, membrane reticulata. Abdomen lateribus
undulatum, segmentis neinpe, praesertim posterioribus, extus ad
pelvis subsinuatis, apicem versus leviter dilatatis, angulo apicali
segmenti sexti obtuse lobulato-producto. Graceful pedes, breviter
erecte pilosuli. - Long. G 8.6 mill. Bengalia borealis (Kurseong). Very distinct from all its congeners. 5. Neuroctenus by Bergr. NEW SPECIES OF THE GENUS EGY MELNUM Lar. straight,

 

by BE. Among the Aradides, which were sent to me from the Museum of
Brussels, was found, like a pretended Aradide, an insect
belonging to the Pentatomidae family. It's a short story
species of the genus Megymenum, a genus remarkable for its large
resemblance to the Aradids. I give below Ja description
of this insect. Megymenu Severini n. sp. Ovatum, nigrum, hic et illic prasertim subtus cupreonitens,
rosiro and tarsis ferrugineis, area evaporativa atra opaca. Caput

505

subaque longum ac cum oculis latum, apice incisum, ante oculos
tumidum, spineless, articulo secundo antennarum distinete compresso
sed haud dilatato (art. ultimi desunt). Pronotum antice medio in
tuberculum majusculum elevatum, lateribus pone medium angulatis,
marginibus antico-lateralibus medio in lobum majusculum apice
obtusum productis, pone lobum leviter sinuatis and erosulis, ante
hune profunde emarginatis, angulis apicalibus prope oculos in
dentem acutum oblique promiuulis, marginibus postico-lateralibus
subsinuatis. Scutellum callo hasali parvo luteo instractum. Heme-
lytra medium segmenti sexti dorsalis attingentia, membrana basin
[| versus patlescente. Abdomen dorso and subtus minus

 

| se punctulatum, lateribus segmentorum (empty fig.) None in lobum majusculum duos trientes apical segmen-
ee torum occupantem extus rotundatum dilatatis, ante
lobum integris, tuberculo vel dente destitutis, segmentis connexivi
lobis lateralibus duplo latioribus. Pedes cupreo-nitentes, femo-
ribus subtus biseriatim because spinulosis, tibiis because hispidulis. —
Long. Q 15-15.3 mill. Patria: Bengalia borealis (Kurseong). This species cannot be placed in any of the four sub-
genera established by Stal. One could base on this insect a
new subgenus with the following characters: Caput utrinque
ante oculos tumidum, unarmed. Articulus antennarum secundus
(and tertius) haud ampliatus. Thorax antice medio in tuberculum
elevatus. Lateral margins segmentorum abdominis posterius in
lobum sat latum et longum dilatati, ante lobum tuberculo destituti. It is possible that the same configuration of the sides of the abdomen
found at Jf. tawriform Dist. of Japan, but the indication of
M. Distant “margins of the abdomen broadly and obtusely
dentate" is too vague for us to get an exact idea
on this point. The pronotum of J/. Severini is trained almost like
at mf. semivestum Vol. I repeat 4 the figure given by Snellen
van Vollenhoven. 506

NEW LAMIIDS FROM TROPICAL AFRICA

by Aug. Lameère. Coprops HYPOCRITA nov. Sp. Ovato-elongata, nigra, sat nitida, infra pube aurantiaca,
supra pube flavo-grisea irregulariter induta; elytris fortiter
punclatis, postice maculis glabris signaturam obliquam forman-
tibus ornalis; pedibus and antennis griseo-flavo pubescentibus. —
Long. 14 mill. ; lat. 6.5 mill. Gabon, Si-Banghi forest, one specimen (J. Caradot): collection
of the Brussels Museum. Body moderately broad, of a slightly brownish black and rather
shiny, but covered with a short pubescence which in some
places, especially above, leaves glabrous spaces. Antennas
entirely covered, except the scape, with a pubescence of a gray
yellowish; their first article, 4 sparse pubescence, especially at the
above, is alutaceous, and furthermore quite strongly but sparsely
punctured. The pubescence of the head is also sparse, over-
all over the forehead which is vermiculated, but simply punctuated between
the antennae and furrowed to the vertex, which is almost smooth. The pronotum also has irregular pubescence
dispersed, leaving 4 bare alutaceous brilliant spaces, and notably
the five ordinary nodules of the disc which are not very pronounced;
on the cdtés behind are observed very large sunken points. Keusson slightly pubescent. Elytra 4 very slightly protruding hasilar crest,
constituting a simple intumescence; they are screened at their base
large sunken dots, arranged towards the middle in long series
lines continued by weak ridges towards the extremity or the points
tend to disappear; the down, a yellowish gray mixed with
reddish, is interrupted by the points and by the ridges in a manner
to appear arranged towards the middle and the rear in longitudinal bands
very close to each other; these bands are interrupted
at the apical third by a bare and rather vague zigzag design. The down is yellowish gray at the base, russet towards the shoulders;
it becomes whitish towards the middle, then reddens in front of the
stripped zigzag, and the extremity of the elytron is mixed with russet and
yellowish-gray. Underside of the body covered with a beautiful orange down,
absent on the middle line which offers a succession of triangles
bare; some very fine black speckles on each side
abdominal segments; legs covered with yellow down
grayish, darker on the femurs, becoming a little golden at the extremity.
moth of the shins. 507

TRAGOCEPHALA CARBONARIA NOV. sp. Robusta, nigra, infra nitida, pube grisea, supra opaca, pube
JSuliginosa induta; elytris maculis transversis tribes velutinis
nigro-brunneis ornatis. - Long. 24-27mm. ; lat. 8-10mm. Kassai, three specimens (capt. of Macar): coll. Candéze and
Lameère. This species offers no analogy with any other, having a
completely characteristic colouring. Underparts and legs of a black
quite shiny finely and sparsely dotted, and covered with a
short pearl-grey pubescence, absent in the middle of the abdomen,
and replaced by a brownish shadow on the metathorax sides
and abdominal rings. Forehead and cheeks showing the same
gray down and very sparse puncture. The whole top of the body and
the antennae are dull, covered with sooty brown down
dark; pronotum alutaceous, wrinkled on sides of disc; elytra
alutaceae, 4 sooty down with a greyish tint a
some day, with three transverse bands of black-brown down
smooth. Sometimes a small spot of a yellowish gray under the shoulder. OLeNngEcAMPTUS Macart nov. sp. Elongatus, rubro-brunneus, pube flavo-rufa supra dense vestidos;
Sronte, genis and vertice crelaceis; pronoto transversim striato,
maculis utringue duabus cretaceis; elytris valde punctatis, basi
triangulariter cretaceis, singulis insuper maculis guingue cretaceis,
una humerali, una magna ante medium, duabus paulo minoribus
posticis appropinguatis, guinta tandem multo minore inter has in
suture; corpore infra in medio griseo vel cretaceo ornato. —
Long. 20mm. ; lat. 5mm. Haut-Kassai, a Gi (capt. of Macar): coll. Candeze. Robust and elongated, dull reddish brown, covered above
with a russet yellow pubescence and spots of a down of a
chalk white which is easily removed, leaving no
traces as greyish spaces. Forehead covered with small bumps
sparse, offering a thin longitudinal hull extending to
behind the eyes and turning into a furrow on the vertex:
this one is smooth; Cretaceous down is found at the bottom of the forehead, on
the cheeks, behind the eyes and on the vertex. Brown antennae
blackish, covered with roughness below the articles and above
of the first three. Pronotum ridged across, offering each
it was two spots of Cretaceous down of the same size. fcusson
covered with eretaceous down. Helytra quite heavily and sparsely

 

508

punctate, showing patches of eretaceous down, each surrounded
of a space devoid of yellowish pubescence, namely: a large
common triangular spot surrounding the crest, another elongated
under the shoulder, a large one located before the middle, two more
small ones placed one behind the other and contiguous towards the extremity, and
a very small last one between the two previous ones and placed at the
suture. Underside covered with greyish down, Cretaceous in places, without
punctuation; legs 4 greyish down, becoming golden red on
the tibiae and the tarsi. ExocENTRUS RUFICOLLIS noy. sp. Breviusculus, niger, valde pilosus, breviter pubescens; thoracic
omnino rufo; antennarum articulis a 4° basi pallido annulatis;
prothorace angustato, spina laterali simplici. postice eatensa;
scutello brunneo; elytris fortiter punctatis, nitidiusculis, epipleuris
rufis, singulis basi, vitta obliqua in medio and lriente apicali minus
darken; pedibus nigris, Jemorum basi rufa. - Long. 7 mill. ;
lat. 2 mill. Congo, one copy: my collection. Slightly elongated, slightly shiny black, very hairy and covered with a
greyish pubescence; fully reddish thorax. Head of a black
dull, grainy, furrowed from epistome to vertex;
antennae has 1 article grainy and adorned with scattered dots, the others &
from 4°, ringed with russet 4 their base. Pronotum of a redhead
dull, very pubescent, rather narrow, streamlined on the median line,
Lateral spine directed backwards, black at its extremity and simple. Fesson covered with a brown down. Black elytra with slight reflection
tanned, the russet fold, the base, a median oblique band and
the apical third of a livid brown, this hue also sharp
quite a few on the rest of the elytra; these are strongly and quite
densely punctate. Underside of the alutaceous body, covered with a
greyish pubescence, black on the abdomen, red on the sternum;
black legs, the base of the femurs red, the shins covered with large
scattered dots. VOLUMNIA TRANSVERSALIS Nov. sp. Nigra, lata, infra nitidiscula, supra opaca, gross punctata,
pube grisea infra, nigro-brunned supra vestila; forehead, genis and ver-
tice albo-vel flavo-maculatis, vel lineatis; prothorace villis longi-
tudinalibus quinque: wna angusta mediana, medio interrupta,
duabus latiusculis in margine, duabus latiovibus prope cozas
anticas, albis; elytris sulura a lertia parte antica alba, singulis

 

 

509

vittis tribus albis, prima obliqua a medio baseos ad suturam
extensa, secunda lata transversa suluram and carinam lateralem
attingente, ibique postice paululo eatensa, tertia anteapicali; meso-
metasterno et abdomina infra maculis albis notatis. - Long. 17mm. ; lat. 7mm. Haut-Kassai, three specimens (capt. of Macar): coll. Candaze
and Lameere. Robust and large species, black, a little shiny and covered
Wa faint greyish pubescence below; opaque and covered
dark brown pubescence adorned with upright hairs
above. Head quite strongly but sparsely pitted, the
finer punctuation on the cheeks and behind the eyes, stronger
and a little confluent on the occiput; furrowed forehead, adorned with a
greyish, denser, yellowish-white pubescence of each
side; cheeks covered with yellowish-white pubescence; of them
longitudinal lines on Vocciput and a narrow band behind
each it continuing into the lateral band of the prothorax, from
whitish down; antennae with finely punctate first article, a
not very shiny; the other opaque, covered with a pubescence of a
dark brown, greyish on the 3¢ and at the base of the 4° and 5th. Prothorax
transverse, weakly rounded on the sides, very strongly punctuated
on the disc, weaker on the sides, covered above
dark brown down; it offers five white longitudinal bands
catres: a narrow median, interrupted in the middle, one of
each side wider, continuing the cephalic band located
behind the wil, and extended by the basilar oblique band of the
elytra, finally one on each side below, even wider and
continued by a similar band of the mesothorax. blackish escutcheon,
depressed and edged with grayness on arrival. Elytra very strongly
punctate, the very large points at the base to which they give a
reticulated appearance, covered with a very short brown down
dark and adorned with white bands, namely: an oblique band
fairly narrow starts from the middle of the base to join the suture at the
anterior third; 4 from this point, the suture is white until
end of the elytron; a wide median band extends from
the suture up to the lateral carina where it is extended slightly
and angularly behind; a third band in the shape of an are
4 anterior concavity is near the end, towards which
it is extended behind by a light greyish down; a line
white narrow skirts over a more or less wide extent the
lateral hull of the elytra on the epipleura: this offers a down
greyish. Meso- and metasternum with a band of white down
chatre on each side; a spot of the same color on the episteres

 

 

 

 

  

510

metathoracic nums; underside of the abdomen smooth, offering two
whitish bands on each side, one of which is quite lateral
and more or less hidden by the edge of the elytra. Finely paws
dotted, covered with a fine ashy down. ON A CAPTURE, IN BELGIUM,
pu PHOLCUS OPILIONOIDES Scurank

(phalangioides Waxcx. ),

 

by A, Preudhomme de Bor

There is not 4 my knowledge that any Araneid of the genus
Pholcus, nor of the Pholcidw family, has hitherto been captured in
Belgium. However, the places of capture of Pholeus opilionoides Schr.,
mainly southern species, are quite numerous in countries that
around us and in even more northern areas, so that it
fat allowed to expect to be able to register some day, did it as a
accidental visitor, this Pholcus among our native species. Already in 1870, the eminent Dutch arachnologist, M. le Général
From A. W. M. van Hasselt, 4 occasion of some captures in
Holland, published in the Tijdschrift voor Hntomologie (t. X11),
a long and remarkable study on this species, which can be
look, if not as definitively acquired in the lands of
middle Europe, and even boreal, at least as trying
sometimes to settle there (*). On October 26, someone came to tell me that a stone's throw from me,
on the landing wall of my first floor (To Schaerbeck, by
consequent), walked an extraordinary animal, 4 long
paws. I hastened to gently drop it into a
jar of alcohol, fearing very much that he would make the sacrifice or

 

(!) The most northern localities, where it had been observed & the time of the
work of Mr. van Hasselt, were: City of Wight and Liverpool (Blackwall),
Amsterdam, Utrecht, Leiden, Delft and Dordrecht (van Hasselt), Gotheborg in
Sweden (Westring) and even St. Petersburg (Siemaschko). I did not have the time
to seek the indications of other localities, which were certainly published
since then. It is possible that she has been seen more than once in Belgium, but without
be noticed there Jement, if one notices the spiders of the houses, and such
is the Ph. optitonoides is to crush them immediately, not to indulge
Atheir study. ° M, General van Hasselt is in the Dutch language, but he has
‘also published in French and can be found in the Dutch Archives of
Water and natural sciences, t. V (1870), p. 340. If

 

amputation of some of his legs. Fortunately he remained
whole, and when he was dead, I was able to study this articulated curienx which,
by the length and slenderness of its legs, was first
think of a Fauchenr. But the body being that of a spider
true, I immediately suspected that I must have been dealing with a
Pholcus, and soon, by confrontation with a good figure,
and then with a no less good description, that of Latreille
(Crustaceans, Arachnids and Insects, Paris, 1829, 1, 241),
I was certain to have encountered this rare Pholeus opilionoides ('). How desirable it would be for attention to be drawn here to this
space, to arrive 4 new captures, I will say two words
its appearance and characteristics, which are easy to see with a magnifying glass. Has disproportionately long and slender legs. as I come from
say so, it joins a soft body, whose cephalothorax and abdo-
men are separated by a short, narrow peduncle. The chest is
quite depressed, and, in front, are the eyes, the ocelli, for better
say, to the number of buit; two smaller ones in the middle, transverse-
ment placed on a small tubercle; the others, larger, are
joined together in threes, on each side, in a sort of cloverleaf. The abdomen
is more or less cylindrical. Whole body measures approx.
7 48 millimeters in length, and is covered with fine pubescence
and short which can only be distinguished with a magnifying glass. It is one color
livid yellowish; on the middle of the cephalotho a nebulosity
greyish, triangular in shape (? ), or 4 pen pres. On the abdomen,
especially towards the end there is a mottling of small spots gr
inconspicuous blackness

The legs, of the same color as the body, and also pubescent,
each bear a ring of pure white, ’ the extremity of each
thigh and each tibia. In countries where it is certainly native, this species
lives in the houses and spins there, they say, in the corners of the walls,
a rather imperfect canvas

P. S. — I preferred to use the name opilionoides,
because qwil is that of the last monograph of the Pholcidw
Simon, 1866). Our learned colleague, very subject to the law of

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

   

    

 
 

»res Walckenaer, all good authors from the beginning

  
  

if it seems that, since then, we have discovered that
Jes, before Walekenaer (1802), and before the use of the name
forgotten from opilionoides by Schrank (1781), had already served

  

 

(*) I have since verified the accuracy of my determination with the Monogra-
phie des Plolcus, by M. Eug. Simon (no. Soc. Ent. France, 18\

(*) The figure of M. Eug. Simon represents this stain comine well divided into
of them; but I do not see this division in the copy taken by me. ANNALS OF THE SOc. EXTON

 

OF BELGIUM, T. AXXVI. she

4 Puessly (1778-1779), and remained unnoticed. So that the as-
servitude has absolute priority now has this effect, of bringing
a new about-face. What proves, and the disadvantages
considerable practices of this law of absolute priority, and how
we must be careful not to be in too much of a hurry to adopt a name,
believed to be the oldest. For my part, I always
declared that I was ready To bow, half-heartedly, I confess,
before the principle of the resurrection of the oldest name, but has
one condition is that, to avoid things like the one that
we see here, it is, in practice, mitigated and limited by another
principle, that of only allowing modifications during a
monographic work, which must fix the nomenclature, at
less temporarily, if you don't want more. Here is why
I stand on behalf of opilionoides, from the latest monograph of
Pholcida’, that of Simon (1866), and this, until this qwilait parunne
new monograph of this group. So we'll see. Who knows
if, Cici i, we will not have found reasons not to resume
phalangioides, this poor phalangioides, qwil have been so simple and so
practical not to give up, since he had served 4 Walckenaer,
a Latreille and 4 tutti quanti. HR LEI I -

    
   
   
 
   
     
       

OF

BELGIUM

THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME

xi

Co number must be kept; it won't be sent for a second
times as before. BRUSSELS
AT SOCIETH HEADQUARTERS
20, NUSEE STREET, 20 ‘7
i have
1892 f ef

 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. XII

Minutes of the monthly meeting of December 3, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP OF Mr. Giron. Present: Messrs. Becker, Bergé, Ed. Coucke, L. Coucke, of
Crombrugghe, Fologna, Hippert, Jacobs, Kerremans, Ledrou,
Robbe, de Selys-Longchamps, Séverin, Van Nerom and Lameere,
secretary. M. Tosquinet excused his absence. Mr. P. Chrétien, from Paris, is present. The session is open 4 8 hours. The minutes of the meeting of November 5 are approved
after the following correction requested by Mr. de Crombrugghe:
it is to Mr. Robbe that the communication on the
variety of Amphidasis betularia, variety which must bear the name of
Doubledayaria and not Boisduvalia printed by mistake. Decisions of the Council. The President announces 4 V’assembly
wheat the names of the six candidates presented by the Board to the
vacancies in honorary membership following the death of
MM. Burmeister and Dohrn. The following proposal intended 4 to appear 4 on the agenda of
The general meeting is presented by the members present 4 the
session: Decision 4 to make regarding members who refuse
to pay their dues. The Board received the resignation of Mr. Bargagli, effective member. Correspondence. M. Roelofs sends his portrait for the album
of the society. The assembly appoints our colleague Mr. T. L. Casey to
represent the Society at the 150th anniversary of the founding of
American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia. The exchange of the Annals for the Proceedings of the Scientific Society
of Chile founded by a group of French 4 Santiago is voted. Readings, communications. The assembly determines the composition
of this issue of Aunales; it postpones 4 the examination of

ANNALKS DE LA SOC, ENTOM, OK BELGIUM, 7. XXXVI, 40

bid

MM. Candéze, Séverin and Kerremans a corrective work on the
Catalog of Buprestids sent by M. Neervoort van de Poll,
and decides to insert in number I of volume XXXVII of the Annales a
Note on the Choa Coleoptera by M. L. Fairmaire. — Mr. Séverin announces that the Brussels Museum has acquired the
Lamellicornes from the collection of our late colleague, founding member

: dater of the Society, La Fontaine. There are about 2500 species represented by 8200 specimens,
Coprophages, Dynastides and Ketonides, mainly from Ame-
South Africa and Australia, being the majority there. — Mr. Robbe read out the following reflections on a
aptless female of Biston hirtarius which he passes under his eyes
of the assembly:

All the Belgian Lepidoptera belonging to the genera Hibernia
Latr., Anisopleryx Steph., Phigalia Dup. and Biston Leach are
characterized by the fact that their females are fit or not
often show only the rudiments of wings, as seen
found in Hibernia ruficapraria and leucophacaria God. In the genus Biston, there are two exceptions to this rule:
Biston hirtarius God. and Biston prodvomaria God., whose
two females are perfectly winged and even larger than
the male. It is especially in species that hatch in
periods of cold, at the beginning or 4 the end of the season that we
observe the Q aptres. The apt Q copy of hirtarius God. that I present to you
today seemed quite interesting to me. He was captured on a
tree throne 4 Ghent, in the company of several males. Wings
are completely aborted, reduced to a small stump making
Barely protruded; however, the upper right wing suffered a
more complete development (2 millim. approximately) and stands out,
A magnifying glass, in its details. We are perhaps dealing in the present case with 4 a Q having
suffered, as is found in many species both
diurnal than nocturnal, a simple accidental arrest of development
is lying; however, it should be noted that this insect was not
obtained by breeding the caterpillar, that it does not have the appearance
of a butterfly whose wings formed suitably in the
chrysalis would not have developed, for lack of humidity,
heat or other conditions, but rather it has the facies
of his aptar congeners who precede him in the group; finally,
quill precisely occupies in the classification the limit between the
flightless and winged species and that it does not seem impossible that this
hirtarius can, according to certain external causes, present

 

515

Q winged or not, the latter having perhaps escaped 4
observation. —M. deCrombrugghe reports on an excursion
entomological 4 Han-sur-Lesse and its surroundings in August 1892:

I observed in certain parts of the Lesse valley in
August 1892 a great abundance of Irebia Blandina. On August 17 I met for the first time this Zrebia on the
hill which surmounts the cave of Han-sur-Lesse. I met her
a second time (August 19), and much more abundant, in the
meadows located along the road that connects Han a Ave.

As of August 17, the copies were no longer fresh. I met this Hrebia again on August 25, but in small
number, on the high meadows which overhang the Lesse between
Chanly and Resteigne. The males in these three localities were more numerous than the
females. I have only captured two worthy Heterocbres in this region.
Wetre reported:

the Luperina Virens, a faded specimen, on an ash bordering
the road from Tellin to Wavreilles, August 26;

2° Chareas Graminis, same period, a copy @ in
a dwelling 4 Tellin. — Mr. Hippert showed the assembly a certain number of
Lepidoptera new to wildlife or rare, the capture of which
was announced in previous issues of the Annales. — Mr. Bergé makes it known that at the 4 Paris alcohol exhibition,
he saw exhibited by the French Society of Chemical Products,
the now industrial process for destroying larvae
of the cockchafer by Jsaria and Botrytis. Apple fragments
of soil infected by these fungi are mixed with the soil and
the parasite thus passes over the white grubs which it exterminates; a
only inconvenience can result from this sowing: the bees
and Silkworms can contract the epidemic; so it's good
not to use this means in the regions where Von collects the
silk or honey. The meeting adjourned 49 1/2 hours. 516

NEW SPECIES OF FORMICIDES pz MADAGASCAR
(COLLECTED BY M. SIKORA)

First series

by Auguste Forel

 

Professor & the University of Zirich. My work on the Formicides of Madagascar, forming the 28m«
booklet of the great work of M. Grandidier on Natural History
of Madagascar, has just 4 just been completed that Mr. Sikora
sends me new and very interesting things. I want in
publish here provisional descriptions which will allow 4 each
entomologist to obtain through T'indefatigable
hunting a complete and determined collection of the Formicides of
this inexhaustible island, whose fauna, so distinct from all
others, almost equals 4 alone one of the great faunas of the
world (e.g. 4 Australian fauna ov 4 Indo-
faintness). Prenolepis amblyops Forel, race rubescens n. st. 9. L. 3.43, 2 mill. Apart from its larger size, this breed differs from the
P. amblyops i. sp., by its color of a reddish yellow or reddish
satre, by the erect hairs which are a little more pointed and yellow
or reddish (black brown in amblyops i. sp.). In addition the
sides of the head are a little more convex and the head is a little more
large. The thorax is shiny, almost without sculpture (a pen
punctate wrinkled in amdlyops). The abdomen, on the other hand, is more
pubescent, punctate and less shiny than in amblyops. Amparafaravantsiy (left bank of the Mangoro). Madagascar. Prenolepis amblyops Forel, (still unpublished). L. 5, 4 mill. Of a brownish yellow; abdomen yellowish brown. Paws
testaceous. Hairs more pointed than in the worker and of a yellow
brownish. Same locality as the previous one, with workers. Prenolepis Ellisii Forel, 6 Q G. Same locality. A variety
darker in color, blackish, with the joints of the legs
yellowish. The internal extension of the middle genital valves
nes is a little more elongated and more concave 4 its edge opposite to the
warts. The exterior valyules are more indented at their
extremity and the two protuberances which limit the indentation are
more equal to each other (a bit like in P. Sikorz). 517

Prenolepis gracilis n. sp. 9. L. 2.8 4 3 mill. More hail
than other species of the genus, without being as slender as the
P. longicornis. The scape of the antennae exceeds the occiput of the
half of its length 4 or so. Head much longer than
broad, shaped like P. longicornis, but larger
and wider. Pronotum a little longer than wide. Kchancrure
much deeper and shorter mesomethoracic
(less flared) than in P. longicornis. The two stigmata
are located dorsally in the middle of the notch, and very close
each other. Metanotum rounded and short; basal face
as long as the sloping face; the two faces form one
one and the same curve. Fairly thick scale, rounded at the top. The mandibles have six teeth and a few ridges; their edge ter-
minal is very oblique, the epistome is widely indented at the
middle of its anterior edge. Eyes located in the middle of the sides of
the head. The head is convex behind or it is narrower than at the
eye level. Absolutely smooth, polished and very shiny, including the legs. Almost no pubescence; on the legs and the scapes even her
is diluted and extremely short and thin. all over the body,
the scapes and on the legs are long blackish bristles,
very thick, more or less pointed or obtuse, bristly, more
longer than in other species of the genus and very characteristic
ticks. They are very abundant on the scapes and the tibiae; on
the scapes they form two regular series, all directed
two obliquely forward. Pale, dirty yellowish brown; antennae, tibiae, top of the
head and upper abdomen brownish. Andrangoloaca forest. Strumigenys Grandidieri n. sp. 9. L. 4.54 4.6 mill. (with
the mandibles). Mandibles as long as more than half the
rest of the head, inserted 4 sides apart, straight and parallel
leles, as in S'. imitator Mayr, and just like at
the Odontomachus; they are relatively wide, with two edges
parallel, smooth, shiny and ending in two long teeth
pointed, simple, curved inwards, the upper part of which is
slightly longer than the lower. The inner edge ends
before the upper tooth by a prominent angle which forms a
small, very obtuse tooth preceded by an even smaller one;
I remain from the inner edge without teeth. Triangle head, very
elongated, extremely narrowed in front, extremely widened
behind, and more deeply indented at Vocciput than all
the species I know of, which divides the posterior head-

518

larly in two lobes. Sides of the head wide and enough
deeply indented in front of the eyes. This indentation which
is much wider than in S. Rogeri Emery and incised
Forel (in lit.) also corresponds 4 to a lateral extension of the
antennal fossa going under the head. A strong impression
transverse behind the mouth, under the head. epistome closely
extended behind, or surrounded by a depression in the forehead. Eyes located 4 barely forward of the middle of the sides. Frontal furrow
wide and quite long. The scapes are straight, cylindrical, narrow;
they reach the middle of the occipital notch, but are far
@ reach the posterior angles of the head. Elongated prothorax and
narrowed front in the shape of a neck that fits into the cutout
occipital. Obsolete pro-mesonotal suture. The pronotum and the
mesonotum are raised and form in the middle a vertex 4 from
of which the pronotum is lowered forward and the mesonotum backward
each forming only a weak convexity. Mesonotum
greatly shrunk. The basal face of the metanotum is much
lower than the mesonotum, without any indentation between
the two ; it is horizontal, 2 1/2 times as long as it is wide,
much longer than the sloping face. Metanotal spines
strong, fairly narrow, longer than the interval between their bases,
slightly divergent, almost vertical and even slightly curved in
before, rather obtuse at their extremity. Sloping face lined with two
very small lateral edges and a transverse, interspinal edge
not membranous. First article of the pedicle very long-
petiolate in front, surmounted behind by a wedge-shaped newud
subvertically truncated in front, much longer than wide;
the anterior petiole is convex above, concave below,
as long as the basal side of the metanotum. The first article of
pedicle has no spongy expansion. Almost second node
as long as wide, relatively narrow, with some expansions
spongy moths little developed, of a brownish yellow, below and
behind. Abdomen oval, pointed 4 the extremity. Abdomen smooth, shiny, with some very longitudinal ridges
short At its base. Sloping face of the metanotum smooth and smooth. All the rest of the body, the legs and the scapes densely reticulated-
punctate, nat, microscopically granulated at bottom of dots. In
in addition, the thorax and the head have rather coarse reticulations and ru-
irregular grooves, superimposed on the reticulated-punctuated sculpture. Very sparse pubescence and hairiness, brownish yellow; the
erect and flat hairs are thick and obtuse, but not dilated or
keyed. A row of curved hairs in front of the epistome and in front
the escapes. The shins have only lying or oblique hairs, the
mostly very short. 519

Of a dull and dirty ferruginous red, ¢d and 14 a little yellowish. A spot on the vertex, above the pronotum and mesonotum,
pedicle, spines, tibiae, tarsi and abdomen brownish; middle of
Abdomen dark brown. Andrangoloaca forest. This is the greatest Strwmigenys that I
know, larger than the S. saliens Mayr. Plagiolepis madecassa Forel, 9. This form deserves to be
raised to species rank and separated from P. pygmaa. Its waist is more slender than that of the pygmwa, and the middle of the
mesonotum is very distinctly constricted, so that its portion
posterior, joined to the postmesonotal stigmata is as long
than its anterior portion located in front of the constriction. The eyes
are also located in the anterior third of the head and the punctuation
piliger of the thorax and the head is much more distinct than in the
pygmva. The abdomen has a few coarse, arranged reddish bristles.
slightly older in series. Same locality as the preceding species, in the termites of
earth. The Mangoro specimens are almost black, shiny,
darker than those of Andrangoloaka. Lobopelta angusta n. sp. None L. 9.8 4 10 mill. Similar to
the L. chinensis Mayr of India, but even narrower and more
long. Mandibles _smooth shiny, sparsely pitted,
with an external basal groove, much wider than in the
L. chinensis, enlarged 4 V'end, 4 concave outer edge and 4
sharp terminal edge, passing to the inner edge by a curve
very rounded. Epistome 4 keel very sharp and with a lobe
anterior very advanced, the edge of which is in no way crenellated. Large, flat eyes. Head almost twice as long
broad, moderately narrowed behind, posterior hord
fairly straight, 4 non-convex sides, slightly indented Thorax
behind the mesonotum. Basal surface of metanotum slightly
longer than mesonotum and pronotum combined. A furrow
longitudinal in the middle of the curve which connects the two faces of the
metanotum. Extremely elongated and compressed pedicle node,
widened behind, 3 times as long as its posterior width and
9 times as long as the width of its anterior third, vertical-
ment truncated behind. Abdomen very long, very narrow, 4 barely
strangled after his 1 segment. Long legs and antennae. scapes
especially widened towards their first third, exceeding by a third of
their length the posterior edge of the head. Two very spurs
distinct at the median and posterior tibiae, one simple, the other
pecting. Smooth, shiny, with sparse pitting mostly spread

 

 

520

on the abdomen and on the head and with a slightly metallic sheen
bluish, even more distinct than in LZ. chinensis. Reddish erect hair, fairly short, pointed, abundant
on the scapes and shins, mediocre on the front of the head and the
rest of the legs, almost none elsewhere. Very sparse pubescence,
very short, raised. Slightly brownish black. Scapes, hips and thighs brown. Mandibles, extremity of the abdomen, tibiae and funicles of a
brownish red. Reddish tarsi. Andrangoloaka forest, on the borders of Imerina. A 9. The termitophagous habits of the Lobopelta demonstrated by
Mr. Wroughton (Journal of the Soc. of Nat. Hist. of Bombay, 1892:
Our Ants), together with the fact that their Q, unknown until now, is
probably blind, as Mr. Emery rightly supposes,
makes me suppose that the Dorylids are descended from Ponerides
analogous to Lobopelta and Leptogenys which are in the
same case, and of which the Zobopelta are hardly more than a subgenus. Cerapachys Mayri Forel, var. brachynodus”. vy. 9. Differs from the typical form by the much shorter pedicle, of which
the sides are hardly longer than half the width. The horizontal teeth of its posterior angles are also a little
shorter. The metathorax is a little wider. Ponera Elise Forel (variety 4 mandibles irregularly
denticulate) and Ponera Johanne Forel (variety 4 notch
meso-metanotal somewhat weaker, mostly forming an esealier
less marked with the mesonotum), both harvested a
Amparafaravantsiv. Mystrium mysticum Roger, § (still unpublished). L.6 47.3
mill. Differs from the Q in its hair on the body, legs and
spoon-shaped keyed scapes, however longer and less
expanded than in Mf. Camille Em. Intermediate segment
(postscutellum) longer than the mesonotum and separated from it by
a deep, coarsely ridged suture. Back of the chest
subdepressed, 4 distinct sutures. Submerged pronotum. The face
slope of the metanotum forms with the basal face an angle almost
straight (a little obtuse). Teeth from the anterior angles of the head
much shorter than in Jf. Camille. The back of the chest
is grossly rough and wrinkled. The metanotum is not more
wider than the intermediate segment (much wider in the
Mr Camille). Moreover, like the Q.

Amparafaravantsiv. Tetramorium (Xiphomyrmex) Steinheili n. sp. 9. W. 3.7
mill. approximately. A little smaller than the 7. Andrei from whom he

521

distinguished by the articles of the pedicle which are shiny, almost
smooth, and in particular in the 1st article, long petiolate
in front, with a scaly knot, concave in front and convex
behind, like that of Z. Bessonii, but a little thicker. The gross wrinkles of the thorax, and especially those of the head, are
much more regular than those of |’ Andrei; those of the head are
transformed into streaks. Mandibles weakly serrated. The back of
thorax is broader, shorter and more depressed, more distinct-
lined with more accentuated festoons, especially that of the mesonotum
which is very advanced. The eyes are set further back, almost
in the middle of the sides. Slightly shorter hairiness and metaster-like spines
fins a little longer than in the 7’. Audrey. Color more
dark, sometimes more brownish, with the antennae, the jaws
ules, the legs, the pedicle and the extremity of the "bdomen of a
reddish more or less yellowish or brownish. For the rest, like
I. Andrey. Q. L. 4.5 mill. Wings fairly narrow, subhyaline, with veins
and pale marginal spot. Thorax narrower than the head. Of
stay as a worker

Forest of Andrangoloaka (borders of Imerina). Tetramorium (Kiphomyrmex) Andrei Forel, race robus-
n. st. ©. L. about 3.8 mil. Stronger and shorter than
the typical form. The thorax is distinctly bordered, with a large
lateral festoon in the pronotum and a smaller one in the mesonotum; those
characters are even more distinct than in 7. Steinheili. Slightly brownish black. Abdomen blackish brown. Paws,
antennae and mandibles reddish. Even stronger sculpture
and coarser than in the typical form of the village of Nosibé
on the borders of Imerind and the edges of the Mangoro

Andrangoloaka forest. Tetramorium (Xiphomyrmex) Nassonowii n. sp. 9. L, 3, 4 mill. approximately. Rectangular head. Eyes set a little
back of the anterior third. The frontal edges are low
and form on the outside only a little accentuated place for the
scapes (place devoid of coarse wrinkles). Convex chest. Pronotum not at all, mesonotum and metanotum weakly subbor-
from. A distinct small indentation 4 the meso-metanotal suture,
Metanotum armed only with two triangular teeth 4 hardly
longer than metasternal lamellar teeth, as wide
that long. The first article of the pedicle is rather briefly petiolate
(as with 7. Schaufussii), surmounted by a cubic knot-
rounded, as long as wide (longer than Schau-

Sussii). 522

Subopaque head and thorax, longitudinally and magnifyingly
wrinkled. The forehead is rather streaked, the sides of the head are rather
reticulated; on the thorax, the sculpture weakens behind. Face
sloping metanotum, pedicle and abdomen smooth and shiny. On the body a very fine and rather sparse upright hairiness. scapes
and tibiae having only adjacent or underlying pubescence. Reddish. Abdomen brownish. Legs and scapes of a redhead
yellowish. Very close to 7'. Schawfussii Forel, from which it differs mainly in
the teeth of the metanotum, the longest node of the pedicle and the
bigger size. The meso-metanotal notch is also more
distinct. Andrangoloaka forest. Tetramorium (Xiphomyrmex) Sikore n. sp. 9. W. 2.2 4
2.4 mill. Very similar to 7'. Schaufussii and Nassonowii, but
much smaller in size, and with a more robust, wider thorax,
weakly convex, with subdepressed and subbordered back. The chest and the
head are subopaque, very finely and fairly densely reticulated-
pitted, with moderately coarse superimposed carving,
rather weak and vague, reticulate on the back of the thorax, longitudina-
slightly wrinkled on head and sides of thorax. Armed Metanotum
two tines noticeably longer than the 7'. Vassonowit
or if you prefer two extremely short spines, many
shorter than those of the 7'. Schaufussti. Lamelliform teeth
very short metasternals. Meso-metanotal suture as in
the L. Schaufussii. First node of the pedicle as in the
Z. Schaufussii, but noticeably higher, more rounded at the
top, especially in front, and even shorter. It is higher
than the 2m naesud. Pedicle and abdomen smooth and shiny. Of a yellowish red. Abdomen reddish brown. Legs and
mandibles reddish yellow. Hairiness and pubescence even weaker than in the 7'. Masso-
nowit. For the rest like this species and like the 7'. Schaufussit. Amparafaravantsiv. Monomorium termitobium n. sp. None L. 1.6 to 1.8 mill. Mandibles armed with 4 teeth. Distinct epistome keels. Antennae of 12 articles; the scapes are far from reaching the edge
back of the head. Rectangular, elongated head. Eyes located
towards the anterior third, very small. The head is slightly convex. Thorax deeply incised between the mesonotum and the metanotum. The latter forms only one moderately convex curve,
without apparent limit between the basal face and the sloping face. First segment of the pedicle briefly stalked, surmounted by a

 

 

523

node which, seen from the side, is conical, larger and higher than
the second node; its anterior side is a little longer than the
rear panel; it recalls the let nud of certain Solenopsis. Abdomen large, legs and antennae short; pretty body shape
slender. translucent chitin. The whole body very smooth and very smooth, with
a few key points. Erect, yellowish, very fine hairs
scattered all over the place. On the shins and scapes, these hairs are
more abundant, rather short and oblique. No pubescence adja~
visible center. Of a translucent orange-yellow, honey color. Abdomen and
legs of a lighter yellow, with some transverse clouds
slightly brownish in the middle of the abdominal segments. At first glance, this species looks like a Solenopsis. But
the antennae prove that it is an Afonomorium. Is it can-
to be Vouvriere of one of the species whose sexes we have described
winged? It doesn't seem likely to me. Amparafaravantsiv. Parasite of earthen termite nests,
@after Mr. Sikora. Genus AEROMYRMA Forel. None Differs from the genus Solenopsis proper only in its
short forms, its toothed metanotum, the dimorphism considered
worker’s table and the penultimate article of the antenna (1* of the
club) much shorter. Mr. Emery received a hook
to the legs of a Q. Maxillary and labial palps of 2 articles. Aeromyrma Nosindambo Forel. 9 minor. L. 1.2 41.2 mill. Short, chunky. Head large, convex, 4 almost square, but &
rounded corners, a little wider behind than in front. Mandi-
fairly large bulbs, provided with 5 teeth, smooth, shiny, with
pillar points. Convex epistome, truncated in the middle of its edge
prior. Very short frontal ridges, with a small overlapping lobe
the antenna joint. Short slices. extreme eyes
small, forming only a black dot made up of a single
facet and a spot of pigment, located behind the anterior third. Separate frontal area. No frontal furrow. The pronotum and the meso-
notum united forming a strong almost hemispherical convexity,
without pro-mesonotal suture. A fairly strong meso-meta-
note. Metanotum short, rather low, armed with two obtuse teeth,
but distinct. Basal surface as wide as long, as long
only the sloping face, 4 slightly convex, bordered by two weak edges
laterals which are continued in the teeth. First node of
pedicle short-stalked, convex below, surmounted by a

 

524

low wedge knot. Second node wider than the
first. Abdomen truncated in front, small. Legs and antennae
short. Antennae of 10 articles, A club of 2. Smooth, shiny, with a very fine, spaced pillar punctuation. Metanotum dull, reticulate-punctate. A yellowish pubescence,
spaced out, fairly long, raised, spread everywhere, on the body,
on the legs and on the scapes, without forming down. Erect hairiness
almost zero. Of a barely reddish yellow, a little translucent and
honeyed; edge of mandibles and epistome reddish, middle
of the abomen barely browned. © major. L. 3.0 43.2 mill. Antennae as in 9 minor. Enormous head, shaped as in the soldier of the Pheidole, in
shape of an elongated rectangle, as long as the thorax and the
pedicle united. Mandibles very strong, 4 terminal edge tran-
song. Very small eyes, but composed of several facets. An ocellus in the middle of the vertex. Widely indented epistome
front in the middle and on each side. Very distant frontal edges
and very different. A very short frontal furrow. Scoop head
behind, in the middle; its two posterior angles are slightly
advanced into short ears and form a sharp, distinct edge.
slightly directed forward, short and transverse. strong mesonotum
developed ; a fairly distinct scutellum and sometimes rudiments
Wing joints more or less distinct. Metanotum armed with
two sharp teeth. Visible pro-mesonotal suture. Metanotum one
slightly less dull than in the minor worker. Head finely, longitudi-
nally and densely streaked and subopaque, except the middle of the forehead
and the epistome which are smooth and shiny. The lines diverge towards
the occipital ears. Behind the ridge that forms these ears
sculpture of the occiput is irregular. Pronotum partly reticulate-
punctuated. Hairiness more erect and longer than in the worker bee
minor. Reddish, with paler legs and antennae,
the abdomen of a honey yellow, translucent, the edge of the mandibles
and brownish occipital ears. We should consider this singular © major as a
totally dimorphic soldier, if he did not exist between her and the ©
minor an intermediate form without median ocellus, without ears,
but with a large rectangular head striped only in front,
short forming the exact passage, and long nearly 2 mill. Another © major, same size as the one I just made
describe, has a mesonotum very similar 4 to that of a Q, arti-
quite distinct wing culations, a very distinct scutellum, the
thorax a little wider, and the sculpture a little weaker. She
has noticeably larger eyes, but has only one ocellus
median. It is a real intermediary between the 3 and the Q. 525

The ears are a little weaker than in the 4. or 9 major. This singular ant was found as a host or parasite
earth termites by M. Sikora, at Amparafaravantsiv. Certain characters, among others the median ocellus, recall the
Pheidologeton. Maybe we should tie it 4 like this,
despite its antennae of 10 articles and not 11. I believed in
a new subgenre, but Mr. Emery's find made me
disillusioned. Pheidole madecassa n. sp. 4. L. 5.3 4 5.8 mill. The head
enormous (2.05 wide and long, without the mandibles, 2.15 mil.) has a completely analogous form to that of Ph. longispinosa. It differs from that of this species only in its size.
smaller, its frontal edges lower and much more
divergent, by the epistome which has behind a median carina, by
its mandibles partly ridged. The end of the scapes is more
away from the posterior end of the head than from the insertion of
Pantenna. The head is deeply incised in apricot. Mesonotum
with a transverse impression 4 its posterior quarter. the
mesonotum, shorter than in the longispinosa, is even more
higher than in this species above the basal face of the metano-
tum, but there is no deep transverse notch 4 the suture
meso-metanotal. Basal and sloping faces as in Ph. lon-
gispinosa, but the spines are hardly longer than in the
Ph. O'Swaldi, about the length of the interval between their bases. They are vertical, weakly divergent and distinctly a
slightly curved forward. Pedicle and abdomen as in the
Ph. longispinosa, but the lateral spines of the 2™ node are more
broad 4 the base, shorter and more obtuse. Sculpture very similar to that of the Ph. longispinosa, but the
coarse carving is more accentuated; head wrinkles or ridges
much stronger and more prolonged behind. Much more
wrinkles on the chest. Large elongated dimples on the front
of the two halves of the occiput. His impressions of the
2nd node of the pedicle. High piliger points on the abdomen
which is otherwise smooth and shiny. Fairly smooth head between the ridges
or wrinkles that fade on the occiput. Yellowish hairiness much more abundant than in the longi-
spinosa, just like in /'O'Swaldi. Brownish red;
brownish abdomen and pedicle; yellow legs and antennae
russet:

©. L. 2.9 4 3.1 mill. Head of ordinary size and shape,
rounded (posterior edge not very marked) behind, but without any
colliform shrinkage. Extremely similar shape and size
to those of the Ph. veteratriz, but the mesonotum has a strong and

 

526

deep impression or transverse indentation, the indentation
nesome-metanotal is less deep, and the metanotum has two
short pointed spines somewhat longer than those of the
Ph. veteratrix, and verticals. The articles of the pedicle are also
a little more elongated,

The whole body is smooth, shiny and of a slightly reddish yellow 4,
slightly browned on abdomen, head, legs and antennae. A few streaks on the front of the head. Hairiness as in
Ph. veteratriz, but paler yellow. Very similar to Ph. O'Swaldi and veteratrix, Vouvritre se
distinguished from the first especially by the shape of the head and the
second by the sculpture and the mesonotum. The soldier on the contrary
much more like ala Zongispinosa, while having the color
and hairiness of the veteratriz. The size difference between the
soldier and Pouvrigre is exorbitant; the latter has no
affinity with longispinosa. Amparafaravantsiv. Pheidole veteratrix Forel, © 2, var. angustinoda n. v.
A little smaller. In case 2, the second node of the pedicle is
as long as wide (much wider than long in the form
typical). Amparafaravantsiv. Pheidole Sikore Forel, var. litigiosa n. v. 21. A bit more
larger than the Sthorw i. sp. Head slightly enlarged behind, but
a little more deeply indented. Very occipital angles
shiny, more or less smooth. The 2” node of the pedicle is more
broad and has on each side a small spine or long pointed tooth. Q. Head, on the contrary, wider behind than in the
Stkorw i. sp. The rest of the same diflerences. The 2™¢ node of the
pedicle has two very long, obtuse, curved teeth
backward. The color is darker and especially abdomen
entirely brown, darker than the thorax. ® Reticulate-punctate head, subopaque. Weakly reticulated thorax
culé. A transverse impression at the esonotum. Forest @’Andrangoloaka. Pheidole nemoralis n. sp. 3. L. 3.7 x 43.8 mil. Tras head
large, rectangular, convex, very deeply indented
creates behind. Mandibles short, smooth, smooth. epistome
indented in the middle of its anterior edge. Quarter-set eyes
anterior of the head. Very short, curved scapes & their base,
not reaching half the distance that separates their base from the
posterior angles of the head. Very divergent frontal edges. Head subdepressed posteriorly, with trans-

527

versal vague, but distinct in its posterior third, as in
the Ph. sulcaticeps. A wide longitudinal gutter extends in
before the occipital notch up to the vertex where it fades slightly
4 bit. Pronotum broad, with two large lateral tubercles in
up and two down. A transverse bead in the middle of the
mesonotum which is a little concave and subvertical between this bead
and the metanotum. Metanotal spines short, long as
half the interval of their bases. Basal face and decliye face
subequal. The anterior petiole of the first segment of the pedicle is
wide, depressed, terminated in front, on each side of the portion
articular, by two horizontal lateral teeth, directed in
outside and very distinct; the node is more or less rectangular,
rounded above, wedge-shaped-scaly. The 2m article is more
wide than long and provided with two wide and long lateral teeth
curved backwards. Abdomen truncated in front. Short legs. Below the head, middle of the epistome, behind the occiput,
legs, scapes and last segments of the abdomen smooth and shiny. The rest finely reticulated and subopaque. Besides the forehead, the
vertex, cheeks and sides of the epistome are coarsely and
longitudinally wrinkled, the prothorax and mesothorax have
coarse, irregular wrinkles, the sides of the head of the reticulations
rather coarse, and the posterior angles of the head of the reticula-
tight, very deep and coarse roughness. Hairiness erect, yellowish, pointed, moderately abundant on
the body, the scapes and the legs. Very dilute pubescence, almost
nothing,

Brownish or reddish brown. Mandibles, antennae, front
head and underside of a more or less brownish red. Legs brownish yellow. 9. L. 1,743 mil. Head and thorax reticulate-punctate and dull, the
remains smooth and shiny. Head distinctly, though faintly
indented behind. The scapes exceed the occiput only by 1/s of
their length (more than 1/s in Ph. Sikore). shorter legs
than at the Ph. Sihove. Head and thorax slightly yellow
reddish. Abdomen with a little brownish. For the rest, like
Ph. Sikora. Andrangoloaka forest. Pheidole O'Swaldi Forel, decollatan breed. st. 2.L. 5 4
5.2 mill. More robust (especially the thorax) than the typical form. Slightly more wrinkles and less reticular pitting. The
indentations of the thorax are a little weaker, the thorax is more
wide and the spines are somewhat shorter. The color is also
brighter, more reddish yellow. None L. 3.5 mil. The head is less elongated than in the form

 

528

typical, 4 barely narrowed behind the eyes and has no narrowing-
colliformly on the occiput. More robust; fairly bright yellow;
more wrinkles on the thorax, fine punctate reticulations less
tight and less opaque; shorter spines. Andrangoloaka forest. This beautiful and large breed seems to me, despite these characters,
must be attached to the Ph. O'Stwaldi and not ala Ph. veterinary,
despite certain analogies with the latter, because it has moreover
all the peculiarities of sculpture, hairiness and shape of
VO'Swaldi. Genus CREMASTOGASTER Lund. The C. Zmme group contains 4 Madagascar a certain
number of species that have the following characteristics in common:
Q aberrantly shaped mandibles; they don't have
usually no teeth, are arched and taper to a point. The
Q present very diverse specific characters, while the
© vary much less (contrary to what generally takes place
ral). Chitin is usually smooth and shiny. The knots of
pedicle are very wide in Q and usually also in 3. The frontal edges are generally lacking or nearly so. The
nests are built on trees, made of more flexible cardboard and a
texture more recognizable than in other species. here is the
table of known species of this group in Madagascar and
C. abervans n. sp. of India which belongs to the same group. Females. 1. Mandibles with a distinct terminal edge, somewhat
concave, armed with 4 teeth, the first and sur-
all the last are the longest. They are
strongly curved, profusely pitted and
provided with a fine pubescence, rather long, short
gaping, abundant, a little woolly, of a white 4 barely
yellowish which also covers the legs and scapes
and has a hairy appearance. Much larger head
behind than in front, slightly indented behind,
as wide as long, very convex, not truncated
before. Absolutely zero frontal edges. scapes
not reaching the posterior border of the head. Area
frontal and frontal furrow distinct. Eyes located
almost in the posterior third of the head. The whole body
short and wide. Short legs and antennae; club
distinct, of 3 articles. Thorax small, rather narrow,

529

a little narrower than the head. Basal pace of the meta-
notum almost nil; almost vertical sloping face. Metanotum armed with two enormous spines, tres
massive, relatively short (a little longer
that half of the wide interval which separates their
bases). First node of the pedicle very widened in front,
4 convex and rounded anterior edge; he is very
massive and its width is twice its length. Second node in the shape of a vertical disc, rectan-
gular-rounded, four times as wide as long,
much wider than in C. Emme,
almost toothless below. Truncated abdomen
in front, wider than long. Whole body smooth,
shiny and almost absolutely glabrous, except the par-
pubescent ties indicated. No punctuation. Black,
with mandibles, funicles, joints
reddish legs and tarsi. Scapes and remains
brownish legs. Wings faintly tinted with

 

russet brown. Brown veins and pterostigma
ginger. L.4,645mill. . . . . . C. Martha b. sp. Mandibles arcuate, pointed, narrow, without ter-
minal distinct, toothless, . . . . . . - . . 2
2. Metanotum armed with two spines. . Fees)
Metanotum rounded, without traces of teeth or thorns”. 4

3. Mandibles very arched, gradually tapering to
only at the end. Short, robust size. head too
wide as long, as wide behind as in front. The scapes reach or exceed the edge a little
back of the head. Eyes located in the middle of the
sides. Legs and antennae much longer than
at Martha's. Basal surface of the beau-
stroke shorter than the sloping face; the article of
pedicle as wide as long, 2° three times as
wide than long, with a tooth below. Wings subhya-
lines. Body smooth, shiny, almost without punctuation. L.545.5 mil... . . C. Emme Forel. Head a little wider than long. mandibles
a little wider towards the base. Thorns of meta-
notum and pedicle almost glabrous (hairy in
Your typical species)) . 2... var. C. laticeps n. var. Mandibles barely arched, quite wide down to their
last third which is quickly narrowed down to the
tooth or terminal point. Fairly narrow waist and
elongated. Head longer than wide, much more
ANNALS OF THE SOC. ENTOM. OF BELGIUM, Ty XXXVI. Al

wide in front than behind where it is rounded, eyes
located a little forward of the middle of the summers of the
heat. Head subtruncated in front, on the extent of
lepistome. Very large and very distinct frontal area,
as well as the frontal furrow. Null frontal edges,
but the edge of the antennal fossa marked. Legs and antennae slender, very long, many
longer than in “imme. The scapes protrude
Yoeciput @ a quarter of their length; the articles
of the funicle are all long and cylindrical (antenna
filiform). Narrow thorax, narrower than the head. Metanotum low, narrow; basal face as long as
the sloping face from which it is separated only by a
weak curve. Spines mediocre, almost as long
gues than at C. Marthe, but infinitely more
slender and closer to each other, barely
divergent, long as more than 2/3 of the weak
interval of their bases. the enlarged pedicle node
in front, a little longer than wide. Second node
shaped as in C. Himme, but without tooth
below; its width is barely 4 times its length. Abdomen rather short. Mandibles ridged and punctured
killed. The whole body, except the sloping face of the metano-
tum and the sides of the prothorax and mesothorax is
covered as well as the legs and scapes of a pony-
spaced tuation, in part piligtre, which is abundant
and very large on the head, sparse on the thorax and
the pedicle, fine on the abdomen and on the limbs. Front of the head, sides of the metathorax and the pedicle
additionally provided with longitudinal wrinkles or ridges
irregular. The rest is smooth and shiny between the
points. Abundant yellowish pubescence on the
legs, antennae, mandibles and front of
the head, spaced out on the abdomen. Erect hairiness
yellowish, abundant on the pedicle and spines,
mediocre on the front of the body, sparse elsewhere,
zero on legs and scapes. black-brown or
of a dark brown. Mandibles, funicles and tarsi of a
reddish noise. Wings quite pubescent, weakly
brownish tints. Ribs and pterostigma bru-
nitrates. L.545.3mill. . . . . C, Pauline b. sp. 4. First segment of the abdomen, seen from above, square,
truncated in front of ot it is at least as wide as a
its postcrier edge. Depressed, very narrow abdomen

  
 

 

531

ot very elongated. Second node of the shaped pedicle
as in C. Hmmx, but without tooth below
and only 1/3 wider than long; 1* bow
almost rectangular, 4 barely widened in front, more
wide than long. Slightly sloping metanotum
conyex. Very narrow thorax; low pronotum. Head much longer than wide and shaped, ex-
perception of the sculpture and the antennae, exactly
like at C. Pauline for all the details
(also the mandibles); frontal area is only one
little less distinct. Antennae club swollen,
of 3 items. The scapes do not reach the occiput and
are somewhat widened at their extremity. Legs and
short antennae. Very narrow and elongated body. Smooth, shiny, with arranged punctuation
like at C. Pauline, but much more
fine and more spaced, very sparse on the head;
mandibles only punctate. Erect hairiness
long, yellowish, obliquely directed backwards,
quite abundant on the thorax, the head and the pediment.
cule, zero on the legs and antennae, almost
none on the back of the abdomen. abdomen, legs
and the antennae have a very fine pubescence, very
short and widely spaced (fairly regular). Of a black
shiny ¢d and 14 a little brownish. Tarsi, club
reddish antennae and cheeks; mandibles and
base of funicles reddish brown. long wings
legs, narrow, rather faintly tinged with brownish;
ribs and pterostigma fairly stacked. L, 5.3A
6 mill. 0.8 4 1 mil wide. . . C. Agnetis n. sp. First segment of the abdomen of ordinary shape,
subtruncated in front, much wider behind
than in front, wider than long and 4 convex sides. The abdomen is neither depressed nor very long. pedicle
and thorax as in the @. Agnetis, but more
short. Head wider than thorax, as long
than the width of its front edge, shaped
as in C. Pauline, but without bordered area
tale. Edge of antennal fossa unmarked. It is also more strongly truncated in front. The
mandibles are weakly arched, but regular
ment narrowed from the base 4 the extremity which is very
narrow and very sharp. Antennae club
trusted; the scapes almost reach the occiput. Paws

532

and mediocre antennae. Smooth and shiny, with a
extremely fine and very piligerous punctuation
sparse, zero on the head. The mandibles have some
What streaks and dots. A fine yellowish pubescence
spaced out everywhere, especially on the shins and
scapes that do not have erect hairs. Some
erect hairs on the pedicle, very few elsewhere. Of a yellowish brown. Slightly darker abdomen
legs a little lighter. Subhyaline wings; ner-
pale eyes, partly atrophic. L. 3.5 4 4 mill. C. aberrans n. sp. (Thana, India). Openers of this group are very difficult to distinguish between
from each other and so entirely different from females that one
must distinguish them by other characters. If Mr. Sikora had not
not taken great care 4 harvest individuals from each separate nest-
ment, it would be impossible for me to relate the 6 to the Q corresponding to
ponderous. All known © have spines at the metanotum,
4 teeth at the terminal edge of the mandibles, the tip of the antennae
swollen into a club of three articles and a blackish-brown color
fairly uniform pitch, sometimes lighter brown. 1. A rudimentary frontal edge starting from the pos-
inside the antenna joint. Eyes located
behind the middle of the sides of the head, near
their posterior third. . . . 1 ee ee ee
No trace of frontal edges. None 3
2. Thorax rather elongated, rather strongly retracted seaxttne
the mesonotum. Weak meso-metanotal notch,
but distinct. Spines slender, divergent, very
pointed, as long as the interval of their
basics. Fairly large abdomen. Pedicle nodes
narrow, the first twice as long as wide, the second
& barely wider than the Isr, 4 barely wider than
long, slightly indented behind. The escapes
well beyond the occiput. Little frontal area
distinctly demarcated. Very shiny head and 4 little
meadows smooth, like the rest of the body, L. 3.5. 4 mill. C. Ranavalone Forel. Thorax 4 barely narrowed behind the mesonotum. Sample
zero meso-metanotal growth (only the suture). pines shorter and less divergent than in
previous. Abdomen short. Pedicle nodes

533,

wider than long, the second rectangular
round. Very distinct frontal area and frontal furrow
and deep. Head subopaque, finely reticulated,
longitudinally wrinkled. Cheeks and mandibles fine-
ment striated. Scapes and legs as in the previous
tooth. L. 3.8 mil. . . . . . . . GC. inops Forel. 3. Mesonotum raised in a hump which forms a different curve
rent from that of the pronotum (as in the Campo-
notus gibber). Eyes located between the middle and third
posterior of the sides of the head. Meso-notch
deep metanotal. Frontal area and frontal sulcus
very distinct. The scapes reach the posted edge-
head laugh. Quite long and slender spines. First node of pedicle widened in front, a little more
long than wide, second node wider than long. Abdomen rather large and elongated, a little depressed. Funicles colored as in the worker bee. Smooth,
shiny, without erect hairs. L. 3.8 4 4.3 mill. C. Agnetis n. sp. The mesonotum forms one and the same curve with
lepronotum. . . ". 4
Spines of the metanotum very short, barely, more
longer than the width of their base, like 1/s
of the interspinal space, directed horizontally and
outside. Fairly strong meso-metanotal indentation. Head subtruncated on the space of the anterior half
lower part of the epistome. Zero frontal area. Eyes
as with ]’ Agnetis. The scapes protrude a little
Yocciput. Short chest. First node of the pedicle
square-rounded; second node almost twice as well
wide than long, rectangular-rounded, strongly
low cut in the middle of the back; the notch reaches
the anterior border in the form of a superficial furrow. Mandibles narrow, 4 curved pains, striped. Smooth, shiny, almost glabrous. The pubescence is
also very diluted, even on the scapes and the legs. Of a light brown, lighter than in the preceding species
teeth and following; posterior half of abdomen
darker, L. 3.3.43.4 mill. . . GC. aberrant n. sp. long pricks like more than half the space
interspinal, divergent, directed backwards and
high. Deep frontal area, very distinct. Heat
not subtruncated in front. Abdomen short. Sample
Distinct but shallow meso-metanotal crure. 534

Second node of the rectangular-rounded pedicle,
strongly indented behind (top). Almost
glabrous, except the legs and scapes which are pubescent-
cents. Smooth and shiny body. Tarsals, funicles
and reddish mandibles. . . . are
5. Head distinctly notched behind. Eyes located
near the posterior third of the head. The scapes do not
not extend beyond the occiput. Pronotom and mesonotum
making a strong enough vote. Spines of the metanotum
a little shorter, more divergent, wider
and stronger 4 their base than in )’2mme. First node of pedicle greatly enlarged in front
ot it is almost as broad as the second. What-
some faint streaks on mandibles and cheeks. we

L.34 43.5 mil. . . . . . . C. Martha b. sp. 'Head not or barely indented behind. Eyes located 4
barely behind the middle of the head. The escapes
protrude a little beyond the locciput. Pronotum and mesono-
tum forming above a weak yotite and a little
weakened behind the pronotum, First node of the
pedicle more or less rounded, small, more than 1/s
narrower than the second. Mandibles and cheeks dis-
distinctly siriate, more strongly than in the
C. Martha. L. 3.6 4 3.8 mill. (still unpublished). CC. Emme Forel (v. laticeps). miles. Mandibles relatively wide, armed at the end
of three distinct teeth. The two nodes of the
cule hairy, wide and short; the 2m knot has little
nearly twice as wide as long. Items from
antenna funicle almost twice as long
than wide. Black-brown. Strongly pitted abdomen

and finely reticulated. . . . . . C. Agnetisn. sp. Mandibles narrower than in the previous one, armed
at the extremity of two small teeth only. Pedicle like the preceding. Short antennae;
articles of the funicle 4 barely longer than wide. Fairly light brown. shiny. Abdomen weakly

reticle. 2.: . C. aberrans n. sp. Mandibles as in Aberrans. Antennae and color
as with Agnetis. Abdomen abundantly and
strongly pockmarked. Narrower pedicle nodes

than in other species. . C, Ranavalone Forel. 535

Mandibles narrow, attenuated, with two very small
teeth at the end. When closed, their
ends do not meet. punctate abdomen
before. Antennae, color and knots like at
Vagnetis. . . . C. Emme Forel (v. laticeps). The males of these four species have hyaline or sub-
hyaline (a little brownish in Agnetis), the irregular body-
ment carved and a length of 3.2 4 3.5 mill. Those of the aberrans
and del'Agnetis are the largest. The diversity of the 9 of the group of the C. Zmma makes me suppose
that in these species the Q is adapted 4 to the biological peculiarities
special tricks. C. Hmme and Pauline come from Andrangoloaka, the
@. inops from the village of Nosibé (Imerina), the C. Agnetis and Martha
of Amparafaravantsiv, the C. Ranavalona of the forests of the coast
East and C. aberrans of Thana near Bombay (India), ot
Mr. Gleadow harvested it. Cremastogaster hova Forel y. latinoda n. v. 9. L. 3.7 mil. Pedicle nodes much wider than in the typical form. First node strongly widened in front, at least as wide as
long. Second node divided into two discs by a deep furrow. Otherwise like the type. Amparafaravantsiv. Mr. Sikora's hunts in the Andrangoloaka forest and on
the banks of the Mangoro are of great interest. These regions form the
passage from the low forests of the east coast to the central plateau of
the Imerina. Their fauna not only passes also from that
from Imerina to that of the East Coast, but it contains a large
number of very curious own species. The Cremastogaster
Schenki de \'Imerina is there 4 sides of C. hova of the east coast. Beautiful species from the East Coast: Odontomachus Coquereli,
Mystrium mysticum already appear there. The Pheidole longispinosa,
the Ponera sakalava and other forms of Imerina are still there. The Camponotus putatus, Reaumuri and pictipes, the Prenolepis
amblyops, Cerapachys Mayri, Simopone Emeryi, 1a Lobo-
pelta angusta, the Leptothorax madecassus and vetusispinosus, the
Cataulacus vegularis, the Pheidole madecassa and Sikora, the
Xiphomyrmex Andrei, Steinheili, Schauffussii, Sikora and Masso-
nowii, the singular Cremastogaster of the EL’mmea’ group (except the
Ranavalonx), Sima hysterica and exasciata are forms which
have been found so far only in this part of Ville and which
seem more or less unique to him. CORRECTION TO MY COMMUNICATION
ON THE MALE OF CARDIOCONDYLA
DONE ON THE SHANCE OF SEPTEMBER 3, 1892. Due to circumstances beyond my control, the rectification
following, already sent for the October session, cannot appear
that now. I erred in writing (p. 460, last line) by
an inconceivable oversight which I beg your pardon,
that the ¢ of Cardiocondyla was unknown until now. In 1881, in
his Species of the Formicides of Europe, Mr. André described a winged ¢
Cardiocondyla Lmeryi Forel. This § was found in Jaffa (Pales-
tine) with ©. If it really belongs to the ©s with which it has been
taken, which seems probable according to its characters, there remain 4 knowing
sila C. Hmeryi has only this winged ¢, or if she has in
besides a ¢ apterous, ergatomorph. In a word, is it a matter of dimor-
¢ Phism or specific features? This is 4 observation
to come and demonstrate it. A.Foren. DESCRIPTION OF A NEW SPECIES OF COREIDA®
CONTAINED IN THE BRUSSELS MUSEUM,

by W. L. Distant. Subfam. BERYTIN A.
Parajalysus brasiliensis n. sp. Head and pronotum brownish-ochraceous; corium and mem-
brane pale shining ochraceous; legs ochraceous, thickly spotted
or canceled with dark fuscous. Antenna blackish, apices of
the first, second and third joints pale ochraceous; basal joint
largest, second a little shorter than the third. Pronotum coarsely
punctate with a central raised pale levigate longitudinal line,
and with four long black spines, one on anterior lobe, one at
each lateral angle and one near center of posterior margin, the
last being very long and recurved backwardly. body beneath
ochraceous, imperfectly seen only to specimens being carded. Long. 5 mm. Hab. Brazil; Rio-Janeiro and Botafogo (Van Volxem, Bruss. Mus.). Allied to P. spinosus Dist., but differing by the very long
and recurved basal spine to the pronotum. TES OF BENGAL
26th memory. CICINDELIDS

Walter

 

day. pe

 

M.Ed. Fleutiaux gave a first list of Cicinde-
Chota-Nagpore Islands in the Proceedings of October 4
1890. He cites 32 species including 2 new ones, but the examples
pleases that he relates to C. multigutlata Dej. do not belong
not & this species, they are only varieties of G. semivit-
aunty ¥. ; I have received and compared more than once. 31 species
therefore remain. The new shipments are much more pany:

1. Dromicidia serobiculata Wiedm. . . . . . Barway. 2. Lelreurytarsa ​​tetrastica Wielm. . . . . . Kurseong. This species described by Wiedm. like Cicindela
was placed in the genus Luryoda, but it
differs (G) by the intermediate tarsi which are
dilated like the anterior tarsi; I based on this
new gen character. Telveurytarsa ​​(Deutsche Entom. Zeitschr. 92, I, p.
3. Luryoda azuneocinela Bates. . . . . Kurseong. It differs somewhat from Bates's ad sscription (which
had received its copies from Bombay) by conleur
head and thorax, which is much more coppery;
however it does not form a variety. The species is not
not a real Zuryoda, but she comes close bean-
shot like this. 4. Cicindela bigemina Klug. . . . . . “~~Barway. 5. — dromicoides Chd. . . . . . 2 we Barwa)
6. — funebris Schm. Goeb. . . . . ““~ Kurseong. fastidiosa De}. etc. Barwaye
— Severini m. (a. sp). . - . +Barwa,

©. labivzenew m. finis, differt imprinis magnit-
dine omnino minore: capite parvo, multo angustiore
(fere ut in C. chlorochila Cha. ), thovace minus lato
minusque vugoso, abdomine medio dense punctato. 19.7mm. Small species, intermediate between C. chlorochilaCha. and labiownea m.; but she comes closest to the
last. The head is generally as in C. chlor
chila, the thorax is wider, less elongated,

ANNALS OF THE ENTOM SOCs. OF RELGIUM, Ts XXXVI. not later. The elytra have the shape of the
G. labiownea, but they are smaller; they offer
4 white spots: a small round dot placed on the
disc before the midline, a larger spot trans-
versale located near the middle of the outer edge, a
small round spot towards the disc (a little lower than
the lateral spot) and a larger point before the extreme
mite of the elytra near the external angle. — Of a brown
brouzé coppernx above, the edges of the head,
thorax and the shoulder of the elytra of a coppery-green
health; below a little less blue. The basis of
they are yellow. The species is from M. Severin. 9. Ciegideta scholar Wiedm. 2. this
This species differs from C. coynata of the same autenr
by the shape of the humeral and apical lunula, however
dant I do not believe that it forms a distinct space
(Deutsch. Ent. Zeitsch. 91, 11, p. 327
10. — semivittata F.v. stviolata MM... ee Barway. 1. — stviutifrons Chad... . - . . Barway. M. Fleutiaux had confused this species with the
C. cancellala Ve}. 12. — sumatrensis Herbst... - + Barwa,
Des\eeein| laivestvarientlenncontmmancen at etm
elytral lanes: the apical humeral lunula is
often interrupted, and sometimes even the tape of the

 
    

     

 

   

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

  

   

 

  

militia. 13. — Cardoni Fleut. . . 2. 2. 2 wee Barw,
14. — funereaMe.L. . . 2 2 we ee Barway

— —_ v. likened Hope. . . Kurseong. This variety is olive-green; she con=

melted for a long time with C. héimalayica Reat. (chlovida

Hope), but it is very diflerent. The last is

smaller, less elongated, of a color much

lighter and brighter, the head is covered with hair

whites between the eyes, summer. I reported the deseription

of Hope, quite omitted by the preceding authors
(Gemminger and Har., Chaudoir ete. ), has the variety of

C. funerea Me. 1. (Deutsch. Ent. Zeitsch. 92, 1, p. 96)

15, Céicindela sexpunctalaP. . . . 2 5 4). “Barway. 6. — hamorrhoidalis Wielm. . . . 2 1 we Bar

 

  

 

 
     

   

 

  

539

On ve PHOLCUS PHALANGIOIDES Purssuy, 1775

Leon Geeker. not

 

 

Avranca phalangioides Fuessly, 177
— meticulous Foure., 1785. — Pluchii Rossi, 1790. — phalangioides Wik., 1802. Pholeus nemastomoides C.K., 1838. — Pluchii Lucas, 1853. — opilionoides Westring, 1861. _ - E.Simon, 1866. — nemastomoides Cn. and Pv., 1869
— BE phalangioides. Simon, 187t.
= _ L.B., 1879. When I published in 1878 my first catalogs of the Ara-
neids of Belgium, I pointed out as a peculiarity quite
curious, absence or rarity in Belgium of Pholeus phalan-
givides, whereas I had already captured him in Holland and that
several times since, our late colleague Mr. Maurissen
Venvoya from Maastricht; I observed him again at Givet; finally he
existed on all our frontiers; it is very common in Paris
as in all of France, both in the North and in the
Noon: also the capture of this Pholeus by M. A. Preudhomme
de Borre fills a real gap; she gives us,
besides new Vespece, a representative of a genus and a
family we didn't have. Convinced that this species should meet one day in
Belgium, I had deposited several copies in the collection
of the Museum, indicating their provenance, although they were
specimens bred at home freely, which allowed me
Wobserve their way of life. The P. phalangioides stands
almost exclusively and everywhere inside houses;
it preferably occupies the angles of the ceilings; it is rare,
even in the South, to meet him in the open air; the canvas is
formed of long and numerous threads, slightly twisted, crossing in
all the senses, arranged almost always on several planes, and
somewhat resembling the canvas of Theridions; the spider stands
always in the middle, gathering her long legs around her. Like the Epeiridea and especially the Cyelosa, it prints
snaps into its web when prey attaches itself to it, and surrounds its
victim of threads before devouring her; it is rare that the female
leaves its canvas. 540

This spider does not build a cocoon; his wufs are simple-
clump together and thus form a small round mass which it
wears continuously under his breastplate; after hatching, the
young people stayed together for a few days, hanging from the
chelictres of their mother, 4 the manner of Lycosidia. I could only keep these spiders for two years, after
this time they disappeared and I have found no more traces of them. bce with which we are dealing is indeed the Pholeus phalan-
givids from Walekenaer and Fuessly; this name is not changed;
it was by mistake that Mr. KE. Simon in 1866 gave him the name
Mopilionoides, Qwil corrected the rest in 1874 in his
the flight. Arachnids of France. Pholcus opilionoides Schrank is a distinct species
specific to central and southern Europe; I observed commu-
nement 2 Bellagio, on the shores of Lake Como, and in the South; her
way of life differs from that of the phalangioides; while
this one lives Uncovered, the opilionoides hides under the stones,
in holes in the wall, summer. There is only confusion between two species; that of Schrank
and that of Puessly and not a question of priority

The phalangioides exists in France, in Germany, in England-
earth, in Switzerland, in Italy, in Austria, in Hungary, in Russia,
in Greece and Turkey. ANNALS

Of the

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

 

BELGIUM

THIRTY-SIXTH VOLUME

XIII

This number must be kept; it won't be sent for a second
times as before. BRUSSELS
AT THE CORPORATE HEADQUARTERS
20, MUSEUM STREET, 20

1892

 

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM. XU

General Assembly of December 26, 1892. CHAIRMANSHIP OF Mr. Giron. Present: Messrs. Becker, Bergé, Coubeaux, Ed. Coucke, of
Crombrugghe, Demoor, Hippert, Fogne, Jacobs, Kerremans,
Ledrou, Michels, Robbe, Seeldrayers, de Selys-Longchamps, Tos-
quinet, Van Nerom and Lameere, secretary. Mr. Preudhomme de Borre excused his absence. The meeting is open 4 2 hours. The minutes of the general meeting of December 26, 1891
is approved. The President takes the floor and speaks as follows:

Gentlemen,

The Entomological Society closes today the 36* year of
his existence. Fortunately, she went through a crisis which, for a while,
tain time, almost paralyzed its activity. Forced to give up
the room it occupied for a long time at the Museum of Natural History,
she has found temporary asylum in the premises where we sit
right now, waiting for him to be allowed to settle down
permanently in a government building. The government we
has allocated the necessary sums to pay for the rental of this new
local calf. On July 3, we celebrated the 50: anniversary of
the publication of the Fauna of Belgium, the first of the great
scientific works which illustrated the name of our venerable
Honorary President, Baron de Selys-Longchamps. We would have liked this demonstration to take place publicly,
and we were counting on the eager assistance of the members of
all learned societies to which Mr. de Selys is affiliated. But his modesty made him decline the brilliance of this ceremony,
and we contented ourselves, to condescend 4 his desire,

ANNALS OF THE SOC, ENTOM. OF BELGIUM, T. XXXVI. 43

542
to express to him cordially, in a fraternal banquet, the feelings
affectionate admiration which he inspires in us all. The mode of publication of our work has undergone, from this
year, a significant change. The monthly newsletter of
sessions of the Society ceased to be printed and distributed two
time. It is now merged with the Annales proper. Works which seem too considerable to be included
in the monthly bulletin are published separately under the title of
Memoirs. This new system saves us money,
that allow us to give a greater extension 4 our
publications. We have published a first volume of Memoirs. This
volume contains the Catalog of Buprestides by M. Kerremans. This work is very extensive, and like, on the other hand, the volume
XXXVI des Aunales is of an unusual thickness, we have
somewhat exceeded the amount allocated by our budget for the
scientific publications. We intend to recover the excess
on the budget for the next financial year. The Annales which appeared this year contain an important
work of Mr. Duvivier on the Coleoptera that his brother collected
in Congo. Mr. Duvivier, overworked by his entomological work, is in
this indisposed moment. You will all join in the wishes that I
form for the speedy recovery of his health. The great development that our publications are taking shows
the vitality of our Company. Please note that the works we publish are due in
part Anos foreign colleagues. We gladly accept their
collaboration, but it is unfortunate that they recruit so few
members for our Society among their compatriots. The recruits we make in Belgium are also not
very numerous. Maybe we should look for the cause of this slump
in the purely scientific nature of our publications. our young college students wanted to deal more with applications
practices of Ventomology, we could attract in our
society a number of farmers and agricultural engineers,
and thus increase the financial resources at our disposal. We have admitted as effective members MM. Andrew
Théry, winegrower 4 St Charles (Algeria), from Crombrugghe de
Picquendaele, 4 Etterbeek, Camille Poncelet, engineer 4 Orsine
faing (Luxembourg) and Poskin, lecturer in zoology and
of entomology at the Agricultural Institute of Gembloux. Have tendered their resignation: MM. Cuni y Martorell, Bargagli,
Bolle and Pierson, full members, and Ducarme, associate member. 543

We 4 regret the loss of Mr. La Fontaine, one of our
founding members, curator of the zoological collections of
the University of Ghent, and of M. Maurissen, of whom M. de Selys has
recalled the scientific titles in a notice which appeared this
year in our Annals. We also lost several honorary members. I quote
in the first place Mr. Dohrn, founder and honorary president of the
Entomological Society of Stettin. Everyone knows their im-
bearing works on the Coleoptera, and recalls the poems
entomologies that he inserted in the Stettiner Entomologische
Zeitung. We also mourn the death of Mr. Burmeister, entomo-
logist of great value, known for his remarkable work on
Hemiptera, Coleoptera and Orthoptera and in particular
by his work, which unfortunately remained unfinished, the Handbuch
der Entomology. Enemy of the Bismarckian regime, he went into exile in
America where he became director of the Museum of Buenos-Ayres, whose
he made the reputation. We have just finally learned of the very recent decree (December 2)
of Mr. Stainton, who has been an honorary member of our society since
its foundation. He has published important works on Micro-
lepidoptera and has enriched them with colored plates which denote
a surprising patience and delicacy of hand. We will have in today's session 4 give successors
to Messrs. Dohrn and Burmeister. The Government granted us this year the subsidy it
usually allocates 4 the Company,

The Company has maintained the monthly excursions this year
which take place on the second Sunday of the months of March, April, May,
June, July, August, September and October. MM. Coucke reported on the excursion they made 4
Eggenhoven last May, and that which Mr. Ed. coucke
did 4 Dieghem in July. The Council had only to praise the zeal and activity deployed
by our assistant librarian, Mr. Coubeaux, who provides 4
The accomplishment of his task the most assiduous care. Our treasurer will report to you on our situation.
financial. You will see that it is absolutely satisfactory. I will place the management of the Society in other hands. Thank you, gentlemen, for the confidence you have in me.
granted during the two years that my duties as
President. (Applause.) 544

— Mr Bergé read the report of the Committee on
collection monitoring. Gentlemen,

Your commission visited the Royal Museum on the 5th instant
@Histoire naturelle 4 the effect of verifying the state of conservation of
your collections. The insects of the country are exhibited in the great hall;
some butterflies have lost their coloring, but this deterioration
unavoidable ration, is not attributable to the mode of conservation of
this collection. It would be desirable for members to be able to
provide new specimens of these Lepidoptera, for it is of
Interest of our Company that these public exhibitions are the
as interesting as possible; 4 this view a collection of
beneficial and harmful insects should be added. Conservation of Putzeys Fire Carabids Leaves Nothing 4
to desire. Consequently, your committee proposes that you thank
administration of the Museum for the conscientious way in which it
fulfilled its mission. — A copy of this report will, under the regulations, be
sent to 4 Mr. Director of the Natural History Museum. — Mr Van Nerom, on behalf of the Committee on the Verification of
accounts, declares that after examination of the books of our treasurer,
the accounts have been found to be perfectly accurate; the commission-
tion proposes the approval of the accounts and the vote of thanks
4M. foland. (Applause.f

— The treasurer explains the financial situation of the Society:
as a result, the accounts for the year 1892 show a
excess of fr. 1.645 03. — The Assembly gives its approval to the accounts after
Mr. Jacobs pointed out that his apprehensions of seeing the
Company entailed 4 much greater expenses, from
made of the new mode of publication of his work, did not
carried out. — The next step is to establish the budget for
Year 1893. The Assembly maintains the figure of 1a contribution 4 16 fr., fixed
the price of volume XXXVI of the Annales 418 fr., of volume I of
Memoirs 4 10 fr., with the usual reduction of 2 fr. for the
booksellers. The sums proposed by the Board for the budget were adopted.
voted unanimously. 545

— The agenda calls for a decision 4 to be taken concerning
members who refuse to pay their dues. M. Fologne having pointed out that this year there are less
bad payers than ever, the Assembly decides not to
take exceptional measures against those of our colleagues
who are in default. — By 16 votes out of 19 voters, MM. J.-H. Fabre of Serignan
and C.-G. Thomson of Lund, are elected honorary members at the
first ballot, replacing MM. Burmeister and
Dohrn. Mr. DF Tosquinet was unanimously elected President of the
Company for the years 1893 and 1894. (Applause.) Mr. Tosquinet thanks the Assembly for this new testimony
of sympathy and promises its most devoted assistance to the interests
of the society. — M. le Dr. Jacobs proposes to the Assembly to vote for the living
thanks 4 Mr. Giron who, during his two years of presidency
dence, has never ceased to be on the breach and has contributed a lot by
his intervention brought across happily to the Company
the critical moments that came for a moment to trouble his
existence. (Applause.) — Messrs. Bergé, Fologne and Lameere are elected members of the Con-
seat of administration. — Messrs. L. Coucke, Dubois and Van Nerom are re-elected members
of the audit committee. — Messrs. Coubeaux and Van Nerom were elected members of the committee
collections monitoring mission. — On the proposal of Mr. Hippert, the Assembly decides that the
Company will specially explore the surroundings of Genck during
Year 1893. The meeting adjourned at 3 1/2 o'clock. LISTING

FROM

LIBRARY INCREASES

FROM DECEMBER 26, 1891 TO DECEMBER 26, 1892

SERVING AS ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF RECEIPT. I, — PUBLICATIONS REGULATED FOR EXCHANGE. BELGIUM. 1. Royal Academy of Sciences, Letters and Fine Arts of
Belgium. Bulletin, 3rd series, LX1, 9-12; LXII, 1-8. Yearbook, 1892. 2. Royal Society of Sciences of Lidge. Memoirs, 2nd series, XVII. 3. Belgian Society of Microscopy. Annals, XVI. Bulletins, XVIII, 3-11. 4. Royal Botanical Society of Belgium. Bulletin, XXXI, 2. Minutes, XXX, 19, 20, 21; XXXI, 2. Demonstration in honor of M. F. Crépin. 5. Central Agricultural Society of Belgium. Journal, XXXIX, 3-12. 6. Ministry of Agriculture, Industry and Public Works. Bulletin of Agriculture, VII, 8; VIII, 1-5. 7. Royal Linnaean Society of Brussels. Bulletin, XVI, 5-9; XVIII, 1, 2. 8. Royal Geographical Society. Bulletin, XV, 6; XVI, 1-5. 9. Circle of Hutois Naturalists. Bulletin, 1892, 1. 548

GERMANY.

. Entomologische Nachrichten, XVII, 24; XVIII, 1, 2, 4-6, 8-10,

12-22.

. Bericht fiber die wissenschaftlichen Leistungen im Gebiete der

Entomology herausgegeben von Ph. Bertkau, 1890; heraus-
gegeben von Ph. Bertkau and D* F. Hilgendorf, 1891.

. Zoologischer Anzeiger, XIV, 380-406.
. Kénigliche Siichsische Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu

Leipzig. Berichte iiber die Verhandlungen, mathematisch-physische
Class, 1891, III-V; 1892, I-III.

. Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein fiir Schleswig-Holstein. Schriften, IX, 1, 2.

. Entomologischer Verein in Berlin. Berliner Entomologische Zeitschrift, XXXVI, 2; XXXVII. Deutsche Entomologische Gesellschaft. Deutsche Entomologische Zeitschrift, 1891, 1, 2.

. Deutsche Entomologische Zeitschrift herausgegeben von der

Gesellschaft "Iris" zu Dresden in Verbindung mit der
Deutschen Entomologischen Gesellschaft zu Berlin. Lepidopterologisches Heft, 1891, IT; 1892, 1.

. Verein fiir Schlesische Insektenkunde zu Breslau. 10.

cis

12. 13. Zeitschrift fiir Entomologie, neue Folge, XVI. Kénigliche Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Miinchen. Sitzungsberichte der mathematisch-physikalischen Class,
1891, II; 1892, I, II. Naturhistorische Museum in Hamburg. Mitteilungen, IX, 1, 2. Kéniglich Preussische Academie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin. Sitzungsberichte, 1891, XLI-LIII; 1892, I-XXV. Kaiserliche Leopoldinisch-Carolinische Deutsche Akademie der
Naturforschor. Nova Acta, LV, LVI. Leopoldina, Amtliches Organ, XXVI, XXVII. Catalog of the Library, H. 3.

. Westfilischer Provincial-Verein fur Wissenschaft und Kunst. Jahresbericht, XIX.

. Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein von Neu-Vorpommern und Riigen. Mittheilungen, XXIII.

. Naturhistorisch-medicinischer Verein zu Heidelberg. Verhandlungen, neue Folge, IV, 5. 549

17. Oberhessische Gesellschaft fir Natur- und Heilkunde. Bericht, XXVIII. 18. Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein zu Bremen. Abhandlung, XII, 2. 19. Naturwissenschaftliche Gesellschaft Isis in Dresden. Sitzungsberichte, 1891, 2. 20. Offenbacher Verein fiir Naturkunde. Bericht, XXIX-XXXII. 21. Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein zu Osnabriick. Korrespondenzblatt, I. 22. Entomologischer Verein zu Stettin. Entomologische Zeitung, LI, 7-12; LILI, 1-6. .

23. Verein fiir Vaterlindische Naturkunde in Wurttemberg. Jahreshefte, XXVIII. 24. Natural History Society of Colmar. Bulletin, new series, I. 25, Medicinisch-Naturwissenschaftliche Gesellschaft zu Jena. Jenaische Zeitschrift fiir Naturwissenschaft, XX VI, 3, 4. 26. Verein fir Naturkunde zu Zwickau. Jahresbericht, 1891. 27. Physikalisch-Oekonomische Gesellschaft zu Kénigsberg. Schriften, XXXII. 28. Naturwissenschaftlicher Verein (friither Zoologisch-mineralogi-
scher Verein) in Regensburg. Correspondenz-Blatt, III. 29. Senckenbergische Naturforschende Gesellschaft. Bericht, 1892. Catalog of the Batrachier-Sammlung in Museum der Sencken-
bergische Naturforschende Gesellschaft von Prof. Dr.
O. Boettger. 30. Naturforschende Gesellschaft in Danzig. Schriften, neue Folge, VIII, 1. Festschrift zur Feier des 150 jahrigen Bestehens der natur-
forschende Gesellschaft in Danzig am 2 January 1893. 31. Nassauischer Verein fir Naturkunde. Jahrbicher, XLV. ENGLAND AND COLONIES. 1. Entomological Society of London. Transactions, 1891, 4.5; 1892, 1, 2. 550

- The Entomologist: an illustrated journal of general Entomology,

XXV, 344-354. 3. The Entomologist's Monthly Magazine, XXVIII, 332, 334-343. 4. The Zoologist: a Monthly journal of natural History, XVI,

oh

10.

ll. 12. 13. 14. 181-191. Zoological Society of London. Proceedings of the scientific Meetings, 1891, IV; 1892, L-III. Indexes 1881 to 1890. Linnean Society of London. Journal, Zoology, XXIII, 148-151. List, 1891-1892. Proceedings, 1888-1890.

. Bejfast Natural History and Philosophical Society. Report and Proceedings, 1890, 1891. Birmingham Philosophical Society. Proceedings, VII, 2.

. Natural History Society of Glasgow. Proceedings, III, 2. Asiatic Society of Bengal. Journal, 1891, part II, nos. 2, 3, 4; 1892, part II, nos 1, 2. Proceedings, 1891, VII-X; 1892, I-VII. Royal Society of Tasmania. Monthly notices of papers and proceedings, 1891. Linnean Society of New South Wales. Proceedings, VI, 1-4. New South Wales Australian Museum. Report, 1890, 1891. Royal Society of South Australia (Philosophical Society of
Adelaide). Transactions and Proceedings, III-XIII, XV, p. 1. AUSTRIA-HUNGARY.

. K. K. Zoologisch-Botanische Gesellschaft in Wien. Verhandlungen, XLI, 3-4; XLII, 1, 2.

. K.KE. Naturhistorische Hofmuseum. Annalen VI, 3, 4; VII, 1, 2.

. Wissenschaftliche Club in Wien. Monatsblitter, XIII, 3-13; XIV, I, 1. Jahresbericht, XVI. 551
. Siebenbirgischer Verein fiir Naturwissenschaften zu Hermann-
city. Verhandlungen und Mittheilungen, XLI.
. Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften. Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftliche Class, Sitzungsbe-
rich, 1890, 4-10. None Kénigliche Béhmische Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften in Prag. Sitzungsberichte, 189). Jahresbericht, 1891.
. Naturforschender Verein in Briinn. Verhandlungen, XXIX. Bericht der meteorologischen Commission iiber die Ergeb-
nisse der meteorologischen Beobachtungen, 1889.

. Verein zur Verbreitung naturwissenschaftlicher Kenntnisse
in Vienna. Schriften, XXXI. Societa Adriatica di Scienze naturali in Trieste. Bollettino, XIII. Meteorological observation, 1891. 10, Siebenbirgischer Museum-Verein in Kolozsvar. Orvos-Természettudomianzi Ertesité, 1892 (XVII), 1, 2.
ll. Természetrajzi Fiisetok, XIV, 3, 4; XV, 1, 2, 3.

has

x

2

has

~

2

DENMARK, NORWAY and SWEDEN. 1, Entomologiska Fereningen i Stockholm. Entomologisk Tidschrift, XII, 1-4. 2, Universitas Lundensis. Acta (Matematich och Naturvetenskap), XX VII. 3. Kongelinge Danske Videnskaber Selskab. Oversigt over der Forhandlinger og dets Medlemmers Ar-
bejder, 1891, 2; 1892, 1.3. Fortegnelseover de af det Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes
Soc. i Tidsrummet 1742-1891, udgevne Videnskabellge
arbejder. Kgbenhavn, 1892.

. Royal Norwegian Society of Science & Throndhjem. Skrifter, 1888-1890. 5. Tromsg Museum. Aarsberetning, 1891. 6. University of Christiania. Nyt Magazin fer Naturvidenskaberne, 32 Binds, 34,
dae Hefte. >

552

7. Stavanger Museum. Aarsberetnung for 1891. 8. Kongelige Norske Videnskaber Selskab. www

13. Skrifter, 1888. UNITED STATES.

. American Entomological Society. Transactions, XVIII, XIX, 1, 2. Entomological News, Il, 5-8; III, 1-3, 5-9.

. Cambridge Entomological Club. Psyche, a Journal of Entomology, VI, 189-199.

. Museum of Comparative Zoology of Harvard College, Cam-

bridge. Memoirs, XVII, 2; XIV, 2. Bulletin, XXII, 1-4; XXIII, 1-3. Annual Report, 1890-1891. + United States Department of Agriculture. Bulletin, XXVI, XXVII. Insectlife, IV, 5-10; V, 2.

. The American Naturalist, XXV, 298, 299; XXVI, 301-303,

305-311. - American Journal of Science, XLII, 258-259; XLIV, 260-263.
. Essex Institute. Bulletin, XXIII, 7-12; XXIV, 1-6.

. Cornell University College of Agriculture, Ithaca N.Y.

Bulletin, XXXV.

. Illinois State. Report of the State Entomologist, XVII.

. Zoological Society of Philadelphia. Annual Report of the Board of Directors, 1892.

. Kansas University. Quarterly journal, vol. I, 1.

. United States Geological Survey. Annual reports, X, 1, 2. Bulletin, 62, 65, 67, 69, 70-81. Publications of the bureau of Ethnology. 1. Catalog of
prehistoric works East of the rocky mountains by Cyrus
Thomas; 2. Omaha and Ponta Letters by J. Owen-
Dorrey; 3. Bibliography of the Algonquian languages
by J.C. Pilling. Now-York Academy of Sciences. Annals, V, 1-3. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 3. 553
Boston Society of Natural History. Proceeding XXV, 1, 2. Smithsonian Institution. Report, 1890. Index to the literature of Columbia 1801-1887, by
F.W. Traphagen. Lecture-Mental overwork and premature disease among
public and professional men, by Ch. K. Mills. Bibliography of the Chemical influence of Light by
A.Tackerman. U. 8. National Museum. Report, 1889. Bulletin, 41, 42. Directions for collecting and preserving insects, by
C.V. Riley. California Academy of Natural Sciences. Proceedings, 2 Series, III, 1. Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia. Proceedings, 1891, 2, 3; 1892, 1. American Association for the Advancement of Science. Proceedings, XX XIX. American Philosophical Society. Proceedings, XXIX, 135-138. New Jersey Natural History Society (Trenton Natural History
Company). Diary, II, 2.

. Buffalo Society of Natural Sciences. Bulletin, V, 3.

. Nova Scotian Institute of Natural Science. Proceedings and Transactions, VII, p. 4; I, 1.

. Minnesota Academy of Natural Sciences. Bulletin, III, 2.

. Rochester Academy of Science. Proceeding, I, 2. FRANCE AND COLONIES.

. Entomological Society of France. Bulletin, 1891, 19; 1892, 1-16. » Le Frelon, Journal of Entomology written by J. Desbrochers

des Loges, 1891, 1-12; 1892, 1-6. Biological Review of Northern France, IV, 4-12; V, 1, 2.

he

12. 13. 14,

16. 17,

18. 19. Zoological Society of France. Bulletin, XVI, 8-10; XVU, 1-5. Natural History Society of Toulouse. Bulletin, XXIV, 7-12; XXV, 1.

. Society for Scientific Studies of Angers. Bulletin, XX. Academy of Sciences, Arts and Belles Lettres of Dijon. Memoirs, 4¢ series, II. Society of Historical and Natural Sciences of Semur
(Golden Coast). Bulletin, v.

The Naturalist, XIV, 116, 117, 119-124; 126-135, 138,

. Sheet of young naturalists, XXII, 255, 256, 258-262, 264;

XXIII, 265-266. Catalog, 14, 15. French Geographical Society. Bulletin, 1891, 2, 3, 4. Minutes of the meetings, 1891, 19, 20; 1892, 1-14. Scientific Review of Bourbonnais, V, 2, 3, 6, 7. Linnean Society of Lyons. Annals, XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII. Linnean Society of Normandy. Bulletin, 4th series, V.

. National Society of Natural and Mathematical Sciences of

Cherbourg. Memoirs, XX VII. Society of Friends of Natural Sciences of Rouen. Bulletin, XXVII, 1. Society of Physical and Natural Sciences of Bordeaux. Memoirs, 4¢ series, II. Rainfall and temperature observations made
in the department of Gironde, 1890. Scientific Exploration of Tunisia. M._N. Patouillard. Illustrations from the Botany section. Knumeration of fungi observed in Tunisia. Paris, in-4°, 1892. — New species of fungi. Paris, in-8°, 1892. Critical review of Les Ants de la Tunisie, by C. Emery. Paris, 1891, in-8°. Hippo Academy. Bulletin, 1891, pages 23-79. 10.

ik

LB. 14,

15. 555

ITALY. Entologica Italiana Society. Bulletin, XXIII; XXIV, I, I.
Societa Toscana di Scienze naturali residente in Pisa. Memory, XII. Processi-verbali, VII, pp. 235-346; VIII, leave. Il Naturalista Siciliano, XI; XII, 1, 2. Africana d'Italia Company. Bollettino, X, 7-10; XI, 1-10.

. Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale Vittorio Emanuele di Roma. Bollettino delle opere moderne straniere acquisitate slab

Biblioteche publiche governative del Regno diltalia, V,
5-12; VI, 12; VI, 13, 14.

. Reale Accademia delle Scienze fisiche e matematiche, Napoli. Rendiconti, ser. 2*, V, 1-12; VI, 1-6. Atti, ser. 2*, IV. Reale Accademia dei Lincei. Rendiconti, VII, 2nd half, 11, 12; ser. V, I, 1* semester,

1-12; 2¢ semester, 1-8. Accademia Gioenia di Scienze Naturali in Catania. Bullettino mensile, XXIII, XXIV, XXV. Atti, series 4*, III. Reale Accademia delle Scienze di Torino. Memorie, seconda series, XLI. Atti, XXVI, 14, 15; XXVII. Regia Accademia di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti in Modena. Memory, VIII. Societa Romana per gli Studi Zoologici. Bollettino, I, nes 3, 4, 5. Reale Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti. Memorie, XXIII, XXIV. Reale Istituto Lombardo di Scienze e Lettere. Rendiconti, XXII, XXIII. Societa dei naturalisti in Modena. Yearbook, XXVI, 1, 2. Ateneo di Brescia. Commentary, 1891. 556

NETHERLANDS, LUXEMBOURG AND INDIA NEER-
LANDAISES. 1. Nederlandsche Entomologische Vereeniging. Tijdschrift voor Entomologie, XXXIV, 1, 2, 3, 4. Verslag van de zes-en-veertigste zomervergadering gehou-
Den te Enschede in 1891. Verslag van de 25*e wintervergadering gehouden te Leiden
op 24 January 1892.
. Nederlandsche Dierkundige Vereeniging. Tijdschrift, III, 2. 3. Koninglijko Akademie van Wetenschappen. Verhandelingen, XXIX. Verslagen in Mededeelingen. Afdeeling Natuurkunde,
3rd reeks, VIII. Jaarboek, 1891. 4, Dutch Society of Sciences 4 Harlem. Dutch Archives of Exact and Natural Sciences,
XXV, 5; XXVI, 2, 3
5. Koninklijke natuurkundige Vereeniging in Nederlandsch-Indié
Natuurkundige Tijdschrift, LI. w

RUSSIA. 1. Societas Scientiarum Fennics. Acta, XVII. Oefversigt af Finska Vetenskaps Societetens Ferhandlingar,
XXXII. 2. Societas pro Fauna and Flora Fennica. Meddelanden, XVI. Acta, VI, VII. 3. Society of Naturalists of Kiew. Briefs, X, 4; XI, 2. 4. Dorpates Naturforschen-Gesellschaft. Schriften, VI; IX, 3.
. Naturforschender Verein in Riga. Correspondenceblatt, XXXV. 6. Imperial Society of Naturalists of Moscow. Bulletin, 1891; 1892, 1.

wow

5.

w

557

. New Russian Society of Naturalists. Zapiski Noworossiiskago Obsczestwa Estestwoispitatelei,
XIV, 1. - Ural Society of Amateurs of Natural Sciences. Bulletin, XII, 2.

. Societas Entologica Rossica. Hore, XXV. SWISS. + International Entomological Society & Zurich. Societas entomologica, VI, 19-24; VII, 1-16.

. Society of Physics and Natural History of Geneva. Memoirs, 1891; extra volume 4
100th anniversary of the founding of the Society:

 

On the occasion of

 

Swiss Society of Natural Sciences. New Memoirs, XXXII. Proceedings (Reports) of the 74¢ session. - Bt-Gallische naturwissenschaftliche Gesellschaft. Bericht iiber die Thitigkeit, 1890. Vaudoise Society of Natural Sciences. Bulletin, XX VII, 105; XXVIII, 106, 107, 108.

. Naturforschende Gesellschaft Graubiindens. Jahres-Bericht, XXXV.

. Naturforschende Gesolischaft in Zurich. Vierteljahrschrift, XXXIV, 3, 4; XXXV, 1-4; XXXVI
1-4; XXXVIL, 1-2.

. Naturforschende Gesellschaft in Bern

Mittheilungen, 1891.

. Naturforschende Gesellschaft in Basel. Verhandlungen, IX, 2. General register of the publication of the naturforschende
Gesellschaft und Uebersicht ihres Tauschverkehres. Zürich, 1892. CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA.

. Sociedad cientifica Argentina. Anal, XXXII, 4, 5, 6; XXXII, 1, 4, 5, 6; XXXIV, 1. The paramillo of Uspallata by G. Aré Lallemant.

. Sociedad ciantifica “Antonio Alzate ~

Memorias, V, 1-12; VI, 1 and 2. ANNALS OF THE SOCIETY. ENTOM, OF BELGIUM, 1, XXXVI-4

558,

3. Revista Argentina de Historia natural, I, 6. 4, Museo Publico de Buenos Aires. Anales, III, 4, 9.
. Anales de la Universitad Central de Heuador. Series, 5*, 38, 40, 41. G. Sociedad Mexicana de Historia natural. La Naturaleza, 2* series, I, 10; II, 1, 2.

has

He. — BOOK ACQUIRED ON THE SALE OF THE ANNALES

Wiener Entomologische Zeitung, X, 10; XI, 1-8. Til, — DONATIONS FROM AUTHORS,

1. Banzan (L.). — Trip by M. E. Simon to Venezuela in
1887-1888. — Arachnids Chernetes (Pseudoscorpio-
nes). — Paris, 1891, in-8th. 2. Brpeu (L.). — Synopsis of the great Hydrophiles). - Paris,
1892, in-8°. 3. Bere (C.). — The Carboniferous Formation of the Republica
Argentina. — Buenos-Ayres, 1891, in-8°. 4, — Nuevos datos sobre la formacien carbonifera de la
Republica Argentina. — Buenos-Ayres, 1891, in-8°. 5. — Dyscophus onthophagus; wn nuevo grillo Urigayo

cavernicola. — Buenos-Ayres, 1891, in-8°. Bourencer (G. HAS.). — Catalog of the Reptiles and Batra-
chians of Barbary (Jforocco, Algeria, Tunisia) based chiefly
upon the Notes and collections made in 1880-1884, by
M.F. Lataste. — London, 1891, in-8°. 7. Bronantart (Cu.) — Note on some fossil insects of the

coalfield which present appendages to the prothorax
aliform sayings. — Paris, 1890, in-8th. >

8. — Paleozoology. Insects. — Paris, 1891, in-8°. 9. — The Desert Locust, Acridivm peregrinum Oliv., its
metamorphoses, its fungal parasite. — Paris, 1891,
in-8°. 10. — Parasitic fungi observed on locusts
pilgrims in Algeria. — Paris, 1891, in-8°. 11. — The metamorphoses of Desert Locusts (Acridium

peregrinun Ol.). — Paris, 1891, in-4°. 559

12. BronentarT (Cu.). — The Cryptogam of Desert Locusts. — Paris, 1891, in-4°. 13. — Locusts in Algeria. — Paris, 1891, in-4°. 14. — Functions of the pectiniform organ of Scorpions. —
Paris, 1891, in-4°. 15. — A new species of Locustid of the genus Megalodon. — Paris, 1891, in-8°. 16. — Monograph of the genus Palophus (Orthoptera). - Paris,
1892, in-4°. 17. — Monograph of the genus Zumegalodon (Orthoptera). —
Paris, 1892, in-4°. 18. — Trip of M. Pavie to Cambodia. Beetles, Longi-
horns. — Paris, 1892, in-4°. 19. — and DeLacrorx. — On the parasitic fungi of

Locusts. — Paris, 1891, in-8°. 20. Caszy (T.). — Coleopterological Notices. - New York,
1891, in-8°. 21. Canpizz (E.). — Elaterides collected by M. Loria in 1889-
1891 in New Guinea, Meri, and adjoining areas. — Genoa, 1892, in-8°. 22. — Eilaterides collected by M. Modigliani in the Ile d'En-
gano in May and June 1891. — Genoa, 1891, in-8th. 23. Cuyzer (C.) and Rutezynsxt (L.). — Aranew Hungary secun-
dum collected at L. Becker pro parte perscrutatas. Flight. I. — Budapest, 1892, in-8>. 24, Cunt y Martorei (D.M.). — Und Excursid Entomologica
Nocturna. — Barcelona, ​​1892, in-8”. 25. Distant (W.L.). — Descriptions of four new species of
Scutellerinee. — London, 1892, in-8°. 26. — On some undescribed Cicadide with synonymical
grades. — London, 1892, in-8°. 27. — Descriptions of four new species of the genus Fulgora. — London, 1891, in-8°. 28. Fernax (L.). — The Portland Catalog of Maine Plants. — Portland, Maine U. S. A., 1892, in-8°. 29. Fores (S. HAS.). — Bacteria normal to digestive organs of
Hemiptera. — New York, in-8°. 30. — Bacterial Insect disease. — New York, 1891, in-8°. 31. Forzt (D A.). — Die Ameisenfauna Bulgarians. — Wien,
1892, in-8°. 32. GapEAU DE KeryiiuE (H.). — The Society of Friends of Science
these natural Rouen in 1890, Annual report. — 1891, in-8°. 560
33. 3k. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 43. 44. 45,

46. 47. 48. Gasperint (R.). — Prilog. K. Dalmatinskoj Fauni — lsopoda
Myriopoda—Arachnida. — U Splitu, 1892, in-8°. Howarp (L. 0.). — The Biology of the Hymenopterous
insects of the family Chalcididia. —Washington, 1892,

in-8°.

. _Kerremans (Cu.). — Elementary entomology. — Brussels,

1891, in-12°. — Viaggo di Leonardo Fea in Burma e regioni vicine. Buprestids. — Genes, 1892, in-8th. Lameere (Aug.). — Outline of Zoology. - Brussels,
1892, in-12°. — Note on the Ants of Belgium. - Brussels,

1892, in-8°,
— New Lamiids of tropical Africa. - Brussels,
1892, in-8e. Levivrs (Ep.). — Trip of M. Pavie to Cambodia. Coleop-
teres, Clytridw and Eumolpides. — Paris, 1892, in-4e. Lint Ner (J. HAS.). — Seventh report of the injurious and others

Insects of the State of New York. — Albany, 1891, in-8°.

. Newron (E.T.). — On a Skull of Zrogontherium Cuviert

from the Forest Bed of East Runton near Cromer. —
London, 1891, in-4°. Oxtvier (E.). — Description of two new species of
genus Luciola (Viaggo di Lamberto Loria nella Papuasia
Oriental). — Genova, 1892, in-8°. OstEN SackEN. —Second notice on the Apiocerina. —Berlin,
1891, in-8°. — Synopsis of the described genera and species of the
Blephatoceridae and synonymy of the Antocha O. S. and
Orimargula Mik. — Berlin, 1891, in-8°. — Addition and corrections to the Catalog of the description
bed species of South American Asilide bij S. W. Wil-
liston. — Berlin, 1891, in-8°. Piatxau (F.). — Protective resemblance in the kingdom
animal. — Brussels, 1892, in-8°. — protective resemblance in the Lepidoptera
Europeans. — Paris, 1892, in-8°.

. Prorer (A.) and pz Saussure (H.).— Iconography of some

Green grasshoppers. — Geneva, 1892, in-4.

. Parinavey (L.). —Third and fourth contributions to the

South African Coleopterous fauna. ~ Cape Town, 1892,
in-8°,

. Reprensacuer (J.). — Monograph of Conocephaliden. —

Vienna, 1891, in-80. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. 61. 62. 63. 64. 66. 67. 561

Rarray (A. ), Bourvar (L.) and Simon (E.). — Study on
Cave arthropods from the island of Luzon. - (Travel
of M. E. Simon in the Philippines). — Paris, 1892, in-8°,

Setys-Lonacuamps (E.pg). — Additions to the Odonata of
Philippines. — Madrid, 1891, in-8°. pE Saussure (H.). — Supplemental Note 4 Synopsis of
the Sagian tribe (Orthoptera). — Paris, 1891, in &. Scupper (S.H.). — The tertiary Rhynchophora of North
America. — Boston, 1892, in-8°. Smon (E.). — Voyage to Venezuela.— Biological observations
ques on Arachnids. — Paris, 1891, in-8°. — Natural History of Spiders, T. I., fasc. 1. - Paris,
2¢ edition, 1892, in-8°. — List of species of the family Aviculariidae which inhabit
try North America. — Bordeaux, 1891, in-8°. — Descriptions of new species and genera of the
Aviculariidae family. — Paris, 1891, in-8”,

— Arachnids collected on the upper Congo by M. A. Gres-
hoff. — Paris, 1891, in-8°. Smrra (J.-B.). — Contributions toward a monograph of the
Noctuids of temperate North America. — i. Review of
Homohadena Grote. — Washington, 1891, in-8°. —
II. Revision of the species of M/amestva. —Washington,
1892, in-8°. — III. Revision of the species of Hadena
referable to Yylophasia and Luperina. —Washington,
1891, in-8°. Tryon (H.). — Rhopalocera collected in British New Guinea
during 1889-1890. — Brisbane, 1890, in-8°,

— Coleoptera collected by M. A. C. English in the
St Joseph River, district of British New Guinea during
1889-1890. — Brisbane, 1890, in-8. Wexrp (C.). — Sixth Contribution to a knowledge of the life
history of certain little-known Aphididew. —Cambridge,
1891, in-8°.

. Wicxnam (H.F.). — In the Canadian Entomologist. — 1. Our

Winter Beetles; 2. A Month on Van Couver Island;
3. Description of four insect monstrosities. — In the “Entomological News”. — i. Collecting in. the far North. The Alaskan coast. —II. On the clothes of
some Meloini. — III. A note on Cychrus. — IV. Remarks
on some western Tenebrionidae. — V. Through the
Pinal Mountains. — Notes on some Myrmecophilous Coleoptera, in Psyche. —Cambridge, 1892. LIST OF MEMBERS

OF THE

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF BELGIUM

DECEMBER 26, 1892. President @honor. MM. SELYS-LONGCHAMPS (Baron Edmond de), honorary member of the
Entomological societies of France, London, Berlin,
Stettin, from Germany, Switzerland, Sweden and the Netherlands. Honorary members. MM. FABRE (J.-H.), in Sérignan (Hérault), France. FAIRMAIRE (Léon), honorary president of the Entomological Society
of France, member of the Entomological Societies of Stettin and
Berlin, Natural History of Maine-et-Loire and Savoie, zoolo-
gic and Botanical of Vienna, and Royal of Edinburgh, licensed in
right, rue du Dragon, 21, 4 Paris. HAGEN (Herman-Auguste), doctor at the University of Cambridge, State
of Massachusetts (United States of North America). KRAATZ (G.), Doctor of Philosophy, President of the Entomo-
logic of Germany, honorary member of various Societies
logical, Linkstrasse, 28, W., 4 Berlin. MAC LACHLAN (Robert), member of the Royal, Linnaean and
Entomological of London, ete., Westview, Clarendon Road,
Lewisham, SE, 4 London. MAYR (Pr Dr Gustave), member of various learned societies, III,
Haupstrasse, 75, 4 Vienna. OSTEN-SACKEN (baron Ch.-R.), member of the diplomatic corps of
Russia, etc., Dr. Phil. honoris causa, May House, Wredeplatz, &

Heidelberg. SAUSSURE (Henri de), member of various Learned Societies, Cité, 24,
& Geneva. THOMSON (C.-G.), professor & University, honorary member of the
Entomological Society of France, & Lund (Sweden). 564

WESTWOOD (John-Obadiah), honorary president of the Society
of London, member of various Learned Societies, pro-
Professor of Zoology at the University, Walton Manor, Oxford. WULP (F. M. van der), secretary of the Dutch Entomological Society
daise, ‘Trompstraat, 154, & the Hague. Official members. The names preceded by an asterisk (*) are those of the founding members. Names in bold are those of Life Members. MM. Abeille de Perrin (Elzéar), member of the Entomological Society of
France, rue de la Bibliotheque, 4 Marseilles. — Tusectes paleareti-
ques, except Lepidoptera. Aupers (G.), senator, in Hanover (Prussia). — Beetles. Atzarp (Ernest), member of the Entomological Society of France, ete.,
rue Paradis Poissonniere, 2, 4 Paris. — Beetles. Bamps (Constant), MD and Alderman, & Hasselt. - Insects
from Limburg. .

Beoxer (Léon), painter, rue Godecharle, 28, 4 Ixelles. — Arach-
nests. Beton (brother M. J. ), of the Order of Brother Preachers, Professor
The Lyon School of Theology, member of the Entire Society
of France, summer, rue du Plat, 25, in Lyon. — Coleop-
land. Berg (D'Carlos), director of the Natural History Museum of Buénos-
Areas (Rep. Argentina), — ​​General entomology. Bereé (Albert), doctor of science, head of chemical work at the Uni-
versity of Brussels, rue de la Poste, 122, & Schaerbeek. — Ento-
general mology, Coleoptera (Scarabidae and Buprestiles). Bercrotx (Ewald), doctor of medicine, 4 Tammerfors (Finland), —
General entomology. Brvorr (Arthur), banker 4 Fleurus (province of Hainaut). — Entomo-
general logy, Coleoptera. Bolivar y Urrutia (Ignacio), member of various Learned Societies,
Museo de Historia natural, calle de Alcala, 11, Madrid. — Coleop-
Tares and Orthoptires of Europe. Brewske (H.), Capellenbergstrasse, 9, 4 Potsdam (Prussia). — Coleop-
land. Bronentart (Ch. ), zoology assistant at the Natural History Museum,
rue Linné, 9, 4 Paris. — Fossil insects. Canpiize (E.), doctor of medicine, honorary member of the Society
entomologist of France, member of the Royal Academy of Bel-
gic. etc., at Glain-lez-Liége. — General Entomology, Coleop-
teres (Hlaterids, Lamellicorns and Longhorns). Carvazito-Mowrerro (Antonio-Augusto de), doctor of law and science
these natural, rua do Alecrim, 70 (Largo do Barao de Quintella),
& Lisbon. — Lepidoptera. 565

Casey (Thomas L.), engineer captain, Army Building, in New York
(UNITED STATES). — Coleoptera (Clavicornes). Carrerset (Joseph), & Heyst-op-den-Berg (province of Antwerp). — Ento-
general mology. Cusiron (George), director of the Journal "le Coléopteriste", rue Duret,
30, & Paris. — Beetles. Cugsrrer pe Hanerre (baron Paul de), Chateau d'Ouhar by Comblain-
at the bridge. — Lepidoptera. Curiirien (Pierre), member of the Entomological Society of France, rue
de l’Etoile, 82, at Ternes 4 Paris. — Lepidoptera of Europe. Cuars (Edgar), lawyer, at the castle of Herckenrode, 4 Curange, near

Hasselt. — Insects of Limburg. Couneaux (Eugéne), painter, rue des Paroissiens, 17, & Bruxel-
the. — General Entomology, Hemiptera. Covexe (Edouard), clerk 4 Société Générale, chaussée de Tervueren,
28, in Etterbeek. — Beetles. Coucke (Louis), second lieutenant, chaussée de Tervueren, 28, 4 Etter-
beek. — Beetles. Craven (Alfred), member of various Belgian scientific societies and
English, 32, Warvick Square, SW, 4 London. — Entomology
general, Crustaceans. Crtrry (Frangois), director of the Botanical Garden of the State, secretary
general of the Royal Botanical Society, member of the Academy
of Belgium, rue de l'Association, 37, & Brussels. —
General entomology. Crompruacue pe PicquenvakLe (baron G. de), rue de Crayer, 5, a Etter-
beck. — Lepidoptera. Demoor (Jean), Doctor of Natural Sciences, Chaussée Saint-Pierre, &

Etterbeek. — General entomology; physiology. De Ré (Btienne), engineer, rue du Midi, 16, & Brussels. — Coleop-
flaws. Desprocurs pes Locns (J. ), member of the Entomological Society of
France, 23, rue de Boisdenier, 4 Tours (Indre et Loire). — Coleop-
European lands, European and exotic Curculionides. Devaux (Jules), rue de la Madeleine, 45, 4 Brussels. — Beetles and

Diptera. Deyroute (Henri), naturalist, member of the Entomological Society of
France, place Denfert-Rochereau, 20, in Paris. — Beetles,

Exotic Lepidoptera. Distant (W. L.), Russell Hill Road, 4 Purley Surrey (England). —

Hemiptera. Dot1# (Mauritius), photographer, member of the Entomological Society of
France, rue des Chenizelles, 2, 4 Laon (Aisne). — Beetles,

especially Lamellicorns; Lepidoptera. Dormer (lord), Fellow of the Entomological Society of London, Grove
Park, Warvick (England). — Beetles. Dusors (Alphonse), doctor of natural sciences, curator at

566

Royal Museum of Natural History, & Brussels. — Entomology
general, Lepidoptera. Dugés (Eugene), doctor of medicine, 24 Calle nacional, & Morelia
(Michoacan), Mexico. — Beetles. Duronr (E.), director of the Royal Museum of Natural History, member of
The Royal Academy of Belgium and several other Societies
scholars, at the Natural History Museum 4 Brussels. ~Entomolo-
general gie. Duvivier (Antoine), 4 Dieghem (Brabant). — Phytophages of the globe;
African beetles. Evcexs (Ch. ), executive clerk, rue de Mazy, 53, & Jambes (pro-
Vince of Namur). — Beetles. .
Everts (squire E.-J.-G.), doctor of philosophy, professor at the

middle, Stationsweg, 79, 4 The Hague. — Beetles. Fievriaux (Edmond), member of the Entomological Societies of France and
French Intomology, rue Malus, 1, 4 Paris. — Beetles. Foxxer (A.-J.-F.), lawyer, member of the Dutch Entomological Society
landaise, in Zierikzee (Netherlands). — Hemiptera. *Foioane (Egide), architect, member of the Malacological Society of
Belgijue, rue de Namur, 12, 4 Brussels. — Lepiiloptera of Europe. Fonrarne (César), member of the Royal Suciété de Botanique de Belgique,
in Papignies, canton of Lessines (Hainaut). — Lepidoptera and
Beetles. Forel (Auguste), doctor of medicine, professor 4 the University, 4 Zurich
(Swiss). —- Hymenoptera (Formicides). Fowler (Rev. W. W.), the School House, at Lincoln (England). —
Coleoptera (Languriidae). Fromonr (Edmond), doctor of medicine, rue de la Victoire, 133, 4 Saint-
Gilles lez-Brussels. — Beetles; walls and metamorphoses. Func (Mauritius), student, rue de Livourne, 30, in Ixelles. — Beetles

 
  

 

 

 

(Longhorns). Gadeau de Kerville (Henri), member of the Zoological and Environmental Societies
history of France, etc., rue Dupont, 7, 4 Rouen. — Entomology
general. Gallegos y Sardina (Ventura), doctor-surgeon and professor of His-
tory, member of various Learned Societies, & Mendoza
(Argentina Republic). — Beetles. GazaGnaire (Joseph), member of the Entomological Society of France,
Boulevard de Port-Royal, 33, & Paris. — Entomological anatomy,
Myriopods, Diptera and Hymenoptera:

GuRard (Jules), dyer, rue des Prémontrés, 6, & Liege. — Lepidop-
teres, Coleoptera (Globe Rhynchophores). Giron (Alfred), adviser to the Court of Cassation, professor at the University
of Brussels, rue Goffart, 16, 4 Ixelles. — Lepidoptera. Goverr (Emile), doctor of medicine & Mont-de-Marsan (Landes). —
Diptera, Coleoptera. Gouts (Maurice des), member of the Entomological Society of France, &
Montlugon (Allier), — Coleoptera and Orthoptera. 567

Grouvette (Antoine), member of the Entomological Society of France,
rue de Charenton, 319, & Paris. — Clavicorns. Haxzzz (Henri), doctor of medicine, i Binche (Hainaut). —Beetles. Hamat (Joseph), student, place Delcour, 14, 4 Lidge. — Beetles,
Chrysomelids of Europe. Heypen (Lucas von), major on leave, Dr. Phil. honoris causa,
member of various learned societies, Schlossstrasse, 54, 4 Bocken-
heim, near Frankfurt am Main. — European insects of all
orders, especially Coleoptera. Heyzaerts (F.-J.-M.), doctor of medicine, member of the Society
Dutch entomologist, Haagdijk, B-377, 4 Breda (Brabant
Dutch). — Lepidoptera, Coleoptera. Hirer (Edmond), rue Rogier, 287, 4 Schaerbeck. — Lepidoptera of
Belgium. Horvatx (Geyza), doctor of medicine, director of the Station Phyllo-
xeric, Delibab-Utéza, 15, 4 Budapest (Hungary). — Beetles
and Hemiptera. *Jacons (J.-Ch. ), doctor of medicine, rue des Ursulines, 28, 4 Brussels. — Hymenoptera, Diptera. Kerremans (Charles), retired captain, rue du Lac, 31, & Ixelles. — Coleoptera (Buprestids). Kocx (Carl-Ludwig), doctor of medicine, Strasse nach Wohrd, 3, a
Nuremberg (Bavaria). — Arachnids. Kokouyew (N.), bookseller, 4 Jaroslavl (Russia). — Beetles. Koxse (H.), curator at the Zoological Museum, Lessingstrasse, 7/8,
NW., 4 Berlin. — General entomology. Kuwerr (A. ), owner, 4 Wernsdorf, near Tharau (Prussia). —
Beetles. Lamarcue (Oscar), industrialist, member of the Royal Botanical Society,
rue Louvrex, 70, & Liege. — Lepidoptera (especially the
Butterflies). Lameere (Auguste), Doctor of Science, Professor at the University of
Brussels, chaussée de Charleroi, 119, in Saint-Gilles lez-Bruxelles. — General entomology. The Arpatesterer (Aristide), administrative officer, quai Saint-
Leonard, 11, has Lidge. — Lepidoptera. Le Brun (Marcel), member of the Entomological Society of France, rue
Wolf, 4 Troyes (Aube). — European Coleoptera. Leprou (Emile), employee at the state railway, rue des Palais, 148,
& Schaarbeek. — Lepidoptera,

Lyrkvre (Edouard), member of the Entomological Society of France,
rue du Bac, 112, in Paris. — Beetles, especially Clytrids and

 

 

Eumolpids. Leruierry (Lucien), member of the Entomological Society of France,
rue Blanche, 16, 4 Saint-Maurice lez-Lille. — Beetles and
Hemiptera. Liven (Albert), archivist-librarian of the Entomolo-
gic of France, rue du Dragon, 10, in Paris. — Beetles

568

Palearctic fauna; Exotic Temnochilides; Hemiptera. Masitie (Paul), teacher at the Lycée de Vanves, member of the Society
entomological of France, rue du Cardinal Lemoine, 75, & Paris. — Lepidoptera. Mazarredo (Carlos de), forest engineer, calle del Almirante, 2, cua-
druplicado, 2° izquierda, 4 Madrid. — General entomology. Meyer-Darcis (Georges), member of the Entomological Societies of Switzerland
and from France, 2 Woblen (Switzerland). — Coleoptera (Carabids and
Buprestids). Micuets (Louis), naturalist, rue d'Arenberg, 26, Brussels. — Ento-
general mology. Mcerenuovr (Victor), Villa Vreedenhof, 4 Laroche (Luxembourg). —
Hymenoptera. Morrarts (Ferdinand de), place Saint-Paul, 10, in Liege. — Coleop-
land. Mourton (Michel), associate doctor at the Faculty of Sciences of the
site of Brussels, curator at the Royal Museum of Natural History,
member of the Royal Academy of Belgium, rue Belliard, 107, &
Ixelles. — General entomology. Neérvoort van de Poll (Jacques), Deputy Director of the Royal Society
of Zoology Natura Artis Magistra, Heerens Gracht, 476, & Amster-
damn. — Globe beetles. Nonrriep (A.-F.}, 4 Rakovnik (Bohemian). — Beetles. Opertur (Ch. ), printer, suburb of Paris, Rennes (Ille-et-Vi-
oldest boy). — Lepidoptera. Oberthur (René), printer, suburb of Paris, 20, 4 Rennes (Ille-et-
Vilaine), — Coleoptera. Otivier (Ernest), member of the Entomological Society of France,
Ramillons, near Moulins (Allier). — Beetles

Pascoe (Fr. P.), Fellow of the Entomological Society of London, ete.,
1, Burlington Road, Westbourne Park, W., 4 London. — Coleop-
teres (Rhynchopores and Longhorn beetles). Pasteur (J.-D.), inspector of the post and telegraph service, & Soera-
Baja (Java). — Lepidoptera. Parernorre (L.), rue Alphonse Vandenpeereboom, 28, & Molenbeek-St-
Jeans. — Beetles. PavLino pe Ouiverra (Manoél), member of the Entomological Society of
France, ete., professor at the University of Coimbre (Portugal), —
Coleoptera and Lepidoptera. Péringuey (Louis), deputy director at the Museum of Cape-Town (Africa). —
Beetles. Prareav (Félix), doctor of natural sciences and zoological sciences
ques, professor of zoology at the University of Ghent, member
of the Royal Academy of Belgium, chaussée de Courtrai, 152,
& Ghent. —- General Entomology, Anatomy and Physiology, Crusta-
ees, Myriopoda. Piatreruw (D'P. HAS. ), 1st class medical officer, Hoflaan, 244, 4
Kralingen lez-Rotterdam. — General Entomology, Lampyrids. 569

Poncetet (Camille), forest engineer, 4 Orsinfaing near Marbehan
(province of Luxembourg). — Applied entomology. Posxrn (Jules), doctor of science, agrégé 4 of the Agricultural Institute of I'Rtat,
At Gembloux. — Applied entomology. Prevpxomme pe Borne (Alfred), member of several Learned Societies,
rue Seutin, 11, 4 Schaarbeek. — General entomology, geography
entomological, Coleoptera. Proost (Alphonse), Inspector General of Agriculture, Professor &
the University of Louvain, rue du Luxembourg, 36, 4 Brussels. —
Applied Entomology, Biology. Raausa (Enrico), member of the Italian Entomological Society, ete.,
Hotel des Palmes, 4 Palermo. — Beetles. Récmmart (Mauritius), doctor of medicine, 4 Evreux (Eure). — Hydro-

kantharos. Remy (Jules), director of the Hospice for Assisted Children, rue du Marais,
& Brussels, — Coleoptera. Rosre (Henri), doctor of medicine, rue Royale S* Marie, 93, 4 Saint-
Josse-ten-Noode. — Lepidoptera. *Rostors (W.), painter, Rynstraat, 20, ala Haye. — Beetles
(Curculionides). Rousseau (Ernest), student, rue Vautier, 29, 4 Ixelles. — Beetles,
Arachnids and Phryganids of Belgium. *Sauveur (Jules), Secretary General of the Ministry of the Interior and
Public Instruction, rue Juste-Lipse, 40, 4 Brussels. — Fauna
Belgian entomology. Scuornretor (H. von), place commander, Burgstrasse, 666, a Siegen
(Prussia). — Beetles. Scott (Robert), Miller street, & Richmond (Victoria, Australia). —
Beetles (Rhynchophores). Sepm:tor (Mauritius), lawyer, member of the Entomological Society of
France, rue de l'0déon, 20, & Paris. — Beetles. Szexprayvers (E.), painter, rue Potagere, 123, 4 Brussels. —
Coleoptera and Lepidoptera. *Suiys-Lonacuamps (baron Edmond de), senator, member of the Academy
of Belgium and several other Academies and Societies
scholars, boulevard de la Sauveniére, 32, 4 Liege. — Neuroptera
(mainly Odonata) and European Lepidoptera. Severtn (Guillaume), assistant naturalist at the Royal Museum of Natural History,
rue Elise, 70, 4 Ixelles. — General entomology. Suarp (David), member of several Learned Societies, 4 Wilmington,
Dartford, Kent (England). — Beetles. Simon (Eugéne), member of the Entomological Society of France, ete.,
Villa Said, avenue du Bois de Boulogne, 56, 4 Paris. -Entomology
general, Arachnids. Simson (Augustus), 4 Launceston (Tasmania). — Beetles. Srvitte (Armand), student, rue des Vingt-Deux, 16, & Liage. - The PI-
doptera (Catocala and Ophideres). 570

Sraupincher (D* Otto), 4 Blasewitz, near Dresden (Saxony). — Lepidoptera
@ Europa. Tuy (André), winegrower, 4 St Charles near Philippeville (Algeria). —
European beetles, globe beetles. Tnmor (Edouard), head of office 4 the municipal administration of
Schaerbeek, rue Van den Broeck, 23, 4 Ixelles. — Lepidoptera and
Beetles. Tosquiner (Jules), Inspector-General of the Army Health Service, in
retirement, rue d'licosse, 4, 4 Saint-Gilles lez-Bruxelles. — Hyme-
nopteres. ‘Tourwrer (Henri), member of the Entomological Society of France, villa
Tournier, & Peney, near Geneva. — Beetles. Tscuorren (Mauritius), Deputy State Prosecutor, & Matadi (Congo). —
Beetles. Van Benepen (Edouard), doctor of natural sciences, member of
V Royal Academy of Belgium, professor of zoology and embryo-
logy @ the University of Liége, quai des Péchours, & Liege. —
General entomology, biology, embryogeny, Crustaceans and Anne-
free. Van Nerow (Prosper), doctor of law, candidate-notary, rue Saint-
Handlebar, 54, 4 Anderlecht. — Beneficial and harmful insects 4 agriculture

culture. Van Srcvett (Edmond), pharmacist, Fellow of the Royal Society of
Botany, Place Raghens, 9, 4 Mechelen. — General entomology,
die of insects, galls and galls, genus Donacia, Lepi-
dopteras. Van Tricur (Rev. P. Victor), professor of natural sciences & Louvain. — General entomology. Venprett (Adolphe), agricultural engineer, in Guatemala (Central America)
tral). — General entomology. Verneccen (Henri), director of the State Middle School 4 Walcourt. — Insects of Belgium. Vurror (Paul), member of the Ontomological Society of France, rue
Boulainvilliers, 24, & Paris. — Lepidoptera. Weyers (Joseph-Léopold), member of various learned societies, 4
Padang (Sumatra), and rue Joseph II, 35, & Brussels. — Beetles
(Buprestids). Waa (D.), municipal teacher and sworn surveyor 4 Triviéres, meadows
Bracquegnies (Hainaut). — General Entomology, Coldoptera. Corresponding members. MM. Gopanz (Joseph), doctor, inspector of primary education &
Klagenfurt (Carinthia). Korren (Fr-Th. ), employee at the ministry, Grande Morskaya, 21, &
St-Petersburg. Packarp (D' A.-8. ), Professor of Zoology and Geology, Bronn University
sity, Providence, Rhode-Island (USA). 571

Patianpt (baron Henri de), Oranjestraat, 4, & the Hague. Perez Arcas (Laureano), professor of zoology at the University, member of
The Royal Academy of Sciences, calle de las Huertas, 14, & Madrid. Roceuorsr (Alois), curator at the Imperial Museum of Natural History
do Vienne, Secretary of the Society Imp. and R. Zoolog.-Botan.,
Jozefstiidterstrasse, 19, 4 Vienna. Scupper (Samuel), assistant librarian at Harvard College, & Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts (United States of North America). Associate members. MM. Bertranp (Emile), student, chaussée Saint-Pierre, 105, in Etterbeek. —
Belgian beetles. Bovie (Albert), student, rue des Fabriques, 2, 4 Brussels. — Entomo-
general logic. Canpiize (Léon), student, at Glain, near Lidge. — Lepidoptera, special-
ment Bombycides. Coion (A. ), professor at the royal athenaeum, 4 Dinant. — Entomology
general. Dz Rasck (Léon), avenue d'Auderghem, 215, & Etterbeek. — Beetles
and Lepidoptera. Duwowr (Gustave), communal teacher, Quai de 'Ourthe, 19, & Lidge. — General entomology. Kravs (Mathias), prison teacher, route d'Arlon, Luxembourg. — General entomology. Lamorts (Arthur), teacher at the middle school, rue Potagare, 25, a
Saint-Josse-ten-Noode. — General entomology. Lansau (Léon), student, rue du Progrés, 79, & Lacken. — Beetles,
Lepidoptera. Meise (Jules), student, rue Faider, 16, 4 Saint-Gilles lez-Bruxelles. —
Beetles. .

Morrarts (Charles de), student, place St. Paul, 10, in Liégge. —
Lepidoptera. Rotors (Paul), student, rue Van Straclen, 90, Antwerp. —Beetles. Srquet (Jean-Michel), teacher at the middle school of Huy. — Entomo-
general logic. .

Van Camrenuour (Victor), slave & I'Wicole d'Equitation, & Ypres. —
Beetles. Deceased members. MM. Burmeister (Herm. ), 4 Buenos-Ayres (honorary member). Dourw (C.-A. ), in Stettin (honorary member). Stainton (H.-T.), 4 London (honorary member). La Fontaine (Jules), 4 Ghent (founding member). Mavrissen (A. H.), & Maestricht (full member). TABLE OF CONTENTS. Pages. Administrative organization for the year 1892... . .. 4
Minutes of the monthly meeting of January 9, 18922. . - 5
> > » > February 6, 1802. . . . 37
> > » > March 5, 1892. . . 85
» > » » of April 5, 18922... . . M1
> > > > May 7, 1892. . . . . 169
> > > >» dudjuinl892 . . . . 227
5 DO > from July 1802. . . . 255
» > » > from Gaotit 1892 . . . . 385
' > >» >» of September 1892. . . 451
» > > » of October 1, 1892. . . 467
» > » » of November 5, 1892. . . 479
> > > of December 3, 1892. . . 513
Assembly conducted from December 26, 1892, . . to 541
List of additions to the Library of December 26, 1891
to December 26, 1892. . . 57
List of members of the Soi as of December 26, 1392. 563
Contents . . . 1 1. 1 wwe ee ee BIB
Bates (H. W.).—Second List of West Bengal Carabidae 230
Backer (L.). — On the Pholous phalangioides Puessly . . . + 539
Berets (A.). — Ketonides of West Bengal. . . 239
— On the destruction of cockchafer larvae by los Cham. sprockets. . tee ee ee BIS
Bereroru (E.). — Rhynchota Aithiopica. soe ee ee + 160
— Aradides of Boreal Bengal. . . . wow ee + 508
— New species of the genus Megymenum Lap. o 0.9 0 504
Bourceors (J.). — Dascillids and Malucoderms of West Bengal
dental. . . se ee ee . . 234
Brensxe (E.). — Synonymous restatements ee ee 170
Canptze (E.). — Capture of a new native Blaterid 227
— Second note on the Blaterids of Chota-D Nagpore. . 480
Countaux (E.). — Enumeration of the Hemiptera of Belgium (continued,
end, addendum eterrata) . . . . . 34, 80, 141
Joucxe (Ep.). — The Brachymeres of Belgium and the regions
sins. . . 0 0 69

ANNALS OF LO SOG. ENTOM, DE RELGIQUE, T. ANAVIL “Bs

Pages. (Ev. and L). - Report on a dipterological exeurion
in the Belgian part of the Hertogenwald between
Goé, In Baraqne-Michel and Kupen. . . . . . 462, 467
Covex (L.). — Third note on some Hetero-Beetles

 

        

 

    

   

 

        

   

 

mothers of Belgium. 2... 2. ee ee ee 9

— Materials for a study of the Tabanids of Belgium. . 134

pe Crommevecue (G.) — Captnres de Lepidoptera indigenes... 515
Distant (W.L.). — Description of a new species of Coreide con-

held in the Brussels Museum... . 2. 2 4 + 586

Duvivier (A.). — Entomological Mclanzes .. » . . 56,163
— Note on the Coleoptera of the valleys of Veimbi i-Rubi and
from PUellé (regions of Hant-Congo) picked up in 1890,

by MM, Joseph Duvivier and Mil... 0.0.0... 287

— The Phytophages of Chota-Nagpore (2 note). 396
Fairnuame (L). — Description of Surrounding Beetles

Wakbes (Syria).. . . . oh. 144

— Descriptions of some Colenptare argentina 00 - 242

 

Foxxer (A.J. F.). — Capture dau Ce indigeneeanltcO
fors. (HAS.). — Myrmecological notes. Slate eoOS
— Review by: Peter Cameron, Hymen: ote "a
extracted from supplementary appendix to t s
the Great Andes of the Equator by Edw. Whymper. — Some Ants of the Mediterranean Fauna. — The mile of the Ce and the inbred eee
perpetuated 2% -
— Correction to the previous communication. — New species of Formicides from Madagascar:

 

      
 

   

 

 

   
     

 

by Mr. Sikora... 516
Giron (Ae) ees Ditecurelaroninccianannucttorand iar at catiets
* aM. of Selys-Lougehamps. None . . 885

 

   
 

ROU

see (A.). — Bengal clavicorns (2 list)
Hey1ar

as (I, J.M.). — Heterocera exotica, new es
of the Dutch East Indies (continued)... . . “7.43

60

   

     

 

  

  

 

 

  

 

Happen (Ep.). — Captures of native Lepidoptera 6, 229, 256, 392
451, Wr 480
Horn (W.). — Bengal cicindelidae. . . 7 . O87
Jacobs (J. Cu.). — Notes on some native Diptyres 479
Kerremans (Cn.). — Note on the African Chrysodemids
assigned to the genus [ridotunia . . . . 49
— Dioenes of two Buprestids of the ern fn ir
nyka. ee ew we we 8
- Buprestiles of India coe ee uals
Laniuenz (A. ), =| Notelaun les) Ants dolla) Beleiquen | aaeaanGl
— New Lamiids of tropical Africa. . . 5
Lewis (G.) — On a new species of Histeride of Bengal. . 142
Prareau (F.). — A special form of temporary colonies of

 

Coccinella septempunctata

575

 

 

 

Pages. Prevpnomme pe Borre (A.). — On the new work of
M. L. Ganglbauer .. + ee) eee)
— Captures of native beetles. 228
— On a capture in Belgium of the Pholeus options
Schrank (phalangioides Walck.) . . . blue
Récrumarr (M.). — Hydrocantharids of West Bengal. 112
Rope (H.). — List of a collection of Lepidoptera reeucilis
in West Bengal. 122
— Congo Saar Lepidoptera) > 132
— Captures of native Lepidoptera | | | . 286, 480, 51%
— Note on an Apterous Female of Biston hirtarius. 5l4
von Scornrenpt (H.). — Lamellicorn bones of Ben-
western scabies. . . . . 107
ve Sezys-Lonecuaurs (Ep.). — Note % monyyaic eur some
Odonata. . oa rae 6
— Causeries eruneealteriient 1 6 eS)
— Adrian Maurissen. Obituary notice. . . . 889
— Summary of our current knowledge of the fauna “of the
Lepidoptera of Belgium. . . 391
— Accidental appearance of the Afantis religiosu and some
than other iusects in Belgium. . . . 495
Severin G.). — The Avticulés collections of the Royal Museum

of Natural History of Belgium. -.. . 469
West (J.). — The Coccinellids of the Chotaserene oo 9 go ie

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

oh

   
        
    

PG eh tel td

ant a Piri AEE EAL aay 4
ee
a) aia Born

LT ha wT

 

ry

Thy eee TTT Hel TOTS
tse | tne ane ry ¥
Ty Wetted Ute ner l|

ata

QUOTE | ad AN
TTT Tremere I ARMs
Pe OEE (yy

  
   
     
  
 

 

tee
aL DPT ite taial alia ddan
HV ol aali ee ee

 

wT yt |. haha
Wee ft aun)

hall at ilo

monel lee | Soe Ty an
OR ao nene ry
Perr

Are
] ae Ae a

HAS

 
 

4 oS) We My

fl rT
ae ae pe at PPL
nah
YH) hae) ee
a A eo ae eA al Pry Thr Lat
per i Fe tte bl Phd Tn Ni
mt Set a3 ely elo}
1) Lee La{|

 

> nt a tna) yeu
AU Lt vanadate

PIT OANA |
Tt NL lepen ener Td) rt) an Npaueee

Hmm
Oe i All TITY TT | Te Posen
wy. Ral

HAS

wai rt summer AGM
eee

 

 

 

     

; VA Sess REE arian, ay ce rt
7 Freitas
ent i

vy aA PH AT