q

The harmful forest and
fruit tree insects
Gustav A.O. Henschel

 

THE LIBRARY
OF
THE UNIVERSITY
OF CALIFORNIA

FROM THE LIBRARY OF
COUNT EGON CAESAR CORTI

 

 

disks

 

 

 

Digitized by Google

The harmful ones

forest and fruit tree insects,

their way of life and abuse. Practical manual

flr

foresters and gardeners

Gustav A.O. Henschel,

kk, Forstrath,

 

Third revised edition. we

With 197 text illustrations,

BERLIN. PUBLISHED BY PAUL PAREY
rgnnag entero eed en
SW 10 Hedemannsi breed,

1895,

 

foreword,

The present manual is a significantly expanded new
Adaptation of my 1876 second edition published guide to
Determination of the harmful forest and fruit tree insects. I have
as a basis the systematic Kintheilung chosen and by addition
appropriately set up analytical ‘tables the determination of the
Families, genera and species much easier. A compact presentation, limited to the essentials only
the animal type of the arthropods in general and the class of the
Insects in particular initiate the study of entomology. the
=practical identification tables* form the end of the work. she
sorted alphabetically according to wood species and wood species groups,
Lytic-biologically furnished and include insect repellents
also the fungal diseases and gall formations. The Tomicide family, as the real domain of the forest
wirths, a very special attention was paid and have
almost all species of bark,
Bast beetle and pin beetle appropriate consideration found, other
On the other hand, such species are also found among the fruit tree scabs
been ranked, whose detriment was unknown to me until then; I have
me in this regard through the communications of the professors Dr. W. Hess
(enemies of fruit growing) and Dr, Oskar Kirchner (diseases and
damage to our economic crops) for inclusion
let the same determine

With the addition of 200 (partly original) text illustrations
the book has gained significantly over the earlier editions
have, The ‘textual references’ used in the practical tables
generally refer to the species in question; in

51628

 

 

  

 

 

 

  

  

v foreword,

e or

  

Of the authors I have consulted, except the
already mentioned above, especially emphasized: R. Hartig (Baum
diseases), the same (examinations), Sorauer (plant diseases),
Frank (diseases of plants), L, Redtenbacher (fauna austriaca,
Beetle), by Heinemann (The butterflies), 0. W
Description of the caterpillars), Dr. E. Hofman (Ranpen der
linge), Dr. F, Klug (collected mounts but leaf
(sawflies and holawe wasps), Schiner (Fauna aust

 

       
 
 
  
    
   

     

 

 

Bergenstamm and P. Low (8
also the works. from Dr. Mrs. Liw, Dr. D.H.R. vou
Rob Liebel, Dr. Gust. Zaddach, Dr. N. 3 among the forest
entomological works: Dr. Bernh, Altwin (forest insects), the same (forest
injuries caused by animals), Dr. sudeich and 1
Book of Central European Fortenkunde, Part
(Forest Protection), Dr. H. (textbook of

In a way that is worthy of recognition, the publisher's book handbook
ment for a dignified equipment: care has been taken,
for which I express my heartfelt thanks to the publisher. ndlings

 

   
  

 

The author. Contents. side
1 bottle Introductory considerations. arthropods. insect w 1
The arthropods in general . J

 

nent dp epee forestry and farming hechaft.. . . . . 2
The insects ne =e

 

 

blood vessels

 

Reproduction ond Eniwicklong the eTseien Rarer ateere, ey

1. The egg_(He Fruchtumg, 5; horen, microphylene, gamogenest

 

I. Order, Coleoptera, Kifer 88
1, General remarks on the kifer's kisser Baw eee ae

 

1. department. Pentamera ss s 5 88

   

vi content. 8th. Family Lymexylonidae, shipyard kifer 60
9. family Anobiidae. Aifer os OP
‘Characteristics of the groups, genera and Aten... . 63

I. Group Anobiini_. ss
ppe_Xy! few ever erecere. red

 

  

IL department. heteromera. . 0 2... 7
(0. Family Tenebrividae, _Dunkelkifer 6i

11. Family Melandryidae. Black pine .. ss 68

 

V. Group Gionini. see
no Group Cryptorrhynchini BE

 

 

yeah, TS
1. Group Seulytida. Bark, Bast and Splintkaver.. 119
‘Characteristics of the subfamilies a

General... eee ee

     

 

‘General... ss
Characteristic of the genera AaALBER
Special part... ss ss ss 131

Ul, Scolytini paternal family. Splintkifer... . 151
7, eee. UNTIL

 

 

 

 

 

VOL

Contents. 'Side

UL order. Lepidoptera, butterflies a 283,

 

 

Digitizm by Google

 

‘VIL okay. Neuroptera, Netzfitgler

 

‘Dighizer/ ty Google

i

8th. 10,

a

etc

Dig harmful insects and their control. antennae four-parted; lateral edges of the head edged; shield

chen shorter than half the abdomen; Tarsi tripartite

— five-parted, turned in under the eyes; sides of the head

sharp-edged; Labels at least from half laggards

(bane bugs): family Pentatomidae. agent missing 2

 

 

Color a fiery red with black markings; Wing covers without
wedge piece and no rear tip (firebugs’

family Pyrrhocoridae,
- different; Fore wing chisel present; mostly tender
Animals (bighorn bugs): family Capsidae,
The cap at the tip of the forewings with at most fiiut
Longitudinal veins 2 =:
-------- always with more than five veins (Led
bugs): . family Coreidae. First foot segment much longer than the head, thickened in a clavate manner; Kirper
narrow, very elongated; Legs aid fihler very long (stilt bugs):

 

 

 

 

 

 

family Berytidae,
— — tighter than the head, and at least not vinger than that
aritte and fourth (long bugs): family Ligaeidae,
Living parasitically on plants. . zi

— Stingetians alive and parasitic; otherwise share the
standing character (Thierliuse family Pedieulidae. Beak intimate with fore chest. grown together, apparently between
or arising from behind the fore-hips, or absent altogether; wings
present or absent; Fbler with three or more segments, without fine ones
terminal bristle; Tarsus mostly bilobed; Kirper small, at most
7mm (plant lice) . None = free, descending at the back of the head, not init’ the front breast
overgrown with one to three strongly thickened grand segments and
fine terminal bristle; Tarsus tripartite; jumping ability strongly
wraps Body usually small, rarely up to 15 mm (chirping)
-derftigel (if any) with cells; both genders both
Eyeless as flagged; Side eyes between Dr who feblend
— — — with at most one vein, cellless; 9 stots undiligled,
covered by a shield (Sehild luxe family Coeeidae. Jumping ability present; Fihler 1Oxlinlerig (datt sucker;
leaf fleas): family Psitlidae,
— feblend; Fuller three to seven members (leaf lens

family Aphididae,

    

   

 

    

   
 

 

 

   

 

 

8th. 10,

12,

486 The shelly insects and their control. 15, body small, to at most 15 mm.; two accessory eyes present or
can absent; Pale tripartite, between eyes and forehead
steered in the largest species front back with lateral extension
sitting: vocal apparatus missing in Minnchen . . - 16 — Where 15mm; three subsidiary eyes always present; moth seven-
jointed; Front back without lateral extensions; vocal apparatus abdominal
wide, present at the base of the abdomen in Minnchen;
Wings clear as glass, unequal in size, longitudinal veins forked (cicadas,
chirping) family Cieadidae,

16 Rear edge of the front back over the cap with thorny
like extension (humpback cicadas) family Membracidae. — — — not withered; thorn-like extension feblend (small
xirpen) Family Cereopi

   

 

  

 

 

  

A. Rhynchota heteroptera. Split into two groups: geocores, land, and hyirocores,
water bugs; the latter are part of the fish farm (pond farming)
detrimental, the species belonging to the first group for the most part

 

 

pw

 

useful or irrelevant to forestry and orchards. pentatom
rufipes L. wid Avadus cinnamomeus Pz, the former species of Niérdlinge
the latter observed by Altum are to be designated as dignified. B. Rhynchota homoptera. The fit groups include Cicadina, Chirps or Cicadas
Payllodina, leaf bug or leaf sucker: Aphidina, plant, leaf
or sap lice; Coceina, scale insect; and Pediculina, parasitic

   

 

The harmful insects and their control. 487

or animal lice. The latter group is outside the frame
our consideration. 1, Group Cicadina. chirp. cicadas. 1. Family Strudulantia, sing cicadas. Genus Clenda Z., Cikad

Fiber with six segments, bent in front of the eyes
unequal in size, as clear as glass, skiny, with forked get! veins. southern species,

1. Cieada orni L., manna cicada;
wits drawn in black, rim of hind
stained, outer edge elbe, wing mark white,

The Mannacikad represents the north until
South Germany encroaching species, where it finds its distribution limit,
she causes_ on the flower ash (Frarinus ornusy) with her sting
sap discharge (mannabildimg). the four wings
old

   
    

   

up to 28 mm long; yellowish, riieken-
body réthlich; Obertldgel black-

 

     

 

n widest

     

Membrancina family. humpbacks. May only be mentioned here with reference to one, with us
Commonly occurring, conspicuous due to their shape
Centrotus cornutus Fabr., cezeicmet by a rotten
originating from the back, reaching backwards to the tip of the abdomen
Spinous process, Most species are native to South America. Family Cieadellina, small cicadas. 1. Genus Aphrophora Germ. foam cadenzas,

Anterior dorsum laterally not extended with oil marks; rear rails
hur anssen amit two thorns; Beak sheath tripartite, the huts
it outstanding. The larvae sang themselves on the may shoots of the willows,
alders etc. test, and wrap themselves in a salivary, from the anus
escaping white foam, the so-called .Kukuksspei ein, Die
The three types mentioned above probably belong to the most common occurrences

1. Aphrophora salicis 26.; to flivzel tip 10.5 mm ang, bright
'yellow, cover fiber doubles as long as tn colored, or at base with
triangular yellow outer spot, widening towards the middle, toward hi i
nugespitat,

2% Aphrophora alni L.; up to the tip of the eligel up to 9.5 mm; cover double
10 long as wide, with two large wi sters
is pointing forward like a hind, you know

 

       

  

 

     
 

   

 

 

     

    

   

488 The harmful insects and their control. hinde is limited_; Cover slightly browned at the top, towards the middle
greatly expanded, rounded backwards and tapered

3. Aphrophora (Ptyeius!) spumarius Z.; 5-6 mm long, yellowy-grey; Flee
ait four, ending in the marginal vein near the apex, aie 2
i bel-forming longitudinal veins; Head with four small schwaraea
speck; face pale yellow, forehead brown, with or without black markings;
abdomen black, lateral rind and tip yellow; breast and legs light yellow,
center of chest deep black, extremely changeable,

2 Genus Ledra Fabr. ear airpen. front ridges enlarged on both sides; head sharp-edged,
semi-solid; stivn flat, directed downwards; rear tibia
With one, especially on saplings of mancherons
Selir frequently: occurring species,

1. Ledra aurita /. ; 15 mm long, grangriin above, ranh; subsite
dirty light yellow; Cover translucent, striped brown, with a lighter spike:
veins strong, gritu knotty, brown mottling, genetat; Underwing light, veins black

 

     

     

top

~

   

 

     

 

II. Group Psyllodina. 4. Psyllodes family. leaf warbler, leaf warbler. Close to the Blattkinsen, and in certain respects the same
similar (especially in the larval state), but differ by dis
their own jumping ability and through more or less hard or stiff ones
Forewings, which are absent in no sex, antennae tenfold. as long as or longer than the body, with two bristles at the apex:
Adjuncts usually must be in twos; genitals protruding
The larvae gregarious, singing about young shoots and blotters; are often whole
billed in a white fleece, and excreted drop by drop in abundance
honey juice: off,

    

 

1. Genus Psylla Geof. leaf athe. she is much shorter than her eyes wide; the latter precedes:
second antennal segment shorter than the third; Front ridges with impressions
in the sides; Stim with two conical elevations (frontal cone:
ze the upper wing rounded; two longitudinal veins from the Lower Raniy
helt, Six species of fruit trees, two a1
worth living vein, of which the second ge
wild-leaved bees,

 

   

') Vou 4phrophora by two-limbed, at most up to 2u the middle hiites
reaching beak sheath, wad by equal distances between the Netaz and Neteo
eyes, and the latter mnter each other, differ

 

 

 

 

489

 

alni L., Erl-Blattsanger; 34.5mm; gritn, abdomen yellow;
three spots on the thorax yellowish. sensor tip black; all rails at
grande with small black spot; surface clear glass, veins fine dark
brown; Marginal nerve and marginal mark (the latter often indistinct) green or yellow. Larvae covered with wool, live sucking, gregarious on blitters of the
Black alder (Alnus glutinosa), *)

2. Psylla erataegi Seop., brick-red apple leaf sucker; 2mm
long; Black on the back of the 2nd breast, hem and midline dirty
rithish yellow; Middle breast back - yellow with black, wing lids impure
grinning brown; legs black, hips and front tibiae greenish; first back
body ring bright yellow in front, wrinkled; the other rings black, with narrow, waxy
yellow hind rims and ring incisions; the latter with black triangle
weights. In the 9, crimson red predominates on breast, neck and abdomen,

Occurrence: blistered on apple bitumen and white on the latter
Causing swelling and red spotting of bhitter. The pre~
coming at the apple tree seems to be secondary at all,

3. Psylla mali Forst, common apple psylla; 2.5mm long; 5
ris, with yellow barbed stripes or spots, or dark yellow, and brown streaked
init; Lower yellowish, Q dorsal red, with green-yellow and red stripes;
Belly grin or yellow, sides of abdomen black. Occurrence: on apple trees, Kier: in autumn in cracks in the bark,
or the last downy shoots of May; hibernation: as
Bi; Early April larvae: dirty yellow, black-legged, on the back
with four rows of dots; abdomen ringed brown; tip dark brown,
white-haired; Eyes red, after the first cut they are lost
Drawings, the larva appears light green, with black eyes, and
completely wrapped in a fleece of wool. Soon after leaving the
The young larvae force themselves between the bud scales
into it, when unfolding the same step onto the butterflies and blossoms
and can be sensitive to sucking, especially of the flower stalks
become harmful, at the beginning of May the sexually mature animal appears,
makes several broods during the summer; the children of the last
Generation overwinter, on 'pot and dwarf trees can from before =
carefully brushing off the larvae in April. 4. Psylla piri £., brown-spotted leaf sucker: dirty red
yellow, with broad brown spots and stripes on the head and thorax, bre
brown bands over the v, and dorsal reddened abdomen
wrestle wings licked brown, veins dark brown,

1) Paylla udmi L. Iebt av Ulmen, ol

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     

   

 

 
       

   

 

not to become somehow sh

 

490 The Injurious Insects and Their Control. Occurrence: on pear trees; should a similar development occur
have like mali; probably of no importance

5. Psylla pirisuga Fort, Greater Bipn Warbler; 25 (8) bis
3.7 minutes (9); at & base of abdomen, posterior edge of black rings
and the jagged side rinds bright red; anal valve black; also are
still red: base of the filers, forehead, eyes, the markings of the breast, and the
'Tarwen the Hi Legs schwara; Fidgel bright, edge mark
brownish-grey, veins shimmering through yellowish, with the Q the trunnions be
bristly, crimson red; Front chest back with black bordered, joeh-shaped
transverse band; chest soft crimson, black spotted; center breast belt it
ell, almost closed circular markings and dark stripes; abdomen ait
black collars on the back, and a black yoke drawing on the Grande; pages
wide red; legs black; Knees, tarsi, and hips of hind legs red. Occurrence: on pear trees, hibernation: as sexual
mature animals; Eggs: at the time of foliage eruption on Bhitter, Blithen,
young instincts; after about 14 days the larvae: initially simple,
dark yellow, cylindrical; Feelers and feet whitish, eyes red, after the
wide hind body brownish, with white dorsal lines; Fithler and
Fissse Duukel. After the first hatch, the larvae leave their
Thirst, suck one and two year old shoots, and
remain here until the last hatching taking place on a leaf. Several generations, the last (males and females) tber
overwinter, with strong reproduction young shoots should die off
become; and through their sticky sea-reections become blitter
and blithen affected; extermination: as in mali,

6. Psylla pruni Seop., Vflanmen leaf sucker; head and anterior chest
dirty dark red, middle breast brown, back breast light red; survivor
'and on the side with wide, burned bands and behind vermilion gr
lower rings; wing dark burned,

Occurrence: mainly on sloe (Prunns spinosa), but also
common on plum trees and service trees (Prunus insititia), where they, at
in large groups base of shoots on
s, development and gene
ration: hardly different from that of pirisuga. and together
say and they to the tickler I

 

 

IN, Group Aphidina. Family Apidina, plant, leaf or sap lilies. A very interesting group with winged and unwinged ones
forms of the same species. If winged, then four fliel (Fig. 174)

 

 

   

 

harmful insects and their control. 491

of the most delicate, transparent texture, few-veined, and the
a few cells adjacent to the edge of the flagella, sometimes even open. fable
long, five to seven members. often sitting on long trunnions, Der
The course of development is sometimes an extremely complicated one, such as
wise with the notorious phylloxera (Phylloxera vastatriz). In general
it takes the following course: eggs in autumn. and hibernation of
the same; from spring on, parthenogenetic matter giving birth to life,
which in turn exclusively parthenogenetic female animals
(virgin mothers, wet nurses) to have as offspring; these are too
unwinged. Not until autumn does a striking change appear
cin; there are also partly fluffed forms of virgin mothers
on, whose last broods consist of male and female sexual

 

   

 

     

 

animals exist; it ensues copala, and the result is the fall
ere, which hibernate. The species of the genus Chermes (s. d.) under=
on them populated

lies of emigration. The dureh aphids at the
Plant parts caused by juice withdrawal pathological F
Symptoms can present themselves in different ways: as jaundice or pallor,
hiuig associated with some form of honey and mehithau formation;
or by rolling, curling, and folding of the bitters; or through
Formation of pouch and bladder galls, wood and bark galls, with, or
without cancerous character, inoculants can only be
apply in moderation; they are not in forestry
feasible, but also hardly necessary. The recipes below. which i dr. W. Hess's enemies of fruit growing borrow, therefore
also only for the interest of the fruit tree breeder. With the distribution should
be started in the Frith year, as long as the increase is still one
is relatively not too big. Where ripples dee
show leaves on the branch tips, the kin fox remains and zweek-
Most careful, careful cutting, and collecting the leaf nests and
Blades in one, with a mixture of water and petroleum
filled vessel. If the initial cutting is to be omitted, then (at Nieder=
votes, young bitmen, in nurseries) kin-diving of the lice-ridden
Write in one of the following fluids; on older (2)
Kiumen and high voices (2) effervesce by means of Die
recommended fluids 1, Sebi seliist,
in the ratio of 5100 Raumthe
Tisong. 3. Tobacco decoction: 1 ky ordindre

    

   

     

      

   

   

 

 

     

   

 

   

fuel

 
      

sini

   

enwasse
Sapocarbol, one percent
tobacco with 1 hl water,

 
  

   

4 The harmful insects and their control. 4. Schmidt's Nicotina, in a 1% dilution. 5. Quassia decoction
1 kg on 2 l water, 6, elder leaf decoction (can be very k
be taken consistently), 7. Barne's Liquid: 51 Oven Soot up
Rainwater, filter off after standing fourteen days, addition of
(= 6 chdem) wooden stick, 1.5 ke freshly slaked lime, and after two days
Filter off again while standing, 8. Nessler's Flitssigkeit: 50 g greasy side
dissolved in 650 g warm water, mixed with 100 g Fuselil (Amsl
alcohol) and 200 g of spirit of wine; for delicate plant parts (Blittern, Mat
driven) in a dilution with water in the ratio of 1:5
1). Koch's liquid: 1 kg soft soap dissolved in 5 1 hot water,
add a quassia decoction (0.25 kg spine), and mix it all through
Increased the amount of water to 201. 10, insect oil (from Kerkboren
and van Dissel in Lochem near Zutphen).!) 11. Parisian green or Londoa
purple as Téisung. A number of recipes can also be found a
given in my Insect Pests. 2)

 
   
   

  

   

 

 

    

    

Characteristic of the genes:
1, wings and sap stirrups®) present or absent; live singing
on above-ground parts of the pilance, deforming the same to the part:
Minnie egg-shaped. - . . hey
— — — never present; Females egg-shaped, males whale
Fithler six-membered, short, with a blunt end member; color pale;
live underground in the wart area, 2, th. as a giste among ants
9. genus Rhizobius Burm,
2. Schrigast 3 the anterior tlage divided into two or three branches
1 fibrous, never forked) . 3. Fore wing divided into three branches. 5.
two branches divided (single forked) . . :
ig, not linger like head and braststilck together;
exclusively on woody plants: 2. Genus Lachnus Ms.
ibboned, at least by half-toddlers, Winfig” much
who; live both] on wood like crane-like thorns:
1. Genus Aphis Z 4) Za relate wm 1:A)M. per bottle with 0.281 content together with instructions for use:
2) G. Henschel, The insect pupils in farmland and kitchen garden, itt
Way of life and Hekimpfuny, Leipzig and Vienna, Franz Deuticke 1890. 2) Two standing on the back side of the abdominal end, the Zuckersaftansscheidaes
serving pipes
4) Ready for the genus Chermes belonging to this Graype genus beckon on dit
reference to this description (p. 563) concerning Gattang

 

  
  

 

     

 

 

 

   

wee

. Fithler six
praise

    
    

 

 

     

 

  

   

The harmful insects and their control. 493

5. lower wing with two scripts; antennae six-membered; wings in
of tranquility roof-shaped; Body of the unwinged form strongly convex;
cause events on branches and bhitters:

3. Genus Schizoneura Harty. — — only one sacral vein; Fabler finicky; wings in the
Rube lying flat; body of the ungulate flat; produce
no deformers 4. Genus Vacuna Heyd. front wing with four scripts; Filer six-membered; the species

 

   

 

 

  

freely or in Gallen bend. 2. — — three writers; Fabler three- or five-membered'). . . . 8th,
7. lower wing with a very guest; living in galls, not of whites

Fish covered: 6. Genus Tetraneura Hrty

— — two writers; free on branches, or living in galls, in
white woolly fins wrapped: genus Pemphigus Hrtg. 8th. feeler five-membered; Lower case with indistinct writing; figs
roof-shaped in rube; live on needlewoods; free, or in gallet

7. Genus Chermes 1. — articulated; the Schrigast skinning the underwings; wings in
lying flat at rest: 8. Genus Phyloxera Fonse. 1. Genus Aphis Z. Aphid. juice stirrers available; fiber seven-membered; Link 1 and 2 short,
Link 3 longest, 4 and 5 equal length, link 6 half as long, 7 very long
din, wing with four scripists, the 3rd forked twice. Free
living on leaves and shoots, writhing and curling
shouting, whether to bring about the actual formation of bile. just one kind
of this genus, Aphis abietina Walker, occurs on softwood, excellent
on spruce (Abies excelsa); and few live by roots, after-
upright the most common species on woody plants:

 

 

Characteristic of the species:*)

   

 

|. Last filblor segment thinner and shorter than the previous 2nd
— = longer than the last but one; bristly . . . .
2 species solitary. Birches, lindens, Mlattunterseits . 5...
— living gossip. birches, alders 2. 2... 2 be

}) The unfledged sex animals of Gattanie Cherm
the ungoverned parthenogenetic females, triglicilerize F
hermes, 8. 508). 4) With partial use ¥. Sehlechtendal and O, Wiinsche Die T
A guide to knowing the same. Leipzig. B. Tenbuer. 1

have four-membered,
here (forget). 7. Genus,

  

woke,

 

 

494 The harmful insects and their control. 3. On linden trees, unwinged and winged yellow, mottled with black;
Fligel cattle with brown shadowy spots, June to fear
Aphis tiliae 1. — Birches, unwinged and winged grin; 3—4 pm, June
August: Aphis nigritarsis Hey
working, alders alive
— willow branches. Unwinged dull black "2, spotted with white, cane marriages
short, club-shaped, yellow-red, one red-yellow; winged black
arin, spotted with white, legs yellow-red. June to July: Aphis salicis L.
5. Occurring on birches. 2. 2 6 6 ee ee soe
= alders; under Blitteru: unwinged yellow, winged yellow-white,
three transverse bands yellow or grim, August to September:
Aphis alni Fair. 6. On butters, unstriped light green; Breastpiece reddish brown:
back with green spot; Filled white zrim, with indefinite
grass-green Que Aphis quadrituberculata Cold
— Twigs, August. liveled and winged blackbramn
Aphis oblonga Hey! 7. Wireless

  

— heaves on forehead hickers, soulern’ directly on the forehead
jumping; these flat or convex. 2. 5 5 8th. Occurring on Prum; July to August. — ir whom leaf underside, single
winged the tatters yellow, Se
look new and tip black; ¢
but I b wit four undeuthi
red, August to s Aphis betulicoln Kuitert

92 Au leaves of sloes and sloes; Lanse and underside of leaf white
fined Aphis pruni Fats. — Cherry helium, curling up of the shoot tips; not bepned;
Uncapped (black) mud winged (abdomen brown, green yellow

awiilkt): Aphis cerasi Fw

ern; Kirper egg round; hey

unwinged nnd ¢
te also, the base d
wrangle like the winged,
n green Fleekehen, and Ai

 

     
 
 

   

  

 

 

 

 

   

  
      

chen socia
= = no se
HL. On Steintvichtlern (amyplateen, Pruncen) yorkommenl
— Apple triiehth wrous)-occurrence
12. Au Miirs; Rolls of the terminal leaves of the shoots. Hinterleity nudged Ian

< oliverfin, Jani

 

hdcker element ss

 

 

n (Cratargus, virus,

       

aww

     

terse

 

Aphis persieae Kaiten). iL
1,
ra

1. 13. “a

16 The harmful insects and their control. — Prunus padus (bird cherry); leaf underside and flowers, un-
winged green, frosted blindly; Winged as in the previous species. Mirz, April to September: Aphis padi 1. on shoots; Kinrolle the Bkitter; forming leaf shovels, June to July:
— the underside of the leaf; hawthorn; Blitter bulged up, Un-
winged grey-green, dusted, winged black, banch and hind

 

 

body base white. May to June: Aphis crataegi Kaltenb,
On marriage ash (Sorbus auenparia), unwinged yellow-green; winged
black-brown, belly reddish yellow: Aphis sorbi Kaltenb. — Apple and pear trees, unwinged grasgrin, head rithii
Winged glistening black, belly grinning: — Aphis mali Fabr,
Lanse never in herds, always single, xerstrent
— in herds, usually together in large families
Au birch, hazel, hornbeam ee . — Oak shoots, under blitteru, unwinged yellowish to dark
grin, antennae ringed black and white, ringed yellow, E
slightly whitish; Fithler black ringed. July to August:
Aphis quereus Kaltent
i.e. Cwinged and (i
Iperlinge, thick, black. Aphis antennata Kaiten'. its. Unwinged and Winged
Aphis coryli Gotze,

 

 

 

 

     

ter

    

To birches! the midrib besanj
flailed rim, feeler yon amore than
August i

   

 

 

September)

 
   

Thu August:
Occurring in willows
— birches; leaf midribs, petiole

     
   

page; winged brown, abdomen réthlich,
August to September Aphis betularia Kalter),
Unbarred black or bramble on top, shiny . — ohew gran, gvaugriin or grin... a
dorsal line present, yellow; Striped black, hindquarters,
with brown bands, on Sahlw on the underside of the sheet and
on the petioles, Aphis saliceti soir. — feblend, witen om inzendschwarz, Daneh
grin, on poplars, on de

third yellow bandage,

 

 

 

 

       
       
  

 

    

Bhittering the tips of branches, June to

  
 
  

  

 

  

 

 

Jul Aphis populi
Unwinged gethyriin or grin. :

— graw_ or dun brown,
Rilekem black, Jwann, with vetbew
Incisions, On branches of poplars, May to July

 

Aphis populea Kallent. 495

14,

16 18 13. 19,

22,

The physical insects and their control. ben, living among blimps . . 33,
n different pastures, winged
black, abdomen green, with black bands, June to July
Aphis vitellinae Schr. On sabl pastures, living among butterflies, unwinged linglieh, behind
spat on, grin, last abdominal ring above before the little pig
with a hare; Winged grin, parting, breast, spots on the back
and a smudge on the abdomen burned, May to October:
Aphis capreae Fabr. — Wicker and willows, at the tips of branches and young oxen
Unwinged one, grin or yellow-green; winged shiny black,
abdomen green, May to August: Aphis saliceti Kaiten',

 

 

 

 

 

2. Genus Lachnus My, tree louse. A

 

‘Predominantly on woody plants, both deciduous and

 

needle bole

Occurring sucking on bark or bliss. error sixfold. much

shorter than the body;
Hind wing with 2S
With Off
are the bark

 

 

— white
and elder twos, shady side, unwinged black, velvety gray
Hairy, silver grain s¢
Back duck and fat, long

 

 

Forewings doubly forked
Christians; Juice tubes reduced to glandular hiatus
two species, L. exsicator Alt, and L. longirostris Al
se only of secondary importance. Characteristic of the species:

 
   

 

 

     

 

  
  
 

 

ern occurring 6th ee

he, Fichte, Lairehe) alive 8

af walnut, an bhittern .. : &

= Cuputifera (Bichen, Bnelen), or on willows : 4
Linglich bare, eld, with four red spots burned; sex
Hull brown, hind quarters yellow, with burned bands; buttocks
with brown ring on s wing Kings of Geiider tanned;

3 um, Sociable on midrib. July August:

Lachnus juglandis Fresh. — Mlasszelb, unlicked; striped yellow, eyes red; sheet-
underside, nd. June, July: Lachnus juglandicola Koch,

On Cupuli &

 

encroaching societies, on fundamental laps

 

werud, with three pairs of longitudinal rows blacker
ucepointed, black hicker
with clear wings, July
Laehnus viminalis Fonse. 1 sap glands: fluted

The harmful insects and their control. 4

s

.

Au beech alive 2 0 BH
— fiches occurring . 7,
6 At the bottom of the blitter, gregarious; Body with bluish-white
wool fluff covered. ungoverned yellowgrin; Winged yellow or
Grey-green, more or less marked with black on the back. May,
Suni: Lachnus fagi 1. ——Children of the voice and branches of weaker pole helpers,
specifically at stock borders; both forms deeply blackish;
Front wing with coarse, black and variegated markings. § mm. Generated
bast tissue gall-like vivarium; as a result of local pressure
cracking of the bark; exposure of the cambinm; possibly cause
admission to cancer formation. When tightly packed, they flow
Individual wounds as a more or less long tear into each other:
Lachnus exsiceator Altum,
By the voices of old oaks, living in cracked bark. . . 8th,
— — Aweigen, sociable; Untitled black, shiny metallic;
Wings black, wings clear as glass, fringed brown; 3-4mm,
July to October: Lachnus roboris 1. 8th. length 4-6 mm; hairy; Unwinged Minglich, shiny brown;
Winged black, wings browned, clear as glass, veins black, July
to October: Lachnus quereus 1. — 6mm; Body deep bark brown, stretched, slightly
compressed; beak of unusual length; does not harm
directly, but probably indirectly by attracting and settling the
Ants (Lasiue fuliginosus Latr. ), which likes to cling to the rootstock
quarter under the bark, and possibly to form cancerous
similar spots: Lachnus longirostris Altum,
per der Unfiiielte lackluster : . - 10 — = = shiny metallic, black-brown, abdomen end dull
black; Wings black, with whitish dusted abdomen;
fitigula clear as glass; Inferior marginal vein and wing spots brown, with a glassy tinge
spot near; a fascia near the inner edge, tip and anssen-
edge burned. Solitary on spruce: Lachnus fasciatus Burm,
10 Occurring on pines') or larches*) . . UK
— Spruce’) living gregarious between the needles; Us tricked brown,

1) In addition to those described below, the following are new: Lachnus hyperophilus
Koch and L. tacniatus Koch

2) Lachnus laricis Koch occurs on lilies. 4) Also found on spruce: Lacknus hyalinus Koch and L. grossa
cold b. ; letatere on old trees (May, June) often in large quantities (also on Welss-
fir [? ); Z. fasciatus Kaltb, one on a smooth groove,

0 altades. 3. Ant, 32

  

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

  

498 The harmful insects and their control,

 

elatt, gra confirmed; winged black-brown; abdomen brownish;

 

 

June to August: Lachnus pinicola Kaith. 11, On or between the needles, solitary or gregarious . . . . . 1%
— the smooth bark of white pine (also spruce): Lachnus
fasciatus Burm. ea. it ee ee ee
12, Lense blissfully; bramn b

—cinzetn, or in small companies, on the needles; unflyable
roll black raised dots: winged long-
stretched, densely dotted with brown spots, dusted with white. August to
October: Lachnus agilis Katt

13, Unwinged burned, whole encased in a whitish-grey woolen flange;
legs long hairy; winged dark brown, hairy, gran dusted,

cobwebs itherdrawn; eight to twelve in a row

Noble. Angust until October Lachnus pineti Faby. — — Head and back weakly pollinated; Winged black-brown

to black, | i, confirmed; front body

black above, between the needles

the Maitried Lachnus pini L.

 
 

 

 

like v

    

 

one

  

   

 

 

Harty, Rindeniaus,

Filler six-membered, the members curled like a flap; si
roar feblend, or reduced to glands: front wing with four sec
sten, branch 3 simply forked; Hintertliizel with two slanting branches; fly
in the Rube roof firm, Ausschliesstich on Holzgewatehsen lebeul,
Deformivend leaves or branch-tips, or gall-like blisters, let
producing sac-like or sac-like galls, or (lanigera) canker
Diseases. causing

     

   

   

 
 
  

Characteristic of the species:

1. The artem do not live in actual galls, but either freely
on the stem or branches, or on, bent downwards,
more or less involuted, forming terminal leaf stalks
bitter 5 - ewe ey Eek

at elm butters, in pouch or pouch galls, or within

iger inflations of the same it
he peaks of the blossoms are eerily Tebend

— voices and twigs of apple trees (primarily jfingerer)

Causing cancer (Pig. 179; Lise of white wool

kt; Unedited ho + Filled ghingend black; Behind-

Leib brown, August Schizonenra lanigera Havsm. we

   

    
 

  

The harmful insects and their control. 499

& species of linden, cornel (Cornus) live freely on branches. . 4,
— — Quaking aspen (Populus tremula) in leaf flakes of the branch
sharpen; Unwinged hemispherical, burnt yellow, shiny, dusted with white;
Winged black, abdomen brownish-red, dusted. 4mm, July,
August: Schizoneura tremulae DG. 4. Twisting the young twigs spivally on the linden tree; unwinged brown;

Migelte black, abdomen dark green, May:

Schizoneura Réaumuri Katt),

— Cornelian cherry (Cornus mas), gregarious in the flowering periods; U.N-

fluffy matte black; Winged glossy black, base and
tip of abdomen white; Frith year to June:

Schizoneura corni Fabr. 5. Living in the pouch or pouch galls of the bhitter fe soan
— Curls and bumpy leaf swellings (Fig. 177); U.N-
winged dark green, glistening, covered with long white wool
Winged black, abdomen brown, dusted with whitish, June, July:

me,

 

   

 

 

 

figure 177, Gallenthollehe Verunstal- Fig. 178, gall of Schlzoneura lanuinons,
Tungee by Sehlzopeur

 

i. 178) hairy, from walnut to very potato size,
fam stalks or at the midrib Aiigelte and un-
feathered black, with whitish wool. August:
Schizoneura lanuginosa Hrty. — white hairy, laterally compressed, on the leaf veins
standing: Schizonevra compressa Kock. aoe

Gallen (Fi