4 pe oe Dwid OOVRARD)
Ce) |

[-

THE |

HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA

(CICADINA AND PSYLLINA)

   
  
   
   
 
    

:
i

OF_THE

BRITISH ISLANDS

 

 

A DESCRIPTIVE ACCOUNT OF THE FAMILIES, GENERA, AND
SPECIES INDIGENOUS TO GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND
WITH NOTES AS TO LOCALITIES, HABITATS, ETC. :
i

BY

JAMES EDWARDS, F.E.S. LONDON
L. REEVE AND CO.
Publishers to the Home, Colonial and Endian Gobernments
6 HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN, wc. 1896

 

 

 

a

=

HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. (CICADINA.) INTRODUCTION. Tue insects of the Homopterous sub-order of the Hemiptera
have the mouth-parts in the form of ashort beak arising from
the middle of the hinder part of the lower side of the head,
close to the base of the fore-legs ; the organs of flight are in
two pairs, of which the upper are nearly or quite of the same
consistence throughout, and in repose are not carried hori-
zontally, but sloping upwards and inwards, meet in a line
down the middlo of the back, and their inner edges do not
overlap towards the apex, except to a trifling extent in certain
cases. ‘the insect passes through no quiescent pupa state,
but feeds and grows continuously from the time that it leaves
the egg. They live exclusively on the juices of plants, and
notwithstanding their activity in the preparatory stages, are
easily reared, as they spond the greater part of the time
with their beaks fixed in the young and tender branches
or leaves of plants, and show little or no inclination to
wander so long as the food-plant is fairly fresh, The number
of times that the young insect changes its skin is variously
stated as three or four; but the term nymph is in this work
applied to the entire state intervening between the egg and
the perfect insect. For some little time previous to a moult,
the nymph anchors itself to the surface of its food-plant by
its beak and claws, and in due course the old skin splits down
A

2 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. the middle of the back and the insect emerges; the exuviee
may frequently be found in the sweeping-net or sticking on
plants. Not long since Mr. Edward Saunders caught a nymph
of Liburnia, from which a male of the rare Strepsipterous
insect Blenchus tenuicornis, Kirby, was in the act of emerging ;
and there is some reason to believe that a nymph of Liburnia
Fairmairei, taken by myself some years ago in Norfolk, had
nourished a similar parasite, since its abdomen presents a
short, wide tubular projection, similar to that by which the
Elenchus is represented as emerging in Mr. Saunders’ figure
on p. 297 of the Entomologist’ Monthly Magazine, 2nd Series,
Vol. IT. In certain families, but more particularly the Delphacidee
and Jassie, there is considerable difference in the develop-
ment of the elytra and wings in different individuals of the
same species. Cases of this arrested development of the
wings are most numerous in the Delphacide, and, indeed,
may be said to form the rule, and in the Jasside there are
several cases in the genera Aéhysanus and Deltocephalus ; no
instances occur in the Cixiide, Cercopide, or ‘Typhlocybidee,
and only one (Agallia brachyptcra) in the Bythoscopide. Where the two forms occur the macropterous form has
generally a very different facies to the brachypterous form,
owing to the greater development of the thorax to afford
space for the muscles which work the wings, and the elytra
generally have the apical areas much longer than wide, and
there is frequently a free membranous margin on the inner
side of the apex. The conditions which govern the full
development of the wings with its attendant modifications are
not, I believe, well understood, but fully developed wings are
always correlated with elytra having a well-developed mem-
brane ; in many species of Liburnia the elytra are truncate at
about half the length of the abdomen, in others they are
lanceolate and as long or longer than the abdomen, but the
wings may be in both cases completely aborted. Sometimes,
asin Dephow pulchella and Liburnia smaragdula, the male is

INTRODUCTION. 3

always macropterous and the female brachypterous; at others,

as in Liburnia lincola and its near allies, no brachypterous
form is known; whilst there are several species in which we
are unacquainted with the macropterous form in either sex. In those Delphacidee which have the two forms, the mesono-
tum in the macropterous form is larger and more convex, and
its keels are less evident than in the brachypterous form. Amongst the Jasside, the species ‘of Deltoephalus and
Athysanus have, as a rule, the elytra and wings shortened in
avarying degree, but the latter are never completely aborted ;
and specimens of both sexes are occasionally met with in
which the wings are fally as long or longer than the abdomen
and the elytra have an ample membrane, but the correspond-
ing modification of the thorax is much less evident than in
the Delphacide. The possible causes of this dimorphism
certainly merit careful investigation. Our native Homoptera do not present so much diversity of
form as the Heteroptera, and although the genera and higher
groups are as a rule well defined and easy of recognition, it
sometimes happens that for the absolute determination of
certain closely allied species we must have recourse to rough
dissection in order to examine the structural characters
afforded by the male genitalia; these, however, are extreme
cases and not of frequent occurrence. None of the Homoptera Cicadina can be said to be of any
economic importance in Britain; certain species, as Philenus
spumarius, Cllorita viridula, Lupteryx euratus, &e., sometimes
swarm in gardens, and elm and beech trees are generally
tenanted by countless numbers of ‘Typhlocybidio, but it does
not appear that they do any real harm in any stage. The
late Mr. C. G. Hall, some years since, sent to me specimens
of Zygina parcula, which species was swarming to such an
extent ina greenhouse at Dover as to disfigure the leaves
of the plants with small roundish pale blotches ; this, of
course, was merely an instance in which this particular species
had been subject to exceptionally favourable circumstances,

 

4 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. since it ordinarily oceurs but sparingly. ‘The species feed ex-
clusively on the juices of plants, which they obtain by fixing
their rostrum, more or less deeply, in the stems and leaves of
grasses and sedges or the leaves and young shoots of trees
and shrubs. ‘The nymphs are generally more or less pro-
tectively coloured, and the assimilation of the tints of the
young of Idiocerus albicans and populi to those of the young
shoots of white poplar and aspen respectively, are especially
noticeable,

A yemarkable contrast to these protectively coloured
nymphs is afforded by those whose presence on their food
plants is rendered conspicuous by the patch of white froth in
which they are enveloped, unless, indeed, we are to assume
that insect-eating birds have not yet found out what that
very patent spot of froth contains. ‘The most familiar
example of these froth makers is, perhaps, the nymph of
Philenus spumarivs, although the habit is common to the
whole of the Cercopide. Both the perfect insects and those
nymphs which do not enclose themselves in froth have a
curious habit of promptly retiring to the opposite side of the
stem on which they are standing, on the too near approach
of an object, thus keeping the stem between themselves and
the source of suspicion, like the squirrel and nuthatch; this
habit materially increases their chances of escape from the
collector and inust be even more effective when the insects
are assailed by insectivorous birds. IyrernaL Anatomy. The internal anatomy of the Homoptera does not differ
essentialiy from that of the Heteroptera. The alimentary
canal, which may be said to commence with the channel
formed by the rostrum. is a long thick muscular tube, variously
dilated and convoluted and subdivided into different parts,
to which distinct names are given according to the function
which they perform; there are also certain appendages to

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION. 5

the alimentary canal, of which the more important are the
salivary and urinary vessels. The Nervous System —The two main nerve masses are the
cephalic and the thoracic ganglia, the latter being somewhat
constricted before the middle, and sending two branches with
filamentous ramifications to the extremity of the abdomen,

The Circulatory System.—The blood is usually colourless or
but slightly tinged with green, and abounds in large cor-
puscles ; it flows in vessels during a part of its course only,
the greater part of the circulation taking place in the cavities
of the body uot occupied by the internal organs or adipose
tissue; its movement originates in a dorsal vessel, usually
termed the heart, by the alternate contractions and dilations
of which it is propelled. The Respiratory Sustem consists of a series of air-tubes or
trachew, which ramify symmetrically in the interior of the
body and communicate with the surface by means of certain
openings termed spiracles; the latter are generally provided
with fringes of hair or other apparatus for the exclusion of
dirt, Ke. The Reproductive System.—The organs of the male consist
ofa number of tubular glands coiled together and forming
two apparently compact bodies, the testes ; each of these has
its efferent duct, and the latter at length unite to form the
ductus cjaculatorius, into which accessory glands open. In
the female there are a pair of ovaries which unite at a short
distance from the external opening and form the vagina ; one
or more pouches, in which the reproductive fluid is received
and stored, communicate with the latter. ExTerNaL ANATOMY. ‘The Head.—Theve is considerable diversity in the form of
the head, and in general the three portions—erown, forehead
and face—are easily recognisable, bat in the Membracide’ tho
crown is vertical and the rostrum lies at right angles to it,

 

6 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. completely on the underside: With the exception just men-
tioned, the crown is that portion of the head which is visible
from above, the whole of the oblique sloping underside of
the head constitutes the face, and the passage between this
and the crown is the forehead. The following divisions are
usually observable in the face of the Cicadina—namely, the
frons, a large area occupying the principal part of its disc;
the clypeus, a rectangular area joining the apex of the former;
the lore, a pair of small areas occupying the angles formed
by the sides of the frons at their junction with the clypens;
and the cheeks, which constitute the remainder of the face;
the latter do not usually lie in the same plane as the frons,
but slope upwards and outwards. ‘These several divisions are
marked off either by keels or more or less distinct impressed
sutures, A considerable portion of the sides of the head is
occupied by the large compound eyes which are always closely
applied to the pronotum. The ocelli, or simple eyes, are
three in number in the Cicadid, and also in the Cixiide, but
it seems doubtful whether the third ocellus, found on the
middle keel of the face at the junction of the frons and clypeus
in the latter, is functionally perfect. In the Typhlocybideo
the ocelli are difficult to observe or altogether absent, and in
the remaining families they are two in number ; their position
is of great use in classification. The antenne are inserted
on the cheeks between the eyes and the frons, or just below
the eyes, and in certain cases, where the eyes are reniform, the
antenne are placed in the sinus, The antennz consist of
two large and stout basal joints, which vary considerably in
shape and relative length, and between the second of these and
the terminal bristle there is a small nodulose joint. The
terminal bristle really represents several distinct joints, as
may be seen in the Cicadidew, where the transition from the
recognisable joints to the bristle is not abrupt, but the two
basal joints are succeeded by four or more distinct joints,
gradually decreasing in size until the bristle is reached ; the
latter is generally simple, but in the males of most species of

 

 

INTRODUCTION. 7

, Idiocerus, there is a small sab-oyal expansion just before the

apex. The rostrum, which is carried close to the breast be-
tween the bases of the first pair of legs, is three-jointed, but
the basal joint is hidden beneath the labrum and clypens;
structurally it is a jointed sheath (supposed to consist of the
labium and the connate labial palpi), enclosing four bristles,
of which two are supposed to represent the mandibles and
two the maxilla. The Thorax is composed of three segments, the prothorax,
mesothorax and metathorax, the upper surfaces of which are
respectively referred to as the pronotum, mesonotum and
metanotum, and the under surfaces as the prosternum,
mesosternum and metasternum. The pronotum, which in
the dorsal aspect of the insect is the portion which joins the
head, is generally of considerable size, but in the Isside,
Cixiidee and Delphacidz it is reduced to little more than a mere
collar; this is the part which assumes such o diversity of
curious forms in the exotic Membracide, and even in our two
native genera it is sufficiently remarkable; in Centrotus the
sides of the pronotum are drawn out into a pair of sharp
triangular processes, somewhat resembling the ears of a vicious
horse, and from the middle of the hind margin there proceeds
a bisinuate ensiform process which reaches as far as the tip of
the abdomen; in Gargara the side processes are wanting, and
the hind process is straight pointed and sharply trigonate. In
the Ledride, too, the same part bears a pair of large rounded
ear-like processes. The ventral surface of each thoracic
segment bears a pair of legs, and the elytra and wings aro
articulated to the mesonotum and metanotum respectively. ‘The mesonotum, for which the term seuéellwm will be adopted
in this work, is the piece adjoining the pronotum on the side
farthest from the head ; it is generally more or less triangular
in outline and in the Cixiide and their allies its area is con-
siderably greater than that of the pronotum, but in the other
families theso proportions are reversed ; in general it bears no
movable appendages except the elytra, but in Tettigometridee,

8 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. Cixiidee, and certain Delphacide, the articulation of the elytra
is covered by a small scale-liké piece, called the tegula. . The
elytra are, for the most part, membranous and smooth, but
sometimes coriaceous and punctured; that portion of the
apex which is marked off from the rest by the angular veins
is usually thinner and hyaline, but the difference in the
texture of the two parts is neither so abrupt nor so great
asin the Heteroptera. In the species with hyaline elytra
the veins are usually very distinct, and as they are much
used in classification, it is essential that their nomencla-
ture and arrangement should be thoroughly understood. In all references to the elytra and wings in this work, those
organs are considered as being spread out at right angles
to the long axis of the body, and under these circumstances
the anterior margin will be the costa, the posterior margin
the inner margin or suture, and the more or less rounded edge
farthest from the body the hind margin. Typically the
elytron is divided into coriwm, clavus and membrane ; the latter
consists of those areas which are open to the hind margin,
and is in general a little thinner than theremainder. Some-
times there is a narrow extension of the substance of the
elytron beyond the vein which bounds the lowermost apical
area; this is called the appendiz. Running obliquely from
the base of the costa to the apex of the inner margin will be
found a more or less impressed straight line, the claval suture ;
the part lying in front of this line is called the corium, and
the part which lies behind it the clavus. Leaving all specu-
lations as to the origin and homologies of the veins as
unsuited to a work like the present, it is proposed to adopt
for the veins and areas the terminology previously employed
by the author; this will be rendered intelligible by the
figures, In repose the metanotum is entirely hidden by the
elytra; it bears the wings. The latter are always membranous
and traversed by a more or less complicated system of veitis
the direction of these veins and their relation to one another
afford useful distinctive characters, especially for the genera

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION. 9

of ‘Typhlocybide ; in the descriptions which follow, they are
numbered consecutively from the anterior margin of the
wing backward. Each leg consists of five main divisions: first, the coz, the
piece by means of which the leg is articulated to the body ;
second, the trochanter, a small piece joining the coxa;
third, the femur, a rather long piece next to the trochanter,
generally simple but sometimes bearing teeth on its lower”
edge; fourth, the tibia, tho longest division of the leg, and
which in the hind legs is especially long and powerful; and
lastly, the ¢arsus, which in these insects is invariably com-
posed of three joints. ~

The Abdomen usually consists of six well-defined segments
in the male and five in the female, and these are followed by
the compound terminal segment, called the pyyofer, which is
modified in order to accommodate that part of the genital
apparatus belonging to the external skeleton. Sometimes,
as in the male of Liburnia, the pygofer forms a complete
chitinous cylinder and its hind margin exhibits much diversity
of outline in different species ; at others, it forms a chitinous
plate, folded somewhat conically so as to leave a slit on its
lower side and a small aperture at its apex. The edges of
this slit support the adeagus, and are frequently produced into
teeth or horns for that purpose ; these modifications farnish
good specific differences in the genus Deltocephalus. In the
female the terminal segment is always folded more or less
conically, and the slit on its lower side is occupied by the
saw-case, the base of the latter being sometimes flanked on
either side by a sinall oblong plate (Jateral lobe); in this sex,
too, the outline of the hind margin of the last ventral
segment often presents good distinctive characters. The
genital appendages of the male are usually the following:
a pair of plates, of more or less triangular form, placed side
by side, their inner margins straight and contiguous, and
their bases covered by a single piece, usually of a triangular
shape, called the valve; affixed to the inner surface of the

To HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. plates is a pair of smaller appendages, the styles, and just
above these, slung as it were by its middle from the roof of
the pygofer, is the adeagus. In many groups all these
appendages are present as in the Jassida, but in the genus
Idiocerus and some others the valve is wanting, whilst in
those species where the pygofer forms a complete cylinder,
as in Liburnia, the styles and cedeagus only are to be seen. “The anal tube, bearing the anal style, is a supplementary piece

of apparatus situate on the upper side of the extreme apex of
the abdomen, where there is generally a notch in the pygofer
for its reception; it is really the rectal extremity of the
alimentary canal, and its lower margin often bears a pair of
teeth or other processes as in the male of Liburnia,&. In
any reference to the outline of the upper or hind margin of
the pygofer, @ lateral aspect is to be understood. In the males of the Cicadids the base of the abdomen be-
neath is furnished with a sound-producing apparatus concealed
beneath a rounded lamellar extension of the hind margin of the
metasternum ; it consists of a pair of large cavities, each closed
by atalclike membrane with an eccentric corneous thickening
Various explanations are given of the way in which the so-
called song of these insects is produced, but the better opinion
seems to be that the sound is the result of the vibration of
a membranous disc, set in motion by a bundle of special
muscles. It should be observed that these introductory remarks
apply for the most part to the Cicadina only ; the peculiarities
of the Psyllina will be dealt with under that head. Collecting, &c.—There are probably few places where there
is vegetation in which Homoptera of some kind are not
to be found, but marshy places produce the greatest number
of species, although dry, elevated localities, and also woods,
have each a few species peculiar to them ; wet heaths, marshes
near the sea, and the fens of the Eastern Counties of England
are all very productive. Many species may be swept up or
eaten from herbage into a large and deep brown holland

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION. u

sweeping net, but certain species which habitually frequent
the lower part of a tall and close-growing food-plant, such as
the common reed, are only occasionally to be taken in that
way ; these must be obtained by searching or by the “rescue”
method, to be described presently. In the fens one often
finds isolated tufts of coarse grass scattered about, and be-
tween these the rank herbage grows in some few inches of
water ; the sweeping net is here of no avail against the insects,

* which live low down on the stems of the tall grasses and
sedges, and searching in such spots is not a convenient pro-
cess. The author, therefore, has had recourse to the following
method of collecting under these circumstances, and succeeded. in taking by its means such species as Deltocephalus costalis,
Cicadula opacipennis, and some others which he failed to
obtain in any other way. It should be premised that the
collector must go on to his ground prepared to wade and pro-
vided with a moderately deep water net, made of cheese
cloth on a landing-net ring, ‘With the left foot let him press
a part of the herbage down into the water in which it is
growing and almost immediately skim the surface with the
net, when the denizens of the now prostrate plants may be
secured, as they disentangle themselves from the wet débris
in the bottom of the net or crawl up its sides in a half-
drowned condition. ‘The writer has found the following piece of apparatus of
great use in the capture of these wary and agile insects. Take a piece of fairly stout glass tubing about 2 inches long
and {ths of an inch in diameter ; next prepare two dises of cork
about §ths of an inch thick, one of which is to be a fixture at
one end of the tube and the other is to be made to slide in
the tube by means of a wire shaft passing through the centre
of the fixed cork; the length of the shaft should be about 24
inches. To use the “piston,” draw up the movable cork
until it is in contact with the fixed one, place the tube over
the insect, which will (or can be made to) jump backward
up the tube, when the latter should be closed with the fore-

 

12 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA

finger of the right hand. To transfer the specimen to the
killing-bottle (which should have its mouth of the same
diameter as the tube), invert the tube over the open mouth
of the bottle and press down the movable cork until it covers
the mouth of the bottle, driving the insect before it; withdraw
the tube from the mouth of the bottle, at the same time
stopping the latter with the thumb of the left hand, and
afterwards quickly replace the cork. The piston may be
used with advantage either to take insects out of the net or
off plants or the ground, and it is not necessary to transfer
each specimen separately to the killing-bottle, ‘The latter
should be carefully lined with white paper, and may be
charged with a very small piece of cyanide of potassium
wrapt in paper and prevented from rolling about amongst
the specimens ; the great object is to keep the inside of the
pottle so dry that the specimens may not adhere to one
another or to the sides of the bottle. Pinning is undoubtedly the mode of mounting which allows
the most complete examination of the specimen without
further trouble, and if the pinning is properly conducted no
distortion of even the smallest specimens need be produced. ‘The larger species may be simply pinned through the middle
of the scutellum, but for the smaller ones the pins in use for
micro-lepidoptera, of varnished steel or silver wire, are re-
quisite, ‘The specimen should be laid on its back and the
fine pin driven perfectly straight through the middle of the
forepart of the mesosternum, and it will then come out
through the centre of the scutellum, whence it should project
for something less than one-third of its length. In this way
the smallest insects may, after little practice, be pinned
without distortion, Insects pinned with these fine pins
cannot, of course, be pinned directly into the cabinet, and
therefore the fine pin is usually stuck into a block of pith or
some other soft substance carried on a stout pin. With
insects pinned from below, the point of the pin is not
available for permanently sticking into the pith, and in any

 

 

INTRODUCTION. 13

case the pins put into the latter sooner or later turn round in
it, and a number of specimens each facing in a different direc-
tion hasa very untidy appearance. These facts, coupled with
the difficulty of obtaining pith from which the glistening white
cubeé in use on the Continent can be cut, has induced the
writer, after trying almost every known substitute for pith
(and of these agave cut across the grain is the best, as cubes
of about half an inch with a good smooth face may easily be
cut from it, although its colour is against it), to invent a
carriage of uniform appearance in which the fine pin may be
absolutely fixed and also withdrawn at will. To prepare a
carriage of this kind for an insect about 8 mm. in length,
take a piece of good cardboard (De la Rue’s thin ivory
visiting card is of good quality and suitable thickness)
12 mm, long and 3 wide, and fold it in half across its long
axis; at a suitable distance from the folded end pierce through
oth thicknesses of the card a hole to receive the fine pin, as
little larger than the diameter of the latter as may be, and
at a little distance from the middle of the opposite end pass
‘a moderately long and strong pin also through both thick-
nesses of the card, and move the latter to within one-third of
the top of the pin; on putting the fine pin bearing the insect
through the hole in the card it will be found to move freely
so long as the inner surfaces of the card are in contact, but. on separating thess surfaces by sliding the lower half of the
folded card down the stout pin, the fine pin will be gradually
rendered immovable under any ordinary usage, for there is
always a point, short of perceptible bending, at which the fine
pin will be fixed; it is best, after slightly separating the
surfaces of the card and whilst the fine pin is still movable,
to turn the latter so that the insect occupies. suitable position
with respect to the card, and then finally to tighten it by
separating the arms of the card a trifle more. Complicated
as the construction of this carriage may appear from the
foregoing account it is really very simple, and, in practice,
much more speedy than the cutting and pinning of pith

 

 

 

4 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. cubes, and in point of appearance it has the further advan-
tage that both the stout and the fine pins must of necessity
lie in the same vertical plane. The necessary modifications
in the modus operandi will readily suggest themselves when
itis desired to make these carriages in quantity. One or
more examples of each species should have tho elytra and
wings spread out ; this may either be roughly done by blow-
ing on the insect from behind when it is freshly pinned, or
the insect may be pinned on its back on a flat piece of soft
cork and the elytra and wings spread out symmetrically and
held in position by paper braces until dry, and in the latter
case the legs may be arranged at the same time. These
insects may also be gummed on small pieces of card, either at
haphazard or with their legs, elytra and wings symmetrically
spread out; mounted in the latter way they certainly look
neater and more picturesque, but after considerable experience
the author quite endorses the opinion of an eminent Con-
tinental authority that “it is not of use to paste the small
Cicadina on card,” because that course always involves loss of
time when the underside has to beexamined. Each specimen
should have a ticket on the stout pin giving the locality and
date of capture, and also a number referring to a register
giving details of the circumstances under which it occurred. HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. 15

TABLE OF FAMILIES. 1. (80) Tarsi three-jointed. From 1-3 basal joints of
the antenne thick, the remainder forming a

terminal seta. CICADINA. 2. (8) Front thighs thickened and toothed beneath. Cicadidec,

3. (2) Front thighs neither thickened nor toothed
beneath,

4, (5) Pronotum produced into a process behind. Membracidec.

. (4) Pronotum not produced into a process behind. (18) Antenne inserted beneath the eyes. (8) Frons nearly on the same level with the cheeks. Elytra horny. Tettigometridee. 8 (7) Frons distinctly projecting beyond the cheeks,
with sharp or keeled side margins. 9. (10) Blytra horny, laterally protuberant just below the
shoulders. Isside. 10. (9) Elytra membranous, not laterally protuberant. 11. (12) No spur at the base of first joint of hind tarsi. Civiidee. 12, (11) First joint of hind tarsi with a spur at the base. Delphacidee. No OF

18, (6) Antenna inserted between the eyes. 14, (15) Hind tibie cylindric, with twospines. Cercopidee. 15: (14) Hind tibiz: not cylindric. 16. (17).Pronotum with a compressed ear-like process on
each side. Ledridee. 17. (16) Pronotum without any process. 18, (21) Hind tibie unarmed, or only with weak bristles
on the angles,

 

 

16 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. 19. (20) Forehead simple, ridge-like. Ulopide. 20. (19) Forehead occupied by a strong X-shaped keel
with an ocellus in each. lateral angle. Paropiide. 21. (18) Hind tibie multispinose. 22, (28) Ovelli on the frons. Bythoscopidee. 23, (22) Ocelli not on the frons. 24, (25) Ovelli on the diso of the crown. —Tettigonider. 25. (24) Ocelli not on the disc of the crown. 26. (27) Crown always distinctly separated from the face,
generally by a well-defined border, its disc
more or less excavated or bearing impressions,
frequently rugose in front parallel with the
forehead, or at least distinctly sculptured. “Acocephalidec. 27. (26) Crown and face passing gradually the one into
the other. Disc of the former never distinctly
excavated, nor bearing impressions, nor rugose
in front parallel with the forehead, rarely per-
ceptibly sculptured. 28. (29) One or more transverse veins standing on the
brachial vein, at least the lower branch of the
cubital vein forked towards the apex. Jasside. 29. (28) Corium with three simple veins only, no trans-
verse vein. Typhlocybidec. 30. (1) Tarsi two-jointed. Antenne ten-jointed, joints
1 and 2 short and stout, remainder filiform,
apex of the terminal joint with two unequal
projecting hairs. PSYLLINA. CICADINA. L OCICADIDZ. Speotes of comparatively large size with a subconical body. Head short and wide; eyes prominent; frons very convex;
ocelli three, on the crown. Elytra subelliptic, longer than
the body, transparent, with strong branching veins; tegule
wanting. Anterior femora thickened and strongly toothed ;
posterior cox subconical, not reaching the sides of the
breast tibie suboylindrical, with fine bristly pubescence and
a few weak spines; no pulvilli between the tarsal claws. The male is provided with a sound-producing apparatus at the
base of the abdomen, which is concealed beneath a lamellar
extension of the hind margin of the metasternum on either
side. Six genera, comprising about fifty species, of this interesting
family are included in the Palearctic fauna, but the greater
number of these are found in Southern and Eastern Europe,
though several are found in Spain. Our solitary representa-
tive of the family is distributed over Europe generally, and
occurs as far north as Sweden and Finland. Cicadetta, Am. (PI. 1, fig. 10.) Antenne inserted in a strong depression beneath a fold of
the temples, apparently 7-jointed, by reason of the articu-
lation of the robust seta. Elytra lanceolate, much longer
than the abdomen, membranous, hyaline ; apex with a narrow,
free margin; veins strong, raised. Basal area of corium
oblong, narrow, the brachial and cubital veins springing from
its lower apical angle; apical areas eight, narrow, first reaching

B

 

 

PSYLLINA. ‘Tue typical Psyllina are suctorial insects with filiform
ten-jointed antenne, two-jointed tarsi, and a superficial
resemblance to a Cicada in miniature. The following are
the chief characteristics of the group: Head produced in
front into two conical lobes, or thin and flat in front, with
a more or less distinct notch in the middle of its edge. Rostrum springing from the hinder edge of the underside
of the head, its apex issuing from between the front coxce
and the front edge of the mesosternum, giving it the ap-
pearance of arising near the middle of the breast. Byes
usually globose and prominent, but flat in Livia, Ocelli
three, one near the hinder edge of each eye, and one
between the bases of the facial cones, or occupying a corres-
ponding position when the cones are wanting. Antenne
inserted in front of the head next the front edge of each
eye, ten-jointed, two basal joints short and stout, remainder
filiform, the last joint with two unequal bristles at the apex;
in Livia the second joint is narrowly obovate and equal in
length to joints three to nine inclusive. Pronotum narrow
and collar-like. Mesonotum large, generally suborbicular;
a portion of its area in front in the shape of a broadly
truncate triangle (the dorsulum), separated from the re-
mainder by a distinct suture, and a small, somewhat crescent-
shaped piece projecting from the middle of its hind margin
(the sutcllum) also marked off by a suture. Mesosternum
produced behind into two large sharp spines. Elytra homo-
geneous, of a much firmer snbstance than the wings, usually
hyaline, with the veins darker, sometimes with a colour

 

PSYLLINA. 225

pattern, rarely opaque and corneons, their periphery, except
a small strip near the basal angle of the inner margin,
bounded by a vein; claral suture present, but feeble; vena~
tion comparatively simple and dividing the surface of the
elytron into seven cells which are irregular in shape and
each open to the margin. The veins of the elytra are as
follows: the suleostad, which passes obliquely fromi the
middle of the base to the costa, near the middle, where it
frequently spreads out along the marginal vein towards the
apex to form the stigma; the cubital is given off from the
first angulation of the subcostal and divides into two branches,
each of which is furcate. generally the first bifurcation of the
cubital occurs at a short distance from its base, but some-
times it takes place directly from the subcostal without the
interposition of any stalk. ‘The radial is always simple and
given off from the subcostal about mid-way between the base
of the cubital and the costa. In certain genera the marginal
vein gives off three very short free veinlets at equal distances
on the outer half of the inner margin of the elytron. The
wings are membranous, and their venation is, for the most
part, very simple and of one type. A vein runs obliquely
from the upper basal angle of the wing to near the middle of
the inner margin, shortly before which it is very unequally
furcate ; ata short distance from its base this oblique vein
gives off, at a short distance from each other, two straight
simple veins which rua to the hind margin; in Livilla the
oblique vein springs from the lower outer angle of an oblong
Insal cell, and the lowermost of the two longitudinal veins is
fureate at the apex. ‘The front pair of legs are rather short
and feeble, but the hinder pair are longer and formed for
jumping; the tiie are subterete and finely ciliate, the
hinder pair with a few blunt spines at the apex; the tarsi
are two-jointed, the basal joint of the hinder pair with a
short blunt spine on each side of the apex beneath; claws
two. Abdomen with five visible segments above and six
beneath, exclusive of the genital segment. The genital
P

 

 

 

 

 

 

226 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. segment of the male is oblong, broadly rounded behind
and deeply concave; its front edge bears a generally upright
bat movable piece, the genital plate, and its hinder edge a
pair of foresps; the latter aro in many cases simply falcate,
but are also found of more complicated forms; the eedeagus is
formed of two nearly straight pieces hinged near the middle
by a somewhat bulb-shaped joint. The female genitalia
consist of two elongate, triangular, more or less acuminate
valves, the upper and lower genital values. ‘The young of many species are covered with a white,
cotton-like secretion, and some produce gall-like malforma-
tions on various parts of their food-plants. None, however,
are of economic importance, except, perhaps, the species
affecting pear and apple trees which are said to occasion
damage in orchards. Speaking generally, the exact determination of these
insects is a matter of great difficulty, and regard should
always be had to structural characters and especially those
of the male genitalia. On reaching the imago state, they
require several days to develop their full colouration, and
specimens which have lived through the winter are always
much darker in colour than specimens of the same species
taken in summer or autumn. In the genus Trioza, the
males are differently coloured to the females, and there are
many species of which the males can only be distinguished
by the form of their genitalia, whilst the females are abso~
lutely indistinguishable. ‘To obtain really trustworthy know-
ledge of any given species, it is necessary to rear the insects
and preserve specimens in each stage. I give tables of
species in this as in the other groups, but enongh has been
said to show that the student must not expect to determine
his specimens with anything like certainty from a table alone. LIVIDE. 227

TABLE OF FAMILIES. 1. (6) Cubitus petiolate. 2, (5) Facial cones absent. _3. (A) First two joints of antenna one third to one half of
the entire length. Lividiide. 4. (8) First two joints of antennae less than one fourth of
the entire length. Aphalaride. 3. (2) Facial cones present. Poyltid

6. (1) Cubitus sessile. Trioxide. I. LIVIIDZ. Head fiat, as long as its width at the base; crown produced
in front into two rounded lobes; eyes flat, not projecting
from the sides of the head. Frontal cones absent. Foremost
ocellus only visible from beneath. Antenna but little longer
than the head, joints one and two one third to one half of the
entire length, second joint much the longest, in the British
species more than twice as long as the first. Pronotum trans-
versely oblong, about one third longer than the dorsulum,
withont lateral impressions. Outline of the crown pronotum
and mesonotum in the lateral aspect continuous. Elytra
coriaceous, long oval, nestly flat; stalk of the eubital about
one half longer than the middle piece of the subcostal. Livia. (Pl. IL, fig. 25.) ‘The characters of the single genus are those of the family. Only two species are known for the European fauna, our
British species, and J, limb, Waga. ‘The latter is recorded
from France and Germany (I have it from Corsica) and is
distinguished by having the second joint of the antennt
about one third longer than the first. 1. L. juncorum, Latr.-—Crown pronotum and mesonotum
pale brown more or less tinged with carmine-red, irregularly

 

 

 

  

t
f

 

i
if

 

 

228 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. punctured and rugulose. Joints one and two of antenne
carmine, joint three fuscous, joints four to eight white, nine
and ten black. Elytra testaceous, transversely rugulose,
veins concolorous, the marginal vein chequered with black
and white between veins two and five. Legs pale sordid
yellow. Breast black, Abdomen above reddish yellow,
darker towards the base, beneath pale. Length, 21-23 mm. On rashes, common and ‘generally distributed. APHALARIDZS. Head broader than long, eyes globose, prominent. . Frontal
cones absent. Foremost ocellus visible from the front. An-
tennze nearly as long as the head and thorax, joints one and
two terete short and stout, remainder filiform, third joint the
longest. Pronotum with lateral impressions, generally much
shorter than the dorsulum, Elytra flat, hyaline with or
without a, colour-pattern or subcoriaceous without a colour-

pattern,
Our two British genera may be thus distinguished. Stigma present. . . .  Rhinocola. Stigma wanting, . . . — Aphalara. In a few species of Aphalara, none of which are at present
known to be British, there is an evident stigma, but in
these the apical portion of the radial curves upward towards
the costa. Rhinocola, Forst. (Pl. IL, fig. 26.) Elytra ragulose, semitransparent, distinctly but bluntly
pointed. Radial ending in the longest point of the elytron
(less distinctly so in erices than in aceris). Stigma well de-
veloped. .

‘We have two species of this genus and there is but one
other of the twelve species given by Puton for the Palearctic
fauna which is likely to occur here. This is B. speciosa, Flor,
which is found on Populus alba and P. nigra from June to
August and (overwintered specimens) also in the spring. APHALARIDE. 229

TABLE OF SPECIES. 1. (2) Blytra pointed oval, radial ending just above the
longest point of the elytron. Lives on ling. 1. erica
2. (1) Elytra subrhomboidal, radial ending in the longest
point of the elytron, Lives on maple. 2. aceris,

1. R. ericz, Curt.—Sordid greyish yellow, the apex of
the antenna, the apex of the rostram and the claws black. ‘Wings lacteo-hyaline, Length, 1-1} mm. _Found by sweeping on heaths, apparently local, but pos-
sibly overlooked on account of its small size. Norwich district. London district, (Douglas); Bourne-
mouth (Dale). 2. BR, aceris, Zin—Head and thorax deep yellow in-
clining té orange (the autumn tint of maple leaves), apex of
the rostrum black, apex of the antenne and the claws
fuscous. Length, 2-2? mm. On maple, rather local. Norwich district, Cotswold district. London district
(Douglas) ; Glanvilles Wootton (Dale). ° . Apbalara, Fors. (Pl. IL, fig. 27.) Elytra widest bebind the middle, rounded atthe apex, not
evidently rugulose, hyaline, with or without a colour-pattern,
Radial ending above the longest point of the elytron. Stigma wanting. Seventeen species of this genus are given by Puton for |

the Palearctic fauna; of these we have six in Britain, and it

does not appear that any of the others are likely to occur here. ‘The usual dark markings, on the head and thorax in this

genus are ‘as follows :

A suffused spot on each side of the crown; two points on

=i ip PLR a ialacanttn

SUS TNIE Ve

   

 

 

230 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. each side of the pronotum and sometimes a spot in the
midile of it; » spot in the middle of the front edge of the
dorsulum; and a pair of stripes on each side of the meso-
notum, of which the inner one is elongate oval in shape and
does not reach the front margin,

TABLE OF SPECIES. 1. (10) Head and thorax glabrous. 2. (9) Elytra without a fuscous spot in the middle of
cell 1,

(6) Vein 2 not ending in a black point. 4, (8) Length 23-8} mm. Head and thorax sordid

Fd

greenish yellow. 1. picta. 5. (4) Length 2-21 mm. Head and thorax emerald
green. 6. nervosa. 6. (8) Vein 2 ending in a black point. 7. (8) Subcostal not ending in a black point; elytra

unbanded, 4. calthec. 8. (7) Subcostal ending in a black point; elytra with
a fascous subapical band. 8. exilis,

9. (2) Blytra with a fuscous spot in the middle of
cell 1. 2. nebulosa. “10. (1) Head ond thorax pilose. 5. artemisia. 1. A. picta, Zett—Head -and thorax sordid yellow, in
some specimens inclining to green, in others to orange. Antenne concolorous with the head, joints 9 and 10 black. the others narrowly black at their apices. Mesonotum with

. four more or less distinct dusky stripes. Elytra pale fusco-

hyaline with a yellow tinge, irrorated with pale fuscous
towards the apex, veins sordid yellow. Abdomen green, dorsal
segments blackish, with their hind margins narrowly pale. Legs sordid yellow, apex of the tarsi blackish. This species is very variable in colour ; sometimes the head
and thorax are dull pale green and the four stripes on the

APHALARIDE. 231

pronotum and the veins of the elytra are brown. Length
24-3} mm. Food plants, Leontodon autumnalis, Orepis biennis, Hypo-
chaeris radicata, and Chrysanthemum leueanthemum. Paisley
(Young); Corfe Castle (Dale); Craigour, Perthshire
Worman.) 2. A. nebulosa, Zett—Head and thorax bone-white,
with the usual markings brown; antenne yellow, joints
1 and 2 dusky, 9 and 10 black. Elytra hyaline; veins
yellow, sometimes fuscous beyond the middle; a fuscous
spot in the middle of cell 1, an irregular fascous band,
frequently broken up into spots, from the apex of the
subcostal to the apex of vein 2; another irregular fuscous
band from the costa near the apex to the apex of vein 3,
giving off branches to the margin along the courses of
the veins. Abdomen above brown, hind margins of the
segments narrowly yellow. Legs yellow, apex of the tarsi
fuscous. Length 24-23 mm. On Epilobium angustifolium, locally abundant. Cotswold district (Marshall; Edwards). Cerne, Dorset
(Dale); Boxhill (Scott). 8. A. exilis, Web. & Mohr—Head and thorax bone-
white with the usual markings rust-red. Antenne sordid
yellow, first and second joints dusky, 9 and 10 black. Elytra
whitish-hyaline irregularly speckled with fuscous, the
speckling confluent near the apex to form a more or less
distinct inwardly oblique fuscous band from near the apex of
cell 6 to the distal half of cell 8; veins sordid yellow, sub-
costal and vein 2 each ending in a distinct black dot, the
marginal vein between the base and vein 2 with two short
dark streaks. Abdomen above dusky, hind margins of
the segments narrowly pale. Legs pale, apex of the tarsi
fuscous. Length 2-2} mm. Found at roots of low plants in dry places. Focd-plant
Ruimex acetosella,

 

ENE Ria ti 2a LTRS

Soman

see qate

 

SSR MRE NEE ote RMAC es

 

232 . HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. Norwich district. Weybridge (Power); Scarborough
(Wilkinson); Addington Hills (Douglas); Paisley (Young);
Newtown-Hamilton, Ardara, Ireland (Johnson); Dublin
district (Halbert); Parley Heath, Mount Edgecombe, Deal
(Dale). 4, A. calthe, Lin. (polygoni, Scott)—Head and thorax
bone-white with rust-yellow markings, of which the most
distinct are the four stripes on the mesonotum. Antenne
yellow with the last two joints black. Elytra pale fusco-
hyaline; veins brown, marginal vein black next the apex
of vein 2, and having a short blackish streak near the apex
of the clavus, vein 4 decurved and therefore reaching the
margin below the longest point of the elytron. Abdomen
above black, hind margins of the segments narrowly yellow. Legs yellow, apex of the tarsi fuscous. Length 13-2} mm. Norwich district. Glanvilles Wootton (Dale) ; Birchwood
(Power) ; London district (Douglas) ; Esher (Scott). Food-plants; Polygonum aviculare, P.amphibium, P. hydro-
piper, and Rumex acetosella. It has also been found on the
flowers of Caltha palustris.

. 5. A, artemisiee, Forst—Head thorax and elytra clothed
with erect white scale-like hairs, Head, thorax, antenne, and
legs sordid whitish yellow, abdomen very pale green. An-
tennz with the tip blackish and the apex of some of the distal
joints narrowly fascous. Elytra white, semitransparent, moré
or less closely irrorated with fuscous. Length 2-2} mm. Weybourne, Norfolk, on Artemisia maritima. Portland
(Pate). 6. A. nervosa, Forst—Body and legs bright emerald-
green, tho legs becoming more or less yellow after death. ‘Antenne sordid yellow, dusky at the tip and at the apex of
some of the distal joints. Elytra hyaline, veins whitish, two,
three, four and five, a piece of the stalk of the two latter and

 

 

 

PSYLLIDE. 233

the apical fourth of vein 6, irregularly bordered with fuscous. Length 2-2} mm. Food-plant Achillea millefolium. Norwich district. Bromley (@oaglas)s Lee (Scott) ;
Glanvilles Wootton (Dale). PSYLLIDZ. Head short, as broad or broader than the thorax, eyes
globose, prominent. Facial cones well developed, longer and
narrower in the female than in the male. - Foremost ocellus
visible from the front, Antenne much longer than the
head and thorax, joints one and two terete short and stout,
remainder filiform, third joint the longest. Pronotum with
lateral impressions, shorter than the dorsulum, the latter
at most two thirds as long as broad. Elytra either flat and
hyaline, with or without a colour pattern, or coriaceous and
strongly convex. Thenormal dark markings on the head and
thorax are similar to those found in Aphalara, ¢f. p. 229.

. TABLE OF GENERA,

1° (6) Elytra membranous, flat. 2. (8) Stigma present,

8. (4) Stalk of the cubitus as long as the basal piece of

the subcostal. Psyllopsis. 4. (8) Stalk of the cubitus much shorter than the basal

piece of the subcostal. Psylla. 5. (2) Stigma wanting, Arytana. 6. (1) Elytra coriaceous, strongly convex. Livilla. Psyllopsis, F. Low. (PI. IL, fig 28.) ‘A genus of four European species, separated from Psylla
on account of the stalk of the cubitus being as long as the
basal piece of the subcostal, the hind margin of the genital
plate in the male produced on each side into a broad rounded
lobe, and the lower genital valve in the female having a deep

 

 

 

 

 

234 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. narrow notch at the apex. We have in Britain two species,
and a third P. diserepans, Flor, which is very similar to
P. fraxini, Lin, but distinguished by the hammer-sbaped
forceps of the male, may possibly be found in this country,
as it has occurred in France and Scandinavia. Our two species of this genus may be distinguished as
follows:

Upper foreparts whitish-yellow, with-

out markings =. . . «1. fraxinicola. Upper fore-parts red-yellow, with
Dlack markings . . 0... framini. 1. P. fraxinicola, Forst—Body and legs whitish-yellow
or very pale greenish-yellow; the claws sometimes fuscous. Antenne about half as long as the costa; their apex black,
and the apices of some of the distal joints more or less
broadly blackish. Elytra hyaline, with a feeble fuscous
tinge towards the apex, veins concolorous with the body. Length, 3 mm. :

On ash ; common, and widely distributed. Norwich district, Cotswold district. Isle of Wight, Lee
(Scott); Balmuto, Fifeshire (Power). 2. P. fraxini, Lin.—Crown red-yellow, the disk more or
less broadly black, facial cones generally black. Antenna
red-yellow, more than half as long as the costa; joints 4-6
lack at the apox, 7-10 black. Pronotum pale yellow. “Mesonotum red-yellow, with e pair of broad black stripes on
‘each side, the members of each pair frequently confluent, and
a black spot near each hinder angle of the dorsulum, the
latter with a Jarge triangular black spot on each side in
front. Blytra hyaline with an irregular suffused dark
fascous band round the apex, one end of which is produced
from the dorsum as far as the apex of the stalk of veins 4
and 5; veins yellowish, except where they cross the ‘fuscons
past, where they ere black; vein 2 suffusedly blackish. PSYLLIDE. 235

Abdomen above black, hind margins of the segments more
or less broadly yellow. Legs red-yellow, hind thighs with a
Dlack or piceous streak, apex of the tarsi and the claws
black, Length, 2}-8 mm. Common on ash. Norwich district, Cotswold district. London district
(Scott) ; Glanvilles Wootton, Ambleside (Dale). Psylla, F. Low. (Pl. IL, fig. 29.) Crown deflexed with two feeble impressions behind,
slightly raised next the eyes; facial cones distinct from the
the crown, porrect or deflexed. Antenns much longer than
the breadth of the head; filiform except the two basal joints,
sparingly pubescent. Thorax more or less convex, dorsulum
generally well developed, as long or longer than the crown. Elytra membranous, more or less broadly rounded at the
apex, at least twico as long as broad; usually broadest
beyond the middle, their longest point between the radius
and vein 4; cell 6 (radial cell) more than three times as
long as broad; cells 2 and 4 of nearly equal size, veins not
set with long hairs, vein 4 ending in or before the apex. Stigma present or wanting. ‘Twenty-three species of this genus aro found in Britain,
out of sixty-three given by Dr. Paton for the Palearctic
fauna, The late Dr. Franz Léw did much valuable work in
the way of putting the nomenclature and claisification of
the Psyllina on a firm basis, but it may be doubted even
now whether all the described European species of Psylla
and Trioza are well ascertained. TABLE OF SPECIES. 1, Elytra brown, becoming colourless towards cell 7. 2. Elyéra simply hyaline, with several irregular sharply-
* defined black spots 1. concinna. Elytra not as above. 3. ~

2

f

HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA.

. Length, 2mm, Species lives on blackthom. 2. pruni. Length, 2J-3 mm. Species lives on sallow. 3. brunneipennis.

. Dorsum (iz, the margin of the elytron opposite to

the costa), with a-short black or dusky streak near

the middle. 4. No black or dusky streak near the middle of the

dorsum. 8.

. Margin of elytra not. spotted between veins 2
and 6. 5. Margin of elytra with about nine dark spots between

veins 2 and 6. 4. crateegi.

. Extreme apex of the clavus filled up with fuscous. 6. The dark dorsal streak confined to the marginal

vein.
. A broad fuscons streak occupying almost the whole

length of cell 1. 5. simulans. A short narrow fuscous streak in cell 1 near the apex
of the clavus. 6. pyricola.

. Length 24-3 mm. Specieslives on sallow. 7. salicicola. Length 3-8} mm. Species lives on Rhamnus,

  

8. rhamnicola,

. Stigma well developed. 9. Stigma obsolete or wanting. 1b. Veins of elytra neither black nor broadly rast. yellow. 10. Veins of elytra broadly rust-yellow. 9. venata. Veins of elytra black =~ 10. melanonewra.

. Species not living on mistletoe, sea-buckthorn, or
sallow. 11. Species living on mistletoe. - 11. wisci.”
Species living on sea-buckthorn. 12. hippophacs. Species living on sallow. 13. ambigua.

. Elytra simply hyaline. 18. Elytra more or less smoky-hyaline. : 2. ‘Blyita testaceous. 14. Hartigit. PSYLLIDE. 237
12, Length 2-8 mm. Lives on conifers. 15. pineti. Length 24-4 mm. Lives on birch. 16. betula. 18. Thorax above, and abdomen (in greater part) pale. 14. Thorax above brown-red, abdomen in greater part
black. 17. costalis. 14, Head and thorax very pale green. Species lives on
whitethorn. 18. peregrina. Head and thorax greyish-yellow or pale brownish-
yellow. Species lives on crab-apple. 19. mali. 15. Elytra flavo- or testaceo-hyaline, veins not black, 16. Elytra simply hyaline, veins in greater part black. 20. alni. 16, Antenne not more than two-thirds as long as the
costa. 17. Antenne nearly or quite as long as the costa. 21, Forsteri. 17. Length 8} mm. Species lives on box. 22. busi. Length 2h mm. Species lives on broom. 23, spartii. 1. P.concinna, Sp. n.—Head and thorax bone white with
reddish brown markings. Facial cones pubescent, of moderate
length, their greatest divergence about equal to the width of
the base of one. Antenne about half as long as the costa,
brownish yellow, first joint, the basal half of the second,
joint 10 and the apices of the intermediate joints (of joints
8 and 4 very narrowly) black. Elytra simply hyaline,
vein 2 standing in a large irregular sharply defined black
spot, the latter with two other oblong irregular black. spots,
forming an oblique interrupted macular band which ends at
the apex of vein 6, a black spot next the apex of the stigma,
and a.short piece of the apices of veins 8, 4 and 5
bordered with blackish. Stigma half as wide as the ‘basal
two thirds of cell 6; radius (vein 6) sinuaté decurved near
its apical third, recurving to the apex. Abdomen above
black, the connections of the segments pale red. Genitalia
of the male blackish, forceps simple, about’ as long as the

 

 

 

 

see eens

Sooners

238 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. genital plate, Legs brownish yellow, hind thighs blackish
except at the apex. Length, 2mm. Dorsetshire (Dale). Described from a single male ex. coll. Dale, where it was
mixed with Aphalara nebulosa, a species to which it bears
some superficial resemblance on account of the black spotting
of the elytra,

2, P.pruni, Scop —Head and thorax varying from pale red
to brownish red. Facial cones shorter than the crown down
the middle, triangular, their divergence moderate. Antenne
distinctly less than helf as long as the costa, brownish
yellow, joints 5 to 8 black at the apex, 9 and 10 black. ¥lytra brunneo-hyaline becoming paler towards the base, cell
7 simply hyaline, veins a little paler than the ground
colour ; stigma half as wide as the basal two thirds of cell 6. Abdomen blackish, sides narrowly red. Legs brownish
yellow, hind thighs black except at the apex. Length,
2mm. Lives on blackthorn. Widely distributed but somewhat
local. Norwich district, Cotswold district. Esher (Power). 8. P. brunneipennis, Sp. 1.—Head and thorax brownish
yellow with yellow brown markings, pronotum blackish. Facial cones as long as the crown down the middle, the inner
edges straight, the outer edges concave, their divergence very
slight. Antenne about half as long asthe costa, brownish
yellow, joints 8 to 10 black, the apices of joints 3 to
7 increasingly black. lytra dark smoky-hyaline be-
coming simply hyaline in and towards cell-7, veins
brownish yellow becoming blackish on the distal half,
dorsum with a blackish streak before the apex of the clavus;
stigma about half as wido as the basal two thirds of cell 6.
lomen above blackish in the male, green in the female;
Connections of the segments paler. Male genital late simple,

  

 

PSYLLIDA. 239

about twice as high’as the forceps, the latter about twice as
high as their basal width, the anterior half of the apex pro-
Auced into a wide blunt tooth. Female with the upper
genital valve one third longer than the lower, Length,
24-8 mm. Found sparingly on Salix pentandra at Colesborne, @louces-
tershire. Full-coloured specimens of this species bear considerable
superficial resemblance to P. pruni, but are at least one half
larger. 4, P. crateegi, Scir.—Head and thorax bone-white with
pale rust-red markings. Facial cones triangular regularly
rounded at the apex, shorter than the crown down the
middle, bone-white with the apical third pale rust-red. Antenne yellow, longer than half the costa, joints 9 and
10 and the apices of joints 4 to 8 more or less broadly
black. Elytra hyaline, the veins and stigma reddish white
or pale reddish yellow, the dorsum at the apex of the clavus
snffusedly blackish, vein two suffasedly bordered with fuscous,
veins 8 to 6 each ending in a black point, a small
blackish spot on the middle of the apex of cells 2 to 53
stigma rather more than half as wide as the basal two thirds
of cell 6. Abdomen above blackish, hind margins of the
segments narrowly, and the sides broadly, bright red.’ Legs
red yellow, tarsi dusky at the apex. Length 8 mm,

Lives on whitethorn, Widely distributed, but somewhat
local. Norwich district, Cotswold district. London district
(Douglas & Scott) ; Glanvilles Wootton, Bournemouth (Dale). I have taken the greater number of specimens by beating
beech in the Autumn. .

5, P, simulans, LOTS (Py=t, Seoet)—Iead and thorax
bone-white or reddish white with lighter or GATKe? 701 vro~=

markings. Facial cones about as long as the crown down

 

 

 

 

— re

240 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. the middle, their divergence moderate, Antenne yellow,
about half as long as the costa, first joint brown red, joints
8 to 5 more or less widely black st the apex, 6 to 10
black. Elytra hyaline or lacteo-hyaline, the disk of the eells
feebly and suffasedly fuscous, a broad fuscous stripe occupying
almost the entire length of cell 1, apex of the clavus
blackish, veins blackish ; stigma pale, about half as wide as
the basal two thirds of cell 6. Wings with the apex of the
clavus blackish. Abdomen dark brown or black, Bind
margins of the segments narrowly ved. Legs brownish
yellow, thighs black, except at the apex, apex of the tarsi
kis th, 24 mm. ue pple aa pear, Widely distributed but not
Norwich district, Cotswold district, Glanvilles Wootton
(Dale). 6. P. pyricola, First—Head and thorax brownish yellow
with dark brown markings. Facial cones shorter than the
crown down the middle, white passing into brown towards
the base, their divergence moderate, Antenne yellow, at
least half as long as the costa, joints 4 to 8 more or
less broadly black at the apex, 9 and 10 black. Blytra
hyaline with a feeble testaceous tinge, the apex of the clavas
and a short streak just above it in cell 1 blackish; veins
concolorous, stigma pale, about half as wide as the basal two-
thirds of cell 6. Wings with the apex of the clavus blackish. Abdomen and legs as in P. simulans. Forceps of the male
when seen from behind about two-thirds as high as the
genital plate, of nearly equal width in their basal balf, then
pent inwards and drawn out into a blackish point. Length,
oes on apple and pear. Widely distributed and
apparently commoner than thelast. Norwich district, Cots-

istrict, 2
whe aucaber of British species of Psylln which live on

 

 

PSYLLIDA, 2

apple and pear trees is not well ascertained ;
P. pyri, Lin, bat it seems more
was P. pyricola, Porst., and
with a query in his revi
Mag. vol. xviii. p.
larger than P. py

Curtis gives
probable that his species
Scott includes P. pyr nga, Férst. ‘d list of British Psyllide (Ent. Mo. » April 1882). P. pyrisuya is a little
ol, and without dark markings on either
elytra or wings. The trae P. pyri. Lin,, is best distinguished
from P. pyrirolu by the form of the forceps in the male; the
latter, when seen from the side, are nearly as high as the
genital plate, narrow, sharply pointed, sickle-shaped with
the point bent towards the ront, the front edge with a pro-
jecting angle at the hase. P. salicicola, Hirs—Head and thorax bone white with
rust-yellow or pale red markings. Facial cones as long ot
slightly longer than the crown down the middle, their diver-
gence moderate. Antenne yellow, joints 3 to 8 more or less
broadly black at the apex. 9 and 10 black. Elytra hyaline,

veins lighter or darker brown becoming paler towards the
base, the dorsum fascous

trom the apex of the claws almost
to the base of the elytron, stigma about half as wide as the
basal two-thirds of cell 6. Abdomen yellow, or brown with
the hind margins of the segments narrowly pale. yellow, apex of the tarsi black. Length 24-3 mm
Lives on sallow. W idely distributed and not uncommon. Norwich district. London district (Scott); Glanvilles
Wootton (Dale). Legs

      

P. rhamnicola, Sv//—Head and thorax bone white or
sordid yellow with red or red-brown markings. Facial cones
about as long as the crown down the middle, the inner edge
straight, the outer edge indented near the middle, apex
rounded, the latter sometimes whitish preceded by a brown
band. Antennw yellow, about half as long as the costa,
joiats 4 and 5 more or less broadly black at the apex,
6 to 10 black. Elytra feebly lacteo-hyaline, veins lighter or

Q

 

242 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. darker yellow-brown, dorsum fuscous from the apex of the
claws about half-way to the base of the elytron, a short
suffused fuscous line running inwards from the hind mangin
ineach of cells 2 to 5, stigma about half as wide as the
basal two-thirds of cell 6. Abdomen above lighter or darker
brownish-red, the disk of the basal Segments somewhat
darker. Legs sordid yellow, apex of the tarsi blackish. Length 3-3} mm. Lives on Rhamnus catharticus. Cotswold district, Sanderstead (Douglas & Scott). P. venata, ns—g. Head and thorax reddish-testa-
ceous, the lateral punctures on the pronotum dlacki: . Facial cones rather short, their inner and onter edges straight:
Antenne brownish yellow, joints 8 to 10 black, the apices of
joints 4 to 7 more or less broadly dusky, lytra lacteo-
hyaline, the veins rather broadly bordered with dull rust-
yellow; radius feebly sinuate; stigma at the base more than
luslf as wide as eell 6, gradually narrowed. Abdomen above
black, the connections of the segments red Lateral genital
valves elongate triangular, as long as the remainder of the
abdomen, their lower cage secight, the upper edge curved. wnish yellow. Length 2} mm. Ae coed from one female taken off bisch at Stratton
Strawless, Norfolk, 24th August, 1895. P. melanoneura, Fors—Head and thorax bone-white
with dull red-brown markings. Facial cones shorter than
the crown down the middle, narrowly pointed, their outer
edge sinuate. Antenna less than half as long as the costa,
black, becoming reddish towards the base. _Elytra hyaline,
becoming yellow-brown towards the apex ; veins dark brown or
black; stigma brown, about half as wideas the basal two-thirds
ofl 6. Abdomen shove dark brown or black. ¥ “= brownish
vellow, thighs piceous except at the apex. Le: 24 mm,

Lives on whitethorn ; apparently local. PSVLLIDE. 243

Colesborne, Gloucestershire, on old whitethorns 28th April
1894. A single male was sent by Walker to Forster,

P. visci, Curb.—Head and thorax pale green with red
yellow markings, Facial cones as long or longer than the
crown down the middle, sharply pointed, the inner edge
straight, the outer edge sinuate, their divergence at the apex
about equal to half the width of the base of one. Antenne
nearly as long as the costa, vellow, joints 4 to 8 more or lese
broadly black at’ the apex, 9 and 10 black. Elytra hyaline,
faintly famose, broadest beyond the middle, widely rounded at
the apex; veins yellow-brown becoming yellow towards the
base ; stigma about half as wide as the basal two-thirds of cell
6. Abdomen green. Legs yellow, tarsi dusky at the apex,

In the dark form the head and thorax are yellow with dark
brown markings, the abdomen above is dark brown with the
hind margins of the segments narrowly yellow, and the hind
thighs are brown except at the apex. Length, 834 mm,

Lives on mistletoe. Norwich District. Hereford (Dale). I have taken both
light and dark forms together in June. P. hippophaés, First.—Head and thorax greenish white
with pale rust-yellow markings. Facial cones a little longer
than the crown down the middle, their inner edge straight,
the outer edge sinuate, the divergence small. Antenna
about half as long as the costa, yellow, the first two joints
greenish white, joints9 and 10 and the apices of joints 4 to 8
more or less broadly, black. Elytra whitish hyaline with a
very feeble fuscous tinge, veins whitish, becoming yellowish
towards the apex; stigma very narrow, about one-fourth as
wide as the basal two-thirds of cell 6. Abdomen very pale
green, dusky at the apex in the female, Legs greenish
white, claws dusky. Length, 3 mm. Lives on Hippophai rhamnoides. Deal (Scott); Winterton, Norfolk (awards),

    

 

m4 HEMIPTERA-HOMOP TERA. P. ambigua, First. (stenolabis, FP. Liw. )—Head and
thorax pale orange with darker markings. Facial cones
nearly as loug as the crown, the inner edge straight, their
outer edge concave. their divergence distinctly less than the
basal width of one. Antenne about half as long as the
costa, third joint one-half longer than the fourth. Elytra
yellowish-hyaline, paler towards the base, veins yellow,
becoming darker towards the apex ; stigma about one-fourth
‘as wide as the basal two-thirds of cell 6, Abdomen pale
green. Genital plate in the male without any process,
scarcely higher than the forceps; forceps straight, very
narrow, gradually attentuate to their acute apex, nearly as
hich as the genital plate, their height five or six times as great
‘as their basal width. Lower genital valve jn the female
gradually acuminate, as long as the two preceding segments,
cne-sixth shorter than the upper valve. Length, 2-24 mm. Lives on Salin eprom. ‘This species was introduced to onr list by Seott in 1882,
without particulars, under the name of sfenolabis, F. Low. P. Hartigii. Flor. (sylvicola, ‘Sruth),—Head and thorax
Aull ochve-yellow, the latter sometimes yellow-red, Facial
cones triangular, distinctly shorter than the crown down the
middle. Autennw less than half as long as the costa, dull
yeliow, points 8 to 10 and the apices of joints 8 to 7 broadly,
black, Hlytra ochreo-hyaline, becoming paler towards the
base, veins brownish yellow ; stigma wide and long, its base
as wide or wider than the base of cell G. Abdomen above dark
brown, the sides and hind margins of the segments ‘ochreous. Legs dall yellow, apices of the tarsi black, Length 23-8 mm. Not common. Food plant unknown. Noreich, off Scotch fir in July. London District (Scott) 5
Weybridge, off birch (Power). P. pineti. Flov.—Mead and thorax pone-white with dark
markings varying from rast-yellow to red-brown. Facial
cones elongate triangalar, slightly excavated on the outer side,

 

PSYLLIDE. 245

a little shorter than the crown down the middle. Antenne
about half as long as the costa, yellow, joints 6 to 10, and the
apices of joints 3 to 5 more or less Droadly, black, Blytra
hyaline, with a greater or less smoky tinge ; veins varying
from brownish yellow to piceons; stigma well developed,
about half as wide as the basal two-thirds of ecll 6. Abdomen
above dark brown or black, margins of the segments more or
less widely pale; sometimes entirely pale. Legs lighter or
darker brownish yellow, apex of the tarsi black; tibial and
tarsal spines and the claws black; thighs sometimes blackish
except at the apex. Length ,

Very common on Conifers, especially in winter and spring. pick district, Cotswold district. London district
{Dooals); Hotn Bush, Mickleham (Power); Glanvilles

 

  

 

 

 

ae Lowi, Scott.—I transcribe the oviginal description of
s, for me, doubiful species. I have authentic specimens
which I am unable to separate from P. pinfi. “Red or
somewhat brownish red, generally with pale streaks on the
mesouotamn. Face—lobes as long as the crown down the
centre ; base broad, rapidly narrowing to the middle, from
thence to the apex almost parallel, where they become some-
what divergent. Antenne short, barely reaching to the base
of the stigma. Llytra smoky-testaceous, or almost clear,
transparent ; nerves, in fresh examples, yellow, inclining to
orange, in others dark brown; stigma moderate, almost
regularly narrowed from the base to the apex; upper arm of
the cubitus long, very convex. J/ewl: evown red, posterior
margin distinctly concave. Face : lobes reddish or yellowish ;
ase broad, rapidly narrowing to the middle from thence to
the apex almost parallel; apex rounded or slightly acute,
somewhat divergent. lntennu reddish yellow, short, barely
veaching to the base of the stigma; 3rd joint short, scarcely
longer than the Ist and 2nd together ; 1th about four-fifths
of the 3rd; Ist frequently black, or the base of 1 to 2

 

 

246 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. black ; 4 to § at the apex narrowly brown; 9 to 10 black. Thorae: pronotum generally yellowish ; mesonotum ved or
brownish red; in the latter case the posterior portion with
four slightly indistinct pale longitudinal lines, the two
exterior carving round and enclosing the inner, which are on
each side of the centre. Elytra smoky-testaceous, or almost
clear, transparent ; greatest breadth pefore the apex of the
stigma, length equal to about two and a half times the
breadth ; nerves yellow, inclining to orange or dark brown ;
stigma moderate, almost regularly narrowed from the base to
the apex; upper arm of the cubitus long, twice the length
of the bifurcation, very convex and approaching the base of
the radius, Leys reddish yeliow. Thighs: Srd pair some-
times brown at the base. Tibi yellowish. Tursi: apex of
the 2nd joint very narrowly and claws dark brown, Abdomen
above, in both sexes, deep pitchy brown, shining ; posterior
margin of the segments very narrowly red, or sometimes the
4 reddish, with a dark band across the segments; 3 genitalia
pale chestnut; ¢ frequently green. Length, 13-1} line
nearl. Taken abundantly by Mr. Douglas beginning of
November, at Addington, on fir and birch, and by Dr. Power
in February, at Esher.”

 

 

P. betule, Lin.—Head and thorax brownish yellow with
red-brown markings. Facial cones about as long as the
crown down the middle, the divergence about equal to half the
base of one. Antenne long, at least two thirds as long asthe
costa, yellow, joints $ to 10 and the apices of joints 4 to 7 more
or less broadly, black. Elytra whitish hyaline, sometimes
with a very faint fuscous tinge, veins yellow-brown stigma
about one-fourth aswide as the basal two-thirds of cell6. Abdo-
ten yellow, the middle dorsal cegments more or less, broadly
dark brown, Legs brownish yellow, hind thighs except at the
apes, and the apices of the tarsi, piceous. Length, 24-4 mm. Lives on birch. Stratton Strawless, Norfolk. London District (Douglas). PSYLLIDE. 247

P. costalis, Hlor—g: Crown sordid yellow, dusky on
the disk. Thorax lighter or darker yellow-brown paler at
the sides, the usual dark markings not discernible, Facial
cones rather sharply triangular, shorter than the crown down
the middle. Antenne about half as long as the costa, yellow,
joints 9 and 10 and the apices of joints 4 to 8 more or less
broadly, black. Elytra hyaline, sometimes with a very feeble
fuscous tinge, veins almost concolorous with the disk ; stigma
ab the base half as wide as the basal two-thirds of cell 6. Abdomen above black, the sides. narrowly and a band across
the base carmine-red, genital segment green or yellow. Legs
sordid yellow, claws black. Length, 2-24 10m. ‘The food plant of this species is, apparently, unknown ;
T have beaten it from an eli fence, also from mixed hedges,
sometimes from whitethorn alone; Flor’s specimens were
taken on Pinus abies at the end of August. Norwich district, Cotswold district, not uncommon. Glan-
villes Wootton (Dale). P. peregrina, First. (crateegicola, Scott).—Very pale
green. Facial, cones elongate-triangular as long or longer
than the crown down the middle. Antenne rather more
than half as long as the costa, joints 9 and 10 black. Elytra
whitish hyaline, veins concolorous ; stigma at the base two-
thirds as wide as the basal two-thirds of cell 6. Tibial and
tarsal spines and the claws black.” Length, 3 mm. Very common on whitethorn in June. The imago does not
hibernate. Norwich district, Cotswold district. London district
(Scott) ; Glanvilles Wootton, Killarney (Dale). P. mali, Schmdbg.—Pale sordid yellow, or brownish

yellow. Differs from P. peryrina in colour, in being dis-

tinotly stouter in build, and in its food-plant. The light and

dark forms occur together as in P. visci. Length, 3 mm. Abundant on Pyrus malus,

   

 

   

248 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. Norwich district, Cotswold district. London district
(Scott); Glanvilles Wootton (Dale). P. alni, Lin.—Head and thorax sordid yellow with lighter
or darker red-brown markings, or green without markings. Facial cones broadly and bluntly triangular, a trifle shorter
than the crown down the middle. Antenne in the male
nearly as long as the costa, in the female about two-thirds as
long as the costa, yellow, basal two-thirds of joints 1 and 2
dusky, joints 6 to 10 and the apices of joints 3 to 5 more or
less broadly, black. Elytra whitish hyaline, costal vein and
stigma green, the other veins, except the basal piece of the
subcostal, black; stigma very narrow, a mere thickening of
the costal vein. Abdomen green, or sometimes with the
dorsal segments more or less broadly brown. Legs green or
yellow, front tibize frequently with a black spot on the outer
side at the base, tibial and tarsal spines and the claws black. Length, 5 mm. Lives on alder. Norwich district, Cotswold district, locally abundant. London district, “ not common ” (Scott) ; Glanvilles Wootton
(Dale). Aberrations of venation are more frequent in this species
than in any of its congeners. P. Forsteri, Flv.—Head and thorax dull yellow, in-
clining to ochreous. Facial cones broadly and bluntly
triangular, a very little shorter than the crown down the
middle, Antenna nearly as long as the costa, yellow ; joints
9 and 10 and the apices of joints 4 to 8 more or less broadly,
black. Elytra hyaline with a feeble ochreous tinge, veins
dull yellow; stigma a mere thickening of the costal vein. ‘Abdomen and legs green or yellow; tibial and tarsal spines
and the claws black. Length, 3-4 mm. Lives on alder ; very common. Norwich district, Cotswold district. London district
(Scott) ; Glanvilles Wootton (Dale). PSYLLIDA. 249

P. buxi, Zin.—Head and thorax very pale greyish green
with rust-yellow markings., Facial cones broadly triangular,
subtrancate at the apex, a trifle longer than the crown down
the middle. Antenne in the male about two-thirds, in the
female about one-half as long as the costa, yellow, passing
gradually into brown on joints 4 to 10. Elytra dull yellowish
hyaline, whitish hyaline in cell 7, veins concolorous with the
disk, the costal vein sometimes green; stigma a slight
thickening of the costal vein. Abdomen green. Legs sordid
yellow, the thighs sometimes brown except at the apex, tibial
and tarsal spines and the claws black. Length, 3} mm. Very common on box bushes. .

Norwich district, Cotswold district. London district
(Scott); Glanrilles Wootton (Dale). P. spartii, Gur. (spartiophila, First)—Head and
thorax sordid yellowish white with yellow-brown markings,
the fovew on the crown and pronotum black Facial cones
very short and broad, rounded triangular, about half as long
as the crown down the middle. Antenne abont two-thirds
as long as the costa, yellow. the apical half of joint 3 and the
succeeding joints entirely black. Elytra testaceo-hyaline,
becoming simply hyaline in and towards cell 7, veins
brownish-yellowish ; stigma a slight thickening of the costal
vein. Abdomen above black, hind margins of the segments
narrowly, and the genital segment, pale. Legs sordid yellow,
last joint of the tarsi and the claws black, thighs sometimes
piceous except at the apex. Length, 2} mm. Lives on broom. Norwich district, local. London district (Scott). Livilla, Cut. (PI. IL. fig. 80.) Head and thorax impunctate. Facial cones longer than
the crown. Elytra coriaceous, strongly convex, transversely
ragulose, broadest in the middle. 250 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. There is but one European species of this genus. It isa
small ovate convex shining brown insect, bearing, in life, »
remarkable resemblance to a small seed. 1.L. ulicis, Curt—Lighter or darker pitch-brown,
shining. Facial cones blackish, about one-third longer than
the crown down the middle, nearly parallel-sided to their
narrowly rounded apex. Antenne nearly as long as the
costa, yellow, joints 5 te 10 and the apical half of joint 4,
black. Legs yellow; tibial spines and the claws black. Length, 2-2} mm. Local. Occurs on furze bushes. Annis, West Camel, and Higham Hill, Langport, both in
Somersetshire, in June (Dale); Malvern, September (Blatch). Tt was also taken by Mr. T. V. Wollaston and Dr. F. B
White. Arytena, Scott. (Pl. I. fig. 31.) Head, with the eyes, somewhat broader than the thorax. Crown flat with two punctures in the middle. Facial cones
porrect, shorter than the crown, proadly rounded at the apex. ‘Phorax very feebly convex; crown pronotum and dorsulum
lying nearly in the same plane, the latter shorter than the
crown; pronotum as wide at the sides as in the middle. Blytra of nearly even breadth throughout, somewhat narrowly
rounded at the apex, vein 5 ending in the apex; stigma
wanting. Besides the British species there is but one other species
of this genus recorded for the Palearctic Fauna; this is
‘A, adenocarpi, Low, which has the elytra hyaline with
yellowish veins, but without fuscous markings, and occurs in
the South of France on Adengearpus commutatus, a legu-
minous shrub allied to Spartium and Ulea. 1. A. genistes, Latr. (wlicis, Scott)—Head and thorax
pale green or yellow, with lighter or darker brown markings. PSYLLIDE. 2st

Facial cones broadly rounded at the apex, about one-third
shorter than the crown down the middle. Antenne nearly
as long as the costa, yellow, joints 6 to 10 and the apex of
joints 8 to 5 more or less broadly, black. Elytra whitish
hyaline, a fascous stripe occupying nearly the whole of cell
5, a feeble fuscous stripe in ceil 1 becoming obsolete towards
the base, and a fuscous cloud (originating in a small fascous
spot next the dorsum) in the apex of each of cells 2 to 4;
veins brownish yellow, becoming fuscous at the apex. Abdomen green or yellow, the dorsa! segments more or less
broadly brown in the middle; genital segment in the’ female
blackish. Legs green or yellow, tibial and tarsal spines and
the claws black. Length, 3 mm. Lives on furze-bushes ; locally common. Norwich district. London district (Scott); Bournemouth
(Dale). TRIOZID Zs. Head, with the eyes, as wide as the thorax, eyes globose,
prominent. Facial cones well developed. Foremost ocellus
visible from the front. Antenne about as long as the head
und thorax, joints 1 and 2 terete short and, stout,
remainder filiform, third joint the longest. Vronotum very
short, abont one-third as long as the crown, with lateral
impressions. Dorsulum as long or nearly as long as wide,
somewhat triengularly produced in front, rounded behind. Elytra flat, more or less pointed at the apex, with or without
a colour-pattern ; stigma and stalk of the cubitus wanting; a
short dorsal veinlet in each of the cells 2 to 4. TABLE OF GENERA,

. (2) Upper side of head and thorax pubescent.
. Trichopsylla,
(1) Upper side of head and thorax bare. Trioza. e

rey

 

252 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. Trichopsylla, Thoms. (Pl. IL fig. 52.) ‘The single species contained in this genus was separated
by ©. G. Thomson from the species of Trioza, Forster, mainly
‘on account of its pubescent head and thorax; it is certainly
much further removed in its characters from the remaining
species of Trioza than the latter are from each other. The
shape of the élytra is peculiar, the costa is not evenly carved
throughout, but is suddenly and obliquely deflected near its
apical third, beyond which it is straight or very feebly
concave. 1. 'T. Walkeri. First—Head and thorax lighter or
darker red-brown or yellow-brown with dark red-brown
markings, with a sparse- short fine pale pubescence. Facial
cones abont one-third shorter than the crown down the
middle, rather narrowly rounded at the apex. Antenne
short, about as long as the costa from the base to the point
where it is joined by the subcostal ; yellow, the two basal
joints red-brown, joints 9 and 10 and the apex of joints 5
to 7 narrowly, black. Elytra brown, and, except on the
white parts, closely and irregularly punctured with darker
brown; an irregular suffused white band from the costa to
the dorsum just beyond the apex of the clavus, constricted
and almost interrupted in the middle, and a semi-ovate white
spot next the costa just before the apex; the dorsum narrowly
dark brown between the apex of the clavus and vein 2; veins
concolorons with the disk, Abdomen above lighter or
darker red-brown, connexivam red. Legs brownish yellow,
tibial and tarsal spines and the claws black. Length,
3}-4 mm. Local ; recorded as having been found on 'runws spinosus,
Euonynus curopeus, and Rlamnus, cathartieus. Cotswold district, on Rhwmnus eatharticus. Mickleham,
on Prunus spinosis (Donglas and Scott); London district
(Beaumont) ; Addington, on Ewonymus curopons (Power) ;
Glanvilles Wootton (Dale). PSYLLIDE. 253

Trioza, Furst. (Plate IT. fig. 33.) ‘This is a rather large and well-marked genus distinguished
from the preceding by the want of pubescence on the head
and thorax, and by the shape of the elytra, which have the
costa convex in its apical third. Dr. Puton gives forty-eight species for the Palearctic
Fauna; of these we have thirteen, and it is probable that
several of the others remain to be discovered in this country. ‘They are, on the whole, a very difficult group of insects; the
males in many cases are only to be distinguished with cer-
tainty by their genitalia, and the females of several species,
unless taken in. rop. or bred, are absolutely indistinguishable. Many of the species pass their early stages on herbaceous
plants, on which they cause various malformations. TABLE OF SPECIES. 1. Apes of cell 7 reaching beyond the base of cell 4;
radius sinuate. 2. Apex of cell 7 not reaching so far as the base of cell
4; radius arcuate, with its concavity towards the
costa, or straight. 6. 2, Costa rounded throughout; or if straight in the
middle, then the abdomen beneath not entirely

pale, 3,
Costa straight in its middle third; abdomen beneath
entirely pale. 1, albiventris. 3, No black points on dorsum of elytra, 4,
‘The three veinlets each ending in a black point on the
dorsum, 2, rhamné,

4, Hind margin of the genital plate in the male not pro-
duced into a long horizontal process. 5. Hind margin of the genital plate in the male produced
on each side intoa long horizontal process. Species
lives on Crithmum maritimum, 3. crithmé,

 

254 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. 5. Forceps of the male long, simple. Species lives on
nettles. 4. wrtico. Forceps of the male unequally bilobed at the apex,
the front portion broadly rounded, the | hinder
portion narrow and pointed. Species lives on
Valerianella and Centranthus. 5 centranthi. 6. Greatest width of cell 6 about equal to the least width
of cell 5. | 7. Greatest width of cell 6 about one and a half times as
great as the least width of cell 5. 6. remote. Greatest width of cell 6 three or four timesas great as
the least width of cell 5. 7. galii. 7. Head and thorax pale green or orange-red. 8. Head and thorax neither pale green nor orange-
red. 9. 8. Head and thorax pale green. 8. viridula. Head and thorax orange-red. 9. salicivora. 9. Hind margin of the genital plate in the male
simple. ; 10. Hind margin of the genital plate in the male pro-
duced on each side into a horizontal process. 10. acutipennis. 10, Forceps of the male simple. | ll. Forceps of the male as high as the genital plate, con-
stricted just before their truncate apex, their front
margin produced below the middle into a short
rounded lobe. . 11. munda. 11. Middle portion of the costa nearly straight sdominati
Costa evenly curved throughout, vein 8 running
parallel to the upper branch of the cubital. .
18. chenopodii. 1, @, albiventris, Firsi—Head and thorax varying
froma bone-white to pale red, with markings which vary from
yed-brown to black, Facial cones black, narrowly and

 

 

 

PSYLLIDE. 255

sharply pointed, as long as the crown down the middle. Antenne less than half as long as the costa, black, joints 2 to
4 pale. Elytra hyaline, faintly fumose, the veins but little
darker; costa straight, except in its basal and apical fourths,
radius straight and nearly parallel with the costa in its basal
two-thirds, afterwards sinuate. Abdomen above black or
blackish, beneath pale; genital segment of the male black,
the forceps yellow. Legs brownish yellow, thighs frequently
with a black or picous stripe, front pairs of tarsi blackish. Length, 8 mm. Not uncommon on conifers in winter; its food plant
according to Low is various species of Salix. Norwich district. Cotswold district. Addington, on fir
and birch, in October (Douglas) ; Glanvilles Wootton (Dale). 1. T. rhamni, S:irk—Disk of the head and thorax
blackish, sometimes with a slate-blue bloom. Facial cones
entirely pale, rather blunt, and but little divergent, about
two-thirds as long as the crown down the middle. Antenne
about one-fourth as long as the costa, pale brownish yellow,
joints 5 and 6 dusky at the apex, 9 and 10 black. Elytra
hyaline, their apex blunt ; veins pale yellow, the three veinlets
each ending in a black point on the dorsum, a minute black
spot on the dorsum near the base; radius bisinuate. Abdomen pale, the middle of some of the dorsal segments
dusky ; male genitalia pale, the forceps narrow and simple. Legs sordid yellow, the tibial spines and the claws, black. Length, 2-2} mm. Food-plant Klumnns catharticus ; it also occurs sparingly
on conifers in winter. This species was originally described
by Forster as 7. abicticola from a British specimen sent to
him by Walker under the name of Psylla abictis. Norwich district, Cotswold district. Glanvilles Wootton
(Dale). 8. T. erithmi, F. Ziw—Head and thorax pale, with
blackish markings. Facial cones pale, about two-thirds as

   

 

256 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. long as the crown down the middle. Antenne less than
half as long as the costa, lack ; the three basal joints whitish,
second joint narrowly dusky at the base. Elytra hyaline,
with avery faint brownish tinge; veins prownish. yellow ;
radins in its basal two-thirds nearly straight and gradually
approaching the costa, afterwards deflexed. Abdomen abore
black or blackish, genital plate of the male yellow, its hind
margin produced on each side into a long blunt horizontal
process. Legs pale, thighs sometimes with a dusky stripe,
claws blackish. Length, 2 3 mm. Lives on Crithinui me: a

‘Anstey’s Cove, near Torquay (P. I. Gosse) 5 Portland,
Lulworth (Dale). 4, T. urtice, Lin—Head and thorax bone-white or
yellow, with lighter or darker rust-yellow or red-brown mark-
ings. Facial cones black, narrow and sharply pointed, as
long as the crown down the middle, Antenne less than
halfas long as the costa, black, joints 2 to 4 and the base of
joint 5 white, basal joint blackish. Hlytra hyaline, veins
brownish yellow. Abdomen above brown, the hind margins
of the segments narrowly pale, Male, forceps narrow and
unusually long, distinctly bigher than the genital plate, six
to seven times as high as the width of the base, narrowed
only shortly before the apes, which is black ; side margins of
the genital plate convex behind, Female: lower genital
plate long acute, distinctly longer than broad and nearly
br quite as long as the three preceding segments, Legs
brownish yellow, thighs more or less piceous in the middle,
apex of the tibice blackish, tarsi plack. Length, 24-8 mm. ‘A very variable species, very abundant on nettles. Norwich district, Cotswold district. Glanvilles Wootton

(Dale). 5. T. centranthi, Fall.—Body above black or brown,
a band across the abdomen near the base, and the hind margin

 

PSYLLIDE. 237
of the last dorsal abdominal segment narrowly, snow-ihite. Legs testaceous, thighs more or less piceous. Elytra faintly
fusco-hyaline veins slightly davker, middle piece of the sue
costal vein subequal in length to the costal piece, radial vein
subparallel with the upper cubital for rather more than its
Decl third, Antenne black joints 8 and 4 pure white

orceps of the male with the anterior apical angle bluntly

rounded, and the posterior api i
unded, pical angle produced
triangular tooth. Length, 2} mm. le peed into Hack

On Valcrianella dentata, Bret,
1894 (Gibbs). ”
‘The nymph lives on Cratrenthius ruber i
y ma Cri s ruber, and various speci
of Valerianclla, causing a crowding together of the flowers

and great broadening of the bracts, th i
a latte
and each sheltering a nymph. © Inter Doing refexed

 

Derbyshire, August

6. T. remota, Férst—Head and thorax bone-white or
yellowish white with lighter or darker red-brown markings
Facial cones dusky in the male, about as long as the crown
down the middle, in the female somewhat longer and more
divergent, pale, sometimes blackish at the apex. Antennze
less than half as long as the costa, black, joints 1 to 3 and
the basal portion of joint 4, yellowish. Elytra hyaline with
a very faint fascous tinge, veins brownish yellow; radius
arcuate with its concavity towards the costa, the greatest
Width of cell 6 about one and a half times es great as the
least width of cell 5. Abdomen above blackish, the margins
of the segments more or less broadly reddish yellow. leg
brownish yellow, thighs sometimes with brown stripe tari
a faa st ‘he apes, tibial pins and the claws bask

Tire on eso ost on Confers wine. orwich district, Addington (Douglas) ; Esher
Glanvilles Wootton (Dale). ston (Douglas); Heber (Bowen)

7. T. galii, First.—Head and thorax pitch-black. Facial
cones about one half as long as the crown down the middle. R

258 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. ‘Antenne in the male about one-third, in the female about
one-half as long as the costa, black, joints 8 and 4 white. Blytra hyaline with a very faint fuscous tinge, costa almost
evenly curved throughout, veins brownish yellow; radius
straight or arcuate with its concavity towards the costa, the
greatest width of cell 6 three or four times as great as the
Jeast width of cell 5. Abdomen above black, in life with a
narrow pare white band across the base, hind margins of the
segments narrowly red. Legs white with the thighs pitch-
black, claws blackish, Length, 2-2} mm. Lives on varions species of Galium. Norwich district, Cotswold district. Ireland (Haliday);
Darenth (Power); Glanvilles Wotton, Bude (Dale). 8. T. viridula, Ztt—Body and legs entirely pale green. Facial cones not so long as the crown down the middle. ‘Antenne yellowish white, joint § blackish at the apex,
9 and 10 black. Elytra clear hyaline, veins but little
darker. Male: genital plate with its hind margin produced
on’ each side into a broad triangular tooth. Forceps
subequal in height to the plate, about four times as high
‘as broad at the base, scarcely narrowed to the apex, the
hind margin very feebly convex. Female: lower genital
plate acuminate, distinctly longer than broad, as long or
longer than the two preceding segments together. Length,
3mm. Lives on varions Umbellifere, such as Dancus carota,
Anthriscus sylvestris, and Petroselinum sativum ; also occurs
on Conifers in winter. Lee (Scott) ; Glanvilles Wootton (Dale). 9, T. salicivora, Rew.—Head and thorax orange-red,
abdomen and legs orange-yellow. Facial cones orange-
yellow, not quite so long as the crown down the middle. ‘Antenne white, joints 1 and 2 fuscous at the base, joints 3
‘and 4 narrowly brown at the apex, 8 to 10 black. Elytra

 

<————

 

 

PSYLLIDE. 259

hyaline with a faint brownish tinge, veins but little darker. Tarsi fuscous at the apex, claws black. Balmuto, Fifeshire (Power), one male. According to Soot this species ocours on Salix caprea in
August. 10. T. acutipennis, Z:¢—Head and thorax black. Facial cones about as long as the crown down the middle. Antenne yellowish white, joints 4, 6 and 8 brown at the
apes, 1 and 2, 9 and 10, black. Elytra brownish hyaline,
acute at the apex, veins brownish yellow; radius straight or
but slightly sinuate before the apex. Abdomen above black. Male: genital segment pale brownish yellow ; plate very low,
its hind margin produced on each side into a long horizontal
tooth, which is rounded at the apex and reaches the base of
the forceps. The latter subequal in height to the plate,
about three times as high as broad at the base, gradually
narrowed from the base with a sharp point somewhat curved
towards the front, the front margin produced into a small
tooth below the middle. Female: lower genital plate acumi-
nate, about as long as broad, narrower than the preceding
segment and about two-thirds as long, Length, 2} mm. Lives on Alchemilla rulgaris. London district (Scott). 11. T. munda, First-—Head and thorax yellow or
brownish with dark markings, which are frequently confluent. Facial cones about half as long as the crown down the middle,
very little narrowed on the outer side, scarcely diverging. Antenne about half as long as the costa, yellow, the first
joint, the apex of the eighth, and the last two joints black. Blytra hyaline, veins yellow, their arrangement as in 7.
viridula, Zett. Abdomen greén, hind margins of the seg-
ments pale. Male: genital plate as long as the genital
segment, its hind margin somewhat roundly produced near
the base. Forceps broad somewhat curving towards the front,

 

  

 

260 HEMIPTERA-HOMOPTERA. very unequally bilobed, the front lobe short and rounded
reaching about half their height, the hind lobé acuminate,
constricted just below its obliquely truncate apex. Female:
lower genital plate about as long as the two preceding ventral
segments. Legs yellow or greenish yellow. Length, 2 mm. This species appears to have been sent to Férster by Walker
and Haliday. According to F. Law its food-plant is Knautia
sylvatica. 12, T. abdominalis, Flor.—Head and thorax black, paler
at the sides. Facial cones sharply pointed, about two-thirds
as long as the crown down the middle. Antenne less than
half as long as the costa, white, joints 1, 9 and 10, and the
apical portion of joint 8, black. Elytra simply hyaline, veins
bat little darker, middle portion of the costa nearly straight,
greatest width of cell 6 about equal to the least width of cell
5; radius straight, scarcely visibly curved in its apical third. Abdomen green with only the middle of the basal ventral
segments black, or entively black. Male genitalia green or
sordid yellow, genital plate simple, forceps scarcely so high as
the genital plate, broad at the base, gradually sharply pointed
and having their very narrow black point somewhat curved
towards the front so that their hind margin is feebly convex
and their front edge slightly concave. Legs yellow, thighs
with a black stripe, last tarsal joint brown, the claws black. Length, 2 mm. This species, according to F. Liw, is found on silver fir in
August. It was introduced by Scott, without remark, in his
list of 1882. 18. I. chenopodii, Reut. (Dalei, Scott)—Head and
thorax sordid yellow with pitch-brown markings which are
frequently confluent. Facial cones pitch-black, nearly as long
as the crown down the middle. Antenne less than half asa
Jong as the costa, white, joint 1 and the base of joint 2 pitch-
prown, apical portion of joint 8 and joints 9 and 10 black. 4

_

—— >

—,—_—. PSYLLIDE. 261

Elytra fusco-hyaline, the veins pale brown, costa evenly
curved thronghout, the curve of vein 3 parallel to that of the
upper branch of the cubital. Abdomen above pitch-brown,
margins of the segments narrowly pale. Male: genital plate
simple rather broad at the base, about one-third higher than
wide, forceps simple, about two-thirds as high as the plate. Legs yellow, thighs sometimes with a dark stripe, apex of
the tarsi and the claws black. Length, 2 mm. A coast species living on Atriplex patula and Chenopodium. Isle of Wight, on thrift (J. C. Dale); Abbotsbury,
Hastings (C. W. Dale). PLATE II. Fie. 1, Zettigonia, wing. 1 2. Strongylocephalus, crown, pronotum, and scutellun. » 8. Acocephalus, ” ” ”

. Lupelix, ” ” ”

. Platymetopius, » ” ”

. Graphocrerus, ” wo, ”

. Doratura, ” ” ”

. Paramesus, ” ” ”
Glyptocephalus, ” ” ”

. Athysanus, face.

. Stictocoris, ,,

Deltocephalus, crown, pronotum, and scutellum.

. Allygus, ” ” ”

. Thamnotettiz. ,, ” ”
Limotettix, elytron.

. Cicadula, ”

. Gnathodus, crown, pronotum, and scutellum. 3. Alebra, wing.

. Dicraneura, 4, ‘
: Kybos, « elytron, 6 wing. « Chlorita, 4, ”

2, Lupteryx, wing. » Lyphlocyba, y

» 24, Zygina, a elytron, b wing. : . » 25, Livia, crown, pronotum, and seutellum. | » 26. Rhinocola, vlytron. » 27. Aphalara, 5,

» 28, Psyllopsis, ,, veins

» 29. Peylla, » » @@ a" subcostal, @ basal piece, a
middle piece, a” costal piece; radial; ¢ ¢' ¢” cubital,
¢ the stalk, c’ upper branch, c” lower branch, d stigma. The veins which reach the margin and tho cells are
numbered consecutively. » 30, Livilla, elytron. » BL. Arytena, ”

| » 82. Trichopsylla,

i »: 88, Trioza, ”

|

|

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

i
}