—

 

80 PSYLLIDS. keys; highly developed Q auger; egg-laying insects,
without agamic reproduction or alternation of generations. 4. Psyllids. Legs not prepared for jumping; antennae having at most
6 items, You 6+ before wearing an appendlee that must
Veffect of a 7 article; auger O absent; Insects
offering a complicated alternation of generations: from
Egg laid in autumn by the Q which is always
flightless and fertilized by a G, winged or not, comes out
in the spring an agamous apleric individual (reproducing
without the assistance of a G) founder of a colony
@apterous agames which give agamic individuals
winged, which emigrate either on a plant of the same
species, producing either new fitless agamas
which gives in autumn the and Q, or else directly-
ment these Get Q, either on a plant of a different species,
y_producing “apterous agamas which give themselves
born of the winged agamas, which emigrate to
return in autumn to the first plant space
give birth to the Get Qs. 2. Aphids. 1, F. PSYLLIDS. Ucbersicht der Gattungen und Arten in der Familie der Paylloden, Ver
sarhist, Ver. d. prooss. Rheinl., V, 184

Scott. — Monograph of the British. Species belonging to the Hemeptera-Homoptera,
family Pryllidae, Trans. Ent. Dry. London, 1876. Law. — Zur Systematih der Peylloden, Verh, r001, bot. Gesellscht, Wien, XXVIII, 1879. 8. Legs a Ee the jump; antennas of 9 or 10

   
     

 

 

 

HT
remote
1, Upper wing & rib starting from its base not emitting
only two branches; point of small shortened veins

cies at its terminal edge. 2. Upper wing has rib starting from its base emitting
three branches; three small shortened ribs 4 sound

terminal edge. 4. Triosins. IL, Payllopste Fraztnt, — UL. Paylla Foerstert, — 1. Threesome

 

 

PSYLLIDS. 81

2. Head without frontal cones. 3. Head with two cone-shaped frontal eminences. 8. Psyllines. 3. Eyes not protruding above the level of the head. 1. Livines. Protruding eyes above the level of the head. 2. Aphalarins. 1, Liviines. Second article of the antennae very swollen and much
“longer than 1* and 3. 1, Livia. 1. G. LIVIA Latreille. Reddish brown; yellowish abdomen and legs; wings
@a pale yellowish brown; long. :2.5mm. -L; juncorum. 1, L. jancorum Latr. — On the jones, June-August, the larva
Completely reshaping the inflorescence and making it
look like & an agglomeration of red buds

very; on the Pines in the spring; vs.

2. Aphalarines. ‘Right against the fore edge of the upper wing, from
from the milicu there is an almost longitudinal rib,
parallel ‘4 this edge. 4. Risocous. This rib is missing. 2. Armatana. 1. G. RHINOCOLA Forster. Vertex not separated from the forehead by a rim; green body or
yellowish; yellowish upper wings; long. : 1mm. R. Ericae. 1. R.Bricae Curtis. — On the heather, June-August, CC. 2. G. APHALARA Forster. Green body; nearly colorless upper wings, no
punctate, has veins partly lined with ohscur;
long. : 2mm. A. nervous. i, A. nervosa Forster. — On Yarrow, June-

August, AC. 3. Psyllines. 1 From the posterior branch of the bifurcation of the rib
basilar of the upper wing is born a rib almost
right, At a distance from this bifurcation at least
equal to the length of the part of the anterior branch
higher between the bifurcation and the division of
this branch into two branches. 1. Psvunorsis. mt

82 PSYLLIDS. From the posterior branch of the bifurcation of the neryure
basilar of the upper wing is born a notable rib-
curved, at a distance from this bifuration more
shorter than the length of the part of the anterior branch
higher between the bifurcation and the division of
this branch into two branches. 2. 2. Domed back; upper wing offering against its fore edge
from the middle a longer longitudinal rib
or less long and almost parallel to this edge. 2, Psruta. flattened back; upper wing devoid of long vein
tudinale against its anterior edge. 3. Anarrara. 1. G. PSYLLOPSIS Léw. Yellowish body, without black spots; upper wings
tranparent, slightly darkened at their end,
their yellowish veins; long. : 3mm. P. fraxinicola. Body of a yellow bean, variegated with black; upper wings
transparent, offering a blackish border & their
extremity, their dark veins & extremity; long. :
2.5mm. P. Fraxini. 1, P. fraxicols Forster. — On the Ash, June-Sept., AC. 2. P. Fraxini Linn. — Like the previous one, June-Sept., C.

2. G. PSYLLA Geoffroy. 1. Upper wings showing no black spots. 2
Upper wings showing a black spot towards the middle of
their posterior edge; green color, more or less

mixed with yellow or reddish; long. : 2mm. P. salicicola. 2. Tibias without black spot at the base. 3. All the shins showing a small black spot outside &
the base; almost all the veins of the upper wings-
res brown or blackish; greenish color with the
thorax more or less reddish and the abdomen more
obscure; long. : G3, Q 4mm. P.Alni. 3. Well-developed frontal cones, at least as long as
the vertex; upper wings have rib located right against
their anterior hord quite distinct from this edge and limiting
between it and this a long and narrow triangular space,
usually lightly colored. 4. Very short frontal cones, at most as long as the
Vertex; upper wings have rib located right against
lour anterior edge 4 barely distinct from this edge and
almost confused with him. 8. PSYLLIDS. 83

. More or less pointed and more elongated frontal cones,
not concave at outer edge, gradually tapering

and equally from their base. 5. Blunt frontal cones, shorter, coneaves at the edge
external, more strongly narrowed from the base to the middle
only middle & end. has.

. Antennae only slightly exceeding the base of the lower wings.
upper wings: very traasparent upper wings, with ner-
thin eyes; greenish or yellowish coloring; long. :

CO 2.9 2.5mm. P. peregrina. Antennae extending far beyond the base of the lower wings.
higher; wings less transparent, yellowish, a
stronger veins. 6

. Very long and very pointed frontal cones, covered with
fur; coloration of a pale yellow with handes
reddish on the thorax and the abdomen of a light green;
long. : 2.5mm. P. Hippophae. Frontal cones moderately long, less pointed, without
fur; yellowish or greenish coloration with bands
Tougedtres on the thorax; long. : 2.5mm. P. ambigua.

. Antennae extending beyond metasternum; upper wings 4
pale ribs; green, reddish or brown color
be; long. : 2.5mm. P.Mali. Antennae barely reaching or ola the base of the

  

lower wings; upper wings with dark veins;
reddish or brownish, dark coloration; long. : G2,
Q 3mm. P. nigita.
. Upper adults having their greatest width apras
the middle; greenish or yellowish coloring including
upper wing neryura and legs; lon,
CO 25.0 4mm. P. Foersteri. Upper wings having their greatest width before the
middle; orange or reddish color with bands
dark on mesonotum; upper wing veins
yellow laughter and legs; long. : 2mm. P.Spartii,

 

   

 

 

1. BP. peregrina Forster, crafaegicola Flor. — On Vaubé-

  

pine, mafjuin, AC. 2. P, MaliForster. — On various trees, especially on the

Plum tree, June-August, AC. 8. P. Foersteri Flor, Alni Forster. — On the Alder, continued

Oct., CC. 4. B. Alni Linn., Heydeni Forster. - Like the previous one,

June-August, AR. 5. P. Hippophaes Forster. —-Litt., in the dunes on

Hippophae rhamnoides, June-Sept., C.

——

84 PSYLLIDS. 6, P. nigrita Zetterst., Pinefi Flor. — On the ‘Pines, march-
Nov., AC. 7. P. salicieola Forster. — On the Willows, June-Sept, C.

8. P. ambigua Forster, stenolabis Low. — Like the previous
tooth, July-Sept., AC. 9. P. Spartii Guér., sparliophila Forster. — On the Genets
in arid places, May-Jul., AC. 8. G. ARYTAINA Forster. Green, yellow or red body with five longitudinal lines

dark behind mesonotum; upper wings

transparent, offering a dark longitudinal band

median on their terminal half and three more

dark bands more or less reunited, close to their

posterior edge; long. : 8mm. 'HAS. Genistae. 1. A. Gonistae Latr., Ulicis Curtis, Spartii Hartig. - On
the Genets, May-August, CC. 4, Lriovines. ‘Head offering two frontal eminences in the shape of an edne,
1. Tniozs,

 

 

   

1. G. TRIOZA Forster. 1. Deep black coloration with melathorax and
sometimes the back of the abdomen reddish; wings, shins and
yellowish tarsi; 3¢ article of the antennae blane; long. :

2mm. : 7. velutina. Coloring more or less clear and varied; colorless wings. 2. 2. Antennae black with the first two segments of a brown
orange and the 3¢ yellow; reddish coloring with
yellowish hands; long. :2 mm. 7. remot. Antennae black with 2nd and 3rd segments white; colo-
yellowish ration, greenish on abdomen, with
branes; long. : 2mm. T.Urticae. 1, T, yelutina Forster. — On the Cailletait, aont-sept.,
Lit., in the dunes, C.; A. elsewhere. 2. T. remota Forster, haematodes Forster. — On the Pines,

” Feb-Mar, AC. 8. T. Urtiosis Linn. — On the Nettles, May-Oct., CC. 2. F, APHIDIDE. Aphids, Boomluizen. — Monographie der Familien der Pflansentauee. Aachen, 1843,
Die Pfansentause, Aphiden. Nuremberg, 1857,

 

 

  

APHIDIDES. 85

   

Passorini, — Aphididae Italyaohueusque observatae, Archiv. per la Zoolog., 11,

Buckton, — Monograph of the British; Aphids. London, 187683,
Liechtenstein. — Lee Aphids, Monographie des Aphidiens, Montpellier, 1885. Td, = Monograph of Poplar Aphids. Montpellier, 1886,

Apterous and winged agamic individuals giving birth to
little living things that come out when you press the abdo-
men; when the antennae have 5 articles, the 5: is not
terminated by bristles and there are never 8 single articulates-
is lying. you. 1. Aphidins. Apterous and winged agamic individuals laying eggs;
very short and thick antennae, of 5 articles, the 5¢ ter-
undermined by bristles, sometimes of only 8 articles. 5 2. Phylloxerines. 1. Aphidins,

1. Upper wings at 3° diagonal rib twice four-
chue;-5* dorsal arch of 'abdomen offering' from each
on the side a more or less developed appendix or cornicle
secreting a protective liquid; antennas of 6 articles,
the 6 offering a more or less developed appendix;

‘when the Insect is underground, there is apparently no
only one article at the tarsi; exceptionally
body with foliate appendages; gendered individuals
well developed and provided with a rostrum; insects do
never producing plant growths. 2. Upper wings at 3° diagonal rib no or -once
forked; abdomen devoid of cornicles; when the
antennae which are always short, have 6 articles, the 6+
offer. a very appendix. short; when the insect is
underground, there are two clearly visible sections- at the
tarsi; dwarf sex individuals and. without rostrum, leG'sans
wings; Insects living in tight societies. 3

2 Cornicles very little developed, hardly longer than
broad, otherwise antennae: hairy or ornate winged individuals
of, hairs on the back; 6 article of the antennas finished on
general by a short appendage, not tapering, ne, making
not the effect of a 7 article and almost always more
shorter than the article; never, appendix in the form of
tail above the anus; Often living insects
isolated and always on woody plants when they are not
are not underground. 1. Lachnians. Crows well developed, almost always noticeable-
ment longer than wide; antennas no. hairy;
individual sane batteries. poila sutt lo dos, G+ articlo des
antennae terminated by a slender appendage, effecting

 

 

   
 

86 APHIDIDS. of a % article, usually much longer than Var-
tickle; almost always a tail-like appendage
above the anus; Insects living in close societies,
generally on herbaceous plants and never on
roots. 2. Aphids. 8. Upper wingsa Diagonal forked rib;Tnectes
producing hairless galls, otherwise living on
herbaceous plants or on the roots.
. 8. Pemphigians. Upper wings have 8* diagonal unforked vein;
Insects that do not produce galls, otherwise these galls
yelues, always living on woody plants and
Never on the roots. 4, Schizoneurians. 1. Lachnians,

   

1. Insects not living on the roots, well-developed eyes
lopped; tarsi do? distinct articles; individuals
Iridescent wings. ay

Insects living on the roots, & very small eyes; tar-
its very elongated, of a distinct soul article, the first
being excessively short; winged individuals unknown. 3. Tnama. 2 Antennae gudre longer than the t2te and the thorax reu
nis, & 6* article ending with an appendix at most also
long than half of this article. not

Antennae usually noticeably longer than the
tote and thorax together, & 6* article ending with a
appendix at least & about as long as this article
key; hairy tubercles on the back or appendages
leafy on the sides of the body. 6.