XXII. Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymously
catalog of the species Psylla, palaearctic regions. Written by Dr. Karel Sule,
Ostrava - Michdlkovice, Moravia. With 2 holes with 6 shapes. (Submitted on 19 November 1909). The present work poses the task of feSen {tif questions related to
of the genus Psylla in the Palaearctic region, namely:

I. General valuation of characteristics to be taken into account in determining
differences ’of species. IJ. Compilation of known types of palaearctic region in synoptic
table for the purpose of overview and snazSiho uréenf. Ill. Extract and assemble the species listed in the synoptic table
in a synonymous catalog. The manuscript and tables of all kinds of families served as my basis
Psylla, palaearctic areas, arranged on the one hand according to their own,
jedoak according to the collection of F. Lorwova, breeders a large majority of typical
exempldri, now in the c. k. Court Museum in Vienna, which happened to me
the kind courtesy of the custodian of the same museum, Mr. A. Hanpuiscue,
for ¢ eZ I hereby express my thanks to him. I, VSeobeené appreciations of species characters. Calculate the external morphological features needed to determine
mum compiled by Fiorem 61., Meyer-Dusr 71., Lozwem 61.-76. -
The concept of the characters and the method of definition of the second named authors are established
However, the days are no longer sustainable for the general progress of science and it was necessary

Véstnik krdl. éeské spol. science. Tiida II. and

2 XXII. Dr. Karel Sulc:

looking for signs of new microscope when old, single magnifying glass
found turned out to be unreliable visions, and vibec unsuitable
for precise differentiation. - Ddale needs to reconcile the old,
Sina careless and superficial nomenclature with new findings in the
general insect morphology; the main thing is the concept of Zilnatina kfidel,
the end of the body and its private. - In its descriptive look
(scheme), according to which I was frustrated during my studies, I will compare the nomenclature
modern with the name starSim, principal Lorw, to homology
with the differences better explained, and both descriptions ¢ tenari the same accessible
permanent; according to the principles mentioned in this work, I have already described several types
Psylls pictures, especially on the will of him, he understands and compares
I do not point out. (Sutc 04, 07, 07 bis, 08, 09.) ;

Comparative description scheme. Head. - The scalp is flat, the back of the back is ordinary
at 0 ° 06 mm uniformly cut, unseen in itself
monotonous appearance and the size ratio of the wall differences
sign; we use only its lengths in the middle of Cadre (in the back from the
Siho point, up to the stted nephew's eye in front), meéfici from the general
most 0:20 mm, compared to the length of the front cone, - Pdrova
simple eye sits in the back corners of the scalp, neuter
the eye at the anterior end ¢ éary stredni; this last is always seen
when viewed from the mountain and its seat is unchangeable, though simple

pdrova hind father, the first defects do not have to sit in the back corners (as

is the usual case), but they can be moved quite a bit to
prefabricated interior; however, this case is very rare so that from nf
so far for the bodies of differential-diagnostic many o ¢ ekavati can not, but
yet they must record the will to compare with the species perhaps in the future
found.— O ¢ even folded in position and size do not change. -
Sensors: are monotonic filamentous, desiti ¢ tennd; unit size
Glanks cannot be used as a difference, as individual variability
in this direction there is a mark; the absolute length of the tentacles would be good
difference, but even that is very large from O90 to 130 mm,
that the differences are not so large as to make it possible to
trebiti; in addition, individual variability is a sign that has a range
at 0 ° 20 mm (i.e. 20—30 ° /,), The number certainly
high; only in dyou nagich is second in the length of the tentacles a degree of
exceeded exceeded, that is Ps. alni L. and Foerstert Fror, where he achieves
antenna length 5–4 mm; at a total length of 3 ° mm, reach

|

 

Introduction to the study, synoptick4 table and synonymous catalog of species of the genus Psylla 3

hence this until the end of compound compounds. - Location of tentacles-for Ziva is:
stretched to the front and a slight ‘curved upward, while
observed tremors move up and down; the posthumous position is
the same location for living. - The body cones are conical
the steps of the seats {under the holes of the tentacles are usually as long as
stredni Gira temene,: t. j. 0 ° 20 mm, but may be shorter in the most
Their cases are delSi; length is also their most common character,
not so shape and direction; they can be more or less divergent, often and not
symmetrically: so that one cone goes straight, the species then considerable on
the left takes refuge in one and the same individual; it's the same for me
even with the shape, even here among individuals almost, from one nest ”we find
deviations: either the sides are straight; or less or less;
starSi autofi on this character as supposedly cost a lot, but me
whether less valuable for the detected variability. - K1ypa-
eus md in the form of half a pear, turned with the narrow end to the back,
does not provide any differential diagnostic features. Thorax. - Pro-, meso-, metathorax do not provide wall di-
species deviations, which we could point to as
safety sign, they are in the construction and proportions of individual parts (for,
meso-, metascutum, acro-, pro- meso-, metapteron, various leaves, thorns,
pleura, etc.) completely monotonous. The wing is one of the few Psyll organs that provides
abundant good, steadfast and therefore secure characters; primarily
we take into account the dimensions and shape of the wing; the length of the wing varies
significant individual, and is often very different uO and dS of the same kind;
the ratio of length to Sifce and individuals of one species would have become; length
we measure the wings from the key to the top; colist between 1-3 ° 5 mm; pfi-
if we give the length of the caliper 05 mm, we will receive in the largest amount
the exact length of the whole animal from the front end to the end of
wings; sitka kridla hyva the largest line led by field Cw 1
perpendicular to the front edge and measures ordinary 1 mm. - What a shape,
Let's see if the leading edge of the back is parallel, but
we can turn our observations only to C4st in front: from
the beginning of the outer half (+ Se, to the end of the stigmal region, in the back:
to A2 and Z inclusive internal {half of cell region. Cw 1; is this
we call the middle Gasti wings and the ordinary is the same as the middle tiretina
full length; Gast wings on the way out are the end, the interior is in the interior
one wing. - The top of the wing is the furthest point of the periphery of the end, ma
location very stable, most often in the middle of the cell. Rs, only in fid-
in cases of marginal vinserci M7 1+ 2, (Ps. ledi), or in the region

i =

4 XXII. Dr. Karel Sule:

cell. M1- + 2 (Ps. fusca). - The arc that forms the end is just
rarely when symmetrically in its halves, its predet
half much more stretched than the back, so geometrically woven
o vétSim radius; This ratio of the two semi-arches to each other
is a good stewardess. - I'm only in one end of the kifdl
belongs to the burnt utata (viburnt). - Zilky. —Vocabulary so far
used by Lorw and Fior; the following Zilks divorced:
62) (FIG. 3.) front region from a to d was called costa, from d
po »postcosta; Zilka cd radius; ef petiolus cubits; fg ramus anterior
cubiti; fh ramus posterior cubiti; hm, hl, gt, gk, erste, zwette, dritte,
four forks; Later, Lozw 76 added other names, majic {za uéel
more detailed designation of individual parts of the cost and sub-costs of the Lozw,
weirs were now named after the names (Lozwovyc) belonging to them
pole, ie margo cell. discoidalis cubitalis, etc., or pars discordalis,
cubitalis costae etc., similar to pars rad. subcostae etc. - Pole jeduo-
was named as follows: (Fig. 3.) l = front basin (cell. bass. anterior), 2 — posterior basal (eell. bass. posterior), 3 - radial
(cell. radialis), 4 - discoidal (cell. discoidalis), 5-cubital (cell. cubitalis), 6— = first extreme (cell. margumalis I. ), 7 — second edge
cell. marginal ID. ), 8 = stigma, 9 = clavus. It is common knowledge that Comstocx-NeepHam has succeeded
to introduce the hitherto chaotic Zilnatina insect puffs to the uniform type;
they knew that the zilks formed along the larvae feeding on the nurseries
kiidlo; In a comparative study, they came to the conclusion that the
The number, branching and story of nutritious trachea in all insects was one,
only with the phylogenetic resolution of insects, changes 1 occurred in the course
both branches and poets (reduction or even change), € {mzZ acquired Zilnatina
on Snilio ruznotvarého yzhledu. Constock's wing tracheization
scheme of works with beer two tribes; to the anterior mesothoracal
kiidla predui strain trachealn {penetrated by the stigma of the original mesothora-
kdlniho (on the prothorax the insect stigma is not based4 vibec), but
Gastro to prothorax is a secondary migratory, a species of stigma pt-
aquatic metathoracal, which again often migrates to mesothorax
(matathorax then finds a substitute in the stigma of IJ. abdominudlmho ¢ élanku
here pastry); the anterior trunk entered the metathoracid cell again
ze stigma (pivodné) metathorakalniho, zadnf {ze stigma I. briSniho;
these strains were breeders of separate airways (this is still the case)
outside the Plecopter), but they can merge (on pi. in Hemipter a
you in our special case in Psyll) in the trachea only t. trachea
basalis transversalis, which connects the two stigmas at the anterior lobe

ii i ie

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of drnhi of the genus Psylla. 5

thoracic, metathoracic posterior stigma and first abdominal
nalni; the front trunk is called costo-radidnn rear trunk cubito-andlni;
the first harvest & again 1. z kosta (costa), znatka C, ¢ i zilky extreme,
is unbranched; 2. subcosts (swbcosta), znatka Se, zilka prikrajni,
is there a forked length in Sc? and Sc2, 3rd radius mark
R.
F1, and radia sector (Rii), radno branch; Rs
longer in two branches, signs R2 - + - 3, RZ - + - 5 and these again each
in two branches, the signs R2, R3, R4, R5, so that they reach the edge of the
five fresh branches at the root of one branch of the radius, namely: RJ,
R2, R3, R4, R2, 4th media (brand) M, Zilka medium, divider
in the next direction to the edge twice dichotomously; first ranges
my name is M1 +2, MS4 + -4, specific types M1, M2, M3, M4, weir
they are growing already with their ends of the edge. The tribe cubito-andlni sklid & se z 1.
cubite (cubsétus) brand Cu, zilka elbow, lengths quite early
in Cul and Cu2, which are no longer the last and the final of the first 2,
3. second and 4. tie vétve andlni (analis), znatka A1, A2, A3, Zilky
ritni (KuapAtex translation: hibetnf). The field marks Comstock according to Zilek making up his front
border. From Hemipter studied Comsrocx gn. Cicada and due to the right
submitted these hypothetical schemas to these regular fixed changes,
which have acquired specific values ​​for this genus:

costalnt trachea very long; subcostalnt also developed,
very long, but at the end of it & Stepend, just simple; 7 weak
developed and it is still at its youngest stage, later disappears completely, £ 2, F3,
R4, R5, developed only at the young stage, in adult nymphs R4 and Rd
merge into a single R4 - + - 5, so R appears to be reduced overall in three
branch Zilka R2, R3, and R4 + -5; media is typical, concrete ¢ tyr-
branch; cubitus typically, bivalve; analis I. merges with cubitus on
marked distance, analis I. and ILI. are also connected at the base. -
The most important deviations from the primitive type are two changes here:
1. fusion of analis I. with cubite, 2. reduction #, already in the state of lar-
country. - We offer our Zilek adults only
Cready with Zilky adult Psylly (which is known li8i), but only
homologisace Zilek Psylly se schema ptvodnim, hypothetickým, ve
sense of Comsrocx, we will take immediate action to bring them to the
vagina of adult larvae and true hatchery Psyllid;
The additional ratios of the wing tracheization in the larvae
and young individuals Cicad. Glee? wim Alayh + 1 ALE Dry Karel, Sales

.., U.adult, larvae 'Aphalara calthae L. I found the conditions these *
transversal .. basdlni trachea ’is developed ;. costdlni tr. is very
short; mé-s tr; subcoated. long. common tribe; radidlné tr. vaniké
a short distance behind the tribe costo-subkostdalnim completely ’separate, and branches
only once, dichotomously; it is not possible with such a reduced state
determine which of the original five kmentt & obliterates and which
behaved; .to the simplicity of the - we know. vétey predni za Ai, vétev
rear for Rs; this turns backwards when the edge of the wing is reached
merges with M. - Media se znatné-svym, jinak-. completely independent
place of origin - from the formation of CSe and FR by moving to the back,
zacind about half length: transversalnt trachee, after a short pr-
run. example, the close part of his tribe before the dichotomous
by branching to Cu, ¢ imZ: it is already indicated the future syarenf of these Zilek;
they only lasted dichotomously in Mi + 2, and M3 + 4, these. branches
continue in M1, M2, MS5, and M4 no longer; both-end of final tra-
chei, I reach from the edge and turn to the front, ¢ emzZ, as already
veno Mi + 2 splyvi.s Rs, M3 - +. 4, s M1 + 2. - Cubitus has crushes
common tribe with Ai, goes exactly along (in front of him) the future syu
klavalntfho and nedéli; reaches at the edge and at the end of Cu2.— Analis 2
has a common strain with Cu- + AJ, no longer in the next
chotomically and at the end of the syym it reaches at the very edge Cu2,. where it ends ¢
also Al, - Analis 3 I am. did not meet. (See table :)

In Ps. Foersteri Fuor (true hatched adult) and u ee
urticae (adult larvae and true hatched adult) I found the ratio
same as those in the adult larva Aph. calthae. (See table.). In adult old Psylly (see table) with well-dried wings and veins
We find the following ratios: Ca Se are indistinguishable welded into one
the only Zilka costo-subcost, C - +. this Zitka is second to all. genus Psylla developed as a strong, more or less movable arch, forming the anterior
kraj ynitfni poloviny kifdla, koné {nahat na potatku-stigma znatelaym
at the beginning of the Holy One (nodal furrow Comsrocr),
however absent here. - The front stigmaloi region is made up of mere
fattening, which is not the basis of Zddná trachee. - F is in the first
thirds of the length of the curl indistinguishable. saints with the same long dilemma
M and Cu are one part denoted R - + - M + Cu, then there is a piece
free &, then climbs in R1, Rs; R1 goes towards the end of C + Se,
where it forms a rear boundary stigma; in the procession, stigma. is. bud. zeela. separate vyyinut, or éasto .ztrakyou, autonomy. a to éasteéné, nebo. completely by, that stigma misto blanitym, stava ..
with goat and merges with / ¢ 1 and the leading edge of the stigma. ‘K me-»,

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymously catalog of the second genus Psylla. 7

recognized; The resulting stigma stigma is the same
blancite stigma; from the end of C + Se goes Al daéle neiprve
in a fairly noticeable distance from the front edge, but then this
stora stale uZ {, az goes own in the front region itself, before it matures
to the marginal end As, where the horse; Then there is a stigma
defining the distance to the story of Zilka # 1 from the front,
stigmal edge; definitive fusion of Al with the leading edge found
for the most part to be far away, and above the rear of the outer quarter or tie-
ts Hs, but it can move much closer, even to the very beginning
stigmal region (end of C + Sc) so that it is neither a diaphragm nor a goat--
stigma, even thickened, the edge stigmalni + - stigma + / 21 then forms
the only thin Zilka as n. pr. in Ps. fusca; in those ptipadas where
did not progress fusion so far centripetal, stiffly stigma
short, as in e.g. in Psylla cytisi Puron. - Rs is always developed and
the assembly is typically unbranched; it is quite parallel to the leading edge
to the edge of the end of the garden, its middle Gast is mild to the front
proinuta; according to its size we determine the species variable length
R1 and stigma, speaking, that these horses on pi. over the outer edge
tiny, or over half the length As. - Media when she left R + - M + Cu
still a bit of welds with Cu, the sign M - + - Cu (petiolus cu-
biti autorum, Stiel), then only definitive, and Stépi se
you Mi + 2aM34 + 4; dal8iho Stépeni Mi + 2 in M1 and M2, then
M3 + 4y M3 and M4, no longer; the ends of both final branches are reversed
to the front, the first merges with the end of As, the second goes tight to the first. - The relative lengths of M + Cu and F uiZivd are considered to be one of the main ones
differences between subf. Psyllinae, where M + Cu is known to be shorter than R
and subf. Aphalarinae and Liviinae, where both of these compartments are the same length,
or is M + Cw known as delSi than R. - Cubitus in the first year
length is, as already mentioned, welded with R- + Mvyvy R + M + Cu, in
the part following the known shorts in M ​​- ++ Cu, gave a separate and
particular typically dichotomously separated in CuI and Cu2; both of these horses
branches reach from the edge and bend along it a piece to the front. -
Analis 1 is very carefully developed, it goes right along its key,
which rides in the trailing edge of the joint; along the trachee this does not form
will never get pregnant and will soon get lost in older adults. - Analysis 2
goes along and near the trailing edge and the end at the end of §vu klavdlnfho;
the vuvec does not branch out, along it the Zilka silads form in adult; Honor
blanks between A2 (cell. A2) bends to the plane of the bow at the bottom and ct so
narrowly like a stegma. AND

The story of Zylnatina's anterior wings of the genus Psylla

8 _ XXII Dr. Karel Sule

visible, we just find deviations that are either abnormalities,
or dajf to be interpreted as reminiscence of atavistic, for example. as is. there are other splits MZ- + 2, or M38 - + - 4 in Mi and M2, respectively
in M3 and M4. The relative length of each Zilek can only be taken into account in the
cases. The color Zilek is sometimes very typical and stable, sometimes changeable;
it must be respected by the sciences, but with regard to its value
views in that species; often zilky are only pale, but hardly
be intense colored their keel, which we call Zebra. Blanka kfidel is either fine or goat-like in appearance. -
It shall not be of color, and here we are talking about an ore blank, or it is
yellowed, zakourend, fluently, or only in certain districts, or
koneéné appears on her tape, or bordered spots, colors and az
cerebrospinal fluid; these conditions are cast in detail in each species, and
they are very important for determining the species, as they are already excellent as 1
easily visible at low magnification. - They are a very important sign
small spines, urite, common in a very permanent way in the individual
second distributed; we divide spines and spiny areas
upper, located on the upper side of the wing, and lower, umf {sténé
on the underside of the wing; the area of ​​both does not have to, but disappears to cover;
barbs stand in ordinary squares and oblique squares at 0 ° 01—0: 02 mm
apart; if they stand denser, for example at 0: 002 mm, it appears at approx. 150
zvétSen {(Retcuert oc. IV., Vol. 4) jig just like tiny aunts
blanks. - The spines are most often fine, sharp, rarely buttoned
(fasciata, as the only case); if we want to examine their shape, we must
to translate and observe the bend; thorns can spill out one
the field is zipped, or they omit individual parts of them, as on
pir. internal corner, or corner of some field; barbed surfaces can be
Shape completely or approximately similar to flat4am polf, or turn
in some places inconspicuous uzi, most often above the peaks of M and Cul;
other times I approach the thorns close to Zilki, elsewhere I miss along
zilek, here uZSi, here SirSi sharp-edged stripes. - Bottom thorns majf
about such a distribution as the surface spines, or have an independent from
nich rozloh i vetsi, i menS {; they tend to be smaller and more pronounced to eat
deeper position of the microscope, for which it is necessary to use the following systems:
optically stronger (Reicuzrr 8a obj., 40c. ); the area of ​​the curler is simultaneous
the present surface and bottom barbed surfaces appear at
smaller animals (obj. 4, oc. 2) twice as dense te ¢ ékovand as
surface only with surface spines, and only a detailed analysis,

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of species of the genus Psyla. 9

and when you grow bigger, we often decide whether one
only on a dense teak area, or if there is an appearance of dense tattooing
optical summation of surface and bottom spines. I recognize as a separate variety of bottom bones
marginal thorns, which are located at the edge common in the cell. Rs, Mi + 2, and Cul; not yet, only some of the others are in the cell. R1; groups of these thorns are as wide as the sagging areas
surface, or uZ8i, usually reach half the cell. M1 +2,
sometimes they are VyS8Si, sometimes Ssirsi; The form of these thorns used to be the game Skovita,
on the whole, more than the top or bottom, the colors are {per
éasté pro silj§ {intensive chitinisation; sit on Wide Bass and mix
ruji na ven. The description of the barbed surfaces, ie the arrangement of the barb, I exhaust completely,
because they are excellent, they have become quite individual
variability subject to species characteristics (with the exception of a few faint species,
as Ps. little ScHuispsercer, visci Curtis, where there is an individual
reliability of signs4). The shape and description of the size of the individual wing fields of each
kind of for the tedious monotony we do not take into account. - The only one
Stigma Cini Gesture exception and we have written about it enough
in criticism 1. The rear rudder does not provide any rear differences. The legs do not provide a completely rear practically usable second
difference in length, shape or color (last)
with the exception of Ps. alni, where it is strong at the base of all shins is excellent
blackhead spot). Butt other than the final cells / OQs and OQs, which
We will discuss closer advisers in more detail, it does not provide any plastic,
species differences; only colored sometimes, and only very rarely,
it can be a good or even inconspicuous sign (abdominalis). 3S End of body. - Article IX. vol. genital segment
it is opened up to the back and pulled out in the form of an elephant; open
rem excellent penis with sex output; the edges of the cable are flat
horizontal; on the edge of the back seat {copulation tongs, on the front
Supinovity. Cable X., fused with circular XI cable XI., Carrying
anus; proto nek lanek X., XI. let's call the pressure with the anus
andlnim; Glanek XII. Hemipter is no longer embryo - based,. disappeared completely (Hrymons). The Gegity segment is the second most compliant, in particular:

10 XXUL. Dr. Karel Sule:

almost straight, bounded in the back by an even arc, only at
Ps. breviantennata is pulled down in the back in a spherical hump. The penis does not provide general generic distinctive features and does not describe
therefore special for each species; consists of two thin parts
which are articulated at half length and fold together.
nuty; if they are open, they often have their free end, glued
give the impression of a tooth on the dome of the forceps, or
short thesis. The pinnacles are pairsy, sitting on the back edge of the
IX. pressure, each branch is 0 ° 16 mm high and 0:05 to 0 ° 09 mm
Wide, thin, at the base of the articular moving, classy, ​​or v & elijak in front
even in the back ohautd, straight, or arcuate strong inside? bent, bud
smooth, or with pre-machined lobed lobes, ending
in the most rare cases blunt (dreviantennata), but most often with different
shaped teeth, the form of which is very cold and for each species very
distinguished (they are either sharp or blunt, heart, or long triangular
nikovitové, Zabkovité, chlatovité, lanceolate, to the front or even to the back
robbed); I describe myself as a sign specifically for each species
in detail; they have not yet been used for this title; list zaéina. ordinary as it seems to us when viewed from the side, then
The description is completed when viewed from above, and finally the description follows
when viewed from behind, when c ¢ emz padd on the weight form zeyn {ho and in
contour, which seems very characteristic. - Embryological
Heyrmons research has shown that genapophysy hemipter
claws as bumps in the middle of the posterior margin of sternum IX. and according to the mines of the same author, this country does not have
with the district from which the abdominal insect limbs are based,
not to mention that these, in addition to the abdominal sternitus on the sternites
other (II-XI) and hemiptera in the larval state do not come,
even in embryos they are not established; we must therefore make these principles valid for
vAll hemipters, valid for Psylly, too
on the larvae of our Palaearctic Psyll to merge the latter
élanku in one Gast, where segmentation disappears, so-called. telson, rozluStiti
neda; perhaps it is or would be more appropriate material for this body
from the Australian region, where the observed Frocecarrovyce have Psylly
and umbilical cord stage, but ceremonies and descriptions have not yet been published
such that we may judge the safe according to them, and unfortunately for me
Australian material was not available. .

Gg Analni segment (that is, X., with him XI. and
anus) appears on the side as primd Supina, often in the back

 

Uyod to study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of species of the genus Psylla {{)

inclined and the end of its covering the end of the pliers; there are very forms
monotonous, some dilesity, generic distinctive features does not provide
and describes the completeness. Anus, which cannot even be conquered, does not provide empty
the character by which we could infer species diversity,
unlike the QQ anus, the length of which is in some cases less pronounced
and familiar species differences. © Connected is two, often very long
élunovitymi ¢ lanky (half ¢ lunu), of which doleni VIII. previous
apparat genitalnimu, and therefore is appointed genitalnim, hofenf X.
named andalnim, has a closed anus and around it
thicker chitinized circle, with holes waxy Zlaz, separated distinct
weaker chitinized soil from its own cable X., which (circle
with Zl4zami) sluS {consider Article XI. - Anus looks like
Anteroposterior stern, without flaps (upper and lower) -
- Analni é ¢ lanek can be divided into Cast basdlni, SirSi section
around the anus and the beak, often the same, who lives at his root more
less suddenly zizend, which we successfully observe when viewed from above
on a pricked individual; looking to the side, peculiar to the praepardt
in glycerin assembled, more or less is evident in front of the beak
rise on the upper contour, which we name the hump ;. otherwise I will see
kyl, or the upper contour of the smooth ,. with a series of fine sharp
hairs, or in rare cases in large growths provided
(sharp as saw teeth at Ps. fusca, hrbolkovitymi in Ps. Foerstert);
the end of the beak has an axis either straight or slightly upwards (at its-:
diné Ps. Hartig's fins are bent down); own finances is bud
uniformly rounded, or puffed up and down straight (alnz ,. betulae), or rounded from the bottom up, with a flat upper edge
so that the uprising brings sharp thel (melanoneura); lower edge of the beak
whether they are either straight or bulging, at the base of the beak on its
the course between him and Gdst {basal is more or less deep cut. -
The spines are very good, the species have a constant value sitting on the side of the beak,
covering it either whole or only in the lower half, tid or very
dense, starting at a certain distance from the end; sometimes Ize watch
transitional shapes, such as barbed hair, or represented by barbed hair
at all, showing that all these rhizome forms of thorns are inherent
hair change; common are long conical, at the end of the blade
pulled out, sometimes flat, Wide, at the end of Wide nicely rounded
(Ps. buat). - Pferty hair is abundant; you will find v vude
véneéek around the anus, outside the circle of waxy Zldz, from completely small

12 XXII. Dr. Karel Sule:
short hair folded; basdlni ¢ ast has hair according to the species here
kratSi, tu delSi, tu ridSi, tu hustSi; on the back of the hump, or you places,
where she lives (if there is a hump, we are talking about the hump), sitting {ordinary 5-6 long
large hairy (or pesikt), excellent in length and strength from others
different hair; a number of similar, but already much smaller,
the hair tightens on the side of the right beak under the ankle. - Poéet chlupi,
their shape, thickened or scattered and spaced vibec forms
good and constant species value and also the proportions of these detailed
I describe everywhere. - Dimensions indicate the following defects: for angelic fiber:
the length of the upper contour, the relative length of the beak to the entire length of the flake,
The strainer of the base and the distance of the base will be barbed from the end; the length of the anus. Genitdlni é nek lanek (VIII) shows about similar ratios
as ¢ lanek X .; and here disappears on the lower contour of the hump, and here it is

zoban more or less pulled, both hairs and thorns are present, ordinary

the same values ​​and the same hairs with the spines and hairs of segment X. -
The dimensions are as follows: lengths of the upper, lower, lower contour. -
The cladding device is very diligent; according to Heymonsovyc research
are based on hemipter cloves like gutters, duplications of koznf
tight at the middle ¢ dry sternitka lanka VIII. and IX. ; those outgrowths
IX. lenf se jesté secondary so that I result in a final 3 pairs of gonapophys,
of which they VII. and Inside Article IX. give rise to internal and external
Simu paru kladélkovych bodel (bodcti, osin, aculeus externus, internus),
external pair then IX. élanku ddva pivod so-called pochvdm kladél-
metal (Scheideklappen, dussere Legescheiden), which are complete
analogous to that in grasshoppers. - Cladder sheaths are the most
outer, Wide at the root, sit first at an angle that forms the lower
the outline of the angel and the upper outline of the genitalia, are sometimes short,
barely the end of the angel's beak reaching, sometimes marked longer, to the back
ordinary narrowed, rounded at the end, rarely cut; their surface
may be u bdse naértdn, in the next continuation complete or incomplete
circled grooves, or in the back thirds longitudinal grooves; detailed
description in vude Court4. - The outer cladding consists of a body that
is flat, long, ordinary the same wide, at the front end with outcrops
for muscle clamps, lowered at the posterior end and sharp; body composition
from the superlatum, which used to be delicate rhombic and, according to
perforated (cirrus); in the middle there is a stronger & i leaf that disappears
beSté sesilenda listénkou; the end is common suddenly seen, the superiors
even the leaves disappear, the leaf goes to the upper edge of the chitinizing zipper and put
ndm already seems to be the end of its own without a superlatum and underlay, even
chitinized, azky, upward curved, with rounded end

_———

 Uyod into the studio, synoptic table and synunymically catalog of drubhi of the genus Psylla. 13

nym, at the bottom with or without zejk; only in rare birds can we find
from this most common and primary type deviating shapes other, on pi. dycovite shape, solid chitinized, 0 straight axis, at the end without zejku
(Ps, Delarbrez), or shapes already similar to the leaf type
superscripts and subseaters, but with an unadulterated end, (as Ps. alni, betulae). -
The inner beam consists of two stabs, thin in front
long (this ¢ dst serves as a muscular muscle), in the back ending
a piece of triangular, or long axillary, puffy,
but now on the dorsal side fused, sloping down the roof; face
Kladelek is a very different species species, but as specific
generic traits have become very important, prominent, almost never individual
bilité nepo | éhajicf. Psyll colorists are never a reliable and cool character,
Although the individual is very variable, even in particular
coloring, otherwise, even the latter takes a very long time and a large scale
colored transitions vendor. Size is given from the front end of the body to the end of the folded
kfidel; its individual variability is known; Vaj 'They usually do
mens {neZ © 9; absolute Gisla lengths of individual species fluctuate between
1:75 mm to 4:30 mm. A nutritious plant (developers) would often be good
Auxiliary guide in the determination, because the larvae of Psyll are mostly
monophagous, or at least paurophagous, never slippery; zndmost
Nutritious plants are a special advantage when we find one plant
current whole colony of adults with larvae, which% provides certainty,
from the adults did not fly over to the finds from elsewhere as Gasto gets up and then
leads to mistakes; It nourishes the plant, or even briefly develops the one
I also mention the species in the synoptic overview of each species; list
plants with reference to the occurring species Psyll filed on them
Loew 1888. The Way of Life (CV) tells them whether that species
winters or does not overwinter (in moss, plant waste, or
za korou), and this is also a very good hypocritical purification; so
on pr. It is very easy to make the work easier when the spring collection on the needles
natych trees, it is common to attack Psyll if their nourishment
the plant has not yet started ragiti - we define in All species that

‘I do not overwinter as an adult, now they race {winter in the state larvdluim

(Ps. buxt), or most often as a egg, on pi, Ps. malt, ulmi, steno-
labis, alni, Koerstert, fusca etc. Larvae are very characteristic in certain forms for certain species.

Ss

14 XXII. Dr. Karel Sulc:

but there are also cases where two species have larvae
the same; a total of a few are described, and it is still not so detailed,
so that we can initiate safe closures now according to the current ones
acquaintances. Gin ot ee

The kinship of individual species among themselves, and the division of them
groups, after the piracy of the subgenera, there is no safe
I want to present rather than publish a premature distribution,
which would not survive later research; according to our current
I know that there is still many things that eat many today
seemingly far apart species many can be% v pritiné
clarification of species relativity d ekdvati from detailed (of course very
detailed) knowledge of larvae, which is the question of the future. - It seems
The wall character sim itself will not be used as a length for the whole genus,
but we will distinguish several groups from several perspectives; Sly
zatasté na pr. either the characters <j, or just the characters QQ completely different
way of development, independently of one another, sometimes even the closest
second. - Our willow Psylly, I tried on the kinship side
analyze in fart in W. ent. Ztg. 09. issued. - Compiled second
in the synoptic table does not correspond to the natural grouping
generic. Per ’)

I present the geographical decryption in this work at synoptic
table only for the Czech Lands (if there is a penny here). Rozfteni po
other European countries it is mentioned in the synonymous catalog

N. B. Appendix instead of tivodu. Study and determination of Psyll
must be prepared before preparation, preparation of the material, unfortunately often enough
peprnd and nesnadnd. - I wouldn't even advise anyone
at Psyllach he learned the preparation of insects and learned entomology,
I would gain too much for this branch of zoology to growers! Therefore
I can address my instructions to topics that I already have some knowledge of
families and gained advice. Studium Psyll has to work on the most important material one
kinds. - First of all, let's meet the families; we will choose for this purpose
Ehinocolu aceris L. \ is very easy to find on sycamores and babykdch
in Ceryn and in July in a great power in the Court (it is best to collect it,
like all Psylly into an ordinary umbrella by knocking and catching
into a small flat-bottomed eprouvettka, plug with a cotton swab;
deadly fluids are not necessary, Psylly themselves die very soon, rather than
we will bring them home! A drop of gasoline, or better vinegar, kills PeZilce,
on the inside of the plug at the moment.). - Aphalara

 

igi

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of species of the genus Psylla. 15

calthae L. is in the first spring collection on conifers as much as possible
the warmer the sun shines; However, when% u% starts to bloom and grow
Polygonum, migrates to these; on Polygonum amphibium we find it
abundant throughout the summer. Psyllopsis fraxinicola ¥ str is found on everyone
ash in June and July on the leaves and on the trunk running, precasto
you dome. - From Psylla's own family, go to the postgraduate study
u nds from the spring on the game Skdch (as they begin to grow) general great crimson
Psylla pyrisuga Fourster, then also from the spring on the blackthorns and Svestka
hojnd mald sienové éervenohnéda (i kifdla) Psylla pruni Scoro1s;
Psylla ulmi Forster (elsewhere)
on elms I do not develop), on hawthorn then light green-yellow Ps. mals
Scumepsercer, which is an abundant apple tree; na ol8fch lepka-
There are also two types of general judgments in July: Ps. alm L.,
and Foersteri ruor easily distinguishable from each other (see table). 'Only
after studying these Six species that cannot be found, he recommended
I would study Psyll willow as difficult; I hope, Ze
This group has also become more accessible to my study on this subject
(Sune 09), to which I refer. - Types of others supplemented {S ​​sndze jiz
collecting on their nutrient plants. - I never recommend determining
From potaitku only two, tiff kusti, but always according to the number of vétsSiho, which
It is not easy to collect at the above, because they come
wady common in large quantities. - Genus Arytaina (u nds genistae
Larr.) is on: Spartiwm scop. and Cytisus austriacus a very abundant species. - The genus Trioza, a species of uréicae L., is very abundant: all summer and spring
and Urtica diica and urens. - You will find the table for the address of Psyll
zatim u Loewa: Zur Systematik der Psylloden, Ver. d. zool. bot. Ges. Vienna 79. We can only pair Psylly for nickel coins
to the middle of the chest and with them to mount them on elderberries, etc. - State, if we spread the nickel past into poia, it is hers
half length in total in this respect more convenient that we can welcome
better from the bottom and with the mountain to see even a larger increase without doing so
long needle preceded. - Adjust the front lights so that they are
the longitudinal axis became perpendicular to the anteroposterior axis of the body; this happens easily
by inserting two more needles on the trailing edge into the positions indicated
wings; they don't find on the back, but it's good when they get
under the front wings, before it remains attached to the body, (ordinary
mrtvolnd position), ponévadZ then looking at the end of the body to the side
they prevent. - The sensors do not need to be adjusted, they remain even after death
pushed to the front. - They end the body with stabbed individuals

16 XXIL. Dr. Karel Sule:

no need to adjust. - The very end of the body needs careful adjustments,
there is a lot to do with it; after the adjustment, we will stab at
the right side of the animal, next to the butt needle (drank minucie) to us
netoéilo, and we will insert the left side between the vertical struts of the Glanek angels
and the whole past with a sharp end in front; we postpone it
Ordinary tight ones pressed against each other both pies and we separate them already
thick mines sufficient; the coin holds the ordinary itself
the feeling of both favors, which tend to have a normal position on each other
if we do not hold on to it, then we will bow it slightly, and sharply end it
we are pouring into the soul; Coins for tension have been serving for several years
(2-5) hours to remove, after that fine Psylly already stay in position,
which we gave them. ;
The fine structure of the wings and the dittles of the body © O9 is not possible
to study differently than on microscopic devices. —- Wings
we assemble that it is S8téteck (with a slightly moistened sharp Spitka)
we break off with gentle pressure, and place on the glass underlay to come
top side up; after that we moisten it with strong alcohol, and then
and all the air of them shall be absorbed until the alcohol is gone,
we drip glycerin and keep it submerged so that it does not float
and they did not catch the air again, we cover it with a covering glass, preferably larger
and water the edges of a mixture of rosin and wax (dissolve both in the heat)
half in a small pot, and mine ready to use),
which we dissolve and nandsime with a scattered brass shovel
sokenkem, as I have already described in the instructions for sbfréni insect, published
Czech Entomological Society in Prague, at its own expense. -
The rear end of the body 9 9 must be repaired separately before mounting
prepare to be translucent; if we faint the mattress, or the only one
piece, we draw drive andlni 1 genitalni ¢ cable with sides and mountain,
note colors and dimensions; If we want to keep our heads, our tentacles
and perhaps one kfidl »o, in situ, break carefully just butt sharp
needle immediately after the thorax, which is easily exaggerated, we throw them) into the test tube
with a little 20 ° /, caustic and cautiously with a slow typani we conquer, az
vAll comrades outside the chitin zmydelnatime (watch out for lye, easy
explodes and overflows, on Oti and Saty! ); now we pour the contents into portions
ldnovoui place, l.uh desiranfme and wash the object with water,
sow on a glass podlogZuf to a drop of glycerin, cover with a cover
skiitkem (dosadivSe or vyssivSe vlycerin as needed), top from above
We will smolder the glass in the above-mentioned way and fill it up immediately
n4lepkou opatiime. - If we have more than one piece available, we're fine
to boil pieces whole, wings free, especially those less colored, and

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of the second genus Psylla 17

we will also avoid some ~ o '. - It should be good to assemble and draw in All
praepardty on one side and the left, timZ we get a lot on the pfe-
view when comparing. II. Synoptic table of Psylla species
palaearctic regions. 1. 12. Blank wings along Cu2 with black-brown bordered spot,
or spot smoke:

2. 5. the end of the bowl with black and brown, precisely bounded,
éasteéné even with continuous spots, or pdskou:

3. 4. The spines on the surface of the wings cover all fields of tight az
to Zilky, along Zilek there are no barbed stripes:

- Thorns stand very dense together, the end of the wing is continuous

black brown, sometimes torn pda. Sensors shorter 1mm. Gelni cones only from half the length of the crown. - ©: zadnf po-
lovina andlniho and genitalniho ¢ lanku suddenly found in Sidlovity
zoban. - <j: zadni dolnf cast genit. stretched in a cube

lovity hump, pinches on the sides of the uniform Wide, top of her
narrowed, rounded, with the mountain ends only by a simple set
with no teeth. - I'm overwhelming adults. - Get on your
fabech. - Length 2 mm. - Guilds. 1. breviantennata Furor 61. 4. 3. along the Zileks there are faint streaks:

- the end of the wing with smooth (ordinary), black-brown, irregular
bounded by Siroka pdska, going from the end of the cell. Rs az do
front half ceil. Cul; ptedni kraj kiidla se zadnim almost
is parallel, so the whole length is the same. -
Sensors 1:30 mm. - Customs cones. - No
mum. - cj: Pliers lower, very wide, with sides at the end
from front to back rounded, with the mountain ending short,
in prostte excavated tooth, outer contour from behind high
trojahelnikovity. - The Way of Life and the developing plant are not
mom. Length 2 ° 5—3 mm. 2. limbata M — D 71. - the end of the wing with a smooth (ordinary), irregular
nigena pdskou, going from wtsti Rs to vrecholu Cul; around
the end of M1 + 2, M2 + 4-5, Cul, and along the entire Cu2, after black

2

18

aS)
eo

oo =]
FROM

9. 8. XXII. Dr. Karel Sulc:

bordered spots, the wing at the turn of the outer third is the widest. -
Sensors 1 mm. - KuéZele ¢ elni znatné kratsi temene. - C:
andlni ¢ rope long, zoban ponendhlu vytazeny. -: pliers
the sides are classy, ​​narrow, the end of something in front and bent inwards,
ends with Mount Siroky, a sharp Spici to the front rippled
toothpick. - Nutrition plant and CV is not zndm. - Length
2 ° 3—2 ° 6 mm. 3. pulchella Loew 77.
end of wrench without precise edged spots and pdsek:
blank in margindlnich ostni district in cell. Rs, M, M1i- + 2,
Cul, zakourend::
the spot along Cu2 is smoky {inaccurately bounded, Rs is
in its middle Gdsti strong to the front curved, barbed surface
above the peaks M and Cu are in their context violated, in the cell. C + Sc only small irregular, central area, then
v cell. Rs in the inner half of the disappearance. - Sensors 1: 3 mm. -
Kuzele éelni o cosi krat8i temene. - Q: andlni segment m4
zoban slowly pulled out, short. - Cd): side of low side,
brichata, the cone of the heart is cut and bent in the back, it ends
Wide inside straight straight tooth, on front sharp and
rear rounded corner; outer {outline is circular at the back. - They're evolving on Crataegus oxyacantha. - It hides like
adult. - Length 25 mm. - Guilds. 4. crataegi Scuranx. Blanka in the district of marginal barbs Cira:

spot along the Cul below the Ssirs {, triangular:

Spitka kldvu zakourend, the field is covered only by surface spines,
regular, wide spiny stripes everywhere; bottom thorns
no. - Sensors 1 mm. - KuzéZele ¢ elni as long as
top. - ©: anus very long, horn {outline of an anal élanek
strong bulges, no hump, long when viewed from the side,
thin. - Cj: the side is fine, quite Sirokd, from the mountain
finishes idedlné lanceolate, straight to the front ripened
toothpick. - Zivndrostlina is not zndma. - I'm overwhelming adults. Length 2 ° 5 mm. 5. albipes Out 61
spot along the Cul totally the same Wide:

10. 11. The top of the squirrel is not smoked:
- yAll fields covered with surface spines, cell. C - + - Sc, Rl

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of drubii of the genus Psylla 19

aT Er. 10:

12. t.
13. 14. 14. 13.

besides, with the bottoms; vSude sharp-edged stripes
visible developed. - Sensors 1 mm. - Gelni cones are probably far away
top. - ©: an. élanek above long wedge-shaped, see
sides pulled out smoothly, straight, hump almost imperceptible. -
oJ: the sides are fine, double-toothed at the top, at the back at the bottom
with a limestone extension, with a mountain branch is established and
carbonaceous, seated tooth, turned backwards; from behind
is the lower part Wide lobes to the interior of the extended, upper {narrow,
uniform to the middle Gate bend. - They're evolving on willows. I overwhelm adults. - Length 2—2 ° 25 mm. - Guilds. 6. Dudai Scxe 04. The tip of the keyboard is smoky:
thorns in the cell. Ril go to the edge and R1_ tight, thorny
areas at the edges are not cut, above the peak M is not
the lower wall and the thorns approach the tight thorns; whole cell. C + Sc barbels, not known to smoke {along Cu2 (to describe
dince pale, unpainted). - Sensors 1 mm. - KuéZele éelnf zdéli
top. - Q: an. Wedge gland, upper contour straight, hump
neni; anus short. - o: pinus duzinovité hnuthé, to the top
Siri, the end of the head, in front and behind, divided into lobes,
the center stands out thin outcrops, at the end to the inside of the ufaty, in front
sharp, rounded at the back; at the base in the back of a large loaf
vity lobe. - He lives on Salix incana. - I'm overwhelming (about)
spelled. - 35mm. 7. iteophila Loew 76.
blank along Cu2 éird, spotless and smoky:
the top of the arch of the end of the kifdla right in the insert Rs:
the winged wing of the goat's appearance turned greenish, yellowish. - You-
incense 1-30 mm. - Kuzele ¢ éelni zdéli temene. - Q: an. and gen.
élanek very long, the beaks pulled out smoothly, in the lower half
dense at the end with rounded spines covered, spitaty fins, from below
rounded up; outer clapper without cuff. - ': kle & sté
prima, to the upper {third is mild S {ri, at the end Siroce rounded-
lend; with the mountain, the rear region is wide rounded, the front
bihd v S-ovité hnuty éervikovity zubec. - He lives on Buxus
always. - I'm overwintering larvae behind Supina buds. - Length
4 mm. - Guilds. 8. Buxi L
top of kfidla from insertion Rs further to the back:
OF

20

15,220;

1671,

17,246 th most common 18. 19. 19. 18. XXII. Dr. Karel Sulc:

The top of the wing in Cell County. Mi + - 2, namely at insertion M1 + 2,
or in its middle:

not a blaze stigma, nenf Rl, this one with a leading edge stigma
malnim welded indistinguishable in the narrow bony stigma Zil-
metallic appearance:

kiidlo in the inner third known wuzké, in the outer known
Wide, Zilky pale, ends of Rs and Cu2 with black-brown Zebras. - Sensors 15 mm. - In the first part of the term,
(030 mm.). - ©: zoban gen. and an. élanku suddenly indented,
A serrated appearance, with the last s_saw-shaped teeth. -
GO: the sides are fine, the end is something expanded, the
tops with a double tooth. - He lives on Alnus incana DC. -
I'm overwintering eggs. - Length 3-4 mm. - Guilds. 9. fusca Foerster 48.
distinct membranous stigma, R1 exists:
the end of the wing is clearly ufat, the peak in the middle of the cut, i.e. in
serci M1 +2:

blanka completely ¢ ira, Zilky pledé, of them Zebra nezbarvend. -

Sensors 15 mm. - KuzZele Gelni o Ctvrtinu del§ {te-
less. - ©: andlni segment 0 ° 85 mm. long, upper outline
broke out, the beaks pulled out smoothly, with the spines thorn on the
them and smooth keel; - anus 0 ° 33 mm. - cj: first priority,
the same Sirokd throughout the story, from above it connects del8im dld-
tooth, the back corner of which is rounded, the front is short
ostte vytazeny; the outline of the pliers from behind is down Sirsi O. -
The color of the animal is only greenYellow, not dark on it
bavey. - He lives on Viburnum lantana. - I'm overwintering eggs. -
Length aZ 3 ° 3 mm. 10. viburni Lozw 76.
the end of the stone is rounded off, the top of the mouth is M1 —- 2:
blank special in the outer half noticeable zakourend, even along
darker, zilky with delicate Gervenava zebras. -
Sensors 1 mm. - KuéZele éelni zdéli temene, - 9: analni
segment Ss mirnym hump, zoban poviovné vytačen, konec mirné
upward movement, end of bottom up rounded; anus jen
O'12mm.
finishes with a golden tooth, with a shortly sharp front
rounded rear corner, rear outer contour uniform O.

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of the genus Psylla 91

21. 26. 22. 23. 23. 22. 24, 25. 25. 24. - Barya éervenohnédava. - He lives on the Ledum palustrre. - Zi-
votopis nenf zndm. - Length 2:25 mm. ll. ledi Fror 61.

. the top of the cell in the county of Cell. Rs, common in the middle of it,

decisive, however, always before insertions + 2:

neni zAdnych ostnu v cell. Rl, Rs and M:

nen {surface spine vibec:

kiidlo in the middle Gasti of the same Wide, does not extend to the outside
third; the stigma of the horse before the peak Rs, M is short,
in longer with Mi +2 identical, Cu krats {as chord Cul;
at the edge of the field and along the Smouha Key. -
Sensors 1 mm. - Kuézele éelni only half the length of the
less. - Q: upper outline. ¢ strands bulged, without hump
zoban long wedge slowly pulled out; anus 0 ° 15 mm.,
- from: something down Siri, to the secret peak, I'm finishing the mountain
a cut-out area occupying the entire sieve, it is a corner
pulled into a sharp curved tooth, the rear is then only
simple blades. - He lives on Glycirrhiz. - Curriculum vitae is not zndm. - Length 2 ° 5 mm. 12. glycirrhizae Becxer-Lozw 80
thorns only in cell.C + Sc and Cu. The shadows occupying the longitudinal centers of the field are very saturated, Ze
The smoky spike does not reflect against them:
Sensors 1mm. - KuéZele éelni o étvrtinu Machinery kratS {temene. - @ 6: Zoban gen. ¢ lanku is suddenly at the root of the sisters and sisters
embraced by lobular extensions of the upper margin gen. ¢ cable

anus very dlonhy. - <j: the side is close, nice to
anterior crescent-shaped, bony from above with a forked cleft;
from behind is the outline of the lyric forceps. - The color of Gernohned. - He lives on pears. - I'm overwhelming adults. - Length 2 ° 5 mm. - Guilds. 13. pyri autorum

shadows as in the previous, but lighter so that the dark spot
key marked by bounce:

feelers 1 mm. - Kuézele ¢ eln {f zdéli temene. - Q:
Zoban shortly wedge-shaped, smoothly extended, with straight
kym kylem, objjaty gen. ¢ cable. - Anus long. -

OG: the sides are low, sweet, and at the very end

26. 21. 27. 40. 28. 31. 29. 30. 30. 29. 31. 25. XXII. Dr. Karel Sule:

zazena and it suddenly in a toothpick to the front turned, which is
phenomena split from above in two; the outer contour of the back is a circle. - We don't know Ziem. - Curriculum vitae nen {zndm. - Length
4 mm. 14. bidens Sovc 07.
cell. RI, Rs, and M covered spines: trey:
there is no barbed wire along the Zilek (at least not along the
nich * /; Rs and M), thorns approach this very tight:
stigma mucous, small, barely noticeable, ending before the beginning
Rs:

superficial spines small, fine, the end of the whip of Wide Round,
split M1 + -2 and M3- + 4 far pied jpolovici Rs:

stigma small, cell. RsaM covered with the entire base,
blank in the outer two tfetindch uniform brownish
bee. - Sensors 1 mm. - KuéZele Gelni barely half
top length. - Q: see the pages very thinly,
the upper contour of the inner pulley in the front half bulge,
outer clapper without cuff. -: pincer tzké, konetéek do
bent at the back, ends with the mountain in front slightly slight buttonhole

tooth, back corner finished {Wide rounded. - He lives on
Sarothamnus scoparius L. (about?) - My resume is unknown. -
Z mm. 15. spartiicola Sue 07.
surface spines large, button-shaped, wing tip even
zuzen, pitch MI + 2a M3-— 4 right under half the length Rs:
stigma short but noticeable, only the inner parts of the cell. Rs, and Mkryty
bottom thorns, blanka brnka, the middle of the field brighter. -— Tv-
incense only 0 ° 70 mm long. - Short shear, 0 ° 12 mm. - 9:
zoban ponenahlu vytahený, koneéek rounded, vnitini kladélko
in the front half upwards convex, on the outside a clapper with a zejk. - o: the sides are low, the top is S {ff, at the end is
concave, posterior horn extended and lingual folded in length; s hora ’
end of the royal utat, on the inside with four nozovitymi teeth
and the back corner above it pulled into a strong long lanceolate toothpick;
from the back we see that the tooth was formed by the longitudinal composition of the back
corner. —- Lives on Spirea sp. - Biography nenf I know. - Long-
up to 25 mm. 16. fasciata Lozw 80.
stigma blanitne, quite wide and long, horses in half {length Rs:

 

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of the second genus Psylla 23

32. 33. 33. 32. 34. 35. 3D. 34. 36. 37.

blanka uniform wine zazZloutla:

in the inner thlech cell. R1, Rs and M, the same along R +
M + Cu are slight, short, barbed stripes; Zilky are
pale. - Sensors 1 mm. - KuZzele Geloi has a long time. - Q: zoban pozyolna vytazeny, na oborni contour an. ¢ cable
noticeable hump. - <j: different sides, uniform Si-

eye, high, with the mountain ending with a short dldt-shaped tooth,

whose hind horn is rounded; contour
from behind, something narrowed up O. - I don't know. -
Biography nenf znidm. - Length 2 ° 25 mm. 17. intermedia Lozw 87.
blank uneven zakourenda, misty are shadows, misty
areas and streaks of light:. the shadows are held in longitudinal fields, I do not approach the zilks:
the shadows retain about the shape of the field, disappearing in the inner halves
Ri and Rs then throughout the cell. C + Sc, aZ on the inside corner. Sensors

1 ° 25 mm. - KuéZele éelni zdéli temene. - 9: an. ¢ lanek ma
the upper contour is curved, the ends are rounded; s mountain long
klfnovity; zoban slowly vytazeny, .— <j: kle & té uzka, se

almost quirky sides, with rounded corners, from the front corner
horizontal finger-like fronts that appear when viewed
Ss mountain thin and inwardly curved; zadnf outline low $ 1-
year O. - I don't know what's going on. - Curriculum vitae is not zndm. -
Length 2 mm. 18. Flori Poron 71.
the shadows approach tightly:
customs cones
wing only lmm long, end of uniform zizeny, shadows
they cling to the inner parts of the field, the spines of the field stand very dense
so, the blank looks like a thick tetkovand. - Sensors
0-830 mm. - Kuzele ¢ éelni zdéli temene. - Q: andlnf élanek
s mountain wedge, zoban ponendhlu vytazané, horni obry ¢ lanku
almost straight, the beaks of the beak at the apex Wide rounded. -:
the sides of the shape inwardly bent half-turned, at the end
rounded, at the base in the back mounted lobe of the contour Siro ¢ inového,
inside thick thorns assessed; from above ends short to
in front of a protruding tooth whose hind horn is rectangular. -
He lives on a willow, Salix rosmarinifolia. - There's no resume on the resume
I know. 1 ° 75—2 mm. 24

37. 36. 38. 39. 39. 38. 40. 27. 41. 42. XXII. Dr. Karel Sule: |

19. parvipennis Lozw 77.
Cones are known for the longitudinal era of the crown:
the spines of the polf stand thickened together (at 0-002 mm), that they make an impression

dense tea; RI welds with a goat stigma in one:

Sensors 1 mm. - Q: andlnf segment very long (1 mm),
from above the wedge, the side of the ankle, at the ankle
lower bent, slightly thicker, rounded, lower outline
zobanu gen. Gldnku horizontal, top from top to back
directing; outer clapper without cuff. - of ”: klesté tenka,
high, often drying at the end marked by twisting, ending
It has two short conical teeth, between which there are blades
zitez (watch out for the twisted drying!). He lives on brakes. - YZivotopis is not a detailed zndm. - Length 225mm. -
Bohemia. 20. Hartigii Froe 61.
the spines of the field stand at 001—0: 02 mm apart, forming a distinct
squares and rhombuses, the stigma is blunted, Rl always retained:
reddish-brown shadows cling to Zilek, leaving Wednesdays
polish fields; v cell. C- + With barbed stripes. - Touch
0-80 mm. - QO: andlnf ¢ lanek top klinovity, zoban pone-
suddenly pulled out, the upper contour totally bulging; zoban gen.
The blade is pulled out and bent upwards
zejkem. - (<j: pinches total lower {, with the front front side
to the front bulge, rear straight, to the top narrowed, horse
a sharp triangular toothed tooth. -
He lives on blackthorns and Svestka. - He's sniffing like an adult. -
Length 2 mm. - Guilds. 21. pruni Scopott. along Zilek, at least along M and Rs are barbed stripes,
here we come here SirSi, thorns never come tight until except
new Zilki:
thorns are superimposed thick (0'002 mm) next to each other, Ze
blank look like a dumb aunt:
barbed stripes sometimes (along Cu, Cu2) marked, other times
nen {traces of them; wing completely pale, neither stfnu, nor dark
Zilek's best color. - Sensors 1 mm. - It's crazy
from the top. - 9: andlni Glinek s hora klfnovity, zoban
slowly pulled out, the hump barely noticeable. - <j: side of the side
classy, ​​narrow, to the top something narrow, ending in a chisel top

and

 

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of species of the genus Psylla 95

42. 41. 43. 64. 44, 49. 45. 46. 47. 45. 47. 48.

sharp in front, rounded tooth in the back. - Color:
unobtrusive light green or light yellow. It lives on jivé - non-

overwinters. Length 2/25 mm. - Guilds. 22. stenolabis Louw 76.
barbed polf stands at 0 ° 02 mm apart (at least in the middle of the cell. Rs) forming noticeable ver squares and diamonds:

the wing of the wing vSude completely Gira, with the exception of a single stigma,
which can be smoked:

anterior stigmalni region with R11 full scabbard in goose unblemished
stigma, which only sometimes (in alm) md small, unstable and unworkable
visible window:

whole cell. C- + The spines and other fields covered with them are filled
complete:

zilky medium grade wings with dark colored zebras. -
Sensors 1 ° 70 mm. - The whole cone is the top. - Q:
zoban an. The article slowly protrudes, the thorns of its sides on

apex rounded, noticeable hump, outer blade without zejku,

. - (j: pliers
lower, with a wide diet, rounded up at the top,
abruptly and ends with a short, in the middle excavated
toothpick. - It lives on Alnus viridis DC. - A resume is not a zndem. - Length 3mm. 23. alpina Fuor 61.
thorns in the cell. C + Forms only a slight abortive middle
group:

zebra Zilek vSechna vSude, prominent blackheads:
wing front 4:25 mm, front half cell. Rl covered

_ spodinovymi ostny, vunitrni tiretina cell. Rs barbed. -

Sensors 3mm. - Kuézele Customs has been on the top. - Q: an. élanek s hora very long, the beak is half the length,
he was suddenly taken at his root, and he gave the same weight
Barbed, covered with barbed hair; hump quite slight; zoban
andlni as gen., outer blade without zejku, inner long
nosovité. - j: pliers with sides high, prima, end l | zZico-
vité rozSifen, above ends two short teeth, between
which is a small hollow. - He lives on ol & ich. - It doesn't overwinter. 4-5 mm. - Guilds. 26

49,

52. 53. 54. 47. 51. 50. =

57. XXII. Dr. Karel Sule:

24. alni L., author
Zebra Zilek completely pale:
front blade 3 mm, outer half cell. R1 covers
Spodinovymi stny; internal third cell. Rs covered with thorns. - RI is developed only in a solitary stigma (probably
one Sixth the whole length of this), then suddenly finished. -
Sensors 1 ° 20 mm. - KuéZele éelni zdéli temene. - 9: over
body as in alnt. - Cj: end of body and forceps as in alm. -
He lives on Betula alba. - Curriculum vitae is not zndm. - Length 3: 5 mm. 25. hetulae Fror 61.

. front edge stigme and Ri are separately developed, between

them a blaze stigma that horses far beyond half Rs, only
in some cases over half of Rs:

. thorns in the cell. Rl I do not approach the region, but omit here

barbed wire:

52. spiny areas in the cell. Rl, Rs, M, large, well developed:

v cell. Rs, M, M1 +2, Cul, are spiny areas on the sides
strong cut; marginal groups of some uZ8 {barbed surfaces
surface. - Sensors 0:90 mm. - KuzZele éelni o nepo-
zndni kratSi temene. - 9: andlni tlanek: upper contour without
hump, straight, rather bulging, wedge-shaped from above, beaked
pulled out, put on a clapper with a zejk. - (Cj: nen {zndm. -
He doesn't know where he lives. - Biography not known. - Length 2 ° 5 mm. 26. picta Forrster 48 def. em. barbed surface in the cell. R1, Rs, M, abortive, very slight,
v cell. R + -M- + Cu vibec schazejf:
Sensors 1 mm. - KuéZele Gelni o one-quarter times krats {
peaks (0 ° 15: 0 ° 20). - Q: an. ¢ long-wedged cable from above,
sides with a slight hump, the end from the bottom up
rounded, the sides of the beak you dolenf half covered with sharp
thorns, outer blade with zejkem. - (j: I can not describe closer
for lack of material. - He lives on a myrtle. - Biography
nen {I know - Length 2 ° 75 mm. 27. myrti Puron 76.
thorns in the cell. R1 I approach tight to the edge:
cell. C ++ Se barbed, only barbed in the outer corner
group, barbed surface in cell. Rs bud above the top of M

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of psylla species 27

55. 56. 56. dD. 57. 54. 58. 61. 59. 60.

interrupted, or vibration disappears in its inner corner; whitefish,
never completely Gernohnédé:

ostuité surfaces in the cell. R1 and Rs in the inner half field
still on one thorn, the outline of the thesis in the inner half
cell. M only approximate with the boundary {field (Zilkami) parallel
a much diive conéict:

Sensors 1 ° 90 mm. - KuiZele éelnf zdéli temene (0 ° 23 mm). - ©: an. segment from above steals klfnovity, at the end
rounded, to the sides, the main dolen {half of the beak sharply
covered with pulled hairs, sheaths outer; external
blade with zejkem, both konééné ¢ ladnny known hairy. -
o: truncated sides of the same Wide, izka, rounded at the end,
from above it ends with a rather long Zabkovity, osttim and vytazaná
Spike to the front facing tooth; from the back the outline
square O, inside down sharp bisquit. - He lives on elms. - It doesn't overwhelm. - Length 4:25 mm. - Guilds. 28. ulmi Foerster 48.
contour of barbed surfaces in total vSude parallel to zilky, from
only the area above the top of M.

Sensors 1 ° 20mm. - KuiZele Gelni from the top of the head (0 ° 23 mm). - Q: as in ulmi, just see the sides uZSi and delSi, then
the whole side is covered with sparse sharply extended barbs. -
WHAT: the sides are straight, the same Wide, the end is Udi
and folds first into the back, then into the front and back
a sharp triangular-faced tooth. -

‘He pours on apple trees, hawthorn and fennel. - It doesn't overwinter. - Length

4mm. - Guilds. 29. little ScumtepBereerR 36.
cell. S + Ce covered with thorns:
cell. C + Se and R1, all covered with bottom spines so, Ze
at first glance I contrast against other fields with thorns only
superficial, venous {density of thorns; barbed surfaces to the sides
in the region are not met:
end A2 even in unpainted individuals pale:
The zilks in the outer half of the kifdla are brown, with fine
brown zebras. - Sensors 1 mm. - KuzZele éelni z46éli
temeve (0 ° 20 mm). - Q: an. segment from above wedge, beak
long, slowly extended, upper outline smooth, straight, outer
blade with a zejk on the lower contour. - Cj: sideways

28

60.58. 61. 58. 62. 63. 63. 62. XXIL. Dr. Karel Sule:

classy, ​​Siroka, bulging, up from Siroka rounded out, with
visible rounded tooth in the back, the back edge in the lower two
tretindch limcovité rozSiten. - He lives on willows. - It's cold. - Length 2-3 mm. - Guilds. 30. nigrita Zerr. 28.
end of angel in Even in unpainted individuals Gerny:
veins in dyed individuals in the outer half of the kifidla whole

black-browned so that zebras cannot repel. - Sensors
1:20 mm. - KuZele éeln {zdélfi temene (0 ° 20 mm.) - Q
the end of the body like a nigrite. - ': pruned sides primd, ve

the middle part of the narrowest, the end in front and in the back is divided into lobes, -
from the middle, between them, a thin branch stands out,
ending in a triangular tooth, in the back down the chair lobe
the outline of the scallop shell, and in front of this quite a small growth
trojahelnikovity. - He lives on willows. - She's pimping. - Length
95—3 mm. - Guilds. 31. Saliceti Foerster Lozw
cell. C- + It is never (cell) covered with bottom spines (only
in the melanoneura spit {these spars outwardly), spiny areas
The following are completely met in the region:
the whole field of Ri is covered with scallops, except for a small
circular section below, right above the outer surface Rs:
marginal groups are uZs {, surface thorns, wing
all the same Wide, stigma carmine. - Sensors 1 mm. -
Gelni cones have long peaks. - 9Q: an. segment klfnovity
small hump, beaked at the root of the broad, slowly stretched, thorns
keen. - J: kle & té zestrany prima, the same sirokd, on top
zuzend in short, front-framed cliffs, with the mountain below
seize and finishes sharp, thin, short, to the front
bent tooth. - He's alive. - He's wintering. - 4mm,
is one of the biggest. - Guilds. 32. pyrisuga Foxrsrer 48.
field Rl complete without base spines, only in the outer corner
mala marg. group:
marg. the thorn groups are as wide as the thorn areas
upper, the interior in the third tenth uZ8i than in tte-
tiné ​​zevni. - Sensors 1 mm. - Kuiele éelni zdéli temene. - ©: an. segment from above the wedge, the sides are seen at the caffeine

 

Uyod do studia, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of species of the genus Psylla 99

64. 43. 65. 68. 66. 67.

narrowest, the ends are something thick and rounded, not hump ’
the upper contour above the coffins of the beaks, the thorns on the strands
beak sharp. - (<j: body tongs with sides Wide, low, horse {
up in the back and in front with a thin delSim ridge so that Ze
nen {unlike zouvyéku. - He lives on an apple tree. - It smells,
it turns very late and slowly until late. -
Length 2-5 mm. - Guilds. 33. pyrastri Loew 71. NB. This also includes the affinis, whose head (with tentacles and cones) and
kffidla I naSel completely identical to pyrastri. v cell. Ri is a small group margindinf and then a small group
feather bottom thorns in its inner corner; groups
marg. the same Wide, with surface barbed surfaces; kiidlo
in the inner {half narrowest, already known than in the third outer. - Sensors 1 mm. - KuzZele éelni to half length suddenly
narrowed, then almost cylindrical, only slightly shorter peaks (0 ° 17:
0:20 mm). - Q: an. élének from above long wedge-shaped, zoban
slowly pulled out, the limbs rounded from bottom to top, his upper
horn ostrothly, thorns on the sides of the beak long, at the end
Broadly rounded, hump smooth, noticeable; outer blade
with zejkem. - Cj: klesté vysokd, prima, v zadu u base neco
rozSitend, at the end with both sides of the same zuzena; above
the end is set up and ends with a short sharp, until the front bends
that toothpick (pliers tend to dry out in unpainted individuals
considerably twisted, which can lead to the increase in many
mistaken). - He lives on hawthorn. - It's wintering, it's spring

weve

34. melanoneura Foerster
blank wings more less but noticeable bud Yellow color,
or brownish zakourend, or finished only with a brown spot
at the end of his term:

Stigma goat-like, solid, not even at the very beginning of Casti
membranous, rather Wide, at least tiikrate as Wide as Rs;
front edge stigmal and R1 with skin stigma in one indistinguishable
welded unit:

front length half cell. Rl, cover & bottom barbs:
marginal group in cell. Rs reaches higher range M1 - + - 2,
M 3 + 4; The zebras in the outer half of the wing are blackhead,
blank in the outer tiretindch of individual poles ocher, colored

30

67. 66. 68. 65. 69. 74.
iO. Tis

XXII. Dr. Karel Sulc:

goes tight up to Zilkam. - Sensors 3 mm. - It's beautiful
with half the length of the crown. - Q: zoban u kofrene ndhle zizen,
thin, on a perch with a bump, long sheaths outer, cylindrical,
circled ribbed, outer cladding without zejk. - Cj: pliers
with the side primd, at the end roz8frenad, from above koneén4 dst
oblong Izicovité rozSitena, ending with two short teeth,
among which there is a shallow cut. - He lives in a permanent society
s alnt na olsich. - It does not overwinter in the adult state, but
jitka, autumn snesend. - Length 4 mm. - Guilds. 35. Foersteri Fior 61
outer pritnd half cell. Rl cover & bottom barbs:
marg. group in cell. Rs low, reaches only the top M1 - + 2,
zilky vaibec nemajf colored Zeber, blanka vSude stej-
nominal burgundy Yellow, only a third lighter on the inside. - Sensors 1 ° 80 mm. - KuéZele éelni jen o cosi kratsi te-
less (0 ° 18: 0 ° 20 mm). - Q: andlni ¢ lanka long wedge-shaped. beak long, slow drawn, with smooth keel, and mild
hump, outer clapper. - (: sideways)
prima, uzkda, vSude same Sirokaé, from above to the end uzi, a
ends with two short toothpicks, between which there are shallow cuts. - She's not kidding. - Curriculum vitae is not zndm. - Length
a5 mm. 36. colorata Lozw 88.
stigma at least a bit of the beginning of the blane:
membranous stigma very short, in front of half length Rs:
stigma zietelné, konéi nad zaédétkem stfedni tretiny Rs:
v cell. Rs do not access thorns and% Z to the region, but do not leave here
barbed wire. - Sensors mm. - KuéZele éeln {short,
0-13 mm. - Q: andlni ¢ laének Siroce klfnovity, beaked slowly
pulled out, the whole side of his thick is covered with thorns, outside
blade long: knives, Spicka shorai bottom bottom selected,
windshield on the upper contour of the seven seductive tri-
carbonaceous protruding teeth. - G ': the sides are fine
high, the farther to the top the more narrowing, with the mountain
utata, ending in front with the heart Spitka, in the back with a corner
rounded; the limb lobe is visible from behind,
sitting under the worst quarter. - He lives best on Cytisus
spinosus Lam. - I don't know the resume. - Length 2 ° 75 mm. ’

hew

Uyod do studia, sxnoptickd table and synonym catalog of the species Psylla 3]

ets 0. 72. 73. 12. 73. 74. 69. 75. 84. 37. cytisi Puron 75.

membrane stigma very small, only window-shaped, then Rs
Welding 8 front region stigma complete, in the narrow Zilko-
white stigma:
cell. C - ++ - With without spines, marg. group in cell. Rs
goes almost aZ to the top of M. ::
Sensors 1 ° 40 mm. - KuZele éelni kratSi temene. - ©: an. Glanek with a mountain of wedges, seen from the side of Siroka,
otherwise slowly pulled out, end mild up bent, dolenf
half of the beak thick sharply extended thorns later, ky)
smooth, outer veneer, without zejek, vibec completely
smooth, 0 straight axis. - Cj: side & bottom: hornf half
I have the shape of a scythe facing the front, at the back at the base
lobed spreading, slightly above half the height in front
vyénivajic {tooth; 8s mountain horse right described coconut
the shape that is on the outside is a vasovite outline, at the bottom of the lobe
special. - You don't know, Gem Zije. - No resume
I know. Length 3: 5 mm. 38. Delarbrei Poron 73.

cell. C - ++ Sc with bottom spines, marg. group in cell. marg. low, reaches only the top of M1- + 2:
Sensors 1-4 mm. - Kuéele Geln {about half the length of the
mene (0: 07: 0 ° 17 mm). - Q: an. D ldének s mountain briefly
wedge-shaped, beaked slowly, finely very spicy,
files bent down, hump noticeable, dolenf half of the beak
Thin thorns covered, inner cladding long, dyed, upper
its side rovnd, the axis of the end of the dyed outer pulley
overall up bent, waist with holes Zlaz around the anus in the back
open. - CG: the sides are high, still at the top
with zugzujici, koneéek slender to the back bent, top end
something scattered, rounded in the back, small blunt in front
provided with a rounded tooth; noticeable lobes at the bottom
rozS {ren {, nahote lzfce konec. - Lives on Spartium scopa-
rium. - Biography nenf I know. - Length 2 mm. 39. spartii Guérm, Loew. stigma blanched, long, fairly wide, horseradish above the zacdtkem
external scrubs Rs; Rl developed throughout, not welded
with stigma membrane:
shadows in the fields, at least in the cell. Rs and M do not proceed to Zil-

Os
IN

- ~}

oO

= |
~]

XXII. Dr. Karel Sule:

wherever, omitting the barbed stripes and there are (shadows)
and only §Wide, like barbed surfaces, or
uzsi:

. only a range of marginal spines smoked:

zilky brown, with Gernohnédymi Zebra, vSude well dyed,
the barbed surface stripes are above the peaks Rs, M and Cul
known zizeny, barbed-free stripes marked Ssiroké. - Sensors
1 mm. - KuéZele éelni z déli temene. - Q: an. segment
from above long-walled, with sides: zoban slow drawn, hump
long, smooth, the end is rounded from the bottom up, the upper corner
its ostrothly, as in the melanoneur, spines abundant at the bottom
half beaks, in the places of the narrowest they have rounded tops,
external clapper with zejkem. - (: side of the lower side,
Wide, Supinovita, seen at the top, rounded at the end;
you back down something lobed rozS8irend, ends two
short toothpicks, among which there are shallow cuts. - Nale-
the woman was on Rhamnus cathartica. - Curriculum vitae is not zndm. Length 4 mm. 40. rhamnicola Scorr 76. 76. smoked {with Sif far outside the marginal zone:
. smoky areas of narrowed areas:

and probably the same area as the pyrtids (but not the groups)
marginal. wall barbed surfaces in the cell. R1, R2 and M). -
Sensors 1 mm. - KuZele éelni zdéli temene. - Q: an. wedge segment anus very
long. - C: side and bottle-shaped sides, upper
slow sizena cast connects short, sharp, narrow,

in front of a hardened tooth. - Colored in whole black
Brown. - He lives on pears. - Biography nenf I know. -
Length 3 mm. 41. simulans Foerster 48. 78. smoky areas of the same Wide with a spine area:
. oStny in the inner angle of the cell, Rs disappears:

the same is true of Cul. - Sensors 2 mm. - KuzZeie éelni del8i temene (0 ° 30: 0'25 mm) do polovice
lengths suddenly lowered, then elongated, almost cylindrical. - Q: an. segment wedge, beak slowly pulled out, external vagina on
end tate, anus short. - (: the side is narrow,
same Wide, only the branch itself is briefly cut, with the mountain

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of the second genus Psylla 33

81. 80. 82. 83. 83. 82. 84. 75. 85. 88. 86. 87.

it is mounted with a short, toothed tooth, the front corner of which is
sharply extended, the back then rounded; the outline of the pliers from behind

is s hora doli splostélé 0. - Colored in yellow
green. - He lives on the mistletoe. - It's not relaxing. - Length 3 mm. Bohemia. 42. visci Curtis 35.
thorns in the inner corner of the cell. Rs not available:
butt and dyed individuals Live Candy Yellows, or
bright green:
top red minion, Zilky kiidla sienové, stiny zevni
halves of sweet wine yellow, they go close to the region;
voitrni polovina cell C - + - With uncovered spines, margin. groups
narrow areas of barbed wire. - Sensors 1:20 mm. - It's crazy
from the top, 0 ° 20 mm. - 9Q: an. Ger Gernohnédy cable,
news. -. pinch piimd, narrow, just something in the back down
wider, hard end, pinnate, front turned toothed
cem. - He lives on a willow ko8tkat. - It doesn't overwinter. - Length
35 mm. - Guilds. 43. abdominalis MD. Sutc 09.
colored buttocks with blackhead:
the shadows in the poles do not go to the edges, but they omit them
the tongs shone a stripe, margin. groups as wide as
barbed surfaces. - ©: an. long flutter. - Cd:
pincer wide, the end of the neck, in the back below it a lobe,
from above it ends with a triangular toothed tooth, whose front corner
is right-handed, § rear sharp. - He lives on willows. -
It overwinters. - Length 4 mm. 44. Klapaleki Suc 09.
the shadows in the poles go as far as Zilky, they don't miss along Zilek
more striking, at least not everywhere:
the tip of the clave is bought from Gernohnéd:
thorns in the cell. Rl do not go to the region and Ri:

v cell. Rs, M, and Mi + 2, Cul, the barbed surfaces are cut together
are not, above the top :: M ostnita area ndpadné zuzené (on
one thorn) and in the inner corner does not access R, in the cell. C + Sc captures only the longitudinal center of the field, sharp-edged stripes
quite wide. - Sensors 0.80 mm. - KuzZele is a third
shorts (0 ° 12: 0'1 mm). - Q an. wedge segment, zoban
Crete, anus very long, longer than a third of the whole upper

3

a4

oO
= ~]
(eo 9)
op

oO oD
co @
5 oF
So

90, 89. 91. 92. XXU. Dr. Karel Sule:

- o: pinched prima, quite low, the sides of the bottle
covita, bottom of banana, top tzeny, ends with mountain to
round rounded end, not a tooth. - He lives on games & skach. It overwinters. - Length 2 mm. - Guilds. 45. pyricola Forrsrer 48.

. thorns in the cell. Ri go to the region:

barbed surface in the cell. Rs and Cul are set together, above the top.
lem neni zizeni, zakoureni Cini Smouhovity impression, interesting
the outer half of the cell. Ri, a external third cell. Rs, in both then
to a more central point; cell. M smoky between the top of Cul
and through the step M1 + 2 M35 + 4, then goes Smouhovity strip tight
along M + Cu, Cu and Cu2. - Sensors 1 mm. - It's crazy

o ¢ tyrtinu krat8i temene. - ©: andlni i gen. as if
in pyri. - og: just like pyri, see this! - He lives on
pears in association with pyri. - It's over. - Length 2:00 mm. - Guilds. 46. ​​pyrarboris n. Sp. ‘5. Spitka klavu nen {smoky:
. barbed surface in the cell. Ri does not reach the edge, but omits

wide barbed wire:

in the middle of the cell. C + Sc is just an abortive {middle group,
elsewhere Wide, irregular spiny stripes, in cell. Rs az
Cul are the barbed areas at the edge with the sides cut. - You-
tubs 160 mm. - KuéZele headwaters (0 ° 13: 0 ° 20). - Q: an. élanek u kofrene strong bloated, under the anus suddenly
zazeny, longer at the end with uniform shields, with the sides of the upper
the outline is convex, it is seen at the base, very thin on the whole,
straight with smooth tulle, evenly rounded at the end. - cj: on the side of the narrow, prima ends sharply from above
to the front of a pulled simple tooth; from behind the outside

contour uniform 0. - Lives on Rhamnus alaternus L. - ©

The biography is not close. Length 2 ° 5 mm. 47. alaterni Forrsrer 48.
barbed surface in the cell. Rl sahd close to the edge:
ostny I approach in all fields tight to Zilky, no
barbed wire, at least not along the outer skin Rs,
M1 + 2, M3 + 4 and Cul:
Rs, M, MIl + 2, M 3 + -4, Cu, Cul, Cu2 completely Gernohnéda,

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of species of the genus Psylla 35

92: 91. along the Zileks are sharp-edged stripes:
23. O4. eee
. 96.

oe
cate

the end of the bridge is uniformly rounded. - Sensors 1 mm. KuzZele éelni zdéli temene, t. J.0'20 mm. - 9: anal Glanek
long wedge-shaped, sisters zoban slowly pulled out, his keel
perfectly straight, smooth. - cj: the sides are similar to half
robliku, turned by Spieka in the back, ends up from above
thinly pulled end with a sharp, pre-pulled tooth,

whose back is rectangular. - I don't know, Gem Zije. -
Curriculum vitae not zndm, - Length 2:70 mm. 48. Palmen Revver 82

thorns in the inner corner of the cell. Rs mizf. barbed surface in the cell. C - Only the middle longitudinal area is interested in:

Zouek is mostly half-naked
wings and edges, sttedy fields find {f unsmoked, Zebra are not
bareyni, marg. groups are narrower barbed surfaces, these near the region
set aside. - Sensors 130 mm. - KuZele éelnf
0.30 mm.— O: an. at the anus, strong ¥, then to the large
to the thin end of the uniform, the hump of the side is noticeable,
_konetek rounded, thorns on the beak very dense, at the end
nice rounded, outer cladding without zejk. - Cj: pliers
tall, narrowly thin, accounts rounded from above, front
the corner is shortly sharp, the back is rounded; from behind the outside
pliers outline is high 0. - Biography not known. - He lives
and Hippophaé rhamnoides L. - 4: 5 mm. 49. phaeoptera Lorw 79
the spines go all the way to the inner corner of the cell. Rs, thorns in the cell. C + Interested more than the average longitudinal area of ​​the field:
top of the vessel in the mouth Mi + 2: ice (repeats, see this in front:
10 18.). top of the wing in the middle of the cell. Rs:
along the Rs and M lighter stripes, otherwise cornered Smouhovité:
narrow-barbed stripes narrow, quite regular here, areas
threads near the region are not met, marg. groups of them,
C + -Sce cell surface covered, bottom spines covered
they only cut out about half the cell. Rs. - Sensors
1 mm.
half narrowly pressed, then cylindrical pulled out. - 9: nenf
znima. - cj: side by side Siri, in the back a gentle la-
lokovité rozSirend, horni Gast zizend ado zadu huuta, vrehol

36

95. 91. 99. 100. 100. 99. 101,102 th most common XXII. Dr. Karel Sule:

It ends at an angle from the top in front, down to the bottom, from above
sharp short, obliquely forward and inward turned,
rounded at the back, outer rear contour O-ovity, top
slightly walled, internal biscuits, with upper cage SirSi, lower
narrow, resulting in a lobed widening of the inner lower edge. - I caught her at the bfize in Krkono & Sicho holidays. -
Curriculum vitae nenf zndm. - Overall coloring: head of lumps Yellow
reddish brown, butt brown (probably not completely colored). -
Length 3:00 mm. - Guilds. 50. corcontum n. Sp. uniformly colored lamp, not particularly light and
darker places (Smouh, in the outer half of the garden):

blank intensive eno red-brown, only the inner third of the wing

lighter, narrow, long:

Sensors 1 mm. - KuéZele Gelnf from the top (0 ° 16 mm)
©: andl segment long wedged, with the sides of the upper contour
straight, without hump, kyl zobanu smooth. - Cd: kle & Sté uzka
tenkd, obruécovnou dovnit® curved, finte from top to
rear corner with a sharp, sharp Spitka until then turned
tooth, the front corner of the end is spread out and rounded.
phlegm. - He lives in the living room. - It's over. - Length 3 ° 5 mm. - Guilds. 5 !. elegant Zerr 40
blank light yellowish, or sedohnehočný zakourend:
barbed surfaces are cut on the sides:
marg. groups of barbs as wide as barbed surfaces,
simple stripes vSude same Wide, only for R strip uZsi and
you are noticeable above the outer quarter Rs; inland
third cell. C + Sc barbs disappear. - Sensors 1:70 mm. -
Conical head length (020 mm). - Q: andlof segment
from above long wedge-shaped, the sides of the upper outline almost straight,
the hump was noticeable, the limbs were swollen, rounded, externally
the blade has no zejk, the spines of the beak short, with a blunt
Spitka, very dense cover the whole side of the same
completely. - cj: kle & Sté se obruéové, uzka, s hora
ends with teeth on the front sharp and rear round-
corner; rear {outer and inner contour perfectly circular. - He lives on Hippophaé rhamnoides. - Biography nenf I know. Length 3 ° 75 mm. Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of species of the genus Psylla 37

52. hippophaés Forrster 48

- marg. groups as in the previous but sharp-edged stripes uZz8i,

102 ° 101.

v cell. Rl nad zevni ¢ ctrtinou nen {rozSfreni, za to v cell. Rs pfristupuji ostny tésnéazk R; whole cell. C- + Covered
thorns. - Sensors 0 ° 90 mm. - KudZele éelni 0 something short
peaks (0 ° 17: 0 ° 20). - Q: long segment of long wedge,
with sides long, noticeable hump, koneéek from the bottom up
rounded, the spines of the beak teardrop, the outer ring
zejkem. - jf: the sides are low, izkd, ending from above
delsim primym, finger-shaped lining, oblique to the front
rujicim, the rear outer contour is O-shaped. - We don't know
aije. - Curriculum vitae is not zndm. - Length 3 mm. 53. Loewii Scorr 76
the barbed areas at the edge are not cut on the sides:
marginal groups are narrower barbed surfaces, barbed-free
stripes total vSude uniform developed, quite wide, only
in the inner corner of the cell. C- + Sc ostny mizi, nad zevnf ¢ tvr-
tinou Rs is not a sharp-barred extension. - Sensors
1:10 mm. - KuiZele éelni are slightly shorter (0 ° 15:
0 ° 20). - 9: anal cable long climatic, with sides hump
povlovny, zoban ke konetgku uniforme zizeny, tento
evenly rounded, the spines of the beak sharp, long out,
cover the entire side of the same. - (? : klegté
the sides are narrow, non-high, ending in above with a short tooth,
whose front corner is sharp, the back {rounded, the outside
the rear contour of the clamp is O-shaped. - He lives on Rhododendron
ferrugineum. - Curriculum vitae is not zndm. - Length 3 mm. -

54. rhododendri Puron 71. N.B. Synoptic tables of the genus Psylla mame in the literature
two, one from Frora 61, the other from Meyrer-Duer 71, at that time
pet ujfef; when assembling
In view of my table, I looked at the compilation as opposed to easy
detectable, and only where there were these, I had to resort
k rozdflim drobnéjSim; In doing so, I always get QQidjid. common, ie the main kiidel. - Compilation of a determination table at Psyll
is much more difficult than in other insect families, because
sime zYici advantages that else give the compiler a color,
difference in the construction of the tentacles, chest, legs and buttocks, which
There are almost no differences in species, as stated in the award
their generic characteristics. 38 XXII. Dr. Karel Sule:

lil. Synonymically Catalog of species of the genus Psylla
palaearctic regions.

. breviantennata Fior 1861.
terminal M-D 1871 ..

. limbata M-D 1871.

. pulchella Loew 77.

. erataegt Scaraxk 180i. coslatopunctata ’Forrsrer 4s. ferruginea Forrsrrr 48.
annulicornis Boweman 1851.
triozoides Lermuierry 74.
puncticosta Tomson 78.
quercus Tuomson 78. -

Hm OS bh

. albipes Out 61. _ Dudai Sune 04.

salicicola Mr. Lonw 76.
ornata p. p. M-D 71.

o> Ot

. teophila Loew 76.
. buxi L. 1767. 9. fusca Forrster 48.
perspicillata Fror 61.
fuscula Tuomson 78. 10. viburnt Lozw 1876. 11. dedi Fuor 61.

lutea Tuomson 78. Oo =)

12. glycirrhizae Becxer-Loew 80. Reuteri Lorw 82. 13. pyrt L. 1767. autorum. 14. bidens Sune O7. 15. spartiicola Sure O07. 16. Loew 80.
sarmatica Low 8z. 7. intermedia Loew 83. 18. Flori Puroyx 71.

insignis Fior 61, nec Forrsrer 48. 19. parvipennis Lozw 77.

saliceti Fior 61, nec Forrster 48.

microptera THomson 78. 20. Hartigii Fuor 61.

sylvicola Leruierry 74. 21st prize Seorvotr 1763.

fumipennis Forrster 48. Bohemia, Austria, Hungary, Hel-
vetia, Gallia:

Helvetia, Gallia. Asia minor, Tauria, Corfu, Tirolia. Bohemia, Europe. Austria, Germania, Helvetia, Gallia. Bohemia, Austria, Hungary, Hel-
vetia, Germany (Saxony), Russia
sia (Livonia). Austria, Itussia (Finland). Bohemia, all of Europe. Bohemia, Europe. Austria, Hungary, Switzerland. Scandinavia, Russia (Fennia), Si-
beria, Asia. Southern Russia,
Turkestan. Bohemia, all of Europe. Gallia. Gallia. Russia meridionalis, Turkestan. Caucasus,

Austria (Illyria). Russia (Fennia, Livonia). Gallia, Germany, Scandinavia,
Russia (Fennia, Livonia). Bohemia, all of Europe. Bohemia, all of Europe. /
|

F

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of species of the genus Psylla. 39

92. stenolabis Lonw 77.

insignis Forrsrer 48.

ambigua Forrster 48.

melina ILor 61.

nec betulue Fror 61.

annellata THomson 78.

ambigua p. Lorw 82. 23. alpina Forrsrer 48. 24. alni L. 1767.

fuscinervis Forster 48.

var. lutea Sune 09.

var. Heydeni Forsrer 458. 25. befulae L. 1757 author
? Zetterstedti TuHomson 78. 26. picta Forrster 48. 27. myrti Puron 75. 28. ulmi Foerster 48.
bicolor M-D. 7 !. 29. little Scameppercer 36.
peregrina Forsrer 48.
carpini Forrstrr 48.
aeruginea Foerster 48.
crataegicola Forrster 48.
dubia Foerster 48.
rubida M-D. 71.
claripennis M-D. 71.
viridissima Scorr 76. 30. nigrita Zerr. 28.
pulchra Zerr. 48.
pineti Fror 61.
similis M-D. 71.
ornata p. p. M-D. 71.
pineti Lorw 77.
nec nigrita Revver 77. 31. Saliceti Foerster 48, Lozw 77.

salicicola ForrstTer 48.
rufula Forrster 48.

subgranulata Forrster 48.

galicicola Fror 61.
nec Ssaliceti Fror 61.
salicicola Loew 76 p. Pp. 32. pyrisuga Forrster 48.

pyri Scuamepsercer 36.
austriaca Fror 61.
rutile M-D. 71.
rufitarsis M-D. 71. Bohemia, all of Europe,
Austria, Helvetia, Gallia. Bohemia, all of Europe. Germany, Switzerland, Britain,
Scandinavia, Rossia (Fennia). Algeria. Bohemia, all of Europe. Bohemia, all of Europe. Bohemia, all of Europe. Bohemia, all of Europe. Bohemia, all of Europe. oo
Oo

54. 38,
39. AND(),

41. 42.

bs

46. 47. 48. 4g,

XXII. Dr. Karel Sule:

3. pyrastri Lozw 71.

costalis Fror 61.

nobilis M.-D. 71.

? affinis Lozw 79.

chlorostigma Lorw 86.
melanoneura Foerster 48.

crataegi Forrsrer 48.

pityophila Forrsrer 48.

oxyacanthae M-D. 71.

similis M-D. 71.

. Foerstert Fior 61.

alni 48.

. colorata Lozrw 88.
. cytist Poron 73. Delarbret Puton 73.
spartii Gukrin 45.

rhamnicola Scott 76.

simulans Forrster 48.
argyrostigma Forster 48.
pyri Scorr 76.

visct Curtis 40.
ixophila Lorw 62.
euchlora Lorw 81.

. abdominal M-D. 71, Svunc 09.

Ambigua Mr. Loew 82.

. Klapdleki Scuc 09.

salicicola Mr. Lozw 76.
elegant Mr. M-D. 71.
ornata p. p. M-D. 71

. pyrarboris Suuc 09.

pyri p. p. autorum:
pyricola Forrster 48.
apiophila Forrsrer 48.
notata ForrstEer 48.
? pyri Curtis 40.
alaternt Forster 48.
flavopunctata Fror 61. Palmen Lorw Revrer 82.
black Revver 76.

phaeoptera Lozw 79. Bohemia, Austria, Gallia, Helvetia,
Rossia, (Livonia, Fennia). Bohemia, all of Europe. Bohemia, all of Europe. Illyria. Gallia meridionalis, Spain, Cor-
sica, Italy, Dalmatia, Algeria. Gallia, Spain. Germany, Britannia, Gallia, His-
Mr. Hungary, Britannia, Scandinavia,
Rossia (Fennia). Austria, Hungary, Germany,
tannia, Gallia, Italy. Bohemia, Austria, Hungary, Gallia
Britain. Bohemia, Austria, Switzerland. Austria, Hungary, Britannia. Bohemia, Austria. Bohemia, all of Europe. Gallia meridionalis, Italy. Russia (septentrionalis,
Lapponia), Siberia. Austria, Helvetia, Gallia, Rossia

(Fennia). Fennia, -

ite i uae

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of species of the genus Psylla. 4]

50,
51. 52.

corcontum Sutc 09.
elegant Zetr 40.
ornata p. p. M-D. 71.

hippophaes Forrster 48.

? = nomen nudum

Bohemia. Bohemia, Austria, Hungary, Hel-

vetia, Rossia (Lapponia). Austria, Germania, Britannia, Gal-

lia, Rossia (Fennia). 55. Loewit Scorr 76. Britain. 54. rhododendri Puroy 71. Austria, Switzerland. 5d. brunneipennis Epwarps 96. Britain. 56. concinna epwarps 96. Britain. 57. coriacea Horvatu 95. Hungary. 58.? frontalis Rupov. Germany. 59.? fuscipes Hantic. Germany. 60.? geniculata Rupov. Germany. 61. hexastigma of Horvat. Ammuria, Japponia. 62.? humult Scunank. Austria. 63. tlicina Desterant Peres 02. Sicily. 64.? marginalis Harrie. Germany. 65. nasuta Horvatu 04. Turkestan. 66.? nigricornis Rupov. Germany. 67.? oblique Tomson. Scandinavia. 68.? olivacea Repov. Germany. 69.? rubra GEOFFROY. Gallia. 70.? salicis L. Scandinavia. 71.? simplex Harrie. Germany. 72.? sorbi.L. Scandinavia. 73. 2? sulfurea Rupov. Germany. 74. suturalis Horvatu. Croatia. “75. ? quercus L. Scandinavia. 76. venata Enwarps 96. Britain. 77.? viridis Harrie. Germany. NB. The first synonymically, cataloged species & genus Psylla
Palaearctic region, Puroy 75 compiled the second day of its
my catalog of European plots; this catalog only contains vyéet
to the time of the material, quite uncritically, as it is otherwise
according to the then state of the literature, it was not possible; only systematically
Lorwovymr's work gained the necessary critical base to assess
values ​​of individual species and describe them so that Of 82 could already sim

49 XXII. Dr. Karel Sule:

Loew published a new catalog, showing a nice series of synonyms, such as
strenuous fruit, twenty years of work; the next and last issue of the
Puralogova 99, accept and respect Lorw's complete results. This is Tini Scorr in his Psyll English and most recently OSaniyx
in detail: Directory of Palaearctic Hemiptera 07. In Gslice, the procedure of our knowledge of pal. Psyllach
transparent as follows:

Foerster 48 distributed 39 others, of which he described sdm as n.
sp. 32 second and 7 of them were old from their pyedchtded, incl. Liyyé; of those vechs has defended its species independence to this day 19,
the others are synonyms. :

Frior 61 describes only the species of Livonia, and the collection of
a short distance to Marseilles; rozezndval 29 druht, including his 10 n. sp. ;
about half of them are paid today, the others are synonymous or wrong
uréeni. Meyer-Dorer 71 sweats Psylly Svycarské, total 51; finds
vAll species of Forrsteroyva, i.e. 39, and describes his new 12
second; only one of the last ones succeeded: abdonwnalis! Rupow 75, working outside the scientific debate. His n. Sp. they are bored. Txomson's work on the Swedish Psyllach is
judgment of my predecessors, with which I fully agree, outside the
ckou diskussi! His n. Sp. they are also nomine nuda. Revrer 89 knows 20 second Swedes, of which about 17 today. Loew 82 lists a total of 113 passwords,% of which% 52 recognizes 52 as good
species, 61 for synonyms, in addition, there are still 12 slogans as nomine boredom
s?, about which nothing certain fici; of the last many neither
Psylly will not. Scorr 82 publishes a list of Psyll English; rozezndv4 22
second, of which 19 apply today; synonyms and nomenclature are adopted
from Lorwa. HorvAra 85 znd 21 second Hungarian, of which would apply today
about 19. Depot 92 zn4 from Guild 19 second, of which I am after the revision of his collection
05 could only recognize 15. Poron 99 will present the third and last edition of its Catalog
a total of 118 passwords, of which 85 are good second, in addition to 11
hesel as nomina nuda. OSaxis OT znd 61 druht a 13 hesel as nomina nuda. |
|
|
:
|

 

Uyod into the studio, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of drnhi of the genus Psylla. 43

In the present work, I found 130 passwords, of which 54 were good
others (6 new ones described by me), 76 synonyms, § names, dam
I could not imagine, not to mention the inexperience to examine the types behind
to find out their characters that the authors do not give; they are: drun-
netpennis Epwarps 96, concina Epwarps 96, coriacea HorvAru 95,
hexastigma HorvArs, ilicina Desterant Peres 02, nasuta Horvirn,
suturalis Horvatu, venata Epwarps 96, plus 14 nomina nuda,
? oznaéenych. Compared to Loew's catalog, which he did
the foundation in all his followers, I did due to the concept
kind of change in total 17 passwords, namely: I only treasure his synonyms. his good species:

sarmatica Lozw 82 is de facto fasciata Loew 80
Reuteri Loew 80 is Becker 64 glycirrhizae
costalis Fron 61 is Mr. Pyrastri Loew 76
chlorostigma Loew 86 is Dr. Pyrastri Low 76
euchlora Lozw 81 is f., hanging Burris

melina Frior 61 is stenolabis Lozw 77

affinis Lorw is? pyrastri Loew 76

Salicicola Foerster 48 is Salicico Foerster Lozw 48
ambigua Foerster 48 is a stenolabis Lozw 77

On the contrary, of the synonym Loew, I consider good
most species:
abdominalis M — D 71 is supplemented by me 09.
stenolabis Loznw 77 is accompanied by 09. Loew was both assigned to a kind of ambigua, Forrsver 48. The following are described and included as new species:
Dudai Sure 04
bidens Sutc 66
spartiicolu Sutc 07
Klapdleki Souc 09
pyrarboris L. sp. described in this article
corcontum 0. sp. described in this article. 44 XXII. Dr. Karel Sule:

Literature. Amyot, Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. 1847 (Clethropsylla - Psylla alni.) Biro Lasos, An Excursion on the Pop- [van, Il. (Rovart. lap = Entomological
letters 1885). Branczix KAnoty, Adatok Trencsén megye Hemiptera faunajdhoz (News
family research association in Trenéiná 1880.) Burmeister, Handbook 1832. CarreNtTizR-Dusgois, Materials for the Fauna of the Hippies of Memory (Memories)
de la Société Linnéenne du Nord de la France. 1892.) =

Comstock-Neepuam, The wings of insects (The American Naturalist. 1897). Curtis, British Entomology. XII. 1835 Datra-Torre KX. W., Beitrage zur Arthropodenfauna Tirols I. (Report d. Naturw. medic. Ver. Innsbruck. 1882.) Desrerani- Perez, Psylla ilicina, (Nuovo Giorn. botan. Italian, 1902). Dupa L., Insects with semi-calves in Czechs. Catalogus insectorum faunae bohe-
micae. (Prague 1892),

Epwarps, The Hemiptera Homoptera of the British Islands. (London 1894) Fasricius, Rhynchota. Fior Gustav, Die Rhynchoten Livlands (Dorpat 1861.) Fror Gustav, Zur Kenntnis der Rhynchoten (Bull. Soc. Imper. Nat. Moscow
1861.) Forrstrr Arnotp, overview of the victories and arts in the family of psyl-
ship. (Verh. d. nat. Ver. d. pr. Rhineland and Westphalia. 1848.) Fravenretp G, Beitrage zur Insekten-Metamorphose. (Vern. d. b. Ges. Vienna
1861.) Fravenretp G., Zoological Miscellenes III. ibidem 1864. Fravrexretp G., Zoologische Miscellen X. ibidem 1866. Fravenretp G., Ueber einige io Suedtirol, Judicarien und Kaernten beobachtete
Metamorphosen, ibidem 1869. Gere De, history of insects. 1780 Gutsin-Ménevitte, Iconography of the animal kingdom of Cuvier. (Paris 1829—43). Hanpuimscu A., The fossil insects. (Leipzig 1908.) :

Hartic, a trial of a plant of the plant (Phytophtires Burn.) purple
der Fluegelbildung, (Germar. Journal. Ent. 1841.) Hetxer ©. and Darna-Torre, about the breeding of the animal world in the Tyrolean Highlands
mountains, Rhynchota. (Sitting reports of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic)
Vienna, 1882.) HorvAru Giza, A magyarorszdgi Psyllidakrél. (Mat. and ter. hand. Hungarian. tud. academy. Budapest 1885.) Horvatu G., Psylla hexastigma (Termesz. Fizetek 1899.) [suturalis (Croatia)]. Horvirtu G., Insecta heptopotamica. (Anales Musei Nationalis Hungarici 1904). [Psylla nasuta. |

Kuaravek Franrigex, O zilnatiné kiidel u posvatek (Plecoptera) (Priroda, r. IV.) a a hi ea rt inn a a il a i

Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synoaymic catalog of species of the genus Psyla. 45

Lerurerry, Catalog of the Department of the North. 2ed. (Lille
1874). Linnt, Fauna Fauna, Holmiae 1761. Liyy #, Synopsis Naturae, editio XII. Holmiae 1767. Loew Franz, Contributor to the knowledge of Rhynchoten. (Verh. d. b. Ges. Vienna
1862.) Lorw Franz, Zur Biologie und Charakteristik der Psylloden nebst Beschreibung
two new species of the Psylla breeding. (Ver. d. b. Ges. Vienna 1876.) Loew Franz, Beiterege zur Kenntnis der Psylloden. (Ver. d. b. Ges. Vienna
1877.) Loew Franz, Zur Systematik der Psylloden. (Ver. d. b. Ges. Vienna. 1878.) Loew Franz, Mittheilungen ueber Psylloden. (Verh. Ges. Vienna 1879.) Loew Franz, Turkestanische Psylloden. (Verh. d. b. Ges. Vienna 1880.) Loew Franz, Beitraege zur Biologie und Synonymie der Psylloden. (Ver. d. z.
b. Ges. Vienna 1881.) Loew Franz, description of many new psylloden arts. (Verh. d. b. Ges. Vienna 1881.) Loew Franz, Revision of the Palaearctic Psylloden in Hinsicht auf Systematik
uod Syponymy. (Verh. d. b. Ges. Vienna 1882.) Loew Franz, Catalog of the Psylliden of the Palaearctic Fauna. (Wiener

; ent. Newspaper 1882.) Lozw Franz, Hine new Psylla Art. (Wiener ent. Newspaper 1882.) Loew Franz, President of the Psylleden Youth Stadium (Ver. d.
b. Ges. Vienna 1884.) Loew Franz, Neue Beitraege zur Kenntnis der Psylliden (Verh. d. b. Ges. Vienna 1886.) Loew Franz, overview of the Psylliden of Austria-Hungary with a key closure
von Bosnien und Herzegovina, nebst Deschreibung neuer Arten (Verh. d,
b. Ges. Vienna 1888.) Loew Pact, Rhynchota, Snake Carpet of the Hernstein area in Nieder-
Austria and the surrounding area. (In Beck’s, Fauna von Hernstein
in Lower Austria * Vienna 1886.) Meyer-Doer, The Psylloden. (Provisions of Switzerland. ant. Ges. Schauffhausen
1871.) Nassonov N. N., Entomology Course. I,, Naruznyje pokrovy nasékomych ‘. (Varéava,
1901.) Osanin B., version of the Palaearctic hemiptera, with special Berueck-
viewing your distribution in the Russian Empire. - (Beilage zum .Annu-
aire du Musée Zoologique de | ’Académie Imperiale des Sciences“ St. Peters-
bourg 1906.) Porton, Pet. New entom. (Ann. S. E. France. 1871.) Psylla Rhododendri,
Flowers. Pouron, eodem 73, Psylla Delarbrei. _ Poron, (Ann. S. E. France. 1876). [Psylla myrti, cytisi.] Puron A., Catalog of Hebrews. (Caen 1899) Reuter M., O., Heteropterorum novorum species aliquot descripsit (Notiser ur
Sallskap. for Flora and Fauna fenica. 1875.) :

Reuter M. O., Catalog Psyllodearum in Fennia hactenus lectarum. (1877) 46 XXII Dr. Karel Sule

Reuter M. O., To the kin of the Syrian Psylloder. (Ent. Timetable. Stock-
holm 1880.) oo
Rupow, To the knowledge of Psylloden Norddeutschlands. (School program

in Neustadt-Eberwalide, 1875.) Scorom, Entomologia carniolica (Vindobonae 1763.) Scorr Joux, Monograph of the British species belonging to the Hemiptera-Ho-
moptera, family Psyllidea, together with the description of a genus which
may be expected to occure in Britain. (Transactions Ent. Soc. London. 1876.) ;

Scorr Jouy, The British Psyllina with corrections in the Synonyms. (Ent. M.
Mag. 1882.) Scumimpperemr Jos., Posture for fruit breeding and for the history of the
Vegetable fruit insects. (Linz 1836.) Scuranx, Enumeratio Insectorum Austriae. (1781)

Scurank, Boica Fauna. (Nuernberg 1 £ 01.) n

Scte Karet, Description of the new measure of Psylla Dudai. (Journal of the Czech Entomological Society
leGnosti. Prague 1904.) Stre Karex, Revise Psyll sbirky Dudovy I. a II. is. (Éeské entomolo-
companies, Prague 1905 and 1906.) Su tc Karst, New news about Psyllach. (Casopis éeské ent. society. Prague 1907.) Suze Karen, Contributions to the Psyll. [Contribution to the psylloden knowledge]
(Debates of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, 1907.) Sure Karen. To the knowledge and synonymy of the contemporary Psylla-Arten. (Wiener ent. Newspaper 1909.) Tomson, Opuscula entomologica (Lund. 1869 Psylly r. 1878.) Wrrtaczit E., Zur Anatomie der Psylliden. (1885. Zeitschr. f. Zool. Bd. “XLIT)

ZeTTeRsteDT, Fauna insectorum lapponica. (Hammone 1828) Zetrexstevt, Insecta Lapponica descripta. (Lipsiae 1840.) ie
06r: 3

Explanation of the figure. 1. Hypothetically type of anterior wing tracheisation according to Cemustock and
Neepuama; C - costa, zilka extreme; Sc —subcosta, Zilka prikrajni; Sct, Sc2, branch
subcosty; R — radius, zilka yretenni; Rs = -radius sector, odnoZ radia; R1, R2
R3, R4, R5, R1 + 2, R3 + 4, designation of the individual branches of the radius; M - media, Zilka
medium; Mi, M2, M3, M4, Mi + 2, M3 + -4, designation of individual branches of the media;
Cu — cubitus, Zilka loketni; Cu1, Cu2, denoting individual cubite branches; Al,
A2, A3, first analysis, second, third angel (fitness); Tr. tr. bass. = trachea
basal transverse; Stl - stigma prothorakdini; StIl - stigma metathorakdalnf. 2. Psylla Foersteri Fuor, praibéh trachei in the fore kiidie of the true hatchery
adult. - Marked as in the previous image. 3. Psyila melanoneura Forrsrer, the story of Ziiek péedniho
dry and dry adult. - C + Sc — costa + subcosta, etc. marked Zilek
as with the previous Comsrox-Nerpuam. - Marked according to Lozw: abd =
costa; iklm = post-cost; aecb— = subcosta cd— = radius ef — cubitus, Stiel des cu-

 

 

bitus; fg ramus anterior cubiti, (A4usserer Ast des cubitus); fh - ramus poste-
rior cubiti (inner Ast des cubitus); hm = first, hl = two, gk = third, gi -
four forks. - 1— vordere Hasalzelle (adcea); 2-rear basal cell (not specified);
3 - Radial cells; 4— Disoidal cells; 5 - Cubital cell; 6-first edge cell; 7 -
second edge cell; 8 - Randmal, Fluegelmal, Pterostigma; 9 - Clavus. - aa ’=
end of the basal field (Rand der vorderen Basalzelle), pars basalis costae;
bd = part of the radial costae; di-pars discoidalis, costae; kl - pars cubitali costae;
tal = margo cell. marginally primae; ki — margo cell. marg. secondary; ae - pars
basalis, ec— pars discoidalis, eb - pars radialis subcostae. - Sut. — suture
anal (this last designation according to Comsrock). 4. Trioza urticae L., course of the anterior wing trachea in the adult larva; marked
éeni jako in fig. 1. 5. Trioza urticae L., the course of the anterior trachea in the first hatchery
spelce. Marked as in FIG. 1. 6. Aphalara calthae L., anterior calf trachei and adult larvae;
marked as in fig. 1 .; Ceph. — trachea going to the head; ped. Il. —Pedalis Il. foot pair. SIFIUNGSBERICHTE

and DER KGL. BOHM. at

you

and"

CHARTER OF RESEARCH

. AND
asa
¥ 2
~~

! .- MATHEMATICAL-)
NATURAL SERVICE CLASSES. Pag we

1909 |

 

JOURNAL

KRALOVSKE
CESKE SPOLEGNOSTL NAUK. THE THREE MATHEMATICAL AND NATURAL SCIENCE,
YEAR 1909. CONTAINS 24 DISCUSSIONS, WITH 12 TABLES AND 15 PICTURES IN THXT. Seles aS SS} -
IN PRAGUE 19140. PURCHASED BY KRRALOVSKE GESKE SPOLECNOST! NAUK

IN THE COMMISSION OF THE FRENCH,

 

SETTING TASKS

GOT «Tim ay
THE CONIGL. BOHMISCHEN CF

OPPOSITION SCHEDULE OF SCIENCE

MATHEMATICAL NATURE-RELATED CLASSES,
YEAR 1909,

ENTHALT 24 SUPPORT WITH 12 TABLES AND 5 TEXTILES. <1

PRAGUE 1910. VERLAG DER KONIGL. BOHM. BUSINESS COMPANY

IN THE COMMISSION BEI FR. RivNAC. List of lectures

mathematical-natural science classes,

—————

On January 8. Pror. Dr. Franr. Koen: Geodetic set of geographical coordinates in Prague

observatory. On January 22.

. Prop. Dr. Fr. Vespovsey: About finding a monosome in a sucker.
. Dr. Anr. Brozex: About variability in Palaemonet of Monfalcone near Trieste. 3. Dv. rada Dr. K. Zaunapyix: Some Notes on Circular Cisseids and

kozto kfivkich patnicovy ¥ ch.

. Paor. Dr. Anr. Frid: Olndlezech radio operator in the Zulu zone at Skutee.
. Well, BF. Rampsousex: About Bulgarian Staphylinides. On the 5th hole.

. Prov, Dr. Fr. Nude: A critical overview of current triangulates

around Prague. 2. J. SvApenix: Contributions to the anatomy and histology of Nematomorph. On the 19th floor. »Prov, Da Fx. Vesvovsxy: On the reduction of cytoplasm in spermiogenesis,

Putsch. B. Cusxa: New genus Enchytraeidi Hepategaster from the island of Novosibitsky. On March 5.

. Prov. Fe. Watbv: Experiment and Theory in Chemistry.
. KE. Procuizea: O linearni ystazmici Ao ua4p—- A, un + p — i + ... 4p un = O,

MAR 9 ~ 1939

Overview of the forecast
in the situations of the mathematical natural sciences class. Day 8 January. Prov. Dr. Fr. Smoking: The geodetic determination of seographic color
data of the Prague Star Wars. Day 22 January. 1, Prop. Dk. Fr. Vesvovsky: The poems of the Monosoms in the Mammals. 2. Dr. Ant. Brozex: About the Variety of Palamonetes from Monfalcone near Trieste. 3. Hofrat Dr. K. Zaunapyix: Einige Bemerkungen wher circulare Cissoiden als
Fuse points. 4. Prov. Dr., Aye. Furic: About a rudderfund in the Granitzone near Skué. 5. Fr. Rawnousex: About Bulgarian stacks. Day 5 February. t. Prov. You. Fn. New: Critical overview of better triangular measurements
in the surroundings of Prague. 2. J. Svinenix; Contributing to the anatomy and histology of Nematomorpha. Day 19 February. 1. Prov. Dr. Fr. Vespovsxy: About the reduction of Cytoplasma in the
matogenesis. 2, B. Ceska: Hine neue Gattung der Enchytraeiden Hepetogaster aus den neu-
Siberian island. Day 5 March. 1, Peor. Fx, Wann: Experiment und Theorie in der Chemie. 2. E. Procudzxa: Uber Lineare Ao wm + tp— + A, un + p = 1 - + - .. Ap un = 0. The

VI List of teachers. On the 19th of March. Av. Horwann and Fr. Stavisx: About tellurides in the aplite villa near Zdechovice. On April 138. 1. R. Hac: A study of sulfide by manganese. 2. Pror. Dr. Ap. Hormann: About boulders in coal flakes. 3. M. Serrert: Bunostomum radiatum. Anatomical study,

On May 14. 1. Pror, De Fr. Nusu: Notes on Abbe's Theory of Optical Imaging. ~

2. Dec. Dr. J. Mitsaver: On the decomposition of minia. 3. Dy. council Av, Horstann: About the so-called circular ruffled in flece stone- and
hnédouhelnyeh. 4. J. V. Zevizko: Piredbézgnd talks about some new Pteropods of the elder

palaeozoic middle guild. On il. June. Prov. F. Novorxsy: A Critical Review of Triangulact You of Praba. On 9%. July. _Vi. Sraxix: On drying substances under ether,

On October 22. 1. Doe. Dr. Avr. Sronc: On Nuclear-Free Individuals and Nuclear-Free Esteos
by proteus. Contributions to the doctrine of nuclear activity and protoplasm. 2. Doe. Dn. Em. Menez: The nucleus and its divisions in Micrococcus oehraceus, Sarcina

rosea a 8. lutea. Ibne November 5. Pror, Dr. V. Jayna: Regenerated in the members. Il. Regeneration in business cards. On November 19. 1. Dx. K. Sure: Introduction to the study, synoptic table and synonymous catalog of the second
genus Psylla paluearctic region. ;
2. Dx. J. Macvxt: The Theory of Three Folding Oscillating Circles. '

On the 3rd of December. -Pror. The. L. Cerakovent-: O. occurring with Stavelauu, calcified in some
Myxomycet. E

History of the future. VII

Day 19 March. Ap. Hormanxy & Fr Snavix: Uber ‘Telluride in e Aplitgange bei Zduchovic. Day 30 April. 1. R. Hac: Studies of the Schwannel manganese. 2, Prov. Dr. Av. Hormann: About the history in the stone coal flute. 3. M. Srirerr: Bunostomum radiatum. Chinese anatomical studies. The 14th May. 1. Pror. Dr. Fe. Nusi: Remarks on the Abbey theory of the pictures
Exhibition. 2, Doz. Dr. J. Mitnavrr: Uber die Zersetzung yon Minium. 3. Hofrat Av. Hormann: About sog. Augenkohle in the stone and brown

coal locks. 4, J. V. Zruizxo: Vorlaufiger Bericht itber einige. new Pteropod of the Alps
Palaeozoikums Mittelbohmens. Day 11 June. Pror. F. Noyorn ¥: A critical overview of triangulations in the environment

from Prague. Day 9 July. Vu. Srantéx: Take the dry matter of the substances under the ether. Day 22 October. 1. Doz. The. Awr. Svonc: About kernel individuals and kernel fragments of
Amoeba proteus. Contribution to the teaching of Kern and Plasma tattoos. 2. Doz. Dr. Kim. Mencri: Kern und Kernteilung bei Microcece ochraceus, Sarcina
rosea and S. lutea. Day 5 November. Pror. Dr. V. Janba: Regenerationsyorgange bei den Arthropoden. Regeneration
at the Libelluliden,
Day 19 November. 1. Dr. K. Sutc: Introduction to the Study, Synoptic Tables and Synonyms
mischer catalog of the art of the psylla district of the palaearctic region,
2. Dr. J. Macxt: Theory of three-year-old oscillating circles. Day 3 December:

Prov. Dr. L. Cetaxoysxy: About the formula of oxalsaurem Kalk at one
Myxomyceten,