wif

GARDEN WORLD

ILLUSTRATED WEEKLY
FOR THE ENTIRE HORTICULTURE

ISSUED

FROM

MAX HESDORFFER, BERLIN

eats sf
XVI VINTAGE before
(1. January to 31 December 1912)"

WITH TWELVE COLORED ART INSERTS
AND SIX HUNDRED AND THREE TEXT FIGURES

BERLIN

 

XVI, 47

The garden world. 653

 

are colored yellow. Don't want to be too cold in winter
Location. A Moroccan woman stands to her left

E. spec. Mogador, cine still undetermined, grateful
voluminous form reminiscent of E. Echinus. Other types mentioned, e.g. the 2—3 m
long-growing, pencil-round twigs, drooping (in the
garden often called Sarcostemma viminalis, ciner Asclepiadaceae,
led) E. pendula Boiss. and other types more, as well as those
mostly semi-succulents, more like warm houses
associated forms were intentionally omitted
taken on the picture. Even from this relatively smaller one
Collection it is evident how multifaceted the
Euphorbias are and it is absolutely worth it
to deal with the same. The connoisseur finds
a number of charms in these wonderful
common xerophytes (e.g. B. on the flowers!) Bell, king. Garden Inspector, Tubingen. perennials. Iris sibirica, from the European iris species
serves more as germanica and sambucina the si-
Birch iris the observance of landscape
girtner, for it is an excellent flowering species
for decorating banks, pond edges
and Gholichen puddles, which, even if they are once a
Standing a foot high in the water for a while, not this
Takes resentment and in turn also on drier soil
still blooms profusely, only their development here is natural
not so ippy. The attached figure shows
a troop of plants at the foot of the Alpinum, which
fewo years ago, from only four weak plants
existing, was planted there and now in the
Flowering time in spring with hundreds of flower stalks
is loaded. The light blue flowers, lighter inside
although they are among the smallest iris flowers, they sting
together in groups and give such a graceful,
long-stemmed filling material (Iris sibirica is
tem location up to 1 m high) for vase and natural
strauBe, with which much more pleasing arrangements
might be better than with the big, stiff ones
flower stalks of the large-flowered races. Form
orientalis Snow Queen is a pure white, valuable
improvement of the purple-violet flowering orientalis. iris
sibirica is also native to us; her dissemination
district extends to Japan, in the northwest
However, it is very rarely found in the wild in Germany. It grows primarily on damp meadows and low
ments. B. Voigtlinder. plant pests. The psyllids as enemies of horticulture. A collective report by Dr. Friedrich Zacher,
Berlin-Dahlem. Among the little enemies of horticulture there are quite a few
Groups of animals in the scientific and in the
horticultural literature is neglected in the same way
be, although their economic importance is not so
is low. These include, in the first place, the mites, which
bug-like insects, the cicadas and the flea or
Psyllids, which I want to deal with here. With the aphids or aphids and the scale insects
or coceids together form the psyllid or': leaf fidhe

the family of plant lice (Phytophthires). This family
is most closely related to the cicadas, but much
more adapted to a parasitic life on plants, and
Admittedly, this close adjustment is the first to the task
of flying ability and finally to give up the free ones
mobility in general, most strongly in the shield
lice pronounced. Only the males still own here
cin pair of wings instead of two, while the females in part

 

      

 

hey

 

Tris sibirica. Photographed for the "Gartenwelt" in the Botanical Gardens in Dresden. are not only wingless, but generally only
imagine motionless tubes bulging with eggs. The development of the parasites does not go quite so far
Nature with the aphids. After all, the convenient
Acquisition of food but here too profound changes
ments of the way of life which causes their exact parallel
in other parasites living in animals, e.g. B. at the
Intestines, thinks. Excess food is working
lawful in the whole of nature in the same sense cin, and
from our human-moral point of view

654 The Garden World. XVI, 47

 

seeks, in an unfavorable way. Valuable Acquisitions
animal organism that faces the hard struggle for food
owe their origin to become superfluous and disappear
hence, and so the parasite decreases from level to level of
its organizational level. The transformation always begins
with the regression of the locomotor organs, then the
sense organs and finally also the digestive tract
driven in the general dissolution. In comparison with
the well-flying and easily mobile cicadas are the
aphid trige animals. The winged animals do it too
of being able to fly only in hot, muggy weather
voluntary plentiful use, and the wingless animals
march very carefully. food at the place of
Birth present immediately, and so they sit there,
This creates the large colonies. Food overflow8
is known to frequently lead to the elimination of the
male sex in several generations. How to find
we in the trematodes, a group of intestinal worms,
between the sex generations a succession of
turned on generations who, without the intervention of male indi-
viduen reproduce. Exactly the same applies to the
Aphids having an alternation of a bisexual
a series of unisexual generations. The leaf-
Thousands are already on the parasitic course of development
quite advanced. Not so the leaf fleas, the psyllids. Here we see newcomers to this profession. In her whole
way of life they have become even more independent
preserved and also in body structure they are still the cicadas
quite similar. Your mobility is in the trained
stood, in which they mostly woblue-formed fligel and
Possess wing-coverts, quite lively; she is exalted
because they also — like their name — “leaf fleas”
states — possess jumping ability. They are mostly small
inconspicuously colored insects with one or two pairs of wings
roof-shaped over the abdomen in both sexes
cover, so that their habit is quite similar to that of the cicadas
are. The larvae show the parasitic nature a little more sharply
pronounced. They usually sit together in herds, are
of flattened structure and difficult to move because of their
long proboscis usually deep into the tissue of the plant
sink, with the aphids they share the peculiarity,
because their sucking often causes the plant to develop into pathological proliferations
ments, is stimulated to form galls. In contrast
but the psyllids remain in all of the scale insects
Stages of development move freely. To the development
to get to know a psyllid, we follow the description,
the Borner about the development of the big pear sucker,
Psylla pyricola Frst. Bérner has the entire
Development of this animal in St. Julien near Metz in
can follow a garden. The little animals were against
Observed in copula at the end of April. Found the first eggs
himself on the 2nd May, while the last ones only on -1. June off
were laid. They were initially light green, later light ocher
coloured, smooth, glossy, sessile, acuminate at the end and
oblique oval. Initially, they were singled out by the females
or in Little Heaps in the Felt of the Young Leaves
and flower stalks are laid down, but the youngest ones were also laid down later
Leaves preferred for oviposition. The first larvae hatched
after 9 days, on the 8th May, and skinned through-
on average once a week, so that on June 8th
reached their final form. Bérner finds five ver-
different stages of metamorphosis after leaving the egg. In the first instar the larva is moderately slender; she owns
no wings yet, but knotted foot bristles
in the same arrangement as the young larvae of aphids. At this stage, the corgi has only one segment
with a single olfactory organ and the outline of the legs
is still imperfect, since rail and Fu8 only through one
Skeleton part, the rail foot, are represented. The second
Stage already shows small progress by the first
Plants of stub wings occur, the body wider
and the knotted back bristles on the legs up
disappear one at a time. The third hiut brings one
Broadening of the wing stumps and thus the reshaping
of the larva into a large, flat-oval disk. still is
the articulation of the legs has not progressed, for that
but the fihlergeiffel already three limbs and the end of
first member, a third olfactory organ. Also the
Eyes have become better trained now, Well
comes the last skinning, in which the body shape of
reason is changed. The flat body of the larvae
is arched, the legs receive the further structure,
and the wings are unfolded. Now that's gender
mature, cicada-like animal ready, but it is not yet
quite inevitable. It is a peculiarity of the Psyillids that
that they change color according to the seasons
appear. Such are the young winged beasts of the great
Birnsangers initially colored light green, with narrow blaBlila
Long stripe on the back of the chest. Darken only in autumn
they appear after and after the hibernation in the Frith year
she dark reddish brown. This evolutionary process of a psyllid,
as Bérner describes him, for most of us
be typical of the forms under consideration. Only at the
Certain deviations can be found in the subdivision of the triocines. While in the case of the real psyllins the body edge of the larvae
wears a few shorter and longer hair, he is all around here
covered with scale-like wax glands, the wax
excrete rods, which the larvae like a radiant
surrounded by a wreath. Also occurs in the trioza larvae
Division of the legs into tibia and tarsus already in the last
larval stage. Let us now see what psyllid forms fir the gardener
eligible as enemies. Those for the outdoors cultivated
Aphids that are harmful to plants belong to the subfamilies of
aphalarines, psyllids and triocines. the adults
Animals can only be distinguished by differences in the wing veins
be distinguished, while the larvae are larger and more distinct
Differences show, but are still little known. Serious
active pests belong only to the genera Psylla and
Trioza, members of other genera form galls
on all kinds of plants without damaging them significantly. causes the larva of Livia juncorum Latr. a wed
of the inflorescences on many species of Juncus, those of Rhinocola
speciosaFlor. Leaf curls on poplars, Psyllopsis fraxinicola L.
(see. fig 2 in No. 49) on ash trees. The larvae of Calophya
rhois L. inhabit the underside of the young, tender leaves
of Rhus Cotinus L. and their sucking makes its way through a
Noticeable wrinkling of the leaf. Numerous kinds seems
to house Cytisus, Trichopsylla walkeri Fstr. calls
Rhamnus cathartica L, cine inflection and fleshy ver-
thickening of the leaf bark upwards. Far the
however, most species of the family belong in the two
Genera Psylla and Trioza. Less harmful than cunning
are the Psylla species, which include the red and white dorm and

 

 

 

——

yay
XVI, 47

inhabit the box tree. The larvae of Psylla crataegi
chrk. initially stick together with those of
Psylla peregrina Fstr. and melanonevra fstr. to the young
tender tips of the shoots and settle later on the
over previous shoots, where they form larger colonies. The Psylla buxi L. brings a peculiar on the box tree
curling of the leaves. Already Réaumur has in years
1737 in his seminal work Mémoires pour servir
4 V'histoire des insectes" masters the way of life of this species
faithfully portrayed. Only in 1881 did Léw have this description
completed. Réaumur knew some of the development
stages of Psylla buxi L. and also the completely
wrapped, winged animal. However, it was left to Léw
to fully elucidate and present the life history of this species
above all the female when she lays the eggs
watch. Depending on the location and the weather
the winged animals develop in May or June
the young. Unlike many other species,
they do not leave the food plant, but they house it
Summer over on her. Several weeks after its completion
begin the reproductive process. Since they don't
are fully developed at the same time, you can find them up to
spit into the summer in Copula. Now they can
However, females do not start laying eggs immediately,
but they have to wait until nature gives them
offers suitable places. Those are the ones for next year
certain leaf buds. Here they lay behind the two
4The scales break off 1-3 eggs each. The larvae hatch
mostly out before the onset of winter, and safe and sound
behind the bud scales and also in one
enveloped in waxy excretion, they survive the rough
Season. If the spring the plant world to new
Awakened to life, then the development of the
Laryen of Psylla buxi L. fast forward and becomes in
ended in a short time. After hatching they have
Boys initially only very imperfect, short, but for that
the thicker filers and legs. Only after the second
or third molt they become mobile, and then
leave the place of your birth for the first time. Far more harmful than those previously mentioned, relatively
harmless psylla species, the leaf fleas of the fruit
biume. Regarding the systematics of these animals prevails
despite Friedrich Low's excellent work
still a great deal of ambiguity. The ones considered for Central Europe
coming species are Psylla pyrisuga Fstr., pyri L. and
pyricola Fstr. for the pear tree, Psylla pyricola Fstr., simu-
Jans Fstr., pyrastri Law and mali Schmiedberger for the
apple tree and Psylla ppraniyScop) fir the plum tree. Of particular noxiousness is the plum leaf flea
nothing has been announced yet. On the other hand, there are
Mean complaints about serious devastation to apple and pear
trees without having to rely on the
Species names given in the literature — Psylla pyrisuga,
pyri and mali are mentioned most - any
value. With the most harmless form, the plum tree leaf flea,

Scop I want to start the dance and how
for the other forms, by and large me
hold the excellent representation of F. Léw. The winged
Animals appear quite early in the year when the buds
of the Prunus species inhabited by them, of the plum tree, the

blackthorn and bird cherry, are still closed. So-

The garden world. 655

soon as these open, in April, they lay their eggs on the
shoots and on the underside of the leaves. Soon
then the young hatch out, the lens-shaped flat
are depressed and have a fairly sharp body edge,
and suck the dustiest shoot tips into the leaf
shoulder tight. Their color is a dark green with two large,
yellow to light brown spots on the apex between the
eyes, as well as indistinct dots and lines of
same color on the back and at the segment borders
the posterior abdominal aid. Also the feelers and the legs
are yellowish brown except for their blackish tip, the eyes
grey-red, the wing-sheaths yellow-brown with brown, on her
End combed hair at its edge. on the abdomen
around the edge are ten to twelve buttoned and alternating with
them six untied hairs from the double length. These larvae do not excrete a secretion. From mid-June
on the winged imagines (sexually mature animals) appear,
which are much lighter in color than the overwintered ones. There is great confusion in the crop protection literature
early of the psylla species of the pear tree. Usually here in the
Older works only Psylla pyri, in the newer Psylla pyrisuga
and next to Ps. pyri mentioned. Léw has now proved that8
Psylla pyri L is a rare species considered a serious pest
is hardly considered. The information contained in the pest
literature on the occurrence and lifestyle of Psylla pyri L.
are made to agree with the in this regard at the
true Psylla pyri L. by no means
adjusted, it can therefore be assumed that the
Guide of this kind under the pear tree shads on a
confusion is based. According to the observations available so far
there are three different psylliums that live on the pear tree.
species, namely Psylla pyrisuga Fstr., pyri L. and pyricola Fstr. Only the latter also occurs on the apple tree. Appear depending on the location of the place and the weather
the adults in June, July or August. Then they are
still light in color, but gradually they darken with progress-
progress according to the season and only in the next spring,
after hibernating, they appear in the darkest
Coloring. Before one knew that, one differentiated
coloration, a large number of species whose composition
belonging was only gradually recognized. There are now typical and permanent differences
regarding the whereabouts of the larvae of the three mentioned
Species. The larvae of Psylla pyrisuga live first
the young leaves, especially the long shoots. Only when
they have grown a bit, after their second molt,
move on to the drive itself, and first of all
the parts that are still green, but later they move to the
already lignified, older part of the shoot. there
they sit tightly together so that they hold the twig
cover to a greater or lesser extent. The larvae of Psylla pyri and pyricola are different. she
always stay on the short shoots and sit there
them on the buds or in the leaf axils. (Conclusion8 follows in No. 49.) issues of time and controversy. From the teaching post. By A Janson. nIt is therefore a great mistake that & at horticultural schools
often the practical-artistic one for the teachers of garden art