PROCEEDINGS

OF THE

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OF

WASHINGTON

 

VOLUME XV, No. 2°
JUNE, 1913 tS Wh

E tic
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY BY THE SociETY
_ OFFICE OF PUBLICATION
2419-21 York Roap
. BALTIMORE, MD. *

EDITORIAL OFFICE
WASHINGTON, D. C.

Entered aa sctond-elass matter at the postoffice at Baltimore, Md., February 28, 1913,
under the Act of August 2471912

 

THE

ENTOMOLOGICAL ‘SOCIETY
OF WASHINGTON ~~

, SEEN ED. Manrcw 12, 1884. The regular meetings of the Society are held on the first Thursday of
each month, from October to June’inclusive, at 8 P. M.

Annual dues of active.members, $3.00; of corresponding members $2.00;. initiation fee (for active members only), $1.00. President...
First Vice-President
Second Vice-President. Recording Secretary. Corresponding Secretary-Treasurer

’ U.S. National Museum, Washingtoh, Dx,
Editor... WD, HUNTER}
Pareatae the ‘Society as a Vice-President of the
Washington Academy of Sciences...

 
   

 

' Executive Committee. “Dae Orricers. Narmay BANKs. B.A: Scawanz. +) L..0; Wowanp. PROCEEDINGS
ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF. WASHINGTON. Published quarterly by the Society at Baltimore, Md., and Wash-
ington, D. C. Terms of subscription: Domestic, $2.00 per annum;
foreign, $2.25 per ansium;' single numbers, 50 cents, foreign postage
extra... Remittances should be|made ‘payable to the'Entomological _
Society of Washington. ‘Authors of leading articles in the PaooaADINGs ‘ill be oniitied t0 26
separates.of each contribution, free of charge. Additional copies may be

had at cost by notifying the Editor before the final page proof is réturned
to the printer. *

 

 

cd

 

PROCEEDING

OF THE

ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

OF WASHINGTON

 

Ss

 

VOL. XV 1913

rey

 

 

Meetine or January 10, 1913. The 264th regular meeting of the Society was entertained by
Prof. A. L. Quaintance at the Saengerbund Hall, 314 C street
N.W., on the evening of January 10, 1913. There were present
Messrs. Barber, Busek, Caudell, Craighead, Crawford, Cushman,
Duckett, Fisher, Gahan, Gill (J. B. ), Gill (T. N.), Green, Hall, Hein-
rick, Holloway, Hood, Hopkins, Howard, Hunter, Johnson (F.),
Knab, McAtee, MeGregor, MeIndoo, Malloch, Marlatt, Morgan,
Myers, Parks, Popenoe, Quaintance, Rohwer, Sasscer, Schwarz,
Shannon, Siegler, Snider, Walton, Wood, members, and Messrs,
A.H. Clark, W. T. M. Forbes, W. H. Sill, F. L. Simanton, and J. F.
Strauss, visitors. President Busck occupied the chair. The minutes
of the preceeding meeting were read and corrected. Mr. Rohwer stated the the Auditing Committee had examined
his accounts as Corresponding Secretary-Treasurer and found them
correct. Mr. Rohwer read a communication from the International Com-
mittee on Nomenclature requesting the codperation of the Entomo-
logical Society of Washington by appointing two of its members to
serve on the American Committee of Entomological Nomenclature. After reading the letter, Mr. Rohwer spoke of the recent action of
the Executive Committee in recommending Messrs. Crawford and
Caudell to represent the Society. Doctor Howard suggested the
name of Dr. C. W. Stiles, whom he considered to be admirably
fitted to serve on such a committee. A ballot was taken resulting
in the election of Mr. J. C. Crawford and Doctor C. W. Stiles. 53,

 

      

 

 

 

54 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Mr. Quaintance then read his address as retiring President as
follow

 

ANNUAL ADDRESS OF THE PRESIDED

 

REMARKS ON SOME OF THE INJURIOUS INSECTS OF OTHER
COUNTRIES. By A. L. Quatwrance. Our knowledge of the injurious insects of the world at large
with the exception of Europe and one or two other region
on the whole, quite meagre. During the past decade or so, it
true there been a notable increase in the attention given by
governments to the subject of cconomie entomology in their respec-
tive territories, and numerous publications are now appearing,
dealing with the insects noxious to crops, forests, domestic animals,
ete. and especially to man himself. The importance of such work
in general has been perhaps the more quickly appreciated in view
of the numerous brilliant discoveries in the field of medical ento-
mology, which from the start have been of the greatest practical
value. The economic investigations along various lines, now well
under way, or but recently b om in many lands, will in due time
make known the more noxious species with which the people of
other-countries have to deal. ‘The extent to which work of this kind has been undertaken may
be judged by citing some of the countries where economic work
has been or is now in progress, as Japan, Java, Straits Settlements,
Fiji, Australia, New Zealand, South Afri 1, British East
Africa, India, Ceylon, Egypt, ‘Turkestan, Chil il, Argentina,
Uruguay, Peru, British Guiana, the West Indies, Mexico, ete. In view of our constantly increasing commerce with other
nations, knowledge of their insect pests is of prime importance, as
enabling us to better guard against their introduction. Aside
from practical considerations, however, much scientific interest
attaches to the biologie and other features of economic investiga-
tions in other countries, which contain much of inspiration and
suggestions for us. The writer personally has felt. the need of a
greater familiarity with the destructive insects, occupying the
attention of entomologists abroad; and in the belief that this
fecling may be shared, to some extent, by members of this society,
he has brought together for your consideration tonight condensed
on some of the ins which attack crops outside of North

  

   

  

 

 

 

 

  

 

    

   

  

 

   

Without doubt reference will be made to inseets which really do
not merit mention on account of their economic importance, and

 

OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1915.

species will have been omitted which should haye been mentioned. It has not been possible to so thoroughly review the literature as to
be reasonably sure even, of including all of the prominently injuri-
ous species, and it has often been impossible to decide upon the
proper economic status of a species from the authors’ remarks. These details, however, lose some of their importance when we
remember that the behavior of a given species in its natural habitat
does not necessarily warrant the conclusion that it would be equally
or more injurious if introduced into another country, though the
assumption that it would, under a new environment, maintain,
or even surpass, its reputation as a pest, is unquestionably a safe
one. Of special importance, however, is a knowledge of the food
habits and life history of a species, which considered in connection
with its original habitat and s stematic position, furnish adequate
grounds for conclusions as to its probable dangerous or innocuous
character. Time does not permit to dwell on the many interesting questions
related to a subject of this kind, which, of itself, is too large to
properly be considered in an address’ of this character. For
instance, it would be of much biological interest, and of very prob-
able practical value to summarize our knowledge as to what
extent insects from other Zodlogical regions, as the Oriental,
Neotropical, Ethiopian, etc. have adapated themselves in the
Nearetic and in what life zones in North America they thrive and
prove noxious. As is well known, Palearctic forms, especially
European, constitute the bulk of our imported injurious pests,
though many exceptions must be noted. ISOPTERA. Practically none of the Neuropteroid orders of insects are injuri-
ous to crops, with the exception of the Isoptera, which contains
two families, many species of which are at times plant enemies,
but especially of houses and other wooden structures. The well known Termes lucifugus of Europe is a pest of buildings
also attacking garden crops. Termes obesus Ramb. is probably the species responsible for
the large amount of damage in India to houses, crops and trees. In Ceylon Calotermes militaris Desn. and C. green’ Desh. are period-
ically pests of the tea plant. Termes lacteus Frogg. is destructive
to buildings about Sydney, and in the woods, builds tall rounded
nests or mounds. some of them 6 fect high. Coptotermes gestroi
Wasm. is destructive to numerous plants in, tropical Asia, as
Hevea brasiliensis, mango, coco nut palm, ete. In Formosa, Termes vulgaris Hay. is very destructive to sugar

ane, the insects eating the roots and paris below the soil, often

 

 

 

    

56 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

killing the young plants. In Turkestan Hodotermes turkestanicus
is noted for injuries to telegraph poles. ORTHOPTERA. Representatives of this order have been scourges to mankind
from the earliest times, sand accounts of their ravages occupy
prominent places in entomological literature. All families, save
one, contain injurious species, but the following especially ‘merit
notice. Locustide (Acridiide). Schistocerca paranensis Burm. is the destructive locust of Argen-
tina and surrounding regions of South America. Its distribution is
given as Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Chile. S. tartarica L.
(C. peregrinum Stal. ), a similar species, and with which the above
has been at times confused, is an insect of the greatest importance
in northern Africa, and western Asia. It occurs insouthern Europe
and is recorded from South and Central America. In the Sudan
this species is stated to be the most important of all insect pests
to crops,

Orthacanthacris egyptia L., the Acridium egypticum of some
authors, ranges over southern Europe, northern Africa and western
Asia. Its history as a devastating species is too well known to
require comment. Another important form, Calliptamus italicus
L., ranges as far north as central Europe, and also inhabits northern
Africa and western Asia. Dociostaurus moroccanus Thunb., period-
ically swarms over Algeria, living permanently in the higher alti-
tudes. This species ranges over about the same distribution as
the foregoing, and also occurs in Madeira. Colemania sphenarioides Bol., the so-called “Jolo Grasshopper,”
and Hieroglyphus banian Fab. are first class enemies of cereals,
rice, etc. in Mysore State, the latter occurring also in China and
India. In Formosa Oxya intricata Stal and O. velox Fabr. ar
destructive enemies of rice, and Gelastorhinus esox Burr. does simi-
lar injury in Formosa, and also in Japan. Cyrtacanthacris septemfasciata Serv. is the plague locust of Natal
central and southern Africa, and is present in Borneo. Thi
species particularly was the cause for the foundation of the South
Africa Central Locust Bureau. nother species, the brown locust
of South Africa, Locusta pardalina Walk. is also a pest of prime
importance. Some other species merit mention almost equally
with the foregoing. Anent locust ravages in northern Syria, it was stated in the
daily consular and trade reports that the commission appointed
by the government required every rural inhabitant to collect and

 

 

 

 
 

   
    

 

 

OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. 57

deliver at least 55 pounds of locust eggs. In this way a total of
629,882 pounds of eggs were collected. Achetide (Gryllide). In this family are several species frequently noted in economic
literature. The mole cricket of the West Indies, Scapteriscus
didactylus Latr., is excessively injurious to tobacco, sugar cane and
various other crops in Porto Rico. _ It is present in various islands
of the West Indies, and occurs in South and Central America and
xico. Its presence in the southern United States is a well
established fact. Gryllotalpa africana Beauv. is recorded from Asia, Africa, Australia
and New Zealand. In Uganda and Formosa, it is said to be ex-
tremely injurious to rice. Occanthus pellucens Scop. occurs in
southern and central Europe, western and central . It pune-
tures grape canes and stems of other plants like our O. nigricornis. Acheta bimaculata DeG., in Formosa, is very injurious to young
vegetation of various kinds, especially cotton, tea, ete. THYSANOPTERA. There are many species in this order which have shown them-
selves in the United States and where to be formidable enemies
of crops, as Nuthrips pyri, E. citri, and Thrips tabaci. The habits of
these insects, in some cases, are quite favorable to their dissemina-
tion from one country to another, and numerous species are already
widely scattered over the world. Limothrips denticornis Haliday occurs generally over Europe, and
, barley, and various fruits. L. cerealium Haliday, the
is distributed over all Europe. It is con-
sidered by Uzel as one of their more destructive species, injuring
it, oats and grasses, the attack causing the grains to
shrivel and become abortive. Heliothrips hemorrhoidalis Bouché,
a species which Bouché thought to be native to America, is widely
stributed over Europe and occurs in Australia. It is destructive
to numerous plants, and is one of our more injurous forms. H-.rubro-
cinctus Giard, the cacao thrips, is spread over the West Indies, *
where it is one of the prime enemies of cacao, attacking the pods,
tender shoots and foliage. It also injures the cushew, guava,
mango, etc. and is recorded from Uganda. The insect has recently
made its way to Florida. Thrips communis Uzel, in Bohemia, injures potatoes and beets,
where it is regarded as quite destructive. 7. flava Schr. injures
blossoms ot pear, apple, plum, cherry, ete. and occurs on vegetables. In England, this species with T. physopus L. are known as pear

  
 

      

   
 

   

 

 

 

 

58 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

 

thrips. The former species occurs in widely separated regions in
Europe and is probably generally present over the entire region. 7. minutissina L., present in England, Germany and Bohemia, is
another general feeder like flava and has about the same distribu-
tion. Thrips sacchari Krueger with 7. serrata Kobus attacks sugar
cane in Java. Stentothrips gramineum Uzel is injurious to barley
and other grains in Bohemia, while Drepanothrips reuteri Uzel is
injurious to grape foliage in Sicily, especially to certain American
varieties (Riparia). Phlocothrips olew Costa is one of the important
olive pests in portions of Europe, injuring the fruit and foliage. P. pallicornis injures sugar cane in Formosa. It is apparent that our knowledge of the injurious Thysanoptera
is confined mostly to Holarctic forms. _Tt is quite certain that other
regions will furnish many species which,-in their present or new
environment, will be quite troublesome. HEMIPTERA. Species of the order Hemiptera are of especial interest to crop
producers, for the sum total of losses for which they are responsible,
would amount to no small part of that chargeabie to insects as a
class. HETEROPTERA. Pentatomide. Two species of the genus Hurydema, namely, ornatum L. and oler
acea L. are pests of cruciferous plants in Burope, and much resemble in
habits and general appearance our harlequin bug. The former
species occurs over most of Europe, Asin Minor, parts of Russia,

nd is
recorded from all of Europe, Western Russia, Turkestan and Siberia. Several species, assigned to this family, are important in Aus-
tralia, as Stilida indecora and Rhoecocoris sulciventris, which, both
in the immature and adult stages swarm over orange orchards, suck-
ing sap from branches, causing the fruit to fall. Biprorulus bibax
is also an orange pest and is known as the spined orange bug. Philia basalis is one of the common fruit bugs of North Queens-
land, and the so-called cherry bug, Peltophora pedicillata ranges
from New South Wales to North Queensland. A similar spec
P. picta Germ. also punctures cherries, causing the fruit to fall. In South Africa, Bagrada hilaris, the Bagrada bug, injures crucif-
erous plants like our Murgantia histrionica Hahn. “This insect
occurs over central Africa, Algcria and the Arabian Desert. Bag-
rada picta Fabr. also infests cruciferous plants in India. Plantia
afinis Dallas infests growing rice in New South Wales. Turkestan, ete. The latter is even more widely distributed

  

   

 

   

OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. 59

Aenaria lewisi Scott does much damage to rice in Japan by piere-
ing the heads. The insect is single brooded, the adults hibernating
under trash in field and woodlands. Cuspicora simplex Walker
the brown potato bug, and C. virescens Tryon, are potato pests in
the Illawarra and Toowoomba districts of Australia. Coreide. In this family are several important species, though but few are
seriously des One species, the riee or paddy bug, Lep-
locorisa waricoruis, Fabris a serious pest to rico, ranging over
Japan, China, India, Ceylon, Philippine Islands, et

Mictis profana, the crusader bug, is abundant in citrous orchards
in Victoria and punctures the shoots, blighting the twigs, often
causing the crop to fall. Lygwide. Nysius vinitor Bergroth, the Ruthergren bug of Australia, punc-
tures fruits, as grapes, peaches, and the like, causing them to rot,
and is considered one of the most destructive plant bugs on that
continent, swarming over fruit and foliage in countless millions. Oncopeltus quadriguttatus, the cotton bug, is common on cotton
in the Richmond River section and ranges from Sydney to Queens-
land. Oxycarenus letus Kirby is a cotton pest in many parts
of India. Only twelve days are required from egg to adult. Pyrrhocoride. This family is of interest principally on account of several mem-
bers of the genus Dysdercus, which contains species quite injurious
to cotton in various parts of the world. There are some four or
five Nearctic species and a single one from the Paleartic region,
D. crucifer Stal occurring in Japan, the Philippines, ete. Some
twenty species occur in the West Indies and South and Central
Ameriea. Dysdercus side infests cotton in New South Wales, staining the
cotton fleece with its excrement, in common with the other forms of
the genus, which seem always to infest cotton when grown within
their range of distribution. D. cingulatus Fabr. is abundanton
cotton in India, while D. fasciatus Sign. is the cotton stainer bug
of South Africa, occurring also in Portuguese Hast Africa. Another
species, D. superstitiosus frequents cotton on the Cape. D. in
laris and D. pacifica oceur on cotton in Fiji, but have not as yet
caused much trouble. Certain species are pests to the south of us,
ice., D. ruficollis L., in Peru; D. howardi Ballou, considered quite
important in Trinidad and Tobago; and D. andree L. in Cuba. D. delauneyi Leth. is common in the Southern Islands. The harle-

 

 

 

 

60 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

quin bug of Australia, Dindymus versicolor, is a Pyrrhocorid and
punctures ripe fruits. :

Tingitide. Urentius echinus Dist. occurs on egg plants in India, though not

yet troublesome. The olive tree bug, Froggattia olivina, of
New South Wales, has turned its attention from the wild to the
cultivated olives, sometimes defoliating the trees. Stephanitis
(Tingis) pyri Fabr., which inhabits Europe, Asia Minor, Russia,
Japan, , is injurious to foliage of pear and is mentioned in most
European works on economic entomology. Capside. In this extensive family, the species mostly live on plants and a
few are of importance.The famous mosquito blight of tea in
India and Ceylon is due to Helopeltis theivora Waterhouse while
H. bradyi Waterhouse injures cae1o in Java. Disphinctus politus
Walker attacks the betel vine and D. humeralis Walker injures
Chincona, in India. Gallobellicus crassicornis Distant, is a garden
pest in Bombay, and in Pusa, attacks and breeds on tobacco. Calcoris angustatus Leth. attacks sorghum in South India. C. trivialis Costa injures the olive, vegetables, ete. in portions of
southern Europe, and is present over northera Africa. HOMOPTERA. Cercopide. The Cereopidie, though not numerous in species, are widely
distributed over the world, though not many are troublesome to
crops. Tomaspis varia Fabr., the sugar-cane frog hopper, is just now at-
tracting considerable attention in Trinidad and Tobago. The
young feed on roots of the sugar-cane plant, following these in
cracks in the soil, and the adults feed on the the leaves. 1’. postica
Walker occurs on sugar-cane in Mexico. Philenus spumarius L.
injures the sugar beet in Bohemia. Ptyelus costalis Wk. is a pest
of rice and sugar cane in Formosa. Jasside. This family has been but little worked in the newer parts of the
world, though a few important species are to be mentioned as
crop pests. Nephotettix apicalis Motsch. is a serious enemy of rice
in seed beds in Japanand lormosa, and has caused a loss of $10,000,-
000 in a single year. The species ranges over Japan, China, Ci

 

   

 

OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. 61

lon, the Philippines, ete. Another Jassid injuring rice in India is
Tettigoniella spectra Dist. Three species of Idiocerus injure the
shoots of mango in Saharanpur, namely, I. clypealis Leth., I
niveosparsus Leth. and I. atkinsoni Leth. Chloritia (Bupteryx)
solani Kollar is the potato frog fly of England, as stated by M
Omerod. Thamnotettix fuscovenosus Ferr. occurs in Italy, Co
Greece, Austria, ete., and in some regions injures the olive. Typhlocyba viticola 'Targ. injures the grape in Italy, as does flaves-
cens in northern Africa. In Bohemia several species of Ja
injure the sugar bees, as Cicadula sexnotata Fall., Eupleryz atro-
punctata Gocze, ete. Zygina subrufa Motseh., Dellocephalus dor-
salis Motsch. and Strongylocephalus agrestis Fall. attack riee and
sugar cane in Formosa, the latter species injuring the same crops
in Japan. Fulgoride. A notorious species in this family is Perkinsiella saccharicida
Kirk., the su; ‘ane leafhopper, which, on account of its injuries,
led to the establishment in Hawaii of the Entomological Division of
the Sugar Planters’ Experiment Station. The pest is thought to
have been introduced from Australia, and is known to occur in
Java. Several other species injure sugar cane, as Phenice moesta
Westw. and Pyrilla aberrans Walk., in India, and Delphax sac-
ora West., which some years ago was troublesome in the
t Indies. Liburnia (Delphax) psylloides Leth. injures corn
in Ceylon and India. Ricania zebra Dist., in the same region, in-
fests rice and grasses. Hysteropterum grylloides Fabr. infests the olive, in Italy, and is
general over all of southern Europe. Another European form is
Hyalesthes obsoletus Sign. injuring young olives. Dictyophora
pallida Dor. is the sugar cane fly of India, and is common inthe
Punjab, United Provinces, and Behar. Cane is said to be its only
food plant. Psyllide. The injurious members of this family are mostly of the genus
Psylla, and numerous forms of decidedly economic importance
occur in the Palearctic region. Thus, Psylla mali Schmidbg. ranges pretty well over Europe, and is a decided pest of apples. In England it is known as the apple sucker, where it is considered
one of the worst of all pests to this plant. P. crategi Schr. occurs
over Europe generally on apples and Crataegus. P. pruni Scop. is also distributed over much of Europe, including Siberia. It
attacks plum and prunes. P. pyri L. occurs on pear and has about
the same distribution as the foregoing. P. pyrisuga Forst., also
attacking pear, occurs over much of Continental Europe, ar is

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

62 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY
also found in Japan. In France it is known as the orange Psylla
on account of injuries to oranges. P. cistellata Buckton caus
galls on mango in Dehra Dun. — Trioza obsoleta Buck. attacks the
persimmon in Thana and a species of this genus injures the young
growth of citrus trees in South Africa, where it is known as the
citrus Psylla. Mycopsylla fici is found on native figs in Australia. the larvie hiding under the abundant milky sap which exudes from
the punctures made. Homotoma ficus L. attacks the foliage of
fig in Italy, the species being present also in Spain, France, Dal-
matia, ete. The olive Psyllid, Euphyllura olévina O. Costa injures
the olive and has about the same range as the preceding species. Aleyrodide. rodidie is a family of wide distribution in the temperate
and tropical parts of the world. Many species have already at-
tracted attention by their injuries and a few constitute quite
destructive pests. Aleyrodes citri and A. vaporariorum may be
cited as examples of very undesirable introductions already effected. Two species injure tobacco, namely, Aleyrodes tabaci Gennadius,
in Greece, and A. nicotiane Maskell in Mexico. Sugar cane in
Java is attacked by three species, namely, Aleyrodes bergii Signoret,

longicornis Zehniner, and A. lactea Zehntner. ‘The guava in
Brazil is infested with Aleyrodes horridus Hempel and A. goyabe
Géldi. Aleurodicus cocois Curtis is a guava pest of importance in
Trinidad, Venezuela and Brazil, and | long been known as
troublesome to cocoanut palms in portions of the West Indies. A closely related species, A. destructor, seriously infests this plant
in the Philippin

In Europe, Aleyrodes brassice Walker has long been known as
more or less destructive to cabbage, kale and other members of the
cruciferous family. Aleyrodes youngi Hempel seriously  infests
cabbage in Brazil. Aleyrodes ribiwm Douglas occurs on red and
black currants in England. Many other species might be men-
tioned as of possible or actual economic importance in foreign
countries. Coceide. The Coceide, asa family, is of the greatest economic importance. The mode of life of the species favor their wide ce and
very many are now practically cosmopolitans. In. th y
especially it is difficult to surmise the behavior of a species intro-
duced in a environment, with abundance of food, ete. Mr.
Sasscer has kindly ed me in the selection of a few. forms, not
yet found in North America, and which are evidently of importance
in their present range of distribution. OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. 63

 
 

attacks sugar cane, guava, palms,
citrus ete., and occurs in New Zealand, China, Madeira, Mauri-
tius, ete. Phenococcus ole Marchal, is an olive pest in Tunis. Pseudococeus sacchari Ckll. infests sugar cane in Cuba, Porto
Rico, South America and probably elsewhere. Pseudococcus perniciosus Newst. & Wilcox is a mealy bug very
injurious to the lebbek in Cairo, Egypt, where the tree is grown for
shade. It also oceurs on the Christ's Thorn and Sunt. Coccus (Lecanium) viride Green., the so-called green bug of Cey-
lon, infests a long series of useful plants, but is espe:
tive to cofiee. Itsravages to this erop have been practically respon-
sible for the abandonment of its cultivation over the greater part
of the planting districts of Ceylon. Lecaniwn krigeri Zelunt., attac ane in Ja’

Three species of Chionaspis are Javanese cane pests, namely,
C. depressa Zehnt., C. sacchari-folii Zehnt. and C. madierensis Zehnt. Parlatoria pyri Marlatt occurs on pear and apple in Manchuria. From its affinities, it must be regarded as a suspicious character. Aspidiotus oceanicus Lindinger is a pest of the coconut in the
South Sea Islands, and A. lauwretorum Lindinger, in the Canary
Islands, infests a long list of plants, including Smilax, Hedera,
Laurus, ete. A. destructor Sign., of very wide distribution outside
of North America, occurs on the banana; coconut palm, tea, mango,
and many other useful plants. A. sacchari infests sugar cane in
Java. Aspidiotus africanus Marlatt, of South Africa, is seriously de-
structiveto the privet and fig, and infests, to a less extent, other
cultivated plants, as apricot, quince and apple. It is also abun-
dant on honey locust and pepper tree. Leucaspis japonica Ckll., occurs in Japan, China, and South
Africa, infesting apple, pear, maple, magnolia, ete. LEPIDOPTERA. In this order, practically all of the families contain species more
; important economically, though the actual number of
families containing notably destructive forms is much less. Nymphatide. Brassolis isthmia Bates, the cocoanut palm butterfly is a trouble-
some enemy’ of its host plant in the Canal Zone. Lycanide. Virachola isocrates Fabr., in India, works havoe in pomegranate
plantations and also injures guavas. Zizera labradus Godt. has

64 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

come into notoriety in Victoria by reason of its injuries to beans
and peas. Thecla pruni L. injures plums in portions of Europe, but
is not of much importance. Hesperiide. Three species of this family are noted as destructive in India. Larve of Gangara thyrsis Mo. are injurious to palms. The rice
skipper, Parnara mathias Fabr. is at times destructive to rice, there
being two broods on rice during the rains. _Telicota palmarum Mo. occurs on date palm, and in widespread in India. Castniide. A single species of this interesting South American family is to
be noted, namely, the giant sugar-cane borer, Castnia licus
Drury. It is quite destructive to sugar cane in British Guiana. It has been collected in various localities in the northern half of
South America and also in Nicaragua, Costa Rica and Trinidad,
where it also attacks the banana. This species is also reported
from Surinam. The larve tunnel the canes, producing the so-
called “dead heart.”

 

   

Notodontide. Phalera bucephala Steph., the bufi-tip moth, in England, is
troublesome to many shade and fruit trees, including nuts. It
occurs over Europe, except the polar region, Siberia, etc. Thaumetopwide. A single species, Thawmetopea processionea L., the so-called pro-
cession caterpillar of Europe is here to be noted. These caterpillars
defoliate oaks, hard wood trees, and even attack field crops, as
potatoes, beans, flax, etc. The species is evidently quite important
to forests, and is interesting on account of the habits of the larvie,
which, after they are about half grown, return after feeding, to
definite localities on the tree trunk, usually a depression or other
deformity. Lymantriide. (Liparide). To this family belong some of our most notorious injurious in-
sects, namely, the gipsy and brown-tail moths, tussock moth,
ete. ' Here also belongs the famous “nun” moth of Europe, Lyman=
tria monacha L. ‘The caterpillars are polyphagous, but especially
frequent coniferous and hard wood trees. This species, judging
from literature, is one of the highly injurious European insects. The “nun” moth ranges over central and northern Europe, except
the polar region, northern Italy, Greece, Japan, ete. Another

 

 

oF

 

HINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. 65

polyphagous species is Porthesia similis Fuessl. with about the
same distribution as L. monacha. It is often very destructive to
fruit trees. Euproctis subflava Brem. is very destructive to fruit
trees of all kinds in the Punjab, and probably elsewhere over its
range, in Japan, Corea, portions of China, Usuri, ete. Dasychira pudibunda L. is also a species of unsavory reputation
in Europe and widely spread, occurring in central and northern
Europe, Japan, China, ete. Orgyia gonostigma F. should also be
mentioned in this connection and has about the same range as
D. pudibunda. In New South Wales, Teta anartoides Walker is
regarded as a serious pest, feeding on Acacias, roses, cherry, ete. T. contraria Walker, the bag shelter caterpillar, is reputed to kill
stock, the hairs of the caterpillars being eaten in grazing, cause
ulcerations of the mucous membranes. Lasiocampide. -

Malacosoma neustria L. makes its tents on various plants, as oak,
elm, fruit trees, roses, etc., occurring pretty generally over Europe
except the polar region, and is present in western Asia, Siberia,
China, Japan, ete. Gastropacha quercifolia L., spread over Europe,
is at times of importance to fruit trees, as is Pecilocampa populi L.
and Odonestis pruni L. Lasiocampa trifolii Esp., occurs on clover,
ete., in Europe and occurs also in England, and portions of Asia
Minor. Noctuidae. This large family, as would be surmised, contains many highly
injurious forms in different parts of the world. Chareas graminis L. is from time to time very abundant and
destructive to meadows in portions of Europe, the larve eating
the roots of grasses. It is usually noted in devastating numbers in
the mountain districts. Mamestra composita L., the army worm of New Zealand, seriously
injures various grains and grasses. Dianthoecia compta occurs
over central and southern Europe, and includes in its food violets
and carnations. Diloba caruleocephala L. injures cherry, plum
and apple in England, oceurring also in Europe and Asia Minor. Hadena brassice L. has a wide range, as Europe, Siberia,
India and South America. Prodenia littoralis Bdvy. is a serious
pest of cotton in Uganda, Cape Colony, and Egypt, and occurs in
the Canaries, Asia, Central America, ete. Gortyna ochracea Hubn. mines the stalks of Irish potatoes in Ireland, and occurs over
central Europe, in Italy, Ru: Corsica, ete. Nonagria inferens
Walk. bores the stems of rice in Formosa, while V. wniformis
Dgn. is the cause of much complaint in India during the cold wea-
ther from its boring of wheat stems. NV. exitiosa Oll. is said to be

 

 

   

 

   

   

 

 

 

   

66, PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

 

 

the most destructive of all pests of sugar cane in New South Wales. Spodaptera inauritia Bdv. appears in great abundance on rice and
grasses during the rains, or soon after, in India and has also been
reported as quite destructive to Batangas rice fields in the Philip-
, s known as a pest also in Borneo. This species also
s tobacco and vegetables. Calamistis fusca Hamp. (gener-
ly referred to as Sesama) is a first class pest of corn in the Trans-
vaal, Natal, Cape Colony, Rhodesia, ete., while Sesamia cretica
Led. is one of the worst of all pests to corn and sugar cane in Khar-
toum. It ranges over Egypt, southern Europe, Minor, ete. The larve bore into the stems of the young plants, later attacking
the ears of corn. Tweniocampa incerta Hbn. feeds on apple foliage and fruit in
England; willow, oak and sloe are, however, its normal food plants. The species is distributed over much of Europe, Siberia, ete., and
is recorded from North America. Two species of Xylina, namely,
ornithopus Rott. and socia Rott. injure plums in Europe and have a
wide distribution in the Palearctic region. In India, Heliothis
assulta injures tobacco. In the same country the green shoots of
the egg plant are bored by Bublemma olivacea Walk. Thalpochares
scitula Rmbr. is noteworthy among Noctuids as feeding on scale
insects in Italy. Plusia chaleytes Esp. feeds on foliage of peas, beans
and potatoes in Australia, while P. agramma Guen. feeds on Cucur-
bits in India. P. nigrisigna Wal a common pest in India,
feeding on lucerne, peas, ete. Ci leucosticha Hamp. is the
East African cob worm and eats the ears of corn, as does our com-
mon bollworm (Heliothis obsoleta). Diparopsis castanea Hamp. is the Sudan cotton bollworm, where it was probably introduced. It is also known from Beira, Delagoa Bay and Ugand Sacododes
alis Dyar, an allied species of South America, has similar habits. Larvie of Ontoplera intricata Walk. are said by French to be the
most destructive of grass-eating grubs known to him. The females
lay from 500 to 700 eggs each. Larvze construct tunnels which
they leave at night to feed. Naranga diffusa Moor is a pest of
rice and grasses in Formosa. One group, of the Noctuide, (Aphiderine) contains several
highly interesting and destructive forms, from the habits of the
moths of piercing with their especially adapted probosces, ripe
fruits, in order to feed on the juices. Menas salaminia Fabr. occurs in portions of Australia, as does
Orthreis fullonica_L. and is further distributed to Africa, India,
Ceylon and the New Hebrides. Argadesa materna L., Cosmophila
erosa Hbn., Egybolia vaillantina, Sphingomorpha chlorea, Ophiusa
liewardi are other names for fruit piercing moths mentioned in
literature as troublesome in Australia or South Africa. C.
erosa is also recorded from the United States. OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME 1913. 67

 

 

Agaristide. to be noted. Phalwnoides glycine Lew

A single Agaristid i
storia, where it may have been introduced. a serious vine pest in V)

   

Geometridae. Cheimatobia brumata L., known in England as the winter moth,
is a fruit pest of importance in Europe. The larvie feed on most
forest trees (except conifers), hedgerows, etc. The insect strongly
resembles our American canker worms, the females being wingless. This species ranges over central and northern Europe, southern
and western Russia, Greenland, ete. Chlorolystis rectangulata
L. is the so-called green pug moth, occurring pretty well over
Europe. In Ireland it is troublesome to apples. Abraxas grossular-
fata L., the magpie moth, is especially troublesome to the currant,
though fruit tree attacked. Its distribution is very wide,
as Europe, Siberia, China, ete. Mibernia defoliara Clerck is often
damaging to fruit and other trees in Europe and is gencrally
referred to in European textbooks. H. rupicapraria Hb. is also
of wide distribution, and apparently of about the same importance. Anisupteryx ascularia Schiff. is an orchard pest in Europe, and
is England is called the March moth. Its usual food is white thorn
and black thorn, but it infests oak, elm, maple, etc. Biston
gracorius Stgr. is a pest of forage plants and occurs in Italy, Greece,
Macedonia, ete. Biston suppre caterpillar pest of tea,
injuring this plant periodically in India. Hemerophila atrilineata
injures mulberry seriously in Japan, interfering with the silk
industry. Cynbide. Earias insulana Bvd. is the Egyptian cotton bollworm, or the
spotted bollworm of India, causing a yearly loss in the former region
of about $5,000,000. It attacks most malvaceous plants. It is
recorded from North and South India, Burma, Siam, Australia,
Mauritius, Uganda, ete. Karias faba Stoll, also known as the
spotted bollworm, has similar habits, though in India it is more
abundant than the former spe: The larvie bore into cotton
bolls and feed on the oily seeds. In the absence of bolls, the shoots
are tunnelled. In warmer parts of India the insect may go through
its life cycle in about thirty days, and they are active throughout
the winter. Zygenide. Leouana iridescens Bet.-Baker, the coconut leaf moth, has for
many years been a destructive insect enemy of the coconut and
Royal palm in Fiji. It is apparently yet limited to these Islands. 68 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Sesiide. Sesia myopeformis Bkh. infests the trunk and branches of apple
trees in Europe, as does S. pyri in North America. Trochilium
crabroniformis Lewin is injurious to osiers, the larvee boring the
stumps. It is recorded from England, Germany, Austria, ete. Cosside. Cossus cossus (ligniperda) L. bores the trunk, limbs and branches
of shade, park and forest trees, as well as orchard trees. According
to Taschenberg 266 larve were taken from one pear tree, while
from 20 to 30, in individual forest trees is usual. The species is
widely distributed, as much of Europe, Syria, Korea, A near
relative, Zewzera pyrina L. is now established in the United States. Z. coffew Nietn. bores coffee stems in India, while Cossus tristis
Drury bores the wood of apple and quince in South Africa. Hepialide. Hepialis lupulina L., the garden swift moth of England, does
great damage to roots and stalks of plants, as well as bulbs and
corms. The larvae attack also the strawberry. It oceurs over
central Europe, Scandinavia, Italy, Dalmatia, ete. Hepialus ~
humuli L. is a pest of the hop plant, the larve tunnelling the roots. It occurs pretty well over northern and central Europe. Larve of
Charagia lignivora Lewin bore apple-trees in Victoria, while in
Australia larvae of Pielus hyalinatus and P. imperialis live inthe
roots of trees. Pyralide. Chilo simplex Butl., C. zonellus and C. partellus Swimb. are pests
of cane, corn, sorghum, grass, etc. in India and Formosa, as
C. fuscatellus Sn. in Java. The larvee bore the stems of the plants. Diatrea striatalis Snellen bores sugar cane in Java, like our D.
saccharalis, and is one of their most important pests. A related, or
perhaps the same species, D. auriflua Zell. similarly injures cane in
India. Diatrea canella, D. lineolata with D. saccharalis injure
sugar cane in Trinidad. Heterographis bengallela Rag. tunnels the
fruit of the custard apple in the region of Caleutta and Euzophera
perticella Rag. is a wide-spread pest of the egg plant in the plain
of India, the larvee boring the lower stems, while another speci
Leucinodes arboralis Guen. infests the fruit. Nephopteryx rubri
gonella Rag. is the pear fruit borer of Ja and is very destructive
to this crop. N. sagitiferella Moore, similarly bores citrus fruits
in Perak and the Malay Archipelago generally. Phycita infusella
Meyr is widely spread over India, and is known as the cotton bud
moth on ans of its injuries to cotton. Nymphula depunctalis

  

 

 

 

    
  

      
    
 

    

 

OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. 69

Dup. is common in India and feeds on foliage of rice. The larve
make cases of leaves and are able to live either in air orwater. Godara comalis Guerin, infests, in Australia, the leaves of turnips
and horse radish. and in the same country Conogethes punctiferalis
Guerin, attacks ripening peaches, eating into and webbing over the
surface, and pupating at the pit. Dichochrosis punctiferalis Guerin
is quite injurious to castor beans in India, the larvie boring into the
stems and seeds, often causing much loss. Pyrausta nubilalis Hb.,
ranging over central and southern Europe, Asia Minor, southern
India, ete., is destructive to hops in Europe, the larve boring the
stems of the plants. Scirpophaga intacta Sn., in Java, injures
sugar cane, the larvee boring the terminal roll of leaves and also the
stem. Sylepta derogata Fabr. and Phycita infusella Meyer, are
both cotton pests in India, the former feeding on the leaves, which
it rolls, and the latter on the buds of the shoots, folding the young
leaves together, which renders its detection’ easy. Glyphodes
indica Saund., which much resembles our melon caterpillar, has
in India about the same habits, the larve defoliating melon and
allied plants. MWicromima olivia in Cuba rolls and eats the leaves
of tobacco in the seed beds, attacking also the egg plant. Tortricide. This family contains some of our most destructive insects and
species of importance in other countries should be looked upon with
suspicion,

Omphisa anastomosalis Guen. is quite destructive to sweet pota-
toes in Formosa and has recently been introduced (1900) in Hawaii,
the larvee boring the roots
the small apricot and vine moth, is destructive to these cro}
England. It occurs over central and western Europe, in Asia
Minor, northwest Africa, ete. Tortrix excessana Walker, nati
to New Zealand, injures the foliage and fruit of the apple, the latter
being tunnelled in all directions, and for this reason is known by
some as the railway bug. Tortrix ashworthana Newm. (= Cacacia
responsana), in Victoria, bores into apple much like our Carpo-
capsa pomonella, with which it has been confused. ‘This is regarded
as a serious pest by reason of the character and amount of damage
to apples. Tortrix divulsana Walker, (= Tortrix glaphyrana), the
lucerne moth, is a regular pest in New South Wales, the lar
feeding on and webbing together the tips of its food plant. Pan-
demis ribeana Hb., P. heparana Schift. P. podana Se. and related
species in England infest ‘ious hard trees often seriously. These are insects of wide distribution in the Palearctic region. Clysia
ambiguella Hb. is one of the first class pests of grapes in France at
the present time, the larvie eating the blossom clust and later

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     

 

 

  
 

    

 

   

   

      

 

 

  
 

  

and tubers. Capua angustiorana Haw.,

rs

se

70 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

 

boring into the berries. This pest has a wide di:
Europe, except in the polar region and occurs in A\
India and Japan. Two species of Olethreutes, namely, cynobatella
L. and pruniana Hb., are worthy of mention as injurmg buds,
young leaves and blossoms of orchard trees in various parts of
Europe, working much like the bud moth, 7’metocera ocellana Fabr. now well established in the United States. Polychrosis botrana
Schiff. corresponds to our grape berry moth Polychrosis viteana
Clemens, and it was long supposed that ours was the European
species. This latter ranks as a vine pest in Fance with Clysia
ambiguella, eartier mentioned, and is widely distributed over
southern Europe. Notocelia roborana Tr. infests currant fruit in
England, at times seriously, the larve hollowing out the ripen-
ing fruit. It ranges over Europe, except the polar region. Several

ecies of Laspeyresia (Grapholitha) in Europe are troublesome
s and would probably prove very undesirable introductions
in the United States, Larvie of L. woeberiana Schiff. bores the bark
of cherry, plum, apple and peach trees. L. funebrana Tr., the
red plum maggot of England, attacks fruit of plum in England and
in the caterpillar state said to be plentiful in plum pies. It
would doubtless be very damaging to our prune industry on the
Pacific It occurs over central Europe, Scandinavia, Italy
and Asia Minor. L. dorsana F. has about the same distribution
and is of importance by reason of its injuries to peas. Laspeyresia
schistaceana Sn. is an important sugar-cane pest in Java, the larvee
boring into the more tender shoots. Carpocapsa splendana Hb. is a serious pest of walnut and chestnuts in Europe. The normal
food is said to beacorns. It occurs in central and southern Europe,
Sweden, England, ete. C. amplana Hb. infests hazet nuts, walnuts,
ete., ete.. occurring in Germany, Austria, northern and central
Italy. The so-called Natal codling moth, a species of Carpocapsa,
is a serious enemy of guavas, oranges and mandarines in that coun-
try. Simethis nemorana Hb. infests and occurs in southern
Europe, Asia Minor, Madeira, Mauritius and is reported from
Canada. Paramorpha aquilina Meyrick has come into notice
as an orange pest in Australia. The larvie bore through the skin
and feed on the pith between rind and flesh. Crytophaga unipunc-
tata Donovan is the cherry borer of Australia. The larvie are said
to be excessively destructive to cherry and peach trees, and some
times to plums. Galleries are eaten under the bark, the lar
later boring into the heart of the tree. Amorbia emigratella Busck,
thought to be native to Mexico and Costa Riea, has recently ap-
peared in Hawaii and is known as the leaf roller of sweet potatoes. [t also attacks many kinds of shrubs and fruit trees. OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1915. 71

Yponomeutide. A few forms in this family require mention. Yponomeuta mali-
nellus Zell. Y. evonymellus L. and Y. padellus L. are recognized as of
considerable importance to orchardists in England and portions of
Europe, especially the first mentioned, which has just made its
appearance in the United States near Geneva, N.Y. Y. padellus
feed on plum and cherry in France, and on plum in Italy. Prays
citri Mill. infests the orange in Corsica, Sicily, Ceylon and Aus-
tra ia, and recently it has been received from the Philippines. P. oleclus F. injures foliage of olive in Italy, and ranges over the
Mediterranean region, where the olive In the genus
Argyresthia are several suspicious characters. A. conjugella Z.
is already established in British Columbia and has been taken in the
Puget Sound region in Washington State. The slender larvze tun-
nel apples and Pother fruits. It ranges over central and southern
Europe, Asia Minor, Japan, ete. A. nitidella Fabr. is the cherry
fruit moth of England, the larve burrowing in the fruit. A. ephip-
pella F. feeds on the shoots of cherry, the leaf and blossom buds of
wild plum, also on the hazel. A. cornella F. attacks the leaf buds
of apple. Gelechiide. Gelechia gossypiella Saund. is another serious cotton pest and is
almost universally distributed over India, Ceylon, Burma, Straits
Settlements and East Africa. It has just now been found in
Hawaii. It is known as the pink bollworm, and is generally asso-
ciated with the spotted bollworms. The larvie also bore into the
bolls and feed on the oily seed. Anacampsis nerteria Meyr. is
injurious to ground nuts in Ceylon and South India, and is ap
parently quite important. Anarsia ephippias Meyr. also feeds on
the ground nut in India and has been taken only during the rains. Tt feeds upon and rolls the leaves together. Elachistide. The pith moths, Blastodacna hellerella Dup., and B. vinolen-
tella H. 8. are insects whose larvee cause a good deal of damage
to apple trees, especially nursery stoe! The larvie bore into the
buds, spurs and shoots, thus causing the foliage and shoots to die. The work something like our Epinotia pyricolana Murtf. Antispila riville’ Stt. injures grape foliage like our A. isabella and
oceurs in northern and middle Italy and Dalmatia Coleophora
anatipennella Hbn. the cherry case bearer, injures cherry buds in
the spring time in England and occurs over central and northern
Europe. _ C. flavipennella HS. injures pears in Europe in a similar
way, while C. hemerobiella Z. feeds on apple, pear and cherry,

 

 

    

   

 

 

 

   

2 PROCE! DIN

 

‘3 ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

 

Blastodacna atra Haw. is the apple fruit borer of Japan and is, one
of their most troublesome pests. Lyonetiide. Lyonetia clerkella LL. mines apple leaves in Europe, but is not
especially important on account of the character of injury. The
species occurs over central and northern Europe, central Italy,
Sardnia, ete. L. prunifoliella Hb. similarly mines plum and cherry
leaves, and has a wider distribution than the former. Cemistoma
scitella Z. mines apple and pear leaves, occurring over central and
northern Europe, Dalmatia, Italy, ete. Cemistoma coffeella Perrottet
is the coffee leaf miner of the West Indies. It has been introduced
into Brazil and other coffee growing regions of the Western Hemi-
sphere and does much damage to this crop. In Porto Rieo, for
example, it was held to have caused a loss of from $150,000 to
$300,000 during 1904. Tineide. Incurvaria rubiella Bjerk., known as the raspberry moth in
England, is important, the larvie boring the shoots, thus lessening
or destroying the crop. It is present in central and northern
Europe, Corsica, Dalmatia, Russia, ete. Incurvaria capitella
Clerk injures the fruit and shoots of the currant and ranges over
central Europe, Norway, Sweden and Western Russia, Gnorimo-
schema heliopa Lower is a serious enemy of tobacco in India, Cey. Jon and Java, the larvex boring the stems, eausing gall-like swellings. Ereunctis flavistriata Walsm., is the Hawaiian sugarcane bud
moth, the larve also eating the dead leaves of palms, bananas,
pineapples, and sometimes eating the skin of the banana fruit. The peach moth of Japan, Carposina persice Sasaki is one of the
yery destructive insects of this crop, more than 90 per cent being
injured during some seasons. >),,[/ i

   

 

 

 

 

   

     

   

 
  

 

Catvrtir m Etbura, Ot

  

\ DI PI
Tipulide. Several species of this family are referred to in European lite
ture and are evidently of considerable importance. The larvie of
Tipula oleracea 1.. injure various root crops, as well as those of 7.
paludosa. Pachyrhina maculosa Meig. has a record of serious
injury to tulip bulbs in England. Cecidomyiide

 

Dasynewra wnophila Haimh. is a gall maker on grape foliage,
occurring in central Europe and the Mediterranean region. D.

 

OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1915. 73

pyri Bouché, the pear leaf curling midge is distributed over central
and norther rope, though it as yet attracted but little atten. tion by juries, Asphondylia lupini Sily. injures lupines in
Italy, the maggots infesting and aborting the seed pods. This
species was reared from its host | - Coquillett at Los Angeles. Mayetiola avene March. injures wheat in southern Europe mueh
like its cogener, M. destructor. Conturinia nasturtii Kieffer, the
so-called “swede midge,” infe: wedes in Ireland, the maggots
occurring at bases of leaf stalks. It occurs on various cruciferous
vegetables in Europe. C. gossypii Felt infests the flower buds of
cotton, causing the bracts to flare and squares to drop. ‘This pest
appeared in Antigua in 1907, and caused very serious lo: at
the time. It is apparently still confined to that Island. Ceci-
domyia oryze Wood Mason has been destructive to rice in Bengal. Parricondyla gossypii Coq. is 2 pest in Barbados, and is presentin. Montserrat. The red maggots occur under the bark of the stems of
the cotton plant, which they may completely girdle, causing the
death of the portion above the infested area. Bibionide. The larve of Bibio hortulanus L. live on the roots of various
garden and other erops in Europe, the species also occurring in
northern Africa and Asia Minor. Syrphide. The Narei , Merodon equestris Fab., in Europe, is injurious
to bulbs of narcissus, daffodil and _amary The species is now
well established in British Columbia. Anthomyide. We have already received from Europe several of the injurious
species of this family and other forms are yet to be introduced. Pegomyia hyoscyami Panz. infests the foliage of garden vegetable
as beets and spinach, though apparently it is not of great impor-
tance at the present time. P. betw Curtis, in England, is noted as
of increasing economic importance and is just now doing a good
deal of injury to beets. The larvie attack the m ophyll of the
leaf. There are two or even three broods each year. Trypetide. The Try petid family of flies is one of almost world-wide distribu-
tion and contains many species of the greatest economic impor-
tance, as the so called fruit flies. These are especially destructive
for the reason that thus far no remedies have been developed which

 

 

 

74 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

are of much value in lessening attack. With the exception of the
Rhagoletis pomonella, no species is as yet notably destructive in
the United States, though the notorious Mediterranean fruit
fly, Ceratitis capitata, is well established in the Territory of Hawaii. Other dangerous forms are in the West Indies, some of them perhaps
already established in South Florida. The fam especially
rich in species in Africa, the East Indies and Australia, and in the
latter country constitute a veritable scourge to certain crops. Ceratitis capitata Wied., is now pretty well distributed over the
tropical and subtropical parts of the old world and oceurs in Aus-
tralia, South Africa, Brazil, Burmuda, Hawaii, etc. It infests
practically all soft fruits, and numerous sorts of vegetables. It
notably injurious to peaches, oranges and guavas, but inf
several dozen other fruits, vegetables and wild fruits. Ceratit
anone Graham injures guavas and the sour sop, in West Africa,
while C. punctata Wied. injures pods of the cacao in the same region. C. catoirei Guerin, considered by some identical with capitata,
infests oranges in Mauritius. C. rubivora Coq., the Natal fruit
fly, injures all sorts of cultivated fruits and is extending its range
over South Africa. It apparently ranks as a pest close with capi-
tata. The genus Dacus also contains a consideration number of forms
highly destructive. D. tryoni Froggatt, the Queensland fruit fly,
infests the banana, mango, peach, nectarine, orange and most other
fruits. It is evidently a pest of first importance and ranges from
India and Ceylon to Java, Amboina and Australia. D. ferrugin-
eus Fabr., the mango fruit fly, also infests oranges, mangoes and
other soft fruits and oecurs in India, Java and probably many
of the Islands of Malaysia. It is thought to have been recently
introduced in the Philippines. D. cucurbite Coq., the melon
fruit fly of India, Ceylor and Hawaii, infests most disastrously
cantaloupes and ‘watermelons in its range of distribution. D.
bipartitus Graham, a West African species, attacks especially
curcubits, though it is not regarded as a serious pest t.
D. persice Bigot, the peach fruit fly of India is very injurious
to peaches, oranges, mangoes, ete. D. psidii Froggat is the
South Sea’ guava fly, and is known from Fiji and New Cale-
donia. The Sudan fruit fly is also a Dacus, the species not yet
having beein dermined apparently. Dacus olew Ro: an old
time enemy of the olive in the Mediterranean region, including
northern Africa and the Canary Islands. It is one of the prime
pests of the olive in its territory. The Baluchistan fruit fly,
Carpomyia pardalina Bigot, is also a melon pest of importance. Anastrepha serpentina Wied. and related species infest guava
sapadillos, ete., in the Lesser Antilles, while several species of this
genus infest fruits in South America, as A. striata, fratercula, serpen-

 

 

   

    

 
    

  

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. 75

tina, ete. Anastrepha ludens Loew is, of course, the principal
pest of orange fruit in certain States in Mexico and was the occasion
of the quarantine by California of Mexican oranges. Trypeta
muse Froggatt, the Island fruit fly, infests bananas and other fruits
in the New Hebrides and has been introduced into Australia. Acidia heraclei L. occurs in Europe and Asia Minor, and mines the
leaves of celery. Platyparea paciloptera Schrank occurs over cen-
tral Europe and is destructive to asparagus. The female fly
deposits her eggs on the tips of the young shoots, the resulting
maggots living beneath the skin and tunnelling towards the base of
the plant. It remains to mention a fly of the family Lonchide,
Lonchea splendida, present in New South Wales, Victoria, New
Zealand and the Pacific Islands, which infests tomatoes, after the
manner of fruit flies. Oscinide. The Oscinide include several species which in Europe are exceed-
ingly troublesome to small grains. Chlorops tentopus Meigen
causes the affection known as “gout” on account of the swollen
condition of the heads. The maggots are especially prevalent in
barley, but are common also in wheat and rye. Another species,
the Oscinis frit L., or frit fly, is especially abundant and injurious
over northern Europe, attacking principally oats and barley, and
constituing one of the most important pests of these crops. The
maggots work in the stems of the host plants, about the level of
the ground, causing these to wither and die. Injury by a second
brood in the heads of these grains causes a blighting of the grains,
producing the condition known in Swedish as “frits” from whence
the name. Oscinis thew is sometimes injurious to tea in Ceylon, the maggots
mining the leaves. A species of Agromyza mines the stems of
peas in India, while still another form mines the leaves of erucifer-
ous plants. CoLEopTERA. Byturide. A single species in this family is regarded as quite troublesome
in England, and occurs in France and Germany, namely, Bylurus
tomentosus Fabr. It attacks raspberries, and the greater part of
the fruit i is stated often to be injured and made unfit for market
nip off the blossoms and the larvie inf
It will be recalled that our specie:
Byturus unicolor Say, infests raspberries in the same way, but is
apparently much less important than its European cogener. 76 PROCE! 2DINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Buprestide. Capnodis tencbrionis L., distributed over southern Europe, attacks
Prunus spinosa L. and Various fruit trees, working something like
our Chrysobothris femorata. Sphenoptera neglecta Klug attacks
cotton throughout the nothern Nile provinces, the larve hollowing
out the stems. A similar (perhaps identical) species, S. gossypii Ker
cotton in the same way over the cotton area of India. 8. hypogea
is a serious enemy of peanuts in South India, the larvee boring
into the underground root stalks. Agrilus grisator Kerr. bores in
lemon trees in the same territory, while the larvee of Belionata
parasina Thunb. is also common in India and bores the trunks of
guava and mango plants. Small leaf-mining Buprestids, Aphan-
isticus consanguineus Rits. and A. kriigeri Rits. attack sugar cane
in. Java, though the injuries have not been very important up to
the present time. , injures

   

 

     

Bostrychide. Dinoderus minutus Fabr. is common in the bamboo in India,
and has been reared from eut sugar cane. Rhizopertha collaris
Erichson bores into the limbs and branches of the apple in Aus-
tralia, and is regarded as quite troublesome. Bostrychopsis je
ita Fabr. is the orange and fig borer of Australia, though it
attacks also lemon and apple. The female places her eggs just
beneath the bark, and the larve tunnel the hard wood mostly
longitudinally. On account of its borings, it has been called the
augur beetle,

      

   

 

 

 

 

Scarabaeidae. An important European member of this family is the )elo-
lontha melolontha L., the common cockchafer, or May-bug. ~ It is
injurious in both the larval and adult stages, the grubs feeding
on the roots of grasses, vegetables and young trees, and the adults
upon foliage of elm, oak, ete., often completely stripping the tree
Most European works on practical entomology give this s
extended attention, perhaps more on account of its commonness
han its real importance as a pest. In India, Anomala varians
s injurious to rice and other ¢ feeding on the
Anomala vitis Fabr. injures the grape in Europe, Algeria
unis, the adults feeding on the foliage and the larvee on the
roots of the plant, and also on roots of various grasses. One of the
very troublesome sugar-cane pests of Porto Rico is a speciés of
Lachnosterna, the grubs of which devour the roots of the plant. The control of this insect is one of the acute problems before the
sugar-cane planters of the Island. Ligyrus bituberculatus Beauv. OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. 7

 

is of interest by reason of its attacking bananas in certain islands
of the West Indies. The grubs tunnel the roots of the banana
plant, and their injuries are apparently important. Phytalus smithi Arrow is destructive to sugar cane in Mauritius
where it has evidently been introduced from Barbados, its native
home. On one oceasion 1,372,000 beetles were captured by the
natives, who placed small branches in the ground upon which the
beetles climbed. Holotricha vidua is reported as the most destruc-
tive enemy of sugar cane in the Philippines and has necessitated
the abandonment of certain fields. In India, Ceylon, Straits
Settlements, Philippines, ete., Oryctes rhinoceros L., eats into the
soft tissues of young palms, often killing the trees. | Diphucephala
colaspidoides injures fruit trees in Australia, especially cherry. The bectles come from the ground about “cherry time” and often
in such countless multitudes as to strip a good sized tree in a very
few minutes. Apogonia destructor R. Bos., as well as a related
species, A. ritsema@ Sharp, are destructive pests of sugar cane in
Java, injuring the roots of the plants like Lachnosterna sp. in Porto
Rico. Heteronychus morator F., in the adult stage, attacks the
young cane at the base in Java, often boring in the canes. Xylo-
trupes gideon L. also bores sugar cane in the Straits Settlements. Anisoplia austriaca Herbst., in Austria, Hungary and southern
Russia, is one of the very troublesome Scarabids attacking cereals
about blooming time, destroying the heads. Cerambycide. Xylotrechus quadripes Chevr. is a serious enemy of coffee in
Southern India, Assam, Sylhet and Burmah, the larv boring the
stems of the plant, especially those shaded. ' Caloclytus annularis
Fabr. injures the bamboo, the larve destroying the plants by their
borings. Calamobius marginellus Fabr. is 2 European species
which injures wheat. The adult oviposits below the head which
the resulting larva injures. Batocera rubus L., occurring in south-
ern India and Ceylon, is one of the large beetles found throughout
the plains, the larvae being common under the bark of felled tre
The beetles penetrate the trunk of young coconut trees and there
deposit eggs, the grubs eating to the top, thus destroying the leaves. The mango is also injured. This species has heen recently intro-
duced in Barbados, where its is domg considerable injury. An
allied species, Melanauster chinensis Forst, is very injurious to
fruit trees in Japan and China. Apomecyna pertigera. Thoms. and A. histrio F., are common insects on cultivated crops in India,
the former attacking cucurbits. Acanthophorus serraticornis Oliv. bores the mango in southern India, while Plocoderus obesus Gah. infests Sal wood, the larve making large cocoons apparently of

 

 
 

 

 

        

 

 

      

 

78 PROCEEDINGS MOLOGICAL SOCIETY

calcium carbonate. Uracanthus acutus Blackl. injures peaches
apricots and plum in Australia. Stetrastoma depressum L., the
cacao beetle, is the most se is pest of cacao in the West Indies,
and the Guianas the larvie living under the bark of the tree, and
also boring the heart wood. Diploschema rotundicolle Serv. bores
the orange in Brazil and is evidently a serious enemy of this plant. Apriona rugicollis Chevr. is a mulberry pest in Japan. The females
oviposit on the branches, the larvee boring into the wood. Three
years are required for the life cycle. Chrysomelide. In this family are quite a number of injurious forms in different
parts of the world. The group ranks close to the Curculionide in
pxonomg importance. Lema flavipes Suffr. is injurious to rice in

Japan, in both the larva and adult stages. Hispa callicantha Bat. also injures rice in the same country, both adults and larvee feed-
ing on the foliage. Crioceris merdigera L., cogenerie with our
asparagus beetles, is distributed over all Europe and is a decided
pest of lillies in France, both the larvie and adults feeding on the
foliage, the former protected by their excrementitious covering. Pachnephorus bretinghami Jac. and P. impressus Ros., replace, in
India, Myochrous in America. They are quite injurious to the
young shoots of sugar cane and to cereals. Chrysochrous chinensis
Baly injures the sweet potato in Formosa. alerucella tenella L.
is common over Europe and attacks the strawberry, though not
yet important apparently. Galeruca semipullata in Australia,
infests wild and cultivated figs, the dirty yellow larvie feeding on
the leaves. Chatocnema concinna Marsh, of Europe, is a pestof
hops, the beet! foliating the plants, attacking also the shoots. Chetocnema basilis Baly is a rice flea beetle in India, and other
species injure various cro) Haltica ampelophaga Leesb., the
grape flea beetle of Europe is one of their more important vineyard
pests. H. indigacea Illig. in Cape Colony, is injurious to buds and
foliage of fruit trees in spring. Hispa_enescens By. is a very important rice pest in India. H.
modesta We. has been reared from sugar cane in the same countr,
Leptispa pygmea Baly attaeks rice in Malabar. Brontispa frog-
gatti Sharp, the palm leaf Hispa, injures the foliage of its host
plants in New Britian and Solomon Islands generally. Scelodnota strigicollis Mots. is a pest of grapes in India. Its
habits, are thought to be like thos of our Fidia viticida. Odon-
tionopa sericea Gyll., in South Africa, injures buds and leaves of
fruit trees in the spring. Aulacophora hilaris Bvd. is a serious pest of eueurbits in Aus-
tralia, where it is known as the banded pumpkin beetle. This, or

 

      

 

   
 

   

 

 

    
 

 
  

 

  

 

 

OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. 79

a related species (olivieri) is considered the worst leaf-eating pest
with which gardners have to deal, attacking also the fruit of the
cherry. Another species, A. foveicollis Kuest. is a cueurbit pest
of importance in Formosa, India, ete. and, A. exacavata Baly is
present along with the former, and has about the same habit

 

 

 

RHYNCHOPHORA,

 

Among the Rhynchophora are to be listed very many of the
worst insect pests of the world, and the number of species to be
noted in the present connection is relatively large. Anthribide. The apple beetle of Australia, Doticus pestilens Oliff, falls here. It is supposed that eggs are laid in the young fruit. "The grubs
live in the apples, which, after about a month, shrivel and dry and
remain hanging on the trees. The stages of the insect are passed
in the fruit, the beetles coming out in the spring, ovipositing in the
young fruit. Curculionide. Several species of Otiorrhynchus are to be mentioned. OQ. sul-
catus F., native to northern and middle Europe, is now present in -
New Zealand, Australia and South Africa. It injures both the
roots and foliage of strawberry and berry plants. O. corruptor
Host occurs in Italy and attacks the foliage of the grape and almond. O. singularis L. is a pest of raspberries in Europe. The beetles
eat the fruit buds, blossoms and foliage and gnaw the bark of
tender shoots. The grubs feed on the roots of the raspberry and
various other plants. O. levigatus Fabr., occurring over middle
Europe, is injurious to buds and shoots of plum, and 0. ligustici L.
in central and southern Europe, attacks grape, peach and hops,
ete., injuring the leaf and fruit buds, as well as the shoots. Several
other injurious forms in the genus ought to be mentioned. Pach-
neus litus and P. azurescens are serious orange pests in Cuba, the
larve feeding on the roots of the plants. Phyllobius maculi-
cornis Germ., P. oblongus L., P. pyri L., occurring over Europe,
attack various fruit trees, as well as Fagus, Quercus, ete. Bary-
pithes araneiformis Schrank, present in eentral Europe, injures
strawberry by eating holes in the green and ripe fruit. Sitona
lineata L., distributed over Europe, and S. sulcifrons Thunb,
attack the shoots of peas as they are pushing through the ground,
and later, the foliage. Cleonus luigionii Motsch. present in central
and southern Italy, is quite injurious to the beet, the larve boring
the roots. Liparus coronatus Geoze, is destructive to carrots in a
similar way. Phytonomus variabilis Herbst. attacks species of

   

 

 

  

   

80, PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

  

Medicago, the | feeding on the foliage. The species is present
over Europe. Huscepes batate Waterhouse, the so called ‘“scara-
bee” or “Jacobs” of the West Indies, is a very important pest of
the sweet potato, the tubers of which the Kuve tunnel. It is
also present in Hawaii. Cryptor ravis abr. is the mango
weevil of eastern Bengal and As le C. mangifere Fabr., is
the common species in South India arid Ceylon. Mango weevils
are, without doubt, the most serious pests of the mango in oriental
countries. The latter species is said now to inhabit all the mango
regions bordering the Indian Ocean, and adjacent islands, and
occurs through the East Indies, the Philippines and other groups of
South Pacific Islands. It is present in South Africa, Madagascar
and other places. Ceutorrhynchus pleurostigma Marsh, ranging
over Europe, is destructive to cruciferous plants, as also C.
assimilis Payk, of similar habits. Another species, C. napi G
is also injurious to cabbage. Two species of Baris also attack
cabbage, namely, B. cuprirostris F. and B. chlorizans Germ. Rhyn-
chophorus ferrugineus F the red palm weevil of India and Cey-
lon, infesting the toddy and coconut palms. The eggs are placed
at a wound or cut in the soft tissues at base of leaf sheath, the larvie
tunnelling through the tissues in all directions, making a cocoon
of twisted fibres. FR. palmarum L. is the palm weevil of Brazil,
Cayenne, Surinam, the West Indies, and probably occurs on
tropical coast of South America generally. The palm weevil is
recorded as also attacking sugar cane in Trinidad. R. cruentatus
Fab. oceurs in Florida. Sphenophorus obscurus Boisd. is the destructive sugar-cane
borer in Tahiti, Hawaii, New Guinea, Fiji, ete., It is widely
spread but is not on the mainland of the United States. It also
attacks the coconut. The female enters between a leaf sheath and
the stem. A small cavity is cut with the mandibles, in which an
egg is placed. The resulting grub tunnels upward in the cane,
making occasional apertures to the exterior. S. sericeus Oliv. is
a well known enemy of sugar cane in the West Indies, where it is
designated the w borer. S. sordidus Germar injures the
banana in the West Indies and is especially compl jained of in Fiji. The yourig suckers are attacked and quickly killed by the larve
boring in the base of the plants. It is said to occur from the South
Pacific Ocean to the Islands of the Indian Archipelago. Balaninus nucum L., the nut weevil of Europe, is commonly
injurious to the filbert, cob and wild hazelnut. Other spec
present in Europe are of more or less importance, as B. cerasorum
Hbst., attacking sour and sweet cherries, and B. elephas Gyll.,
attacking chestnuts. vils of Europe which has not yet reached the United
States, and which is without doubt a first class pest of the apple is

   

       

 

 

   

  

 

   

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 
 

  
 

 

 

  

  

OF WAS

 

NGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. Sl

 

Anthonomus pomorum L. The female dep’ in unopened
flower buds and blossoms of the apple. Its injuries were recorded
as early as 1801, and there is now a considerable European litera-
ture on the species. Cold, damp weather, retarding the opening
of apple blossoms, is said to be quite favorable to it.. The symp-
toms of injury are the scorched appearance of the blossoms, and
their failure to open normally. A, rubi Herbst., in Europe, injures the raspberry in about the
same manner as the foregoing. The weevils of the new generation
puncture the shoots and feed on the foliage. A. rectirostri. attacks stone fruits in Europe, especially cherr The grub infest
the pits or se our Coccotorus prunicida apparently. The
cotton square weevil of Peru, species of Anthonomus, probably
vestitus Boh. injures cotton in a way similar to A. grand
varipes DuVal injures the egg plant in Cuba, the beetles feeding on
the tender buds. Wagdalis is well represented in Europe by spe-
cies occurring on useful plants. __M. armigera Geoff. infests branches
of plum trees. /. barbicornis Latr., the branches of apple, quince. ete. M. cerasi_L., cherry and plum; WV. duplicata Germ., pear;
MM. ruficornis’ L., various orchard trees, and VW. violacea 1., the
pear. Apion apricans Hbst., of Europe, attacks red and purple
clover. Eggs are placed in the blossom heads, the larvee eating
the unripe seeds, reducing seed production. There are everal
broods each year. Rhynchites ceruleus DeGeer oviposits in tender
shoots of apple, and then cuts off the twig just below the point of
insertion of the egg. Considerable injury is thus done to young
growing trees. The insect occurs over Europe. 2. ruber Fairm,
occurring in Greece, Corsica, Crete, ete., is a very local species,
but which is quite a pest of the olive. The female oviposits in the
fruit in which the grubs feed much like our Conotrachelus nenuphar. Other species of Rhynchites are of more or less prominence in Europe
to one plant or another, as 2. bacchus L., cupreus L., interpunctatus
Steph., ete. Byctiscus betula L., distributed over Europe, Asia,
Siberia, etc., injures numerous plants in its range, and is especially
likely to attack the grape. Diaprepes abbreviatus is present gener-
ally throughout the West Indies, where it is destructive to sugar
cane, especially in parts of Barbat Rhinaria perdix Pascoe is a
enemy of strawberry in Victoria and Tasmania, and to a
less extent, raspberries. Both adults and larve are destructive,
though the larvie more so as th ey feed on the central “bud” of
head of the plant, thus often killing the plants outright. Rhadino-
somus lacordairei is said to be the worst insect enemy of straw-
berries in Tasmania, and occurs in all of the Australian States, and
perhaps in New Zealand. Another Australian pest is Leptops
hopei Fah which is said to be one of the most troublesome
insects of Victoria, attacking especially apples and pears. Eggs

 

     

 

    
   

 
  

 

 

      

  

    

    
     

 

 

 

 

     

 

            
      

 

 

 

    

  

82 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

are laid in batches on the leaves, and the grubs crawl down in the
soil and feed on the roots in which they cut galleries and furrows,
often largely devouring them. Metatyges turritus Pase. is quite
injurous to figs in Natal and the east coast generally. Eggs are
laid in the fruit in which the grub feeds. The species is two-
brooded. Echinocnemus squameus Billb. is a rice pest in Formosa,
the larvie feeding on the roots. A species of Phylaitis bores the
stems of cotton in South India and Behar, fron the effect of which
the plants become weakened, break off and die. Orthorrhinus
klugi Sch. is injurious to grape in Australia, the larvie hollowing
out the can Another species of the same genus, 0. cylindri-
rostris Fabr., is a pest of the orange. The eggs are laid in the bark
of the tree, a foot or so from the ground, the larvie boring into the
wood in all directions. The tomato weevil of Victoria, Desiantha
nociva Lea, has attracted some attention on account of its injuries
to tomato. Certain speci Belus are regarded in Victoria as
serious enemies of the apricot. Adults bore holes in the branches
in which the eggs are placed, the grubs tunnelling the branch,
thus killing the trees. The spe mentioned are B. bidentatus,
B. suturalis, B. irroratus, B. centralis and Belus sp. HYMENOPTERA. Tenthredinide. Allantus cinctus L., distributed over Europe, infests normally
the leaves of the rose, wild and cultivated, and is known to attack
the raspberry. The prepupal larve hollow out the canes, where
also they pass the winter, transforming in the s Athalia
spinarum Fabr., occurring in Europe, Algeria, ete., is injurious to
the turnip, beet and cruciferous plants, destroying the foliage. ximata Klug, in India, feeds on cruciferous plants generally
and is one of the commonest species of the plains. Two species of Hoplocampa are troublesome pests. H. testu-
dinea Klug occurs over central Europe, and is quite injurious to
apple in portions of England. The females oviposit in the apple
blossoms, the larve boring into the young fruit, which later fall. A related, and perhaps identical species, is already established in
Washington State, and in British Columbia. H. fulvicornis Panz. also ranging over central Europe, attacks the plum after the same
manner, and is a pest of importance in England. P*eronidea teucotrochus Htg. is injurious to gooseberry, the larvie
eating the foliage like J besii and is spread over central and
northern Europe. Priophorus padi L., the plum saw-fly, ranges
over central and northern Europe, the larvie feeding on the foliage,
also attacking pear, rose, hawthorn, ete. Diprion pini L., distrib-

 
      

 
  

   
  

 

     

   

 

    

OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913. 83

uted over central and northern Europe, defoliates the pine, as its
name indicates, to which at times, it is quite destructive. Arge
rose L. is a rose pest widely spread over Europe, and occurs in
Siberia and Asia Minor. Janus compressus Fabr., of central and southern Europe,deposits
its eggs in the buds of the pear, which the larve: hollow out, and
later eat their way into the twig, tunnelling along the pith. Pam-
philius flaviventris Retz is distributed over western Europe. It
is known in England as the social pear saw-fly. Eggs are placed
in groups of from 30 to 60 on under-surface of pear leaves. ‘The
young larve at once commence to form a web, which is added to
as they grow, sometimes reaching a length of a foot. The larvee
also feed upon plum, cherry, white thorn and other rosaceous
plants. The author wishes to acknowledge the assistance of his col’e igues,
Messrs. Schwarz, Dyar, Busck, Caudell, Heidemann, Knab, Rohwer
and others in connection with questions of nomenclature in the
orders in which they are respectively specialists. Commenting on Professor Quaintance’s address, Mr. Marlatt
id that he had been much interested in the presentation made,
and that the subject was most timely in view of the recent enact-
ment of the plant quarantine law which now furnishes, for the first:
time in the history of the United States, a means of excluding for-
eign insect pe: It is therefore of especial importance just now
to make available a publication which will give descriptions
so far as possible, illustrations of all known important foreign insect. pests, for the guidance of state inspectors and others engaged in
plant quarantine and inspection work. He said that he believed
Dr. Howard had in view the preparation of a comprehensive bulle-
tin covering this general subject, and that it was to be prepared
id of the many experts which Dr. Howard had as his
s in the Bureau of Entomology. Such a publication, pre-
pared with the aid of th experts and edited by Dr. Howard,
should have a comprehensiveness and value which would make it
of great usefulness. The inspection of plant material imported by the Department
and other imported plant stock coming to the District of Columbia,
largely under the expert management of Mr. Sasscer, has shown
that much of such imported stock is infested, and the comparison

 

 

 

   

 

 

  

 

 

84 PROCEEDINGS ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the findings made from the local inspection referred to with that
of state inspectors shows the great value of the wider acquaintance
which the Bureau inspectors have with foreign insect pests. Neces-
sarily most state inspectors are little acquainted with foreign
pests, and have expert knowledge only of the common insect and
fungous pests of this country. A publication, therefore, for which
Professor Quaintance’s address may furnish the basis, is very much
needed. The classification of foreign injurious insects would perhaps be
more useful to the inspectors and quarantine officers if it were based
on countries and food plants. The inspector, then, knowing the
country of origin and the character of the plants, could determine
at once the known injurious insects which he would have to be on
the watch for. A systematic classification of such insects could
also be included, following theplan adopted by Professor Quain-
tance. Mr. Marlatt added that a publication of this kind must neces
sarily be based on known injurious insects. It should not be over-
looked, however, that the injuriousness of an insect in a foreign
country (and this, was alluded to by Professor Quaintance) is not
necessarily a measure of its possible economic importance if estab-
lished elsewhere. The San Jose scale, for example, as found by
Mr. Marlatt in northeastern China, was an insect of little impor-
tance on native plants and fruits, presenting a very scattering and
insignificant infestation. The wide horticultural exploration con-
ducted later by Mr. F. N. Meyer in northern China and Man-
churia resulted in his importing quantities of fruit twigs and trees
for the Department of Agriculture. Much of this material was
infested with the San Jose scale, but most scatteringly and giving
no indication whatever of the tremendous power of damage which
this seale insect has developed in this country. Many other illus-
trations of the same sort will occur to most entomologists, and they
simply emphasize the need of not only looking out for the known
injurious species, but making the most careful inspection to detect
any new form, however unimportant it may appear on the imported
plants. This is particularly true of all plant stock imported from
countries which have not been in close commercial relationship
with this country and Europe. Practically all the scale insects,

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

~

OF WASHINGTON, VOLUME XV, 1913.

in addition to the San Jose scale, and other pests found on the
plants just referred to as imported from northern China and Man-
churia proved to be new, and therefore with unknown potentialities
for injury. This condition is also likely to be true of South Ameri-
ean, African, and most Asiatie countries. Inspectors should there-
fore be especially vigilant in the examination of stock from such
countrie:

Appreciating the special danger from such countries the Federal
Horticultural Board, in the revision of its regulations, has very
greatly restricted the importation of plants from all countries
which cannot or do not have an adequate system of plant inspec-
tion and certification. This practically limits free importation
to European countries and European colonies which have well
ablished entomological and plant pathological bureaus. From
Asiatie and other countries where inspection is not possible the
importation of plants is limited to small amounts, and these are to
be held at the port of entry until thoroughly imspected and passed
by federal inspectors, the provision being intended merely to fur-
nish a means of entry of new and valuable fruits or ornamental
plants. ‘Mr. Marlatt extended his hearty congratulations to Professor
Quaintance for the comprehensive and excellent manner in which
he had covered in his address the field of foreign injurious insects. Dr. Howard stated that he had listened to Professor Quaintance’s
address with considerable interest and hoped the paper would be
published in full. He made a few remarks on the work of insects
in other countries and spoke of discussions which he heard at the
International Congress of Zodlogy in reference to the quarantine
law recently passed in this country. He mentioned a talk by Mr.
Rogers of the Board of Agriculture and Fisheries of Great Britain,
who seemed to be of the opinion that the United States should
accept the observations of experts in foreign countries before tak-
ing any action along quarantine measures, but our distinguished
colleague, Dr. S. A. Forbes, soon showed the fallacy of his com-
ments. .

After remarks by President Busck on the capable manner in
which Professor Quaintance conducted the meetings as President
during the year, Mr. Schwarz moved that the Society extend to