SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM
Bulletin 85

A MONOGRAPH OF THE
JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDA
OF THE NEW WORLD

By

DAVID L. CRAWFORD

Of the Laboratory of General Biology, Cornell University
Ithaca, New York

 

WASHINGTON
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
1914

 

BULLETIN OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Issuep June 3, 1914. ADVERTISEMENT. The scientific publications of the United States National Museum
consist of two series—the Proceedings and the Bulletins. The scientific publications of the United States National Museum
intended primarily as a medium for the publication of original, and
usually brief, papers based on the collections of the National Museum,
presenting newly acquired facts in zoology, geology, and anthropol-
ogy, including descriptions of new forms of animals, and revisions of
limited groups. One or two volumes are issued annually and dis-
tributed to libraries and scientific organizations. A limited number
of copies of each paper, in pamphlet form, is distributed to specialists
and others interested in the different subjects as soon as printed. The date of publication is printed on each paper, and these dates are
also recorded in the tables of contents of the volumes. The Bulletins, the first of which was issued in 1875, consist of a
series of separate publications comprising chiefly monographs of
large zoological groups and other general systematic treatises (occa-
sionally in several volumes), faunal work, reports of expeditions,
and catalogues of type-specimens, special collections, etc. The
majority of the volumes are octavos, but a quarto size has been
adopted in a few instances in which large plates were regarded as
indispensible. Since 1902 a scries of octavo volumes containing papers relating
to the botanical collections of the Museum, and known as the Con-
tributions from the National Herbarium, has been published as
bulletins. The present work forms No. 85 of the Bulletin series. Ricuarp Ratnsun,
Assistant Secretary, Smithsonian Institution,
In charge of the United States National Museum. Wasuinerton, D.C., April 30, 1914. ur

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS. Introduction. Morphology. Head
‘Thorax. Appendages of the thorax. Abdomen...
Locomotion...
Relations to other Homoptera. Collecting and preserving. Determinations from immature stages. Acknowledgments... Explanation of descriptions. Systematic treatment. Subfamily Liviine. Tribe I.

Genus Livia. coloradensis
maculipennis. marginata. vernalis. ‘Tribe Aphalarini

Genus Rhinocola. Subgenus Anomocera...
‘Aphalara (Anomocera) minutissima
(Anomocera) anomala. Genus Aphalaroida

 

 

 

 

VI “ ‘TABLE OF CONTENTS. Subfamily Pauropeyllinze
Genus Paurocephala. magnifron:

ilici

Genus Heteropsyl

   
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
    
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  

mexicana. forcipat:
cubana..
quassie. Genus Calophya. californica. Subfamily Carsidarin:
Genus Freysuila. Genus Epicarsa. corniculata. Genus Carsidara...
gigantea,
dugesii. mexicana. concolor. Genus Rhinopsylla. echwarzii,
athene. jalapensis,
antennata. proxima
Subfamily Ceriacremince. Genus Ceriacremum. quadrigibbiceps. setosum,
Subfamily Triozine. Genus Kuwayama. medicaginis,

 

 

 

  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 

 

 

  
 
 

Genus Paratrioza. cockerelli. arbolensis
maculipennis

TABLE OF CONTENTS. Subfamily Triozinze—Continued. Genus Trioza.....

bakeri. breviantennata . longistylus. quadripunctata. albifrons. Genus Cecidotrioza. mendocina . Genus Neotriozella..
immaculata. sideroxyli-

californica...
johnsonii. Genus Hemitrioza. sonchi
Subfamily Psylline. ‘Tribe Pachypsyllini
Genus Uhleria. mira..

Genus Tetragonocephal
flava...

Genus Pachypsylla. vir

Page. 101
102
103
104
104
105
106
106
107
107
108
108
109
110
lg
u2
113
113
3

VIII TABLE OF CONTENTS. Subfamily Peyllinee—Continued. Tribe Euphyllurini. ;
Genus Katacephal - :

  
 
 

arbuticola. Tribe Arytainini.. .
Genus Euphalerus. nidifex...
rugipennis. immaculatu:

vermiculosus. propinquus. Genus Arytaina....
robusta. fuscipennis. genistie....

ribesiv. .

assimilis. minuta. chelifera. amorphee. ceanothie. Genus Payllopsis
fraxinicola. mexicana. Tribe Psyllini.......

Genus Mitrapsylla
albalineata. cubana. Genus Psylla. hartigii. ameri

alaskensis. .
magnicauda. TABLE OF CONTENTS. Subfamily Peyllinee—Continued. Tribe Psyllini—Continued. Genus Psylla—Continued. alni americana
caudata. galeaformis

torrida. .

orizabensis

minuticona

recticeps provancher. Diraphia quadricornis -

sanguinea . Psylla duvaue. Bibliography. Explanation of plat
Index... Page. 150
11
1
152
152
153
154
154
154
155
155
156
156
157
157
158
159
159
159
160
160
160
‘161
wm
183

 

A MONOGRAPH OF THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR
PSYLLIDA OF THE NEW WORLD. By Davin L. Crawrorp,! Of the Laboratory of General Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York. INTRODUCTION. The family Psyllide, or the Jumping Plant-lice, have received com-
paratively little attention in the New World, especially from the
systematic point of view. A relatively small number of species have
been described, but no serious attempt has been made to relate the
several genera represented by these species. The European forms have received a great deal of attention,
notably by Dr. Franz Loew and now by Dr. Karel Sule. Others have
made some contributions, but in a much more unrelated manner. With the two names just mentioned, the name of Witlaczil should not
be omitted. Some very good work on the internal anatomy has been
done by him. Until 1848 only a few genera were recognized, most of the species
being placed in Psylla. At that date Foerster divided Psylla into
severel smaller genera, most of which are still valid. In 1878 Loew
published his Zur Systematik der Psylloden, in which he established
several additional new genera and tabulated four subfamilies—
Triozine, Psylline, Aphalarine, and Liviine. With the exception of
the latter, these were separated from each other on the basis of wing
venation characters. In his subsequent work he followed this same system of classifica-
tion and there soon appeared more subfamilies and many more
genera. Other workers during and since his time have employed his
system of classification, also. The basic diagnostic characters used
by Loew in this system were largely venational. The presence or
absence of the cubital petiole (M-+Cu), and the relative length of
this petiole, when present, and the radial stem (or discoidal subcosta),
were the two principal characters for the separation of subfamilies. In undertaking systematic work on a large collection of Psyllide
some four years ago, Loew’s system of classification was employed
because it was practically the only one to be used. The collections
before me were very large and contained very large series of speci-
mens of many species, in which there would naturally be more or

 

  

2 Contribution from the Entomological Department of Cornell University, Ithaca, N
Persedes the former papers by the suthor on this group. 2 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Jess variation. It was soon found that by Loew’s system very closely
related species were thrown into different genera and even different
subfamilies. Sometimes, too, specimens of the same species were
separated into different subfamilies. This was true especially of
several species of Aphalara and of related genera. As the work progressed and other large collections were studied,
many unsatisfactory features were found in this system and a great
many difficulties encountered. Some of these have been mentioned
in more or less detail in my former papers on this group. It became
apparent that any classification based principally on wing venational
characters would be artificial and unsatisfactory.. At the same time
other characters were noted that seemed to be more fundamental
and whose use in classification seemed to place together certain
obviously related genera. The form of the head, for instance, was found to be very significant
in diagnosis. In some genera the frons is a visible sclerite between
the gene, while in others it is completely covered by the gene which
in the latter case are nearly always produced into conical processes. Genera related or separated on this character were found to be
distinctly related or separated in other structural characters, as well. The form of the vertex, and that of the pleurites of the prothorax
and of the pronotum, the armature of the hind tibie, and several
other structural characters, have been found to correspond closely
in certain groups of genera. These, naturally, do not divide the
genera into sharply defined groups, but the groupings are, at least,
more sharply defined and less artificial than by Loew’s system. As a result of this study, a complete rearrangement of the genera
of Psyllide is herein presented. While only the American genera
are treated in this monograph, yet most of the genera of the world
have been considered in connection with this new system of classifi-
cation, and it appears that this system will be very satisfactory
for all. The American genera have been arranged in six subfamilies—
Liviine, Pauropsylline, Carsidarine, Ceriacremine, ‘Triozine, and
Psylline. Some of these are new names and those which have
already been used are here used with different limits, representing
a different group of genera. Each is described and discussed under
its own subhead and need not be discussed here. It should be noted,
however, that the old subfamily Aphalarinew is not recognized. Its
typical genus, Aphalara, has been transferred to the group Liviine,
and the other genera formerly placed in it have been referred to
Psylline or some other subfamily. Some confusion has arisen in the past over differences in the
nomenclature of the external sclerites, and these differences have
been due largely to our imperfect knowledge of the homologies of

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 3

these external parts. In the following pages a brief discussion of
the homologies of the sclerites is given, with an explanation of the
terms used in the systematic portion of this work. MORPHOLOGY. Anatomical studies on the family Psyllide are not numerous, but
in proportion to the systematic work on the group they are quite
extensive. All of this work has, however, been based on a relatively
small number of species and therefore the results are not entirely
accurate. The most extensive of these works was by Emmanuel Witlaczil
in 1885, Die Anatomie der Psylliden. The largest and most impor-
tant part of this paper is on the internal anatomy, with a relatively
small part on the external morphology. He discusses in more or
less detail the following subjects: Segmentation of the body wall,
musculature, wax glands, tracheal system, nervous system, digestive
canal, circulatory system, reproductive organs, and finally the
relationships of the family to the other groups of Homoptera, both
the Phytophthires and the higher groups. Loew (’76:187-194) discusses very briefly the external anatomy,
but in a very general way. H.B.Stough (’10:121-165) has more
recently studied the morphology of the hackberry psyllid, Pachypsylla
c-mamma Riley. This latter work is not altogether satisfactory
from the point of view of clarity and definiteness, and also shows
several errors in the interpretation of sclerites. It may be stated,
however, that the species of Pachypsylla are among the most difficult
for the purpose in view—of homologizing sclerites of Psyllide with
those of other Homoptera—and this may account for the errors. Some very good work has been done by Miss Patch (’09:117-121)
on the wing veins of Psyllide, homologizing them with the veins
of Aphidide, Coccide, and Aleyrodide. ‘The Comstock-Needham
system of nomenclature of veins as applied to many other groups of
insects has been applied here by Miss Patch. Because of its sim-
plicity and superiority in all ways the same nomenclature is followed
in the taxonomic work of the present paper. No attempt has been made by the writer to go into the internal
anatomy of the Psyllide; nor is the external morphology presented
in as much detail and completeness as would be desirable if the
scope of the present work were not so limited. There are many very
curious and remarkable developments in the members of this family,
and several sclerites which are difficult to homologize satisfactorily
with other Homoptera. These must be studied more carefully
before the conclusions can be relied upon with absolute certainty. Certain phases, therefore, of the external morphology are presented
in somewhat of a tentative manner. 4 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. The present study has been based on a large number of species,
representing many genera of the family, as follows: Livia vernalis
and L. coloradensis, Aphalara veaziei, Pauropsylla sp. (a Javanese
species), Paurocephala magnifrons, Apsylla cistellata (Indian), Pha-
copteron lentiginosum (Indian), Heteropsylla texana, Kuphyllura
arbuti, Arytaina robusta, Psyllopsis fraxinicola, Psylla alni americana,
Psylla pyricola, Trioza diospyri and T. albifrons, Paratrioza arbolensis,
and many others compared but studied less carefully. Apsyjlla cistellata, an Indian species, is somewhat generalized and
proved to be very valuable for indicating the path of specialization
in the more highly specialized forms, or those considered to be more
typical of the family. It was pointed out in the description of this
species (Crawford ’12¢:421, 429) that it was scarcely psylline in many
respects, and in fact the generic name, Apsylla, was suggested by
that fact. Many developments so complicated and so highly special-
ized in Psylla that it is extremely difficult to understand them
become much clearer when the Indian species is compared with them. The methods of study used have been both gross dissections and
microtome serial sections in balsam, The dissections were made
in a liquid—alcohol, cedar oil, or glycerine being the best, and for
most purposes alcohol the best—and under a binocular microscope
with a magnification of about sixty diameters. The specimens were
first softened, cleared and distended in a warm, strong solution of
caustic potash and then placed in a watch glass on the microscope
stage with a strong tungsten light directly beneath the stage. In
this way the sclerites of the exo-skeleton become easily visible because
of the semitransparent and distended condition of the body wall. By means of fine needles and special tweezer-like scissors the insect
may be very easily dissected. Another method of dissection which proved to be very valuable
and which is offered as a suggestion to others for similar work is as
follows: Soak the specimens in warm caustic potash for ten or twelve
hours, then place in water for a few minutes, and dehydrate with
alcohol; then soak in cedar oil for several hours and imbed in par-
affine. With a microtome, section away one-half of the insect, either
longitudinally or sagitally, dissolve away the paraffine from the
remaining unsectioned half with xylol, and mount in balsam with
the cut surface up. No staining is necessary unless a chitin stain
is used in cases where the body wall is mostly depigmented and
transparent. A half insect mounted with the open side up shows
with remarkable clarity and perspective the internal skeleton and
the internal side of the sutures. This method was found to be
valuable also for the study of the musculature, but of course for
this the specimen must be first fixed alive instead of soaking it in
caustic potash. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 5

As a third and very essential method of study serial sections of
specimens fixed in various fluids were used. Transverse, sagital,
and longitudinal sections were made. HEAD. Figs. 1, 3, 5, 15, 17, 21. The head of the members of Psyllide in the essential parts is not
materially different from that of other Homoptera. In appearance
it is very variable within the family because of the peculiar pro-
longations of the gene or the vertex or some other part of the head. The vertex is a large dorsal sclerite comprising usually most or all
of the top of the head and divided by a median suture which is
always easily visible (fig. 5). At the extreme posterior angles of
the vertex are the two posterior ocelli. The surface of the vertex
is variable, being sometimes flat, or more often with irregular depres-
sions or fover, or sometimes rounded forward and downward. Its
shape also is variable from quadrate to triangular or semicircular,
or each of the two lobes may be rhomboidal. The frons has in most cases been overlooked in the Psyllide and
the clypeus erroneously called the frons. In Psylla, Trioza, and
many other genera the frons is searcely visible as a sclerite, but in
some species it is very prominent, as, for instance, in Paurocephala
magnifrons (fig. 16) and Livia, Aphalara, and several other genera. In all cases it is present as a small or large sclerite bearing the anterior
ocellus at its base or the end nearest the vertex. In many species of
Psylla the ocellus is imbedded between the vertex and the gene
and no fronsis at first apparent. After careful examination, however,
the small sclerite of the frons becomes visible below the ocellus and
between and beneath the genal cones (figs. 15, 21). The shape and form of the frons is very variable. In Paurocephala
magnifrons, 2 Mexican species (fig. 16), it is a relatively large, con-
spicuous, pentagonal sclerite occupying an anterior position on the
head (actual, not relative), with the vertex articulating on the two
sides, the genz on two sides and the clypeus on the fifth side or apex. The anterior ocellus is at the base, the same relative position as in
all the other species. The sutures and sclerites are almost dia-
grammatically clear in this species. In Livia (fig. 20) Rhinocola, Aphalara (fig. 18), Aphalaroida,
Paurocephala (fig. 16), Pauropsylla, Heteropsylla, some species of
Carsidarine, and others the frons is very distinct but occupies an
inferior position on the head and is more elongate and the sutures
sometimes less distinct than in the Mexican species mentioned above. In these forms, too, the anterior ocellus is borne at the base of the frons
(the apex of the head), and the frons appears sometimes as the stalk
of the ocellus. As stated above, the frons in Psylla and many other

6 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. genera has been suppressed and becomes almost invisible in some
cases. In Pachypsylla it is so small and indistinet that Mr. Stough
overlooked it as a sclerite and called it the ‘‘ligamentary process
attaching the frons (really the clypeus) ' to the head.” Figure 15 is
from a sagital section through the front ocellus and the frons. The
suture between the vertex and the frons is very distinct just above
the ocellus. The frons is seen to extend downward beneath the
genal cones which lie over it and to attach to the clypeus a little
farther down (fig. 15). A complete and very interesting series may be found within the
family, showing the suppression of the frons from a large and promi-
nent sclerite to a very small one which is little larger than the ocellus
attached to it. The variation of the frons in many other groups of
the Homoptera is very similar, and there is little doubt but that a
comparative study of this sclerite throughout the whole suborder
would throw much light on the taxonomy of the group and the rela-
tions of the families within the group. The genz are very large and comprise the largest part of the head
ventrad.? In Livia (fig. 20) the gene are two sclerites, lying one
on each side of the elongate frons and between the vertex in front
and the clypeus behind. In all cases the antenn are attached on
the edge of the genx near the vertex. The variation in the form and
shape of the head is due mostly to the variability in the form of the
gene. From the simple condition as mentioned above for Livia
there is a gradual pushing outward of the genx to form two spherical
lobes or two conical processes projecting downward or forward. These processes have had various interpretations, and various names
have been assigned to them. Some writers have called them frontal
cones, or frontal lobes, or frontal processes; Slingerland called them
“cones of the clypeus”; Loew and other European writers have
called them stirnkeln, and conti frontales. The writer in previous
papers has called them facial cones, a noncommittal term. Stough
is inconsistent in recognizing the sclerites from which these cones
arise as the gene and yet calling these processes frontal cones, and
at the same time calling the clypeus the frons, a sclerite which has no
relation to the cones whatever. The term genal cones is applied to
these processes in the taxonomic work of the present paper, and, of
course, this is the only possible interpretation of them. Usually the gene are inferior in position, but in some species of
Carsidarine, notably in Carsidara (figs. 150, 151) a part of the top
surface of the head—what appears to be the vertex—is formed by
the gens. The vertex consists of a pair of narrow oblique lobes

  

 

1 The parenthesis is my insertion. 2 In all of this discussion the position of the sclerites is described as actually found in the Psyilid head,
and not as in the typical or generalized insect. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 7

with the front ocellus far from the front margin of the head, and the
gene forming the front part of the head with the antenne attached
on their front margin. In Euphyllura, also, a part of the top of the
head is formed by the gene (figs. 34, 36). Behind the eyes is another sclerite, the occiput, which is often not
easily distinguished from the genx, although the suture between it
and the vertex above is always distinct. In Livia this is very large
and extensive (figs. 3, 20), and the sutures are distinct. In most of
the genera, however, it is less extensive and more closely fused with
the gene. The occipital foramen is surrounded by this sclerite. The elypeus is a relatively large sclerite and very prominent. It is
usually pyriform or cordate in shape, but sometimes more or less
conical (Aphalara calthae, Paurocephala ilicis, and Ceropsylla john-
sonii). The large end usually overlaps on the frons and often covers
a large part of the latter, as in Psylla, Trioza, and many other genera. It is often obscured from view from in front by the genal cones which
project downward in front of it. The other end converges rapidly
toward the labrum and labium (fig. 15). The suture between the
clypeus and labrum is quite distinct (in a good preparation), dividing
off a relatively small and short labrum. Stough (’10: pl. 29, fig. 1)
has indicated an extra suture in the clypeus, and thus the proper
number of sclerites is obtained after omitting the frons and calling
it the ligamentary process. The epipharynx is a very small and
inconspicuous sclerite. Appendages of the head.—The labium in the Psyllide is very peculiar
in being sharply flexed at a point between the forecoxe and the distal
portion extending perpendicularly downward. This distal portion
only is movable, the basal part being held rigidly between the fore-
coxe. The basal segment is thin, being membranous in appearance
but really well chitinized. It is more or less internal, being covered
partially by the prosternum. At the beginning of the second seg-
ment, or at the tip of the first, the labium makes a sharp turn and
passes downward. If the head were in the normal position of a
generalized insect, this sharp turn would be perpendicularly upward. The furce from the prosternum are large and heavily chitinized. The
second labial segment passes down directly in front of this and is
apparently supported and strengthened by it. In some species, Psylla
alni americana for instance (fig. 15) it seems to be partially surrounded
by the furce. The labium passes out between the legs of the furce
and immediately behind the forecoxe, thus appearing to arise from
the prosternum instead of the head. The distal portion of the second
segment and all of the third is outside and forms the visible beak or
rostrum. The latter is movable and may be exserted and drawn in
more or less, being movable on, or within, the profurce. 6060°—Bull, 85—14——2

8 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM,

The mandibular and maxillary sete are attached near the base of
the clypeus and pass out along the labium. They are very long,
often very much longer than the labium. The eyes are large and usually more or less hemispherical, project-
ing laterad from the side of the head. The facets are relatively very
large. In Livia (fig. 20) the eyes are peculiarly flattened, and are
peculiar, too, in having a tubercle (pre-ocular tubercle) projecting
partly into their front margin. This resembles very much an ocellus
and may possibly be some kind of a sense organ. There are three
ocelli, as mentioned above; two on the vertex and one on the frons. The antennz are nearly always ten-segmented, rarely nine- and
only abnormally eleven-segmented. They are attached to the gen
near the margin of the vertex, sometimes near the lateral margin of
the gen, and sometimes more toward the front. The first two
segments are always larger and shorter than the following joints. The third is nearly always the longest, the others each being shorter
than the preceding one. The terminal segment is thickened a little
and bears two thick sete of unequal length. In some genera (Pauro-
spylla and others) these sete are half as long as the antenne. Scat-
tered over the surface of the intermediate segments are hairs, probably
sensory, which in some species, Homotoma species for instance, are
very abundant. There are also a considerable number of sensory
areas of various kinds, some being simple differentiated rings or pits,
and others being of a rather complicated structure. Further study
of these undoubtedly will bring to light many interesting forms of
sensory apparatus. The living psyllid moves the antenne rapidly
and almost continually; sometimes the movement is so rapid that
it might well be called vibration. ‘THORAX. Figs. 1-4, 6-12. In proportion to the rest of the body the thorax of the Psyllide is
very large. It has become specialized by the habits of leaping of
the insect, and is not only large and strong but some of the sclerites
are most remarkably developed. This is true especially of the meso-
and metathorax. The prothorax is short. The notum consists of a single sclerite
which is arched over behind the head. The extent to which it reaches
downward on each side varies in the different genera. In Livia it is
large and extends down laterad to the forecoxe (fig. 3), while in
Psylla and Trioza it extends only about halfway down toward the
coxe (figs. 1, 4, 6-8). Near each lateral extremity, in most species,
is a foveal impression which sometimes is very prominent. The
lateral extremity may be more or less swollen and knoblike, as in

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDA OF THE NEW WORLD. 9

Aphalara (fig. 166) or it may be uniform to the margin and the suture
between it and the pleurites indistinct. The pleurites, in most genera, are easily visible, but in Livia they
are less so (fig. 3). The pleural suture is distinct, extending from
the base of the forecoxe to the lateral extremity of the pronotum. The episternum may be equal in size to the epimeron, or it may be
larger, but it is seldom smaller. A small trochantin is usually visible
at the lower end of the episternum. The taxonomic value of the form of the pleurites of the prothorax
has been emphasized elsewhere in this paper. In some genera, as
in Aphalara (figs. 1, 166), the pleural suture extends to the middle
of the knoblike lateral extremity of the pronotum, while in others,
as in Psylla (figs. 4, 8), it is oblique and extends to the posterior edge
of the lateral extremity of the pronotum, and the latter is not knob-
like. The episternum is often more or less covered by the receding
eye and occiput (Huphyllura, fig. 35), or both pleurites may be so
covered. The epimeron often is partially concealed by the con-
junctival membrane between the pro- and mesothorax. The prosternum is greatly reduced in most genera, the forecoxe
being contiguous and occupying most of the space. In Apsylla,
however, the prosternum is much larger and the forecoxe are not
contiguous (fig. 9). In fact, the condition in this genus in this regard
resembles very much the nymph of the more specialized genera. In
the latter genera the furce of the prosternum are strongly developed,
as pointed out in connection with the labium. The attachment of
the furce on the sternum is not strongly chitinized, but a short
distance from the base they become very thick and strong, forking
about midway from base to apex. The apical arms are very heavy
and knobbed at the end and roughened. Several very large muscles
are attached here. Between the pro- and mesothorax are three small chitinized sclerites
which are not visible on a dried specimen unless it be distended by
means of a warm liquid. One of these is the peritreme bearing the
mesothoracic spiracle and is, therefore, not part of the prothorax. Lying close to the upper margin of the peritreme and sometimes not
separated from it is a second sclerite which is sometimes small and
elliptical and extends only a little above the upper edge of the pro-
pleurites, and sometimes long and narrow and extends far up between
pro- and mesonotum. In Apsylla these two sclerites are one (fig. 2),
while in Trioza albifrons (fig. 7) they are divided only by a line. In
other species they have become more or less separated, but it seems
obvious from the two species mentioned above that the upper sclerite
is only a part of the peritreme, which has become separated for some
reason from the lower part. Stough called this upper sclerite the

10 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. epimeron of the prothorax, having overlooked or disregarded the
pleural suture in what he calls the episternum (really both pleurites). The third of the sclerites is not so easily accounted for. Judging
from its position behind the peritreme it can hardly be prothoracic. It is quite evident that it is an accessory sclerite, but its homology
in other insects is not certain at present. Stough does not show this
in his figures, although it is present in all the species that I examined,
including Pachypsylla, with which he worked. Mesothoraxz.—The mesothorax is the largest part of the thorax,
being both long and broad and well adapted for muscle attachment. Tho prescutum (often called the dorsulum) is always as long as the
pronotum and very often much longer. The anterior edge is some-
what flexed upward to hook into the posterior margin of the prono-
tum. The lateral margin is not so low as that of the pronotum,
but a long, narrow process extends from this margin down and a
little backward to the mesepisternum, articulating with the latter
somewhat below the wing base. In many species, notably Apsylla
cistellala (fig. 2), there seems to be a suture dividing this process
at its base from the prescutum. Whether this is a true suture or
only an internal ridge is difficult to state. It seems more reasonable
that it is only a ridge and that the part in question is a real process
and not a distinct sclerite. The scutum, sometimes spoken of as the mesonotum, is a large and
heavy sclerite. It is separated from the prescutum and scutellum
by prominent furrows externally and ridges internally. There is a
strong articulation between this and the episternum near the wing
base and epimeron behind the wing base. Between the lateral process of the prescutum and the anterior
margin of the scutum and the wing base are two tuberculous sclerites,
the anterior one being often large and very conspicuous. These are
evidently the paraptera, which in most other insects are simple
selerites and not knob-like or tubcreulous. Behind the wing base
and near the end of the axillary cord is a third parapteron, but this
is not swollen as the others are. The scutellum is very much smaller than the scutum and is hemi-
spherical in shape with a long slender axillary cord extending down
laterad from it to the wing base and forming part of the latter. The postscutellum, or pseudonotum of Verhoeff and Snodgrass,*
is a very short sclerite behind the scutellum and extends down laterad
beneath the axillary cord in the basal portion and then behind it
from there on, articulating at its apex with the epimeron. The mesopleurites are very large and extensive, forming a large
part of the entire pleural region. The wing base is a large bifurcate

3Snodgrass’s The Thorax of Insects and the Articulation of the Wings (Proc. U. 8. Nat. Mus., "86: 511-595,
1009), has been used continually in these interpretations of the thoracio sclerites. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 11

process, with the axillary cord usually fused with it and forming
part of the attachment base for the anal angle of the wing. The pleural suture is distinct from the coxa to about the middle
of the pleura, but from the wing process downward to this point it
is usually either obsolete or very indistinct. In Apsylla, however,
and also Livia and Euphyllura and perhaps other genera the suture
may be traced to the base of the wing process, its course being rather
tortuous. A little above the cox may be seen the lateral apodemes
of the mesopleure, as invaginations on the pleural suture. The
lower end of this suture is at the articulatory condyle of the mesocoxa
and usually meets the margin of the episternum at the same point. The episternum is somewhat larger than the epimeron and has a
long line of articulation with the mesosternum in front of the coxa. The epimeron articulates above with the postscutellum and also with
the scutum and below with the coxa. Below the wing base in many
species is a more thinly chitinized and impressed area of irregular
outline. The mesosternum also is very large and extensive, forming even
more of the sternum relatively than the mesonotum does of the entire
thoracic dorsum. It extends forward to the forecoxie and is flexed
upward at this point with the anterior margin arcuate inward to
allow for the labium which passes out behind the forecoxe. From
near the posterior margin, between the mesocoxe, arise the meso-
furee. These are a little larger than the profurce, and the end 6f
each arm is broadened out T-shaped to facilitate muscle attachment. A narrow prolongation of the sternum extends back between the
coxe, but not beyond this point. Metathorax.—The metathorax presents more remarkable develop-
ments and specializations than any other part of the body. This
is especially true of the pleurse and the endoskeleton and has been
eaused by the habit of leaping which has necessitated unusually
strong attachments for the relatively gigantic muscles found in the
thorax of these insects. The metanotum is much smaller and less conspicuous than the
mesonotum. The praescutum of the metanotum is almost or com-
pletely suppressed. The scutum forms the largest part of the
notum and articulates with the wing process of the hind wings. The scutellum is similar in shape and appearance to the mesoscu-
tellum, but is usually smalle An axillary cord extends down
from it to the wing process, as in the mesothorax, and forms the point
of attachment for the anal angle of the hind wing. The postscutellum, or pseudonotum, is much larger than that of
the mesothorax, and is very often produced into a pair of horn-like
processes or very prominent ridges. It extends down laterad and
articulates with the epimeron. 12 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. The metapleure have been very much changed from their original
simple condition and show complications which are difficult to
understand without a more generalized form, as Apsylla, to compare
with. In the more highly specialized species (which include nearly
all) the metacoxe have become enormously enlarged and have
pushed far up into the pleural region nearly up to the tergum and
have displaced the pleurites from their normal position. A careful
examination of Apsylla (figs. 2, 9, 12) first will aid greatly in inter-
preting the sclerites and sutures in the other species. The pleural suture is distinct in Apsylla, extending from the wing
process to the articulatory condyle of the metacoxa at the upper-
most point of the latter. The metacoxa is not much larger than
the mesocoxa and does not extend very far upward. The episternum
is much larger than the epimeron and bears the metathoracic spiracle
near its anterior margin. This is not a distinct sclerite, peritreme,
as it is in the other species, but the chitin between the spiracle and
the part of the cpisterum posterior to the spiracle is thinner. The
episternum articulates on its lower margin with thesmall metasternum,
which is a small, narrow sclerite between the meta- and mesocoxe. A rather large trochantin articulates with the rest of the lower mar-
gin of the episternum and with the sternum. The epimerom is broad above, articulating with the postscutellum
on its posterior corner. A thickened ridge passes down its posterior
edge to the articulatory condyle of the coxa, and at this point the
epimeron, still thickened, is flexed backward and passes down
behind the coxa. Here it turns inward and unites with the corre-
sponding prolongation of the epimeron of the other side, and together
they fuse with the end of the metasterum, which is described below. The metacoxa is more or less cordate and not very much larger
than the mesocoxa. By reflected light it appears to be uniformly
thick throughout, but by transmitted light, when the specimen has
been well cleared, a distinet thickening along the posterior edge is
easily visible. This thickened ridge becomes broader below. From
near the coxal cavity, caudad, there projects a thick spiniform
process, the meracanthus or coal spur. This appears to be articulated
and is not a true process. In the more highly specialized species the metacoxa, as already
stated, has become very enormously enlarged and has pushed far
up into the pleura. A comparison of Apsylla (fig. 2) and Psylla alni
americana (fig. 4) shows very plainly that this pushing upward of
the coxa has been between the pleural suture and the posterior
thickened ridge of the epimeron. As a consequence, the pleural
suture in Psylla does not extend to the upper end of the coxa, but
terminates in front of and below that point. The lower extremity
of the episterum articulates with the sternum, which is even smaller

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 13

and more reduced than in Apsylla. The trochantin is larger and
articulates with the coxa in front and well below the upper end. Along this margin of the episterum next to the trochantin inside
there is a ridge, which extends upward along the corresponding
margin of the epimeron and articulates with the coxa at its upper-
most point and passes on downward behind the coxa to unite with
the corresponding process from the other side and with the sternum,
as described for Apsylla. ‘The metacoxa is similar to that of Apsylla, except that it is much
larger and the posterior thickening is more marked and conspicuous,
while the anterior part is thinner. Stough went widely astray in
his interpretation of the metathorax. The thickened posterior part
of the metacoxa he called the epimeron and the remainder he called
the coxa. The pleurites he did not attempt to explain or show,
except his supposed epimeron. The sternum of the metathorax is, in the generalized Apsylla,
rather similar to that of the mesothorax, but much smaller. It is a
narrow, though easily visible, sclerite between the meso- and meta-
cox with a narrow projection extending back between the metacoxe
and mostly covered by them so that it is scarcely visible from directly
beneath. This narrow process articulates with the two prolongations
from the two epimera which project downward behind the coxe. The metafurce arise from the posterior part of the sternum ventrad,
near the point from where the posterior prolongation begins. They
are about one-half larger than the mesofurce and of similar shape
and form, except that the apices are more flattened out and broad-
ened (fig. 12). The lateral apodemes are small but distinct, and
show plainly the position of the pleural suture (figs. 2, 12). In Psylla, and practically all the genera except Apsylla, the
sternum and metafuree are very much more complicated. The
sternum is scarcely visible from beneath, except a small sclerite at
the lower end of each metepisternum. This extends upward (shown
in fig. 1 by dotted lines) between the meso- and metacoxe, and is
visible only by dissection, being concealed by the coxe (figs. 10, 11). The posterior prolongation is, therefore, a little farther up from the
venter and is larger and longer because the metacoxe are larger
and it must reach to the posterior margin of the latter. At the
posterior margin of the coxe the sternum articulates with the pro-
longations of the epimera in exactly the same manner as in Apsyila. The metafuree are not simple and small, as in Apsylla, but are
exceedingly long and complicated (figs. 10, 11) in their structure and
articulations with the other parts of the body. The two main forks
of the furce pass upward arcuately to the dorsum of the metathorax
and extend backward to beyond the posterior margin of the post-
scutellum, projecting into the base of the abdomen. About half

  

14 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. way between the fork and the apex is an arcuate transverse process
connecting the two arms of the furee; extending from each arm a
little further distad is a process connecting with the post-coxal pro-
longation of the epimeron; another, a little more proximal of the
latter process, unites with the ridge on the internal side of the margin
of the epimeron and episternum in front of the coxa (figs. 1, 10, 11). This is the form in several species of Psylla. In other genera there
are minor differences, but the principal features of the endo- and
exoskeleton are the same. The musculature of the thorax, and especially of the metathorax,
is very remarkable and interesting, but it will not be discussed here. It scarcely needs to be said that these peculiar developments of the
metafurce and metasternum are for muscle attachment. APPENDAGES OF THE THORAX. Wings (fig. 395).—The wings, four in number, are membranous,
though sometimes the anterior pair is thickened and leathery. The
shape is variable from elongate-ovate to rhomboidal. The venation
is simple, and presents relatively few striking differences throughout
the family. The media and cubitus have fused at the base with the radius, and
only one principal basal vein is present (R+M+Cu). This divides
near the base into either three (Triozine) or two veins. In the latter
case the posterior of the two veins (M+Cu, or the cubital petiole)
divides again into the media and cubitus. The upper fork, radius
(R), gives off the radial sector (Rs) about midway in its course to
the costa (C). The radius may unite with the costa directly or it
may turn near the costa and follow parallel with it for a distance
before uniting with it. The space between the costa and radius, in
the latter case, is called the pterostigma. The radial sector passes to
the apical portion of the wing and is branched only in exceptional
cases. ‘The medial vein is branched once near its apex, forming M,,, and
M,, and the cell thus formed is called the second marginal cell. ‘The
cubitus, also, forks once into Cu, and Cu,, forming the first marginal
cell. The claval suture dividing the clavus and corium is near the
base, extending from the base to near the tip of Cu,. Only one anal
vein is present, and that is very short and near the base. The veins,
and sometimes the membrane, are beset with fine or coarse hairs. The venation of the posterior wings is even more simple, the
wings themselves being much smaller and more delicate in texture. R, is wanting, the first vein behind the costa being the radial sector. The media is unforked at the end. The cubitus divides, as in the
primary wing, into Cu, and Cu, A short anal vein is sometimes
present. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 15

Legs.—The coxe are large and subglobose or ovoid, the metacoxe
being very much larger and more complicated in their structure
(see discussion of the metapleuree above). ‘The fore- and metacoxse
are usually contiguous, while the middle pair are not. The trochanter is freely movable in the acetabulum of the coxa. The femur is long and large, and the hind pair are well supplied with
muscles for springing. The tibia is as long as or longer than the
femur and relatively slender. In’ many genera there is a spur at
the base, and in all the genera there are from three to many black
spines at the apex. ‘The tarsi are two-segmented. The apical segment bears two large
sharp claws with a long seta between them. The basal segment in
most genera, except Triozine, bears two large claw-like spines at
the apex, one extending out on each side of the distal segment. ARDOMEN,
Figs. 1, 8, 18-14. The number of segments in the abdomen is reduced below the
number in the typical or generalized insect. There are five easily
visible segments besides the genital segment in the female and six
plus the genital segment in the male. In addition to this there are
several segments reduced or suppressed and several represented by
the gonapophyses in both sexes. The total number has been said
by Witlaczil and others to be ten, while Heymons ' shows eleven to be
the total number in the several genera of Homoptera, though Psyl-
ide are not explicitly included. I find that the latter, eleven, is
correct. The first segment has been said to be fused with the metathorax
as a propodium. This is not possible according to the position of
the first spiracle. Stough (’10:151) states that there are seven spira-
cles on the abdomen. In Psylla pyricola (figs. 13, 14) and in all of
the other species which I have examined there are eight in both
sexes. Two are between the metathorax and first tergite. The
latter is much reduced and is not the first of the large tergites. There
are two very small chitinized sclerites below these and before the
first large urite. It is obvious that these are two atrophied urites
and represent two suppressed abdominal segments. The tergites
of the first two seem to be wanting entirely, while that of the third
is present as a reduced sclerite. The fourth to eighth tergites, inclu-
sive, are distinct enough. The ninth segment in the female is
represented by the ventral valve of the genital segment. The tenth
is represented by the ovipositor sheath within the genital segment
and the eleventh segment by the dorsal or anal valve of the same
genital segment. The eighth urite is suppressed. In the male the
segments are similar up to the ninth. The ninth tergite is suppressed

 

1 Heymons, R. Beitriige cur Morphologie und Entwickelunggeschichte der Rhynehoten, 1899. 16 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. but the urite is well developed. The tenth segment is represented
by the ventral genital valve, bearing the forceps on its upper margin. The eleventh segment is the anal valve, the dorsal sclerite bearing
the anal opening at its extremity. The term supra-anal plate applied
by some to this sclerite is hardly correct, for it is not above the anus,
as the term implies, but bears the anus; hence the term anal valve. The spiracles are quite dependable for the interpretation of the
abdominal segments, and it seems’obvious that the above statements
are correct. However, the best and surest method of determining
the actual number of the segments is by embriological studies. Until
such studies are made the conclusions can not be absolutely certain. LOCOMOTION,

The Psyllids are usually very active little creatures and often
difficult to catch without the aid of a net. The rapid movement is
a combination of leaping and flying. When disturbed a psyllid
throws itself into the air by means of its powerful hind legs, and
once in the air it vibrates its wings and thus increases the rapidity
of movement and the distance covered. The wings are scarcely
strong enough to permit of rapid or prolonged flight unaided by the
preliminary leap. By this combined leaping and flying, however,
the insect is able to travel several yards, although more often it . merely leaps a few inches or feet from the point of disturbance. The hind legs are much larger and longer and more muscular than
the others. The femur is directed backward, the tibia bends forward
and the tarsi backward. For leaping, the insect doubles the tibie
close up under the femora and the tarsi close under the tibie, and
fastened firmly by means of the claws. The tarsi are so short that
the claws are nearly under the trochanter, when the leg is doubled for
leaping. By suddenly extending the tibie by means of the powerful
muscles in the femora and coxe the body is thrown upward and
forward. This may be most easily understood if one folds a piece
of paper in the form of a Z with the base short, and performs the
motions described above. RELATIONS TO OTHER HOMOPTERA,

It seems apparent from the morphological studies on this family
that it is less closely related to the Aphidide, Aleyrodide, and Coc-
cide than has been heretofore supposed. Many things point to a
close relationship with the higher Homoptera, especially the Cica-
doidea, and the Membracidx, and related families. The writer is
not yet prepared to make any definite statement in this regard. It
is to be hoped that more work will be done in the future with a view
to establishing the true relationships between the families of Homop-
tera. The sclerites of the head and thorax, the number of abdominal
segments present and suppressed, many features of the internal

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 17

anatomy, the form of the gonapophyses and many other things
indicate a much closer relationship with the higher Homoptera than
has been generally supposed. COLLECTING AND PRESERVING. The Psyllide, like most Homoptera, are to be found on trees or
smaller plants, sucking up the plant juices by means‘of the long beak. They may be collected with a sweep net, or with tweezers if the insects
are not too active—as they often are. The external skeleton is hard
enough so that the insect will retain its form after drying. For this
reason they may be killed in a cyanide bottle and preserved on paper
triangles or minuten nadeln. Or, they may be placed in 70 per cent
alcohol and preserved indefinitely in this way. Specimens may be
sent by mail, also, in either manner. If possible, all stages of the insect, nymphs as well as imagines,
should be preserved. The nymphs are best preserved in 70 per cent
alcohol. As much data as possible regarding the host-plant, time
of year, locality, elevation, etc., should be secured and should accom-
pany the insect either by means of lot numbers or else on the pin or
in the vial of alcohol. Specimens for study should be mounted on a paper triangle or
minuten nadeln, and not mounted in balsam. The shape and natural
form of much of the body surface is not readily visible, because of
distortion, in balsam mounts. The finer details of the genitalia,
however, are best seen by clearing and mounting the cauda in
balsam. DETERMINATIONS FROM IMMATURE STAGES. Determination of the species when only the nymphal form is
available is quite impossible at present. No serious attempt has
been made thus far to work out a system of classification based on
nymphs only. As soon as sufficient material for this work becomes
available, the writer expects to undertake such a task. At present,
however, the best that can be done is to determine, sometimes, the
subfamily to which the nymphs belong. In general, the nymph possesses a flattened oval body, with the
long beak on the ventral surface near the center. There are usually
three or four instars. After the first molt the wing pads become
visible on the anterior half of the dorsal side. The body is often cov-
ered or fringed with variously shaped hairs. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. I wish to express to Dr. J.C. Bradley and Dr. William A. Riley, my
hearty appreciation of assistance and many valuable suggestions
during the preparation of this monograph, the former in the taxonomic
portion and the latter in the morphology. To Prof. C. F. Baker,

18 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. formerly of Pomona College, I owe much gratitude for first starting
me on this task and helping me through many difficulties, as well as
placing before me his extensive collections. Without Dr. L. O.
Howard’s kindness in loaning to me for study the large collection of
Psyllidx from the United States National Museum, this work would
have been much more limited in its scope. To many others, also, I
desire to express my thanks for assistance rendered in one form or
another; Prof. J. H. Comstock; Mr. E. A. Schwarz, of the United
States National Museum; Miss Edith M. Patch, for the loan of para-
types of her species; Dr. L. Melichar, and Dr. O. M. Reuter; Mr.
E. P. Van Duzee, and Prof. T. D. A. Cockerell. EXPLANATION OF DESCRIPTIONS. Since the two sexes differ very little in this family, except in the
genitalia, one description is given for both the male and female of
each species, followed by a description of the genitalia first of the
male, then of the female. If any other secondary differences between
the sexes do occur, these are noted in the general description. SYSTEMATIC TREATMENT. SYNOPSIS OP THE SUBFAMILIES,

a’, Head deeply cleft in front, with the antenne attached to the truncate anterior
ends on each side of cleft (see fig. 122); gene seldom produced into conical
processes; furcation of media not dichotomous (see figs. 395 and 492); hind tibise
often with a spur at base. CARSIDARINE. a, Head not as above (head may appear to be cleft, but this is due to the genal cones,
and the antenne are not attached to the ends of these). b', Frons not covered by gene; gene not produced into conical processes (except
in Calophya); front ocellus at extremity of frons. ec, Vertex flat and horizontal, with frons beneath it in the form of a narrow
(usually elongate) sclerite from clypeus to front ocellus; wings often more
orless thickened and maculated. .. . ------ Livan. ce, Vertex rounded downward in front, not horizontal, with frons as a distinct
sclerite usually forming a uniformly smooth surface with vertex and gene;
wings usually membranous... -Pavropsytunm,

#2, Frons covered by gense; gene usually produced into conical processea (genall
cones); front ocellus imbedded between vertex and gene. c. Forewing with more than the usual two marginal cells, the additional ones
(or one) being formed by the branching of the radial sector or a cross vein
from same to media. - -CERIACREMINE,

©, Forewing with only the usual two marginal cells, formed by furcation of
media and cubitus; radial sector not branched and without cross vein to
media,

a, Basal tarsal segment of hind legs without a pair of black, claw-like spines
at tip; radius, media and cubitus usually diverging at same point from
basal vein; wings usually angulate at apex... -Triozina. @, Basal tarsal segment of hind legs with two black, claw-like epines at tip;
the three veins not diverging at same point from basal vein, but media
and cubitus with a common stem (cubital petiole); wings rarely angulate
atapex.... .-Psyiuina. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLID# OF THE NEW WORLD. 19

Subfamily LIVILN As. This subfamily is characterized chiefly by the flattened head, the
inferior position and the shape of the frons, the form of the gene, the
short antenna and more or less thickened wings. Head flat, not deflexed; vertex longer or shorter than broad; frons
beneath vertex, not covered by gene, visible as a narrow (usually
elongate) sclerite from clypeus to front ocellus; gens more or less
swollen beneath vertex, never conical. Antenne usually short,
rather thick. Eyes compressed (Liviini), or bulging more con-
spicuously (Aphalarini). Thorax scarcely arched; sutures not deeply
impressed. Wings more or less thickened, variable in shape and

venation. SYNOPSIS OF GENERA,

a}, Eyes greatly flattened, not hemispherical; vertex longer than broad; pronotum
extending far down laterad toward cox; wings thickened. Tribe Liviini. One genus... Livia Latreille. @®, Eyes more or less hemispherical; vertex not longer than broad..Tribe Aphalarini. +1, Pronotum extending down laterad to below lower surface of eyes; vertex about
aslongasbroad; genz not swollen; wings thickened........ Rhinocola Forster. 3, Pronotum not extending down laterad as far as lower eurface of eyes, shorter
with a knob-like lateral termination; vextex broader than long; gene some-

what swollen,
¢!, Vertex flat, more than half as long as broad; gene only slightly swollen; wings
usually ovate, hyaline, often maculated; male anal valve with a Jong
posterior horizontal lobe. Aphalara Forster. @. Vertex shorter, not as flat as in above genus; gene more swollen but not cover-
ing frons; wings more or less thickened and rhomboidal; male anal valve
not as above. Aphalaroida new genus. Tribe LIVIINI. Genus LIVIA Latreille. Head not defiexed, as broad as prothorax and closely joined to it;
vertex flat, usually longer than broad, more or less rectangular in
outline, apical portion thin; frons not covered by gene, visible as
an elongate sclerite beneath vertex from clypeus to front ocellus;
genz somewhat swollen, never produced into cones; eyes greatly
flattened, scarcely bulging from head, with a small tubercle (pre-
ocular tubercle) in front of each; anterior ocellus beneath, not
visible from above. Antenne short, basal segments unusually
large. Thorax flat; pronotum extending far down laterad nearly to
coxe; propleurites very small. Legs short. Wings thick, often
maculate, or rhomboidal. Type of genus.—Livia juncorum Latreille. This species was desig-
nated as the type by Latreille in 1810 (?10: 265). SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES,

a, Wings maculated, relativery broad. b. Wings rather small, rhomboidal or rectangular; M strongly arched; Re sinuate;

vertex short; segment IT of antennee short. coloradensis, new species. 2. Wings rather large, broadly ovate, not squarish; M almost straight; second mar-
ginal cell much larger than first. 20 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. c!, Wings rather dark, with subapical whitish band before the apical dark band;
veins abundantly spotted with dark brown; first marginal cell mostly clear;
vertex broadly and usually deeply emarginate in front; segment IT of
antennw more than one-third as long as flagellum.......maculipennis Fitch. ©, Wings lighter, unicolored to apical brown band; latter lighter than in above
species; first marginal cell brown; veins without spots; vertex longer, as in
vernalis, less emarginate in front; segment II of antennee less than one-third
as long as flagellum... ‘marginata Patch. a, Wings not maculated, yellowish brown, thick and transversely wrinkled, rela-
tively not so broad. B, Body, with wings, seldom less than 4 mm. in length; vertex large, deeply emar-
ginate in front, protruding to nearly midpoint of second antennal segment,
sometimes less, sometimes raised on margins; flagellum of antenn usually
three to four times as long as segment II; forceps of male long, constricted mid-
way and more or less pyriform; forewings thick, nearly opaque. .vernalis Fitch. 8, Length seldom more than 3 mm., often less; vertex smaller, protruding less over
antenner, not deeply emarginate in front, scarcely raised on margins; flagellum
of antennze usually about two and a hali times as long as segment II; forceps of
male usually short, stout, not pyriform, truncate at apex, more pubescent,
especially at apex; forewings thinner, semitransparent. . .. .caricis, new species. LIVIA COLORADENSIS, new species. Figs. 20, 27, 33, 222, 275, 426. Length of body 2.4 mm. ; length of forewing 2.4; width of head
0.80; length of vertex, 0.55. General color brown to dark brown,
darker on abdomen than on thorax and head. Body robust, mod-
erately small. Head relatively short, not longer than width between eyes; occip-
ital margin but slightly arcuate; vertex coarsely vermiculo-punctate,
with a broad, rounded depression on each side of median line, flat
anteriorly, only slightly emarginate in front at median line and
also over antennal insertions. Eyes less compressed than in jun-
corum, but slightly bulging; ocelli small. Antenne short, stout;
basal segment pedicellate; II not much longer than I; flagellum
stout, about three and a half times as long as IT; terminal sete long. Thorax flat, coarsely punctate, more so on pronotum than on rest
of notum. Pronotum about as long as prescutum, sometimes
slightly shorter; margin of lateral extremity even with face. Wings
subrectangular, about one and a half times as long as broad, rather
square apically, coriaceous, conspicuously maculated; apical fourth
darkly spotted and maculated, the rest with fewer and more scat-
tered spots; veins with numerous black spots at regular intervals;
second marginal cell broad, larger than first. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment small, rounded; forceps small,
scarcely arched, narrowly acute at apex; anal valve large, long,
broad, longer than forceps, square at tip, sides subparallel. Hemale—
Abdomen very stout; genital segment not quite as long as rest of
abdomen; dorsal valve longer than ventral, equally acute. ‘THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 21

Described from one male and three females from Colorado (C. F.
Baker), and one female from Texarkana, Arkansas (E. S. Tucker). This species is apparently related to maculipennis Fitch, an eastern
species; the wing venation is quite similar, but the size is markedly
different. In the characters of the head and thorax the two species
are quite distinct. Type-specimen in author’s collection. LIVIA MACULIPENNIS Fitch,

Figs. 25,425. Diraphia maculipennis Frrcu '57: 740.—Tuomas 779: 14. Livia maculipennis Rivey ’83:68.—Patcn ’12a:7. Livia bifasciata Provancner ?86: 307. Length of body 2.8 mm. ; length of forewing 2.9; width of head 0.84. General color brown to dark brown. Body rather large. Head rather long, about as long as width including only one eye,
as broad as prothorax; vertex long, quite deeply emarginate in front
at median line, very coarsely vermiculo-punctate, ascending posteri-
orly and outwardly toward posterior ocelli, front margin rough and
broken; eyes very compressed, large. Antenne relatively longer
than in preceding species, second segment very large and long, one-
half as long as flagellum; two apical segments black; terminal sete
long. Pronotum slightly longer than prescutum, somewhat constricted
dorsad. Prescutum small. Wings large, coriaceous, maculated,
broadly ovate and broadly rounded at apex, about one and two-
third times as long as broad; second marginal cell much larger than
first; pterostigma large; with a dark band across wing distad, then
a light almost hyaline band subapically about as broad as the apical
band; basal half yellowish brown except clavus rather hyaline; light
portions with conspicuous brown spots situated mostly on veins. Genitalia. — Male.—Genitalia similar to coloradensis. Female.—
Abdomen large; genital segment about as Jong as rest of abdomen;
dorsal valve longer than ventral, slightly sinuate caudad. Described from 17 males and females from Washington, District
of Columbia (E. A. Schwarz), on ‘swampy meadows,” May, 1880; 7
from Eufaula, Alabama (Schwarz), on Pine; 1 from Holderness, New
Hampshire (Hubbard and Schwarz); 12 marked ‘U.S.D.A., 4783,
Sept. 29, 1910;” 2 collected by Uhler (locality unknown); 4 from
Hamburg, New York (van Duzee), July; 1 from Pennsylvania (C. F.
Baker). LIVIA MARGINATA Patch. Livia marginata Patou 12:8. This species is closely related to maculipennis, but in a few char-
acters seems to be distinct. The size is about thesame. The vertex

22 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM,

is longer and bears considerable resemblance to that of vernalis,
being less broadly emarginate in front; antennal segment II relatively
smaller and shorter, less than one-third the length of flagellum. The
forewings are similar in shape, but lack the spots on the veins and are
lighter colored, with the apical brown band lighter and extending over
first marginal cell. The genitalia are similar. The mesonotum is
conspicuously darker than in maculipennis, appearing as a brown
spot on the dorsum. Described from two females from Holderness, New Hampshire,
collected by Hubbard and Schwarz at the same time apparently as
the one specimen of maculipennis from this same locality. The
type locality is Colebrook, Connecticut (H. L. Viereck), one male
described by Miss Patch. LIVIA VERNALIS Fitch. Figs. 3,24,26,217, 270,423. Livia vernalis Frren 51:64.—Tuomas 79:14.—Ritey 83:68.—Packarp 90:803.—

Lanter 98:404,411.—Paten 12a:7. Diraphia femoralis Fitcn 57:740.—Riwey 83:68. Livia femoralis LaNtNER 98:
Diraphia calamorum Frrcn 8'
Livia saltatric Provancner 86:307. Length of body 2.8 mm; length of forewing 2.9; width of head 0.81;
length of vertex 0.76. General color orange to light brown, sternum
and face dark, abdomen lighter; antennew black at tip. Body large. Head long, as broad as prothorax; vertex large, sides nearly straight,
as long as width including only one eye, rather deeply emarginate
in front of median line, margins more or less upturned, produced in
front to nearly the middle of segment II of antennx; postocular
portion large and extensive, with an oblique fossal impression across
it. Eyes large, scarcely bulging. Antenne short, II longest and
largest, only a little longer than I, one-fourth as long as flagellum;
flagellum short, thick, whitish except black tip; terminal sete long. Thorax broad, flat, coarsely punctate. Pronotum longer than
prescutum, with dorsal fove prominent, annulated. Forewings
large, very thick and coriaceous, quite opaque, yellowish brown,
ovate, about twice as long as broad, broadly rounded at apex; second
marginal cell larger than first, relatively broad; Rs scarcely sinuate,
rather short; pterostigma long and narrow; clavus very large; distal
portion of wing often with a few brownish spots visible only by
transmitted light. Genitalia — Male. —Genital segment large; forceps large, broad at
base, narrowed midway and attenuate distad, more or less asymmetri-
cally pyriform, sparsely pubescent; anal valve large, rectangular,
sides subparallel, longer than forceps. Female.—Genital segment

 
 
 

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 23

about es long as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve longer than ventral,
somewhat sinuate on dorsal margin. Described from many males and females from the following
localities: Agricultural College, Michigan (C. F. Baker); Ames, Iowa
(C. W. Mally); New York; Washington, District of Columbia (Hub-
bard and Schwarz), February, March, June, and November: Mary-
land, February; Herndon, Virginia, in June. LIVIA CARICIS, new species. Figs. 28, 221, 424. This species is in many respects very similar to vernalis. The size
is usually distinctly smaller, sometimes very much so. The general
color is similar, but often darker, sometimes almost black. The
principal differences in structure are as follows: Vertex relatively
shorter, usually broadest at front margin of eyes and converging
anteriorly thereafter, protruding less over antenne and protruding
portion thicker, less deeply emarginate in front, not raised on mar-
gins; second antennal segment relatively longer and larger, flagellum
shorter, only about two and a half times as long as II. Forewings
thinner, similar in shape, usually less opaque, similar in venation,
except M +Cu relatively longer, and Cu, shorter and more arcuate. Genitalia.—Male.—Genital plate small, rounded; forceps small,
stout, not pyriform nor constricted as in vernalis, truncate at apex,
with a slight constriction just below apex, more densely pubescent;
anal valve short, only slightly longer than forceps, rectangular. Female.—Genitalia similar in general to vernalis. Described from several males and females from Boulder, Colorado,
collected by E. Bethel on Carex, in July; many males and females
from Colorado (no data) ; Santa Fe, New Mexico (H. S. Barber), May;
Lake Tahoe, California, May, 1879; Placer County, California. (A. Koebele), September; Siskiyou County, California (Koebele);
Park City, Utah (Hubbard and Schwarz), June; Bear Paw Mountain
(Hubbard and Schwarz), September; Oregon (Koebele); Glacier,
British Columbia (Hubbard and Schwarz); Northern Hlinois; Pen
Mar, Pennsylvania (Hubbard and Schwarz); Brunswick, Maine
(A. S. Packard). Type specimen in author’s collection. The differences between this and vernalis are somewhat inconstant,
except those of the genitalia. The antennal and cephalic characters
approach in similarity to such an extent that it sometimes becomes
difficult to distinguish the two species on these characters alone. The
differences in the male genitalia, however, seem to be constant. Miss
Patch (?12a:7) mentions the Colorado forms of vernalis as somewhat
distinct and gives to them the name of variety @ of that species. 6060°—Bull. 85 —14—3

24 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Most of the western individuals seem to belong to this species, while

most of the eastern forms are typical vernalis. It is interesting
to note, however, that in Pennsylvania and Maine five specimens
have been taken which seem to belong to the western species. It is
possible that these two species represent only one very variable
species which is distributed over the entire country, and varying in
the different geographical localities. The specimens from Placer and Siskiyou Counties are a little
smaller and superficially a very little different in appearance, and
bear the manuscript name of Livia subtruncata Riley. ‘These, how-
ever, seem to belong to the species caricis. Tribe APHALARINI. Genus RHINOCOLA F6Orster. This genus is not represented in the American fauna, but it is given
a place in this work because of its significance as a connecting form
between Livia and Aphalara. Many of the species described in this
genus are not congeneric with the type-species, 2. aceris Linneus,
and must be referred to other genera. An examination of Rhinocola aceris (figs. 29, 30, 31, 219, 273, 428)
will show the many transitional characters which it possesses, inter-
mediate between the two genera above mentioned. The head and
dorsum are very slightly arched; the vertex is flat, about as long as
broad; the frons and gene resemble both genera; the antenne are
short and thickened. ‘The pronotum is intermediate between the
two genera, extending far down laterad but not as far as in Livia,
with the pleurites shorter than in Aphalara, but of similar form. The
wings show some peculiarities of both. Genus APHALARA Forster. Notum not strongly arched, often almost flat; head usually scarcely
deflexed; vertex flat, more than half as long as broad, lobes somewhat
rectangular but rounded in front, making an emargination between
them; frons not covered by gene, but narrow and elongate as in
Livia, with front ocellus at its anterior end; gen not swollen into
cones, but often roundly swollen on each side of frons; elypeus pyri-
form, rather large. Antenne short, never more than twice as long
as width of head, often not at all longer than width of head, ten or
nine segmented (usually the former). Pronotum rather long, with two foves on each side, and a knob-
like lateral termination; pleurites very short, quadrate; pleural
suturo straight, extending to middle of lateral termination of pro-
notum; prescutum rather short; scutum large. Hind tibie without
spur at base, with six to nine black spines at apex; basal tarsus

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDA OF THE NEW WORLD. 25

of hind Jegs with two black, claw-like spines at end, as in Psylla
and many other genera. Wings elongate-ovate, never acute at
apex, often moro or less thickened and subopaque or hyaline, often
maculated or spotted; M+Cu nearly always as long as R; pter-
ostigma always wanting. Male anal valve always with a long,
horizontal, posterior lobe, extending back to forceps. Type of genus.—Chermes calthe Linneus. Foerster erected this
genus in 1848, and named in it several species but indicated no type
species. The structure of the head resembles rather closely that of Livia;
the vertex is flat, the frons similar in form, position, and appearance;
gene similar; antenne short; notum rather flat; pronotum some-
what similar. In the hemispherical eyes, however, the two genera
are quite distinct. Since my treatment of this genus in a previous paper (Crawford
*11b: 492) a considerable amount of additional material has come to
hand, including several new species, and many new records for already
described species. Several new species have been added also by
Miss Patch (Patch ’11: 16; 712b: 216-219), as well as some life-
history records. This genus presents serious difficulties to the systematist because
of the great amount of variation in certain characters which in other
genera are more or less constant. Size and color of body, shape of
forewing, presence, absence or degree of maculation or coloration of
latter, size of genital appendages in both sexes, are all subject to
considerable variation within a species, or else there are a very
large number of closely related and intergrading species. The collection of the United States National Museum contains a
very large number of specimens of this genus from many Jocalities,
and with accompanying notes and data of varying degrees of com-
pleteness. These specimens, together with those of the C. F. Baker
collection, haye been divided into apparent species and arranged
in series of variation. In many cases the series are very long, and
the variations are so gradual and complex that it is quite impossible
to separate species within the series. Until accurate ecological
data is available for many of these species we can not be sure of our
systematic arrangement. All that can be done at present is to
group these series of similar forms into provisional species. Any
attempt to subdivide them would result in confusion. SYNOPSIS oF SPECIES. a‘. Antenne ten-segmented. 61. Clypeus much elongated, more or less cylindrical, rounded or truneste at apex,
extending down and forward; notum with four more or less distinct light-
colored stripes; female genital segment very short; wings hyaline to fumate,
or maculated apically. -ealthee Linnweus,

 

26 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM.

} 2. Clypeus subglobose or pyriform, not elongated, more or less appressed to face. ¢1. Forceps of male clavate, with an inwardly directed tooth on inner anterior
margin subapically. d?, Body not very large; length to tip of folded wings distinctly less than 4 mm. ¢}, Antenne not longer than width of head. f. Wings clear, with an irregular brown band across apex diagonally;

color of body reddish to flavous .. rumicis Mally. 7. Wings whitish, opaque, covered more or less densely with small round
brown spots. g}. Tead and thorax not brown or dark colored (see pinicola). kh}. Color whitish; length usually about 2 mm to tip of folded wings;
wings sparsely dotted.......... artemisize Forster. 12. Color not whitish. g

i, Female genital segment as long as head and thorax together,

with short pubescence; length to tip of folded wings usually

over 2.5 mm, often -3.5 mm; color greenish yellow, with

whitish stripes on thoracie dorsum; wings elongate, densely

spotted.. -angustipennis Crawford. i2, Female genital segment shorter, with Jong hairs on distal half

of dorsal valve; length to tip of wings not much over 2 mm;

color greenish; wings less densely spotted, less elongate. g?. Head and thorax brown, or mostly dark colored; wings rather
sparsely spotted. 28, Thorax very strongly arched, broad, variegated with flavous and
dark brown (female sometimes mostly flavous). pinicola, new species. 1, Thorax not very strongly arched, narrower; dorsal head and thorax
chocolate brown, abdomen and venter flavous.

. suaedee, new species. @. Antenne distinctly longer than width of head. (f!. Head and thorax greenish yellow or flavous; length to tip of folded
wings 3 mm or more; thorax scarcely arched. q'. Forewings not spotted, somewhat flavous. g°. Wings indistinctly and sparsely spotted

(/P?. Head and thorax darker; brown or black. g'. Wings clear or indistinetly spotted in apical portion; male genitalia
relatively very large; color brown to black, abdomen flavous. caudata, new species. g®. Wings with an irregular oblique brown band across apex, and spotted

more or less besides; male genitalia not large; color light brown to

blackish, with lighter markings on thorax. . . .. pulchella Crawford. @, Body very large, over 4 mm long to tip of folded wings, often over 5 mm;
male forceps greatly enlarged at apex; wings very large and broad. ¢!, Wings clear or indistinctly browned in apical portion, often with a slight
brownish tinge over entire surface. picta Zetterstedt.
. Wings similar, but with a distinct brown transverse band subapically. ‘fascipennis Patch. @, Male forceps not clavate at apex, without inner subapical tooth; wings
maculated. @, Posterior process of male anal valve tapering uniformly to apex, not lanceo-
late; forceps deeply bifurcate, with two long thin processes; antenne
one and a half times width of head alaskensis Ashmead. @. Posterior process of male anal valve conspicuously lanceolate, petiolate
atbase; forceps T-shaped; antenne one and afourth times width of head. nebulosa kincaidi Ashmead. --veaziei Patch,
eaziei metzaria Crawford. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 27

a?, Antenne nine-segmented (apparently eight); body small. Anomocera, new subgenus. bt. Forewings whitish, not maculated or spotted; forceps of male serrate on apical
margin, with a small inner apical tooth - -minutissima Crawiord. 8, Wings with numerous brown spots; a supernumerary marginal cell often
present; forceps with apical margin not serrate; inner subapical tooth on
anterior margin... ----anomala, new species. APHALARA CALTHE Linnaeus,

Fics. 106, 161, 165, 170, 171, 377, 380, 982, 500, 604. Chermes calthe Linnzxus °61: sp, 1005,
Aphalara calthe Lozw '82: 233; ’86: 149; *88: 13.—Epwarps ’96: 232.—Suc ’06:
1,—Osnanin ’07:346.—Reurter 81: 149; ’08: 65.—Kuwayaua
*08: 154.—Crawrorp ’11b: 495. A, polygoni Foerster ’48:80.—Scorr ’76:561.—Dovetas '79: 255.—Lozw ’86:
M49,—Mattry °94: pl. 15.—Epwarps ’96:232.—Patcn 711: 235;
°12b: 216. A. ulicis Forrster 48:96. Length of body 1.6 to 2.2 mm; length of wing 2.5 to 2.9; width
of head 0.75 to 0.80. General color light brown to dark chocolate
brown or reddish; vertex usually lighter; mesonotum with four
stripes of lighter brown usually present; stripes just mentioned may
be variable in degree of distinctness; abdomen darker, more or less
variegated; antennz flavous, black at tip; legs light brown to brown;
wings variablo in extent of maculation, from a slight fumato condition
in apical portion to a more distinct brown maculation or bands; some-
times the entire wing surface is slightly fumate, with veins dark and
prominent. Head not quite as broad as thorax; vertex nearly half as long as
broad, with two fovew of varying depth and extent; genm somewhat
swollen; clypeus unusually enlarged and elongate, projecting forward
and downward, cylindrical and truncate. Antenne seldom longer
than width of head (this may vary somewhat, however), rather
thick

Thorax seldom arched strongly, usually rather flat, coarsely
punctate. Legs short. Wings variable in size as well as coloration,
usually darker in apical half, venation as shown in figure. Genitalia —Male—Anal valve moderately large; posterior lobe
long, converging to apex; forceps rather short, slightly enlarged at
apex, inner terminal tooth short.— Female.—Genital segment usually
about as long as preceding ventral sclorite, sometimes longer, variable. Deseribed from numerous males and females from: Washington,
District of Columbia (E. A. Schwarz), May 30, 1884; Massachusetts
(no data); Ames, Iowa (C. W. Mally), on Polygonum sp., March 1,
1885; Illinois (no data); Louisiana (C. F. Baker), no data; Wyoming
(A. Koebele), June; Ogden, Utah (Koebele), on ?Artemisia tridentata,
June 17, 1885; Park City, Salt Lake City, Amorican Forks, and Alta,

 

     

 

28 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. all Utah (Hubbard and Schwarz), June 15 to 30; Caiton City, Colorado
(J. Gravenstock), on “cultivated tomatoes,” October 15, 1884;
Glenwood, Colorado (©. P. Gillette), no data; (Mesilla, Now Mexico
(Cockerell), August 3; Santa Fe, New Mexico (H. S. Barber), May
6; Placer County, California (Kocbele), September; Alameda, Cali-
fornia (Koebele), August 1, 1885; San Mateo, California (Baker),
no data; Castle Rock, Nevada County, California (Koebele), Sep-
tember (doubtful specimens) ; Claremont, California (Baker); Oregon
(Baker), no data; Washington (C. P. Gillette), no data; Acapulco,
Mexico (Baker); Havana, Cuba (Baker). Tho distribution is wide,
also, throughout Europe, many localities in Asia; Japan (Kuwayama). The food plants are several and varied: Polygonum, several species;
Caltha palustris; Artemisia tridentata; probably others, also. It is quite possible that there are several closely related species in
this largo series of specimens before me, but with the present inade-
quate biological data it is impossible to separate them. For the
present, at least, the name calthae will be applied to all. The varia-
tions in color, markings, size, relative proportions of parts, sizo of
genitalia, etc., are so numerous and gradual and intergrade to such
an extent that it is impossible to recognize two or three species without
being required to recognize a dozen. Aphalara polygoni. of Forster was said by Loew (’82:233), to be
identical with calthe. Mally’s polygoni, notwithstanding Miss
Patch’s statements, seems to differ from calthe no more than do
many other slight variants. For the present, therefore, it seems
reasonable to continue to recognize the two species as identical,
polygon’ being a synonym ot calthz. This conclusion is based on the
examination of several of Mally’s specimens and several of those
studied by Miss Patch, as well as several European specimens of
both species. ‘A. nubifera Patch (12b:216) is very close to calthz and is really
not more distinct than many variants of the species. However,
until more certain disposal of this variable specific group can be
made, nubifera will not be merged into calthz. In the one paratype
which Miss Patch has kindly loaned to me practically the only differ-
ence there is between the two species is in the longer genital segment
of the female of nubifera, and this character is subject to some varia-
tion in calthz. Aphalara exilis Weber and Mohr was referred (Crawford ’11b: 496)
to calthz, with some uncertainty. Since then I have examined several
additional specimens of that European species, as determined by
Melichar and Reuter, and the identity of the two species seems more
certain. However, since evilis has not been reported from America
we need not concern ourselves with it at present. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 29

APHALARA RUMICIS Maly. Figs. 164, 984, 501. Aphalara exilis rumicis Matty ’94:166. A, rumicis Parcn ?12b:217. A, calthz maculipennis CrawForp ’11b:496. Very similar to calthz, differing chiefly in having the clypeus
shorter, subglobose or pyriform as in most species, and not projecting
downward. Male forceps with a tooth on anterior inner margin
much farther from apex than in calthe. Wings usually more decidedly
colored than in calthz, pattern similar. Described from several specimens of both sexes from Ames, Iowa
(C. W. Mally), on Rumezx altissimus, March, 1895; several from St.
Louis, Missouri (J. T. Monell), on Rumex sp., September 22, 1911
(loaned by Miss Patch). In this species are placed also for the
present at least other specimens from Evanston, Wyoming (Koebele),
June 15, 1885; Hood River, Oregon (Hubbard and Schwarz), May 25;
Placer County, California (Koebele), Sept.; Scotia, California (H. S.
Barber), May 20; Boulder, Colorado (E. Bethel), on Sophia pinnata;
Plano, Texas (E. S. Tucker), “in corn field,” June, 1907. These latter specimens were named A. calihe maculipennis Loew
in a former paper (Crawford 11b:496), and it is possible that all of
these mentioned under rumicis belong to Loew’s species. No good
specimens of the latter, however, are available for comparison, and
until they are it will create less confusion to designate our American
forms as rumicis, instead of by the European name. APHALARA ARTEMISLE Forster. Aphalara artemisix Férster ’48:96.—Scorr ’76:67; '77:283.—Reurter '81:152-
Loew ’8: 88:12 Lc 706:1.—Epwarps ’08:86; (not
°96:232).—Kuwayama ’08 .—Crawrorb’11b:496. Psylla malackitica Dameava °50:177. Length of body (male) 1.3 to1.5 mm; (female) 1.7; length to tip of
folded wings usually about 2. General color whitish to very pale
flavous; wings spotted. Body small. Vertex slightly more than half as long as broad, with a large shallow
depression on each side of median line; clypeus pyriform. Antenne
about as long as width of head or shorter. Thorax not strongly
arched, coarsely punctate. Legs short. Wings small, not over two
and a half times as long as broad, covered sparsely with small round
brown spots; membrane somewhat thickened, divided by a series of
fine dots into numerous cell-like divisions (visible only under high
magnification), each brown spot covering one of these. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve relatively rather small; forceps
somewhat enlarged at apex, with a small tooth on inner anterior side

 

     

 

30 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. subapically. Female.—Genital segment large, longer than rest of
abdomen, dorsal valve a little longer than ventral. Described from several males and females from American Forks,
Utah (Hubbard and Schwarz), June 24; Colorado (no data); one
male from Pernitz, Austria (determined by Franz Loew). Edward’s
artemisiz (?96:232) is a totally different species, named by Oshanin
(?07:344) pilosa. Closely related to this species is a long series of forms which show
more or less pronounced differences and many close similarities. Some of these, though not all, have been separated off and assigned
to distinct species. APHALARA ANGUSTIPENNIS Crawford. Figs, 162, 373, 502, 503,

 

A, artemisize angustipennis ORawrorD ?11b:499.—Pareu ?12b:218,

Similar to artemisiz, differing as follows: Size usually larger, some-
times much larger; length to tip of folded wings varying from 2.3
to 3.5 mm. Color flayous; scutellum with several more or less dis-
tinct whitish stripes; antenne black at tip. Wings relatively nar-
rower and longer, usually nearly three times as long as broad, more
densely covered with similar brown spots which are often crowded
together so closely that they run together and form more extensive
macule. Genitalia similar, but larger. Described from numerous specimens from many localities: Clare-
mont and Berkeley, California (Crawford), on Artemisia californica,
June to September; Los Angeles, California (Coquillett), no data;
Hood River, Oregon (A. Koebele), May 21; Easton, Washington
(Koebele); Wasatch Mountains, Utah (Hubbard and Schwarz), June
20, 1885; Colorado (Gillette), no data; Black Hills, South Dakota
@. I. Webb), July 11; Oakland, Maryland (Hubbard and Schwarz),
July 10. Some of these bear the manuscript name of Aphalara
angustipennis Riley, and others A. utahensis Riley, but some of the
latter seem to belong to artemisiz, as described above. ‘Type-specimen in author's collection. APHALARA VIRIDIS, new species. Color greenish or greenish yellow throughout; wings rather
sparsely covered with small, round, brown spots, as in artemisiz,
membrane thick and whitish. Female genital segment distinctly
shorter than in artemisiz, and with long hairs on dorsal side of dorsal
valve caudad, instead of the short pubescence characteristic of the
related species. Male genitalia similar to artemisiz. More closely related to artemisie than to angustipennis, being
similar in size and general proportions to the former. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 31

Described from several males and females from Sulphur Springs
Valley, Arizona (Hubbard) May. Type.—Cat. No. 18065, U.S. Nat. Mus. APHALARA PINICOLA, new species. Close to artemisiz, but body much more robust; thorax broader
and much more strongly arched; head narrower than thorax. Color
blackish and flavous; vertex black in center of each lobe; pronotum
and scutum with alternating stripes of black and flavous; prescutum
black cephalad; abdomen mostly dark, variegated somewhat with
flavous; antenne black at tip. One female in the lot is mostly
flavous, with much of the black faded or wanting. Wings shaped as
in artemisiz, sparsely spotted. Genitalia rather similar. Described from four males and females from Argus Mountains,
California (Koebele), on Pinus monophylla, May, 1891. Type.—Cat. No. 18066, U.S. Nat. Mus. APHALARA SUAEDA, new species. Fig. 110. Close to artemisiz, differing as follows: Color of vertex and thoracic
dorsum reddish brown to chocolate brown, abdomen, venter, legs,
and antenne light yellow. Thorax rather flat, not arched as in
pinicola, and rather narrow, finely punctate. Vertex relatively
larger. Wings narrower in apical portion, more densely spotted. Genitalia similar. Described from several males and females from Death Valley, Cali-
fornia (Koebele), April, 1891; Las Cruces, New Mexico (Cockerell),
on Suaeda hiemalis, November 13, 1893; several in National Museum
collection with data “4395,” and no more, these bear the nomen
nudum, A. sucdz Riley). Type.—Cat. No. 18067, U.S. Nat. Mus. APHALARA VEAZIEI Patch. on Figs. 18, 163, 172, 386, 505. A, veaziei Parent 711316. A. communis CRawrorD ’11b : 499.—Parcn '12b : 218. Length of body 2 to 2.7 mm. ; length of forewing 2.7 to 3.1: width
of head 0.80 to 0.87 m. General color greenish yellow Body
variable from rather small to large, but not as large as picta. Head moderately broad, not quite as broad as thorax, not deflexed;
vertex a little more than half as long as broad, with two shallow
foveal depressions; clypeus pyriform. Antenne longer than width
of head, some times as much as one and a half times as long. Thorax almost flat, less arched than usual, finely punctate. Legs
moderately long. Wings about two and three-fourths times as long
as broad, clear or slightly flavous, more or less transparent, rarely
with faint indications of spotting; venation typical. 32 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Genitalia. — Male.—Anal valve of usual form, rather large; forceps
somewhat similar to those of artemisiz, but more enlarged at apex,
with subapical inner tooth larger and more prominent. Female.—
Genital segment large, longer than rest of abdomen, or as long, dorsal
valve longer than ventral and less acute. Described from numerous specimens from the following localities:
Washington, District of Columbia (E. A. Schwarz), May 11, July;
Virginia, May 15, 1881 (cabinet name, Aphalara solidaginis Riley);
Oakland, Maryland (Hubbard and Schwarz), July 10; Fort Pendle-
ton, West Virginia (Hubbard and Schwarz), July 10; Dows Lake,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (W. Metcalfe), May 27, 1903; Nebraska
(Bruner), no data; Black Hills, South Dakota (J. L. Weber), June
24; Polk County, Wisconsin (C. F. Baker); Banner, Wyoming (C. W.
Metz), August, 1910; American Forks, Utah (Hubbard and Schwarz),
June 22; Easton, Washington (Koebele); Argus Mountains, California
(Koebele), May, 1891; Ormsby County, Nevada (Baker); Flagstaff,
Arizona (Barber and Schwarz), ‘‘4-7;” Pagosa Springs, Colorado
(Baker). This is another very variable and widely distributed species, and
one as difficult to define as calthz and artemisiz. The variations in
size of body, size and shape of forewing, length of female genital seg-
ment, and minor variations in wing venation may represent several
closely allied species, or one variable and elastic species. If the former
is true it is impossible to attempt to separate the species with our
limited ecological data. The description of A. communis Crawford was in press when Miss
Patch’s description of veaziei appeared. A comparison of a paratype
of her species with communis shows that the two are identical, so far
at least as we are able to determine now. The structure of the male forceps is not very distinctive of this
species. The same type of forceps is possessed by A. picta, and
other species also. APHALARA VEAZIEI METZARIA Crawford,
A, communis metzaria CRawForp ?11b: 499. This varietal name was given to several individuals with the wings
spotted more or less indistinctly (never darkly) in the apical portion. It is possible that this character is not of varietal value, but for the
present it may remain. Described from several males and females from Sheridan, Wyoming
(C. W. Metz); Pagosa Springs, Colorado (C. F. Baker); Los Angeles,
California (Koebele); Beeville, Texas (Hubbard and Schwarz), on
Aster, November. Type in author’s collection. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 88
APHALARA CAUDATA, new species. Resembling suaedz in color and size; head similar, but antenne
distinctly longer than width of head. Vertex and thoracic dorsum
strigate, Wings usually clear, sometimes indistinctly spotted, not
thickened and marked, as in artemisiz, but similar in shape and
size to the latter. Male genitalia relatively very large; forceps as
in veaziei, with a large, clavate apex, and a rather large subapical
inner tooth. Deseribed from seven males and females from Los Angeles, Cali-
fornia (Koebele), March. These bear the manuscript name of
A. kocbelei Riley. Type.—No. 18068, U

 

Nat. Mus. APHALARA PULCHELLA Crawiord. Figs. 107, 168, 176, 379, 499. A, pulchella CrawrorD ?11b: 500. Length of body 1.7 to 2.2 mm. ; length of forewing 2 to 2.4; length
to tip of folded wings 2.3 to 3. General color brown, variegated with
flavous; scutum more or less striped with flavous; antenne pale,
black at tip, and sometimes on tip of each segment. Head not as broad as thorax; vertex conspicuously emarginate
on front margin, coarsely strigate; antenne about one and a half
times as long as width of head, slender. Thorax rather strongly
arched, broader than in caudata, strigate. Legs slender. Wings
rather narrow, more attenuate at base than usual, broad distally,
almost half as broad as long, clear and semitransparent except on the
brown macule; wing picture as in figure. Genitalia — Male —Genitalia rather large; anal valve of usual
form for this genus; forceps as in caudata, enlarged at apex. Female.—Genital segment as in veaziei, longer than rest of abdomen,
rather slender, acute at apex. Described from several males and females from California, as
follows: Claremont (C. F. Baker); San Mateo County (Baker); Los
Angeles (Coquillett). The latter bear the manuscript name of
A. coquilletti Riley. Type in author's collection. APHALARA PICTA Zetterstedt. Figs. 168, 173, 383, 506. Chermes picta ZetterstEvT ’40: 308. Aphalara picta Fior ’61: 539.—Scorr 776: 563.—Lorw ’76: pl. 2, figs. 36-40;
77: 124; "79: 562; °82: 256; °86: 150; 88: 13.—Revrer ’81: 151.—
Epwarps ’96: 230.—Sute 06: 2,—OsHANIN ’07: 347.—CRAWFORD
711b: 501,—Parcn 712b: 217,

 
  

34 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. A, flavipennis Foerster ’48: 89. A. sonchi Foerster '48: 96. ‘A. alpigena Maven-Diir ?71: 402. A. nervosa THomson, Opuse. Ent. ’08: 840. Length of body about 3.3 mm. ; length to tip of folded wings 4.5 to
5.2; length of wing 4 to 4.3; width of head 0.95 to 1. General color
flavous to brown; thoracic dorsum often more or less distinctly
striped; abdomen darker; wings usually flavous; antenne flavous,
black at tips. Body very large. Head much narrower than thorax; vertex more than half as long
as broad, rather deeply emarginate in front at median line, coarsely
punctate; antenne a little longer than width of head. Thorax very large, broad and strongly arched, coarsely punctate. Legs thick and stout. Wings large, broad, almost half as broad as
long, more or less flavous, sometimes brownish in apical third with
faint markings, somewhat transparent; first marginal cell large. Genitalia.— Male.—Genitalia large; anal valve of usual shape, with
the inferior process of the posterior lobe larger than usual; pubescence
stiff; forceps very large, with a large, clavate apex and an inner
subapical tooth. Female.—Genital segment almost or fully as long
as rest of abdomen, thick at base, subacute; dorsal valve longer than
ventral; pubescence stiff and prominent. Described from several males and females from Colorado (Baker),
no data; St. Louis, Missouri, May 5, 1878. ‘Two manuscript names
have been applied to these: A.harrissii Riley and A.leucanthemi (?). Fitch. These have been compared with four females from Aaken,
Germany (determined by F. Loew). The large size of the body easily distinguishes this and the following
species from other American species of this genus. Some indi-
viduals, however, are smaller, not much larger than the largest of
veaziei, but differ in having the male forceps relatively larger, the
female genital segment relatively stouter, the wings more flavous,
the thorax broader and more strongly arched, and the antennwe
relatively shorter. APHALARA FASCIPENNIS Patch. A. foscipennis Parcn ’12b:217. This species is very closely related to picta, resembling it in size,
shape, and structure of body, including the genital appendages. The
chief difference is in the maculation of the forewing. A brown
irregular band s the wing near the apex. This is a rather
doubtful specifie-character in this genus, if we may judge from several
other species previously described, but the fact that the fuscous-
winged forms have been found thus far mostly in the western portion
of the country, while the maculate-winged forms seem to be limited

 

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 85

to the Northeast, seem to indicate that they may be distinct species
but closely related. The characters of the male genitalia have been taken from Miss
Patch’s description, since only female specimens are before me. This
description has been based on four females, two from Bretton Woods,
New Hampshire (van Duzee), June 30, 1909; and two from Massa-
chusetts (Philip Uhler), bearing Harris’s manuscript name of Psylla
pallida. Miss Patch gives as localities: Ottawa, Ontario, Canada,
and Tompkins County, New York. APHALARA ALASKENSIS Ashmead,
Figs. 109, 111, 112, 132, 408. Aphalara alaskensis Asameap *10:136. Length of body (male) 2.1 mm; length of forewing 3; width of head
0.78. General color dark brown to black, sometimes flavous (per-
haps immature adults); vertex glossy black, smooth; thoracic dorsum
mostly black, strigate; pronotum yellow on hind margin; pleura
around wing bases and connexiva of abdominal segments flavous;
tibie, basal tarsus, antenne except tip, yellow; wings maculated
brown, picture as in figure. In the two paratypes of this species
from Fox Point, Alaska, the color is nearly uniformly flavous with
indications of brownish markings, and the wings are indistinctly
maculated, as described above. It is possible that the darker indi-
viduals represent a varietal form of the species, but it seems most
probable that the Alaskan individuals were not yet fully colored. Head large, fully as broad as thorax, scarcely deflexed; vertex
very broad, smooth, glossy, broadly depressed discally on each side
of median line, less emarginate over front ocellus than in pulchella;
gene and clypeus small; eyes very large and prominent. Antenne
very long relatively, nearly twice as long as width of head, slender. Thorax long, somewhat arched, strigate on dorsum. Legs long,
slender, especially the front pair. Wings hyaline, transparent
except on the maculz, nearly two and a half times as long as broad,
broadly rounded at apex; marginal cells large, subequal. Genitalia.— Male.—Genitalia large; forceps large, bilobate, pubes-
cent; basal portion short and narrow, dividing into two long pro-
cesses; posterior process long, arcuate, acuminate, subacute at tip:
anterior process shorter, narrower, less acute, extending inward. Anal valve long, with posterior lobes long and rather large. Described from six males, two from Fox Point, Alaska (paratypes),
July, 1899, collected by Harriman-Alaska Expedition; one from
Easton, Washington (Koebele); and three from Colorado (C. P. Gil-
lette), no data. a

 

36 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. One female of A. schwarzii (a paratype), from Popoff Island,
Alaska (Harriman-Alaska Expedition) is colored very similarly to
the darker forms of alaskensis. Ashmead’s figure of the male geni-
talia of schwarzii is practically meaningless, and therefore I am
unablo to state with certainty whether or not these two species are
identical. It seems probable, however, that they are at least closely

related. APHALARA NEBULOSA KINCAIDI Ashmead. Figs. 167, 174, 175, 508,

Aphalara kincaidi: Asuaean *10: 136. A. nebulosa americana Crawrord ’11b: 503,—Parcn ’12b: 219,

Length of body (male) 1.8 mm; (female) 2.2; length of forewing 2.2
to 2.4; width of head 0.82. General color brown to blackish, with
flavous markings on vertex and thoracic dorsum; wings transparent,
maculated brown in apical half, as shown in figure; legs pale brown;
antenna flavous, black distally. Head almost as broad as thorax, not deflexed; vertex large, almost
flat, resembling alaskensis, but more emarginate in front; antenne
about one and a half times as long as width of head; elypeus smaller
than in European nebulosa and more posterior. Thorax rather flat,
not very broad, strigate. Wings about two and a half times as long
as broad, rather transparent, maculated, venation as usual in genus. Genitalia.— Male.—Posterior lobe of anal valve not as in other
species of genus, but conspicuously lanceolate with a petiolate base,
and a ridged “midrib” in basal portion; forceps moderately long,
constricted subapically, and apex abruptly broadened out, T-shaped,
with anterior part of apex longer than posterior. /emale.—Genital
segment rather long, but not as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve
longer than ventral. Described from one male (paratype of A. kincaidi), from Popoft
Island, Alaska, July 9, 1899, collected by the Harriman-Alaska
Expedition; many males and females from Easton, Washington
(Koebele); Fieldbrook, California (H. S. Barber), May 19, 1903;
Colorado (no data). Manuscript name: Aphalara epilobii Riley. The American varicty differs from the European form as follows:
Clypeus smaller and situated farther back; male forceps larger,
with apical transverse part almost as long as vertical portion, while
in the other it is only a little over half as long; wing picture lighter
in color. ANOMOCERA, new subgenus. Although a reduction in the number of antennal segments in
Psyllide is apparently a striking character, judging from the small
number of species which show this character, yet this alone may
not warrant the erection of a new genus. Two species of Aphalara

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDAS OF THE NEW WORLD. 37

with the antennal segments distinctly reduced are so similar to other
species of the genus in nearly every other respect that it seems
advisable to regard them as forming a subgeneric group within the
genus Aphalara. Because of this antennal reduction the name
Anomocera is given to the subgenus. The antenne are short, but not unusually so. The reduction
seems to have occurred in the apical segments. The two basal seg-
ments are normally enlarged; the third is longest and the succeeding
segments subequal to each other. What appears to be the terminal,
(eighth) segment is really composed of two short closely connate
segments, thus making the antenne nine-segmented, but apparently
only eight-segmented. Other characters are more or less similar to
the holocerous species. Type of subgenus.—A phalara (Anomocera) minutissima Crawford. APHALARA (ANOMOCERA) MINUTISSIMA Crawtord. Figs. 169, 177, 381, 507. Aphalara minutissima CrawrorD *11b: 500,

Similar in size and general gross appearance to artemisize, differing
as follows: Color a little more whitish; wings white, not spotted;
antenne of about the same relative length but only nine-segmented,
with the terminal two segments so closely connate that they appear
as one segment except by close examination. Thorax usually less
arched, coarsely punctate. Wings more narrowed apically, thick,
whitish, not spotted or maculated, venation as usual for genus;
sometimes slightly brownish toward apex. Genitalia.— Male.—Genitalia similar, but forceps more enlarged
at apex,moreas in caudata. Female.—Genitalsegment relatively very
large, almost as large as rest of abdomen and thorax combined,
dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from numerous males and females from Claremont,
California (Crawford), on Artemisia californica, April, 1912; Los
Angeles, California (Koebele), on same host, April 23, 1886; Argus
Mountains, California (Koebele), May, 1891; Ormsby County,
Nevada (Baker); American Forks, Utah (Hubbard and Schwarz),
June 22; Ogden, Utah (Koebele), on “‘sage,” June 20, 1885; and on
Artemisia tridentata, June 13, 1885; one female from Nebraska on
Artemisia tridentata. Manuscript name: A. occidentalis Riley. Type in author's collection. APHALARA (ANOMOCERA) ANOMALA, new species. This species is somewhat similar in general proportions to minu-
tissima, but a little larger and a little more robust. Antenne short,
a little longer and more slender than in minutissima; III relatively

38 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. shorter; IX very short, indistinct, comprising only a short apical
portion of VIII-IX. Forewings small, whitish, wrinkled, covered
with numerous small round, brown spots, as in artemisiz. In both
forewings of all three specimens at hand (both sexes) there is a
remarkable anomalous venational character; Cut and M® unite and
send a common vein to the margin, thus making a supernumerary
cell. The uniformity of these veins in both forewings of several
specimens is aremarkable anomaly. Additional material is necessary,
however, to ascertain the general prevalence of this character. Male genitalia somewhat similar in general type to those of arte-
misiz; forceps with a small inner subapical tooth, not serrate on
apical margin, as in minutissima. Female genitalia, as in artemisiz. Described from two females from Sacramento, California (Koebele),
June 28, 1885, and one from Folsom, California (Koebele). No other
specimens from either of these localities are available. These bear
the manuscript name of A. occidentalis anomala Riley. A. occiden-
talis was a manuscript name for minutissima. Type.—Cat. No. 18069, U. S. Nat. Mus. APHALAROIDA, new genus. Head resembling somewhat that of Aphalara, but shorter, slightly
less flattened, somewhat rounded down in front, but much less so
than in Heteropsylla; genze somewhat swollen beneath, never conical,
not covering frons; frons similar to Aphalara, but much shorter. Antenne very short. Thorax only slightly arched; pronotum ter-
minating laterad in a knob-like swelling, with the pleural suture extend-
ing to the midpoint of this as in Aphalara. Wings small, thickened,
opaque, or semiopaque, often maculated, with a pterostigma. Anal
valve of male simple, not asin Aphalara. Body surface often covered
with glandular hairs. Type of genus.—Aphalaroida pithecolobia, new species. This is a very homogeneous and interesting little group of species,
distributed over southwestern and southern United States. There
is a remarkable similarity throughout the genus in structural char-
acters, the species differing chiefly in size, amount of glandular
pubescence and in markings of body and wings. There is some data
to show that summer and winter forms of the same species differ in
color and markings to some extent. The species are so similar that
only a brief description of all but the type is given herewith. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDA OF THE NEW WORLD. 39

SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a’, Head, thorax, and sometimes wings covered more or less densely with white
glandular hairs. b!. Forewings not maculated, almost or quite uniform in color; hairs not dense on
body, often wanting on wings pithecolobia, new species. 5, Forewings maculated, not uniform in color. c!, Body large, more than 2.5 mm to tip of folded wings; forewings brown and
white; body and wings covered very densely with long white hairs (some
times shorter and more sparse, or almost wanting in a few specimens);
dorsum brown with orange stripes and bands.........spinifera, new species. , Body smaller, less than 2 mm to tip of wings; body and usually the wings
covered more or less densely with short white hairs; color dark; wings white,
with brown macule; dorsum uniform brown to black. prosopis, new species. @, Body and wings without glandular hairs, or if present, very short and inconspicu-
ous; body medium to small. b!. Forewings brown, with numerous small white spots scattered over surface

... tnermis, new species. #. Forewings white, with a broad, crescentic, brown macula on apical and posterior

margin, often extending into primary furcation of M-+Cu. Winter form:

Wings brown, with the same macula black. = -acacize, new species. APHALAROIDA PITHECOLOBIA, new species. - 59, 289, 284, 449,

Length of body 1.4 mm. ; length of forewing 1.7; width of head
0.70. General color whitish to very light brown. Body small,
finely pubescent. In all the specimens before mo the hairs have
collected particles of the fine waxy excrement. Head not deflexed, not as broad as thorax, punctate; posterior
margin arcuate; vertex discally rather plane, with a small foveal
impression on each side of median line, scarcely elevated on post-
ocellar regions, rounded downward in front, with anterior ocellus
beneath. Antennal insertions large, lateral, in front of eyes; gene
and subantennal regions somewhat swollen. Eyes small. Antenne
not longer than width of head, slender. Thorax broad, coarsely punctate. Pronotum flat, with lateral
“knob” small; pleurites short; dorsum finely pubescent. Wings
small, slightly rhomboidal, coriaceous, white to light brown, deeply
wrinkled, granulate; about two and a fourth times as long as broad,
somewhat rounded at apex; first marginal cell larger than second;
pterostigma long and conspicuous; claval suture prominent; veins
set biseriately with conspicuous setx, similar in appearance to those
on dorsum and vertex. Genitalia.— Male.—Genitalia relatively not very small; forceps
large, short, broad, subspatulate; anal valve very long and slender,
simple, square at tip. Hemale—Genital segment short, broad, acute
at apex; valves of equal length; pubescence quite dense. Described from 14 males and females collected by E. A. Schwarz at
Devil’s River, Texas, on Pithecolobium,

Type in author’s collection. 6060°—Bull. 85—14—4

 

40 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. APHALAROIDA SPINIFERA, new species. Fig. 399. Length of body 1.7 mm. ; length of forewing 2. General color
brown, with orange markings, sometimes more uniformly orange
to yellowish (probably immature forms) ; vertex orange on lateral half
of each lobe; pronotum and prescutum orange on posterior portion;
scutum orange on median dorsal line and around wing bases, and a
narrow arcuate line halfway between these; venter dark; forewings
whitish, with irregular brown macule, usually as represented in
figure, sometimes less maculated; some forms are lighter with only
a few small scattered macule on the wings. Head, thorax, wings, legs, and abdomen (to a Jess extent) densely,
often very densely, covered with long white hairs which are usually
clavate because of the excretions on them; sometimes the hairs are
fewer or even almost wanting in rare instances. Head distinctly nar-
rower than thorax, deflexed somewhat, similar in general to type
species; antenne one and a half times as long as width of head. Thorax long, rather broad. Wings over two and a half times as
long as broad, coriaceous, maculated, rhomboidal, apex at termina-
tion of radial sector; first marginal cell larger than second. Genitalia.— Male.—Resemble type species; forceps stout, about
twice as long as broad, oval; anal valve nearly twice as long as forceps,
converging a little toward apex. Female—Genital segment stout,
shorter than rest of abdomen, subacute at apex. Described from 30 males and females from Tucson, Arizona
(H. G. Hubbard), on Prosopis juliflor, in December and January; 7
from Palm Springs, California (Hubbard), on Phoradendron, growing
on Acacia gregii; 16 from Argus and Panamint Mountains, California
(Koebele), April. All in the collection of the United States National
Museum. The Arizona specimens bear the label Rhinocola spinifera, a
manuscript name; the California forms are labeled Rhinocola rauca,
but are apparently the same species. Type.—Cat. No. 18070, U. S. Nat. Mus. APHALAROIDA PROSOPIS, new species. Fig. 404,

Length of body 1.7 mm. ; length of forewing 1.5. General color
dark brown to black uniformly; forewings maculated with dark
brown, as in figure. Body small. Glandular hairs dense, but short,
on head, thorax, and wings and sometimes the legs. Head narrower than thorax, deflexed; antenne a little longer than
width of head. Eyes small. Thorax arched somewhat; pronotum
moderately long; meso-episternum prominently bulging between
fore and middle cox. Forewings small, coriaceous, rhomboidal
slightly, with apex between radial sector and medial branch, less

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 41

than two and a half times as long as broad, very slightly transparent
on white portions, granulate; marginal cells subequal; pterostigma
long. Genitalia.— Male.—Genitalia similar to type-species; relatively
small; forceps narrower than in spinifera; anal valve not much longer
than forceps. Female.—Genitalia similar to type species. Described from 10 males and females collected at Tucson, Arizona,
by H. G. Hubbard, in January, on Prosopis juliflor, and 15 on
“Varrea,” on December 13, 1896, at the same place. These speci-
mens were labeled hinocola prosopis (manuscript). Type.—Cat. No. 18071, U. S. Nat. Mus. APHALAROIDA INERMIS, new species. Fig. 398,

 
 

Length of body 1.7 mm. ; length of forewing 1.8. General color
light chocolate brown over most of body surface, ineluding legs;
vertex often lighter; thoracic markings as in spinifera; wings light
brown, with small, irregular white spots, which are sometimes
rather large. Body small to medium in size, without conspicuous
glandular hairs except in front of vertex and in frout of wing bases,
very small. Head almost as broad as thorax, relatively large; vertex rather
long, more or less rectangular. Antenne a little longer than width
of head. Thorax as in related species. Forewings nearly two and
a half times as long as broad, rather thick, coriaceous, somewhat,
thomboidal; pterostigmal vein (R) incomplete; marginal cells sub-
equal. Genitalia of both sexes similar to prosopis. Described from many males and females from Tucson and Fort
Yuma, Arizona (Hubbard), December and January, on Prosopis
juliflor; Palm Springs, California (Hubbard), February; one female
from San Antonio, Texas (E. A. Schwarz), on Mimosa borealis, in
May. Type.—Cat. No. 18072, U. S. Nat. Mus. APHALAROIDA ACACIAE, new species. Fig. 397. Length of body 1.7 mm. ; length of forewing 1.7. General color
brown; vertex light brown; thoracic dorsum marked as in spinifera
but much more indistinctly so; forewings (summer form) largely
whitish with a brown to dark brown macula as in illustration;
(winter form): Darker on body; wings darker, with macula black. Body and wings without glandular hairs, or with extremely short
ones; usually almost glabrous. Body small to medium in size. Head narrower than thorax; relatively smaller than in inermis;
antenne about as long as width of head, light colored. Thorax of
typical form. Wings slightly rhomboidal, thickened, granulate, less

 

42 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. than two and a half times as long as broad; pterostigma long; mar-
ginal cells subequal. Genitalia.—Male and female genitalia similar to type-species. Described from 17 males and females from San Diego, Texas (E. A.
Schwarz), on Acacia amentacea,‘ May, October, and December; 1
female from Palm Springs, California (Hubbard), on Phorodendron
growing on Acacia gregii, February. Type-—No. 18073, U.S. Nat. Mus. Subfamily PAUROPSY LLIN AS. The chief characteristics of this subfamily are the rounded head
and the usually visible frons. Head short, uniformly rounded
forward and down, with the frons usually not concealed by the
gen and the genz variously swollen (conical in Calophya). Wings
hyaline, ovate; pterostigma usually large and long; first marginal
cell often enlarged, or long and narrow. The typical genus, Pauropsylla, is not represented in the American
fauna. For a description of this genus see Riibsaamen ’99: 263;
Kieffer 05: 167; or Crawford ’12¢: 429. SYNOPSIS OF GENERA. a!.Genze more or less swollen, but not produced into conical processes; frons always
visible; first marginal cell not unusually large. b'. Frons, gene and vertex forming a relatively smooth surface, frons not as in
following genus; head uniformly rounded forward and down; antenna not
very long... Paurocephala Crawiord

2. Frons forming the bottom of a groove between genw, with gene protruding
below frons; head less uniformly rounded down in front; antennee very long
and slender. 5 Heteropsylla, new genus

@, Genz produced into two short or longer conical processes, with the frons sometimes
covered; head rounded downward as in the first genus; first marginal cell very
much larger than second; antennie short .. -.Calophya Loew

 

 

   

 

 

Genus PAUROCEPHALA Crawford.' Body robust, surface strigate; thorax strongly arched. Head
strongly deflexed, rounded downward in front, presenting a roundly
convex surface in dorsal view; frons not covered by genw, visible as
a small sclerite forming an uninterruptedly smooth surface with
vertex and gens; gene not conical, though often swollen. Eyes
large. Antenn longer than width of head. Wings hyaline, more
or less oval in shape, with a pterostigma. Type of genus.—P. psylloptera Crawford (a Philippine species). PAUROCEPHALA MAGNIFRONS, new species. Figs. 16, 73, 296, 461. Length of body, 2.6 mm. ; length of forewing 3.5; width of head 1. General color greenish yellow throughout. The first description of this genus is being published in the Philippine Journal of Science, Vol. 8, No. 4, sec. D, p. 293, Aug. 1813. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 43

Head broad, but not as broad as thorax, very uniformly rounded
downward in front; vertex rather large, converging toward front;
frons unusually large, a heptagonal sclerite visible from in front,
broadest at ocellus, continuing uniformly the surface of vertex and
gene; gene large, swollen lobately on each side beneath antennal
bases, with a long hair at lowermost point; clypeus rather large;
(antenne broken). Thorax well arched, coarsely punctate or strigate; pronotum long. Hind tibie with a spur at base. Wings long, hyaline, transparent,
about two and two-thirds times as long as broad, narrowed toward
apex, rounded at tip; first marginal cell broader than in ‘licis; ptero-
stigma long, broad at base. Genitalia.— Female—Genital segment about half as long as rest of
abdomen, acute; dorsal valve a little longee than ventral, with a tuft
of hairs dorsad. Described from one female from Escuintla, Chiapas, Mexico (Craw-
ford), July 25, 1910. Type in author's collection. PAUROCEPHALA ILICIS Ashmead. Figs, 102, 108, 104, 105, 108, 410. Psylla ilicis Asueap ’81: 22:
Aphalara ilicis Rize °83: 69. N. B.—Psyllopa ilicis Crawrorn ’11c: 632 is a different insect. Length of body 2 mm. ; length of forewing 2.6; width of head 0.93. General color flavous; antennz brown. Head uniformly rounded down and forward as in magnifrons; frons
smaller, similar in position; gens less swollen, making head appear
more as a longitudinal portion of a cylinder. Antenne about twice
as long as width of head, not very slender. Clypeus large, conical,
perpendicular. Thorax moderately broad. Propleurites rather large,
with pleural suture oblique. Legs rather short; hind tibise without
spur at base. Wings hyaline, elongate-ovate, venation typical of
genus; first marginal cell elongate; pterostigma large. Genitalia — Male.—Genitalia as in Aphalara; anal valve with a
similar long, caudal projection from the perpendicular axis; forceps
slender, converging to an acute point, bowed. Female.—Genital
segment about as long as rest of abdomen, very acutely pointed,
dorsal valve a little longer than ventral, with long pubescence dorsad. Described from eight males and females from Savannah, Georgia
(Schwarz), April 15, 1884. These bear the label “Aphalara ilicis
Ashmead.” ‘This is an entirely different insect from that described
by myself recently from Florida (Crawford ’11e¢: 629,632), and called
Psyllopa floridensis first and then corrected to Psyllopa ilicis. Judg-
ing from Ashmead’s description of the nymph, I am inclined to
believe that the latter is correct, while the present species, of Pauro-

  

 

44 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. cephala, is a distinct and new species. However, since these have
been determined as Ashmead's dlicis and the other is merely a sur-
mise, ilicis should be placed in Paurocephala and the Florida species
become Psyllopa jloridensis. The latter species, it is shown later
(p. 129), is identical with Arytaina amorphe (Qfally). HETEROPSYLLA, new genus. Body usually smali. Mead short, rather small, deflexed, rounded
forward and down in-front, but loss evenly so than in preceding
genus; gen somewhat swollen beneath vertex, but not produced
into conical processes; with the frons as a visible sclerite between the
gen and forming the bottom of a groove between them, somewhat
resembling Aphalaroida in shape of frons; clypeus pyriform, not
large. Eyes medium to small in size. Antenne very long and
very slender. Thorax not strongly arched; propleurites narrow,
largely concealed by receding head. Wings broadly rounded at apex,
hyaline, with a broad pterostigma. Type of genus —Hetcropsylla texana, new species. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a, Forewings maculated apically around marginal cells and on apex of radial sector;
gene conspicuously swollen yentrad; male forceps bidentate at apex. .texana, new species. a. Forewings not maculated; hyaline or indistinctly fumate, transparent; gene
not conspicuously swollen ventrad. }', Antenne distinctly more than twice as long as width of head, usually at least
two and a half times as long; frons partially or nearly entirely covered by
gen.

c!. Forceps of male very long, arcuate caudad, divided from base into two parts;
anterior part thin, suleate, square at tip; posterior part spiniform, as long
as other part, scarcely pubescent. --forcipata, new species. ©. Forceps of male about half as long as in Sorcipata, divided from base, but
posterior part very slender and inconspicuous; pubescence much denser

: -mericana, new species. a a hnot over twice as long as width of head; frons ‘entirely visible.
. Female genital eogmont almost as long as rest of abdomen, dorsal valve dis-
tinctly longer than ventral. a’, Forceps of male as long as anal valve or longer; forewings clear; body very

often light colored. ©. Forceps with a long posterior, spiniform process, extending from near
base to near tip; dorsal valve of female genital segment less than twice
as long as ventral... cubana, new species. €, Forcops larger, with a chort process arising from near middle and extending
obliquely inward and upward; dorsal valve of female genital segment
fully twice as long as ventral... quassiz, new species. a, Forceps of male about half as long as anal valve, very short; forewings
slightly fumate; head and thorax usually dark colored. . fusca, new species. ©. Female genital segment exceedingly short; ventral valve much shorter than
dorsal; male forceps somewhat similar to those of eubana. mimose, new species. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 45

HETEROPSYLLA TEXANA, new species. Figs. 70, 246, 205, 456,

Length of body 1.5 mm. ; length of forewing 2.1; width of head 0.75. General color orange yellow to reddish brown; abdomen often
lighter than thorax and head, sometimes darker; mesonotum often
striped with brown. Head about as broad as thorax, deflexed, rounded forward between
antenne, slightly strigate, arcuate on posterior margin; vertex with
a slight foveal depression on each side of median line, elevated on
postocellar regions, not emarginate in front at median line; gene
large and swollen, with a long scta at apex of swelling; frons not
covered by gene, visible as a small sclerite between the gene but not
forming a smooth surface with the latter, appearing somewhat as a
short stalk of the front ocellus. Antenne about twice as long as
width of head or more, very slender. Thorax arched, rather broad, coarsely punctate; pronotum short,
attaining laterad about to upper margin of eyes; pleural suture long,
oblique; pleurites narrow. Wings relatively large, hyaline, macu-
lated on basal and apical margins, with a brown macula at tip of
claval suture, a curved one around the forks of the cubitus, and
another at tip of radial sector; abouttwoand a fifth times as long
as broad, broad and broadly rounded apically; first marginal cell
larger than second; pterostigma yellowish, rather short. Genitalia.— Male.—F orceps short, broad, rather deeply notched at
tip, with posterior process longer than anterior, both acute; anal valve
short, simple, slender, truncate at apex, pubescencesparse.— Female.—
Genital segment moderately long, acute; dorsal valve distinctly longer
than ventral, with a prominent convexity dorsad at base. Described from many males and females in a collection sent to me
by Mr. W. D. Hunter, and many in the United States National
Museum collection. Type-locality: Devils River, Texas (E. A.
Schwarz), on Pithecolobium; also, on Sphaeraleca angustifolia (F. C.
Pratt), and on Monarda citriodora, in the same locality; other
localities: Dallas, Texas (W. W. Yothers and C. R. Jones); Corpus
Christi, Texas (R. A. Cushman), on Chrysopsis sp. ; Galveston,
Texas (W. D. Pierce), on Zamaraz gallica; San Antonio, Texas (E. A.
Schwarz, F. C. Pratt), on Celtis pallida; Kerrville, Texas (Pratt), at
light; Cuero, Texas (Cushman); Victoria, Texas (J. D. Mitchell),
on Acacia; Plano, Texas (Tucker). The dates of collection range
from March to August. In the National Museum collection as
follows: Wades, Texas (Hubbard and Schwarz), on Prosopis juliflor,
May 22; Austin, Texas, on Prosopis sp., August 7, 1894; Fort Yuma,
Arizona (Hubbard), on Prosopis julijlor, January 21; Colorado (C. P.
Gillette), no data; Wellington, Kansas (E. G. Kelly). Some of these
specimens are labeled Pseudaphalara prosopis Schwarz (manuscript). Type in author’s collection,

 

46 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. HETEROPSYLLA MEXICANA, new species,
Figs. 68, 244, 298, 455. Length of body, 2 mm; length of forewing, 2.2; width of head, 0.76. General color, light brown to black. Head almost as broad as thorax, scarcely deflexed, punctate;
vertex similar to preceding species, not elevated on posterior margin,
and less elevated on postocellar regions; genx less swollen than ‘in
preceding species, but somewhat bulging roundly on each side of
frons; frons small, often scarcely visible, being mostly covered by
gene. Antenne about two and one-half times as long as width
of head. ‘Thorax not strongly arched, coarsely punctate. Pronotum rather
long, flat, reaching laterad to a little below upper margin of eyes;
prescutum shorter than in preceding species. Wings hyaline, with-
out macula, about two and a fourth times as long as broad, broadly
rounded at apex; first marginal cell slightly smaller than second and
different in shape; pterostigma brownish, almost as long as radial
sector. Genitalia — Male.—Genitalia rather small; forceps short, about as
long as anal valve, deeply divided from near base into an anterior,
thin, slightly suleate process, and a posterior, slender, spiniform
process; anal valve simple, curved, slender; pubescence prominent.—
Female.—Genital segment moderately long, acute at apex; dorsal
valve much longer than ventral, with one long seta on dorsal surface. Described from two males and five females collected at Jalapa,
Mexico (Crawford), August 28, 1910. Type in author's collection. HETEROPSYLLA FORCIPATA, new species. Figs. 116, 118. This species is very closely related to mexicana, differing chiefly
and widely in male genital characters. The forceps are nearly twice
as long as the anal valve and arcuately curved forward; deeply
divided as in mexicana, but the anterior portion more deeply sulcate
and forming a groove in which lies the long posterior spiniform
process, very acute at apex and as long as anterior part; pubescence
very slight. Described from one male from Oaxaca, Mexico (A. Koebele). Type.—Cat. No. 18074, U. S. Nat. Mus. HETEROPSYLLA CUBANA, new species. Figs. 69, 245, 204, 458. Length of body, 1.5 mm; length of forewing, 1.6; width of head,
0.71. General color, greenish yellow to yellowish brown throughout. Head about as broad as thorax, rounded in front, punctate; vertex
arcuate on posterior margin but not elevated there, with a prominent

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 47

and deep fovea on each side of median line in rear center, clevated
slightly on postocellar regions; genw large, rather prominent; frons
usually mostly covered by gen but not entirely, visible as a small
sclerite. Antenne about twice as long as width of head. Thorax arched, coarsely punctate, slightly pubescent. Pronotum
rather long, flat; propleurites long and narrow; prescutum short. Wings small, hyaline, about two and one-third times as long as broad,
broadly rounded at apex or somewhat squarish; first marginal cell
larger than second; pterostigma rather long, and broad at base,
yellowish. Genitalia. — Male.—Genital segment small, rounded; forceps longer
than anal valve, elliptical in profile, with a short narrow pedicel,
rather flattened, with a long spiniform process arising from inner
surface near base and extending backward and upward along posterior
margin of forceps to near apex. Anal valve short, rather cylindrical,
truncate at apex, sometimes nearly as long as forceps.—Female.—
Genital segment almost as long as rest of abdomen, acute at apex,
dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from numerous males and females collected at Havana,
Cuba, by C. F. Baker, occurring in great numbers on Leucaena glauca;
several specimens in the U. S. National Museum collection from
Santiago de las Vegas, Cuba (P. Cardin), on Poinciana regia, December
29,1910. Both plants belong to the Leguminosw, the former being
closely related to Afimosa, which is the food plant of another species
of this same genus, in Texas. Type in author’s collection. HETEROPSYLLA QUASSLA, new species. Figs. 113, 117. _ Length of body 1.5 mm; length of forewing 1.7; width of head
0.72. General color light yellowish orange to orange, vertex and
dorsum of thorax sometimes brown, always more or less distinctly
strigate. Head and thorax similar in most respects to the following species
(fusca). Forewings seldom fumate, sometimes very slightly so,
usually clear. Male genital segment not as small as in fusca; forceps
as long as anal valve, strap-shaped, curved inward at apex, tip
rounded, black, sides parallel; with a short process on posterior side
near middle, extending upward and inward for a short distance. Anal valve moderately long, of usual cylindrical shape. Female
genital segment as in fusca. Described from two males and seven females from the Bahama
Islands, some of them from Nassau Island (Schwarz), March 27, 1879;
and the rest from Long Island, April 3, 1879, on Quassia sp. Type.—Cat. No. 18075, U. S. Nat. Mus. 48 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. HETEROPSYLLA FUSCA, new species. Figs. 119, 125. Length of body 1.5 mm; length of forewing 1.9; width of head
0.73. General color brown to dark brown on head and thoracie
dorsum, yellow on venter and abdomen; apical half of antenne,
and sometimes femora, brown. Head relatively rather large, as broad as thorax, surface distinctly
strigate; vertex moderately long, not as long as broad, with the
usual two foveal impressions, rounded in front; gen less swollen
than in most other species of the genus; frons largely visible, only
slightly covered by gene. Eyes large. Antenne about twice as
long as width of head. Thorax arched, moderately broad, distinetly strigate on dorsum. Forewings slightly fumate over most of surface, similar in shape and
venation to cogenors. Genitalia.— Male—Genital segment small; forceps small, very
short, not much longer than broad, oval in profile, with a posterior
spiniform process almost as long as main portion and lying closely
appressed to it. Anal valve nearly twice as long as forceps, cylindri-
cal, distal third narrowed, truncate at apex, pubescent. Female.—
Genital segment as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve nearly
twice as long as ventral, both acute. Described from two males and four females from Santo Domingo,
West Indies (Aug. Busck), August 6 and 7, 1905. Type.—Cat. No. 18076, U. S. Nat. Mus. HETEROFSYLLA MIMOSZ, new species. This species resembles more or less closely mexicana and eubana in
some respecis but is smaller than either. General color light orange
to reddish brown. Head as broad as thorax; vertex only very slightly impressed
diseally; frons largely visible between gene; antennz about twice as
long as width of head. Forewings clear, venation similar. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment small; forceps similar in out-
line to those of fusca, with a large, prominent spiniform process behind
and between. Anal valve very short and thick. Female.—Genital
segment exceedingly short, ventral valve sometimes scarcely visible,
much shorter than dorsal. Described from 18 males and females from Columbus, Texas
(Schwarz), on Mimosa sp., August 16; Brownsville, Texas (Hubbard
and Schwarz), June; Victoria, Texas, July 29, 1903. Type.—Cat. No. 18077, U. S. Nat. Mus. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 49

Genus CALOPHYA Loew. Body usually small to medium in size, robust. Head very short,
seldom as broad as thorax; vertex smooth or impressed discally with
fovem, more or less roundly convex in front, sometimes very uniformly
so, as in Paurocephala; gene swollen, and usually produced into
conical processes which may be very short and inconspicuous or quite
long and acutely pointed; frons usually mostly covered by gene, but
often partially visible. Antenne short and rather thick, seldom
longer than width of head; terminal sete rather long; segment IIT
often nearly as long as IV-X combined. Thorax strongly arched,
broad; propleurites largely covered by eyes. Forewings ovate, or
more or less pointed at apex, hyaline to opaque, with a pterostigma;
first marginal cell usually much larger than second. Type of genus.—Calophya rhois Loew (not Glover). The members of this genus, so far as is known, are confined, in this
country, to species of Rhus (Sumach) and have been called the Sumach
Psyllids. One species, C. rhois Loew, has been described from Europe
and four from Japan by Kuwayama (C. nigra, nigridorsalis, viridis,
and viridiseutellata). Five forms are known in this country. There
is more or less close resemblance between this genus and Pauropsylla
of which there are no American representatives. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES,

a’. Genal cones distinctly longer than the width at base, coniform; wings rounded at

apex. Bi, Cones very long, slender, white; wings hyaline, shining, stightly iumate along
forks of media and cubitus; vertex and thorax black or brown. californica Schwarz. B. Cones not very long, only a little longer than basal width, acute. c'. Cones thick at base, contiguous basally, divergent; wings yellowish, trans-
parent; body in both sexes uniformly honey yellow. -flavida Schwarz.

. Cones slender, distinctly separated at base and extending outward; wings
clear; head and thorax of male black, abdomen yellow; female yellow. dubia, new species,

Genal cones not longer than broad, usually very much reduced and not markedly

coniform; wings more or less angulate at apex. U4, Wings black or brown, not transparent, only somiangulate at apex; pterostigma
very long; vertex black, depressed; posterior ocelli not visible from side;
thorax orange yellow; praescutum not Jong; genal cones subacute at apex,
directed forward; fomale genital segment short nigripennis Riley. 12, Wings hyaline, transparent, shining, rather acute at apex; pterostigma very
short and small; praescutum long; genal cones very short, subacute at apex,
directed inward. e', Vertex and thorax black or brown; wing with a large brown macula at base
of anterior basal cell .. triozomima Schwarz. ©. Vertex and thorax honey yellow; wing clear, without macula in basal cell. triozomima claripennis, new variety. 50 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. CALOPHYA CALIFORNICA Schwarz,

Figs. 75, 248, 208, 463

 

Calophya californica ScaWARz °04:242. Length of body 1.6 mm. ; length of forewing 1.8; width of head
0.69. General color black to brown; vertex and thorax shining
black to light brown above, flavous ventrad; abdomen dark, except
base and genital segment flayous; genal cones white; antenne pale
yellow except at tip; legs pale yellow, femora partially brown; wings
clear. Vertex very broadly impressed discally on each side of median
line and somewhat bulging forward in front on each side of median
line, very slightly pubescent; genal cones about half as long as
vertex, more or less divergent, subhorizontal, scarcely visible from
directly above, acute at tip, slightly pubescent. Antenne about as
long as width of head, rather thick, black at tip. Thorax strongly arched, strigate dorsad; pronotum rather long. Forewings oval, about two and one-third times as long as broad,
rounded at apex but not broadly so, clear, with a tinge of milky
white sometimes apparent; pterostigma long and rather narrow;
first marginal cell about twice as large as second. Genitalia — Male.—Genital segment usually pale straw-yellow;
anal valve very large, broad, larger than ventral plate of segment;
forceps moderately long, flattened, tip curved inward and forward,
acute. Female.—Genital segment as long as three preceding ventral
selerites, very acute at apex, dorsal valve a little longer than ventral. Described from many males and females from Claremont, Cali-
fornia (Crawford), on Rhus integrifolia, April, 1910; several from
Los Angeles, California (Koebele), on the same host plant, in March. The latter are paratypes. Type.—Cat. No. 8147, U. S. Nat. Mus. CALOPHYA FLAVIDA Schwarz,

Fig. 419. Calophya flavida SCHWARZ 043243. Length of body 1.5 mm. ; length of forewing 1.9; width of head
0.70. General color uniformly honey yellow; legs and antenne
paler, thorax sometimes with ill-defined markings of a pale brown
color. Head and thorax smooth, shining; vertex convexly rounded for-
ward and down with a slight foveal impression on each side of median
line (sometimes larger and very prominent); gene distinctly coni-
form, stout, a little longer than basal width, scarcely one-third as
long as vertex, contiguous at base, divergent, acute at apex, scarcely
pubescent. Antenne shorter than width of head, thick, slightly
darker at tip. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 51

Thorax broad, strongly arched, smooth. Forewings about two
and one-third times as long as broad, rounded broadly at apex, pale
yellow and scarcely shining, moderately transparent; pterostigma
long, rather large; first marginal ccll about twice as largo as second. Genitalia. — Male.—Anal valve relatively narrower than in cali-
fornica, oblong-oval in profile; forceps similar in shape to californica. Female.—Genital segment a little longer than preceding ventral
sclerite, very acute; dorsal valve scarcely longer than ventral. Described from one male and five females from Washington, Dis-
trict of Columbia (Schwarz), on Rhus glabra, in May. These are
apparently paratypes. Recorded also from Massachusetts and St.
Louis, Missouri, by Mr. Schwarz. Type.—Cat. No. 8148, U. 8. Nat. Mus. CALOPHYA DUBIA, new species. Fig. 420. Length of body 1.5:m.; length of forewing 1.8; width of head 0.68. General color (male) head and thorax black dorsad, venter and abdo-
men yellow; legs, genal cones, antenne (except tips) yellow. Female
(see note below) honey yellow, as in flavida. Body rather small. Vertex a little more flattened than in flavida, more deeply impressed
discally, rounded down in front, smooth; genal cones well separated
at base, a little longer than basal width, curved outward and sub-
horizontal, acute at tip, not pubescent. Antennz nearly as long as
width of head, rather thick. Thorax arched, strigate dorsad. Forewings clear, or very slightly
yellowish, transparent, rounded at apex rather narrowly; pterostigma
short and broad; first marginal cell fully twice as large as second,
or larger. Genitalia — Male.—Genitalia similar in gencral to first species;
anal valve longer than broad, posterior margin arcuately rounded;
forceps as in californica. Female.—Genital segment very short,
about as long as preceding ventral sclerite; dorsal valve a little longer
than ventral. Described from one pair from Colorado, with no data accompanying
them. Type.—Cat. No. 18078, U.S. Nat. Mus. Female in author’s collec-
tion. This species seems to bo distinct from all others, but it is with
hesitation that it is described as new because of the absence of data. There can be no certainty that the female belongs to the same species
as the male described above, but in spite of the color differences,
the structure seems to indicate that they are the same species. 52 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. CALOPHYA TRIOZOMIMA Schwarz,
Figs. 74, 207, 402. Calophya triozomima Scawanz ?04: 241. Length of body 1.7 mm; length of forewing 2.1; width of head
0.72. Vertex and thorax reddish brown to black; abdomen and legs
yellowish; genal cones light orange; antennw yellow, darker at tip. Body stout; surface smooth or slightly alutaccous. Vertex moderately large, strongly rounded down in front; discal
impressions variable, often large and extensive; genal cones very
small, scarcely coniform, rather transverse, not visible from above,
not acutely pointed. Antenne not as long as width of head, thick. Thorax stout, broad, strongly arched; dorsal surface punctate
and strigate, more or less shining. Forewings about two and a third
times as long as broad, hyaline, often with a yellowish tinge, trans-
parent, distinctly angulate at apex; with a large black macula
in anterior basal cell; veins prominent; pterostigma very small; first
marginal cell about three times as large as second. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve much longer than broad, both front
and hind margins arcuate, narrow at apex; forceps similar in shape
to californica, rather long, acute at tip. Female.—Genital segment
almost as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve very acuminate, and
acute at apex, longer than ventral. Described from many males and females from Oracle and Santa
Rita Mountains, Arizona (Hubbard and Schwarz), on Rhus trilobata,
June and July (these are paratypes); several from Los Angeles
County, California (Coquillett); Claremont, California (Baker) ; Boul-
der, Colorado (E. Bethel), on hus trilobata; Fort Collins, Colorado. Type.—Cat. No. 8149, U.S. Nat. Mus. CALOPHYA TRIOZOMIMA CLARIPENNIS, new variety. This varietal form is very similar structurally to the species, but
differs in the following respects. The vertex is more flattened and
the front ocellus more nearly visible from above. The color differ-
ences are marked. The body is uniformly honey-yellow throughout;
the forewing lacks the dark macula in the basal cell present in the
species. The genital characters are quite similar. Described from one male and three females from Galiuro Mountains,
Arizona (H. G. Hubbard), on Rhus sp., May 25; and two females
from Pagosa Springs, Colorado (Baker). Type.—Cat. No. 18079, U. S. Nat. Mus. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 53

CALOPHYA NIGRIPENMIS Riley. Figs. 76, 250, 290, 464. Psylla rhois Guover (not Loew) ?77: 33

Calophya rhois Rrney 88: 69. Calophya nigripennis Riury 83: 69.—Scuwanz '04: 244,

Length of body 1.7 mm; length of forewing 2.1; width of head
0.72. Color of vertex, wings, and anterior and middle femora black
to brown, wings sometimes light brown; abdomen light brown to
almost black; genal cones and thorax bright orange or sulfur-yellow;
antenne, except at tip, posterior femora and all tibiw pale yellow. Vertex smooth, seldom alutaceous, shining, very convexly rounded
downward in front, more so than in the other species of the genus. Genal cones small, not as long as basal width, often distinctly shorter,
acute at apex, divergent, subhorizontal, not pubescent, contiguous
at base. Antenne shorter than width of head, thick, alw:
at tip. Thorax smooth, less strongly arched than in preceding species,
sometimes faintly alutaceous, sometimes striped on dorsum. Tore-
wings thick, not transparent, somewhat punctulate, narrowly
rounded at apex, about two and a half times as long as broad; ptero-
stigma long and large; first marginal cell about twice as large as
second. Hind wings somewhat fumate. Genitalia —Male—Genitalia similar to flavida; anal valve broad,
about two-thirds as broad as long, convex on both hind and front
margins; forceps as in flavida. Female—Genital segment scarcely
as long as two preceding ventral sclerites, stout, not acuminate. Described from six males and females from Washington, D. C.
(Schwarz), on Rhus copallina, in May; several from Raleigh, North
Carolina (E. P. Van Duzee), April; Falls Church, Virginia, June;
Alabama; Pennsylvania (no data on the latter specimens). Mr.
Schwarz gives, also, “various parts of Georgia.”

Schwarz states that immature specimens resemble flavida but may
be distinguished by the shorter vertex, shorter genal cones, differences
in the genitalia, and slight differences in wing venation. Subfamily CARSIDARIN 2s. Head deeply cleft in front, giving a bi-rostrate appearance, which is
increased by the large basal antennal segments. Gene variable in
form, sometimes swollen into small or larger conical processes bencath
antennal bases, sometimes not at all swollen; frons usually covered by
gen, somewhat as in Psylline, or sometimes not covered and easily
visible between gene, as in Pauropsylline. Antenne usually long
and slender, sometimes much thickened. Thorax not strongly arched. Hind tibie often with a spur at base. Wings hyaline, variously
shaped, branching of veins usually not so typically dichotomous as

54 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. in Psylline (sce illustrations of wings of Carsidara, especially the
medial vein). ‘The members of this subfamily seem to be mostly tropical in their
distribution. Four, out of a dozen or more genera, are represented
in the American tropics and subtropics. The most characteristic
feature of the group is the deeply cleft head and the peculiar type of
wing venation, which is rather difficult to define. In this, as in the
preceding subfamily, one genus distinctly ¢riozine in many respects
has been included. The relationships of this triozine genus, Rhinop-
sylla, to Carsidarins seem to be closer than to Triozine. SYNOPS(S OF GENERA. a, Frons not covered by gens; antennee greatly thickened in basal half. B!. Antenna much longer than body; genie produced into two small, inferior cones;
frons rather large; clypeus large; hind tibiae without basal spur. Freysuila Aleman. b*, Antenne much shorter than body; gene not produced as above; frons very
narrow; clypeus small; hind tibice with a spur at base. ...Epicarsa Crawford. a?, Frons covered by gene, but sometimes not entirely so; antenne not thickened

in basal hali,
U4, Cubital petiole (M-+Cu) present; head very deeply cleft in iront; anterior
ocellus above; pterostigma present in forewing. ........... Carsidara Walker. 8, Cubital petiole and pterostigma wanting (as in Trioza); head less deeply cleft;
anterior ocellus in front -.-Rhinopsylla Riley. Genus FREYSUILA Aleman. Frey-suila AvEMAN, °87: 21-26. Freysuila Scuwanz, '97:196. Head very deeply cleft in front and deeply concave between pos-
terior ocelli, strongly birostrate, with the thick antennx attached
to truncate apex of rostrate lobes and increasing the rostrate appear-
ance; frons not covered by gene, visible as an oblong sclerite between
genie; genz swollen beneath antenne, with a small inferior epiphysis;
clypeus large. Antenne very long; third joint unusually long and
thick. Thorax large, broad, coarsely punctate. Hind tibise with-
outspurat base. Wings large, hyaline, rounded at apex; pterostigma
present. Type of genus.—Freysuila dugesit Aleman. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a', ‘Third antennal joint not over twice as long as fourth, usually flavous; color of
body uniformly flavous. b!. Third antennal joint about twice as long as fourth; genal epiphyses acutely

pointed; M-+Cu shorter than R; veins yellow. dugesii Aleman. 2, Third antennal joint only a little longer than fourth; genal epiphyses smaller,

not acutely pointed; M+-Cu as long as R; veins black...... .ernstit Schwarz. a, Third antennal joint neatly four times as long as fourth, black; vertex and thoracic

dorsum with conspicuous black spots and bands (or brown); M+Cu shorter

than R = cedrele Schwarz. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 55

FREYSUILA DUGESII Aleman,
Figs. 122, 124, 408. Frey-suila dugesii AuEMAN °87:21. Freysuila dugesii Scuwarz ’97:197.—Crawrorp ’11b:491. Length of body 3 mm. ; length of forewing 4.8; width of head 0.95;
length of antenne 4. General color flavous; antenne black on seg-
ments V-X, basal joints flavous. Head broad, surface smooth or very finely punctate. Anterior
ocellus in front at base of cleft; gene produced beneath into a pair
of small conical processes directed downward. Antenne longer
than body; I and II very large; III not quite twice as long as IV,
fusiform, and very thick in the middle; IV to X more slender. Legs
long, rather thick. Wings large, broadly rounded at apex; veins
flayous; first marginal cell much larger than second. M-+Cu shorter
than R.

Genitalia.— Female.—Genital segment as long as rest of abdomen,
about 1 mm. long; dorsal valve longer than ventral, acutely pointed;
both valves with a tuft of long hairs near apex. Described from two females from Guanajuato, Mexico (Duges), on
Cedrela sp. These are two of the specimens sent by Mr. Duges to
the United States National Museum some years ago, on which Schwarz
based his description. FREYSUILA ERNSTII Schwarz. Freysuila dugesii ernstii Sonwanz ’97:197. Very close to dugesii, differing in only a few respects; third anten-
nal segment only a little longer than fourth; genz swollen much less,
processes not conical. Wings broader; M+Cu equal in length to R;
pterostigma a little longer; veins black. Genitalia.—Male.—Anal valve small, not longer than forceps, sim-
ple; forceps thick, cultrate, acute at apex, inner edge rather sharp. Described from one male (paratype), from Caracas, Venezuela
(A. Ernst), on Cedrela, April 20, 1894. FREYSUILA CEDRELZ Schwarz,
Fig. 417. Freysuila dugesti cedrelee Scuwanz ’87:197. Close to dugesii, differing as follows: Color flavous, with a brown
streak on each side of vertex, another behind each eye, extending
to wing base; a brown spot on front of prescutum and a brown
stripe on each side of scutum just above the wings; venter yellow;
antenne entirely black. Third antennal segment nearly four times
as long as fourth; genal epiphyses acutely pointed. Wings large, as

6060°—Bull. 85—14——5. 56 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. in ernstii, but with M+Cu shorter than R; veins black. Female
genital segment much shorter than rest of abdomen. Described from two females (paratypes), from Trinidad, West Indies
(F. W. Urich), on Cedrela odorata, January 29, 1894. Genus EPICARSA Crawford. Epicarsa CrawForD, '11b: 488. This genus is close to Freysuila, differing in the following characters:
Head less deeply cleft in front; vertex only a little concave between
posterior occlli; frons narrow; gen with a minute epiphysis beneath
each antennal base; clypeus very small. Antenne shorter than
body, greatly thickened from base to tip. Hind tibie with a spur at
base. Wings rounded; Rs and M almost touching; first marginal
cell smaller than second; pterostigma wanting. Type of genus.—Epicarsa corniculata Crawford. EPICARSA CORNICULATA Crawford. Figs. 152, 153, 157, 497. Epicarsa corniculata CRAWFORD ?11b: 488,

Length of body 1.9 mm. ; length of forewing 2.5; width of head
0.75. General color dark brown or black; head and prothorax jet
black; abdomen lighter; genitalia yellowish brown. Head not deflexed, almost as broad as thorax, finely punctate;
vertex elevated somewhat on postocellar regions, concave between
posterior ocelli but Jess so than in preceding genus; with a con-
spicuous epiphysis near eye, over insertion of antenne. Eyes rather
large; posterior ocelli reniform in shape, situated well forward;
anterior ocellus in front at apex of excision, visible from above. Antenne about three times as long as width of head, very stout and
thick; two basal segments very large; third about as long as first
two together. Thorax rather flattened; pronotum long, flat on dorsal surface;
pleurites very large and long; pleural suture oblique, almost as long
as episternum. Spur at base of hind tibie not very large, but con-
spicuous. Wings large, hyaline, shining, less than two and a half
times as long as broad, quite broadly rounded at apex; first marginal
cell much smaller than second; second very large; venation very
distinctive (see figure); with a black band along M, and Rs; a black
band, also, along Cu, and a third on R,. Genitalia. — Male.—Genital segment relatively rather small; forceps
short and slender; anal valve small, simple. Described from one male collected at Para, Brazil, by C. F. Baker. Type in author's collection. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 57

Genus CARSIDARA Walker. Carsidara WALKER ’69: 329.—Scorr ’82: 466.—Crawrorp ’11b: 484. Head very deeply cleft in front; vertex short, lobes diverging
toward anterior margin of eyes; gene large, composing anterior
portion of what appears to be the vertex; front ocellus at end of
median line of vertex, near the middle of the top of the head; gen»
not produced below, as in Freyswila; frons mostly covered by genx,
sometimes slightly visible. Antenne very long and slender. Beak
Jong. Thorax not broad. Hind tibie with a large spur at base. Wings hyaline, angulate at apex, with a pterostigma. Type of genus.—Carsidara marginalis Walker. The four following species from the American tropics are very
closely related to each other. This seems to be a tropical genus
almost exclusively. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a', Length to tip of folded wings about 5 mm. ; head large, subglobose in profile. gigantea Crawford. a?. Length about 4 mm., or less. b!. Thoracic dorsum conspicuously striped; length sometimes slightly over 4 mm. dugesii Loew. 2, Thoracic dorsum pale, not striped, or at most very indistinctly so; size smaller. ¢!. Color flavous; body surface not pluverulent..... «mexicana Crawford. @. Color whitish; body surface pulverulent; sometimes indistinctly striped on
dorsum of thorax....sceseeceseeeeeeesseseseestereeeed concolor Crawford. CARSIDARA GIGANTEA Crawtord,
Figs. 149, 151, 373, 492. Carsidara gigantea CrawrorD ?11b: 486. Length of body 3 mm. ; length of forewing 4.3; width of head 0.96. General color light yellowish brown; thoracic dorsum with yellowish
or pale stripes; distal portions of antennal segments black. Body
large. Head not deflexed, finely punctate, not quite as broad as thorax,
arcuate on posterior margin; vertex with a deep suleate depression
between posterior and anterior occlli, and a lesser one extending
outward on each side from anterior ocellus; anterior ocellus almost
in the middle of the top of the head (vertex and gene together);
posterior ocelli situated well forward, almost in a line transversely
with anterior ocellus. Clypeus very small, inconspicuous; beak very
long; slender and acutely pointed. Antenne fully as long as body,
very slender. Thorax long, rather large, punctate, striped. Propleurites large;
pleural suture curved; prascutum long and rather broad. Basal
spur on hind tibie large and conspicuous. Wings large, hyaline,

58 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. shining, about two and three fourths times as long as broad, rather
acute at apex; first marginal cell much smaller than second; ptero-
stigmal space open, large, long. Genitalia.— Female.—Genital segment very stout, relatively short,
rather acute at apex; dorsal valve large, abruptly acute at apex;
ventral valve more slender, equal in length to dorsal; pubescence
rather dense and long. Described from three females collected at Granada, Nicaragua,
by C. F. Baker. Type in author’s collection. CARSIDARA DUGESII Loew. Figs. 148, 150, 374, 494,

Carsidara dugesii Low ’86: 160. Carsidara rostrata Cnawrorb ’11b: 486. Close to gigantea, but distinctly smaller; color light brown, striped
similarly; vertex with sulcate depressions distinctly different (see
figure). Second marginal cell of forewing relatively larger; ptero-
stigma slightly thickened. Female genital segment more slender,
with a longer, more slender, and upturned termination. Described from three females (one not typically colored), from
Chinandega, Nicaragua (C. F. Baker). Judging from the similarities
in size, color, general appearance, and habitat, rostrata Crawford is
probably identical with Loew’s dugesii, which was described from
Mexico (collector, A. Duges), on a species of Malvacez. CARSIDARA MEXICANA Crawford. Figs. 147, 160, 385, 496,
Carsidara mexicana Crawrorp ?11b: 487. Close to dugesii and possibly not a distinct species. Thoracic
dorsum with no indication of stripes; color uniformly flavous or
yellow. Vertex and thorax similar in structure and appearance;
pterostigma of forewing not thickened as above. Genitalia.—Male—Anal valve large, almost as long as genital
segment, with a short, large posterior lobe, somewhat as Loew figures
for dugesii, but apical portion much shorter; forceps long, strongly
curved, obtuse at apex; second pair of forceps shorter, very acutely
pointed. Described from one male from Acapulco, Mexico (C. F. Baker). Type in author's collection. CARSIDARA CONCOLOR Crawford. Figs. 146, 159, 975, 495. Carsidara concolor CRawForp ’11b: 484. Similar to dugesti, but differing sharply in being whitish and more

or less pulverulent; thoracic dorsum not or very indistinctly striped

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 59

as in dugesii; size uniformly smaller; body and wings more slender;
vertex with sulcate depressions much less marked and conspicuous. Female genitalia somewhat similar; male anal valve similar but
with apical portion much shorter and broader. Described from many males and females from Habana, Cuba
(Baker). ‘Type in author’s collection. Genus RHINOPSYLLA Riley. Rhinopsylla Rey ’83:77.—Crawrorp ’11a:440; ’11b: 483. Head often less deeply cleft in front than in preceding genera,
though sometimes very deeply cleft; anterior ocellus in front, as in
Freysuila; frons covered by gene; gene sometimes swollen (approach-
ing psemiane of Triozine). Antenne long. Thorax only slightly
arched. Legs long and slender; hind tibie with a small spur at
base, or often none. Wings ériozine, with no cubital petiole (M+Cu)
and no pterostigma, but resembling preceding genera somewhat also. Type of genus—Rhinopsylla schwarzii Riley. This is a very interesting genus, in that it grades into Kuwayama
of the Triozinw on the one hand, and other species grade into the
preceding genera of Carsidarine on the other hand. There are
unmistakable relationships to both subfamilies, but the most fun-
damental characters seem to indicate a closer relationship with the
Carsidarine. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES,
a’, Head very deeply cleft in front; eyes appearing as if stalked; forefemora (of
male at least) greatly enlarge schwarzii Riley. a, Head not very deeply cleft in front; forefemora not greatly enlarged. b'. Legs extremely long and slender; tibice much longer than femora; head mod-
erately deeply cleft; third antennal joint thickened. c!, Head and thorax shining black, abdomen flavous; vertex smooth and shining,

deeply concave between posterior ocelli; forefemora slightly enlarged. athenz, new speci
©. Color flavous; vertex punctate, deeply concave between posterior ocell:
forefemora scarcely enlarged . .. jalapensis Crawford. 8. Legs not unusually long; tibice only a little longer than femora; third antennal

joint not thickened. c!. Body black; head moderately deeply cleft in front; antennze broad at base. antennata Crawtord. c*, Body orange to flavous; head not deeply cleft; antenn smaller at base,
antennata prozima Crawford. RHINOPSYLLA SCHWARZII Riley. Rhinopsylla schwarzii Ritey ’83:78.—Crawrorp ’11a:441. Length to tip of folded wings about 3 mm. General color dull
reddish on head and thorax, abdomen greenish; femora red, tibie
flavous; thoracic dorsum with indistinct pale stripes; antenne pale
on joints III to VI. 60 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Head very deeply cleft in front, strongly birostrate; eyes appearing
to be stalked because of this rostrate condition; antenne very thick
at base and increasing rostrate appearance; gene scarcely swollen
beneath antennal bases; third antennal segment distinctly thicker
than succeeding joints, longer than IV and V combined; total length
of antenne more than twice width of head. Thorax slightly arched. Legs long, front pair longest; forefemora greatly enlarged in male
(female not known), and curved strongly; hind tibie not spurred at
base, but distinctly swollen. Wings more than three times as long
as broad, acute at apex. Genitalia obscured in both cotypes. Male genitalia very small. Described from the two cotypes in the National Museum (together
with Riley’s original description). One of the specimens is all
destroyed except the abdomen. Collected at Baldwin, Florida, by
BE. A. Schwarz, March 11, 1879, on ‘low plants in the cypress swamps’’. RHINOPSYLLA ATHENA, new species. Figs. 123, 400. Length of body 1.9 mm; length of forewing 3; width of head 0.72. General color deep shining black on head, pronotum, and prescutum;
rest of body flavous orange; antenne black, except IV and V and
tip of III white; male genitalia a little darker than rest of abdomen. Somewhat similar to schwarzii, but head not so strongly birostrate,
not so deeply cleft, not as broad as thorax; eyes hemispherical and
directed somewhat forward (as in schwarzii also), but not giving
the appearance of being stalked; antenne somewhat similar, but
third joint less swollen. Thorax scarcely arched; pronotum rather long; prescutum small. Legs very long; forefemora larger than the second pair, but not so
conspicuously enlarged as in schwarzii; tibiee much longer than femora. Wings narrow, three times as long as broad, narrowly angulate at
apex, venation rather similar. Genitalia. — Male.—Anal valve rather small, broad in caudal view,
somewhat extended caudad in lateral view; forceps small, cultrate,
inner edge rather sharp, only a little arched. Described from one male from Athens, Georgia (J. C. Bradley),
June 15, 1909. ‘Type in the collection of Cornell University. RHINOPSYLLA JALAPENSIS Crawford. Figs. 154, 155, 278, 976, 498. Rhinopsylla jalapensis CrawvorD 11b:490. Length of body 2.6 mm. ; length of forewing 3.7; width of head
0.70. General color greenish brown. Tlead not deflexed, scarcely as broad as thorax, arcuate on pos-
terior margin; vertex with a deep sulcate depression on each side of

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 61

median line extending obliquely toward outer margin of antenne;
anterior margin rather deeply cleft, but less so than in athenz;
anterior ocellus at apex of excision, visible from above; posterior
ocelli situated well forward. Antenne very long and slender, nearly
as long as body, uniformly black; antennal bases swollen. Clypeus
rather large; beak long and slender, acute. Thorax arched, rather narrow, coarsely punctate. Preescutum
long, rather narrow. Hind tibie with a small spur at base. Wings
large, hyaline, acute at apex, about two and threo-fourths times as
long as broad; first marginal cell smaller than second. Genitalia — Male——Genital segment large; forceps large, stout,
obtuse at apex; anal valve long, spatulate; pubescence moderate. Female.—Genital segment almost as long as rest of abdomen, quite
acute and slender; dorsal valve a little longer than ventral; pubes-
cence rather sparse. Described from several males and females from Jalapa, Mexico
(Crawford), August 28, 1910. Type in author's collection. RHINOPSYLLA ANTENNATA Crawiord. Figs. 215, 333 541. Paratrioza antennata CrawrorD 10a:2:
Rhinopsylla antennata Crawronp 11a:441; 11b:191,

Length of body 1.8 mm. ; length of forewing 2.7; width of head
0.73. General color black, abdomen white ventrad; antenne and
tarsi lighter. Tlead not deflexed, about as broad as thorax, broad posteriorly
when viewed from the side, and tapering toward the insertion of the
antenne. Vertex arcuate on posterior margin, with a prominent
suleate depression extending forward and toward lower margin of
eye on each side, rather deeply cleft in front; anterior ocellus at
apex of excision, visible from above; gene slightly swollen beneath
antennal bases. Prascutum small. Legs not very long, as in pre-
ceding species. Wings hyaline, small, about two and a half times
as long as broad, subacute apically; marginal cells subequal; venation
light brown, inconspicuous. Genitalia. — Male—Genital segment small, not much larger than
preceding segment; forceps small, subglobose basally, slender and
acute apically; pubescence short and sparse. Anal valve about
equal in size to ventral plate of segment, almost straight on inner
margin, strongly arched posteriorly; pubescence longer than on
genital plate and forceps. Described from two males from Colorado (C. F. Baker), no data. Type—Cat. No. 18082, U. S. Nat. Mus. 62 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. RHINOPSYLLA ANTENNATA PROXIMA Crawford. The chief variation from the species lies in the cephalic characters. The anterior emargination is less pronounced, and the basal segments
of the antenne are distinctly smaller, but of the same type. The
sulcate depression on the vertex is more marked. The genal cones
are entirely wanting, as in the other species of the genus, but the
gene are more globosely enlarged beneath the antenne. The color
is lighter in the varietal form, but this may be of no importance. Described from one female collected in Colorado by C. F. Baker
(a0 data). Type in author’s collection. The varietal form approaches rather closely to species of Kuwayama
(of Triozinz) in the shape of the head, except for the anterior emar-
gination, in which they are quite distinct from each other. Subfamily CERIACREMIN 25. This subfamily was created by Enderlein in 1910 (10: 138) fora
number of unrelated genera, some of which should be referred to
Carsidarine and some to Psylline. Two species only of the typical
genus, Ceriacremum, are known in the New World fauna, and for
these species Enderlein’s subfamilynameisretained. The limitsof the
subfamily, however, are very uncertain. The chief character upon
which it stands is the presence in the forewing of one or more addi-
tional marginal cells, besides the usual two which are formed by the
forking of the media and cubitus. The additional ones are formed
either by the forking of the radial sector or by a cross vein between
the latter and the medial vein. This character is possessed by a dozen or more species, mostly tropi-
cal, but there are often wide differences between these species in
other characters. It seems probable that this venational character,
after further study of the tropical Psyllid fauna of the world, will
prove to be valueless as a subfamily character. However, since
only a few of these species are available for comparison at present,
the most reasonable course to follow is to retain Enderlein’s subfamily
name for our two species, and to omit describing or designating the
limits of the subfamily until more detailed study is possible. For
the present, the description of the single New World genus, Ceriacre-
mum, may suffice for the subfamily description. Ceriacremum resembles members of Psyllineein cephalic and thoracic
characters, having the frons completely covered by the genw. Pha-
copteron Buckton ('94:18) resembles Ceriacremum in venational
characters, but differs widely in having the frons not covered by
the gene. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 63

Anomoneura, a Japanese genus, is very anomalous in having the
radial sector branched several times, thus forming several super-
numerary marginal cells. In other respects it seems to be closely
related to species of Psyllina. Genus CERIACREMUM Enderlein. Ceriacreumum ENDERLEIN ’10a: 138. Panisopelma ENDERLEIN ’10b: 280. Head rather large, not strongly deflexed ; vertex broader than long,
converging toward front; frons covered by gene; gene produced
into cones of variable size. Antenne long, slender. Hind tibie
with a spur at base behind. Wings somewhat thickened, ovate,
broadly rounded at apex, veins setigerous; radial sector branched
apically and sending a short cross vein to media, thus making a third
marginal cell. Type of genus.—Ceriacremum filiverpatum Enderlein (an African
species), designated by Enderlein (10: 138). SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a’, Genal cones very small; vertex twice as broad as long; antenna half as long as

forewing; length to tip of folded wingsabout 2 mm. .quadrigibbiceps Enderlein. a?, Genal cones two-thirds as long as vertex; vertex not quite twice as broad as long;
antenne as long as wings; length 3 mm to tip of folded wings

selosum, new species. CERIACREMUM QUADRIGIBBICEPS Enderlein. Panisopelma quadrigibbiceps EXDERLEIN 710b:280. The principal differences between this and the following species
are mentioned in the foregoing synopsis. I have seen no specimens
of this species. Locality: Province of Mendoza, Pedregal, Argentina (Jensen-
Harup), October 24, 1906 (one female). Type in Stettin Zoological Museum. CERIACREMUM SETOSUM, new species. Figs. 37, 43, 220, 272,

 

8, 432,

Length of body 2.1 mm; length of forewing 2.1; width of head
0.91. General color brownish flavous. Body robust, quite large,
finely and rather densely pubescent. Head large, fully as broad as thorax, punctate, pubescent; vertex
rather flat, with two slight depressions discally, scarcely elevated on
postocellar regions, somewhat produced in front on each side of
median line. Genal cones large, broad, continuing plane of vertex,
almost horizontal, somewhat divergent, subacute at apex, pubescence
very short. 64 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Thorax arched, large, pubescent, punctate. Pronotum long, flat;
mesopleurites extending forward almost to head. Prscutum long,
broad, not aslongasscutum. Hind tibie with a spur at base; all tibize
with a conspicuous fringe of spines at apex. Wings large, broad,
broadly rounded at apex, subhyaline, fumate in apical marginal
area; about twice as long as broad; pterostigma large, long, darker
than adjoining membrane, pubescent; first marginal cell very large;
second marginal cell rectangular; all veins set biscriately with sete,
larger on basal and pterostigmal costa. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment rather large; forceps rela-
tively very large, directed cephalad, and as long as genital plate, with
a dorsal vertical epiphysis; anal valve bi-dactylate; the lower dactyl
staight, bidentate at tip; upper dactyl arcuate; base large. Female.—Genital segment rather small, acute at apex; dorsal valve
distinctly larger and longer than ventral. Described from three males and four females collected in Chinan-
dega, Nicaragua, and Granada, Nicaragua, by C. F. Baker. Type in author's collection. Subfamily TRIOZIN 2a. Head more or less deflexed, seldom as broad as thorax; vertex
usually subtriangular to semicircular in outline; gene produced into
conical or lobate processes, or sometimes only spherically swollen;
frons covered by genx, as in Psylline, visible only as a minute
sclerite bearing the front ocellus. Antenne ten-segmented, variable
in length. Eyes hemispherical. Thorax, typically, well arched;
sclerites variable, as described for the genera. Hind tibiw with three
to four black spines at apex; basal tarsus of hind legs without claw-
like spines present in Psylline. Wings typically hyaline, elongate-
ovate, more or less angulate at apex; cubital petiole (M-+Cu) nearly
always wanting, R, M and Cu arising together from the basal vein
(see Ceropsylla and Hemitrioza for exceptions) ; pterostigma wanting. The members of this subfamily bear a striking resemblance to
species of Psylla, but differ sharply in several respects: The more
slender body (usually), the absence of the “claws” on the basal
tarsi of the hind legs, the differently shaped wings and the different
venation of same. The presence or absence, and the number, of
spines on the hind tibiw and the basal tarsus of the hind legs seem to
be very constant characters, although not heretofore used, and
very valuable for classification. SYNOPSIS OF GENERA. a'. Media and cubitus never with a petiole, the three veins (radius, media, and cubitus)
arising at same point from basal vein. }!, Genze not produced into cones but more or less swollen spherically beneath base

of antenne ... ...-Kuwayama Crawford. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 65

22 Gene produced more or less conically beneath antenne. *

c', Pronotum long, flat, not at all depressed below level of preescutum and vertex,
with an acute epiphysis in center of front margin, and a similar one on front
margin of prescutum; notum nearly or quite flat; forewings nearly or quite
three times as long as broad, often maculated. . .....Leuronota, new genus. @, Pronotum shorter, distinctly descending cephalad, depressed below head and

prescutum; notum more strongly arched. @, Genal cones short and small; clypeus easily visible from front; vertex often
conspicuously colored or banded. Paratrioza Crawford. @. Genal cones at least moderately long, or not exceedingly short; clypeus
not visible from front. é!. Thorax broader than width of head including eyes; genal cones more or
less divergent, variable in length, acute to subacute at apex
Trioza Forster. @, Thorax narrower than width of head, or not broader; genal cones Jong,
slender, acute, closely appressed and not at all divergent; hind tibie
with three apical spines within .... “otriozella Crawford,
2, Media and cubitus with a short petiole, or showing a distinct tendency toward
such a character, variable. b. Forewings elongate, nearly or fully three times as long as broad; R+-M-+Cu
relatively long; M-+Cu petiole short or subobsolete, rather constant within
a species; hind tibise with two apical spines within Ceropsylia Riley. 4, Forewings short, about twice as long as broad; M++Cu petiole variable within
a species from long to obsolete (variable even on same individual); hind tibise
with three apical spines within ...Hemitrioza, new genus. Genus KUWAYAMA Crawford. Epitrioza Crawrorp (not Kuwayama) ’11a: 452. Kuwayama Crawrorp ’11b:

Head small, scarcely deflexed; notum rather flat, not arched;
gene not produced into cones, but swollen more or less spherically
beneath bases of antenne; clypeus large, easily visible from in front. Thorax as broad as, or broader than, head including eyes; pronotum
usually not depressed below head and prescutum. Forewings
subacute to acute at apex; venation as in Trioza; base of Cu
relatively short. Type of genus.— Kuwayama medicaginis Crawford. This genus is rather closely related to Paratrioza, as shown espe-
cially by K. dorsalis. The form of the gens, however, easily separates
the two genera. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a’, Vertex rather deeply excised on each side of median line on top, margins not
sharply differentiated; color of body light. b!. Body small, wings less than 2.5 mm. long; antenne scarcely twice as long as

width of head; genital segment of female about half as long as rest of abdomen. medicaginis Crawford. 8. Body larger, wings more than 3 mm, long; antenns much more than twice as long
as width of head; female genital segment nearly as long as rest of abdomen. oaxacensis Crawford. @, Vertex not excised, almost flat, with margins sharply differentiated and giving

vertex appearance of being raised plate-like. Color of body dark; forewings

acute at apex; notum very flat. dorsalis, new species. 66 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. » KUWAYAMA MEDICAGINIS Crawford. Figs. 204, 208, 346, 393, 537. Paratrioza medicaginis CRawrorv 10a . Epitrioza medicaginis Crawrord ?11a: 452. Length of body 1.7 mm. ; length of forewing 2.6; width of head
0.68. General color yellowish-green throughout. Body small,
slender. Head scarcely deflexed, small, not quite as broad as thorax, some-
what punctate. Posterior margin of vertex arcuate; discal area with
a distinct foveal depression on each side of median line; anterior
margin somewhat emarginate at median line above front ocellus. Genz swollen into two rather large globose lobes extending vertically
downward, slightly visible from side, slightly pubescent. Clypeus
large, prominent below genal lobes from in front. Thorax small, not strongly arched, quite coarsely punctate; pro-
notum short; prescutum ascending, rather small. Wings small,
hyaline, sometimes faintly coriaceous, less than three times as long
as broad, subacute at apex; marginal cells subequal. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment moderately large, rounded;
forceps deeply divided, bilobate or bicuspidate; the posterior process
longer than anterior, more acute and glabrous; remainder of forceps
surface sparsely pubescent; anal valve rather large, broad at base,
more slender distally and terminating in a uniformly tapering
epiphysis, sparsely pubescent. Female—Genital segment moderately
large, both valves of almost equal length, rather acute at apex,
sparsely pubescent. Described from several males and females from Colorado (Cock-
erell), on alfalfa; El Centro, California (J. C. Bridwell), on the same
plant, Medicago sativa. One female specimen from Jalapa, Mexico
(Crawford), seems to represent a species close to medicaginis, or
possibly identical, but until the male is known it had better remain
undescribed. Type in author’s collection. KUWAYAMA OAXACENSIS Crawford. Figs, 203, 347, 510,
Epitrioza oazacensis CRawrorD *11a:453. Length of body 1.9 mm. ; length of forewing 3.3; width of head
0.70. General color light green with a tinge of yellow. Head scarcely deflexed, small, punctate; vertex somewhat as in
preceding species, but foveal depressions different in shape, arcuate
on posterior margin and emarginate in front at median line. Genal
lobes globose, very slightly angulated on inner margin, somewhat
visible from side, sparsely pubescent. Clypeus visible from in front,
rather large. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 67

Thorax somewhat arched, broader than head including eyes,
rather coarsely punctate. Prescutum longer than in preceding
species, relatively narrower, rounded cephalad. Wings rather large,
hyaline about two and a half times as long as broad, rounded apically
or very broadly angulate; marginal cells subequal; one specimen
presents the anomaly of the furcation distally of the radial sector
of both primary wings. Genitalia.— Female.—Genital segment long, slender, about as long
as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve slightly longer than ventral, equally
acute but less slender; pubescence sparse and short. Described from four females from Oaxaca, Mexico (Crawford),
August 10, 1910. Type specimen in author’s collection. KUWAYAMA DORSALIS, new species. Fig. 415. Length of body 1.8 mm. ; length of forewing 2.9; width of head
0.70. General color chocolate brown on dorsal surface of head,
thorax, and abdomen; lighter on pleural and ventral regions and on
legs; dorsal surface smooth. Head almost as broad as thorax, not deflexed; vertex about twice
as broad as long, with a foveal depression near posterior margin on
each side of median line, anterior and lateral margins sharply defined,
somewhat elevated. Genz subspherically swollen beneath antennal
bases. Clypeus large. (Flagellum of antenne broken off.) Thorax only a little arched; pronotum very short; prescutum
ascending, long. Forewings hyaline, acute at apex, more than two
and a half times as long as broad; marginal cells small; radial sector
short. Genitalia.— Male.—Genitalia small; forceps slender, almost as long
as anal valve, acute at apex; viewed from behind, with apical half
much narrower, flattened laterally, basal portion thick with a small
inner process. Anal valve with a large posterior lobe, reaching nearly
to base of forceps. Described from one male from Tucson, Arizona (H. G. Hubbard),
December. Type-—Cat. No. 18080, U. 8. Nat. Mus. In some respects this species seems to be closely related to members

of Paratrioza. LEURONOTA, new genus. Head not as broad as thorax, scarcely deflexed; notum almost flat,
scarcely arched; genal processes conical, divergent. Antenns more
than twice as long as width of head, slender. Pronotum long, flat,

not descending cephalad, produced in the center of the anterior
margin into an acute epiphysis, on same level with prescutum and

68 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. vertex. Praescutum rather flat, with an epiphysis corresponding to
that of pronotum. Forewings long and slender, nearly or quite
three times as long as broad, more or less acute at apex, often macu-
lated. Hind tibie with two apical spines on inside. Type of genus.—Leuronota maculata Crawford. This genus is erected to include two of the species formerly placed
in Allotrioza, now in synonymy. The character of the pronotum is
still used somewhat as it was in Allotrioza, but it is more restricted
and more sharply differentiated from the usual type in Trioza. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a, Forewings conspicuously maculated, fully three times as long as broad. b. Genal cones descending; vertex with a deep fovea on each side of median line;
dorsum slightly arched; wings three times as long as broad. maculata Crawford. 22, Genal cones extending forward in same plane with vertex; vertex almost flat;
dorsum scarcely arched; wings more than three times as long as broad, very
narrow... longipennis, new species. @, Forewings not, or indistinctly, maculated, slightly less than three times as long
as broad; genal cones descending. --acutipennis Crawiord. LEURONOTA MACULATA Crawford. Figs. 180, 181, 352, 510. Trioza maculata CRAWFORD ’10b:349. Allotrioza maculata Crawrorp ‘11a :446. Length of body 2.3 mm. ; length of forewing 3.1. General color
greenish white to light brown; abdomen dorsally dark brown, ven-
trally mottled with brown; forewings maculated with brown. Head not quite as broad as thorax, fincly punctate; vertex emar-
ginate on posterior margin in front of pronotal epiphysis, with a
prominent foveal depression on each side of median line; genal cones
not quite as long as vertex, descending somewhat, abruptly smaller
and more divergent in apical half, subacute at apex, pubescent. Clypeus moderately large, visible from in front. Antenne about two
and a half times as Jong as width of head, slender; segments tipped
with brown, apical segment entirely brown. Thorax only slightly arched, more coarsely punctate than head. Pronotum one-third as long as prescutum, anterior epiphysis con-
spicuous; pleurites large; prescutum slightly broader than long, as
long as scutum, with a short epiphysis on anterior margin in center;
scutum with three indistinct stripes. Legs slender. Wings hyaline,
three times as long as broad, subacute at apex, with a large brown
macula covering most of posterior apical half and often extending
to basal half; radial sector short; first marginal cell larger than
second. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment moderately large; anal valve
large, simple, fusiform in lateral aspect, much longer than forceps,
pubescent; forceps broadest at base, curved forward, acute at apex

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDA OF THE NEW WORLD. 69

and tapering thereto from base. Female.—Genital segment nearly
half as long as rest of abdomen, roundly acute at apex, thick dorso-
ventrally, pubescent, dorsal valve slightly longer than ventral. Described from 19 males and females from: San Diego, Texas
(Jones and Pratt), on Condalia obovata, March 25, 1908; Rockport,
Texas (Schwarz), on Columbrina texana, August; Wades, Texas
(Schwarz), May; Brownsville, Texas (Schwarz), June; Hot Springs,
Arizona (Barber and Schwarz), Junc; Arizona (Baker). Type in author’s collection. LEURONOTA ACUTIPENNIS Crawtord. Figs. 186, 612. Trioza acutipennis CrawrorD ’10b:350. Allotrioza acutipennis CrawrorD ’11a: 446,

Trioza crawfordi AULMANN 713: 44. Length of body 2.7 mm. ; length of forewing 3.5; width of head 0.72. General color yellowish brown; scutum with five brownish stripes. Head almost as broad as thorax, fincly rugoso-punctate; vertex
emarginate on posterior margin, as in maculata, with a foveal depres-
sion on each side of median line. Genal cones not quite as long as
vertex, descending somewhat, divergent, subacute, sparsely pubes-
cent. (Antenne destroyed.) Thorax slightly arched, more coarsely rugulose than head. Pro-
notum one-third as long as praescutum, anterior epiphysis conspicu-
ous, laterai fovee black; pleurites large; preescutum longer than in
maculata, about as long as broad, with a conspicuous epiphysis in
middle of front margin fitting into an emargination on hind margin
of pronotum. Wings hyaline, about two and four-fifths times as
long as broad, acute at apex, with several very light brown and indis-
tinet macule, one in inner basal cell beside Cu,, another extending
through first marginal cell to M, a third at tip of wing in second mar-
ginal cell; radial sector longer than media. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment one-fourth as long as rest of
abdomen; forceps bilobate, with a projecting lobe extending pos-
teriorly; anal valve and forceps thickly pubescent. Described from one male collected at Chinandega, Nicaragua
(C. F. Baker). The abdomen has been broken off since the original
description of the species. Type specimen in author's collection. LEURONOTA LONGIPENNIS, new species. Figs. 141, 405,

Length of body 2.8 mm; length of forewing 3.1; width of head 0.68. General color brown; genal cones, anterior margin of pronotum,

part of sternum, legs, antenne except terminal segment very light
brown; antennal segments tipped with brown. 70 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Head small, flattened, not deflexed, not as broad as thorax; vertex
flat, with a broad, shallow depression on each side of median line,
smooth; genal cones about two-thirds as long as vertex, extending
forward in same plane with vertex, divergent, subacute at apex,
slightly pubescent. Clypeus far back, with a conspicuous cavity
in front of it between gene. Antenne more than three times as long
as width of head, slender. Thorax not arched, flat, narrow; pronotum moderately long,
anterior epiphysis smaller than in two preceding species. Legs
slender. Wings nearly four times as long as broad, very narrow,
narrowly rounded at apex, apical third brown, basal two-thirds
transparent, membrane coarsely punctate; first marginal cell larger
than second; radial sector long. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment small; anal valve much longer
than forceps, fusiform, narrow at apex, with processes; forceps small,
short, slender, acute at tip, strongly arcuate; pubescence short. Described from one male from Palm Beach, Florida (H. G. Dyar),
no data. Type.—Cat. No. 18081, U. S, Nat. Mus. This species bears some resemblance to members of the European
genus Floria. Genus PARATRIOZA Crawford. Head more or less deflexed; vertex distinctly raised plate-like,
with margins sharply defined, sometimes briefly pubescent, and
sometimes variegated in color (as in cockerelli); genal cones short,
often very short, acute, directed forward and outward; anterior
ocellus best visible from in front, beneath slightly overhanging ver-
tex. Antenne slender. Clypeus large, easily visible from in front. Dorsum of thorax not strongly arched. Wings membranous, usually
more than two and a half times as long as broad. Hind tibie with
two apical spines on inner side, and sometimes a spur at base. Type of genus.—Paratrioza cockerelli Sulc. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a’, Wings maculated, acute at apex; radial sector short and straight; second marginal
cell much smaller than first; vertex and notum not conspicuously striped and
banded. . - maculipennis Crawford. @, Wings not maculated, eubacute at apex; Rs Jong and curved. bt, Body large; length to tip of folded wings at Jeast 4 mm; vertex and notum not
or only slightly variegated; hind tibie with large spines at apex and a emall
spur at base; wings large; first marginal cell larger than second. arbolensis Crawiord. b2, Body small; length to tip of wings only 3 mm; vertex and notum very con-
spicuously striped and banded with white or yellow; hind tibice with emall

apical spines and no basal spur; wings small, marginal cells subequal. cockerelli Sule. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 71

PARATRIOZA COCKERELLI Sule. Figs. 211, 330, 391, 348, 535, 536. Trioza cockerelli Suro 09a: 102-108. Paratrioza cockerelli Crawrorp ’11a:448; Parcu ’12:321. Paratrioza pulchella CRAWFORD 7102 :229. P. ocellata CRawForD ’11a: 447. The Tomato Psyllid, Jounson ’11: (?). Length of body, average, 1.4 mm; length of forewing 2.7; width of
head 0.52 to 0.70. General color light to dark brown (to unaided
eye); head and thorax conspicuously striped and banded with white
or yellow; vertex black, with a whitish or yellow band bordering it,
and a white to yellow crescentic macula in center of discal area of
variable size; pronotum white to yellow on posterior side; pra-
scutum with a white stripe along median dorsal line and a horse-shoe-
shaped band laterad; scutum with a stripe on each side of median
dorsal line and an arcuate band laterad; pleure more or less varie-
gated, legs and antenne brown. Head deflexed, nearly as broad as thorax, finely punctate; margins
of vertex distinctly raised and sharply defined; discal impressions
small. Genal cones very small, acute, divergent, projecting forward
or slightly outward, seldom downward, pubescent. Antenne not
over twice as long as width of head, slender, with a peculiar sense
organ on segment IV. Clypeus large. Thorax arched, punctate. Pronotum descending cephalad below
posterior margin of vertex. Praescutum roundly acute cephalad. Wings small, hyaline, about two and three-fourths times as long as
broad, subacute at apex; Rs moderately long, flexed subapically; M
and Cu long; marginal cells subequal. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment rather small; forceps relatively
long, somewhat scythe-shaped when viewed either from side or rear;
anal valve reaching higher than forceps, produced posteriorly on each
side into a lobe which varies in size and shape from long and slender
to very broad at base and triangular in shape. Female.—Genital
segment very short and small, subacute; dorsal valve about as long
as preceding tergite; anal pore large; pubescence sparse. Described from numerous males and females from the following
localities: Boulder, Colorado (Cockerell), on pepper (Capsicum
annuum), topotypes; Rocky Ford, Colorado (McMillan), on tomato
(Solanum nigrum), September, 1910; Cafion City, Colorado (Grave-
stock), on tomatoes, October, 1894; Colorado (Gillette, Baker), no
data given; Park City, Utah (Hubbard and Schwarz); Milford, Utah
(J. C. Bradley), September, 1908; Williams, Arizona (Barber and
Schwarz), on Purshia and Arbor-vitw, May and July; Tucson,
Arizona (Hubbard), December; Fort Yuma, Arizona (Hubbard),
January; Madagascar Mountains, New Mexico (Snow), August, 1894;

6060°—Bull. 85—14——6

  

72 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Claremont, California, Mountains (Crawford), on a species of Spruce,
June, 1911, found in myriads infesting the twigs and needles; El
Centro, California (J. C. Bridwell), on alfalfa; San Luis Obispo, Cali-
fornia (Condit), on “green-house tomatoes,” September, 1909; Argus
Mountains, on Pinus monophylla, and Death Valley, California (Koe-
bele), May; Alameda, California (Koebele), September. Food plants: Pepper (Capsicum annuum), tomato (Solanum nigrum),
potato (Solanum tuberosum), Purshia sp., arbor-vitew (Thuja occiden-
talis), spruce (Picea sp. ), pine (Pinus monophylla), alfalfa (Medicago
sativa). Some of these plants may not be true food plants. This
is a species easily distinguished from all others by the striking colora-
tion of the body. Its distribution seems to be general throughout
the southwestern United States and is often found in great numbers,
sometimes becoming a pest to cultivated plants. Since describing
P. ocellata (Crawford ’11a: 447) as a new species closely related to
cockerelli, I have had an opportunity to examine many more speci-
mens from many localities, and have come to the conclusion that all
these represent but one species more or less variable in some respects. The variation in degree of coloration is so marked and continuous
that it seems useless to try to distinguish the varietal forms nigra

and flava. PARATRIOZA ARBOLENSIS Crawtord. Figs. 197, 200, 207, 3

 

5, 301, 532,

 

    

Paratrioza arbolensis Crawrorp '10a

Allotrioza arbolensis CRawrorp ?11a?444,—Parcou 712:231,

Length of body 2.6 mm; length of forewing 3.9; width of head
0.96. General color light green throughout. Body very large. Head a little deflexed, very large, punctate; vertex arcuate on
posterior margin, front margin sharply defined, with a deep fovea on
each side of median line discally and a marked depression diverging
toward insertion of antenne with a prominent elevation on each side
of median line between depressions. Eyes very large. Genal cones
short, horizontal. Extending outward, subacute at apex, moderately
pubescent. Antenne large basally. Clypeus very large, easily
visible from in front. Thorax large and broad, slightly broader than head including eyes,
more coarsely punctate than vertex. Pronotum rather long, some-
what depressed below head and prescutum; latter long and broad,
rather triangular, narrow cephalad. Legs large; hind tibie with
large spines at apex and a distinct spur at base; claws large. Wings
hyaline, large, straight on hind margin, front margin arched, not
quite three times as long as broad. Genitalia.— Male.—Forceps rather large at base, subacute at apex;
anal valve small, simple. Female.—Genital segment rather small,

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDEZ OF THE NEW WoRLD. 73

scarcely longer than two preceding ventral sclerites; dorsal valve
longer than ventral, acutely pointed; ventral valve acute; pubes-
cence sparse. . Described from three males and four females from Arboles, Colo-
rado (C. F. Baker), on Shepherdia sp. Type in author’s collection. In the preliminary synopsis of Triozine (Crawford ’10a: 229) this
species was included in the genus Paratrioza. In a later paper it
was removed and made the type of a new genus on the basis, prin-
cipally, of the larger pronotum. After further study, it seems that
this species is not distinct generically, and therefore it is returned to
Paratrioza, and Allotrioza is sunk into synonymy. The other species
of the latter genus are placed in other genera. PARATRIOZA MACULIPENNIS Crawford. Fig. 392. Trioza maculipennis CRAWFORD 10a: 2
Paratrioza maculipennis CRAWFORD ’11a:

 

50. Length of body 1.7 mm; length of forewing 2.85; width of head
0.77. General color reddish brown to dark brown or black; vertex
fulvous brown, margin and discal area usually lighter; thorax darker,
somewhat mottled; notum more or less striped; abdomen dark;
antenne black at tip, intermediate segments tipped with black. Tlead deflexed, almost as broad as thorax; vertex flat, with a
shallow depression on each side of median line, pubescent; genal
cones short, longer than in cockerelli, directed forward and outward,
acute, pubescent. Antenne fully twice as long as width of head,
slender. Thorax not strongly arched, coarsely punctate, slightly pubescent. Pronotum rather short, descending cephalad; prescutum broader
than long. Legs moderately long; apical spines on hind tibie
rather large; basal spur small or wanting. Wings acute at apex,
posterior margin somewhat angled, front margin strongly arched,
about two and two-thirds times as long as broad, with several brown
macule in apical half covering both marginal cells and parts of other
cells; Rs short and straight; first marginal cell distinctly larger than
second. Genitalia — Male —Anal valve relatively large, with a long posterior
process reaching over forceps, somewhat as in cockerelli; forceps
small, short, acute at apex. Memale.—Genital segment short, about
as long as preceding ventral sclerite, subacute at apex, dorsal valve
a little longer than ventral. Described from two males from San Mateo County, California
(C. F. Baker), and 17 males and females from the following

74 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. localities: Sacramento, California (A. Koebele), on Convolvulus ocei-
dentalis, July; Folsom, California (Koebele), on same host, August;
Ukiah (? ), California (I. J. Condit), on Convolvulus arvensis, Septem,
ber; Placer County, California (Koebele), on Ceanothus cordulatus,
September; Stanford University, California (Crawford), on Saliz sp.,
February (probably only migrants). Type in author's collection. Genus TRIOZA Forster. Head not broader than thorax, usually distinctly narrower,
deflexed; vertex much broader than long, with more or less of an
emargination in front between the two lobes; genal cones variable
in length, shape, and trend, usually subacute, always more or less
divergent. Clypeus subglobose or pyriform, scarcely visible from
in front. Eyes large, hemispherical. Antenne slender, from one
to two and a half times as long as width of head. Thorax usually arched rather strongly; pronotum short, descending
cephalad quite strongly, depressed below level of head and prescutum;
propleurites as in Psylla; epimeron usually shorter than episternum;
pleural suture oblique, not extending to middle of lateral extremity
of pronotum, as is the case in Aphalara. Prescutum usually about
as long as broad, narrowed conspicuously cephalad. Legs usually
slender; hind tibiee with two or three black spines at apex on inner
side and one outside. Wings hyaline, membranous; radius, media,
and cubitus diverging at same point from basal vein (R+M+Cu),
and cubital petiole (f+Cu) wanting. Type of genus—Trioza urtice Linneus. Apparently no species
has yet been designated as the type of this genus. Because urtice
is both typical and one of the first known species, it is here designated
as the type. This is a very large genus and many of its species are difficult to
distinguish, as is usually the case in large genera. The same is true
of Psylla and Aphalara. Under this generic name there have been
described a number of species which differ sufficiently to warrant
the erection of other genera for them. The synopsis of species pre-
sented in a former paper (Crawford ’11a) has been entirely made over
and is now much more usable than before. All the species described
from America have been included so far as possible, so that it is also
much more complete than before. Descriptions of the genus, as formerly defined, may be found in
Scott 76:551, and Froggatt ’01:273. Synopses of genera, including
Trioza, have appeared in several papers, as in Loew ”78:609; Maskell
°89:164; Crawford ’1la:423. The genus is redefined here, however,
and the descriptions of both genus and species are based on some
characters not heretofore used. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 75
SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES,

a', Posterior tibise with three black spines on inner side, and one outside; pronotum
usually long. 31, Antenne not longer than width of head; body large, robust; wings large. , Vertex and notum with short pubescence; vertex light colored, rather fiat, not
coarsely punctate. . .bakeri Crawford.
. Vertex and notum not pubescent; vertex black, bulging lobately in front, very
coarsely punctate breviantennata, new species. ¥. Antenne distinctly longer than width of head, seldom more than twice as long. c!, Vertex and thoracic dorsum more or less pubescent. @, Pubescence long, prominent; wing veins without sete; membrane of wings
transparent; second marginal cell unusually large; genal cones about half
as long as vertex. diospyri Ashmead. @, Pubescence very short; wing veins with conspicuous sete; membrane
darkened by numerous punctural dots; second marginal cell not unusually
large; genal cones as long as vertex. e!, Body large; wings smoky or fulvous; seta on veins prominent. mericana Crawford. @, Body rather small; wings only slightly fulvous; sete not prominent. mexicana minuta Crawford. c?, Dorsum of thorax not pubescent. d', Genal cones not or scarcely more than half as long as vertex, not strongly
divergent; female genital segment very elongate and styliform. @!, Female genital segment three-fourths as long as rest of body; styliform
prolongation more than twice as long as basal portion; posterior margin
of male anal valve angulate; antenn twice width of head. prozimata Crawiord. @. Female genital segment not over half as long as rest of body; styliform
prolongation one to one and a half times as long as basal portion; pos-
terior margin of male anal valve arcuately rounded; antennz less than
twice width of head. f}. Clypeus very large; styliform prolongation of female genital segment
usually much longer than basal portion; genal cones bluntly
rounded... ongistylus Crawtord. ‘f?. Clypeus not large; styliform prolongation of female genital segment
usually not longer than basal re (sometimes longer): genal cones
acute at apex. .. .--.collaris Crawford. @, Genal cones more than half 3 as long as vertex, more divergent; female
genital segment not styliform. é. Forewing with four brown macule on posterior margin; costal margin
strongly arched; Rs short; genal cones rather short, scarcely two-thirds
as long as vertex. quadripunctata Crawford. Feomeeern eer cet cto Riaatalee deena fetriente Pilesetl omc th iriayaa

long as vertex. ‘fi. Antenne nearly or quite twice as long as width of head; forewings
broadly rounded at apex; Rs short, straight; legs very slender; genal
cones about two-thirds as long as vertex; hind tibie occasionally with
only two spines at apex inside. albifrons Crawford. ‘f?. Antenne not over one and a half times width of head; wings not broadly
rounded; Re longer; genal cones often as long as vertex; legs not
always slender. g'. Antenne one and a half times width of head; vertex not or scarcely
pubescent; posterior lobe of male anal valve large (fig. 358). h.* Body brownish red to orange; thorax strongly arched; dorsum not

pubescent. frontalis Crawford,

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

16 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 1@, Body dark reddish brown; thorax less strongly arched; dorsum
with slight and inconspicuous pubescence,

Srontalis suleata Crawiord. g’. Antenne one and one-fourth times width of head; vertex distinctly

pubescent; posterior lobe of male anal valve smaller, more slender. obtusa Patch. Posterior tibixe with two black spines on inner side and one outside; pronotum

usually shorter. Forewings more or less maculated or banded. Notum distinctly pubescent; maculation of wings very extensive and con-

spicuous. .-lobata, new species. Notum not pubescent; maculation much less extensive. d!. Media and cubitus bordered with a dark band; marginal cellsdarkened; Rs
long and curved; female genital segment rather long; anal valve of male
obtriangular. - -tripunctata Fiteh,

@, Posterior margin darkened from tip of clavus to tip of wing and through
both marginal cells; Rs short, straight; female genital segment, short;
male anal valve small, with a rectangular posterior lobe. arizone Aulmann. bt

 

    

   

 

b. Forewings not maculated or banded. c, Preescutum not distinctly longer than broad. d', Antenne not over twice as long as width of head. , Genal cones usually fully or very nearly as long as vertex (sometimes
scarcely over two-thirds as long), divergent, acute to subacute; Rs long
and curved,

s'. Forewings very broadly rounded at apex; thorax and vertex often more
or less conspicuously striped or banded with yellowish white on a
dark ground color ---varians Crawford. f. Forewings more ot less angulate at apex, not broadly rounded; thorax
and vertex not as above. g'. Vertex conspicuously bulging forward; male anal valve with posterior
lobes short; female genital segment usually moderately long, some-
times short... salicis Mally.

. Vertex not conspicuously bulging forward; female genital segment
very short, not longer than preceding ventral sclerite; genal cones
not very slender; forewings usually (not sivas) fulvous; vertex
without deep sulcus. --maura Forster. @. Genal cones not over two-thirds as long as vertex, ot less. f'. Forewings short, seldom over 2.5 mm. long; body small. g'. Genital segment of female short, less than half as long as rest of

abdomen; genal cones short, about half as long as vertex. salicis Mally. g?. Genital segment of female nearly or fully as long as rest of abdomen;
genal cones two-thirds as long as vertex. 12, Female genital segment with a short styliform prolongation, very

acute; clypeus small. -nicaraguensis Crawford,
Female genital segment without styliform prolongation; dorsal
valve longer than ventral, acute; wings sometimes 2.8 mm. long;
male forceps enlarged and hood-shaped at apex. .stylifera Patch. ‘f?. Forewings more than 2.5 mm, long, usually at least 3 mm. ; body larger. (See stylifera.) g'. Wings broadly rounded at apex; antenne about one and a half
times width of head. 2, Male anal valve with a long posterior lobate prolongation with long. hairs; forceps large, clavate at tip... _ .aylmerize Patch. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDA OF THE NEW WORLD. 77

12, Anal valve without long posterior lobe but posterior margin arcu-
ately rounded caudad; forceps strongly arched laterally; ver-
tex bulging in front; hind tibia usually with three apical spines
inside... albifrons Crawford. o®, Wings angulate at apex, sometimes broadly so. IA, Female genital segment more than half as long as rest of abdomen;
antenne about one and one-third times width of head; wings
rather narrowly acute at apex... alacris Flor. ¥. Female genital segment less than half as long as rest of abdomen;
antenn@ about one and a half times width of head; wings rather
broadly acute at apex. -salicis Mally. @. Antenne about two and a half times as long as width of head; body and
wings small; pronotum rather long; apical spines on hind tibice very
small... viridis Crawtord. ©, Praescutum distinctly longer than broad; body large; gall-makers. d', Antenne twice as long as width of head; head nearly or fully as broad as
thorax, Galls on leaves of Magnolia; nymph not pubescent. magnolize Ashmead. @. Antennie about one and a hali times width of head; head usually much
narrower than thorax. Galls on leaves of Persea (avocado or aguacate);
nymph pubescent... -hoebelei Kirkaldy. TRIOZA BAKERI Crawford. Trioza bakeri CRawrorp ’10a:
Trioza montana CRawrorD ’11

 

Length of body 2.2 mm. ; length of forewing 3.5. General color
brown, light to dark; dorsum and abdomen sometimes darker;
antenne black at tip. Vertex and notum covered with fine short
pubescence. Body large. Head somewhat deflexed, almost as broad as thorax, large; vertex
more than half as long as broad, pubescent, each lobe rounded
broadly in front, with a foveal impression posteriorly on each side
of median line; genal cones about two-thirds as long as vertex,
divergent, acute to subacute, not much deflexed from plane of vertex. Antenne scarcely longer than width of head, a little thicker rela-
tively than in most species of the genus. Thorax broad, arched, punctate, pubescent and slightly pulveru-
lent. Pronotum long, not as conspicuously descending cephalad as
usual. Hind tibie with three inner apical spines. Wings large,
two and two-thirds times as long as broad, acute to subacute at
apex; Rs very long, reaching nearly to apex of wing. Genitalia.— Male —Anal valve triangular in profile, with base
broad and apex roundly acute, slightly longer than forceps; forceps
thick, flattened, somewhat arcuate, apex not acute. Female—
Genital segment large, nearly as long as rest of abdomen; valves about
equal in length, pubescent. Described from one pair from Claremont, California (C. F. Baker);
eight males and females from the mountains of the same locality
(Crawford), collected in June on the foliage of Pinus ponderosa,

 

78 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM,

white fir (Abies sp. ), and a species of spruce (these latter were

described as T. montana Crawford); seven specimens from Placer

and Nevada Counties, California (Koebele), September. The latter

specimens bear the manuscript name of Trioza puberula Riley. Type in author’s collection. TRIOZA BREVIANTENNATA, new species. Figs. 394, 396, 422. Very similar in size and general proportions to T. bakeri; wings
relatively a little shorter. General color light to dark brown, often
very dark; legs and antenne lighter, except latter black at tip; in
light forms the vertex is dark brown to black. Vertex and dorsum
not pubescent as in bakeri, but very coarsely punctate. Similar in many respects to bakeri, but vertex very conspicuously
bulging on each side of median line; genal cones relatively shorter;
antenne a little shorter, scarcely as long as width of head. Thorax
as in bakeri, but not pubescent. Hind tibie with three apical spines
within. Wings large, resembling bakeri. Genitalia — Male —Anal valve as in bakeri, but base of triangle
shorter; forceps similar, subacute at apex, sides almost parallel. Female.—Genital segment similar, but dorsal valve a little longer
than ventral. Described from two males and one female from Claremont, Cali-
fornia (mountains), collected by C. F. Baker, no data with them. Type in author’s collection. ‘TRIOZA DIOSPYRI Ashmead. Figs. 179, 356, 360, 519. Psylla diospyri Asumean ’81: 222. Trioza diospyri Rie ’83: 70.—CRawrorp ?10b:

Trioza latipennis CRAWFORD ’10a: 230. Length of body 2.5 mm; length of forewing 4.4; width of head 0.79. General color shining black; middle and hind tibie and all tarsi
whitish; pubescence long and sparse, conspicuous. Head nearly as broad as thorax; vertex more than half as long as
broad, emarginate in front at median line, with a broad shallow
depression on each side discally; genal cones about half as long as
vertex, subhorizontal, not strongly divergent, broadly rounded at
apex, very densely hirsute. Antenne about one and a third to one
and a half times width of head, whitish except black at tip, clothed
very sparsely with long hairs. Thorax rather strongly arched, smooth and shining; pronotum
short, much depressed below head and prescutum; latter narrowly
rounded cephalad. Legs rather long, thickly pubescent; anterior
metacoxal spur unusually long; hind tibie with three apical spines

 

.—Parcn ’12b: 226. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 79

within. Wings much longer than body, very large, apex acute to
subacute, about two and a half times as long as broad; Rs about as
long as M to fureation point; second marginal cell unusually large. Hind wings relatively very small. Genitalia. — Male.—Anal valve with a large, lobate, posterior pro-
longation; anus on aslender dorsal epiphysis; forceps long, somewhat
cultrate in form, erect on basal two-thirds, apex flexed inward, not
acute. Female—Genital segment about half as long as rest of
abdomen; dorsal valve a little longer than ventral, acute. Described from more than 100 specimens of both sexes from the
following localities: West Falls Church, Virginia (Nathan Banks);
Clayton, Georgia (J. C. Bradley), May 18, 1911, altitude 2,000 fect;
Burton, Georgia (Bradley), May 21, 1911, altitude 1,800 feet; Atlanta,
Georgia (Bradley), June 30, 1909; Athens, Georgia (Bradley), June
15, 1909; Austell, Georgia, August 27, 1910; Savannah, Georgia
(Schwarz), April 15, 1884; Thalmon, Georgia, April 28, 1911; Billys
Island, Okefenoke Swamp, Georgia, June, 1912; Crescent City,
Florida (Hubbard), May 23, on persimmons; Tampa, Florida (B. P.
Van Duzee), May 2, 1908; San Antonio, Texas (E. A. Schwarz), May
9, 1907; Devils River, Texas (F. C. Bishopp), May 5, 1907; San
Diego, Texas (Schwarz), April 29. No host plant data accompanies
any of these specimens except the two taken on persimmons in
Florida. This is said to be a very common species on persimmons,
Diospyros virginiana, throughout the southern portion of the country. W. H. Ashmead’s account of the life history of the species is given
as follows (Ashmead ’81:221-223):

In the summer of 1879 I noticed for the first time that the leaves of the persimmon
trees, Diospyros virginiana, in the vicinity of Jacksonville, Florida, were very much
discolored, curled and distorted; on most of them, too, were numerous small, warty
galls. A thorough examination under the curled and twisted parts of the leaves
revealed numerous small, flattened hemipterous bugs, arranged in rows and covered
with a fine mealy or powdery substance; on being disturbed they secrete large watery
globules, the color of milky water. A careful study of these during the past two
years has enabled me to completely work out their life history. By the middle of April they are found in considerable numbers on the young leaves
* * *. At this time, also, they are caught copulating, soon after which the female
begins depositing her eggs. These are very minute, 0.01 of an inch in length, elongate-
ovate, pale greenish in color, with a wavy filament beneath at the thick end, nearly the
length of the egg, extending backward over it. These are laid along the margin of
the leaf without regard to regularity, the female first preparing for their reception
by secreting a threadlike gummy, transparent substance along the extreme edge of
the leaf; she then fastens them in place by the beak, which adheres securely to the
gummy substance. The eggs hatch in irom five to six days (actual observation) and the leaf from their
punctures curls completely over them. Under this they reside until just bofore
their transformation (last). The pupa then comes forth, attaches itself to a twig or
leaf, and changes into the perfect fly, escaping through a longitudinal slit in the head

 

80 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. and thorax. ‘The young take from four to five weeks to mature, and breed throughout
the summer. ‘The fall brood probably lay their eggs in the crevices of the bark and twigs. ‘These
hatch at the first appearance of spring and feed on the tender new shoots and leaves,
and are those found fully matured by the first or second week in April. The larva is fringed on the margins with long hairs, as in other

species of Trioza. ‘TRIOZA MEXICANA Crawiord. Figs. 210, 340, 399, 531. Trioza mexicana CRAWFORD ?11a:

 

Length of body (female) 2.6 mm; length of forewing 3.6; width
of head 0.87. General color reddish brown, usually dark, occasionally
lighter; head lighter than thorax; antenne whitish on basal third,
remainder black. Vertex and notum slightly pubescent. Head not as broad as thorax; vertex more than half as long as
broad, with a very shallow depression on each side of median line,
rounded down in front toward genal cones; cones nearly or fuily as
long as vertex, rather slender, acute, not very divergent. Antenne
about one and a half times as long as width of head, slender. Thorax strongly arched, punctate, pubescent slightly. Pronotum
long. Jind tibie with three apical spines within. Wings dusky,
membrane covered entirely with fine punctural dots; veins set with
a double row of set; less than two and a half times as long as broad,
broadly rounded at apex. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valvo large, long, front margin straight,
hind margin very arcuately rounded caudad, apex short; forceps long,
sides subparallel except subapically, apex abruptly broadened, black. Female.—Genital segment almost as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal
valve longer than ventral, both slender and acuminate in apical
portion, margin slightly serrate. Described from several males and females collected on a species of
Rhus in the mountains near Cuernavaca, Mexico, altitude 10,000 feet
(Crawford). Type in author’s collection. TRIOZA MEXICANA MINUTA Crawtord. Body distinctly smaller than in the species. ead similar, Pro-
notum comparatively shorter. Wings smaller, less dusky; seta on
veins smaller and less prominent; venational characters similar. Genitalia similar, smaller in male. Described from three females and one male from Oaxaca, Mexico
(Crawford), no other data. Type in author’s collection. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDEZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 81

TRIOZA PROXIMATA Crawiord. Figs. 388, 629,
Trioza proximata CRAWFORD *11a:435. Length of body (female) 3.4 mm; (male) 2.4; length of forewing
3.7; width of head 0.78. General color light greenish yellow; ovi-
positor of female black; antenne black apically. Head small, much narrower than thorax; vertex a little more than
half as long as broad, somewhat bulging in front on each side of
median line, with a deep foveal impression posteriorly on each side;
genal cones short, half as long as vertex, only slightly divergent,
subacute, pubescent. Antenn about twice as long as width of head. Thorax large, broad, strongly arched, punctate; pronotum rather
short, strongly descending eephalad; propieurites broad. Prascutum
very narrowly rounded cephalad. Mesonotum long. Hind tibie
with three apical spines within. Wings about two and a half times
as long as broad, broadly rounded at apex; Rs very olong. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment large. Anal valve about as
long as forceps, triangular in outline, posterior margin angulately
arcuate, anus on an epiphysis; forceps long, curved cephalad, and
arcuate toward each other, rather slender, acutely pointed at apex,
with two ridges of hairs on inner surface. Penis long. Female—
Genital segment very elongate and styliform except at base, nearly
three-fourths as long as rest of body; base large, subglobose; apical
two-thirds styliform, very slender and acuminate, dorsal valve longer
than ventral. Pubescence short. Described from several males and females from Oax
Mexico (Crawford), August, 1910. No host plant da

Type in author's collection. ca and Orizaba,

 

TRIOZA COLLARIS Crawford. Figs. 185, 187, 350, 509. Trioza collaris Crawrorv ’10b:347; ’11a:436.—Paren ’12b:

 

Length of body (female) 2.5 mm; length of forewing 3.7; width of
head 0.72. General color greenish yellow; notum more or less
streaked with brown; abdomen darker dorsad. Very similar in most respects to proximata, differing as follows:
Antenne only about one and a half times as long as width of head;
prescutum more broadly rounded cephalad; wings less broadly
rounded at apex, sometimes subacute. Female genital segment
not over half as long as rest of body, usually less than half; styliform
prolongation not, or only a little, longer than basal portion. Male
genitalia similar, but anal valve roundly arcuate behind, not angu-
lately; forceps similar. 82 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Described from several males and females from Claremont, Cali-
fornia (Baker); Santa Clara County, California (Baker); Santa Cruz,
California (Koebele), August 15, 1885; Los Angeles, California
(Coquillett); Argus Mountains, California (Koebele). Type in author’s collection. ‘TRIOZA LONGISTYLUS Crawiord. Figs. 201, 338, £28,
3; *11a:434.—Paren '12b:227. Trioza longistylus CRawrorD ’102. This is very similar to collaris, differing only in a few minor details. Genal cones bluntly rounded at apex, instead of acute as in collaris;
clypeus larger; preescutum more broadly rounded cephalad. Female
genital segment about midway in relative length between collaris
and proximata; styliform prolongation relatively longer than in
collaris. ‘

Described from two females from Colorado (Baker), no data. Type.—Cat. No. 18083, U. S. Nat Mus. Miss Patch (?12b: 227) assigns to this species several specimens from
northern and central California, but these, I believe, belong to the
species collaris. The two are distinguished with difficulty and it is
possible that they are both one species. Until further evidence is
available to prove this, however, I will not merge the two species

into one. TRIOZA QUADRIPUNCTATA Crawiord. Figs. 209, 336, 360, 527. Trioza quadripunctata CRAWFORD ’10a: 233; ’11a:433,—Paron ’12b:229. Length of body about 2.2 mm; length of forewing 2.5 to 3.3;
width of head 0.71. General color greenish yellow to dark brown,
hibernating forms darker; antenne white on basal two-fifths, the
rest dark; tibie at tip and tarsi brown or black; forewings with four
brown or black spots on hind margin. Tlead much narrower than thorax; vertex very conspicuously
bulging in front, little more than half as long as broad, with a foveal
impression posteriorly on each side of median line accentuating
anterior bulging; genal cones about two-thirds as long as vertex,
acute, divergent, subvertical, only slightly pubescent. Antenne
about twice as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched, coarsely punctate; pronotum moderately
long, much depressed below prescutum. Legs long; hind tibie
with three apical spines within. Wings large, only a little more than
twice as long as broad, costal margin more arcuate than usual, apex
rounded but not broadly so; Rs usually short, straight; with a black
spot at tip of clavus, one between branches of cubitus, one between
cubitus and media, and a fourth between branches of media; spots
sometimes not conspicuous. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 83

Genitalia. — Male.—Anal valve about as long as forceps, posterior
margin moro or less angulately arcuate caudad; forceps long, slender,
slightly curved forward, and arcuate toward each other, inner surface
concave basally, subacute at apex. Female.—Genital segment
almost as long as rest of abdomen, acute at apex, dorsal valvo a
little longer and less acute than ventral. Described from many males and females from Colorado (type);
Los Angeles, California (Coquillett); Bear Paw Mountains, Montana
(Hubbard and Schwarz), September 17; Canastota, New York
(Faure), hibernating on grass stems, March 12, 1913. Miss Patch has
examined a number of specimens from several localities in Colorado:
Boulder, Fort Collins (E. D. Ball), and Palmer Lake (Gillette). Type.—Cat. No. 18084, U. S. Nat. Mus. Because the species seems to be most common in the west the dis-
covery of many hibernating forms in northern New York is especially
interesting and deserving of some attention. The present data does
not show whether the species has a wide distribution, or whether
this portion of New York is merely an isolated point in its distribution. The hibernating forms are very similar in all respects to the summer
forms, except that the color of the body and wings is uniformly

much darker. TRIOZA ALBIFRONS Crawtord. Figs. 7, 188, 344, 361, 514. Trioza albifrons CRAWFORD *10a:231; ’10b:355; '11a:438. Trioza rotundipennis CrawrorD ’10a:236; ’11a:425. Length of- body 1.9 mm; length of forewing 2.4. General color
brown to orange; head brownish, except margin of vertex light;
pronotum whitish; preescutum and scutum with light stripes;
genital segment of male whitish; antenne white on basal third,
remainder black. Similar in many respects to guadripunctata and closely related to
it, differing as follows: Body smaller; thorax narrower, not much
broader than head; vertex bulging less conspicuously in front. Legs more slender and relatively longer; apical spines of hind tibie
small, sometimes only two on inside instead of three. Wings usually
more broadly rounded at apex, without marginal spots which are
present in the related species; venation similar in most respects,
but Rs relatively longer. Male genitalia similar; anal valve less
angulate on posterior margin (profile); forceps shorter. Female
genitalia similar. Described from numerous specimens of both sexes from Stanford
University, California (Crawford), February and March, 1912, on
Urtica holoserecia; Nordhoff, California (Crawford), March, 1911,
on same host; Claremont, California (Baker); Bear Paw Mountains,
Montana (Hubbard and Schwarz), September 17. Type in author’s collection. 84 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM,

Trioza rotundipennis is merely a variant of this abundant species
and not specifically distinct. Although the description of this
species appeared before that of albifrons, the latter preceded it in
the preliminary synopsis and therefore has priority in the name. Both this species and quadripunctata are exceedingly closely related
to the European species urtice, likewise abundant on nettles. Indeed,
it was only after very close comparison that albifrons was not merged
into urticz. The principal difference lies in the male forceps; in
urtice they are constricted midway, broadened distally and terminate
in a conspicuous hook-like process, while in albifrons they are not
constricted midway nor broadened distally and terminate in a
black, subacute tip; they are distinctly shorter and stouter also in
albifrons. T. quadripunctata is usually easily distinguished from albifrons
by the wing markings, but sometimes these macule are less promi-
nent. It is possible that careful life-history studies will show these
two American species to be variants of one species. They are
apparently often found closely associated in their habitats. Nymph.—From 1 to 2 mm in length, according to age, ovate in
shape, flat; color: Pale greenish yellow in youngest forms, brown
to dark brown in older nymphs; latter with a median dorsal white
stripe over entire length, with a fringe of spine-like processes from
entire margin and a double row of eight spines on dorsal white stripe. Present in large numbers, singly, on both surfaces of the leaves of
Urtica holoserecia without flocculence; move about readily and
freely. Eggs, nymphs and adults found together in February to
April at Stanford University and Nordhoff, California. Adults
probably winter over and lay eggs in the early spring. There seem
to be several continuous generations. ‘The eggs are deposited on the under side of the leaves in great
numbers; they are whitish, pyriform in shape, with the large end
attached to the leaf, and the other end terminating in an acute point;
they stand erect or nearly so. ‘TRIOZA FRONTALIS Crawlord. Figs. 184, 342, 385, 358. 359, 362, 513, 518,
Trioza frontalis CRAWFORD ’10a: 230; 710b: 353; *11a: 426. Trioza similis CRawrorp ’10b: 352. Trioza similis fovealis CRawrorv ’11a: 438. Length of body 2 mm. ; length of forewing 2.9 to 3.2; width of
head 0.65. General color brownish red, abdomen brownish; genal
cones and antenne usually black, at least apically. Head narrower than thorax, deflexed; vertex a little more than
half as long as broad, somewhat bulging in front, with a foveal
impression (often deep) on each side of median line; genal cones

 

 

; THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 85

acute, divergent, two-thirds or fully as long as vertex, slightly
pubescent. Antennz about one and a half times as long as width of
head, segment III thicker than succeeding segments. Thorax strongly arched, punctate. Hind tibiw with three apical
spines on inner side. Wings about two and a half to two and two-
thirds times as long as broad, narrowly rounded to subacute at apex;
Rs usually rather short. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment very large; anal valve very
large, produced caudad into a large, broad flap on each side; much
broader at apex than at base; apical margin concave, with a fringe
of long hairs; with a ridged rib extending into posterior lobe as well
as axis. Forceps large, clavate, arcuate inward, apex coarsely
toothed or serrated. Female.—Genital segment almost as long as
rest of abdomen, acute, dorsal valve longer than ventral, apex
slender. Described from several specimens from Colorado (no data); sixteen
males and females from Placer County, California (Koebele), on
Amelanchier alnifolia Nuttall, September 24-30, 1885. These latter
are very similar to obtusa Patch, a species found on another species of
Amelanchier in Maine. Type.—Cat. No. 18085, U.S. Nat. Mus. TRIOZA FRONTALIS SULCATA Crawford. Trioza suleata CawrorD ?10a:233. Trioza frontalis sulcata CRAWFORD ’11a:436. The differences between the varietal form and the species are slight. Coloration depends on the age of the individual largely, and perhaps
this may account for the difference between them. Color dark
reddish brown. Prescutum distinctly less arched than in species;
notum finely and inconspicuously pubescent. Described from several specimens from Colorado (no data). TRIOZA OBTUSA Patch. Trioza obtusa Patcu ?11: 18. Length of body 2.1 mm. ; length of forewing 2.6 to 3.1; width of
head 0.77. General color reddish brown; newly emerged individuals
pale green, older ones light reddish to dark, wings often dark and
smoky; vertex often covered with a white powdery substance. Very similar and closely related to frontalis, differing as follows:
Body usually larger, head and thorax relatively distinctly broader,
especially the head; vertex finely pubescent, a little more bulging in
front; genal cones thicker at base, relatively shorter. Antenne only
about one and a fourth times as long as width of head, segment HI
sometimes thickened, often not. Thorax strongly arched, sometimes
very finely pubescent. Wings large, often smoky; Rs very long,
reaching nearly to apex of wing. 86 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Male genitalia similar, except posterior lobe of anal valve is nar-
rower; forceps similar in shape, but apex not toothed, with one
indentation anteriorly. Female genitalia similar. Described from one paratype specimen (female) from Orono, Maine
(Patch), collected on Amelanchier canadensis (Linneus) Medicus, in
July; several from Washington, D. C. (Koebele), April 6-27, 1885;
and Maryland (Koebele), February 22, 1884; these bear the manu-
script name of Trioza amelanchieris Riley, indicating probably that
they were taken on Amelanchier, although there is no data to indicate
this fact. This species is remarkably closely related to T. frontalis, but seems
to be quite distinct, nevertheless. Miss Patch (?11: 19-20) has
recorded some interesting and valuable life-history data for this
species, which is well worth quoting here. ‘The nymphs of this species were found in all stages upon the leaves of Amelanchier
canadensis, They were collected by Mr. William ©. Woods, July 6-27, 1910. ‘They
fed upon the ventral surface of the leaves where their presence was readily detected
on account of the beautiful white, floss-like wax filaments that curled softly up from
the margin of their bodies. These wax filaments are secreted by wax glands which
extend in a single marginal row in the earlier stages, but which in the later stages
occur both on the margin and for a considerable distance mesad on the dorsal surface
of the body. A crescent-shaped area of wax glands surrounds the anus in all the
nymphal stages. TRIOZA LOBATA, new species. Figs. 140, 143, 401. Length of body 2 to 2.7 mm. ; length of forewing 3.1; width of
head 0.76. General color light yellowish brown; abdomen greenish
ventrad; sternum partially, genital segment in both sexes, antennal
segments IX-X and tips of IV-VIII black; forewings extensively
maculated with brown and numerous round darker spots scattered
over the macule. Head a little narrower than thorax; vertex large, not quite twice
as broad as long, pubescent conspicuously, with a shallow depression
on each side of median line, emarginate in front; genal cones scarcely
two-thirds as long as vertex, separated somewhat at base and diver-
gent, rounded at apex, pubescent. Antenne a little less than twice
as long as width of head, conspicuously ringed. Thorax rather strongly arched, covered sparsely with rather long
hairs. Pronotum short, strongly descending cephalad. Meso-
thorax large. Legs short and thick; hind tibiee with two thick black
spines at apex on inner side and one on outer side. Wings large, less
than two and a half times as long as broad, broadly angulate at apex,
veins heavy; maculated conspicuously (fig. 401); marginal cells large,
subequal; Rs long. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 87

Genitalia. — Male—Anal valve with a long caudal lobe on each
side, longer than axis of valve and converging to a narrow tip, reach-
ing a little beyond forceps. Forceps long, slender, narrowed mid-
way, abruptly broadened distad into a T-shaped end; from behind,
arched strongly laterally and appearing acute at end, broad at base. Female.—Genital segment not longer than preceding ventral sclerite,
small, acute, dorsal valve slightly longer than ventral, pubescent. Described from twelve males and females from Los Angeles, Cali-
fornia (Koebele), taken on “a species of Ceanothus’’; one female from
Arizona (Morrison), 1882 (no data). Type-—Cat. No. 18086, U. S. Nat. Mus. This is a very easily distinguished species because of its conspicu-
ously marked wings. The name Jobaéa is Riley’s manuscript name
for this species. TRIOZA TRIPUNCTATA Fitch—not Loew. Figs. 198, 834, 868, 524. Psylla tripunctata Frrcn °51:64.—Riey ’80:62.—LintvER ’93: 64. Trioza tripunctata Timer °84:70.—Mauty °94:154 (Phylloplecta id.? ).—Sirn
°09:110.— Crawrorp ’10a:231, 232; *11a:430.— Parcn
°12:230. Psylla rubi Wause and Rivey °69:225.—Tuomas ’79:17.—Fuuier ’80:62.—Riey

780: 62 (footnote). Length of body (female) 2.6 mm; (male) 2.1; length of forewing
3 to 3.5; width of head 0.79. General color brown to dark brown,
dorsum often black; head lighter; antenne yellowish, black at tip;
legs light brown. Head much narrower than thorax; vertex rather flat, with a slight
depression discally on each side of median line, more than half as
long as broad, front margin a semicircle; genal cones about two-
thirds as long as vertex, thick at base, subacute, usually not deflexed
much from plane of vertex, pubescent. Antenne about one and a
half times width of head, slender. Thorax broad, arched strongly. Pronotum short. Legs rather
long and thick; hind tibiw with two large spines on inner side, one
outside. Wings large, about two and a half times as long as broad,
subacute at apex, with three brown bands, one on Cu and extending
into basal subcostal cell, another on M, and the third on distal half
of Rs; marginal cells small; Rs long. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment rather large; anal valve pro-
duced caudad into a long distally rounded lobe (in lateral view);
forceps long, curved forward, tapering to an acute point at apex,
with three sharp edges. /emale—Genital segment acute at apex,
from one-half to three-fourths as long as rest of abdomen, dorsal
valve a little longer than ventral. 6060°—Bull. 85—14——7

88 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Described from several males and females from: Washington,
District of Columbia (Koebele), February to May, 1884; Virginia
(no data); Holderness, New Hampshire (Koebele); Jamaica, Long
Island (Sirrine), October 11. Reported (Patch ’12b:230) at Orono
and Sebago Lake, Maine, on blackberry bushes, August, 1904 and
1911; said to be abundant on this host plant. Reported also from
several localities in New York State. The nymphs and pup are yellowish and pellucid, the head and
thorax being a deeper yellow than tho rest of the body; eyes are
dark red; meso- and metathorax sometimes pale green. They are
surrounded by flocculent, white fluff on the ventral surface of the
blackberry leaves (Patch 12b:230). Both nymphs and imagines
found in August. TRIOZA ARIZONZ Aulmann. Figs. 189, 357, 963, 515. Trioza marginata CRAWFORD 10a: 232; 710b:356.—Partcu 712b: 228. Trioza arizone AULMANN °13:39 (new name). Length of body 2 mm; length of forewing about 3; width of head
0.70. General color light brown, mesoscutellum often with two
darker stripes; antenne and legs lighter colored; abdomen pale
ventrad. Head narrower than thorax, much broader than .prothorax; vertex
slightly impressed discally and postocellar areas well elevated, about
twice as broad as long, scarcely emarginate in front at median line. Genal cones about two-thirds as long as vertex, slightly divergent,
subacute, sparsely pubescent. Antenne about one and a half times
as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched, moderately broad; pronotum very short,
much longer than prescutum. Hind tibie with two small spines
at apex within and one outside. Wings slender, nearly three times
as long as broad, subacute at apex, with a more or less pronounced
brown band along posterior margin. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve with a relatively large lobate pro-
jection caudad on each side, somewhat as in maura; forceps slender,
simple, acute, and slightly toothed on inner margin apically. Female.—Genital segment short, scarcely longer than preceding
segment, very acutely pointed; dorsal valve slightly longer than
ventral. Described from one male and several females from Arizona (no
data), and one from Fort Yuma, Arizona (Hubbard), January 20. |

Type.—Cat. No. 18087, U.S. Nat. Mus. (Type of 7. marginata.) This species shows a marked resemblance to T. maura, but is
sharply differentiated from it by the maculation of the wings. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 89

TRIOZA MAURA Forster. Figs. 190, 192, 354, 365, 370, 371, 372, 517, 520, 822. Trioza maura Foerster °48:94.—Meyer-Diir °71:387.—Lozw '82:242; °84:144
(nymph); °88:24.—Osnanin ’07:376.—Suie ’11:10 (bibliography
and good figures) —Partcr 712b: 228,
Trioza helvetina Mever-Diir ’71:388, 391. Trioza nigrifrons CRAWFORD ’10a:230; '10b:351. Trioza fulvida CrawrorD 10a: 231; 10b:358. Trioza fulvida similis CRawrorp *10b: 359. Trioza aurantiaca CRAWFORD ’10a: 231; 10b:360; ’11¢:628. Length of body 1.8 to 2.3 mm; length of forewing 2.8 to 3.5;
width of head 0.65 to 0.73. General color variable from light orange
yellow to dark reddish brown or dark red; vertex and cones usually
reddish, sometimes pale on margin, occasionally dark brown or even
black; antennz white usually on basal third or half, the rest orange
to black; abdomen pale ventrad, though sometimes not; legs orange,
tarsi often black. The autumn forms are usually darker than the
spring forms. Head narrower than thorax; vertex rather flat, a little more than
half as long as broad, with front margin broadly and evenly rounded
and raised slightly, with a shallow or deoper foveal impression discally
on each side of median line. Genal cones two-thirds to three-fourths
as long as vertex, divergent, acute, slightly pubescent, more or less
deflexed from plane of vertex. Antenne about one and a half times
as long as width of head, nearly always whitish at base. Thorax strongly arched, punctate; pronotum short; legs slender to
rather stout; hind tibie: with two black spines at apex on inner side
and one without. Wings variable in length, usually about two and
a half times as long as broad, subacute to narrowly rounded at apex,
usually clear, but sometimes more or less fulvous or smoky, anal angle
black; Rs usually long, rarely shorter and straight. Genitalia.— Male. —Anal valve short, with an ovate, lobate pro-
longation caudad reaching about to base of forceps, longer than
broad; anus on a slightly elevated ring above caudal prolongation. Forceps long, curved forward, very acute, and acuminate, sharply
edged. Female.—Genital segment very short, scarcely longer than
preceding segment, acute at apex, dorsal valve slightly longer than
ventral. Described from numerous males and females from the following
localities: California: Laguna Beach (Crawford), August, 1911, on
Saliz lasiolepis; Los Angeles (Coquillett); Placer County (Koebele),
September, on Saliz lasiolepis; Nevada County (Koebele), Septem-
ber; Folsom (Koebele), August 18, 1885, on Salix longifolia (these
bear the manuscript name of Trioza saliciperda Riley); San Mateo

 

90 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. (Koebele), September, on Salix lasiolepis; Ormsby County, Nevada
(C. F. Baker); Colorado (no data), on Saliz; Santa Fe, New Mexico
(H. S. Barber); American Forks, Utah (Hubbard and Schwarz);
Oregon (Koebele); Easton, Washington (Koebele); Algonquin, IIli-
nois, July 12, 1895. Nymphs, also, have been taken on Salix lasiolepis, showing that
the willows are undoubtedly the food plant of the species. This is a very abundant specios and subject to some variation, as
the above synonymical list shows. After careful examination of
humerous specimens from many localities and comparison with Sule’s
excellent figures (711: pl. 14), it is apparent that all these variants
(formerly described as species) belong to one and the same species,
and, furthermore, that this species is identical with the European
species maura Forster. The distribution seems to be exceedingly
wide. The food plants, both here and in Europe are species of Saliz,
the willows. According to the description by Sule (I have seen no European
specimens) there are some slight differences between the European
and American forms. The head, in the latter, is typically orange
with some black, while Sule described it in the European forms as
typically mostly black. The abdomen, too, in the American forms
is typically white or pale ventrad, while Sule describes the abdomen
as entirely brown. In the American forms, however, these characters
are not constant, and therefore, these differences in description
between the American and European forms are not surprising. The following is taken from Loew (’84:144-145): Nymph flat, 2.5
mm long and 2 mm broad, egg-shaped, glabrous, green, yellow, or
yellow with greenish spots; with a dark brown dorsal stripe and
several cross bands; eyes red; with a fringe of hyaline hair-like pro-
jections around entire margin, about as long as width of brown
bands. Found singly on the under surface of leaves of Salix alba and S.
purpurea; Adults emerge about the first of October and over-winter. In the following May and June the females oviposit. Parasitized
nymphs are black and always on the upper surface of the leaves. It is quite probable that the American forms pass through a similar
life history, since adults may be collected in late autumn. The following two species, 7. salicis and T. varians, are very
closely related to this species and often very difficult to distinguish
from it. Tho male genitalia are very similar in the three species,
differing only in slight details; the female genital segment, however,
shows some specific differences. It is possible that these three
should be considered as one polymorphic species, but since they can
be distinguished it is just as well to regard them as specifically
distinct. 7. marginata is, also, closely related to this group of three
species. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 91

TRIOZA SALICIS Maly. Figs. 191, 195, 196, 202, 335, 337, 341, 364, 387, 516, 525, 526, 530. Trioza salicis MaLty ’94:161.—Crawrorp ’11a:432. Trioza assimilis CRawFoRD ’10a:233; ’11a:438; '11b:503 (name changed to flori). Trioza flori CRawFoRD '11b: 503 (footnote). Trioza pomonz AULMANN ’13:51. Trioza dubia Parc 712b: 226. Trioza nigra CrawForD 7101
Trioza louisianz AULMANN 713:48. Trioza minuta CRawrorD and var. similis CRawronp ?11a:432, 433.

 

; 711b:508 (changed to nigrilla). Very similar to maura in size and proportions; color similar, except
vertex and cones typically dark to black, occasionally light; abdo-
men not white ventrad. Most of the structural difference are slight
and difficult to describe. Vertex lobately swollen in front on each
side of median line, more coarsely punctate. Wings similar, subacute
to narrowly rounded at apex, seldom flavous, usually clear, anal
angle seldom dark. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve similar, but caudal prolongations
shorter, sometimes shorter than broad; forceps often shorter. Female.—Genital segment twice as long as in maura, slender, acute,
dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from many specimens of both sexes from the following
localities: Ames, Iowa (Mally), September to December, 1894, on
Salix sp. ; Stanford University, California (Crawford), September, on
Salix lasiolepis; Santa Clara County, California (Baker); Leona
Heights, Alameda County, California (J. C. Bradley), August; Placer
County, California (Koebele), October (these are labeled T'rioza
pyrifoliz* (%) Forbes: Ormsby County, Nevada (Baker); Colorado;
Easton, Washington (Koebele); District of Columbia, August 24,
1899. I have examined three paratypes (one male and two females) of
T. dubia Patch, and find this species to be identical with salicis. These specimens are from San Francisco, California (Bradley) The
similarity between flori and salicis was noticed in the preparation of
the previous papers, but no males of salicis were then available and
therefore the identity of the species could not be established. The
Iowa forms have relatively shorter genal cones than the western
forms and less divergent, but I believe this is only a minor variation. TRIOZA VARIANS Crawtord. Figs, 194, 369, 523. Trioza varians CRawForD '10ac:231; ’1Obe:361; ’11¢:628. Similar in size and general proportions to maura. Color characters
conspicuous: general color brown to black; vertex dark with a broad
yellow border; cones dark; pronotum orange; prescutum orange on

 

17 have been unable to obtain authentic specimens of this species, and have not included it in the
synoptic table of species. 92 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. hind margin and a longitudinal dorsal stripe; seutum with several
orange stripes; femora black, tibie orange; antenne as in maura;
female genital segment usually dark with an orange spot dorsad. These colors may be much less pronounced in some forms, though
this is typical. Vertex and head rather similar to maura. Wings smoky, seldom
fulvous, usually broadly rounded at apex. Male anal valve similar,
but smaller, as in salicis, distinctly more pubescent; forceps more
pubescent. Female—Genital segment very short, as in maura,
dorsal valve blunt at apex. Described from many specimens from Alta, Utah (Hubbard and
Schwarz), June 30, on Sali sp. ; Banff Springs, Alberta, Canada (Hub-
bard and Schwarz), June 10; Placer and Nevada Counties, California
(Koebele), September; Colorado (Gillette). Type.—Cat. No. 18088, U. S. Nat. Mus. The most typically colored specimens are from Alta, Utah. TRIOZA LONGICORNIS Crawford. Figs. 199, 867, 521. Trioza longicornis CRAWFORD ’10b: 359. This is apparently very close to varians and perhaps identical. The type, and only, specimen on which the description was based
is not before me, and therefore I am unwilling to refer it to varians. It has not been included in the synoptic tables because certain of its
characters are not known to me. The following description is
adapted from the original one. Length of body 2.4 mm; length of forewing 3.6; width of head 0.72. General color greenish yellow, notum slightly darker. Vertex sharply defined on front margin, with two broad depressions
diverging toward front margin from the usual fovew near posterior
margin; emarginate in front at median line; genal cones long, fully
as long as vertex, divergent, acute at apex, pubescent. Wings trans-
parent, about two and a half times as long as broad, broadly rounded
at apex; Rs long; veins yellowish. Genitalia— Female.—Genital segment short, about as long as pre-
ceding ventral sclerite, dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from one female from Vancouver, British Columbia. Type—Cat. No. 18089, U. 8. Nat. Mus. ‘TRIOZA NICARAGUENSIS Crawiora. Figs, 212, 989. 534,

 

Trioza nicaraguensis CRAWFORD '110: 436,
Length of body 1.7 mm; length of forewing 3.1; width of head 0.55. General color lemon yellow; antennz black at tip. Insect small. Head not as broad as thorax, finely punctate; vertex not deeply
sulcate, with a small fovea on each side, bulging forward on each
side of the median line in front; genal cones short, scarcely two-

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 93

thirds as long as vertex, acute, divergent, very slightly pubescent. Antenne slightly over one and one-fourth times width of head, slender. Thorax arched rather strongly; pronotum short. Legs slender;
hind tibize with two very small spines at apex inside and one outside. Wings small, transparent, about three times as long as broad, sub-
acute at apex. Genitalia.— Female.—Genital segment large at base, subglobose,
each valve produced at end into a short, slender, acutely pointed
process. Described from one female from San Marcos, Nicaragua (0. F.
Baker). Type in author's collection. The genitalia are very easily recognizable in this species. TRIOZA STYLIFERA Patch. Figs. 199, 414. Trioza stylifera Parcn '12b :229. Width of head 0.61 mm; length of forewing 2.4 to 2.6. General
color brownish; antenng pale brown, dark at tip. The only specimen before me of this species is a balsam mount con-
taining the head, both wings, and the male cauda of one specimen,
consequently not all the usual characters can be given. Vertex more than half as long as broad, somewhat emarginate in
front at median line; genal cones scarcely two-thirds as long as
vertex, rather strongly divergent, acute at apex, slightly pubescent. Antenne about one and a half times as long as width of head. Because
of its resemblance to certain other species I have inferred that the
hind tibie have two spines at apex on inner side (an uncertain infer-
ence), and have placed it in that category in the synoptic tables. Wings yellowish, broadly rounded at apex, with a slight degree of
angulation at tip of medial vein; Rs short and straight; venation
suggesting albifrons somewhat. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve moderately large, produced caudad
a little (in lateral aspect); forceps nearly as long as anal valve, nar-
rowed midway, then broadened and thinner at apex and forming a
hood. Female.—Genital segment “relatively long and acutely
pointed; the upper plate extends a bit beyond the ovipositor and
is slender at tip” (Patch). Described from one male (paratype?) mounted in balsam (with
thorax and legs wanting), kindly loaned to me by Miss Patch; col-
lected at Brockville, Ontario (W. Metcalfe), October, 1903. TRIOZA AYLMERLE Patch. Trioza aylmerie Paton ’12b :225. Two balsam mounts of this species containing two heads, four wings
and a male and female cauda have been loaned to me by Miss Patch. As in the case of T, stylifera, the inference that the hind tibie possess

94 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. two apical spines on the inner side is based on its resemblance to
certain species with this character. Head about 0.82 mm broad, more than half as long as broad; genal
cones scarcely two-thirds as long as vertex, acute to subacute,
divergent, pubescent. Antenne about one and a half times as long
as width of head, rather thick. Wings rather slender, about 3.2 mm
long, broadly angulate at apex, with a tinge of flavous; veins yellow;
venation typical. Genitalia. — Male.—Anal valve large, with a pair of very long,
lobate processes extending caudad and somewhat upward, from
basal two-thirds of valve; with many very long hairs at end of proc-
esses; forceps rather long, constricted subapically, apex enlarged. Female.—Genital segment longer than preceding ventral sclerite,
but not as long as the two preceding, acute at apex, dorsal valve
a little longer than ventral. Described from portions of one male and one female (paratypes ? ),
mounted in balsam; locality: Aylmer, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
(W. Metcalfe), on “Bilberry,” May 20, 1906. ‘TRIOZA ALACRIS Flor. Figs. 137, 421. Trioza alacris Fuor °61:380, 386, 393, 398.—Loew °82:230; ’86:160; ’88:22.—
Oswantw ’07:372.—Dicket ’05:402,—Tnomas ’91:92,—CrawrorD
712a:86.—Sute 712: 49. Trioza lauri Taraiont-Tozetti, Resocont. Soc. Ent. Ital., 1879:19. Length of body 1.9 mm; length of forewing 3.2; width of head
0.71. General color greenish yellow to light brown; dorsum in darker
individuals more or less striped and streaked with brown; abdomen
often brown; antenne black at tip. Head nearly as broad as thorax, not strongly deflexed; vertex
more than half as long as broad; emarginate in front at median line,
with a prominent sulcate impression on each side of median line and
parallel to it; genal cones scarcely two-thirds as long as vertex,
divergent, subacute, pubescent, not much depressed from plane
of vertex. Antenne about one and a third times width of head,
slender. Thorax not broad, well arched, punctate; pronotum moderately
long, not strongly depressed; prescutum rather large. Legs slender;
hind tibie with two black spines at apex on inside and one outside. Wings long, slender, transparent, fully three times as long as broad,
subacute at apex; Rs short. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve a little longer than forceps, hind
margin arcuate, with long pubescence; forceps rather stout, sides
almost parallel (from side), terminating in a subacute, black point at
apex. Female.—Genital segment nearly as long as rest of abdomen,

 

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 95

acute at apex, valves subequal in length (Sule figures the dorsal valve
as a little longer than the ventral, °12: pl. 32). Described from eleven males and females collected in San Mateo
County and Alameda County, California (O. E. Bremner), November
18, 1911, on Laurus nobilis. These infested trees had been imported
from Belgium several years previous. The species is well known and
destructive throughout Europe, but so far the San Francisco Bay
region is the only place in this country in which it has been found. Nymph.—The half-grown or mature nymph is light to dark brown,
somewhat mottled with lighter spots, about 1.5 to 2 mm long, ovate
in shape and flat. The entire dorsal surface, including wing pads, is
covered with conspicuous spine-like processes; margin with a fringe
of similar spines. Young nymph pale green, spines smaller. A
white cottony substance is produced by the nymphs, in which they
are wrapped. The leaves of the laurel are badly curled and thickened
by the action of the nymphs, and the insects may be found in con-
siderable numbers within these leaf-rolls or pseudo-galls. The life cycle of the insect in this country is probably similar to
that in Europe, from where these individuals came. Loew thinks
that the adults emerge in May or June, and a second brood appears
in late summer and passes the winter in hibernation, then oviposit
early in the spring. The nymphs from these eggs develop the first
brood of that year. In California the time of emergence may be
earlier because of the more favorable climate. TRIOZA VIRIDIS Crawford,
Figs, 182, 183, 351, 853, 511. Trioza viridis CRAWFORD ’10a:230; ’10b:350. Allotrioza viridis CRawrorp ’11a:446. Length of body 2 mm; length of forewing 2.4; width of head 0.62
General color greenish yellow, female ovipositor black at apex;
antenne brown or black apically. Body small. Head much narrower than thorax; vertex three-fourths as long as
broad, with a deep and conspicuous sulcate depression on each side
of median line and more or less parallel to it; genal cones three-
fourths as long as vertex, divergent, rather thick, subacute at apex,
extending in nearly the same plane with vertex, pubescent. Antenne
over twice as long as width of head, slender. Thorax arched only a little, broad; pronotum moderately long. Hind tibie with two very small black spines at apex on inner side,
one outside. Wings small, transparent, about two and two-thirds
times as long as broad, acute at apex; Rs very short. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment small; anal valve not longer
than forceps, rectangular in outline, about twice as long as broad,
sharply flexed caudad a little at about end of basal third, sides sub-

 

96 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. parallel, apex square, with sharp, black edge. Female.—Genital
segment almost as long as rest of abdomen, large and thick, rounded
caudad, and each valve produced into a short, slender, acute process,
the dorsal one distinctly longer than ventral. Described from one male and two females from Claremont, Cali-
fornia (C. F. Baker), and one female from Los Angeles, California
(Coquillett). Type in author’s collection. TRIOZA MAGNOLLE Ashmead. Figs. 109, 343, 390, 533,
Psylla magnoli# Asumeap ’81: 224,
Trioza magnoliz Ritey ’83: 70.—CRawrorpD 10a: 228,
Allotrioza magnoliz Crawrorp ’11a: 445,

Length of body (female) 2.9 mm. ; (male) 2.1; length of forewing
(female) 3.8 to 4; (male) 2 mm. ; width of head 0.94. General color
greenish yellow; tips of antenne, tarsi, beak, black or brown. Body
large. Head large, nearly or fully as broad as thorax; vertex about twice
as broad as long, with a deep foveal or sulcate depression on each
side of median line, coarsely punctate. Genal cones two-thirds to
three-fourths as long as vertex, thick, divergent, subacute. Antenne
long and slender, twice as long as width of head or more. Thorax large, broad, not strongly arched, coarsely punctate; pro-
notum moderately long, depressed below head and prescutum;
prescutum distinctly longer than broad. Legs long; hind tibie with
two large spines at apex within, and one on outer side. Forewings
large, about three times as long as broad, subacute at apex, trans-
parent; venation resembling that of Paratrioza arbolensis somewhat. Genitalia.— Male.—Abdomen constricted just before genital seg-
ment; latter rather large; anal valve slightly longer than forceps,
caudal margin strongly arcuate, front margin nearly straight, narrow
at apex, pubescent. Forceps moderately broad, front margin bowed
forward, with a black, sharp apex, which is in line with the posterior
edge; caudal margin pubescent. Female.—Genital segment nearly
as long as rest of abdomen, valve subequal in length, acutely pointed,
pubescent. Described from many males and females from Crescent City,
Florida (H. G. Hubbard); Biscayne Bay, Florida (Schwarz), May 10;
Savannah, Georgia (Schwarz), April 15, 1884; Billys Island and
Honey Island, Okefenoke Swamp, Georgia, June, 1912 (J. C. Bradley,
and others). This species according to Ashmead (’81: 224) is a true gall-maker
on leaves of Magnolia glauca, the common bay magnolia of the
southern swamps. Ashmead describes the galls as being “quite

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDM OF THE NEW WORLD. 97

conspicuous on the leaves, of a large size, greenish in color with a
bluish plume, and when fully mature open along the side in the form
of a large, curved lip.” They are half an inch or more in length. Ashmead was unable to find the eggs on the leaves and concluded
that they were deposited beneath the surface within the tissue. Nymphs are abundant in the galls in various stages of growth and
surrounded by a milky fluid which usually almost fills the galls. They are elongate-ovate, over 2 mm. long when mature, flattened,
pale yellow to green, without marginal hairs, not pubescent. He
does not state the times of emergence of the adults, but from the
data accompanying the specimens at hand, it appears to be April

to June. ‘TRIOZA KOEBELEI Kirkaldy. Trioza koebelei Kingarpy '05 : 290,

Very similar to T. magnoliz in size and general appearance, dif-
fering as follows: Color darker, light brown to dark blackish brown;
“head and thorax varying from dark fulvous to blackish, polished,
shining; antenne testaceous except apically; femora dark fulvous
or blackish brown, tarsi and tibiw testaceous except apices of apical
tarsal segments; abdomen smooth, polished, and shining, with a dark
bluish-green gloss.” Head broader than anterior portion of thorax
but distinctly narrower than broadest part; genal cones relatively
shorter and more horizontal than in related species (magnoliz);
antenne distinctly less than twice as long as width of head. Thorax
similar; wings similar, but marginal cells subequal or the second
larger. Genitalia of female similar. According to Kirkaldy’s poor illustration, the malo genitalia are
quite different. Described from two females from Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico,
collected by A. L. Herrera, on Persea gratissima (alligator pear, or
aguacate, or avocado), February, 1906. The specimens are much
lighter in color than those described by Kirkaldy, but they seem
surely to be his species. He describes the head and eyes as being
broader than the thorax, but he undoubtedly meant the anterior
portion of the thorax and not its broadest part. The gall is described as being large, light brown, ovoid with a trun-
cate base, and placed erect usually on the upper surface of the leaves. Height about 6 mm. The insect is said to be very destructive. One late nymph, in the collection before me, is darker in color than
that of magnoliz, and is covered with long sparse pubescent on the
dorsal surface. Genus CECIDOTRIOZA Kieffer. This genus is unknown to me in nature and has not been included
in the synoptic table of the genera. As near as can be determined
from Kieffer’s descriptions, its members come near to Troza magno-

98 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. liz and koebelei. The genus is probably not distinct from Trioza,
but no disposal of it will be made until specimens of its species are
available for comparison. ‘Two species have been described in the genus, one from Argentina,
South America, and the other from Asia. Both are gall-forming
(as are also the two Trioza species mentioned above), the Argentine
form being on Baccharis. CECIDOTRIOZA MENDOCINA Kieffer. Cecidotrioza mendocina Kizrrer ’10 :372. Locality.—Province of Mendoza, in Pedragal and Chacras de Coria,
Argentine Republic; December to last of June. Galls on Baccharis salicifolia. The flower head is greenish, becom-
ing enlarged, thick, three to four times normal size, 8 to 9 mm. long,
and almost as thick; the bractlets are enlarged and produced, linear
and curled at the tip (Kieffer 710: 372). Genus NEOTRIOZELLA Crawford. Head as broad as or broader than thorax, latter narrow; genal cones
long, usually slender, not at all divergent, but closely appressed from
base to tip, acute at apex, usually vertical; vertex more or less plane;
antenne more than twice as long as width of head. Pronotum short,
descending strongly cephalad, much depressed below level of head
and prescutum. Forewings elongate; hind tibiee with three spines
at apex within. Type of genus.—Neotriozella immaculata Crawford. The members of this genus are very peculiar, and easily distin-
guished from other species by the remarkable form of the genal
cones. The original name Neotrioza was found to be preoccupied by
Neotrioza machili Kieffer (1905), and was consequently changed to
Neotriozella (Crawford ’11b: 503, note). SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES,
a', Genal cones longer than vertex; forewings two and a hali to three times as long
as broad. b!. Genal cones slender, acute at apex, whitish; vertex reddish with light margins;

antenne rather slender... -immaculata Crawford . ?. Genal cones moderately thick, less acute at apex, strigate, dark brown; vertex
brown; antenne moderately thick. . -sculploconus, new species. a, Genal cones not longer than vertex; forewings three times as long as broad;
vertex and genal cones black ... laticeps Crawford. NEOTRIOZELLA IMMACULATA Crawiord. Figs. 205, 213, 216, 332, 539. Trioza immaculata CRAWFORD ’10a: 233. Neotrioza immaculata Crawrorp 711: 0. Neotriozella immaculata Crawrorp ?11b:503. Neotriozella ottawanensis Patcr ?12b: 231. Length of body 1.7 mm. ; length of forewing 2.7; width of head 0.59. General color reddish brown to red; thorax lighter than abdomen;

 

 

 

   

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 99

vertex black to reddish with yellowish border; genal cones whitish,
sometimes brown at tip; antenna black; prascutum darker on
anterior third; scutum with four brown stripes; legs light colored. Head deflexed, broader than thorax, surface smooth, slightly
pubescent; vertex broadly and shallowly impressed on each side
of median line, front margin rather sharply defined, slightly emar-
ginate over anterior ocellus. Genal cones longer than vertex, very
slender, acuminate, acute at apex, vertical or even retrose, very
sparsely pubescent. Antenne slender. Thorax arched, narrow, slightly punctate, sparsely and_ briefly
pubescent. Pronotum short; prescutum about as long as broad,
rounded narrowly cephalad. Wings rather long, hyaline, from two
and a half to three times as long as broad, acute to subacute apically. Genitalia.— Male.—Genitalsegment small; forcepsspatulate, broad-
est at apex, a little shorter than anal valve; latter long, broader at
base than at tip, rather densely pubescent. Female.—Genital
segment half as long as rest of abdomen, tapering evenly to a very
acute point; dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from one male from Algonquin, Illinois (Dr. Nason),
the type, and two females from Ames, Iowa (C. W. Mally), May, 1895;
one female from Washington, District of Columbia (Schwarz),
October, 1883; one female “dipped from surface of ocean 94 miles
from Nova Scotia, July 3, 1887.” The latter bears the manuscript
name of T’rioza proboscidia Riley. Miss Patch’s N. ottawanensis, two
paratypes of which I have examined and found to belong to this same
species, are from Ottawa and Aylmer, Ontario, Canada (W. Metcalfe),
May, 1903 and 1905, one of them having been collected on “pine.”

Type.—Cat. No. 18090, U. S. Nat. Mus. NEOTRIOZELLA SCULPTOCONUS, new species. Length of body 1.8 mm. ; length of forewing 2.6. General color
reddish to reddish brown; pronotum and hind margin of vertex
whitish; vertex dark red with light margins; antenne and genal
cones black; legs light brown. Head not, or slightly, broader than thorax, deflexed; vertex as in
immaculata, slightly pubescent; genal cones a little longer than
vertex, thicker than in congenors, closely approximate, vertical,
subacute at tip, with rather coarse transverse strie, scarcely pubes-
cent, tipped with orange. Antenne about twice as long as width
of head, III a little thicker than succeeding segments. ‘Thorax somewhat arched, narrow, punctate. Legs slender, rather
long. Wings hyaline, a little more than twice as long as broad, acute
at apex; venation similar in type to that of congenors. Genitalia.— Male.—Genitalia resemble those of immaculata; anal
valve relatively longer and produced more into a posterior lobe;
forceps broadest subapically, flattened at apex. 100 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Described from two males from California, one from Placer County,
the other from Castle Peak, Nevada County, both collected by
A. Koebele in September. Type.—Cat. No. 18091, U. S. Nat. Mus. This is close to immaculata, in some respects, differing chiefly in
head characters. One of the two specimens bears the manuscript
name of Trioza frontalis Riley. NEOTRIOZELLA LATICEPS Crawiord. ‘Figs. 206, 214, 349, 538

Trioza laticeps CRAWFORD ?10a: 233. Neotrioza laticeps Crawrorp ’11a: 450. Neotriozella laticeps Crawronn °11b:503. Length of body 1.6 mm. ; length of forewing 2.7; width of head 0.62. General color dark brown, thorax lighter; head and genal cones
black. Head strongly deflexed, distinctly broader than thorax, slightly
punctate; vertex rather sharply defined on margin, scarcely impressed
discally, slightly emarginate over front ocellus; genal cones not
longer than vertex, acute, more abruptly converging to apex than in
immaculata, vertical or retrose, slightly pubescent. Antenne very
slender. Thorax arched, narrow, punctate, slightly pubescent. Wings
hyaline, narrower than in immaculata, relatively longer usually,
subacute at apex. Genitalia.— Female.—Genital segment almost as long as rest of
abdomen, very acute at apex; dorsal valve longer and larger than
ventral, very acute. Described from one female collected by G. R. Pilate in Louisiana. ‘This is very close in many respects to immaculata. Type.—Cat. No. 18092, U.S. Nat. Mus. Genus CEROPSYLLA Riley. Ceropsylla Ruey 88: 76. Triozoida CrawForp ’11b: 491. Head deflexed, not as broad as thorax; vertex more or less plane,
except postocellar areas conspicuously elevated, bulging lobately in
front between antennal bases, with front ocellus not or scarcely
visible from above; genal cones short to long, separated but not
strongly divergent, vertical. Genw swollen close behind antennal
sockets; clypeus at least moderately large (very prominent in john-
sonii). Antenne usually not over twice as long as width of head. Thorax arched; pronotum short; strongly descending cephalad,
depressed below level of vertex and prescutum. Hind tibiw with
two apical spines within, and one outside. Wings hyaline, usually

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 101

acute at apex; basal vein (R +M-+Cu) relatively longer than in most
species of the genus Trioza, distinctly more than one-fourth the length
of the wing (very long in siderozyli); M and Cu sometimes petiolate
at base, or with a distinct tendency toward such a character. Type of genus.—Ceropsylla siderozyli Riley. The two species of Triozoida Crawford (’1lb: 491) are closely
enough related to Riley’s species to justify placing them in the same
genus and making Triozoida a synonym of Ceropsylla. The long basal
vein (unusually long in the type-species), the type of origin of M and Cu
with the tendency toward becoming petiolate, the general appearance
of the vertex and genal cones all denote a mutual relationship. This
was overlooked at the time of erecting the genus Friozoida, but since
then specimens of C. sideroryli have become available for comparison,
and, therefore, this change is made. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a!, R+M-+Cu longer than Rs; genal cones short, scarcely half as long as vertex;
vertex very conspicuously bulging in front; M and Cu scarcely petiolate. sideroryli Riley. a?. R4+M-+Cu chorter than Rs; genal cones nearly or fully as long as vertex. b!, M and Cu ecarcely or only slightly petiolate; clypeus eubglobose; genal cones
as long as vertex; antennz whitish on basal third........californica Crawiord. 8, Mand Cu distinctly petiolate; clypeus elongate, vertical, nearly as long as genal
cones and similar in shape; genal cones not quite as long as vertex; antenne
black from base to tip.....00000000..20 . .joknsonti Crawford. CEROPSYLLA SIDEROXYLI Riley. Figs. 138, 407. Ceropsylla sideroxyli Riuey °83: 76. Length of body 2.1 mm; length of forewing 2.9; width of head
0.74. General color greenish yellow on the upper side, abdomen and
venter green; prescutum brownish on anterior half or two-thirds;
head with a black area between antenne, extending up around front. ocellus and including genal cones; antenne brown, greenish on basal
half. Head much narrower than thorax; vertex with posterior ocelli
greatly elevated, rest of surface smooth, almost flat, a little more than
half as long as broad between eyes, emarginate in front at median
line (when viewed dorsally); view from in front shows vertex acutely
angled downward with a subcircular elevated area around front
ocellus; antennal sockets and genal cones more inferior than in
Trioza; cones small, between and below antennal sockets, almost
parallel to each other, vertical, blunt at apex, with a few long sete. Eyes large. Antenne not over twice as long as width of head, flat-
tened and broadened at apex. Thorax arched rather strongly, broad, finely strigate. Pronotum
short; mesopleurites large; legs moderately stout. Wings long,

102 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. transparent and clear, about two and a half times as long as broad,
acute at apex; basal vein unusually long, longer than Rs, dark and
heavy; Rs short; first marginal cell much larger than second. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve large, almost as broad as long;
posterior margin strongly arcuate, anterior nearly straight; forceps
as long as anal valve, slender, sinuate (posterior view), and very acute
at apex. Female. Genital segment short, not much longer than
preceding ventral sclerite, not very acute at apex, dorsal valve a little
larger and longer than ventral. Described from eight males and females from Lake Worth, Florida
(E. A. Schwarz), June. Type.—Cat. No. 18093, U. S. Nat. Mus. Riley stated that the larva of this species is very peculiar in form,
“Full-grown larve were found by Mr. Wittfeld at Georgiana, in
southern Florida, on the under side of leaves of Sideroxylon masti-
codendron, embedded in small, scattered, cup-shaped excavations,
which on the upper side of the leaves appear as rough, elevated pus-
tules. A white waxlike (not flocculent) excretion covers the dorsal
surface of the larva and has suggested the generic name” (Riley). The immature forms of the other two species are not known yet. CEROPSYLLA CALIFORNICA Crawtord. Trioza californica CRaw¥orD *10a:234. Triozoida californica CRawForD ’11b:492. Length of body 2 mm; length of forewing 3.35. General color
dark brown to orange, head almost black, darker than thorax; abdo-
men greenish white ventrally, dorsally black; legs uniform reddish
brown; antenne brown to black, except segments II to III whitish. Head almost as broad as thorax, finely punctate; vertex about
half as long as broad, bulging in front roundly and emarginate at
median line; postocellar areas not as much elevated as in the other
two species; genal cones large, about as long as vertex, vertical,

. divergent slightly, subacute, coarsely punctate or strigate; clypeus
globose, not unusually large. Eyes large. Antenne scarcely twice
as long as width of head, not very slender. Thorax arched; preescutum moderately long, narrowly rounded
cephalad. Wings hyaline, about two and a half times as long as
broad, acute at apex; R+M-+Cu and R very heavy and margined
with black; anal angle narrowly black or brown; Rs short; M and
Cu sometimes slightly petiolate; marginal cells subequal. Genitalia.— Male.—Forcops (from side) seythe-shaped, with sharp
edge cephalad; (from behind) swollen on basal half, apical half
abruptly very slender and acuminate, arcuate outward, pubescent;
anal valve short, with a long posterior lobate process from apical

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDA OF THE NEW WORLD. 103

half at right angles to axis of valve. Female.—Genital segment short,
not much longer than preceding segment, dorsal valve a little longer
than ventral, subacute. Described from eight males and females from: Claremont, Cali-
fornia (C. F. Baker), Laguna Beach, California (Baker); Los Angeles,
California (Coquillett); Argus Mountains, California (Koebele),
April; Boulder, Colorado (S. A. Rohwer), on Saliz rostrata (bebbiana),
May 2, 1908. Type in author’s collection. The three specimens in the collection
of the U.S. National Museum bear the label Trioza ichnewmonia
Riley, » manuscript name. CEROPSYLLA JOHNSONII Crawiord. Figs, 156, 158, 498,
Triozoida johnsonii Crawrorp *11b: 492. Length of body 2.2 mm; length of forewing 3; width of head 0.78. General color light brown; vertex shining black; prescutum brown;
hind legs light brown, others dark or black. Tfead moderately broad, not quite as broad as thorax, scarcely
punctate; postocellar regions unusually elevated; vertex smooth
between posterior ocelli, roundly bulging in front and less emarginate
at median line than in californica; anterior bulging less acute than in
sideroxyli and more so than in californica; genal cones nearly as long
as vertex, conspicuously separated from base to apex, vertical,
blunt at tip, sparsely pubescent; with the elongated clypeus extend-
ing downward and visible behind and between cones, as long as latter
and appearing as a third cone. Eyes large. Antenne about twice
as long as width of head, inserted almost directly in front of genal
cones instead of at the side as in most other species of the family. Thorax strongly arched; pronotum and prescutum rather stout. Wings transparent, almost three times as long as broad, slender,
acute at apex; basal vein not as heavy as in californica; M and Cu
distinctly petiolate; Rs short; second marginal cell much larger
than first. Genitalia.— Male.—Forceps almost as long as anal valve, simple,
converging uniformly from base to tip, arcuate, toothed at apex,
rather densely pubescent; anal valve with a short, subacute lobate
process caudad from subapical portion of axis, pubescent. Described from one male collected at Belize, British Honduras,
by J. D. Johnson. No other data are given. Type in author’s collection. This species, in general, is more closely related to sideroxyli than
to californica, but in wing characters it is more closely related to
the latter. 6060°—Bull. s5—14——8

104 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. HEMITRIOZA, new genus. Head much narrower than thorax, deflexed; vertex not raised
platelike; genal cones not long, divergent; clypeus small. Eyes
very small. Antenne not more than twice as long as width of head. Thorax arched quite strongly; pronotum short, depressed below
level of head and prescutum, descending strongly cephalad; pro-
pleurites as in Trioza. Hind tibie with three apical spines within
and one outside; basal tarsus of hind legs without apical clawlike
spines. Wings short, membranous; media and cubitus often with a
long or short petiole or without one (varying on wings of individual) ;
basal vein long. Male often much smaller than female. Type of genus.—Hemitrioza sonchi, new species. This genus is distinctly triozine in general form, but in wing vena-
tion it approaches Psylla. Its position seems to be more or less
intermediate between Psylla and Trioza, hence the name. HEMITRIOZA SONCHI, new species. Fig. 402,
Trioza sonchi Rrvey (nomen nudum), Proc. Amer. Ass. Adv. Sci., 82:319.—AULMANN

13:55. Length of body, 1.7 mm; length of forewing, male, 2; female, 2.5. General color, red to orange; antenne white, black at tip; beak
black; fore and middle tibie and all tarsi whitish; wings with a
broad reddish band across the middle and three spots on hind mar-
gin. Head and thorax coarsely punctate. Male much smaller
than female. Head rather small relatively; vertex more than half as long as
broad, with a large foveal depression on cach side of median line,
emarginate in front over ocellus; genal cones not quite as long as
vertex, broad at base, subacute, widely divergent, subvertical, pubes-
cent. Eyes very small. Antenne about twice as long as width
of head, ITI thicker than succeeding segments. Thorax rather strongly arched, broad; pronotum short; scutum
large. Wings hyaline, relatively short, about twice as long as broad,
conspicuously colored as described above; petiole of media and
cubitus variable in length even on wings of an individual; radial
sector very short; marginal cells subequal. Hind wings very small. Genitalia.— Male.—Forceps about half as long as anal valve, thick
at base and converging to apex to a sharp toothlike point, arcuate
somewhat; anal valve rather large, elliptical (from side view),
broadest at middle; forceps and anal valve quite densely pubescent.—
Female.—Genital segment short, a little longer than preceding seg-
ment, dorsal valve longer than ventral,

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 105

Described from three males and two females from Virginia, October
9, 1881, on Sonchus arvensis; one male and three females from Wash-
ington, District of Columbia (E. A. Schwarz), June; many males,
females, and nymphs from Atlanta, Georgia (J. C. Bradley), July 6,
1909. Type.—Cat. No. 18094, U. S. Nat. Mus. The nymph of this species is distinctly triozine in form, being
bordered completely by a dense fringe of long, white, hair-like
processes, so characteristic of Trioza species. Subfamily PSYLLIN.As. Head more or less deflexed, sometimes perpendicularly so; vertex
quadrate, semicircular, or subtriangulate; gene produced into vari-
ously shaped lobes or cones beyond end of vertex; frons covered
by gene, visible only as a very small sclerite bearing front ocellus. Antenne typically ten-segmented, long or short. Thorax usually
well arched; sclerites of thorax variable, as described under tribes
and genera. Hind tibiz often with a spur at base, with five to twelve
black spines at apex; basal tarsal segment of hind legs with a pair of
black claw-like spines at apex. Wings variable from thick to hyaline,
rhomboidal to elongate-ovate, seldom, if ever, ovate and at the same
time acutely angled at apex, as in Trioza; media and cubitus always
with a petiole. There are grouped in this subfamily several genera not heretofore
associated together. Several genera formerly placed in Aphalarine
have been transferred to this group because of obviously close rela-
tionships one to another. The relative length of the cubital petiole
Qf£+Cu) and the discoidal subcosta (R) has been the basis for sep-
arating certain of these genera into one or the other of Aphalarinaw or
Psylline, but this character is of little value and often separates
widely two closely related species, or even two specimens of the same
species. A comparison of forms at opposite ends of the subfamily series
does not show any apparently close similarities, and yet with the
many intermediate forms before us, we readily see the inter-relation-
ships and similarities of the various genera. The group has been,
for convenience, divided into four tribes: Pachypsyllini, Euphyllurini,
Arytainini, and Psyllini. The principal and most distinctive characters of this subfamily are
the concealed frons, the presence of genal cones or lobate processes,
the presence of the apical claw-like spines on the posterior basal tarsus
(not limited, however, to this group), and the presence of a cubital
petiole (f+Cu). The following synoptic table shows the relation-
ships of the tribes and genera to each other to a certain extent,

106 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. SYNOPSIS OF GENERA. a!. Vertex quadrate, flat, very large, perpendicularly inclined, or nearly so; wings
seldom ovate. ‘Tribe Pachypsyllini. b'. Praescutum, pronotum and vertex perpendicularly inclined; wings very long,
thomboidal, subhyaline. - Uhleria, new genus. &, Only the head and sometimes the pronotum perpendicularly inclined. cl. Wings subhyaline, not rhomboidal; antenne distinctly longer than width of
head; genal cones rather large. . - Tetragonocephala, new genus. ©. Wings thick, opaque, mote or less thomboidal; antenne short; genal cones
small; vertex often not quite perpendicular, broadest at apex; insects gall-
forming Pachypsylla Riley. @?. Vertex not quadrate, narrowed distinctly anteriorly, not perpendicularly inclined,
but sometimes strongly descending. b, Forewings strongly rhomboidal, usually thickened and opaque; vertex flat;
gene produced into two transverse contiguous lobes on same plane with vertex. Tribe Euphyllurini. c!, Head and pronotum vertically inclined; eyes not covering propleurites; wings
only semiopaque; dorsal head and thorax pubescent. Katacephala, new genus. @. Head deflexed, but not perpendicularly inclined; eyes receding strongly,
covering propleurites; wings opaque; head and thorax not pubescent. Euphyllura Forster. 62. Forewings elongate-ovate, sometimes with a rhomboidal tendency (see Eupha-
lerus propinquus), usually hyaline or subhyaline, rarely opaque; genal cones

not as above. c. Pleural suture of prothorax extending to middle of lateral extremity of pro-
notum, which is more or less swollen and knob-like; propleurites subequal
in length (see fig. 1) -Tribe Arytainini. a’. Vertex large, flat, more or less as in Luphyllura, with eyes strongly recessive;
genal cones with vertex forming a uniformly flat surface; wings often
subopaque... --Buphalerus Schwarz,

@, Vertex smaller, less flat, with eyes less recessive; genal cones not as above;
wings usually subopaque to hyaline. é. Genal cones rounded at apex, not acutely conical, more or less parallel to
plane of vertex; vertex bulging on each side of median line; thorax
usually less strongly arched... - Arylaina Forster. &. Genal cones acutely conical, perpendicularly inclined; vertex not bulging
in front on each side of median’ line; antenna rather long; wings
hyaline; thorax well arched Psyllopsis Loew. @, Pleural suture of prothorax extending obliquely to posterior part of lateral
extremity of pronotum, or not attaining to it at all; episternum longer than
epimeron.. Tribe Psyllini. a’, Vertex with a longitudinal, whitish ridge along each side of median line,
with a furrow outside of and between the two ridges; genal cones short

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

and usually separated at base; antennae long. . .. Mitrapsylla, new genus. @. Vertex without such ridges and furrows; genal cones various, usually
conical - -Psylla Geotiroy. Tribe PACHYPSYLLINI. UHLERIA, new genus. Head, pronotum, and praescutum perpendicularly inclined, with
mesothorax exceedingly thick dorso-ventrally and anterior part of
head about on same level with the ventral surface of mesothorax;

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICR OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 107

vertex very large, flat, square; genal cones small, subconical, flexed
outward. Thorax very large; pronotum short; mesonotum ascending
vertically to scutum, coarsely punctate. Legs thick. Wings very
long, subhyaline, rhomboidal; cells long and narrow. Type of genus.— Uhleria mira, new species. ‘This is a very aberrant and unusual genus, showing, however,
marked relationships to other Pachypsyllini genera. UHLERIA MIRA, new species. Figs. 114, 115, 411. Length of body 3.9 mm. ; length of forewing 4.2; width of head 1.05. General color brown, variegated with flavous; an indefinite flavous
stripe extending up each side of vertex over pronotum and on each
side of praescutum, and meeting at posterior side of latter and
extending as one median stripe over scutum; pleure variegated. Body very large. Vertex nearly square, very slightly broader than long, with a
shallow fovea on each side of median line, coarsely punctate; genal
cones about one-fourth as long as vertex, flexed outward, rather acute
at tips, slightly pubescent. (Antenne broken off.) Thorax very large, coarsely punctate. Pronotum short, broader
at lateral extremities; praescutum relatively small. Mesoscutum
exceedingly large, strongly arched. Wings about three times as long
as broad, flavous and somewhat thickened, subhyaline or semi-
opaque; posterior apical margin angulate; marginal cells very
elongate and narrow; pterostigma rather large. ‘The genitalia of the single specimen (apparently a female) before
me have been removed. The abdomen is very large at base and
converges to a small apex. Described from one female with no locality data, in the United
States National Museum collection. It is probably an American
species, however. Cat. No. 18095, U.S. Nat. Mus. s such a remarkable and interesting species that it has seemed
worth while to describe it, even without any locality data, in the
hopes that future collecting will bring to light additional specimens. ‘The name given to this species is that applied, in manuscript, to the
same insect by Riley. It was apparently named after Dr. Philip
Uhler. TETRAGONOCEPHALA, new genus. Head, and sometimes pronotum also, perpendicularly inclined;
vertex flat, quadrate, rarely converging slightly toward front; genal
cones rather large. Thorax strongly arched; pleurites of pronotum
rather broad. Wings subhyaline, more or less elongate-ovate, cells
long and narrow; pterostigma wanting. Type of genus.—Tetragonacephala flava, new species. 108 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. TETRAGONOCEPHALA FLAVA, new species. Figs, 128, 129, 418. Length of body 2.7 mm. ; length of forewing 4; width of head 0.92. General color flavous, with seven small black spots on mesonotum;
antenne black at tip. Head vertical; vertex large, almost square, flat, punctate; genal
cones about half as long as vertex, slightly divergent, rounded at
apex, a little longer than broad in same plane with vertex. Antenne
about one and a third times as long as width of head, slender. Thorax
strongly arched, punctate; pronotum moderately long, ascending. Legs long, a little longer than in Katacephala. Wings long, about
two and a half times as long as broad, hyaline, scarcely rhomboidal,
broadly rounded at apex; marginal cells long and narrow; ptero-
stigma wanting. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment partially retracted into pre-
ceding segment, very hairy; anal valve very large and broadly ovate,
from caudal aspect; forceps long, gradually enlarging toward apex,
with apical fourth converging again to a point; with long hairs on
caudal surface. Described from one male from Brownsville, Texas (H. S. Barber),
May 13, 1904. Type—Cat. No. 18096, U. S. Nat. Mus. Genus PACHYPSYLLA Riley. Pachypsylla Riley *83:71. Dorsum strongly arched; body robust. Vertex very large, almost
square, flat except apical margin rounded down, nearly or quite
perpendicularly inclined. Genal cones small, subconical, divergent. Antenne short, seldom longer than width of head. Thorax large
and broad; propleurites broad. Legs rather short. Wings more or
less rhomboidal, often only slightly so, thickened, variously colored
and maculated; marginal cells long and narrow; pterostigma present;
veins usually setigerous. Type of genus.—Pachypsylla venusta Osten Sacken. This is a very interesting genus, whose distribution seems to be
limited to the United States. The members are gall-makers on
several species of hackberry (Céltis spp. ), and apparently on no other
plants. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a’, Body very large; length to tip of folded wings over 5 mm. ; wings maculate apically. Gall large, spherical, polythalamous, on twigs or petioles..venusta Osten Sacken. a?, Length not over 4 mm. to tip of folded wings. Gall smaller, monothalamous. WU. Vertex and thoracic dorsum pubescent; forewings scarcely rhomboidal, about
two and a half times as long as broad, with a subapical, oblique, whitish band. Galls on leaves. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 109

¢!, Body moderately large, seldom less than $ mm, long to tip of folded wings. Gall mammiform, on under side of leaf, more or less pubescent, concave
on upper side of leaf... .-mamma Riley. ©. Body emall, seldom over 2.5 mm. to tip of folded wings; gall blister-like on
both sides of the leaf, raised only slightly above surface of leaf,
c-vesiculum Riley. 2, Vertex and dorsum not pubescent; forewings more rhomboidal, not much over
twice as long as broad, more or less wrinkled. Galls on petioles or small
twigs. c!, Pterostigma indistinct, not black; head and thorax more or less flavous. @, Forewings uniformly brownish. e-gemma Riley. @, Forewings finely mottled in apical portion. -dubia Patch. @, Forewings mottled and spotted, with an oblique, clear band subapically. pallida Patch. @. Pterostigma black, prominent; head and thorax black, marked with flavous;
marginal cells less narrow than in other species, the first shorter and more
V-shaped than second; antenne black; wings with a smoky band along
anal and apical margins and extending along branching of veins toward
base. Galls oblong-oval, located on twigs or base of larger limbs just
beneath the bark. ‘inteneris Mally. The following species are too closely related to ¢c.~mamma and
c.vesiculum to be easily distinguishable and have not been included
in the synopsis:
coastersicus Rex '90:618.—TuckERr ’07:69.
c.-cucurbita Ritey ’90:621.—Beutenmt rer ’92:276,—StepBins ’10:33.
c.-globulus Riey ’9'
c-minuta Taney (MS? ).—Tucxer ’07:69.
c.-pubescens RitEy ’90:620.
c.-umbilicus Rirey ’90:619.
rohweri CockERELL ’10:180. PACHYPSYLLA VENUSTA Osten Sacken. Figs. 65, 66, 255, 451. Peylla venusta OsrEN SackeN °61:422. Pachypsylla venusta Rey °83:72.—BEUTENMULLER ’9:

Packypsylla c.-grandis Pavey *83:70. Pachypsylla tridentata Parc ?121

Length of body 4.4 mm. ; length of forewing 5.1; width of head 1.2. General color brown to brownish yellow, often more or less variegated
with darker brown; thorax with longitudinal stripes. Body very
large and massive. Head vertical, large, with eyes much narrower than thorax; vertex
very coarsely rugoso-punctate, straight on posterior margin, not. converging toward front, rounded forward between anterior ocellus
and posterior margin but not between eyes, quite coarsely pubescent,
with a small fovea on each side of median line, otherwise plane;
anterior margin slightly arcuate. Genal cones short, small, subacute
at apex, projecting slightly forward from plane of vertex and sharply
depressed and separated therefrom, distinctly divergent, slightly

 
  

 

4.—Matty ’93:137. 110 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. pubescent. Eyes large, extending back over propleurites; anterior
ocellus large, prominent. Antenne short and stout. Thorax very large and robust, broad, very strongly arched, very
coarsely punctate and pubescent. Pronotum long, subvertical,
extending laterad to middle of eyes; lateral margin straight; pro-
pleurites rather long. Prescutum large, arched rather strongly. Wings very large, whitish and partially subhyaline, maculate; about
two and a half times as long as broad, rhomboidal, rather acute at
apex; costal margin nearly straight; marginal cells long, first longer
and larger than second, of similar shape; pterostigma long, distinct,
almost as long as subcostal cell; basal vein elevated on a distinct
callus; veins set with a double row of setz. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment large, conspicuous; forceps
relatively not long, simple, stout, tapering to apex. Anal valve long,
front margin arcuate, posterior margin bulging roundly over middle
two-thirds, emarginate subapically; pubescence long. Female.—
Genital segment fully as long as rest of abdomen, or slightly longer,
acute at apex, narrow; dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from several males and females from Dallas, Texas (E. 8. Tucker); Colorado (Gillette); Kansas (no data). An examination of
a paratype of Miss Patch’s P. tridentata shows it to be identical with
venusta; ‘Cation City, Colorado, on Celtis,” is the data accompanying
her description of this species. ‘The gall is large and spherical, about 1 cm. in diameter, woody,
polythalamous; found on twigs and petioles of Celtis occidentalis. PACHYPSYLLA C.-MAMMA Riley. Figs. 64, 242, 452,
Pachypsylla celtidis-mamma Ruey °76:425; ’88:73; Canad. Ent, 15:158,—Packanp
9: ; 704:35,—Coox
°04:844.—Jarvis
—Matty ’93:131-138; ‘Stove °10:121-165
(anatomy). Length of body 2.4 mm. ; length of forewing 2.8; width of head 1.04. General color reddish brown to light brown, very little variegated. Body moderately large, robust. Head large, not as broad as thorax; vertex straight on posterior
margin, somewhat rugoso-punctate, not converging toward front,
rounded downward toward front, finely pubescent, with a small fovea
on each side of median line in rear center; genal cones short, small,
subacute, divergent, extending slightly forward from plane of vertex
and depressed and separated therefrom. Thorax large, very broad and strongly arched, coarsely punctate
and pubescent. Pronotum long, not quite vertical, lateral margin
straight, short; propleurites rather short; praescutum long and
broad. Wings moderately large, whitish, scarcely hyaline, covered

   
 

 

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLID# OF THE NEW WORLD. 111

with numerous small impunctations over entire surface, each spot cov-
ering from three to five impunctations; with a band nearly free of
spots extending from near tip of Rs obliquely to tip of Cu,; about two
and a half times as long as broad; first marginal cell smaller than sec-
ond; veins with a double row of seta. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment rather elongate; forceps not
long, simple, slightly tapering to tip; anal valve long, similar in shape
to P. venusta, arcuately bulging on hind margin and emarginate sub-
apically. Female.—Genital segment about as long as rest of abdo-
men, similar in shape to that of venusta. Described from many males and females from Ames, Iowa (C. W.
Mally); Kansas (no data); Colorado (no data); several points ia
Texas: Plano (E. S. Tucker), October, November; Wills Point (F. C.
Bishopp), March 15, 1904; Dallas, November to March; Ithaca, New
York, 1893. In the Fifth Report of the U. S. Entomological Commission (1890),
pages 614-622, Riley describes the galls of several species of this genus. The adult insects of some of these species he has described in another
paper, but for several closely related to c.-mamma he has described
nothing but the gall. No authentic specimens of his species c.-aster-
iseus, c.-umbilicus, c.-pubescens, c.-globulus, c.-cucurbita and c.-
cucurbita var ?, are available, and therefore, with no description of the
insect extant, nothing can be done at present, except to disregard
these species until some knowledge of them is obtained. In all
probability, all of these species are only variations of the species
c.-mamma, since the insects are said to be very similar and the differ-
ences in the galls are not great. In the collections at hand there are
large numbers of specimens belonging to and closely related to this
species, forming a large series more or less continuous in variation. In all this series there are almost no structural differences at all, the
only variations being in size of body and maculation of wings. The
size of the body varies almost continuously from somewhat larger
than the size given for c.-mamma to almost as small as c.-vesiculum. The spotting of the forewing varies in intensity within certain limits,
but always the oblique, white band is present apically; the margins
of this band are often darker than the rest of the wing surface, and
sometimes a very dark band about as broad as the light band borders
the latter on the inside. Although there exist in the series at hand
seyeral interruptions in continuous variation it is quite probable that
more extensive collections will fill these gaps and demonstrate that
this is a very widely variable species, instead of many species as stated
by Riley. In a large collection of galls one notices many variations in form
and size. It is this fact that has given rise to many of the species
listed above. After much careful study Mally (’98:136) has stated

 

 

112 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. that these gall variations have no specific significance. He describes
a wide range in form variation from the typical perpendicular,
mammiform gall to a short, rounded gall without the nipple, or
even concave at the end. He further states that a great many of
these different galls were placed singly in pill boxes and the adults
bred out. With a few possible exceptions, all the adults thus
bred out were typical c¢.-mamma. A few he thought might be
varietal forms. He concludes, and correctly I believe, that gall
variations such as are described above have little or no specific
significance. ‘These several species listed above are therefore either
identical with ¢.-mamma or are varietal forms of it. PACHYPSYLLA C.-VESICULUM Riley. igs. 68, 241, 292, 454. Packypsylla celtidis-vesiculum River ’88b: ’90:618.—Bevurenutuwer ’92:275;
0 Janvis 06: 65.—Srepsins 710:33. Very close to ¢.-mamma, differing as follows: Much smaller, about
2 mm, long to tip of folded wings, rarely over 2.5 mm., less robust;
similar in general coloration except genal cones distinctly lighter
than vertex; head usually less perpendicular. Genitalia relatively
smaller. Wing venation not exactly similar (see figure). Galls
distinctly different, blister-like and similar on both sides of leaf,
never mammiform or elongate; often scarcely raised above surface
of leaf. Described from many males and females from Ames, Iowa (Mally),
and from Ithaca, New York (Crawford), bred from Ciéltis galls,
October, 1912. PACHYPSYLLA C.-GEMMA Riley. Figs, 67, 243, 453. Pachypsylla celtidis-gemma PRitey ’88:74,—BEvTENMULLER ’92:275.—Matty ’98: 138,

Length of body 3.2 mm. ; length of forewing 3.3; width of head 1.2. General color yellowish brown, variable in shade; head and thorax
dirty yellow with a tinge of brown. Body moderately large, robust,
surface glossy, not pubescent. Head almost vertical, much narrower than thorax; vertex large,
straight on posterior margin, not converging toward front, not
pubescent as in preceding species, with a shallow fovea on each side
of median line, punctate; genal cones small, short, rounded apically,
projecting outward and slightly forward from plane of vertex,
sharply depressed and separated therefrom, divergent, pubescent. Antenne very short, scarcely as long as width of head. Thorax very large, massive, strongly arched, glabrous and very
finely punctate. Pronotum not very long, almost vertical, lateral
margin straight. Wings broad, large, rather rhomboidal, light
brown throughout, coriaceous, about twice as long as broad, sides

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 113

subparallel basally, rhomboidal apically, rather narrowly rounded
at apex; marginal cells shorter than in typical species, but of similar
form, first shorter than second; pterostigma short, indistinct; veins
with double row of sets; one specimen presents the anomaly of
the entire absence of the second marginal cell in one forewing and
the reduction of it to a very small cell in the other. Genitalia.— Male—Genital segment short; forceps rather small,
simple; anal valve rather large, tapering roundly to apex on both
margins. Female.—Genital segment about as long as rest of abdo-
men, dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from several males and females from Brownsville,
Texas (Jones and Pratt), on Celtis, March 20, 1906; Corpus Christi,
Texas (F.C. Pratt), April 13, 1906; Natchitoches, Louisiana (Cush-
man, and Pierce), on Crategus, March 28, 1907 ; Cadet, Missouri, May,
1885; Des Moines River, Iowa (Mally); Virginia; Washington, Dis-
trict of Columbia (Schwarz), June 1. The record on Cratezgus is the
only instance of any member of this genus occurring on anything
except Celtis. This and the three following species differ from the others in
having the body smooth instead of pubescent, but this scarcely
warrants the recognition of a subgenus or a distinct genus, although
Riley did place ¢.-gemma in the subgenus Blastophysa. PACHYPSYLLA DUBIA Patch. Pachypsylla dubia Parc ’12b: 224,

T have examined a paratype of this and the following species and
both seem to be distinct from ¢.-gemma, though closely related. The
chief difference is in the mottled appearance of the forewing instead
of being uniformly brown. Seven paratypes in the collection of Cornell University, but the
locality is not given for any of them. PACHYPSYLLA PALLIDA Patch. Pachypsylla pallida Paver ?12b: 225. Similar to ¢.-gemma in characters of head and thorax and shape of
wings; color of wings somewhat resembling that of c.~mamma, with
a clear, transverse, oblique band subapically and spotting on each
side of band; this color, however, is less marked than in ¢.-mamma. Described from one paratype from Arizona (no data). PACHYPSYLLA INTENERIS Maly. Pachypsylla inteneris Manx 98: 138. Closely related to c. -gemma, but differing in color and venation, as
described in synoptic table. The characterization there is taken
almost verbatim from Mally’s short description, and it need not be
repeated here. I have seen no specimens of this species. Locality —Ames, Iowa (C. W. Mally), on Celtis sp. 114 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Tribe EUPHYLLURINI. The most characteristic features of this tribe are the rhomboidal
wings and the form of the genal lobes in front of the vertex. Two
species of a new genus, Katacephala, are closely enough related to
Euphyllura to be included in the same tribe although there are
marked differences between the two. It is interesting to note that Katacephala bears certain marked
resemblances to the Pachypsyllini, while Euphyllura grades off into
Euphalerus on the other side. With these intermediate forms before
us it is easy to see the relationships of the various genera of this
subfamily

 

KATACEPHALA, new genus. Head and pronotum perpendicularly inclined; vertex large, con-
verging roundly toward front; genal lobes transverse, contiguous on
inner margin, thicker than in Euphyllura, scarcely differentiated from
vertex. Antenne not much longer than width of head. Vertex and
thoracic dorsum conspicuously pubescent. Thorax broad, and
strongly arched. Legs very short. Wings rhomboidal, but much
more hyaline than in Euphyllura; venation similar to latter; veins
setigerous. Type of genus.—Katacephala grandiceps, new species. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a’, Wings very strongly rhomboidal; antennse not longer than width of head; head
not retrose -. .grandiceps, new species. a®, Wings with rhomboidal angles more rounded; antennz distinctly longer than
width of head; head retrose. arcuata, new species,

 

 

 

KATACEPHALA GRANDICEPS, new species. Figs, 120, 121, 126, 127, 416,

 

Length of body 2 mm; length of forewing 2.7; width of head 1. General color brown to yellowish brown; eyes and genal lobes of
male dark brown to black. Entire body surface clothed with a con-
spicuous pubescence. Body very stout, not large. Head vertical, lying closely against prothorax and forecoxe, as
broad as thorax; vertex broader than long, anterior margin roundly
arcuate, with an arcuate fossal depression parallel with front margin
reaching about half way to the front. Genal lobes large, very thick,
rounded in front, broader than long, lying against forecoxe. Anten-
nw inserted between eye and genal lobe, about as long as width of
head, black at tip. Eyes touching mesopleure; anterior ocellus at
base of genal lobes, apparently remote from front margin of head. Thorax broad, high; pronotum mostly covered by eyes; pre-
scutum, scutum, and scutellum very large; pleurites large. Wings
rhomboidal, semi-hyaline, slightly rugulose, almost twice as long as

 

 

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD, 115

broad; pterostigma very long and narrow; marginal cells long, tri-
angular; veins setigerous. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment small. Forceps slender, sim-
ple, as long as anal valve, curved inward at apex, acute; anal valve
slender, posterior margin sinuate. Female-—Genital segment as long
as rest of abdomen, stout, dorsal valve a little longer than ventral. Described from one pair collected on Long Island, Bahamas, by
E. A. Schwarz, April, 1879, and one pair from Key West, Florida
(Schwarz). Type.—Cat. No. 18097, U.S. Nat. Mus. KATACEPHALA ARCUATA, new species. Figs. 61, 62, 450. Length of body 2.9 mm. ; length of forewing 3.6; width of head 1. General color brown throughout. Body quite large, very pubescent. Head moderately large, vertical, not visible from above, retracted
or retrose, not as broad as thorax, pubescent, punctate; vertex
rounded, without fovex, straight on posterior margin, converging
from middle of eye to front ocellus. Genal lobes moderately large,
contiguous on inner margin, broad, not depressed below plane of
yertex, pubescent. Clypeus scarcely visible between head and
foreeoxe. Front ocellus large, round, prominent. Antenne longer
than in preceding species. Thorax unusually arched, broad, large, densely pubescent. Prono-
tum very long, vertical, in same plane with vertex and almost as long. Prescutum very large, more or less horizontal. Wings large, subhya-
line, maculate on hind margin from margin to media, darker in second
marginal cell, about two and one-third times as long as broad, rather
angulate at apex, semi-rhomboidal; basal costa very thick, densely
pubescent; all veins with a double row of sete; marginal cells elon-
gate, first longer than second; pterostigma long, pubescent. Genitalia.— Female.—Genital segment about as long as rest of
abdomen, similar in shape to Pachypsylla; dorsal valve longer than
ventral. Described from one female collected at Jalapa, Mexico (D. L.. Craw-
ford), August 28, 1910. Type specimen in author's collection. Genus EUPHYLLURA Férster. Euphyllura Forster ’48:93. Body very robust, strongly arched, coarsely punctate, often more
or less spotted. Head deflexed strongly, large, flat, as broad as
thorax; vertex large, usually rather flat; genal lobes rectangular in

shape and about as broad as vertex and not depressed from the level
of vertex. contiguous on inner margin and either conjointly truncate

116 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. or separately rounded slightly in front; anterior ocellus at base of
genal lobes, apparently remote from front margin of vertex. Eyes
large, strongly recessive and covering propleurites. Antenne short,
thick. Pronotum extending far down laterad to a point lower than
base of forewings; propleurites short. Wings rhomboidal, coria-
ceous, not transparent, apex near anterior margin; second marginal
cell often elongate. Type of genus.—Euphyllura phillyre Forster, a European species. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a!, Vertex very deeply emarginate over insertion of antenne, with a prominent,
rounded projection between emargination and front margin of eye; wings strongly
rhomboidal. b!. Wings brown, thick, transversely wrinkled; costa somewhat sinuate. arctostaphyli Schwarz. b*, Wings white, rather powdery, sculpture concealed; costa not sinuate. arctostaphyli neveipennis Schwarz. Vertex not emarginate over antennal insertion, or if so, not deeply; prominent

projection wanting; wings rhomboidal, but not strongly so. b. Forewing bicolored, brown basally and light apically; forceps of male very
slender, emarginate near apex on front margin, without tooth on hind mar-
gin; genal lobes moderately long... -arbuti Schwarz. 8%. Forewings uniformly brown; forceps of male rather stout, not emarginate at
apex, with a distinct tooth on posterior inner margin about one-third the
length from apex; genal lobes short .-arbuticola, new species. EUPHYLLURA ARCTOSTAPHYLI Schwarz. Figs. 32, 34, 279, 431. Euphyllura arctostaphyli ScawARz ’04:235. Length of body 2.2 mm; length of forewing 3; width of head 1.18. General color reddish brown, varying from light to very dark, more
or less conspicuously spotted; head and thorax reddish brown or
brownish yellow; abdomen blood red; legs yellowish; forewings dark
brown with a reddish tinge, more or less maculated with whitish,
often with a prominent white fascia at basal third and sometimes a
whitish area or fascia subapically. Head as broad as thorax, strongly deflexed, rugose-punctate;
vertex broader than long, emarginate over insertion of antenne,
nearly straight on posterior margin; genal lobes a little less than
half as long as vertex, rectangular in shape, scarcely separated from
vertex. Antenne short. Eyes large; ocelli small. Thorax very broad and strongly arched, less rugose than vertex
but very coarsely punctate. Pronotum half as long as prescutum,
ascending, covered laterad by receding eyes; scutum strongly convex. Wings thick, coriaceous, transversely rugose and rugulose, opaque,
more or less maculated and not wholly constant in color, more rhom-
boidal than in arbuti, sides parallel to apical third, about twico as

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WoRLD. 117

long as broad; marginal cells subequal; veins not sinuate; radial
cell large. Genitalia. — Male.—Anal valve long, slender, simple, a little longer
than forceps, posterior edge concave, pubescent; forceps long,
widening slightly toward apex, rounded at apex; posterior view
shows forceps thin and subspatulate apically, densely fringed with
hairs on inner margin. Female.—Genital segment moderately long,
dorsal valve longer than ventral, margin regular, both acutely pointed. Described from 12 males and females from Placer County, Cali-
fornia (paratypes), collected by A. Koebele on Arctostaphylus pun-
gens, September and October; several from Marble Valley, California
(Koebele), July; Siskiyou County, California (Koebele); Oracle,
Arizona (Hubbard and Schwarz); Colorado (Gillette); Easton, Wash-
ington (Koebele); and Big Horn Mountains, Wyoming (C. W. Metz),
August. Type.—Cat. No. 8143, U. S. Nat. Mus. EUPHYLLURA ARCTOSTAPHYLI NEVEIPENNIS Schwarz. Euphyllura arctostaphyli var. neveipennis ScAWARz '04:235. Form and structure similar to species; color variable, as in species;
wings snow-white, sometimes with brown spots on apical margin,
surface rather white-pulverulent in appearance, venation somewhat
obscured. Genitalia somewhat similar, but forceps with the inner
ridge and fringe of hairs much less conspicuous. Described from nine specimens from Placer County, California
(paratypes), collected by A. Koebele together with the typical speci-
mens of the species, and several from Marble Valley, California
(Koebele); Los Angeles, California (Koebele); and Pasadena, Cali-
fornia (Grinnel). EUPHYLLURA ARBUTI Schwarz. Fig. 6. Euphyllura arbuti Scnwanz ’04: 237. Length of body 2.3 mm. ; length of forewing 3.2; width of head 1.3. General color reddish brown to yellowish brown, venter and legs
lighter; wings very light brown, but dark brown to black in front of
claval suture. Body moderately large, robust. Head strongly deflexed, as broad as thorax or broader, rugose,
rather shining; vertex much broader than long, slightly convex;
genal lobes thick, slightly shorter than in arctostaphyli, not depressed
below vertex, a little lighter in color than vertex, very sparsely and
briefly pubescent on front margin. Antenne a little longer than in
preceding species, slender. Eyes very recessive. ‘Thorax very broad and strongly arched, less rugose than vertex,
coarsely punctate. Pronotum as in preceding species. Wings much

118 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. less rhomboidal than in arctostaphyli, thick, coriaceous, almost opaque,
especially on darker portions, about twice as long as broad, trans-
versely wrinkled; first marginal cell small; medial veins and radial
sector sinuate; pterostigma wanting; clavus large. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve long, slender, simple, about one-
third longer than forceps, tip rounded; forceps slender, converging
a little toward apex, posterior edge straight, anterior edge deeply
emarginate near apex making the tip hook-like in appearance,
pubescent. Female.—Genital segment longer than in preceding
species, dorsal valve longer than ventral, both acute at tip. Redescribed from eight males and four females (which are para-
types) from Santa Cruz Mountains, California (Koebele), collected on
Arbutus menziezii during July and August. EUPHYLLURA ARBUTICOLA, new species. This species resembles very closely arbudi in inost respeets, including
size and general color, but differs in the color of the forewing, being
uniformly darker brown and not bicolored, with sometimes a lighter
area across the base; the venter is darker than in arbuti. Body a
little more rugose. Genal lobes shorter, and more squarely truncate;
antenne slightly shorter. Head and thorax similar. Wings some-
what larger, thicker, more rugose; veins even more sinuate. The chief difference is in the male genitalia; anal valve stouter,
relatively shorter; forceps distinctly thicker, without apical emargina-
tion on anterior edge, and with a distinct tooth on posterior edge
inside about one-third the length from apex, broadly rounded at
apex. Described from six males and four females from Chiric Mountains,
Arizona (H. G. Hubbard), on Arbutus arizonica, in September. Type-—Cat. No. 18098, U. S. Nat. Mus. ‘Tribe ARYTAININI. The distinctive characters of this tribe are given in the synoptic
table above. Genus EUPHALERUS Schwarz. Euphalerus Scuwanz’04:239. ‘This genus was erected in 1904 by E. A. Schwarz for the single
species nidifex from Key West, Florida. The addition to the genus
of three new species necessitates a slight revision of the original
generic description. Body robust, surface punctate. Head vertical to subvertical;
vertex broader than long, sides straight between eyes, then converging
to front, truncate at front margin. Genal cones large, broad,
rounded at apex, more or less divergent, not depressed below level

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 119

of vertex, separated thereffom by a slightly impressed line. Anten-
ne short, slender. Thorax very convex transversely and longi-
tudinally; propleurites long and narrow. Wings membranous, more
or less hyaline, sometimes subopaque, oblong-oval or somewhat
rhomboidal. Type of genus.—Euphalerus nidifex Schwarz. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a’. Entire body surface including legs and wings speckled with brown or black dots
and spots; vertex and pronotum very finely punctate, or smooth; eyes scarcely
recessive; genal cones one-half to five-sixths as long as vertex . .nidifer Schwarz. @. Body surface not speckled with brown or black spots or dots; vertex and notum
coarsely punctate; eyes more recessive over propleurites. b', Forewings conspicuously and coarsely rugose; body eurface and legs orange to
brown with numerous white spots; forceps of male not terminating in a long
hook-like process . .rugipennis, new epecies. #, Forewings not rugose, semihyaline, more or less maculated apically. Vertex
and notum very conspicuously vermiculo-punctate or rugose; forceps of male
terminating in a long hook-like procese. c!. Forewings oval or only very slightly rhomboidal; genal cones nearly as long

as vertex; forceps of male slender... +. -vermiculosus, new species. 2. Forewings distinctly more rhomboidal, more maculated; genal cones one-half
as long as vertex, broad; forceps of male very stout and thick. propinquus, new apecies. EUPHALERUS NIDIFEX Schwarz. Figs. 38, 40, 281, 433. Euphalerus nidifer Scuwarz ’04: 153, 239. Length of body 1.9 mm; length of forewing 2.1; width of head
0.90. General color greenish white, speckled with brown or black
spots over entire surface, including legs and wings; antenne tipped
with black on each segment; wings maculated apically and covered
over entire surface with dots. Head deflexed, not as broad as thorax, finely punctate; vertex
scarcely arcuate on posterior margin, almost flat, slightly raised along
median line, rounded broadly on anterior margin, slightly emarginate
over front ocellus. Genal cones large, broad, very obtuse at apex,
varying in length from one-half to five-sixths as long as vertex,
divergent only in apical half, continuing plane of vertex. Antenne
short. Thorax broad, strongly arched, punctate, spotted. Pronotum
moderately long, flat on dorsal surface; praescutum shorter than
scutum. Wings subhyaline, except maculated apically, covered
with dots on veins and membrane, about two and one-seventh times
as long as broad, broadly rounded at apex; first marginal cell larger
than second; pterostigma large. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment relatively large; forceps rather
small, slender, arched, acute at tip; anal valve longer, sides subparal-

6060°—Bull, 85—14——9

 

120 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. lel, rounded at apex, not close to forceps at base. Female.—Genital
segment small and short, dorsal valve slightly longer than ventral and
less acute; pubescence sparse. Described from numerous males and females from Key West,
Florida, and Cayamas, Cuba (Schwarz), on Piscidia erythrina; these
are apparently paratypes; they are labeled Huphalerus ficus (MS)
Riley in the United States National Museum collection—apparently
an earlier manuscript name for the species. One female, also, from
Belize, British Honduras (J. D. Johnson). There is a certain amount of variation in the relative length of the
genal cones and in the color of the body. The specimens from Cuba
have relatively longer genal cones and are more conspicuously spotted. There is an indistinct white broken stripe on the dorsum from the
vertex to the metascutum which scarcely is apparent in the Florida
forms, but is quite distinct in the Cuba specimens. The Belize
specimen resembles most closely the Florida forms. This species has nest-making habits. *

EUPHALERUS RUGIPENNIS, new species. Figs. 134, 406. Length of body 2 mm; length of forewing 2.1; width of head 0.81. General color yellowish orange to reddish brown, with numerous
irregular white spots scattered over surface of body and legs; abdomen
lighter ventrad; legs yellowish. Body medium in size to small. Body surface coarsely punctate. Head large, as broad as thorax, deflexed strongly, subvertical;
vertex slightly impressed discally, not entirely flat, front margin
rounded. Genal cones large, one-half to two-thirds as long as vertex,
broadly rounded, not contiguous at base, divergent, not depressed
below plane of vertex, pubescence white, conspicuous. Eyes large,
recessive over propleurites. Antenne slender, less than twice as
long as width of head, black distad. Clypeus small. Thorax strongly arched, broad; pronotum moderately long; pro-
pleurites narrow; mesonotum long. Legs short, stout. Forewings
somewhat thickened, semihyaline, very conspicuously and coarsely
Tugose, about twice as long as broad, broadly rounded at apex;
pterostigma rather broad at base; radial sector sinuate. Genitalia.— Male.—Genitalia resembling somewhat those of vermi-
culosus; forceps slender, somewhat three-faced, with a black, acutely
pointed tip; anal valve slender, long. Female.—Genital segment
short, thick, acute at apex. Described from twelve males and females from Oracle, Arizona
(Hubbard and Schwarz), on (?) Acacia gregii, July; twelve speci-
mens from Placer County, California (Koebele), on Ceanothus cuneatus,

1A discussion of which see in Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash., vol 6, 1904, pp. 153, 239,

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 121

in September; nine from Los Angeles County, California (Koebele),
on Ceanothus rigidus, in May. These are labeled Cephalopsylla
rugipennis, Riley, a manuscript name. Type.—Cat. No. 18099, U. S. Nat. Mus. The California specimens are uniformly a little smaller, lighter in
color, and the forewings are a little less rugose. There seem to be
no structural differences, however. One specimen of the Arizona
lot is somewhat distinct in a few minor respects and seems to repre-
sent a varietal form of the species. EUPHALERUS RUGIPENNIS IMMACULATUS, new variety. Similar to the species in most respects; body surface finely punc-
tate or very finely rugose, without white spots so characteristic of
the species; genal cones about half as long as vertex, less pubescent. Described from one female from Oracle, Arizona (Hubbard and

Schwarz). EUPHALERUS VERMICULOSUS, new species. Figs. 39, 41, 225, 434. Length of body 2.1 mm; length of forewing 2.4; width of head 0.98. General color greenish white; thorax darker, with numerous irregular
brown spots. Head subvertical, not deflexed below level of pronotum, long, nar-
row laterally, very markedly vermiculo-punctate, fully as broad as
thorax; vertex flat, large, with a small but distinct fovea on each
side of median line posteriorly, sides straigat between eyes, then
converging toward apex, truncate anteriorly; median line scarcely
impressed. Genal cones large, continuous at base, slightly divergent,
broadly rounded at apex, scarcely or not at all depressed below level
of vertex, separated from vertex by a slightly impressed line, pubes-
cence short. Antenne short, with a conspicuous protuberance at
base of insertion. Eyes large, recessive. Thorax strongly arched longitudinally and transversely, coarsely
punctate; pronotum vermiculo-punctate; prescutum rugoso-punc-
tate. Pronotum long, broad, ascending; propleurites long, narrow,
largely concealed behind receding eyes; scutum long, well arched. Hind tibie with a small tooth at base. Wings relatively small,
subhyaline at base, fumate in apical third, often brown along
apical margin, about twice as long as broad, very broadly rounded
at apex, slightly rhomboidal; apical marginal vein often alternately
white and black; marginal cells subequal; radial sector long, curved;
pterostigma short, yellowish; claval suture prominent. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment rather large; forceps slender,
long, with a black, hook-like process at apex, pubescent; anal valve,
large, long, broad, simple, truncate at apex, pubescent. Female.—
Genital segment as in preceding species. 122 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Described from one male from Claremont, California (C. F. Baker),
one male from Eureka, California (H. S. Barber), on Ceanothus sp.,
in May, and numerous males and females from Placer County, Cali-
fornia (Koebele), on Ceanothus cordulatus, in September, and in
Siskiyou County, California. These are labeled in the National
Museum collection Cephalopsylla ceanothi Riley (MS). Type in author’s collection. EUPHALERUS PROPINQUUS, new species. Figs. 131, 400. Closely related to vermiculosus, but readily separated on the follow-
ing characters: Head relatively broader; vertex much broader, more
deeply vermiculo-punctate, without brown spots. Genal cones
shorter, much broader, broadly rounded at apex, with apical portion
turned outward alittle. Wings somewhat rhomboidal, usually with a
brown to black marginal band apically, more or less interrupted;
venation similar, except Cu, distinctly shorter. Genitalia.— Male.—Forceps stout, abruptly narrowed apically into
a long, slender, hook-like process, longer than in vermiculosus, acute
at tip and directed inward. Anal valve more rounded at apex,
stouter. Described from 13 males and females from Arizona, some of them
from the Chiricahua Mountains, collected by H. G. Hubbard in Sep-
tember, on Ceanothus. These bear the label in the National Museum
collection, Cephalopsylla latifrons Riley MS.

Type.—Cat. No. 18100, U. S. Nat. Mus. Genus ARYTAINA Forster. Arytaina Forster ’48: 69. Arytaena Scott 76: 528.—LoEw '78: 596. Psyllopa CRawrorD (n. n.) ’11¢: 628; 712b. Resembling Psylla in many respects and sometimes difficult to
distinguish therefrom; differing chiefly as follows: Genal cones
usually short and very broadly rounded, seldom long and acute as in
Psylla, extending parallel to plane of vertex but depressed below
it, not widely divergent; pleurites of pronotum (see fig. 1) subequal
in length, with pleural suture as in Aphalara. Wings usually more
narrowly rounded at apex, often more or less maculated, spotted or
marked, often less hyaline than in Psylla, but sometimes very similar
to wings of Psylla. In other respects not differing markedly from
Psylla in characters of antenne, thorax except propleurites as noted
above, legs including claw-like spines of basal tarsus of hind legs;
basal spur of hind tibie seldom distinct, if present. Type of genus.—Arytaina geniste Latreille. This is the first species
named in this genus by Férster and should be recognized as the type-

 

 

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 123

species. There is no reason why the genus name should be spelled
Arytzna instead of Arytaina, as Forster first used the name. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a!, Vertex and notum not or scarcely pubescent. b', Forewings conspicuously spotted, maculated, or entirely dark. c!. Wings with numerous brown spots isolated or fused to form two irregular
macul, one apical and the other subbasal; male genitalia simple; body
surface and wings often pulverulent robusta, new species. @. Wings not as above; body surface and wings not pulverulent. d', Wings entirely brown to black, thickened, not at all transparent; forceps

of male bi-lobate, large; genal cones rather large. fuscipennis, new species. d?, Wings with one or two dark macula; forceps of male simple. e?, Genal cones large; head often broader than thorax; maleanal valve simple;
notum often striped. ‘f?. Wings with a longitudinal brown macula between Rs and M; forceps
large, broad, thick... ...geniste Latreille. f?. Wings clear except a conspicuous black spot at tip of clavus and some-
times a faint brown streak across base; forceps smaller, more slender;
thoracic dorsum usually conspicuously striped and mottled. ribesiz Crawford. @. Genal cones small; head not broader than thorax; wings with a brown
band extending along posterior margin, thence toward primary furca-
cation of basal vein; anal valve of male very large, with a large, angular
posterior lobe about half as long as valve; forceps slender. assimilis, new species. 0%, Forewings not conspicuously maculated; hyaline or sometimes slightly fumate
or browned apically. c!. Wings more or less fumate, at least apically; body emall. d', Female genital segment as long as rest of abdomen or longer; anal valve
of male very broad at base, triangular in shape; forceps simple; vertex
not emarginate at median line. . minuta, new species. @, Female genital segment very short; anal valve of male not triangular;
forceps deeply bifurcate at apex, processes slender, acute, parallel; vertex
emarginate at median line in front. -chelifera, new species. 2. Wings entirely clear or nearly so; body small; genal cones very small, short;
antenne short. d@, Female genital segment converging uniformly to apex, not styliform. Forceps of male stout, with a long, large, anterior lobate process at or
near apex; wings entirely clear. ‘amorphe Mally. @. Forceps of male slender, elongate, acute at apex, cultrate; wings some-
times indistinctly fumate at apex - -ceanothw, new species. @. Female genital segment eubglobose at base, with apical portion slender
and styliform, very acute; genal cones as in two preceding species. aculeata, new species. a?, Head and notum conspicuously pubescent; forceps of male short and stout, with
a long, slender, hook-like process at apex; wings brown at apex; vertex bulging

on each side of median line in front... -pubescens, new species. ARYTAINA ROBUSTA, new species. Figs. 1, 50, 50a, 86, 280, 288, 285, 444, 45. Length of body 1.8 mm. ; length of forewing 2.3; width of head 0.95. General color very variable from greenish white to dark brown;

124 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. head often whitish or light brown with ventral surface of genal
cones dark brown, or else uniformly brown to dark brown; thoracic
dorsum very light to dark brown, more or less variegated; abdomen,
venter, pleurse of thorax, and legs usually distinctly darker, often
very dark; forewings variable, either very light with small brown
spots scattered over apical half or often the entire surface, or with
these spots aggregated into a large irregular apical macula and another
just below middle of wing, more or less separated, often with these
macule very dark and more regular in outline and more distinctly
separated by a transparent band. Body surface and wings often
covered with a white powder which lends a whiter color to the insect
and covers more or less the brown areas; very often the body and
wings are glabrous without any powder or with only a slight amount. The latter are uniformly darker in general color. All these characters
vary widely but gradually in a large series. Body rather small, but
robust. Head more or less deflexed, often almost vertical, sometimes less
so, almost or quite as broad as thorax, punctate, often pulverulent;
vertex large, broad, with a deep fovea on each side of median line
diseally, rounded and full on each side anteriorly, postocellar regions
somewhat elevated. Genal cones rather large in comparison to
some of its congenors, occasionally very large, broad at base, broadly
rounded at apex or sometimes more narrowly rounded, more or less
divergent, depressed below plane of vertex, briefly. pubescent. Antenne slender, about twice as long as width of head, or shorter,
black apically. Thorax broad, robust, strongly arched, often pulverulent, punctate. Pronotum rather long, more or less flat, with lateral enlargement. medium to small in size; propleurites rather short. Wings relatively
rather small, subhyaline, variously maculated as described above,
often pulverulent, a little more than twice as long as broad, broadly
rounded at apex; first marginal cell larger than second; pterostigma
very small. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment large; forceps slender, rather
long, arched, cultrate, acute at apex; anal valve long, broadly ovate
when viewed from behind, rounded acutely at apex. Female.—
Genital segment not quite as long as rest of abdomen, acute; dorsal
valye a little longer than ventral and Jess acute, with a tuft of long
hairs midway on dorsal surface. Described from over one hundred specimens of both sexes from
the following localities: Colorado (C. F. Baker), mostly dark forms;
Santa Rita Mountains, Arizona (Hubbard and Schwarz), June;
Flagstaff, Arizona (Barber and Schwarz), July; Williams, Arizona
(H. S. Barber), July; Chiricahua Mountains, Arizona (Hubbard),
June, on Ceanothus fendleri (most of these are lighter forms); Placer

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WoRLD. 125

County, California (Koebele), September, on Ceanothus cordulatus;
Siskiyou County, California (Koebele); Easton, Washington (Koebele). Type in author’s collection. The species seems to be western in its distribution. The indi-
viduals of one locality show the variations mentioned above to a less
extent than individuals of separated localities. ARYTAINA FUSCIPENNIS, new species. Figs, 51, 229, 233, 288, 447. Length of body 1.9 mm. ; length of forewing 2.2; width of head
0.99. General color dark brown, genal cones lighter in male, yel-
lowish white. Head rather strongly deflexed, often almost vertical, about as broad
as thorax, finely punctate ; vertex arcuate on posterior margin,
deeply excavated discally, almost glabrous, emarginate in front at
median line, and bulging roundly on each side of emargination. Genal cones short, broad, rounded at apex, contiguous at base,
slightly divergent, with short pubescence. Clypeus small. Antennse
about twice as long as width of head. Thorax large, broad, strongly arched both longitudinally and
transversely; praescutum rather short. Wings broad, relatively
short, about twice as long as broad, darkly fumate, scarcely hyaline,
subcoriaceous, broadly rounded at apex or very slightly rhomboidal;
first marginal cell large; pterostigma rather small. Genitalia.— Male—Genital segment large, erect; forceps bilobate,
long; inner lobe more slender and acute than outer and somewhat
shorter, and scarcely visible in profile; petiolate base attenuate; outer
lobe large; anal valve larger than forceps, convergent distad, quite
broad at base, simple; pubescence long and dense. Female.—Genital
segment moderately long, stout, rather small; dorsal valve longer and
more acute than ventral; ventral valve stout, blunt at apex. Described from several males and females from: Redwood Creek,
Humboldt County, California (H. S. Barber), on “ White Myrtle,”
in June; Siskiyou County, California (Koebele), on Ceanothus; North
Bend, Bri Columbia (Schwarz), on Ceanothus sanguineus; Orms-
by County, Nevada (C. F. Baker); Colorado (Baker). The U. S.
National Museum specimens are labeled Euglyptoneura tristis
Schwarz, 2 manuscript name. Type.—Cat. No. 18101, U. S. Nat. Mus. ARYTAINA GENISTE Latrellle. Figs. 42, 227, 276, 436,

Poylla genistae LATREILLE 1810: 382.—Loew °77:125. Psylla ulicis Curtis 85: 565. Psylla spartii Harrie, Germar Zeit. Ent., 3: 375.—Fior ’61:358. Arytaina spartii Foerster ’48: 69.—Meyver-Dir ’71:405. 126 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Arytaena ulicis Scorr 176:529. ‘Arytaena genistae Loew '78:597; '88:19.—Scorr *80:132.—Reurer 81: 162.—
Epwarps ’96: 250.—Sute ’05: 4.—OsHanin ’07: 366. Psyllopa magna CRawFoRD "11¢:

 

Length of body (male) 2.1 mm. ; (female) 2.5; length of forewing
3; width of head 1. General color light brown to brown; thoracic
dorsum more or less distinctly striped; genal cones, and often vertex
too, lighter colored; antenne dark, fuscous at base; legs light brown
to yellowish, tarsi yellowish; forewings with a brown macula between
Rs and M in apical half, and a continuous or broken macula on
posterior margin apically. Head broad, often broader than thorax, not strongly deflexed;
vertex large, nearly half as long as broad, with two small fovew as
usual, bulging in front on each side of median line above genal cones,
somewhat emarginate at median line; genal cones nearly as long as
their basal width, broadly rounded at apex and only slightly divergent,
pubescent. Antenne a little more than twice as long as width of
head. Thorax large, broad, not strongly arched. Pronotum long. Hind
tibiw with a small spur at base. Wings hyaline, maculated as de-
scribed above, clongate, more than two and a half times as long as
broad, narrowly rounded at apex; pterostigma small. Genitalia.—Male——Anal valve not much longer than forceps,
simple, pubescent; forceps thick and rather large, somewhat con-
stricted midway, apex broadened and bifurcate with a short posterior
point and a longer anterior process; pubescence silky. Female.—
Genital segment almost as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve
longer than ventral, both acute at apex. Described from many males and females from Woods Hole, Massa-
chusetts (T. D. A. Cockerell), on Spartinum sp. This species is widely distributed in Europe, and probably has been
brought into the eastern part of this country on some nursery stock. The identity of Psyllopa magna with this species was not discovered
until some time after the publication of the description of the former. ARYTAINA RIBESIE Crawtord. Figs. $3, 84, 252, 253, 304, 306, 408, 470,

 

Psyllopa ribesie CRAWFORD ’11¢:

Length of body (male) 2.2 mm; (female) 2.7 to 3.3; length of
forewing 3 to 4; width of head 0.90 to 1.08. General color very light
brown (probably the more immature specimens) to brown or dark
blackish brown; thoracic dorsum with more or less pronounced
stripes; vertex variable from uniform reddish brown to mottled
brown and whitish; abdomen usually darker; antenne dark; fuscous
at base; legs light to dark. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 127

Somewhat similar to genistz in general size and appearance, but
differing sharply in several respects. Head often broader than
thorax; genal cones variable from very broad and not longer than
basal width to narrower and one-third longer than basal width, only
a little divergent, rounded at apex, sometimes rather narrowly
rounded. Antenne usually about twice as long as width of head. Thorax often more strongly arched, large; hind tibie with basal
spur smaller, or wanting. Wings large, hyaline, or sometimes with
a slight brownish tinge, with a black spot at tip of clavus and some-
times a more or less distinct. brown area across wing base, about
two and a half times as long as broad, somewhat narrowed toward
apex; venation similar to preceding species in general; pterostigma
small. Genitalia.— Male —Anal valve much longer than forceps, somewhat
narrowed toward apex; forceps rather short, slender, converging
toward tip, latter subacute. Female. —Genital segment thick at base,
usually about half as long as rest of abdomen, dorsal valve slightly
longer than ventral, both acute or subacute. Described from numerous specimens of both sexes from: Boulder,
Colorado (E. Bethel), on Ribes longiflorum; Fort Collins, Colorado
(C. P. Gillette), on Rhus trilobata, September 27, 1894; Poudr River,
Colorado, ‘‘sweeping on low bushes,” June 28, 1883; Colorado (no
data); Williams, Arizona (Barber and Schwarz), July 27; Ogden,
Utah (Koebele), ‘“‘on currant” (Ribes sp. ), June, 1885; Los Angeles,
California (Coquillett), on Ribes aureum, March 28; same locality, on
Ceanothus divaricatus, June 8, 1887; Placer County, California
(Koebele), on Ceanothus cordulatus %

Type in author’s collection. This species has been known more or less commonly by Riley’s
manuscript name of Psylla ribis, but this is not the same as Miss
Patch’s species of that name. ARYTAINA ASSIMILIS, new species. Figs. 57, 257, 448. Length of body 1.9 mm; length of forewing 2.2; width of head
0.80. General color reddish brown, lighter on dorsum and head. Body rather small, long. Head relatively rather small, deflexed quite strongly, about as
broad as thorax, punctate; vertex arcuate on posterior margin, with
a deep fovea on each side of median line near center, slightly bulging
in front on each side of median line, not strongly elevated on post-
ocellar regions; genal cones rather short, contiguous at base, rounded
broadly at apex, slightly pubescent. Antenne a little more than
twice as long as width of head, slender. Thorax arched strongly, robust, punctate. Pronotum rather long,
flat on dorsal surface; propleurites short. Wings small, sub-hyaline,

128 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. maculate in middle and on hind margin conspicuously so, semitrans-
parent, alittle more than twice as long as broad, broadly rounded at
apex and apical half of wing distinctly narrowing toward apex; first
marginal cell larger than second; radial sector long and curved; ptero-
stigma long, large at base. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment very large, about half as large
as rest of abdomen; forceps moderately long, stout, roundly acute at
tip; anal valve very large, larger than forceps, with a large, lobate
protuberance on hind margin; pubescence short. Described from one male from Claremont, California (Crawford), on
Ceanothus crassifolius. This form is manifestly distinct from A.
ceanothe, but was taken on the same tree and together with the
specimens of the other species. Type in author's collection. ARYTAINA MINUTA, new species. Figs, 60, 234, 286, 446,

Length of body 1.9 mm. ; length of forewing 2.4; width of head
0.88. General color light brown, abdomen darker. Head not strongly deflexed, not quite as broad as thorax, punctate. Vertex with a fovea on each side of median line, arcuate on posterior
margin, with a swollen area on cach side of front ocellus. Genal
cones short, rounded, broad, contiguous at base, divergent, somewhat
descending from plane of vertex. Antenne rather short, slender. Thorax not strongly arched, coarsely punctate. Pronotum rela-
tively rather long, with lateral foveee prominent; preescutum short. Wings small, slender, about two and a half times as long as broad,
hyaline, maculate apically, roundly acute at apex; marginal cells
subequal; radial sector long, straight; pterostigma long, narrow,
yellowish. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment large, rounded; foreeps mod-
erately short, simple, curved; anal valve obtriangular, large, with the
long axis anterior; pubescence sparse. Female.—Genital segment
much longer than rest of abdomen, which is usually rather short,
acute at apex; dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from one male and seven females collected at Claremont,
California (C. F. Baker); several from Los Angeles, California
(Koebele), (Coquillett), on Ceanothus sp., in May. Type in author's collection. ARYTAINA CHELIFERA, new species. Figs. 135, 136, 412. Length of body 1.7 mm; length of forewing 2.3; width of head
0.84. General color greenish yellow; genitalia, tip of antenne, and
venter more or less browned; forewings very slightly fumate, browned
a little darker on apical fourth. Body small. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 129

Head moderately deflexed, almost as broad as thorax; vertex
almost semicircular in outline, conspicuously emarginate in front at
median line and bulging roundly on each side of this. Genal cones
about one-third as long as vertex, divergent, narrowly rounded at
apex, pubescent, considerably below plane of vertex but extending
parallel to it. Clypeus moderately large. Antenne not much longer
than width of head, slender. Thorax long; pronotum Jong and rather flat transversely; pro-
pleurites very short and small. Wings a little less than two and a
half times as long as broad, broadly rounded at apex; hyaline,
slightly rugose, fumate more darkly at apex. Genitalia. — Male.—Genital segment rather small; forceps moder-
ately small, deeply bifureate at apex, the two processes slender, acute,
parallel, the posterior one a, little longer than the other. Anal valve
small, broad at base when viewed from behind. Female.—Genital
segment very short, dorsal valve longer than ventral, ventral very
short; both acute. Described from many males and females from Williams, Arizona
(Barber and Schwarz), July; American Forks, Utah (Tubbard and
Sehwarz), on Purshia tridentata, June 23. These bear the manuscript
name of Brachypsylla purshiz Schwarz. Type-—Cat. No. 18102, U. S. Nat. Mus. ARYTAINA AMORPH Maly. Figs, 53, 285, 289, 441. Paylla amorphze Matix '94:
Psyllopa floridensis Cnawronp ’11¢:629; '12b. Psyllopa ilicis Crawrorp (not Ashmead) ’11e: :629; ’12b. Length of body 1.4 mm. ; length of forewing 1.8; width of head 0.69. General color light greenish yellow throughout. Body very small,
not very robust. Head small, deflexed, about as broad as thorax, punctate. Vertex
areuate on posterior margin, elevated on postocellar regions, with a
distinet fovea and sulcate impression on each side of median line. Genal cones very short, broad, broadly rounded at apex, sharply
depressed below vertex, slightly pubescent. Eyes relatively large. Antenne short, not twice as long as width of head. Thorax relatively long, well arched, coarsely punctate. Pronotum
small, short. Preescutum long, arched. Wings small, subcoriaceous,
whitish, semitransparent, not maculate, about two and two-thirds
times as long as broad, sides subparallel, quite broadly rounded at
apex, very slightly rhomboidal; first marginal cell a little larger than
second; pterostigma long, three-fourths as long as radial sector. Genitalia. — Male-—Genital segment relatively moderately large. Forceps short and thick, with a large lobate process projecting

130 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. horizonatally toward anal valve from near apex; with a tooth at
apex of forceps and one at about the middle of the posterior process. Anal valve long, rather broad, sides subparallel, slightly recurved. Female.—Genital segment not as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal
valve only slightly longer than ventral, very acute at apex. Described from seven males and females from Ames, Iowa (C. W.
Mally) and four from Luverne, Iowa (Mally), and six from West-
point, Nebraska, all on Amorpha canescens, from March to June. ‘The latter specimens in the United States National Museum collection
are labeled Amblyrhina fractiforceps Riley, a manuscript name. After careful comparison of more specimens it seems evident
that the Florida species which I erroneously named Psyllopa ‘ilicis
(Ashmead) in a former paper’ is identical with amorphx. The
Florida specimens are considerably smaller than many of the Iowa
forms, but some of the latter are very small also. In structure they
are very similar. If we allow for a certain amount of variation in
size and minor characters, such as length of antenna, etc., we can not
recognize the two lots as even varietally distinct. The difference in
food habits is interesting but not unusual. The ilicis species of
Ashmead, according to several determined specimens in the United
States National Museum collection, is neither an Arytaina nor an
Aphalara, but belongs to a new genus, Paurocephala. (See p. 43.) ARYTAINA CEANOTHE, new species. Figs. 58, 240, 200, 442. Length of body 1.7 mm. ; length of forewing 2.3; width of head 0.70. General color yellowish to light brown to dark brown; on the darker
forms the dorsum, vertex, and legs are light brownish yellow. Body
very small. Head strongly deflexed, about as broad as thorax, punctate. Ver-
tex arcuate on posterior margin, with a deep and prominent fovea
on each side and often a deep suleate impression also, elevated
roundly on postocellar regions, bulging forward on each side of
median line. Genal cones very short, small, broadly rounded,
much depressed below level of vertex, divergent, not always easily
visible from above, slightly pubescent. Clypeus very large. Eyes
rather large. Antenne about twice as long as width of head, slender. ‘Thorax strongly arched, rather broad and stout, coarsely punctate. Wings small, rather transparent, oblong-ovate, broadly rounded at
apex, about two and one-fourth times as long as broad; second mar-
ginal cell smaller than first; pterostigma nearly half as long as radial
sector; apex of wing sometimes indistinctly fumate. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment rather long, semiovate; for-
ceps very long and very slender, roundly acute at tip. Anal valve

 

1 Pomona Journal of Entomology, vol. 3, 1911, p. 629. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 131

not much longer than forceps, roundly tapering to tip, subacute at
apex. Female—Genital segment almost as long as rest of abdomen,
broad at base, acuminate, very acute at apex; dorsal valve some-
what longer than ventral, equally acute. Described from many males and females collected at Claremont,
California, by D. L. Crawford, on Ceanothus crassifolius; found in
very great numbers and in all stages of development in the middle
of April; three from Los Angeles, California (Coquillett), April,
on the same host plant; twenty-two from Santa Clara County, Cali-
fornia (Koebele), May, on Ceanothus rigidus; eight from Eureka,
California (H. S. Barber), May, on Ceanothus, and one from Scotia,
California (Barber), May; several from Claremont, California, on
Rhamnus sp. Type in author's collection. ARYTAINA ACULEATA, new species. Similar to amorphz and ceanothe in size and general appearance,
with whitish thoracic markings as in the former, and head as in the
latter; differing from both in female genital segment, which is sub-
globose at base and produced caudad into a slender, black, styliform
process not as long as the large basal portion. Wings as in amorphe,
but first marginal cell much shorter and pterostigma much smaller. Described from three females from California, two of them from
Santa Cruz Mountains (Koebele), and the other from Los Angeles
(Coquillet), no data accompanying either, but the latter specimen
was placed with several specimens of ceanothz collected on Ceanothus
crassifolius, April 1, in the same locality. Type.—Cat. No. 18103, U. S. Nat. Mus. ARYTAINA PUBESCENS, new species. Figs. 52, 282, 287, 443. Length of body 1.6 mm. ; length of forewing 2; width of head 0.86. General color light brown, head greenish white, scutellum with several
light-colored stripes. Body small. Head small, deflexed, about as broad as thorax, punctate, con-
spicuously pubescent. Vertex rather flat, pubescent, arcuate on
posterior margin, elevated on postocellar regions, roundly bulging in
front on each side of median line. Genal cones short, broad, broadly
rounded, somewhat pubescent. Antenne short, moderately slender. Thorax arched strongly, coarsely punctate and pubescent. Pro-
notum rather long, arched, with a prominent knob like lateral termi-
nation. Prescutum moderately flat. Wings small, subcoriaceous,
whitish, maculate on apical third, and a macula at base of media;
marginal cells subequal, moderately large; pterostigma not very
large; about two and one-third times as long as broad, slightly
rhomboidal in outline, broadly rounded at apex. 132 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment small, inconspicuous; forceps
small, short, stout, with a black hook-like spine at tip; anal valve
relatively not very long, curved, simple, sides subparallel. Female—
Genital segment short, retracted into abdomen beneath; dorsal valve
longer than ventral, with a prominent convexity dorsad; ventral
valve short, acute at tip, with a long projection laterad toward dorsal
convexity. Described from numerous males and females collected in Ormsby
County, Nevada, by C. F. Baker, and four specimens from Colorado
(Baker); fourteen from Placer County, California (Koebele), Sep-
tember, on Purshia tridentata, eleven from Nevada County, California
(Koebele), September, on same host, and four from Siskiyou County,
California (Koebele). Type in author’s collection. Genus PSYLLOPSIS Loew. Psyllopsis Lorw ?78:587. Head deflexed rather strongly; vertex not sharply defined on
anterior margin but merged into genx; genal cones perpendicularly
inclined, acutely conical, divergent, not continuing plane of vertex. Antenne at least moderately long. Thorax well arched; pleural
suture of prothorax as in Arytaina, but pronotum not knoblike at
lateral termination. Wings ovate, subhyaline, usually with a
pterostigma. Type of genus.—Psyllopsis frazinicola Forster. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a’. Antenne about two and a half times as long as width of head; first marginal cell
not twice as large as second; male anal valve very broad in lateral aspect. frazinicola Forster. irst marginal cell three times as

_..mericana, new species. a’, Antenne over four times as long as width of hea
large as second; male anal valve slender...

 

PSYLLOPSIS FRAXINICOLA Férster. Figs. 21, 47, 230, 280, 439. Psylla fraxinicola Férster ’48:73.—Mever-Dir °71:399.—Scorr 76: 544.—Loew
177: 138. Psyllopsis fraxinicola Lonw *78: 588; ’88: 14.—Revrer ’8
Epwarps °96:234.—Surce  ’06:
Fevt 11:39. Paylla viridula Forster 48: Mever-Dir ?71: 399. Psylla frarinola Mever-Dt

Psylla unicolor Fior *60:479; 76

Psylla chlorogenes MEYER-DUR 7

Length of body, 2.5 mm. ; length of forewing, 3.2; width of head,
0.90. General color, greenish-yellow throughout. Head strongly deflexed, not quite as broad as thorax, punctate;
vertex anteriorly roundly sloping down toward genal cones, without

 

153.—Scorr ’86: 281.—
-—OSHANIN °07:348,—

   

   
   

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 133

sharp marginal line in front differentiating it from gene. Genal cones
moderately long, conical, divergent, rather acute at apex, slightly
pubescent, deflexed from plane of vertex and descending almost
vertically. Antenne slender, about two and a half times as long as
width of head. Thorax strongly arched, coarsely punctate; pronotum long, ascend-
ing toward prescutum; latter rather long. Wings moderately large,
oblong-ovate, hyaline, slightly flavous, a little more than twice as
long as broad, broadly rounded at apex; pterostigma long, closed,
yellow; radial margin with sete. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment large; forceps relatively short,
shaped like an ax blade, narrow at base, very broad at apex and
convexly rounded, with a large thick process on inner posterior
margin near base projecting inward to meet the process of the other
side; anal valve large, long, greatly broadened basally, profile tri-
angular. Female.—Genital segment short, stout, not very acute
at apex, valves subequal in length. Described from one pair from England (James Edwards), four
specimens from Scotland (O. M. Reuter); eight from Washington,
District of Columbia (Hubbard and Schwarz), June; and about sixty
from Stanford University (H. Morrison), on leaves of Frazinus sp.,
in May. One female belonging to this species, or very closely related,
was taken on walnut leaves (Juglans regia) at Richfield Springs,
New York, in August, 1897; reported by E. P. Felt (710: 39) as
injuring leaves of Frazinus at Rochester, New York. The species
probably has a wider distribution than these records show. PSYLLOPSIS MEXICANA, new species. Figs. 46, 228, 438. Length of body 2.2 mm. ; length of forewing 3.1; width of head 0.92. General color brownish yellow throughout. Body of medium size. Head about as broad as thorax, coarsely punctate, strongly descend-
ing; vertex with asulcate fovea on each side of median line extending
obliquely toward median line, anterior margin not sharply defined,
rounded downward toward genal cones. Genal cones almost as
long as vertex, projecting down almost vertically, scarcely divergent,
subacute at apex, pubescent. Clypeus large. Antenne very long
and slender, fully as long as body or over four times as long as width
of head. Thorax strongly arched, broad, coarsely punctate. Pronotum
long, ascending, distinctly broadened at median dorsal portion, with
lateral extremities rather narrow. Hind tibie with a small spur
at base. Wings elongate, almost three times as long as broad,
sides subparallel, rounded at apex, hyaline, slightly browned, trans-
parent; first marginal cell much larger than second; pterostigma
long and narrow; veins dark brown. 184 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment small, rounded; forceps long,
arched, acuminate, acute at apex; anal valve long, slightly broad-
ened at middle, converging toward tip. Described from one male
from Acapulco, Mexico (C. F. Baker). Type in author's collection. Tribe PSYLLINI. MITRAPSYLLA, new genus. Body moderately large, not strongly arched on dorsal surface,
usually more or less variegated in color. Head not strongly deflexed;
vertex rather large, with a prominent ridge along each side of median
line and a furrow between and outside of these ridges, converging to
arather acutely angled apex in front; genal cones very short, porrect,
divergent. Eyes somewhat recessive. Antenne long and slender. ‘Thorax rather broad. Hind tibie with a small tooth at base. Wings
subhyaline, broadly ovate, with a pterostigma. Type of genus.— Mitrapsylla albalineata, new species. MITRAPSYLLA ALBALINEATA, new species. Figs. 78, 79, 249, 300, 465. Length of body 2.4 mm. ; length of forewing 2.8; width of head 0.91. General color light to dark brown ground color, with white markings
and stripes; vertex with a white stripe on each side near median line
and a white spot below each posterior ocellus; pronotum with two
white stripes continuing those on vertex; prescutum with a white
stripe on median line and one on each lateral margin; scutum with
a median stripe and one on each side; pleure with several conspicuous
white spots. Head scarcely deflexed, moderately large, fully as broad as thorax,
finely punctate; vertex broad posteriorly, converging evenly toward
front, the whole more or less triangular in outline, with a conspicuous
Tidge on each side of median line (white), and a furrow between
these and on the outside of each, produced in front into a rather
acute point on each side of median line. Genal cones short, rela-
tively thick, depressed a little below level of vertex, divergent,
acute at apex, very sparsely pubescent. Antenne long, over three
times as long as width of head, slender, apical portion of each segment
dark. ‘Thorax not strongly arched, coarsely punctate; prascutum moder-
ately large. Hind tibie with a small spur at base. Wings rather
small, subhyaline, more or less transparent, slightly browned or
fumate along veins or sometimes the whole surface slightly fumate,
a little more than twice as long as broad, broadly rounded at apex;
pterostigma small, distinct. Genitalia.— Male.—Genital segment relatively large; forceps long,
thick, simple; anal valve long, broadest at base, slightly constricted

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDA OF THE NEW WORLD. 135

midway. Female.—-Genital segment fully as long as rest of abdomen,
deflexed, acuminate; dorsal valve longer than ventral; pubescence
very sparse. Described from many males and females collected at Chinandega,
Nicaragua, by C. F. Baker, San Marcos, Nicaragua (Baker), Acajutla,
Salvador (Baker), Acapulco, Mexico (Baker), and Oaxaca, Mexico
(Crawford). No biological data with these. Type in author’s collection. The white markings are very conspicuous and constant in extent
and color. A few specimens present variations in color not worthy
of varietal names but deserving of mention. Two males, one from
Chinandega and the other from Granada, Nicaragua, have the
thoracic stripes a very dirty yellowish white and the cephalic stripes
almost wanting entirely. The four specimens from Oaxaca, Mexico,
are uniformly darker in color, almost black, the wings deep yellow;
in two of them the stripes are almost wanting on the vertex and
yellowish on the thorax, while in the other two the stripes are white
and conspicuous and the eyes are whitish. The species seems to
be distributed very widely throughout the American tropics. and
more extensive collections will probably complete the variation series
in color. The size and structure is quite constant throughout the
one hundred or more specimens before me. MITRAPSYLLA CUBANA, new species. Length of body, 2.1 mm. ; length of forewing, 2.5. General color
light brown; prescutum and scutum with light yellowish stripes
placed as in the preceding species. This species resembles quite closely the related species albalincata
in many respects, differing in the following characters: Body smaller
than in related species. Vertex with a deep suleate depression
posteriorly between ocelli and median line, with the ridges along the
median line very prominent but not striped with white. Genal cones
similar. Pronotum without stripes, unicolored; pleurites of pro-
thorax longer and narrower. Wings small, hyaline, transparent,
not in the least fumate or yellow; venation more or less similar. Genitalia similar except that the female genital segment is narrower
and more acuminate and not deflexed. Described from one female from Havana, Cuba (C. F. Baker). Type in author’s collection. Genus PSYLLA Geoffroy. Psylla Gorrroy 1762:482.—Scorr '76:530.—Loew '78:600.—Froceatr ’01:243. Dorsum arched, usually strongly so; head broad, nearly as broad
as or, broader than thorax, more or less deflexed; vertex usually
elevated at posterior ocelli. Genal cones always present, variable
in shape, more or less coniform and divergent, usually deflexed and
6060°—Bull. 85—14——10

136 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. depressed from plane of vertex. Eyes large, hemispherical; front
between and in front of lobes of vertex, with the frons not at all,
or sometimes very slightly, visible around the ocellus. Antenne
slender, at least as long as width of head, usually much longer,
typically ten-segmented. Thorax broad; pronotum relatively longer
than in Trioza, ascending; pleural suture of prothorax oblique, not
extending to middle of lateral extremity of pronotum, but to its
posterior edge or often not attaining to it at all. Praescutum long. Legs usually long and strong; hind tibie often with a distinct spur
or tooth at base behind and with five or six black spines at apex;
basal tarsus of hind legs with two black, claw-like spines at apex,
lying one on each side of second tarsus. Forewings hyaline, trans-
parent, rounded at apex, never angulate; cubitus and media always
with a distinct petiole, which is usually distinctly shorter than the
basal portion of radius (discoidal subcosta); pterostigma nearly
always present; veins set with more or less visible sete, usually
bi-seriately. Type of genus.—Psylla alni Linneus (Chermes). The first use of the name Psylla was by Geoffroy! in 1762. He
described the genus Psylla but named no species within it, merely
indicating nine species by a brief Latin diagnosis. His nomenclature,
therefore, was binary but not binomial. ‘This is a case exactly parallel
with that of Gronow’s which is treated at length by the International
Committee on Nomenclature, and, since the generic names used in the
latter case are considered valid, there is no reason why Geoffroy’s
Psylla should not, also, be valid. No species was indicated by Geoffroy as the type-species, but in
1810 Latreille (1810: 264) described the genus again and made
Chermes alni Linneus the type-species. Lamarck (1801: 298) redescribed the genus in 1801 and named
under it the single species Ch. ficus Linneus, but there is no evidence
whatever to show that he designated this as the type-species. In
some genera he named two or several species and before each, in every
case, he placed a star. He offers no explanation of the significance
of the star. Kirkaldy in 1904 (’04: 254) made Psylla a synonym
of Chermes because, he stated, Lamarck had fixed the type of the
latter as Chermes jficus Linneus, which is a Psyllid and not an Aphid. As a matter of fact, Lamarck does not describe Chermes at all, but,
as pointed out above, mentions ficus under Psylla. Kirkaldy’s con-
tention, therefore, is groundless. It is true that the original description of Chermes by Linneus fits
more decidedly the Psyllid group than it does Aphids or Coccids. He included within it, however, species which have been subsequently
placed in each of these families. Geoffroy’s Psylla was not, appar-

 

 

‘Histoire Abrégée des Insectes, vol. 1, 1762, p. 482. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 137

ently, intended for a substitute for Chermes, as Kirkaldy contended,
but only to take in part of it. Since a type-species has been desig-
nated for Psylla since 1810 and since Passerini in 1865 designated an
Aphid species as the type of Chermes,! it is impossible to consider
Psylla as a synonym of the latter. The genus has been redefined several times (see bibliography above),
and various species have been designated as type. The valid type,
however, is alni Linneus, as set by Latreille. Foerster (’48: 67) has divided the original genus into many distinct
genera, most of which are still valid. Franz Loew (78: 600) defined
Psylla as it is to-day regarded. It is a very large genus and its
members are subject to considerable variation, thereby rendering it
difficult to determine specific lines in many cases. SYNOPSIS OF SPECIES. a}, Antenne not over two and a half times as long as width of head (except sometimes
in brevistigmata); length to tip of folded wings distinctly less than 5 mm. b!, Antenne less than twice width of head, or at most not more than twice. c!. Hind tibie without spur at base,? or if present very small and indistinct. @, Forceps of male not simple; wings clear, transparent. e!, Male forceps very broad at base, abruptly constricted near base, thence
slender; anal valve long, sides subparallel; vertex only slightly emar-
ginate in front at median line. Jfibulata, new species. @. Male forceps with posterior margin conspicuously sinuate, apical third
slender, acute; anal valve converging to tip; vertex more deeply
emarginate in front. -sinuata, new species. @, Male forceps converging to near apex, then abruptly broadened and
T-shaped; antennz less than one and a half times width of head. parallela, new species. @. Forceps of male simple, sides subparallel or converging to apex; wings
usually more or less fumate or maculate, sometimes clear. !, Wings maculate on posterior and apical margins and along Cu to its furca-
tion; pterostigma short; female genital segment exceedingly short. maculata, new species. @. Wings not maculate but more or less fumate, or clear; pterostigma rather
long; female genital segment not exceedingly short. ‘f?. Antenne scarcely longer than width of head........... breviata Patch. J?. Antenne about one and a half to two times as long as width of head. g'. Body very small, less than 3 mm. to tip of folded wings; wings small. 1, Wings fumate in apical half, without spot at tip of clavus; genal
cones separate at base and strongly divergent. i}, Forceps of male 0.30 mm, long or more, converging to a simple,
acute tip, pubescent almost uniformly from base to tip; body
dark.. minuta, new species. ®. Forceps of male 0.20 mm. or less, apex not simply pointed;
scarcely pubescent on distal half; body lighter in color. coryli Patch. 1T do not know whether or not this was the earliest date at which the type of Chermes was set, but it
certainly was not set before 1810. ?If the hind leg is cleared and mounted on a glass slide, and examined under high magnification, a spur
ill be found on practically every species of the genus. The above key refers, however, to a lower magniti-
‘cation and the specimen not mounted on a slide. 138 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 1@, Wings clear; genal cones not separate at base and not strongly
divergent. #. Color of body whitish; wings without black spot at tip of clavus,

alba, new species. #®. Color of body flavous to reddish brown, with dark markings on

thoracic dorsum; wings wita a prominent black spot at tip of

clavus. ----pyricola Vorster (summer form). g’. Body larger, more than 3 mm. long to tip of folded wings, usually more
nearly 4mm. 1, Female genital segment short, less than half as long as rest of abdo-
men; antenne nearly twice as long as width of head; wings
fumate.. -pyricola Forster (winter form). 18, Female genital segment as long as rest of abdomen, or nearly so. 7. Antenne nearly twice as long as width of head; dorsal valve of
female genital segment downcurved; wings yellow. hartigii Flor. #. Antenne variable from one and one-fourth to one and three-
fourths as long as width of head; dorsal valve of femaie genital
segment not downcurved; wings variable in color. j'. Wings with a black spot at tip of clavus...quadrilineata Fitch,
#. Wings without black spot at tip of clavus. #. Body reddish brown to blackish; wing veins black. B, Genal cones reddish or orange at tips; male anal valve
not much longer than forceps; forceps converging to
apex. m’, Male forceps large, .45 to .50 mm long; female genital

segment very slender. americana, new species. m?, Male forceps smaller, .25 to .30 mm long, more densely
pubescent; female genital segment stouter at base. americana minor, new variety. P, Genal cones unicolorous to tip; male anal valve more than
twice as long as forceps; forceps broad, flexed, apex
broadly truncate. ribis Patch. # Body light flavous to orange; wing veins flavous; genal cones
not darker at tip; male forcepsaboutas long as in americana
minor. -americana flava, new variety. @. Hind tibiee with a distinct spur at base behind; pterostigma Jong. @, Female genital segment not as long as rest of abdomen, not very large; genal
cones not quite as long as vertex; antenna scarcely one and a half times
as long as width of head. .-alaskensis Ashmead. @, Female genital segment elongate, longer than rest of abdomen, or at least as
long; antenna nearly twice as long as width of head. e. Genal cones longer than vertex; female genital segment unusually large

and thick.. -magnicauda, new species. @. Genal cones not as long as vertex; female genital segment not unusually

large, more elongate and acute at end... striata Patch. }, Antenne more than twice as long as width of head; body usually larger than in
preceding species. c!. Female genital segment longer than rest of abdomen; pterostigma usually

small,

@, Genal cones acute or subacute at apex as long as vertex or longer; Cu, not
strongly arched...........2222c.2e0c-202eeeeeee carpinicola, new name. @, Genal cones broadly rounded at apex, only a little divergent, about as long
as vertex; Cu, more strongly arched.............4 cephalica, new species. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDZ OF THE NEW WORLD. 139

©, Female genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen. @', Pterostigma of forewing long; head very broad, with a short, constricted,
stalk-like area between inner margin of eye and elevated portion of vertex
and posterior ocellus; genal cones not separated at base; color greenish
yellow. e!, Autennie conspicuously annulated with black on basal half. annulata Fitch. @. Antenne uniformly yellowish, except terminal segment black. negundinis Mally. @. Pterostigma of forewing very short, broaa at base; eyes not stalked, vertex
extending uniformly to base of eyes; genal cones separated at base,
strongly divergent; color orange to red, vertex often bordered with white,
and genal cones white or pale on basal half. el. Male forceps converging to a simple point, not acuminate. brevistigmata Patch. @. Male forceps more slender, more acuminate, and turned forward in apical
third, bluntly pointed.............-. brevistigmata acuta, new variety. @. Antenne distinctly over two and a half times as long as width of head, sometimes
much more. b', Body very large, length to tip of folded wingsat least 5 mm., seldom less; antennse
nearly or more than three times as long as width of head. c!, Pterostigma almost obsolete; basal spur on hind tibise small. d', Female genital segment longer than rest of abdomen, very slender and
acuminate, abruptly enlarged at base; male forceps subacute at tip, not
notched. floccosa Patch,

@, Female genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen, thick and stout;
male forceps more or less notched at apex, or bifid. e!. Color of body nearly uniformly cee yellow, or with an orange tinge;
genal cones subacute... -astigmata, new species.

. Color similar but with three large conspicuous red spots on thoracic dorsum;
genal cones acutely pointed. trimaculata Crawford. &, Color of head and thoracic dorsum rosy, abdomen vermillion with a
black spot at base dorsad, and five transverse black bands. cerasi Patch. c?. Pterostigma distinctly present, usually rather large and long; basal spur on
hind tibie larger. d', Genal cones not as long as their basal width, very broadly rounded, about as
long as vertex or shorter; forceps of male broadened apically; female
genital segment as long as or often longer than rest of abdomen,

alni americana, new variety. d*, Genal cones distinctly longer than their basal width, more or less acute
at apex. e!, Female genital segment nearly as long as rest of body, acuminate, strongly
upcurved, with an apparent suture about midway across both valves;
color of body dark brown, notum striped... -caudata, new species,

@, Female genital segment only about three-fifths as long as rest of body,
not upcurved, without the apparent suture; color of body typically green. galeaformis Patch. +2, Body small, scarcely over 3 mm. long to tip of folded wings; antenne extremely
long and slender, more than four times as long as width of head; basal spur
on hind tibix large; male forceps not simple. c!, Genal cones moderately long, coniform, not quite as long as vertex. d', Wings Jess than twice as‘long as broad, rather square on apical margin;

pterostigma short... torrida, new species. 140 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. @, Wings larger, more than twice as long as broad, broadly rounded at apex;
pterostigma half as long as Rs.........--2.2-+--- orizabensis, new species,

@, Genal cones very short, rounded at tips; wings twice as long as broad,
minuticona, new species,

 

PSYLLA FIBULATA, new species. Pigs. 98, 266, 314, 482. Length of body 1.6 to 1.9 mm. ; length of forewing 2.6; width of
head 0.81. General color light yellowish green throughout; antennz
black distally. Vertex scarcely half as long as broad, bulging forward in front on
each side of median line, with a shallow fovea on each side posteriorly;
genal cones about as long as vertex, not strongly divergent, sub-
acute, pubescent. Antenne about one and a half times as long as
width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Legs rather stout; hind tibia about as
long as femora, without a spur at base, or if present it is very small. Wings hyaline, slightly whitish in color, about two and a half times
as long as broad, venation as in illustration; pterostigma long and
rather narrow. Genitalia.— Male—Anal valve long, much longer than forceps,
sides subparallel, pubescence short; forceps enlarged at base, acute
at apex, front margin nearly straight, posterior margin deeply con-
eave making basal portion unusually large and distal half slender,
acuminate, slightly pubescent. Female.—Genital segment about as
long as rest of abdomen, dorsal valve distinctly longer than ventral,
slender at apex. Described from several males and females from Colorado (no data)
collection of C. F. Baker. Type-—Cat. No. 18104, U. S. Nat. Mus. PSYLLA SINUATA, new species. Figs. 267, 268, 491,

Length of body 1.9 to 2.1 mm. ; length of forewing 3.1; width of
head 0.89. General color greenish yellow, antenne black on distal
half or third. Similar to fibulata, but differing as follows: Body and wings larger;
vertex relatively a little longer; genal cones longer. Hind tibie with
a minute spur at base, scarcely visible. Male forceps longer, with
posterior margin sinuate conspicuously, with long pubescence, apical
portions slender and strongly bowed inward. Female genital seg-
ment similar but larger and thicker. Described from several males and females from Pagosa Springs,
Colorado (C. F¥. Baker); these bear the manuscript name of Psylla
fibulata simulans Crawford; several from Ungava Bay, Labrador
(L. M. Turner), July 22, seem undoubtedly to belong to this same
species. Type.—Cat. No. 18105, U. S. Nat. Mus. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 141
PSYLLA PARALLELA, new species. Closely related to fibulata, differing as follows: Vertex more emar-
ginate in front at median line; genal cones not quite as long as vertex;
antenn only about one and a fourth times as long as width of head. Hind tibie with basal spur very small or wanting. Wings clear,
similar in shape and venation to preceding species; pterostigma
long, yellow-opaque. Male forceps a little shorter than anal valve,
middle somewhat enlarged, then converging to near apex where an
abrupt broadening produces a T-shaped apex. Female genital
segment as long as rest of abdomen, slender, dorsal valve longer than
ventral. Described from four males and one female from Nevada County,
California (Koebele), September. Type.—Cat. No. 18106, U.S. Nat. Mus. PSYLLA MACULATA, new species. Figs. 100, 315, 485. Length of body 1.5 mm. ; length of forewing 2.2; width of head
0.85. General color dark brown; vertex, posterior half of pronotum;
praescutum caudad, scutum dorsad, lighter brown to yellowish;
facial cones tipped with brown. Body small. Similar to P. americana, but vertex slightly pubescent, bulging
forward in front a little more; genal cones about as long as vertex,
separate at base, not deflexed much from plane of vertex. Antenne
not quite twice as long as width of head. Basal spur of hind tibie
very minute. Wings maculate on posterior apical margin and along
cubitus. Female genital segment very short and small; dorsal valve
scarcely longer than ventral. Described from one female from Colorado (C. F. Baker). Type-—Cat. No. 18107, U.S. Nat. Mus. PSYLLA BREVIATA Patch,
Fig. 133. Psylla breviata Patou 12b: 2:

Length of body 2.5 mm. ; length of forewing 2.9; width of head
0.89. General color greenish yellow; antenne black at tip. Vertex a trifle more than half as long as broad, with a shallow
depression on each side discally; genal cones about two-thirds as
long as vertex, divergent, subacute at apex, slightly pubescent. Antenne short, only a little longer than width of head. Thorax as in
preceding species. Legs slender; hind tibie with a very small
spur at base (easily visible in a balsam mount). Wings typical in
shape and venation, slightly yellowish in apical half; pterostigma
long. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve longer than forceps, of usual form,
elongate with sides subparallel, pubescent; forceps rather slender

142 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. and long, sides straight and nearly parallel to near apex, then the
anterior margin is conspicuously emarginate, making a terminal tooth-
like process (fig. 183). Female.—Genital segment about as long as
rest of abdomen, stout; dorsal valve longer than ventral, slender
distad, pubescent. Described from one female (paratype), mounted in balsam, from
Dow’s Swamp, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (W. Metcalfe), June 14, 1903
(this specimen, together with paratypes of several other species, was
loaned to me by Miss E, M. Patch; her description of this species was
based on three females only); several males and females from
Marquette, Michigan (Tubbard and Schwarz), July 27; Placer County
and Nevada County, California (A. Koebele), September; Argus
Mountains, California (Koebele), on Pinus monophylla, May, 1891. It is possible that the latter do not belong to this species. PSYLLA MINUTA, new species. Figs. 99, 261, 316, 483,

Length of body (male) 1.4 mm. ; (female) 1.8; length of forewing
1.8; width of head 0.75. General color brown to dark brown or black;
thoracic dorsum and vertex light brown to brown, sometimes dark;
scutum with stripes of a lighter color; antennw mostly dark; femora
and tibie usually mostly brown or darker. Body small. Vertex a little more than half as long as broad, bulging forward
narrowly on each side of front ocellus, somewhat pubescent, with a
round fovea on each side discally; genal cones slender, strongly
divergent, separated at base, acute at apex, not quite as long as
vertex, with several long sete distad; antenne one and a half to one
and three-fourths times as long as width of head, slender. Thorax very strongly arched, with very sparse pubescence. Legs
slender; hind tibia with basal spur very small or wanting. Wings
small, venation typical, conspicuously fumate in apical half, some-
times darkly so; pterostigma long, rather large. Genitalia.— Male—Anal valve a little longer than forceps, broad
(in caudal view), apex rounded, pubescent; forceps about 0.30 mm. long or more, converging to a simple black point at apex, entire
surface rather densely covered with large, heavy spine-like sete. Female.—Genital segment as long as rest of abdomen or longer,
acutely pointed, broad at base, dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from numerous males and females from American Fork
Cafion, Utah (Hubbard and Schwarz), on Purshia tridentata, June 13;
Williams, Arizona (Barber and Schwarz), on Purshia tridentata, May
25-28; Argus Mountains, California (Koebele), May, 1891; Ormsby
County, Nevada (Baker); 2 number more from Colorado, with no
data. Some of these specimens bear the manuscript name of Psylla
purshize Riley, and Brachypsylla purshiz. Type.—Cat. No. 18108, U.S. Nat. Mus. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 143
PSYLLA CORYLI Patch,

Very similar to minuta in most respects, including size and general
proportions; color lighter. Vertex less pubescent, similar in form. Male anal valve similar; forceps distinctly shorter, not over 0.20 mm. in length, with similar spine-like set on inner surface, but only on
basal half; apex with a conspicuous notch on outside near tip, giving
hoe appearance of an inner apical tooth. Female not known to me. Described from one male (paratype) from Colorado (no data),
kindly loaned to me by Miss Patch. This species is exceedingly close
to minuta, and were it not for the constant difference in the male
genitalia I would not hesitate to include them both in one species. It should be noted that the manuscript name of Psylla coryli Riley
has been attached to another species, represented in the National
Museum collection, which is close to carpinicola (Fitch’s carpini). Miss Patch states that the present species also was known by the
same manuscript name. PSYLLA ALBA, new species. Figs. 254, 321, 490. Length of body (male) 1.6 mm; (female) 1.9; length of fore-
wing 2 to 2.2; width of head 0.69. General color greenish white;
antenne black at tip. Vertex about half as long as broad, with two fovew as usual,
bulging in front rather roundly; genal cones nearly or fully as long
as vertex, not strongly divergent, subacute, pubescent. Antenne
about one and three-fourths times as long as width of head. Thorax not strongly arched. Legs small, short; hind tibie about
as long as femora, with basal spur very small or wanting. Wings
whitish, clear, typical in shape and venation; pterostigma moderately
large. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve longer than usual, of usual elongate
form, pubescent; forceps small, simple, rather strongly bowed,
slender, acutely pointed at tips. Memale.—Genital segment about as
long as rest of abdomen, dorsal valve a little longer than ventral. Described from many specimens of both sexes from Ormsby County,
Nevada (C. F. Baker); Claremont, California (Baker); Sacramento,
California, on Salix longifolia, July; Folsom, California (Koebele), on
same host plant; Las Vegas, New Mexico (Barber and Schwarz),
August 8; El Paso, Texas (Cockerell), May 13. Some of these bear
the manuscript name of Psylla americana alba Crawford. Type in author's collection. 144 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. PSYLLA PYRICOLA Forster. Figs. 8, 13, 14,

Psylla pyricola Forster 748 Scorr 76: 137; °83:205.—Lorw 8
184148; °86 °88:15.—Saro 195 WARDS 796: 240. Sui ’05 :2; 110:34.—Kuwavama ’08 :163 (Japan) —Ritey °84:69;
791: 127 (abstractof Loew ’86 :156).—Rizeyand Howarp ’93:226.—
SuNGERLAND '92: 159-186; 796 : 69-86.—LirweR ’98 :317.—MALLY
°94:153 (mention).—Mantarr "95a: 175-185; ’95b: (Circular 7).—
Sari ’96 :137; 709 :109 (mention).—Patcn "11:11; 912b:221. Psyllaapiophila Férsrer °48 :78.—Lorw ?77 :137; ’82 1232. Psylla notata Fror °61 :365.—Loew ’82 :244. Psylla pyrisuga BARNARD, Proc. Amer. Ass. Ady. Sci., vol. 28, 1879, p. 478. Poylla pyri Curtis, Gard. Chron. 1842:156.—Harnis, Inj. Insects, 18522201; (for

several more brief articles see Slingerland 82 :186.) Psylla simulans SLINGERLAND *92 : 186. (2) Psylla argyrostigma Pérsrer ?48 :97. Summer form.—Length of body (male) 1.5mm; (female), 1.9; length
of forewing 1.7 to 1.9; length to tip of folded wings 2.1 to 2.8; width
of head 0.78. General color light orange to reddish brown, with
darker markings; vertex, genal cones, scutum between stripes, male
genitalia, legs except hind femora, antennz except at tip, light brown
to orange; genal cones lighter colored at apex than at base. Head very strongly deflexed; vertex about half as long as broad,
with two foves, conspicuously emarginate in front at median line
with front ocellus in emargination; genal cones about two-thirds as
long as vertex, not strongly divergent, subacute at tips, pubescent. Antenne about one and a half times as long as width of head, slender. Thorax strongly arched. Legs slender; hind tibiw with basal spur
very small, or wanting. Wings transparent, clear or often with a
slight yellowish tinge, especially in the distal cells; with a conspicu-
ous black spot at tip of clavus; pterostigma long and relatively broa:
venation typical. Genitalia. — Male.—Anal valve a little longer than forceps, sides
subparallel, pubescent; forceps simple, rather acute at tips, tapering
uniformly from base to tip, about as long as in coryli Patch. Female—
Genital segment short, scarcely longer than two preceding segments,
dorsal valve a little longer than ventral, both acute. Winter form.—Diflers from summer form chiefly in being larger
and darker in color. Length to tip of folded wings 3.3 to 4 mm. ;
other measurements proportionate; nearly one-third longer. General
color very dark reddish brown to black; markings black; areas noted
in summer form as lighter are correspondingly a little lighter here,
but antenne mostly dark from base to tip; wings darker on basal
portion, apically clear, veins black and very conspicuous, black claval
spot more pronounced. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDA OF THE NEW WORLD. 145

Described from numerous males and females from Ithaca, New
York, and several other near-by localities; collected from May to
August of several years; and many from Detroit, Michigan (Hubbard
and Schwarz), October 7. Distribution —Introduced from Europe into Salisbury, Connecticut
(1832); spread subsequently into Massachusetts and New York;
recorded later from Illinois (Le Baron), Michigan (Schwarz), (sce
Slingerland ’92:162); Ohio (Webster); New Jersey (Smith), (see
Lintner ’98:325) ; Maine (Patch ’11:11); ‘‘southwest to Maryland and
Virginia” (Sanderson—Insect Pests of Farm, Garden, and Orchard
1912:641) ; California (Essig. Mon. Bul. Cal. Comm. Hort. 2:43; 1913),
the latter is doubtful. Distribution outside of America: Great Britain, Gallia, Germany,
Austria, Hungary, Transcaucasia, Akstafa (Oshanin ’07: 352); Japan
(Kuwayana ’08: 163). Food plant.—Pyrus communis (common pear), on which it is very
destructive and of great economic importance; reported on Pyrus
malus (apple) to a less extent .in Europe, but not in America. Life history.—Eggs.—The eggs are deposited about the middle of
April by the females which have passed the winter in hibernation;
they are light yellowish in color, ellipsoidal, with a short attachment
pedicel at large end and aslender filament at small, free end ; deposited
singly or in rows of five to ten in cracks and creases in the bark, or in
old leaf scars at the bases of the terminal buds of the preceding
year’s growth,

The eggs hatch in from eleven to thirty days, according to the
temperature. The hibernating adults disappear about the time most
of the eggs have hatched. Nymph.—First instar —Oval, pale, translucent yellow, abdomen
darker, eyes reddish; abdomen fringed with several long hairs; wing
pads not distinguishable; antenne three-jointed; length about 0.37
mm,

Second instar —First molt about six or seven days after hatching;
size one-third larger; color practically unchanged; antenne four-
jointed; wing pads begin to appear. Second molt in four days. Third instar—Length 0.77 mm. Wing pads blackish and thoracic
markings begin to appear; antenne six or seven jointed. Third molt
three days later. Fourth instar.—Full-grown nymph; length 1.4 mm. ; width 1.15;
oval, flattened; general color light yellowish brown, marked with
blackish; wing pads, distal half of abdomen, head except a mesal
light stripe, several bands and spots on thoracic and basal abdominal
dorsum blackish or brown; a number of long, stout, spine-like sete
project from margin of body. 146 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM,

After five or six days more the adult emerges, making the cycle
from egg to adult about one month. There are about four broods
each year (in New York), but they are not sharply separated. All
stages may be found on one tree from June to September. In general,
however, the greatest numbers are present at intervals of about one
month. The adults emerging in September are usually the hiber-
nating winter forms. For further details on the life history and other
phases of this species, consult Slingerland ’92: or ’96, from which
source most of the above statements have been derived. PSYLLA HARTIGII Flor. Figs. 130, 145. Psylla hartigii Fuor ’61: 469.—Loew '77: 130; °79: 577; 82: 240; ’88: 18.—Rrvurer
81: 150.—Scorr °82: 253.—Epwarps '96: 244.—Sure "05: 3; *10b:
24; ’10e: 26 (pl. x11).—OsHANIN ’07: 358. Psylla hartigii (2) Parcu ?12b: 222. Psylla sylvicola Leruierry '74: 90.—Scorr ’76: 539.—Douatas °76: 68.—EpwaRDs
"96: 244. Length of body (male) 2 to 2.5 mm; (female) 2.8 to 3.2; length of
forewing 3.3; width of head 0.89. General color greenish yellow to
orange yellow; antenne black distally. Vertex rather long down the center, fully half as long as broad,
emarginate in front at median line, with two fovee discally as usual;
genal cones nearly as long as vertex, rather stout, roundly acute at
apex, pubescent; antenne one and three-fifths to two times as long
as width of head. Thorax arched, typical in form. Legs rather slender; hind tibie
with basal spur wholly wanting. Wings slightly tinged with yellow,
especially in apical half, venation typical; pterostigma large. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve long, sides subparallel, truncate at
apex, pubescent; forceps much shorter than anal valve, rather
slender, somewhat constricted a little beyond midpoint, terminating
ina blunt, slightly bifid apex, pubescent. Memale.—Genital segment
very elongate and slender, longer than rest of abdomen, dorsal
valve a little longer than ventral and conspicuously curved
downward. Described from six males and females in balsam (some of the speci-
mens used by Miss Patch in her description ’12b: 222), from Orono,
Maine, on birch (Betula populifolia); these were loaned by Miss Patch. Also, several females from‘ Liue,” Europe determined by Sule as P.
hartigii. The distribution in Europe is as follow
Austria, Finland, Russia (Oshanin ’07:
plant in Europe to be Betula alba. Great Britain, Germany,
8). Sule reports its host

 

 

 

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLID# OF THE NEW WORLD. 147

PSYLLA AMERICANA, new species. Figs. 101, 265, 318, 486, 487, 488. Psylla americana CRAWFORD ’11: 628 (n. n). Length of body 2 to 2.4 mm. ; wing length 3 to 3.3; width of head
0.95 to 1.04. General color reddish brown to dark brown or blackish;
vertex reddish, sometimes whitish in center; genal cones reddish
at apex, paler than vertex; pronotum usually black cephalad, pale on
posterior margin; prescutum whitish on posterior margin; scutum
often striped with black; abdomen dark; antenne mostly dark;
wings clear, veins dark. Vertex broad, about half as long as broad, long down median line,
lobes becoming narrow on each side of front ocellus, with two foveal
impressions; genal concs seldom as long as vertex, divergent, rather
acutely pointed, with short pubescence. Antenne usually about one
and a half times as long as width of head, sometimes a little longer,
rarely shorter. Thorax arched rather strongly, typical in form. Legs moderately
stout; hind tibiew slightly longer than femora, with basal spur very
small or wanting. Wings long, clear, transparent, rarely with a yel-
lowish tinge, veins black and conspicuous, venation typical; ptero-
stigma large, denser than adjacent membrane. Genitalia. — Male.—Anal valve longer than forceps, of usual form,
pubescent; forceps rather long and large, usually about 0.45 to 0.50
mm. long, sometimes less, broadest at base and rapidly converging to
a narrow and acute apex. Female.—Genital segment slender, as long
as rest of abdomen or longer, dorsal valve very slender in apical third
and longer than ventral valve. Described from numerous specimens of both sexes from: California:
Claremont (Crawford), on Pinus ponderosa, June, 1911 (altitude 10,000
feet); Argus Mountains (Koebele), on Pinus monophylla, May, 1891;
Placer and Nevada Counties (Koebele), September; Banff Springs,
Alberta, Canada (Hubbard and Schwarz), June. Type in author's collection. PSYLLA AMERICANA MINOR, new variety. Very similar to species in size, coloration, and general structural
characters, differing as follows: Male forceps shorter and more pubes-
cent, seldom more than 0.30 mm. long, usually about 0.20 to 0.25 mm. ;
anal valve proportionately shorter and broader. Female genital
segment similar but usually thicker dorso-ventrally. Described from many males and females from Colorado (C. P. Gil-
lette), on Salix sp. ; Boulder, Colorado (Rohwer); Berkeley, California
(Crawford), on Saliz lasiolepsis, January, 1912; Laguna Beach, Cali-
fornia (Crawford), on same host, July, 1911; Los Angeles, California

148 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. (Koebele), on Salix californica, April; Fieldbrook, California (Bar-
ber), May 31, 1903. Some of these specimens bear the manuscript
name of Psylla rufula Riley. Type.—Cat. No. 18109 U. S. Nat. Mus

PSYLLA AMERICANA FLAVA, new variety. Very close to the species and similar in general structural characters,
but differing in color chiefly; color conspicuously lighter; dorsum with
indistinct stripes or none at all; genal cones uniform in color; wings
whitish, veins yellowish instead of black. The genitalia of the male
resemble those of the variety minor of the species; the female genital
segment is variable from slender to rather thick. Described from numerous males and females from Utah: Park
City, Alta and Utah Lake, collected by Hubbard and Schwarz, in
June; Victoria, Vancouver, British Columbia (Hubbard and Schwarz),
June; Oregon (Koebele); Santa Clara County, California (Baker);
Los Angeles, California (Coquillett); Pagosa Springs, Colorado
(Baker). Some of these bear the manuscript name of Psylla ameri-
cana longipennis Crawford. Type-—Cat. No. 18110, U. 8. Nat. Mus. PSYLLA RIBIS Patch. Psylla ribis Patou *121

 

Similar in size and general appearance to americana, and especially
the variety minor; differing as follows: Genal cones less acute, not
tipped with a darker shade than that of base; antenne shorter than
average of americana; wings similar; pterostigma large, yellow. Male
anal valve very elongate, more than twice as long as forceps, con-
verging a little toward apex, straight; forceps rather broad and
thick, flexed forward midway, sides subparallel, apex truncate. Female genital segment similar but somewhat thicker. Described from one male, mounted in balsam (paratype? ), from
Colorado (no data), and one female, in balsam, from Orono, Maine
(Patch), June, 1910. Both specimens were kindly loaned to me by

Miss Patch. PSYLLA QUADRILINEATA Fitch. Psylla quadrilineata Frrcu ’51:65.—Ri.ey '84: 69.—PRovaNncuer '86:305.—LinTNER
93:64. Psylla gillettei Patou 12b: 221. Very closely related to americana, both in structure and color
characters, differing as follows: Vertex different in shape, relatively
broader and shorter; antenna relatively longer, nearly twice as long
as width of head. Wings with a conspicuous black spot at tip of
clayus; pterostigma much smaller. Male forceps narrower at base. Female genital segment thicker dorso-ventrally. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 149

Described from Fitch’s type of quadrilineata, and one male and
two females (paratypes of gillettei), from Colorado; the latter are in the
Cornell University collection and were determined by Miss Patch. She states (’12b: 221) that some of the specimens were taken on Salix
sp. in Colorado. This species is apparently identical with Psyllagillettei Patch. Some
confusion exists concerning Fitch’s types of Psyllide. Specimens in
the United States National Museum correspond closely with Fitch’s
descriptions and type numbers and are said to be his types. It is in
accordance with this that P. gillettei is merged with this species. PSYLLA ALASKENSIS Ashmead. Fig. 413,
Psylla alaskensis Asameap '10: 137. Length of body (male) 1.8mm. ; (female) 2.8; length of forewing 3;
width of head 0.87. General color greenish or brownish yellow; a
spot on each side of pronotum and indistinct stripes on scutum fuscous
or darker; abdomen with narrow, dark cross bands; antenne darker
on apical half or two-thirds. Vertex about twice as broad as long, bulging forward on each side
of front ocellus; with a shallow foveal impression on each side of
median line posteriorly; genal cones nearly as long as vertex, subacute,
divergent, pubescent; antenne less than one and a half times as long
as width of head. Wings large, hyaline, or slightly browned, venation
typical; pterostigma long and large. Legs stout; hind tibie scarcely
longer than femora, with a distinct spur at base. Genitalia.— Male. —Anal valve longer than forceps, simple, typical
in shape; forceps thick at base, converging to an acute point (this is
according to Ashmead 710: fig. 9). Female.—Genital segment about
half as long as rest of abdomen, stout; dorsal valve a little longer than
yentral, less acute, with long and short sete. Described from one female (paratype) from Saldovia, Alaska,
July 21, 1899 (T. Kincaid). Other localities: Popoff Island, Shu-
magin, Islands, Fox Point, all in Alaska (Harriman-Alaska Expe-
dition, July, 1899.) Type.—Cat. No. 6274, U.S. Nat. Mus. PSYLLA MAGNICAUDA, new species. Figs. 319, 489. Length of body (male) 1.8 mm. ; (female) 2.2; length of forewing
3.1; width of head 0.90. General color greenish yellow, antenne
black at tip. Body robust. Vertex about half as long as broad, emarginate in front at median
line and roundly bulging on each side, with two rather shallow foveal

* 150 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. impressions; genal cones long, at least as long as vertex, usually
longer, slender, moderately divergent, rather acute at apex, pubes-
cent. Antenne nearly twice as long as width of head. ‘Thorax well arched. Legs stout; hind tibiew with a distinct basal
spur. Wings slightly tinged with yellow, venation and shape typical;
pterostigma small and narrow. Genitalia.— Male—Anal valve long, sides subparallel, pubescent;
forceps elongate, slender, strongly bowed, reaching nearly to tip of
anal valve, acutely pointed. Female.—Genital segment unusually
large and thick, as long as rest of abdomen, dorsal valve a little longer
than ventral. Described from several males and females from Sheridan, Wyoming
(C. W. Metz), August, 1910; Arboles, Colorado (C. F. Baker). These
pear the manuscript name of Psylla americana abdominalis Crawford. Type in author's collection. PSYLLA STRIATA Patch. Peylla striata Parce ’11:14. Length of body (male) 1.9 mm. ; (female) 2.3; length of forewing
2.7; width of head 0.82. General color greenish yellow, antenne
black or brown on apical third. Close to carpinicola, differing chiefly in antenne and genal cones;
antenne distinctly shorter, not over twice as long as width of head,
often less and relatively thicker; genal cones shorter; body somewhat
smaller; wings more flavous; pterostigma moderately broad at base. Male genitalia similar to carpinicola; female gerital segment rela-
tively a little shorter. Described from one female (paratype), from Orono, Maine (Patch),
on birch (Betula sp) June 25, 1910; two from Portland Maine (E. P.
Van Duzee), 7-7-'09; several of both sexes from Holderness, New
Hampshire (Koebele), on birch, October 2, 1884; several from Polk
County, Wisconsin (Baker). Several specimens from Colorado seem
to belong to this species, but this is not certain. Several others from
Marin County, California, seem to be a varietal form of the species,
collected by A. Koebele on Corylus rostrata, August 11, 1885; these
bear the manuscript name of “ Psylla coryli n. sp.” but are wholly
distinct from P. coryli Patch. Miss Patch seems to have identified with her striata a number of
specimens of a closely related but distinct species from New York
State. These have been referred to the species cephalica. ‘The nymphs live on the terminal loaves and shoots of Betula, and
cover themselves with inconspicuous woolly masses. The mature
forms emerge late in June (Patch 711: 14). THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDE OF THE NEW WORLD. 151

PSYLLA CARPINICOLA, new name,
Figs. 86, 91, 262, 317, 473, 478. Psylla carpini Frrcit ’51:—Rrvey ’83: 69.—Larver '93: 64. Length of body (male) 2.1 mm. ; (female) 2.7 to 3; length of fore
wing 3; width of head 0.87. General color greenish yellow, antenne
black at tips and on apices of four terminal segments. Head broad; vertex usually not deeply impressed discally, nearly
half as long as broad, emarginate in front at median line; genal cones
as long as vertex or often longer, acute to subacute at apex, moderately
divergent, pubescent, scarcely deflexed from plane of vertex. Anten-
nz long and slender, fully two and a half times as long as width of
head. Thorax typical in form. Hind tibie with a distinct spur at base. Wings rather clear, sometimes slightly yellow but never so much as
in striata, venation similar to that of striata. Genitalia.— Male —Anal valve long, narrowed apically, tip broad-
ened somewhat, densely pubescent; forceps long, slightly narrowed
midway, with a black tooth at apex. Female—Genital segment
longer than rest of abdomen, moderately thick at base and converging
to an acute apex; dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from several males and females from Polk County, Wis-
consin (Baker); Ames, Iowa (Mally), July 1, 1894; Ormsby County,
Nevada (Baker). Several of these specimens have been identified
as P. carpini by C. V. Riley and others, though how authentic this is,
is not certain. Forster, in 1848, named a European species carpini. Although this
is a synonym of Psylla mali, yet it invalidates Fitch’s carpini which
was described in 1851. In order not to change the name too much,
since it is so familiar, I have assigned to it the name carpinicola. PSYLLA CEPHALICA, new species. Figs. 90, 263, 309, 475,

Closely related to carpinicola, but a little larger and broader; head
distinctly broader, sometimes about 1 mm broad; vertex flatter;
genal cones larger, broadly rounded and only a little divergent, about
as Jong as vertex or shorter; antenne equally long and slender. Legs rather stout. Wings more yellow than in carpinicola but less
than in striata; long branch of cubitus (Cu,) distinctly more arched
than in either of the above species. Described from several males and females from Texarkana,
Arkansas (R. A. Cushman) on Carpinus caroliniana, March 20, 1907;
Marshall, Texas (Cushman), on Rubus, March, 1907; Washington,
District of Columbia (Schwarz), August; Mud Creek, Tompkins
County, New York, in June, 1904 (determined by Miss Paich as

60¢0°—Bull. 8—14——11

152 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Psylla striata Patch), Polk County, Wiseonsin (Baker). The
northern specimens are smaller than the southern forms and come
closer to carpinicola. Type in author's collection. PSYLLA ANNULATA Fitch,

Figs. 77, 80, 258, 201, 466. Psylla annulata Frrou’51:64.—Asumeap ’81 .—Rizy °83:70.— Lintner
°93:64.—Rivey (in Lintner’93:411.—Maty ’94:153.—Paton ’12b:220. Length of body (male) 2.1 mm. ; (female) 2.7; length of forewing
3.8; width of head 1.08. General color straw-yellow; antenne
straw-yellow, annulated with black on basal half. Head relatively very broad; vertex not half as long as broad, with
a more or less conspicuously constricted annular, stalk-like area
between base or inner margin of eye and elevated portion of vertex
and posterior ocellus; genal cones longer than vertex, divergent,
acute to subacute, pubescent. Antenne long, about two and a half
times as long as width of head, not as slender as in carpinicola. Legs rather stout; hind tibie with a large spur at base; wings large,
clear, or slightly yellowish; pterostigma large. Genitalia.— Male.—Genitalia similar to carpinicola. Female.—
Genital segment much shorter than in that species, not as long as rest
of abdomen, dorsal valve a little longer than ventral. Described from one pair from Ames, Iowa (Mally), which seems to
fit very well Fitch’s brief description. Miss Patch (?12b: 219) states
that the species is abundant at Middletown, Connecticut, on Rock
Maple, Acer saccharum Marsh. Fitch stated that the species occurs
on maple, so that it seems very probable that this is his species. The
black annulation of the antenne seems to be very constant, and this,
together with the fact that it seems to be restricted to the maple,
probably indicates that it is a species distinet from the very closely
related negundinis of Mally. PSYLLA NEGUNDINIS Maly. Psylla negundinis Mauty '94:155.—Parton ’12b: 220. Exeeedingly close to annulata, differing chiefly in antennal colora-
tion and in food-plant. Antenne without black annulation, straw-
yellow, except terminal joint black. Food-plant.—Negundo sp. (box
elder). Were it not for the constant, though slight, difference in
color and the difference in food-plants, I should not hesitate to make
this species synonymous with annulata, as perhaps it is. Deseribed from several males and females from Ames, Iowa (C. W.
Mally), on box elder, August 16, 1894 (determined by Mally); Polk
County, Wisconsin (Baker); Colorado (Gillette), no data; several in
the National Museum collection with only the data ‘3658, June
20, ’85.”

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 153

PSYLLA BREVISTIGMATA Patch. Figs. £2, 93, 264, 308, 484. Psylla brevistigmata Patou ’12b:

Length of body (male) 1.6 mm. ; (female) 2.1; length of forewing
2.3 to 2.5; width of head 0.85. General color light reddish brown to
red, with more or less conspicuous white markings and stripes; vertex
with border more or less continuously white, or at least front margin
white; genal cones white on basal half, red distally; pronotum white
on posterior half; prascutum bordered with white on hind margin;
scutum with longitudinal white or pale stripes; pleure and abdomen
more or less variegated. These colors may sometimes be more
indistinct. Vertex broadly crescentic, front margin evenly rounded, emarginate
at median line, somewhat bulging on each side of front ocellus, with
ashallow depression discally on each side. Genal cones thick at base,
shorter than vertex, strongly divergent, roundly acute at apex,
pubescent. Antenne about two and three fourths times as long as
width of head, slender, black apically. Thorax rather strongly arched, broad. Hind tibie, slender, longer
than femora, with a small spur at base behind. Wings about two and
a half times as long as broad, hyaline, slightly yellowish along veins
in distal third or half; pterostigma broad at base but short, less than
half as long as Rs. Genitalia — Male.—Anal valve slightly longer than forceps, simple,
broad from posterior view; forceps acute at tip, arched toward each
other rather strongly, sides subparallel, pubescent. _emale.—Genital
segment not as long as rest of abdomen, dorsal valve a little longer
than ventral and less acute at apex, with a number of short, thick
sete at tip. Described from two females (paratypes) from Alta Meadows,
Sequoia National Park, California (9,000 feet), July 19, 1907 (J. C.
Bradley); these paratypes are in the collection of Cornell University,
Department of Entomology; one male from California (no data),
which bears the manuscript name of Psylla albirufa Crawford; one
male from Santa Clara County, California (Koebele), September, 1885,
on Cercocarpus parviflorus Nuttall; six from Los Angeles, California
(Koebele), April; several from Santa Cruz Mountains, California
(Koebele); these differ slightly in the male foreeps and may be a
varietal form; Siskiyou County, California (Koebele); Colorado (no
data). Whether or not certain variations in the male genitalia in these
forms indicate distinct species, it is difficult to say. For the present,
at least, these will be called merely varietal forms of the one species. In size and coloration of body also there seems to be considerable
variation, but this is due probably to differences in local environment. 154 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. PSYLLA BREVISTIGMATA MAGNA, new variety. Similar to the species, except in the male forceps, which are longer
and diagonally truncate at the apex. Several males and females from Utah; one from Ormsby County,
Nevada (Baker). Type.—Cat. No. 18111, U.S. Nat. Mus. PSYLLA BREVISTIGMATA ACUTA, new variety. Close to the species, but differing in the male forceps, which are
more slender, more acuminate, and are turned forward in distal
third, terminating in a blunt apex. Several males and females from the mountains near Claremont,
California (Crawford), on foliage of Pinus ponderosa, elevation 10,000
feet, July, 1911; Wasatch Mountains, Utah (Koebele), on Cercocarpus
ledifolius, June 20, 1885. Type.—Cat. No. 18112, U.S. Nat. Mus. PSYLLA FLOCCOSA Patch. Figs. 82, 142, 251, 302, 467. Psylla floccosa Parcu ’09: 301; °10: 29; 11: 11. Length of body (male) 2.1 mm; (female) 3.8; length of forewing 4.8;
width of head 0.98 to 1.05. General color greenish yellow, sometimes
with a brownish tinge; distal antennal segments black. Vertex not half as long as broad, with two shallow fovee, front
ocellus rather sunken in emargination at median line. Genal cones
longer than vertex, not strongly divergent, large, subacute or nar-
rowly rounded at apex, sometimes densely pubescent. Antenne not
quite three times as long as width of head, slender. Thorax strongly arched, coarsely punctate. Pronotum long. Legs
moderately large; hind tibie slightly longer than femora, basal spur
small or almost wanting; apical spines conspicuous, seven or eight in
number. Wings very large, broad at apex, transparent; venation
typical; pterostigma almost or wholly wanting; veins flavous. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve long, converging toward tip, pubes-
cent; forceps long, rather slender, converging in distal portion to a
simple, acute, black point. Female.—Genital segment as long as rest
of abdomen or longer, somewhat subglobose in basal fourth or fifth,
thence abruptly narrowed and slender, styliform, dorsal valve slightly
upturned at tip, a little longer than ventral. Described from one female (metatype) from Orono, Maine (Patch),
July 6, 1909, on Alnus incana Willdenow; Lake Temagami, Ontario,
Canada, August 12, 1906 (W. J. Palmer;) Oakland, Maryland (Hub-
bard and Schwarz), July 9; Toland, Colorado (Cockerell), on Alnus
tenuifolia, August, 1911; Placer County, California (Koebele), on
Alnus incana, September. Some of these bear the manuscript name
of Psylla styliformis Crawford. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDM OF THE NEW WORLD. 155

Nymph.—Adult nymphs are oval in shape, flattened, about 3.19
mm in length more or less; head and thorax pale green, abdomen
pale yellow; eyes bright pink; tips of antenne, legs, and beak dusky;
densely covered with a white, flocculent fluffy mass, appearing, as
Miss Patch very aptly described them, as “walking ostrich plumes.”

“The eggs are probably deposited upon the alder in the fall, as the
newly-hatched psyllids appear about the time the alder leaves are
unfolding in the spring, and settle upon the ventral surface of the
leaves” (Patch ’10: 301). Adults emerge about the middle or latter
part of June, in Maine. PSYLLA ASTIGMATA, new species. Figs. 87, 256, 257, 311, 471. Length of body (male) 2.3 mm; (female) 3; length of forewing 4.8;
width of head 0.95. General color yellowish green throughout,
antenne brown or black except three basal joints. Vertex not half as long as broad, roundly concave between clevated
posterior ocelli; genal cones about as long as vertex, divergent, rather
acute to subacute at apex, pubescent. Antenne nearly three times
as long as width of head. Thorax typical. Legs long; hind tibia a little longer than femora,
with basal spur small or almost wanting. Wings very large, clear;
venation typical; pterostigma small or wanting. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve similar in form to that of floccosa;
forceps broad, black at apex, with apical margin distinctly emarginate
or bifid; the degree of this emargination varies; anterior subapical
margin sometimes roundly emarginate, making a long median tooth. Female.—Genital segment short and thick, not as long as rest of
abdomen, nearly or fully half as thick dorso-ventrally as long; dorsal
valve a little longer than ventral. Described from several males and females from Polk County, Wis-
consin (Baker); Manitou, Colorado (Gillette); September; Placer
County, California (Koebele), on Prunus demissa, October; Sisson,
California (J. C. Bradley), August 19, 1908; Easton, Washington
(Kocbele). Type in author’s collection. PSYLLA TRIMACULATA Crawford. Psylla alni trimaculata Crawrorp ’11¢: 631. Very close to astigmata, and perhaps not specifically distinct;
differs chiefly in having three large and very prominent red spots on
thoracic dorsum, one on anterior half of praescutum, and one on each
side of seutum. Genal cones more acutely pointed. Described from two females, one from Gowanda, New York (E. P.
Van Duzee), August 2, 1907, and one from Lake Placid, New York,
August 15, 1896 (C. S. Sheldon). Type in author’s collection. 156 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. PSYLLA CERASI Patch. Poylla cerasi Patou ?12b: 223. Very close to astigmata, differing chiefly in being very strikingly
red to vermillion in color instead of greenish; “head and thorax rosy,
dorsal abdomen almost vermillion, a black spot on dorsum of first
abdominal segment, five vivid transverse black bands across abdomi-
nal dorsum, the last coming just cephalad the genital segment. Antennal joints I to III rosy, rest black: eyes bright black: wings
clear and a little brownish, ventral body pale.” (Patch 712b: 233.) The one paratype (?) which Miss Patch has kindly loaned to me does
not show these color characters, since it has been mounted in balsam. Vertex and genal cones resembling more closely astigmata than tri-
maculata. Wings very large; medial vein closer to radial sector
than in astigmata,

Described from one female (paratype %), in balsam, from Stillwater,
Maine (Patch), on wild cherry (Prunus cerasus 2), September 14,
1911. The eggs, supposedly of this species, were found on the same
date between the leaf buds and twigs. More biological data or more extensive collections will be necessary
before the true relationships of this and the two preceding species can
be ascertained. It is possible that all three will prove to be but
variations of one species. PSYLLA ALNI AMERICANA, new variety. Figs. 4, 10, 11, 15, 85, 89, 260, 307, 310, 477. Length of body (male) 3 mm. ; (female) 3.8; length of forewing 4.3;
width of head 1.08. General color yellowish green, antenne black or
brown distally. Similar to floccosa but vertex relatively shorter, only about one-
third as Jong as broad, as long as pronotum; genal cones short, about
as long as vertex or often distinctly shorter, broadly rounded at apex
or sometimes broadly subacute, pubescent. Antenne nearly or fully
three times as long as width of head. Basal spur of hind tibix usually
large and conspicuous. Wings typical in form and venation; ptero-
stigma large, sometimes moderately narrow; wings clear, sometimes
slightly flavous. Genitalia. — Male.—Anal valve long, converging to a narrow apex;
forceps long, narrow, broadened in apical third or fourth (from side
view), apex truncate, either straight or slightly emarginate on trun-
cate margin. Female—Genital segment slender, usually longer than
rest of abdomen, dorsal valve longer than ventral. Described from several hundred specimens of both sexes from:
Claremont, California (Crawford), July, 1911, on Alnus rhombifolia;
Stanford University, California (Crawford), on same host, September,
1911, and May, 1912; Visalia, California (J. C. Culbertson); Ormsby

 

 

THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WoRLD. 157

County, Nevada (C. F. Baker). Some of these bear the manuscript
name of Psylla alni gossypiona Crawford, having been separated from
the variety americana on too slight differences. Type in author's collection. Nymphs.—Abundant on the lower surface of the alder leaves in
summer and fall, conspicuous because of the dense white flocculent
substance with which they cover themselves, as described for
floccosa; length 1.8 to 2.5 mm. Color pale brownish, or often brown;
caudal half of abdomen darker, with dark cross-bands on basal half. PSYLLA CAUDATA, new species. Figs. 88, 250, 305, 472. Length of body (male) 2.2 mm. ; (female) 4.1; genital segment of
female 1.9; length of forewing 4.3; width of head 0.98. General color
brown to blackish; dorsum of head and thorax with irregular pale
stripes, bands, or spots; antenne and legs brown to fuscous; abdo-
men mostly blackish. Vertex less than half as long as broad, relatively a little longer
than in preceding species, less concave; genal cones large, as long as
vertex, rounded at apex or often subacute, pubescent. Antenne
over two and a half times as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Hind tibie with large basal spur. Wings
clear, transparent; veins black and prominent, venation typical;
pterostigma moderately large. Genitalia.— Male —Anal valve not much longer than forceps,
abruptly narrowed just before apex; forceps moderately long, some-
what enlarged at apex, apex truncate and bifid or rather deeply
emarginate, as in astigmata. Female—Genital segment extremely
long, nearly as long as rest of body, very slender, acuminate and
curved upward in caudal third or half, very acute at apex, dorsal
valve longer than ventral; with an apparent suture across both
valves near the center. Described from several males and females from Tolland, Colorado
(Cockerell), on Alnus tenuifolia, August, 1911; Pagosa Springs, Colo-
rado (Baker); several others with data “Colo,” and no more. Type in author’s collection. PSYLLA GALEAFORMIS Patch. Fig. 144,
Psylla galeaformis Parc 11:12. Length of body (male) 2.2 mm. ; (female) 3.8; genital segment of
female 1.3; length of forewing 4.2; width of head 0.96. General color
orange to reddish brown, sometimes rather dark; paler ventrad; thorax
with paler markings, somewhat as in caudata, but less conspicuous. Similar to caudata in most respects, but genal cones usually more
acute; antennm nearly three times as long as width of head; hind

158 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. tibia: with a moderately large spur at base. Wings similar but often
tinged with yellow. Male anal valve and forceps longer than in
caudata; forceps more slender and less enlarged at apex. Female
genital segment less elongate, relatively thicker and not upcurved
at apex, less than one-third as long as rest of body, without an appar-
ent suture across the middle. Described from one female (paratype) from Orono, Maine (Patch),
on Alnus incana, July 26, 1905; several males and females from
Stamford, New York (Van Duzee), June 6, 1909; Holderness, New
Hampshire (Koebele), October, 1884; Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
(W. Metcalfe), on “Alder,” August 3, 1904; Marquette, Michigan
(Hubbard and Schwarz), July 27; Easton, Washington (Koebele). PSYLLA TORRIDA, new species. Figs. 96, 269, 312, 474. c

Length of body (male) 1.6 mm. ; (female) 2.1; length of forewing
2.3; width of head 0.70. General color orange to red; abdomen
blackish ventrad; antenne black on apical three-fourths. Head scarcely as broad as thorax; vertex elevated roundly (when
viewed from directly above it) in front on each side of median line,
postocellar areas strongly elevated, somewhat pubescent. Genal
cones about two-thirds as long as vertex, more or less separated at
base and quite strongly divergent, rounded to subacute at apex, with
a few long blackish hairs, Antenne extremely long and slender,
more than four times as long as width of head. ‘Thorax rather strongly arched, somewhat pubescent. Hind tibie
with a relatively large spur at base. Wings small, less than twice as
long as broad, rather squarish on apical margin, clear or slightly
tinged with yellow; costal margin distinctly setose; pterostigma small,
opaque-yellow. Genitalia.— Male—Anal valve small, rather cylindrical, not much
longer than forceps, somewhat flared out cup-like at apex; forceps
ovoid, flattened, about twice as long as broad (in lateral aspect),
pubescent; with a slender, crotch-shaped structure arising between
forceps from dal end of genital segment, and the two slender
capitate arms lying close to the inner surface of forceps. Female.—
Genital segment nearly as long as rest of abdomen, dorsal valve longer
than ventral and less acute; ventral valve very acute at tip; pubes-
cence long and stiff. Described from four males and five females from Para, Brazil
(C. F. Baker). This and the following two species, all tropical, are
sharply distinguished by the extremely long antenne, and are closely
interrelated in many respects, and it is quite possible that they
should be placed in a distinct genus. Type in author's collection. THE JUMPING PLANT-LICE OR PSYLLIDH OF THE NEW WORLD. 159

PSYLLA ORIZABENSIS, new species. Figs. 95, 479. Closely related to torrida, differing as follows: Larger; body (female)
2.6 mm. long; forewing 3; head relatively a little broader. Vertex
less emarginate in front at median line. Wings longer, over two and
a fourth times as long as broad, rounded at apex, yellowish, venation
similar, but pterostigma distinctly larger. Female genital segment
a little longer. Described from one female from Orizaba, Mexico (Crawford),
August 20, 1910. Type in author’s collection. PSYLLA MINUTICONA, new species. Figs. 94, 480. Length of body (male) 1.7 mm. ; (female) 2.1; length of forewing
2.2; width of head 0.68. General color greenish yellow to light
orange; antenne flavous on basal half, rest black. Resembling torrida, but smaller ; vertex almost straight across
front margin, rounded down from base toward genal cones almost as
in Calophya; genal cones very short and rounded, not as long as their
width at base, with a few rather long hairs; antenne as in torrida,
Wings about twice as long as broad, clear or slightly yellowed, broadly
rounded at apex, venation similar; pterostigma small, as in ¢orrida. Genitalia.— Male.—Anal valve similar to torrida; forceps of same
type, flat-ovoid, about two-thirds as broad as long, with a similar
crotch-shaped structure between them. Female.—Genital segment
similar, but shorter. Described from one male and two females from Champerico,
Guatemala (C. F. Baker). Type in author's collection. DOUBTFUL SPECIES. PSYLLA RECTICEPS Provancher. Psylla recticeps PROVANCHER ’86: 305. This seems to be aspecies of Aphalara, and were it not for the fact
that the wing is described as acute, I would have no hesitation in
assigning it to that genus. The description of the wings suggests
Trioza. Tn his key to the genera, Provancher describes Psylla as
“head square in front, anterior margin slightly emarginate; antenne
nearly as long as body;” this is apparently Aphalara. Diraphia is
described as “head cleft in front, forming on each side a conical pro-
jection”—apparently Psylla. It was described by Provancher as follows:

Paylla recticeps n. sp.—Length 0.12 inch; color greenish yellow; head short, trans-
verse, emarginate in front, with a median impressed line and a depression on each

 

160 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. side of it; ocelli light red, two near posterior margin of eyes, third in anterior emar-
gination. Eyes green or brown, large, prominent; antennee long, elender, two basal
joints longest, 11 longer than I; terminal joint a little thickened, with two sete. Rostrum $-jointed, lange, tip black. Prothorax short, rounded on front margins;
mesonotum large, transverse. Wings transparent, yellowish, veins rather prominent;
median vein forming a cell at the acute apex of the wing, enlarged at base and flexed
above. Venter and legs concolorous; abdominal segments margined with red. Com-
mon on bushes. Cape Rouge, Isle de Ia Madelaine. DIRAPHIA QUADRICORNIS Provancher. Diraphia quadricornis PRovaNcuERr ’86: 306. This appears to be identical with Psylla galeaformis Patch, but
because of the uncertainty I am unwilling to refer the latter to
this name. According to Provancher it was described as follows:

Length 0.20 inch; color green with orange tinge; cephalic cones, legs, and antenne
slightly lighter; antenne green at base, then lighter, black at tip, almost as long as
body. Wings entirely hyaline, veins prominent. Metacoxal spurs large, acute. Female abdomen large, stout, brownish at extremity. Cape Rouge, Ottawa. Common. DIRAPHIA SANGUINEA Provancher. Diraphia sanguinea PRovaNcuer ’86: 307. This suggests Psylla cerasi Patch, and is perhaps identical with it. It was described by Provancher as follows:

Length 0.13 inch; color reddish to black; three lobes of mesonotum blood-red; tip
of rostrum, abdominal segment margins and tarsal spines black. Head pale beneath,
redabove. Wings hyaline, triangular terminal cell very long and narrow. Abdomen
striped red and black. " Genital segment long, pointed, conical. Cape Rouge. PSYLLA DUVAUZ Scott. Psylla duvaux Scorr ’82i: 443.—JnErtne ’85: 129. A South American species. PSYLLA, sp. (?) A few apparently new species are not sufficiently represented in

the collection to be described as new, but illustrations of them are
included herewith, in figs. $1, 97, 303, 313, 469, 481. EUROPEAN SPECIES. For the sake of comparison, several European species have been
illustrated in the plates, but no description is given in the text:

Livia juncorum Latreille (figs. 22, 23, 218, 271, 427); Euphyllura phillyreae Forster
(figs. 35, 224, 274, 430); Euphyllura olivina Costa (figs. 223, 429); Floria spectabilis
Flor (figs. 44, 226, 435); Ploria radiata Forster (Alloeoneura) (figs. 45, 277, 437); Apha-
laroida ericae Curtis (Rhinocola) (figs. 55, 291, 460); Aphalaroida succincta Heeger
(Rhinocola) (figs. 54, 238, 459); Amblyrhina cognata Loew (figs. 71, 72, 247, 457);
Psyllopsis fravint Linnaeus (figs. 231, 282, 440); Psylla crataegi Forster (fig. 320);
Peylla alni Linnaeus (fig. 476); Psylla pyri Linnaeus (fig. 395). BIBLIOGRAPHY. Aueaan ’87.—La Naturaleza (Mexico City), 1887: 21-26, pl. 3. (Freysuila.) Anpre, Ep. ’78.—Life history of Trioza centranthi Vall., Ann. Soc. Ent. France,
1878:77-86. Asuweap, Wat. H. ’81—The Aphidee (Psyllide) of Florida. Can. Ent.,
1881. "10.—Homoptera of Harriman-Alaska Series, vol. 7: 135-137, 1910.
, G. 11.—Schiidlinge an Kulturpflanzen aus deutschen Kolonien. Mitth. Zool. Mus. Berlin, 5: 261-273, 1911. "12.Beitrige zur Kenntniss der Afrikanische Chermiden- (Psylliden-) Fauna,
pts. 1-v, Ent. Rundschau, 29: 10-12, 19-21, 35-36, 100-101, 117-118, 123-125,
1912. °13.—Peyllidarum Catalogus, W. Junk, Berlin, 1913: 1-92. Barwarp, '79.—Peylla pyrisuga (Pear tree psylla). Proc. Amer. Ass. Adv. Sci.,
28: 478, 1879. Beurenmiter, Wa. '92,—Catalog of Gall-Producing Insects found within fifty
miles of New York City. Journ. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., 4: 245-268, 1902. 94.—Insect Galls of the Vicinity of New York City. Journ. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist No. 4, 1904. Bouty, Knur’01.—T vii Zoocecider p4 Laurus canariensis. Ent. Tidskrift,22:89-91,
1901. (Trioza alacris.) Borex, Cart. ’10.—Die Fligeladerung der Aphidina und Psyllina, Zool. Anzeiger,
36: 16-24, 1910. Boyer, M. '40.—Insects Which Attack the Olive Tree. Ann. Ent. Soc. France,
1840: 111-112. Bucxron, G. B. ’93a.—The Mango Peylla. Indian Museum Notes, 3: 13-14, 1893. *93b.—The Mango-Shoot Psylla. Indian Museum Notes, 3: 91-92, 1893. *94.—Notes on a New Payllid. Indian Museum Notes, 3 (No.5): 18-19, 1894. 700.—Description of New Species of a Psylla Destructive to Forest Trees. Indian

Museum Notes, 5: 35-36, 1900. Cockerrut, T. D. A. '10.—A New Gall-Making Psyllid. Ent. News, 21: 180-181. *11.—Fossil Insects from Florrisant, Colorado. American Museum of Natural
History, 30: 75-76, 1911. Coox, M. T. '04.—Insect Galls of Indiana. Indiana, Dep. Geology and Natural
Resources, 29th Report, 1904: 888-901 (Payllidw, 844-845). Costa, A. '57.—Pailla dell’ Olivo (Paylla olivina). Insetti Novici Al’ Agricultura,
35-42, pl. 2a, B, 1857. Crawrorp, D. L. ’10a—American Psyllide I (Tri
mology, 2: 228-237, 1910. 106.—American Psyllide II (Triozinw). Pomona Journ. Ent., 2: 347-362, 1910. ‘Ma.—American Psyllidee III (Triozine). Pomona Journ, Ent.,3: 422-453, 1911. °116.—American Psyllide IV (Partial Revision of Subfamilies). Pomona Journ. Ent., 3: 480-503, 1911. ‘Ie.—American Psyllide V. Pomona Journ. Ent., 3: 628-632, 1911. 12a.—Trioza alacris Flor.—A New Pest in California. Bulletin California State
Commission Horticulture, 1: 86-87, 1912. 12b.—A Note on Certain Psyllid. Pomona Journ. Ent., 4: —, 1912. "12c.—Indian Psyllidee. Records of the Indian Museum, 7: 419-437, 1912. "13a.—New genera and species of Psyllide from the Philippine Islands. Philip-
pine Journal of Science. 8 (Sec. D): 293-301, 1913. 714.—A newly described Psyllid from East Africa (Hemip.). Entomological
News, 25: 62-65, 1914. 161

 

 

 

 

 

  

  

‘ine). Pomona Journal Ento-

 

 

    

 

  

 

 

 

162 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Curmis, Jonn ’35.—British Entomology 1835: No. 565 (2 pages and 1 color plate). ’42.—The Pear Tree Psylla. Gardeners’ Chronicle, 1842: 156. Dautsom, A. G. ’51—Anmirkninger dfver Insekter som blifvit funne pa Gottland
och i en del af Calmare lin. Vet. Akad. Handl., 1851: 177. DickeL, Orro '05.—Bisherige Veranderungen der Fauna Mitteleuropas durch Einwand-
erung und Verbreitung Schidlicher Insekten. Zeitschr. {. Wiss. Ins. Biol.,
1: 402, 1905. Doseneck, von ’95.—Ein Unbekannter Rhynchote auf Sinapis alba. Zeitschr. Pflanzenkr., 5: 324-326, 1895. (Apparently a psyllid larva.) Dovatas, J. W. ’76a.—Notes on Some Species of Psyllidw. Ent. Month. Mag.,
13:40-42, 1876. ’76b.—Notes on Some Species of Psyllids (2). Ent. Month. Mag., 13: 67-68, 1876. ’78a.—The Scandinavian Psyllide. Ent. Month. Mag., 15: 41-42, 1878. ’78b.—The Natural History of Psylla succincta. Ent. Month. Mag., 15; 68-69, 1878. ’78c.—Note on Triozagalii Fret. Ent. Month. Mag., 15: 92-93, 1878. *79.—Notes on Some Species of British Hemiptera. Ent. Month. Mag.,
1879. Dupa, L. ’92.—Catalogus Insectorum Faune Bohemice Rhyncota.—Heteroptera,
Cicadina, Psyllina. Ges. f. Physiokratie, Bohmen, 1892: 37-39. Epwarps, J. °90,—Catalog of British Hemiptera (Homoptera), 1890: 15-16. (A Dare
list, with no references.) °96.—Hemiptera-Homoptera of the British Isles.—Psyllide:
26-28, 1896. ’08.—Some British Homoptera Hitherto Undescribed or Unrecorded. Ent. Month. Mag., 44: 85-87, 1908. Enver.e, G. 10a.—Panisopelma quadrigibbiceps, Hine neue Psyllidengattung aus
‘Argentinien, Zool. Anzeiger, 36: 280-281, 1910. *10b.—Wissen. Ergebnisse der Exped. dem Kilimandjara, etc., Hemiptera (Paylli-
den). Kén. Schwedischen Akad. Wiss., 12(8): 137-144, 1910. Essta, E. O. ’13.—Injurious and Beneficial Insects of California. Month. Bul. Cali-
fornia State Commission Horticulture, 2: 43-44, 1913 (pear psylla in California). Feit, E. P. ’11.—The Ash Psylla (Psyllopsis fravinicola Frst). New York State
Entomologist, 26th Report; in New York State Museum Bull. 147:39—40, 1911. Frren, Asa ’51.—Catalog, with References and Descriptions of the Insects Collected
and Arranged for the State Cabinet of Natural History, 1851: 64. (Reprinted
in Lintner ’93.) *57.—Fourth Report New York State Entomologist, 1857: 740. Furrcuer, J. °83.—Note on the Occurrence of Pachypsylla in Cowansville, Canada,
near Ottawa. Canadian Entomologist, 15: 40, 1883. Fuor, G. ’60.—Die Rhynchoten Livlands in Systematischer Folge Beschreiben (1)
Rhynchota frontirostria Zett., 1860: 479. ’61.—Zur Kenntniss der Rhynchoten Beschreibung neuer Arten der Familie
Psyllodea Burm., Moskau, 1861. Forster, Arn. '48.—Uebersicht der Gattungen und Arten in der Familie der Psyl-
loden. Verh. d. Nat. Vereins d. Preussischen Rheinlande, 1848: 67-98. Forses, 8. A. ’85.—The Yellow Jumping Pear Louse. Illinois State Entomologist’s

14th Report, 1885: 98-100. ( Trioza pyrifoliv)
Fravenretp, G. R. ’61.—Beitrag zur Kenntniss der Insekten-Metamorphose. Verh, Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 11: 163-174, 1861. ’64.—Zoologische Miscellen III. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 14: 681-696, 1864. °70.—Metamorphoses of Injurious Insects. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 20: 662,
1870. Frocearr, W. W. ’98.—The Growth of Vegetable Galls (Psyllide). Agricultural
Gazette of New South Wales, 9: 488, 1898. 261 and pls. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 163

Frocearr, W. W. '00.—Australian Psyllide I. Proc. Linn. Soc. N. 8. Wales, 1900:
250-302. ‘01.—Australian Psyllidz II. Proc. Linn. Soc. N. 8. Wales, 1901: 242-298. 02.—Insects of the Wattle Trees (Psyllide et al.). Agr. Gaz. N. 8. Wales,
13: 718, 1902. °03.—Australian Psyllidz III. Proc. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales, 1903: 315-337. °05.—The Insects of the Kurrajong. Agr. Gaz. N. 8. Wales, 16: 231-232, 1905. ’07.—Psyllide, Lerp-Insects. Australian Insects, 1907: 361-367. Fouter, A. 8. '$0.—Psylla rubi (Trioza tripunctata). Amer. Ent., 3: 62, 1880. Fyzes, T. W. ’88a.—The Gall Insect of the Nettle Tree. Can. Ent., 15: 83-84, 1883. °83b.—Further Notes on the Psyllide. Can. Ent., 15: 198-200, 1883. Grorrroy, M. 1762.—Histoire Abrégée des Insectes, 1: 482-489, 1762. (Psylla)
Grarp, A. 702.—A Psyllid Gall on Rhamnus alaternus erroneously attributed to a
Coceid. Bull. Ent. Soc. France, 1902: 121-122. Guzerre, C. P., and Baxer, C. F. ’95.—A Preliminary List of the Hemiptera of
Colorado. Colorado (Fort Collins) Agr. Exp. Station Bull. 31: 113-115, 1895. Grover, T.’77.—Calophya rhois. Agricultural Report for 1876, 1877: 33. (see Riley
"84: 69). Hacker, P. L. '00.—A Note on Paylla pyrisuga. Ilustr. Zeit. Ent., 5: 219, 1900. Hanis, ’52.—Injurious Insects, 1852: 201. (Early history of Psylla pyri in U. S.)
Harnio, 41.—Germar Zeitschrift fiir der Entomologie, 3: 375, 1841. Horvatu, G. ’97.—Homoptera Nova ex Hungaria. Termeszetrajzi Fuzettek, 20:
638-643, 1897. 703.—Ann. Nat. Mus. Hung., 6: 568-569, 1908. (Psylla borealis in Greenland). Hovarp, C. ’08-09.—Les Zoocecides des zl d'Europe I-II, 1908-1909 (page
references too numerous to cite in det
Jarvis, 06—Entomological Society of Ontario ‘oansde), 37th Annual Report, p. 65,
1906. Juerina, H. ’85.—Gall Insects of Southern Brazil. Ent. Nachricht., 11: 129-130, 1885. Jonson, S. A. "11.—News Notes—The Tomato Psyllid. (see Patch ’12b : 232). Kirrrer, J.J. ’89.—Mittheilung iiber Psylliden. Ent. Nachricht., 15: 4, 1889. °93.—Galls Collected in Lothringens. Ent. Nachricht., 19: 22, 1893. °98.—Description of a Coccid Producing Galls on Rhamnus alaternus and oleoides. Bull. Ent. Soc. France, 1898: 214-215. ’05.—Etude eur de nouveaux Insectes et Phytoptides gallicolesdu Bengale. Ann. Soc. Sci. Bruxelles, 29: 159-182, 1905. °06.—A New Gall-Making Psyllid from India. Zeit. f. Insekt. Biologic, 2: 387-
390, 1906. °08.—Galles et d’Insectes Gallicoles d’Asie. Marcellia, 7: 149-167, 1908. Kierrer, J. J., and Hersst, P. '05.—Psyllid Galls from Chile. Zeit. i, Wiss. Insekt. Biologie, 1: 65, 1905. *09.—Uber einige neue Gallen aus Chile. Centralbl. #. Bakt., 23: 122-123, 1909. Kierrer, J. J., and Jorcensen, P. '10.—Gallen und Gallentiere aus Argentinien. Centralbl. f. Bakt., (Abt. 2) 27:362-444, 1910. (Psyllid galls on pp. 372, 386.) Kirxavpy, G. W. ’02.—Fauna Hawaiiensis, 1902: 113-114. ’04.—Nomenclature of Hemiptera. Entomologist, 1904: 254. (Psyllida—=Cher-
mide.) °05.—Two New Homoptera of the Family Chermide. Can. Ent., 37: 290-292,
1905. ’07.—On Two New VitianChermide. Proc. Hawaiian Ent. Soc., 1: 103-104, 1907. *08a.—A List of the Described Hemiptera (Excluding the Aleyrodide and Coc-
cide) of Hawaii. Proc. Hawaiian Ent. Soc., 1: 205-206, 1908. 708b.—A Catalog of the Hemiptera of Fiji. Proc. Linn. Soc. N. S. Wales,
33: 390, 1908. 164 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Kuwayama, §. ’07.—Die Psylliden Japans I. Trans. Sapporo Nat. Hi
49-189, 1907. 09-10.—Die Peylliden Japans II. ‘Trans. Sapporo Nat. Hist. Soc., 3: 53-66, 1909. 1910. Lamventie, M. ’09.—Contribution a la Faune des Hemipteres, Heteropteres, Cica-
dines et Psyllides du Sud-Ouest de la France (Ed. 2). Acta Soc. Linn, Bor-
deaux, 1909: 94-98. Larrertix, P. A. 1810.—Considerations general sur L’Ordre Natural des Animaux des
Crustaces, Arachnides, et des Insectes, Paris, 1810: 264-265, and 434. Leguwen-Reunvaan, J-and W.’09a.—Einige Gallen aus Java. Marcellia, 8: 21-36,
1909. (Peyllid galls, p. 25.) °09b.—Binige Gallen aus Java II. Marcellia, 8: 85-119, 1909. (Psyllid galls,
pp. 89, 95, 108). Lernoy, H. M. '09.—Peyllida of India, in Indian Insect Life (Thacker and Spink Co.,
London), 1909: 742-743. Lerntenry, L. '74.—Catalogue des Hemipteres du Departement du Nord (ed. 2)
1874: 90. Mem. Soc. Imp. des Sc. de I’Agr. et des Arts de Lille. °90.—Description of a New Psyllid (Diaphorina guttulata). Proc. Asiatic Soc. Bengal, 1890: 165-166. Lermierny, M.,and Purow, A.’76.—Hemipteres de Biskra. Ann. Soc. Ent. France,
1876: 54-55. Licurenstein, J. °74.—Bull. Soc. Ent. France, 1874: cexxviii. (A brief note on
Aphalara targionii n. sp.) °79.—Description of a New Species of Trioza. Ent. Month. Mag. 16: 82-84, 1879. Lixaeus, C. 1758.—Systema Nature, 1, 1758: 453-455 (Chermes). 1G1.—Fauna Svecica, 1761: 262-264. (Chermes.) Livtwer, J. A. '93.—Injurious Insects of New York, Ninth Report (46th Report of
N.Y. State Museum), 1893: 317-329 (The Pear-Tree Psylla), and 404 (Reprint
of Fitch ’51). Loew, F. ’73.—Zoologische Notizen. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 23: 141-143, 1873. °76,—Zur Biologie und Charakteristik der Psylloden nebst Bescreibung zweier
neuer Arten der Gattung Psylla. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 26: 187-216,
1876. °77a.—Beitrige zur Kenntniss der Peylloden. Verh, Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 27:
123-154, 1877. °776—On the Identity of 7. abicticola Fret. with Chermes rhamni Schrk. (a letter
to Douglas). Ent. Month. Mag., 14: 20-21, 1877. °78a.—Zur Systematik der Psylloden. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 28: 585-610,

 

Soc.,

 

 

 

1878. °78b.—Diagnoses of Three New Speciesof Psyllide. Ent. Month. Mag. 230,
1878. °79.—Mittheilungen tiber Psylloden. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 29: 549-598,
1879. '80—Turkestanische Psylloden. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 30: 251-268, 1880. '$1a.—Beitrige zur Biologie und Synonymie der Psylloden. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 31: 157-170, 1881. °81b.—Beschreibung von zehn neuen Peylloden-Arten. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 31: 255-268, 1881. *s2a.—A New Species of Peylla. Wien. Ent. Zeit., 1: 92-04, 1882. °82b.—Katalog d. Psylliden des Paliarktischen Faunen-Gebietes. Wien Ent. Zeit., 1: 209-214, 1882. ’82c, Comments on Current Literature. Wien. Ent. Zeit., 1: 283, 1882. 82d—Revision d. Paliarkitechen Peylloden in Hinsicht auf Systematik und
Synonymie. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 32: 227-254, 1882. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 165

Loew, F. '82c.—Zur Characteristik der Psylloden-Genera Apahalara und Rhinocola. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 33: 1-6, 1882. ’83.—A New Species of Trioza. Wien. Ent. Zeit., 3: 83-86, 1883. °84,—Beitriige zur Kenntniss der Jungenstadien der Psylliden. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges, Wien, 34: 143-152, 1884. °86,—Neue Beitriige zur Kenntniss der Psylliden. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien,
36: 149-170, 1886. 's7.—Ubersicht. d. Psylliden yon Austerreich-Ungarn mit Einschluss von
Bosnien und der Herzgowina nebst Beschreibung neuer Arten. Verh. Zool. Ges. Wien, 37: 540, 1887. Loew, H. '47.—Psylla cerastii n. sp. Stettiner Ent. Zeit., 1847: 344. Mazzy, C. W. ’93.—Hackberry Psyllide Found at Ames, Iowa, Proc. Iowa Acad. Sciences, 1: 131-138, 1893. °94.—Psyllidee Found at Ames, Towa. Proc. Iowa Acad. Sciences, 2: 152-171,
1894. Manarr, ©. L. '95a.—The Pear Tree Psyllain Maryland. Insect Life, 7: 175-185, 1895. "056.—The Pear Tree Psylla. U.S. Dep. Agr. Bur. Ent. Circular 7, 1895. Masxeut, W. M. '78.—Coccidee of New Zealand, Trans. New Zealand Institute, 11:
223-225, 1878. ’89.—Psyllidee of New Zealand. Trans. New Zealand Institute, 22: 157-170, 1889. Meuicnar, L. '05.—Beitrag zur Kenntniss der Homopteren-Fauna Deutsch-Ost-
Airikas. Wien. Ent. Zeit., 24: 304, 1905. Mever-Diir ’71.—Die Psylloden. Mitth. Schwei
Mink, W. A New Livia. Stettiner Ent. Ze
'59.—Kleinere Mittheilungen. Ent. Zeit. in Stettin, 20: 430, 1859,
strap, R. ’11.—A New Genus of Peyllidee irom Nyasaland, Africa. Bull., Ent. Research, 2: 105-106, 1911. Newsrean, R., and Cumnes, B. F. '13.—On a Remarkable Gall-Producing Psyllid
from Syria. Ann, and Mag. Nat. History, 9 (ser. 8): 306-308, 1913. Onsenon, E. A. °78.—Leaf Galls on Parinarium curatellifolium. Ent. Month. Mag.,
15: 97-99, 1878. Osnaniy, B. ‘07a.—Catalogue des Hemopteres (Auchenorhynques et Psyllides) du
gouv. de St. Petersbourg. Ann. Mus, Zool. Acad. Imp, Sci. St. Petersbourg,
12: 37-40, 1907. °076.—Verzeichnis der Palwarktischen Hemipteren, mit Besonderer Berucksichti-
gung Ther Verteilung im Russischen Reiche. Ann. Mus. Zool. Acad. Imp. Sci. St. Petersbourg, 12: 338-381, 1907. 10.—Verzeichnis der Palwarktischen Hemipteren, IIT. Ann, Mus. Zool. Acad. Imp. Sci. St. Petersbourg, 1910: 187-196. OsteN-SackeN, B. ’61.—Gall Insects of North America, Ent, Zeit. in Stettin,
1861; 422,
Packarp, A. S. °90,—See Riley, C. V. ’90, Author of Chapter XII, Hackberry Insects,
in Forest and Shade Tree Insects—5th Report U. S. Ent. Comm., 1890: 614-622
Also see p. 805. Parcn, E. M. ’09a,—The Downy Psyllid of the Alder, Psylla floceosa n. sp. Can. Ent.,
41: 301-303, 1909. '09b.—Homologies of Wing Veins of the Aphididse, Psyllidi, Aleyrodide, and
Coccide. Ann. Ent. Soc. America, 2: 101-129, 1909. "Va. —Peyllide of Maine. Maine Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 187: 10-20, 1911 (Insect
Notes for 1910). "11b.—Insect Notes for 1911. Maine Agr’ Exp. Sta. Bull. 165:
*12a,—Notes on Payllidse, Livia. Psyche, 19: 5-8. °12b,—Notes on Psyllide, II. Maine Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 202; 215-234, 1912.

 

 

 

   
      
 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

, 1911. 166 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Provancuer, L. ’72.—Nat. Can., 1872: 379. *86.—Fauna Entomoligique du Canada, 3: 302-308, 1886. Puron, A. ’71.—Two New Species of Psyllidz with Observations on Other Species. Ann, Soc, Ent. France, 1871: 435-438. °73.—Notes on Some Hemiptera. Ann, Soc, Ent. France, 1873; 21-22. °76.—Notes on Hemiptera. Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1876: 283-288. "78.—Psylla (Arytaina) retame, n. sp. Bull. Soc. Ent. France, 1878: exxxiv-v.
Revrsr, O. M. ’76.—Catalogus Peyllidearum in Fennia hactenus lectarum. Medd. Soc. Fauna et Flora Fenn., 1: 69-77, 1876. ’81,—Till Kiinednomen om Sveriges Psylloder. Ent. Tidskrift, 2: 145-172, 1881. ’82.—Resumés. Ent. Tidskrift 3: 209, 1882. 08.—Verzeichnis der auf den Coniferen gefunden Paliarktischen Heteroptera,
Auchenorrhyncha und Psylliden. Acta Soc. Scient. Fennicz, 36: 61-65, 1908. (Also, an extensive bibliography of European works on Hemiptera.) Ruey, C. V. ’76.—Johnson’s Universal Encyclopedia, 1876: 425. *80.—Footnote to Fuller ’80: 62. Amer. Ent., 3: 62, 1880. *83a.—Hackberry Psyllid Galls. Can. Ent., 15: 157-158, 1883. ’83b.—Proceedings of the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
32: 319, 1883,
*84.—Notes on North American Psyllidwe. Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 2: 67-79,
1883. °00.—Hackberry Psyllids. U. S. Ent. Commission, 5th Report, 1890: 614-622
(see Packard ’90). *91.—The Three Pear Tree Psyllas. Insect Life, 4: 127-128, 1891. (Abstract of
Loew ’86). Ruey, C. V. and Howanp, L. 0. ’93.—The Pear Tree Psylla. Insect Life, 5: 226, 1893. Rissaamen, E. H. ’04.—Australian Gall Insects. Berliner Ent. Zeit., 39: 229-230,
1894. ’99.—Gallen aus Europa, Asien, Afrikaund Amerika. Ent. Nachricht., 25:225-281,
1899. ’05.—Gallen von Aussereuropa. Marcellia, 4: 5-71, 1905. 08.—Gallen aus Brazilien und Peru. Marcellia, 7: 15-79, 1908. 710.—Gallen aus Persien. Zool. Jahrbiicher, 16: 283-295, 1910. Sago, Karu ’95.—The Control of Psylla pyricola. Zeit. {. Pflanzenkr., 5: 28-29, 1895. Sanperson, E. D. ’12.—Insect Pests of Farm, Garden, and Orchard, 1912: 641 (pear
psylla). Sasaxt, C. 09.—On the Life History of Trioza camphor n. sp. of the Camphor Tree,
and its Injuries. Journ. College Agric. Imp. University, Tokyo, 2: 277-286,
pls. 15-16, 1909. Scuourspen, H. ’01.—Hemipteres de Francochamps. Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgique,
45: 270, 1901. Sonwanz, E. A.’96.—Anomoneura mori n. sp. (Japan). Proc. U. 8. National Museum,
19: 295, 1896. ’98.—Notes on the Lerp Insects (Psyllide) of Australia. Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash-
ington, 4: 66-75, 1898. 99.—Note on the Cedrela Psyllids (Freyswila Aleman). Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash-
ington, 4: 195-197, 1899. '00.—Peyllidae of the Harriman-Alaska Bxpedition. Proc. Washingtan Academy
Sciences, 2: 539-540, 1900. *04a.—A Nest-Making Psyllid Larva (Euphalerus nidifer). Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash-
ington, 6: 153, 1904. *04b.—Notes on North American Psyllide I. Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, 6: 234-
245, 1904. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 167

Scnwarz, E. A. and Cockerett, T. D. A. ’00.—American Naturalist, 31: 290, 1900. Scorr, Joun ’76a.—Diagnoses of Certain Species of Psyllidre which may be expected

to occur in Great Britait Ent. Month. Mag., 13: 66-67, 1876. °765.—Monograph of British Psyllidee, Trans. Ent. Soe. London, 1876: 525-569. "T6e.—Notes on Some Additional Species of Psyllidw. Ent. Month. Mag., 13:
137-138, 1876. 'T7a.—New British Species of Psyllide. Ent. Month. Mag., 1

77b,—Deecription of a New Species of Trioza. Ent. Month. Mag., 14

"77c.—Description of Psylla visci Curtis. Ent. Month. Mag., 1

"78.—Paylla rhamnicola Bred—Description of the Nymph. Ent. 15: 67-68, 1878. '79a.—Description of Two New European Psyllide. Ent. Month. Mag., 15:
265-267, 1879. ’79b.—Description of a New Species of the Family Psyllidse—Floria horvathi
n. sp. Ent. Month. Mag., 16: 84-85, 1879. "79¢.—Description of the Nymph of Spanioncura fonscolombei Vrst. (Psyllide). Ent. Month. Mag., 16: 85-86, 1879. .

°70d.—Description of the Female of Trioza atriplicis Licht. Ent. Month. Mag.,
16: 11-115, 1879. 80a.—Description of Four New Russian Psyllide. Ent. Month. \
1880. '80b.—Description of the Nymph and Imago of Paylla peregrina Frst. Ent. Month. 32-283, 187. 2, 1877. 1S-y 16: 250-2:

 

 

'80e.—Description of the Nymph of Arytaina geniste Late,
32-133, 1880. *S1a.—Note on Aphalara nervosa. Ent. Month. Mag., 18: 18, 1881. 81b.—Note on the Earlier Stages of Psylla burt, Ent. Month. Mag., 18: 1S, 1881.
sh Peyllina, With Corrections in the Synonymy. Ent. Month.

 

. Month, Mag.,

 

   

   
 
 

Ent. Month. .—Note on Aphalara nebulosa Zett. Ent. Month. Mag., 18: 275, 1882. ’82d.—Further note on Trioza crithmi. Ent. Month. Mag., 18: 276, 1882. 2¢.—Food Plants and Times of Appearance of Species of Psyllide in Great
Britain, with others which may occur here. Ent. Month. Mag., 19: 13-14, 1882,

°82/.—Capture of Aphalara nebulosa Zett. Ent. Month. Mag., 19: 42-43, 1882. 82g.—Doscription of a Species of Payllidme Recently New to Great Britain. Ent. Month, Mag., 19: 64-66, 1882. ’82h.—Description of a New Genus and Two New Species of Psyllide from South
America. Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1882: 443-448. ’82i.—On Certain Genera and Species of Psyllide in the British Museum. Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1882: 449-473, 2 pls. °83a.—Note on Aphalara subpunctata Frst. Ent. Month. Mag., 19: 189, 1883. °83b.—New Localities for Trioza crithmi. Ent. Month. Mag., 19: 205, 1883. '83e.—The Early Life of Psylla pyricola Frst. Ent. Month. Mag., 19: 205-206, 1883. '86a.—Description of the Nymph of Psylla maliSchm. Ent. Month. Mag., 22: 281,
1886. ’36b.—Description of the Nymph of Psyllopsis frarinicola Frst. Ent. Month,
Mag., 22: 281-282, 1886. *$6e.—Note on Trioza remota Frst., with a description of the nymph. Ent. Month. Mag., 22: 282, 1886. Scupper, 8. H. '90.—Tertiary Insects of North America, 2: 175-178, 1890. 60¢0°—Bull. 85—14—12

 

 

 

    

 

   

 

 

168 BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. S1axorer, V. '79.—Spondiliaspis, A New Genus of Hemiptera. Bull. Soc. Ent. France, 1879: Ixxxv-vii. 81.—Notes by Signoret. Bull. Soc. Ent. France, 1881: cl
Suarrtann, M. V. °92.—The Pear Tree Psylla. New York (Cornell) Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull, 44, 1892. °96.—The Pear Tree Psylla. New York (Cornell) Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 108: 691-81,
1896. (Largely a repetition of Bull. 44.) Samm, J. B. ’96.—Economic Entomology, 1896: 137. (Psylla pyricola.) 709.—Incects of New Jersey, 1909: 109. (Psylla pyricola.) Sresuins, IP. A. ’09.—Insect Gallsof Springfield, Massachusetts. Springfield Museum
of Natural History, Bull. 2, 1909. Sroven, H. B. ’10.—The Hackberry Psylla, Pachypsylla c.-mamma. Kansas Uni-
ersity Science Bulletin 5: 121-165, 1910. (A treat on the anatomy of the
species.) Srranp, E. 02.—Norske Fund av Hemiptera. Ent. Tidskrift, 23: 269-270, 1902. Sute, K. ’04.—Popis nové mery Psylla Dudain. sp. Acta Soc. Ent. Bohemiae, 1: 1-4,
1904. 705.—Revise Peyll skirby Dudovy. Acta Soc Ent. Bohemiae, 2: 1-4, 1905. 06.—Revise Psyll skfrby Dudovy, I. Acta Soc. Ent, Bohemiae, 3: 1-2, 1906. *07a.—Beitrige zur Kenntniss der Psylloden. Bull. Int. Akad. d. Sciences de
Bohéme, 12: 1-9, 1907. 207b.—Nové avésti o Payllich, Acta Soc. Ent. Bohemiae, 4: 110-116, 1907. 708.—Paylla Lemurica n. sp., z. Madagaskarn, Acta Soc. Ent. Bohemiae,
‘77-82, 1908. 09a.—Trioza cockcrelli n. sp. Acta Soc. Ent. Bohemiae, 6: 102-108, 1909. 109b.—Zur Kenntniss und Synonymie der Weiderbewohnenden Psylla-Arten. Wien. Ent. Zeitung, 28: 11-24, 1909. "10a.—Monographia Generis Trioza Forster. Sitz. Kén. Bohm. Ges Wiss. Prag,
1910: 1-34. °10b.—Uvod do Studia, Synoptické Tabulka a Synonymicky Katalog Druhu
Rodu Psylla palacarktickf. Kral. Ceské Spolecnosti Nauk, 5: 1-46, 1910. (A
synopsis of the genus Psylla, with synonymy.) 10c.—Piispévky Ku Pozniini Payll. Ceské Akad. Cisare Frant. Josefa, 19: 1-33,
1910; ten plates. (Descriptions and figures of Psylla.) *11.—Monographia Generis Trioza Frst., Il. Sitz. Kén. Bohm. Ges. Wiss. Prag,
1911: 1-34, with 10 plates. 12.-Monographia Generis Trioza Frst., III, Sitz. Kén. Bohm, Ges. Wiss. Prag,
1912: 1-63, pls. 21-35. 713.—Monographia Generis Trioza Frst., IV. Sitz. Kon. Bohm. Ges. Wiss. Prag,
1913: 1-48, pls. 36-48. ‘Tanctont, T. °79.—Rendiconti Soc. ent. ital., 1879. ‘Terren, J. G. ’83.—Manna, or Lerp Insects of South Australia, Journ. Linn. Soc. London, 17: 109-111, 1883,
Tuomas, C. ’79.—Thomas’ Third Report—IIinois, Eighth, 1879. Tuomas, Fr. ’91.—Die Blattftohkrankheit der Lorbecrbaume. Zeit. f. Pflanzenkr.,
8: 92-93, 1801. (Zrioza alacris.) ‘Tuomson, C. G. ’77.—Ofversigt af Skandinaviens Chermes-Arter, Op. Ent., 8:
844, 1877. ‘Tuexer, E. S.’07.—Results of Collecting Insects in Kansas and Colorado. Kansas
Univ. Science Bulletin, 4: 69, 1907. ‘Tyuer, C, H. ’05.—A Payllid Leaf-Gall on Celtis, probably Pachypsylla e.-pubescens
Riley. Psyche, 7: 187-188, 1895. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 169

Vossexer, J. 06.—Kine Psyllide als Erzeugerin von Gallen am Mwulebaum. Zeit. £. Wiss, Insekt. Biologie, 2: 276-285, 305-316, 1906. Waca, M. °42.—Diraphia, A New Genus Near Livia. Ann. Soc. Ent. France, 1842:

 

 

 

275-278. Warxer, F. A. ’69.—Catalog of the Homoptera of the Indian Archipelago, 1869:
329-330. Warsi and Ritey, C. V.’69.—Paylla rubi (Trioza tripunctata), Amer. Ent., 1: 225,
1869. Westwoop, J. 0.’40.—An Introduction to the Modern Classification of Insects, 2: 434~
437, 1840; and
Synopsis of Genera of British Insects (in same book), p. 117. Wrrtacztt, Em, ’85.—Die Anatomie der Psylliden. Zeit. Wiss, Zool., 42: 569-638,
pls, 20-22. Gerrerstepr, J. W. ’40.—Insecta Lapponica Descripta, 1840: 308. EXPLANATION OF PLATES. List or ABBREVIATIONS,

 

   

 

 

 

 

A.—anal vein. ‘meracanthus. a.—anus. mandibular seta. ac.—axillary cord. mx.—maxillary seta. ant.—antenna. o.—ocellus. ap.—apodeme. P.—pronotum. ‘ase.—accessory sclerite. p-—penis. cl.—clypeus. Pse.—praescutum (dorsulum). Cu.—cubitus. pt.—parapteron. x.—coxa. ptb.—preocular tubercle (Lit
e—eye. PN.—Pseudonotum. epm.—epimeron. eps.—episternum. f—trons. ‘fp.—forceps (male). fu—fureae. Scl.—scutellum. g-—gena. sp.—spiracle. ge-—genal cone. tn.—trochantin. lab.—labium. vertex. labr.—labrum. w.—wing. M—media. wp.—wing process. Prate 1. [Structure of skeleton.] 1. Arytaina robusta, lateral view showing sclerites of head and thorax. (See
above for explanation of abbreviated terms.) Stippled areas are conjunc-
tival membrane. Dotted lines indicate endoskeleton. 2. Apsylla cistellata, lateral view of thorax. Compare metathorax with that

of (1). Livia vernalis, lateral view of head and thorax. Psylla alniamericuna, lateral view of thorax. Psylla pyri, cephalic view of head, showing the sclerites and suppression

of the frons. Puate 2. [Structure of skeleton.) Euphyllura arbuti, sclerites of thorax. Trioza albifrons, same. Psylla pyricola, same, with base of abdomen, also. Apsylla cistellata, ventral view of head and thorax. Psylla alni americana, metacoxa, metafuree, part of epimeron, metasternum
and chitinous process from metafurca: connecting the endoskeleton with
the inner surface of the exoskeleton. The episternum and most of the
epimeron is removed. 11. Same, caudal view. 12. Apsylla cistellata, caudal view of metathorax, partially diagrammatic, show-

‘ing comparatively simple metafurcee. Prate 3. [structure of skeleton.) 13. Psylla pyricola (male), lateral view of abdomen, distended, showing segments,

spiracles, and atrophied and modified sclerites. 14. Same, female. Seoene

a7

172

Fic. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. Psyllopsis fraxinicola, same, more enlarged.

 

. L.
|. Rhinocola aceris, ventral aspect.

. Same, cephalic.

. Same, lateral.

. Bupyllura arctostaphyli, lateral.

. Livia coloradensis, lateral.

. Eupliyllura arctostaphyli, cephalic.
. Bu. phillyree, lateral.

. Same, cephalic. BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Peylla alni americana, showing frons, clypeus, labrum, labium, ete. Paurocephala magnifrons, front view of head, showing frons, clypeus, etc. “Apsylla cistellata, corresponding view as in (16), but actually ventral. ‘Aphalara veaziei, same. Phacopteron lentiginosum, same. Livia coloradensis, same. Pate 4. [Lateral and cephalic views of head.)

. Livia juncorum, lateral aspect.
. Same, cephalic aspect.
. L. vernalis, ventral aspect. L. maculipennis, cephalic. L. vernalis, lateral. L. coloradensis, cephalic. caricis, lateral. Prate 5. (Views of head.)

. Ceriacremum setosum, cephalic.
. Buphalerus nidifer, cephalic. 30. B. vermiculosus.
. E, nidifer, lateral.
. B. vermiculosus, lateral.
. Arytaina geniste, lateral.
. Ceriacremum setosum, Yateral.
. Floria spectabilis, lateral.
. F. radiata, lateral. |. Psyllopsis mexicana, lateral.
. P. frazinicola, lateral.
. P. fravini, lateral.
. Same, cephalic.
. Arytaina robusta, Yateral. Ja. Same, cephalic.
. A, fuseipennis, lateral. ‘A. pubescens. 53. A. amorphe. 54. Aphalaroida suecincta. 55. A. erica. 56. Arytaina robusta. 57. A. assimilis. 58. A. ceanothee. 59. Aphalaroida pithecolobia. 60. Arytaina minuta. EXPLANATION OF PLATES,

Pare 6. [Views of head.} Fic. 61. Katacephala arcuata, lateral. 62, Same, cephalic. 63. Pachypsylla vesiculum. 64. P. mamma. 65. P. venusta, cephalic. 66. Same, lateral. 67. P. gemma,

68. Heteropsylla mericana,

69. 1. cubana. 70. H. terana. 71. Amblyrhina cognata, lateral. Same, cephalic. Paurocephala magnifrons. 74. Calophya triozomima. 75. C. californica. 76. C. nigripennis. 77. Psylla annulata. 78. Mitrapsylla albatineata, cephalic. 79. Same, lateral. 80. Psylla annulata. 81. Psylla sp. (not described). 82. P. floccosa. Phare 7. [Views of head]

83. Arylaina ribesia. 84. Same. 85. Psylla alni americana. 86. P. carpinicola. 87. P. astigmata. 88. P. caudata. 89. P. alni americana. 90. P. cephatica. 91. P. carpinicola. 92. P. brevistigmata. 93. Same, cephalic. 94. P. minuticona. 95. P. orizabensis. 96. P. torrida. 97. Psylla sp. (not described). 98. P. fibulata. 99. P. minuta. 100. P. maculata,

101, P. americana. Pare 8. [Views of head and genitalia.) 102. Paurocephata ilicis, lateral. 103. Same, cephalic. 104, Same, male cauda. 105. Same, forceps, caudal view. 106. Aphalara calthe, cephalic. 17

174

Fig. 107. 108. 109. 10.
lil. 112. 13. 14. 115. 116. 17. 1s. 119. 120. 121. BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM,

A. pulehella. Paurocephala ilicis, female cauda. Aphalara alaskensis, one of male forceps. A, suaedae, head. ‘A. alaskensis, head. Same, male genitalia, lateral aspect. Heteropsylla quassiae, male forceps. Uideria mira, head and part of thorax. Same, cephalic, of head. Heteropsylta forcipata, male forceps. TZ, quassiv, male genital segment. I. forcipata, same. HH. fusca, male forceps. Katacephala grandiceps, head. Same, lateral aspect. Freysuila dugesii, head. Phinopsylla athens, head.

. Freysuila dugesii, basal part of antenna. Heteropsylta fusca, male genitalia. 26. Katacephala grandiceps, male forceps. 27. Same, male genital segment. 128. 129. 130. 131,
132. 133. 134. 135. 136. 137. 138. 139. 140,
141,
142. 143. 14. 145. Piate 9. [Views of head and genitalia.) Tetragonocephala flava, head. Same, male forceps, caudal view. Psylla hartigii, male forceps. Euphaterus propinguus, head. Aphalaza alaskensis, female cauda. Psylla breviata, male cauda. Luphalerus rugipennis, head. Arytaina chelifera, male forceps, caudal view. Saine, lateral view. Trioza alacris, male cauda. Ceropsylla sideroryli, head. Trioza stylifera, male forceps. 7. lobata, male cauda..
Lewonotu longipennis, head. Psylla floceosa, fernale cauda. Trioza lobata, male forceps. Psylla galeaformis, female cauda. P. hartigii, ene. Prarte 10. [Views of head and mate cauda.)

. Carsidara eoncolor, head, lateral aspect. ~ C. mexicana, head.

. C. dugesii, head. }. C. gigantea, head.

. C. dugesii, cephalic view of head.

. C. gigantea, same. 52. Epicarsa corniculata, head, lateral. Same, cephalic. Rhinopsylla jalapensis, lateral.
. Same, cephalic. Fig, 156. 157. 158. 159. 160. 161. 162. 163. 164. 165. 166. 167. 168. 169. 170. 171. 172. 173. 174,
175. 176. 177. 178. 179. 180.
isl. 182,
183. ‘184. 185. 186. 187. 188. 189. 190. 191. 192. 193. 194. 195. 196. 197. 198. 199. 200. 201. EXPLANATION OF PLATES,

Ceropsylla johnsonii, head, lateral. Epicarsa corniculata, male cauda. Ceropsylla johnsonii, came. Carsidara concolor, same. C. mexicana, same. Prate 11. [Views of head and male cauda.) Aphalara calthz, head, lateral-aspect. A, angustipennis, same. A, veazici, came. A. rumicis, same. A. calthe, same. A. picta, eame. A. nebulosa kincaid’, same. A, pulckella, same. ‘A. minutissina, same. A. calthe, male cauda. Same. A, veazici, same. A. pieta, came. A. nebulosa kincaidi, same. A, nebulosa kincaidi, same. A,
A.

 

pulchella, came. ‘minutissima, same. Rhinopsylla jalapensis, same. Piate 12. [Views of head J

Trioza diospyri, lateral. Leuronota maculata, lateral. Same, cephalic. Trioza viridis, cephalic. Same, lateral. T. frontalis, lateral. T. collaris, cephalic. Leuronota acutipennis. Trioza collaris. T. albifrons. T. arizonw. T. maura. T. salicis. T. maura. T. tongicornis. T. varians. T. salicis. Same, cephalic. Paratrioza arbolensis. Piare 13. [Views of head.) Trioza tripunctata, lateral. T. magnoliz. Paratrioza arbolensis. Trioza longistylus. a

176

Fie. 202. 203. 204. 205. 206. 207. 208. 209. 210. 211. 212,

245. 246. 247. 248,
249. |. Calophya nigripennis. 251. BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. T, salicis. Kuwayama oazacensis. K. medicaginis. Neotriozella immaculata. N. laticeps. Paratrioza arbolensis. Kuwayama medicaginis. Trioza quadripunctata. P. mexicana. Paratrioza cockerelli. Trioza nicaraguensis.

. Neotriozella immaculata,
. N. laticeps.

. Rhinopsylla antennata. }. Neotriozella immaculata. Prate 14.
an ; [Views of mate cauda,}
Livia vernalis. LL. juncorum. Rhinocola aceris.

. Ceriacremum setosum.
. Livia caricis. L. coloradensis.

. Euphyltura olivina. E. phillyreee. Euphalerus vermiculosus.

. Floria spectabilis. Arytaina geniste. Psyllopsis mexicana.

. Arytaina fuscipennis.
. Psyllopsis fraxinicola. P. fravini. Arytaina pubescens.

. A. fuuscipennis,
A

. minuta. ‘A. amorphee. A. A.
Aphalaroida succincta. A, pithecolobia. Arytaina ceanothe,
Packypsylla vesiculum. P. c.-mamma. P.e.-gemma. Heteropsylla mexicana. Puate 15. [Views of male eauds. Heteropsylla cubana. HH, texana. Amblyrhina cognata. Calophya californica. Mitrapsylla albalineata. Peylla floccosa. Fra, 252. 253. 254. 255. 256. 257. 258. 259. 260. 261. 262. 263. 264. 265. 266. 267. 268. 269. 270. 271. 272. 273. 274. 275. 276. 277. 278. 279. 280. 281. 282. 283. 284,

286. 287. 288. 289. 290. 291. 292. 293. 294. 295. 296. 297. 298. 299. EXPLANATION OF PLATES,

Arytaina ribesiz. Same, variation in size. Psylla alba. Pachypsylla venusta. Paylla astigmata, tip of male forceps. Same, male cauda. P. annulata,
P. caudata,
P. alni americana. P. minuta. P. carpinicola. P. cephalica. P. brevistigmata. P. americana,
P, fibulata. P. sinuata. Same, caudal view. P. torrida. Prats 16. {Views of female cauda.) Livia vernalis. L. juncorum. Ceriacremum. setosum. Rhinocola aceris. Euphyllura phillyrex. Livia coloradensis. Arytaina geniste. Floria radiata. Ceriacremum setosum (tibial epur). Buphyllura aretostaphyli. Peyllopsis frazinicola,
Euphalerus nidifer. Psyllopsis frazini. Arylaina robusta. Aphalaroida pithecolobia.

. Arytaina robusta. A. minuta. ‘A. pubescens,
A. fuscipennis. A. amorphe. A. ceanothe. Aphalaroida eriese. Puate 17. [Views of female canda. Pachypsylla vesiculum. Heteropsylla mexicana. HH, cubana. AH. texana. Paurocephala magnifrons. Calophya triozomima. C. californica. C. nigripennis. 1i7

178

Fic. 300. 301. 302. 303. 304. 305. 306. 307. 308. 309. 310. .P.
. P. foersteri.
. P. hippophes. BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM,

Mitrapsylla albalineata. Psylla annulata. P. floccosa. Psylla sp. (not described). Arytaina ribesiw. Poylla caudata. Arytaina ribesiz. Psylla alni americana. P. brevistigmata. P. cephalica. P. alni americana,

Piate 18. {Views of female cauda,)

. Psylla astigmata.

. P. torrida,

. Psylla sp. (not described).
. P. fibulata.

. maculata. minuta.

. carpinicola.

. americana.

. magnicauda

. cratiegi.

. alba.

. pruni.

. viburni. - pyrisuga.

. mali.

. melanoneura. terminalis. Prare 19,
[Views of male and female cauda.} ). Paratrioza cockerelli.

. Same, variation in anal valve. 32. Neotriozella immaculata,

. Rhinopsylla antennata.

. Trioza tripunctata, female cauda.
. T. salici
. T. quadripunctata,
37. T. salicis.
. T. longistylus.

. T. nicaraguensis.
. T. mexicana. » P. salicis.

. T. frontalis.

. T. magnoliz. 344. .. Paratrioza arbolensis.

. Kuwayama medicaginis. 347. 348. 349. T. albifrons. K. oazacensis. Paratrioza cockerelli. Neotriozella laticeps. Fie. 350. EXPLANATION OF PLATES,

Pirate 20.

. [Views of male and female cauda.) T. collaris.

. T. viridis.

. Leuronota maculata. 59. Same, caudal view. 370. 371. 372. 373,
374. 875. 376. 377. 378. A. 379. 380. 381. 382. 383. 384. 385. 386. 387. 388. 389. 390. 391. 392. 393. 394,
395. 396. 397.

 

. 7. diospyri.
. T. albifrons. 362.
. 7. arizone.

. 7. salicis.

. T. maura.

. T. quadripunctata. 367. 368. 369. T. frontalis. T. longicornis. T. tripunctata. 7. varians. T. maura. Same, forceps of male, lateral. Same, male cauda. Prare 21. [Viows of male and female cauda,)

Carsidara gigantea, female cauda. C. dugesii. C. concolor. Rhinopsylla jalapensis. A oe calthee. - angustipennis. A. pulchella. A. calthe. A. minutissina. A. calthe. A. picta. A. rumicts. Carsidara mexicana (tibial epur). Aphalara veaziei. Trioza salicis, male cauda. T. proximata, same. T. mevicana. T. magnolize. Paratrioza arbolensis. P. maculipennis. Kuawayama medicaginis. Prate 22. (Wings, eto)

Trioza breviantennata, head. Paylla pyri, explaining wing venation. Trioza breviantennata, male cauda. Aphalaroida acaciz. 1i9

180

Fra. 398. 399. 400. 401. 402. 403. 404. 405. 406. 407. 408. 409. 410. 411. 412. 413. 414. 415. 416. 417. 418. 419. 420. 421,
422,

423. 424,
425. 426. 427,
428. 429. 430. 431. 432. 433. 434,
435. 436. 437. 438. 439. 440. 441,
442,
443,
444,
445. BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM,

. A, inermis. A. spinifera. Buphalerus propinquus. Trioza lobata,
Hemitrioza sonchi. Aphalara alaskensis. Aphalaroida prosopis. Leuronota longipennis. Buphalerus rugipennis. Ceropsylla sidero:
Freysuila dugesit. Rhinopsylla athenx
Paurocephala ilicis. Uhleria mira. Arytaina chelifera. Psylla alaskensis. Trioza stylifera. Kuwayama dorsalis. Katacephala grandiceps. Freysuila cedrelee. Tetragonocephala flava. Calophya flavida. dubia. Trioza alacris. T. breviantennata. Livia vernalis. L. caricis. L. maculipennis,

L. coloradensis. L. juncorum. Rhinocola aceris. Euphyllura olivina. E. phillyren. E. arctostaphyli. Ceriacremum setosum. Euphalerus nidifer. EB, vermiculosus. Floria spectabilis. Arytaina genista. Floria radiata. Psyllopsis mexicana. P. fraxinicola. Psyllopsis fraxini. Arytaina amorphz. A, ceanothe. A, pubescens. A. robusta. Same, variation in color. Piare 23. (Wing)

Puate 24,
Wings.) Prater, 25. (Wings)

Fie. 446. 447. 448. 449. 450. 451. 452,
453. 454,
455. 456. 457. 458. 459. 460. 461. 462. 463. 464. 465. 466. 467. 468. 469. 470. 471. 4
473. 474. 475. 476,
477. 478. 479,
480. 481. 482. 483. 484. 485. 486. 487. 488. 489. 490. 491. 492. 493. 494. EXPLANATION OF PLATES. A. minuta. A. fuscipennis. ‘A. assimilis. Aphalaroida pithecolobia. Katacephala arcuata. Pachypsylla venusta. P. mamma. P. gemma. P. vesiculum. ‘Heteropsylla mezieana. HH. terana. Amblyrhina cognata,
Heteropsylla cubana. Aphalaroida succincta. A. rice. Prare 26. [Wings.) Paurocephala magnifrons. Calophya triozomima. C. californica,
C. nigripennis. Mitrapsylla albatineata. Paylla annulata. P. floccosa. Arytaina ribesize. Paylla sp. (not described). Arytaina ribesi«e. Psylla astigmata. P. caudata. P. carpinicola,
P. torrida,
P. cephatica. Prare 27. Paylla alni. eee)
P. alni americana. P. carpinicola. P. orizabensis. P. minuticona. Paylla sp. (not described). P. fibulata,
‘minuta. brevistigmata,
maculata. americana. americana. americana. magnicauda,
alba. sinuata,

DRS TD

Prate 28. {Wings
Carsidara gigantea. Rhinopsylla jalapensis. Carsidara dugesii. 181

182

Fra, 495. 496. 497. 498. 499. 500. 501. 502. 503. 504. 505. 506. 507. 508. 524. 525. 526. 527. 528. 529. 530. 531. 532. 533. 534. 535. 536. 587. 538. 539. 540. 541. BULLETIN 85, UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM,

. C. concolor. C. mexicana. Epicarsa corniculata. Ceropsylia johnsonii. Aphalara pulchella. calthz. rumicis. angustipennis. angustipennis. calthe. veaziei. picta. minutissima,
nebulosa kincaidi. PRERARBR DE

Trioza collaris. ). Leuronota maculata.
. Trioza viridis.

. Leuronota acutipennis.
. Trioza frontalis.

. T. albifrons.

. T. arizone.

. T. salicis. maura. frontalis. |. T. diospyri. ). T. maura,

. T. longicornis.

. T. maura.

. T. varians. Trioza tripunctata. 7. salicis. 7. salicis. T. quadripunctata. 7. longistylus. T. proximata. 7. saticis. T. mexicana. Paratrioza arbolensis. Trioza magnoliz. 7. nicaraguensis. Paratrioza cockerelli. Same. Kuwayama medicaginis. Neotriozella laticeps. N. immaculata. Kiuwayama oaxacensis. Rhinopsylla antennata,

Puate 29. (Wings)

Prate 30. Wings.) U. 8. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. +

 

a 11h 3 Os OF er

"TN
‘ Sam

   

DorsaL, LATERAL, AND VENTRAL ASPECTS OF THE HEAD OF PSYLLID. U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 5

 

DorsaL AND LATERAL ASPECTS OF THE HEAD. Fon EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 172,

 

 

 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 7

 

Dorsat AND LATERAL ASPECTS OF THE HEAD. Fon EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 173,

 

 

 

U. &, NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 9

 

Views OF THE HEAD AND CAUDA OF BOTH SEXES

For EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 174. U. . NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 10

 

VIEWS OF THE HEAD AND MALE Caupa. FoR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGES 174 ANO 175,

 

{1 NATIONAL MUSEUM cotter seat
Poe Nels
“A > \ lea E
a

165 es Tee

 

 

 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL 12

 

DorsaL AND LATERAL ASPECTS OF THE HEAD. FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 175. U. 8. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 13

 

Dorsal AND LATERAL ASPECTS OF THE HEAD. Fon EXPLAKATION OF PLATE SEE PAGES 175 AND 176. BST

2 co aS

 

= ase
: SW
eS a

i ESS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a) ae (J
Exp pst
CDN 881

   
    

MALE AND FemaLe Caupa. FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 178. U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 20

 

 

FeMALe Caupa. OF PLATE SEE PAGE 179,

 

U. 8. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 21

 

MALE AND FEMALE CauDa. FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE StE PAGE 179,

 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 22

 

FoREWINGS OF PSYLLID€. FoR EXPLANATION OF PLATE GEE PAGES 179 AND 180. U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 89 PL. 23

 

FOREWINGS OF PSYLLIDA. FOR EXPLANATON OF PLATE SEE PAGE 180. U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 24

 

FOREWINGS OF PSYLLIDA. FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 180. U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 25

 

FoREWINGS OF PSYLLIDA. Fon EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGES 180 Ano 181. U. 8. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 26

 

 

FOREWINGS OF PSYLLIDA. FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 181. U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 27

 

481

 

FOREWINGS OF PSYLLIDA. FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 181. U. 8. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 28

SS :
<—

 

\ SSS

 

508

 

ForEwinas OF PsyLLip€. FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGES 181 AND 182,

 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 29

509 517

 

519
512
520
ZS
521
514

 

ForeWwINGs OF PSYLLIDA. Fon EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 182,

 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM BULLETIN 85 PL. 30

 

 

532
533
535
536
—&x_

538

 

  

Forewines oF PsyLLing,

FOR EXPLANATION OF PLATE SEE PAGE 182,

 

 

INDEX. [tatics indicate synonyms. Italies inclosed in brackets indicate manuscript names ia literature, or present

ineabinet collections.) Page. abdomen, sclerites of 18
aeacie..... 41
‘aceris.. 2
acknowledgments. 7
sculeata, 131
‘acutipennis.. 69
alaeris. my
alaskensis (Aphalara).. 35
alaskensis (Psylla) - M9
143

134

3

68

156

34

M7

44s

ww

. 129
angustipennis..... 30
annulata...... 152
37

36

6

61

62

m4

2

a

Aphalarofda. 38
apiophita.... Ma
Apsylia. 4
2

uz

us

6

7

areuata........ us
argyrostigrra.. 144
arizonze 8s
artemisice. 2
artemisize augustipennis 30
Arytacna ..... 12
122

Arytainini...- ns
assimilis (Arytaina).. 127
essimilis (Trioza), 1
109

155

Cy

89

6060°— Bull. S—14——13

Page. aylmeriae . one

   

baker
bibliography. Ddifasciata. Blastophysa....

[Brachypeyita)..

breviantennata. breviata. Dbrevistigmata........... 153
var, acuta. 154
Var. MagD2. eee eeeeeseeee 18M

    
 

ealamorurn.......-. californica (Calophya). californica (Ceropsylla. caudata (Aphalara
caudata (Psylla). e.-cucurbita. Celtis (hackberry)..
cephalica, 4
{Cephalopsylta}
cerasi. Coriacremine

 

uz

 

 

184

coloradensis. .
communis,

crawfordi. cubana (Heteropsylla)..
cubana (Mitrapsylla)
cucurbita..
c-umbilicus
c.-vesioulum. iospyri. Diraphia
dorsalis. dorsum...
dubia (Calophya)
dubia (Pachypsylla)..
dubia (Trioza). dugesti (Carsidara)
dugesii (Freysuila)
duvause

 

 

 
    
    
 
   
  
     

Epitrioza Crawford. cernstii . [Buglyptoneura}. Euphalerus
Yuphyllura..
Euphyllurini. ‘fibulata...
‘iliverpatum. var. sulcata. frons of Psyllidae
Frontal cones...

 

  
 
  
 
 
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
    
  

   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 
   
   

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
    
 
 
 

INDEX. Page. Page. 20 - 109
31 ay
32 109
58
56 108
143 146
2 89
109 108
6 “a
46
135 | iets (Paurocephala) . 3
109 | iticis ... 129
109 | immaculata. 9s
112 | immature stages. 7

41

13

60

103

19

aa

36

7

Kuwayama. 6

56 | labium. 7
6 100
eat 78
35 Pa
135 oH

- us Be
15 »
na 19
8 86
29 | locomotion of Psyltidee. 16

longicornis. 92

aq | longipennis 9
2p | longistylas 82
ap | uisianze, on
63 | maculata (Leuronota). 68
108 (@sylla)... ML
50 | maculipennis (Livia)........-.- 2
34 (Paratrioza). 73
154 | magna 126
91 | magnicaud: 149
+ 43,129 | magnifrons. 42
46 | magnolie.. ce 96
132 2
132 110
oA 37
S4 | marginata (Livia)... a
85 | marginata (Trioza).. 88
5 | maura, 89
6 | medicagini 66
89 | mendocina 98
48 | meracanthus. 2
125 | mexicana (Carsidara). 58
(Heteropsylla). 46

47 i 133,
uz 0
6 80
6 43
125 | minuta (Arytaina). 128
a7 (Pachypsylla), nD
143 (Psyla). 2

 

 

 

     
     
   

 

    
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
    

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
   

 

 

    

 

 

 

   
   

INDEX. 185
Page. ‘minuia (Trioza). OL
minuticona .... steeceeeeteeeeeees 150
37
107
134
7
3 | quadrigibbiceps.. : 8
quadrilineata. 18
36 82
36 a
36
152 159
98 m4
98 59
Ei 0
2 3
ng 148
1 135
80 1B
3 109
notata....... eee aad 58
nubifera.. 3 83
Ww 87
120
6 12t
& 2
‘cellata n
[oceidentalis}. 37 . a
Sat. 7 | satatriz... 2
orizabensis... ...” 159 | sanguinea. 160
ottawanensis.. see. 98 | Sehwarzil (Apbalara) 36
(Rhinopsylla) . 59
Pachypsyls.. oerree 108 | sclerites of thorax. 3
Pachypsyllin!. 106 } sculptoconus. %
pallida......... 113 10
Panisopelma.. 63 10
wk 6B
10t
a
8
4s
140
104
ot
15
ithecolobia. “0
polygon... 150
. 8
suede... 31
[subtrunceta} %
Sulcata.. ee 85
122 | sylvicota. oe
40
proximata. 81 | Tetragonocephala. [Pseudaphalara]..... 45 | texana..
Pseudonotum..... 10 | thoracic sclerites
Psylla. 135 | tomato Psyllid, the. Payline 105 | torrida. . .
Psyllini.. 134 | tridentata. Psyllopa. 122,
Psyllopsis. 132
psylloptera . 42
pubescens (Arytaina) 131
(Pachypsylla).. - 109
pulehella (Aphalara), 33 var. claripennis. (Paratrioza). . 71 | tripunctata.. ee

 

   

186 INDEX. Page. Page. 306 | venusta. , 109
27 | vermiculosus. aa. (Psylla, Arytaina) 325 | vernalis......0.0-.2..0-- -
umbilicus. 109 | vertex, of Psyllide...... - =
192 | vesiculum......20.--e00- n2
74 | viridis (Aphalara), - 30
(Trioza).. a)
1 | viriduia... 132
31
32 } wings, venation of... aon
venation of wings. u

 

oO

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

“LAA

3 9088 01421 5

 

\
OY \ ‘