120 THE SCOTTISH NATURALIST

PSYLLIDA IN CERTAIN HIGHLAND COUNTIES. By GEORGE HESLOP-HARRISON, B.Sc. Ph.D. RECENTLY, in a paper in the Transactions of the Entomo-
logical Society, Lal+ enumerates fourteen species of Psyllida
which he had collected in the Edinburgh district. These,
added to my own list? of ten species captured on the Island
of South Rona, and certain casual records of very common
species, represent the present extent of the Scottish list,
although a paper of mine® dealing with the Psyllid Fauna
ef twelve of the islands of the Inner and Outer Hebrides is
now in the press. However, last year, owing to the necessity which arose for
procuring certain Scottish material for genetical research, I
spent three periods in the Highlands and Islands. On these
occasions, advantage was taken of the opportunity offered
to collect as many Psyllidz as possible. On the first visit
the counties of Perth, Inverness and Elgin were examined,
on the second the Islands of Skye, Raasay, Longay, Scalpay
and Fladday, and on the third Mull, Tiree, Coll, Canna,
Barra, South Uist, with certain areas in Argyllshire. In spite of the generally unfavourable weather experi-
enced, and of the fact that the first-named visit took place
in April and the third in October and November, as a result
of my work I am able to report no fewer than twenty-four
species for the areas in question. Some of these represent
very important captures. 1. Aphalara calthe Linn. Struan, Aviemore and Oban. Several of the Aviemore
specimens resembled Low's variety maculipennis very closely. 2. A. exilis Web. and Mohr. Struan and Aviemore, very abundant on juniper as well as on
pines and spruces. This is the first time hibernating, adults have
been collected from conifers of any description. 1 Lal, K. B. (1934), Trans. Ent, Soc. Lond., vol. lxxxii., pp. 363-385. 2 ScoTtisH NATURALIST (1938), May-June, pp. 57-59
3 Ent, Mo. Mag. (1936). (In press.) PSYLLID& IN CERTAIN HIGHLAND COUNTIES 121

3. A. (Anomocera) nervosa Forst. Struan, Aviemore and Forres. Larva were found in these

localities on the roots and lower portions of Achillea millefolium. 4. Aphalaroida erice Curt. Struan, Aviemore, Forres (Culbin Sands) and Oban (Glencruiten). At all these points the larvae were observed on the host plants at
ground level. 5. Psylla peregrina Forst. Struan, Aviemore, Forres (Culbin Sands and Findhorn) and
Oban. The hibernating eggs were detected whenever they were
sought, clustered round the buds and in the leaf scars of hawthorn
twigs. 6. P. sorbi Linn. Almost as common as the preceding species; the eggs were

noticed in similar situations on mountain ash. 7. P. mali Schmdbg. Struan, Forres and Oban; hibernating eggs on crab and
cultivated apple. 8. P. nigrita Zett. Struan, Aviemore and Forres ; collected freely as they oviposited
on the host plants which are various species of Salix. Only a few
hibernating adults were beaten at Oban from Conifer. 9. P. melanoneura Forst. Most abundant, both as egg-laying adults in spring and as

hibernating individuals in autumn. 10, P, bagnalli Harr. Hibernating adults on Coniferze near Oban; not common. 11. P. prunt Scop. A few at Oban from Conifer but one male from the unusual
foodplant, bullace, at Struan. 12. P. brunneipennis Edw. Sparingly at Struan, Aviemore and Oban, over-wintering on
Coniferee. 13. P. dudai Sule. Sparingly on sallows at Glencruiten. 14. P. ambigua Forst. Small lave found on Salices nearly everywhere. 15. P. abdominalis M.-D.

With the preceding species. 122 THE SCOTTISH NATURALIST

16. P. subferruginea Edw. Hibernating on conifers at Struan and Oban, but not very
plentiful. 17. Arytaina geniste Latr. Struan, Aviemore, Forres and Oban. On the Culbin Sands
an immaculate-winged form was found. 18. Psyllopsis spp. Eggs were found abundantly on the buds of the common ash
everywhere ; these, in all probability, should be referred to both
Ps, fraxini and Ps. fraxinicola. 19. Triosa urtice Linn. Common everywhere both in hibernation, or on its host, Urtica
dioica. 20. T. remota Férst. Common in hibernation at Oban on Conifers ; rarely at Struan
and Aviemore,

21. Z. maura First. Four females and two males at Struan from conifers, A single
pair from a similar situation at Glencruiten; a very rare British
species. 22. T. albiventris Forst. Quite uncommon at Struan, Aviemore and Oban. Specimens
were taken from birch in the Altyre Woods, near Forres, and from
the dwarf willow, Sadix repens, on the Culbin Sands. 23 T. munda Forst. At Struan only. Except for my record of this species on
Canna, I can find no mention of its capture in any of the literature
other than that it was one of those species sent to Forster by
Walker and Halliday prior to 1848. 24. Triosa sp. Females of an unknown species were beaten from juniper at
Aviemore. These belong almost certainly to a species unrecorded
as British, but, in the absence of males, it is inadvisable to describe
them. ORNITHOLOGY OF W. LANARK AND E, RENFREW 123

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE ORNITHOLOGY OF
WEST LANARKSHIRE AND EAST RENFREW-
SHIRE. (TeRRtToRY coveRED—TuE Wutre Cart AND ITs TRIBUTARIES.) By PHILIP ALEXANDER CLANCEY, Glasgow. (Continued from p. 91.) 66. THz Mattarp, Anas platyrhyncha platyrhyncha Linneus. Common at all seasons. 67. Tue Treat, Anas crecca crecea Linneus. Common, breeds in suitable localities. 68. Tur WrpcEoN, Anas penelope Linneus. Occurs. 69. THe Pocnarp, Myroca ferina ferina (Linneus). Occurs in the winter months. yo. Tue Turtep Duck, Myroca fuligula (Linneus). Common on the lochs and breeds in quite considerable
numbers. 71. Tue Cormorant, Phalacrocorax carbo carbo (Linnzus). One record. (See Scor. Nav., 1935, p. 172.) 72. Tue Gannet, Suda bassana (Linneus). Occasionally found. 73. THE Great Crestep Grese, Podiceps cristatus cristatus
(Linneeus). Rare, but breeds on a few of the lochs. 74. Tur Lirtie Grepe, Podiceps ruficollis ruficollis (Pallas). Common on all lochs and smooth flowing rivers. 75. Tue Woon-Picron, Columba palumbus palumbus Linnzus. Common, but much persecuted. Breeds in the pine and
larch woods in considerable numbers. 76. THe Stock-Dove, Columba wnas Linnzus. Common, but somewhat local. Does not appear to be on
the increase. 77. Tue Rincep Puover, Charadrius hiaticula hiaticula Linneus. One seen at the Binend Loch, Renfrewshire, on the
23.Viii. 1933. 78. Tue SourHern Goupen Puover, Charadrius apricarius
apricarius Linneus. Not uncommon on the moors during the breeding season. 79. THE Lapwine, Vanellus vanellus (Linnzus). Abundant at all seasons. 80. THe Turnstonn, Arenaria interpres interpres (Linneus). Two or three observed at the Binend Loch, Renfrewshire,
on the 12.v,1933. 124

Sr.

82.

go. or. 92. 93-

94

95:
96. 97-

98. 99. THE SCOTTISH NATURALIST

‘Tue Souruern Dunuin, EZrolia alpina schinzii (C. L. Brehm). Not uncommon on the moors and ioch sides during the
breeding season. Tue SanppiPer, Zyinga hypoleucos Linneus. On whole common but appears to be decreasing. (See
Scot. Nat., 1935, p- £71.)

. Tue British RepsHank, Zringa totanus britannica Mathews. Common during the spring and summer months. Breeds
in the marshes.

. Tre Curtew, Nimenius arquata arquata (Linnaeus). Common on the moors. Tue Common Snipe, Capella gallinago gallinago (Linnwus). Common at all seasons. Breeds in considerable numbers.

. THe Jack SNIPE, Lymnocryptes minimus (Briinnich). Occurs.

. THE Woopcock Scolopax rusticola rusticola Linneus. Not rare. Breeds in several places. Tue Common TERN, Sterna hirundo hirundo Linneus. Seen frequently in the summer. One or two pairs breed
yearly on the Brother Loch, Renfrewshire. Tae Brack-neapeov Gutt, Larus ridibundus ridibundus
Linneus. Very common. Breeds in vast numbers on the moors. Ture Common Guut, Larus canus canus Linneus. Frequently seen. Tue Herrinc Gutt, Larus argentatus argentatus Pontoppidan. Immature and non-breeding birds frequently seen. Tue British Lesser Buack-sackep Gut, Larus fuscus
grelsii Brehm. Occasionally seen. Tur Lanp-Ram, Crex crex (Linneus). A common summer visitor. Tur Moor-Hen, Gallinula chloropus chloropus (Linneus). To be found in considerable numbers on the lochs and
rivers. Tue Coot, Fikca atra atra Linneus. Rare. A few pairs breed on several of the lochs. Tue British Buack Grouse, Lyrurus tetrix britannicus
Witherby and Lénnberg. Found on the moors, but exact status uncertain. Tue British Rep Grouss, Lagopus scoticus scoticus (Latham),
Common on the moors. Tue Pueasant, Phasianus colchicus Linnzus. Local. Tue Partrivcr, Perdix perdix perdix (Linnzus). Common in the arable districts and stubble lands.