200 THE CANADIAN ENTOMOLOGIST oct., 1938

few red scales, below that, a white and reddish white area; the basal portion of
the hind wing is sparsely covered with black and white hairs. On the underside
the markings are reproduced in the typical Eushydryas fashion, the primaries
have a salmon flush except at the apex and part way from the apex along the,
costa and outer margin, all black markings are very much reduced on both wings
and the red and especially the white areas are larger. The antennae are dull red,
the club black with reddish shading. The thorax end head are bluish black, palpi
white at base, the balance salmon. ‘The abdomen is black with six reddish bands,
‘on the underside it is white, the legs are salmon. Allotype % 50 mm. The markings on both sides are similar to the
8 but the reddish areas on the secondaries are more extensive and the reddish
white areas and even some of the white spots in the é are entirely red in the 9. ‘On the underside, the black areas on the primaries are more extensive than in
the ¢. The appearance of many @ ¢ on the upperside is rather dull and suffused. The types and their disposition are as follows:

Holotype— 8, Roosevelt Lake, Ariz., Mar. 30 (D. K. Duncan) and gen-
italia slide No. 68 (C. F. dos Passos). Allotype—2, Superstition Mts., Ariz. same date and collector; both in
the American Museum of Natural History. Paratypes—8 8 &, Roosevelt Lake, Ariz. Mar. 30 (6) Mar. 30, 1934 (1)
Apr. 23, 1935 (1); 34 é, Superstition Mts., Ariz, Apr. 2 (1) no date (1) Mar. 30, 1934 (1); 18, Wheatfields near Globe, Ariz. Mar. 29, 1934; 2¢ 8, San
Carlos Lake, Ariz. Apr. 17, 1935; 32 2, Roosevelt Lake, Ariz. Mar. 30, 1934;
12, Roosevelt, Ariz. Apr. 23, 1935; 12, Superstition Mts., Ariz. Mar. 30. All
‘collected by D. K. Duncan at altitudes of 2100 to 2500’, 146, Roosevelt Dam,
Ariz. Apr. 20, 1929; 12, Roosevelt Dam, Ariz. Apr. 20, 1929. One pair of
paratypes each to the British Museum (Natural History), Paris Museum, Cana-
dian National Collection, os Angeles Museum, Academy of Natural Sciences,
Carnegie Museum and U. S. National Museum. ‘The remainder are in the col-
lection of the author. THE CHERMIDAE, (HOMOPTERA), OF ALBERTA. BY E. H. STRICKLAND
University of Alberts. The only published records of Chermidae captured in Alberta, which we
have been able to find, refer to Psyllia americana Cwfd., Trioza varians Cwfid. both taken at Banff, and Paratrioza cockerelli Sulc., which has been, in recent
years, accidentally introduced into the province. A few specimens, consisting of three or four species, have been represent-
ved in the University of Alberta collection fora number of years. These included
a series of a species which we had tentatively identified as P. cockerelli. ‘They
were sent to us, in the early spring of 1928, from a greenhouse near Medicine
Hat and were reported to be very abundant on tomatoes, This material was sent
to two specialists for determination but it returned to us unnamed. By 1934, the prevalence of “potato yellows” in a number of localities in

{Southern Alberta resulted in the definite identification of this species, both in
Downloaded from htps://www.cambridge.org/core. CIRAD DIC/DSI-INFODOC, on 09 Oct 2020 at 14:44:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://waw.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://dol.org/10.4039/Ent70200-10

Lxx. THE CANADIAN ENTOMOLOGIST 201

 

greenhouses and in the field, and the association of the potato disease with its
presence. ‘There can be little doubt but that it was brought into the province
with infested greenhouse plants and that it escaped from the houses into the field. It is very doubtful whether it can over-winter in the open here and it
would appear that the persistent infestation of potatoes in Southern Alberta is
due to annual escapes from infested greenhouses. In 1936, a case of “yellows” was reported in a city garden in Edmonton. ¥. cockerelli was found to be abundant in this garden though, elsewhere in the
city, neither the disease nor the Chermid could be found. Growing near the in-
fested garden were tomatoes. No information cculd be obtained regarding their
origin except that the seedlings had been purchased in the spring. We were,
thus, unable to confirm our suspicion that they had been imported from an in-
fested greenhouse in the southern part of the province. A careful survey of
potato gardens around Edmonton in 1937 failed to reveal “yellows” or P. cock-
erelli, The latter appears to have beer killed out during the winter. Among the numerous specimens of P. cockerelli which were collected
from the infested potatoes was a single specimen of Trioza maura Forst. Since
this, apparently, breeds on Salix Spp. it would appear that its presence on potat-
oes was accidental. During the same year two further species were taken in
large numbers on other vegetation which was being swept. ‘This suggested that
somewhat intensive sweeping of vegetation in the neighbourhood of Edmonton
might add a few records to the species known to occur in the province. Sweeping activities were, therefore, commenced during the latter part of
May, 1937. ‘These yielded such prclific results that they were continued energeti-~
cally until towards the end of July. A large range of possible food plants was
systematically examined and, when possible, records were kept of the plants
en which various species were taken. In a few instances, the presence of immature forms established “host”
relationships. More often adults only were taken, When the latter were num-
erous and could be taken repeatedly from scattered representatives of the same
plant though rarely, if ever, from neighbouring vegetation, we feel justified in
considering the infested species to he of some biologica! significance in the life-
cycle of the Chermid. Foliowing the terminology of Klyver’, who states that
there is no proof that adults ever feed, we are listing these plants as “nominal
hosts,” though we have no proof that the Chermid in question actually breeds
on them. When, as frequently happened, adults were taken singly on plants other
than on those on which they obviously congregated it would appear that their
presence had no biological significance other than that the plant in question had
served as a temporary resting place. In the following list, therefore, “host” indicates that immature stages
were taken; “nominal host” that adults evidently congregate on that particular
species, while plants listed as “taken on” are recorded as a possible source of
information should further observations suggest a relationship which is not, at
present, indicated. No particular efforts were made to ascertain the effects of the presence

DovirloatlaerrdmlHepEilsy. ARLE oni OAHRAD bieIbS-InFODOU ISA Bh OFF DogD.HETURAALE! sub]ea fo ROESABH ae Core terms of use,

available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://dol.org/10.4039/Ent70200-10

202 TUE CANADIAN 1£N’TOMOLOGIST ocr, 1938

 

which was attributed to their presence. It is hoped that more complete biological
data will be obtainable in future years. We were most fortuinate in obtaining the assistance of Mr. J. S. Cald-
well, of the Ohio Biological Survey, who most generously determined cur mater-
ial for us. With the assistance of Crawford’s monograph on the Family, Mr. F.
O. Morrison, a graduate student at this University, had already attempted to
name the species taken. Although his attempts were largely successful, a complete
lack of authoritatively determined species in our collection preyed to he an insur-
mountable obstacle against so doing with any certainty. Mr. Caldwell found that we had taken twenty-five recognized species. Four additional species could not be placed with any certainty until more ma-
terial is available and Mr. Caldwell states that two of these are, undoubtedly, un-
described. He suggested that we describe these ourselves, which we hope te do
in a future article when we are rather more familiar with the taxonomy of the
group. Liviinae. Aphalara artemisiae Forst. Kdmonton, Dapp. [une to July. Adults of the species were taken, in relatively small numbers (in compari-
son with A. vancouverensis Kby.) on three species of sage. No immature stages
could be found. With reference to the determination Caldwell writes, “This is
probably a “composite’”’ species . . . . personally I doubt whether artemisiae Forst. actually occurs in this country.”

Nominal host :—Artemisia Spp. (Sage). Aphalara confiusa Cald. Wabamur, Dapp, T.esser Slave Lake, Donelly. June
to July. Adults were taken rather freely on docks in the Peace River District. They appear to be definitely associated with this plant. At Dapp. however,
they were taken sparingly on Asters, whereas docks growing in the vicinity were
heavily infested, solely, with 4 micis Mall. Nominal host -—Rumex Sp. (Dock). Taken on:—Aster Spp., Rushes and Slough Grass. Aphalara curta Cald, Beaverlodge

A single adult was taken, without further data, by I. C. Shanks in 1934. Aphalara dentata Cald. Medicine Hat. May. ‘Two adults were taken in 1928 by the late F. S. Carr,
Aphalara loca Cald. Fdmonton, Dapp, Donelly, July. Adults abundant on knetweed growing along infrequently used farm rvads
im several localities. .

Nominal host --Polygonum erectum. (Knotweed). Taken on:—Solidago Sp. (Goldenrod), Aster Spp. Aphalara simila Cald. Wabamun. June. One specimen, only, was taken in sweeping vegetation by a lake-side

Taken on :—Juncus Sp. (rush). ‘The preceding five species are members of the complex, formerly referred
in American literature to 4. calthae L., but which have recently been separated

Downloaded trom nt XSi NE SMA HAAG bud ABEinPBBBE, AGS ONG NEUE sBGEPES Re Conte CSC AREA oe

available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://dol.org/10.4039/Ent70200-10

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

LXx. THE CANADIAN ENTOMOLOGIST 203

calthae occurring on this Continent. Aphalara hebecephala Cald. Edmonton, Wabamun, Dapp. June to July. ‘This breeds extensively on fireweed. It was first observed on June 13 at
Edmonton. No eggs were found but nymphs were crowded, head downwards,
at the base of the leaves. ‘hey were all mature, and left the plants, at about the
time that the fireweed came into bloom. Host :—Epilobium angustifolium. (Fireweed). Taken on:—Chenopodium album (Lambsquarters), in July. Aphalara nebulosa kincaidi Ashm. Edmonton, Beaverlodge. June to July. Adults were moderately common on fireweed which was heavily infested |
with A. hebecephala. No host plant is known for the American variety, but
Klyver® states that fireweed is the host of the European variety. Nominal host:—Epilobium angustifolium (Fireweed). Aphalara rumicis Mall. Dapp, July. ‘This was very abundant on a patch of dock which was growing on a des-
erted farm site on the bank of the Pembina River. Elsewhere this weed was
infested only with A. confusa. Patch® states that the nymphs form pseudo-galls
on the leaves of Rumex. Host :—Rumex Sp. (Tall dock). Aphalara vancouverensis Kby. Edmonton, Dapp, Beaverlodge. June to July. Three species of Artemisia were very heavily infested at Edmonton from
the beginning of June until observations stopped at the end of July. No imma-
ture stages could be found. No eggs were found when the plants were examined
in October and a careful examination of plants which were very heavily infested
during the previous year was made in May 1938, but no Chermids could be
found. By June 26th, 1937, colonies of adults were found on isolated yarrows
and related plants. From their abundance, and their scattered incidence, it would
appear that they must have bred on these plants even though no nymphs were
found. Nominal host:—Artemisia (four) Spp., (Sage), Achillea lanulosa and
millefolium (Yarrow), A. ptarmica (Wormseed). Aphalara veaziei Patch. Edmonton, Donelly, Dapp. June to July. Regarding this species, Caldwell writes “Probably several species are
mixed up here.” Adults were taken sparingly (a maximum of about seven to «
patch of plants) as listed helow. None were found on adjacent vegetation. Klyver’ gives Solidago as a host. Normal host :—Aster Spp., Solidago Spp. Triozinae. Paratrioza cockerelli Sulc. Medicine Hat, Drumheller, Calgary, (Edmonton). January to December in greenhouses, July to September in the field. Host plants :—Tomatoes, Potatoes, Jerusalem Cherry. Trioza frontalis sulcata Cwfd. Edmonton, May and September. Caldwell writes that Oman considers this to be a “good” species. Klyver®
gives Amelanchier as a host. Txtensive sweeping of Saskatoons in 1037 pro-
duced no Chermids but adults are fairly common on them in May, 1938. Downloaded febiroistps://wudhsacadebyiddeiexd/core. CIRAD DIC/DSI-INFODOC, on 09 Oct 2020 at 14:44:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://dol.org/10.4039/Ent70200-10

204 THE CANADIAN ENTOMOLOGIST oct., 1938

Trioza maura Forst. Edmonton, Wetaskiwin. May to September. Caldwell writes that this species is not well-defined and that Chermids,
so determined, may belong to more than one species. Various authors give Salix
Spp. as a host plant. A single adult was taken from potatoes, which were not
growing in the vicinity of willows, in September, 1936, and adults are moderately
abundant on willows during May and June. Nominal host :—Salix Spp. (Willows). Taken on :—Potatoes. Trioza quadripunctata Cwid. High Prairie, Dapp, Edmonton. July. Adults were taken, in very large numbers, exclusively on nettles. Craw-
ford states that they hibernate on grass-stems, but gives no host. Nominal host :—Urtica procera. (Nettle). Trioza (near) similis Cwfd. One adult female, only, taken. No data as to food plant. Caldwell writes
that, though this is very like similis, it is, apparently, not identical. Crawford
records similis as feeding on Amelanchier Sp. None were taken in Alberta dur-
ing consistent sweeping of Saskatoons. Trioza varians Cwfd. Banff, Fdmonton, High Prairie. June to August. Crawford states that this feeds on Salix Sp. on which it was taken at
Banff. We took it freely from willows growing on sand bars close to rivers but
failed to find any on similar bushes if they grew at a distance of more than
about fifty feet from the water. Nominal host :—Salix linearifolia (Narrow leaved Willow). Psyllinae. Psyllia alba Cwid. Edmonton, High Prairie. June to July. Crawford gives Salix longifolia as a host. While this Chermid is mod-
erately abundant on willows in Alberta the adults were taken so frequently, and
in such large numbers, on asters that some biological significance is indicated. Nominal hosts:—Salix linearifolia, Aster Spp. Psyllia alni americana Cwfd. Nordegg, Athabasca. July. Adults were abundant on swamp birch at Nordegg in 1936. None could be
found on these bushes at Athabasca in 1937, though a few were taken in this
locality from alders, which are given by Crawford and Klyver® as host plants. Nominal hosts:—Alnus incana (Alder), Retulosa glandulosa (Swamp
birch). Psyllia americana Cwfd. Banff. June. This species was described from Banff by Crawford who gives as a food

plant, Pinus Spp. We have not taken this typical variety. Psyllia americana flava Cwid. Edmonton. April to June. Adults were taken from the surface of a snow-bank in April 1925. A

single specimen was captured, in June, without data as to vegetation. Psyllia (near) fibulata Cwfd. Rdmonton. June. Caldwell doubts whether this is a typical fibulata which he states is
smaller, paler and with more slender genal cones. Nominal host :~-Salix lincarifolia (close to water). Downloaded from hups: Avi id Ag SANS ARES or BUENPBHEE ond Bee 2020 at 14:4456, subject the Cambridge Core terms of use
avalabie at psn cambridge org/eorenerms: htps//do\org/10.4039/E%¢70200-0

Lxx. ‘THE CANADIAN ENTOMOLOGIST 205

Patch’, in describing this species from Maine, states that the nymphs,
which live on Alders, have a pale greeu head and thorax, and a yellow 2bdomen. She states further, that they are covered with white flocculent secretions. Nymphs
which we took in association with the adults were destitute of secretions and
were green with strongly contrasted black abdomens. Nominal host:—AJnus incana (Alder). Psyllia hartigii Flor. Edmonton. June. Crawford states that, in Murope and America, this species feeds on birch. At Edmonton, diligent sweeping of birch yielded nothing except P. sinuata,
which, though not common, was taken repeatedly on these trees. Two adults of
hartigii were taken, however, on a very stunted basswood, which was rather
heavily infested with P. striata. Data were too meagre to suggest a nominal
host in Alberta. Taken on:—Basswood. Psyllia magnicauda Cwid. Edmonton. June to July. Nymphs were common in Juse on wolf willow. First adults taken on
June 22 and they were plentiful throughout July. Klyver? gives Prunus? as a
host plant. Host :—Eleagnus commutata (Wolf willow). Psyllia negundinis Mall. Edmonton. June to July. ime:

 

Caldwell writes that our speci
at least, have a new variety.” ‘Typical specimens are recorded by Crawford as
feeding on Manitoba maple. We failed to obtain nymphs. sre not quite typical and adds —“You,

 

 

Nominal host:—Negundo interius. (Manitoba maple). Psyllia sinuata Cwid. Edmonton, Nordegg. June to July. Nymphs and adults were taken on small spruces growing under decid-
uous trees. ‘They could not be found on spruces which grew in the open. Adults
were taken, repeatedly, on birch trees growing at a distance from spruces. Al-
though this species was taken on a greater variety of vegetation than was any
other, comparatively few specimens were found on anything with the exception
of spruce and birch. Host :—Picea glauca (White spruce)

Nominal hosts :--Betula Spp. (Birch, inciuding swamp birch). Taken on:--Populys tremuloides (Aspen), Oaycoccus macrocarpus
(High cranberry), Quercus Spp. (Ook), Salix myrtillifolia (Myrtle-leaved wil-
low, Laurel leaved willow, tall grass in wood-lands. Psyllia striata Patch. Edmonton. June. A number of specimens were taken from a small, stunted, basswood on
which, evidently, they congregated. Since this tree is not native to Alberta, and
we know of one example only in Edmonton, it probably is not the normal host
plant here. Patch’ bred this species from birch, but none could be found on this
tree in Alberta. Taken on:—Basswood. REFERENCES TO LITERATURE CITED
1. Crawford, D. L. Monog. Jumging Plant Lice. UJ. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85. 1914. Downidaded Rathore hs: lanicator Mbakerdeéor@/ CRAB BYEDSLINFOBOE, of 65-064 £036 at Virad:be, Rubjdetrolthé Cambridge Core terms of use,

available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://dol.org/10.4039/Ent70200-10

 

206 THE CANADIAN ENTOMOLOGIST ocr., 1938

Klyver, F. D, Biol. Notes &c. N. Am. Chermidae. Ent. News. V. 43. p. 7. 1932. Caldwell, J. S. Some N. Am. rel. of A. calthae, Ann. E. S. Am. V. wo 563, 1937. Klyver, FD. New Rec. of Cherm. from B.C. &c. Pan-Pac Ent. V. 8 p- 11, 1931. Patch, E. Notes on Psyllidae. Me. Ag. Exp. Stat, poe ae ie

Patch, E. Downy Peyllid of Alder, Can. Ent. V. 41. Patch, E. Insect Notes for 19iC. Me. Ag. Exp. Stat. Bui "ete Dp. 14. 1911. THELYOTOKOUS PARTHENOGENESIS IN CEPHUS CINCTUS
NORT. (HYMENOPTERA: CEPHIDAE). BY C. W. FARSTAD,
Dominion Entomological Laboratory, Lethbridge, Alberta. The wheat stem sawfly (Cephus cinctus Nort.) has recently become es-
tablished as a serious pest of wheat in the Nobleford—Lethbridge area of south-
ern Alberta, the first appreciable damage to wheat occurring in 1934. Each
succeeding year the insect has increased and spread rapidly throughout the area,
and in many cases crop losses have run as high as 75 to So per cent. During laboratory investigation in the winter of 1936-37 a complete ab-
sence of male sawflies was noticed in all the material collected from fields ad-
joining Lethbridge. In all other districts where wheat stem sawfly has been és-
tablished for many years the sexes occur in approximately equal numbers. ‘The
Jack of males in southern Alberta was tentatively attributed to a differential sex
mortality, but since the mortality did not approach 50 per cent, this hypothesis
was discarded. Reared female C. cinctus Nort. were confined over host plants of wheat
and brome grass for oviposition and developmental studies. After egg-laying was
completed the eggs were removed from the stems and placed in seamless salve
tins containing moist blotting paper. ‘This precaution was necessary because canni-
balism inside the stems would make an accurate check on hatchability impossible. One hundred and seventeen eggs were secured in this way and 92 per cent of then
hatched. It is quite possible that some of the eggs were injured during stem
dissection, which might account for the fate of some of the unhatched eggs. A series of reared female wheat stem sawflies secured from an area where
both sexes occur in approximately equal numbers was then placed on wheat
plants in an outdoor cage for oviposition. ‘This material was not disturbed until
the larvae cut the stems at harvest time. Since these larvae apparently developed
normally from unfertilized eggs, it appears as though the males are functionally
useless so far as the survival of the species is concerned. According to Hewitt!, ““The parthenogenetic young are constitutionally
weak and may die before obtaining maturity.” There is no evidence from either
laboratory investigations or field observations of any constitutional weakness in
the parthenogenetic progeny of C. cinctus Nort. ‘The newly hatched larvae ap-
pear normal in every respect, and the adult females have approximately the same
number of eggs as those taken from areas where both sexes occur. A search of the literature failed to reveal similar cases in the Cephus
group. Correspondence on this subject between Dr. Arthur Gibson, Dominion
Entomologist, Ottawa, Canada, and Sir Guy Marshall, Director of Imperial In-

PONE es

 

IMemoirs and Proceedings of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, Vol. 50, Pt. IIT, 1906, p. 5. Downloaded from itips://winw.cambridgé.cra/core. CIRAD DIC/DSF-INFODOC, on 09 Oct 2020 at 14:44:56, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
avallable at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.4039/Ent70200-10