212 THE CANADIAN ENTOMOLOGIST OCT., 1939

Structurally resembling multidubiata except for shorter and more round-
ed forewing and the remarkable short radial-sector making the forewing very
similar to Trioza 4-punctata Craws. /

Female holotype, male allotype, and paratypes taken from Shepherdia
canadensis, V-31-38, Edmonton, Alberta. Psyllia stricklandi n. sp. Length to tip of forewing 4.—4.2 mm. ; forewing 3.—3.7 mm. Color: Head yellow; antennae yellow with joints and terminal segments
blackish; eyes black; thorax yellowish-brown; forewing yellowish with yellow
veins; abdomen greenish overcast with brown. Antennae about one and a half times as long as width of head. Genal
cones divergent, bluntly rounded at apices, as long as vertex. Forewings twice
as long as broad; pterostigma long, very narrow; Cu | not highly arched. Genitalia: Female segment longer than rest of abdomen. Dorsal valve
much longer than ventral; styliform for caudal half; apex gently elevated,
sharply pointed; styliform portion minutely but extremely roughened. Ventral
valve evenly contoured ventrally; dorsal margins narrowed for apical third,
minutely roughened, Lateral plates very long, narrowly elliptical. Forceps in male appearing evenly arched and of even width in caudal
aspect; in lateral aspect appearing straight and parallel margined. Holotype female, allotype male, and paratypes taken VII-22-38, Columbia
Ice Field (6700), Alta., on Shepherdia canadensis, also paratypes from Edmon-
ton and Evansburg 1937-38. ‘The writer takes pleasure in naming this species in honor of Mr. E, H.
Strickland,

 

Psyllia virida n. sp. Length to tip of forewing 3.-3.5 mm. ; forewing 2.7—3.3 mm. Color: Appearing yellow-green throughout; antennae black at joints and
distally; forewings yellowish; genital segment brownish. Genal cones longer, more divergent, and more slender than in stricklandi
Forewings with Cu I rather arched, similar to carpinicola Crawford,

Genitalia: Female segment longer than rest of abdomen. Dorsal valve
styliform for caudal third, this portion minutely roughened; caudal half of
styliform portion abruptly turned up; apex blunt.’ Ventral valve almost as long
as dorsal; very strongly hooked dorsad in lateral aspect. Lateral plates no longer
than ventral valve. Forceps of male attenuate in apical third in caudal aspect; in Jateral
aspect appearing very slender and gradually narrowed to apex. Female holotype, male allotype, and paratypes taken VIII-7-38. Medicine
Hat, Alta., on Bullberry. FURTHER NOTES ON PSYLLIDAE TAKEN IN ALBERTA. (HOMOPTERA)
BY FE, H. STRICKLAND,
University of Alberta, Edmonton. In 1938 (1) we recorded twenty-eight species of Psyllidae which had
been captured in Alberta. Of these, twenty-one were taken, for the first time
on record, during the summer of 1937. Although psyllids were far less numer-
ous in 1938 than they had been in 1937, it is now possible to add eleven addition-
al records to the list of species which occur in this province. These include three
previously undescribed forms all of which are described by Caldwell in ant
accompanying article. We are indebted to Mr. Caldwell, also, for the determiv-
ation of the other species here recorded. A few additional data were obtained on one or two of the species listed
in 1938. The names of these appear in brackets when reference is made to them. Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. CIRAD DIC/DSI-INFODOC, on 09 Oct 2020 at 14:48:42, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://dol.org/10.4039/Ent71212-10,

LXXL ‘THE CANADIAN ENTOMOLOGIST ais

Althongh attempts were made to observe abnormalities in the growth of the
plants on which the various species were taken in the largest numbers, we have
nothing specific to record. Neither were we able to gain much information
regarding immature stages. This, probably, was due in part to the relatively
small numbers of adults which were found in sweeping vegetation, Any nymphs
which may have been present in small numbers would not be very easily found,

During the winter of 1938-39, a representative collection, consisting of
about a hundred specimens which had been taken during intensive sweeping in
alfalfa by Dr. K. W. Salt, of the Dominion Entomological Laboratory at Leth
bridge, was submitted for determination. Since the bulk of these had been
taken in the vicinty of Lethbridge where very little previous collecting in this
family had been accomplished, it was anticipated that a number of new records
for the province might be forthcoming. With one exception, however, ail
proved to be species which had already been taken from various weeds or trees
in the vicinity of Edmonton, P. cockerelli was represented by very few specimens:
‘The newly recorded species was determined by Caldwell as Arytaina ribesiae
Cwid. Since, as its name implies, this species is associated with currants, it
would appear that none of the species taken have any direct relationship with
alfalfa,

Aphalara fumida Cald. Edmonton, Evansburg, High Prairie, St. Paul. June. Adults of this
species, which collect during June at the base of the buds and flowers of fleabane
were found wherever this plant was examined. By the end of the month all were
dead. Many had turned black and were attached to the stems. A single final
nymphal exuvium, attached to a leaf, probably belonged to this species and
suggests that fleabane is the true host plant. Though fleabane was examined
periodically from the end of June until the beginning of October, there were
no further indications of the presence of this species. Host; Erigeron philadelphicus (Fleabane) . Aphalara gutierreziae Kly. Medicine Hat. August. One specimen only was taken in sweeping gums
weed (Grindelia squarrosa). Intensive sweeping of this plant in several local-
ities failed to produce further specimens. Caldwell states that the single speci+
men submitted is certainly very close to this species but may not be identical. (Aphalara nebulosa kineaidi Ashm.) The discovery of nymphs of this species on Fireweed in June establishes
this as the host plant of the American variety of nebulosa which is in conformity
with that of the European form. Aphalara manitobaensis Cald. Wabamun. May. One specimen only has been taken. It is believed that
it was taken from myrtle leaved willow. Calophya triozomima Schw. Medicine Hat. August. Adults of this pretty little green and black species
were abundant on scattered sumach bushes which grew on a river bank, No
nymphs were taken but Crawford (2) records the species exclusively from this
host. Host, Rhus trilobata Nutt. (Sumach) . ( Paratrioza cockerelli Sulc. ) In August reports were received to the effect that several adjacent garderis
in Edmonton were showing signs of potato yellows. A careful examination of
the supposedly affected plants failed to reveal any psyllids with the exception of
a few Psyllia negundinis adults which had evidently scattered from some nearby
Manitoba maples. Two greenhouses in the vicinity, in which tomatoes were
growing, showed no signs of infestation. Although the range of this insect is

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. CIRAD DIC/DSI-INFODOC, on 09 Oct 2020 at 14:48:42, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://dol.org/10.4039/Ent71212-10

214 THE CANADIAN ENTOMOLOGIST OCT., 1939

increasing in southern Alberta, the infestation resulting from an importation into
Edmonton in 1986 appears to have died out completely. Trioza frontalis Cwfd. Edmonton. May. On May 11 adults of this species were congregated in:
very large numbers on a few small spruce trees growing in a garden. At about
sundown they were flying freely around the trees but appeared always to come to:
rest on them in preference to saskatoon bushes whiich grew a few yards away-
‘The latter were not then in leaf. By May 26 all had apparently deserted the
spruces and they were even more abundant on the neighboring saskatoon bushes. which are considered to be their host plant. The suggestion is that they over-
winter on the spruces. Host, Amelanchier alnifolia (Saskatoon) , taken on Picea glauca (Spruce) -

(Trioza quadripunctata Cwfd. ) The presence of numerous green or green and yellew adults on nettles
during the summer of 1937 has already been recorded. On May 24, 1938, nettles
which were about three inches high were swept at Wabamun. Four unusually
dark adults were captured. Crawlord states that overwintering forms are mucle
darker than those taken in the summer but these appeared to be exceptional
in this respect. Two of the specimens were quite black with contrasting dull
yellow areas at the base of the wings and along the sutures of the abdomen. The legs, a cloudy pattern on the mesonotum and the lateral margins of the
vertex were also of a smoky yellow colour. Although later in the year a few
typically light coloured adults were taken elsewhere on nettles, no nymphs
could be found in repeated examinations. (Trioza yarians Cwfd. ) In May, 1937, a few practically black adults were found on willows around
a small dry meadow near Edmonton. We were unable to see that these differed
structurally from typical green varians which were found in large numbers,
Jater in the season, only on willows which grew close to water. Caldwell wrote
with regard to these dark forms that Oman, to whom he had submitted them,
stated that they were larger than typical varians and he suggested that they
might represent a new species. The whole body, including the antennae, cones and legs is deep black
with the exception of a slightly reddish area along the sides of the pleurae and
a well defined red to yellow margin to the vertex. Similar specimens were
taken in the same place in May, 1938, but they disappeared soon after the bushes
were in full leaf. Phylloplecta multidubiata breviradia Cala. Edmonton. May to June. Adults were taken scatteringly from a number
of bushes of Buffalo berry. Nominal host; Shepherdia canadensis (Buffalo berry) . PhyNoplecta multidubiata Cald. Edmonton. May. At about sundown on May II, a few adults of this
species were flying around spruce trees in company with numerous T. frontalis. Two days later none could be obtained in the same locality. Psyllia alni americanella new name. The varietal name americana, applied to this form by Crawford (2, p.
156), is preoccupied by his P. americana on page 147 of the same publication. For this reason a modification of the former is herewith proposed. Last year we recorded with some hesitation that we had taken this species
in large numbers from swamp birch at Nordegg in 1936. Both Crawford and
Klyver give alder as the host plant and, in 1937, we found them exclusively on
alders at Athabasca even though swamp birch was abundant in the vicinity. This year they were abundant on swamp birch which grew at an elevation of
6,700 teet tiear the edge of the Athabasca glacier in Jasper Park. Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. CIRAD DIC/DSI-INFODOC, on 09 Oct 2020 at 14:48:42, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://dol.org/10.4039/Ent71212-10,

 

LXXI THE CANADIAN ENTOMOLOGIST 215

Psyllia cerasi Patch. | . Edmonton. September. Both sexes were taken in association on wild
cherries which grew in a sandy area near Edmonton. The foliage of all of the
bushes on which they were found had turned, and the highly pigmented psyllids
blended perfectly with the red of the leaves. The females alone possessed the
conspicuous black bands on the bright red and yellow abdomen which were
given as a distinguishing character of this species by Patch (3) who had only
this sex before her when she drew up her description. Ali of the males tended
to assume a rosy tint, which was most pronounced on the thorax. The abdomen
was unmarked. Many of these males were indistinguishable from those of P.
cerasi astigmata Cwfd. which is discussed below. Nominal host; Prunus melanocarpus (Choke cherry). Psyllia cerasi astigmata Cwfd. (new combination) . Wabamun. July. A few adults-Were scatteringly present on the leaves
of cherries in July. Although the prevailing colour was green, a few of the
specimens had a rosy tint on the thorax. ‘This was observed in both sexes. There was no sign of black marks on the abdomens of the females. Crawford
(2), in his description of astigmata, refers to its structural similarity with cerasi,
but distinguishes the two forms on colour. It is unfortunate that ‘cerasi has
priority over astigmata since the former is undoubtedly a colour variety of the
latter and the peculiarities are apparently confined to one sex only. Our ob-
servations indicate that it is an overwintering form. Nominal host; Prunus melanocarpus (Choke cherry) . (Psyllia magnicauda Cwid.) Wolf willows, growing near: Wainwright, were extremely heavily infested
with this species. Nymphs and adults crowded around the junction of the old
and the new growth. It is possible that their presence somewhat stunted the
new growth but no other symptom could be observed. Psyllia stricklandi Cald. Edmonton, Evansburg, Athabasca Glacier 6,700 feet. June to July. On
June 20, 1937, numerous adults of this species were present on buffalo berry
ushes at Edmonton, Two days later, and for the rest of the season, none could
be Jound. intensive sweeping in this locality during May and June, 1938. failed
to reveal either nymphs or adults. The latter were, however, abundant on these
bushes growing near the Pembina River at Evansburg early in July and later
in the month were taken in large numbers on very stunted bushes grawirg near
the Athabacsa Glacier in Jasper Park. Nominal Host; Shepherdia canadensis (Buffalo berry) . Psyllia virida Cald. Medicine Hat. August. Adults and a few nymphs were taken from bull
berry bushes growing by a small stream at Medicine Hat. They so closely re-
sembled P. magnicauda, which heavily infests the related wolf-willow, that they
were believed to be the same species and no nymphs were preserved. Host; Shepherdia argentea (Bull or Bear Berry). (Psyllia floceosa Patch.) ‘Typical flocculent nymphs, agreeing with the description by Patch (4),
were found freely on alders. ‘The green nymph with a black abdomen which
was taken in association with this species in 1937 was not again encountered. REFERENCES
1. Strickland, FE. H., The Chermidae of Alta., Can. Ent, Vol. 70. 1938. 2: Crawford, D. L. Monog., Jumping Plant Lice., U. S, Nat. Mus. Bull. 85, 1914,
3. Patch, E. M., Notes on Psyllidae IL, Me. Agr. Exp. Bull. 202, 1912. 4. Patch, E. M., The downy Psyllid of the Alder., Can, Ent. Vol. 41, 1909,

Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. CIRAD DIC/DSI-INFODOC, on 09 Oct 2020 at 14:48:42, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://dol.org/10.4039/Ent71212-10