ASG2 David OUVRARD

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA
NORTH OF MEXICO (PSYLLIDAE: HOMOPTERA)

(Subfamilies Psyllinae and Triozinae)
Leowarp D, Toran
Department of Zoology and Entomology, Iowa State College

TABLE OF CONTENTS

InTRODUCTION ..

 

Histortcan Resume ..

 

Genera Discussion
Morphology ... Biology .... Collecting and Preserving .. Explanation of Terms and Methods
Synonymy and Bibliography ....
Illustrations .. Location of Types ... 451

 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ....

Sysrematic TREATMENT
Family Psyllidae

 

 

Key to subfamilies ....
Subfamily Psyllinae

Genus Psylla ..
Genus Arytaina
Genus Psyllopsis
Genus Euphalerus
Genus Euphyllura ...
[443]

 

Ginnno ben

444 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

 

Genus Pachypsylla ..
Genus Tetragonocephala
Genus Spanioneura ..
Subfamily Triozinae ....
Genus Trioza ...

533

   
 
 
  

Genus Paratrioza ..
Genus Kuwayama .....
Genus Neotriozella .. Genius Metatrioza .

. 592
. 593
. 597
- 598

 

Genus Leuronota ..

 

Genus Ceropsylla . Genus Hemitrioza ....

 

 

Genus Levidea .. . 604
BIBiioGRAPHY .... . 606
PLATES ..... . 619

 

Invex - 659

 

 

INTRODUCTION

The psyllids, sometimes called jumping plant lice, are small homop-
terous insects constituting the family Psyllidae. They resemble . the
plant lice or aphids in many respects but may be distinguished from them
by the stout legs which are adapted for leaping, the presence of nine or ten
segments in the antennae (three to six in the aphids), the greater scleroti-
zation of the exoskeleton, and the venation of the wings which, although
somewhat variable, is quite unlike that of the aphids. Although much interest exists concerning those species which are of
economic importance, taxonomic work in the group has been sporadic
since the publication, in 1914, of Crawford’s monograph of the forms
known to occur in the Western Hemisphere. Numerous new forms have
been described since that time in scattered articles. This presentation is
an attempt to incorporate the known data, other than that of purely
economic import, of all the forms of the two principal subfamilies known
to occur in America north of Mexico. It is hoped that it will be of interest
and value not only to insect taxonomists but also to all those who are
interested in’ these insects for any reason. HISTORICAL RESUME

In 1851 Fitch described six species of psyllids from the state of New
York. This is apparently the first definite record of the occurrence of
these animals in North America. The following year Walker, in his List
of the Homopterous Insects of the British Museum, listed Fitch’s species,
several more of Fitch’s manuscript names, and added one new species
from Hudson Bay. Provancher added three names to the list in 1872,
In 18$0 he described six species as new, then in the Errata and Corri-
genda of the same volume made two of them synonyms of his older species. Unfortunately, he had the genera confused. Although one can almost be
positive of what his genera really were, the specific descriptions are almost
entirely of the coloration except for characters which are of only generic
or family significance. Until his specimens can be seen (if they are still
extant), his names must remain nomina inquirenda, Beginning in 1876
C. V. Riley published various articles on Psyllidae intermittently for
the next fifteen years, describing several new genera and species. Various
workers added a few names to the growing list of species known from

[445]

446 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

North America until, when Mally published a list of all such in 1894, a
total of thirty-one species was listed (several of these have since proved
to be synonyms). The first worker in this country to take an active
interest in other than North American forms was Schwarz, who made a
few contributions to the knowledge concerning this group in other parts
of the world as well as describing several new forms from this continent,

About 1910 two workers, who were to add a great deal to our fund
of knowledge of the psyllids, became interested in this family. The first
of these was Patch, who described numerous species, noted the life history
of several, and worked out the wing venation, homologizing it with the
venation in other Homoptera and applying the Comstock-Needham system
of nomenclature to the veins. The second was Cravford, who culminated
several years of very active work with his Monograph of the Jumpi
Plant-Lice or Psyllidae of the New World in 1914. In this paper he ne
vised the subfamily classification. As far as the North American genera
are concerned at least, this classification appears to be valid for the most
part, and it is followed here without exception, as the possible misinterpre-
tations are in those subfamilies which are largely exotic and with which
the author is not familiar. Crawford continued active work in the field
until quite recently, but as soon as he removed to Hawaii most of his
interest devolved to the Pacific fauna. Numerous contributions have been made since Crawford's work
notably by Ferris, Klyver, Van Duzee, and Caldwell. The forms of eco”
nomic importance have, of course, received a great deal of attention,
especially the pear psylla (Psylla pyricola Férster) and the potato psyllid
(Paratrioza cockerelli (Sulc)), A very voluminous literature has de-
veloped about these two species,

GENERAL DISCUSSION
MORPHOLOGY

‘The first extensive work on the structure of the Psyllida:
of Witlaczil who in 1885 published his Die Anatomie de Paylliden tn
viewed by Macloskie, Am. Nat. 20, 1886), treating not only the external
anatomy but also the internal structure, with especial emphasis on the
nervous system. Stough, 1910, published on Pachypsylla celtidis-mamma
at some length, but as this species is one of the more specialized and was
studied without a background of the generalized species, his interpreta-
tions are somewhat erroneous. As is mentioned above, Patch determined
the homologies of the wing veins in 1909. Crawford’s work on the external morphology remains as the most
complete and thoroughly done. With a few changes in terminology, his
interpretations are followed by the author. The figures explanatory of
fhe Be mholosy are adapted from those of Crawford (Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5,
an +

‘The structure of the nymphs has received comparatively little atten-
tion. Mally described and figured a few in 1895, PPerris has published

 

 

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 447

several papers on various species. He started a series in which he
planned to study the nymph of the type of each genus; this was subse-
quently turned over to Klyver and unfortunately seems to have been
abandoned. As this family is of world-wide distribution and is quite highly
evolved, great variation in structure occurs, and considerable work re-
mains to be done in homologizing and interpreting structures both within
the family and with other Homoptera. ‘BIOLOGY

The biology of the forms in this family has received but desultory
interest for the most part. Notes on observations of time of emergence
of adults, egg-laying, appearance of nymphs, gall formation, etc, make
up the bulk of our knowledge. The complete life cycle of several species
has been worked out, however; Ashmead (1881) being the first to give
such data for some of his species. Among others who have recorded some
complete life cycles are Mally, Ferris and Hyatt, and Caldwell. The
biology of the economically important species has, of course, been studied
extensively, and most of their life cycles are known in detail. Much more
life history work needs to be done, as much of the taxonomic work is,
and shall remain quite uncertain until biological evidence such as the
amount of variation within a species, the degree of host specificity, etc.,
is known. This is especially true in Aphalara, Aphalaroida, and certain
complexes of Trioza and Psylla. The most common life cycle finds the adult as the overwintering
stage, the eggs deposited singly on the foliage of the host plant in the
spring, one or more generations developing through the summer. Several
species, however, overwinter as nymphs, emerging as adults late the
following spring. This variation in life cycle occurs between members
of the same genus. The coloration of both nymphs and adults is quite variable as has
been noted by all who have worked on these insects. Léw, Mally, Frog-
gatt, Patch, Caldwell, and others have remarked on this variation and
noted that it occurs among individuals of the same age and brood and
that there is no correlation between the amount of pigmentation in the
nymph and the adult. Without known exception the members of this family are plant feeders,
sucking the sap and cell contents from their hosts. The great majority
live upon trees and shrubs. Some occur on herbaceous plants of various
kinds other than grasses (Gramineae). There are a few that develop on
Juncus, however. ‘The feeding of the nymphs of many species causes the production
of galls or pseudogalls on their hosts. Among the more remarkable gall-
formers are the pachypsyllids—the entire genus produces galls on the
leaves, twigs, or branches of Celtis spp. (hackberries). In most of the

other genera occasional species cause gall formation. Some species, not-

448 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

ably Paratrioza cockerelli, apparently inject a toxic material into the host
plant, thereby causing a physiological disturbance, an insect disease. The different species vary markedly in the amount of host speci-
ficity which they exhibit, some being limited to a single species and others
developing on a number of hosts of various degrees of relationship. ‘The
adults seem to be able to maintain themselves on a wider variety of plants
than the immature stages. At least a few species apparently have a defi-
nite alternation of hosts between the nymphal and imaginal stages, al-
though the adult host range does not seem to be as limited as it is in many
of the aphids which exhibit the same type of relationship. Because of the
variability in the feeding habits of the adults, no plants are recorded in the
following pages as hosts unless it is quite certain that the nymphs develop
thereon. The literature of this group is full of references to hosts many
of which seem to have been merely plants on which adults were resting
at the time of collection. All recorded host records are, therefore, disre-
garded unless there is some evidence given that the plant named as host
actually supports the developmental stages. Unfortunately, such discrimi-
nation has not always prevailed, and thus we have species named for
plants which are not hosts at all. The production of honey dew and of wax is general throughout the
family. Many of the nymphs secrete large quantities of wax which may
occur as a filamentous or a powdery deposit. Some of the adults also
secrete wax but usually in less abundance. COLLECTING AND PRESERVING

‘The psyllids are commonly overlooked by most collectors due in part
to their small size but even more to their habits when swept up in a net. For several minutes after being thus captured, most of the specimens
remain quiet in any debris which may be present in the net. Their first
activity is usually to jump from the net in two or three leaps. This type
of action causes them to be very easily missed. As most of the species occur on trees and shrubs and many cling
very tightly to the host, the ordinary type of sweeping often fails to dis-
lodge them. Beating or a thorough shaking of a plant within the net
will sometimes produce specimens which are utterly unobtainable by
other means. They are so small and jump so quickly that an aspirator,
while not indispensable, is of the greatest aid in their capture. The adults may be preserved in alcohol or mounted dry on points or
minuten nadeln. Mounting of the entire insect on slides after clearing
and dismembering as practiced and recommended by Ferris and Klyver,
who carried the idea over from the former’s work with coccids, is not
satisfactory. This is especially true where only one or two specimens are
known, By this method one can ascertain many minutae, of course, such
as the exact number and shape of setae or glands, but some of the more
general and certainly more usable characters, such as proportionate
length of various parts, shape of vertex and genal processes, angle of the
latter with respect to the vertex, and color, are lost. It is often desirable

 

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 449

to clear and study some parts, such as the genitalia, under higher mag-
nifications. When this is necessary a temporary glycerine mount of the
cleared parts is preferable for study; after such study is completed, the
part or parts are placed, still in a small drop of glycerine, in a minute vial,
covered with refined mineral oil, corked, and placed with the untreated
part of the insect by pinning through the cork. In this way the material
is always available for further study, it may be viewed from any angle,
further dissection may be made if desired and no distortion occurs such
as is unavoidable in slide mounts. By the use of oil to cover and thus seal
off the small drop of glycerine, any possibility of its creeping out and
rusting the pin or ruining the label is forestalled. Nymphs, on the other hand, are best preserved and studied as per-
manent slide mounts. As they are quite strongly flattened, almost no
distortion occurs in such mounting nor are any characters obscured. EXPLANATION OF TERMS AND METHODS

In order to prevent misunderstanding and confusion, the following
explanations and definitions are given. Only the over-all length from the tip of the head to the tip of the
folded wings is given in millimeters. In making this measurement the
insect is measured with a millimeter rule under a binocular microscope. This measuring is not done more accurately and no other such measure-
ments are given for the reason that it has become evident from study
of large series of specimens of various species that so much variation in
size occurs within a species that exact measurements are of little signifi-
cance. The proportions between various parts of the insect are in general
quite constant, however, and have been utilized in lieu of metric frac-
tions in the conviction that they are of much more value than the latter. The proportional measurements are made by means of a squared eye-
piece in the ocular of the microscope. The principal mensural terms are defined as follows:

Width of head—distance across head including eyes. Length of vertex—total length from most caudal points to most an-
terior points, measured with vertex flat (not the median length). Width of vertex—width between compound eyes. Length of genal processes—length measured on median line from
base of frons to apices of processes. Length of antennae—total length including the two basal segments. Width of thorax—width at widest point, as seen in dorsal view, usually
across mesoscutum. Length of forewing—total length measured parallel to straight por-
tion of anal margin. Width of forewing—greatest width at any point. Wherever such comparative terms as long. short, large, etc., are
used, they mean, of course, in proportion to the rest of the insect and
imply comparison with the same structure in related species,

All descriptions are from dried specimens unless otherwise indicated. 450 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

The term genal processes has been substituted for genal cones as
used by Crawford et al. ; to obviate the absurdity of such expressions as,
cones conical, cones transverse, etc. The cell in the forewings between the branches of media is termed
the medial cell, and that between the branches of cubitus, the cubital cell,
for reasons of brevity and convenience. These names are much less con-
fusing than the previously used first marginal and second marginal. In those descriptions in which minute setae on the wing membrane
are referred to, the tiny setae which were called points by Ferris et al. are meant, not the larger hairlike setae which occur quite commonly
on the veins and occasionally on the membrane. These minute setae are
often continuous with, but much smaller than those which make up the
radular areas near the wing margin (the alar radulae of authors). A group of individuals is considered as a subspecies when it shows
some constant but minor morphological differences, usually coupled with
a somewhat different range. Such probably represent incipient species. Variety as herein used refers to a distinct, constantly reappearing
variation in color or color pattern. Most of Crawford’s varieties are based
on morphological differences and are here classed as subspecies. SYNONYMY AND BIBLIOGRAPHY

Under each species is listed the complete synonymy as known to the
author. A complete list of references is included for. most of the species. For those forms which are of considerable economic importance or for
some other reason have received great attention, the list is necessarily
curtailed and includes only those which are deemed pertinent to a work
of this nature, that is, those which deal with the taxonomy, biology, or
morphology of the species, or which contain a considerable bibliography
of other types of papers. In these specific lists only abbreviated references
are given. In the bibliography the complete title of the paper and of the
publication is given. The bibliography includes all works cited plus other important con-
tributions with especial emphasis on those not included in Crawford’s
monograph. Except where otherwise indicated, the original of all references has
been seen. ILLUSTRATIONS

An attempt has been made to include all such illustrations as are
necessary for identification of species, but unnecessary repetition has been
avoided as much as possible, Illustrations occurring in-the. literature
which have been found satisfactory have been used in lieu of preparing
new drawings. In choosing such illustrations, preference has been given
to drawings published with the original description or those known to be
of the type specimens. All such figures used have been checked against
specimens wherever they have been available, and ‘slight changes have

 

|

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 451

been incorporated in many. The author of each figure is given in the list
of illustrations, those not otherwise credited are original. LOCATION OF TYPES

Some of the insects in Fitch’s collection, including the Psyllidae, found
their way to the United States National Museum, and the types of his
psyllid species are there. Van Duzee (Can. Ent. 44:317-329) discussed
Provancher’s collection, which he had studied, but he made no mention
of the Psyllidae. It seems doubtful, therefore, that they have-been pre-
served. Riley’s types (where designated) are in the National Museum
as are those of Ashmead and Schwarz. Mally’s types, the location and
existence of which have been problematical, are in the Iowa State College
collection at Ames, Iowa. In reply to a query concerning the types of
some of her species, Dr. Patch replied that the specimens “must be among
those lent some time ago to someone who has not yet returned. them.”
Whether this means that all of her types are thus lost I am unable to say. As the type specimens were not listed as such in many cases, no data
concerning them have been available. Fortunately, photographs were
published with her descriptions which make the identity of most of her
species quite certain. Crawford's types are in the United States National
Museum, and in his own collection, which has been recently added to the
National Museum. The whereabouts of Klyver'’s types is unknown to
the writer—presumably they are in his personal collection at San Mateo
Junior College, San Mateo, California. Those of Van Duzee are in the
Museum of the California Academy of Sciences. Caldwell reports that
his types are in the Ohio State University collection. The European
workers who have described species occurring in North America seem
te have designated no types; at least no mention of them has been made
in the literature. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I wish to express my deepest appreciation to Mr. P. W. Oman, of the
United States National Museum staff, through whose good offices I was
able to obtain the available material in the National Museum for study
and whose suggestions and assistance have done much to aid and lighten
this task, and to Dr. John S, Caldwell who has been most kind in exchang-
ing and comparing specimens and has furnished heretofore unpublished
drawings of some of his species. D. L. Crawford has not only supplied
specimens and reprints of his papers, but his own work has been a con-
stant help and inspiration. Dr. R. H. Beamer of the University of Kansas
has placed the material of that institution at my disposal and has been
a. great source of encouragement. To Miss Margaret Poor, I am deeply
grateful for the comparing of specimens with the types in Crawford’s
collection and the taking of notes on them, and for assistance in the
preparation of the keys. The late E. P. Van Duzee was helpful in the
exchange of paratypes. .

452 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

It was at the suggestion of Dr. C. J. Drake that this work was initiated,
and it has been pursued under his direction. Dr. H. H. Knight and Dr.
i. M. Harris have been of great assistance by their constant help and sug-
Bs ave been very ably aided in proofreading, and the checking and
preparation of figures by my wife, Shirley P, Tuthill. .

To the following, also, I wish to express my thanks for placing at my
disposal specimens in their charge: Mr. Joe Schuh and Mr. R. L. Post,
Oregon State College; Mr. Roy D. Shenefelt, Washington State College;
Dr. Maurice T. James, Colorado State College; Dr. Clarence E. Micke! >
University of Minnesota; Dr. Herbert H. Ross, Ilinois Natural History
Survey; Dr. H. D. Tate, University of Nebraska; Mr. John Standish an
Mr, Robert W. Kaiser, formerly of Oklahoma State College. SYSTEMATIC TREATMENT

FAMILY PSYLLIDAE LATREILLE
1807 Psyllidae Latreille, Gen, Crust. Ins. 3:168. 1810 Psyllidae Latreille, Consid. Gen. sur L’Ordre Nat. Anim. 252, 264. 1814 Chermides Fallen, Spec. Nova. Hemip. Disp. Meth. Exhib. 3, 22. 1815 Psyllides Leach, Edinb, Encycl. 9:125 [fide Aulmann]. 1825 Psyllides Latreille, Fam. Nat. Régne Anim. 428. 1835 Psyllodes Burmeister, Handb. d. Ent. 2:95. 1840 Psylliens Blanchard, Hist. des Ins, Hemip. 201. 1847 Saltipedes Amyot, Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. 5 (2nd series) :456. 1861 Psyllodea Flor, . Liv, 2:438,
1861 Psyllodea Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscow 34:331,
1874 Psyllodae Lethierry, Cat. Hemip. du Nord. ed. 2:85 [fide Aulmann]. 1876 Psyllidae Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876:525-570. 1896 Psyllina Edwards, Hemip.-Homop. Br. Is. 1904 Chermidae Kirkaldy, Ent. 37:255. 1908 Psyllidae Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 2:338,
1912 Psyllidae Oshanin, Kat. pala. Hemip. 125. 1913 Psyllidae Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 5. 1914 Psyllidae Crawford, U.S. Nat, Mus. Bull. 85. 1917 Chermidae Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip, N. Am, 782. 1935 Psyllina Haupt, Tierw. Mitel. 4, 3:

 

 

Antennae filiform, usually of ten segments, sometimes fewer. Three
ocelli, one medial on frons, two lateral near compound eyes near caudal
edge of vertex. Genae often produced, variously shaped. Beak arising
from posterior portion of head, usually enclosed by forecoxae, appar-
ently arising between them. Thorax strongly developed for flying and
jumping. Two pairs of wings, usually membranous, anterior pair some-
times thickened, coriaceous, veins of forewings consisting of radius
(branched once), media (branched once), cubitus (branched once), first
A (claval suture); venation of hind wings very variable, weak, often
indicated merely by rows of setae, similar to forewing, radius and media
usually unbranched. Usually all legs fitted for jumping; tarsi two-seg-
mented. Metacoxa usually with large spur caudad. Male genital segment
bearing a pair of somewhat elongate processes (forceps). Type genus—Psylla Geoffroy. Much confusion has arisen as to the correct family name for this
group of insects since Kirkaldy (1904) proposed the name Chermidae
for Psyllidae Latreille. Kirkaldy erroneously thought that Lamark
(1801) designated ficus Linnaeus as the type of Chermes. Lamark, how-
ever, merely cited it as an example of the genus, and this is not acceptable
as a type designation (Op. 79, Int. Comm. Zoél. Nom.). Apparently be-
cause of this belief that ficus was the type of Chermes, Kirkaldy consid-
ered Psylla Geoffroy a synonym of Chermes. This left the Psylla of
Latreille et al. without a name, as ficus is not congeneric with the species
of the latter. He subsequently (1905) proposed Psyllia as a new name
for this orphaned group. The family name would not have been Chermi-
dae but Psylliidae, however, as the type of the family had been, set as
Psylla Latreille in 1807 by Latreille, the changing of the name of this'genus

[453]

454 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

would merely have changed the root of the family name, not transferred
it to another genus. Since the type of Chermes is abietis (an aphid)
rather than ficus, Kirkaldy’s contention is groundless. E. P. Van Duzee, the chief proponent of the name Chermidae, while
following Kirkaldy’s names, based his argument on different grounds, In
an editorial note in the Pan-Pacific Entomologist (7:96) he states his
case quite clearly and in private communications states his views more
completely. Briefly stated, his thesis is this: The type of any category
must agree in all details with the published description. At first glance
this position has a seemingly logical basis, and in the specific instance of
Chermes versus Psylla his position appears sensible, but it is certainly
not expedient, nor does it conform to the rules of nomenclature. To aban-
don the system of nomenclatorial rules established by the Zoélogical
Congress and return to such a so called “logical” basis is of course un-
thinkable, and one shudders to think of the resulting confusion. The name Psyllidae had been in general, almost exclusive, use for
about 100 years when this “correction” first appeared, an instance in
which; if it had been necessary, the International Commission would
surely have, suspended the rules to prevent confusion. It is unfortunate,
indeed, that this needless confusion has existed and been so Jong continued. KEY TO THE SUBFAMILIES (AFTER CRAWFORD)

1. Vertex deeply cleft medially, anteriorly (in Rhinopslla, the only genus occurring
in our fauna, media and cubitus of the forewing are not petiolate nor are the
genae produced)....... : : Carsidarinae'. Head not deeply cleft anteririy : :

2. Frons covert produced as variously shaped
rocesses. . bese
‘rons not covered by genae ventrally; g Pr (except in Calopyha)....4. 3. Media and cubitus of forewing with a prominent common tiole; ee

rarely angulate apically; basal segment of metatarsus with two Black spines at up
(lacking in Tetragonocephala)..... +... .Psyllinae. ‘Media, cubitus, and radius of forewing arising from basal vein at same point (or
very nearly so); forewings usually angulate apically; metatarsus without
spines Triozinae. 4, Vertex flat and horizontal. Liviinae!. Vertex smoothly rounded down anterior! Pauropsyllinae!. * Occurring in North America but not within the scope of this work. SUBFAMILY PSYLLINAE LOW

1879 Psyllinae Law, Verh. zool.-bot. Ges. Wien 28:605, 607. 1886 Psyllaria Puton, Cat. Hém. Faune Paléa. 91,

1896 Psyllidae Edwards, Hemip.-Homop. Br. Is. 227, 233. 1908 Psyllaria Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 2:349. 1912 Psyllaria Oshanin, Kat. palia. Hemip. 126. 1913 Psyllinae Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 5. 1914 Psyllinae Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull 85:18, 105. 1916 Psylliinae Van Duzee, Check List Hemip. N. Am. 87. 1917 Psylliinae Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 799. Head more or less deflexed. Genae produced as variously shaped
processes. Frons covered by genae except a small portion bearing median

   
  
    

   
            

 

 

    
  
 

 

 

 

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 455

ocellus. Antennae ten-segmented, length variable. Eyes hemispherical
and lateral or somewhat elongate and recessive. Thorax variously arched. Forewings variable in shape and texture, media and cubitus with a com-
mon petiole, pterostigma commonly present but frequently obsolete. Metacoxal spurs present. Metatibiae often armed basally, a variable
number of spines apically. Basal segment of metatarsus bearing two
black clawlike spines except in Tetragonocephala. Male proctiger simple. This is a very large and widely distributed subfamily, representa-
tives being found throughout the world. There are few characters which
can be cited as typical of it which will not show some exceptions. There
is always a medial-cubital petiole in the forewing; the genae are pro-
duced as variously shaped processes which almost always cover the frons
except for a small area which bears the median ocellus. Crawford con-
sidered the presence of the two black claws on the basal segment of the
metatarsi as of great importance, which indeed it is, although these
spines are lacking in one genus. The nymphs are often quite active and free-living, others are gall-
formers. Some are producers of copious quantities of wax; others seem
to produce none. They characteristically have the wing pads extending
prominently beyond the margin of the abdomen, not produced cephalad
at the humeral angles, and are without a fringe of large setae on the

in. Type: Psylla Geoffroy. Key To THE GENERA oF Psyllinae

1. Head somewhat deflexed, not vertical
Head very strongly deflexed, head and pronotum vertical. 2. Genal processes large, flattened, contiguous, on same plane as vertex; forewings
thickened, rugose, rhomboidal.......--...+--+22e00peceeeees Euphyllura p. 526. Genal processes not flattened, rarely contiguous; forewings usually membranous,
sometimes thickened and rugose, not rhomboidal (except Euphalerus propinguus)... 3. 3, Pleural suture of prothorax extending to middle of lateral margin of pronotum,
propleurites equal dorsally. veseeeen ens
Pleural suture of prothorax oblique, propleurites not equal dorsally. Forewings broadly rounded apically

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

4. Poyila p. 455. 4. :
Fofewings strongly narrowed apically. . . 200121, [Spanioneura p. 544. 5, Genal processes sharply depressed from plane of vertex, parallel to it. Arytaina p. 503. Genal processes not depressed from plane of vertex. oe

6. Vertex flat, large; eyes recessive; genal processes somewhat porrect; forewings
more or less thickened ......Euphalerus p. 519. Vertex somewhat rounded ‘to vertical genal processes: eyes lateral; forewings
membranous........++.++ vases . .Psyllopsis p. 516. 7. Basal segment of metatarsus ¥ Pachypsylla p. 533. Basal segment of metatarsus without black claws “Tetragonocephala p. 542. Genus Psylla* Geoffroy

1758 Chermes Linne (pro parte), Syst. Nat. X:453-455. 1762 Psylla Geoffroy (? ), Hist. Abr. ins. envir. Paris :482~198 [non viso, fide auct.]. 1764 Psylla Geoffroy, Hist. Abr. des Insectes 1:482, pl. X. * Psylla -ae, Gr. f, noun—a flea. 456 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

1804 Psylla Latreille, Hist. Nat. Crust. Ins. 3:266. ae
1810 Psylla Latreille, Consid. Gen. sur L’Ordre Nat. Anim. A [designates type}. eink. 5:67. 1848 Psylla Forster, (pro parte), Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. 1861 Psylla Flor (pro parte), Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou
1872 Psylla Meyer-Diir (pro parte), Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 3:
1876 Psylla Scott (pro-parte), Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876
1877 Chermes Thomson, Opuse. Ent. 8:820. 1879 Psylla Léw, Verh. zool.-bot, Ges. Wien. 28:600-603, 608. 1896 Psylla Edwards, Hemip.-Homop. Br. Is. 233-249. 1905 Psyllia Kirkaldy, Wien, Ent. Zeitg. 24:268. 1908 Psylla Oshanin, Verz, palae. Hemip. 2:
1912 Psylla Oshanin, Kat. pala. Hemip. 127. 1913 Psylla Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 8,

1914 Psylla Crawford, U, 8. Nat. Mus. Bull, 85:135. 1914 Brachypsylla Crawford, (pro parte), U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:142. 1917 Psyllia Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N, Am. 805. 1918 Labicria Enderlein, Zool. Anz. 49:348. 1921. Asphagis Endeflein, Zool. Anz. 52:120. 1921 Asphagidella Enderiein, Zool, Anz. 52:120. 1926 Baeopelma Enderlein, Ent. Mitt. 15:399. 1935 Psylla Haupt, Tierw. Mittel, 4, 3:231, 232. 1938 Psyllia Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv. Bull. 34:260. ), 337-377

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

Head large, as broad as thorax or nearly so, deflexed. Vertex more
or less depressed discally, shape somewhat variable. Genae produced
as conical processes usually deflexed from plane of vertex. Eyes hemi-
spherical. Antennae slender, usually longer than head, often much longer. Thorax large, well arched. Pronotum descending anteriorly, not flat. Propleurites not equal at juncture with pronotum, pleural suture oblique,
extending to posterior edge of pronotum, or proepimeron not extending
to pronotum at all. Forewings membraneous, usually hyaline, trans-
parent, rounded apically, cubitus and media with a common. basal
petiole, pterostigma present, obsolescent, or obsolete. Metatibiae usually
with a large or small basal. spur and five or six black spines apically. Basal segment of metatarsi with two black clawlike spines. Locoryre: Psylla alni (Linnaeus). Linnaeus’ genus Chermes (1758) contained fourteen species includ-
ing abietis and alni. The first valid designation of a type species for
Chermes is that of abietis by Passerini in 1863 (Arch. Zool. Anat. Fisiol. 2:205). As abietis is an aphid, Chermes is established as an aphid genus. The first use of the name Psylla seems to have been in the 1762 edi-
tion of “Histoire abrégée des Insectes” which is generally accredited to
Geoffroy. If the 1762 edition is not acceptable the name will date from
1764. Geoffroy’s treatment is not binomial but is binary which is valid
under the international code. Latreille first designated a type for the
genus Psylla in 1810, naming alni Linnaeus. Kirkaldy (1904) cited Psylla as a synonym of Chermes, basing this
action on the ground that Lamark (1801) had designated Chermes ficus
Linn. as the type of Chermes thereby making Psylla Geoffroy a synonym
of Chermes and leaving Psylla Latreille without a name. For this latter
group he proposed (1905) the name Psyllia Kirkaldy—type Chermes pyri
Linn. As the type of Chermes is not ficus but abietis, an aphid, his action
was groundless, and Psyllia is a synonym of Psylla. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 457

Enderlein, in the later numbers of his “Psyllidologica,” established

a great many new genera, apparently without seeing any specimens of
many of the species involved and using characters of slight significance. In this way he sometimes has placed very closely related species in dif-
ferent genera on some minor, scarcely specific character. Labicria,
Asphagis, Asphagidella, and Baeopelma are four fragments which he thus
splits from Psylla and which I do not believe to be worthy of generic dis-

   

     
 
 
 
 
     

  

    

  
  

 

       

 

  
  

     

     

 

 
 

 

     
  

tinction. Key to tHe Species oF Psylla
1. Eyes borne on prominent stalklike portion of head... 55
Eyes not borne on prominent stalklike portion... .- 2. 2. ( 1) Antennae twice as long as width of head or longer. 3. Antennae distinctly less than twice as long as width of head. 121,
3. (2) Antennae more than 234 times as long as width of head (usually 3 times
as long)...
Antennae less than 24 times as long as width of head
4. ( 3) Pterostigma present, prominent...
Prerostigma obsolete or almost obsolet
5. (4) Genal processes no longer than their basal w
apically.. 0.2.00... eeee eee sees . :
Genal processes longer than their basal width, sharper apically. 6. (5) Female genital segment 34 as long as rest of body; male forceps enlanged
apically... -caudata p. 461. Female genital segment 4 as long as rest of body; male forceps
nearly parallel margined to apices....................galeaformis p. 462. 7. (4) Female genital segment longer than rest of abdomen, slender, styliform,
abruptly enlarged basally; male forceps not notched apically. .floccosa p. 463. Female genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen, stout; male forceps
notched apically........ vette eete essen sence :
8. (7) Uniformly green or greenish yellow in color_trimaculata var. astig)
Not uniformly greenish, at least some red markings. . .
9. (8) With three prominent’ red spots on: dorsum of mesothorax, otherwise
unicolorous fete ieecseeeeteteeneenees trimaculata p. 464,
General color red, black bands on abdomen. .trimaculata var. cerasi p. 465
10. ( 3) Forewings with definite maculae. . sense : AL. Forewings without maculae. . 12. 11. (10) Genal processes cone-shaped, as long as vertex maculata p. 466. Genal processes small, blunt, less than 14 as long as vertex. . .. mana p. 467,
12, (10) Male forceps simple*, straight in lateral view (except brevistigmata acuta) 13. Male forceps not simple and straight . : 19. 13. (12) Female genital segment shorter than res lomen. . -
Female genital segment longer than rest of abdomen. .
14. (13) Pterostigma large, long; genal processes large, blunt, scarcely divergent
. albagena p. 468. Mterostigma broad but short; genal processes slender, subacute, strongly
ivergent.... :
15. (14) Male forceps straight; vertex an

 

 

brevistigmata p. 471,
vertex and genal
-.+ brevistigmata acuta p. 472. Male forceps bent sharply cephalad in apical 34:
processes nearly unicolorous

 

 

    

imple as used in this key means t

 

red to an acute, subacute, or blunt apex, not

broadly truncate, dentate, notched, lobate, emarginate, etc., the forceps may be eutved OF

ed, however. 458

16. 17. 18. 20. 21. 22,
23. 24,
25. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34,

35. LEONARD D. TUTHILL

(13) Female genital segment large basally, then attenuate, styliform floccosa p. 463. Fe genital segment stout, not styliform
(16) Apex of dorsal valve of female genital segment sharp. Apex of dorsal valve of female eee segment blunt. (17) erat processes large, acute, fully as long as vertex
al processes small, blunt, 3 as long as vertex. ‘carpinicola p. 4 ‘ea

dilonchi p. 0.
striata p. 470,

 
  

 

. (12) Female genital segment as long as rest of abdomen or longer; male forceps

not cleft, bearing a large Y-shaped black tooth apically... .. insignita P. 473. Female genital segment shorter than abdomen; male forceps cleft. (19) Larger species (3.5 mm. ); male forceps with only apical cleft, poste

   

r
an acute black tooth....-..+eeseceeceeteeeeueeeees magna p. 473. Smaller species (3 mm. ); male forceps cleft nearly halfway to the base,
caudo-mesal lobe ending in a T-shaped tooth..............5 omani p. 474. (2) Small species (22.5 mm. ); genal processes separate basally, strongly
divergent; forewings more or less fumate........00000s00eceeceeeeeeees 22. Larger species (2.5 mm. or more); genal processes not separate basally,
less strongly divergent; forewings usually not fumate (more or less fumate
in alaskensis, ppricela and media) . (21) Head and thorax very prominently . Head and thorax not prominently pubescent
(22) Male forceps simple to apex. Male forceps not simple. .
(23) Male forceps deeply cleft apically
Male forceps notched on lateral margin apically seoryli p. 476. (24) Genal processes 34 25 long as vertex; female genial segment 34 a2 long as
rest of abdomen, dorsal valve sinuate, upturned apically....... media p. 477. Genal processes’ as long as vertex; female genital segment longer than
rest of abdomen, valves straight, subequal cilis p. 477.

  
  
 
 
 
    

 

} (21) Female genital segment distinctly longer than rest of abdomen, "and male

 

forceps simple. Female genital segment at most as long as rest of abdomen, or if longer
male forceps not simple :
(26) Antennae 14 times as long as width of head or more. Antennae 1 to 134 times as long as width of head. (27) Apex of dorsal valve of female genital segment curved ventrad. hart
Apex of dorsal valve of female genital segment upcurved
(28) Dorsal valve of female genital segment with apex sharp
Dorsal valve of female genital segment with apex blunt. (29) Ventral valve of female genital segment nearly as long as dorsal v:
latter very abruptly upturned apically. . tuthilli p. 480. Ventral valve of female genital segment distinctly shorter than dorsal valve,
Jatter evenly upcurved.. -magaicanda p. 480,
(27) Large species (3.5 to 4 mm. to tip of folded wings). - -buxi p. 481. Smaller species (2.75 to 3 mm. to tip of folded wings) . “bulbosa p. 482. (26) Antennac but slightly longer than width of head. . seer eee BB. Antennae at least 13 times as long as width of head (o
less in alaskensis) :
(32) Male forceps T-shaped apical
Male forceps not T-shaped . . :
(33) Forewings more or less fumate; male forceps with broad platelike caudal
Jobe. -manisi p. 483. Forewings | not fumate (often whitish); male forceps without plat
caudal lobe . (34) Uniformly yellowish green in color; head and thorax not punctate; genal
processes 34 as long as verte: -breviata p. 484. + General color red to reddis! , black and
white; genal processes }4 or 24 as long as verteX..........002-0ece eee eee 36. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 43. 44,

45. 46. 47,
48. 49. 50. St.
52. 53. 54. (35)

2)
G7)
(38)

(38)
(40)

. (40)

(37)

(43)

(44)
(45)
(44
(47)
(47)

(49)

(50)
(31)

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 459

Female genital segment elongate, slender, dorsal valve straight; male
forceps in lateral view swollen midway, tapered to apices, curved caudad,
apices truncate with a small sharp anterior tooth. .... .quadrilineata p. 484. Female genital segment short, dorsal valve concave; “male forceps in

 

 

lateral view very broad, apically twisted caudad, apices broadly. .
-eonfusa p. 492,
38.

rounded teeth
Male forceps simple, blunt to acute apically (not truncate). Male forceps not simple
Genal processes almost as long as vertex; light green species. Processes not over 34 as long as vertex; dark-colored species
Tenet to tip of folded wings 4 mm. ; genal processes slender, divergent;
female genital segment much shorter than rest of abdomen, valves
nearly equal... p. 485. Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. ; genal processes stout, nearly con-
tiguous; female genital segment nearly as long as rest of abdomen
alba p. 487. Forewings with a black spot at apex of clavus, often somewhat fumate. . -.41. Forewings immaculate... . 142. Genal processes uniformly white robust; prerostigma narrow. .ribesiae p. 487. Genal processes dark, at least basally, less robust; pterostigma large

 

   
  
 

 

 

   

 

 

pyticola p. 489. Proctiger distinctly longer than forceps americana p. 490. Proctiger scarcely longer than forceps, usually enclosing latter apically

americana curta p. 491. Forewings with a prominent dark spot at apex of clavus. ... .ribesiae p. 487. Forewings immaculate (except Pterostigma may be dark; more or less
fumate in alaskensis and media). . Male forceps narrowed before. apes then enlarged and truncate, some-
what T-shaped in appearance. :

Male forceps not T-shaped
Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm.... Length to tip of folded wings 33.5 to4 mm

 

 

 
  
 
 
 
     
  
  
 
 

 

General color dark brown to black nor Pp. 493,
General color yellow...... vminor var. i flava p. 494,
Male forceps deeply notched apically 48. Male forceps otherwise......... +. 149. Forewings fumate; pterostigma very small... -media p. 477. Forewings clear; pterostigma moderately large. . usitata p. 494. Male forceps broad, apices very broadly, truncate and heavily sclerotized

latiforceps p. 495. Male forceps otherwise

Male forceps very broad, flatiened, narrowed toward apices, twisted”
caudad, apices visible only in caudal view, sharply narrowed near tips,
terminating as a blunt rounded tooth, somewhat sinuate on caudal margin
confusa p. 492.
wee SL

 

 

Male forceps otherwise...........-..2.. Male forceps strongly sinuate on caudal margin. . Male forceps otherwise. Male forceps produced ‘as rounded 1ol

    

 

 

fibulata p. 497. Male forceps otherwise 3. Proctiger of male about as long as forceps; forceps hooked ‘cephalad
apically
Proctiger of male very long, twice as long as forceps; forceps bent casdad ">
apically, truncate . propria p. 497. Entie apical portion of forceps hooked cephalad, ible in lateral
view... »uncata p. 498. 460 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Forceps bearing a small apical hook, scarcely visible in lateral view; fore-
wings typically much narrowed and elongate . -alaskensis p. 499. 55. ( 1) Forewings twice as long as wide. ‘phoradendri p. 500. Forewings 214 times as long as wide 56. 56, (55) Antennae annulated with black. ‘Antennae unicolorous except tip da

    
 

“annulata p. 501. “negundinis p. 501,

 

Psylla alni* (Linnaeus)
Figs. 1, 2, 7, 8, 255)

1758 Chermes alni Linnaeus, Syst. Nat. X:454. 1761 Chermes alni Linnaeus, Fauna Svecica 263. 4773 Psylla alni Linnaeus, DeGeer Mem. I, II:148 [fide Aulmann]. 1841 Psylla alni Hartig, Germ. Zeitschr. Ent. 3:373. 1848 Psylla alni Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:70,
1848 Psylla fuscinervis Forster, 0. 1801 Pevlle eft For, Riynch. Liv. 2:80
1861 Psylla alni Flor, Rhynch. Liv. 2:460. 1861 Peylla alni Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscow 34: 342, 350, 353. 1869 Chermes alni Thomson, Opusc. Ent. 8:831. 1872 Psylla alni Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent, Ges. 3:395. 1872 Psylla fuscinervis Meyer-Dir. ibid. 395. 1872 Psylla heydenii Meyer-Diir, ibid. 395. 1876 Psylla alni Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876:532. 1896 Psylla alni Edwards, Hemip.-Homop. Br. Is. 248. 1907 Psylla alni Kuwayama, Trans. Sap. Nat. Hist. Soc. 2:169. 1808 Poylla alni Qshanin, Vere. palae, Hemip. 2:356. 1913 Psylla alni Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 9. 1914 Peylla alni americana Crawford, U. S, Nat. Mus, Bull. 85:139, 156. 1914 Psylla alni_ gossypione Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:157. 1917 Psyllia alni americana Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 811. 1932 Psyllia alni americana Klyver, Pan-Pac. Ent, 8:17. 1932 Psyllia alni americana Klyver, Ent. News 4
1938 Psyllia alni americana Strickland, Can. Ent. 70:204. 1939 Psyllia alni americanella Strickland, Can. Ent. 71:214. 1. Length to tip of folded wings 4.5 to 5 mm. Cotor: General color yellowish green. Antennae dark in distal half. Forewings clear, veins often bright green. Srrucrure: Head broad, strongly deflexed. Eyes unusually large. Vertex % as long as wide, two discal foveae, clothed with very short,
sparse pubescence. Genal processes short, 3, as long as vertex, divergent,
from blunt to subacute. Antennae about 3 times as long as width of head. Thorax well arched. Pronotum long, half as long as prescutum. Hind
tibia with small basal spur. Forewings with typical venation, 244 times
as long as wide, pterostigma small. GenIratta: Male proctiger long, straight to near apex then hooked
caudad. Forceps in lateral view slender basally, enlarged apically; in
caudal view slightly but evenly arched; apex truncate, plack-margined,
often somewhat excavate thus appearing slightly bidentate. Female
genital segment longer than rest of abdomen, prominently pubescent,
slightly upcurved, broad basally, evenly narrowed to apex; dorsal valve
longer than ventral, styliform in apical third, blunt; ventral valve very
slender apically. * Genitive of Alnus—the generic name of the host plants. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 461

In the tenth edition of Systema Naturae, Linnaeus gives North
America as the habitat of alni. The designation of American specimens
as a subspecies is therefore an error. I have examined European speci-
mens (Austria) and find them to be identical with North American
material. As the name indicates the host is Alnus (alder), of several species. Strickland records it as occurring on “Betulosa glandulosa” (apparently
Betula) in Alberta. Numerous specimens are at hand from various
localities in California and Oregon; Oak Creek Canyon, Arizona; and
Asotin, Washington. It has also been recorded from Nevada, British
Columbia, Idaho, and Alberta. Outside North America it has been re-
ported from almost all of Europe, from Russia, and from Japan. Psylla caudata* Crawford
(Figs. 9, 10)

1914 Psylla caudata Crawford, U.S, Nat. 'Mus, Bull. 85:139, 157. 1917 Psyllia caudate Van Duzze, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 811. 1932 Psyllia caudata Klyver, Pan-Pac. Ent. 8:17. 1932 Psyllia caudata Klyver, Ent. News 43:75. Length to tip of folded wings 4.5 to 5 mm. Cotor: General color light to dark brown in fully matured speci-
mens. Younger individuals greenish yellow. Antennae dark from third
segment. Srrucrure: Head rather small, strongly deflexed. Vertex strongly
impressed discally, 4% as long as wide. Genal processes rather short,
cone-shaped, blunt, about 34 as long as vertex, as long as vertex on
median line. Antennae slightly over 2% times as long as width of head. Thorax somewhat arched. Pronotum large. Hind tibia with prominent
basal spur. Forewings large, often milky, membrane very thickly set
with small setae, 2% times as long as wide; medial cell large, pterostigma
prominent. Hind wings very long, equalling genital segment'in female. Genitatia: Male proctiger short, straight. Forceps in lateral view
slightly curved cephalad, slender basally, much enlarged apically; apices
black, notched; in caudal view slender, slightly arched. Female genital
segment extremely long, upcurved, about 3% as long as rest of body (often
appearing even longer due to the partially exerted ovipositor); ventral
valve slender, attenuate, acute apically; dorsal valve much longer than
ventral; very slender and styliform in apical half, apex scarcely acute; an
apparent suture across segment midway. Described from several hundred specimens from Colorado taken on
alder (Alnus sp.). This species is similar to galeaformis in many respects
but can readily be separated from the latter by the color, which is typi-
cally much darker, the smaller genal processes, and the genitalia of both
sexes. Both the forceps and proctiger of the male are much shorter than
they are in galeaformis, and the forceps are much enlarged apically. The

 

* caudatus -a -um, L. adj—tailed. 462 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

extremely long and upcurved female genital segment is instantly recog-
nizable. Klyver has recorded it from Vancouver, British Columbia, and Idaho. These are the only records of its occurrence outside of Colorado where I
have taken it in great numbers in company with P. floccosa. ‘Type, male, Pagosa Springs, Colorado, Baker, in Crawford Collection. Psylla galeaformis* Patch
(Figs. 11, 12)

1911 Psylla galeaformis Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 187:12-14. 1914 Peylla Satecformis Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:157. 1917 Psyllia geleaformis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 812,

1923 Psylla galeaformis Patch, Hemip. Conn. 249. Length to tip of folded wings 4.5 to 5 mm. Cotor: General color green to yellow to reddish brown. Antennae
dark distally. Wings hyaline to yellowish. Sraucrure: Head strongly deflexed. Vertex with deep discal im-
pressions, ¥%4 as long as wide. Genal processes large, cone-shaped, straight,
plunt, as long as vertex. Antennae slightly less than 3 times as long as
width of head. Thorax well arched. Pronotum large, strongly descend-
ing. Hind tibia with large basal spur. Forewings typical in size and
venation, pterostigma small. Membrane of both fore and hind wings
set with minute setae. Hind wings large, exceeding abdomen. Genrrauta: Male proctiger long, straight, slender. Forceps slender;
in lateral view slightly curved cephalad, almost parallel-margined to
apices; apices black, notched; in caudal view narrow, strongly arched. Female genital segment longer than rest of abdomen, slender, with promi-
nent pubescence; ventral valve very slender and attenuate in apical half,
acute; dorsal valve longer than ventral, apical third very slender,
straight, apex blunt with a rosette of short stiff setae. Described from’a large series of specimens from Dixfield, Maine,
August 20, 1934, P. W. Oman. Specimens are also at hand from the fol-
Jowing states and provinces: Vermont, Massachusetts, New Hampshire,
Nova Scotia, Ontario, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Manitoba, Sas-
katchewan, Colorado, Utah, Nevada, Oregon, Washington, and British
Columbia. The host is alder (Alnus), apparently of several species (A.
incana and A. tenuifolia). It has also been recorded from New York and
Connecticut. ‘As Crawford indicates, this may be identical with Diraphia viridescens
(=4-cornis) Provancher, Without seeing Provancher’s specimens this
cannot be determined, however. * From galea -ae, L. f, noun—helmet + formis (comb. form of forma ~ae, L. f.
noun) — shape. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 463

Psylla floccosa* Patch
(Figs. 13, 14)

1909 Psylla floceosa Patch, Ann. Ent. Soc. Am. 2:117 [nomen nudum]. 1909 Psylla floccosa Patch, Can. Ent. 41:301-303,

1911 Psylla floccosa Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 187:11-12. 1913 Psylla floccosa Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 15. 1914 Psylla floccosa Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:154,

1914 Psylla styliformis Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:154. 1917 Psyllia floceosa Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 810. 1921 Asphagidella floccosa Enderlein, Zool. Anz, 52:120. 1922 Psyllia floccosa Osborn, N. ¥. St. Coll. For., Tech. Pub. 16:54. 1923 Psylla floccosa Patch, Hemip. Conn. 2
1982 Psyllia floccosa Klyver, Ent. News 43:
1938 Psyllia floccosa Strickland, Can. Ent. 70:204,
1939 Psyllia floccosa Strickland, Can. Ent. 71:215. Length to tip of folded wings 5 to 5.5 mm. Cotor: Green to greenish yellow, sometimes brownish dorsally. Antennal segments with dark annuli, distal segments entirely dark. Wings clear. Srrucrure: Head scarcely as long as thorax, strongly deflexed. Vertex about % as long as wide, discal impressions shallow, anterior
margin not abrupt or overhanging median ocellus. Genal processes large,
cone-shaped, blunt, slightly longer than vertex. Antennae typically over
3 times as long as width of head (numerous Colorado, Utah, and Oregon
specimens at hand have the antennae slightly less than 24% times as long
as width of head). Thorax well arched. Pronotum large. Hind tibia
with small basal spurs. Forewings large, slightly less than 14 times as
long as wide; membrane set with minute setae; venation typical, ptero-
stigma almost or entirely lacking. Genrratta: Male proctiger long, straight. Forceps much shorter
than proctiger; in lateral view straight; in caudal view slender, evenly
arched to apices; apices slightly pointed, black. Female genital segment
longer than rest of abdomen, large basally, very suddenly narrowed,
styliform to apex; ventral valve acute; dorsal valve’ slightly longer than
ventral, more slender, straight, apex upturned as a small dorsal tooth. Described from many specimens from the following states and prov-
inces: Nova Scotia, New Hampshire, Maryland, Ontario, Michigan, Min-
nesota, Manitoba, Montana, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico, Utah,
Nevada, California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. It has also been recorded from Maine, Connecticut, New York, and
Alberta. . The nymphs are very conspicuous on the host, alder (Alnus spp. ),
being covered with a very abundant flocculent waxy secretion, The wax
is easily removed, leaving the nymphs naked. Miss Patch has recorded
the life history briefly: “The eggs are probably deposited upon the alder
in the fall, as the newly-hatched Psyllids appear about the time the alder
leaves are unfolding in the spring, and settle upon the ventral surface of

* floccosus -a -um, L. adj.—woolly. 464 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

the leaves. . . . The mature winged forms are present in great numbers
on the ventral sides of the leaves, freshly emerged and not yet taken: to
flight (June 6).” Near Creede, Colorado (elevation 9,000 ft.), the adults
appear about the first of June. The Colorado specimens and others from
the western area have much shorter antennae than the typical form as
noted in the description. Specimens from the San Jacinto Mountairis of
California have the longest antennae of any of the numerous specimens
at hand. Specimens of Crawford’s P. styliformis are in the United States Na-
tional Museum. Psylla trimaculata* Crawford
(Figs. 15, 16)

1911 Psylla alni trimaculata Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:631. 1914 Psylla trimaculata Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:155. 1917 Psyllia trimaculata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 810. 1922 faye trimaculata Osborn, N. Y. St. Coll. For, Tech. Pub, 16:54, 101-104 [life

notes}. 1952 Peyllia trimarulate Klyver, Bnt. News 43:14. Length to tip of folded wings 5 mm. Cotor: General color yellow or greenish yellow. A large median
spot on anterior portion of prescutum, a large spot on each side of
scutum, red. Antennae dark except three basal segments. Forewings
hyaline. Hind wings slightly whitish. Srrucrure: Head small, narrow. Vertex twice as wide as long,
deeply excavate between lateral ocelli. Genal processes as long as vertex,
scarcely divergent, slender apically, bhint. Antennae pubescent, 3 times
as long as width of head. Thorax well arched. Pronotum large, roundly
produced cephalad mesally. Hind tibia with large basal spur. Forewings
large, 144 to 1% times as long as body, very broadly rounded; veins biseri-
ately set with small setae; membrane with numerous extremely small
setae; medial cell unusually large, elongate, petiole of cubitus and media
very short, pterostigma very narrow, almost obsolete. Hind wings very
long, greatly exceeding abdomen. Genrrat1a: Male proctiger stout, slightly produced on caudal margin. Forceps short; in lateral view slender, enlarged apically; in caudal view
heavy, strongly arched to black apices; in dorsal view apices notched to
form two acute black teeth, cephalic-tooth larger than caudal, somewhat
variable. Female genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen; dorsal
valve straight to blunt black apex, apical portion slender; ventral valve
upcurved in apical half to meet dorsal, acute; long silky pubescence on
both valves. Described from numerous specimens from New York, New Hamp-
shire, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Manitoba, and Florida. This
species is apparently numerous wherever its hosts (various species of

* From tri L. — three + maculatus, L. (p. part. of maculare)—spotted. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 465

Prunus, wild cherry) occur. Numerous specimens collected in Minnesota
show gradations from typical trimaculate forms to unmarked individuals. The latter are identical with P. astigmata Crawford, which name is re-
tained as a variety, however, since typical specimens of the two forms
are so distinct in appearance. Osborn (1922) noted the same facts and
made astigmata a direct synonym of trimaculata. Strickland (Can. Ent. LXXI:215, 1939) has taken both males and females of a darker form,
apparently that described as P. cerasi Patch from the female only, and
concludes that they are only a color variant of astigmata. It is interest-
ing to note that both Miss Patch’s and Strickland’s specimens were taken. in September and in quite northerly latitudes. It seems probable that a
temperature factor is responsible for the greater pigmentation. Miss Patch
notes (1923) that her P. cerasi is “pale early in the season but richly col-
ored in fall.’

Crawford (1914 Lc.) says of the three forms involved: “It is possible
that all three will prove to be but variations of one species.”

Typr, female, Gowanda, New York, August 2 to 9, 1907, Van Duzee,
in the Crawford Collection. Psylla trimaculata var. astigmata* Crawford n. comb. 1814 Peylla astigmata Crawford, US. Nat. Mus, Bull 85:199, 155. 1917 Psyllia astigmata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 8

1921 Asphagidella astigmata Enderlein, Zool. ‘Anz. 52: ne

1932 Psyllia astigmata Klyver, Pan-Pac. Ent. 8:16. 1932 Psyllia astigmata Klyver, Ent, News 43:

1939 Psyllia cerasi astigmata Strickland, Can. Ent. 71:215. Identical with the typical form except in color. The three red maculae
on the mesothorax lacking. Green to yellow unicolorous. Numerous
specimens are at hand from Wisconsin, Michigan, Minnesota, Colorado,
Arizona, Idaho, California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. Many of the western specimens have genal processes which are propor-
tionately shorter and thicker than is typical. It is also recorded from
Nova Scotia and Alberta. Type, female, Polk Co., Wisconsin, July, Baker, in Crawford Collec-
tion. Host: Prunus spp. Psylla trimaculata var. cerasit Patch n. comb. 1912 Psylla cerasi Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull, 202:223. 1914 Psylla cerasi Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:156. 1917 Psyllia cerasi Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip.. N. Am. 810. 1923 Psylla cerasi Patch, Hemip. Conn.

1939 Psyllia cerasi Strickland, Can. Ent. it 215. Distinguished from typical trimaculata by the color of the females. Patch describes the color as follows: “dorsal head and thorax rosy, dorsal

* From a, Gr. — without + stigma -atis, L. f, noun — mark. + Genitive of cerasus ~i, L. f. noun—cherry tree. 466 LEONARD D. TUTHILL . abdomen almost vermillion, a black spot on dorsum of 1st abdominal
segment, five vivid black transverse bands across the abdominal dorsum,
the last coming just cephalad the genital segment. Antennal joints I, II,
* II rosy, rest black. Eyes bright black and bulging to width of thorax
or slightly more. Wings clear and a little brownish. Ventral body pale.”
Strickland collected numerous males and females of this form in
Alberta. He found the males to be much less highly pigmented than the
females, in fact he states that many of the males were indistinguishable
from astigmata. Apparently Miss Patch’s and Strickland’s specimens are the only known
collections of this color variety. One teneral female in the United States
National Museum bears no locality label. This is probably Provancher’s Diraphia sanguinea (as Crawford sug-
gests), but without a study of his types this cannot be determined. Psylla maculata* Crawford

(Figs. 17, 52, 52a)

1914 Psylla maculata Crawford, U. S. Nat, Mus., Bull. 85:137, 141. 1917 Psyllia maculata Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip, N. Am. 806. 1925 Psylla maculata Crawford, Proc. Haw. Ent. Soc. 6:31 [male described]. Length to tip of folded wings 2.50 to 2.75 mm. Cotor: General color dark brown. Vertex, posterior half of pro-
notum, posterior portion of prescutum, longitudinal bands on scutum,
scutellum, genal processes, distal portions of legs, margins of abdominal
sclerites, lighter brown to yellow. Forewings with brown maculae along
cubitus and media, including most of medial cell and extending to Rs
at margin. Srrucrure: Vertex almost twice as wide as long, pubescent on
anterior margin, discal foveae very prominent. Genal processes as long
as vertex, cone-shaped, separated at base. Antennae slightly over twice as
Jong as width of head. Thorax typical. Basal spur on hind tibia small. Forewings somewhat less than 2% times as long as wide; veins setaceous;
pterostigma short and wide, Rs sinuate. Genrratia: Male proctiger rather short, in lateral view narrow,
curved caudad. Forceps bearing a very large acute retrorse hook on
caudal margins reaching almost to base, apices acute, black. Female
genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen, both valves acute, dorsal
longer than ventral, excavate dorsally. Described from numerous specimens collected at Mesa Verde, Colo-
rado, on Cercocarpus parvifolius. Also at hand are specimens from
Durango and Poudre River Canyon, Colorado. The males have very dis-
tinctive forceps, the large retrorse hooks on them being quite unlike
anything known in the genus. ‘The male from California described by
Crawford is apparently a different species as he certainly would not

* maculatus, L.(p. part, of maculare)—spotted,

 

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 467

have overlooked such a prominent structure. A male of the series at
hand (Mesa Verde, Colorado, July 18, 1938, L. D. Tuthill) is therefore
designated as the allotype and deposited in the United. States National
Museum. Typz, female, No. 18107 United States National Museum, Colorado,
Baker. Type examined. Host: Cercocarpus parvifolius. Psylla nana* Tuthill
(Figs. 53, 54, 277)
1938 Psylla nana Tuthill, Ent. News 49:242. Length to tip of folded wings 2 to 2.55 mm. Cotor: General body color, including legs, dirty white, with orange
markings. Vertex white with margins, median line and discal foveae
orange; genal processes white; antennal segments dark on apices, last
two segments black. Thoracic dorsum with a median orange line, a pair
of broader orange stripes on each side of scutum. Forewings more or
less fumate in basal half; membrane whitish with somewhat irregular
brown maculae as illustrated; veins white. Srructure: Head of medium size. Vertex bulging forward between
antennae, medial suture and discal impressions prominent. Genal pro-
cesses small, blunt, somewhat pubescent, slightly over % as long as
vertex. Antennae about twice as long as width of head. Thorax rela-
tively flat. Hind tibia with large basal spur. Forewings 214 times as long
as wide, broadly rounded; venation typical, medial cell larger than cubital,
pterostigma very short. Genrratta: Male genitalia quite large. Proctiger slightly longer
than forceps, tapering from rather broad base, apex bent caudad at right
angles. Forceps fairly broad in lateral view, curved cephalad and then
caudad near apices, apices black; in caudal view almost straight. Female
genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve straight on
dorsal side; ventral valve evenly curved up to apex, slightly exceeded
by dorsal valve. Known from several points in Arizona. (Santa Rita Mountains,
Chiricahua Mountains, Patagonia). Host unknown,

Tyee, male, Santa Rita Mountains, Arizona, in Snow Collection, Uni-

versity of Kansas. * nana -ae, L. f. noun—dwarf. 468 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Psylla albagena* (Caldwell)

(Figs. 18, 19)
1988 Psyllia albagena Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull. 34:261, 262-264,

Caldwell’s description of this speciés is as follows:

“Length to tip of forewing 2.5-3.5 mm. ; forewing 2-2.3 mm. “Color: Genal cones light gray to white; vertex light orange to
yellow; pronotum dark gray; prescutum and scutum orange; abdomen
green; legs sooty white; forewings appearing white; sometimes whole
body covered with a white dust. “Head over twice as broad as long. Vertex almost two-thirds as long
as broad; dorsal margin concave; depressed discally. Genal cones as long
as vertex at median line, divergent; apices not broadly rounded; bases
moderately depressed below plane of vertex. “Thorax strongly arched; pronotum and prescutum strongly descend-
ing. Forewing almost two and one-half times as long as broad, hyaline;
pterostigma rather broad and long. “Genitalia: Male genital plate small. Forceps short, moderately
stout. Proctiger one and one-half times longer than forceps. Oedeagus
swollen and hooked apically. “Female genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen. Dorsum of
dorsal valve sinuate; apical fourth straight, narrow; apex broadly round-
ed. Ventral valve short, stout.”

I have a pair of paratypes of this willow-inhabiting species. Some
additional data taken from them are: Genal processes very large, blunt. Antennae twice as long as width of head. Thorax scarcely arched. Hind
tibia with small basal tubercle. Male proctiger slightly flexed caudad. Forceps simple, straight, slightly turned cephalad apically. Caldwell also describes the various stadii nymphs and gives some
biological data. Hosr Salix longifolia. Tyres, male, in Ohio Biological Survey Collection, Ohio State Uni-
versity. © Psylla carpinicolat Crawford
(Figs. 20, 21)

-sylla carpini Fitch, 4th Rept. N. Y. St. Mus.. 64. 1851 P non] "Peylla carpini Forster, Verh, natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein, 5:72. 1848. 1885 Psylla carpini Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 2:69. 1910 Psylla carpina Smith, Ins, N. J, 109. 1913 Psylla carpini Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 12. 1914 Psylla carpinicola Crawford, U. S. Nat, Mus, Bull. 85:151. 1914 Psylla cephalica Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:138, 151. 1917 Psyllia carpinicola Van Duzee, Cat. Hemij i. Am. 809. 1917 Psyllia cephalica Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. 809. 1918 Psylla carpinicola McAtee, Ent. News 29: 24. * From albus -a -um, L. adj. — white + gene ae, L. f. noun—cheek (gena of in-
sect). oo
+¥From Carpinus the generic name of the host + cola, L.—inhabitant. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 469

1918 Psylla cephalica McAtee, Ent. News 29:224. 1922 Psyllia carpinicola Osborn, N. Y. St. Coll. For., Tech. Pub. 16:54. 1938 Psyllia carpinicola Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull. 34:26,

Length to tip of folded wings 4 mm. _

Cotor: Variable in color from uniform light green to reddish brown. Forewings clear to slightly fumate, veins green. Srrucrure: Head large, strongly deflexed (typically). Vertex
slightly over ¥ as long as broad, discal impressions slight, genal processes
large, blunt, pubescent, variable in angle, in shape, in length, usually
about % as long as vertex. Antennae twice as long as width of head
(Crawford and Caldwell both record the antennae as 2% times as long
as width of head, but I have been unable to find any of more than very
slightly over twice the head width). Thorax scarcely arched. Hind tibia
with large spur at base. Forewings somewhat rugose; membrane evenly
set with numerous very small setae, 24% times as long as wide; veins biser-
riately setate, venation variable in curvature of Rs and amount of arching
in Cui, pterostigma small, also somewhat variable. Genrratra: Male proctiger ‘slender, narrowed, and bent caudad in
apical third. Forceps shorter than proctiger; in lateral view stout,
straight, slightly enlarged apically; in caudal view very slender, gently
arched to apices, terminating in a small black tooth. Female genital seg-
ment large, longer than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve much longer than
ventral, dorsal margin sinuate, apical third attenuate, apex upcurved,
acute; ventral valve acute, upcurved. At hand are specimens from New York, Connecticut, New Hamp-
shire, Nova Scotia, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, District of
Columbia, Virginia, North Carolina, Alabama, Florida, Mississippi,
Louisiana, Missouri, Illinois, Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin, Iowa, and Kan-
sas. Crawford (1914) records specimens from Nevada; these, however,
are dilonchi which he had not separated from carpinicola. His confusion
of these two forms accounts for some of the indefiniteness of his
description. P. cephalica was established on the greater arch in vein Cu, and
several other minor variations from the type which are apparently of
no specific significance. Typical examples of cephalica are abundant
from Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida. Specimens from more northern
localities show a gradual decrease in the amount of variation from the
type, which is a specimen from New York. The host of this very abundant species is Carpinus caroliniana,

Fitch’s type series is in the United States National Museum. Type, No. 1343 United States National Museum (Fitch’s No. 9680). Type examined. 470 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Psylla dilonchi* (Caldwell)

igs. 22, 23)

1914 Psylla coryli Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85: 150. {non] Psylla coryli Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta, Bull, 202:223. 1912,
1938 Psyllia diloncha Caldwell, Ohio Biol” Surv, Bull. 34:261, 267. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 4 mm. Cotor: Pale green to yellow. Apical half of antennae with segments
annulated, tip black. Forewings slightly yellowish. .

Srrucrure: Head only slightly deflexed. Vertex % as long as wide,
discal impressions slight, scarcely emarginate anteriorly. Genal processes
large, cone-shaped, acute, extending forward and almost on same plane
as vertex, with long silky pubescence, fully as long as vertex. Antennae
about 2% times as long as width of head. Thorax scarcely arched. Hind
tibia with srnall basal spur. Forewings large, membrane set with num-
erous very small setae, veins bearing small setae, 244 times as long as
wide; venation typical, Rs curved, pterostigma almost obsolete. Genrra.ia: Male proctiger long, slightly narrowed and bent caudad
in apical third. Forceps shorter than proctiger; in lateral view slender,
straight; in caudal view slender, slightly arched, apices’black, acute, many
long silky setae on caudal and medial margins. Female genital segment
longer than rest of abdomen (much longer in dry specimens); ventral
valve elongate, acute, upcurved; dorsal valve attenuate, longer than ven-
tral, dorsal margin sinuate, apex blunt, slightly upcurved. This species was described from one pair from Ohio. I have taken it
in great numbers in Minnesota on hazel brush (Corylus sp.) during
August. Specimens are also before me from Wisconsin; Onaga, Kansas;
Ormsby County, Nevada; Humboldt and Marin County, California (Koe-
bele, on Corylus rostrata). The latter specimens are those mentioned by
Crawford as a varietal form of striata and inadvertently named Psylla
coryli by him. This name was preoccupied by P. coryli Patch; thus Cald-
well’s name stands for the species. ie

‘Type, male, Fulton Co., Ohio, H. Osborn, in Ohio Biological Survey
Collection, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio. 4

Host Corylus sp. Psylla striata} Patch
(Figs. 24, 25)

1911 Psylla striata Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 187:14-15. 1914 Psylla striata Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mas, Bul. 85:58, 150. 1917 Psyllia striata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemi

1922 Peilia strata Osborn, NW. St. Coll For, Tech, Pub, 1683,
1923 Psylla striata Patch, Hemip. Conn. 249. 1932 Psyllia striata Klyver, Ent. News # 73. 1938 Psylla striata Brimley, Ins, N. C. -
1938 Psyllia striata Strickland, Can. Sac 70:205. From di, L. — two + lonchus -i, L. m. noun — lance, -i is the correct plural
endin;
FP. part. of strio, L. v—wrinkled, striated. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 471

Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 3:5 mm. Cotor: Yellow, including wings, sometimes greenish. Apical third
of antennae dark. Srrucrure: Head small, strongly deflexed. Vertex over % as long
as wide, discal depressions slight. Genal processes small, blunt, scarcely
divergent, ¥% as long as vertex. Antennae twice as long as width of head. Thorax well arched. Hind tibia with basal spur. Forewings with typical
venation, about 2% times as long as wide; Rs weakly sinuate, pterostigma
prominent. GenrTaLta: Male proctiger slender, almost straight, very slightly
curved caudad. Forceps in lateral view very narrow, straight; in caudal
view slender, arched to acute black apices, medial margins with many
long setae. Female genital segment twice as long as rest of abdomen;
dorsal valve much longer than ventral, apical half attenuate with dorsal
margin straight, apex blunt; ventral valve acute. Numerous specimens are at hand from Massachusetts, New Hamp-
shire, Nova Scotia, New York, Michigan, Wisconsin, South Dakota, Col-
orade, Utah, Washington, and British Columbia. It is also recorded
from Connecticut, California, and Alberta. Miss Patch described this species from Betula sp. (birch) and gives a
few life history notes, the nymphs occurring on the leaves and terminal
shoots of birch, covering themselves with inconspicuous woolly masses. The adults emerge late in June in Maine. Klyver records it as occurring
in California on Betula fontanalis. There is in the University of Kansas collection one female bearing
a paratype label and the data: “Basswood, Ottawa Ont. 1-VII-1904,
W. Metcalfe.” This is obviously incorrectly labeled as the original de-
scription lists only specimens from Orono, Maine. This specimen is
actually P. diloncha Caldwell. Psylla brevistigmata* Patch

(Figs. 27, 28)

1912 Psylla brevistigmata Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull, 202:222. 1914 Psylla brevistigmata Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:153. 1914 Psylla albirufa Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:
1917 Psyllia brevistigmata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 809. 1925 Psylla brevistigmata Crawford, Proc. Haw. Ent. Soc. 6:30. 1932 Psyllia brevistigmata Klyver, Ent. News 43:73. Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 to 3.25 mm. Coxor: General color red with white markings as follows: Posterior
and anterior margins of vertex, basal 34 of genal processes, posterior
margin of pronotum and prescutum, six longitudinal stripes on scutum,
margins of scutellum, margins of abdominal sclerites, Antennae dark
distally. Wings somewhat fumate, pterostigma yellow. Variable from
typical coloration to dark forms with genal processes, anterior portion
of pronotum, venter of thorax, abdomen, and veins of forewings dark

  

* From brevis -e, L. adj. — short + stigma, L. f. noun — mark,

 

472 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

brown. Forewings variable from almost hyaline through whitish to
heavily infuscated. Structure: Head broad, deflexed. Vertex pubescent on anterior
margin, less than ¥% as long as broad, very deeply impressed discally,
anterior margin abrupt. Genal processes strongly divergent, subacute,
nearly parallel to plane of vertex, 34 as long as vertex, prominently
pubescent. Antennae twice as long as width of head. Thorax weakly
arched. Hind tibia with prominent basal spur. Forewings long, over 2%
times as long as wide, often somewhat rugose; small radular areas on
apical margin; venation typical, veins biseriately setate, pterostigma
broad but typically very short, somewhat variable. Genrratta: Male genitalia small. Proctiger in lateral view slender,
curved caudad apically. Forceps shorter than proctiger; in lateral view
slender, straight to acute black apices; in caudal view simple, slender,
evenly arched to acute black apices, a fringe of stout setae on medial
margins. Female genital segment subject to considerable variation in
length, typically much shorter than rest of abdomen even in dried speci-
mens, in some equalling rest of abdomen; dorsal valve longer than ven-
tral, somewhat upturned, subacute; ventral valve evenly curved dorsad,
apex acute. The above description is written from California specimens, but
many specimens are at hand from various western states. As may be
expected in such an abundant species, considerable variation occurs in
characters. In addition to color variations, the pterostigma is quite
variable in length as is the female genital segment. It occurs in large
numbers on its host plant, mountain mahogany (Cercocarpus parvi-
folius.) Specimens are at hand from numerous localities in California, Ari-
zona, Utah, Colorado, and New Mexico. The type specimens (two fe-
males) were from Sequoia National Park, California. Crawford gives the length of the antennae as 2% times the width of
the head. I believe this to be a mistake as I have measured numerous
individuals and have been unable to find any in which the antennae are
more than slightly over twice as long as the width of the head. Psylla brevistigmata acuta* Crawford

1914 Psylla brevistigmata acuta Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:139, 154,
1917 Psyllia brevistigmata acuta Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip, N. Am. 810. Twelve specimens of this subspecies are at hand, all from Utah. They are uniformly much lighter in color than the typical subspecies, the
genal processes are shorter (barely ¥% as long as vertex), more blunt,
and more divergent. The male forceps in lateral view tapered from mid-
point, strongly bent mesad and cephalad as long slender black apices. Specimens at hand are from Cedar City, Pintura, Weber Canyon,
Providence Canyon, Logan Canyon, and Wasatch Mountains, Utah. One

* acutus -a -um,, L. adj. — sharp, pointed. tee

PTI:

Be

mas

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 473

of the Wasatch Mountains specimens (Koebele) bears-a label Cercocarpus
ledifolius. Tyre, male, No. 18112 United States National Museum. Type examined..

Psylla insignita* n. sp. (Figs. 55, 56, 278)

Length to tip of folded wings 3.25 to 3.50 mm. Cotor: General color red. More or less distinct white markings as
in brevistigmata. Srrucrure: Similar to brevistigmata except genal processes much
larger, almost as long as vertex. Geniratta: Male proctiger long, stout, parallel-sided. Forceps in
lateral view long, slightly swollen apically; in caudal view nearly straight
to near apex, turned sharply mesad as black, heavy, sharp apices; in
dorsal view apices rounded, bearing a large somewhat Y-shaped black
tooth, extending mesad. Female genital segment very large, as long as
rest of abdomen or longer; dorsal valve slightly longer than ventral, blunt. The exact relationship of this form to brevistigmata is uncertain, but
as it is distinct and readily recognizable it is described as a species of the
somewhat confusing brevistigmata complex. Described from numerous males and females bearing data as follows:
Salt Lake City, Utah, July 3, 1931; Weber Canyon, Utah, July 4, 1931;
Fish Lake, Utah, Aug. 16, 1929; Bray, California, June 30, 1935; all speci-
mens collected by R. H. Beamer; two females from Bray, California,
June 30, 1935, P. W. Oman. Hotoryre, male, aLtoryPe, female, Salt Lake City, Utah, in Snow
Collection, University of Kansas. Paratypes in Snow Collection, United
States National Museum, and author's collection. ‘The females from Bray, California, have an extremely large genital
segment the valves of which are somewhat different in shape from the
Utah specimens, but the males appear to be identical. Psylla magna} Crawford

(Figs. 57, 58)
1914 Psylla brevistigmata magna Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus.. Bull. 85:139, 154. 1917 Psyllia brevistigmata magna Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 809. Similar to brevistigmata except in genitalia and size. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. Genrratra: Male proctiger short; in lateral view straight, broad,
excavate on caudal margin apically. Forceps in lateral view nearly
straight, enlarged apically, a deep, rounded cleft in apices, anterior lobe
short, rounded, posterior lobe ending in a large, black, acute tooth extend-
ing antero-mesally; in caudal view weakly arched to black apices. Female

{ hnsignitus -a um, L, adj—striking, remarkable,
magnus ~a -um, L. adj-—large. 474 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

genital segment very short and tumed ventrad; dorsal valve slightly
longer than ventral, apex blunt. Crawford described this form as a variety, but due to the very dis-
tinct and constant genital characters I am raising it to specific rank. Numerous specimens are at hand from Bray, California; Carson
City, Nevada; Fish Lake, Richfield, Weber Canyon, Zion National Park,
and Pintura, Utah. Host unknown, probably Cercocarpus. Type, male, No. 18111, United States National Museum,

‘Type examined. Psylla omani* n. sp. (Bigs. 59, 60, 279)
Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. Cotor: General color light green to white. Flavous to orange mark-
ings on thorax. Wings whitish.

. Srructure: Head deflexed. Vertex broadly impressed discally, over
¥ as long as wide. Lateral ocelli on raised areas. Genal processes slender,
parallel to plane of vertex, scarcely divergent, blunt, % as long as vertex. Antennae twice as long as width of head. Thorax weakly arched. Pro-
notum strongly descending, long. Hind tibia with prominent basal spur. Forewings somewhat thickened, 2% times as long as wide; venation typi-
cal, pterostigma short; radular areas at margin of marginal cells and
between M, and Cu;. Membrane of hind wings set with minute setae. Genrratia; Male proctiger short, straight. Forceps with long heavy
pubescence; in lateral view narrow basally then much enlarged on caudal
margin, apices bearing a large, black, somewhat T-shaped tooth near
cephalic margin; in caudal view bowed outward basally, deeply cleft,
outer lobes slender, erect, acute, inner lobes, stout, bent mesad, then
dorsad to black apices, a small hooked tooth apically. Female genital
segment shorter than rest of abdomen, bent ventrad; dorsal valve curved,
apex blunt; ventral valve equalling dorsal, spoon-shaped apically. Described from two males and two females from Bray, California,
June 30, 1935, P. W. Oman. Holotype and allotype in United States
National Museum, paratypes in author's collection:

Hotorvrs, male, No. 55169 United States National Museum. It is with great pleasure that I dedicate this species to a friend and
colleague, P. W. Oman, of the National Museum. Psylla hirsuta} (Tuthill)
(Figs. 61, 62, 280)
1938 Arytaina hirsuta Tuthill, Ent. News, 49: 241-242. Length to tip of folded wings 2 to 2.25 mm. :
Cotor: General body color, including legs, red. Head and thoracic

* In honor of P. W. Oman, homopterist of the United States National Museum. {hirsutus -a -um, L. adj.—hairy. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 475,

dorsum with prominent white pubescence. Disc of vertex white, except
medial line and two foveae black; antennae black at tip. Thoracic dorsum
white, heavily marked with black and red; scutum definitely striped. Forewings reddish fumate, darker toward apex; veins red. Srrucrurs: Head deflexed, slightly broader than thorax. Discal
foveae and medial suture of vertex very prominent, postero-lateral por-
tions of vertex, which bear ocelli, prominently raised. Genal processes
blunt, pubescent, strongly divergent from base, scarcely touching basally,
¥% as long as vertex. Antennae about 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax heavily pubescent, granular. Posterior tibia with very small
basal spur. Forewings twice as long as broad, coriaceous; venation typi-
cal, pterostigma short and broad. Genrratta: Male proctiger longer than forceps, narrow in lateral
view. Forceps in lateral view straight, parallel-margined; in caudal view
strongly arched, apices notched, medial tooth thus formed, black, enlarged,
extending antero-mesally. Female genital segment short, constricted mid-
way and very narrow to apex; dorsal valve slightly longer than ventral. This species is close to Psylla coryli but can readily be distinguished
from it by the very heavy pubescence. The forewings are much more
coriaceous and darker, the head is larger, and the female genital segment
is different. Specimens are at hand from Oregon, Washington, California,
Nevada, and Montana. Some of the California specimens bear labels
identical with a series of coryli. A series from Satus Creek, Washington,
April 23, 1938, K. Gray, bears the label “on Purshia tridentata.”

Hotoryps, male, No. 55170 United States National Museum. Psylla minuta* Crawford

(Fig. 26)

1914 Psylla minuta Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:137, 142. 1914 Psylla purshiae Crawford U.S. Nat. Mus, Bull. 85:142. 1914 Brachypéylla purshiae Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:142. 1917 Psyllia minuta Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 806,

1931 Psyllia minuta Klyver, Pan-Pac. Ent. 7:158. 1932 Psyllia minuta Klyver, Ent, News 43:71. Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 mm,

Cotor: General body color light to dark brown or red. Vertex,
stripes on scutum, parts of remainder of thoracic dorsum, lighter. Wings
more or less fumate, more heavily in apical half. Strucrure: Vertex slightly more than ¥% as long as wide, strongly
bulging anteriorly, shallowly depressed. discally. Genal processes cone-
shaped, slender, acute, separated at base. divergent, 2% as long as vertex
(typically). Antennae 134 as long as width of head. Vertex and dorsum
of thorax slightly pubescent. Basal spur on hind tibia very small, blunt. Forewings somewhat rugose, 2% times as long as wide; venation typical,
pterostigma long, large. Genrratra: Male proctiger in lateral view narrow, longer than for-

 

 

* minutus -a -um, L. adj—small. 476 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

ceps. Forceps straight in lateral view; in caudal view arched to rather
blunt, black apices; heavy pubescence, especially on mesal margins. Female genital segment as long as rest ‘of abdomen; dorsal valve longer
both acute at apex. .

Oe emma Species is represented in the material at hand by
specimens from various localities in California, Arizona, Utah, Colorado,
and Idaho. Klyver records it from Nevada also. As is to be expected in
such an abundant species, the specimens show considerable variation,
especially in color. The host plant is Purshia tridentata. :

‘Type, female, No, 18108 United States National Museum, American
Fork Canyon, Utah, Hubbard and Schwarz. ‘Type examined. Psylla coryli* Patch

i Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 2
Hee peut cordtt Crawford, US, Nat Mus, Bull
1917 Psyllia coryli Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip..N. Am. 806.
to tip of folded wings 2 to 2.25 mm. cae General color light brown to yellowish, thoracic dorsum
dark brown except for light stripes. Posterior portion of vertex some-
times dark. Forewings yellowish fumate, more heavily so apically. Srrucrure: Vertex narrow, strongly depressed discally, %4 as long
as wide, strongly overhanging anteriorly. Genal processes large, slightly
over % as long as vertex, acute, divergent, almost parallel to plane o}
vertex. Antennae 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax very
strongly arched. Only a very slight protuberance on base of hind tibia. Forewings of typical shape and venation, a little more than twice as long
as wide; pterostigma broad, of moderate length. .

Genrratta: Male proctiger long, straight. Forceps small, straight,
and parallel-sided in lateral view; in caudal view arched, each with a

* Jarge black inner apical tooth, heavy setae on basal half of inner margins. Female genital segment.as long as rest of abdomen; valves somewhat
attenuate, dorsal longer than ventral, latter plack-margined apically,
somewhat flattened. |

‘This species was described by Patch from one (?) male specimen
from Colorado. Specimens are at hand from Colorado, Arizona, Nevada,
California, Idaho, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. Although Miss Patch’s specimen is unavailable, her photograph of
the male forceps plus Crawford’s description make the identification of
this species fairly certain. Tyre, male, whereabouts unknown. |

No indication of a host plant is given on any of the specimens. 23,
37, 143,

* Genitive of Corylus -i, L. f. noun—a genus of plants (hazel). THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA ATT

Psylla media* n. sp. Figs. 63, 64, 281)

Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 mm. Cotor: Head and pronotum white with orange markings. Remain-
der of thorax mostly orange with markings lighter to white. Abdomen
dark brown, sclerites white-margined. Forewings somewhat fumate, most
heavily along veins M.and Cu, whitish spots on margin in medial cell, be-
tween M, and Cu, and in cubital cell. Hind wings white. Srrucrure: Head small. Vertex 36 as long as wide, discal impres-
sions broad and deep, deeply emarginate anteriorly. Genal processes
cone-shaped, strongly divergent, blunt, 1% as long as vertex, nearly paral-
Jel to plane of vertex. Antennae 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax well arched. Pronotum long. Mesopleurites very. strongly devel-
oped. Forewings long; venation typical, pterostigma very small. Basal
spur on hind tibia extremely small. Genrrauta: Male genitalia large. Proctiger short, stout, evenly nar-
rowed to blunt apex. Forceps in lateral view broad, deeply cleft apically;
caudal portion extending antero-mesally as a large, heavily sclerotized,
obliquely truncate tooth, cephalic lobe rounded; in caudal view stout to
cleft apices, well arched. Female genital segment % as long as rest of
abdomen; dorsal valve sinuate on dorsal margin, apex slightly upturned,
acute; ventral valve shorter than dorsal, acute. Described from three females and one male from Trout Creek, Utah,
May 8, 1934. T. O. Thatcher, taken on “Carcocarbus aedifolius”; one fe-
male, Green Canyon, Utah, April 22, 1934, T. O. Thatcher. Hotoryre, female, No. 55171 United States National Museum. Psylla difficilis} n. sp. (Figs 29, 30)

Overall length 2 mm. Cotor: General color of head and thoracic dorsum orange to white. Abdomen and venter of thorax fuscous. Forewings hyaline except ptero-
stigma and borders of veins dark. Structure: Head small. Vertex deeply impressed, about 34 as long
as wide. Genal processes very short, 1/6 as long as vertex, blunt, separate
basally. Antennae nearly twice as long as width of head (11.5:6.5). Thorax quite flat. Forewings very small; venation typical, pterostigma
small. Hind tibia with small basal spur. GeniTatia: Male genitalia very similar to media. Proctiger in lat-
eral view stout, straight, caudal margin oblique apically. Forceps in lateral

‘view straight, moderately broad, deeply cleft apically, lateral lobe

rounded, caudo-mesal portion a black, curved hook; in caudal view stout,
mesal teeth incurved, touching; in dorsal view mesal portion of forceps

* medius ~a ~um, L. adj—ambiguous. 7 difficilis -e, L. adj —troublesome. 478 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

is obliquely truncate apically. Female genital segment long (% as long as
distended abdomen, longer than remainder of abdomen in normal dried
specimens) , dorsal and ventral valves both straight, slender, acute, nearly
equal in length. This species is quite similar to media but is distinct in the length
of the antennae, the genal processes, the flatter thorax, and the genitalia
of the female. The genitalia of the male are much like those of media. It is described from a series of eight males and females from Trident,
Montana, Nov. 16, 1939, D. J. Pletsch, taken on mountain mahogany
(Cercocarpus) and from specimens collected by D. D. Jensen at Pollock,
Idaho. The Montana specimens have very small forewings which are
much exceeded by the distended abdomens of males and females alike;
the Idaho specimens have normal-sized forewings. Hotoryrs, male, atorypr, female, Trident, Montana, Nov. 16, 1939,
D. J. Pletsch, in author’s collection. Paratypes with same data and from
Pollock, Idaho, D. D. Jensen; paratypes in collections of Montana State
College, author, and D. D, Jensen. Psylla hartigii* Flor
(Figs. 31, 32)

1861 Psylla hartigii Flor, Rhynch. Liv. 2:450, 469. 1861 Psylla hartigii Flor, Bull, Soc. Imp, Nat. Moscou 34:35, 343, 351,
1874 Psylla sylvicola Lethierry, Cat. Hémip. Dept. Nord. 90 [fide Van Duzee]. 1876 Psylla sylvicola Scott, Trans. Ent, Soc. London 1876:539. 1898 Psylla hartigii Edwards, Hemip.-Homop. Br. Is, 244, pl, XXVIII, fig. 4. Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 2:358. (2) Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., B
1912 Psylia hartigii Oshanin, Kat. pala, Hemip. 1913 Psylla hartigi Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 16. 1914 Psylla hartigii Crawford, U, S. Nat. Mus, Bull, 85:146,
1917 Psyllia hartigi Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 807. 1932 Psyllia hartigit Klyver, Ent, News 43:71. 1935 Psylla hartigi Haupt, Tierw. Mittel. 4, 3:235. 1938 Psyllia hartigii Strickland, Can. Ent. 70:205. Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 3.5 mm. Couor: General color yellow to orange, darkest on dorsum, An-
tennae black apically. Forewings yellowish fumate. Srructure: Head small, not as strongly deflexed as in striata, Vertex
slightly over ¥% as long as wide, with very slight discal impressions. Genal
processes acute, apices incurved, almost 23 as long as vertex. Antennac
1% times as long as width of head (sometimes longer—Crawford). Thorax moderately arched. Hind tibia without basal spur. Forewings of
average size, slightly less than 244 times as long as wide; venation typical,
Rs straight, pterostigma very large. Geniratta: Male proctiger straight, narrow. Forceps in lateral view-

broad basally, quickly narrowed and very slender td apices; in caudal
view slender, arched to apparently acute black apices; apices slightly
bifid in caudal yiew. Female genital segment longer than rest of abdo-

* Named in honor of Hartig, an early European entomologist. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 479

men, slender, valves attenuate, ventral valve acute, straij s
slightly longer than ventral, apical third very dlenden denna

Described from specimens from Lead, South Dakota, and Douglas
Lake, Michigan. Originally described in Europe where it occurs on
Betula alba, this apparently holarctic species was first recorded from
North America by Miss Patch (Maine) on Betula populifolia. Additional
records are New York, Nova Scotia, and Alberta. No host records are
available on the specimens at hand, but the Lead, South Dakota, series
was apparently taken with P. striata, Other than North America its known
distribution is northern and central Europe. Flor in describing this psyllid used the spelling hartigii. According
to the international rules of nomenclature, when modern patronymics are
originally published as ending in ii such names retain their original form
even though they have been incorrectly formed (Op. 8). Psylla stricklandi* (Caldwell)

(Figs. 34, 35)
1939 Psyllia stricklandi Caldwell, Can. Ent. 71:21:
1939 Psyllia stricklandi Strickland, Can. Ent. 71:215,

Length to tip of folded wings 4 to 4.5 mm. Cotor: General color green to yellow, fully mature specimens with
brown markings on thorax, males darker. Antennae dark apically. Fore-
wings slightly yellowish. Srrucrure: Head small. Vertex % as long as wide, posterior margin
almost straight, discal impressions slight, Genal processes slender, blunt,
divergent, as long as vertex at middle, vertical, Antennae slightly under
twice as long as width of head. Thorax slightly arched. Posterior tibia
with small basal spur. Forewings large, broad, barely over twice as long
as wide, costal margin strongly arched; venation typical, pterostigma
small. Genrratra: Male proctiger long, slender, bent caudad apically, For-
ceps as long as proctiger; nearly straight in lateral view to near apex,
then narrowed (mostly on caudal margins) to blunt black apices; in
caudal view slender, well arched, very long slender setae medially. Female
genital segment longer than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve much longer
than ventral, attenuate in apical half to slender, acute, slightly upturned
apex, dorsal margin almost straight, styliform portion very densely
radulate; ventral valve in lateral view acute, radulate apically. Described from a pair of paratypes from Columbia Ice Field, Alberta
(6,700 ft), July 22, on Shepherdia canadensis, and numerous adults and
nymphs from Creede, Colorado, taken at about 10,000 to 11,000 feet; also
in July on Shepherdia canadensis in 1938, 1939, and 1940. In general, the
Colorado specimens are lighter in color than the paratypes. ‘Tyre, female, in Canadian National Collection, Ottawa, Ontario. * Named in honor of E. H. Strickland, the collector. 480 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Psylla tuthilli* (Caldwell)
ig. 33)
ia vi . Ent. 71:212. 1988 Pollan ‘Hatie Germ, Zeitschr. Ent. 3:374. 1841. 1939 Psyllia virida Strickland, Can. Ent. T1215,
1940 Psyllia tuthilli Caldwell, Ohio Jour. Sci. ; 40:50. |

“Length to tip of forewing 3 to 3.5 mm. ; forewing 2.7 to 3.3 mm. “Color: Appearing yellow-green throughout; antennae black at
joints and distally; forewings yellowish; genital segment brownish. in

“Genal cones longer, more divergent, and more slender than i
stricklandi, Forewings with Cu, rather arched, similar to carpinicola
Crawford. “Genitalia: Female segment longer than rest of abdomen. Dorsal
valve styliform for caudal third, this portion minutely roughened; caudal
half of styliform portion abruptly turned up; apex blunt. Ventral valve
almost as long as dorsal; very strongly hooked dorsad in lateral aspect. 1 plates no longer than ventral valve. |
Tatelporceps of vn ‘attenuate in apical third in caudal aspect, in lateral
aspect appearing very slender and gradually narrowed to apex. '—Cald-
well. ‘This speci i i nd several males. This ies was described from a single female a vere
Thave examined one male paratype and find it to be very similar to P.
magnicauda. The genal processes are more slender than on. the latter
species, the antennae slightly shorter proportionately, slight differences
see apparent in the venation, ete., but nothing of any marked distinction. Caldwell writes that the female was quite distinct, however, and was
therefore made the type, that the dorsal and ventral valves of the female
genital segment are ynuch more upturned than they are in magnicauda,
that the valves are nearly the same length, and that the lateral plates do
not exceed the ventral valve as they do in magnicarda,

Host Shepherdia argentea, “Bullberry” (Strickland). _ . Type, female, August 7, 1938, Medicine Hat, Alberta, in Canadian
National Collection, Ottawa, Ontario. Psylla magnicauda} Crawford
(Figs. 36, 37)

magnicauda Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:138, 149,
isa Paulle sng ricana abdominalis Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:150. 1917 Psyllia magnicauda Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 809. 1932 Psyllia magnicauda Klyver, Ent, News 43:72,
1938 Psyllia magnicauda Strickland, Can. Ent. 70:205-
1939 Psyllia magnicauda Strickland, Can, Ent. 71:215. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 425 mm. . |
Coton: Uniformly light green or slightly yellowish, occasionally faint,
longitudinal stripes on scutum. ‘Head often whitish. Forewings clear or
slightly yellow. * ed in honor of L. D. Tuthill. tei
{Boom magnus -a ~wm, L, adj—large + eauda -ae, L. £ noun—tail. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 481

Srrucrure: Head strongly depressed, vertex almost perpendicular. Vertex % as long as wide, rounded down anteriorly, discal impressions
prominent. Genal processes large, slender, cone-shaped, about as long as
vertex, Antennae almost twice as long as width of head. Thorax well
arched. Hind tibia with small basal spur. Forewings broad, less than
2% times as long as wide;.marginal cells large, Rs sinuate, pterostigma
small. Genitatra: Male proctiger slender, apical fourth bent caudad. For-
ceps large, almost as Jong as proctiger; in lateral view parallel margined;
in caudal view slender, arched to black, blunt apices. Female genital
segment large and very thick dorso-ventrally, as long as rest of abdomen
or longer; dorsal margin of dorsal valve sinuate, apex slender, elongate,
radulate, apex upturned; ventral valve much shorter than dorsal, acute,
slightly upcurved; lateral plates longer than ventral valve. Numerous specimens are at hand from Colorado, Wyoming, 'Mon-
tana, North Dakota, Minnesota, British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Mani-
toba. It is also recorded from California and Alberta. Strickland gives
the host of this abundant and widespread species as Eleagnus commutata
(Eleagnus argentea), wolf willow. In Colorado I have taken it on
Shepherdia argentea,

Tyre, female, Sheridan, Wyoming, Metz, is in the Crawford collec-
tion and also bears the type label of Psylla americana abdominalis. Psylla buxi* (Linnaeus)

ig. 38)

1758 Chermes buxi Linnaeus, Syst. Nat, 10:454. 1848 Psylla buzi Férster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:71. 1872 Psylla buxi Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch, Ent. Ges. 3:399. 1876 Psylla buxi Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876:534. 1890 Psylla buxi Riley, 5th Rept. U. S. Ent. Comm, 672 (rept, of discovery in N. ¥., 1881]. 1896 Psylla buxi Edwards, Hemip.-Homop. Br. Is, 249, pl. XXVIII, fig. 7. 1908 Psylla buxi Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 2:357,

1910 Psylla busi Smith, Ins. N. J. 109,

1912 Psylla buxi Oshanin, Kat. paliia Hemip. 127. 1913 Psylla buxi Aulmann, Psy. Cat, 11. 1916 Psylla buxi Britton, 39th Rept. Conn. Agr. Exp. Sta. 186. 1917 Psylla buxi Weiss and Dickerson, Ent. News 28:40-41. 1917 Psyllia buxi Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip, N. Am, 811,

1921 Asphagidella buxi Enderlein, Zool. Anz. 52:120. 1926 Asphagidella buri Enderlein, Ent. Mitt. 15:399. 1926 Psyllia buxi Ferris, Can. Ent. 58:19 [desc. and figs. nymph]. 1932 Psyllia buxi Klyver, Ent. News 43:75. 1938 Psyllia buxi Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull. 34:265,

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 4 mm. Cotor: General color light green, more or less brown on dorsum
and pleurites of thorax, pro- and mesothoracic femora partly embrowned. Forewings slightly yellowish. Hind wings white. Srrucrure: Head large, deflexed about 45°. Vertex % as long as
wide, with very prominent discal foveae, a sharp sulcus extending from

 

 

  

 

 

* Genitive of Buzus -i, L. f, noun—the box-tree (the host plant). 482 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

each medio-anteriorly to near anterior margin. Genal Processes very
large, robust, blunt, % as long as vertex. Antennae 1% times as long as
width of head. Thorax well arched. Posterior tibia with large basal spur
and small tubercle. Forewings large, much longer than body, somewhat
over 1% times as long as wide; membrane thickly set with minute setae;
marginal cells large, Rs long, curved, pterostigma almost entirely lacking. Genrratia: Male proctiger longer than forceps, almost straight. Forceps in lateral view broad, straight, slightly enlarged toward apices;
in caudal view stout, slightly arched, apices flattened, incurved, terminat-
ing in a large, curved, black tooth. Female genital segment twice as long
as rest of abdomen, dorsal valve much longer than ventral, downcurved,
apex acute, upturned; ventral valve acute, upturned. a . Described from a series of specimens from New York on ‘Bux. Additional specimens are at hand from Portland, Oregon. It is also re-
corded from New Jersey, Ohio, Connecticut, and California. Outside of
North America its known distribution embraces Great Britain and almost
all of continental Europe. The male specimens at hand are all somewhat teneral, hence the
description of the male genitalia may be erroneous in some details. Enderlein (1921) designated P. buzi as type of a new genus, Aspha-
gidella, based on the lack of pterostigma in the forewing and venational
characteristics of the hind wings, characters which I do not believe to be
of generic si
This species causes considerable injury to its host, ornamental box
(Buxus sempervirens) . Psylla bulbosa* n. sp. (Figs. 67, 68, 283)

Length to tip of folded wings 2.75 to 3 mm. Cotor: Whitish green, scutum and anterior portion of prescutum
sometimes yellowish. Forewings slightly fumate. Tip of antennae dark. Structure: Head strongly deflexed. Vertex almost plane, slightly
over % as long as wide. Genal processes large, swollen, rounded, con-
tiguous most of length, % as long as vertex, scarcely depressed below
plane of vertex, nearly parallel. Antennae 114 times as long as width of
head. Thorax broad, well arched. Hind tibia with prominent spur at
base. Forewings broad, but slightly over twice as long as wide; venation
typical, pterostigma very broad, of moderate length. Membrane of both
fore and hind wings thickly set with minute setae, forming. indefinite
radular areas on margin of forewing. Genrratta: Male genitalia large. Subgenital plate unusually large. Proctiger straight, narrow. Forceps nearly reaching tip of proctiger,
with long heavy pubescence; in lateral view narrow, slightly sinuate on
caudal margin; in caudal view arched to blunt, black apices, somewhat
flattened on caudal side near apex; in dorsal view apices truncate, pro-

* bulbosus -a -um, L, adj—bulbous, in reference to the genal processes. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 483

duced cephalad as small blunt tooth. Female genital segment heavy,
longer than rest of abdomen, with long sparse pubescence; dorsal valve
longer than ventral, nearly straight, apex subacute, upturned, apical
portion radulate; ventral valve nearly straight, acute. Described from twenty-two specimens from Ruby, Arizona, July 22,
1938, 'R. H. Beamer, collected on Salix tazifolia HB.K., in the Snow Col.
lection, University of Kansas, and twenty-six specimens in the United
States National Museum, twenty-one of which bear a label, “Turkey
Creek, Arizona, June 10, 1933, P. W. Oman”; the remaining five are from
Nogales, Arizona, June 25, 1933, P. W. Oman. Hotoryps, male, Attorype, female, and paratypes in Snow Collec-
tion; paratypes in United States National Museum and author’s collection. Psylla manisi* n. sp. (Figs, 69, 70, 284)

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. Cotor: General color reddish, genal processes and legs lighter. Antennae black apically. Forewings fumate, most heavily along veins
and apically; pterostigma yellowish opaque. Srrucrure: Head strongly deflexed. Head and thorax punctate. Vertex long, over % as long as wide, slight discal impressions. Genal
Processes stout, contiguous almost to tips, % as long as vertex. Antennae
slightly longer than width of head. Thorax well arched, Pronotum
almost vertical. Hind tibia with small basal tubercle. Forewings slightly
over 2% times as long as wide; membrane very thickly’ set’ with minute
setae; cubital cell larger than medial, pterostigma very large. Genitatia: Male proctiger much longer than forceps, near apex
narrowed and flexed caudad. Forceps in lateral view broad basally, much
enlarged, then converging (more abrupt on caudal margin) to narrow,
cephalically tured, sharp, black apices; in caudal view very broad bas. ally, mesal margins sinuate, lateral margins nearly straight 34 of length
then sharply excavate, slender brown apical portion slightly incurved,
sharp lateral margins near base produced caudad as a small flat lobe. Female genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen (much shorter in
fresh or alcoholic specimens); dorsal valve slightly upcurved, blunt;
ventral valve shorter than dorsal, deep, ventral margin straight to mid-
point then angularly bent dorsad to acute apex. Described from a series of thirty-seven males and females sent to me
by H. C. Manis of the University of Idaho, to whom the species is dedi-

‘cated. They were collected on mountain ash on Moscow Mountain near

Moscow, Idaho, September 5, 1940. Three additional females from the
same locality were collected in July and August, 1938, by H. M. Harris. Hotorype, male, AtLoryrs, female, and paratypes in author’s collec-

tion; paratypes in United States National Museum and University of
Kansas. “Named in honor of H. C. Manis, the collector. 484 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

Psylla breviata* Patch
(Figs. 39, 40)

breviata Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 202220.
joa Revie breviata Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. ast, 141. 1917 Psyllia breviata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip..N. Ams . 1931 Psyllia. breviata Kilyver, (?) Pan-Pac. Ent. 7:157.
th to tip of folded wings 3 mm. ;
Length to HP och yellow throughout except tip of antennae dark. ings slightly whitish. : ; :
ing irre Head strongly deflexed. Vertex with prominent discal
i i ‘ie. Genal processes slender, straight, blunt,
impressions, 3 as long as wide. ae trai Oh ok
y longer than
34 as long as vertex. Antennae but very slig! y longer oe bia with
x well arched. Pronotum nearly vertical. 1
net ne St spur, Forewings broad, but slightly over twice as Jong
‘as wide; venation typical, plerostigma large, Membrene of both for
‘hind wings very thickly set with minute setae. : ;
and CowrraLta: Male proctiger long, straight. Forceps an view
traight to near apex than excavate on cep! lic margin;
10n8 Seeved basally, nearly straight to near apex then sharply bent
jnesad; apices slender, acute, curving cephalad. Fomale genital segmen
ae ong as rest of abdomen, stout; dorsal valve longer than ,
apo ete. slightly upcurved and Knoblike apically ventral valve acute,
f ichi; and a
‘One female is at hand from Marquette, Michigan, e series
Mornia (Placer and Nevada Counties an:
of males and females from California ( ‘Nevada Counties and
i jption of the male genitalia is from the la
‘Argus Mountains). The description o l ia Is from the later
iforni re Miss Patch’s species
group. That the California specimens ai s pecies | pe
i Jes are available from the type
is quite doubtful, but until some mal rea ¢ from the type crates
1 description was based on
they are placed here. The original d was based on three fem
Swamp, Ottawa, Ontario, June 14, - a ;
from, Pows wo agure of the male genitalia accompanying Klyver’s records
£ breviata from Utah and Nevada, his specimens apparently are not the
of brevmecies, 1 believe them to be a heretofore undescribed species

Psylla mani

 

Psylla quadrilineatat Fitch
(Figs. 71, 72)

i . 64,
drilineata Fitch, 4th Rept. N.Y. Sta. Mus, 64. 1ee, Pevta Guadriineate Key, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 269. 4, og,
189 eat aust neat Fitch sch Rept, N. ¥. Sta. Mus. (reprint of original desc. )-

 
 

Ma quadril
1eey Pella quadrilineata Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 25. ge 14g
}eit Peylla quadrilineata Crawford, U, S. Nat. Mus. Bull: Bross
317 Psyllia quadrilineata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 808.

tip of folded wings 3 mm. a .
ae ‘General color red to reddish brown. Lighter on margins of

i . part. of brevio)—shortened. oe
4 breviats, FG Petour + lineatus, Le (P. part, of lineo)—striped. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 485

most sclerites. Four light longitudinal stripes on scutum. Wings slightly
whitish, pterostigma infuscated. ;

Srrucrure: Head and thorax coarsely punctate. Head large, strongly
deflexed. Vertex % as long as wide, posterior margin deeply concave,
deeply impressed discally, anterior margin very strongly protruding,
overhanging median ocelliis. Genal processes stout, straight, blunt,
scarcely tapered, ¥% as long as vertex. Antennae short, thick, as long as
width of head. Thorax moderatély arched. Legs short. Hind tibia with
short, stout, basal spur. Membrane of both fore- and hind-wings thickly
set with minute’ setae, in forewing forming indefinite radular areas on
apical margin. Forewings slightly less than 2% times as long as wide;
marginal cells unusually large; Rs very long, pterostigma very large. Gentratia: Male proctiger stout, straight, parallel-margined, with an
anterior projection basally and an apical epiphysis. Forceps in lateral
view moderately broad basally, enlarged, slightly constricted beyond
midpoint, apical portion sharply constricted and flexed caudad to truncate
black apices; meso-apical margin produced anteriorly as a small black
tooth; in caudal view evenly arched from bases to acute black apices,
broadest midway. Female genital segment ¥% shorter than rest of abdo-
men; dorsal valve straight, apical portion attenuate, blunt; ventral valve
shorter, upturned midway, acute. Described from five females and one male from New Hampshire which
have been compared with the type. The Typs, a female, No. 1342 United
States National Museum, and two females of Fitch’s type series are in
the National Museum. They have been molded but are in fair condition. This species is similar to P. americana in many respects. The host is unknown. Psylla mali* (Schmidberger)
(Figs. 41, 42)
1836 Chermes mali Schmidberger, Beitr. z. Nat. Schadl. Ins. 4:186 [fide Aulmann]. 72. 1848 Psylle mali Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 1848 Psylla ulmi Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhei

 

 

5:
1848 Psylle pomi Forster, Verh, natur, Ver. preuss, Rhein. 5:72. 1848 Psylla crataegicola Férster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:72. 1848 Psylla aeruginosa Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rheii
1848 Psylla occulta Férster, Verh. natur, Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5
1848 Psylla dubia Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss, Rhein. 5:
1861 Psylle mali Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou 34:

   
 

 

 

3. 5, 345, 350, 958. 1872 Psylla mali Meyer-Diir, Mitt, Sch. Ent. Ges. 3:398. 1872 Psylla rubida Meyer-Dir, Mitt, Sch. Ent. Ges. 3:398. 1872 Psylle claripennis Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 3:400. 1876 Psylla mali Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc, London 1876:542. 1878 Psylla mali Léw, Verh. zool.~bot. Ges. Wien 27:135. 1876 Psylla crataegicola Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876:542. 1876 Psylla viridissima Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876:543. 1908 Psylla mali Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 2:355. 1910 Psylla mali Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 3:191,

1912 Psylla mali Oshanin, Kat. pala, Hemip. 127. * Genitive of malus—the apple, its principal host. 486 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

1913 Psylla mali Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 19. 1919 Psyllia mali Brittain, Agr. Gaz. Can. 6:823-827 [figs]. 1923 Psyllia mali Brittain, N. S. Dept. Agr., Bull. 10:1-69, VI pls. [life history, control]. 1931 Psylla mali Klyver, Can. Ent. 63:114. 1935 Psylla mali Haupt, Tierw. Mittel. 5:236. Length to tip of folded wings 4 mm. Cotor: “Summer coloration. General color pale green, sometimes
tinged with yellow; no color difference exists between the sexes in the
early part of the season. . . .

“Autumn coloration, female. . . Head varying from bright yellow to
dark brown with local modulations; median suture always darker . . .
Prothorax, dull yellow varying to dark brown; reddish and dusky mark-
ings may occur. Praescutum of mesothorax orange to brown, sometimes
greenish; anterior portion usually darker. . . . Scutum, dull yellow to
dark orange, dark brown where yellow bars existed in summer coloration. Remainder of thorax, dull yellow and orange with dusky markings vary-
ing in location and intensity. Abdomen; the yellow posterior margin of
the dorsum of each segment becomes orange or deep blood red, . ...
(rest) dusky or jet black. . . . Entire ventral surface of body uniform dull
yellow... .

“Mate, General body color changed from green to bright orange
yellow.”—Brittain. Srructure: Head very strongly deflexed, almost perpendicular to
axis of body. Vertex with shallow discal impressions, bulging anteriorly,
¥% as long as wide. Genal processes divergent, slender, blunt, almost as
long as vertex. Antennae small, 134 times as long as width of head. Thorax
strongly arched. Legs small; hind tibia with small basal spur. Fore-
wings somewhat whitish, 2% times as long as wide; venation typical,
pterostigma very large. Membrane of fore- and hind wings thickly set
with minute setae. Genrratta: Male genitalia small. Proctiger short, slightly longer
than forceps, strongly bent caudad near apex. Forceps simple, slightly
arched to blunt, black, apices. Female genital segment shorter than rest
of abdomen, stout; dorsal valve blunt, slightly longer than ventral, latter
acute. Described from a'short series from Digby and Kings Counties, Nova
Scotia, collected by W. H. Brittain, July, 1931, and determined by Oman
as Psylla mali. I have not seen any European specimens. Brittain has done a great amount of work on this pest since its dis-
covery in Nova Scotia in 1919. It is treated in detail in Bulletin No. 10
of the Department of Agriculture of Nova Scotia. Briefly, the life history
in Nova Scotia is as follows: The eggs are deposited in the fall (Septem-
ber and October). Hatching occurs early in May. The average nymphal
life is 34 days, the adults appearing in the last half of June. Mating occurs
within a fortnight of emergence and continues for thé next two months. There is but one generation per year. As indicated above the color changes as the season progresses, from
a pale green to brown and vivid orange or red. THE PS¥YLLIDS OF AMERICA 487

To date it has been recorded only from Nova Scotia and New Bruns-
wick in North America. It is generally distributed through northern and
central Europe and Asia including Japan. Psylla alba* Crawford
Figs. 43, 44)

1914 Psylla alba Crawford, U. S. Nat, Mus,, Bull. 85:138, 143,
1814 Psylla americana alba Crawford, U, S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:143. 1917 Psyllia alba Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 806. 1932 Psyllia alba Klyver, Ent. News 43:71. 1938 Psyllia alba Strickland, Can, Ent. 70:204. Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. ish Cotor: Typically greenish white, some specimens (faded?) yellow-
ish,

Sraucture: Vertex a little over % as long as wide, strongly bulging
anteriorly, with shallow discal impressions. Genal processes almost: as
long as vertex, heavy, contiguous basally, rather blunt. Antennae a little
more than 144 times as long as width of head. Thorax typical. A small
basal spur on hind tibia, Forewings large, whitish, transparent; over
twice as long as wide; venation typical, pterostigma large. Genrratta: Male proctiger long and slender, straight. Forceps small,
much shorter than proctiger, stout; in caudal view almost straight to near
apices, a large, black, incurved tooth at apex of each. Female genital
segment as long as rest of abdomen, dorsal valve a little longer than
ventral, both acute. Described from specimens from Nicolaus, California, which have
been compared with the type. Specimens are at hand from California,
Washington, Utah, Wyoming, Colorado, and Wisconsin. Tyre, female, Ormsby County, Nevada, July, Baker, in the Craw-
ford Collection. The host is Salix sp. Psylla ribesiae+ Crawford

(Figs. 45, 46)

1911 Psyllopa ribesiae Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:630-631,
1912 Psylla giltetti Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 202:221. 1914 Arytaina ribesiae Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:126,
1914 Psylla ribis Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull’ 85:127. [non] Psylla ribis Patch. Me, Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 202:22:
1917 Arytaina ‘ribesiae Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 804. 1932 Arytaina ribesiae Klyver, Ent, News, 43:39-40. Length to tip of folded wings 3.25 to 4 mm,
Cotor: Quite variable. From light to dark brown, usually dark. Scutum with light and dark stripes. Vertex white with variable dark
markings. Genital processes white. Antennae dark distally, tips of basal

 

‘albus -a -um, L. adj.—white. + Etymology obscure; apparently based on Ribes, the generic name of the host. 488 . LEONARD D. TUTHILL

segments dark. Forewings clear except for a prominent dark spot at
apex of clavus, sometimes a brownish area at base, four more-or-less
prominent spots on margin. Srrucrure: Head large, very strongly deflexed. Vertex’ shallowly
impressed discally, 3/5 as long as wide. Genal processes almost on same
plane as vertex, somewhat divergent then incurved slightly, blunt, quite
variable in shape and size, usually about 34 as long'as vertex. Antennae
134 times as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Hind tibia
with small basal spur. Forewings about 2% times as long as wide;
venation typical, pterostigma small; four radular areas along margin, in
cubital cell, between Cu; and M,, in medial cell, between M, and Rs. Genrratra:’ Male proctiger stout, straight, length somewhat variable. Forceps in lateral view broad basally, unevenly narrowed to slender
truncate apices, turned caudad at apex; in caudal view broad, slightly
arched. (Quite variable in size and exact shape.) Female genital segment
shorter than’ rest of abdomen, stout; valves almost equal in length, acute,
ventral valve strongly upcurved. This is a numerous and widespread species occurring over western
North America. It is extremely variable in almost all characters, espe-
cially color, genal processes, and genitalia, which makes it very difficult
to define. In addition to a paratype from Boulder, Colorado, specimens
are at hand from numerous localities in the following states: Colorado,
Kansas, Nebraska, South Dakota, Wyoming, Idaho, Arizona, California,
and Oregon. Klyver records Ceanothus thyrsiflorus as a definite host in Cali-
fornia. Many of the specimens at hand bear labels “currant,” Ribes, Ribes
aureum. Many of the specimens so labeled are teneral and have cast
nymphal skins or nymphs on the pin with them. It would seem, therefore,
as if hosts in at least two different genera were capable of supporting
this common form. Many of the specimens from which Patch described
gilletti are in the collection of the Colorado Agricultural College and have
been’ examined. Crawford placed this species in Arytaina apparently because of the
position of the genal processes in which character it resembles some
members of that genus. The chief distinction between the two genera,
however, is the shape of the prothoracic pleurites. On this basis ribesiae
must go in the genus Psylla to which it is similar in most respects. In
many specimens a slight groove on the episternum is pigmented and on
superficial examination the propleurites do have the appearance of being
equal in length and in breadth dorsally. Several other species of Psylla
exhibit this same character, and in those forms in which the head extends
well back over the prothorax laterally, it becomes quite difficult to ascer-
tain the exact condition of these sclerites without dissection. Type, female, Boulder, Colorado, Bethel, Ribes longiflorwm, in the
Crawford Collection. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 489

Psylla pyricola* Forster
(Figs. 4, 5, 47, 48)
1840 pala puny Curtis, Gard. Chron. 156 (nec Linn. Faun, Svec. 1761) [fide Aulmann,
xy. Cat, 24]. 1848 Psyila pyricola Férster, Verh, natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:77-78,
1848 Psylla apiophila Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:78. 1861 Psylla notata Flor, Bull. Soc, Imp. Nat. Moscou 34:341, 349, 355, 365-367. 1872 Psylla pyricola Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 3:396. 1872 Psylla apiophila Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 3:396. 1880 Psylla pyrisuga Barnard, Proc. A-A.AS. 28:478-486,
1885 Psylla pyricola Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 2:69,
882 Psylla pyricola simulans Slingeriand, N.Y. (Cornell) Agr. Exp. Sta, Bull
1893 Psylla pyricola Lintner, 9th Rept. N. Y, Sta. Ent. 317-329. 1908 Psylla pyricola Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip, 2:352. 1910 Psylla pyricola Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 3:189. 1910 Psylla pyricola Smith, Ins. N. J. 109. 1911 Psylla pyricola Patch, Me. Agr. . Sta., Bull. 187:11. 1912 Psylla pyricola Oshanin, Kat. paléa. Hemip. 127. 1913 Psylla pyricola Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 24. 1914 Psylla pyricola Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus, Bull, 85:144. 1917 Psyllia pyricola Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 806. 1918 Psylla pyricola Ross, 49th Ann. Rept. Ent. Soc, Ont. 81. 1931 Psylla pyricola Klyver, Can. Ent. 63:112. 1938 Psyllia pyricola Caldwell, Ohio Biol, Surv., Bull, 34:261. 1988 Psylla pyricola Brimley, Ins. N. C. 104,

Length to tip of folded wings (summer form) 2.0 to 2.75 mm., (winter
form) 3.3 to 4mm. (Crawford). Cotor: Summer Form. “General color light orange to reddish brown,
with darker markings; vertex, genal cones, scutum between stripes, male
genitalia, legs except hind femora, antennae except at tip, light brown to

  

 

 

orange; genal cones lighter colored at apex than at base. . .. Wings trans-
parent, clear or often with a slight yellowish tinge, especially in the distal
cells; with a conspicuous black spot at tip of clavus. . . .” WinTER FoRM. “General color very dark reddish brown to black; markings black; areas
noted in summer form as lighter are correspondingly a little lighter here,
but antennae mostly dark from base to tip; wings darker on basal portion,
apically clear, veins black and very conspicuous, black claval spot more
pronounced.”—Crawford. Srrucrure: Vertex a little over % as long as wide, discal impres-
sions and medial suture very prominent, especially anteriorly. Genal
processes 4/7 as long as vertex, robust, contiguous basally, sharp apically. Antennae 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Hind tibia with small basal spur. Forewings slightly over twice as long
as wide, four diffuse radular areas on margin; venation typical, ptero-
stigma large. Genrratra: Male proctiger short, slender, curved caudad. Forceps
almost as long as proctiger, narrowed from base to acute black apices. Female genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen, stout, dorsal valve
slightly longer than ventral, blunt. * From pyrus -i, L. £, noun—pear + cola, L—inhabitant. 490 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

This, the pear psylla, was introduced from Europe early in the 19th
century. It is of great importance as a pest on its host plant, Pyrus com-
munis, the common pear. Since its introduction into the New England
states, it has spread north, south, and west, having been recorded from *
Nova Scotia, Maine, Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey,
Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Ohio, Illinois, Michigan, Ontario,
British Columbia (? ), and California (?). Recently, it has made its ap-
pearance in the Pacific Northwest, in the Spokane, Washington, area. Besides North America it is known to occur in most of Europe, and
northern and central Asia, including Japan. Lintner (1893) discusses it in detail, gives figures, life history, dam-
age, and a complete history of its occurrence in North America to that
date, including a bibliography. "a brief life history taken from the sources cited above is as follows:
‘The overwintering stage is the adult. Copulation and egg-laying begin
in early spring (April in New York). ‘Approximately a month is required
for the insects to reach maturity. Breeding continues throughout the
season, there being several generations per year. Due to its economic importance, this psyllid has been discussed at
great length and in considerable detail in various bulletins and other
economic entomological literature. A great deal of research has been
done on control work, especially in New York state. This literature is too
voluminous to be cited here but is all listed in the Indices of American. Economic Entomology. Psylla americana* Crawford
(Figs. 49, 91)

1914 Psylla americana Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus,, Bull. 85:138, 147. 1917 Psyllia americana Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 808. 1932 Psyllia americana Klyver, Ent. News 43:71. 1938 Psyllia americana Strickland, Can. Ent. 70:204. Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 3.75 mm. Conor: General color red to reddish brown. Vertex usually whitish
medially. Genal processes light basally, dark toward apex, Pronotum
black on cephalic half, remainder white. More or less distinct white mar-
gin on lateral and posterior margins of prescutum. Variable white lines
on scutum and scutellum. Wings hyaline, veins dark, ptérostigma dark. Srructure: Head strongly deflexed. Vertex with deep discal im-
pressions, about % as long as wide, somewhat bulging anteriorly. Genal
processes slender, divergent, blunt, 2 as long as vertex, Antennae about
1% times as long as width of head or slightly longer. (I have seen none
jn which the ratio is as much as 1.5:1). Thorax well arched. Pronotum
large, nearly vertical. Hind tibia with small basal spur. Forewings large,
about 2% times as long as wide; marginal cells large, pterostigma large. Membrane of both fore- and hind wings thickly set with minute setae. * Adjectival form of America. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 491

Gentrauia: Male genitalia large. Proctiger long, straight, sli
bent caudad apically. Foreeps large; in ‘aera eee eed fated
cephalic margin tapered to acute apices; in caudal view slender, almost
straight to subacute black apices. Female genital segment as long as rest
of abdomen, slender, straight; dorsal valve straight, apical third very
slender; apex acute in both lateral and dorsal view, considerably longer
than ventral valve; latter acute. Described from specimens from “Mountains near Claremont, i~
fornia”—C. F. Baker. These specimens are considered as typical. "Many
other specimens are at hand from numerous localities in California, from
Utah, and Colorado. It is also recorded from Idaho and Nova Scotia. A
series of specimens in the United States National Museum from Banff
Springs, Alberta, is, I assume, the basis for Crawford's record for that
locality. They represent a distinct species, however, which is described
below. The host plants of this abundant species are willow (Salix spp.). Crawford records the type as in his collection, but there seems to be tio
specimen so designated. Peylla americana curta* n. subsp. ig. 92)
Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. Coton: Similar to P. americana
rructune: Similar to typical subspecies ex: i
longer, 1% times as long as that head Swoeet antennae slightly

_GENrraita: Male genitalia much smaller, heavily pubescent. Proc-
tiger scarcely longer than. forceps, stout, curved caudad. Forceps in
lateral view stout, tapered to subacute apices, in caudal view stout, some-
what arched, apices touching. Female genital segment shorter than rest
of abdomen, slender; dorsal valve straight, long, apical portion slender,
straight to blunt tip; ventral valve much shorter than dorsal, not up-
turned, straight to acute apex. ,

Biological evidence may subsequently prove this to be a distinct
species, but since no such data are available I am unwilling to give it
that status even though it can be distinguished from typical americana, the
only distinct difference being in the male genitalia, This would appear
to be the form Crawford had in mind when he established P. americana
minor. His designated type for that name, however, is distint from this

‘orm. Specimens are at hand from Del Mar, San Jose, Berkeley, San Fran-
cisco, Monterey, Fieldbrook, Little River, Lompoc. Alameda County, and
Los Angeles County, California (some of the latter were collected on
Salix californica, April, Koebele), and Colorado. “Hoxoryre, male, No. 55172 United States National Museum, Del Mar,
California, June 2, 1935, Oman; aLLoryee same data. Holotype, allotype,

* curtus -a -um, L. adj.—short. 492 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

+ Le
and paratypes in United States National Museum, paratypes in Snow Col
jection, University of Kansas, and author’s collection. Psylla confusa* 0. Sp. (Figs. 73, 74, 285)

ngth to tip of folded wings 3 mm. oe ;
cent ta is wety similar to P. americana curta excert in genital char. acters Membrane of forewings without or almost without (e ii”
setae “which are so numerous on americana and ame’ ican oof the
somewhat shorter, about 1% times as long as : 2 of the
tenes it is distinguishable, and from-the labels on the specter
neaeand appears fo live upon an entirely different host, it is s
al
iven specifie rank. ; :
doubtfully sive Male genitalia very sparsely pubescent Proctges sen
der, Lie mes as long as forceps, hooked caudad apically, Poresrs eg
der 1m sted toward apices with flat surface caudad, sharply nate
near apices leaving a large blunt apical | tooth, ae margins lly,
ital ent shorter than curta; y i
eee astion eae tip blunt, slightly upturned; ventral valve shorter
than dorsal, sharply upturned. vrevada, and Arizona, al ol
i ‘imens from Utah, Nevada, Zona, 2
1 aes acch and ‘Roril; several bear host plant labels wie, vit one
nee tion are Covillea tridentata or C. tridentata (creoso' te push st
CA EH ion re Gnale, No. 55173 United States National Musoum
Omir tench 9, 1934, E. W. Davis, C. tridentata; antorves ave
George tan ae data, Other PararyPes as follows: 9 Hoytsvim, Ol
eee TTT 1912, V. L. Wildermuth; 3 Riverside, Nevada, Mar. 8, 1994, 5. W.
Bere G. tridentata; 2 Littlefield, Arizona, April 28, 1931, E, W, Davis
pavitjea tridentata; 1 same locality and collector Mar. 27, 289°,
‘cea; 1 Arizona, C.F, Baker. / /
serie pe, ohatype, and paratypes in United States National Museum
Paratypes in author’s collection. Psylla parallelay Crawford
(Fig. 75)

2137, 141,
1914 Poylla paraltela Crawford, U_ S. Nat. Mus, Bull asst,
Jol7 Peyllia parallela Van Duzze, Cat. Hemip, N_Am-
4932 Psyllia parallela Klyver, Pan-Pac. Ent. 9:10.
ip of folded wings 3 mm. ;
ae ‘Seliowish green (?). I have seen only te type specimens
hick ae cather old and apparently faded to a yellowish shades 5,
“ Srrucrure: Head small, strongly deflexed. Vertex ae as wee
ith deep discal impressions, bulging in front each side of m
wi

 

. cum, L.adj—confused. conta "tg Sm L.ai—parallel, application obscure,

 

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 493
Genal processes small, slender, rather sharp, % as long as vertex. An-
tennae short, about 114 times as long as width of head. Thorax well
arched. Pronotum almost vertical. Hind tibia with small basal spur. Forewings of moderate size, almost 2% times as long as wide; venation
typical, pterostigma large, yellow. Genrratta: Male’ proctiger straight, swollen from base to middle
then tapered to broad, rounded apex. Forceps short; in lateral view
narrow basally, caudal margin slightly excavate, cephalic margin strongly
bulged midway then narrowed to near apices, apically produced both
cephalad and caudad as a black tooth, general appearance T-shaped; in
caudal view stout basally, bowed outward, apical third strongly narrowed,
bent mesad, apices black, truncate. “Female genital segment as long as
rest of abdomen, slender, dorsal valve longer than ventral.”—Crawford. I have seen only the type specimens, which are from Nevada County,
California, Castle Rock, collected by Koebele in September. Klyver
records it from Washington and British Columbia. I am rather doubtful
of these records; the specimens referred to are probably P. minor, the
male genitalia of which resemble those of P. parallela. The former is very
abundant in the Pacific Northwest. Host entirely unknown. Tyres, 2 males (on same pin), No. 18106 United States National
Museum, with data given above, have been examined. Psylla minor* Crawford

(Fig. 76, 77)

1914 Psylla americana minor Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:138, 147. 1914 Psylla rufula Crawford, U, S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:

1917 Psyllia americana minor Van Duzee, Cat. Hemi Nim, 808,
1932 Psyllia americana minor Klyver, Ent. News 43:72. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 4 mm. Cotor: General color dark brown, abdomen black. Some white on
vertex and thoracic dorsum. Females lighter than males. Wings whitish. Veins black. Pterostigma fumate. Srrucrure: Head strongly deflexed. Vertex about as long as wide,
discal impressions prominent. Genal processes slender, slightly divergent,
slightly over */; as long as vertex. Antennae 11; to 14 times as long as
width of head. Thorax well arched. A blunt tooth at base of hind
tibia. Forewings large, enlarged toward apices, 244 times as long as wide;
marginal cells large, cubital larger than medial, pterostigma of moderate
width, very long. Hind wings very long. Membrane of both fore- and
hind wings thickly set with minute setae. Genrratra: Male genitalia large, very pubescent. Proctiger stout,
curved cephalad, then strongly caudad to truncate apex. Forceps almost as
long as proctiger; in lateral view broad at base, narrowed, swollen mid-
way, converging slightly to near apices then enlarged, apices roundly

 

  

 

 

* minor ~us, L, adj. (comp. of parvus)—smaller. 494 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

i i ical third narrowed and
truncate; in caudal view large, swollen basally, apical

straight ‘to truncate apices. Female genital segment somewhat shorter
than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve much longer than ventral, straight,
apical half slender, apex plunt; ventral valve nearly straight to acute blac

Described from many specimens from numerous localities in Oregon,
Washington, and Colorado. A series received from Mr. R. L. Post of the
Osegon State College, collected in Salem, Oregon, was taken on “pussy
‘willow? and was injuring the plants. This series was erroneously deter
Jnined as Psylla parallela Crawford, a closely related or at least similar
pecies, Other specimens bear labels “willow blossom,” “willow bloom
‘Petlow,” ete. Crawford records specimens on Salix lasiolepsis, Salix
celifornica, and Salix sp. The hosts are apparently several species 0
Cilio (Salix spp.). Crawford records it from several localities in Cali-
fornia, I believe these records refer to P. americana curta, a form whi
Hoceems to have had confused with minor. The type specimen, a male, on
ne eet the above description is based, is not, in my opinion, conspecific
with americana, It is, however, the same species as Crawford’s americana

being but a color variety of minor. Fao oe ale, Na’ 18109 United States National Museum, Colorado,
“from Gillette Collection, 1894.” . ‘Type examined. Psylla minor var. flava* Crawford n. comb,

i flava Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:138, 148.
isd Pebita americana longipennis Crawford, U. S. Nat, Mus. Bull. €5:148
4817 Psyllia americana flava Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 808. 1938 Psyllia americana flava Strickland, Can, Ent. 70:204.
i i i i is i 1 yellow in-
‘This form is a color variety of P. minor. It is in general
stead of reddish brown or black. Specimens are at hand from Vancouver,
B.C; Oregon (Koebele); California; Utah Lake, Alta, and Park City,
Utah, and Colorado. . |
Typr, No. 18110 United States National Museum, is a somewhat
teneral female from Victoria, Vancouver, Hubbard and Schwarz,

Type examined. Psylla usitatay n. sp. (Figs. 78, 79, 79a, 286)

Length to tip of folded wings 3mm. ;

Cae “General color yellow. Wings whitish; forewings more or

fumate apically. Antennae dark apically. oe :
Jess Fama ae. Head strongly deflexed, Vertex slightly impressed dis:
cally, ¥4 as long as wide, bulging anteriorly, posterior margin nearly
Straight, Genal processes cone-shaped, blunt, divergent, % as long as

* flavus -a -um, L. adj—yellow. poeta’ ca cum, L. adj—ordinary. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 495

vertex. Antennae somewhat over 13% times as long as width of head. Thorax moderately arched. Hind tibia with small basal tubercle. Fore-
wings about 21% times as long as wide; venation typical, pterostigma of
moderate size. Membrane of both fore- and hind wings thickly set with
minute setae. Geniratta: Male proctiger very short, straight on caudal margin,
slightly convex on cephalic margin. Forceps very pubescent, nearly as
long as proctiger; in lateral view broad, margins parallel to broadly
notched apices; in caudal view broad, evenly arched, notched, medial
lobes produced as heavy, subacute black teeth; in dorsal view apices
deeply notched, anterior lobe large, blunt, caudal lobe produced anteriorly
as a black tooth, narrow basally, enlarged and sharply truncate, Female
genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen, dorsal valve concave
dorsally, apex upturned, acute; ventral valve shorter than dorsal, up-
turned, acute. Hororyre, male, No. 55174 United States National Museum, aLto-
‘yp, female, 9 male and 6 female paratyres, Deborgia, Montana, July 9,
1935, P. W. Oman. Holotype, allotype, and paratypes in United States National Mu-
eum, paratypes in author’s collection. Psylla latiforceps* n. sp. (Figs. 80, 81, 287)

Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 3.5 mm. Conor: General color greenish yellow to yellow. Wings hyaline. Distal half of antennae, apical tarsal segments, and wing veins apically,
dark. Sometimes a fumate spot in apex of clavus. Srrucrure: Head small, vertical. Vertex ¥% as long as wide, with
deep discal impressions, bulging ‘anteriorly. Genal processes slender,
subacute, strongly divergent, 2, as long as vertex. Antennae rather thick,
somewhat less than 114 times as long as width of head. Thorax strongly
arched. Pronotum nearly vertical. Hind tibia with very small basal spur. Wings very large, 2% times as long as wide; venation typical, pterostigma
moderately large. Genrratia: Male proctiger in lateral view broad, parallel-sided,
straight or flexed caudad apically, longer than forceps. Forceps in lateral
view moderately broad basally, suddenly enlarged on cephalic margin
then parallel-sided to apices, apices very heavily sclerotized, obliquely
truncate, produced caudad as a short heavy tooth; in caudal view broad,
very slightly arched; in dorsal view apices are very heavy, long, produced
caudad as a small mesal tooth. Female genital segment longer than rest
of abdomen; dorsal valve straight, apex attenuate, slightly downcurved,
blunt; ventral valve long, straight, acute. Hotoryre, male, atLory?s, female, numerous paratypes, Creede,

* From latus ~a -um, L. adj—broad + forceps -cipis, L. m. and f, noun—forceps. 496 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Colorado, July 14, 1940, L. D. Tuthill. Additional paratypes: Creede, Colo-
rado, 1936 to 1939, L. D, Tuthill; Redmond, Oregon, April and June, 1939,
Schuh and Gray. One teneral pair from Easton, Washington, (Koebele)
is perhaps also conspecific. Holotype, allotype, and paratypes in author's collection. Paratypes
in Oregon State College Collection, United States National Museum, and
University of Kansas. ‘

The Creede specimens were taken on willow. As many of them are
very teneral, and nymphs (presumably of the same species) were taken
at the same time, Salix sp. is undoubtedly the host. Psylla sinuata* Crawford

. (Figs 93, 94)
1914 Psylla sinuata Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:137, 140. 1914 Psylla fibulata simulans Crawford, U. S. Nat, Mus., Bull. 85:140,
1917 Psyllia sinuata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 805. 1932 Psyllia sinuata Klyver, Ent. News 4
1938 Psyllia sinuata Strickland, Can. Ent. 70:205. . Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 3.5 mm. Cotor: Light green to light yellow brown to orange. Segments of
antennae black-tipped, distal segments entirely black. Wings slightly
whitish. Srrucrure: Head small, strongly deflexed, almost perpendicular. Vertex with shallow discal impressions, almost flat, nearly twice as wide
as long. Genal processes slender, divergent, blunt, slightly over 4 as long
as vertex. Antennae 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax scarcely
arched. Pronotum strongly descending. Hind tibia with very slight
tubercle at base. Forewings about 2% times as long as wide; Rs sinuate,
marginal cells somewhat elongate, pterostigma of medium size. Mem-
brane of both fore- and hind wings thickly set with minute setae. Genrrata: Male genitalia very large with heavy, fine pubescence. Proctiger broad, slightly curved caudad, tapered to sharp apex. Forceps
in lateral view evenly curved caudad on anterior margin, caudal margin
sinuate to black, blunt apices; in caudal view broad, well arched, produced
midway as a large mesal lobe, apices black, heavy. Female genital seg-
ment longer than rest of abdomen, very thickly set apically with minute
setae; dorsal valve much longer than ventral, straight, flattened and
rounded apically; ventral valve strongly upcurved, flattened, acute. Described from numerous specimens taken on willow at 11,000 fect
near Creede, Colorado. Other specimens are at hand from Colorado (C. F.
Baker); Ungva Bay, H. B. T., L. M. Turner; Birch River, and Swan
River, Manitoba, R. H. Beamer; Itasca Park, Minnesota. It is also
recorded. from Idaho and Alberta. Strickland records white spruce

(Picea alba) as a definite host. .
Types, male, No. 18105 United States National Museum. Type examined,

 

 

 

* sinuatus, L. (p. part. of sinuo)—wavy. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 497

Psylla fibulata* Crawford
igs, 95, 96)
1914 Psylla fibulata Crawft 5:
1917 Poyllia floulata Van Buses Gao et Mus; Bull aoe Mo. 1932 Psyllia fibulata Klyver; Ent. News 43:71, :
1938 Psyllia fibulata (7) Strickland, Can. Ent. 70-204,
Genath tote of folded wings 2.5 to 3 mm. _ Cotor: eneral color whitish green to yell tenn:
apically. Wings more or less whitish, Yen Antennae dark
TRUCTURE: Head small, strongly deflexed. Vert ii
| . E » st . lex with shalk
discal impressions, roundly bulging anteriorly, slightly over % as long
s wid le. Genal processes small, slender, divergent, blunt, slightly over
fh as ‘ong as vertex. Antennae sniall, 114 times as Jong as width of head. tubercle ot pan Rely arched. Legs small, hind tibia with very: small
‘e at base. Fore- and hind wings large, greatly exceedis
membranes thickly set with minute setae. Forewings slightly eae
times as jong as wide; venation typical, pterostigma large, long. LIA: ‘ale proctiger long. slightly curved caudad. F
produced caudad basally as rounded lobes, caudal margins then excavate
to apices, anterior margins almost straight, apices black, subacute. Female
Benita] segment stout black-tipped, longer than rest of abdomen; dorsal

ve straight, subacute, broad, so: hat “ +s "5 a
Shorten, bend, wepacutes mewhat “shovel-shaped”; ventral valve
Described from numerous males and fem:

z ales taken at Creede, Colo-
rado, July 14, 1940, on willow (Salix sp. ); many of the specimens ‘are
very teneral and were accompanied by nymphs presumably of the same
species. Other specimens at hand bear the label, “Colorado, C. F. Baker.”

Type, female, No, 18104 United States National Museum, ;
Type examined,

Psylla propria} n. sp. (Figs. 84, 85)
Length to tip of folded wings 4 mm. ‘oto: General color chocolate brown. Li; i

4 . Lighter to white alo:
medial suture of vertex, base of genal processes, proximal portion of ane
tennae, caudal half of pronotum, caudal margin of prescutum, longitudi-
nal lines on scutum, margins of scutellum, tibiae, tarsi and margins of
abdominal sclerites. Wings hyaline; Pterostigma brown.

. Structure: Head strongly deflexed. Vertex about Y% as long as
wide, prominently impressed discally. Genal Processes 34 as long as
vertex, not divergent, parallel to plane of vertex, blunt, Antennae 1%
times as long as width of head. Thorax well arched. Pronotum nearly
vertical. Hind tibia with two small basal tubercles. Forewings 2 times

+ *fibulatus, L. (p. part. of ignil
5 Aalatus, L. & part of Peale cio fasten together) significance obscure. 498 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

as long as wide; marginal cells large, pterostigma large; four radular
areas on apical margin. Membrane of both fore- and hind wings set with
minute setae. Genrratra: Male genitalia large. Proctiger very long, twice as long
as forceps; in lateral view slender, straight to near apex then sharply
flexed caudad. Forceps stout; in lateral view narrow basally, very much
enlarged and bent cephalad then narrowed, apices truncate, black, pro-
duced on mesal margin; caudo-mesal margins produced caudad basally;
in caudal view very broad, straight, lateral margins incurved apically to
subacute apices; median portion of each forcep excavate caudally leaving
margins raised as sharp ridges, mesal margin produced basally and api-
‘cally, lateral margin produced above mid-point. Female genital segment
as long as rest of abdomen, slender; dorsal valve straight, slender from
base, apex blunt; ventral valve shorter than dorsal, slightly concave
ventrally in proximal half, abruptly turned dorsad to acute apex. Described from 8 males and 13 females from Colorado, C. F. Baker,
and 1 male from Milford, Utah, April 24, 1934, E. W. Davis. The latter
specimen bears a label C. repand. Holotype, allotype, and paratypes in United States National Museum,
paratypes in author’s collection. Hotorype, male, No, 55176 United States National Museum, Colorado. Psylla uncata* n. sp. Figs. 82, 83, 288)

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. Cotor: General color reddish brown. Abdomen and venter darker. Thorax with more-or-less distinct light stripes. Vertex light-margined. Wings whitish. Srrucrure: Head strongly deflexed. Vertex % as long as wide,
discal impressions very broad, deep. Genal processes small, cone-shaped,
subacute, less than % as long as vertex. Antennae about 14% times as
Jong as width of head. Vertex and thorax punctate. Thorax moderately
arched. Pronotum descending but not vertical. Hind tibia with very
small basal spur. Membrane of both fore- and hind wings thickly set
with minute setae. Forewings over twice as long as wide; venation typi-
cal, pterostigma prominent, dark. Genrratra:. Male proctiger slightly longer ‘than: forceps, almost
parallel margined, slightly and evenly curved caudad. Forceps heavily
pubescent; in lateral view broad basally, caudal margin almost straight,
cephalic margin produced in basal half then strongly excavate, apices
extending cephalad as a black hook; in caudal view stout, slightly and
evenly arched to truncate apices. Female genital segment shorter than
rest of abdomen; dorsal valve slightly upcurved, apex blunt; ventral valve
but slightly shorter than dorsal, ventral margin evenly upcurved to acute
apex, dorsal margin produced dorsad as a large broad lobe midway. *uncatus ~a -um, L, adj.—hooked. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 499

Described from two males and six females from Banff Spri
springs,

Alberta, Hubbard and Schwarz. Five other females bearing the same
data are probably the same species but are atypical in structure of
genitalia. Holotype, allotype, and paratypes in United States National Museum,
paratypes in author's collectior. Honoryre, male, No, 55175 United States National Museum. Psylla alaskensis* Ashmead
igs. 65, 66, 282)

1904 Psylla alaskensis Ashmead, Harriman Alaska . 8:

1913 Psylla alaskensis Auimann, Psy. Cat. 8. Exped. 6:187,
1914 Psylla alaskensis Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:138, 149. 1917 Psyllia alaskensis Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip. N. Am. 809. 1938 Arytaina fuscata Caldwell, Ann. Ent, Soc. Am. 31:443. Length to tip of folded wings 2.75 to 3 mm. _ Cotor: General color orange to reddish brown, faint longitudinal
stripes on scutum. Forewings with veins dark, prominent, membrane
more or less fumate, more heavily apically, sometimes with a white bloom. Srrucrure: Vertex %4 as long as wide, with two discal foveae,
strongly bulging anteriorly. Genal processes cone-shaped, blunt, about
%4 as long as vertex. Antennae short, pubescent, about 134 times as long
as width of head. Thorax quite flat for this genus. Hind tibia with slight
tubercle at base. Forewings long and slender, over 24% times as long as
wide, tapering apically to narrowly rounded apices; Rs reaching almost
to apex, cells elongate, narrow, cubital larger than medial, pterostigma
very long, narrow. Genrratta: Male subgenital plate large, globose. Proctiger broad,
short; in lateral view broad and straight. Forceps in caudal view stout
moderately arched to acute, black apices; in lateral view broad basally,
cephalic margin excavate about midway to apex, then strongly narrowed
to black apex, apically produced anteriorly as a rather sharp tooth, caudal
margin straight to near apex then extending caudad. Female genital seg-
ment as long as or longer than rest of abdomen, both valves broad; some-
what shovel-like, dorsal valve straight, much longer than ventral, latter
stout; black-tipped. Described from numerous specimens from Alaska, Colorado, and one
specimen bearing the label, “Ks. 2138, C. F. Baker.” Ashmead’s descrip-
tion of the color seems to have been based on rather teneral specimens. His illustration of the male genitalia is of very little value as the tips of
the forceps are not shown. The type is apparently lost or destroyed. There remain in the United
States National Museum but two specimens of the original series, one
male from Fox Point and one female from Seldovia, Alaska. The male

is here designated as neotype. * Adjectival form of Alaska. 500 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

In Colorado this species has been taken on Salix sp. at altitudes of
about 11,000 feet. A paratype of Caldwell’s Arytaina fuscata in the collection of the
University of Minnesota has been examined, and it is undoubtedly con-
specific with the Alaskan specimens at hand. This adds Manitoba to the
known range of the species. Numerous additional specimens from Church-
ill, Manitoba, differ from the type in having broad, short forewings and
blunter genal processes. Type, male, No. 6274 United States National Museum, Fox Point,
Alaska. Type examined. Two species of Psylla have been described from Greenland by Sule,
Psylla groenlandica (Ann. Hist-Nat. Mus. Nat. Hungarici 11: 424, 1913)
and Psylla septentrionalis (Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist.-4 (ser. 11):78, 1939). Both of these forms show affinities to alaskensis. The Churchill, Manitoba,
specimens referred to above appear to be somewhat intermediate be-
tween alaskensis and groenlandica, but until more extensive collections
are made in this northern area no conclusions as to the exact relationship
of these forms can be drawn. Poylla phoradendri* Tuthill

. (Figs. 50, 51, 276)
1939 Psylla phorodendrae Tuthill, Ia. St. Coll. Jour. Sci, 13:186,

Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm,

Cotor: Green, forewings olive green. Srructure: Head very broad. Genal processes short, not as long as
broad, rather blunt. Antennae 14 times as long as width of head. Eyes
borrie on prominent stalklike area of head. Thorax very broad. Wings
twice as long as wide; cubital cell larger than medial, latter slender, Rs
straight to near apex, sharply turned toward costa, pterostigma large. Genitatia: Male proctiger narrow in lateral view, straight. Forceps
very slender in lateral view, base somewhat enlarged, remainder bent
forward, apices blunt, postero-apical margins sharp, black-margined; in
caudal view arched, apices touching, a large mesally projecting, black-
tipped tooth near base. Apical portion of aedeagus very much enlarged,
in dorsal view notched apically, large wing-shaped lateral lobes, two
slender, retrorse, medial processes extending caudad. Female genital seg-
ment short, about % as long as remainder of abdomen; dorsal valve
elongate hood-shaped; ventral valve very short with a large median,
transparent, truncate tooth. In addition to the type specimens from Los Angeles County, Cali-
fornia, and Huachuca Mountains, Arizona, specimens are at hand from
the Santa Rita Mountains, Arizona. Additional specimens from the Hua-
chuca Mountains bear the host plant label Phoradendron tomentosum
Olivar. * Genitive of Phoradendron—the generic name of the host plant. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 501

The original spelling of the name as phorodendrae was an error in
transcription and is here amended to phoradendri,

‘Tyre, female, Huachuca Mountains, Ari: i i
Unies male, Hu rizona, in the Snow Collection,

Psylla annulata* Fitch

(Figs. 97, 98)

1851 Psylla annulate Fitch, 4th Rept. N.Y. Sta. Mus. 1885, Psylla annulata Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash B10. ie Povila gnnulata Smith, Ins, N. J. 109. *

‘sylla annulata Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull. 202:219. 1913 Psylla annulata Aulmann, ag ee 10. Bull 202:218,

1914 Psylla a: 5:
1917 Psytlia cout Gian Busse, Cat Ne ttUsy Bull 85152,
1918 Psylla annulata McAtee, Ent, News 29:323, ;
1938 Psyllia annulate Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull. 34:264,

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 4 mm. Cotor: General color light yellow, abdomen often green. Antennae
with dark annulus apically on each segment, Wings whitish,

_ Srrucrure: Head unusually wide. Vertex short, slightly impressed
discally, abrupt anteriorly. Median ocellus far below plane of vertex. Eyes
borne on very prominent stalklike areas of head, definitely separated from
raised portion of vertex. Genal processes slender, cone-shaped, divergent,
blunt, as long as vertex, longer than median length of vertex. Antennac
twice as long as vertex. Thorax scarcely arched. Hind tibia with short
basal spur. Forewings broad, 2% times as Jong as wide, membrane mi-
nutely setate; veins biseriately set wtih very fine setae; venation typical,
pterostigma very broad. ,

Genrratta: Male genitalia small. Proctiger short, almost straight. Forceps in lateral view straight; in caudal view straight basally then
bowed out and arched to sharp black apices. Female genital segment
short, shorter than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve slightly longer than
ventral, almost straight to rounded apex; ventral valve strongly upcurved. Described from specimens from the following localities: New York,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Connecticut, Maine, Michigan, and Iowa. Caldwell records it from Ohio and McAtee from Maryland. The host is Acer saccharwm Marsh,

 

Psylla negundinis} Mally

1895 Psylla negundinis Mally, Proc. Ia. Acad. Sci, 2:155-159,
1912 Psylla negundinis Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull, 202-200. 1913 Psylla negundinis Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 20. 1914 Psylla negundinis Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:152,
1917 Psyllia negundinis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 809,
1938 Psyllia negundinis Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull. 34:265. 1938 Psyllia negundinis Strickland, Can. Ent, 70:205. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 4 mm. *annulatus ~a -um, L, adj—ringed. 7 Genitive of Negundo, the host plant. 502 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

Very similar to annulata from which it is distinguished chiefly by the
lack of annulations on the antennae. Color uniformly green to yellow,
except tip of antenna black. The host plant is box elder, Acer negundo. Specimens are at hand from Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas, Minnesota,
North Dakota, Manitoba, Colorado, Utah, and Arizona. It is also recorded
from Wisconsin, New Mexico, Ohio, and Alberta (Strickland, on Negundo
interius). The life cycle is recorded by Mally as follows:

“The eggs are deposited in autumn just as soon as the leaves begin
to fall. They are inserted closely around the edge of the buds, but are
attached to the twig, so in case the bud is broken off the eggs still remain
in place. They hatch in early spring, enter the opening buds and feed by
sucking the juices from the young tissue. When the leaves are-large and
have a long petiole, the young larva may be found anywhere on the under
side of the leaf, on the petiole, or more preferably at the axil of the leaf,
with head downward, i.e., toward the stem, and crowded as far down as
possible for protection. In this position they may be observed for hours,
sitting very quietly, only moving the abdomen laterally or vertically

occasionally so as to remove the white mass of excreta and the cottony
‘wax secretion. They pass through five stages and emerge as adults about
the middle of May or tle first of June. The adults live on the trees during
the summer months, feeding on the plant juices, pairing, and maturing
the eggs till autumn. When the leaves begin to fall and expose the buds,
the female begins depositing the little white glistening eggs around the
edges of the buds, and their life cycle is complete.”

‘Type, male, in the collection of Iowa State College. Psylla ribis* Patch

 
  

1912 Psylla ribis Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta, Bull. 202:
1914 Psylla ribis Crawford. U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:148,
1917 Psyllia ribis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 809. I am unable to place this species as none of Patch’s specimens are
available. Were it not for the fact that Crawford states definitely that
it is not the same as ribesiae (a statement based on study of Miss Patch’s
specimens) , I would believe it to be synonymous with that species,: Her
pictures and his description do not agree perfectly, however, so it remains
a mystery until the type specimens are found and its identity established. Psylla arcticat (Walker)

1852 Aphalara arctica Walker, List. Homop. Br. Mus. pt. IV:931-932. 1882 Psylla arctica Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1882:459. 1885 Psylla arctica Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 2:69. 1900 Psylla arctica Schwarz, Proc. Wash. Acad. Sci. 2:540. 1913 Psylla arctica Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 1917 Psyllia arctica Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 808. * Genitive of Ribes—the generic name of its hosts. tareticus -a -um, . adj—arctic. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 503

Described from three females from St, Marti
. Martins F; All i
Hudson Bay. Scott figures the head, wing, and genital coe Rigen
ies seems to belong in the americana complex. i ,
forms in this group it may be I have no ides’ | DUSt Which one of the
Tyres in British Museum. Genus Arytaina* Forster

1804 Psylla Latreille [pro parte], Hist, Ni
re , t. Crust, 7
388 Aryiaina Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. press, Rhein ee
Arytaina Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 3:380, 404
1876 fivtzena s Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876:528,
jtaena 1817. " 1877 Ataenia Thomson, Optise, Hat, 8:828 erme:
182 Arutaena Low, Verh. zool.-bot. Ges, Wien 3a of Chermes}. 1208 Ariaene  Eawards, Hemip.-Homop. Br. Is. 250. 1912 Arytaine Oshanin, Kat ald, Bony Oe SES: id. 6684, 182 [note
3813 Arutaena Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 32.
i814 Arutaina Crawford, U.S. Nat, Mus,, Bull. 85:122
Jolt peglpptoneura Crawford, U.S. Nat! Mus., Bull. 85:125,
ichypsylla Crawford Pe Parte). U. S. Nat, Mus., Bull. 85:129,
1917 Arytaina Van Duzee, Cat, Henk AN A aie 180

. 15:399,

Head more or less deflexed, narro sti
L wer to distinctly wider than
sense Zroduerd as rounded, usually short processes, strongly doen
‘© plane of vertex. Antennae moderately i
arched. Pronotum large, flat, ending i ike swelling latest
1 , flat, knoblike swelli
Propleurites equal at juncture with pronote ft ray. s pronotum. Forewings oft
rounded apically, usually more or le mate, sometime,
> "ss maculate or fumate, sometim
rugose and somewhat coriaceous, i ving Meta,
rug 4 ” , pterostigma present or wanti
tibia sometimes with basal mous with te
Black clawitee seth Pass! spur. Basal segment of metatarsus with two
Haoorvee: Aryiaing genistae (Latreille),
riginally separated from Psylla by the lack of a igma i
Y from pterosti;
forewing, a character which is not of sufficient importance fe itaclf no

 

 

 

wings. Enderlein (1926) refers all the North Ameri i
—apparently without having seen any of them, Species bark to Peylla

 

* Arytaena -ae, G. £, noun—I i
sucker of proboseg) £, noun—ladlé or dipper (so named because the genus has a

 

504 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

‘The Committee on Nomenclature, Division of Insect Identification
of the Buréau of Entomology and Plant Quarantine, United States Depart-
ment of Agriculture, headed by C. F. W. Muesebeck, has recently, ex-
pressed an opinion concerning the valid name for this genus.. It is the
conclusion of this committee that the original spelling of the name,
Arytaina, must be preserved even though Forster should have transcribed
the name from the Greek as Arytaena (Appendix F of the International
Rules). This opinion is in accord with opinion 125 of the International
Commission. Key to the Species of Arytaina

 
  
 

  

 

  

    

 

 

 

      
 

 

 

 
  
       
   
  

i a 2.
ings conspicuously maculate, spotted or entirely dark -
' Forewing: not Eonspicuously maculate, often more or less evenly furnate. z. 2. (1) Forewings with prominent pterosigma. ii 6. Forewings with pterostigma almost or ¢ v8. i i ’ ; than thorax
3. ( 2) Forewings hyaline except for brown maculae; an thor
Forewings otherwise; head narrower than thorax. tev
4. (3) Forewings entirely dark; male forceps bilobate. “fuscipennis p. 506. Forewings white with brown spots or maculae; male foreeps not bilobate +...
rd vi y 4 i it ot sint
5. (4) Body and forewings usualy pulverulent media of forerings not sinuate
Without white pulverulence; media of forewings sinuate.robusta sinuata p.
6. (2) Prominently pubescent on head and thorax; forewing white, brown
apically; male proctiger without caudal lobes. pubescens p. 508. Head and thorax not prominently pubescent; forewing semitransparent;
male proctiger with large caudal lobes... -assimilisp. 509. 7. (1) Genal processes not contiguous basally, very short, rounded 8
Genal processes contiguous, at least basally. Wins ath
8. ( 7) Prerostigma lacking . “spartiophila p. 509. Pterostigma prominent Fassett feats apically
‘ preple comewha
9. (8) Male forceps simple; igs often apically
Male forceps with a large anterior lobe and a shorter caudal one; forewings
entirely clear or whitish.....- bees woes
10. (9) Antennae as long as width of head; genae produced as blunt lobate pro

visible in dorsal view of head

Antennae 136 ti

view of head. 11. (7) Female genita

 

Female genital segment not styliform. 12. (11) Male forceps deeply bifurcate; proctiger small;
short, much shorter than abdomen... .-
Male forceps simple; proctiger very large; fe
large, stout, longer than rest of abdomen... .

13, (12) Forewings narrowed apically, pterostigma prominent. Forewings broadly rounded, pterostigma obsolete. .

  

 

tal segment very
chelifera p. 514.
sale genital segment v

      
  

 

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 505

Arytaina genistae* (Latreille)
(Figs. 99, 100, 101, 250)

1804 Psylla genistae Latreille, Hist. Nat, Crust, Ins. 12:382,
1835 Psylle ulicis Curtis, Brit. Ent, 12:565. 1841 Psylla spartii Hartig, Germ. Zeitschr. Ent. 3:375. 1848 Arytaina spartii Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:69. 1861 Psylla spartii Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou 34:335, 338, 347, 351, 358. 1872 Arytaina spartii Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch, Ent, Ges. 3:405. 1876 Arytaena ulicis Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876:529. 1877 Chermes (Ataenia) genistae Thomson, Opuse. Ent. 8
1879 Arytaena genistae Low, Verh. z0ol.-bot. Ges. Wien
1908 Arytaena genistae Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 1911 Psyllopa magna Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 3:
1912 Arytaena genistae Oshanin, Kat. paliia. Hemip. 128,
1913 Arytaena genistae Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 32. 1914 Arytaina genistae Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:125. 1917 Arytaina genistae Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am: 803,
1921 Arytaena genistae Enderlein, Zool, Anz. 52:120. 1935 Arytaena genistae Haupt. Tierw. Mittel. 4, 3:241,

Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 4 mm. Cotor: General color light green to dark brown. More-or-less dis-
tinctly striped on dorsum. Forewings with a brown macula between Rs
and M, another along posterior margin, following Cu nearly to base
of wing. Srrucrure: Head large, deflexed, broader than thorax. Vertex
nearly plane, over % as long as wide, discal impressions slight, anterior
margin strongly produced each side of median line as small tubercle,
laterally rounded down to genal processes. Eyes very large, protruding,
appearing slightly stalked. Genal processes large, heavy, rounded apic-
ally, nearly parallel to plane of vertex, not contiguous basally, 4% as long
as vertex. Antennae slightly over twice as long as width of head. Thorax
broad, moderately arched. Pronotum nearly flat, long. Forewings long,
narrowly rounded apically, 22% times as long as wide; Rs long, slightly
sinuate, medial cell larger than cubital, pterostigma lacking. Hind tibia
with basal spur. Genrratta: Male protiger short, stout, curved caudad apically. For-
ceps as long as proctiger, stout; in lateral view bent caudad midway, trun-
cate apically; in caudal view slender, nearly straight to black, bifurcate
apices; in dorsal view black-margined, deeply emarginate, caudal tooth
stout, sharp, anterior tooth longer, obliquely truncate. Female genital
segment longer than rest of abdomen, stout; dorsal valve straight to
blunt, slightly upturned apex; ventral valve shorter than dorsal, up-
turned, acute. Described from specimens from Europe, determined as A. genistae by
Franz Léw, in the United States National Museum. Crawford records
it from Woods Hole, Massachusetts, on Spartinum sp. In Europe its hosts
are Cytisus scoparius (Scotch broom) and Ulex europaeus (gorse) both
of which are established in eastern United States. It seems most prob-
able that these same species are the hosts in North America also. * Genitive of genista -ce, L. f. noun—broom (its host plant). 506 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Arytaina fuscipennis* Crawford
Figs. 102, 103, 104)

i . S, Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:123, 125.
its ee ec ees Ms a
1917 Arytaina fuscipennis Van Duzee, Cat. H
1932 Arytaina fuscipennis Klyver, Ent, News 43:

Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 to 2.75 mm. Coror: General color brown to black including forewings. Genal
processes somewhat lighter, especially in the male. Srrucrure: Head scarcely deflexed, narrower than thorax. Vertex
with very broad discal impressions, nearly twice as wide as long. Genal
processes conical, divergent, from blunt to nearly acute, % to 3% as long
as vertex, pubescent. Antennae 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax broad, well arched. Pronotum long, straight. Forewings cori-
aceous, somewhat rugose, twice as long as wide, broadly rounded; veins
minutely setate, cubital cell larger than medial, pterostigma very small
to obsolete. Hind tibia without basal spur. Genrrat1a: Proctiger of male broad, in lateral view broad basally,
converging then slender to apex. Forceps narrow, petiolate basally then
produced as two divergent, elongate lobes, medial lobe slender, acute,
lateral lobe spatulate. Female genital segment short, about % as long as
rest of abdomen; dorsal valve longer than ventral, excavate dorsally to
slightly upturned, blunt apex; ventral valve deeply excavate mesally. Described from numerous males and females from Lapine and Bend,
Oregon; two from Los Angeles County, California; one from Palomar
Mountain, California, and one from Nevada. Klyver records Ceanothus
papillosus as a definite host. Crawford records specimens as bearing
labels of other speceis of Ceanothus. Type, male, No. 18101 United States National Museum, Humboldt
County, California, H. S. Barber. Type examined. Arytaina robusta} Crawford
(Figs. 6, 105, 106)

1914 Arytaina robusta Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:123-124,
1917 Arytaina robusta Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 803. 1920 Arytaina montana Crawford, Ent. News, 31
1932 Arytaina robusta Klyver, Ent. News, 43:39. 1932 Arytaina snowi Dowell, Jour. Kans.'Ent. Soc. 5:93-94. Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 mm. Coxor: Coloration extremely variable. General color from green-
ish or yellowish white to dark brown. Dorsum usually light, venter and
legs darker. Often with considerable red marking, especially the genal
processes. Forewings white with variable brown maculation, usually
taking the form of two irregular, diffuse maculae separated by a broad

  
 

* From fuscus -a -um, L, adj—dark + pennis, L. irr. noun—wing.”
}robustus -a -um, L. adi—strong, solid. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 507

immaculate band across wing beyond tip of clavus; often more or less
evenly covered with small brown spots, with seven more-or-less persist-
ent spots on margin. A white pulverulence commonly covers a greater
or lesser portion of the insect, especially the forewings. Srrucrure: Head more or less deflexed, narrower than thorax. Vertex with broad, deep discal impressions, bulging anteriorly each side
of anterior ocellus, twice as wide as long, lateral ocelli on slightly raised
areas. Genal processes variable from bluntly cone-shaped to broadly
rounded, contiguous basally, about 23 as long as vertex. Antennae some-
what over 11 times as long as width of head. Thorax moderately arched. Pronotum deflexed, long. Forewings broad, narrowly rounded apically,
slightly more than twice as long as wide (variable); costa very heavy,
Rs short, sharply turned to costa, cubital cell larger than medial, ptero-
stigma lacking or extremely small. Hind tibia with small basal spur. Genrratia: Male proctiger rather short, stout, slightly tapered. Forceps simple; in lateral view somewhat enlarged toward apices; in
caudal view moderately stout, well arched; apices subacute, turned
cephalad somewhat. Female genital segment a little shorter than rest
of abdomen; dorsal valve longer than ventral, sharply concave in apical
half, upturned apically, subacute, a tuft of long setae on dorsal hump;
ventral valve shorter than dorsal, upturned, acute. This species is very abundant throughout the western United States
occuring in large numbers on Ceanothus fendleri and perhaps other
species of Ceanothus. It is extremely variable as is usual in such abundant
and widespread species, the coloration and pulverulence being especially
erratic, In general the individuals from the southern part of its range
have less definite wing maculae. Many specimens are at hand from numer-
ous localities in the following states: Colorado, Wyoming, South Dakota,
Montana, Idaho, Washington, Oregon, California, and Arizona, It is also
recorded from Utah and British Columbia. Type in Crawford's collection, apparently a specimen from Colorado,
but no specimen so labeled. Paratypes of both A, snowi Dowell and A. montana Crawford have
been examined, and they are merely robusta in which the wing maculation
is diffuse. Arytaina robusta sinuata* n. subsp. (Fig. 289)

Similar to the typical form except as follows: Darker, general color
chocolate brown; entirely devoid of pulverulence, including forewings;
genal processes generally longer and nearer plane of vertex; veins of fore-
wings more distinctly raised from membrane; R shorter, Rs therefore
longer, M strongly sinuate; female genital segment longer, fully as long
as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve straight on dorsal margin, attenuate,
upcurved to blunt apex; ventral valve almost equalling dorsal. * sinuatus, L. (p. part,. of sinuo)—wavy. 508 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

‘This form may represent a distinct species, or it may be merely
another variant of robusta. As Ihave only four female specimens I am un-
willing to designate it as of specific rank, but it is hoped that by naming it
attention may be directed to it and its true taxonomic nature thereby
determined.

. Hotoryre, female, Moscow Mountain, Idaho, July 20, 1938, H. M.
Harris, in author’s collection. Paratypes: Placer County, California, September, Koebele, (Cean-
othus cordulatus) in United States National Museum; Big Bear Lake,
California, July 26, 1932, R. H. Beamer in Snow Collection, University of
Kansas; Colo. 2030, in Crawford Collection. Arytaina pubescens* Crawford
(Figs. 107, 108)

i , U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:123, 131-132,
Jgts Arytina pubescens Grawtord, U.S Net Se Ai. 80h
1932 Arytaina pubescens Klyver, Ent. News 43:70-71. Length to tip of folded wings 2 mm. |

ae General color light brown to red. Head mostly white. Dor-
sum of thorax more or less marked with white. Abdomen often green. Forewings white to hyaline, maculate with brown apically and along
media. uCrUnE: Head and thorax with prominent white pubescence. Head slightly deflexed, as ‘road as thorax. Vertex % as long as wide,
deeply emarginate anteriorly, lateral ocelli borne on prominently raise
portions. Genal processes plunt, divergent, scarcely contiguous basally,
slightly over 4 as long as vertex. Antennae about 1% times as long as
width of head. Thorax moderately arched, broad. Pronotum slightly
descending anteriorly. Forewings short, broadly rounded, about twice as
long as wide, somewhat coriaceous; Rs short, marginal cells equal, ptero-
stigma small. Hind tibia with very small basal tubercle. Genrrauta: Male proctiger short, broad basally then narrowed,
curved caudad. Forceps short, stout, plunt, a slender black spine arising
on mesal margin, as long as base, incurved apically. Female genital seg-
ment shorter than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve large basally, very
abruptly narrowed to short, straight, subacute, apical portion; ventral
valve largely covered by last sternite, a large lobe extending caudad over-
lapping dorsal valve, apex acute, nearly equalling dorsal valve. f

‘Many specimens of this very distinct little species are at hand from
California, Oregon, Nevada, Idaho, and Colorado. The host plant is
Purshia tridentata. . Type in Crawford's collection (? ), no labeled specimen. ‘* pubescens, L. (pres. part. of pubescere)—having hair, ‘pubescent. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 509

Arytaina assimilis* Crawford '
(Fig. 110)

1914 Arytaina assimilis Crawford, U.S, Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:123, 127-128. 1917 Arytaina assimilis Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip. N. Am. 804. 1932 Arytaina assimilis Klyver, Ent, News, 43:70. I have seen no specimen of this species which was described from a
unique male. “Length of body 1.9 mm; length of forewing 2.2; width of head 0.80. General color reddish brown, lighter on dorsum and head. Body rather
small, long. “Head relatively rather small, deflexed quite strongly, about as broad
as thorax, punctate; vertex arcuate on posterior margin, with a deep fovea
on each side of median line near center, slightly bulging in front on each
side of median line, not strongly elevated on postocellar regions; genal
cones rather short, contiguous at base, rounded broadly at apex, slightly
pubescent, Antennae a little more than twice as long as width of head,
slender. “Thorax arched strongly, robust, punctate. Pronotum rather long,
flat on dorsal surface; propleurites short. Wings small, subhyaline, macu-
late in middle and on hind margin conspicuously so, semitransparent, a
little more than twice as long as broad, broadly rounded at apex and
apical half of wing distinctly narrowing toward apex; first marginal cell
larger than second; radial sector long and curved; pterostigma long,
large at base. “Genitalia: Male genitalia segment very large, about half as large
as rest of abdomen; forceps moderately long, stout, roundly acute at tip;
anal valve very large, larger than forceps, with a large, lobate protuber-
ance on hind margin; pubescence short. “Described from one male from Claremont, California (Crawford),
on Ceanothus crassifolius. This form is manifestly distinct from A. cean-
othae, but was taken on the same tree and together with the specimens
of the other species. “Type in author’s collection.”—Crawford. Klyver records this species from several localities in California on
species of Ceanothus. Arytaina spartiophila} (Forster)
(Figs. 86, 109, 109a, 290)
1843 Psylla spartii Guérin, Iconographie du régne animal de G. Cuvier, Part 1V:370
[fide Léw 1878}. om =
[non] Psylla spartii Hartig, Germ. Zeitschr. Ent. 3:375. 1841. 1848 Psylla spartiophila Férster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:75. 1876 Psylla spartiophila Scott, Trans, Ent. Soc. London 1876:533. 1878 Psylla spartii Léw, Verh. zool-bot. Ges. Wien (1877) 27:126-129,
1908 Peylla sporti Sule, Bull. Int. Acad. dos Sclences Francois Joseph T (Prague)
1913 Psylla spartii Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 27. 1935 Psylla spartii Haupt, Tierw. Mittel. * assimilis -e, L. adj.—similar. + From spartius, Gr. noun—spanish broom + philos, Gr. noun—a lover. 510 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. Coror: General color light to dark brown. Abdominal segments
dark brown except margins. Forewings somewhat yellowish, darker
along veins. ‘Srrucrure: Head nearly as broad as thorax, scarcely deflexed. Ver-
tex with small discal foveae, % as long as wide, strongly produced anteri-
orly each side of median suture, lateral ocelli on raised areas. Genae
swollen, rounded, nearly vertical, not touching, 44 as long as vertex. Median ocellus very large. Antennae twice as long as width of head. Thorax weakly arched. Pronotum long, descending anteriorly. Fore-
wings 2% times as long as wide, broadly rounded; Rs long, somewhat
sinuate, marginal cells equal, pterostigma almost obsolete. Hind tibia
with small basal spur. Genrratta: Male proctiger, long, slender, curved caudad. Forceps
Jong and slender; in lateral view tapering slightly from base, apices black,
curved caudad; in caudal view slender, strongly arched to black sub-
acute apices, postero-medial margins densely pubescent. Female genital
segment stout, about as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve longer than
ventral, dorsal margin slightly sinuate, apically attenuate, black, acute,
upturned; ventral valve very sharply upturned, truncate, slightly exca-
vate apically. Described from numerous specimens from Washon Island, Washing-
ton, May 1, 1940, W. W. Baker, taken on Cytisus scoparius; four female
specimens taken at Fort Lewis and Dupont, Washington, July 5, 1935,
P. W. Oman and R. H. Beamer. Heretofore unrecorded from North America, this species has been
introduced from Europe, probably with its host, Cytisus scoparius, which
is well established in the coastal region of the Pacific Northwest. Guérin first described this species in 1843, naming it Psylla spartii. He knew of Hartig’s use of the name two years before but since he knew
Hartig’s species to be a synonym of P. genistae Latreille he used the name
again, a homonym. In 1848 Forster, unaware of Guérin’s work, rede-
scribed the species as Psylla spartiophila which name is the correct one
for the species. Léw had all these facts in mind but continued the use
of Psylla spartii. This use of a homonym has continued until the present
time. Host: Cytisus scoparius. The name in use at the time of Guérin and
Forster was Spartium scoparium. Arytaina ceanothi* Crawford

(Figs. 111, 112)

4914 Arytaina ceanothae Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:123, 130. 1917 Arytaina ceanothae Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 804. 1832 Arytaina ceanothae Klyver, Ent. News 43:70. * Genitive of Ceanothus—generic name of its host plant. (The ending ae used by
Crawford is evidently a lapsus calami and is emended to 4.) THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 511

Length to tip of folded wings 2 mm. Cotor: Yellowish to brown. Forewings more or less fumate. STRUCTURE: Head small, narrower than thorax, deflexed. Vertex
nearly twice as wide as long, discal impressions broad and deep, rounded
anteriorly, emarginate medially. Genae swollen as small lobes, not
touching and scarcely extending beyond anterior margin of vertex. An-
tennae about 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum descending. Forewings broadly rounded, about twice as long
as wide or slightly over; cubital cell slightly larger than medial, ptero-
stigma prominent, somewhat variable in size. Hind tibia without basal
spur. Genrratta: Male proctiger slender, slightly tapering, curved caudad
somewhat. Forceps very slender; in lateral view straight to rounded,
black-tipped apices; in caudal view evenly arched, Female genital seg. ment about as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve strongly concave,
apical portion slender, apex subacute; ventral valve stout, dorsal margin
excavate, acute. Specimens at hand are from Los Angeles County, Siskiyou
Mt, Shasta County, and Sta, Cruz Mountains, California; Easton, Wack
ington; Haugan, Montana. Host: Ceanothus (Crawford and Klyver). lab ype designated as in Crawford Collection, but no specimen so
labeled. Arytaina amorphae* (Mally)

(Figs. 87, 88)

1895 Psylla emorphae Mally, Proc, la. Acad. Sei. 2:159. 1911 Psyllopa floridensis Crawford, Pom. Coli. Jour. En
1911 Psyllopa ilicis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:
1912 Psyllopa ilicis Crawford, Porn. Coll. Jour. Ent. 4:684,
1913 Psylla amorphae Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 10. 1914 Arytaina amorphae Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:85. 1914 Amblyrhir si 3
IST Arytelna emorphae Van Dusce, Cet Hemip Nar 84

Length to tip of folded wings 2.0 to 2.25 mm. Cotor: General color light green to yellow, white longitudinal lines
on thoracic dorsum, irregular white markings on vertex. Forewings
more or less yellowish. Antennae dark apically. Srrucrure: Head deflexed, slightly narrower than thorax. Vertex
with prominent discal impressions, definitely margined anteriorly, % as
long as wide. Genae produced as short blunt processes 1/6 as long as
vertex, not touching, extending forward, visible in dorsal view of vertex,
a prominent suture between vertex and genae. Antennae short, about
as long as width of head. Thorax well arched longitudinally, quite flat
laterally. Pronotum strongly descending. Forewings long, 2% times as
long as wide; cubital petiole short, cubital cell elongate, larger than
medial, pterostigma large. Hind tibia without basal spur. :

* Genitive of Amorpha—the generic name of its host. 512 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Genrratta: Male proctiger straight, moderately broad in lateral
view, slightly converging toward apex. Subgenital plate elongate, rounded
lobe on dorsal margin, apex swollen ventrad, a stout spine on caudal
margin, extending dorso-caudad between forceps. Forceps in lateral view
of moderate width basally, abruptly enlarged about midway, cephalic
lobe much larger than caudal, dorsal margin evenly excavate; in caudal
view stout, elbowed near apices to obliquely truncate apex; in dorsal view
anterior lobes slightly, turned mesad, a heavy truncate median lobe bear-
ing several small stout black spines, a sharper caudal point bearing two
black spines. Female genital segment somewhat shorter than rest of
abdomen; dorsal valve longer than ventral, sinuate dorsally, apex blunt;
ventral valve upcurved, acute. This species and the following have been confused heretofore. They
are very similar and live upon closely related plants, this form on
Amorpha fruticosa the other on Amorpha canescens. Due to the small
size of these insects, differences in structure which would be very notice-
able in larger forms are easily passed by as of no consequence. In the
original description of amorphae, Mally recorded the host plant as A.
fruticosa. Crawford (1914) cites A. canescens labels on amorphae; these
specimens are probably the related species. In June, 1940, large series of
both species were taken on the same date and the same general locality,
and sufficient difference was apparent in the field that they were kept
very carefully separated in order to determine definitely their status. Upon microscopic examination, they have proved to be distinctly differ-
ent. The most distinctive differences are in the size and shape of the
vertex and genal processes and in the length of the antennae. Minor but
apparently constant differences occur in the genitalia also. The cotypic series (5 females) is in the Iowa State College Collection. One of the specimens is here designated as lectotype. Other specimens at
hand are from various localities in lowa, Kansas, Texas, Colorado, and
Arizona. Host: Amorpha fruticosa. Type, female, I. A. C., 6/12/94, C. W. M., is in the Iowa State College
Collection. Arytaina pallida* n. sp. Figs. 89, 90, 291)

Length to tip of folded wings 1.75 to 2.25 mm. Coxor: General color greenish white to yellowish white. Forewings
whitish to slightly fumate. Hind wings white. Antennae dark apically. Srructure: Head slightly deflexed, nearly as wide as thorax. Vertex
with broad discal impressions, about % as long as wide, rounding down
anteriorly, genae swollen, but scarcely produced; separated by full width
of frons, not extending forward beyond anterior margin of vertex, suture
between genae and vertex indistinct laterally. Antennae 11/4 times as

* pallidus -a -um, L. adj—pale. PE

 

ae

 

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 513

long ss ae of head. Thorax well arched. Pronotum descending. Fore-
wings 234 times as long as wide; venation as in am: y
little shorter, Hind tibia without basal spurs Ph“ Plevostigma a

GeniTatia: Male genitalia similar to amorphae but proctiger stouter,
Forceps with petiolate base more slender, anterior lobe longer, scarcely
produced caudad, dorsal margin strongly sinuate; in caudal view slender
basally, enlarged apically, a stout incurving truncate tooth borne at apex;
in dorsal view somewhat produced medially with an almost continuous
row of black teeth to caudal margin. Female genital segment similar to
amorphae but dorsal valve less sinuate, apex upturned, subacute, ventral
valve more slender. ,

This species while very similar to A. amorphae Mally may be distin-
guished from it by the ‘shorter and less protruding genal processes, the
longer antennae, the upturned tip of the dorsal valve of the female genital
segment, and the shape of the male forceps as shown in the figures. 7 It was taken abundantly on Amorpha canescens, its host plant, in
une. Hoxorypz, male, autorype, female, numerous PARATYPES, Turin, Iowa,
June 1, 1940, L. D. Tuthill. Other rararyees (7) Eureka, Ki
29, 1933, P. W. Oman; (1) Wilson County, Minnesota, July 1, 1922, P. B.
Lawson; (4) Oakland, Nebraska, July 5, 1940, W. W. Wirth. Holotype, allotype, and paratypes in author's collection, Paratypes
in United States National Museum, University of Kansas, and University
of Minnesota. Arytaina aculeata* Crawford

1914 Arytaina aculeata Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:123, 131. 1917 Arytaina aculeata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 804. 1932 Arytaina aculeata Klyver, Ent, News 43:70. Length to tip of folded wings 2 mm. Cotor: Light brown with whitish markings on head and thorax. Forewings yellowish. ‘

Srrucrure: Head small, deflexed, as wide as thorax. Vertex rounded
anteriorly, produced each side of median suture, 24 as long as wide, an-
terior margin abrupt, discal impressions prominent. Genal processes short,
rounded, contiguous basally, less than 4 as long as vertex, scarcely visible
in dorsal view. Antennae 11% times as long as width of head. Thorax
moderately arched. Forewings narrowed apically, somewhat rhomboidal,
slightly coriaceous, about 2% times as long as broad; Rs moderately long,
straight, marginal cells equal, pterostigma small, Hind tibia without basal
spur. Genrratra: Male unknown. Female genital segment longer than
rest of abdomen, enlarged and globose basally, apical portion attenuate,
styliform, black; dorsal valve slightly longer than ventral, both acute. Known only from the female, this rare species has been taken only

 

*aculeatus -a -um, L, adj—pointed, sharp. 514 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

in California. Four specimens are at hand from Los Angeles County. Klyver records it is taken on Cercocarpus betuloides, Napa County, Cali-
fornia. ‘Type, female, No. 18103 United States National Museum. Arytaina chelifera* Crawford

i i . S. Mus., Bull. 85:123, 128-129. 191d Brechypeilte purchiae Crawiord, US. Nat. Mus, Bull 85:19. 1917 Arytaina chelifer Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 804. Length to tip of folded wings 2 mm. Cotor: “General color greenish yellow; genitalia, tip of antennae, and
venter more or less browned; forewings very slightly fumate, browned a
little darker on apical fourth.”—Crawford. Srrucrure: Head nearly as broad as thorax, moderately deflexed. Vertex swollen and rounded anteriorly each side of median suture, %
as long as wide. Genal processes cone-shaped, rounded at apex, divergent,
Yas long as vertex, depressed much below but parallel to plane of vertex. Antennae about as long as vertex. Thorax moderately arched. Pronotum
quite flat. Forewings slightly rugose, hyaline, broadly rounded, some-
what over twice as long as wide; Rs short, slightly sinuate, marginal cells
equal, pterostigma very short, but distinct. Hind wings thickly set with
minute setae. Hind tibia with prominent basal spur. Genrratia: Male proctiger small, straight, about as long as forceps. Forceps in lateral view stout, cephalic margin straight, caudal margin
swollen, deeply notched apically, anterior process straight, subacute, not
heavily sclerotized, posterior process extending antero-mesally, heavily
sclerotized, black, curved, acute; in caudal view broad, black tooth-
like processes arising from mesal margins, touching apically. Female
genital segment very short; dorsal valve somewhat concave dorsally,
apex elongate, acute, with many short setae; ventral valve upturned,
acute apically. | ;

Known only from the type series from Williams, Arizona; and Ameri-
can Fork Canyon, Utah. These specimens are now quite faded to a “mu-
seum tan.” As Crawford notes, the Utah specimens were taken on
Purshia tridentata, which is probably the host. -_

Tyre, female, No. 18102 United States National Museum, Williams,
Arizona, Barber and Schwarz. ‘Type examined. Arytaina minuta} Crawford
(Figs. 113, 114) . 1914 Arytaina minuta Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. $5123, 128.
m. 804. ° =

1917 Arytaina minuta Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Ai
1982 Arytaina minuta Kiyver, Ent. News, 43:

 

* Apparently from ¢(h)ele; Gr. noun—claw + fer from L, v. fero—bearing. minutus -a -um, L. adj—small. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 315

Length to tip of folded wings 2 to 2.5 mm. Cotor: General color light brown, abdomen darker brown. Fore-
wings clear brown, darker apically. Structure: Head strongly deflexed, nearly as wide as thorax. Vertex
nearly flat, discal impressions shallow, sloping downward anteriorly to
genae, nearly twice as wide as long. Genal processes broad, rounded, con-
tiguous, % as long as vertex. Antennae 1% times as Jong as width of
head. Thorax well arched. Pronotum descending. Forewings slightly
coriaceous, narrowly rounded, 2% times as long as wide; Rs long, mar-
ginal cells equal in size, pterostigma prominent, slender, long. Hind tibia
with small basal spur. Genrratta: Male genitalia large. Proctiger triangular, broad at
base. Forceps slender in lateral view, slightly sinuate, apices black, sub-
acute; in caudal view moderately broad, arched. Female genital segment
very large, longer than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve longer than ventral,
sinuate, apex attenuate, slightly upturned, subacute; ventral valve stout,
acute,

Several males and females are at hand from Los Angeles County,
Mint Canyon, and Del Mar, California. One specimen bears a label
Ceanothus rigidus. Klyver records Ceanothus cuneatus as a definite host. Crawford records the type as in his collection, but no specimen seems
to have been so designated. Arytaina insolita* n. sp. (Figs. 141, 142, 292)

Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 to 3 mm. Cotor: Reddish brown. Forewings yellowish brown, darker along
veins, males darker on genae and legs. Structure: Head deflexed, narrower than thorax. Vertex nearly
flat, bulging anteriorly each side of median suture, slight discal impres-
sions, lateral ocelli borne on prominently raised areas, Genal processes
parallel to plane of vertex, rounded apically, contiguous at base, % as
long as vertex. Antennae slightly over 1% times as long as width of
head. Thorax well arched, broad. Pronotum descending. Forewings
broadly rounded, 2% times as long as wide; Rs of medium length, mar-
ginal cells large, equal, pterostigma almost completely lacking. Hind tibia
without basal spur. .

Geniratta: Male genitalia very large. Proctiger long, apex slender,
rest produced caudad as a large rounded lobe. Forceps in lateral view
a little more than % as long as proctiger, slender, tapering apically to
blunt, black tips; in caudal view slender, evenly arched to black apices,
a dense fringe of setae mesally. Female genital segment very large, stout,
longer than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve apically slender and upturned

to subacute apex; ventral valve shorter than dorsal, strongly upturned,
acute. *insolitus -a -um, L. adj—unusual,

 

516 LEONARD.D. TUTHILL

1, male, attoryp#, female, 3 male and 15 female paRatyPEs
with ae Sof Mt. Shasta Cy, California, June 29, 1935, P. W. Oman. Other panarypzs as follows: 1 male and 2 females, Big Bear Lake, Cali-
fornia, July 26, 1982, R. H. Beamer; 2 females, San Jacinto Mountains,
California, July 21, 1929, R. H. Beamer; 1 male, Dunsmuir, California,
June 29, 1935, R. H. Beamer; 1 female, Strawberry Dam, Utah, July 16,
1935, P, W. Oman; 1 male, Jacumba, and 1 female, Campo, California,

D. J. and J. N. Knull. My on, ‘No. 55178 United States National Museum, allotype and

paratypes in United States National Museum. Paratypes in University -

of Kansas, Ohio State University, and author’s collections. Genus Psyllopsis* Low

161 Chermes Li ro parte), Faun. Svec. ines piste Geof spe tare parte), Hist, Abr. des Insectes 1.4. 5.14
1848 Psylla Forster, (pro parte), Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:73. 1877 Psylla Thomson, Opusc. Ent. 8:820 [as subgenus of Chermes]. 1879 Psyllopsis Law, Verh. z001.~bot. Ges. Wien 28:585, 587. 1896 Psyllopsis Edwards, HemipHomop. Br. Is. 283.5 yoy
1912 Psyllopsis Oshanin, Kat pal Hemi. 126 [designates type]. 1913 Psyllopsis Aulmann, at. 71. ‘332. llopsis Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:132.
tot Payllopsis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 804. Head narrower than thorax, deflexed. Vertex rounding smoothly
into genae anteriorly. Genae produced as conical processes, more or less
divergent, deflexed sharply from plane of vertex. Antennae rather, long,
distinctly longer than width of head. Eyes hemispherical, of moderate
size. Thorax well arched. Pronotum descending anteriorly, rather long. Propleural suture ending medially on lateral margin of pronotum. Fore-
wings membranous, broadly rounded apically, pterostigma present. Meta-
tibia without basal armature, with a row of small black apical spines. Metatarsus with two black clawlike spines. Logotype: Psyllopsis fraxinicola (Forster)

 

 

    

 

Key to the Species of Psyllopsis

 

1. Unicolorous, including wings. .
k or black markings on body and forewings. ; . 2. Bale forceps jn lateral view with a caudal lobe, anterior margin nearly straight

 
   

  

fraxini p. 518. Male forceps in latéral view very much enlarged apically, quadrate

discrepans p. 518. Psyllopsis fraxinicolat (Forster)
(Figs. 115, 116, 117, 117a, 249)

inicola Férster, Verh. natur, Ver. preuss, Rhein, 5:73.
ise Paull Suda Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:74. * ‘is -is, Gr, £, noun—the aspect, the appearance. [BEING plashmus—genetic name of the host + cola, L.—inhabitant. .fraxinicola p. 516. 2. AEG SEE TIO EERO

LA

a
:
:
p
:

 

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 517

1861 Psylla wnicolor Flor, Rynch. Liv. 2:449, 479. 1861 Psylla unicolor Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou 34:335, 340, 347, 353. 1872 Psylla fraxinicola Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 3:398. 1872 Psylla chlorogenes Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 3:399. 1872 Psylla viridula Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 1876 Psylla fraxinicola Scott, Trans, Ent. Soc. Lot
la

 

 

5. 31399,

ndon 1876:544,
fre Ent. 8:829,
psis fraxinicola Léw, Verh. zool.-bot. Ges. Wien 28:588,

 

1912 Psyllopsis fraxinicola Oshanin, Kat. paléa. Hemip. 126 (designated type]. 1913 Psyllopsis fraxinicola Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 73. 1914 Psyllopsis fraxinicola Crawford, U, S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:132. 1917 Psyllopsis fraxinicola Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip. N. Am. 805. 1923 Psyllopsis fraxinicola Patch, Hemip. Conn. 250. 1923 Psyllopsis fraxinicola Ferris, Can, Ent. 55:251-254 [figs. nymph). 1935 Psyllopsis fraxinicola Haupt, Tierw. Mittel. 4, 3:230. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. Cotor: Uniformly greenish yellow except tips of antennae. Wings
hyaline. Srructure: Head deflexed, narrower than thorax. Vertex evenly
excavate, % as long as wide, anteriorly rounding down to genae without
a visible. suture between latter and vertex, discal impressions small,
distinct. Genal processes cone-shaped, subacute, somewhat divergent,
nearly vertical, less than % as long as vertex. Antennae nearly twice
as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum broad,
rather long, descending. Forewings large, very broadly rounded apically,
slightly over twice as long as wide, membrane thickly set with minute
setae; Rs very long, medial cell elongate, about equal in size to cubital,
pterostigma very large. Hind tibia without basal armature. Geniratta:. Male genitalia large. Subgenital plate elongate, slender. Proctiger curved on cephalic margin, caudally produced in basal half as a
triangular lobe. Forceps short with large anterior lobe, narrow at point
of origin then enlarged, very broad apically, convexly rounded, caudal
portion stout, converging; in caudal view posterior lobes black-tipped,
serrate, touching, apices of anterior lobes touching. Female genital seg-
ment shorter than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve with a short styliform
portion apically, blunt, slightly downcurved; ventral valve in lateral view
upcurved, acute, in ventral view broad basally then narrow, deeply and
narrowly excavate apically, heavily pubescent. Specimens are at hand from Washington, D. C.; Atlantic City, New
Jersey; Kings County, Nova Scotia; Stanford University, California. It
is also recorded from Connecticut and Idaho, Felt (26th Rept. N. Y. Sta. Ent.) reported it from New York, but this is based on a misidentification. It probably does occur in New York and many other states, however. Outside North America its distribution embraces ‘all of Europe in which
its host occurs. In Europe it seems to be limited to Fraxinus excelsior;

in North America it has been recorded also on Fraxinus dipetala and
Juglans. .

  
 
 

 

 

 

518 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Psyllopsis fraxini* (Linnaeus)
(Fig. 118)

1761 Chermes fraxini Linnzeus, Faun. Svec. 264. .

1848 Psylla fraxini Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein, 5:80. 1861 Psylla fraxini Flor, Rhynch, Liv. 2:481. 1861 Psylla fraxini Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou
1872 Psylla fraxini Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 3: 5. 4876 Psylla fraxini Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876:
1877 Chermes fraxini Thomson, Opusc. Ent. 8:829. 1877 Chermes sorbi Thomson (pro parte), Opusc. Ent. 1879 Psyllopsis fraxini Léw, Verh. zool.-bot. Ges. Mica 28:58. 1935 Psyllopsis

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. .

Cotor: “General ody color yellow with dark brown to black mark-
ings as follows: Disc and posterior margin of vertex, two large spots
on prescutum, four longitudinal stripes on scutum, abdominal tergites
except margins, portions of legs, venter and genitalia. Forewings with a
large, irregular, marginal, apical macula, another at apex of clavus. Sraucture: Very similar to fraxinicola except wings smaller, ptero-
stigma shorter, Rs shorter, medial cell Jess elongate, much smaller than
cubital. .

Genrratra: Male genitalia large. Subgenital plate slightly elongate. Proctiger produced caudad basally as a bluntly rounded. lobe. Forceps
erect; in lateral view narrow basally, nearly straight on cephalic margin,
produced caudad as a blunt lobe, apices rounded; in caudal view stout,
nearly straight, a very small mesal lobe basally. Female genital segment
very similar to frazinicola. ;

‘This species is represented in the Iowa State College Collection by a
series of specimens collected in Buffalo, New York, July, 1886 and 1888,
by E. P. Van Duzee. It has not heretofore been recorded from North
America. Felt (1911) describes and figures a species occurring on ash
which was determined for him as P. fraxinicola; it is apparent from his
description and figures that P. fraxini was the species he had, however. He reported considerable damage to, the foliage of ash (Fraxinus) , its
host. Recorded heretofore from all of Europe, including Scandinavia,
Russia, Syria, and Palestine. Psyllopsis discrepanst (Flor)
(Fig. 119)

1861 Psylla discrepans Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou 34:335, 340, 347, 353, 376. 1871 Chermes sorbi Thomson, Opuse, Ent. 8:829. sen De:

1879 Psyllopsis discrepans Léw, Verh. zool.-bot. Ges. Wien 28:590. 1908 Psyllopsis discrepans Oshanin, Verz, palae. Hemip. 2:349. 1935 Psyllopsis discrepans Haupt, Tierw. Mittel. 4, 3:230. * Genitive of Frazinus—the generic name of the host. + Pres. part. of discrepo, L. v.—-to differ. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 519

A single male in the National Museum from Kings County, Nova
Scotia, July 1, 1921, is apparently this species. It resembles P. frax-
ini closely except in darker coloration, more extensive maculation of the
forewing and in genitalia. Male genitalia very large. Subgenital plate elongate. Proctiger with
rounded caudal lobe as in fraxini. Forceps in lateral view erect, narrow
basally, abruptly enlarged into a quadrate apical portion, slightly excavate
dorsally; in caudal view very heavy, slender and incurved apically, a
small basal mesal lobe. Its recorded distribution is Central Europe and Scandinavia. Genus Euphalerus* Schwarz

1904 Euphalerus Schwarz, Proc. Ent. Sec. Wash. 6:238. 1913 Euphalerus Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 74. 1914 Euphalerus Crawford, U, S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 3. 1914 Cephalopsylla Crawford, U, S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:121, 122,
1917 Euphalerus Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 802. 1937 Euphalerus Tuthill, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc. 10:69-70. Head deflexed, broad. Vertex plane or nearly so. Genae produced
as large processes, rounded apically, on same plane as vertex, more or
less divergent. Antennae short (less than 1% times width of head). Eyes
more or less recessive over propleurites, not elongate. Thorax quite
strongly arched. Pronotum not extending far down laterally, terminating
in a knoblike swelling. Propleurites equal in length dorsally, suture
terminating at middle of lateral margin of pronotum. Forewings mem-
branous or somewhat thickened and rugose, rounded or oblique apically. Metatibia with basal spur. Basal segment of metatarsus with two black
clawlike spines. Orthotype: Euphalerus nidifex Schwarz. Some of the western species of this genus show a marked relationship
to Arytaina,

  

 

Key to the Species of Euphalerus

 

. Forewings not rugose, ‘body and forewings light in color with many minute

       
      

 

brown spots s-.+- midifex p. 520. Forewings rugose, body and forewings not covered with minute brown spots
2. Meso and metascutellum produced dorsad, cone-shaped
Meso and metascutellum not at all or scarcely produced. .
3. Forewings strongly rhomboidal opinguus p. 521. Forewings rounded apically. -jugovenosus p. 521. 4, Uniformly red or reddish brown in color; without a tubercle ventrad of antennal

insertion; male forceps not simple
Not uniformly reddish in color; with a more or less prominent tubercle ventrad of
antennal insertion; male forceps simple. .

5, Larger species (3.75 mm. to tip of folded wings); genal processes nearly as long
as vertex... : adustus p. 5:

 

 

     

* Apparently from Gr. prefix eu—true, very + phalerus, Gr. adj—clear, bright. (application obscure). 520 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

Smaller species (2.5 mm, to tip of folded wings); genal processes 34 as long as
tantillus p. 523.

at least one dark macula at apex of

: vermiculosus p. 524. General color green (sometimes reddish) with many small white spots; forewings

without dark maculae........00000ceeeeesessteeeeseelevees rugipennis p. 525. 2

  

Euphalerus nidifex* Schwarz
(Figs. 120, 121, 122, 256)

1904 Euphalerus nidifex Schwarz, Proc. Ent, Soc. Wash, 6:238-239 and 153-154. 1913 Euphalerus nidifex Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 74,

1914 Euphalerus nidifex Crawford, U. $, Nat. Mus. Bull, 85:119,

1914 Euphalerus ficus Crawford, U. 8. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:120. 1917 Euphalerus nidifex Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 802. 1937 Euphalerus nidifex Tuthill, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc, 10:72. Length to tip of folded wings 2 mm. Cotor: “Color pale ochre-yellow varying to greenish yellow or red-
dish yellow, head, thorax, wings, and legs speckled with minute black or
brown dots, wings slightly whitish."—Schwarz. Srrucrure: Head narrower than thorax, vertical, finely punctate. Vertex.% as long as wide, nearly plane, somewhat bulging anteriorly, dis-
cal impressions prominent. Genal processes large, on same plane as
vertex, rounded apically, 34 as long as vertex. Antennae slightly longer
than width of head. Eyes rounded, recessive. Thorax finely punctate,
strongly arched. Pronotum narrow, long, nearly vertical. Forewings not
rugose,. broadly rounded, membrane thickly set with minute setae, a
little more than twice as long as wide; Rs long, nearly straight, cubital
cell larger than medial, pterostigma large, unusually broad, not elongate. Hind wings equalling forewings. Hind tibia with small basal spur. Genitatta: Male proctiger slender, straight, truncate. Forceps
small; in lateral view broad basally, tapered to acute black apices, slightly
turned caudad; in caudal view broad, arched to mesally truncate opposing
tips. Female genital segment small; dorsal valve straight, slender apically,
blunt-tipped; ventral valve nearly as long as dorsal, upcurved, acute. Described from specimens in the United States National Museum
from Key West, Florida. Dr. John Caldwell in a private communication
informs me that he has specimens taken on Key Largo, Florida, As the
latter is but a stone’s throw from the mainland this beautifully spotted
species undoubtedly occurs in the southern part of that state. Its host
plant is Piscidia erythrina. Schwarz reared the nymphs but gives only a
few notes concerning its habits, these chiefly concern the nestlike struc-
ture in which they live on the ventral side of the leaves. Known from Cuba and the Virgin Islands in addition to the localities
mentioned above. . Type, No. 8146 United States National Museum, is missing. * From nidus -i, L. noun—nest + fer (faex)—dregs. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 521

Euphalerus propinquus* Crawford
(Fig. 251)

1914 Eu; lerus i
1914 Cebhatopeatke entans Crawford, U. Saat Mas ee aes na

1917 Euphalerus propinquus Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am, 803°

1937 Euphalerus propinquus Tuthill, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc. 10:72.”

Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. Cotor: General color white to light green with red dots and vermi-
culations on head and thorax. Forewings nearly transparent, dark from
clavus to apex, many small brown spots in darkened area, apical margin
alternately black and white, small opaque white spots on veins,

_ Sraucrors: Head large, broader than thorax, rugose. Vertex broad
twice as wide as long, nearly plane, discal impressions very broad, shal. low. Genal processes large, broad, swollen, continuous with vertex
roundly truncate, % as long as vertex, pubescent. Antennae 1% times
as long as width of head, a small tubercle ventrad of insertion. ‘Thorax
rugose, very strongly arched. Pronotum descending anteriorly, Meso and
metascutellum conically produced dorsad. Latter with a smaller protuber-
ance on each side. Forewings rhomboidal, rugose; Rs somewhat sinuate,
sharply curved to costa, not attaining apex of wing, M somewhat sinuate,
marginal cells about equal, pterostigma of moderate size. Hind tibia with
small basal spur. Legs heavily pubescent. Genrratta: Male proctiger short, stout, straight, parallelsided
rounded apically. Forceps nearly as long as proctiger, with long pub. escence; in lateral view broad, straight, enlarged toward apices, notched
apically, anterior portion rounded, blunt, caudal part produced as a long,
slender, curving, black tooth, projecting cephalad and mesad, acute; in
caudal view stout, curved outward basally then straight to ineurving
apical portion. Female genital segment about as long as rest of abdomen,
with long sparse pubescence; dorsal valve strongly upcurved, subacute,
ventral valve shorter than dorsal, thick, strongly upcurved from base
dorsal margin strongly sinuate, apex acute. ,

Numerous specimens are at hand from the Chiracahua, Huachuca
and Santa Rita Mountains of Arizona, some of which were taken on
Amorpha fructicosa, some swept from walnut. The type series was taken
on Ceanothus. The latter is probably the host. Tyee, female, No. 18100 United States National Museum, Arizona
Morrison. , ,

Type examined,

Euphalerus jugovenosus} Tuthill

(Figs. 143, 144, 293)
1937 Euphalerus jugovenosus Tuthill, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc. 10:70, 74,

* propinquus -a -um, L. adj—near. {From jugosus -a -um, L. adj—mountainous +- venosus -a -um, L. adj—veiny. 522 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

ength to tip of folded wings 2.5 to 3 mm. Gotee: “Need, pronotum, and prescutum white, with more ‘or less
vermiculate red markings; remainder of thorax dark red; legs somewhat
lighter. Forewings hyaline except apex dark through cubital cell, latter
black, apical margin alternately black and white; veins with rather
regular opaque whitish areas and irregular red spots. Abdomen green,
male genitalia and tip of female genital segment red. Srrucrure: Head, pronotum, and prescutum rugose, rest of body
punctate. Head broader than thorax, deflexed. _ Vertex nearly plane,
twice as wide as long, posterior margin almost straight, discal impressions
large. Genal processes large, a little more than % as long as vertex, very
broad, somewhat divergent, blunt apically, moderately pubescent. An-
tennae about as long as width of head, a small tubercle ventrad of inser-
tion. Thorax very strongly arched. Pronotum nearly vertical. Prescutum
with a small raised epiphysis on each corner caudally. Meso and meta-
scutellum produced as heavy conical process. Forewings short, narrow! y
rounded, rugose, twice as long as wide; veins very prominent, marginal
cells small, cubital somewhat larger, Rs sinuate, pterostigma moderately
broad, very short. Small basal tubercle on hind tibia. Legs moderately

cent. ae TALZA: Male proctiger very stout, produced caudad asa broad
Jobe. Forceps straight, tapering to slender twisted black apices extending
mesad, acute, moderately broad in lateral view. Female genital segment
shorter than rest of abdomen, large basally, strongly narrowed; dorsal
valve sharply upturned, acute apically, a tuft of long setae before slender
apical portion; ventral valve shorter than dorsal, upturned, acute. |

In addition to the type series from Lockwood and Monterey, Cali-
fornia, specimens from Los Angeles County, Alameda County, Santa Cruz
Mountain, and Delta in the same state are at hand. an

. Type, male, Lockwood, California, in Snow Collection, University of
Kansas. Euphalerus adustus* Tuthill

(Figs. 145, 146, 294)
1937 Euphalerus adustus Tuthill, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc. 10:70.
to tip of folded wings 3.75 mm. |
oe Uniformly vellowish red, often with some white vermicula-
tions on head and thoracic dorsum. Forewihgs hyaline, yellow. Abdomen
i reen,

se RUCTURE: Body large, punctate. Head deflexed, as broad as thorax. Vertex plane, pubescent anteriorly, twice as wide as long, discal impres-
sions slight. Genal processes cone-shaped, large, ‘swollen, subacute,

i i tex medially, on same
divergent, prominently pubescent, as long as verte
plane as vertex. Antennae 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax

*adustus -a -um, L. adj—sunburned. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 523,

strongly arched. Pronotum moderately long, descending. Forewings long,
rugose, 2% times as long as wide; Rs somewhat sinuate, marginal cells
about equal, pterostigma prominent, short but broad; three prominent
radular areas on margin. Hind wings long, nearly equalling forewings. A large spur on base of hind tibia. Genrratia: Male proctiger short, straight, stout. Forceps large,
almost as long as proctiger; in lateral view very broad, straight, parallel-
margined; in caudal view broad basally, narrower apically, slightly
arched; anterior margin heavily pubescent to roundly truncate apex,
caudo-mesal margin produced as heavy, slightly bifid tooth, extending
barely beyond apex. Female genital segment shorter than rest of abdo-
men; dorsal valve slightly longer than ventral, straight, acute; ventral
valve attenuate, strongly upturned, apex black, acute. Besides the type series from Utah and Colorado, about 20 specimens
of both sexes from several localities in Utah are before me. Some of those
taken in the Wasatch Mountains by Koebele and accompanied by nymphs
bear labels, ““Cercocarpus ledifolius.”

Type, male, in Snow Collection, University of Kansas. Euphalerus tantillus* Tuthill

(Figs. 147, 148, 295)
1936 Euphalerus tantillus Tuthill, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc. 10:70, 71. Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 mm. Cotor: Uniformly red to brownish red, indistinct lighter markings
on head and thorax. Forewings reddish fumate. Srructure: Head as wide as thorax, strongly deflexed. Vertex twice
as wide as long, nearly plane, discal impressions very broad, somewhat
bulging anteriorly, slightly pubescent on anterior margin. Genal pro-
cesses large, conical, ¥4 as long as vertex, on nearly same plane as vertex. Antennae slightly longer than width of head. Thorax moderately arched. Pronotum nearly vertical. Forewings somewhat rugose, short, slightly
over twice as long as wide, three radular areas on margin; Rs slightly
sinuate, marginal cells equal, pterostigma small, Hind wings nearly as
Jong as forewings, thickly set with minute setae. A very small basal spur
on hind tibia. GenitaLia: Male proctiger large, stout, parallel-sided to truncate
apex. Forceps about 4 as long as proctiger; in lateral view broad, en-
larged apically; in caudal view broad at base, sharply narrowed, then
moderately broad to apices; caudo-mesal margin produced cephalad
apically, in dorsal view forceps appear double; heavy pubescence on
caudal margin. Female genital segment about as long as rest of abdomen,
large basally, suddenly narrowed, acuminate; dorsal valve longer than
ventral, acute, styliform portion” slightly upcurved, radulate, spines
retrorse, basal portion with short even pubescence, a tuft of very long

* tantillus -a -um, L. adj—so small,

   

524 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

setae at base of styliform portion; ventral valve acute, a tuft of long setae
on basal portion. Known only from the type series from Salt Lake City, Utah. Type, male, in Snow Collection, University of Kansas. Euphalerus vermiculosus* Crawford
(Figs. 123, 124, 125)

1914 Euphalerus vermiculosus Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:119, 121,
1914 Cephalopsylla ceanothi Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:12,

1917 Euphalerus vermiculosus Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N, Am. 803. 1932 Euphyllerus vermiculosus Klyver, Ent. News. 43:39. 1937 Euphalerus vermiculosus Tuthill, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc. 10:72. 1937 Euphalerus beameri Tuthill, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc. 10:70, 73. Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. Cotor: General color greenish white to yellow, more or less brown
on thoracic dorsum. Forewings hyaline, somewhat yellowish, to whitish
opaque, at least one black spot at apex of clavus, usually fumate along
apical margin, margin alternately black and white. Structure: Head large, as broad as thorax, strongly deflexed, rugose. Vertex somewhat concave, over % as long as wide, discal impressions
broad. Genal processes continuous with vertex, large, bluntly conical,
swollen basally, 34 as long as vertex. Antennae less than 114 times as
Jong as width of head, a small tubercle ventrad of insertion. Eyes large,
strongly recessive. Thorax very strongly arched, both laterally and longi-
tudinally, coarsely granular. Pronotum long, strongly descending, with
small raised prominences laterally. Forewings small, slightly over twice
as long as wide, broadly rounded, rugose; Rs sinuate, long, marginal cells
about equal, pterostigma of moderate size. Hind wings equalling fore-
wings. Hind tibia with basal spur. Geniratta: Male proctiger moderately short, stout, straight, caudal
margin slightly swollen, truncate apically. Forceps in lateral view
straight, slightly swollen toward rounded apices, a large, black tooth
apically, curving cephalo-mesad; in caudal view slender, strongly arched. Female genital segment almost as long as rest of abdomen, stout; dorsal
valve slender apically, upturned, blunt; ventral valve nearly as long as
dorsal, upturned, acute, dorsal margin sinuate. Many specimens of this Ceanothus-inhabiting species are at hand
from California, Oregon, Idaho, and Montana. The form described as E. beameri is not sufficiently distinct to war-
rant a specific designation, the chief difference being in the forewings,
and intermediate forms have come to light. As a matter of fact it appears
that the type specimen of vermiculosus is the form called beameri. Tyre, male, mountains near Claremont, California, Baker, in the
Crawford Collection. * vermiculosus -a -um, L. adj—wormy. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 525,

Euphalerus rugipennis* Crawford

Figs. 126, 127)
1914 Euphalerus rugipennis, Crawford, U. S, Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:119, 120. 1914 Euphalerus rugipennis var. immaculatus Crawford, U. S, Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:121,
1914 Cephalopsylla rugipennis Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus, Bull. 85:121. 1917 Euphalerus rugipennis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 803,
1917 Euphalerus rugipennis var. immaculatus Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip, N. Am. 803,
1937 Euphalerus rugipennis Tuthill, Jour. Kans, Ent. Soc. 10:72. Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 mm,

Coxor:, Usual color uniformly green, more or less completely cov-
ered with small white, spots, sometimes. partly or entirely red. Srrucrure: Head coarsely punctate, as broad as thorax, deflexed. Vertex nearly plane, fully twice as wide as long, anterior margin slightly
bulging medially, discal impressions shallow. Genal processes large,
broad, bluntly rounded, divergent, not contiguous, heavily pubescent, 44
as long as vertex or more, on same plane as vertex. Antennae 114 times
as long as width of head, a small tubercle ventrad of insertion. Thorax
well arched, coarsely punctate. Pronotum descending anteriorly. Fore-
wings coarsely rugose, thickened, semitransparent, twice as long as wide;
Rs sinuate, marginal cells about equal in size, pterostigma rather small,
not prominent. Hind wings nearly equalling forewings. Legs short,
pubescent. Small basal spur on hind tibia. Geniratta: Male proctiger stout, somewhat swollen caudad, For-
ceps straight, heavily pubescent, especially on caudo-mesal margin; in
lateral view moderately slender; in caudal view very slightly arched to
apices which are black and sharply curved mesad; black apical tooth
extending cephalo-mesad, acute. Female genital segment shorter than
rest of abdomen, stout, with long sparse pubescence; dorsal valve sharply
upcurved, subacute, a cluster of small setae at apex; ventral valve shorter
than dorsal, strongly upcurved, acute, dorsal margin sinuate. Many specimens of this beautiful little species are at hand from
numerous localities in Arizona, California, and Oregon. Numerous speci-
mens from California bear the label Ceanothus cuneatus Nutt. One series
of teneral specimens and nymphs from Los Angeles County, California,
bears a label Ceanothus rigidus Nutt. Apparently several species of
Ceanothus may serve as host. Type, male, No. 18099 United States National Museum, Oracle, Ari-
zona, Hubbard and Schwarz. The type is in poor condition, the head and
wings of one side being gone. Type examined. The specimen which Crawford described as E. rugipennis var. im-
maculatus is in the United States National Museum and according to
Oman is merely a teneral specimen. * From rugosus -a -um, L. adj—wrinkled + pennis, L. irr. noun—wing. 526 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Genus Euphyllura* Forster

} insetti ospitanti sull’ olivo e nelle
1839 Thrips O. G. Costa (pro parte), Monogr. deg!’ insetti ospitanti s
olive 2 ed. Napoli 23-25 (larva) [fide Aulmann]. au. 1840 Psylia Boyer de Fons-Colombe (pro parte), Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. 9:111. 3848 Euphyllure Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:93. 1861 Euphyllura Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou 34:337, 416-422. 4872 Euphyllura Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Schw. Ent. Ges. 3:380, 403. 1879 Euphyllura Low, Verh. zool.-bot, Ges. Wien 28:607. 4904 Euphyllura Schwarz, Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash, 6:234. 1912 Euphyllura Oshanin, Kat. palda. Hemip. 126 [designates type]. 1913 Euphyllura Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 67. .
4914 Euphyllura Crawford, U.S, Nat. Mus, Bull. 85:115. 1917 Euphyllura Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 802. 1921 Platystigma Enderlein, Zool. Anz. 6. 1921 Syntomoza Enderlein, Zool. Anz. 52:117. Head large, strongly deflexed, not vertical, as broad as thorax or
broader. Eyes large, elongate, strongly recessive, extending back over
propleurites. Vertex rather flat, more or Jess notched above, or extending
over base of antennae, a tubercle next eye. Genal processes on same
plane as vertex, very broad, blunt, usually rectangular, contiguous. An-
tennae shorter than width of head. Thorax very strongly arched, pro-
notum strongly descending, extending far down laterad. Forewings thom-
boidal, coriaceous, more or less rugose, venation somewhat variable,
pterostigma variable from large to obsolete. Hind tibia without basal
spur, with several black spines apically. Two black claws on basal seg-
ment of metatarsus. LocoryPe: Euphyllura olivina O. Costa. |

Enderlein erected the genus Platystigma for those species which have
a’pterostigma but are without, usually entirely without, cross veins in the
pterostigma and with the cubitus of the hind wings not branched. In this
group he included all of the North American species, some of which
have a pterostigma and some of which do not. As the pterostigma is very
weak and variable in the entire group, I think its presence or absence
cetrainly not of sufficient importance to warrant a separate genus. The
so-called cross. veins in olivina are so slight as to be scarcely significant
specifically. I do not consider the venation of the hind wings of much sig-
nificance as'the entire wings are somewhat vestigial in some members
of the family, and the veins are very weak in almost all, |

‘Syntomoza was distinct from Platystigma: solely in the lack of a
pterostigma. Key to the Species of Euphyllura

1, Veins Rs and M (including branches) of forewing very strongly sinuate. .d M not or but very slightly sinuate wees:
2. Eye elongate "Strongly recessive, extending to mesonotum; forewings brown
ly, light apicall : - vas. -arbuti p. 528. Byer We aeicd not strongly recessive, not covering prothoracie pleurites; fore-
wings uniformly brown

 

 

 

 

  

* Derivation obscure. ‘arbuticola p. 529. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 527. »

Unicolorous red to brown to black

Not unicolorous red to black, forewings with white maculae, entirely light or
entire body and forewings light with minute brown spots. . .
Vertex plane, not swollen nor rounded down anteriorly; genal processes on
same plane as vertex; antennae 24 as long as width of head. . .. .arctostaphyli p. 529. Vertex swollen anteriorly, rounded down to genae; genal processes deflexed
from plane of vertex; antennae ¥4 as long as width of head. .separata p. 532. 5, Forewings red with two transverse white maculae

 

 

 

 

 

 

Forewings unicolorous. .

. Forewings white or cream, head and thoracic dorsum red. ‘7,
Body and forewings whitish with numerous minute brown dots, evenly scattered
over surface; more or less covered with large flaky wax granules... .pruinosa p. 531.

. Forewings with a loose, snowy white pulverulence; female genital segment short,
dorsal valve not sinuate, about as long as ventral - niveipennis p. 531. Forewings cream, without loose pulverulence; female genital segment Jong,
dorsal valve sinuate, attenuate, longer than ventral. sbicolor p. 532.

cS

 

 

 

Euphyllura olivina* (Costa)
(Figs. 128, 129, 130, 257)

1839 Thrips olivinus O. G. Costa, Monogr, degl’insetti ospitanti sull olivo e nelle olive,
2 ed., Napoli pp. 23-25.—Larve [fide Aulmann]. 1840 Psylla oleae Fons-Colombe, Ann. Soc. Ent. Fr. 9:111,

1848 Euphyllura oleae Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein. 5:93. 1857 Euphyllura olivina Costa, Degl'insetti che attacano Y'olivo, ete. 3542 [fide
Aulmann]. 1861 Euphyllura oleae Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou 34:418, 420, 422,
1872 Euphyllura oleae Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Schw. Ent. Ges. 3:403. 1883 Euphyllura olivina Liw, Verh. zool.-bot. Ges. Wien (1882) 32:245,
1908 Euphyllura olivina Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 2:340. 1912 Euphyllura olivina Oshanin, Kat. paliia, Hemip, 126,

1913 Euphyllure olivina Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 67. 1935 Euphyllura olivina Haupt, Tierw. Mittel. 4, 3:227. Length to tip of folded wings 2 mm. Cotor: General color light green. Dorsum more or less embrowned. Forewings dirty white with small brown spots. Srrucrure: Dorsum of head and thorax coarsely punctate. Head
broader than thorax, strongly deflexed. Vertex plane, twice as wide as
long, posterior.margin evenly concave, discal impressions shallow. Genae
smoothly continuous with vertex, produced as broad, rounded, flattened
contiguous lobes. Antennae short, % as long as width of head, arising
beneath projecting edge of vertex. Eyes elongate, strongly recessive, ex-
tending back to mesonotum. Thorax very strongly arched. Pronotum
small, nearly vertical. Forewings twice as long as wide, coriaceous,
rugose, opaque, obliquely narrowed to rounded apex, costal margin
setate; basal vein (R + M + Cu) short, medio-cubital petiole and stem
of R of equal length, Rs long, nearly straight, curved to margin apically,
medial cell elongate, flaring at margin, cubital cell small, pterostigma very
large, as wide as medial cell, rugosity of membrane strong (the “cross
veins” of Enderlein). Membrane of hind wings finely setate. Legs short,
stout. Metatibia with several black spines apically. Proximal segment of

 

* Adjective from oliva, L. £. noun—the olive tree. 528 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

metatarsus with two black spines. Metacoxal spurs very small, rounded. Genrratia: Male proctiger short, stout, straight, slightly swollen
on caudal margin, sharply produced caudad apically. Forceps short, about
¥ as long as proctiger, broadly spatulate. Female genital segment longer
than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve sinuate on dorsal margin, apex blunt;
ventral valve thick, upcurved to acute apex, nearly equalling dorsal. Redescribed from three specimens from “Syra, Graecia” determined
by Léw. Not known to occur in North America, it has been recorded from
Spain, France, Italy, Dalmatia, Liguria (Aulmann). Euphyllura arbuti* Schwarz

1904 Euphyllura arbuti Schwarz, Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash. 6:235, 237-238. 1913 Euphyllura arbuti Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 67. 1914 Euphyllura arbuti Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:17. 1917 Evphyllura arbutl Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip, N’ Am. 802. 1921 Platystigma arbuti Enderlein, Zool. Anz, “

1923 Euphyllura arbuti Ferris and Hyatt, Can. Ent, 55:88-92 [life history, nymph
1928 Bephyllura arbuti Ferris, Can. Ent. 60:116. 1932 Euphyllura arbuti Klyver, Ent. News 43:39. Length to tip of folded wings 3.25 to 4 mm. Coxor: General color yellow to brown. Darker on vertex and thor-
acic dorsum. A broad brown macula on forewings extending from base
obliquely to anal margin distad of apex of clavus. Srructure: Finely punctate, glabrous, shining. Head broader than
thorax, strongly deflexed. Vertex plane, twice as wide as long, posterior
margin nearly straight, emarginate anteriorly over antennae, discal im-
pressions very slight. Genae continuous with vertex, produced as trun-
cate, contiguous lobes %4 as long as vertex. Antennae slender, slightly
over 3 as long as width of head. Eyes slender and very strongly reces-
sive, extending back to mesonotum. Thorax very strongly arched. Pro-
notum moderately long, straight, nearly vertical. Forewings coriaceous,
rugose, semitransparent, obliquely rounded from apex of clavus to
rounded apex at costa, twice as long as wide; Rs and M, including
branches, very strongly sinuate, medial cell slender, sinuate, cubital small,
R, extending nearly straight to costa, no pterostigma, a slight notch in
costa proximad R,. Membrane of hind wings thickly set with minute
setae. Gentraia: Male proctiger straight, longer than forceps. Forceps
long, straight; in lateral view moderately slender, apices excavate
cephalically leaving a blunt black-tipped tooth. Female genital segment
shorter than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve straight, evenly tapered,
subacute, longer than ventral; ventral valve straight, tapered to acute
apex. This species is represented in the material ‘at hand by specimens
from Jamesburg, Sargent, and Boulder Creek, California, and from
Grants Pass and Canyonville, Oregon. Recorded from British Columbia

  

* Genitive of Arbutus—the generic name of the host plant. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 529

by Klyver. Its host plant is madrone, Arbutus menziesii. Ferris and
Hyatt discuss the life history and habits in detail. The nymphs live in
waxen cells, usually under scales of the bark. Breeding apparently oc-
curs throughout the year. Tyre, male, No. 8145 United States National Museum, Santa Cruz
County, California, Koebele. ‘Type examined. Euphyllura arbuticola* Crawford

1914 Euphyllura arbuticola Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. & 8. 1917 Euphyllure arbuticola Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 8
1921 Platystigma arbuticola Enderlein, Zool. Anz, 52:116. “This species resembles very closely arbuti in most respects, includ-
ing size and general color, but differs in the color of the forewing, being
uniformly darker brown and not bicolored, with sometimes a lighter
area across the base; the venter is darker than in arbuti. Body a little
more rugose. Genal lobes shorter, and more squarely truncate; antennae
slightly shorter. Head and thorax similar. Wings somewhat larger, thick-
er, more rugose; veins even more sinuate. “The chief difference is in the male genitalia; anal valve stouter,
relatively shorter; forceps distinctly thicker, without apical emargination
on anterior edge, and with a distinct tooth on posterior edge inside about
14 the length from apex, broadly rounded at apex. “Described from six males and four females from Chiric Mountains,
Arizona (H. G. Hubbard), on Arbutus arizonica, in September,

“Type No. 18098, United States National Museum.”—Crawford. One female which is apparently this species is at hand from the
Huachuca Mountains, Arizona, Aug. 22. From it I add the following:
Antennae thicker than in arbuti. Eyes much smaller, scarcely recessive,
not covering prothorax laterally. Forewing not as elongate and slender
apically. Type examined. Euphyllura arctostaphylit Schwarz
(Figs, 131, 132, 133)

1904 Euphyllura arctostaphyli Schwarz, Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash. 6:234-236. 1913 Euphyllura arctostaphili Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 67. 1914 Euphyllura arctostaphyli Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:116. 1917 Euphyllura arctostaphyli Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 802. 1921 Platystigma arctostaphili Enderlein, Zool. Anz. 52:116. 1928 Euphyliura arctostaphyli Ferris, Can. Ent, 60:116. 1930 Euphyllura arctostaphyli Klyver, Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash. 32:153-160. 1931 Euphyllura arctostaphyli Martin, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc. 4:69. 1932 Euphyllura arctostaphyli Klyver, Ent. News 43:38. 1932 Euphyllura arctostaphyli Klyver, Pan-Pac, Ent. 8:15. * From Arbutus—the host plant + cola—inhabitant. 7 Genitive of Arctostaphylos—the generic name of the host plant. 530 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

Length to tip of folded wings 2.0 to 3.5 mm,

Cotor: General color reddish to reddish brown, variable from light
to very dark. Legs lighter to yellowish. Forewings generally brownish,
veins red. Entire body punctate, with more or less short pubescence. Srrucrure: Head large, broad, as broad as thorax or slightly
broader, strongly deflexed. Vertex plane, nearly straight-margined
posteriorly, very deeply emarginate anteriorly over insertion of antennae,
forming a tubercle next the eyes, nearly twice as wide as long, discal
impressions slight. Genal processes continuous with vertex, short, very
broad, roundly truncate, contiguous. Antennae distinctly shorter than
width of head, % as long or more. Thorax broad, very strongly arched. Pronotum sharply descending anteriorly. Forewings about twice as long
as wide, thickened, coriaceous, somewhat rugose, surface very rough,
somewhat rhomboidal, a more or less prominent notch on costal margin
opposite furcation of R; cubital petiole longer than R, Rs moderately long,
straight, turned to costa, marginal cells large, medial broadly flaring,
branches of media slightly sinuate, R; angling, indistinct near costa, no
definite pterostigma. Hind wings thickly set with minute setae. Genrratra: Male proctiger nearly straight, slightly swollen, apex
slightly produced caudad. Forceps nearly as long as proctiger, spatulate,
enlarged apically; in caudal view slender, slightly arched, apices touching. Female genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve
slender apically, nearly straight to blunt apex; ventral valve nearly as
long as dorsal, upturned, acute. This species is very abundant on several species of manzanita
(Arctostaphylos) in the western part of North America. It shows a great
deal of variation in most characters. Schwarz (1904) named the variety
niveipennis which was raised to specific rank by Klyver in 1930 after a
detailed study of both forms. He describes and figures the principal dif-
ferences. Martin in 1931 added two more to the list of named variations. These four forms can be quite easily separated in most instances. Iam not
convinced that they represent distinct species, however, but I believe it
will be less confusing to retain the names until such time as some careful
biological work shall determine the status of this complex. In 1920 Crawford named the color variety E. arctostaphyli bifasciata
which differs from the typical form solely in color and is evidently a true
color variety. Specimens are at hand from numerous localities in California, Oregon,
Washington, Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, Montana, ‘and Mafeking,
Manitoba. It is also recorded from Wyoming by Crawford, and from
Nevada and British Columbia by Klyver. Specimens at hand are from various species of Arctostaphylds: A.
pungens H. B. K., A. tomentosa Pur., A. patula Greene, A. montana East,
A. glauca Lindl., A. canescens East, and A. viscida Parry. Type No. 8143 United States National Museum, several specimens on
one pin, Placer County, California, Koebele. ‘Types examined. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF ‘AMERICA 531

Euphyllura arctostaphyli var. bifasciata* Crawford
1920 Euphyllura arctostaphyli var. bifasciata Crawford, Ent. News 31:13,

Similar to species except forewings wi i
e gs with two white areas, one a

broad band across wing basally, the other more irregular, oblique, neat
apex, not extending entirely across the wing to anal margin. ,

_ From the material at hand this pattern variation
ubiquitously with the typically colored individuals. seems 1 occur

| PE, female, Placer County, California, August 24, 19:
Giffard, No. 463 California Academy of Sciences (Crawford), MWe Me

Euphyllura niveipennist Schwarz

(Fig. 134)
1904 Euphyllura arctostaphyli niveipennis Sch’ 5 236-2
1913 Euphyllura arctostaphili nivetpennie “Aulmarn, Bore ‘ee S205, 236-287. 1d Euphyllura arctostaphyli neveipennis Crawford, U, 8. Nat, Mus., Bull, 85:117. 1917 Euphyllura arctostaphyli niveipennis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip, N. Am. 802. 1930 Euphyllura neveipennis Klyver, Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash. 32:153°160. 1931 Euphyllura neveipennis Martin, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc. 4:69. " 1982 Euphyllura neveipennis Klyver, Ent. News 43:38. _ Similar to E. arctostaphyli, differing in the followin :
wings snowy white, pulverulent, due to what appearsc bes lene ones
deposit (Klyver, 1930, states that it is “small colorless chitinized plates”)
often a few bright red spots on margin; female genital segment distinctly
shorter, valves equal in length, dorsal valve not slender and attenuate
but more nearly acute and slightly downcurved apically, entire segment
thickly set with short fine setae of equal length, giving it a very distinctive
appearance; male forceps broader from base, not enlarged apically, more
tapered apically in lateral view and slightly curved cephalad

For an exhaustive discussion of the differences between these two
forms, see Klyver, 1930. In the large series of arctostaphyli at hand the
range of size isso great that it includes that of niveipennis aso

pecimens are at hand from sever: ies in Californi

them from Arctostaphylos viscida Pony. vonalites im California, some of

Tyres, 12 specimens on 1 pin, No. i 7
seum, Placer County, California, Kocbele |? States National Mu-

Types examined. Euphyllura pruinosat Martin
1931 Euphyllwra pruinosa Martin, Jour. Kans. Ent. Soc. 4:69. Similar to E. arctostaphyli except as follows: More pubescent, en-

tire body including forewings more or less covered with flaky white wax
deposit apparently secreted by the setae which cover the body; general

color of body light yellow, with scattered red punctations, medio-anterior

* From bi, L. prefix—two + fasciatus, L. Q rt of i
jFrom niveus'~a -um, L. adj—snowy -f penvis, Ly ie noun ee
Epruinosus ~a -um, L. adj-frosty, >) 7 Pen" 1 fr noun—wing. 532 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

portion of prescutum. and four broad longitudinal ‘stripes a on
‘ yhite with numerous very smal pots,
are ery apically female genitalia similst to serctostephy male more
ike niveipennis, fort broader in lateral view. like néveipennis, foreer td from numerous localities in California talven
on Avetostaphylos pungens, H. B. K., A. glauca Lindl., and A. me
: y i distinct in appear-
ted that although this form is very 008
ance ne Poctaphy the differences are almost solely in color, greater
d presence of a prominent waxy leposit. | . Pee, inale, San Diego County, California, in Snow Collection, Uni-
versity of Kansas. Euphyllura bicolor* Martin

i i Kans. Ent, Soc. 4:69, 70. 1931 Euphyllura bicolor Martin, Jour. ° :

Similar to E. arctostaphyli from which it differs as fons caer
(35 to 4.5 mm. in length); general color yellow, with siall red spots,
G8 ted thoracic dorsum almost entirely red; forewings cream Crt. ning pulverulent as in niveipennis,
opaatue, (not appearing Pot very large; female genital segment longer,
Tre eer atmute, atenuate, downeurved to Sunt Bey Bubs
i ivei is but not as thick. ale a
more as in niveipenn’s tently larger than the preceding three in the
ti vial at hand The female genitalia js its most distinctive feature o! mate! l,

tae Se neTOUS specimens are before me from various localities in Cali-
‘um«

i i indl.,
fornia, from several species of Arctostaphylos including 4- glauca Lind,
fornia, nite, Parry, A. zacaensis East, A, patula Greene, and
dulosa Nast. Je, Alpine, California, in Snow Collection, University of

“Kansas. Euphyllura separatay n. sp. (Figs. 149, 150, 296)

ip of folded wings 2.25 to 2.75 mm. ,

ae “General color red to black, Forewings very thickly strewn

i 1 ts except at tip of clavus. .
with see “Head and thorax punctate. Head and. prothoy ax
vertical. Vertex with broad Giseal impressions, oe as wi de as long. i ded down to ant >
seat p ater oduced as a blunt lobe next to eyes. Genal processes
genal process rate, scarcely contiguous, not deflexed from Dia’
verncx ‘Antennae very short, not much over ¥2 as long as wi
vertex. Tic bicL, prefixctwo + color ~oris, L, m. noun—col0r. }separatus -a -um, L. adj—distinet. ae

    

ge

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 533

Thorax very strongly arched. Prothorax straight. Prescutum strongly
deflexed. Forewings slightly rhomboidal, rounded apically, rugose, thick-
ened, not notched on costal margin, twice as long as wide; Rs straight to
near apex then curved to costa, branches of media strongly divergent,
straight, medial cell larger than cubital, pterostigma lacking. Genrratra: , Male proctiger long, slightly tapering apically. Forceps
spatulate,, straight; in lateral view broad, narrowed apically. --Female
genital segment very large, much longer than rest of abdomen; dorsal
valve tapering to acute, upturned apex, dorsal margin sinuate; ventral
valve thick, shorter than dorsal, evenly upcurved to acute apex. Described from 2 females and 8 males bearing the data, “10 miles west
of Bend, Oregon, June 21, 1939, Gray and Schuh.”

Hotoryre, female, aLLoryPs, male, and paratypes in the collection of
Oregon State College. Paratypes in author's collection. Genus Pachypsylla* Riley
1861 Psylla Osten-Sacken (pro parte), Ent. Zeit. 22:422. 1883 Pachypsylla Riley, Can. Ent. 15:157. 1885 Pachypsylla Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 2:71. 1885 Pachypsylla (Blastophysa) Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 2:74,
1913 Pachypsylla Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 29. 1914 Pachypsylla Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull
1917 Pachypsylla Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N.

 

1, 85:108 {designates type]. \. 799. Head small, vertical. Eyes hemispherical, lateral. Ocelli large. Ver-
tex plane or somewhat rounded anteriorly, quadrate, broader anterior
to eyes than on posterior margin. Genae produced as short lobate pro-
cesses, depressed strongly from plane of vertex. Antennae short, about
as long as width of head. Thorax large, strongly arched. Forewings more
or less rhomboidal, often opaque or semiopaque, rugose, punctate, or
covered with disc-shaped cuticular thickenings, M + Cu with common
base, marginal cells more or less elongate, pterostigma present, small to
moderate size. Hind wings with prominent venation, at least basal vein
(R + M + Cu) heavily sclerotized. Hind tibia without basal spur, with
several small black spurs apically. Basal segment of metatarsus with two
black claws. Metacoxal spurs, large, stout, blunt. Logotype: Pachypsylla venusta Osten-Sacken. Riley in 1883 mentioned, in a short article on the galls of Celtis, that
these insects belonged to a new genus which in a paper he had prepared
was called Pachypsylla. He then proceeded to give a short characteriza-
tion of the genus. The aforementioned paper did not appear until two
years later. ‘The genus is composed entirely of gall-forming species which inhabit -
Celtis spp., the hackberries. It is known only from North America. Boselli (1929b) described the nymph of an unknown species of psyllid
forming galls on Celtis sinensis in China which may belong to Pachypsylla. The subgenus Blastophysa was erected by Riley for P. celtidis-

+ From pachys, Gr. adj.—thick, large + psylla. 534 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

gemma. The differences between it and the other species are insufficient
to warrant any such distinction, however. Key to the Species of Pachypsylla

1, Head and thoracic dorsum with short stiff pubescence, not shining; marginal
cells of forewings very elongate; forewings not rugose . cece ee Qe
Giead and’ thorax Appearing glabrous, shining (often with sparse, minute 4
pubescence); marginal cells les elongate, broad; forewings more or less rugose. 4+
. Large species (5.5 to 6 mm.). . -venusta p. 534. Smaller species (4 mm. or less)

Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 4 mm. Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 mm. or less. Forewings uniformly brown. Forewings maculate. . . Branches of media sinuate. . . Branches of media not sinuate
. Forewings finely mottled apically. Forewings with large maculae (sometimes

 

  
    
  
 
  
 

“celtidis-mamma p. 536. “celtidis-vesicula p. 538.
celtidis-gemma p. 539.

   

  
 
     

ae fF PN

laubia p. 541.
pallida p. 541. Pachypsylla venusta* (Osten-Sacken)
(Figs. 137, 138, 139, 140)

-sylla venusta Osten-Sacken, Ent. Zeit. 22:422. .
1906 Palle ecluudis-grendie Hiley, Johnson's Univ. Cyel. (gall) [fide Riley]
1883 Pachypsylla venusta Riley, Can. Ent. ae" (gall only). I Psylla venusta‘*Fyles, Can. Ent. , . -
ies Pachypeylla pemista Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 2:70, 72 [describes]. 1885 Pachypeylla venusta Riley, 5th Rept, U. S, Ent. Comm, 615-617. 1894 Pachypsylla venusta Maly, Broc. ta. Acad. i. 1, 4:137. 1895 Pach: lla venusta Mally, Proc Ia. Acad. a
1912 Pachypsylla tridentata Patch, Me, Agr. Exp. Sta, Bull. 202:224. 1913 Pachypsylla venusta Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 30. 1914 Pachypsylla venusta Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:109. 1917 Pachypsylla venusta an Dues, Cat. Hemip- N, Am. 799. 1923 Pachypsylla venusta Patch, Hemip. Conn. 247. .
1926 Pachypsylla venusta Ferris, Can, Ent. 58:13-15 [describes and figs. nymph]. 1929 Pachypsylla venusta Boselli, Boll. Lab. Zool, Gen. e Agr. Port, 22:204-218. 1932 Pachypsylla venusta Klyver, Ent. News 43:38. 1938 Pachypsylla venusta Brimley, Ins. N.C. 104. 1938 Pachypsylla venusta Caldwell, Ohio Biol, Surv., Bull, 34:255. Length to tip of folded wings 5 to 5.5 mm. |

Cotor: General color tawny with numerous black markings, latter
often so extensive that general color black, markings tawny would be
more accurate.. Dorsum of thorax longitudinally striped. Forewings
whitish, maculate in well-colored specimens with black as follows: a
broad band of small spots across apical third becoming more dense
apically, a clear rectangular area on margin between the apices
of each pair of veins; small single maculae at base of pterostigma, along
basal vein and R, at furcation of M and Cu and two or three on anal
margin. Antennae with dark annulus on apex of each segment. Srrucrure: Entire body punctate, head coarsely. Head much nar-
yower than thorax, vertical. Eyes large, hemispherical. Vertex plane,

  

 

  

 

*Venustus -a -m, L, adj—beautiful. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 535

quadrate, emarginate posteriorly, rounded to genae anteriorly, %4 as
long as wide, discal impressions small, foveate. Genal processes lobate,
strongly divergent, heavily pubescent, about 14 as long as vertex, much. depressed from plane of vertex but parallel to it. Antennae slightly
longer than width of head. Thorax very strongly arched, very short
sparse pubescence dorsally. Pronotum strongly descending, nearly verti-
cal, long. Prescutum large, descending anteriorly. Forewings large,
hyaline, rhomboidal, slightly over 24% times as long as wide, membrane
thickly set with minute setae, veins biseriately set with small setae; Rs
long, slightly sinuate, marginal cells elongate, cubital larger than medial,
M + Cu ¥% as long as R, pterostigma of moderate size. Hind wings nearly
equalling forewings, thickly set with minute setae. venation prominent,
R-+M + Cu heavily sclerotized. Legs large, heavily pubescent, hind
tibia with small basal tubercle. Geniratia: Male proctiger short, stout, roundingly produced caudad,
near apex sharply emarginate, apical epiphysis thus formed sharply
flexed caudad. Forceps in lateral view broad basally, strongly narrowed
then slightly tapering to subacute apices; in caudal view moderately
broad basally, tapering to. incurved subacute tips. Female genital seg-
ment very large, longer than rest of abdomen; dorsal valve straight,
apical third slender, roughened, apex acute, upturned; ventral valve
roughened toward apex, gently upturned, acute. Baron Osten-Sacken in an article on the Galls of North America
describes the galls he found on the leaf petioles of Celtis occidentalis and
then says, “I reared therefrom a beautiful large Psylla, (P. venusta n. sp.) with black-flecked wings. The peculiar form of the apex of the metaster-
num and of the wing veins will no doubt make it necessary to erect a new
genus for this species.” Since this mention of the insect constitutes a
description under the rules of nomenclature it is fortunate that he was
dealing with this species since the gall is quite typical in this instance. The galls are large (ave. 1 to 1:5 em. in diameter), more or less
spherical, not completely closed on one side and form on the leaf petioles. They remain attached to the tree usually, the mature insects emerging
in the spring when the temperature becomes sufficiently high. They may
be brought out during the winter by bringing them into a warm room. The last stadium nymph crawls from the gall and emerges as the adult
very shortly thereafter. The galls are polythalamous. Known from Iowa, Kansas, Colorado, Texas. New Mexico, Ohio,
Mississippi, Tennessee, North Carolina, New Jersey, and Connecticut. It is undoubtedly much more widespread throughout the range of its host. 536 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

Pachypsylla celtidis-mamma* (Fletcher)
(Fig. 258) . 1876 Psylla celtidis-mamma Riley, Johnson’s Univ. Cycl. (gall) [fide Riley, Can. Ent,

1883 Boyle “celtidis-mamma Fletcher, Rept. Ent. Soc. Ont. 1882, 13th:79-80 [reprint
of Riley 1876 and describes insect]. 1883 Psylla celtidis-mamma Fletcher, Can. Ent. 15:40. 1
1883 Pachypsylla celtidis-mamma Riley, Can, Ent, 15:157-158 [gl]. .
idis~ n. Ent, 15:199. :
iss Pashypeylla celtdis namin Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 2:73 [detailed desc.]. 1890 Pachypsylla c. mamma Riley, 5th Rept. U. S. Ent. Comm. 615, 616, 619. 1894 Pachypsylla celtidis-mamma Mally, Proc. Ia. Acad. Sei. 1, 4:131-137,
1805 Pachypeylla celtidis-mamma Mally, Proc. la: Acad. Sei. 2:154.
tla i Cockerell, Ent. News 21:180. : ;
iso Packypeulla ‘Celtidis-mammae ‘Stough, Kans, Univ. Sci. Bull. 5, No. 9:121-165,
pl. XXVI-XXXV [morphology]. .
1933-Pachypsylle celtidis-mamma Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 30. ‘ato
1814 Pochypsylla c. -mamma Crawford, U. &. Nat. Mus», Bull. 85:110,
1817 Pochypsylia ceiidis-mamma Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip. N. Am, 800,
lla celtidis-mamma , Hemip. Conn, 247. 1929 Pechspeutla celsidis- mamma Bosell, Bell Lab, Zool, Gen, © Agr. Port. 22:204-218,

43:38.
tess Pachupevtle cgi oe Sages Ono Bit Surv, Bull. 34:257. Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 4mm. Cour: General color dull brownish yellow with many variable black
and brown markings. Antennae with dark annulus apically on each
segment. Forewings white with numerous small round brown spots
usually more or less fused each side of an oblique subapical band almost
free of them. Markings extremely variable, especially on the forewing. Very commonly a large irregular macula appears centrally, occasionally
this is very sharp and dark with the remainder of the wing almost
immaculate. Srructure: Entire body punctate with short pubescence, most
prominently on head and thoracic dorsum. Head narrower than thorax,
vertical. Vertex plane, nearly quadrate, 24 as long as wide, discal im~
pressions broad, shallow. Genal processes depressed from plane of vertex
but parallel to it, short, strongly divergent, bluntly rounded, 14 as long
as vertex, heavily pubescent. Antennae about 4/5 as long as width of
head, arising far down on head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum nearly
vertical. Prescutum large. Forewings 2% times as long as wide, very
slightly rhomboidal, surface covered with minute circular plates, veins
very prominent, biseriately setate; Rs long, somewhat sinuate, marginal
cells very elongate, equal in length, medial broader, M + Cu very short,
¥ as long as R, pterostigma large, yellowish. Legs long. _

Genrratia: Entire genital segment of male heavily pubescent. Proctiger stout, slightly enlarged from base to near apex then sharply
emarginate on caudal margin, a large apical epiphysis thus formed, flexed

 

 

 

 

* Genitive of Celtis the generic name of its host plant -}+ mamma ~ae, L. f. noun—
breast (a reference to the shape of the galls formed by this insect), ‘The form of this
and the following three names is extremely poor. They are basically trinomial; how-
ever, as they were used as binomials, they must stand. See

 

eRe

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 537

caudad. Forceps stout; in lateral view anterior margin somewhat sinuate,
narrowed apically to subacute apices; in caudal view moderately stout
basally, arched and tapered to acute apices. Female genital segment
shorter than rest of abdomen, slender; dorsal valve straight, attenuate
apically, tip acute; ventral valve shorter than dorsal, slightly, evenly,
upcurved to acute apex. . The. galls formed by this species occur on the leaves of hackberry,
developing into a more or less mammiform growth on the underside of the
leaf. On the upper surface of the leaf a depression forms, cupping down
into the gall. The shape of the gall itself is quite variable, often with a
nipple-like tip, sometimes conical, glabrous or pubescent, ete. Usually
they are monothalamous. The adults emerge in the fall, overwinter in crevices of bark, ete. ;
early in the spring they fly to the twigs, and after mating, the females be-
gin to deposit eggs about as soon as the leaves begin to appear. The
nymphs feed on the lower side of the leaves and are soon enclosed in the
gall. There is but one generation per year, the nymphs reaching maturity
in September. :

In 1876 Riley in an article on “Galls” in Johnson’s Universal Cyclo-
paedia (which I have not seen) discussed the gall formation of this entire
group in a very general way. Fletcher (1883) purports

   

Fletcher in the above-mentioned article unfortunately proceeds to di
cuss the coloration and some of the structure of the insect and thus be-
comes the author of the species since Riley's original use of the name is
an utter nomen nudum, and his detailed description Which he headed
“n. sp.” did not appear until 1885. Fletcher mentions no specific speci-
mens and undoubtedly kept none, so Riley's designated types in the
United States National Museum stand as the type specimens. There are
numerous cotypes in the series on four pins, the type number being 657. The type of Pachypsylla rohweri Cockerell (No. 18476) is in thé
National Museum and is in my opinion identical with celtidis-mamma. -

The variation in this species is quite marked, especially the colora-
tion, most markedly the wing pattern, so much so that when first en-
countered it appears that several species must be present. Fortunately,
the insect is very abundant throughout its range and thus almost all
of those who have dabbled in the group have come to the conclusion that
the variants are so numerous and diverse that they are indistinguishable
and inconstant. Riley, apparently assuming that the shape of a gall was an extremely
accurate and highly constant specific character (even more so than the
structure of the insect) proposed names for a species of Pachypsylla
for each different shape of gall that he found. With these names he
described the galls in detail but made no mention whatsoever of the
insects. In a preliminary statement, however, he said “the yet un-
described species are all so closely allied to P. c-mamma that they can only

538 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

he distinguished with difficulty.” Elsewhere (Can. Ent. 15:158) he says
of one of them “P, c-mamma so closely resembles another species (P.
c-cucurbita M. S. mihi), however, that without the galls it would be
difficult, if not impossible to separate them—a not uncommon occurrence
among gall-making species.” Anyone rearing these insects from the galls
and not blinded by the above assumption of infallible gall specificity
must soon come to the conclusions reached by Mally (1849) that, “the
shape and size of the gall is not at all constant ... It was found that
P, c.-mamma occurred in all the different variations, thus showing that
these variations are not of specific importance.” Fortunately, the series
of names proposed by Riley stand as nomina nuda. Some few of them
have cluttered up the literature of galls, however, and do until the present
time. ‘This species frequently becomes a nuisance in the house in autumn
when seeking hibernation quarters. Large numbers often collect on the
screens, which barrier they readily penetrate and move into the house-
hold to hide for the winter. Typically, they seek shelter in the rough bark
of the hackberry and other trees. Thave seen specimens of this very abundant animal from, or definite
records are available of its occurrence in, the following states and
provinces: Colorado, Texas, Arizona, Utah, Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska,
Towa, Minnesota, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, North Carolina, New Jersey,
New York, Connecticut, and Ontario. It undoubtedly occurs, however, throughout the range of its host
species, hackberry (Celtis occidentalis L.

 

Pachypsylla celtidis-vesicula* Crawford

1890 Pachypsylla celtidis-vesiculum Riley, 5th Rept. U. S, Ent. Comm, 618 (gall]. 1895 Pachypsylla celtidis-vesiculum Mally, Proc. la. Acad. Sci. 2:154 [lists]. 1913 Pachypsylla celtidis-vesiculum Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 30 [lists]. 1914 Pachypsylla c.-vesiculum Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:112 [describes]. 1917 Pachypsylla celtidis-vesiculum Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip. N. Am. 801. 1923 Pachypsylla celtidis-vesiculum Patch, Hemip. Conn. 247. 1938 Pachypsylla celtidis-vesiculum Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull. 34:259. Length to tip of folded wings 2 to 2.5 mm. This form is very similar to celtidis-mamma but seems to be a dis-
tinct species. It is distinctly smaller; the wing pattern is often more or
Jess diffuse. Other minor differences have been noted by Crawford and
Caldwell, none of which will hold when a large series from various
Jocalities is studied. The sudden narrowing midway of the ventral valve
of the female genital segment is the most constant of these. The gall formed on the leaves of the hackberry is of a quite differ-
ent type from that of celtidis-mamma; it is plister-like and more promi-
nent on the upper than on the lower surface. Very many galls are
frequently found on the same leaf, and they are found on the same leaf

  
 

 

= vesicula -ae, L. £, noun—little blister (the improper ending used by Riley and
others is here corrected). ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 539

with celtidis-mamma galls. This species is extremely abundant. It over-
winters in the adult stage as does its relative and in company with it
sometimes becomes a household nuisance in the fall. All uses of the name cestidis-vesiculwm until 1914 are nomina nuda. Although the gall was often described, no one mentioned the insect until
Crawford discussed it briefly in his monograph. It is known from Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, Arizona,
Louisiana, Ohio, New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut. It doubt. lessly occurs throughout the range of its host (Celtis). No type has ever been designated; the cotypic series i
in Crawford’s collection. *P ia presmmably

Pachypsylla celtidis-gemma* Riley
Fig. 259)

1885 Pachypsylla (Blastophysa) ¢.~gemma Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 2:
1800 Pochypevlla Sogemmna Riley, Sik Rept. U.S, Ent, Comm, 15, 616, 618. 1804 Pachypeylla eagemma Mally, Proc. Ta. Acad, Sci 1, 4:138. °

-achypsyt lastophysa) celtidis-gemma Mally, Proc. Ia. Acad. a
1913 Pachypsylla (Blastophysa) celtidis-gemma Aalann Boy Cat 36. 215
1914 Pachypsylla c.-gemma Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:112. 1917 Pachypsylla celtidis-gemma Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip. N. Am. 801. 9-21. 1921 Pachypsylla celtidis-gemma, Weiss, :
1923 Pachypsylla celtidi ‘vemip. Conn, 2

1923 Pocl idis-gemma Patch, Hemip. Conn. 247. :
Zen Pookypelleceltde-gemma Brinley ra S.C. gg.” SS

Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 3.5 mm. _ Coto: General color brownish yellow, vertex and legs darker, fore-

wings evenly brown, opaque. ,

Srrucrure: Head much narrower than thorax, vertical, coarsely
punctate, shining. Vertex straight on posterior margin, quadrate, rounded
down to genal processes anteriorly, 4 as long as wide, discal impressions
small, foveate. Genal processes short, rounded, strongly divergent, 44 as
long as vertex, pubescent, much depressed from plane of vertex but on
nearly parallel plane. Antennae a little longer than width of head. Thorax large, very strongly arched, shining, glabrous. Pronotum nearly
vertical. Prescutum large. Forewings slightly over twice as long as
wide, narrowly rounded apically, costal margin slightly concave at ptero-
stigma, rugoso-punctate, strongly convex, veins scarcely raised from sur-
face except basally; Rs short, nearly straight, marginal cells of moderate
size, equal, not extremely elongate, M; slightly sinuate, R nearly twice
as long as M + Cu, pterostigma very small. Hind wings nearly equalling
forewings, thickly set with minute setae, venation prominent. Legs
long, heavily pubescent. Genrratia: Male proctiger stout, roundly swollen caudad, with a
prominent epiphysis. Forceps short; in lateral view straight, broadest
basally, apically tapered to subacute tips; in caudal view stout, strongly

um Bem gemma -ae, L. f, noun—bud (of the plant), in reference to the position of

540 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

arched to acute apices. Female genital segment slender, shorter than rest
of abdomen; dorsal valve slightly upeurved, tip subacute; ventral valve
evenly upcurved to acute apex, nearly as long as dorsal. The shining head and thorax of this species and those following
readily distinguish them from the preceding forms. The adults appear in
the spring (April and May in Iowa), having overwintered as nymphs in
the galls. The galls are formed from the ‘axillary buds on the twigs,
usually they are polythalamous. Weiss (1921) gives @ detailed account
of the life history. Specimens are at hand from Maryland, New Jersey, St. Catharine’s
Island, Georgia, lowa, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Louisiana. It is
also recorded from Virginia, District of Columbia, New York, Connecti-
cut, Ohio, and Missouri. Numerous corypes (galls, nymphs, and adults), No. 658, United
States National Museum. Pachypsylla celtidis-inteneris* Mally

     

i914 Pachypsylla inteneris Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus
134 packypsylla inteneris Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip. N. Am, 01,
See yeeeuila ungulata Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull. 34:255, 256-257. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 4mm. Cotor: General color dark brown to lack. Vertex and thoracic
dorsum with more or less yellow, sometimes entirely yellow. Forewings
hyaline except for an irregular macula usually as follows: black along
pterostigma becoming dark brown and continuing around apex as a broad
band onto tip of clavus, extending along Cu and basal vein, sometimes
extending across to costa, leaving an jsolated clear area medially, or
entire basal 34 dark. Srrucrure: Head narrower than thorax, vertical. Vertex coarsely
punctate, shining, with sparse minute pubescence, quadrate, strongly
rounded down anteriorly, posterior margin straight, 34 as long as wide,
discal foveae very small. Genal processes short, blunt, scarcely diver-
gent, 14 as long. as vertex, sparsely pubescent, strongly depressed from
plane of vertex. Antennae stout, slightly longer than width of head. Thorax strongly arched, shining. Pronotum descending but not vertical. Forewings somewhat rugose (less so than in celtidis-gemma), shining,
2% times as long as wide, rounded apically; Rs nearly straight, long,
marginal cells large, equal, branches of M sinuate, M: more strongly so,
pterostigma small. Hind wings thickly set with minute setae, venation
prominent, Legs large, heavily pubescent. Genrratra: Male proctiger in lateral view stout, straight, slightly
swollen caudally, with a prominent epiphysis apically. Forceps in lateral

 

 

+ Possibly from in, a negative particle + tener -era -erum, L, adj—tender. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 541

Miew moderately ‘broad, basally enlarged, then tapered to apices; in
road basally, arched, narrowed on lateral margins in api
¥% to acute apices. Female genital see setae than vent at
. genital segment slender, short
abdomen; dorsal valve straight, api i Thor ta nubecate copes
; ght, apical portion slender t 5
ventral valve shorter, suddenly narrowed 3% of way 0 coon
ast his species is quite similar to celtidis-gemma from which it can be
distinguished by the maculate forewings end the venation, chiefly the
ranches of media. The adults emerge in thi rt

a : n the spring from the galls
which are located beneath the bark on the twigs or bases of the larger

The type series, three females, is in th

series, thre , e Towa State College Collecti
A female beating Mally’s type labe, reared from a gall by iim, at Ames,
is designated as the lectotype. When Caldwell was working’ with this
genus in Ohio, he inquired as to the whereabouts of the type of this
species At that time Mally’s specimens were hidden away where they
noticed apparently since his departure from Ai

Caldwell was informed that none of Mally's mere neve; he

d d ally’s specimens were here;
therefore proceeded with his description of P. ungulata, I Nave at hand
@ Specimen of ungulata, and it is without doubt inteneris although much

colored than any of the types which are all
Known from Iowa, Ilinois, and Ohio. somewhat teneral

Pachypsylla dubia* Patch

1912 Pachypsylla dubia Patch, Me. Agr. Ex: :
1914 Pachypeytie dubia Crawford, US. New: Mug, Bull 852113,
1917 Pachypsylla dubia Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 801.

cones whe saw the types. of this species, has the following to say
: : ve examined a paratype of this and the followir
species (pallida), and both seem to be dist ‘ma though
, t from c.-gemma th
closely related, The chief difference is in _ oomnee the
y rel . th t
forewing instead of being uniformly brown. # mottled appearance of the

“Seven paratypes in the collecti
“Sev ction of Corn iversi
locality is not given for any of them.” ell University, but the
iss Patch in her original descripti
igi iption says no more—rath: i
less—as she apparently had no specimens of e-genma, Hae
There are no further records of the occurrence of this form. Pachypsylla pallida} Patch
1912 Pachypsylla pallida Patch, Me. Agr. E: :
1914 Pachypsylte pallida Crawlores US Nat Mus, Bull, Sel13. 917 Pachypsylla pallida Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 801. —
Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. oor: General color greenish yellow to ‘i

, y yellowish brown. Prescutt
especially of a green cast. Forewings hyaline or somewhat whitish except

* dubius -a -um, L. ad
+ pallidus <a “um, Le adj

   
 
 

incertain, doubtful. pale. 542 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

for dark maculae as follows: three broad transverse bands, one apical,
one crossing base of medial cell, the third arising at costal angle, extend-
ing obliquely to apex of clavus, all three converging on anal margin at
tip of clavus, latter two quite irregular. Pterostigma dark. Srrucrure: Head narrower than thorax, vertical, Vertex plane,
coarsely punctate, shining, somewhat rounded down anteriorly, over ¥2
as long as wide, discal foveae small, prominent. Genal processes elongate,
blunt, slightly pubescent, somewhat divergent, about 14 as long as vertex. Antennae a little longer than width of head. Thorax well arched. Pro-
notum nearly vertical. Prescutum large. Forewings broad, a little over
twice as long as wide, finely rugose, set with minute setae, at least basally,
broadly rounded; Rs short, slightly sinuate, marginal cells equal, broad,
R over twice as long as M-++Cu, pterostigma small, costal margin
slightly concave. Hind wings thickly set with minute setae. Legs heavily
pubescent. GeniTaLia: Male genitalia very similar to celtidis-inteneris. Proc-
tiger somewhat swollen caudally, with a caudally flexed epiphysis. For-
ceps enlarging from moderately narrow base, then converging to subacute
apices; in caudal view strongly arched, tapered to acute apices. Female
genital segment long, slender, upcurved; dorsal valve slender, evenly
upeurved, attenuate in apical half, apex subacute; ventral valve long but
shorter than dorsal, evenly upcurved to slender, acute tip. Numerous specimens are at hand from several localities in Arizona
and New Mexico which seem undoubtedly to be this species. Two of them,
from Organ Mountains, New Mexico, are accompanied by galls. The
latter are on the twigs and appear to be very densely pubescent; on closer
examination this pubescence seems to be a dense growth of sporangio-
phores of a white fungus, completely covering the galls. There is no evi-
dence to indicate whether this is accidental or whether there is some
significance to this association. Genus Tetragonocephala* Crawford

1914 Tetragonocephala Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:108. 1917 ‘Tetragonocephala Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 799. Head narrower than thorax, vertical. Vertex quadrate, smooth,
rounded down anteriorly. Genae produced as lobate processes, parallel to
plane of vertex. Thorax very strongly arched. Pronotum long, vertical. Wings submembranous, elongate-ovate, marginal cells elongate, ptero-
stigma lacking, M and Cu petiolate. A small tubercle on base of meta-
tibia, basal segment of metatarsus without black spines. Metacoxal spurs
long, straight, slender. Orthotype: Tetragonocephala flava Crawford. .

Placed in the subfamily Psyllinae by Crawford, this genus seems to
be related to Pachypsylla. One of the cardinal characters of this subfamily

* From tetragonon ~i, Gr. n, noun—quadrangle + cephala -ae, Gr. f, noun—head. * flavus -a -um, L, adj—yellow. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 543

is, however, lacking. The basal
7 5 5. segment of th is wi
spines. At least for the present, however, it is left: int this cba Shout

Tetragonocephala flava* Crawford
our (Figs. 135, 136, 151, 152)
‘etragonocephala flava C;
1ai7 Fetragonocephaa flava Van Duvees Ca Beans: Ball go08,
known op] a2 flava (22) Ferris, Can, Ent. 58:16 [describes nymph of un-
Gngth to tip of folded wings 3.75 to 4.25 mm. ‘oLor: General color of newly emerged individuals green, more

mature specimens yellow to brown, is
Spots on scutum, one on scutellum, Meee crsaly. Six mili Hack

spots Membrane of wings milky, veins
Strucrure: Head vertical. Ve
large, blunt, % as lon:
as width of head, ‘Thorax strongl
head, gly arched. Pro
cal, extending down laterally beyond antennal i
anenee ene sone nat apically, about 2% times as long as wide;
: , furcation of media about even with furcati tus,
medial cell very long. Legs lon; i f metatarsse oi
. g. Pro: ith. out claws, Small tubercle at base of tind aoe of metatarsus with:
ENITALIA: Male proctiger long and slend i
as forceps, slightly swollen in lateral view, anus bone on Tong, presi
epiphysis. Forceps in lateral view broad basally, narrowed aed omed
faudad to blunt, black-tipped apices; in caudal view broad, strongly avched
aad Fare nb Sharp, black apices; tips in dorsal view seem to be broad
and Satened : Tumale genital Segment short; ventral valve very small
0 d apically; dorsal valve large, deepl ;
s a collapsed (six females are at hand and all present this came pence
ce), margins of depression wi ing, hairli
appee ovposior senting saepression with many long, curling, hairlike
Described from one male and four females fro

m Bro i 'exas,
one female from the Santa Rita Mountains, Aricone ey ue, Texas,

Brownsville, Texas, collected June 29, 1938,

‘ e R. H. Beamer, is desi;
the allotype. It is i t r, is designated
Ka oye it is deposited in the Snow Collection at the University of

tex” female, No. 18096 United States National Museum,

Type examined. Brownsville,

   

544 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Genus Spanioneura* Forster

1848 Spanioneura Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss, Rhein, 5:94. 1876 Spanioneura Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876:527, 550. 1878 Spanioneura Léw, Verh. zool.-bot. Ges, Wien 28:608,

1912 Spanionewra Oshanin, Kat. palda, Hemip. 128. 1913 Spanioneura Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 22. 1935 Spanioneura Haupt, Tierw. Mittel 4, 3:231. The principal points of distinction between, this genus and Psylla
are the shape of the forewings and the recessive eyes. The forewings are
strongly narrowed apically, almost rhomboidal, Rs terminating at apex. Haplotype: Spanioneura jonscolombii Forster. Spanioneura fonscolombii} Forster
(Fig. 261)

1848 Spanioneure fonscolombii Forster, Verh. natur. Ver, preuss. Rhein. 5:94,
1872 Spanioneura forscolombei Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 3:403. 1876 Spanioneura fonscolormbei Scott, Trans, Ent. Soc. London 1876:550. 1908 Spanioneura fonscolombei Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 2:365. 1913 Spanioneura fonscolombii Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 32. 1918 Spanioneura jonscolombii Britton, Conn, Agr. Exp. Sta., Rept. 39:186. 1923 Spanioneura fonscolombii Patch, Hemip. Conn. 247. 1935 Spanioneura fonscolombei Haupt, Tierw. Mittel, 4, 3:240. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. Srructure: Head somewhat narrower than thorax. Vertex 34, as long
as wide, posterior margin excavate. Genal processes long, conical, scarcely
divergent, as long as vertex. Antennae slender, slightly longer than width
of head. Thorax moderately arched. Forewings long, nearly 3 times as
long as wide, strongly narrowed apically; Rs long, curved, extending to
apex, marginal cells large, elongate, prominent radular areas on margin
in cubital cell, between M, and Cu,, in medial cell and between Rs and
M,, pterostigma prominent. Hind wings nearly equalling forewings. Legs
stout. Hind tibia with small basal spur. Genrratra: Female genital segment as long as rest of abdomen,
straight; dorsal valve somewhat attenuate, radulate apically, apex sharp
dorsally, curved ventrally; ventral valve much shorter than dorsal,
slightly upturned apically, apex acute. This species was reported by Britton (1916) as occurring on Box
(Buus), its host plant, in Connecticut. Four specimens (2 males, 2
females) from this series are in the Maine Agricultural Experiment Sta-
tion Collection. These I have seen. They are mounted in balsam so that
a complete description is impossible. No further records of its occurrence
in North America are known. No adequate description and only frag-
mentary drawings are available in the literature. Outside of North America it has been reported from France, Ger-

many, and England. .

 

*Erom spanios, Gr, adj—scarce + neuron ~i, Gr. n. noun—nerve. Named in honor of de Fons-Colombe, a French entomologist. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 545
* ke ®

SUBFAMILY TRIOZINAE LOW

1879 Triozinae Low, Verh. x

te a ‘ool.-bot. Ges. Wit 605,
1885 Frigzaria Puton, Cat. Hém. Faune Baten 93 oo 98. 1W Those Kawayarna Tra Ue gee 2, 2
: toa 9 rans, Sapp. Nat, Hist. $
tie priozaria Oshanin, Verz. palae, Homigs bce” 8°

 

 

1912 Triozaria Oshanin, Kat a
ioza » Kat. pala, Hemi
1913 Triozinae Aulmann, Psy Cat Sen

1914 Triozinae Crawfor
1917 Triozinae Van Duce Cs Fons Ames *

Head
veneers Shan need usually small and narrower than thorax,
conical processes or somewhat swollen, mmo oo Tees ie as Uaally

h . | slender. Thorax st
usually (not in Leuronote). Forewings membranous hyaline: geen
angulate apical Y,pometimes narrowly rounded, radius, media and cubitus
g fr vein (R-+ M+ Cu) at int
i ” ~ at same point or
a C2 on and Ceropsylla), no pterostigma, usually wtih three ed Ae
areas or margin, between branches of M, between M, and Cu, and be
twee retes of Cu. Caudal metacoxal spurs present, anteriorly meta
with basal apo (oPed 85 SPinose or flattened process, Metatibia usvetip
1 rrate carina, with three or four apical ani
ute (lateral) margin and either two or three on innee tena eee
in,

Basal segment of metata i
With caer of us without black spines. Male proctiger usually

Type genus: Trioza Forster,

This subfamily is characterized chi
erized chiefly by th i
' : Ss c 'y by the shape of th gs
the absence of a medial-cubital petiole, and the lack of clanlie ne ne
e basal segment of the metatarsus, © Spies on
and yaa of the species are gall-forming, but the majority are free-living
honeydew, They ec agamebs: The latter secrete more or less wax and
: re characterized by a fringe of waxcceceti
(sectasetae) on the margin and by the shape of the wing ‘pode te oa
ao ee eeaggh. 88 almost continuous with those of the head and ablon
n.

le nymphal stages as

; this white band is
rioza cockerelli, for

 

546 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Key. To THe GENERA OF Triozinae

 

 

5 se atc ek ont. <.cccccecesees’ 2
| Radius, media, and cubitus arising from basal vein at same point... ...... +. .:-+-
1. Ragive media, and cubitus not arising at same point, radius and media or media 3
aud cubitus with a short common petiole.....--.+.+.s+seeseapeereseeeneeeee . 2, Thorax scarcely arched; pronotum long, flat, a prominent medial epiphysis on
” cephalic margin. .....--e0-c-yeceeeeqeetegseteetetnae ss Leuronota p. 598. Thorax well arched; pronotum shorter, descending cephalad, usually depressed
below vertex and prescutum, without an epiphysis.
. Head narrower than thorax...
Head as broad as thorax or broadei
Vertex smooth, rounded, no anterior margin... idea p. 604. Vertex not perfectly smooth and rounded, anterior margin more or less abrupt. ; . .5. 5, Genae produced as usually conical processes at least moderately long (usually ¥4 —
as long as vertex or longer) Trioza p. 546. Genal processes, if present, very
mae smoothly, spherically swollen . 6, Vanes distinctly tnargined, genae produced as small conical or adlkeprocests
ollen at all........s++eeereeeeeestesesenee ...-Par za p. 584,
Yonex not distinctly margined anteriorly, rounded down; genae spherically
gwollen ccs sscsgesesceesecesteececseseeenuereseersness Kuwayama p. 592. Genae produced as Tong, slender, closely appressed processes; vertex ot deeply 503
concave between eyes. es . 593. Genal processes short, ; vertex deeply concave Benen oa p. sor. i .edia petiolate; basal vein (R+-M+Cu) very long; antennal in-
" Radi anterior, eee ce nncenesvesitssstvess ‘fi ~Ceropsyita p. 600.
i i | basal vein ‘not unusuaily long; antennal insertion
Media and cubitus petiolate; basal vein not unusually sal insertions

 

 
   
  

»

  

=

  
 
  
 

   

 

 

Pa

    

gi! 2

  

 

Genus Trioza* Forster

  

1848 Trioza Férster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss, Rhein. 1851 Psylla Fitch (pro parte), 4th Rept. N. ¥. St. Mus,
1861 Trioza Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou 34:35, 336,
1876 Trioza Scott, Trans, Ent. Soc. London 1876:551. 1879 Trioza Low, Verh. zool.bot. Ges. Wien 28:609. 1896 Trioza Edwards, Hemip.-Homop. Br. Is. 25:
1910 Trioza Crawford, Pom. Coll, Jour. Ent. 4911 Trioza Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:423. 1911 Allotrioza Crawford (pro parte), Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:423, 442,
1911 Triozoida Crawford (pro parte), Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:493. 912 Trioza Oshanin, Kat. pala, Hemip. 128 (designates type]. 1913 Trioza Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 37. 3914 Trioza Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:74. 1914 Ceropsylla Crawford (pro parte), U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:102,
1917 Trioza Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Ai . 4817 Ceropsylla Van Duzee (pro parte), Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 798. 1926 Spanioza Enderlein, Ent. Mitt. 15:400. 1928 Colopelma Enderlein, Ent, Mit,
1926 Phyllopecta Ferris, Can. Ent, 58:16. 1938 Phylloplecta Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull. 34:248. Head usually narrower than thorax, sometimes as wide, somewhat
deflexed. Vertex much broader than long, usually deeply impressed dis-
cally, more or less emarginate medially in front. Genae produced as
processes of varying length and shape, more or less divergent, depressed

  
  

 

  

 

 

   
 

  

* From triozos, Gr. adj—with three branches. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 547

from plane of vertex and usually deflexed more or less. Antennae
slender, variable in length from about as long as width of head
to 2% times as long. Eyes hemispherical. Thorax usually strongly arched. Pronotum short, descending cephalad, often depressed below plane of
head. Propleurites not equal, suture not extending to middle of pro-
notum. Prescutum usually about as long as broad, sometimes longer. Forewings membranous, hyaline, typically acutely angled apically, some-
times rounded; radius, media, and cubitus arising from basal vein
(R +M-+ Cu) at same point, no pterostigma. Metatibia often with basal
spur or carina, one outer and either two or three inner apical spines. Metatarsus without spines. Metacoxa often developed anteriorly as flat
plate or spur. Logotype: Trioza urticae (Linnaeus). In 1884 Riley (Proc. Am. Assoc. Adv. Sci. 1883, 32:319) used the name
Phylloplecta tripunctata with no characterization or indication, leaving
ita nomen nudum, Subsequently (1885), he lists all of the species “actually
described” (18 in all) from North America and makes no mention of
Phylloplecta. In this paper he refers Psylla tripunctata Fitch to Trioza. Mally (1894), in a footnote, points out that Riley used the name Phyllo-
plecta without any description and raises the question as to whether it was
meant to be the same as Trioza tripunctata (Fitch) or some other species. The next use of the name was by Zacher in 1913 (Ent. Mitt. 2:148). In indicating omissions from Aulmann’s catalogue, he lists “Phylloplecta
fiir Trioza tripunctata Fitch, cf. Riley, 1883.” This was not a proposal of
the name Phylloplecta for Trioza tripunctata by Zacher but a reference
te Riley’s nomen nudum. Ferris (1926) considers this as the designation
of a type for a new genus, Phylloplecta Zacher. It is my opinion, how-
ever, that this listing of a nomen nudum does not constitute the proposal
of a new genus with tripunctata as the type. Ferris misspells the name and
so actually establishes the genus Phyllopecta Ferris. Caldwell (1938a)
resurrects Phylloplecta Riley, refusing to recognize it as a nomen nudum. He likewise credits Zacher with Phyllopecta, apparently following Ferris’
reference. The cephalically projecting spurs on the metacoxae of this species
(tripunctata) have apparently been the chief basis on which the genus
Phylloplecta has been maintained. The presence of these spines has been
considered by a number of workers to be of more importance than I be-
believe is valid. As Caldwell (1938a) recognizes, many species of Trio-
zinae exhibit a pair of spurs or an apparent tendency toward such pro-
cesses between the hind legs. Trioza ininuta, Trioza maura, Trioza rubra,
to mention a few, have short but distinctly developed processes in this
position. In the genus Paratrioza these spurs are well developed in most
of the species, especially in P. arbolensis and P. cockerelli. These spurs-
may even be found on members of other subfamilies, in the genus Rhino-
psylla for example. I fail to agree, therefore, that the mere presence of
such a spur is of generic importance and so consider Phyllopecta and
Phylloplecta as synonyms of Trioza. 548, LEONARD D. TUTHILL

The genus Megatrioza was established by Crawford (1915) for a
Philippine species, Subsequently (1919), he referred the North American
species Trioza diospyri (Ashmead) to this genus where it seems to belong

on the basis of his characterization and figures of the genus. Megatri

 

seems to be a natural group of species, but I am somewhat doubtful of its
being of generic rank. The characters given for the genus are all appar-
ently extremely variable within the group with the exception of the num-
ber of inner apical spines and the presence of “a small or large spur at
base” of hind tibia, the presence of a pair of spiniform processes projecting
cephalad on the metacoxae, and the reduction in size of the hind wings. Since I have seen few specimens of Megatrioza other than diospyri, 1 am
unwilling to abolish it, but I feel that it is probably worthy of no more

than subgeneric rank. Ferris (1926) considered Megatrioza a synonym of Phylloplecta,
stating that diospyri and tripunctata are “actually congeneric, all of the
characters given by Crawford for Megatrioza being equally well devel-
oped in both, if not even more strongly in tripunctata.” This is not true,
as tripunctata has only two inner spines at the apex of the tibia (a char-
acter hardly of generic significance, however), the anterior metacoxal
spines while: present are small while the caudal metacoxal spines are
unusually small for the Triozinae. Large basal tibial spurs are present in
tripunctata, but this character occurs in some species of most of the genera
with which I am familiar. They are entirely lacking in diospyri. Further-
more, the head is quite different, as is the wing venation, the latter being
as distinct in the two species as in any of the North American Triozinae. If these two species are congeneric, it must be within the genus Trio-a,
which contains other species more similar to tripunctata than diospyri. Enderlein’s genera Spani
which are too minor to be valid. ‘a and Colopelma were based on characters

Crawford considered Petalolyma Scott a synonym of Trioza. There
is nothing in Scott's description to distinguish the two, but his figure of the

wing does not appear to be that of a species of Trioza. Key to the Species of Trioza

  

 

    

   

 

1. Hind tibiae with two inner apical spines 2. Hind tibiac with three inner ical spines . see eeeees Qt. 2. (1) Forewings not maculate, hyaline or evenly infuscated (except radular areas) 3. Forewings distinctly maculate. : : vee 18. 3. ( 2) Genal processes longer than vertex..2..22.., pulla p. 352
Genal processes not longer than vertex (usually distinctly shorter) code
4. (3) Antennae at least twice as long as width of head........ o3
Antennac less than twice as long as width of head (rarely over
as Jong) . 28. BQ) eveeeeee

5. (4) Antennae 24 times as long
costa; small species, 2.5 to 2.75 mm...
Antennae twice as long as width of hea
straight; large species, 3.25 to. 4.5 mm. 6. (5) Prescutum longer than wide
Prescutum wider than long

 
    
   

    

Rs long,

slight

‘magnoliae p.

   

 

 

7. 8.
o

10. 11. 12,

14,

16,

17,

18,

3.

. (18) Marginal cells of fore
. (19) Entire posterior margin of forewing brown;

+ (1) Antennae no longer than width of head.
. (21) Small species (2.75 mm,), not pubescent, uniformly. 5. (22) Light colored species, vertex and thoracic dorsum more or less pubescent

4) Darks a s
| Ql) Vertes and thoracic dorsum with long conspicuous pubescence

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 549

( 6) Head almost as wide as thorax. .
Head much narrower than thorax. (4) Genal processes not over 14 as long as vertes
Genal processes over 34 (usually 24) as long as verte
(8) Genal processes strongly divergent, acute; wings short
‘enal processes contiguous or very slightly div wi
(5) Be Sender cece anus Glergent Blunt; wings Io ‘D555. 's more than 36 as long as entire fo: reen species ‘ . 556,
(8) Res than x as long as entire forewing; brown species. “shepie’! Hae-p. Bey,
inal cells of forewing very small; i s
[yazeinal cells of forewing very small; female genital segment over Pas
Marginal cells of forewing typical size for 2
Jess than 34 as long as rest of abdomen. (11) Genal rocesses 2% as long as vertex; forewings 224 times as long as wide;
male genital segment 2¢ to fully as l 5 4
ee 7 fully as long as rest of abdomen; male forceps
enal processes slightly over 34 as long as vertex; forewings short
more than twice as long as wide); male forceps much Shlsnged Goteeie
| stylifera p. 557. (12) Dorsal valve of female genital segment straight and acute “Spica “7

| identalis p.
Dorsal valve of female genital segment upturned and blunt ee 558.

rubicola p. 559. 215.

   
   
 

singularis p. 554. -longicornis p. 554,
9. (11) Antennae 14 times. as long as width of head. .
ntennae at least 134 times as long as width ofhead. ||. (14) General color black; female genital segment straight and acute. incerta p 364

neral color green to orange, head often bl: i :

_, shorter, strongly curved ventrad. ne nan female genital segment

(15) Vertex’strongly bulging anterior! only 34 as long as axial portion. Vertex not strongly bulging; caudal

 

 

   

 

caudal lobes of male p:

 

  

iger short,
-.-minuta p. 562.
male proctiger as long as axial

 

 

 

        

 

 

portion. : see
(14) Body unicolorous, red to almost black. TPabra 565,
Body black with extensive yellow to red markings including longitudinal

 

stripes on dorsum of thorax i
x see ee eee eee dees .+-Varians p, 564. ( 2) Dorsum of head and thorax pubescent (sparsely); maculation of forewings
Segaaive maculac brown with many small darker brown spots. lobata p. 366
jorsum of head and thorax not pubescent; maculati ive,
maculae not spotted. . . p # maculasion Jes extensive

 

 

 

    

 
        

a short but wide;’ brown
and apical portion of Rs, more or less con-
tri

 

maculae along cubitus, media
tinuous along margin
Marginal cells normal; maculation otherwi

 

   

Rs long,

minuta var. arizonae p. 563. Ofelavus, browns, Re

sess €alifornica p. 568. 122. Basal vein (R-+M+Cu), Ry and poste
short, arched to costa. .

 
 
  
 

 

 

  

Antennac distinctly longer than width of head,

 

ly. yellow in’ color
. horadendri
Large species (4 to 4.5 mm. ), sometimes pubescent. .., Preradendsi P- 569.

; bakeri p. 570. Dark species, at least the vertex black, not pubescent, -breviante weet p ito. Vertex and thoracic dorsum not conspicuously pubescent. 550

25. 26. 27,

28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34,
35,

3

s

37. 38. 3

Ss

40. LEONARD D. TUTHILL

(24) Black; medial cell of forewing much larger than cubital
Light colored; cubital cell of forewing larger than medial
(24) Genal processes as long as vertex. Processes shorter than vertex
(26) Antennae twice as long as width of head; genal processes divergent

chlora p. 573. Antennae 1 34 times as long as width of head; genal processes contiguous or
nearly so phoradendri acuminata p. 569. (26) Genal processes very short, about 34 as long as vertex or less, scarcely

divergent; pronotum not depressed below plane of vertex; female genital
segment elongate, styliform. Genal processes more than 34 as long as vertex, about 34 as long or longer;
pronotum depressed below plane of vertex; female genital segment not
unusually long and styliform. (28) Female genital segment 34 as long as rest of body; smaller species (3 to 3. mm.).... :+++proximata p. 574. Female genital segment 34 as long as rest of body; larger species (4 to
4.5mm.).. »- 30,
(29) Female genital segment with a prominent ventral hump on basal portior
collaris p. 574. Female genital segment without ventral hump.......... longistylus p. 575. (28) Anterior margin of vertex smoothly rounded down to genal processes;

female genital segment with a short styliform projection; male proctiger
arcuate posteriorly, without a caudal lobe -mexicana minor p. 576. Anterior margin of vertex abrupt. .

(31) Thorax very strongly arched; male proctiger arcuate caudad but not

produced into an extended lobe; both valves of female genital segment

straight, about equal in length, ventral valve not upcurved to meet dorsal

-diospyri p. 571. “beamerl b. 573. Thorax moderately arched: male proctiger with a prominent caudal lobe
(cither apical or basal); female genital segment with at least the ventral
valve strongly upcurved (Amelanchier inhabiting species except possibly

     
  

    
    

    

‘th fow . ipunctata p. 576. Forewings immaculate... ... -albifrons p. 577. (32) Apex of male forceps produced cephalad, rounded caudally. . .sembla p. 579. Male forceps otherwise. .........00sceeeeeeeeeee 235. (34) Female genital segment short, lateral aspect subglobose. :
Female genital segment usually elongate (not styliform), lateral aspect
not globose...
(35) Male proctiger with
length. Caudal
touching... mira curta p. 582. (35) Male proctiger with caudal lobes as long or nearly as long as axial por-
tion, lobe never entirely basal vedbes eee
Caudal lobe of male proctiger much shorter than axial portion, lobe
basal in origin. 2.0.0.0... . eee eee eecnee ec ee tenets eee inversa p. 582
(37) Caudal lobes of male proctiger in lateral view very broad, dorsal margin 30.
straigh 39. Caudal lobes of male proctiger slender, upcurved. 40. (38) Forceps of male in lateral view parallel-sided, not iy,
er species (3 mm.). . suleata p. 580. Forceps of male in lateral view slender basally, enlarged apically, larger
species (3.5 mm.)....... — . frontalis p. 579. (38) Caudal lobes of male proctiger very long and slender, with a very promi-
nent tuft of large setae apically.........00eeeeede reece aylmeriae p. 583. Caudal lobes of proctiger shorter, without such a tuft of setae. .obtusa p. 582.

   
 
  
  
   

 

 

  

es

38. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 551

Trioza urticae* (Linn.) (Figs. 163, 164, 165, 262)

1758 Chermes urticae Linnaeus, Syst. Nat, 10:454. 1761 Chermes urticae Linnaeus, Fauna Svec. 263. 1841 Psylla urticae Hartig, Germ. Zeitschr. Ent. 1841 Peylle eupoda Hartig, Germ. Zeitschr, Ent. 3:374

‘rioza urt ‘érster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss. Rhein, 5:82. 1848 Trioza eupoda Forster, ibid. 82. » in 5
1848 Trioze protensa Forster, ibid, 82. 1848 Trioze forcipate Forster, ibid. 84. 1848 Trioza crassinervis Forster, ibid. 83,
1861 Trioza urticae Flor, Rhynch. Liv. 2:505-508. 1861 Trioza urticae Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou 34:383, 387, 392,
1872 Trioza urticae Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Schw. Ent. Ges. 3:386,
1872 Trioza crassinervis Meyer~Diir, ibid. 387,
1872 Trioza eupoda Meyer-Dir, ibid. 389. 1872 Trioza protensa Meyer-Diir, ibid. 389,
1872 Trioza forcipata Meyer-Diir, ibid. 389. 1872 Trioza bicolor Meyer-Diir, ibid. 389, 391. 1876 Trioza urticae Scott, Trans. Ent. Soc. London 1876:553,
1877 Trioza urticae Thomson, Opuse. Ent. 8:827. 1878 Trioza urticae Léw, Verh. zool.-bot. Ges. Wien 27:141. 1896 Trioza urticae Edwards, Hemip.-Homop. Br. Is, 254,
1908 Trioza urticae Oshanin, Verz. palae. Hemip. 2:375. 1912 Trioza urticae Oshanin, Kat. palia. Hemip. 129. 1925 Trioza urticae Ferris, Can. Ent. (nymph). 1930 Trioza urticae Klyver, Can. Ent. 62:169,

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 3.75 mm. Conor: General color greenish yellow to light brown. Genal pro-
cesses black or brown-tipped. Tip of legs, antennae, and margins of ab-
dominal and thoracic sclerites more or less embrowned. Wings hyaline
clear to slightly yellowish. ,

Srrucrune: Head small, narrower than thorax. Vertex depressed
discally, roundly protruding anteriorly. Genal processes acute, divergent,
extending anteriorly, 3% as long as vertex. Antennae nearly twice as long
as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum depressed below. plane of vertex. Forewings rounded apically; Rs long, nearly straight, M
evenly curved, marginal cells small. Legs long, slender. Hind tibia with
out basal armature, with one outer and three inner apical spines. Gewrratta: Male proctiger small, broadly produced caudad. Forceps
longer than proctiger; in lateral view narrow, enlarged apically then nar
rowed to subacute apices, latter hooked cephalad (see fig. 164). Female
genital segment % to % as long as rest of abdomen, valves nearly equal
in length, straight to acute apices. This species, the type of the genus, does not occur in North America
although a very closely related form (T. albifrons) is very abundant. It
has been recorded from all of Europe including Scandinavia, Russia,
Transcaucasia, and Siberia. The above description is from eight speci-
mens from Europe and Reshadieh, Turkey, As the name indicates, its
host plant is Urtica—nettle. Ferris (1925) figures the nymph,

=

 

  

  

 

   

* Genitive of Urtica—the generic name of the host plant,

 

552 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Trioza pulla* Tuthill

(Figs. 153, 154, 297)
1939 Tricza pulla Tuthill, Ia. St. Coll. Jour. Sci. 13:184. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. Cotor: Head, thorax, femora, and apical half of antennae fuscous. Remainder of legs and antennae pale. Abdomen green. Wings milky. Females lighter, vertex and thoracic dorsum fusco-testaceous. Structure: Head broad. Vertex quite flat for Trioza, Antennae long,
almost twice as long as width of head. Genal processes slender, acute,
slightly longer than head, projecting downward, straight, not touching at
all. Genal processes, legs, and genitalia very pubeséent. Thoracic dorsum
not very strongly arched. Hind tibia with large serrate basal carina, two
inner apical spines. Anterior portion of metacoxa weakly developed. Forewings large, 24% times as long as wide, narrowly rounded apically; Rs

ng. * eserratza: Male genitalia small. Proctiger with long, blunt, caudal
lobes. Forceps quite broad at base, sharply narrowed midway, then taper-
ing to truncate apices with small anterior tooth. Female genital segment
about 14 as long as remainder of abdomen; dorsal valve rounding down
to acute black apex; ventral valve shorter. |

Known only from the type series from Washington and Oregon. Hotoryre, male, No. 55179 United States National Museum. Trioza viridis} Crawford

(Figs. 166, 167, 264)

1910 Trioza viridis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:230, 350. 1911 Allotrioza viridis Crawford, Pom. Goll, Jour. Ent. 3:44, 446,
1913 Tri . Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N: Am. 797.
ioza viridis Crawford, Proc. Haw. Ent. Soc. 6, 1:30,
1826 Spanioza viridis Enderlein, Ent. Mitt. 15:400. Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 to 2.75 mm. ,
Cotor: Greenish yellow, except apical 34 of antennae and tip of
female genital segment, black. : ; ;
Structure: Head large, not deflexed. Vertex long, with two longi-
tudinal sulcate impressions. Genal processes large, blunt, extending for-
ward, almost on same plane as vertex, slightly over % as long as vertex. Antennae slender, almost 2% times as long as width of head. Thorax
rather flat and broad. Pronotum long and flat, somewhat below plane of
vertex. Forewings acute, 24% times as long as wide; Rs very short, arched. Hind tibia with two inner apical spines. ,
Genrratia: Male proctiger long, almost parallel-sided, slightly pro-

 

 

s ~a -um, L. adj.—dark colored,
j viridis -e, L. adj—green,

 

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 553

duced caudad. Forceps shorter than Proctiger; in lateral view broad
basally, slightly narrowed and flexed caudad in apical 34; in caudal view
slender, almost straight to black, truncate apices. Female genital seg-
ment large, about as long as rest of abdomen: ventral valve straight to
acute black apex; dorsal valve longer than ventral, basal portion swollen,
distal portion acuminate and upcurved, black. Six specimens from Monrovia and one from Claremont, California,
are at hand. These are the only specimens reported besides the type series
(8), one female from Los Angeles and one female taken on Mt. San
Antonio, California. Type locality Claremont, California. ‘Type in Crawford Collection, Mountains near Claremont, California,
Baker. Trioza magnoliae* (Ashmead)

(Figs, 168, 169)
1881 Psylla magnoliae Ashmesd, Can. Ent, 13:224,
1885 Trioza magnoliae Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash, 2:70. 1911 Allotrioza magnoliae Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:444, 445. 1613 Psylla magnoliae Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 19,
1914 Trioza magnoliae Crawford, U, S, Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:96,
1817 Trioza magnoliae Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N, Am, 797. 1919 Trioza magnoliae Barber, Proc. Ent. Soc. Wash. 21:59,

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 4.5 mm. Cotor: General color green to light brown with brown stripes on
thoracic dorsum. Tips of antennae dark. Eyes reddish. Wings hyaline. Srrucrure: Head large, as broad as thorax, scarcely deflexed. Vertex
large, flat except for discal impressions, medial suture prominent. Genal
processes short, blunt, divergent, about 14 as long as vertex. Antennae
twice as long as width of head. Vertex and dorsum of thorax often with
sparse short pubescence, most apparent near eyes. Thorax somewhat
arched, long. Prothorax not depressed below plane of vertex, caudal mar-
gin upcurved, carinate. Prescutum distinctly longer than wide, anterior
angle very sharp and abrupt. Forewings large, straight, sharply angulate,
almost 3 times as long as wide. Hind tibia with large, serrate, basal carina,
two inner apical spines. Geyrratia: Male proctiger small, arcuate posteriorly from near
apex. Forceps slightly longer than proctiger; in lateral view broad, some-
what pyriform, anterior margin strongly curved caudad, apices blunt,
black, in line with posterior margin; in caudal view almost straight,
slightly arcuate, apices touching. Female genital segment large, % as
Jong as rest of abdomen, valves almost equal in length, acute. Ashmead described this gall-forming species from Magnolia glauca, a
synonym of M. virginiana L., the “laurel magnolia” or “sweet bay.”

Specimens are at hand collected by E. A. Schwarz on Persea caro-
linensis, a synonym of P. borbonia (L.), “red bay,” a member of the laurel
family. Three specimens from Orlando, Florida, bear the label Tamala

 

* Genitive of Magnolia—a genus of plants, presumed to be the host. 554 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

borbonia. I am unfamiliar with these trees, but it would seem that there
has been some error in the determination of the host plant (see Barber,
1919). Specimens are before me from several localities in Florida and from
Mobile, Alabama. It is also recorded from southern Georgia. Ashmead gives a brief account of the biology, including a description
of the galls and nymphs. He remarks that the nymphs do not have the
fringe of hairs on the body which most Trioza do have; cast skins accom-
panying some of the specimens at hand do bear such setae although they
are quite short. Typz, female, No. 14819 United States National Museum, is a very
poor, teneral specimen. Type examined. Trioza singularis* n. sp. (Figs. 155, 155a, 298)

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. Cotor: General color of body black. Tibiae, abdominal sternites,
antennae (except tips and segments I and II) white. Srrucrure: Head large, almost as broad as thorax. Vertex strongly
bulging and overhanging anteriorly each side of median line, discal im-
pressions large. Genal processes blunt, divergent from base, % as long
as vertex. Antennae about twice as long as width of head. Thorax
strongly arched, coarsely punctate. Pronotum much depressed below
plane of vertex. Forewings sharply angulate, almost 3-times as long as
wide, venation typical. Hind tibia with 2 inner apical spines. Anterior
portion of metacoxa broadly produced, truncate. Genrratta: Male proctiger very short, produced on each side into
long blunt caudal lobe, no anal epiphysis. Forceps longer than proctiger;
in lateral view broad basally, constricted midway, slightly curving cepha-
lad to acute apices; in caudal view broad and divergent basally, at about
¥% their length suddenly narrowed and directed dorsad to acute apices,
with a sharp lateral hook near apex, appearing almost T-shaped. Described from a unique male collected in Cheboygan County, Michi-
gan, by H. B. Hungerford, July 23, 1931. Type in Snow Collection, Uni-
versity of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas. Trioza longicornist Crawford

1910 Trioza longicornis Crawford, Pom. Coll, Jour. Ent. 2:231, 359. 1911 Trioza longicornis Crawford, Pom. Goll. Jour, Ent. 3:425, 427. 1912 Trioza dubia Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta, Bull. 202:226,

1912 Trioza forcipula Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 202:227. 1913 Trioza longicornis Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 48,

1914 Trioza longicornis Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus, Bull. 85:92. 1917 Trioza longicornis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 797. 1926 Spanioza forcipula, Enderlein, Ent. Mitt, 15:400. 1928 Trioza forcipula Leonard, Ins. N. Y. 183. * singularis -e, L. adj—remarkable, unique. +From longus -a -um, L. adj—long + cornu -us, L. n. noun—horn. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 555

Length to tip of folded wings 3.75 mm. .

Cotor: Described as greenish yellow, now faded to a uniform tan. Srrucrurs: Head narrower than thorax. Vertex plane, edges raised,
platelike, discal impressions and medial suture prominent. Genal pro-
cesses subacute, about as long as vertex. Antennae twice as long as width
of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum depressed below plane of
vertex. Forewings hyaline, 24% times as long as wide, apex scarcely
angulate. Hind tibia with two inner apical spines, . GenrTaLia: Female genital segment with ventral valve as long as
preceding sternite, straight; “dorsal valve longer than ventral”—Craw-

ford. ‘The dorsal valve of the type and only specimen is apparently broken
off. I have examined the type (No. 18089 United States National
Museum). Crawford (1914) refers Trioza dubia to minuta, but from Miss
Patch’s picture of the female genital segment, I think it more probable
that it belongs here. It is quite possible that Trioza incerta is synonymous
with dubia or forcipula or both, but as no specimens of these species have
been available I am unwilling to further confuse the literature by re-
surrecting these names. Trioza alacris* Flor

(Figs. 170, 171)

1861 Trioza alacris Flor, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou 34:335, 380, 386, 398-400,
1879 Trioza lauri Targioni, Res. Soc. Ent. Ital. 19-20. 6

1908 Trioza alacris Oshanin, Verz, palze. Hemip. 2:372. 1912 Trioza alacris Oshanin, Kat. paliia. Hemip. 129. 1912 Trioza alacris Crawford, Calif, Comm. Hort. Mon., Bull, 1:86-87. 1913 Trioza alacris Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 38. 1914 Trioza alacris Crawford, U. S. Nat Mus, Bull. 85:94,

1917 Trioza alacris Weiss, Ent. News 28:
1917 Trioza alacris Weiss, Can, Ent. 49:73-75. 1917 Trioza alacris Essig, Jour. Ec. Ent. 10:439-444,

1917 Trioza alacris Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 797. 1918 Trioza alacris Weiss and Dickerson, Psyche 25:59-63. 1926 Spanioza alacris Enderlein, Ent. Mitt. 15:400. 1932 Trioza alacris Klyver, Ent, News 43:37. 1935 Trioza alacris Haupt, Tierw. Mitel. 4, 3:251. Length to tip of folded wings 4 mm. Cotor: General color of specimen at hand yellow-white, brown
markings on abdomen and dorsum of thorax, latter forming longitudinal
stripes. Lighter specimens “greenish yellow to light brown.” Tip of
antennae black. Wings hyaline. Structure: Head large, almost as broad as thorax. Vertex with two
very prominent discal foveae. Genal processes projecting forward, blunt,
% as long as vertex. Antennae about 144 times as long as width of head. Thorax rather flat for genus. Pronotum not at all depressed below ver-
tex. Forewings long and slender, acute, almost 3 times as long as broad;

 

 

 

 

* alacer -cris -e, L. adj—quick, active. 556 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Rs short. Hind tibia with two inner apical spines. Metacoxa with short,
i SS. pron sa “Male anal valve (proctiger) a little longer than for-
ceps, hind margin arcuate, with long pubescence; forceps rather, stout,
cries almost parallel (from side), terminating in a subacute, black point
.”—Crawford. “
“ “Female genital segment about %2 as long as rest of abdomen (“nearly
as long as”—Crawford) ; valves subequal in length, dorsal valve slightly
oe ea ke species apparently occurs in North America only on bay trees
(Laurus nobilis). It was recorded from California in 1912 by Grawtord. Essig subsequently (1917) discusses it in some detail, gives life history
notes and figures. Weiss and Dickerson record the ocurrence of this
insect in New Jersey, give notes on jts life history there and describe
immature stages. .

‘he Outside of North America it is recorded from France, Spain, Portu-
gal, Italy, Dalmatia, Hungary, and Germany. Trioza stygma* Tuthill
(Figs. 156, 157, 299)
1939 Trioza stugma Tuthill, Ia, St. Coll. Jour. Sei. 13:183.

th to tip of folded wings 2.5 mm. ; ;
Cane General eolor green. Eyes, antennae, distal portions of leg
é i i i i ited. ts, ete, light fulvous. Forewings slightly infuscated. :
See TRUCTURE: Oa vee ot as wide as thorax. Vertex with two promi:
nent foveae, very strongly protruded in front on each side of medial
Suleus, overhanging the short genal processes, latter ¥2 as long as vertex. ‘Antennae 114 times as long as width of head. Thorax not strongly arched:
Pronotum short, depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings rounde
at apex, 2% times as long as wide; venation typical. Hind tibia with two
i eal spines and basal carina. ne SE ATALIA: Male genitalia small. Proctiger short, somewhat pro-
duced caudally. Forceps very short and broad in lateral view, apices
Cocrded and bearing a large, medially projecting, black-pointed tooth. Female genital segment short, valves subequal in length, dorsal straight,
1 dorsally. —_
vente enown only from the type series from California, Host plant
unknown. ne was originally spelled stugma, an error of transliteration. Hotoryre, male, No. 55180 United States National Museum. * From stygmus Gr. adj—that produces grief. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 557

Trioza shepherdiae* Tuthill

(Figs. 158, 159, 300)
1938 Trioze shepherdiae Tuthill, Ent. News 49:243,
1939 Phylloplecta multidubiata breviradia Caldwell, Can. Ent, 71:211. 1939 Phylloplecta multidubiata breviradia Strickland, Can. Ent. 71:214. 1940 Phylloplecta minuta breviradia Caldwell, Ohio Jour. i. 40:

Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 mm. Cotor: General color of head, thoracic dorsum and legs light'testa-
ceous to fulvous, Vertex light except discal impressions. Genal processes,
eyes, distal half of antennae dark. Prescutum with a pair of brown stripes
on cephalic half. Scutum with two inverted, V-shaped, brown marks. Wing membranes slightly fumate; veins brown. Abdomen brown to black,

Srrucrore: Head and thoracic dorsum coarsely granular. Head of
medium size, narrower than thorax. Vertex decidedly emarginate in
front, with very prominent discal impressions, postero-lateral angles,
which bear ocelli, raised. Genal processes short, about % as long as ver-
tex, conical, almost parallel to plane of vertex. Antennae about 1% times
as long as width of head. Pronotum depressed below plane of vertex. Prescutum strongly arched. Forewings 2% times as long as wide, mem-
brane rather thick, slightly rugose; venation typical. Hind wings more
rugose than forewings. Legs of medium length. Hind tibia with serrate
basal carina, two inner apical spines.. Anterior portion of metacoxa
bluntly produced. Genrratra: Male genital segment small. Proctiger as long as forceps,
almost right-triangular in lateral view, posterior lobe of medium length. Forceps slender, irregularly narrowed to sharp apices, with medium
pubescence. Female genital segment short, dorsal valve decidedly longer
than ventral, terminating in a heavy, black, upcurved hook, usually ex-
ceeded by partially extended ovipositor sheath. The type series from Lake City, Colorado, and additional specimens
from Wolf Creek Pass, Colorado, are at hand. Examination of paratypes
of Caldwell’s Trioza multidubiata breviradia prove it to be synonymous
with shepherdiae. Host, Shepherdia canadensis (L.) Nutt. Type, female, in author's collection. Trioza styliferat Patch

(Fig. 172)
1912 Trioza stylifera Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 202:229. 1914 Trioza stylifera Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:93. 1917 Trioza stylifera Van Duzce, Cat. Hemip, N. Am. 797. Length to tip of folded wings 2.75 mm. Cotor: General color dark brown. Margins of vertex, median line
on scutum, legs, and venter, lighter. Forewings somewhat yellowish. Srrucrure: Head narrower than thorax. Vertex broad, margins

 

* Genitive of Shepheridia—the generic name_of the host. 7 From stylus -i, L. m. noun—style + fer (from fero) L.—bearing. 558 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

raised. Genal processes slightly over % as long as vertex, somewhat
divergent, blunt. “Antennae about one and one-half times as Jong as
width of head” (Crawford). Pronotum strongly descending cephalad,
depressed below plane of vertex. Dorsum of thorax punctate. Forewings
short, slightly over twice as long as wide, very slightly and broadly anew
late, costal margin strongly arched; Rs slightly sinuate, short, medial cel
somewhat smaller than cubital. Hind tibia with two inner apical spines,
l carina. |

serrate basal ce Male genital segment large. Proctiger short, bearing on
each side a swollen bladder-like caudal lobe which extends dorsad,
equalling axial portion. Forceps heavy; in lateral view large basally, a
blunt tooth on caudal edge, narrowed and sharply curved cephalad at
¥, their length, apical third much enlarged, apices roundly truncate,
anterior margin of enlarged portion straight to apex, there produced as
a small tooth; in caudal view stout, broad basally, produced into a blunt
tooth both mesad and laterad, narrowed somewhat, swollen apically,
apices truncate and flatly produced mesad. “The female cauda is rela-
tively long and acutely pointed. The upper plate extends a bit beyond the
ovipositor and is slender at tip.” (Patch). ; ; son of

Described from one rather poor male specimen in the collection of
the University of Minnesota collected at Herchmer, Manitoba, August 1,
1937, by D. G: Denning. The peculiar male forceps make the determina-
tion of this male almost certain, although I have seen none of Patch’s
specimens. Her type series was from Brockville, Ontario,

Trioza occidentalis* Tuthill
(Figs. 160, 173, 178a, 301)
1939 Trioza occidentalis Tuthill, Ia. St. Coll. Jour. Sci. 13:184.

tip of folded wings 4 mm. /
Coven, Mites dark on head and thoracic dorsum, Females uni-
den brown (?). ;

formly se Tend » rower than thorax. Vertex plane, raised. Genal processes large, thick, conical, 24 as long as vertex. Antennae 154
times as long as width of head. Thorax very strongly arched. Pronotum
moderately long, strongly descending anteriorly, not depressed below
plane of vertex.’ Prescutum very abrupt anteriorly. Forewings broad,
rounded, 2% times as long as wide; Rs slightly sinuate; marginal cells
small, equal. Hind tibia with small serrate basal carina, two inner apical
“PiMGenrratia: Male genitalia of medium size. Proctiger swollen in
appearance, produced caudad as two large lateral lobes as figured; in
dorsal view lobes broad, nearly contiguous basally. Forceps shorter than
proctiger; in lateral view broad basally, narrowed in apical half, evenly
curved cephalad, apices acute; in caudal view slightly arched, broad

* occidentalis -e, L. adj.—western. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 559

basally, suddenly narrowed on medial margin about % distance from
base. Female genital segment nearly as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal
valve straight to acute tip; ventral valve almost as long as dorsal, straight,
or ventral margin somewhat sinuate, apex acute. A series of nine males and seven females is at hand from Puyallup,
Washington, collected July 10, 1934, by W. W. Baker. These are the only
specimens known besides the two females from which the species was
originally described, one from Marin Co., California, the other Kaslo
Creek, British Columbia. With these additional specimens for study it
is evident that the resemblance of this species to T. tripunctata is more
than superficial. The metacoxae are produced anteriorly but not to as
marked an extent as in the latter Species. As these specimens were taken
on Rubus parviflorus and many of them are teneral, it appears that the
host plants of the two forms are very close as tripunctata develops on
other species of Rubus. One of the males from this series is designated as
AtLoryre and is in the United States National Museum,

Hovoryrs, female, No. 55181 United States National Museum, Marin
County, California. Trioza rubicola* n. sp. (Figs, 174, 175, 175a)

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. Cotor: Undeterminable as specimens have been preserved in
alcohol. Males quite dark on dorsum of head and thorax. Females uni-
colorous,

Srrucrure: Head narrower than thorax. Posterior and lateral mar-
gins of vertex carinate. Genal processes conical, stout, not divergent, 2%
as long as vertex. Antennae slightly over 1%4' times as long as widih
of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum broad laterally, narrower
medially, nearly vertical medially, not depressed below plane of vertex. Anterior margin of prescutum vertical. Forewings membranous, slightly
rugose, broad, almost 2% times as long as wide; costa strongly curved,
Rs sinuate, marginal cells small, about equal. Hind tibia with serrate basal
carina, two inner apical spines. Genrratta: Male genitalia of medium size. Proctiger very similar
to occidentalis. Forceps in lateral view stout basally, narrowed and
sharply bent cephalad near base, nearly straight to near apices, apices
tapered to acute tips, hooked cephalad; in caudal view nearly straight,
lateral margins straight, medial margins sharply excavate near base. Female genital segment as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve straight,
apex flattened, rounded and upturned; ventral valve slightly sinuate
ventrally, straight, acute, shorter than dorsal,

Described from a series of eleven males and eight females collected
at Tacoma, Washington, July 10, 1940, W. W. Baker, on Rubus leuco-
dermis, which is apparently the host plant as many of the specimens are

* From Rubus—generic name of host plant ++ cola, L.—inhabitant. 560 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

i i i istingui T. occidentalis,
ite terleral. This species may be distinguished from ,
which it resembles very closely, by its smaller size, smaller head, more
deeply impressed vertex, and the genitalia. The tip of the dorsal valve
of the female genital segment serves to distinguish the two forms very
readily, the less strongly ‘curved forceps of the male will serve-to separate
ecimens of that sex. .
‘he ‘Houoryes, female, No. 55177 United States National Museum. Holo-
type, allotype, and paratypes in United States National. Museum, para-
types in author's collection. Trioza maura* Forster
Figs. 176, 177)
4848 Trioza maura Forster, Verh. natur. Ver. preuss, Rhein. 5:94. 1872 Trioza maura Meyer-Diir, Mitt. Sch. Ent. Ges. 3581 so. ‘rioza helvetina Meyer-Diir, Mitt, Sch. Ent. Ges. 152 Prisca maura Oshanin, Vere. palae, Hemip. 2376. 230
1910 Trioza nigrifrons Crawford, Pom. Coll: Jour. Ent, 2:230,
1810 Trioza fulvida Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour, Ent. 2:231, 358. {o10 Trioca fulvida similis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 2:281, 359. {10 Trice aurantiaca Crawiord, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:231, 360. {ell Trioza aurantiaca Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 3:628. 1912 Trieza maura Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull, 202:228. 1912 Trioza maura Oshanin, Kat, paléa. Hemip. 129. 1913 Trioza maura Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 49. 4913 Trioza aurantiaca Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 39. 1913 Trioza fulvida Aulmann, Psy. Cat 46. 4913 Trioza nigrifrons Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 50. ;
Y9l4 Trioza maura Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus, Bull 85:89...
414 Trioza saliciperda Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:89. 4917 Trioza maura Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 795. |
1925 Trioza maura Crawford, Proc. Haw. Ent. Soc. 6, 1:30. 1998 Trioza maura Leonard, Ins. N. Y. 183. 1932 Trioza maura Klyver, Pan-Pac. Ent. 8:14. 1932 Trioza maura Klyver, Ent. News 43:37. 1935 Trioza maura Haupt, Tierw. Mitel. 4, 3:247. 1038 Trioze maura Strickland, Can. Ent, 70:204.

ip of folded wings 3.5 to 4 mm. .

a “Color extremely variable, mhost typical coloration reddish
brown, but often darker. Head testaceous to black. Genal processes vary
from almost white to black. Antennae white basally, dark distad. Ab-
domen usually darker than thorax but often white ventrad, entire

requently green. Forewings sometimes fumose. aoe roe Head narrower than thorax, somewhat deflexed. Vertex
somewhat platelike, discal impressions from very shallow to promingits
anterior margin abrupt, scarcely bulging. Genal processes broad basally,
acute, divergent, about *; as long as vertex. Antennae about 142 times
as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum depresse "
below plane of vertex. Forewings variable in length, from 2% to al most
3 times as long as wide, roundly angulate. Hind tibia with basal spur . two inner apical spines. Anterior portion of metacoxae bluntly produced. Genrratra: Male genitalia small. Proctiger short, produced into two

 

  

 

 

*From matros, Gr. adj—dark. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 561

long lobes, as long as or longer than vertical axis of proctiger, blunt. Forceps in lateral view slender, curved cephalad distally, apices acute; in
caudal view swollen basally, distal half very slender, arched apices
touching. Female genital segment typically shorter than preceding ab-
dominal sternite; ventral valve somewhat upcurved, with acute black tip;
dorsal valve longer, curved ventrad, black at apex, acute. This, one of the few holarctic species of psyllids, was described
from Europe. As can be judged from the foregoing description, most of
the characters are quite variable, as one would expect in such an abund-
ant and widespread species. Like the three following species, it lives upon
Salix spp. All four of these Salix-inhabiting species are very closely related and
somewhat difficult to distinguish one from another. Trioza minuta is very
much like maura; in fact they seem to intergrade, but until their identical-
ness is established by biological. evidence I am unwilling to abolish
minuta. The female genitalia are almost indistinguishable. In typical
specimens of minuta the anterior margin of the vertex is swollen and the
genal processes are shorter than in maura, The male genitalia of typical
specimens of the two are also sufficiently different to be readily separated. The color and markings of varians and incerta make them quite distinct
from the other two species. In addition the male genitalia of varians are
easily distinguished; the female genital segment, however, is much like
maura in structure; the larger size and more rounded wings (almost
as round as a Psylla wing) are quite distinct. The male genitalia of incerta
are very similar to maura, but the female genital segment is distinctive;
also the genal processes are more slender and placed farther back under
the head. Many of these distinguishing characters are largely differences in
degree and are therefore difficult to describe and even to figure. If typical
specimens of the different species are at hand, they can be quite readily
separated. It is possible that these species hybridize with one another,
thus causing much of the difficulty of separating them. It would not be
strange if they did hybridize, as they occur on the same host plants and
in enormous numbers. The chief difficulty in explaining some of the
variations that occur as being a result of hybridization is that several
short distinct series of what appear to be intermediates are at hand. While collecting on willow near Creede, Colorado, I noted two forms
of psyllids that I thought to be distinct, one red with a green abdomen
occurring in enormous numbers on Salix longifolia. another yellowish,
abundant on a broad-leaved, yellow-stemmed willow. I can, however,
find no significant structural differences between the two forms; both
are apparently maura. Patch, noting the same color variations, concluded
that the lighter forms were teneral, but this is not the case. Much the
same sort of variation has been noted by Caldwell in minuta. Specimens of maura are at hand from the following states and pro-
vinces: California, Oregon, Washington, British Columbia, Alaska, Mon-

    

 

562 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

tana, Idaho, Utah, Nevada, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico, and Minne-
sota. It is also recorded from Alberta, Illinois, and New York. Trioza minuta* Crawford
Figs. 178, 179)

1895 Trioza salicis Mally, Proc. Ia. Acad. Sci, (1894) 2:161. [non] Trioza salicis Low, Verh. zoo! jot. Ges, Wien 32:249. 1883. 1910 Trioza salicis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent z

  

 
  
 
 
 

  

1910 Trioza assimilis Crawford, Pom. [non] Trioza assimilis Flor, Bull. Soc. Imy

4911 Trioza minuta Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:425, 427, 432. {Sil Trioca minuta similis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:425, 427, 432. J911 Trioza assimilis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jor Ent. 3:426, 429, 438. 1911 Trioza nigra Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour, Ent. 3:427, 428. 1911 Trioza salicis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 3:426, 428, 432, -

Jol Triosa flori Crawford, Pom, Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:503 (n. n. for assimilis). Y911 Trioza nigrilla Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 503 (n. n. for nigra). 4912 Trioza louisianae Aulmann, Ent. Rund. 22 (n. n. for nigra). 1912 Trioza pomonae Aulmann, Ent. Rund. 22 (n. n, for assimilis). 1913 Trioza louisianae Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 48. 1913 Trioza minuta Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 4

1913 Trioza pomonae Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 51. 1913 Trioza salicis Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 53. 1914 Trioza salicis Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:91. 1917 Trioza nigrilla Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am, 796. 1918 Trioza salicis McAtee, Ent. News 29:

1922 Trioza nigrilla Osborn, N. Y. Ii, For., Tech. Pub. 16:53. St. Col
1932 Trioza salicis Klyver, Ent. News 43:

1838 Phylloplecta salicis Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull. 34:250. 1939 Phylloplecta multidubiata Caldwell, Can. Ent, 71:21,

1939 Phylloplecta inultidubiata Strickland, Can, Ent. 71:214. 1940 Phylloplecta minuta Caldwell, Ohio Jour. Sci. 40:50:

 

 

  

 

 
 

  

   
 

 

 

Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 3.5 mm,

Coxor: Head usually black, or orange with some black markings. Genal processes sometimes white. Thorax orange, often with black
markings. Abdomen typically green but frequently dark orange brown. Females lighter colored than males. ‘Sraucture: Head small, narrower than thorax, Vertex with discal
impressions shallow, strongly bulging in front, overhanging median ocel-
lus, Genal processes short, acute, divergent from base, % as long as
vertex. Antennae about 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax
strongly arched, pronotum depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings
slender, angulate, almost 3 times as long as wide. Hind tibia with two
inner apical spines, serrate basal carina. Metacoxa somewhat produced
anteriorly. Gunzratra: Male proctiger shorter than forceps, caudal lobes only
14 as long as axial portion. Forceps in lateral view slender, tapering from
base to acute apices, apical third slightly flexed cephalad; in caudal view
broad basally, slightly arched to acute apices. Female genital segment

* minutus -a -um, L. adj—small. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 563

short; ventral valve upeurved, scarcely sh: ;
ly downeurved, longer than ventral, BILE? tapes dorsal valve strong,
is willow-inhabiting form was described b i

nee oa en A BO
preoccupied, however, by Léw’s use of the name in 1882. Crawford in
1910 proposed three new names, nigra, assimilis, and minuta, for variants
of the same species. In 1911 he changed the name nigra to nigrilla and
assimilis to flori as these names were both preoccupied; subsequently
(1914) he suppressed all of these names as synonyms of Trioza salicis
Mally. as  saticis is preoccupied, this leaves minuta as the oldest available

e which has been applied to the speci
name which bas been appli species and therefore the name by

Caldwell in 1938 referred the species to the genus
erroneously resurrected the homonym salicis; this error Se eed a
1939, but he added another name multidubiata, to the already long list of
synonyms which this species carries. Subsequently (1940), he correctly
attributed the name minuta to the spectes. ;

pecimens are at hand from the following localities: i

Maryland, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Colorado, Arizona, Cuitenta Gor. Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and Montana. Caldwell records it from Ohio,
gives the life history, and describes the immature stages. It is also record
ed from New York and doubtlessly occurs over most of North America. The type of minuta is assumed to be in the Crawford collection. The
type of T. salicis Mally, female, Ames, Iowa, September 8, 1894, is in the
Towa State College Collection at Ames, Iowa. a

The types of Crawford’s various synonymic species are also assumed
to be in his collection if they were ever selected. Trioza minuta var. arizonae* Aulmann
(Fig. 263)

1010 Tress marginata Crawford, Pom Coll. Jour, Ent, 2:232, 356. {non} Trioza marginata ‘Low, Verh. zool.-bot. Ges. Wien 32:
1911 Trioza marginata Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. Sa age, 2. 3882. 1812 Trioza marginata Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta, Bull 202:228,
8 za arizonae Aulmann, Ent. Rund. Heft 22 *
1913 Trioze arizonae Aulmann, Psy. Cat, 39, Ufde Aulmann, 1818). 1914 Trioza arizonae Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:88. 1917 Trioza arizonae Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 795,

___ The brown posterior margin of the forewing is the character separat-
ing this variety from the typical form. This band, while quite distinctive,
is hardly of specific value. Specimens are at hand from Arizona and from
Oklahoma. __ Type, female, No, 18087 United States National Museum, has all the
wings broken off. ‘Type examined. * Genitive of Arizona. 564 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Trioza varians* Crawford
(Figs. 180, 181, 265)

ie ic . Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:231, 361. ILE Frio carlone Crawford, Bom. Col Jour. Bot 223 et
1913 Trioza varians Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 57. 1917 Trioza varians Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 796. 1938 Trioza varidns Strickland, Can. Ent. 70:204. 1939 Trioza varians Strickland, Can, Ent. 71:214.
to tip of folded wings 4 to 4.25 mm. one General color black. Tibiae, first tarsal segment, segment III
of antennae, broad subapical band on dorsal valve of female genital seg-
ment, yellow. Vertex and dorsum of thorax with extensive festaccous
markings. Vertex testaceous on margins and usually along median sul aes
Pronotum, posterior margin and mid-line of prescutum, Jongitud a
stripes on mesoscutum, scutellum, testaceous. Veins of forewings black. Srructure: Head narrow. Vertex raised, platelike, discal impres-
sions prominent. Eyes appearing slightly stalked. Genal processes Jone
slender, acute, somewhat divergent, 44 as long as vertex. Antennae 134
times as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum en-
tirely depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings about 2% times as
long as wide, very large, almost twice as Jong as body, apices rounde 4
Rs long and sinuate. Hind tibia with two inner apical spines, prominent,
serrate, basal carina. Metacoxa moderately produced anteriorly. Geniratia: Male proctiger shorter than forceps, caudal lobes Jatge,
almost as long as vertical portion. Forceps in lateral view long, s en er,
sinuate, evenly tapering to rounded apices; in caudal view very broa
basally, constricted and incurved midway, thence straight to apices. Female. genital segment short; ventral valve straight, apex produce: é as
a large tooth; dorsal valve twice as long as ventral, terminating as a blun
tooth. . |
cimens of this beautiful species are at hand from
Colonie where Rann to be limited in distribution to altitudes of about
11,000 feet or more. In addition to these specimens, I have one rom
California and one from Ungava Bay, H. B. T. It is also recorded from
ae . here are Colorado, C. F, Baker, No. 18088 United States National
Museum. Type examined. Trioza incerta} n. sp. (Figs. 161, 162, 302)

th to tip of folded wings 3.25 to 3.5 mm. Coa Color very much like varians. General color black. Mark-

  

* Part. adj. of vario, L. v.
Fincertus ~a -um, L. a

varied,
unsettied. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 565

ings orange red, almost identical pattern as varia:
lighter. Male forceps apparently always white,

Structure: Head narrower than thorax, deflexed. Vertex with mar-
gins raised, platelike, discal impressions shallow. Genal Processes about
% as long as vertex, straight, divergent, acute. Antennae about 1% times
as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum depressed
below. plane of vertex. Forewings about 2% times as long as wide. Hind
tibia with two inner apical spines, sérrate carina basally. Metacoxa some-
what produced anteriorly. Gewiratta: Male proctiger short, caudal lobes as long as vertical
portion. Forceps longer than proctiger; in lateral view slender, evenly
narrowed from base to acute apices, very strongly curved cephalad; in
caudal view very large basally, constricted, then straight to apices. Female
genital segment as long as rest of abdomen; ventral valve swollen basally,
slender apical portion 34 as Jong as base; dorsal valve longer than ventral,
somewhat attenuate apically, blunt. This form, while much like varians in coloration, is smaller, less ro-
bust, and has genitalia quite distinct from the latter species, It occurs on
willow at quite high altitudes (10,000 ft.) in southern Colorado. Speci-
mens are also at hand from California, Oregon, Washington, British
Columbia, and Alaska. Hotoryrr, female, and ALLOTYPE, male, Spring Creek Pass, Colorado,
June 29, 1937, L. D. Tuthill. Numerous PARATyPES with the same data
and also from the localities listed above. Holotype, allotype, and para-

types in author's collection; paratypes in United States National Museum
and Snow Collection, University of Kansas. ms. Females generally

Trioza rubra* Tuthill

(Figs. 212, 213, 213a, 303)
1939 Trioza rubra Tuthill, Ia. St. Coll. Jour. Sci, 13:185,

Length to tip of folded wings 3.75 mm,
Cotor: General color red to almost black, males darker in general. Distal portions of legs lighter. Antennae white except distal third black,
Srrucrure: Vertex almost plane, bulging in front, medial suture
prominent. Genal processes large, divergent, blunt,
Antennae almost twice as long as width of head, ba
swollen. Thorax weakly arched. Pronotum short, depressed below plane

of vertex. Forewings rather bluntly angled, almost 3 times as long as
wide. Hind tibia with large serrate carina basally, tw

vo inner apical spines. Metacoxa developed anteriorly as blunt process. Genrratra: Male proctiger with rather sharp caudally projecting
lobes, surrounding forceps. Forceps large at base, tapering to long slen-
der black-tipped apices, curving cephalad throughout their length; in
caudal view broad basally, lateral margins straight, mesal margins bearing

 
 

*rubrus -a -um, L, adj—red. 566 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

a triangular tooth midway, apices acute. Female genital segment short,
about 44 as long as rest of abdomen, dorsal valve somewhat concave,
black apically, slightly longer than ventral. Specimens are at hand from Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, and
Oregon. ‘Tyr, female, Creede, Colorado, in author’s collection. Trioza lobata* Crawford
(Figs. 182, 183, 253)

1814 Trioea lobata Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:76, 88
4917 Tricza lobata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 7
1981 Trioza lobata Klyver, Pan-Pac. Ent. 7:143. Length to tip of folded wings 3.25 to 3.5 mm. Cotor: General color yellow to yellowish brown. Abdomen green
ventrally. Tip of each antennal segment dark. Forewings with irregular
brown maculae as follows: a broad vitta extending from anal margin
between apex of clavus and Cuz obliquely to basal angle of costa, another
following margin from center of cubital cell across apex, a third arising
at tip of Rs extending to cubital cell. Maculae with darker brown dots. Srrucrure: Head broad, somewhat deflexed, narrower than thorax,
with hairlike pubescence. Vertex flat with two prominent discal im-
pressions, produced anteriorly each side of median ocellus. Genal pro-
cesses short, very strongly divergent, rounded, parallel with and not
much below plane vertex, ¥ as long as vertex including antero-lateral
portion. Antennae slightly less than twice as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched, sparsely pubescent. Pronotum depressed below
plane of vertex. Forewings short and broad, less than 2% times as long
as broad, bluntly angulate. Hind tibia with serrate basal carina, two
inner apical spines. Metacoxa with stout spiniform process anteriorly. Geniratra: Male genital segment small. Proctiger short, produced
into two long attenuate lobes. Forceps about as long as proctiger; in lateral
view rather broad basally, constricted midway, apices enlarged; in caudal
view broad at base, tapering and arched to acute apices. Female genital
segment short; ventral valve very short, apically produced as a large
black tooth; dorsal valve strongly curved downward, apex black, beak-
like. Crawford records the type series of this very distinctive species as
taken on “a species of Ceanothus.” Klyver lists one specimen from
Chrysothamnus. Specimens are at hand from Mojave, Mint Canyon,
Tehachapi, and Los Angeles, California; Santa Rita Mountains, Arizona;
Organ, New Mexico, and Rattlesnake Buttes in eastern Colorado. Type, male, No. 18086 United States National Museum. Type examined. .

*From lobus -i, Gr. noun—lobe; adjectival form—lobed. aa eae ee

 

 

by
fe. fe
fe

 

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 567

Trioza tripunctata* (Fitch)
(Figs. 184, 185, 267)

1851 Psylla tripunctata Fitch, 4th Rept. N. Y. Mus. 64. 1869 Psylla rubi Walsh and Riley, Am. En
1879 Psylla rubi Thomas, 8th Rept. St. Ent. 1880 Paylla tripunctata Fuller and Riley, Ai
1885 Trioza tripunctata Riley, Proc. Biol. Si
1893 Pout tripunctata Fitch, (Reprinted in

1894 Trioza tripunctata Mally, Proc. Ia. 1910 Trioza tripunctata Crawford, Po:

  
  
 

‘ash. 2:70.
tner’s 46th report, N. Y. State Museum,

Acad. Sci, 2:154,
Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:231, 232. A

, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:424, 429, 430,
1912 Trioza tripwnctata Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 202: 230. 1913 Trioza tripunctata Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 1914 Trioza tripunctata Crawford, U, S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:87. 1817 Trioza tripunctata Van Duzee, Cat. Hei . 1918 Trioza tripunctata McAtee, Ent. News 29:223,
1920 Trioza tripunctata Crawford, Ent. News 31:
1923 Trioza tripunctata Patch, Hemip. Conn. 245. 1923 Trioza tripunctata Peterson, N. 1. Agr. Exy
1926 Phyllopecta tripunctata Ferris, Can. Ent. 1938 Trioza tripunctata Brimley, Ins. N. C, 103. 1938 Phylloplecta tripunctata Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull. 34:248. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 4 mm. Coxor: General color yellow to brown. Tip of antennae dark. Fore-
wings marked with brown vittae as follows: along distal half of Rs, along
M and including cell Mz, along Cu and including cel! Cu, latter two con-
tinuous at margin, also a spot on anal vein. Structure: Head large, somewhat deflexed. Vertex platelike with
very broad shallow discal impressions. Genal processes large, subacute,
parallel to plane of vertex, between % and 24, as long as vertex. Antennae
about 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax broad, strongly arched. Pronotum depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings broad, about
2% times as long as wide, angulate; Rs long, sinuate, marginal cells very
short and broad. Hind tibia with basal spur, two inner apical spines. Metacoxa with anterior portion produced as blunt process. Genitata: Male genital segment of medium size. Proctiger short,
produced into two, long, distally rounded lobes. Forceps as long as proc-
tiger, evenly narrowed to acute apices curved cephalad, scarcely arched. Female genital segment about ¥% as long as rest of abdomen; dorsal valve
excavate on dorsal margin, somewhat longer than ventral, latter straight,
both acute,’ black-tipped. _ One of the first species of psyllids to receive attention in North
America was this “bramble flea-louse” or “blackberry psyllid.” It has
attracted considerable attention in the eastern part of the United States
as a pest on blackberries. Peterson’s paper (1923) is a most complete
account of the damage, life history, and control. It includes figures of
the various stages and a complete bibliography up to 1923. The common
blackberry (Rubus) is the summier host, and Peterson apparently proved

 

  

  

 

   

  
 
 
  

 

 

  

 

 

 

* From tri-, L. prefix—three + punctatus, L. (p. part. of pungo)—punctured. 568 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

that coniferous trees are an essential host for the overwintering females,
There is but one generation per year. Specimens are at hand from South
Carolina, Maryland, New Hampshire, and Minnesota. It has also been. recorded as occurring in Virginia, District of Columbia, New York, Con-
necticut, Maine, New Jersey, Ontario, Florida, North Carolina, Ohio,
Michigan, and probably occurs throughout all the eastern portion of
North America wherever Rubus and conifers occur together. Type, No, 1345 United States National Museum, male and female on
one pin. Types examined. Trioza californica* Crawford

(Fig. 269)
1910 Trioza californica Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 2:232, 234,
1911 Triozoida californica Crawford, Pom, Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:492. 1913 Trioza californica Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 40. 1914 Ceropsylla californica Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:102. 1914 Trioza ichneumonia Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:103. 1917 Ceropsylla californica Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 798. Length to tip of folded wings 4 mm. .Cotor: General body color orange to brown. Head darker, espe-
cially genal processes almost black. Abdominal sternites, basal third of
antennae, distal portions of legs light. Veins R -+- M +- Cu, R, anal margin. basally, and adjacent membranes heavily embrowned. Strucrure: Head of medium size, narrower than thorax. Vertex
plane with broad discal impressions. Genal processes large, straight, sub-
acute, only slightly divergent, barely shorter than vertex. Antennae
slightly less than twice as long as width of head. Eyes protruding rather
more than usual. Thorax strongly arched. Anterior margin of pronotum
depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings about 2% times as long as
wide, acute at apex; Rs short. Hind tibia with two inner apical spines,
large serrate basal spur. Anterior portion of metacoxa slightly produced. Genrratta: Male genital segment small. Proctiger short, with long,
blunt posterior lobes. Forceps large at base, slender and laterally flat-
tened abruptly at about half their length, apical third curved cephalad,
apices acute. Female genital segment very short, dorsal valve slightly
longer than ventral, acute. ‘This species is represented in the material before me by several
specimens from Southern California and one from Gila County, Arizona. Crawford also records it from Colorado on Salix. He placed this species
in the genus Ceropsylla on the basis of a tendency toward a petiolate
condition of M and Cu ‘in the forewings. This petiole is very slight or
entirely wanting in the specimens I have examined. It is quite unlike
C. sideroxyli in head and thoracic characters, and even in wing venation
it is more typically triozine; hence, I am referring it back to Trioza. ‘Type, male, mountains near Claremont, California, Baker, is in the
Crawford Collection. * Adjectival form of California. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 569

Trioza phoradendri* Tuthill

Figs. 214, 215, 304)
1989 Trioza phorodendrae Tuthill, Ia. St. Coll. Jour. Sei. 13:182. - Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 mm. Cotor: Uniformly yellow except eyes, tip of female genital segment,
ovipositor and margins of male forceps, black. Forewings yellowish,veins
yellow. :

Srrucrure: Vertex somewhat rounding. Genal processes acute,
slightly divergent, % as long as vertex, pubescent. Antennae about as
Jong as width of head. Thorax scarcely arched. Pronotum moderately
long, depressed below plane of vertex. Legs short. Hind tibia with large
basal spur, three inner apical spines. Forewings small, narrowly rounded
apically, almost 3 times as long as wide; marginal cells small, Rs very long. Genrratra: Male proctiger quite broad, posterior margin curved;
anterior margin straight. Forceps in lateral view curving cephalad;
“folded” so as to appear double in apical half from caudal view, lateral
folds evenly narrowed to apices, medial folds with heavy, black, truncate
apices, bearing many, very heavy, medially projecting setae basally. Female genital segment as long as rest of abdomen, rounded, produced at
apex into a brown styliform portion, at least tip of ovipositor protruding. Known only from the type series and one additional female all from
Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado. Host Phoradendron juniperinum
Engelm. The original spelling of the name as phorodendrae was an error
of transcription and should be phoradendri, as above. Type, male, in author's collection. _ Trioza phoradendri acuminatat n. subsp. Similar to typical subspecies but apparently greenish in color (the
specimen at hand is old and therefore quite faded). Head smaller and
narrower proportionately. Genal processes fully as long as vertex, slightly
divergent, acute. Antennae 114 times as long as width of head. Male
genitalia similar. Hotoryrr, male, Los Angeles County, California, May, collected on
“Phorodendron pubescens,” No. 55182 United States National Museum. The genitalia are somewhat obscured on the one specimen at hand
but seem to be very much like the typical form. This may be a distinct
species, but until more material is available to certify such an opinion I
prefer to consider it as a subspecies. * Genitive of Phoradendron—the generic name of the host. Facuminatus, L. (p. part. of acumino)—sharpened,

 

570 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Trioza bakeri* Crawford

(Figs. 186, 187, 252)
1910 Trioza bakeri Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:230, 235. 1911 Trioza bakeri Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 3:424, 428,
1911 Trioza montana Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:631. 1913 Trioza bakeri Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 39. 1914 Trioza bakeri Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:77. 1914 Trioza puberula Crawford, U.S, Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:78. 1917 Trioza bakeri Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 792. 1932 Trioza bakeri Klyver, Ent. News 43:35. Length to tip of folded wings 4 to 4.5 mm. Cotor: Variable from yellow to brown, tip of antennae black, abdo-
men of female green when alive. Variable brown markings on dorsum. ‘Wings hyaline. Srructure: Head large, almost as broad as thorax. Vertex plane,
rectangular, discal foveae and medial suture prominent, Genal processes
on approximately same plane as vertex. Antennae about as long as width
of head. Thorax broad and flat for genus. Pronotum large, not depressed
below vertex. Forewings about 2% times as long as wide, acutely angled;
Rs long and sinuate. Hind tibia with serrate basal tubercle, three inner
apical spines. Metacoxa with short, stout, anterior process. Genrrauta: Proctiger of male produced caudad as a blunt triangle,
widest basally, with truncate apex. Forceps shorter than proctiger; in
lateral view almost straight; in caudal view arched to black-margined
apices, posterior edge produced as blunt tooth. Female genital segment
large, % as long as rest of abdomen in fresh specimens, about as long as
rest of abdomen in dried specimens, valves straight, equal in length. Described and recorded heretofore only from California, this species
has been taken on Pinus abies, Arctostaphylos, pear. In 1938 (July 19)
I swept numerous specimens from Rhamnus smithii Green near Pagosa
Springs, Colorado. Since the bushes upon which they occurred were
quite isolated and teneral specimens occur in the series, I believe this
shrub to be the host plant. Unfortunately, I-did not determine whether
or not nymphs were present. . Type, male, Claremont, California, Baker, in Crawford Collection. Colorado specimens compared with type. Trioza breviantennatat Crawford

1914 Trioza breviantennata Crawford, U.S. Nat, Mus., Bull. 85:5, 8. 1917 Trioza breviantennata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 7:
1932 Trioza breviantennata Klyver, Ent, News 43:35. Crawford describes this species as similar to Trioza bakeri but differ-
ing in color, pubescence, punctation, and in minor details of structure. Ido not believe that these differences are of specific value as Crawford
describes them, but as I have seen none of the specimens on which the

* Named in honor of C. F. Baker. *
7 From brevis -e, L. adj.—short + adjectival form of antenna. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA S71

species was based, I hesitate to throw it into synonymy. His description
follows:

“Very similar in size and general proportions to T. bakeri; wings
relatively a little shorter. General color light to dark brown, often very
dark; legs and antennae lighter, except latter black at tip; in light forms
the vertex is dark brown to black. Vertex and dorsum not pubescent as
in bakeri, but very coarsely punctate. “Similar in many respects to bakeri, but vertex very conspicuously
bulging on each side of median line; genal cones relatively shorter; an-
tennae a little shorter, scarcely as long as width of head. Thorax as in
bakeri, but not pubescent. Hind tibiae with three apical spines within. Wings large, resembling bakeri. “Genitalia: Male—Anal valve as in bakeri, but base of triangle
shorter; forceps similar, subacute at apex, sides almost parallel. Female—
Genital segment similar, but dorsal valve a little longer than ventral. “Described from two males and one female from Claremont, Cali-
fornia (mountains), collected by C. F. Baker, no data with them.”

Tyre in Crawford Collection,

 

Trioza (Megatrioza)* diospyri; (Ashmead)
(Figs. 188, 189, 254)

1881 Psylla diospyri Ashmead, Can. Ent. 13:22. 1885 Trioza diospyri Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 2:71

1910 Trioza latipennis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. ‘ni 2:20. 1910 Trioza diospyri Crawford, Pom. Coll, Jour. Ent. 1911 Trioza diospyri Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3: 2k 428
1912 Trioza diospyri Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull, 202:226. 1913 Psylla diospyri Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 14. 1914 Trioza diospyri Crawford, U. §. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:78. 1917 Trioza diospyri Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 792,
1918 Trioza diospyri McAtee, Ent. News 29:23. 1919 Megatrioza diospyri Crawford, P! 1926 Spanioza diospyri Enderlein, Ent. Mitt. 1926 Phyllopecta diospyri Ferris, ‘Can. Ent, 58:16. 1928 Trioza diospyri Leonard, Ins, N. Y. 183. 1928 Phyllopecta diospyri Ferris, Can, Ent
1938 Trioza diospyri Brimley, Ins. N.

1938 Phylloplecta diospyri Caldwell, Ohio Biol. Surv., Bull, 34:24,

Length to tip of folded wings 4.5 mm,

Coxor: General color shining black. Meso- and metatibiae, all tarsi,
genal processes and antennae except tip, whitish. Srructure: Entire body sparsely clothed with long hairlike setae. Head broad but narrower than thorax. Vertex plane, with slight discal
impressions. Genal processes short, about 1% as long as vertex, rounded,
slightly divergent. Antennae about 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum strongly depressed, entirely below. level of vertex. Forewings very large, almost twice as long as body, about

 

  

    

 

  
    

* From megas, Gr. adj- j—great, large + trioza. + Genitive of Diospyros—the generic name of the host. 572 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

23% times as long as wide, acutely angled at apex; marginal cells unusually
large, especially medial, Rs short, less than ¥% total length of wing, straight. Hind wings very small, less than % as long as forewings. Legs longer
than in most species. Hind tibia with three inner apical spines, without
basal spur or carina. Posterior metacoxal spur large, curved. Anterior
margin of metacoxa produced into spur, larger than posterior one. Gentratta: Male genital segment small. Proctiger somewhat longer
than forceps, produced caudad.as large blunt lobes, anus borne on a
prominent epiphysis. Forceps almost straight in lateral view; in caudal
view broad, basal %4 straight, apical 14 curved inward, apices with several
small black teeth. Female genital segment of medium size, about % as
long as rest of abdomen, valves acute, ventral upcurved to meet dorsal,
latter longer, entire segment usually pointing ventrad. This species is quite distinct in many respects from other North
American Trioza. It is abundant throughout the range of the common
persimmon, Diospyros virginiana L., which is its host. Specimens are at
hand from the following states: Florida, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi,
Louisiana, Texas, Oklahoma, Kentucky, Tennessee, New Jersey, Iowa. It is also recorded from Missouri, Virginia, North Carolina, Ohio, New
York. Ashmead gives the life history in Florida in some detail:

“By the middle of April this is found in considerable numbers on
the leaves of the young trees, with beaks inserted, almost standing on
their heads, and swaying from side to side like the motion of a vessel in
a stormy sea. This motion is evidently intended to assist either in insert-
ing the beak or in pumping up the juices of the tree. “At this time they are also caught copulating, soon after which the
female begins depositing her eggs. These are very minute, 0.01 inch in
length, elongate ovate, pale greenish in color, with a wavy beak beneath
at thick end, and a long filament at tip of smaller end, nearly the length
of the egg, and extending backwards over it. These are laid along the
margin of the leaf, without regard to regularity, the female first preparing
for their reception by secreting a threadlike, transparent, gummy sub-
stance along the extreme edge of the leaf; she then fastens them in place
by the beak, which adheres securely to the gummy substance. “These hatch in from 5 to 6 days (actual observation) and the leaf
from their punctures curls completely over them; under this they reside
until just before the final transformation. The pupa then comes forth,
attaches itself to a leaf or a twig, and changes into the perfect fly, escaping
through a longitudinal slit in the head and thorax. The young take from
four to five weeks to mature and breed throughout the whole summer. “Like the Fig Psylla, the fall brood probably lay their eggs in crevices
of the bark and twigs; these hatch at the first breath of spring, feed on
the tender new shoots and leaves, and are those found fully matured by
the first and second week in April.”

The fifth stadium nymph has been described and figured by Ferris
(1926). THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 573

____ Tyre, female, No. 14820 United States N;
in poor condition, but is unmistakable. Type examined. ‘ational Museum, is moldy and

Trioza beameri* Tuthill

(igs. 216, 217, 305)
1939 Trioza beameri Tuthill, Ia. St. Coll. Jour. Sci. 13:182,
Geneth to tip of folded wings 5 mm,
‘oLoR: Gi iti i
tengo or eneral color whitish-yellow except eyes and tips of an-

v Structure: Entire body pubescent, least prominently. on abdomen,

V oie rather flat with two Prominent sulcate depressions, Antennae about
8 times as long as width of head. i

eh irae ead. Genal processes large, extending for-

ng as vertex. Thorax not ver
very long, scarcely depressed. Forewings Nay ee net: a
body, acute, almost 3 times as long as broad; cubit
medial. Posterior tibia with serrate carina basally, three inner aniat
spines. Anterior process of metacoxa scarcely developed. ee

_ Genmatia: Male proctiger in lateral view broad in basal 4, then
obliquely truncate to apex. Forceps in lateral view almost straight to
apices, latter produced caudad as blunt black teeth; caudal view tread
est at base, bowed out, evenly narrowed to apices. Female genital segment
about as long as rest of abdomen, valves straight to acute apices, done]
slightly longer than ventral, very pubescent, pies dors

Kni ‘i . Calton” Only from the type series from the San Jacinto Mountains,

Tyre, male, in Snow Collection, University of Kansas. , twice as long as
ital cell larger than

Trioza chlora} Tuthill
. (Figs. 218, 219, 306)
1938 Trioza chlora Tuthill, Ent. News 49:244,

Length to tip of folded wings 3.25 to 3.50 mm. Cotor: General color white to yello: ical 4
antennae black. Thoracic d ind vertex deeper yon of

lorsum and
Wines hatte ind vertex deeper yellow to orange,

ere mUeTURE: Head medium in size, post-ocular occipital region very
large giving the eyes the appearance of projecting forward’ Verte,
somewhat rounding, rather deeply emarginate in front, extending forweed
over front ocellus, Genal processes vertical, about as long as vertex,
rather acute. Antennae twice as long as width of head. Thorax strongly
arched. Pronotum short, descending, depressed below plane of verte,
Forewings almost 3 times as long as broad, sharply angled; venation
typical triozine. Hind tibia with large basal spur, three inner apical

{Named in honor of R, H. Beamer. + From chloros, Gr. adj—pale. 574 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

Genrratta: Male genitalia small. Proctiger broad at base, tapered
to slightly produced apex, bearing a black spine at base on each side. Forceps slightly shorter than proctiger; in lateral view broad, anterior
margin almost straight, posterior margin slightly curved, apices roundly
truncate and slightly produced anteriorly, apical margin brown. Female
genital segment shorter than rest of abdomen, basal portion subglobular,
apex a short, brown, styliform elongation; dorsal valve slightly longer
than ventral. Hotoryee and attoryre in the Snow Collection, University of Kan-
sas, are from Arizona and are the only known specimens. Trioza proximata* Crawford
(Figs. 190, 191)

1911 Trioza proximata Crawford, ‘Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 3:424, 429, 435. 1914 Trioza proximata Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:81. Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 3.5 mm,

Cotor: Testaceous to almost white, perhaps greenish when fresh. Tips of antennae and styliform portion of female genital segment black. Srrucrure: Head narrower than thorax. Occiput large, posterior
margin of eyes opposite lateral ocelli. Vertex with two discal sulci, medial
suture deep. Genal processes short, heavy, blunt, ¥% as long as vertex. Antennae twice as long as width of head. Thorax broad, quite strongly
arched. Pronotum strongly descending but not at all depressed below
plane of vertex. Forewings almost 3 times as long as wide, rounded
apically. Hind tibia with large serrate basal tubercle, three inner apical
spines. Geniratia: Male proctiger long, caudal margin arcuately produced,
a prominent epiphysis at apex. Forceps long; in lateral view moderately
broad, curved cephalad, tapering, apices black, with small black tooth; in
caudal view almost straight-sided, slightly arched, a prominent row of
setae on inner margins. Female genital segment very long, %4 as long as
remainder of body, proximal 44 large, tapering distal portion of valves
very slender, acuminate and appressed to ovipositor, latter extending
somewhat beyond valves; dorsal valve longer than ventral. ‘A number of specimens are at hand from Ramsey Canyon, Huachuca
Mountains, Arizona, October 30, 1937, collected by P. W. Oman, which
seem undoubtedly to be this species described from southwestern Mexico. No host plant data are available. Tyre in Crawford Collection. Trioza collaris+ Crawford

(Figs. 192, 193)

1910 Trioza collaris Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:229, 347. 1911 Trioza collaris Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:424, 429. * Apparently from proximus -a -um, L. adj—nearest. {collaris ~e, L. adj—pertaining to the neck.”

 

e
:
fe
:
le
E
s

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 575,

1912 Trioza collaris Pat: 5. 1813 Prose collaris Actas ‘pa Caria > Ball 20z2as
id Frioza colors Ferien, U5 Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:81,
a Q
1982 Prioza eollaris Kiyver, Ent. News tag. Length to tip of folded wings 4 to 4.5 mm,
‘otor: General color green to yellowish i i
: green, occasionally with
some darker markings on dorsum of thorax. Tips of antennae. styliform
Portion of female genitalia, and apices of male forceps dark.”
Srrucrure: Head large, only slightly narrower than thorax. Vertex
scarcely plane, discal impressions prominent. Genal processes short, not
over % as long as vertex, appressed, blunt to acute, Antennae twice oe
long as width of head. Thorax large, flat. Pronotum long, strongly
descending cephalad, not depressed below vertex. Forewings large angu-
lar at apex, almost 3 times as long as wide. Hind tibia with basal tubercle
ring two small spines, with three inner apical spi i ic
baring two small spines, apical spines. Anterior portion
Genrrauta: Male proctiger slight] i
: ly, roundingly produced on caudal
margin. Forceps about as long as proctiger, slender, bent cephalad,
slightly bowed, apices sharp, black. Female genital segment large’ about
twice as long as rest of abdomen, about half as long as remainder of body. consisting of a large basal-portion and a styliform projection, latter about
as long as base, black; basal portion produced ventrally just before con. striction. This species is apparently quite common in Californi i
i nia and neighbori
states. Klyver gives data indicating Baccharis spp. as the rebate host,
Numerous specimens are at hand from California, Arizona, New Mexico,
and El Paso, Texas. Some of these speci é - 1
and El Paso, Texas. specimens bear labels “collected on
Tyre in Crawford Collection. Trioza longistylus* Crawford

1910 Trioza longistylus Crawford, Pom. Coll, Jour. Ent. 2:
1911 Trioza longistylus Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Eni, dtai
1912 Trioza longistylus Patch, Me. Agr, Exp. Sta., Bull. 202-227
1913 Trioza longistylus Aulmann, Psy. Cat.48. 1914 Trioza longistylus Crawford, U, S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:82
1917 Trioza longistylus Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 793,”

An examination of the type (No. 18083 United SI i
c . tates National Mu-
seum), a female, fails to show any apparently significant difference
between this form and collaris except that the ventral hump present on
the Senital segment of the female of collaris is lacking. That this is a
istinet species is extremely doubtful, but it is retai i
collection in the type locality. Hh Teteined, penting further

 

* From longus -a -um, L. adj—long + stylus ~i, Lem. noun—style,

   

576 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Trioza mexicana* minor** n. n.

Figs. 194, 195)
1911 Trioza mexicana minuta Crawford, Pom, Coll. Jour. Ent,
4914 Trioza mexicana minuta Crawford. U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. Length to tip of folded wings 2.75 to 3.0 mm. Coxor: .General color red. Abdomen darker. Legs and genal pro-
cesses testaceous. Srrucrure: Head large but narrower than thorax. : Vertex with
medial suture prominent, discal impressions very shallow, rounding in
front to genal processes. Latter straight, slender, acute, scarcely diver~
gent, % as long as vertex. Antennae about 1% times as long as width of
head. Thorax broad, well arched, with very short, sparse pubescence,
scarcely visible, Pronotum long, scarcely depressed below vertex. Fore-
wings broad, rounded apically, slightly less than 2% times as long as
wide, finely punctate. Hind tibia with large basal spur, three inner apical
spines. Genrratia: Male proctiger roundly produced caudad, with very
distinct apical epiphysis. Forceps in lateral view rather broad to near
apex then curved cephalad, apices broad, black; in caudal view broad,
almost straight, apices incurved, touching, postero-mesal margins with a
row of very large heavy setae. Female genital segment longer than rest of
abdomen, basal portion large, swollen, apices of valves acuminate, black;
prominent short setae on all of basal portion, a tuft of very long setae on
dorsal valve at base of acuminate portion. This insect was described by Crawford from Mexico. Numerous
specimens are at hand from southern Arizona and have been compared
with the type. Although this subspecies is like the typical form except
for slight differences in the genal processes, it is so consistently smaller
that it is maintained. The name minor is proposed to replace the name
minuta which is preoccupied by Trioza minuta Crawford. Crawford
records the typical form as taken on Rhus sp. Type (type of Trioza mexicana minuta Crawford) in Crawford Col-
lection. 429, 440. Trioza quadripunctatat Crawford
(Figs. 196, 266)

1910 Trioza quadripunctata Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:233. 1911 Trioza quadripunctata Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 3:425, 429, 433. 3912 Trioza quadripunctata Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 202:229. 3913 Trioza quadripunctata Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 51. 4914 Trioza quadripunctata Crawford, U. S, Nat. Mus. Bull. 85:82. 1917 Trioza quadripunctata Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip. N. Am. 793. 1926 Spanioza quadripunctata Enderlein, Ent, Mitt. 15:400. 1928 Trioza quadripunctata Leonard, Ins. N. Y. 183. .

* mexicana—the adjectival form of Mexico. ** minor -us, L. adj. (comp. of parvus)—smaller. From quadri, L, comb, form—four + punctatus, L. (p. part. of pngo)—
punctured. ie
rE
ie
e
ie
E
Hs
fe
fe
? r
e

 

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 577

1 5 io Bi
1888 Tricce duadribunctate Strickland Can, Ek 1004 ST
1939 Trioza quadripunctata Strickland, Can. Ent. . Length to tip of folded wings 4 mm. | Cotor: General color of summer form greenish-white to yellowish,
winter form darker, brownish. Apical % of antennae and tips of tarsi
black. Hind margin of forewing with four black spots, three distal ones
coinciding with radular areas typical for genus, remainder of wing hyaline
or somewhat milky. Srrucrure: Head small, narrower than thorax, Vertex with promi-
nent discal impressions, anterior margin produced, overhanging. Genal
processes short, stout, divergent, about % as long as vertex. Antennae
twice as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum long,
anterior margin below plane of vertex. Forewings short, slightly less
than 2% times as long as wide, costal margin rounded, apex scarcely
angulate, Rs short, straight. Hind tibia without basal armature, with three
inner apical spines. | Genrratta: Male proctiger arcuately produced caudad, an apical
epiphysis. Forceps long, slender; in lateral view straight; in caudal view
strongly arched to acute black apices. Female genital segment % as long
as rest of abdomen, valves straight, acute, dorsal slightly longer than
ventral, black-tipped. Numerous specimens of this nettle- (Urtica) inhabiting species are
at hand from the following localities: Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Kansas,
Colorado, and Wyoming. It is also recorded from California, Montana,
Alberta, Ohio, and New York. It is very much like albifrons but can
readily be distinguished from it by the dark maculae in the forewings. This may be simply a variety of albifrons, but it seems doubtful from
collecting and distributional data. I have swept great numbers of albi-
frons in Colorado and Minnesota without finding a single specimen of
quadripunctata; in Towa pure populations of quadripunctata have been
observed. Type, male, No. 18084 United States National Museum. Type examined. Trioza albifrons* Crawford
(Figs. 3, 197, 198)

1910 Trioza albifrons Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 2:231, 355,
1910 Trioza rotundipennis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 1910 Trioza similis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 1910 T: i
19il 7
191 T
igi
1st T: i

1913 Trioza albifrons Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 39. 1913 Trioza fovealis Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 46,
1913 Trioza rotundipennis Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 52. * From albus -a -um, L. adj.—white + frons frontis, L. f, noun—forehead. 578 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

1918 Trioza similis Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 55. 1914 Trioza albifrons Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:83,
1917 Trioze albifrons Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 793. 1930 Trioza albifrons Klyver, Can. Ent. 62:169. 1932 Trioza albifrons Klyver, Ent. News 43:36. 1938 Trioza similis Strickland, Can. Ent. 70:204. Length to tip of folded wings 3 to 3.5 mm. Coxor: General color from green to light yellow through brown to
black. In lighter forms only eyes, distal % of antennae, and last segment
of tarsi, dark. In dark forms, rim of vertex, male genitalia and usually
legs, light. (Between these extremes all variations in color occur.) ‘Srrucrore: Head small, narrower than thorax. Disc of vertex de-
pressed, edges carinate, protruding in front. Genal processes acute, diver-
gent, on approximately parallel plane to vertex, about % as long as
vertex. Antennae 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax strongly
arched. Pronotum depressed below plane of vertex. .Forewings varying
from angular to round apically; Rs rather short to Jong. Hind tibia
without basal armature, with three inner apical spines. Genrratia: Male proctiger slightly longer than forceps, basal %4
roundingly produced. Forceps stout, arched to heavy, apparently black-
tipped apices (see Klyver, 1930), anterior margins excavate near apices. Female genital segment % to % as long as rest of abdomen, valves
approximately equal in length, almost straight to usually sharp apices,
somewhat rounded in some specimens. Crawford states that there are sometimes only two inner apical
spines on the hind tibia instead of three. I have examined several hundred
specimens from various localities and have seen this condition on only two
specimens, one collected by Crawford at Stanford University and one
other. In both these specimens one tibia bears three spines and the other
only two. This condition I believe to be only an aberration of such infre-
quent occurrence as to be of no significance. T have examined Crawford’s types (?) of similis and rotundipennis
which are in the National Museum (specimens with red labels) and find
them to be albifrons. The type of similis fovealis is a malformed specimen. This is apparently a widely distributed species of western North
‘America. Numerous specimens have been examined from the following
localities: California, Oregon, Washington, British Columbia, Alaska,
Idaho, Utah, Montana, Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico, and Minnesota. Strickland records it (similis) from Alberta. It occurs in large numbers
on various species of Urtica, As would be expected in such a widespread
species, there is considerable minor variation in characters. Type, a male from Claremont, California, is in the Crawford Col-
lection. :

Crawford (1914) gives a general description of the egg and nymph
together with some biological notes. Klyver (1930) compares albifrons
with urticae in detail, describes and figures the nymph of the former. ‘(THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA / 89

Trioza sembla* Caldwell
(Fig. 220)
1940 Trioza sembla Caldwell, Ohio Jour. Sci. 40:49,

“Length to tip of forewing 2.7 mm. ; forewing 2.2 mm,

“Color: Light orange except for black eyes, black antennae beyond
second segment, brown tarsi, and yellow margin around vertex. “Head as broad as thorax, both finely pubescent. Genal cones % as
long as vertex, acute, slightly divergent. Antennae a little longer than
width of head. Forewings little over twice as long as broad; apices sub-
acute. “Proctiger of male with large caudal lobes. Forceps shorter than
proctiger.. In lateral aspect: Caudal margin practically straight, cephalic
margin slightly produced cephalad, apices slightly rounded rather than
truncate. In caudal aspect: thick basally, slightly bowed, narrowed
evenly to apices. ,

“Male holotype, Painted Desert, Arizona, VI-25, D. J. and J. N.
Knull, collectors, is in the Ohio State University Collection.” Caldwell. Ihave not seen the specimen on which this species is based. Caldwell
has supplied me with the additional information that there are three inner
apical spines on the hind tibia. Trioza frontalist Crawford

(igs. 199, 200, 201, 271)

1910 Trioza frontalis Crawford, Pom. Coll, Jour. Ent. 2:
IGil Triose frontalis Crawford, Por, Coli, Jour, Ent, 3:136. 45, 436. 1913 Trioza frontalis Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 46, ao
1914 Trioza frontalis Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus,, Bull. 85:84. 1917 Trioza frontalis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip, N. Am. 794. 1926 Spanioza frontalis Enderlein, Ent, Mitt. 15:400. 1932 Trioza frontalis Klyver, Pan-Pac. Ent. 4. 1932 Trioza frontalis Klyver, Ent. News 43:
1939 Trioza frontalis Strickland, Can. Ent, 71:214,

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm,

Cotor: General color orange red to brown. Ant

2 ennae, genal pro-

cesses, and abdomen darker. 8 ®

Srrucrore: Head Jarge, deflexed. Vertex broad, discal foveae and
medial suture prominent, front margin abrupt. Genal processes acute,
divergent, 24 as long as vertex at middle, on parallel plane with vertex. Antennae rather heavy, 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax not
very strongly arched. Pronotum narrow, depressed. Forewings about
2% times as long as wide, apices subacute. Hind tibia with small serrate
carina basally, three inner apical spines. Metacoxa only slightly produced
anteriorly. Genitatia: Male genitalia large. Proctiger longer than forceps,

 

 

    

produced caudad as large lobes with dorsal margins slightly upcurved,

* A barbaric name. + Apparently based on the latin..frons—forehead. 580 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

i i ight, apical
ices blunt. Forceps large; in lateral view stalk slender, straight
Fontion evenly enlarged; in caudal view slightly arched, apices exceeate
on mesal margins, anterior portion more or less of a truncate tooth. Female
genital segment large, almost as long as rest of abdomen; ventral valve
upcurved, acute; dorsal valve longer than ventral, apical portion attenu-
ae mas i £ Amelanchier-inhabitin,
is species is quite typical of a number of Amelanel g
forms all of which have quite massive heads, large bodies, and are more or
dered with a waxy bloom as adults. _
is Specimens are “at hand from the following localities: California,
British Columbia, Manitoba, Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, and
do. ‘It has also been recorded from Nevada,
oe of the California specimens (including nymphs) bear the label
Amelanchier alnifolia which Klyver also records as the host. The Cali-
fornia specimens show some variation from those taken in Colorado but
ignificant difference. ret “Tyee, male, No. 18085 United States National Museum. Type examined. Trioza sulcata* Crawford

(Figs. 221, 222, 307)

 

1910 Trioza sulcata Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour Ent. 22 2238.
str Triose Frontalis suloaee Gawiotd ‘Pom, Colt Jour Eat ‘426, 429, 436. 1913 Trioza sulcata aaa PY oa Scot 55
Ista Trioce Prontalis Suleata Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mug., Bull, 85:85. 1917 Trioza frontalis sulcata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am, 794,
1938 Trioza frontalis sulcata Strickland, Can. Ent, 70:203.
ip of folded wings 3 mm. cee “General color most typically orange with black tarsi and
antennae. Often much darker with brown markings on vertex an
thorax, abdomen, femora, ete., dark. Frequently with a wax b! oom tw

Srructure: Head large, almost as wide as thorax. Vertex wil two
sulcate impressions. Genal processes slender, straight, acute, ivergent
from base, about 4% as long as vertex. Antennae about 1%; times as long
as width of head. Thorax strongly arched, often with short sparse pul ts
cence. Pronotum depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings slender,
234 times as long as wide. Hind tibia with small serrate carina, asa ys
three inner apical spines. Anterior portion of metacoxa enlarged, promi-
nent enrratta: Male genitalia large. Proctiger produced caudally fron
base to apex, dorsal margin straight, crenellated, ventral margin upeurve a
Forceps in lateral view very broad, parallel-sided, apically curved cepha
lad, apices with a slight notch; in caudal view straight, broad st y:
tapered to sharp apices. Female genital segment short, about % as long

 

* sulcatus, L. (p. part. of sulco)—furrowed,

 

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 581

as abdomen; ventral valve strongly upeurved, acute; dorsal valve slightly
longer, blunt. Crawford originally separated this species from frontalis because
of the more divergent genal Processes and the deeper sulci on the vertex. Subsequently, he decided these differences were insufficient to constitute
@ species and maintained it as a variety chiefly on color. Unfortunately
he had no males, the genitalia of which are quite distinct: from -frontalis. The type specimen is a dark-colored individual, but a majority of the
specimens at hand are of an orange-red color. They were taken on . Amelanchier sp. in the arid portions of southwestern Colorado. Specimens are at hand from the following localities: Durango and
Mesa Verde, Colorado; Arizona; Utah; Nevada; California; Oregon. Strickland records it from Alberta (2). Hotoryre, female, Colorado, C. F. Baker, No. 55183 United States
National Museum. Attoryrg, male, Durango, Colorado, July 4, 1937,
L. D. Tuthill, in the United States National Museum. Type examined. Trioza mira* n. n,
(Figs, 223, 224)
1989 Trioza forcipula Tuthill, Ia, St. Coll. Jour. Sci. 13:183,
{non} Trioza forcipula ‘Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta, Bull, 202:207. 1912,

Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. Cotor: Dorsum orange-red except center of abdominal tergites, two
incomplete lines on thorax, discal foveae and medial suture of vertex and
antennae black. Venter black except tip of genal processes and tibiae. Srructure: Head wide, almost as wide as thorax. Discal foveae and
medial suture of vertex prominent, Genal processes 7;; as long as vertex,
Antennae slightly over 11%4 times as long as width of head. Thorax
weakly arched. Pronotum short, strongly descending, depressed below
plane of vertex. Forewings a little more than twice as long as wide,
rather bluntly angled. Hind tibia with very small basal spur, three inner
apical spines. Metacoxa slightly produced anteriorly as very broad flat
process. Genrratia: Proctiger of male with very long, upcurved, posterior
lobes, with a prominent apical tuft of spines, Forceps bent forward and
also inward, touching most of their length, apices deeply notched, anterior
tooth larger. Female genital segment short, almost globose -in lateral
aspect, apices of valves black; dorsal valve slightly produced; ventral
valve truncate and concave about ovipositor,

In addition to the type series from Colorado and Washington, addi-
tional specimens are at hand from scattered points in Colorado and Utah. As do the foregoing and following species, this form inhabits Amelanchier. Tyre, male, in author's collection,

 

* mirus -a -um, L. adj—extraordinary,

582 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Trioza mira curta* n, subsp. Similar to species except male genitalia. Caudal lobes on proctiger
much shorter, forceps not incurved and touching, apical notch much
shallower. Female genitalia similar to typical subspecies. Described from seven specimens from Placer and Nevada Counties,
California, September, collected by A. Koebele, all of which are some-
what teneral and are faded, the thoracic markings of the typical sub-

ecies show faintly, however. sree roLoryre, male, aLLoryP®, female, (same mount) No. 55184 United
States National Museum, Lake Tahoe, Placer County, California, Sep-
tember 30, 1885; five female paratyPss, one additional male (doubtful)
Placer and Nevada Counties, California; one of the paratypes bears the
Jabel Amelanchier alnifolia Nutt. Holotype, allotype, and paratypes in
the United States National Museum; paratypes in author's collection. Trioza inversat Tuthill

(Figs. 225, 226, 308)
1939 Trioza inversa Tuthill, Ia. St. Coll. Jour, Sei, 13:185. Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. Cotor: General color of dorsum ferrugineous with a pair of fuscous
markings on vertex, a pair on scutum, another pair on scutellum. Venter,
femora, and antennae fuscous, remainder fulvous. Wings hyaline. Structure: Head broad, almost as wide as thorax. Genal processes
long, quite sharp, projecting downward, 45 as long as vertex. Antennae
1 times as long as width of head. Thorax moderately arched. Pronotum
short, not depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings only slightly
angulate, almost 3 times as long as wide. Hind tibia with small basal
spur, three inner apical spines. Metacoxa with anterior process moder-
ately developed. Genrratra: Proctiger with a basal caudal projection, apex very
narrow. Forceps in lateral view large at base, narrowed to spatulate
apices; in caudal. view broad at base, laterally concave to apices, touching
most of their length. Female genital segment about Ye as long as re-
mainder of abdomen, acute, dorsal valve slightly longer than ventral. This Amelanchier-inhabiting species was described from specimens
from Colorado, Utah, and British Columbia and is no doubt much more
widespread in distribution. ‘Type, male; in author's collection. Trioza obtusa} Patch
(Figs. 202, 203)

1911 Trioza obtusa Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull, 187:18. 3914 Trioze obtusa Crawiord, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:85.

curtus «a -um, L.adj—short. + inversus -a -um, L. adj—turned inside out. fobtusus -a -um, L. adj.—blunt, obtuse. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA . 583

1917 Trioza obtusa Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 795. 1918 Trioza obtusa McAtee, Ent. News 29:223. 1932 Trioza obtusa Klyver, Ent. News 43:36. 1938 Trioza obtusa Brimley, Ins, of N.C. 103. Length to tip of folded wings 4 mm. Cotor: General color ranging from green in newly emerged adults
to red and reddish brown. Typically colored individuals, orange-red,
antennae, genal processes, femora, and genitalia darker, often with antero-
lateral margins of prescutum dark. Wings from transparent to brownish
opaque. Srructure: Head large, almost as wide as thorax. Vertex with medial
suture prominent and very deep discal foveae, posterior margin raised. Genal processes heavy, sharp, 34 as long as vertex, apices divergent. Antennae short, about 114 times as long as width of head. Thorax broad,
well arched. Pronotum depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings very
bluntly angulate, 2% times as long as wide; Rs very long. Hind tibia with
prominent, serrate, basal carina, three inner apical spines. Metacoxa
somewhat produced anteriorly. Geniratra: Male genital segment of medium size. Proctiger with
large caudal lobes, latter as long as axial portion, ventral margin of lobes
almost straight, apices narrow but blunt, setae prominent, especially on
dorsal margin of lobes. Forceps shorter than proctiger, very heavy; in
lateral view enlarged at apices, apices notched on mesal margin to form
two black tooth-like lobes. Female genital segment large, about as long
as rest of abdomen; ventral valve upcurved to black, acute apex; dorsal -
valve longer than ventral, attenuate, tip blunt. This form, while much like Trioza frontalis, is even more robust of
head and body, the forewings are more rounded apically and are more
or less brown, in hibernating forms very dark. Specimens are at hand from the following localities: Raquette Lake
and White Face Mountain, New York; Washington, D. C.; Maryland;
Alabama (taken on pine in February, Schwarz); Park Rapids, Minne-
sota. The Minnesota specimens (including nymphs) were taken from
Amelanchier sp. in company with Trioza frontalis (August 1), apparent-
ly the ranges of the two species overlap in this region. Additional records
are Maine, Nova Scotia, and North Carolina. Host Amelanchier sp. Types (lost? ), Orono, Maine. Miss Patch briefly described the nymphs and gave a few life history
notes. Trioza aylmeriae* Patch

1912 Trioza aylmeriae Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta, Bull. 202:225. 1914 Trioza aylmeriae Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:

1914 Trioza amelanchieris Crawford, U. S, Nat. Mus., Bul
1917 Trioza aylmeriae Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 7

 

   

* Genitive of Aylmer, name of a town in Ontario—the point of collection of the
originally described specimens. 584 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

i ): 223,
ine Fiera he inshatieneny ra eRe Surv., Bull. 34:254. 1939 Neotriozella virginiana Tuthill, Bull. Brooklyn Ent. Soc. 34:53. Length to tip of folded wings, 4 mm. |

Very closely related to Trioza obtusa, but wings are larger, marginal
cells larger, Rs straighter. Caudal lobe of male proctiger much more
elongate and upcurved, bearing prominent tuft of large setae at apex. Female genital segment similar but more slender in lateral view. One pair from Maryland and one pair without locality data in the
United States National Museum are apparently this species. Described
by Miss Patch from Aylmer, Ontario, on “Billberry.” . . |

The collection of a male of Neotriozella virginiana shows it be identi-
cal with aylmeriae. Genus Paratrioza* Crawford

ic . Ent, Bohemicae 6:102-108 {fide Crawford]. 1810 Parairiona Craving, Pome Call Sour Eat 2228 22,
1911 Allotrioza Crawford’ (pro parte), Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 3:423, 442. 1911 Paratrioza Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 3:42, 446 [designates type]. 1914 Paratrioza Crawford, U.S, Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:70. 1917 Paratrioza Van Duzee, Cat, Hemip. N: Am, 791. Head narrower than thorax, scarcely deflexed. Vertex very dis-
tinctly margined, anterior margin usually slightly overhanging. Genae
usually produced as short, rather broad padlike processes, sometimes
conical, sometimes entirely without processes, not spherically swollen,
Clypeus visible from anterior view. Antennae slender, variable in length. Thorax moderately arched. Pronotum short, descending anteriorly. Proepisternum strongly produced laterad. Forewings membranous, elong-
ate, acutely angled to somewhat rounded apically, venation triozine. Hind
wings much shorter than forewings. Metatibia with basal spur, two inner
and one outer apical spines. Metacoxa often with anteriorly projecting
process. Logotype: Paratrioza cockerelli (Sulc). |

This genus, while exhibiting distinctive characters of its own, seems
to represent ‘an intermediate between Trioza and Rhinopsylla, the latter
belonging to the Carsidarinae of Crawford. P. dorsalis shows a very great
similarity to Rhinopsylla antennata in all characters except the head
which is slightly cleft in antennata. ; a

Kuwayama Crawford is quite similar to Paratrioza but is distinct
enough in head characters and type of genitalia to be distinguished. Of
the species of the latter, dubia n, sp. is most like Kuwayama; dorsalis is
very typically paratriozine except that the genae are utterly devoid of any
processes, they are not even swollen as in Kuwayama. *From para, Gr. prep—near + trioza. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 585,

Key to the Species of Paratrioza

+ Genae produced as small but distinct conical processes
Genae very slightly produced as padlike lobes if at all.

. Small species (3 mata. to tip of folled wings); forewings hyaline
Larger species (3.5 mm. or more to tip of folded wings) .

. Forewings maculate. .
Forewings not maculate.

. Rs of forewings short, not reaching furcation of media...
Rs of forewings longer, extending at least to furcation of media,
sinuate. 2. eee eee eee eae

. Ventral valve of female genital segment produced as a large biun 3
lobes of male proctiger perpendicular to axial portion...........lavaterae p. 590. Ventral valve of female genital segment not produced apically; caudal lobes of
male proctiger slanting ventrad, touching subgenital plate........... dubia p. 591. A eB ON

w

 

   

Paratrioza cockerelli* (Sulc)

(Figs. 204, 205, 206, 272)

1909 Trioza cockerelli Sule, Acta Soc, Ent. Bohemicae. 6:102-108 [fide Crawford, 1914b]. 1910 Paratrioza ocellata Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 2:229,

1910 Paratrioza pulchella Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 2:229,

1910 Paratrioza pulchella flava Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour, Ent, 2:229,

1911 Paratrioza cockerelli Crawford, Pom, Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:446, 448. 1911 Paratrioza ocellata Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour, Ent. 3:447. 1811 Paratrioza ocellata nigra Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour, Ent, 3:447, 448. 1911 Paratrioza ocellata flava Crawford, Pom. Coli. Jour. Ent. 3:447, 448,
1912 Paratrioza cockerelli Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta. Bull, 202:231. 1913 Trioza cockerelli Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 44. 1914 Paratrioza cockerelli Crawford, U, S, Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:71. 1917 Paratrioza cockerelli Essig, Jour. Ec. Ent. 10:434-439,

1917 Paratrioza cockerelli Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 792. 1925 Paratrioza cockerelli Ferris, Can. Ent. 57:47-48 [dese. and figs. nymph]. 1931 Paratrioza cockerelli Klyver, Pan-Pac. Ent. 7:142,

1931 pega cockerelli Knowlton and Janes, Ann. Ent. Soc. Am. 24: 283-290 [life
istory]. 1932 Paratrioza cockerelli Klyver, Ent. News 43:34. 1933 Paratrioza cockerelli Richards and Blood, Jour. Agr. Res, 46:189-216,

1934 Paratrioza cockerelli Knowlton and Thomas, Jour, Ec. Ent, 27:547. Ui Knowlton, Utah Agr. Exp. Sta., Leaflet 36.

trickland, Can. Ent. 70:200. Milliron, Ins. Pest Surv., Bull. 19, 9:564. 1939 Paratrioza cockerelli Strickland Can, Ent, 71: 213. Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm,

Cotor: General color black typically, with lighter markings varying
from white to red. Vertex black except margin and transverse discal area
light, dorsum of thorax with light longitudinal stripes. At least posterior
portion of pronotum light. Prescutum with a medial longitudinal band
and a horseshoe-shaped macula on each side, light. Scutum with a pair
of broad medial stripes, a narrow one laterad, lateral margins, light. Posterior margins of abdominal tergites white, first one most prominently
so. Extent of pattern somewhat variable, often appearing as dark mark-
ings on light ground color. Genal processes and legs usually light. Apices
of antennal segments black. Wings hyaline,

 

 

   

  

* Named in honor of T. D. A. Cockerell. 586 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Sraucrure: Head of moderate size, narrower than thorax. Margins
of vertex raised and abrupt; vertex discally impressed, median suture
prominent. Genal processes very small but distinct, divergent, acute. Clypeus visible from anterior or lateral view. Antennae 1% times as long
as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum strongly descending
cephalad but not entirely depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings
straight, roundingly angular, about 2 times as long as wide; venation
typical triozine, Rs long and sinuate. Hind tibia with two inner apical
spines, large basal spur. Caudal spur of metacoxa small, erect, straight,
an anterior one of about the same size but flattened. Genrratza: Male proctiger in lateral view produced caudad as a lobe
of variable size and shape, from slender to almost triangular, length
through lobe not greater than that of vertical axis, with distinct apical
epiphysis. Forceps as long as proctiger in lateral view, slightly curved
cephalad apically to acute apices, flattened and somewhat incurved
apically; in caudal view straight, narrow. Female genital segment short,
about as long as last abdominal sternite; dorsal valve downcurved, black-
tipped, acute, anal pore % total length; ventral valve shorter, black and
acute apically, slightly produced. This species is quite variable in color and to a lesser extent in other
characters. I have at hand a series of specimens sent to me by Mr. J. R.
Eyer of the New Mexico State Agricultural College in which two quite
distinct, color “phases” occur. In addition to the typical black individuals,
there are numerous specimens so light in color that the general color ap-
pears to be yellow.. Mr. Eyer reports that these yellow forms occur over
the states of New Mexico and Arizona on potatoes in conjunction with the
typical ones. He adds that he can find no difference in the nymphs nor in
the effect that they have on the potato plants. It is my opinion after ex-
amination of the specimens that they do not constitute a species but simply
a color variant such as is found in other species of psyllids (Trioza minuta,
for example). It is possible but improbable that they are merely teneral
forms, but as the specimens at hand are mounted on slides or are in alco-
hol this is difficult to determine. As Knowlton and Janes have pointed out,
for 2 or 3 days after emerging, the adults are greenish or amber-colored,
subsequently attaining the typical black coloration. ‘This is the widely known “potato psyllid” or “tomato psyllid” which
has developed into one of the most important potato and tomato insects
in the western part of North America. The feeding of the nymphs causes
the diseased condition known as “psyllid yellows.” Numerous solanaceous
plants have been recorded as definite hosts supporting the nymphal stages
as well as the adult. The adults have been taken on several other plants

(see Knowlton, 1933). ‘The life history has been worked out in detail by Knowlton and
Janes (loc. cit.) in Utah. The following brief account is’ taken from
Knowlton (1934):

“The winter is passed in the adult stage, the psyllids finding shelter
over winter in the various favorable places which are available. Lack of

 

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 587

excess moisture is important to successful survival. As tl i
host plants, such 25 matrimony vine, begin to ovoduce their fret leaves,
the adult potato psyllids congregate upon them, beginning to lay eggs
when the leaves are only % to %2 developed. A part of the first generation
usually is matured before the last of the early potato crop has sprouted
from the ground. Where breeding plants are not available, adult psyllids
will survive for several weeks, feeding upon conifers, grasses, or upon. almost any other succulent plant until the potato crop is available. The
average number of eggs laid by an individual female is between 300 and
400, most of which hatch under favorable conditions, The eggs of the
potato psyllid hatch in from 3 to 9 days in warm weather but may require
a longer time if the weather is cool. Upon hatching, the nymph crawls
from the egg, creeps down the pedicel supportng the egg, and soon
settles down to feeding. Under favorable conditions each nymph passes
through 5 molts and instars, or growth periods, requiring from 12 to 19
days for completion. If conditions for growth are unfavorable, the number
of molts may vary from four to six; the developmental period may also
be longer. No pupal or rest stage occurs in the development of this insect
the winged adult developing directly from the last nymphal stage or
instar. Newly emerged adults are usually pale green or light amber in
color, darkening to brown and then to blackish-brown during the first 2
or 3 days. The proportion of developing at is i

tent females and 50 per cent males. dults 1s approximately 50 per
“Males of the potato psyllid seldom live longer than 1 month; however,
1 female which was under observation lived for more than 6 months,
depositing 1,352 eggs over a period of 179 days. Females usually begin
laying eggs in from 5 to 12 days after becoming winged; on the average,
they continue to lay eggs for the next three weeks, usually depositing from
5 to 50 eggs per day. In northern Utah, 3 to 4 generations develop in 1
season, depending both upon the host sequence available and the length
of the season.”

For a discussion of “psyllid yellows,” the condition caused by feedit

of the nymphs, Psyllid yellows of the Potato, Richards and Blood oe
should be consulted. ,
Numerous specimens are at hand from many localities in Colorado,
New Mexico, Arizona, and California. Mr. Oman records the following
additional localities from the material in the United States National
Museum: Utah, Texas (Winter Garden section of the Rio Grande Valley)
Oklahoma (Stillwater), Nebraska (Lincoln, Scottsbluff), South Dakota
(Brookings). It has also been recorded from Nevada, Idaho, Montana,
Wyoming, Alberta, and Minnesota. As can be judged from these distri-
butional records, it occurs throughout the western portions of North
America wherever the winters are neither too cold nor too damp. 588 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

Paratrioza maculipennis* (Crawford)
Fig. 270)

ie i i Ul. Jour. Ent, 2:230, 237. 1310 Frieze maeulipee Oe Ceawiged, Pow. Col, Jour. Ent. 8:46, 450,
1913 Trioza maculipennis Aumann, Poy. Cat: 48. :
1914 Paratrioza maculipennis Crawford, U, S. Nat. Mus, Bull. 85:73. 1917 Paratrioza maculipennis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip, N. Am. 792. 1932. Paratrioza maculipennis Klyver, Ent. News 43:35. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. |
Conor: General color brown, darkest on abdomen and thoracic dor-
sum. Antennae black-tipped, apices of segments dark. Thoracic dorsum
more or less prominently striped. Wings somewhat milky. Forewings with
prominent brown maculae as follows: A narrow irregular one along anal
margin from apex to cubital cell; another including most of cubital cell,
more or less continuous across wing to furcation of R; an oblique one at
ip of Rs; several small ones in clavus. *e Srrucrure: Head large, narrower than thorax. Eyes large. Vertex
pubescent, almost flat, two discal foveae, margins prominent. Genal pro-
cesses well déveloped but small, parallel to plane of vertex, divergent,
Jess than % as long as vertex. Clypeus visible from front. Antennae about
twice as long as width of head, first segment unusually large. Thorax
moderately arched, pubescent. Pronotum depressed below plane of ver-
tex. Prescutum broad. Forewings acutely angled, 2% times as long as
wide; Rs very short, slightly arcuate to costa, media strongly curved,
marginal cells somewhat flattened, cubital larger than medial. Hind tibia
with two inner apical spines, a prominent tubercle at base, scarcely a
spur. Metacoxa with caudal spur of moderate size, anterior process well
veloped. ae GENTTALZA: Male proctiger short, with long sloping caudal lobes
surrounding forceps, axis through lobes longer than axial portion. For-
ceps in lateral view broad, curved cephalad to acute apices; in caudal view
broad basally, narrowed and arched, apices touching. Female genital
segment about as long as preceding sternite; ventral valve produced as a
broad truncate tooth; dorsal valve longer than ventral, downcurved, acute,
k-tipped. oe ee peautifully marked species is easily distinguished from other
members of the genus by the maculate wings. Specimens are at hand
from Anaheim, Sargent, and Strawberry, California. Originally described
from California, it has been recorded from numerous localities in that
state but from nowhere else. It has been taken on numerous plants, but
is still unknown. the Se male, San Mateo County, California, Baker, in Crawford Col-
lection. ‘From macula -ae, L. £, noun—spot -+ pennis, L.—wing. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 589

Paratrioza arbolensis* Crawford

ig. 207, 208, 273)
1910 Paratrioza arbolensis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:229. 1811 Allotrioza arbolensis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:442, 444,
1912 Allotrioza arbolensis Patch, Me. Agr. Exp. Sta., Bull. 202:231. 1914 Paratrioza arbolensis Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:72. 1917 Paratrioza arbolensis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 792. Length to.tip of folded wings 4 to 4.5 mm. Coton: General color light green to greenish gray. Abdomen darker
green to brown. Vertex with anterior band and discal spots typical of
genus, dark, Thoracic dorsum with brown longitudinal stripes. Portions
of pleurae, ventral side of head and femora brown. Antennae black at tip
and at apices of segments. Wings hyaline. Srrucrure: Head large, narrower than thorax, not deflexed, flat. Vertex broadly excavate, anterior margin abrupt, medial suture promi-
nent, two very prominent discal sulci. Genal processes definite but very
short, projecting forward, strongly divergent. Clypeus large, easily visible
from in front. Antennae from 2% to 2% times as long as width of head. Thorax broad, not strongly arched. Pronotum long, weakly descending
cephalad, not depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings large, acutely
angled, almost 3 times as long as wide, costal margin arched; Rs moder-
ately long, reaching furcation of media, slightly sinuate, cubital cell very
large and long. Legs very large. Hind tibia with two inner apical spines,
prominent basal spur. Tarsal segments very long, claws unusually large. Caudal metacoxal processes small, anterior pair larger. GenrTatta: Male proctiger very short with broad irregularly mar-
gined caudal lobes, no epiphysis. Forceps longer than proctiger, flattened;
in lateral view broad, apices curved cephalad, beaklike, very sharp-
pointed, apical margins black; in caudal view broad at base, narrowed
apically. Female genital segment longer than preceding sternite; ventral
valve broad, with sharp black median tooth; dorsal valve longer than
ventral, narrowed in apical 44, dorsal margin almost straight, apex sharp,
slender, black, upcurved. I have a long series of this species, including nymphs, collected on
Shepherdia argentea Nutt. near Durango, Colorado, July 17, 1938. Other
specimens are at hand from various points in Colorado; Green River,
‘Wyoming; and Poplar, Montana. Host Shepherdia argentea Nutt. Tvs, female, Arboles, Colorado, C. F. Baker, in Crawford Collection. Paratrioza dorsalist (Crawford)

(Figs. 227, 228, 309)
1914 Kuwayama dorsalis Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:67. 1917 Kuwayama dorsalis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am, 791. * Adjectival form of Arboles—a small town in Colorado near which the original
collection was made. +This appears to be a misspelling of dorsualis -e, L. adj—dorsal; no derivation
was given by the author. 590 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 3.75 mm. Cotor: Male shining deep brown on head, dorsum of thorax and
dorsum of abdomen; venter of abdomen lighter to green, pleurae and
venter of thorax brownish to yellow; antennae ight, Segments black-
ipped; margin of first abdominal tergite prominently white; proctiger
ae forceps whites wings hyaline. Female dark brown only on dorsum
of abdomen, remainder of body reddish, legs lighter, with brown reticulate
markings on prescutum, scutum, and scutellum, pattern much as on

wratrioza cockerelli. |
Pa “SmucTURE: Head narrower than thorax, short. Vertex twice as
wide as long, somewhat flattened, discal impressions shallow, margins
somewhat sharp, sparsely pubescent. Genae scarcely swollen beneath
antennae. Clypeus small, visible from front. Antennae slender, slightly
over twice as long as width of head. Thorax moderately arched. Pro-
notum short and depressed below plane of vertex. Prescutum broad,
rounding anteriorly. Forewings 2% times as long as wide, angulate,
costal margin strongly arched; Rs short, almost straight, not reaching
fork of media. Legs sturdy. Hind tibia with double basal spur, two inner
apical spines. Metacoxa with caudal spur small, erect, with small one
eriorly. |

ant GeNTratta: Male proctiger with broad caudally projecting lobes
reaching almost to base of forceps, axis through lobe as long as axial
portion, prominent epiphysis apically. Forceps in lateral view almost
parallel-margined to near apices then strongly curved cephalad to acute
apices; in caudal view broad in basal half then narrower to apices, slightly
arched. Female genital segment short; ventral valve shorter than pre-
ceding sternite, broad, broadly excavate apically with a median tooth;
dorsal valve longer, narrow, overhanging, “hood-shaped,” apex acute,
black. | -

Described from one male from Cochise County, Arizona, which was
compared with the male type by Mr. Oman, and from four females, One
of the females bears the same data as the male and is designated as the
ALLOTYPE, Cochise County, Arizona, July 29, 1927, R. H. Beamer. Allo-
type in Snow Collection, University of Kansas. The three parallotypes
bear data as follows: Chiricahua Mountains, Arizona, July 8, 1932, R. H.
Beamer (1); Arizona, A. Koebele (2). The latter are in the United
States National Museum, the former in the author’s collection. Type, male, No. 18080 United States National Museum,

Type examined. Paratrioza lavaterae* (Van Duzee)

1925 Kuwayama lavaterae Van Duzee, Pan-Pac. Ent. 1:22. 1932 Kuwayama lavaterae Klyver, Ent. News 43:33. . Length to tip of folded wings 3.25 to 3.75 mm. Coton: “Male mostly black; edge of vertex, antennae, frontal cones

* Genitive of Lavatera—the generic name of the host. Noe eR De re

  

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 591

(genae), clypeus, lateral tubercle of pronotum, some marks at base of
wings, hind margin of tergal segments one and six and legs, whitish; apical
segment of antennae, tips of four preceding and base of first, and the hind
femora, except apex, black; anterior and intermediate femora with a
brown cloud above; tarsal claws black; wings clear, veins pale, the mar-
ginal scarcely darker. Sometimes the mesonotum shows four longitudinal
vittae, and there may be one on the prescutum. Female paler, yellowish
fulvous to brown, more or less varied with darker; antennae as in male.”
—Van Duzee. .

Srrucrure: Head and thorax sparsely pubescent. Head narrower
than thorax. Vertex sharply margined, “plate-like,” slightly less than
twice as wide as long, discal impressions prominent, Genae produced as
small tubercles or pads, not conical. Antennae slender, twice as long as
width of head. Thorax strongly arched, prominently punctate. Pronotum
strongly descending, short. Prescutum acute anteriorly. Forewings
rounding apically, barely angulate, somewhat over 2% times as long as
wide; Rs long, sinuate, exceeding point of furcation of media, medial cell
somewhat larger than cubital. Hind tibia with small basal spur, two
inner apical spines. Small anterior metacoxal process. Genrratta: Male proctiger short, with large caudal lobes, latter
broad basally then attenuate and overlapping, longer than axial portion. Forceps in lateral view narrow basally, slightly enlarged, then narrowed
to acute apices, slightly curving cephalad; in caudal view fairly stout,
parallel-margined, somewhat incurved apically. Female genital segment
about as long as 2 preceding segments; ventral valve produced as large,
blunt, black tooth; dorsal valve exceeding ventral, slender apically, blunt,
black-tipped. Described from a pair of paratypes, This species was described by
Van Duzee from specimens taken on its host plant Lavatera assurgenti-
flora from San Francisco, California. Known only from California. ‘Tyre, male, No. 1592, Museum of the California Academy of Sciences. Paratrioza dubia* n. sp. (Figs. 229, 230, 310)

Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 to 3.75 mm. Cotor: General color of head and thorax whitish with orange to
brown markings. Vertex light with a narrow band anteriorly and a short
transverse band posteriorly, latter often broken, Genae light. Antennae
white, apices of segments dark. Thoracic dorsum with somewhat variable
longitudinal stripes. Legs light. Dorsum of abdomen chocolate brown,
margin of first tergite white. Venter lighter. Genitalia light. Wings
smoky. Structure: Head narrower than thorax. Vertex almost twice as
wide as long, margins sharply raised, discally strongly depressed, 2 foveae

* dubius -a -um, L. adj—doubtful. 592 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

udal margin, medial suture prominent, Genae slightly swollen,
padlike, not conical, Antennae twice as long as width of head. Thorax
well arched. Pronotum short, depressed below plane of vertex. Prescutum
acute anteriorly. Forewings large, straight, angular, 1% times as long as
wide; Rs long, sinuate, reaching point of furcation of media, marginal
cells about equal. Legs large. Hind tibia with small basal spur, two inner
apical spines. Metacoxa with caudal spur of moderate size, small anterior
ome: Couratta: Male proctiger with large slanting caudal lobes, axis
through lobes longer than axial portion, lobes enclosing forceps, anus on. an oblique epiphysis. Forceps shorter than proctiger; in lateral view slen-
der, very strongly curved cephalad to sharp apices; in caudal view broad
~ basally then slender, slightly arched to apices. Female genital segment
short, ventral valve quite flat, rounded and dark apically; dorsal valve
narrower, hood-shaped, overhanging, apex black. | . Hotorypr, male, attotypz, female, Patagonia, Arizona, June 24,
1933, R. H. Beamer; four parATyPES same data, two male, three female;
PARATYPES same data collected by P. W. Oman; one male and two female
paratypes Tubac, Arizona, June 24, 1933, P. W. Oman. | . Holotype, allotype, and paratypes in Snow Collection, University of
Kansas, paratypes in United States National Museum and author's collec-
tion, One male and one female are also at hand from California which

bably this species. ae This aie resembles both cockerelli and lavaterae but is distinct,
as judged by available specimens. Genus Kawayama*

1911 Epitrioza Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:423, 452. [non] Epitrioza Kuwayama, 1910. 1911 Kuwayama Crawford, Pom, Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:503. 1914 Kuwayama Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:65. 1917 Kuwayama Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 791. Head narrower than thorax, scarcely deflexed. Vertex not distinctly
margined, rounded anteriorly. Genae spherically swollen, prominent. Clypeus visible from anterior view. Antennae slender, moderately long. Thorax not strongly arched. Pronotum short, descending anteriorly. Forewings membranous, elongate, acute to subacute apically, venation,
triozine. Hind wings slender. Metatibia with basal spur, two inner and
one outer apical spines. -

Orthotype: Kuwayama medicaginis (Crawford) _ ,

Although this genus is quite similar to Paratrioza in many respects it
is distinct in the structure of the vertex and genae and in the type of
genitalia, both male and female. The type species apparently represents
the northernmost member of a natural group, as its congenors are found
in Mexico and on various Pacific Islands. * The. name of Kuwayama, a Japanese entomologist. PRESTR Da SSR RN

 
 

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 593

The species dorsalis Crawford and lavaterae Van Duzee have been
referred to Paratrioza as they show much more relationship to the species
of that genus than to medicaginis. Kuwayama medicaginis* (Crawford)

(Figs. 209, 210, 211, 268)

1910 Paratrioza medicaginis Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:229,
1911 Epitrioza medicaginis Crawford, ibid. 3:452. 1914 Kutwayama medicaginis Crawford, U.S, Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:66,
1917 Kuwayama medicaginis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 791,
1932 Kuwayama medicaginis Klyver, Ent, News 43:1,

Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm,

Cotor: General color sordid white to yellowish. Flavous markings
on vertex and thorax, latter forming incomplete longitudinal stripes. Distal tarsal segments and apical % of antennae fuscous. (Crawford
records the color as “yellowish green throughout.” This is possibly the
color of living specimens.) Srructure: Head narrower than thorax. Vertex long, discal impres-
sions very deep; anterior margin overhanging median ocellus, somewhat
rounded down. Genae swollen ventrally (rarely with any suggestion of
a cone-shaped projection), not touching. Clypeus plainly visible from
front. Antennae about 1% times as long as width of head. Thorax mod. erately arched. Pronotum not depressed below plane of vertex. Fore-
wings slender, straight, angulate, almost 3 times as Jong as broad; Rs long,
sinuate. Hind tibia with two inner apical spines, prominent basal spur. Genrratta:' Male proctiger short, curved caudad, caudal margin
roundingly produced, narrow apical epiphysis. Forceps almost as long as
Proctiger, broad basally, narrowed to obliquely truncate apices, flattened
apically, apical margin heavy, crenate, black; a prominent, acute, antero-
lateral projection shorter than principal portion; base heavily pubescent. Female genital segment almost as long as rest of abdomen; apical Portion
of ventral valve very slender, acute, dark; dorsal valve longer, roundly
blunt, black apically. Numerous specimens are at hand from various localities in Arizona,
New Mexico, and Texas. Originally described from Colorado (?) and
subsequently recorded from California by Crawford. Judging from the material at hand it appears that this species occurs
in large numbers. Whether alfalfa (Medicago sativa) is a true host or not
is undetermined. ‘Type, male and female on same point, in Crawford Collection, no
locality label. Genus Neotriozellat Crawford

1884 Trioza Forbes (pro parte), 14th Rept. Sta, Ent, Il. 98. 1911 Neotrioza Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 3:423, 450. [non] Neotrioza Kieffer, Ann, Soc. Sci. Brux. 29:32, 1904-05 [fide Aulmann]. Apparently intended as the genitive of Medicago, the supposed host plant. 7 From neos, Gr—new + triozella—a diminutive form of trioza. 594 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Ibld Neotriozela Grawiord, US: Nat us, Bull. &58
1917 Neotriozella Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 798__
1939 Neotriozella Tuthill, Bull. Brooklyn Ent. Soc. 34:51. Head as broad as or broader than thorax, deflexed. Vertex nearly
plane, lateral ocelli borne on raised portions of vertex. Genae produced as
elongate, slender, vertical processes, contiguous thoughout their length
or nearly so. Antennae moderately long. Body small, slender. Thorax
very strongly arched. Pronotum short, very strongly descending cephalad. Proepisternum strongly produced laterad as flat plate behind eyes. Forewings membranous, long, acutely pointed, venation triozine. Hind
wings slender, much shorter than forewings. Metatibia with one or more
basal spurs, two or three inner and one outer apical spines. Orthotype: Neotriozella pyrifolii (Forbes). Key to the Species of Neotriozella

. Genal processes white. Genal processes black . Body glabrous, red to brown in color
Body pubescent, very light colored. Genal processes longer than vertex. Genal processes shorter than vertex. 3. -pyrifolii p. 594. - chirsuta p, 595.
sculptoconus p. 596. --laticeps p. 596.

    
  

yoN

 

Neotriozella pyrifolii* (Forbes)
(Pigs. 236, 237, 274)

1884 Trioza pyrifoliae Forbes, 14th Rept. Sta. Ent. Ill. 98. 1910 Trioza immaculata Crawford, Porn. Coll. Jour. Ent. 1911 Neotrioza immaculata Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:450. 1912 Neotriozella ottawanensis Patch, Me. Age. Exp. Sta, Bull. 202:231,

1914 Neotriozella immaculata Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:98,

1914 Trioza proboscidia Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus. Buil. 85:99. 1917 Neotriozella immaculata Van'Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 798,

1918 Neotriozella immaculata McAtee, Ent. News 29:223. .

1927 Trioza pyrifoliae Frison, Ill. Nat. Hist, Surv., Bull. 16:154 [lectotype designated]. 1938 Neotriozella immaculata Caldwell, Ohio Biol, Surv., Bull. 34:253,

1939 Neotriozella pyrifoliae Tuthill, Bull. Brooklyn Ent. Soc. 34:51. Length to tip of folded wings 3.5 mm. Conor: General color of thorax orange red, head and abdomen
brown. Vertex brown to black discally, white to orange on margins. Genal processes white, sometimes brown apically. Antennae black. Pro-
notum light. Scutum with more or less distinct brown stripes. Legs
light to brown. Srructure: Body slender. Head large, about as broad as thorax. Disc of vertex almost flat. Lateral ocelli very prominently raised, medial
suture very prominent. Vertex and pronotum sparsely pubescent. Genal
processes slender, attenuate, vertical to retrorse, as long as vertex, or
longer. Post-ocular portion of occiput swollen, prominent. Antennae

  

* Apparently from Pyrus—the pear + genitive of folium ~ii, L. n, noun—leaf
(heretofore used with the incorrect ending -ce). THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 595

slender, not quite twice as long as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum short, depressed below plane of vertex. Forewings long, slen-
der, blunt, about 3 times as long as wide; Rs very long, sinuate. Hind
wings very long, twice as long as abdomen. Legs slender. Hind tibia with
three inner apical spines, with two basal spurs. GenrTatta: Male: genitalia small, Proctiger pyriform, longer than
forceps. Forceps short, broad, spatulate in lateral view; in caudal view
slender, straight. Female genital segment almost as long as rest of
abdomen; ventral valve slender, acute, dark at apex; dorsal valve longer
than ventral, attenuate, not as sharp as ventral. Originally described from Illinois by Forbes, this species has also
been recorded from Iowa (Ames), District of Columbia, Ontario, and
Nova Scotia. Specimens are at hand from all the above localities and
from Tallulah, Louisiana. The latter series was taken in airplane traps
by P. Glick. Type, male, in Illinois Natural History Survey Museum. Male paratype examined,

Neotriozella hirsuta* Tuthill

(Figs. 231, 311)
1939 Neotriozella hirsuta Tuthill, Bull. Brooklyn Ent. Soc. 34:52,

Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. Cotor: General color yellowish white. Eyes, lower edge of margin
of vertex, tips of antennal segments and tarsi dark. Prescutum and
scutum with yellow stripes. Wings hyaline. Structure: Head, thoracic dorsum, legs and genital segments with
sparse, rather long, silky pubescence. Head large, as wide as thorax. Anterior margin of vertex very abrupt and protruding, disc distinctly
concave. Genal processes longer than vertex, closely appressed, rather
thick, moderately acute at apex. Antennae slightly over 1% times as long
as width of head. Thorax strongly arched. Forewings about 3 times as
long as wide, veins setaceous. Hind wings long, prominently punctate. Hind tibia with one very large basal spur, two inner apical spines. Geniraia: Male genitalia moderate in size, covered with very long,
fine pubescence. Proctiger greatly produced caudad into enveloping
posterior lobes. Forceps as long as proctiger; in lateral view broadest
at base, strongly curved caudad to acute black apices; in caudal view
evenly incurved, broadest before apex, inner anterior margin produced
medially into a blunt, black-margined tooth. Female genital segment
rather short, quite suddenly narrowed to black tip; dorsal valve longer
than ventral, apices of valves broad and flat. Known only from the type pair from Arizona. Type, male, in Snow Collection, University of Kansas. * hirsutus -a -um, L. adj.—hairy. 596 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Neotriozella sculptoconus* Crawford

1914 Neotriozella sculptoconus Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:99. 1914 Trioza frontalis Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:100. 1917 Neotriozella sculptoconus Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip, N. Am, 798. 1939 Meotriozeila sculptoconus Tuthill, Bull. Brooklyn Ent. Soc. 34:52 [female

Length to tip of folded wings 3 mm. Cotor: Thorax orange to red. Abdomen brownish, lighter, beneath,
Dise of vertex reddish brown, margin light. Antennae and genal pro-
cesses black . Pro- and mesotibiae and tarsi dark, Wings hyaline. Srrucrure: Head about as wide as thorax. Disc of vertex depressed
leaving raised margins except medially in front, pubescent. Genal pro-
cesses: large, acute, contiguous throughout, as long as vertex or a little
longer, parallel to plane of vertex. Antennae thick, especially basally,
slightly over twice as long as width of head. Thorax slender, very strongly
arched, Pronotum depressed, with sparse pubescence. Very short sparse
pubescence on remainder of thorax. Forewings long, slender, angulate,
3 times as long as wide; Rs shorter than in pyrifolii. Hind wings long,
greatly exceeding abdomen. Hind tibia with three inner apical spines, two
basal spurs. Metacoxa somewhat produced anteriorly, not spiniform. Gentratra: “Male genitalia resemble those of immaculata; anal valve
relatively longer and produced more into a posterior lobe; forceps broadest
subapically, flattened at apex.”—Crawford. Female genitalia similar to pyrifolii, almost as long as rest of abdo-
men, slender; ventral valve narrowed to acute apex; dorsal valve longer
than ventral, attenuate, not as sharp, black-tipped. Known only from three specimens, all from California; two males
from Placer and Nevada Counties collected in September by Koebele, one
female from Big Bear Lake, July 26, 1932, R. H. Beamer. The above
description is from the female allotype. Type, male, No. 18091 United States National Museum,

Type examined. Neotriozella laticepst (Crawford)

 

1910 Trioza laticeps Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent, 2:23. 1911 Neotrioza laticeps Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:451. 1914 Neotriozella laticeps Crawford, U.S, Nat, Mus., Bull, 85:100,
1917 Neotriozella laticeps Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 798. 1932 Neotriozella laticeps Klyver, Ent. News 43:38. 1939 Neotriozella laticeps Tuthill, Bull. Brooklyn Ent. Soc. 34:53. Crawford’s description of this species is as follows:

“Length of body 1.6 mm,; length of forewing 2.7; width of head 0.62. General color dark brown, thorax lighter; head and genal cones black. “Head strongly deflexed, distinctly broader than thorax, slightly

* From sculptus, L. (p. part. of sewlpo—to carve, grave) + conus -i, L. m. noun—

cone,
+From latus -a -um, L. adj—broad + ceps a combining form of caput, L. n.
noun—head,

 

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 597

punctate; vertex rather sharply defined on margii i
‘ v r gin, scarcely impressed
discally, slightly emarginate over front ocellus; genal cones not longer
than vertex, acute, more abruptly converging to apex than in immaculata,
vertical or retrorse, slightly pubescent. Antennae very slender. ,
lin ‘Thorax arched, narrow, punctate, slightly pubescent. Wings hya-
es narrower than in immaculata, relatively longer usually, subacute at
apex. “Genitalia: Female genital segment almost as lon;
3 ig as rest of abdo-
men, very acute at apex; dorsal valve Jon: than
mem ve ger and larger ventral,
“Described from one female collected by G. il i isi
4 r y G. R. Pilate in Louisiana. This is very close in many respects to immaculata.”
‘Tyre, female, No. 18092 United States National Museum,
Type examined. Genus Metatrioza* Tuthill
1939 Metatrioze Tuthill, Bull. Brooklyn Ent, Soc. 34:53,

Head large, at least as broad as thorax. Vertex with sharp anterior
and posterior margins, strongly concave between eyes, medial suture
prominent. Genal processes not contiguous. Clypeus very small. Dorsum
of thorax rather broad and flat,’ pronotum not depressed below head
Rorewings mith typical triozine venation, except cubital cell which is
unusually lrge,Metatiba with large basal spur, one outer and two

Orthotype: Metatrioza pubescens Tuthill,

Metatrioza pubescens} Tuthill

(Figs. 232, 233, 238, 312)
1939 Metatrioza pubescens Tuthiil, Bull. Brooklyn Ent, Soc. 34:53,

Length to tip of folded wings 4 mm. Cotor: General color reddish brown. Genal Processes, pronotum
and posterior portion of vertex yellow. Venter and antennae dark. Fore,
wings hyaline, hind wings more or less white. .

___, Stucture: Body finely punctate, clothed with short, fine pubescence,
including veins of forewings, pubescence most prominent on genital seg. ments, legs, and antennae. Head very large, as wide as thorax, 3 times
as wide as long in dorsal view, strongly deflexed. Vertex as long as wide,
sharply margined both anteriorly and posteriorly, deeply excavate, media]
suture prominent. Anterior ocellus large, beneath overhanging margin
of vertex. Frons visible as a distinct sclerite, not covered by genal pro-
cesses, latter not contiguous, short, ¥ as long as disc of vertex, slightly
divergent, rather blunt. Clypeus very small, entirely invisible from fron

* meta, Gr. prep—in company with + trioza. * pubescens, L. (pres. part. of pubescere)—pubescent, having hair. 598 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Antennae slightly over twice as long as width of head. Pronotum not
depressed below level of head, episterna strongly produced. Prescutum
not very strongly arched, about 134 times as wide as long. Forewings
acute at apex, 3 times as long as wide; veins prominently pubescent,
marginal cells large, cubital larger than medial, Rs very long, curved. Venation of hind wings unusually prominent. Hind tibia with very promi-
nent basal spur, two inner and one outer apical spines. Genrratta: Male genitalia of moderate size. Proctiger longer than
forceps, almost equilaterally triangular in outline, broadest near base,
truncate at apex. Forceps simple; in caudal view somewhat broader at
base, slightly bowed, apices blunt, with very small medial black tooth. Female genital segment quite large, about % as long as rest of abdomen;
dorsal valve longer than ventral. Known only from the type series from the Baboquivari Mountains,
Arizona. Host plant unknown. Type, male, in Snow Collection, University of Kansas. Genus Leuronota* Crawford

1910 Trioza Crawford (pro parte), Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:230, 349. 1911 Allotrioza Crawford (pro parte), Pom. Coll. Jour, Ent, 3:433, 442,
1914 Leuronota Crawford, U_ S. Nat.’ Mus., Bull. 85:67. 1917 Leuronota Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N_ Am. 791. 1920 Leuronota Crawford, Proc. Haw. Ent. Soc. 4:

1928 Leuronota Ferris, Can. Ent. 60:240. Head narrower than thorax, scarcely or not at all deflexed. Genae
produced as conical processes, porrect. Antennae slender, long. Eyes
hemispherical. Thorax scarcely arched. Pronotum flat, long, on same
plane as vertex and prescutum, produced cephalad medially as blunt
epiphysis, very narrow. Proepisterna very large, visible in dorsal view
as prominent quadrate lateral processes. Prescutum flat with a small
median anterior epiphysis. Mesopleurites strongly developed. Fore-
wings long, slender, angulate, venation triozine. Legs long. Metatibia
with basal spur, two or three inner, one outer apical spines. Orthotype: Leuronota maculata (Crawford). A total of nine species has been referred to this genus, only two of
which occur north of Mexico. Three of the nine were originally described
in Cerotrioza by Crawford and subsequently (1920) placed in Leuronota
by him. From his descriptions of these latter species it seems unlikely that
they are congenors of maculata, but as I have seen no specimens of any of
the three, no other disposition can be made at this time. ‘The nymphs apparently produce galls or semi-galls on their host
plants. * From leuros, Gr. Adj.—flat + noton ~i, Gr, m. noun—back. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 599

 

Key to the Species of Leuronota

. Antennae 234 times as long as width of head; genal processes somewhat descend- i
INQ eee eee eeeeeeseteteeteeseetrtteetsns eee, maculata p. 599. Antennae 3 times as long as width of head; genal processes extending forward on
same plane a5 Vertex 6.62... 0eeeceeeeeeeseeteueeeesseve ess longipennis p. 599. Leuronota maculata* (Crawford)
(Figs. 239, 240, 241, 275)

1910 Trioza maculata Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:230, 349,
1911 Allotrioza maculata Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:44. 446. 1913 Trioza maculata Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 48. 1814 Leuronota maculata Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:68,
1917 Leuronota maculata Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 791. 1928 Leuronote maculata Ferris, Can, Ent. 60:240,
1982 Leuronota maculata Klyver, Ent. News 43:34,

Length to tip of folded wings 3.25 to 4 mm. Cotor: General color dirty white to brown, abdomen darker. Fore-
wings with numerous small brown dots forming maculae as figured,
amount of maculation quite variable. Srrucrure: Entire body more or less pubescent. Head narrower
than thorax, not deflexed. Vertex almost plane, discal foveae more or less
prominent. Genal processes short, blunt, divergent apically, about % as
long as vertex, somewhat deflexed from plane of vertex. Antennae slen-
der, 24 times as long as width of head. Clypeus large, visible in cephalic
view. Thorax scarcely arched. Pronotum flat, above plane of vertex, acute
epiphysis medially on anterior margin fitting into excavate posterior mar-
gin of vertex. Prescutum broad, lateral margins long. Forewings slender,
3 times as long as wide or slightly over, roundingly angulate; Rs straight
then arched to costal margin, cubital cell larger than medial. Hind tibia
with three inner apical spines. Genrratta: Male proctiger of medium length, rather stout, straight,
anal pore opening antero-dorsally. Forceps very short; in lateral view
broad, produced dorso-cephalically as long, acute lobes; in dorso-caudal
view broad, flattened, arched to black-tipped apices. Female genital seg-
ment about ¥% as long as rest of abdomen, thick dorso-ventrally; dorsal
valve somewhat hood-shaped, exceeding ventral, ventral margin of latter
straight for about ¥% its length then sharply upturned to acute apex. Ferris gives Celtis iguanea as a definite host, having taken both
nymphs and adults on this plant. Many specimens are at hand from Ari-
zona taken on Celtis pallidis Torr. Tyee, female, Arizona 2315, in Crawford Collection. Leuronota longipennist Crawford

1914 Leuronota longipennis Crawford, U.S, Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:68, 69. 1917 Leuronote lengipennis Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip, N. Am. 791. .

* maculatus, L. (p. part. of maculare)—spotted,
+ From longus -a -um, L. adj.—long + pennis, L. £, noun—wing. 600 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Crawford’s description of this species is as follows:

“Length of body 2.8 mm. ; length of forewing 3.1; width of head 0.68,

“General color brown; genal cones, anterior margin of pronotum,
part of sternum, legs, antennae except terminal segment very light brown;
antennal segments tipped with brown. “Head small, flattened, not deflexed, not as broad as thorax; vertex
flat, with a broad, shallow depression on each side of median line, smooth;
genal cones about % as long as vertex, extending forward in same plane
with vertex, divergent, subacute at apex, slightly pubescent. Clypeus
far back, with a conspicuous cavity in front of it between genae. Antennae
more than 3 times as long as width of head, slender. “Thorax not arched, flat, narrow; pronotum moderately long, anterior
epiphysis smaller than in two preceding species [maculata and crawfordi]. Legs slender. Wings nearly 4 times as long as broad, very narrow, nar-
rowly rounded at apex, apical third brown, basal % transparent, mem-
brane coarsely punctate; first marginal cell larger than second; radial
sector long. “GENITALIA: Male genital segment small; anal valve much longer
than forceps, fusiform, narrow at apex, with processes; forceps small,
short, slender, acute at tip, strongly arcuate; pubescence short. “Described from 1 male from Palm Beach, Florida (H. G. Dyar),
no data. “Typ, Cat. No. 18081, United States National Museum. “This species bears some resemblance to members of the European
genus Fioria.”

Type examined. Genus Ceropsylla* Riley

1885 Ceropsylla Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 2:76. 1910 Ceropsylla Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. a
1911 Ceropsylla Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:423. 1911 Triozoida Crawford (pro parte), Pom. Coll, Jour. Ent. 3:493. 1913 Ceropsylla Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 59. 1914 Ceropsylla Crawford, U.S, Nat. Mus., Bull. 85:100. 1917 Ceropsylla Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 798. Head narrower than thorax. Vertex smooth, somewhat rounded,
portion bearing lateral ocelli very strongly raised, next eyes rounding
evenly into genae, medially overhanging median ocellus. Genae produced
as short, blunt processes extending somewhat forward, a second pair of
small rounded processes next eyes, below antennal insertions. Antennae
slender, long, arising close together and far down on genae, largely on
genal processes. Eyes hemispherical, very large. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum very short, vertical, depressed below vertex and prescutum. Proepisternum produced laterad, platelike. Prescutum as long as wide,
very strongly arched. Mesopleurites strongly developed, episternum
very large, swollen. Forewings large, membranous, angulate apically,

 

* From ceros -ou, Gr. m. noun—wax + psylla,

 

a

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 601

basal vein (R-+ M+ Cu) very long, parallel to costa, cubitus arising
separately, radius and media with a short petiole, R very short, R: long,
Rs very short, no pterostigma. Hind wings much shorter than forewings. Metatibia with basal spur, one outer and two inner apical spines. Haplotype: Ceropsylla sideroxyli Riley. * This genus is most peculiar in the characters of the head and venation
of the wings. The position of the antennal insertion is unique, in the
North American Psyllidae at least. The extremely long basal vein of the
forewings is very distinctive as is the very short base of R and short Rs. Cubitus arises separately from the basal vein leaving radius and media
with a short common base as described by Riley, not cubitus and media
on a common petiole as Crawford states. This character I do not consider
to be of the importance that Crawford attached to it. Crawford synonymized his Triozoida with Ceropsylla; from his des-
criptions and figures of johnsonii it would seem to be congeneric with
sideroryli except for the disparity in wing venation. As no specimens of
johnsonii have been seen, it is left in this genus for the present. The other
species placed here by Crawford, californica, is referred back to Trioza. Ceropsylla sideroryli* Riley
(Figs. 242, 243)

1885 Ceropsylla sideroxyli Riley, Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash, 2:76. 1910 Ceropsylla sideroxyli Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 2:229,
1911 Ceropsylla sideroxyli Crawford, Pom. Coll. Jour. Ent. 3:423,
1913 Ceropsylla sideroryli Aulmann, Psy. Cat. 59. 1914 Ceropsylla sideroxyli Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull, 85:101. 1917 Ceropsylla sideroxyli Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 798. 1923 Ceropsylla sideroxyli Ferris, Can, Ent. 55:254 [nymph]. 1928 Ceropsylla sideroxyli Ferris, Can. Ent. 60:245. Length to tip of folded wings 4 mm. Cotor: General color green to yellow. Front of head, between an-
tennae, including genal processes, anterior 44, of prescutum and two broad
stripes on scutum, dark brown. Antennae dark apically. Wings hyaline. Srrucrure: Dorsum with short sparse pubescence. Head small,
narrower than thorax. Vertex very small, rounded downward both pos-
teriorly and anteriorly, except over median ocellus. Eyes very large. Lateral ocelli on raised prominences, far forward, almost midway of eyes. Genae separated medially to above bases of antennae, below antennae
genae produced into short, bluntly rounded processes. Antennae 14
times as long as width of head, arising far down on genae, and close to-
gether. Thorax strongly arched. Pronotum depressed below plane of
vertex. Prescutum large, rounded anteriorly, as long as wide. Mesopleu-
rites very large, swollen. Forewings long, slender, acutely angled, 3 times
as long as wide; basal vein (R-+M-++- Cu) very long; R and M with a
short common stem; Rs very short, straight; cubital cell larger than
medial. Hind tibia with small basal spur, one outer and two inner apical

 

* Genitive of Sideroxylum—the generic name of the host. 602 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

spines. Metacoxa with posterior spur of moderate size, anteriorly some-
what produced but not spiniform. Genrrauta: Male proctiger produced caudad as a broad rounded
Jobe. Forceps shorter than proctiger; in lateral view slender, slightly
curved cephalad, a short, slender, curved process near base on anterior
margin; in caudal view slender to spatulate apices. Female genital seg-
ment longer than preceding sternite; ventral valve very broad, slightly
sinuate to a medial, broad, truncate tooth; dorsal valve exceeding ventral,
narrower, blunt. Described from specimens from Lake Worth, Florida (E. A. Schwarz)
in the United States National Museum. According to Riley this species
forms galls on the leaves of “Sideroxylon masticodendron,” evidently the
mastic, the name of which as given by Sargent is Siderorylum foeti-
dissimum Jacq. Ferris describes and figures the nymph which is apparently even
more strikingly distinct than the adult. He also records it from Mexico,
the only record of its occurrence outside of Florida. Tyrx, No. 695 United States National Museum (6 cotypes). Types examined. Genus Hemitrioza* Crawford

1914 Hemitrioza Crawford, U.S. Nat. Mus., Bull. gs: 104. 1917 Hemitrioza Van ‘Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 798. Head much narrower than thorax, deflexed. Vertex without abrupt
margins. Genal processes short, strongly divergent. Clypeus small. Antennae moderately long. Eyes very small, hemispherical. Thorax
broad, moderately arched. Pronotum short, depressed, strongly descend-
ing cephalad. Forewings short, membranous, bluntly angulate, usually
media and cubitus with a short common basal petiole, sometimes none
(varying on wings of individual), basal vein long. Hind wings much
smaller than forewings. Metatibia without basal armature, one outer and
three or four inner apical spines. Metatarsus without claws on basal
segment. Orthotype: Hemitrioza sonchi Crawford. As Crawford notes, this genus while distinctly triozine in general,
shows some psylline characteristics. Klyver’s species washingtonia appears from his figures to be con-
generic with sonchi although it differs from the latter markedly in some
respects, notably the very short antennae, the longer and less angulate
wings, and the venation. * From hemi, Gr. prefix—half + trioza. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 603

Key to the Species of Hemitrioza

1. Costal margin of forewings strongly arched, Rs arched to costa, short, not reach~
ing furcation of media; general color red, antennae, tibiae and tarsi white, fore-
wings maculate. . . sonchi p. 603. Costal margin of forewings not strongly arched, Rs long, straight, extending be-
yond furcation of media; general color brown, forewings immaculate

washingtonia p. 604,

 

Hemitrioza sonchi* Crawford
(Figs, 244, 245)

1884 Trioza sonchi Riley, Proc. AAAS. _EP:818 (nomen wiudum],
1913 Trioza sonchi Aulmann, Cat. 55 [nomen pada). 1914 Hemitrioza sonchi Crawford, U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 1917 Hemitrioza sonchi Van Duzee, Cat. Hemip. N. Am. 790,

Length to tip of folded wings 2.5 to 3 mm. Cotor: General color red. Tibiae, tarsi, and antennae white, latter
black-tipped. Wings hyaline except a broad band across middle and
three or four spots on posterior margin, brown. Structure: Head small. Vertex with deep discal foveae, rounding
down in front, deeply emarginate. Eyes very small. Genal processes
stout, strongly divergent, acute, about % as long as vertex. Antennae
rather short, stout, slightly over twice as long as width of head, segment
III thicker than distal segments. Thorax proportionately very broad,
weakly arched. Pronotum almost as wide as head, above plane of vertex. Forewings short, slightly over twice as long as wide, narrowly rounded
apically, membrane thickly set with minute setae. Costal margin strongly
arched; media and cubitus with a short common petiole, length somewhat
variable; Rs short, arched to costa. Hind wings very small, thickly set
with minute setae. Hind tibia with three inner apical spines. Genrratta: Male genitalia described by Crawford as follows: “For-
ceps about % as long as anal valve, [proctiger] thick at base and con-
verging to apex to a sharp toothlike point, arcuate somewhat; anal valve
rather large, elliptical (from side view), broadest at middle; forceps and
anal valvé quite densely pubescent.” Female genital segment longer than
preceding sternite, ventral valve rounded apically, dorsal valve longer,
blunt. This species is represented in the material at hand by two females
from the District of Columbia. It was described from Virginia, District
of Columbia, and Atlanta, Georgia. It is recorded from Sonchus arvensis
(Riley’s specimens). Crawford mentions the nymph but gives no host
plant data. Type, female, No. 18094 United States National Museum. Type examined. * Genitive of Sonchus—the generic name of the supposed host. 604 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Hemitrioza washingtonia* Klyver
(Figs. 246, 247)
1932 Hemitrioza washingtonia Klyver, Pan-Pac. Ent, 8:14-15. “Length of body on slide, 2.0 mm. ; length of forewing, 1.8 mm. ; width
of head, .6 mm. General color of entire body uniform medium brown. Eyes dark brown. Genae lighter than the general ‘color. Tip:of antenna
plack. Wings uniform brown (including veins) , semi-opaque, shiny; hind
wings iridescent. Agreeing fairly well with the characters of the genus
as defined by Crawford except that the head is not much narrower than
the thorax, the eyes are not proportionately very small, and the hind
tibia has 4 instead of 3, apical spines or teeth on the inner aspect. “Head strongly deflexed. Antenna ten-segmented with the third
segment nearly as long as segments 4, 5, 6, and 7 combined; antennal
sensoria obscure; antenna scarcely as long as width of head. “Thorax moderately arched; without pubescence. Posterior tibia
with 1 large black tooth and a comb of setae on the outer aspect and with
4 black teeth, 2 of them large and 2 distinctly smaller, on the inner aspect. Forewing semi-opaque and punctate throughout with a suggestion of alar
radulae in the 2 marginal cells and between Cu: and M; + 43... with
irregular venation, in the same individual .. . Posterior wing distinctly
brown, with the venation . . ., developed for the most part as little more
than streaks of brown along which the punctations that beset the entire
wing membrane are arranged in more or less definite but irregular rows. “Abdomen with the tergites and sternites uniformly and equally
chitinized; with small pleurites at the lateral extremities of tergites 4, 5,
6, and 7. Male genitalia relatively small; the proctiger oval in lateral view,
with’ sparse pubescence; the clasper simple in structure, with the distal
end directed anteriorly.”—Klyver. This species was described from one male from Toppenish, Wash-
ington. Type in Klyver'’s collection. Genus Levideat Tuthill
1938 Levidea Tuthill, Ent. News 49:245. Head small, much narrower than thorax, deflexed. Vertex perpendi-
cular, rounded, smooth, median suture lacking or at least apparent only
above front ocellus, no discal impressions. Genae somewhat swollen be-
low antennae, almost touching. Clypeus large and globose, visible from
front. Antennae slender, of moderate length, longer than width of head. Eyes small, hemispherical. Thorax moderately arched. Pronotum nearly
vertical, broad. Proepisternum produced laterad, plate-like around pos-
terior of eye. Forewings long, pointed apically, somewhat coriaceous,

* An adjectival form of Washington. From levis -e, L. adj—smooth + idea -ae, L. f. noun—form. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 605

radius, media and cubitus arising from basal vein (R + M + Cu) at same
point, no pterostigma. Metatibia with basal spur, one outer and two inner
apical spines. Metatarsus without claws on basal segment. Orthotype: Levidea lineata Tuthill. This genus is included in the Triozinae chiefly on the venation of the
forewings. The head is quite unlike any other members of this subfamily. It perhaps is more closely related to some other genera with which I am
unfamiliar. Levidea lineata* Tuthill

(Figs. 234, 235, 248, 313)
1938 Levidea lineata Tuthill, Ent. News 49:245,

Length to tip of folded wings, 3 to 3.5 mm. Cotor: General body color, including legs, stramineous. Vertex and
genae light, antennae darker. Eyes dark. Two brown lines extending
across prescutum, sometimes incomplete, continuing on scutum as a
diverging pair of lines. Membrane of forewings with small brown spots,
very thick at anal margin to sparse on costal margin, the veins unspotted
except at marginal cells, thus giving general appearance of stripes. Srrucrure: Head very small, strongly deflexed. Vertex slightly
swollen in appearance, perfectly smooth except for two very small foveae
near occipital margin and remnant of medial suture above front ocellus. Genae slightly swollen. Clypeus very large, visible from front or side. Antennae twice as long as width of head. Thorax moderately arched. Pronotum developed out and around the occiput. Forewings slightly more
than twice as long as wide, without pterostigma or cubital petiole, mar-
ginal cells about equal. Metatibia with stout basal spur, one outer, two
inner apical spines. ,

Geniratia: Male genitalia large, proctiger triangular in outline,
broad at base, slightly longer than forceps which are simple, tapering
from base to acute apices, quite strongly arched, apices touching, pubes-
cent on posterior margins. Female genital segment large with rather
dense, silky pubescence; dorsal valve very large, hood-shaped; ventral
valve smaller, sharply pointed. Known only from the type series from Arizona. The probable host
is Parthenium incanum, “wild rubber.”

Hotoryrs, female, No. 55185 United States National Museum,

* Adjectival form of linea, L.—line. BIBLIOGRAPHY

Amyor, Cuartes Jean Bapriste Co
1847, Entomologie Francaise. Rhynchotes (part 4). Annales de la Société
Entomologique de France, 2nd Series 5:453-524. Asumeap, Wm. H. . . . |
1881. On the Aphididae of Florida With Descriptions of New Species (Family
Psyllidae). Canadian Entomologist 13:220-225.

tera of Alaska. Alaska 8(part 1):129137. 1904, New York,
Doubleday, Base ‘and Cor {Harriman Alecks Series of the Soafihoonlan ne
stitution (i910)1,

Avutmann, Georc
1912, Entomologische Rundschau, Heft. 22. [fide Aulmann, 1913]. 1913. Psyllidarum Catalogus. Berlin, W. Junk. Barger, H. S. | |
1919. Avocado Seed Weevils. Proceedings of the Entomological Society of
Washington. 21:53-60. .

Barwarp, W. S. . _
1880. The Bud-Blight Insect. Proceedings of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science 28:478-486 (1879). Bevrenmijtier, WILLIAM ;
1904. The Insect-Galls of the Vicinity of New York City, American Museum
Journal 4:89-124,

Brancnarp, EMILE _. 1840. Histoire Naturelle des Insectes 3. Paris, P. Duménil. Boseuut, F. B. |
1928. Studii Sugli Psyllidi I, Contributo alla Conoscenza della Psylla del Fico
(Homotoma ficus L.). Bolletino del Laboratorio di Zoologia Generale e
Agraria del R. instituto superiore agrario in Portici 21: 218-251. 1929a. Studii Sugli Psyllidi II. Descrizione de una Nuova Specie di Pawro-
cephala della Gina e det suoi Stadit Larvalt, Ibid. 21:251-264,

1929b. Studii Sugli Psyllidi II. Appunti su Alcune Ninfe di Pachypsyllini. Ibid. 22: 204-218. 1929c. Studii Sugli Psyllidi IV. Biologia e Svillupo della Spanioza galii aspin-
ovelutina (Sulc). Ibid. 23:13-27. 1929d. Studii Sugli Psyllidi V. Descrizione di un Nuovo Genere di Psyllidi di
S. Domingo (Antille). Ibid. 24:70-77. 1930a. Studii Sugli Psyllidi VI. Psyllidi di Formosa Raccolti dal Dr. R.
Takahashi. Ibid. 24:175-210. [606]

 

SLANG HI em TeNeeaRE ee oe e OT  T A

 

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 607

1930b. Studii Sugli Psyllidi VII. Descrizione di una Nuova Specie di Dia-
ina_del Senegal. Annali de Museo Civico di Storia Naturelle Giacomo
oria, Genova 55:10-14 (1930-31). 1930c. Studii Sugli Psyllidi VIII. Biologia e Sviluppo della Rhinocola succincta
Hegeer. Bolletino del Laboratorio di Zoologia Generale e Agraria del R.
instituto superiore agrario in Portici 24: 211-222. 1930d. Studii Sugli Psyllidi IX. Descrizione di una Triozina Galligena su
Agrumi in Eritrea. Ibid. 24: 228-222. 1931. Studii Sugli Psyllidi X. Instituzione di un Nuovo Genere e Descrizione
di Egeirotrioza Ceardi (De Bergevin) euphratica n. var., Triozina Galligena su
Populus euphratica in Mesopotamia. Ibid. 24:267-278,

Barrram, W. H.

1919. An Infestation of Apple Sucker Psyllia mali Schmidb. in Nova Scotia,
The Agricultural Gazette of Canada 5, 9:823-827. 1922. The Apple Sucker. Journal of Economic Entomology 15:96-101. 1923. The European Apple Sucker. Nova Scotia Department of Agriculture,
Bulletin 10. 1927, Injurious Insects of Nova Scotia. Nova Scotia Department of Natural
Resources, Bulletin 12. Barron, W. E.

1916. Two Psyllids New to Connecticut. 15th Report of the State Entomologist
of Connecticut. (In) 39th Annual Report of the Connecticut Agricultural
Experiment Station, p. 186. Brocher, FRANK

1925, L’appareil buccal des larves de Psylla pyrisuga Fstr. Etude anatomiqu
et physiologique. Annales de la Societé Entomologique de France. 94:55-66. Burueister, Herman
1835, Handbuch der Entomologie II. Berlin, T. E. F. Enslin,
Ca.pwett, Joun S,

1936. Seven New Species of the Genus Aphalara (Homoptera: Chermidae). Ohio Journal of Science 36: 220-224. 1937. Some North American Relatives of Aphalara calthae Linnaeus (Homop-
tera:Chermidae). Annals of the Entomological Society of America 30:563-571. 1938a._ The Jumping Plant-Lice of Ohio (Homoptera: Chermidae). Ohio
Biological Survey Bulletin 34(Vol. VI, No. 5):228-281. 1938b. Three New Species of Psyllids and the Description of the Allotype of
Livia opaqua Cald. (Homoptera: Psyliidae). Annals of the Entomological
Society of America 31:442-444,

1939. New Psyllids from Alberta (Psyllidae, Homoptera). Canadian Entomol-
ogist 71:211-212,

 

1940a, Three New Species of Psyllitiae with Notes on Others. Ohio Journal
of Science 40: 49-50,

 

 

  

608 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

1940b, New Genera and Species of Jumping Plant-Lice from the Howaiian
Islands with Descriptions of Several Immature Stages (Homoptera: Psyllidae),
Proceedings of the Hawaiian Entomological Society 10:389-397. Cums, L., ann E, J. Newcomer
1939. Report of the Pear Psylla in Idaho. U. S. Bureau of Entomology and
Plant Quarantine. Insect Pest Survey, Bulletin 19, 8:264,

Cocxerext, T.D. A. 1910, A New Gall-Making Psyllid on Hackberry. Entomological News
21:180-181,

Costa, 0. G.
1839. Monogr. degl’ Insetti Ospitanti sull’ Olivo e nelle Olive, 2.ed., pp. 23-25
[fide Aulmann, 1913}. Crawroro, Davin L.
1910a, American Psyllidae I (Triozinae). Pomona College Journal of Entom-
ology 2:228-237. 1910b, American Psyllidae II (Triozinae). Ibid. 2:347-362. 1911a, American Psyllidae III (Triozinze). Ibid. 3:422-453. 1911b. American Psyllidae IV (A Partial Revision of Subfamilies). Ibid. 3:480-503,

1911e. American Psyllidae V. Ibid. 3:629-632. 1912, A Note on Certain Psyllidae. Ibid. 4:684. 1912b. A New Insect Pest (Trioza alacris Flor). Monthly Bulletin California

Commission of Horticulture 1:86-87. 1912c. Indian Psyllidae. Records of the Indian Museum 7: 419-435. 1913, New Genera and Species of Psyllidae from the Philippine Islands. Philippine Journal of Science 8: 293-301. 1914a, A Recently Described Psyllid from East Africa (Hemip.). Entomological
News 25: 62-65. 1914b, A Monograph of the Jumping Plant-Lice or Psyllidae of the New
World. Smithsonian Institution, United States National Museum, Bulletin 85. 1915. Ceylonese and Philippine Psyllidae (Homoptera). Philippine Journal
of Science 10:257-269. 1917. Philippine and Asiatic Psyllidae. Ibid. 12:163-175. 1918. The Jumping Plant-Lice (family Psyllidae) of the Hawaiian Islands. Proceedings of the Hawaiian Entomological Society 3: 430-457. 1919. The Jumping Plant-Lice of the Palaeotropics and the South Pacific
Islands. Philippine Journal of Science 15:139-207. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 609

1920a, No Interestit i i
102 8 New Sor ntgresting Psyllidae of the Pacific Coast (Homop.). Entomolog-

1920b. Notes on Psyllidae (Homoptera). Ibid. 31:69-70,

192%e. Cerotri llidae, He eedin, i
Entornological Sociegy hae gr omopters)- Proceedings of the Hawaiian

1920d. The Psyllidae of Borneo, Philippine Journal of Science 17:353-361. 1924. New Indian Psyllidae. Records of the Indian Museum 26: 615-621..

1925a. Notes on Hawaiian llidae. i is
logical Society hanes! Psyllidae. Proceedings of the Hawaiian Entomo-

1925b. Notes on California Psyllidae. Ibid. 6:30-31. Tease 4, Ep tlomopterous Genus Meschomotoma (Psyllidae or Chermidae). 1925d. The Genus Macrohomotoma (Psyllidae or Chermidae). Ibid. 6:36-39,
1925e. Psyllidae of South America, Brotéria:Série Zoologica 22:56~74,
1925f. Notes on Psyllidae. Philippine Journal of Science 28:39-43. 1927a. Psyllidae (Chermidae). Insects of Samoa and Other Samoan Terres-

Hnrtnrepods. Part II, Hemiptera: 29-33. London, British Museum. (Natural

rei tas, of Molokai. Proceedings of the Hawaiian Entomological

1928a, A New Psyllid from Maui. Ibid. 7:33. 1928b. Psyllidae of Fiji and Samoa. Ibid. 7:33-35. 1928c. Fauna Sumatrensis, Psyllidae. Entomologische Mitteilungen 17:425-426,
Curtis, Jorn

1835. British Entomology 12. [private printing]. Dowett, ALLEN

1932. A New Arytaina (Homoptera, Chermi
Entomological Soctennns. gofigmoptera, Chermidae). Journal of the Kansas

Epwaaps, James

1896. The Hemiptera-Homopt: ‘icadit it iti:
Islands, London Roe mopters (Cicadina and Psyllina) of the’ British

‘ENvERLEIN, GUNTHER

1910. Panisopelma quadrigibbiceps, eine neue Psyllidenyatt -
tinien. [Psyllidologica I]. Zoologischer Anzeiger 36:280-281, © °YS ATée™

   

610 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

1914. Psyllidologica Il, H. Sauter’s Formosa-Ausbeute: Psyllidae (Homopt.). Entomologische Mitteilungen 3:230-235,

1915. Psyllidologica III. Strophingia oligocaenica nov. spec, eine fossile
Peyllide. Zoologischer Anzeiger 45: 246-248. 1918a, Psyllidologica IV. Zoologischer Anzeiger 49: 344-352. 1918b. Psyllidologica V. Zoologische Jahrbiicher. Abteilung fiir Systematik,
Geographie und Biologie der Tiere 41: 479-486. 1921. Psyllidologica VI. Zoologischer Anzeiger. 52:115-122. 1923. Psyllidologica VII. Deutsche Entomologische Zeitschrift 1923:543-544. 1926. Psyllidologica VIII. Entomologische Mitteilungen 15:397-401. Essie, E. O. 1917, ‘The Tomato and Laurel Psyllids. Journal of Economic Entomology
10: 433-444, figs. Faién, Kart FRepaox
1814. Specimen Novam Hemiptera Disponendi Methodum Exhibens. Lund,
Litteris Berlingianis. Fevr, Eparamt Porter
1911, 26th Report of the State Entomologist, State of New York. New York
State Museum Bulletin 147. Ferris, G. F.

1923. Observations on the Chermidae (Hemiptera:Homoptera). Part I.
Canadian Entomologist 55:250-256. 1924. The Nymphs of Two Species of Chermidae (Hemiptera). Pan-Pacific
Entomologist 1:24-28,

1925. Observations on the Chermidae (Hemiptera:Homoptera). Part II. Canadian Entomologist 57: 46-50. 1926. Observations on the Chermidae (Hemiptera:Homoptera). Part III. Ibid. 58:13-20. 1928a.' Observations on the Chermidae (Hemiptera:Homoptera). Part IV. Thid. 60: 109-117. 1928b. Observations on the Chermidae (Hemiptera: Homoptera). Part V.
Ibid. 60: 240-245,

‘Feats, G. F., ano Persis Hyatt

1923. The Life History of Euphyllura arbuti Schwarz (Hemiptera: Chermidae).-

Canadian Entomologist 55: 88-92. Ferns, G. F., anp F. D. Kiyver . 1930 (?). Report upon a Collection of Chermidae (Homoptera) from New
Zealand. Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New Zealand
63: 34-61, pls. 7-16 [from reprint without date and with incomplete title]. ne

Dancearea

 

 

‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 611

Frrew, Asa

1851. Catalogue with References and Descriptions of the Insects Collected
and Arranged for the State Cabinet of Natural History. Fourth Annual
Report of the Regents of the University on the Condition of the State Cabinet
of Natural History. [Annual Report New York State Museum] pp. 43-69,

Fuercuer, JAMES

1883a, Homoptera—The Harvest Flies and Their Allies. Annual Report of
the Entomological Society of the Province of Ontario for 1882:69-83. 1883b. Note on Pachypsylla celtidis-mamma. Canadian Entomologist 15:40. Fror, Gustav

1861la. Zur Kenntniss der Rhynchoten. Bulletin de la Societé Impériale d
Naturalistes. Moscou, 34:331-422, " ees

1861b. Die Rhynchoten Livlands 2. Dorpat, E. J. Karow. Fons-Cotomse, BoYER DE

1840. Second Mémoire sur les Insectes qui Attaquent l’olivier, Annales de la
Société Entomologique de France 9:101-116. Fonrses, S. A. 1885. Fourteenth Report of the State Entomologist on the Noxious and
Beneficial Insects of the State of Illinois. Forster, ArNoLp

1848. Uebersicht der Gattungen und Arten in ‘der F: der Psylloden. Yeghandlungen des naturhistorischen Vereines der preussischen Rheinlande

 

Faison, THEoporE H.

1927. A List of the Insect Types in the Collections of the Illinois State Natural
History Survey and the University of Illinois. Ilinois Natural History Survey
Bulletin 16, art. 4:137-309. Froccarr, Watrer W.

1900. Australian Psyllidae. Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South
Wales 1900; 250-302. 1901. Australian Psyllidae. Part II. Ibid. 1901:242-298. 1903, Australian Psyllidae. Part III. Ibid. 1903:315-337. 1907. Australian Insects. (Psyllidae pp. 361-367.) Sydney, W. Brooks and Co.

Futter, A. S., ano C. V. Ritey
1880. The Insect Enemies and Diseases of Our Small Fruits. American
Entomologist 3 (I. 2nd series) :61~-63. Fytes, Taomas W.

1882. Notes on a Gall Mite of the Nettle Tree (Celtis occidentalis). Canadian
Entomologist 14: 198-199. 1883a.. The Parasite of Phylloxera vastatrix, and the Gall Insect of the Nettle
Tree. Ibid, 15: 83-84. 1883b. Further Notes on the Psyllidae. Ibid. 15:198-199. 612 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Grorrroy, Errenne Louis

1762. Histoire abrégée des Insectes qui se trouvent aux environs de Paris, etc. Paris [fide Van Duzee, 1917]. Ti64, Histoire abrégée des Insectes, dans laquelle ces Animaux sont rangés
suivant un ordre méthodique. Paris, Durand,
Guerre, C. P,, anv Cant F. BAKER
895, A Preliminary List of the Hemiptera of Colorado. Colorado Agricul-
tural Experiment Siation, Bulletin 31 (Tech. Series No. 1). Grover, Towne
1877. Homoptera. Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for the year
1876 (Annual Report of the U. S. Dept. Agr.):24-46. Guinm-Ménevinte
1843. Iconographie du régne animal de G. Cuvier, Part VII:370 [fide Low 1878]. Hania, Ta. 4841, Versuch einer Eintheilung der Pflanzenluse (Phytophthires Burm.) EX dor Pligelbildung, Zeitschrift fiir die Entomologie, E. F. Germar
3:359-376. Leipzig, Friedrich Fleischer. Haver, H.
1935. Psylloidea Mitteleuropas. Tierwelt Mitteleuropas 4, 3:221-252. Leipzig,
Quelle u. Meyer. Kimearpy, G. W.

1904. Bibliographical and Nomenclatorial Notes on the Hemiptera, No. 2. ‘The Entomologist 37: 254-258. 3905. Neue und wenig bekannte Hemiptera. Wiener Entomologische Zeitung. 24: 266-268. Kxyver, Frep D,

1930a. Notes on the Chermidae. Part I. (Hemiptera: Homoptera). Canadian
Entomologist 62:167-175,

1930b. Euphyllura arctostaphyli Schwarz and Euphyllura_ neveipennis
(Schwarz), (Homoptera:Chermidae). Proceedings of the Entomological
Society of Washington 32:153-160. 4931a. Chermidae from Utah, Nevada, and Arizona, Including Three New
Species (Homoptera). Pan-Pacific Entomologist 7:131-143, 157-158. 7931b, Notes on the Chermidae (Hemiptera:Homoptera). Part II. Canadian
Entomologist 63: 111-115. 4931c, California Psyllids of Present and Potential Economic Importance. Monthly Bulletin of the Department of Agriculture, State of California,
20: 691-697. 1932a. Biological Notes and New Records of North American Chermidae
(Homoptera). Entomological News 43:7-12, 33-40, 70-73. 1932b, New Records and Two New Species of Chermidae from British
Columbia and Washington, with Biological Notes. Pan-Pacific Entomologist
8:11-17 (1931). ‘THE -PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 613

1932c. Anomoterga tahuata, New Genus and New Specie id othe
midae from the Marquesas. Bernice P. Bisho; rn Bullen 88. (Saclic
Entomological Survey Pub. 1):93-10i. P Museum Bulletin $$ (Pacific

1932d. Chermidae from the Society Islands. Ibid. 113 (Ibid. 6):25-27. Knowzzon, G. F.

1933. Note on Host Plants of Paratrio: i
1989. Note on Host, Plants of Paratrioza cockerelli (Sulc). Journal-of Eco-

1984. The Potato Psyllid. Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, Leaflet 36. Knowtrow, G. F., an M. J. Janes

1931. Studies on the Biology of Paratrio: Annals
Entomological Society of Aaverica 24-289-556 °e (Sale)- of the

Kwowzron, G. F., ano W. L. Txomas
1994, Host Plants of the Potato Psllid. Journal of Economie Entomology

Kuwayama, S.

1907. Die Psylliden Ja Lg i is
4007, Die Paylliden Jepans I. Transactions of the Sapporo Natural History

1910. Die Psylliden Japans II. Ibid. 3:53-66. Lame, FREDERICK

1922, On Some Fijian Psyllida
Pe PS aSome oun, au 1c Homoptera). Annals and Magazine of

1923. On some Psyllidae (Hem.-Hom. i
es Bh SoS ’syllidae (Hem.-Hom.) from the New World. Ibid. 11

Lamarx, Jean Baptiste
1801. Systéme des Animaux sans Vertébres. Paris, Chez Deterville. ‘LaTRerLie, Prerre ANDRE

1802, 1804, Histoire Naturelle, genérale et ticuli és
Inseotes 3, 1802; 19, 180d; Pasig F Dadar ore Ges Crustacts et des

er ee Crustaceorum et Insectorum etc. 3. Parisiis et Argentorati,

1810. Considérations Générales sur L’Ordre Naturel des Ani Cor
les Classes des Crustacés, des Arachnides, et des Insectes, ete. Paris, F Schoell,

1825. Families naturelles du Régne Animal. Paris, J. Tastu. Leaci

1815. Hemiptera, in Brewster's Edinburgh En i
aS. Hemipters, in J i inburgl cyclopedia IX [fide Aulmann,

Leonaro, M. D.
1928. A List of the Insects of New York. C jiversi . Experiment Station, Memoir 101. ‘ornell University Agricultural
Leratseay, L.

1874. Catalogue des Hemipteres du Department du Nord (ed. 2), 1874:90. Erin Imp. des. Se. de l'Agr. et des Arts de Lille 1874 [fide Crawford,

 

614 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

Lavnagus, CAROLUS
1758. Systema Naturae. Editio Decima I. Holmiae, Laurentii Salvi. 1761, Fauna Svecica. Stockholmiae, Laurentii Salvii. ‘Lanrner, J. A. 1893. Report of the State Entomologist for the Year 1892. New York State
Museum, 46th Annual Report. ‘Low, Franz
1877, Zur Biologie und Charakteristik der Psylloden nebst, Beschreibung

zweier neuer Species der Gattung Psylla. Verhandlungen der kaiserlich-
k6niglichen zoologisch-botanischen Gesellschaft in Wien 26:187-216. 1878. Beitrage zur Kenntniss der Psylloden. Ibid. 27:123-154,
1879. Zur Systematik der Psylloden. Ibid. 28:585-610. 1883. Revision der paléarktischen Psylloden in Hinsicht auf Systematik und
Synonymie. Ibid. 32:227-254. Mactosxie, G.
1886. Witlaczil on Psyllidae. American Naturalist 20:283-287. [An abstract
of Die Anatomie der Psylliden, Emanuel Witlaczil]. Matxy, C. W.
1894. Hackberry Psyllidae Found at Ames, lowa. Proceedings of the Iowa
‘Academy of Sciences 1893, 1:131-138. 1895. Psyllidae Found at Ames. Ibid. 1894, 2:152-171. Marrin, Ratri S.
19 ae New Euphyllura. Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society

McAree, W. L.
1915. Psyllidae Wintering on Conifers about Washington, D. C. Science, N. S.,
41, June 25, p. 940 [fide McAtee 1918]. 1918. Psyllidae of the Vicinity of Washington, D. C., with Description of a
New Species of Aphalara (Hom.). Entomological News 29: 220-224. 1926. Notes on Homoptera from Illinois, with Descriptions of New Forms,
Chiefly Eupteryginae. Ilinois Natural History Survey, Bulletin 16:127-136. Meyer-Dir. 1872. Die Psylloden, Mittheilungen der Schweizerischen Entomologischen
Gesellschaft (Bulletin de la Société Suisse d’entomologie) 3:376-406. ‘Mmuuron, H.
1939, Paratrioza cockerelli in Minnesota. U. S. Bureau of Entomology and
Plant Quarantine. Insect Pest Survey, Bulletin 19, 9:564. Osnorn, Herbert
1922a. Homoptera in the Vicinity of Cranberry Lake. Technical Publication
No. 16 of New York State College of Forestry at Syracuse University, 24-54.

. 1922b, Life History Notes on Cranberry Lake Homoptera. Ibid. 87-104,

    
  

a RT TS

TGR Tyan em ae a

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 615

Oszanmn, B. 1908,-1910. Verzeichnis der palaearktischen Hemipteren 2. St. Petersburg,
3, 1910. Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1908. Band 3, 19:
4912, Katalog der paliarktischen Hemipteren. Berlin, R, Friediander and

OstEN-SAcKEN

1861. Ueber die Gallen und andere durch Insecten hervorgebrachte Planzen-
deformationen in Nord-America. Entomologische Zeitung Stettin. 22 Jhg. ‘Passerini, J. 3863, Aphididae Ifalicae. Archivo per. la Zoologia l’Anatomia e la Fisiologia

Patcu, Eprrn M.

1909a. Homologies of the Wing Veins of the Aphididae, Psyllidae, Aleurodidae,
and Coccidae. Annals of the Entomological Society of America 2:101-135. 1909b. Downy Psyllid of Alder, Psylla floccosa, New Species. Canadian Ento-
mologist 41:301-303. 19lla, Insect Notes for 1910: Psyllidae, Maine Agricultural Experiment Sta-
tion, Bulletin 187:10-20, vilidae, Maine Agricultural Experiment Sta

1911b. Insect Notes for 1911. Ibid. 195. 1912a, Notes on Psyllidae. Ibid. 202: 215-234. 1912b. Notes on Psyllidae: Livia. Psyche 19:5-8. 1916. A Psyllid Gall on Juncus (Livia maculipennis Fitch). Ibid. 23: 21-22. 1923. Family Psyllidae (or Chermidae). (In) The Hemiptera or Suckinj
Insects of Connecticut. State of Connecticut State Geological and Natural
History Survey, Bulletin 34:243-250. Pererson, ALVAH
1923. The Blackberry Psyllid. New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station,
Bulletin 378. Provancuer, Leon

1872. Description de Plusieurs Hémiptéres Nouveaux. Le Naturaliste Cana-
dien 4:73-79, 103-108, 319-320, 350-352, 376-379. 1890. Petite Faune Entomologique du Canada II. Québec, C. Darveau. Puron, Aucuste
1875. Catalogue des Hémiptéres (Hétéroptéres, Cicadines et Psyllides) d’
Europe et du Bassin de la Méditerranée. 2nd ed. Paris, Deyrolle. [Later edi-
tions (3rd 1886, 4th 1899) entitled, Catalogue des Hémipteres de la Faune
Paléarctique.) Ricuagps, B, L., anv H. L. Boop
1933. Psyllid Yellows of the Potato. Journal of Agricultural Researcli
46: 189-216. 616 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

Ruy, C. V.
1876. Gall-insects, in Johnson's New Universal Cyclopaedia [fide Riley 1883). 1883. Hackberry Psyllid Galls. Canadian Entomologist 15:157-159. 1884. The Psyllidae of the United States. Proceedings of the American Asso-
ciation for the Advancement of Science (1883) 32:319. 1885. Notes on North American Psyllidae. Proceedings of the Biological
Society of Washington (1882-1884) 2:67-79. 1890. Insects Injurious to the Hackberry. Chapter XII, Fifth Report of the
United States Entomological Commission,

Ross, W. A. 1919. ‘The Pear Psylla in Ontario. 49th Annual Report of the Entomological
Society of Ontario (1918) 81-90. Scinempsencer, Joser
1836. Beitriige zur Obstbaumzucht und zur Naturgeschichte der den Obst~
baumen schadlichen Insekten 4. Linz, [fide Catalogue of the Library of the
British Museum (Natural History) ]

Scuwarz, E. A,

1900. ‘Papers from the Harriman Alaska Expedition 19. Psyllidae. Proceed~
ings of the Washington Academy of Sciences 2:539-540,

1904. Notes on North American Psyllidae, Part 1. Proceedings of the Entomo-
logical Society of Washington 6:234-245. Ibid. 6:153 [note on nest-making
psyllid larva]. Scorr, Jon

1876. Monograph of the British Species Belonging to the Hemiptera~Homop-
tera, Family Psyllidae; Together with the Description of a Genus Which May
be Expected to Occur in Britain. Transactions of the Entomological Society
of London 1876:525-570. 1882, On Certain Genera and Species of the Group of Psyllidae in the Col-
lection of the British Museum. Ibid, 1882:449-473. StaNceRLAND, M. V.
1892. The Pear-Tree Psylla. Cornell University Agricultural Experiment Sta-
tion, Bulletin 44: 161-186. Smarr, Joun B. 1910. The Insects of New Jersey. Annual Report of the New Jersey State
Museum 1909. Sears, L. G.
1939. Occurrence of Psylla pyricola in Washington. U.S, Bureau of Entom-
ology and Plant Quarantine. Insect Pest Survey, Bulletin 19, 6:374. SroveH, H. B. 1910. The Hackberry Psylla, Pachypsylla celtidis-mammae Riley. A Study
in Comparative Morphology. Kansas University, Science Bulletin 5(9):121-165,
pl. XXVI-XXXV,

‘Srricktann, E. H.

1938, The Chermidae, (Homoptera), of Alberta. Canadian Entomologist
70: 200-206. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 617

1939. Further Notes on Psyllidae Taken in Alberta (Homoptera). Ibid. 71: 212-215. Sutc, Karen
1908. Beitrage zur Kenntniss der Psylloden. Bulletin International de

T’Académie des Sciences de lEmpereur Francois Joseph I 12(1907):248-256. (Ceska Akademie Cisare Frantiska Josefa I.) 1909. Trioza cockerelli n. sp. Acta Societatis Entomologicae Bohemiae 4:110-116
[fide Crawford]. 1913. Zur Kenntnis einiger Psylla~Arten aus dem Ungarischen National-
Museum in Budapest. Annales Historico-Naturales Musei Nationalis Hungarici
(Budapest) 11: 409-435,

1989. Description of a New Psyllid from Greenland (Homoptera). Annals and
Magazine of Natural History 4(Series 11): 78-81. ‘Tararon1 Tozzerrt, Avouro

1879. [Discussion of Trioza lauri]. (In) Resoconti della Adunanze della
Societa Entomologica Italiana 1879, pp. 19-20. Tuomas, Cyrus

1879. Eighth Report State Entomologist of Ilinois. Tuomson, C. G.

1877. Opuscula Entomologica, Fasc. 8. Trelleborg, Sandberg and Jénssons. Torm, Leowarp Dare

1937. The Genus Euphalerus in America North of Mexico (Psyllidae:
Homoptera). Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society 10:69-74. 1938. Some New North American Psyllidae (Homoptera). Entomological
News 49: 241-246. 1939a. Neotriozella and a New Related Genus (Homoptera: Psyllidae). Bulle-
tin of the Brooklyn Entomological Society 34:51-54,

1939b. New Species of Psyliidae from the Western United States. Iowa State
College Journal of Science 13: 181-186. Van Duzee, Eowarp Payson

1912. Synonymy of the Provancher Collection of Hemiptera, Canadian
Entomologist 44:317-329. 1916. Check List of the Hemiptera (excepting the Aphididae, Aleurodidae,
and Coccidae) of America North of Mexico. 1917. Catalogue of the Hemiptera of America North of Mexico excepting the
Aphididae, Coccidae, and Aleurodidae. University of California Publications,
Technical ‘Bulletin 2. 1923. The Hemiptera of the Gulf of California. Expedition of the California
Academy of Sciences to the Gulf of California in 1921. Proceedings of the
California Academy of Sciences (4th series) 12, 11:199-200. 1 fharacters of Two North American Chermidae. Pan-Pacific Entomologist

618 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

1931. Comment. Ibid. 7:96. ‘Urcnanco, Leorotpo B. 1921, New Records and Species of Psyllidae from the Philippine Islands,
with Descriptions of Some Preadult Stages and Habits. Philippine Journal of
Science 18: 259-288. ‘WALKER, FRANCIS
1852, List of the Specimens of the Homopterous Insects in the Collection of
the British Museum. Part 4. London, Edward Newman. ‘Warse, Bensamin D,, ano C. V. Riey
1869. New Insect Foe of the Blackberry. American Entomologist 1:225. ‘Weer, Hermann
1930, Biologie der Hemipteren. Berlin, Julius Springer. yess, Harry B. 1917. The Bay Flea-Louse, Trioza alacris Flor as a New Pest in New Jersey. Canadian Entomologist 49:73-75,

1921. Notes on the Life-History of Pachypsylla celtidis-gemma Riley. Ibid. 53:19-21. ‘Werss, Harry B., ano Encar L, Dickerson
iy, Psyllia buxi Linn. in New Jersey (Homop. ), Entomological News

1918. Notes on Trioza alacris Flor in New Jersey. Psyche 25:59-63. ‘Wass, Harry B., AND ALan S, Nicouay
1918. The Life History and Early Stages of Calophya nigripennis Riley. Journal of Economic Entomology 11:467-471. Wetss, Harry B., anv ExpMan WEST
1922, Notes on Livia maculipennis (Fitch) (Homoptera; Chermidae). Psyche

Wrreaczm, EMaNveL
1885. Die Anatomie der Psylliden. Zeitschrift fur Wissenschaftliche Zoologie
42;560-658. [non viso]. Zacuer, FRiepRict
1913, Bemerkungen zum “Psyllidarum Catalogus” von G. Aulmann. Entom-
ologische Mitteilungen 2: 148-153. See

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 619

EXPLANATION OF PLATES
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

a—anus

ae—aedeagus

ant—antenna

cl—clypeus

x—coxa

dv—dorsal valve of female genital
segment

e—eye

epl—epipleurite

epm—epimeron

eps—episternum

f—forceps

fr—frons

gp—genal process

Jab—labium

m sp—metacoxal spur

o—ocellus

Pp—pronotum

ph—phragma

pn—postnotum. psc—prescutum

ptg—proctiger

s—sternum

sc—scutum

scl—scutellum

sgp—subgenital plate

sp—spiracle

st—sternite

t—tergite

tn—trochantin

v—vertex

vv—ventral valve of female geni-
tal segment

w—wing

wp—wing process

 

 

621 LEONARD D. TUTHILL i
0 01 . 2 THE PS¥LLIDS OF AMERICA 621

PLATE I

Fic. 1. Psylla alni—frontal aspect of head. 2. Psylla alni—lateral aspect of thorax (Crawf.). 3. Trioza albifrons—lateral aspect of thorax (Crawt.). 4. Psylla pyricola—lateral aspect of abdomen of female (Crawf.). 5. Psylla pyricola—lateral aspect of abdomen of male (Crawf.). 6. Arytaina robusta—lateral aspect of head and thorax (Crawf.). 622

Fic. 7. 8. 10. 11. 13. 14. 15. 16. LEONARD D. TUTHILL

PLATE II
Psylla alnifemale cauda (Crawf.).

. Psylla alni—male cauda (Crawf.). ). Psylla caudata—female cauda (Crawf.). Psylla caudata—male cauda. Psylla galeaformis—male cauda.

. Psylla galeaformis—female cauda. Psylla floccosa—female cauda (Crawf. mod.). Psylla floccosa—male cauda (Crawf. mod.). Psylla trimaculata—female cauda (Crawf.). Psylla trimaculata—male cauda (Crawf.). THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

    

 

FTL LE NOTE PLT ALATA

 

624

LEONARD D. TUTHILL

PLATE II

. Psylla maculata—female cauda (Crawf,).

. Psylla albagena—female cauda (Cald.).

. Psylla albagena—male cauda (Cald.). |. Psylla carpinicola—male cauda (Crawf.). » Psylla carpinicola—female cauda (Crawf.).
. Psylla dilonchi—female cauda (Cald. mod.).
. Psylla dilonchi—male cauda (Cald. mod.). |. Psylla striata—female cauda.

. Psylla striata—male cauda.

. Psylla minuta—female cauda (Crawf. mod.). » Psylla brevistigmata—female cauda.

. Psylla brevistigmata—male cauda.

. Psylla difficilis—female cauda.

. Psylla difficilis—male cauda. : Psylla hartigii—male cauda.

. Psylla hartigii—female cauda.

. Psylla tuthillifemale cauda (Cald.). THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

626

Fic. 34.
. Psylla stricklandi—female cauda. 36. 37. LEONARD D, TUTHILL

PLATE IV
Psylla stricklandi—male cauda. Psylla magnicauda—male cauda. Psylla magnicauda—female cauda (Crawf.).
. Psylla. buxi—fémale cauda (Cald.). ° 7
39. ). Psylla breviata—male cauda (Crawf.). 41. 42. 43. 44
45. 46. Al. 48. 49,

Psylla breviata—female cauda,

Psylla mali—female cauda. Psylla mali—male cauda. Psylla alba—female cauda (Craw#.). Psylla alba—male cauda. Psylla ribesiae—female cauda (Crawf.). Psylla ribesiae—male cauda. Psylla pyricola—female cauda. Psylla pyricola—male cauda. Psylla americana—female cauda (Crawi.). ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

 

628 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

PLATE V

Fic. 50. Psylla phoradendri—female cauda. 51. Psylla phoradendri—male cauda. 52. Psylla maculata—male cauda, lateral aspect. 52a. Psylla maculata—caudal aspect of forceps. 53. Psylla nana—female cauda. 54. Psylla nana—male cauda. 55. Psylla insignita—male cauda. 56. Psylla insignita—female cauda. 57. Psylla magna—female cauda. 58. Psylla magna—male cauda. 59. Psylla omani—female cauda. 60. Psylla omani—male cauda. 61. Psylla hirsuta—female cauda. 62. Psylla hirsuta—male cauda. 63, Psylla media—female cauda. 64, Psylla media—male cauda. 65. Psylla alaskensis—female cauda. 66. Psylla alaskensis—male cauda. 67. Psylla bulbosa—female cauda. 68. Psylla bulbosa—male cauda. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

629

 

 

630 LEONARD D. TUTHILL ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

PLATE VI

Fre. 69. Psylla manisi—male cauda. 70. Psylla manisifemale cauda. 71. Psylla quadrilineata—female cauda. 72. Psylla quadrilineata—male cauda. 73. Psylla confusa—male cauda. 14. Psylla confusa—female cauda. 15. Psylla parallela—male cauda. 76. Psylla minor—male cauda. 71. Psylla minor—female cauda. 78. Psylla usitata—female cauda. 79. Psylla usitata—male cauda. 79a. Psylla usitata—tip of forceps. 80. Psylla latiforceps—female cauda. 81. Psylla latiforceps—male cauda. 82. Psylla uncata—male cauda. 83, Psylla wncata—female cauda. 84. Psylla propria—female cauda. 85. Psylla propria—male cauda. 86. Arytaina spartiophila—female cauda. 87. Arytaina amorphae—male cauda. 88.. Arytaina amorphae—female cauda. 89, Arytaina pallida—male cauda. 90. Arytaina pallida—female cauda. 632

Fic. 91. 92. 93. 94,
95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 100:
101. 102. 103. 104. 105. 106. 107. 108. 109. LEONARD D. TUTHILL

PLATE VII

Psylla americana—male cauda. Psylla americana curta—male cauda,

Psylla sinuata—male cauda, lateral aspect (Crawf.). Psylla sinuata—male cauda, caudal aspect (Crawf.). Psylla fibulata—female cauda (Crawf.). Psylla fibulata—male cauda (Craws.). Psylla annulata—female cauda (Crawf.). Psylla annulata—male cauda (Crawf.). Arytaina genistae—head. Arytaina genistae—female cauda (Crawf.). Arytaina genistae—male cauda (Crawf.). Arytaina fuscipennis—female cauda (Crawf.). Arytaina fuscipennis—male cauda, lateral aspect (Crawf.). Arytaina fuscipennis—male cauda, caudal aspect (Crawf.). Arytaina robusta—female cauda (Crawf.). Arytaina robusta—male cauda (Crawf.). Arytaina pubescens—female cauda (Crawf.). Arytaina pubescens—male cauda (Crawf.). Arytaina spartiophila—male cauda (Sule):

109a, Arytaina spartiophila—tip of forceps (Sulc). 110. 111. Arytaina assimilis—male cauda (Crawf.). Arytaina ceanothi—female cauda (Crawf.). THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

  

107

634 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

PLATE VIL

Fic. 112. Arytaina ceanothi—male cauda (Crawf.). 113. Arytaina minuta—female cauda (Crawf.). 114. Arytaina minuta—male cauda (Crawf.). 115. Psyllopsis fraxinicola—female cauda (Crawf.). 116. Psyllopsis fraxinicola—head. 117. Psyllopsis fraxinicola—male cauda (Léw). 117a. Psyllopsis fraxinicola—forceps enlarged (Low). 118. Psyllopsis fraxini—male cauda (Léw). 119. Psyllopsis diserepans—male cauda (Léw). 120. Euphalerus nidifex—head (Crawf.). 121. Euphalerus nidifex—female cauda. 122. Euphalerus nidifex—male cauda. 123. Euphalerus vermiculosus—head (Crawf.). 124, Euphalerus vermiculosus—female cauda. 125, Euphalerus vermiculosus—male cauda. 126. Euphalerus rugipennis—male cauda. 127. Euphalerus rugipennis—female cauda. 128, Euphyllura olivina—female cauda. 129. Euphyllura olivina—head. 130. Euphyllura olivina—male cauda. ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

 

|
|
f

 

636

Fic. 131. 132. 133. 134. 135. 136. 137. 138. 139. 140. LEONARD D, TUTHILL

PLATE IX

Euphyllura arctostaphyli—head (Crawf.). Euphyllura arctostaphyli—female cauda. Euphyllura arctostaphyli—male cauda. Euphyllura niveipennis—temale cauda. Tetragonocephala flava—head (Crawf. mod.). Tetragonocephala flava—forewing (Crawf.). Pachypsylla venusta—head (Crawi.). Pachypsylla venusta—female cauda. Pachypsylla venusta—forewing (Crawi.). Pachypsylla venusta—male cauda. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

637

 

638

Fic. 141. 142. 143. 144,
145. 146. 147. 148. 149. 150. 151. 152. 153. 154. 155. 155a. Trioza singularis—caudal aspect of forceps. 156. 157. 158. 159. 160. 161. 162. LEONARD D. TUTHILL

PLATE X

Arytaina insolita—male cauda. Arytaina insolita—female cauda. Euphalerus jugovenosus—female cauda. Euphalerus jugovenosus—male cauda. Euphalerus adustus—female cauda. Euphalerus adustus—male cauda. Euphalerus tantillus—female cauda,
Euphalerus tantillus—male cauda. Euphyllura separata—male cauda. Euphyllura separata—female cauda. Tetragonocephala flava—male cauda. Tetragonocephala flava—female cauda. Trioza pulla—female cauda. Trioza pulla—male cauda. Trioza singularis—male cauda. Trioza stygma—male cauda. Trioza stygma—female cauda. Trioza shepherdiae—male cauda. Trioza shepherdiae—female cauda. Trioza occidentalis—female cauda. Trioza incerta—female cauda. Trioza incerta—male cauda. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

 

 

 

640 TEOHARD D. aL ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA . 641

PLATE XI

Fic. 163. Trioza urticae—head. 164. Trioza urticae—male cauda. 165. Trioza urticae—female cauda. 166. Trioza viridis—male cauda (Crawf. mod.). 167. Trioza viridis—female cauda (Crawf. mod.). 168. Trioza magnoliae—female cauda (Crawf.). 169. Trioza magnoliaé—male cauda (Crawf.). 170. Trioza alacris—female cauda (Essig) . 171. Trioza alacris—male cauda (Essig). 172. Trioza stylifera—caudal aspect of forceps (Crawf.). 173. Trioza occidentalis—male cauda. 173a. Trioza occidentalis—caudal aspect of forceps. 174. Trioza rubicola—female cauda,
175. Trioza rubicola—male cauda. 175a. Trioza rubicola—caudal aspect of forceps,
176. Trioza mawra—female cauda. 177. Trioza mawra—male cauda. 178. Trioza minuta—male cauda (Crawf.). 179. Trioza minuta—female cauda. 180. Trioza varians—female cauda. 181. Trioza varians—male cauda. 182. Trioza lobata—female cauda. 183. Trioza lobata—male cauda. 184. Trioza tripunctata—female cauda (Peterson). 185. Trioza tripunctata—male cauda (Peterson). 186. Trioza bakeri—female cauda. 187. Trioza bakeri—male cauda. 188. Trioza diospyri—female cauda (Craw#.). 189, Trioza diospyri—male cauda. Fic. 190. 191. 192. 193. 194,
195. 196. 197. 198. 199,
200. 201. 202. 203. 204,
205. 206. 207. 208. 209. 210. 211. LEONARD D. TUTHILL

PLATE XII

Trioza proximata—female cauda. Trioza proximata—male cauda. (Crawf.). Trioza collaris—female cauda (Crawf. mod.). Trioza collaris—male cauda. Trioza mexicana minor—female cauda. Trioza mexicana minor—male cauda. Trioza quadripunctata—male cauda. Trioza albifrons—male cauda (Crawt.). Trioza albifrons—female cauda (Crawé.). Trioza frontalis—male cauda (Crawf. mod.). Trioza frontalis—male cauda, caudal aspect (Crawé.). Trioza frontalis—female cauda. Trioza obtusa—female cauda. Trioza obtusa—male cauda. Paratrioza cockerelli—head (Crawf.). Paratrioza cockerelli—male cauda. Paratrioza cockerelli—female cauda. Paratrioza arbolensis—male cauda. Paratrioza arbolensis—female cauda (Crawt.). Kuwayama medicaginis—male cauda (Crawf. mod.). Kuwayama medicaginis—head (Crawf.). Kuwayama medicaginis—female cauda (Crawf.). THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

644 LEONARD D. TUTHILL

PLATE XII

Fic. 212. Trioza rubra—female cauda. 213. Trioza rubra—male cauda. .
213a, Trioza rubra—caudal aspect of forceps. 214. Trioza phoradendri—female cauda. 215. Trioza phoradendri—male cauda. 216. Trioza beameri—male cauda. 217. Trioza beameri—female cauda. 218. Trioza chlora—female cauda. 219. Trioza chlora—male cauda. 220. Trioza sembla—male cauda. 221. Trioza suleata—female cauda. 222. Trioza sulcata—male cauda. 223, Trioza mira—female cauda. 224. Trioza mira—male cauda. 225, Trioza inversa—male cauda. 226. Trioza inversa—female cauda. 227. Paratrioza dorsalis—female cauda. 228, Paratrioza dorsalis—male cauda. 229. Paratrioza dubia—female cauda. 230. Paratrioza dubia—male cauda. 231. Neotriozella hirsuta—male cauda. 232. Metatrioza pubescens—female cauda. 233. Metatrioza pubescens—male cauda. 234. Levidea lineata—female cauda. 235, Levidea lineata—male cauda. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

646

Fra. 236. 237. 239,
240. 241,
242. 243. 244,
245. 246. 247,
248. 249,
250. 251. 252. 253. 254,

LEONARD D, TUTHILL

PLATE XIV

. Neotriozella pyrifolii—head_(Crawf.). Neotriozella pyrifolii—female cauda.

. Metatrioza pubescens—head. Leuronota maculata—head (Crawf.). Leuronota maculata—female cauda (Crawf.). Lewronota maculata—male cauda. Ceropsylla sideroxyli—head. Ceropsylla sideroxyli—forewing. Hemitrioza sonchi—head. .

Hemitrioza sonchi—forewing (Crawf. mod.). Hemitrioza washingtonia—head (Klyver). Hemitrioza washingtonia—male cauda (Klyver). Levidea lineata—head. Psyllopsis fraxinicola—forewing (Crawf.). Arytaina genistae—forewing (Crawf.). Euphalerus propinquus—forewing (Crawf.). Trioza bakeri—forewing (Craw#.). Trioza lobata—forewing (Crawé.). Trioza diospyri—forewing (Crawt.). ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA

 

 

648 LEONARD D..TUTHILL THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 649

PLATE XV

Fic. 255. Psylla alni—forewing (Crawt.). 256. Euphalerus nidifex—forewing (Crawf.). 257. Euphyllura olivina—forewing. 258. Pachypsylla celtidis-mamma—forewing. 259. Pachypsylla celtidis-gemma—forewing. 260. Pachypsylla celtidis-inteneris—forewing. 261. Spanioneura fonscolombii—forewing (Patch). 262. Trioza urticae—forewing. 263. Trioza minuta var. arizonae—forewing (Crawf.). 264. Trioza viridis—forewing (Crawf.). 265. Trioza varians—forewing (Crawf.). 650 LEONARD D. TUTHILL ‘THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 651

PLATE XVI

Fic. 266. Trioza quadripunctata—forewing (Craw#.). 267. Trioza tripunctata—forewing (Craw). 268. Kuwayama medicaginis—forewing (Crawé.). 269. Trioza californica—forewing (Crawf.). 210. Paratrioza maculipennis—forewing. 271. Trioza frontalis—forewing (Crawf.). 212. Paratrioza cockerelliforewing (Crawf.). 213. Paratrioza arbolensis—forewing (Crawf.). 274. Neotriozella pyrifolii—forewing (Crawf.). 275. Leuronota maculata—forewing (Crawi,). 652

Fic. 276. 277,
278,
279,
280. 281,
282,
283,

. Psylla manisi—forewing. 285. 286. 287. 288. 289,

LEONARD D, TUTHILL

PLATE XVII

Psylla phoradendri—forewing. Psylla nana—forewing. Psylla insignita—forewing. Psylla omani—forewing. Psylla hirsuta—forewing. Psylla media—forewing. ©
Psylla alaskensis—forewing. Psylla bulbosa—forewing. Psylla confusa—forewing. Psylla usitata—forewing. Psylla latiforceps—forewing. Psylla wncata—forewing,

Arytaina robusta sinuata—forewing. THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 653

 

276
; 279
218
280 281
282 283
284 ag
286 287

‘288 289

 

654 LEONARD D, TUTHILL

THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 655
291
290
292 293
PLATE XVIII
Fic. 290. Arytaina spartiophila—forewing. 291. Arytaina pallida—forewing. 292. Arytaina insolita—forewing. 293. Euphalerus jugovenosus—forewing. 294. Euphalerus adustus—forewing. 295. Euphalerus tantillus—forewing. 296. Euphyllura separata—forewing. 295
297. Trioza pulla—forewing. 294
298. Trioza singularis—forewing. 299. Trioza stygma—forewing. 300. Trioza shepherdiae—forewing. 301. Trioza occidentalis—forewing. 296
297
298 299
300

301

 

656 LEONARD D. TUTHILL THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA 657

302 303

304
PLATE XIX

Fic, 302. Trioza incerta—forewing. 303. Trioza rubra—forewing. 304. Trioza phoradendri—forewing. 305. Trioza beameri—forewing. 306. Trioza chlora—forewing. 307. Trioza sulcata—forewing. 308. Trioza inversa—forewing. 309. Paratrioza dorsalis—forewing. 310. Paratrioza dubia—forewing. 311. Neotriozella hirsuta—forewing. 312. Metatrioza pubescens—forewing. 313. Levidea lineata—forewing. 306 307

308

310 311

312 313

 

 

 

INDEX TO “THE PSYLLIDS OF AMERICA NORTH OF MEXICO”

Names in italics are those placed in synonymy. aculeata, 513
adustus,’ 522
aeruginosa, 485
alacris, 555
alaskensis, 499

alba, 487

albifrons, 577
albagena, 468
albirufa, 471
Allotrioza, 546, 584, 598
alni, 460

alni americana, 460
alni americanella, 460
alni gossypiona, 460
alni trimaculata, 464
Amblyrhina, 503
amelanchieris, 583
americana, 490
americana abdominalis, 480
americana alba, 487
americana curta, 491
americana flava, 494
americana longipennis, 494
americana minor, 493
amorphae, 511
annulata, 501
apiophila, 489
arbolensis, 589
arbuti, 528
arbuticola, 529
arctica, 502
aretostaphyli, 529

arctostaphyli var. bifasciata,

Arytaena, 503

Arytaina, 503
Asphagidella, 456
Asphagis, 456

assimilis, (Arytaina) , 509
assimilis (Trioza), 562
astigmata, 465

Ataenia, 503

aurantiaca, 560
aylmeriae,’583

 

Bacopelma, 456

bakeri, 570

beameri (Euphalerus), 524
beameri (Trioza), 573
bicolor (Euphyllura), 532
bicolor (Trioza), 551
Brachypsylla, 456, 503
breviantennata, 570
breviata, 484
brevistigmata, 471
brevistigmata’ acuta, 472
brevistigmata magna, 473
bulbosa, 482

buxi, 481

californica, 568

carpini, 468

carpinicola, 468

caudata, 461

ceanothi (Arytaina), 510

ceanothi (Euphalerus), 524

celtidis-gemma, 539

celtidis-grandis, 534

celtidis-inteneris, 540

celtidis-mamma, 536

celtidis-vesicula, 538

cephalice, 468

Cephalopsylla, 519

cerasi, 465

cerasi astigmata, 465

Ceropsylla, 546, 600

chelifera, 514

chlora, 573

chlorogenes, 517

claripennis, 485

cockerelli, 585

collaris, 574

Colopelma, 546

confusa, 492

coryli Patch (Psylla), 476

coryli Crawford (Psylla),
470

crassinervis, 551

crataegicola, 485

difficilis, 47
dilonchi, 470

diospyri, 571

discrepans, 518

dorsalis, 589

dubia (Pachypsylia), 541
dubia (Paratrioza), 591
dubia (Psylla), 485
dubia (Trioza), 554

Epitrioza Crawford, 592
Euglyptoneura, 503
Euphalerus, 519
Euphyllura, 526,
eupoda, 551

fibulata, 497

fibulata simulans, 496
ficus, 520

flava, 543

floccosa, 463

flori, 562

floridensis, 511
fonscolombii, 544
forcipata, 551
forcipula Patch (Trioza),
+554

forcipula Tuthill (Trioza),
581

[659]

fovealis, 577
fractiforceps, 511

fraxini, 518

fraxinicola, 516

frontalis (Trioza), 579
frontalis (Neotriozella), 596
frontalis suleata, 580
fulvida, 560

fulvida’ similis, 560

fuscata, 499

fuscinervis, 460
fuscipennis, 506

galeaformis, 462
genistae, 505
gilletti, 487
groenlandica, 500

hartigii, 478

helvetina, 560

Hemitrioza, 602

heydeni, 460

hirsuta (Neotriozella), 595
hirsuta (Psylla), 474

ichneumonia, 568
ilicis Crawford, 511
immaculata, 594
incerta, 564
insignita, 473
insolita, 515
inversa, 582

jugovenosus, 521
Kuwayama, 592

Labicria, 456
laticeps, 596
latiforeeps, 495
latijrons, 521
latipennis, 571
lauri, 555
lavaterae, 590
Leuronota, 598
Levidea, 604
lineata, 605
lobata, 566
longicornis, 554
longipennis, 599
longistylus, 575
louisianae, 562

 

maculata (Leuronata), 599
maculata (Psylla), 466
maculipennis, 588

magna (Psylla), 473

 

magna (Psyllopa), 505 Bs 1
magnicauda, 480 e
ie! x

 

mexicana minor, 576

mexicana minuta, 576

minor, 493

minor var. flava, 494

minuta (Arytaina), 514

minuta (Psylla), 475

minuta (Trioza), 562

minuta var. arizonae, 563

minuta breviradia, 557

minuta similis, 562

mira, 581

mira’ curta, 582

montana (Arytaina), 506

montana (Trioza), 570
aul

 

ma ita,
‘multidubiata breviradia, 557

nana, 467
negundinis, 501

Neotrioza Gsawford, 593
Neotriozella, 593
nidifex, 520

niveipennis, 531
notata, 489

obtusa, 582

occidentalis, 558

occulta, 485

ocellata, 585

ocellata’ flava, 585

ocellata nigra, 585

oleae, 527

olivina, 527

omani, 474

ottawanensis, 594
Pachypsyila, °533

pallida (Arytaina), 5:
pallida Gautopeylis), 541
parallela, 492

Paratrioza, 584
Peripsyllopsis, 503
phoradendri (Psylla), 500
phoradendri (Trioza), 569
phoradendri acuminata, 569
Phyllopecta, 546

INDEX TO PSYLLIDS

Phylloplecta, 546
Platystigma, 526
pomi, 485
pomonae, 562
proboscidia, 594
Propinquus, 521
propria, 497
protensa, 551
proximata, 574

puberula,'570

pubescens (Arytaina), 508

pubescens (Metatrioza), 597

pulchella 585

pulchella flava, 585

pulla, 552

purshiae (Brachypsylla),
415, 514

pyri Curtis, 489

pyricola, 489

simulans, 489

 

pyrisuga, 489

quadrilineata, 484
quadripunctata, 576

ribesiae, 487
ibis Fatch (Paylla), 502
Crawford (Psylla), 487

Tobuste, S06

robusta sinuata, 507

rohweri, 536

rotundipennis, 577

rubi,

rubicola, 559

rubida, 485

rubra, 565

rufula, 493

rugipennis, 525

rugipennis var. immacula-
tus, 525

salicis Mally, 562
saliciperda, 560
sculptoconus, 596
sembla, 579
separata, 532
septentrionalis, 500
shepherdize, 557
sideroxyli, 601

similis, 577
similis’ foveatis, 57
singularis, 55
sinuata, 496

sorbi, 518
Spanioneura, 544
Spanioza, 546

 

sulcata similis, 580
sylvicola, 478
Syntomoza, 526

tantillus, 523
‘Tetragonocephala, 542
tridentata, 534

trimaculata, 464
trimaculata’ var. astigmata,

trimaculata var. cerasi, 465
Trioza, 546

Triozinae, 545

Triozoida, 546, 600
tripunctata, 567

tristis, 506

tuthilli, 480

ulicis, 505
ulmi,” 485
uncata, 498
ungulata, 540
unicolor, 517
urticae, 551
usitata, 494

varians, 564
venusta, 534
vermiculosus, 524

iana, 584
virida (Psylla), 480
viridis (Trioza), 552
viridissima, 485
viridula, 516

¢

 

washingtonia, 604

 

Aikman, J, M., 175

Andersen, Ariel Andrew, 25
Armstrong, Williamina E, 417
Baker, Richard Dean, 28
Baskett, Thomas Sebree, 31
Becker, E. R., 257, 431

Beebe, J. M. 227

Bender, Charles Richard, 34

 

Castonguay, Thomas T., 37
Coblentz, Jacob Michael, 40
Corley, Robert Townsend, 43
Crews, Frank Warne, 46

Dale, Lois Wilna, 49
Dickinson, David Franklin, 51
Drake, Carl J., 1

Eaton, Gerald Almond, 54
Eddy, Gaines W., 205

Farley, Francis Frederic, 57
Fisher, Elton,'241

French, Dexter, 60
Fulmer, Ellis 1, 251

Gaines, J. C., 63
Gray, C. F., 66

Grayson, James McDonald, 69, 191
Guymon, J. F., 251

Hao, Lu Cheng, 71

Harrington, Marion Thomas, 74
Harris, H. M,, 197

Hayden, Ada, 277

Hedrick, Theodore Isaac, 77
Hollingsworth, Egbert Wilson, 80
Howe, Donald Eugene, 82
Hunter, Byron A., 85

Johnson, Eleanor M., 431
Jones, David T., 221
Jones, Reuben G., 88
Joyce, C. R, 205

Kempf, Clayton Arford, 91
Kent, G. C., 163

AUTHOR INDEX

Krall, Jack, 221

Krampitz, Lester Orville, 93
Londergan, Christopher, 95
Lyerly, Paul J., 98

McLaughlin, J. Harvey, 213
Manresa, M., Jr., 257, 431
Measamer, Schubert Gernt, 100
Melhus, I. E., 163, 213

Nagel, C. M., 163
Nelson, P. Mabel, 417

Ogg, Clyde L, 103
Palmer, John F., Jr, 106

Rayman, M. M,, 251
Rogers, Howard Topping, 108
Rowe, John Allen, 111
Rudolph, Altheus S,, 114

Scott, Thos. G., 117
Silverman, Milton, 120
Slade, Hutton Davison, 123
Smith, L., 257

Sooter, Clarence A., 126
Spatz, Sidney Martin, 129
Spawn, Gerald Bishop, 133
Stamm, Robert Franz, 136
Standen, J. H., 263
Swanson, Pearl P., 417

Tatum, Loyd, 138
Tauber, Oscar E., 191
Tripp, Ralph H, M41
Tuthill, Leonard D., 443

Underkofler, L. A. 251
Venzke, Walter George, 145

Waller, Richard Conrad, 149
Warner, Robert M., 175

Webb, Frederick Jarvis, 152
Weber, George Russell, 155
Wilcox, Ethelwyn Berniece,” 158
Willson, Stuart D., 161

[661]