NATURE-
HISTORICAL

 

ORGANIZATION OF IT
NATURAL HISTORICAL

 

SOCIETY IN LIMBURG

sis i) ales eae

Se Se Se ee

fs

 

 

 

 

VACANT

TOURISTS, 2:zos«
Oabhenburg (LIMB.). X

LIMBURG'S CENTER OF IT
FOREIGN TRAFFIC

Picturesque change from
Hills, Forests, Rivers, Fields
and Meadows. Magical Caverns, Grottoes and
Grooves, including the
Daelhemerberg quarry with model
coal mine, remarkable sights
dignity with expert guides
under the supervision of the State Mines. Open all year round. INFORMATION :

LINDENLAAN 30 — VALKENBURG (Limburg)
Teleloon (K 4406) 2057-2519-2403

NEW ONES
OLD

Natural Science BOOKS

Special:
ENTOMOLOGY
'ZOOLOGY
BOTANY

deliver on very easy terms

GOECKE & EVERS

Publishing-Bookstore and Antiquarian for
Natural Science Literature
VON BECKERATHPLATZ 9
KREFELD - GERMANY

CATALOGS ARE ON REQUEST AND UNDER
DECLARATION OF STUDY AREA SENT FREE OF CHARGE

 

 

 

43rd Volume

Maastricht 30 Dec. 1954 12

 

Natural History Monthly Magazine

Organ of the Natural History Society in Limburg

 

EDITORIAL: R. Geurts, Echt. Dr W. Minis-van de Geyn,
Maastricht, C. Willemse, Eygelshoven, Editor-in-chief:
dr. E. M. Kruytzer, Bosquetplein 7, Maastricht. President of the Natural History Society:

C. Willemse, Eygelshoven. Secretary: Dr E. M. Kruytzer, Bosquetplein 7, Maastricht. Treasurer: P. Wassenberg, Hertogsingel 87 A, giro
125366 in the name of Natural History Society, Maastricht. ADMINISTRATION: Changes of address, declaration of new
members, to send orders from Monthly Magazines to the
Natural History Museum, Bosquetplein 7, Maastricht. Phone. K 4400-4174. Membership f 5.00 per year. The Monthly Magazine is on
sent to all members free of charge. Price for non-members f 7.50
per year. Separate numbers for non-members f 0.75,
f 0.50 for members. Copyright reserved. CONTENTS: Announcement of the Monthly Meetings, p. 81. — A New Editor-in-Chief, p. 81. †
Report of the extraordinary general meeting and of the monthly meeting in Maastricht, p. 81. †
W.J.M. Sterk. Slime moulds, p. 82. — Dr H. C. Bléte, Bugs, Cicadas and Leaf fleas collected in
1950, biz. 83. — P.E, van Heerdt and J.W. Sluiter. The results of bat banding in the Netherlands in 1954, page 85.

eS

ANNOUNCEMENT
OF THE MONTHLY MEETINGS

in Maastricht on Wednesday 5 Jan. 1955,
at 7 p.m. at the Museum, After a
short introduction will be Mr N, Nelissen from
Visé only recorded by himself
show color films, two about flowers

and two on the life of bees. in Heerlen on Wednesday 12 Jan., at
7 p.m. in the R.KH.BS. in Maastricht on Wednesday 2 February, at
7 p.m. at the Museum,

in Heerlen on Wednesday 9 February, at
19.00 in the R.K.H.B.S,

A NEW EDITORIAL EDITOR. As in the report of the extraordinary
members meeting of December 1 can be read,
Dr Kruytzer has been elected editor-in-chief of
the Natural History Monthly, and of the
Publications. So the secretariat of the Society is
in the future merged again with that of
Editors. Address: Bosquetplein 7, Maastricht. For further changes resulting from these changes
ensued, read the report of
aforementioned meeting. REPORT OF THE EXTRAORDINARY
GENERAL MEETING AND OF THE
MONTHLY MEETING

in Maastricht on Wednesday, December 1, 1954. Present the ladies: Willemse-Widdersho-
ven, Minis-van de Geyn, van der Mijll Dekker,
Tulleners-Jansen, Sterk, Smeets, Jaspars, Mom-
mers, Berendschot and the gentlemen: Willemse, van
Rummelen, Kruytzer, Mommers, Sterk, van der
Lion, van Wouw, van Rijckevorsel, Leysen,
Stevens, Otten, Nulens, Kicken, Gytenbeek,
Tulleners, Willems, Koelman, Ittman, Hensels
and Beaulen,

The chairman, doctor Willemse, introduces
reminder that the lord of Nieuwenhoven,
already a year ago when he left for
Amsterdam has expressed the wish,
of the leadership of the Monthly Magazine
released and says the outgoing editor-in-chief
thanks for all he has done for Pu-
publications and monthly magazine. Then comes to the
order the election of the new chief
editor. The board candidate, Dr E. M.
Kruytzer, is elected by acclamation. He declares his willingness to make the appointment
accept and announce that he intends
the Monthly Magazine in the future, at
test method, every two months
make dente appear, but then
in a size of 20 pages,

 

 

82 NATURAL HISTORY MONTHLY MAGAZINE. instead of 8 pages. Thus he hopes to~
also be able to pay more attention to
book reviews, because it is in the interest
of the members of the Society. The first-
next song will then appear at the end of Fe-
February, For excursions
serve one with this change
to take due account,

After this, the regular monthly meeting
started. Mrs. Minis-van de Geyn
points out that it is not only useful, but also
necessary, to consult the old monthly
commit. This has only now become apparent from the article
van C, den Hartog about Hildenbrandtia rivula-
ris, which states that this red seaweed at 14
Found in the Netherlands for the first time in May 1951
is. The Natural History Monthly of 1919,
volume 8, p. 16, already mentions the find
of this weed on December 21, 1918 in a stream
of the park in Elsloo by Dr G. Romijn. The
Mr Kruytzer can add two more entries here
to add, namely in the Monthly magazine of
1924, volume 13, p. 110, and from 1940, year-
corridor 29, p. 87. He also leaves a stone with
red seaweeds, which he during the summer
excursion of the Society on August 2
1924 has fished up from a stream in the park
in Elsloo. The original label is still there
Bee. Following this announcement,
the chairman insists that it is very desirable
would be to compile a repertoire of
the existing monthly magazines, especially the oldest ones
(1912-1923), of which there is not even an index. Afterwards, Mr Kruytzer recalls the fact,
that appeared 400 years ago is the famous
"Cruydtboeck" by Rembert Dodoens, co-
cijn der stadt of Mechelen, printed by Jan
van der Loe in the printing house,, den Swerten
Arent' in Antwerp, and in honor of this memory
like fact he offers to the Museum, the
fourth and last edition of this work: ,,Cruydt-
Boeck Remberti Dodonaei''', printed in Antwerp
pen in the Plantinsche Druckerije of Balthasar
Moretus MDXLIV. It's a gift from
the Episcopal College in Roermond. Of
a heartfelt thank you to the very honorable
dear Mr. A. J, M. van Thiel, director of
the College, and the general consent of the
meeting, this valuable gift is
sail. Thereafter, Mr Sterk will keep his
lectured about :

slime molds

It's actually not quite possible for this one
group of organisms to write down a name,
that satisfies everyone. Finding in ancient literature
we them to the Gasteromycetes, the pollinators,
classified. When reproduction became more
became known, this could no longer be sustained,
and a separate main division was established for
created, Where it should now
standing was an immediate difficulty, The fruit-
bodies, in which the spores are formed,
sometimes reminiscent of pollinators. top
that is why the group has mainly been studied
by botanists, who furthermore mainly use fungi
have described. Therefore, the mucous
fungi often under the name Myxomycetes
classified in the plant kingdom. There is also a lot to be said for them, she in the
place animal kingdom. They are then called Mycetozoa. Fungi would-
that we can translate. It just depends,
what stage of the life cycle do we consider
most important, whether we find one or the other
want to use name, They are organisms,
that stand between plant and animal. The name slime molds has been given to it,
there the most conspicuous, and usually largest
part of the development, the plasmodium, there
can look slimy, these plasmodien
are especially common in the summer and autumn
found on dead wood. Like a giant
Amoeba crawls the plasmodium over the
forest floor and especially it often shows a
preference for old tree stumps. It nourishes
themselves with dead material, but also often with
living cells, Different types are good
grow, if they get yeast as a nutrient. There are also those who show a clear preference
for mushrooms,

When the plasmodium is ripe, it crawls to
a lighter, usually slightly drier place than where
it was first. For the species that have a colored
have plasmodium, light shines necessary
to form fruit bodies. The classification is based on the structure of the fruit
bodies. Usually these are only small, 1 or 2
mm, is a regular size. If they are greater than
5 mm., they are large species,

These large fruiting bodies actually exist
from the amalgamation of several small ones. One
it's called aethalium. NATURAL HISTORY MONTHLY MAGAZINE. 83

Between the spores in a fruiting body
we den a threadlike support, the capillitium. Its shape is one of the most important
layout features. By the sexes
Badhamia, Physarum, Craterum, Fuligo and
some smaller genera we find in the
capillitium-net lime pieces, Bij Diderma, Diachea
and Mucilago, on the other hand, the lime is deposited
in or on the outer layer of the fruiting body. In America it has been shown that the above
genera, whose fruiting bodies so well
be endowed with lime, even for strong limestone
holding grounds have a preference. Until
so far I don't have enough material from the
lime-free soils here in South Limburg, to
can say that this is also the case here. The
most other genera shine it with
to make less lime. In the capillitium
or at least in the outer layer lime does not get in
notable amounts. If a spore ends up favorably,
water absorbed, The core divides, and there
single swarmer cells emerge, provided with
a cilia, or an Amoeba-like cell, which
divides into a few swarmer cells. The Amoeba-like
cells feed on bacteria,
swarmer cells form zygotes,
who are also amoboid, From this arises a
new plasmodium. About the prevention of different types of
ten in Limburg I have not yet
data, to get a somewhat complete list of them
to compose, For sending ge-
found material, which can contribute to a
better knowledge of this interesting group, will
I always be grateful. Commission communications on scientific
investigation of the Sint-Pietersberg, No, 31

BUGS, CICADES AND LEAD,
COLLECTED IN 1950

by means of
Dr H.C. BLSTE
National Museum of Natural History, Leiden

In 1950, intensive progress was made with the
inventory of the fauna of St. Peter's
mountain, and gradually more perfect
popular collection methods was the size
of the collected material much greater than in
the_previous year. This had the disadvantage that preparation and
work would take much more time. It is

as a result, this article is first published now. However, it also appears that this extensive
material is by no means an unnecessary luxury. In
the following list will give you several
species that are not in our control in 1949
den came, and even 4 of the 6 in this list
stated ,,Faun, Nov. spec.” are from St.
Pietersberg, but proof that there
a lot has to be collected before that one
a somewhat complete overview of the fauna
even in a relatively limited area. In this second year of research,
‘paid a little more attention to the fauna of
the surrounding areas, in order to give an impression
to get from the peculiar place that the
Sint-Pietersberg occupies in between. This sub-
is missing, partly due to the larger surface of
the area under investigation, not yet at a stage,
that allows far-reaching conclusions, Only
may I point out that many of the rare
species, which we found in 1949 on the Sint-Pietersberg
found, also appear to occur elsewhere. In 1952 H. Ribaut's important
adaptation of the Jassidae in the Faune de France. In this connection it will be necessary
Dutch data subject to revision
throw; there is mainly to the nomenclatur of
our Jassiden quite a bit to improve. For the
for a moment I have determined myself to the animals
of this group that appear in my list with the
to indicate the correct name, with the addition of
the name by which they were given in earlier faunistic
literature are listed. Bugs (Heteroptera)
Dufouriellus ater Duf. This quite rare

*species was collected in one specimen above

Slave, behind bark of a — probably~
corpse birch — fence post. Anthocoris pilosus Jak, also proved not to be in 1950
to be rare on the St.-Pietersberg; the kind
was also recorded in the Cannerbos and on the Bemeler
mountain encountered, Also Anthocoris sarothammi
D. & S. and A. Minki Dohrn became single again
times observed. Macrotylus solitarius M.-D. was born on July 18
captured in the Canner Forest. so far in
The Netherlands only found near Bemelen,

Psallus salicellus M.-D. This quite rare
bug was found both on the St.-Pietersberg (Sun-
neberg, Caestert) as at the castle Neercanne
and found on the Heerderberg. 84 NATURAL HISTORY MONTHLY MAGAZINE. Orthotylus viridinervis Kb. was caught
at Slavante, also in the Cannerbos and on the
Heerderberg. All copies were delivered in July
collected,

Dicyphus annulatus Wolff was except on
the St.-Pietersberg (at border marker 51) also
found on the Bemelerberg and on the Heer-
derberg. Lygus pratensis L. was also more-
grinding on the St.-Pietersberg and in the surrounding area
observed. From Lygus spinolae M.-D. became
a copy on 17 August at Slavante
to catch. Lygus (Agnocoris) rubicundus Fall. we gathered on April 25 in the Sjechelder
grub under Ryckholt,

Adelphocoris quadripunctatus F, was used with the
var. innotatus Reut. repeatedly around~-
collected from the castle Neercanne. The
var. innotatus Reut. also on the St.-Pietersberg
(south slope of the dump, August 17), A
somewhat different specimen in the Eysdener forest,
Sept 14. Adelphocoris seticornis F. var. pallidipennis
Reut. was also found on the Bemelerberg,
(July 20). Coranus tuberculifer Reut. Faun. Nov. spec. Although the species is released for the first time
The Netherlands is mentioned is the first catch
by no means new. In the collection of A.J.
F, Fokker is located. a copy
of this kind, marked "Valkenb. v. Rabbitb. 8”
(Valkenburg, Van Konijnenburg, Augustus),
the etiquette probably by E.J.G. Everts
written. However, the copy was for a
Coranus subapterus de Geer forma macroptera
held. The longer 2nd member of the antennae and
the deviant shape of the spire of the shield
distinguishes C, tuberculifer Reut. however, indicate
ljk of C. subapterus. It seems that C. tuber-
culifer Reut. is increasingly macroscopic. C. tuberculosis
lifer Reut, is not closer to our country so far
gathered then Southern France and Tyrol, and
further south and east. It will
however useful are the macropter specimens,
those for C. subapterus the G, continue
to investigate further. We collected
a copy on the St.-Pietersberg near the
new doline (August 22). Nysius senecionis Schill. Except in the
of the landfill, where this species just
and at the French Battery, we found her
at the castle Neercanne, on the Bemelerberg,

under Cadier and Keer and at Tulle, March and
July-October,

Nysius ericae Schill. was again several times
on the East slope and south of the dump
found, in total 10 specimens, in May,
August and September. Tropistethus holosericeus Schltr. Of this
species, which perhaps because of its way of life has little
is seen, we caught a
exemplar at boundary posts 57-58,

Eremocoris podagricus F, This sort, which in
our country is limited to South Limburg,
on March 21 at Slavante with the beetle sieve ~
collected,

Stictopleurus punctatonervosus Goeze became
repeatedly on the St-Pietersberg
catch, but also at Tulle, under Cadier and
Turn and on the Bemelerberg. Also Stictopleurus
abutilon Rossi appeared on the St.-Pietersberg for
to come, the species was caught on the Oude
Luikerweg, above the Enci quarry, at the border
posts 51-52 and at the French Battery. Stenocephalus medius M. & R. This very
rare species (known from Arnhem and Flea ~
drop) was recorded on October 17 in the Cannerbos
found,

Stenocephalus agilis Scop., which is equally rare
is as the previous one (mentioned from The Hague
and Vlodrop) was released in 2 copies on May 23
collected on the south side of the dump. Ceraleptus lividus Stein, was born on August 14
between the French Battery and on August 22
gathered near the new doline,

Syromastes rhombeus L. var. quadratus f.
A copy at boundary posts 57-58 at 22
August,

Bathysolen nubilus Fall., which only a few
times elsewhere in Limburg was found,
was collected with the beetle sieve on March 23
in the Vineyard. Berytus montivagus M.-D. This rare
species, which in the Netherlands only many years ago
van Zierikzee and Utrecht was mentioned,
on April 6 at the pebble pit on the Heerderberg
captured. Tropidocheila pilosa Humm, This one, in us
land only at Noordwijk and Schin op Geulle
collected species, was found in some specimens in
the Eysdenerbos, on August 23 and September 14
tember caught. Cicadas (HomopteraCicadariae)

 

 

 

NATURAL HISTORY MONTHLY MAGAZINE. 85

 

Stenocranus minutus F. was also found in 1950
regularly, and sometimes in quite large numbers (e.g.
statue 27 pieces on August 20 in the Encibos)
collected on the St.-Pietersberg. The species became
also on the Heerderberg, in the Eysdenerbos and
captured at Bemelen. Stenocranus fuscovittatus Stable. This sort,
which in September 1948 at Vlodrop and Herken-
bosch was collected in 1950 at Tulle
captured, on September 16. Kelisia punctulum Kbm. Faun. Nov. spec. By
this species became 9 specimens, all females,
gathered in a swampy terrain beneath Nuth,
on Sept 16. Liburnia marginata F. This species was until now
only caught once in the Netherlands, at
Arnhem, in June. We met on August 17th
a copy to Slavante. Liburnia spinosa Fieb. Of this kind, which to
so far only at Waalré (NB) was caught,
we collected on April 23 2 brachyptere
specimens near the Belgian border on the
southwestern part of the St.-Pietersberg. Liburnia albostriata Fieb. Faun. Nov. spec. Also on April 23, and also at the Belgian
border, 6 specimens of this species were
collected; additionally 6 in the Vineyard. This one
species similar to L. collina Boh. (which is also on that
day was found in the Vineyard); the  
anterior cranial groove, however, is less narrow than
in L. collina, especially from behind. the guys
can be distinguished, because the lateral edge of
the last segment is not cut; also be
the genital plates smaller, wider at the base
continuous and without hook-shaped protrusion~
sel at the top. Circulifer (— Thamnotettix) fenestratus H.-
Re also caught on the Heerderberg (19
uli). Arocephalus longiceps KBm. (== Deltocepha-
loop linnei Fieb.). Was also used elsewhere in South Limburg
burg repeatedly observed. We can
mention the following locations: Canner-
forest, July 18; Savelsbos near Dolenkamer, 23 Aug.;
Heerderberg, September 13; Eysdenerbos, 14
September; Tulle, September 16; Molenberg at
Bemelen, September 19; at Nercanne Castle,
17 Oct. Sardius (— Deltocephalus) argus Marsh. Was also collected in the same place this year
as in 1949, on August 22. Also on the Heerder
mountain, a specimen was captured on July 19. Eupteryx collina Fl, Faun. Nov. spec. This one
species has so far only been used a few times in the
around the castle Neercanne gathered,
in July and in October. Eupteryx melissae Curt. This rare species
was held in July and October at the castle of Neer-
canne collected, and on September 16 at Tulle. Typhlocyba bifasciata Boh. On July 19,
den 2 copies of the typical form in the

_Canner forest caught on light, in addition to a

copy of the Faun. Nov. var. fenestrata
Mel. Erythroneura parvula Boh., from our country
known only from the dunes near The Hague,
was repeatedly at the castle Neercanne, in
May, July and August, collected, also a
copy at Schinnen (July 21), one in the
Vineyard on the St.-Pietersberg (August 14)
and one at Tulle (September 16). Erythroneura scutellaris H.-S. turned out in 1950
not on the St.-Pietersberg, especially in August
to be rare. This species was also
met at Tulle, in the Canner Wood, on the Heer-
derberg under Cadier and Keer and at Amby. Erythroneura hyperici H.-S., occurs locally
quite numerous on the St.-Pietersberg in front, (Langs
the Oude Luikerweg, at the dump, and at the
French Battery). Also under Cadier en Keer en
the species was collected at Schinnen. Leaf fleas (Psyllides)

Aphalara innoxia Foerst. Faun. Nov, spec. was published in a single copy at the Nieuwe
Doline collected on July 19. Psylla pruni Scop. Faun. Nov. spec. Of this
species became 2 copies on April 23 in the
Vineyard captured. THE RESULTS OF BAT BANDING IN THE
DUTCH IN 19541)

by P.E, VAN HEERDT 6 J.W. SLUTER
Zoological Laboratory, University of Utrecht

As in previous years the authors have been
continuing the investigations on migration and
hibernation of dutch bats, which were started
by Dr L. Bels in 1936. The same methods were used and the same
limestone caves in the southern part of the
Netherlands (Limburg Province) were searched,

1) ‘This work has been done under a grant from the
Netherlands Organization for Pure Research (Z.W.O.). 86 NATURAL HISTORY MONTHLY MAGAZINE. TABLE I

species

B. barbastellus
Eptesicus serotinus
Myotis bechsteinii
» dasycneme
» daubentonii
emarginatus
myotis
mystacinus
” wetness
Plecotus auritus
Rhin, ferrum equinum
hipposideros

as decribed by Bels (1952) and by Van
Heerdt & Sluiter (1953). According to table I all species which were
collected show a sharp decline in numbers if
compared with results of the preceding year. Only Myotis dasycneme maintains about the
same value,

The percentage of recovery differs to some
extent from the result of 1953: Myotis emargi-
natus (Notch-eared Bat) and M. mystacinus
(Whiskered Bat) have been recaptured in
smaller numbers, but Plecotus auritus (Long-
eared Bat) and Rhinolophus hipposideros
(Lesser Horseshoe Bat) show a higher per-
percentage of recovery. The recaptures of the
other species remain about constant. This win-
ter the authors did not succeed in collection
ting a Myotis bechsteinii in the caverns which
are regularly visited, but Dr J. The wild
found one specimen in Apostelhoeve Cave
(Louwberg no. 96) near Maastricht. New data on the longevity of bats are
available now, as Bels started to band the
smaller species in the winter of 1942/43 (table
II). His conclusions have once more been
confirmed, that even the smaller species may
attain an old age. The foreign returns provide a few interesting
points. Myotis dasycneme (Rough-legged Bat)
no. 7978, banded in Ravensbosch near Valken-
burg was recovered on 8-III-1953 at Tilff, 6 km. south of Liege (Belgium). It's not certain, whe-
ther this bat has chosen a hibernating place in a
more southward site than where is has been ban-
ded, or that it has been diverged from its normal
route to its summer quarters in the northern part
of the Netherlands. A fine illustration of
the northbound “trek” of M. dasycneme has
been demonstrated by no, 19261 which was
captured on March 29, 1954 near 's-Hertogen-
bosch on its way to its summer haunts,

An interesting record has been made on June
10, 1954 at Kollum (Friesland, northern part of
the Netherlands) where a nursing colony of M.
dasycneme was found in the attic of the Protes-
aunt Church. However, the day the authors came
to inspect the site, slaters had worked on the
roof and the bats, the number of which was esti-
mated to be about 100, had disappeared from
the attic. Only 24 2 9 could be captured in a
cleft in the tower, 16 of them were pregnant and
5 lactating, No specimens banded in S. Limburg
could be recovered. A male Common Continental Bat (M.
myotis), banded near Maastricht, was recovered
on July 11, 1953 in the Roman-Catholic Church
at Berlicum (N. Bro. ), which proves that this
species has still its summer quarters there, where
once has been one of the biggest nursery colo-
sneeze. The other foreign returns, needing no further
discussion are grouped in table III. NATURAL HISTORY MONTHLY MAGAZINE. 87

Apart from the limestone caverns in Limburg,
bats were banded and recovered in the buildings
of 19th century fortresses near Utrecht. In the first days of July the authors made
an inspection trip to S. Limburg in order to
collect data on nursery colonies and summer
habitats in that part of the country (Sluter
and Van Heerdt, 1954). Compared with the numbers captured in
previous years the results of the expedition of
January 1954 shows a marked decline. while
collecting in 1952 and 1953 yielded 1118 and
1116 specimens respectively, this year only 759
bats were found, notwithstanding exactly the
same caves were searched by about the same
number of collectors. The influence of Man had
not been increased since the preceding year,
only the Schenk Cave (no. 163) being used by
mushroom growers now. However, the weather
in December had been very mild and in the
beginning of January, temperature just started
to drop. It may be suggested that a number of
bats had not yet reached their hibernation quar-
ter. On the other hand, disturbance of nursing
colonies may prove to be another explanation. The investigations will be continued next winter. References:

Bels, L. (1952) Fifteen years of Bat Banding
in the Netherlands. thesis, Utrecht. Also: Publications of the Natuurh. enjoyed-
Limburg board, Series V, 1952. Van Heerdt, P. F. & J. W. Sluiter
(1953). The Results of Bat Banding in the
Netherlands in 1952 and 1953,

Natuurh, Monthly Bl. Limburg 42 (11): 101—
104. TABLE II. species

Sluiter, J. W. and P. F. Van Heerdt
(1954). Where are the South Limburgse
Four mice in the summer? The Living Nature 57 (12). Summary

The results of the research into the
bat population of the South Limburgse
marl caves during winter 1953/1954,
in addition to any feedback from outside the
cave area are listed. Compared to the results of the previous
year, the number of captured animals is approximately 14
diminished (1953:1116, 1954:759), though
exactly the same caves with an approximately even
large number of employees were examined. Only one cave in the Geul valley, which was the last
year was empty, was used in 1954 by a
mushroom grower. Nearly all species, except M. dasyc-
neme (Lake bat), showing a decline. Also the percentage of feedbacks in the major
ten has declined, especially at MM. emarginatus
(Hiveted Bat) and M. mystacinus
(Bearded bat), but from Plecotus auritus
(Great-eared) and Rhinolophus hipposideros (Small
Horseshoe nose) they have become slightly higher. Perhaps the extraordinarily gentle December
month of 1953 the cause, that not all
animals in the winter quarters were
man. Disturbing maternity wards is possible in this
also be an important factor, The bat
research in the caves will continue. We thank all who contributed to
have granted the ring test, in particular
without Ir D. C. van Schaik, who, like
the other years, again with advice and action
stood aside. Utrecht, September 1954. Banded Recovered

 

M. dasycneme
», daubentonii
» mystacinus
» wetness
Rhin. hipposideros

9— II—1941
28—XII—1942
8—XII—1942 7—
24—XII—1942
26—XII—1942
27—XII—1943
27—XII—1942

 

6— I—1954
27— IN—1954
I—1954
6— I—1954
29— XI—1953
4— I—1954
9—XII—1952

 

 

“ZS6I 'F4213(] 'SISPYT 'ST? _ O} ajar aM
siaquinu-dAry ayy jo UoHPURTdxa ue JOT

      

           

 

 

 

 

 

Approx) bar quey | FS6T-AI -¢
8 CD 9a | CS6T-AI “FI
9€ Approx) wepsnaH | #S6I-AI -9T
7c CaN) "aTeUtog | FC6T-AI -F1
6 CT) weuunps | cS6I-A “£7
7 Approx) “Pa | CS6r-TII -8T
or CD Hopuoyw | s6I-X -OT
ear | CaN) wmoyeg | CCOT-ILA-IT
8z | Approx) xO FSET -Z
~yypaiquiey “3S
“AVN'N| #2 Approx) wpa | coor sundg
“ANN'N] 26 | (@°N) FS6I-IIT ~LZ
apse yfmsaepy
“ANN'N] OTT | Psoquedoyoyy-s, | FO6T-III -67|
“ANSS| 8€ [a @32T 4) HELL | CSer-LII -8
ee itd = cares

 

sorry
16
ST/<T
ST/eT
71/89
cor
L8/78
stet
ST/ct

22/89

ct

SI/cT

   

 
 

ou
aaec

       

  

 

            

  

 

 

  

      

     

        

  
   

  
      

   

 

yurgeig-pIoNy IN

Bmquiry aT

wunispg = '¢

waunoy] | 9F6T-IIX-62 FS - S| 69sst

waynoH | Zc6I-I sorspisoddiy “uryy | S| 69SLT

HPLIsAeW | FL6I-1s is L | sosoz
wpuysarew | Z6I-1 lareyeu sTpOAWW p 10L6
BinquayleA | CC6I-] i . 2 | Ostzz
waynory | £c6I-I snupeyshur syodw] 9 | 6¢¢7z

AaPATPO | CS6I-1 - . S| s9ger
HPHISEPW | TS6I-1 spodu syodw | 2 | CFL
PpUseepy e'i £9SZ9OT
Binquax[eA | GFOI-LIX-8Z| MHeUIBIEMIA sHOAW] 4 | CITOT
HPUASeW | ZFOI-LIX-8Z] Huo}aqnep sHodw] O | OFF
HPHISPW! † CCT -9 i < & T9Z6T
Gosoqsuaary TS6l-Il “87 auiaus4sep sod é 8Z6ZL
apnea Pepaeg sopadg ns |

 

 

 

 

 

TH AVVL

 

Founding

THE
LIMBURGSCHE
LANDSCAPE

Nature and Landscape are always inseparable
connected and both interests always go hand in hand
By protecting the landscape, the
plant and animal world taken under protection
Therefore supports the Foundation "Het Limburgsche"
Landscape" in her pursuit and you give up as
contributor to the Secretariat. min. contribution f 5. OBSERVANTENWAY 76 — PHONE 6121
MAASTRICHT

Ministry] recognized
ZOOLOGICAL
PREPARATORS BUSINESS
AND SHELL PREPARATION

Jack. Bolts (f.h. Leo Bouten)
Phone. 2303 Venlo Giro 397465

 

BRAND'S BEERS

THE BEST

WORKSHOP FOR IT

PREPARE

BY

BIRDS AND MAMMALS

COLLECTIONS FOR
SCHOOL AND HOME

LEPIDOPT FOSSILS
COLEOPTER MOLLUSQUES
MINERALS EMBRYONES
ROCKS SPIRIT PREPARATIONS

PREPARATOR TOOLS
GLASS EYES — INSECT PINS

D.J. KIENJET
HOOLSTRAAT 8 BEEK (LIMBURG)

 

 

 

——s ee ee lL eee

 
   
 
 
 

FOR MAASTRICHT
YOUR HOTEL

GOFFIN PRESSURE
QUALITY WORK

    
     
 

 

WI] ALSO PRINT THIS SHEET

STATIONSTREET | Gy PRINTING Yin CL. GOFFIN
PHONE K 4400-3385 ​​| WieUWSTRAAT 9 - TEL. 2121 - MAASTRICHT

†
MAASTRICHT 3

THE HISTORICAL CITY, RICH IN

      
 
      
       
 

MONUMENTS. STARTING POINT FOR Fort St. Pietersberg relaxation resort
TOURIST WALKS IN '
THE LIMBURG HILL LAND AND | MAASTRICHT - PHONE 2837

 
 

TO THE FAMOUS CAVES OF
THE ST. PIETERSBERG,

 
 

AT THE NORTH POINT OF ST. PIETERSBERG
IN THE IMMEDIATE NEIGHBORHOOD OF
MAASTRICHT LOCATED. VERWACI | T U ! SPACIOUS VIEWS OVER THE CITY,
THE MEAS AND THE JEKER VALLEY. EXPL. FA. RUTTEN

         
 

INFORMATION :
INFORMATION OFFICE V.V.V. MAASTRICHT BRUGSTRAAT 7

PHONE K 4400. no. 2814.