. Extomon., Soc. Brit, CoLumnra 70 (1973), Ave. 1, 1973

   

 

  

 

   

 

 

   

 

see Betula Yueca smalliana Adam's Needle
Weeping Willow see Salix Aulacorthum circumflexus

Western Birch see Betula Myzus persicae

Wheat see Triticum — Zea may Maize, Corn
Wheat Grass see Agropyron Macrosiphum avenae

White Sweet Clover see Melilotus Macrosiphum euphorbiae

Wild Cherry see Prunus oeeZi
Wild Lily-Of-The-Valley see Maianthemum ans ee
(Wild) Mountain Ash see Sorbus s fabac

Wild Strawberry see Fragaria Macrosiphum euphorbiae

Wild Sweet Crabapple see Malus yr se Zygad:

ild Wood Strawberry seeFragaria 7 9E8a°ne ee eadean
Willow see Salix eee eee an ki nigaaens
Willow, Pacific see Salix flacrosiphum kiowanepum
Willow, Scouler’s see Salix Acknowledgments

low, Wee see Salix Our sincere thanks are due to Mr. H. N. W.
Winged Spindle Tree see Euonymus — Toms who reviewed the scientific and common
Wood Sorrel ee Oxalis names of the plants in the host list. Mr. Cho-Kai
Yellow Pond-Lily seeNuphar Chan did much of the work of compiling the

index. A NOTE ON THE TAXONOMY OF THE
PSYLLIDAE OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
I. D. HODKINSON:

Kitching (1971) recently published a key to Heslop-Harrison (1961) discussed — the
the Psyllidae of British Columbia which North American  Arytaina in detail and
contains a number of nomenclatorial and established four new genera. three of which are
taxonomic errors. His key is based on the relevant here. Arytaina robusta and A.
monographs of Crawford (1914) and Tuthill fuscipennis are referable to the genus
(1943) and more recent work has not been EuglyptoneuraH-H., A, ceanothi to the genus
considered. The purpose of this note is to try to. CeanothiaH-H. and_A. pubescens to the genus
bring the nomenclature in line with modern Purshivora H-H. ‘This does not alter the
usage. validity of the key at the species level. Tuthill (1044) replaced the name Psylla The American scheme of _ psyllid
uncataTuthill by Psylla hamata Tuthill as the — classification is based on that proposed by
former was preoccupied by Psylla uncata Crawford in 1914, Modern authors working
Ferris & Klyver. ‘ outside North America (Vondracek 19. - - Dobreanu & Manolache 1962, Loginova
J have since split certain of the genera
yenised by Crawford and these divisions

   

   

   

    
    

 

 

Arytaina spartiophila has only one basal
metatarsal spine and would therefore not fall
within the proposed definition of the Psyllinae

 

196

   
 
 

 

  

 

ain is : linae appear valid on both morphological and
{Mitching SB). Couples § should be modified pioloyieal grounds. On the modern European
to read — Basal tarsal segment of hind legs classification system Livia caricisis referable to

     

     

with at least one black claw-like spine at tip. This will make the key valid for North
Ameri

the genus Diraphia Waga and Aphalara s
Crawford is split into Aphalara sensu stricta
and Craspedolepta Enderlein on the basi:
the form of the cly peus. A revision of the North
n Aphalara is thus urgently requ

    

 

an species but not for the world species. tal Sciences Centre (Kananaskis), University of

Environm
rs. Alberta Americ

Calgary. Cal

  

      

References
Crawford, D. L. 1914. A monograph of the jumping plant lice or Psyllidae of the New World
Bull, U.S. natn. Mus. 85: 1-182. Dobreanu, E. and C, Manolache, 1962. Homoptera Psylloidea. Fauna Repub. pop. rom. Insecta
76 pp

 

Heslop-Harrison, (
Psyllidae

  

1961. The Arytainini of the subfamily Psyllinae, Hemiptera-Homoptera, family
Ann. Mag. nat. Hist. (ser. 13) 17-43

 

    

J. Exromor, Soc. Brrr, Covusnta 70 (1973), Ave. 1, 1973 69

 

Kitching, R. L. 1971, The Psyllidae of British Columbia with a key to species. J. Entomol. Soc. Brit. Columbia 68: 36-43. Loginova, M. M. 1967. Psyllinea - Jumping plant lice - in Bei-Bienko et al. Keys to the

insects of the European U.S.S.R. 1. Israel Program for Scientific Translations, Jerusalem. Tuthill. L. D. 1943. The psyllids of America north of Mexico (Psyllidae:Homoptera). Iowa St.
Coll. J. Sei. 17: 443-660. ‘Tuthill, L. D. 1944. Descriptions of some new North American Psyllidae with notes on others. J. Kansas ent. Soc. 17: 1-6. Vondracek, K. 1957. Mery Psylloidea. Fauna C.S.R. 9: 431 pp. Loginova (1972) (Commentat. Biol. Soc. Sic. Fenn. 47: 1-37) has recently placed Arytaina

spartiophila in a new genus Arytainilla Log,

 

Pendergast. C. 1971. Introduction io Organic
Gardening. Nash Publishing. Los Angeles. 167 pp. $2.50 in Canada. Null, G. and Staff. 1972. How to Grow Food
Organically. Leisure Books. Inc.. New
York, 278 pp. 95e. Tyler, H. 1972. Organie Gardening Without
Poisons. Pocket Books (Simon & Schuster). New York, 224 pp.. $1.50. Rodale, Robert, Ed. 1971. The Basie Book of
Organic Gardening. Ballantyne Books. Inc., New York, 377 pp.. $1.25. Harrison, J. B. 1972. Good Food Naturally
J. Douglas Ltd., West Vancouver. 116 pp..

3. Asone who strugel ars to wrow food
in pre-DDT days. with indifferent success. I
have a sceptic’s interest in the current outbreak
of books on organic gardening. Listing this
randomly chosen quintet of paperbacks in my
own ascending order of merit was a temptation
not to be resisted. The first. is

 

 

well
4

printed and bound. carelessly proofres nd without illustrations,
which might even have improved it: they could
cely have harmed it. The book exemplifies
everything that is half-baked about the organic
food movement. This is a pity because the
movement is a logical and healthy reaction to
the hard sell of over-refined and over-processed
conver

        

sea

  

 

     

  

    
 

¢ foods. to careless and excessive use
of chemicals. and logically. to
produced. farm-factory foods. Much is made here of the Grand Plan of
Nature. This is never laid out in so
words, but the phrase is repeated over and
over. Insects and insecticides are covered in 5.
pages which confirm the superficiality of the
author's knowledge. Some samples: the insect

less

 

mass:

  

   

many

    

 
  

 

world numbers in the millions of species: there
are 60,000 different types of pesticides: “It is
an established fact that insects will attack an

will attack a
(the insects could

unhealthy plant before they
healthy, sound plant . .

 

easily be trapped if only they knew thi
ablished fact too): “insecticides ... began
killing large numbers of other animals in-
cluding man himself. There are lakes and
streams throughout our country which are
totally devoid of all life because of these
wonder powders. Hundreds of thousands of
acres of farm and forest lands have been
sprayed, and sprayed again, poisoning the
lands and all of the life upon it.” (P. 149. Emphasis added). This is poor stuff for a book
published in 1971. The facts of pollu
bad enough without piling falsehood on
exaggeration. ‘The author extrapolate
gardening to ial farming without,
apparently. re ence in scale. His treatment of gardening consists mostly of
sketchy instructions on how to make compost. rather than on how to grow fruits and
vegetables, as stated on the cover. Nowhere
does he suggest specific methods to reduce
insect damage. The whole issue is quickly
sidestepped by stating that there is an enor-
number all of them easy and
available through a short trip to the library. No
bibliography is given. ‘The author has an irritating knack for the
wrong word. e.: erosion will be stifled: Sir
Howard (Sir Albert’ Howard) foreiblyex-
claimed his stand: scientists who regaled in
their achievements: our youth formulating a
significant number of people. The writing in
general is an abrasive mixture of high-flown
phrases, italies and colloquialisms. It includes

bout
for in-

 

 

 

pn are

   

from amateur

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

of ways. some completely meaningless passages
which it is difficult to write soberly
stance: (PL 97) “A. soil that is. rich in
microscopic life, is rich in organic matter. and
is a fert A soil tl rich in organic
ly a soil that is rich in

Nature works in ever-

In ever-narrowing ones too. matter is nat
»pic life. micros

  

widening circles. apparently

Only the heady enthusiast could

 

most