PLANTED HAT

fig 1: ESFY symptoms
tome on an April
kosenbaum: yellowed
(chlorotic), a-
gerolite leaves
(to the right); left: branch
of a healthy building
mes. (Photo: Mark
Biinter, ACW)

European stone fruit yellowing disease
(ESFY) — Surveillance 2006 in Switzerland

In 2006 tapping tests were distributed at 19 locations throughout German-speaking Switzerland
of apricots, plums and blackthorn for the presence of the plum psylla
(Cacopsyl-la pruni) and randomly selected branch samples from the same plants for ESFY infestation
examined. Only one of the 40 samples was ESFY positive, although the carrier was C. pruni
found at all locations. German-speaking Switzerland can therefore (still) be regarded as
be labeled ESFY. In addition, 56 tree nurseries in Switzerland were

addiction — 49 were ESFY-free. THEKLA ACKERMANN, HEINRICH HOHN AND Markus BUNTER,
RESEARCH INSTALLATION AGROSCOPE CHANGINS-WADENSWwiL ACW

ie European stone fruit yellowing disease
(European stone fruit yellows, ESFY for short)
also called Apricot chlorotic
Leafroll, Dépérissement de l'abricotier, Enroule-

 

 

ment chlorotique de I'abricotier (ECA), chloroti-
cal leaf rolling of apricots, infected apricot
die away or deperimento del albicocco be-
know. It's a quarantine disease caused by
phytoplasma is caused. are phytoplasma
very small, cell-wallless bacteria living in the phloem
tissue for the transport of nutrients from the
leaves to the roots) live on plants. the
Phytoplasma can only grow in living plants
increase zen material; they are immobile. company
the spread of diseased to healthy plants
the phytoplasma are therefore on a transferrer
(vector) instructed. ESFY can affect all Prunus species, especially
but others in apricots (Prunus armeniaca), Japan
nic plums (Susinen, P salicina), peaches
and nectarines (P persica) as well as mirabelle plums (P do-
mestica spp. syriaca) and bitter almonds (RP amyg-
dalus amara) the disease can be economic
cause damage. Plums (P domestica)
are considered tolerant and show no symptoms. Cherries (P avium) are even described as resistant
draws. All infested Prunus species, including those
without manifestation of symptoms, but can
serve as a source of propagation. Depending on the variety, rootstock and growing conditions
shows stone fruit yellowing disease (ESFY) and
different symptoms. Curling yellowed
(chlorotic) leaves are the most common
observed (Fig. 1). In addition, necrotic occurs, ie. dead phloem (Fig. 2). In the course of the
Then the symptoms become more pronounced and can
to dry up and die off whole branches or
Baume fithren (Fig. 3). The fruits are divided
wrapped, partly wrinkled and brownish, have little
tasty and often fall off prematurely. There is no curative treatment against phytoplasma
action possible, even antibiotics that act against
teria work, show no success. Therefore stays
only to destroy the infected plant material. SWITZERLAND. Z, FRUIT VITICULTURE No. 22/06

CROP PROTECTION

 

 

‘Fig. 2: ESFY symptom on apricot branch: necrotic (dead
benes) phloem. (Photo: Maria Elena Ramel, ACW)

 

fig 3: ESFY symptom: partially dead branches or
dead tree (can also be caused by other causes)
fen, e.g. frost or fungal diseases). (Photo: Paul Guger-
left, ACW)

ESFY can be transmitted by humans through all types of
propagation of diseased plant material
be transferred to the young plants. additional
phytoplasma from phloem-sucking in-
sects and rarely also over root adhesions
(e.g. in tree nurseries). Egg-
ne transmission of ESFY while cutting the trees
has not been proven so far. Next to humans is the plum leaf sucker
(Cacopsylla pruni, Fig. 4) as a vector of ESFY
know. Because of its absorbency, it can
Plants take up phytoplasmas and transfer them to
transmitted to healthy plants. According to the
calculations by Schaub and Monneron (2003)
he winters as an adult winged
animal on conifers and flies from March on Prunus
Species (main host) to reproduce there. Of the
Plum leafworm has only one generation per

SWITZERLAND Z. FRUIT WINE GROWING No. 22/06

Year. Adult winged C. pruni, which may contain phyto-
plasmas can be found from March to
May in the Prunus stands. The development of the
Fier and juveniles (larvae) are found in April through June
these host plants stat. However, since the larvae
wings, there is hardly any over-
risk of wear. The appearance of the plum aphid
gers on Prunus species is also known for the various
those affected stone fruit species insignificant and
not harmful. Occurrence and spread of ESFY and
plum leaf sucker

situation in Europe

ESFY is currently one of the most important
most common diseases in stone fruit, especially in
apricots and peaches. In most European
ESFY has already been proven as an effective remedy. Especially the important large growing areas for April
kosen, like Germany, France, Greece,
Italy, Austria, Romania, Spain and the former
former Yugoslavia are ESFY¥ infected
EPPO - Data Sheets on Quarantine Pests. situation in western Switzerland

The Agroscope researchers (Ramel et al. 2001) ha-
in western Switzerland in earlier studies
can show that ESFY in particular in Valais
apricots, but also in other places in western
widespread in Switzerland and that the plum
leaf suckers everywhere and on all Prunus species
is found. Study in German-speaking Switzerland in 2006

With the increasing cultivation of apricots in the
German-speaking Switzerland gets this disease with us too
given increased attention. The dissemination
tion of ESFY and also of the plum leaf sucker in
this part of Switzerland was previously little known
know. For this reason, the Steinobstforum
proposed a study on this subject
and also prioritized for 2006. Already in winter
In 2005/06, Agroscope researchers from Widens-
wil a targeted search for corresponding symptoms
and found some associated with ESFY
infected trees mainly in newly planted areas. This
were almost exclusively imported apricots and
Japanese plums (susinen). The infected plants
zen were promptly eliminated. For more information, led
ACW in the spring and summer of 2006 a large
monitoring in orchards and on game
zen through. A total of 15 were awarded at 19 locations
apricot plants, 9 plum plants and 16
Blackthorns (Prunus spinosa), a wild Prunus
species common in hedgerows and along forest edges
the presence of the leaf sucker and on the
disease investigated. From Mérz to May, tapping tests were carried out
wanted for the plum leaf sucker. He was at all
locations and on all three examined Prunus
species found (Fig. 4). The appearance of the vector
is however absolutely unproblematic, as long as one
region is uncontaminated. CROP PROTECTION

 

fig 4: plum
leaf sucker cacopsyl
Yes prun. (Photo: Luke
Schaub, ACW)

 

Investigation in western Switzerland 1999-2002

OC pruni and ESFY detected

Study in German-speaking Switzerland in 2006
* Cpruni proven

* ESFY proven

 

  
 
  

 

fig 5: Spread
of the plum leaf
suckers C. prun/ and
ESFY in regions of
Western Switzerland and on
19 locations in the
German-speaking Switzerland
(Nursery not
shown). In order to test the trees for ESFY,
location of ten trees at random
material collected. These samples were tested in the laboratory
studied genetically. Out of a total of 40
tested samples showed only one apricot sample
the phytoplasm - the examined plums
and also blackthorns were all ESFY-free. In a targeted search in the immediate vicinity
Testing an infested apricot orchard in the canton
TG was planted on an old plum tree in a
Hausgarten ESFY, however, detected. It can
characterized by a transmission by C. pruni
be gone. This infestation on plum caused us to 25
Plum submissions due to fruit deformation
whose causes are unknown, from the cantons
NEN AG, BL, TG, SG and ZH to examine for ESFY. ESFY
be detected. Due to this situation, the German
Switzerland generally as not contaminated with ESFY, but
ding is particularly in new systems
the discovery of diseased imported trees
calculate. Situation in Swiss tree nurseries

In June 2006, just before the start of the annual

technical plant passport control in the tree nurseries,

all registered establishments were registered with

Prunus production via ESFY monitoring

informed by letter. In 56 nurseries they have

Concerplant inspectors and Agroscope employees

and employees then collected samples. Per tree nursery, 5 to 10% of the apricot

biume and a few peaches and nectarines

rehearses. The typical ESFY symptoms (Fig. 1 and 2)

are usually no earlier than the 3rd Status year visible. A total of over 2000 samples went through the ACW diagnostic

nose laboratory. Well over 200 molecular

carried out genetic studies. In seven tree nurseries (table) ESFY was able to

individual varieties can be detected:

e Apricot varieties: Bergeron, Hargrand, Holubs
Sugar Apricots, Jumbo Cot, Luizet, Royal Ké-
nig apricots and breeding number

e peach variety: Belle de la Croix Rouge

 

   

 

ESFY infestation situation 2006 in a Swiss tree nursery

Region number of nurseries
examined by it

Latin Switzerland 13 4

(Western Switzerland and Ticino)

German Switzerland 43 3rd

Total 56 7th

 

 

 

Two tree nurseries in German-speaking Switzerland
ESFY infestation bought the trees. in the
tree nurseries were all the trees of the
diseased varieties destroyed and future pro-
production according to the certification standards
foal. In Sweden, certification for stone
fruit under construction, there are currently no certified
th stone fruit young trees available. Conclusion and measures

The previous investigations showed that ESFY in
Europe on apricots is widespread, in the German
schen Switzerland is found only occasionally. The plum leaf sucker, the natural carrier
by ESFY, is cultivated throughout Switzerland
and wild Prunus species found. The vector will
However, only dangerous when within his rather
modest radius of action infested plants
are available. Because the disease itself is not directly
can be combated, we must focus on measures
restrict measures that ensure that a
Transmission (by the vector or the human,
that is, by vegetative propagation of diseased
plant material) is prevented. Because of his
biology, combating the vector is not very efficient
ent and not useful. It remains to us as the best and one-
umpteen effective measure only the search and that
destroying diseased trees and planting phyto-
plasma-free young plants. The best awareness for
The certification indicates that the seedlings are free of infestation

SWITZERLAND. Z. FRUIT WINE GROWING No. 22/06

CROP PROTECTION

 

 

of fruit candies. If we stick to this

If we keep to these known rules, we can assume European stone fruit yellowing disease
that our apricot crops differ from ESFY
stay safe. ESFY is a quarantine disease — hence it exists
an obligation to report to the cantonal authorities
Thanks to plant protection. The most important
We thank the laboratory teams of Maja Hilber-Bodmer Symptoms: chlorotic leaf curling
and Santiago Schirer for the molecular genetic Necrotic phloem
laboratory analyzes and the Concerplant inspectors Abnormal fruit development
Bea Buchmann and Pierre-Henri Crausaz for the pro- ‘Death of Asten and
in the tree nurseries, the cantonal whole trees
Fruit departments for sampling in the pro-

 

. . : Transmission: Vegetative Reproduction
duction plants as well as all tree nurseries and Stei Prlaumenbl atsouger
Ti

fruit producers for their support. Alfred Klay, (Cacopsylla pruni
BLW, thank you for the information and the root growths

view of the manuscript. P Measures: — Find and treat diseased trees
literature

Ramel M.-E., Gugerli P., Bourquin L., De Meyer J. and Schaub L. Buy certified young plants
Caractérisation de ’enroulement chlorotique de \'abricotier et détec-
tion du phytoplasme ESFY in Suisse Romande. Revue suisse Vitic. Arboric. Hortic. volume 33 (5): 279-286, 2001

Schaub L. and Monneron A.: Phénologie de Cacopsylla pruni, veo-
tour de enroulement chlorotique de V'abricotier. Revue suisse Vitic
Atboric. Hortic. volume 35 (2): 123-126, 2003,

EPPO (European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization):
Data Sheets on Quarantine Pests: Apricot chlorotic leafroll phyto-
plasma, 1997. hitp:/Awww.eppo.org/QUARANTINE/bacleria/Europe-
‘an_stone_fruit/PHYPPR_ds.pdt

Ramel M.-E., Gugerli P. and Schaub L.: European stone fruit
yellowing disease (ESFY). Leaflet in Switzerland. Z. Fruit viticulture

139, no. 5, 2003. It

resume

Enroulement chlorotique de I'abricotier (ECA) — contréle 2006 en Suisse

Lenroulement chlorotique de Vabricotier (ECA) en anglais European stone fruit yellows ou ESFY,
sévit dans toutes les grandes zones de production européennes d'abricots et de péches telles que
Allemagne, la France, la Greéce, l'Italie, VAutriche, la Roumanie, l'Espagne et l'ex-Yougoslavie. Of
études menées en 2001 en Suisse Romande et en 2006 en Suisse Alémanique ont confirmé la présence
you vector Cacopsylla pruni partout en Suisse. Dans le contexte de ces mémes investigations, on a éga-
element tenté de pister 'ECA sur diverses plantes. D'aprés l'enquéte de 2001, 'ECA existe bien en
Vaud et Valais, la Suisse alémanique semble épargnée d'apres les recherches menées cette année. In 2006, the "chasse a VECA" a été menée dans 56 pépiniéres en Suisse dont 87.5% n'étaient pas
infestees. Les pépinieres avec des jeunes plantes malades se trouvent pour la plupart en Suisse ro-
mande. Les deux principales mesures de lutte contre 'ECA:
e Chercher les arbres malades et les décimer; il n'existe pas de traitement curatif. e Nvacheter que des jeunes plantes certifiées. The certification offered la meilleure garantie de santé des
jeunes plantes. SWITZERLAND Z. FRUIT WINE GROWING No. 22/06