Sseeera INTEGRATING AND STRENGTHENING
NETWORK
Global epidemiology of phytoplasma

diseases of economic importance in
Southeast Europe

FINAL REPORT

-_
Sseee! = INTEGRATING AND STRENGTHENING
THE EVROPEAN RESEARCH AREA

WWW.SEE-ERA.SET IM SOUTHEAST EUROPE

PROJECT AT A GLANCE

Project title and duration
Global epidemiology of phytoplasma diseases of economic importance in Southeast Europe. (Network PHY TOPLASMA-EPIDEMIO, 9 months starting November 2007)

Project Coordinator
Dr. Xavier Foissac (team INRA-Bordeaux-France)

Network objectives

The network PHYTOPLASMA-EPIDEMIO will coordinate the efforts of plant pathologists,
microbiologists and entomologists of Southeast European countries to better monitor
phytoplasma strains propagation in grapevine, fruit and vegetables crop through nurseries and
insect vectors, at the European scale. The network will promote the use of molecular typing of
phytoplasma strains and initiate the development of mitochondrial gene markers for the
description of hemipteran vectors at species and ecotype level, to promote phylogeographic
studies and describe co-evolution between phytoplasma strains and insect vector ecotypes. Network participants :

The 13 SEE groups with diverse multidisciplinary phytoplasma expertise that wish to join the
network are from 8 elligible countries including Croatia (1), France (2), Germany (2), Greece
(2), Hungary (2), Former Yougoslavian Republic of Macedonia (1), Romania (1) and Serbia
(2) and represent 59 participants including 25 team members under 35 years. Network governance and management

The network will be run by a management committee consisting of an overall coordinator
(Dr. Xavier Foissac, coordinating team) and task leaders. The committee will have the
responsibility for administration, network communication, meeting organization and ensuring
that working groups remain on schedule to achieve their milestones. The committee will be responsible of periodic and final reports. To improve fine monitoring and result dissemination, each Task Leader will transmit at
milestone and no later than two month before beginning tasks, timetables describing detailed
subtasks with team members and other local partners involvement and budgeting. Task
Leader will transmit task reports no later than two months after task completion. Specific milestones and timetables are included in tasks descriptions. Duration of tasks 2, 3, 4
is from month | to month 9, tasks reports will be communicated every 3 months. Networking activity

Two meetings and a workshop dedicated to molecular typing in addition to bilateral visits will
constitute the networking activity. The first meeting will take place during the first meeting of
the International Phytoplasma Working Group (IPWG, Bologna, november 2007). Six SEE-
eranet phytoplasma working groups corresponding to tasks 2 to 7 , will concentrate on three
different phytoplasmas of high economical impact. Network tasks
1. First meeting Bologna
2. Typing of FD and related phytoplasma isolates (groups 16SrV-C and -D)

3. Typing of stolbur phytoplasma isolates (group 16SrXII-A)
3.1 Collection of vegetable, wild plants and grapevine samples
3.2 Collection of cixiids

4. Typing of fruit tree phytoplasma isolates (group 16SrX)

4.1 Collection of stone fruit samples displaying early burst
4.2 Collection of fruit tree psyllids

5. Development of mitochondrial markers for insect typing

6. Database for phytoplasma strains description

7. Worshop and second meeting

Tasks participants

Teams Task 4 \Task 5\Task 6/Task 7

 

INRA-Bordeaux-France
PPI-HAS-Hungary
IPPE-Zemun-Serbia
PSI-ISC-Macedonia
PPL-AUTH-Greece
LPP-UTH-Volos-Greece
DBUZ-IPPAF-Croatia
BBA-Bernkstl-Germany
ICDPP-Bucharest-RO
PPDL-EXPERT A&-Hungary|
RLP-AlPlanta-Germany
PERI-Belgrade-Serbia
INR&-Montpellier-FR

   

Task milestones and deliverables

1. First meeting Bologna

Task leader : X. Foissac (team INRA-Bordeaux-France)

Task Duration : 11-16 november 2007

Task milestones & deliverables:

Planning for the network, working groups organized as well as bilateral visits and exchanges. List of phytoplasma isolates to be typed. List of participants established for the six working groups :

2. Typing of FD and related phytoplasma isolates (groups 16SrV-C and -D)

Task leader : S. Malembic-Maher (team INRA-Bordeaux-France)
Duration : november 2007 — july 2008
Task milestones & deliverables:
Milestone | : final isolate list and markers : december 2007. Molecular typing of grapevine FD phytoplasma isolates from Serbia, France and other
countries if applicable
Molecular typing of alder phytoplasma isolates from all countries involved. 3. Typing of stolbur phytoplasma isolates (group 16SrXII-A)
Task leader : Michael Maixner (team BBA Bernkastel-Germany )

Task Duration ; november 2007 — july 2008

Task milestones & deliverables:

Milestone | : final isolate list and markers : january 2007. Milestone 2 : second list of isolates collected in june-july 2008 for molecular typing before
end of 2008. Molecular characterization of stolbur phytoplasma isolates from grapevine, solanaceous crop,
lavender, strawberry, insect vectors in eight different countries of Southeast Europe. Geographical and ecological mapping of stolbur strains in 8 different countries of Southeast
Europe. 3.1 Collection of vegetable, wild plants and grapevine samples

SubTask leader ; Dijana Skorié (team DBUZ-IPPAF-Croatia)

SubTask Duration : july-august 2008

SubTask milestones & deliverables:

Milestone 1 : Identification of sample collection to be conducted to improve representativity
of sample set. May 2008. New collection of samples displaying stolbur symptoms in solanaceous crop, celery,
stawberry, lavender, grapevine, bindweed, nettle and other wild plant hosts during july and
august 2008 increasing representativity of variability study. 3.2 Collection of cixiids

leader : Slobodan Krnjaji¢ (team IPPE-Zemun-Serbia)

Dur: june-july 2008

SubTask milestones & deliverables:

Milestone 1 : Definition of the collecting strategy, regions and countries, crop or wild
environment targetted. Collection of cixiids (Hyalesthes obsoletus, Reptalus panzeri, Pentastiridius sp., ...) for
checking infected status and characterization of stolbur phytoplasma strains proven to be
propagated by insect vectors. New cixiid DNA positive for phytoplasma infection available for molecular typing of stolbur
phytoplasma strains proven to be propagated by insect vectors. 4. Typing of fruit tree phytoplasma isolates (group 16SrX)
Task leader : Wolfgang Jarausch (team RLP-AIPlanta-Germany)
Task Duration ; november 2007 — july 2008

Task milestones & deliverables:

Milestone | : final isolate list and markers : january 2007. Milestone 2 : second list of lates collected during winter and spring 2008 for molecular
typing during the final training course. may 2008. Molecular characterization of apple proliferation, pear decline and European stone fruit
phytoplasma isolates from orchards in different countries of Southeast Europe as well as from
psyllid vectors. Geographical and ecological mapping of group 16SrX strains in 8 different countries. 4.1 Collection of stone fruit samples displaying early burst

SubTask leader : Sandor Sule (team PPI-HAS-Hungary)

SubTask Duration : january-april 2008

SubTask milestones & deliverables:

Milestone | : Identification of sample collection to be conducted to improve representativity
of sample set. december 2008. New isolates for European stone fruit yellows phytoplasmas to be submitted to molecular
typing during the workshop in Bordeaux. 4.2 Collection of fruit tree psyllids
SubTask leader : Gérard Labonne (team INRA-Montpellier-France)

 

‘ones & deliverables:

Milestone | : Definition of the collecting strategy, regions and countries, crop or wild
environment targetted. February 2008

DNA from different species of psyllids of different origin. New phytoplasma strain proven to
be epidemic available for typing during the workshop in Bordeaux. 5. Development of mitochondrial markers for insect typing

Task leader : Nicolas Sauvion (team INRA-Montpellier-France)

Task Duration ; november 2007 — july 2008

Task milestones & deliverables:

Milestone 1: Mitochondrial markers identified. april 2008. Development of mitochondrial markers for molecular typing of Scaphoideus titanus,
Hyalesthes obsoletus, Reptalus panzerii, Cacopsylla pyri, C. pruni, C. melanoneura and C.
picta. First description of mitochondrial haplotypes for these insect vectors. 6. Database for phytoplasma strains description

Task leader : Florin Oancea (team ICDPP-Bucharest-Romania)

Task Duration ; november 2007 — july 2008

Task milestones & deliverables:

Milestone 1 : 2 months after first meeting

Definition of the phytoplasma isolate properties to be described

Milestone 2 : 5 months after first meeting

Definition of the database format and the team and website which will host the database and
its online access. Milestone 3 : 1 month before the second meeting in Bordeaux the database is functional. Milestone 4 : Uploading of isolate description during the workshop in Bordeaux. A first version of the database to describe phytoplasma strains. 7. Worshop and second meeting
Task leader : Xavier Foissac (team INRA-Bordeaux-France)

 

stones & deliverables:
Milestone | : Participant list available february 2008
Milestone 2 : Tentative programme for the workshop proposed. March 2008
Milestone 3 : Final programme made available with all protocoles and the list of phytoplasma
and insect isolates to be tested during the workshop. April 2008. Milestone 4 : Final programme for the two days meeting (scientific reports, prospective for
FP7). May 2008.

seeera The EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA. WWW-SEE-ERA.WET IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE

NETWORK

GLOBAL EPIDEMIOLOGY OF
PHYTOPLASMA DISEASES OF ECONOMIC
IMPORTANCE IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE

FIRST MEETING
AND PLANNING MEETING

11 & 16 November 2007

Holiday Inn Hotel — Bologna
& University of Bologna

name

Dijana Skoric

Martina Seruga-Music
Ivan Mikec

Emilija Nakova
Slobodan Krnjajic
Tatiana Simic

Jelena Jovic

Ivo Tosevski

Bojan Duduk

Ibolya Ember

Maria Kélber

Sandor Sule

Barbara Jarausch
Wolfgang Jarausch
Michael Maixner

Jes Johannesen

Fatu Viorel

Nikolaos Katis
Evangelos Vellios
Fevronia Lioliopoulou
Gérard Labonne
Nicolas Sauvion
Sylvie Malembic-Maher
Jean-Luc Danet

Anne Fabre

Xavier Foissac

LIST OF PARTICIPANTS

Country-partner

CROATIA-DBUZ
CROATIA-DBUZ
CROATIA-IPPAF
FYROMACEDONIA-UGD
SERBIA-IPPE
SERBIA-IPPE
SERBIA-IPPE
SERBIA-IPPE
SERBIA-PERI
HUNGARY-PHYTOLAB
HUNGARY-PHYTOLAB
HUNGARY-PPI-HAS
GERMANY-RLP.AIPlanta
GERMANY-RLP.AIPlanta
GERMANY-BBA
GERMANY-U.MAINZ
ROMANIA-ICDPP
GREECE-PPL-AUTH
GREECE-LPP-UTH
GREECE-LPP-UTH
FRANCE-INRA.Montpellier
FRANCE-INRA.Montpellier
FRANCE-INRA.Bordeaux
FRANCE-INRA.Bordeaux
FRANCE-INRA.Bordeaux
FRANCE-INRA.Bordeaux

e-mail

dijana@botanic.hr
martina @ botanic.hr
ivan.mikec@zzb.hr
emilija.nakova@ugd.edu.mk
titanus_serbia@yahoo.com
titanus_serbia@yahoo.com
titanus_serbia@yahoo.com
tosevski_ivo@ yahoo.com
duduk@net.yu
ember.ibolya@fitolab.hu
kolber.maria@fitolab.hu
ssule@nki.hu
barbara.jarausch@agroscience.rlp.de
wolfgang.jarausch@agroscience.rlp.de
M.Maixner@BBA.de
jesjo@uni-mainz.de
fatu_viorel@yahoo.com
meniakats@yahoo.gr
evellios@agr.uth.gr
flioliop@agr.uth.gr
Labonne@supagro.inra.fr
sauvion@supagro.inra.fr
smalembi@bordeaux.inra.fr
danet@bordeaux.inra.fr
amfabre@bordeaux.inra.fr
foissac@bordeaux.inra.fr

 

 

First meeting (1h 30) Sunday 11 Nov. 2007 17h30-19h
Holiday Inn hotel

 

Presentation of the network objectives and Consortium. Presentation of tasks — X. Foissac 10 min
Roundtable presentation of team members by team leaders — 20 min

Presentation of tasks by task leaders for each working group. Setting-up of the list of WG participants — 30 min

Proposition of bilateral visits for team 3 (IPPE- Serbia), team 5 (PPL-AUTH Greece), team 6 (LPP-
UTH Greece) and team 7 (DBUZ-IPPAF Croatia). 10 min

Open discussion 15 min
Conclusion and future milestones — X. Foissac 5 min

 

 

Second meeting (2 h30) Friday 16 Nov. 2007 8h30-11h00
University of Bologna

 

Presentation of the programme for second meeting
Setting up of WG mailing list and network mailing list 10 min

For WG1, WG2, WG3 andWG5 20 minutes each
Presentation by task leaders — discussion with WG participants
Presentation of task objectives, milestones
and provisional of isolates or insect populations 10 min
Strategy for selecting isolates or completing the final list - 5 min
Choice for markers - work plan for typing 5 min

    

For WG 4, 20 minutes
Presentation by task leaders — discussion with WG participants
Task objectives and milestones 5 min
Discussion about the phytoplasma isolate properties to be described in the database 5 min
Form of the database, strategy for information upload and update (curators ? ), work plan 10 min

 

For WG 6 25 minutes

Practical workshop — identify needs 5 min

Discussion about possible programs 10 min

Provisional list of participants, date & organizing committee 10 min

 

 

Planning for one week SEE-ERANET bilateral visits

 

Person host institution date

Martina Seruga Music INRA-Bordeaux February 2008
Jelena Jovic INRA-Bordeaux May 2008
Asimina Katsiani INRA-Bordeaux June 2008

Evangelos Vellios GERMANY-RLP.AIPlanta July 2008

 

 

 

 

 

Working plans and-or discussions about each task :

 

Working Group 1: Phytoplasmas of the 16SrV group

- Typing by RFLP on map and secY loci for groupV phytoplasma detected on grapevine
- Collection of alders in Republic of Serbia
- Sequenicing of map gene for isolates detected in alders

Working group 2 : Stolbur phytoplasmas (group 16Sr-XII-A)

- As the project timetable does not overlap august and September which correspond to the
best moment to see stolbur symptoms, decision is made to set up a list of available
frozen plant DNA isolates concentrating mainly grape, bindweed, nettle, solanaceous
crop, corn. - The team fromm IPPE-Serbia produce and communicate a document containing
protocols for collecting and provide pictures in order to recognize the most common
European cixids, most of them vectors of stolbur phytoplasmas. - Typing markers will be Tuf-RFLP with Hpall, secY sequencing and VmpI RFLP with
Rsal or vmp! sequencing. - INRA-Bordeaux has to provide ASAp the protocols for amplifying secY and Vmp1
(former stollH10 gene)

Working group 3 : fruit tree phytoplasmas (group 16Sr-X)

- According to W. Jarausch it is still time to sample for Apple proliferation

- Croatian team will provide pear decline sample

- Most of the samples currently being typed by sequencing 4 makers (MLST) by at
INRA-Bordeaux are from France, Italy, Germany, Spain, Croatia. - For psyllids B. Jarausch and N. Sauvion would like the participants to collect f 5 insects
from 5 sites per countries to have a first evaluation of taxonomic status of the insects and
infection status. Samples should be individually stored in dry tubes or in absolute
ethanol (no 70% ethanol) and send to Germany o dry ice for identification. Working group 4 : database

- An agreement is made of an excel format for each pyhytoplasma group and will be send
to participants by W. Jarausch. - Aspecific SEE-ERANET code is designed A= AP, E= ESFY, P=PD, F = grapevine
group V, S=Stolbur, X= alder isolates. P =plant sample, I= Insect sample

Two letter for the country-two digit for the region-three digit as sample number in this

region. The original laboratory sample id number will be kept in an independent column in

the excel file. Example SP-F-33-001 is the first plant stolbur sample from Gironde France

 

Working group 5: Insect typing

- Mitochondrial typing preferred because of the multiple copies, no introns, better
resolution. Cytochrome Oxydase I region taretted. Working group 6:

- _ the practical workshop and final meeting will be held at INRA-Bordeaux on 23-27 June. Seeo! > INTEGRATING AND STRENGTHENING
MOT rac ceuropeAN RESEARCH AREA

WWW.SEE-ERA.NET IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE

Task 2 : Typing of Flavescence dorée and related phytoplasma isolates (groups
16SrV-C and -D)

Coordinator : Sylvie Malembic-Maher, belonging to team INRA-Bordeaux-France
The context : The Flavescence dorée (FD) of grapevine is a quarantine disease caused by
phytoplasmas of the 16SrV group (Boudon-Padieu, 2002). Transmitted by a leafhopper of
North American origin (Scaphoideus titanus) (Schvester et al., 1963), it is spread in the
vineyards of South-western Europe and has been recently reported in the Balkans (Duduk et
al., 2004). The genetically related alder phytoplasmas (AldYp) are very common in Europe. They are transmitted by the leafhopper Oncopsis alni which can occasionally inoculate them
to grapevine, leading to Palatinate Grapevine Yellows (PGY) disease (Maixner & Reinert,
1999; Maixner et al., 2000). According to recent findings, these phytoplasmas could
constitute a wild reservoir of FD (Angelini er al., 2003; Arnaud et al., 2007). Objectives : To gain ground on the genetic and biological relationships between AldY and
FD phytoplasmas, we will study their diversity by PCR-RFLP and MLST typing of infected
plant and insect DNA extracts collected in the different countries involved in the program. Methodology : DNA extracts from the established list will be submitted to a real time PCR
detection text to verify their infection status. PCR-RFLP will be performed on the map gene
to differentiate FD subgroups. Finally, a multilocus sequence typing of non ribosomal genes
(rpsC, secY, map and degV) will be realised according to Arnaud et al., 2007. Task Input : DNA extracts from infected grapevine, alders and leafhopper vectors. Result, milestones : 1. Final isolate list and markers, december 2007. 2. Molecular typing of
grapevine FD phytoplasma isolates from Serbia, France and other countries if applicable. 3. Molecular typing of alder phytoplasma isolates from all countries involved. I Constitution of the list of samples

In September 2008, the following call was sent to all the participants in order to constitute
the list of DNA samples :
- Grapevine and/or S. titanus samples : countries were FD is recorded (Serbia and France)

should compile infected samples representative of the main focal points on their territory. Twenty to 30 samples by country should be enough. Countries were FD is not recorded could
eventually compile other grapevine yellows phytoplasma isolates already identified as 16SrV. - Alder samples : countries having FD should collect symptomatic alder samples in a vine
area where FD outbreaks have been identified, in a vine area known free of FD and in a vine
free area. Countries without FD, if interested, could collect symptomatic alders in one area
(with or without vines). Ten samples from each area should be sufficient. During the first meeting in Bologna, 5 teams confirmed their participation in the task 2 :
INRA-Bordeaux — France, IPPE- Serbia, BBA- Germany, EXPERTA LTD — Hungary, PERI
— Serbia. IPPE and INRA Bordeaux teams transmitted a first list of collected FD phytoplasma
(FDp) isolates from grapevine and S. titanus, and AldY phytoplasma (AldYp) isolates from
alder. - BBA team declared his intention to transmit a list of collected PGY phytoplasma (PGYp)
isolates from grapevine and AldYp isolates from alder and O. alni. - PERI team declared his intention to transmit a list of collected FDp isolates from grapevine. - EXPERTA team declared his intention to collect symptomatic alder samples. Before the end of December, the final lists tables in the annex were established. The lists
were presented according to the format collectively established during the Bologna meeting. A total of 132 isolates were collected : 57 from alder (AldYp), 50 from grapevine (FDp and
PGYp), 18 from O. alni (AldYp) and 7 from S. titanus (FDp). Photos of some samples are

presented in Fig 1. A summary of the collected isolates is also presented in Table 1. Il. Detection of the phytoplasmas in the samples

Detection of 16SrV phytoplasma in the samples had already been done by the different
teams by single or nested-PCR with group V specific primers. The primers and the results of
the PCR are detailed in annex’s tables. Thus, we decided not to check the infection status by
real-time PCR and to directly realise the typing. A practical session entitled “Detection of
Flavescence dorée and Bois noir phytoplasmas in grapevine by a triplex real-time PCR” was

organised during the workshop (see task 7 report). Ill. Typing of the phytoplasmas
In a first step, the typing of every isolates was performed by sequencing of the map gene
as described in Arnaud et al., 2007. In a second step, some isolates were selected for the

sequence typing with a second marker uvrB-degV gene (Arnaud ef al. 2007). IPPE team

realized the typing of their own isolates and INRA Bordeaux team characterized the rest of
the isolates. The map gene (800 bp) was amplified by nested PCR for 126 isolates. After sequencing
on one strand with MAPR2 primer, the chromatograms of 116 isolates were fully exploitable
on 674 bp. Some isolates’ chromatograms revealed sequences ambiguities (superposition of
nucleotide pics) which were detected for one up to ten positions. This indicates a mix of
different phytoplasma populations in the same sample. “Mixed” infections were detected, in
1/18 O. alni and in 30/56 alders but were not detected in grapevine and S. titanus (see Table
1). For the mixed infections, the map gene was re-amplified by single PCR with a tag proof-
reading enzyme (30 cycles with the FD9F6 and MAPR2 primers), cloned in the pGEMt Easy
plasmid and 4 clones were sequenced (named A, B, C and D). The cloning was performed at
INRA Bordeaux during the bilateral visit of Jelena Jovic from IPPE team-Serbia (from the
25" to 31st of may) . She was trained to the cloning techniques and we were able to clone 8
French and 3 German alder isolates (Table 1 and annex). Cloning of the Serbian isolates is in
course. Phylogenetic analyses were performed on a total of 117 sequences plus 19 sequences
of reference strains (Arnaud et al. 2007). A phylogenetic tree is presented Fig. 2. Forty six
different genotypes were identified : 3 in S. titanus, 7 in O. alni, 11 in grapevine and 37 in
alder. Analyses confirmed that grapevine and alder phytoplasmas have a common
phylogenetic origin. Twelve genetic clusters could be described. Three clusters containing
FDp isolates were named FD1, 2 and 3. FD | was strictly French, FD2 was French and Italian
and FD3 was Serbian and Italian. No German isolates were found in these clusters. French
AldYp isolates with exactly the same genotype as FD isolates were found in the FD1 cluster. French and Serbian AldYp isolates presented 3 and 4 SNP’s respectively with the FD isolates
from the cluster FD2. There were no AldYp isolates genetically close to the FD3 cluster. Nine
genetic clusters containing AldYp and PGYp isolates were named AldY 1 to 9. They
contained German, Hungarian, Serbian and French isolates. The uvrB-degV gene was amplified and sequenced for 8 grapevine isolates (5 from
Germany and 3 from Serbia) (See Table | and annex). Two different genotypes were
identified in Germany and 2 different ones in Serbia. This is the first time that different
genotypes are identified in grapevines from Serbia. A phylogenetic tree was realized,

including the sequence of 23 reference strains (Fig. 3). IV. Conclusion and perspectives

We could collect and molecularly characterize FDp isolates from different viticultural
areas in Serbia and France, and AldYp isolates from viticultural and non-viticultural areas in
Serbia, France, Germany and Hungary. The sequence typing of the map gene showed that:

- The phytoplasmas from alder and grapevine have a common phylogenetic origin. - Some AldYp genotypes are identical (or very close) to FDp genotypes in FD-contaminated
and non-contaminated areas. - In alders, there is an important diversity of isolates and mixed infections are frequent
whereas in grapevine the diversity is poorer and we could not find any mixed infection. These results strengthen our hypothesis that AldY constitutes the original reservoir of FD in
Europe with a low frequency of phytoplasma exchange between alder and grapevine. These
results led to a first publication (Cvrkovié et al., 2008) and to two presentations at scientific
congress (Malembic-Maher et al., 2007; Malembic-Maher et al., 2008). In order to confirm our hypothesis, we will realize the molecular typing of alder and
grapevine isolates from northern Italy where FD is present. We will also evaluate the ability
of S. titanus to transmit AldYp and PGYp isolates and especially isolates which have the

same genotypes as FDp isolates. Angelini, E., Negrisolo, E., Clair, D., Borgo, M. & Boudon-Padieu, E. (2003). Phylogenetic
relationships among Flavescence dorée strains and related phytoplasmas determined by heteroduplex
mobility assay and sequence of ribosomal and non-ribosomal DNA. Plant Pathol 52, 663-672. Arnaud, G., Malembic-Maher, S., Salar, P., Bonnet, P., Maixner, M., Marcone, C., Boudon-
Padieu, E. & Foissac, X. (2007). Multilocus sequence typing confirms the close genetic inter-
relatedness between three distinct flavescence dorée phytoplasma strain clusters and group 16SrV
phytoplasmas infecting grapevine and alder in Europe. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 73,
4001-4010. Boudon Padieu, E. (2002). Flavescence dorée of the grapevine:knowledge and new developments in
epidemiology, etiology and diagnosis. ATTI Giornate Fitopatologiche 1, 15-34. Cvrkovié, T., Jovié, J., Mitrovié, M., Petrovié, A., Krnjaji¢, S., Malembic-Maher, S. & ToSevski,
I. (2008). First report of alder yellows phytoplasma on common alder (Alnus glutinosa) in Serbia. Plant Pathology 57, 773. Duduk, B., Botti, S., Ivanovic, M., Krstic, B., Dukic, N. & Bertaccini, A. (2004). Identification of
phytoplasmas associated with grapevine yellows in Serbia. Journal of Phytopathology 182, 575-579. Maixner, M. & Reinert, W. (1999). Oncopsis alni (Schrank) (Auchenorrhyncha: Cicadellidae) as a
vector of the alder yellows phytoplasma of Alnus glutinosa (L.) Gaertn. European Journal of Plant
Pathology 105, 87-94. Maixner, M., Reinert, W. & Darimont, H. (2000). Transmission of grapevine yellows by Oncopsis
alni (Schrank) (Auchenorrhyncha: Macropsinae). Vitis 39, 83-84. Malembic-Maher, S., Salar, P., Vergnes, D. & Foissac, X. (2007). Detection and diversity of
“flavescence dorée” related phytoplasmas in alders surrounding infected vineyards in Aquitaine -
France. First International Phytoplasmologist Working Group meeting, November 12-15 2007,
Bologna Italy. Bulletin of Insectology 60, 329-330. Malembic-Maher, S., Cverkovic, T., Salar, P., Jovié, J., Mitrovié, M., Petrovié, A., Krnjaji¢, S.,
Tosevski, I. & Foissac, X. (2008).Looking for genotypes related to the grapevine Flavescence dorée

 

phytoplasma among phytoplasmas infecting alders in France and in Serbia. IOM Congress. Tianjin,
China. Schvester, D., Carle, P. & Moutous, G. (1963). Transmission de la flavescence dorée de la vigne par
Scaphoideus littoralis Ball. Ann Epiphyties 14, 175-198. Fig. 1: Photos of some collected samples: A. Grapevine infected by Flavescence dorée
phytoplasma in France. B. Grapevine infected by Palatinate grapevine yellows phytoplasma in
Germany. C. Alder infected by Alder Yellows phytoplasma. D. Scaphoideus titanus E. Oncopsis
alni. Fig. 2: Phylogenetic tree constructed by parsimony
analysis of map sequence (674 bp). “Ca. Phytoplasma ulmi” isolates were taken as the outgroup. Branch lengths are proportional to the number of inferred
character state transformations. Bootstrap values for 100
replicates are shown on the branches. Reference strains (Arnaud
et al. 2007) have accession number. Genotypes (M1 to 54) are in
green. Highlighted in yellow: AldYp isolates from alder; orange
and red: PGYp and FDp isolates from grapevine. ; green: AldYp
isolates from O. alni; pink: FDp isolates from S. titanus. Ez Aaya [ge

a we PGYC)

5 |

 
    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
  
  

 

 

=
wf—Saee | Aldve

fg alay7 =

Fos a

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

fra

i"

oy

 

 

 

 

 

 

[oorastess
| arzes ss. Jean z0sc uss
sss

 

 

 

 

soe sean)

 

 

rus cou)
OT tse

a ~~

 

 

ro2 PHOT

 

Aldy2(PGYB) { ) ==

Foi

| Aldys (=

a
Ee] Aldyo
82 een

AldY1 (PGYA)

==

Fig. 3: Phylogenetic tree constructed by parsimony a

analysis of uvrB-degV sequence (1037 bp). [ Vi04-188-04 (AM396423)
“Ca. Phytoplasma ulmi” isolates were taken as the outgroup. Branch lengths [-—— PGY-C EY38 (AM396412) US
are proportional to the number of inferred character state transformations. | FD70(AM238517)
Bootstrap values for 500 replicates are shown on the branches. Reference
strains (Arnaud et al. 2007) have accession numbers. Genotypes (U1 to
U6) are in green. Highlighted in yellow: AldYp isolates from alder; orange 95|

and red:.PGYp and FDp isolates from grapevine. lz

 

 

83

met nen
85] 87

L___ si04-s4 (AM396432)
Rl04-3-26 (AM396427)
‘9a! Rus (AM396426)

HD1 (AM396433)

 

 

 

 

 

29]

 

 

r— Wut296-30 (AM396431)
[-— El04-2-2 (AM396429)
EY1 (AM396428)
L_wJ1274-81 (AM396430)

 

 

 

i

 

Table 1 : Results of map and uvrB-degV genes sequence typing
from all the 16SrV collected isolates. Gene Sample Country | PCR Low quality | Single | Mixed | Cloned Genotypes
Positive | rejected infection | infection | From
Samples | sequence mixed
analysed infection
Alnus sp. France | 30 3 10 7 8 MI, M5, MIO, M13,
MI7, MI8, M19, M20,
M21, M22, M23, M24,
M25, M26, M28, M29,
M30, M31, M32, M33,
M37, M41, M44, M46,
M48, M49, M50, M52,
M53
Germany | 10 0 4 6 3 M4, M7, M8, M9,
MI4, MIS, M43, M48,
M53
map Hungary | 2 1 1 0 0 M53
Serbia 15 0 8 7 0 M42, M49, M52
Vitis sp. France| 23 0 23 0 0 M38, M50, M54
Germany | 12 1 1 0 0 M39, M40, M45, M47,
M48, M52, M53
Serbia 12 2 10 0 0 MSI
Oncopsis alni | Germany | 17 3 13 I 0 MII, M16, M44, M45,
M47, M52, M53
Scaphoideus | France | 3 0 3 0 0 M50, M54
titanus Serbia [2 0 2 0 0 M51
TOTAL | 126 10 85 31 il 46 genotypes
Vitis sp. France | 0 0 0 0 0
uvrB- Germany | 5 1 4 0 0 U7.UL
degV Serbia 2 0 2 ) 0 U1,UI4
TOTAL |7 1 6 0 0 4 genotypes

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Seeea = INTEGRATING AND STRENGTHENING
THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA

WWW.SEE-ERA.NET IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE
Task 3 : Typing of solbur phytoplasma isolates (group 16SrXII-A)
Coordinator : Michael Maixner, belonging to team BBA Bernkastle-Kues

The context : The stolbur phytoplasma (group 16SrXII-A) is an European endemic
phytoplasma of wild compartment origin and is transmitted from bindweed, nettle and
lavender to grapevine, maize, solanaceous crop (tomato, pepper, potato, eggplant), strawberry
and sugarbeet by polyphagous planthoppers of the Cixiidae family. Some stolbur phytoplasma
strains recently appeared to be associated with specific insect vector ecotype which could

indicate some strains specialization (Langer and Maixner, 2004). Objectives ; Establish a list of stolbur DNA isolates collected on plant hosts or insect vectors. Evaluate the genetic diversity of stolbur phytoplasma at the European geographical scale. Methodology : DNA extracts from the established list will be submitted to stolbur-specific
PCR detection test to verify their infection status. Genotyping of the stolbur isolates by using
genotyping tools based either on RFLP patterns of the variable gene vmp1 encoding a putative

membrane protein and the house-keeping gene tuf or by sequencing of the secY gene. Task Input : DNA extracts from infected grapevine, wild plant and planthopper vectors. Result, milestones : 1. Final isolate list and markers, january 2008. 2. Molecular typing of

stolbur plant isolates. June 2008. 3. Molecular typing of stolbur insect isolates. July 2008. 1. Constitution of the list of samples
Nine partners participated to the setting up of the collection of DNA isolates namely DBUZ-

IPPAF (Croatia), INRA-Bordeaux (France), BBA-Bks-UnivMainz (Germany), LPP-UTH
(Greece), PPDL-Experta (Hungary), PSI-ISC (Macedonia), IPPE (Serbia), PERI-Belgrade

(Serbia), UTH (Greece). Altogether 311 plants samples including 265 grapevine samples as
well as 14 bindweed and stinging nettle samples and fifteen samples of other plant species
were proposed to be included in the genotyping study. For the insect vectors, 174 DNA extracts were proposed including 170 Hyalesthes obsoletus

from Germany, Croatia and Serbia. 2. Plant Genotyping :

Hundred and twenty seven samples were typed by Hpall-RFLP of tuf-PCR : 79 samples were
of tufll genotypes while 43 samples were of tufl and 5 of tufIIl genotypes. This may indicate
that in our collection two third of the isolate were coming from bindweed reservoir. In Balkan
countries genotype tufll was largely dominating, while in France and Germany the ratio
between the two genotypes was balanced. According to vmpl Rsal-PCR-RFLP, 210 samples could be examined. Fourteen different
RFLP patterns could be evidenced. Pattern V1 73 isolates) and pattern V4 (45 isolates) were
predominating. The V1 genotype appeared specific of France and Germany, while the
genotype V4 was present in all countries except Hungary. Pattern V2 accounted for 28 and
V3 for 18 isolates. The latter was absent from Germany. V18 and V14 represented 15 and 11
isolates respectively and were specifically abundant in the Balkan countries. Genotypes V6,
V7, V8, V12 and V19 were only detected in one or two French grapevine samples, whereas
genotype V13 was only detected in one infected grapevine in Croatia and V15 in three
samples from Germany. Two mixed infection of V2:V18 genotypes were detected in Croatian
grapevines, one mixed infection V14/V2 in a Serbian grapevine and two mixed infection of
V4:V14 genotypes in two Macedonian grapevines. In Germany, mixed infection of V1:V4
was found in one grapevine and one bindweed and V1:V2 was detected in a grapevine. As an
example results obtained for some samples from the Macedonia and Serbia are illustrated in

Figure 1. SecY sequence genotypes were obtained for 138 isolates and 7 different genotypes were
distinguished (see Figure 2). Most of the stolbur genotypes belonged to the S6 (56 isolates),
the SI (44 samples) and the S4 (26 samples) genotypes. Four genotypes, namely S18 (4
samples from Serbia, FYRM, Hungary), S7 (3 samples from Croatia), S20 (1 sample from

Greece) and S21 (1 sample from Greece) were only detected in samples from Balkan. Timp typing (Rsal RFLP)
Serbia

FYEDA [M. wititfieta) Corn, Corn, Carrot

2D

a ag
Be eu

=| aren) —|— 1a te)
— ite |

ol nl ae ere)

Non specific
band >

 

Figure 1: Electrophoretic analysis of Rsal restriction product of vmpl PCR on 8 %

polyacrylamide gel. The genotypes V are indicated below the figure. $13 French Lavender

  
  
 
 
  
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
  

S10 Frernh | avenrter

S18

$15 French Lavender
S23 French Lavender

$22 French Lavender

$12 French Lavender
S21

3 Lebanese grapevines

$19 French Lavender

$11 Franch Lavender

814 French Lavender

1 mutation
72

S5 Bulgarian Grapevine
French Tobacco
Lebanese grapevine

$16 French Lavencer

S20

Figure 2: phylogenetic analysis of secY genotypes detected in plant samples of the SEE-
ERANET consortium. Genotypes in red are the most abundant genotypes. Genotypes in blue

colour represent minor genotypes detected in Balkan. 3. Insect Genotyping :

Hundred and sixty one insects were typed by HpalI-RFLP of tuf-PCR : 81 samples were of
tufll genotypes while 77 samples were of tufl and 6 of tufIII genotypes. The genotype tuflII
was the only detected in Serbian insects. According to vmp1 Rsal-PCR-RFLP, 133 samples could be examined. Eight different RFLP
patterns could be evidenced. Patterns V1 (64 insects) and pattern V4 (22 insects) were
predominating. Patterns V2 was detected in 11 insects whereas pattern V14 was detected in 2
Serbian insects. Four other pattern, namely V3, V12, VIS and V16 were only detected in one
or two insect samples. Eight mixed infections of V1:V2 and three of V1:V4 were found. SecY sequence genotypes were obtained for 18 insect isolates and only the three main
genotypes were detected, namely S6 (7 insects), the S1 (5 samples) and the S4 (4 insects)

genotypes. Two mixed infection between S1 and S4 genotypes were also evidenced. Seee! 7 INTEGRATING AND STRENGTHENING
ne THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA

WWW.SEE-ERA.NET IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE

Global epidemiology of phytoplasma diseases

of economic importance in Southeast Europe
Task 3. Typing of stolbur phytoplasma isolates (group 16SrXII-A)

Subtask 3.1. Collection of vegetable, wild plants and grapevine

samples

Dijana Skorié (team DBUZ-IPPAF-Croatia)

Zagreb, May — June, 2008

Contents

1. Background............cececec cece ec ee ee ee eee eeeeeeneeneneeeeneeneneaaee 3

1.1. Economical importance of stolbur phytoplasmoses in Southeastern

3. Assesment of the type of stolbur isolate distribution
in the database. ......... 0. eee e eee nee e eee ee eee een eee eees 4

4. Considerations for plant sample representativity improvement......
4.1. Weed sampling 0.0.00... 0. cece cece nee cece neeeeeea scence eeneeeeeeneeenees
4. 2. Tissue storage and DNA extraction...............cceecee eee eee nese eee
4. 3. Collection of other herbaceous plants. .................ccceceeeeeeee eee eee
4.4. Comclusion.........0...cccc cece eee e ce eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeeae esse eeeeegs 8
Acknowledgements

5. Selected references........ 0... cece cc eee e cece eee e eee eeeneeeeaeeeeneenene

1. Background

1. 1. Economical importance of stolbur phytoplasmoses in Southeastern Europe
Phytoplasmoses associated with the agents from the ribosomal subgroup 16SrXII-A
have been increasingly important in the countries of Southeastern Europe. Different names
have been attributed to them (stolbur, bois noir, legno nero, Schwarzholzkrankheit,
Vergilbungskrankheit) depending on the country of occurrence and cultivated plants affected. Early reports drew attention to stolbur “virus” as a serious disease of vegetables (Panjan 1957,
Panjan et al. 1970) especially potato, tomato and pepper (Aleksié et al. 1969) or, generally
speaking, those from from Solanaceae family. The members of this family also include
common weeds that can be found at the borders of the vegetable plots or in and around
vineyards. The importance of weeds as alternative stolbur hosts is crucial in the stolbur
epidemiological studies and the disease management. This is especially significant for
grapevine as a woody perennial stolbur host having long-term impact in its agro-ecosystem. Even though, Flavescence Dorée had been pointed out in the literature as the most serious
phytoplasma threatening the European viticulture and the importance of stolbur was thought
to be less important, probably given its endemic nature, the epidemics of grapevine yellows
(GY) attributable to stolbur has increased over the last 10 years. The problem of simultaneous
stolbur outbreaks in different European regions, as well as other open questions regarding the
epidemiology pertinent to this network, were summarized in the opening lecture of the GY

session at the XV. ICVG meeting (Maixner 2006). 1.2. Epidemiological considerations

So far, we have probably the most epidemiological data from stolbur infected German
vineyards where the roles of pathosystem’s weed members Urtica dioica and Convolvulus
arvensis have been investigated (Langer and Maixner, 2004). Calystegia sepium, another
weed from the Convolvulaceae family, may also play a role in the distribution of VK-II and
VK-III types of stolbur. The body of knowledge about alternative phytoplasma hosts is
increasing. Various research groups working on samples from their own countries or in
collaboration with foreign scientist have pinpointed other weed species potentially important
in phytoplasma epidemiology. Since common vineyard weeds like Cirsium arvense,
Taraxacum officinale, Plantago sp., Medicago sativa, and even Polygonum lapathifolium and

Datura stramonium continuously appear in reports as stolbur hosts (First International

Phytoplasmologists Working Group Meeting 2007, Extended Abstracts of the XV. ICVG
Meeting 2006, Atti di 3. incontro nazionale selle malattie da fitoplasmi 2005, Palermo et al. 2004, Skorié et al. 1998, Panjan 1957) it would be worthwhile to investigate their role in the
GY epidemiology more closely. Shrubs and trees hosts growing as bordering plants (Sambucus nigra, Prunus spinosa,
Rubus spp.) should also be considered in global epidemiology investigations because they are
perennials whose fixed spatio-temporal position in the ecosystem may influence the course of
the disease. Moreover, some of them have already been found to harbour stolbur
phytoplasmas. The fruit and vegetable, especially the staple food plants, production in the countries
involved in this network have also suffered serious losses due to stolbur epidemics. While the
problem is obviously perpetuating in solanaceous crops and maize from the 1950s in the
Balkan area (Panjan 1957, Jovié et al. 2007, Avramov et al. 2008), it has become evident in
the last 5-10 years in parsley, celery, carrot, lettuce, and strawberry. The recent study of maize
redness disease in Serbia is a good example of early epidemiological study with implications
for more efficient disease control (Jovié et al. 2007). Most of the countries involved in this networking effort are endowed with some
variant of continental climate and, so far, most of the epidemiological data on stolbur come
from these types of ecosystems. However, the stolbur-type phytoplasmoses affect cultivated
plants in the Mediterranean area with consequences that are especially important in lavender
and grapevine production. Even though some of the vectors and herbaceous hosts are found in
the Mediterranean vineyards and fields as well as in those of central and eastern Europe, there
is not enough information on this type of agro-ecosystems and phytoplasma alternative weed

hosts therein. 2. Subtask Aim
This subtask aim is to increase the sample representativity of stolbur phytoplasma variability
study regarding the grapevine samples, vegetables and wild plants with special regard to ones

showing potential phytoplasmoses symptoms. 3. Assesment of the type of stolbur isolate distribution in the database

So far the database of plants available for the stolbur phytoplasmas encompasses 289
samples from 5 countries of which about 87% (251 samples) is from grapevine. Since the
project is in its final phase, this number is growing and the rough assessment given here will
surely change shortly. French and Macedonian stolbur isolates are exclusively from
grapevine, while other groups have a proportion of samples from other hosts. These include
herbaceous specimens of indigenous flora that grow in or around vineyards as weeds or
cultivated plants like corn (8 samples), potato ( 1 sample), carrot (1 sample) and a peach (1
sample). The latter may not be relevant to the stolbur epidemiology type of study although it
reflects an ancient practice in some of the countries (Croatia, Germany, Serbia, others?) of
growing a peach from a seedling (so called vineyard peaches) amidst grapevines. This
practice exists in some Mediterranean vineyards but in these agro-ecosystems figs are
sometimes cultivated in or close to grapevines. The proportion of plant samples other than
grapevine is roughly about 20% for the teams that counted them in, but the overall
representativity in the plant stolbur database is only 8.3% for weeds and about 3.5% for
vegetables. The samples from the Mediterranean area are either not represented yet (Greece),
represented only as grapevine samples (France) and scarcely represented (Croatia). No weed. or vegetable stolbur isolates have been listed from the Mediterranean yet. The Greek
colleagues have announced input of the isolates from tomato. Vegetable crop isolates have been listed mostly from Serbia (corn, carrot) and weeds
have been systemically investigated only in Germany. Lists from other countries probably
represent certain focal points, but better representation is needed for good quality

epidemiological studies. 4. Considerations for plant sample representativity improvement

4.1. Weed sampling

Due to limited time and resources within these networking activities, it would be
prudent to sample in well known agro-ecosystems of high interest taking into account specific
factors like: climate, relief, natural pytocenoses and factors influencing them. The knowledge
of feeding preferences of potential and well known insect vectors is important. The relative

abundancy of weeds should also be considered. Weeds are often asymptomatic phytoplasma

hosts, but Convolvulus, Cirsium and probably others may show yellowing, stunting and other
phytoplasmoses-like symptoms. Preferential sampling of symptomatic ones may even reveal
new hosts with epidemiological importance. When collecting weeds, make sure that they are properly identified. For example,
Calystegia sepium has been, to our experience, mistakenly identified in preflowering phase as
Convolvulus arvensis. Identification of Convolvulus althaeoides (below, right) in the
Mediterranean should be easier in case this bindweed type plant is found symptomatic and/or

phytoplasma infected. Uninfected Convolvulus arvensis L. and Calystegia sepium L.

lO ROL LAL

  

CroFlora database

Convolvolus a:

Wy

 

4, 2. Tissue storage and DNA extraction

Practical considerations of weed sampling and phytoplasma extractions include
preferential methods of tissue storing and DNA extraction. Storing the newly collected
herbaceous material in a cool box prior to extraction or freezing (-20°C for short term, or -
80°C for longer) should keep the level of tissue oxidation at minimum. We had good
experience with drying bigger veins (where applicable) or complete leaves on calcium-
carbonate in the field. DNA extraction, as pointed out in Langer and Maixner (2004) for
nettle, may be difficult. The level of polyphenols and polysaccharides in weeds is often high

and it should be considered when the experiments are planned. 4. 3. Collection of other herbaceous plants

Solanaceous crops, celery, strawberry and lavender are not represented (except for 1
potato sample) in the current version of the database. Efforts should be made to collect some
symptomatic plants especially if located in the areas of grapevine and/or vegetable and

aromatic plants cultivation. Photo: M. Maixner

   

Stolbur symptoms on potato (left) and tomato (right)

Lavander and aromatic plants (thyme — found to be a stolbur host in Spain,
chamomile, Chrysanthemum cineraiifolium) have become new cash crops in continental
Croatia (Slavonia) lately. It may be, or soon became, the case in other countries of this
network. Their cultivation plots often border with vineyards (lavender) or vegetables, maize,
and sometimes even tobacco, all known stolbur hosts. Plants with little leaves, yellows,
virescence, stunting and general decline should be seriously considered for sampling. Solanaceous crops with exemplary stolbur symptoms like the tomato and potato shown above

should not be missed. 4.4. Conclusion

Underrepresented plant isolates of stolbur in the database have been pointed out in the
text above. Ideally, the whole pathosystems should be considered which translates to a simple
tule - collecting weeds, cultivated plants and insects in the same area whenever possible. Accordingly, recommendations given in the Subtask 3.2. (Collection of Cixiids) for sampling

sites should be considered. Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Dr. Michael Maixner for his help with this subtask and photographic
documentation. Dr. Antun Alegro is acknowledged for his botanical expertise and inspiring

stories on plants. 5. Selected references (alphabetically):

Aleksié Z., Sutié D., Aleksié D. (1969) Study of stolbur disease as a problem of pepper
production in Yugoslavia. Za8tita bilja 105, 235-239. Avramov Z., Gillet J., Laginova M. (2008) First detection of stolbur phytoplasma in
grapevines (Vitis vinifera cv. Merlot) affected with grapevine yellows in Bulgaria. Journal of Phytopathology 156, 112-114. Davis R. E., Dally E. L., Tanne E., Rumbos I. (1997) Phytoplasmas associated with grapevine
yellows in Israel and Greece belong to the stolbur phytoplasmas subgroup 16SrXII-a. Journal of Plant Pathology 79, 181-187. Jovié J., Cvrkovié T., Mitrovié M., Krnjaji¢ S., Redinbaugh M. G., Pratt R. C., Gingery R. E.,
Hogenhout S. A., ToSevski I. (2007) Roles of stolbur phytoplasma and Reptalus
panczeri (Cixiinae, Auchenorrhyncha) in the epidemiology of maize redness in Serbia. European Journal of Plant Pathology 118, 85-89. Langer M., Maixner M. (2004) Molecular characterization of grapevine yellows associated
phytoplasmas of the stolbur-group based on RFLP-analysis of non-ribosomal DNA. Vitis 43, 191-199. Maixner M. (2006) Grapevine yellows — current developments and unsolved questions. Extended abstracts of the XV. ICVG Meeting, Stellenbosch, pp. 86. Palermo S., Elekes M., Botti S., Ember I., Alma A., Orosz A., Bertaccini A., K6lber M.
(2004) Presence of stolbur phytoplasma in Cixiidae in Hzngarian vineyards. Vitis 43,
201-203. Panjan M. (1957) Stolbur virus. Glasnik zaitite bilja 5, 51-54. Panjan M., Sarié A., Wrischer M. (1970) Mycoplasmanliche Gebilde in Tomatenpflanzen
nach Infektion mit Kartoffelgelbsucht. Phytopathologische Zeitschrift 69, 31-35. Skorié D., Sarié A., Vibio M., Murari E., Krajacié M., Bertaccini A. (1998) Molecular
identification and seasonal monitoring of phytoplasmas infecting Croatian grapevines. Vitis 37, 171-175. Collective sources of information:
Extended Abstracts of the XV. ICVG Meeting (2006), SASEV, Stellenbosch, South Africa. Also available at ICVG site http://www. icvg.ch/

First International Phytoplasmologists Working Group Meeting 2007Atti di 3. incontro
nazionale selle malattie da fitoplasmi (2005), Universita degli studi di Milano, Istituto
di patologia vegetale, Italia. Proceedings of the First International Phytoplasmologists Working Group Meeting (2007)
Bulletin of Insectology 60 (2). CroFlora database http://www hirc.botanic.hr/croflora

10

 

Seeca' = 1 INTEGRATING AND STRENGTHENING
THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA

WWW.SEE-ERA.NET IM SOUTHEAST EUROPE

Global epidemiology of phytoplasma diseases
of economic importance in Southeast Europe

Task 3. Typing of stolbur phytoplasma isolates (group
16SrXII-A)

SubTask 3.2 Collection of cixiids

2

Table of Content

1. Background: Cixiids (Vectors) 3
2. Sampling 4
2.1. Daylight sampling method 4
2.2. Nightlight sampling method 5
2.3. Larvae sampling method 5
3. Identification 7
4. Sampling sites 7
5. Sampling protocol 8
Appendix: Distribution Al

Subtask 3.2 Collection of cixiids 11/2007 IPPE-Zemun Serbia

3
Background: C is (Vectors)

Cixiidae is a species-rich family with worldwide distribution. Over 100 species
exist in Europe, out of which about one third occurs in central Europe. Adults of
European species are usually polyphagous, feeding on trees and shrubs (Holzinger et
al. 2003). Females oviposit into the soil, nymphs are with endogeic development and
feed on roots. Cixiid species known as or possible vectors of Stolbur phytoplasma are: Cixius
wagneri (China) (Fig.1), Hyalesthes obsoletus Signoret (Fig.2), Pentastiridius beieri
Wagner, P. leporinus (Linnaeus) and Reptalus panzeri (Léw) (Fig 3, above and left). =| a Ee,
Fig. 1. Cixius wagneri (China) Fig. 2. Hyalesthes obsoletus Signoret

Several Reptalus species had been identified as relatively common and probably may
have role in phytoplasma transmission: R. quinquecostatus, R. cuspidatus, R.
melanochaeta (Fig. 3; Appendix —Table 1). Presence of Stolbur in R. quinquecostatus is
already documented (Trivellone et al., 2005). Reptalus panzeri

re
Reptalus melanochaeta Reptalus quinquecostatus
Fig 3. Reptalus species - potential vectors of Stolbur

Subtask 3.2 Collection of cixiids 11/2007 IPPE-Zemun Serbia

4

Real estimation of population density of Cixiids on selected sites is correlated with
ability to collect their representatives. Standard methods, such as exposing yellow sticky
traps, do not provide significant information about cicadas abundance. According to our
experience, swiping during daylight is probably the best method which can give
information on Cixiids presence, as well as, possible association with plants that can
serve as hosts to adults. Cixiids are more active during night, so their evident
phototrophic behavior usually gives quite valuable information about number of species
inhabiting site and their abundance. For this reason, we propose as efficient methods
both, daylight and nightlight sampling of Cixiids. 2.1. Daylight sampling method

Collecting equipment: robust sweeping net with solid frame (40-50cm diameter, 50 cm
depth, Fig 4), mouth exhauster (Fig. 5), vials with 80% ethanol, cool-boxes. When
collecting living material for laboratory study, captured samples should be placed in
previously prepared plastic cylinders with mixture of several most common plants
(potted), found at collecting site. a) field sampling -
b) field sampling -
c) laboratory handling

 

sponge- for catching live and undamaged cixiids

Fig 4. Sweeping net Fig 5. Mouth exhauster

 

Collecting strategy 1: “15 minutes walk” in zigzag transect (intervals 20m) may
give general view of Cixiids abundance on selected site. Collected material may give
data on the general abundance of the cicadas on selected site. It is strongly
recommended that material during “15 minutes walk” should be separately marked
for statistic calculations. Subtask 3.2 Collection of cixiids 11/2007 IPPE-Zemun Serbia

5
Collecting strategy 2: consider sweeping on specific phytocenological assembly,
where collector selects spots inside the site where Cixiids are more abundant. This
is important moment during collection, because it provides information on possible
plant-vector interactions. 2.2. Nightlight sampling method

Collecting equipment: electric power mobile unit, light source (metahalogen), white
cloth, exhauster (Fig. 6). source of metahalogenic light (60w)

by

}

i

Taleledi(-McelU ner Kol i
electricity

\

 

Fig. 6. Nightlight sampling equipment

Collecting strategy: consider collecting Cixiids which are attracted to light. Usually,
nightlight collections are more productive and identify more Cixiid species which are not
collected by daylight sweeping (hidden behavior of some species), or bring data
concerning abundance and number of species inhabiting collecting site. Increasing
activity of Cixiids (in general) starts with dusk, while activity of Cixiids during night may
perform different flying periods (flying on light in “waves”). 2.3. Larvae sampling method

Consider collection of larvae on sites where population of single Cixiid species is
expected or targeted collection of larvae on selected plants (roots) to study vector-plant
interaction. Cixiids larvae are situated 15-30 cm deep in the soil, usually gregarious (2-5
larvae) feeding on terminal roots of the host. As a good indicator of its presence are
remains of white wax along feeding spots on roots (Fig.7 A, B). Prior to emergence, L5

Subtask 3.2 Collection of cixiids 11/2007 IPPE-Zemun Serbia

3. Identification

Most recent publication that deals with taxonomy of European cixiids is:

Holzinger, W. E., Kammerlander, I., & Nickel, H. (2003). The Auchenorrhyncha of
Central Europe, Fulgoromorpha, Cicadomorpha Excl. Cicadellidae (p. 673). Leiden: Brill
Academic Publishers. 4. Sampling sites

- Sampling should be done on at least two target sites (agro-ecosystems). a) Every target site should consider site which is affected with phytoplasma
(endangered agro-ecosystem) and a nearby sites (s./.) which may be significant from
epidemiological point of view. b) Agro-ecosystems of significance are: vineyards, corn fields, strawberry fields, pepper,
potato and tomato crops. c) It is recommended that selected nearby sites should have physical connection to
target site (forest margin, meadow along the crop, etc). d) It is recommended that sampling should be done in 15 days intervals (from beginning
of April to end of September) to provide data of Cixiids fluctuation during collecting
season. d) Forest margins should be also considered as sampling sites as natural habitats of
most little-known but common Cixiids. Subtask 3.2 Collection of cixiids 11/2007 IPPE-Zemun Serbia

8

5. Sampling protocol

 

Locality :

 

GPS:

 

Locality code:

 

Date:

 

Time:

 

Day sampling time: hh-mm

 

Night sampling time: hh-mm

 

Site description:

Site exposition:

 

Site phytocenosis/assembly:

 

 

 

 

 

 

>30% 10-30% <10%
Dominant plants
(site cover)
Number of cixiids
species observed:
Cixiid sp. Plant sp. Observed cixiids-plant
associations

 

 

 

 

 

15 minutes sampling

 

code of vial:

 

 

Remarks:

 

Subtask 3.2 Collection of cixiids 11/2007

IPPE-Zemun Serbia

 

 

 

 

 

      

 

qwasqy

qasqy

qwasqy

 

  

  

qwasqy qwasqy qyuasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy qyuasqy quasqy uolBer [eu
| quesqy | quesqy quasqy quesqy quesqy quesqy | queseid | BOL YON

quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy uoiBei
jeoidosjoay

qwasqy qwasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy uolBe1 HOW

    

yseq sean
oreaeled Se

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

JU9SAld
quasald

 

     

 

quaseld

 

JUasald

JUaSeld

  

 

Uasald

JUaSAlq

 

quesqy quesqy quesqy quesqy quasqy quesqy quesqy quesqy quasqy | uolbe ueleqsny
qwasqy qwasqy quasqy qyuasqy quesqy quasqy quasqy quasqy quasqy oles

jeoldo.-ouyy
yueselq | lueseld | jUeSeld UaSeld WUaseld qUaseld qUaseld UaSeld qUaSseld BIqIaS
quasald quasdid wasaid yuasdid quasdid yuasdid

 

UaSAlq

 

qUasald

 

 

qUaseald

  

JUaSeld

qUaSeldq

  

qwesqy

 

queseld

 

 

need ‘d

quaselg
quaseld
‘sn}@j0Sqo “H

 

 

quesdig
quaseld
‘sedjayn| ‘H

 

yuaseld

 

         

yuasald

JUasald

‘snjeeyoourjewi “y

 

yuasald

quaseld

quasaig | puelUreU y8eID

 

qUaSeldq

yuasdld Kuewas

 

JUaSsald

 

yuaseld

‘snyesooenbuinb -y }4/AUNOD,

juasald | puejuyew youes4
eyeolD,

 

 

 

 

 

 

eUIse[oyAY INg[O}g JO SIOJOA PIIXID QIqQtssod Jo uoNNGINSIq ‘| Aq". uonnqiisiq :xipueddy “¢

 

IV

 

Seeea = INTEGRATING AND STRENGTHENING
THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA

WWW.SEE-ERA.NET IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE
Task 4 : Typing Typing of fruit tree phytoplasma isolates (group 16SrX)
Coordinator : Wolfgang Jarausch, RLP-Alplanta, Germany

The context : European stone fruit, pear decline and apple proliferation phytoplasmas (group
16SrX) are affecting South European orchards and are transmitted by psyllids, some of which
are doing part of their ecological cycle on wild hosts. Genotyping phytoplasme isolates at the

strain level will help to trace the route and the origin of phytoplasma diseases outbreaks. Objectives : Establish a list of fruit tree phytoplasma DNA isolates collected on plant hosts or
insect vectors. Evaluate the genetic diversity of group 16SrX phytoplasmas at the European

geographical scale. Methodology : DNA extracts from the established list will be submitted to phytoplasma-
specific PCR detection test to verify their infection status. Genotyping of the isolates by using

the four genotyping tools based on sequencing of aceF, pnp, secY and imp genes . Task Input : DNA extracts from infected fruit trees and psyllid vectors. Result, milestones : 1. Final first isolate list and markers, january 2008. 2. Final list of
isolates including psyllids, May 2008. 3. Molecular typing of phytoplasma_ isolates. July
2008. 1. Constitution of the list of samples
A set 74 of Prunus samples infected with Ca P. prunorum (ESFY), 25 Malus samples infected
by Ca. P. mali (AP) and 35 Pyrus samples infected with Ca. P. pyri (PD) were collected in
Germany, France, Serbia, Hungary, Greece and Croatia. This list was completed by a set of

isolates coming from Spain, Italy, Azerbaijan and Turkey. Psyllids DNA were also extracted from 64 insects positive for ESFY (42), AP (25) and PD
(3). 2. Plant and insect isolates genotyping :
Most of the samples could be amplified for the four gene markers and sequenced. Each type
sequence was given a genotype number according to the following nomenclature. First letter
of the marker and the number of the genotype. For example : Al is the first genotype for the
aceF marker. The most of the diversity was found for the marker imp for which 28 different
genotypes were found. An example of the analyses which are going to be performed is shown

in the figure below. Geographical distribution of Ca. P. prunorum
imp genotypes detected in plants

 

23

°° Pad
go 8

8 0
e. 2s

‘e

 

«Major genotype | predominates in Germany, Croatia and Italy
«Genotype | and 3 are not detected in Spain
— *Possible West to East gradient for genotype 2 distribution ? mm oo

 

1
substitution

N. Sauvion, ERANET, rapport Tasks : insect typing 19/12/08

Se QI! INTEGRATING AND STRENGTHENING
THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA

WWW.SEE-ERA.NET IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE

 

Task 5 : Development of mitochondrial markers for insect typing
Coordinator : Nicolas Sauvion, belonging to team INRA-Montpellier-France

The context :

The quarantine grapevine phytoplasma inducing Flavescence dorée (FD, group16SrV) and transmitted by a
leafhopper of North American origin, has been recently reported in Balkans and the recent genetic
characterization of the related alder phytoplasmas indicate they could constitute a wild reservoir of FD. The
stolbur phytoplasma (group 16SrXII-A) is a phytoplasma endemic to Europe and Near East and originate from
the wild compartment (bindweed, nettle, ...) from which it is transmitted to grapevine, maize, solanaceous crop
(tomato, pepper, potato, eggplant), strawberry, lavender and sugarbeet by polyphagous planthoppers of the
Cixiidae family. Some stolbur phytoplasma strains were recently found to be associated with specific insect
vector ecotypes, which could indicate some strains specialization. Finally European stone fruit, pear decline and
apple proliferation phytoplasmas (group 16SrX) are affecting South European orchards and are transmitted by
psyllids, some of which are doing part of their ecological cycle on wild hosts. Only specialized entomologists can differentiate these vectors of phytoplasma; in particular the psyllids because
of the morphological similarity of the Cacopsylla species. It is only recently than a electronic key have been
developed for an easy determination of these psyllids by plant protection services, skilled growers or researchers
(EUREKA project ‘Psyllids vectors’ see : http://www.psyllidkey.info/). No key of this type exists for the other
vectors. This limitation inherent in morphology-based identification systems signal the need for a new approach
to the vectoring species. DNA-based identification systems are today reliable, cost-effective and accessible
solution for species identification (e.g. Hebert 2003). The most commonly sequenced regions in insect systematics are mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and nuclear
ribosomal DNA (rDNA). As contiguous pieces of DNA, these two classes also lend themselves to easy
comparison (Caterino et al 2000). The combination of nuclear and mitochondrial data is useful because
incongruence between nuclear and mitochondrial phylogenies can reveal important aspects of species histories
such as introgression, hybridization, direct or indirect selection, and incomplete lineage sorting (for reviews see
Simon et al 2006). Because mtDNA can introgress faster than nuclear DNA and can sometimes entirely replace
the mtDNA of the species invaded the combined use of nuclear traits is an important check. Mitochondrial genes are useful tools for the phylogenetics of closely related taxa (Simon et al 2006), and so they
seem to be appropriate to differentiate the vectors of phytoplasma. One of the most frequently sequenced
mitochondrial gene is cytochrome oxidase I (COI). However, due to its length, the specific region chosen varies
from study to study. Sequencing larger fragments (more than | kb) increases the likelihood that regions of
different levels of variation will be spanned, giving resolution for a greater range of divergences. But, for a
question of time and cost, in a first time we have decided to choice a specific region of 708 bp classicaly used for
Hemiptera. The picture for nuclear rDNA is one of greater consistency (Caterino et al 2000). The internal transcribed spacer
(ITS) and 28S regions predominate in studies of Diptera and Hymenoptera, and satisfactory results have been
recently obtained with Hemiptera like aphids or whiteflies. ITS has typically been most useful for molecular
systematics at the species level, and even within species (e.g., to identify geographic biotypes). Objectives : At the beginning of the project, it was decided to focus not only on the development of a
mitochondrial marker (COD) but also on a nuclear marker (ITS) for molecular typing of the vectoring species. Methodology : DNA extracts from the established list will tested during the worshop with two pair of primers :

N. Sauvion, ERANET, rapport Tasks : insect typing 19/12/08

(1) COT primers : LCO-1490 / HCO-2198 (Folmer et al.1994) ; (2) ITS primers : FCM / BrD (Hillis & Dixon
1991). At the beginning of the project (first meeting Bologna), the choice have been done to test a range of
samples of each species from different localities (that is, most large number) rather than many individuals of few
localities. Primers (COI and ITS) have been choice after preliminary successfully tests on Cacopsylla pruni in
the laboratory of Montpellier. Task Input : DNA extracts from Scaphoideus titanus, Hyalesthes obsoletus, Reptalus panzerii, Cacopsylla pyri,
C. pruni, C. melanoneura and C. picta. Result, milestones : 1. Molecular markers identified. April 2008. 2. Molecular typing of vectoring species
sampling in France, Germany, other countries if applicable. 1. Constitution of the list of samples

In December 2008, the following call was sent to all the participants in order to constitute the list of DNA
samples :

* Cacopsylla spp. : countries where European Stone Fruits Yellow, Apple Proliferation and Pear Decline are
recorded should collected insect samples representative of the main focal points on their territory. Five to 10
individuals per site, and ideally two to 3 samples by country should be sufficient. + Scaphoideus spp. : countries having Flavescence dorée should collected insect samples representative of the
main focal points on their territory. Five to 10 individuals per site, and ideally two to 3 samples by country
should be sufficient. + Hyalesthes spp. : countries having Bois Noir should collected insect samples representative of the main
focal points on their territory. Five to 10 individuals per site, and ideally two to 3 samples by country should be
sufficient. During the first meeting in Bologna, 6 teams of the project confirmed their participation in the task 2 : INRA-
Montpellier, France, INRA-Bordeaux, France, RLP-AIPlanta, Germany, BBA Bernkastel, Germany, DBUF-
IPPAF, Croatia, IPPE-Zemun, Serbia, and a associated partenair, Palacky University of Olomouc, Czech
Republic. INRA-Montpellier and RLP-AJPlanta transmitted a first list of Cacopsylla (C. pruni and C. picta, but not
only) collected in different sites in France and Germany isolates from Prunus sp. or conifers, and from which the
DNA was already extracted. Palacky University of Olomouc declared his intention to send to the team of Montpellier samples in alcohol
of whole C. pruni collected in different sites in Czech Republic on Prunus sp. or conifers. INRA-Montpellier declared his intention to test several primers (COI and ITS) with DNA extracts of psyllids
or cixiids. At Bordeaux, in June during the Workshop, the final list of samples was established according to the format
collectively established during the Bologna meeting and was distributed to all the participants. The list in the
annex is a summary/synthetic list. A total of 214 individuals were analysed. Few Cacopsylla spp. from France were tested during the
Workshop. In fact, only some of them were used as positive control. INRA Montpellier have a collection of
thousand samples, and sequencing are in progress within the framework of another project (Barcoding project). Details concerning sampling sites, number of individuals per site ete are given in the annex. We were able to
collect psyllid samples only of 3 countries : Croatia, Czech Republic and Germany. This denotes actually the
difficulty to find entomologists capable of making the collects, We can do the same remark for the other
vectors : Scaphoideus titanus were collected by Daciana Pupara (INRA-Bordeaux), and Hyalesthes titanus by
Michael Maixner (BBA Bernkastel) or Xavier Foissac (INRA-Bordeaux)

2. DNA extractions

DNA was isolated individually using a cetyl-trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) protocol (Doyle &
Doyle 1987) for almost all insects analysed in this project. DNA of several psyllids (see annex) were extracted
with the methodology of prepGEM™ Insect (for details see http://www.zygem.com/Products/Products-PG-
Insect.html) at Montpellier or during the Workshop. III. Typing of the insects
The majority of the C. melanoneura gave positive results with ITS primers, but negative results with COI
primers, independently of the origin of psyllids. N. Sauvion, ERANET, rapport Tasks : insect typing 19/12/08

C picta gave good results with ITS primers, and COI primers, except for insects from Czech Republic with
col.

Disappointingly, typing of C. pruni gave negative results (except for positive control!) with ITS and COI,
except for individuals from Germany with COI. We cannot exclude a problem because of the DNA extraction
with the Zygem protocol for the Czech samples. New extractions from these localities will be done with the
classical (CTAB) protocol to test again the ITS and COI primers. The other psyllid species (C. pyri, C. pyricola, and C. pyrisuga) gave negative results for almost all samples. Bad DNA extraction or conservation of the extracts could explained these results (almost all samples were
coming from the same lab) but we cannot exclude a problem with the primers. These were non-degenerated and
because of their specificity, they may fail if there are mismatches in critical positions. It should be useful to test
degenerated primers. ITS and COI primers used in this study seem a good tools for Scaphoideus titanus. Except for several
individuals, all samples gave positive results. On the contrary, almost all the Hyalesthes obsoletus samples are negatives, particularly those which were
extracted with the Zygem protocol. New extractions should be done with the classical (CTAB) protocol to test
again the ITS and COI primers before any definitive conclusion concerning the interest of the used primers. 3. Conclusion and perspectives

Molecular typing with psyllid species realised at the Montpellier laboratory showed that the results with COI
or ITS were very variable from a species to the other one, even between individuals of the same species. Results
described here confirm this observation. This shows the difficulty finding the adequate primers. To by-pass this
problem two strategy could be followed : (1) use degenerated primers at one or more sites (see Simon et al 2006
for a large list of primers); (2) refine primers by sequencing the region surrounding the primer for
representatives of the desired taxa (by using bracketing primer pairs), and reducing or eliminating degeneracy
where possible. These two strategies will be tempted at INRA-Montpellier, at least in a first step on the psyllids. We cannot exclude that the negative results could also due to a bad quality of the DNA (because of the
extraction or mode of conservation). Participants of the Workshop had brought whole insects in the alcohol, so
extractions will be done again with the classical (CTAB) protocol at the INRA-Montpellier lab. Independently of the technical problems met during this study, a major conclusion is, i twas very difficult to
collect insects from the various partner countries of the project. This prove a real and crucial problem in finding
people for trapping insect in the field. All the samples from which we have had positive results, will be sequenced within the framework of the
Barcoding project (http://, www.barcodinglife.org) in collaboration with J-Y. Rasplus (INRA-Montpellier,
CBGP, http://www L.montpellier.inra.fr/CBGP/rasplus.html). 4. References

Caterino MS, Cho S Sperling FAH (2000) The current state of insect molecular systematics : A Thriving Tower
of Babel Annu. Rev. Entomol. 45:1-54

Hebert PDN, Cywinska A, Ball SL, deWaard JR (2003) Biologicals identifications through DNA barcodes. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B, 270: 313-322. Simon S, Buckley TR, Frati F, James B. Stewart JB, Beckenbach AT (2006) Incorporating Molecular Evolution
into Phylogenetic Analysis, and a New Compilation of Conserved Polymerase Chain Reaction Primers for
Animal Mitochondrial DNA. Annu, Rev. Ecol. Syst., 37, 545-579

Folmer O, Black M, Hoeh W, Lutz R, Vrijenhoek R (1994) DNA primers for amplification of mitochondrial
cytochrome ¢ oxidase subunit I from diverse metazoan invertebrates. Molecular Marine Biology and
Biotechnology, 3, 294-299. Hillis DM, Dixon MT (1991) Ribosomal DNA — molecular evolution and phylogenetic inference. Quarterly
Review of Biology, 66, 410-453

Doyle J, Doyle J (1987) A rapid DNA isolation procedure for small quantities of fresh leaf tissues. Phytochimical Bulletin, 19, 11-15. N. Sauvion, ERANET, rapport Tasks : insect typing

Species
Vectors of Aj

Country
le Proliferation
noneura [Croat
inoneura | Croat
janoneura Czech Republic
noneura |Czech Republic
‘a [Czech Republic
‘a [Czech Republic
[Germany

[Cacopsylla picta
ce German;

sylla picta
icta [German;
la picta German;
la picta German;
la picta German;
sylla
sylla picta

[Cacopsylla

icta German;
[Croatia

ictal [Czech Republic

‘Sampling site

Valesoviel
Brno

[Obernai (Alsace) “Ver”
Magden (Suisse) "CH. [Karlsruhe (D) "KAT
[Offenburg (D) "OG:
Neustadt "NWI"
[Siidpfalze (D) “Inter:
Freiburg "FR8™
[Jastrebarsko

[Olsan,

(Vectors of European Stones Fruits Yellow

la pruni (German;

la pruni,

Ha pruni

Ha pruni

Ha pruni

Ha pruni

Ha pruni

sylla pruni

[Cacopsylla pruni

[Cacopsylla pruni France,

[Cacopsyla pruni [Croatia
[Vectors of Pear Decline

[Croat

[Croat

German;
German;
(German;
[Czech Re}
[Czech Re}
[Czech Re}
[Czech Rej
France,

[Cacopsylla pyri
copsylla pyri
copsylla pyri
copsylla pyri
“opsylla pyri

[Cacopsylla pyri

[Cacopsylla pyri

[Cacopsylla pyricola

[Cacopsylla a

[Cacopsylla a

[Cacopsylla a

[Cacopsylla a

[Cacopsylla a

[Vectors of Flavescence dorée

[Scaphoideus titanus [Rumania

[Scaphoideus titanus [Canada

USA,

USA,

Rumania

[Croat

[Croat

Hungary

[Scaphoideus titanus
[Scaphoideus titanus
hoideus titanus
hoideus titanus
hoideus titanus
hoideus titanus
alesthes obsoletus __[German;
alesthes obsoletus __[France? [Croatia
[Croat
[Croatia

alesthes obsoletus
alesthes obsoletus
alesthes obsoletus
Vectors ? [Asymetrasca decedens
a decipiens

France,
[France
sca solani [France
a vitis France,

Jacobiasca libica Portugal

[Koblenz "Grabs"
Neustadt "U2"
[Oppenheim "OP2”
Koblenz "Grabsa”
Velesorice
Brno, Cerveny
Bulhar
[Drahanska vichovina,Kaleeni|
Fesche,

Larzac

[Skudelin

shel

Kopee. =]22] 2 Joe} o0| 2

[Osijek
Jastrebarsko
[Skudelin|
[Sv. Marija
Jastrebarsko
Vucjak Fer,
ice
Jastrebarsko
Jastreba
[Olsan;
[Voloder
[Osijek
Vucjak Fer

Timisoara
[Saskatoon

Hither Hills
Niagara Peninsula
Fast

ok

[Strigova

Kiskun halas st.

Bernkastel-Kues
France? Zelezna gora
Voloder

Drnis

Verteuille
Verteuille
Verteuille

Verteuille

 

Ds : Ivana Krizana / Dijana Skovic (HR)
B) : Barbara Jarausch (D)

  

RF

Renata Fialova (CZ)

NS : Nicolas Sauvion (FR)
DP : Daciana Papura (FR)
XF : Xavier Foissac (FR)
MM : Michael Maixner (D)
IE : Ibolya Ember (HU)

19/12/08

ts | cor] Sampler [Extraction]

DS zygem
DS ctab

Zygem
RE zygem
RE zygem
RE zygem
BI ctab
BI ctab
BI tab
BI tab
BI tab
BI tab
BI tab
DS zygem
RE zygem

BI tab
BI tab
BI tab
BI tab
gem
gem
gem
gem
tab
tab
tab

zygem
tab
tab
tab
tab
tab
tab
tab

zygem

zygem
tab
tab
tab

tab
tab
ctab
tab
tab
tab
tab

zygem

all negative
almost all negative
50% positive
almost all positive
all positive

NN number of tested individuals

 

Seea < INTEGRATING AND STRENGTHENING
THE EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA

WWW.SEE-ERA.NET IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE

Global epidemiology of phytoplasma diseases of economic importance in Southeast
Europe(Network PHYTOPLASMA-EPIDEMIO)

Tasks 6. Website and database for phytoplasma strains description
Task Leader : Florin Oancea (team ICDPP Bucharest Romania)

The network “Global epidemiology of phytoplasma diseases of economic importance in
Southeast Europe” coordinate the efforts of plant pathologists, microbiologists and entomologists
of Southeast European countries to better monitor phytoplasma strains propagation through
nurseries and insect vectors, at the European scale. The activity 6 was to develop a website of the
project, which is hosting also the database for phytoplasma strains description. The web site of the project is indented to reach two aims:

v Communicate to the stakeholders of the importance of the ERANET project regarding the
global epidemiology of phytoplasma diseases of economic importance in Southeast Europe”;

v Exchange results between scientists members of the network. The following major objectives were considered to be delivered by the web site:

v The website had to be dynamic, by incorporating a database, to allow the simple and
secure communication of results between Phytoplasma epidemio project members. v The website had to be easily updatable by the project leader / activity leaders until
completion of the scientific project. v The website had to be informative, by providing a section which would provide relevant
information about project. v The website had to be accessible, also considering the needs of those with low bandwidth
connections and older technologies so that they can use, interact, understand, navigate and fully
perceive the website. The main characteris

 

's of the web site of the projects were considered to be: (i) fast-
loading; (ii) flexible; (iii) functional and (iv) accessible. A special attention was paid to the way
of presenting the information. This was effectively presented in a front-loading manner, called
the inverted-pyramid. This style ensures paragraphs are kept short, presenting one main point at a
time. Each paragraph begins with the conclusion, and then presents supporting details. The web site includes two parts: the public one, including the information about the
Phytoplasma epidemio network and project, participants, objectives, news. The private part of the
network is accessible only by username and password, for the members of the SEE ERANET
network. This part include a database developed as a MySQL object under a PHP environment
running on an Apache server. The developed public part of the website comply with the W3C accessibility guidelines
which provide equal access and equal opportunity for disadvantaged or disabled users (Caldwell
et al., 2008). The W3C is the governing body for developing protocols and guidelines for the
web, including the standards that drive Hypertext Markup Languages and stylesheets. The W3C
accessibility guidelines mean that more websites and software are available for people with
disabilities to use the web more effectively. (Caldwell et al. 2008). On the public part the
information is structured in 9 pages: Home, Project, Objectives, Results, Activities, Team,
Duration, Participants, Events. The web page is presented in fig.1. The design of the web page was chosen by
Phytoplasma epidemio project members from 29 different website designs. ee Oe er os

     
  
 

aati nail

PHYTOPLASMA

       
     
      

—Fecmeg |] SEEERANET
| Qbiecmes | ‘he Souret Europan Ere
|eecseamoe Stes ana soune
em tng atonal

 

ies ine European Research Nea ining esearh ates win
RTD programmes

 

Pyoplasma epidemio project,

 

rk ‘Global epidemiology of phntoplasma

  
  

  

fist ternational
opiasmolaist
| working croup

 
   
 

 
 

 

  
  

[ fosuts

 
 
  

} EMOEWO database

  

Fig.l. Website of the “Global epidemiology of phytoplasma diseases of economic

importance in Southeast Europe” — network Phytoplasma epidemio. On the Home page it is a header with link to the 9 pages of the web site. This page also
include a summary description of the Phytoplasma epidemio project; a link to objectives; a link to
events pages; a link to results pages (which include the link to private section of the web site -
database). On Team page it is a list of research entities participating to the Phytoplasma epidemio
project, with link to the webpage of each entity and on Participant page is a list of the research
entities with secured link to the participant e-mail address. On page Results are short presentations of the reports on each activity, with link to the
complete forms of reports encapsulated as (locked) pdf. Here is also the entrance to the database

(secured link to the database, based on password). On Activities page there are presentation of

project activities objectives and task leaders (with secured e-mail link, opening an Outlook
form). In order to create the database of the project Phytoplasma epidemio first of all was chosen
the DBMS (Database Management System), i.e. the software that defines a database, stores the
data, supports a query language, produces reports, and create data entry screens. The EU public
funding of this network requires the use of open-source software applications PHP, MYSQL, and
Apache. PHP: HyperText Preprocessor, stands for Personal Home Page tools and is a scripting
language designed to be embedded in HTML code (Valade 2002). When a user requests to see a
HTML static website, the web server sends the HTML code as-is which is then read by the web
browser. In contrast, code containing PHP on a dynamic site is processed by PHP software such

as Apache, before it is returned to the web browser. It is this processing which allows for

 

complicated tasks such as data entry on a dynamic site. The processed data can be stored with
MySQL, a small, efficient, easy-to-use and secure open source database popular with Web
developers. A database acts as a long-term memory that stores information for an application,
similar to an electronic filing cabinet. Naramore et al. (2005) made a creative analogy for an explanation of how Apache,
MySQL and PHP work together in a dynamic website. They represent the website as a fancy
restaurant. The customers, or users of the site, want their food to appear attractive, but do not care
how the food is prepared. The customer does not want a buffet-style meal where they make their
own meal (or develop the website themselves). This restaurant encourages an interaction between
the customers and waiter, thereby ensuring complete customization of food according to dietary
needs. In this analogy, the waiter, PHP, goes to the kitchen with specific instructions for the food
preparation. The chef in the kitchen is Apache, preparing different types of food (or files) in a
quick and flexible manner. MySQL is the stockroom containing all the ingredients (or the
database of information). The phytoplasma isolate properties to be described for the insect isolate are the following:
Nr. crt. (# ); Code; Disease; Running nb; Number (final); Isolate code;
Extraction nb; Tube nb; Extraction date; Nb of insects; Country code; Department code;
Growing region; Sampling site; Orchard name or code; GPS coordinates; Insect species;
Developmental stage; Male; Female; Plant species; Direct PCR; Nested PCR; Universal primers;
Specific primers; Name of specific primers; Final PCR result; Subtype rpS group; Markerl
xxx; Marker2 xxx; Marker3 xxx; Unambiguous association. The phytoplasma isolate properties to be described for the plant isolate are the following:
Nr. crt. (#); Code; Disease; Running nb; Nb; Isolate code; Extraction nb; Tube nb; Extraction
date; Plant organ; Tissue; Country code; Department code; Growing region; Sampling site;
Orchard name or code; GPS coordinates; Plant species; Plant age; Direct PCR; Nested PCR;
Universal primers; Specific primers; Name of specific primers; Final PCR result; Subtype; rpS
group; Marker xxx; Marker2 xxx; Marker3 xxx; Vineyard name or code; Localized or systemic
symptoms; Weeds type of symptoms; Cultivar; No symptoms; Nonspecific symptoms; Specific
symptoms; Global yellowing; Yellowing of some branches; Yellowing of the shoots; Small

leaves; Witches broom; Enlarged stipules; Small fruits; Autumn flowers; Reddening; Early bud
break; Dieback; Chlorotic leaf roll; Nonchlorotic leaf roll; Leaf discoloration; Leaf rolling;
Flexuous canes; Shriveled grapes and stalk; Slow decline; Quick decline; Weak growth; Missing
or incomplete lignification; Pustules along shoots. The links for database are: http://www.phytoplasma.eu/view/vizualizareins.php (for insect

phytoplasma database on SEE-ERA.NET Phytoplasma epidemio network) and
http://www.phytoplasma.eu/view/vizualizarep|.php (for plant phytoplasma database). The aspect of pages of the web database and form for entering data for insect phytoplasma
and plant phytoplasma are presented in fig. 2. Displaying list of plants

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2. Aspect of pages of the web database and form for entering data for insect
phytoplasma and plant phytoplasma. a) insects; b) plant. In order to allow future development of the database a procedure for the description of a
new sequence genotype was agreed with the members of the Phytoplasma epidemio network. This procedure is presented in fig.3. Transmit raw sequence
data to curator

 

Quality assessment of the
data

 

Producing of the verified Fasta
file

 

 

Uploading of the new
sequence genotype
Fig. 3. Procedure for the description of a new sequence genotype agreed with the

members of the Phytoplasma epidemio network. Among phloem-restricted bacteria, phytoplasmas are the most damaging plant pathogens
with important economical impact in perennial as well as corn and legume crop. Phytoplasmas
reside in sieve cells of plant phloem tissue and are transmitted by phloem-feeding hemipteran
phloem feeders like leafhoppers, planthoppers and psyllids (Weintraub and Beanland, 2006), but
also spread through nurseries when infected planting material is propagated. Very few genetic
resistance to phytoplasma infection have been reported and disease control rely on prophylactic
sanitary measures consisting in the destruction of infected crop, the chemical control of insects
and protection of nurseries. Genotyping of the phytoplasma European populations by using updated molecular typing
tools is a solution for a better understanding and monitoring of these important economic plant
diseases. Database are necessary for a proper analysis of the results from the molecular typing
tools, and a dedicated website is an useful tool, both for communicating the importance of
Phytoplasma epidemio network research and co-coordinating the activities of the participants to

Phytoplasma epidemio network. Bibliography

Caldwell, B., Cooper, M, Reid, L.G, Vanderheiden, G., 2008, Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
(WCAG) 2.0, http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/PR-WCAG20-20081103/

Naramore E, Gerner J, Le Scouarnec Y (2005) Beginning PHPS, Apache, and MySQL Web Development
(Programmer to Programmer).,Wiley Publishing, New Jersey

of Entomology 51:91-111. Valade J (2002) PHP & MySQL for Dummies, 3rd edn. Hoboken, Wiley Publishing, New Jersey. Weintraub P.G., Beanland, L., 2006. Insect vectors of phytoplasmas. Annual Review

seerra The EUROPEAN RESEARCH AREA. WWW-SEE-ERA.WET IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE

NETWORK

GLOBAL EPIDEMIOLOGY OF
PHYTOPLASMA DISEASES OF ECONOMIC
IMPORTANCE IN SOUTHEAST EUROPE

oS are

PRACTICAL WORKSHOP
FINAL MEETING
23-27 June 2008

UMR- 1090 Génomique Diversité Pouvoir Pathogéne
INRA & Université Victor Ségalen Bordeaux2

  

name

Dijana Skoric
Ivana Krizanac
Emilija Nakova
Slobodan Krnjajic
Tatiana Simic
Bojan Duduk
Ibolya Ember
Barbara Jarausch
Wolfgang Jarausch
Michael Maixner
Jes Johannesen
Florin Oancea
Asimina Katsiani
Varvara Maliogka
Eleni Karatsiori
Renata Fialova
Pavla Valova
Nicolas Sauvion
Daciana Papura
Sylvie Malembic-Maher
Pascal Salar
Jean-Luc Danet
Anne Fabre
Patricia Carle
Xavier Foissac

LIST OF PARTICIPANTS

Country-partner

CROATIA-DBUZ
CROATIA-IPPAF
FYROMACEDONIA-UGD
SERBIA-IPPE
SERBIA-IPPE
SERBIA-PERI
HUNGARY-PHYTOLAB
GERMANY-RLP.AIPlanta
GERMANY-RLP.AIPlanta
GERMANY-BBA
GERMANY-U.MAINZ
ROMANIA-ICDPP
GREECE-PPL-AUTH
GREECE-PPL-AUTH
GREECE-LPP-UTH
CZECH REP-UP-Olomouc
CZECH REP-UP-Olomouc
FRANCE-INRA.Montpellier
FRANCE-ENITA-INRA Bordeaux
FRANCE-INRA.Bordeaux
FRANCE-INRA.Bordeaux
FRANCE-INRA.Bordeaux
FRANCE-INRA.Bordeaux
FRANCE-INRA.Bordeaux
FRANCE-INRA.Bordeaux

e-mail

dijana@botanic.hr
ivana.krizanac @zzb.hr
emilija.nakova@ugd.edu.mk
titanus_serbia@yahoo.com
titanus_serbia@yahoo.com
duduk@net.yu
ember.ibolya@fitolab.hu
barbara.jarausch@agroscience.rlp.de
wolfgang.jarausch@agroscience.rlp.de
M.Maixner@BBA.de
jesjo@uni-mainz.de
florino@ping.ro
meniakats@yahoo.gr
vmaliogk@agro.auth.gr
elkar81@yahoo.gr
renata.fialova@upol.cz
pavia.valova@upol.cz
sauvion@supagro.inra.fr
dpapura@bordeaux.inra.fr
smalembi@bordeaux.inra.fr
psalar@bordeaux.inra.fr
danet@bordeaux.inra.fr
amfabre@bordeaux.inra.fr
carle@bordeaux.inra.fr
foissac @bordeaux.inra.fr

 

PROGRAMME OF THE WORKSHOP

 

Day! (23-06)

In parallel

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Virology AM 9h30 Welcome adresses & Introduction
meeting room 10h30 Phytoplasma collection — Visits of laboratory, greenhouses and insectarium
PM_| Triplex Real time Group 16SrX
PCR typing Insect Typing
Virology meeting Jean-Luc’s UMR Santé Végétale
room office Bio-mol lab
Day2 (24-06) Tn parallel
AM | Triplex Real time Group 16SrX
9h PCR typing Insect typing
Xavier’s Lab Jean-Luc’s UMR Santé Végétale
office Bio-mol lab
PM FD and related | Stolbur typing | Group 16SrX
14h typing Xavier’s Lab typing Insect typing
Sylvie’s Office & Mollicute Jean-Luc’s UMR Santé Végétale
meeting office Bio-mol lab
room
Day3 (25-06) In parallel
AM FD and related | Stolbur typing | Database and Cixid and psyllids collection
9h typing Xavier’s Lab web site and/or taxonomy
Sylvie’s Office Virology Jean-Luc’s office
Meeting
room
PM FD and related | Stolbur typing | Database and Cixid and psyllids collection
14h typing Xavier’s Lab web site and/or taxonomy
Sylvie’s Office & Mollicute Virology Jean-Luc’s office
meeting Meeting
room room
END OF PRACTICAL SESSIONS DINNER IN BORDEAUX
Day4 (26-06)
Virology and |AM_ | Preparation of practical sessions reports
mollicute Preparation of working group reports
meeting rooms
Virology PM _ | Some scientific presentations on related TOPICS
meeting room Reports for bilateral visits and practical sessions
SEE-ERANET reports
DayS (27-06)
Virology AM _ | European perspectives : Formal propositions
meeting room
Virology PM_ | European perspectives : Open discussion about perspectives & programmes

meeting room

 

 

Conclusions

 

Lunches are at INRA restaurant between 12h and 13h30

 

PRACTICAL SESSIONS PARTICIPANT LIST

Participants
Sylvie Malembic-Maher*
Pascal Salar
Dijana Skoric
Eleni Karatsiori
Katsiani Assimina
Emilija Nakova
Varvara Maliogka
Ibolya Ember
Florin Oancea
Xavier Foissac*
Anne Fabre*

Jes Johannesen
Michael Maixner
Renata Fialova
Barbara Jarausch
Nicolas Sauvion*
Daciana Papura*
Ivana Krizanac
Wolfgang Jarausch
Jean-Luc Danet*
Pavla Valova

PRACT |
REALT-PCR
REALT-PCR
REALT-PCR
REALT-PCR
REALT-PCR
REALT-PCR
REALT-PCR
REALT-PCR
REALT-PCR

PCR stolbur samples
PCR stolbur samples

INSECT
INSECT
INSECT
INSECT
INSECT
GRX
GRX
GRX

*organizing committee

PRACT II
GRV
GRV
GRV
GRV
GRV
GRXII
GRXII
GRXII
DBWEB
DBWEB
GRXII
GRXII
GRXII
GRXII
CIX-PSYL
CIX-PSYL
CIX-PSYL. DBWEB
DBWEB
CIX-PSYL
GRXII

Wednesday 25 June Evening

A Quick tour in Bordeaux Historical Center

18h45 : meeting at the station ‘Porte du Palais’ on tram line A

Dinner in Bordeaux

Restaurant ‘La Petite Gironde’ (cost 30 €)
meeting 20h at square ‘Stalingrad’

The address is 75 Quais de Queries. It is on the right river bank 10-15 minutes walk
on left hand when crossing the bridge ‘pont de pierre’. Line A stop at ‘Stalingrad’ for the restaurant. REPORTS & RELATED TOPICS
Thursday 24 June morning
Virology meeting room

9h00-10h30 Preparation of practical sessions reports :

Produce a 5-10 min report
Realtime-PCR : Virology meeting room Ibolya Ember & Emilija Nakova
Typing of group V phytoplasmas : Sylvie’s office Dijana Skoric & Varvara Maliogka

Typing of group X phytoplasmas : Jean-Luc’s office Jean-Luc Danet & Pavla Valova
Typing of group XII phytoplasmas : Molli. meeting room Anne Fabre & Jes Johannesen
Insect typing and taxonomy : Virology meeting room Barbara Jarausch & Renata Fialova

Preparation of working group reports
Produce a 10 min report

Typing of group V phytoplasmas : Sylvie’s office Sylvie Mal.-Maher & Dijana Skoric
Typing of group X phytoplasmas : Jean-Luc’s office Jean-Luc Danet & Wolfgang Jarausch
Typing of group XII phytoplasmas : Molli. meeting room Michael Maixner & Slobodan Krnjaji¢

Insect typing and taxonomy : Virology meeting room Nicolas Sauvion & Barbara Jarausch
Database and website : Virology meeting room Florin Oancea & Xavier Foissac
10h30-10h45 Coffee break Floor 0

10h45-11h40 Practical sessions reports (max 10 min each)

Triplex Realtime-PCR for grapevine phytoplasma: Ibolya Ember
Typing of group V phytoplasmas : Dijana Skoric

Typing of group X phytoplasmas : Jean-Luc Danet

Typing of group XII phytoplasmas : Anne Fabre

Insect typing and taxonomy : Renata Fialova

11h40- 12h15 Research activities not related to SEE-ERAnet tasks
11h30-11h50 : Slobodan Krnjaji¢é, IPPE- Department of Plant Pests :
current research and prospective

11h50-12h10 : X. Foissac, Epidemiology of marginal chlorosis of strawberry
12h10-12h25 : S. Eveillard, Ca. Liberibacters and citrus HLB, an update

12h30-13h30 Lunch at INRA restaurant

13h40 - 15h30

13h40-14h00 :

14h00-14h20 :

14h20-14h40:

14h40-15h00:

15h00-15h20 :

REPORTS & RELATED TOPICS
Thursday 24 June Afternoon
Virology meeting room

Activities not related and stolbur phytoplasma genetic diversity

Invited speaker : Joel Renaudin, Functional genomics and strategies to study
Spiroplasma citri interactions with its plant host and insect vector

Invited speaker : Nathalie Bouvery, Mollicute-insect hosts interactions : Cellular
model and protein-protein intercations

Invited speaker : Pascal Sirand-Pugnet : Comparative genomics of Mollicutes
Xavier Foissac, Vmp1, a gene encoding a variable putative membrane protein of the

stolbur phytoplasi st variability studies in France, Italy, Czech republic,
Lebanon and Azerbaijan. Jes Johannesen and Michael Maixner, VMP1-RFLP variation in Germany, sequence
variations and geographic distributions in VMP1 and Stol-11

15h20-15h40 : Dijana Skoric, Bilateral visit of Martina Music to UMR-GDPP

15h40-16h00 :

16h00-16h20 :

16h20 - 16h15 :

16h15-18h15 :

Invited speaker : Renata Fialova Typing of phytoplasma isolates from the Czech
Republic

Coffee break Floor 0
Group picture on stairs of IBVM hall

Working group reports (15 minutes + 5 min discussion)

16h15-16h20 Special adress by Alain Blanchard, head of UMR-1090,
Vice President of University of Bordeaux II, IOM chair-elect

16h20-16h40

16h40-17h00

17h00-17h20

17h20- 17h40

Typing of group V phytoplasmas : Sylvie Mal.-Maher
Typing of group X phytoplasmas : Wolfgang Jarausch
Typing of group XII phytoplasmas : Michael Maixner

Insect typing and taxonomy : Nicolas Sauvion

17h40-18h00 Invited speaker : Daciana Papura (UMR Plant Health, INRA-ENITA
Bordeaux) : Scaphoideus titanus population genetics and bases for a phylogeographic study
at the European scale. 9h15 -—

9h45-

EUROPEAN PERSPECTIVES
Friday 25 June
Virology meeting room

9h45 Working group reports (20 minutes + 10 min discussion)

9h15-9h35 Database and website : Florin Oancea

9h35-9h45 Discussion

Formal propositions: bilateral and multilateral collaborations (10 min each)

9h45-9h55 Xavier Foissac :

Epidemiology of Stolbur and Fruit tree phytoplasmas in Eastern Europe and Caspian Area —
ECONET possible partners : France, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Romania, Czech Republic,
Serbia, Croatia. Epidemiology of grapevine Yellows and survey for insect vector — Balaton Hungarian-
French bilateral project. Submitted spring 2008

Incidence and genetic diversity of phytoplasmas and spiroplasmas affecting agriculture in
Northwestern governorates of Egypt : IMHOTEP Bilateral project being currently submitted
with the Faculty of Agriculture, Kafrelsheikh University . 9h40-9h50 Dijana Skoric :

Israeli-Croatian bilateral project on the molecular epidemiology of grapevine phytoplasmas
(under review, participants : Weintraub, Gera, Skoric, Seruga Music, Krizanac, Mikec,
Budinscak). Cogito — France — Croatia : Epidemiology of Stolbur and Fruit tree phytoplasmas

 

9h50-10h00 Sylvie Malembic-Maher

Galileo Italian-French bilateral project : detection and diversity of FD Phytoplasma and
related phytoplasmas of vineyard and wild eco-system in France and Italy. Submitted spring
2008

Variable surface proteins in phytoplasmas of taxonomic group 16SrV. 10h-00-10h10 Florin Oancea
REGPOT 2009 — Use of phytoplasma collections for plant breeding. 10h10-10h20 Other bi-lateral collaborations in place, being submitted or proposed

10h20-10h50 Coffee break Floor 0

10h50-12h00 Proposition of research topic to develop
10h40-10h55 Slobodan Krnjajic

- Current distribution of maize redness disease and impact on corn production
- New strain of Ca. Phytoplasma ulmi — distribution, epidemiology and pathogenicity

11h10-12h10 FP7 -SEE-ERANET+ propositions
- Renewal of SEE-eranet network on epidemiology (complementarity to COST proposal )

- Xavier Foissac (2009) : A specific project on Stolbur : MOLDEPHY : molecular determinants of
phytoplasma pathogenicity and epidemic properties. - Other propositions

12h30-14h00 : Lunch at INRA restaurant

14h00-15h00 : Open discussion regarding to projects and European perpectives

Where are Visio-conference facilities ? Tests to be planned at fall 2008

15h00-15h30 : Projects of publications as outcomes of the SEE-ERANET network

15h30-16h00 : Participants conclusions

Future ERANET milestones

16h00-17h00 End of the meeting & farewell coffee break floor 0

16h30-18h00 Second visit of Phytoplasma collection -greenhouses and insectarium
& Laboratory visit for participants arrived on Wednesday and Thursday.