Epidemiology of European Stone Fruit Yellows in Germany

B. Jarausch', I. Miihlenz', A. Beck’, I. Lampe’, U. Harzer’ and W. Jarausch!

' AlPlanta-IPR, RLP AgroScience, Breitenweg 71, D-67435 Neustadt an der WeinstraBe,
Germany

? DLR Rheinpfalz, Kompetenzzentrum Gartenbau, Breitenweg 71, D-67435 Neustadt an
der WeinstraBe, Germany

Keywords: Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum, apricot, Prunus species, symptom
specificity, Cacopsylla pruni, transmission trials

Abstract

Since 2000, surveys have been conducted in different stone fruit growing
regions in South-western Germany to detect European stone fruit yellows (ESFY)
disease in Germany. Each year visual inspections for typical symptoms of ESFY
such as early budbreak in late winter and chlorotic leafroll in summer have been
done on different Prunus species. Branch samples of all trees with typical symptoms
as well as randomized samples from trees with doubtful symptoms have been taken
in summer and analysed for infection with Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum via
PCR using specific primers ECA1/ECA2. The pathogen could be detected in the
regions Rheinland, Rheinhessen, Vorder- and Siidpfalz and Baden and was present
in all cultivated Prunus species: P. armeniaca, P. persica, P. domestica and P.
amygdalus. For apricots, more than 80% of the samples were infected while peach
and European plum were less affected. Trees of P. armeniaca with typical symptoms
showed up to 90% correlation with the presence of the phytoplasma but also a high
percentage of trees with doubtful symptoms were highly infected. For P. persica,
symptom specification was less pronounced. Almost no infection was found in the
wild Prunus species P. spinosa and P. cerasifera. In contrast, regular psyllid captures
on all different Prunus species gave high populations of Cacopsylla pruni on P.
spinosa and P. cerasifera while only few individuals were collected from cultivated
orchards. The natural infection rate of field collected C. pruni was between 2 and
3%. Transmission trials under controlled conditions showed the capability of C.
pruni to transmit the phytoplasma to healthy test plants and proved that C. pruni is
also a vector of Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum in Germany. INTRODUCTION

All stone fruit species in the southern half of Europe are affected by severe decline
diseases associated with phytoplasmas (Jarausch et al., 1998). The European stone fruit
yellows (ESFY) phytoplasma, termed now Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum
(Seemiiller and Schneider, 2004), is the causal agent of apricot chlorotic leaf roll and
other decline diseases affecting trees of the genus Prunus (Lorenz et al., 1994). Phytoplasmas have also been found on peach and almond (Poggi Pollini et al., 1993;
Lederer and Seemiiller, 1992) and on wild Prunus species (Jarausch et al., 2001; Carraro
et al., 2002). Typical symptoms are yellowing and leaf roll in summer and off-season
growth in winter, dieback and a more or less rapid decline follow. Carraro et al. (1998) identified the psyllid species Cacopsylla pruni as vector for
Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum in Italy and Jarausch et al. (2001) confirmed the
vector capacity of this psyllid species in France. Some years later, C. pruni was also
described as vector for Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum in Spain and Czech Republic
(Lavina et. al., 2004; Fialova et al., 2004). However, after the first detection of Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum in
Germany (Lederer and Seemiiller, 1992) no further data on this disease, the pathogen or
the vector were available for Germany. Since 2000, a new survey was started in order to
obtain more information about the pathogen and the presence of the potential vector
Cacopsylla pruni and finally to estimate the actual spread of this disease in the most

Proc. XX" IS on Fruit Tree Virus Diseases A417
Eds. : K. Caglayan and F. Ertung
Acta Hort. 781, ISHS 2008

important stone fruit growing regions in South-western Germany. MATERIALS AND METHODS

Field Surveys

Since 2000, field observations have been conducted in five different regions in
South-western Germany. In either spring, autumn or in both seasons, certain regions were
surveyed each year: region Mosel, 5 orchards of the Prunus species P. armeniaca
(apricot), P. persica (peach) and P. domestica (European plum); region Rheinhessen, 14
orchards of P. armeniaca and P. persica; region Vorderpfalz, 22 orchards of P.
armeniaca, P. persica and P. amygdalus (almond); region Siidpfalz, 4 orchards of P.
armeniaca and P. persica; and region Ortenau, 10 orchards of P. domestica. Plant
samples have been taken from symptomatic trees and from a certain number of trees
without symptoms. Insect captures using the beat tray method have been done each year from March
until July in the region Rheinhessen in one orchard of P. armeniaca, in the region
Vorderpfalz in one orchard of each P. armeniaca and P. persica and on 2 sites with wild
Prunus species P. cerasifera and P. spinosa (hawthorn) and in the region Siidpfalz in one
orchard of P. armeniaca and P. persica, respectively. All psyllid species were determined
from the mixed insect samples and all specimens of Cacopsylla pruni were separated for
DNA extraction and PCR analysis. Nucleic Acid Extraction and Phytoplasma Detection by PCR

Total DNA from plant material was extracted from leaf petioles or branch phloem. Total DNA from insects was extracted from single individuals of C. pruni. For plant as
well as for insect material a modified CTAB-based protocol as published by Maixner et
al. (1995) was employed. PCR detection was done with Candidatus Phytoplasma
prunorum-specific primers ECA1/ECA2 as published by Jarausch et al. (1998). Transmission Trials

Transmission trials were carried out with overwintering adults of C. pruni from
field captures in closed glass vessels under controlled conditions in the greenhouse (16 h
light at 20°C, 8 h dark at 15°C) using micropropagated GF-8.1 (P. marianna) (Jarausch et
al., 1994) as healthy test plants. Acquisition/transmission procedures were conducted with young adults
(springtime generation) from rearing cages in the greenhouse. The young individuals
were transferred from the healthy rearing plants (GF-8.1) to plants infected with
Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum for acquisition feeding for a variable number of days. After a defined acquisition period, groups of 10 individuals were transferred to healthy
GF-8.1 plants in glass vessels and kept there under controlled conditions until their
natural death. All dead psyllids were collected from the vessels and analysed for infection
with Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum via PCR. The test plants were cultivated in the
greenhouse under insect-proof conditions. The analysis for infection with the
phytoplasma was done after 6, 12 and 18 months by PCR detection. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

From 2000 until 2005, a total of 55 orchards with different Prunus species have
been surveyed in 5 regions in South-western Germany in order to demonstrate the spread
of ESFY disease in the most important stone fruit growing regions in Germany. The study
showed that Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum was present in all regions with various
infection rates in the different orchards and on the different Prunus species. Summarizing
all PCR-positive samples from all regions, 64% of all samples were infected with the
phytoplasma. Table 1 demonstrates the host range for Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum
in Germany. Thus, the most affected species in all investigated regions was P. armeniaca
(apricot) with more than 80% of infected samples, while P. domestica (European plum)

418

and P. persica (peach) were less affected. This observation agrees with reports from other
European countries (Desvignes and Cornaggia, 1982; Carraro et al., 1998; Jarausch et al.,
2000). The analysis of the symptom specificity revealed a high correlation between
typical symptoms in the late winter period (February) such as early bud break (Table 2). For this symptom we found a high correlation with phytoplasma detection by PCR for P.
armeniaca but also for Prunus species that in general show less or no symptoms such as
P. amygdalus, P. domestica or P. cerasifera. The 100% correlation between early bud
break and positive PCR result in the case of P. cerasifera (Table 2) must be considered
cautiously as the sample number is very low. Surprisingly, early bud break was not a
specific symptom for P. persica in Germany. As it is already reported by other authors (Jarausch et al., 2001; Carraro et al.,
2002; Labonne and Lichou, 2004), we can confirm that the wild Prunus species P.
spinosa and P. cerasifera do not show obvious symptoms and the infection rate with
Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum is very low. Regarding summer symptoms (August),
we distinguished between specific symptoms such as chlorotic leaf roll or complete
dieback of the trees and rather unspecific symptoms such as chlorosis without leaf roll or
non-chlorotic leaf roll. For P. persica reddened, longitudinally rolled leaves were
considered as specific symptom. The analysis of the samples due to this classification is
shown in Table 3. The results confirm that P. armeniaca is the most affected Prunus
species with a high correlation for specific symptoms but as well as for non-specific
symptoms. Interestingly, more than 20% of the samples from other, less susceptible
Prunus species with non-specific symptoms were infected with phytoplasma. This
observation signifies that the latent infection in an orchard can be estimated much higher
than it is expressed by visible symptoms. Again, the symptomatology of P. persica
remained unclear and visual symptoms were not reliable enough for monitoring the
disease in peach orchards in Germany. Those latently infected trees represent an enlarged source of inoculum for insect
vectors which acquire the pathogen and transmit it across the orchard. As Cacopsylla
pruni has been identified as vector for Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum in many
European countries (Carraro et al., 1998; Jarausch et al., 2001), we concentrated our
research for the vector in Germany on this psyllid species. C. pruni was found in all
ESFY-infected orchards by the regular psyllid captures during 3 years in 3 different fruit
growing regions in South-western Germany. Wild Prunus species such as P. cerasifera or
P. spinosa were the main host plants for C. pruni in Germany while population densities
on cultivated Prunus species were always lower (data not shown). This result fits with
observations from other European countries (Carraro et al., 2002; Yvon et al., 2004). In
some regions (Rheinhessen, Siidpfalz), we also found important populations on P.
armeniaca depending on the climatic conditions in the year of investigation. From the
PCR analysis of each single C. pruni, we calculated a mean natural infection rate of about
2-3% during all 3 years of investigation. In order to verify that C. pruni is a vector for Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum
in Germany, we conducted transmission trials under controlled conditions in the
greenhouse with field collected overwintering adults and springtime generation adults
from rearing. During 3 years of study we obtained a successful transmission with
overwintering adults of C. pruni on 21% of the test plants (6 plants PCR positive out of
28 plants tested). In contrast, in acquisition/transmission trials with springtime generation
adults, only 1 test plant out of 32 became infected thus corresponding to a transmission
rate of 3%. Carraro et al. (2001) also found better transmission efficiency with
overwintering adults but also obtained better results for the springtime generation. The
transmission trials under our conditions have still to be improved and the specific
transmission parameters have to be characterized in detail; however, from our results we
can conclude that C. pruni is also a vector of Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum in
Germany. 419

CONCLUSIONS

Our survey for several years showed that the ESFY pathogen is widely spread in
all important stone fruit growing regions in South-western Germany. All cultivated stone
fruit species were found infected but P. armeniaca is the most affected species. Infected
trees may die off rapidly from one year to the other and thus cause a complete economic
loss for the grower. The vector Cacopsylla pruni is present in all investigated stone fruit growing
regions with wild Prunus species as preferred host plant. The overwintering generation
appears to be the most efficient vector. At present, no commercial insecticides are
available for an efficient control. We hypothesize that a high percentage of latent infected trees together with an
important number of potential insect vectors that acquire the pathogen from these
inoculum sources is responsible for the high presence of ESFY in Germany. In order to
control a further spread of the disease we propose a complete uprooting of all infected
trees and an efficient vector control focused on the most dangerous developmental stages. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank the W. Dahlbender, G. Hensel and W. Hein for their help in psyllid
collections in Rheinhessen and Dr. Pavel Lauterer for his contribution to psyllid
identification. Literature Cited

Carraro, L., Ferrini., F., Ermacora, P. and Loi, N. 2002. Role of wild Prunus species in
the epidemiology of European stone fruit yellows. Plant Pathol. 51:513-517. Carraro, L., Osler, R., Loi, N., Ermacore, P. and Refatti, E. 1998. Transmission of
European stone fruit phytoplasma by Cacopsylla pruni. J. Plant Pathol. 80:233-239. Carraro, L., Loi, N. and Ermacora, P. 2001. Transmission characteristics of European
stone fruit yellows phytoplasma and its vector Cacopsylla pruni. J. Plant Pathol. 107:695—700. Desvignes, D.J. and Cornaggia, D. 1982. Observations on apricot chlorotic leaf roll
(ACLR): sencitiveness of different Prunus species, detection, spread in plum
orchards. Acta Hort. 130:249-256. Fialova, R., Navratil, M., Valova, P. and Kocourek, F. 2004. Epidemiology of Euroepan
stone fruit yellows phytoplasma in Czech republic. Acta Hort. 657:483-487. Jarausch, W., Eyquard, J.P., Lansac, M., Mohns, M. and Dosba, F. 2000. Susceptibility
and tolerance of new French Prunus domestica cultivars to European stone fruit
yellows phytoplasmas. J. Phytopathol. 148:489-493. Jarausch, W., Jarausch-Wehrheim, B., Danet, J.L., Broquaire, J.M., Dosba, F., Saillard, C.
and Garnier, M. 2001. Detection and identification of European stone fruit yellows
and other phytoplasmas in wild plants in the surroundings of apricot chlorotic leaf
roll-affected orchards in southern France. Eur. J. Plant. Pathol. 107:209-217. Jarausch, W., Lansac, M. and Dosba, F., 1994. Micropropagation for maintenance of
mycoplasma-like organisms in infected Prunus marianna GF 8-1. Acta Hort. 359:169-176. Jarausch, W., Lansac, M., Saillard, C., Broquaire, J.M. and Dosba, F. 1998. PCR assay
for specific detection of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasmas and its use for
epidemiological studies in France. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 104:17—27. Labonne, G. and Lichou, J. 2004. Data on the life cycle of Cacopsylla pruni, Psyllidae,
vector of European stone fruit yellows (ESFY) phytoplasma in France. Acta Hort. 657:465—-467. Lavina, A., Sabaté, M., Garcia-Chapa, M., Battle, A. and Torres, E. 2004. Occurence and
epidemiology of European stone fruit yellows in Spain. Acta Hort. 657:498-494. Lederer, W. and Seemiiller, E. 1992. Demonstration of mycoplasmas in Prunus species in
Germany. J. Phytopathol. 134:89-96. Lorenz, K.-H., Dosba., F., Poggi Pollini, C., Llacer, G. and Seemiiller., E. 1994. 420

Phytoplasma diseases of Prunus species in Europe are caused by genetically similar
organism. Z. Pflkrankh. Pflschutz. 101:567—575. Maixner, M., Ahrens, U. and Seemiiller, E. 1995. Detection of the German grapevine
yellows (Vergilbungskrankheit) MLO in grapevine, alternative hosts and a vector by a
specific PCR procedure. Eur. J. Plant Pathol 101:241-250. Poggi Pollini, C. and Giunchedi., L. 1993. MLOs and suspected MLO diseases in fruit
trees in Emiglia-Romana and Veneto. Phytopathol. Med. 32:65—66. Seemiiller., E. and Schneider, B. 2004. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasmas mali’, ‘Candidatus
Phytoplasma pyri’ and ‘Candidatus Phytoplasmas prunorum’, the causal agents of
apple proliferation, pear decline and European stone fruit yellows, respectively. Int. J.
Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 54:1217—1226. Yvon, M., Labonne, G. and Thébaud, G. 2004. Survival of European stone fruit yellows
phytolplasmas outside fruit crop production areas: a case study in Southwestern
France. Acta Hort. 657:477-481. Tables

Table 1. Host plants for Candidatus Phytoplasmas prunorum in Germany and percentage
of PCR positive samples from different Prunus species. Total nb. tested ities % positive
Cultivated species
P. amygdalus (almond) 12 8 67
P. armeniaca (apricot) 290 242 83
P. cerasifera (Myrobalan) 3 3 100
P. domestica (European plum) 24 16 67
P. persica (peach) 131 28 21
Wild species
P. cerasifera 6 1 17
P. spinosa 5 0 0
Total 471 298

 

Table 2. Correlation between symptoms and PCR results for late winter symptoms. Total early PCR+

 

 

Species bud early bud ==% PCR+
break break

P. amygdalus 10 8 80
P. armeniaca 55 52 95
P. cerasifera 3 3 100
P. domestica 17 14 82
P. persica 35 5 14
Total 120 82

 

421

Table 3. Correlation between symptoms and PCR results for summer symptoms. Chlorotic Apoplexie/ Unspecific

Species leaf roll* die-back symptoms
Total PCR+ Total PCR+ Total PCR+

P. amygdalus nt nt nt nt 2 0
P. armeniaca 100 89 (89%) 31 29(94%) 105 ~—- 70 (67%)
P. domestica 0 0 2 1 (50%) 5 1 (20%)
P. persica 25 5 (20%) 36 9 (25%) 35-9 (26%)
Total 125 94 69 39 147 80

 

*For P. persica reddened, longitudinally rolled leaves were considered as specific symptom. 422