National Agronomic Institute - Algiers
Dissertation with a view to obtaining the Magister degree in Agricultural Sciences
Department of Botany
Specialty: Phytopathology

 

Search for photoplasmic diseases
on fruit rosaceae in the region of
Algerian center

 

Presented by
Mile MATALLAH Hafidha

Director M™©. LOUANCHI M. Lecturer

Co-director M™®, AITOUADA M. Lecturer
Defended on 03/10/2008

In front of the jury composed of: President M. GUEZLANE A. Lecturer Examiners M.
BOUZNAD Z. Professor Mr. Mohamed Tahar SABOU NE. Teacher


Contents

THANKS . .
Summary ..
Abstract. .
pdtue..
ABREVIATIONS LIST . .
INTRODUCTION . .
|- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA ..
1.1- Some data on the cultivation of fruit rosacea in Algeria. .
1.1.1- Area and production. .
1.1.2- Phytosanitary problems. .
1.2 - Phytoplasmas . .
1.2.1-Properties of Phytoplasmas . .
|.2.2- Spread in nature . .
1.3- Taxonomy. .
1.4 -Phytoplasmoses affecting fruit rosacea. .
1.4.1- Apple proliferation, Apple proliferation Phytoplasma . .
1.4.2- Pear dieback or Pear declines phytoplasma. .

|.4.3- European stone fruit yellows or European stone fruit
yellows, (ESFY) ..

1.5- Control methods ..
1.5.1-Sanitary selection, monitoring of starting material: Mother plants . .
|.5.2-Pruning diseased plants . .
1.5.3-Elimination of reservoir plants. .
1.5.4-Monitoring vector activity. .
|.5.5-Thermotherapy . .

1.5.6-Premunition . .

|.5.7-Search for resistant or tolerant varieties by classical selection . .

|. 6-Identification. .
1.6.1- Biological methods. .
1.6.2- Histological methods. .
1.6.3 -Serological methods . .
1.6.4-Molecular methods . .
Il- MATERIALS AND METHODS ..
IL.1- Plant material. .
1I.1.1- Sample collection areas . .
11.1.2- Plant species. .
|I.1.3- Sample preparation and storage . .
I.2- Observation of symptoms ..
11.3 - Molecular diagnosis. .
\1.3.1— DNA extraction Ahrens and Seemiiller (1992) . .

||.3.2- Electrophoresis of DNA on agarose gel in a concentration gradient. .

22
23
23
24
24
24
24
25
25
26
26
26
26
27
30
30
30
30
30
30
31
31
31

11.3.3- The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) . .
IL.4 - Histological diagnosis using DAPI. .
11.4.1-Making the cuts (Plank‘) . .
\1.4.2-Observation under a microscope . .
Ill- RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS..
ll.1- Symptoms observed in the fields ..

Ill.2- Molecular diagnosis . .

\lI.2.1- Electrophoresis of DNA on agarose gel in a concentration gradient. .

II1.2.2- PCR results . .
Ill.3- Observations by light microscopy in fluorescent light. . GENERAL CONCLUSION ..
BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES . .

Annex chemicals . .

32
33
34
34
37
37
4
4
43
43
47
48
54

THANKS

 

THANKS

This document represents the culmination of work that could not have been accomplished without the
contributions from many people. First of all, I would like to express my deepest thanks, gratitude and respect.
deep 4 Ms. Aitouada. M. for all his involvement, his dedication, his presence and above all
his trust without which this work would never have seen the light of day

My thanks and appreciation also go to Mrs. Louanchi.M for her
availability and efforts 4 do everything possible to facilitate the progress of this work. I would also like to thank Mr Guezlane A. for kindly presiding over the examination of this
work. I would also like to express through this document, my thanks to Mr. Belarbi B. for
willing to review this work. It is with great honor that we welcome among our examiners someone whose
reputation preceded: Mr. Sabaou N.E. I have therefore been given the opportunity to express to him all my
thanks for the time he devotes to us. The cooperation and assistance of many institutions was relevant to the outcome
of this work, this is why, I would like to express all my consideration and my gratitude to:

The Technical Institute of Fruit Arboriculture: Mr. Director General, Mr. Saraoui, Mr. Aouan,
Mrs. Guezli, Mr. Haddad. For opening the doors of their orchards to us and guiding us
with great patience throughout our surveys. The Department of Applied Biology 4 Plant Defense University of Udine: Mr.
Fiaro. G and Miss Rekab. D. for providing us with the necessary equipment and for all their help
and valuable advice. The National Institute of Agronomic Research: Ms. Abed.F, M.Amara.B. to have us
allowed and helped to achieve an important stage of the work. The National Institute of Veterinary Medicine: Mr. Djerbal, Mrs. Abba for their warm
welcome within their institute as well as all their help. My thanks also go to:

My father without whom the work could never have started. Yanis for always being on my side. Mr Bouznad. Z. for allowing us access to the molecular biology laboratory. Miss Boureghda for her availability and her support. Miss Benslimane.H for the precious help she gave us. Fatima for her contribution
to the completion of this work. Mrs. Chahed for her valuable advice. All those who have directly or indirectly contributed to the realization of this work. Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

Summary

A study was undertaken with the aim of looking for the presence of phytoplasma diseases that could
touch the fruit rosacea of ​​the country, the latter focused on two essential points. - The first consists of a search for symptoms reminiscent of phytoplasmoses on the
fruit rosacea in the stations of the Technical Institute of fruit arboriculture (ITAF), as well as
only in a few private orchards. -The second point concerns the detection of agents by using microscopic methods
and molecular. Key word: Phytoplasmas; Fruit trees ; Light microscopy; Polymerase chain
Reaction. Abstract

 

Abstract

A study was undertaken in order to search Phytoplasma diseases which can affect fruit trees. This
study consists of two essential points:

- The first point is to look for symptoms reminding of phytoplasma of fruit trees situated in
the Technical Institute of Fruit Trees and some private orchards. - The second point is to find out the causal agent by using microscopic and molecular methods
Key words: Phytoplasma; fruit trees; photonic microscopy; Polymerase Chain Reaction

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

adve
DAM pg giao do gal yc) Lath) putas ll Maw lagal! yal yal op Cad ch ce uly Casi
Ves g coined yin ya Fle ell ath Sle]
PSE AM geal pgs de gsigall Leth pan All tla (ya yal bl yabed pp Sol
AvoLebl ch dell | yay 9B ychal]
Aa pufelst 9 daghug sian iy chlisiug Copal jhe Aa yell
ayda gli latkgd like chee

ABREVIATIONS LIST

 

ABREVIATIONS LIST

ITAF: Technical Institute of Fruit Trees. MADR: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. POV: Plum Dwarf Virus
PNRSY-: Prunus Necrotic Ring Spot Virus
PPV: Plum Pox Virus. ACLSYV: Apple chlorotic leaf spot virus
AlmWB: Almond Witch Broom Phytoplasma. AP: Apple Proliferation. AY: Aster Yellow. ESFY: European Stone Fruit Yellow. PD: Pear Decline. APS: Ammonium Persulfate. CTAB: Cetyl Trimethyl Ammonium Bromide. DAPI: 4'-6 diamidino-2 phenylindole-2 HCl. EDTA:Ethylene Diamintetra Acetic Acid
FAA: Formalin - Aceto-Alcohol. PG: Phytoplasma Grinding

PVP: Polyvinyl Pyrrolidone. SDS: Sodium diethyldithiocarbamate. TBE: Tris Borate-EDTA

TE: Tris EDTA. %: Percent. °: Degrees. °C: Degrees Celsius. ug: Micro gram

ul: Microliters

um: Micrometer. Atm:Atmosphere. Da: Dalton. g: Gram. Kpb: Kilo Base pairs. M: Molar. Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

ml: Milliliters. cm: centimeter. nm: Nano meter. Pb: Base Pairs. V: Volt. UV: Ultra Violet. DNA: Deoxyribonucleic acid

RNA: Ribonucleic acid. rRNA: Ribosomal ribonucleic acid. dNTP: Deoxyribonucleoside Triphosphate. A: Adenine. C: Cytosine. G: Guanine. T: Thymine. ELISA: Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
PAUP: Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parcimony
PCR: Polymerase Chain Reaction. RFLP: Fragment Length Polymorphism Restriction
E.coli: Echirichia coli. MLO: Mycoplasma like Organisms. INTRODUCTION

 

INTRODUCTION

Phytoplasmas are another class of disease-causing pathogens
jaundice type in plants. Due to the similarity of some of their
characteristics with persistent viruses (6failure of mechanical transmission,
possible transmission by vector, grafting and dodder, symptoms of yellowing), they have
for a long time been assimilated to the latter. It was not until 1967 that a team of Japanese researchers (Doi et al., 1967) by
observations by electron microscopy of infected tissues of plants affected by
jaundice, suggests that this type of infection is probably due to pathogens
of the same type as the mycoplasmas encountered in numerous affections in
animals and belonging to the mollicutes family. They gave them the name of

“Mycoplasma-Like Organisms” (MLO). In addition, the presence of abnormal DNA in
the sieve tubes of plants with yellows and the inability of researchers to purify
these pathogenic agents by the classic methods applied to viruses, have oriented them
towards the search for other micro-organisms with phloemic localization (Cousin and Boudon-
Padieu., 2001). Finally, with the advent of molecular biology, the nucleic acid of agents of
jaundice could be compared with that of mycoplasma and wall bacteria, which
revealed a unique character to phytoplasmas and prompted the international committee
taxonomy of mollicutes, in July 1994, to replace the name "Mycoplasma-like
Organisms” by the term “Phytoplasma”. (Lee et a/., 2000). Since then, the list of phytoplasma-related diseases continues to grow, and
the losses caused to increase. Phytoplasmas have become for a decade
the first limiting factor in the production of certain plant species, and appear in
high on the list of quarantine pests. Among the phytoplasmoses, those affecting perennial species are the most a
be feared because the losses generated are of great economic importance. This
economic importance encompasses not only the long-term investments that
ask for these species, but also the cost of uprooting and replacement in the event of
presence of incurable diseases. For example, Almond witches' broom disease (AlmWB), a disease
lethal caused by a phytoplasma, quickly spread in Lebanon, killing a hundred
thousands of trees in 10 years (Abou-Jawdah, et a/., 2003). The lethal yellowing of the palm
caused nearly 83% of losses on coconut trees in Florida, and between 95-99% in Jamaica
(Harrison and Elliott, 2007). The emergence of symptoms reminiscent of this type of condition on
several cultivated species, throughout the world and in the countries around the Mediterranean
(Choueiri et a/., 2002; Myrta et a/., 2003; Carraro et al., 1998) the extent of the damage
caused, have prompted researchers to take an interest in it. In addition, advances in biology
molecular diagnostics have enabled the precise identification of these agents,
their vectors and the development of more adequate control methods to limit their
extension. 11

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

Due to the dangerousness of Phytoplasmoses and the presence of symptoms
similar to those described on fruit rosaceae, in certain plantations in the country,
we thought of undertaking research in this direction. This study, which falls within the overall framework of research on the diseases of
fruit trees, will focus on two points:

The first point concerns the search for symptoms reminiscent of phytoplasmoses
on fruit rosaceae in the stations of the Technical Institute of fruit arboriculture
(ITAF), as well as in some private orchards. The second point concerns the detection of agents by using methods
microscopic and molecular. |- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA

 

l- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA

1.1- Some data on the cultivation of rosaceae
fruit trees in Algeria

1.1.1- Area and production

In Algeria, fruit crops occupy 810,193 ha and are mainly represented
by species with stones and seeds (34.6%), the olive tree (32.5%), the palm tree (19.1%), the
citrus (7.8%), fig (6.1%) (MADR., 2006). The area devoted to species
has pits and seeds is 280,387 hectares, and is distributed among several species,
apricot, medlar, peach, pear and apple. Despite the importance that Algeria gives to fruit tree growing by the surface areas
devoted to it and the various State subsidies, the yields remain
insufficient and unmet demand. This state of affairs is linked to a number of
problems including climatic instability inducing physiological disturbances,
nutritional deficiencies due to unfavorable soil conditions, or even
phytosanitary constraints of various origins. 1.1.2- Phytosanitary problems

 

The diseases encountered on fruit trees are of various origins, and may be due
has different types of organisms; fungi, bacteria, phytoplasmas, viruses, nematodes,
or viroids (Table 1). However, some pathogens can cause more losses
economic on fruit trees than others especially when it comes to diseases for
which no chemical treatment is currently developed, such as those due to
viruses or phytoplasmas and against which the farmer has no choice but
that of tearing and burning. In Algeria, the phytosanitary problems of fruit trees have already been the subject of
several studies, and in particular viral infections. Indeed, Belhadj in 1990 identifies the Prunus
necrotic ringspot virus (PNRSV) on peach and apricot in the center and east of the country. Boussalem (1992), at the level of the central region, highlights peach and apricot
Plum Pox Virus (PPV), Prune Dwarf Virus (PDV), and Apple Chlorotic Leaf Spot Virus
(ACLSV). In 2003, the ITAF team, in a survey carried out across the regions
center, east and west of the country detects PNRSV and PDV on peach and ACLSV on apricot
(Aouan., 2003). 13

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

 

 

 

 

 

aa oa BE |
van people

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

yyy | PREIS [igi Jase er

 

 

 

 

 

    
 

 

baars

 

 

has bone

 

 

 

 

 

 

ah,

 

 

Table 1: The main diseases of
quarantine affecting fruit trees (EPPO, 1999)

1.2 -Phytoplasmas

Phytoplasmas are organisms of the Mollicutes class (from mollis = soft,
flexible) and which have the following main characteristics:

- The absence of a wall (nucleic acid surrounded by a simple membrane). - High sensitivity to variations in osmotic pressure, hence their location
almost exclusively in the sap of sieve tubes whose osmotic pressure reaches 10 a
12 atmospheres (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2001). - The impossibility of cultivating them in vitro which makes their study very difficult. |- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA

 

1.2.1-Properties of Phytoplasmas

 

1.2.1.1-Physico-chemical properties of Phytoplasmas

Phytoplasms are in the form of “pleimorphic” bodies, of morphology
ovoid, filamentous, Y-shaped, or dumbbells, but never spiral, capable of crossing sieves
sieve tubes (Figure 1). Figure 1: Ultrastructure of phytoplasmas. Phytoplasmas
polymorphs. Deformation of some of them crossing
screens from the wall of the screened tube. Left, protein P fibers

(characteristic protein of the phloem) (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2001). This polymorphism is particularly visible on thick sections, reaching a
micron thick, observed by transmission electron microscopy or scanning. Their size varies from 100 nm (by electron microscope) to more than one micron (by scanning)
(Lee et a/., in 2000; De La Rue et a/ ., 2003). Observation of ultra-thin sections of plants infected with phytoplasmas reveals
that the latter are limited by a membrane with three sheets (two dense sheets at the
electrons surrounding a light sheet), inside which we can see DNA filaments
as well as ribosomes of different size from those of the host plant (Cousin and Boudon-
Goddamn., 2001)

The inability to cultivate phytoplasmas "in vitro" makes the study of their properties
physico-chemical difficult. Nevertheless, phytoplasmas are known to be sensitive
osmotic pressure variations which must be between 10 and 12 atmospheres. The absence of a wall in phytoplasmas explains why these micro-organisms are
sensitive to antibiotics of the tetracycline group which act on the synthesis
protein, but resistant to penicillins which act on the bacterial wall. 1.2.1.2- Molecular properties

1.2.1.2.1-L-ribosomal DNA of phytoplasmas

The study of ribosomal DNA (rRNA gene) (16 S fraction and spacer located between the
16S and 23S fractions), shows a character unique to phytoplasmas, the spacer contains a
only isoleucine tRNA, unlike mycoplasmas stricto sensu which do not have it
or to spiroplasma and cell-walled bacteria where tRNA diversity is observed
in two or three different spacers. Moreover, in phytoplasmas, the codon UGA
functions as a stop codon, as in wall bacteria and acholeplasma,
unlike spiroplasma which have a UGA codon corresponding to tryptophan
(Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2001). 15

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

Recently, and thanks to pulsed field electrophoresis techniques, we have been able to
separate the entire chromosome from certain phytoplasmas, dieback agents in
woody species. The size of the chromosome does not exceed 600 kbp, and would be the most
small currently known among organisms that can replicate autonomously. 16S fraction of L-rRNA

It contains 1536 base pairs, it starts from base 271733 and ends at
base 273268. (Bai et a/., 2006)

16S-23S spacer
It includes 239 base pairs (from 273269 to 273510) consisting of:

- A transcribed intergene spacer (ITS1) containing 102 base pairs (from 273269
& 273370) (Bai et a/., 2006).

. - An isoleucine tRNA (Ile tRNA) containing 77 base pairs (from 273371 to 273447)
(Bai et a/., 2006). - A transcribed intergene spacer (ITS2) containing 63 base pairs (from 273448
& 273510) (Bai et a/., 2006). 23S fraction of rRNA

It consists of 2868 base pairs starting from base 273510 to 276378
(Bai et a/., 2006). 1a! (L535pb) ABDI be Pep] 2 PacTpk]
eg] rma pola Se

Figure 2: Representative diagram of sub-
ribosomal unit of phytoplasmas (Bai et al., 2006). 1.2.1.2.2- Evolution

According to Lee et al. (2000), reduction in genomic size and divergence in complexity
genomics could result from a loss of genes during evolution. So in the case
of the agent of jaundice of the queen-daisy (aster yellow, AY), the genome measures 1
200 kbp and consists of two chromosomes with a large number of sequences
in common. During evolution, only one chromosome would have survived in agents
dieback of woody plants (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2001). This loss of gene
concern, according to these same authors, the genes coding for the synthesis of precursors
of certain macromolecules such as cell wall components, acids
amino acids, vitamins and long chain fatty acids. The main characters
distinctions between phytoplasmas, Spiroplasmas, Mycoplasmas and E.coli, are given in the
table 2. -: Absence ,+: Presence

1.2.2- Spread in nature

 

The propagation of phytoplasmas in nature is essentially linked to the presence
insect vectors and vegetative propagation material. — (4224- Transmission by vectors

|- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA

 

Phytoplasmas are carried by biting-sucking insects of the order
Hemiptera (Figure 2) which take sap from the sieve tubes of the bast and in particular the
leafhoppers or /eafhoppers (especially Jassidae), Fulgoromorphs, planthoppers (in
particular Cixiidae) and the Psyllidae (psyllids) (Maixner., 1994; Campbell et a/., 1995; Cousin
and Boudon-Padieu., 2002). Figure 3: Phylogeny of Hemiptera (Campbell et al., 1995). Phytoplasm vectors are marked in green

1.2.2.1.1-The main groups of vectors

The majority of phytoplasma vectors currently identified belong to the group of
Jassids. The role of some of them in the transmission of diseases such as jaundice
has been highlighted for a long time. Thus, for example, from 1952, the multiplication
of the "aster yellows" pathogen was reported both in the plant
and its vector Macrosteles fascifrons (Maramoroschs.., 1952). It is the same for
Scaphoideus titanus (S. littoralis) mentioned as vector of “flavescence dorée” of
the vine in France around the 1960s (Schvester et a/., 1962). Some "cixiids" are vectors of phytoplasma diseases, Hyalesthes obsoletus
Sign, has been described by Suchov et a/. from 1948 as a vector of the "stolbur" of Solanaceae
and is present around the Mediterranean basin, in Germany and Alsace. In 1968 he
has been identified in the South of France as a vector of phytoplasmas of the group “
stolbur" responsible, in the vine of the "black wood" and in the lavender and the lavandin of the

“yellow dieback” (Leclant and Lacok., 1969; Sforza et a/., 1998) . Recently, a
cixiid belonging to the genus Pentastiridius has been described in France on beet, ot it
transmits the "low wealth syndrome" (SBR), a disease associated with a phytoplasma
of the “stolbur” group (Gatineau et a/., 2001)

From 1964, the role of psyllids in the transmission of "pear dieback, pear
decline” (PD), is mentioned and this while the disease was considered to be
of viral origin (Jensen et al., 1964). Cacopsylla pyri has been identified in France (Lemoine
et al .,1991), C. pyricola has been identified in England (Davies.,1992) as vectors
of this disease. In 1998, C. pruni is recognized vector of the "European yellows of the
stone fruits, European stone fruit yellows” (ESFY) (Carraro, et a/., 1998), then in 1999,
and in 2000 the respective roles of C. melanoneura and C. costalis in the transmission of
“apple proliferation” in Italy, are highlighted (Alma, et a/., 1999; Frisinghelli
et al., 2000). 17

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

1.2.2.1.2-Cycle of infection

The general diagram of the cycle of phytoplasmas in the insect and in the plant has been proposed
following observations made by electron microscopy during the transmission
Euscelis lineolatus phytoplasmas to the host plant by Lherminier et a/., (1990). Those
latter reveal that the phytoplasma is transported from the lumen to the cells of the tube
digestive, then from the hemolymph to the salivary glands to reach the saliva from
which they will be transmitted to the plant through the salivary canal and acquired from the plant
through the alimentary canal (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2002)

At the plant level, phytoplasmas are always “intracellular” because they are located at
inside the host cell walls but alternatively "extra cytoplasmic", in
the sap of adult sieve tubes whose cytoplasm has disappeared, and "intra cytoplasmic",
in cells of young undifferentiated sieve tubes. Similarly, in the insect, they are
"extra cytoplasmic" in hemolymph, midgut lumen and saliva and "
intracytoplasmic" in the cells of the digestive tract, salivary glands and other
insect cells (Fletcher ., 1999). (Figures 3 and 4). Gang weeks after acquisition Ha weeks after acquisition

 

Figure 4: Journey of phytoplasmas inside an insect-vector during the
weeks following the acquisition meal (Lefol et al., 1994). C: brain; GS: glands
saliva; CF: filter chamber; MY: mycetoma; MI: mid intestine; TM: tubes
of Malpighi; PI: hindgut; CG: fatty substance. (Phytoplasmas shown in green.) |- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA

 

 

ncn ites

‘Audrexcefules
selenite

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5: Passage of plant phytoplasmas
to the insect and vice versa (Maillet and Gouranton ., 1971). 1.2.2.2- Transmission through contaminated plant material. The plant material, resulting from the vegetative propagation of infected plants, can during
cultural practices, such as cuttings or grafting, propagate phytoplasmas. This
is particularly dangerous in the case of the production of woody plants. the
cuttings of scions from infected stock plants is responsible for the spread of
multiple phytoplasma diseases, in particular that of flavescence dorée of the vine. This propagation is insidious when cuttings are taken from stock plants
contaminated the previous year and who do not yet show symptoms or feet-
mothers of infected tolerant rootstocks (Caudwell et al., 1994). When the grafts are
made from contaminated material (rootstock or graft), the grafted material can
quickly waste away, or look healthy for several seasons before showing signs of
disease symptoms. This last case is particularly dangerous if the material
has been shipped to areas where the disease does not exist, but where the potential vector is
present (Boudon-Padieu et a/., 1999). 1.3- Taxonomy

In 1980, Woese developed new procedures allowing the study of fraction 16
S of the rDNA of phytoplasmas and the determination of their taxonomic position among the
mollicutes .II then suggested that mollicutes derived from an ancestral line of bacteria
a gram + (Woese et al., 1980). By comparing the 16 S fractions of the rDNA of the different members of the mollicutes,
Weisburg indicated that this ancestral bacterium was of the line of Lactobacillus whose
genome contains a small fraction of guanine plus cytosine (G+C). They thus identified
four distinct groups belonging to the mollicutes: Mycoplasma hominis, Mycoplasma
pneumonae, Spiroplasma and Anaeroplasma. The Anaeroplasma group contains two
orders: Anaeroplasmatales and Acholeplasmatales (Weisburg et al., 1982). 19

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

20

In 1989 Lins and Sears compared the genetic sequence of the fraction
16 S of the r DNA of MLO with those of Acholeplasma and animal Mycoplasma,
they noticed that MLOs were closely related to Acholeplasma. This discovery
inspired much further research on MLOs (Lins and Sears, 1989). Confirmation of these results was made a few years later with the study
ribosomal DNA (16 S fraction and 16 S/23S spacer). Indeed, cloning and
r16 S DNA sequencing of classical phytoplasmas and bacteria have shown,
using the cladistic or parsimony method which consists in comparing
whole sequences, base to base and to establish the phylogenetic tree with the PAUP software
(Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parcimony), that phytoplasmas are derived from Bacillus subtilis

(gram bacteria”). The results obtained show that the phytoplasmas are closer,
phylogenetically, Acholeplasma and Anaeroplasma, than mycoplasmas
animals and spiroplasms. All have Bacillus subtilis as a common ancestor. The results obtained from the 16 S/23S spacer clarified the phylogenetic position
phytoplasmas (figure 5). —
yop
Arawrcotaima abactowtasieum

ibe ope
ace

Whore tha padaeeticom

— teen phoumit ine
$$ rewire tomes

Mpoonta oma: you

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gipetntiem aphorcsuts

 

Bubbles sutwtis

 

 

 

Figure 6: Situation of Phytoplasmas among mollicutes and
two classic bacteria (phylogenetic tree established from the
16 S fraction of the ribosomal DNA) (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2001). The classification of phytoplasmas, for its part, has often been changed according to
the evolution of the techniques implemented for the study of the latter. Nevertheless the
last changes were established in 2006 and it is from this year that the name of the
genus Phytoplasma has been definitively revised to give way to the status of Candidatus
(Anonymous., 2006). The place of phytoplasmas in the taxonomy is therefore as follows:
Kingdom: Bacteria. Division: Firmicutes. Class: Mollicutes. Order: Acholeplasmatales. Family: Acholeplasmataceae. Genus: Candidatus phytoplasma. |- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA

 

Species: Candidatus phytoplasma sp. 1.4 -Phytoplasmoses affecting rosacea
fruit trees

Based on the sequencing of the 16S fraction of RNA by RFLP, 15 groups,
characterized by biological, phytopathological and genetic properties associated with them
own, have been established (Table 3). In temperate regions, phytoplasma diseases of fruit trees belong
has two main phylogenetically distinct groups, that of X diseases, and that of
the Apple proliferation (Anonymous., 2006). The first group brings together Castern X-disease and Western X-disease which present
slightly different symptoms but are currently considered two
strains of the same pathogen, Peach X -disease phytoplasma, which is present only in
North America (EPPO/CABI., 1996). The second relates to the agents of apple proliferation, dieback of
pear (Pear decline, PD), European stone fruit yellows (European stone
fruit yellows, ESFY) which affect apricot, peach, almond, European plum and
Japanese (Seemiller., 1999). 1.4.1- Apple proliferation, Apple proliferation Phytoplasma

 

This disease is present in the countries of the European Union, and probably in India
and in South Africa. It affects the apple tree, several varieties of which have shown
very sensitive. The disease is transmitted by grafting from apple tree to apple tree.
(budding and other practices) and by root fusion (Anonymous, 2006). Symptoms exhibited by infected trees are reduced vigour,
appearance of necrotic areas on the trunk and branches, fine roots and whose
the bark turns reddish brown, small and chlorotic or reddish leaves,
abnormally long stipules and premature defoliation (Anonymous., 2006). But the most characteristic symptom is the premature development of
axillary buds during the first two or three years after infection,
which gives the appearance of a witch's broom. When the infection is moderate, the tree can
restore (Anonymous., 2006). These symptoms are not expressed uniformly throughout the tree and are
often located on a part of it, even all the symptoms described do not
not speak at the same time. Depending on weather conditions and weather conditions
culture, a more or less lasting remission of symptoms can be observed. Often has
the latent state the disease is expressed after jolts of vegetation (severe pruning, on grafting)
(Anonymous., 2006). 1.4.2- Pear dieback or Pear declines phytoplasma

 

21

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

This disease is widely distributed throughout Europe, Canada and the United States and

even in Libya, and its main host is the pear tree. It is transmitted by a psyllid, Cacopsylla

pyricola. Depending on the rootstock, the cultural practices and the pressure of psyllid vectors, we

distinct :

Quick decline: the trees die in a few weeks because the phloem, at the
level of the graft site is damaged, and prevents the translocation of nutrients
towards the roots, during the growth period. The fruits in this case do not develop

not and wilt along with the leaves. The slow decline: the leaves are small with rolled edges and a light green tint which

turns red in autumn. The number of flowers is reduced and the fruits remain small. 1.4.3- European yellows of 4a stone fruit or European
stone fruit yellows, (ESFY)

In this set, we find the chlorotic winding of the apricot also called
the chlorotic winding of sin which affects all prunus, and which is for the moment
limited to European countries. However, an as yet unconfirmed report was made in

South Africa (Morvan ., 1977). Apparently spread by a leafhopper, Fieberiella florii, but not yet confirmed,
the symptoms are noticeable throughout the year and consist mainly of a departure from
vegetation during the winter, yellowing and curling of the leaves and

deterioration of structures. 22

|- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Band. Space. Tesrl @roupedes Aster Yalow) Candians prytoplema astais. CoxdWahs prytp hema japonicum. TeSrIl (Fearon Witchesbroom group). CoxdWans prywplham wmmiiola. ‘16SrII (X disease group). Condigams phytop hema prumi. Condidaiw phytoplasma pale. Condiiahs prytopleama castaneae,
Candigaius Proytop hema cocomigerine. T6SrV (Elm ydlow group). CaxdWams pytop hema ziiphi

Canada Paytop hema witis. Condom: pytoplema ulmi. Tesr¥l (Clover proliferation group). Candidaius proytop lematrifo Li. TesrVIl (group of the Ashydlows). Canduans prytoplema fue. Tésr VIM (group of Diffa vatches broom) Canduans prytoplema hie. TeSrIX (pea vathes-brocm pigeon group) CoxdWahs prywplemaphomichm. TosrX Appleprolteration Group). CoxdWians prywplema mall. CoxdWans prywplema pyr. Coxduahs pybphamprmonm. Condiians prytopleama sparta
Candin prytop hema thammi. Cada Prytophema allocasurmae. T6SEXI Group of Riceydlow dwarf). CaedWans phytophama eleven. TesrXil (Stelhur group). Caondians pytoplema solani. Condon: pytoplema wistralinse. l6SrXI (Mexican pectvankle group | Not yet defined. virescence),

TeSrXv Barwuda Wiiteleaf Group). Condiahns phytop lama qmodantis. T6SEIXV Group of Hihiscus Witches-hroom). CoxdWians Phytoplama treilese. Table 3: Main groups of phytoplasma diseases (Anonymous ., 2006). 1.5- Control methods

1.5.1-Sanitary selection, monitoring of starting material: Feet-
mothers

 

Phytoplasmoses are not transmissible by seeds, but the parts
contaminated plants may be responsible for their spread, particularly
in the case of woody species. Sanitary selection is based on the choice of mother plants
healthy both for the production of scions and rootstocks, which is particularly
delicate because feet without symptoms can turn out to be infected if they have been contaminated

23

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

late in the summer preceding graft harvesting, when the disease
is still in incubation. 1.5.2-Pruning diseased plants

 

In some cases, pruning diseased branches as soon as the first symptoms appear
can be recommended. Thus, vines affected by black wood disease, including
shoots showing symptoms have been removed, can be maintained without
symptoms for several years. This method only presents a risk in the
case where the host plant is a preferential host of the vector (case of the flavescence dorée of the
vine whose vector Scaphoides titanus has no other hosts)(Boudon-Padieu .,1999)

In the case of the "poplar witch's broom", the pruning of the branches located
the base of the tree has been advised, since the young larvae of the insect-vector Rhytidodus
decimusquartus migrate from this zone to the upper parts of the tree in
spring. 1.5.3-Elimination of reservoir host plants

 

Removal of reservoir host plants is recommended and, in the case of
golden flavescence” of the vine, the destruction of diseased or abandoned vines, only
hosts and reservoirs of the disease, is required. Regarding the "black wood" of the vine and the "yellow withering of lavender
and lavandin" ("stolbur" group), the elimination of weeds by cleaning the
fallow land and paths is strongly recommended, bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis) and
labiatae being the main reservoirs of the disease. (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2002). 1.5.4-Monitoring vector activity

 

In the case of a disease whose vector is dependent only on the cultivated species and when the
number of generations per year is low, treatments can be used
chemicals. Such is the case, for example, of the "golden flavescence", Scaphoideus titanus is
subservient to the vine and has only one generation per year. Treatment warnings
have been implemented in France. The first, one month after the start of hatching, is intended
to eliminate all the insects, because they are likely to be infectious one month after their
first meal taken on a diseased vine. One or two additional treatments are applied
a month apart. These treatments are currently the only method of combating
effective against disease. The fight is much more random in the case of the "black wood" of the vine transmitted by
Hyalesthes obsoletus, a polyphagous cixiid, which feeds only very occasionally
on the vine. In this case, plowing the soil reduces the larvae present on the
roots by exposing them to the cold. 1.5.5-Thermotherapy

A method of curing vines by immersing dormant canes or plants
grafted, for 45 min in hot water at 50°C has proven to be effective, safe and
has been recommended by the International Board for Plant Genetic Resource (FAO/IBPGR) for

24

|- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA

 

safe movement of vine germplasm (Boudon-Padieu., 1999). A
phytoplasma and virus elimination program has been undertaken in New Zealand
to regenerate pear varieties and rootstocks introduced from other continents
(Wood., 1997). Heat therapy has been shown to be effective in India in combating "
narrow shoots" (grassy shoot) of sugar cane, phytoplasmosis which constitutes one
of the most dangerous diseases for this species, with yield losses
up to 100% (Viswanathan et a/., 1999 ). Steam in aerated, aerated environment
steam therapy (AST), at 50°C for one hour, is not enough to reduce the disease
significantly, while the treatment at 52°C, for the same duration, eliminates
completely the phytoplasmas, without alteration of the buds. 1.5.6-Premunition

 

Cross-protection, the effectiveness of which has been reported in the case of the "proliferation of
apple tree" (Kunze., 1976) and "chlorotic rolling up of the apricot tree" (Castelain et al.
al., 1997), could be extended to other phytoplasmas responsible for diseases on
fruit trees and against which there is currently no effective control method. 1.5.7-Search for resistant or tolerant varieties by selection
classic

 

Different types of pathogen resistance, different cultivar susceptibility,
resistance to the insect vector or variation in a plant's appetite for vectors,
are used in the fight against phytoplasmosis. Carraro (1998) showed that unlike Japanese varieties, varieties
European plum trees are very tolerant to the phytoplasma responsible for
“leptonecrosis, plum leptonecrosis” (PLN), considered to be very close to that of “
apricot chlorotic leaf roll (ACLR).
diversity in the intensity of the disease in the different Prunus (P. salicina, P. armeniaca,
P. cerasifera and P. domestica), all heavily infected, could be observed (Carraro et al.,
1998). In the United States and China, a study conducted on Prunus virginiana L. affected by
"disease X, Western X" and calling on increasingly diagnostic methods
more sensitive, showed that the absence of symptoms, correlated with a low content of
phytoplasmas, could be used in breeding programs in the absence of
true resistance (Guo et a/., 1998). In other cases, and in particular to fight against “Pear decline” (PD) and
the “apple proliferation”, it is possible to use rootstocks of lesser
sensitivity (Seemiller et a/., 1998). Unfortunately in the case of the vine, some carriers
tolerant grafts contribute to disease transmission and hinder the recovery of
scions (Caudwell et a/., 1994). The differences in "attraction" of the insect-vector towards the plant can also be
causing variations in sensitivity. Boudon-Padieu in 1999, indicates that the grape variety "
Chardonnay” is particularly attractive to Hyalesthes obsoletus vector of the disease
of the "black wood" of the vine. Thus the search for less attractive grape varieties for the insect
could be an effective control method. 25

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

In any case, it is advisable to increase genetic diversity by intensifying
the search for new clones to avoid the problems associated with monoculture
which has greatly contributed to the epidemic nature of certain diseases such as
dieback of Populus migra cv ltalica and yellow dieback of lavandin. Breeding efforts should therefore take into consideration the resistance or
tolerance to phytoplasma, repulsion to its vectors, the quality of the species produced and
good adaptation to the environment (Cousin and Moreau ., 1991). None 6-Identification

As with all other pathogens, diagnosis of a phytoplasma disease
can be done using several complementary techniques, biological methods
(symptomatology on host and transmission of the agent by grafting, dodder or vectors),
histological methods, in particular those using electron microscopy or
photonics in the presence of fluorochromes (DAPI), serological methods (ELISA) or
still molecular methods (PCR). 1.6.1- Biological methods

 

These methods consist in transmitting the phytoplasma either by grafting a variety to be tested
on another sensitive who has the ability to easily exteriorize the symptoms sought
(indexing) or by making a dodder bridge between a studied plant and a host plant
from another family (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2001; Pracros., 2000). 1.6.2- Histological methods

 

These methods can be either not specific to the phytoplasma, thus highlighting
phenomena occurring at the level of the plant in the presence of the pathogen (example:
autofluorescence, callosis detection.) or specific to the phytoplasma and
particularly to its DNA and then consist of a specific staining of the DNA in
using certain reagents such as Feulgen's reagent in normal light or fluorochromes
in fluorescent light. The fluorescence in DAPI (4'-6 diamidino-2 phenylindole-2 HCl) is
also used in the diagnosis of phytoplasmas, this reagent has the ability to detect acids
nuclei rich in A and T nucleotides after observation with ultraviolet rays (Cousin
and Boudon-Padieu. , 2001). 1.6.3 -Serological methods

 

26

These methods allow us to use the relationships that exist between an antigen and its
specific antibody, the most used of which for the detection of phytoplasmas are
following:

Immunofluorescence

It uses fluorescence in blue light (450 nm) of fluorescein isothiocyanate
attached to an antibody, to reveal the presence of homologous antigens present in the
infected tissues (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2001). |- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA

 

Immunolabelling

In this case, the antiserum is coupled with colloidal gold which allows identification by
electron microscopy or is amplified with silver for microscopy tracking
photonics (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2001). Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)

The ELISA test is suitable for serial analyzes of phytoplasmas, it allows to
differentiate between diseases that have the same symptoms and can be used on
veins, petioles, young twigs and even insect vectors. This test is not
not sensitive enough on the tissues of the infected rootstocks which are generally poor
into detectable phytoplasmas (Anonymous., 2002). 1.6.4-Molecular methods

 

Molecular methods, due to the low concentration and uneven distribution of
phytoplasmas in the host, are those that are best suited to this scenario. Very
sensitive and extremely reliable, they are essential for routine detection,
especially in cases of carrier tolerant plants. Several techniques are
usable, it all depends on the purpose sought. 1.6.4.1- Genomic localization of oligonucleotides (figure 7)

The different oligonucleotides used for the detection of phytoplasmas are localized
at the level of the 16 S fraction, the non-transcribed intergene space (IS) and a portion of the
fraction 23S these can be divided into two groups:

Universal primers

They make it possible to detect the presence or absence of the phytoplasma at the level of the
plant. According to the genomic localization of the latter we can distinguish:

Primers that can amplify the entire 16S fraction, the intergene space
(IS) and a portion of the 23S fraction such as primers NPA2F/R (1667bp), PA2F/R
(1669bp) (Heinrich et a/., 2001), P1/Tint (1627bp) (Smart et a/., 1996) and the primers
P1/P7 which amplify 1784 bp and which are the most used (Schneider et a/., 1995). Primers that can only amplify the 16S fraction including: R16m/F2/mR1 (1416bp)
(Gundersen and Lee., 1996). R16F1/RO (1300bp), R16F2n/R2 (1239bp) described by
Lee's team in 1995, fU5/U3 (876bp) (Lorenz et a/., 1995) and finally M1/2 (509bp)
(Gibb et a/., 1995). Specific primers

These primers are specific to non-conserved sequences of the 16S fraction of
ribosomal DNA among them two pairs specific to fruit trees have been described. The first being the fo1/ro1 pair described by Lorenz et a/ in 1995 which amplifies 1057 bp, the
second, being R16(x) F1/R1 which amplifies 1085 bp (Lee et a/., 1995). 27

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

 

16s
“ >
1 PLIPT[L7o4pb] ihneiter and a1 1995)

48 Bl6inF2 mF [Ll6pb] (Gundersen and Lee, 1996) 1464
us FIGFLEO 1300pb] (Lee et al, 1995)
1430
>
137 PLGF2n/F2 [1239] (Lee et al, 1995) 1376
S$
356 Fus/U3 [B76pb] (Lorenzec af,199S) 1232

 

74 ALI? [509pb] (Gibb et af, 1995) 1233
* *
1 PLTint (1627bp] (mare et a, 1996)
W627 >
G1 01! O[L1057pb] Lorenz ee al.1995) us

rr
192 Fl6(x FLL [109Spb] Leet al1995) 1277

a2 PANE. [110 7pb] Henrich et al 2000)
1669

1182
1667
AWPLUEE [49>pbJ J Uitemrich et as 2001)

Figure 7: Position of oligonucleotides on the ribosomal unit of the phytoplasma. 1.6.4.2- Diagnosis

The hybridization of DNA with oligonucleotide probes makes it possible, on the one hand, to establish the
different genetic groups of phytoplasmas (the dot blot) and on the other hand to determine
the close relationships between members of groups and subgroups (the Southern blot)
(Lee et a/., 1992). Amplification of specific DNA sequences by PCR has proven to be the method
of choice for the diagnosis of phytoplasmas (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., 2001). PCR
can be carried out from the infected plant and even from insect vectors, which
allows the detection of phytoplasmas on the one hand and the establishment of a correlation between
the transmissibility of the disease and its vector on the other hand (Tanne et a/., 2001). Several types of PCR protocols are possible (Cousin and Boudon-Padieu.,
2001). 28

|- BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA

 

PCR using universal primers obtained from sequences
conserved phytoplasmas, makes it possible to detect a broad spectrum of
phytoplasmoses, both in the plant and in the insect vector. Primers P1-P7
which amplify the whole of the r16 S DNA and the 16 S/23S spacer are frequently
used. PCR 4a using specific primers chosen from non-conserved sequences
ribosomal DNA (r16 S DNA, 16 S/23S spacer) or in sequences
obtained from randomly cloned DNA fragments. Stacked PCR or nested PCR, which uses two amplification reactions
successive, and which aims to increase the sensitivity of the diagnosis when
detection is particularly difficult due to the low concentration of
phytoplasmas or the presence of inhibitors in the extracts subjected to PCR. PCR immunocapture avoids lengthy DNA extraction processes from
phytoplasmas, when specific antiserum for the disease under study is available. This method, applicable both to the plant and to the insect, has a specificity
high, high sensitivity and quick to execute (Kesumawati et a/., 2006). Quantitative PCR consists in comparing, on the same electrophoresis gel,
the intensity of the bands of two DNA fragments, amplified by the same primers,
but of different size, therefore easily identifiable on the gel. One of them (target DNA
under study) competes with the second (competitor DNA of concentration
known) for the use of primers. This very sensitive method can be
applied to all phytoplasmas, provided a competitor is chosen
appropriate. It makes it possible to follow the fluctuations of the quantity of phytoplasmas
seasons and in the different organs of the plant, which is very useful in
particularly in the case of woody species. 29

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

MATERIAL AND METHODS

ll.1- Plant material

Il.1.1- Sample collection areas

Surveys were made at the level of the experimental stations of the technical institute
fruit trees (ITAF) in the following regions: Tessala el merdja, Boufarik, Ben
Itamou, Ben chikao (Médéa) and Ouamri (between Médéa and Chlef) and this from the month of
July 2006 until October 2006. 11.1.2- Plant species

 

The samples are taken from different species (medlar, peach, plum, apricot,
apple and pear) showing symptoms reminiscent of those caused by phytoplasmas. The
different species and varieties as well as externalized symptoms are reported in the
table 5. Controls (showing no symptoms) are collected from a farm
private. 11.1.3- Sample preparation and storage

 

The leaf samples taken from the different plots are washed with water
tap, then dried between two layers of paper towel. The leaves intended for
subsequent use are weighed, placed in plastic bags and then
stored in a freezer set at -20°C. Note that on the large leaves alone
the ribs are cut out and retained. II.2- Observation of symptoms

30

Field diagnosis is made on the basis of the symptoms described in the literature. In fact, the yellowing of the leaves and the decline of certain structures, on
apricot tree, are symptoms that have been observed during infections linked to the presence
of European Stone Fruit Yellows phytoplasma (ESAFY) (Myrta et a/., 2003, Ramel et a/.,
2003). Regarding peach, plum and medlar, these species are susceptible to memes.
phytoplasmas, (peach rosette phytoplasma, peach X disease phytoplasma, peach yellows
phytoplasma and apricot chlorotic leafroll phytoplasma) (Anonymous., 2003a). In the case of apple, host of the apple proliferation phytoplasma or Apple
Proliferation, which according to 2000) and Anonymous (2001a), is expressed by sparse foliage and
yellowing appearance, reduced leaf size and rosette development. These symptoms are sometimes accompanied by a reddish discoloration of the leaves of

Il- MATERIALS AND METHODS

 

tips of the shoots as well as fine and abundant root hairs and a reduction or
inhibition of fruiting. As for the pear tree, the Pear Decline disease described on pear trees is expressed by a
reddening of the leaves which, depending on the severity (slow or rapid dieback), leads to
following years either leaf wilting and dieback or curling
with dwarfing of the leaves and a slower weakening of the tree (Anonymous., 2001b). Samples are taken from as many individuals as possible with
symptoms reminiscent of those induced by phytoplasmas (Table 5). Il.3 — Molecular diagnostics

II.3.1- DNA extraction Ahrens and Seemiiller (1992)

Nucleic acids are extracted from the main veins of the samples of
leaves stored in the freezer at -20°C. The method used for DNA extraction
is that described by Ahrens and Seemiiller in 1992. In this method 1.5 g of the sample to be analyzed are incubated for
10 minutes in 8 ml of PGB buffer, inside a mortar kept cold. After
grinding, 5 ml of the same buffer are added and the mixture is centrifuged for 5 minutes
at 2500g. The supernatant is recovered then subjected to a new centrifugation of 25
minutes at 18000 g. The pellet taken up in 1 ml of CTAB is incubated in a water bath
for 1 hour at 60° C. (bain Marie); the DNAs are then extracted from the aqueous phase after
addition of a chloroform-isomyalcohol mixture (24v/1v) and an equal volume of isopropanol
cold, followed by incubation for 1 hour in the cold (on ice), the mixture is then
centrifuged at 12000g for 10 minutes. The recovered pellet is dissolved in 400 uI of buffer
TE supplemented with 40ul of 3M sodium acetate, and 0.9 ml of 95° ethanol. After a
further incubation for 12 to 24 hours at -20°C, the supernatant is removed and the pellet is
washed with 80° ethanol, then dissolved in 100 uI of sterile water. The DNAs are then
freeze-dried and stored in this form until use. The complete composition of the buffers used for this step is given in the appendix. I1.3.2- Electrophoresis of DNA on agarose gel in gradient of
concentration

 

Not having DNA markers, we carried out a series of electrophoresis on
agarose gels at different concentration gradients (from 1% to 2.5%.) in a way to
determine the lower and upper limits of the size of the purified fragments. We used the method of Querci and a/. (2004) which makes it possible to determine the size
DNA fragments retained depending on the concentration of the agarose gel. Gels
are subjected to a migration of 2 hours at 100V, i.e. for a migration distance of 10 cm
for all gels. After migration, the gels are stained with ethidium bromide for 30
minutes, the bands are observed under UV. 31

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

II.3.3- The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)

 

32

The portion of the genes coding for the ribosomal RNAs was obtained using
synthetic nucleotide primers these were provided to us by Professor
FERRAO from the University of Udine (figure 6). The synthesis of the double-stranded DNA is carried out
in nested PCR amplification “Nested PCR” described by Querci et a/. (2004). The
Nested PCR is more accurate than a single PCR as it uses two types
primers (Table 4). Its principle is the same as a classic PCR except that it is done
in two steps:

At first, the P1 and P7 primers allowed the amplification of DNA
corresponding to the 5' end of the 16S fraction, the 16S-23S spacer and a small portion
of 10 base pairs of the 23S fraction, i.e. 1784 base pairs in all. Products
of this

first amplification are amplified a second time by the primers fU5 and RU3 which
make it possible to amplify the DNA corresponding to 876 base pairs of the 16S fraction. This manipulation takes place entirely in a thermocycler (Mj.Reasearch.INC). During the first amplification, the purified DNAs are first denatured at 94°C
for 2 minutes. They are then subjected to a first amplification cycle comprising
denaturation (1 minute at 94°C), hybridization with P1 P7 primers (1 minute at
55°C) then an elongation (2 minutes at 72°C). This cycle, which is repeated 40 times, is followed by a
final elongation of 10 minutes at 72°C. In the second amplification, these same DNAs are denatured at 95°C for 2
minutes, then subjected to a second cycle of amplification with the primers fU5/RU3, i.e.
secondary denaturation (30 seconds at 94°C), hybridization by the primers (30
seconds at 55°C) followed by elongation (1 minute 30 seconds at 72°C). These three steps
are repeated 38 times, before a final elongation of 10 minutes at 72°C. The products amplified by nested PCR are analyzed by electrophoresis in a
agarose gel (1.5% in 0.5* TBE buffer) then stained with ethidium bromide. The amplified DNA fragments are finally visualized under ultraviolet light thanks to a
transilluminator (Konrad Benda Wiesloch). The appearance of a band at the level of the gel reveals
that the sample is infected, but its absence indicates that the individual is healthy. Il- MATERIALS AND METHODS

 

  

SPL rar
ISNA ering aimed by creeey bitdura ,

altel

ab Ch
FOTHTAN crebltiongs airaet estarroas bari. ariel

 

Aeontan

Figure 8: Descriptive diagram of Nested PCR (Bai et al., 2006)

she? Plogel wecanhisect

lat ABMI a]
IT's Im2

 

Lug gh von

lat ABMI a]

mms peg ql vs 0259
Eee

Figure 9: Position of the oligonucleotides on the unit
ribosomal content of the phytoplasma during nested PCR. Il.4 - Histological diagnosis using DAPI

In ultraviolet light (380 nm), fluorescence with DAPI (4'-6 diamidino-2 phenylindole-2
HCl) preferentially detects DNA molecules rich in A and T nucleotides, which
is the case of phytoplasmas. This method is not specific to phytoplasmas but
represents a means of preliminary diagnosis. 33

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

11.4.1-Making the cuts (Plate 1)

 

Fixing and inclusion (Plate 2)

The method used is that used by Sahraoui in 1989. In this method,
the main ribs taken from samples that are still fresh, are cut
in fragments 1 cm long. These fragments are fixed for 24 hours and more
in a mixture of formalin, acetic acid and alcohol (FAA), then dehydrated
by successive passages in alcohol baths of increasing degree (70-100°). After
progressive substitution of alcohol by toluene (miscible with paraffin), then of toluene by
paraffin, the samples are then definitively mounted in molds containing
liquid paraffin (58°C) and pure (filtered). After complete cooling of the paraffin
in ambient air, the paraffin blocks are removed from the mold, then prepared for sectioning
microtome. The complete composition of buffers used for diagnostic microscopy
fluorescence photonics is given in the appendix. Making paraffin sections

The blocks obtained after final inclusion are mounted in the block holder of the
microtome (LKB), the knife of the latter is adjusted so as to draw up a cutting face
clean (thick cuts). The thickness of the ribbon will then be definitively fixed at 8 microns
before making serial histological sections. Section bonding and deparaffinization

The paraffin ribbons carrying the samples are collected on clean slides
flooded with 0.1% albumin water. The slides are then placed on a plate
heater set at 30°C to allow the stretching of the cuts once the excess water
evaporated. They are then placed in an oven set at 37°C for 24 hours to ensure
good adhesion of the cuts to them. After dewaxing by progressive passage
first in toluene then in alcohol baths of decreasing degree (100-70°), the
sections are rehydrated in distilled water then stained using the Savoure technique
(1984). Staining with HOECHST reagent and observation

The staining stock solution is prepared directly from Hoechst's reagent
33 258 dissolved in distilled water (appendix) then stored at 4°C. At time
use, the solution is diluted in cacodylate buffer (0.1M, pH 7.2) to obtain
with a final concentration of 0.5 to 1 µg/ml. The rehydrated sections are immersed for 20 minutes in the staining solution
then rinsed in two successive baths of cacodylate buffer (0.1M) for 2 to 3 minutes
each. They are then mounted, between slide and coverslip, in a solution consisting of
of a mixture of 50% cacodylate buffer (0.2M) and 50% glycerine then sealed with
nail polish. 11.4.2-Observation under a microscope

 

The sections are observed in blue ultraviolet light using a microscope.
photonics (Hund Wilover Swizlar), equipped with a mercury lamp and filters (1 filter
exciter: 0.3; 1 stop filter: G 247; 1 blue filter: 510). 34

Il- MATERIALS AND METHODS

 

rcoammoownp

 

Plate 1: Steps followed for preparation
histology for light microscopy. : Fixation,

: Dehydration and substitution,

: Gradual inclusion. : Definitive inclusion and molding,

: Realization of sections in paraffin. : Bonding,

: deparaffinization of sections,

: Coloring. 35

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

For 24 hours ouphe dare du Formalin-acety-aloool. Destyiration

 

-Alool 70°: 30 minutes. -Aloool 90°: 30 minutes. -Alool 95°: 45 minutes. -Aloool 100°: 3 saccessive baits of 3) mirutes dom. Q

Substitution
-1 Valcool 100° +1 Vtohhine: 45 mirotes. - Toha&te pur: 3 excess bakes of 30 minutes each. Q

Progressive Inchwian
-1AV Tohine+ ¥, Vparatin ligaide (58°C) 30 minutes. - Pure liquid paraffin (58°C): Successive baths respectively: 1h30, Thet

motes. Final indhwicn and molding

- Deposit of a thin layer of pure liquid paraffin (58°C) at the bottom of the mould. - Despite the request for the paraffin sample. - Deposit of a thick layer of liquid paraffin (58°C jdare the mouks or
Yechatilbn. - Cooling at ambient temperature. - Demolding of bhcs. Plate 2: Technique for fixing and embedding in paraffin
for observation under a light microscope in fluorescent light. 36

Ill- RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

 

lll- RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

III.1- Symptoms observed in the fields

The most common symptoms encountered on fruit trees during surveys
are reported in Table 5. - On the sin: we essentially noted a reddening or a blackening
leaves accompanied by necrosis (Plate 3: Figures A and B). On some trees
we observed a development of the leaves in rosettes (Plate 3, figure C). What
regardless of the region, individuals carrying this type of symptom end up wasting away
totally. - On apricot, the most striking symptom is the yellowing of the leaves
accompanied by a decline of certain frameworks (Plate 3, figure D). - Medlar shows necrosis of leaves, twigs and inflorescences
(Plate 3, Figure E). - On the plum tree we observed mosaics and a reddening or browning
and rolling of the leaves, some branches die back (Plate 3, figures F and G). - The apple trees show a yellowing which evolves into a necrosis causing
dieback of the tree and development of the leaves in a rosette. some leaves
show reddening (Plate 4, figures H, |, J and K). - The pear tree shows yellowing and drying of the leaves (necrotic tint)
(Plate 4, figure L). To sum up, it seems that the symptoms encountered, whatever the species
are mostly represented by yellowing or reddening of the foliage, a
rosette development, leaf rolling and finally necroses and
dieback of part or all of the tree. The yellowing of the leaves and the dieback of certain structures, on
apricot tree, are symptoms that could be attributed to the European Stone Fruit
Yellows phytoplasma (ESAFY). Concerning peach, plum and medlar, the symptoms encountered during
prospecting, yellowing or reddening, necrosis and rolling of the leaves and
finally, the decline of trees could be attributed to one or other of these
phytoplasmas

previously described (peach rosette phytoplasma, peach X disease phytoplasma,
peach yellows phytoplasma and apricot chlorotic leafroll phytoplasma) which, except
for peach X disease phytoplasma, have been encountered in several European countries and
particularly in France, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, Bulgaria (EPPO, 1998) and even
in Lebanon (Abu Jawdah et a/., 2003). In the case of apple, host of the apple proliferation phytoplasma or Apple
Proliferation, among all the symptoms described by the authors, we have in our
case noted rosette development, yellowing and sometimes reddening of the

37

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

38

foliage as well as dieback. These symptoms could be attributed to the disease
of the proliferation of the apple tree, especially since, according to these same authors, the symptoms
are not expressed uniformly throughout the whole tree and are often localized on one
part of it. Depending on climatic conditions and growing conditions, we can
observe a remission of more or less lasting and non-lasting symptoms. Moreover,
this disease is often in a latent state and only expresses itself after jolts of vegetation. As for the pear tree, on the plots visited, the trees mainly showed
yellowing and drying of the foliage, which suggests the presence of pear
decline. According to the descriptions given by the authors (NAPPO., 2007, Anonyme., 2001b;
EPPO., 1998), the symptoms observed and described above could be attributed to
phytoplasmas. The expression of the disease can vary according to the climatic conditions,
the management method, rootstocks and varieties, but also according to the
virulence of the phytoplasma. Thus in the case of the witch broom of Populus nigra cv Italica
(group AY, subgroup B) Berges and a/., (1997), then Cousin, and a/., (1998), showed that
the virulence of the pathogen was stronger in France than in Germany and explain that this
difference was related to a slight sequence polymorphism detected in RFLP profiles or in
heteroduplex electrophoretic mobility analysis (Heteroduplex Mobility Analysis),
HMA. Ill- RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

 

 

‘Epaimartal station of Bou rik (TAN Ie S1AT/2006
Bahandilian, Syngas

ice das hulls dee ne,

 

 

 

 

Wea. Poaniar vari ma, ~Developpenart aurosete
-Beginning of janissemert of fails,

Pouniarwaial Dora. “Dereloppanat arose

 

- Debate of judging of the leaves,
—Tanisation of Inperiphinia of the fealles,
-Reddening of the nostrils,
Péchercordial variety. - Phe rust color,
-Rosette developer. -Desperation of Vesbre

[experimental quotation of Besitumele 01/08/2006,

|Eantandian Prmatine

Ponmiervarie Golden | Necrosis of feales

- Withering away of the other

| fading of queues

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

|ooriconir wait Zine. downpour of cea rene,
Experimental station of Mélea (Ben dikac) on 16/09/06. |Bcanditen Prmatine:

Prniaveiat bah. Tinian Gulab
Apple variety Surthzinson, Development enroeete dae ules

 

[Fexmneyaince situde das Le ilage de Ben Sebi Ben Gk, Melza)e 2409/2006,

 

 

 

HBdanaen, Pimatine
cama rah Golden dare from npg des frales
Dipeisenert of Tate
Prana dirty rogue date

Linbe flushing
[Fexmne oq aimnendale de Ouararile 3009/2006

 

 

 

 

 

 

|Ehantten Pratine
Pouniervaiae Golda Wecrove des fas
Dipirssemat of whe
Nowcsvenat desea. eer arid Saree aero files
Dipéissmar de ete. [Pechervaried Top Red] Rougissenee du lie,
Dipirssemat of whe
Power varied Dr aes Gayet. Hold on to the

 

 

 

 

Table 5: Surveys carried out at orchard level. 39

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

 

Plate 3: Symptoms observed in the fields on
peach (A, B, C), medlar (D), apricot (E) and plum (F and G). 40

Ill- RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

 

 

Plate 4: Field symptoms on apple (H, I, J, K) and pear (L). Ill.2- Molecular diagnosis

Ill.2.1- Electrophoresis of DNA on agarose gel in gradient of
concentration

Observation of the gel under ultraviolet light, after staining with ethidium bromide,
reveals the presence of bands corresponding to DNA fragments of different sizes. 41

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

42

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Agarose percentage. Presence of bars. Fragment size (bp. aah Hon. 250
Yes. 50-10000,
aK Hon. 50-100. Yes. 50-10000,
15% Hon. 40-200,
Yes. 50-10000,
125%, Hon. 50-300. Yes. 50-10000,
l% Hon. 50-500. Yes. 50-10000,

 

Table 6: Determination of fragment size
of phytoplasma DNA (Querci et al., 2004)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Agarose percentage. Presence of bars. Fragment size (bp. 25%. Yes. 50-10000,

yes. 50-10000,

lsh Yes. 50-10000,

135%. Yes. 50-10000,

l% Hon. 50-500. Table 7: Size of DNA fragments after
migration on agarose gel of different concentrations. By comparing the results of Querci et al., (2004), given in table 6 and
the results of our manipulation reported in table 7, we can provide the
following conclusions:

We notice that the DNA fragments appeared at the level of four gels a
respective concentrations of 2.5%, 2%, 1.5% and 1.25%, whereas the gel has 1%
reveals no band. In addition, the sharpness of the bands that appeared is greater on the gel a
1.5% than those of other concentrations. According to Querci et a/., (2004), agarose concentrations of 2.5%, 2%, 1.5% and 1.25%
give gels the ability to retain fragments ranging in size from 50
and 10,000 bp. Depending on the presence or absence of bands, the size of the DNA fragment can
be estimated. Thus in the case of agarose concentrations of 2.5, 2, 1.5 and 1.25%, the
presence of bands could indicate that the size of the DNA fragments obtained from
of our samples, is between 50 and 10,000 bp. On the other hand, the absence of bands
for an agarose concentration of 1% would indicate that the size of the fragments is between
more precisely between 50 and 500. According to Cousin and Boudon-Padieu., (2001), the size of the 16S/23S spacer of
phytoplasmas of the Aster Yellow group is 298 bp. Since we are
in the presence of fragments of sizes varying from 50 to 500 bp and that the 1.5% gel reveals

Ill- RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

 

better bands (200-400bp), we can assume that our DNA samples
would belong to phytoplasmas of the Aster Yellow group. 111.2.2- PCR results

Analysis of the amplification product obtained, by 1.5% agarose gel electrophoresis
allowed the observation of bands corresponding to phytoplasmic DNA sequences
amplified by the two pairs of primers (P1/P7, fU3/RUS5) (figure 9), and for the fragments
of DNA from the samples of Plum Stanley, Peach Scarlette, Apple Golden
(1), Start Krimson apple tree, Burla plum tree. No amplification could be detected in the case of Golden Apple (2), Poirier
Dr Jules Guyot, Top red peach, Medlar, Anna apple tree, Dorset apple tree, Cardinal peach tree,
Zine apricot tree,

1 ol Bo e

Figure 10: Results of PCR on agarose gel a
1.5% (after amplification by primers P1/P7, RU3/fU5). Pr1: Burla plum tree (ITAF of Ben chikao.) Po1: Start Krimson apple tree (ITAF from Ben Chikao). Po2: Golden apple tree (ITAF of Ouamri). Pe: Pecher Scarlette (ITAF of Ouamri). Pr2: Stanley plum tree (private farm of Ben Chikao). CP: Positive control. We notice :

- That only the samples taken in the regions of Ben chikao and Ouamri are
were found to be positive by PCR. For all those coming from Tessala El Mardja, Benitamou
and Boufarik, there was no amplification. - That only DNA from peach, plum and apple trees could be amplified. We can also observe that in the same orchard, and within the same
species, for some individuals we were able to amplify the DNA for others not, it is the
case of peach from the ITAF of Ouamri, where only the Scarlette variety responded
positively. III.3- Observations in light microscopy in
fluorescent light

43

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

44

Staining with HOECHST 33 258 reagent revealed abnormal fluorescence in
plants suspected of being infected with phytoplasmas compared to healthy controls for
following samples: Prunier (Stanley), Prunier (Burla) (Plate 5, fig. M,N,and O) , Apple tree
(Golden) ,Apple tree (Start Krimson) (Plate 5, fig. P,Q and R),Peach (Scarlette) (Plank
5, fig. S and T)

Light microscopy does not make it possible to see phytoplasma bodies but to
see their effects on the bast tissues of affected plants. This technique has been used
with success in the case of flavescence dorée (Carle., 1965) of solanaceae affected by
“stolbur (Cousin et a/., 1966), faba bean phyllody in Sudan (Dafalla., 1987), and
of a phytoplasmosis on broad beans encountered in Biskra (Sahraoui., 1989). Although this method is old, it is still relevant since
the authors (Lee., 1999., Cousin and Boudon and Padieu., 2001.) still cite it as a
reference method for a preliminary diagnosis of phytoplasmas. Today we can say that the use of HOECHST's reagent for the
diagnosis of phytoplasmas is an effective method since the results obtained
agree with those obtained by the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). Ill- RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

Quasi-fluorescence
absent 'm rivem des
sieve tubes
sample know

 

 

 

 

 

Observations m light microscope 4

fluorescent master (Gr x 10000),

LI: Tauemyomaes % Tomom polo shirts
A Prous Shady T. Poclos toubte
0:Prag:Boh

P. Yauompouauior,

Q Ponausa sat

Tamason

F. Pouauds Collen

Plate 5: Observations under the microscope
fluorescent light photonics (Gr x 10000). M: Witness plum,
N: Stanley plum tree,
O: Plum tree Burla. P: Witness apple tree,
Q: Start Krimson apple tree,
A: Golden apple tree,
S: Witness sin,
T: Sin Scarlette. The comparison between the results of the PCR and the symptoms externalized by the
individuals studied reveal this:

45

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

46

Some samples whose DNA has been amplified show the same symptoms as
those described in the bibliography. In fact, samples of apple trees of the Start variety
krimson from Ben Chikao whose DNA was amplified by the two pairs of primers
exhibited a rosette development which is one of the symptoms of
apple proliferation (AP) (Anonymous., 2001a). On the other hand, the symptoms expressed by the apple tree of the Golden variety and whose
rDNA could be amplified do not recall any of those described in the bibliography. Note also that the scarlet variety sin for which we obtained a
amplification shows symptoms that resemble peach X disease (Anonymous.,
2003b). For other samples, although the exteriorized symptoms approximate those
described in the bibliography, the DNA fragments could not be amplified, this is the case for
the apricot tree of Beni Itamou which presents a decline of the framework similar to that
attributed to European Stone Fruit Yellows phytoplasma disease (ESAFY). At this stage of our experiment, we can only put forward hypotheses:

1- For certain species from Ben Chikao and Ouamri presenting
symptoms reminiscent of phytoplasmoses, the DNAs could be amplified by the primers
used in this case the P1/P7 and the RU3/fU5, and an abnormal fluorescence could be
observed in tissues subjected to detection by DAPI. In this case we can
assume the presence of the pathogens sought without giving their exact identity since
primer pairs are not specific. 2- For other samples, even if the symptoms noted are attributable to
first sight to phytoplasmas, the amplification of the DNA fragments did not give
of results that can direct our diagnosis towards this type of disease. In this case,
we can simply conclude that either the observed symptoms are due to other
parasitic or non-parasitic causes, either that the pathogen is present but its
concentration is too low to be detected by nested PCR. Precisely concerning nested PCR, and although, according to Berges et al. (2000), this
technique would increase the sensitivity of PCR by 10 to 100 times for each cycle
amplification, several authors have reservations about its use as a
diagnostic method due to a greater probability of occurrence of false positives related
contamination (Palmano, 2001) or the existence of homologous sequences between the

primers and some regions of the 16S fraction of chloroplasts. To compensate for this
problem, the authors suggest the use of DNA extraction methods allowing
to increase the final DNA concentration, or to confirm the results obtained
by the use of specific primers (Tanne et a/., 2001). GENERAL CONCLUSION

 

GENERAL CONCLUSION

At the end of this work, the aim of which is the detection of phytoplasma diseases on
the different fruit species of the Algerian center we can draw the conclusions
following:

The surveys on the ground allowed us to check the health status of the species.
fruitières of the center and to note the presence of several types of symptoms on these
individuals, some of which are reminiscent of those caused by phytoplasmas. The laboratory analysis of the samples taken allowed us to conclude the following:

The absence of phytoplasma diseases in the following regions: Tessala El
Merdja, Benitamou and Boufarik

The presence of phytoplasmas is concentrated in the Médéa region
(OQuamri and Ben chikao). The species affected by phytoplasma diseases are: Apple,
Plum, Peach. Although the damage caused by phytoplasmas in the Médéa region
have not yet taken on worrying proportions the mere presence of the latter
should attract our attention. Indeed, this region is a place where arboriculture
fruit is very intense and from which some regions of the country are supplied
in plants. This is why it seems to us that this work deserves to be continued on the one hand
to prevent the spread of this type of pathogen, on the other hand to better understand what
type of diseases and know their causative agent as well as their vectors. This could be
to do by extending the study of the latter to other woody or herbaceous crops. To do this, it would be interesting to undertake the study of the following aspects:

- Identification of diseases from which individuals are affected. - Expansion of surveys to other regions of the country. - Search for vectors and study of their evolution parallel to that of the disease. - Molecular characterization of detected phytoplasmas. - Serum production test allowing us to make the identification of
simpler and more precise phytoplasmas so that the diagnosis of these in Algeria
become routine. 47

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES

ABOU-JAWDAH Y., DAKHIL H.., M.SHOAA E. and LEE |.M., 2003. almond
witches'broom phytoplasma: a potential threat to almond, peach and nectarine. Tea
journal of Canadian plant pathology. 25.1: 28-32. AHRENS U., SEEMULLER E., 1992. Detection of DNA of plant pathogenic
mycoplasmalike organisms by a polymerase chain reaction that amplifies a sequence
of the 16S rRNA gene. Phytopathology. 82, 828-832. ALMA A., NAVONE P., VISENTIN C., ARZONE A. and BOSCO D., 1999. Rilevamento di
fitoplasmi di “Apple proliferation” in Cacopsylla melanoneura (Férster) (Homoptera
Psyllidae). Atti Incontro Nazionale sulle malattie da Fitoplasmi. Stato attuale delle
conoscenze, Udine: 7-65. ANONYMOUS, 2001(a). Apple Proliferation (AP). IAM Plant Biotech Unit.13: 5-6. ANONYMOUS, 2001(b). Pear Decline (PD). IAM Plant Biotech Unit. 13:8-9. ANONYMOUS, 2002. Grapevine phytoplasma yellows: Flavescence dorée and wood
black . National Technical Establishment for the Improvement of Viticulture. 24p. ANONYMOUS. ; 2003(a). Peach yellows phytoplasma. Information sheet on
quarantine pests .EPPO Bulletin . 4p. ANONYMOUS. ; 2003(b). Peach X-disease phytoplasma. Information sheet on
quarantine pests .EPPO Bulletin,5pp. ANONYMOUS, 2006. phytoplasma. Wikipedia. the tree encyclopedia. https: //
www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/phytoplasma.htmI. AOUANE B., 2003. Preliminary Studies On Stone Fruit Tree Viruses In Algeria. Virus
and virus-like diseases of stone fruits, with particular reference to the Mediterranean
region. Mediterranean Options.45:39-42. BAI X., ZHANG J., EWING A., MILLER S.A., JANCSO RADEK A., SHEVCHENKO
D.V., TSUKERMAN K., WALUNAS T., LAPIDUS A., CAMPBELL J.W. and
HOGENHOUT S.A;.2006. Living with genome instability: The adaptation of
phytoplasmas to various environments of their insect and plant host. J. Bacteriol. 188: 3682-3696

BELHADJ D., 1990. Diagnosis of viral diseases affecting nucleus rosacea in
central and eastern regions. Notes of virology. INES .Blida: 12-18. BERGES R., COUSIN M.T., ROUX J., MAURER R. and SEEMULLER E., 1997. Detection of phytoplasma infections in declining Populus nigra cv Italica trees and
molecular differentiation of the aster yellows phytoplasmas identified in various
Popular species. Eur J For Path, 27: 33-43. BERGES R., ROTT M. and SEEMULLER E.; 2000. Range of phytoplasmas
concentrations in various plant host as determined by competitive polymerase chain
reaction. Phytopathology 90: 1145-1152. 48

BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES

 

BOUDON-PADIEU E., 1999. Detection and molecular characterization of phytoplasmas
infecting grapevine in Liguria (Italy). Phytopatol. tells me. 34:137-141. BOUSSALEM A., 1992. Project activity report 88/025.45p. CAMPBELL B., STEFFEN-CAMPBELL C., SORENSEN J.D. and GILL J.T., 1995. Paraphyly of Homoptera and Auchenorrhyncha inferred from 18S rDNA nucleotide
sequences. Entomol System. 20:62-241. CARLE E., 1965. Fluoroscopy of histological sections of flavescence dorée from
Vine. Application to the rapid detection of early lesions on sensitive grape varieties. Ann. epiphytias. 16:73-85. CARRARO L., OSLER R., ERMACORA N. and REFATTI P.; 1998. Transmission of the
European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma Cacopsylla pruni. J Plant. 80:9-233. L. CARRARO, N. LOI, P. ERMACORA and R. OSLER. ;1998. High tolerance of European
plum varieties to plum leptonecrosis. European Journal of Plant Pathol. 104:5-141. CASTELAIN C., CHASTELIERE M.G., JULLIAN J.P., MORVAN G. and LEMAIRE
J.M. ;1997.Protection against chlorotic leafroll of the apricot tree. Balance sheet of ten
years of observation on eight orchards. phytoma. 493: 39-44. CAUDWELL A., J. LARRUE V. and TASSAR T., .1994. Carrier character of the
golden flavescence in the rootstock vines, in particular 3309 C and Fercal. Agronomy. 14:83-94. CHOUEIRI E., VERDIN E., DANET J.L., JRENIRI F., EL ZAMMAR1 S., SALARD P.,
BOVE J.M. and GARNIER M., 2002. A Phytoplasma Disease Of Almond In Lebanon. Mediterranean Options.45: 129-131. COUSIN M.T., J. P-MOREAU. 1966. Role of Euscelis plebejus Fall in transmission
of white clover virus diseases: study of the conservation of the virus during
Winter. Ann.epiphyties. 17:75-79. COUSIN M.T., MOREAU J.P., 1991. Yellow decline of Lavandin (Hybrid L. Officinalis x
L. Latifolia): a MLO (mycoplasma-like organism) disease. Symptoms, experimental
transmission, ultrastuctural studies, role of leafhoppers, methods of control. /not:
Raychaudhuri SP. Ed. Recent Advances in Medicinal, Aromatic and Spice Crops. New Delhi, India: Today and Tomorrow's Printers and Publishers 1: 59-62. COUSIN M.T., ROUX J., BOUDON-PADIEU E., BERGES R., SEEMULLER E. and
HIRUKI C.;1998. Use of Heteroduplex Mobility Analysis (HMA) for differentiating
phytoplasma isolates causing Witches broom disease on Populus nigra cv Italica and
stolbur or Big bud on tomato. J Phytopathol. 146: 97-102. COUSIN M.T., BOUDON-PADIEU E., 2001. Phytoplasmas and phytoplasmoses:
characteristics, symptoms and diagnosis. Notebook of studies and research
francophone/agriculture. 10:76-361. COUSIN M.T., BOUDON-PADIEU E., 2002. Phytoplasma and phytoplasma diseases:
vectors, control, and research topics. Book of studies and research in French/
agriculture. 11:26-115. DAFALLA E.A., 1987. Contribution to the study of mycoplasma "jaundices"
in sudan: Partial inventory in the central region of sudan. Study of the

49

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

faba bean phyllody. First tests for the serological characterization of the agents
pathogens. Same. Doc. Paris-Sud University. Center d'Orsay, 92p. DAVIES D., GUISE C.M., CLARK M.F. and ADAMS A.N., 1992. Parry's disease of
pears is similar to pear decline and is associated with mycoplasma-like organisms
transmitted by Cacopsylla pyricola. Plant Pathol 41: 195-203. DE LA RUE S.J., HOPKINSON R., FOSTER S. and GIBB K.S., 2003. phytoplasma
host range and symptom expression in the pasture vegetable Stylosanthes. Field Crop
Research. 84: 327-334. DOI Y, TERANAKA M., YORA K., ASUYAMA H.; 1967. Mycoplasma or PLT-group-
like-microorganisms found in the phloem elements of plants infected with mulberry
dwarf , potato witches'broom, aster yellows or pawlonia witches'broom. Ann. Phytopathol.Soc.Japan:3:259-266. FLETCHER J., 1999. Interactions of Phytopathogenic Mollicutes With Insect and Plant
Hosts.First internet conference on phytopathogenic mollicutes. http://www.uniud.it/
phytoplasma/pap/boud8290.html

FRISINGHELLI C.L., DELAITI M.S., GRANDO D,. FORTI M.E and VINDIMIA N., 2000. Cacopsylla costalis (Flor 1861), as a vector of Apple proliferation in Trentino. J
Phytopatho 148: 425-31. GATINEAU F., LARRUE J., CLAIR D., LORTON F., RICHARD-MOLARD M.
and BOUDON-PADIEU E., 2001. A new natural planthopper vector of stolbur
phytoplasma in the genus Pentastiridius (Hemiptera: Cixiidae). Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 107: 263-71

GIBB K.S., PADOVAN A.C. and MOGEN B.D., 1995. Studies of sweet potato little-leaf
phytoploasma detected in sweet potato and other plant species in northern Australia. Phytopathol.85:169-174. GUNDERSEND.E and LEE I.M., 1996. Ultrasensitive detection of phytoplasma by nested-
PCR assays using two universal primer pairs. Phytopathologia Mediteranea. 35:
144-151. GUO Y.H., CHENG Z.M. WALLA J.A. and ZHANG Z., 1998. Large-scale screening for X-
disease phytoplasma infection in chokecherry. Out Science. 33:293-5. HARRISON N.A and ELLIOTT M.L., 2007. Lethal Yellowing (LY) of Palm’ http://

edis.ifas.ufl.edu. HEINRICH M., BOTTI S., CAPRARA L., ARTHOFER W., STROMMER S., HANZER V.,
KATINGER H., BERTACCINI A. and CAMARA MACHADO M.L., 2001. Development
and evaluation of improved detection methods for phytoplasmas in fruit trees. Phytoplasma. Plant Molecular Biology Reporter. 19:169-179.

http://www. fao.org/es/ess/top/commodity.html?lang=fr&item=526&year=2005

JENSEN D., GRIGGS D., GONZALES W.H. and SCHNEIDER C.Q., 1964. Pear declines
virus transmission by pear psylla. Phytopatholy, 54:51-1346. KESUMAWATI E., KIMATA T., UEMACHI T., HOSOKAWA M. and YAZAWA S., 2006. Correlation of phytoplasma concentration in Hydrangea macrophylla with green-
flowering stability. Scientia horticulture. 10: 74-78. 50

BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES

 

KUNZE L., 1976. The effect of different strains of apple proliferation on the growth and
crop of infected trees. Mitt Biol Bundesamt Land-Forstwirtsch Berlin-Dahlem.170:
15-107. LECLANT F., LACOTE J.P.; 1969. Research on stolbur vectors in the South
from France. (Homoptera: Cixiidae). Ann Phytopatho. 19:42-439. LEE |.M., DAVIS R.E., CHEN T.A., CHIYKOWSKI L.N., FLETCHER J., HIRUKI C. and
SCHAFF D.A. ; 1992. A genotype-based system for identification and classification
of mycoplasmalike organisms (MLOs) in the aster yellows MLO strain cluster. Phytopathology. 82:977-986. LEE |.M., BERTACCINI A., VIBIO M. and GUNDRSEN D.E.;1995. Detection of multiples
phytoplasmas in perennial fruit trees with decline symptoms in Italy. Phytopathology. 84:559-566. LEE I.M., 1999. Molecular-based methods for the detection and identification of
phytoplasma. First internet conference on phytopathogenic mollicutes. http://
www.uniud.it/phytoplasma/pap/boud8290.html. LEE I.M., DAVIS R., GUNDERSEN E., and RINDAL D.E. ; 2000. PHYTOPLASMA:
Phytopathogenic Mollicutes. Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 54: 221-255. LEFOL C., LHERMINIER J., BOUDON-PADIEU E., LARRUE J., LOUIS C. and
CAUDWELL A.; 1994. Propagation of flavescence dorée MLO (mycoplasma-like
organism) in the leafhopper vector Euscelidius variegatus Kbm. J Inverteb Pathol. 63: 285-93. LEMOINE J., 1991. Pear dieback: role of Psylla pyri in its
dissemination. Fruit tree growing. 442: 28-32. Diseases of degeneration of pome fruit trees (apple trees, pear trees)
Diseases caused by viroids, viruses, phytoplasmas. http://www.angers.inra.fr/dossiers/virus/
filevir2.html. LHERMINIER J., PRENSIER G., BOUDON-PADIEU E. and CAUDWELL A.;

1990: Immunolabeling of grapevine flavescence dorée MLO in salivary glands
of Euscelidius variegatus: a light and electron microscopy study. Journal of
Histochemistry and Cytochemistry. 38: 79-85. LINS, SEARS, 1989. 16S rRNA sequence indicates that plant-pathogenic
mycoplasma-like organisms are evolutionary distinct from animal mycoplasmas. J
Bacteriol. 1989. 171:5901-6. LORENZ K., SCHNEIDER B., AHRENS U. and SEEMULLER E.;1995.Detection of the
apple proliferation and pear decline phytoplasmas by PCR amplification of ribosomal
and nonribosomal DNA. Phytopathol. 85: 771-776. MAILLET P.L., GOURANTON J., 1971. Study of the biological cycle of the mycoplasma of
clover phyllody in the insect vector, Euscelis lineolatus Brullé (Homoptera,
Jassidae). Journal of Microscopy. 11: 143-62. MAIXNER M., 1994. Transmission of German grapevine yellows (Vergilbungskrankheit)
by the planthopper Hyalesthes obsoletus (Auchenorryncha: Cixiidae). Vitis .33:
14-103. 51

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

MARAMOROSCH K., 1952. Direct evidence for multiplication of aster yellows virus in its
insect vector. Phytopatholy. 42: 59-64. MCCOY R.E., HOWARD F.W., TSAI J.H. ; 1993. Lethal yellowing of palms. Univ FI IFAS
Agric Exp Stn Tech Bull; 834: 1-100. MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT, 2005. Agricultural Statistics: areas and production. Series "B" 2004: 42-60. MORVAN G.; 1977. Apricot chlorotic leafroll. Bulletin OEPP/EPPO Bulletin 7. 37-55. MYRTA A., ERMACORA P., STAMO B. and OSLER R., 2003. Identification of European
Stone Fruit Yellows from apricot and Japanese plum in Albania. Virus and virus-
like diseases of stone fruits, with particular reference to the Mediterranean region. Mediterranean Options. 45: 129-131. NAPPO, 2007. Apple proliferation phytoplasma. Phytosanitary alert system. Pest-alert
www; pestalert.org. NYNNE M., CHRISTENSEN K.B., AXELSEN M.N. and SCHULZ A., 2005. Phytoplasmas
and their interactions with hosts. Plant science.10: 526-535. OEPPI/CABI., 1996 . Peach X-disease phytoplasma. In / quarantine organisms

for Europe. 2°M edition. CAB International, Wattingford, UK. EPPO, 1998. Phytosanitary methods. Phytoplasms of fruit trees and
vine. test and inspection method. http://archives.eppo.org. EPPO, 1999. Harmful organisms present in the European Union, prohibited
introduction and dissemination and/or compulsory control limited in time and
in a specific area. EPPO Bulletin, 5p. PALMANO §. ;2001. A comparison of different phytoplasma DNA extraction methods
using competitive PCR. Phytopathol. Mediterranean 40: 99-107. PRACROS P., 2000. The collection of phytoplasmas. Genomics, development,
pathogenic power. http://www. phytoplasma\phytoplasmoses\genomics,
Development, Pathogenic Power collection phytoplasmes.html. QUERCI M., SOMMA M.; 2004. The Polymerase Chain Reaction. The analysis of food
samples for the presence of genetically modified organisms. 6:3-31. QUERCI M., JERMINI M. and VAN DEN EEDE G., 2004. Agarose Gel Electrophoresis. The analysis of food samples for the presence of genetically modified organisms. 5,
3-12. RAMEL M.E., GUGERLI P. and SCHAUB L., 2003. Chlorotic coiling of
apricot European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma (ESFY). Swiss journal of
Viticulture, Arboriculture and Horticulture. 35: 522-531. SAHRAOUI K., 1989. Test for identification of a suspected disease of origin
mycoplasma on broad bean (Vicia faba L). Same. Eng. Agro. I.N.A. El Harrach, 83p. ENJOY., 1984. Mycoplasmosis of ornamental plants: Study of the
vierescence of the hydrangea. Internship report. INRA Versailles. SCHNEIDER, B., SEEMULLER E., SMART C., and KIRPATRICK B.; 1995. Phylogenetic classification of plant pathogenic Mycoplasma-like organisms or
phytoplasmas. Cytobios. 102:133-147. 52

 

BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES

 

SCHVESTER D., MOUTOUS G., BONFILS J. and CARLE P.; 1962. Biological study
of vine leafhoppers in the South-West of France. Ann Epiphyties. 13:
37-205. SEEMULLER E., LORENZ K.H. and LAUER U.; 1998. Fruit tree phytoplasmas. pear
decline resistance in Pyrus communis rootstocks and progenies of wild and
ornamental Pyrus taxa. In: Hadidi A, ed. proc. 17th Int. Symp. on Fruit Tree Virus Dis. Acta Hort. 472: 681-7. SEEMULLER E., 1999. On some problems in temperate fruit tree phytoplasma
research. First Internet Conference on Phytopathogenic Mollicutes http./Awww. iniud.it/
phytoplasma/pap/seem2700.html. SFORZA R., CLAIR D., DAIRE X., LARRUE J. and BOUDON-PADIEU E., 1998. Tea
role of Hyalesthes obsoletus (Hemiptera: Cixiidae) in the occurrence of "Bois noir" of
grapevines in France. J Phytopathol. 146: 56-549. SMART C., SHNEIDER B., BLOMQUIST C., GUERRA L., HARRISON N., AHRENS. U., LORENZ K., SEEMULLER E. and KIRKPATRICK B.; 1996. Phytoplasma-specific
PCRprimers based on sequences of the 16S-23S r RNA spacer region. App! Approximately
Microbiol.62:2988-2993. SUCHOV K.C., VOVK A.M., 1948. Biology of the planthopper Hyalesthes obsoletus
Sign, vector of the stolbur virus. Trudy instituta genetiki .15: 193-202. TANNE E., BOUDON-PADIEU E., CLAIR D., DAVIDOVICH M., MELAMED S. and KLEIN
M., 2001. Detection of Phytoplasma by Polymerase Chain Reaction of Insect Feeding
Medium and Its Use in Determining Vectoring Ability. Bacteriology. 91:741-745. VISWANATHAN R., PADMANABAN P., RAMESH SUNDAR A., PRAKASAM N. and
TRIPATHI B.K., 1999. Different aerated steam therapy (AST) regimes on grassy
shoot disease caused by phytoplasmas in sugarcane. First Internet Conference on
Phytopathogenic Mollicutes http://www. uniud.it/phytoplasma/pap/muse0100.html

WOOD G.A., 1997. Viruses and phytoplasma in European pear trees in New Zealand
and the role of these pathogens in the compatibility of pear with quince rootstocks. New Zealand Journal of Crop and Horticultural Science. 25: 333-40. 53

Research of photoplasma diseases on fruit rosacea in the central Algerian region

 

Annex chemicals

I- Light microscopy:
Formalin Fixer - Aceto-Alcohol (FAA):
- Ethyl alcohol & 50° OR 70°... eee eececeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 90mI
- Glacial acetic acid................0.ccccccececeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee it 5m. - Formalin
Dye stock solution:

Il- DNA extraction:
Buffer PG (Phytoplasma Grinding):

 

SACCHALOSE...... occ cece e cece cece eee cece eects etaeeeeeencatenereeiee

 

- Bovine albumin. - PVP
- EDTA. TE buffer:
= Tris-HCI (PH=8).

0.14g
Ill- Polymerase Chain Reaction:
l.1. DNA amplification:

 

54

Annex chemicals

 

Preparation of primers diluted to 1μWg/μl:

 

Preparation of primers diluted at 0.1 g/l. 50ul of each primer is taken and diluted in 450ul of distilled water. Preparation of the mixture (for one sample):

- Buffer loading 10*............ cece eeceee cece cease eeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenenes 2.5ul

 

- Distilled water
- Primer. - T AQ POIYMEASE. ...... ee cece ec seeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaseeseassaseeseeean reese 0.25ul
- SAMPLE DNA...... 0... ccc eeecsseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeed 1ul
III.2- Migration on agarose gel (1%):

Buffer TBE10*

 

44g

 

Load buffer. - Bromophén0l blue.............cccccceceeceseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeitseeeeed 0.25g. - SACCHALOSE.... 2... eee e cece e cece eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeetsssaeaeeeseneeey 40g. Ethidium Bromide
- Ethidill M bromide...........cccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesrsneeeere® 0.1g. ~ Eau Distill6e ...... eeeeee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 10m. Preparation of the gel. - TBE buffer 0.5%... ... eeceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 200ml
- Agarose. - Ethidium bromide...

 

55