Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

® Bdizioni ETS Pisa, 2010 19

OFFERED REVIEW

CANDIDATUS PHYTOPLASMA PRUNORUM, THE CAUSAL AGENT
OF EUROPEAN STONE FRUIT YELLOWS: AN OVERVIEW

C. Marcone!, B. Jarausch? and W. Jarausch?

' Dipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Universita degli Studi di Salerno,
Via Ponte Don Melillo, 84084 Fisciano (Salerno), Italy
2 RLP AgroScience GmbH AlPlanta, Institute for Plant Research, Breitenweg 71, 67435 Neustadt, Germany

SUMMARY

‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ is an important
prokaryotic pathogen that infects stone fruits in Europe. It is known to cause several economically relevant disor-
ders of Prunus spp. which are collectively referred to as
European stone fruit yellows (ESFY). This organism is
phylogenetically closely related to other important fruit
trees pathogens such as apple proliferation (AP), pear
decline (PD) and peach yellow leaf roll (PYLR) agents. Together they form a distinct phylogenetic cluster, the
AP or 16SrX group. Like the other fruit tree phytoplas-
mas of the AP group, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ exhibits a high
host specificity. In nature, this pathogen has been re-
ported to infect only plants in the genus Prunus and to
be transmitted by one insect vector species, the psyllid
(Psyllidae) Cacopsylla pruni. Also, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ in-
cludes strains which greatly differ in virulence. This re-
view summarizes the current knowledge of ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ with emphasis on advances that have been
made during the last two decades in understanding mo-
lecular and epidemiological aspects. Prospects for dis-
ease management and future research which could pro-
vide insights into the largely unknown mechanisms in-
volved in pathogenicity of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’, are also
critically discussed. Key words: phytoplasmas, phytoplasma detection,
phytoplasma characterization, phytoplasma transmis-
sion, stone fruits, Cacopsylla pruni, epidemiology, dis-
ease management. INTRODUCTION

‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ is an important
prokaryotic pathogen that infects stone fruits in Europe
and is known to cause apricot chlorotic leaf roll of apri-
cot (Prunus armeniaca), leptonecrosis of Japanese plum. (BP. salicina) and yellows and decline diseases of peach

Corresponding author. C. Marcone
Fax: +39.089.969602
E-mail: cmarcone@unisa.it

(P. persica), European plum (P. domestica), almond (P.
dulcis) and flowering cherry (P. serrulata). All these dis-
orders are collectively referred to as European stone
fruit yellows (ESFY) (Lorenz et al., 1994; Seemiiller and
Foster, 1995; Seemiiller et al., 1998a). The largest eco-
nomic losses are recorded in apricot and Japanese plum
orchards where infection rates of susceptible cultivars
can be up to 50% and orchards are rendered unproduc-
tive eight to ten years after planting. ESFY has become
a major obstacle for successful production of apricot in
all central and southern European countries. Due to its
economic importance, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ is one of the
most intensively studied phytoplasmas. Molecular stud-
ies using Southern blot hybridization and restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and sequence
analyses of polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified
ribosomal DNA (rDNA) and _ non-ribosomal DNA
showed that ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ is a relatively homoge-
neous organism throughout Europe (Ahrens et al.,
1993; Lorenz et al., 1994; Kison et al., 1997; Jarausch et
al., 1998a, 2000a; Seemiiller et al., 1998b; Seemiiller and
Schneider, 2004). This pathogen is phylogenetically
closely related to the apple proliferation (AP), pear de-
cline (PD), and peach yellow leaf roll (PYLR) agents,
the causes of other major diseases of deciduous fruit
trees, which are members of a distinct phylogenetic
cluster, the AP or 16SrX group within the phytoplasma
clade (Seemiiller et al., 1998a; IRPCM, 2004; Seemiiller
and Schneider, 2004). The ESFY agent is distinctly dif-
ferent from the X-disease phytoplasma, a major stone
fruit pathogen of North America and from ‘Ca. P.
phoenicium’ that infects Prunus spp. in Asian and
North African countries. The ESFY agent also differs
from various phytoplasma strains that have been trans-
mitted from diseased apricot, cherry, and Japanese plum
trees to the experimental host Catharanthus roseus (peri-
winkle). These strains are members of either the aster
yellows or the stolbur or X-disease phytoplasma group
(Ahrens et al., 1993; Lorenz et al., 1994; Seemiiller et
al., 1998a; Marcone et al., 1999a). ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ is
known to occur in most southern and central European
countries and as far north as in south-east England
(Seemiiller et al., 1998a, 1998b; Davies and Adams,
2000; Topchiiska et al., 2000; Deli¢ et al., 2008; Laimer

 

 

 

20  ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’

and Bertaccini, 2008). It has also been reported in
Turkey and Azerbajdzhan (Jarausch et al., 2000a;
Sertkaya et al., 2005; Danet et al., 2007). It is likely that
the pathogen is present wherever stone fruits are grown
in Europe and non-European Mediterranean countries
(Seemiiller and Foster, 1995). Like the other fruit tree
phytoplasmas of the AP group, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ ex-
hibits a very high host specificity. In nature, this
pathogen seems to infect only plants in the genus
Prunus and appears to be transmitted by one insect vec-
tor species, the psyllid (Psyllidae) Cacopsylla pruni
(Scopoli) (Carraro et al., 1998a; Weintraub and Bean-
land, 2006). Also, the pathogen exists in strains which
greatly differ in aggressiveness, ranging from avirulent
(or nearly avirulent) to highly virulent (Kison and
Seemiiller, 2001). The aim of this review is to summarize
the current knowledge about the ESFY agent ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’. Emphasis is placed on advances that have
been made during the last two decades in understand-
ing molecular and epidemiological aspects. MOLECULAR CHARACTERIZATION
OF ‘CA. P. PRUNORUM’

Molecular taxonomy. According to the phylogenetic
phytoplasma classification, which is largely based on se-
quence analysis of 16S rDNA, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ is a
member of the AP group (IRPCM, 2004). Other mem-
bers of this group are ‘Ca. P. mali’ (the AP agent), ‘Ca. P.
pyri’ (the PD agent), the PYLR agent, and the newly
identified PD (PDTW) agent infecting pear in Taiwan
(Lee et al., 2000, 2007; Seemiiller and Schneider, 2004;
Liu et al., 2007). Nucleotide sequence comparisons re-
vealed that the 16S rDNA sequences of five ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ strains from Germany, Austria and Czech Re-
public are identical or nearly identical, showing similari-
ty values between 99.8 and 100%. There is no indication
of sequence heterogeneity between the two rRNA oper-
ons of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ (Seemiiller and Schneider,
2004). In interspecific comparisons of the ESFY/AP, ES-
FY/PD, ESFY/PYLR and ESFY/PDTW agents, differ-
ences in 16S rDNA sequences were 1.3-1.5, 1.2-1.3, 1.4-
1.6 and 1.2-1.4%, respectively (Seemiiller and Schneider,
2004; Liu et al., 2007). More distantly related to ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ are four other phytoplasmas that cluster in
the same subclade as the AP-group members: ‘Ca. P.
spartii’ (associated with spartium witches’-broom), ‘Ca. P. rhamni’ (associated with buckthorn witches’-broom),
‘Ca. P. allocasuarinae’ (associated with allocasuarina yel-
lows), and ‘Ca. P. tamaricis’ (associated with salt cedar
witches’-broom). These phytoplasmas share between 94
and 97.1% 16S rDNA sequence similarity with ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ (Marcone et al., 2004; Zhao et al., 2009). The
16S/23S rDNA spacer region sequences of the above-
mentioned ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains are also identical. Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

At 16S8/23S rDNA spacer region sequence level, ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ differs from the other AP group fruit tree
phytoplasmas in 1.2-3.0% of nucleotide positions and
from the other phytoplasmas clustering in the AP group
in more than 11% of positions (Marcone et al., 2004;
Seemiiller and Schneider, 2004; Liu et al., 2007). Also,
by RFLP analysis of PCR-amplified rDNA using several
restriction enzymes, no genetic polymorphisms were ob-
served among numerous ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ isolates col-
lected at various locations in European countries and
from various stone fruit species (Marcone et al., 1996a;
Seemiiller et al., 1998b; Topchiiska et al., 2000; Jarausch
et al., 2001a; Laimer Da Camara Machado et al., 2001;
Deli¢ et al., 2008) whereas the ESFY agent can clearly
be distinguished from the other AP-group fruit tree phy-
toplasmas using RFLP analysis of PCR-amplified 16S
rDNA sequences employing Sspl, BsaAT and Rsal re-
striction endonucleases (Marcone et al., 1996a;
Seemiiller et al., 1998b). Genetic characterization. Sequence alignment of
less-conserved, non-ribosomal genes has shown a con-
siderable genomic variability among ‘Ca. P. prunorum’
isolates in the imp gene, which encodes an immun-
odominant membrane protein, with similarity values
ranging from 95.4 to 99.8%. Less genetic variability oc-
curred in the aceF, secY and pnp genes encoding a com-
ponent of pyruvate dehydrogenase, a translocase pro-
tein and a polynucleotide phosphorylase, respectively. For tuf and tlyC genes, which encode the elongation
factor Tu (EF-Tu) and a hemolysin known as a mem-
brane-damaging agent and important virulence factor of
many bacteria, respectively, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ isolates
proved to be identical or nearly identical with similarity
values between 99.7 and 99.9%, and 99.8 and 100%,
respectively. No dissimilarities were observed in both
rpsC and fol genes, encoding a ribosomal protein and an
enzyme essential for folate biosynthesis, respectively
(Danet et al., 2007, 2008; Marcone et al., 2009). Analy-
sis using aceF sequences generated a tree in which
French hypovirulent strains of the ESFY agent, namely
peach vein clearing, B7 and E22, clustered together and
were thus distinguished from the other strains of the
same pathogen (Danet et al., 2008). However, phylogenetic trees inferred from imp, secY
and pnp genes had different topology and did not allow
differentiation of the mentioned hypovirulent strains. Also, phylogenies based on imp and secY genes clus-
tered some ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains which are sup-
posed to be non-circulative in a monophyletic group. In
phylogenetic trees based on aceF and imp sequences, an
isolate from Azerbajdzhan was delineated as a distinct
lineage among the ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains (Danet et
al., 2007, 2008). Also, maximal dissimilarities identified
between ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ and AP and PD agents were
36 and 29% on the basis of imp gene, 11 and 12% in

   

 

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

aceF, 7 and 6% in pnp, 8 and 7% in secY, and 5.4 and
5.9% for ribosomal protein (rpsV and rpsC) genes, re-
spectively (Morton et al., 2003; Danet et al., 2007, 2008;
Lee et al., 2007; Martini et al., 2007a). Recent work has
shown that ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ shares 84.6-87.8% and
89.6% hfIB gene sequence similarity with ‘Ca. P. mali’
strains and ‘Ca. P. pyri’, respectively (Schneider and
Seemiiller, 2009). RFLP analysis of PCR-amplified tuf gene sequences
was also employed to differentiate ‘Ca. P. prunorum’
strains. Following separate digestion with Alul, Rsal,
Sau3AI, Msel, Hhal, Hinfl, Hpall and HaellI, more
than a hundred isolates infecting peach, apricot and
plum trees in southern Italy had similar RFLP profiles. When the same tuf gene fragments were digested with
TaqI restriction endonuclease, two distinct restriction
profiles were identified among the ‘Ca. P. prunorum’
isolates examined (Marcone et al., 2002; C. Marcone,
unpublished data). Similar results were obtained by
Ferretti et al. (2007, 2008, 2009) who employed RFLP
analysis of PCR-amplified tuf gene sequences using
NlalII restriction enzyme to examine genetic polymor-
phism among ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains which were de-
tected in both stone fruit trees and C. pruni individuals. Work by Martini et al. (2009) showed that four RFLP
subgroups designed Acef-A, -B, -C, and -D, could be
identified among ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains originating
from several European countries when aceF gene se-
quences were digested with HaelII and Tsp509I restric-
tion endonucleases. One hundred and seventy-five ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ iso-
lates, which were collected from 14 Prunus species and
4 hybrids in four Mediterranean countries, were ana-
lyzed by RFLP using several restriction enzymes of a
PCR-amplified non-ribosomal fragment which included
a putative nitroreductase gene, an intergenic region and
a truncated open reading frame of unknown function. All isolates proved to be identical. However, ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ could clearly be differentiated from the AP
and PD agents. An overall sequence similarity of 89.6%
between ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ and ‘Ca. P. mali’ occurred
on this fragment (Jarausch et al., 1994a, 2000a). By
Southern blot hybridization of HindIII- or EcoRI-di-
gested DNA from over 60 ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ isolates us-
ing a mixture of randomly cloned chromosomal DNA
fragements from the ‘Ca. P. mali’ as probes, polymor-
phisms were only observed in two isolates. However,
hybridization patterns of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains dif-
fered significantly from those of ‘Ca. P. mali’, ‘Ca. P.
pyri’ and PYLR strains (Ahrens et al., 1993; Lorenz et
al., 1994; Kison et al., 1997; Kison and Seemiiller, 2001). Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) analysis re-
vealed a uniform chromosome size of 630 kb for three
strains of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ including the reference
strain GSFY1. This size is in the same range as that of
“Ca. P. mali’ and ‘Ca. P. pyri’ strains (Marcone et al.,

 

Marcone etal. 21

1999b; Seemiiller and Schneider, 2007). Physical maps
have been constructed from the chromosomes of ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ and ‘Ca. P. mali’ (Lauer and Seemiiller,
2000; Marcone and Seemiiller, 2001). The physical map
of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strain GSFY1 chromosome is dif-
ferent from that of ‘Ca. P. mali’, as evidenced by fre-
quency and location of restriction sites, but the overall
genetic arrangement of chromosomes is similar (Mar-
cone and Seemiiller, 2001). Work by Kube et al. (2008)
showed that chomosome of ‘Ca. P. mali’, ‘Ca. P. pruno-
rum’ and ‘Ca. P. pyri’ was linear and not circular as pre-
viously known. To prove chromosome linearity, the
PFGE-purified, agarose-embedded full-length chromo-
somes of the three mentioned phytoplasmas were di-
gested with I-Ceul, an intron-encoded endonuclease
that cleaves specifically in the 238 rRNA gene of many
bacteria. This digestion yielded three macrorestriction
fragments, as expected for linear chromosomes having
two rRNA operons whereas I-Ceul restriction of the
‘Ca. P. australiense’ resulted in only two fragments, as
expected for a circular chromosome with two rRNA
operons. Detection. Molecular characterization of ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ has also enabled the development of sensitive
and specific methods for detection. All attempts to devel-
op direct serological detection methods failed. Currently,
PCR technology is the method of choice and has com-
pletely replaced the other techniques like dot and South-
ern blot hybridization. A drawback of molecular detec-
tion is the requirement of purified total DNA extracted
from infected plants or insects. Several extraction proto-
cols have successfully been applied, e.g., the phytoplas-
ma-enrichment procedure described by Ahrens and
Seemiiller (1992) or the simplified CTAB-based extrac-
tion protocol first published by Maixner et al. (1995). Re-
liable diagnosis is also dependent on the sampled organ
and tissue as well as on the sampling time. The seasonal colonization pattern of ‘Ca. P. pruno-
rum’ has been studied in France in apricot, Japanese
plum and European plum (Jarausch et al., 1999a). Al-
though the pathogen was detectable throughout the
year in the aerial parts, the most reliable detection was
achieved during summer (July-September) whereas
sampling in springtime was not recommended. The
pathogen can be detected in roots throughout the year. Detection in phloem preparations from stem and root is
usually more reliable than detection in leaf petioles (Ja-
rausch et al., 1999a). PCR technology offers the advantage of the use of
primers with different degrees of specificity. Universal
phytoplasma primers as well as AP group-specific
primers have been designed in ribosomal DNA se-
quences (Lorenz et al., 1995; Seemiiller et al., 1998b). Due to the close relationship of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ with
the other AP-group fruit tree phytoplasmas, primers de-

 

22 ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’

signed in ribosomal DNA sequences for the specific de-
tection of the ESFY agent cross-amplify DNA from oth-
er AP-group fruit tree phytoplasmas, especially PD and
PYLR agents (Lorenz et al., 1995; Smart et al., 1996; Ki-
son et al., 1997; Seemiiller et al., 1998b). Thus, reliable
direct identification of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ could be
achieved with non-ribosomal primers selected in the se-
quence of a putative nitroreductase gene and an inter-
genic region (Jarausch et al., 1998a, 2000a). Very recent-
ly, Yvon et al. (2009) published 16S rDNA and 16S/23S
rDNA spacer region-based primers which proved to be
specific for ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ and which did not show
PCR signals with several reference strains of ‘Ca. P.
mali’ and ‘Ca. P. pyri’. As mentioned above, ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ can also be distinguished from the other AP-
group fruit tree phytoplasmas by RFLP analysis of PCR-
amplified rDNA using suitable restriction enzymes
(Marcone et al., 1996a; Seemiiller et al., 1998b). The
sensitivity of detection can be increased by nested PCR
which is currently one of the most sensitive means suit-
able for detecting extremely low-titer infections in
woody plants. For this, different combinations of ribo-
somal primers can be used. A PCR-ELISA procedure has been described by
Poggi Pollini et al. (1997) using a ‘Ca. P. prunorum’-
specific biotinylated probe for detection. This proce-
dure which has been applied for detection of several
phytoplasmas other than the ESFY agent, proved to be
10 to 15 times more sensitive than the electrophoretical
detection of amplicons (Poggi Pollini et al., 1997, 2001). Unspecific detection of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections
is also possible by microscopic examination of phloem
tissue sections stained with the DNA fluorochrome 4’-
6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Seemiiller, 1976). However, this method is not as sensitive as PCR (Ja-
rausch et al., 1998a). Visual assessment of characteristic
symptoms as described below is possible but not always
reliable because symptom expression is largely depend-
ent on the genotype and the season and can be masked
by unrelated pathogens or environmental factors. The correlation between typical symptoms and PCR
detection of the pathogen was studied by Jarausch et al. (1998a) in France and by Jarausch et al. (2008) in Ger-
many. In the first study typical symptoms in a wide range
of species and cultivars were highly (95%) correlated to
the presence of the pathogen. However, trees showing
an unclear symptomatology tested positive for “Ca. P.
prunorum’ in 51% of the cases. These data were con-
firmed in the study conducted in Germany under differ-
ent climatic conditions. Early bud break in late winter
was the most reliable symptom for ESFY diagnosis in
apricot, European plum, almond and flowering cherry. In certification or quarantine programs, detection
still involves indexing using a sensitive indicator host
such as peach GF305 seedlings and Japanese plum
“Ozark Premier’ and ‘Red Heart’. The lengthy proce-

   
 

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

dure and low sensitivity are major drawbacks of the in-
dexing approach. ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ detection in quar-
antine programs might in future rely on the simultane-
ous detection of a wide range of pathogens by diagnos-
tic DNA microarrays. Prototypes of such a microarray
have been developed (Hadidi et al., 2004; Pelludat et
al., 2009). Quantification of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ by real-time
PCR. Determination of absolute quantity of the
pathogen in plants and insects has gained increasing im-
portance in recent years to study the plant response in
resistance screenings or to characterize insect transmis-
sion parameters. The development of real-time PCR
technology has greatly facilitated these investigations and
several assays for detection and quantification of “Ca. P.
prunorum’ have been published. Torres et al. (2005) first
reported a real-time assay with ribosomal primers using
the fluorescent SYBR Green I dye for the simultaneous
detection and quantification of phytoplasmas of the AP
group. Absolute quantification was achieved with the
standard curve calibration method using a plasmid as
template. The measured phytoplasma concentration in
the sample was referred to the weight of the plant tissue
used for DNA extraction. By this method the authors
determined concentrations of 9.7x10? to 3.0x10° phyto-
plasma cells per gram of tissue of Japanese plum of apri-
cot buds. Martini et al. (2007b) were the first to publish
a specific real-time assay based on primers selected in
the rplV (rpl22) gene of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’. These au-
thors also used the SYBR Green technology and the
standard curve method for absolute quantification. However, they referred the measured concentration of
phytoplasma cells to concentration of plant DNA in the
analysed extract. The reported phytoplasma concentra-
tions of 1.55x10? to 6.18x10* genome units per
nanogram plant DNA of infected apricot trees is there-
fore not comparable to the data of Torres et al. (2005). Martini et al. (2007b) determined also the phytoplasma
concentration in infested insects of the vector species C.
pruni and found 1.07x107 to 4.24x10’ phytoplasma cells
per tested insect. Finally, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ primers
ECAI1/ECA2 (Jarausch et al., 1998) have also been em-
ployed in real-time PCR using SYBR Green I dye (Ja-
rausch et al., 2009). In this work higher phytoplasma
concentrations were determined: up to 10° phytoplasma
cells per gram freshweight of infected apricot and up to
108 phytoplasma cells per individual of C. pruni. TaqMan probes for the specific detection of ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ were first described by Pignatta et al. (2008)
who adapted a multiplex TaqMan assay published by
Baric and Dalla-Via (2004) for the simultaneous detec-
tion of the phytoplasma and the plant host DNA. Whereas these authors did not quantify the phytoplas-
ma, Thébaud et al. (2009) developed a new TaqMan as-
say with specific primers and probes in the ‘Ca. P.

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

prunorum’ 16S rDNA and specific primers and probes
in the C. pruni 18S rDNA for the absolute quantifica-
tion of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ in its vector. These authors
could show that the DNA extraction yield from single
psyllids varied little as determined with the C. pruni-
specific TaqMan assay. Therefore, they were able to re-
fer the phytoplasma concentration to the tested insect as
it was done in the other reports. Thébaud et al. (2009)
measured the highest phytoplasma concentration of
4.9x 107 cells per insect in overwintered adults of C.
pruni. Thus, the data of the different authors for the
phytoplasma load of psyllids are all in a similar range of
107 to 108 phytoplasma cells per individual. The use of real-time PCR for sensitive detection of
“Ca. P. prunorum’ showed that the detection threshold
of real-time PCR is largely similar to that of nested PCR
while real-time PCR assays greatly reduce the risk to ob-
tain false positives due to contamination of laboratories
arising from previous amplifications (Torres et al., 2005;
Pignatta et al., 2008). INTERACTION OF ‘CA. P. PRUNORUM’
WITH THE PLANT

Host range. ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ preferentially infects
plants in the genus Prunus. It occurs in nature mainly
on apricot, Japanese plum, and peach. However, the
pathogen is also common on almond and flowering
cherry (Seemiiller et a/., 1998a). On the basis of primer
specificity and RFLP analysis of PCR-amplified DNA,
‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections have also been observed in
naturally infected plants of P. domestica, P. avium (sweet
cherry) and P. cerasus (sour cherry), P. mahaleb, P.
cerasifera, P. bokhariensis, P. brigantina, P. cocomilia, P.
hollywood, P. orthosepal, P. simonii, P. spinosa, P. subcor-
data, P. cerasifera x P. munsoniana (P. ‘Marianna’ GF
8/1), and P. besseyi x P. hortulana (Jarausch et al., 1994a,
1998a, 2000a; Poggi Pollini et al., 1995, 2005; Navratil
et al., 2001; Paltrinieri et al., 2001; Carraro et al., 2002). However, its causative role in yellows diseases of these
taxa is not as clear, mainly because they are usually less
affected and/or tolerant (Carraro et al., 1998b; Kison
and Seemiiller, 2001). By grafting and insect vector, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ was experimentally transmitted to several
Prunus taxa listed above including P. insititia, P tomen-
tosa, P. padus, P. laurocerasus, P. cerasus x P. canescens, P.
fructicosa x P. avium, P. fructicosa x P. cerasus (Kison and
Seemiiller, 2001; Carraro et al., 2004a). It has also been
transmitted from diseased stone fruit trees to periwinkle
and from periwinkle to tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) via
dodder (Cuscuta campestris and C. reflexa) bridges (Loi
et al., 1995; Marcone et al., 1999a; Marcone and
Seemiiller, 2001). Moreover, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ was
transmitted by grafting from N. tabacum to several other
Nicotiana species and other solanaceous plants, includ-

 

 

Marcone etal. — 23

ing tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) (Marcone and
Seemiiller, 2001). By PCR assays using specific non-ri-
bosomal primers and RFLP analysis of PCR-amplified
non-ribosomal and/or rDNA sequences, ‘Ca. P. pruno-
rum’ was detected in naturally infected plants of ash
(Fraxinus excelsior), dog rose (Rosa canina), hackberry
(Celtis australis), European hazel (Corylus avellana) and
grapevine (Vitis vinifera) (Marcone et al., 1996b; Varga
et al., 2000; Jarausch et al., 2001a; Duduk et al., 2004). However, further work based mainly on graft inocula-
tion and vector transmission studies is needed to evalu-
ate the significance of these non-Prunus species as alter-
native hosts of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’. Symptom expression. ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ induces
symptoms mainly on leaves and shoots which can vary
considerably depending on plant species, rootstock,
scion cultivar, strain virulence, phytoplasma concentra-
tion, climatic condition, age of trees and insect vector
population (Seemiiller and Foster, 1995; Kison and
Seemiiller, 2001; Thébaud et al., 2006). The most char-
acteristic symptoms which can be observed in most of
the infected Prunus species are off-season growth and
premature break of leaf buds before flowering. In sum-
mer, leaf yellowing or reddening in combination with
leaf roll is the most common symptom. Detailed de-
scriptions of symptoms are available elsewhere (Lederer
and Seemiiller, 1992; Seemiiller and Foster, 1995;
Laimer and Bertaccini, 2008). Also, trees intensively
colonized in the aerial parts usually develop characteris-
tic symptoms (Jarausch et al., 1998a, 2008). One major
aspect of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections is the high mor-
tality rate of apricot, Japanese plum and peach on sus-
ceptible rootstocks. Even more tolerant species like Eu-
ropean plum may die after strong winter frosts when
they are grafted on susceptible rootstocks. Typical ES-
FY symptoms are common in southern European re-
gions but they have been recently observed in a similar
way also in Germany (Jarausch et al., 2008). Colonization behavior. Phytoplasmas differentially
colonize plants, depending on the pathogen type, prop-
erties of the host and its specific reactions. ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ can persist in the aerial parts of diseased
trees during the dormant season whereas it is always
present at root level throughout the year (Seemiiller et
al., 1998c; Jarausch et al., 1999a). Furthermore, Ja-
rausch et al. (1999a) proved by tissue culture techniques
that the ESFY pathogen colonizing the aerial parts dur-
ing winter is viable. This behavior is in contrast to AP
and PD agents, which owing to the degeneration of
sieve tubes in the above-ground parts of apple and pear
trees in late autumn and early winter, are, in almost all
cases, eliminated in the aerial parts during winter while
they persist in the roots where intact sieve tubes are
present throughout the year. From the roots both

24 ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’

pathogens may recolonize the aerial parts in spring
when new phloem is being formed (Schaper and
Seemiiller, 1984). However, monitoring of the ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ population by DAPI fluorescence method
and PCR assays has shown that the pathogen slowly col-
onized the leaves in spring, yielding thus a colonization
pattern like AP and PD agents. Systemic colonization of
diseased trees occurred from July throughout late fall. Responses of Prunus genotypes to ESFY infections. It is well known that rootstocks significantly affect the
response of grafted trees to ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections. Thus, 23 established and experimental Prunus root-
stocks, which are used in Europe were examined by
graft-inoculation, PCR assays and DAPI fluorescence
method to identify ESFY resistance in stone fruits (Ki-
son and Seemiiller, 2001). For inoculation, twenty differ-
ently virulent ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains, which were col-
lected from diseased almond, apricot, flowering cherry,
Japanese plum and peach trees, were used. Inoculations
were performed by grafting infected tissue onto healthy
rootstocks and the inoculated plants were trained in a
way that the shoot that developed from the inoculum
was grown as scion. Symptom development was moni-
tored over a 5 to 8-year observation period. The root-
stocks examined showed considerable differences in
their response to ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections. The
symptoms induced included foliar yellowing, foliar red-
dening, leaf roll, premature defoliation, off-season
growth, reduced vigor, phloem necrosis, and death of
trees. Also, mortality within the same rootstock and
scion often varied considerably, depending on strain vir-
ulence. Trees on P domestica stocks Achermann’s,
Brompton and P 2175 and P. cerasifera stock Myrabi (P
2032) were little affected. Most of these trees did not
suffer from death of rootstock and scion nor showed fo-
liar symptoms and reduced vigor. Moreover, phloem
necrosis was rare and the scion was usually less affected
than on other rootstocks, even in presence of severe
strains. Slightly more damage occurred in trees on root-
stocks GF 677 (P. dulcis x P. persica), P. ‘Marianna’ GF
8/1, and P. insititia stocks St Julien A and St Julien GF
655/2. However, some scion genotypes grown on these
stocks were markedly damaged, as evidenced by mortali-
ty, foliar symptoms and phloem necrosis. Ishtara [(P.
cerasifera x P. persica) x P. salicina], Myrobalan (P
cerasifera), and peach rootstocks Higama and GF 305
were found to be moderately to highly susceptible. Mild
strains and also some severe strains only affected these
rootstocks slightly. However, they were severely dam-
aged by other highly aggressive strains. The most suscep-
tible were peach rootstocks Montclar, Rutgers Red Leaf,
Rubira, peach seedlings, apricot seedlings, and P.insititia
stock St Julien 2. Losses up to 100% were recorded on
trees of apricot and all of the most susceptible peach
rootstocks. Trees on apricot rootstocks were most se-

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

verely affected when the scion was apricot and the in-
fecting strain was originating from apricot. In contrast,
the susceptibility of trees on peach rootstocks appeared
not to be affected by the kind of scion and origin of the
inoculum. Off-season growth depended on both host
and pathogen. It usually occurred in combinations of the
more virulent strains and the more susceptible host. Of
the flowering cherry trees grown on various rootstocks. the least susceptible were those on Gisela 3 (P. fruticosa
x P. avium) and F 12/1 (P. avium) whereas Gisela 1 (P.
cerasus x P. canescens), Weihroot 158 (P. cerasus) and
Gisela 5 (P. fruticosa x P. cerasus) were more affected. The mortality of flowering cherry scions was often high-
er than that of the rootstocks. Phytoplasmal infections
were detected by either DAPI fluorescence test or PCR
assays, in all inoculated Prunus genotypes, irrespective of
symptom expression. The colonization density was lower
in little or not affected rootstocks than in susceptible
rootstocks. There were also differences between colo-
nization of the roots and the aerial parts of rootstocks. Usually phytoplasma population was higher in the roots
than in the stem of the same genotype. In some root-
stocks, infections were not found in the stem but only in
the roots. Colonization appeared to be persistent over
the observation period even in the least affected root-
stocks such as P. domestica stocks Achermann’s, Bromp-
ton and P 2175 and P. cerasifera stock Myrabi. Since
trees on these rootstocks were also slightly damaged, and
no recovery was observed, none of the examined geno-
types could be considered resistant. Jarausch et al. (2000b) examined the response of six-
teen P. domestica genotypes which were grown as scion
on P. ‘Marianna’ GF 8/1 to a French strain of the ESFY
agent. Following graft-inoculation, the plants were ob-
served over a 6-year period. Of the material tested,
Prune d’Ente genotypes were shown to be moderately
to highly susceptible. Among them, scion cultivars Pri-
macotes, Tardicotes, Lorida and Spurdente were con-
siderably damaged, as expressed by symptoms such as
leaf roll, off-season growth, reduced vigor and produc-
tivity, and plant death. Little or not affected were sever-
al hybrids and X-ray mutants of Reine Claude (green-
gage) cultivars as they exhibited no mortality while only
a few ‘Fermareine’ and P9184 trees showed off-season
growth. By PCR assays, phytoplasmal infections could
be detected in all inoculated genotypes, irrespective of
symptom expression. However, detection frequency and
phytoplasma concentrations were usually lower in the
more tolerant hosts than in susceptible genotypes. For
the Reine Claude genotypes P1771 and P1119, infec-
tions could only be detected in the rootstocks. Experi-
mental inoculations of thirteen sweet cherry cultivars
demonstrated a high level of resistance in P avium to-
wards ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ (Jarausch et al., 1999b). Audergon et al. (1991) reported that 155 cultivars
and selections of apricot grown on apricot seedling

 

 

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

A1236 Manicot, greatly differed in their susceptibility to
the strain G 32 Noves of apricot chlorotic leaf roll, fol-
lowing experimental inoculation. Some of them, e.g.,
‘Tardif de Bordaneuil’, ‘Caid Azdz 1’, and ‘Bebeco LA
2-A’ proved highly susceptible to be used as indicators
whereas other, e.g., ‘Jaubert Foulon’, ‘Max Gold’, and
‘Chastemi do’ resulted tolerant or not infected. Maintenance of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ in micropropagat-
ed plants. So far, biological studies on interactions of
‘Ca. P. prunorum’ with its plant host are restricted to
field-grown plants which are subjected to the vegetative
cycle. As these experiments are long-lasting, attempts
have been made to maintain the ESFY agent in micro-
propagated plants. This can be achieved by introducing
ESFY-infected plant material into tissue culture as it has
been first reported by Jarausch et al. (1994b). These mi-
cropropagated ESFY-infected cultures of P. ‘Marianna’
GF 8/1 were maintained up to now proving a stable cul-
ture of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ in its host plant for more than
18 years (W. Jarausch, unpublished data). ESFY-infect-
ed tissue cultures of P. domestica, P. ‘Marianna’, P. ar-
meniaca and P. persica, have also been established by M.
Laimer and co-workers (Laimer, 2003; Laimer and
Bertaccini, 2008). These cultures have then been used
to develop protocols for the elimination of ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ from micropropagated plant material. ES-
FY-elimination could be achieved applying a combina-
tion of in vitro thermotherapy and meristem prepara-
tion (Laimer, 2003; Laimer and Bertaccini, 2008). In
these studies, forty-three out of 48 plantlets regenerated. from meristematic tissue of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’-infected
peach proved to be healthy while the rate of the
pathogen-free plants in regeneration of apricot plantlets
was about 80%. Data reported by Jarausch et al. (1998b) indicate that simple axillary bud culture of ES-
FY-infected in vitro shoots is not sufficient to eliminate
the phytoplasma. Plantlets regenerated from buds of
only 2 mm in size remained still infected by ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ as demonstrated by PCR detection. These
data indicate that micropropagated plants are homoge-
neously infected with the pathogen and that reliable
phytoplasma elimination can only be achieved by com-
bining in vitro thermotherapy and meristem prepara-
tion. Plant tissue culture has also successfully been used
to transmit ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ by in vitro grafting (Ja-
rausch et al., 1999c). By this approach, ESFY-infected
micropropagated P. ‘Marianna’ GF 8/1 scions were
grafted onto healthy rootstocks of the same genotype. High transmission rates up to 94% were achieved with-
in three months of growth. Thus, it could be shown that
in vitro grafting may be useful for a preliminary screen-
ing of Prunus genotypes for ESFY resistance (Jarausch
et al., 1999c). Actually, this approach has regained new
interest as the development of quantitative real-time
PCR assays for determining the phytoplasma concentra-

 

 

Marcone etal. 25

tion in the inoculated genotype has provided new tools
for resistance evaluation (Jarausch et al., 2009). Recovery. Studies conducted in France and Italy have
shown that in apricot orchards severely damaged by ‘Ca. P. prunorum’, some trees recovered spontaneously while
the vast majority of them declined (Morvan et al., 1986,
1991; Castelain et al., 1997; Loi et al., 2008; Ermacora et
al., 2009). In recovered trees a permanent disappearance
of symptoms in the above-ground parts but not of the
‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections, occurred. However, the
phenomenon of recovery or reduction of strain virulence
is still poorly understood especially on molecular and
biochemical basis. Musetti et al. (2005) investigated the
effect of reactive oxygen species (ROS) on the recovery
phenomenon in ESFY-affected apricot trees by compar-
ing hydrogen peroxide and related metabolites and en-
zymes in leaves from recovered, symptomatic, and non-
symptomatic infected plants. Substantial amounts of hy-
drogen peroxide occurred in the sieve tube plasma
membranes of leaves from recovered plants but not in
those from symptomatic and non-symptomatic plants. Leaves from recovered plants had a guaiacol peroxidase
(GPX) activity, which keeps under control ROS genera-
tion, lower than that of leaves from symptomatic plants
whereas the lowest GPX activity level occurred in non-
symptomatic leaves. Also, the reduced glutathione,
which can be oxidized to glutathione disulfide in pres-
ence of unstable molecules such as ROS, showed a con-
tent which was higher in recovered leaves than in symp-
tomatic leaves. In contrast, the highest content of re-
duced glutathione was recorded in non-symptomatic
leaves. From these data the authors concluded that the
overproduction of hydrogen peroxide in recovered
plants owing to a non-very active oxidant-scavenging
system may account for reduction of strain virulence and
disease severity, thereby playing a major role in the re-
covery of ESFY-infected apricot trees. Also, the study by
Musetti et al. (2005) provided further evidence that *Ca. P. prunorum’ infections persist in the aerial parts of re-
covered apricot trees. Host plant genes differentially expressed upon ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections. In contrast to progress made in
detection, differentiation and phylogenetic classification
of phytoplasmas, very little is known about the mecha-
nisms by which phytoplasmas induce disease in plants
and the reason for different reactions of the host plants
to phytoplasmal infections. Carginale et al. (2004) re-
ported on the identification of apricot genes whose pat-
tern of expression changed in response to ‘Ca. P. pruno-
rum’ infections by using the differential display tech-
nique of mRNAs. Among the genes identified, a gene
encoding the heat-shock protein HSP70, a gene encod-
ing a metallothionein and another homologous to the ex-
pressed sequence tag 673 cDNA clone of P. armeniaca,

26  ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’

whose function was unknown, were up-regulated where-
as a gene encoding a protein which showed a significant
homology to an amino acid transporter of Arabidopsis
thaliana was down-regulated. Heat-shock and metalloth-
ionein proteins are known to be produced in plants and
many other living organisms to a high level in response
to a variety of stress conditions. Thus, as concluded by
the authors, a possible role of the induced metalloth-
ionein proteins in ESFY-infected apricot may be to re-
duce the concentration of free metal ions in the cell un-
der pathogen attack and preventing an increase in reac-
tive oxygen species. Metal ions may arise from enzymatic
degradation of substances contained in the plant cells. Therefore, metallothionein proteins may be involved in
sequestering and transport of metal ions from infected
tissue to developing areas of the plant. Also, the fact that
the expression level of an amino acid transporter gene is
greatly reduced by ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections indicates
that the transport of amino acids which are essential for
growth and development, to various plant parts includ-
ing sink organs, is impaired in diseased plants. Amino
acid transport also plays a key role in leaf senescence
which is a well-controlled process during which the
plant recycles substances from cells before death eventu-
ally occurs. Thus, the impaired amino acid transport that
occurs in infected plants may account for some of the
symptoms exhibited by these plants. TRANSMISSION OF ‘CA. P. PRUNORUM’

Graft transmission. ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ can be tran:
mitted from tree to tree by grafting. Usually, it is effi-
ciently transmitted by chip-budding from a suitable
donor host to a recipient tree throughout the year in-
cluding the winter because this pathogen is present in
the aerial parts of trees even during the dormant season
and is viable and transmissible (Seemiiller et al., 1998c;
Jarausch et al., 1999a). ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ is not seed-
transmissible. However, a recent work by Necas et al. (2008) has shown that ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections oc-
curred in a few fruits and seeds collected from ESFY-af-
fected apricot trees, as revealed by PCR assays. Also,
seeds from ‘Ca. P. prunorum’-infected apricot trees had
a viability which was 4.5 times lower than that of
healthy seeds while the germination rate was 7 times
lower than the healthy control. No phytoplasmal infee-
tions occurred in apricot seedlings originating from ES-
FY-affected trees. The ESFY pathogen has also been
transmitted by the in vitro grafting technique (Jarausch
et al., 1999c). Insect vector transmission. In the recent years,
progress has been made in understanding the epidemi-
ology of the ESFY agent, in particular in insect vector
transmission. The psyllid Cacopsylla pruni has been

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

shown to vector the pathogen in various European
countries such as Italy, France and Germany (Carraro et
al., 1998a, 2001; Jarausch et al., 2001b, 2007a, 2007b,
2008). C. pruni is a European-Middle Asiatic species
which is known to occur in several European countries
(Lauterer, 1999). This psyllid is strictly oligophagous on
Prunus spp., completes one generation per year and
overwinters as adult on shelter plants, usually conifers. At the end of winter/early spring, overwintering adults
move from the shelter plants back to stone fruit trees
(primary hosts) for oviposition (Thébaud et al., 2009). The insects of the new generation feed on the primary
hosts until the beginning of July when they leave the
stone fruits as adults to move to overwintering hosts. Studies by Carraro et al. (2001, 2004b) have shown that
both springtime and overwintered adults were able to
transmit the ESFY agent to healthy plants, and that the
re-immigrant adults transmitted the winter-retained
phytoplasma that had been acquired the previous year. In spring, 8.6% of overwintered adults proved to be in-
fested by the ESFY agent and were highly infectious. A
similar percentage of springtime adults proved to be
phytoplasma-positive but showed a transmission effi-
ciency lower than that of the overwintered adults. The
authors concluded that most insects of the new genera-
tion, although having acquired the phytoplasma from
the primary host, could not complete the latency on
them. In experimental transmission trials, a minimum
acquisition access period (AAP) between 2 and 4 days,
a minimum latent period of 2-3 weeks and a minimum
inoculation period of 1-2 days, could be defined. It also
was shown that the psyllid transmitted the pathogen in
a persistent manner. In Germany, studies performed by
Jarausch et al. (2007a, 2007b, 2008) revealed that in
spring 2-3% of the field-collected overwintered adults
were infested by ‘Ca. P. prunorum’. Also, in experimen-
tal transmission trials the vector capacity of both over-
wintered and springtime adults proved to be lower than
that described by Carraro et al. (2001, 2004a). Similar
low infestation and transmission rates were recorded in
France by Jarausch et al. (2001b) and Thébaud et al. (2008). The latter found that in transmissi
0.5% of the sampled re-immigrants were infectious
whereas springtime adults of the new generation reared
on infected plants showed a transmission efficiency of
0.6%. Recent work by Thébaud et al. (2009) has shown
that the ESFY agent multiplied in its vector after acqui-
sition by the emerging generation also during overwin-
tering, therefore it is transmitted in a persistent-prop-
agative manner. The full acquisition-latency-inoculation
sequence could be accomplished only by a few spring-
time adults before migrating from Prunus spp. to
conifers. In contrast, most new adults born on infected
plants reached their maximum phytoplasma titer only
after migrating to conifers in mountainous areas and
that, after a latency of eight months, when migrated

 

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

back to Prunus spp., had a very high transmission effi-
ciency (60%). Thus, secondary spread of the ESFY
agent during the growing season appeared to be mar-
ginal in comparison to primary infections which origi-
nate from outside a given orchard. Individuals of C. pruni which were naturally infested
by the ESFY agent as revealed by PCR assays, and for
which no transmission data are available, have been
found in several European countries like Italy (Carraro
et al., 1998a, 2001; Pollini et al., 2004; Ferretti et al.,
2009), France (Jarausch et al., 2001b; Yvon et al., 2004,
2009), Spain (Lavifia et al., 2004), Czech Republic (Fi-
alova et al., 2004, 2007), Germany (Jarausch et al.,
2007a, 2007b) and Bosnia and Herzegovina (Deli¢ et
al., 2008). A vertical (= transovarial) transmission of the
ESFY agent by C. pruni was not observed by Carraro et
al. (1998a). However, Tedeschi et al. (2006) found indi-
cations for a possible transovarial transmission of ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ by C. pruni. In this work, different develop-
mental stages of the progeny of infested C. pruni fe-
males were examined by PCR technology. ‘Ca. P. pruno-
rum’ could be detected in eggs, nymphs and newly
emerged adults. Also, in transmission experiments using
nymphs and newly emerged adults originating from in-
fested females, successful transmission of the ESFY
agent to healthy plum plants was achieved in one case. Poggi Pollini et al. (2009), were also able to detect the
ESFY pathogen in some eggs of C. pruni, by using the
highly sensitive real-time PCR assays. Wild Prunus spp. play an important role in the epi-
demiology of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’. Several studies in dif-
ferent European countries have shown that C. pruni
prefers wild Prunus spp. as main host plants (Carraro et
al., 2002; Deli¢ et al., 2008; Fialova et al., 2004, 2007;
Jarausch et al., 2001a, 2001b, 2008; Labonne and Li-
chou, 2004; Lavifia et al., 2004; Pollini et al., 2004;
Ramel and Gugerli, 2004). During these studies many
cultivated and wild Prunus spp. have been monitored
for the presence of both the ESFY agent and the insect
vector. Among the cultivated taxa, P. armeniaca, P. persi-
ca and P. dulcis were the most affected plants by ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ but with generally low populations of the
vector. In contrast, the highest vector densities were
mainly recorded for wild Prunus spp. such as P. spinosa,
P. cerasifera, P. domestica and P. salicina. Interestingly, P.
spinosa and P. cerasifera which acted as reservoirs for
the pathogen and the vector rarely showed typical
symptoms (Carraro et al., 2002; Jarausch et al., 2008). Carraro et al. (2004a) investigated the susceptibility of
12 wild and cultivated Prunus spp. to ‘Ca. P. prunorum’
as well as their capability to host the vector. They found
that P. armeniaca, P. cerasifera, P. domestica, P. persica, P.
salicina and P. spinosa can be considered as common
and natural hosts of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’, P. avium and P.
mahaleb can be considered as non-common natural

Marcone et al. 27

hosts of the agent, P Jaurocerasus and P. padus can be
considered as experimental hosts of the phytoplasma
and P. dulcis and P. tormentosa can be considered as po-
tential common and natural hosts. These findings indi-
cate the epidemiological relevance of some wild Prunus
genotypes which allow to both the ESFY agent and the
insect vector to complete the cycle regardless of the
presence of cultivated stone fruit trees. BIOLOGICAL CHARACTERIZATION
OF DIFFERENT STRAINS

Strain differences and strain interference. ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ has been shown to exist as several strains,
each varying in virulence and the ability to induce spe-
cific symptoms. Dosba et al. (1991) found differences in
virulence when several French strains of ‘Ca. P. pruno-
rum’ were characterized pathologically by graft-inocula-
tion to various Prunus genotypes. Also, some strains of
the ESFY pathogen are known to induce off-season
growth and premature bud break in a given rootstock-
scion combination while other strains do not (Lorenz et
al., 1994; Seemiiller and Foster, 1995). ESFY-affected
peach trees with symptoms which were very similar to
those described for PYLR in California, have been ob-
served in southern Italy (Marcone et al., 1996a). The
most characteristic symptom of the affected trees is a
pronounced enlargement of midribs and major lateral
veins. Infection of peach by the ESFY agent is known to
result sometimes in swollen veins whose occurrence and
intensity may vary from year to year and with cultivars. However, it has never been observed in other areas in
Europe at the same severity as in southern Italy. Al-
though the cause for the pronounced symptom expres-
sion is not clear, it might be due to a specific strain or
pathotype (Marcone et al., 1996a). In France, during a 8-year survey of ESFY-infested
apricot orchards in the Pyréneés-Orientales, among the
diseased apricot trees, some trees were found to be little
affected and never declined. From the latter trees, a
strain which clearly differed from the more aggressive
strains on the basis of symptoms induced in peach GF
305 seedling, following graft-inoculation experiments,
was identified. This strain was designed as peach vein
clearing (PVC) due to the leaf vein-clearing symptoms
induced in peach GF 305 seedlings and subsequently
was molecularly identified as ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ (Cor-
naggia et al., 1995; Danet et al., 2007, 2008). Evidence
that variation in symptom expression in a given plant
host may be due to the occurrence of different strains
also stems from Gentit et al. (1998). These authors used
differences in symptomatology in peach GF 305 after
graft-inoculation to distinguish ‘Ca. P. prunorum’
strains from various Prunus genotypes from each other
and from PVC. A severe strains of the X-disease phyto-

28  ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’

plasma which infects peach in North America could be
distinguished from the ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains as well. In Germany, work by Kison and Seemiiller (2001)
has shown that twenty strains of the ‘Ca. P. prunorum’
greatly differed in virulence when examined by graft-in-
oculation of trees on peach (Rubira, Rutgers Red Leaf,
Montclar, GF 305), peach hybrid GF 677 and P. ‘Mari-
anna’ GF 8/1 rootstocks. While some strains were near-
ly avirulent or weakly virulent and induced only mild
foliar symptoms and slightly reduced vigor but no mor-
tality, others were highly virulent and caused severe
symptoms and a high mortality rate of affected trees. The scions were often more severely affected than the
rootstocks. Also, severe strains caused distinctly more
phloem necrosis than mild strains. Virulence often de-
pended on the pathogen-scion combination and was in
several cases most severe when a strain was maintained
in or grafted to its original host which was grown as
scion. However, in some instances the origin of the
strain and the kind of scion were not crucial for strain
virulence, as trees on peach rootstocks were severely af-
fected when grafted with strains from sources other
than peach. Furthermore, strains showing pathological
differences were indistinguishable with techniques for
routine phytoplasma differentiation and characteriza-
tion such as sequence and RFLP analysis of PCR-ampli-
fied rDNA as well as Southern blot hybridization using
probes suitable for differentiation of the fruit tree phy-
toplasmas of the AP group (Kison and Seemiiller, 2001). Recent work by Marcone et al. (2009) using sequence
analyses of less-conserved, non-ribosomal genes has re-
vealed that genetic variability occurred among the
above-mentioned strains within some genes. However,
the genetic differences observed are neither suitable
markers for strain differentiation nor linked to patho-
logical traits. Differences in virulence were also identified among
‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains infecting apricot trees in an
orchard located in northeastern Italy in which infected
trees and symptom development under natural infection
conditions have been monitored since 1990 (Loi et al.,
2008; Ermacora et al., 2009). Among severely affected
trees, non-symptomatic infected trees and trees which
showed a complete disappearance of symptoms while
being ‘Ca. P. prunorum’-positive (recovered trees), were
observed. Healthy apricots were graft-inoculated with
scion wood from these three kinds of inocula and moni-
tored for disease development over a 6-year period. The
trees inoculated with symptomatic scions developed se-
vere symptoms and these strains were accordingly clas-
sified as hypervirulent strains whereas trees inoculated
with non-symptomatic scions remained non-sympto-
matic and these strains were thus regarded as hypoviru-
lent strains. Also, transmission rates in graft-inoculation
experiments were higher for hypervirulent strains than
for hypovirulent strains. By quantitative real-time PCR

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

assays, the phytoplasma concentration in trees infected
by hypovirulent strains proved to be lower than in trees
infected by hypervirulent strains (Loi et al., 2008; Erma-
cora et al., 2009). Hypovirulent strains of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ have also
been identified in recovered apricot trees in France
(Morvan et al., 1986, 1991; Castelain et al., 1997). Healthy apricot trees inoculated with scions from recoy-
ered trees and grown under high infection pressure con-
ditions developed no or only mild symptoms while non-
inoculated healthy trees became severely diseased due
to natural infection. Thus, recovered trees were harbor-
ing avirulent or low-virulent strains (protectant strains)
which protect the plant from subsequent infection by
virulent (severe) strains. As mentioned above, some of
these strains along with PVC are distinguishable from
severe strains of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ on the basis of
branching patterns using phylogenetic analysis of aceF
sequences (Danet ef al., 2007, 2008). It is conceivable
that strain interference (or cross protection) play a key
role in the recovery phenomenon in which protectant
strains may suppress severe strains. Interference be-
tween two strains of the ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ has also been
reported by Cornaggia et al. (1995). When peach GF
305 seedlings were graft-inoculated first with the severe
ACLR strain and then with the low-avirulent PVC
strain, the inoculated plants developed mainly leaf vein-
clearing symptoms, indicative of PVC strain infections. However, in plants inoculated first with the PVC strain
and then challenged by the ACLR strain, mild symp-
toms of the first strain developed. Plants inoculated
with ACLR strain alone, died within four months. The
results indicated a cross protection reaction. Interfer-
ence between strains of the same taxon is also known
for other phytoplasma-plant host combinations (Freitag,
1964; Sinclair and Griffiths, 2000). MANAGEMENTS APPROACHES

Like other phytoplasmas, direct protection of trees
from ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ cannot be achieved by chemical
control measures. However, the incidence of ESFY
agent can be reduced significantly if proper attention is
given to several other control measures. These include
mainly the use of healthy planting material, effective
control of the insect vector, removal of diseased trees
and orchard management. Furthermore, data on experi-
mental biological control by cross protection are also
available. The most promising approach to control ES-
FY agent would be through the use of resistant plants. Healthy planting material. The use of certified
pathogen-free trees is recommended for establishing
new orchards. Strategies to screen stone fruit crops for
graft-transmissible agents including phytoplasmas, have

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

advanced substantially over the past decade (Rowhani et
al., 2005). As ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ persists in the stem dur-
ing winter it can also be transmitted by infected dor-
mant bud wood (Seemiiller et al., 1998c). This has great
implications for epidemiological and quarantine pur-
poses. In the case of no persistence such as for ‘Ca. P.
mali’ and ‘Ca. P. pyri’, dormant scion wood can be
grafted and shipped with no risk of pathogen transmis-
sion and spread. If the pathogen persists, dormant scion
wood should be treated like bud wood during the grow-
ing season. Because nearly all stone fruit plants are pro-
duced by vegetative propagation, ESFY pathogen
spread by latently infected, symptomless planting mate-
rial is a great risk. Nowadays, nuclear stocks for root-
stocks and scion wood have to be tested regularly with a
highly sensitive and specific PCR procedure to ensure
that they are free from infections. The propagation ma-
terial in the nursery has then to be protected from natu-
ral infections by vector control. In vitro thermotherapy and meristem tip culture
techniques have been used for eradication of ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ infections in diseased Prunus plants (Laimer,
2003; Laimer and Bertaccini, 2008). Furthermore,
cryotherapy of shoot tips which is known as a newly
pathogen eradication method, has been successfully ap-
plied to eliminate several graft-transmissible pathogens
including phytoplasmas from crop plants belonging to
six families. Although this method has not yet extended
to ESFY-infected Prunus genotypes, it has the potential
to replace more traditional methods like meristem cul-
ture for production of healthy planting material (Wang
et al., 2009). Vector control. As overwintering as well as spring-
time generation of the vector C. pruni may transmit the
pathogen, vector control has to start in early spring with
insecticide treatments directed against the re-immigrant
adults which are highly infectious (Carraro et al., 1998a,
2001). A second treatment at the period of egg deposi-
tion should prevent the development of a new genera-
tion in the orchard. Another spray program may focus
on the control of the developing new generation as the
new generation is potentially infective when born on
diseased trees and is able to transmit the pathogen when
leaving the primary hosts. However, insecticide applica-
tion might not be possible during blossom and has to be
selective in late spring and summer in order to minimize
damage to beneficial insects. Furthermore, insecticides
efficient for the control of psyllids in stone fruits have
still to be evaluated and/or are not authorized in every
country. Early detection and uprooting of infected trees
is of paramount importance to reduce the inoculum
sources and the further spread of the pathogen. In addi-
tion, wild Prunus species such as P. spinosa, P. cerasifera
and P. domestica present a further risk for the disease
spread. They may harbor the pathogen without obvious

Marcone etal. 29

symptoms and are known to be preferred hosts of the
psyllid C. pruni (Carraro et al., 2002). Therefore, wild
Prunus species present within or around ESFY-infested
orchards should be carefully monitored and removed if
they test phytoplasma-positive. Orchard management. Another important control
measure to slow down the disease spread can be appro-
priate orchard management. Most of the commonly
used rootstock genotypes based on P. domestica, P.
cerasifera or P. salicina tend to produce more or less im-
portant rootstock suckers. However, these young devel-
oping suckers are the preferred host plants of C. pruni
(Labonne and Lichou, 2004). Much higher psyllid pop-
ulations have been found on the suckers than on the
scion cultivar. A consequent elimination of the root-
stock suckers before the migration period of C. pruni is
therefore strongly recommended (Labonne and Lichou,
2004). Resistance. Since ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ is able to over-
winter in the above-ground parts of the trees, resistance
of both rootstock and scion cultivars is required to pre-
vent damage by the disease. Also, as rootstocks signifi-
cantly affect the response of grafted trees to ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ infections, the choice of a suitable rootstock
may prolong productivity of infected trees. In a previ-
ous work, many established and experimental root-
stocks and scion cultivars were examined by graft-inoc-
ulation, PCR assays and DAPI fluorescence tests to
identify resistance in stone fruits. For inoculation, sever-
al differently virulent ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains were
used (Kison and Seemiiller, 2001). Both rootstocks and
scion cultivars showed considerable differences in their
response to ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections. However, sat-
isfactory ESFY resistance could not be detected. Only
trees on P. domestica stocks Achermann’s, Brompton
and P 2175 and P. cerasifera stock Myrabi were litte af-
fected. Slightly more damage occurred in trees on root-
stocks GF 677, GF 8/1, and P. insititia stocks St Julien
A and St Julien GF 655/2. The remaining tested geno-
types including Ishtara, Myrobalan, peach and apricot
rootstocks were found moderately to highly susceptible
and, thus, cannot be recommended for commercial
growing (Kison and Seemiiller, 2001). Also, the scions
were often more severely affected than the rootstocks. An interesting level of resistance has been observed in
several hybrids and X-ray mutants of Reine Claude cul-
tivars (Jarausch et al., 2000b). Cross protection with avirulent, or weakly virulent
strains. Control of ESFY has been attempted by cross
protection in France (Morvan et al., 1986, 1991; Caste-
lain et al., 1997). The cross protection effect among ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ strains has been observed over 20 years,
indicating therefore a stable establishment of the causal

30 ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’

agent. However, information on a detailed molecular
characterization, mode of action, insect vector transmis-
sibility, and safety aspects of protectant strains is still
lacking. Also, it is largely unknown whether protectant
strains identified in apricot trees in France show cross
protection efficiency either on other stone fruit species
or against severe strains occurring in other geographic
areas of Europe. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The wealth of molecular and epidemiological data
available highlights the unique properties of ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’, which is relatively homogeneous genetically
although it infects a range of different Prunus species. Although ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ infections have been de-
tected in other plant species than stone fruits, the rele-
vance of the occurrence of ESFY agent in other plants
is not clear. Its detection is mainly based on the highly
sensitive nested PCR assays with no data from patholog-
ical studies. Therefore, ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ appears to be
a highly Prunus-specific pathogen. Also, it is transmitted
by only one vector, C. pruni, and all attempts to find
further vector species failed (J.L. Danet and W. Ja-
rausch, unpublished information). Increasing amount of
reports on the occurrence of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ in Eu-
rope and neighbouring Mediterranean regions is a clear
evidence for a dynamic spread of the pathogen but also
for an increased alertness of growers and advisors for
this economically damaging agent. The relatively genetic
homogeneity and a high plant host and insect vector
specificity rise interesting questions about the evolution
of the causal agent and the disease. The most suscepti-
ble Prunus genotypes originate from Asia while tolerant
ones are native to Europe. Tolerance or resistance to
‘Ca. P. prunorum’ would be expected in regions where
the pathogen and its plant hosts have co-evolved, while
lack of tolerance or resistance could indicate recent in-
troduction of either the pathogen or the host. Also, the
vector C. pruni is a European species with limited
spread in adjacent Asian countries. Thus, it appears that
the distribution of ‘Ca P. prunorum’ is tightly linked to
the distribution of its vector and that the economic inci-
dence of ESFY has raised dramatically with the intro-
duction of highly susceptible genotypes into Europe. Ongoing phylogeographic studies on the ESFY agent
and its vector will shed light into the evolution of the
disease in near future. Recent data indicating a
monophasic spread of ESFY offers new insights into the
efficacity of vector control strategies and the risk assess-
ment and management (Thébaud et al., 2009). Despite
its apparent genetic homogeneity, several strains of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ with varying degrees of virulence have
been described. Although preliminary attempts to ex-
ploit avirulent strains in cross protection strategies have

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

been made in restricted areas where these strains were
discovered, new research is needed to develop cross
protection procedures as an efficient, safe and environ-
ment-friendly tool to control ESFY on larger scale. This
research can now be addressed since molecular tools to
characterize protectant strains and elucidate their mode
of action, are available. Natural resistance to ‘Ca. P.
prunorum’ is still poorly understood and needs further
investigations. The role played by the rootstocks for the
spread of the disease has not been taken into account
sufficiently. Resistant rootstocks may limit the incidence
of the disease in the scion cultivar whereas rootstock
suckers, especially in susceptible genotypes, may be im-
portant entry ports for ‘Ca. P. prunorum’ as they are at-
tractive for its vector. In contrast to progress made in understanding mo-
lecular detection and characterization, taxonomy, phy-
logeny, and epidemiological aspects of ‘Ca. P. pruno-
rum’, very little is known about genes mediating patho-
genicity or virulence. A number of putative pathogenici-
ty factors are known from the complete genome se-
quences of the few phytoplasmas which have been de-
termined so far (Hogenhout et al., 2008; Kube et al.,
2008; Tran-Nguyen et al., 2008). However, sequence
comparisons of the entire genome from a virulent and
an avirulent strain of ‘Ca. P. prunorum’, would provide
insights into the largely unknown mechanisms involved
in pathogenicity of this Prunus-infecting agent. REFERENCES

Ahrens U., Seemiiller E., 1992. Detection of DNA of plant
pathogenic mycoplasmalike organisms by a polymerase
chain reaction that amplifies a sequence of the 16S rRNA
gene. Phytopathology 82: 828-832. Ahrens U., Lorenz K.-H., Seemiiller E., 1993. Genetic diversi-
ty among mycoplasmalike organisms associated with stone
fruit diseases. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 6: 686-
691. Audergon J.M., Castelain C., Morvan G., Chastellitre M.G.,
1991. Behaviour of 150 apricot varieties after apricot
chlorotic leaf roll inoculation. Acta Horticulturae 293: 593-
598. Baric S., Dalla-Via J., 2004. A new approach to apple prolifer-
ation detection: a highly sensitive real-time PCR assay. Journal of Microbiological Methods 57: 135-145. Carginale V., Maria G., Capasso C., Ionata E., La Cara F,, Pa-
store M., Bertaccini A., Capasso A., 2004. Identification of
genes expressed in response to phytoplasma infection in
leaves of Prunus armeniaca by messenger RNA differential
display. Gene 332: 29-34. Carraro L., Osler R., Loi N., Ermacora P., Refatti E., 1998a. Transmission of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma
by Cacopsylla pruni. Journal of Plant Pathology 80: 233-
239. Carraro L., Loi N., Ermacora P., Osler R., 1998b. High toler-

  

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

ance of European plum varieties to plum leptonecrosis. European Journal of Plant Pathology 104: 141-145. Carraro L., Loi N., Ermacora P, 2001. Transmission charac-
teristics of the European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma
and its vector Cacopsylla pruni, European Journal of Plant
Pathology 107: 695-700. Carraro L., Ferrini F,, Ermacora P., Loi N., 2002. Role of wild
Prunus species in the epidemiology of European stone fruit
yellows. Plant Pathology 51: 513-517. Carraro L., Ferrini R, Ermacora P., Loi N., 2004a, Transmis-
sion of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma to
Prunus species by using vector and graft transmission. Acta
Horticulturae 657: 449-453. Carraro L., Ferrini E, Labonne G., Ermacora P., Loi N.,
2004b. Seasonal infectivity of Cacopsylla pruni, the vector
of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma. Annals of
Applied Biology 144: 191-195. Castelain C., Chastelligre M.-G., Jullian J-P., Morvan G.,
Lemaire J.-M., 1997. La prémunition contre 'enroulement
chlorotique de labricotier, Bilan de dix annés d’observa-
tions sur huit vergers. Phytoma 493: 39-44. Cornaggia D., Gentit P,, Boyé R., Desvignes J.C., 1995. A new
phytoplasma disease of apricot trees: the peach vein clear-
ing. Acta Horticulturae 386: 448-453. Danet J.-L. Bonnet P,, Jarausch W., Carraro L., Skoric D.,
Labonne G., Foissac X., 2007. Imp and secY, two new
markers for MLST (multilocus sequence typing) in the
16SrX phytoplasma taxonomic group. Bulletin of Insectol-
ogy 60: 339-340. Danet J.-L., Bahriz H., Cimerman A., Foissac X., 2008. New
molecular typing tools to monitor fruit tree phytoplasma
variability in the 16SrX taxonomic group. Acta Horticul-
turae 781: 343-349. Davies D.L., Adams A.N., 2000. European stone fruit yellows
phytoplasmas associated with a decline disease of apricot
in southern England. Plant Pathology 49: 635-639. Deli¢ D., Martini M., Ermacora P., Carraro L., Myrta A.,

2008. Identification of fruit tree phytoplasmas and their vec-

tors in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Acta Horticulturae 781: 429-

434,

Dosba F, Lansac M., Mazy K., Garnier M., Eyquard J.P.,
1991. Incidence of different diseases associated with my-
coplasmalike organisms in different species of Prunus. Acta
Horticulturae 283: 311-320. Duduk B., Botti S., Ivanovic M., Krsti¢ B., Duki¢ N., Bertac-
cini A., 2004. Identification of phytoplasmas associated
with grapevine yellows in Serbia. Journal of Phytopathology
152: 575-579. Ermacora P., Loi N., Ferrini F, Loschi A., Martini M., Osler R.,
Carraro L., 2009. Hypo and hyper-virulence in apricot trees
infected by European stone fruit yellows. Proceedings of the
21* International Conference on Virus and other Graft Trans-
missible Diseases of Fruit Crops, Neustadt 2009: 48. Ferretti L., Pasquini G., Albanese G., Barba M., 2007. Molec-
ular investigation on the genetic polymorphism of ‘Candi-
datus Phytoplasma prunorum’ detected in plum and apri-
cot fruit trees. Bulletin of Insectology 60: 337-338. Ferretti L., Gentili A., Poggi Pollini C., Ermacora P., Pasquini
G., 2008. Caratterizzazione molecolare di isolati di ‘Candi-
datus Phytoplasma prunorum’ identificati in pesco, susino

 

 

 

     

Marcone etal. 31

e albicocco. Petria 18: 178-181. Ferretti L., Gentili A., Poggi Pollini C., Ermacora P,, Pasquini
G., 2009. Individuation of Candidatus Phytoplasma pruno-
rum type a and type b in Cacopsylla pruni individuals. Pro-
ceedings of the 21 International Conference on Virus and
other Graft Transmissible Diseases of fruit Crops, Neustadt
2009: 82. Fialova R., Navratil M., Valova P., Lauterer P,, Kocourek F,
Poncarova-Vorickova Z., 2004. Epidemiology of European
stone fruit yellows phytoplasma in the Czech Republic. Ac-
ta Horticulturae 657: 483-487. Fialova R., Navratil M., Lauterer P,, Navrkalova V., 2007. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’: the phytoplasma in-
fection of Cacopsylla pruni from apricot orchards and from
overwintering habitats in Moravia (Czech Republic). Bul-
etin of Insectology 60: 183-184. Freitag J.H., 1964. Interaction and mutual suppression among
three strains of aster yellows virus. Virology 24: 401-413. Gentit P,, Cornaggia D., Desvignes J.C., 1998. Identification
and comparison of different Prunus phytoplasma diseases
by indexing on GF305 peach seedlings in the greenhouse. Acta Horticulturae 472: 723-729. Hadidi A., Czosnek H., Barba M., 2004. DNA microarrays
and their potential applications for the detection of plant
viruses, viroids, and phytoplasmas. Journal of Plant Pathol-
ogy 86: 97-104. Hogenhout $.A., Oshima K., Ammar E.-D., Kakizawa S.,
Kingdom H.N., Namba S., 2008. Phytoplasmas: bacteria
that manipulate plants and insects. Molecular Plant Pathol-
ogy 9: 403-423,

IRPCM Phytoplasma/Spiroplasma Working Team — Phyto-
plasma taxonomy group, 2004. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma’,
a taxon for the wall-less, non-helical prokaryotes that colo-
nize plant phloem and insects. International Journal of Sys-
tematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 54: 1243-1255. Jarausch B., Mithlenz I, Fuchs A., Lampe I. Harzer U., Ja-
rausch W., 2007a. Untersuchungen zur Europiischen
Steinobstvergilbung (ESFY) in Deutschland. Gesunde
Pflanzen 59: 183-192. Jarausch B., Fuchs A., Mithlenz I., Lampe I, Harzer U., Ja-
rausch W., 2007b. Research on European stone fruit yel-
lows (ESFY) in Germany. Bulletin of Insectology 60: 389-
390. Jarausch B., Miihlenz I. Beck A., Lampe I, Harzer U., Ja-
rausch W., 2008. Epidemiology of European stone fruit
yellows in Germany. Acta Horticulturae 781: 417-422. Jarausch W., Saillard C., Dosba F, Bove J.M., 1994a. Differ-
entiation of mycoplasmalike organisms (MLOs) in Euro-
pean fruit trees by PCR using specific primers derived
from the sequence of chromosomal fragment of the apple
proliferation MLO. Applied and Environmental Microbiol-
ogy 60: 2916-2923. Jarausch W., Lansac M., Dosba F, 1994b. Micropropagation
for maintenance of mycoplasma-like organisms in infected
Prunus mariana GF 8-1. Acta Horticulturae 359: 169-176. Jarausch W., Lansac M., Saillard C., Broquaire J.M., Dosba F,
1998a, PCR assay for specific detection of European stone
fruit yellows phytoplasmas and its use for epidemiological
studies in France. European Journal of Plant Pathology 104:
17-27. Jarausch W., Brison M., Gabova R., Lansac M., Pierronnet A.,

32 ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’

Decroocq V., Helliot B., de Boucaud M., 1998b. Prunus-
and Malus-infecting phytoplasmas are not eliminated from
in vitro shoot cultures by passage through axillary bud cul-
ture. Proceedings of the IX International Congress on Plant
Tissue and Cell Culture - Plant Biotechnology and In vitro
Culture, Jerusalem 1998: 14-19. Jarausch W., Lansac M., Dosba F, 1999a. Seasonal coloniza-
tion pattern of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasmas
in different Prunus species detected by specific PCR. Jour-
nal of Phytopathology 147: 47-54. Jarausch W., Eyquard J.P., Mazy K., Lansac M., Dosba F,
1999b. High level of resistance of sweet cherry (Prunus avi-
um L.) towards European stone fruit yellows phytoplas-
mas. Advances in Horticultural Science 13: 108-112. Jarausch W., Lansac M., Bliot C., Dosba F,, 1999c. Phytoplas-
ma transmission by in vitro graft inoculation as a basis for
a preliminary screening method for resistance in fruit trees. Plant Pathology 48: 283-287. Jarausch W., Saillard C., Broquaire J.M., Garnier M., Dosba
F, 2000a. PCR-RFLP and sequence analysis of a non-ribo-
somal fragment for genetic characterization of European
stone fruit yellows phytoplasmas infecting various Prunus
species. Molecular and Cellular Probes 14: 171-179. Jarausch W., Eyquard J.P., Lansac M., Mohns M., Dosba F,,
2000b. Susceptibility and tolerance of new French Prunus
domestica cultivars to European stone fruit yellows phyto-
plasmas. Journal of Phytopathology 148: 489-493. Jarausch W., Jarausch-Wehrheim B., Danet J.L., Broquaire
J.M., Dosba E, Saillard C., Garnier M., 2001a. Detection
and identification of European stone fruit yellows and oth-
er phytoplasmas in wild plants in the surroundings of apri-
cot chlorotic leaf roll-affected orchards in southern France. European Journal of Plant Pathology 107: 209-217. Jarausch W., Danet J.L., Labonne G., Dosba FE, Broquaire
M., Saillard C., Garnier M., 2001b. Mapping the spread
of apricot chlorotic leaf roll (ACLR) in southern France
and implication of Cacopsylla pruni as a vector of Euro-
pean stone fruit yellows (ESFY) phytoplasmas. Plant
Pathology 50: 782-790. Jarausch W., Fuchs A., Jarausch B., 2009. Establishment of a
quantitative real-time PCR assay for the specific quantifica-
tion of Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum in plants and
insects. Proceedings of the 21* International Conference on
Virus and other Graft Transmissible Diseases of Fruit Crops,
Neustadt 2009: 80-81. Kison H., Seemiiller E., 2001. Differences in strain virulence
of the European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma and sus-
ceptibility of stone fruit trees on various rootstocks to this
pathogen. Journal of Phytopathology 149: 533-541. Kison H., Kirkpatrick B.C., Seemiiller E., 1997. Genetic com-
parison of the peach yellow leaf roll agent with European
fruit tree phytoplasmas of the apple proliferation group. Plant Pathology 46: 538-544. Kube M., Schneider B., Kuhl H., Dandekar T., Heitmann K.,
Migdoll A.M., Reinhardt R., Seemiiller E., 2008. The linear
chromosome of the plant-pathogenic mycoplasma ‘Candi-
datus Phytoplasma mali’. BMC Genomics 9: 306. Labonne G., Lichou J., 2004. Data on the life cycle of Cacop-
sylla pruni, Psyllidae vector of European stone fruit yellows
(ESFY) phytoplasma, in France. Acta Horticulturae 657:
465-470. Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

Laimer M., 2003. Detection and elimination of viruses and
phytoplasmas from pome and stone fruit trees. Horticultur-
al Reviews 28: 187-236. Laimer M., Bertaccini A., 2008. European stone fruit yellows. In: Harrison N.A, Rao G.P., Marcone C. (eds. ), Characteri-
zation, Diagnosis and Management of Phytoplasmas, pp. 73-92, Studium Press, LLC, Houston, Texas, USA. Laimer Da Camara Machado M., Paltrinieri $., Hanzer V.,
Arthofer W., Strommer $., Martini M., Pondrelli M.,
Bertaccini A., 2001. Presence of European stone fruit yel-
lows (ESFY or 16SrX-B) phytoplasmas in apricots in Aus-
tria, Plant Pathology 50: 130-135. Lauer U., Seemiiller E., 2000. Physical map of the chromo-
some of the apple proliferation phytoplasma. Journal of
Bacteriology 182: 1415-1418. Lauterer P,, 1999. Results of investigations on Hemiptera in
Moravia, made by Moravian Museum (Psylloidea 2). Acta
Musei Moraviae Scientiae Biologicae 84: 71-151. Lavifia A., Sabaté J., Garcia-Chapa M., Batlle A., Torres E.,
2004. Occurrence and epidemiology of European stone
fruit yellows phytoplasma in Spain. Acta Horticulturae 657:
489-494,

Lederer W., Seemiiller E., 1992. Demonstration of mycoplas-
mas in Prunus species in Germany, Journal of Phytopatholo-
gy 134: 89-96. Lee L-M., Davis R.E., Gundersen-Rindal D.E., 2000. Phyto-
plasma: phytopathogenic mollicutes. Annual Review of Mi-
crobiology 54: 221-255. Lee I-M., Zhao Y., Davis R.E., Wei W., Martini M., 2007. Prospects of DNA-based systems for differentiation and
classification of phytoplasmas. Bulletin of Insectology 60
(2): 239-244,

Liu H-L., Chen C.-C., Lin C.-P., 2007. Detection and identi-
fication of the phytoplasma associated with pear decline in
Taiwan. European Journal of Plant Pathology 117: 281-291. Loi N., Carraro L., Musetti R., Pertot I., Osler R., 1995. Dod-
der transmission of two different MLOs from plum trees af
fected by “Leptonecrosis”, Acta Horticulturae 386: 465-470. Loi N., Ferrini F, Loschi A., Martini M., Carraro L., 2008. Fenomeni di recovery in albicocchi infetti da European
stone fruit yellows. Petria 18: 377-379. Lorenz K.-H., Dosba F, Poggi Pollini C., Llécer G.,
Seemiiller E., 1994. Phytoplasma diseases of Prunus
species in Europe are caused by genetically similar organ-
isms. Zeitschrift fiir Pflanzenkrankheiten und Pflanzen-
schutz 101: 567-575. Lorenz K.H., Schneider B., Ahrens U., Seemiiller E., 1995. Detection of the apple proliferation and pear decline phy-
toplasmas by PCR amplification of ribosomal and nonribo-
somal DNA. Phytopathology 85: 771-776. Maixner M., Ahrens U., Seemiiller E., 1995. Detection of the
German grapevine yellows (Vergilbungskrankheit) MLO
in grapevine, alternative hosts and a vector by a specific
PCR procedure. European Journal of Plant Pathology 101:
241-250. Marcone C., Seemiiller E., 2001. A chromosome map of the
European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma. Microbiology
147; 1213-1221. Marcone C., Ragozzino A., Seemiiller E., 1996a. European
stone fruit yellows phytoplasma as the cause of peach vein

Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

enlargement and other yellows and decline diseases of
stone fruits in southern Italy. Journal of Phytopathology
144; 559-564. Marcone C., Ragozzino A., Seemiiller E., 1996b. Association
of phytoplasmas with the decline of European hazel in
southern Italy. Plant Pathology 45: 857-863. Marcone C., Hergenhahn F, Ragozzino A., Seemiiller E.,
1999a, Dodder transmission of pear decline, European
stone fruit yellows, rubus stunt, picris echioides yellows
and cotton phyllody phytoplasmas to periwinkle. Journal of
Phytopathology 147: 187-192. Marcone C., Neimark H., Ragozzino A., Lauer U., Seemiiller
E,, 1999b. Chromosome sizes of phytoplasmas composing
major phylogenetic groups and subgroups. Phytopathology
89: 805-810. Marcone C., Camele I., Lanzieri A., Rana G.L., 2002. Individ-
uazione dei fitoplasmi del giallume europeo delle drupacee
e della moria del pero in specie arboree da frutto in Cal-
abria e Basilicata, Petria 12: 423-425. Marcone C., Gibb K.S,, Streten C., Schneider B., 2004. ‘Can-
didatus Phytoplasma sparti’, ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
rhamni’ and Candidatus Phytoplasma allocasuarinae’, re-
spectively associated with spartium witches’-broom, buck-
thorn witches’-broom and allocasuarina yellows diseases. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Micro-
biology 54: 1025-1029. Marcone C., Schneider B., Seemiiller E., 2009. Comparison of
European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma strains differing
in virulence by multi-gene sequence analyses. Proceedings
of the 21 International Conference on Virus and other
Graft Transmissible Diseases of fruit Crops, Neustadt 2009:
47-48. Martini M., Lee L.-M., Bottner K.D., Zhao Y., Botti S., Bertac-
cini A., Harrison N.A., Carraro L., Marcone C., Khan AJ.,
Osler R., 2007a. Ribosomal protein gene-based phylogeny
for finer differentiation and classification of phytoplasmas. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Micro-
biology 57: 2037-2051. Martini M., Loi N., Ermacora P,, Carraro L., Pastore M.,
2007b. A real-time PCR method for detection and quan-
tification of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ in its nat-
ural hosts. Bulletin of Insectology 60: 251-252. Martini M., Ferrini F,, Danet J.-L., Ermacora P,, Sertkaya G.,
Deli¢ D., Loi N., Foissac X., Carraro L., 2009. PCR/RFLP
based method for molecular characterization of *Candida-
tus Phytoplasma prunorum’ strains using aceF gene. Pro-
ceedings of the 21" International Conference on Virus and
other Graft Transmissible Diseases of Fruit Crops, Neustadt
2009: 80. Morton A., Davies D.L., Blomquist C.L., Barbara D.J., 2003. Characterization of homologues of the apple proliferation
immunodominant membrane protein gene from three re-
lated phytoplasmas. Molecular Plant Pathology 4: 109-114. Morvan G., Arnoux M., Castelain C., 1986. Prospective for
the control of apricot chlorotic leaf roll a mycoplasma dis-
ease, by cross protection. Acta Horticulturae 193: 359-366. Morvan G., Castelain C., Chastellitre M.-G., Audergon J.M.,
1991. An account of the attempts at controlling apricot
chlorotic leaf roll with cross protection. Acta Horticulturae
293: 555-561. Musetti R., Sanita di Toppi L., Martini M., Ferrini F, Loschi

Marcone etal. 33

A,, Favali M.A., Osler R., 2005. Hydrogen peroxide local-
ization and antioxidant status in the recovery of apricot
plants from European stone fruit yellows. European Jour-
nal of Plant Pathology 112: 53-61. Navratil M., Vélové P,, Fialové R., Petrova K., Poncarové-
Vorackova Z., Frénova J., Nebesdrova J., Karesova R.,
2001. Survey for stone fruit phytoplasmas in the Czech Re-
public, Acta Horticulturae 550: 377-382. Necas T., Maskova V., Krska B., 2008. The possibility of ES-
FY phytoplasma transmission: through flowers and seeds. Acta Horticulturae 781: 443-447. Paltrinieri S., Martini M., Stefani E., Fideghelli C., Pondrelli
M., Bertaccini A., 2001. Phytoplasma infection in peach
and cherry in Italy. Acta Horticulturae 550: 365-369. Pelludat C., Duffy B., Frey J., 2009. Design and development
of a DNA microarray for rapid identification of multiple
European quarantine phytopathogenic bacteria. European
Journal of Plant Pathology 125: 413-423. Pignatta D., Poggi Pollini C., Giunchedi L., Ratti C., Reggiani
N., Forno F, Mattedi L., Gobber M., Miorelli P., Ropelato
E,, 2008. A real-time PCR assay for the detection of Euro-
pean stone fruit yellows phytoplasma (ESFYP) in plant
propagation material. Acta Horticulturae 781: 499-504. Poggi Pollini C., Bissani R., Giunchedi L., Vindimian E.,
1995. Occurrence of phytoplasma infection in European
plums (Prunus domestica). Journal of Phytopathology 143:
701-703. Poggi Pollini C., Giunchedi L., Bissani R., 1997. Immunoen-
zymatic detection of PCR products for the identification of
phytoplasmas in plants, Journal of Phytopathology 145:
371-374,

Poggi Pollini C., Bissani R., Giunchedi L., 2001. Occurrence
of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma (ESFYP) in-
fection in peach orchards in Northern-Central Italy, Jour-
nal of Phytopathology 149: 725-730. Poggi Pollini C., Giunchedi L., Gobber M., Miorelli P., Pignat-
ta D., Terlizzi F, 2005. Indagini sulla presenza del giallume
europeo delle drupacee (ESFY) e di altri fitoplasmi in pi-
ante spontanee in provincia di Trento, Petria 15: 201-202. Poggi Pollini C., Forno F, Franchini $., Gobber M., Lanzoni
C., Mattedi L., Miorelli P., Profaizer D., Ratti C., 2009. De-
tection and distribution of European stone fruit yellows in
apricot cv, Bergeron and epidemiological studies in the
province of Trento (Italy). Proceedings of the 21% Interna-
tional Conference on Virus and other Graft Transmissible
Diseases of Fruit Crops, Neustadt 2009: 79-80. Pollini C.P,, Bissani R., Giunchedi L., Mori N., Dradi D., Visi-
galli T., 2004, Detection of European stone fruit yellows
phytoplasma (ESFYP) in Homoptera insects and in wild
stone fruit trees collected in peach orchards in northern
Italy, Acta Horticulturae 657: 513-518. Ramel M.E., Gugerli P,, 2004. Epidemiological survey of Eu-
ropean stone fruit yellows phytoplasma in two orchards in
western Switzerland. Acta Horticulturae 657: 459-463. Rowhani A., Uyemoto J.K., Golino D.A., Martelli G.P., 2005. Pathogen testing and certification of Vitis and Prunus
species. Annual Review of Phytopathology 43: 261-278. Schaper U., Seemiiller E., 1984, Recolonization of the stem of
apple proliferation and pear decline-diseased trees by the
causal organisms in spring. Zeitschrift fiir Pflanzenkrankheit-
en und Pflanzenschutz 91: 608-613. 34 ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’

Schneider B., Seemiiller E., 2009. Strain differentiation of
Candidatus Phytoplasma mali by SSCP- and sequence
analyses of the HFLB gene. Journal of Plant Pathology 91:
103-112. Seemiiller E., 1976. Investigations to demonstrate mycoplas-
ma-like organisms in diseased plants by fluorescence mi-
croscopy. Acta Horticulturae 67: 109-112. Seemiiller E., Foster A., 1995. European stone fruit yellows. In: Ogawa J.M., Zehr ELL, Bird G.W., Ritchie D.F, Uriu
K,, Uyemoto J.K. (eds.). Compendium of Stone Fruit Dis-
eases, pp. 59-60. APS Press, St. Paul, MN, USA. Seemiiller E., Schneider B., 2004. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
mali’, ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma pyri’ and ‘Candidatus Phy-
toplasma prunorum’, the causal agents of apple prolifera-
tion, pear decline and European stone fruit yellows, re-
spectively. International Journal of Systematic and Evolu-
tionary Microbiology 54: 1217-1226. Seemiiller E., Schneider B., 2007. Differences in virulence and
genomic features of strains of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
mali’, the apple proliferation agent. Phytopathology 97:
964-970. Seemiiller E., Marcone C., Lauer U., Ragozzino A., Géschl
M., 1998a. Current status of molecular classification of the
phytoplasmas. Journal of Plant Pathology 80: 3-26. Seemiiller E., Kison H., Lorenz K.-H., Schneider B., Marcone
C.,, Smart C.D., Kirkpatrick B.C., 1998b. Detection and
identification of fruit tree phytoplasmas by PCR amplifica-
tion of ribosomal and nonribosomal DNA. In: Manceau
C,, Spak J. (eds.). COST 823 -New technologies to im-
prove phytodiagnosis. Advances in the detection of plant
pathogens by polymerase chain reaction, pp. 56-66. Office
for Official Publications of the European Communities,
Luxembourg. Seemiiller E., Stolz H., Kison H., 1998c. Persistence of the
European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma in aerial parts of
Prunus taxa during the dormant season. Journal of Phy-
topathology 146: 407-410. Sertkaya G., Martini M., Ermacora P., Musetti R., Osler R.,
2005. Detection and characterization of phytoplasmas in
diseased stone fruits and pear by PCR-RFLP analysis in
Turkey. Phytoparasitica 33: 380-390. Sinclair W.A., Griffiths H.M., 2000. Variation in aggressiveness
of ash yellows phytoplasmas. Plant Disease 84: 282-288. Smart C.D., Schneider B., Blomquist C.L., Guerra L.J., Harri-
son N.A., Ahrens U., Lorenz K.-H., Seemiiller E., Kirk-
patrick B.C., 1996. Phytoplasma-specific PCR primers
based on sequences of the 168/238 rRNA spacer region. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 62: 2988-2993. Tedeschi R., Ferrato V., Rossi J., Alma A., 2006. Possible phyto-
plasma transovarial transmission in the psyllids Cacopsylla
melanoneura and Cacopsylia pruni. Plant Pathology 55: 18-24. Journal of Plant Pathology (2010), 92 (1), 19-34

Thébaud G., Sauvion N., Chadeeuf J., Dufils A., Labonne G.,
2006. Identifying risk factors for European stone fruit yel-
lows from a survey. Phytopathology 96: 890-899. Thébaud G., Yvon M., Labonne G., Alary R., 2008. European
stone fruit yellows: consequences of the life cycle of the
vector and of the multiplication of the phytoplasma in the
insect on the epidemiology of the disease. Acta Horticultur-
ae 781: 423-428. Thébaud G., Yvon M., Alary R., Sauvion N., Labonne G.,
2009. Efficient transmission of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
prunorum’ is delayed by eight months due to a long latency
in its host-alternating vector. Phytopathology 99: 265-273. Topchiiska M., Marcone C., Seemiiller E., 2000. Detection of
pear decline and European stone fruit yellows in Bulgaria. Zeitschrift fiir Pflanzenkrankheiten und Pflanzenschutz 107
(6): 658-663. Torres E., Bertolini E., Cambra M., Montén C., Martin M.P.,
2005. Real-time PCR for simultaneous and quantitative de-
tection of quarantine phytoplasmas from apple prolifera-
tion (16SrX) group. Molecular and Cellular Probes 19: 334-
340. Tran-Nguyen L.T.T., Kube M., Schneider B., Reinhardt R.,
Gibb K.S., 2008. Comparative genome analysis of “Candi-
datus Phytoplasma australiense” (subgroup tuf-Australia I;
rp-A) and “Ca. Phytoplasma asteris” strains OY-M and AY-
WB. Journal of Bacteriology 190: 3979-3991. Varga K., Kélber M., Martini M., Pondrelli M., Ember I.,
Tékés G., Lazar J., Mikulas J., Szendrey G., Schweigert A.
Bertaccini A., 2000. Phytoplasma identification in Hungar-
ian grapevines by two nested-PCR systems. Proceedings of
the 13'" Meeting of ICVG, Adelaide 2000: 113-115. Wang Q.C., Panis B., Engelmann F., Lambardi M., Valkonen
L.PT., 2009. Cryotherapy of shoot tips: a technique for
pathogen eradication to produce healthy planting materials
and prepare healthy plant genetic resources for cryopreser-
vation. Annals of Applied Biology 154: 351-363. Weintraub P.G., Beanland L., 2006. Insect vectors of phyto-
plasmas. Annual Review of Entomology 51: 91-111. Yvon M., Labonne G., Thébaud G., 2004. Survival of Euro-
pean stone fruit yellows phytoplasma outside fruit crop
production areas: a case study in southeastern France. Acta
Horticulturae 657: 477-481. Yvon M., Thébaud G., Alary R., Labonne G., 2009. Specific
detection and quantification of the phytopathogenic agent
‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’. Molecular and Cellu-
Jar Probes 23: 227-234. Zhao Y., Sun Q., Wei W., Davis R.E., Wu W., Liu Q., 2009. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma tamaricis’, a novel taxon discov-
ered in witches’-broom-diseased salt cedar (Tamarix chi-
nensis Lour.). International Journal of Systematic and Evo-
Jutionary Microbiology 59: 2496-2504.