a)
(ey)
ae)
{e)
aon
ra)
(qv)
oO
~
om
&
ae

 

Plant Pathology (2016) 65, 837-846 Doi: 10.1111/ppa.12464

Incidence and distribution of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
prunorum’ and its vector Cacopsylla pruni in Spain: an
approach to the epidemiology of the disease and the role of
wild Prunus

J. Sabaté, A. Lavina and A. Batlle*

Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentaries, IRTA, Ctra Cabrils km 2, Cabrils, 08348 Barcelona, Spain

“Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ is the causal agent of the European stone fruit yellows (ESFY) disease. This phy-
toplasma affects wild and cultivated species of Prunus to different degrees, depending on their susceptibility. ‘Candida-
tus Phytoplasma prunorum’ is present in the four regions of Spain surveyed in this study (Aragon, Catalonia,
Extremadura and Valencia) with a variable incidence. Results showed that ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ was detected
in all of the cultivated Prunus species studied, except P. avium and P. dulcis, and was widespread in Spain. The most
affected species was P. salicina, with symptoms including early bud break and blooming, leaf curling and yellowing,
collapse, and a major decrease in production. In some plots in the Baix Llobregat area of Barcelona province (Catalo-
nia), the incidence of ESFY on P. salicina was as high as 80%. The insect vector, Cacopsylla pruni, was present in all
four of the regions studied, with the highest captures in yellow sticky traps in Catalonia on P. mahaleb and in Extre-
madura in peach orchards. In Baix Llobregat, large populations of C. pruni were present on infected P. mahaleb
bushes, and with high infection rates. This was a key factor in the local pathogenic cycle that caused a major ESFY
outbreak in the nearby P. salicina orchards. In the Ebro valley (Lleida and Aragon) and Valencia, the surveys showed

very low incidences of the disease and low C. pruni populations. Keywords: European stone fruit yellows, Phytoplasma prunorum, Prunus, vector

Introduction

‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ is the causal agent
of several diseases of stone fruit trees such as apricot
chlorotic leaf roll, plum leptonecrosis and peach yellows. These are collectively referred to as European stone fruit
yellows (ESFY) disease, a major problem affecting stone
fruit trees in Europe (Lorenz et al., 1994). ‘Candidatus
Phytoplasma prunorum’ belongs to the apple prolifera-
tion (16Sr-X ribosomal) group, and is closely related to
“Ca. Phytoplasma mali? and ‘Ca. Phytoplasma pyri’,
causing apple proliferation (AP) and pear decline (PD),
respectively (Seemiiller & Schneider, 2004; Danet et al.,
2011). ESFY is a quarantine disease that is widespread in
Europe and the Mediterranean basin and is a limiting
factor for apricot and Japanese plum tree cultivation in
several major growing areas (Marcone et al., 2010; Cies-
linska, 2011; Steffek et al., 2012). European stone fruit yellows symptoms and their inten-
sity vary considerably depending on different factors,
including: Prunus species, variety and rootstock; age;

*E-mail: assumpcio.batlle@irta.es

Published online 29 October 2015

© 2015 British Society for Plant Pathology

agro-ecological conditioning; phytoplasma concentration;
insect vector infection pressure; and strain virulence. The
symptoms are generally characterized by physiological dis-
orders such as short internodes, off-season growth, prema-
ture bud break, leaf rolling, chlorosis, reddening, slow or
sudden decline and a loss of vigour and production (Kison
& Seemiiller, 2001; Marcone et al., 2010). The expression
and intensity of the symptoms differ depending on the
susceptibility of the species, from the more susceptible
ones such as Prunus salicina and P. armeniaca, to the most
tolerant ones such as P. cerasifera and P. spinosa, which
may be infected but symptomless (Giunchedi et al., 1982;
Jarausch et al., 2000; Carraro et al., 2002; Yvon et al.,
2004). ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ is transmitted
by vegetative multiplication and by its insect vector
Cacopsylla pruni (Scopoli, 1763; Carraro et al., 1998). Cacopsylla pruni is oligophagous on Prunus species, uni-
voltine, and overwinters as an adult in refuge plants,
mainly conifers far from the orchards (Thebaud et al.,
2009). In late winter, depending on the climate conditions,
the overwintering adults (remigrants) lay next generation
eggs on Prunus species, where nymphs develop. In June,
young adults (emigrants) move to refuge trees to overwin-
ter. Cacopsylla pruni acquires the phytoplasma within 2—
4 days and is infective for the rest of its life, after a latency
period of approximately 3 weeks (Carraro et al., 2004;
Labonne & Lichou, 2004; Thebaud et al., 2009). 837,

838 J. Sabaté et al. European stone fruit yellows was first reported in
Spain, by Sala (1935), on Japanese plum in the Baix
Llobregat area (Barcelona, Catalonia), where it appeared
as a syndrome similar to those observed before in south-
ern France and Italy (Marcone et al., 2010). More
recently, vegetative disorders have been observed in
Japanese plum and apricot growing in Valencia, Murcia
and Catalonia regions (Llacer et al., 1986; Torres et al.,
2004). Cacopsylla pruni carrying ‘Ca. Phytoplasma
prunorum’ was first reported in Spain in 2003 (Lavinia
et al., 2004). Given the importance of stone fruit cultiva-
tion in Spain, the destructive potential of ESFY and its
geographical dispersion, there is a serious threat for
Spanish stone fruit production. The aim of this study
was to obtain data on the incidence, hosts, life cycles
and geographical distribution of ‘Ca. Phytoplasma
prunorum’ and C. pruni in Spain. These data will be
helpful in evaluating the losses and the risk of spread
for different species and regions, to establish control
measures and prevent the expansion of ESFY. Materials and methods

 

Incidence of ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ on different
Prunus species, orchards and regions

The incidence of ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ was studied in
2005, in four regions in Spains Aragén, Catalonia, Extremadura
and Valencia, in seven stone fruit production areas with differ-
ent characteristics. A total of 47 plots of seven cultivated Prunus
species were studied. Plots were chosen with the advice and col-
laboration of the regional phytopathological services, which
identified orchards that were representative of each area and
species. The incidence of Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ was eval-
uated in orchards of P. avium, P. salicina, P. cerasifera, P. ar-
meniaca, P. persica, P. domestica and P. dulcis. The objective
was to cover a wide range of hosts and agro-ecological condi-
tions, including tolerant species and areas with few reported
cases of ESFY. The incidence of ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’
was surveyed in the Baix Llobregat, Ribera d’Ebre and Lleida
areas of Catalonia, in the Vegas Altas and Vegas Bajas areas of
Extremadura, and in Aragon and Valencia. The incidence of
ESFY was initially assessed by visual inspection of 200 trees per
orchard in a large central block and subsequently confirmed by
PCR. To standardize variations in the expression of ESFY symp-
toms in different conditions, species and varieties, visual inspec-
tions were carried out in March and September. The whole
symptom range was covered: phenological mismatch in March,
and yellowing, curling and reddening in September. ‘The assessment was particularly concentrated in the Baix Llo-
bregat area (Barcelona, Catalonia), in 22 plots. The coincidence
in a small area of historic reports, a high incidence, several wild
and cultivated Prunus spp., and a stable population of C. pruni,
makes this area an interesting case to study. This area includes
the lower valley of the Llobregat River and the coastal moun-
tains, both with a Mediterranean climate. The valley is charac-
terized by flat gravity-irrigated intensive orchards, devoted to
cultivating vegetables and stone fruit trees. In the mountains
there are small, non-irrigated orchards of P. avium grafted on
P. mahaleb. Two other areas in Catalonia were studied. One in
Ribera d’Ebre, in Tarragona province in the lower valley of the
Ebro River, also has a Mediterranean climate and has intensive

 

drip-irrigated orchards of P. persica, P. salicina and P. armeni-
aca. The other, Lleida, is in the plains of the central Ebro valley
with a dry continental Mediterranean climate. This area is
mainly dedicated to peach, apple and pear production in large,
intensive drip-irrigated orchards. ‘The Aragon region fruit production area, as Lleida, is in the
central Ebro valley, and both have the same agro-ecological con-
ditions. The Valencia area is characterized by small, flat drip-
irrigated orchards of P. salicina and P. armeniaca, with a
Mediterranean climate. In Extremadura, the fruit production
areas are characterized by a southern Mediterranean climate
and large new, drip-irrigated, orchards of P. salicina and P. per-
sica. In each plot, the shoot samples for phytoplasma detection
were taken randomly, in September, from 10 individual trees
showing symptoms of ESFY. To ensure detection, samples were
taken from four branches per tree. In orchards where fewer than
10 trees had clear symptoms, samples were collected from those
with symptoms and also from randomly chosen symptomless
trees, to give 10 samples per plot. In plots with no symptoms,
all samples were taken randomly from any tree. Samples were
stored in plastic bags at 4°C prior to DNA extraction. Cacopsylla pruni captures in Prunus species orchards

Cacopsylla pruni populations on different cultivated Prunus spe-
cies were surveyed using yellow sticky traps in the four regions. The surveys were begun in the Bai LlObregat area with eight
traps per plot in 2003 and 2004, four in the centre and four in
the corner trees of the orchards. In following years, due to the
results obtained, only the four traps in the corners were used, In
2005 and 2006, the surveys were extended to the other areas and
regions. In Catalonia, affected P. salicina orchards were also
monitored by beating. Different branches on trees were beaten 10
times and psyllids were collected and aspired from a tray. The
20 x 20 cm (800 cm) yellow sticky traps (Projar), placed at a
height of 1-75 m, were replaced once every 15 days, from Jan-
uary to July. Cacopsylla pruni individuals were then removed,
identified following Hodkinson & White (1979) and stored at
—20°C prior to analysis. The insects were analysed individually. Evaluation of wild hosts for ‘Ca. Phytoplasma
prunorum’ and C. pruni in Catalonia

The communities of potential wild hosts for ‘Ca. Phytoplasma
prunorum’ and C. pruni in the three stone fruit production areas
of Catalonia were surveyed in 2009 and 2010. Five communities
of P. mabaleb, four of P. spinosa, two of P. cerasifera and one
of naturalized P. domestica were studied in the coastal moun-
tains of the Baix Llobregat. In these mountains, wild P. mabaleb
is relatively abundant above 100 m a.s.l., most of them natural-
ized rootstocks from old deserted P. avium orchards. There are
also small communities of wild P. spinosa above 400 m asl. The Ribera d’Ebre area (Tarragona) is surrounded by the broken
1000 m-high precoastal mountains, where a P. mahaleb com-
munity was studied. In the Lleida area, two plots of P. spinosa
and three plots of naturalized P. dulcis near the orchards were
studied. These P. spinosa trees are present above 500 m a.s.l. in
the Pyrenean foothills, but the nearest stone fruit orchards are
30 km away. The samples of wild or naturalized, symptomless
Prunus spp. were taken as described for the symptomless orch-
ards. The number of samples varied with the size of the commu-
nity, with a maximum of 10 individuals per plot. Cacopsylla
pruni was captured on wild hosts by yellow sticky traps and
beating the trees as described for orchards. Plant Pathology (2016) 65, 837-846

Epidemiology of Ca. P. prunorum in Spain 839

Phytoplasma detection in plants and insects

The samples of Prunus plants and C. pruni individuals were
analysed by PCR to detect phytoplasmas. Total DNA from
plants was obtained by mixing 1g of fresh leaf midribs and
phloem tissue from stems together, using the phytoplasma-
enrichment procedure of Ahrens & Seemiiller (1992). Total
DNA from insects was obtained following the procedures of
Batlle et al. (2008) and Garcia-Chapa et al. (2005). The DNA
extracts were stored at ~20°C. The universal primers for phyto-
plasma detection, P1/P7 (Deng & Hiruki, 1991; Smart et al.,
1996), were used during the first step and fO1/rO1 AP group-
specific primers for the second (Lorenz et al., 1995). The first
amplification was in a total volume of 20 pL containing 5-
10 ng DNA and the following mixture: 0-25 ya each universal
primer, 250 ya dNTPs, 0-2 U Taq DNA polymerase (Promega)
and 1 x Taq buffer. Two microlitres of a 1:50 dilution of the
first amplification product were used for the second step, with
0-375 yt of the group-specific primers. The products were anal-
ysed by electrophoresis in a 1-5% D-1 agarose gel (Pronadisa)
according to standard procedures. DNA was stained with ethid-
ium bromide and exposed to ultraviolet light. Healthy Prunus
and Catharanthus roseus seedlings were used as a negative con-
trol in PCR assays. To ensure ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’
detection, an RFLP analysis of {O1/rO1 primer pair amplifica-
tion products was performed with Rsal and Sspl enzymes fol-
lowing Lorenz et al. (1995) and Garcia-Chapa et al. (2003). Results

Incidence of ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ in orchards
of stone fruit species

‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ was detected on all
of the cultivated Prunus species studied, except P. avium
and P. dulcis, and in all four of the regions surveyed
(Table 1). The species most affected and showing most
symptoms was P. salicina, which exhibited early bud
break, leaf curling, yellowing, collapse and a complete
loss of the harvest. Its visual incidence ranged from 1%
in Valencia to more than 80% in some plots in the Baix
Llobregat area (Table 1). Two plots of P. domestica
were studied in Baix Llobregat: Santa Coloma 6 and 7. In the Santa Coloma 6 plot, ‘Reina Claudia’ presented a
visual incidence of 2%, confirmed by PCR on the four
trees with symptoms analysed. However, PCR analysis
of the infection rate on samples randomly collected from
the six symptomless trees was 2+/6. In the Santa Coloma
7 plot, the traditional local variety of P. domestica
‘Coll6 de Mico’ was completely symptomless, but PCR
analysis gave an infection rate of 4+/10. The visual inci-
dence of P. persica was low, with PCR analysis of infec-
tion rates ranging from 0 to 4% on all the plots, except
Encomienda 1 and 2 in the Vegas Altas area (Extrema-
dura) where the incidence was as high as 25% (Table 1). The main symptoms observed on peach were leaf yellow-
ing, curling and in some cases collapse. There were no
symptoms and ESFY was not detected in the five P. av-
ium and three P. dulcis plots, even in areas with high
infection pressure. Three commercial plots of
P. cerasifera were studied, one a pollinator within a

 

Plant Pathology (2016) 65, 837-846

highly affected P. salicina orchard (Olesa 4). No clear
ESFY symptoms were observed on P. cerasifera in any of
the cases, but ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ was detected
by PCR in 22 of the 30 symptomless trees randomly col-
lected in the three plots (Table 1). European stone fruit yellows incidence and dissemina-
tion were very high in the Baix Llobregat area of Catalo-
nia, where the phytoplasma was present in all the plots
of P. salicina, P. domestica, P. cerasifera, P. armeniaca
and P. persica surveyed. In the Ribera d’Ebre area, the
incidence was more than 30% on P. salicina in the Mira-
vet 1 and 2 plots. In the Lleida area, ESFY was only
detected in one P. salicina orchard (Borges 2; Table 1). The incidence of ESFY in Valencia and Aragon was very
low, ranging in both cases from 1 to 7%, even in very
susceptible species. In Extremadura, ESFY was present in
all except a P. dulcis orchard (Lob6n). The visual inci-
dence was low in the Vegas Bajas area and high in the
Vegas Altas area, up to 25% in some plots (Table 1). Cacopsylla pruni captures and ‘Ca. Phytoplasma
prunorum’ infection rate in Prunus spp. orchards

Cacopsylla pruni was captured by yellow sticky traps in
all four of the regions studied, but not in all of the fruit
growing areas. The beating method was not successful in
P. salicina and P. cerasifera orchards in the Baix Llobre-
gat, with zero captures, whilst it proved to be effective
for wild P. mahaleb growing nearby. In the Ribera
@Ebre area of Tarragona (Catalonia), a peak of 1-75
individuals per trap was captured in a P. salicina plot
(Miravet). No C. pruni were captured in the Lleida area
(Borges and Alcarras), or in the Torres de Berrelén plot
in Aragon and the Barxeta plot in Valencia. In the other
plots in Aragon, the number of C. pruni captures was
very low with a maximum of 0-75 and 0-5 individuals
per trap in the Montanana and Alagén plots, respec-
tively. Peaks of capture in the Belgida and Llutxent plots
(Valencia) were 0-25 and 0-5 individuals per trap, respec-
tively. The C. pruni captures in Extremadura rose to a
maximum of 12 insects per trap in 2006 (Fig. 1). Cacop-
sylla pruni adults mainly appeared in the middle of
February, but in warm winters, in some years and plots
such as in the Baix Llobregat area in 2004, they
appeared in January (Fig. 2). The C. pruni peaks were
very variable in the date and the number of captures
between years. In the P. mabaleb of Torrelles plot, the
remigrant peak ranged from 15 March in 2004 to 15
April in 2006, and the captures ranged from 11 individu-
als per trap in 2003 to 3-75 in 2005. The emigrant peaks
commonly appeared in early June, with captures lower
than in remigrant peaks. The dates of peaks in the
nearby St Viceng and Sta Coloma plots of P. salicina
were very similar, but the captures were lower, especially
in the remigrant peaks (Figs 1, 2 & 3). In Extremadura,
only one clear peak was observed between 1 March and
15 July, on 15 May in 2005 and 1 May in 2006. These
peaks were of emigrant individuals, with remigrant indi-
viduals only captured in March 2005. The captures in

840

J. Sabaté et al. Table 1 Visual incidence and PCR detection of ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ on different cultivated Prunus spp. in 2005

 

 

Plot Prunus sp. * Variety ‘Age (years) Visual incidence (%) PCR detection? Aragon
Santa Inés Ps ‘Angeleno 9 5 6
Alagon Ps Sungold 18 6 8
Torres Berrelén Ps Pioneer 19 7 6
Catalonia
Baix Llobregat area
Olesa 1 Ps 606 12 63 8
Olesa 2 Ps Fortune 12 74 10
Olesa 3 Ps ‘Anne Gold 12 59 9
Olesa 4 Pe Pollinator 12 0 10
Castellbisbal Pa Moniqui 25 8 8
Sant Boi 1 Ps Black Amber 18 45 8
Sant Boi 2 Pe Valentins 50 0 4
Santa Coloma 1 Pp Babygold 10 4 2
Santa Coloma 2 Ps ‘Autumn Giant 8 6 9
Santa Coloma 3 Ps Fortune 18 82 7
Santa Coloma 4 Ps ‘Anne Gold 8 63 10
Santa Coloma 5 Po Levadé 60 0 8
Santa Coloma 6 Pd Claudia 25 2 6
Santa Coloma 7 Pd Collé Mico 35 ° 4
Santa Coloma 8 Pav Burlat 30 0 °
Torrelles 1 Pav Summit 15 0 °
Torrelles 2 Pav Burlat 25 0 °
Torrelles 5 Pau Marcona 20 ° °
Begues 1 Pav Burlat 25 0 °
Begues 2 Pav 470 10 0 °
Sant Viceng 1 Ps Black Diamond 10 76 9
Sant Viceng 2 Ps Pioneer 18 24 10
Ribera d'Ebre area
Miravet 1 Ps ‘Angeleno 16 37 9
Miravet 2 Ps Larry Ann 16 32 10
Benissanet 1 Pa Moniqui 20 7 6
Benissanet 2 Pp ‘Snow Queen 9 1 3
Ginestar Pa Bulida 24 5 8
Lleida area
Alcarras 1 Pp Babygold 10 1 °
Alcarras 2 Pp Catherine 15 0 °
Borges 1 Pp Top Lady 8 0 °
Borges 2 Ps ‘Angeleno 4 15 7
Borges 3 Pau Texas 24 0 °
Valencia
Belgida Pa Canino 4 1 3
Liutxent Pa Moniqui 18 2 2
Barxeta Ps Golden Japan 8 1 1
Extremadura
Vegas Altas area
Encomienda 1 Pp Spring Crest 12 25 7
Encomienda 2 Pp May Crest 12 23 6
Zurbaran 1 Ps 606 10 8 8
Zuraran 2 Ps Red Beauty 10 10 6
Zurbaran 3 Pp ‘Snow Queen 10 5 5
Vegas Bajas area
Lobén Pau Texas 16 0 °
Valdelacalzada 1 Ps 606 8 8 5
Valdelacalzada 2 Ps Black Star 8 5 7
Valdelacalzada 3 Pp Spring Crest 8 4 1

 

"Pa, Prunus armeniaca; Pav, P. avium, Pc, P. cerasifera; Pd, P. domestica; Pdu, P. dulcis; Pp, P. persica; Ps, P. salicina. ®Number positive out of 10 samples. Plant Pathology (2016) 65, 837-846

Epidemiology of Ca. P. prunorum in Spain 841

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

 

  
   
  
  
  
 

 

 

 

2
——Torrelles Pmo3
10 ——Torrelles Pmo4
—©=staColoma Ps03
a B=StaColoma Ps04
s
£ = stvicens Ps03
a a= stViceng Ps04
3
$
3
2
3
=
Figure 1 Evolution of the mean number of
Cacopsylla pruni individuals captured per
trap in 2003 and 2004 on wild Prunus
mahaleb (Pm) and in P. salicina (Ps)
orchards in Baix Llobregat area (Catalonia) 15) IF 15F 1M SM 1A 5A IM SM US)
8
—STorrelles(ct) Pm
—BstViceng(Ct) Ps
7
te StaColoma(Ct) Ps
Encomienda(Ex) Pp
a 6
£ = Zurbaran(Ex) Ps
as
S
3
24
3
=
3
2

Figure 2 Evolution of the mean number of

Cacopsylla pruni individuals captured per 1
trap in 2005 in the Baix Llobregat (Catalonia,

Ct) and Vegas Altas (Extremadura, Ex) areas

of Spain on wild Prunus mahaleb (Pm), oO
P. salicina (Ps) and P. persica (Pp). 15) iF 15F iM iSM 1A 154 1M 15M 1 15) 15d

 

14

 

12
<Encomienda(Ex) Pp
10 = Zurbaranlex) Ps
—eTorrelles(Ct) Pm

BStaColoma(ct) Ps

te StViceng(Ct) Ps

 

luals per trap

  

 

 

3
£

 

Figure 3. Evolution of the mean number of
Cacopsylla pruni individuals captured per
trap in 2006 in the Baix Llobregat (Catalonia,
Ct) and Vegas Altas (Extremadura, Ex) areas
of Spain on wild Prunus mahaleb (Pm), 0+
P. salicina (Ps) and P. persica (Pp). 15) 1F 15F 1M 15M 1A 15A 1M 15M U 15) WU 15)

Plant Pathology (2016) 65, 837-846

842 J. Sabaté et al. plots and regions with very low populations only differed
slightly, but it was difficult to track the peaks due to the
low level of captures. In the two P. salicina plots in the
Baix Llobregat, there were differences between the cor-
ners and the central part of the orchard, with captures in
central traps being very low (Fig. 4). ‘Candidatus Phyto-
plasma prunorum’ was detected in C. pruni in all of the
regions studied. In the Ribera d’Ebre (Miravet), ‘Ca. Phy-
toplasma prunorum’ was detected in around 7% of the
insects. In Aragon, Valencia and Extremadura, ‘Ca. Phy-
toplasma prunorum’ was detected in 4, 5 and 9% of the
insects, respectively. There were no significant differences

124
=P. salicina corner
=P. salicina central

Mean Individuals per trap

 

 

February(R)

‘March(R) April)" May(é) _June(é)
Figure 4 Mean number of Cacopsyila pruni individuals captured per
trap in the central part and in the comers of two Prunus salicina
orchards (St Viceng and Sta Coloma plots) in 2003 and 2004 in Baix
Llobregat area (Catalonia, Spain). Remigrants (R); emigrants (E). 60

in infection rates between insects captured on different
species in the same area. Analysing the C. pruni infection
rate throughout the season in Baix Llobregat (Catalonia),
the highest level of carriers corresponded to remigrants
in late winter (March), with infection rates of around
40%. In the new generations of young emigrant adults
(June), the infection rate fell to approximately 10%
(Fig. 5). Study of ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ and C. pruni on
wild Prunus species

The wild Prunus species were surveyed for ‘Ca. Phyto-
plasma prunorum’ and C. pruni in three stone fruit pro-
ducing areas in Catalonia. The highest captures in all the
study were on a wild P. mabaleb plot in the Baix Llobre-
gat area (Barcelona), with a maximum mean up to 13
insects per trap in 2006 (Fig. 1). No symptoms were
observed on any wild or naturalized P. mabaleb,
P. spinosa, P. cerasifera, P. dulcis and P. domestica sam-
pled. In the Lleida area, wild P. spinosa communities
studied were not infected, and no C. pruni was captured
by beating or yellow sticky traps. In this area, there was
no C. pruni capture or phytoplasma detection in analyses
of naturalized P. dulcis near the plots. In the Ribera
dEbre area (Tarragona), a small community of wild
P. mahaleb had the same negative results (Table 2). In
the coastal mountains of Barcelona, ‘Ca. Phytoplasma
prunorum’ and C. pruni were found on different wild
hosts. In Cabrils plots, some C. pruni individuals were
captured by beating on P. spinosa, but no ‘Ca. Phyto-
plasma prunorum’ were detected in either plants or
insects (Table 2). In Begues plots, the P. cerasifera,
P. spinosa and P. mabaleb communities found were very

 

  

= Torrelles Pm

= StaColoma Ps

 

50

  
  

m StViceng Ps

= TorrellesB Pm

 

 

% positive insects
@ s
8 8

x
8

5/40
2192/20

 

February(R)

March(R) April(E)

  

Figure 5 Monthly percentage of Cacopsylla
prunt individuals carrying *Candidatus
Phytoplasma prunorum’ in orchards of
Prunus salicinia (Ps) and wild P. mahaleb
(Pm) in the Baix Llobregat area (Catalonia,
Spain) in 2005 and 2006. Remigrants (R);
emigrants (E). All captured by yellow sticky
traps except Torrelles B, captured by

June(E) beating,

Plant Pathology (2016) 65, 837-846

Epidemiology of Ca. P. prunorum in Spain 843

Table 2 ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ infection rate and Cacopsylla pruni captures in different wild symptomless Prunus spp. communities in

Catalonia in 2009 and 2010

 

PCR detection®
C. pruni capture

 

Province Plot Prunus sp. method Trees Insects
Barcelona St Viceng P. domestica Beating 2/2 No captures
Torrelles 1 P. mahaleb Yellow/beating 70 15/69
Torrelles 2 P. mahaleb Yellow/beating 418 8/44
Torrelles 8 P. mahaleb Yellow/beating 3/5 9125
Sta Coloma P. cerasifera Beating 2183 No captures
Begues 1 P. spinosa Yellow/beating o/s 4
Begues 2 P. spinosa Beating 0/4 No captures
Begues 3 P. cerasifera Beating o/s No captures
Begues 4 P. mahaleb Beating 012 No captures
Cabrils 1 P. spinosa Beating o/s No captures
Cabrils 2 P. spinosa Beating o/a o2
Tarragona Cardé 1 P. mahaleb Beating o/s No captures
Ueida Balldellou P. spinosa Beating o/2 No captures
Baells P. spinosa Yellow/beating of6 No captures
Baells P. dulcis Yellow/beating or No captures
Atcarras P. dulcis Yellow/beating o/4 No captures
Borges P. dulcis Beating ont No captures

 

"PCR analysis with {01/01 primers. Results are number of positive results/total number analysed. small and scattered. A few C. pruni individuals were
found on these P. spinosa, but no ‘Ca. Phytoplasma
prunorum’ was detected on either plants or insects. In
Torrelles sampling points, there was a high ‘Ca. Phyto-
plasma prunorum’ infection rate in the communities of
P. mahaleb, and major C. pruni infected populations,
showing a high hosting capacity. Here, the phytoplasma
was detected in 14 out of 23 P. mabaleb tested and in
two naturalized P. domestica (Table 2). Discussion

This study presents extensive data on the hosts and vec-
tors of ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ in Spain, demon-
strating that it is widespread in all of the regions studied. While part of the data in this study is 10 years old, it
still represents the general situation in the different areas. The regional phytopathological surveillance programmes
for quarantine diseases, carried out recently, showed that
the ESFY geographic distribution and incidence pre-
sented is still valid. ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ contin-
ues to be mainly present in the Baix Llobregat in
Catalonia and Vegas Altas in Extremadura. In the other
areas there are sporadic cases and very low incidences. These results confirm the many and continuous reports
which date back to the beginning of the twentieth cen-
tury. Sala reported, in 1935, early shoot growth on
P. salicina in the Baix Llobregat area. In Valencia in the
1970s and 1980s there were some outbreaks on P. salic-
ina and P. armeniaca: nowadays cases are isolated (San-
chez-Capuchino & Forner, 1973; Llécer et al., 1986). In
the last decade, recurrent ESFY outbreaks and C. pruni
have been reported in the Baix Llobregat area, condition-
ing P. salicina cultivation (Lavina et al., 2004; Torres
et al, 2004). Prunus dulcis and P. avium were not

 

  

Plant Pathology (2016) 65, 837-846

infected, even in high-infection pressure areas such as
Baix Llobregat (Catalonia), and confirm these species as
poor hosts. Prunus mahaleb and P. cerasifera had high
infection rates without symptoms. Prunus armeniaca and
P. salicina were the most affected, showing clear symp-
toms and great damage. In general, there was a low inci-
dence in P. persica, except in Extremadura, where
incidence was high. These results are similar to those
obtained in previous studies (Giunchedi et al., 1982; Jar-
ausch et al., 2001, 2008). There is disagreement between visual incidence and
PCR detection rate that could be due to the condition of
the trees when the samples were taken. This is the case
for the P. salicina and P. armeniaca plots of Sta Inés,
Torres de Berrelen and Benissanet 1, with clear symp-
toms of phenological mismatch in spring. These samples
had to be taken in September from collapsed trees due to
the low number of trees with symptoms available. On
P. persica, some trees without symptoms were also col-
lapsed, but this low correlation could be due to confu-
sion with other biotic and abiotic factors. On P. persica,
other factors could not be discriminated due to the lack
of specific symptoms showing phenological mismatch in
this species. This is the case for the Extremadura peach
plots, where the real ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ inci-
dence was probably slightly lower. The incidence and
damage were high in Baix Llobregat (Catalonia) and
Vegas Altas (Extremadura) areas, in agreement with the
highest C. pruni captures. The low incidence in Valencia,
Aragon and Lleida is associated with very low C. pruni
populations and confirmed the limited ‘Ca. Phytoplasma
prunorum’ presence in these areas, even on very suscepti-
ble species such as P. salicina and P. armeniaca. The low
ESFY incidence and C. pruni captures are probably
related to a lack of potential wild hosts and overwinter-

 

844 J. Sabaté et al. ing refugee plants in the plains. The results show an
association between high ESFY incidence areas, large
C. pruni populations and availability of wild hosts. In
the Baix Llobregat area, results pointed to P. mabaleb as
a wild symptomless host, with a high infection rate and
capacity to host C. pruni. The P. spinosa infection rate
was lower, as in other countries (Yvon et al., 2004;
Maier et al., 2013). The infected P. mahaleb plots of
Torrelles are located only 2 km from the high incidence
P. salicina plots in Sta Coloma and St Viceng. Although
P. mabaleb could play an important role in local patho-
logical cycles, studies of this species in Italy have
revealed very low infection rates and capacities to host
this vector (Carraro et al., 2002). Prunus mahaleb was
not considered a common natural host for ‘Ca. Phyto-
plasma prunorum’ (Carraro et al., 2004), but sporadic
cases of ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ have been reported
in regions of Italy such as Trentino, even showing symp-
toms (Pignatta ef al., 2008). These differences between
the hosting capacity of P. mabaleb communities could be
due to the different C. pruni biotypes in Spain (Peccoud
et al., 2013) or to the genetic differences between the
P. mabaleb communities. Prunus mahaleb was infected
in the three plots of Torrelles, but tested negative in
Begues and Cardé, showing an irregular hosting beha-
viour. It is important to point out that some P. mahaleb
are naturalized rootstocks that could belong to different
varieties. In Vegas Altas there is a high incidence, but no
large wild Prunus communities within 50 km. It could
be that C. pruni may have been hosted here by rare,
small and distant communities of P. spinosa or by culti-
vated Prunus spp. Another hypothesis is that the peren-
nial relict endemic P. lusitanica, 50 km from the Vegas
Altas area in the Guadalupe Mountains, could be the
host. These P. lusitanica communities, now under study,
are larger and closer than other wild Prunus spp. Previ-
ous studies have reported that other perennial Prunus
species, such as P. laurocerasus, are poor hosts for
C. pruni and ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’, but they have
been experimentally infected (Carraro et al., 2004). The C. pruni dynamics gave two population peaks,
corresponding to remigrant and emigrant individuals,
confirming the behaviour observed for C. pruni in other
European countries (Labonne & Lichou, 2004; Jarausch
et al., 2008). In the Baix Llobregat area, the higher cap-
tures of C. pruni on wild P. mabaleb than in P. salicina
orchards were probably due to host species preferences
of C. pruni and to the insecticide treatments used on the
commercial plots. While insecticide treatments do not
kill all C. pruni in commercial orchards, they probably
reduce the population to levels difficult to track, but
enough to produce very high incidences. The results here
showed that C. pruni fed and developed on wild hosts
outside the commercial plots, although untreated or
deserted orchards could also play an important role
(Thebaud et al., 2006, 2009). Yellow sticky traps were a
good method for trapping C. pruni in commercial orch-
ards with low populations. Zero captures were obtained
when the striking method was used on commercial plots

 

of P. salicina and P. cerasifera in the Baix Llobregat
area. The capture peaks were variable in dates and num-
ber of captures from year to year. Comparing the cap-
tures between P. mahaleb and P. salicina, the dates of
the two peaks were similar, but the remigrants peak was
generally greater than the emigrants peak on P. mahaleb,
whilst the opposite was the case on P. salicina. Comparing the vector dynamics between Extremadura
and Catalonia, there was a tendency for the emigrant peak
to appear 1 month earlier in Extremadura. This cannot be
fully confirmed, because winter trapping in Extremadura
was not successful due to variable circumstances, and the
remigrant peak was not clearly observed. The remigrant
peak probably appeared in February, 1 month earlier than
in Catalonia, as for the emigrant peak, but the loss of the
traps means this cannot be confirmed. It is possible that
the remigrant captures in the first peak were very low. The results gave the percentage of remigrant individuals
as carriers of the phytoplasma in the Baix Llobregat at
around 40%, in contrast to an average of less than 10%
of young emigrants from April to June. This was probably
due to the remigrant individuals being most infected
because they had had more time to incubate the phyto-
plasma. This is supported by the transmission efficiency of
the remigrants being much higher than for emigrants, sug-
gesting that C. pruni completes latency in its secondary
overwintering hosts (Thebaud et al., 2009). These infec-
tion rates are higher than in other countries, but it should
be taken into consideration that the present data was
obtained by nested-PCR in contrast with other studies
(Jarausch et al., 2001, 2008; Carraro et al., 2004). ESFY
epidemics and damage in Spain can be divided into two
major patterns: low and high impact. Low impact epi-
demics can be found in Valencia, Aragon and Lleida (Cat-
alonia), characterized by generally low incidence and
C. pruni populations. In general, there are no major hosts
for the vector or ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ within
50 km of the orchards. High impact epidemics occur in
the Baix Llobregat area of Catalonia and are associated
with high incidence and levels of damage in the orchards;
this area is characterized by populations of infected wild
P. mahaleb hosting large populations of _ infective
C. pruni. These findings for P. mahaleb (high ‘Ca. Phyto-
plasma prunorum’ infection rates and high C. pruni host-
ing capacities) combined with the poor results for
P. spinosa, suggest a major role for P. mahaleb in the
ESFY cycle in this area. Historical ESFY reports, the long history of stone fruit
cultivation, and the tolerance of traditional varieties and
wild Prunus spp. in the Baix Llobregat area, indicate co-
adaptation between ‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’, the
autochthonous Prunus species/varieties and C. pruni. For
this reason, the introduction of such a very sensitive spe-
cies as P. salicina unleashed a major epidemic and eco-
nomic loss. The identification of ‘Ca. Phytoplasma
prunorum’ on isolated wild or naturalized individuals of
P. domestica and P. cerasifera indicates that these species
could play a secondary role in the epidemiology. Based
on these results, P. mahaleb communities could hold the

Plant Pathology (2016) 65, 837-846

Epidemiology of Ca. P. prunorum in Spain 845

key for the control of the disease in the Baix Llobregat
area. Here, the main action to fight against ESFY has
been substituting P. salicina’ with the __ tolerant
P. cerasifera and P. domestica, remaining productive
despite infection. Other control actions undertaken have
been the elimination of deserted Prunus spp. near the
orchards and insecticide treatments before flowering
directed at remigrant C. pruni. However, these measures
could not be fully implemented because of the impossi-
bility of completely removing wild Prunus spp. and the
insecticide safety margin for flowering required for bee
protection. In conclusion, these data show that ESFY is widely
distributed in Spain, but generally with low incidences. It
is important to take into consideration that Spain is in
the southern border region of ESFY and any climate
change will move the limit of distribution of the wild
and cultivated Prunus spp., and therefore C. pruni and
‘Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum’ distribution. In fact, the
lower incidence and spread in Valencia found in this
study compared to the 1980s (Llacer ef al., 1986) is
probably due to this climate change. It could be that this
area is the southern limit for ESFY in Mediterranean cli-
mate zones, but more complete studies are required to
establish this limit in continental climate areas such as
Extremadura. This border effect, the climate change and
the adaptation of vectors and plants, are very important
factors for predicting future risks. Large-scale outbreaks
and their duration should highlight the possibility of
destructive episodes in Spain. Future studies of ESFY
should focus on characterization of the pathological
cycle that led to the outbreak on peach trees in Extrema-
dura, and the development of better control strategies for
ESFY and its vector C. pruni. Acknowledgements

This study was funded by grants RTA04-066 and RTA
09-070 from the Programa Sectorial de ID, MAPA,
Spain. The authors would like to thank Remedios Santi-
ago from SPV Junta de Extremadura, Rafael Balduque
from SIA, Zaragoza (Aragén), Joan Catala from Estacién
Experimental Agraria of Llutxent (Valencia) and Andreu
Vila from Associacié defensa vegetal del Baix Llobregat
(Catalonia) for their help in identifying the plots and
conducting the surveys. References

Ahrens U, Seemiiller E, 1992. Detection of DNA of plant pathogenic
mycoplasmalike organisms by a polymerase chain reaction that
amplifies a sequence of the 16S rRNA gene. Phytopathology 82, $28—
32. Batlle A, Altabella N, Sabaté J, Laviia A, 2008, Study of the
transmission of stolbur phytoplasma to different crop species, by
Macrosteles quadripunctulatus (Kirschbaum). Annals of Applied
Biology 152, 235-42. Carraro L, Osler R, Loi N, Ermacora P, Refatti E, 1998. Transmission of
European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma by Cacopsylla pruni. Journal of Plant Pathology 80, 233-9. Plant Pathology (2016) 65, 837-846

Carraro L, Ferrini F, Ermacora P, Loi N, 2002. Role of wild Prunus
species in the epidemiology of European stone fruit yellows. Plant
Pathology 51, 513-7. Carraro L, Ferrini F, Ermacora P, Loi N, 2004. Transmission of
European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma to Prunus species by
using vector and graft transmission, Acta Horticulturae 657, 449-
53. Cieslinska M, 2011. European stone fruit yellows disease and its causal
agent ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’. Journal of Plant
Protection Research 51, 441-7. Danet JL, Balakishiyeva G, Cimerman A et al., 2011. Multilocus
sequence analysis reveals the genetic diversity of European fruit tree
phytoplasmas and supports the existence of inter-species
recombination. Microbiology 157, 438-50. Deng , Hiruki C, 1991. Amplification of 16S FRNA genes from
culturable and non-culturable mollicutes. Journal of Microbiological
Methods 14, 53-61. Garcfa-Chapa M, Lavifia A, Sanchez I, Medina V, Batlle A, 2003. Occurrence, symptom expression and characterization of phytoplasma
associated with pear decline in Catalonia (Spain). Journal of
Phytopathology 151, 584-90. Garefa-Chapa M, Sabaté J, Lavifia A, Batlle A, 2005. Role of Cacopsylla
pyri in the epidemiology of pear decline in Spain. European Journal of
Plant Pathology 111, 9-17. Giunchedi L, Poggi Pollini C, Credi R, 1982. Susceptibility of stone fruit
trees to the Japanese plum-tree decline causal agent. Acta
Horticulturae 130, 285-90. Hodkinson ID, White IM, 1979. Homoptera. Psylloidea. Handbooks for
the Identification of British Insects. Vol. II, part S(a). London, UK:
Royal Entomological Society of London. Jarausch W, Eyquard JP, Lansac M, Mohns M, Dosba F, 2000. Susceptibility and tolerance of new French Prunus domestica cultivars
to European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma. Journal of
Phytopathology 148, 489-93. Jarausch W, Danet JL, Labonne G et al., 2001. Mapping the spread of
apricot chlorotic leaf roll (ACLR) in southern France and implication
of Cacopsylla pruni as a vector of European stone fruit yellows (ESEY)
phytoplasmas. Plant Pathology 50, 782-90. Jarausch B, Miihlenz I, Beck A, Lampe I, Harzer U, Jarausch W, 2008. Epidemiology of European stone fruit yellows in Germany. Acta
Horticulturae 781, 417-22. Kison H, Seemiiller E, 2001. Differences
European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma and susceptibility of stone
fruit trees on various rootstocks to this pathogen. Journal of
Phytopathology 149, 533-41. Labonne G, Lichou J, 2004, Data on the life cycle of Cacopsylla pruni,
Payllidae vector of European stone fruit yellows (ESFY) phytoplasma,
in France. Acta Horticulturae 657, 465-70. Laviiia A, Sabaté J, Garcfa-Chapa M, Batlle A, Torres E, 2004. ‘Ocurrence and epidemiology of European stone fruit yellows
phytoplasmas in Spain. Acta Horticulturae 657, 489-94. Llicer G, Medina V, Archelos D, 1986. Investigaciones sobre la
deteccién, difusién natural y control del enrollamiento clorético del
albaricoquero. Boletin Sanidad Vegetal de Plagas 12, 181-207. Lorenz KH, Dosba F, Poggi Pollini C, Llacer G, Seemiiller E, 1994. Phytoplasma diseases of Prunus species in Europe are caused by
genetically similar organisms. Zeitschrift fiir Pflanzenkrankbeiten und
Pflanzenschutz 101, 567-75. Lorenz KH, Schneider B, Ahrens U, Seemiiller E, 1995. Detection of the
apple proliferation and pear decline phytoplasmas by PCR
amplification of ribosomal and nonribosomal DNA. Phytopathology
85, 771-6. Maier C, Bachinger K, Martel J, Engel C, Czipin L, Riedle-Bauer M,
2013. European stone fruit yellows in Austria: epidemiological
observations and a mark and recapture experiment tracking
the dispersal of its vector Cacopsylla pruni (Hemiptera: Psyllidae)
in a model apricot orchard. Journal of Phytopathology 161,
713-22

 

in strain virulence of the

 

  

846 J. Sabaté et al. Marcone C, Jarausch B, Jarausch W, 2010. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma
prunorum’, the causal agent of European stone fruit yellows, an
overview. Journal of Plant Pathology 92, 19-34. Peccoud J, Labonne G, Sauvion N, 2013. Molecular test to assign
individuals within the Cacopsylla pruni complex. PLoS ONE 8,
72454. Pignatta D, Forno F, Giunchedi L et al., 2008. A real time PCR assay for
the detection of European stone fruit yellows phytoplasma (*Ca. P.
prunorum’) in plant propagation material. Acta Horticulturae 781,
499-504

Sala R, 1935. El Ciruelo y su Cultivo. Barcelona, Spain: Salvat Editores. Sanchez-Capuchino JA, Forner JB, 1973. Vegetative disorders in Japanese
plum trees on myrobalan rootstocks in the province of Valencia
(Spain). Acta Horticulturae 44, 93-7. Scemiiller E, Schneider B, 2004. *Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’,
*Candidatus Phytoplasma pyri? and ‘Candidatus
Phytoplasma prunorum’, the causal agents of apple proliferation,
pear decline and European stone fruit yellows, respectively. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology
54, 1217-26. Smart CD, Schneider B, Blomquist CL et al., 1996. Phytoplasma-specific
PCR primers based on sequences of the 165-235 rRNA spacer region. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 62, 1988-93. Steffek R, Follak S, Sauvion N, Labonne G, MacLeod A, 2012. Distribution of *Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ and its vector
Cacopsylla pruni in European fruit-growing areas: a review. EPPO
Bulletin 42, 191-202. Thebaud G, Sauvion N, Chadoeuf J, Dufils A, Labonne G, 2006. Identifying risk factors for European stone fruit yellows from a survey. Phytopathology 96, 890-9. Thebaud G, Yvon M, Alari R, Sauvion N, Labonne G, 2009. Efficient
transmission of *Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’ is delayed by
eight months due to a long latency in its host-alternating vector. Phytopathology 99, 265-73. Torres E, Martin MP, Paltrinieri S, Vila A, Masalles R, Bertaccini A,
2004. Spreading of ESFY phytoplasmas in stone fruit in Catalonia. Journal of Phytopathology 152, 432-7. Yvon M, Labonne G, Thebaud G, 2004. Survival of European stone fruit
yellows phytoplasma outside fruit crop production areas: a case study
in southeastern France. Acta Horticulturae 657, 477-81. Plant Pathology (2016) 65, 837-846