MEETING OF YOUNG TALENTS

 

December 01, 2017 APPLICATION OF LEAF FLAKES APRICOTS
IN SOWERS, IN THE AREA OF GONC

Occurence of psyllid species in apricot plantation, in the countryside of Génc

Csilla Molnar

molnar.scilla @ gmail.com
St. Stephen's University, Faculty of Horticulture, Department of Entomology and Anthropology

Summary
A Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum, European Stone Fruit Yellows,
ESFY) in recent years at the European level
cause. Significance in the propagation of the infestation in addition to the infected propagating material
is the vector, the plum leaf flea (Cacopsylla pruni). It is the largest apricot grower in Hungary
Leaf fleas are collected from shrubs (blueberries, hawthorn) in the vicinity of spruce trees. The lumps returned with a knock-on medication weekly from early spring to April.
with regularity. Occurrence, species composition, migration of leaf fleas on these plants
we examined his time. The molecular biology laboratory tests are performed at St. Stephen's University
They are performed in a plant laboratory, where the answer to the question of whether a
are Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum carriers of leaf fleas

korokozonak. Keywords: Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum, European sargulas, Plum leaf fleas,
Cacopsylla pruni, vector. MEETING OF YOUNG TALENTS

 

December 01, 2017 1. Introduction, purpose of the work

Both domestically and in the euro area, there are serious problems with the cultivation of
Bones of the European Union cause the disease Cargatus Phytoplasma_ prunorum
phytoplasm. Apricots have been shown to be guttable in their unaltered form.
had to be counted. Previous research has included the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae and Cytospora
cincta mushroom species was identified as the cause of the destruction of the tree. These ages are the oldest
In recent years, it has been feared that
wood destruction. The extent of destruction was determined by agrotechnical measures (incision, wound healing,
torsion protection, drug supply) could also be reduced. A Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum
With the emergence and spread of the next year, he wants to be questioned in Hungary

Extensive knowledge of life cycle, vectors and their puzzles. An important issue is

 

phytoplasma of both the subject and the noble propagating material during the distribution of the propagating material
guaranteeing his immunity. The counterattack is made difficult by the fact that you only want years to eat
a fakon latni. If phytoplasma freedom of the propagating material cannot be guaranteed (not all
laboratory), only the cutting and replacement of the tree is prohibited in the ban.
remains. It has not been sufficiently demonstrated to spread with vectors and nominal juices
In addition to phytoplasma, there may be a single
in his neighbor and in the adjacent rows, this would explain the destruction. Being sick
it is impossible to completely remove the roots of the pods, it is questionable whether this causes early
infestation and destruction, or they are already infected with nursery. Lathato has a very complex problem, for which my dissertation is only a small but important one
trying to illuminate part of it. In my dissertation and in front of me all6 years for that question
I'm looking for the answer to Ca. What vectors of P. prunorum can be identified in Génci
in apricot orchard in natural milk. When they appear in the orchards and

whether effective protection against them is possible during their period of settlement. 36

MEETING OF YOUNG TALENTS

 

December 01, 2017 2. Materials tested and instruments used

My examinations are in a 5-hectare apricot banquet and in its immediate hands
I carried out on shrubs (blueberries and hawthorn) after previous examinations in the meadow
leaf fleas and leaf flea species found in the shrubs and pines in the environment
relationship. According to the literature, Cacopsylla pruni overwinters on pine trees in its imaginary age
in the spring migrate to apricots and an ¢ other Prunus species. I completed my exams from the end of the rest period from the hand of March 2017 to the end of April
weekly. I collected the leaf fleas with a knocking tool. The hunts
The success of the
anonymity work, so not all of our hunts were successful. A molecular
bioldg laboratory tests in the Anthropology Laboratory of St. Stephen's University
where I framed the answer to the question of whether the

whether leaf fleas are carriers of Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum korocozo. 3., Experimental results and their evaluations

In the course of my examinations and observations, I found it in accordance with the literature data
aC. pruni and C. crataegi on both apricot and putative host plants. Cabbage
the number of individuals of hawthorn-leaf fleas was significantly less than that of plum-leaf fleas
kiili left the plantation sooner, at the end of March we could no longer hawthorn.
you can collect leaves. During the laboratory tests, the apricot was tested with molecular drugs (nested PCR).
captured individuals, as a result of which 42 individuals were identified in 5 of the examined individuals
the presence of phytoplasm. Each of these individuals was C. pruni. Our laboratory tests a
PCR analysis of samples from blue whiting, hawthorn and pine perch is still ongoing
van. Further examinations with specimens of bluetongue, hawthorn and pine
they are still going on. I would like to continue my examinations next year in order to
to get a clearer picture of the life cycle of leaf fleas, the relationship between migracids and the

role in the distribution of phytoplasma_. Hawthorn leaf fleas are a particularly important target

37

MEETING OF YOUNG TALENTS

 

December 01, 2017

 

clarification of the role of Ca. In the spread of Phytoplasma prunorum. I want my tests
extended to wild copper (Rosa canina) as it is based on literature data on Ca. Phytoplasma prunorum is also an aphid of leaf fleas. 4. Triad list

Carraro, L., Loi, N., and Ermacora, P. 2001. Transmission characteristics of the European stone
fruit yellows phytoplasma and its vector Cacopsylla pruni. European Journal of Plant
Pathology.107: 695-700. Czibulyds P. 2016 Leaf fleas in apricot orchards and their roles in ‘Candidatus
Phytoplasma prunorum ’. Budapest, Szent Istvan University. Diploma thesis

Czotter et al. 2017. Investigation of phytoplasma infestation in apricot orchards. Georgikon For

Agriculture. A multidisciplinary Journal In Agricultural SciencesVolume 21.1. 22-26. Jarausch et al. 2001. Detection and identification of European stone fruit yellows and other
phytoplasmas in wild plants in the surroundings of apricot chlorotic leaf roll-affected
orchards in southern France. European Journal of Plant Pathology 107: 209-217. Marcone et al. 2010. Candidatus phytoplasma prunorum, the causal agent of European stone
fruit yellows: an overview. Journal of Plant Pathology. 92 (1), 19-34

Mergenthaler E. 2004. Phytoplasma diseases in Hungary: modern diagnostics
development of methods. PhD thesis. Research Institute for Animal Welfare, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest

Nagy G., Pénzes B., 2017. Apricot protection technologies for apricots. Female protection. 78 (53). 4. Riedle-Bauer, M., Bauer, H., Moertel, J. 2011. Effects of possible repellents on feeding and
survival of Cacopsylla pruni (Scopoli). Bulletin of Insectology 64: 263-264. Ripka G. 2010. Leaf fleas 1. Budapest Agroinform Kiad6

Seemiiller E, Schneider B. ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma mali’, ‘Candidatus Phytoplasma pyri’ and
‘Candidatus Phytoplasma prunorum’, the causal agents of apple proliferation, pear decline
and European stone fruit yellows respectively. 2004. International Journal of Systematic and
Evolutionary Microbiology 54, 1217-1226. Hedgehog S. 2014. Phytoplasmic diseases of children in Hungary. Agrartudomanyi
publications, 62. Kiilénszam

Tedeschi, R., Ferrato, V., Rossi, J., Alma, A. 2006 Possible Phytoplasma Transovarial
Transmission in the Psyllids Cacopsylla Melanoneura and Cacopsylla Pruni. Plant Pathology
55 (1): 18-24. Viczian O., Siile S, Pénzes B., Seemiiller E. 1997. A_ aphid phytoplasmic destruction
In Hungary. New Horticulture. 3rd year.1. 48-51. Ministry of Human Resources UNKP-17-2 Kedam New National Excellence
The program is fully supported

38